<£rr c, 



6i<.<^ C( 












W c<f< 









^, ^<^ C <r^^C (Sic 















--^^^ 






TRANSACTIONS 

OF THE 

CUMBERLAND ASSOCIATION 

FOR THE 

ADVANCEMENT OF LITERATURE AND 
SCIENCE. 

IP-A-I^T I. 1875-6. 



Edited by J. CLIFTON WAED, Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S. 



Single Mbmbee's Corv, Pkice One Skilling. Fuethee Copies to 

Members and Copies to Non-Membees, Price Two Shillings 

AND Sixpence. 



KESWICK : 

PRINTED BY E. BAILEY, COCKERMOUTH AND KESWICK. 

18 70. 



lA? 



TRANSACTIONS 



CUMBERLAND ASSOCIATION 



ADVANCEMEN T OF LITERA TURE AND 
SCIENCE, 



FJ^:EIT I. 1875-6. 



Edited by J. CLIFTON WARD, Assoc. R.S.M., F.G. S. 



/ 



Single Mejibee's Copy, Pkice One Shilling. Fuetheb Copies to 

Members and Copies to Non-Mesibees, Pkice Two Shillings 

and Sixpence. 




KESWICK : 

PRINTED BY R. BAILEY, COCKERMOUTH AND KESWICK. 

1 87G. 



EDITOR'S PREFACE. 



The first Part of the Association Transactions is necessarily im- 
perfect in many ways. It was, however, thought advisable to com- 
mence the work of publication with the close of the first year of the 
Association's existence, although the material to hand, l)earing the 
stamp of originality, was somewhat limited. It is hoped that each 
year will witness an increase in the number of Papers dealing with 
subjects of original investigation or local interest. 



XoTE. — The Paper by llr. SiNELUS, at the end of this Part, came too 
late for its title to be included in the list at the commence- 
ment. 



4 

CONTENTS 

RULES. 

Part I,— PROCEEDINGS AT THE ANNUAL MEETING— 

PR00RA^r^rE carried out. 

Inaugural Address by the President. 

Reports from the Associated Societies. 

General Discussion on the work of the Societies. 

Election of Officers. 

Excursions Made, 

Papers Read at the Conversazione and General 
Meeting : — 

" Some Plumbago Coining- Moulds" (Abstract) by 
R. S. Ferguson, M.A., (Carlisle). 

" Local Tokens" (Abstract) by Wm. Jackson, J.P., 
Whitehaven. 

" Harbours and Docks" by J. E. Williams (White- 
haven). 

" The Cumberland Dialect" by John Richardson 
(Keswick). 

"Sketch of the Geological History of the Lake 
District" by J. Clifton Ward, F.G.S., (Keswick) 

Part II.— Original Papers communicated to the Societies during 
the Session 1875—6, and selected by the Association 
Council for publication :— 

" The Cumberland Dialect." (See above). 

" Old Borrowdale." by J. F. Crosthwaite, (Keswick). 

" Personal Name.s." by Peter Harrison, (Kes^\'ick). 



RULES ADOPTED AT A MEETINTG TO ESTABLISH THE 

CUMBERLAND ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 

OF LITERATURE AND SCIENCE, 

FEnRUARY 9.Slh, 1S70. 



1 . That an Association be formed to be called the " Cumberland 
Association' foe the Advancement of Literature and Science." 

2. The Association shall consist of all members of the following 
Societies, Whitehaven Scientific Association, Keswick Literary and 
Scientific Society, Cockermouth Literary and Scientific Society, Work- 
ington Scientific and Literary Association, and of the members of such 
other Societies as shall be duly affiliated. Also of persons not belonging 
to any of the affiliated Societies, if nominated by two members of the 
Council ; this latter class of members shall pay the sum of 5s. annually. 

3. The Association shall be governed by a Council, consisting of a 
President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary, Treasurer, and of ordinary members, 
two to be elected by each affiliated Society. 

4. The President, Secretary, and Treasurer, shall be elected annually 
at the Annual Meeting, and be capable of re-election. 

5. The Vice-Presidents shall consist of the Presidents of the various 
affiliated Societies ; and the delegates of the various Societies shall be 
elected annually by their respective Societies. 

6. An Annual INIeeting of the Association shall be held at such time 
and place as may be decided upon at the previous Annual Meeting, or 
(failing such appointment) as may be arranged by the Council. 

7. At each Annual Meeting, after the delivery of the President's 
Address, and the reading of the Reports from the affiliated Societies, the 
objects of the Association may be furthered by Lectures, Papers, Address- 
es, Discussions, Conversaziones, tfec. The Council shall have the power of 
obtaining the assistance of jiersons who are not members of the 
Association. 

8. The Council may publish at the expense of the Association such 



portions of its own or of any of the associated Societies' communications 
as may be deemed advisable, subject to the consent of the author. 

9. The Council shall endeavour to promote co-operation among 
existing Societies, and may assist in the formation of new ones ; it may 
also aid in the establishment of classes in connection with any of the 
associated Societies. 

10. Affiliated Societies shall contribute towards the general funds 
of the Association the sum of Six2)ence for each member. 

11. The Rules can only be altered by a majority of two-thirds of 
the members present at an Annual Meeting, Any member desiring to 
alter the rules must send a copy of the proposed alterations to the Secre- 
tary, at least two weeks before the meeting is held. 



OFFICERS FOR THE SESSION 1876—7. 
:o: 

PRESIDENT. 

The Loed Bishop of Carlisle. 

VICE-PRESIDENTS. 

James Raird, Esq., (Whitehaven.) 

J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S. (Keswick.) 

Isaac Fletcher, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. (Cockermouth) 

H. F. CuRWEN, Esq., (Workington.) 

COUNCIL. 

T. F. I' Anson, Esq., M.D. ) ,„, ., , 
William Jackson, Esq. / Whitehaven. 

Alexander A. H. Knight, Esq., M.D. ) t^ . , 
J. F. Crosthwaite, Esq. / Keswick. 

Rev. W. Williams, F.G.S. ) ^, , 

Henry Dodgson, Esq., M.D. / C-ockermouth. 

George J. Snelus, Esq. ) „. , . 

A. Peile, Esq. / Workington. 

TREASURER & SECRETARY. 

J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S. 



PROCEEDINGS AT THE ANNUAL MEETING. 



The following Programme was carried out :— 

^Fay 1st. — 1-0 p.m. — Luiu-lieon, 

2-30 i).m. — Address l>y tlio President, the Lord Lisliup uf 
Carlisle. 

3-30 p.m. — Excm-sion.s — • 

(a). Docks, Ship_yard, and Lonsdale Iron Wtnl's. 
(h). Geological ILxcursi.ni along St. P.ecs ('lift', 
(c). Colliery Excursion (Henry Pit). 

8-0 p.m. — Conversazione in the Town Hall, inchuling the 
foUoAving addresses and papers : — 
Demonstrations on Sjiectrum Analysis by ]\Ir. G. 
J. Snelu.s, and on the Radiation of Heat l)y 
]\rr. J. Laird. 

Plumbago Coining-]\Ioulds found in AVastdale, by 
]\[r. Pt. S. Ferguson. 

"Tokens" of Cumberland and Westmoreland, by 
Mr. Wm. Jackson. 

^Iay 2nd. — 10-0 a.m. — General Meetinc; in the Lecture Hall, Plowgill- 
street. Election of Officers and next year's place 
of IMeeting. Discussion as to the work of the 
various Societies. 

11-0 a.m. — Pleading of Original Papers ; — 

The Cumberland Dialect, by Mi: .John 
Piichardson. 

Harbours and Docks, by Mr. J. E. "Williams. 

Sketch of the Geological History of the 
Lake District, by Mr. J. Clifton Ward. 



INAUGL'ilAL x\.DDi{ESS OF THE PUESiDENT, THE LUilD 
BiSHur UE CAKLISLE. 



Ill looking forward to the delivery of an address sucli as that which 
is demanded from me to-day, the question must always arise, " Shall I 
write it or, shall I speak it 1 " A good deal may be said (as is usual in 
the case of problems admitting of two solutions) in favour of either 
course. I Avill not trouble you with the arguments which have chiefly 
weighed with me in the present instance, but merely say that upon due 
consideration I have come to the conclusion that I should perform my 
duty best, as the President of this infant Association, in making the speech 
which inaugurates its birth, if I set down beforehand on paper what I 
intended to say. One advantage at least will accrue from this determi- 
nation, namely, that I shall not be tempted by the interest of the subject 
to address you at an unreasonable length — a temjJtation which you will 
scarcely regard as imaginary, when I tell you that your Secretary, in ;i 
communication which he, perhaps, regarded as " privileged," used these 
remarkable word.s with reference to our meeting of to-day : " Please do 
not hesitate to give us 'a good strring up,' of about an hour's duration." 
I do not exactly know what will constitute, in the opinion of your worthy 
Secretary, " a good stirring up;" but I confess that the notion of per- 
forming that irritating process for the duration of a whole hour somewhat 
appals me, and I trust that you will find me more merciful. Nevertheless 
the subject before us is, in truth, one of vast extent, and which it will 
require some care to reduce to reasonable dimensions, and, at the same 
time, to treat profitably, or with anything like completeness. 

THE GOOD EFFECT OF FOKMING A CONFEDEEATION. 

The Association which we inaugiu-ate to-day, and to which you have 
given the bold title of " The Cumberland Association for the Advance- 
ment of Literature and Science," ajipears to be a confederation of a num- 
ber of existing societies, with the proposal to afiiliate other similar 
societies if formed, and with the offer of membership on certain terms to 
suitable persons, not members of any affiliated society, either existing or 
to exist hereafter. Assuming the fact of a number of separate societies, 



9 

it is not difficult to understand that considerable advantage may arise 
from some kind of confederation being established among them. The 
possibility of advantage is so obvious, that I observe very little is said of 
the raison d'etre of the Association in your printed rules. It is obvious, 
I think, that if the purposes and operations of the component societies be 
good, their confederation will also be good. Such confederation will 
naturally lead to mutual encouragement and to progressive improvement. 
Each society, without sacrificing its independance, will have the advantage 
of seeing and knowing what is done in others. There will be, as it were, 
a comparing of notes, and any bright thought originated by some vigorous 
secretary will have free course beyond his own society. Moreover, I 
should trust that the effect of confederation would be to excite emulation 
in those places in which no affiliated society exists. It seems remarkable 
(if I may say thus much by way of illustration) that we should inaugu- 
rate an Association for Cumberland from which the name of Carlisle should 
be conspicuously absent. One may hope, ever bearing in mind the as- 
sumption that a literary and scientific society is a thing good in itself, 
that the Association wUl find before long an affiliated society in each of 
our larger towns ; and then it may be added, upon the general principle 
that Vtmion c'esi la force, that, without attempting to define too carefully 
the further operations of an Association like this, there will doubtless be 
a variety of ways in which a confederation will be able to give an imijetus 
to the cause for which it has been formed, such as would have been 
quite impossible for any local society, however vigorous and however 
well managed. 

THE PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE INDIVIDUAL SOCIETIES EXIST. 

Passing, then, from the general question of the advantage of con- 
federation, I will trouble you vsdth a few words concerning the purposes 
for which as I understand them, the individual societies exist. Of the 
four societies which at present constitute our " United States," one is 
called "Scientific" only, and the other three " Literary and Scientific," 
or, to be more exact, two of the three are " Literary and Scientific," and 
the third " Scientific and Literary." I shall not be far wrong if I assume 
that the purposes of all four societies are much the same, and that I may 



10 

regard tlieiu all as both literary and .soieutific Ijodics. It may, of course, 
be a question in what manner a society, in a not very large town in 
Cumberland, is able or will attempt to cultivate or promote literature and 
science. Taking the phrase in its broadest and fullest meaning, I suppose 
that the effects of such a society must be of a very modest kind. Never- 
theless, it is well to examine what can be done ; and I shall venture to 
submit a few thoughts to you, for which, of course, no one is answerable 
but myself, and which, thei'efore, you may take for what they are worth, 
and for no more. 

1. Turning first to Literature, I presume that a literary society in 
a country town will probably have the usual literary machinery of a 
library, reading-room, and so forth. These things will have a variety of 
advantages, direct and indirect, which it is unnecessary for me to discuss. 
Like all similar appeals to the higher intellectual portion of human 
nature, they will tend to encourage worthy tastes, they will give educa- 
tional facilities to those who would otherwise not be able to pay for them, 
and they will be more or less advantageous, according to the more or less 
of wisdom with which they are managed. But I think they may be 
made to do something more than this ; and I will mention two ways in 
which, not to mention others, good work may be done. The first is this. 
A literary society affords a ground upon which the few highly cultivated 
intellects of a neighbourhood can be brought into profitable contact with 
the many less highly cultivated. Be it ever remembered that there are 
comparatively few intellects of the first quality sent into this world, and 
that not all of these are cultivated as they might be. But you generally 
find in any neighbourhood a certain number (it may be only two or three) 
of minds capable of imparting valuable thoughts to others ; and the 
possessors of those minds are frequently not churlish or selfish, and would 
be most willing to impart of their abundance if they only knew how. 
The opportunity of coming in contact with such men, and hearing them 
speak, observing how they deal with a subject, following the workings of 
their minds — all this, independently of any actual information conveyed, 
is a delight and privilege ; and a literary society makes this kind of 
meeting of minds not only possible, but easy. I think with melancholy 



II 

pleasure upon days gone by when I say this : to have met years ago in 
the lecture-room of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, such men as the 
late Professor Sedgwick, to mention only one name, is a thing for which 
to be thankful to the last day of one's life. The other way in which a 
literary society may be advantageous, and which it has occurred to me to 
mention, is this. There is much of what I may call local literature, which 
may be studied with advantage through the instrumentality of local 
societies. No country is richer than Cumberland in local customs, and 
peculiarities, and history. These things like the ruins of the Roman 
wall, or our old castles and abbeys, are in a continual condition of decay; 
folk lore constantly becomes more difficult to collect ; local traditions and 
curious local superstitions have a tendancy to vanish ; even our fine 
Cumberland dialect is likely to be improved off the face of the earth by 
schoolmasters and school-boards ; and a local literary society may do good 
work by being to such like things that which a local jnuseum is to 
antiquities — namely, a home where they may find rest in the midst of the 
bustle and progress of this prosaic, matter-of-fact world. I observe that 
one of the arrangements for to-morrow is a paper on " The Cumberland 
Dialect," by Mr. John Richardson. I can easily conceive that the trans- 
actions of a very humble literary society might, Avith the help of an 
intelligent secretary (for that is quite indispensable), become, in the course 
of say fifty years, of great and general value. 

2. And, now, turning to Science, much of what 1 have said con- 
cerning literature will, mutatis mutandis, be applicable. But the field of 
operation for a local society, with respect to science, is, if I am not mis- 
taken, more extended than it is with respect to literature. The pursuit 
of literature is cliiefiy confined to the house, and to the time that can be 
given to books, but science may be cultivated, in a certain sense, every- 
where, and at all times {semper, uhique, et ah omnibus), and it is perfectly 
possible that a local scientific society, with the indispensible requisite (to 
which I have before referred) of a good secretary, and therefore, with 
good direction and management, may teach men, who are not profession- 
ally scientific, to make many useful observations, and to add much to their 
own enjoyment of this world in which God has placed them. 



12 

WHAT THESE LOCAL SOCIETIES MAY DO. 

I wish to speak temperately upon this point, because I know enough 
of exact science, and of the labour which exact science requires, to make 
me fully appreciate the modest limits within which any scientific efforts of 
an amateur must of necessity be confined. Nevertheless, most men may 
be taught habits of observation ; they may be instructed what to observe, 
and how to observe it ; and I should imagine that (to take the lowest view) 
the man who has cultivated habits of observation will prove in almost all 
the practical employments of life more handy and more useful than the 
man who has not cultivated such habits. Men differ very much in their 
natural endowments as regards this matter. Some men, like myself, are 
unfortunately short-sighted, and are almost incapable of observing anything ; 
and some men are incapable of caring about the things to be obser- 
ved. I remember hearing two men discussing the geological 
formation of a country through which they had both travelled, 
when a third, interposing, sagaciously asked, " If the roads be good, what 
possible difference can it make what there is lying underneath them ?' 
But the large majority of mankind are observing animals, and though the 
science of observation and classification be not very high in the scale, it 
is, for the majority of men, the most accessible, and it is the liasis of 
much that is very useful. Let me add that if one country be more 
favourable than another for calling out the power uf observation, few can 
be better for the purpose than this county of Cumberland. Moreover, 
a good deal of useful practical work may be done in the way of ex- 
cursions. I perceive from your programme that it is intended to do some- 
thing of the kind this afternoon. And with reference to this question I 
should like to record the pleasure which I once enjoyed in being per- 
mitted to spend a day in an excursion with the members of a society, 
more or less resembling those with Avhich we are concerned to-day. The 
plan was this : we met at a cei-taia railway cutting, where a geological 
member explained to us the section of strata which the railway operations 
had brought to light, and gave us a short lecture on the geology of the 
neighbourhood. Then we visited some local antiquities, which were ex- 
plained by an antiquarian, who told us something of the history of the 



13 



ch«tnct lu ancient time... We next fell in Nvitli a church, where an 
eccle-siologist gave a lecture on architecture ; and .soon after, a botanist 
liappily stumbled upon a rare plant, which he forthwith pulled to pieces 
and expounded for the benefit of those who were botanically inclined 
" A little learning" is, proverbially, '' a dangerous thing," but " a little 
learning" acquired under such circumstances as I have described, is cer- 
tainly very agreeable, and, notwithstanding the proverb, I would trust not 
very dangerous. 

But there is another thing which a local society may do 
for science, and upon which I would lay great stress as being really im- 
. portant, and as a work which cannot be done in any way so well as through 
this kind of agency. I refer to the establishment of a local museum. °I 
do not he.sitate to say that in my opinion every town, worthy of the 
name (I mean every town as distinguished from a mere village), ouoht to 
have its museum. You will, I hope, understand what I intend to express 
by the term " museum." I do not mean a mere cabinet of miscellaneous 
curiosities, than which few things can be more useless ; but I mean an 
orderly, well-arranged, collection of things, interesting on the score of 
science, or antiquity, or beauty, which the neighbourhood supplies. The 
degree of perfection which such a museum can attain will depend, of 
course, upon a variety of circum.stances ; but, if only a local scientific 
society will start a museum, and lay down the fundamental law that trash 
is to be excluded, the collection will quite certainly become sooner or 
later valuable. And there is one department beyond others for which, if 
I am not mistaken, a museum is specially required— it is that of antiqui- 
ties. In almost all neighbourhoods, and, I should conceive to a pre- 
eminent extent in Cumberland, antiquities come to light from time to time; 
men plough up, or dig up the monuments of past days— records, it may 
be, of Roman occupation, or of our British ancestry, or of Border war- 
fare, and the treasures so found go sometimes one knows not where. 
Now, it is in the highest degree desirable that they .should not be lost, 
and that they should not pass into private collections ; and the way to 
secure this is to establish a local museum, and to let it be known (which 
is very easy) that all treasure-trove brought there will find a ready pur- 



14 

chaser. I speak of a local luuseuiu as being of special importance 
witli regard to antiquities, because these, of course, are limited 
in number ; and when once a relic has been found, and lost or destroyed, 
it is gone for ever, and nothing can take its place. But a museum is of 
not much less importance with regard to local specimens, illustrating the 
geology, or the fauna or flora of the district. This might well be under 
taken under the auspices of our affiliated societies, and it might be matter 
of honourable rivalry amongst them which should possess in the various 
de2Jartments the most complete or most valuable collections. Other re- 
marks might be made touching the beneficial operation of local literary 
and scientific societies ; but those which I have offered to you are perhaps 
as plain and obvious as any, and I trust as useful and important. They 
are certainly as numerous as my time on an occasion such as this would 
seem fairly to allow. I pass on, therefore, from the more immediate con- 
sideration of the advantages and the operations of such societies to make 
a few general observations concerning literature and science, which seem 
to be germane to the present occasion, and which I should be sorry to omit. 

GENERAL KEMAKKS ON LITERATUEE AND SCIENCE. 

For the question naturally occurs to myself, and Avill pi'obably occur 
to others who take an interest in the proceedings of this day, and, it may 
be also, to some who take no such interest, " Why should the Bishop of 
the Diocese be invited, and why should he consent to be the first president 
of an association for the advancement of literature and science 'V Cer- 
tainly it cannot be on the ground of anything which he can himself per- 
sonally do in the advancement of literature. For, alas ! a bishop in these 
days is a man of letters chiefly in the sense of being a man who has a 
fearful amount of letters both to receive and to write ; and as for science, 
a scientific bishop is still more impossible and inconceivable than a literary. 
I myself, though I have received that kind of education which is necessary 
for the study of the higher departments of science, and though I know 
very well the delicious taste of the frrit of mathematical research, have 
long long ago been compelled to forego all such delights, and to regard 
the i^rogress of science at a resjsectful and ever increasing distance. Still 
I cannot but feel that there is a certain propriety, I wUl not say in your 



15 

lirupusiiig, but in luy iiccuiitiiiy this uJlicc, )i;isud u|)<jii the struiiy ties 
 \vliicli biucl together literature and «cienee with those purposes to which I 
have more especially been led by God's providence to devote my life and 
my labour. At all events, if I had declined the office, when you had 
done me the honour to propose it to me, it would have seemed as if I had 
l)y that act, declared that in my judgment there was no necessary or in- 
timate connection between the work of a Christian bishop and the work 
Avhich the name of your association implies. Now, my opinion 
is exactly the reverse of this. I believe that the %\'ork of a 
Christian bishoj*, and that of men who combine themselves for the 
purpose of advancing literature and science, are very closely allied — much 
more closely than is often supposed. Anyhow, I am quite sure that your 
road and mine lie to such an extent in the same direction that we may 
very well be on friendly terms, and try to help each other. For look to 
the question of literature, and observe to what a great extent the religion 
which Christian people profess is Avhat I may call without offence, a 
literary religion. Those to whom the first propagation of the faith was 
entrusted connnitted their knowledge to writing. They did not merely 
move the hearts of people by sermons and speeches, but they wrote books ; 
and so it became jjossible from the beginning, and it became essential in 
after times, to appeal to the Holy Scriptures — that is, to literature. 
Lilera scripta manet ; and, under God, the Church Avas founded upon a 
rock just because it had a written basis upon which to rest.   And so, to 
take as an example one of the most stirring periods of Christian history, 
and that in which we are chiefly interested as members of a reformed 
Church — I mean the great Reformation movement of the sLxteenth cen- 
tury — it should be observed that this was distinctly a literary movement. 
The men who made the stir were contemptuously called " men of the 
new learning.'' It was the study of Greek, and the general movement in 
the direction of candid literary investigation, and independent criticism, 
and literary discovery, which made the great religious revolution of the 
sixteenth century both a possibility and a necessity. I do not wish to 
travel far into this subject, the more so as it is possible that I may be 
speaking to some who would not agree with me in regarding the ecclesi- 



16 

astical revolution of the .sixteenth century as a reformation ; but the 
literary character of the movement cannot be doubted, neither can the 
imi)ortance of literature in the conduct of the controversy which has raged 
more or less ever since. But apart from this question of the Reformation 
it may be averred that tlie deeper and more general cpiostion of the 
defence of the truths upon which the Christian CJhurch stands has tended 
more and more, as time goes on, to connect itself with literary considera- 
tions. I have already remarked upon the manner in which, according to 
the good providence of God, the revelation of His will was made from the 
beginning to depend upon Ijooks ; but as time went on those books be- 
came anticpiities ; the original copies were lost or worn out ; the books 
had to survive the perilous period of manuscript transmission, previous to 
the more secure and calm days of printing ; and so they have become 
subject to all the questions of genuineness, and authenticity, and balance 
of probability for this reading and that, to which all ancient 
books are subject ; so that independently of the almost infinite amount 
of devotional, historical, homiletical, and other literature con- 
nected with Holy Scripture, there is a large amount devoted to the 
scientific establishment of the sacred text, and the discussion of the 
genuineness and authenticity of each component book, which can only be 
sound and good when it forms a part of a literature which is based upon 
sound scientific principles, and has the benefit of the labours of the most 
clear-headed and most skilful literary labourers whom the age afford. 
Thus, I think, you will perceive that it is impossible to any one who 
takes an interest in the Christian faith to be indifterent to literature, and 
especially to what I may call literary science ; and this leads me to 
the further remark, that if an association for the advancement of litera- 
ture be one in which a person occupied and pledged as I myself am, may 
rightly take an interest and a part, this is equally true— perhaps even 
niore true— in the case of an association for the advancement of science. 
Under the term "science" I should, of course, include all departments 

the lowest as well as the highest. I have already said that I think 

there are branches in which you and your various local societies may do 
good service, but I shall not be so foolish as to flatter you by saying, or 



17 

as to imagine that yoii yourself believe, that in the higher or highe 
branches you can make any great advances ; nevertheless I may with 
propriety speak quite generally of the advancement of science ; and I 
think it very desirable to assert that there can be nothing in that advance- 
ment, whether in the modest manner which yon probably propose to 
yourselves, or in the broader way which is open to the British Association, 
whose descriptive name you have not been to modest to adapt and adopt, 
which does not demand the sympathy of all Christians, whether bishops, or 
priests, or laymen. Of course I do not expect that every man is to know 
much of exact science ; nor, indeed, do I expect to think it necessary that 
every man should take a keen interest in scientific results. I had once a 
friend, who was a most distinguished literary man — -a great writer, a 
great reader, a man of most prodigious memory, most cultivated taste, and 
most varied acquirements — who nevertheless assured me that he viewed all 
scientiftc questions with absolute and complete indifference. He never 
could understand the least particle of mathematics ; and he cared not a 
bit whether the earth revolved round the sun, or the sun round the earth, 
or whether neither of them revolved at all. It is a curious question for 
examination, how far experience warrants us in saying that the literary 
and scientific tastes usually accompany each other. I am disposed to 
think that the two do much more usually accompany each other than not. 
You may find literary men without any taste for science, such as he to 
whom I have referred ; and, on the other hand, dry men of science, like 
him who was said to have read Shakespeare through, and then to have 
asked what it all proved 1 But my belief is that these are the exceptions 
not the rule ; the monsters, not the normal typical animals. Take a few 
examples of the combination of high literary taste and scientific power, 
such as the following : Aristotle, Bacon, Pascal, Leibniz, Sir John 
Herschel, and Whewell, to which list many more might be added. I was 
speaking of my scientific friend. Such men may be curiosities, but they 
are facts ; and bearing in mind that facts are stubborn things, I do not 
feel justified in claiming that every one should even take an interest in 
scientific matters ; but I think we may certainly say this : that in the 
present epoch of the world's history it is well that science should be as 



18 

accessible as jjossible, and that men should be accustomed to distinguish 
between science real and sound and science falsely so called. Societies 
such as yours will do something if they only give currency to sound views on 
scientific subjects — if they only lead men into healthy lines of thought ; 
if they only help men to perceive that science, if it be science indeed, 
must be, and cannot fail to be, a form of the knowledge of God. 

But, to take what may be regarded as a somewhat lower and yet 
very important view of this subject, I think it may fairly be argued tliat 
societies which mark upon their banner " literature and science " do so 
far declare themselves as intended and intending to minister to the better 
and more spiritual side of men's nature, that they may be rightly regarded 
as allies of that other society in which I am more directly appointed to 
bear office. This age in which we live is undoubtedly a very utilitarian 
age. I do not assert — and I do not in reality believe — that it is worse 
either in this respect or in many others than some of the ages which have 
gone before ; but certainly there is much in the atmosphere of our times 
to make us look very earnestly to the utilitarian side of almost every 
subject, for unquestionably this our age is one of unprecedented command 
of money, and command of mechanical power, and consequent connnand 
of luxury. It can scarcely be called a simple age ; and though there has 
been a large and very happy development of taste in many dejjartments, 
still, upon the whole, there is also a very great tendency towards the wor- 
ship of the material, and a temptation, in the way of literature, to mag- 
nify the Timei newspaper as greater than Thucydides, and in the way of 
science to lay special stress upon such things as iron shipbuildino-, and 
steam hammers, and electric telegraphs. This being so, there is some- 
thing comforting in the mere fact of the juxtaposition of tlie terms 
literature and science in such a manner as to make it clear that both the 
one and the other are intended to be taken in a higher sense — that litera- 
ture is intended to embrace all the wisdom of the past which has been 
embalmed and conserved in good books ; and that science is intended to 
witness all kinds of knowledge which the human mind is able to acquire 
by observation, or study, or discourse of reason, whether the same can 
properly be regarded as technically useful or not. Thus it may be said 



19 

of literature and science, and therefore of societies which are based upon 
them, that they tend to correct some of the sjiecial defects of our age and 
country ; and I will go further than the consideration of utilitarianism, 
and the evils directly or indirectly connected with it, and I will say that 
oven with regard to religious questions I look for help and not for hin- 
drance fi'om well conducted literary and scientific societies. It would be 
most improper and undesirable that I should make this address the 
occasion of overstepping the bounds which good sense and good taste 
dictate, and of dragging you, along with your president, into the hot 
atmosphere of religious controversy ; but I think I may say without 
offence, and without fear of contradiction, that such an atmosphere does 
exist, and that it is very unpleasant, and that some good people find it 
hard to breathe it. In the proximity, then, of such an atmosphere, I can 
scarcely do wrong in eulogizing the influence of literature and science as 
valuably prophylactic, and as having a tonic and embracing tendency. 
The more carefully and deeply men read, and the more they think, and 
the more they really know, the more tolerant will they be of views dif- 
ferent from their own, and the more disposed will they be to live in 
charity with those who differ from them. And if the literary and scienti- 
fic society in a country town be little more than the common ground upon 
which we can meet and exchange thoughts, and, at the same time, learn 
something of what is being done in the world of literature and science, 
and be led to appreciate to some extent there own ignorance, it may not 
have discharged its highest functions, but it certainly will have produced 
a result not altogether to be despised. Nay, I would venture to say that 
even in softening down political asperities — in causing Yellows and Blues 
to coalesce upon many subjects in a common colour- — and generally in pro- 
ducing neighbourly feeling and goodfellowship in the best sense of the 
term, a literary and scientific society may do a work — humble it may be, 
V)ut not to be disregarded, not to be altogether put aside. So long as it is 
true that "Blessed are the peacemakers," and so long as the differences of 
opinion, and contrariety of interests, and the miscellaneous jostling of 
one against another in this busy world tend to give rise to feelings opposed 
to peace aiid good-will, so long may a society which brings men together 



20 

on common ground, upon ^vhich it is difficult to inck a quarrel, be re- 
garded as a social advantage, and as an institution upon which all good 
men may look with favour and 's\ith hope. 

But I must stop. The subject is tempting, and one feels to be 
warming to the work; but the "stirring up" has already approached 
more nearly to an hour's duration than I had intended when I commenced 
my address, and I will bring it, perhaps somewhat abruptly, to a close, 
by thanking you for the honour you have done me in electing me as your 
first president, and liy adding a sincere expression of my most earnest 
hope that your Association may grow and prosper, that you may have 
many presidents more efficient than myself, and may be able to do all the 
good that you desire, and much more than you are bold enough to 
expect. 



21 



REPORTS FROM THE ASSOCIATED SOCIETIES. 

WHITEHAVEN SCIENTIFIC ASSOCIATION. 
HOWGILL STREET. 

SESSION, 1875— 187G. 



Pn'sideiit. H. A. Fletcher, F.R.A.S. 

Vice-Prcskh'tH James Baird. 

Past Preskh^its. 

T. F. r Anson, M.D. | William Jackson. 

Augustus Heldee. I W. H. Kitchin. 

Committee- 

E. Ablett, M.D. 1 R- F. Martin. 

Joseph Adair.   J. W. Montgomery, F.C.S. 

Archibald Kitchin, F.C.S. | R. Pickering, C. E. 

R. EussELL, C.E.,F.G.S. 

Curators. 

Botanical \ JJoseph Adair. 

Zoologicall cE. Ablett, M.D. 

Geological ...") ( R- Pickering, C.E. 

 ^Mineraloffical j I. R- Russell, C.E.,F.G.S. 

, °. / ST. F. F Anson, M.D. 

Archaeological ^-yy j^ckson. 

Treasurer John S. Hellon. 

Eon. Secretary B. Taylor. 

3IEETINGS irere held dv.ring the Session as follows: — 
Oct. 19.— Conversazione— Introductory Address by the President. 
Nov. 2.— J. D. Kendall, M.E., F.G.S..— On Valleys and Valley-Gravels, their 

bearing on the question of the Antiquity of Man. 
Nov. 16. — T. Thompson— On Cumberland Past and Present. 
j)ec. 7.— Edward Ceompton, — On Railways, their Permanent Way and 

Signals. 
Dee. 21. — C. Mc.Glashan,— On Coral Formations. 

Jan. 4. — A. Kitchin, F.C.S. -On some of the Phenomena of Light experimen- 
tally illustrated. 
Jan. 18. — E. Russell, F.G.S. — On Pompeii, 
yglj. 1. — W. Jackson, J. P. — On Cockermouth Castle. 
Feb. 15. — James Baird, — On Heat. 



22 

Mar. 2.— W. H. Kitchin,— On some Curiosities of Plant Life. 

Mar. 16.— M. Pateeson, C.E. — The Life and Writings of Thomas De 
Quincey. 

Apr. 6. Edward Atkinson, On the Postal Telegraph System. 

Apr. 20. Conversazione, Election of Officers &c. 

Hour of Meeting 8 pm. 



Mr. H. a. Fletcher gave the following report of the work of the 
Whitehaven Society during the past session : — He was very happy to say 
that, although they had spent about ^160 during the year in providing 
the eases they had seen in the museum downstairs for the reception of 
the different articles that had been presented to them, they had still a 
very handsome balance in hand. They had this advantage, that they had 
no rent to pay. The rooms were altogether their own property, and 
of this they were rather proud. They had done something, it 
would be seen, in the way of a museum, and that was one of the things 
that the Bishop had alluded to in his address on the previous day as 
being a very necessary and desirable thing for each Association to 
have. It had been suggested, and he thought they would be able to 
cany it out, that in addition to the museum they should have a small 
library of scientific and technical books, and this will be done in the 
ensuing year. There had been 36 new members elected during the past 
year, and the total number now on the books was 243. The session was 
opened as usual by a conversazione. It was very largely attended, and 
one interesting feature connected witli it was that the visitors comprised 
a great variety of ranks, from a young Viscount, who was heir to an 
earldom, down to mechanics and colliers. During the session they had 
held eleven ordinary meetings for the reading of papers. An original 
paper was read at each of them, and he thought they had had a little more 
discussion than in former years. The diversity of subjects was somewhat 
considerable. Although they called themselves the Whitehaven Scientific 
Association, they considered it within the scope of their Society to admit 
subjects of a literary character. Of these eleven papers six had been 
purely scientific, three arch;\3ological, and two literary. The session 
closed with the annual meeting for the election of officers and general 



23 

business, and not as usual with a conversazione, because they felt that as 
the county Association was likelj- to hold one in a few days afterwards, 
it would be desirable to omit that part of their usual proceedings. They 
had formed an astronomical sub-section during the year, which seemed to 
hav« done good work. The number of members of the sub-section was 
seventeen, inclusive of thre3 ladies, and there had been altogether fifteen 
meetings, with an average attendance of eight members. 



KESWICK LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



7th, SESSION 1875-6. 



President J- Clifton Waed, Assoc. R.S.M.,F.G.S. 

Vice-President .• Alexandee A. H. Knight, M.D. 

Secretary E. J. Geayson. 

Treasurer ... ... .. ... ••• R. R. Lowthian. 

Committee. 

John Fishee Ceosth-waite. 



Rev. Canon Batteesby, M.A. 
Rev. W. Colville. 
Rev. a. Howson. 

MEETINGS were held during the Session as foUov;s 



Rev. S. Streeten, B.A. 
A. B. Wood. 



SUMMER SESSION. 

EieM Meetings. 
(1.) Crummock Water and Scale Hill. 

(2.) Borrowdale (joined by the Societies of Whitehaven, Workington, and 
Cockermouth.) 

(3.) Thirlmere. 
(4.) Penrith. 

At each of these meetings short addresses were given or papers read 
on Geological and Archaeological subjects. 



WINTER SESSION. 

ORDINARY MEETINGS. 
Held in the Keswick Library at 7-30 p.m. 

Nov. 1st. — The Peesident, — " Electro-Chemical Decompositions," (illustrated 
experimentally.) 



24 

Nov. 29th Mh. J. Richardson,—" The Cumberland Dialect and the Bards who 

have written in it." 
Jan. 17th. — Captain Jno. Jackson,^" Incidental Reminiscences in a Sea- 

Faring Life." 
Jan. 31st.— Mb. J. P. Crosthwaite,— " Celebrated Lake "Visitors." 
Feb. 7th. — Mk. P. Harrison, — " Personal Names." 
Feb. 14th. — Discussion on "Our Lake District," introduced by Mr. E. J. 

Geatson. 
Feb. 28th.— Rev. S. Stbeeten, B.A.,— " Books." 

Mar. 13th.— Eev. W. Colville,— " History, in relation to Human Progress." 
Mar. 30th. — Mr. P. T. Freeman,— " Elementary Music." 
LECTURES. 
Held in the Keswick Lecture Hall at 8 p.m. 

Nov. 8th.— Rev. C. H. Gem, M.A.,— " Life and "Writings of Tom Hood." 

Nov. 22nd. — R. F. Martin, Esq., — " The Great Pyramid." 

Dec. 6th. — Rev. Canon Batteesby, M. A., — " Sites of Ancient Assyria and 

Babylon. " 
Dec. 20th.— E. J. Hebeet, Esq., B.A, F.G.S., of Her Majesty's Geological 

Survey,— "The Planets." 
Jan. 24th. — "W. H. Kitchin, Esq., — " Some Curiosities of Plant Life." 
Feb. 21st. — Rev. J. D. Harrington, M. A., — " A Comparative Sketch of Human 

Languages," 
Mar. 6th. — Rev. J. Christie, M.A. — "A Tour in Italy." 



Mr. J. Clifton Ward gave the following report of the work of 
this Society during the past session : — The number of members is now 
170. During the winter session four kinds of meetings had been held — 
ordinary meetings, nine in number ; public lectures, eight in number 
(one failing, there were only seven delivered) ; a chemical class, and a 
geological class. 

Mr. Townley had conducted a chemical class on the basis of Roscoe's 
Chemistry Primer. The little book was gone through experimentally but 
the attendance averaged only six in number. 



25 

I have held a geological class on nine evenings, the average attend- 
dance being twenty-five. Two field excursions were made with the class. 
At the final examination eight candidates presented themselves and the 
result was very satisiactory. 

The local museum has made considerable progress and the present 
accommodation is found to be all too small. 

Retrospect. Looking back on the work of this and previous years 
it would seem advisable to extend systematic instruction on special 
subjects. The Ordinary Meetings give scope for original papers on varied 
subjects, and hence it might be well to divide the lecture course into two 
parts, one part consisting of a short series of lectures on some one branch 
of science, and the other of lectures on some purely literary subject (such 
as Our Lake Country Poets, or Social Life in England in past centuries, 
or the Histoi-y of a certain period). The formation of classes should also 
be encouraged and a taste for Natural History specially cultivated. 



COCKERMOUTH LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



SESSION 1875-6. 



President... ... ... ... Isaac Fletcher, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. 

Vice-Presidents T. Deane, Esq., C.E. Rev. W. "Williams, F.G.S. H. Dodgson, 
Esq., M. D. 

Co7nmittee. 



Mb. Joseph Beown. 
Rev. Eldred Geeen. 
John Robeetson, M. D. 



Me. T. M. Hareis. 

Me. Hoeace R, Wtndham. 

Me. William Youdale. 



Secretary ... ... ... ... ... .. Me. J. Simpson. 

Treasurer ... .. ... ... .. ...Me. J.H.Watson. 

Lectures delivered in the Court House, Cockermouth, during the session, as follows : 

Hour of Meetinn 8 v.m, 
1875. 

Thursday, October 21st.—" The Progress and Decline of Civilization, as illus- 
trated by the Greeks and Saracens." By T. Deaije, Esq., C.E. 

Thursday, November 4th. — " Some of the Phenomena of Life, in relation to 
Matter and Force." By T. F. I'Anson, Esq., M.D. 



Thursday, November 25th. — " Thomas Hood^Life and Times." By the 
Eev. C. H. Gem. M.A. 

Thursday, December 9th. — " Locomotion." By the President. 

1876. 
Thursday, January 6th. — " The Pedigree of the English People." By the 

Rev. Charles Geant. 

Thursday, January 20th. — ' Pompeii." By R. Russell, Esq., C.E., F.G.S., of 
Her Majesty's Geological Survey. 

Thursday, February 3rd. — " Cocker mouth Castle and its early owners." By 
W. Jackson, Esq., J.P, 

Thursday, February 17th. — "A Fortnight in the Orkneys." By Mr. Thomas 
Fareall. 

Thursdaj, March 2nd. — " Magnetism and Electro -Magnetism, illustrated 
experimentally. " By J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S., of Her Majesty's 
Geological Survey. 

Thursday, March 16th. — "Scottish Minstrelsey and Humour." By Mr. W. 
F. Lamonbt. 

Close of Session, Business, and Election of Officers. 
The programme as given above was successfully carried out, the 
attendance having been generally better than in previous sessions. 

Mr. Ward held a Geological class on nine evenings, the attendance 
averaging twenty-five. Six members presented themselves for examina- 
tion, the result being very satisfactory. 



WORKINGTON SCIENTIFIC AND LITERARY ASSOCIATION. 



SESSION 1875—1876. 



President H. F. Cuewbn, Esq. 

Vice-President ... G. J. Sneltjs, Esq. 

Treasurer Mr. A. Pbile. 

Hon. Secretary Mr. G. F. Downab. 

Committee. 

Me. T. Milburn. | Mr. R. Whitelock. 

Dr. Steano, I Mr. W. Griffiths. 

Rev. J. J. Thornlet. M.A. 



27 

Mcptinqs wrrr h(rld dunny the session as follows : — 
Nov. 3rd.—" Cumberland : Past and Present." By T. Thompson, Esq. 
Dec. 8th.— "The Alphabet," by Rev. J. J. Thoenlet, M.A. 
Jan. 5th.— "The Correlation of Physical Forces," by J. MacFaelane, Esq. 
Feb. 9th.—" The Life and Writings of Thomas De Quincey," by E. W. 

Whitelock, Esq. 
Mar. 1st. — " The old Volcanoes of Cumberland," by J. Clifton Waed, 

Esq. F.G.S. 
Apl. 26th.—" The Spectroscope," by G. J. Snelus, Esq. 
Hour of Meeting 8 ji.m. 

The Secretary furni.shecl the following report : — • 

The Coniraittee of the Workington Scientific and Literary Association 
in presenting their second annual report congratulate the members upon 
the healthy and vigorous condition of the association. During the past 
year the progress although unostentatious has been as satisfactory as in 
the year preceeding ; the lectures have been fairly attended, and the dis- 
cussions that have followed them seem to indicate a growing appreciation 
of scientific and literary pursuits. 

The financial position of the Association is very satisfactory, for 
whereas at the beginning of the year there was a debt of ^13 13s. 8d. 
there is now a balance of ^6 lis. 4d. in the hands of the Treasurer. 
The association at present numbers 60 members. 



GENERAL DISCUSSION ON THE WORK OF THE SOCIETIES. 



The subject of the advisability of promoting more systematic work in 
the individual societies was then brought forward, Mr. Ward mentioning 
what they had proposed to themselves at Keswick for the next winter 
session. 

Mr. Martin said he unfortunately came in too late to hear the 
beginning of the meeting, and almost too late to catch what was said 
about the astronomical section at Whitehaven, in which he was more 
particularly interested. At the last meeting of the section, some ten days 
or a fortnight ago, an interesting discussion took place as to the future of 



28 

the section, and he was deputed to say a few words that day, if tim» were 
given him, upon this subject. It was felt by all present that they had 
made a start, perhaps not a formal or a first-rate one, but also it was felt 
very strongly that another year they should attempt some more definite 
and more organized work than they had attempted this year. Their 
attendance at the beginning was very good, and showed signs of consider- 
able elasticity, and it was thought if the section had been advertised 
more widely they might have got a better attendance. At the last meet- 
ing an opinion was expressed that many ladies and gentlemen in White- 
haven would be glad to join the section if it were known and understood, 
and they would like some more definite course of work and lectures than 
they had had last winter. What was proposed the other day was that 
they should endeavour if possible before another winter, to get a regularly 
organized course of lectures upon astronomy as the work of the section at 
Whitehaven, and the ciuestion which he had before brought before them 
of the Cambridge system of University extension was discussed. 
They found that if they applied for a lecturer from Cambridge upon 
astronomy it would cost somewhere between ^30 and ^35 a year, 
if they could get some other town in Cumberland to join them, and it was 
proposed that they should endeavour, before the next autumn, to get a 
volunteer to give them a regular course of lectures, and also that the 
introductory lecture should be given by Professor Stewart, of Cam- 
bridge, whose name was so well known. He (Mr. ]\Iartin) had 
promised to endeavour to arrange this on their behalf, and he hoped to be 
able to report that this would be done some time in the autumn. If so, 
they would hope to have, at any rate, the sympathy of their 
fellow-workers in other towns in Cumberland, and possibly, at some future 
time, to have a regular system of lectures organized at Whitehaven, and 
perhaps at other places, if the matter were taken up by the feUow- 
societies. 

The Secketary, the Rev. Canon Batteesby, and Mr. Peile, all 
concurred with Mr. Martin's observations. 

Dr. I' Anson fully endorsed all that had been said as to tlie work of 
the different societies being systematized. Looking back to the early days 



29 

of their Association, he remembered that they then attempted special 
classes to carry out systematic instruction, and they were somewhat 
unfortunate. The rock on which they split was, he believed, that they 
attempted too much. Had they reaUy confined themselves to one subject, 
and one only, during one session, they would have had very much better 
results. On the contrary, they undertook three special classes, and the 
consequence was very unsatisfactory, and what Mr. Martin spoke of as 
having been accomplished during the last session would give good earnest 
of greater results if the work were more systematically pursued. 

In reply to Mr. Grayson, the Chairman said he presumed, in the 
case of a course of lectures being given by a Cambridge lecturer on the 
subject of Astronomy, to the expense of which two or more Associations 
would contribute, it would be arranged for a course of lectures in each of 
the contributing towns. 

The Secretary then called attention to the fact that the Societies 
might render considerable service to each other by the exchange of surplus 
specimens from their museums. 



ELECTION OF OFFICERS, &c. 

(General Meeting, May 2nd.) 

The following motions were passed : — 

Proposed by Mr. H. A. Fletcher, and seconded by Dr. I' Anson, that 
the Bishop of Carlisle be requested to accept the post of President for 
another year. 

Proposed by Mr. W. H. Kitchin, and seconded by Mr. Fisher 
Crosthwaite, that Mr, J. C. Ward be re-elected to the postSNof Secretary 
and Treasurer. 

Proposed by Mr. Russell, and seconded by Mr. Crosthwaite, that the 
annual meeting be held in Keswick in May next. 



30' 

E X c u n S I O N 8 



VISIT TO THE DOCKS, SHIPYARD, AND LONSDALE 
IRONWORKS. 

The j)arty who preferred this excursion were met at the docks by Mr. 
Williams, the resident engineer, who conducted them over the works. The 
strong gates that are in cousse of erection were examined, and the process of 
pile-driving was witnessed. At the shipyard, which adjoins the dock, the 
company were received by Mr. Patterson, the manag-er. The drawing-office was 
first visited, and there the models of the vessels that the Company have built or 
are building were seen. Walking round the yard they examined the machine 
for planing the edges and butts of plates, the five punching and shearing 
machines, the angle-iron cutting machines, &c. As time was limited, the party 
passed on to the steam-hammer, lately erected in the yard. A block was made 
from scraps, and the process of converting it into what is called " hammered 
scrap iron " was illustrated. Instead of having to send this description of iron 
away, it is wrought into keel bars, and stem and stern posts. The ruins of the 
saw mill that was burnt down last week were next viewed, and the company 
passed on to the Lonsdale Hematite Ironworks. We may state that the Ship- 
building Company have in course of construction six barques — one of 1,000 tons, 
for Messrs. Fisher and Sprott; two of 800 tons each, for Messrs. Jackson and 
Metcalf ; one of 800 tons, for Captain Borrowdale ; one of SCO tons, for Captain 
Connell ; and one of 200 tons, for Caj^tain Nelson. In addition to these there 
are contracts on hand for three other vessels — one of 600 tons, for Mr. Raie, 
Liverpool ; one of 650 tons, for Captain Nelson ; and one of 800 tons, for 
Captain Ditchburn. 

The Lonsdale Ironworks, over which the party were kindly conducted by 
Mr. Baird, managing director, stands on an area of aboiit six acres. There are 
three furnaces in blast, and one is in course of erection. Those in blast are all 
close-topped, the gas being utilized for heating air, raising steam, &c., thereby 
effecting a considerable saving as compared with the old system. The furnaces 
were tapped in rotation, so that there was abundant opportunity of observing 
the process of "pig" making. The engine-room was the next department. 
Here are three large engines, on the " grasshopper " principle, by Barclay, of 
Kilmarnock. There are seven boilers in operation, heated by gas, and two 
others are well on towards completion — the latter being required for the new 
furnace (larger than the present ones, but on the same principle) which is 
being constructed on the south side of the works. The "hoist" for the new 



31 

furnace will be made of bricks (which the Company manufacture themselves) 
instead of the iron framework of which they are usually made. The heating 
stoves were visited, and it was here explained that the air, after travelling 
thi'ough these, passed into the fui-naces at a temperatiu'e of about 1,000 degrees. 
Lead was easily melted in the stoves by the hot air. The depots for the delivery 
of iron ore, coke, &c., were also noticed in passing. We observed one improve- 
ment in the disposing of slag. Opposite each fiu-nace is a bridge spanning the 
railway, and on the surface of each bridge is an inclined plane. The slag is 
lifted by means of a steam-crane, and deposited upon bogies on the incline 
plane, along which they are run, and the contents are tipped on the shore, the 
descending bogie bringing back the empty one. Hitherto this task of clearing 
away the slag had to be done by locomotives, but by the system now adopted 
expense is saved, and the work is performed more expeditiously. The steam for 
the crane is supplied by gas. The question was asked at the meeting on Tuesday 
" Were these slag blocks utilized? " and we may state that they are to a con- 
siderable extent. The softer portion is comparatively easily affected by the 
weather, and is callable of being worked up into a mortar, which, mixed with 
sand or other suitable material, hardens very soon. Other parts of the slag, 
when crushed, make a very good concrete, which is valuable for a variety 
of purposes. 

GEOLOGICAL EXCURSION. 

Under the leadership of Messrs. Russell, Pickering, and Ward, about 70 
members made an excursion along the coast, the various geological features 
between Whitehaven and Barrowmouth being pointed out. 

THE VISIT TO HENRY PIT. 

Not the least interesting portion of the programme was that devoted to 
visiting Lord Lonsdale's colliery on the north of the town. Hitherto the col. 
iery has been known as William Pit, but for the last few years another seam — 
known as the six-quarter — has been opened out. To enable this to be done, the 
late Mr. T. E. Forster, who had then the charge of the collieries, determined to 
sink a new shaft, called Henry Pit, after the Christian name of the present 
Earl. When Mr. Forster was succeeded by the present manager, Mr. Martin, 
that gentleman continued to carry out the plans of his predecessor, and at 
present they have so far advanced that Mr. Martin thought a visit to the place 
would well repay the trouble to those of the Association who take an interest in 
such matters. Accordingly, on Monday afternoon, shortly after the appointed 
time, thii-ty members mustered at the pit top, and the overmen, deputy over- 



32 

men, and wastenien having kindly placed their pit clothes at their disposal, it 
was not long before the whole were turned out in their new rig. And a motley 
crew they looked ! The diversity of uniform was ludicrous in the extreme. As 
for ourselves we sported a suit of blue duffle, about the proper size and shape, 
while the head piece consisted of a very dilapidated white billy-cock. The 
representative of a contemporary got into a pair of what had very much the 
appearance of a French sailor's pants that had been made for a man twice his 
own size, a coat that much resembled the pattern of that of Joseph's of old, 
while the roof was covered by a sou' wester. Some of the men who supplied 
the clothing sent their blue flannel shirts, and not a few of the new tenants had 
got into these over their own clothes, while perhaps a pair of checked horse- 
knee breeches covered the lower extremities. Many a hearty laugh was enjoyed 
at the expense of a neighbour, as he emerged from the dressing-room, where the 
metamorphosis was such as, in some instances, to defy recognition by intimate 
friends. Everything being ready, Mr. Martin an-anged to form the 
company into three detachments, and despatched Mr. Harker, the viewer of the 
pit, with the first installment. The visitors were sent down two at a time, an 
official accompanying each cage, in order that the possibility of an accident 
should be averted. Mr. Barker's gang having been despatched, Mr. Moore, the 
viewer on the south side, went down with the first of his party, Mr. Martin 
remaining to the last. On arriving at the i^it bottom the route taken was along 
the north drift, a distance of 600 yards under the sea. The first part of this 
drift, for a distance of 300 yards, is through stone, and all arched with brick 
and must have been both a slow and an expensive process. As soon as the coal 
was pierced the drift was continued in a straight line, as it is intended at some 
futm-e period to haul the coal by means of an engine plane. Of coiu-se, the 
workings branch off from the main drift, and also from a second one, which is 
used for the return air, and up to the present time there are some 19 fore heads 
in the north district. The company of which we were a member (that piloted 
by Mr. Moore,) walked right to the fore head at the end of the di-ift and found 
a good-sized working, with a good roof some seven feet high. This place was 
making a little gas, as was evinced by the hissing sound caused by it coming in 
contact with water. One of the party tried it, with his lamp, and the usual 
indication of a blue flame presented itself. The ventilation was, however, so 
good that there was no lodgement of gas. Most of the workings were afterwards 
visited, and Mr. Moore pointed out such places of interest as were worthy of 
notice. There was one place of particular interest on the north side that he 
took care his friends should not depart without having a thorough knowledge 
of, and one which wovdd leave a lasting impression, not only on the mind, but 
also on the small of the back, and that was a place known by the name of the 



33 

Low Steer. He steered his way tliroiigh this, and, of course, all hands had to 
follow suit, whether it suited or not. The height of the Low Steer is something 
under three feet, and the length of it about 200 yards. A lilliputian brigade of 
the standard height of that mythical army could march through this place with 
the greatest degree of comfort, bolt upright ; but if anyone whose proportions 
had ventured to elongate themselves to something like six feet, were seduced to 
pass through they would find that long before half the distance was covered the 
spinal cord had tindergone an operation which was highly objectionable to the 
proprietor. A welcome rest at the outer end enabled the party to assiime some- 
thing like their original form, and a move was made towards the south side. It 
was necessary to go by way of the pit bottom to get to the workings on the 
other side, and here, as upon the north side, they are approached by a stone 
drift some 300 yards in length, all arch bricked and being of the most costly and 
substantial character. The seam here is the same as upon the north side, and 
the few workings that were visited were almost immediately underneath Bransty 
Hospital. Approaching the south workings there is a self-acting inclined plane, 
which will save a good deal of labour. The return journey was then made, and 
the party rode to bank in twos as they had gone down ; and if the Association 
ever missed a treat it was in not being present to witness the members who had 
ventured " down amongst the coals," as they reappeared in daylight, with their 
begrimed hands and faces, their ludicrous apparel, and the absolute necessity 
for at least a couple of shoe blacks each. A i^lentiful supply of hot and cold 
water was, however, provided, with plenty of soap and clean towels ; and a large 
staff of officials having for the occasion been converted into waiting-maids, a 
respectable toilet was performed, and aU were soon again jiresentable to the 
outer world. 

We may state that the six-quarter seam is about 6^ feet in thickness ; is 50 
fathoms below the main band, which is being worked in William Pit ; and the 
coal is of a sviperior quality, especially for coking purisoses. We are informed 
that it is the intention of Mr. Martin to erect coal-washing machines for the 
purpose of making the small coal usable for making coke ; and so convinced is 
the manager of the Lonsdale Hematite Iron Company of the success which will 
attend the experiment, that they intend to erect several coke ovens for the pur- 
pose of manufacturing their own fuel, instead of having to bring it all the way 
from the Darlington district, as they do at i^resent. The shaft itself is perhaps one 
of the finest in the north of England. Its depth is 155 fathoms, and it is 12 feet 
in diameter, and easel several bricks thick from top to bottom. It is now being 
fitted up with iron slides for a now double-deck cage, capable of carrying four 
tiibs at a time, and which wiLl shortly supersede the present ox'dinary cage. 



34 

 which is only capable of carrying one tub, and runs in iron mre gaiides In 
order to work the new shaft efficiently, a 3G-inch double cylinder engine has been 
put down, with a 20-feot winding drum ; and the head-gear, which is in course 
of construction, will, when complete, be some 60 feet high. The columns and 
girders are of iron, and were made by the Whitehaven Shipbidlding Company. 
They are, however, being put up by the Granary Yard hands, under the super- 
vision of Mr. Hetherington. Hitherto the ventUation of William Pit has been 
by furnaces, but the ventilation of the Whitehaven collieries on the south side 
having been so successfully adapted to the French patent known as Guibal's fan. 
it has been determined to ere(;t one for the ventilation of both Henry Pit and 
William Pit. On visiting the fan case we found that it was in a forward state, 
and when complete, the present shaft into William Pit will be converted into an 
air shaft, and the whole of the coals will be drawn from Henry Pit. At present 
Henry Pit is being ventilated by a small Guibal fan, some 10 feet in diameter, 
and will be driven by a 30-inch double cylinder, disconnecting engine. The 
steam to drive the winding engine and the fan engine will be generated in five 
large boilers immediately against the face of Bransty quarry, and the flue goes 
to a chimney which has made its appearance in the field above. Amongst other 
improvements on the pit top has been the erection of new screens. The whole 
of the frame work is made of iron, and when complete wUl be very commodious ; 
and as soon as Henry Pit shaft is ready to draw the whole of the coals a new 
inclined plane from the pit top to the screens wUl come into operation. The 
tubs will rvtn upon an inclined plane, both from and back to the pit top, a steam 
lift at the screen end raising the tubs a sufficient height to enable them to find 
their way back to the pit top alone. 



35 



PAPERS EEAD AT THE CONVERSAZIONE. 

ON SOME PLUMBAGO COINING-MOULDS FOUND AT NETHEE.- 
WASDALE, 

By R. S. Febguso^j, M.A. 

(This Paper is given iu abstract, the author having been requested by the 
Association to communicate it in full to the Cumberland and Westmoreland Anti- 
quarian and Archceological Society.) 

When my friend ilr. Jackson invited me to be present here to-night 
and to give a short address, he further furnished me with the text of my ad- 
dress in the shaj^e of a mould of phmibago, whose halves have cut on their 
inside the obverses and reverses of some English coins. This mould was 
found in Api'il, 186-5, in a small cairn of stones in a straggling oak coppice 
a little outside the village of Netherwasdale, and near to the river Irt. 
It is composed of two blocks of pure Cumberland plumbago, one weighing 
5oz. 3dr., and the other weighing 5oz. 7dr. 

The fact that these blocks are blocks of pure Cumberland plumbago 
is a proof of the genuineness of the discovery, for that material is now 
both rare and expensive, the mines having been closed for many years. 
The mould, when open, exhibits the dies of the obverses and reverses oj 
five coins. The largest coin is a groat of either Edward IV. or Richard 
III. The second coin, in point of size, is the half-groat, exactly suuilar 
to, but smaller than, the groat. The other three coins are all the same, 
and are silver pennies of Henry VII. 

We now know all that can be known about these moulds. They are 
the tools of some coiner, who lived in the early part of the reign of 
Henry VII. 



3G 



ON LOCAL TOKENS. 



By Wm. Jackson, J. P. 



(This Paper is given in abstract, the author having been requested to bring 
the subject before the Cumberland and "Westmoreland Antiquarian and Archoe- 
ological Society.) 

Mr. Jack.son exhibited two cases of Cimiberland Tokens, the larger 
one containing twenty-seven, and the smaller four, specimens, and after a 
few preliminaiy remarks on the subject of Tokens generally, stated that so 
very numerous were the varieties, and so extensive had been their circu- 
lation at one time when the copper currency was not in the settled 
condition that it is at present, that a correspondent of his, an ardent 
collector, possessed not less than 15,000 varieties in his cabinet. He then 
drew attention to the larger case, the specimens in which (though they 
had passed in a few instances into the general circulation as pence, half- 
pence, and fartliing.s, according to their various sizes,) were not formally 
intended to pass as money, but were given out to carters as certificates 
that the load of coals taken from the pit, had been duly delivered at the 
shipping port, and therefore the holder was entitled to receive a certain 
sum, on presenting the same at the office on pay nights. Each shipping 
colliery had a die of its own struck off, and one of the specimens exhibited 
dated as far back as the sixteenth century, which indicated the antiquity of 
the practice. 

The smaller case contained a few of the many pecuniary tokens struck 
by John Wilkinson, the great iron founder, of last century, whose residence 
at the foot of Castle Head, near Grange, may be seen by the traveller on 
the Furness line to Carnforth, on the left, after passing the Grano-e station. 
Amongst other very interesting facts in connection with this very re- 
markable man, it was stated that he was the first who made practical use 
of coke in the smelting of iron ; that he built the first iron vessel ; that he 
was primarily concerned in the erection of the first iron bridge, that of 



37 

Coalbrookdale ; and that, at his own express desire, he was buried in an 
iron coffin, imder very peculiar circumstances. 

Mr. Jackson asserted that, (though it could scarcely be hoped at a 
period so remote from his birth, being now one hundred and fifty years, 
it would ever be proved) there was good reason to believe that Wilkinson 
was born near Clifton, where his parents resided; near and not at, because 
it was certain that he was born in a market cart, and, that being so, the 
event most probably occured whilst his mother was returning from Work- 
ington Market to Clifton, a mai'ket two miles distant from that town. 



WHITEHAVEN HARBOUR 
1876 




38 



HARBOUES AND DOCKS. 

By J. E. Williams, Resident Engineee, Dock Woeks, Whitehaven. 
(With a Plate . ) 

It is usual to designate by the term harbour a place protected from 
the winds and waves so as to afford shelter for shipping. The term may be 
sub-classified into those harbours which are accessible at certain states of the 
tide only, and those which are accessible at all times and in all weathers. 
The former are known as ordinary or tidal harbours, and the latter as 
harbours of refuge, because they aflford shelter at all times to vessels 
overtaken by stress of weather or requiring to effect some repairs, thus 
avoiding the risk and wear and tear of keeping to sea during an on shore 
gale and the delay of jjutting back to port. That harbours of refuge 
contribute very materially to save both life and property on our coast, is 
fully attested by the numbers of vessels that may be seen during stormy 
weather anchored in perfect safety within the shelter of the breakwaters 
of Holyhead, Plymouth, and other ports. 

It is obvious that in crowded and confined seas like our own, 
harbours accessible at all states of the tide, and in all weathers, should be 
at frequent intervals along the coast. During storms, when vessels can 
only reach those ports which are under their lee, it is evident that the 
greater the number of such ports — affording easy access and shelter at all 
times - the greater will be the safety of life and property on our shores. 

By a cursory glance at the configuration of our coast it would almost 
seem that with our bays and bold projecting headlands, such places of 
shelter already exist naturally. But on examination we find 

that where shelter is obtained there is insuflScient depth of 
water for a vessel to ride at anchor at all states of the tide, 
or where we find ample depth of water it is only partially sheltered, 
and perhaps too far away from the track of passing vessels. Thus it is 



39 

that we are called iipon to complete by artificial means those features that 
exist naturally in a more or less perfect state, either by constructing 
breakwaters or piers to obtain sufficient shelter, or by resorting to dredging 
for the removal of shoals to acquire ample depth of water at all 
states of the tide. 

In connection with harbour works, it would be manifestly absurd to 
generalise or advocate any jjarticular mode of procedure or disposition of 
structure that would be applicable to all circumstances and localities. No 
works whatever require more careful consideration and skill, or are at- 
tended with more aggravating consequences when hastily or improperly 
devised. 

Of course shelter may be obtained in a broad expanse of sea by con- 
structing an isolated breakwater in the midst of the bay, as at Plymouth, 
or by running a pier from the land oi;t into deep water ; but if the 
prevailing winds and the set of the tides are not carefully considered, 
serious complications of tidal currents may be the result, and the harbour 
instead of being a place of shelter easy of access, will be only a 
trap for the accommodation of shoals and a terror to the mariner. 

In addition to possessing ample depth of water and good sheltered 
anchorage at all times, it is obvious that a harbour of refuge should be 
particularly easy of access ; greater facility should be afforded for the 
entry of vessels than for their departure, because during an on-shore gale 
when vessels seek the protection of a port on their lee, manoeuvering at 
the entrance might result in their missing the harbour altogether and 
becoming wrecks on the lee-shore, whereas when once inside and anchored 
in safety they can very well remain there until the storm has abated. 

In the standard type of breakwater the substructure is formed by 
depositing stone in the rough state along the site of the work, either by 
tramways from the shore or by hopper barges directed in position by 
beacons or landmarks ; a huge mound is thus formed which after exposure 
to the action of the sea foi- some time becomes consolidated and assumes 
a certain form. Within the limits of the tidal range the materials are 
disposed of in the form of a long flat slope similar to a beach ; below low 



40 

water mark the slope becomes steeper, about 5 horizontal to 1 vertical 
for a depth of 15 feet ; from this change of inclination to the bottom, 
no matter how deep, the slope assumes a much steeper character, varying 
from 1| and 2 horizontal to 1 vertical. The general uniformity in the 
depth at which these rubble mounds assume their final change of inclina- 
tion, tends to confirm the opinion that the disturbing action of waves on 
our coast does not extend lower than 15 fc3t below low- water mark. It 
has been exemplified, however, after the completion of some of our break- 
waters, that the disturbing action of the waves extends about 5 feet lower 
or to a depth of 20 feet ; but this is no doubt owing to the recoil and 
increased agitation — produced by the upright face of the superstructure. 

Instead of the upright wall as adopted at Holyhead, Portland, and 
Alderney, the superstructure of the Plymouth breakwater presents a 
sloping face to the sea. It is evident that a sloping face is less exposed 
to the violent shocks and blows of the waves than an uj^right wall ; waves 
in rushing up a slope are allowed as on a beach to expand and exhaust 
themselves gradually ; whereas on striking an upright wall they act like 
a ram and tend to overturn the structure, but at the same time the effort 
of the wave is more effectually destroyed. 

The force exerted by waves in exposed positions is very considerable, 
and sometimes forms an important element of consideration in reference 
to harbour work. It is generally assumed that unbroken waves 
never exceed, under any circumstances, 43 feet in height 
or 560 feet in length, and that their power of destruction 
varies directly with the height. The latter depends upon 
what is termed the "fetch," or distance from the weather shore; 
and, according to Mr. Stevenson, it is approximately, in feet, equal to 
once and a half the square root of the fetch in nautical miles. 
From this, it seems that at a distance of about 800 miles from the 
weather shore waves attain the maximum height. Now, the 
heaviest gales recorded at the Liverpool Observatory during the 
year 1874 and 1875, were from W. S. W., and theii' force was 
respectively equal to 50 and 70 pounds per sc^uare foot of flat surface 
With such gales here, the Isle of Man, distant about 30 miles, would form 



41 

the weather shore. The height of iinhroken waves, due to that fetch, 
would be about 8 feet 3 inches ; but if the storm veered to W. or S.W., 
the Irish coast would then form the weather shore, and the resulting 
waves would be nearly twice as high. These are, of 
course, unbroken waves in deep water, and not the 
concentration or heaping-up of energy we see on a shelving beach 
during an on-shore gale, dashing against cliffs and leaping into the air 
100 feet high. 

At Skerryvore, a point on the west coast of Scotland, exposed to the 
full fury of the Atlantic, waves were observed to exert a force of three 
tons per square foot, and on the shores of the Shetland Islands, blocks 23 
tons weight were transported by the waves a distance of 30 feet, and then 
broken into fragments. 

In modern harbour-works advantage is taken of the employment of 
large concrete blocks to resist the destructive force of the waves. Blocks 
weighing 350 tons each are now employed with success. These are formed 
on shore, and as each block becomes set or hard it is conveyed to its 
destination in a barge provided with a derrick and jjowerful machinery, 
by which it is lowered into position when the bed or substructure is 
levelled to receive it. The advantage of employing such huge blocks is 
chiefly that several linear yards of structure are laid in one operation, 
reaching above low water mark, and capable of resisting the force of 
the heaviest seas. Concrete, in the liqviid state, is also extensively employed. 
In some instances it is formed in bags of 1 00 tons each, in others it is un- 
protected and lowered in skips or boxes, the bottoms of which are provided 
with butterfly doors, and opened by means of a trigger, worked from a 
stage above water. The chief advantage of these modes of procedure is 
that the concrete in the liquid state conforms readily to the natural bed 
of the sea or substructure upon which it is deposited, thus dispensing 
with the manual labour under water necessary in setting large blocks ; 
and, further, the structure, when complete, is more monolithic, or 
free from joints and weak places. 

Works in connection with tidal harbours, require to be even more 



42 

carefully studied than those further seaward in deep water, which allow a 
wider margin for contingencies. By constructing jjiers in comparatively 
shallow water, and within the tidal range, we form abrupt projections from 
the general outline of the shore ; the effect of thus interfering with the 
tidal or littoral currents is always problematical, and if they are 
not so governed or modified that the silting tendency of the flood 
tide is fully counterbalanced by the scour of the ebb, the result may 
be very prejudicial to the normal condition of the port. 

At the entrance to some harbours, a phenomenon may be observed 
due to the interception of the tidal and shore currents, and it is sometimes 
very clearly defined at the entrance to Whitehaven Harbour, (see Plate.) 
During the ebb, the current setting south from Redness Point is intercept- 
ed by the outflow from the harbour ; the curve of mutual counteraction 
of these two opposing forces is frequently defined by a zone on the surface 
of the water, which attains its maximum convexity towards the sea during 
the first half of the ebb, when the depth and momentum of outflow is 
greatest. The convexity of the curve towards the sea, clearly shows that 
the tendency of the shore current to set into the harbour, is overpowered 
by the outflow of the ebb. Now if we formed a secondary 
outlet for the tide so as to diminish the momentum of outflow 
at this point, the curve of mutual counteraction would then probably 
become convex towards the harbour instead of towards the sea as 
at present, thus indicating the set of the shore current into the 
harbour, carrying with it the sand or other matter held in sus- 
pension ; deposition would ensue and periodical dredging would be 
necessary to maintain a navigable fairway. 

Piers to afford shelter from the prevailing storms, such as the West 
Pier, (see Plate) are generally formed polygonal in plan or constructed in 
a series of cants, terminating with a bold pier-head. This not only gives 
the structure increased lateral stability, but, in addition, the cants or 
elbows change the direction of the waves, and finally the bold pier-head 
checks the fetch of the sea across the harbour mouth, which might 
otherwise sweep the vessels to the lee-ward of the entrance. 



43 

When the pier-heads are disposed so as to form a funnel mouth con- 
tracting inwards, such as the entrance to Whitehaven Inner Harbour, 
they tend to produce increased agitation within ; because, as the waves 
roll in between the outer shoulders of the jjiers, instead of being allowed 
to jjass on freely to spread and exhaust themselves gradually, they are 
contracted and increased in height, or in other words a heaping-iip of 
energy takes place between the piers, which is forced through the con- 
tracted passage by the following waves, thus producing a chopping and 
agitated sea inside. 

In the disposition of the quays and jetties in a harbour on an ex- 
posed coast, sufficient space should be allowed for the evolutions of vessels 
driven in whilst under sail. Facilities for railway traffic are frequently 
important elements of consideration ; and where sheds or warehouses are 
required for the protection of perishable articles, the width of the quays 
must be regulated accordingly. 

In constructing the quays, it is usual to take advantage of the 
increased stability afforded with a sloping or battering frontage, but in 
tidal harbours, where vessels frequently lie abreast, it is manifest that the 
batter must be very limited, otherwise a vessel in the inside berth might 
get nipped during the fall of the tide between a deeper-laden vessel and 
the face of the structure. 

The expansion of traffic at a tidal harbour is frequently met by con- 
structing open-piled timber jetties, which, though not so lasting as stone 
structures, are less costly, and possess the advantage of affording addi- 
tional quay space without encroaching to any prejudical extent upon the 
water area or tidal volume of the harbour. Cheap structures of this 
class readily meet the demands of increased traffic, and encourage its 
development to such an extent that it becomes absolutely necessary to 
have dock accommodation in which vessels can lie loaded and discharged, 
or moved about at all states of the tide. It is indispensable 

to the commercial prosperity of a seaport to jjossess dock accom- 
modation in which vessels can float at all times, so as to avoid 
the risk of taking the ground when deeply laden, particularly after the 



structural fatigue of a long and tempestuous voyage. Vessels have 
frequently to carry weights far in excess of their own and unequally dis- 
tributed, so that when a long steamer takes the ground, it involves the 
risk of impairing the rigidity of the hull and the adjustment of 
the machinery 

A century ago the area of the Liverpool docks was only about 13 
acres ; now the docks form an unbroken chain of six miles in length, and 
the value of the imports and exports for the year 1874 reached the 
enormous amount of ^667,733,165. At present, extensive works are 
in progress to meet the requirements of the increasing commerce of the 
port ; similarly at Hull, Glasgow, Bristol, and other places. 

The wonderful change that has come over the character of our 
shipping must be considered with reference to the proportions and details 
of modern docks. In 1860 the number of vessels registered as belonging 
to the United Kingdom, consisted of 25,663 sailing vessels and 2,000 
steamers; in 1874, the number of sailing vessels decreased to 21,464, and 
the number of steamers increased to 4,033 ; or in other words, while the 
number of sailing vessels had decreased, the number of steamers had 
doubled ; but instead of the tonnage simply doubling as well, it increased 
from 454,327 to 1,870,611 tons, thus showing that steamers are now not 
only twice as numerous, but twice as large as they were fifteen years ago. 
This increase of tonnage in the modern steamship is not so much due to 
increased depth or beam, entailing wide and deep entrance locks, as to 
increased length ; so that instead of providing dock accommodation for 
the comparatively short bluff vessels of the past, we are now required to 
afford accommodation generally for steamers long and thin in character, 
and, in some instances, exceeding 500 feet in length. 

The construction of docks in a tidal harbour is sometimes attended 
with many difficulties and obstructions. In the majority of cases, the 
difficulties and delays attending tide-work are overcome by constructing a 
coffer-dam, so as to exclude the tide from the area of operations ; but, of 
course, in ports where the existing accommodation is very limited, 
this preliminary step is impracticable, and in consequence the work 



4fi 

assumes an intermittent and tedious character. The difficulties 
attending unfavourable strata in the foundations are readily over- 
come by driving piles or sinking concrete cylinders. The latter have 
  been used very successfully on the Clyde for forming the sub- 
structure of quay walls reaching 20 feet below low water mark. 

Where space will permit, it is usual to form a Lock at the entrance 
to a dock with a double pair of gates, the distance between which is 
regulated by the class of vessels frequenting the port. At high water the 
inner gates are closed, so as to maintain the water level in the dock, and 
thus prevent the possibility of the larger class of vessels within taking the 
ground. The outer gates may be kept open so long as there is water 
enough in the harbour to admit a vessel. If one should arrive and wish 
to enter the dock, she is moored in the lock, the outer gates of which are 
then closed. The water level in the lock is then raised to that in the 
dock by means of sluices through the inner gates or side walls ; when this 
is done, the inner gates are opened, and the vessel allowed to enter the dock. 
The reverse operation of passing a vessel out is performed in a similar man- 
ner. In some cases an outer, or what is termed a " Half-tide Dock" is 
provided, capable of holding several large vessels and which, in 
addition, is used as a dock proper by the smaller class of vessels. 
By fixing a pair of gates at the entrance to Whitehaven North 
Harbour it could be utilised as a half-tide dock and kept open for ship- 
ping an hour after the gates of the inner dock were closed ; during which 
time a spring tide would have ebbed about 2 feet 4 inches ; this would 
represent the difference in level of the water in the inner and outer docks. 
But as they are about of equal area, by opening the inner gates to allow 
vessels to pass in, the general water level would be reduced only one-half 
the original difference in level, or 1 foot 2 inches. 

In a busy harbour the advantage of a lock or half-tide dock is mani- 
fest, but in an important seaport with a long chain of docks it is almost 
indispensable. Vessels arriving late during the tide, having been delayed 
by fog or stress of weather, are passed through to their appropriated berthg 
and enabled to discharge their cargoes of perishable goods and leave by 
the next tide. 



46 

Lock g<ates of large span are generally so constructed that when 
closed they form an arc of a circle, thus producing tightness or compres- 
sion at the meeting posts and side walls, tending to prevent leakage. 
With gates of medium size this is obtained by making them meet at an 
obtuse angle, so that M'hen closed against the water pressure they mutually 
strut each other, and moreover the opening and closing of the gates is facil- 
itated. The entrance to Whitehaven Dock is 50 feet wide ; during a spring 
tide, the stress in direction of each gate is 233 tons and the resulting 
thrust on each side wall is 250 tons. With forces such as these, together 
with the hydrostatic pressure on the gate floor, it is evident that the work 
in the vicinity of lock gates requires to be not only massive but as 
impervious as possible. 

Sluices or outlets are generally formed in the gates or side walls for 
the purpose of keeping the lock floor clean, and to counteract any shoaling 
or silting tendency in the vicinity of the entrance ; their efficiency will, of 
course, dejjend in a great measure upon the volume and velocity of the 
water emitted. The latter is proportional to the square root of the depth 
of the outlet below the surface of the water ; that is to say, with four 
times the depth the velocity will be only doubled. If the stream is 
opjjosed by a stratum of standing water the efficiency of the sluicing will 
be nullified, and it -will only tend to create whirlpools and eddies. 

In connection with harbours and wet docks it is necessary to have some 
place for the reception of vessels so that they can be examined and repaired 
in the dry. For this purpose the "Graving or Dry Dock" is the most popular. 
When a vessel is once in and the gates closed, the water is allowed to run 
out, or is pumped out by steam power, according to circumstances, thus 
leaving the dock perfectly dry until the vessel's repairs are complete, when 
the water is again admitted and the vessel floated out. Other means are 
adopted for repairing vessels in the dry, or free from the flow of the tide, 
such as the " Patent Slip," the " Hydraulic Lift Dock," and the 
*' Floating Dock. " The Patent Slip is only used for vessels of medium 
size, and consists of a cradle with rollers, upon which the vessel is laid 
and then drawn up an incline beyond high water mark. One of these 
may be seen in use at the south side of the Whitehaven Harbour. 



47 

The " Hydraulic Lift Dock " consists of a platform, formed by 
pontoons connected to a row of pillars or hydraulic presses on each side. 
When a vessel requires to be docked, valves are opened to admit the 
water into the pontoons so that the platform may sink to the required 
depth, the vessel is then hauled over it and shored. The platform and 
vessel are then lifted by means of the hydraulic presses on each side ; 
at the same time the water is allowed to escape from the pontoons 
whicii are then sufficiently buoyant to support the vessel above water. 

The " Floating Dock " consists of a hugh iron pontoon formed like 
an ordinary Graving Dock ; when required for use, valves are opened to 
admit the water, and the structure gradually sinks to the required depth 
to receive the vessel, which is floated into it and shored. The water is 
then pumped out by steam power until the floor of the dock is above 
water ; it can then be moved to any suitable position. For general 
purposes it is evident that the ordinary Graving Dock has the advantage 
of all these systems, the vessel when once inside and shored in the dry is 
free from accident and the risks attending mechanical complications ; 
moreover, the vessel is uniformly accessible both for workmen and 
materials at all times, being in no way aflected by the rise and fall 
of the tide. 

Hydraulic machinery is now extensively used in connection with 
docks, for the working of cranes, opening and closing the gates, turning 
swing-bridges and capstains. The pressure is obtained by load instead of 
by elevation, and is generally that due to a head of water 1,500 feet high, 
or about 700 lbs. per scjuare inch. This is produced by means 
of pumping by steam power against a column of water supporting 
a loaded piston termed an accumulator. The water pressure is 
transmitted from the accumulator to the several machines around 
the docks, by means of pipes laid under the surface of the 
quays, and the ej;haust water is sometimes brought back in return pipes to 
the pump-well and used over again. 

On the Mersey Dock Estate hydraulic machinery is very extensively 
employed, and the arrangements carried out in connection with the ware- 



48 

housing and transmission of grain are beautiful examples of mechanism. 
The grain is lifted in a huge tub from the hold of the vessel to the top 
storey of the warehouse. It is then emptied into a hopper and glided on 
to an endless travelling band, upon which it is transmitted horizontally to 
any part of the building ; by a deflection of the band the grain is diverted 
on to another band travelling in a different direction, or cast into a hopper ' 
from which it can be distributed on any of the lower floors by means of down 
spouts. " Dredging Elevators, " and " Kevolving Screw Creepers " are 
sometimes used for the warehousing and transmission of grain in con- 
nection with docks, but they absorb, proportionately, an enormous amount 
of power, and, moreover, the grain suffers by attrition, whereas with the 
travelling barid the condition of the grain is improved by the current of 
air in transmission. 

The advantage of hydraulic machinery in connetion with a system of 
docks, or where a multiplicity of mechanical appliances is necessary, is 
now fully attested by its general adoption at all the principal ports 
of the kingdom. 



Me. Williams, in reply to Mk. Martin, then described the dis- 
covery of the fact that the foundation of a portion of the west v/all of the 
dock (Whitehaven) was bad on account of the action of Bransty Beck on the 
gravel bed on which it was built, and he described the i^rocess by which it 
was overcome. In reply to Mr. Eussell — who asked how it was that, the 
current from the harbour during the ebb of the tide being stronger, as illus- 
trated by Mr. Williams in his paper, than the current flowing into the har- 
bour from Redness Point, there was an accumulation of silt within the West 
Pier — he said that it being found that the accumulations in the harbour 
were very considerable, the attention of Sir John Rennie was drawn to 
it. Before the North Pier was built the sand came right inside the curve 
of the West Pier, and Sir John Rennie recommended that the North Piei- 
should be carried out simultaneously with the West Pier. The Trustees 
in their wisdom did not do that, and he understood it silted up compara- 
tively little since the building of the North Wall, 



49 

In reply to Me. Snelus, who asked whether Mr. Williams had 
directed any attention to the utilization of slag in dock works, Mr. 
Williams said that he would only use it for mixing with concrete or 
rubble in walling. Mr. Snelus said they had been successful at the 
West Cumberland Iron and Steel Works in employing it as a concrete, 
and had built a river wall on the Derwent entirely of it. 



50 



THE CUMBERLAND DIALECT. 

By John Eichaedson, (St. John's Vale, Keswick.) 

As the Cumbrian is only one among a great number of dialects which 
are sijoken in Bi'itain, each of which differs more or less from the others 
in pronunciation and idiom, it perhaps may not be out of place, by way of 
introduction to the subject under consideration, to glance at the probable 
origin of the dialects in past times, and the causes of the slow but gradual 
disuse which they seem destined to fall into in the future. 

No one who has thought at all on the subject can fail to see that the 
origin of so many different modes of speech in this country has been 
principally owing to the absence of a written language, and, in a less 
degree, to the imperfect means of communication which existed in primi- 
tive times between one district and another. It is little more than four 
hundred years since printing was first introduced into England, and although 
there might be printed books a few years sooner, and manuscripts 
some centuries earlier still, these, besides many of them being in Latin, 
were so extremely scarce and inaccessible that there could not be said 
to be any written language available to the common people, among whom 
the dialects originated, until towards the end of the fifteenth century. 

Now, it is supposed that the first inhabitants of Britain were Celts, 
who crossed over from Denmark about five or six centuries before the 
Christian era ; and, assuming this to be correct, there was a period of 
more than two thousand years during which the people of this island had 
no written language, and consequently no fixed standard of speech— a fact 
which is of itself quite sufficient to account for all the variations and 
irregularities which have prevailed. 

Setting out with the assumption (which is by no means certain) that 
the first settlers all spoke the same language, or dialect, which would of 
course be Celtic, we can easily imagine how, in the course of time, when 



51 

the coast where they had first established themselves became over-popu- 
lated, parties would wander off from the main body, and go in search of 
other favourable situations, where they would build their huts and form 
separate communities ; how in these new settlements any word which by 
chance got a different pronunciation, or any new phrase or idiom started 
by one, would be imitated by the rest, learned by the children, and so 
perpetuated ; how other words and phrases would follow, and other 
colonies branch off to other parts of the island. And when we reflect that 
Britain was then a vast wilderness, without roads or means of com- 
munication between the different settlements, we can easily understand 
that in the course of ages every district would have a community in a 
great measure isolated from the rest, with a dialect of its own. How 
these dialects were acted upon and modified in after ages by successive 
incui'sions of new comers from diflerent parts of Europe is a subject 
beyond the range of this paper. No doubt many of them were almost 
entirely changed in their character, but that they were never totally 
obliterated is evidenced by the numerous Celtic words and root.s which 
still remain in all of them. We may, however, observe that the dialects 
would not all be acted upon in an equal degree. For instance, in the 
southern parts of the island, where the C4enuan intruders wei-e most 
mimerous and longest established, the Anglo-Saxon would become the 
dominant tongue. In the Northern parts the Danish and Scandinavian 
elements would prevail ; while in the more inaccessible districts such as 
North Wales, the Celtic would remain almost unchanged. 

As, therefore, there can be little doubt but that the great diversity 
of speech in this country arose, as has just been stated, from the absence 
of a written language, and the imperfect means of communication which 
formerly existed between one district and another, it would seem to follow 
as a natural sequence, that, these wants having l)een supplied, the dialects 
would quickly die out. How is it, then, it may be asked, that many of 
them and notably the Cumbrian, are nearly as vigorous as ever? In 
replying to this question, and taking the Cumberland as the dialect with 
which we are best acquainted, we may observe that though books, periodi- 
cals, and newspapers, are now so plentiful and cheap as to be easily 



52 

olitaipel by every one, and filthough the means of travelling and postal 
communication have become almost perfect, the people who speak the 
dialect in the rural parts of the country have hitherto as a rule, neither 
read, written, nor tra\elled. There is, however, a marked change taking 
place in this respect. Newspapers and books are becoming far more 
common in country houses ; and it is probable that as our dream of general 
education beconies gradually realized, old prejudices will be given up, old 
habits laid aside, and at some future time the rural inhabitants of Cumber- 
land may perhaps converse together in the ordinary Queen's English. The 
intention nf this paper, however, is rather to treat of the dialect as we find 
it, than to inquire into the changes it has undergone, or to speculate upon 
the length of time which may elapse before it is entirely laid aside. It 
will therefore be limited in a great measure to the two questions — "Where 
is the dialect spoken at the present time ? " and " What are its chief 
distinctive ch.aracteristics 1 " 

To the iirst question, "' ^Vliere is the dialect .spoken at present ?" we 
may answer : It is spoken under one form or another over all the 
agiicnltural and pastoral districts of Cumberland, and by the common 
people in the tuwns as well, but only in its pure state toAvards the middle 
of the county, being mixed with other dialects around the outsides. 
This may be accounted for in the following manner. In former times, 
Avhen England and Scotland were sejjarate kingdoms, and almost con- 
stantly at M-ar with each other, there was a strip of land, a few mUes in 
breadth, stretching from Berwick, on the German Ocean, to the Solway 
Firth, which M^as called the debateable ground, being a sort of overlajJ of 
the boundary ; and this land was claimed by both nations, but could not 
jiroperly be said to belong to either. Now, something similar to this 
happens, wherever two districts meet in which different dialects are 
spoken. There is a sort of overlap, where the words and phrases have 
become so blended and intermixed, that the folk speech cannot be said to 
belong exclusively to either district. Hence, in that part of Cumberland 
bordering on Scotland, from the Cheviot Hills on the east, to Silloth on 
the west, the dialect is half Scottish. In the higher part of the dales, such 
as Borrowdale and Wythburn, which run up to the southern boundary of 



the county, it is mixed with that of Westmorland. In the east, towards 
Crossfell, it has many Northumbrian words ; while in the west, of late 
years, since the iron manufacture has become so much developed, the 
Cumbrian, Irish, Welsh, Cornish, and other dialects, have become in some 
instances rather awkwardly jumbled together. It is, therefore, only in 
the central part of the county that the Cumberland dialect is spoken in 
its purity ; and this central part may be defined as a tract of country 
surrounding the Skiddaw and Blencatlira range of mountains, and ex- 
tending about fifteen miles east and west from their base, and some five 
or six north and south. 

To those persons who have always looked upon the dialect as 
something exceedingly vulgar and outlandish, it will no doubt appear 
paradoxical when we refer to its being spoken in its purity. It 
will therefore be as well to observe here that there is nothing 
necessarily vulgar about it. One may be vulgar either with or without 
it. There are some people excessively vulgar who do not speak the dia- 
lect, while there are others who use no other form of speech who have not 
a particle of vvilgarity about them. They make quite as great a mistake 
who think that all dialect words are corruptions, or wrong pronunciations 
of ordinary English. On the contrary, there can be little doubt but that 
a great many words now used in standard books, were formerly so used 
exactly in the form in which we now find them in the dialect, but have 
since been modified and altered to suit our modern ideas of speech. In 
proof of this, if we look into the writings of some old authors — books 
which, no doubt, were standard works at the time they were published — 
we find numbers of old words written in just the same way as they are 
now used in dialect writing ; and it is quite possible that many old dames, 
who have spent all their lives up in the dales, could give a much more 
sensible explanation of some doubtful passages in Chaucer than many 
learned members of the Philological Society. 

We will, however, proceed to point out a few of the peculiarities 
of vocalism and idiom which render the dialect so difficult to understand 
by persons not acquainted with it. One of the first things that will 
strike a stranger on hearing it is the way in which the double vowel or 



04 

diphthongal sounds vary from the ordinary English. The proper diph- 
thongal sound of "ou" or "ow" is changed to that of "oo" : thus, house 
becomes "hoose" ; cloud, "clood"; round, "roond" ; and so with "ow," 
cow is "coo" ; now, "noo" ; how, "hoo" ; and so on. Then such words 
as have the "oo" sound in ordinary English require "eu" in the dialect : 
book is "beuk"; look, "leiik"; school, "scheul"; and fool, "feiil." Again 
such words as in the English have the long "o" and "oa" sound, are 
sometimes pronounced in the dialect as if spelt with a "w," so that note 
is "uwote" ; coat, "cwoat" ; and boat, "bwoat" ; but sometimes the long 
"o" is changed into the proper diphthongal sound of "ow," so that 
brought is "browt" ; thought, "thowt," &c. The sound of the long "i," 
too, is often changed to that of "ee" ; and right is "reet" ; light, "leet" ; 
bright "breet" ; and so on. The short "e" also is occasionally changed to 
the long "e," when head becomes "heed," and dead, "deed." Passing 
from the vowel sounds, we will proceed to notice some other peculiarities 
of pronunciation. In the dialect the termination "en" is invariably used 
instead of "ing" — thus writing is " writen' ; " walking, "walken';" 
working, "worken'," and so on. The dental sound of "th" is seldom 
heard in the dialect either- — as : father is "fadder" ; mother, "niudder" ; 
and brother, "brudder" ; twentieth is "twentit" ; and thirtieth, "thirtit." 
Even in the article "the" the "th" is not sounded Instead of saying "The 
master and the mistress," a Cumbrian says "T' maister an' t' mistress.'' 
"And" is always contracted to "an," "thee" to "the'," and "with" to "wf ": 
thus, the sentence "I will go with thee," is shortened to " I'll ga wi' the'." 
It will be seen from these few examples, that in the Cum- 
brian pronunciation there is a marked tendency to contract, or 
shorten the words, a tendency of which many more specimens might 
be given, such as "slape" for slippery; "flate" for frightened; " 'pleen" 
for complain, and such like. The few words we have noted wiU, 
however, be sufficient to give a fair idea of the Cumbrian vocabulary, 
and therefore we will next glance at a few of its idiomatic peculi- 
arities. Perhaps the most noticeable thing about the way in which the 
dialect is .spoken, and its worst feature, is the total disregard which 
the speakers have f(.)r all the rules of grammer. They use pronouns in 



55 

the objective case instead of in the nominative ; and singular verbs 
instead of plural ones in almost every sentence. Instead of saying 
"He and I are going," a Cumbrian says, "Him an' me's gaan." They 
do not i;se the possessive case of proper nouns at all. Instead of 
saying "George's cow and Harry's horse," they say " Gwordie coo and 
Harry horse." Then they have an odd way of omitting the object of a 
sentence, and leaving it to be guessed at. They will say, " They're gante 
wesh," or " They're gante clip," without saying whether they are going 
to wash clothes, or the sheep, or themselves ; or whether they are going 
to clip the sheep, or a hedge, or something else. The anecdote told by 
the butcher was an instance of this kind. A butcher went to a farmhouse 
to ask for his weekly order, when the old dame said to him, " Nay barn, 
we'll nut want enny this week, we're gante kill oorsels." That did not 
mean that they were all going to commit suicide, and so would not require 
any more meat, it simply meant that they were going to kill a sheep of 
their own. They sometimes confound quantity and numbers in a droll 
way, too. They will say, " A few poddish " or " A few broth," but 
they would laugh at you if you said a few water, or a few milk. Although 
these and other peculiarities of the idiom, which might be pointed out, 
render the dialect almost unintelligible to strangers, they are so perfectly 
familiar to those who speak it, that they do not hinder conversation in 
the least. Only give two or three Cumbrians some subject of dispute — 
for instance, the merits or demerits of some particular horse or cow, — and 
they will argue the different points with as much energy, and as fluently, 
as if they had all the rules of Lindley ]Murray by heart. Indeed it is when 
listening to an argument, or " fratch " as it is called, that one may pick 
up some of the broadest and richest specimens of the dialect. It will be 
seen, however, by all impartial critics that the irregularities we have men- 
tioned are simply corruptions and excrescences, which no more affect the 
real character of the dialect than the bad EugUsh of uneducated Londoners, 
or the coarse slang of the American rowdy affect that of the English 
language itself. 

We will next notice some of the redeeming traits of the dialect. 
Chief among these are its conciseness and its expressiveness. We have 



56 

already referred to the shortness of Cimibrian words, and jDointed out how 
monosyllables in the dialect are frequently synonymous with ordinary 
English words of two or three syllables ; and when we consider that, 
besides this, many of the phrases, too, are extremely laconic, it is easy to 
understand that a Cumbrian requires far less time and breath to express 
his ideas to his neighbour than would be required to do it in Queen's 
English. Take, for example, the questions, "Where are you going?" 
" What are you doing 1 " and "What is the matter?" It will be observed 
that each of these questions consists of five syllables, whereas, in the 
dialect, they only require three each, thus, " Where's te gaan 1" " What's 
te deiin ? " and " What's t' matter?" N umerous examples of this kind 
might be given ; but as the above will give an idea of our meaning, we 
will proceed to make a few observations on the expressiveness of the 
Cumbrian mode of speech. We cannot illustrate this part of the subject 
better than by giving a few specimens of the short saj's with which the 
folkspeech of Cumberland abounds. Indeed, there is hardly a circum- 
stance or incident in the lives of the dales people, but there is a figurative 
phrase of some kind applicable to it. Here are a few. If a person is 
thought foolish they will say, " He's nobbut hofe rock't," or " He"s as 
thin as a cat lug." If one is slow in his movements, they say, " He'll 
gang farder i' two days ner yan." When an old courtship is renewed, 
they say, " Auld ke'all ur seuner warm't nor newens meade. " If a man 
marries for money, they say, " He's weddit t'middin for 't seiike o't 
muck." If a person is not to be depended upon, " He's not to ride a 
watter on." If an insignificant per.son has had a narrow escape, it is said 
" That 'at's nowt's niver i' danger. " If a person is cross and cantan- 
kerous, " He's as creuk't as a tip horn." If one is sly and deceitful, they 
say, " Smooth water runs deep." We might go on quoting these old 
saws, but the few si^ecimens given may serve to give some notion of their 
character, and though many of them may not be so very refined, we must 
at least admit that they are uncommonly expressive and much to the 
purpose. 

Alluding, in a former part of this paper, to the corruptions and 
irregularities of speech which abounded among the dialect-speaking people 



57 

of Cumberland, we remarked that such irregularities were no obstacle in 
the way of conversation, but to any one attempting to write in the dialect 
it is very different. In composition (even in the dialect,) a writer is 
obliged to pay some attention to the laws of grammer, and consequ.ently is 
prevented from writing many of the most common and striking phrases 
exactly as they are sjjoken ; and although the pronunciation may, as a 
general rule, be pretty cleax'ly indicated by means of phonetic spelling, 
there are some words in use the sound of which it would be impos- 
sible to give a correct idea of on paper by any combination of letters. 

It may perhaps be asked, " But what is the use of writing in the 
dialect at all 1 If people will write, why not Avrite in ordinary English 1 " 
Well, perhaps it is fancy as much as anything. Tastes differ so much, that 
it is said there is no accounting for them. Talents differ very much, too. 
Peoj)le who do write ordinary English have very different ideas. One 
writes prose, another poetry. One truth, another fiction. One songs, and 
another sermons. But there may also be utility in dialect-writing. If, 
as we surmised at the beginning, the Cumbrian mode of speech is destined 
to die out in the course of two or three generations, it may be desirable to 
preserve as many specimens of it as we can, from which onr grandchildren 
and greatgrandchildren may see the rough and homely garb in which their 
forefathers were wont to clothe their ideas. And further, the peculiar 
manners, traits, and above all the humour of Cumbrians may be far more 
forcibly depicted in the dialect than in any other way. If any one wishes 
to know about the manners and customs of the people who lived in 
this county towards the latter end of the last and beginning of the present 
century, he will do well to read, not Nicholson and Biirn's or Hutchinson's 
History of Cumberland, but the dialect writings of Anderson, Stagg, and 
others. From the songs and ballads of these writers, one may get a far 
better insight into the pecular traits and rough manners of the Cumbrians 
of that time than from any other source whatever. 

Our old border county has-been peculiarly rich in native writers. 
Not to speak of Woi-dsworth and others, who have distinguised themselves 
in the higher walks of literature, Cumberland has never, for the last one 
hundred and fifty years, been without its dialect writers ; many of whom 



58 

have enjoyed a large amount of local popularity. The first who attempted 
to rhyme in the vernacular (of whom we have any authentic record) was 
the Rev. Josiah Relph, of Sebergham, who died in 1743. He was fol- 
lowed in succession by Evan Clark, of Wigton ; Miss Gilpin, of Scaleby 
Castle ; Miss Blamire, of Thackwood ; Blind Stagg, of Burgh-by-Sands ; 
and Robert Anderson, of Carlisle. The last has been commonly styled 
the Cumberland Bard, and has been the most popular of all the dialect 
writers. Then, there were Mark Lonsdale, John Rayson, and Woodcock 
Graves ; and there was Alexander Craig Gibson, who, I have no doubt, 
was personally known to some here present. There are still living Mr. 
William Dickinson and Miss Powley ; so ' that we have a continuous 
chain, or succession, of dialect writers, stretching from Relph to the 
present time. 

It may be that but few educated persons take much interest in the 
dialect, nevertheless, if entered into without prejudice, or affectation, the 
study of it, as the study of most other things, may become very interest- 
ing. I have in my possession a letter which I received from the late Dr. 
Gibson, two or three years before his death, in which he styles it our 
" Grand old dialect ; " and when we reflect that, to the people of Cum- 
berland, it has for hundreds of years served every purpose for the inter- 
change of their ideas ; that they have ever found in it words and jjhrases 
which were amply sufficient to express every emotion of their minds ; that 
in it they have told their joys and their griefs ; their hopes and their 
fears ; and that in it thay have sung their loves and their sorrows, their 
sports and their rejoicings, — I think that if we do not go so far as Dr. 
Gibson, to style it our " Grand old dialect," we may, at least, respect and 
value it as an old and faithful servant. 

(The Chairman afterwards observed that the author had alluded to 
writers in the Cumberland dialect past and present, but his modesty had 
not permitted him to tell them that he himself was one of the foremost 
dialect writers of the day. Mr. Richardson's book was one of the very 
best that had been issued, and was remarkably free from the errors that 
some of the writers in the dialect had fallen into. They were very much 
indebted to Mr. Richardson for his paper.) 



59 



SKETCH OF THE GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF THE 
LAKE DISTRICT. 



By J. Cliftox Wabti, F.G.S.. A.^.sno. R.S.M., of Her Majnsty's 
% Geological SuT\'ey. 

Whenever we wish to draw np an account of the history of any par- 
ticular period, our first care is to search out all the old parchments and 
examine all the records that have been preserved in library and museum. 
And when we wish to learn the geological history of any particular 
district, our first care is to examine carefully the rocky volumes of that 
district, to unroll its time-worn parchments and decipher their faded and 
half-obliterated charfcters. 

No more interesting tract of country could we thus enquire into than 
our English Lake District, and we shall nnd, I doubt not, that its past 
history adds another charm to its present scenery. 

In Fig. 1 I have drawn a diagrammatic map of the district showing the 
relations of the various rock-groups to one another, and how the older 
(A to C) are enclosed in a frame — somewhat broken on the south — of the 
newer Carboniferous (D) and Permian (E). Fig 2 is a horizontal section 
taken through the area from north to south (N". to S.) In these figures (and 
in Fig. 3), A — Skiddaw Slate, B — Volcanic Series, C — Coniston Limestone 
and Upper Silurian, d — Conglomerate, D — Carboniferous, and E — Permian. 



GO 




Fio /. 




FjQ 2. 



61 

Lowermost, we have the Skiddaw Slate group, a great thickness 
(some 8,000 to 10,000 feet) of old muddy and sandy deposits, indicating 
general shallow water conditions, and containing remains of marine 
organisms. Such a sequence of beds indicates a continued subsidence of 
the sea bottom, thus allowing the accumulation of so gi'eat a thickness of 
shallow-water deposits. It is quite impossible to estimate the length of 
this period — as impossible as it is to conceive of the distance separating 
us from our central luminary. But at last the I'ecords of this first volume 
of our geologic history cease or pass upwards into those of volume two. It 
would seem that those mysterioiis forces from below began to seek some 
outlet, and a line of weakness being found, a volcanic vent was opened 
out. The earlier eruptions were clearly sub-marine in character, for we 
find muddy deposits interstratifled with beds of volcanic lava and ash, 
but soon the shallow sea became filled iip, or a moderate elevation helped 
to convert the sub-marine volcanoes into sub-aerial ones. The great series 
of volcanic deposits now piled up above the Skiddaw Slates, and forming 
our second volume, maybe estimated at 10,000 or 12,000 feet, but as we 
know that volcanic activity is very variable in its nature, it is not easy 
to form an idea of the duration of the period, which, however, may have 
been far shorter than the preceding. 

We next come upon a gap in our records ; a long j^eriod of time 
ela^Dses, during which no volume is inscribed, but, on the contrary, por. 
tions of the previoiis records destroyed by denudation, so that when the 
volcanic tract of land has subsided fairly beneath the sea-level, the succeed- 
ing marine deposits are laid down iipon an irregular and denuded surface. 
These marine deposits consist of the Coniston Limestone and Upper 
Silurian grits and slates, the whole having, according to Mr. Aveline's 
estimate in the Kendal district, a thickness of no less than 14,000 feet.   
Once more, then, we find the evidence of the continued slow subsidence 
of the sea bed sufficient to allow of the accumulation of this great thick- 
ness of deposits. The fourth volume (the third being wanting) of our 
history may be formed of very similar materials to those comi^osing our 
first, but the nature of the writing has in great part changed, just as the 
characters used in a fourth century manuscript may be distinct from, and 



62 

more highly developed, than those in a manuscript of the first century. 
The fossils in the Upper Silurian are higher in character than those of 
the far older Skiddaw Slate period. 

Ar^ain vre find another gap in our records ; those internal forces be- 
fore spoken of begin to re-assert themselves, but being unable to burst 
through their rock-bound prison, produce a vast and probably slow up- 
heaval, throwing the various deposits forming our volumes one, two, and 
four, into great ciu-ves and contortions, a large portion being denuded and 
swept away as bed after bed is brought within the range of marine and 
atmospheric action, so that finally, even the lowest of these deposits is 
once more exposed to daylight, and a table-land, formed of the older 
rocks, appears as the nucleus of the future mountain district (fig. 3). 




Around this early nucleus are heaped up in certain areas great thick- 
nesses of conglomerate and breccia, some of the stones of the latter 
perhaps indicating a more or less glacial character of climate, and these 
conglomeratic deposits are succeeded by those of the great Carboniferous 
period, formed in the seas surrounding the embryo mountain district, and 
affording evidence of a warm and more genial condition of things — our 
volume six. Here also we find that the fossils entombed in this series of 
rocks are greatly different from those found in the leafy deposits of volume 
four. The sixth century characters differ markedly from those of the 
fourth ; but let us remember that in some other library, in some other 
district, fifth century manuscripts are preserved, containing those tran- 
sitional forms of character, of organic life, which are missing in our own 
neio-hbourhood. Thus do physical evidence -and the varied phases of 



63 

organic life both clearly point to that long period of time elapsing between 
the formation of the Upper Sihtrian (vol. iv.) and that of the carbon- 
iferous (vol. vi.) 

But just as the length of time between the sixth century and the 
nineteenth is great in modern historic impoitance, so is that between the 
Carboniferous and the present vast in geologic significance. Yet, during 
the whole of that long series of past ages, I believe our early nucleus was 
ttbove Water, and UTider very varied conditions of climate, was being 
carved out by nature's tools — now ice and snow, now semi-tropic rains — 
into that lovely form we now behold. The atmospheric agents, as we see 
them at work, during our puny lifetime, seem weak indeed ; but how vast 
this period during which they have been at work ! To my mind it is not 
the great amount of denudation thus effected that is so surprising as the 
survival of any portion of that rough-hewn block of country turned out 
from nature's quarry in early (jarboniferous ages. In our own time, geolo- 
gically sjieaking, this district exjjerienced, I believe, a very considerable 
change of level during the lapse of the most modern of glacial periods, 
but long ere these glaciers clothed the districts in mantles white, or glacial 
seas washed mountain foot, our mountains and our glens had received very 
much their present form. 

Finally, let us remember that if we, in our literary aspect, preserve 
with so much care the mouldering manuscript of a long past age, we ought 
far more to venerate our weathered and time-worn mountain district, with 
its rocky volumes inscribed by the finger of God, and its grand old history, 
and take care that we allow not encroaching railway and utilitarian smoke 
to mar this ancient relic. 

SuMxMAEY. (To be read from below upwards.) 

18th. to 6th. cent, f Geological periods from the Carboniferous to the 
M. S.S. ) Present. 

5tb. cent. M.S. or j Upheaval and enormous denudation with formation 
Vol. V. miAAiViy. ( of early nucleus (fig. 3.) 

4th. cent, M.S. or i Prolonged depression and accumulation of Upper 
Vol. IV. ( Siluian marine deposits (14,000 ft.) 



64 

3rd. cent. M.S. or J Depression of sub-aerial volcanic deposits beneath 

Vol. Til. mixsing. \ the sea, with deundation. 

2nd. cent. M. S. or J Period of great volcanic activity, volcanoes at first 
II. t 



Vol. II. ( sub-marine, afterwards .sub-aerial (12,000 ft.) 

;ent. M.S. or ( Prolonged depression and accumulation of .Skiddaw 
Vol. I. \ Slates, marine shallow-water deposits (10,000ft.) 



60 



PART II. 



Original Papers communicated to the Societies during the Session 1 87 5-6, and 
selected hy the Association Council for puhlication. 



OLD BORROWDALE. 



By J. FisHEE Ceosthwaite, (Keswick). 

[ Read in Borrowdale at a Field Meeting of the Four Societie.s of Whitehaven, 
Workington, Cockerraouth, and Keswick, June 2nd, 1875], 

The object of this paper i.s to bring together a few facts rehiting to 
the people who have inhabited Borrowdale, and the tenure by which the 
Dalesmen hold their lands. Vie^ving the Borrowdale mountains from 
Friar's Crag we used in our young days to take up the language of the 
patriarch and speak of them as "the utmost bounds of the everlasting 
hills." Many singular stories jjassed current among the juveniles as to 
the doings over the wall beyond Watendlath, which was supposed to be 
the world's end. The early writers on the Lake Country have made 
common cause in speaking of Borrowdale and its people in the most 
grotesque and exaggerated terms. One writer says the southern extremity 
of Derwentwater "is a composition of all that is horrible." "An 
immense chasm opens in the midst and is divided by a rude conical hill, 
once kept by a castle, beyond a chain of crags patched with snow and 
containing various minerals, overshadowing the dark winding deeps of 
Borpowdale." Clark in his survey of the Lakes is grossly inaccurate in 
his description of the people, but his stories have been repeated by nearly 
all the guide writers who have succeeded him, till very recently. 

It is difficult to meet with any early records of so remote a place as 
Borrowdale. There is no mention of our jjarish in Doomsday Book. The 
manor on the western side of Borrc>wdale was given by one of the de 



Derwentwatera to the Abbey of Furness. On the dissolution of the 
Monasteries it fell to King Henry VIII. and remained in the possession 
of the Crown tUl the 10th year of King James I. about the 
year A.D. 1613. While it was vested in King Henry the VIII. 
John Fyssher and Lancelot his son were bailiffs of the King and in the 
33rd year of his reign they rendered an account headed — "Furness 
Monastery — Ministers Accounts. — Borrowdale in the County of Cumber- 
land." They answer for rents paid, amounting to £29 14s. These rents 
were paid as follows : — viz., by John Hynde, 8s. ; Robert Udale, 5s. ; 
John Lambert, 5s. ; Nicholas Fisher, 8s. 6d. ; Thomas Fysher, 8s. 6d. ; 
John Fysher, for Rygge, 15s. ; the widow of John Fisher, 15s. ; the 
widow of Edward Fysher, 15s., and similar sums were paid by Oliver 
Fisher, Hugh Harrey, Christopher Harrey, John Fyssher and Lancelot 
his son, Hugh Youdale, John Udale, Gwydone Byrkehead, Miles Byrkehed, 
John Byrkhed and his son John. The widow of Wm. Burkehead, 
Nicholas Birkehead, Hugh Richardson, Christopher Byrkhed, John Brath- 
wayte, Thomas Dyconson, John Jobson, Hugh Brathwayte and Robert 
and John Brathwayte. 

King James sold the manor of Borrowdale to William Whitmore, 
and Jonas Verdon, gentlemen, both of London, in 1613, and two years later 
they sold it to Sir Wilfred Lawson, of Isel, knight ; Johii Lamplugh, 
gentleman, John Braithwaite, Robert Braithwaite, John Jopson the 
younger, Nicholas Dickinson, Thomas Birkhead, of Seathwaite, yeomen ; 
Charles Hudson, of Boutherbeck, gentleman; WiUiam Braithwaite, John 
Fisher the younger, John Jopson, Thomas Fisher, John and Robert 
Birket, Anthony Braithwaite and Christopher Vickars, of Seatoller; Daniel 
Heckstetter, of Rosthwaite, gentleman ; John Birket, of Thorneythwaite; 
Janet Richardson, of Longthwaite ; John Youdale and Nicholas Birket, of 
The Chapel ; Edward, John, Christopher and Thomas Birket, all of Rosth- 
waite; Hugh Fisher and Gawen Harris, John Wood, of Skairness; John 
Fisher, of Grange ; John Banks, of Stanger ; John Fisher and Timothy 
Fisher, of Hollows; John Lambert and Richard Hyne, of Manesty; Wm. 
Howe, of Newlauds, yeoman ; Wm. Braithwaite, of High House, and 
Christopher Braithwaite, yeoman. It is described in a document com- 



67 

moiily known as the Great Deed of Borrowdale, as " all that manor of 
Borrowdale with the rights, members and appurtenances, and all those lands 
and tenements in Borrowdale aforesaid by particulars thereof mentioned 
to be of the yearly value of £28 lOs., and all that Salt Well or Salt 
water within the Grange of Borrowdale, together with all Royalties," but 
they except and reserve to the said Wm. Whitmore and Jonas Verdon 
and their heirs, all those Wad holes commonly called Black-cawke within 
the commons of Seatoller, or elsewhere within the commons and wastes 
of the manor of Borrowdale aforesaid, with liberty to dig, work, and 
carry the same and other their ajjjjurtenances whatsoever. The jjurchase 
money was £25 2s. Thus the tenants became owners of all minerals and 
manorial rights excepting the Black lead, and each statesman is lord of 
his own estate, and cannot have his property invaded by any one to dig 
for minerals, except by his own permission. These ancient freeholds 
render the yeomanry more free than any other tenure of land, and the in- 
dependence which it produces is a quality which the dalesmen are noted lor. 

Whitmore and Verdon sold the Black Lead Mine to John Lamplugh, 
gentleman, and Charles Hudson, gentleman, of Bowtherbeck. Lamplugh 
sold his share of the Wad l\Iines to John Bankes (father of Sir John 
Bankes) in the year 1622. 

Camden says — " Li this parish in Seatoller Fell is that famous mine 
of Black Lead or Wad, a mineral very scarce elsewhere to be met with." 
He calls it " that mineral earth or hard shining stone, which j^ainters use 
in drawing their lines, and shading their pieces in black and white." 

Robinson in his Natural History of Westmorland and Cumberland 
speaking of this mineral says : — " The most remarkable Mundic 
Vein ujjon these mountains, is that we call Wad or Black 
Lead. Its composition is a black pinguid, and shining earth 

impregnated with Lead and Antimony. The Ore is more valuable than 
either Coi^ijer, Lead, or Iron. Its natural uses are both JNIedicinal and 
Mechanical. It's a present remedy for cholick, and other complaints and 
for these and the like uses, it's much bought up by Apothecaries and 
Physicians, who understand more of its Medicinal uses than I am able to 
^ve account of," 



68 

Tradition says that the mine was discovered by the wind having 
blowni np an ash tree by the roots. Although probably known for a long 
time before, it seems to have been wrought with great success after it came 
into possession of the Banks' family and their co-partners. 

The mine has eight stages, Thirty Veins, Eight Pipes, and four great 
Sops or bunches of wad or plumbago as it is usually called. In Winkles 
pipe at the meeting of the Veins a Sop was discovered in 1812 which 
produced 87 casks of best lead for pencils and 495 casks of coarse lead, in 
all 582. The 87 casks of best lead alone would realize £24,360. The 
grand pipe which was the one discovered as before described was wrought 
to the depth of 64 yards to the top of Harrison's pipe. In 1778 no fewer 
than 417 casks containing about 701bs. each, of the best quality, were 
extracted ; this at 30s. per lb. would amount to £43,785. There were 
besides two other openings of this pipe in the ten years ending in 1788. 
In 1802 — 3, Dixon's pipe was discovered, when ore to the value of 
£98,74:2 was got. So valuable a mine needed more than ordinary 
protection. Consequently an Act of Parliament was passed enacting that 
any one breaking into the mine or picking Wad or Black-cawke at the 
rubbish heaps would be guilty of Felony. Notwithstanding, some black 
lead did find its way to Keswick, and Jews came regularly to the George 
Hotel to buy it. The owners had aU the mineral taken to London and 
monthly sales were held at their warehouse only. Thus, any sold privately 
in the country must have been got dishonestly, except scattered pieces 
which were not unfrequently foimd in the beds of the streams, washed 
down by the floods. Great care was taken to guard the mine. A house 
was built over the entrance and guards slept there with fire arms. When 
the ore was taken to London in the six horse waggon then used by car- 
riers, half a dozen men, armed with blunderbusses, slept in the warehouse 
with the precious load, and guarded it on its way as far as Kendal. The 
present worthy steward of the mine is the fourth of the name who has 
held the office with great reputation for integrity and ability. His great 
grandfather Thomas Dixon, came from Langdale 150 years ago, and his 
descendants have continued in the office till the present time. The mine 
is now being re-opened, and it is hoped that it will be a profitable under- 



taking for all concerned. This is the only plumbago which can be made 
into pencils to stand a point in its natural state, and is the purest and best 
in the world. 

It has often been stated that Castle Crag was formerly a Roman 
Station. There is no trace of masonry, nor have any Roman weapons or 
coins been found upon the hill. The name of Borrowdale has been a 
puzzle. The most recent suggestion seems to commend itself as a natural 
explanation. It was common to call all strong places castles, where no 
artificial defence in the way of masonry was erected. Thus we have 
Castle Rock in St. John's, Rea Castle on the left of the jjass to Watend- 
lath, Castle Howe near Peile Wyke, and many others. So we have Castle 
Crag, in Borrowdale, which has been a place of defence during the incur- 
sions of the Scots, when the moss troopers made a short way into Lancashire, 
Coming over Binsa from Carlisle it was a near cut through the Stake 
Pass. Castle Crag formed a natural place of offence and defence and relics 
of machinery for throwing stones iipon any hostile array, are said to have 
been found. The term burgh is often used as synonymous with castle 
e.g. the borough walls, Workington, and accepting this idea, Boro'dale 
would simply be the burgh defended dale. 

The ancient endowment of Borrowdale chapel was £3 os. It received 
an augmentation by lot of £200 about the year 1744, and had again in 
1752 and in 1762 a further augmentation of £200 in conjunction with 
£200 given by the Countess dowager Gower, which sums were laid out in 
lands in Crosthwaite and in Lancashire. Recently the parsonage was built 
by the liberality of Joseph and Abraham Fisher, Esqrs., of Seatoller.| 

In all parts of the lake country the lands are passing out 
of the hands of the ancient Yeomen. A new race is coming 
in, building villas and making a total change in the appearance 
of the country. If Gray the poet could revisit Grasmere, he 
would hardly recognise the place. Perhaps in the parish of 
Crosthwaite, and in Borrowdale especially, there has been less change 
than elsewhere. The lands being freehold their owners have been able to 
leave them unencumbered to their children, which they could hardly have 



70 

done if they had been subject to arbitrary fines on the death of the Lord 
and the change of tenant. Long may the Yeomen hold their own ! The 
Birketts of Rosthwaite can trace theij property to have been 400 years in 
the family, and in all probability it has been so for double that length of 
time. The Fishers of SeatoUer, the Youdales, the Jopsons and the 
Braithwaites, are of equal antiquity. The Wilsons have been at Watend- 
lath more than 300 years. The Threlkelds came from Patterdale 150 
years ago. There were 37 tenements in all enfranchised and bought free by 
the great deed of Borrowdale, and almost all the names exist, and many 
of them still own the same property. The tenements at Seathwaite 
were six in number, owned by Lamplugh, two Braithwaites, John 
Jopson, Nicholas Dickenson, and Thomas Birkhed. At SeatoUer there 
were eight tenements belonging to two Fishers, two Braithwaites, two 
Birketts, a Jopson, and a Vickers. 

Although I have said that there are no remains of Roman roads or 
masonry, yet there can be little doiibt that the Romans crossed from one sta- 
tion to another by the mountain passes, where for temporary purposes they 
seem to have laid down blocks of unhewn stone to make the road passable. 
The nearest stations of the Romans were at Whitbarrow, at Caermot, at 
Papcastle, and at Ambleside. Their base of operations was never from 
the crown of a hill, but on a gentle slope commanding a view of the 
adjacent country. In the earliest times, however, hostile tribes met in 
deadly warfare, and these mountains and valleys have witnessed battles 
when the weapons were Celtic hammer heads, arrows made of stone, and 
similar missiles. No doubt the hardy mountaineers made good their 
defence on many occasions against invaders, from the natural places of 
defence which they could select as occasion required. 

Although we see nothing recorded in the histories of the civil wars 
respecting the state of this neighbourhood, yet there are to be found from 
time to time glimpses of the turmoil having reached this parish. 
Sir Wilfred Lawson, of Isel, was a strong parliamentarian, and he 
with Cromwell's Ironsides plundered Rydal Hall, and his followers even 
tore up the flooring there, in search of treasure. His arsenal was on St. 
Herbert's Island ; there he stored munitions of war and probably from 



fl 

thence he started, taking Lord's Island on his way, and passed through 
Borrowdale over the Stake Pass to Langdale and Rydal. Sir Edward 
EadclifFe was residing on the Island in 1641, and for some time after. 
He mentions the fact in his will. It is probable that his house on the 
Island was battered down at this time, for there is no record of any one 
living in the house thereafter, and in 1750 there was a tree growing in 
the ruins of very large size, which was cut down with the rest of the 
timber on the forfeited Derwentwater Estate. Very likely the escape of 
the Lady of the house up Lady's Rake took place at this time, for a 
tradition so strong could not have arisen without some foundation in fact. 

Borrowdale and Watendlath contributed trained bands forming, no 
doubt, part of the troop which Sir Edward RadcUffe raised for the service 
of the King, and probably for his own defence. At this period the 
smelting mills at Brigham, on the Greta, were destroyed by the rebels. 

I have alluded to the Yeomen of Borrowdale as a class whose 
independence and energy are conspicuous whenever they emerge into the 
busy world. It was a Birkett who set on foot the first Banker's Clearing 
House, for which he was rewarded by a pension by the London private 
Bankers, who at first kept the establishment entirely to themselves, but 
it is now extended to Joint Stock Banks, and there is one in London for 
country Bankers also. This principle has been adopted by the Railways 
in their gigantic clearing house system. 

Mr. Isaac Fisher, who died at the comparatively early age of forty 
five, was an instance of great ability and energy in business transactions, 
and he would no doubt, like his friend Sir Richard Birnie, have risen to 
eminence in London had he lived longer. As a representative man the 
Borrowdale Statesmen never had a worthier than the late Abraham 
Fisher, Esq., of SeatoUer. Living among his own people, thoroughly 
understanding and appreciating his neighbours, he exercised an 
influence, social, moral, and religious, which was felt during his 
life and will be remembered for many years to come. He 
was the last of the Fishers of Seatoller, and no nobler man 
could be found to be the last representative of his famUy and 
name in Borrowdale. 



72 



PEESONAL NAMES. 



By Peter Haeeison, (Keswick.) 



I jjurpose in this paper on " Peksonal Names," to take a passing 
glance at their origin and significance, and — in order to relieve the dryness 
of the subject — to add such little bits of history or anecdote as I have met 
with in connection with some of these names. 

I use the term " Personal Names " i.e. the names of persons or 
individuals, in contradistinction to the term " Local Names," or the names 
of places. Nomenclature may be defined either as the science of name- 
giving, or as that science which investigates the principles upon which 
names are given, and forms a branch of what is termed Philoloytj, which 
latter term, as understood at the present day, is a very large and a very 
wide subject indeed, embracing as it does the whole science of language 
or speech, but which fortunately it is not necessary to my present purpose 
to enter into upon this occasion. Indeed, if you consider for a moment 
how multitudinous is the variety of names found in the Directory of one 
of our large towns or cities, or even in a single copy of one of our Daily 
Papers, e.g. the " Times" or " Telegraph," and if you still further consider 
that every one of these different names has a history and significance of its 
own — although we may not always be able to get at the correct inter- 
pretation—you will readily understand that the subject I have taken in 
hand is a very large one of itself : so large, in fact, that it would be 
altogether impossible to do full justice to it in the compass of a single 
paper. I am therefore under the necessity of confining myself chiefly to a 
consideration of one branch of the subject, viz., to that of Surnames, which 
will however necessitate occasional references to Prtnomens, or what we 
understand by baptismal or Christian names. 



73 

Surnames, or names superadded, it may be useful to notice at the 
outset, have at all times and in all nations been but a kind of second, or 
after-growth, springing up not from caprice but from necessity. In the 
more primitive stages of society where population is but scanty and 
thinly scattered a single appellative seems to be all that is required for 
particularising one person from another. Without referring to the custom 
prevailing among the native tribes of America or Australia at the present 
day, we see this well exemplified in Biblical nomenclature. In that oldest 
of all Books, the Book of Genesis, we find the single names, Adam, Eve, 
Cain, Abel, Seth, Adah, Zillah, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, &c. 
At a somewhat later period in the history of the Israelites a second name 
began to be applied, at least in some few instances, as Joshua the Son 
of Nun, Caleb the son of Jephunneh and Jair the Son of Manasseh. It 
must be remembered that at this time the Israelites were living in a small 
corner of Egypt and had greatly multiplied in numbers, so that it is pro- 
bable these second names were given for the purpose of distinguishing 
those to whom they were applied from others of the same name. They are 
probably the earliest surnames to be met with, and they are examples of 
what are termed patronymics, formed precisely in the same way and from 
the same cause that hundreds of our present surnames were formed some 
six or seven centuries ago, e.g. 3oh\\so7i, the son of John ; Williamson ; 
Robinsow ; or the Norman Fitz Herbert, the son of Herbert, or Herbertsow ; 
or the Scotch jl/ac.Donald, Donaldson, or the son of Donald ; or the Welsh 
Ap Thomas the son of Thomas, or Thomson ; or the Manx Killip, /. e. the 
son of Phillip or Phillipson. In still later times when they had become 
still more numerous and settled down in cities, the Jewish people in 
addition to these ]}afro7ii/mics wliich they still retained, as seen in such 
names as ^arjonas, i.e. the son of Jonas, had recourse to other kinds of 
surnames, svich as Simon the Zealot, Avhich is of the descriptive class, or 
Simon of Cyrene and Judas of Galilee which are local, i.e. denote either 
the place of birth or residence. 

Again, if we turn to the oldest of extant Heathen writings, e.g. 
Homer's Iliad, we find the characters there designated by single names, as 
Achilles, Ajax, Hector, Priam, &c,, with a few patronymics as Atrides, 



74 

Pelides, and a few descri^^tive or epithetic names generally applied to the 
Gods and Goddesses of the Greek Mythology. The same need of surnames 
was iindoubtedly felt by the Latin races as they settled down in masses 
and progressed in civilization. In the Augustan age the Roman citizen 
generally bore a threefold name. The first, denoted the prenomen, corres- 
l^onding to our baptismal name ; the second, was the clan or family name ; 
the third answered to our modern surname, and was often bestowed in the 
first place in much the same way as many of our surnames were given, 
viz , from some cause or quality affecting the owner ; thus, in Titus 
IManlius Torquatus, Titus is the prenomen, Manlius the clan name, and 
Torquatus the surname — which signifies, " One provided with a torquis " 
and was acquired by Titus IManlius wearing the necklace of a 
Gaul whom he had slain in battle. At this time too the 
Greeks were using double and in some cases threefold names, but 
their system of nomenclature was neither so precise nor so complete 
as that of the Romans. 

Let us now turn to our own country and see what was the custom 
prevailing here. The earliest inhabitants of the British Islands of whom 
we have any written record were undoubtedly of the Celtic race. They 
must have reached Britain long anterior to the beginning of the Christian 
Era, probably not less than 1,000 years. Their descendants, it may be 
remarked in passing, still exist in the north of Scotland, in Wales, Ireland 
and the Isle of Man. L'ntil within a comparatively recent period the Celtic 
langiiage continued to be a spoken language only, and therefore we are 
furnished with but a scanty stock of Celtic names, those of Cassivellaunus, 
Caractacus, Cartismundua, Boadicea, (all in the Latinized form, remember) 
Vortigern, Vortimer, the legendary Arthur, and our own better authen- 
ticated Dunmail " last King of rocky Cumberland, " are familiar to all 
readers of history, and in them we see again a people using one appel- 
lative only. The hordes of Jutes, Angles, Frisians, and Saxons, now 
comprehended under the generic term, Anglo-Saxon, who continued to 
pour upon our shores during part of the 5th and throughout the 6tli 
centuries, used' single names only by which to distinguish themselves one 
from another, though frequently individuals amongst them acquired a 



75 

second name, generally from some quality of mind or body possessed by 
the owner, as, Ethelred Mucel (the term Muckle or Mickle, great, still 
lingers among us colloquially) i.e. Ethelred the great — ^huge of bulk or 
proportion ; Hewald Black and Hewald White, mentioned by Bede, who tells 
us they were so called from the colour of the hair. Most of you, too, wiU be 
familiar with the historical epithets of Unreachj, Harefoot, Harfagres, i.e. 
Fair Locks, modern Fairfax, Ironsides &c. But I must ask you to bear 
in mind that in no instance did these acquired names become hereditary. 
They invariably died with their possessors, though some centuries later 
when names did become hereditary, epithets of similar import were bestowed 
which took root and still abide among us as our Blacks, Whites, Grays, 
Sharps, Lightf oots, Heavisides, are at hand to testify. Since many of the 
Saxon single names are in themselves very expressive, generally betoken- 
ing some mental or physical characteristic of the individual, but more 
especially because a large number of them have come down to us and form 
part of our present stock of names, both prenominal and surnominaJ, I 
think I cannot do better than turn aside for a moment and select a few 
for special notice. Fortunately for our purpose, long before the Saxon 
rule came to an end in England, the various spoken dialects of the early 
invaders had become blended into one language and had passed from a 
mere spoken speech into a written tongue, of which there is a compara- 
tively large stock of its literature still extant, out of which Dictionaries 
and Grammars have been formed. 

Instead of forming half-guesses, therefore, or of taking upon trust 
the half-gueases of others, we can go to the fountain's source and satisfy 
ourselves. The following may be set down as some of the leading Saxon 
roots of most frequent use in the composition of Saxon names : — God, 
signifying Deity, or Good, which was synonymous with Deity while 
the Saxons were in a state of Heathenism ; Os a hero, also signifying 
Deity ; Thor, the Teutonic Jupiter, or Father of Heaven ; Wulf and 
Wylf — a Wolf ; Orni, a serpent or tvorm ; Win, Hilcl and GutJi, all 
si^niifying, battle, war or strife ; Sig, a conquest or victory ; Helm, a 
helmet: Bald, bold ; iVald, power or dominion ; Rice, mighty, (compare 
our modern term rich); Ethel, noble; Ead or Eadig, blessed or prosperous; 



76 

Wyne, pleasant, or as a noun, Joy or Pleasure ; Bert, bright ; Ulf, help ; 
Eed or Roed (hence our modern read) used in the composition of 
names both as a prefix and a postfix and signifying speech, counsel, 
prudence or sagacity; and lastly Frith, peace. Hence such modern names as 
Goodwin, Godfrey, Goderick ; Oswald, a heroic ruler ; Osmond, protected 
by the Gods ; Oscar, Osbert, Oswy and Osric. From Orm, a serpent, 
which was a common personal name among the Northmen, is derived our 
local name " Ormathwaite, " which in our days has given a title to a peer 
of the realm, and Ormerod, which is the exact synonym of Ormathwaite, 
both signifying Orme's Clearing. Then we have Hildehrand which 
signifies the torch of war, as Guthred does sagacious in war ; Guthlac is 
the modern Goodlake; Baldwin, bold in battle; Ethelred, noble in council; 
and Ethelwolf, the noble wolf ; Egbert, bright eyed ; Edivin, gainer of 
prosperity ; Edward, guardian of happiness. It would be easy to extend 
this list, but half a dozen Saxon feminine names must suffice. Alfred the 
Great, we learn, married the daughter of a Mercian noble ; she bore the 
name of Ethelswitha, which signifies, noble in the highest degree ; then we 
have Wiymefred, pleasant or persuasive or perhaps, winning in speech (Of. 
our old English word, tvinsome) ; Mildred, mild or gentle of speech ; 
Bertha, the bright maiden ; Ethelinda, the noble maiden ; Edith, the 
happy, or blessed or prosperous maiden. 

With the advent of the Norman rule was ushered in a host of new 
names which for a time eclipsed the Saxon, as the historical 
records of Rolls of Courts of the period abundantly testify ; indeed it 
seemed as if not merely the Saxon names but the Saxon tongue itself was 
to become extinct. We all know how under the stern savage rule of the 
early Norman Sovereigns the Norman language was constituted the lan- 
guage of the Court, the Church, the Baronial Hall, the Courts of Law and 
Justice and the Public Schools of the Kingdom ; and most of us know I 
suppose, how, after a struggle for the mastery between the two — the one 
the language of the rich, the powerful, and the noble, the other the lan- 
guage of the common people — for more than 200 years, the down-trod- 
den and despised Saxon tongue finally re-asserted its sway, and how it now 
forms the staple of modern English as spoken in the walks of everyday life 



77 

in the busy mart, or on oiar higliways, or by the quiet fireside, or as we 
have it enshrined for generations yet to come of English-speaking men and 
"women in the grand old Version of our authorised Bible, or as we read it 
in the pages of Chaucer and Wyclrffe, in the dramas of Shakespere or the 
pages of Bunyan, or in the works of Dickens and Tennyson. All this is 
familiar to every student of English History and therefore I need not 
dwell upon it here, yet, — though, somewhat foreign to my immediate 
subject — I cannot resist reading to you the words of an eloquent modern 
writer upon this conflict between the two languages " Thus we see," 
he says, " that Conquests cannot exterminate a language, nor drive it 
from its native soil. The Normans with all their power and strength, 
lords of the land, masters of the people and with every advantage on their 
side, could not destroy a highly cultivated ancient and national tongue like 
the Saxon. * * It rose against them and conquered them in its turn. * * 
They could as Conquerors seat their Norman French upon the throne and 
judge's bench — at the dais of the noble and in the refectory of the monk, 
but they found the door of the manor house and the cottage jealously 
guarded. * * The Norman French was neither carried to all parts of the 
Kingdom, because of the comparatively small number of invaders, nor 
supported by the aid of superiority. The Anglo-Saxon on the other hand 
had been carefully guai-ded and preserved by the people, it had never lost 
its hold upon their affections. Persecution and the neccessity of conceal- 
ment had made it all the dearer to the suffering race. It now made its 
way, slowly and imperceptibly, but with unerring and unceasing perseve- 
rance, from rank to rank, until it finally reached the very court from which 
it had been so ignominiously driven, and seated itself once more i;pon the 
throne of England. " 

Amongst the personal names due to the Norman Conquest the most 
prominent are William, Robert, Henry, Richard, Roger, Hugh, Reginald, 
Roland, Oliver, ]\Iiles and John. And from these were afterwards formed a 
vast number of patronymic surnames. But in addition to the patronymics 
formed by prefixing Fitz, the Normans introduced another class of names 
which soon began to assume an hereditary character viz., Local Names, 
or names derived from place of residence. No sooner did the Conqueror 



78 

find himself securely seated on the throne than he rigorously established 
the Feudal System of the Continent by parcelling the land among his 
followers, and these Norman Feudatories for the sake of distinction were 
generally known by the name of the place w^hence they had set forth in 
their Norman home. Hence are due such names as Granville, Boville, 
Neville, Tankerville, Colville, VilHers, Beaumont, Harcourt, <fec. For 
several generations these surnames were prefixed by the preposition de, o/, 
or from, as Hugh De Granville, i.e. Hugh of the great house or town, 
and so on, but in course of time these prefixes were either cast aside or 
became incorporated, as Delamere, Delisle, Defontaine, Deville, (kc. 
Dilstou Castle, the Northumbrian seat of the last Earl of Derwentwater, 
it may be noticed in passing, is a contracted form of this latter name, 
Deville and the suffix ton an enclosure — i.e. Deville's ton. The time was 
now come when a second name or surname was becoming absolutely 
necessary throughout society generally for distinction's sake. We have 
seen that for some centuries preceding the Conquest the custom had been 
in use in particular cases, but in every instance such surnames which were 
almost in all cases of the descriptive class, passed away with the lives of 
the owners. They did not become hereditary, i.e. they were not handed 
down from one generation to another. Now, however, a change was to 
take i^lace "Slowly at first, and silently and unpremeditatedly but 
nevertheless surely," — I am quoting the words of a writer upon the subject, 
— -"it came to pass that the name by which one man was distinguished from 
another became part and parcel of his property and passed with his other 
property to his direct descendants." It is impossible to fix upon any 
particular epoch or indeed any particiilar reign when surnames first became 
hereditary, but speaking genei'ally it may be said that the custom arose 
in the latter part of the 11th century or early in the 12th, and continued 
until the close of the 14th, i.e. the time of Chaucer, before our present 
nomenclature was completed. The Normans undoiibtedly gave the first 
impulse to this new fashion by adopting as a distinguishing name the 
residential or Place-name. How long the custom was in finding its way 
into our own then remote part of England we have no means of .ascer- 
taining but that it did find its way here we have undoubted proof in the 



79 

Registers of our Parish Churcli— more than 300 years ago — and how much 
farther back we cannot tell for unfortunately our Registers go no farther 
back. jNIore than 300 years ago, there were families residing in the parish 
bearing the still familiar names of Thwaite ; Braithwaite (i.e. Broad- 
thwaite,) Thornthwaite, Dowthwaite, (I take this to be dark or gloomy 
thwaite), Birkhead (now Birkett,) Borrowdale, Threlkeld, Yewdale (which 
I believe was the Ancient name of Borrowdale,) Howe, Gillbanks, Banks, 
Gasgarth, Brownrigg and Leathes, all of Avhich names are still living and 
I trust will long continue to live and thrive in our midst. But these 
Registers also furnish us with some interesting names which are now 
extinct, or extinct as far as I can learn to the contrary. We find the 
name, Smaithwaite (which I think means Small Thwaite) Langstrath (we 
find this family settled at Watendlath from 1565 till 1612,) Cowdale, 
which in these latter times has become corrupted into Coledale, and in 
1607 the name of one Thomas Buttermere appears. The surname, 
Derwentwater, has long been extinct, but the personal name Wastwater 
only died out so lately as in the present century, for in our Parish 
Churchyard I find a tombstone inscribed to the Memory of Robert West- 
water (Wastwafer) who died in 1814 and of Isabella his wife, 1816 ; our 
venerable sexton — and no doubt others still living in Keswick — remember 
the old couple. 

It would be impossible in the limited time at my disposal to do more 
than take a hasty survey of this part of my subject, but as to leave it here 
would be to leave it in a very improper state, I will furnish you Avith a 
list of Saxon roots of Place-names which occur most frequently in the 
composition of Modern Local Surnames, and then those who feel sufiicient 
interest or curiosity in the matter may interpret for themselves : — 

The Thwaite was a forest clearing, or land enclosed and cleared of 
timber. The Roi/d or Rod was the ridded land, or clearing in the thickly 
wooded districts, compare Acroyd (oak), Holroyd (holly), Huntroyd, the 
clearing for the purposes of the chase, &c. 

Greave, Grove and Grave, a woodland avenue cut or graved out of 
the forest — compare our locally common names of Grave, Grove and 



80 

Greavs, also such compounds as Gravesend, Hargraves (hare), Congreve 
(Coney or rabbit,) &,c. 

The Hirst is a term synonymous with wood — lience we have 
Lyndhurst, Brockhurst, &c. 

The Holt was less in sizs than the Hirst, being merely a small thicket 
or coppice. To it are owing such names as Oakshot, Bagshot, Aldershot, 
Cockshot, all of which are softened in sound by the elision of the letter 1. 

Shaw, a small woody shade, a covert forming shelter for game and 
the \vilder animals. Bagshaw signifies the Badger's shaw. We have also 
Hiudshaw, Eamshaw, Earnshaw (Earn, Eagle), Openshaw, Broadshaw 
and Shaw. 

The Ben or Deane, a sunken and woody dale affording food and 
shelter to cattle — Brogden i.e. the Brock or Badgers deane, Eamsden, 
Hareden, Dearden, Oxenden, Swinden, Ogden, i.e. Hog's den. 

The Ley was pasture land undisturbed by the plough, and afforded 
pasturage to all manner of domesticated animals and some of the wilder 
kinds, if we may trust such surnames as Hartley. Oxley, Cowley, Horsley, 
Eowley, Buckley, Shipley (sheep), Hiiidley and Kinley, — which last is the 
Kine ley or cow-pasture and which in its turn by the addition of the suffix, 
side becomes Kiiileyside — then we have Stanley (Stony), Ashley, Elmsley, 
Oakley, Lindley, Berkley, and Ridley — a name made illustrious in our 
annals by the old stouthearted martyr, Bishop Ridley, who sprang from a 
well known Northumberland family of that name. This list might be 
greatly extended but enough has been said to show what a fertile source of 
surnames these Local names have been. The roots, Holm, Knoll, Ljaich, 
Slade, Frith, Kay, Hill, Cliff, Clongh, Cop, Cope, Cob, Down, Dun, Ton, 
Ham, Combe, Moor, More, Howe, Law, Shore, Over, Hatch, Gore, Gate, 
Gale, Cross, Rood, Stead, Mead, Croft, Garth, Yard, Hay, Worth, Grange, 
Field, Barn, Leath, Booth, Bower, Scale, Bold, Thorpe, and Borough have 
all helped to swell the list of proper names. 

But numerous as these roots are they were not sufficient to supply 
surnames to each separate famUy. To make a homely illustration of my 
meaning — all the families living at Crosthwaite, or Thornthwaite, or 



81 

Threlkelcl, or Borrowdale, could not take their names from their place of 
residence, otherwise the quality of distinction would to a great extent have 
been lost. Therefore other modes were also adopted. The best known 
of these was the patro7iyinic, a class at which I have already glanced. 
Thus where the head of a family bore the name of John his sons became 
known as John's sons. — so of Robert or William, and eventually these 
individuals became Johnsons, Robertsons or Williamsons ; and so on 
through the whole list of baptismal names in vogue at the time surnames 
were forming. Again, these patronymics were much increased by the 
custom which prevailed then as now of using contracted or corrupt forms 
of baptismal names. Thus we have Wihon, Jac/<son, Dickson, BicJison, 
(Hikke was a corruption of Isaac), Watson (Wat, for Walter), Dmvson 
(Daw, a corruption of David,) &c., &c. And, again, the list was still 
further increased by the use of pet names, or names of endearment, which 
were then given, as now, in the nursery and playground. Thus our Charles 
becomes Charlie, William, Willie, John is known as Johnnie, Edward is 
familiarly styled Teddy, and Robert, Bobby. Our diminutives you will 
see are ie and lei/ but they were unknown in England 500 years ago or 
assuredly we should have had, odd as they may seem, such corresponding 
surnames as, Johnnieson, Willieson, Teddyson, and Bobbison. The pet 
forms in use at the time were of quite a ditferent form and they must 
have been in very common use : the principal terminations were Kin, and 
Cock, both of Saxon orgin, and the Norman diminutives ot or et and on or 
en. Kin has its living representative in the German Chen, as Miidchen, a 
young or little maiden and still exists in our lambkin, pipkin, mannikin 
&c. To it we owe such names as Tomkin, Jenkin, Wilkin, Atkin, 
Simpkin and their compounds Jenkiuson, equivalent to Johnson, 
Atkinson, i.e. Adamson &c. The diminutive Cock or Cox still lives in 
. our nursery literature in the forms of Cock-robin, Cock-boat, Cock-horse ; 
we owe to it such names as Cox, Cowx, Wilcox &c., &c. The Norman 
on or en played no small part in the formation of our surnames, Robert 
became Robin ; Nicol was transposed into Colin ; Richard was familiarly 
known to his schoolmates as IDiccon ; Pierre became Perrin, and Mary 
Marion, and in this manner sprang up such surnames as Robinson, 



82 

CoUinson, Dickinson, and Dickens. Ot or et exists still in 
such words as pdcket, a little poke or bag ; ballot, a little ball ; chariot, 
target, hatchet, and latchet. To it we are indebted for snch names as 
Emmet, Elliot, Tillotson, Hewetson, and many others. 

Before finally leaving this part of my subject I will refer briefly to 
the modes in which patronymic surnames were formed severally in 
Scotland, Ireland, Isle of Man, and Wales. The Norman patronymic we 
have already seen was formed by prefixing Fitz, which is a corruption, or 
perhaps more correctly speaking, a modernised form of Latin, filius, a son, 
and thus FitzwiUiam is identical with Williamson. In Scotland the terms 
Mac and Vich supplied the place of the Saxon, Son, or the Nonnan Fitz ; 
thus Mac Donald is Donalds' son or Donaldson. The Manx, whose 
language is very closely allied to that of the Scottish Highlanders, formerly 
used this term Mac but curiously enough in most Manx names of the 
present day the letters Ma have been cast off and the C has become 
incorporated with the baptismal name, thus forming a list of surnames 
whose initial letters are represented by K or C hard and In. These 
surnames as seen on the sign-boards of Douglas soon attract the notice of 
the visitor to the Isle of Man and at first sight are puzzling even to the 
curious in name-lore. I found in an old note-book the following list 
which I suppose must have been made in order partly to while away the 
time of my stay. AVWip, Kiss&ck, Kcwvr'iw, Kaighim, Kenmali, Kinrade, 
Kewley, Kermode, Kineale, Keig, Callow, Clucas, Clague, Costeen, Kneen, 
Craine, Cieppin, Cubbin, Curphey, Callister, Gillow, Quaye, Quayle, 
Quark, Quilleash, Quaggin, Quiggin, Quill, and a few names compounded 
with the prefix Mai, a male, and Gil — Scotch, Gillie, a servant, e.g. Maly- 
voirrey, Malyvartin, MoUyree, Mollyruig, Malychreest, Gilchreest &c. 
Time will not allow me to do more than interpret a few of these. Kissack 
is Mac Isaac or Isaac's son, Callister is Alexander's son, KUlip is PhiUipson, 
Kewin is MacEoin or Johnson just as Costean is Stephenson and Clucas 
Luke's son, Quark is Mac Pharick, i.e. Patrickson, Quayle is Mac Fayle or 
the son of Paul, Kermode is the son of Dermot, Quilliam is equivalent 
to Williamson, Quill is our common name Wilson, and Kneal, is the 
son of Niel, as is also a name which has lately come into undue prominence, 



83 

Kenealy. Malyvoirrey represents Mary's son, anglice Morrison; Molly- 
ruig is our Eitson, e'.e, Eedson, the Norman synonym of whicliis Fitzroy; 
MoUyvriddy is Bridget's son, and Malyvartin Martin's son, while Christo- 
pherson finds its name synonym in Malychreest. 

The Irish, whose language again is very closely akin to those of both 
the Highland Scotch and the Manx, use the same prefix Mac by which 
to form patronymics, but they much more frequently supplant the Mac 
by prefixing the letter O.' Need I cite such well known names as 
O'Connel, O'Brien, O'Rourke, O'SuUivan, O'Donoghue 1 Now I must 
confess this prefix O' puzzled me a good deal some times, but searching 
through the pages of a Celtic dictionary one day for quite a different 
purpose I accidentally stumbled upon the following exj)lanation. " O' is 
a prefix signifying, of ov from, and added to proper names signifies the 
oldest branch of a family, for," adds the lexicographer "the Erse, i.e. 
the Highlanders, use Mac for a descendant or son but the Irish use O, as 
in O'Neil, considering this appellation as being the further removed. " So 
it appears that family pride — pride of name or descent is at the bottom of 
it all. The more modest Highlander or Manxman is content to style 
himself the ion of his immediate ancestor but the Irishman by the use of 
O,' which is le.?s definite than Mac or Son, wishes to show that his descent 
dates farther back than at least one generation. In the same spirit the 
Spaniard who can claim the title of Hidalgo to his name is j^roud to show 
on all occasions that he is the son of some one and he looks down 
upon those families who have not acquired this title as a parcel of 
nobodies. 

We now turn to Welsh names, but I must be very brief on this head. 
Like the Normans, Scotch, Irish, and Manx, their patronymics are formed 
by a prefix, viz. Ap, signifying also, " The Son of." In former days the 
Welshman was proud to show he had an ancestry of more than one, or 
two, or even three descents and for this purpose had recourse to repeating 
the Ap instead of using the indefinite 0, of the Irishman. This custom is 
playfully satirized in the Play of Sir John Oldcastle (1660.) 

Scene — A Court of Justice. 
Judge. — What bail ? What sureties ? 



84 

Davy. — Her Cozen, Ap Pace, Ap Evan, Ap Morrice, Ap Morgan, Ap 
Llewellyn, Ap Meredith, Ap Griffin, Ap Davis, Ap Owen, Ap 
Thenkin Jones. 

Judge. — Two of the most efficient are enow. 

Sheriff. — And please your honour they are all but one. 

As we have seen in the case of the Manx Mac, the Welsh Ap became 
in process of time abbreviated, indeed we may say almost lost, by casting 
off the initial a and incorporating the p in the personal name, and thus 
we have the common Welsh surnames of Probert, Probyn, Prichard, 
Prodgers, Penry, Penrice, Parry, Preece, Prossei", Pugh, Powell 
Pumphrey, Bevan, Bowen, Bethell — of course Probert is Ap Robert or 
Robertson, Probyn Robinson, Pi'itchard Richardson, Prodgers Rogerson, 
Pariy is Harrison, and Penry is the son of Henry, and so on through the 
whole list of names of this class. 

Of Cornish names, too, want of time forbids me to speak ; many of 
them will be readily detected by remembering the old distich : — 

"In Tre, Pol, and Pen, 

You may know the Cornish men " 

The next class of names I have to deal with are of a different kind 
altogether. There is nothing more natural than that some individual should 
have been known among his neighbours by the name of the occupation he 
followed, and it is not too much to say that in our modern directories 
every kind of occupation known to our forefathers of five or six centuries 
ago has its representative surname — we have Butcher and Bewsher, Baker 
and its feminines Bagster and Baxter, Webb with its feminines Webster 
and Weaver, Dyer, Fuller, Tucker, and Walker which last is derived 
from any superior pedestrianic powers, as some might suppose, but to a 
veritable and highly useful occupation, in the days of home-spinning and 
home manufacturing, viz. : that of the Walker or Treadei of the cloth. 
Wickliffe's Version of the Transfiguration on the Mount renders the pas- 
sage thus " His clothes became shining so as no fullere or Walker of 
Cloth may make white upon earth." Our Sharman, Sherman, and 
Shearman were shearers or croppers of the manufactured Cloth — then we 



85 

have Tanner, Skinner, Wooler, Currier, Fellmonger, Glover, and Barker 
. {i.e. he who attended to the preparation of the bark used in the tanning 
of leather) ; the Tailor, Draper, Mercer and Flaxman are each represented 
in our nomenclature ; so are the Waller, Slater, Thatcher, Joiner, 
Carpenter, Wright, Sawyer, Painter, Nailer, and if we turn to the 
occupations of rural life we find represented in our directories and news- 
papers of the present day, the Squii'e, Yeoman, Farmer, Steward, and 
Bailiff, the Wheeler and Wheelwright, Cai-ter and Cartwright, and Wain- 
wright, i.e. Wagon wright. If we bear in mind that the more menial 
occupations were performed by the serfs who were still bought and sold 
with the glebe, we need be at no loss to understand how it came to pass 
that each separate duty of the farm had a particular individual assigned 
to it. There was the Herd, Shepherd, Cowherd (Coward), Calvert (Calf- 
herd), Stoddart (Stot herd), Coulthard (Colt herd), Cowman, Horsman, 
Hayward {Hay, hedge and ward, keeper), Hogward (modern Hogarth) and 
Woodward. We may readily understand, too, how in a district like our 
own the surname Fisher came to be so widely spread— probably in com- 
mon with many of those just mentioned, it had several distinct centres of 
origin — the same may be said of such names as Hunter and Todhunter 
(so late as the time of Shakspeare the fox was known as the Tod). It 
woiild be tedious to run through the whole list, therefore I shall close this 
part of the subject with the commonest of all surnames, that of Smith. 
Between the years 1838 and 1854, i.e. 17 years, there were registered in 
England, as born, married or died no less than 286,307 people of the 
name of ' Smith.' In medieval England it must be remembered that 
the Smith was an important personage in rural life — our old literature is 
full of allusions to him. No village could dispense with his services. 
To worker in iron he added the profession of Cattle Doctor, and upon a 
l^inch could exercise the art of phlebotomy upon his neighbour. His 
smithy was then as now a centre of village gossip and village politics. 
You remember how well the Smith of our days has been drawn by one of 
the sweetest of living poets :— 

" Behiud the spreading chestnut tree 
The village smithy stands, 
The Smith, a mighty man is he 



86 

"With large and sinewy hands, 

And the muscles of his brawny arms 

Are strong as iron bands. 

His hair is crisp and black and long ; 

His face is like the tan, 

His brow is wet with honest sweat, 

He earns whate'er he can, 

And looks the whole world in the face, 

For ho owes not any man. 



And children coming home from school 

Look in at the open door ; 
They love to see the flaming forge 
And hear the bellows roar. 
And catch the burning .sparks that fly 
Like chaft' from a threshing floor." 

I am afraid I have left myself but little time to notice the two I'e - 
maining classes of Surnames, viz., those derived from office and those 
Avhich were bestowed in the first place as Nicknames and afterwards 
became hereditary. I must therefore hurry over this part of my subject. 
Of the former many of them are due to the mock ceremonies, outdoor 
pageantries and rural games of the middle ages. Of such are King, 
Pope and Pape, Cardinal, Bishop, Abbot, Duke, Lord, Barron, Monk — 
others are due to the offices their owners held, as Vicars, Parson, Priest- 
man, Chaplin, Clerk, Crozier, i.e. he who bore the jjastoral staff, Latimer, 
i.e. Latiner or teacher of Latin. We have also rej^resented, the Mayor, 
Sheriff, Eeeve, Burgess, Beadle, Clerk, and Wake or Watchman, i.e. the 
modern Policeman — and Constable, Forester, Parker, Woodruffe, i.e. Wood- 
reeve, Fowler, Falconer, Messenger, Spencer, i.e. he who had charge of 
the buttery or spence, as well as Butler, i.e. Bottler, he who had charge 
of the bottles, an important office in the days of our hard-drinking 
forefathers. 

The Surnames owing their origin to soiibriquets or nicknames are so 
numerous that I almost shrink from touching upon them here. It is a 
curious but well known fact that in the history of our religious sects as 
well as of our political parties, the names by which they are now best 
known are those bestowed upon them by the outside world,- not the 



87 

uauieti Avhich tlie founders wished to give them, and they have generally 
l^een bestowed upon them in an opprobrious sense. For instance such 
terms as Quaker, Methodist, Eanter, and Shaker, or Whig, Tory, or 
Radical — and thus it has been with hundreds of our modern Surnames. 
One man was distinguished from his fellows by some striking physical or 
external peculiarity, such as the colour of his hair, his stature, shape of 
body or limb, his prowess, age or condition. Another was known by some 
mental or moral peculiarity or endowment. Thus we find in our director- 
ies the namas Long, Short, Longman, Little, Big, Grant {i.e. Grand, Great) 
High, Lowe, Greathead, Whitehead, Cruikshank, Sheepshank, Armstrong, 
Strongitharm, Strong, Lcggc, Foote, Swift, Slow, Sly, and Golightly. 
Nearly all the colours are represented, Black, White, Gray, Brown, Dun, 
Scarlet, Red (Reed), Blond, Yellow, and Fallows, i.e. the pale yellow colour 
of our fallow fields, and also the colour of the fallow-deer ; then we have 
Whitelock, Blacklock, Blackman, Whitman, Redman. So of the mental or 
moral peculiarities, thus there occur Wiseman, Goodfellow, Merry, Gay, 
Blythe, Joyce, Makepeace, Trueman, Hardy, Smart, Quick, Sharp, Freake 
{i.e. fresh), Bold, Doughty, Champion, Careless, Jolly, Merryweather; Play- 
fair is Playfellow — from old English f^re a fellow or Comrade, Penny- 
father was an opprobrious term for miser. The insect world, the beast 
world, the fish-world and the bird-wcrld are all represented in our 
directories, and the same may be said of the vegetable world, but I must 
close here. If I have succeeded in awakening among you an interest in a 
subject usually considered dry and uninviting but which in reality throws 
a good deal of light upon the social customs, modes of thought, manners 
and occupations of our forefathers obtainable from no other source, the 
chief object I had in view in setting out is attained. 



88 



ON THE SPECTROSCOPE. 



By Q. J. Snelus, Assoc. R.S.M, (Workington). 

DeUvered to the Workington Society (April 26th, ia76), and before the 
Cumberland Association (May 1st, 1876,) at Whitehavpn. 

The invention of the' Spectroscope may fairly be considered one of 
the most important triumphs of modern science. 

In explaining its construction and use it will be advisable that I 
remind you briefly of the nature of light. Modern Physicists hold that 
light is the result of vibrations of the particles of an extremely attenuated 
medium, termed the luminiferous ether, which is supposed to permeate all 
space. Just as touncl is the result of motion imparted to the air, which 
motion is propagated in the form of waves, the size of the wave determining 
the pitch of the sound ; so light is the result of wave motion among the 
particles of the luminiferous ether, different sized waves producing 
differently coloured lights. But while the motion of the air producing 
sound is comparatively slow, the highest musical sound that the ear 
is capable of detecting being produced by 38,000 vibrations per 
second, and the lowest by 16, the smallest number of vibrations 
capable of affecting the eye and producing a red ray is about 451 millions 
of millions per second and the length of the wave is only ,^^ ^^^ th 
part of an inch. As the waves decrease in length and increase in velocity 
the eye interprets the result as orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet, 
respectively, till we get up to 789 millions of millions per second with 
wave lengths of ^,\,. th the H line in the violet, which is the most rapid 

^ 04,000 

wave the eye can register under ordinary circumstances. White light is 
the result of vibrations of several degrees occuring together. When 
white light impinges upon different objects they stifle some rays and either 
reflect or transmit others. When white light falls perpendicularly upon 
colourless glass, if the two surfaces are parallel, the ray passes straight 
through, it is neither bent oiit of its course nor changed in any way, but if 



89 

the two surfaces meet at an angle and form a wedge or prism and the 
light is directed against one surface obliquely, a part of the light passes 
through the prism, but in doing so it is not only bent out of its course 
but it becomes analyzed, and those rays such as the blue, which are the 
result of shorter and quicker waves, are more bent or refracted than 
others, such as the red and yeUow, produced by longer and slower vibra- 
tions. Newton discovered this fact and propounded it exactly 201 years 
ago in the form of the celebrated theorem that "lights which differ in 
colour differ also in their degree of refrangibility." His mode of proof 
was as follows. — Through a small hole in the shutter he allowed a ray of 
light to pass into a darkened room, forming a spot of white light upon 
the opposite wall. He then interposed a prism of glass so that the ray of 
light fell obliquely upon its surface and was delighted to find the spot of 
white light replaced by a band of most gorgeous colours. 

Newton termed the band of light so obtained the spectrum. I cannot 
shew the spectrum of sun light, but I will endeavour to show you the 
spectrum of a white light, the electric light, which rivals that of the sun 
in intensity. You will observe that the spectrum is continuous, and the 
colours shade off gradually into one another. Newton saw no more than 
this when he examined sunUght, because he admitted his light through a 
round hole. But Wollaston on admitting the light through a narrow sUt 
found that the spectrum was crossed by a number of very fine dark lines, 
and Fraunhofer carefully mapped and lettered these lines which have 
since borne his name. Kirchoff and Bunsen employed this plan for 
examining coloured flames, and instead of employing a dark room and 
shutter with a sUt, constructed the instrument termed the spectroscope. 
I have here the instrument in one of its earliest forms. You will observe 
that it consists essentially of a triangidar prism of glass, fixed firmly upon 
a table. Opposite one face of the prism there is a tube, at the end of 
which is an arrangement for admitting a ray of light through a very nar- 
row slit. This ray of light strikes the face of the prism obliquely, and 
in passing through the glass it is both refracted and decomposed, and can 
be seen through the opposite face of the prism. In order to view the ray 
more accurately a telescope is placed opposite this face. Two fine cross 



90 

wires in the telescope give a fixed point, which can be brought upon 
any line in the spectrum so as to register its position. 

In this instrument you will observe that there are two prisms side by 
side. The ray of light passes through both and is thus spread out into 
a much broader band ; the number of prisms is sometimes increased to 
3uch an extent that the emergent ray crosses its original path. The 
prisms may also be so arranged that the ray of light passes out of the 
telescope in a direct line from its source. Such an instrument is termed 
a "direct vision" spectroscope and is very handy for general work, but 
is not suitable for very delicate research. 

It had long been known that certain substances when burnt produced 
variously coloured flames. Thus I have here some of the red fire of the 
pyrotechnist and you will see what a splended crimson flame it produces. 
Fox Talbot examined this flame (among others) with the prism, and dis- 
covered that its spectrum was crossed by brilliantly coloured lines. 

Soda salts produce a yellow line and Swann very nearly discovered 
the true cause, but the absolute discovery remained for Bunsen and 
Kirchoif. They found that all sodium salts gave this yellow line, and 
that no other substance that was perfectly free from sodium did give the 
same line ; hence they rightly argued that the presence of this line in the 
spectrum was indicative of the presence of sodium in the flame. They 
were not long in generalizing upon this fact, and found that every 
elementary substance which could give rise to a flame in burning, produced 
a definite set of lines which always occured of the same colour, in the same 
position, and of the same strength ; and they termed these lines the 
spectrum of the element. They carefully mapped all the lines produced 
by the then known elements and used these maps to discover the nature 
of unknown substances, just as the mariner uses his map to discover his 
whereabouts in approaching an unknown shore. Their work soon bore 
remarkable fruit, for in examining the residue from a German mineral 
water they saw some lines which were new to them, and immediately 
concluded that they had dropped across an unknown element. And so it 
turned out ; for after patiently evaporating 44 tons of the Durkheim 
spring, they got 200 grains of salts, of what they found to be two new 



metals, which they termed Caesium and Rubidium. Shortly afterwards 
our own countryman Mr. Crookes saw in his spectroscope, when examining 
the residue from burning pyrites, a beautiful green line that was new to 
him and this turned out to be jiroduced by the salts of a metal till then 
unknown, but which he was not long in preparing by the cwt. He termed 
it Thallium. Indium is a fourth element discovered in the same way. 

The following table will give you some idea of the delicacy of this 
mode of analysis and of the quantities which may easily be detected. 1. 



3,000,000 -t^ ° ' 180,000,000 

2. Lithium, ^^^th part of a millegrarame, or jr^oi^oo*^ ^^^^ °^ ^ S'^''^^'^' 

3. Strontium, j^^th of a millegramme, or ^5^50*^ "^ ^ S^'^^"- *' 
Calcium, j^— gg-th of a millegramme, or __^_th of a grain. 

We will now pass to the examination of the sun by the spectroscope. 
I told you that the solar spectrum was crossed by a large number of very 
fine dark lines. It had long been known that one of these, the D line, 
corresponded in position with the bright yellow line prodticed by Sodium. 
Kirchoff and Bunsen discovered that other dark lines corresponded in 
position to the bright lines found in the spectrum of other elements and 
upon carefully comparing that of iron, which contains no less than 460 
bright lines, they found that each one of these was matched by a dark 
line in the solar spectrum, and the conclusion was irresistibly forced upon 
them that these dark lines must be caused by iron existing in the sun. 
But why were the lines dark and not bright 1 They solved this question 
by observing that the sodium flame was opaque to the light which it itself 
emitted. Thus if we have a glowing substance producing this particular 
ray D and place before it a sodium flame we see a black patch in the place 
of the yellow flame. This is exactly the state of the case in the sun. 
The body of the sun, which is termed its "photosphere," contains certain 
glowing elements, and the vapour of these elements, at a much higher 
temperature, surrounds the photosphere ; the particular rays emitted by 
the substances in the photosphere are absorbed by this vapour and instead 
of seeing a bright line we see a dark one. In the case of certain of the 
stars some of the lines are actually bright. The following bodies have in 
this way been detected in the sun : — 



92 

1. Sodium. 5. Iron. 9. Zinc. 13. Hydrogen. 

2. Calcium. 6. Chromium. 10. Strontium. 14. Manganese. 

3. Barium. 7. Nickel. 11. Cadmium. 15. Aluminium. 

4. Magnesium. 8. Copj^er. 12. Cobalt. IG. Titanium. 

Around this gaseous envelope there is a still moi'e attennuated one, 
composed mainly of the lightest known element, viz., hydrogen. It is 
this envelope which gives rise to the peculiar flame-like protuberances 
that are seen surrounding the sun during an eclipse. Thanks to the 
labours of Lockyer and Janssen we are now enabled to examine this 
envelope, which is termed the Chromosphere, by the spectroscope, without 
waiting for an eclipse, and it has been found that it extends to an average 
height of 5,000 miles, that it is subject to most violent storms which 
sometimes raise it in clouds 50,000 miles high, leaving depressions at 
other parts, through which the cooler portions' of the sun can be seen, thus 
giving rise to the phenomena known as sun spots. We are thus enabled 
by this beautiful instrument to dive deeply into the mystery of that orb 
which has been the wonder of all ages. But not only so, we can by its 
aid study those far off worlds whose light takes thousands of years to 
reach us, and we can also gain deep knowledge of those erratic phenomena, 
the comets, which have before time so terrified our ancestors by their 
sudden and startling appearance. What is yet more remarkable is, tha t, as 
Huggins has shewn us, it is possible to determine whether a star is mov- 
ing to or from us, and even to calculate the velocity with which such 
motion is taking place ; in this way he has demonstrated that Sirius is 
receding from the earth at the rate of 41 miles per second. 

Time will not admit of my explaining to you how by 
the aid of the spectorscope we can also examine the nature of 
colouring matter in coloured solutions ; how the smallest speck 
of human blood can be detected by the characteristic absorption 
bands which it produces, or how Sorby has traced the changes 
taking place in tree foliage from summer to winter, and many other 
equally interesting fields of investigation. Nor can I stay to explain to 
you the last, bvit by no means the least contribvition to the subject, except 
to state that within the last year Sir J. AUene has shewn us that it is not 



93 

only possible by the aid of the Spectroscope to determine the kind of 
element we are examining, but that he can actually determine the relative 
quantity, that is, he can perform a c^uantitative as well as a qualitative 
analysis by its means. 

But I may be permitted to call your attention to a more homely field 
of investigation with the Spectroscope, in which much yet remains to be 
done. I refer to the investigation of the nature of the flame from the 
Bessemer convertor. As many of you know, this flame is of a most 
intense character, throwing a shadow in broad day light, and when ex- 
amined by the Spectroscope we see one of the most beautiful spectra I 
know of. The flame is mostly due to the combustion of carbon, but it 
differs in a remarkable manner from other cai-bon spectra, and even when 
we collect the carbonic oxide as it comes from the convertor (as I have 
done) and burn it at leisure, we get quite a different spectrum ; so that 
although many have worked slightly at the subject, and we know that the 
' bloiv'' should be stopped when all the gi-een and red lines disappear, 
(as they do suddenly) and although some years ago I even got so far as 
to find that we could predict the duration of the blow from a given 
point, very much remains iinexplained. Those persons who, like myself, 
have to conduct the large operations of extensive works, have little time 
for devoting themselves to a subject which requires constant and close 
attention, while other workers in science have been attracted to the more 
wonderful phenomena of stellar analysis. I shall be happy however 
to give our members an opportunity at any time of witnessing the 
Bessemer spectrum, as we can generally promise that there will be a 
~ " blow" going on at West Cumberland, at least every hour day and night. 
I will now attempt to show you on the screen, the spectra of one or 
two of the heavy metals, but I must point out to you that the spectra of 
these, as of many other bodies, are far better examined by taking the 
induction spark between two jDieces used as the j^oles, and that the ex- 
hibition on the screen is coarse and rough compared with the beauty of 
the spectrum seen through such instruments as are on the table for your 
inspection. 

I have endeavoured in the short time at my disposal to give you 



u 

some idea of the delicacy and beauty of spectrum analysis and also to 
shew you how large a field is open for investigation. I do not pretend 
that I have been al)le to shew you anything that is new, nor do I lay claim 
to any wonderful discoveries of my own. All I hoped to be able to do 
Avas to put before you, in simple language, a description of the Spectro- 
scope and its use, and if possible to increase the army of enthusiastic 
workers with this wonderful instrument. The method of Spectroscopic 
investigation is not many years old, and yet it has been the means of dis- 
covering four new elements, and of explaining many phenomena before 
inexplicable. It has carried us as it were, to the very verge of our system, 
and even iDeyond it, enabling us to speak confidently of the constitution 
of our gi'eat solar luminary, to trace the disturbances that are occurring 
upon its surface ; it has afforded us an insight into the nature of those 
vast orbs whose magnitude is only equalled by their distance from us, has 
even told us which way and how fast they are moving, and has in fact 
thrown more light upon the constitution of the universe, than even 
Galileo's great invention, the telescope. What would Newton have given 
for its aid, and who shall tell what discoveries it has yet in store for us 1 
It wants only patient and careful investigators, and if my remarks induce 
one such to devote himself to the work, I shall feel amply repaid for the 
little trouble I have taken. 



E. Bailey, Machine Peintee, Cockeemouth and Kesvick. 



"CUMMERLAND MAK 0' TALK." 

" /"lUMMERLAND TALK": Tales and RlijTnes in the Dialect, By Johit 
\J EiCHAEDSON. Second Series- (An entirely new collection). Price, 3s. 6d. 

Also, ''CUMMERLAND TALK." First Series. Price, 3s. 6d. 

Carlisle : G-. & T. Cowakd ; Loudon : Beiieose & Sons. 



WORKS BY J. C. WARD, F.G.S., Assoc. R.S.M., of Her Majesty's 

Geological Survey. 

ELEMENTARY NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, Fcap, 8vo. pp. 222, clotli, with 
154 Woodcuts, Price, 3s. 6d, By Post, 3s. 9d. 
Subjects : — Electricity, Magnetism, Light, Sound, Heat, Pneumatics, and 
Hydi'ostatics. Lists of Experiments, A pparatus required and a Glossarj' of Scientfio 
Terms, are ai>pended. 



I ELEMENTARY GEOLOGY, Fcap. Svo. pp. 292, cloth, -ndth 120 Illustrations, 
J Price, 4s. 6d. By Post, 4s. 9id. 

Contents: — Origin and Classification of EocVs. — Denudation. — Elevation and 
Depression of Land. — Geological Terms. — Physical Geography. — Geological 
Surveying. — Geologic History.— Tables of Distribution of Life in Time. — Practical 
Oeology. — Summary of Geological changes in England. — Glossary. 

Teubnee & Co., 57 & 59, Ludgate Hill. 



MEMOIRS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF ENGLAND AND 
WALES. 



By the same Author, 

GEOLOaY OF THE NORTHERN PART OF THE ENGLISH LAKIE 
DISTRICT, being the OiEcial Memoir- descriptive of the ore-inch 
Geological Map, 101 S.E. (Keswick ) 

Contents : — Character of the Rocks and their distribution. — Mineral Veins and 
Deposits. — Faidts. — Cleavage. — Glacial Phenomena. — Geological Histoi-y of th& 
District. — Relation of Scenery to Geology, — Fossils. — List of Geological Works 
and Papers on the District. 

The Work is Illustrated by one large folding plate of horizontal sections, thice 
plates of coloured microscopic drawings, one coloured index-map, three full-page 
illustrations, several plates of new fossils, and various woodcuts. 

LONGHAN & Co., Paternoster Row, and Edwaed Stanfoed, 
6, Charing Cross. 



o 



,NE-INCH GEOLOGICAL MAP, 101 S.E., KESWICK DISTRICT. 
Price, 3s. — Edwaed Stanfoed, Charing Cross. 



TRANSACTIONS 



Cumberland Association 



Advancement of Literature and 

Science. 

I'ARl II.— 1876-77 
Ml EY J. CLIFTON WARD, Assoc. R.S.M. 

Fellow of the Geological, Mineralogical, and 
Royal Microscopical Societies. 



Pi! hi K. MEArBEES, OnK ShILLINc, 

_Nir, Mt .\ii;i I' 'Two ^HTin-rr:-^ a-.T) ''t- 1 



OARLISLi; 

1 s 7 7 



TRANSACTIONS 



Cumberland Association 



Advance^nent of Liter ahire and 
Science, 

PART II.— 1876-77. 

Edited by J. CLIFTON WARD, As.soc. R.S.AI. 

Fellow of the Geological, Mineialogical, and 
Royal Microscopical Societies. 



Price to Members, One Shilling. 
Non-:Mesibees, Two Shillings and Sixpence. 




CARLISLE : 

<T. & T. ('OWARD, PPJXT12RS, 75, SCOTCH STREET. 

1877. 



CONTENTS 



IUles, List of Ofiicerh, and TEEAsrEER's Account. 
I'AET I.— PROCEEDINGS AT THE ANNUAL MEETING (Keswick) :— 

PpOfiEAMJIE CAEEIED OUT. 

Address bv the President. 

perorts from the associated societies. 

Papers Eead at the Annu.\l Meeting : — 

"Notes on the Meteorology of Cockermouth." By H. Dodgson, 
M.D., E.E.A.S., (Cockermoutli.) 

"The Eainfall of Keswick." By J. F. Crosthwaite, (Keswick.) 

"Notes on .some Peculiarities of the West Cumberland Coal Field." 
ByE. F. Martin, M.A., (Whitehaven.) 

"The Hematite Deposits of Cumberland and Lancashire." (Ab- 
stract.) By J. D. Kendall, C.E., F.G.S., (Whitehaven.) 

"The Eaised Peach on the Cumberland Coast between Whitehaven 
and Bowness." (Abstract.) By E. Eussell, C.E., F.G.S.. 
(Whitehaven,) and T. V. Holmes, F.G.S. 

"Remarkable Boulders of the Keswick District." By J. Clifton 
Ward, Assoc. E.S.M., F.G.S., (Keswick.) 

Part II. — Orksinal Papers coji;«unicated to the Societies during the 
Session 1876-7, and selected by the Association Council for 
Publication : — 

"Fletcher Christian and the Mutineers of the Boiinl;/." By William 
Fletcher, F.G.S., (Cockermouth.) 

"Old Customs and L^sages of the Lake District." By John 
Eichardson, (Keswick.) (Eead at Cockermouth and Kes- 
wick. ) 

"Jonathan Otiey, the Geologist and Guide." By J. Clifton Ward, 
Assoc. E.S.M., F.G.S., (Keswick.) 

"Notes on a few of the Migratory Birds of the English Lake 
District." By John Birkett, (Keswick.) 

"Coleridge." By the Eev. J. D. Harington, M.A. (Lecture 
given at Keswick.) 



RULES 



OF THE 

CUMBERLAND ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT 
OF LITERATURE AND SCIENCE, 

( IVit/i Additions made at the Anntuil Meeting, May 2nd, 1S77. j 



1 — That an Association be formed to be called the "Cumberland 
Association for the Advancement of Literature and Science." 

2. — The Association shall consist of all members of the following 
Societies,* Whitehaven Scientific Association, Keswick Literary and 
Scientific Society, Cockermouth Literary and Scientific Society, Work- 
ington Scientific and Literary Association, Maryport Literary and 
Scientific Society, and of the members of such other Societies as shall 
be duly affiliated. Also of persons not belonging to any of the affiliated 
Societies, if nominated by two members of the Council ; this latter class 
of members shall pay the sum of 5 s. annually. 

3. — The Association shall be governed by a Council, consisting of 
a President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary, Treasurer, and of ordinary 
members, two to be elected by each affiliated Society. 
• Named in their order of birth. 



6 



4- — The President, Secretary, and Treasurer shall be elected annually 
at the Annual Meeting, and be capable of re-election. 

5. — The Vice-Presidents shall consist of the Presidents of the various 
affiliated Societies ; and the delegates of the various Societies shall be 
elected annually by their respective Societies. 

6. — An Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held at such 
time and place as may be decided upon at the previous Annual Meeting, 
or (failing such appointment) as may be arranged by the Council. 

7. — At each Annual Meeting, after the delivery of the President's 
Address, and the reading of the Reports from the affiliated Societies, the 
objects of the Association may be furthered by Lectures, Papers, 
Addresses, Discussions, Conversaziones, &c. The Council shall have 
the power of obtaining the assistance of persons who are not members 
of the Association. 

8. — The Council may publish at the expense of the Association 
such portions of its own or of any of the affiliated Societies' communica- 
tions as may be deemed advisable, subject to the consent of the author. 

g. — The Council shall endeavour to promote co-operation among 
existing Societies, and may assist in the formation of new ones ; it may 
also aid in the estabHshment of classes in connection with any of the 
associated Societies. 

10. — Affiliated Societies shall contribute towards the general funds 
of the Association the sum of Sixpence for each member. 

II. — The Rules can only be altered by a majority of two-thirds of 
the members present at an Annual Meeting. Any member desiring to 



alter the rules must send a copy of the proposed alterations to the 
Secretary, at least two weeks before the meeting is held. 

12. — Past Presidents of the Association shall be permanent members 
of the Council, and be described as Past Presidents. 

13. — The travelling expenses of all who assist in carrying out the 
programmes of the various affiliated Societies shall be defrayed by the 
Society assisted. 



The third Annual Meeting will be held at Cockermouth in the 
month of May, and due notice of the arrangements for the same will 
be issued to all members of the Association. 

Members willing to bring forward Papers on subjects of original 
investigation or of local interest should send in the titles of the same to 
the Secretary. 



OFFICERS FOR THE SESSION 1877-8. 



I. Fletcher, Esq., M.R, F.R.S. 

^ast ^rtsibjiit. 
The Lord Bishop of Carlisle. 

R. Russell, Esq., C.E., F.G.S. (Whitehaven.) 

J. F. Crosthwaite, Esq. (Keswick.) 

Isaac Fletcher, Esq., M.R, F.R.S. (Cockermoulh.) 

H. F. CuRWEN, Esq. (Workington.) 

J. Wood, Esq. (Maryport.) 

Cmintil. 

T. F. I'Anson, Esq., M.D. ) 

( Whitehaven. 
William Jackson, Esq. ) 

Alex. A. H. Knight, Esq., M.D. ) 

(• Keswick. 
E. J. Grayson, Esq. ) 

Rev. W. Williams, F.G.S. ) 

T^ ,T T^ i Cockermouth. 
Henry Dodgson, Esq., M.D. ) 

Geo. J. Snelus, Esq., Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S. ) 

^ ( Workington 

A. Peile, Esq. ) 

Rev. J. S. Craig ) 

A. Haine, Esq. j ^ ^''yP^'''- 

STrtasurtr mxH Sfcrttarg. 
J. Clifton Ward, Esq., Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S. 



00 



o 






^ 



^ O O vo ro CO 
_^ O O O •»*• N 

VO t^ LI-) *H \o 






• S 3 ii w 

Pi M U Cm 



S? 






< 

H 
O 

u 

w 



s? 



"1 >r> 



CO "^ lo 

ro O O 



s? 



Q 

(5^ 






^ 



u 




: S 


00 


00 


C 


€1 

a. 


g 
53 


o 




u 
o 

C/5 


V 

'S. 


.2 

2 
o 

< 






VO 




^ 


rl 


c 


rt 


c 


^ 


^ 


o 


c 


o 


c 




c! 


< 

3 o 






O 


_u 


.2 
.2 


H 


i 




o 

C 


'a, 





O -2 



.2 S a, >- >" 



fc< c« 12 c« < g 






U Q U U 

OO rj- lo fO .1 



10 



Iroa^bmgs at i^t ^nmtal gtwliitg, |lcstokk, 

May ist, 2nd, atid ^rd, 1877. 



The following Programme was carried out : — 

PRESIDENT: THE LORD BISHOP OF CARLISLE, 

TUESDAY, May ist. 

12-15 p.m. Opening of the Keswick Museum of Local Natural History, by the 
President. 
i-o p.m. Public Luncheon, the President in the Chair. 
2-30 p.m. Address by the President. 
3-30 p.m. EXCURSIONS, starting from the Keswick Hotel :— 

Archceological. — British Village and Druids' Circle, conducted by Mr. 

J. F. Crosthwaite. 
Geological. — Giant Boulders on the Flanks of Skiddaw, above Lyzzick, 
conducted by Mr. J. Clifton Ward. 
8-0 p.m. Lecture on "Wordsworth," by Principal Shairp, of St. Andrew's 
University ; the President in the Chair. 

WEDNESDAY, May 2nd. 

lo-o a.m. General Meeting in the Lecture Hall. — Election of Officers and 
next year's place of Meeting. Discussion as to the work of the various 
Societies. 
II-O a,m. Reading of Original Papers : — 

Section A. — Lecture Hall. 
G. J. Snelus, Esq., Assoc. R.S.M., — Iron and Steel Manufacture. 
H. Dodgson, Esq., M.D., — Meteorological Notes on the Cockermouth District. 
J. F, Crosthwaite, Esq., — The Rain-Fall of Keswick. 
Sectio7t B. — 3I»seum. 
R. F. Martin, Esq., M.A., — Notes on some peculiarities of the West Cumberland 

Coal Field. 
D. Kendall, Esq., C.E., F.G.S., — The Hematite Deposits of Cumberland and 

Lancashire. 
R. Russell, Esq., C.E., F.G.S., and T. V. Holmes, Esq., F.G.S.,— The Cumberland 

Raised Beach between Whitehaven and Bowness. 
J. CHfton Ward, Esq., Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S.,— Remarkable Boulders of the District. 

3-30 p.m. EXCURSION. 

Geological : — Typical Volcanic Series of Falcon Crag, Keswick, conducted 
by Mr. J. Clifton Ward. 
8-0 p.m. READINGS from the Lake Poets, with selections of Classical Music by 
Mr. P. T. Freeman, in aid of the funds of the Keswick Museum. 

THURSDAY, May 3rd. 
9.0 a.m. Excursion to Scafell Pikes conducted by Mr. J. Clifton Ward, 



11 



ADDRESS OF THE PRESIDENT, THE LORD BISHOP 
OF CARLISLE. 



THE ANALOGIES AND CONTRASTS BETWEEN 
HUMAN AND DIVINE SCIENCE. 

According to the programme of this Anmial Meeting, the Address 
of your President occupies the middle place between the easy social 
arrangements of the luncheon table and the more serious occupation of 
papers and discussions which are to come hereafter. I feel that your 
President, in like manner, himself occupies somewhat of a middle place : 
by his position as the nominal head of your Association he is pledged 
to take interest in the progress of science and the well-being of literature, 
while at the same time he cannot divest himself of that character which 
pledges him above all things to an interest in things divine, and which 
makes it a necessary condition of his concerning himself with the former 
that the latter shall not be disparaged or forgotten. 

•But, indeed, every thoughtful person must, to a considerable 
extent, occupy mentally and spiritually something of this middle place : 
every human soul, which is conscious of the dignity of its own being, 
touches the things temporal with one hand, and reaches out towards the 
things eternal with the other ; and while it is foolish and fanatical to 
interest ourselves only in those thoughts, which connect themselves 
with what is knowable through the processes of the human intellect, it 
is unphilosophical, to say nothing more, to concentrate our minds 
absolutely and exclusively upon this department of knowledge, so as 
practically to deny the existence of another department of equal import- 
ance, and possibly of deeper and more abiding interest. Hence it has 
occurred to me that I might, perhaps, occupy your time for a few 
minutes advantageously, and deliver what might, under your kind in- 
dulgence, be regarded as an address suitable to this occasion, if I 
discoursed to you on what may be called " the Analogies and Contrasts 
between Human and Divine Science." I do not wish, however, to be 



12 

tied up too closely to this title ; I invite you rather to join me on a 
mental afternoon's excursion, with the phrase, " The Analogies and 
Contrasts of Human and Divine Science," as the general chart for our 
walk, and as a guide to bring us safely home if we should chance to 
wander or to lose ourselves. 

I commence with a smcere apology for my apparent audacity in 
presuming to speak on the subject of Science ; but a person, who years 
ago was more or less conversant with the elements of some few branches, 
may be able at least to take account of the progress which Science has 
made and is making, even though he be altogether unable to keep pace 
with it : just as an old post by the side of a stream may give us some 
notion of the rate at which the stream is running, though it remains hard 
and fast in its position. I think I have on some former occasion, 
though I forget when, quoted an amusing observation of the late 
Professor Sedgwick, who congratulated the Cambridge Philosophical 
Society on the evidence of mathematical progress, which was to be 
found in the fact that he himself had not been able to understand any 
memoir that had been read before it for some twenty years. So I also in 
my humbler way can mark the progress of science, while unable to 
follow it. I cannot quite say Non eqiddem invideo : miror magis. 
Certainly miror : perhaps to a certain extent invideo. The pleasure of 
investigation by means of those powerful helps which mathematical 
science supplies, or even of reading and understanding what has been 
done by others, is such as perhaps only mathematicians can duly, or 
even approximately, appreciate. Such pleasure can never again be 
mine ; yet it is a pleasure of memory to have once known that of which 
I speak. 

In this condition of scientific helplessness, it is a great satisfaction 
to be able to turn to such a book as Professor Tait's " Lectures on 
some Recent Advances in Physical Science." I shall make free use of 
this volume, partly because it supplies in a very convenient form the 
kind of material which I require for the purpose of some portion of this 
address, partly because the author is a genuine scientific man, and one 
who does not confound real advance in science with mere speculation or 



13 

rash unwarranted generalization. I have the less hesitation' in using 
Professor Tait's book, because many years ago I examined him for his 
degree, and I remember that early in the examination his remarkable 
powers caught my attention, and I was confident that we had got the 
right man in the right place when we placed him as Senior Wrangler. 
Under these circumstances, you will, I am sure, admit that any theft on 
my part from the Professor's Lectures may be described as justifiable 
appropriation. 

I \vish then to direct your attention to two or three great advances 
which have been lately made in our scientific knowledge — advances 
which have a special interest, as bearing upon the general question of 
the structure of the physical universe. 

Towards the knowledge of this structure we have been making 
steady progress for many years. The establishment of the Copemican 
theory was one great step : the discovery of Kepler's laws of planetary 
motion has been another : the theory of universal gravitation applied by 
Newton to explain the mechanical motion of the heavenly bodies, and 
the more complete development of the results of the theory by Laplace, 
Lagrange, and other masters in mathematical science has been a still 
further and a quite gigantic step. These and the like theoretical investi- 
gations, combined with almost unmeasured improvements in methods of 
observation, have advanced physical astronomy to an exceedingly high 
scientific pre-eminence, and one from which it may be safely asserted 
that it can never again be dislodged. Then, on the other hand, such 
discoveries as that by Dalton of the combination of the atoms of 
matter according to definite numerical proportions, and the investigations 
made through the microscope of small objects close at hand, corres- 
ponding to the investigations made through the telescope of distant 
bodies, have established another branch of physical science upon 
foundations hardly less secure than those upon which physical astronomy 
itself rests. Had our knowledge of the material universe been found 
incapable of advancement beyond the point which it had reached, say, 
forty years ago, the results would still have been splendid and absolutely 
marvellous to contemplate. 



u 

But it is the almost necessary result of scientific discoveries to lead 
on to others, and also to give unity and simplicity and consistency to 
the knowledge already attained : and I wish to call your attention to 
certain steps which have lately been made, both because they are re- 
markable in themselves, and because they help towards the general 
conclusion to which I wish to conduct your minds. 

The first great step which I will mention is that which is expressed 
by the terms Conservation and Transformation of Energy. I am here 
using technical terms, and I am not sure whether it is possible to convey 
to minds which have had no scientific training precisely what is intended 
by the terms ; but perhaps something may be done, and, at all events, it 
is worth while to try. Of course I might refer you to the Lectures, of 
which I have already said that I should make use ; but I wish rather, 
if I can, to put the matter in a still simpler form, and to make it to 
some extent intelligible to persons who would not be capable of reading 
these Lectures, and similar scientific treatises, with much advantage or 
satisfaction. 

Let us begin, then, with a much simpler example of Conservation 
and Transformation than that of Energy, namely, the Conservation and 
Transformation of Matter. It is, I suppose, a familiar thought with 
most of us, that matter cannot be destroyed. We commonly speak of 
destraction, but there is no such thing in nature. You burn a piece of 
wood, or a piece of coal, and the result is to resolve the wood or coal 
into its constituent parts, but those constituent parts are simply separated 
from each other, or compelled to combine with other substances ; 
destroyed they never are. There is a story, I know not whether 
authentic or imaginary, of Sir Walter Raleigh, when smoking in the 
presence of Queen Elizabeth and her Court ladies a piece of the newly- 
introduced article tobacco, amusing the royal party by offering to weigh 
the smoke, the production of which was being watched with so much 
interest. The Court ladies laughed at the promise ; but when the pipe 
was smoked out. Sir Walter calmly knocked out the ashes, and pointed 
out that if they were weighed, and the weight subtracted from that of 
the tobacco, as originally deposited in the pipe, the remainder would 



15 

represent the weight of the smoke. The Court ladies laughed again ; 
but clever Queen Bess nodded her head, and said that Sir Walter had 
performed his promise. 

This is a simple instance of the remarkable truth which all reason- 
ing and experience confirms, namely, that matter may be variously 
transformed but cannot be destroyed. 

Now that which is true of matter is true in a still more remarkable 
manner* of that which is called energy. The word is a technical one, 
and I cannot very easily go into an accurate discussion and definition 
of it ; but a very simple illustrative example may be given. Conceive 
two equal inelastic masses, say masses of mud or putty, to be thrown so 
as to meet each other with exactly equal velocities ; the result will be 
that both will cease to move ; because each will convey to the other its 
own energy, and as these energies are equal, neither can prevail over 
the other, and the bodies will be brought to rest. If one of the bodies 
were greater than the other, then the energy of this body would survive 
in proportion to its excess over the other. 

It may be said, however, that in this case energy is destroyed, 
inasmuch as before the collision there were two bodies in motion, 
whereas after the collision the bodies were at rest, and so their energy 
gone. This is true ; and the remark leads to the very pith of the 
subject which I am now discussing. Regarding the question as one of 
mere motion, it is sufficient to say that each body transfers its motion to 
the other, and that the result is rest ; but in the process of collision and 
transference of motion, something else happens : heat is generated : it is 
a matter of familiar experience that to rub one substance against another, 
or to knock one body against another produces heat : and, speaking 
scientifically, when a body in motion is brought to rest by impact upon 
another, its energy is converted into heat. Putting this result in a more 
general form, we are led \o say that energy and heat are convertible, 
that is, that energy produces heat, and that, conversely, heat may be 
changed into energy. 

Of course I am now giving the merest hint of a grand compre- 
hensive theory ; but you will, I think, easily perceive that the theory, of 



16 

which this is the seed, may be capable of being worked out completely, 
and that it may be possible to determine how much heat will be 
represented by so much energy ; or, on the other hand, how much 
energy will correspond to so much heat. 

Let me illustrate this by an example. The sun gives out heat at a 
certain rate. The earth is moving in her orbit with great velocity, about 
eighty times as fast as a cannon ball : suppose she should impinge upon 
some immovable obstacle, or, what would be the same thing, upon a 
body exactly like herself coming the other way, then the heat supplied 
by this awful collision would be equivalent to that given out by the sun 
in about eighty days. If we imagine a still more strange catastrophe, and 
conceive the earth to be brought to rest, and then allowed to fall as she 
would into the sun, the result of her tremendous fall of more than 
90,000,000 of miles would be a generation of heat which would keep the 
sun supplied for more than ninety years. And if the same catastrophe 
should happen to the planet Jupiter, which is immensely larger in mass 
than the earth, and much further from the sun, the result would be to 
produce as much heat as would last the sun, at its present rate of 
expenditure, for no less a time than 32,000 years. 

The result of this law of the Conservation and Transformation of 
Energy is to give us quite a new insight into the economy of Nature. 
All kinds of forces are subject to it, whether they arise from gravitation, 
electricity, magnetism, or what not. Energy can, in all cases, only be 
transformed : we can no more create it than we can create matter. We 
burn coal, and we change the heat which we produce into steam power : 
the power of the engine is merely the heat of the coal in another form. 

And it is not difficult to see how vast are the fields of inquiry and 
speculation which are opened by a theory of this kind : it helps us to 
speculate upon the possible past, and throws also some light upon the 
possible future. There is just one such speculation to which I will call 
your attention, in consequence of its great interest. 

I refer to the question of the probable extent of time, during which 
something like the present state of things has existed upon our globe. 
Sir William Thomson has discussed this question in three different ways; 



17 

all, however, depending upon considerations of heat or of" energy; and 
the result to which he has come is that he cannot grant more than about 
10,000,000 years for the production of all those results to which Geology 
bears witness. You may think this a tolerably liberal allowance ; but 
some of the Geologists and Mr. Darwin appear to' think that even 
300,000,000 of years would be insufficient for the work to be done, 
which has actually been accomplished. Professor Tait says that if 
Geology really cannot do without so long a period, so much the worse 
for Geology, inasmuch as the theory of heat and energy cannot, in its 
most liberal mood, grant it anything Hke such a long innings. I do not 
regret this present apparent conflict between different sciences ; it is by 
such conflicts that truth is not unfrequently secured ; if upon more 
careful inquiry it should appear that Geology and other natural sciences 
cannot have so much time to expatiate in as has been till lately imagined, 
I doubt not that further investigation will prove that the enormous 
length of time is not really required ; ultimate harmony will assuredly 
prevail amongst the sciences, however different may be the starting 
points of their respective investigations. 

Let me say a word here upon the term Theory, as I have been lately 
using it. I have spoken of the Theory of the Conservation and Trans- 
formation of Energy ; and you' may speak, if you please, of Mr. Darwin's 
Theory of the Transformation of Species, and you may be disposed to 
say that one Theory is as good as another. But it should be borne in 
mind that when a Mathematician speaks of a Theory, he generally means 
something different from speculation, different from ingenious guess, 
diff'erent from plausible hypothesis : he speaks of the Lunar Theory, the 
Planetary Theory, the Undulatory Theory of Light, and so forth, as 
doctrines respectively concerning the Moon, the Planets, and Light, 
which can be proved to be true by such evidence as no reasonable man, 
who follows the steps of the investigation, can find it possible to doubt. 
These Theories are absolutely different in kind from mere hypotheses 
which cannot be verified ; and it is in this sense that we speak of the 
Theory of the Conservation and Transformation of Energy. I cannot, 
of course, prove to you in an address like this that the Theory is of the 



18 

kind that I have described ; I can only state that it is so received by all 
competent persons; and that this being so, it must be regarded as a 
great fundamental truth to which all the conclusions of science must of 
necessity be subject. 

Hitherto I have been speaking, directly or indirectly, chiefly of 
heat : it is the investigation of the nature of heat, principally due (it may 
be said with satisfaction) to Mr Joule, a countryman of our own, that 
has given the enormous advance in our physical knowledge, which I 
have pointed at, rather than described. Let me turn now to /ighf. 
Heat and light generally go together, and they have both been the fields 
recently of great discoveries, though in very different ways. 

Light, as almost every one is supposed to know now-a-days, is due 
to the vibrations of a fine elastic medium, very much in the same way 
as sound is due to the vibrations of the air. The undulatory, or wave 
theory, of Light, as it is called, has been for some time recognized as 
established ; and a vast number of complicated phenomena have been 
worked out mathematically upon the wave hypothesis in such a manner 
as to leave no doubt upon the minds of those who can follow the 
investigations, that the hypothesis must be sound. Of late, however, 
the discoveries made concerning the nature of light have been diverted, 
as it were, from light itself to the universe, in which light is so important 
an agent, in a manner which cannot be passed over by any one who is 
touching ever so slightly upon recent advances in Science. 

Some of those, to whom I am speaking, will probably be acquainted 
with the nature and results of Spectrum Analysis ; it is a great question 
whether it will be possible for me to make intelligible to others the 
principles upon which the analysis is based. I should utterly have 
despaired of doing so, had it not been for the lucid pages of Professor 
Tait; whether his light, when further refracted through the medium of my 
brain, will continue to be luminous may be gravely doubted. But with 
your kind acquiescence the attempt shall be made. 

We will start with sound, the analogy of which with light is 
frequently most helpful. Every one knows that if he whistles or sings 
the note to which a tuning fork, or stretched string, or even a China 



19 

basin corresponds — the fork, string, or basin will be put in vibration and 
will give back the sound. Suppose now that you have a box, open at 
the two opposite sides, and full of tuning forks corresponding to the 
same note, and suppose you sound that note : you put all the forks 
very slightly in vibration. What will be the consequence to a person on 
the other side of the box 1 This, that it will be difficult for him to 
hear the sound which you make ; because the vibrations which you 
produce are used up in passing through the box by setting the forks in 
motion. Any other note the person on the other side would hear quite 
well : the one note which he cannot hear, which is in fact absorbed, is 
the one which the tuning forks would themselves give if made to 
vibrate. 

Now bear in mind the analogy between sound and light, and you 
will not have much difficulty in perceiving that a certain kind of light, 
which belongs to a particular substance, may be in like manner absorbed 
by havmg to pass through that very substance which would itself emit 
the kind of light in question. 

If I were to go beyond this rough and most elementary, though highly 
ingenious explanation, I fear that I should not be able to stop short of 
a discussion which would be quite unsuitable to the purpose and limits 
of this address. I shall therefore assume that by means of the scientific 
apparatus of the spectroscope, it is possible to analyze the light which 
comes from any luminous source ; the light coming from one source is 
as clearly distinguished from that coming from another, as the sound of 
a flute is different from that of a violin ; incandescent hydrogen gas, for 
example, will have certain unmistakable characteristics, — certain bright 
lines in its spectrum, as scientific men say— -and if other light is made to 
pass through this incandescent gas, it will produce an effect upon that 
light, according to what has been already said, by absorbing those very 
portions of the light which are characteristic of itself when used as a 
source of illumination. 

Examining the light which comes from distant bodies, by the method 
of the nature of which I have endeavoured to give just the slightest 
indication, we arrive at very remarkable results. The Spectrum 



^0 

Analysis enables us to tread with firm step in regions of nature, which 
previously might well have been regarded as absolutely inaccessible ; 
light is as true a messenger as sound, and in some respects we become 
as conversant with what is going on in the remote regions of the universe, 
as if we had correspondents in those regions who could report to us viva 
voce. 

By this method of investigation we can assert that a variety of sub- 
stances known upon the earth's surface are to be found in the sun ; for 
example, iron, magnesium, manganese, cobalt, chromium, sodium, 
titanium, calcium have been identified. And it has been further proved 
that the sun emits from its surface grand jets of blazing hydrogen gas, 
some 70,000 miles high. 

There is still another application of this kind of analysis, which I 
will not tax your patience by endeavouring to explain, but the results of 
which are so curious that I may well refer to them. It is possible by the 
examination of the light coming to us from a certain distant body to 
ascertain whether that body keeps its distance from us, or whether it is 
approaching or receding. By observations made upon the well-known 
star Sirius, commonly called the Dog Star, it has been shown that the 
distance between that star and the sun is increasing at the rate of about 
20 miles a second. This increase of separation has apparently been 
going on ever since Sirius was first known and observed, and yet there is 
no evidence that the apparent brightness of that star has been perceptibly 
diminished. I need hardly say what a magnificent conception is thus 
given us of the enormous grandeur of Sirius, regarded as a luminous 
body. 

But I pass away from this fascinating subject, merely adding that 
the spectrum analysis is almost in its infancy, and that it is impossible 
even to guess what may be the extent of direct knowledge in store for us 
with regard to the heavenly bodies, whether stars, planets, or comets, 
and with regard to phenomena such as the Aurora Borealis, to which an 
investigation by means of light is applicable. The limits of scientific 
knowledge, if limits there be, are certainly very far from being yet 
reached. Newton was nearer to the truth, than perhaps even he with his 



21 

far reaching intellect and his modest estimate of himself was able to per- 
ceive, when he spoke of having picked up a few pebbles upon the shores 
of the vast sea of truth. While however this is true, and while we grate- 
fully acknowledge not only the marvellous character of the physical 
universe, but still more the marvellous gift of intellect which has enabled 
us to comprehend to some extent the wonders of that universe, I think it 
is well that we should bear in mind, that the ultimate foundation upon 
which the fabric of nature stands is almost, if not quite, as dark and 
mysterious and unknown, as it was in olden days, before genuine science 
had commenced its mighty and glorious career. 

For what is that physical universe which we examine with such care, 
and in which we make such wonderful discoveries ? We know to a 
great extent of what the earth is made ; and, as we have already seen, 
science has lately been able to tell us something as to the materials of 
the sun itself; and we are not content with a rough classification of 
materials, but we have already been able to reduce the ultimate elements 
of which matter is composed to very few.* Possibly the analysis is not 
yet complete, and conceivably we may arrive at the discovery of one 
ultimate entity of which every material substance is composed ; but what 
will be the nature of that ultimate entity, and how much nearer shall we 
be to the first cause and ground of existence, when we have reached 
this at present distant goal ? This is not properly speaking a scientific 
question. A scientific man would say, "Such questions are no business 
of mine ; all that I have to do is to go on discovering truth." But the 
question is one which / may very well ask, having reference to the 
general scope of this Address, as announced at the opening of it ; and 
I may ask it in connection with the discussion of the " Structure of 
Matter," which occupies two chapters of the volume, to which I have 
already referred as my help and companion in the composition of the 
remarks which I am now laying before you. 

I shall pass over the rough suggestions of Lucretius, which, notwith- 
standing the favour they have lately found in the eyes of an eminent 

* " All organic compounds, derived from the animal and vegetable kingdoms, 
are composed almost wholly of four elements — Oxygen, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, and 
Carbon." — National Cydopadia, Art: " Atomic Theory." 

2 



man of science, appear to me to be scarcely worthy of being regarded as 
even an approximation to the solution of the problem. I pass over also 
for other reasons the speculations of Newton, Boscovich, and others ; 
and I come to the latest suggestion of all,* namely, that of Sir William 
Thomson, which is, that " what we call matter may really be only the 
rotating portions of something which fills all space ; that is to say, 
vortex-motion of an everywhere present fluid." To say that a suggestion 
is made by Sir William Thomson is to say that it is worthy of all conside- 
ration from scientific men ; and to such a jury, rather than to the mixed 
audience which I have the honour to address to day, I should be dis- 
posed to leave the determination of the value of the suggestion concern- 
ing matter which I have just now quoted. In truth, it would be im- 
possible for me, on an occasion like this, even to put before you some of 
the considerations, upon which alone any solid opinion could be formed ; 
but what I wish to bring under your notice is this, that the hypothesis in 
question concerning matter postulates " something which fills all space." 
What can that something be ? If it be not matter, what is it ? I do not 
say that it does not exist, though the actual conception of something 
filling all space is manifestly impossible to the human mind ; the thing 
may however be assumed for argument's sake to be capable of existence, 
though, in consequence of an inherent infirmity of the mind, this exist- 
ence may not be thinkable. But granting all that can be required for 
the purpose of making Sir William Thomson's hypothesis a possible one, 
do we really do more than drive back the existence of matter one step 
further ? Do we do more than arrive at the conclusion, that matter is 
something, which is something else under certain peculiar conditions ? 
Is not the all pervading fluid merely the raw material, out of which is 
formed by vortex-motion those atoms of which Professor Clerk Maxwell 
speaks as having much of the character of " manufactured articles"? 

You will quite understand that I am by no means desiring to speak 

lightly of this hypothesis. Professor Tait says,t " With a little 

further development the theory may perhaps be said to have passed its 

first trials at all events, and, being admitted as a possibility, left to time 

* "Recent Advances in Physical Science," p. 290. + Do., p. 300. 



23 

and the Mathematicians to settle whether, really, it   will account for 
everything already experimentally found. If it does so, and if it, in 
addition, enables us to predict other phenomena, which, in their turn, 
shall be found to be experimentally verified, it will have all the possible 
claim on our belief that any physical theory can ever have." This will all 
be readily granted, and I for one wish the theory all success ; but I 
think I am not wrong in saying, that if it be found to be true, the 
mystery of existence, — the ultimate question, what is this material universe] 
— will be very much where it is now. 

All scientific achievement seems to lead to the same conclusion, 
namely, that human investigation can move freely for a long distance, 
we know not perhaps as yet how great the distance may be, but that there 
are certain limits imposed by Him who made us which we cannot pass 
— sunt certi denique fines. There is a charming little French book, which 
I would recommend any intelligent person to read, entitled " L'histoire 
d'une bouchee de pain." It has, I believe, been translated under the 
literal title, "The History of a bit of Bread" — but I should recommend 
the original, because the French language lends itself with peculiar 
happiness to the style of exposition which the author has adopted. Let 
me, however, tell you what the book is, and why I refer to it. It is in 
reality a popular exposition of the process, by which food is assimilated 
by the living body. The food is followed, through all its processes of 
change, till it is formed into arterial blood, and till in this condition it 
circulates through the body and supplies the waste and becomes itself 
transmuted into the various substances of which the body is composed ; 
skin is formed here, muscle there, hair in a third place, nail in a fourth, 
and so on. But how this is done the ingenious author cannot tell us : 
there is an absolute hiatus between the manufacture of the material, and 
the appropriation of the material to its purpose. Here comes in 
the mystery of life: and when we reach that mystery, we seem 
to find ourselves in sight of a lofty barrier which can in no wise 
be passed. The existence of this barrier is seen very conspicuously 
in the " History of a bit of Bread," and that is why I have referred to 
the book; it illustrates in one familiar department the law which 



24 

appears to be quite universal, namely, that all nature furnishes us with 
abundant fields of investigation, that the amount of knowledge to be 
obtained is practically unlimited, but that in every direction we perceive 
if we go far enough the existence of an absolutely impassable barrier ; 
we become aware that beyond the vast fields of the knowable and the 
known there is an infinite region of the unknown and unknowable, v/hich 
the human intellect cannot penetrate, strive and struggle as it may. 

This consideration leads to the obvious remark, that it can be no 
objection to any science that it runs into mystery, or involves the 
unknown or the inconceivable. If this be the case, as undoubtedly it 
is, with physical science, which beyond all others deals with the seen, 
the palpable, the sensible, d fortiori it is likely to be the case with other 
sciences, which deal more especially with the unseen and the spiritual. 
But the analogy of the physical sciences may teach us, that, while there 
are confessed limits to the investigations of the human mind, there are 
still almost infinite fields of inquiry, which are quite free and open to all 
comers, and in which admirable discoveries have already been made. 
To be more definite as to the point at which I am aiming, I would say 
that there may be a true knowledge of God, a genuine Science of 
Theology, in which there may be abundance of room for the expatiation 
of all thoughtful earnest minds ; and yet the science may begin in 
mystery as human science ends in it ; and it may be as wrong to put 
down theology by the objection that God cannot be known, as it would 
be to try to hamper physical science by the objection that the nature of 
Matter is inconceivable. Some would have us substitute for the know- 
ledge of God, in other words, for divine science, what they call 
Agnosticism : the Altar at Athens is supposed after all to have had more 
wisdom in its inscription than St. Paul supposed : but the fallacy of the 
proposed substitution is seen, when we consider how easy it is, nay, how 
necessary it is, for all thinking persons to grant that in a certain sense 
God must be unknowable, and how foolish it is to regard this admission 
as at all equivalent to this other assertion, that nothing can be known 
about God. Once more I take the analogy of Physical Science ; and I 
say that Matter is unknowable ; but I ask whether this admission proves 



25 

that no knowledge'of Matter is due to the discoveries of Newton, and of 
all that glorious band of which he may be regarded as the head, that 
Physical Science is a delusion, and the alleged " Recent Advances" a 
dream 1 

I am thus led to make a few remarks upon the respective origin and 
principles of each. Dr. Whewell dealt with the whole field of Physical 
Knowledge, under the title of the History and Philosophy of the 
"Inductive Sciences." Those who have read these works will remember 
the almost dramatic form in which Dr. Whewell's genius has presented 
the subject. There is first the prelude to some great discovery, when 
previous discoveries have turned men's minds in a particular direction 
and it is felt that some great mental movement is at hand. Then there 
is the happy thought, the inspiration of genius, what in a lower subject 
matter we should call the felicitous guess. Then comes the verification, 
the appeal to facts, the rigid tests of mathematical calculations and 
numerical results, and above all the prediction of consequences subse- 
quently found to be true. And each discovery reaches on towards some 
other, and even the detection of residual errors in previous conclusions 
becomes a specially fertile source of further progress. Guessing, doubt- 
ing, testing, correcting — may be said in homely phrase to be the efficient 
engines of scientific motion ; and the Inductive Sciences may find an 
incidental justification of their name in the fact, that they /mti on from 
one point to another, that each discovery induces another, that another, 
and so on (it may be) ad infinitinn. 

Now, divine science presents a remarkable contrast in regard to the 
qualities which have just been mentioned as belonging to physics. 
Divine science is as essentially rt'(?ductive as physical science is z«ductive: 
</(fductive processes are of course required in following out results in 
physical investigation ; and in like manner zwductive processes may be 
available and necessary in investigations connected with certain branches 
of Theology; but still the basis of divine science does not depend upon 
happy guesses, nor upon an accumulation of verifications ; neither does 
it offer an infinite field for progress, nor does its success demand that 
same kind of chronic scepticism which is so useful, or even essential, in 



26 

the case of natural science. On the other hand, it professes to rest upon 
ultimate truths, which are made known to mankind either by a moral 
instinct, in virtue of which man is man, or by that revelation from God 
which religion necessarily postulates, and of which man alone of all 
earthly creatures is susceptible. 

I shrink from introducing into an address of this kind illustrations 
drawn from the highest source of religious knowledge, namely, the 
message delivered to mankind by Him whom we regard as both God 
and man; though I would just remark by the way, that I can find 
nothing essentially opposed to the knowledge attainable from other 
sources, in the idea of such a message. But I shall be content with a 
much humbler illustration of the point which I am endeavouring to 
enforce just now. I will suppose a father to be walking in the country 
with young hopeful, aged we will say twelve years, more or less, and 
endeavouring to improve his mind. Pater discourses upon geology, and 
points out various features in the rocks illustrating this or that ; he finds, 
we will suppose, that his companion, instead of swallowing all that is 
told him whole, bolting it undigested, or apparently regarding the 
paternal lecture as a bore, asks some awkward but most pertinent 
question which it is difficult to answer ; the boy in fact doubts ; he is 
not convinced by what his elder tells him; he determines to think about 
the matter, to observe for himself, and then try to make up his mind. 
What does the father think of this 1 Is he offended or frightened? Not 
at all. He says, " That boy has got the making of a man of science ; 
he will inquire for himself; he will be somebody one of these days." 
And papa and mamma rejoice together. But suppose that in the course 
of the excursion the conversation should fall, not upon rocks and strati- 
fication, but upon some moral subject, such as truf/i : and suppose that 
the youth should shew himself, like Pilate, sceptical upon i/iis point, and 
that with a precocious freedom of thought he should express the opinion, 
that there was no great difference between truth and falsehood ; and 
that he should announce his intention of regarding the question of lying 
as an open one at present, to be decided perhaps in future by obser- 
vation of consequences. Would the father go home as comfortable under 



27 

these circumstances as under the former ? Would he not see ruin and 
misery for his son in mature Ufe 1 Might he not even be tempted to lay 
the foundation of a respect for truth in an immediate application of the 
birch rod ? 

This familiar illustration might be added to and enforced abundantly 
if necessary : but it will probably be sufficient by itself as an indication 
of the contrast upon which I am now dwelling. It may be added 
that, as analogy is not identity, so contrast is not contradiction. I think 
we may well compare human and divine science, or (if we please so to 
describe them,) physical science and spiritual, to the military staircase 
which some of us have seen in Dover cliff, or to the similar construction 
of the famous S. Patrick's well at Orvieto. These staircases are double, 
and consist of two spirals like each other, supported by one central 
column, but such that a body of men can ascend by one while another 
body of men simultaneously and without interference descend by the 
other : their support is, as I have said, the same ; they are inextricably 
intertwined with each other, and the beginning and end of them are 
identical, only that one ends where the other begins, and begins where 
the other ends. The physical sciences begin from below, and wind 
upwards towards heaven, while religious trutli starts from heaven and 
descends earthwards : but neither needs to jostle with the other, and 
both in reality revolve about the same central column and rest upon the 
same foundation. 

It is perhaps a misfortune of this particular epoch of scientific 
history, that one can scarcely speak of the progress of science 
without being tempted to say something of its moral and religious 
aspects. If I am not mistaken, there was comparatively little of such 
temptation fifty years ago. It may be that the particular fields in which 
science was then chiefly at work did not give occasion to so much 
anxiety as to a possible collision between human knowledge and divine: 
it may be that the great popularization of physical knowledge in latter 
years, and the consequent approximation of the physical and the moral 
in the minds of the thousands of intelligent persons who nevertheless 
have received no real scientific training, may have introduced a danger 



28 

which did not exist to any great extent before. It may be also that a 
certain rashness of speculation, and a tendency to introduce speculation 
into regions which ordinary people profoundly feel not to be the exclusive 
property of scientific men may have tended in the same direction. 
When, for example, a man of high scientific position announces to us, 
as a result of his investigations, that our great great great grandmothers 
were hairy creatures, presumably not very easily distinguishable from 
certain half-human looking brutes which may be seen in our own time 
in the Zoological Gardens, — it is not much to be wondered at if many 
of us should begin to feel that physical science was treading upon some- 
what delicate ground. Our fathers perhaps we might have left to take 
care of themselves; but to give our mothers beards, and to suppose that 
they had sloughed them off only in comparatively late times, in deference 
to a growing taste on the part of their mates, — may fairly be regarded as 
rather hard to be swallowed, and somewhat unpleasant when it has 
been. Nevertheless, I am persuaded that in the case of all such rash 
speculations, our "strength is to sit still." No such speculation need 
ruffle our tempers : still less need it make us full of alarm lest important 
moral or religious truths should be in jeopardy : we may be quite sure 
that false hypothesis, and unwarranted generaHzations, will not live long; 
that if they have any seed of truth in them, that seed will take root and 
survive ; and that if they are wholly false, they will sooner or later perish 
altogether. "Magna est Veritas, et prsevalebit," is the motto at once 
for a student of Physical Science and for a student of Theology ; it may 
be written with equal propriety over the door of a lecture-room and over 
the porch of a church ; it ought to be as dear to the President of a 
Scientific and Literary Association, as it is to a Bishop of the Church of 
Christ. I am quite sure that the more thoroughly we realise this, and 
the more completely we agree to regard truth as the common treasure of 
us all, the greater will be our happiness in seeking that treasure, and 
the greater our chance of finding it. 

But it is time that I should be drawing this address to a close. I 
have discoursed concerning Science and its advancement, to as great an 
extent probably as your patience and your courtesy combined are willing 



29 

to permit ; and I feel that, having reference to the title of our Associ- 
ation, I owe a certain amount of apology to "Literature," for having 
paid all my attentions to her younger sister, and for having seemed so 
rudely to neglect her not inferior beauty and her rival charms. Literature, 
however, will have any rudeness on my part more than compensated to 
her this evening, when we have the pleasure of listening to a discourse 
on one of the few great modern English poets, delivered by one of the 
few men who are capable of doing that great poet justice.* Perhaps, 
also, I may be permitted to add, inasmuch as the remark to a certain 
extent illustrates the subject of this address, that although our Association 
describes itself as one for the "advancement of Literature and Science," 
still, the kind of advancement which is possible, and whicli is being continu- 
ally carried out, with respect to Science, is impossible with regard to Litera- 
ture. Probably no man has ever yet lived who had in greater perfection 
the true scientific mind than Sir Isaac Newton ; certainly no man ever 
made such advances in science ; and yet, by the necessity of the case, 
the science of Newton was but a rude and contracted body of knowledge 
as compared with the science of those who have stood upon his shoulders, 
and who have inherited his achievements. And the men of to-day will be 
but as children by the side of the men of the next century; and many of 
the grandest and most cherished results of the science of to-day may be 
looked upon by our successors as familiar knowledge. But in Literature 
this is not so. Shakspeare occupies in this respect a prouder chair than 
Newton. Shakspeare may safely smile upon the efforts of Associations 
for the advancement of Literature, if by the phrase is meant such an 
advance as shall supersede "Hamlet" and "Macbeth" in the manner in 
which the "Principia" and the "Optics" have been already superseded. 
There may be an improvement in the general quality of the Literature 
of a country : the historians may be more candid and pains-taking ; the 
novehsts may be less trashy, and higher in their tone; the manner and 
the matter of the thousand and one volumes, which each year produces, 
may be on the whole in better taste, and of more sterling value : but the 
giants of the past, specially the giants of poetry, can be surpassed by no 
* Lecture on "Wordsworth," by Principal Shairp. 



30 

process of advancement similar in kind to that which takes place in the 
case of science ; and if ever Shakspeare should find himself second in 
the list of poets, according to the verdict of English-speaking men, it 
will be the result of no steady hard-won progress, but because some God- 
sent poet greater than himself has been granted as a gift to mankind. 

Here, however, I see the opening of a field of thought upon which I 
dare not enter. Let it suffice to remark that, if our Association cannot 
advance Literature, as in fact no association can, it can at least encourage 
the study of it, and lead people to read and enjoy and profit by those 
many masterpieces of literary power, which are perhaps the chiefest 
secular blessing that we possess, and the purest source of intellectual 
pleasure. 

It remains that I congratulate you upon the progress and prosperity 
of our Association. We consist now of branches at Whitehaven, Kes- 
wick, Cockermouth, Workington, Maryport ; and I understand from the 
best authority, that an increase of our family may be shortly expected at 
Harrington. I have looked through the programmes of the lectures, 
which have been given during the past winter, and am surprised by their 
variety and by the number of the lectures. Certainly our Association does 
seem to be the exciting cause of a great amount of intellectual energy in 
this district. It is not easy to measure results, and the mere listening 
to lectures does not necessarily inform the mind ; still I cannot but 
believe, upon the evidence before me, that the Association is doing good 
work in many more ways than one ; and therefore I heartily wish it 
continued success ; and I feel that it is both a pleasure and a duty to 
endeavour to promote that success by any efforts in its behalf, which it 
may be practically in my power to make. 



I 



31 



REPORTS FROM THE ASSOCIATED SOCIETIES. 



WHITER A. YEN SCIENTIFIC ASSOCIATION, 

HOWGILL STREET. 



SESSION, 1876 — 1877. 



President 
Vice-President 



James Baird. 

R. Russell, C.E., F.G.S. 



Past Presidents. 



T. F. r Anson, M.D. | William Jackson, J.P. 

Augustus Helder. | W. H. Kitchin. 

H. A. Fletcher, F.R.A.S. 



E. Ablett, M.D. 

Joseph Adair. 

Archibald Kitchin, F.C.S. 



Botanical \ ... 
Zoological / . . . 

Geological 
Mineralogical 



Archaeological 



Treasurer. . . . 
Hon. Secretary. 



Committee. 

R. F. Martin. 
J. W. Montgomery, F.C.S. 
R. Pickering, C.E. 
John Vivian, C.E. 

Curators. 

(  Joseph Adair. 

i E. Ablett, M.D. 

[R. Pickering, C.E. 

LR. Russell, C.E., F.G.S. 

[T. F. I'Anson, M.D. 
[W. Jackson, J.P. 

John S. Hellon. 

B. Taylor. 



::{i 



MEETINGS were held during the Session as follows: — 

Oct. 17. — Conversazione — Introductory Address by the President. 
Nov. 7.— Rev. S. T. Taylor-Taswell, M.A., Christ Church, 



Oxford — On 



Rev. S. T. 
Ancient Slavery in Relation to Roman Jurisprudence. 

Nov. 21. — Richard A. Proctor, B.A., Hon. Sec. AstronomicalSociety, London 
— On the Giant Planets (Illustrated). 



32 

Dec. 5.— J. D. Kendall, M.E., F.G.S.— On the Theory of Evolution. 

Dec. 18.— AV. H. Watson, F.C.S., F.M.S.— On the Food of Plants. 

Jan. 9. — J. Hughes — On Steam Boilers. 

Jan. 23.— E. F. Martin — On Optical Instruments. (Illustrated). 

Feb. 6.— Right Hon. G. C. Bentinck, M.P.— Ou Modern Architecture. 

Feb. 20. — J. Eaton, M.D. — On the Eye: its Structure and Development. 

March 6.— T. F. I'Anson, M.D. —On the Sense of Touch. 

March 20. — J. C. Waed, F.G.S.— On the Ear: its Structure and Development. 

April 3. — W. Wilson — On Linen and the Linen Trade. 

April 17. — Conversazione — Election of Officers, &c. 

Hour of Meeting 8 p.m. 

During the past year some very good work has been done; and 
although the entire expenditure of the Society has been about ;!^i8i, 
which inckided an extraordinary item of ^121, the ordinary annual 
expenditure was well within the annual revenue. 

During the session 61 new members have been elected, and the 
number of members whose names have been removed from the Register — 
death or removal to some other part of the country being the chief 
cause — amounts to 29, leaving a nett increase of 32. 

The session opened in a very auspicious manner, the conversazione 
being very largely attended by members and friends of the Association. A 
new feature in the past session has been the engagement of Mr. Proctor, 
the eminent and popular lecturer and writer on Astronomy, who gave 
his instructing and interesting lecture "On the Giant Planets" to a large 
and ap]Dreciative audience of members and non-members. The success 
that attended this action of the Committee far exceeded their expectations. 
The programme of the Association has also included a paper from the 
Right Hon. G. C. Bentinck, M.P., "On the Decline and Fall of 
British Architecture," a Lecture which has since been fully discussed in 
the Architectural Journals. These two Lectures were given in the Town 
Hall. 

The other nine Meetings at which papers were read, were held in 
the Association Rooms, in Howgill Street. Of nine papers, one was 
literary, three were physiological, and five were on various other scientific 
subjects. The last meeting of the session was a conversazione, when 



33 



the Secretary's and Treasurer's Reports were read and passed, and the 
Officers and Committee elected to serve for the present year. 

The Astronomical sub-section has also had an active session, 
during which Mr. Martin delivered a course of twelve lectures, and also 
conducted the same number of class meetings. This section numbered 
twenty-eight members — four ladies and twenty-four gentlemen; the 
average attendance was fourteen. The lectures were free to the public . 
they were also attended by many members of the Association who did 
not join the class. These Lectures were given in connection with the 
Cambridge University. 

Several additional specimens have been added .to the various 
departments of the museum. Much remains to be done in the way of 
classifying and arranging the specimens which the Association possesses. 

At the commencement of last session, a Library was started, which 
has received considerable support. All things considered, the position 
of the Association, and the work it has accomplished during the year, 
the Committee flatter themselves that their labours have not been in 
vain. 



KESWICK LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 
8th session, 1S7G — 1877. 



President 
Vice-President 
Secretary 
Treasurer 



Rev. Canon Batteksby, M.A. 
Rev. W. CoLviLLE. 
Rev. A. HowsoN. 



Committee. 



J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S. 
A. H. Knight, Esq., M.D. 
E. J. Grayson. 
R. R. Lowthian. 



John Fisher Crosthwaite. 
Rev. S. Streeten, B.A. 
J. Birkett. 



MEETINGS were held during the Session as follows : 

SUMMER SESSION. 

Field Meetings. 

April 18.— Geological Excursion to the Granite and Metamorphic Rocks of 

Skiddaw Forest and Glenderaterra Valley. 



34 

May 1 and 2. — Annual Meeting of the Cumberland Association for the 

Advancement of Literature and Science, at Whitehaven. 
June 7. — Excursion to the Goldscope and Yewthwaite Mines, Newlands Vale. 

Mineralogical, Geological, and Botanical. 
July 5. — Archaeological and Geological Excursion to Cockermouth Castle and 

The Clints (Limestone rocks). Joint Excursion with the Cockermouth Society . 
Aug. 2. - — Excursion to Grasmere, visiting Easdale. 
Sept. 2. — Geological Excursion to High and Low Rigg (St. John's Vale. ) 



WINTER SESSION. 
ORDINARY MEETINGS. 

Held in the Kesioich Library at 7-30 p.m. 

Oct. 16. — The President — Jonathan Otley. 

Nov. 6. — Me. J. Richardson — Old Customs and Usages of the District. 
Nov. 27. — Mr. J. F. Crosthwaite— Celebrated Lake Visitors. (Continued.) 
Dec. II. — Microscopic Soiree— Short addresses on the Microscope and Micro- 
scopic Work. 
Jan. 16. — Mr. John Birkett — Birds of the District. 
Jan. 29. — Mr. George Lowthian — Self-culture 
Feb. 12. — Dr. Knight— The Gottenburg System. 
Mar. 12. — Mr. J. Bromley — Burial Customs 
Mar. 26.— Mr. P. Thompson— Dr. Kitto. 

Election of Office Bearers. 

LECTURES. 

Held in the Keswick Lecture Hall at 8 p.m. 



Oct. 30.— A. Kitchin, Esq., F.C.S. — Some of the Elementary Principles of 

Light, (experimentally illustrated. ) 
Nov. 20.— James Baird, Esq., President of the Whitehaven Society— Some of 

the Elementary Principles of Heat, (experimentally illustrated). 
Dec. 4.— J. Clifton Ward, Esq., Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S.— Some of the Analogies 

between Sound and Light, (experimentally illustrated). 
Dec. 18.— Rev. Canon Dixon, M.A., — Some of the Great Principles and Forms 

of Poetry, as developed by the English Poets. 



35 

Dec. 27 — Kev. W. Knight, Professor of Moral Philosophy at St. Andrew's — 

The Rise of Great Cities. 
Jan. 22. — R. F. Martin, Esq.— The Sun as a Source of Light and Heat. 
Feb. 5. — Eev. J. D. Harrington, M.A.— Coleridge. 
Feb. 19. — C. Llotd Morgan, Esq., Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S.— Sketches iu North 

and South America. 
Mar. 5. — R. S. Ferguson, Esq., M.A., LL.M. — Heraldry. 
Mar. 19. — Rev. J. Colling wood Bruce, LL.D, — The Roman ^^'all. 

The number of members is now 177. 

The summer field-days were five in number, exclusive of the ex- 
cursions in connection with the Association Meeting at Whitehaven, and 
were all well attended, papers being read at each meeting. 

The winter programme has been more successful than in any- 
previous year, both ordinary meetings and lectures having been attended 
by greater numbers than in former years. There were nine Ordinary 
Meetings, including a highly successful microscopic soiree ; and the 
papers brought forward were generally speaking entirely original in their 
nature. The Public Lectures were ten in number, four of them bearing 
upon the principles of light, heat, and sound ; two of them upon poetry; 
and the rest upon various subjects, among which should be specially 
mentioned those of Professor Knight on "The Rise of Great Cities," and 
Dr. Bruce on "The Roman Wall."' 

The Local Museum of Natural History has made considerable 

progress; so much so, that the Society felt itself justified in taking 

advantage of the occasion of the visit of the Association for a public 

opening of the same. The collection is wholly confined to specimens 

illustrating the Natural History and Antiquities of the District, and may 

be thus briefly summarized. 

Zoological Collection ..; ... ... 700 specimens 

Geological „ ... ... ... 1368 ,, 

Antiquarian „ ... ... ... 71 „ 

Woods of the District ... ... ... 41 „ 

Lichens of the District ... ... ... 238 „ 

Remaining Botanical Collection, very con- 
siderable, but not enumerated 

2418 specimens 
exclusive of the remaining botanical, and of various maps, models, &c. 



36 

It is confidently hoped tliat the Museum, having attained this degree 
of development, may in future be made available for systematic instruc- 
tion in some of the various branches of natural history. 



COCKERMOUTH LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



SESSION, 187G-1877. 



President ... ... ... Isaac Fletcher, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. 

Vice-PresidenU 

Rev. W. Williams, F.G.S. 

Henry Dodgson, M.D., F.R.A.S., F.M.S. 



Mr. Joseph Brown. 

Rev. Eldred Green. 

Mr. John Robertson, M.D. 



Committee 

Mr. Thomas M. Harris. 

Mr. Horace R. Wyndham. 

Mr. William Yoddale. 
Mr. John Simpson. 



Secretary ... ... ... ... ... Mr. J. H. Pickering. 

Treasurer ... ... ... ... ... Mr. R. C. Shawyer. 

LECTURES toere delivered in the Court House, Cockermouth, during 
the Session, as folloivs : — 

November 2. — Some of the Phenomena of Light, (experimently illustrated.) By 

A. Kitchin, F.C.S. 
November 16. — Some of the Phenomena of Heat, (experimentally illustrated). 

By James Baird. 
November 30. — Some of the Chemical Relations of Light and Heat, (experimentally 

illustrated). By G. F. Downar. 
December 14. — Electro-Chemistry, (experimentally illustrated). By J. C. Ward, 

F.G.S. 
January 11. — History of the English Language. By J. Gordon. 
January 25. — Gothic Architecture. By the President. 

February 8.— Some of the Laws of Thought. By the Rev. W. Williams, F.G.S. 
February 22. — Fletcher Christian, and the Pitcairn Islanders. By W. Fletcher, 

F.G.S. 
March 8. — Old Customs and Usages of the District. By J. Richardson. 
March 22. — The Character of Hamlet, (Papers). By M. Edwards, J. Straughton, 

F.R.G.S., and J. H. Pickering. 

Close of Session, Business, and Election of Officers. 



J 



37 

A joint Field-day was held in connection with the Keswick Society, 
on July 5th, when the Glints Crags, near Cockermouth, were visited, 
and the Geological features described by J. Clifton Ward, Esq. 

A Class for the study of Chemistry was held during the Winter, 
conducted by Mr. G. F. Downar. At the concluding Examination six 
members competed for the Prizes offered, and Mr. Downar reports — 
" All the Papers displayed a considerable amount of knowledge, and I 
am very pleased with them." 

The attendance of members at the General Meetings has not been 
very satisfactory, and with one or two exceptions compares unfavourably 
with that of previous Sessions. 

The number of members upon the Register this Session is 130. 



WORKINGTON SCIENTIFIC & LITERARY ASSOCIATION. 



SESSION 1876—1877. 



President ... ... ... ... H. F. Curwen, Esq., J. P. 

Vice-President ... ... ... Rev. J. J. Thornley, M.A. 

Treasurer ... ... ... ... Alfred Peile. 

Hon. Secretary ... ... ... Geo. F. Downar. 

Committee. 

Henry Bowes. I Thomas Iredale. 

Chas. Hindjiarsh. I Tom Milburn. 

George J. Snelus. 



During the Session the following Lectures were delivered in the Savings Bank 
Large Room ; except that on Nov. 22nd, which was in the Assembly Room, when 
the general public were admitted. 
Nov. 8. — G. F. Downar — On Artificial lUumination, (experimentally illustrated.) 

Nov. 22. — Richard A. Proctor, B.A., Hon. Sec. Astromonical Society, London 
— On the Giant Planets. (Illustrated). 

Dec. 6. — H. F. Curwen, Esq. — On Ancient Coins and Medals. 

Dec. 20. — J. Clifton Ward, Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S. — On Coal: its history. 

Jan. 10.— R. Russell, C.E., F.G.S. —On Coal Mining. 

Jan. 24. — J. Bolton— On Lord Byron. 

3 



38 

Feb. 21.— K. Russell, C.E., F.G.S.— On the Iron Ores of Great Britain. 

Mar. 7. — G. J. Snelus, Assoc. E.S.M. — On the Manufacture of Iron and Steel. 

Mar. 21.— Thomas Thompson — On Thomas Carlyle. 

April 4. — J. Clifton Waed, Assoc. E. S. M. , F. G. S. — On Magnetism and Electro- 
Magnetism, (experimentally illustrated). 

April 11. — C. Strang, M.B. — On Pauperism: a Sociological Study. 
Business Meeting — Election of Officers, tLc. 

The Session has been most successful, for not only have there been 
twice as many meetings as in previous Sessions, but those meetings also 
have been better attended than formerly, and the various Lectures that 
have been given have been of such a character as is well calculated to 
further the objects of the Association. On one occasion, a professional 
Lecturer, (Mr. Proctor), was engaged, and to his Lecture members of 
neighbouring Societies were invited, and twenty-five from Maryport and 
Cockermouth attended. 

The Association numbers seventy-six members, which is an increase 
upon last year's membership; and the financial position also is very 
satisfactory. 



MARYPORT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



SESSION 1876—1877. 

President ... ... ... ... ... Rev, A. Oates. 

Vice-President ... ... ... ... Mr. J. Wood. 

Secretary ... ... ... ... ... Mr. J. B. Bailey. 

Treasurer ... ... ... ... Mk. J. Robinson. 

Committee. 

Dr. Crerar. I Rev. J. Cochrane. 

Mr. W. Hine. I Mr. J. Hodgson. 

Mr. J. Adair. 

MEETINGS were held during the Session, as follows : — 
ORDINARY MEETINGS. 
Held in the George Street School-room. 
Oct. 27.— Rev. J. Cochrane — Criticisms. 
Nov. 17. — ^Mr. R. Adair — Love, Courtship, Marriage. 






3d 

Dec. 15. — Mr. J. B. Bailey — The Flame of a Candle. 

Dec. 20. — Me. J. Hodgson — The Creation. 

Jan. 26.— Me. H. Conley— Winds. 

Feb. 2.— Me. A. Noble, F.C.S.— Water. 

Feb. 23. — Me. J. H. Goudie— Charles Lamb. 

March 23. — Eev. J. S. Cbaig — The Ancient Icelander : His Life and Literature. 

April 27. — Me. J. B. Bailey — Shakespeare. 

LECTURES. 
Nov. 3.— J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S.— The Old Glaciers of Cumberland. 
Dec. 1.— E. Russell, Esq., C.E., F.G.S. — Coal, and its formation. 
Jan. 12. — Jas. Goedon, Esq. — History of the English Language. 
Feb. 9.— Rev. W. Williams, F.G.S.— Some of the Laws of Thought. 
Mar. 9.— Rev. J. J. Thoenley, M.A.— The Alphabet. 
Apl. 6.— J. D. Kendall, Esq., C.E., F.G.S.— The Theory of Evolution. 

The Committee of the Maryport Literary and Scientific Society in 
presenting this, their first Annual Report, have great pleasure in drawing 
attention to the steady and regular increase in the number of members. 

At a preliminary meeting held on September 25th, J. Clifton Ward, 
Esq., delivered an able address on the objects and working of Literary 
and Scientific Societies; after which twenty-five members were enrolled, 
whilst at the close of the Session there were seventy-one on the books. 

The programme was successfully carried out, and the discussions at 
the end of each meeting fairly well upheld. The ordinary meetings 
were for members only. To the lectures the public were admitted on 
payment of a small sum. The attendance at the meetings has been of 
a very encouraging nature. 

Financially too, the Society is in a flourishing condition, having a 
balance of nearly ^d in hand. 



41 



NOTES ON THE METEOROLOGY OF COCKERMOUTH. 

By Henry Dodgson, Esq., M.D., F.R.A.S., (Cockermouth). 

This paper comprises a summary of Meteorological observations 
taken at Cockermouth during the fifteen years, from. January 1862, to 
December 1876. 

The instruments observed w^ere the barometer, wet and dry-bulb 
thermometers, together with self-registering thermometers for recording 
the maximum and minimum temperatures both in the shade and on the 
grass. The rain-fall was also noted, as well as the amount of cloud and 
of ozone; and the direction of the wind with its apparent force recorded. 

All the observations were made twice a day — at 9 a.m., and 9 p.m., 
— except that the rain-fall was in general only measured once a day — at 
9 in the morning. 

Barometer. 

In giving a summary of the readings of the Barometer, there is 
nothing very noteworthy to record, since the atmospheric pressure is pretty 
uniform over the British Isles : there being a small but gradual diminution 
of pressure from south to north. 

The mean annual height for this latitude is about 29-9 inches; and 
my own observations agree very well with this, the mean I obtained for 
the 15 years being 29-876 inches. 

In the first table I have given the mean pressure for each year of 
the series together with the highest and lowest observed during that year. 

It is very common for persons who are in the daily habit of observ- 
ing the Barometer as a "weather glass," but without keeping any record 



42 



of its readings, to remark, after any unusual rise or fall in the mercurial 
column, that they never before saw "the glass" so high, or so low, as the 
case may be. It is therefore, perhaps, worthy of note, that the highest 
reading in the 15 years occured on the 6th March, 1874, and was 
30.834 inches; and the lowest on the 19th January, 1873, when it was 
28.176 inches; the range for the period thus being 2-658 inches (a little 
over 2}^ inches). 

Comparing one year with another, the greatest difference in mean 
pressure occured on two consecutive years, 187 1 and 1872, when there 
was an average of rather more than ^^ inch between them ("274 inch ) 
These two years were also, as will be seen, remarkable in another respect, 
as being the driest and the wettest years of the period of observation. 

I may add for the information of any one who may wish to compare 
my results with his own, that all the readings have been corrected for 
index error, capillarity and temperature, and reduced to the mean sea 
level. 

Table I. 
BAROMETRIC SUMMARIES. 





Mean 


Highest 


Date of 




Date of 


Year 


Pressure 


Reading 


Highest 


Lowest 


Lowest 




Inches 


Inches 




Inches 




1862 


29-851 


30725 


Feby. 9 


28-308 


Oct. 19 


1863 


29-873 


30-679 


Feby. 13 


28-699 


Sep. 22 


1864 


29-910 


30751 


Novr. 6 


28-621 


Nov. 18 


1865 


29-895 


30-766 


Deer. 1 1 


28-311 


Jany. 14 


1866 


29-793 


30-569 


J any. 25 


28-669 


March 24 


1867 


29-911 


30-819 


March 3 


28-527 


Jany. 8 


1868 


29-878 


30705 


Nov. 13 


28-469 


Dec. 27 


1869 


29-894 


30-544 


Dec. 6 


28-633 


Dec. 13 


1870 


29-932 


30-683 


Dec. I 


28-488 


Oct. 23 


1871 


29-993 


30-585 


March 28 


28-529 


Jany. 16 


1872 


29-719 


30-451 


April 6 


28-397 


Jany. 18 


1873 


29-855 


30-712 


Feby. 18 


28-176 


Jany. 1 9 


1874 


29-886 


30-834 


March 6 


28-651 


Nov. 29 


1875 


29'933 


30-674 


March 17 


28-771 


Jany. 24 


1876 


29-816 


30-602 


May 9 


28-377 


Dec. 4 



43 



Wind. 

The few remarks that I have to make about the wind may be stated 
here, since the Barometric readings are more affected by currents of air 
(or wind) than by any other cause. 

Cockermouth being placed in a valley, is not well situated for 
observations on the wind. It is too much sheltered from it. For some 
time I attempted to record both the speed and pressure of the wmd, but 
soon came to the conclusion that the readings were too low; although 
my gauges, consisting of Robinson's anemometer, and Lind's wind gauge, 
were placed on the top of a barn. I therefore gave up observmg the 
instruments, and contented myself with noting the direction and apparent 
force of the wind. 

The prevailing air currents are from the S. & W., and these are both 
warmer and more moist than winds from the N. or E. 

The greatest depressions of the barometer precede or accompany 
gales from the S.W. A heavy fall of rain causes much less depression 
than an impending high wind. I have generally observed gales to 
commence from the south, and then gradually veer round the west, and 
N.W. towards the close. This is common, I believe, in other parts of the 
kingdom, as the centre of most of these storms is somewhere in the 
north sea. 

Thermometers. 

In stating the results of the readings of the Thermometers, we will 
take first the temperature in the shade. 

The instruments for recording this were placed at the height of four 
feet from the ground, in a stand which shaded them from the sun, and at 
the same time allowed them to be freely exposed to the air. The sides 
of the stand, which is quadrangular, is composed of a double framework 
of louvre boards on three sides. The north side, where the door is, 
being single. The top of the stand is also double, and the outer covering 
painted white, and quite open on all sides, so as to prevent any heat 
being communicated from the sun's rays to the instruments below, 



44 













Ta^k II. 
















MEAN TEMPERATURES IN SHADE. 




1862— 1876. 


Year 


n 






'j-l 

< 


^ 
§ 


1— > 

';3-9 


,S.S'2 


<: 
577 


c^ 1 




P 


Means 


1862 


•^Q-2 


41-8 


417 


46-6 


S3-2 


S4'9 


49-8 38-0 


44"5 


48-0 


1863 


40-7 


42-3 


44-8 


467 


49 -8 


ss-i 


58-0 


S7-b 


52-b 


5?-3 


4b -0 


43 •* 


49 '0 
47 '6 


1864 


M'2 


3S'2 


41 '0 


48-8 


S37 


 ;4'o 


58-8 


5b-i 


54-5 


48-9 


43-3 


40 -b 


1865 


S6'4 


3S"3 


38-2 


So-3 


S27 


60-3 


bo -4 


58-4 


bo -3 


49 '2 


42-6 


44 '3 


49-0 


1866 


42-1 


3P7 


3P'6 


47'3 


50 "2 


58-9 


59-8 


58-3 


537 


51-0 


44'5 


43-5 


49 '05 


1867 


 ^27 


44 '0 


37-6 


47-3 


52-6 


S67 


58-3 


bo-o 


56 -b 


49 'i 


41-5 


40 '3 


48-06 


1868 


^q-I 


43'3 


44 '4 


47S 


S47 


S77 


63-2 


62-0 


57-2 


4yb 


4i-5 


44 -b 


50-2 
48-9 


1869 


43-6 


4'? "2 


39 -6 


4Q7 


48-0 


SS-9 


61-4 


S8-0 


57-2 


49 '2 


42-9 


30-5 


1870 


S8-3 


38-0 


41-0 


487 


51-8 


S7-0 


61-8 


60-8 


55 -f 


487 


397 


337 


47-9 


1871 


337 


427 


44-8 


46-9 


S2-3 


S6-I 


587 


61 "4 


54-6 


497 


39'i 


39-8 


48-3 


1872 


41-8 


44'3 


44"'^ 


46-4 


49-3 


S6-S 


62-0 


60-5 


55-4 


47 -b 


43 'b 


40-9 


49 '4 
48-3 


1873 


41-2 


3S-2 


42-8 


46-6 


497 


S7-6 


bO-2 


58-9 


53-4 


47-2 


42 -b 


44b 


1874 


42-0 


3P7 


44"2 


49-4 


49-9 


S6-5 


607 


58-4 


55-5 


50-1 


43-1 


30 '3 


48-3 
48-7 


1875 


4'^''; 


37 "2 


41 "0 


46 -q 


52-9 


56-0 


59-1 


bo-^ 


58-4 


48-8 


41-0 


39 '2 


1876 


40-4 


40-0 


397 


45-8 


49-8 
SI -4 


56-5 
56-6 

57-8 


60 '3 
59-8 


59-8 
59-2 


54-2 

55-3 


51 •» 

49-3 


41-9 
42-1 


43  « 


48-6 


Means 


3P°4 


40-3 


41 -6 


47-6 


40-7 


48*6 


Nr London 


38-3 


40 "0 


42-2 


46 •£ 


52-3 


61 -c 


60 'C 


57-6 


i£:8 


43-t 


39 -i: 




Greenwich 


3 S 7! 38-2 


40-9 


467152-6 


58-0 


6ri 


60-51 56-31 49-31 42-4' 38 •«! 



J 

Table II. gives the mean temperature for each separate month in 
the fifteen years, also the means for every year, and for each month, 
collectively. For the purpose of comparison, there is added under the 
mean temperature for each month similar means for the neighbourhood 
of London, and for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich. As there is 
considerable discrepancy between these two, I may state that I have 
taken the former from Mr. Glaisher's "Tables of Corrections to be applied 
to Meteorological Instruments," (1850); and the latter from Drew's 
"Practical Meterology," (second edition, i860). It will be observed that the 
summer months. May, June, July, and August, have a higher mean 
temperature assigned to them on the authority of Drew, than on that 
of Mr. Glaisher, whilst the remaining eight months are much lower. 

I cannot determine which of these two is the more rehable, but 
whichever is correct, the result of the comparison is the same in /cmii, 
although it differs in degree, viz:— that the mean temperature of the 
winter months is higher, whilst that of the summer is lower at Cocker- 



45 

mouth, than in the neighbourhood of London : that is, we have a milder 
winter, with a cooler summer. 

[Since the above was written I have ascertained the average mean 
temperature at Greenwich for the past 105 years (from Mr. Glaisher's 
remarks on the weather published in the Registrar General's Quarterly 
Returns of Marriages, Births, and Deaths,) viz. — 

January 36"5° April 46*0° July 61 "6° October 49"6° 

February 38-6° May 52-8° Aug. 60-8° Novr. 42-3° 

March 41-1° June 58-2° Sept. 56-6° Deer. 39"i° 

It is noteworthy that the mean temperature for each month, except May, 
was higher during the last thirty-five than in the previous seventy years 
of this period, at Greenwich.] 

These results, as regards the winter months, may surprise those who 
have not paid much attention to climatology, but they are quite in 
accordance with ascertained facts. It is well known that whilst the 
isothermal lines, (or lines of equal temperature) in summer cross the 
British Isles from East to West, in winter their direction is from south 
to north. In other words, in summer the mean temperature increases 
from north to south; whilst in winter the increase is in a direction from 
east to west; so that the former of these facts account for the lower 
summer temperature here in the north, whilst the longitude of Cocker- 
mouth, west of Greenwich, (about 3° 23') may in like manner account 
for the warmer winter months. 

Very possibly, however, the means obtained for the fifteen years of 
observation may have to be modified by a more extended series, as 
there are known to be cycles of hot and cold years, in periods varying 
from nine to fifteen years ; but these results agree very well with the 
isotherms which Mr. Buchan gives on outline charts of the British Isles, 
in his handbook of Meteorology. In the month of January, the isothermal 
line of 39° is there represented as skirting the west coast, and passing 
through Cumberland, to the east of Cockermouth. Whilst for July, the 
isothermal lines of 59° and 60", cross the former to the north of 
Cumberland, and the latter to the south of it, or about the mouth of the 
Duddon. 



46 



Range of Temperature. 

The mean temperature, if taken alone, is not a safe guide to climate ; 
for two stations may be identical as to their mean temperature, and yet 
the climate be very different. It is for this reason I have constructed 
Table III., giving the extremes of heat and cold during the period over 
which the observations have extended. 

Table III. 
EXTREMES OF TEMPERATURE. 





Highest 




Lowest 










Temper- 


Date of 


Temper- 


Date of 


Highest 


Lowest on 




ature in 


Highest 


ature in 


Lowest 


in Sun 


Grass 




Shade 




Shade 


























1862 


747 


April 30 


i9"o 


March 3 






1863 


77-0 


July 1 1 


25-4 


Mch. 18 






1864 


82-5 


May 19 


14-4 


J any. 6 


1 24-0 May 


6-9 J any. 


1865 


8i-3 


June 18 
Sep. 15 


9-5 


Feb. 15 


1 29-8 June 


6-7 Feb. 


1866 


83-4 


June 29 


i6-8 


Jan. 1 2 


134-8 June 


10-6 Jan. 


1867 


84-9 


Aug. 13 


7 '4 


Jan. 14 


139-8 July 


0-4 Jan. 


1868 


89-3 


Aug. 4 


22"I 


Jan. 10 


146-5 Aug. 


9-1 Nov. 


1869 


86-9 


Aug. 27 


4-9 


Dec. 28 


1357 July 


-3-0 Dec. 


1870 


89-4 


July 25 


12-4 


Dec. 23 


136-0 Aug. 


5-0 Dec. 


I87I 


80-3 


Aug. 30 


io"5 


Jan. 12 


137-0 June 


5-2° Jan. 


1872 


84-1 


July 26 


2 I '2 


Dec. 1 2 


127-5 July 


10-2° Dec. 


1873 


89-1 


July 2 2 


"•5 


Feb. 24 


137-0 July 


4-0 Feb. 


1874 


8i-6 


July 18 


I2-I 


Dec. 29 


134-0 July 


1 2 -I Dec. 


1875 


78-4 


Sep. 13 


1 9 •6 


Dec. 5 


133-2 July 


i"i -8 Jan. 


1876 


88-3 


Aug. 13 


i6-8 


Jan. 9 


130-4 July 


II -o Nov. 



The IVth Table gives the range of temperature in each month, also 
the mean daily range, and the greatest range that occured in any one 
day. 



47 



Table IV. 
A TABLE OF THE RANGE OF TEMPERATURE. 







CIS 

1— > 






a, 
< 




(U 

n 
3 
1 — > 


1—1 


3 

<: 


lU 
t/3 





> 



Q 


1862 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range . . 




7-8 
17-9 
30-6 



10-2 

20-8 
41 




12-5 

27 "2 
39-5 



14-3 
32-8 
51-0 



13-8 
26-9 
35 



10-2 
24-4 

247 



HI 

19-6 

20-8 




12-3 
22 1 

24 5 




17-5 
30-8 
.367 
10-0 
21-5 
25-5 
13-3 
31-9 
31-9 
15-8 
34-8 
41-9 



13-5 
251 

34 
110 
22-5 
31-4 
13-6 
25 3 
32-5 
15-2 
22-3 
45-4 



11-6 

18'4 
38-4 
lO'o 
24-1 
33'S 
101 
237 
26'2 
12'0 
20-9 
30-8 




7 '3 
14-6 
28-4 

S'2 
21'1 
25-1 

77 
147 
28 '9 

87 
257 
31-6 


1863 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range 


6.2 
11-6 
22 


9-3 
24-3 
27-4 


11-3 
20-9 
36-6 


134 

257 

277 


13-3 
26-8 
30 1 


12-9 
26-6 
30 '9 


IS -5 137 
26-8; 22 -S 
38-6I34-2 


IS64 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


9-7 
19-3 
35-1 


11-8 
21-3 
31-8 
11 
25-4 
38-4 


12 3 
25-0 
36-3 
11-4 
211 
29-7 


16-4 
27-6 
39-8 
187 
33-3 
407 


17-5 
337 
46 
131 
30-3 
39-4 


131 
29-3 
33 
IS -5 
29-5 
35-3 


16-4 
291 
36.3 
15-3 
28-5 
31-4 


17-8 
301 
42-3 
14-8 
27-2 
29-6 


1865 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


9-3 

22-7 
.33-7 


1866 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


77 
25 1 
35-1 


9-5 
19-5 

28-2 


12-6 
22 2 

35-6 


147 
31-6 
44-9 


20-2 
36-9 
44-5 


15-5 
31-4 
43-8 


151 
30-1 
38-2 


12-8 
24-5 
37-4 


120 
237 
29-9 


137 
27-3 
37-9 


9'2 
217 
33'1 


9'1 
19'6 
257 


1867 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range . . . 


12-4 
24-4 
45-4 


8 -8 
21-2 
30 1 


12 
25-8 
37-3 


9-9 
25-5 
25-5 


155 
28-1 

45-8 


15-5 
29-0 
33-3 


15-9 
28-6 
40 


13-4 
32-3 
43-4 


10-9 
24-9 
35-8 
15-9 
27-6 
467 


10-8 
20-5 
307 
13-6 
281 
337 


107 
197 
30-3 
96 
20'4 
34'5 


9'2 
20'0 
30-6 

7-5 
16'3 
27 '0 
117 
29 8 
47 '6 
lO'O 
20-4 
41 '2 

8 '4 
19'3 
34'0 

8'1 
21 '6 
33'6 


1868 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


"8~9 
16-8 
30-4 


7-4 
19-3 
26-5 


10-7 
23-2 
29-9 


15-6 

277 
34-9 


14-9 
26-3 
.387 


14-6 
34-8 
40-8 


20-2 
341 
43-0 


13-9 
321 
46-3 


1869 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range 


8-7 
18-3 
26-3 


8-4 
17-1 
28-8 


131 
21-2 
25-3 


17-8 
33-5 
44-0 


15-4 

37-0 
37-5 


16-6 
25-6 
38-9 
13-9 
29-{i 
35-8 
19-2 
29-9 
39-3 
14-3 
28-8 
41-6 


15-8 
.33-8 
36-9 
17-0 
39-2 
42 
131 
24 1 
27-9 
15-6 
.30-8 
427 


187 
41-0 
53-8 
22 8 
32-3 
47-0 
16-8 
30 1 
37-2 
16-9 
31-4 
42-3 


11-2 
287 
35-4 
16-1 
29 1 
.34-8 
15 8 
28-8 
45-0 
12-3 
25-1 
45-9 


13-2 
24-3 
457 
13-4 
36'5 
39'8 
14'1 
319 
37-3 
126 
27 4 
29-4 


9'6 
23-6 
32-1 
12'0 
20'4 
30'2 
12'0 
23-3 
33-0 

9-3 
22-4 
317 


1870 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 
Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


9-4 
24-6 
30-5 
101 
23-3 
37-3 


10-6 
18-8 
28-5 
8-1 
16-0 
32-0 


137 
22-2 
30-2 
15-4 
38-4 
487 
11-8 
23-8 
407 


17-0 
37-1 
47-1 
14-1 
29 
33-6 
137 
23 1 
33-3 


15] 
29-6 
43 
194 
30-5 
49-9 
13-9 
24-4 
29-8 


I87I 


1872 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


8-2 
18-9 
28-9 


9-6 
24 1 
24-1 


IS73 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


8-7 
21-9 
29-6 


11-2 
27-5 
361 


14-2 
28-3 
41 '8 


187 
38-5 

42-8 


17 -b 
31-1 
38 '0 


17-6 
32-0 
32-1 


13-8 
261 
42-4 


12-3 

22-8 
327 


151 
31 5 
401 


117 
24'2 
40'3 


98 
20'6 
31-9 


6'6 
18'6 
30'0 


1874 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range .. 


6-6 
20-1 
20-2 


11-2 
21-5 

28-9 


11-8 
25-9 
367 


16-2 

277 
441 


16-2 

287 
337 


187 
29-3 
41-2 


18 1 
28-0 
37-4 


127 
231 
31 8 


11-3 

23-0 

28-8 


108 
21-5 
32'S 


87 
187 
27-4 


IM 
22'6 
36'S 


187s 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range ... 


8-S 
18-2 
341 


8-3 
15-4 
26-7 


11-9 
25-1 
29-9 


17-4 
31-9 
39 1 


155 
297 
34-6 


14-9 
32-9 
33 2 


17 
301 
37-3 


13-5 
24 
28-1 
17-0 
38-8 
447 


13-9 
29-9 
38-5 
13-2 
22-9 
367 


9-6 
21 '1 
34-5 

9'5 
20'8 
43'6 


8'6 
18'5 
31 '0 
105 
197 
36-4 


7'] 
16'2 
324 

5'0 
20'3 
23-6 


1876 


Mean daily range 
Greatest daily range 
Monthly range . . . 


S-8 
18-9 
34-5 


8-0 
18-4 
30-7 


10-5 
19-0 
29-4 


127 
27-5 
40-0 


187 
28-3 
41-1 


170 
32-4 
45-5 


15-8 
35-2 
40-8 



M 


°6 






P ^ 

o w « 
CO '-' 












CO 


p J-> 

ON " 


P s 

ro M 


o 00 o 
ro M 




00 
00 




O On M 

1-1 M 


r* r- 


o lo ^ 

CO 00 


VO 
00 

M 


°J 


^ 5 

O N CO 


000 C 


M ^ 

OOO "5 
CM '-' 




M M 


o CO -^e 
CO^ 


^ 5 

o w 00 


1) 
CO 


P  £ 

o lO to 


o t^ O 

CM CM 


ro " 


CO 

M 


°J 


P  £ 

o lO On 


vp X! 


CO 


00 

M 




vp ^ 
O ^vo 


o bv ti 

CM M 


CO ^ 

o 'co ^2 
CO " 


V 

c/2 


o Tj- o\ 


VO -a 

O OS CO 






o o ^  

ro H 


vp ^ 

o VO o 
CO CO 


00 ^ 
o Ov "^ 

CO l-l 


VO 

00 

M 


°l 


P •£ 

O M O 


O M >-i 
N CO 


P •£ 

O M 00 
to H 


CO 

M 




P •£ 

o CM ^J^ 


P-S 

o cott 

M M 


^ 5 

OVO tl 
CM M 


en 


vp ^ 

o r^ O 

N CO 


Pt3 

O H 1- 

co ^ 


vp ^ 

o O Ov 
ro M 


^1 

CA) 


O N to 
fO H 


CM ^ 

O M o 

CO M 


o '•* tJ 
ro M 


to 

00 

M 




O N O 


00 CO 
ro ^ 


O CON 

ro w 


CO 
CO 

M 


°6 


o ^  ^^ 

M CJ 


o vb o\ 


o covo 

CO M 


1) 

CO 


P •£ 


o b to 


PX 


1) 

55 


vp TD 
ovb to 


o b ov 

CO M 


o O c 


00 

H 


5 ^ 


P  £  

O N to 


O lO -^e 


ovo C 


CM 

CO 

M 


°l 


CO On 

VO 


o >-i 00 


o O -tl 
CO "^ 


CO 


P -^ 

o rf r^ 
ro H 


ovb rt 


CO M 




P •£ 

o w o 
fO N 


00 J3 

O CO(S 

fO M 


OOO  " 
CO '^ 


CO 

M 


o| 




00 TJ 
OOO G 


O CO N 

CO H 


tH 

00 

M 






CO^ 

O CM t^ 

CM M 




C/2 


O CM t^ 


o vn^ 

fOCO 


O OS N 
fO M 


cn 


M ^ 


00 ^ 

ooo tt 

P4 M 


O Tf t, 

CO <0 


00 


°>5 








o 

CO 




GO*-" 
CM ^ 


O M ;- 
CM CO 


pvir 
fO (M 




O CO M 
M M 


ovo CO 

to 


o d o 


^1 

C/2 


O t^ !- 




p "^ 

 * CM 




' i-t 




<u 

c 

3 

1— > 




<: 


^ 

^ 


c 
1— > 



I 



49 

The mean daily range varies from 8 •4° in December, to nearly 16° 
in May, June, and July. The greatest range observed in any one month 
was S3*8° in August, 1869; and the greatest range in twenty-four hours 
was 41 "0° also in August, 1869, (from 45*9° to 86'9°). 

The occurence of low night temperatures in the spring months is of 
much importance to the agriculturalist, from the injurious effects they 
have upon young and tender vegetation of all kinds. 

From Table V., it will be seen that the thermometer in the shade was 
at or below the freezing point in ten years out of fifteen in April, and in 
nine years of the fifteen in May, and 32.1° in another year. 

It has never been observed so low as 32° at night in June, in the 
shade at four feet above the ground ; but on June 2nd, 1864, it registered 
34-2°, and on June 12th, 1874, as low as 34"i° (only 2° and a fraction 
above it). 

The thermometer on the grass has frequently been down to the 
freezing point in June. This has occurred in seven out of fifteen Junes ; 
and of course this low temperature on the grass will act very injuriously on 
any low growing plant or germinating seed, although plants of a taller 
growth may escape its influence. 

The highest summer temperatures recorded (in the shade) were : — 

89-4° on July 25th, 1870. 
89-3° on Aug. 4th, 1868. 
89-1° on July 22nd, 1873. 

Whilst the lowest in winter was 4*9°, on December c8th, 1869. 

In the direct rays of the sun, the blackened bulb thermometer, in 
vacuo, registered i39"8 in July, 1867 — this being the highest observed. 
Whilst in December, 1869, the minimum thermometer on the grass 
registered — 3-0" (below zero). 

These are the extremes of temperature that occurred during the 
fifteen years. But I believe that on the 24th December, i860, a year 
before the systematic observations were commenced, the thermometer 
was down to, or even a little below zero, in the shade. 

The extreme range of temperature in the shade, may therefore be 
assumed to be about 90°. It rarely occurs that the summer heat exceeds 



50 

85° in the shade, and when it does, a thunderstorm is the usual result, 
and this cools the atmosphere for a time. 

The amount of Solar radiation in the summer months is from 30° 
to 50°. It is greater during June than July : the mean of the former 
month being 43-9°, and of the latter 42-0'. In August the mean falls to 

By Solar radiation is meant the excess of temperature registered by 
a thermometer, with a blackened bulb, fully exposed to the sun's rays on 
the grass, above that recorded by an instrument in the shade. In like 
manner, a thermometer exposed on the grass at night usually reads much 
lower than a similar one in the shade, at four feet above the ground. 
The difference between the readings being greatest when the air is clear, 
and the sky free from clouds. Under such circumstances, there is 
generally a difference of 10° or 12'', or even more. This is called 
terrestrial radiation, and is shewn in Table III. 

Ozone. 

Except in the first month of 1862, a daily record of the amount of 
ozone in the atmosphere has been kept during the fifteen year period. 

Some Meteorologists are so sceptical as to the value of the tests used 
for the detection of this agent, that they take no account of it. The 
test which I employ is Dr. Moffat's, or rather a modification of it; the 
test papers being prepared and sold by Messrs. Negretti and Zambra. 
I believe it is generally admitted that these papers may occasionally be 
affected by other gases than ozone, e. g. by free nitric or nitrous acid 
fumes, present in the atmosphere. However, I give my results for 
what they are worth. 

The ozone scale is divided into ten parts, according to the degree 
of coloration : (I show you here the scale employed, from o up to 10): 
The strip of test paper is exposed to the air for twelve hours, and then 
compared with the chromatic scale. The mean degree of coloration 
imparted to it at Cockermouth was only 2-2. It was greatest in January, 
and smallest in June. Since the tint was also, in general, deeper by 
night than during the day, I am inclined to think that it was influenced 



A 



oi 

by light; for, although the test-paper was screened from the sun, it was 
exposed to diffused day-light, which, of course, is of longest duration in 
June. Some authorities recommend the papers to be kept in the dark 
during exposure. Ozone was observed to be most abundant during damp 
and windy weather, and least so, when the atmosphere was comparatively 
dry and calm. A south or S.W. wind always coloured the test-paper 
most deeply; and a polar current, or one from the N.E., seldom gave 
indication of the presence of much ozone. This may be one reason, I 
do not say the sole one, why Easterly winds are unhealthy ; for ozone 
undoubtedly possesses great disinfecting properties ; it is regarded by 
many as Nature's own disinfectant. 

I may just contrast for a moment the small amount of ozone 
registered at Cockermouth, with the abundance of the same agent at 
Silloth, where it is present in such quantity that it has been found 
necessary to make an alteration in the scale for that place. The test- 
papers were so frequently coloured of a deeper tint than any on the 
scale, that the Rev. F. Redford has had it extended up to twenty, 
in place of ten. I believe that Silloth stands the highest of any known 
place in the kingdom as regards ozone. 

Cloud. 

The amount of Cloud is estimated like ozone ; the scale being from 
o when the sky is perfectly clear, up to lo when it is entirely covered 
with cloud. The mean amount during the year was estimated at 62 ; 
this is probably a little too low, since at Greenwich the mean is 67. 

The West coast of Scotland has also a similar mean ; whilst in the 
interior, and on the east Coast of Scotland, the mean is only 6-o 
according to Buchan's Meteorology. The smallest average amount of 
cloud was in the months of July and April, and the greatest in 
December and January. 

Humidity. 

The existence of cloud indicates a certain amount of moisture in 
the atmosphere. The degree of humidity is calculated from the 
difference between the readings of the dry and wet-bulb thermometers, 



52 



except when the air is fully saturated with moisture, the wet-bulb 
always reads lower than the dry-bulb. This varies from a fraction of a 
degree, up to twelve or fifteen degrees. If, as is generally done, we 
estimate the humidity from o up to loo, the former denoting absolutely 
dry air, and the latter complete saturation; the mean degree of 
Humidity was 80-5 during the years of observation, and the range of the 
months from 72 to 92. The driest atmosphere during any one month 
was in June, 1865, when rain fell on three days only, and the mean 
temperature of the month was 37" above the average. On May 24th, 
of the same year, immediately before a thunderstorm, the humidity fell 
to 45, there being a difference of 13^ degrees between the readings of 
the dry and wet-bulb thermometers, (7 8 -4° and 64-9° ). The dew point 
on that occasion was 22*8° lower than the air temperature. 

Table VI. 
SUMMARY OF RAIN-FALL. 

1862— 1876. 



Years 


>> 

i 


-Q 


c3 


"ft 


1 


p3 


>f 


6b 

3 


ii 
ta 





> 





a) 


Totals 




1-5 


^ 


§ 


< 


% 


i-s 


1^ 


< 


m 





!zi 


Q 






In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


In. 


Inc. 


1862 


4-93 


1-39 


3-06 


4-45 


3-61 


4-20 


3 03 


4-23 


2-24 


10-38 


1-94 


7 03 


50-50 


1863 


7-48 


3-45 


1-38 


3-50 


3-69 


5-14 


1-48 


3-94 


7-97 


6-09 


6-38 


4-14 


54-64 


1864 


2-67 


2-18 


3-72 


2-20 


2-44 


3-24 


1-66 


3 01 


5-79 


3-22 


4-87 


6-32 


41-32 


1865 


3-48 


3-39 


2-57 


0-56 


6-31 


0-70 


2-80 


3-51 


1-90 


3-41 


4-22 


4-93 


37-78 


1866 


8-56 


4-44 


2-44 


100 


1-95 


2-49 


4-51 


3-45 


6-91 


2-55 


6-89 


5-57 


50-76 


1867 


4-29 


3-32 


1-54 


4-72 


1-59 


1-60 


3-37 


3-67 


5-05 


4-31 


1-01 


3-88 


38-35 


1868 


5-14 


6-52 


6.92 


3-08 


3-22 


1-28 


0-80 


4-11 


1-93 


5-99 


2-91 


8-22 


50-12 


1869 


5-35 


6-63 


0-84 


2-69 


2-05 


1-66 


1-81 


1-80 


7-55 


3-97 


6-17 


5-78 


46-30 


1870 


4-41 


3-56 


2-36 


211 


4 02 


1-97 


1-05 


2-85 


4-32 


9-56 


3-53 


2-00 


41-74 


1871 


3-97 


3-52 


2-95 


2-50 


0-97 


1-74 


2-92 


3-32 


2-23 


3-80 


2-65 


6-32 


36-89 


1872 


7-00 


3-34 


3-57 


1-55 


2-92 


4-59 


4-04 


3-88 


6-93 


7-77 


5-20 


5 03 


55-82 


1873 


8-48 


0-65 


316 


0-46 


1-82 


2-92 


4-42 


5-23 


1-61 


7-01 


2-62 


2-46 


40-84 


1874 


5 04 


3 03 


310 


1-51 


1-28 


119 


2-65 


6-70 


6 03 


8-63 


4-57 


2-57 


46-30 


1875 


4-79 


1-35 


1-33 


1-51 


2-53 


3-54 


3-11 


3-34 


5-38 


3-31 


3-44 


3-39 


37-02 


1876 


2-48 


3 94 


3-76 


2-65 


0-72 


3-76 


2-25 


3-82 


6-59 


3-58 


2-64 


4-77 


38-96 


Means 


5-20 


3.3812-85 


2-30 


2-61 


2-671 2-66 


3-79 


4-69 


5-57 


3-93 


4-82 


44-49 



Rain-fall. 
From humidity there is a natural transition to rain fall. That for 
Cockermouth is, as might be anticipated, intermediate between the 
excessive fall in the mountain districts, and the smaller amount registered 



53 

on the comparatively flat district along the shores of the Solway Firth. 
The mean yearly fall, as may be seen from table VI., was 44-5 inches; 
but for the first eleven years of the period, the gauge was kept in a 
situation which appeared to have an undue amount of rain fall. For 
three other similar gauges placed apart from it, but within a radius of 
half-a-mile, did not collect so much rain by about six per cent. 

The first gauge was placed in a somewhat sheltered garden, 
comparatively open to the S. and W., but having buildings to the E. and 
N. of it ; this probably caused more rain to fall there than would have 
done, had it been more open. 

On this account, I have thought it right in taking an average, to 
deduct six per cent, from the total fall in the first eleven years. When 
this is done, the mean annual rain-fall of Cockermouth is reduced to 
42'i4 inches. In order to compare this with what falls at other stations, 
I have extracted from Mr. G. J. Symon's annual vols, of "British 
Rain-fall" the means for the ten years, (1866 — 1875). 

Seathwaite, Borrowdale, has for that period a mean 

rain fall of ... ... ... i4S"o6 inches. 

Barrow House, (Derwent Water) ... 73 '63 

Keswick, (Mr. Crosthwaite) ... ... 61-82 

Mirehouse, (Bassenthwaite) ... ... 52-20 

Whinfell Hall, (Lorton) ... ... 54-62 

Higham ... ... ... ... 4573 

These are all near the mountains, and have a higher rain fall than 
Cockermouth, (which for the same period was 44-42 inches, uncorrected). 
If we now take the rain fall for stations further away from the 
mountains, the fall is found to be much lower. 

At Stainburn, (near Workington) it is ... 3870 inches. 

At Whitehaven, (Braystones) ... ... 39"48 „ 

AtSilloth ... 33-77 „ 

At Carlisle, (Cemetery) ... ... 28-95 » 

Thus showing that there is a gradual decrease in the rain fall as we 
leave the mountains. 

4 



54 

If, instead of placing a rain gauge on, or a few inches above the 
ground, it is fixed on the top of some elevated building, it will be found 
to collect considerably less rain — the amount decreasing as the elevation 
increases. 

As an illustration of this law, I may state that for a few years a 
rain gauge was kept on a pinnacle of the tower of Christ Church, 
Cockermouth, about loo feet above the ground. During the five years, 
1866— 1870, the mean annual fall collected there only amounted to 
2474 inches ; whilst on the ground below it, it was 45-45 inches during 
the same period. 

It is rather singular that two consecutive years should have been 
respectively the wettest and the driest during the period of observation. 
This, however, was the case, the year 1872 was the wettest, and the 
year preceding, (187 1) the driest. 

If we now examine the separate months, October will be found to 
be the wettest, and April the driest. 

The heaviest falls of rain that occurred during any one month were 
in October, 1862, when 10-38 inches fell; and in October, 1870, the fall 
was 9-56. The least aniount of rain was in April, 1873, °"46, and in 
April, 1 865, o'56. In June, 1865, there were the fewest rainy days of any 
month in the series, viz : three days only ; the total fall during that 
month being 070 inches. 

Taking now the daily falls which were remarkable, we find that the 
heaviest falls in 24 hours were : — 

Sept. 27th, 1863, when there fell in that time 2.177 inches. 

Nov. 15th, 1866, 

Nov. 13th, 1869, 

Oct. 8th, 1870 

Oct. 29th, 1872 

Oct. 6th, 1874 

In November, 1866, also November, 
there were floods in consequence of the heavy rain ; the last of these 
being the highest since November, 1861. There was no flood during 
1875 ; a year remarkable for floods in other districts, 





1-955 








1.590 








1.800 








1.600 








2.140 






186 


9, and October, 


1874 



55 

The rain-fall was occassionally measured at shorter intervals than 
24 hours, when it was excessive in amount. Thus, 1-82 inches of the 
heavy rain-fall of September 27th, 1863, was collected in 12 hours. On 
September 20th, 1866, 1.24 inches fell in 12 hours. On October 6th, 
1874, there fell also in 12 hours 1.89 inches. During a thunder-storm 
on May 20th, 1865, there fell 0.55 inches in twenty minutes. 

The average number of rainy days during the year is (for 15 years) 
185, or rather more than every other day. By a rainy day is meant a 
day on which not less than  — of an inch of rain is collected. In the 
year 1871 there were only 167 wet days, whilst in 1872 there were 209. 
These were the two extreme years both as to amount and frequency of 
rain fall. 

Evaporation. 

It would be very interesting to be able to say how much of the rain 
which falls in our neighbourhood passes off by evaporation, and how 
much percolates through the soil or flows off in streams and rivers. 

I made some attempt to ascertain the first of these points, but 
without much success, owing chiefly to want of time to devote to it. 

The usual form of Evaporating Gauge, or "Evapometer," is a circular 
shallow metallic vessel. Into this a known quantity of water is placed, 
and the whole is kept freely exposed to the air. 

It is evident that in summer, the water contained in a vessel of this 
kind will become unduly heated by the rays of the sun, and consequently 
too great an amount of evaporation will take place from it : a metallic 
vessel being a much better conductor of heat than any kind of soil. 

Isaac Fletcher, Esq., F.R.S., of Tam^Bank, has pubHshed in "British 
Rainfall, 1869," p. 39, the result of his experiments on evaporation, 
carried on for six years, in a copper vessel ; from which it appears that 
the evaporation exceeds the rain-fall. This may be quite correct under 
the given conditions, but it cannot be of any practical or scientific value 
as a guide to the amount of evaporation that goes on from the surface of 
the soil or of water. 

In my attempts to elucidate this matter, I adopted a suggestion of 
Mr. G. J. Symons, and endeavoured to ascertain the evaporation which 



56 

takes place from the surface of a considerable body of water. A polished 
slate tank 3ft. by 2ft., and ij^ft. deep, was fixed in one of the filter-beds 
of the Cockermouth Water Works, where it was partly immersed in water 
which was being constantly renewed. The filter-beds are supplied by a 
self-acting valve from a storage reservoir, and after percolating through 
the gravel the water passes into another reservoir. This appeared so 
admirably adapted for the end in view, that I was very sorry to be obliged 
to relinquish the experiment before obtaining any good results. 

The observations were extended over part of three years, with 
occasional interruptions from various causes, so that I cannot give 
accurate figures ; but I believe the annual amount of evaporation under 
the conditions named to be about 21 or 22 inches, i. e. about one half 
of the rain-fall. 






57 



THE RAIN-FALL OF KESWICK. 
By J. F. Crosthvvaite, (Keswick). 

One of the earliest notices of British rain-fall is contained in 
Dr. Dalton's book on Meteorology which was published in the year 
1793. Dr. Dalton was then residing at Kendal. In 1788, he commenced 
his observations at Kendal, and Mr. Peter Crosthwaite did the same 
at Keswick, each over a period of five years, ending in 1792. The 
following table gives the mean annual quantity of rain — 

At Kendal ... ... ... 64-50 Inches. 

At Keswick ... ... ... 68-54 „ 

At London ... ... ... 17 "63 „ 



Year 


AT KENDAL 


AT KESWICK 


AT LONDON 


Inches of Rain 


Wet Days 


Inches of Rain 


Wet Days 


Inches of Rain 








9 MONTHS 






1788 


39-25 


193 


34-30 


152 


14-89 


1789 


60-83 


244 


72-24 


276 


12-97 


1790 


62-36 


203 


64-74 


225 


16 05 


1791 


66-20 


219 


73-55 


241 




1792 


84-98 


233 


84-60 


238 




M 


ean Annual 


Quantiti 


/ of Rain for 


the Fiv 


3 Years. 




1 64-50 


I 217 


1 68-54 


1 241 1 



The next series of observations made at Keswick were by 
Mr. Jonathan Otley, from 1842 to 185 1. From the following table it 
will be seen that the average of ten years was 57-162 inches. In the 
year 1848 there was the largest quantity, being 66-407 inches; and in 
1850 the smallest being 39-528 inches. 



58 



YEAR 


INCHES 


1842 


40-110 


1843 


59-654 


1844 


40-629 


1845 


62-200 


1846 


67-678 


1847 


58-286 


1848 


66-407 


1849 


48-802 


1850 


39-528 


1851 


62-327 


10 1 


571-621 


Average of Ten Years 


57-162 



When Mr. Otley found it inconvenient to continue these 
observations, he requested me to accept his rain gauge, and to continue 
to make a note daily of the rain-fall, which I have done from 1852 up 
till now. In the year 1872 I cast up the result of twenty-one years 
observations, and found the average fall during that period was — 
Inches, 58.948. 

The particulars are given below : — 



YEAR 


INCHES 


1852 


79-954 


1853 


50-499 


1854 


46-815 


1855 


37-400 


1856 


47-552 


1857 


48-885 


1858 


50-270 


1859 


66-883 


1860 


54-173 


1861 


74-417 


1862 


61-370 


1863 


71-542 


1864 


52-676 



59 



1865 
1866 
1867 
1868 
1869 
1870 
1871 
1872 



49-184 
70-810 
52137 
65-742 
72-001 
56-268 
46-180 
83-150 

21 I 1237-908 



Average fall in Twenty-one Years 58-948 inches 



1873 


54-990^ 




1874 


67-030 f 


Average in 4 Years 


1875 


50-990 r 


56-880 inches 


1876 


54-510; 






9K 1 14.RK.4 0.Q 





Average in Twenty-five Years 58-613 inches 



It will strike every one that the result of Mr. Peter Crosthwaite's 
observations shows a much higher average than Mr. Otley's, or my own. 
This was occasioned by the exceptional year 1792, when 84-60 inches 
fell at Keswick, and 84-98 at Kendal. This, coming within the short 
period of five years, unduly increased the average. During the ten years 
Mr. Otley's observations covered, there was no such exceptional year ; 
consequently by his measurement the annual rain-fall of Keswick was 
1 1 -38 inches less than that recorded by Dr. Dalton. There can be no 
doubt that Keswick and Kendal being amongst the first places in 
Britain where any regular accounts were kept, and the rain-fall being so 
far in excess of the quantity recorded at London (17-63 inches) gave 
rise to the common belief that Keswick and Kendal are the two 
wettest places in Britain. 

During the last twenty-five years, there have been two exceptional 
years, viz: — in 1872, when there fell 83-150 inches, being within one 
inch and a half of the highest recorded in 1792, just eighty years before. 



The other excessive year was 1852, when 79'954 inches fell, being only- 
four inches less than in 1872. But, there was this remarkable difference 
between the two years. In 1852, in the months of January, November, 
and December, we had 43'i9o inches; whilst in 1872, in the same 
months, the fall was 34*920 inches ; thus showing that with four inches 
/ess rain in the whole year of 1852, there were 8*27 inches more in the 
three rainiest months. 

The smallest quantity which fell in any year within the twenty-five 
years, was in 1855, when it was 37'4oo inches. There have been nine 
years above the average, viz: — 1852, 1859, 1861, 1863, 1866, 1868, 
1869, 1872, and 1874. 

During the period when Mr. Otley made his observations, viz : — 
from 1842 to 185 1, Dr. John Fletcher Miller, of Whitehaven, had rain 
gauges placed at many stations in the Lake country ; he was the first 
person who attempted on a large scale, a system of mountain gauges, 
which, on his lamented decease, were taken up by Isaac Fletcher, Esq., 
M.P., of Tarn Bank, Cockermouth, and he still continues the 
observations. Dr. Miller's observations led him to the conclusion that 
"the quantity of rain increases from the valley upwards to an altitude of 
about two-hundred feet, at which it begins to diminish." He says — 
"the mountains increase in altitude with great regularity, and it is here 
the greatest depth of rain invariably is found ; the difference in the 
annual quantity between places contiguous to each other in the same 
valley is often remarkably great. The amount increases rapidly as we 
recede from the sea, and towards the head of the valley the increment 
ratio is enormous." 

"Loweswater, Buttermere, and Gatesgarth, are in the same line of 
valley, and are about two miles apart from each other, yet in 1848, 
Loweswater had received seventy-six inches; Buttermere, 98 inches; 
and Gatesgarth, 133^ inches of water. Here in a space of four miles, 
we have a difference of fifty-seven inches in twelve months, and in some 
years the proportional increase is still greater. The head of Eskdale 
receives one-fourth more rain than the middle of the valley, and a Hke 
difference obtains between two stations in the vale of Borrowdale about 



61 

a mile apart, (Seathvvaite and Stonethwaite), while the deposit at 
Ennerdale lake, and a farm-house three miles westward, is as two to one 
nearly." 

The same law is observable in the valleys of Derwentwater and 
Bassenthwaite. At the foot of Bassenthwaite, Mr. Hoskins registered in 
1871, thirty-six inches; at the head of the lake, at Mirehouse, Mrs. 
Spedding had forty inches ; at the Post-office, Keswick, I measured 
forty-six inches ; at Barrow House, Mr. Langton, fifty-nine inches ; and 
at Seathwaite, the head of Borrowdale, one hundred and fifteen inches 
were measured. This shows that the fall was nearly double at Seathwaite 
to that at Barrow, although only four miles distant, the difference being 
fifty-six inches, and nearly three times the quantity which fell at Keswick. 

This was in a year below the average. 

The contrast between the years 187 1 and 1872 is very striking, as 
will be seen by the following instances of places in this immediate 
neighbourhood, viz : — 





1871. 




iDches. 


Mirehouse 


40-12 


Keswick 


46-18 


Deer Close 


48-05 


Barrow House 


59-10 


Watendlath 


67-00 


Seathwaite ) 
Borrowdale J 


10975 



1872. 


Excess in 1872. 


Inches. 


Inches. 


70-62 


30'5c. 


83-15 


36-97- 


80-43 


32-38- 


94-87 


3577- 


109-50 


42-50. 



182-05 72'3o. 

I have before alluded to the general notion that Keswick is the 
rainiest place in Britain, and some affirm in the Lake district also. 
This, however, is contrary to the fact, but the close proximity of the 
metropolis of the lakes to Borrowdale, may have tended to fix this 
popular error. Mr. G. J. Symon's excellent annual book, entitled 
"British Rain-fall," shows that in 1S71 Grasmere had twenty-six inches 
more than Keswick ; that Ambleside had twenty -five ; Lesketh Howe, 
26; Kirkstone Pass, 52; Haweswater, 37; Patterdale, 32; Windermere, 
14; and Bowness 13 inches more than we had. 

But, lest it should be thought that a single year is hardly a fair 



62 

criterion, I have taken the average of six years from Mr. Symon's boolc, 
and find the result even more noticeable. I find Grasmere had twenty- 
eight inches; Ambleside, twenty-six; Haweswater, forty-three; Patter- 
dale, twenty-eight; Windermere, seventeen; Wythburn, forty- three; 
Barrow House, twenty-eight; and Seathwaite eighty inches more than 
Keswick. Indeed, if any one will examine carefully the annual accounts 
to which I have referred, it will be found that the quantity is greatest at 
Scavvfell and Sty Head, and the places in the line of showers coming 
from the south-west have the greatest fall. Thus, while Kendal and 
Keswick have about an equal quantity, the places intermediate have 
considerably more. 

My own observations for twenty-five years, (including the tv/o 
exceptional years of 1852 and 1872), give an average of 58-61 inches, 
this may fairly be accepted as the ascertained average rain-fall at Keswick. 



63 



NOTES ON SOME PECULIARITIES OF THE WEST 
CUMBERLAND COAL FIELD. 

By R. F. Martin, M.A., (Whitehaven). 

When the writer heard last year— -at the joint meeting at White- 
haven — the very graphic paper which was read by Mr. CHfton Ward, 
upon the history of the formation of the Lake district, the following 
thought suggested itself : — 

"The history of the hills as given in this paper, terminates with the 
era of the coal formation, since which time, Mr. Ward believes that the 
hills have never been beneath the ocean. What, then, has been the 
subsequent history of the Lake hills? Have they had their ups and 
downs, or stood sublimely in their place, and watched time after time the 
upheaval and submergence of the rest of England as from a lofty 
pinnacle ?" 

The answer to this question must be sought from the consideration 
of the land round about the lakes : and as on one side, (and on one 
only, so far as the writer is aware,) not only has the Geology of the 
country been accurately observed, but also the ground has been 
extensively worked over by our miners, it is natural that the first appeal 
should be made to it. The writer then purposes to point out briefly 
the data which West Cumberland (as known chiefly by her mining 
 population) may afford for answering the question asked above ; and he 
must premise that he can but point out now the questions which we 
should endeavour to answer — not himself supply the answers ; in fact, 
he wishes if possible to elicit some information upon this subject, from 
those more conversant with the subject than he is himself, even before 
we are favoured with the Geological Map and Memoir for West Cum- 
berland, in which these matters will no doubt all be made plain to us. 



64 

(a) First, then, there are ample proofs in West Cumberland of 
successive elevations and depressions, more or less extensive, since the 
time of the coal formation; Tlie Lower New Red, the Magnesian Lime- 
stone, and the New Red Sandstone, are all known to be marine form- 
ations ; and since the time of the formation of these strata, the whole 
district has been faulted to an extraordinary extent by forces which must 
have produced large upheavals and depressions. 

(b) A brief examination of the faults of West Cumberland will 
bring out some curious results. The whole district is faulted to an extent 
which is certainly without a parallel in coal-fields with which the writer 
is familiar. The faults also appear to arrange themselves in two distinct 
parallel systems — the one running about N.W. and S.E., the other about 
W.S.W. and E.N.E. This will be seen distinctly upon the map, where 
the two systems of faults as found in the coal-workings are shown in red. 
These faults are also remarkable for their sudden changes, not in 
magnetic direction, but in the amount of throw. 

(c) The following questions will at once suggest themselves : — 

1. Can any law or periodicity be made out from the directions and 

magnitude of these faults % 

2. Has the direction of these faults anything to do with either the lines 

of level in the coal or the direction of the grain or cleat of the 
coal? 

3. Can the main lines of fault be traced out upon the surface, by such 

natural features as the hills and valleys, the course of rivers, &c. 

4. Has the direction or position of the lake hills anything to do with 

these systems of faults ? Do they either converge to the hills, or 
swerve round as they get north or south of them ? Do their 
directions correspond with lines of faulting in the hills, amidst 
the older lodes'? 

5. Is it possible by examining the intersections of the two systems, to 

infer which is the older of the two ? 
Now, without pretending to give any reply to these questions, the 
writer would wish to point out a few matters which seem to him material 
to forming an opinion upon them : — 



65 

I. Taking the main system of N.W. faults, the writer has counted 
faults dipping north to an extent of 330 fathoms, and rising north an 
amount of 5 10 fathoms. The average amount of throw for the faults is not 
far different in the two directions, viz. about 23 to 25 fathoms; but the 
result will place the north end of the field fully 180 fathoms above the 
south end so far as this system of faults has affected it. 

Taking the other system of faults, there are throws dipping xiOX\h to an 
amount of 280 fathoms, and rising r\ox\h to an amount of 160 fathoms. 
Those throws which dip north have a preponderance of about 120 
fathoms. 

It will be readily understood that these figures are but very rough 
approximations ; the larger faults only are taken in each case, and these 
vary so enormously in even short distances, that it is difficult to give 
anything more than a rough guess at the average value of each. 

2. The question of cleat or grain in coal is one which has given 
rise to a great deal of discussion, and the writer will not hazard an 
opinion upon this point. It is, however, a fact that in a majority of 
instances the main N.W. system of faults appears to have determined the 
level lines in the coal, and consequently in the beds above and below the 
coal. 

3. In the immediate neighbourhood of Whitehaven the valleys 
appear curiously to follow the lines of fault. The main valley in which 
the town lies is connected with the great 40 fathom dyke underneath 
the town, and the Aikbank valley just north of the town follows along 
the line of the 60 fathom " Davy Pit Dyke." Whether this be true of 
the rest of West Cumberland the writer hopes to hear this morning. 

4. It is to be observed that the principal direction of most of the 
pockets of hematite in the Cleator district appears to conform in a 
curious way with that of one of these systems of faults, and also that the 
Lake Valleys themselves (and consequently the lakes) show the same 
tendency to arrange themselves along the same lines of direction. 

5. The faults here referred to exhibit great variety of behaviour 
where they meet, but the general result appears to be that the N.W, 



66 

system is the oldest, and most general, the S.W. system the most recent 
and most marked and sudden system. 

The writer would, in conclusion, ask one further question about 
these faults. 

Can it in anyway be determined, by examining their peculiarities, 
by what kind of force they have been formed. 

Now there are three ways in which faults may have been made. 

1. By a force thrusting up a portion of the earth's crust. 

2. By the interior of the earth cooling down and contracting, and 
so the surface falling in. 

3. By an undulation of the surface of the earth such as is 
experienced in the case of the waves of earthquakes. 

Now these three classes may be easily illustrated in diagrams, 
and it will be at once seen that the thrusting force is the one which 
corresponds with the general rule of the miners that a fault is nearer 
" back over." 

If faults be produced by subsidence of surface then it must (in order 
to maintain this rule) be always accompanied by a corresponding 
elevation beyond. 

And this may lead us to what must be at present a mere conjecture 
as to the origin of these systems of faults, viz. — 

That West Cumberland has at different times been subject to two 
main earth-waves. The one running N.E. and S.W. (producing the 
N.W. system of faults) which was more general, gradual, and probably 
older, the other running about NN.W. and SS.E., which was more 
partial sudden and probably more modern : both however occurred 
after the formation of the New Red Sandstone Rock. 



67 



THE HEMATITE DEPOSITS OF CUMBERLAND AND 
LANCASHIRE. 

By J. D. Kendall, C.E., F.G.S., (Whitehaven). 

(Abstract./^ 

The writer after briefly noticing some of the principal facts which 
have been brought to light in working these deposits (those in the Carb. 
Lime.) went on to show that none of the explanations hitherto offered as 
to the manner in which the deposits originated could be considered at 
all satisfactory, and then proposed that it is only on the assumption of a 
Chemical replacement process that all the facts at present known can be 
explained. The facts on which he principally rests that hypothesis are 
the occurrence in the hematite of fossils similar to those found in the 
Carboniferous limestone, and the existence of thin bands of shale which 
run completely through the ore and into the limestone. 

* The Author reserves the full details of this paper for the present. 



68 



THE RAISED BEACH ON THE CUMBERLAND COAST 
BETWEEN WHITEHAVEN AND BOWNESS. 

R. Russell, C.E., F.G.S., (Whitehaven,) and T. V. Holmes, F.G.S. 
(Abstract.) 

The authors pointed out that an old sea beach could be traced, 
almost continuously between Workington and Bowness, thus indicating 
an elevation of the Cumberland coast corresponding to that which had 
been shown by Mr. Milne Holme and others, to have occurred on the 
Scotch coast. South of Workington the raised beach was not so well 
defined, but sufficient traces of it remained to show that the elevation 
had taken place along the whole coast. 

A typical example of this ancient sea beach occurred between 
Workington and Flimby. From the shingle of the existing beach a broad 
flat was seen to stretch away inland for about 40 chains, and terminated 
at the base of the cliff, on which stands the ruins of the Burrow Walls. 
Near the existing beach this flat is about 25ft. above the mean sea level, 
but gradually rises to about 40ft. at the base of the inland cliff. When 
looked at from above, the ground lying at the foot of this cliff presents 
an apparently smooth and even surface, but a closer examination reveals 
the existence of a number of ridges running parallel to the present coast 
line and also nearly parallel to each other. These ridges consist of sand 
and gravel, covered with occasional patches of blown sand, and give to 
the surface that peculiar appearance which is so characteristic of shore 
deposits. 

On the existing beach, especially that portion of it between the 
highest spring, and the highest neap tides, similar ridges of shingle and 
gravel are found at several different heights. Each of these gravel 



69 

ridges indicates the height to which the tide rose on each of the 
intermediate days between the two periods above mentioned. The 
tendency of the tidal action is to throw up the highest ridge on the 
inland side, because the shingle or gravel, accumulated on each occasion 
when spring tides occur, is not so liable to be removed as are the ridges 
thrown up at the heights to which the ordinary tides flow. There is a 
very great similarity between the shape and mode of occurrence of these 
gravel ridges, now being formed, and those which are found lying fiurther 
inland, therefore, the authors conclude that the latter were formed by the 
flow and ebb of the tides when the land stood at a lower elevation than 
it does at present, and in a manner exactly similar to that in which the 
former are now being deposited and arranged. 

South of Workington an alluvial plain extends from Workington 
Harbour to the Moss Bay Iron and Steel Works, the mean height of 
which above the sea level corresponds to that of the raised beach north 
of the harbour. The raised beach can also be traced for a short distance 
along the outside of the ridge at Chapel Hill ; indications of it remain at 
Harrington ; and the village of Parton stands on a portion of it. A 
considerable portion of the valley between Whitehaven and St. Bees is 
also not more than 40ft. above the sea level. 

Northwards from Workington the raised beach stretches almost 
continuously to Silloth. Between Silloth and Grune Point a gravel ridge 
extends along the coast, on the east of which lies an extensive loamy 
plain, dotted here and there with a few patches of clean sand and gravel, 
the general level of the latter being some 4ft. or 5ft. below that of the 
former. Crossing Moricambe Bay a similar ridge nms through 
Cardumock and Herd Hill to a point just west of the Solway Viaduct, 
and as on the southwest side of the bay, so here again the gravel ridge 
slopes down to a mossy flat a few feet below it. 

The general elevation of the greater portion of the raised beach is 
from 20ft. to 25ft., but it occasionally attains a height of 40ft. above the 
mean sea level. As already pointed out, there is, north of Workington, 
the old sea cliff, the base of which was washed by the tide when the land 
stood 40ft. below its present level, but there is no distinctive cUff to mark 

5 



70 

a second elevation as a 25ft, beach would indicate. The elevation 
apparently took place very gradually until it reached 40ft. 

The continuation of the Roman Wall to, or below, low water mark 
at Bowness ; the fact, that when the land stood at a lower level of 25 ft., 
a considerable portion of Burgh Marsh would be under water, (and if this 
had been the state of things when the Wall was constructed, instead of 
crossing the marsh in a straight line between Burgh and Drumburgh, it 
would have been carried further south, or have ended off at Drumburgh 
altogether); the positions of the Roman camps at Maryport and Moresby ; 
and other sources of information, afford grounds for arriving at the 
conclusion that the elevation took place sometime prior to the Roman 
occupation of this country. 

In conclusion, it was stated, that the latest movement on this coast, 
however, was probably one of depression. The existence at St. Bees, of 
the remains of an old forest lying between high and low water mark 
would seem to point to a submergence of a more recent date than the 
elevation of the raised beach. Whether this submergence, if a 
submergence actually occurred, was also of pre-Roman age, there is not, 
at present, sufficient evidence to show. 



71 



REMARKABLE BOULDERS OF THE KESWICK DISTRICT 

By J. Clifton Ward, Assoc. R.S.M., &c., (Keswick.) 

Boulders may be considered as remarkable under three heads. 
I. As to their position with regard to the parent rock. 2. As to their size. 
3. As to the manner in which they have been placed or perched in their 
present situation. 

This subject has been already dealt with in some detail in my 
Memoir on " The Geology of the Northern Part of the English Lake 
District," and here I shall only state general results and principles in 
order to aid local observation. 

I. POSITION WITH REGARD TO PARENT ROCK. 

If the one-inch Geological Map of the Keswick District be examined 

it will be seen that its south-eastern half is occupied by rocks of the 

Volcanic Series, and its north-western by those of the Skiddaw Slate 

iSeries. Boulders of either can readily be detected when lying upon the 

lother, from their dissimilar character. Now, what are the facts of distri- 

Ibution 1 Mainly these :^not a siiigle^boulder belonging to the Skiddaw 

iSlate Series is found upon the Volcanic Rocks to the south-east, while 

Ithousands of boulders of the latter series (the Volcanic) are found upon 

[the area to the north-west, occupied by the Skiddaw Slate. Nor is this 

[chiefly because the Skiddaw Slate Series generally consists of softer rocks 

than the Volcanic, for it contains within its area not only granite and 

lard metamorphic rocks surrounding it, but intrusions of massive Diorite 

ind Dolerite, and considerable thicknesses of sandy and even gritty beds- 

When this question of the transport of boulders is however regarded 

[side by side with that of the land glaciation and the trend of the ice" 



72 

scratches, it is at once seen that these latter, taken with the direction of 
boulder distribution, clearly point to the old glaciers of the valleys 
draining northwards, having flowed to the north and north-west, and to 
their having stranded fragments of the Volcanic rocks on the flanks of the 
Skiddaw Slate Mountains. 

If the small glacial model in the Museum* be examined, the follow- 
ing details of distribution will be further seen. The boulders of the 
Ennerdale and Buttermere syenitic rock have been carried down the 
Lorton Vale in great abundance and over the low fells between Lowes_ 
water and Lorton. Boulders of the Armboth Dyke may be traced down 
the Thirlmere, Naddle, and St. John's Vales, and then mainly to the west 
towards Bassenthwaite, but none have beeii found on the west side of the 
Keswick Vale or Bassenthwaite ; they occur here and there nearly to 
the summit of Bleaberry Fell (at 1800 feet), and upon the top of Latrigg 
(1200 feet). 

Boulders of the St. John's Quartz Felsite, situated on either side of 
the end of St. John's Vale, have been transported eastwards towards 
Mell Fell and Berrier in abundance, and westwards towards Bassen- 
thwaite in smaller quantities, keeping on the north side of the valley. 

Then, among rocks of the Skiddaw Slate area, we may note a stream 
of boulders proceeding from the Sinen Gill granite and surrounding 
metamorphic rocks, and passing down the Glenderaterra Valley (between 
Skiddaw and Blencathra) and then principally westwards, granite and 
spotted schist boulders being both found on the top and back of 
Latrigg and far down towards Bassenthwaite. 

An interesting case of abnormal dispersion is that of boulders of the 
Sale Fell Minette (above and north of Wythop Vale) carried souihiuards 
across Wythop Moss on to the flanks of Kirk and Broom Fells. 

2. BOULDERS REMARKABLE AS TO SIZE. 

Two of the most note-worthy boulders, as to size, in the immediate 
district, are those of Volcanic Breccia and Conglomerate which we 
yesterday visited upon the flanks of Dodd, Skiddaw. Their dimensions 
* Keswick Museum of Local Natural History. 



are as follows : — Breccia boulder, in feet, 17 x 12 x 93 Conglomerate 
boulder, in feet, 18 x 14 x 8. This last is of special interest, moreover, 
inasmuch as the length of the boulder seems exactly to represent the 
thickness of the Conglomerate bed from which it has been derived, and 
the only one I know of in the district is at the northern end of High 
Rigg, west of the Chapel of St. John's in the Vale. 

The Bowder Stone, I believe, is not a glacially transported boulder, 
but only a huge block fallen from the Crags behind, whence others are 
ready to follow. 

A boulder of the Volcanic rocks on the hill slope just south of 
Matterdale Common, and at a height of over 1500 feet, measures in feet, 
18 X 9 X 9, and there are many others of gigantic size. 

Upon the Skiddaw Slate mountain flanks on the west side of New- 
land's Hause, boulders of Volcanic rocks occur, one of which measures 
in feet 6 x 4J x 3. In many places outside the mountain district there 
may be found boulders of gigantic size, such as the one near Bothel, 
but these would lead me too far from my present area. 

3. BOULDERS REMARKABLE AS TO THE MANNER IN WHICH THEY HAVE 
BEEN PLACED OR PERCHED. 

It is well known that retreating glaciers often leave boulders perched 
upon the rocks around in very extraordinary looking positions. There 
are not so many examples of this in our district as might have been 
expected when its extremely glaciated condition is considered; and I am 
inclined to think that the reason may be, that earthquake shocks have 
visited the area, since the close jof the glacial period, sufficiently severe 
to topple over the more delicately poised blocks. The great Assuring 
of some of the mountain sides rather lends support to this view. There 
are, however, a few good cases of well-perched blocks, some of 
which may be mentioned. Upon Glaramara, at heights of 2000 feet 
are several examples of blocks nicely perched on ice-rounded rocks. 
On the west side of Thirlmere, there are two cases ; one, a little 
south of Launchy Beck, is that of a large boulder standing upright on its 
smallest side, something after the manner of the Bowder Stone 3 and the 



n 

other may be seen from the high road on approaching VVythburn from 
Keswick, quite on the summit of the Fell above the upper end of 
Thirlmere, appearing as a rounded mass standing on a point in a top-like 
manner. 

Over the fells south of Eskdale the well-perched boulders are perhaps 
more numerous than in many other parts, but time will not permit of the 
enumeration of a greater number of individual cases. 



SUMMARY OF LESSONS TO BE LEARNT FROM THE DISTRIBUTION OF 

BOULDERS. 

1. The boulder scattered country plainly tells the story of its recent 
glaciation, and the evidence gained froai the study of the boulders is 
strongly confirmed by the system of ice-grooving and scratching so patent 
to the geological observer. We know of no other agency but that of ice 
which could give rise to the phenomena in question. 

2. The distribution of the boulders tells us of ice acting in two ways : 
as land-ice, transporting them in the same general directions as those 
taken by the ice-groovings ; and as floating-ice, carrying them sometimes 
against the general direction of the former land-ice and into positions into 
which no glacier system could have brought them. 

Of this last fact it will be necessary to give a few examples. 

There are several boulders of ash upon the southern slope of 
Lonscale Fell, just at and above the road-way, about 1200 feet above the 
sea-level, and there is one on the fiofik side of the water shed between 
the valley of the Glenderaterra and that of the Caldew, at a height of 
1300 feet. Now it seems quite out of the question to suppose that /and- 
ice from the Borrovvdale Mountains or Helvellyn range could ever have 
intruded itself among the recesses of Skiddaw and Blencathra, for these 
mountains would have supported large glaciers of their own and kept 
other ice at arm's length, therefore these boulders must have been trans- 
ported by floating ice, and the land must have been submerged to at 
least a depth of 1300 feet. 

There are many other instances in which the present position of 



75 



I 



boulders can be most readily explained by the action of floating ice ; of 
such are the boulders of the Buttermere syenitic granite on the summit 
of Starling Dodd (2084 feet), and this and other cases support the idea 
that the submergence must even have reached to a limit of more than 
2000 feet. 

A group of boulders of minette from the small patch on Sale Fell, 
carried southwards on to Broom Fell, seems to prove that when the land 
stood at about 1200 feet lower than at present, a current swept the north- 
western outskirts of the district. 

Thus, it will be seen, what interesting facts as to the history of the 
district may be learnt from the study of a boulder; it may .tell us of a time 
when the land was glaciated much as parts of Greenland are at the 
present day, also of a time when this district was a group of icy islands, 
and may even reveal to us the direction of the currents in those ancient 
and ice-laden seas. 



77 



FLETCHER CHRISTIAN AND THE MUTINEERS OF THE 
"BOUNTY." 

By William Fletcher, F.G.S., (Cockermouth.) 

Many of you will not need to be reminded that in one of Sir Walter 
Scott's most charming novels — " Peveril of the Peak"' — two of the lead- 
ing characters are the brothers William and Edward Christian. They 
were both real, and prominent historical personages in the times of the 
Civil War, and as regards William, the part assigned to him by the 
novelist very much agrees with the actual facts of his life. He was 
Receiver-General of the Isle of Man, and used his influence to procure 
the surrender, to the Parliamentary party, of Peel Castle, which had been 
heroically held for the King by the famous Countess of Derby. For this 
transaction he was brought to trial twelve years afterwards, found guilty 
by a compliant jury, and condemned to death, and was executed on the 
2nd of January, 1663. By the bulk of his fellow-Islanders he was looked 
upon as a martyr, and his memory was embalmed in Manx patriotic 
songs, one of which, entitled, " The heart-rending death of the fair-haired 
William," survives to this day. The Edward Christian of real life was 
not quite the detestable villain described by Sir Walter Scott ; but, as 
the tool of Buckingham and the ally of the notorious Colonel Blood, he 
probably deserved the long imprisonment which ended in his death. 
The Christian family had been settled in the Isle of Man for many 
generations, and they held, as they have since continued to hold, the 
chief public offices in that little principality. 

Towards the end of the seventeenth century, Ewan Christian, anephew 
of William and Edward's, originated the connection of the family with 



78 

this county under circumstances which afford a curious iUustration of the 
manners of the period. It seems the then Bishop of Sodor and Man 
was accustomed to beguile the monotony of his Episcopal duties by 
gambUng, and one night the luck went so much against him, and in 
favour of Ewan Christian, that the latter was able to purchase with his 
winnings the estate and manor of Ewanrigg, near Maryport, which still 
remains the property of the family. Ewan was blessed with five sons and 
ten daughters. His successor, John, married a Senhouse, of Netherhall, 
and their eldest daughter, Mary, married Dr. Law, afterwards Bishop of 
Carlisle, and became the mother of the first Lord Ellenborough, who 
chose that title in consequence of his having been born at Ewanrigg 
Hall, which is close to the village of Ellenborough. John Christian's 
second son, John, who became his successor, married a Curwen, of 
Workington, and their son John, marrying his cousin, the heiress of the 
Curwens, took his wife's name, and, as John Christian Curwen, M.P. for 
Cumberland, acquired a fame which is not yet forgotten, both as a 
politician and as an agriculturist. John Christian's sixth son, Charles, 
was an attorney at Cockermouth, and married the grand-daughter of 
Jacob Fletcher, of Moorland Close, who was, like myself, descended 
from the William Fletcher who built Cockermouth Hall (now known as 
the old Hall), in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. 

Charles Christian and his wife took up their residence under her 
paternal roof at Moorland Close, and there, according to the registers of 
Brigham Church, on the 25th of September, 1764, was born their sixth 
son, Fletcher Christian, — the ill-fated " Mutineer of the Bounty." Their 
fourth son, Edward, was brought up to the Bar, became professor of law 
at Cambridge and eventually rose to the dignity of Chief Justice of Ely. 
Besides editing a well-known edition of Blackstone's Commentaries, he 
was the author of numerous books on legal and social questions. One of 
these, which would have been of great interest to me in preparing this 
lecture, was called forth by the trial of some of the mutineers of the 
"Bounty," in 1792, but I regret to say I have not been able to meet with 
a copy anywhere, notwithstanding a careful search through the library 



i 



79 

of the British Museum, and although the Hbrary contains upwards of 
twenty of Edward Christian's works. 

Moorland Close, being within two miles of this town, is probably 
known to most of you as a quadrangular pile of buildings, in the style of 
the mediaeval manor house, half castle and half farmstead, and those who 
have visited the field of Waterloo may have noted some points of 
resemblance between Moorland Close and the famous Chateau of 
Hougoumont. Few records have been preserved of Fletcher Christian's 
boyhood. He received his education, first at the parish school of 
Brigham, and afterwards at the Grammar School, Cockermouth. There 
was at one time at Moorland Close a painting of a piebald pony, upon 
which tradition said the boy Fletcher used to ride to and from school ; 
and I understand that a sketch of the outline of his foot, which he had 
traced with his initials, may still be seen upon the lead roof of a summer 
house in the garden. One of Fletcher's schoolfellows at Cockermouth 
was Isaac Wilkinson, once a poet of some local celebrity. In after years 
the poet bore this testimony to the early character of the mutineer : — •" I 
can with truth say, a more amiable youth I never met with ; he was 
mild, generous, and sincere ;" and Wilkinson repeated this testimony in 
the following verses : — 

" His soul was open, generous, and humane : 
His was a heart that felt for others' pain ; 
Yet quick of spirit as the electric beam 
When from the darkling clouds its lightnings gleam." 

At an early age, Fletcher Christian entered the navy as a midship- 
man, and during his two last voyages in that capacity he served under 
Lieutenant Bligh, who was subsequently appointed to the command of 
" the Bounty," and commissioned by the Government to sail to Otaheite, 
for the purpose of transplanting bread-fruit trees thence to the West 
Indies. Although Fletcher Christian was then only 23 years of age, he 
was selected by his old commander, Lieutenant Bligh, to act as first 
mate, or lieutenant, of the " Bounty," which affords a strong proof that 
the young midshipman must have stood well in the service, both as to 
character and as to nautical ability. One of the midshipmen of the 



80 

" Bounty," Peter Heywood, also belonged to Cumberland, being a native 
of Whitehaven, and his name will often recur in my narrative. The boat- 
swain's mate, was a man called James Morrison, who not only possessed 
uncommon powers of observation, but also considerable literary skill. 
Fortunately he turned his talents to account by keeping a diary, which 
survived all his vicissitudes, and a copy of which made by himself and 
extending to 382 pages of foolscap, has been kindly placed in my hands 
by Lady Belcher, the accompHshed authoress of "The Mutineers of the 
Bounty," and a stepdaughter of Peter Heywood. It is to this diary that 
I shall be mainly indebted for my account of the mutiny, and of the fate 
of a portion of the mutineers. 

Lieutenant Bligh had been for four years sailing master of Captain 
Cook's ship, the "Resolution," under the command of that distinguished 
navigator; and there is no doubt that he stood well both in Captain 
Cook's opinion and in that of his illustrious friend and comrade. Sir 
Joseph Banks. But there can also be no doubt that Bligh was a man of 
an irritable and overbearing temper, and that he maintained the discipHne 
of his ship in the tyrannical and abusive fashion which was then too 
common in the British navy, and which, ten years later, led to the great 
mutiny of the fleet at the Nore. As Bligh acted as purser as well as 
commander of the " Bounty," and in that capacity had charge of the 
provisions, his opportunities for indulging the worse side of his nature 
towards the officers and crew were thereby greatly increased, and 
Morrison's diary shows that even before the ship set sail the foundation 
for future heart-burnings had been laid by Bligh's conduct as purser. 
The "Bounty" sailed from Spithead for Otaheite on the 27th of 
December, 1787. There is not time for me to follow the ship through all 
her adventures, and I will therefore only pick out such incidents from 
Morrison's graphic story of the voyage as particularly relate to Christian 
or bear upon the causes which led to the mutiny. He writes : " January 
II, 1788. The ship's company were now put on three watches, and Mr 
Christian appointed to act as lieutenant by order of Lieutenant Bligh, 
which order was .read to the ship's company by Mr. Bligh. The weather 
continuing fine, a few days later the cheese was got up to air, when on 



81 

opening the casks two cheeses were missed by Mr. Bligh, who declared 
they had been stolen. The cooper, however, declared that the casks had 
been opened before while the ship was in the river by Mr. Samuel's 
orders, and the cheeses sent to Mr. Bligh's ovm house. Mr. Bligh, 
without making any further enquiry into the matter, ordered the allowance 
of cheese to be stopped until the deficiency had been made good, and 

told the cooper he would give him a d d good flogging if he said 

more about it. The order was strictly obeyed by Mr. Samuel, who was 
both clerk and steward, and next day butter was only issued. This the 
seamen refused, alleging that their acceptance of the butter without cheese 
would be a tacit acknowledgment of the supposed theft, and John Williams 
(a sailor) declared that he had carried the cheeses to Mr. Bligh's 
house, with a cask of vinegar and some other things. The crew persisted 
in their refusal of the butter for two more days, and then no more notice 
was taken of the matter." Later on Bligh ordered pumpkins to be served 
out instead of bread, at which the men grumbled ; whereupon Bligh 

told them they were a lot of d d infernal scoundrels, and that he 

would make them eat grass before he was done with them. Afterwards 
the officers took up this grievance and remonstrated with Bligh, who 
ordered all hands aft and told them " everything relating to the provisions 
was done by his orders, and it was therefore needless to complain, for 
they would get no redress. He added that he would flog the first man 
severely who dared to make another complaint." Further on Morrison 
records that the junior officers raised a complaint that all the pick of the 
provisions was devoured at the cabin table by Bligh and his messmates, 
the master and the surgeon. The result is not given ; but as thieves fall 
out, so Bligh and these two messmates at last quarrelled, and during the 
rest of the voyage the latter sulked in their own cabins, and would not 
speak to Bligh when they could help it. 

After a tedious passage, checkered apparently by many such troubles 
and also by a good deal of bad weather and of sickness, the " Bounty" 
anchored at Otaheite on the 25th of October, 1788. The winter was 
spent in collecting and storing bread-fruit plants, and as provisions were 
now plentiful and the natives treated their visitors with the utmost 



82 

hospitality and kindness, a better feeling seems to have prevailed for a 
while between Bligh and his officers and men. Amidst mutual regrets 
and many tender and sorrowful leave takings between the gallant tars (in 
a double sense) and their favourite Otaheitan beauties, the " Bounty" set 
sail for the West Indies on the 4th of April, 1789 ; but no sooner were 
the pleasures and excitements of the sojourn at Otaheite left behind than 
the old animosities broke out again on shipboard, and the conduct of 
Captain Bligh towards Christian seems to have become more insulting 
and brutal than ever. On one occasion whilst touching at the Friendly 
Islands, and without any apparent cause, Bligh, in a fit of passion, cursed 
Christian as a "cowardly rascal." This was language not likely to be 
forgiven by a young man of high spirit and ancient lineage. A few days 
subsequently the officers, and Christian in particular, had to endure a still 
worse outrage from their commander. As it proved to be " the last 
straw which broke the camel's back," I will give the incident in 
Morrison's own words (though it is needful to soften some of the 
adjectives) : — "April 27, 1789. This afternoon Mr Bligh came up, and 
taking a turn on the quarter deck he missed some of the cocoa nuts 
which had been piled up between the guns, and said they had been 
stolen. The officers were all called, and declared they had not seen a 
man touch them, to which Mr. Bligh replied, 'Then you must have 
taken them yourselves,' and questioned every officer in turn concerning 
the number he had bought. Mr. Christian's answer was, ' I do not 
know, sir, but I hope you don't think me so mean as to be guilty of 
stealing yours.' Bligh replied, 'Yes, you infernal hound, I do,' and 
then addressing the whole of the officers he added (with an oath which I 
cannot quote), ' You scoundrels, you are all thieves alike, and combine 
with the men to rob me. But I'll sweat you for it, you rascals, and make 
half of you jump overboard before we get through Endeavour Straits.' 
He then called Mr. Samuel and said, ' Stop these villains' grog, and give 
them only half a pound of yams to-morrow, and if they steal them, I'll 
reduce them to a quarter.' The cocoa nuts were carried off, and Mr- 
Bligh went below. The officers then got together, and were heard to 
murmur much at such treatment, and it was talked among the men that 



1 



83 

the yams would be next seized, as Mr. Bligh knew they had purchased 
large quantities of them, and they set about secreting as many as they 
could." 

Then follows the story of the mutiny — " On the morning of the 
28th, the boatswain came to my hammock and waked me, telling me to 
my great surprise that the ship was taken by Mr. Christian. I hurried on 
deck and found it true, as Mr. Bligh had his hands tied behind him, and 
Mr. Christian was standing by him with a drawn bayonet in his hand. 
Several of the men were under arms, the small cutter was hoisted out, 
and the large one being got ready. I asked the boatswain how I should 
proceed, but he was as much at a loss as I, and in a confused manner 
told me to lend a hand in clearing the boat and getting her out, which I 
did. When she was out the smaller one was got in again, and Mr. 
Christian ordered Churchill to see the master and clerk into the boat. 
Mr. Bligh then tried to reason with Mr. Christian, but the latter replied, 
'Silence ! not a word or death's your portion.' When Mr. Bligh found 
that he must go, he begged of Mr. Christian to desist, saying, ' I'll pa-\\Ti 
my honour, I'll give my bond, Mr. Christian, never to think of this if 
you'll desist,' and urged the consideration of his wife and family. To 
this Mr. Christian replied, 'No, Captain BHgh, if you possessed any 
honour things had not come to this ; and if you had any regard for your 
wife and family you should have thought of it before, and not behaved 
so much like a villain.' Mr. Bligh attempted to speak again, but was 
ordered to be silent ; the boatswain also tried to pacify Mr. Christain, 
but he replied, 'It's too late; I have been in hell this fortnight past, and 
am determined to bear it no longer; and you know, Mr. Cole, that I 
have been used like a dog all the voyage.' In getting the things into 
the boat a dispute happened between Churchill and the carpenter about 
the tool chest, which Churchill wanted to keep in the ship, but by Mr. 
Christian's orders it was allowed to go in the boat. The masts and sails 
were also got in, and all the new canvas, with nails and saws, and Mr. 
Bligh's and the master's clothes, two casks of water, three bags of bread, 
Mr. Bligh's spirit case, some bottles of wine, and several other things. 
Mr. Bligh was then brought to the gang-way, and his hands cast loose, 



84 

and he went into the boat. After he was in he begged for his commis- 
sion and his sextant. The commission, and also his pocket book and 
private journal, were instantly given him by Mr. Christain's orders ; and 
Mr. Christian took up his own sextant and handed it into the boat with 
a 'Daily Assistant,' saying, 'There, Captain Bligh, these are sufficient 
for every purpose, and you know the sextant to be a good one.' Mr. 
Bligh begged for a musket, which was refused, but Mr. Christian ordered 
four cutlasses to be handed in, and twenty-five or twenty-six four-pound 
pieces of pork and two gourds of water, as well as several other things : 
after which the boat, containing nineteen hands, was cast off — about 
eight o'clock in the morning. Mr. Christian then called together the 
hands left in the ship (twenty-five in number^ including two of the 
midshipmen, Mr. Heywood and Mr. Stuart) and explained to them the 
cause of this sad affair, to the following effect : — Being much hurt by the 
treatment he had received from Mr. Bligh, he had determined to quit 
the ship the preceding evening, and had informed the boatswain and 
carpenter, and Mr. Stuart and Mr. Heywood of his resolution, who 
supplied him with some nails, beads, part of a roasted pig, and some 
other articles which he put into a bag and hid the bag in the 
clue of Robert Tinkler's hammock. Mr. Christian also made fast 
some staves to a stout plank, by which raft he intended to make his 
escape, but finding he could not do so in the first and middle watches, 
he went to sleep about half-past three. When Mr. Stuart called him to 
relieve the watch, he begged Mr. Christian not to make the attempt, and 
added that the crew were ripe for anything. This made a great impres- 
on Mr. Christian, and he at once resolved to seize the ship." Peter 
Heywood subsequently related, from what he knew of the circumstances, 
that it was Christian's first intention to take Captain Bligh a prisoner to 
England in the "Bounty," and to demand a trial by court martial. It 
was probably the knowledge he possessed of the partiality of the tribunal 
towards those in authority which drove him to another course ; and it 
must be borne in mind that the mutiny was conceived and executed 
upon the impulse of the moment, and gave no opportunity for reason to 
assert her sway over a mind goaded to desperation by the bitter sense of 



85 

wrong and outrage. Morrison, after concluding a detailed history of the 
mutiny, goes on to say : " Mr. Christian, now finding himself master of 
the ship, ordered the plants to be thrown overboard, and the cabins 
cleared, which was finished by the ist of May," and after a council of 
war it was agreed to sail back to Otaheite. The remembrance of how 
the winter had been spent there caused this decision to be hailed by 
a general shout of "Hurrah for Otaheite!" But Lady Belcher states, 
on the authority, as she has informed me, of her step-father, Peter Hey- 
wood, that Christian was himself a changed man. "A reaction had 
taken place ; passion and resentment had cooled. He stood with his 
arms folded in moody thought and with his eyes riveted in the direction 
of the boat. Nor was it a matter of surprise that such should have been 
the case. What would be the result of the mutiny to himself? Degrada- 
tion ; and should he ever fall into the hands of his countrymen, the death 
of a felon." 

Before pursuing the " strange eventful history" of the mutineers, 
and of Captain Bligh and the other castaways, I will ask you to consider 
the verdict which impartial posterity should pronounce upon Fletcher 
Christian's part in the mutiny. I suppose nearly everyone now-a-days 
will admit that individuals as well as nations have an ultimate right to 
rebel against injustice and tyranny. In this case, therefore, the 
great question to direct our judgment is, whether or not the treat- 
ment of Christian by Captain Bligh was such as to give a moral warrant 
to the act of mutiny ; and if this can be settled in the affirmative, there 
remains the lesser question, whether or not the mutiny of the "Bounty" 
was undertaken in as humane a manner as could reasonably be expected 
under the circumstances. I do not hesitate to say that a careful investi- 
gation of all the data which exist relative to Christian's character, and to 
the incidents connected with the mutiny, has led me to a conclusion in 
his favour upon both of these questions. I believe it can be clearly 
established — first, that Captain Bligh's treatment of Christian was so 
offensive and brutal, that no man, and least of all one who had been 
born and bred a gentleman, and who probably inherited through his 
mother the independent spirit of the old race of Cumberland "statesmen," 

6 



86 

could have endured it any longer ; secondly, that Christian's antecedents 
raise a fair presumption that he was naturally incapable of breaking the 
most time-honoured traditions of the service, and the most inflexible 
laws of his country, except as a last resort against misused authority ; 
and thirdly, that the mutiny was enacted not only with humanity, but, 
comparatively speaking, with moderation and indulgence towards the 
victims. 

As to the amount of provocation received by Christian, the narrative 
of Morrison is pretty conclusive of itself; and the opinion of Peter 
Heyvvood (wlio was Christian's fellow-offiicer and a man of strict truth- 
fulness), on the subject is, I know from his step-daughter, Lady Belcher, 
fairly represented in her reflections upon the scene of the mutiny. She 
says : " What a contrast was there between the stillness of nature and 
the terrible conflict raging in the breast of Fletcher Christian, as he 
paced the deck, brooding over his wrongs, and goaded as it were to 
madness by the coarse unfounded accusations of the preceding morning. 
For months these indignities had been borne with patience and forbear- 
ance ; but now it seemed as if endurance had passed its utmost limits." 
That Christian's previous character was such as to indicate that he would 
not have resorted to mutiny without a reason sufficient to his own 
conscience, there is abundant evidence to prove. You have heard 
already Isaac Wilkinson's tribute to. his youthful virtues ; and there is 
every reason to infer that in this respect the child was father to the man. 
Captain Bligh, in his account of the mutiny, has not a word to say 
unfavourable to Christian's antecedents ; but he describes him and 
Heywood as young men of great abilities who promised to be a credit 
to their country, and who had been the objects of his particular regard 
and attention. 

After the trial of some of the mutineers three years later, when all 
England rang with the misfortunes of Bligh, and Christian was generally 
looked upon as the villain of the drama, Peter Heywood, who had just 
been condemned to death for his share in the mutiny but had received 
the royal pardon, wrote thus to Edward Christian (November 5th, 1792) 
— "Your brother was not that vile wretch, void of all gratitude, which 



87 

the world has had the unkindness to think of him ; but, on the contrary, 
a most worthy character, ruined only by having the misfortune, if it can 
be so called, of being a young man of strict honour adorned with every 
virtue, and beloved by all (except one whose ill report is his greatest 
praise) who had the pleasure of his acquaintance." In the "Cumberland 
Pacquet" for November 20th, 1792, I find this paragraph in reference to 
the court martial: "For the honour of this county, we are happy to 
assure our readers that one of its natives, Fletcher Christian, is not the 
monster of wickedness which, with extreme and unexampled injustice 
and barbarity to him and his relatives, he has long been represented ; 
but a character for whom every feeling heart must now sincerely grieve 
and lament. This character every officer and seaman, except one 
(meaning, of course, Captain Bligh) on board the 'Bounty,' who have 
yet arrived in England unite in bestowing upon him." When Joseph 
Coleman, one of the mutineers who was tried by the court martial but 
acquitted, was asked what he knew of Fletcher Christain, he replied 
" I only know he was a very good man to me." Perhaps there could be 
no severer test of a man's quality than the impression he would make 
upon the kind-hearted and hospitable Otaheitan people of that day; and 
Morrison says in his diary "Mr. Christian was beloved by the whole of 
them ; but on the contrary none liked Mr. Bligh, though they flattered 
him for his riches, which" — (Morrison dryly adds) — "is the case even 
among polished nations, those in power being always courted ! " Thus 
you will see that Mr. Heywood and Morrison not only agree in praise 
of Fletcher Christain, but also in suggesting the inference that his 
character formed a favourable contrast to that of Captain Bligh. And 
in regard to Bligh's character, and as bearing upon the degree of 
provocation received by Christian, I may quote the testimony of two 
other excellent authorities. The editor of the "Universal Library" says 
of Bligh: "His temper was infirm, and when under its influence he 
suffered himself to use language to his officers and crew" which gave 
rise to "many irritating altercations." And Lady Belcher states: 
"Captain Bligh, besides being of an irritable and passionate disposition, 
was of a most suspicious turn of mind. The language he indulged in 



88 

was so harsh and offensive as to be exceptional, even at a period when 
it was deemed that disciphne could not be enforced without the use of 
profane and opprobrious epithets." I may add that a gentleman who 
married one of the Heywood family writes to me as follows : "My wife's 
aunt, Mrs. Aislabie, was often heard to say that previous to the mutiny 
Fletcher Christian was considered a man of high character ; and her 
uncle Captain Peter Heywood, has repeatedly declared that Christian 
was nearly driven mad by the unfeeling conduct of Captain Bligh." As 
to the question of the manner in which the mutiny was carried into effect, 
Morrison's account of it, which substantially agrees with that given by 
Captain Bligh himself, puts Christian in the light of performing a painful 
duty with gentleness and consideration, rather than of gratifying his 
revenge upon a man who had cruelly wronged him. Not a drop of 
blood was shed, no personal indignity was offered to Bligh or any of his 
companions, and in supplying the boat with a fair stock of provisions 
and handing to Captain Bligh his own sextant and chart. Christian plainly 
showed that he had no design upon the lives of the castaways. And it 
must be remembered also that the mutiny occured at no great distance 
from groups of islands, some of which were known to yield abundance 
of food, and to be inhabited by tribes not unfriendly to the countrymen 
of Captain Cook. That Christian rushed upon his fate blindly and 
rashly, and with a culpable disregard of the issues of the proceeding to 
everybody concerned, the best friends to his memory cannot deny ; but 
notwithstanding all this I hope you will now agree with me that up to 
this period Fletcher Christian was more sinned against than sinning; 
and when we come to the few incidents which survive of the rest of his 
career, I think you will still find more traces of good than of evil. 

Meanwhile I will for a few minutes follow the fortunes of Captain 
Bligh and his eighteen companions whom we have seen cast adrift in the 
mid-Pacific, crowded into the launch of the " Bounty," which was an 
open boat no more than twenty-three feet long, six feet nine inches 
broad, and two feet nine inches deep. If the mutiny was, as I have 
endeavoured to show, fairly chargeable upon Captain Bligh's own mis- 
conduct, one must acknowledge that adversity had upon him the effect 



89 

that it often has upon the mysteriously compounded elements of human 
nature : it drove into the background all those faults and failings which 
had marked the days of his prosperity, and had at last brought upon 
him this terrible penalty, and it developed heroic qualities of mind that 
had hitherto lain dormant. Captain Bligh's first act after leaving the 
"Bounty" was probably in accordance with Christian's expectations ; he 
directed the boat to one of the neighbouring islands (called Tofoa), 
either to seek a refuge until a ship should pass that way, or at any rate 
to procure an additional supply of water and provisions. In the latter 
object Bligh was partially successful, but the boat was suddenly attacked 
by the natives (who were much more savage than the inhabitants of 
Otaheite), and after losing one of his men in the fray, he was glad to 
regain the open sea. Disheartened by this affair, the men now begged 
their commander to make for the nearest European settlement. Un- 
happily there was none nearer than Timor, a distance of 1,200 leagues; 
but the men having all agreed to be content with one ounce of bread 
and a quarter of a pint of water each per day, on the 2nd of May they 
bore away towards Timor. The very next day a terrible hurricane set 
in, which lasted for many days ; and to prevent the boat being swamped, 
everything that could possibly be spared had to be cast overboard. 
On the 5th they passed some islands, but after their experience at Tofoa 
ihey did not venture to land. On the 7th they passed some of the now 
well-known Fegee Islands, and were pursued by natives in canoes. In 
the afternoon a heavy rain came on, and increased their discomfort, but 
enabled them to add thirty-six gallons to their stock of water. This was 
chiefly accomplished by means of stripping off and wringing out their 
clothes as fast as they became soaked with rain ! From the 9th to the 
19th the luckless voyagers encountered a succession of storms which 
made constant baling necessary, and almost prevented their getting any 
sleep. So much labour, anxiety, and exposure, with so little food and 
sleep, now began to tell seriously upon their health and spirits. " I 
could look no way," says Captain Bligh in his journal, " but I caught 
the eye of someone in distress. Extreme hunger was too evident; the 
little sleep we got was in the midst of water, and we often awoke with 



90 

severe cramps and pains in our bones. I began to fear that another 
night would put an end to the lives of several who seemed no longer 
able to support their sufferings." Fortunately just then the wind abated? 
and an occasional tea-spoonful of rum helped to keep body and soul 
together. On the 25 th they caught a booby — a bird the size of a duck 
— which was divided and devoured raw — entrails, beak and claws and 
all. Next day another booby was captured and similarly disposed of 
On the 29th of May they reached the desolate coast of New Holland, 
where they obtained some oysters and dog-fish ; but in two days they 
were driven off by the savages. About this time a mutinous spirit broke 
out among some of the men, mainly brought about by fatigue and 
despair ; but it v/as overcome by the firmness and tact of Captain Bligh. 
Soon afterwards several men were attacked by alarming symptoms of 
illness. "On the morning of the loth of June," says Bligh, "there was 
a visible alteration for the worse in many of the people. An extreme 
weakness, swelled legs, hollow and ghastly countenances, a more than 
common inclination to sleep, with an apparent debility of understanding, 
seemed to me the melancholy presage of approaching dissolution." 
However, relief was now at hand, for on the 14th they reached the 
Dutch settlement of Timor, after having run a distance of 3,618 miles 
in forty-one days. The poor sufferers when landed were scarcely able 
to walk ; their bodies were nothing but skin and bone, their limbs were 
covered with sores, and they were clad in rags. " In this condition," 
adds Bligh, " but with tears of joy and gratitude running down our 
cheeks, the people of Timor beheld us with a mixture of horror, surprise, 
and pity," — 

' ' The ghastly spectres, which were doomed at last 

To tell as true a tale of dangers past 

As ever the dark annals of the deep 

Disclosed for man to dread or woman weep." 

There is certainly no exaggeration in the concluding paragraph of 
Captain Bligh's journal : — "Thus happily ended, through the assistance 
of Divine Providence, without accident, a voyage of the most extra- 
ordinary nature that ever happened in the world, let it be taken either 
in its extent, duration, or the want of every necessary of life." 



91 

After staying at Timor for two months to recruit their strength, and 
receiving every attention and assistance from the settlers, Captain Bligh 
and sixteen of his companions left for England. Mr. Ledward, the 
surgeon, preferred to remain behind, and five of the others died on their 
homeward journey. Captain Bligh himself safely landed at the Isle of 
Wight on the 14th March, 1790; and it need hardly be said that the 
tale of his experience, under such extraordinary and romantic circum- 
stances, aroused much interest throughout the country. The mutineers' 
version of the chief event being as yet untold, it is not to be wondered 
at either that Captain Bligh became the object of general sympathy, or 
that Fletcher Christia.n and his comrades were regarded as culprits 
of the blackest dye. The Government lost no time in fitting out the 
" Pandora" frigate, under the command of Captain Edwards, to go out 
in search of the mutineers. She sailed direct for Otaheite, and arrived 
there on the 23rd of March, 1791. 

Meanwhile Captain Bligh had been promoted to the rank of a 
rCommander, and sent out a second time to transplant bread-fruit plants 
[to the West Indies ; and on this occasion he successfully performed his 
[mission. He was afterwards employed in active service, and in command 
[of the " Glatton " took a conspicuous part in the famous battles of 
[St. Vincent, Camperdown, and Copenhagen. In 1805 he was appointed 
lOvernor of New South Wales. It is worthy of particular remark that 
tin that capacity his judgment was again overturned by his bad temper, 
[and that his offensive and arbitrary conduct was actually the cause of 
[another mutiny. The New South Wales Military Corps, commanded by 
[Colonel Johnstone, revolted against the Governor, deposed him, and 
sent him back to England ; and though Colonel Johnstone was tried by 
Icourt-martial and cashiered, so little further notice was taken of the 
Imatter as to indicate that Captain Bligh could not have had a very strong 
[case. Bligh then retired into private life, and after attaining the rank of 
^Vice- Admiral of the Blue he died in London in 1 818, at the age of sixty- 
ive years. Taking a final leave of Captain Bligh, whose capacity 
^inspires one witli respect, and his misfortunes with pity, notwithstanding 
Lall his faults, and leaving the "Pandora" at anchor off Otaheite, I now 



92 

revert to the story of the "Bounty," which had also reached Otaheite 
with the mutineers one year and nine months before the " Pandora," 
viz., on the 6th of June, 1789. 

Christian's first object was to revictual the ship, and being, as 
we have already seen, a great favourite with the natives, he had no 
difficulty in obtaining supplies, including a quantity of live stock 
descended from the cattle, goats, and hogs which had been presented to 
the Otaheitans by Captain Cook. With these supplies, and accompanied 
by nine native men, ten women, and several boys, the mutineers sailed 
in the "Bounty" for the island of Tonbouia, which seems to have been 
pitched upon by Christian because of its remoteness from the track of 
ships, and where, in Morrison's words, "he hoped to be permitted to 
end his days in peace, which was all he now desired, knowing that he 
had taken such steps as had for ever debarred him from returning to 
England, or any civilised place." On the 23rd of June, 1789, after a 
very rough passage, they reached the island, and proceeded to land the 
stock and provisions, whilst Christian arranged with the chief for the 
purchase of land on which to build a fort and make a settlement. But 
before their arrangements were completed, Christian's plans were frus- 
trated by the disaffection of many of his followers. Some who thought 
their share in the mutiny had not been such as to preclude them from 
the hope of pardon, began to quail before the prospect of dragging out the 
rest of their existence on this desolate reef, and clamoured to return to 
Otaheite, where they would be sure before long to fall in with an English 
ship. Others, consisting of the most lawless and depraved members of the 
party, disgusted Christian with their cruelty and injustice towards the 
natives, and especially the women, who are described by Morrison as 
possessing great personal attractions. As long as the mutiny of the 
" Bounty" is told in our language, I hope it will also be recorded that 
Fletcher Christian preferred to brave the anger of these ruffians and risk 
his own life rather than permit such wrongs to be continued. It was at 
length agreed that the settlement should be abandoned, that all should 
return to Otaheite in the " Bounty," that those who declined to abide by 
Christian's regulations and follow his fortunes should be left tbej-e, and 



93 

that the rest might have the ship and find another hiding place for them- 
selves. This resolution was acted upon, and taking with them the 
Otaheitan emigrants and a young chief of Tonbouia, who had become 
devotedly attached to Christian, on the 22nd of September, 1789, they 
once more touched Otaheite. There the separation of the party at once 
took place ; sixteen out of the twenty-five mutineers (including Peter 
Heyvvood and Morrison) elected to abide their chance at Otaheite, and 
then (to quote from Hey wood's account of the occurrence) "Mr. Christian 
and the eight other men went away in the ship, but God knows whither!" 
They were accompanied by nine Otaheitan men and twelve women. 
Before leaving. Christian spent some hours with the young midshipmen, 
Heywood and Stuart, when he earnestly advised them to give themselves 
up to the first ship of war that passed Otaheite. Then turning to Hey- 
wood, he recapitulated the events of the mutiny, and declared that on 
that fatal morning his brain seemed to be on fire ; and with a magnanimity 
worthy of his recent conduct at Tonbouia, he went on to exonerate all 
his adherents from any blame for the mutiny — which he took wholly 
upon himself Finally he charged Heywood to communicate to his 
(Christian's) family, certain circumstances which he hoped would 
extenuate in their eyes, the offence he had committed against the laws of 
his country. He then bade a last farewell to his old comrades, who 
evidently regarded him with great esteem and affection ; nor have I been 
able to find any other feeling towards him, amongst either his English or 
his Polynesian associates, except in the solitary instance of Captain 
Bligh. Morrison notes in his diary that even during the troubles at 
Tonbouia the most turbulent of the gang never failed in their respectful 
attitude towards their leader, and never spoke of him but as Mr. 
Christian. 

From the departure of the "Bounty" in September, 1789, until the 
arrival of the "Pandora" in 1791, Heywood, Stuart, Morrison, and their 
companions continued to reside at Otaheite, and to receive from the 
natives every mark of kindness and distinction which it was in their 
power to bestow upon the fugitives. The chiefs freely endowed them 



94 

with lands and houses, and they were permitted to take their choice of 
wives amongst the belles of the island. 

" The white man landed ! need the rest be told? 
The new world stretched its dusk hand to the old ; 
Each was to each a marvel, and the tie 
Of wonder warm'd to closer sympathy. 
Kind was the welcome of the sun-born sires, 
And kinder still their daughters' gentler fires. 
Their union grew : the children of the storm 
Found beauty link'd with many a dusky form ; 
While these in turn admired the paler glow, 
Which seemed so white in climes that knew not snow. 
The chase, the race, the liberty to roam. 
The soil where every cottage show'd a home ; 
The sea-spread net, the lightly launched canoe. 
Which stemmed the studded Archipelago 
O'er whose blue bosom rose the starry isles ; 
The healthy slumber, earn'd by sportive toils ; 
The palm, the loftiest dryad of the woods 
Within whose bosom infant Bacchus broods ; 
The cava feast, the yam, the cocoa's root, 
Which bears at once the cup, the milk, the fruit ; 
The bread-tree, which, without the plovigh-share, yields 
The un-reap'd harvest of unfurrowed fields, 
And bakes its unadulterated loaves 
Without a furnace in unpurchased groves — 
These, with the luxuries of seas and woods. 
The airy joys of social solitudes. 
Tamed each rude wanderer to the sympathies 
Of those who were more happy, if less wise : 
Did more than Europe's discipline had done, 
And civilised civilisation's son ! " 

This extract, the only one I can make room for, from Byron's poem of 
" The Island, or Christian and his Comrades," epitomises the attractions 
of Otaheite, which are set forth by Morrison at greater length, and if in 
less poetical, at least in picturesque language and in an equally appreci- 
ative spirit. I may just observe, in passing, of Byron's poem, that it is 
of no value to us historically, seeing that the scene of Christian's 
adventures and death is laid at Otaheite, whilst as you will find presently 
the real tragedy occurred under entirely different circumstances, 1,200 



i 



95 

miles away; and that, judged by its poetical merits, the poem can hardly 
be said to be worthy of Byron's genius. Morrison closes a minute and 
most interesting description of the island, from every point of view, with 
the words, " Such is the best account I have been able to collect of 
Otaheite and its inhabitants, who are without any doubt the happiest on 
the face of the globe." But the Arcadian pleasures of Morrison and his 
companions were at length rudely interrupted by the appearance of the 
"Pandora" upon the scene, and all of them either surrendered themselves 
to Captain Edwards or were quickly captured. They were at once put 
in irons, and from that day till the arrival of the survivors in England, 
they were treated by Captain Edwards with a cruelty and malignity for 
which there was no excuse in the case of men who had at the worst been 
only guilty of a passive share in the mutiny. It is impossible to read of 
their sufferings without indignation, and without being forced to the 
conclusion that if Commanders like Bligh and Edwards were fair speci- 
mens of their profession, the wonder is, not that this mutiny should have 
happened, but that mutiny was not more frequent and more fatal in the 
British Navy. Morrison relates with much pathos the terrible grief of 
their native wives at the loss of their husbands. He says it would have 
melted a heart of stone. When these hapless women, with their infants, 
attempted to get on board to reach the prisoners, and were driven away 
by the captain's orders, they sailed round the ship in canoes for many 
days and nights, making heart-rending lamentations, and lacerating their 
heads and bodies, in accordance with the native rites of mourning, until 
the sea was reddened with their blood. They could not have shown 
more fidelity and devotion to their quasi-husbands if they had been 
married after the latest and most approved fashion in Westminster 
Abbey. 

For the next few months the " Pandora" sailed about among the 
Pacific Islands, in a vain search for the "Bounty." All this time the 
mutineers were cooped up in a small wooden hut on deck, which 
Morrison with a touch of his dry humour christened " Pandora's box," 
and which had only a small hole or "scutde" at the top for ingress and 
egress. The heat of the place was so intense, and it was so over-run 



96 

with maggots and every kind of vermin, that the poor wretches had to 
discard their clothing. Their hands and feet were all shackled with 
iron, and three armed sentries were placed outside with orders to prevent 
any communication with the crew and to shoot anyone who spoke to 
another in the Otaheitan language. One day, probably owing to the 
shrinking of the men's wrists. Captain Edwards ordered the handcuffs to 
be reduced in size. In carrying out this order the first lieutenant would 
not be at the trouble to unlock a handcuff to take it off, but seizing it 
with both hands, and putting his feet against the man's breast, he pulled 
it by main force over the hand, bringing all the skin with it. On the 
29th of August, in approaching the coast of New Holland, the "Pandora" 
struck upon a reef, and soon became a total wreck. 

The story of the shipwreck is so graphically told by Morrison that 
I need not be afraid of wearying you if I quote it almost in full. He 
says : " The current running fast, forced the ship further on to the reef 
with violent and repeated knockings, and we expected every surge that 
the masts would go. Seeing the ship in this situation, we judged she 
would not hold long together, and as we were in danger every lurch of 
killing each other with our irons, we broke them off, and informed the 
officers what we had done. In the meantime the ship lost her rudder 
and part of the sternpost, and having heeled over between eleven and 
twelve, she was brought up in fifteen fathoms, with both anchors, and 
the first cry was, 'Nine feet of water in the hold !' Coleman, Norman, 
and Mcintosh (three of the prisoners) were now ordered out to assist at 
the pumps and to get the boats out. When Captain Edwards found we 
had broken our irons, he ordered the rest of us to be handcuffed and 
leg-bound again, though we begged for mercy, and desired leave to help 
at the pumps. The master-at-arms and the corporal were then armed with 
pistols, and placed as additional sentinels over us, with orders to shoot 
the first man who stirred ; and the master told us Captain Edwards 
would shoot or hang at the yard-arm any man who attempted to break 
the irons. There seemed, therefore, no remedy but prayer, as we never 
expected to see daylight again ; and having recommended ourselves to 
the protection of the Almighty, we lay down, and tried for a while to 



I 



97 

forget our miserable situation. We could hear the officers busy getting 
their things into the boats, which were hauled under the stern on purpose, 
and we heard some of the men on deck swearing that the officers should 
not go without them. This made some of us start, and so move the 
irons, upon which the master-at-arms called out, 'Fire upon the rascals !' 
As he was then just over the scuttle, I spoke to him and said, 'For God's 
sake don't fire!' In a few minutes one of the boats broke adrift, and 
having but two men aboard she could not reach the ship again till 
another boat was sent to bring her back. And now we began to dread 
they would set off and leave us behind, as it was but natural to expect 
they would think of themselves first; however, they did return. The 
booms were next cut loose for the purpose of making a raft, when 
one of the topmasts fell and killed a man who was helping to heave the 
guns overboard. At daybreak the following morning, most of the officers 
came aft on the top of our box, and we could perceive they were armed, 
and preparing to go into the boats by stern ladders. We begged that 
we might not be forgotten, when by Captain Edward's order the 
armourer's mate was sent down into ' Pandora's box' to take the irons off 
Muspratt, Skinner, and Byrne ; but Skinner being too eager to escape, 
was hauled out with his handcuffs on, and the other two followed him. 
The scutde (or door) was then shut close and barred. In the meantime 
Hodges knocked off my hand-irons and Stuart's, and I begged the 
master to leave the scuttle open, when he answered, ' Never fear, lads ; 
we'll all go to hell together !" The words were hardly out of his mouth 
when the ship give a lurch, and a general cry of ' There she goes ! ' was 
heard. The master and corporal, with the other sentinels, rolled over- 
board, and at the same instant we saw Captain Edwards swimming 
towards the boats. The water was rising fast upon us, and we should 
soon have been lost if Divine Providence had not put it into the heart 
of William Moulter (the boatswain's mate) to heed our cries. He 
scrambled on to the box, and saying he would either set us free or go to 
the bottom with us, he undid the bolts and opened the scuttle. On this 
we all got out except one, but it was as much as I could do to clear the 
ship before she sunk. The boats were now so far off that we could not 



98 

distinguish them ; however, observing one of the gangways in the water^ 
I swam towards it, and got upon it. I then saw that our prison 
(Pandora's box) had floated, and that some of the men were upon it. 
Presently Mr. Heyvvood passed me swimming towards the boats (he had 
his mother's prayer-book between his teeth), so I resolved to follow his 
example, and after being an hour and a half in the water, we reached the 
blue yawl, and were taken on board. After several others had been 
taken up, we were landed on a small sandy reef about three miles from 
the ship. Here we found that four of our fellow-prisoners had been 
drowned, two with their handcuffs on, but Birkett had actually swam to 
the land with his handcuffs on! Thirty-one of the 'Pandora's' crew 
were lost, including the master-at-arms and the corporal, but all the 
officers had saved themselves. A tent was pitched for the officers, and 
another for the crew, but Captain Edwards would not allow us a sail to 
shelter us from the sun, and we were ordered to keep apart by ourselves 
and not to speak to anyone. The sun took such an effect upon us, after 
we had been shut up for five months, that all our skin peeled off from 
head to foot, although, during the heat of the day, we buried our bodies 
in the sand, which was all the shelter we could get." 

I must now quit Morrison's diary, which goes on to narrate their 
subsequent experience with a vividness and realistic force worthy of 
Defoe, and give you the sequel in a few words* After many weeks of 
privation and suffering in the "Pandora's" boats, the whole party at last 
managed to reach Timor, the same Dutch settlement where you will 
remember Captain Bligh and the other forlorn castaways of the "Bounty" 
had landed the year before. Captain Edwards, whose treatment of the 
prisoners in the boats had been as bad as in the "Pandora," no sooner 
landed here than he ordered all the poor wretches, half dead with hunger 
and exposure, and far more than half naked, to be put in the public 
stocks. After many further vicissitudes. Captain Edwards and his 
prisoners at last found their way to England, where they landed on the 
19th June, 1792, four years and five months after the sailing of the now 
missing "Bounty" for Otaheite. 

The same autumn the prisoners underwent trial by court-martial. 



99 

Three were acquitted; the rest were found guilty and condemned to 
death. Two of the latter, however, our old friends Heywood and 
Morrison, received the Royal pardon ; the others were executed. The 
pardon of Heywood was mainly due to the unceasing exertions of his 
sister, Nessy Heywood, a lovely and accomplished girl; but unhappily the 
strain had been too much for her strength, and she died within a year Of 
his liberation. The correspondence of the brother and sister, embracing 
some poetical effusions not devoid of merit, has been published, and 
forms an interesting part of the " Bounty" literature. After the pardon, 
Heywood was at once reinstated in the navy, and soon attained the rank 
of captain, and did good service in the naval wars of that period. He 
died in 183 1. James Morrison, the author of the diary, also joined the 
service again, and was chief gunner on board the " Blenheim" when she 
was lost, with all on board, in 1807. One may imagine with what 
''yarns" the brave old gunner would entertain the fo'castle, when one 
thinks of his powers of description, and that his memory was a store- 
house of facts more strange and stirring than almost any creations of 
fiction. 

In September, 1789, we left Fletcher Christian, with eight other 
mutineers, and a number of natives, on board the "Bounty," and sailing 
from Otaheite — as Heywood expressed it — "God knows whither." 
Twenty years passed away without any tidings of the voyagers, and 
public attention, absorbed in the more terrible drama which was then 
being enacted across the channel, had long ceased to concern itself with 
their fate. But suddenly the country was startled by news so passing 
strange, that at first it was hardly believed ; but it turned out to be as 
true as strange. The news was that an American vessel which happened 
by mere chance to touch at Pitcairn's Island, there found an Englishman, 
called Alexander Smith (he afterwards changed his name to John Adams), 
who infoiTTied the captain he was the sole survivor of Christian's party 
of the mutineers, who had sailed from Otaheite twenty years before. 
There were also on the island thirty-four youths and women and children, 
who were the wives or offspring of Adams and his late companions. Five 
or six years later, two English ships of war, cruising in the Pacific, came 



100 

upon an island not marked upon their charts, and never suspecting it to 
be Pitcairn, great was the astonishment occasioned when a canoe came 
alongside one of the ships, and a youth in the canoe called out, in good 
English, "Won't you heave us a rope now?" This youth, when he got 
on board, announced himself as Thursday October Christian, eldest son 
of Fletcher Christian, and the first child bom upon Pitcaim's Island. He 
was then twenty-four years old, six feet high, with dark hair and eyes and 
an open interesting countenance. "Added to a great share of good 
humour, we were glad to trace," says Captain Pipon, " all the features of 
an honest English face." He told them he was married to a woman 
much older than himself, one of those who accompanied his father from 
Otaheite. His companion was a fine handsome youth of eighteen, son 
of George Young, the midshipman. The young men mformed the two 
captains of the principal events since the settlement of the island, but for 
fiirther particulars referred them to an old man on shore, who turned out 
to be Smith, or Adams. The captain then landed, and received from 
Adams a narrative of his experience since the time of the mutiny. \Vhen 
they prepared to sail, Adams expressed a wish to accompany them to 
England ; but Captain Pipon states that on this being made known to 
the little society, an indescribable scene of distress ensued. All the 
women burst into tears, and the young men stood motionless with grief, 
whilst Adams' daughter, a fine young woman, threw her arms round his 
neck, and entreated him not to leave all his children to perish. After 
this demonstration he was easily persuaded to abandon his project. 

Nothing more was heard of the colony until 1825, when it was 
visited by Captain Beechey, of the "Blossom." The patriarch Adams 
was still alive, and the number of the inhabitants had increased to forty- 
six. From the statements made to him and to the two captains before 
mentioned, I will give such a brief outline as time permits of the 
events which connect the state of Pitcairn's Island in 1825 with 
the final departure of the "Bounty" from Otaheite thirty-six years before. 
It seems that on board the "Bounty" was a copy of Captain Carteret's 
"Voyage to the South Seas," which contains a description of Pitcairn's 
Island (discovered by him), and remarks upon the extreme isolation of 



I 



101 

its situation. It was no doubt from reading this description that 
Christian came to fix upon the island as a last retreat for himself and his 
followers. It is only five or six miles in diameter ; the shores are 
bastioned by huge rocks, one of which towers to the height of a thousand 
feet; but they enclose rich and beautiful valleys clothed in forests of 
palms. Here the "Bounty" discharged her freight on the 23rd of 
January, 1790, after which she was burned, so as to leave no traces that 
might lead to discovery. Christian then divided the island into nine 
equal portions between himself and the other mutineers, each of whom 
took a wife from the Otaheitan women, Avhilst the rest of the Otaheitans 
they had brought with them acted as servants, or slaves. Adams informed 
Captain Beechey that Christian's cheerful example was of the greatest 
service in reconciling his companions to their lot, and that his happy 
and ingenious disposition always secured him their respect and good-will. 
But the opportunity now given him for quiet reflection, after the turmoil 
and excitement of his life at sea, gradually led him into a mood of serious 
meditation, which lessened the sympathy between himself and the coarser, 
or lighter, natures around him. He sought out a cave on an almost 
inaccessible part of the coast, where he often spent whole days in solitude, 
except for the chosen companionship of his Bible and Prayer-book. Let 
us hope that he found more comfort in their contents than he was likely 
to derive from his own thoughts. As he gazed upon the waste of waters 
which probably for ever separated him from his native land, one may 
conceive, as has been said, that he felt like Cain, both as to the mode 
and the measure of his punishment. But however much Christian 
abstracted himself from the uncongenial society of the island, and 
abandoned himself to moods of lonely contemplation and contrition, he 
was never unmindful of the duties he owed to his neighbours and to his 
own household. Adams always assured his visitors that Christian 
preserved a good influence upon all his companions, and that amongst 
other things he induced them to join him in public worship. 

One anecdote related by Captain Beechey affords a touching proof 
of Christian's care for his family. When Thursday October Christian 
was invited to join the Captain at luncheon he would not begin the meal 

7 



102 

until he had stood up and said grace ; and it was then eUcited from him 
that Fletcher Christian had enjoined the practice upon his household, 
and had also taught its members to repeat this confession every day at 
noon : "Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before Thee, and am 
no more worthy to be called thy son!" For three or four years at first 
all went pretty smoothly upon the island, after which it became for a 
ime the scene of some terrible and bloody tragedies. One of the 
mutineers, Williams, whose wife had been killed by a fall from a cliff, 
insisted that the wife of one of the Otaheitan men should be given up to 
him. This act naturally excited the indignation of the Otaheitans, and 
led to a conspiracy amongst them to murder all the Englishmen ; but 
the scheme was frustrated by the women, who had been let into the 
secret, and gave warning to the intended victims by singing them a song, 
of which the refrain ran : "Why does black man sharpen axe'? — to kill 
white man." The result was a disturbance which ended in the death of 
two of the Otaheitan men. Two or three years afterwards the peace of 
the colony was again interrupted by a conspiracy of the Otaheitans, by 
whom five of the Englishmen were treacherously butchered. One of the 
five was Fletcher Christian himself, the hero of my story, who was shot 
down whilst quietly working in his garden. I have already put before 
you my interpretation of his motives and character, and I will not pause 
now to moralize upon his untimely fate. The account I have given of 
Fletcher Christian's end is the one which passed current among the 
Pitcairn Islanders in after times : but I should omit the strangest of all 
the strange stories about him if I did not tell you there is some reason 
to doubt this explanation, and to suppose that in reality Christian 
escaped from the island, and found his way back to England, to survive 
there for several years in seclusion and disguise. Many tales were rife, 
from sixty to seventy years ago, of his having been met and recognised 
in the woods and bye-paths in this neighbourhood, but by those who 
had too much sympathy for him and his family to betray the secret. It 
was also said that his first cousin, John Christian Curwen, M.P., used 
his great influence to prevent any official search being made for the 
fugitive. But the theory of Christian's return is supported by something 



103 

stronger than these rumours. One day at Plymouth Peter Heywood, 
now become Captain Heywood, was walking along the street, when a 
man, closely muffled, and with his hat slouched over his eyes, walked 
quickly past him. The figure and gait of the man so startled Heywood 
by their resemblance to Christian's that he followed him, and exclaimed, 
in a low voice, "Fletcher Christian!" The man stopped as if shot, and 
after turning half round he darted at full speed down a side lane. 
Heywood, greatly excited, followed as fast as he could, but the 
mysterious stranger was the better runner, and eluded his pursuer. Out 
of regard to the Christian family, Heywood said nothing at the time of 
his adventure, and it was possibly for the same reason that he used after- 
wards to speak of the man's likeness to his missing friend as only a 
"singular coincidence." A circumstance incidentally mentioned by 
Captain Beechey certainly lends countenance to the supposition of 
Christian's escape. He states that although Adams was frank and 
explicit on all other topics, he always tried to evade the subject of 
Christian's death, and professed entire ignorance of his burial-place. 
The statement seems of some significance, as it is a fair inference that 
if Christian had resolved to take advantage of an opportunity to escape, 
such as by reaching a passing ship in one of the boats of the 
"Bounty," he would be likely to employ Adams, the most trustworthy man 
left of his companions, both to assist in his escape and to help to draw 
a veil over his future by reporting his death to any English ships that 
might turn up. After Christian's escape, or death — whichever it was — 
the four remaining Englishmen at Pitcairn's Island lived in constant 
dread of being treated like the others, and having no longer Christian's 
humane authority to keep them in check, they resolved to destroy all 
the Otaheitan men, which they did, having actually persuaded the 
unfortunate women to aid them in doing so. Another interval of peace 
followed, to be disturbed at last by an element of mischief which has 
been the curse of all modern countries, large or small, namely, intoxi- 
cating drink. One of the men, M'Coy, had formerly been a distiller, and 
in an evil hour he discovered the art of extracting spirit from the root of 
a tree. M'Coy and another man (Quintal) thereupon abandoned 



104 

themselves to constant drinking. M'Coy died in delirium tremens, and 
Quintal's conduct became so dangerous to the others that in self-defence 
they took his life. 

John Adams and Young the midshipman were now the only 
survivors of the nine mutineers who had found a refuge at Pitcairn's 
Island nine years before. They became seriously impressed by 
their forlorn state, and by the responsibility which devolved upon 
them as the sole protectors of so many helpless women and young 
children. The Bible and Prayer-book which Christian had diligently 
studied were sought out, and regular morning and evening prayer was 
established, as well as daily instruction for the children. Young being a 
man of good education, took the lead in this duty, but was zealously 
assisted by Adams, who also was at great pains to increase his own 
slender acquirements. Young, who had long been a delicate man, sank 
into the grave at the early age of thirty-six.* This happened in the 
year 1800, and from that time until his death in 1829, John Adams 
devoted all his energies to promoting both the outward and spiritual good 
of the population, which by and bye increased in number from the 
intermarriage of the children of the original settlers. Such was the 
success that attended his teaching and example that crime and vice were 
completely banished and forgotten, and for the first time perhaps in 
history there was to be seen the picture of an entire society of men, 
women, and children living in harmony and primitive innocence, and 
seeking for no greater pleasure than the happiness which waits upon 
virtue. Two years after the death of Adams a long season of drought 
caused so great a scarcity of fresh water in the island that the British 
Government induced the whole colony, now increased to eighty -seven 
souls, to migrate to Otaheite, where a sufficient tract of land was allotted 
to them by Queen Pomare. But the climate did not agree with the 
immigrants, many of whom were cut off by fever ; and the loose habits 
of the natives were so distasteful to them that the survivors took the 
earliest opportunity of returning to Pitcairn's Island. 

*It has been stated that the celebrated Mormon chief, Brigham Young, is a lineal 
descendant of this mutineer. 



105 

In 1832 an impudent impostor of the name of Joshua Hill 
found his way to the island, and pretending that he had been 
sent out as a governor by the Crown, he managed for six or 
seven years to usurp the supreme authority, which he exercised in 
a way to cause general discontent and unhappiness. In the end 
he was found out and taken away by a British ship, and peace and 
prosperity were restored. On the 23rd of January, 1850, the islanders 
held a great jubilee, to celebrate the settlement of the colony by the 
mutineers sixty years before. Lady Belcher says of this occasion : — 
" Well might the existing generation be proud of the happy state of the 
community, descendants of the men whose illegal acts had' compelled 
them to seek concealment from the outer world. Of that generation all 
had passed away, oppressors and oppressed, the white men and their 
coloured associates. Violence had ceased, and this anniversary was 
celebrated in as fair a land and by a people as free from guile as any on 
the face of the earth." In 1854 Admiral Moresby stayed some time 
at the island with his ship, and his son, Mr. Fortescue Moresby, wrote 
an account of the visit, in which he pays an enthusiastic tribute to the 
industry, sobriety, hospitality, intelligence, and virtue of the inhabitants. 
He winds up by saying, "Truly, a more innocent or delightful race 
does not exist." In 1855 Captain Freemantle was sent by Sir William 
Denison, Governor General of New South Wales, to report upon the 
condition of Pitcairn's Island. Of the people he said, " I will only add 
my corroboration to their still remaining the same cheerful, docile, and 
unsophisticated community they have so often been represented to be;' 
but owing to the want of water and for some other reasons Captain 
Freemantle recommended their being again removed to some place more 
capable of sustaining their continual growth. Acting upon this advice, 
the Government set aside Norfolk Islands — no longer used as a penal 
settlement — for the exclusive occupation of the Pitcairn Islanders, and 
the following year they were removed thither to the number of one 
hundred and ninety-three persons, composed of forty men, forty-seven 
women, fifty-four boys, and fifty two girls, with all their worldly possess- 
ions. In 1857, Sir William Denison, accompanied by Mr. Fortescue 



106 

Moresby, visited Norfolk Island to investigate the condition of the 
settlers, which he pronounced to be perfectly satisfactory. During his 
visit he divided all the land amongst the heads of families, and established 
laws for the regulation of the island. In 1858 or 9, the "home-longings" 
of a few of the settlers induced them to return to Pitcairn's Island with 
their families. There they were found prospering and following the 
good example of their fathers, by Sir Wentworth Dilke, who visited the 
island eight years afterwards. Sir Wentworth relates that the first 
islander who came on board rushed up to the Captain, and shaking him 
violently by the hand, enquired with an earnest expression of simple 
loyalty, "How's Victoria^" 

No later intelligence of Pitcairn's Island has come across my notice- 
Meanwhile the settlers at Norfolk Island continued to increase and 
multiply, and in ten years they numbered three-hundred, the two sexes 
being exactly equal. Most of the men had taken up with whale-fishing 
during a part of the year. The Bishop of New Zealand visited the island 
several times, and in 1869 he wrote, "They are really a friendly, kindly, 
amiable people." How they have fared since that date I am not able to 
tell you, but two years since I saw a letter in the "Times" which 
insinuated (I trust without foundation) that some of the vices of civili- 
sation had begun to undermine the simplicity and rectitude which 
distinguished the descendants of the mutineers for more than seventy 
years. Thus ends a story as full of lessons for the preacher as it is of 
material for the poet and the painter ; and if I have failed to tell it in a 
way to awaken your interest and sympathy, the fault has been with 
myself, and not with my subject. 



107 



OLD CUSTOMS AND USAGES OF THE LAKE DISTRICT. 

By John Richardson (Keswick). 

(Read at Cockermot<tk and Keswick.) 

In this age of cheap newspapers, when every occurrence of the least 
consequence is chronicled, and almost every one reads the newspapers, 
it is to be presumed that most persons aje perfectly well acquainted with 
the customs and usages of the present time, and therefore, the purpose 
of this essay is more particularly to notice some of the old customs of 
the district, which have either altogether passed, or are fast passing 
away. 

In a progressive country like our o^vn, manners and customs are 
constantly changing. Old things are passing away, and new ones taking 
their places ; these, in a generation or two, to be again superseded by 
others, more in harmony with the ever improving and advancing state of 
society. 

The customs and usages of a country, or district, therefore, are 
always a true indication of the degree of civilization, or culture, to which 
the people of such country or district, have attained; and are usually 
those best suited to the condition, or circumstances, under which they 
exist. To this it may perhaps be objected, that customs when once 
firmly rooted among a people, continue to be observed long after the 
state of things under which they were estabHshed has passed away, and 
when they have become altogether unsuited to the altered state of society. 
But, if we look more closely into the matter, we will invariably find tha*. 
in those remote districts, where old customs and superstitions linger 
longest, there also civilization and improvement are lagging behind, that 



108 

there the majority of the people spend their leisure hours in talking a 
great deal about nothing, and that habits of reading and self-culture are the 
exception rather than the rule. In all cases, as soon as the mass of the 
people become sufficiently enlightened to see the absurdity and unsuitable- 
ness of an old custom, they let it drop quietly out of sight; and until that 
time arrives, no amount of persuasion, or even ridicule, will make them give 
it up. With respect to some of the old world usages which in a somewhat 
modified form are still observed in rural districts, such for instance as 
eating, drinking, and smoking at funerals, there is very little doubt, but 
that many of the more intelligent members of the community would be 
glad to give them up, but for a dislike of being thought singular, or 
stingy; and as soon as the majority has become enlightened enough to 
see them in the same light, they will be discontinued. 

We will now proceed to notice a few of the customs formerly 
prevalent in the Lake country; and as many of them may no doubt 
appear incongruous, and ridiculous enough to us at the present time, the 
few foregoing observations may serve to remind us that, whatever we may 
think of them now, there was a time when they were in perfect keeping 
with the old-fashioned, uncultivated ways of the dwellers among the 
Cumbrian hills. 

The three great epochs of life — Birth, Marriage, and Death — have 
in all ages been marked by particular customs and observances, varying 
according to the different ideas and beliefs of the people among whom 
they prevailed. 

Beginning with the Birth customs of the district, there was one in par- 
ticular which belonged exclusively to the dales of Cumberland and Westmor- 
land, viz. — the custom of making sweet-butter. As it is still occasionally 
made, there are probably few persons who live in the district who have 
not seen and tasted it ; but if there should be any such here, it may be 
as well to explain, that it simply consists of soft sugar moistened with 
rum, and then mixed with an equal weight of melted butter. This mixture 
being well stirred together, is poured into a basin, and when cooled, is 
fit for use. It is eaten with bread, the thin oat-meal cake once so 
common in the district being accounted best for the purpose. 



( 



109 

Down to a very recent date, it was an invariable custom, some 
weeks before a child was expected to be born, that a large china 
basin which was called the sweet-butter basin, (which was generally 
an heirloom in every family) was filled, to be in readiness; and 
as soon as the important event was safely over, this basin was 
brought out, and all in attendance invited to partake of its contents, 
the doctor being usually honoured with the first cut. It was afterwards 
offered, with oat-bread and ale, to every one without exception who 
called during the ensuing month. At the end of the month there was 
what was called an "Old Wife do." All the married women within a 
certain radius, which was termed the " Laatin," were invited to go and 
drink tea, eat sweet-butter, and rejoice with the mother for her safe 
deliverance. It was the custom, too, on that occasion for each guest to 
bring a gift — a pound of butter, a pound of sugar, or a shilling, was the 
usual offering. There was also another curious custom connected with 
the old wife do's, which was termed "Stealing the Sweet-Butter." A 
number of young men of the neighbourhood, assembled in the evening, 
and waited outside the house, until the table was spread and the women 
all seated round it, when two or three of the boldest youths rushed in, 
and seized, or attempted to seize the basin and carry it off to his com- 
panions; but as many of the old wives were prepared to make a desperate 
fight for it, it was frequently no easy matter to secure the prize, and get 
out again ; and it often happened that some silly pilgarlick was glad to 
escape minus his coat-tails, or perhaps some more important part of his 
habilaments. When they succeeded in getting the basin of sweet-butter, 
a basket of oat-bread was handed out to them, and they went to some 
neighbour's house to eat it, after which each put a few coppers into the 
empty basin and returned it to the owners. Another curious custom 
connected with the old wife do's remains to be described. This was, 
"Jumping the Can." A large milking pail was placed on the middle of 
the floor, and in it was stuck a birch broom without the handle. Over 
this each of the women was expected to jump. It was no great height, 
and those who were young and active went over easily enough, but there 
were others who did not succeed so well, and that constituted the fun of 



no 

the thing. Only imagine the ladies of the present day, mth their long 
trailing skirts and their tight aprons, attempting to jump over the can with 
the beesom stuck in it ! 

Passing from Birth, to Marriage customs, we may remark, that the 
bidden weddings and bridewains, so graphically described by some of 
the old Cumbrian writers, were altogether exceptional affairs, only 
happening now and then, and by no means general or customary. They 
seem to have been got up occasionally by persons who had an eye to the 
main chance, purely as money speculations, and never to have become 
common enough to deserve the name of a custom, so that we need not 
further allude to them here. 

The common weddings, however, were usually celebrated by a 
good deal of sociality. There were generally ten or a dozen couples of 
young people, who went to church ; and as the distance was frequently 
several miles, they travelled on horseback, there being then neither 
wheeled carriages nor roads suitable for them. There was always a 
public house not far from the church, where they put up their horses 
during the ceremony, and to which they adjourned after it was over, to 
drink health and happiness to the newly married couple. This having 
been done to the satisfaction of all parties, ^the horses were brought out, 
and all being fairly mounted, the word was given, and a race home took 
place, the prize being a ribbon to be presented to the winner by the 
bride. Mounted on their rough and shaggy farm horses (many of which 
carried double), a neck-break race of six or eight miles over such roads 
as they then had, was no joke, and many were the disasters which 
resulted. After a great deal of feasting, drinking, singing, and dancing, 
the last act at an old-fashioned wedding was throwing the stocking. The 
bride having retired, all the young women entered the room, and stood 
at the foot of the bed, when she sat up with her back towards them, and 
threw her left leg stocking over her shoulder, and the girl who chanced 
to be hit by it was supposed to be the next to be married. 

The Funeral customs of the district, although, perhaps, still capable 
of improvement, have been greatly modified since the beginning of the 
present century. It was formerly the custom when a person died, and 



Ill 

the body was laid out, to have watchers through the nights which inter- 
vened between the death and burial. These were always two of the 
nearest neighbours, who sat in an adjoining room, and went at stated 
intervals to snuff the candles, which were kept burning near the corpse, 
and to see that all was right. 

The afternoon before the funeral, all the married women in the 
" Laatin" were invited to go to what was termed the winding, which 
meant the placing of the body in the coffin ; but as this might be done 
in a few minutes, by two or three persons, the gathering was in reality a 
tea party, where, solemn though the occasion might be, a good deal of 
gossip was sure to be retailed. To the funeral itself, two were invited 
from every house in the " Laatin," which included a much larger circuit 
than the "Laatin" to the winding, and these, with the friends from a 
distance, usually made a pretty large gathering. A substantial dinner 
was provided for all comers, as well as a supply of ale and spirits, and 
tobacco for those who chose to smoke. At the time appointed for 
starting to church, which was often about three o'clock, the coffin being 
brought outside the door and placed upon the bier, the mourners standing 
near, four verses of the sixteenth Psalm were sung. The way in which 
this was done rendered it a somewhat slow and monotonous proceeding. 
A line at once was given out, in a peculiar sing-song tone, by the clerk, 
or sexton, and then sung by a few of those present, then another line, 
and so on through the four verses. The next step was termed lifting the 
corpse, when four men lifted the bier, shoulder height, and walked 
solemnly away towards the church, followed, first by the mourners, and 
then by other friends and neighbours. As the distance was often two or 
three miles, or even more, the bearers were relieved by fresh relays of 
men, at certain places on the route. 

In the quaint old times of which we are speaking, they were very 
particular at funerals, about going the right way to church. From every 
hamlet or homestead, to the parish church, was a particular road, or 
path, called a corpse road, and so exact were they on these occasions, 
to keep upon that path, that in time of flood, a funeral party has been 
known to wade knee deep through the water, rather than deviate a few 



112 

yards to the right or left. There was a general belief, which has 
partly come down to our own times, which in some degree accounts 
for the scrupulous exactness with which they kept upon these old 
established paths. It is a vulgar error of course, but there are 
old people yet living who will tell you, that if a corpse on its 
way to church, is carried by a fresh way across the fields, that 
way becomes a public road for all time, not to be stopped by any 
thing short of an act of parliament, if by that. The ceremony over, and 
the body left in its last resting place, as many of the attendants as chose 
went back to the house, where each was presented with a small loaf of 
bread to take home. This was called arvel bread, and was originally 
given only to the poor, but afterwards came to be offered to all alike. 

Turning to the periodical customs, or those observed at particular 
seasons of the year, we find, that many such have disappeared within the 
memory of persons now living, and still more, if we go back another 
generation or so. In treating of these, it must not be supposed that 
they all belong exclusively to the district. The purely local customs are 
very few, and in looking into the matter, we find, that many which have 
commonly been considered such, have had their counterparts in other 
places widely separated from each other. Most customs, however, have 
in each district, something quite local in the way of their being observed. 

Very many of the old customs observed by our forefathers no doubt 
had their origin in some religious or superstitious belief For instance, 
the customs once common in these counties of making bonfires at mid- 
summer, and burning the Beltain, or Baalfires at Mayday, were no doubt 
relics of the fire worship, which was universally practised among the Celts. 
In like manner, the custom of visiting, what were called holy wells, upon 
particular days, and waking the well, once much observed in Cumberland, 
most probably came from a belief in water spirits, a superstition which 
was a part of the Scandinavian mythology. There were several holy 
wells in the Lake District, at which annual meetings were once held. 
Near Penrith were four such, which were visited in succession on the four 
Sundays of May, on which occasions drinking tents and confectionary 
stalls were erected, and various sports and diversions indulged in. 



lis 

Whatever might have been the primary meaning, or origin of any 
particular custom, whether rehgious or otherwise, its annual observance 
always in time became supplemented by sports and rejoicings, frequently 
by athletic games, and in very many cases, these festivities were kept up 
and celebrated for hundreds of years after the first meaning and intention 
of the observance were altogether lost and forgotten. As a familiar 
example of this, we may take the Rushbearings, once so common in the 
north. Two or three hundred years ago, the country churches, and 
places of worship, in the Lake District, were many of them little better 
than barns. They were open to the roof, with benches of the rudest 
description for seats, the floors being neither flagged nor boarded, but 
simply the bare earth, covered thickly over with rushes. On a particular 
day in each year, usually in autumn, the parishioners assembled, to take 
the old rushes out and carry new ones in ; and this being completed, a 
special service was held, the intention of which was, to bless, or consecrate 
the rushes, which had just been spread over the floor. In time, this 
became a festival, friends were invited from a distance, sports on the 
green were got up, and the day ended with drinking and dancing at the 
village inn. Now, it is probably more than a hundred and fifty years 
since any church floors have been strewed with rushes, and yet there are 
several places, such as Grasmere, Ambleside, Warcop, and others, where 
the festival has been observed annually, almost down to the present 
time. At some of them it is kept up still. The present practice at these 
gatherings is, for the children to walk in procession round the village, 
bearing garlands and other floral devices, which they afterwards deposit in 
the church, where a service is then held, and although it may seem a 
curious mixing up of things sacred and profane, the day ends as of old, 
with athletic sports and a dance at the public-house. 

Of all the seasons of the year, which were marked by our ancestors 
with particular observances, Christmas was perhaps the most noted. 
Religious both in origin and name, as it was, and although, after the 
lapse of many centuries, it retains all its sacred character and associations, 
there is no season of the year around which so many purely secular 
customs and festivities have clustered, and in no part of the island were 



114 

Christmas customs formerly more observed than among the hills of 
Cumberland and Westmorland. 

In order to understand the general hospitality which then prevailed, 
we must remember, that at the middle of the last century, society in the 
rural parts of Cumberland and Westmorland, was very differently consti- 
tuted from what it is at present. Instead of there being Landlords, 
Farmers, and Labourers, which now form three distinct grades, the land 
was divided into a great number of small estates, each occupied by its 
owner, and cultivated by himself and his family; so that the head of 
every house was landlord, farmer, and labourer, at the same time. Most 
of these holdings were so small, that with the then imperfect modes of 
cultivation, their produce was quite insufficient to support the families of 
their owners, who consequently had to eke out a living by hand carding, 
spinning, and weaving the wool, shorn from their mountain flocks ; an 
employment with which they occupied themselves during the long winter 
evenings; in wet weather, and at other vacant times. In a community 
so constituted, all were socially equal, and when there was any important 
event to be celebrated in a family, all the neighbours within a certain 
distance, were invited to go, and partake of the hospitalities and join in 
the rejoicings of the occasion. Even the clergy assisted in the fieldwork, 
at busy seasons, and mixed freely with the people, in their sports and 
revellings. We learn from old authors, as well as from tradition, that on 
Christmas eve, all work was suspended, and with the exception of 
attending to the cattle, was not resumed until after the twelfth day. 
During this fortnight the whirr of the spinning wheel was never heard, 
the looms were silent, and the flails hung idle in the barn, while the 
people went from house to house, feasting, singing, dancing, and card 
playing. Every dwelling was visited in turn, the Christmas pie, home- 
brewed ale, and ale possets without stint, were provided by every 
housewife. Soon after the commencement of the present century, a 
great change took place in the district. When machinery came to be : 
applied to manufactures, the trade all went into the towns, hand-carding, 
hand-spinning, and country weaving were thrown out of use, and the 
dalesmen found that the better half of their occupation was gone. In a 



115 

few years many of the small holdings passed into other hands, and 
eventually, two or three, or even more of them were thrown together, 
and let as one farm. This change reduced two-thirds of the population 
to the condition of labourers, or farm servants, and the farmers and their 
families reckoning themselves a degree above these, left them out of their 
Christmas parties, and then it was that the Christmas merry-nights sprung 
up. These were held at the public-houses and served two purposes. 
They were places of amusement for all who chose to go, and also annual 
benefits to the inn-keepers who made them. Some of them were simply 
gatherings at public-houses, where no stated charge was made,' but every 
one was at liberty to spend and drink what he chose. At others, each 
guest paid a shilling, or eighteenpence, for which they were supplied, 
in some cases with supper, and in others with a basin of "Powsowdy," 
which was simply the old ale posset mixed with rum. As might be 
expected from the rough uncultivated manners of the people, the proceed- 
ings at these assemblies were often of the wildest description. There 
were dancing and singing, card playing, drinking and fighting. There 
was no etiquette, or ceremony there ; every one made meny in the way 
he liked best, and did it in the most energetic manner. Anderson in 
describing the Bleckell merry night, tells us, that, "The dogger o' 
Dalston" danced "Till the sweat it ran off at his varra chin end." 

The mummers of Yorkshire, and the Christmas carol singers of 
other parts of England, had their counterpart in this district in the 
country fiddlers who on Christmas and New Year's eves, went about to 
every house, and after playing the "Hunt's up," wished the inmates a 
merry Christmas and a happy New year. In ancient times, it was the 
custom to herald in the New year with much pomp and ceremony, but 
in these northern counties the Christmas festivities extending a week 
into the new year, there was no room for any special New year rejoic- 
ings. It was, however, the custom at some churches, for the bell-ringers 
to ring the old year out and the new one in; and it was also very 
common for young people to sit up on that night until the clock struck 
twelve, and then open the door to let the New year in. There was also 
a custom, very common on New year's day, in many villages of Cumber- 



116 

land, called Stanging, which was highly characteristic of the days when 
the old parish constable was the sole guardian of the peace. A party of 
roughs assembled in the morning of the first of January, and continued 
throughout the day, to intercept all passengers, and extort from them a 
sort of black mail. If the person stopped was willing to pay sixpence 
or a shilling, he was suffered to go on his way without further molestation; 
but if not, he was hoisted by main force shoulder height, upon a pole, 
and carried to the public-house, by which time he was generally ready 
enough to pay his ransom, when he was set at liberty. The money 
thus obtained was all spent at the village inn, during the same day and 
night. 

Passing to Candlemas, the observances among our forefathers at 
that season, were more of a business than a festive character. It was 
the end of their financial year, when all accounts were settled. All 
interest on borrowed money then became due, and most of the farms 
and tenements were let to be entered upon at that time. In Westmor- 
land and the north of Lancashire, it was the custom until lately for all 
tradesmen to give twelve months credit, and no accounts were settled at 
any other time than Candlemas. 

Coming next to Shrovetide, or the beginning of Lent, we find that 
most of the names and customs connected therewith have come down to 
us from Roman Catholic times. The name Lent is said to be derived 
from a term used by the Saxons. They called the spring — Lengthentide, 
because then the days were lengthening. Shrovetide originally signified 
the time of confessing sins to a priest. The term was derived from the 
Saxon word shrive, to confess, and was applied to the first day of Lent, 
because on that day the people in every parish throughout England, 
were obliged to confess their sins to the parish priest, each in his own 
parish church. In our own county, and perhaps some other parts of the 
north, the beginning of Lent was formerly called Fasten's even, because 
of its being the eve of the long Lenten fast. In the north of England, 
and especially in this county, the three days at the beginning of Lent 
have, time out of mind, been known as Collop Monday, Pancake 
Tuesday, and Ash Wednesday ; and till lately, each was commemorated 



117 

by a meal corresponding to the name. The two former evidently date 
from before the reformation. Under the Roman Catholic rule Monday 
in Shrove week was the last day on which people were permitted to eat 
meat, until the end of Lent ; and in consequence every one contrived to 
have it on that day, and hence it came to be called Collop Monday. Of the 
origin of making Pancakes on Shrove Tuesday, many widely different 
accounts have been given. The most obvious explanation seems to be, 
that the people being debarred the use of meat during the whole of 
Lent, eggs would be much used as a substitute, and the housewives of 
the time would, no doubt, for the sake of variety, contrive various ways 
of cooking them. They made them into pancakes and puddings, they 
mulled ale with them, and they dyed them into pace eggs for the 
children. Ash Wednesday is a remarkable example of the curious way 
in which, among dialect speaking people, words sometimes become 
corrupted both in pronunciation and meaning. It was called Ash 
Wednesday because, in early times, on that the second day of Lent, it 
was the custom for devout christians to sprinkle themselves with ashes, 
in token of sorrow and humiliation. In later times, however, after the 
old religious observances were discontinued and forgotten, the day came 
to be called not Ash, but Hash Wednesday, and the country people 
commemorated it by having a hash to dinner on that day. 

The second Sunday before Easter was formerly called Carling Sunday, 
and it was a very general custom, in the northern counties, on that day, to 
offer visitors peas, which had first been boiled, and afterwards fried in 
butter, and were called carlings. It was also common for people, on 
that day, to carry raw peas in their pockets, and to throw them at each 
other. The origin of this curious custom is very remote. For centuries 
before the introduction of the potatoe into England, and when grain was 
imported in very small quantities, if at all, pulse was one of the chief 
staples of food, and at that particular time in the spring, when the winter 
stores of the poor were all exhausted, it became a custom for charitable 
people to make a distribution, or dole, of peas, to the serfs, or carles, 
and hence it came to be called Carling Sunday. In some of the midland 
counties, doles of wheat are given out in the same manner. 

8 



118 

The custom of Pace Egging, at Easter, common among children 
all over England and some parts of the continent, is slill pretty generally 
observed in this district ; while the more local ones of drinking mulled 
ale, on Easter Sunday, and providing the children with new clothes for 
that day, are well nigh obsolete. The latter custom was once so general 
that if any poor child was compelled to go out on that day, without 
wearing anything new, the other children thought that something terrible 
would happen to it. The practice of sending persons on foolish errands 
on the first of April, is so ancient, that its origin seems to be lost in 
obscurity. A great deal has been written by way of attempting to explain 
the meaning of this singular custom, but the accounts are so various, 
and all seem so purely conjectural, that no reliance can be placed upon 
them. In Cumberland, the same thing was practised on both the first 
of April and the first of May, the only difference being, that the dupes 
at the one time were called " April Noddies," and at the other " May 
Geslins." Noddy, in the dialect, means one easily imposed on, and 
geslins are young geese, which are often hatched about the first of May. 
There is strong evidence, both in some place names in the district, and 
particular phrases still used in the dialect, that the Mayday rejoicings 
once so popular in other parts of England, were common in the north. 
This very ancient festival was pagan in origin. It was a custom among 
the Britons, before they were converted to Christianity, to erect Maypoles 
adorned with flowers, and dance around them, in honour of their heathen 
deities. In the time of our Saxon ancestors, the festival was somewhat 
modified, but still retained its chief characteristics. The beginning of 
May was the time which the Saxons had chosen for the assembling ofJ 
their "Folkmotes," or conventions of the people; and when the baronsj 
were absent at these ancient Parliaments, the inhabitants of each village 
gave themselves up to mirth and rejoicings. The feast was dedicated tc 
Hertha, the goddess of peace and fertility, and all quarrels were to be 
laid aside during its continuance. On Mayday, the young people met 
upon the green around the richly decorated May poles, where they chose 
a village king, as he was called, who afterwards selected his queen.! 
He wore an oaken, and she a hawthorn wreath, and together they gave] 



119 

laws for the rustic sports, and bestowed the prizes upon the victors. 
After the Norman invasion, the May-day observances continued to be as 
popular as ever, and down to the time of the Commonwealth, every 
village had its May pole, where on the first of May in each year, the 
youths and maidens assembled, and having decorated the pole with 
garlands of flowers, they chose and crowned the May-queen, after which 
dancing on the green and various rural "sports were kept up during the 
remainder of the day. In the time of Cromwell, the Puritans set them- 
selves against these rustic rejoicings, and, in obedience to an ordinance 
of the long Parliament, dated April, 1644, all the May poles were taken 
down by the constables and churchwardens. After the Restoration, the 
festival was partially resumed, but never again became so popular or 
general as before. Bourne tells us that, in his time, in the villages in the 
north of England, the children of both sexes were wont to rise a little 
after midnight on the morning of the first of May, and, accompanied 
with music and the blowing of horns, to walk to some neighbouring 
wood, where they broke down branches from the trees and adorned 
them with nosegays and crowns of flowers. This done, they returned 
homewards with their booty, about the time of sunrise, and decorated 
their doors and windows with the same. Alluding to the Restoration, 
we may remark in passing, that on the twenty-ninth of May, called 
Royal Oak day, it was customary to carry about oak branches, in com- ' 
memoration of Charles the Second's escape in the oak tree, after the 
battle of Worcester. In the old coaching and carrier cart days, the 
horses on that day used to be decorated with oaken twigs. 

Coming next to Whitsuntide, if we endeavour to find out the 
meaning of the name, we become quite bewildered among the various 
explanations given by different authors. One writer tells us that it was 
" White Sunday," because in the early days of Christianity the converts 
who went to be baptised on the day of Pentecost, were all dressed in 
white. Another tells us that it took its name from a French word 
pronounced " Huiet," which meant eight, because beginning with Easter, 
Whit-Sunday was the eighth Sunday. Another quaint old writer on the 
subject says, that it was not W/ii'f, but f^/-Sunday, because at that time 



120 

the disciples were endued by the Holy Spirit with wit and wisdom to 
teach and instruct the people in the Christian religion. Still another 
writer informs us, that it was pagan in origin, and did not become 
identified with the Christian holiday of Pentecost till after the Norman 
conquest, and that its original name was Wittentide, because it was the 
time when the Wittenagemote, or Saxon Parliament, assembled. What- 
ever may have been its origin, or the derivation of its name, it is best 
known to Cumbrians as a hiring term for farm servants, and the time at 
which, in conjunction with Martinmas, the statute fairs are held. It is 
difficult to understand why Whitsuntide should have been chosen for 
such a purpose, as, being a moveable feast, whilst Martinmas is fixed, it 
very rarely happens that the two divisions of the year are of the same 
length, and not unfrequently the winter half-year, as it is called, is thirty 
weeks, leaving the summer division only twenty-two. It was formerly 
the custom for all masters requiring servants, to attend some or other of 
these fairs, and there to hire such as seemed most suitable to them. The 
servants, male and female, stood promiscuously in the market place, with 
pieces of straw in their mouths, as badges of servitude, or signs that they 
were open to engagements ; and the masters went among them in much 
the same manner as they might have done among a herd of cattle, out of'', 
which they wished to purchase two or three heifers, and their mode of 
  choice was exactly the same, the judgment in both cases being guided by 
the physical appearance of the animal to be bought or hired. Having 
made a selection, and a bargain as to the amount of wages to be paid at 
the end of the next half-year, the master gave the servant a shilling, which 
was understood to make the agreement binding. This money was called 
" Yearls," probably from a custom once common, of hiring servants by 
the year ; thus when a master hired a servant for a year, and gave him 
the shilling, he was said to yearl him, or bind him for a year. 

A great deal has from time to time been written and said in con- 
demnation of the half-yearly hirings, and at one time they possibly 
deserved all the odium which has been attached to them. However, to 
judge of them impartially, it will be necessary to go back some forty or 
fifty years, to a time when country servants were in a very different 



121 

position from what they are at present. The wages they then got were 
less than a third of what they receive now ; and when at the end of the 
half-year, they had paid their shoemaker's and tailor's bills, the few 
shillings which remained were too often squandered before the term was 
over. They then commenced another half-year of toil and drudgery, 
during which time they seldom left the farm, having neither the oppor- 
tunity nor the means of going away in search of excitement or pleasure. 
It would be difficult to imagine a rougher set of people than most of the 
farm servants were fifty or sixty years since. Thoroughly uncultivated 
in appearance and in manners, while at the same time many of them 
were overflowing with animal spirits and rollicking fun, which seldom 
found a free outlet at any other time, it is scarcely to be wondered at, if 
when they got to the fair, they threw off all restraint and rushed into 
every kind of excess. While, however, we are looking at this dark view 
of the subject, and cannot help lamenting such excesses, and the immo- 
rality which they undoubtedly sometimes led to, we must not forget that 
the picture had a bright side too. Among the poorer families, many of 
the members of which were out at service in different parts of the country, 
and who seldom or never met at any other time, the hiring day being 
the only opportunity they had to form a reunion during the six months, 
on that account was always looked forward to with the brightest 
anticipation. It was a kind of oasis in the desert of labour and servitude, 
where father, mother, sisters and brothers all met together to shake hands 
and exchange affectionate greetings, after a half-year's separation. The 
mother went shopping with her grown-up children, advising them how to 
lay out their wages to the best advantage, and in return, having her 
basket filled with fairings for herself and the children at home. The 
hiring fairs are still kept up to some extent, but are altogether modernized 
in character. The march of improvement is nowhere more perceptible 
than among the agricultural servants of the northern counties. It in the 
manufacturing and mining districts high wages have led to reckless 
extravagance and intemperance, they have had the very opposite effect 
upon farm servants. When at the end of the half-year, they found that, 
after making their necessary purchases, they had a few pounds to spare, 



122 

it was worth while to put them in the savings bank ; and the very fact of 
their having an account there, led them into habits of sobriety and 
economy, and gave them feelings of independence and self-respect, which 
they had not had before. With few exceptions, too, they are now able 
to read and write; and availing themselves of the increased facilities for 
travelling, they go more from home, and are consequently as a class 
much better informed, and more civilized in every way. There are still, 
of course, specimens of the old boorish type to be found here and there, 
but they are getting fewer year by year, and will no doubt in time 
disappear altogether. 

The midsummer rejoicings, once general throughout England, were 
partly kept up in the north, till the beginning of the present century. 
In Hutchinson's history of Cumberland, 1794, we learn, that at Cum- 
whitten, the festival was then celebrated with bonfires and dancing ; and 
Sullivan tells us, that the same custom was observed at Melmerby several 
years later still. At Michaelmas it was the custom among our forefathers 
to kill their cattle out of the pastures, for their winter provisions ; and in 
October they brewed their ale for the ensuing year. There are other 
local customs, such as clippings, shepherd's feasts, and kurn suppers, 
which are still partly observed, and therefore do not require much 
explanation. 

Forty or fifty years since, sheep shearing time, which extended over 
the second and third weeks of July, was quite a festive season among the 
vales. Every flock master made a clipping, to which he invited all his 
neighbours and friends ; and every housewife made a brewing of extra 
strong ale, called clipping drink, for the occasion, and to it the dalesmen 
always did ample justice before they went home. The shepherd's feasts 
do not date very far back, being simply meetings of shepherds from the 
surrounding vales, which are held at some particular inns. To these 
meetings, all the stray sheep picked up on the mountains during the 
autumn are brought, and after being claimed by their respective owners, 
a supper is provided by the host, and the evening is spent in conviviality. 
The kurn suppers of the district correspond to the harvest homes of 
other parts of England, and the name is another example of the way in 



123 

which words sometimes become corrupted. It was originally called the 
" Corn winning," because it was a feast held by the country people when 
they had won, or secured their corn crops. It afterwards, came to be 
called the " Kurn winning," and "Kurn" being the dialect word for 
churn, it became a custom for each of the family and work-people to be 
regaled with a basin of cream, as a part of the feast, and thus it became 
the kuin, or churn supper. 

I will now conclude with a few brief remarks, which have 
suggested themselves to me while investigating the subject. We 
are all prone to retrospection. We look back with a sort of fond 
remembrance to the years of childhood and youth, and affect to lament 
for the joys which are gone, never to return. This feeling, however, 
when it comes to be analyzed, and submitted to the test of critical 
examination, is found to be in a great measure fallacious. If by any 
possibility we could have the choice, there are probably very few of us 
who would elect to change the advantage which he has, for the much 
lauded pleasures of youth. Would any of us be willing to give up the 
endearments of our homes, our valued friends, the knowledge and experi- 
ence we have gained in all our battles with the world, and the numerous 
other blessings we each of us have, for the sake of going back to the 
frivolous pleasures of childhood and youth, which after all, were not the 
unalloyed pleasures which we are apt to fancy them, when they are left 
a few years behind. If we search our memories, we shall find, that we 
all had our troubles, our crosses, and our disappointments in youth, as 
well as now, equal perhaps in number, if different in kind ; and if we 
come to strike the balance, it certainly ought to be in favour of what we 
are, and not what we were. Now, it is just the same feeling which 
throws such a halo of romance around what are called the good old 
times, and it is equally false and fictitious in both cases. If we look 
back to the old times, by the light of history, we see little but a succession 
of wars, murders, and religious persecutions, with tyranny and oppression 
of every kind. We see the mass of the people of this country in a state 
of serfdom, or semi-slavery, most of them in the most abject poverty, and 
frequently dying by thousands of small-pox, famine, and the plague. In 



124 

our own county, which perhaps retained more freedom and independence 
than any other part of England, there was for centuries very little security 
for either life or property, it being almost the constant theatre of Border 
raids, rapine, and robbery. If we judge of the old times from the 
manners and customs of the people, although we cannot help admiring 
the openhanded hospitality, and the jovial hilarity which characterized 
all their proceedings, we look in vain for any mixture of the intellectual 
element in any of their observances. Their celebrations were all, without 
exception, of the roistering, bacchanalian kind, and even their religious 
festivals, were often mixed up with, or supplemented by, sports and revels. 
If we contrast the state of things just described with that of the present, 
when the humblest individual among us has as much liberty and freedom 
as the noblest in the land ; when any respectable cottager has a score of 
comforts and conveniences which, a hundred years since, the richest 
could not buy ; when every township has its school, every household its 
newspaper, every village its library, and every town its mechanics' insti- 
tute, its literary society, and numerous other facilities for improvement, 
it seems a curious misnomer to call those the good old times, in 
disparagement of these. However, having made this comparison, do not 
let us run away with the idea that the people of old times are deserving 
of all the blame, and we of all the praise. We must simply go back to 
the proposition with which we set out, viz. — the manners, customs, and 
institutions of former times were the best and only ones possible under 
the circumstances then existing, and we may make this addition to it : 
that, whereas, our ancestors were rude and uncultivated, because they 
had no means of culture or improvement ; on the contrary, if any of us 
are contented to remain in the slough of ignorance and sensuality, we 
have ourselves alone to blame. 



125 



JONATHAN OTLEY, THE GEOLOGIST AND GUIDE. 

By J. Clifton Ward, Assoc. R.S.M., &c. (Keswick.) 
INTRODUCTION. 

In commencing this slight sketch of your late fellow-townsman, 
Jonathan Otley, it may be asked why should I, a south countryman, take 
it upon me to sing the praises of a Cumbrian whose daily life never 
extended beyond these mountains? I reply, that our modest hero dearly 
loved and carefully explored this district over which it has been my 
privilege to work for more than seven years ; that under his hammer the 
rocks have rung full oft, as under mine ; that he loved nature for nature's 
sake, as I trust I fondly do ; that my heart feels drawn out to speak of 
Jonathan as a geological pioneer in this country, and that, though I be not 
Cumbrian born, as I might wish, this is not my fault but my misfortune. 

OBJECTS OF A BIOGRAPHY. 

But why should biographies be written at all? The nwrk each man 
has done has its influence for good or bad upon those he has left behind, 
whether he be remembered or forgotten. The instrument may have been 
broken up, but the work done is lasting somewhere, though maybe 
hidden from sight by all that surrounds it and unites with it. All this is 
true, but are not our minds so constituted that we cannot look upon a 
thing done without going back in thought to the doer, and this because 
man is essentially a doi>ig animal. Hence not only work accomplished, 
but the modes of working become profoundly interesting and important 
to us. We are not content to see the mighty steam-engine speeding along 
our iron roads, but we must follow back to the child Watt, seated in his 



126 

cottage home, holding a spoon at the kettle mouth, making his first 
experiment on the condensation of steam. We marvel at the speed of 
the electric message, and our thoughts journey back through a crowd of 
earnest workers to Galvani making experiments on the frog's limbs. We 
are lost in wonder at the calculations of modern astronomy, and then 
stand before the early and self-made telescopes of a Newton and Galileo 
with child-like surprise. We allow our minds to wander through the vast 
field of the modern science of geology, and then think of old William 
Smith, or Strata Smith, as he was called, the land surveyor, making his 
observations on the lie and position of the rocks while digging his canals 
and making his bridges. Thus, again, do I, having investigated the geology 
of this immediate district as none before me has ever had the happy 
opportunity of doing, look back with pleasure to the pioneering 
work of Jonathan Otley, the quiet, nature-loving, simple-minded, modest 
old guide. 

One object, then, of a biography, is to make us familiar with the 
facts as to how the work was done, that by the proper exercise of our 
judgment we may be the better enabled to do our own work, walking 
both in present and in past light. A second object is, by linking our 
own work to the past, to prevent our thinking more highly of ourselves 
than we ought to think. I can fancy many a distinguished astronomer 
standing before Newton's early telescope in the Loan Exhibition of 
Scientific Apparatus, and judging his own work to be very very small 
in the light of Newton's work and Newton's instruments. 

A third object in biography should be to unite our minds with all 
that is noble and great in the character of past generations, as we would 
wish to mix with the intellectual and pure of mind at the present day. 

A fourth useful purpose which biography serves is that of encourage- 
ment to the worker at the present time. Does the way seem steep and 
arduous? think of those who traversed it joyfully and successfully, when 
perhaps far worse shod than yourself, or ere life's sign-posts were so 
numerous or clear as now. Are we discouraged because our work seems 
unacknowledged ? think of that glorious army of literary and scientific 
workers who toiled on vmceasingly, accepting their mission — present 



127 

contempt, for a futm-e usefulness ; who laboured in state prisons, in 
county gaols, were counted mad by kinsfolk and acquaintance, brought 
before papal inquisitions, and their search after truth denounced as 
impious and heretic ; of those who laid the foundations of some mighty 
discovery in a cottage or a work-shop, who made the garret or solitary 
spot on the mountain side more sacred and royal than the Queen's 
council-chamber, because here alone, unfriended, with no words of 
sympathy, no outward helps, were laid the key-stones of many an edifice 
which shall stand while royal palace and the proudest earthly buildings 
crumble away, till the scattered grains of truth which man can collect are 
all merged in the boundless sands of a truthful eternity. As Longfellow 
has so beautifully sung : — 

"Lives of great men all remind us 
We can make our lives sublime, 
And, departing, leave behind us 
Footprints in the sands of time ; 

Footprints, that perhaps another, 
Sailing o'er life's solemn main, — • 
Some forlorn and ship-wrecked brother. 
Seeing, shall take heart again." 

With these words of preface I will address myself to my pleasing 
task — many kind friends have come forward to help me. First, I must 
mention the name of Mr. J. Otley Atkinson, of Kendal, nephew to our 
hero, who has most generously placed letters and papers at my disposal. 
For further details, many of them of a personal character, I am indebted 
to Mr. J. F. Crosthwaite and others. 

JONATHAN OTLEY'S ANTECEDENTS. 

Otleys have lived in the parish of Grasmere for fully two centuries 
and a half, and Mr. Otley Atkinson thinks he can trace them back to the 
year 1575, the earliest date of register in this part of the country, while 
it may be remembered that the oldest register in England goes no further 
back than 1525. The following copy of entries from the Grasmere 
register have been kindly furnished me by Mr. O. Atkinson. 



128 

i662. Marriage of George Otley and Agness Harrison, 2ist of June. 

1662. Chris: of Micliaell Otley, sonne of Edward of Gressmyre. Novr. 24. 

1732. Burials. Jane, wife of Edward Otley of Great Langdale, was buried September 

the tenth day Ano. Dni. 1732. 
1 732. Barbary, wife of John Otley of Grasmere, was buried December the third day, 

Anno Dom. 1732. 

1 762. Banns of marriage were published between Jonathan Otley, Basket Maker, and 

Jane Satterthwaite, Widow, on the 2Sth of March, the 4th and nth days 
of April, 1 762, by me John Wilson, Curate. 
The aforesaid Jonathan Otley and Jane Satterthwaite, both of this parish, were 
married the 25th of April, 1762, by a Certificate to Langdale by Richard 
Steele, Curate there, in the presence of Christopher Grigge and Edward 
Ottley. 

1763. Chris : March 3rd, Edward the son of Jonathan Otley of Loughrigg fold. 
1766. Chris: Feb. II, JONATHAN, the Son of Jonathan Otley of Nook House, 

Loughrigg. 

1768. Chris : Novr. 22, Jane, daughter of Jonathan Otley of Nook House in Lough- 
rigg- 

1792. Burials. April 26, Jonathan Otley of Scroggs, Loughrigg. 

1794. Married. Mr. Robt. Rigg, of Lamplugh, in the County of Cumberland, 
Schoolmaster, and Jane Otley of the parish of Grasmere, Spinster, were 
married in this Church by Licence this ist day of Novr., 1794, by me, 
Edward Rowlandson, Curate, in the presence of — 

Robert Newton. Robt. Rigg. 

Sarah Newton. Jane Otley. 

1808. Burials. March 12, Jane Ottley, of Scroggs in Loughrigg. 

It would seem that Nook House was the old name of Scroggs, where 
our Jonathan was born, and the change made can scarcely be said to have 
been on the side of euphony. Jonathan's mother, widow Satterthwaite, had 
been a Grigge, and one of the witnesses of the marriage was her brother, 
Christopher Grigge, while the other was Edward Otley, probably brother 
to the bridegroom. Jonathan, the geologist, was born Jany. 19th, 1766, 
and christened on Feb. nth. As both he and his brother (who was in 
the army) died unmarried, the name of Otley is now extinct. His only 
sister, Jane, was married to Mr. Robt. Rigg, of Lamplugh, in 1794, and 
died in 185 1, aged eighty-two years. 



129 

SCHOOL-DAYS AND EARLY LIFE. 1766 — 1791. 

Jonathan's father, who was by trade a wood-sieve and basket maker, 
seems to have been a man of superior education and tastes ; he was a 
good Latin scholar, and encouraged his son in the study of both Latin 
and mathematics. Jonathan's school-days were spent partly at the 
Langdale school, then taught by the Rev. R. Steele, and partly at a 
good school at Ambleside. 

From his school-days until his twenty -fifth year, Jonathan dwelt with 
his father at Scroggs, working with him in the making of wood-sieves, 
baskets, etc. He also cleaned all the clocks and watches in the neigh- 
bourhood, and showed himself very skilful in engraving upon copper- 
plates, seals, and coins. Connected with this last act is a story which 
relates to this part of his life, before he left Scroggs to live at Keswick. 
Jonathan was in love with a young woman named Ann Youdale, and he 
engraved their names together upon a silver coin. But unfortunately, 
the village blacksmith (Mr. Bowness) was also a suitor for the maiden's 
hand ; and some years after, on his niece (Mrs. Wilson) enquiring of 
Jonathan how it was that his name and that of Ann Youdale were 
engraved on the same coin, he replied, "Oh, the blacksmith beat me." 
Clearly the smith understood the value of striking the iron Avhile hot, 
while our friend's geological hammer had scarcely as yet been wielded. 

It is probable that business reasons induced him to move to Keswick 
in the year 1791. From this time we hear no more of love-suits, and the 
geologist and guide were wedded solely to nature and the hammer. 

Before moving to Keswick, his acquaintance with Mr. Peter 
Crosthwaite began on this wise. Jonathan, standing outside the Cros- 
thwaite Museum, was accosted by its founder and asked if he would sell 
a curious stick he held in his hand ; Otley asked a shilling for it, the 
proprietor of the Museum stipulating to show him the collection over 
bargain ; from this time congenial tastes drew the two together as firm 
and staunch friends. 

KESWICK LIFE. 179I — 1856. 

We now enter upon Otley's Keswick life, which lasted for a period 
of sixty -five years. He first lodged at Brow Top, and his little shop- 



130 

window even now looks out upon the old coach-road. His host's name 
was Youngbusband, and Jonathan was wont to relate, as showing the 
difference in the cost of living between then and now, how he paid what 
was considered very handsome for his board, viz. — one shilling a day ; 
and when he remarked to Mr. Younghusband that he ought to throw the 
Sundays in, his host replied, " No, no, man ; we boil the pot on 
Sundays ! " 

Mr. Crosthwaite has supplied me with a copy of a memorandum in 
Otley's hand-writing, showing his board and lodging expenses for a 
period of sixty-one years and one week, as follows : — 

[Memo, in Mr. Jonathan Otley's Hand-writing, copied by J. F. Crosthwaite], 
BOARD AND LODGINGS. Quarto Ledger, p. 6. 

Oct. 8, 1791 ) At Mr. Dawson's, Brow Top, 5^ years at 4/8 and 

to 1797 ) 5/- per week 

To 1807 At John Robson's, 10 years at 6/- & 7/- per week 

rp ,oon ) At Sarah Clark's, Board only, at 8/4, 9/-, and 10/- 

^°1^^^ I per week 

To 1842 At Mrs. Richardson's, 3 years at 10/- per week ... 

To Oct. 18, ) At Richard Burgess', 10 years and 10 weeks at 
1852 \ 10/- per week 

Total : 61 years, 1 week £1325 

Rent op Room. — {Paid to Geo. Rookin and the Rev. John Todd.) 

1797 to 1826, 29 years, at £2/2, £2/5, and £2/10 £70 

To 1853, 27 years, at £3/10 94 10 



£67 








164 








746 








78 








270 









Total : 56 years £164 10 

Otley lived at Brow Top for five-and-a-half years, and then removed 
into the town, where he commenced business as a watchmaker, and was 
for a long time the only one in the neighbourhood. 

Jonathan is now in his humble lodging in Keswick, called "Jonathan 
Otley's, up the steps," watch-mending, making his observations on lake 
and mountain-side, and year after year becoming more sought after for 
his practical guidance and fund of local information by such eminent 
men as Airy, Dalton, and Sedgwick. Mr. Crosthwaite supplies me with 



ISl 

the following notes : — Mr. Otley was naturally shy, which he attributed 
to his living so long in the country. But he was of a quiet, reserved turn. 
He was a reader, a thinker, and a listener, rather than a talker; but, at 
the conclusion of a conversation, he used to give his opinion in such a 
manner as to show that he had grasped the whole matter. Mr. Otley 
was, however, quite fond of society, and especially of some of the ladies 
of his acquaintance. He would go to a pic-nic to have tea with a large 
party of friends, and gaily bring the hostess on his arm into the ring 
where the cloth was spread on the green. He used to go every year to 
visit his native place, and stay there two or three weeks. He said it was 
not much holiday, for all the watches far and near came in from friends 
for his manipulation. 

The earliest letter that I have seen in Otley's hand-writing, is one 
written on July lo, 1812, to Dr. Dalton, the world-famed chemist. I will 
give you some quotations from it, as it at once shows his habit of careful 
observation, and love of accuracy of detail : — 

Thinking it might be acceptable to you to have some account of my excur- 
sion to Great Gavel, I have taken the liberty of sending you the following 
particulars. Thirty-seven minutes after parting, I saw you upon the high ground 
about the level of one of the Langdale Pikes, you were then turning to the right. 
Without meeting any difficulty, I arrived on the top of Gavel about a quarter 
past eleven, and was agreeably surprised to find there a triangular cavity in the 
rock of about two feet the longest side, and containing about two gallons of clean 
well-tasted water, of the temperature of 71°, the air ranging from 63° to 66° out of 
the sun ; the deepest part of the water did not exceed four inches ; its surface was 
about two inches below the brim of the cavity, and I could not perceive any 
running in or out. I lowered it about a quarter of an inch by drinking, and did 
not find it to rise again. There is a little earth in the interstices of the rock, but 
I think there is not more of it above the level of the well than might be carried in 
a wheelbarrow. 

The summit of Gavel is something like Scawfell but more pointed, of irregular 
broken rock. There is not an area of more than eight or ten square yards above 
the level of the well, and the highest point of rock is only two feet above the 
surface of the water. 

I remained on the top two hours and a half, and though the clouds frequently 
varied their shapes and permitted me to view different objects, I was rather 



132 

disappointed in not being able to sea the top of Scawfell, where we were the other 
day. I observed one of the pikes of Broad Cragg, or whatever it may be called, 
(I think it should have a more distinguishing appellation,) far above Gavel, with 
Greatend, the difference is scarcely perceptible. Helvellyn is above the level, and 
Skiddaw verj- little more than what may be allowed for the curvature. 

I left the hill a little before two, and by a rather rugged descent, found the 
way to the Blacklead mines, where I rested a while. I arrived well at Keswick in 
the evening ; the barometer had risen during my absence about the eleventh of an 
inch. I hope you and your companion arrived safe at Kendal. 

(See also further correspondence on the subject of the Well loith Sir G. Airy.) 

Another letter to the same celebrated chemist gains additional 
interest from its being one of the earhest inteIHgent accounts of the 
Floating Island, and, as subsequently noticed, some of its particulars 
were afterwards published in the Memoirs of the Manchester Philo- 
sophical Society. 

September 14th, 1815. 
Mr. Dalton, — 

I received yours of the Sth, and much obliged to you for the analysis of the 
gas. The books for Mr. Knight shall be duly forwarded. 

Derwent Lake varied very little in height for about a month after you saw it, 
which was unusually low for such a length of time. About the 6th day of August, 
the Floating Island began to appear above water. I was upon it on the 21st, at 
which time the lake had risen about eight inches, and the Island was only about 
four inches above the level of the water ; its length was eighty-eight yards, its 
greatest breadth twenty-five, but some part of it less than half that. The gas on 
coming up had then a very perceptible smell, which I compare to that of a foul gun. 
Whether this smeU is stronger when the Island first emerges, or whether when the 
Island is sunk the smell is taken away by the greater depth of water through which 
the gas ascends, I am not able to determine. I endeavoured to ascertain whether 
the Island consisted of the same peat earth throughout, which I find to be nearly 
the case ; and also to examine more particularly the earth underneath it, which I 
have been inclined to call a Vegetable Oxide. On taking up some of this at the 
depth of thirteen feet from the surface, I found it intermixed with specks of a 
bluish green colour, which from its turning black with infusion of gall, I take to be 
Sulphate of Iron ; this makes me suspect that in my hypothesis of the generation 
of the gas, I may have laid too much stress upon the decomposition of vegetable 
matter in the Island, or could the Iron be originally contained therein ? 

The gentleman who brought the book having kindly offered his services to take 



I 



133 

you anything I might wish to send, I embrace the opportunity of sending you a 
small specimen of the earth of the Island taken from the surface, a small one 
taken at its under surface, and a larger specimen taken from below the Island, 
part of it at the depth of thirteen feet from the surface, that is, four feet below the 
water under the Island ; you will find this when dry to be uncommonly light. 
The Island never appeared to rise so high above water this season as it did in 1808, 
and on the 1st of September, the lake having risen about two feet, it was entirely 
covered, and has not appeared since. 

From this time forwards, Otley receives numerous applications for 
various objects of natural history, and for very varied items of natural 
information. Thus, in 1824, Wm. B. Clark sends payment for minerals 
sent, and adds — "The price you have fixed, forty shillings, appears to 
me to be too little, I have ventured to make it fifty shillings." 

The following letters from Dr. Pearson and Dr. Henry give us a 
glimpse of Jonathan the guide, and how he was treated by tourists of 
half a century back. 

From Dr. Pearson. 

Globe Inn, Cockermouth. 

August 25th, 1826. 
My dear Sir, 

Mrs. Pearson and myself, in common with our daughter, Mrs. Moffat, regret 
exceedingly that the little irritation produced by the hostler at the moment of our 
departure prevented our taking a friendly leave of you, as we intended ; and we 
beg to offer you our united thanks for your great civility and attention during the 
day, as well as for your valuable present, one half of which my daughter has 
already read to us in the carriage, which afforded us much pleasure. You have 
arranged your ideas very methodically, and have expressed yourself in sensible 
and significant language, and we shall peruse the remainder, I dare say, with equal 
pleasure. The ladies desire to be kindly remembered with, dear sir, your very 
obliged and grateful friend. 

W. Peaeson. 

P.S. — Since writing the above, I have discovered that I left a silk red and 
yellow handkerchief in the dinner room at the Inn, which I used for the pocket, 
and which is consequently dirty ; I will thank you to enquire for it, and if it 
should be found, which I hope \ it will, I beg you will accept of it, as a trifling 

9 



134 

mark of my respect, when you have first got it washed. You may show this to 
the landlady, who will no doubt cause enquiry to be made of the waiters. 
(Written outside the wrapper.) 
As I have found the dirty handkerchief in a side pocket, I beg leave to 
substitute a clean one for your acceptance. — W. P. 

From Dr. Henry. 

Manchester, October 5th, 1832. 

Dear Sir, — 

When I parted with you at Ambleside, I regretted that I was prevented 
(by the limited remains of my finances, which I calculated would barely allow me 
to discharge a small debt on the road and pay my expenses home,) from doing what 
I then felt, and now on reflection still more strongly feel, to be an act of justice 
towards you. You were kind enough to place the accompanying of me on my 
several excursions on a purely gratuitous footing, but I cannot reconcile it to 
myself to take advantage of your liberality, and beg that you will do me the great 
favour of accepting the enclosed. I offer it by no means as a compensation for 
your services, and I shall still hold myself indebted to you for a fund of valuable 
information, much of which I could not without your assistance have obtained at 
all, and the rest of which, if I had been left to myself, must have been purchased 
at a much greater cost of time and labour. By your kindness I was put in posses- 
sion of knowledge on the soundness and accuracy of which I can fully rely, not 
without a great sacrifice of your time, and on some occasions not without personal 
fatigue, which I felt concerned that you should encounter. 

I should have written sooner, but have only just been able to procure a frank. 
You will favour me with a single line that I may know this reaches you. 
Believe me, dear Sir, yours obliged, 

William Henry. 

P.S.— Mr. Dalton desires his best regards. He is quite well. Please to tell 
Mr. Wright that Mr. Gilbertson, druggist, of Preston, is still living. Will you 
allow me to trespass upon you for a shilling to the letter carrier whom I forgot. 

Among the many letters addressed to Otley as a guide and collector, 
there are some asking for flowers, there are others for information about 
such matters as mineral veins, water, soil, the names of mountains (from 
Lieut. Murphy of the Ordnance Survey), the floating island (correspond- 
ence with Dr. Dalton), cleavage of the rocks (from Professor Phillips), 
state of the wind, helm and bottom winds, the well on Great Gavel 



135 

(correspondence with Sir G. Airy), the meaning of words, and questions 
about lost people. 

A few extracts from some of these letters will suffice to show how 
Otley was employed, and how he was thought of by those with whom he 
came in contact. 

In 1818, Otley corresponds with Mr. Greatorex of Portland Place, 
who sends him the heights of several stations visited by them together, 
as calculated from their barometrical observations, giving at the same 
time the details of his calculations. 

Throughout his long life he interested himself in the heights an 
names of mountains, and the two following letters bear upon this point, 
the one by Otley being written in his eighty-ninth year. 

From Captain Gosset. 

Ordnance Map Office, Southampton, 
March 26th, 1853. 
Sir,— 

Your note relative to the datum plane for the LeveUing of the Ordnance 
Maps has been forwarded to Colonel Hale, R.E., by whom I am directed to reply 
to your questions. 

The datum plane is mean line of the Sea Level (obtained from a large number 
of tide observations) at Liverpool. The six-inch Ordnance Survey began in Lanca- 
shire, therefore Liverpool was selected. The mean line has been adopted because 
it is the most steady point in'Tides. The mean between a High and Low water 
mark at a Spring Tide is nearly the same point as the mean between High and Low 
water mark at any other tides taken by pairs of tides. 

You are coloring some of the contours ; permit me to remark that to color 
those of the same altitude one color, those of a second altitude another color, and 
so on, gives information to the eye from end to end of a sheet at a glance. 

Your obedient servant, 

W, DmscoH 60SSET, 

Captain R.E. 

From Mr. Otley to Captain Gosset. 

Keswick, July 13th, 1854. 

Your kind letter of March 26th, 1853, in answer to my enquiry respecting the 
Map of Coniston Fells, I am emboldened to offer to your notice a few of the 
observations that I have made on the subject, chiefly relating to names. I am glad 



136 

that the conductors of the Survey have preserved the established names, rather 
than inventing new ones, following our learned antiquarians into obscurity. 

I am aware of the difficulty of obtaining local names from the inhabitants of a 
district, they are sometimes reserved in speaking out ; but if you find a party of 
Fox-hunters enjoying themselves, that is the time to obtain the local pronunciation 
of names of mountain rocks. As to spelling, in reports of Fox-hunting, we find 
great Oukrigg, and Hookriggs. In some districts, the termination crag is pronounced 
as crig, so in the map, it is How Crags. From infancy to manhood, my every-day 
prospect, from the Scroggs, where I was born, was Weatherlam and the twin Carrs, 
with the Old Man just peeping over the shoulder of the former. The Carrs we 
found to be higher than Weatherlam by the clouds first touching them ; and when 
a cloud settled upon the Carrs it was generally the forerunner of a shower coromenc- 
ing in Greenburn. One of these was the Great Car, and the other situated between 
that and Weatherlam, at the junction of Prison band and Swirl band, with the 
top of Broadslack, being nearly equal in height to the Old Man, and wanting a 
name, I should call it High Carr. These, with the Little Carr, Mr. Green in his 
assiduously compiled guide calls the Langdale Carrs ; and Black Scar with How 
Crags he calls the Coniston Carrs. 

The word Carr I take to be synonymous with Scar, which I formerly defined 
as an escarpment or range of rock ; I cannot now tell how I got the word ; but I 
have since found that Mr. Richardson, in Wordsworth's guide, had adopted it. In 
Westmorland we have Flammar Scar, Orton Scar, Nab Scar, Scout Scar, Whit- 
barrow Scar : I do not know why we double the r in Carr, any more than in Scar, 
or the g in Crag. I should write Little Car, Great Car, High Car in the singular, 
and in plural the Carrs. 

In some districts the termination crag is pronounced as crig ; so Long Crag is 
made into Lankrigg, and How Crags is converted into Hookriggs. An artist that 
I employed to make a sketch for me, imitating the pronunciation, wrote it Great 
Oukrigg. 

I should write Great How Crag, Little How Crag, and plural How Crags. 
Much has been said of the derivation of the name "Old Man," which had been 
originally applied to the pile of stones on the summit, and has since been extended 
to the mountain itself ; but if I bad to speak of climbing the old man, I should 
rather think to the old man a more correct expression. With respect to Hen Crag 
and Hen Tor I have little to say ; we called it Hen Teah : I suppose from a fancied 
resemblance to the toes of a Hen's foot, and Mr. Green intending as an improvement, 
wrote it Enfoot Crag. 

Doe Crag, as wrote in the map, is pronounced Dow Crag, and Mr. Gibson, 
author of "The Old Man," a neat and entertaining volume, writes it Dow or Dhu 
Crags. 



J 



137 

"Thus motionless, and moanless drew 
His parting breath stout Roderick Dhu!" 

Lady of the Lake. 

I have been supplied with two small sheets of explanation, yet still there are 
some initials and signs, and in one or two places the word "bolt" of which I cannot 
make out the signification. 

N.B. — The figures on Great How Crags 2625 should be 2525. I hope you will 
excuse the liberties I have taken with the work which had afforded me a great 
deal of pleasure. Now ia my eighty-ninth year I am not able to climb the hiUs, so 
I must content myself with them represented on paper in a way I had not expected. 
If you find anything deserving a reply, I should be glad to receive it from you. 

Yours, 

The following letter from Mr. Farey, the well known old mining 
engineer, is of considerable importance. 

I'roin Mr. J. Farey. 

37, Rowland Street, Fitzroy Sq., 
March 14th, 1819. 

Dear Sir, — 

The bearer, Mr. Wilson Lowry,* is my particular friend ; he is a native 
of your country, but left it very young, and has long resided in Great Titchfield 
Street (No. 57), very near here ; — he is not less known, as the unrivalled Engraver 
of perspective and scientific subjects, than as a most able Mineralogist, Crystallo- 
grapher, &c., &c., and having the most extensive scientific acquaintance of perhaps 
any man in England, except 'Sir Joseph Banks ; — if during the short time he may 
be able to stay at or near Keswick, you can show him attention, it would 
greatly oblige me, and the same may eventually prove beneficial to yourself, Mr. L. 
having often proved himself a liberal recommender of ingenious, practical, un- 
assuming men like you. 

I hope that you received my long letter of the 26th ult. , and that you will be 
able to shew and explain to my friend Mr. L. on your map, all the Lines of Strata 
Ridges (troughs) and Strata Partings which I have described therein ; with all 
such corrections or verifications of them, new ones, etc., as you may have been 
able to make. Wherever you actically ohsei~ve the direction of the Dip, draw a short 
dart on the place on your map ; and if you want to express the different degrees of 
Dip, the most ready and useful mode is, that of the colliers, who always mention 
the proportion of CB (considered as 1 or unity) to AC ; and they say, a coal (as AB) 

* Father of Mr. Lowry, the present talented engraver of the Hor. Sects, of the 
Geological Survey. 



138 

' ' dips 1 in 8 to the N W ; " or " dips N W 1 in 8 ; " that is imagining AC level, and 8 
of any measure (as inches, feet, yards, fathoms) CB, or the perpendicular descent 
or fall of the seam in that length, is 1 of the same measure. This T express on my 
maps, by writing a small 8 at the point of the dart. I hope I shall soon receive a 
long letter of neto facts and corrections from you, of the suggestions I have sent to 
you, as to the structure of your interesting District, the technical mineralogy of 
which is rather out of my way, but exactly in that of my friend Mr. Lowry, who 
may perhaps give you some useful hints, as to the sale at or near home (perhaps at 
Kendal, Penrith, Carlisle, Whitehaven, etc. ) of Strata Maps, coloured by you, as 
I have recommended in my last. 

I am, dear Sir, 

Yours very truly, 

J. FAREY, Senr. 

In a second letter, dated March 17th, 1823, Farey asks Otley 
numerous geological questions, and alludes to Jonathan's first meeting 
with "Strata Smith," often called the Father of English Geology; he 
says — " Mr. Smith's conduct, on your first meeting with him in summer, 
182 1, affects me, much more with shame and regret, than with surprise. 
Had he met me there, or any one else, who he knew had laboured at the 
"knotty parts" he was examining, he probably would alike have shunned 
us." . . . Smith and his nephew, John Phillips, afterward the well- 
known and accomplished Professor, stayed shortly after for some time 
at the Queen's Head, Hesket Newmarket, having business in connection 
with the High Pike Mine. 

• From Mr. J. Farey. 

37, Rowland Street, Fitzroy Square, 
March 17th, 1823. 
Dear Sir, — 

My apology is due to you for not sooner answering your kind letter of the 
12th December, 1821. For some weeks after that date I had not seen Mr. W. 
Forster's book, and could not therefore immediately understand and reply to j'our 
remarks thereon ; and in the meantime, I was fortunate enough to be employed by 
the Commissioners of His Majesty's Woods, Forests, &c., to investigate and report 
on the Slate rocks and quarries in the vicinity of Bangor, in North Wales ; which 
has given me a good opportunity of comparing the stratification there with that 
which surrounds you in Cumberland : confirmatory of the important fact which 
you taught me (having myself never seen about the western halfoi your mountains) 



139 

viz. that all the Slate Series dips one way, with considerable regularly, instead of 
exhibiting, either "mantle -shaped" strata, around the great mountain masses, on 
which Geognosts had so often fabled, or the ridged and troughed structure, which 
I had supposed, and that the Coal-measures and under-coal Limestones, &c., lap 
round the denudated edges of your slaty mountains, unconformahly on all sides, 
even on the south-eastwards. 

From Dr. Dalton. 

Manchester, January 15th, 1826. 
Dear Friend, — 

I received your letter and parcel all safe in due time in October last, and 

have to apologize for my neglecting to acknowledge it for so long a time. In the 

first place I was very unwell at the time, being confined to the house for two or 

three weeks by the most severe cold I ever had, and indeed in a great part to bed. 

It was accompanied by an affection of hearing I had never before ; I was so deaf 

for two or three weeks that I could not hear the church bells across the street, 

unless I was out of doors. However, I have since entirely recovered my former 

state of health. 

I wished also to analyze the air before I wrote, which I did as soon as I 
recovered. I also read the greatest part of your letter at one of our more vacant 
meetings of the Society, and have to return you the Society's thanks for your 
communication, as well as my own. Indeed, as soon as I heard of the floating 
island being astir, I was hoping that you would not let slip the opportunity of some 
farther observations. If you have not published the substance of your letter, you 
will perhaps have the goodness to extract what you may think proper for our next 
volume, which however will not be published perhaps for a year or two. 

1 examined the bottles, of air : the new air and the old were exactly of the 
same quality, a circumstance to me very surprising : I also had some of the old air 
left, and they were all found to agree as nearly as could be : a little carbonic acid 
being washed out, they all yield about half carhuretted hydrogen and half azote, 
proportions which I never before met with in mixture, though I have found the 
proportions various. Nothing adverse to your theory occurs from this : but it is 
wonderful the same proportions should be found as were before. 

I examined the air from Helvellyn and Skiddaw. The former was considerably 
inferior in oxygen to the air below ; and the latter a little, but much less than the 
other. You will remember the atmosphere was changing much about the time 
from the odd appearance of the clouds the evening we left Skiddaw. 

We have just had some severe frost : on Friday morning, the thermometer 16* 
in town and 4° or 6* in the vicinity ; a slight cover of snow and fine clear frost in 
the country. 

I remain, yours truly, 

JOHN DALTON. 



140 

The following extracts, from letters in connection with the water- 
supply for Keswick, are of interest, as mentioning Otley's nickname 
among some of his friends, and showing his power of repartee. 

From Wm. Dickinson* of North Mosses. 

January 28th, 1851. 
Dear Sir, — 

When you next come across "Anthony Loajet," be good enough to say I 

take some discredit to myself for not having made myself acquainted with the fact 

that the district mentioned in his "bold conception" had ever been proved in the 

way he mentions. Should my Essay ever require a new issue, his observations 

shall be duly considered, and such alterations made as the case may seem to 

require. 

Does friend "Anthony" bear in mind that nearly all the little hills and 
elevations in Underskiddaw have wet crowns, and that the Uck is very near tlie 
surface ? so near in some of them, as to be within reach of the plough ? Some, 
indeed many, of the crowns of these hills are of small extent — much too small 
perhaps to retain water sufficient to keep up the continued oozing they exhibit, 
giving full allowance to the coDJectured equilibrium of gravity and attraction he 
so opportunely enlists. 

From the long continued operations of husbandry, the crowns of the hills must 

be, and are, becoming bare of soil, and of all other porous covering. Does it not 

seem reasonable that the supply, constant as it is, should come from below ? Pray 

put a few of these questions to friend "Anthony," and coax him to put his pen to 

paper again. 

I remain, dear Sir, 

Yours most truly, 

WM. DICKINSON. 

To which Otley replied : — 

Anthony Loajet is obliged to acknowledge that his ammunition has been 
exhausted in the first onset ; he is unable to prove the solidity of his conceptions, 
but he cannot divest himself of an opinion. As A. L. 's paper has not been pub- 
lished, I hope it will not be the means of interrupting that friendly feeling which 
has hitherto subsisted between us. 

In 1852, Mr. J. F. Miller of Whitehaven, asks for information about 
the Helm Wind and local phenomena, amongst others, the last time 

* Author of a Paper on "The Farming of Cumberland." Journal of the Royal 
Agricultural Society, vol. xiii., p. 207. 1852. 



141 

eagles were known in Borrowdale. With regard to this last point, Mr. 
Miller says — " From J. Dixon I learn that the eagles' nests in Eagle 
Crag were robbed by W. Walker and W. Youdale in 1772 or 3, and 
after that they got out a brood in Wything's Crag, above Stonethwaite, 
which was the last time they were known to build, probably about 1784, 
as stated in your account." 

In 1853 and 4, Dr. Henry of Haffield, Ledbury, applied to Otley 
for details of Dr. Dalton, which were published in the Life of that 
celebrated chemist ; a letter of Otley's (to be quoted farther on) to Dr. 
Henry is of interest, as it is written in a beautifully clear hand, and shows 
how his mind was in activity in his 90th year. 

Among miscellaneous M.S. memoranda is the following concerning 
the inscriptions on the Keswick Town Hall Bell : — 

" Many inscriptions nearly of the same age as that on the Keswick 
bell, with figures in Arabic numerals, are said to have been discovered 
in diffrent parts of England, as for instance — one at Rumsey in Hamp- 
shire, dated ion; another at Wignall Hall in Hertfordshire, dated 1016; 
another at Daresbury in Cheshire, dated mo; another on the rock at 
Alnwick, dated 115 5; another on the tomb of Gilbert de Astlay in 
Keighley church, Yorkshire, dated 1023; another at Bigland, near 
Cartmel in Lancashire, inscribed upon a beam, and dated 1161; and 
another upon Tice's Well, on Dartmoor, dated 1168. 

The authorities for some of the above are the Letters of Leonard 
Atkins; Cooke's Topography of Lancashire, p. 104; Carrington's 
Dartmoor, in Note 118; Baines's Yorkshire Gazetteer, I. 167, 218; 
Archaiologia, vol. 113. 

It is asserted that Gerbert, who was afterwards Pope under the title 
of Silvester II., brought this notation from the Moors of Spain into 
France about 960, and that it was known among us in Britain in the 
beginning of the eleventh century, if not somewhat sooner. (Nicholson's 
Encyclopoedia Arith.) Dr. Wallis, in a letter inserted in the Philo- 
sophical Transactions (266), shows that Arabic numerals were used in 
England, Anno 1090. See also Bibliotheca Literaria, viii. 25." 



U2 

otley's guide books. 

At present Otley's fame rests mainly upon his early map and guide- 
book, the first of their kind, and worthy the man in every respect. His 
mountain outlines are for the most part admirably truthful, and devoid of 
that sensational exaggeration in which too many artists are apt to indulge. 
The following are the dates of the various editions of the Guide, with 
particulars of each as given by Otley himself in 1840, in reply to a letter 
by Mr. Thos. Sanderson of London. 

"In 18 1 7 I constructed a map of the district, which I had engraven 
and published in 1818. It was chiefly sold as folded for the pocket. 

In 1823 I arranged a description of the lakes and mountains, with 
the stages and other requisites for a Guide, to which were added some 
essays which I had wrote for the Lit. and Phil. Soc. of Manchester, 
making together a book of 136 pages ; sold at 4s. 6d. in printed covers. 
600 copies. 

In 1825, a Second Edition, extending to 142 pages. 1000 copies. 

In 1827 I reconstructed the map, and had it engraven on a new 
plate, with considerable improvement, and pubhshed Third Editon, 150 
pages. 1200 copies. 

In 1830, 4th edition, with eight woodcuts, designed and engraved 
by my=:elf, and eight pages relating to the Botany of the district. 180 
pages. 1 00c copies. 

1833-34, Fifth Edition, with eleven woodcuts, several of them 
re-engraved, ten pages of Botany, 184 pages and Index. 1200 copies. 

1837-38. Sixth edition, twelve woodcuts and copper of my own 
drawing and engraving, 184 pages + 8. 1200 copies. 

When I first published there was no other work that had any pre- 
tension to compete with it ; now almost every bookseller in the district 
publishes. By extending some of the articles, and abridging others, it 
was kept to the same number of pages ; and although the Plate is some- 
thing worn, I am confident it will lose nothing by comparison with 
any others, especially in the hands of persons well acquainted with the 
country. 

1844. Seventh edition. Large and small cuts of Lake mountains. 



143 

— Skiddaw, Helvellyn, Lowdore, Scroggs — twelve or fifteen drawn by 
Binns, engraved by Jevvitt. Lonsdale and the caves, and a new map. 

1849. Eighth edition. Plates same as the last, with Druid's 
Temple. 216 pages. 46 Illustrations. 1250 copies. 

OTLEY AS A GEOLOGIST. 

But Jonathan Otley ranks far higher than a mere guide-book maker, 
He was most decidedly the pioneer of Geology in this district ; and as the 
one who laid the first stones upon which Sedgwick and others have built 
a superstructure, we owe him all honour and thanks. His writings are 
not numerous, nor is this to be expected ; but whatever he did write he 
wrote with much care, and always plainly to the point, and with great 
good sense. The following is a list of his various writings : — 

18 19. Account of the Floating Island in Derwent Lake, Keswick. 
— Mem. Lit. d^ Phil. Soc. Manchester. Ser. 2, vol. iii., p. 64. 

1819. Account of the Black Lead Mine in Borrowdale. — Ibid-g. 168. 

1820. Remarks on the Succession of the Rocks in the District of 
the Lakes. — Phil. Mag. vol. Ivi. p. 257. (From the Lotisdale Magazine, 
vol. i. p. 433.) 

1823. A Concise Description of the English Lakes and adjacent 
Mountains. 8vo., Keswick, 6th edition in 1837 ; 8th edition in 1850, 
with Portrait and Memoir. 

1831. Further Observations of the Floating Island of Derwentwater, 
with Remarks on certain other Phenomena. — Mem. Lit. &> Phil. Soc. 
Manchester. Ser. 2, vol. v., p. 19. 

The earliest of Otley's written works seems to have been a paper 
read before the Manchester Philosophical Society on December 27th, 
18 1 6, upon the Black Lead Mine, in Borrowdale, and published in their 
Memoirs in 181 9, together with another paper upon the Floating Island 
in Derwent Lake. The former paper is dated Keswick, November 28th, 
1816, and is a careful and trustworthy account of all that was then 
known of the Mine. 

In 1823 Otley first introduced Sedgwick to Cumbrian geology, their 



144 

first excursion together being up the river Caldew firom Mosedale. Dr. 
Leitch, in liis short memoir, quotes Otley thus, regarding this excursion ; 
"when I proposed to return, Mr. Sedgwick threw off his coat and went 
on : I went across and showed him where granite appeared near the foot 
of Willey Gill." This was the commencement of a true friendship which 
lasted unto the end ; each trusted the other completely, and ascribed 
everything done to good motives ; both lived to a very advanced age, 
and left behind the memory of well-spent lives. . 

The paper entitled "Remarks on the Succession of the Rocks in 
the District," first attracted the attention of geologists to our Cumbrian 
mountains ; and Sedgwick pointed out to the Geological Society of 
London, in 1831, how that Jonathan Otley had been the first to 
recognize that "the greater part of the central region of the Lake Moun- 
tains is occupied by three distinct groups of stratified rocks of a slaty 
texture." These groups Otley first called the Clayslate, Greenstone, 
and Greywacke divisions, the first representing the Skiddaw Slate, the 
second the Volcanic Series of Borrowdale, and the third the Coniston 
Limestone and Upper Silurian of the southern part of the district. This 
threefold classification of the rocks of the mountain country forms the 
basis of all geological work in the district ; and thus did old Jonathan 
lay the foundation stones of the future building. 

Again in 1836, Professor Sedgwick, in his paper to the Geological 
Society, entitled, "Introduction to the General Structure of the Cumbrian 
Mountains," after describing the various subdivisions of the altered slate, 
rocks around the Skiddaw granite, says "we owe our first accurate 
knowledge of these subdivisions to Mr. Jonathan Otley of Keswick, who| 
not merely described them in general terms, but gave their geographical 
distribution with a very near approach to accuracy." 

In 1835 we find Jonathan in communication with Professor Phillipsjj 
then curator of the museum at York. Besides his observations upon the 
larger divisions of the rocky series of Cumbria, he had been noting sucli 
matters as the distribution of boulders and the character of the red' 
conglomerates of Kirkby Lonsdale and Mell Fell. The following letter 
from Professor Phillips is dated York, November 25th, 1835. 



145 

From Professor Phillips. 

Dear Sir, — 

I am much obliged by the receipt of your notices concerning the distribu- 
tion of Boulders from various parts of the Cumbrian Mountains, which are very 
satisfactory, and will be incorporated in a general view which I mean to oflfer to the 
next meeting of the Association, of the Phenomena of this nature in the west of 
England. 

I have also been much gratified by the specimen of red crinoidal lime- 
stone from the "Old Red" Conglomerate of Kirkby Lonsdale. In my long 
residence at Kirkby Lonsdale, I also found Limestone fragments in that 
singular rock, and experienced exactly the same hesitation as to its geo- 
logical place.* These doubts I have discussed at length in my new volume on 
Yorkshire Geology, now passing through the press, and from the whole of the 
evidence at this and the other stations where that rock occurs, I conclude it to be 
of the Old Eed as the most pi-obable of the possible results, but 1 know no one instance 
of real and actual superposition, except perhaps at Dacre Castle. There are 
absolute and good arguments for this antiquity, and jjerhaps none positive against 
it. The Limestone is puzzling, however, and so I always thought it. 

Can you give me a notion of your results as to the general direction of slaty 
clearage in your country ? I mean as compared to the E. W. N. <L S. , also as to its 
relation to the planes of stratification ; is it rectangled to them, (oot quite I think) ; 
have you noticed any general directions to the joints, fissures, or "Backs" in the 
slate ? is there any "bate" besides the clearage, (as we have in Craven always) ? 

Ever yours truly, 

JOHN PHILLIPS. 

This last question addressed to Otley, by Phillips, regarding cleavage, 
brings me to notice what I cannot but consider the best piece of 
geological work ever done by Otley, and that by which he ought to be 
known by all English geologists. No one with even a slight knowledge 
of rocks, can fail to see the difficulty which frequently attaches itself to 
the distinction between bedding and cleavage in such highly contorted 
strata as those of the Skiddaw Slates. The bedding lines are those of 
original deposition, and are frequently marked by bands of slightly 
different colour, (called stripes by the old writers), but the planes of 
cleavage which frequently cause the rock to split readily across the 
bedding have been produced, subsequently, by great lateral pressure, the 
particles of the rock being made to take up new positions, and being 

* In former letters Otley had, from the presence of such fragments of limestone 
in the Conglomerate, doubted whether the latter really underlaid the Carboni- 
ferous Limestone. 



146 

lengthened along the cleavage planes thus produced. If the planes of 
cleavage are mistaken for those of bedding, errors of the most serious 
character might arise in working out the structure of a tract of country. 
Hence, the man who first clearly pointed out the difference between these 
two structural planes, did a great and worthy work, which should receive 
its due acknowledgment from the after-workers. And this did Jonathan 
Otley. 

Professor PhiUips, in his exhaustive Report on "Cleavage and 
Foliation in Rocks," published in the British Association Report for 1856, 
page 369, thus mentions Otley's work. 

"The earliest notice of a real and firm distinction between cleavage 
and stratification, derived from English examples, which I have met with, is 
in Otley's 'Concise description of the English Lakes' (Keswick 1823, 
an earlier publication in Kirkby Lonsdale Magazine, 1820). He speaks 
of the beds of slate with frequently vertical cleavage, and adds — ' but it 
is foimd in various degrees of incliftation, both with respect to the horizon 
and planes of stratification.^ Sedgwick, in 1835, defined the character 
of slaty cleavage, the fundamental generalization, due to him, is that 
'cleavage is a peculiar structure impressed on certain rocks, and in certain 
regions, by the operation of some very extensive cause, operating after 
the stratified rocks had undergone great displacement.' " 

With these remarks on Otley's geological work, I am content to leave 
his character as a geologist. His observations on various points of 
geological detail were numerous and important, but his position among 
English geologists of note will ever rest upon his work in the first classi- 
fication (into three divisions,) of the rocks of the Lake District, and in 
the first drawing attention to the fundamental distinction between 
cleavage and bedding. Jonathan Otley worked according to his light, 
and used the talents given him, in a quiet, unobtrusive manner, which 
bringeth its own reward, even that of a contented and happy spirit, joying 
in the works of nature. 

As a further illustration of Otley's work, and the estimation he was 
held in by Professor Sedgwick, the following series of letters are of great 
interest. They date from the year 1827 to 1855, ^^^^ 7^^"^ before Otley's 
death at the advanced age of ninety. 



147 

From Professor Sedgwick. 

Trinity College, Cambridge, 

February 9tli, 1827. 

Dear Sir, — 

Since I had the pleasure of seeing you at Keswick last September, I have 
made very little progress with my geological papers. A public examination, and 
a course of Lectures to the University, took up the greatest part of my time in the 
October Term ; and as soon as it was finished I started for Paris, at which place I 
remained five weeks ; employed among other things in studying the public collec- 
tions of that capital. You would have been at once delighted and astonished at 
the magnificent fossils and other specimens of natural history in the. Parisian 
museums. In about a fortnight I hope to finish the work which I have at present 
on hand ; and I shall then commence with arranging my Cumberland collection. 
If you have finished the map of the Skiddaw region, have the goodness to send it 
up along with my own geological map, by some safe conveyance. The mail is, I 
think, on the whole, the safest — more safe than a private hand. I don't regard 
any expense of carriage, it would therefore perhaps be best to make it into a 
moderate sized parcel. Pray send at the same time your own account, and I will 
transmit the money by the very first opportunity. Cowper is here with a large 
assortment of minerals, but I have not yet seen him. How is C. Wright getting 
on? Present my kindest remembrances to Mr. Southey, and believe me with 
great regard, 

Very truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 

P.S. — Your own reputation is quite safe in my hands. I will carefully 
describe in my paper all those facts and details, which I derive from yourself and 
from your prior publications. And I shall adopt with proper acknowledgment, 
your three great divisions of the Slate formation. 

From Professor Sedgwick. . 

Deal, October 5th, 1827. 
Dear Sir, — 

I received your map and letter some time last Spring, and hoped to have 
found an opportunity of sending to you ; but I started for Scotland before our men 
left College, and have since that time been scrambling among the Highlands of 
Scotland and the Hebrides. Dr. Ainger is commissioned to pay you five pounds ; 
not as a remuneration, but as an acknowledgment for what you have done for me 
in perfecting the map of the Skiddaw region. I am quite sure the sum is not 
adequate, but the employment was one which I believe you do not dislike ; and 
perhaps in some future year I may again look for your assistance in a friendly way. 
I hope in course of next year to complete a description of a portion of the Cumber- 
land mountains. I shall also endeavour to draw up an account of what I have seen 
in Scotland. 



148 

The conglomerates of the Old Red Sandstone are developed upon an enormous 
scale in the Highlands, composing whole mountain ranges. I traced them from 
the Hebrides by the north-west coast round Cape Wrath, and along the 
north and north east coasts as far as Aberdeenshire. They then run on the south 
side of the Grampians, and gradually slide down under the coal measures of Fife- 
shire and Stirlingshire. If you have any geological news to tell me, I hope you 
will write to me at Cambridge, where I expect to be next week. 

Believe me, my dear Sir, 

Very truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 

J'rotn Professor Sedgwick. 

Trinity College, January 26th, 1828. 

My dear Sir, — 

I was much obliged by the receipt of your plan of the mountains, etc., 
near Buttermere, and shall endeavour to turn it to some account. But I shall hope 
to see you during next summer, and we may perhaps be enabled to make a Short 
excursion together. 

I know you were formerli/ sceptical about the conglomerate of MeU Fell, etc. 
Now the fact is — that it appears just where you would expect it if it were inferior 
to the mountain limestone — that it contains no pebbles of that rock — that close to 
Shap Abbey, and in one or two other places it is actually seen under the limestone. 
It may in some places contain concretions of Umestone, which might be mistaken for 
pebbles. If this be the case, it resembles the old red conglomerate of the west of 
England, which has subordinate calcareous stony concretions sometimes in large 
beds, which are worked for the roads, and called comstone. Wherever I have seen 
the new red conglomerate near the mountain limestone, it has been half made up of 
that rock. 

I have lately been reducing my observations on a part of the Hebrides. I am 
now finishing a paper on the Magnesian limestone which I have had on hand for years. 
On comparing my results with the observations in Central Germany, I find the 
agreement between the contemporaneous deposits more exact than I ever expected 
The great sub-divisions are nearly the same, and the fossils are almost identical. 

As soon as I have finished what I have in hand, I mean to attack the Skiddaw 
region, with the help of your beautiful map. The mineralogy I however find 
extremely perplexing and difficult. I had a copy of your Map of the Lake District, 
but I have mislaid it ; would you have the goodness to send me your latest edition 
of it. You may send it, and direct it as a letter. I will pay you for it when we 
meet. Present my respectful remembrances to Mr. Southey, and my best wishes 
to Charles Wright. 

Very truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 



149 

Fro7n Mr. Otley. 

Keswick, January 30th, 1828. 

Sir,— 

I am much obliged by your explanation relating to the conglomerates ; I 
am not suflSciently acquainted with them myself to form any very strong opinion, 
and I did not know that this of Mell Fell had actually been observed to pass under 
the limestone. Two or three questions naturally suggest themselves. — From 
whence have the included pebbles been derived ? Have they travelled from the 
fells of Orton and collected the calcareous and ferruginous matter by the way, 
or have they once existed as a bed of Gravel, and been afterwards conglomerated 
by the infusion of calcareous tufa ? and what became of the surplus when Mell Fell 
was rounded into its present shape? I was at a loss to guess. I do not know 
that what I have taken for limestone pebbles are to be found in Mell Fell ; I think 
I found one in the Conglomerate, near the foot of Ullswater : from their greater 
frequency in that at Kirkby Lonsdale, I thought it might have been of somewhat 
later formation, and I almost imagined that I saw where it had rested upon the 
Limestone at the foundation of Kirkby Lonsdale Bridge : however, this certainly 
bears no resemblance to the BrocTcrem of Kirkby Stephen, of which Wright has 
brought me a specimen only last week. 

I have not had an opportunity of seeing the Old Red Sandstone, on which, 
"in its common form of a coarse pudding-stone," the lowest stratum of the great 
escarpment of the great limestone series of Cross Fell is said to be incumbent from 
Melmerby, to High Cap, near Marton. 

In the map of Skiddaw, etc., which I sent you, I believe I made a small 
mistake in a part where I ought to have been best acquainted. On the South side 
of the mountain, Bargill should have been made to join Howgill, before it crosses 
the Turnpike road; instead of joining Gale Gill, which enters the Derwent at a 
different place. 

C. H. Wright is obliged by your kind remembrance ; he is preparing to set off 
for Oxford with a collection, in consequence of an invitation from some young 
Collegians last Summer, and you may probably see him at Cambridge before his 
return. I have the pleasure of sending you a copy of my new Map of the Lake 
District, and shall be very happy in making an excursion with you in the ensuing 
Summer. 

I am, Sir, 

Your humble Servant, 

JONATHAN OTLEY. 



10 



150 

From Professor Sedgztnck. 

Trinity College, Cambridge, 
October 29tb, 1836. 
My dear Sir, — 

I am just returned from a geological tour of nearly four months in 
Devonshire, Cornwall, and Pembrokeshire ; and I have now brought to a close a 
series of observations on the older strata of England, which I began in 1822. When 
I shall be able to get my observations down on paper I hardly know ; as new matter 
is continually rising up, and my health when I lead a sedentary life, is never very 
good. When I began my work in Westmoreland, (the year before I became 
acquainted with you at Keswick) I was puzzled to death at first by the appearance 
of three parallel systems of planes, traversing many of the coarse upper slates. 
These were joints, cleavage planes, and beds. But which were the true beds? I 
found them to be indicated by the stripe and other appearances not easy to describe. 
I also find among my old memoranda a notice of two sets of master-joints : one set 
I call dip joints, because they are nearly transverse to the beds, and therefore 
coincident nearly with the dip — another set, strike joints, nearly at right angles to 
the former, and therefore nearly in the direction or strike of the beds. Unfortunately 
during subsequent years, though I often remarked the joints and the rhombohedral 
soUds into which they often divided the slate rocks, I never noted their direction by 
the compass. Now during the past summer, I have found that in the Granite from 
Dartmoor to Land's End, there are three sets of master-joints. First set— horizontal, 
or nearly so, on the tops of the moors ; Second set — nearly vertical, and between 
Mag. N. and True N. ; Third set — not far from Mag. E. and W. These divide 
the granite into great cuboidal masses. Besides these master-joints, there are of 
course many "cracks, backs, slides, flaws," etc., etc., which are quite irregular and 
undefinable. The Granite workers split the blocks parallel to the three joints above 
mentioned, and the forces required to split the blocks in these directions are nearly 
as the Nos. one, two, and three, respectively. Again, the longer axes of the felspar 
crystals are on the average nearly parallel to the N. and S. joints, it is therefore 
quite certain that these joints are (at least in part,) due to crystalline action. In 
these observations, I have only verified what others have done before ; I have also 
observed in many places, that the joints of the granite 2Jass, ivithout interruption, 
through the contiguous slates. Such slates are however crystalline, and altered by the 
contact of the granite, or probably became solid nearly at the same moment with it. 
I have however, observed this Summer, traces of parallel systems of Mag. E. aud 
W., and Mag. N. aud S. joints in calcareous slates very far from the granite, and 
many miles beyond its influence. PhilHps, in his geology of Yorkshire, has found 
the master-joints in the chain of mountain limestone affecting the above-named 



directions, viz: — Mag. N. and S., and Mag. E. and W. The same observations 
have been made by Mr. Hopkins, in Derbyshire, and extended into the coal field. 
Now, I am anxious that you, whom I respect as a careful and good observer, should 
bear these facts in mind, whenever you visit the rocks of your neighbourhood. 
Note the master-joints carefully, and by comparing different points together, try 
to reduce the results to system. Try also to put Wright on the same scent. The 
observations should be carefully made and registered : but they are not very 
troublesome, and may be made from time to time as occasion offers. Among 
mechanical rocks, I have also seen many examples of joints in the same direction as 
the dip, and also at right angles to it, i.e. dip-joints and strike -j oints ; as I am in 
the habit of calling them. These, at least, have nothing to do with the points of 
the compass. I do however think that I was wrong in what I published some 
time since, when I stated that joints were due to mechanical, and not to chemical 
forces. I thought then that they were produced mainly by contraction, when the 
primeval masses passed into a solid state. This theory may explain the origin of 
some of them ; but it does not account for others which I now think the results of 
crystalline action. Besides the stripes, you so well know, parallel to the beds and 
crossing the cleavage of slates — there are sometimes in Cornwall very fine stripes, 
resembling scratches along the surface of the Slates, and also a kind of false stripe. 
The strice and false stripe, are both parallel to joints in the same or neighbouring 
rocks of the quarries ; I don't remember having seen such appearances in the green 
slates of Cumberland : but I think there is sometimes a false stripe in the Skiddaw 
slate. I am not sure I make myself understood ; but I shall be glad to hear from 
you on these subjects, and when I can procure a frank, I shall perhaps trouble you 
again with some questions. The winter has already set in with much severity, 
and we have thick snow on the ground accompanied by hard frost. 

Believe me, dear Sir, 

Very truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 

From Mr. Otlcy. 

Keswick, December 20th, 1836. 
Sir,— 

I should not have so long delayed acknowledging the receipt of yours of 
the 29th October, had 1 been able to say anything satisfactory in reply. With 
regard to the joints in the slate rocks, I have found them running in such various 
directions that I considered them accidental, and the result of contraction ; and 
having imbibed that idea, I have observed nothing to make me relinquish it. For 
some years I have travelled but little, and had few opportunities of conversation 



152 

with any experienced geologists. The only rock that I have encountered since I 
received your letter is that of Castlehead, near this town. I find the most general 
bearing of joints in that rock is about 46° W. of true N., and nearly perpendicular ; 
at least in the upper part : but there is a portion of rock appearing on the S.E. 
side, about three yards thick, which is divided by parallel joints bearing 40° E. of 
true N., and dipping to the N.W., at an angle with the Horizon of forty degrees. 
Beneath this the rock appears to regain its former perpendicularity. In a quarry 
on the E. side, where they are getting stones for a new church, now building at 
the south end of Keswick, I observed a master- joint bearing about 65" W., and on 
the S. W. side I observed one in the magnetic meridian : but there are indeed joints 
in every imaginable direction. 

I had a letter from Professor Phillips, in which he asks if I have noticed any 
general directions to the joints, etc., in the slate ; I answered that I had not ; and 
to his question — ''is there any 'bate' besides the cleavage?"— I answered that, 
according to my notion, the Skiddaw Slates have a cleavage without a bate: the 
green slates have a bate synonymous with cleavage ; and that the Ingleton slates 
possess both bate and cleavage in some degrees. 

I dare say you are acquainted with that property in the green slates, especially 
those of Borrowdale, which admits of their being cut, that is, being divided into 
breadths in a certain direction ; of which I cannot discover the relation to either 
the cleavage or stratification. This, and the bate, I am willing to refer to 
crystalline action ; but that of the joints I cannot comprehend ; as they include 
angles of such various degrees. 

I showed your letter to my neighbour Wright, who has of late had better and 
more frequent opportunities of observing and learning the opinions of others than 
I have had; but he has not paid attention to this part of the subject. 

I have been puzzled a good deal by what you call a false stripe in the Skiddaw 
Slate, as I could not refer it to the stratification, as we are in the habit of doing in 
the green slate, I suppose one is an effect of lateral pressure, the other of deposition. 

In summer I spent a few days upon the coast about Flimby ; there are a great 
variety of granite pebbles along the beach there, and at Allonby ; but I was most 
at a loss to trace the blue stones there in such quantity ; I suppose it is the Scotch 
Whinstone, so much spoken of by the late Mr. Mc.Adam in his road -making. 

I am quite aware of the trouble you will experience in arranging your 
multitudinous observations : in my limited ones I find considerable difficulty in 
finding what I am in search of ; and the observations n(jt being all made, with equal 
accuracy, makes it still more perplexing. I find two observations on Brathay Flag 
quarry, which is one of our best sections in the upper slate. Taking a mean, what 
I call the'plane of stratification, bears 85° E., dipping S. at an angle of 25°; the 
hate or cleavage bearing 55° E., nearly perpendicular. 



153 

I am quite well iu liealth at present, but last winter, I had a complaint begun 
in my hand, which deranged my whole frame, and summer was considerably 
advanced before I regained my usual strength. Although, as Dr. Southey says, 
passing into "the sere and yellow leaf," I am still proud to be acknowledged as 
one lit to be spoken with on a subject of science ; and shall always be glad if I can 
answer any question you may honour me with. 
I am, Sir, 

Your obliged and obedient servant, 

JONATHAN OTLEY. 

From Professor Sedgwick. 

Cambridge, February 14th, 1847. 

My dear Sir, — 

I do not know how many years have passed away since I last saw you ; 
but I continue to remember, with iindiminished pleasure, the happy days I spent 
with you among the Cumbrian mountains in the summers of 1823 and 1824. Then 
I was a vigorous walker and climber among the mountains. But alas ! twenty-two 
years have taken away from the strength and activity of my limbs, and I, year by 
j'ear, find myself less equal to those robust tasks I formerly set myself. In short, 
1 have nearly done my field work, and all I hope to do now is, to draw up a 
systematic account of our older rocks, in two parts. The first part is to include all 
the slate rocks, and the sporiated unstratifled rocks below the old red sandstone. 
The second part is to include the old red sandstone — the rocks of Devon and Corn- 
^^'all — the carboniferous series — and the magnesian limestone. There the work is 
to terminate ; for the secondary rocks, including the new red sandstone, do not 
come within my plan. 

My health is not good, for (not to mention the influenza, which I regard as an 
accident, tho' a bad one, as it has kept me indoors for two months, ) each spring 
and part of each summer, ever since 1830, have I been attacked by rheumatic gout ; 
and while it hangs about me, I am hardly good for anything ; but I do trust that 
within twelve months I may finish the first and hardest part of the work I have in 
hand. Three plates of fossils, come to me by post, from my artist and naturalist 
in London, remind me that it is high time to rouse myself, if possible, from this 
long and weary fit of influenza, and resume my labours. 

In describing Cumberland, I shall have to give profiles and sections in various 
directions ; and I should feel greatly indebted to you if you could lend me a helping 
hand in finishing the profiles ; for you know the heights of the hills and irregulari- 
ties of surface far better than I can do, especially after the lapse of so many years. 
Any help I receive from you shall be faithfully acknowledged. Should you kindly 



154 



consent to this, I would fix upon certaiu lines of section and send down a rough 
profile outline to be im]3roved and corrected by yourself. I wish this had been 
dons many years since, but I cannot call back what is past. Your improved map 
of Skiddaw Forest (made many years since) I have in my drawer, and I hope to 
make it the foundation of a separate memoir for the Geological Society this spring. 
I should also be obliged for a list of the mines now working in your country, and 
of the nature and quantity of their produce. Much has been done in this way 
since my walks in Cumberland, and no one knows the subject so well as you. I 
have often visited Coniston, which of late years has become a great mining countrj^ ; 
and all the facts I want I could procure from JMr. Taylor. Not that I mean to 
enter at large on mines or mining, — only to give the leading facts, mineral and 
statistical, in a note or appendix to some chapter or chapters. Has anj'thing been 
done of late years in the centre of Skiddaw Forest ? When I was there the veins 
were not worked, except for procuring minerals, of which there were many curious 
specimens, such as Wolfram, Tungstate of Lime, Apatite, Schorl, &c., &c. But I 
consider the facts respecting the mineral veins of less importance to my intended 
work, than the profiles I have mentioned. There is another subject I often thought 
of writing about while I was rambling during the two last summers with J. Euth- 
ven of Kendal. He told me that my letters, published in Mr. Hudson's Guide to 
the Lakes, had hurt the sale of your work, and that you rather complained of it. 
He did not say that you complained of me, and I assure you, you had no reason to 
do so ; for I have no pecuniary interest whatsoever in Mr. Hudson's Guide. I have 
told my tale fairly in my letters. Before I ever saw your face (which was in the 
summer of 1S23), I had promised Mr. Wordsworth, when he published a new 
edition of his Essay on the Lake Scenery (I do not remember its title), to give him 
a sketch of the Geology of the Country. He asked me to do so (I think in 1822 
and again in June, 1823), and I said, '•! have yet to learn the Geology of your 
country ; but by the time you bring out a new edition, I hope to know enough for 
the kind of sketch you ask for. " Thus I gave my word to him, more than once. 
My promise was not claimed for twenty years ; and it was claimed by Mr. Words- 
worth in a letter to me at Cambridge ; and when I sent down the letters to Mr. 
Danby of Kendal, who undertook to see them thro' the press, I did not know what 
was the exact nature of Mr. Hudson's work. I thought it was to be little more 
than a reprint of Mr. Wordsworth's former little book, with a few notes and 
additions. If I have hurt the sale of your work, I am truly sorry for it ; for I 
think it one of the very best guides that ever was written, and I always recommend 
it. But I have also hurt the sale of Panoramic Views by Mr. Westall, my brother- 
in-law. He tells me that I have almost destroyed the sale of views of which he 
before had made a considerable profit. If so, there was no help for it. I was 
bound by my promise, and must have performed it, tho' I had foreseen the conse- 



155 

queuces, which assuredly I did not ; for I sent down the letters never dreaming 
about any injury they might do to the sale of any other work, and was very glad 
when they were once off my hands. I trust you will see by this explanation how 
entirely free I have been from any unkind feeling towards yourself. Do you wish 
to publish a geological majD of j'our country, on tlie scale of your Lake Map ? If 
so, I would most willingly help you to the best of my power ; and you might use 
my name in any way you thought fit. I think such a map, with a short explanatory 
sheet, might have a sale. Have you a copy of the last edition of my letters (pub- 
lished 1846) with the long list of fossils ? If not, I mil tell Hudson to forward you 
one with my compliments. I think it is now high time to set you at liberty. I 
shall be glad of any geological news. Is Charles Wright flourishing and making 
discoveries ? Remember me to him and any one else who remembers me. 

Very truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 

From Mr. Otlcy to Professor Sedgwick. 

Keswick, Februarj' 24th, 1847. 

Rev. Sir, — 

I was very glad to see your writing after so long absence ; at the same 
time I feel for the infirmities of which you have to complain. I should have had 
great pleasure in executing what you request, if I had felt able to do it ; but if I 
should undertake what I fou^jd myself incapable of completing, it would hurt my 
feelings too much for me to bear. I am as well as a person can expect to be at the 
age of eighty-one ; but I have left off rambling the mountains for the last ten years. 
Tlie last time I was on Helvellyn was with Dr. Dalton in 1836, and my last time 
on Skiddaw, the same year. I was so kindly noticed both by Dr. Dalton and 
yourself, that to see each of you once a year was one of my principal and greatest 
enjoj^ments. If I had been as I was twenty years since, when I made jou the map 
of Skiddaw, I think I could not have managed what you require, without having 
time to walk along each line of section, or at least within sight of it. I have seen 
so little of the mountains for the last ten years, except those in my view every day, 
that my recollection of their features is not so perfect as it once was ; and some of 
your sections will pass through parts with which I have never been much acquainted ; 
besides, I am but a poor draughtsman. Mr. Foster was not satisfied with what I 
had drawn and engraved myself for the Guide, but he sent an artist to draw them 
afresh from the same points of view for the last edition. 

Mr. Fluitoft's model would be of service in drawing these profiles ; and perhaps 
Mr. F. might be the likeliest person to do it. I may observe, there is one thing 
not quite satisfactory in drawing a section ; if the vertical dimensions are on the 



156 

the same scale as the horizontal, it looks very poor aud tiat ; and if the vertical 
line is enlarged, it will appear distorted. 

Mr. Flintoft was in London some weeks last summer exhibiting before Parlia- 
ment a model of a gentleman's estate in Lancashire, to show how it would be 
aflfected (injured) by railways passing through it. There is nothing doing in the 
mining way at present in this parish, except the Black Lead Mine, and I believe 
they are getting little or nothing. I understand they are driving a level below all 
the old workings. There is nothing doing in Loweswater, and I think Routen 
Gill is the only place in Caldbeck Fells. The search for mineral specimens near 
the Caldew is nearly abandoned ; the surface has been so often examined, there is 
little to be found. Greenside Miue is still, I believe, going on favourably. 

When my map first came out in 1818, Mr. Farey was at the Black Lead Mine ; 
he felt great interest in it, and got favorable notices inserted in the Monthly 
Magazine. When here again, about ten years later, he pressed me very much to 
colour it as a geological map, and so did others. I tried a few, but could not 
entirely satisfy myself, and did not find it likely to be profitable. I sold to Dr. 
Buckland and Mr. Greenough each one, with a sheet taken out of the Guide, at 
5s. each. This was the most I recollect making of it. 

I am sorry that you should feel it necessary to enter into a particular explan- 
ation of the circumstances which led to the appearance of your letters in Mr. 
Wordsworth's Guide. I am quite sure it was far from your intention to do any- 
thing that would tend to my disadvantage. I always felt a pleasure in seeing ever 
so short a notice in the "Athenaeum," of any paper you may have been reading ; 
but I did say to Mr. Ruthven, and perhaps to others, that I had rather have seen 
your letters in some other work than a Guide to the Lakes ; as, if they augmented 
the sale of Mr. Hudson's work, of course mine would be diminished ; at the same 
time, I am bound to acknowledge my gratitude for the manner in which you have 
mentioned my name on this as well as on other occasions, and your recommendations 
have undoubtedly tended to my advantage. 

In 1837, I saw you at Kirkby Lonsdale ; I was there again in 184'2, when Mr. 
Fisher told me yoii had written an article on Geology for Mr. Wordsworth to insert 
in a Guide. I could have liked much to have seen it before mine was printed, but 
there was no opportunity ; however, at Kendal, on my return, Mr. Hudson kindly 
presented me with a copy of his work. I have not got a copy of your last letters, 
but have seen it at the bookseller's ; you know I am very ignorant on the subject 
of fossUs. 

I know something of the history of Wordsworth's Guide, as it was once named, 
and is now generally called, although Hudson has changed its title. After mine 
came out, Mr. Nicholson made an overture to me for the future publication, but I 
told him I could not take it from Mr. Foster, who has assisted me in bringing it 



157 

out. Afterwards they made some arrangement with Mr. N. I have a copy 
labelled, "Wordsworth's Guide through the Lake District. 4s. Fifth edition." 
And on the title page, published by Hudson and Nicholson, 1835, in 140 pages, 
including an Itinerary of the Lakes "with permission of the Author." I asked 
Mr. Nicholson whom they called the author, as a great part of it had been pub- 
lished as an accompaniment to my map of the Lakes ever since 1819. 

Speaking of Mr. VVestall, I think "Fisher's Views," of which hundreds are 
annually sold here at 3d. and 2id. each, do more harm to Mr. VVestall's sale than 
any other thing. I was somewhat displeased with Mr. Flintoft when he imitated 
for Mr. Hudson my sketches of mountains, to many of which I had furnished him 
with the names ; and perhaps Mr. Hudson may not like that he has done the same 
for Black's Guide, which is got up in such a way as to be the most formidable rival 
that has yet come out. 

Mr. Brayley was here on account of some property of which he is left trustee ; 
he sent me a S3'llabus of two lectures he had been delivering on the Geology of the 
Lake District. 

Mr. Cooper stUl attends, at the season, with a splendid collection of crystal- 
lized minerals, and also a gi'eat variety of cut and polished articles. 

My usual walk is to Barrow Common. I have only been twice to Lowdore in 
the last year. I have stood this winter, so far, better than I did the last. My 
hearing is the greatest defect at present. 

To a person that could be persuaded to expect fossils in the red rock, on 
Barrow Common, it would require no great stretch of the imagination to discover 
the impression of an ammonite twelve inches diameter on the road-side, just within 
the old gateway ; I believe it was not exposed when you were here. 

Mr. Foster was at an unwarrantable expense in procuring the woodcuts for 
m)' last edition, and if there is a deficiency of sale, the loss will fall more heavily 
on him than me. I am afraid we cannot yet aflford another edition. I have been 
writing a page on the introduction of railways, which is all that I shall be able to 
add this year. If I cannot lay claim to superiority, I can to originality. I have 
laid a foundation on which others have built, and if they rise above me, I must be 
content to live on the ground floor. I will keep the thing alive as long as I can, 
though I sell but a few copies. I am happy to say that my comfort, and better or 
worse living, does not depeud now upon the sale of the work. 

Draft of a letter from Jonathan Otley to Professor Sedgwick. 

The above draft, when compared with the actual letter sent to 
Professor Sedgwick, which Professor Hughes has kindly sent me, shows 
how carefully written all his letters were ; the matter in both is much the 
same, but the arrangement of paragraphs somewhat different. 



158 

Ft'om Professor Sedgiuick. 

Norwich, May 2nd, 1853. 
My dear Sir, — 

Your kind remembrance has been forwarded to me at Norwich, where I 
am now residing, and I heartily thank you for it. I cannot forget the happy and 
laborious days I spent in Cumberland, and the pleasure and instruction I had from 
your society. Alas ! thirty-one years have passed away since I first saw you at 
Keswick. Every spring I am tormented by a long lingering rheumatic affection, 
they call suppressed gout. It takes away my sleep, and destroys my spirits. I 
have it now. Business calls me away for one day to Cambridge, and I stumbled, 
while packing my bag, on your note, and I resolved to answer it forthwith. Some 
one told me a few days since, that poor Charles Wright had come to an untimely 
end. Is it true ? Pray send me some Keswick news. And if it would not trouble 
you too much, I will send you a few questions about the mineral veins, now worked 
or formerly worked near you. The/y is come for me ; and the trains wait for no 
man. So no more at present. I hope to see you in the summer. 
Ever truly and gratefully yours, 

ADAM SEDGWICK. 

From Professor Sedgwick. 

Norwich, May 12th, 1853. 
My dear Sir, — 

Your long and kind letter reached me yesterday morning, and I was 

shocked at your allusion to poor Bird's suffering and death. From your words I 

suppose he has met with some horrible death ; but I am anxious to hear more on 

the subject, as no one had mentioned it to me before. He was an old pupil of 

mine, and the' eccentric in his habits, he was at the bottom a kind-hearted man, 

and he has I beheve a great regard for me. Pray is his widow living ? In regard 

to your printed paper, I can offer no opinion on the first 'part of it, as I do not 

know the arrangement of the drifted matter to whicli you allude. I am a believer 

in great currents, such as you imagine, and they liave, I doubt not, been caused by 

sudden changes of level between sea and land. The second part of your paper is 

ingenious and good. I hope to see Keswick again this summer, and to have the 

pleasure of shaking you by the hand. Eemember me to Wright, if you see him. 

He is worth a hundred dead men. With best wishes for the restoration of your 

strength by the influence of summer temperature. 

Believe me, very truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 

P.S. — I am devoured by rheiunatic gout, and feel the infirmities brought by 
sixty-eight winters that have j)assed over me. 



159 

From Mr. Otley. 

Keswick, May 9th, 1853. 
Eeverend Sir, — 

I was afraid that my tedious epistle of February 24th, 1847, would have 
so far exhausted your patience that I concluded if ever I presumed to write to you 
again my words should be few ; and I was truly glad when I found that my short 
note had been honoured with so instant and kind a reply. I am sorry that your 
complaint, which you mentioned in 1847, still troubles you. I shall first acquaint 
you with my own situation in regard to health, that in any future correspondence 
you may consider that I am, as to myself, not as the same person you saw me 
eleven or twelve j^ears ago. I enjoyed good health till February and March, 1852, 
when I felt myself so well that I walked two or three times a week to my favorite 
spot at Barrow Side, where I could spend hours in amusing myself,, by forming 
little wells in the springs which issue from the mountain side. 

As the weather grew warmer, I was obliged to contract my excursions. In 
the drought of April I stopped at Friar's Crag to see how the depth of the lake 
was reduced ; and the last time that I reached the lake side was the 4th of September. 
I then began to feel that the old stone stairs that I had clomb for fifty-five years 
were too hard for me, and I took a small cottage, about three doors from Charles 
Wright, where I am now living, having got a niece to keep the house ; and I felt 
so gradually losing strength that since the 12th of December I have scarcely been 
out of doors till yesterdaj% which was very warm. I reached as far as the market 
place — nearly as far as the pofet-office ; and to-day being colder again, I reached 
about the same distance. On leaving my old apartments I was obliged to submit 
the greatest part of my Books, Botanical and Geological specimens, and watch- 
makers' tools to the Auctioneer's hammer ; such a variety as never was exposed in 
Keswick, when 336 lots were disposed of, leaving me, after expenses, about twenty 
pounds. 

You do not mention the slip of paper from the Kendal Mercury enclosed with 
my note, which I have called a bold conception. I enclosed a copy to Mr. Rooke, 
from whom I have received a rather lengthy reply ; he speaks of valuable truths of 
which he has availed himself as stepping stones, and of which your "bold 
conception" is a vast move in advance. 

Tuesday Morning, May 10th, gloomy and cold. 

Snow on Skiddaw, more on Helvellyn. 

JONATHAN OTLEY. 

Memoranda enclosed in above draft of letter to Sedgwick: — 
February 9th, 1827. I shall adopt your three di\'isions. 
January 16th, 1826. 
October 29th, 1836. 



IGO 

July 20th, 1841. llelating to Rooke's Geology. 

February 14th, 1847. Wordsworth. — In the two last summers John Ruthven 
told me. Before I ever saw your face (which was in the 
summer of 1823), I had promised Mr. Wordsworth. He 
asked me in 1822, (and again in June 1823). I said I have 
yet to learn the geology of your country. Three letters 
were published in Wordsworth's guide in 1842. 

February 17th, 1855. 

From Mr. Otley to Professor Sedgwick. 

January 19th to 23rd, 1854. 
Rev. Sir,— 

On the completion of my eighty-eighth year I feel in somewhat better 
health than I was last year at this time. I have out-lived nearly all my acquaint- 
ances and correspondents ; but I am still able to write a letter, or to take a walk 
to the water-side on a fine day : these have been rather scarce lately, but to-day 
is better. Yours of May 12th led me to hope that I should see you at Keswick 
in the course of summer. I was much pleased with the idea, but as summer 
advanced, reason told me that I could hardly expect it. There is a paper in the 
"Lonsdale Magazine," for October 1820, entitled " Remarks on the Succession of 
Rocks in the District of the Lakes, by J. Otley. " On reading it now, I wondered 
how I came, at that time, to know so much of the subject ; and was almost 
ashamed that, with all my oj)portunities, in thirty-three years, I have learned so 
little since. I read your three letters to Mr. Wordsworth with pleasure, agreeing 
in all they contain, and proud of the way in which my name is introduced. Your 
fourth letter I did not see, till it and the fifth came together in Mr. Hudson's 
" Complete Guide." In the fourth I was struck with the word sheerhate, a term I 
had not before observed in print, although I had frequently heard it in conversation 
among the quarrymen. I should say, it has a cleavage diagonal or oblique to the 
bed ; and from the little I know of the Horton flags, I should be iaclined to place 
them in the same category. I have read such parts of your fourth and fifth letters 
as relate to the district with which I am acquainted ; into Wales I cannot follow 
you. While I feel flattered by the way in which you continue to place my three 
divisions of rocks before the public, I cannot but feel sorry, that in your endeavour 
to assimilate the rocks of the two countries, you should be led to remove the 
boundary, I had thought fully estabUshed, between my second and third divisions ; 
but not doubting your reasons sufl&cient to satisfy yourself in the conclusion you 
have arrived at in p. 242, I can have nothing more to say. What I have had 
printed cannot be altered ; there are copies of my Guide still on sale ; and I can 
see no probability of another edition ever being called for. With regard to 



161 

fossils, I know so little, that it ill becomes me to speak ; but I am not convinced 
of the propriety of joining the Skiddaw slate, and all up to the Coniston flags, in 
one group. I should rather have seen the fossils arranged the same as plants, viz. 
the name of the individual and the place where found. 

I have almost lost the companionship of our old friend C. H. Wright. He is 
living chiefly at Swineside, engaged by a Mr. Emerson in superintending about 
thirty workmen driving levels into the bowels of the mountain on the north of the 
river Caldew. The chief product I believe is Wolfram. They have met with a 
little lead and copper, but little of anything is yet brought to market. 

I am very lonely. I have had no conversation with anyone respecting your 
letters ; I could not lay them aside without some observation. 

If I have spoken freely, I hope it will be received with the same kindly feeling 
with which you have always treated me. 

From Professor Sedgwick. 

Norwich, February 5th, 1854. 
My dear Sir, — 

So you have completed your 88th year, while I have not yet quite 
completed my 68th ; but spite of a difi-erence of more than twenty years in our 
ages, you have in some respects the advantage over me. Your health this winter 
has been far better than mine, and your clear hand-writing beats mine out and out. 
I gave this Autumn, my thirty-sixth course of geological lectures, and to the largest 
class I ever had to address. This was flatteriug to an old man, and perhaps I over- 
exerted myself : for I broke down before the end of my course, and had such attacks 
of swimming in the head that I was forced to suspend aU lectures for fifteen days. 
The Term was hardly over when I was attacked by broDchitis, and was never able 
to leave my room for twenty-nine days ; and when I had partially recovered and 
began to go out, I had another attack of giddiness. So soon as I was able to travel, 
I was sent 'by my doctor to my nephew and niece, who are in my Canon's residence 
near this Cathedral ; and I was ordered to live on slops, to walk as much as I 
could bear, and to abstain, as far as possible, from reading, writing, and thinking. 
All this kind of abstinence I have practised almost literally ; so that after more 
than three weeks' idleness at this place, I am now nearly off the sick list. An 
accident to some lithographic plates last summer detained me three or four weeks 
in Cambridge longer than I intended ; so that I had a very few days to spare for 
my north country visit : and really had not time to visit Keswick and St. Bees' as 
I had fully intended, and greatly wished: but if I have a few days to spare next 
summer, I hope that I may still have the pleasure of shaking you by the hand, and 
of congratulating you on your healthy and vigorous old age. My own Father lived 



162 

into his 93rd year, had the use of most of his faculties in great perfection, enjoyed 
a healthy aud happy life to the last day of it ; and at last died without pain or 
struggle as quietly as a child drops asleep in a cradle. He was a good man, and as 
faithful a believer in God's mercies through Christ as if he had lived among and 
been taught by the Apostles. 

I do make a separate group of the Skiddaw slate : and I should give it a 
separate colour on a Geological Map. I call it loiver Cumbrian, or, (taking the 
Welsh type), lower Cambrian. The Green Slate and Porphjry I call middle 
Cumbrian, and I also give it a separate colour. Certainly, if we went by true 
primeval character, we should have a new colour and a new group at the Coniston 
Limestones. But the fossils interfere — for the Coniston fossils are absolutely 
identical with those of the Welsh calcareous Slates, which alternate with, and 
descend far down into the beds that are analogous to the green slate and Porphyry. 
The fossils below the hard Coniston grits are of the old Cumbrian type. While the 
fossils above the grits are of the Silurian type. From the two fossil groups I have 
about one hundred and seventy species, and the number of species common to the 
two groups amounts only to about three per cent, of the whole. The arrangement 
of the fossils which you suggest, is actually adopted in the large systematic descrip- 
tion of the old fossils in the Cambridge Museum. The names of the several species 
are followed immediately by the localities. I will some day draw out my North of 
England list in that way and send it you. There ! I have said very little, yet I 
have contrived to fill my sheet. My lungs are still very tender, so that I dare not 
expose them to the cold of the Cathedral : by the end of this week I do hope to get 
back to Cambridge. Believe me, with the heart-felt regard of an old friend. 

Very truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 

From Mr. Otley. 

Keswick, February 10th, 1855. 
Rev. and dear Sir, — 

Another year has passed over since our last correspondence. In your 
last, dated February 5th, 1854, you indulged a hope that I might see you in the 
ensuing summer. I am afraid that we have little left here to induce you ; I should 
certainly be very glad to see you ; but I cannot say why I should be very sorry on 
your not coming, as if you were here, I should be sorry that I could not enjoy your 
company as formerly, when we could walk over the hills together ; altho', even in 
1823, you were too much for me. When I cannot see you, I am always glad to 
hear of you or from you. I shall expect to hear of you next week by the Kendal 
papers ; and anything//-0OT yourself at a more convenient time, will satisfy me that 
I am not forgotten by one who has always treated me with so much kindness and 



163 

condescension. Not having been able to read or to think much on Geology since 
my last, I have little to say upon that subject, but to acknovrledge my obligation for 
the considerate manner in which you have replied to my remarks upon your letters, 
and for your notices of the Good old man. Having entered upon my ninetieth 
year, I have the use of my limbs, and a good appetite, but subject to various 
infirmities ; that which most interferes with my rest, is a series of fictitious noises 
in my ears or head, from which I can learn no hopes of relief ; and it may take a 
long time in wearing me down. We have had severe winter weather lately, and I 
can get but little out of doors ; on a fine day I am able to walk to the water-side. 

If I mention your proposal to send me a list of fossils, it is only to say that I 
cannot wish you to take the trouble, as I shall not be able to take advantage of it. 

JONATHAN OTLEY. 

From Professor Sedgwick. 

Cambridge, February 17th, 1855. 
My dear Friend, — 

Your kind letter has been on my table since Tuesday last, when it first 
reached me. Allow me to give you joy on having a head as clear, and a hand as 
firm, as you had in 1823, when I first had the pleasure of seeing you at Keswick. 
In what you write, and in the manner in which you write, I see no signs of decrepi- 
tude ; yet you tell me that you have entered on your ninetieth year, and therefore, 
you are nearly twenty years older than I am ; for, to use a good homely expression 
of my dear native valley, "I am going in my seventieth year;" and, in a few more 
weeks, if God spare my life, I shall have completed my journey tliro' this seventieth 
year. Let us then, my kind and valued old friend, be thankful for the mercies we 
have had, and in that spirit try to use well that remnant of life which our Maker 
stiU gives us, in a sure Christian hope that all is not to end here, and that our 
humble duty will be accepted by Him, not for anything in us, but for the sake of 
One who has paid our ransom and made us free to count ourselves as God's 
children. Like yourself, I have found my side deserted by old friends. It 
must be so to any man who lives to seventy. Of course, you feel this kind of 
solitude still more than I do. During last year my health was never good ; and I 
have begun this year very badly on the score of health. My lecture which was to 
have been given on the 12th, was thus put off to the 26th. But the terrible 
weather has prevented the restoration of my lungs to a healthy state, so that I 
last night wrote to the Mayor, and told hiin that I did not look forward, with any 
hope, to being in a condition to perform my promise with any comfort to myself, 
or advantage to the Society of Naturalists, by the day I had fixed upon. But, 
God willing, I hope to come down about the middle of March, and at length to 
perform my promise, the very thought of which makes me unhappy, now that it is 



164 

so long delayed in the performance. When I last wrote to you, I fuUy intended 
to visit Keswick during the summer of 1854, and now I hope to visit Keswick 
before the coming summer is over ; but I cannot do so with much confidence, 
considering my many disappointments arising out of uncertain health. 

Instead of going down to the north in the summer vacation, I made a short, and 
I think my last, trip in Wales, to look at one or two doubtful geological sections ; — 
and as a mark of my kind regards, I will send you "Author's copies" of the two 
papers I published late in the year in the "Annals of Natural History." I have no 
news ; for I live almost in solitude, not being able to go out among my college 
friends, or to preside at the table in our great hall. And I live in a great measure 
upon slops. This is, indeed, necessary, considering the condition of my lungs, and 
my entire want of exercise. How different from the life we led together in Cum- 
berland during many days of the glorious, bright summer of 1824 ! 

I sleep very badly, and rise early, spite of the weather. I light my own fire, 
which is laid over-night ; and I have a cup of coffee by candle-light. When I visit 
the north (as I hope in a few weeks) I hope again to write to you. 
I am, my dear friend, in heart-felt good-will. 

Ever truly yours, 

A. SEDGWICK. 

Otley's meteorological observations further illustrate his industry and 
carefulness. One MS. book contains his observations from 1844 to 
1855, all carefully written out and tabulated; and I trust Mr. Crosthwaite 
will incorporate these with his own observations at some future time. 

Among miscellaneous papers in MS., are numerous calculations of 
the heights of mountains, notes on floating islands in various parts of the 
world, and on the helm winds. All these, where concerned with his own 
observations, have been worked up into the articles on these subjects in 
his guide-book. 

THE CLOSE. 

Even in extreme old age his interest in his beloved mountains never 
failed him. In the year 1841, he had corresponded with the Astronomer 
Royal about the cistern on the top of Great Gable, and in the autumn 
of 1854, several letters passed between the Royal Observatory at 
Greenwich, and Otley's lodging at Keswick. The last'of these on either 
side I will quote. 



165 

From the Astronomer Royal. 

Koyal Observatory, Greenwich. 
Dear Sir,— ^^^*- October 5th. 

Your complaints about the cistern on the Great Gable have not fallen to 
the ground. Since I last wrote to you, I have consulted with Dr. Lietch who at 
my request, was so kind as to undertake the practical management of the' matter 
and we have fairly shifted the man ten feet to the Magnetic West. I have given 
notice of this to the Ordnance Survey Office, so that no confusion wiU be produced 
in their bearings. As you probably remember very weU the former state of the 
cistern, perhaps you wiU have the goodness to compare notes with Dr Lietch or 
with Mr. John Jackson, the postmaster at Eostliwaite, who went up with Dr 
Lietch and directed the wallers in the work. I should be glad to know that the 
cistern had not suffered under the operations of the Sappers of the Survey. 

I am, dear Sir, 

Yours truly, 

G. B. AIRY. 
Frnm Mr. Otley to the Astronomer Royal. 

October 10th, 1854. 
^ ours of the 5th came duly to hand. Dr. Lietch called on me yesterday to say 
that they had built a nice man on the Gable, according to your directions. If you 
had not distinctly mentioned magnetic West, I should have thought it would have 
been true west, as I presume the Ordnance Maps are laid down from the true meridian 
He says they could not perceive any damage that has been done to it I should 
have hked that he could have given some more of his observations long since made 
He mentioned a natural crack which would prevent the cistern being filled to the 
very brim, and he threw out a suggestion that the crack might be filled ud to 
ascertain if it was really a spring. I told him I thought that was decided long 
since as from the thousands of copies of my description, that have been put into 
circulation since 1812, where I have said it is not a stream. If I had been wrong 
I should have beeu contradicted before this time. I should have liked to have seen 
John Jackson on the subject, but he seldom comes to Keswick, and I as seldom 
reach Rosthwaite. Altho' I shall never see it, I am glad that it has been restored 
to Its original state, so that if it ever was worth looking at as a natural curiosity it 
may s ,1 continue the same. I have some recoUection of a natural crack in he 
rock, 1 believe in the angle towards Great End. 

J^etu^en the years 1848 and 1855, a number of letters passed 
between Otley and Mr. George Harrison, of Longlands, near Milnthorpe. 



166 

In one of these dated September, 1848, Otley says, "I have outlived 
most of my old correspondents, and feel grateful to any who favour me 
with a few observations ; at the same time I should be sorry if I should 
become tiresome by my questions." In reply, Mr. Harrison remarks: — 
"I hold it an honour to be in correspondence with a man who has 
himself given so much useful and interesting information to the world." 

In another letter, dated November 2nd, 1849, Otley writes thus to 
Mr. Harrison : — "The view you describe is such a one as I never had 
the pleasure of witnessing ; indeed, in my younger and stronger days, I 
never beheld the extreme distant views, sometimes perhaps because I 
did not think they might be seen; and at one time, if one spoke of 
seeing Ireland from Skiddaw, it was only to be laughed at ; indeed, in 
all my views from Skiddaw, I have only been confident of seeing the 
coast of Ireland twice — October 17th, 1817, 5 p.m., and August i6th, 
1829, 6 p.m.; and the mountains of Wales I once saw — October 28th, 
1818, II a.m. — very plainly from Coniston Fell, and in a short time 
they faded away, and left nothing to be seen in their place. As auxiliary 
to the clearness, there is something in the refraction of the atmosphere 
which at some times causes distances to rise into view. On looking for 
Criffell from Castlehead, it appears about twenty feet higher at some 
times than others." In reply to the letter from which I have taken the 
above quotation, Mr. Harrison writes — 

November 30th, 1849. 
If you had pleasure in writing your very agreeable letter, I am sure I had in 
reading it ; for I know few treats more charming than that of finding a person of 
your years enjoying in retrospect the innocent occupations of his past life, and 
thus, in fact, living twice over, as the Roman poet expresses it. Your description 
of your mountain ramble was so spirited, that I could almost fancy myself going 
with you, as you rambled over the lofty range, height after height. . . . (Then 
in. conclusion he says — ) I shall have great pleasure in hearing further from you, 
or I can honestly declare that your cheerful buoyant spirit does good to, 

Yours very sincerely, 

GEO. HARRISON. 

On May 3rd, 1855, the same correspondent writes to Otley : — 
Dear Mr. Otley, — 

You are quite right in supposing that I was deterred from writing to you 
by a few words in your letter of the 30th of October last, where you say that you 



167 

had "closed your accounts with all your correspondents." Had I not misunderstood 
those words, I should have answered your letter long ago, and thanked you for the 
information contained in it." 

This correspondent must have enlivened some of Otley's solitary- 
hours by his lively and entertaining letters. In one dated July, 
1855, he says : — "Your mention of Sedgwick reminds me of some letters by 
the warm-hearted but very comical clergyman, Sydney Smith, to Sedg- 
wick's geological comrade, Murchison, in which he asks whether in the 
numerous worlds distributed through the universe, one of them might 
possibly be inhabited by men of stone, perhaps of Parian marble ; and 
then he adds, ' what a Paradise for Murchison to spend eternity with a 
grey-wacke woman.' If I stumble on Sedgwick, I must rally him about 
his having a like reason for having hitherto remained a bachelor." 

The following letter to Dr. Henry, before alluded to, shows how his 
mind was in activity in his ninetieth year. 

Keswick, August 5th, 1854. 
Dear Sir, — 

I duly received your valuable present of the "Life of Dr. Dalton." It 
must have given you considerable'trouble to collect and arrange all the materials. 
Some parts I knew before, but the chief articles are so far beyond me that I shall 
not think of reading them : but still I shall prize it highly in remembrance of old 
association. I think you have done justice without withholding anything through 
favour. In my narrative, p. 15.5, 1. 8, by a tj^pographical error, hause is converted 
into house ; it will scarcely be observed by any but myself. This word gave me 
some trouble in my first publication ; I thought that hawse related chiefly to 
shipping, and hose to garments, therefore as I could find no other purpose to which 
the word hause was applied, I adopted it. I have since found it wrote hawse in 
the ordnance survey. 

My general health is nearly as good as it was two years ago, but my limbs are 
much weaker, my head not so steady, and my eyes more watery. 

I am, &c., 

JON. OTLEY. 

John Jackson, of Warrington, a member of the Society of Friends, 
kept up correspondence with Otley to the year of his death (1856). On 
December 20th, 1855, he writes: — "Seldom, if ever, have I beheld 
writing so neat and firm by anyone of thy years." Alluding to the life 



168 

of Dr. Dalton, in the same letter, Mr. Jackson says, " I attended his 
funeral, and was in one of the ninety-five carriages. The procession 
reached probably three-quarters of a mile." Another letter from the 
same correspondent, dated Warrington, 28th day, ist month, 1856, 
begins thus : — 

My venerable Friend, — 

Although I am writing out of "my turn," I did not like to delay any 
longer in letting thee know that the 19th instant was not forgotten by thy friends 
here. . . . Although the "drinking of health" is I believe much less 
common, and our Society almost, if not wholly, omit it, yet thine was drunk, 
and good wishes expressed, and, I doubt not, felt on thy behalf. 

To this Jonathan replied, even after his attack of paralysis, and his 
Quaker friend responded on February 29th, 1856, thanking him for his 
interesting letter, and in the course of his note remarking, " I well 
remember the name of Anthony Loajet, but had no idea that it was 
intended for thyself, being, I readily perceive (after the hint given me) 
an anagram on thy name." 

In the following August, another attack of paralysis deprived him 
almost wholly of speech, though he continued conscious to the last. 

And now, as Otley's last days approach, there comes a final and 
touching meeting between the two veteran geologists, the one having 
spent his life among his mountains, and never appearing among the 
magnates of science in the outside world, and the other toiling in a busy 
centre of learning, acknowledged as a leader in his own branch, and 
revered far and wide. Both simple-hearted men, reverencing nature as 
an expression of all-power and wisdom, and both going down to the 
grave with a sure and certain hope. 

Aged Jonathan lies in his bed helpless and speechless from paralysis, 
albeit quite sensible, and recognizing the Professor as he stands by his 
bed-side, silent and deeply moved. Otley's right hand is clasped for 
some minutes between the hands of Sedgwick, until at last that solemn 
silence is broken by the Cambridge Professor bursting into tears and 
crying, as he fell upon his knees, "Jonathan, I'll pray with you." Thus 
passed their last meeting in this world. On the 7th of December 



169 

following, at five o'clock in the afternoon Jonathan Otley died, having 

thus nearly completed his ninety-first year. 

It is not for me, who never had the privilege of seeing the old guide 

and early geologist, to make comments upon his life and work, other than 

those already called forth by what has been narrated. But of this we 
may be sure, that there has been many a man held up to fame for stirring 
deeds and victories won, who has not half the claim to the admiration of 
posterity, that quiet, nature-loving, God-serving Jonathan Otley has. May 
future history rank among its heroes— not the blood-stained conquerors, 
the amassers of wealth, or the praise-seeking restless spirits— but those 
who, Hke Jonathan, did their duty in whatever sphere placed, with child- 
like simplicity and humble confidence, knowing that true happiness 
consists in the harmony of the spirit of man with the Eternal Spirit— 

"And that unless above himself he can 
Erect himseK, how poor a thing is man." 





CllcilCllS Ca,iio)'-LLS. Afahsixt 



ScL\/ coltt- otm cL-n. 2-A.C',  A&bsize 







JUCLIULLS CoCCl.H'-/o. A/cil^: 




Size 



CcL/jl^m ulcf lli^ixrof:>OtXlsMil-St2t 




V 



V^^fnio-rusticci.. A/abjiz.<\S<jcloj3<^n^usl-/co2a.^ArcU. siz Ci 




171 



NOTES ON A FEW OF THE MIGRATORY BIRDS OF THE 
ENGLISH LAKE DISTRICT. 

By John Birkett, (Keswick.) 

WITH A PLATE. 



THE CUCKOO (Ciuulus canonts). 
THE WHEATEAR (Saxicola ananthe). 
THE BUTCHER-BIRD (Lanius collurio). 
THE NIGHT-JAR ( Caprlmulgits Eiiropxus). 
THE CHIMNEY-SWALLOW (Hirjmdo rnstica). 
THE WOODCOCK (Scolopax rusticola). 



THE CUCKOO. 

There are few birds which have excited so much interest as the 
common Cuckoo. Its note in spring, heralding the return of sunny 
skies and bursting vegetation, carries with it dear associations in every 
country where it is known. The average date of its arrival in this 
district is between the 20th and 29th of April, although there are instances 
when its note has been heard, and the bird seen, earlier; I myself 
remember once seeing one flying across the side of Latrigg during the 
second week in April ; I was not more than fifty or sixty yards from it, 
but did not hear its note, nor did I hear the note of any, that spring until 
nearly a fortnight after. Generally on its arrival its note is heard 
proclaiming its presence to its mate ; this is continued until the season 
of breeding has passed, the note gradually becoming hoarser and more 
indistinct as the season advances ; and ultimately, before their departure, 
the birds become entirely mute. The old birds leave us very early; they 
are among the first of our visitors to depart, none remaining after July ; 



172 

so that their visit to this district seems confined entirely to the time 
necessary for seeking suitable places wherein to deposit their eggs, which 
they do in the nests of other birds. The Cuckoo is the only bird known 
to manifest this almost unnatural disposition. It has been ascertained 
without doubt, that the common European Cuckoo, and several foreign 
species, deposit their eggs in this strange manner, none of the species 
afterwards attending to the fate of the egg, or to the after rearing of the 
young. 

The Cuckoo does not pair, but is polygamous. The first eggs are 
seldom laid before the middle of May, or not until the birds have been 
here three weeks or a month. The egg, which is about equal in size to 
that of the skylark, is very small, considering the bulk of the bird which 
lays it. It is white, closely freckled over with grey, or sometimes reddish 
brown, and generally has a few darker specks at the larger end. Not 
building a nest for itself, the Cuckoo deposits its eggs singly, and at 
intervals of a few days, in the nests of a variety of other birds, and leaves 
them to be hatched and the young reared, by the foster parents. The 
nests in which the Cuckoo's eggs are most frequently deposited are those 
of the hedge sparrow, meadow pipit, pied wagtail, and reed warbler ; 
but occasional instances have been known of their being deposited in 
the nests of about fifty other birds. 

I may here mention cases of Cuckoo's eggs and young Cuckoos 
which have been found in this district. A young Cuckoo was found in a 
meadow pipit's nest just behind Field Side, a few years ago. I remember 
seeing a young Cuckoo at the upper end of Thirlmere, which was just so 
far fledged as to prevent my catching it. I may mention that Mr. 
Greenip, of Keswick, found a Cuckoo's egg in the nest of a twite, or 
mountain linnet, in Newlands, on the 24th of May, 1858; also one at 
the same place, in a meadow pipit's nest, on the 27th of May, 1859. 
The eggs are extremely rare to meet with, and Mr. Greenip, who has 
been a collector of birds' eggs all his life, never remembers finding more 
than these two. 

Mr. Dickinson of Corkickle, near Whitehaven, has kindly sent me 
some information respecting the Cuckoo. He says, " For many years I 



178 

have had a weakness for peering into every bird's nest I came across. 
I admire the artistic beauty and workmanship of the nests, and the pretty 
eggs therein, and I have had a hope of some day finding a Cuckoo's 
egg. In only one instance have I so far been successful. The egg was 
in the nest of a blackcap, in the edge of a gutter on my farm at Ullock, 
in the parish of Dean. In the summer of 1875, i"^ the parish of Arlecdon, 
still following up my old habit, I went a little out of my way one day to 
have another look at the nest of a meadow pipit, which I had observed 
sometime previously. To my great astonishment, I found there, not a 
nestful of little pipits, but one young Cuckoo, just shewing a few feathers 
in his wings and other places ; but what a ferocious looking fellow, what 
a black, diabolical, mischievous eye ! He would have pecked me to 
death if he'd had the power, judging from his earnest endeavours to bite 
my fingers : he throve apace, and at last left the nest, remaining for a 
few days perched on an adjoining wall, before finally disappearing. I was 
careful on the first discovery, to examine the nest and gutter beneath, 
but found no young pipits or eggs ; they might have been washed away 
by the stream if thrown out of ihe nest by the Cuckoo." 

In the summer of 1867, in the nest of a meadow pipit, near the 
Nag's Head Inn, Wythbum, a young Cuckoo was observed by my 
brother ; it was the sole occupant of the nest, and was fed by its foster 
parents until it was fledged ; it was then seen for some time flying about 
the place and perching on the haycocks, until it finally disappeared. 

The strange action of the young Cuckoo, in ejecting the other 
nestlings from the nest, their true home, was long a matter of controversy. 
It is now, however, needless to bring forward all the evidence from 
various quarters on this point ; suffice it to say that the infant Cuckoo, 
blind and unfledged, has been seen to get rid of its foster-brothers by 
insinuating its hinder quarters under the young birds, hoisting them upon 
its back, and tumbling them over the edge of the nest. Mr. Gould, a 
great authority, who at first doubted the truth of this strange habit, has 
now accepted the fact as such. 

I will here give the dates of the arrival of the Cuckoo in this district, 
for a series of years, as noted by Mr. Greenip of Keswick : — 



174 



i8S7 


May 3rd 


1866 


April 26th 


1858 


April 23rd 


1867 


April 28th 


1859 


May 2nd 


1868 


May 2nd 


i860 


May I St 


1869 


April 15 th 


1861 


April 28th 


1870 


April 26th 


1864 


April 25th 


1871 


April 24th 


1865 


April 23rd 








THE 


WHEATEAR. 





The name of this bird may have been derived either from the season 
of its arrival, or from its being captured largely for the table at Wheat- 
harvest; or again, it may be a corruption of white-ear, a feature very 
conspicuous in its spring plumage. 

The Wheatear is one of our earliest summer visitants, sometimes 
appearing even when the ground is whitened with the last snow showers 
of spring. It is plentiful in this district, and is often to be seen on the 
lower part of the mountain sides. High and Low Rigg, in St. John's 
Vale, seems to be one of its favourite haunts ; and it frequents all 
commons and waste lands, old quarries, etc. The average period for its 
arrival here is the last week in March and the first week in April. It 
spends the breeding season amongst us, and may be seen flitting from 
stone to stone, from one rising ground to another, along the tops of stone 
walls, and appearing to fall as it were on the opposite side of the wall, 
on resuming its flight. It makes its nest in holes under and among rocks 
and stones, in old walls and quarries, and in the rents or splits of dry 
peat-mosses. The nest is built according to the form of the hole, and is 
composed of fine grasses, with a Httle lining of wool or hair. The eggs 
are of a pale blue, occasionally spotted at the larger end with a pale rust 
colour, and are generally five or six in number. 

Many instances are on record of Wheatears having come on board 
vessels several miles from land, at the period of migration ; and from the 
observations of naturalists in various parts of the country, it would appear 
that these birds travel by night, or at early dawn, as there is not an 
instance on record in which they have been seen to land upon our shores 



175 

in the day-time. The number of Wheatears which used to be taken 
years ago upon the South Downs, in autumn, is a matter of notoriety. 

Like all the chats, the ^Vheatear keeps much to the ground, seldom 
perching on trees, although often to be seen on gate-posts and rails, 
where a broader footing is afforded it. Its song is rather sprightly, "and 
is occasionally uttered on the wing. The contrast between the spring 
and autumn plumage of this bird is very remarkable. If an old bird be 
examined in September, it will be found that the white superciliary streak 
has almost disappeared, the colour of the upper parts has become reddish 
brown, the throat and breast pale ferruginous, lighter on the flanks and 
belly, while the primaries and tail at its extremity are much browner. 
On raising the feathers of the back, it will be found that the base of each 
feather is grey, and in spring this colour supersedes the brown of winter, 
which is worn off, and the upper parts assume a beautiful bluish grey, 
while the under parts become pure white. In this species, therefore, it 
is evident that the seasonal change of plumage is effected by a change of 
colour in the same feathers, and not by a moult. The food of the 
Wheatear during its residence here is composed of insects, small snails, 
slugs and worms. Insects are sometimes taken on the wing, the bird 
springing after them from an eminence, or even from the level plain, as 
well as following them on the ground ; after darting upon its prey it often 
returns, as is the habit of other fly-catching species, to the spot on some 
raised clod, or grass-grown ant-hill, which served as its look-out and 
watch-tower. 

The geographical range of the Wheatear is very extensive for so 
small and short-winged a bird. It is found in the Faroe Isles, Iceland, 
and Greenland ; in Lapland, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark ; through- 
out Europe to the Mediterranean ; in Egypt, Arabia, Asia Minor, etc. 

I append a list of dates of arrival of this bird in the district, as 
noted by Mr. Greenip : — 

1857 April loth 1866 April 6th 

1858 March 30th 1867 March 29th 

1859 March 23rd 1868 April ist 
i860 April 6th 1869 April 12th 
1861 April 5th 1870 April 8th 

1864 March 26th 187 1 March 21st 

1865 April loth 



176 



THE RED-BACKED SHRIKE, OR BUTCHER BIRD. 

Quite unlike any other of our summer migrants in appearance, the 
Red-backed Shrike, or Butcher Bird, as it is more frequently called, also 
differs from them all in habits, and from the majority in having no song to 
recommend it to notice. It is a curious bird in its way, shy and retired 
in its disposition, and prefers tall tangled hedgerows, or the thick foliage 
of the lower branches of the oak, where it can sit unobserved, and dart 
out upon its unsuspecting prey. It is a very hawk by nature, capturing 
and killing mice, small birds, and moths and beetles of every size and 
description. These when caught, are firmly impaled upon the long and 
strong points of the white-thorn, for future consumption ; and the odds 
and ends which may be found thus hung up, as it were, in the Butcher 
Bird's larder, are worth notice. On one thorn, perchance, a blue tit- 
mouse with its head off; on another a small meadow mouse, or perhaps 
a harvest mouse ; on a third, a great dor-beetle, or a cockchafer, not 
yet dead, but buzzing round and round upon the sharp thorn, and 
trying in vain to effect its escape ; while above, below, and on all sides 
may be seen the wingless bodies of large moths, the fluttering forms of 
dragon-flies, or the remains of beetles. From this singular habit, the 
bird has earned the name of Butcher Bird, not only in England, but in 
other countries. In France it is termed the Flayer ; in Germany it is 
known as the Strangler, or Garrotter. 

The Red-backed Shrike arrives here somewhat later than most of 
the summer migrants, and is seldom seen before the first week in May. 
They are generally found in pairs until after the young are hatched and 
ready to fly, when the families keep together in little parties until at the 
end of August or beginning of September they leave the country, and 
cross the Mediterranean into Africa. They travel down the east coast 
through Egypt, Nubia, and Abyssinia, to Natal ; and on the west coast 
they have been met with in Great Namaqua Land, Damara Land, and 
the Okavango region, where, according to Andresson, breeding goes on 
in winter quarters. 

The distribution of this bird in the British Islands is very partial, 



177 

for it is unknown in Ireland, of rare occurrence in Scotland, and in 
England is found chiefly in the midland and southern counties, though 
we have a few pairs every season in this district. The pair belonging to 
our museum was procured in the valley between Derwentwater and 
Bassenthwaite Lake, in the summer of 1875; ^'^d, curiously enough, two 
other Butcher Birds took possession of the same thorn bush the next 
season ; perhaps it was that the shambles were ready fitted up, and the 
place being unoccupied, they were tempted to secure it. 

A young Butcher Bird was observed last summer on the line of the 
Cockermouth, Keswick, and Penrith railway, near The How, with one 
foot amputated, supposed to have been done by a passing train ; the bird 
seemed not to have been injured in any other part. Perhaps this was 
one of the progeny of a pair of Butcher Birds which have been known to 
nest in a thorn bush by the river side, near to Braithwaite bridge, for 
several years. I have also been informed by a very trustworthy person, 
that about thirty years ago, two pair of Butcher Birds regularly nested in 
Langton Moss for many years. 

The hen bird is much the plainer in appearance, being of a dull and 
somewhat mottled brown above, and buffy white beneath, with crescentic 
brown markings on the breast and flanks. The bill in both is short and 
thick; the upper mandible is hooked at the point, and prominently 
notched or toothed, as in a hawk. The feet are strong, with sharp and 
curved claws, and well adapted for seizing and holding a struggling prey. 
Both birds assist in the construction of the nest, which is a substantial, 
well built structure of twigs, dry grass, and moss, lined with fibrous roots 
and horse-hair, and is usually placed at some height from the ground in 
the middle of a white-thorn bush, or thick hedgerow. The eggs, five 
and sometimes six in number, vary a good deal in colour, being yellowish 
or grayish white, with lilac or pale brown markings disposed in a zone at 
the larger end ; or pale salmon colour, with dull red markings distributed 
in the same way. 

The following are some dates of arrival in this district since 1857 : — 



1857 


May 13th 


1865 


April 27 th 


1858 


May 1 2th 


1867 


May 6th 


1859 


May 1 2 th 


1868 


May 1 8th 


i860 


May 1 2 th 


1871 


May 9th 


I86I 


May loth 







178 



THE NIGHTJAR, OR HAWK. 

In order of date, the Nightjar is one of the latest of the summer birds to 
arrive, being seldom seen before the beginning of May, although, as in the 
case of other species, one now and then hears of an exceptionally early 
arrival. Between the months of April and October, our Nightjar is generally 
dispersed throughout the British Islands ; by the end of September, or 
the first week in October, these birds have returned to their winter 
quarters in North Africa. Colonel Irby, in his recently-published volume 
on the " Ornithology of the Straits of Gibraltar," states, on the authority 
of M. Favier, that Nightjars cross the Straits, from Tangiers to Gibraltar, 
in May and June, and return the same way, between September and 
November ; they have been seen on the passage. Dr. Dnmimond 
informed the late Mr. Thompson of Belfast, that when H.M.S. "San 
Juan," of which he was surgeon, was anchored near Gibraltar, in the 
spring of the year, a few Nightjars flew on board. During the passage 
of H.M.S. " Beacon," from Malta to the Morea, in the month of April, 
some of these birds appeared on the 2 7 th, and alighted on the rigging. 
The vessel was then about fifty miles from Zante (the nearest land), and 
sixty, west of the Morea. They came singly, with one exception, when 
two appeared in company. 

The Nightjar, although tolerably dispersed throughout North Africa 
during certain months of the year, does not, apparently, travel so far 
down the east or west coasts as many of our summer migrants do. In 
Egypt and Nubia, according to Captain Shelley, it is only met with as 
a bird of passage, but how much further south it goes he does not say. 
Mr. Blandford did not meet with it in Abyssinia, where its place seems to 
be taken by two or three allied species. The same remark appHes as we 
proceed eastward. In Syria and Palestine, Canon Tristram did not 
observe the European Nightjar, but found a smaller and lighter coloured 
species, on which he has bestowed the name Caprimiilgiis tamaricis. 
Stragglers have been observed in summer and autumn for several years 
in Shetland. The late Dr. Saxby saw it at Balta Sound, about the end 
of July, skimming over the fields, and now and then alighting on the 



179 

dykes ; but he regarded its appearance in Shetland as merely accidental. 
In Ireland this bird is considered to be a regular summer visitant to 
favourite localities in all quarters of the island, but of rare occurrence 
elsewhere. There are a few to be found in this district every season. 

I once had the good fortune to find a Nightjar's nest myself, on a 
place called Moss Hills, at the south-east end of Shoulthwaite Moss, 
and about a quarter of a mile from the high road to Windermere. The 
nest, of a very shallow basin shape, was close to, and partially under, a 
heather bush, apparendy for protection from the south-west storms. The 
ground in the immediate vicinity of the nest was wild, heathery, and 
broken, and partially covered over with ferns. In the nest were two 
young ones, about half fledged. Their appearance was singularly ugly, 
on account of their enormous mouths and large prominent eyes, which 
gave them an expression almost repulsive. I paid a good many visits to 
the two young Nightjars, but only on one occasion did I see the old bird, 
which flew from the nest, or near it. I could not be certain, but I fancy 
it had been feeding the young. Any fine calm summer evening, especi- 
ally a moonlight one, if walking along the main road at the foot of the 
moss, one is almost certain to hear the whirring note of a Nightjar. I 
have on different occasions, on a moonlight night, about half-past nine 
o'clock, heard the whirring note, as if it were close over my head, and 
the next few seconds it sounded half a mile distant ; but this was o^\^ng 
to the fact of the bird being a sort of ventriloquist, and the sound seems 
to come from different places, because the bird turns its head from side 
to side, and both up and down, and scatters, as it were, the notes on 
every side, so that one is quite puzzled sometimes to know where the 
bird is. I have stood and listened several times, but have never been 
fortunate enough to see one of these birds at night. 

Notwithstanding what has been said to the contrary, the Nightjar, 
Night-hawk, Fern Owl, or Goatsucker, as it is variously called in different 
parts of the country, is one of the most inoffensive birds imaginable. By 
farmers it is accused of robbing cows and goats of their milk, and by 
keepers it is remorselessly shot as "vermin"; but by both classes its 
character is much maligned. In its feeding it is purely insectivorous, and 



180 

it is as incapable of sucking milk as it is of carrying off and preying upon 
young game birds. The mistake in the former case must have arisen in 
this way : The habits of the bird are crepuscular, and it is seldom seen 
in broad daylight, unless disturbed ; but as soon as twilight comes on, 
and moths and dor-beetles begin to be upon the wing, it comes forth 
from its noonday retreat, and is exceedingly busy and active in the 
pursuit of these and other insects. Montague says he has observed as 
many as eight or ten on the wing together in the dusk of the evening, 
skimming over the surface of the ground in all directions like swallows 
in pursuit of insects. Cattle, as they graze in the evening, disturb 
numerous moths and flies, and the Nightjar, unalarmed by the animals, 
to whose presence it becomes accustomed, dashes boldly down to seize 
a moth which is hovering round their feet, or a fly which has settled upon 
the udder. Being detected in this act in the twilight by unobservant 
persons, the story has gone forth that the Goatsucker steals the milk. 
From the keeper's point of view, it is a Night-hawk, in the worst sense 
of the word ; a hawk that under cover of the night flits noiselessly but 
rapidly by, and carries off the unsuspecting chick. But here again the 
observer has been misled by appearances, associating the pointed wings 
and long tail with the idea of a hawk, entirely overlooking the small 
slender claws and mandibles, which are quite unequal to the task 
of holding and cutting up live and resisting feathered prey, and also 
entirely overlooking the fact, that at the time the Nightjar is abroad, the 
young pheasants and partridges are safely brooded under their mothers' 
wings. Attentive observation of its habits, and examination of numerous 
specimens after death, have revealed the real nature of its food, which 
consists of moths, especially Hepihis Jmmiili (which from its white colour 
is readily seen by the bird), fernchafers, and dor-beetles. Mr. Robert 
Gray of Glasgow, has seen it in grass-fields, cleverly picking ghost moths 
off the stems, from the points of which these sluggish insects were 
temptingly hanging. "But as a rule," he adds, "the Nightjar captures 
its prey while in flight." Macgillivray says: "The food which I have 
found in its stomach was composed of the remains of coleopterous insects 
of many species, some of them very large, and occasionally larvae ; I 



181 

have seen the inner surface slightly bristled with the hairs of caterpillars, 
as in the cuckoo." He adds, "As no fragments of the hard parts of 
these insects ever occur in the intestine, it follows that the refuse is 
ejected by the mouth." From its habit of capturing dor-beetles, the bird 
in some parts of the country is known as the Dor-hawk. Wordsworth 
has referred to it by this name in the lines — 

"The busy dor-hawk chases the white moth with burring note." 

Elsewhere it is called the Eve-jar, and Chum-owl; the latter name is 
bestowed by Gilbert White, in his " Naturalist's Summer Evening 
Walk"— 

"While o'er the cliff the awaken'd Churn-owl hung, 
Through the still gloom, protracts his chattering song." 

In his 37th Letter to Pennant, the same author refers to it as "the 
Caprimulgus, or Fern Owl," and gives an agreeable account of its move- 
ments as observed by himself Amongst other things he says : " But 
the circumstance that pleased me most was, that I saw it distinctly more 
than once put out its short leg while on the wing, and by a bend of 
the head deliver somewhat into its mouth. If it takes any part of its 
prey with its foot, as I have now the greatest reason to suppose it does 
these chafers, I no longer wonder at the use of its middle toe, which is 
curiously furnished with a serrated claw." Yarrel has figured the foot, 
in a vignette to his work on " British Birds," in order to show this 
peculiarity of structure, the use of which has puzzled so many. 

The correctness of the view expressed by Gilbert White, and 
confirmed by other authors, has been disputed, on the ground that many 
other birds, as herons, gannets, and I may add coursers, have a pectinate 
claw upon the middle toe, and yet do not take insects upon the wing, or 
even seize their prey with their feet. 

It has been ingeniously suggested that perhaps the serrated claw 
may be used for brushing away the broken wings and other fragments of 
struggling insects which doubtless adhere occasionally to the basirostral 
bristles with which the mouth of the bird is furnished. This is very 
possible, at tlie same time it may be observed that hawks, parrots, and 

12 



182 

other birds habitually cleanse the bill and sides of the gape with their 
feet, and yet have no pectination of the middle claw. 

A theory advanced by Mr. Sterland, and endorsed by Mr. Robert 
Gray, is that since the Nightjar sits lengthwise, and not crosswise, upon 
a bough, the serrated claw gives a secure foothold, which in so unusual 
a position could not be obtained by grasping. But to this theory the 
objection above made also applies, namely, that many birds, such as 
coursers and thick-knees, have serrated middle claws, and yet are never 
seen to perch. Some naturaHsts, and amongst others Bishop Stanley, 
have surmised that, by means of its peculiarly-formed toes, the Nightjar 
is enabled to carry off its eggs, if disturbed, and place them in a more 
secure spot ; but should any such necessity arise, one would think that 
its large and capacious mouth, as in the case of the cuckoo, would form the 
best and safest means of conveyance. In the young Nightjar, the peculi- 
arity in question is not at first observable ; and Macgillivray remarked 
that in a fully fledged young bird, shot early in September, the middle 
claw had only half the number of serrations which are usually discernible 
in the adult. He says : " All birds whose middle claw is serrated, have 
that claw elongated, and furnished with a very thin edge. It therefore 
appears that the serration is produced by the splitting of the edge of 
the claw after the bird has used it, but whether in consequence of 
pressure caused by standing or grasping, can only be conjectured." I 
have detected some confirmation of this in the case of the common 
thick-knee, or stone cvcAt'N ( CEdicnemus crepitans ), in some specimens 
of which I have remarked a very distinct serration of the middle claw, 
in others only the barest indication of it (the edge of the claw being 
very thin and elongated), in others again no trace of it. 

The objections, however, which have been taken to the suggested 
use of the pectinated claw in the Nightjar, do not invalidate the state- 
ments which have been made by Gilbert White, and other observers of 
the bird's movements and habits ; for the homologous structures which 
are found to exist in certain species in no way related to each other, 
may well be designed for very different functions. I do not find in the 
works of either Macgillivray or Yarrell, any mention made of the peculiar 



183 

viscous saliva wliicli is secreted by this bird, and which reminds one of 
what is observable in the case of the wryneck, and the different species 
of woodpecker. It no doubt answers the same purpose, namely, to 
secure more easily the struggling insects upon which its existence 
depends. 

THE SWALLOW. 

The chimney Swallow is one of the earliest arrivals, coming from 
Africa over the English Channel about the middle of April. Every one 
seems glad when the first Swallow flits across the village green, but we 
sober English have never kept a "Swallow holiday" on the isth of 
April, which is, in some parts of Europe, called "Swallow day." In 
ancient Greece the children might well clap their tiny hands when the 
birds of spring appeared, a holiday being then given to little boys and 
girls. They danced in the market-places, wore garlands of early flowers, 
and shouted in the luxury of childish joy. That was a capital plan for 
making children love the birds. These birds are called chimney 
Swallows from their tendency to build in hollow places, such as old mine- 
shafts, disused wells, chimneys, insides of barns, cow-houses and sheds. 
They generally build their nest against the sides of beams, rafters, or any 
wood-work of the roof; it is composed of clay, and strengthened with 
straws or slender roots, lined with feathers, and open at the top. Two 
or three pairs often frequent the same outhouse, and are known to have 
returned from year to year to the same nest. The chimney Swallow is 
easily known by its deeply forked tail, the ruddy hue on its throat, and 
its lightish tinted breast. The rapid movements of the bird — its sudden 
darts and turns, now up, now down, over the observer's head, then 
skimming the ground in long arrow-like flights — present a specimen of a 
living machine in beautiful and perfect action. But notwithstanding 
this power of flight, the birds are sometimes completely exhausted by 
their journeys across the sea. They can battle for a long time with the 
mere force of a tempest, but when the blast is both cold and strong, the 
winged voyagers are almost paralysed. A whole army of Swallows will 



184 

then crowd the rigging of some lonely ship, clinging for hours to ropes 
and spars, until recovered strength again enables them to obey the 
"forward " impulse. No wonder if these beings of summer climes some- 
times marvel at the rough treatment received in our ruder latitudes; a 
cutting " north-easter" is no smiling reception for a creature which has 
been basking for months in the sun of Egypt. On one bitter spring day, 
a gentleman* picked up in the course of his morning's walk ninety-two 
chimney Swallows, not dead, but benumbed by the cold. Being placed 
in a warm hamper, they all recovered, and flew off the next day. On 
another occasion numbers were found on the window-sills of a country 
house, heaped on each other five or six deep. Instinct had clearly led 
them to seek aid from man. Some may naturally ask — Why do Swallows 
so eagerly rush from the warm regions of the south to battle with the 
storms of the north 1 We cannot answer the question, guessing on such 
subjects is trifling; that there is some wise purpose in the habit we may 
be sure, or it would not exist. Another remarkable characteristic of 
chimney Swallows is their courage — look at these birds fighting with a 
hawk, and then say whether they are cowards. Of course they suffer for 
their daring? Not in the least — the hawk gets the worst of it, and 
retreats in a fury from the inglorious contest. What can the hawk do ? 
He is a brave fellow, but the Swallows are too quick for him, darting 
down on his back, and up again with a speed which baffles the clutch of 
his talons. He resembles a heavy seventy-four man-of-war surrounded 
by a fleet of steam gun-boats : strength is beaten by speed. 

The chimney Swallow does not "come to the British Isles for a 
holiday, tliat is certain, but for downright hard work. The building of 
a house, and the bringing up of two families in one short season, are 
enough to tax the energies of the most enterprising bird. The parents 
are so hard pushed for time, that the first family often receives warning 
to quit before its education is quite complete. But the little things soon 
manage to provide their own food without the aid of the mother bird. 
The second family sometimes fares the worst, being forced to join in the 
great autumnal migration as soon as they are able to fly. The 
* Dr. Hunt, of Addlethorpe. 



185 

assembling of these birds is a well-known sight — how closely they crowd 
on the house-tops, trees, and railway wires, sometimes roosting together 
amongst the long reeds fringing some lake or stream. I once saw some 
hundreds among the tall reeds, near to Lodore beck foot. Three of us 
were in a boat "looking for Snipe," on a very fine clear evening, early 
in the month of October, when all at once our attention was aroused by 
something like a strong breeze in front of us ; daylight had partly gone, 
so we could not see very distinctly ; our boat was sailing along partially 
amongst the reeds, which were so numerous we could not see far througli 
them, and in a few minutes another strong breeze seemed to be blowing. 
We were all quite puzzled, and could not account for it, when all at 
once, on rounding a corner of the reeds, we got close to the Swallows, 
which were just rising from amongst the reeds and flapping their wings 
amongst the reed stems. There seemed to be three or four Swallows on 
each stem, and the reeds moving and rattling against each other, produced 
the sound we previously had heard. 

The attachment of Swallows to the neighbourhood of water at 
roosting-time — which formerly led to the supposition that they actually 
retired under water for the winter — may be easily accounted for 
by the circumstance that the willow branches and reeds not only 
afford them most convenient perches, but enable the birds to crowd 
closely together, and so secure greater warmth to individuals than they 
could possibly enjoy if each roosted upon a separate twig in trees or 
shrubs of different growths. 

The greater number depart in a body ; and the retreat which was 
one night enlivened by their evolutions and sprightly twitter, is the next 
solitary, or rendered to all appearance more deserted by the presence of 
the few who have been unable to accompany the main body. I may 
here mention one or two instances in which Swallows have been seen 
long after the usual time of migration. ]\Ir. Dickinson of Corkickle 
informed me, that "in 1875 ^^ Martinmas week, whilst in the hayloft 
getting hay for my cattle, I was surprised to see a Swallow flying about 
in a rather slow, uncertain way, yet still quickly enough to keep out of 
harm. I can only account for its presence then at that late period, by 



186 

assuming that it was the soUtary progeny of a pair of birds which regularly 
bred in the byre underneath, and usually had three broods in the season. 
In their last attempt they only succeeded in hatching one, which I 
observed in the nest, and remarked at the time how late it was. The 
old birds were so tame that they would permit my little daughter to lift 
them off the nest and replace them without alarm." 

The food of the Swallow consists entirely of insects, and it is in 
pursuit of these that it is seen soaring far above, in the settled days of 
summer ; and, again, suiting itself to the changes in the weather, skimming 
close above the surface of the lake, or river, or meadow, along the side 
of a cliff, a hedge, a paling, or a sheltered avenue of trees. When feeding, 
it flies with the mouth more or less open ; and the capture of an insect 
is indicated by an audible snap of the bill : it drinks and laves itself 
while on the wing. Do the Swallows render any service to mankind 1 
Yes ; they keep the insect myriads within safe limits. If one of these 
birds should eat but a hundred insects a day, the number consumed in 
a summer by the whole swallow family might puzzle a calculating machine 
to enumerate. Many a farmer can ruefully remember the ravages which 
"the fly" has often made among his turnips or in his hop-grounds. He 
may well look upon the Swallows as most useful, though unpaid, labourers. 

I will now give the dates of the Swallow's arrival in different years, as 
noticed by Mr. Greenip : — 



1857 


April 22nd 


1866 


April 22 nd 


1858 


April 19th 


1867 


April 20th 


1859 


April 26 th 


1868 


April 15 th 


i860 


May 2nd 


1869 


April nth 


I86I 


April 30th 


1870 


April 9th 


1864 


April 2 1 St 


1871 


April 1 6 th 


1865 


April 1 6th 







Let us then, with one consent, welcome in hamlet, village, and town, 
these confiding summer visitors : wishing them much happiness while 
here, and giving them a regretful "good-bye" at their departure. 



18^ 



THE WOODCOCK. 



The Woodcock has long been in high favor for the table, and has 
always been much sought after by sportsman. There are now many 
instances on record of the Woodcock breeding in various parts of Great 
Britain. Mr. Mawson, of Thornthvvaite, informs me that in 1862 he 
found a Woodcock's nest, in Sir John Woodford's woods, when out in 
search of insects, on the 24th of June. It contained four eggs; the old 
bird was rising from the nest at the time. He continued to visit it daily 
up to the time of hatching, which was on the 7th of July. The old bird 
allowed him to go within a couple of yards of the nest without being in 
the least annoyed. The nest was merely a slight hollow in the ground, 
with a few dry leaves round the sides ; the old bird, when sitting, always 
rested the point of its beak upon the ground, with its dumpy tail almost 
erect, giving it a curious appearance. The nest was upon a dry bank 
facing the north, which I believe is nearly always the case with the 
Woodcock, the bird preferring the shady to the sunny side of a bank. 
The eggs are very similar to those of the corncrake, being rather larger, 
but in colour much the same. After hatching, the young birds left the 
nest almost immediately. In 1872, in the month of May, a brood of four 
young Woodcocks was seen in the Ladstock wood, not far from the head of 
Bassenthwaite lake. A setter dog found them, along with the old birds, 
and made a steady point, when one of the parents rose and flew some 
distance, then three of the young ones rose, being only able to fly a very 
short distance at once ; after that the other old Woodcock followed, and 
carried the fourth young bird in its feet a distance of about ten yards 
down the hill ; and on being disturbed a second time, the old bird 
took up the young one, (which perhaps was not able to fly, or it might 
be a little weaker than any of the other three,) and flew for a distance of 
about forty or fifty yards. 

In 1875, three young Woodcocks were observed in Ullock Mois, 
near to Derwent Bank, in the month of April ; when discovered, the old 
bird was in the act of flying about with her wings trailing on the long 



188 

grass as if lame. A dog being there at the time, it unfortunately caught 
hold of one of the young birds and killed it. 

In 1876, in the month of July, three young Woodcocks were seen 
along with the old one, about a couple of hundred yards above Wood- 
land cottage. These were all strong, and could fly pretty well, so it seems 
probable that a few pair breed every year in this district. Yet it still 
must be considered as one of our winter migrating birds ; the great mass 
visiting us in the commencement and towards the end of October, and 
leaving us again in February ; and those that breed here are only a few 
stragglers. 

The Woodcocks, when first arriving in this country, may be found in 
whin cover on the coast, or at a great distance from wood, often on the 
moors, amidst long heather. They are extremely shy. Sometimes if fatigued 
with their flight, they can scarcely be got to rise, and frequently, when 
fallen in with in such a state, are killed in numbers. They soon, however, 
leave these districts, and do it altogether, scarcely a bird being found in 
the morning where the day before they had been abundant. Their 
most favourite haunts, when settled, as it were, for winter, are woods of 
some extent, where there is cover tliat can be run through beneath, and 
where shelter is afTorded. Young larch plantations, especially those 
shaded from the sun, are favourite haunts, as they generally prefer the north 
side of a hill, and are always found to be more numerous in those larch 
plantations where there are a few spruce, thorn, and holly trees, whose 
branches afford shelter, and underneath which there is generally a nice, 
smooth piece of ground, well protected both from sunshine and storm. 
They seldom move much in the day-time, unless disturbed, resting by 
day, and only feeding at times, or turning over the dried leaves. At 
twilight they regain activity, resorting to the open glades, marshy 
bottoms, or sheltered outskirts, and then for a time feed in earnest. 
Their food seems to be aquatic insects or larvae, which they procure by 
thrusting their bills into the soft mud, "or boring," as in sporting language 
it is termed. In this process a quantity of sand is also taken, for the 
stomach is always filled with it, in addition to any remains of insects 
that can be seen. In the woods, they also seem to turn over the dead 



189 

leaves in search of what may be beneath; and in hard frost, this bird, 
owing to these peculiarities, is one that suffers most severely. The 
number of Woodcocks which visit us, varies much from year to year, and 
without apparent cause. Whatever it may be, it should be sought for 
in their summer land, not in that which receives them in winter. The 
migration of the Woodcock is nocturnal, and birds are occasionally taken, 
after having dashed themselves against lighthouses, attracted by the 
light. The flight of the Woodcock has been estimated to be at the rate 
of one hundred amd fifty miles an hour. Its geographical distribution is 
extensive — besides being generally met with in Great Britain and Ireland, 
wherever suitable localities occur, its range extends occasionally to Ork- 
ney and Shetland, but from the want of shelter, it continues there for no 
time, as we have seen with various species which range far to the north 
in the British Islands. Still, abroad, the same degrees do not restrict 
them; thus, we have the Woodcock extending even beyond the Arctic 
Circle, and breeding in Siberia, Austria, and Silesia. In an opposite 
direction, they reach the Italian States, Smyrna, and some parts of the 
African coast. They are seen at Madeira ; and Mr. Yarrell states that 
the "Zoological Society have received notices of our Woodcock having 
been obtained at Cashmere," and Dodah near Cashmere, is given by 
another authority. Specimens have also been brought from India and 
Japan. The Woodcock is the largest known species of the genus, 
weighing on an average from nine to eleven ounces. The colours vary 
in intensity in different birds. 

In drawing these remarks to a close, I would beg all who are 
interested in the subject to observe, on all possible occasions, the habits 
of our migratory and other birds. Much yet remains to be known, and 
every observer may extend our knowledge in some direction. On a 
future occasion I hope to be able to put together my scattered notes upon 
other species of birds of our district, and shall at all times be glad to 
receive information collected directly from nature. 



191 



COLERIDGE. 

A Lecture delivered at Keswick before the Literary and 
Scientific Society, February e^th, 1877. 

By the Rev. J. D. Harington, M.A. 

In the early years of this century, for eighteen years — from 1816 till 
his death in 1834 — there lived in a surgeon's house on Highgate Hill, the 
remarkable man, of whom I have ventured to speak to you this evening. 
I say ventured ; for, in truth, to unravel the mysteries and perplexities, in 
which Coleridge's life and work were wrapped up, is not quite the simple 
thing it seemed at first to be. Of disciples he had no lack — sometimes 
he would receive only one at a time : he would walk with him in the 
garden, or he would invite him to sit in his own room, conversing volubly 
all the while, glad to get a patient listener, whether converted to his way 
of thinking or not. At other times, chiefly, as we read, on Thursday 
evenings, he would be the centre of a group, to whom he talked, im- 
patient of interruption, liking to have all the conversation on his own 
side, so that his hearers came to call it "monologue." I cannot refrain 
from quoting some short extracts, from descriptions of these scenes, 
which are on record : some not altogether laudatory — rather the opposite 
— and yet always acknowledging the peculiar power of the man ; not, as 
it seems to me, ill-natured, even in depreciation. " I may say of him," 
says Hazlitt, "that he is the only person I ever knew, who answered to 
the idea of a ' man of genius.' He talked on for ever, and you wished 
him to talk on for ever. His thoughts did not seem to come with labour 
or effort, but as if borne on the gusts of genius, and as if the wings of 
his imagination lifted him from off his feet. His voice rolled on the 



192 

ear like the pealing organ ; and its sound alone was the music of thought. 
His mind was clothed with wings; and, raised on them, he lifted phi- 
losophy to heaven. In his descriptions you then saw the progress of 
human happiness and liberty in bright and never-ending succession, like 
the steps of Jacob's ladder, with airy shapes ascending and descending, 
and with the voice of God at the top." More graphically, in his peculiar 
incisive way, Carlyle gives us his own reminiscences too. After describing 
Coleridge's private room, and the view from it, he adds, " No where 
could you see a grander prospect on a bright summer's day. Here for 
hours would Coleridge talk, concerning all conceivable or inconceivable 
things ; and liked nothing better than to have an intelligent, or, failing 
that, even a silent and patient human listener. He distinguished himself 
to all that ever heard him, as at least the most surprising talker extant in 
this world;" and elsewhere he adds with some irony, what Hazlitt 
spoke of him — " Excellent talker, very— if you let him start from no 
premises, and come to no conclusion." 

The person of this surprising talker is drawn with uniformity enough 
to assure us of the truth of the description. Forgive me for reminding 
you of Wordsworth's oft-quoted account of him, as of "a noticeable man 
with large grey eyes." A letter of his own comments on a portrait of 
himself, recently painted, in these words: "The exceeding weakness, 
strengthlessness, in my face was even painful to me." Carlyle says of it : 
"The good man, he was now getting old, and gave you the idea of a lite 
that had been full of suffering : a life heavy-laden half-vanquished ; still 
swimming painfully in seas of manifold physical and other bewilderments. 
Erow and head were round, and of massive weight. The eyes, of a light 
hazel," (his gifted daughter describes those of her brother, as being like 
her father's — " the colour of London smoke,") " were as full of sorrow as 
of inspiration ; confused pain looked mildly from them, as in a kind of 
mild astonishment; a heavy-laden, high-aspiring, and surely much-suffering 
man. His voice, naturally soft and good, had contracted itself into a 
plaintive sing-song; he spoke as if preaching — you would have said, 
preaching earnestly and yet hopelessly, the weightiest things." 

With many weaknesses and defects, as you will gather even from 



193 

these quotations, Coleridge was, however, a great man. He has left his 
mark upon much of the thought of our times ; the years that have followed 
upon his death have been the most remarkable and pregnant years of 
English History ; and in much of what is characteristic of them, there is 
a touch of the influence of Coleridge. He was a many-sided man ; 
desultory enough, but anxious to give to his time what he felt was best 
in all branches of thought. He had but litde activity, and no energy ; 
and yet he ventured to be at once poet, philosopher, politician, and 
theologian. And his broken utterances on all these subjects have 
coloured much of what we accept about them. 

Subject to all kinds of obloquy and abuse during his life-time, since 
his death England has perceived that she had a great man as her son, 
and did not value him. The "teachers of men" listened to him, and 
spoke out, and all were then aware that a prophet had appeared and had 
passed away : not thought much of at the time, as is the case with most 
other prophets. Except perhaps his critical writings, none of his prose 
works obtained general acceptance during his life -time. Coleridge spoke 
only to the faithful few ; only to his disciples ; and his disciples have 

i influenced their generation. The little leaven has gone far to leaven the 

' whole lump. 

To give any adequate notion of the life-work of this man, within the 

I limits of a lecture, is no easy task. Almost all that Coleridge said requires 

' "filtering" through the minds of plainer-speaking men, and "coming 
out" from their tongues or their pens, to be intelligible to the great mass 

\ of English people. This particular point is alluded to in the second 
stanza of the dedication to " Don Juan," where Lord Byron says : — 



k 



" Coleridge, too, has lately taken wing, 

But like a hawk encumbered with his hood, — 
Explaining metaphysics to the nation, 
I wish he would explain his 'Explanation.' " 

Fide ( Biographia Lit. ) 



He was one who had great thoughts: but the thoughts were "veiled." 
There was a haze surrounding them, a haze of words borrowed from 
German and other philosophies, which English people have never much 



194 

cared to penetrate. They believe him to have been great, because other 
great and dependable men have said so ; they have never accepted the 
fact, or rather, gathered it, from their own apprehension of his merits. I 
shall try to put in plain words, some of his thoughts on different subjects, 
that so you may apprehend his greatness, and see that there is a reason 
for his being said to be so. Perhaps the best way to this end, will be to 
divide his life into different sections, according to the subjects which, 
roughly-speaking, occupied it at different times. I will say something 
of him as Poet first ; then as Philosopher ; then (though I would not 
touch this subject, but that a lecture on Coleridge can never ignore it,) 
of his influence on Theology and Religious Thought. In doing this, I 
must intersperse my account of what he was as Poet, Philosopher, and 
Theologian, with a sketch of his life ; though it is by no means always 
easy to trace where Coleridge lived at particular times, and how he 
moved from place to place, as his restless disposition prompted. 

Let us first glance at his career till he came to Keswick in 1800. 
He lived here three or four years. It is this which gives us here a very 
special interest in Coleridge. In this place, rich in reminiscences of 
Poets, he was one of the company of Lake Poets ; though he was much 
besides, both in this and in other places. 

Samuel Taylor Coleridge was born at Ottery St. Mary, in Devon- 
shire, in the year 1772. He was the youngest son of the vicar of that 
place. In 1782, when ten years old, he was sent to Christ's Hospital. 
This famous school, which has its branch at Hertford, and its centre in 
Newgate Street ; the quaint and antique dress of its scholars, which gives 
them the name of "Blue Coat Boys," you must all be familiar with. Here 
the young Coleridge stayed nine years, and then went to Jesus College, 
Cambridge, in 1 791. At Christ's Hospital, he was a contemporary of 
Charles Lamb, who in after years contributed to literature the charming 
" Essays of Elia." "At school," he says, "I enjoyed the inestimable 
advantage of a very sensible, though at the same time very severe master. 
His name was Mr. Bowyer. ' In the truly great poets,' this master would 
say, ' there is a reason assignable, not only for every word, but for the 
position of every word.' At the same time we were studying the Greek 



195 

Tragic Poets, he made us read Shakespeare and Milton as lessons ; and 
they were the lessons, too, which required most time and trouble to 
'bring up,' so as to escape his censure." 

In this master's lessons we trace much of that common good sense 
which has altered so largely the diction and style of modern English 
poetr)^ " In our English compositions," says Coleridge, " he shewed 
no mercy to phrase, metaphor, or image, unsupported by sound sense ; 
or when the same sense might have been conveyed with equal force and 
dignity in plainer words. Lute, harp, and lyre ; muse, muses, and inspi- 
rations ; Pegasus, Parnassus, and Hippocrene, were all an abomination to 
him. ' Pierian spring, boy,' he used to say, ' I suppose you mean the 
cloister-pump !' 'Harp ! lyre ! boy, I suppose you mean pen and ink.'" 
This sensible master sent his boys, however, to the University, excellent 
Latin and Greek scholars, and tolerable Hebraists. One master in a 
thousand, one might say. Coleridge was attracted, too, very much at 
this period by the sonnets of Mr. Bowles, "a style of poetry," as he says, 
"so tender and yet so manly; so natural and real, and yet so dignified 
and harmonious," that they exercised a genial influence and an undis- 
puted sway over his mind for a time. 

At College he was "indifferent and indolent;" still, he gained the 
medal for the best Greek ode ; but after three years residence, he left 
without taking any degree. It is said, he fell for a few months into evil 
courses; at all events, he left in despondency, perhaps in debt, and enlisted 
in London in a cavalry regiment. His friends soon procured for him a 
discharge; and in June, 1794, he paid a visit to Oxford, when for the 
first time he met Southey. This acquaintance put an end to all bad 
habits, and indeed seems to have been the turning point in his life. In 
the autumn, at Bristol, he again met Southey ; and the two young friends 
discussed their scheme of establishing Pantisocracy, a model settlement, 
on the banks of the Susquehanna. He also engaged himself to a sister 
of Southey's future wife, — and in October was married to her. At this 
time he assayed to become a Unitarian preacher at Bristol, and projected 
a periodical called the "Watchman," which had an existence of only 
three months. The preachership fell through, and disappointed his 



196 

friends ; for his first two sermons were two old lectures — one on the 
Hair-powder Tax, the other on the Corn Laws. 

In April of 1796, his first volume of Poems was published; and at 
the end of that year, having suffered much from poverty and his own 
utter thriftlessness, he went to live at Nether Stowey, in Somersetshire, 
in order to be near Mr. Wordsworth. At the same time a friend came 
to live with him, and relieved him from much anxiety about money- 
matters ; and in the following year Coleridge's best poetry was written, 
in this quiet village home. To find how it came to be written, we must 
go to his own account of it, which he gives so graphically in his Biographia 
Literaria. " The first year that Wordsworth and I were neighbours," he 
says, " our conversations turned frequently on the two cardinal points of 
poetry — the power of exciting the sympathy of the reader, by a faithful 
adherence to the truth of nature ; and the power of giving the interest of 
novelty by the modifying colour of the imagination. The thought 
suggested itself that a series of poems might be composed of two sorts. 
In the one, the incidents and agents were to be, in part at least, super- 
natural. The excellence aimed at was to consist in interesting the 
affections by the dramatic truth of such emotions as would naturally 
accompany the situations, supposing them real." Coleridge's share in 
the work was to be confined to this— to pourtraying persons and 
character supernatural, or at least romantic, so as to transfer from our 
inward nature a human interest, sufficient to procure for these shadows 
of imagination that willing suspension of disbelief for the moment which 
constitutes poetic faith. Mr. Wordsworth, on the other hand, was to 
have this object — to give the charm of novelty to things of every day, by 
awakening the mind from the lethargy of custom, and directing it to the 
loveliness and the wonders of the world before us. "An inexhaustible 
treasure," says Coleridge, "but for which, in consequence of familiarity, 
we have eyes that see not ; ears that hear not ; and hearts that neither 
feel nor understand." Thus originated the joint volume of poems called 
"Lyi-ical Ballads ;" and in 1798 it was published, Coleridge's contribution 
to it being The Antient Mariner, and a few minor poems. Wordsworth 
was so much more industrious, that his friend had not time to finish 



197 

another poem which he had been preparing for the vokime — Christabel. 
The second edition contained Wordsworth's celebrated Preface. 

Certainly the best poetry which Coleridge ever wrote was this, 
written in the Somersetshire village. In this sense he was hardly one of 
the Lake Poets ; but this name was given to him in common with Words- 
worth and Southey, a few years afterwards, after the removal of the three 
friends to Cumberland. Indeed, if we regard the name as being the 
designation of a "school" which revokitionized the current ideas of 
poetry, Coleridge was never anything else but a "Lake Poet," widely as 
he differed from the others. 

Coleridge's place amongst poets is indisputable. Mr. Hort says : 
" One of the most common complaints against him is, that he quitted a 
sphere in which he was so pre-eminently fitted to shine, for others in 
which a poetic mind cannot but go astray. The few pages of Philo- 
sophical Poetry which he wrote, are not at all characteristic of him. It 
is not by this kind of poetry that he has made good his claim to be 
ranked amongst poets. His dramatic compositions were still less 
successful." "It is by his Odes, and still more by his Ballads, that he 
must at last be judged." For two main articles of his literary creed, the 
absence of arbitrary treatment in all true poetry, and the worthlessness of 
artificial diction, we saw that he was largely indebted to his school-master; 
for the halo of beauty and fascination which is thrown round his best 
compositions, The Attfient Mariner, Christabel, and the ballad on Love, 
he was indebted to nothing but his own brilliant imagination. And it is 
undoubtedly this gift which makes us all acknowledge the true poet in 
him. " His place," says Swinboume, " is amongst the highest of all 
time. The highest lyric work is either passionate or imaginative. Of 
passion Coleridge had nothing ; but for height and perfection of imagin- 
ative quality, he is the greatest of lyric poets. This was his special 
power, and this his special praise." 

If you wish to see what Coleridge makes of this " fusing power of 
the Imagination," as he calls it, I would refer you to the Biographia 
Literaria, chapters 13 and 14. It was his own chief excellence to 
possess it ; and when he was at work on the Lyrical Ballads, he set 

13 



198 

himsell to unravel what it was, and what it signified. Thus he arrived 
at his doctrine of the Imagination, and the essential distinction between 
it and Fancy. To make much of these subtle psychological inquiries, 
would only mystify and weary you. The Imagination, in brief, was 
denied to be the maker of images; and Imagination was the proper 
organ of poetry. So was overturned the current criticism, which 
believed poetry to consist in the use of eloquent or sublime metaphors 
and similes. He tells us how he was impelled to answer the question — 
What is Poetry? by his strong feeling of Wordsworth being so real a 
poet ; and yet of his being so entirely free from what had usually been 
considered the marks of one. He arrived at the conclusion by this 
process — that true poetry deals with the world of sense and its manifold 
contents, only so far as they are symbols of corresponding realities in 
the world of spirit. The first work of the Imagination is to read the 
symbolic language of nature. This is the proper sphere in which Imagin- 
ation moves ; and the poet, possessing this gift above other men, sees 
every object more truly and completely than is possible to the unimagin- 
ative eye ; and paints nature, not absolutely, but as contemplated by 
man ; a being who belongs to both worlds at once, and is capable of 
beholding glimpses of the one reflected from the unconscious face of the 
other. With two or three vivid strokes, e.g. in some of his o^vn poems, 
a scene flashes entire into his reader's imagination, where others with less 
intensity would have laboured long in creating the same impression. 
"The Imagination dissolves," he says, "diffuses, dissipates, in order to 
re-create ; or where this process is rendered impossible, yet still at all 
events, it struggles to idealize and unify ; it is essentially vital, even as 
all objects are essentially fixed and dead." The Fancy he dismisses in 
a few words. "It is indeed," he says, "no other than a mode of memory, 
emancipated from the order of time and space, blended with and modified 
by choice." Let me give you two or three passages of his own, which 
serve to show that he possessed these gifts in no ordinary measure : — 
" Down dropt the breeze, the sails dropt down, 

'Twas sad as sad could be ; 
And we did speak, only to break 

The silence of the sea ! 



Or again :- 



199 

All in a hot and copper sky, 

The bloody sun, at noon, 
Right up above the mast did stand, 

No bigger than the moon. 

Day after day, day after day, 

We stuck ; nor breath, nor motion ; 

As idle as a painted ship. 
Upon a painted ocean." 



" 'Twas not these souls that fled in pain, 
Which to their corses came again, 
But a troop of spirits blest. 

For when it dawned, they dropped their arms. 

And clustered round the mast ; 
Sweet sounds rose slowly through their mouths, 

And from their bodies past. 

Around, around, flew each sweet sound. 

Then darted to the sun ; 
Slowly the sounds came back again, 

Xow mixed, now one by one. 

Sometimes a-dropping from the sky, 

I heard the skylark sing ; 
Sometimes all little birds that are, 
How they seemed to fill the sea and air, 

With their sweet jargoning. 

And now 'twas like all instruments. 

Now like a lonely flute ; 
And now it is an angel's song. 

That makes the heavens be mute. 

It ceased : yet still the sails made on, 

A pleasant noise till noon ; 
A noise like of a hidden brook. 

In the leafy month of June ; 
That to the sleeping woods all night, 

Singeth a quiet tune. 



200 

Besides this essentially poetic gift of Imagination, I must not forget 
to mention another characteristic of Coleridge's poetry. This, however, 
has more to do with the form, than of the subject matter ; and therein, 
too, we trace a vast influence which he has had upon the poetry of the 
times that came after him. He restored music to metre. " In the hands 
of that polished school," says Mr. Hort very happily, speaking of the 
'Poets of Man,' "the art of versification consisted in cutting down the 
pleasant hilly road into a level or decorously inclined railway, along 
which the voice slid with gathering momentum to the grand shock at the 
final goal." One great mechanical change made by Coleridge, was of 
itself a thorough revolution : reckoning by accents instead of syllables. 
By introducing at the same time new forms of metre, he became 
indirectly the fashioner of the best known poetry of this century ; the 
originator of some of the most charming compositions of Byron ; of all 
those of Walter Scott. In the " Hints from Horace," Byron expressed 
his preference for the octosyllabic metre : — 

"Tho' at first view, eight feet may seem in vain, 
Formed, save in ode, to bear a serious strain ; 
Yet Scott has shown our wondering isle of late, 
This measure shirks not from a theme of weight ; 
And, varied skilfully, surpasses far 
Heroic rhyme, but most in love and war : 
Yl'hoit flttcttiaiions, tender or sublime, 
Are curbed too rnttck by long recurring rhyme." 

Lord Byron admits here that he borrowed from Scott this measure, as 
Scott, in his turn, confessed to have derived it from the Ch7-istabel of 
Coleridge. 

In 1798, after the pubHcation of his best poems, Coleridge was 
rescued from much pecuniary embarrassment by the kindness of the two 
celebrated potters, Josiah and Thomas Wedgwood. He had before 
this, during his residence at Nether Stowey, been subsisting by writing 
articles and verses for the London newspapers and magazines, till a 
friend coming to live with him, relieved him in some degree ; but now 
these generous benefactors wished the poet, whom they so much admired, 



201 

to complete his education by foreign travel, and by means of the pension 
they offered him, be enabled to restrict himself to literary work. Cole- 
ridge therefore started for Germany, in company with his friend 
 \Vordsworth, in the autumn; and I must recommend you to read at the 
end of his Biographia Literaria, the letters in which he describes so 
inimitably the incidents of the voyage to Hamburg, and the subsequent 
tour. They had letters of introduction to Klopstock, and many talks 
with him about poetry. They attended Blumenbach's lectures on natural 
history, and Eichhorn's on the New Testament. Coleridge learnt Gothic 
and German, and made his first acquaintance with German philosophy. 
Late in 1799 he returned to England, and in July, 1800, he came with his 
family to Greta Hall, where he lived for nearly the next four years. 
There is a letter dated April in the following year, in which he describes 
Greta Hall to Southey, and urges him to join them. This was done, 
and for a time the two families resided together in that house, so familiar 
to us all here. Coleridge had married, as you know, some years before 
this. Miss Sarah Fricker, a sister of Mrs. Southey's, — he had when he 
came with her to Greta Hall, two living children. Hartley, the eldest, 
was born at Bristol, and was now four years old. Derwent was born in 
1800. A second child, Berkeley, had been born at Nether Stowey, but 
only lived a year. Sara was born at Greta Hall in 1802. The reminis- 
cences of his gifted daughter Sara, as to her early home, are very 
interesting — for she continued to live on here with the Southeys and her 
mother, till her marriage in 1829. 

"Two houses inter-connected under one roof," she describes Greta 
Hall. " The larger part of which my parents and my uncle and aunt 
Southey occupied, while the smaller was the abode of Mr. Jackson, the 
landlord. It was built on a hill, on one side of the town of Keswick, 
having a large nursery garden in front. The gate at the end of this 
garden opened upon the end of the town. A few steps further was the 
bridge over the Greta. At the back of the Hall was an orchard of not 
very productive apple-trees and plum-trees. Below this a wood stretched 
down to the river side. A rough path ran along the bottom of the wood, 
and led on the one hand to the carding-mill field, which tlie river near by 



202 

surrounded; on the other hand the path led below the forge field on to 
the forge. Oh ! that rough path beside the Greta! how much of my child- 
hood, of my girlhood, of my youth was spent there ! There was a room," 
she continues, after describing the arrangement of the house, "which used 
to be my father's study, called the organ-room, from an old organ which 
Mr. Jackson placed there." But Coleridge was not much at Greta Hall 
after the year 1804. He fancied the climate did not suit his health, and 
went to Malta on a visit. While there he obtained the place as Secretary 
to the Governor, and received for his services ;^8oo a year. We next 
hear of him at Syracuse, then at Naples, then at Rome and Leghorn, 
returning to Keswick in 1806 — though no longer to be much his home, 
for he was oftener staying at Grasmere with the Wordsworths. 

" How gravely and earnestly used S. T. C.," says his daughter, 
speaking of these times, "and W. Wordsworth and my uncle Southey, to 
discuss the affairs of the nation, as if it all came home to their business 
and bosoms ; as if it were their private concern ! Men do not canvass 
these matters now-a-days, I think, quite in the same tone. Domestic 
concerns absorb their deeper feelings ; national ones are treated more as 
things aloof — the speculative, rather than the practical." She has 
interesting reminiscences, too, of her father's domestic notions, of this 
period. " My father had particular feelings and fancies about dress. He 
could not abide the scarlet socks which Edith and I wore. I remember 
going to him, when mamma had just dressed me in a new stuff frock : he 
took me up and set me down again without a caress. I thought he disliked 
the dress. He much liked everything feminine and domestic, pretty and 
becoming, but not fine-ladyish. My uncle Southey was all for gay, 
bright, cheerful colours, and even declared he had a taste for the grand 
in half jest. Mr. Wordsworth, too, loved all that was rich and picturesque, 
light and free, in clothing ; he wished that white dresses were banished, 
and that our peasantry wore blue and scarlet, and other warm colours, 
instead of sombre dingy black, which converts a crowd that miglit be 
ornamental in the landscape, into a swarm of magnified ants. My father 
admired white clothing, because he looked at it in reference to woman, 
as expressive of her delicacy and purity, not merely as a component part 
of a general picture." 



203 

He had a kind heart too, withal. Sara, as a child, used to be 
terrified at night with things she had heard spoken about : with lions, 
the ghost in Hamlet, the picture of Death at Hell Gate, in an old edition 
of Paradise Lost; and last, and worst of all, with her uncle Southey's 
ballad horrors — above all, the "Old Woman of Berkeley." "Oh !" she 
says, "the agonies I have endured between nine and twelve at night, 
before mamma joined me in bed, in presence of that hideous assem- 
blage of horrors, and the horse with eyes of flame." Her uncle only 
laughed ; but her father understood the case better : " He insisted that 
a lighted candle should be left in my room, in the interval between my 
retiring and mamma's joining me. From that time forth my sufferings 
ceased. I believe they would have destroyed my health had they 
continued." 

During this period of ten years, in which it is by no means easy to 
follow his movements, Coleridge delivered his celebrated Lectures on 
Poetry and Fine Arts at the Royal Institution. Those on Shakespeare 
and Education achieved the widest distinction. This line of authorship 
he continued in the review of Wordsworth's poetry, so able, so pene- 
trating, so lucid, which we find in the second volume of the Biographia. 
And it was his excellence in this respect as a lecturing critic, which in a 
short time afterwards gained him the pension of ^105 a year from 
George IV. as an Academician of the Royal Society of Literature. His 
great reputation as a critic of poetry and sesthetics is founded upon the 
courses of Lectures delivered at this period, and upon his "written 
recastings of their purport." He spoke from notes ; but frequently, and 
at considerable length, launched out into extempore discourse. 

The publication, of this time, of most importance, however, was 
the Friend, which came out in 1809, in a periodical form; and this was 
followed by many contributions to the Courier. " My father," says Sara 
Coleridge, "used to talk to me with much admiration and affection of 
Sarah Hutchinson, Mrs. Wordsworth's sister, who resided partly with the 
Wordsworths, partly with her own brothers. At this time she used to 
act as my father's amanuensis : she wrote out a great part of the Friend 
to his dictation." 



204 

Soon after the successful acting of his drama, " Remorse," at Drury 
Lane, which, by the bye, met with this success through the good offices 
of Lord Byron, Coleridge went to live at Calne, and here collected the 
poems called "Sibylline Leaves," (newspaper poems, reprinted under this 
name,) wrote the "Lay Sermons," and most of the Biographia Literaria. 
And then we come to his distinctly last period, and the home which for 
his last sixteen years may be said to have been the anchorage of his 
storm-tossed and wandering life. 

Everyone has heard of Coleridge as an opium-eater. It is uncertain 
when he first began the habit ; but when a boy at school, imprudent 
exposure to wet and cold, brought on tlie illness from which he suffered 
much in after life— rheumatism. And it is said that he began the terribly 
fascinating practice of taking opium, from seeing a medical notice of 
Kendal's Black Drop, as a cure for rheumatism and diseased action of 
the heart. " The medicinal virtue of the drug appeared at first almost 
magical." There is no reason to suppose that he weakly yielded to it, 
as a mere sensual gratification. With the exception of a few months, on 
his leaving college, Coleridge's life had been a singularly blameless one, 
and free from vice. He was not a man who would rush headlong into a 
course such as this ; but the fascination of opium, begun from motives 
entirely innocent, as is well known, binds its victim with cords, that 
many a stronger man than Coleridge has been unable to break. In 1814 
he confesses "a sad retrogress of twelve years;" but he may have begun 
the practice before this century, and have overcome it partly. Mr. Gill- 
man, one of his biographers, dates it from the attacks of rheumatism in 
his school days ; from swimming over the New river in his clothes, and 
remaining in tliem. " From these indiscretions and their consequences, 
may be dated," he says, "all his bodily sufferings in future life." If we 
add, that he gained a slow victory over the baneful and self-detested 
habit after he went to live with Mr. Gillman in 18 16, we shall not be 
harsh in our estimate of this unfortunate practice. Anyhow, in 18 16, 
the fatal habit had gained such an ascendancy over him, that his friend 
Dr. Adams, persuaded him to place himself in the house, and under the 
care and supervision, of a medical man. This was the origin of his 



205 

going to Mr. Gillman's at Highgate, where, I believe with the exception 
of visits to Oxford in 1820, and to Cambridge to a meeting of the British 
Association in 1833, and also a tour in Holland and Belgium, undertaken 
in 1828, he lived constantly till his death. "At Highgate," says another 
biographer, "he conquered his habit of taking opium, though he never 
before had gone sixty consecutive hours without taking it. He cultivated 
his flowers, and had a set of birds as pensioners. He was not apparently 
sad, though there are ample evidences in his writings of deep-seated 
dissatisfaction with himself, and with the comparatively slight life-long 
results of his spacious, splendid, and various intellect." " His extra- 
ordinary powers of conversation, or rather 'monologue,' now found 
ample exercise ; there were many, and some half-worshipping, listeners 
to the oracular and super-abundant utterances which flowed on for hours." 
Nor must we suppose that those who rather severely handled this 
"monologue," and from their dislike of metaphysic, would sometimes 
call it "bottled moonshine," were unjust and unfair to the real flashes of 
genius which now and again were apparent enough. " Glorious islets, 
too," says Carlyle, " I have seen rise out of the haze. Balmy sunny 
islets, islets of the blest and the intelligible ; on which occasions the 
secondary humming groups would cease humming, and hang breathless 
upon the eloquent words. Eloquent, artistically expressive words you 
always had : piercing radiances of a most subtle insight came at intervals : 
tones of noble pious sympathy were never wanting long." 

In the year he came to London (the only wonder is that he had 
the energy to write anything,) the "Two Lay Sermons" were written ; 
his Autobiography in the following year; his "Aids to Reflection" in 
1825 ; and his "Church and State" in 1830. 

This literature introduces us to those other departments, besides 
poetry, in which Coleridge v.-as certainly great. I must say something 
to you of his Philosophy and of his Theology, though there is but little 
space left to deal with such vast and formidable subjects. His political 
ideas began by being eminently visionary : he thirsted for liberty, in a 
way which we^ who know what it is so well now, can scarcely conceive. 
It was a much less familiar thing in Coleridge's youth ; and when the 



206 

great outburst of the French Revolution came, that dawn of the new 
epoch for Europe, he rejoiced in it, and threw into its cause all his 
youthful enthusiasm. Gradually as life went on, as he became older, 
and knew more what the world is, his enthusiasm cooled down. The 
terrible crimes which dyed with blood the advancing times of the great 
change ; its tremendous wrenches and excesses and throes, in escaping 
from the past ; its trampling under foot all that man's spirit had ever 
carved out for itself as dear and venerable, perhaps disgusted his gentle 
nature ; and as his years went on, he sank into an acquiescent, if not 
a vehement admirer of established modes of carrying on the world's 
business. Perhaps he never, like Southey, became a Tory ; he loved 
liberty to the end ; but he saw better and more clearly how only it could 
be gained and kept. He wrote essays in his latter days on the Consti- 
tution of Church and State ; but he never advocated stagnation and 
absolute conservativism. He taught that there must always be progress, 
but that the progressive and permanent elements in a State should work 
together. While advocating rights and realities of property, he acknow- 
ledged the majesty and supremacy of law. But I don't know that these 
changes of mind are worth dvveUing upon, or indeed, that they are in 
any way uncommon. What we see taking place in Coleridge, I think, 
we see taking place in a vast number of minds. The great majority of 
thinking men get to know in time, that all changes must be brought 
about gradually and slowly, if the improvement is to be permanent; 
and they get to see that rushing headlong into the future, and dashing 
one's head against the strong wall which the spirit of the time has thrown 
up, never succeeds. It is only by slow and patient sapping and mining 
that the walls of human prejudices ever come to fall. The enthusiasm 
of youth invariably gives way to the clearer and calmer insight of 
advancing life, and at last we learn that hard lesson — waiting patiently. 
Mental Philosophy always had more attractions for Coleridge than 
any other kind. He was above all things a metaphysician. There are 
many different ideas as to the possibility of anything worthy the name of 
science in this region. Certainly, a survey of what has been thought and 
written and said about the science of mind, is not encouraging. Perhaps 



207 

we are, as speculators, but little more knowing than Aristotle was two 
thousand years ago, as to the origin of all knowledge and all ideas. 
While at Cambridge, Coleridge admired more than all other philosophers 
— Hartley and Berkeley. In after years his admiration of them continued, 
for he named after them his two eldest boys. But he must have changed 
afterwards, for when he comes to speak in his Biographia of this year, 
1797, he says : "After I had successively studied in the schools of Locke, 
Berkeley, Leibnitz, and Hartley, and could find in none of them an 
abiding place for my reason, I began to ask myself — Is a system of 
philosophy, as different from mere history and historic classification, 
possible? If possible, what are its necessary conditions? I was for a 
while disposed to answer the first question in the negative, and to admit 
that the sole practicable employment of the human mind was to observe, 
to collect, and to classify." It might have been well for Coleridge's 
philosophy, if he had stopped at this point. If instead of dreaming of 
what cannot be verified, he had turned some of that great genius, and 
even that splendid imagination, to the work of real science, that which 
is alone worthy of the name : that of which Bacon is the immortal guide; 
that which has done more for man, and aided his progress and enlighten- 
ment and happiness, more than all the philosophies of the past world 
put together ; that unravelling and reading of the marvellous universe 
which surrounds us, but of which it may be said we have only just begun 
to cut the first pages of the mighty and divine book. But Coleridge's 
longing for mere speculation as to the mind and its workings, was too 
strong for him ; he fell back into the endless mazes of ontology. Lessing 
and Kant and Schelling, in his later days, were his most loved and 
revered audiorities. From the second of these gifted men, he is usually 
understood to have borrowed that doctrine which is so eminently Cole- 
ridgean in this country — the distinction between the Reason and the 
Understanding. Doubtless there were differences between the system 
which Kant taught on the one hand, and Coleridge on the other ; but 
in this point they were agreed — "The Understanding is a lower faculty, 
which only collects ideas, ('disconnected and helpless notions,') and 
supplies them as materials for the great combining faculty^?/;-^ Reason." 



208 

He found here the assurance that man's reasoning — or rather, under- 
standing — powers, are not man himself, and that he may rise above their 
impotence, and have direct faith in unseen reaHties. He seems to have 
differed from the German philosopher in denying that the Reason is, as 
it is with him, only a faculty of individual men, and not rather a divine 
nature of which all are partakers, and that equally. 

The Reason instructs by intuition — divine insight; it is in the 
same region, and allied to his Imagination, which sees in the things of 
the external world only symbols of the unseen. It does many other 
wonderful things ; but it is difficult to feel quite sure, when you are 
treading this ground, that you are not dealing only with ingenious 
inventions and fanciful conceits. Some minds have but Uttle taste for 
speculations which can never be profitable, and are always conflicting. 
There are as many systems, indeed, of mental philosophy, as there have 
been teachers and professors of it. Hardly two have thought alike. Let 
us admire their courage and their ingenuity. I can hardly ask you to 
follow me through any more of Coleridge's speculative teaching ; the 
very phraseology becomes wearisome to our ears ; the perpetually 
recurring ego and non-ego — the object and the subject — the real and 
ideal — the identity of knowledge and being, and much more, all 
conveying to the ordinary mind very little meaning, and to the instructed 
mind only the idea of endless intellectual battle-fields. 

Coleridge at last thought he saw in Schelling's writings a coincidence 
with his own imperfect results. The teaching of both was Objective 
Idealism, which term will certainly want interpreting. So far as I can 
interpret it, it means, divested of technicalities, something of this sort — 
Beside the Subject, there must exist an Object ; the two are identical in 
a third, which is the Absolute. This Absolute is neither Ideal nor Real 
— neither mind nor Nature — but both. The Absolute is God. He is 
the All in All : the eternal source of all existence. He realises Himself 
under one form as Objectivity, and under a second form as Subjectivity. 
He becomes conscious of Himself in man ; and thus man, under the 
highest form of his existence, manifests Reason ; and by this Reason 
God knows Himself. 



209 

So does Coleridge's Philosophy lead us directly down to his 
Theology. The one with him was indeed almost identical with the 
other. He began his thoughtful life, as we saw, by being a Unitarian, 
and a great admirer of Spinoza. His Religious Musings are a fair 
specimen of his religious ideas at the time of his leaving Cambridge ; 
and these are tinctured with Spinozism to a considerable extent. After- 
wards he gives up Unitarianism, and accepts the doctrine of the Trinity. 
He is careful to tell us, that he does not think he could have arrived at 
that doctrine from the reasoning process alone ; but that having been 
revealed, he sees at once its truth in its coincidence with philosophy. 
There is Absolute Being when, as we saw, the Subject and Object 
become identified. The Infinite, which manifests itself in the Finite, in 
the Creature. But Ideas are but emanations from the Infinite. Know- 
ledge and Being are one — i.e. — the Father and the Logos of the 
Christian Trinity are absolutely one. But there is also a result of this 
combination, that is — energy, that is — active Love. From Being and 
Knowledge proceed Energy — i.e. — the Holy Spirit proceeds from Father 
and Son. Again — Ideas and Conceptions are distinct ; ideas are flashes 
from the Universal Light ; conceptions are the abstract images and defi- 
nitions of things drawn by each man's particular understanding. By the 
pure reason, man holds communion with God ; it is not only closely 
allied to Imagination — the maker of poets and prophets — but it is a 
spiritual and intuitive faculty. By virtue of it (the Light which lighteth 
every man), man \i2& faith. The individual recognizes as true, by this 
precious gift, the revelations of the Logos. So again. Inspiration or 
Revelation, is that which brings home the voice of the Infinite, of God, 
to the heart. The statements in the Bible, which are true, commend 
themselves at once to the Intuitive Reason. This is the "verifying 
faculty," by which our Faith or Reason is able at once to distinguish 
between true and false, between the gold and the dross. Or, once 
more — The voice of the divine Reason in regard, not to faith, but to 
duty or conduct, is ever heard in the conscience ; hence, whatever truth 
man has to tell, is the same in all times. Poets and philosophers, by 
listening to and interpreting the Imagination and the Reason, have the 



210 

same truths to tell with prophets and apostles ; in all the Reason, or 
Logos, within them, is the revealer of God's Eternal Truth. So it was, 
too, that Coleridge at last possessed intense reverence for the wisdom of 
the past. In it he recognized the instincts and intuitions of humanity. 
Adulterating ingredients, no doubt, he saw in it all ; but yet, beneath 
all, a germ of eternal truth : the Spirit guiding into all truth. The 
Catholic dogmas, he felt, were to be interpreted in this way ; and always 
recognizing the truth which underlay them, he would have had all men 
to pay reverence and respect to the substructure, however much they 
might repudiate the false glitter and meretricious ornament of the super- 
structure. 

These grand ideas, by filtering through the minds of many who sat 
at his feet, have influenced widely and deeply the religious thought of 
our time. Chiefly interpreted, no doubt, by Hare and Maurice and 
Kingsley, they have had a far wider extension ; and it is plain, have 
modified the ideas of those who would be most loud in disclaiming their 
influence ; and have, we may hope, paved the way for a higher, purer, 
more enlightened, more loving Church of the future. It may be dan- 
gerous to say more on this subject ; but let us be just to Coleridge at all 
events, and accord him all that we believe to be his most distinctive 
praise. 

For four years he was almost confined to his own room; four years, 
no doubt, somewhat dreamily and weakly spent, but still with intellectual 
life beneath the bodily weakness, making itself known and felt. Troubled 
nights and reslless days came to him, caused by changes in the structure 
of his heart; and on July 25th, 1834, this great, and yet troubled spirit, 
passed quietly away. No one is better able to speak of him and his 
character, than his daughter ; and she says in a letter to a friend : " In 
his death we mourn not only the removal of one closely united to us by 
nature and intimacy, but the extinction of a light which made earth more 
spiritual, and heaven in some sort more visible to our apprehension." 



»'•''"'' 



TRANSACTIONS 



Cumberland Association 



Advancement of Liter ahLve and 
Science. 



PART III.— 1877-78. 



Edited by J. CLIFTON WARD, Assoc. R.S.M., 

Fellow of the Geological, Mineralogical, and 
Royal Microscopical Societies. 



Price to Members, One Shilling. 
Non-Members, Two Shillings and Sixpence. 



CARLISLE : 

{;. cV T. COWARD, PRINTERS, 75, SCOTCH STREET. 

1878. 



TRANSACTIONS 



OF THE 



Cumberland Association 



Advancement of Literature and 
Science. 



PART 111.^1877-78. 



Edited by J. CLIFTON WARD, Assoc. R.S.M., 

Fellow of the Geological, Mineralogical, and 
Royal Microscopical Societies. 



Price to Members, One Shilling. 
Non-Members, Two Shillings and Sixpence. 




CARLISLE : 

G. & T. COWARD, PRINTERS. 75, SCOTCH STREET. 

1878. 



CONTENTS. 



Pago. 

Rules ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 

List of Officers ... ... .. ... ... ... 8 

Reports from the Associated Societies ... ... ..: 9 

Annual Report and Treasurer's Account ... .. ... 23 

Part I.— PROCEEDINGS AT THE ANNUAL MEETING 

(Cockermouth) : — 

Progi'..\mme carried out ... ... ... ... 28 

Address by the President ... ... ... 29 

Papers Read at the Annual Meeting : — 

"On the Probable Condition of the Interior of the 
Earth." By Sir George Airy, K.C.B., F.R.S., 
Astronomer-Royal ... ... ... ... 43 

"Local Names." By Peter Harrison, (Keswick) ... 61 

"Quarts, as it occurs in the Lake District; its 
Structure and its History." By J. Clifton Ward, 
P.G.S., F.R.M.S., (Keswick) 77 

"Wordsworth." By Rev. Professor William Knight, 
St. Andrews ... ... ... ... ... 203 

Part II. — Original Papers communicated to the Societies 
DURING the Session 1877-78, and selected by the 
Association Council for Publication : — 

"Boulder Clay." By C. Smith, M.R.I.A., F.G.S., 
(Whitehaven) ... ... ... ... ... 91 

"Submerged Forest at St. Bees." By R. Picker- 
ing, C.E., (Whitehaven) ... ... ... 109 

"Theory and Practice in their Relation to each other." 
By J. D. Kendall. W. H. Kitchin, and J. Nixon, 
(Whitehaven) ... ... ... ... ... 115 

"ADayatEnnerdale." By Joseph Adair, (Whitehaven) 139 

151 



"Peter Crosthwaite. " By J. Fisher Crosthwaite, 
(Keswick) 

"Symbolism in Art." By J. A. Wheatley, Carlisle, 
(Cockermouth) 

"Half an Hour with a few Common Beetles." By 
William Duckworth (Carlisle) ... 



165 
189 



RULES 



CUMBERLAND ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCE- 
MENT OF LITERATURE AND SCIENCE. 



-:o:- 



I. — That an Association be formed to be called the "Cumber- 
land Association for the Advancement of Literature and 
Science." 

2. — The Association shall consist of all members of the following 
Societies : — ^\Vhitehaven Scientific Association, Keswick Literary 
and Scientific Society, Cockermouth Literary and Scientific Society, 
Workington Scientific and Literary Association, Maryport Literary 
and Scientific Society, Longto\vn Literary and Scientific Society, 
Carlisle Scientific Society and Naturalists' Field Club, Ambleside 
and District Literary and Scientific Society, and of the members 
of such other Societies as shall be duly affiliated. Also of persons 
not belonging to any of the affiliated Societies, if nominated by 
two members of the Council ; this latter class of members shall 
pay the sum of 5s. annually. 

3. — The Association shall be governed by a Council, consisting 
of a President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary, Treasurer, and of 
ordinary members, two to be elected by each affiliated Society. 



4- — The President, Secretary, and Treasurer shall be elected 
annually at the Annual Meeting, and be capable of re-election. 

5. — The Vice-Presidents shall consist of the Presidents of the 
various affiliated Societies; and the delegates of the various 
Societies shall be elected annually by their respective Societies. 

6. — An Annual Meeting of the Association shall be held at such 
time and place as may be decided upon at the previous Annual 
Meeting, or (failing such appointment) as may be arranged by the 
Council. 

y. — At each Annual Meeting, after the delivery of the Presi- 
dent's Address, and the reading of the Reports from the affiliated 
Societies, the objects of the Association may be furthered by 
Lectures, Papers, Addresses, Discussions, Conversaziones, &lc. 
The Council shall have the power of obtaining the assistance of 
persons who are not members of the Association. 

8. — The Council may publish at the expense of the Association 
such portions of its own or any of the affiliated Societies' communi- 
cations as may be deemed advisable, subject to the consent of the 
author. 

g. — The Council shall endeavour to promote co-operation among 
existing Societies, and may assist in the formation of new ones ; it 
may also aid in the establishment of classes in connection with 
any of the associated Societies. 

10. — Affiliated Societies shall contribute towards the general 
funds of the Association the sum of Sixpence for each member. 

II. — The Rules can only be altered by a majority of two-thirds 
of the members present at an Annual Meeting. Any member 



desiring to alter the rules must send a copy of the proposed alter- 
ations to the Secretary, at least two weeks before the meeting is 
held. 

12. — Past Presidents of the Association shall be permanent 
members of the Council, and be described as Past Presidents. 

13. — The travelling expenses of all who assist in carrying out the 
programmes of the various affiliated Societies shall be defrayed by 
the Society assisted. 



The Fourth Annual Meeting will be held at Workington 
in the month of May next, and due notice of the arrangements for 
the same will be issued to all members of the Association. 

Members willing to bring forward Papers on subjects of 
original investigation or of local interest should send in the titles 
of the same to the Secretary. 



OFFICERS FOR THE SESSION 1878-9. 



'^uni'iinxt. 
I. Fletcher, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. 

The Lord Bishop of Carlisle. 

R. Russell, Esq., C.E., F.G.S. (Whitehaven.) 

Rev. Canon Battersby, M.A. (Keswick.) 

I. Fletcher, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. (Cockermouth.) 

G. J. Snelus, Esq., Assoc. R.S.M., F.C.S. (Workington.) 

John Crerar, Esq., M.R.C.P.E. (Maryport.) 

Rev. J. J. Burrow, M.A. (Longtown.) 

The Lord Bishop of Carlisle (Carlisle.) 

Robert Crewdson, Esq. (Ambleside.) 

CotttttU. 

T. F. r Anson, M.D. I Whitehaven. 

William Jacksos, F.S.A. > 

Alex. A. H. Knight, M.D. | Keswick. 

E. J. Grayson ) 

rev. W. Williams F.G.S. ) Cockermouth. 
Henry Dodgson, M.D. ) 

John Highet, M.D. { Workington. 
A. Peile \ *" 

rev J. S. Craig ) Maryport. 
A. Hine ) •'^ 

F. B. Graham, M.D. ) Longtown. 
John Wilson ) " 

Henry Barnes, M.D I Carlisle. 

R. S. Ferguson, M.A., F.S.A. ) 

Rev. H. S. Callender, M.A. | Ambleside. 
C. W. Smith ) 

STrtasurtr anit gtcutarg. 
J. Clifton Ward, Assoc. R.S.M., F.G.S. 



REPORTS FROM THE ASSOCIATED SOCIETIES. 



WHITEHAVEN SCIENTIFIC ASSOCIATION. 

HOWGILL STREET. 



nth session; 1877-78. 



President 

Vice-President 



T. F. r Anson, M.D. 
W. Jackson, J. P. 
Augustus Heldee. 



... R. Russell, C.E., F.G.S. 
... A KiTCHiN, F.C.S. 

Past- Presidents. 

W. H. KlTCHIN. 

H. A. Fletcher, F.R.AS. 
James Baikd. 



E. Ablett, M.D. 
Joseph Adair. 
John Jackson. 



Committee. 

I J. D. Kendall, M.E., F.G.S. 

J. W. Montgomery, F.C.S. 
I R. Pickering, C.E. 
J. Vivian, C.E. 



Botanical \ 

Zoological \ 

Geological | 

Mineralogical \ 



Arch Ecological 



Treasurer 
Hon. Librarian 
Hon. Secretary 



Hon. Curators. 



J. Adair. 
E. Ablett. 

R. Pickering. 
R. Russell. 

T. F. I'Anson. 
W. Jackson. 



J. S. Hellon. 
C M'Glashan. 
B. Taylor. 



Oct. 



The following MEETINGS were held during the Session.  - 
9. — CoN'VERSAzioNE. — The President's Address. 



Oct. 23.— J. D. Kendall, W. H. Kitchin, J. Nixox, B. A. —Theory and 
Practice considered in Relation to each other. 

Nov. 6. — W. M. Mooesom, B.A. — General Sketch of Political Economy. 
(1.) — Wealth ; what it is, and a few facts about it. 



10 

Nov. 20.— T. V. Holmes, F.G.S., H.M. Geological Survey.— The Chalk ; 

its origin, characteristics, and scenery. 
Dec. 4.— J. S. A1N.SWORTH, M.A., LL.B.— General Sketch of Political 

Economy. (II. )— The Production and Distribution of Wealth. 
Dec. 18.— C. Smith, F.G.S.— President of the Barrow Naturalist's Field 

Club.— Boulder Clay. 
Jan. 8.— T. F. I' Anson, M.D.— How an Animal is built up. (I.)— Bone 

and Muscle. 
Jan. 15. — J. E. Taylor, F.G.S., (Ipswich.)— Flowers : their shapes, 

perfumes, and colours. 
Jan. 22. — A. A. H. Knight. M.D., (Keswick. )— How an Animal is built 

up. (II. ) — The Organs of Circulation and Respiration. 
Feb. 5.— J. Adair.— A Trip to Ennerdale. B,. Pickering.— The Sub- 
merged Forest at St. Bees. 
Feb. 19. — H. Barnes, M.D. (Carlisle) —How an Animal is built up. 

(III.) — Brain and Nerves. 
Mch. 5. — W. Alsop. — The Introduction and Progress of Printing in 

England. 
Mch. 19.— Rev. W. H. Wilkinson.— The Study of Words. 
Apl. 2. — J. Main, M.E.— Gravitation. 

Apl. 16. — J. Vivian, C.E. — The Past and Present of Mineral Research. 
Apl. 30. — Conversazione. — Business Meeting. Election of Officers, &c. 



Two SPECIAL COURSES of LECTURES were also given on the 
following Subjects : — 

Six Lectures on Light and Spectrum Analysis. — A. Kitchin. 
Six Lectures on Geology. — R. Russell. 

The session commenced as usual with an opening conver- 
sazione which was very numerously attended, and the committee 
have to acknowledge the assistance and support which they received 
from members of the association and others who kindly lent objects 
for exhibition on the occasion. At that meeting one of the most 
recent discoveries in science was brought before the association, 
viz., the transmission of sound by means of an induced magnetic 
current. These experiments with the Telephone were amusing and 
instructive. The number of members at present amounts to 269, 
nearly the same as at the close of last session. The new members 
admitted during the present session were 45 in number. By way 



11 

of experiment in one of the meetings a special subject was selected, 
and treated controversially by three gentlemen. These papers 
Avere of a very interesting character. The committee would 
recommend that in future more papers of a similar character should 
be read. Two evenings were devoted to local subjects. . The 
paper by Mr. C. Smith, F.G.S., on " Boulder Clay," is worthy of 
note for some suggestions made in the introduction. These referred 
to the desirability of some joint action being taken by the White- 
haven Scientific Association and the Barrow Naturalists' Field Club 
for the encouragement of original work, especially in connection 
with subjects pertaining to our own neighbourhood. This subject 
was also mentioned in the president's address at the commence- 
ment of the session, but no definite action in this line has yet been 
taken by either society. Two local papers were read — " A Trip. to 
Ennerdale," by Mr. J. Adair; and "The Submerged Forest at St. 
Bees," by Mr. R. Pickering. These papers do not appear in the 
original programme, but were substituted for that promised by the 
Right Hon. G. C. Bentinck, which he was unable to read at the 
appointed date. It is to be hoped that during next session we may 
have the honour of hearing this paper read. There were also two 
lectures on "Political Economy," and three lectures on physiological 
subjects. The attendance at the lectiu-es on " How an Animal is 
Built up," was decidedly more numerous than was the attendance on 
a somewhat similar series given during the session of 1876-77. 
These lectures were highly instructive, and being given in a popular 
manner, must have conveyed much valuable information to those 
who were really desirous of such instruction. As the pursuits and 
tastes of the members are so varied, it may not be justifiable for 
your committee to extend this system to any very great length. 
All the other papers read during the session were of a varied and 
interesting description. To gentlemen who have prepared and read 
papers to the association during this session, the best thanks of 
your committee are due. When the time and labour which must 
be devoted to the preparation of these papers are taken into consider- 
ation, we cannot too highly appreciate their disinterested kindness. 
The attendance at the meetings generally during this session has 



12 



been good. Still, out of our large membership the attendance on 
all occasions might be more numerous. Two special courses of six 
lectures each were also given, at the request of some of the mem- 
bers of this association. The attendance at these meetings was as 
large as could reasonably be anticipated. Various articles and 
specimens have been presented to the museum during this year. 
To the donors the curators have to express their very best thanks. 
Your committee think that if the funds of the association would allow 
of a little more money being devoted to museum expenses, an 
earnest attempt should be made to classify and arrange the collec- 
tions already in our possession, and also to increase them still further. 
On the occasion when the Westmorland and Cumberland Archaeo- 
logical and Antiquarian Society visited Whitehaven in December 
last, your committee invited the members to a conversazione. The 
invitations were confined to members of the two societies, and the 
conversazione was held in the Association Rooms, Howgill-street. 
Our guests expressed themselves thoroughly pleased with the enter- 
tainment which was provided for the evening, and also wished their 
thanks to be conveyed to the association for the use of the rooms 
on the following day. The papers then read were of very great 
local interest 



KESWICK LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



9th session, 1877-78. 



President 
Vice-President 
Secretary 
Treasurer 



J. Fisher Ceosthwaite. 
J. Clifton Ward, F.G.S. 
W. Wood. 

J. FiSHEK CrCSTHWAITE. 



Commitlee. 



Rev. Canon Batteksby, M.A. 
Rev. Alfred Hoavsox. 

Rev. W. COLVILLE. 

Rev. Geo. L. B. Wildig, B.A. 



A. H. Knight, M.D. 
E. J. Grayson. 

R. R. LOWTHIAN. 
J. BiRKETT. 



13 

MEETINGS HELD DUBING THE SESSION. 

SUMMER FIELD MEETINGS. 

June 27. — Excursion to the Roman Station called Cser-niot, near Bassen- 
thwaite, conducted by Mr. J. Fisher Ceosthwaite. 

August 2. — Archffiological Excursion to Huttou-John and Dacre Castle, 
conducted by Mr. J. Fisher Crosthwaite. 

Aug. 29. — Geological Excursion to Greenup GiU and Eagle Crag, conducted 
by Mr. J. Clifton^ Ward, F.G.S. 

(.This w;is in connection with the SLaiyport ami Cuckermouth Societies.) 

The above Field days were in addition to four which took place on 
the occasion of the Meeting of the Association in Keswick, Alay 1st, 
2nd, and 3rd, 1877, and which are reported in the Transactions of 
tliat j'ear. 



WINTER SESSION. 

K D I X A R Y Meetings. 

Htld ill the Kemcick Librarij at 7-30 p.m. 

Oct. 22.— The President — Peter Crosthwaite. 

Nov. 5. — Mr. J. RiCHARDSOX — The Superstitions once common in the Lake 
District. 

Dec. 3. — Open Night, for Short Papers, when Capt. .John Jacksox read 
a paper on "Self Elevation," and Mr. .J. C. Ward and Mr. W. 
Wood one each on the "Manchester Thirlmere Water Scheme." 

Feb. 4. — Mr. Thos. Mayson — The Character of Cromwell. 

Feb. 18. — Mr. J. P. Anderson, B.A. — Italy in the Thirteenth Century. 

Mch. 4. — Mr. Wm. Wood — The Drama and some of its Actors. 

Mch. 18. — Mr. Thos. Mayson — Printing, practically illustrated. 

Mch. 25. — Mr. .J. Postlethwaite — Some Curiosities of the Mineral King- 
dom ; and the Election of Officers and Committee. 

Lectures. 
Held in the Keswick Lecture Hall, at S p.m. 



Oct. 29. — A. G. Sy.monds, Esq., M.A. — Prose, Poetry, and Music. 

Nov. 19. — D. Birkett, Esq., F.R.I. B.A. — Originality and Individuality in 
Art, as shown in the Works of British Artists. 

Dec. 17. — J. CLiFfON Ward, Esq., F.G.S. —Faraday. 

Dec. 31.— Prof. T. Mc.K. Hughes, M.A., F.G.S.— Sedgwick. 

Jan. 16. — J.\s. Gordon, Esq. — How Ave See Things. 

Jan. 21.— .J. E. Taylor, Esq., F.L.S., F.G.S. — Geographical Distribution 
of Animals and Plants. 



14 

Jan. 28. — Geo. E. Lowthian, Esq. — Chemistry of Water, illustrated by 

Experiments. 
Feb. 11. — Eev. W. Sheewen, M.A. — Words. 
Feb. 25. — G. J. Snelus, Esq., Assoc. E.S.M. — The Telephone. 
Apl. 1. — Rev. Geo. L. B. Wildig — The Study of Historj^. 

The Lectures and Ordinary Meetings have been fairly well 
attended by the members, but the Lectures have not been so well 
attended by non-members as they ought to have been, considering 
the character of the lectures and the low charge of admission {}d.) 
At the Ordinary Meetings the discussion of Papers was pretty well 
sustained. 

Mr. J. Clifton Ward conducted a Natural History Class in 
the Museum, upon six consecutive Saturday afternoons, the subject 
being the "Lower Forms of Animal Life." Two Saturday night 
Lectures were also given on the same subject to working-men, in 
the Museum. 

Both numerically and financially the condition of the Society 
is satisfactory. There are 156 members, 11 of whom are under 
age. Thirteen new members have been elected during the last 
Session. 

At the commencement of the Session the subscription was 
raised from 2s. 6d. to 5^"., thus making it uniform with that of most 
of the other Societies. 

The Museum was lighted and thrown open free to the public 
on Saturday evening, Dec. ist, and microscopes were placed on 
exhibition round the room. Several hundreds visited the local 
collection on this occasion. 

Though several valuable contributions have been made to the 
Museum during the past year, there is still much room for the 
efforts of local naturalists. 

It is intended to hold a Bazaar in August, in aid of the funds 
of the local Museum and School of Art. 

The Committee has purchased Flintoft's Model, which will 
henceforth form an important part of the local collection. The 
Museum is open to members and their friends free. 



15 
COCKERMOUTH LITERARY ^ SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 

7th SESSION, 1877-78. 



President ... ... ... Isaac Fletcher, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. 

Vice-Presidents. 

Rev. W. Williams, F.G.S. 

Henry Dodgson, Esq., M.D., F.R.A.S., F.M.S. 

Conuiiittee. 

Mr. Joseph Brown. | Mr. .John Simpson. 

Eev. Eldeei) (tREEN. 
Mr. Thomas M. Harris. 
Mr. J. H. Pickering. 



Mr. E. L. Waugh. 

Mr. Horace R. Wyndham. 

Mr. William Youdale. 



Secretary ... ... ... ... ... Mr. M. Edwards. 

Treasurer ... ... ... ... ... Mr. Graham. 

LECTUllES were delivered during the Session as fuUon's :^ 

Oct. 18. — The Bessemer Process. By G. J. Snelus, F.C.S. 

Nov. 1. — Faraday. By J. C. Ward, F.G.S. 

Nov. 15. — Protectorate of Cromwell. By the Eev. G. L. B. Wildig. 

Nov. 29. — Evolution as the process by which tlie earth has arrived at its 
present form. By .J. D. Kendall, C.E. 

Dec. 1.3. — The Empire of the Incas. By J. H. Pickering. 

Jan. 10. — Dante and his Times. By R. A. Allison, M.A. 

Jan. 17.— All Hour at the Sea-side. By J. E. Taylor, F.L.S., F.G.S. 

Jan. 31. — Pope : his Life and Times. By the Rev. .J. T. Pollock. 

Feb. 14. — Symbolism in Art. By J. A. Wheatley. 

Feb. 28. — History of the House of Commons. By the President. 

Mch. r4. — The Huguenots. By Jos. BK0^\^^ . 

Close of Session, Business, and Election of Officers. 

The attendance at the Lectures (though satisfactory as regards 
the average) was unequal ; that at Dr. Taylor's Lecture, given in 
the Public Hall, was very large. 

On August 29th, the Society joined the Keswick and Mary- 
port Societies in an excursion to examine the Glacial Moraines of 
Greenup Gill, Borrowdale. 

An English Literature Class has been most efficiently con- 
ducted by the Rev. C. H. Gem ; eight separate evenings were 
devoted to it ; the attendance averaged thirty. 



16 



WORKINGTON SCIENTIFIC AND LITERARY 
ASSOCIATION. 



4th session, 1877-78, 



President 
Vice-President 
Treasurer 
Secretary 



Mr. H. Bowes. 
Mr. W. Deighton. 



H. F. CuRWEN, Esq. 
Rev. J. J. Thornley, M.A. 
Mr. W. Wilson. 
Mr. J. Johnson. 



Committee. 



Mr. G. F. Downak. 
Mr. J. H. Howe. 



Mr. G. J. Snelus. 



The folloiri/Kj LECTURES icere given during the Session : —   

Oct. 24.— R. Russell, C.E., F.G.S.— Pre-Historic Man. 

jJqv_ 7., — Rev. J. S. Craig. — The Ancient Icelander; his Life and Litera- 
ture. 

Nov. 21. — A. KiTCHiN, F.C.S. — Some of the Elementary Principles of 
Light (experimentally illustrated). 

Dec. 5. — J. Clifton Ward, F.G.S. — Some of the Elementary Principles 
of Sound (experimentally illustrated). 

Jan. 16.— J. E. Taylor, F.L.S., F.G.S.— An Hour by the Sea-side. 

Jan. 30. — Dr. Highet. — Reminiscences of Travel in Egypt and Syria. 

Yeh. 6. — James Baird, Esq. — Some of the Elementary Principles of Heat 
(experimentally illustrated). 

Mch. 6. — E. S. Crompton, Esq. — Railways : their Permanent Way and 

Signals. 
Mch. 20. — W. W. KiTCHiN, Esq. — Some Curiosities of Plant Life. 
Apl. 3. — C. Mc.Glasham, Esq. — Coral Formation. 

The Committee, in presenting their fourth annual Report, 
have to state that the number of members on the books is about 
the same as last year, some old members having withdrawn and 
their places being taken by new ones. The attendance of members 
at the meetings has been very fair. 

The Committee suggest that next session the course should 
be divided into two parts, as in some of the other Societies, one 
part consisting of monthly ////5//V lectures., and the other of ordinary 
meetings, at which short papers should be read by the members, 
and a discussion encouraged. 



17 
MARYPORT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



2nd session, 1877-78. 



President ... ... ... ... Mr. J. Wood. 

Vlce-Presiilents. 
Eev. A. Gates. | Dr. Crerar. 

Secretary ... ... ... ... Mr. J. B. Bailey. 

Treasurer ... ... ... ... Mr. J. Robinson. 

Delegates. 
Rev. J. S. Ceai«. I Mr. A. Hine. 

Committee. 

Rev. J. S. Crair. I Mr. P. Macintyre. 

Mr. J. Hodgson. | Mr. W. Hine. 

Mr. R. Adair. 

MEETINGS were held during the Session in the George Street School Eoom 
as follows : — 

Ordinary Meetings. 

Nov. 2. — Revision of Rules, &c. 

Nov. 16. — Conversazione and Exhibition. 

Nov. 30.— Mr. P. Macintyre— Air. 

Dec. 21. — Mr. R. Adair— Spelling Reform. 

Jan. 25. — Discussion. 

Feb. 22.— Mr. F. Walker— Photography. 

April 5. — Mr. J. E. Corner — Physiognomy. 

April 12. — Mr. J. B. Bailey — Ancient Maryport. — Revision of Rules, 
Election of Officers, &c. 

Public Lectures. 
Dec. 14. — J. Clifton Ward, Esq., P.G.S. — Optical Instruments. 

Jan. 18.— J. E. Taylor, Esq., F.L.S., F.G-.S.— Earthquakes and Volcanoes : 
their History and Origin. 

Feb. 8.— T. F. I'Anson, Esq., M.D.— On Touch. 

Mch. 8.— J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S.— The Ear. 

Mch. 29.— „ ,, ,, —The Eye. 

The Committee, in presenting this its second annual Report, 
is glad to notice a very satisfactory increase on last year's member- 



18 

ship. Many difl^culties incident to a new Society have been 
encountered, but it is now hoped that a prosperous future is 
before the Society. With satisfaction the admission of several 
lady members is recorded. The attendance at both Public and 
Ordinary Lectures has been much better than last year. 

The Conversazione and Exhibition proved a decided success, 
the Athenaeum being engaged for the occasion. During the 
evening papers were read by the following gentlemen : — 

Capt. CoNLEY, R.N. ... "Life-Saving, &c., Apparatus." 

P. Macintyre, Esq. ... ... " The Blast Furnace. " 

G. J. Snelus, Esq., Assoc. E.S.M. ... . . "The Telephone." 

A. KiTCHiN, Esq., F.C.S. ... ... "The Spectroscope." 

The Exhibition comprised a large and choice collection of pictures, 
statuettes, models, Hindoo, Chinese, Japanese, and Burmese 
vases, paintings, carvings, &:c. 

A Field-day was arranged in connexion with the Keswick 
and Cockermouth Societies on Wednesday, August 29th. 

The TraJisactions have been given to the members free. 

It is in contemplation to form a local Museum in connexion 
with the Society. 



LONGTOWN LITERARY <t SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



1st session, 1877—78. 



President ... ... ... ... ... Rev. J. J. Bureow. 

Vice-President... ... ... ... ... R. A. Alllson, Esq. 

Secretary mid Treasurer ... ... ... Mr. John Wilson. 



Committee. 



Dr. Graham. 
Mr. J. RiGG. 
Mr. J. Peel. 



Mr. E. J. Musgrave. 
Mr. W. Little. 
Mr. A. WiLKiE. 



Public Lecture. s. 

Nov. 19. — J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S. — Ice and the Old Cumberland 

Glaciers. 
Dec. 10. — Rev. Canon Battersby — Recent Discoveries in Ancient Assyria 

and Babylon. 



J 



19 

Jan. 14. —Rev. Geo. L. B. Wildig — The Protectorate of Cromwell. 
Feb. 11.— Rev. C. H. Gem— Life and Writings of Tom Hood. 
Mch. 18.— T. F. I'Anson, M.D.— Water : its Forms and Forces. 
Apl. 8. — Dr. Walker — Sanitation. 

Ordinary Me e t i n g s . 

Dec. 3. — Eev. J. J. Burrow. — Coal. 

Dec. 17. — Mr. W. Hood— Education : its true Nature and Aims. 

Dec. 24. — Readings by several Members. 

Dec. 31. — Mr. J. Wilson — The probable effect of Shortening of the Hours 
of Labour. 

Jan. 7.— Mr. Mc.Coxochie— The Steam Engine and Printing Press. 

Jan. 21. — Discussion on the Protectorate o^ Cromwell. 

Jan. 28.— Mr. Towns— Public Health. 

Feb. 4. — Discussion on Public Health. 

Feb. 18. — Discussion on Tom Hood. 

Feb. 25. — Rev. J. J. Burrow — A Reading on Food and Digestion. 

Mch. 4. — Dr. Graham — The House we Live in. 

Mch. 11. — Rev. J. J. Burrows — A Reading: The Unconscious Actions of 
the Brain, by Dr. Carpenter. 

Mch. 25.— Mr. A. Wilkie— Plants and their Food. 

Apl. 1. — Discussion on the Causes of the present Depression in Trade, and 
Election of Officers for the present year. 

The Society has enrolled 42 members. The Meetings have 
been fairly well attended, and much instructive and interesting 
matter has been advanced. 

It is intended that a Field-day shall be held in the Summer, 
and the Meetings resumed in Autumn. 



CARLISLE SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY AND FIELD 
NATURALIST CLUB. 



1st session, 1877-7 



President ... The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Carlisle. 

Vice-Presidents. 

Robert Ferguson, Esq., M.P. 

S. J. Binning, Esq., Mayor of Carlisle. 



20 



Treasurer ... ... ... R. S. Ferguson, Esq. 

Hon. Curator ... ... ... T. K. Atkinson, Esq. 

Secretary ... ... ... Mr. John Sinclair 



Committee. 



Dr. McLaren. 
Dr. Barnes. 

Mr. C. J. Ferrttson. 
Mr. W. I. Pt. Crowder. 
Mr. Baxter Smith. 
Mr. J. B. Watson. 



Mr. R. M. Hill. 
Mr. Geo. Dawson. 
Mr. W. Duckworth. 
Mr. John Jackson. 
Mr. W. B. DoDD. 
Mr. T. Duckworth. 



Public Lectures. 

Dec. 18. — The President — Inaugural Address. 

Jan. 22.— J. E. Taylor, Esq., F.L.S., F.G.S.— An Hour by a Pond Side. 

Feb. 19.— J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S.— Tlie Old Olaciers of Cumbria. 

Mch. 19. — Dr. Barnes — The Nervous System. 

Apl. 16.— Geo. J. Snelus, Esq., F.C.S.— The Telephone. 

Ordinary Meetings. 

Feb. 8. — Mr. R. S. Ferguson — Some of the Contents of the Museum. 
Mch. 5. — Mr. George Dawson — The Birds of the District. 
Apl. 9. — Mr. Duckworth — Beetles. 

The Committee of the above Society have much pleasure 
in presenting their first annual Report, and congratulate them- 
selves on the success which has so far crowned their efforts. The 
want of such a Society in Carlisle had long been felt ; — and 
although the Session has only been short, it has been eminently 
successful. 

The Society was organized in December 1877, with 50 
original members, and the number now on the books has reached 
159. 

The attendance at the Lectures and the reading of Papers 
has been very good, and from the interest manifested, the Com- 
mittee are encouraged to hope that a still more successful Session 
will be possible next year. 

A very considerable improvement has been made in the 
Museum, and many new specimens have been added to the 
collections. 

An excellent gift of about forty volumes has been made to 
the reference Library, for the use of members at such times as 
the Museum is open. 



tt 



21 



AMBLESIDE AND DISTRICT LITERARY AND 
SCIENTIFIC SOCIETY. 



1st session, 1878. 



President 



Rev. H. S. Callender. 



Vice-Presidents. 



Secretary 
Treasurer 



R. Crewdson, Esq. 



Rev. J. Spaven. 



C. W. Smith 
W. Lister 



W. Barton 
T. Bell, Junr. 
J. Bentley 
J. Fleming 
W. Fletcher 



Committee. 



G. Gatey 

E. J. Hebert 

A. Johnston, M.D. 

F. M. T. Jones 
W. T. Kendall 



MEETINGS were held during the Sessio7i as follows : — 

Ordinary Meetings. 

ffeld in the Lecture Room, Church Street, Ambleside, at Eight p.m. 

— Rev. H. S. Callender, Vice-president — Introductory Address. 

— Mr. J. Bentley — Wordsworth. 

— E. J. Hebert, Esq.. M.A., F.G.S.— The Eye, a victim of con- 
stant deception. 

—Mr. W. T. Kendall, M.R.C.V.S.— Some of the changes produced 
in Nature by Chemical agency. 

—Rev. E. M. Reynolds, M.A.— Debate : That the Foreign Corre- 
spondence of our Newspapers exercises a baneful influence. 

— R. Crewdson, Esq., President — Concluding Address. — Annual 
Meeting of Members ; Election of Office-bearers. 

Lectures. 

Feb. 8.— J. Clifton Ward, Esq., F.G.S., Assoc. R.S.M.— The old Glaciers 

of Cumberland and Westmorland. 
Feb. 22.— AVaynman Dixon, Esq., C.E.— Engineer in Egypt for the 

transport of the Obelisk — Cleopatra's Needle : Its History and 

Transport. 

3 . 



Feb. 


1. 


Feb. 


15. 


Mch. 


1. 


Mch. 


15. 


Mch. 


29. 


Apl. 


12. 



n 

Mch. 8. — Rev. John Spave>', F.R.M.S. — The Telephone; with practical 

demonstrations. 
Mch. 22. —Archibald Hamilton, Esq., M.D.— The History of Chloroform 

and other Aneesthetics. 
Apl. 5. — Rev. Haedwicke D. Rawnslky, B.A. — The Brothers of the 

Poet Laureate. 

The Committee of the Ambleside and District Literary and 
Scientific Society, have much pleasuse in reporting that the estab- 
lishment and proceedings of the Society have been attended with 
great success. 

A preliminary meeting was held on January 17th, when J. 
Clifton Ward, Esq., gave an account of the work done and methods 
employed by the Keswick Society, after which thirty-nine members 
were enrolled. 

The number of members is now 172. 

The programme was successfully carried out, both ordinary 
meetings and lectures having been well attended. 



23 



|.miual '§tpQxi of |.ssoda:tion Sfimtarg. 



The following Report of the work carried on by the Associ- 
ation during the past year will, it is hoped, go far to justify its 
existence and general methods of working. 

Three new Societies have been formed during the year, and 
have become affiliated to the Association. On Nov. 19th, 1877, 
the Longtown Literary and Scientific Society was founded, now 
numbering 42 members; on Dec. i8th, 1877, the Carlisle Scientific 
Society and Naturalist Field Club, now numbering 159 members ; 
and the Ambleside and District Literary and Scientific Society was 
instituted upon the 17th of Jan., 1878, and already includes 172 
members. Thus the Association now consists of eight different 
Societies, as follow, named in the order of their birth : — White- 
haven, Keswick, Cockermouth, Workington, Maryport, Longtown, 
Carlisle, and Ambleside. There are also forty-one Association 
members, living in different parts of the county, but belonging to 
no special Society. The total number of members belonging to 
the Association is about iioo, as against 700 this time last year. 

In the carrying out of the winter's courses of lectures and 
meetings, co-operation among the existing Societies has largely 
prevailed, and every assistance has been rendered in the formation 
of new Societies and the strengthening of weak ones. 

The Public Lecturer, Dr. Taylor, appears to have given great 
satisfaction to the six Societies before whom he lectured on 
Natural History subjects, and a wish has been expressed by many 
that he might again visit our Association in the same capacity. 



^4 

The total cost of the Public Lecturer to each Society was only 
£,2 11$. lid., a sum of ;£6 6s. having been voted towards the 
general expense, out of the Association funds. It may be men- 
tioned that Dr. Taylor afterwards expressed the very great pleasure 
he had experienced in giving his lecture course to so many attentive 
Cumbrian audiences. 

At the commencement of the winter sessions, Part II. of the 
Transactions was issued. Before the work was commenced, 
estimates were procured from several local publishers, through 
advertisement in local papers — and that furnished by Messrs. G. 
and T. Coward of Carlisle, accepted. The Assoc. Secretary 
would here wish to acknowledge the prompt attention and helpful 
care bestowed on the work by Messrs. Coward, and the 
Association generally will acknowledge that the execution has 
been equalled by the moderate cost. The estimate for 8oo copies 
of 150 pages, sewed, was between ^^25 and ;^26, but the Part 
ran to 210 pages, the extra quantity being charged for at the rate 
of 44^. per 16 pages. The Part was issued at the low price of is., 
and contains, besides the President's Address and Reports of 
Societies, nine original Papers and two Abstracts. As an en- 
couragement to authors of original papers, fifty copies of their 
respective memoirs were sent to each author at a moderate charge. 

Each Society has taken a certain number of copies of Trans- 
actions for its own members, and two of the Societies (Keswick 
and Maryport,) have presented a copy to each member free of 
charge. 

The following is the Balance Sheet for the past year of the 
Association. It includes the printing expenses of the Annual 
Meeting at Keswick, last year, and those of the present meeting, 
so that the balance now presented is less by the amount of the 
latter than it would ordinarily have been. It has been thought 
well, however, to have all clear a-head; and the Secretary and 
Treasurer to-day to be appointed, will have no incoming expenses 
to provide for on entering office, but a good sum in hand.* 

* There will be expenses in connection with the Lectures given at the 
Cockermouth Annual Meeting, yet to be deducted from the balance. 



25 





\0 o 


*ove 


o 


o ^ 


- 





























-" N 


fOf^O 


0\vO 


O rON 








„ 




















•^ 


►^ 


*^ 






M 




























vO N 


M rr> "" 


fOvO 


<*1 roio 








t^ 
















S 




ro 


















t^ 


















s? 
















s? 
















< 






=^ = 






' '3 '  
  3 • 


























^ 












g 














lA 












X 






:| : 






.<: 














V 












H 

C/3 




1^ 

O : 


  a   
•c 

ui"^"   
rt 0) c 






"<2 ' 
















u 

1 


ll 

1a..S 








H 


uT 






TS 














^ 


s 






.« 


Krf 


S 
> 


4^ 






j2 o 


1 












g 



u 


: : 




1 




< 
0^ 


u 

8 


" rt.S 




3 


.3 
o 














00 


LTIVO 


8 


8 


H^^ 




00 g 


ors' Copi( 
g Expens 
gs at Wo 
onery, &( 
Public L( 


 H-3 


< 
o 

u 

3 












% 
^ 


«o 




00 


1 






in 


•S.E.S 
3 t! tS 


rt 


T3 




O 
1 






















1 






c 2 ort-G 


C/3 


O 




c 

1> 




























II 


o c o 


"3 




(4 'Ji 


J 




























PhS 


U<UUOpNli. 


P5 




























ro 


 o 






o 























(3\ 








M 


1^ p 






M 

















"1 


„ 








• < 










• • 


















►^ 










^ 


o o 






CTv 

















roO 


r^ 








s? 










M 




















t^ 




























t*» 








s? 








: >, 
























B 














•  £ 
















-V 

































o 


M 








i 

o 




























vn 

O 








• M 


^ 














.J 












«• 


  j3 


^ 




1 


« « 


$ 


i 


o 

.5 















•*1 








H 


O 






1 

^3 


S2 fe 


TJ 


ui 


3 






1 




c 




2 








M 

w 
o 


.1 

V4 


S 

c 2 


- 


C 

o 


u! « ^ so fO 

-  § S „• - 


< 




2 

a 



rt 





3 
3 










BJ 


a. 
"- o 

1> *j"! 


<1^ 


i 


O <5 O 3 

o 


O 


3 o^ 





1 


1 

£ 

V 





73 

J3 


S73 
1 < 












O P.( 


3i : ; 

S. 
o 

Q O 


N 




3 




1^ 


4J 

'S. 





C 


c 



Mo 

0.i<l 










^5 


-Q 




- 














1) 

'a. 


15 














rt rt 


3 




o 
































05 '>^ 


vi 




V 














U 




Q 




^ 









26 

Ere closing my Report, I trust I may be allowed, as both 
Secretary and Treasurer, to make a few remarks upon past and 
future work, which I hope may be taken up in the discussion that 
should ensue on the reading of the various Society Reports. 

Undoubtedly our object is mainly this — to draw out the 
mental powers by specially encouraging self-culture. This may 
be done by leading members to work out a subject for themselves, 
and, if possible, present the result to the Society ; and by bringing 
before the members new and varied matter from a circle outside 
them. In other words, mental growth is the aim ; to be brought 
about by nourishment from within and nourishment from without. 
The most effectual way of securing this among our Societies is, in 
my opinion, the plan first pursued at Keswick, and afterwards 
followed at Maryport, Longtown, Carlisle, and Ambleside, —of 
having two classes of meetings during the winter session : the 
Ordinary Meeting, at which Papers are read by Members of the 
Society only, and the Public Lecture given usually by an outsider, 
and open to the general public on a small charge. I can speak 
confidently of the good result, for by the adoption of this plan 
each Society is bound to provide a certain number of Papers out 
of its own resources, while the Public Lecturer from a distance 
may bring in new matter and new life, and the geiiej-al audience 
which gathers around him serves as a recruiting ground for the 
enlistment of new Society members. At any rate, I believe facts 
clearly prove that more papers of an original character have been 
brought before those Societies having these two classes of meeting 
than before those which have but one class. When the Ordinary 
Meetings are well sustained by the Society members, the Associ- 
ation Secretary may with all the better conscience help to supply 
the Lecture course with efficient lecturers from the neighbouring 
Societies and county at large, for then it becomes a clear case of 
helping those who try to help themselves. 

Another and most essential point in the welfare of a Society 
is the possession of an efficient Secretary. In many cases I would 
advocate the union of the posts of Secretary and Treasurer, as an 
economy of labour and a concentration of interest in the work. If, 



I 



moreover, as is the case now in three of our Societies, the Local 
Secretary could also be one of the Delegates, much trouble would 
be saved to the Association Secretary. 

Looking forward to the work of another Association year, I 
believe there is every prospect of a still further increase in the 
number of Local Societies ; and I doubt not but that the increased 
number of Association members now scattered throughout Cum- 
berland and parts of the adjacent counties, will help to originate 
new centres of Society life, and quicken those now in existence. 
All may and should help forward this work, and whenever any of 
us see suitable ground wherein to sow good seed, the same should 
be scattered, and the Association Secretary appealed to for imple- 
ments and methods to till the new ground and make it fruitful. 
With regard to the publication of Transactions, I feel that the 
most trying period has now passed. The first year, much hardship 
was felt by the decision of the Council— that each Society should 
take a full number of copies. Yet this course of action enabled 
the funds to be put on a proper footing at the outset. During the 
past year, although the general work done by the funds of the 
Association has been greater ; though the 2nd Part of the Trans- 
actions has contained much more matter than the ist Part; and 
though each Society only took such a number of copies as was 
voted for in each Committee, yet the balance in hand is over ^15. 
This shows that while the general work of the Association— such 
as the contributing towards Public Lecturers, &c.— may be still 
more extended during the coming year, there will yet be ample 
means for the publication of a third Part of the Transactions; and 
several important and original papers have already been recom- 
mended to the Council for publication. 



28 



|pr0mbinigs at t^e %mxm\ Pwting at Corhermout^, 

Uj>on Easter Monday &' Tuesday, April 22 dr* 23, 1878. 



PRESIDENT : ISAAC FLETCHER, Esq., M.P., F.R.S. 

MONDAY, April 22nd. 

4-15 p.m. Address by the President, at the Pubhc Hall. 

5-15 p.m. Paper on " Cockermouth Castle," by Wm. Jackson, Esq., 

F.S.A., in the Stone Room of the Castle. 
6-30 p.m. Public Tea (in Public Hall.) 
8-0 p.m. Lecture on " The Probable Condition of the Interior of the 

Earth," by Sir George Airy, K.C.B., F.R.S. , Astronomer Royal, at 

the Public Hall. 

TUESDAY, April, 23rd. 

lo-o a.m. General Meeting in the Pubhc Hall. — Election of Officers 
and next year's place of Meeting. Reading of Reports from all the 
affiliated Societies, and Discussion upon Society work in general. 
11-15 *•">• Reading of Original Papers, (Public Hall :— 
" Local Names," by Mr. Peter Harrison. 

" Quartz, as it occurs in the Lake District ; its Structure and 
History," by Mr. J. Clifton Ward, F.G.S. 
Experiments with the Telephone. 
1-30 p.m. Public Luncheon at the Globe Hotel. 

3- o p.m. Excursion to the Clints (Limestone rocks) and Isel Hall. 
6-30 p.m. Public Tea (in Public Hall). 

8-0 p.m. Lecture on "Wordsworth," by the Rev. Professor 
Wm. Knight, (St. Andrews') ; in the Public Hall. 



29 



ADDRESS BY THE PRESIDENT. 
ISAAC FLETCHER, M.P., F.R.S. 

When I reflect how ably the chair of this Association has 
been filled on two former occasions by the Lord Bishop, I cannot 
but express my regret that his mantle has not fallen on a more 
worthy successor; but the responsibility rests not upon me, but 
upon those who have elected me President for the current year. 
I have received a touching letter from your late President, ex- 
pressing his warm and unabated interest in the Association and 
its doings, and also his great regret that on the one hand, the 
duties of his important office at this season of the year, and on the 
other, the overwhelming sorrow which has so recently overtaken 
him, render it impossible for him to carry out his intention of 
being present on this occasion. Every member of the Association 
will unite with me in an expression of sympathy and condolence 
with the good Bishop and his family, in the sudden removal from 
their midst of one so young, so amiable, and so full of promise. 

. Although perhaps I am not in a condition to speak with 
perfect impartiality, I cannot but think that the Association has 
done a wise thing in selecting Cockermouth for holding one of its 
early gatherings. The main object of the Association I take to be 
to diffiise a love for literature and science throughout the district 
we represent ; and Cockermouth and its neighbourhood are honour- 
ably associated with both literature and science. Cockermouth 
was the birthplace of Wordsworth ; — of Wordsworth I will say 
nothing, but simply congratulate you on the fact that the immortal 
bard will form the subject of a lecture to-morrow evening by 
Professor Knight, who possesses every qualification for such a task. 
An audience like this need not be reminded that the neighbouring 



30 

village of Eaglesfield was the birthplace of Dalton, — perhaps the 
greatest of chemists, and a true philosopher in every sense of the 
word. The late Professor Sedgwick said of Dalton, "from the 
hour of his birth the God of nature laid His hand upon him and 
ordained him to the ministration of high philosophy." With such 
associations as these our good old town may well be proud, and 
they justify my statement, if justification were needed, that to-night 
we meet in an appropriate place. To-morrow, literature will be 
most appropriately represented by Professor Knight ; this evening, 
I rejoice to say, science will be represented by its acknowledged 
chief, the Astronomer-Royal. 

Fortunately foi me, and fortunately for you, the presence of 
these distinguished men renders it unnecessary for me to attempt 
to do much more than to endeavour to discharge the formal duties 
cast upon me by the office of President. But as something may 
reasonably be expected from me even under these circumstances, 
I propose to direct your attention for a short time to the labours 
and achievements of another Cumberland worthy who rendered 
services to science and to the welfare of the human race of a very 
high order. I allude to George Graham, who was born in the 
Parish of Kirklinton in the year 1673. 

When the late Dr. Lonsdale was engaged in writing his 
interesting series of volumes on the Wort/iics of Cumberland, I 
drew his attention to the important part which George Graham 
played in the scientific progress of the age in which he lived, and 
pointed out that whilst he had written the lives of many Cumbrians 
of lesser note, he had omitted all mention of the most distinguished 
man of science that Cumberland ever produced, with the single 
exception of Dalton. Versatile and laborious as were the Doctor's 
researches, his reading had not been directed very much to 
mechanics and astronomy, and therefore he had heard but little of 
George Graham, and he was not at that time even aware that he 
was a Cumberland man. The life of Graham occupies a prominent 
place in the last volume of the Cumberland Worthies, which 
appeared shortly before the Doctor's death. When he had the 
volume in hand, his health had become much impaired, and at 



31 

his earnest request I collected and arranged for him nearly all the 
facts and substance of the memoir. I mention this circumstance 
lest any of you who have read Dr. Lonsdale's biography of Graham 
may think I am merely poaching on his preserves. It has occurred 
to me that a short account of Graham and what he accomplished 
might be acceptable to the Society, and be thought worthy of a 
permanent record in its Transadiotis. 

George Graham, as I have already said, was born in the 
year 1673, in the Parish of Kirklinton ; but of his boyish days we 
know next to nothing. He went to London at the age of fifteen, 
and there is no evidence that he ever afterwards visited his native 
county or maintained any communication with those he left behind 
him. Probably his early lot was a hard one. His parents were 
in very humble circumstances, and the general condition of the 
peasantry at that time was that of grinding poverty and extreme 
hardship. A petition presented to parliament about the date I 
have mentioned, says that "families of the first quality had scarcely 
bread sufficient for their consumption, and no beverage but water; 
that many died in the highways for want of sustenance, and 
that there were thirty thousand families who had neither seed, nor 
bread corn, nor money to buy any. ' Probably young Graham's 
reminiscences of his boyhood would be unpleasantly tinged with 
the memory of much privation, and this may account for his 
apparent forgetfulness of his native county.' In 1688, Graham 
was bound apprentice for seven years to Henry Aske, clock- 
maker, London ; and at the termination of his apprenticeship in 
1695, he was admitted by the Society of Clock-makers, a "free 
clock-maker." He then became assistant to Mr. Tompion, an 
horologist of European fame, and an original thinker and inventor 
of no mean order. So highly was he esteemed, that on his death 
in 1 7 13, his remains were buried within the hallowed walls of 
Westminster Abbey. 

Before proceeding to an account of the inventions with which 
Graham will be for ever associated, let me draw your attention to 
the importance of an accurate measure of Time ; for an accurate 
knowledge of this element lies at the very root of every funda- 



32 

mental astronomical observation ; and to take the most practical 
and utilitarian view of the subject, yet one which transcends almost 
every other in importance — it is upon an exact means of finding 
the true time and keeping it when you have got it, that the safety 
of our ships and the lives of our seamen mainly depend. For 
these reasons eminent horologists and astronomical instrument 
makers have always ranked with eminent astronomers, and most 
justly so ; and what I now wish to impress upon you is this, — that 
the most eminent horologist England ever produced was a Cum- 
berland man, and that man was George Graham of Kirklinton. 

When Graham's apprenticeship expired, he at once entered 
into Mr. Tompion's service, and became his chief assistant and 
most intimate friend. On the death of Tompion, Graham inherited 
the business and reputation of his master, both of which he largely 
extended, and indeed, speedily eclipsed all rivals. His whole time 
was devoted to the perfecting of the art of horology, and the 
constructing of instruments for the most delicate astronomical 
researches. It would be quite out of place at a meeting of this 
character for me to enter into the minutiae of Graham's mechanical 
improvements in clocks and watches ; they may be found in 
Denison's "Hand-book of Clock-making," and in all rudimentary 
treatises on the subject. His capital improvement in watches was 
the invention of the horizontal escapement ; but it was in the clock 
that he mainly distinguished himself 

At the period in question, probably the best clock in existence 
was no better than an ordinary kitchen clock of the present day : 
good enough for domestic and business matters, but unfit for any 
scientific purpose. Graham made two improvements, the import- 
ance of which can hardly be over-estimated. The one was the 
"dead beat escapement," and the other the "mercurial com- 
pensating pendulum." The joint application of these two 
inventions, combined with the exquisite finish and workmanship 
which characterised his handicraft, at once converted the clock 
from a useful domestic machine into a scientific instrument of the 
highest value ; and, in conjunction with the transit instrument, it 
has, since Graham's inventions were applied to it, been adopted 



33 

to the exclusion of all other methods, to the determination of the 
right ascensions of the stars, on the accuracy of which all the 
fundamental problems of astronomy are based, and on which the 
art of navigation is mainly dependent. I therefore claim for 
Graham that he was not a mere dreamy speculative philosopher, 
but that he applied his talents with unwearied assiduity and perse- 
verance to the practical purposes of life, and to the promotion of 
the welfare and happiness of mankind. - 

Probably there are none of you who have not observed that 
in old-fashioned kitchen clocks which are furnished with a seconds 
hand, the hand recoils at each beat of the pendulum. Though 
somewhat of a technical matter, I will here give Dr. Pearson's 
description of the distinction between the old "recoil escapement" 
and Graham's "dead beat escapement," remarking in passing that 
Dr. Pearson was himself a Cumberland man of considerable 
reputation. 

"The recoil escapement, and which is most commonly applied 
to ordinary clocks, impels and retards by turns, the alternate 
motion of the pallets by its continued action on their faces, 
occasioned by a force derived through the media of the wheels 
and pinions from a suspended weight denominated the maintaining 
power; while the crutch on the axis of the pallets, transmits this 
modified force to the rod of the pendulum, and thus perpetuates 
the vibrations. The constancy of the escapement-wheels' action 
with the pallets in this construction, owing to their cuneiform shape, 
is so circumstanced that the force of the returning pendulum makes 
each pallet in its turn oppose the force derived from the maintaining 
power, when the wheel is obliged to recede for a moment, and the 
seconds hand inserted on its axis at the same time recoils. The 
effect of such action is the alternate pushing and opposing of the 
pendulum in different parts of each vibration, that an increase in 
the maintaining power accelerates the rate of going ; and conse- 
quently, any irregularity in the action of the wheel work, which 
deals the force out in small portions, or any foulness from dirt or 
thickened oil, will have an undue influence on the rate by varying 



34 

the arc of vibration, and accordingly this escapement is never 
adopted in an astronomical clock. 

" To avoid the bad effects of a recoil, the justly celebrated 
Graham invented that species of escapement which is called 'dead 
beat,' in which the faces of the pallets are circular as well as 
concentric, and allow the teeth of the escapement wheel to rest on 
them, while the pendulum is completing its vibration, after receiving 
its impulse ; this wheel, therefore, never recedes, and the hand 
carried by it remains motionless, or dead, for a certain portion of 
each vibration. The rubbing of the teeth against the circular 
portion of the pallet, however, produces some friction, that requires 
a little fine oil to lubricate the parts of action, and an addition 
given to the maintaining power by increasing this friction retards 
the rate of going. Hence the wheel work is usually made with the 
greatest care, and pinions of not fewer than eight or ten leaves 
each, are nicely fitted, hardened, and polished, to diminish the 
irregularities of transmitted force ; the pivot holes also of the 
two wheels' last arbors, as well as the pallets themselves, are 
frequently jewelled in the best clocks, to avoid friction as much as 
possible, and to supersede the necessity of applying much oil. 
Escapements of this description have long been held in high 
estimation when they have had the advantage of being united with 
a well-compensated pendulum. Indeed, till within these few years, 
no other escapement was put in competition with it, and the 
observations made in the different public observatories for half a 
century back bear testimony to its competency. The circumstance 
of its giving the impulse to the pendulum at or near the lowest 
point of its arc when its momentum is a maximum, affords a most 
important advantage." 

This was written more than fifty years ago, and Graham's 
"dead beat" still holds its own, though it has been improved upon 
by the escapements of the Astronomer-Royal, Hardy, and others. 
In a private letter to me, Sir Edmund Beckett, the well known 
parliamentary counsel, and a great authority in horology, says, 
" Graham's dead escapement has been used for more than a 
century in nearly every astronomical clock in the world, and 



35 

without it, it is not too much to say that there would have been no 
better time-keeping than could be obtained from a common kitchen 
clock made more carefully than usual ; at least, until some of the 
latter inventions of Hardy and others, which might have been 
more generally adopted if Graham's had not existed." 

The other capital invention of Graham was the " mercurial 
compensating pendulum," to which I have already alluded. Its 
principle is very easily understood. Galileo's attention is said to 
have been attracted by the swinging to and fro of some lamps 
suspended from the roof of a cathedral, and he observed the fact 
that the same lamp performed its oscillations in the same time 
whatever might be the arc of vibration. Further investigation 
revealed another law, viz. — that different lamps swing in times 
proportioned to the square roots of the lengths of the cords by 
which they were suspended. The subsequent study of these laws 
gradually led to the application of the pendulum as a means of 
regulating the rate of a clock ; and it is probable that for this 
purpose it will never be replaced by anything more efficacious. 
The length of a pendulum vibrating seconds in the latitude of 
London is 39-6 inches; and if it were possible to make a pendulum 
on which variations of temperature had no effect, it would be 
theoretically perfect, and would be (certain other conditions being 
complied with,) an accurate method of measuring out time. But 
there is no substance in nature which is insensible to changes of 
heat and cold, and therefore it was found that the rate of a clock 
varied with changes of temperature. In hot weather the seconds 
pendulum lengthened, and the clock lost time ; in cold weathe r 
it shortened, and the clock gained. The problem which Graham 
set himself to solve was this: to construct a pendulum which 
should practically be insensible to changes of temperature ; and 
this he effectually accomplished by a contrivance wonderfully 
simple and beautiful. Lindley Murray tells us that "two nega- 
tives in English destroy one another." Applying this principle to 
Mechanics, he righdy concluded that two expansions in opposite 
directions would likewise destroy each other, with the result that) 
virtually there would be no expansion at all. Fortunately, he 



36 



has left behind him in the Philosophical Transactions a detailed 
account of the various experiments which resulted in the invention 
ofthe "mercurial compensating pendulum," which consisted of a 
rod of steel of the requisite length, but instead of having a leaden 
bob at the end, he adopted a glass cylinder, containing a given 
quantity of quicksilver, a metal singularly sensitive to changes of 
temperature. 

The effect of such a combination is at once apparent. If the 
temperature increases, the rod lengthens downwards, but the 
column of mercury lengthens upwards, and the centre of gravity 
remains unaltered. On the other hand, if the temperature falls, 
the rod shortens upwards, but the column of mercury shortens 
downwards, and again the centre of gravity remains unaltered. 

As I have before remarked, the combination of these two 
inventions of Graham, at once raised the clock from the position 
of a useful article of furniture, to that of a scientific instrument of 
the highest value; and so thorough was the quality of his work- 
manship, that there is to this day in the Greenwich Observatory a 
clock by Graham in daily use, which must be about 140 years old 
the performance of which, even yet, is on a par with that of any 
other in the establishment. 

But it is not as a means of regulating a clock with accuracy 
only that the pendulum has rendered great services to science; it 
has been used with wonderful success, by watching its oscillations 
m different latitudes, to determine the exact figure of the earth, and 
more recently, by the Astronomer-Royal, for the no less important 
purpose of weighing the earth, by watching its oscillations on the 
surface, and at the bottom of a deep coal shaft at Harton Colliery, ' 
m the county of Durham, with a result probably more accurate than 
those arrived at by other methods. 

Graham also was the first watch-maker of his day, and no 
dandy of the period considered his personal adornment complete 
unless he possessed one of his repeaters. In 1 753, the " London 
Magazine" contains a poetic effusion, which describes the ingredi- 
ents required in the manufacture of a fop :— 



37 

"A repeater by Graham whicli the hour reveals, 
Almost over-balanced with knick-knacks and seals." 

It was not in horology only that Graham was pre-eminent, 
but as a maker of astronomical instruments, especially of those 
where accurate graduation is essential, he had no rival in his day. 
Mr. Sheepshanks in the "Penny Cyclopaedia," says : — "The art of 
dividing assumed a new form under the celebrated Graham, the 
father of all good clock, watch, and instrument making in this 
country, and the worthy associate of Bradley." He constructed a 
large iron quadrant for the Greenwich Observatory, which remained 
in constant use until the year 1811, when it was superseded by a 
six foot mural circle made by Troughton, who, singularly enough, 
was also a Cumberland man, and, like Graham, the foremost 
instrument maker of his day. It is still carefully preserved, and 
Sir George Airy informs me that in 1829, when he made a tour 
among the European Observatories, he was struck with seeing how 
many quadrants were still retained as instruments of the highest 
class, which were copies of the Greenwich quadrant. He also 
made an instrument called a Zenith Sector, which, in the hands of 
Bradley, who became Astronomer-Royal on the death of JIalley 
in 1742, led to the two memorable discoveries of the aberration of 
light, and the nutation of the earth's axis. But not only did he 
devise and make the instruments with which these discoveries were 
made, he was largely engaged with Bradley in making the actual 
observations which resulted in those discoveries. It is worthy of 
remark that these observations were undertaken for the purpose of 
endeavouring to find the parallax of the fixed stars ; but the results 
which flowed from them were hardly less important. In short, it 
is not too much to say that Graham himself, besides furnishing the 
instrumental means, contributed largely by his personal labours as 
an observer, to the store of facts which led to the discoveries with 
which Bradley's name will be for ever associated. Bradley himself 
says, in a communication to the Royal Society : — " A mind intent 
upon the pursuit of any kind of knowledge, will always be agreeably 
entertained with what can supply the most proper means of attaining 
it. Such to the practical astronomer are exact and well contrived 

4 



38 

instruments; and I reflect with pleasure on the opportunities I 
have enjoyed of cultivating an acquaintance and friendship with the 
person that, of all others, has most contributed to their improve- 
ment. For I am sensible that if my own endeavours have in any 
respect been to the advantage of astronomy, it has principally been 
owing to the advice and assistance given me by our worthy member 
Mr. George Graham, whose great skill and judgment in mechanics, 
joined with a complete and practical knowledge of the uses of 
astronomical instruments, enable him to contrive and execute them 
in the most perfect manner. The gentlemen of the Royal Academy 
of Sciences, to whom we are so highly obliged for their exact 
admeasurement of the quantity of a degree under the arctic circle, 
have already given the world very convincing proofs of his care 
and abilities in those respects ; and the particular delineation which 
they have lately published of the several parts of the Sector which 
he made for them, hathgnow rendered it needless for me to enter 
into any minute description of mine at Wanstead, both being con- 
structed upon^the same principles, and differing in their component 
parts chiefly on account of the different purposes for which they 
were intended." 

It is worthy of remark that this same Zenith Sector was used 
at the Cape of Good Hope between the years 1838 and 1848, for 
observations connected with the measurement of an arc of the 
meridian, and is now preserved at Greenwich. 

Graham also gave'much attention to the subject of Magnetism; 
he discovered the diurnal variation of the compass, and made 
many observations with the dipping needle, throwing much light 
on this obscure but interesting subject. He also investigated with 
acuteness and labour, the standards of weights and measures 
in the Exchequer, and others which were kept for public purposes; 
but it is not needful to allude to them further than to show the 
range and importance of his researches. 

In connection with his business as a watch-maker, some 
characteristic anecdotes have come down to us. It is related that 
on the occasion of a person applying to him on the subject of a 
watch upon which his name had fraudulently appeared, he at once 



39 

broke it with a hammer, and presented another to the person, 
saying, "Sir, here is a watch of my making." He would never allow 
an inferior article to pass out of his workshop, and worked far 
more for fame than profit. He often lent money, but never would 
take any interest ; and all his savings were locked up in an iron 
box. 

At the request of the Earl of Macclesfield, Graham's portrait 
was painted by Hudson, and afterwards engraved. A contempla- 
tion of this likeness led Dr. Lonsdale to the following reflections : — 
" Judging from it, Graham appears to have been a man of consider- 
able stature. His physiognomy offers strongly marked features, 
and of a northern type that is by no means rare in the Border 
district. His wig interferes with a just appreciation of his cranial 
capacity, but there is enough visible of his frontal developement to 
indicate the man of clear discernment, shrewd intellect, and power. 
His visage is long ; his eyebrows large, but not overshadowing ; 
clear observant eyes ; his nose is prominently marked ; whilst his 
lips and chin show a less masculine type than the rest of his facial 
features. There can be little hesitation in inferring from the study 
of his portraiture, that he was endowed with though tfulness, acumen, 
and fixedness of purpose. Along with his self-possession there 
seems to breathe an air of complaisance and kindly feeling ; but the 
most tangible manifestation in his portrayal is strength of mind, 
with large perception and general knowingness of cliaracter. A 
collarless coat buttoned up in the front, with full skirts and ample 
outside pockets, upturned sleeves giving freedom to the wrist, and 
the opportunity of displaying white linen ; breeches buckled at the 
knees, and strong hosing covering the lower limbs, constitute his 
habilaments. He is seated on a big arm chair ; upon his knees 
rests a three-cocked hat holding his gloves, and portion of his right 
hand, whilst his left arm rests on a table near to a book. A portion 
of a clock, with a glass front showing the mercurial pendulum, 
graces the wall of the apartment, — a fitting, or rather an historical 
adjunct to his portraiture." 

He was never married, and no record of his domestic life or 
social habits has come down to us. He died full of years and full 



40 



of honours at his house in Fleet Street on Saturday, the 1 6th of 
November, 1751, in the 78th year of his age. On Sunday night, 
the 24th, his remains were buried in the nave of Westminster 
Abbey, in the same grave where thirty -eight years before his friend 
and companion, Thomas Tompion, was interred. 

The "Gentleman's Magazine," vol. xxi., contains an obituary 
notice of him, the sonorous phraseology of which raises a suspicion 
that it may have been written by Dr. Johnson : — " As he was 
perfectly sincere, he was without suspicion ; as he was above envy, 
he was candid ; and as he had a relish for true pleasure, he was 
generous. He frequently lent money, but could never be prevailed 
upon to take any interest ; and for that reason he never placed out 
any money on Government Securities. He had bank notes which 
were thirty years old by him when he died; and his whole propert)', 
except his stock-in-trade, was found in a strong box, which, though 
it was less than would have been heaped up by avarice, was yet 
more than would have remained to prodigality." 

A slab is placed over the grave of Tompion and Graham, 
bearing the following inscription ; — 



Here lies the Body 
Of Mr. THO. tompion, 

who departed this 

life on the 20th of 

November 1713, in the 

75th year of his age. 

GEORGE GRAHAM, of London, 

watchmaker and f.r.s., 

whose curious inventions 

do honour to ye British Genius, 

whose accurate performances 

are ye standard of mechanic skill. 

He died y« xvi. of November, mdccli. 

in the Lxxviii. year of his age. 



41 

To the best of my knowledge George Graham is the only 
Cumbrian whose ashes rest beneath the vaulted roof of Westminster 
Abbey, where for many ages have been deposited England's most 
illustrious dead : her Kings and Queens, her Statesmen and 
Warriors, her Philanthropists, her Philosophers, and her Poets. 

Such was the brilliant career of the poor peasant boy of 
Kirklinton. 

It is very remarkable that nearly all our most eminent makers 
of instruments intended for refined astronomical observations, were 
north country men ; for in addition to Graham, Troughton, the 
ablest artist of his day, was bom in the parish of Corney, in this 
county, in the year 1753. Then there was the Rev. William 
Pearson, who, though not a practical mechanic, devoted his life to 
the thorough investigation of the principles and theory of astrono- 
mical instruments, and the methods of using them, and published 
the result of his labours in two large quarto volumes which form 
the most elaborate and comprehensive work on Practical Astronomy 
that ever issued from the press. John Bird was a Durham weaver. 
He was employed by Graham, and afterwards began business on 
his own account. His attention is said to have been first drawn to 
the subject of the accurate graduation of instruments by observing 
the imperfect division of a clock dial. Jessie Rarasden, a man of 
equal celebrity, was the son of a Yorkshire innkeeper. Lastly, the 
present Astronomer-Royal, who unites with his many accompHsh- 
ments a profound knowledge of Mechanics, and who has effected 
an entire revolution in the principle of astronomical instrument 
making, is a Northumberland man. I content myself with drawing 
your attention to these curious facts, for I confess I have no theory 
to advance. 

Turning for a few minutes to our Cumberland Association, I 
may fairly congratulate you on having already attained a fair measure 
of success. A glance through the two volumes of Tra?isaciiojjs in 
print shows the variety and value of the subjects which have 
claimed the attention of the members, and they contain many 
original papers of much interest. Without being invidious, I may 
point to the biographies of Fletcher Christian and Jonathan Otley 



42 

as being admirable productions of more than local interest ; and 
the other papers are all good in their way. Dr. Dodgson's elaborate 
paper on the Meteorology of Cockermoiith, leads me to a subject 
on which I wish to speak with all caution and moderation. The 
Lake District has recently been shaken to its centre by a project of 
the Manchester Corporation to supply Manchester and its neigh- 
bourhood with water from Thirlmere, and there is no doubt the 
scheme will be carried into effect. I am not going to bring a 
hornets' nest about my ears by raising any controversial question ; 
I shall take no aesthetic view, nor dilate on the iniquity of reversing 
a natural water-shed. But in a merely engineering point of view 
the scheme is a grand one, and by way of encouragement to those 
of you who are engaged in original observations of any kind, I 
would point out that it is to the investigations of a very few private 
individuals into the rain-fall of the Lake District, who proved an 
average fall among the mountains ranging from 80 to 180 inches, 
that the feasibility of the project on which the Manchester people 
are about to expend something like ^4,000,000 sterling, mainly 
depends. This shows in a striking manner that results almost 
national in their importance may, and do continually, flow from the 
steady and anxious inquiries of those who search into facts, and 
into the laws of nature, with no other object than to arrive at the 

TRUTH. 

It has been suggested to me in connection with Professor 
Knight's promised lecture on Wordsworth, that beyond a painted 
window in All Saints' Church, the birth-place of the Lake Poet 
has no monument to perpetuate his fame. It may indeed be said 
of him, what can be said with equal truth of every great man, that 
his works form the best and more durable monument ; still, I think 
the suggestion is worthy of your consideration — that at Cocker- 
mouth something more should be done in honour of Wordsworth's 
memory. 

It only remains for me to congratulate you on the results 
which have hitherto attended the Association, and to express a 
hope that your labours- will bear good fruit in the future. I will 
hazard the prediction that, at any rate, the Cockermouth meeting 
will prove a success. 



Redtued Copy of the Diagram of IDEAL EARTH referred 
to in the text. 



"ij /////fN rock 




43 



ON THE PROBABLE CONDITION OF THE INTERIOR 
OF THE EARTH. 

(with a plate.) 



A Lecture delivered at the Annual Meeting, Cockermouth, 
April 22nd, 1878. 



By Sir GEORGE AIRY, K.C.B., F.R.S., Astronomer-Royal. 

Some time ago your Secretary, Mr. Ward, suggested to me 
that an address might be given by me in this Hall on the subject 
of the Probable Condition of the Interior of the Earth. I was not 
able at that time to attend to his suggestion, but at a later time, 
when your President kindly called upon me to appear before you, 
I adopted the suggestion of Mr. Ward in the selection of that 
subject. And in doing this, which I do upon my own responsbility, 
I wish to remark that the nature of the subject is different from 
any on which I ever lectured before, — in regard to its indefiniteness, 
to the doubts on some parts, to the difficulties all through ; — and 
if I considered it to be my absolute duty to lead you to a definite 
point, I should have found some difficulty in doing so. But I can 
give you somewhat as explaining my ideas of probability, and I 
can advert to points that will be found interesting and valuable. 
I propose to take my address in three parts. The first will relate 
to measures generally of the earth ; the second will relate generally 
to observations of temperature ; and the third will relate to the 
manner in which we may suppose the earth to have been formed, 
especially with reference to the nebular hypothesis ; and after that 
I shall give you my general notions upon the conclusions to which 
they all lead. 



44 

Now in regard to measures. I must begin with some ideas 
upon the way in which extensive measures are made upon the 
surface of the earth. I daresay there are gentlemen present who 
are so well accustomed to the ordinary process of surveying that they 
will enter into the matter at once ; but it appears proper to explain 
to my audience the way of proceeding. In the first place a line 
of a few miles in length, commonly six or eight miles, is measured 
with the utmost care — with a degree of care of which you have no 
conception — with bars brought into contact in the most definite 
way, in which intervals are measured in the most exact manner, 
with corrections for temperature, and many other things into which 
I cannot enter at present. Surveyors will easily comprehend that 
if a theodolite is placed at each end of this base-line, and if an 
object on a hill is observed at a distance, there is no difficulty in 
ascertaining the distance of that new point on the hill from either 
of the ends of the base. Then advantage of that determination is 
taken to go to another hill, and then to two or three more hills ; 
and hill after hill is observed in that way till by these processes a 
whole country is covered by triangulation. It is possible to lay 
down a map of a large district in which the distance between any 
one point and any other point is certain perhaps within a few inches. 
I have here two specimens of this triangulation. I am sorry that 
the nature of the address does not admit of exhibiting them in a 
manner in which they can be seen by a large audience like this, 
but as I propose to stay here at the conclusion as long as it may 
appear advantageous, I shall be glad if gentlemen taking interest 
in the matter will come upon the platform and look at these. This 
(pointing to a map) is one of them. This is the triangulation over 
the greater part of Europe, as it existed a few years ago. Then 
(pointing to a second map) there is another. This is the triangu- 
lation of the great survey of India, which is one of the most 
remarkable triangulations in the world. I hope those who have 
followed me in the principle of triangulation will inspect these two; 
they are authentic documents, and you will learn something from 
them. That is the first process in the way of measuring upon the 
earth, Now arises the question — how is this to be made available 



45 

for ascertaining the dimensions and the figure of the earth ? For 
this purpose we must go to astronomy. One thing which must be 
fully understood by you is this, that when we speak of observing a 
star, we are observing something so prodigiously distant that the 
direction in which we look at it may be taken as absolutely the 
same from whatever part of the earth we view it. The nearest star 
of which we have any accurate notion of distance is distant more 
than two billions of miles. I have here, a map of a portion of the 
earth with its proper curvature, and I am sorry since I made it 
that I did not give it an improper curvature and make it more 
convex, as it would have been more intelligible. It contains the 
British Islands, and it shows the degree of curvature the earth, has 
in that extent. This (showing an apparatus upon the table, a rude 
imitation of a Zenith Sector,) is a very rough affair. It represents 
an astronomical zenith sector, or an instrument for measuring the 
apparent distances of stars from the point over-head. Starting at 
the Isle of Wight, I direct that telescope to a certain star there. 
Suppose now that I carry the same instrument to a place in 
Shetland, and I look at the same star. In consequence of this 
curvature of the earth's surface, my telescope points too high, and 
I must give it a certain degree of inclination in order to catch the 
same star. That change of inclination in passing from the Isle of 
Wight to Shetland is not because the place of the star is moved, 
but because the direction of the footing of the instrument has 
changed. It does not stand on the same level here as it did there, 
and that degree of tilt which I have been obliged to give to the 
telescope in order that, having seen the star from that place with 
the telescope in one position, I may see the star from another 
place — that degree of tilt is the genuine degree of change in the 
position of the ground. That gives me a measure of the curvature 
of the earth. So that, by these two processes, one of triangulation 
— measuring enormous distances with great accuracy; and the 
other — by observing the same star with the same instrument at 
different places, and so getting a distinct difference in the curvature 
of the earth, — by these we can compute the diameter of the earth 
supposing it to be a sphere. This is the manner in which all the 



46 

great measures have been made ; and I am able to exhibit to you 
upon this globe — for the use of which I am indebted to a Society- 
similar to your own in East Suffolk — the principal lines that have 
been measured in the north and south directions. There are 
astronomical advantages in taking these measures in the north and 
south rather than in any other direction. I only mention that as 
accounting for the directions of certain lines, and those lines I have 
laid down by pieces of paper upon the globe. 

Now, beginning from the East. The first is the Great Indian 
arc, which extends from Cape Comorin to the neighbourhood of 
the Himalaya mountains. The second is the greatest of all : it is 
the Great European arc, which, by the united efforts of the Ger- 
mans, the Russians, and the Swedes, has been extended from the 
Danube to the North Cape. It is a prodigious arc. In calling 
your attention to this map of the triangulation of Europe, I am 
desirous of pointing out to you one line in particular. When you 
come to look clearly at this map, you will see that over the greater 
part of Europe the triangles are numerous, partly for the purpose 
of territorial survey, and pardy for purposes like this — for the 
dimensions of the earth. But beyond St. Petersbiug you see a 
single chain of triangles, through the desolate parts of Norway to 
the North Cape. It is a truly scientific and meritorious enterprise, 
undertaken not for any territorial purpose, but solely for the 
measure of the earth. It begins as a single chain at St. Petersburg, 
and so goes on to the North Cape— a line of great extent. 

To make a recapitulation of the principal arcs measured. I 
begin with that of India. Then there is this very long one, 
through the East of Europe. The next is the French Arc, begun 
during the height of the terrors of the French Revolution ; and it 
is a most remarkable instance that that noble nation would, at the 
most agitated time, turn their attention to Science. It starts from 
a small island not far from Minorca, and extends to Dunkirk. 
Observe that, as it was done before the others, its methods are not 
quite so good as they are now. Then here is our English Arc, 
which extends from Dunnose, in the Isle of Wight, to the 
northernmost point of Shetland ; that is an arc of the highest 



47 

quality in regard to its exactitude. The next in longitude is one 
at the Cape of Good Hope, done in the first instance by French 
astronomers of the last century, but extended by the last English 
astronomer who was at the Cape of Good Hope. Then there is 
one in Peru, of no great value now, and comparatively a short one. 
Still I am unwilling to let it go without notice, for this reason. 
When the question of the figure of the earth was raised theoretically 
by Sir Isaac Newton, it was disputed; till, of all people in the 
world, the French took it up, and determined to make a critical 
observation. They sent out two expeditions of great celebrity, 
one was to Lapland, and the other went to Peru actually to cross 
the Equator, and it was a noble combination of enterprise. I 
should have been unwilling to leave this out of sight at present, 
although it is not so valuable by any means as these others. These 
are the principal measures that we have, and upon these depend 
our estimation of the size of our globe and its shape. When we 
look at them, they seem hardly sufficient. I should like to see a 
dozen twice as long, and I have no doubt some of our successors 
will have an arc measured along the whole of South America, and 
another along the whole of North America. However, that is not 
done yet. Taking these as the best materials which we have at 
present, we find from their agreement that there is no doubt that 
the earth is very nearly a sphere. In fact, they agree so well — 
and with another correction, which I shall indicate in a few 
moments —that they leave no doubt at all in our minds that the 
earth is essentially a sphere. Everything goes upon that, and 
everything answers properly. Of course it is a method of 
measuring the earth, founded, in the first instance, upon few 
measures, but if our theory were wrong it would soon be found 
out. But every calculation and every comparison of the theory 
with observation, has agreed in confirming the notion that, 
generally speaking, the earth is a sphere. Now to apply this to a 
numerical measure of the dimensions of the sphere. I mentioned 
to you that by the use of the zenith sector with its telescope for 
observation of the stars, we can obtain the curvatures of the earth's 
surface. Suppose in going from this place in the Isle of Wight 



48 

to that in Shetland, the ground is tilted say ten degrees, and the 
distance is nearly seven hundred miles. If it is ten degrees for 
seven hundred miles, we have only by a rule of proportion to find 
out what the length would be for three hundred and sixty degrees. 
That is one in thirty-six, and you have only to multiply seven 
hundred by thirty six and you have the entire circumference of the 
earth. That is the way the dimensions of the earth are ascertained. 
Thus we come to the general conclusion that the earth is a sphere 
eight thousand miles in diameter, and twenty-five thousand tniles 
in circumference. 

When I speak of the surface of the earth, it must be under- 
stood that we always mean the surface of the earth as referred to 
the sea level, — to that level which, if the land were perforated with 
canals, the sea would take there. Above it stand mountains, and 
below it the depths of the sea. When you see a mountain, you 
think it is a great thing, and that it should be taken into consider- 
ation. Mountains are taken into consideration by persons going 
accurately into the depths of science, — but they are very small in 
proportion to the earth. Suppose we had a model of the earth 
twenty-five feet in diameter, how much do you think the mountains 
on such a sphere would rise above the level 1 One-fifth of an inch. 
That would never be seen. It may be neglected entirely. The 
greatest depression of the sea would be about one-fifth of an inch 
also. Understanding that, we may say generally, that as far as 
our accurate measures go, our earth is a sphere ; to which I shall 
refer again, introducing a small modification of considerable 
importance. 

Then, having got so far, there is another thing which is 
important to our principal subject, and that is the density of the 
matter of which the earth is formed. This is a subject which has 
engaged the best experimentalists in a variety of ways. The first 
of these experiments is a very celebrated one, known as the 
Schiehallien experiment, so called as being made on the attraction 
of the mountain SchiehaUien, in Perthshire, in the Scotch High- 
lands. It ranges to the east and west, and is well adapted to the 
measures of attraction, carried on in the north and south directions- 



49 

We will consider what the effect of a mountain will be. I have 
got this instrument, to which I have referred, and it is in a position 
here to observe a star. Suppose all on a sudden you were to 
introduce a mountain here. Now, the efifect of that upon the 
instrument would be this. The position of this instrument must 
be determined— that is to say, the position of its fundamental 
bearing must be determined — by a plumb-line or a level, which is 
pulled down by the earth's attraction. If the mountain were not 
there, the only force upon the plumb-line would be downwards. 
But if you had a mountain here, the force would be a combination 
of two, one pulling down and the other towards the mountain, so 
that upon the whole, the plumb-line by which this instrument is 
regulated does not take the same direction as when there is no 
mountain. In like manner, if the instnmient is carried to the 
other side of the mountain, the plumb-line, instead of being drawn 
down, is drawn in an inclined direction, being attracted by the 
mountain. Therefore, we have a disturbance of the plumb-line 
produced by the circumstance of the mountain being here, which 
disturbance can be determined by observations of a star made on 
the opposite sides of the mountain. The real difference in the 
slope of the earth's surface on the opposite sides is to be compared 
with what the difference would have been between the two situ- 
ations supposing the mountain had never existed. The observation 
is one of great accuracy. At Schiehallien the difference was eleven 
or twelve seconds,— I do not recollect the exact quantity, but there 
was no doubt at all as to its reality and its amount. Having got 
that, there is this proposition to be considered. If the mountain 
Schiehallien, whose dimensions we can measure, pulls a plumb- 
hne aside so far, what is the proportion of its attracting mass to 
the attracting mass of the earth 1 This may be a little obscure to 
persons who have not made any observations such as are familiar 
to surveyors. As you see, the two stations of the instruments are 
so far apart that the position of their plumb-lines ought to have 
differed we will say by sixty seconds. But it is found with this 
mountain between them, that the positions of the plumb-lines 
differ seventy-two seconds, or perhaps more. The comparison of 



50 

these gives us the effect of the attraction of that mountain, as 
compared with the attraction of the earth. There is a mountain 
at a certain distance, and this great earth at another certain 
distance : by due computation from that, with the attractions 
above-mentioned, we find the proportion of the mass of matter 
in that mountain to the mass of matter in the whole earth. 
Then as we also know the magnitude of the mountain and the 
magnitude of the earth, we can compare the density of the moun- 
tain with the density of the earth. This was gone through with 
extreme care, and the density of the earth was ascertained to be 
four-and-a-half times the density of water ; the earth therefore is 
more dense towards the centre than at the outside. 

The next experiment that was made was almost free from 
objection. It is what is known as the Cavendish experiment. It 
was a cabinet experiment entirely. Here is a rod with two light 
balls upon it, suspended by a fine wire, which is the most delicate 
suspender we have. Then two huge masses of lead were placed 
one on one side of one ball, and one on the other side of the 
other ball, and they tended to pull the rod round by attracting the 
small balls. Then the experiment was varied by placing the 
masses of lead each on the opposite side of its small ball ; and in 
that manner the circumstances were changed so as to show how 
much the great balls of lead attracted these little balls. By a 
series of calculations, of which I cannot pretend to give you a 
precise idea, the density of the earth was ascertained, and that 
gave a greater result than before, namely — that the average density 
of the earth was about five-and-a-half times that of water. 

The third experiment was one I made myself in the Harton 
Colliery, near South Shields. It was judging how much the 
force of gravity was altered by going to a great depth, that force of 
gravity at the top and bottom being ascertained by swinging a 
pendulum. At a depth of twelve hundred feet the pendulum 
swung two seconds more in a day. That gave the average density 
of the earth as a little more than six times that of water. Every 
experiment is open to some objection ; but I believe the best 
calculation is the one founded upon the Cavendish experiment, 



51 

and I am ready to take five-and-a-half times as the average density 
of the earth, including every part of it. The consequences which 
flow from that are rather striking. Of course, as this density is 
much more than double that of the surface, it shows that it is 
more dense towards the centre than the outside. One result of 
the calculation rather startled me when I made it. Since the 
constituent parts of the earth press upon one another as you go 
down, what is the pressure per square inch when you approach 
the centre of the earth 1 There are many gentlemen among you 
who have heard of a pressure of fifty or a hundred or two hundred 
or three hundred pounds on the square inch. I believe the 
greatest we know is ten thousand pounds on a square inch of 
tough Aberdeen granite, which is just sufficient to crush the 
granite. My calculation of the pressure at the centre of the earth 
gave thirty millions of pounds on every square inch. It is an 
astounding thing, and we cannot conceive what consequences may 
follow on that. The word million runs very easily off the tongue, 
but if you attempt to construct it you find it a very unmanageable 
thing. If you make a hundred dots on a page, and do the same 
over ten thousand pages, you will find it will take a long time to 
make those dots ; and if you repeat it thirty times, you will 
find it an enormous labour for which life will hardly suffice. But 
to conceive that as the pressure of things at the earth's centre — 
we don't know such a thing ; we don't know the consequences. 
Perhaps gas maybe squeezed into gold, or silver into platinum j 
a solid may be forced into powddr, or powder into a solid. We 
are in total ignorance ; and that is one of the troubles of this 
case. 

Now I come to a result of another kind, namely, that of the 
rotation of the earth. The earth revolves once in the course of 
a day. Everybody knows also, from the housemaid who spins a 
mop to the highest philosopher, that the rotation would swell out 
the middle of the earth. Calculations have been made on that, 
and the result is that the diameter of the earth in the equatorial 
direction is greater by about one three-hundreth part than the 
diameter in the polar direction. I cannot attempt to represent 



52 

this to you on a diagram. If I had made a diagram twenty-five 
feet in diameter, it would only have amounted to half-an-inch on 
each side. You must accept that as a thing which has been very 
accurately calculated from theory; and the way in which it has been 
determined from observation is this. If the earth is swollen out at the 
equator, then the earth is flatter towards the poles than it is at the 
equator: the bend of the earth is more rapid at the equator than 
at the poles. We have great materials for arriving at a certain 
conclusion on that point. That was the first thing in the remarkable 
French experiment I mentioned, that is, — the relation of the bend at 
Peru to that at Lapland. There have been many similar results, 
but the best is that found by combining the great European arc 
that goes so far north, and the Indian arc that goes so near the 
equator. Generally speaking we have all agreed, and there is no 
doubt that it is a general fact that the difterent parts of the earth 
have those different degrees of bend. 

Now when in this manner, by the measurements of arcs, we 
obtain the measures of the dimensions of the ellipsis of the earth, 
and they agree so well with what we calculated on the supposition 
that the mass of the earth is or has been fluid, it leads us at once 
to the conclusion that the earth has been in a fluid state. Taking 
the dimensions of the earth as measured upon the sea, there is very 
little departure from those computed on the elliptic supposition. 
There are mountains in some places, but a great extent of sea in 
others, and islands are cropping up in all places ; and altogether 
the form is not such as would-be taken by piling a number of 
blocks for building any structure, but the form that would be taken 
by a fluid mass carrying floating solids, and partially solidified 
since the form was taken. But it has at some time been in a fluid 
state. 

There is a curious thing which was brought particularly under 
my notice some time ago during the Indian Survey. The Indian 
arc begins at Cape Comorin, and goes through the whole length 
of India past Delhi. It is a most remarkable arc in geographical 
position. The officers used the instruments for the star- 
observations at divers points on the line. They found these 



53 

observations went on in perfect harmony with the understood 
conditions of the earth, till they came to the neighbourhood of the 
Himalaya range. It was not unnatural to conceive that the 
Himalaya mountains would exercise an influence on their levels ; 
and they did so, attracting the plumb line from the direction it 
would otherwise have taken towards the centre of the earth. The 
magnitude of this attraction was measured with much care, and 
then the theoretical calculation was taken up by Archdeacon Pratt. 
(When Mr. Pratt was a young man I examined him at Cambridge, 
and I was then struck by the practical tendency of his knowledge 
of mathematics.) He examined carefully the measurements of the 
mountains, and what their disturbance of the plumb-line ought to 
have been. To his great astonishment he found it ought to have 
been a great deal more than it really was. It seemed there was 
something that almost neutralised the attraction of the Himalaya 
mountains. With the ideas I have on the circumstances, I have 
no difficulty in suggesting the cause. In the sectional diagram I 
have here, suppose the black part to represent the mountains, and 
suppose this lower part to represent lava — as we will call it for 
want of a better name — and suppose the lava to be much more 
dense than the mountains, and that the mountains are floating upon 
that lava. Now, when you see a thing floating upon water or 
anything else, you are quite sure that that which stands highest 
above sinks deepest below. If you see a great log of Memel timber, 
and a small spar or English pole, and the great log rises highest 
above the water, you are sure that it also goes deeper. So does a 
great ship go deeper than a boat. Supposing that to be the 
representation of things here, this follows, — that a great deal of 
this light matter has displaced a great deal of the heavy lava 
matter, and the attraction of the upper part is neutralised in great 
measure by the circumstance that the heavy lava is displaced. 
That very curious observation seems to reconcile the whole. So 
far I have said all I have to say respecting the measures. 

The second part of my lecture is founded on what we know 
about the temperatures. I must mention in the first instance that 
we know something of the rate at which temperature travels through 

5 



54 

the earth. We know it in this way : — The experiments, as with 
many good experiments, began Avith the French, who fixed 
thermometers with very long stalks, to the great depth of twenty- 
five feet into the ground. This was followed up after some time 
by similar thermometers at the Observatory at Edinburgh, and 
about the same time at Greenwich, and there the deeper 
thermometers are read every day. The first and most conspicuous 
result of this, is the discovery of the retardation of the seasons. 
High midsummer at a depth of twenty-five feet occurs in 
December. It has taken five months for the heat at the surface 
to travel down twenty-five feet. That is very slow travelling. If 
you compute it further, it takes a hundred years to travel a mile. 
If the crust of the earth is one hundred miles thick above any of 
the hot matter which may be supposed to be below it, it must 
take ten thousand years for the transmission of heat through it, 
and so on in proportion to the thickness of the crust. This shows 
that really after all we may have a great deal of heat below us, 
and it will not come to us for a very long time. It will come at 
last, but it will be travelling slowly; and in the meantime v/e have 
the radiation from the earth, so that it is conceivable, with the 
cool comfortable earth we have here, there may be a great heat 
below. In every part, I believe, of the earth, there is the evidence 
of intense heat at former times. The extent of volcanic action is 
very much disguised on the earth by the effects of air and water, 
which have degraded the surface in almost every part. The body 
which is most nearly similar to the earth in some former state, in 
several respects, is the moon. But the moon has no air and no 
water. The surface of the moon, in almost every part, is volcanic ; 
and that would in a former state have been seen on the earth in 
general ; but in the earth the action of the air and water have 
degraded the rocks, and many traces of their original form are 
lost. But if we look at the old rocks of the earth, we find there 
has been volcanic heat in some shape or other in almost every 
way. In the limestone rocks, for instance, there are the basaltic 
beds, which in some places go by the name of "toadstone;" they 
are certainly the result of volcanic heat which has produced 



fluidity. In some rocks in Cornwall, and almost everywhere, we 
find there are volcanic streams intermixing with all the harder 
strata which originally existed. Although the surface of the earth 
has been free from volcanoes in a given district for a time, yet 
there has always been volcanic action near enough to force in 
veins of fluid lava from time to time. It seems, therefore, that we 
are entitled to say that we have always been near a great degree 
of heat. We have been nearer than we are at the present time ; 
but we are still near enough to experience a great deal in these 
countries. Experiments have been made on the increase of 
temperature as you go downwards, and the increase is one degree 
of Fahrenheit sometimes in sixty, and sometimes one hundred feet 
in depth. There is some uncertainty about it, but the increase of 
heat is considerable. There is one mine in Cornwall I have been 
in, in which I have walked in a stream of water actually scalding 
to the legs. We know the quantity of water in various hot springs, 
and there is a great display of volcanic action which certainly 
came from great heat somewhere ; and in the intermediate ages 
we can trace the formation of basaltic continents at no very 
distant period. Since the valleys assumed their present shape in 
the centre of France, they have been choked up with basaltic 
matter, which you can trace to the volcanoes from which it came. 
In the former ages there has been much more heat than at present. 
In later times there is a great deal shown in the ejection of fluid 
volcanic matter among volcanoes. 

There is another thing in connection with that, of which I 
speak with no great boldness, but yet to which I cannot deny 
some importance — that is the change in magnetism. The subject 
of terrestrial magnetism is one of the most obscure in the world; 
nevertheless I think, looking at the direction in which it always 
acts towards the colder parts, and tracing its general phenomena 
it must be affected by thermal electricity; and I imagine that 
this may be produced by the constant wear going on in some parts 
of the interior of the earth, where the hot fluid lavas are wearing 
away solid parts, or are consolidating themselves into solid parts — 



66 

I cannot tell which — but there is a constant change which may 
cause the change in thermal magnetism which is such a puzzle. 

Within a few years, the voyage of the Challenger has been 
made, and I have little hesitation in saying it is one of the most 
important made in the scientific history of the world. In crossing 
those great seas, they have sounded to greater depths than ever 
before ; and have measured, in a satisfactory way, the temperature 
of water down to the bottom, to a depth of five miles. At those 
depths the water is cold. There is great controversy about 
this, whether the cold here can be formed by a stream of cold 
water coming from the polar regions. I believe that stream has 
some influence, but I do not believe it has enough. At the bottom 
of the water, the ground on which the water is lying at those great 
depths, is cold. I do not think that part partakes of the same heat 
as other parts; that I express as my opinion, in which, of course, I 
should be met by the disbelief of a great many persons, and I do 
not argue it any further than that. That is the state of things as far 
as we know regarding the present temperature of the earth ; but 
there is evidence everywhere that there has been enormous heat 
almost all over the earth. I will not say whether there has or has 
not been the same heat in those which I consider the cold masses, 
but they are so near heat that they are perforated in places that 
come near volcanic heat ; and there are volcanic islands in all 
parts of the oceans. There is evidence, therefore, that there is 
heat very near the surface. In one of the bays of Italy, not a 
great way from Naples, I have thrust my hand through the sea 
into the sand, and found it so hot that I was glad to take my hand 
out again. That difference of the apparent temperatures at 
different parts, I look upon as a theory leading us to the conclusion 
of what the earth really is. I think I have said enough of the 
temperatures. 

Now to enter upon a matter which is undoubtedly one of the 
boldest speculations of modern science, and the conception of a 
very vigorous intellect. It is the formation of the Earth. I 
cannot say its creation, but its formation, — the way in which it has 



J 



been put into its present shape. The theory of which I have to 
speak, known as the nebular hypothesis, is one of the conceptions 
of Laplace. It was remarked by Laplace that every planet 
revolves in the same direction round the sun ; and they all turn on 
their axes in the same direction. It was difficult to deny that there 
must be some general cause for this, and it naturally occurred to 
Laplace that if we could find something which was contracting its 
dimensions, and which had a litde rotation to begin with, then, 
with every contraction of dimensions, that little rotation would 
become more and more rapid, till it might acquire any degree of 
rapidity depending on the condensation of the parts not condensed 
before. We look out into the world. Can we find anything in 
such a state that it is probably being condensed, and, having some 
trifling rotation, will come at last to a rotation that will whirl parts 
off and form a system of planets and satellites ? There is a system 
of bodies in the skies which did not attract much attention in 
former days, mainly because telescopes were not large enough; 
but they are attracting attention novv-a-days, and are being cata- 
logued by thousands. They are nebulse. When you examine the 
sky, small clouds of white matter are to be found. These are 
small bodies in the skies among the stars. Sometimes they have 
stars apparently among them. Sometimes they seem to be 
connected with stars, and sometimes not. They have the 
strangest and most capricious shapes imaginable. One of the 
great nebulae is in Orion. That (pointing to a drawing of the 
nebula) is a very strange piece of matter to form a solar 
system from, yet there is no doubt, mathematically speaking, that 
it is competent to that purpose ; — that if this nebula is attracting 
its particles together, so as to come to a more condensed 
state, and if it has a very slight rotation to begin with, that 
rotation in the course of condensation will become so rapid, that it 
may form sun and^earth and planets round it; and there is no 
difficulty whatever, on contemplating the matter in this supposition, 
of making a complete solar system out of such amess^ as that is. 
I think that is the most conspicuous to all our telescopes, and also 
perhaps one of the most confused and complicated. There are 



58 

others which have acquired names for themselves, such as the 
Horse-Shoe and the Dumb-Bell ; another is that in Andromeda, 
and there is the ring-nebula in Lyra, very well known (represented 
in diagram). 

In the observations that have been made lately with the 
best and largest telescopes, in the first instance of Lassell 
and Lord Rosse, both of which are reflecting telescopes of 
the largest class, there has come to light a system of nebute 
called spiral nebute (one is represented in this drawing). 
They seem to have some bearing on the supposition that the 
nebulse are contracting and getting into a rotatory state. But these 
changes go on so slowly that whether human life is long enough to 
see them we do not know. We have not been able to infer with 
certainty any of the changes of which I speak ; the whole thing is 
theoretical, but is in the highest degree probable. Supposing 
things contracted together in this way, they would get rapid 
rotation, and in their contraction they would become very hot. 
Condensation of them would produce enormous heat, and we have 
there sufficient explanation of the great heat we find in the centre 
of the earth, or little below the surface of the earth in some 
places. 

Now there is another circumstance connected not simply 
with the nebulse but with other stars. We suppose, of course, that 
the stars have been formed from the condensation of nebulse. A 
series of scientific inferences, founded upon optical observations, 
has come to light in late years, which has done more to reveal 
some of the secrets of nature than anything before, — that is 
spectroscopy. It is a word not generally understood by many of 
my audience, and I cannot explain it, on this occasion, so fully as 
I could wish. Sir Isaac Newton first made extensive use of a 
prism of glass. Whether he invented the prism or not I cannot 
say, but he was the first person who made a rational use of it. In 
looking through a prism at anything, say at a lamp, you will see 
into what strange colours its appearance is changed. We know 
that on looking at a brilliant white lamp we see it partly red, and 
blue, and green. We know it is not a change of the light, because 



no 

we can put the colours all together and their union is white again. 
We are able to separate it as distinct lights and possessing distinct 
properties. By voltaic action, sparks like those of the electrical 
machine may be produced which derive their characteristics in 
great measure from the metal from which they spring ; and the 
characters of those metals give different characteristics to the 
sparks. We have one set of these produced by iron, another by 
nickel, and others by hydrogen gas, and so on. These have been 
observed and catalogued with great care. When we observe the 
light of the stars in like manner, we find there are scarcely two 
stars alike. Some are found exhibiting that light which is given in 
sparks from iron, and others shewing the light derived from a 
number of different things, and we are actually able by legitimate 
reasoning to say what the stars are made of As a general rule 
there are hardly two stars alike, so that in this nebular hypothesis 
we are not bound to say that the nebula; are all of the same 
materials ; and we may go further in this assertion when we come 
to consider other matters, and say that even the parts of any 
one nebula are not of the same materials ; and we are justified in 
saying so, by comparing things that we know of the bodies of 
the solar system. We cannot see anything different in the light 
from them, because they all get their light from one source, that of 
the sun. But it is in regard to what we know of the densities that 
we are justified in saying that their compositions are different. As 
I have said, the average density of the earth is probably five-and- 
a-half times that of water. But the density of the sun is only once 
that of water. The density of Mercury is nearly the same as that 
of the earth ; the density of Venus and Mars is much the same. 
Then comes a shower of little planets numbering about two 
hundred, and we cannot tell what these are made of Jupiter and 
Saturn are no heavier than water. Therefore assuming the form- 
ation of these things by condensation of nebute, on the theory I 
have mentioned, it appears clear that the different parts of nebulae 
which have contributed to form our solar system are very different. 
That being considered as established, it follows as likely enough 
that in the constitution of our earth there are parts of very different 



60 

density. If one might presume on such a point, I should say that 
the high parts of the earth are made of something light. The 
heavy dense parts are those covered by considerable quantities of 
water, and they have sunk deep into the centre of lava, in which I 
conceive all things to be resting. 

I come now nearly to the end of my theory, and I will show 
you what you will think is an absurd representation of what 
I consider the earth to be. Here is a diagram of the earth. 
See Plate. You will remember that everything here is 
exaggerated ; it is not intended to be a correct representation. 
It is a caricature, and a caricature of the most extravagant kind ; 
but if it conveys to you the broad ideas which have impressed 
themselves on my mind, it will be doing the right thing. It will 
only be expressing what I really think about the broad characteristics. 
I do think that a large proportion of the central part of the earth 
is fluid and hot, and I think that upon this there are resting divers 
classes of something like solid matter, — how many I cannot say, 
but it is enough for my purpose to take two. The deep black I 
take to be heavy rock ; and the fainter black is lighter and floats 
lightly ; and all the rest of blue-green colour is sea. There are at 
various places cracks or chinks where volcanoes break out. At some 
places where the crust of the earth is thin you can have two or three 
volcanoes close together, as in Europe we have Etna, Stromboli, 
and Vesuvius. So that, in this figure, absurd as it may seem, I 
have condensed, to the best of my conjectural power, my suppos- 
ition as to what the state of the earth really is ; and if anybody 
chooses to find fault with it, I will not quarrel. I give it as a sort 
of inference from the number of things I have said. My lecture is 
terminated, and I only hope that those of my audience who have 
not fully caught my words, or have in other ways failed to under- 
stand me, will come up and speak to me. 

( This Lecture mas taken dcnvn by short-hand reporters and subsequently 
revised by the lecturer. ) 



61 



LOCAL NAMES. 

By peter HARRISON, (Keswick.) 

(Abstract.) 

One advantage, and that perhaps not the least in value, arising 
from the cultivation of the intellectual and reasoning faculties, is 
the habit of observation and reflection which the strivings after 
knowledge engender and call into action, and the daily, nay- 
hourly, pleasure afforded by the exercise of such a habit. Let any 
one, for instance, who for years, it may be, has been in the habit 
of Avalking abroad without any other purpose in view than the 
exercise of his limbs and the inhaling of the fresh air of field and 
fell, be led by any chance to have his interest awakened in the 
commonest objects around him. If after frequenting some grove 
or wood, let us say, for years without paying any special attention 
to the various kinds of trees, he be once led to distinguish one 
class from another and to inform himself of their various rates of 
growth, the respective uses and values of their timber, the most 
suitable soils and situations for their growth, their size and produc- 
tiveness, and — better still — if of those of foreign introduction he 
learns to refer each class to its native climate, and to know some- 
thing of the causes or reasons which led to their introduction. 
How much fresh food for thought will have here been supplied 
him ! With what additional pleasure will his future rambles be 
attended ! Or let us suppose that all his life he has had a strong 
love for the mountains, that he has visited their summits and 
explored their valleys over and over again ; that with their varied 
outlines, their contours, their huge bulky masses, their ravines, 
precipices, waterfalls, and passes he is familiar; that he has admired 



62 

their exquisite loveliness when viewed from a distance through the 
soft light of a summer's eve, and felt the influence of their lonely 
grandeur and majesty when witnessing from their summits a 
sunrise in the early morning. Let him have had experience of all 
this, and yet be ignorant of the causes which for ages have been 
at work to produce so much loveliness and grandeur and majesty. 
By some slight incident, it is probable, at first his attention is 
drawn to some object he had never thought much about before — 
some rock, or even stone by the wayside — his interest is aroused, 
he looks around him and about him ; begins to observe, compare, 
and classify, by putting his observations side by side with one 
another, and drawing his own inferences. He has found a key which 
opens to him the gateway into a new field of knowledge. He 
extends his observations ; he avails himself of the knowledge 
stored up in books upon the subject — the result of other men's 
experiences who have gone before him over the same field, or 
whose greater opportunities and abilities are far in advance of his 
own, — he comes step by step to know more of the geological 
structure of a district he has traversed so oft. He learns to 
distinguish the igneous from the aqueous rocks, and finds that 
these not only determine the. nature of the soil he is treading on, 
but also the character of the indigenous flora around him. In 
one region ice-scratchings, terminal moraines, and transported 
boulders, tell him of a far-off time when vast glaciers were slowly 
scooping out, or giving their present form to, our more upland 
valleys. In another direction he finds the ground strewn with scorise, 
ash and lava, pointing back to a still more distant time when the 
internal fires of the globe were giving rise to the material of some of 
our finest mural precipices. Or while wandering over the beds of 
slate on our mountain slopes, his attention may be arrested by 
observing embedded in the stones beneath his feet the encrusted 
forms of plants and animals which carry him back in thought 
almost to the dawn of life in its lowliest forms upon our globe. Is 
it not likely that a new kind of interest will be added to his walks 
abroad ? that every now and then some new light will be flashing 
in upon his mind to yield him fresh delight? that objects he had 



63 

long been familiar with, henceforth to him will possess a new 
meaning ? 

As it is with the world of objects surrounding us, when we 
walk abroad among the works of Nature, so is it when we turn to 
books which treasure up for us such inexhaustible sources of 
refined pleasure, from which we can refresh the over-taxed mind or 
body. In the region of rom.ance we may be able to enjoy the 
descriptive powers of Scott, and laugh at the humour or weep at 
the pathos of Dickens. In the field of poetry and imagination we 
may be able to appreciate the stately sublimity of "Paradise Lost" 
and the loftiness of its theme, or be lost in amaze at the far-seeing 
philosophy of human life of a Shakespeare. We may be able to 
admire and appreciate the language which clothes the thoughts 
and aspirations of the greatest and noblest who have ever lived, 
and yet all the time be insensible to the worlds of poetry, of history, 
piety — nay, even of superstitious bigotr}', religious persecution and 
crime, which are oftimes hidden in the words themselves, entirely 
apart from the subject matter of the writer. Even from words of 
commonest use we may often draw interesting scraps of information. 
For instance, I am reading now from a "book." In its primary 
signification the word book does not mean an article made up of 
paper, print, page and binding — it once meant nothing more than 
" beech," i. e. the tree we know as the beech ; and probably the 
term at first meant " bark"; and this carries us back in thought to 
the remote ages when our ancestors, still dwelling in the forests of 
Germany, used the smooth bark of that particular kind of tree on 
which to scratch or wrUe their Runes long before they knew the 
use of the alphabet. I have just made use of the word "write." 
It comes from a Teutonic root, "Ritzen," or "Reitzen," which 
signifies scratc/iitig or tearins;, and bears testimony in itself to the 
usage common among the northern nations of employing some 
hard substance, such as wood or bark, on which to scratch or 
grave their legends, or record the warlike exploits of their heroes. 
Again, there is the word "read"; the word comes to us through 
the Anglo-Saxon noun "roed," "rad," or "red," which meant 
speech, counsel, advice, It has a whole host oi kindred in the 



64 

modern languages of Teutonic origin, and is not without represent- 
atives in the Irish, Welsh, Latin, and Greek tongues. In the 
Moeso-Gothic, "rodyan" meant, to speak, and was in use long 
before the old northern tribes had any books to read, in the 
modern sense of the term. That it retained its original signification 
long after books came into use, may be seen in such phrases as 
"Read me this riddle"; or in Shakespeare, when speaking of a 
noble woman, he exclaims in a fine spirit — 

"Those about her 
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour." 

The same root was used very happily by the Anglo-Saxons in the 
formation of personal names, some of which still exist. There is the 
exceedingly appropriate feminine "Mildred," or Mild, i. e. gentle 
in speech, and the masculine "Eldred," or old in counsel, and so 
on. Then we might take another monosyllable, "spell." We 
might show by reference to our early literature, that it had not 
formerly that sense to which it is now almost wholly restricted, of 
naming the different letters of which a word is composed. In 
Anglo-Saxon literature the phrase " Ealdra Cwena Spell" is found, 
which, literally rendered, is "Old Wives' Fables," showing that 
the saying is nearly a thousand years old. Their spell-boc 
was a book of Homilies or of History, and we see in the 
compound "God-spell," softened into Gospel, that the root 
spell signified a story, narration, a tidings. One more instance 
still of a monosyllable, though of a different class. The word 
"green," like most of our monosyllables, comes down to us 
through the Anglo-Saxon, but is probably of much earlier origin 
than the Anglo-Saxon language. Now, how many of us have used 
the word all our lives without having ever given a passing thought 
to the full force of its meaning? We know that it is used to 
distinguish one color from another colour ; we use it as such, and 
think no more about it; but our conception of its meaning is 
enlarged when we come to recognise it as a form of the verb to 
"grow." "Green" is that which is "growing;" and probably we 
here gain some little insight into the origin and rise of new terms, 



65 

or of the new application of words already existing. From the 
earliest times of human speech, there must doubtless have been 
terms whereby to express the idea of the upspringing and growth 
of vegetation, which the revival of the year brings with it to gladden 
our hearts; and hence, when men had distinguished this from other 
colours, and wished to give expression to the distinction, they 
likened it to "growing" things. If, then, round such words of 
common everyday use, and, to unobservant ireaders, at least, of such 
ordinary significations, we can group information that is interesting, 
and sometimes, too, instructive ; much more can we do so with 
those more significant expressions, names of places, or to speak 
technically, local names. Among the Bahama Islands there is one 
bearing the name of " San Salvador." It is a small piece of land 
of coral formation, and of little commercial importance; yet, 
nevertheless, noteworthy for all time as the first land sighted in the 
New World by Columbus in that voyage of discovery, which has 
perhaps done more than any other event recorded in history to 
affect the condition of mankind. It would be foreign to my 
purpose to enter into the story of Columbus, or to follow him in 
his voyages. . . . All this has been admirably told by 
Washington Irving. We can well imagine the deep thankfulness 
of the man, when after seventy days of buffeting with the waves 
and storms of a wide and unknown ocean, and the still greater 
perils he had escaped from at the hands of a mutinous crew, he at 
length set foot upon a new shore. One of his first acts, we learn, 
was to erect the symbol of the Christian faith, and kneel before it 
in deep thankfulness for the great mercies bestowed upon him; and 
then rising, he proclaimed that the land should hereafter bear the 
name of San Salvador, i.e. the Holy Saviour. Doubtless he called 
to mind that other voyager of ancient days, who submitting himself 
to the Divine will, and committing himself to the same protection, 
in token of his thankfulness for the preservation of himself and 
family, "builded an altar to the Lord" on Mount Ararat. It was 
not until five years after this event that Continental America was 
discovered. John Cabot, a Venetian merchant settled at Bristol, 
was sent out by Henry VII. of England. He reached that part of 



66 

the mainland now known as Labrador. This name owed its origin 
to motives far different from that of San Salvador, having been 
some years after its discovery bestowed upon it by the Portuguese 
slave merchants on account of the strength and endurance of the 
hardy "labourers" whom they kidnapped on its coasts. Of that 
powerful federation now known as the United States of America, 
the smallest in point of size is the State of Rhode Island. Its 
capital, "Providence," is the second in size and importance of all 
the cities in the New England States. The name furnishes a 
curious commentary upon the spirit in which religious toleration 
was viewed two hundred years ago by men who had themselves 
become voluntary exiles for conscience' sake, for daring to proclaim 
the great principle that the "doctrine of persecution for cause of 
conscience is most evidently and lamentably contrary to the 
doctrine of Jesus Christ," and that "no man should be bound to 
worship against his own consent." Roger Williams, a minister of 
the gospel, was banished from Massachusetts, and compelled to 
seek refuge upon an island at that time unsettled by the white man. 
The site of the city marks the spot where his canoe first touched 
the shore ; and, when in scanning the map of America, we come 
across the name of "Providence," let us think of its founder, Roger 
Williams, to whom justly belongs the honour of having established 
the first political community in which perfect religious toleration 
was admitted. The mere enumeration of the hundreds of names 
inscribed upon the map of the New AVorld, to which interest of a 
varied kind is attached would, I fear, be a tax upon both your 
time and patience this morning. . . . The name "Virginia" 
as surely points out that a Queen was ruling the destinies of 
England when that State was founded; as the name "Queensland" 
will point out to generations yet to come that a Queen was again 
holding sway at the time that colony was carved out from the 
Australian Continent. Such names as Jamestown, James River, 
Cape Charles, the Carolinas, the Rapid An, Georgia, and a hundred 
others, possess no small interest for the student of the history of 
the colonization of America. Similarly, the share taken by other 
European nations in the exploration and settlement of the 



67 

Americas, can be traced with tolerable accuracy, by means of the 
names inscribed upon the map. In the Spanish Main, and all 
along the shores of the Gulf of Mexico, Spanish names will be 
found to predominate. . . . Santa Cruz, and Vera Cruz severally 
mark the spot where the Spaniards erected the Holy Cross and the 
True Cross, preparatory to the Conquest of Mexico, and eventually 
to that of Peru. AVould that more of the true Spirit of Him, of 
whom the Cross is the symbol, had animated their breasts, rather 
than that insatiable thirst for gold which left a trail of cruelty and 
violence and blood upon their track, happily unparalleled even in 
the annals of conquest. There would have been one foul stain 
the fewer inscribed in the pages of the so-called civilization of the 
age. For more than two thousand miles along the Brazilian coast, 
the map is studded with names of Portuguese origin ; while on the 
opposite, or Pacific coast, Spanish names again preponderate. 
Some commemorate the Saint Days on which the particular places 
were discovered, as Santiago or St. James, &c. ; others are of the 
descriptive class, as Valparaiso, i.e. the Vale of Paradise; several 
are corruptions of the aboriginal names, and a few are of English 
origin. In short, the names laid down upon a modern map of the 
new world, may be compared to a kind of irregular mosaic work, 
pregnant with interest to those who can spell out the history of 
each separate piece. First there is a pavement of primitive setting 
represented by aboriginal names. Some of these are descriptive 
of the great natural features of the country, such as mountains, 
rivers, lakes, &c.; others are derived from the names of the tribes 
who once owned the soil, but have now wholly disappeared ; a 
third class are commemorative of some remarkable events in the 
history of those tribes. . . . Around the whole coast, and 
occasionally intruding inland, along the courses of rivers, there is 
a secondary setting, consisting of names imposed by the early 
discoverers, conquerors, and setders. These names are derived 
from the language of every maritime nation in Europe ; each has 
a history of its own, too. The tertiary is composed of names 
bestowed in recent times, and serve to mark the progress made by 
the white man in settling the wide domain of prairie and forest, 



68 

over which once roamed countless herds of buffalo and the race of 
the red-skin. This formation, it is needless to say, is still going 
on, though one could wish that a people speaking our own tongue, 
and spnmg from our own stock, had made choicer selections in 
naming new settlements than they have done in many instances : 
Smithvilles, Jonesvilles, and Brownsvilles are numerous. Most of 
the States have their Thebes, Cairo, Athens, Troy, Rome, &c. 
Russel, in his diary of North and South, describes one of the 
"Corinths" as "consisting of a wooden grog-shop and three log- 
shanties;" while he found the Acropolis represented by a "grocery 
store ;" and all that can be seen of the City of Troy is "a timber 
house, three log -huts, a saw-mill, and twenty negroes." 

It was my intention to touch upon the place-names of that still 
newer world, which is so fast rising into importance at our 
Antipodes, by a process similar to that which has been done with 
the map of the Americas. Similar results could have been 
obtained, but time at present forbids; besides, those who feel 
sufficiently interested in the matter, can work out the subject for 
themselves by reading the Voyages of the Early Navigators — 
Tasman, Dampier, Cook, Carteret, &c., aided by a good modern 
Gazetteer and Maps. 

The investigation of the earliest European place-names is 
beset by considerable difficulties ; in some instances the languages 
from which they are derived have passed away; in others they have 
become so much corrupted as to make the attempt to explain them 
satisfactorily little better than guess-work. Still, a great deal has 
been done in recent times to unravel their significance, especially 
by the German philologists who are now being closely followed by 
some of our English scholars. In order to follow such authorities, 
some knowledge of the present state of philological science will 
be necessary. ... I will condense into as small a space as 
possible the leading principles of Philology which bear upon 
Nomenclature. It has been shown beyond dispute, that the 
present existing languages of Europe — the Turkish, Basque, Finn, 
and Lapp excepted — are closely akin to each other. They form, 
together with the Indianic and Persian, one family, known as the 



69 

Indo-European. The same terms, under slightly different forms, 
all of which are satisfactorily explained by what is known as 
Grimm's Law, (expressing the idea of the numerals up to ten) exist 
still in Sanscrit, Greek, Latin, Welsh, Old Sclavonic, modern 
Russian, French, Spanish, Italian, Anglo-Saxon, German, Dutch, 
Danish, Gothic, and English. Some of the personal pronouns are 
common to all. The terms expressing relationship, as father, 
mother, sister, brother; the names of some parts of the body, as 
"tooth;" of some of the domesticated animals, as "cat," "mouse," 
"goose;' of agricultural tools and agricultural operations; and of 
two or three of the commonest metals and cereals, and various 
other terms, are identical in most of them. Sanskrit and Pali are 
the dead languages of India, and bear the same relationship to the 
modern dialects of Hindostan as the Latin does to the modern 
languages of Italy, Spain, and France. The Zend is a dead 
language, and bears a similar relationship to modern Persian. 
The same may be said of Old Sclavonic and modern Russian, &c.; 
and what are known as Meso-Gothic and Anglo-Saxon, hold a 
like relationship to modern German, Dutch, Danish, Norwegian, 
and English. Philologists refer the whole of these languages to 
one parent stock, to which they agree to apply the term "Aryan." 
This Aryan language, they reason, from the internal evidence it 
furnishes of itself, must have been the speech of a people leading 
chiefly a pastoral kind of life, generally peaceable in their nature, 
and subjected to bonds which knit men together in communities. 
The country inhabited by this ancient race must have been in 
Asia, probably to the north and north-west of Hindostan. They 
must have separated, or at least sent off successive tides of 
emigrants to overspread and occupy other lands, long before the 
dawn of history : one branch turning southwards, and peopling 
Hindostan; another moving westward, and peopling Persia; 
others, by slow degrees undoubtedly, pressing on further west and 
north-west, until further progress was finally debarred them by the 
shores of the Mediterranean and the Atlantic. Judging by the oldest 
European place-names, viz., those of mountain, river, plain, and 
valley, they seem to have passed over Europe in two main streams, 



70 

and at periods of time considerably apart. One stream descended 
the great river-valleys of North Germany, and, crossing the North 
Sea, peopled the northern part of Great Britain, the whole of 
Ireland, and the Isle of Man. The other flowed in a more 
southerly direction, peopling ancient Greece, Italy, a great part of 
Spain, France, and the southern part of our own Island. At least 
this is the testimony afforded to us by the study and comparison 
of the Indo-European languages, if the study and comparison of 
languages be of any value in lending aid to the researches of 
History and Ethnology. Those who spread over the north of 
Britain, Ireland, and the Isle of Man, are now distinguished from 
the others by philologists, by the term Gadhelic, or Hiberno-Celtic. 
Their language still survives in the modern Gaelic of Scotland, the 
Erse or Irish, and the Manx. The southern Celts are known as 
the Cymri, or Cambro-Celtic race, and their language is still 
spoken in Wales, and by nearly three millions of the inhabitants of 
Brittany in France. The Gaelic, Erse, and Manx have a close 
relationship, being only, in reality, varying dialects of the same 
tongue ; the same affinity exists between the Welsh and the 
Breton; but between the two languages themselves, i.e., between 
the Cymrio and the Gadhelic, the relationship is no closer than 
that between modern English and German. Now these nations 
must have overspread Europe in ages long anterior to the 
historical era. They were a numerous and powerful people in 
Gaul in Ccesar's time, and when he crossed over to Britain, he 
found them no less powerful or warlike. They were not altogether 
unacquainted with agriculture ; they had an established religion, 
with its hierarchy, temples, groves, grove rites, mysteries, and 
ceremonies. In short, there is nothing to lead us to think they 
were strangers in the land, but on the contrary, much to lead us 
to conclude that they had long been in possession of the " Isles of 
the West" More than two thousand years ago, the then 
inhabitants .of Cornwall supplied the Phenician traders with tin 
from their mines. 

By the time the light of history does break in upon us, we 
find another wave of people flowing westward and approaching our 



71 

shores, viz. those tribes we now include under the generic name of 
Teutons : they are known to us in history as Angles, Frisians, 
Jutes, Goths, Danes, and Norsemen. Who were they? Whence 
came they] History is dumb, or at least such utterances as she 
has given forth are mere speculations and guess-work. Modern 
Philology has done much to solve the enigma. A comparison of 
the Teutonic languages with the Celtic, proves beyond doubt that 
the Teutonic races were originally of the same stock as the Celtic; 
that they, like the Celtic, had at one time led a pastoral life ; lived 
in communities ; worshipped a Supreme Being, whom they looked 
upon as the author of all good, and had known the family ties which 
bind men together in domestic affections. The same test, i.e. the 
test of language, shows at the same time that the two races, the 
Celts and the Teutons, had been separated by a wide gulf of time, 
sufficiently wide to allow the two languages to become considerably 
different from each other. The southern Celts, the Greeks, and 
Romans, worshipped the Supreme Being under the name of Dios, 
Zeus, Jupiter (all the same word) i. e. the God of Day. The 
Persians are sun-worshippers still, and the Druids of Britain taught 
the worship of the heavenly bodies. The Teutons deified the sun 
and the moon, as seen in the names Sunday, Monday ; but they 
only knew the Supreme Being as God, i. e. Good. There is a 
Sanskrit root kiina, signifying Snow ; it is found in the name of 
the loftiest range of mountains in the world — -Himalaya, i. e. the 
abode of Snow. The southern Celts must have carried this root- 
word with them, for we find it embodied in the written language 
of both Greeks and Romans ; in the former cheitna, in the 
latter /items, both signifying the same thing, viz. — Winter, i. e. the 
Siioivy Season. To signify the same season of the year, the 
Teutons had a totally different word. Long exposure to the cold 
howling blasts that sweep over the plains and forests of northern 
Europe, led them to characterise the return of that dreary time of 
the year by the term Winter, i. e. the Windy Season. 

To the earher comers, the Celts, the names of all the great 
natural landmarks of the country over which they spread, as one 
might naturally expect, are due. Among the rivers the Rhine, 



Rhone, Danube, Elbe, Weser, Oder, are a few examples. Among 
mountains, the Alps, Apennines, and Caucasus will suffice. With 
verj'- few exceptions the river-names of Great Britain, Ireland, and 
the Isle of Man, are Celtic ; the same holds good of the mountains 
of Scotland and Ireland, and partially so of those of England and 
the Isle of Man. With respect to the names of the bays, estuaries, 
headlands, political divisions, towns and villages, the case is 
somewhat different. As we saw in the case of America, so was it 
in the British Isles. From time to time our shores were invaded 
by men of different nations. First the Romans, then the Saxons, 
now Angles, then Jutes, Danes, Norwegians, and lastly, the 
Norman — they either slew the people whom they found in 
possession of the land, or enslaved them, or drove them into 
their mountain fastnesses. They carved out for themselves new 
districts, founded new settlements, and gave them names of their 
own. Thus it is we have to deal with a medley of place-names 
derived from the languages of the Celt, the Roman, Saxon, Angle, 
Dane, Norwegian, and Norman. One instance by way of illustra- 
tion. We know from history that the Danes, after many fierce 
struggles with their kindred, the Saxons, succeeded in gaining a 
footing in England. A district on the east coast, extending from 
the Wash to the Tees, and known as the Danelagh, was assigned 
to them as a place of settlement. The names of the towns and 
villages over the whole of that district are, with very few exceptions, 
of purely Danish type. In Lincolnshire alone there are sixty-three 
place-names containing the suffix— //;^;;^<?, which is the Danish for 
village. . . A second instance. Among the sea-faring nations 
of yore, there were no more adventurous, more skilful, or more 
hardy sea-rovers than the Norsemen. In the tenth century 
Norway sent out a colony to Iceland ; Norsemen seized upon and 
colonised the Shetlands and Orkneys ; they sailed up the North 
Sea, passed through the Straits of Dover, crossed the Bay of 
Biscay, and entered the Mediterranean. Norse Vikings harried 
the Hebrides and the east coast of Ireland ; they seized the Isle 
of Man, which they erected into a Norse sovereignty, and sailed 
along the coast of Wales into the Bristol Channel, Wherever they 



73 

came, there they left the imprint of the Norse tongue upon the 
mountains, the headlands, bays, creeks, and coasts. In Pembroke- 
shire there is still a cluster of Norse names— Milford, Tenby 
(Danes village), Fishguard, and a score of others. Off the coast 
of North Wales, "Ormes' Head" is purely Norse. Of the seven- 
teen parishes into which the Isle of Man is divided, fifteen are 
distinguished by the term— Kirk; several names of the Manx 
villages are compounded of a Norse personal name and the suffix 
—by. There are several "dales," "nesses," or headlands, and 
"wicks" or bays round the coast. The highest mountain in the 
Island bears a true Norse name, " Snaefell," i. e. Snowfell. Near 
Ramsey there is a mountain which, according to train, once bore 
the name of "Skeafell," i. e. Sky, or Mist Fell; which probably 
explains the meaning of our Cumberland Scawfell. Among 
the islands of western Scotland, and on the west coast 
Itself, Norse place-names still abound ; they run across the north 
coast, too,— and very singular it seems, at first sight, to find that 
the most northern county in Scotland should bear the name of 
Sutherland, or Southland; but this becomes intelligible enough 
when we find that the Orkneys once formed a Norwegian jarldom, 
and when we reflect that to people dwelling to the northward, 
Scotland would as much be a south land as the north coast of 
Africa is a southern land to Spain. 

Now, these Northmen had a great share in the formation of 
the present names of places in Cumberland and Westmoreland. 
Throughout the Lake District proper, these names are almost 
exclusively either Celtic or Norwegian. The "gills," "hau<^hs," 
"howes," "thwaites," "forces," "dales," "fells," and "holms," as 
applied to islands, or rivers, or lakes, are abundant, and they are 
purely Norse. The swffvx—tkwaite, is found in more than two 
hundred instances in the two counties; it occurs but once in 
Northumberland, is altogether unknown in Lincolnshire. The 
term signifies a clearing. Garth is a common name in the dales. 
We have Applegarth, Deergarth, Gas or Goosegarth, Gatesgarth, 
etc.; its kindred terms are garden, yard, orchard, etc. Force is an 
expressive term for a Waterfall ;— the word had lived among the 



n 

inhabitants of the district merely as a dialectic term until Words- 
worth incorporated it in his writings. It is now an accepted 
English word, and in the Lake District, at least, has supplanted 
the use of the Italian exotic, cascade. 

An interesting question connected with this concluding part 
of my subject arises here. How came these Norwegian place- 
names into the English Lake District 1 Neither chronicle nor 
history can give an answer. There is no recorded invasion or 
irruption of Norwegians into this part of the country. Towards 
the latter end of the ninth century the Danes marched northwards 
from the Humber, entered Northumberland, and effected a 
permanent settlement in that county. These Northumbrian 
Danes made incursions into Cumberland, destroyed at one time 
the City of Carlisle, and, if we may be guided by the evidence of 
village names, colonies of them must have settled in the more 
open and fertile parts of Cumberland and Westmoreland, for there 
is a cordon of Danish place-names extending from Appleby north- 
wards along the vale of the Eden to the north of Carlisle, thence 
across the Cumberland plain to AUonby, and along the belt of 
coast country as far as Ravenglass in the south again. Of these 
distinctively Danish names, all terminating in the suffix — by, an 
abode, there are more than sixty in the two counties, but not one, 
I think, in the region of the Lake District proper. We may fairly 
infer, then, that the Danes did not settle as colonists in the fell- 
dales. If Ferguson in his interesting work on the Northmen in 
Cumberland and Westmorland, has given a satisfactory answer to 
the question, then one more proof is afforded of the value of the 
study of languages and place-names as a means of throwing light 
upon obscure points often met with in the study of history and 
ethnology. In the absence of all historical evidence he has shown 
conclusively, I think, by a careful comparison of the language and 
place-names of the colonists of the Isle of Man, with the dialect 
and place-names peculiar to the Lake District, that the dales and 
i^alleys of the mountainous regions must have been seized upon 
and colonised by men of Norwegian blood from the Isle of Man. 
This theory is strengthened by the fact that many of the holdings 



15 

of the statesmen of the dales were allodial rather than feudal in 
their tenure — just such as would be formed by men who in making 
for themselves new homes in new lands would adopt — 

"The good old rule, the simple plan, 
That they shall take who have the power, 
And they shall keep who can." 



77 



QUARTZ, AS IT OCCURS IN THE LAKE DISTRICT; 
ITS STRUCTURE AND ITS HISTORY. 

By J. Clifton Ward, F.G.S., F.R.M.S. 

Introduction. 

I. Geological Distribution. 

Vein Quartz, tinder four conditions. 

Quartz as a Rock Constituent, 

(a) Of Stratified Rocks. 

(b) Of Unstratified and Volcanic Rocks. 

1. Among Granitic and Granitoid Rocks. 

2. Among Intrusive Diorites, Dolerites, &c. 

3. As an Accidental Constituent. 

II. Quartz as a Microscopic Study. 



Introduction. 

There are few minerals more widely spread than Quartz, a 
chemical compound of the two elements Silicon and Oxygen. 
Common though this mineral is, however, its study opens out 
questions of deep interest, and may lead us from the contemplation 
of a pretty piece of rock-crystal to the consideration of subtle and 
hidden processes in the formation of the crust of our globe. 

/ GEOLOGICAL DISTRIBUTION. 

Quartz occurs among our Lake-country mountains in several 
forms, but never as a rock by itself, in thick bedded masses, as is 
occasionally the case in other mountain tracts. 



Vein Quartz, under four conditions. 

(i) Constituting the whole thickness of a Lode or Vein, 
in which case the latter may be said to be a Quartz Vein, 
unless the quartz contains much valuable ore, such as Lead 
or Copper, for then it will more frequently be called a Lead 
or Copper Vein with a quartz vein-stone. Some of these 
Quartz Veins are of considerable width — many yards — and 
run in straight lines, sometimes for several miles, though 
often broken by faults. That they contain gold in small 
quantities is certain, and I have in my possession some small 
grains of this precious metal extracted from a vein of Quartz in 
Borrowdale. It is well known that gold has been mined in Wales 
for a great many centuries, but it seems not to exist in any of our 
Cumberland Quartz Veins in workable quantities, so far as I have 
been able to judge. 

(2.) Instead of being itself a lode or vein, quartz h-equently 
forms strings or courses running in or through a lode formed of 
various mineral substances. Supposing the lode be lead-bearing, 
it often becomes an important question, how much of the vein-stone 
be quartz, and how much calc-spar, baiytes, or other minerals. 
For the quartz is very much harder than most other constituents ot 
veins, and if the ore has to be extracted entirely from such a matrix, 
the labour is much increased. Nevertheless, sometimes even a 
quartz ore vein-stuff is quite crumbling, and when so, the working 
is comparatively easy. This is the case with several lead-veins 
occurring in the Vale of Newlands. 

(3.) Quartz when occurring either as a massive lode or a 
slender string is opaque, and generally of a pure white colour ; but 
it occurs, thirdly, in the form of clear transparent crystals, lining 
the sides of cracks and fissures either in massive quartz or in some 
other mineral substance. These crystals have the general form of 
a six-sided prism terminated by a six-sided pyramid ; but owing to 
variations in the relative size of the several faces the appearance of 
the crystals may vary. Sometimes also they are coloured in various 
tints, due to oxides of iron, manganese, etc., mingled with the 
oxide of silicon, or silica, as it is more usually called. It will be 



79 

noticed that the pointed ends of the crystals project away from the 
sides of the crack or fissure which they Hne. 

(4.) Lastly, Vein Quartz occurs in indefinite lenticular 
masses and strings among the strata of many geological formations. 
Thus, occasionally it may be seen to occur between the planes of 
bedding of stratified rocks, more frequently, however, traversing 
those planes in an irregular and stringy manner, and sometimes 
much developed along the cleavage planes, as may be seen in the 
Skiddaw Slate between the summit of Hindscarth and Scope End. 

Quartz as a Rock-Constituent. 

(a) Of Stratified Rocks. 

(b) Of Unstratified Rocks and Volcanic Rocks. 

(a) Of Stratified Rocks. 

In the Skiddaw Slates there are many parts — especially the 
lower, seen on Whiteside and Grasmoor — which have been pro- 
duced by sandy or gritty deposits, and the grains of quartz may 
frequently be distinguished clearly with the naked eye. Again, in 
a well marked bed of grit, in the upper part of the Skiddaw Series, 
to be well studied in Great Cockup, north of Skiddaw; in the 
sides of the northern breast of Skiddaw ; and notably at Lank Rigg 
and Latterbarrow, in the south-west of the Lake District, the grains 
of quartz frequently approach the size of small pebbles. In all 
these cases the quartz fragments are more or less rounded, showing 
that they have been rolled in the water, and are formed of white 
quartz, such as occurs in veins, or such as may be won from the 
disintegration of granite. Even in the clay-slate proper the 
microscope reveals the presence of small grains of quartz amongst 
the aluminous matter. 

In some of the beds of Carboniferous Limestone that wrap 
round the mountainous tract, quartz occurs both in the form of 
small pebbles, and of curious amorphous masses very similar to 
the flint in chalk, but known as chert. In the sandstones inter- 
stratified with the Limestone, quartz in more or less rounded grains, 
is the chief constituent In the Penrith Sandstone, of younger age 



so 

than the Carboniferous, the small grains of quartz are specially 
interesting, because, in some parts of the sandstone, at any rate, 
each grain shows the form of a doubly pyramidal crystal, the 
crystals being of very uniform size, and their form often not a great 
deal affected by roUing. Whence these little crystalline particles 
could have been derived, to form the sandstone, is somewhat of a 
puzzle. Among the Blue Mountains of New South Wales, Darwin 
observed a similar case, and remarks, " It is difficult to imagine 
how these crystals can have been formed ; one can hardly believe 
that they were separately precipitated in their present crystallized 
state. Is it possible that rounded grains of quartz may have been 
acted on by a fluid corroding their surfaces and depositing on them 
fresh silica?" The silica in old glass sometimes regains its 
crystalline structure, as shown by Sir David Brewster in 1840. 

(b) Quartz as a Constiiiunt of Vnstratified and Volcanic Rocks. 
:. Among Granitic and Granitoid Rocks. 
Generally speaking, in true granites, quartz occurs uncrystal- 
lized, being the last of the constituent minerals to solidify ; it then 
appears to fill up all the interstices of the other minerals, the 
felspar and the mica. This is the case with the Skiddaw, Eskdale, 
and Shap granites in the mass, though sometimes very locally or 
in the form of dykes proceeding from the main mass, the disposi- 
tion of the quartz is not interstitial but crystalline. This latter mode 
of occurrence may be well studied in the Quartz Felsite of St. John, 
and notably in the Armboth Dyke. In these cases the quartz and 
some of the felspar have crystaUized out in a felsitic base, and the 
cross sections of the quartz crystals often look nearly square, from 
the unequal development of all the six sides. In the Armboth 
Quartz Felsite Dyke the embedded crystals are most clearly seen, 
and the pyramidal termination of both ends may be well observed. 

2, Among intrusive Diorites, Dolerites, &'c. (Greenstones. ) 

I know of no cases of quartz occurring in a crystalline 
condition in the rocks of the Greenstone class. Nor is quartz 
generally a conspicuous constituent in any form among such rocks. 



81 

Microscopic study of the class, however, reveals the very frequent 
existence of this mineral in small portions among the other 
constituent minerals. In some cases its presence may be due to 
deposition subsequent to the first formation of the rock, and such 
belong to our next group. 

3. Quartz as an accidental constituent. 

By an accidental constituent is meant one that forms no 
essential part of the rock, but has been introduced perhaps long 
after that rock was formed or solidified. Its manner of occurrence 
in these cases clearly shows that the quartz has been deposited 
from solution — water containing silica infiltrating through the rock- 
mass. It thus fills up cavities, and sometimes replaces other 
minerals dissolved away. 

Among the Volcanic rocks of the District, quartz is very 
common in this form. In beds of lava, and sometimes in those of 
volcanic ash, vesicles or long almond-shaped cavities are generally 
produced by the escape of vapour and gases from the molten or 
heated matter, on its first eruption from the volcano. Subse- 
quently when such lava beds have been covered up by great 
thicknesses of overlying strata, the water which is for ever 
percolating the crust of our earth, and contains very various 
mineral substances dissolved in it, deposits these in the cavities 
and vesicles, and amongst other minerals thus left to fill the vacant 
spaces, quartz is very common, and may often be found filling the 
same vesicle together with the minerals calcite (carbonate of 
lime) and chlorite. When a large vesicle has been thus filled 
with quartz, variousl)' coloured and under difTerent physical forms, 
it sometimes happens that the surrounding rock is subsequently 
broken up and destroyed, and then the hard kernels of quartz are 
isolated in the form of agates. Such are the agates of U'allow 
Crag, Keswick. 

// QUARTZ AS A MICROSCOPIC STVDY- 

Having enumerated the various forms and conditions under 
which Quartz is found in the Lake District rocks, I wish to say 



82 

something about its internal structure as revealed by the microscope. 
The method of study is this. The fragments of quartz, or the 
rocks containing quartz, are sliced very thin and mounted; the 
slice being reduced to such a degree of thinness as to allow of its 
ready examination by transmitted light. 

At the outset let us find out what can be the difference 
between a piece of opaque white quartz and clear transparent rock 
crystal. The difference is somewhat similar to that between a 
piece of opaque ice and a piece of glassy transparent ice ; for if 
water be frozen very quickly, a large number of air-bubbles will be 
entrapped; while slow freezing enables the air to escape. Or again, 
take a handful of snow, it is white but decidely opaque. Though 
formed of clear crystals of ice, air is so mixed up with them, 
that the rays of light constantly suffering reflection from the limiting 
surfaces of the two, are unable to pass through the mass. Subject 
such a mass of snow crystals, however, to powerful pressure, the 
air will be squeezed out, and the formerly opaque snow may be 
converted into a block of transparent ice. Reverse the experiment, 
pound up your block of clear ice, and once more you have an 
opaque white powder, the minute icy particles being separated from 
one another by air. The same may be done with a transparent 
quartz crystal : grind it to powder, and the powder is found to be 
opaque and white. 

Hence may we not conclude that the difference between clear 
rock crystal and opaque white vein quartz is that, while in the case 
of the transparent quartz, there is nothing, or but Httle, to reflect 
the rays of light, or to prevent their passing uninterruptedly through 
the mass ; in the case of the opaque white quartz, there must be 
something included which acts in the same manner, as the air- 
bubbles in opaque or cats' ice, as it is called. The microscope 
reveals what this something is. 

Take a piece of ordinary vein-quartz, and examine a thin 
slice of the same ; every part of the field of view is seen to be full 
of little cells of very various form, some round, some long dra^vn 
out, some branched, and some even having a regular and what 
appears like a crystalline outline. Examine them more closely, 



83 

and each little cell is seen to contain a bubble, sometimes larger 
and more or less flattened by the sides of the cavity, and 
immovable ; sometimes like the bubble in a spirit-level, moving 
sluggishly from end to end of a tube-like cell, and sometimes very 
small, and moving about freely in the cell like a thing of life, 
perhaps visiting all parts of the cell in turn, occasionally becoming 
hazy and indistinct, because, passing to a deeper part of the cell 
the bubble has gone slightly out of focus. If the cell, too, be very 
small, the bubble, owing to its extreme minuteness, may seem like 
a mere black speck, and in these cases the motion is exceedingly 
active, and reminds one still more of a living organism. What can 
these things mean? For a bubble to move thus freely about, all 
analogy would lead us to suppose that the cell must be full of 
liquid, except the bubble spot, otherwise this free motion would be 
impossible. What then is the liquid, and what does the bubble 
contain ? Mr. Sorby has paid great attention to these interesting 
facts, and has clearly proved (ist) that the liquid in most cases is 
water; (2nd) that the bubble is a vacuum or empty spot, when the 
movement in the cell is very free ; and (3rd) that the water is 
frequently saline, and sometimes the cells contain small cubical 
crystals of salt. Thus we have the astounding fact revealed to us, 
that in every small fragment of opaque quartz, there are thousands 
upon thousands of these minute liquid parcels shut up within it, 
and each containing a vacuous bubble. Again we ask— What can 
this mean? Can it be that water has had so large a part to 
play in the formation of this hard mineral quartz ? that granite, 
which we used to look upon as a molten rock formed in the bowels 
of the earth, can yet have been formed largely in connection with 
water? for the quartz combining with felspar and mica to form 
granite, is literally full of these minute water-cavities. Let us see 
how this can be in the case of granite, and then other quartz 
occurrences may prove easier to understand. Mr. Sorby has made 
many and delicate researches into this subject, and he has found 
that on subjecting the liquid cavities to heat; first, any minute 
crystals of salt contained in them are slowly dissolved ; and, 
second, that when the heat is made sufficiently extreme, the 



84 

minute bubble becomes smaller and smaller, until finally the liquid 
fills the whole cavity, the bubble completely disappearing. Now 
it is evident that these -little parcels of water must have been 
enclosed within the quartz on its solidification, when the granite 
was being formed deep beneath the surface, for all geological 
evidence goes to show that granite is deep-seated in its formation ; 
although of various ages, yet no other rock is ever found beneath 
it. Therefore^ it is further evident that when first enclosed, the 
water must have been in a highly heated condition, and unable to 
attain the'state of vapour by reason of the great pressure to which 
it was subject ;"so that we may regard the liquid, now contained 
in the quartz, as part of the original mother-liquor, if I may use 
the term, which, together with a heated condition of other 
minerals, and great pressure, made up the conditions under which 
the granite was formed. In the formation of the granite, the two 
minerals mica and felspar were the first to crystallize, impressing 
their form upon the semi-molten or semi-fluid quartz, which 
solidifying last, wrapt up within itself large quantities of the highly 
heated water, in the form of minute liquid parcels or cavities. 
Subsequently, on cooling of the mass, removal of pressure, or both, 
the water would cool ; but being closely sealed up in glassy 
(quartzy) cavities or minute bottles, it could not escape in the 
state of vapour any more than at the first, but in its cool condition 
would occupy a slightly less space ; in other words the contraction 
would leave a minute bubble or empty space (called, for 
convenience sake, a vacuity), which vacuity you will see must have 
a size proportionate (ist) to the size of the liquid parcel ; (2nd) to 
the heat and pressure under which the fluid was originally confined. 
Hence, if it be found that in a number of cases the relative size of 
vacuities and liquid-cavities is the same, these relative dimensions 
give us a clue to the amount of combined heat and pressure under 
which the granite (or, to speak more accurately, the quartz of the 
granite) was formed. Here, then, is an interesting problem ; but 
at the outset it appears that to find out the exact amount of either 
the heat or the pressure it is necessary to know that of one of 
these elements ; thus, if we knew the pressure, and observed the 



85 

relative size of vacuity (or bubble) to liquid cavity, we should 
have the two elements from which to calculate the heat; or, if we 
could form a tolerably accurate estimate of the heat, and make 
observations on the relative size of vacuity and liquid-cavity, these 
elements would allow us to form some fairly correct idea of the 
pressure under which the rock was formed. 

Now, by an elaborate series of investigations, Mr. Sorby has 
shown it to be very probable that the heat was not much greater 
than 360° C (680° Fah.), or not more than a dull red heat visible 
in the dark. We have already seen how the water in many cases 
contained when hot more mineral salts dissolved in it than could 
be so contained when cold, hence the small crystals of salt some- 
times found in the liquid cavities ; but Mr. Sorby has also called 
attention to the fact that crystals of the mineral called Schorl (a 
variety of hornblende) are frequently enclosed in the liquid-cavities, 
and that these would be fused at any temperature greater than a 
dull red heat; and from this and other facts, he has fixed on the 
temperature of 360° C (680° Fah.) as the probable extreme at 
which the quartz of granites was formed. Calculating on the basis 
of these elements, and having made a large number of observations 
upon the relative size of the vacuities and liquid cavities in the 
quartz of the Cornish granites, Mr. Sorby arrived at the conclusion 
that the mean of the pressure expressed in feet of rock under which 
the Cornish granites were consolidated was 50,000 feet (this not 
necessarily the actual depth at which formed). 

A few years ago, being anxious to apply Mr. Sorby's method 
to the granites and granitoid rocks of this lake country, I examined 
a number of slices of our granite rocks, and measured nearly 500 
cases of liquid-cavities, ascertaining the relative size of the vacuity 
(or bubble) to the liquid cavity. My method of proceeding I will 
describe directly, but I will at once state that the result arrived at 
in the case of the Skiddaw granite, for example, was, that its 
consolidation took place under a pressure of rather more than an 
equivalent of 50,000 feet of rock ; and that the mean pressure, 
under which all the principal granitic and granitoid rocks were 
consolidated, was equivalent to that of 44,000 feet of rock. 

7 



86 

My experiences in the course of this investigation may be of 
interest to some who wish to undertake original work of a similar 
kind. (For the Memoir containing the investigation as a whole, 
see Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society, vol. xxxi. p. 568.) 

The object-glass generally used was a ^-inch (by Collins) 
with a C eye-piece, the combination magnifying 665 times. When 
I first began my measurements, I used a neutral-tint glass reflector, 
and traced on paper all the best defined fluid cavities, making a 
note by the side of those in which the vacuities showed a constant 
spontaneous movement. I soon found, however, that on a com- 
parison of a considerable number of drawings, the fixed bubbles 
were almost invariably relatively larger than those which showed 
this free movement. Hence I was led altogether to reject from 
my measurements all cases in which the bubble was fixed, and in 
which it would seem either that gas had been primarily entrapped, 
or that in the making of the thin slice, leakage had occurred in the 
cavity. This last case must necessarily often occur in the making 
of thin slices, especially as the liquid-bearing cavities are frequently 
so irregular in shape and prolonged into horns and fine points. I 
then gave up tracing the outlines of cavities on paper, and measured 
the relative size of bubble and liquid-cavity directly, by means of 
a Jackson's micrometer, with divisions equal to 10000 ths of an inch. 
This micrometer being placed in the eyepiece, the fine divisions 
could be brought over the bubble and liquid-cavity, and their 
relative size at once estimated with tolerable accuracy. But a little 
consideration will make it evident that measurement of a liquid- 
cavity in one plane would be of little use unless the cavity be 
exceedingly shallow, and lie along the plane, hence it became 
necessary to take this further precaution, viz. — to rely only upon 
the measurements of those cases in which the tiny bubble (or 
vacuity) moved freely into all parts of the liquid-cavity without 
going out of focus ; this would imply that the cavity was of tolerably 
uniform depth, but little more than the depth of the diameter of 
the bubble. And it was found that when I restricted my measure- 
ments to these cases, there was a fairly marked uniformity in the 
ratio between vacuities and liquid-cavities occurring in the quartz 



of the same rock. Thus, take as an example two different rock- 
sHces of the same granite : — 



No. 



•154 
•154 
 154 
•166 
•180 
•180 
•154 
•154 



f 



[►•162 



No. 2 



•166 

•125 
•166 
•180 
•200 
•166 
•166 
•166 

 154 
•166 
 142 
•142 



^ -164 



J 



In No. I there are five cases in which the whole liquid-cavity is 
6>< times the size of the vacuity, one case in which it is 6 times 
the size, and two cases in which it is only 51^ times. The mean 
•162 is probably not far from the truth. 

It may be difficult to realize the size of these liquid-cavities 
and their contained bubbles. Those reliable for measurement are 
extremely small, sometimes less than T^r^th of an inch in diameter. 
Much larger cavities generally occur in plenty; but these seldom 
exceed W^th of an inch in length, and in them, the bubbles eithe: 
have no movement, or but a very slight or sluggish one. In 
fact, such is the minuteness of these cavities and their number, in 
many cases, that more than a thousand million might be contained 
easily within a cubic inch of quartz, and sometimes the contained 
water must make up at least five per cent, of the volume of the 
containing quartz. In some cases the liquid-cavities are much 
arranged along lines, as in the quartz crystals occurring in the 
Armboth Dyke. Occasionally, however, liquid-cavities are met 
with in quartz crystals of very considerable size, such that the 
movement of the bubble can even be recognized by the naked 
eye. 

Having accumulated a sufficient number of reliable measure- 
ments, and struck the mean for any one rock, such as the Skiddaw 
Granite, the calculation of the pressure under which the granite 
was found is proceeded upon by mathematical formula furnished 



88 

by Mr. Sorby's investigations, the temperature of a dull red heat 
visible in the dark (68o°F.) being assumed as the probable 
temperature of consolidation. The result, in the case of the 
Skiddaw Granite, is that a pressure equivalent to 52,000ft. of rock 
must have been necessary to compress the liquid so that it would 
fill the cavities at a temperature of dull red heat. 

The next question, bearing upon this result, is one for the 
field-geologist alone to determine. What is the greatest thickness 
of rock which can have been removed from over the mass of the 
Skiddaw granite as we now see it exposed ? Geological investi- 
gation of the whole district leads me to infer that at one time the 
granite must have been covered by some 30,000 feet of rock — 
including Skiddaw Slates, "Volcanic Series, and Upper Silurians. 
But we have seen that the calculated pressure is equivalent to 
52,000 ft, hence the pressure to which the consohdating granite 
(and therefore quartz) was subject was greater than what could be 
due to the mere weight of overlying rocks. How then was this 
pressure applied'? We have seen that the condensed liquid 
confined within the quartz has remained as a registering ther- 
mometer, to show the existence and amount of the pressure, 
and geological examination of the District further informs us that 
the overlying 30,000 feet of rock was in some way elevated, and 
contorted — being also slowly removed by denudation. Thus we 
have physical evidence from two different sources of the existence 
of great pressure exerted upon the granite-forming mass ; evidence 
derived from the liquid-cavities and their contained bubbles, and 
evidence in the rocks overlying the granite of such pressure having 
produced elevation, contortion, cleavage, and general meta- 
morphism. It is further interesting to notice what would be the 
probable heat at a depth of 30,000 feet, according to our estimates 
of known increase on descending through the crust of our globe. 
If we take that increase as 1° Fah. for every 49ft. (Mr. R. W. Fox, 
Brit. Assoc. Report, 1857, p. 91), we find that at a depth of 30,900ft. 
the temperature would be 360° C. (680° F.), or that of a dull red 
heat visible in the dark, and just the temperature at which we 
were supposing the granite was formed. Thus, to sum up our 
results in the case of the Skiddaw Granite : — 



89 

ist. It is probable from geological evidence that this granite 
was consolidated at a depth of about 30,000 feet. 

2nd. An increase of 1° for every 49ft. on descending gives a 
temperature of 360° C. (680° F.) at a depth of 30,900 feet. 

3rd. Microscopic evidence, deduced from examination of the 
liquid-cavities in the quartz, gives a calculated pressure, under 
which the quartz was consolidated, at a temperature of 360° C. 
(680° F.), equivalent to 52, 000ft. of rock. 

4th. As the calculated pressure thus far exceeds (by 22,000 
feet) that due to the estimated thickness of overlying beds or — 
what is the same thing — to the estimated depth at which the 
granite -formation took place; it follows that there must have been 
a great amount of available pressure to be exerted upon the rocky 
crust around, and hence we find evidences of folding and contortion 
of the rocks, and of their upheaval and general metamorphism 
around the granitic area. 

The case of the Skiddaw Granite will suffice as an example 
of this mode of treatment. I have elsewhere (Quart. Journ. Geol. 
Soc, vol. xxxi. p. 568) treated all the other granitoid rocks of the 
Lake District in the same way, and with very similar general 
results. There are yet, however, one or two points I should like 
to call attention to. 

The first of these is the general absence among the liquid- 
cavities in the quartz of Lake District rocks, of crystals of various 
salts, such as have been found in plenty in some other districts. 
Are we to infer from this that the liquid enclosed at the period of 
the formation of the granites was less saline than in some other 
cases ? Or is it possible that a more extended investigation would 
make it appear otherwise 1 Another thing worth noting is the 
general absence, as far as I have been able to judge, of cavities in 
the quartzes containing — not water — but liquid carbonic acid 
which in some other rocks and other districts are not infrequent. 

While thus calling attention to various points connected with 
the formation of quartz-bearing rocks of the District, I am far from 
claiming to have examined into the question exhaustively, and 
would gladly see other workers take up the subject more com- 
pletely, and either prove or disprove the results already obtained. 



90 

It is evident that microscopic examination throws light not 
only upon the origin of such quartz-bearing rocks as granite, but 
also upon that of quartz as an accidental and accessory mineral 
among rocks, and upon the mode of formation of quartz veins. 
We are in fact led to see that heated water containing silica in 
solution has played a most important part in geological history, 
that such water has sometimes been diffused through a rocky 
magma at a dull red heat under enormous pressure, and finally 
become entrapped in millions of minute cavities in the solidified 
rock ; sometimes it has worked its way up along cracks and fissures 
and deposited quartz in those fissures, forming veins ; sometimes 
circulating throughout the mass of a rock it has deposited the 
quartz in all irregular cavities or vesicles at a less degree of 
temperature ; and finally, we recognize the same heated water 
fully charged with silica rising to the surface in the form of the 
Geysers of Iceland, and playing a large part in all volcanic out- 
bursts. Surely there can be few thoughts more surprising than 
this, that every piece of granite we pick up contains in its quartz 
particles thousands of minute liquid-cavities, and moreover that 
every such liquid-cavity includes a tiny vacuous bubble in constant 
tremor or active motion, such motion, it would seem, having been 
kept up for the countless ages since the granite was first solidified 
deep down in the bowels of the earth. Truly we learn great things 
from study of the most minute. 



91 



BOULDER CLAY. 

By Charlks Smith, M.R.I. A. F.G.S. 

(Read at Whitehaven. ) 

Until the past few years, the so-called Boulder Clay deposits 
were comparatively little studied. More recently this early neglect 
has been amply atoned. They might even be said to have been 
too much studied, as many have worked upon them in order to 
extract arguments in reference to subjects which are altogether 
extraneous. The deposits are doubtless directly or indirectly of 
glacial origin, these involve a " Glacial Epoch," and it has been 
endeavoured on astronomical bases to calculate the time which 
has elapsed since this ice period existed. Further, it has been 
assumed that proofs of the existence of man may be found anterior 
to the close of this epoch, and thus those, who have adopted 
theories for or against the antiquity of man, have made the boulder 
clay formation a battle ground for ethnological discussions. 

The first question for us to examine is, What is Boulder 
Clay % Over a considerable portion of Northern Europe, as well 
as in North America, we find that though the great slate, sandstone, 
granite, or other formations appear on high ground, yet at lower 
levels they do not form the absolute surface (irrespective of the 
superficial beds of soil and disintegrated material) ; but between 
the soil and the foundation rocks there occurs, in very varying 
thicknesses of from a few feet to hundreds of feet, a peculiar clay, 
in which a greater or less number of boulders are contained. The 
clay is of different colours, but usually very tenacious and fine- 
grained \ the stones may be of one kind only, or, as in our Furness 



92 

district, form a heterogeneous assemblage of various rocks, mixed 
in perfect confusion. It is natural that when local students meet 
with such wonderful collections of rocks as are contained in the 
Boulder Clay of this and the adjoining districts, that they should 
endeavour to unravel the mysteries of their appearance, — the why 
and the wherefore of their presence, their derivation, and the mode 
of transit from their far-away homes to their present locales. 

Perhaps it would be impossible to find better opportunities 
for studying these deposits than are presented on this north-western 
coast. Here we find a stiff hard clay enclosing these various 
rocks, which are usually more or less sub-angular, and not un- 
frequently are scratched in a peculiar manner — the well-known 
glacial striae. There is no regularity in the deposition of the 
beds, large and small stones are mixed heterogeneously together 
without, in the typical deposits, any stratification or bedding in 
them or the clay. Water has undoubtedly been the motive power 
that has brought together these various materials ; but water as 
water has a wonderful sorting faculty. The fine particles are 
carried farthest, the coarser portions to a less distance, whilst 
larger blocks travel but a little way comparatively from their parent 
home, until from some cause or other they are broken up, and 
their constituent parts travel farthest in inverse proportion to their 
size. Water as water cannot have laid down a deposit of the 
finest mud interspersed with huge boulders. We are therefore 
driven to assume that ice must have been the proximate cause of 
the formation. This explanation, however inevitable, by no means 
clears away our difficulties ; we are but landed amongst phenomena 
which are in general most difficult of elucidation, and in many 
cases have as yet received very unsatisfactory solutions. 

When the glacial origin of these deposits was first surmised, 
it was, I believe, generally assumed that they were the remains of 
icebergs which had melted in the respective localities. But this 
hypothesis proved highly unsatisfactory. It required immense 
depressions of the land to allow of the flotation of the icebergs, 
which in many instances could scarcely be granted. Icebergs in 
general contain an infinitesimal proportion of debris, quite in- 



93 

sufficient to account for the enormous European and American 
deposits of boulder clay on any reasonable grounds. If icebergs 
brought the stones from the Arctic Circle, they evinced a most 
extraordinary reflective power, as they invariably deposited their 
burden of rocks where counterparts could be obtained /// situ in 
not distant localities. As the iceberg theory is thus untenable, we 
are compelled to assume that the Boulder Clay deposits owe their 
origin inore or less to land ice, which we must now examine. 

Undoubtedly there was a time, geologically speaking not long 
ago, when a great portion of Europe was swathed in ice. Some 
astronomical geologists think that such epochs occur in cycles, 
and fancy that it may be possible to predict the period when our 
beautiful Lake Country will once more be sealed with a coating of 
ice, and when England will be as desolate as the interior of Green- 
land is now. Happily this is placed so far in the future that we 
need not personally make a trouble of the matter. We may 
calmly examine the data of the past by the light of the little 
knowledge we possess of what is now going on in the cold polar 
latitudes. We are in a tolerably warm cycle now. The ice, 
which enveloped a great portion of the British Islands, North 
Germany, Switzerland, Italy, and perhaps France, has shrunk till 
the glaciers of the highest mountains are alone left for our 
examination, and to study it thoroughly we must go far away to 
the northwards, where physical difficulties present insurmountable 
obstacles to exhaustive investigations. The same circumstances 
have taken place in the southern hemisphere. Great as are the 
obstacles to examination in the north, they are as nothing when 
compared with those which are encountered in the southern polar 
regions. Beyond the facts that the cold is intense, that a conti- 
nent is buried beneath ice, and that great ice barriers exist for 
hundreds of miles, our knowledge is too vague and superficial to 
warrant any scientific deductions being drawn, which could be 
utilized in our present enquiry. Although more is known about 
the Arctic Circle, yet it is but very little ; and for information as 
to the action of land ice, perhaps Greenland is the country whence 
we may best derive data suitable for our purpose. But our know- 



94 

ledge is very limited, and we must be careful not to assume too 
much from observations that may not be entirely accurate. 

It is known that Greenland, speaking generally, is covered 
with one vast mantle of ice, which in places attains enormous 
thickness. Snow falling inland is converted sooner or later into 
ice, and the drainage of the country is carried on by means of an 
unceasing downward motion of the ice towards the sea ; but in 
thus acting, hills are crossed over, and valleys filled to an extra- 
ordinary degree, so that the upper surface of the ice is comparatively 
level, as compared with the actual contour of the country. As the 
ice sweeps down to the coast it will be thinner on the high ground, 
assuming that it covers the crests, but the valleys will be filled up 
with ice to a depth that we can hardly appreciate. As the huge 
streams of ice, which may be two thousand feet thick, come down 
to the shore, they press onwards over the sea-bottom. The farther 
they go, the greater is the inclination of this seaward portion to rise 
to the surface, owing to the greater lightness of ice as compared 
with water, until the moment finally arrives, more frequently in the 
summer, when the cohesion of the mass fails, enormous fragments 
break off, rise in the water, and float away to melt on the banks of 
Newfoundland. Any examination of these bergs is a difficult 
matter ; but we may assume that though they frequently contain 
considerable quantities of rock materials, yet, comparatively, this 
amount must be very trifling. Grottoes in Swiss glaciers show the 
ice almost free from visible impurities, and we may well believe 
that Greenland icebergs are no less pure than Swiss glaciers. 
Nevertheless, though the ice be clear as crystal, and though we 
know nothing at present as to deposits forming in front of these 
ice sheets, there must be enormous denudation going on, caused 
by the unceasing movement over the surface of the land of its icy 
shroud, ever scraping off irregularities, and rounding every pro- 
tuberance. If we attempt to imagine this ice action in Greenland, 
we may perhaps suppose that it has so long continued, that most 
of the irregularities are now planed off", and that the work of the 
ice will be mainly confined to grinding the rounded or level 
surfaces of the rocks. Weathering will doubtless bring down 



95 

immense blocks from mountains too precipitous to allow of the 
accumulation of snow or ice, and these would travel down the 
glacial valleys in the form of moraines ; but the quantity must be 
relatively small, and the question may be raised whether stones 
can travel any distance along glaciers and escape falling into the 
crevasses. There is also great waste along the sea-cliffs, as is seen 
in the so-called "ice-foot," or masses of ice, perhaps, partially, 
frozen sea water, which adhere to the lo'wer margin of the cliffs 
and become laden with stones, broken off from above by the 
action of frost. But these losses of the land are comparatively of 
little account, and we may conclude that a country such as Green- 
land, completely clothed in ice, must be suffering far less from 
atmospheric action than any land, even in the most favoured 
climes, which is exposed altogether. There is then to be con- 
sidered the scraping action of the ice sheet, which must be 
enormous to a degree beyond our comprehension in the earlier 
portion of a glacial epoch. We may suppose that where this 
action is long continued, the denudation must very materially 
decrease, when once all the asperities have been worn off, and the 
work of the ice is confined to grinding the rounded surface of the 
subjacent rock. 

We have now arrived at another stage in our enquiry. In 
what form is the material carried away by the ice, and in what 
manner is the transit effected? We will first consider the stones 
that fall down crevasses. What becomes of these? It has been 
suggested that stones which from this cause become embedded in 
the ice, gradually rise in the glacier and appear once more at the 
surface. This seems a very hazardous conjecture, and if it were 
true, the surface of glaciers should be pitted over with stones just 
emerging into daylight from the bosom of the ice. We know that 
such is not the case. Neither can the stones retain a horizontal 
position, as the ice at the end of glaciers is free from impurities, 
whether stones or dirt. But the vast heaps of moraine matter 
which fall down crevasses must go somewhere ; and if the rocks 
neither rise again, nor remain horizontal, they must sink to the 
bottom, either to be ground into an impalpable powder, or to form 



96 

a bottom bedding to the ice, and if this latter theory proved to be 
true we might here have the origin of many of the rocks in the 
boulder clay. 

We may perhaps take it for granted that an ice cap causes 
immense denudation, but it may not be so easy to describe the 
Jtiodus operandi. In what form is the material ground off? We 
cannot examine the foot of the Greenland land ice, but we can do 
this with the more accessible Swiss glaciers, from the end of which 
usually rushes a thick turbid stream, holding in suspension a large 
amount of mineral matter. We may perhaps suppose that as the 
ice crushes over the rocks, grinding off infinitesimal portions, most 
of the debris is carried away by the streams which it is thought are 
at least not uncommon beneath the ice ; or if the theory were true 
that stones rise in glaciers, why should not the impalpable powder, 
which has not lost its specific gravity by grinding, be pressed by 
the weight of the superincumbent ice into various interstices, and 
rise slowly to the surface ; but this supposition is negatived by the 
crystal clearness of the ice, wherever examined beneath the surface. 
It might be that the worn off material accumulates between the ice 
and the rock in the form of a fine mud. This mud might to a limited 
extent be collected in the hollows or places where temporarily the 
main pressure might not be, but would always be liable to be 
carried forwards and downwards, never remaining permanently 
stationary. It scarcely seems possible that this layer of mud could 
accumulate to any thickness. If such were the case the grinding 
action would cease, as the mud would protect the subjacent rock. 
A greater difficulty even is to suppose conditions which would 
allow of ice two thousand, or even two hundred, feet thick, resting 
on soft clay and yet not scouring it out, so that the ice should once 
more rest on its rocky bed. This last proposition may sound 
plausible, but if we grant it, shall we not, of necessity, have to 
reject the prevalent opinion that boulder clay was formed beneath 
land ice, though it is very difficult to picture circumstances when 
such a formation could take place. The boulder clay is, however, 
an actual fact, and the more mysterious its origin, the more in the 
nature of things shall we unceasingly attempt to solve its presence. 



97 

It appears to show evidence of having been subjected to great 
pressure. We know of nothing except this ancient ice cap, which 
could have exerted this pressure, yet we can scarcely consistently 
allow that if this shroud of ice has the power to smooth every 
protuberance, to widen and deepen valleys, and even grind out 
immense lake basins, that with still greater facility it would not 
carry with it all loose non-compact matter, and prevent any such 
accumulation except in protected hollows. So many of our 
difficulties would be removed if we could only see the formation 
of boulder clay going on. We may examine limestones, sandstones, 
and slates in their most incipient stages ; but though such immense 
areas are covered with boulder clay, and doubtless deposits are 
now being made, yet there is not one authenticated case of boulder 
clay having been seen in process of formation, nor has it ever been 
noticed in siti),, with ice in whatever form resting upon it. It is 
nearly always impossible to examine in the smallest degree the 
lower portions of glaciers or of sheets of ice ; but so far as has 
been observed, it is not known that anything intervenes between 
them and the subjacent rock, with the possible exception in a few 
cases of an assumed "pavement," or consolidated bed of rolled 
stones. Then in examining glaciated countries, the smooth 
rounded contours, with the striated markings on the polished 
rocks, are surely more probably the results of the passage over 
them of enormous volumes of ice, containing isolated embedded 
stones which would account for the striae, rather than that a 
confused bed of clay and stones had been dragged across the 
surface by the unceasing movement of the restless mass above. It 
is possible when land ice descends from high ground and debouches 
on a level plain, that its progress may be much checked and its 
speed much lessened, which would necessitate that the ice on the 
lower levels should thicken correspondingly, and that thus in some 
way a deposit beneath might be formed ; but even this supposition 
is fraught with many difficulties, and may hardly be tenable. 
However slowly the ice moved, it still would move, and the under- 
lying clay with it. If so, we should have this further question to 
deal with. It is believed that during the glacial epoch there were 



98 

several centres of ice action ; that the Scandinavian mountains 
sent out huge streams that flowed in one continuous sheet into the 
Baltic, invading North Germany, and spreading along the floor of 
the North Sea until it coalesced with the land ice proceeding from 
the various mountain groups of the British Isles, till at last, with 
the possible exception of portions of high ground, Scandinavia and 
Britain, with part of Germany, were enveloped in the same shroud 
of ice. Were this the case — and the evidence is very strong — and 
we grant that boulder clay forms beneath the ice and is carried 
along with it, at the warm latitude where the latter melted, there 
would have been prodigious accumulations of debris, gathered 
indiscriminately from the Arctic Circle, Scandinavia, and Britain : 
but none such exist. What then became of the Scandinavian 
debris, if it did not intermingle with the spoils of the British 
Islands 1 

In this hasty review of some of the main features of glacial 
action, our chief impression must be how little we know, and in 
what numberless directions research may be made ; but we have 
chiefly considered matters which refer either to distant ages, or to 
far off lands, which are beyond our observations. Let us now 
examine the boulder clay formation as we find it in our own day, 
the product of forces we are not yet able to explain, and about 
whose origin, though amongst the newest of geological records, we 
know less than of some of the most ancient of rocks. The boulder 
clay varies in colour and composition, according to the general 
characteristics of the neighbouring hills, but its mode of occurrence 
seems fairly constant. It consists of either one or two beds of 
true boulder clay, with various deposits of sand and gravel. The 
lower beds are usually more compact than the upper ones, and 
more highly charged with stones; but this is not an invariable rule. 
Occasionally sections occur where a greater or less thickness may 
be seen, where there is little clay except in the interstices of what 
appears a compressed mass of stones. There are, however, 
no characteristics which definitely indicate respectively what are 
termed by the Geological Survey the Upper and Lower Boulder 
Clays; and in the memoir for South-West Lancashire, it is acknow- 



9{) 

ledged that where there are no sand or gravel beds, it is extremely 
difficult to determine their respective horizons. Sometimes the 
boulder clay may be slightly stratified, but usually there is not the 
remotest appearance of stratification, the stones being mixed pell- 
mell in the clay without the slightest order, and they are almost 
invariably either rounded or sub-angular, and not infi-equently are 
scored with glacial striae. The sand and gravel beds intercalated 
with the boulder clay, occur with great fire^juency, and often with 
considerable constancy. They are assumed by probably a large 
majority of geologists, to occur both above and below true boulder 
clay, and have thus been termed Middle Drifts. They are very 
complex in their characteristics, often contain fossil remains of 
warmer than Arctic types, and present extreme difficulties in many 
respects. If we grant that there are two deposits of undoubted 
boulder clay, the product in each case of the extremest cold, 
during which the country was enveloped in an ice sheet that must 
have stifled all life, except the most hyperboreal forms ; and that 
these two epochs were separated by a period of milder climate of 
sufficient duration to allow of the immigration of numerous forms 
of life, which during the preceding glacial epoch could not have 
existed in any near vicinity, we are compelled to grant an enormous 
period of time, and such immense physical changes, as we are 
only warranted in doing on the most indisputable evidence. I fear 
that in geological matters we are too ready to assume on the 
slightest pretext gigantic changes, that could only occur after the 
lapse of incalculable ages ; possibly the simplest geology is the 
best, and more extended research and greater knowledge will 
undoubtedly tend to abolish theories which constantly require 
cataclysms, and to substitute in their place the slow silent agencies 
which we may see every day at work. We have some slight 
evidence in the earlier stone-records of other glacial epochs, but we 
have no foundation to assume that there were many of them, and 
we should be very careful as to our evidence before we affirm that 
there were two glacial periods, comparatively speaking, close 
together, and in the very latest chapter of geological history. If 
boulder clay formation could be proved to be the product of one 



100 

glacial epoch, matters to that extent would be much simplified, 
and it may be wise in our explorations if we ask ourselves whether 
the observations we may make will not fit in with the more simple, 
as well as with the most complex theories. Doubtless these so- 
called Middle Drifts are most difficult of explanation, so much the 
more must we patiently examine them, and not be too ready to 
draw rash conclusions. They have already given rise to innume- 
rable discussions and disputations, whilst the most opposite theories 
have been derived from them. In Ireland some members of the 
Geological Survey think that the Boulder Clay in that country may be 
divided in such a manner that it may only be necessary to assume 
one glacial epoch, which was succeeded by warmer conditions, 
with the sea at higher levels, and that this period was that to which 
we must attribute the so-called Middle Drifts, whilst in addition 
there is much moraine matter due to local glaciers from the high 
ground. If the results of years of study in Ireland have led to 
these conclusions, may we not hope that the same may be the 
case later on in England, especially when we remember that the 
author of the Geological Survey memoir for the south of our own 
district acknowledges the extreme difficulty of determining over 
large areas whether the so-called upper deposits are Upper or 
Lower Boulder Clay. Doubtless in Furness there is the appear- 
ance of sand and gravel beds separating the Boulder Clay into 
two great divisions, but no palseontological evidence has yet been 
adduced in support, and it may be that as in Ireland we may have 
a threefold division, and that in our district what has been taken 
to be the Upper Clay may partly be of moraine origin, and partly, 
with the underlying gravels and sands, may be the work of the sea, 
re arranging the old boulder clay beneath, tliough this suggestion 
would be difficult to reconcile with our present knowledge. There 
is here room for much study, and I believe that there are not a 
few students who are ready to work on the subject, and we must 
hope that the result will be that within a few years the tangled 
history of this portion of the past will be unravelled, when we 
shall see the true bearing of these disputed beds. Clearly 
there is much to learn, when even the origin of the deposit is 



101 

undetermined, and we have to seek for a hypothesis that shall 
account for the formation of beds of great thickness of finely- 
comminuted clay, enclosing incalculable quantities of rounded or 
sub-angular boulders. The clay we might believe to be the product 
of the grinding action of ice, but we know of no glacial influences 
that would cause the boulders to be rounded, an effect solely due 
to marine or fluviatile agency ; but rivers can have had no share 
in this instance, and we are left to look to the sea alone for an 
explanation. Is it possible that when this vast accumulation was 
brought down from the high ground, that the ice came down to 
the sea, which in this district was, at the beginning of the formation, 
at a lower level than now? that the mud ground off the rocks was 
deposited in a zone near the shore, which was constantly sinking?, 
and that the rocks and stones, brought down as moraine matter 
were, before their final entombment, subjected to the rounding 
action of the sea? If this process were continued, and the land 
sank to the great degree that is assumed by most writers, but little 
would be left above water, and i^erforce the deposit of glacial 
matter would nearly cease as the country sank beneath the waves, 
which would melt its icy covering. Then may have been formed 
the sand and gravel beds, the result of the sea disintegrating the 
previously deposited boulder clay, and re-arranging the materials. 
But the movement of the land changed, the period of subsidence 
was ended ; and slowly our mountains once more emerged from 
the sea ; as they did so, they would present more and more surface 
for the formation of glaciers and land ice, but the cold epoch was 
on the wane, and though the land rose to a degree nearly equal to 
the subsidence, the coating of ice never reached its former 
dimensions; still it could produce prodigious efifects, and the 
so-called Upper Boulder Clay may be its witness. This theory 
practically harmonizes with the results mentioned as having been 
worked out in Ireland, and does away with the necessity of 
assuming two glacial epochs. 

In studying the Boulder Clay formation, there are perhaps few 
districts that offer so many advantages as our own north-west coast. 
I do not know whether the members of the AVhitehaven Scientific 

s 



Association have done much work in this direction, or whether 
they have left their President alone in his explorations ; but in our 
Furness district, until t^velve months ago, no one appears to have 
given the formation the least attention, or if the Survey officers 
have worked upon it, the results of their labours have been carefully 
hidden in the archives of their Department. The neighbourhood 
of Barrow is singularly favourable for making examinations ; the 
formation is not one that is ever commercially explored, except for 
subsidiary reasons, and therefore with the chief exception of railway 
cuttings, we have to depend on the sea shore for sections, and in 
most places there will not be more than a dozen miles of beach 
within half a dozen miles ; but at Barrow, in consequence of the 
configuration of the land, giving us Morecambe Bay on one side, 
the estuary of the Duddon on the other, and to seaward the long 
island of Walney, with other smaller islands, we have within half a 
dozen miles probably forty miles of coast, — thus "we have most 
exceptional opportunities for exploring the Boulder Clay and its 
accompanying beds, which a number of the members of the Barrow 
Field Club, who are working conjointly on the subject, propose to 
take advantage of. When this joint action was first proposed 
last winter, it was more with the object of working on the contained 
boulders, rather than on the formation as a whole ; but the field 
has widened at every step, and new subjects crop up in endless 
succession. Our first work, however, was with the boulders, to 
endeavour to find out their origin. Their variety was so amazing, 
and there were such numbers which at first we did not recognize, 
that most of our time has been occupied with these rocks, collecting 
them in their various forms and correlating them as far as possible 
with the rocks of the district. This was no easy matter; the 
boulders lie scattered in such absolute confusion, of many ages, 
and of the most varied composition, that a stranger would deem it 
impossible that such could all have had an approximately local 
derivation, and might hastily assume that the iceberg theory would 
most easily account for this extraordinary assortment of rocks. 
We determined as far as possible to collect every variety of 
boulder that could be found, distinguishing between loose 



103 

boulders from the shore and those in siiA in the clay, and at 
the same time making ourselves acquainted, as far as we could, 
with the rocks in situ in the district. We do not pretend, of 
course, that we have accomplished all this ; we are, indeed, only 
on the threshold as yet; but so far as we have gone, we have not 
found amongst all these slates, limestones, granites, and traps, any 
rock that may not have been derived from the Lake district, with 
the single exception of what, for convenience we will term — 
vermiculitic granite. To prove the proximate derivation of the 
mass of boulders, it was very desirable, if possible, to find any 
that should possess such marked characteristics that there should 
be no question as to their origin; we therefore considered the 
vermiculitic granite as of special value in this respect, though as 
yet we have not been able to trace it to its parent rock. You will 
see from the specimens exhibited, that it might easily be mistaken 
for ordinary granite containing black mica, and it was almost by 
accident that the curious properties of some of the black crystals 
were discovered. The mineral was too uncommon and peculiar 
for us to bring it forward publicly, without having upon it more 
than local opinion. I sent specimens to the late Mr. David Forbes, 
and received from him, only a few days before his lamented death 
last year, a long letter, in which he stated his impressions that the 
mineral was a vermiculite, but if so, it was previously unknown to 
Great Britain ; he thought the subject to be of considerable interest, 
and intended to have continued his investigations. After his death 
I took other specimens to the British Museum, where nothing was 
known as to any similar mineral having been discovered in Great 
Britain. It has now been found in several localities near Barrow, 
and also by members of our Field Club near Millom and at 
Nethertown. The granite in which it is contained is usually 
friable and partially disintegrated, or it may be that unless the 
granite be in this condition, the vermiculite is not so easily 
recognized. Possibly the Ennerdale district may be the home of 
this rock, yet if so, it is strange that the vermiculite has not been 
detected in sitA by some of your Cumberland savants ; but if this 
assumption as to locality be correct, I trust another summer will 



104 

settle the question. If this rock prove to be Cumbrian, it will be 
the strongest proof that we can offer as to the local derivation of 
the Boulder Clay, and should serve as another argument against 
the iceberg theory, that assumes that our district was a grand 
rendezvous for ancient bergs, which here melted and deposited 
their solid contents borne from the ice-fields of the Arctic circle ; 
though this theory has received well-nigh a death-blow from the 
elaborate work of the Scotch Geological Survey, which has proved 
that the boulders in the deposits in that country are derived from 
the two great mountain districts of the north and south 
respectively, each within their own boundaries, except in a zone 
running across the central districts of the valleys of the Clyde and 
Forth, where the two great glacial systems coalesced, and where 
boulders from the north and from the south are intermingled. 

We have scarcely begun the examination of the so-called 
Middle Drifts, deeming them perhaps the most difficult part of our 
work, and that it would be wiser to take first the simpler branches; 
and we find no lack of subjects, for the more we have done the more 
we see there is to do ; or in other words — the more we have 
learned, the more we find we do not know ; at every turn some- 
thing fresh crops up, often leading far away into other fields of 
science. I do not doubt but that it will be found that these drift 
beds are, in Furness, a very difficult subject, as they are 
frequently of wide extent and of considerable thickness; as a 
sample may be taken, a very fine section of gravel south of Furness 
Abbey, about forty feet high, which is slightly stratified, and 
contains, in certain zones, large quantities of Red Hematite at a 
much greater altitude than any known deposit of that mineral in 
Furness ; and I may here mention that we have found Hematite 
in several other localities several miles from the nearest known 
deposits, and occasionally in comparatively large quantities within 
small areas. If our Boulder Clay owed its origin to icebergs, it is 
indeed a strange vicissitude of fortune that large numbers of 
pebbles of a mineral so rare in quantity as Red Hematite, should 
be brought from the frozen north, to be cast on the shores of 
Cumberland and Furness ! 



105 

One branch of the subject that we have had much under 
observation, is the travelling of the boulders, and this, again, opens 
out in various directions. The extent to which the boulders will 
travel, owing to marine action and the set of currents is of 
necessity very obscure, and here we have more negative than 
positive evidence. For instance, we cannot watch a boulder in 
its submarine course, but if we find that certain classes of rocks 
never occur beyond certain limits, though the currents may be 
favourable, we may fairly assume that the rocks are not hard enough 
to bear the disintegrating process of the journey. Take for 
example, an extreme case, which maybe studied at St. Bees; doubtless 
large numbers of boulders of red sandstone set out southwards from 
St. Bees Head, but they are too friable to bear the wear and tear 
of even a short journey, and few sur\dve the first mile of the route 
except in the form of sand, when their origin would become 
problematical. I believe it is not yet known definitely to what 
distance boulders travel on this north-west coast. Have for 
instance, all the loose boulders on our shores been derived from 
the boulder clay, or have some portion of them travelled by marine 
agency? We have an immense proportion of Eskdale granite 
which gives rise to several questions — Did the boulder clay 
originally contain so large a proportion of these stones.? or has 
their hardness preserved them whilst their brethren have been 
disintegrated ? Have some or any of these travelled from Raven- 
glass? Again, is there a general roll southwards along the 
Cumbrian shore? and is the Eskdale granite the best fitted to 
withstand the wearing influences encountered ? 

We would thus require to assume that a predominance of 
boulders of one class does not represent their original proportions 
but merely their superior hardness, which quality alone determines 
their longevity. All these are questions much easier asked than 
answered, and much observation will be needed to settle the points 
definitely. In reference to this part of the subject, it would be very 
desirable to know the various proportions of the rocks forming the 
boulders at points all along the coast, but so far the Barrow Field 
Club have not begun the collection of these data. 



106 

The question whether or not there is a general tendency of 
the boulders to travel southwards, is a matter of practical importance 
to us at Barrow, in reference to the harbour and the means necessary 
to keep the entrance clear for shipping. On the Cumberland 
coast, the extraordinary bank thrown up by the river Ehen, between 
itself and the sea, would appear to indicate that there is at least at 
that point a tendency southwards ; though in opposition to this 
the Esk and the Annas have their banks facing to the north. The 
origin of the bank of the Ehen south of Braystones might perhaps 
be due to the configuration of the coast, in that when the sea rolls 
in against the cliffs, particularly during storms, the back water has 
to escape in the direction of least resistance, which happens to be 
the south, towards the point where the Ehen is emerging from its 
ancient delta or estuary, and the struggle between the sea and the 
river, meeting at an acute angle, might originate the bank ; but it 
is difficult to see that these causes constantly acting, only at a 
point moving southwards, would prolong the bank to so great a 
distance as two miles. On the west coast of Walney there can be 
no doubt as to the boulders travelling to the south, as there is a 
remarkable annual increase of sixteen feet at the south end of the 
island, the material being derived from its more northern portions. 
The accumulation of boulders is enormous, and they lie in huge 
ridges like the waves of a stormy sea ; very many acres are perfectly 
bare, without any vegetation or any sand or gravel in their in- 
terstices. They form an arm at right angles to the general trend 
of the island, the greater portion being covered by sand dunes ; 
and as the accretion is so rapid, combined with other circumstances, 
I have come to the conclusion that this angle is extremely modem, 
possibly, or rather probably, not more than three or four centuries 
old. There is not the time now to state all the reasons for this 
conclusion, which I stated fully in an address given last month to 
the Barrow Field Club ; but my general argument was that Walney 
Channel was the ancient course of the Duddon, and that Walney 
was then joined to Cumberland ; were this suggestion to be correct, 
light is thrown on the location of Piel Castle, which doubtless was 
a fortress of great strength, and would scarcely have been built 



107 

where it is, if its relative position formerly had been as at present 
Further, if this assumption were true, Walney Island forms a 
parallel, but on a larger scale, to the bank of the Ehen, and if so, 
it may prove that this large island is not true boulder clay, but 
that it owes its origin to marine and fluviatile action, or as has 
been suggested, there may have been small islands of boulder clay 
which have been joined by drift deposits. 

In giving these particulars as to what is known or suspected 
as to the Boulder Clay formation, it must not be supposed that a 
tithe has been related ; merely some of the most salient points 
have been noticed; I have also omitted all mention of many 
matters intimately connected with the subject, such as the astro- 
nomical theories to account for the supposed cycles of extreme 
cold through which the earth passes, as these suppositions are 
somewhat vague as yet, and depend upon abstruse calculations 
that future discoveries may prove erroneous. Neither have I 
referred to the palaeontological evidence as to the arctic condition 
of our climate, which is of the utmost importance, and may be 
taken as absolutely demonstrated. Nor have I given any particu- 
lars as to the so-called erratics or huge boulders, often of enormous 
dimensions, found scores of miles from their parent home, separated 
it may be by high ridges and possibly lying on the summits of high 
ground ; their evidence is of immense value in investigations as 
to glacial action, and their position may be due to icebergs, 
or floating ice, of the period intermediate between the so-called 
Upper and Lower glacial epochs. Nor must we forget to make a 
passing reference to the subject of the Antiquity of Man, on which, 
in reference to the Boulder Clay formation, there has been such 
fierce discussion and such angry contention. All these are subjects 
that in themselves are sufficient for an illimitable number of 
papers. 

In conclusion, I must apologize to you for the manner in 
which the subject of my paper is brought before you. But I have 
intentionally departed from the usual custom of attempting to 
explain everything. I may have erred on the other side ; but my 
object has been to present the various matters touched upon in such 



108 

a light that you will feel they are inherently of great interest, and 
that very little is really known about them. Hard defined theories 
are stated positively, which often do not agree with each other, or 
with the most ordinary observations, and men of equal eminence 
hold absolutely opposite ideas on some of the fundamental points 
we have had under review. Our subject is one which must be 
treated broadly, and, above all, not from merely local standpoints. 
Observations at one place alone might give rise to the most 
fallacious opinions, and the facts collected in the most widely 
separated districts or countries must all be carefully weighed. 

I do not doubt but that much remains to be discovered on 
this north-west coast, as to these Boulder Clay deposits, and the 
most effectual way to acquire the greatest amount of knowledge as 
to the formation, in the shortest time, and with the least expendi- 
ture of unnecessary labour, would perhaps be a properly organized 
examination by the members of this Association and of the Barrow 
Field Club. The purpose of this paper would indeed be accom- 
plished if it should be the means of producing joint action between 
the two Societies, thus work would be economized and mutual 
assistance rendered in these explorations, which probably might lead 
to most valuable discoveries. If we work alone, we each may be 
wasting our strength where the other has been before, whilst if we 
both are aware of what each has decyphered of the dim records of 
the icy past, the result could not fail to be a confirmation of the 
old proverb that Union makes Strength. 



109 



SUBMERGED FOREST AT ST. BEES. 

By R. Pickering, C.E. 

(Read at IVhitehavm.) 

The submarine forest at St. Bees is situated on the sea shore 
nearly opposite to Sea Mill, stretching south-west from that place 
and diagonally from the coast line. Some years ago I noticed two 
small patches of peat bed on the shore, about four hundred yards 
northward and nearer Sea Cote. These patches of vegetable 
matter are, however, usually covered up with sand. Although a 
connection with the forest was not very evident, it occurred to me 
that, should the small patches of peat bed referred to, be a 
continuation of the forest, and if they underlaid the drift of which 
the adjoining cliff is composed, the deposit would be of great 
antiquity, and preglacial. My geological friends held various 
opinions on the matter, as well as to whether the forest was really 
a forest in sitd, or an accumulation of drift wood and other 
vegetable matter, such as is now forming on a large scale in the 
embouchures of the Missisippi. I felt inclined to attempt a 
solution of the problem. 

The forest extends, with a dip seawards, for about six 
hundred yards, between the lines of high and low water-mark, and 
still continues to dip under water. The width varies from forty to 
seventy yards. Fully three-fourths of this surface is thinly covered 
with gravel and boulders, yet these are of sufficient thickness 
to prevent the forest being observed by persons previously 
unaware of its existence. A considerable portion has been 
denuded, and the process is still continuing. Seven bore holes 
were put down through the remaining stratum ; the thickness varied 



110 

from two feet to five feet six inches. The vegetable matter is 
underlaid in places by a varying stratum of light blue clay, about 
one foot thick, in a great measure analagous in composition to 
the fire-clay beds often found under coal in the neighbouring coal- 
fields. One of the bore holes was put down at the edge of the 
shingle, five feet six inches deep ; and immediately the vegetable 
deposit was perforated, water rose up to the surface. This was an 
important aid : it proved that the impervious vegetable stratum 
underlaid the shingle to a sufficient distance landwards to connect 
it with the stratum seen in the river bed of the valley of St. Bees. 
Along the greater part of the submerged south-east boundary, the 
forest lies on the thick red clay bed which underlies the drift 
of the escarpment to the south-east ; its opposite margin, however, 
was not nearly so clearly defined. 

On a consideration of the whole case, I am decidedly of 
opinion that the forest does not underlie the true glacial deposit 
adjoining, and that it is continuous up the St. Bees valley, as far 
as Stanley Pond, and even further, and that it lies under most of 
the flat or meadow portion of the valley. The underclay is 
succeeded by huge prostrate trees and roots, and then by decayed 
plants and peaty matter. A transverse section of the forest 
would present a concave line at the bottom, and this line indicates 
the eroded surface, resulting from long continued ice action during 
the glacial period. The underclay would be produced from the 
waste and decomposition of the rocks forming the hilly ground at 
the head and sides of the valley. It is probable that the lower 
part of the then valley would be partially blocked up, as the clay 
is lacustrine in character, yielding under the microscope the 
following species of Diatomaceoe : Epathemia turgida, Epathemia 
granulata, Epathemia proboscidia, Pinnularia acuta, and frag- 
ments of other species of this genus. These are all fresh water 
organisms, and all existing now in this neighbourhood, except the 
Epathemia granulata, which is peculiar to the Irish Bogs. A 
fragment of a marine species ( Cositiodiscus punctata ) was found, 
but this would seem to have been an introduction from the present 
sea. The submarine forest, as it is called, is really a forest in sit'd. 



Ill 

Clusters of roots of trees in an upright position may be seen. Oak, 
Alder, Birch, Fir, Willow and Hazel Trees have taken root and 
flourished in the underclay, and in turn decayed and been over- 
run with rank moss growth, along with gigantic reeds, and remains 
generally of lacustrine flora. Along the valley of St. Bees, some 
twenty years ago, the river was diverted from its then bed, or 
course, and a new course made. Wood, hazel-nuts, and other seeds 
were found in abundance under the alluvial soil, and peat may yet 
be clearly seen, opposite to Blythe Place in the river bed. Most 
of the Oak trees are very sound. The forest having fairly been 
established, as time sped on, the trees decayed and were covered 
up with decaying leaves and other vegetable debris, forming peat. 
This was ultimately surmounted by alluvial soil, the waste from 
the adjoining higher lands. With regard to the epoch of depo- 
sition, we have no means of measuring geological time in years and 
centuries, it is merely relative. We can, at the most, but say that 
one series of deposits is of earlier date than another series, or vice 
versa ; and the terms early and recent, should be understood to be 
so only in a geological sense. 

I think we may fairly class the "forest bed" and its under- 
clay as belonging to the lowest division of the post tertiary or 
recent system, and consider it to be co-eval with the existence of 
the Irish Elk, the mammoth, and the long-fronted ox (all now 
extinct), and Man himself Indeed it is quite probable that 
primeval man may have hunted the Irish Elk in the forest glades 
of this epoch, just as his compeer now hunts the buffalo on the 
prairies of the Far West. 

The geological importance of these deposits is principally due 
to the aid they render in arriving at correct deductions as to the 
means whereby beds of lignite, coal, and clays of the earlier 
epochs have been formed. In this case a piece of greenstone 
was found embedded in the forest. Some time ago, con- 
siderable discussion ensued in influential quarters respecting the 
origin of boulders, fragments of quartz, and other rocks found 
embedded in true coal. The conditions at St. Bees favouring 
denudation are opposed to the consolidation of the forest form- 



112 

ations into lignite. It will be obvious to you all that a covering-up 
process would be the favourable condition. 

This submarine forest growth implies a larger extension of the 
land formerly, and judging from the numerous recorded deposits 
along the coast, it may be fairly inferred that at no distant period 
a great part of the bed of the present Irish Sea was inhabited by 
the fauna, and adorned by the flora of the dawn of the present 
system. It is also evident that the climate was warmer and milder 
than at present. Trees would not now grow at Saint Bees at all 
approaching in size the giants entombed in the forest. It is possible 
that at that time Saint Bees might be many miles inland, and 
thoroughly sheltered ; it is, however, also probable that the gales 
from the south-west were of a milder type than at present. Peat 
is a product of cold and temperate regions, arising chiefly from the 
growth and decay of marsh plants — reeds, rushes, equisetums, 
grasses, sphagnums, confervoe, and the like, being the chief contri- 
butors to the mass. Peat moss has a tendency to accumulate in 
all swamps and hollows, and wherever stagnant water prevails, 
filling up hollows and lakes, choking up river courses, entombing 
fallen forests and spreading over every surface having moisture 
sufficient to cherish its growth. 

I make the following deductions, ist. That at or about the 
close of the Drift or Pleistocene epoch, the land about Saint Bees 
was elevated considerably higher than it is at present, and placed 
beyond the influence of sea currents. 2nd. That the climate also 
at the same time changed from its arctic intensity to a temperature 
somewhat warmer and milder than that we now enjoy, 3rd. That 
the land extended to the west and south-west to a very great 
extent. 4th. That from the close of the Drift period to the present 
time the sea has not flowed in the valley of Saint Bees, despite all 
legendary tales to the contrary. 5th. That after the deposition of 
the forest, peat, and part of the alluvium of the valley of Saint 
Bees, the land has been much lowered ; but whether such lowering 
is being continued at the present time, I cannot tell. 

I will endeavour briefly to explain the character of the drift, 
as is shown at the mouth of the valley in the cliffs and railway 



113 

cuttings. There is a saying that every valley has its own peculiar 
drift, composed for the most part of materials torn from the parent 
rocks at higher levels in the same valley, always, however, having 
some extraneous material brought from a distance. 

The valley of Saint Bees is an exception to some extent, 
inasmuch as a very considerable amount of the debris at Sea Mill 
has been brought from about Cleator Moor, Frizington, Weddi- 
car, &c., these neighbourhoods having other valley lines of their 
own. The deposits near Sea Mill, on botli sides of the forest, are 
of the roughest character imaginable, great blocks (both rounded 
and angular) of coal measure sandstones, AVhitehaven sandstone, 
Permian conglomerate, Saint Bees sandstone, shale, limestone 
(both Carboniferous and Permian), and almost every other 
conceivable description of rock, all accumulated in the most 
promiscuous manner. A peculiar kind of rock is found in the 
debris called Mussel Bed. This material is probably brought 
from about the Griffin Inn at Frizington, where it crops out. It 
forms one of the measures of the Cleator Moor coal field. At 
Wyndham Pit (now closed), within the yard of the Hematite 
Company, the bed is forty-three fathoms below the surface, and 
about seven fathoms below the Main Band of Coal. It is ift. gin. 
thick, and is a calcareous and ferruginous deposit, composed of 
shells resembling the fresh, water mussel or unio. This was at one 
time smelted at the Cleator Moor Works. It contains about 
twenty -five per cent, of iron. Some of the rock fragments have 
the well known glacial grooves or striations on them. 

Leaving Sea Mill, and proceeding towards the north along 
the sea cliff, we find the drift becoming finer and milder in type. 
It is, however, a strange agglomeration — clay, sand, and gravel, 
derived chiefly from its own valley line, shot down anywhere, and 
in any form, and in places partly rearranged by water in short 
lines. At the time of deposit, an immense amount of rounded 
coal has drifted, in such abundance as to form beds one foot in 
thickness and upwards, I have found this to hold good at New 
House Brow, in the Ehen valley. 

During this last winter, after the heavy tides had partly wasted 



114 

the rubbish away at Wellington Pit, I was struck with the resem- 
blance it bore to the appearance of the finer drift in these 
escarpments. It would appear that the material had been dropped 
into the sea by icebergs in masses, and then partly arranged by 
the currents. 

As we proceed to Sea Cote, still further northwards, the drift 
has been influenced by the Rottington Valley. The rocks from 
that valley being mostly Saint Bees sandstone (Permian), we have 
red clay and sandstone gravels predominating, but deposited as 
irregularly as before. 

I have omitted to describe the thick red conglomeratic clay, 
on which the rough drift reposes at Sea Mill. Its surface dips 
seawards, and is eroded into grooves evidently by ice action. 

A great deal of red sandstone debris exists in the clay, which 
rests on the Saint Bees sandstone, whose surface has been at some 
time exposed to the same denuding and grooving action. The 
flanks and head of the valley are comparatively clear of drift, if we 
except the Scalegill Valley, where there is an immense gut or gully 
filled with drift, between the red sandstone at Hole House and the 
carboniferous limestone at Shaw House, on the edge of Bigrigg 
Moor. If we allow this gut to have been filled subsequently to 
the moraine-like mounds at Sea Mill, we would have a clear and 
uninterrupted course for the wash or for the action of glaciers over 
the northern edge of the Cleator Moor coal field. This is the 
only explanation that seems plausible, and whereby we can 
account for Mussel Bed and other rocks in the drift found at Saint 
Bees. 

I would invite some of my audience to examine for themselves 
the cliff on the edge of the Keekle river, near Moor Row Engine 
Works, and also the railway cutting at Scalegill, in confirmation of 
this theory. 



This paper was illustrated by the aid of a model and sections of Saint 
Bees Valley, specimens of rocks from the drift, and organic remains from the 
vegetable matter. 



i 



115 



THEORY AND PRACTICE, IiM THEIR RELATION 
TO EACH OTHER. 

By J. D. Kendall, W. H, Kitchin, and J. Nixon. 

(Read at Whitehaven.) 



Mr. J. D. KENDALL'S PAPER. 

How frequently do we hear it said that a certain thing or 
operation is, or ought to be, so-and-so, according to theory, but 
that practically it is found to be something altogether different, as if 
the words theory and practice were the expressions of an incom- 
patibility. That they are held to be such by many we know very 
well, but I think wrongly so held ; in fact, I hope to be able to 
show in the course of these remarks that they are rather reciprocal 
parts of a unity — expressions of operations whose conjunction is 
essentially necessary for the useful and efficient effect of either of 
them. As, of course, the agreement or disagreement of theory 
and practice depend entirely upon the meaning which we attach 
to those words I shall, in the first place, state what that meaning 
is. In doing so I shall not trouble you with the definitions they 
received at the hands of the early Greeks, with whom they origin- 
ated, and by whom they were contrasted and placed in opposition, 
but I will rather go at once to the meaning which they have at 
present. For however useful and interesting it may be to know 
the origin and history of a word, it is, in my opinion, much more 
useful to know its meaning now. A theory then may be said to be 
an explanation of natural phenomena, founded on facts, which are 
known to be true, from evidence independent of those phenomena 



116 

or appearances. The word is, however, hke many of our other 
words, sometimes used in a very loose and indefinite sense, as, for 
instance, a man says, I have a theory that the heat of the sun is 
produced in such and such a way. Now, to me at least, it is quite 
clear that in so speaking he really means nothing more than that 
he has an opinion to that effect. Why he elects to dignify it with 
the name of a theory I cannot say, but so it is. Yet if the meaning 
of the word opinion be what I take it to be, that is, the uncertain 
judgment of the mind on any matter submitted to it, I think it 
must be clear to you all that, in the present state of science, the 
so-called theories of the sun's heat, as well as many other such 
theories, are really nothing more than opinions, which may be 
either right or wrong, as is the case with all opinions. If they are 
proved to be right, why they will be opinions no longer but facts ; 
if they are proved to be wrong they will be at once rejected. Now, 
what do we know about the sun, with all our knowledge of it, to 
enable us to say with certainty, that its heat is produced either this 
way or that way ? if but little, then our theories are only opinions 
with another name. The only definite sense in which the word 
theory is used, is where we say that the theory of a certain opera- 
tion or result is so-and-so. For instance, we say that the theory of 
the ascension of a column of water in a tube that has been 
exhausted of air, is — first, that water presses equally in all 
directions ; secondly, that action and reaction are equal ; and, 
thirdly, that at the sea level water is everywhere overlaid by a 
stratum of air which exerts on it a pressure of nearly fifteen pounds 
per square inch. These three stages in the explanation are facts 
which have been established independently, and from them it 
follows that if the atmospheric pressure on the water be anywhere 
removed, as it would be under an exhausted tube, since action and 
reaction are equal, and water presses equally in all directions, then 
the surface of the water under the tube being reheved of downward 
pressure must rise in that tube until the weight of the ascending 
cohimn is equal to the pressure of the air that has been removed. 
Now, every part of this explanation or theory is capable of 
demonstration, in other words can be shown to be a fact, and 



117 

therefore the whole of it is a fact. Whence follows the deduction, 
which to many may seem an anomaly, that a theory may be a fact, 
in short is a fact when the word is used in the definite sense in 
which I have now used it. Absurd as such a thing may seem, I 
nevertheless believe that the definition which leads to such an 
apparent anomaly is the true meaning of the word. Indeed, what 
other meaning are we to infer can be attached to it by those who 
put that most common question, "What is the theory of this?" 
It is not asked what is your theory of it or some one's else theory 
of it, but what is the theory of it. Now, in asking that question, 
what do they wish to know % Surely not that you think 
that the effect witnessed, which has led to the interrogation, may 
be the result of a certain cause, but that it is the result of some 
remote or mediate cause whose action you are able to point out. 
They wish to know the truth. In other words, they expect that 
your reply will be a fact. As to the meaning of the word practice 
when used conjunctively with theory, that is, in the sense in which 
I am now considering it, there is little difference of opinion ; it 
being held to be the actual performance or carrying out of an 
operation. 

With these definitions, let us now see what are the relations 
in which theory and practice stand towards each other. But let 
me remind you that I shall deal with theory in its definite sense, 
and not with that indefinite sense of it which is synonymous with 
opinion. 

The great majority of our acts and operations may be 
divided into two parts — thinking and doing. The deciding how 
we are to do, and then the doing of it. Upon our decision as to 
the how mainly depends the result of our work. If we decide 
rightly, our work may be finished as we wish it ; but if we decide 
wrongly, no amount of excellence in the manner of doing it will 
bring us to the desired result. It is clearly, therefore, of the 
greatest importance that before we commence to do, v/e should 
be right in our decision as to how we are to do. Our plan must 
be correct before we commence to carry it out. But how are we 
to know when it is correct ? How, amid the manifold properties 

9 



118 

of matter, the raw material with which we work, and amid the 
actions and interactions of what we call the physical forces, can we 
know what we are to do to arrive at any given result 1 Clearly but 
by the possession of a knowledge of those varied properties and 
actions. Now that knowledge, which is clearly so desirable, we 
call science, or when implying practice, theoretical knowledge — 
that is, the knowledge necessary to enable us to form theories or 
explanations of natural phenomena. We therefore arrive at the 
conclusion that to plan correctly we should be in possession of 
sound theoretical knowledge, or in other words — of a knowledge 
of those facts and abstract principles of nature which we call 
science. But planning is only one part of an operation. Our 
plans, to be useful, require carrying out, and for that purpose it is 
clear that we should possess a thorough knowledge of tools, of 
their use and application. Now that knowledge we call practice 
when we use the word in connection with theory, although it is 
sometimes used in that connection in the sense of experience, 
which is clearly wrong, because experience includes both thinking 
and doing, while practice has only reference to the latter. The 
relation in which theory and practice stand to each other — that is 
what we set out to find — is therefore that of planning and executing 
or thinking and doing, both of which operations are included in 
everyone of our works and actions that are not purely automatic. 

Theory and practice are therefore, what I said before, 
reciprocal parts of a unity — expressions of operations whose con- 
junction is essentially necessary for the useful and efficient effect 
of either of them. For as thinking is useless unless it be carried 
out in action, so is theory useless without practice. And as doing 
without thinking may result in a great waste of time, material, and 
energy, so may practice without theory. Moreover, as doing 
without thinking resembles the action of a machine, so practice 
without theory could not possibly be progressive, but would repeat 
itself again and again. The arts would at once come to a stand- 
still, and with them the whole moral and intellectual progress of 
man. Again, as we know of no doing that is not accompanied by 
some thinking, so there is no practice but is preceded by more or 



119 

less theory. And, further, as we know of much doing that follows 
inadequate thinking, so we see much practice that is the result of 
insufficient theory. But as that doing which is preceded by the 
greatest amount of thinking is most likely to be successful, so that 
practice which is accompanied by the greatest amount of theory 
will be most likely to attain the object it has in view, surely and 
economically. 

From the definition which I have given of practice — as the 
carrying out of an operation — it follows that a practical man is 
one whose business is practice, that is, one who attends to the 
doing, but has nothing whatever to do with the thinking which is 
required in any operation. Yet the common usage of the phrase 
"practical man" implies that he is one that both thinks and does, 
who both plans and executes. But surely that is a mistake. For 
we have seen that before a man can plan correctly he must be a 
theorist, whereas we know very well that there are hundreds — nay 
thousands — of so-called practical men who know very little about 
theory. The really practical man, as that phrase is usually under- 
stood, is one who knows both theory and practice ; who can think 
as well as do, plan as well as execute. As correct thinking and 
doing can never be antagonistic, so true theory and perfect practice 
must ever be in harmony. Whence then the alleged discrepancy 
between theory and practice'? Here, either from mistaking that 
for a theory which is not a theory at all, or from the imperfection 
of practice. With the former we have nothing to do, but in 
reference to the latter we know that there has frequently been an 
apparent discrepancy between theory and practice, owing to the 
inability of practice to imitate at first trial the model that theory 
has set before it. But when such a thing does occur, practice 
should not hastily condemn theory, as it has too often done ; it 
should rather remember that it is not itself pefect, and that there. 
fore many improvements may be necessary in its methods before 
it can attain that special one to which theory points. It should 
not forget that but a few years ago the common operations of our 
machine tools were reckoned unattainable. They were then 
theoretical. They arc now illustrations of the advantage which 



120 

practice reaps by following in the path of theory. Railways and 
all the ideas we associate with them existed a few years back but 
in theory, and the whole aggregate achievements of the steam- 
engine are but so much practice derived from the deductions of 
theory. 

In conclusion, let me give you one or two examples of the 
absurdities into which so-called practical men may be led from a 
want of that theoretical knowledge which they affect so much to 
despise. The action of the siphon has often been a source of 
surprise to these so-called practical men. They have noticed that 
before that instrument can be made to act, it is necessary that the 
end from which the water is discharged should be at a lower level 
than that at which it enters. From that they have concluded that 
if the difference of level be sufficiently increased, water can be 
made to run over any height whatever. Such an assertion I 
have heard often by men of no mean so-called practical abilities. 
Yet a very small amount of theoretical knowledge would speedily 
convince them that increase the difference of level of the ends of 
the pipe as we may, the water will only rise to a certain height. 
After repeated, it may be expensive, failures they learn that truth. 
Yet that is what is commonly called practice, but what I call 
groping about in the dark. Again, it may be known'^to most of 
you, that on some pit cages there is fixed a contrivance for the 
purpose of preventing the fall of the cage should the rope break. 
A common form of the apparatus is for two pairs of levers or 
eccentrics to be fixed to the cage so as to be on opposite sides of 
each guide. These levers or eccentrics are actuated by springs, 
which are connected with the rope that is used to raise and lower 
the cage. When the weight of the cage is on the rope, the action 
of the springs is taken off the eccentrics or levers ; but immediately 
the weight of the cage is taken off the rope, as for instance when 
the rope breaks, then the springs act on the eccentrics or lever, 
causing them to grip the guides, and thereby stop the cage from 
falling. Now, I have seen a model of a cage and safety appartus 
of this sort prepared by a man who was considered by some people 
eminently practical, in which weights took the place of the springs 



121 

I have described for actuating the levers or eccentrics. Of course, 
the model could not be got to act as it was wanted, and no wonder, 
yet its maker could not see the reason why ; but a very small 
amount of theoretical knowledge would have told him that when 
the cage was detached from the rope it would fall as fast as his 
weights, and therefore they could not by any means bring the lever 
or eccentrics into action. I might go on and give you scores of 
such examples as these, but time will not permit. I trust, how- 
ever, that I have already said sufficient to show you that practice 
to be successful must be guided by theory. The two operations 
— mental and physical — must be united to secure complete and 
efficient action. Undoubtedly they have not been united to the 
extent they should have been, probably for the reason that good 
thinkers are not often good workers, and vice versa ; but I believe 
that the day is not far distant when men professing to be practical 
men will guide their practice by theory. 



\ 



Mr. W. it. KITCHIX'S PAPER. 

In the consideration of the relations between theory and 
practice, it is necessary in the first place to have a clear idea of 
the meaning conveyed by the terms, otherwise it will be impossible 
rightly to value the bearing which one has upon the other. Of the 
\i 0x6. practice, it is easy to conceive that the definition which occurs 
to every one will sufficiently cover and explain the term. It is 
understood to mean the working out of an operation which has 
previously been designed, or conduct which is guided by previously 
established rules. This view will in the main agree with that 
stated in the previous paper, and will suffice for the purpose of 
this discussion. 

As regards the term " theory," considerable difficulty arises in 
making clear what it conveys. Under different conditions and 
relations the meanings which it bears may be widely separate. 



122 

The definitions which are usually attached to the word have been 
well stated as follows: — "(r) Speculation — a doctrine which termi- 
nates in speculation or contemplation without a view to practice. 
Here it is taken in an unfavourable sense as implying something 
visionary. (2) An exposition of the general principles of any 
science, as the theory of music. (3) The science distinguished 
from the art — for example, the theory of medicine as distinguished 
from the practice. (4) The philosophical explanation of phe- 
nomena, either physical or moral, as Lavoisier's theory of 
combustion, Smith's theory of moral sentiments." 

Theory is distinguished from hypothesis, a word very often 
used synonymously, thus : — " A theory is founded on inferences 
drawn from principles which have been estahlisJied on independent 
evidence; a hypothesis is a proposition assumed to account for 
certain phenomena, which has no other evidence of truth than that it 
affords a satisfcactory explanation of those phenomena." 

Mr. Kendall seems to have somewhat mistaken the true 
meaning of the word. He makes the term theory to a great extent 
answer to fact, from which it appears to have a meaning entirely 
different. Theory is defined by him as follows : — " A theory then 
in physical science is an explanation of natural phenomena founded 
on facts known to be true, from evidence independent of those 
phenomena or appearances;" and he goes on to argue that a 
theory must be a fact, while he has in this definition affirmed that 
it is "an explanation founded on facts." If he had said, "a theory 
is an explanation founded on i/ferences drawn from facts established 
on independent evidence," no difficulty would arise in accepting 
the proposition, as it bears upon physical science ; but it can 
hardly be assumed, for instance, that the explanation of the rise of 
a column of water in a tube from which the air has been exhausted 
is an "inference drawn from facts," it is rather a statement of facts 
themselves, and of their bearing one upon another. Each of the 
steps in the process is known and can be explained up to the 
highest point to which explanation is possible in the present state 
of knowledge. Not so with regard, for instance, to the atomic 
theory or the theory of gravitation. These are not and have not 



123 

been put to the actual test of fact. They remain "inferences 
deduced from facts," and which give a reasonable explanation of 
phenomena. Doubtless there is often a very close relation between 
theory and fact in physical science, and the former may be resolved 
into the latter, but a wide distinction must be drawn between the 
two when the former is treated of in its relation to practice. The 
bringing to bear upon everyday life of an accumulated knowledge 
of facts, is not the application of theory to practice; in this case, 
what has really passed from the stage of theory into fact, becomes 
utilised, and a man cannot be accounted a theorist because he 
employs his knowledge of facts as a guide in his conduct or that of 
others. Thus the application of the knowledge that a column of 
water will rise no higher in a tube than to the point at which it 
counterbalances the pressure of the atmosphere, no more makes a 
man a theorist, than does that which causes him to use a lever in 
moving a heavy weight ; these acts are not done or directed on 
assumptions, they are based on experience and actual fact. 

In the discussion of the proposition which forms the title of 
these essays, it will be well to adopt the broader view of theory 
which defines it as — "The philosophical explanation of phenomena 
either physical or moral ;" and that of practice which may be 
taken as the application of the philosophical explanation to the 
rules of conduct, either physical or moral. These definitions are 
wider than those adopted by Mr. Kendall, but the subject under 
discussion should be treated in the broadest possible manner. 
Bearing these definitions clearly in mind, it will not be difficult to 
estimate the relation of one to the other, and the value which the 
one may have in guiding and directing the other. The very loose 
application of the word theory which has been touched upon in 
Mr. Kendall's paper is common enough, that is, its employment to 
signify a mere asssrtion of " opinion," and in contradistinction to 
practice as guided by opinion or judgment or independent of them. 
Thus it follows that the so-called theoretical man is often unfavour- 
ably contrasted with the so-called practical man, a position of 
matters which appears to arise mainly from a misconception of the 
terms and their application. A theory must needs be abandoned 



124 

if in practice it be found untenable — in other words, if on the 
application of a test it is found wanting. In the physical world 
no better illustration of a theory and of its practical application 
can be adduced than that set up by a fellow-Cumbrian, Dalton, 
and which remains till the present time unshaken as a "reasonable 
explanation of phenomena." The view propounded by Dalton 
was that matter exists in the form of atoms of different sizes which, 
when grouped together, unite in certain definite mathematical 
proportions, the proportions being always constant; that these 
atoms are the limits to which matter can be subdivided, and are 
so minute as to defy any examination. This theory, involving the 
three laws of chemical combination, is supported by facts which 
bear upon it indirectly. There is no direct evidence of its truth, 
as no one has ever seen an atom, and in point of fact their 
existence is purely theoretical. But what is the value of the 
theory? Briefly this — that the whole practice of modern chemistry 
has hinged upon it, and it remains the rule by which the operations 
of an important branch of science may be safely guided. Such a 
theory as this may be spoken of as established, yet it is but a 
theory, and may never in human experience be raised out of that 
position into one of actual fact. This may serve as an example of 
many other physical theories, which being reasonable explanations 
of phenomena, daily receive practical application, the laws which 
govern the physical operations and which are involved in the 
theory being brought into action. In such theories and their 
application, we see the relation which is pointed out by Mr. 
Kendall as that of thinking and' doing, but which is yet a broader 
one than is quite conveyed to the mind by these terms. Such a 
relation is close enough, and in it we may admit the proposition 
that " theory and practice are reciprocal parts of a unity." Doubt- 
less there is a class of theories which can never be practically 
appUed, though their influence may be none the less great in 
directing us towards the solution of problems which may beset the 
mind. The ceaseless spirit of inquiry has in all ages led to the 
foundation of speculations as to the origin of the universe and 
its destiny. These speculations have through the more recent 



125 



I 



advances of science become theories, and can fairly be propounded 
as such at the present time. The assertion may be doubted, but 
it will bear a close examination. Does not the nebular theory of 
the planetary system hold good as a reasonable explanation of 
phenomena, and is it not clearly supported by facts? This is 
evidently so, and though not established upon so purely mathe- 
matical a basis as Laplace's theory, that of Darwin holds no second 
position. Generalisation from facts is the basis of both theories, 
and they both become absorbed in that higher generalisation which 
points to the theory of evolution as that which may possibly in 
time become fully accepted as the most rational explanation, not 
of the causes of existence — ideas of these must remain purely 
speculative — but of the mode in which the universe became what 
we now see it to be. 

In speaking of the philosophical explanation of moral phe- 
nomena, a field is opened up which could hardly have been 
intended to be entered upon when this discussion was instituted, 
yet it is difficult to treat of so wide a subject without some 
reference to this branch of it, probably the most important of all, 
as the conduct of life must to a very great extent be guided by 
theories of morality. These may be defined as rules of conduct 
deduced from experience, and from an estimate of the consequences 
of human action. As such every man may form his own theory as 
to what course of action will in practice tend towards the greatest 
good, either for the one or for the many. He is free to form his 
own judgment- or to accept the theories propounded by others. 
The high moral tone adopted by many writers is based upon a 
theory of ethics which it is a lamentably rare thing to see practically 
applied. This is much to be deplored. The slight bond which 
appears to exist between theory and practice in the moral universe, 
contrasts very unfavourably with the relations they hold to each 
other in physics. A course of action guided by a theory of morals, 
that is, by a system which is laid down from deductions drawn 
from the results of conduct, ought to hold as close a position 
relatively to the theory which guides it, as does the practical 
working out of theory in the material world. In each case there 

10 



126 

is a scheme or plan laid down, from which the best results may be 
expected ; and on the extent to which the conduct or action is 
guided by the scheme or plan, depends the perfection or otherwise 
of the result. The conclusion arrived at must be that, viewed in 
the abstract, theory and practice bear the very closest relation to 
each other. Considered in reference to physics, their relation is 
close, and is constantly becoming closer ; in morals it is capable 
of being much more intimate than at present seems to be the case. 
Physically only, and not morally, can we as yet accept the definition 
of theory and practice which postulates them as " thought and 
action," or as "reciprocal parts of a unity." 



Mr. J. NIXON'S PAPER. 

It is a common assertion that all our great practical utilities 
existed at first in the state of theory. I quote this statement, 
because I wish to inform you that I shall confine my attention to 
the theory and practice implied in it, that is to the theory and 
practice meant by those who use the words in ordinary conversation, 
and discuss their relative value in the rise and progress of our arts and 
manufactures. Every department of practice has its special ends to 
be attained, and the means for attaining these ends finally resolves 
itself into knowledge. One of the ends of agriculture, for example, 
is to have good crops, and the means for attaining this end is a 
knowledge of certain implements with the mode of using them, 
and of certain manures to be applied ) the end of navigation is 
sailing the seas, and the means for attaining this end is a knowledge 
of certain vessels which float in water, of contrivances for moving 
them through the water, and of various sciences for guiding them 
to their destination. Now, if knowledge be one extreme, and an 
end to be attained the other, somewhere between the two, theory 
and practice will be found. In solving the question it will be 
convenient to view it in three different aspects, — the first, where 
the means suggests the end ; the second, where the end leads to 
the discovery of the means ; and the third, where the end has been 



127 

successfully attained for some time by one means, and it is proposed 
to attain it more advantageously by a newly-discovered means. 
Very often the mere acquisition of knowledge suggests some useful 
purpose to which it may be applied. To improve upon Shake" 
speare, not in poetry, but in sentiment, — 

" How oft the sight of means to do good deeds, 
Makes good deeds done." 

The knowledge of the motive power of steam, the knowledge that 
electricity can be transmitted through a long wire and act upon a 
magnetic needle at the end of it, and the knowledge of the inflam- 
mable properties of coal gas, are three most apposite, and altogether 
most extraordinary illustrations of this. In all the three cases it was 
in men's minds for a long time to apply the knowledge to the 
useful purposes of life, and each practical application in succession, 
as Mr. Kendall has already remarked with reference to the steam- 
engine and its off-shoots, existed for years in the state of theory ; 
that is, though there was no doubt about the knowledge, as 
knowledge, there was a doubt whether, when applied to practical 
purposes, it would produce the desired ends. I need not say how 
fully all these ends have been realised. 

The second aspect of theory and practice is that in which 
there is an urgent need for something — some end is very desirable, 
and men are prompted to search for the means. Now, which kind 
of men would most likely be successful in the search ? The self- 
styled practical men, those mere mechanics, who just work by the 
light of a candle, which some have made and others have lighted 
for them, or rather men of high intellectual attainments in the 
subject matter, in other words — those who have a rich store of 
theoretical knowledge to draw upon ? In the case of the former, 
the result would very probably be like Mr. Kendall's siphons and 
pit cages ; with the latter, every condition, positive and negative, 
would be thoroughly investigated, and if the end were attainable 
at all in the state of knowledge at the time, the means would be 
brought to light. About sixty years ago there was a very pressing 
need for some contrivance to prevent the fearful loss of life by the 
explosions of fire damp, and practice showed its good sense by 



128 

making a special appeal to theory, for Davy was expressly sent in 
quest of the means, and, after much thinking and many careful 
experiments upon the gas and upon flame, he found it in the shape 
of these two items of knowledge : No mixture of gases will take 
fire below a certain temperature ; and wire gauze conducts the 
heat away so rapidly as to keep it below this temperature. As 
long as the knowledge and the arrangements necessary to render 
it useful as a means to an end existed in Davy's mind, it was theory 
to himself; after his lamp was made and tested on a small scale, 
there were doubts for some time whether such a simple contrivance 
would be sufficient to meet the want generally ; but now the theory 
is converted into a rule for practice. Again, in Newcomen's steam 
engine, at every stroke the steam was condensed by a jet of cold 
water ; but this cooled the cylinder too, and of every five parts of 
steam which afterwards entered, nearly four were employed in 
raising the cylinder to the proper heat, and only one part did 
effective work in moving the piston. To prevent this waste of 
steam — that is waste of fuel — was a very desirable end, and Watt 
found the means one Sunday when he was taking a walk, in the 
shape of this item of knowledge — steam is an elastic fluid, which 
means in simple language, that if that room were air-tight, and full 
of steam, and if this room were air-tight, and contained nothing, 
except, perhaps, luminiferous ether, and if the door were opened, 
the steam in that room would stretch itself out until it filled both 
rooms. Not many minutes afterwards everything was sketched out 
in Watt's mind. He had a separate condenser connected with the 
cylinder; he saw the cylinder filled with steam, the condenser 
exhausted of its air, connection opened between the two, the steam 
rushing into the condenser to shrink into a drop of water, and the 
water which accumulated removed by the same pump as the air. 
When Mr. Kendall decided that the relation between theory and 
practice was that of thinking and doing, he must have had some 
example like this in his mind. It would be impossible to find in 
the history of mankind an instance where thinking, pure and 
simple, has resulted in so much doing. Well, Monday morning 
came, and Watt hastened to test his theory by experiment ; before 



129 

night it was no longer a theory to him, but it was so for many years 
afterwards to the world, and why? Because he could not get 
cylinders made which did not leak, and pistons whicli were air- 
tight, — in short, because of the "inability of practice to imitate the 
model theory set before it." 

The third aspect of the question is the one which has received 
most attention, by all except men of science. In this case, there 
are two rival means, — one known by experience to be sufficient for 
the end, the other as a rule discovered by the philosopher in his 
study, or the chemist in his laboratory, and shown by a process of 
reasoning to be capable of producing the end more efficaciously or 
more profitably than the old means. The successive steps are the 
same in all the three cases. First, there is knowledge, then a 
proposal to employ the knowledge as a means to an end — that is 
to apply it to some practical purpose, — and lastly, there is the active 
process towards the end. But in new cases there is always an 
element of uncertainty as to whether the end will be successfully 
attained, and, until this uncertainty is rem'oved, the proposed means 
is generally known by the name of theory. In the two former 
aspects there is only one means to one end, and though there may 
be the same, if not greater, interests at stake, there is not, as a rulej 
the same antagonism of interests, and, consequently, not the same 
amount of discussion. When there are two means, it invariably 
happens that one is regarded as infallible ; it is knowTi from 
experience that it has only to be applied and the desired end wiU 
inevitably folloAv ; the other is looked upon with suspicion, and the 
men who propose to apply it, and those who first actually apply it 
to tlie requirements of life, are by some called theorists. These 
so-called theorists may sometimes be too persistent in pushing a 
theory after it has had abundance of trial ; or they may be too 
imiiatient, and throw up a theory before it has been sufficiently 
tried. There are examples of both kinds of men, and to such is 
due the disrepute into which theory has fallen ; but without such 
theorists at all, practice would be stationary. And who are the 
practical men I Those who profess to be guided only by the 
experience they gain in the pursuit of their several branches of 



130 

industry. And what is this experience of theirs ? A few years ago 
it possessed exactly the same attributes as that which they now 
designate theory, and it was gained, for the most part, from the 
practice of those whom they designate theorists. This may be 
shown by an example. The colouring properties of madder root 
have been long known, and when it was first proposed to apply 
this knowledge to the art of dyeing, there would doubtless be 
considerable uncertainty whether the scheme would turn out to be 
profitable. However, madder has been for many years extensively 
cultivated in many countries of Europe and Asia, and England has 
imported it to the value of a million of money annually. The 
transition from theory to practice is here well exemplified. About 
ten years ago, some one analysed the madder root, and found that 
the colouring principle was a substance which was produced by 
a kind of fermentation in the root, and which received the name of 
alizarine. Two German chemists analysed the alizarine, and found 
in it a substance called anthracene ; this they recognised, and 
knew that it could be got from coal tar. Thus it was discovered 
that alizarine could be got from coal tar. That the colouring 
principle of the madder root can be manufactured from coal tar is 
merely an item of knowledge ; but the knowledge, coupled with 
the proposal to use coal tar as a substitute for madder, is regarded 
as theory. There is no question as to whether the dye from one 
source is as effective as that from the other ; the question is whether 
it would be profitable and expedient in every way to give up the 
cultivation of madder and use the artificial instead of the vegetable 
dye. This question remains to be answered. 

Theory and experience are, therefore, not two distinct 
species, but the same in different stages of development. Thus 
far it seems that theory and practice are mutually implicated in all 
our industrial achievements. In estimating their relative value in 
the progress of nations, we are apt to confine our attention too 
exclusively to such men as Watt, Stephenson, Cooke, VVheatstone, 
Cyrus Field, or Holmes, who applied knowledge to useful purposes, 
and to leave out of the question those who created the knowledge 
so applied — men who have spent long years of hard labour in the 



131 

advancement of theory — who have worked for the pure love of 
science, without any idea of gain to themselves or benefit to the 
world at large — to whom it has rarely occurred that their labours 
would bear other fruit than the explanation of a phenomenon, or 
a separate existence and a name of its own to some substance. 
Galvani's mind was not engrossed with any immediate benefit he 
would confer upon mankind when he made his experiments upon 
the frog's limbs. He was only trying to settle a point in physiology. 
Whether he found what he was in quest of or not, does not matter, 
but he found something else. The limbs of the frog were hanging 
by a nerve from a metal support near an electric machine, and it 
was observed that the limbs twitched at every spark of the machine. 
Galvani could turn even this fact to a practical account, for he 
afterwards used frogs' limbs as electroscopes, and when so doing 
on one occasion, he observed the same twitchings as before, when 
the limbs and the metal attached to the nerve touched, at the 
same time, an iron railing. He explained this phenomenon by 
asserting that there was electricity in the limb itself Volta main- 
tained that the electricity was all owing to the contact of two 
different metals, and some one else attributed such phenomena to 
chemical action. Hence arose the two rival hypotheses usually 
called the contact theory and the chemical theory, and the sequel 
will show how, from mere hypothesis, a great deal of practice may 
spring, though indirectly. 

These theories led to much discussion and investigation, and 
to new discoveries, amongst which may be mentioned Volta's pile, 
Davy's electric light, Oersted's discovery of the action of electricity 
on the magnetic needle, and Faraday's specific inductive capacity 
and magneto-electricity. 

"What have all these to do with theory and practice?" it may 
be asked. The answer is that these discoveries to which Galvani's 
experiment led are just like so many guide-posts, stretching their 
arms in many directions — pointing out the way to practical applica- 
tions of service to the metallurgist, the photographer, and the sugar- 
refiner — leading up to the electric telegraph and the Atlantic cable 
— guiding men to the brilliant light which sends its beams far over 



132 

the sea, and, like a new star placed in the sky, keeps the mariner 
safe upon the great waters. 

On the other hand, when knowledge has been successfully 
applied to practical purposes, the advance in every direction is so 
rapid — such gigantic strides are made that we ascribe everything 
to practice. In contemplating the majestic oak, the little acorn 
that was buried in the ground centuries before is forgotten. Know- 
ledge is the seed ; theory is the seed cast into the ground ; practice 
is the growing plant, and the end is the ripened fruit. Some 
seeds never germinate ; some theories only require trial to show 
that they are utterly incapable of producing the end aimed at. 
Some seeds spring up, but the young plant withers away ; some 
theories assume a practical shape, but the counteracting causes 
cannot be eliminated, and the scheme is abandoned. Most seeds 
spring up and attain perfection ; most knowledge, when applied to 
useful purposes, produces a rich crop of practical results. Theory 
without practice is nothing ; and what is practice without theory ? 
Perhaps a navigator sailing over the seas without sails or steam, 
without compass or chart — nay, without a ship ; or else a husband- 
man living on the acorns and arbutes of the holy wood. To 
recapitulate, practice is the application of knowledge to the 
requirements of life ; and, according to the general usage, theory 
is this knowledge at the stage where it has been proposed to apply 
it to some useful purpose, and before it has been proved to be 
sufficient as a means to an end. If a formal definition be required, 
it would be something like this : — -In the business of everyday life, 
theory is an explanation of the way in which an end may be 
attained, the explanation being founded on knowledge acquired 
by scientific investigation, or by deduction from abstract laws, and 
not in the exercise of the art to which it is proposed to apply the 
knowledge. Upon comparison it will be seen that the difference 
between this definition and those given in the preceding papers is 
more apparent than real. Further, the end of knowledge, or 
theory — for theory is only a particular phase of knowledge — is 
practice, and practice is entirely dependent on knowledge or 
theory. 



133 

I do not altogether agree with Mr. Kitchin in one or two 
points. I think that the theory which implies practice must not 
be confounded with hypothesis ; it is, in fact, much the same as 
general knowledge or science. Mr. Kitchin says that the bringing 
to bear upon everyday life an accumulated knowledge of facts is 
not the application of theory to practice. It is not the application 
of hypothesis to practice ; it is the application of knowledge to 
practical purposes ; and whenever knowledge is for the first time 
applied to the useful purposes of life, there is an element of 
uncertainty, not necessarily in the knowledge itself, but as to 
whether the desired result will follow its application. It is assumed 
that the desired result will follow its application. Before the 
uncertainty is removed the knowledge, coupled with the idea of 
making a practical use of it, has received the name of theory ; 
after the uncertainty has been removed it is called experience, and 
is then utilised for practice. 

I differ from Mr. Kitchin in reference to what he says about 
the atomic theory. It is not supported by facts : it is a mere 
hypothesis devised by Dalton to explain facts, and it is quite 
within the bounds of possibility that it may hereafter be supplanted 
by some other hypothesis which explains the facts better. . I hardly 
think that the practice of chemistry is based upon the atomic 
theory as Mr. Kitchin has enunciated it, but rather upon the laws 
the theory is assumed to account for. These laws are four in 
number, and are called the laws of chemical combination. It 
would perhaps be well to explain briefly at least one of them. I 
will take that one called the law of multiple proportion. It asserts 
that, when one substance combines with another in several pro- 
portions, the higher are multiples of the lowest. Thus 10,000 
ounces of nitrous oxide contain 6,364 ounces of nitrogen, and 
3,636 ounces of oxygen; 10,000 ounces of nitric oxide contain 
4,667 ounces of nitrogen and 5,333 ounces of oxygen. By reducing 
these numbers, we find that, in the former compound, the propor- 
tions of nitrogen and oxygen are 28 and 16 ; and in the latter 
the proportions are 28 and twice 16; and so with three other 
compounds of nitrogen and oxygen, the proportions are 28 and 

11 



134 

three times i6 ; 28 and four times 16 ; and 28 and five times 16. 
The atomic theory assumes that the weight of the nitrogen atom 
is represented by the number 14, and that of the oxygen atom by 
16; when combination takes place it must take place between 
whole atoms ; two atoms of nitrogen, whose weight is represented 
by the number 28, unite with one of oxygen, weight 16, to form 
nitrous oxide, and with two of oxygen, weight 32, to form nitric 
oxide, and so on. Of course, this is all hypothesis ; but the law 
of multiple proportion, and all the other laws of chemical 
combination, are facts. If they are not, it is either because there 
has never yet existed a trustworthy balance, or because a single 
accurate chemical analysis has never yet been made. The practice 
of chemistry is based on the facts, and not on the hypothesis which 
has been formed to explain the facts. 



Mr. J. D. KENDALL'S REPLY. 

That there would be an absolute agreement on all the points 
involved in such a discussion as this, none of us I think expected. 
Nor are we disappointed : for although we all arrive at the same 
conclusion, yet you cannot fail to have observed that, between 
Mr. Kitchin and myself, there are considerable differences by the 
way; differences, which, considering our ultimate agreement, it 
seems to me ought not to exist. In this reply — provided for in 
the arrangement of the discussion — I will, therefore, address 
myself to the consideration of those differences, with a view of 
showing how they have arisen. In the first place Mr. Kitchin 
objects to my definition of theory as an explanation of natural 
phenomena founded on /ads, and suggests that it is rather an 
explanation founded on inferences drawn from facts. But surely 
that is a distinction without a difference. Can any one say that it 
is not a fact that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two 
right angles ? But we know also that it is an inference drawn from 
facts. We see, therefore, that an inference may be a fact In 



135 

this case it is a fact ; and I unhesitatingly say that any inference 
which is not a fact, is utterly worthless as a foundation on which 
to build an explanation of natural phenomena, or indeed of 
anything else. What can the superstructure be worth if the 
foundation is not sound ? and every inference that is not a logical 
inference must be unsound. But logical inferences drawn from 
facts we know are facts — facts about which we are as sure as we 
are of those with which we become acquainted through the 
instrumentality of the senses. Mr. Kitchin's definition, therefore, 
when reduced to simple terms, reads thus : — A theory is an explan- 
ation of natural phenomena founded on facts drawn from facts — 
which I think you will agree is only a roundabout way of putting 
the definition given by me. I should like you to bear this in 
mind, because it is the source of nearly all the differences that 
have arisen between Mr. Kitchin and myself in this discussion. 

The next point of difference between us is where Mr. Kitchin 
says that it can hardly be assumed that the explanation of the rise 
of a column of water in a tube from which the air has been 
exhausted is an "inference drawn from facts," but that it is rather 
a statement of facts themselves. Now, whilst I agree with Mr 
Kitchin that it is a statement of facts, it is at the same time quite 
clear to me that it is also an inference drawn from facts. What is an 
inference ? A deduction from premises. It is something there- 
fore which is outside of observation. No man ever arrived at an 
inference through observation alone. Deduction is the business 
of the reason. We may observe the pressure of the air at the 
earth's surface. Or we may observe, under suitable conditions, 
the equality of action and reaction. Observation, too, may show 
us that water presses equally in all directions, and that it rises to a 
certain height in an exhausted tube, but it can never tell us why it 
so rises. The senses may say what is, but it is the intellect 
alone that can tell us 7ej/iy it is, when it is possible to satisfy the 
why. The rise of a column of water in an exhausted tube is not 
by any means self-evident. It requires explanation, and the way 
it is explained I have already stated. In that explanation we start 
with certain isolated facts as premises. From these, by a process 



136 

of deduction, we arrive at the conclusion that il a tube, the end of 
which is immersed in water, be exhausted of air, the water will rise 
in that tube to a certain height and no further. It will be clear to 
you all, I think, that that is an inference — an inference, too, drawn 
from facts — the premises with which we started. It is, moreover, 
an inference which, without the testimony of observation, we might 
have pronounced a fact. But observation also tells that it is a 
fact. The explanation therefore of the rise of a column of water 
in an exhausted tube, is not only a statement of facts themselves, 
but it is also an inference draAvn from facts. 

I next come upon a statement in Mr. Kitchin's paper 
to which I must object most strongly. It runs thus: "the 
bringing to bear upon everyday life of an accumulated know- 
ledge of facts is not the application of theory to practice." 
To this I would reply that if the theory meant by Mr. Kitchin 
be anything less than an accumulation of facts, I for one would 
most certainly object to employ it as a guide to my practice, 
since I know that there is something — call it what you will — which 
I can safely employ as a guide. That something is the rational 
application of the body of accumulated and accumulating facts — 
both logical and observational — which goes by the name of science. 
That is what I call theory when I use the word in connection with 
practice, and I cannot possibly understand any one advocating the 
regulation of practice by theory, unless that be the meaning of the 
word. 

A little further on in Mr. Kitchin's paper I find him saying 
" that the application of the knowledge that a column of water will 
rise no higher in a tube than to the point at which it counter- 
balances the pressure of the atmosphere, no more makes a 
man a theorist than does that which causes him to use a lever in 
moving a heavy weight." True, but Mr. Kitchin here fails to note 
a great distinction. One man may know but the simple fact that 
water will only rise to a certain height in an exhausted tube. 
Another man kows the fact quite as well, and in addition knows 
why it will only rise to that height. That is the man I call a 
theorist, and that, I think, you will agree, is the man most likely 



137 

to succeed in his practice, other things of course being the same. 
The former in using a siphon on the top of a high mountain would 
be misled by the knowledge he had gained by observation near the 
sea level. But the latter could not, because he would know 
theoretically that the higher he ascends above the level of the sea 
the less is the pressure of the air, and therefore the less will be the 
rise of a column of water in an exhausted tube. 

Further on Mr. Kitchin remarks " that a theory must needs 
be abandoned if in practice it is found untenable." I should rather 
say so, if your practice is perfect before you abandon any theory. 

I agree with Mr. Nixon in his criticism of Mr. Kitchin's 
remarks on the atomic theory — so called. The only value that I 
can see in the theory is that which attaches to every opinion — in 
which there is any appearance of truth — ^that it stimulates to 
further inquiry. To say that the whole practice of modern 
chemistry hinges upon it, seems to me like putting the cart before 
the horse. 

From Mr. Kitchin's remarks on the nebular hypothesis and 
Darwin's theory of evolution — which he apparently sets on the 
same level of probability — he seems to make no distinction between 
hypothesis and theory, notwithstanding his definitions wherein he 
makes considerable difference between them. We know that 
Laplace, in his explanation of the planetary system, begins with a 
nebulous cloud — which he assumes — and out of that cloud evolves, in 
the most satisfactory manner, the whole planetary system. But given 
the planets as they are now, with their motions of rotation and 
translation, neither Laplace nor any of his followers have been able, 
by any process of deduction at present kno\%'n, to arrive at the 
conclusion that those planets originally existed as a nebulous cloud. 
It is clear, therefore, that his explanation is founded on an assump- 
tion — the same as Dalton's atomic theory. Now, Darwin's theory 
is entirely different. It is foumded on facts. He begins with the 
facts that both plants and animals vary, and that there is constantly 
going on between them a struggle for existence. From these 
facts he infers, in the most logical manner, that species may be 
modified indefinitely. There is, therefore, this diffsrnce bstwee 



the theory of Darwin and the hypothesis of Laplace, the former is 
an inference drawn from facts, the latter is an inference drawn from 
assumptions. The nebular hypothesis has had no more influence 
on the practice of astronomers, than the so-called atomic theory 
has had on the practice of chemists. But Darwin's theory of 
evolution has completely revolutionised the practice of Biologists, 
as did Newton's theory of gravitation revolutionise the practice of 
astronomers. The difference between theory and hypothesis is 
just as great as between fact and opinion, the latter may be true, 
the former we know is true. Never let us confound science with 
the opinions of scientific men. 



I3d 



A DAY AT ENx\ERDALE. 

By Joseph Adair. 
(Read at Whitehaven. ) 

A portion of this paper was read at the Society's excursion to 
Ennerdale in October last, under the title of " The Botany of 
Ennerdale." Since then it has been re-written, and although some 
facts touching on the botany of the district have been omitted, 
other paragraphs have been added so as to embrace in a narrative 
form what may be seen in a day's excursion. Most of the short 
notes which follow refer to the middle of August, that being the time 
when the lake and mountain district is seen to greatest advantage; 
for at that time the ling and heather are in bloom, and give the 
fine purple colour to the hills which adds so much to the beauty 
of the landscape. 

Ennerdale is perhaps less visited by the tourist from a distance 
than most of the other lakes in Cumberland, owing chiefly to the 
difficulty of reaching it, and not from a lack of picturesque beaut}', 
of which all admit it has a fair share, of the more rugged kind. It 
is, however, the place most accessible to our townsmen, and as 
such merits exploration by the geologist and botanist, as well aS 
by the lover of fine scenery. Those acquainted with the district 
will observe a new and pleasing feature in the landscape as we 
approach within a mile or so of the lake. The piece of moorland 
known as Braemer, which was formerly a bleak and unproductive 
tract of land, is now covered by a thriving plantation, adding 
very much to the beauty of the place, and taking away in a great 
rheasure the appearance of barrenness which it previously had. 



140 

Ennerdale was no doubt at one time well timbered, and on seeing 
this vigorous young plantation of forest trees, one cannot help 
wishing that other owners of land in the district may emulate the 
example set by the owner of Braemer, and restore to the district 
its well-wooded hills. After passing Braemer wood we find our- 
selves in a green lane, rich in a variety of ferns and wild flowers, 
amongst which are the fox-glove and the hare-bell, intermixed with 
a variety of yellow and purple flowers. We may now stay for a while 
to examine one of the purple-flowered plants, which bears at the 
end of the stem a short spike of flowers, and below at regular 
intervals little clusters of like flowers. We may recognise it as 
betony. This plant was in old times in so much repute that a 
physician to one of the Roman Emperors wrote a volume in its 
praise. The herbalists of later date greatly esteemed it. Dr. 
Salmon, in his large folio, treats on the plant and its various 
preparations at great length, such as the liquid juice, the decoction, 
the oily tincture, the spirituous tincture, and so on, through thirteen 
different preparations, all of which (according to the writer's belief) 
have some value in alleviating or removing disease. It was sup- 
posed, however, to have a higher quality than that of a medicine 
to remove diseases of the body ; for if it were hung up in a house it 
prevented the inmates from being bewitched. Even at the present 
day it is said there is a proverbial wish amongst the Italians to this 
effect, " May you have more virtue than betony." 

Leaving for the present the further consideration of these 
virtues, let us take a few steps onwards towards How Hall. Near 
this farm we find the hop growing vigorously in the hedge by 
the roadside. It is a matter of dispute whether this plant is a 
native of this country or not. It grows in the south of England 
in a wild state, but the cultivated plant was no doubt introduced 
about the time of Henry the Eighth. For the old couplet says : — 

" Hops, Reformation, bays, and beer, 
Came into England all in one year." 

The hop is closely allied botanically to the nettle, and bears the 
male flowers in loose panicles on one plant, and the female flowers 
in a catkin on a separate plant — these catkins being that part of the 



ui 

plant used in brewing ale and beer. The hop is a very quick 
growing plant. A relative of mine had it covering his summer- 
house, and he observed that the usual length of growth of all the 
branches during the height of summer was about two or three inches 
in twenty-four hours, and that during the middle of the day the 
growth was equal in swiftness to the movement of the hour pointer 
on a watch, or about half an inch in three hours. 

After passing How Hall, and descending the hill towards the 
boat house, we may find the elegant purple loosestrife growing in 
the hedge near the bottom of the hill. This species was referred 
to by Mr. Taylor in his lecture three weeks ago, when he 
pointed out that owing to the construction and nature of this plant 
it could not be fertilized if it were left to itself, and that it is 
necessary for the pollen of one flower to be carried to another 
(perhaps at some distance) by insects in order to secure (by means 
of cross fertilization) the production of seed. 

On reaching the lake we see the gravelly bottom covered 
in many places with a green carpet formed by the leaves of the 
shore weed, intermixed with an odd looking plant, Lobelia Dort- 
manna, whose straight stem rises above the water, bearing sometimes 
a solitary flower or a couple of flowers resembling the campanula, 
or bell flower, to which it is closely allied. The leaves of this 
plant, as well as those of the shore-weed (both of which are 
generally under water), are hollow, having internally what appear 
to be water-tight compartments, which no doubt serve some 
purpose in the life and growth of the plant. 

If we now for a short time take a walk to the right, by the 
side of the wood at the lake edge, we may, perhaps, get a glimpse 
of the meteor-like motions of a small bird darting up and down 
near the top branches of the trees, now on one side, now on 
another, and apparently never at rest. This is the golden-crested 
wren, the least of British birds (being only about the size of a 
walnut). Montagu says of this species, "It is the only native bird, 
I believe, which ever suspends its nest like so many of the tropical 
birds, for I have always found it hanging under the broad bough 
of a spruce, cedar, or yew tree ; the thick flat disposition of the 



142 

leaves forming a sort of umbrella over the opening." For this 
information I am indebted to my sons, who have frequently seen 
the bird in this wood. 

Returning to the left side of the lake we lind on many 
parts of the boggy ground a peculiar-looking three-leaved plant, 
but at this season of the year without any flower. This is 
Menyanthes, a plant which Dr. Lindley says is reckoned one of the 
best of tonics. Were the time of year May, instead of August, we 
should see that it bore a flower, equal in beauty to many of the 
rarest exotics, and one which is hardly equalled by any ether 
native plant. In similar kind of ground we find also the plant 
called sheeprot (supposed at one time to give that disease to sheep). 
It is noticeable as being the only British plant with a leaf like the 
garden nasturtium — that is, with the leaf stalk from the centre of 
the leaf This plant belongs to the large order Umbelliferse, but 
it is very unlike the other members of the order, such as the carrot, 
parsley, celery, and a host of similar plants, so much alike that in 
many cases it is difficult to identify them. 

The most abundant species belonging to this order in the 
valley at this time of the year is the Burnet saxifrage, which has no 
particular virtue, unless it be that the root is said to have the 
desirable property of clearing the complexion. A very large pro- 
portion of the plants in this order are poisonous ; fully one-fifth of 
thbse found in this country being either poisonous or. hurtful to 
both man or other animals. Two of these grow in near proximity 
to each other a little from the lake, one being Ethusa, or fool's 
parsley, sometimes eaten with fatal effects for parsley; and the 
other hemlock, a well-known poison, the plant with which it is 
said Socrates was poisoned. In passing along by the lake side, or 
in the lanes, we cannot have overlooked a rather handsome-looking 
plant with a globular head of small purple flowers, which is abun- 
dant on every side, and now in full bloom. The story in 
connection with it is well known, but will bear repeating in the 
quaint language of one of the old botanists. The name of the 
plant is Devil's bit, and it has a stumpy root, as if the end were 
bitten off. The old writer says : — " Some have fabled that the 



143 

devil, envying the good which the herb might do to mankind, bit 
away part of the root, by which means it came to have the name 
of Devil's bit, but the fable is so ridiculous, that one which has but 
a grain of sense or reason, can never believe such a fiction." 

In wandering along by the lanes and hedges, we meet with 
many plants that are not of frequent occurrence, amongst which 
are the Welsh Poppy and Hypericum calycinum, or large St. John's 
wort. Both of these are evidently escapes from cultivation, or 
garden plants, the St. John's wort being known as the Rose of 
Sharon. The white Corydalis, the small annual known as 
Teesdalia, the bird's foot, and the pretty eyebright, are all to be 
found in more or less abundance. The plant known as bird's foot 
has, when in seed, almost a perfect resemblance to the foot of a 
small bird. The old botanists seemed to have the idea that a 
plant indicated by its appearance or growth what its uses were, for 
instance, the plant named eyebright, from its likeness to the eye of 
an animal, was supposed to be good for removing films from the 
eye : " it strengthens the eye and optic nerves, helps a weak brain, 
and restores the sight being decayed." Culpepper says, "if it was 
as much used as neglected, it would half spoil the spectacle 
maker's trade." On the same grounds, the plantain with a leaf 
toothed something like the teeth of a dog, was considered a remedy 
for hydrophobia. 

Leaving for the present many species of plants which claim 
our attention, let us return to the side of the lake again, and we 
may make an easy experiment to prove the truth or fallacy of the 
idea that most of our fresh-water fish change colour when they are 
swimming in a stream, and assume that of the bottom of the river 
in which they happen to be. Further, if they move from a light 
pebbly part of the river to a part where the bottom is dark, they 
will soon take a darker shade of colour, and become so nearly like 
the ground underneath as to be almost invisible. 

At the entrance of one of the mountain becks flowing into the 
lake, we shall find a number of small streams of water, some with a 
clear pebbly bottom, others dark and mossy, and in all numbers of 
minnows are sporting about. Those that are swimming in the 



144 

clear streams are light-coloured, almost pearly in shade ; and those 
in the stream with the dark bottom are equally as dark as the 
bottom of the stream they are in. We now take three or four 
minnows from the clear stream, and transfer them to the dark 
mossy stream. For a short time they seem uncomfortable, and 
swim rapidly about. Owing to their light colour their movements 
can be followed by the eye with ease. Very soon they become a 
shade darker in colour than they were when placed in the dark 
stream, and gradually assume, in a quarter of an hour or so, the 
same colour as the original denizens of the stream. If we now 
reverse the experiment, and remove the dark fish into the light, 
clear-coloured stream, we see that they for a short time dart swiftly 
about as before. The change comes quickly, however, and in a 
short time they become as clear and pearly in colour as those that 
they were placed amongst, and assimilate as nearly as possible to 
the colour of the clear pebbly bottom of the stream. 

As we have still a good part of the day's work before us, let 
us return to the inn and take a boat across the lake to the Side 
wood, and as we shall not require the boatman for four or five hours, 
we may ask him to meet us at Smiddy Beck on our return. On 
landing, the lover of wild flowers will be gladdened by seeing an 
adundance of a rare plant growing freely along the edge of the lake. 
This will be recognized as Thalictrum flavum, meadow rue, an 
elegant species belonging to the same natural order as the butter- 
cup. The rough rocky ground higher up supplies two uncommon 
species of ferns, known as the oak and beech ferns, both of which 
attain a good size, owing to the soil and situation being favourable 
to their growth. As we wander along through masses of ling and 
heather, we find everywhere the honey bee busy at work. A 
stranger might ask where do all the bees come from? Those 
acquainted with the district can soon answer the question. For 
the past fortnight or three weeks, the beekeepers from the lowlands 
have been busy bringing up their hives to the fells, for the bees to 
lay in a stock of the finest honey, which is obtained from the ling. 
The hives are scattered over the fells, on both sides of the lake, 
where the heather abounds, and being securely built in amongst 



145 

the rocks and stones, we may pass by numbers of them without 
seeing them, or having any idea of their being there. We now 
proceed by the side of the lake to its head, and then by the base 
of the mountain, and cross by a foot-bridge a considerable stream 
(coming down from the right) known by the name of Deep Gills. 
Following the stream about a quarter of a mile or so by the 
shepherd track leading up to the fells, we obtain a sight of a 
fine waterfall, which is quite hidden from view until we are a short 
distance from it. On returning, we obtain a very fine prospect of 
the head of the lake, backed by Bowness Knot and Latterbarrow, 
over which the higher fells of Herdhouse and Great Borne tower 
to a great height. On the left, the Side and Crag Fell ; and on 
the right. Ling Mell and Starling Dod ; in the middle distance the 
lake showing the entrance of the Lizza; and the foreground 
diversified by the mountain torrent of Deep Gills. We now return 
by the base of Ling Mell. At a short distance from the Lizza, we 
find the shepherd track which will guide us up the valley. After 
passing the two streams, known as Low Beck and High Beck, both 
of which are crossed by foot-bridges, and each with very fine 
waterfalls, we climb up on the right to the base of the Coves, about 
1,200 feet or so. At this point the fells rise up on all sides before 
us, forming an amphitheatre of rocks of great extent and towering 
height, so that we might almost fancy we were treading in the 
crater of an extinct volcano. 

Following the streams, we are sure to find that beautiful 
star-like plant, Saxifraga stellaris, and the rich orange-flowered 
species of the same family, growing in large tufts by the sides 
of the brooks. On the level part we have now attained, we 
may find (as I have been informed by Mr. Addison) the small 
willow, Salix herbacea, which, at its full growth, attains only the 
height of a few inches ; and is consequently the least of British 
shrubs. It is properly an Alpine plant, flourishing only on the 
higher mountains. 

We will now suppose that, so far from being tired, we are 
ready to ascend the Pillar Mountain, which, from this point, is 
only about an hour's climb. After climbing over a good deal of 



146 

rough ground in the ascent, we shall be rather suprised to find the 
top flat, smooth, and grassy, and sheep quietly browsing as if in a 
sheltered meadow. The view from the top is very fine and 
extended ; Ennerdale, the lake, fields, and farms being mapped 
out beneath us. At this elevated point we find, in many places, 
the ground covered with silky-leaved plants, known as the Alpine 
ladies' mantle ; and, like the least willow, only a denizen of the 
higher mountains. A little beyond the highest point of the 
mountain, which, by the way is over 2,900 feet above the sea, 
there is an easy descent, which leads us to the foot of the Pillar 
Rock ; and no one can be said to have properly seen the Enner- 
dale Valley unless he has, to some extent, explored the precipices 
of this mountain, and stood at the foot of the Pillar Rock. This 
rock, which gives its name to the mountain, presents a striking 
figure as seen from the valley below; but it is only on near 
approach that we can see to full advantage its towering height 
and massiveness. On a fine calm day, we seldom hear any sound 
in this desolate region except the bleat of a sheep, or the scream 
of the buzzard as it circles high up in the air, with now and then 
the hoarse croak of the raven, whose nest is in some precpice of 
the mountain. The descent from the foot of the rock is over 
rather rough ground, but there is very little difficulty in reaching 
the bottom of the valley, nor much more so in crossing the Lizza, 
which, as seen from above, looks like a narrow silvery stream 
winding down the valley. Any one travelling down this inner 
valley, must have observed that a very great number of streams and 
springs fall into the Lizza from both sides. From this circumstance 
we may conjecture that the name Lizza comes from the Anglo- 
Saxon word, lisan, to gather ; the Lizza being truly the gatherer 
of almost numberless streamlets from the mountains. 

After passing the farm of Gillerthwaite, we ascend the hill of 
Latterbarrow, a few hundred feet in height, by an easy and gradual 
climb. Near to the top of the sloping ground, facing the east, we 
find here and there small heaps of stones, such as are very 
frequent in other parts of the Lake district. There is perhaps 
some kind of order in the arrangement, and it is assumed by 



147 

antiquaries that these heaps are the ruins of primitive dwellings, 
inhabited by a race of people now extinct in this part of the 
country, and whose remains are also to be found in the 
Highlands of Scotland and Wales. On the other hand, the 
sceptics say that the stones have- been gathered together for the 
purpose of clearing the ground, so that the scythe of the mower 
might not be injured when cutting down the brackens. Others say 
that the stones are for the purpose of marking the burial places of 
these old inhabitants, and that the name Barrow, meaning mound 
or burial-place, was applied to this hill in consequence of this being 
the cemetery of the tribe. The answer to this is, that Barrow 
means also a wooded hill, the Latterbarrow the lower wooded hill, 
in contrast with the higher wood on the opposite side of the lake. 
This view is strengthened by the fact that the face of the hill next 
the lake is still covered with a growth of stunted trees. 

On descending from the hill towards the stream known as 
Smiddy Beck, we traverse a long stretch of mossy ground, on which 
grows one of the most interesting class of plants that this country 
produces. The study of the carnivorous plants by Darwin and 
other observers has thrown a new light on the subject, and invested 
them with a new interest. Amongst these interesting plants the 
Sundew is the most abundant here, and is found in almost every 
piece of boggy ground, and at this season of the year one can 
seldom find a plant whose leaves are not disfigured by the remains 
of insects. It flowers at this season of the year, but the flowers 
are so seldom seen opened, that the enquiry has been made by 
experienced botanists, asking if the flowers ever do open. The 
answer is : The flowers (which bear a considerable resemblance to 
the garden saxifrage — London pride) expand in the forenoon of a 
fine sunny day, at other times they are closed ; consequently 
visitors looking for them on dark days, or even at any other time 
than the forenoon, would find the petals closely shut. The mode 
by which the leaves of this plant capture insects was so well 
explained in a lecture by one of our members a short time ago, 
that it need not be repeated. It will be fresh in the memory of 
most of our members. 



H8 

Beside the Drosera or Sundew, we have also in the same kind 
of soil the Butterwort, which is a great insect destroyer, and effects 
its purpose by the same means as those employed by the Sundew. 
This plant is easily recognised by its bright green leaves, which 
spread out and form a rosette on the dark mossy ground. In 
spring it bears a pretty purple flower resembling the marsh violet, 
but at this season is destitute of both flower and flower-stem. The 
leaves of this plant, like the Sundew, are covered with glands 
which secrete an abundance of tenacious fluid. When a small fly 
or other insect touches this fluid it is instantly arrested and 
captured, and on one occasion I remember seeing a plant that was 
completely sprinkled over with captured insects. It was a plant 
of ten leaves, and on one leaf there were twenty insects, and as 
each leaf seemed equally covered with dead or captured flies, the 
total number of insects secured by this plant would be about two 
hundred. 

On arriving at the lake edge again, we have the opportunity 
of examining another member of the carnivorous family of plants. 
One which captures its prey in a very peculiar manner, quite 
different to that by which the Sundew and Butterwort obtain their 
victims. The plant is found in the pools of water known as moss 
dubs, not far from where Smiddy Beck empties itself into the lake. 
It is rather an insignificant-looking plant, which is found floating 
in the water ; the hair-like leaves forming tufts of foliage near the 
surface. On examination it will be found that these tufts have 
branches attached to them bearing something that are neither 
leaves nor flowers. They are something like bladders, and the 
plant gets its name, Bladderwort, from these appendages. It was 
supposed at one time that these bladders served quite a different 
purpose to that which it is proved by the investigations of Darwin 
and others they do serve. The idea was a very plausible one, and 
may perhaps still be partly true. The theory was as follows : — 
When the plant is very young it is found at the bottom of the pool. 
At this time it is said the bladders contain a kind of mucus, 
which prevents their floating, but as the plant requires more 
light and air, the mucus from the bladders is discharged, and thQ 



149 

bladders being filled with gas, buoy up the^plant to the surface 
during the flowering season, after which the whole plant sinks 
to the bottom until the same thing is repeated in the following 
year. Darwin believes this to be a fallacy, and that the only 
purpose of the bladders is to capture minute animals which serve 
to nourish the plant, which according to this authority has no root, 
but floats loosely in the water. The bladders are furnished 
internally with glands. These glands do not discharge anything, 
but are for absorption. The entrance to the bladder is by a valve 
that opens inwards, and there is a collar against which it rests, and so 
prevents the valve opening outwardly, so that a small water flea or 
minute animal can push open the valve and enter, but having 
once entered, escape is impossible. Into this living trap the small 
animals force themselves, and as they can never escape they die 
in prison. The soft parts of the dead animal are then absorbed 
by the plant, and the hard insoluble parts rejected. On the few 
occasions on which I examined the bladders I found all tenanted, 
but the animals (one being in each bladder) seemed active arid 
full of life. According to Darwin they might continue in that 
state until they died from want of air and food. Darwin says, 
with respect to the entrance into the bladders : " Animals 
enter the bladders by bending inwards the posterior free 
edge of the valve, which, from being highly elastic, shuts 
again instantly. As the edge is extremely thin and fits 
closely against the edge of the collar, both projecting into the 
bladder, it would evidently be very difficult for any animal to get 
out when once imprisoned, and apparently they never do escape. 
To show how closely the edge fits, I may mention that my son 
found a daphnia which had inserted one of its antennse into the 
slit, and it was thus held fast during a whole day. On three or 
four occasions I have seen long narrow larvae, both dead and alive, 
wedged between the corner of the valve and collar, with half their 
bodies mthin the bladder, and half out." Darwin felt much 
difficulty in understanding how such weak and minute animals 
could find their way into the bladders ; but he found that a thin 
human hair, when cut short, could be made to enter, and that 

12 



15X) 

although there is a considerable elasticity in the valve, it yields to 
a very gentle force properly applied. We are greatly indebted to 
the careful and exact investigations of Darwin in the science of 
botany. A mossy-looking plant in a half-stagnant pool is full of 
interest to him, and proves, on examination, to be a real curiosity 
in natural history. 

Our ramble is now brought to a close. We have sei«i many 
things of interest; but not a tithe of what there is to be seen. The 
geologist might spend weeks in exploring the rocks, and in 
examining the different veins of iron, slate, and copper ; some of 
which will no doubt, in the future, be fully explored and opened 
out. The botanist might also find in the exploration of the valleys, 
streams, and hills, work for many days, while the lover of 
scenery would delight in the never-ending change of the prospect 
— in cloud and sunshine — "ever changing ever new." 



151 



PETER CROSTHWAITE, 

The Founder of Crosthwaite's Museum, Keswick. 

By J. Fisher Crosthwaite. 

(Read at Keswick.) 

Peter Crosthwaite was the third son of Robert Crosthwaite, 
of Monk's Hall. He was born at Dale Head, in the parish of 
Crosthwaite, and was baptized at the Parish Church on the 22nd 
of September, 1735. His father learnt farming with Mr. Bell, of 
Goose Well, who was farm-bailiff for the forfeited Derwentwater 
Estates. He took the Dale Head farm, belonging to the ancient 
family of Leathes, who came thither from Leathes, in this county, 
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. From this place he removed to 
Monk's Hall, where he continued to reside till his decease, at the 
age of eighty -five years, in the year 1787. His descendants have 
resided there ever since, except for one short lease. Peter Cros- 
thwaite probably received his education at the Crosthwaite High 
School. When he left school, the only means of putting young 
men forward in the neighbourhood were farming, a mechanical 
trade, or the woollen manufacture. In many of the hamlets, 
farming and weaving went on together. Most of the farmers and 
yeomen brought up their sons either to farming or the woollen 
trade ; but some went off to large towns, where they frequently 
succeeded well. Now and then a more opulent yeoman sent a 
son to Oxford, as was the case with Sir John Bankes. The subject 
of this notice was sent to Brownbeck, in Naddle, (a farm which 
belonged to his father,) to learn weaving with John Howe, who 
was then the tenant. The employment was monotonous and 



152 

sedentary, and did not suit the health nor the inclination of Peter 
Crosthwaite. Nevertheless, he faithfully served his apprentice- 
ship. 

A sea voyage having been recommended to counteract the 
effects of long hours in an ill-ventilated workshop, he elected, with 
his father's consent, to go to sea, and to follow a sea-faring life. 
Governor Stephenson went from Keswick to the East Indies in 
1707. He returned twenty years after, and resided at home for 
forty years. He built the house in Keswick called Governor's 
House. Possibly such an example of prosperity in the East may 
have given an additional impulse to a youth anxious to see the 
world, and turned his thoughts to India. He went for twelve 
months to learn navigation, and at the age of twenty-two, having 
letters of recommendation from Mr. Stephenson, he sailed from 
Gravesend in April, and from Spithead in May, 1758. After a 
voyage of nine months he reached Bombay. He was at once 
engaged in the East India Company's service. After serving eight 
months before the mast, he was appointed master of the Gallivat 
" Otter," a gun vessel used by the East India Company to convoy 
their ships while trading, and to drive off the Malay pirates. In 
the ordinary course, seven, and sometimes even nine years, had to 
be spent in the service before such a post could be obtained. He 
was equal to the situation, and had the credit of discharging his 
perilous duty with great zeal and ability. The "Grab Service," as 
it used to be called, has become the "Indian Navy," and it now 
opens a noble field to English seamen. Captain Thomas Fletcher, 
who went from Myrtle Grove, has recently retired with a good 
service pension ; and Captain John Howe, who went from Harry- 
man Field, is now the oldest officer remaining in that service. The 
rapid promotion of Peter Crosthwaite provoked the enmity of those 
of the same rank, and of one or two immediately above him. The 
friend to whom Governor Stephenson had recommended him died, 
and on that event occurring, he was subjected to a series of 
annoyances which, to his sensitive nature, were intolerable. He 
bore up for some years, but ultimately, his health giving way under 
the mortifications he endured, he determined to quit India and 



153 

return to England. The papers relative to this period are still in 
existence, and I am satisfied that if his lot had fallen in our own 
times, his Indian experience would have been far different. He 
arrived at Gravesend in November, 1765, no richer than when he 
went out, and with an arrear of pay still owing to him by the 
Company. 

He was now thirty-one years of- age, having been nearly 
nine years away. In London he casually met with a former 
neighbour, !Miss Hannah Fisher, of Shaw Bank. She was the 
daughter of Mr. Daniel Fisher of that place, and a descendant of 
that stout yeoman, John Fisher, who fought the eight years' legal 
battle with the first Earl of Derwentwater, relative to the " Town 
Cass," and "prevailed." She was a girl in her teens when Peter 
Crosthwaite finished his apprenticeship at Brown Beck. Whether 
it was love at first sight, or the re-kindling of a former friendship, 
I know not ; but certain it is that they engaged to marry as soon 
as he settled in any new employment. Her brother, Mr. Timothy 
Fisher, of Holborn Bridge, became King's Linen Draper, and she 
had been engaged keeping his house. It was not long before 
Crosthwaite obtained a situation in the Customs at Blyth, in 
Northumberland, and to this place he took his young wife. The 
village of Blyth then contained about one hundred and thirty 
families. It is still, I am told, about as unprepossessing a place 
as could well be imagined. The preventive service was always 
laborious and dangerous, and Blyth Nook was one of the spots 
where smugglers followed their contraband work with great bold- 
ness. Many a time during the twelve years he was engaged in the 
service was he fired upon. But he was zealous in the performance 
of his duty, holding it to be "undeniable that those people who in 
anywise encourage smuggling are disloyal, traitors to the State, and 
enemies to civil society." The incessant night duty at length told 
upon his health, and his friends urged him to retire. His wife 
joining in their entreaties, he at length decided to do so. As an 
additional inducement, his father gave him the small estate where 
he served his time. He procured the superannuation to which he 
had subscribed, and entered upon his "Castle" (as he called it) 



154 

at Brown-Bcck with his wife, son, and daughter, in the year 1779. 

No doubt the changes which had taken place in the twentyyears 
which had elapsed, would force themselves upon his notice. No 
longer the old Lonnings Hke "Castle" and "Cuddy" Lonnings for 
a King's highway, but a new turnpike road, made under an Act of 
Parliament passed in 1760. The Derwentwater Estates had been 
covered with majestic oaks. Every one of them had fallen beneath 
the woodman's axe, leaving Crow-Park, Strand's Hagg, Deer-Close, 
and Water-house Banks, with only the young trees which have 
been allowed to spring up from the roots of the ancient forest 
trees. For twelve months only he rested at Brown-Beck. No 
doubt he thoroughly enjoyed that year. His son, then only four 
years old, well remembered in after life how his father took the 
family out on a Sunday morning to one of his fields, called "The 
Hills," to hsten to the ringing of the Crosthwaite Church bells, 
before going to St. John's Chapel. The little estate was too small 
a holding. He let it, and took a house in the Square at Keswick 
in 1780, and at once commenced his Museum. 

It required the man to have some confidence in his own fore- 
sight to think of establishing a Museum for tourists, who were only 
just then beginning to visit the Lakes. It was but seven years 
before that Hutchinson had pubUshed his "Excursion," and Gray, 
the poet, his "Journal." But he saw that the Lake District only 
required to be made known to become the holiday place of the 
many, as the Continent had been for the few. Keswick had then 
only 1078 inhabitants, with one main street seven hundred yards 
in length. The first step which he took to increase the number 
of tourists was to pubHsh maps of the Lakes : — Dervvent, Winder- 
mere, Ullswater, Coniston, and also of Pocklington's Island; to 
which he subsequently added Bassenthwaite, and on another 
sheet, Bultermere, Crummock, and Loweswater. These accurate 
drawings, with neat vignettes, soundings, West's fine stations, and 
others of the author's own choice, met with an extraordinary sale, 
enabling him to enlarge his museum, which now became the 
treasure and solace of his life. He notes ordering 3370 sheets in 
1786, aud 4450 in 1789. The Museum House (as we still call it) 



155 

was built in 1784. He entered upon it as soon as it was finished, 
and the Museum continued to be exhibited till 1870. 

The year before he commenced it he succeeded in re- 
covering the pay that was due to him from the East India 
Company. He had never ceased to call- at the India House, but 
for nineteen years he was denied a hearing, so unwilling were the 
directors to hear anything amiss of their servants abroad. But 
now. Sir Joseph Pennington, of Muncaster Castle (the first Lord 
Muncaster) was chairman, and Sir Henry Fletcher, M.P. for Cum- 
berland, a director. The case was referred to a committee, of 
which Sir Henry Fletcher was one, and he received the ;^6o pay 
due to him. This act of tardy justice gratified him far beyond its 
intrinsic value. He was always a staunch Whig, and no doubt he 
had great pleasure in writing to Sir Henry Fletcher next year, that 
he hoped he would be returned M.P. for Cumberland without 
opposition, but if there was a contest he might depend on his 
attendance at Cockermouth on the polling day, and three or four 
more in his interest. 

In 1785 — -June loth, he enters in his journal : — "Soon this 
morning found six musical stones at the end of Long Tongue," on 
the sandbeds of the river Greta. He afterwards mentions, that 
while the first six of the collection he formed were in perfect tune, 
the remaining ten cost him half a year to collect and reduce, by 
chipping, into perfect tune, working twelve hours a day. It has 
been the ill-fortune of Peter Crosthwaite to lose whatever credit 
may be due to this and other discoveries. When a party firom 
Keswick travelled with a set of five octaves, and played in the 
presence of Royalty, the merit of the discovery was given by the 
press, and claimed by the chief of the party, as due to him. Mrs. 
Southey (Caroline Bowles) wrote, requesting that I would contradict 
the statement in the London newspapers, as she had done in a 
public room where they were exhibiting. I did not think it worth 
while, but when the same statement was made in Keswick, by 
advertisement, I did think it right to point out that the History of 
Cumberland mentioned the set in Crosthwaite's Museum many 
years before the collector of the new set was born. A Whitehaven 



156 

paper put in an excuse for refusing my letter, and the Carlisle 
Journal only admitted it as an advertisement. In the Leisure 
Hour for August, 1857, was the following passage: — "The ^olian 
Harp was first invented, or rather discovered in Keswick, by old 
Peter Crosthwaite, the founder of the Museum. Peter had a fine 
ear for Nature's harmonies ; and not only did he tune the wild 
harpings of the mountain winds, but while listening to the wail of 
the Greta, he learned that its very stones were melodious. And 
so he gathered now one, and then another, from its rocky bed, 
and, striking them, his thrilling ear caught the regular rise of one 
note above another. In this way he formed two octaves, and laid 
up in his beloved museum the first set of "Musical Stones" which 
perhaps were ever arranged in England." 

In 1786, Mr. Crosthwaite made a zig-zag road up the front 
of Latrigg, for the convenience of tourists and the public. He 
began the road on the 14th of November, and continued to work 
upon it till it was completed, sometimes working as much as nine 
hours a day. In his Journal, February 2Sth, 1786, he says, "Took 
Mary, and surveyed from the foot of new road to the head of the 
first stairs^ and beat off work by east wind, proceeded to top of 
Latrigg and Catgill — then dined in the Rocky Alcove, and inspected 
Skiddaw road, from thence to Spoona-green and the old Casten-up 
works on the hill above Birkett Wood, where there are many and 
large on its side, next to Skiddaw in particular." Four years later 
he records himself and son having wrought upon the same road, 
and that Robin Lancaster, aged eighty-six years, walked to the 
top of Latrigg with ease, and told old stories all the way up and 
down again. " Afterwards Daniel and I made eighteen yards of 
new road leading from the middle of Spoona-green Head to the 
first tack, and set the water-course right, which Andrew had again 
put wrong." In June following, he mentions John Jackson, late 
of Stenwick, aged eighty-seven years, and old Thomas Ladyman, 
aged eighty-five years, having accompanied himself and Mr. 
AUinson to the top of Latrigg. This was all before the Brund- 
holme enclosure took place, after which Latrigg was ploughed, 
and the foot-way of course disappeared. About this time he says, 



157 

"Sent three men to build up fiist beacon on Skiddaw — Henry 
Powlay, Isaac Williamson, and — Dunglinson, which they did, 
and drove in two posts with rings to fasten horses to, but by 
September the same year both posts were gone." 

The sham battle which came off annually at tlie Keswick 
regatta, was depicted by Smirke, and published as a coloured 
print at the cost of a guinea. The affair was thus described in 
Hutchinson's History of Cumberland : — " About three o'clock 
preparations were made for the sham attack on Pocklington's 
Island. The fleet (consisting of several barges, armed with small 
cannon and muskets) retired out of view, behind Friar's Crag, to 
prepare for action : previous to which a flag of truce was sent to 
the governor, with a summons to surrender upon honourable terms. 
A defiance was returned ; soon after which the fleet was seen 
advancing with great spirit before the batteries, and instantly 
formed a curved line. A terrible cannonading began on both 
sides, accompanied with a dreadful discharge of musketry. This 
continued for some time, and being echoed from hill to hill in an 
amazing variety of sounds, filled the air with whatever could 
produce astonishment and awe. All nature seemed to be in an 
uproar ; which impressed on the awakened imagination the most 
lively ideas of the "war of elements" and "crash of worlds." After 
a severe conflict the enemies were driven from the attack in great 
disorder. A feu-de-joie was then fired from the port, and oft 
repeated by responsive echoes. The fleet, after a little delay, 
formed again ; and practising a variety of beautiful manoeuvres, 
renewed the attack. Uproar again sprung up, and the deep- 
toned echoes of the mountains again joined in solemn chorus ; 
which was heard at a distance of ten leagues to leeward through 
the easterly opening of that vast amphitheatre as far as Appleby. 
The garrison at last capitulated, and the entertainment of the 
water being finished, the company moved to Keswick, to which 
place from the water's edge, a range of lamps were fixed very 
happily disposed, 'and a number of fireworks displayed off." 
Whatever may now be thought of this diversion, it is certain that 
it drew together the nobility and gentry from the adjacent counties « 



158 

It was not merely the whim of Colonel Pocklington, the defender 
of the island, aided by Peter Crosthwaite as admiral of the fleet, 
but the stewards for the ten years it was continued, were the 
leading noblemen and gentlemen of the county, as will be seen by 
the following list : — 

1781 — Joseph Pocklington, Esq. 

1782 — Rowland Stephenson, Esq. 

1783 — Edward Stephenson, Esq. 

1784 — Sir Michael le Fleming, Bart. 

1785 — William Dacre, Esq. 

1786 — The Earl of Surrey. 

1787 — Joseph Pocklington, Esq. 

1788 — Sir Henry Fletcher, Bart. 

1789 — Wilfred Lawson, Esq. 

("Henry Howard, Esq., of Corby ; and 
<- Thomas Wallace, Esq., of Carlton Hall. 

In 1786 a poem was written on this topic, which is given in 
Hutchinson's History. 

In 1788 Mr. Crosthwaite commenced his correspondence 
with Dr. Dalton. In 1793 Dr. Dalton published his first work, 
" Meteorological Observations," in which the observations made 
by himself at Kendal, are compared with those made by Mr. 
Crosthwaite at Keswick, over a period of five years. The 
Barometer, Thermometer, Rain-gauge, Height of Clouds, Winds, 
Snow, Aurora Borealis, and a variety of other phenomena were 
duly registered. Dr. Dalton remarks, that Mr. Crosthwaite's table 
recording 5,381 observations taken over a period of five years, on 
the height of clouds, is the only one of the kind extant. 

In 1794, Lord William Gordon was settled in his new house 
at Water End. He bought up all the land on the western shore 
of Derwentwater, and planted it with great taste. Before this, 
there was no wood on that side of the lake, except one large tree. 
Lord William was very popular with all classes. He invited his 
neighbours to join him in hunting, and entertained them to dinner 
afterwards. In his Journal, Mr. Crosthwaite mentions three 



159 

occasions when he was present, and on another occasion when Dr. 
Norman and he were the only guests. 

While measuring Scale Force, in 1796, he mentions giving 
Mr. Robinson, the host at Buttermere, half-a-crown to encourage 
him to make steps up the Black Rock, to aid tourists in visiting 
the fall. 

During his residence at Blyth he invented a life boat, for 
which he thought of taking out a patent. He consulted a ship 
builder at Shields, who said that ninety-nine out of every hundred 
patents did not pay. He took his model of the invention to the 
Admirality, and was requested to leave it there for consideration. 
Meanwhile, a boat builder at Shields in the employ of the ship 
builder previously consulted, brought out a life boat lined with 
cork, which was the new principle Peter Crosthwaite applied, and 
which he had not hesitated to mention to the ship builder in 
consultation. Whether the latter communicated the idea to his 
boat builder or nOt, can now only be a matter for conjecture, but 
it is quite certain that Peter Crosthwaite's model was deposited at 
the Admirality some years before Mr. Greathead's was sent in. 
The Government awarded Mr. Greathead j[^\ 200 for his invention. 

In the year 1800, he published a pamphlet, and issued one 
hundred copies, relating to the settling of Dervvent Lake twelve 
inches, in addition to nine inches which his brother had already 
lowered it. This would have brought one hundred and thirty-six 
acres into cultivation. On this topic his diary has the following 
entry: — "March 31st, 1801. At this time I received the thanks 
of two philosophers for writing my small pamphlet on the draining 
of Derwent one foot, and thereby mending the relaxing air and 
rendering the coast of Dervvent better for individuals. Their 
names were Coleridge and Wordsworth— both poets too." 

Meanwhile, the Museum increased year by year. His extra- 
ordinary zeal in collecting, and the liberal prices he paid, brought 
everything that was curious from all parts of the county. The 
time would fail me to tell the excursions he made on the 
mountains to examine their geological formation. The papers 
he has left behind are so numerous and varied, that, although 



160 

I have spent all my spare hours amongst them for the last 
two or three weeks, I am only able to give a scrap here and there. 
Mr. Otley told me the secret of all this industry. He said, 
" I early adopted your grandfather's habit, of never indulging in a 
second sleep, and I continued it with the best results tUl extreme 
old age caused me to indulge in a second nap." Mr. Crosthwaite' 
often commenced his journal at three, four, or five o'clock in the 
morning, and consequently he had frequendy done a deal of work 
before most people were astir. But, Peter wTote a book. " O ! 
that mine adversary had WTitten a book ! " said the patriarch Job. 
I do not know whether friends or foes knew much about it ; but, 
during the twelve years he was at BIyth, he made health a study. 
In the year 1775, he published a work of 215 pages, entitled " The 
Ensign of Peace," " showing how the health both of body and 
mind, may be preserved, and even revived by the mild and 
attennuating power of a most valuable and cheap medicine. Its 
singular and most excellent property is to subdue the flesh to the 
will of the spirit, by which means mankind may enjoy a state of 
temperance instead of intemperance, and a state of virtue instead 
of vice. The continued use of this medicine eradicates most 
diseases, and is seriously recommended to the people of this island. 
By a Friendly Traveller. London : printed for J. Wilkie, No. 71, 
St. Paul's Church Yard, 1775." 

Five hundred copies were struck off at Newcastle-on-Tyne. 
After going into the whole subject of temperance, exercise of the 
passions, sleep, intemperance, lust, tyranny, war, duelling, pride, 
revenge, ingratitude, quanels, gaming, injustice, justice, faith, vice, 
virtue, and magnanimity, he recommends his medicine in the 
following words : — "The name of this medicine which I am about to 
recommend the world is Water, and the purer the better. It is to 
be applied externally and internally to the body. The external 
application is by washing every part of the surface of the body 
with it, from the crown of the head to the soles of the feet, in its 
natural state in the warmth of summer, but in high latitudes in 
autumn, winter, and spring, its cold may be so far removed by the 
action of fire as not to make it too disagreeable when it comes in 



161 

contact with the skin. And this salubrious method of washing I 
would recommend to all ranks of the people, from an infant to the 
exit of the gray-headed, making allowance for the few infirmities 
which cold bathing is against, in the greatest heats of summer." 
He quotes various authorities in favour of the use of soft water, 
amongst others. Dr. Rotherham, who says — "the water in some of 
our lakes in this island is, I apprehend, as- pure and good as we 
shall find elsewhere. I pretend not indeed to have analysed many 
of them, nor even to have tried their specific gravit)', but I 
remember well to have drunk of the waters of Winander-mere, 
Ulls-water, and others of our large lakes of Westmorland and 
Cumberland, and have found them very soft and good." Mr. 
Crosthwaite continues, "There are many lakes in Cumberland 
which the Doctor hath not named, particularly three, which are 
situated about three miles from each other, extending in a right 
line from south-west to north-west, and are known by the names of 
Wythburn-water, Derwentwater, and Bassenthwaite-water. Wyth- 
burn-water is the least, and in compass nearly one square mile ; 
Derwent is situate in that delightful and much admired valley in 
which Keswick stands. They all receive and emit running waters, 
and that perhaps on the average, at the rate of their whole contents 
in the space of a month in the summer season." These opinions 
were published one hundred and two years ago, and seem to 
indicate that the writer looked forward to the adoption of soft 
water for domestic purposes. When he settled in Keswick he had 
a well sunk at High Hill, and a pump placed there. It stood at 
the corner of Crosthwaite Sunday School. The water was filtered 
through a gravel bed from the river, and was remarkably soft and 
pure. Many persons derived benefit from the use of it, and the 
last entry in his journal, mentions that he had sent to Mr. 
Pocklington an account of its valuable properties. Southey, in a 
letter to Mr. Grosvenor Bedford, thus playfully alludes to this 
pump : he says, " I have discovered most poignant and good 
galvanism in drinking water out of an iron cup — how far this may 
improve fermented liquors remains to be experimented ; the next 
time you see a pump with an iron ladle thereunto appended, stop, 



162 

though it be on Cornhill, and try." He notices it a second tifne 
just after Mr. Crosthwaite's death. I forget the occasion — but he 
called it " poor old Peter Crosthwaite's pump." For very many 
years people from the town went to High Hill for water in 
preference to the wells close at hand, which were contaminated by 
noxious matter. To return again for a moment to his book. Here 
we have a man. a hydropathist before his time. His recommen- 
dation of the use of water is the key note of the work, and I just 
quote the remarks on the last page, which will show the spirit in 
which the writer propounded his theory. In conclusion he says, 
" Barter with Jews and Gentiles. Give and take. Give pure 
religion, and receive their cleanly and salutary customs. Teach 
them without superstition the gospel of Christ, in its greatest 
purity, and learn from them (it was from them I received it) how 
to make the best use of pure water. Draw near to them in a 
cleanly and temperate manner, and they will draw near to you ; 
and let us, in the name of God, be one fold under one great 
shepherd. Then shall the wolf dwell with the lamb ; and the 
leopard lie down with the kid ; and the calf and the young lion 
and the fatling together : and a litde child shall lead them." And 
then, may " the earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the 
waters cover the sea." 

It is not every one who has been in India who has 
faith to believe in the conversion of the heathen. But here 
is a man who advocated Christian Missions, just a quarter of 
a century before the Church Missionary Society for Africa and the 
East was established. 

In 1798, when canals were being constructed in other 
places, Mr. Curwen, M.P., and other country gentlemen, mooted 
the question whether one from Skinburness to Keswick could 
not be made, passing along the shore of Bassenthwaite Lake. 
Mr. Crosthwaite took five or six days to level from the sea to 
Uunmail Raise at his own cq^t, and he reported that the number 
of locks necessary would make the work so expensive, that it would 
not pay for the outlay, and consequently the idea was abandoned. 
For eight and twenty years he carried on his Museum, and in his 



\ 



163 

will provided that it should never be disposed of, except altogether. 
For sixty-two years longer his son, and his family carried it on, 
making a total of ninety years. Every effort was made to dispose 
of it in its entirety, but without success. For seven years this was 
done. It was offered to the County first, next to the British 
Museum, and then to the principal large towns. Sir Ashton Lever 
disposed of his large Museum by lottery, but the person who won 
it sold the collection a few years after, so that the plan held out 
no encouragement for keeping the collection together. Its 
dispersion being inevitable, it was determined that the sale should 
be at Keswick. Not that the best prices were expected in so remote 
a place, but it gave the opportunity to those who cared for such 
things to possess themselves of anything they liked in connection 
with the neighbourhood. 

It would ill become me to attempt any eulogium on a 
person so nearly related as a grandfather. I have placed 
before you a few facts, and I leave you to pass your own 
judgment. I may, however, claim for him a foremost place as a 
pioneer, in opening out and making known the Lake District. 
Hife exertions in this direction were not undertaken in any 
mercenary spirit, but for the public good. He died of apoplexy 
after a few hours illness, on the 9th of June, 1808, and some 
friendly hand put on his tomb the words : —   

"after many dangers, I HAVE FOUND A PORT." 

In Ware's Cumberland Advertizer (now the Cumberland 
Pacquei) the following obituary notice appeared : — " On Thursday 
last, at Keswick, in the 73rd year of his age, (after experiencing 
for eighteen months past better health than he had enjoyed for 
twenty years before,) Mr. Peter Crosthvvaite, the establisher and 
proprietor of the celebrated Museum at that place — a depository 
of curious articles, so universally known to the nobility and gentry 
of the United Kingdom as of itself to afford the best eulogium on 
the zeal, discrimination, and indefatigable assiduity of its projector, 
to whose persevering spirit the public are indebted for an extensive 
and interesting collection of rare productions, both of nature and 



164 

art, from every known part of tlie world. Mr. Crosthwaite opened 
the Museum in his native place, in the year 1780, some time after 
his declining health had rendered it necessary for him to quit the 
service of the East India Company. He lived respected by his 
neighbours, and few men in this or any other country had so 
numerous an acquaintance." 



165 



SYMBOLISM IN. ART.* 

By J. A. Wheatley. 

( Read at Cocker mouth. ) 

The subject of Symbolism is one of absorbing interest ; it 
enchains the attention of the student of History and Theology as 
much as that of the artist, perhaps more, because in its primitive 
forms, when it is most interesting and instructive, it has little, if 
any claim to the title of Art at all; and even in its culminating 
epochs, it is remarkable more for manipulative skill than artistic 
genius, and appeals to the intellectual and imaginative faculties in 
a manner very different from, and in a degree far inferior to, the 
sublime conceptions of Greek and Roman Art. In what then 
consists its great importance, its powerful interest, its mysterious 
charm? To answer in some degree these questions is the object 
of this lecture, and I will endeavour to deal with it in a loving and 
reverent spirit. 

In the first place then, to trace the history of Symbolism, 
we must go back to the very earliest authentic records of the 
history of the human race. It pervades, almost absorbs, what we 
know of the earliest historic races of man ; and would it not be 
wonderful if it were otherwise ? Let us for a moment glance at 
the faculty of man to which Symbolism first appeals — the sense 
of Sight — the first of the gifts of the Almighty ; the first agency by 
which the powers of the intellect are awakened ; through which his 
mental faculties are called into being, and trained for good or ill. 
Through the sense of sight the brain is reached, the heart is 
touched, the imagination is aroused. Effects are instantaneously 
* This Lecture was profusely illustrated, 
13 



166 

achieved which, by the slower sense of hearing, require time, 
patience, and laborious effort. 

Sight, too, is a universal language ; so that we find in every 
primitive race the principles of Symbolism practised and under- 
stood. Where intellect exists, the sense of sight enables man to 
attach a meaning to the forms of objects, animate and inanimate, 
around him. This is amply illustrated by the pictures of Indian 
life sketched by many illustrious writers. The Mohawk brave, 
who stands before you in his war paint, and bears on his swarthy 
breast, indelibly tatooed, the representation of a grisly bear, a rattle 
snake, or a beaver, proclaims in language that all who run may 
read, that he is a formidable and powerful enemy, a secret and 
dangerous foe, or a wise and illustrious chief Here then is the 
origin of Symbolic Art; nor is it less conspicuous in his squaw who, 
even in name, symbols her qualities, good or bad : her fierce and 
angry passions, her patient and yielding temper, or her thrifty and 
careful love. Need I remind the readers of Longfellow of the 
charming picture which he gives in his poem of " Hiawatha," of 
the old arrow maker's child. 

' ' With him dwelt his dark-eyed daughter, 

Wayward as the Minnehaha, 

With her moods of shade and sunshine : 

Eyes that smiled and frowned alternate ; 

Feet as rapid as the river ; 

Tresses flowing Hke the water, 

And as musical as laughter — 

And he named her from the river — 

From the waterfall he named her 

Minnehaha — laughing water. " 

Nor is it only in the Indian's name and effigy that Symbolism is 
apparent, it exists in every important act of his life, it pervades all 
his thoughts and feelings. Is he friendly? he smokes with you 
the calumet, the symbol of peace ; and in the fleecy clouds rising 
from his pipe and mingling with yours, merging and floating away 
as one, you see a symbol of his unison with you in thought and 
sentiment, as beautiful and appropriate as the clouds of incense, 
typical of atonement, wafted to heaven from the swinging censor 
of the Israelitish priest. Nor is it only to Indian life, or even 



167 

mainly, that these remarks apply ; they are universally applicable, 
varying only in accordance with the degree of imaginative and 
creative faculties. Do my hearers need to be reminded of the 
early history of the Celtic inhabitants of the British Isles; the 
symbolic sacrifices of the Druids ; or the pagan theology of the 
Danes, Norsemen, and Anglo-Saxons'? Even now Symbolism 
lingers in our own habits and most cherished customs to a degree 
we scarcely suspect until we come to analyze them. The 
Mistletoe which we inherit, as well as the Oak, the Ivy, and the 
Holly, in their symbolic uses, from those very Druids of whom I 
have been speaking, becomes very useful about Christmas time, 
and gives a decided zest to our parties and friendly gatherings : 
ay, and occasionally leads to the use of another symbol for which 
we have a great respect, viz., the Ring — -the emblem of eternal 
union — a symbol we may trace through every style of Art, 
Christian and Pagan, until it vanishes into pre-historic time, fit 
emblem of its own appropriateness. The exchange of Easter Eggs 
is another symbolic custom inherited from a remote ancestry ; but 
how many think of its beauty as a type of the resurrection of the 
soul to a future state 1 containing, as every egg does, the germ of 
life. The primitive habits of our country people of Cumberland 
and Westmorland teem with customs of distinct symbolic origin, 
although in many instances little suspected or understood ; and 
those of the Highlands of Scotland have been made familiar to us 
by the works of the great northern wizard. Sir Walter Scott. I 
will only advert to one of these, viz., the custom which formerly 
prevailed of sending the Fiery Cross, the symbol of war, to 
summon help from the neighbouring clans. 



The grisly priest, with murmuring prayer, 
A slender crosslet formed with care, 
A cubit's length in measure drew — 
The shaft and limbs were rods of yew. 



Wo to the clansman who shall view 
This symbol of sepulchral yew. 



168 

Forgetful that its branches grew 

Where weep the heavens their holiest dew , 

On Alpine's dwelling low. 

Wo to the wretch who fails to rear, 
At this dread Sign, the ready spear ; 
For as the flames this symbol sear. 
His home, the refuge of his fear, 
A kindred fate shall know. 

Far o'er its roof the volumed flame 
Clan Alpine's vengeance shall proclaim, 
While maids and matrons on his name 
Shall call down wretchedness, and shame, 
And infamy, and woe. 

I have briefly endeavoured to show that the love of symbolism is 
a kind of instinct in man, and is adopted by unlettered races 
living in various climes and in various conditions of existence, as 
the readiest means of communicating ideas ; where, without it, in 
fact, they would have had no means of communicating ideas at all. 
But if this is so amongst the cold apathetic races of a temperate 
clime and a western sky, how much more would it strike root and 
flourish among the fervid and impassioned tribes of Asia, under 
the burning sun of the torrid East; the land of song and tradition; 
the birth place and cradle of the human race? The sacred writings 
teem with illustrations of this truth, and the history of the 
Israelites, as contained in the Old Testament, is one long struggle 
with the idolatrous worship of symbolic forms, of which the real 
meaning and original intent has been lost and misunderstood. I 
feel much tempted to linger over this part of my subject, but it 
would detain me from the more immediate object of my lecture ; 
I will therefore only remind you of one of the earliest and most 
striking instances of the use of symbols, which is contained in the 
49th chapter of Genesis, where Jacob illustrates by symbols the 
characters of his sons, fortells the future of the tribes which 
shall descend from them, predicts the coming of the future Shiloh 
as the offspring of Judah, whom he describes as an old lion. 
Who, he says, shall stir him up ? How pregnant with meaning is his 
comparison of Issachar to a strong ass crouching between two 



169 

burdens; and of Dan, who should judge his people, to a snake — 
an adder in the path, who biteth his horse's heels so that his rider 
should fall backward ; of Napthali to a hind let loose "he giveth 
goodly words ; " Joseph is a fruitful bough, by a well, whose branches 
run over a wall; and Benjamin — the fierce and warlike Benjamin 
— he describes as a wolf, "In the morning he shall devour his prey, 
and at night he shall divide the spoil." 

This subject brings me, by an easy transition, to those 
wonderful nations with which the history of the Israelites is so 
much identified, viz., the Assyrians and the Egyptians. The 
creators and founders, so far as we at present know, of the first 
great schools of historic, and especially Symbolic, Art. The 
Assyrian Empire is said to have been founded by Nimrod, and its 
original seat was Babel or Babylon, about 2,200 years before the 
Christian era. The Seat of Empire was afterwards moved to 
Nineveh. It lasted about 1,400 years, when it was divided into 
two kingdoms, which endured about 200 years longer. During the 
whole of this long period the history of the Assyrian people must 
have been the history of the arts and civilization of the world; and 
I know of no study more interesting than the unfolding of its 
hidden pages, for, marvellous as it may seem, it is nevertheless true 
that the mighty volume, after being hidden in the earth over two 
thousand years, is now being brought to light. Up to 1843 the 
history of the Assyrians was conjecture and tradition ; now it is an 
open book, the pages written in huge characters of stone. Even 
the type of lines and symbols, which seemed a hopeless enigma, 
has yielded to the untiring industry and ingenuity of those who 
have devoted themselves to the task of deciphering them. The 
folios of ancient history are there found, illustrated by artists 
contemporary with the scenes depicted ; and we find, as in the 
pages of a mighty " Graphic," the story of the Kings of Chaldea, 
including many of those, as it is supposed, mentioned in holy writ. 
One of the latest discoveries is a complete narrative of the history 
of the Flood, and portions of a great work on Astronomy and 
Astrology, as well as a history of the Comets, the whole of which, 
it is hoped, may some day be brought to light. Interesting as are 



170 

the discoveries hitherto made, they are as nothing to those which 
remain to be explored, for, as an eminent writer* observes — 
" The whole of the history, and almost all the literature of the age 
of Nebuchadnezzar, now lies buried in Babylon." 

From an artistic point of view, these discoveries are equally 
important, if only from the light they cast on the schools which 
followed. For it is now evident that marvellous as were the 
triumphs of Greek Art in their sublime conceptions of the beautiful, 
we are enabled to trace their origin in Architecture to the pre- 
existent schools of Assyria and Egypt. "These two stand, and 
probably will remain the primitive styles of the human race."t 

It is not within the scope of this lecture to go deeply into the 
records of Chaldean superstition, but we know that it must have 
been built mainly upon cruelty, and owed its power to its means 
of inspiring awe and terror. Human sacrifices to the gods were 
the means of averting divine wrath, and the aid of science was 
invoked by the priesthood to rivet the fetters of their influence. 
It was a great pastoral country, and the shepherds watching their 
flocks by night along the vast valley of the Euphrates, became 
familiar with every aspect and change of those starry constellations, 
which rolled their silent wheels above their heads, and learned to 
read their fate therein. Lucky and unlucky signs and symbols 
came to rule the most trivial and common-place events of their 
lives. Can we wonder at this when we consider the revelations 
which are made at the present day of learned societies and a free 
press, amongst ourselves. The Gipsy Fortune-teller on the race- 
course does not find her dupes only amongst the poor and ignorant 
when she practices, or professes to practice an art which she claims 
to inherit by direct descent from the very people of whom I now 
speak ; and every newspaper will show that no class of society can 
yet claim exemption from the charge of weakness and credulity. 
It is to the Assyrians that we may trace the invention of the fable 
and the allegory, for the earliest known works of this kind are 
amongst recent Assyrian discoveries. These inventions in litera- 
ture are closely allied to the tales of Genii, the oriental ancestors 
* Layard. + Ferguson's Hand-Book of Architecture. 



I 



171 

of the Western Ogres, Gnomes, and Fairies. The Phoenix, the 
Griffin, the Chimera, the Dragon, and other mythical creatures were 
originally used, no doubt, as symbols, but afterwards adopted by the 
ignorant and credulous as real creatures, and transplanted by 
Eastern travellers and crusaders into European heraldry and 
tradition. There can be no doubt of the worship of the heavenly 
bodies by all Eastern nations, and the influence upon them all, of 
Egyptain and Assyrian mythology, maybe distinctly traced by their 
symbolio%decoration. The sun being in its conception merely a 
symbol, the noblest and grandest of the works of God, the medium 
of heat and life, was afterwards regarded as the creator itself, 
and worshipped as the Osiris of Egypt, and the Baal or Bel of 
Chaldea. The Persian worship of fire was of similar origin ; and a 
host of symbols, such as the mystic Fir Cone, the Sphinx, the 
Winged Bull, and the Winged Lion, were used to perpetuate and 
extend the imposture. Time will not permit me to linger over 
Assyrian Art, as its leading features are closely allied, and in some 
respects identical with, the Egyptian, of which it is, in its later 
periods, a development; but those who wish to investigate the 
subject further, will be well repaid by the perusal of the works of 
Layard, G. Smith, Niebuhr, and other eminent writers. 

Our knowledge of Egyptian Art is much more complete than 
that of Assyrian, but to comprehend the barest outlines of it, we must 
know something of the people themselves, their climate, and the 
conditions under which they live. The original occupation of 
Egypt is a matter of, at the best, vague tradition; but it is stated that 
Middle and Lower Egypt were first occupied after the flood by Ham 
and his descendants, who being driven from their homes, and 
subjected to heavy losses by the inundations of the Nile, before 
they understood the natural laws by which those inundations were 
governed, many of them retired to Upper Egypt^ where they built 
the city of Thebes, and founded the first great Egyptian empire. 
I say the first, because that empire was divided into two distinct 
periods, and existed under widely different circumstances. The 
first period probably dates from about 1400 B.C. to 525 B.C.; 
and it was during this period that the pyramids were built, which. 



172 

colossal monuments will serve to perpetuate to still future ages the 
grandeur and magniticence of the Egyptian race. The second 
period dates from 323 B.C. to 30 B.C., and its chief city was 
Memphis, in the Delta, or Lower Egypt, so called from the 
resemblance the shape of the country bears to the Greek letter a, 
and it is to this second period of empire that the obelisks are 
attributed, one of which has now, after so many vicissitudes, found 
its way to our shores. 

The great feature of Egyptian life which stands out pr(|piinently 
above all others, is the influence on their habits and customs of 
the periodical inundations of the Nile, that marvellous flood which 
from the beginning was a myster}', to the solution of which the 
bravest of Englishmen have devoted their heroic lives— a sacrifice 
that even now seems to be achieving its destined triumph. The 
original settlers in Egypt were preparing to cut down their harvest 
when, without rain or other previous warning, the river swelled. It 
overflowed its banks, and spread over the whole country, sweeping 
away the dwellings, the cattle, and even many of the inhabitants 
themselves. Those who persevered in their occupation of this 
part of Egypt found that the alluvial deposit remaining after the 
inundation had subsided, left the land^^'a fertile garden. They 
therefore set themselves to guard against the recurrence of their 
losses, without relinquishing their hold upon the country. With 
this object, they organized a class of wise men, or magi (the 
magicians mentioned in the Scripture), whose special duty it was, 
by their scientific researches, to guard the common people against 
a recurrence of their calamities. It is to these magi, in Egypt, as 
to those in Assyria, that the pre-eminence of their country in art 
and science may be attributed ; and it is, I think, evident that 
while they carried their own researches into the most hidden 
depths of Nature and Science, as far as their means would allow, 
it was no part of their policy to have the masses of the nation 
equally instructed. The very significance of their symbolic 
teaching implies an appeal to the simplest and rudest order of 
intelligence ; and by perpetuating the ignorance of the mass, they 
were consolidating their own power and influence. To such an 



extent was this caste influence carried, that men were not allowed, 
excepting under the most exceptional circumstances, to rise above 
the class to which they originally belonged ; and children were 
compelled by law to follow the occupation of their parents. The 
discoveries of the magi of these countries are therefore the history 
of art, for their art is in fact, in Egypt, symbolical and hieroglyphic 
caligraphy. 

Interesting as this subject is, I must deal with it in the briefest 
possible manner. I have already alluded to the proficiency to 
which the Assyrians attained in the study of Astronomy; this 
proficiency was shared by the Egyptians. Early in the history of 
Egypt we find the country over-run and subjugated by a nation' of 
shepherds, whose severe rule was so hated by the Egyptians, that 
the name of shepherd — as we are informed in Scripture — became 
an abomination to the Egyptians, even when the foreign yoke was 
broken, and the invaders driven out. These shepherds were no 
doubt Assyrians ; and in that instance, as in many others, the 
two races mingled their lore of arts and science, accounting for the 
close intimacy we find existing between the two. That the 
divisions of time, the signs of the Zodiac, and the principles of the 
solar, lunar, and stellar systems, were perfectly understood by both 
nations, there is abundant proof; and it is to symbolism we must 
look for the explanation of those signs of the Zodiac, which are so 
interwoven into their Mythology and Art, and handed down to a 
remote posterity. Thus, the habits of the people of these countries 
give us the solution to these signs ; for we find the stars forming 
the constellation under which the great event of the Egyptian year 
occurred, viz. — the overflowing of the Nile — is called Aquarius, 
the Water-carrier. The Ox, or Bull, denotes the ploughing season ; 
Leo, the season when the Lion, driven by thirst from the desert, 
invades the villages of the people, and commits his depredations in 
the close proximity to the river ; Virgo denotes the harvest maid, or 
reaping time; the Ram, the breeding season among their flocks; the 
Crab is that season which is indicated by the stars which were visible 
when the sun, having reached the bounds of the tropic, moved in 
an eccentric orbit, backwards and forwards, like the crab ; the 



174 

Goat is when the sun has attained its highest altitude, from the 
well known habits of that animal to seek the summits of the rocks 
and mountains ; Libra (the Scales), when the days and nights are 
about equally balanced in duration ; the Scorpion records the 
prevalence of the regularly recurring scorching winds from the 
desert ; and so on. 

Now the magi discovered that the Nile inundation was 
preceded by an annual wind blowing from north to south, about 
the passage of the sun under the stars of Cancer ; and that this 
wind was preceded by a particularly brilliant star, which was 
selected as their warning to the people of the coming inundation. 
This star, because it served as a warning from danger, they depicted 
as Thayaut, the watch dog, or Anubis, the dog star. In Hebrew 
it is called Sihor. Its Latin name is that by which it is familiar 
to us, viz. Sirius. This star is honoured amongst Freemasqns as 
the great Blazing Star of Freemasonry, and is one of their most 
ancient and honoured symbols. The wind to which I have 
alluded, and the return wind which stopped the inundation and 
drove the waters back, they typified by two birds — the Hawk and 
the Hoop or Hoophoe. The Hawk, because at the return of mild 
weather it is the habit of that bird to make her way south, with her 
wings spread towards the quarter from whence the warm air comes ; 
the Hoop, on the contrary, wings her way from south to north, 
living on the small worms which are hatched in great numbers in 
the mud left behind by the inundations of the Nile. The symbols 
bearing on this subject are very numerous, and were used by the 
magi as means of warning. The Dog Star was symbolized in a 
variety of ways, but the commonest was the figure of a man, with 
the head of a dog. This figure, exhibited in suitable localities, 
gave warning of the coming inundation. It bore on its arm a 
kettle or porridge pot, to indicate that provisions were necessary. 
Wings on his feet denoted the urgency of flight ; in one hand he 
holds a feather, and behind him a tortoise or a duck is placed— 
both amphibious animals — typical of the coming inroad of water. 
Another common means of expressing the rising of the water was 
by lines in the form of a cross, and surmounted by a globe or 



175 

circle, expressive of the providence of God. Another method was 
by pitchers or measures of unequal size, called canopi, decorated 
with the crosses referred to, and surmounted bv birds' heads 
typical, as I have explained, of the prevailing winds. Sometimes 
the head of a dog, and at others a female head, marked the state 
of the river under the sign of the Virgin, when the water begins to 
subside. 

As the Egyptians had their warnings and friendly symbols, so 
they had their symbols of hatred and fear. They conveyed their 
horror of the ruin wrought by the stormy winds which drove on 
the floods, by depicting some terrible form — a dragon, or other 
composite animal ; a sea monster, a crocodile, or a hippopotamus; 
and sometimes a nondescript which they called Ob — a swelling, 
an overflowing ; or Python, the enemy. 

It is evident that in so elaborate a system as this, in which 
the constellations play so conspicuous a part, the Sun and Moon 
must occupy a prominent position. Accordingly we find the Sun 
typifying the Source of all good, as the symbol of the Almighty, — 
the King, the Ruler, — expressed in the figure of a man, bearing the 
sceptre, or a whip ; and frequently by another Masonic symbol, the 
eye. The type of the Moon was a woman bearing on her head a 
crescent ; and it is remarkable that this figure was also intended to 
typify not only the Moon, but the prolific Earth. Indeed, in the 
process of time all these symbols assumed other meanings, and 
from their simple outlines grew that mighty superstition, the Pagan 
Mythology. The Egyptians came to regard the male figure — 
emblem of the sun, or solar year, as a real personage, and paid 
him divine honours under the name of Osiris. The female they 
called Isis, his wife, and they had a circumstantial narrative of 
their supposed history. This narrative gives the clue to the origin 
of most of the heathen deities. For just as the Egyptians them- 
selves had various symbols to denote the same being under varying 
circumstances (for instance, another of their gods, Horus, indicated 
the sun, as well as Osiris), so the Greeks and Romans adapted the 
Egyptian deities to their own requirements. Thus Osiris Amnion 
found his parallel both in Jupiter Amnion and in Apollo j and 



176 

indeed, the story of Apollo slaying the Python is palpably 
Egyptian, and alludes to the rays or arrows of the sun dispelling 
the mists and fogs exhaled from the slimy inundations of the river. 
Ceres is another name for Isis, and is pourtrayed with sheaves 
and a sickle in a precisely similar manner; but Isis is also the 
prototype of Venus, under the Egyptian name of Ken; and is 
in Assyrian, Astarte, the emblems and attributes being identical. 
Hercules was one of the Generals of Osiris ; and I might pursue 
these comparisons to a wearisome length. The narrative, 
however, of the death of Osiris, caused by Python, and his 
resurrection as typified in a picture on a mummy cloth in Paris, 
is evidently symbolical of the ruin caused by the inundation of 
the Nile; his rescue by the returning seasons under the stars 
of Leo ; his period of repose and final resurrection. This 
accounts in the simplest possible way for the whole mythical 
story. 

I must briefly allude to a few other prevalent Egyptian 
symbols frequently recurring in Art, before leaving the subject. 
Of these the Sphinx is the most important. There are many 
suggestions as to its meaning : one is that it is a combination of 
the constellations of Virgo and Leo. This is, however, an error, 
so far as Egypt is concerned, because the Egyptian Sphinx is 
never female, but always male, and sometimes human headed, but 
frequently hawk headed or ram headed. The Sphinx, however, is 
as common in Greek art as in Egyptian, with this difference — that 
the Greek Sphinx is exactly the reverse of the Egyptian ; it is 
3\\idi.ys female, and it is winged, which the Egyptian never is.* I 
believe the true solution will be a symbolical one, viz. — that it is 
intended to convey to the Egyptian mind a type of God's provi- 
dence and guardian care, combining, in a manner most highly 
figurative to them, the human intellect with the courage and power 
of the lion ; whilst its immense proportions convey — in a manner 
congenial to the Egyptian mind, the idea of superhuman and 
supernatural endowments. The variety of heads given to the 
oracle may be accounted for in a manner suggested in the earlier 
* See Sir Gardner Wilkinson's Egyptian Antiquities. 



177 

part of my lecture, by a reference to the peculiar wants or circum- 
stances of the people in various localities. The hood or cap on 
the head of the Sphinx is generally supposed to be a throne, and 
alludes to the sovereignty of Upper Egypt. 

The Winged Globe comes next in importance, and is a type 
of the enduring providence of the Almighty. This explanation is 
equally applicable to the Scarabeus or .Mystic Beetle ; but the 
latter admits of a fuller and more comprehensive meaning. This 
is contained in an examination into the habits of this singular 
insect, when its apparent absurdity as an emblem of God's provi- 
dence must yield to a sense of its beauty and appropriateness. It 
is thus explained. The Scarabseus envelopes its egg in a ball of 
clay, and this ball, teeming with the germs of life, is adopted as 
the type of the present world. It is rolled by the insect with 
laborious care to a suitable place, where it is buried to a sufficient 
depth in the soil to protect it from the effects of the approaching 
inundation of the Nile. Here is symbolized the tomb. Tlie 
chrysalis represents the mummy state — death as a transition to the 
perfect day, when the Nile having retired, the grub emerges from 
its swathings, and soars into ethereal space, emblem of resurrection 
to eternal life. It would be difficult to conceive a more appropriate 
symbol to the Egyptian mind of his belief in a future state and the 
immortality of the soul. 

Next in order in Decorative Art I must allude to those 
prevalent features in Egyptian architecture, the Papyrus and the 
Lotus, and point to their wonderful influence in all the schools of 
decorative art which follow. They are commonly used together 
in Egyptian ornament, and have, like all Egyptian art, a highly 
symbolic meaning. They represent the intellectual and material 
wants of man. Thus the Lotus, or water lil)', is the accepted type 
of their great river, the Nile, to which they owe the fertility of the 
soil, and to which they are indebted for every material necessity of 
their daily existence. The Lotus will be found as commonly 
adopted in Assyrian as in Egyptian art, especially in its latest 
forms, when the Assyrian may be said to bear the same, culminating 
position with regard to Egyptian, as Roman bears to Greek art, 



178 

There is perhaps no ornament of such universal application ; its 
varied developments furnish some of the most beautiful features 
cf every school which follows. It is the anthemion of the Greek, and, 
with very slight alteration from the original, furnishes the fleur-de-lys, 
the proudest blazonry of the Merovingian dynasty of France. The 
Papyrus, from which the Egyptian paper was made, represented 
fitly their intellectual requirements ; and it is from the natural form 
of these two plants that we are said to owe the suggestion of the 
pillar, which may be said to be the foundation of Architectural 
Science. The Palm is next in importance. It represents material 
providence, as displayed in the vegetable world ; and again we 
must admit the beauty and force of the illustration; "for to the 
Palm the native of Egypt owes — shelter from the blazing sun, 
timber for houses and temples, and other varied wants. Baskets 
were made from its branches, and cordage from its fibres. It 
furnishes thatch for his roofs, and fruit for his table ; and 
embellishes the landscape with its luxuriant and varied form." * 

Another leading feature of Egyptian ornament perpetuated by 
succeeding schools is the Serpent, which, from its peculiarity of casting 
and renewing its skin, they used as an emblem of health and 
vigour, as Moses used the brazen serpent in the wilderness. Even 
the geometrical patterns used in Egyptian ornament — and they are 
very numerous — have distinct meanings, many of them plainly 
indicated by their names. Thus the wave scroll, the spiral, the 
fret or labyrinth, the zig-zag — have all taken an indelible position 
amongst the ornamental features of succeeding schools of archi- 
tecture ; and all allude to their great river in its varied features. 

I have done but scanty justice to Egyptian symbolism ; but 
time will not permit more, if I am to allude, however sparingly, to 
other branches of my subject. I must therefore conclude by 
observing that the great features both of Egyptian and Assyrian 
art are — grandeur of proportion, colossal size, gorgeousness of 
decoration, and richness of material — gilding, colour, gems, and 
ivory being freely used. 

I have;, already alluded to the fact that the Greek Mythology 
* Eygpt of Pharoah and the Khedive. 



179 

is a development of the Egyptian and Assyrian, the same deities 
being worshipped under various names, but with the same symbols 
and attributes. This is so well known that I will not further dwell 
upon it, but rather direct attention to the wide difference of 
artistic treatment between the two schools. It is this : — In the 
parent school, artistic treatment was kept subservient to the 
symbolic. In the Greek school, beauty, is the great aim of the 
artist ; the symbolic meaning, where it exists, being kept subordinate 
to the study of the beautiful, and more frequently discarded 
altogether. It is to this fact that the world owes those glorious 
productions of Greek statuary, in which the genius of man seems 
to find its culminating development. Indeed, gazing on those 
marvellous forms, where the majesty of the Creator seems stamped 
on the divine image, it is difficult to imagine the lives of those 
producing those works as other than pure and holy. The light of 
Christianity had not yet dawned, and could the teaching of 
paganism have been maintained as here symbolized, the soil would 
indeed have been ready for the seed, and the harvest sure and 
abundant. This could not be, however, and the weakness of 
Pagan philosophy was apparent in the voluptuous degeneracy of 
its mythology. If symbolism disappearing from Greek sculpture 
is kept subservient to artistic treatment, or utterly abandoned, as 
some say, it is still more true of decorative ornament. We have 
here the Egyptain symbols re-produced for their beauty alone, and 
this is but natural amongst a people to whom their meaning would 
be a mystery : the conditions of their daily existence being so 
different. In architecture and in ornament the world gained greatly 
by the change. The Lotus and Papyrus caps of pillars, the 
symbolic Caryatides and Isis heads and other deities, give place 
to the succeeding developments of the three great orders of the 
Greek schools — the Doric, the Ionic, and the Corinthian ; but in 
the friezes and other decorative features, we find Egyptain 
ornament distinctly perpetuated. 

The Roman school of ornament is merely a development of 
the Greek, adding to Greek details a gorgeous magnificence of 
treatment peculiar to itself. It consequently claims no originality 



180 

of invention, although it combines with the more severe simplicity 
of Greek forms, the use of grotesques, or combinations of human, 
animal, or vegetable ornaments. There is no symboHc meaning in 
their deHneations ; no attempt to appeal to any other sense than 
that of beauty or grace, although the use of the Griffin, the Sphynx, 
or otherjforms of symbolic origin, is much more frequent in Roman 
than in Greek art. Perhaps the only really distinctive ornament 
the Roman school can claim, is the Shelly one of great importance, 
however, being afterwards one of the most important features 
of the Renaissance. 

We now come to the next great symbolic style of art, viz. 
the Early Christain, with its development, the Byzantine, and to 
comprehend even the barest outlines of this subject, we must again 
glance at contemporaneous history. I must remind you for a 
moment of the might, the majesty, the magnificence, the cruelty 
he vice, the sensuality, and the voluptuous degeneracy of that 
great Empire of Rome, which never seemed so superb and gorgeous 
as when on the brink of destruction. Like some mighty ship, 
manned by a drunken crew, with all sails set, driving right ahead 
for the rock-bound coast, where the sullen roar of the breakers is 
already heard, and the white surf is dimly seen. I must remind 
you of the peculiar tenets of Christianity, which made it a 
revelation of freedom and light to the poor and ignorant toilers of 
Rome ; whilst it came as a rebuke and menace to the great and 
mighty. Early Christian Art is in fact the history of the early 
struggles of Christianity : it tells in touching and pathetic language 
of its secrecy, its dangers, its tenacity, its faith, perseverance, 
simplicity, and heroism; its endurance amid trials; its hidings in 
caves and tombs ; its martyrdom ; its fortitude through all ; its 
success ; its triumph — all are symbolized here ; the cycle of time is 
rolled back again, and though with widely different conditions, we 
revert to the same objects and motives which actuated the origin 
of Egyptain and Ass}Tian art. The first and second centuries, 
therefore, of the Christian era, yield not only a record of the gradual 
triumph of Christian doctrines over Pagan idolatry, hut an illustration 
of the triumph of the austere principles of Christian symbolism over 



181 

the sensuous beauty of Heathen art. Forms beautiful and harm- 
less in themselves were condemned because tliey were associated 
with Heathen customs and worship, and were replaced by outlines 
crude and unattractive, but embodying the principles of that faith 
which conveyed to the hungry the assurance of the bread of life, 
and to the thirsty that of living water. These early symbols are the 
monogram of Christ : the Lily,the Cross, theSerpent, andthe Aureole 
or Vesica-pisces. This Aureole enveloped the whole person, and 
represented the acrostic symbol — the fish, from the Greek, 
word being composed of letters which initial the following : 
Jesus Christ, God, Son and Saviour. The fish was also commonly 
used as the emblem ol baptism. The dove was used in various 
ways ; it was the emblem of peace and reconciliation ; it also 
symbolizes the freedom of the departed soul; but when the dove 
bears the nimbus, it has a higher meaning, and symbolizes the 
Holy Ghost. The Olive branch is also a symbol of peace, though 
of well-known Pagan origin, being used in exactly the same sense 
by Minerva in her celebrated contest with Neptune, to denote the 
highest gift of the gods to man. The Palm branch denoted 
victory, and is equally of Pagan as well as Biblical origin. A Ship 
was sometimes used to signify the Church. When used in com- 
bination with the Fish, it expresses Christ supporting His Church. 
The Vine is also a frequent symbol of Christ's Church. But the 
most important feature in early Christian Art is the Nimbus. It 
was the glory encircling the head, combinations of which form the 
well known Byzantyne and Gothic trefoil and quatrefoil, the former 
denoting the Trinity, and the latter the four evangelists. So im- 
portant is the Nimbus, that it is described as the key to the 
Archaeology of Early Christian Art, and volumes have been written 
on its details. 

But more immediate to my purpose it is to show how Art, 
like History, repeats itself We find the mystic triangle of the 
Egyptians, which forms the basis of the design of the pyramids, 
reproduced as the symbol of the Christian Trinity. The Cross, so 
common on Egyptian monuments, is now the glorious type of the 
resurrection; and even the Tau, the Egyptian sign of life, is 

14 



182 

literally copied as one of the forms of the cross used in Christian 
Art, and known as the cross of St. Thomas. The Serpent, the 
Lion, the Dragon, the Peacock — all Egyptian — are also prominent 
Christian symbols ; and there is no difficulty in tracing such forms 
as the Winged Ox. the Winged Lion, the Eagle, and the Winged 
Man, to a date far antecedent to the time of the four evangelists 
whom they symbolically represent. 

How dangerous to the unlettered mass the fertility of the 
artist's imagination may become, in the unfettered production of 
heavenly symbols, may be well illustrated by the Tetramorph, a 
mysterious being with four heads, surrounded by Nimbi and 
numerous wings covered with eyes. It stands on two fiery wheels 
or stars, also winged. It may be seen in a Byzantyne mosaic in 
a convent at Mount Athos. A fable long believed in by naturalists 
is perpetuated in Christian symbolism, adopted from Egyptian, viz. 
the Pelican feeding its young from the blood on its breast. It was 
used as an emblem of Christ, and is well known as a favourite 
device of the Church of Rome. 

On the various forms of crosses used in Christian Art, a 
volume might be written ; and the same may be said of the 
monogram of Christ. They are, however, so familiarly known in 
their ordinary forms, that I will not dwell upon them, but pass to 
another feature of the subject, less understood, viz. the meanings 
attached to colours, metals, and precious stones. When tints are 
used by early artists of this school, it is necessary to remember 
that the artist is not merely a colourist, but a preceptor ; he is not 
only painting a picture, but he is preaching a sermon ; consequently 
he arranges his colours less to produce a pleasing effect to the eye 
than to appeal to the mind by their symbolic significance. Silver 
in metals and white in colours, were used as symbols of light and 
life, innocence and purity ; pure yellow and gold denoted faithful- 
ness, brightness, and the goodness of God. Impure or dingy 
yellow was used to denote the exact reverse of these qualities — 
deceit and jealousy. Judas Iscariot is generally depicted in robes 
of this tint. In the same manner every colour has its well known 
symbolic attribute. The canonical colours are black (which is 



b 



183 

used on Good Friday only), white, green, violet, and red, and have 
each their separate festivals and fasts at which they are respectively 
used as the prevailing colour. In precious stones, the diamond 
has the same significance as white and silver. The niby signifies 
love, dignity, royalty ; the carbuncle, blood and suffering — our 
Lord's passion and martyrdom ; fivf carbuncles on a cross mean 
our Lord's five wounds. The sapphire denotes truth ; the emerald, 
exalted faith ; and the pearl, innocence and humility. 

In treating of Christian Symbolism, I have necessarily dealt 
with it as a whole, embracing its principles from their conception 
in poverty and persecution, among the poor and ignorant outcasts 
from society, hiding in the catacombs by hundreds ; — and how 
vast these catacombs were, may be understood by the fact that 
they measure from 800 to 900 miles in extent, and are assumed to 
contain from six to seven millions of Christian dead. The primi- 
tive Christians met here by stealth, hunted down like malefactors, 
holding their lives by a thread that a breath might sever; denounced, 
pursued, torn by wild beasts in the arena, mid the exultant roars 
of the still more cruel crowd. There is no fancy sentiment in this 
view of Christian Symbolism ; no poetical mind adorning its 
devotional aspirations in a garb of Oriental splendour. It is a bare 
struggle for spiritual existence ; a tenacious and desperate hold of 
drowning humanity, which none might sustain but such as reali2ed 
the full meaning of the words " other hope have I none," " simply 
to Thy cross I cling." And from this point of view, what a world 
of meaning is there ! What a vista of bygone hopes and fears, 
joys and sorrows, we gain by a contemplation of those crude, hard 
outlines of crosses and doves, serpents and fishes, which are 
scratched, rather than sculptured, on the walls of the catacombs, 
and in the relics of the purlieus of Ancient Rome. 

But when Constantine embraced Christianity, all was clianged. 
Christian Art, still pure, intolerant, and ascetic in its principles, as 
opposed to Pagan Art, sought development and expanse by the 
free amplitude of its details. The use of gorgeous materials and 
colours became the rule, and emblems of shame and servitude were 
adopted in their turn as the proud insignia of victory. Christianity 



184 

became the fashion, and lost in its triumph much that made the 
triumph worth the winning. In the progress of time Christian Art 
lost its stern simpHcity of symboUc teaching, but artistically gained 
more than an equivalent by engrafting on to its principles the 
splendid features of Greek and Roman Art. This blended style is 
commonly known as Byzantyne. 

In this school or epoch of art, we find the old classic scrolls 
combined in their details with the lily and the trefoil, the cross and 
the monogram. More and more latitude is taken as the study of 
the beautiful is permitted and encouraged, until it eventually 
culminates in the gorgeous beauty of the Romanesque. 

When the degenerate Roman Empire fell to pieces, and 
Europe was over-run by barbarous hordes, symbolism again played 
a vitally important part. Society was unconsciously undergoing a 
purifying process ; but during this time, commonly known as the 
dark ages, the masses of the people were sunk in ignorance and 
barbarism. Religion was the only home of the Arts and Sciences, 
and outside her pale another institution had to fill the place of 
civilization : this was called Chivalry. Both Religion and Chivalry 
had to work upon the imagination and the intelligence. Compelled 
by necessity, both employed the same primitive agency : both 
adopted the language of symbolism. Thus we find our Gothic 
cathedrals and churches built on the ground plan of a cross ; their 
niches full of saints and virgins ; their windows had tracery of 
trefoils and quatrefoils ; and the stained glass contained effigies of 
saints and martyrs, apostles and evangelists. They carved their 
misereres and stone capitals with types of the seasons, and taught 
the people to behold the goodness of the Creator in the bounteous- 
ness of His works. Unconsciously also they went further back, 
and in their steeples they copied the obelisks. They ornamented 
their arches (the construction of which in its principles they owe 
to the Egyptians,) with the zig-zag, the emblem of the Nile. They 
carved lions, masks, and fantastic heads on their gurgoyles, which 
may find their prototypes in Egyptian, Indian, or Chinese temples; 
and on their crockets we find numerous varieties of the mystic 
lotus. 



185 

We now turn to Chivalry ; and here we find Symbolism 
organized and cultivated as a science, under the title of Heraldry, 
with complete paraphernalia. Their society was a College of Arms ; 
their professors were Kings of Arms; and their ushers were Heralds. 
They had missionaries in the Troubadours, who nursed iu those 
dark times the love of poetry and song. By means of this singular 
institution a power was created which, exercised a wonderful 
influence. The most powerful of the nobility bowed to its sway, 
and its laws were as absolute as those of the church itself The 
proudest monarch would have deemed the chopping off his golden 
spurs — the symbol of his knighthood — an evil not inferior to the 
loss of throne, lands, or power. Gallant feats of arms were 
considered amply repaid when their heroes were permitted to 
perpetuate them by the acquisition of some symbolic device to 
add to their armorial bearings ; and in the Crusades we have the 
solution of the importation of oriental symbolic animals into the 
heraldic system of the less imaginative, but not less superstitious, 
people of the west. The Phoenix, the Salamander, the Chimera, 
find their origin here ; so do Dragons and Wyverns. The Mer- 
maid (the western version of the Syren), the Cockatrice, the 
Basilisk and the Unicorn, all of evidently eastern origin, and 
symbolic in their combinations. Indeed the mediaeval knight, 
bearing on his helmet a boar's head, surmounted with plumes of 
feathers ; a coat over his armour quartered with lions and panthers, 
and bearing on his shield a flying spur, is only the development of 
the same train of ideas embodied by the Indian in his war paint, 
alluded to in the opening of my lecture, and would proclaim, 
without any necessity for the herald's flourish, that he was as 
strong, as brutal, as fierce, and as fleet a foe as any savage of them 
all. 

Sometimes, indeed, popular ignorance will persist in makino- 
mistakes ; and some emblazonments have become sadly perverted 
from their original meaning. There is no more remarkable 
instance of this than in the patron saint of England, St. Geort^e, 
who is represented on horseback, slaying a dragon. The St. 
George alluded to is said to be George, Bishop of Cappadocia 



18R 

who probably never wore armour, except that of controversy. The 
Dragon is Sin and Error; although, if Gibbon's account is true, 
the sin is as mythical as the armour ; and George's claim to be 
considered a saint at all is of #ry doubtful kind. 

The figure of Britannia bearing the trident of Neptune seems 
a more appropriate emblem of our tight litde island, though some- 
how it has a very pagan look; the figure being as evidently 
Minerva, as the trident is filched from the sea god. The only bit 
of Christianity about it is the Union Jack on the shield, which is 
a combination of the crosses of our various nationahties. We 
have our national flowers too. The Rose was the emblem of 
the rival houses of York and Lancaster; and the Thistle, with 
the proud motto, ' ' nemo me impicne lacessit" has been well and 
worthily born by the gallant Scots ; but the most poetical and 
beautiful national emblem is the Shamrock of Ireland, which, as 
the legend tells us, was used by St. Patrick at a critical moment, 
as a symbol of the Trinity, to show the hesitating people how 
nature has combined three in one, and so, by making clear to their 
minds a seeming impossibility, decided them to adopt the Christian 
religion. 

I have now completed my sketch of the Symbolic Schools of 
Art. At their influence on our own times I cannot do more than 
glance. It is impossible however to over-rate their importance in 
art teaching. Kept aUve in the monasteries and convents during 
the dark ages by the influence of the Church, they inspired and 
developed many of the features of Gothic ornament; for although 
in its essential features Gothic architecture is pointed and geomet- 
rical, it preserves all the symbolic elements of the Byzantyne 
period, combining with them adaptations of natural plants and 
flowers in endless variety and profusion. 

It is certain that a study of Symbolism is absolutely essential 
to a right understanding of Mediaeval Architecture, for it furnishes 
the clue to meanings which otherwise seem hopeless absurdities, 
and the vagaries of an eccentric or distempered imagination. But 
these meanings will well repay study. These old monks never did 
anything without a purpose and a meaning, and they devoted an 



187 

amount of time and earnest thought to the elaboration of the 
details of their work, which is rarely achieved in these go-ahead 
times. Their work was like their pace— a walk. They had time to 
digest every detail of the landscape in their earnest gaze ; we race 
along by steam, and talk by telegraph and telephone ; but we see 
so much that we see little long. We see it also superficially and 
imperfectly, and there is much that we ought to see that we never 
see at all. 

I am aware that there is a disposition to over-rate Symbolism, 
and to attach in some quarters too great and over due importance 
to it. But while we deprecate such exaggeration and extravagance, 
let us take care that we do not go into the other extreme, and 
deny it any interest and importance at all. The best security 
against the abuse of symbols is to study them for ourselves, and 
learn their true meaning and value. As a means of communicating 
ideas, as an educational medium, .symbolism owed its usefulness to 
its faculty of appealing to the sense of sight of an illiterate, but an 
earnest and devout, people. The spread of education, the increase 
of schools and churches, has superseded this necessity. Its chief 
value — and it is very great — lies in the clue it gives to past history. 
It is not Religion, and it is not Art, but it is a very valuable aid to 
the study of both. It carries the mind back to remote ages, and 
raises — be it ever so little — that mysterious veil which enshrouds 
the story of primeval man. It links the living present with the 
mighty spirits that have long passed away ; and whilst it strengthens 
the bonds of a broad, reflecting, and enduring faith in ourselves, it 
preaches above all things — humility and wide toleration of the 
opinions of others. 



189 



HALF-AN-HOUR WITH A FEW- COMMON BEETLES. 
By WM. DUCKWORTH. 

(Read at Carlisle.) 

The subject we have chosen for our paper to-night, though 
not a popular one, is one which, we trust, will prove of some 
interest to you all. Perhaps the general idea of beetles is 
confined to the cockroach or black-beetle of our cellars (which, by 
the way is not a beetle, but belongs to the cricket family) or 
perhaps to the pretty and useful lady-bird or the dor beetle, which 
goes under rather a vulgar name locally ; and it is rather surprising 
that, generally, so little interest is taken, even by entomologists, in 
such a numerous and strange class of insects. The life history of 
some of our beetles reads like a fairy tale ; and some years ago the 
narrators of each would, we are afraid, have been credited with the 
powers of Baron Manchausen. We could tell you of one beetle, 
whose bundle of small yellow eggs is laid in a hole in the ground ; 
the eggs are soon hatched into free creeping larvae, something like 
miniature spiders, which climb the nearest flower stem to the 
blossom, and there wait the arrival of some unfortunate bee, in 
search of honey or pollen ; they now leave the flower and cling to 
the bee, and so get carried to the nest, where their first duty is to 
eat the bee's egg, and then change into the true larval form. 
They find enough nourishment in the food which the bee had 
provided for its young, to carry them through the various stages to 
the perfect insect, knoun as tlie Oil Beetle, ( Melor Cicafricosus,) 
which deserves its name from a curious habit it has of distilling a 
yellowish oil from the joints of the legs on being handled. We 
could also tell you of the Bombadier Beetle, armed with a stern 



190 

chase gun. which, when pursued by its enemies, discharges an 
acid that volatiHses on coming into contact with the air, with noise 
and smoke. Our efforts to-night are of an humble description, 
and will be confined to a few locally common beetles, and whose 
habits may be studied almost at any time. 

In a young Society like ours, it would have been more 
in keeping if we had given you some idea of the external 
anatomy of the beetle, and their arrangements into sections and 
families. This, however, is rather dry work at first, and we pre- 
ferred to niake the paper more of a popular character ; and if by 
so doing we can interest anyone in the study of our Coleoptera, our 
object will have been attained. The study of beetles — though they 
form the first order in the class Insecta — has been very much put 
aside for the more pleasant one of their brilliant cousins, the butter- 
flies and moths, and we think unworthily so, playing, as we believe they 
do, a greater part in the economy of nature than the Lepidoptera. 
Therefore there is plenty of room for the study of Coleoptera, 
especially in our own neighbouthood ; and a good collection of 
local beetles would add very much to the interest of the museum. 
There is some difficulty in the classification, more so perhaps than 
other insects ; but this disappears on close application, and the 
manipulation of them is so easy, that there is little fear of spoiling 
a specimen after you once have got it. One great drawback in 
studying the life history of beetles, is the difficulty of rearing them 
from the larvae, it being impossible to breed many of these 
artificially, especially the carnivorous ones, and many others take 
two and three years to come to maturity. 

Taking the few beetles we shall bring forward to-night in their 
proper order, the first one we have to say anything about is the 
Common Tiger, known scientifically as Cicindela campestris, 
section Gcodephaga. This is a good representative of the car- 
nivorous beetles, its whole life, both during its larval condition and 
as a mature insect, being one scene^ of raj:y,ne and slaughter. It 
it also one of our most beautiful insects, its prominent colors 
being green, yellow, and bronze of many tints; and on seeing it 
flying^on a_,hot^sunshiny day — in which the beautiful steel blue of 



. 191 

the abdomen is shown, it ghstens like a, jewel : this has earned for 
it the name of the "Sparkler" Beetle. It is a very active insect, 
taking to wing almost as readily as a wasp or bee ; in fact the 
quickest of any of our beetles, and being equally energetic on its 
legs, walking or running. On being handled, it emits a delicate 
scent, of what we should say was rosemary, but has been variously 
described as lavender, musk, roses, and sweetbriar. The Tiger 
Beetle delights in sandy banks, and if with a southern aspect so 
much the better; for in such a soil its peculiar larva finds a home 
and food. The body of the larva is divided into thirteen segments, 
first, a very large and horny head, armed with a pair of powerful 
jaws, like sickles toothed on the inside, so that there is no escape 
for any poor insect once in their embrace ; the next segments 
carry the almost useless feet; and the eighth projects out very 
much from the rest of the body, and is finished off with a small 
pair of hooks ; this segment and the large head give the larva a 
very peculiar appearance. The larva digs a tunnel in the sandy 
soil about twelve inches in depth, carrying the eartli up on its broad 
flat head ; when the tunnel is completed, the larva climbs to the 
top, and, hooking itself by the small hooks on the eighth segment 
of the body to the side of the tunnel, it fills the top of the holes on 
a level with the ground with its large head and jaws, and there 
lies in wait for any unfortunate insect that may travel that way, 
which, when caught, is dragged to the bottom of the den 
and eaten. Deprived as it is of any powers of locomotion that 
would be of use to it in procuring food, it makes up for it in 
cunning — literally making itself into a living trap for its victims to 
walk into. The larva is not often seen, as it disappears to the 
bottom of the hole on the slightest appearance of danger ; but if 
you know the habitat of the insect, all you have to do, is to 
find the tunnel and insert a stem of grass fully to the bottom, 
when it will be grasped by the irritated larva, which will not leave 
its hold till landed safely on the surface. May, June, or September 
are the best months for finding it ; and there is a bank a few yards 
to the south of Heads Nook Station where you may study it to 
perfection. 



192 

The wonderful transfortnation taking place in beetle life is 
well illustrated by this insect. First a small egg ; then an ugly — 
if anything in nature can be called so — nearly colourless larva, 
almost without the power of locomotion ; then comes the great 
sleep of pupa life ; then the fierce, handsome and perfect insect, 
capturing its prey not by cunning, but by its superior agility with 
legs and wings. The elytra, or wing cases, of the common tiger 
beetle, to the eye alone, are of a dull green or shagreen, spotted 
with whitish yellow or buff; and it is only with the aid of the 
microscope that the real beauty of the insect is seen. This acts 
like the wand of a fairy : the dull green vanishes, giving place to 
a surface of little rounded knolls, each of them sparkling with 
green and gold reflections. 

To the same section as the above belong the ground tiger 
beetles ( carabidce J, many of them apterous, or without wings ; 
but for this they amply make up in having an extra length of 
limb, travelling far in search of prey. One species of them may 
often be seen during the summer months, lying crushed on the 
footpaths about the suburbs of our city. They are of various 
colours — bronze green, violet, etc.; and several of them are of 
large size, averaging an inch in length. This family of beetles is 
very useful in gardens, and ought not to be destroyed, but 
encouraged to remain whenever seen. They live entirely on 
insects, young slugs, etc., all of which, more or less, are vegetable 
feeders. The ground tiger beetles are not much seen while the 
sun has power, being nearly all nocturnal feeders ; but they may 
be found during the day under loose stones, in heaps of refuse, etc. 
One of them, the golden tiger, (C. amaties) in France goes under 
the name of " the gardener," it is found so useful in keeping down 
the numbers of the cockchafer, a beetle very destructive to plant 
life. Another member of the Carabidce family I wish to bring 
forward to your notice is C. nitens, one of the rarer ground tigers, 
but considered by Rye to be the most brilliant and effectively 
coloured beetle we possess. To this section also belongs a family 
of beetles quite different in their habits from the foregoing, namely, 
the Aj?iara, or Sunshines, as they are commonly called, delighting, 



193 

as ihcir name im[)lies, in the sun's rays. The first fine hot day in 
spring brings them from their winter quarters, and you ma}' see 
them almost everywhere, from tlie centre of our city — say the Cross 
steps— to the quietest country footpath you could find. Their 
principal colours are brilliant green and bronze of various hues, 
and the size runs from about half-an-inch downwards. In child- 
hood we remember we had a legend connected with this beetle, 
that to kill one was quite sufficient to spoil the fine weather and 
bring on rain. 

Passing by the Water Beetle section ( Hydradephaga), of 
which we might have something to say some future time, we shall 
go on to the Brachelytra, or Rore Beetles, perhaps better known 
as 'cocktail' beetles. Of this large section of our coleoptera — and 
there are about seven hundred species recognized at the present 
time — we shall only take two common beetles to represent them. 
The variation in size of the Brachelytra is something wonderful, 
some of them taking a powerful lens to tell what they are, while 
others are above an inch in length. The name Brachelytra is given 
from the wings being packed under very short v;ing cases, thus 
exposing a good deal of the abdomen. Some of my hearers will 
have had a closer acquaintance with the Rore Beetles than they may 
have liked ; for fully two thirds of the so called flies that get into 
the eye in summer time, and cause such acute pain, are cocktail 
beedes ; and it is the very act of turning up their tails, and the 
discharge of an acrid fluid, that cause the severe pain. The first 
of these beetles I have to draw your attention to is Creopliilus 
maxillosus. It has no common name, though rather a common 
insect. But the scientific name, when translated, is very applicable, 
meaning the large jawed fiesh-eater. And certainly it deserves it. 
One we kept in confinement for some time, could eat a piece of 
cooked meat rather larger than itself in a day ; so the large jaws 
are not there for nothing. AVe were very thankful after having 
watched that beetle for some time, that we were not gifted with an 
appetite in proportion, or, we are afraid, there would soon be 
a scarcity of beef Tiiis beetle may be taken by laying traps of 
oflal, meat, etc., under stones and rubbish about a garden. 



194 

The other beetle in the Brachelytra we have something to say 
about, is the giant of the section, of rather repulsive and ferocious 
aspect, and one which you don't care about making friends with. 
It is commonly known as The Devil's Coachhorse ( Ocypiis olcns); 
and its ferocious aspect is fully borne out by its actions, being 
readier to fight than fly, caring little what its opponent is. Most 
of you, I dare say, have seen this beetle, as it has a peculiar habit 
of turning up in all sorts of places — about the edges of sinks, 
pantries, meat safes, in the bone bag, etc. The menacing attitude 
it puts on when alarmed, raising its head and working its jaws, 
while the tail is turned up over the back as if it were going to sting, 
makes people fight shy of it, and you had best let it alone, at least 
don't handle it ; if you want it for the cabinet, pick it up with a 
pair of forceps, and drop it into the cyanide bottle, or boiling water. 
Tha bite of it would not hurt you very much ; but when excited, 
two yellow points protrude from the end of the tail, from which is 
distilled a fluid, the smell of that same fluid being really something 
horrible. We have been trying to compare it with something else, 
but cannot ; but we know in this case the old saying would come 
true — that comparisons are odious ; and if once infested with the 
smell, it will take a good deal of soap and water before you get rid 
of it. It is a carnivorous beetle, though not disdaining carrion 
when it has the chance ; and we remember once seeing the Devil's 
Coachhorse attack a small earthworm, which it grasped by the 
middle and shook, much as a terrier does a rat ; the end of the 
tragedy we did not see, as both spoiler and prey disappeared down 
a hole. This beetle, like the rest of the family, uses the tail to 
pack the long wings under the short elytra, after a fight. 

We now come to a very interesting order of beetles, and one 
to which we have paid a good deal of attention. We refer to the 
Burying or Sexton beetles, section JS'ecropIiaga. And it will amply 
repay anyone who has the time and circumstances to suit, to 
observe the habits of these insects. It is not at all a difficult 
matter to do, if you live in the country, or even the outskirts of the 
city. Though the burying beetles are seldom seen, they are not 
uncommon 3 working and flying as they generally do by night, and 



105 

hiding by day. But if you want to observe their habits, you have 
simply to place a dead bird, frog, mouse, or something of that 
kind on the ground,— and so much the better if you choose 
a piece of light sandy soil. If there are any beetles about, 
you will observe next morning that the bird, or whatever it 
may be, has sunk so much into the ground, it may be very little, 
it may be half-an-inch, or it may be more, according to how the 
work has progressed. If it has sunk at all, and you see any signs 
of excavation round it, you may be sure the beetles are there; and 
by gently lifting the turf, one or more pairs of the Sexton Beetles 
will be found. And it is worthy of remark that the beetles are 
always found in pairs; and the male beetle is the principal worker. 
Now, if you get a spade and remove part of the earth, beetles and 
altogether, put them in a big flower-pot full of mould, and cover 
them with a glass shade, so as to prevent their escaping till their 
work is finished, you will have a good opportunity of judging their 
ways of living. They, will, in all probability, remain pretty quiet 
during the day, but as the shades of evening begin to fall, they 
bestir themselves. Their first duty on finding a suitable substance 
is to help themselves, to what a citizen of U.S. would call a square 
meal ; after that they set to business, the male, as I said before, 
doing most of the digging. After the body has been buried deep 
enough, and this occurs sometimes to the depth of several inches, 
the female deposits her eggs in it; they then make their way to 
the surface, and, using their long and powerful wings, go in quest 
of fresh fields and pastures new. Though the Burying Beetle finds 
its food by night, occasionally they may be seen flying during the 
day : their sense of smell must be very acute, and they are 
provided with ample wing power, as they must often have many a 
long flight before their hunt is successful. It was often a won4er 
with us in boyhood's days, why in our country rambles we so seldom 
came across a dead bird or animal. At that time we knew nothing 
of the Burying Beetle, but, with the expanse of knowledge, we 
think now, that that mystery is solved, and the solution is the 
Sexton Beetle. This insect by obeying a law of nature in provid- 
ing for the future larva also does a signal good to us, by removing 



196 

from the surface of the earth substances which putrefy and render 
unpleasant, if not unhealthy, by their foul emanations, the pure 
fresh air of our lields and lanes. One remarkable instance of 
instinct, if not reasoning power, shown by the Burying Beetle, was 
brought forcibly to our notice some time ago. While walking by 
the side of the river Eden, we came across a dead rat, it had fallen 
with its head just on the edge of a hole from which a stake had 
been withdrawn. On partially raising the rat we discovered a pair 
of the black and orange Burying Beetle (N. Vespillo) underneath; 
the rat was carefully replaced, and the beetles left to continue their 
work. On returning some six or seven hours after, the rat was still 
in the same place, but had somewhat altered its position j its head 
was hanging considerably down the hole, while the hinder parts 
where much in the same place. On lifting the body the reason 
was soon seen ; the beetles instead of undermining the body 
equally all along its length, as is their usual custom, were neatly 
digging away the edge of the existing hole, thus taking advantage 
of it to make their work less. So that in a short time, if left un- 
disturbed, the rat would have slid down an inclined plane to a 
ready made grave. The query now comes, was it instinct or 
reason that guided the beetles to this unusual method of burial, 
thus easing their labours to a great extent ? At times, we believe, 
there is no boundary line between the two. The perseverance and 
industry of the Sexton Beetle is very great. In some experiments 
carried out by M. Glaiditsch two pair of beetles succeeded in bury- 
ing in a small piece of earth — and in a short time — four frogs, three 
birds, two fishes, one mole, two grasshoppers, the entrails of a fish, 
and two pieces of meat. A man would look rather surprised 
if he were ordered to go and bury some huge animal forty or 
fifty times as big as himself in two days, taking his pick 
and tools. Yet a pair of beetles, armed with nothing but 
their feet and head, will bury a rat, fully fifty times bigger than 
themselves in a day. If the human race were endowed, in ratio, 
with a tithe of the wonderful power of difterent insects, we should 
live in a world of giants, as to strength. 

We have endeavoured to give you, in a rough niodel, an idea 



197 

of the Burying Beetles at work, busy in the process of interring a 
female yellowhammer, but still life falls a long way short of nature. 
You need hardly expect naturally to find all the beetles on one 
bird; but in the district of the true burying beetles, the 
one you will commonly find is the handsome black and orange 
insect JSJecrophorus ruspator; one of them is set with elytra 
raised and wings spread, to give yoii an idea of the extent 
of them. The pair in deep black are N. humator, the most 
common sexton beetle, we believe, in the south of England. 
The other two pairs are Silpha thoracica and Silpha obscura. 

In the autumn months of the year, just when slight frosts are 
changing the color of the leaves, numbers of the common Shrew 
(Sarex araneus) may be found lying dead in the fields and 
pathways without any apparent injury, as if some disease had 
swept them off. We have examined a great number of these in 
search of the Burying Beetle, but have never yet been successful in 
finding it. Dogs, we believe, will not touch the dead shrew. 

In the next section of beetles, the Lamellicornia or Chafers, we 

have to introduce to you a rather handsome, quiet and harmless 

looking insect, but one which is not to be judged by its looks. 

Taking the Cock Chafer (Melolontha vulgaris) in all the stages of 

its existence, we should think that the insect world could hardly 

produce a greater destroyer of vegetable life. Though in this part 

of the country it does not exist in sufficient numbers to cause its 

^ ravages to be felt ; yet in some of our southern counties, whole 

H cornfields and pasture lands will be completely ruined by the larva 

  , of the Cock Chafer, which feeds on the roots of grasses and grass- 

' like plants. The perfect insect is quite as destructive as the grub, 

and in certain years when it is plentiful, rows of trees may be seen 

I with not a leaf on them, but their branches covered with Cock 

Chafers. And yet this is nothing to the damage they do in France, 
districts being completely laid bare as if a plague of locusts had 
swept over them. The children of one small town caught fourteen 
thousand in a few days, the farmers got tired of counting them after 
I that and measured them by the bushel. There, their bodies are 

not allowed to waste, but boiled down for a coarse kind of fat, 

15 



19S 

which is very abundant in them. The antennae of the Chafers have 
a very beautiful leaf-life arrangement, from which they take the 
name of Lamellicornia, and which is most conspicuous in the 
male Cock Chafer. Watching the insect opening and closing them, 
reminds one of a lady toying with a fan. Another beetle in this 
section is well known to all of you who are anglers, by the name of 
Brackenclock, or June bug, (Phyllopertha horticola), but which 
may be found quite as plentifully among nettles and other plants 
as brackens. If you are going for a day's Brackenclock fishing you 
may save time by looking for the beetles the night before, with the 
aid of a lamp, about places where they resort. The June bug has 
a curious manner of simulating death when alarmed. This it does 
by sticking the two hind legs up over its back, shoving the front 
pair out and squatting close to whatever it may be resting upon. 
In this rather absurd position it will continue some considerable 
time till all likelihood of danger is past. No doubt but this simulating 
of death, both in this and other beetles, occasionally saves their 
lives, as toads will not touch an insect unless it is moving, and 
birds often act in the same way. 

Another well known beetle belonging to the Lamellicornia, 
though differing in family from the foregoing, is the Dor (Geotrupes 
stercorarius) alias the Watchman, the Clock, the Lousy Clocker, 
&c. It is one of the very few beetles that have been honored with 
a place in poesy. In that beautiful poem of Gray's, Elegy written 
in a country churchyard, it is alluded to in the line : — 
" Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight ?" 

Tennyson in " Claribel " says, 

"At eve the beetle boometh." 

While Collins in an " Ode to Evening" sings of it, 

" Or where the beetle winds 

His small but sullen hoon, 

As oft he rises midst the twilight path 

Against the pilgrim borne, in heedless hum." 

We might quote more passages relating to the " Shardborne" 

beetle, but the above, we think, are sufficient for our purpose. The 

Dor Beetle, we have no doubt, is familiar to you all, and some of 

you may have unpleasant recollections pf coming into collisiqn 



199 

with it on a summer evening's walk. If you have, and have 
not been too much startled to watch the motions of the insect 
afterwards, you might wonder whether the beetle or you were 
the most frightened ; you would observe it in all probability lying 
on its back on the ground, and as still as the dead insect it was 
imitating. Not a sign of life about it except the numerous 
parasites which might be seen crawling over it in every direction, 
and from which it derives the rather vulgar name of the " Lousy 
Clocker." The Dor beetle in laying its eggs and providing for its 
young, digs a hole eight or twelve_^inches in depth beneath cow 
dung, carrying part of this to the bottom of the hole, and laying its 
eggs in it. So that when the larva are hatched, they are like those 
of the Burying Beetle, at once in the midst of food. Now from the 
fact of the beetle working so much among such a plastic material, 
we might expect to find it more or less defiled and contaminated 
with it ; but such is not the case, they all seem perfectly new, 
(if we might use such a phrase), except for the presence of the 
parasite. We have often asked ourselves where this parasite 
got its living from, as it seemed almost impossible to extract 
it from such a fully armoured insect as the Dor Beetle. 
However, since Dr. Taylor's lecture, in which he told us 
that the scientific world was only beginning to understand the 
nature of parasites, and that in the first instance they were 
only there to clear away what otherwise would be a nuisance, 
it has struck me that, in the case of this beetle, the presence of 
the parasite and the absence of dirt, may be cause and effect. 
We need hardly say that the beetle on first emerging from the pupa 
has no parasites. An idea of the strength of this beetle may be 
gained by trying to hold one in the closed hand; do not squeeze it, 
but give it free use of its limbs, and it will, if so inclined, force its 
way out from between the fingers. The tenacity of life in the Dor 
Beetle is something extraordinary. For three days, in a daily walk 
last spring, we passed one of them in a small water tank apparently 
drowned; on the fourth day we were surprised to see it making efforts 
to swim. We took it out and placed it in a cyanide bottle, which 
generally means death in a minute or two, and let it remain some 



200 

four or five hours. We felt quite sure about its being dead now, 
and so pinned it and placed it in a small collecting box with some 
others. Two days after we had occasion to open the box and found 
the beetle walking about over the other insects in its usual blunder- 
ing fashion, with the pin in it, and destroying a good deal more 
than what it was worth. A dip into boiling water was resorted to 
at last, and this is the most certain method of kiUing large beetles. 
We have known specimens of Rhagium inquisitor, one of the wood 
boring beetles, stay for twenty four hours in the laurel box without 
seeming to suffer any inconvenience from it. Also belonging to 
this section of beetles is the Scarabseus, the Sacred Beetle of the 
Egyptians, a rude representation of which may be seen in Mr. R. S. 
Ferguson's case of Egyptian curiosities. 

Of the next section of beetles, the Sternoxia, we shall take one 
beetle to represent it, that is the well known Skipjack, to be found 
almost everywhere, but very abundant in particular localities 
We have seen it on a bright June morning on the lower slopes of 
High St., Kid sty Pike, &c., Hterally in hundreds. This is the 
acrobat among beetles, and to see it jump four or five times its 
own height in the air when laid on its back is rather amusing. 
This spring is accompanied by a sound which resembles the word 
click or crick, and from this peculiarity, in Westmorland it gets the 
name of Crick Neck. The larva of the Skipjack is one of the 
wire worms so much dreaded by farmers and gardeners, a specimen 
of which we have mounted for the microscope. 

Two more beetles out of the next section, Malacodermata, or 
soft skinned beetles, and we have done. The first we shall allude 
to is the well known glowworm (Lampyris noctiluca) ; and never 
shall we forget the pleasure derived from first finding this insect on 
the banks of the Chalk, a small river a few miles from this city, 
though at that time we were not aware it was a wingless female 
beetle. Certainly the male shows a small light, but nothing com- 
pared with the female, and it is the female which is popularly 
called the Glowworm. The male beetle is a perfect insect, much 
rarer than the female, and seldom captured. This beetle divides 
the honours, if not taking the first place in poesy, with the Dor 



^01 

beetle, and the allusions to it from Shakespeare downwards are too 
numerous for mention here. The light from the Glowworm pro- 
ceeds from the underside of the last three segments of the body, 
and in the unmounted specimen shown to you these segments are 
to be recognised by their lighter colour. The Glowworm seems 
to have the power of retaining or emitting this light at will, for 
sometimes on being disturbed the light disappears, and it is only 
after remaining quiet for a lengthened period that the lamp is again 
lit. The light of the male is not of the same broad brilliant 
nature as the female, but proceeds from two tiny spots on each 
side of the abdomen. Dear old Gilbert White says the lamps are 
put out about eleven o'clock. We should advise you all who have 
the chance, to introduce the Glowworm to your gardens, not alone 
from the fact of its being such an interesting insect, but during its 
larval condition it lives entirely on snails and slugs — often eating 
the poor snail out of its shell, which affords no protection to the 
attacks of the Glowworm larva. From the nature of its food, the 
larva often gets covered with slime; but nature has provided a 
remedy for this, in the shape of some seven or eight whisks, which 
are protruded from the end of the tail at will, and which are used 
to clear the slime from the body. 

We have now come to the last beetle, and unfortunately there 
is no occasion to leave the fireside to study it. Even the very 
chair you are sitting upon may contain it; and too often has 
lament been made over some old favourite piece of furniture which 
has become worm-eaten and worthless, through the attacks of the 
Anobiura Beetles. This beetle is the author of the sounds which 
give to it the name of the Death Watch or Death Tick, and the 
terror in which it was held — and is yet in certain districts — is too 
well known. The mysterious ticking heard in the silent watches 
of the night, was said to be a warning that some one was going to 
die; and the effect of this on an invalid, whose mind was 
thoroughly endued with the superstition, may be imagined ; 
while it was simply a little beetle giving a love call to its mate. 
We once had the good fortune to trace the sound to the beetle, 
generally most difficult to do. We were staying over night 



20^ 

at a small Country Inn on the outskirts of the Lake District, 
when about dusk, our ears caught the ticking of the death 
watch. Here was an opportunity not to be lost — we had the old 
room to ourselves and nothing else to do, for all the literature it 
contained was a Farmers' Almanac and a Whitehaven News a 
fortnight old. After procuring candles, we commenced our search, 
and a most exciting hunt it was — the beetle either possessed the 
powers of ventriloquism, or there were more than one of them ; for 
the sound seemed to change from one place to another, till we 
were nearly bewildered. However, we changed our tactics, and 
instead of rushing up and down after the sound, we sat down to 
watch one particular place ; and after a very patient vigil, we 
discovered the insect on the inside of the door of an old cupboard, 
which bore unmistakeable signs of the tunneling of Anobium. 
The power of this insect to resist poison, may be seen from the 
fact of the root of Monkshood, which I obtained from one of 
our members, Mr. Fisher, of Bank Street, having been tunneled in 
all directions, both by the larva and the perfect insect. There is 
one poison that is too much for it, and pieces of furniture, etc., 
may still be saved, even when very bad, by injecting into the 
holes spirits of wine in which corrosive sublimate has been 
dissolved. We have tried this on several occasions, and always 
found it answer. 



203 



WORDSWORTH. 
By the Rev. PROFESSOR WILLIAM KNIGHT. 

( Lecture ddivertd in May, 1878, at Cockermotdh, during the Annual 
Meeting of the Association. ) 

So much has been said about the genius and poetic mission of 
Wordsworth-and said so well-that I daresay some of you, who 
hve in his birthplace, may think that the subject is exhausted. After 
the critcisims of Coleridge and De Quincey, of Sir Henry Taylor, 
of Brimley, Clough, Robertson, Lowell, and above all of Mr.' 
Stopford Brooke, and the late and the present Professors of Poetiy 
at Oxford, there seems little need to say more. 

And yet, there is no possibility of exhausting Wordsworth, any 
more than of exhausting Plato. When the time comes for the 
world to feel that the last word has been said about the great 
idealist of antiquity, men may perhaps think that Wordsworth also 
is exhausted. Plato, indeed, moves in a sphere, and speaks in a 
dialect, that is philosophically more profound; but he never soars 
into a more ethereal region. He does not interpret Nature or 
human Life more adequately, nor does the student of his works 
breathe a more untroubled air, than that in which Wordsworth 
lived and had his being. 

In order to a just appreciation of this poet, two things are 
necessary. First, we must mark the growth and developement in 
his own mind of a new attitude towards Nature, and Man in 
relation to nature, as this is disclosed in his autobiographical poem, 
Tfte Prelude,~hy far the greatest work of its kind ever contributed 
to literature. Secondly, we must ascertain the relation in which he 



204 

stood to the poetical literature of England in the immediately 
preceding age, and what new elements he introduced into it, by 
his twofold interpretation of nature and man. 

[I omit the earlier paragraphs of this Lecture, which dealt 
exclusively with the first of these two points — the life and 
individuality of the poet — since that has been often and ably 
unfolded : and I pass to the second of the questions raised in the 
preceding sentence.] 

I have now to ask, What was it that Wordsworth did for 
literature and for the world, as no poet before him had done, and 
no one need attempt to do again 1 What, in other words, were 
the distinctive elements of his genius and his power, constituting 
him a teacher for all time 1 It is a large question, and one to 
which many lectures might be devoted. 

It is to him, beyond question, that we mainly owe the 
nineteenth century renaissance, in the poetical literature of England. 
The so-called poets of the eighteenth century were simply " men of 
letters." They had various accomplishments, and great general 
ability ; but their thoughts were expressed in /rose, or in mere 
metrical diction, which, in the low ebb tide of creative imagination, 
passed current as poetry, without being so. Towards the close of 
the century, however, there was a reaction, and a quickening of 
mind, which took shape in many different directions. One of its 
most prominent signs was a rise in the poetical temperature. 
This may be traced mainly to two great European influences ; to 
the growth of modern German philosophy, and to the social and 
political forces that culminated in the French Revolution. In 
Germany Lessing, Goethe, Schiller, and Jean Paul, were all the 
products of this movement. A new way of looking both at Nature 
and Society had been inaugurated by Rousseau, and our insular 
mind — never long unaffected by the great pulse of European 
thought — caught the contagion, and responded sympathetically in 
many ways, carrying forward the stream of tendency, to new and 
original issues. Amongst the poets, in whom we trace the working 
of the new spirit, themselves influenced from very diverse quarters, 



fi05 

were Cowper, Crabbe, and Burns. All the greater poets, though 
in part the product of their age, are more conspicuously its 
formative and inspiring spirits. In them, the intellectual and 
aesthetic energy of a period finds one of its most characteristic 
expressions. And in the group of illustrious men, who created the 
poetical literature of England, towards the close of last century, and 
during the first quarter of this, — Wordsworth, Coleridge, Scott, 
Byron, Shelley, Keats, with many others of lesser note, — we find a 
sudden outcome of energy long repressed : as, in this district of 
yours, after a tardy spring, one week of genial weather will some- 
times liberate the imprisoned life of Nature, and cause it to burst 
suddenly into leaf and bloom. 

Of this brotherhood of poets (which in originality and genius 
far excelled the earlier constellation of the Elizabethan era) 
Wordsworth was, beyond all question, the leader. In him, the 
creative impulse, and the new attitude towards nature and man, 
assumed features altogether unique ; and he may therefore be taken 
as their most prominent literary representative in England. 

Accurately to measure his genius, however, either as to its 
positive amount or special quality, Wordsworth must be compared 
both with his predecessors and his contemporaries. Few things 
are more interesting than to contrast his work in detail with that 
of those earlier writers from whom the whole new movement was 
a reaction, and with that of those who were borne for\vard along 
with him on the rising tide of the renaissance, bringing out 
succinctly the precise points of difference. Take only two. 

Comparing him with Pope, you find in Wordsworth a 
frankness and directness, the absence of all roundabout or artificial 
ways of dealing with and describing things. He spoke and he 
wrote, because he felt, and as he felt ; therefore clearly, freshly, 
adequately. He did not describe what all men saw, but what the 
majority failed to see only because their 'inward eye' had not 
been trained to see it. Their mind had never awakened to 
perceive, nor their heart to feel, the significance of the simplest 
things ; and so, in reading Wordsworth, many became aware for 
the first time that they 



206 

had faculties 
Which they had never used ; that thought with them 
Was in its infancy. 

They felt as if a new sense had been given to them, or a power, 
higher than sense, had suddenly arisen from obscure and shadowy 
recesses. As Keats wrote, when he first looked into Chapman's 
Homer — 

Then felt I as some watcher of the skies 
When a new planet swims into his ken. 

Comparing him again with Byron, you find in Wordsworth a 
healthful radiance, the supreme note of naturalness. His serenity 
was due to a clear-eyed freshness of perception, and — what is often 
denied to him — his objectivity of mind. He is never morbid, or 
hollow, or cynical ; while to those who craved excitement he had 
nothing to offer. As he wrote in the poem of Hart-leap Well: — 

The moving accident is not my trade, 
To freeze the blood I have no ready arts ; 
'Tis my delight alone, in summer shade, 
To pipe a simple song for thinking hearts. 

He could not have wailed out his own sorrows to the world 
in a misanthropic manner, even supposing him to have felt that 
' vanity of vanities ' was the last word of the wise, in reference to 
earthly good. To carry, like Byron, through Europe, 
The pageant of a bleeding heart, 

was impossible to Wordsworth ; both, because his heart never bled 
like Byron's — 

the holy forms 
Of young imagination keep it pure ; — 

and also, because he would have scorned to parade his misery. 
One element in his greatness was, that with open soul he felt the 
spirit of the age, which took him out of himself, in the first 
instance, to Nature. He saw that Nature had a revelation to im- 
part which man ought, in ' a wise passiveness ' to receive. This 
he perceived very early, and may be said to have absorbed the idea 
within a spirit singularly pliant, and open to such influence. It 
gradually consolidated and matured — the form changing, but the 



20t 

substantial part of the idea remaining unaltered ; and it became 
the increasing purpose of his life to proclaim it to his contemp- 
oraries, carrying it out through a long literary career, against all 
adverse critfcism and the want of popular appreciation, and 
embodying the result in a series of immortal poetic creations. 

It is the easiest thing in the world to criticise Wordsworth as 
Jeffrey did, — the acute Edinburgh lawyer, blind of one eye, who 
neither "saw life steadily nor saw it whole" and for whom nature 
contained no oracle or shrine. It is poor criticism even to say, as 
others have done, that Wordsworth had no humour, and no 
dramatic faculty; and that he, therefore, belongs to the secondary 
rank of genius. Humour is doubtless a great power, and Words- 
worth had little or none of it. But though the sunny laughter of 
the humourist is a source of inexhaustible delight to men who have 
to face much vanity and vexation of spirit, it is intrinsically a poorer 
thing to resuscitate our cheerfulness by laughter, than to rouse our 
flagging energies by insight, and fellowship with nature. It is true 
that Wordsworth would have had comparatively little appreciation 
of the intricate culture of our age, an age that is daily growing more 
involved. His poetry traverses a few great lines of thought and 
feeling, more profoundly than any other poetry does ; but its area 
is not wide. The complex civilisation of the nineteenth century, 
with its endless detail, was on the whole distasteful to him ; and 
jts best side, its redeeming side, was probably not understood. On 
the other hand, the cure for the fever and fret of the nineteenth 
(or of any) century was weft known, and profoundly grasped by 
him. The best antidote to the distractions of life — to the frittering 
away of strength, and the dissipation of energy in trifles — was 
understood ; and by no writer, ancient or modem, has it been more 
nobly uttered. 

It is, perhaps, useless to revive the criticisms of half a century 
ago, the long-buried judgments that were passed, by the guides of 
literary opinion in their time, on the merits of this new poet ; 
except, in so far as they afford one of the most significant instances 
on record, of the powerlessness of hostile or partisan reviews to 
extinguish original genius, and the certainty of a reversal of their 



m 

verdict by the next generation. The Edinburgh Reviewers did, 
on the whole, more harm than good, by their smart writing. 
They retarded for years the appreciation both of Wordsworth and 
of Coleridge, and prevented many of our fathers from coming under 
an influence, which would have deepened their lives and broad- 
ened their culture, whether it increased their cleverness or not. 
But as surely as those who lose their temper injure only themselves, 
all literary curses come home to roost ; and the verdict of the 
scornful, though brilliant, essayist, dealing with a mind he cannot 
comprehend, is reversed in the next generation, and soon forgotten 
altogether. 

We do not now even laugh at Jeffrey's sentence, "This will 
never do,'' with which the Edinburgh Polyphemus began his 
assault upon T/ie Excursion; because criticism has itself taught 
us that Jeffrey was incapable of appreciating one so new, original, 
and great. It was his misfortune, as much as his fault. The 
commonplace mind (and many acute critics have very common- 
place minds), however clear sighted within its own domain, cannot 
take the measure of an intellect like Wordsworth's. And in this 
connection, it is most interesting to look back for half a century 
and compare the estimate formed of him by the Edinburgh and 
the Quarterly with the appreciation of Coleridge, who, during his 
undergraduate residence at Cambridge, and before the two men 
ever met, read the Descriptive Sketches, and said of them, " Seldom, 
if ever, was the emergence of a great and original poetic genius 
above the literary horizon more evidently announced." It always 
requires some originality to discover the merits of an original mind; 
and, after all, the poets are the best critics of each other, as may 
be seen in Mrs. Browning's Vision of Poets ; though, to be candid, 
they are sometimes also the worst, witness the English Bards and 
Scotch Reviewers. You will remember, I dare say, Southey's reply 
to the Ettrick Shepherd, who had said to him, " I suppose you 
have heard what a crushing review Jeffrey has given The Excursion." 
— " He crush The Excursion 1 Tell him he might as easily crush 
Skiddaw." 

It must be admitted that there are structural defects in the 



209 

framework or ground-plan of each of Wordsworth's larger poems, 
and also in many of his shorter ones. It may even be natural to 
wish that a mind like Scott's, for example, had constructed the plot 
of The Excursio7i for him, in whole or in part, — Sir Walter would 
have done it with so much more artistic skill. But such literary 
copartnery is not possible. Supposing all initial difficulties removed, 
irregularities would be seen in the woA, in proportion to the 
originaHty of the minds engaging in it. The respective portions 
would not dovetail into one another. The sutures would not fit. 
Then, had the plot of The Excursion been prepared for Wordsworth 
by such a master of construction as Scott, he would not have kept 
to it. His idiosyncrasy would have rebelled against the suggested 
plan, as something that trammelled the freedom of his own mind > 
and he could not have woven into the more perfect framework, 
handed to him by Scott, that wealth of imagination which now lies 
within the less interesting skeleton of his own story. It is easy to 
see that all literary work has it blemishes, and that the most perfect, 
in form and "substance alike, must have its lacuna, which are even 
essential to its limited perfection. But it is not always seen, that 
excellence in one direction must of necessity, be balanced by defect 
in another ; and hence, that the wish to possess a perfect poem, or 
a perfect philosophy, or a perfect work of art, is as Utopian and 
absurd as the longing for a perfect human being. 

It is extremely easy to point out the infelicities and tran- 
sitions in Wordsworth's style, its ' inconstancy,' its occasional 
abrupt descents to an inferior level, its sinking from ideality into 
matter-of-factness, its frequent prolixity, due to the poet's lingering 
over details and elevating secondary incidents to a primary place, 
and hence "an eddying instead of a progression of thought." 
But what is the use of such nimble-witted criticism noiv ? It may 
be of use to prevent an unaccredited poet from fancying that he 
has secured a place amongst the immortals, merely because he has 
succeeded in becoming a clever writer of verses. But when one 
so great, original, and rare as Wordsworth has once taken his 
place in that Hierarchy, where so few sit together through all time 
• — and when that place is assured to iiim by the suffrage of posterity 



210 

 ^what is the use of obtruding our petty critical estimates ? Is it 
said to prevent those who belong to his school, and are pleased to 
rank as his " disciples," from a too indiscriminate eulogy ? Good : 
an intelligible aim, and a useful end. But, surely the world has a 
superabundance of critics and very few original minds. We are 
all born critics, but how many are creators ? and is it difficult to 
put even Shakespeare and Goethe, Plato and Aristotle, on the 
Procrustes bed of criticism, and stretch them curiously about? 
Besides, every critic has his critic ; and while admiration for ex" 
cellence unites men, animadversion divides them. All the above- 
mentioned faults in Wordsworth's style were noticed by Coleridge 
long ago in his Biographia Literaria, where the enumeration of 
blemishes is followed by one of the finest and most discriminative 
eulogies to be found in the annals of literature, and in which — 
with true prophetic insight — he says, " His fame belongs to another 
age, and can neither be accelerated nor retarded."* This estimate 
of Wordsworth by his friend Coleridge is so just (and in rigour it 
has not been surpassed by later criticism) that I cannot do better 
than quote to you its chief points. 

He notes '^ First, an austere purity of language, a perfect 
appropriateness of the words to the meaning. . . . Second, a 
corresponding weight and sanity of the thoughts and sentiments, 
won not from books but from the poet's own mediative observa- 
tion. They are fresh, and have the dew upon them. , . Third, 
the sinewy strength and originality of single lines and paragraphs j 

the frequent ciiriosa felicitas of his diction Fourth, 

the perfect truth of nature in his images and descriptions taken 
immediately from nature. . . . -ti/th, a meditative pathos, a 
union of deep and subtle thought with sensibility ; a sympathy 
with man as man ; the sympathy, indeed, of a coiitemplator, rather 
than a fellow-sufferer or co-mate, but of a contemplator, from whose 
view no difference of rank conceals the sameness of the nature ; 
no injuries of wind or weather, of toil or even of ignorance, wholly 
disguise the human face divine. The superscription and image of 
the Creator still remain legible to him under the dark lines with 
* Biografhia Literaria, p. 165. Ed. 1847. 



211 

which guilt or calamity had concealed or cross-barred it. In this 
mild and philosophic pattern, Wordsworth appears to me without a 
compeer. . . . Last, and preeminently, I challenge for this 
poet the gift of Imagination, in the highest and strictest sense of 
the word. ... In imaginative power he stands nearest of all 
modern writers to Shakespeare and Milton ; and yet, in a kind, 
perfectly unborrowed and his own."* With this I conjoin the 
estimate of another acute critic, the poet Delta. Dr. Moir says, 
"Never, perhaps,'_in the whole range of literary history, from 
Homer downwards, did any individual, throughout the course of 
a long life, dedicate himself to poetry with a devotion so pure, so 
perfect, and so uninterrupted, as he did. It was not his amuse- 
ment, his recreation, his mere pleasure. It was the main, the 
serious, the solemn business of his being. It was his morning 
noon, and evening thought, the object of his out-door rambles, the 
subject of his in-door reflections ; and, as an art, he studied it as 
severely as ever Canova did sculpture, or Michael Angelo paint- 
ing."! 

This leads me to a fresh point in the estimate of Wordsworth. 
It was the ambition and aim of his life to construct " a literary 
work that might live ; " and he first wrote his own autobiography 
in verse. The result was such, that he determined to compose 
" a philosophical poem, containing views of Man, Nature, and 
Society, to be called The Rediise." One part of this only — The 
Excursion — was written. The Prelude, he tells us, was meant to 
have the same relation to The Recluse as the " ante-chapel has to 
the body of a Gothic church ; " and he hoped that his minor 
poems, when properly arranged, would be found " to have such a 
connection with the main work as might give them claim to be 
likened to the little cells, oratories or sepulchral recesses, ordinarily 
included in these edifices."! 

In this ambition, you see the love of artistic symmetry and 
completion. He was not satisfied with occasional " lyric cries " 

• Biographia Literaria, pp. 161-186. 

+ The Poetical Literature of the Last Half-Century, p. 65. 

5: Poetical Works, vol. vi, Preface, p. 4. 



212 

or short swallow-flights of song. He wished to leave behind him 
a literary whole, gathered up into unity, and with a defined pur- 
pose from first to last, stately, with massive proportions, and 
manifold embellishments. 

And in connection with this, note his conviction of the high 
calling of the Poet, and of his responsibility as an educator of his 
age. He held that the poet's function was not to descend to the 
level of other men but to endeavour to raise them up to his 
own level. As he wrote to Sir George Beaumont, from 
Goslar, '• The poet is a teacher. I wish to be considered as a 
teacher, or as nothing." The strength of resolution with which he 
pursued this purpose has probably had few, if any, parallels in 
literature. Fiercely abused, even ridiculed — not by puny assail- 
ants, but by the accredited critics of the day — he went on, with a 
grand tenacity of purpose, to write fresh poems, of the same 
character ; the creative impulse welling up within him, like the 
waters of a perennial spring. He felt sublimely sure of the verdict 
of posterity. And yet, it was not his confidence that the judg- 
ment of contemporaries would be reversed that kept him loyal to 
his vocation ; but his conviction of the inherent worth of that 
vocation, his belief in himself, and in the ends to which his life 
was devoted. His sense of the dignity of his calling, as a Poet, 
is the greatest in literature. He expresses it in a noble sonnet to 
his friend Haydon — 

High is our calling, friend ! creative art 

Demands the service of a mind and heart 

Though sensitive, yet in their weakest part 

Heroically fashioned — to infuse 

Faith in the whispers of the lonely muse, 

While the whole world seems adverse to desert, etc 

Mr. Lowell thinks that his early conviction of being " a 

dedicated spirit" led to "a one-sided, as well as to an intense 

development of his intellectual powers ; and that this was fostered 

by the solitude of his life, which deprived him of any standard of 

proportion outside himself, by which to test the comparative value 

of his thoughts." Let us grant it. But had he possessed such 

' a standard ' the world would probably have been deprived of 



213 

much that he has given it. A ' standard of proportion ' would 
have repressed the outflow of his genius, dwarfed his originality, 
and checked the free course of that stream of imaginative ardour 
to which we owe so many immortal creations, and so much of the 
scattered wealth of his poetry. We may be thankful that the 
greater poets have seldom had a perfect " standard of proportion." 
The rounded completeness which comes of culture would have 
maimed W'ordsworth altogether. 

It is refreshing to turn from the critics, and listen to the poet's 
own estimate of his office, and of its fulfilment in the future. He 
said to his nephew : — " Every poet must diffuse health and light ; 
he must prophesy to his generation ; he must teach the present age 
by counselling with the future ; he must plead for posterity."* To 
his friend, Lady Beaumont, he writes as follows of the Lyrical 
Ballads. The quotation is a little long, but it is so excellent that 
I must give it in full. " It is impossible that any expectations can 
be lower than mine concerning the immediate effect of this little 
work upon what is called the public. I do not here take into con- 
sideration the envy and malevolence, and all the bad passions 
which always stand in the way of a work of any merit from a living 
poet ; but merely think of the pure, absolute, honest ignorance in 
which all worldlings of whatever rank and situation must be en- 
veloped, with respect to the thoughts, feelings, and images on 
which the life of my poem depends. The things which I have 
taken, whether from within or from without, what have they to do 
with routs, dinners, morning calls, hurry from door to door, from 
street to street, or foot or in carriage, with Mr. Pitt or Mr. Fox, 
Mr. Paul or Sir Francis Burdett, the \\'estminster election or the 
borough of Honiton. . . There peither is, nor can be any 
genuine enjoyment of poetry among nineteen out of every twenty 
of those persons who live, or wish to live, in the broad light of the 
world, amongst those who are striving to make themselves people 
of consideration in society. Trouble not yourself upon the 
present reception of my poems ; of what moment is that compared 
with what I trust is their destiny ? To console the afflicted ; to 
* Memoir, vol. ii. p. 7. 



214 

add sunshine to daylight by making the happy happier ; to teach 
the young and the gracious of every age to see, to think, and feel, 
and therefore to become more actively and securely virtuous ; this 
is their office, which, I trust, they will faithfully perform, long after 
we (that is, all that is mortal of us) are mouldered in our graves. 
. . . Never forget what was observed by Coleridge, that every 
great and original writer, in proportion as he is great or original, 
must himself create the taste by which he is to be relished, 

he must teach the art by which he is to be known 

My ears are stone-deaf to their idle buzz, and my flesh as insen- 
sible as iron to their petty stings. I doubt not that you will share 
with me an invincible confidence that my writings (and among 
them these little poems) will co-operate with the benign tendencies 
in human nature and society wherever found ; and that they will, 
in their degrees, be efficacious in making men wiser, better, and 
happier." 

Again, in the same strain, to Sir George Beaumont he Avrites : 
"Let the poet first consult his own heart, as I have done, and leave 
the rest to posterity — to, I hope, an approving posterity." 

No one can fail to be struck with the nobleness, I might 
almost say the sublimity, of these thoughts. The grandeur of 
dedicating life to 'W07-k has been taught us by Carlyle in a very 
significant manner ; but to consecrate it to thought and communion 
with Nature ; to prolonged, devoted, wistful fellowship with her, in 
her ever-changeful moods, while at the time faithful to the moral 
ideal; this is -a still grander aim, and a yet nobler achievement. 

I shall not say much about Wordsworth's special theory ol 
poetry. He believed that it takes its origin in "emotion recollected 
in tranquillity." The poet, he held, should represent the incidents 
or scenes of real life, in which the emotions are at their natural 
height, or in their intensest outflow. To this, few discriminating 
minds can take exception. But then, he went on to say, that since 
at these times men naturally use a language precisely adapted to 
the situation, the poet ought to use the same language, modifying 
it only to tliis extent, that he must omit the disagreeable 
remembering that his function is to give pleasure. Further, the 



215 

metrical form into which he casts his language delights the reader 
or hearer, by ' the succession of pleasurable surprises ' M'hich it 
gives, and rhyme adds an additional delight. 

Now, it is doubtless true that, if we remove all the crude 
phrases used by men in a state of vivid emotion, the natural 
language they then employ is sometimes the choicest. But, this 
' natural language ' before it is fitted • for the purposes of poetic 
expression, must pass through a further process of refining, in the 
alembic of the poet's own soul. The language of real life, if it be 
natural, spontaneous, and unconscious, very often assumes a poetic 
form ; but the conversational style of speech, however simple and 
natural, could never become the sole, or the highest style for 
literary or artistic expression. The most animated and brilliant 
conversational style does not make the best literary style ; and the 
choicest language of real life must come forth from the poetic mint 
— not in the hard, realistic shape in which it entered in, nor, on the 
other hand, artificialised by its presence there — but recast in a form 
of ideal grace, the ' naturalness ' of its original form preserved, and 
a new adequacy imparted to it. This much may fairly be said in 
in criticism of Wordsworth's theory, as to the language of which the 
poet should make use. 

In the preface to the first edition of the Lyrical Ballads he 
says that his aim was ''to ascertain how far the language and 
conversation of men in the middle and lower classes of society is 
adapted to the purposes of poetic pleasure;" and, in the second 
edition, he describes it as " an experiment." His own practice 
was better than his theory, and in part disproved it. No doubt, he 
frequently carried out the latter consistently, to the verge of a bald 
literalism ; and it was easy for the critics to hold up to ridicule the 
" tub" of the Wind boy, and the "swollen ancles" of Simon Lee. 
But on the other hand, had Wordsworth not carried the realistic 
tendency at times too far, it may be doubted if the literary world, 
in his own and the next generation, would have learned to 
appraise it truly. It is to be fiirther observed, that what his 
theory sanctions, and tends to, is the use, not of the language of 
common life, but that of simple, natural, unaffected life. 



216 

Much more important than the form, however, is the subject- 
matter of all poetry. It has been affirmed that its essence consists 
in its form alone, — the form given to thought by language. This 
is one of the delusions against which Wordsworth's whole vocation 
and achievements are a protest. You hear it sometimes said 
vaguely, that the movement which in England began with Cowper, 
which Burns carried out so fully in one direction, and which 
Wordsworth developed to such magnificent results, was a return to 
nature, to the simplicity and truth of nature, from the artificiality 
and mannerism of the past. This is undoubtedly true ; but it is 
too indefinite a statement to be of much value. The precise 
significance of the ' return to nature ' must be ascertained. Now, 
you will not only find a clear natural note struck by Wordsworth, 
in the simple way in which he described what he saw, and was not 
ashamed to speak of it as he saw it — calling the sun, the sun, and 
not 'bright Phoebus,' as the eighteenth century men vvouldhave done. 
But, in addition to this, in selecting the subjects on which to write, 
he found that his predecessors had departed so far from nature, 
into artificial regions, and dealt so largely with conventional topics, 
that he had, in the first instance, to go back, in the homeliest 
fashion, to the most obvious facts of every-day experience. The 
idea of writing a poem about sheep, or daisies, seemed to the 
magnificent men of the Pope and Johnson era to indicate some 
incipient lunacy. They thought that the man was moonstruck who 
could write serious verses about 'daffodils,' or 'pedlars,' or 'boats,' 
or 'waggoners." Now one element in the greatness of Wordsworth 
was that, by " the power of a peculiar eye," he saw a meaning in 
the lowliest things of earth, and in the apparently forlorn specimens 
of humanity, which few other eyes in his time perceived. He did 
not roam over the broad earth, seeking materials for romantic 
narrative, and thrilling story. He asked, What is to be found at 
hand, if we open our eyes to see it? what meaning in nature? 
what significance in life ? Can we not get beneath the surface of 
both? and apprehend, in a real and verifiable manner the truth of 
that which is unfolding itself around us every day, instead of 
floating down the stream, chasing the shadows of excitement, or 



217 

vaguely sighing for changes ? Though intensely fond of travelling, 
he never could have said or felt, with Goethe, 

To make room for wandering was it 
That the world was made so wide. 

On the contrary, within the circle of his own mountains, and 
among the simple unconventional dalesmen of the north he sought 
for a deeper meaning, underlying the commonplaces of life and 
nature. To Wordsworth, the ' open secret ' lay at the heart of the 
most familiar, lowly, and even common things. The humblest 
object in nature, if approached with reverence, the most trivial 
task in life, if discharged with dignity, was at once transfigured, 
and lit up with ideal grace in the light of that transfiguration. 

But how are we to see this latent significance in common 
things, this worth within the trivial and the familiar ? The diffi- 
culty is a most real and serious one to many. Wordsworth's 
answer is substantially this — It is by the opening of the inward 
eye. There is no veil on the face of Nature, needing to be re- 
moved : the film is on the human eye. We do not see what is 
everywhere around us to be seen, because our organ of vision is 
impaired ; and the malady is, to a great extent, hereditary. But 
the recovery of the power of sight — that second sight, which 
divines the secrets inaccessible to the material organ— is eflfected 
by simple contact with Nature herself; not by the secondary study 
of her through books, through Hterature, or through science, but 
by familiarity with her face to face, in the ever-fresh and reno- 
vating processes incessantly at work around us. 

If we are to reach the secret of Wordsworth, however, and 
find his " healing power," we must apprehend something more 
about it, even than this. There are one or two preliminary things 
to be noticed. Those of you who have made his acquaintance at 
all, will not have failed to note the accuracy of his local allusions 
the rigid fidelity of his descriptions. They are not photographs : 
but they are far better. They are divinations of the spirit of the 
places he describes. His topographical allusions are so numerous 
and minute that some have felt them to be wearisome ; but there 



218 

is no spot in all your district, to which he has referred, which he 
has not interpreted, illumining it with 

The light that never was on sea or land. 

It is this element of local colour, in his poems, that has made the 
whole region of the English Lakes pre-eminently classic ground. 
There is no place in Scotland associated with the genius of Burns 
or of Scott — Ayrshire, Tweedside, Loch Katrine, or the Western 
Isles — over which the ethereal light of imagination still broods, as 
it lingers amongst the hills and dales of Cumberland and West- 
moreland. And if the remark of Mr. Lowell, that the poet was 
" the historian of Wordsworthshire," has any force, it is part of 
his imperishable renown that he created such a shire, and gave 
it a meaning vastly more interesting than those geographical 
county boundaries, to which the poet's work as stamp-collector 
was confined. 

Wordsworth possessed, first of all, a wide knowledge of nature; 
a knowledge that was broad, intimate, minute, and thorough. 
Hence the perfect truth of his description of the external aspects 
of a scene, before he sought its inner meaning, or its " soul." 
Without such accuracy of perception and report, no divination was 
possible. He was unerring in the fidelity with which he observed 
the minute features of nature, which other eyes failed to see. One 
day some one told him he had heard that he (Wordsworth) had 
written a poem upon a daisy. " No," said the poet indignantly, 
"it was on the daisy, a very different thing !" He had unustially 
fine physical senses ; and, with rapid intuition, he pierced beyond 
the reports they brought him, of form, colour, sound, etc., that he 
might discern the underlying suggestions, with which the scene was 
charged. His special greatness, as an interpreter of Nature, lay in 
his power of divining the genius loci, — that subtle arrowy glance 
going direct to the very core, always adequate, and usually 
profound, often tenderly human ; in every instance bringing back 
some secret, and disclosing the immeasurable significance of com- 
mon things. He was never contented with deciphering outward 
featvures. Forms, colours, sounds, always led up to some 



I 



219 

Remoter charm 
Unborrowed from the eye 

or ear. Nature's face was full of expression; and this expression 
revealed character, as truly as a human face reveals the workings of 
emotion in a human soul. Other poets were content simply to chron- 
icle natural phenomena, asbeautiful, or grand, picturesque, or sublime. 
Wordsworth always asked. What is the meaning of Nature, in those 
places where she has concentrated her expressiveness, and in those 
moods in which she seems to be unburdening herself to man ? 
What is the secret of the glory of the sky, at sunrise or sunset ] 
and their difference ? What is the meaning of the motions and 
balancings of the clouds? of the alternate wail and sigh of either 
wind or ocean ? Or, if he did not ask these questions, he answered 
them without asking. All that is distinctive in his poetry, grows 
out of the belief that Nature's soul has a definite expression, 
whether in rock or flower, m tree or stream, and can be recognized. 
It can appeal to us, and mould us. In each natural object, some 
' invisible thing ' is 'clearly seen.' Wordsworth, in short, had a 
strong, intuitive grasp of that subtle spirit of the Beautiful, which 
breathes throughout the whole framework of nature, emanating 
from, and expressing itself in, the life of every material thing. 

But it is important to go,if possible, a little deeper down, and 
see to what this distinctive feature amounted ; because we hear it 
constantly reiterated — and with vague inaccuracy affirmed — that 
AVordsworth was a subjective poet, that he thrust himself into the 
scene he described, and saw his own individuality (nay his own 
idiosyncrasies) mirrored in Nature. Nothing could be more erro- 
neous; nothing less exact. It is both an utterly irrelevant, and a 
totally ignorant criticism. It is irrelevant, because I suppose it is 
not possible for a poet, any more than for a critic, to escape from 
his own shadow. It is ignorant, because Wordsworth's subjectivity 
is not greater than, it is not nearly as great as, that of his contem- 
poraries, — Scott only excepted. Byron's heroes, for example, are 
more Byronic, than Wordsworth's are Wordsworthian. It is one 
of the most foolish and futile of charges, either that he was im- 
prisoned within the circle of his own subjective broodings about 



220 

Nature, or that his characters were the mere dupHcates of himself. 
Not only was "the mind of man," (as he says) 

The haunt and the maui region of my song ; 
but Nature was nothing to him apart from man. Still further, 
it was man as social, man in relation to his fellows, man organized 
in society, that chiefly interested him. 

The charge of throwing his own subjectivity into Nature, and 
"seeing himself in all he saw," is so foolish that it is difficult to 
deal with it. He saw a life in Nature distinct from his own, yet 
kindred to it, a reciprocal and complementary life. You may say, 
if you choose, that Imagination enabled him to do this ; and that, 
without imagination, he could not have been brought into such a 
living rapport with Nature, as certainly, without it, he never could 
have chronicled the things he saw. But imagination gives insight, 
as well as creative power ; and insight must in all cases go before 
creation, if the latter is worth anything. Poetic creation is simply 
the embodiment in an imaginative form, or in an intellectual and 
aesthetic shape what has previously been discerned or divined. 
Now Wordsworth's very speciality as a poet lay in this, that he 
interpreted the universe in terms of humanity, without throwing 
over it the mantle of his own subjectivity. He read its secret, by 
the use of his own faculties of course, and with the aid of the 
'auxiliar light' which 'came from his mind,' but not by a process 
of mere idealisation. He saw Nature through his own lens — less 
he could not do without ceasing to be a poet, or even a man- 
But he did more than this. He saw into Nature's innermost heart, 
and was throughout and pre-eminently, a' seer, and not an idealiser. 
He perceived that the universe is animated by a living and recog- 
nisable soul; that we do not err in describing it as, at least, quasi- 
human : and conversely, he not only desired to bring humanity 
into vital contact with the sunshine of the broad world, and to 

Feed it, 'mid nature's old fehcities ; 
but he saw that human life finds its deepest interpretation, in direct 
relation to nature. Thus Nature reveals man, while Man mirrors 
nature. 

Not only so : not only was Nature, according to Wordsworth, 



221 

instinct with personality (or what resembled it), but the spirit or 
soul of nature, animating and informing it everywhere, was 
recognisable and realisable in detail. It was not always, nor 
indeed usually recognisable, as one vast all-comprehending Force : 
but to our vision, was divided into many single forms and phases. 
Each separate object, every flower, every mountain, every star, had 
its spiritual essence or informing soul, which was vitally related to 
the larger soul of the world, the poet could not tell how. It was 
for the speculative philosopher to say, — if he could, — what were 
the relations between the separate objects, and the universe as a 
whole. The poet might occasionally refer to the underlying unity, 
which he realised as vividly as the philosopher, or more so. But 
his special function was to interpret the detail, or the specialisation 
of nature ; its variety, rather than its unity. 

Thus, the soul of nature, localised here and there, — ^just as 
humanity is individualised in separate men and women — has, to 
the poet, its own peculiar life and changing moods. Not only has 
each mountain or stream ks ge/ims loci; but that genius is fully as 
changeful as man — now bright and radiant, again depressed and 
dull. It is alternately glad and festive, mourning and bereaved. 
Nature is seen toiling, rejoicing, sorrowing, just as we toil, rejoice, 
and sorrow. And this is not the polytheistic notion of separate 
beings, as tutelary gods, oreads, dryads, etc, inhabiting distinct 
localities. These were detached from nature, spirits that came 
and went, and were as capricious in their comings and goings, as 
fairies are alleged to be. But there is a wide interval between a 
belief in ghosts and fairiae, and a recognition of those ' souls of 
lonely places,' or the 'spirit of the woods', mountains and floods, of 
which Wordsworth speaks. In the latter case, the inner spirit ot 
the Univefse is recognised, revealing itself to us, in this way, as the 
breathing life of the place, — a portion of the infinite Existence, not 
really cut off from the rest, but only seeming to be so, to our finite 
imagination. The link connecting part with part may be too 
subtle for us to trace, but it exists, and is felt to exist, at the very 
moment when our perception of difference in the parts is keenest. 

Thus 'the mighty being' of Nature, ever 'awake,'* manifests itself 
* Miscellaneous Sonnets, part i. Sonnet 30 (vol. ii. p. 275). 



222 

incessantly and simultaneously, in a hundred different ways, all 
over the world ; its diversity not destroying its unity, nor its unity 
abolishing its diversity. It is too vast for human realisation as a 
whole. In virtue, however, of its apparent divisions, its dismember- 
ment to the human eye — assuming, as it does, an immense variety 
of phases — it can be realised in detail ; and, in fellowship with any 
one of the details, the soul of man has unquestionable fellowship with 
the very essence of nature. Each of these, when apprehended by us, 
awakens a kindred or correspondent state of feeling, while the 
conviction of the profound unity of the whole remains unshaken. 
The highest life of each separate object having thus an interior 
relation to the life of every other, there is reciprocity amongst 
them all. a never-ceasing intercommunion, as the common element 
ebbs and flows throughout them. This is admirably expressed by 
Mr. Stopford Brooke. He says : — 

"This idea is the loveliest of all which Wordsworth has 
introduced into English poetry, and it flowed from his conception 
of everything in nature having its own peculiar life. . . . There 
was ceaseless intercommunion founded on the unutterable love 
which flowed through all things, and with which every thing acted 
on every other. The whole world was linked together ; every part, 
every element, gave and received, honoured and did service, to 
each other. . . . And they delight in social intercourse, like 
friends who love each other — there is no jar, no jealousy, no envy 
there — their best joy is in being kind to one another."* 

And better illustrations of this idea than those which Mr. 
Brooke has selected from the poems could not be chosen : — 

Through all her depth, St. Mary's lake 

Is visibly delighted, 
For not a feature of the hills 

Is in that mirror slighted. 



Or again- 



There is a blessing in the air, 

Which seems a source of joy to yield 

To the bare trees, and mountains bare, 
And grass in the green field. 

Theology in the English Poets, p. 107. 



2^3 

Love, now an universal birth, 

From heart to heart is stealing, 
From earth to man, from man to earth. 

It is the hour of feeling. 

It must be observed, however, that the perception of this 
feature of the life of Nature — its semi-huraan characteristic — and 
the intercommunion and reciprocity to which it gives rise, is not 
possible at all times. It is only perceived when certain subjective 
states of the percipient mind correspond with special objective 
conditions in Nature itself. When these conditions are realised, 
material forms seem but the raiment of a life beneath them, which 
alone is real. As this life is not discerned by us equally in every 
object, but only in some, so it is not apprehended every moment, 
but only occasionally. If an apocalypse were constant, it would 
be like the sunrise, and cease to be an apocalypse ; just as a 
constant discernment of the underlying unity of things would 
prevent us from recognising the diversity which plays npon the 
surface. But when our faculties are at their keenest stretch, and 
when our external conditions and surroundings are favourable — as, 
when on the high hill tops, or under the clear vault of the sky on 
a still and luminous night, or by the shore of the everlasting sea — 
the veil is at its thinnest ; and the conviction is flashed upon us, 
that the life of Nature is fundamentally kindred to our own. The 
persuasion that Nature desires our fellowship is then no fancy, but 
an intuition of the heart and the intellect and the esthetic sense 
combined. For example, if you gaze into the heart of some 
tenderly beautiful flower as it looks up from the moorland to the 
sky, or listen to the sound of running waters on a far-off mountain 
side, or watch the radiance of the clouds that gather round the 
setting sun, does the sense of solitude deepen, or does the feeling 
of a latent bond, and hidden social unity surviye ? Is the prevailing 
thought that of the coldness, and silence, and unrecognisableness 
of nature, or of its kindredness, its affinity, and its friendship? 
Whatever it may be with the laivs of nature, — whether they do or 
do not correspond, as Mr. Hinton put it, to the habits of a friend, 
— the life of nature (of which the laws are the expression) is a 
continual revelation of character; unfolding itself, now more clearly, 



^24. 

and again more dimly, as the clouds break or gather upon its face, 
and as the eye of the beholder is fresher or duller in its percep- 
tions. 

I need scarcely guard myself against mistake, by adding that 
it is easy to carry this notion of kindredness too far, and thus to 
degrade it altogether. If we do not recognise the transcendant 
unlikeness of nature to man, along with the likeness which exists, 
the latter idea is mord than vulgarised. It becomes distorted and 
untrue. Only through the recognition of the former notion does 
the latter gain its reality and grandeur. We do not need, however, 
to be reminded of the difference, so much as of the resemblance. 
The former idea always takes care of itsolf It is constantly 
suggested, and sometimes painfully obtrusive: the latter is occasion- 
ally grasped, is often dimly possessed, and is always fugitive. Too 
soon the curtain falls, the glory fades ; and after every disclosure 
of Nature's heart, in the most lovely of its apparitions, we are again 
in the presence of the old grey skies, the silent and the seemingly 
unresponsive heaven. But the two feelings, whether major or 
minor, whether for the time in the foreground or the background 
of consciousness, are complementary ones. They are, indeed, but 
the two sides of the knowableness and the unknovvableness of the 
Infinite. 

Our inability to look on nature as Wordsworth did, is as often 
due to our artificiality, as to our shallowness. If nature is to 
continue to subdue, to teach and to mould, as well as to fascinate 
us, we must retain the heart of childhood, with its natural wonder, 
delight, admiration, and reverence, — let the intellect develop as it 
may. In a 'wise passiveness' we must receive her sweet influences 
from without. She won't yield up her secret to us when we are 
being wliirled along on the surface of life's stream, absorbed, and 
excited by artificial things, or magnetised by any secondary interest. 
This was nobly taught by Wordsworth in the sonnet beginning — 

The world is too much with us. Late and soon, 
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers. 
Little we see in nature that is ours. 

There is a most intimate relation between Wordsworth's 



225 

moral elevation and his intellectual insight. The artificiality and 
mannerism, the haste and distraction, of our modern life, with its 
many prolix ceremonies, prevents the simple raJ>port of the mind 
with Nature, in which all natural poetry is born. Furthermore, 
tlie marriage of the soul with nature is a union of equals ; and its 
result is a realisation of that other or higher self, our alter ego in 
nature, not (as I have already said) as an idealisation of the mind, 
but as a reality of mental vision. Transcending all subjective 
bonds, we enter a region 'where time and space are not,' — a world 
of higher apperception, in which the unity of self and not-self, of 
the mind within and the universe without, is clearly understood, — 
while neither the one nor the other is overborne, but their funda- 
mental separateness preserved. 

Too much stress cannot be laid upon another feature kindred 
to this, in the teaching of Wordsworth. It is Nature's office to 
cure us of morbidity and melancholy, as well as of artificiality ; 
its healing and restoring function calming us, reanimating and 
reassuring us. He shows, as few teachers have shown, that while 
full of sympathy with us. Nature will not abide, our sadnesses. 
She feels them to be an intrusion on her peace, her immense latent 
life, out of which all that allays them proceeds. Our introspec- 
tiveness and self-consciousness are rebuked by Nature, whenever 
we are alone with her, and open to her influences : and it is as 
necessary that these should be taken out of us, as the conceit that 
we have fathomed her ways and processes of work. She reveals 
an impersonal Order as well as a personal power, a transcendant 
and \itterly mysterious life, with which v/e may not presume to be 
too familiar ; and it is merely this side that is turned towards us, — 
the seemingly stony and unresponsive side,- — -when we complain 
of her mysteriousne.ss. But who will say, that, in this, she does 
not educate us also '? 

In the same connection, I claim for Wordsworth a clear 
knowledge of the profoundest problems, with which the human 
mind has grappled, from Heraclitus to Immanuel Kant.* He 

* It is for this reason that a knowledge of Wordsworth is one of the very 
best introductions to the Platonic (or any other) Philosophy. There are 



226 

seems to have penetrated to the very core of philosophical ideas, 
not by laboured argumentation, but by intuitive discernment — both 
intellectual and moral — which began early and developed rapidly, 
keeping pace with the growth of his imagination. By that con- 
summate vision, which is superior to all processes of reasoning, he 
reached the ultimate data of speculative Philosophy and Theology. 

Further, in dealing with the perennial problems, Wordsworth 
almost always keeps to their elements. He therefore moves within 
a verifiable region; and hence his treatment of the questions cannot 
be superseded. His poetry is intrinsically durable ; not only 
because— like all poetry of the first magnitude — it is a joy to the 
human race for ever; but also because it has no mythological 
elements, which Science may some day compel us to lay aside. 
He carries us into a region altogether unaffected by the discoveries, 
which imperil a merely traditional faith. Let Science march 
forward as it may, and where it may, Wordsworth's poetry moves 
in a sphere unaffected by its conclusions, a sphere indeed to which 
its widest generalisations bear witness, and pay tribute. 

And this leads me to speak of the bracing effect, the moral 
tonic, to be found in his poetry. It presents a high ideal of life, 
elevated alike above the sordid and the capricious, above the trivial, 
the artificial and the ignoble. Hence there is no ennui, no tedium 
vita, in Wordsworth. Every one knov/s his reference in the sonnet 
to 'plain living and high thinking:' but few have adequately 
realised the immense serenity, the large divine tranquillity, and the 
indefinite hopefulness, that breathe through all his writings. In 
him, aspiration blends with contentment ; placidity and calm, with 
effort to be other than we are, and with a belief in the endless 
possibilities of human nature. This is the secret of what Mr. 
Arnold has so happily called his ' healing power.' You feel it, 
just as you feel the effect of mountain air after languishing in a city. 
The ' strength of the hills ' is in almost everything he wrote. And 

numerous passages in The Prebtde and The Excursion, as well as in the minor 
poems, which condense within them the essence of the great ideal systems of 
Plato, Spinosa, and Kant. Many a single line of Wordsworth's contains a 
precise and singularly felicitous embodiment of the philosophical ideas which 
lie at the heart of these systems. 



J 



227 

there is no influence so good and gracious as Wordsworth's, so 
directly sanative, to those who have felt a relaxation of fibre, from 
long pondering on the 'riddle of the painful earth,' or brooding 
over the antinomies of our intellectual and moral nature. 
There is a well-known sense of hopelessness, when one is 
beaten down before the mysteries of the universe, if these 
have been wrestled with and found insoluble, and a feeling 
of languor and indifference — the ad bono feeling — is incipient. 
To one, in such a mood of apathy or life-weariness, the in- 
fluence of Wordsworth is incomparable. His poetry is a moral 
tonic, reinvigorating the heart, by taking it straight away to some 
fresh natural well of feeling, or of thought. Great as he is 
therefore, as a poet, I consider him still greater as a moralist. His 
sense of the infinite moral unity of which we are but parts, and his 
conviction of a 

Central peace, subsisting at the heart 
Of endless agitation, 

are as guide-posts in ethics. In the forest paths of human life, 
with their labyrinthine windings, or, when out in the open, cross- 
ways meet and perplexity is inevitable, he, of all poets, best helps 
you to know where you are, what direction to take, and how to 
travel forward with serenity, and even with joy. If his teaching — 
as embodied, for example, in the Ode to Duty, or in the chapter of 
The Excursion entitled "Despondency Corrected,"- — is inconsistent 
with a Goethean sweep and universality, delighting in all things 
with frank objectivity, simply because they are, its narrowness is the 
narrowness of one who has a root in himself, of one who has found 

Within himself a measure and a rule. 
And one, thus taught and disciplined, will ' live and breathe,' as 
he says — 

For noble purposes of mind ; his heart 
Beats to the heroic song of ancient days ; 
His eye distinguishes, his heart creates. 

In all that I have said, I have been giving you the merest 
introduction to the poetry and poetic mission of Wordsworth. 
Those of you who have not yet begun the earnest study of this 
poet — and he requires not only to be read but to be studied — may 



228 

consult, along with the poems themselves, two discussions, which, 
amongst the large literature that has now accumulated on the 
subject, are, in my judgment, by far the most thorough and 
satisfactory : — I refer to Principal Shairp's Essay on Wordsworth, 
originally contributed to the ^ort/i British Review, and republished 
in liis Studies in Poetry and Philosophy; and Mr. Stopford Brooke's 
volume, entitled TJieology in the- English Poets. The former is 
more condensed and finished as a work of art ; the latter is more 
detailed in its analysis, and almost exhaustive in one direction. 

Before closing, I merely add, as I have already hinted moi;e 
than once, that there is no poet after Shakspeare more worthy of 
prolonged, careful, and even reverential study, and especially of 
study by women. There is none whose influence on character is 
more ennobling, and from contact with wliose spirit you can draw 
a serener inspiration. And though our poetical literature is now 
becoming more complex, and many a kindred spirit has embodied 
fresh forms of Imagination in the raiment of our English speech, 
since Wordsworth breathed his last at Rydal Mount, he remains 
one of those 

St9.rs pre-eminent in magnitude 

Which, from the zenith, dart their beams, 

of which he spoke ; and he has deeper things to teach us, in our 
nineteenth century haste and high pressure, than any of his co- 
mates, who are seated along with him on the imperial height. 

It may be as difficulty for some to get within his circle, as it 
is for others to understand Beethoven, or Fra Angelico. Neverthe- 
less, his is an ' open secret,' and as he said of Burns, 

In busiest street, and lonhest glen, 

Are felt the flashes of his pen. 

He rules 'mid winter snows, and where 

Bees fill their hives. 

Deep in the genial heart of men 

His power survives. 

And sure I am that long as the streams of Westmoreland sing their 
songs of 'peace with quiet blending,' long as Helvellyn rears its 
head above the neighbouring hills, and the sunlight and the moon- 
light come and go amongst the mountains, the radiance of this 



I 



229 

Poet's genius will shed a more ethereal light over the whole district, 
and will disclose the inmost soul of Nature, and the boundless 
significance of Life to the English generations of the future. 

He found us when the age had bound 
Our souls in its benumbing round ; 
He spoke, and loosed our hearts in tears. 
He laid us as we lay at birth 
On the cool flowery lap of earth, 
SmUes broke from us, and we had ease ; 
The hills were round us, and the breeze 
Went o'er the sunlit fields again ; 
Our fo7-eheads felt the wind and rain. 
Our yortth returned ; for there was shed. 
On spirits that had long been dead. 
Spirits dried up and closely furl' d. 
The freshness of the early world. 



^ DEC188S 



O. AND T. COWARD, FRINTEES, CAEtlSLE. 



DATES OF FOUNDATION. 



y<fi^^^ 



( 



Mr 



LONOTOWN 



X' 



GARUSLE 

/(S/7 r 



'-. f- ^ ?*^S>-y_ /<C 



J87e 



J, WORK! NO CON 



OCKERMDL'Th 
, .'37/ 



K e S Vv ( ' •. K 



WHITE HAVE,> 



n 



/86'7 



W- 



AMBLfSJDE 



!»•) 






1»J 












>>) ') ) 



^> jS^ 



^-:>>. 



^l>i) 



'^.^ ^>lr 



^M>iy 



» J 



jr>-^ 















^)))^^^ 


^ \\ >>^> 3^ 


ii^B 


'-^^J^j^SiM 


' •">r""^ 




 ^"-^^ ^-^ -: 






»01 




