This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



^-:vi 






;^iV,, 









•VJ.'V,'* -'i-^' 



' «' ' i ' ' 



'if.'' / 



§8 



ViUiW,y,^:;,^^ 



-^ '.'.'''At:  '/- .•• • ""/'/-',  ' 



W^ II 'W I' 



^ u 









„yv' 









;.".i'j 

*'%'<"' 



^m. 






-^pjwmi 



U'M: 



3®i:;uS^ 



^u 



\:>u^^^ 






^ U 



iW.«--^/ 



W V 






\^ V W, Vy 



^UMH 



^^\J 



v^v^IHk^it^ii^ 



^i^iU 



VJ\ i V/VJv" JV-iv JV 






l^xbrarg of %t SPlusjettm 



OF 



COMPARATIVE ZOOLOGY, 



AT liBTAKB GOLINE. CAUBINI. U88. 



The gift of C7^ yV<xX<^^ a_L 
No. // CiJ 

./C./s-y 



Digitizecwy 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



P-EOCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY 

OF GLASGOW. 

VOL. V. 

1880-1883. 




GLASGOW: PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY 
AT ITS ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET. 
^^^1884. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Glasgow: Printed by Thomas Duncan, 
88 SaachlehaU Street. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. 



Vol. v.— October 1880 to April 1883. 



Agreement between tlie Society and the Town CJonndl regarding the 
Formation and Development of CJollections of Plants and Inyerte- 

brata for the Keltingroye Moseom, 172 

Allan, Mr. James, Death of^ 156, 160 

Alston, Mr. Edward Richard, F.L.S., &c., Death of, - - - - 155 

Alston, Mr. Edward Richard, F.L.S., &c.. In Memoriam Notice o( • 69 

Amphidotus cordatus ( Penn. ). By Mr. David Robertson, F. L. 8. , F. G. S. , 17 

Apiarian Notes in Argyllshire for 1880. By Mr. Robert J. Bennett, - 18 

Apiarian Notes in Argyllshire for 1881. By Mr. Robert J. Bennett, • . 163 

Apiarian Notes in Argyllshire for 1882. By Mr. Robert J. Bennett, - 269 

Archasocidaris, Mr. John Young, F.6.S., on a New Species of, - - 108 

Astrorhiza Umicola (Sandahl. ). By Mr. David Robertson, F. L. S. , F. G. S. , 17 

Athalia ScuteUarUe, Mr. Peter Cameron on, 4 



Bath Street, Removal of Society to, 

Beith, Carboniferous Foraminifera jfrom. By Mr. John Young, F.G.S. 

Ben Ghnuis, Arran, Mr. David Gregorson on, - 

Ben Laoigh, the Flora o£ By Mr. Peter Ewing, 

Brooke's Snail (Helix Brookei), Mr. John M. Campbell on, 

Buchan, Notes on the Mammalia of. By Mr. William Horn, 

Bye-laws of the Natural History Society of Glasgow, - 

Caddis-flies from Carluke, Mr. James J. King on, 

CaUianassa tumeriana, Mr. John Young, F.G.S., on, 

Carpellary Leaves in Angiosperms, Prof. A. S. Wilson, M. A., B.Sc , on, 

Cetacea, On the Natural History of the. By Mr. Thomas Southwell, 

F.Z.S., ' 

Chilian Seed-potatoes, Experiments with. By Mr. Thomas King, 
ChiUmidcBf A Contribution to the Study of the British Carboniferous. 

By Mr. R. Etheridge, jun., F.R.Ph.8.Ed. (with Two Plates, 

I. and II.), - 

Collecting Natural History Specimens, On Method in. By Mr. John 

M. Campbell, 

Cqprimu comcUuSf Mr. Robert Turner on, 

Council, Report oi^ for Session 1879-80, - - - . . 



2 
175 
258 
274 
181 
228 
301 

176 

29 

3 



269 



84 

191 

181 

1 



Digitized by 



Google 



IV CONTENTS. 

Paor 

Council, Keport of, for Session 1880-81, 166 

Council, Report of, for Session 1881-82, 247 

Cumbrae, Foraminifera from, Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., F.G.S., on, 163 

Dairy, Carboniferous Foraminifera from. By Mr. John Young, F.6.S., 176 
Dredge in Portree Bay, Skye, Remarks on a Few Hauls with the. By 

Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., F.G.S., 11 

Eagle-owl {Bubo ignavus, Forst.), Mr. John M. Campbell on, - • 223 

Excursions : — 

Benbowie and Helensburgh, 260 

BenVoirlich, 161 

Bridge of Weir, - - - 266 

Bute (Dredging), 252 

Gourock (Dredging), - - - 6* 

Highlands, 160 

Innellan, 160 

Kilmahew Glen, 6* 

Kilmalcolm, 169 

Manuel, 6*, 260 

Milngavie, 9* 

Possil Marsh, 249 

Shielhill Glen, 169 

Torrance Glen, East Kilbride, 263 

Troon, 256 

Vaut and Castlecary Glens, 249 

Fife and the Lothians, A Collection of Plants from. By Mr. Robert 

Turner, 174 

Flannan Isles and their Bird Life. By Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, 

F.Z.S., F.R.S.E., &c. (with Two Plates, Nos. IV. and V.), - 197 
Flying Gurnard, Indian {Dadylopterus orierUcUis, Lin.), Mr. John M. 

Campbell on, - - 28 

Foraminifera from Cumbrae, Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., F.G.S., on, 163 
Fusus antiquus (Lin.), var. alba, Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., 

F.G.S.,on, - - 223 

Garvel Park, Greenock, Fish and Crustacean Remains from, Mr. Thomas 

Scott and Mr. James Steel on, , - - ^ 192 

Glencart, near Dairy, Ayrshire, Notes on the Fossils found in a Thin 
Bed of Impure Carboniferous Limestone at. By Mr. John Young, 

F.G.S.,V.P., - 234 

Ooniocypris mUra, Notes on. By Mr. Thomas Scott, - - - 214 

Grebe, Sclavonian or Dusky {Podiceps comtUus, Gmelin), Mr. James 

Lumsden, F.Z.S., on, 77 

Greenock, On some of the Rarer Plants found in the Neighbourhood of 

By Mr. Thomas Scott, 77 

Greenock District, Land Shells from. By Mr. Thomas Scott, - - 290 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. V 

FAOE 

Haskeir, The Islands and Rocks of, and their Bird Life. By Mr. John 
A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., &c. With a Sketch by the 

Author. (Plate III.), 181 

HetercBcism of the Uredines. By Mr. Robert Turner, - - - 293 

ffelix nemoralis, Notes on an Unusual Variety of. By Mr. Thomas Scott, 808 

Hislop, Mr. Robert, of Polmont, Death of, 2 

Homed Tmnk-fish (OstrdcUm comtUtis, Lin.), Mr. John Eirsop, F.S.A., 

Scot, V.P., on, - - - - 180 

Human Skulls from Peru, Notes on. By Mr. Henry E. Clark, M.R.C.S., 808 

Hymenoptera, Mr. Peter Cameron on, 181 

Hymenoptera from the Sandwich Islands, Mr. Peter Cameron on, - 29 

Hyrax capensis, Schreb. (the Cape Hyrax), Mr. John M. Campbell on, 64 

Innellan, Mr. Thomas King on Mosses from, 192 

Kammplatten from Airdrie Coal-field. By Mr. John Young, F.6.S., - 18 

Kelvingrove Museum, Collection of Mosses for, 272 

Land Rail ( Orex pratensis, Bechst ), Notes on. By Mr. W. Craibe Angus, 808 
Larvae and Pupae, Notes by Mr. Peter Cameron on a New Process of 

Preserving, 289 

Library Report for Session 1879-80, 2 

Library Report for Session 1880-81, 166 

Library Report for Session 1881-82, 248 

Library, Additions to, 107, 167, 173 

Loch Lomond, Ornithological Jottings from the Neighbourhood of, for 

1881. By Mr. James Lumsden, F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., ... 209 
Lyre-bird of Australia {Menura superba, Davies). By Mr. C. W, 

Amott Stewart, 19 

Afarsupella Stoibleri (Spruce), Mr. George J. Combe on, - - - 180 
Meteorological Notes and Remarks on the State of Vegetation in the 

Public Parks of Glasgow during the Year 1880. By Mr. D. 

M*Lellan, Superintendent of Parks, - 36 

Meteorological Notes and Remarks on the State of Vegetation in the 

Public Parks of Glasgow during the Year 1881. By Mr. D. 

M*Lellan, Superintendent of Parks, 193 

Meteorological Notes and Remarks on the State of Vegetation in the 

Public Parks of Glasgow during the Year 1882. By Mr. D. 

M*Lellan, Superintendent of Parks, 303 

Microscopic Examination, On a Simple Method of Mounting Objects 

for. By Mr. Peter Cameron, 10* 

Microscopic Manipulation and Mounting, Mr. Peter Cameron on, - 262 
Mimicry, or Protective Resemblance among Animals. By Mr. A. S. 

Wilson, M.A., B.Sc, 16 

Natural History, On the Relations of, to Medicine. By Prof. John 

Young, M.D., F.G.S., President, 174 

Nutiia (Myopotanvas coypus^ Mol.), Mr. John M. Campbell on, - - 28 



Digitized by 



Google 



VI CONTENTS, 

Office-Beaiers for Sessioii 1880-81, 9* 

Office-Bearers for Session 1881-82, 102 

Office-Bearers for Session 1882^88, 266 

Orange, On the Structure of an. By Mr. Thomas King, - - • 85 
Ornithology, Third Report on Scottidi, October 1st, 1880, to April, 1881. 

By Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., &c, V.P., - - . 41 

Otter-pike, Mr. James Mahony on, 9* 

Pectoral Sandpiper (Tringa macuUUa), Notes on. By Mr. James 

Lumsden, F.Z.S., 201 

Perthshire, North-west, On the Mammalia of. By Mr. William Horn, 119' 
Perthshire, North-west, Additional Notes on the Birds of. By Mr. 

William Horn, M.A. Oxon., Advocate, 225 

Rne Marten (Afartes syPoestris, Nilsson), Notes on. By Mr. W. Craibe 

Angus, 265 

Pladda, List of Plants found on. By Mr. David Gregorson, - - 6* 
Polycentropus Kingi (M'Lach.) from the North of Scotland, Mr. F. G. 

Binnie on, 76 

Porpoise and White-beaked Dolphin, On the Viscera of the. By Prof. 

JohnCleland, M.D., F.R.S., &c., - - - - - - 178 

Potato, ^Cultivation o^ in its Native Country. By Mr. Thomas King, 166 

Potatoes, Experiments with Chilian Seed-. By Mr. Thomas King, • 269 

Pratt, Mr. Arthur, Death of, 165, 174 

President's Address. By Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., 

M.B.O.U., 267 

Protection of Wild Birds, Mr. James C. Christie on the, - • - 83 

Rankin, Dr. Daniel Reid, of Carluke, Death o^ 221 

Ruppia marUima (Lin.), sub-sp. rosUllata (Koch.), Mr. D. A. Boyd on, 227 

Sandstone, Flexible, Mr. John Eirsop on, 66 

Schiehallion and the Neighbourhood of Tummel Bridge, Mr. R. Eidston 

on the Flora of, 161 

Schimper, Professor, of Strasbourg, Death of^ 2 

Seal and Whale Fishery of 1881. By Mr. Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., 216 
Seal and Whale Fishery of 1882. By Mr. Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., 292 
Secretary Vulture (Serpentarius secreiarius, Scop. ), Mr. John M. Camp- 
bell on, 64 

Shell Mounds of the North of Ireland. By Mr. James A. Mahony, - 7 
Shells from tbe Glasgow and Paisley Canal, Notes on. By Mr. Thomas 

Scott, 310 

Short Sun-fish (Orthagoriscus mola, Lin.) caught in the Firth of Clyde, 

Notes on a. By Mr. John M. Campbell, - • - - 176 

SUiquaria carbanaria, Mr. John Young, F.G.S., on, - - - - 108 

Skua, Chilian (Stercararius chilensis, Saunders), Mr. John M. Campbell on 110 

Societies, &c:, with which Publications are exchanged, List of . . 814 

Species, Mr. Peter Cameron on, - - - - -i • • - 168 



Digitized by 



Google 



00NTBNT8. Vll 

PAGE 

St. AbVs Head and its Bird Life. By Mr. John A. HarrieBrown, 

F.R.S.E., M.B.O.U.,&c.,V.P., UO 

Sterna hirundinacea (Less.), Notes on Eggs of. By Mr. John M. 

Campbell, 274 

Stewart, Mr. A. B., Death of; 2 

Suednea oblonga (Drap,), Mr. James Steel on, 267 

Summer Session of 1881, Report of Proceedings, .... 157 

Summer Session of 1882, Report of Proceedings, .... 248 
Sutherland, On the Birds of the East of By Mr. Thomas E. Buckley, 

F.Z.S., 126 

Swan, sp. (?), Mr. John M. Campbell on, 109 

Synodadia and other Allied Forms, Remarks on the Genus, with 

Description of a New Species. By Mr. John Young, F.G.S., - 80 

Teehndtella legumen (Norman) and Techmtella mato (Norman) from 

Oban, Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., F.G.S., on, ... 107 

2%^«ano0attZo?iP»it^;eftoni, Dr. JamesStirton, F.L.S., on, • - 252 

Trichoptera, Mr. James J. King on, 28 

Treasurer's Accounts for 1879-80, Abstract of, 153 

Treasurer's Accounts for 1880-81, Abstract of, 246 

Treasurer's Accounts for 1881-82, Abstract of, 318 

Underground Stems, Prof. A. S. Wilson, M.A., B.Sc., On the Morph- 
ology of, 158 

West Kilbride and Ardrossan, Notes on the Flora of. By Mr. D. A. 

Boyd, - . - . ^ 241 

Whale, Atlantic Right (Baksna biscayensiSf Kschricht), On its Occur- 
rence on the East Coast of Scotland. By Mr. Thomas Southwell, 

F.Z.S., 66 

White-beaked Dolphin {Lagenorhynchtis cUMrostriSf Gray), On the Occur- 
rence of, near the Bell Rock. By Mr. John M. CampbeU, - - 24 

Winter of 1880-81, Journal of the. By Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, 

F.R.S.E., &c., V.P., 42 



Digitized by 



Google 



<:, 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROCEEDINGS 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY 

OF GLASGOW 

VOL v.— PAKT I. 

1880-81. 




GLASGOW: PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY 

AT THEIR ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET 

188 2. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. 



Vol. V.—Part I. 

Paor 

Report on the Business of Session 1879-80, 1 

Office-Bearers for Session 1880-81, 3 

Schimper, Prof., of Strasbourg, Hon. Mem , Death of, .... 2 
Hislop, Mr. Robert, of Polmont, Hon. Mem., Death of, ... 2 
Stewart, Mr. A. B., of Glasgow, Life Member, Death of, ... 2 
Microscopic Examination, On a simple Method of mounting Objects for. 

By Mr. Peter Cameron, 4 

Shell Mounds of the North of Ireland, On the. By Mr. James A. Ma- 

hony. Cor. Mem., 7 

Dredge in Portree Bay, Skye, Remarks on a few hauls with the. By 

Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., F.G.S , .11 

Apiarian Notes for 1880, Some. By Mr. Robert J. Bennett,, . . 13 
Mimicry, or Protective Resemblance among Animals, On. By Mr. A. 

S. Wilson, M. A., B.Sc, 16 

AstrorTma limicola, Sandahl, and Amphidotus cordatus, Penn, Note on. 

ByMr. DavidRobertson.'F.L.S., F.G.S., 17 

Kammplattm from Airdrie coalfield, Mr. John Young, F.G.S., on, . 18 
Lyre- Bird, of Australia, Menura superba, Davies, Notes on the. By Mr. 

C. W. Amott Stewart, 19 

White-beaked Dolphin, Lagenorhynchus aUnrostris, Gray, ne^r the Bell 

Rock, Sept., 1880, On the occurrence of. By Mr. J. M. Campbell, 24 
Idmnophilus subcentralis, Brauer, and Molanna palpata, M*Lach., from 

Inverness-shire, Mr. J. J. King on, 28 

Nutria or Coypu, Myopotamus coypus^ Mol., from Chili, Mr. J. M. 

Campbell on the, 28 

Gurnard, Indian Flying, Dactyloptenu orientalis, Lin. , from the Gulf of 

Aden, M. J. M. Campbell on the, 28 

Callianassa tumeriana, White, from Old Calabar, Mr. John Young, 

F.G.S., on, 29 

Hymenoptera from the Sandwich Islands, Mr. Peter Cameron on a col- 
lection of; 29 

Synodadia and other allied forms. Remarks on the genus, with descrip- 
tion of a new species. By Mr. John Young, F.G.S., . . . 30 
Orange, On the structure of an. By Mr. Thomas King, ... 36 



Digitized by 



Google 



IV CONTENTS. 

Page 
Cetacea, On the Natural History of the. By Mr. Thomas Southwell, 

F.Z.S., Norwich, 36 

Meteorological Notes and Kemarks on the state of Vegetation in the 
Public Parks of Glasgow during the year 1880. By Mr. D. M 'Lellan, 

Supt. of Parks, 36 

Ornithology, Third Report on Scottish, Oct., 1880, to April, 1881. 

Compiled by Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., &c., V.P., . il 

Winter ofl 880-81, Journal of the 42 

Hyrax, Cape, ffyrax capensis, Schreb., Mr. John M. Campbell on, 64 

Vulture, Secretary, Serpentarius secretarinst Scop., from South Africa, 

Mr. John M. Campbell on, 6i 

Sandstone, Flexible, from India, Mr. John Rirsop, V.P., on, 65 

Whale, Atlantic Right, Balaena hiscayerms^ Eschricht, On the occur- 
rence of the, on the East Coast of Scotland. By Mr. Thomas 

Southwell, F.Z.S., Cor. Mem., 66 

Alston, Mr. E. R., F.L.S., F.Z.S., &c, In Memoriam notice of, . 69 

Polgcentropus Kingif M'Lach., from the North of Scotland, Mr. F. G. 

Binnie on, 76 

Grebe, Sclavonian or Dusky, Podiceps comutuSf Gmelin, from Loch 

Lomond, Mr. James Lumsden, F.Z.S., on 77 

Plants found in the Neighbourhood of Greenock, On some of the rarer. 

By Mr. Thomas Scott , .... 77 

Protection of Wild Birds, On the. By Mr. James C. Christie, . 88 

Chitonidae, A Contribution to the Study of the British Carboniferous. 
By Mr. R. Etheridge, jun., F.R.Ph.S.Ed., Cor. Mem. (With two 

Plates, L and IL) 8i 

Technitella leffumen, Norman, and T. malo, Norman, from Oban, Mr. 

David Robertson, F.L.S.,F.G.S., on, 107 

Archaeocidaris and SiliquarUif from the collection of Dr. Rankin, Car- 
luke, Mr. John Young, F.G.S., on, 108 

Swan, sp. ? from Ramelton, Donegal, Mr. John M. Campbell on a, 109 

Skua, Chilian, Stercorarius chiUnsis, Saunders, Mr. John M. Campbell 

on the, . . . . . . ' 110 

St. Abb's Head and its Bird Life, On. By Mr. J. A. Harvie-Brown, 

F.RS.E., &c., V.P., 110 

Mammalia of Perthshire, The. By Mr. William Horn, . .118 
Birds of Sutherland, On the. By Mr. Thomas E. Buckley, F.Z.s!, . 126 
Abstract of Treasurer's Accounts lor 1879-80, 154 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROCEEDINGS 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



SESSIOIST 1880-81. 

THE TWENTY-NINTH ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING, 
ANDERSON'S COLLEGE BUILDINGS, 

October 5th, 1880. 

Professor John Young, M.D., F.G.S., President, in the chair. 

The Treasurer submitted his Annual Financial Statement, 
duly audited by Messrs. James Lumsden and George E. Paterson, 
the balance in Bank and in the hands of the Treasurer being 
£56 19s. 3d. He called attention to the gradual decrease of the 
Society's funds, and suggested that means should be adopted by 
increasing the membership, or otherwise, to obtain a larger revenue 
in order to meet the expense of an annual publication of the 
Proceedings, and a larger prospective outlay on the Library. 

The Secretary read the Report of the Council on the business of 
last session, which gave a favourable account of the progress of 
the Society and of its prospects in the future. The usual eight 
monthly meetings were held, and were all well attended, the 
interest being maintained until the close. Full reports appeared 
regularly in the North British Daily Mail, and so brought the 
Proceedings under the notice of the absent members and the general 
public. The number of life and ordinary members on the roll 
at last annual meeting was 174; 11 new entrants were received 
during the session, and these, with the addition of the members of 
the Field Naturalists' Society, after allowing for deaths and with- 
drawals, make up the number to 230, being an increase of 56 since 
last Report. The obituary of the year records the death of two 

VOL. V. A 



Digitized by 



Google 



2 PROCBBDINGS OP THE 

honorary members, viz. — Professor Schimper, of Strasbourg, who 
was distinguished for his attainments in Geology, Botany, and other 
branches of Natural History; and Mr. Robert Hislop, of Polmont, 
who, although not personally known to many of the present 
members, was at one time, in the early history of the Society, 
recognised as a regular attendant upon, and a worthy partaker in, 
the business of the meetings. His speciality was Entomology, 
particularly Coleoptera, upon which order he was accounted an 
authority. 

There is also to be recorded the sudden death of Mr. Alexander 
Bannatyne Stewart, one of the life members, whose sudden removal 
has been deeply lamented not only by the members, but by the public 
of Glasgow and the West of Scotland generally. He was especially 
distinguished for his liberality, and for the support he gave to all 
institutions having for their object the benefit and improvement of 
his fellow-citizens. 

The Council has concluded arrangements at a moderate rent with 
the Committee representing the two Societies which are the pro- 
prietors of the handsome new suite of rooms, at 207 Bath Street, 
where accommodation will be provided for holding the monthly 
meetings, and for the library. For the successful issue of the 
negotiations connected with this change in the Society's local 
habitation, the members are entirely indebted to Mr. Archibald 
Robertson, who has throughout shown an appreciation of the wants 
of the Society, and an interest in its prosperity, which deserve their 
warmest thanks. In leaving the time-honoured institution where 
so many agreeable and useful evenings have been spent, it is 
natural to cast a retrospective glance and think of the many re- 
spected members whose loss we have to mourn, and who in their 
day carried on with energy and prosperity the business of the 
Society. May their activity and success be an incentive to those 
who have taken their places in making this new departure a 
notable point in the promotion of the interests and work of the 
Natural History Society of Glasgow. 

The Librarian reported that all the books were in good condition, 
that the use of the volumes had been largely taken advantage 
of by the members, and that considerable additions had been made 
by donation, purchase and exchange. The number of corresponding 
Societies has increased, and the last part of the Proceedings has been 
sent to 23 British, 34 Continental, and 13 American Societies; and 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL- HI8T0BY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 3 

also to the Mitchell Library, to the Paisley Free Library, to the 
British Museum, and to the Kelvingrove (City) Museum. 

The Report of the Summer Session was read by the Secretary, 
Mr. Thomas King, as follows : — 

Procbbdings of the Summer Session, 1880. 
llTH May, 1880. 

The first meeting was held in the Society's Rooms, Anderson's 
College, this evening — Mr. W. J. Milligan, V.P., in the Chair. 

The Chairman called the attention of the members to the 
approaching Conference of the Cryptogamic Society and the 
Exhibition of specimens which was to be made in Glasgow under 
its auspices. He then delivered an introductory address — "On the 
Modes of Reproduction in Cryptogamic plants." 

Mr. Robert Turner read a paper on the "Fertilisation of Plants," 
tracing the history of discovery in regard to the subject, and 
d^^aM|y^Mm^o^h^unmi8mAitual^^ adaptations of 

NOTE 

This sheet contains the Proceedings of the Summer Session, 
1880, which were accidentally omitted from Part L, Vol V. It 
has been paged separately from the present part, so that it can be 
detached and bound in at its proper place — page 3 of Part L — the 
original leaf — pp. 3, 4— being cancelled. [Sept., 1883.] 



presence of a completely closed pistil, he held, is lor an important 
end. It affords security against the entrance of fungus spores, and 
thus prevents the destruction of the immature ovules, which contain 
a large amount of easily assimilable matter destined for the support of 
the embryo. It is the counterpart of those hermetically-sealed flasks 
in which experiments are made on the preservation of organic fluids 
against putrefactive changes. The loose cellular substance in the 
style and the acid secretion on the stigma serve to filter the air before 
it reaches the ovules, and thus prevent the access of fungus germs. 

8th June, 1880. 
Mr. W. J. Milligan, Y.P., in the Chair. 
, Mr Thomas Khig exhibited, specimens, giithered. near PoJlok- 

a 



Digitized by 



Google 



PBOCBBDINGS OP THE 



shaws, of Lamiuni GaJeobdolon, a plant not previously recorded for 
the Clyde district. He then read a paper " On the Structure and 
Classification of Fungi," which he illustrated by specimens, 
diagrams, and microscopic sections. 



22nd June, 1880. 

Mr. James Allan in the Chair. 

Mr. Christopher Sherry exhibited a fine blossom of the Night- 
flowering Cactus ( Cereus grandiflora), and Mr. J. Broom, specimens 
of Lepidimn campestre, 

Mr. Bums shewed three monstrosities of the Dandelion, in each 
of which two flower-stalks were completely united, while the heads 
remained more or less distinct. 

Mr. Wm. Stewart exhibited a collection of native Ferns, of which 
he described the more important species and varieties. 

Mr. Robert Turner read a paper on "British Ferns." 



6th July, 1880. 

Mr. James Allan in the Chair. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited a specimen of Saussurea alpina in 
flower, from Ben Laiogh, Perthshire, and mentioned that he had 
seen Dryas octopetala in great abundance on the same mountain. 

Mr. Wm. Stewart, shewed a frond of Lastrea cristata, var. spinulom, 
which he had found growing near Glasgow. 

Mr. James White exhibited some monstrosities of Kale, in which 
branches sprang from the surface of the leaf. 

Mr. Peter Cameron exhibited an undescribed species of AthcUia, 
which he proposed to name Scutellariae on account of its leaves 
feeding on Scutellaria, The larva is of a deep velvety black and 
studded over with three rows of white points, while the imago is 
not unlike the common A, roaae, but differs in having the scutellum 
luteous, and in certain other points. Mr. Cameron also shewed a 
Wasp from Nicaragua, from every part of the body of which radiated 
the filaments of the myceliiun of a fungus. In this connection he 
mentioned having observed in Bute, in June last, large numbers of 
a Syrphus attached in a lifeless condition to the stems of grasses, 
and that they had been destroyed by the fungus Entomophthora, 

A paper on "Seaweeds," contributed by a corresponding member, 
Mr. James A. Mahoney, Ramelton, County Donegal, was then read. 
After rjsfQriiag to the gei^eral geographical distribution of the AJgae^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATtTRAL HISTORt SOCIETY OV GLASGOW. 5* 

he remarked that the coasts of France and Portugal were barren 
compared with those of the British Isles. Along our shoi*es the Algae 
form a luxuriant fringe extending from high- water mark to a depth 
of from 1 20 to 150 feet. The modes of repi-oduction were described, 
and directions were given for collecting and preserving specimens. 



3bi) August, 1880. 
Mr. W. J. MiUigan, V.P., in the Chair. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited the following plants, collected on the 
Breadalbane mountains: Arabis petraeay Draha rupestris, Draba 
incanOy Cherleria sedoides, Alsine rubella, Sagina saxatUis, S, nivalis^ 
Dryas octopetala, Saxifraga cemuay Gomm mecicay Satissurea 
cUptna, Erigeron dlpiniis, Epilobium ahnnifolium, E, anagallidi' 
folium^ E, alpinum, Solidago virga-aureay var. cambrica, Lobelia 
Dortmanna, Veronica saxatilis, V, humifusa^ Pyrola rotundifoliay 
Gentiana nivaUsy Bartsia cUpinOy Myosotis alpestris, Loiseleuria 
procmnbens, Salix reticulata, Salix herbacea, LuztUa spicata, Juncu& 
trtfidusy Kobregia carieina, Garex atrata, C, capillaris, C. pulla, 
G, rigida, Gystopteris montana, Equisetum variegatum. He also 
exhibited, from Fife and Kinross, Ranunculus r&ptans, Campanula 
rapunculoides, C. glomeraia, and a series of abnormal plants. He 
rep(»^ed that Timmia norwegica, which was first found on Ben 
Lawers by Dr. Stirton in 1861, had been got by the same gentleman 
on Cam Creag; and that Leskea rufeseem was gathered on Ben 
Laoigh in fruit. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited a collection of plants made by 
himself in Fife, including ThdHctrum minus, Reseda lutea^ Trifoli- 
um aroeme, Anchurn sempervirens, Cynogloasum officinale, Hyos- 
eyamus niger, Rumex alpinus, Rumex sanguineus. Astragalus 
hypoglottis, Campanula rapuncutoides, Salvia verbenaca, etc. 

Mr. Bichard McKay gave an account of a visit he had made in 
July to the English Lake District, where he found plentiful the 
following species, which are either rare or unknown in the neigh- 
bourhood of Glasgow: Gorydalis daviculata, Geranium lu>cidum. 
Genista tinctoria, Poterium Sanguisorba, P. officinale^ Galium 
MollugOy Lactuca muralis, Stachys Betonica, Plantago media, Avena 
flavescens, Briza media, Asplenium Ruta-muraria, Gryptogramme 
crispa. He also found, but less plentifully, Thcdictrum minus^ 
Meeanopsis cambrica, Hdianthemum vuJgare, Silene inflata, Ononis 
arvensis, AiUhyllis mdjie^'aria, Saxifraga aizoides, Knautia ai'uenMs, 



Digitized by 



Google 



6* J»ROCBiaDiNGS OP THB! 

Campanula latifolia, Linaria mim/r, L, Gymbalariay Salix 
herhacea, Gymnadenia conopsea, Habenaria viridis^ H. chloranthOy 
Foa rtgida, Malva moschata, Arirni rtmculatum, Corydalis solida. 
These plants were found in a semi-circle from Kendal, by Winder- 
mere, Grasmere, Keswick, Ullswater, and Penrith, including 
Helvellyn and Skiddaw. 

Mr. D. Gregorson exhibited a line specimen of Carlina vulgaris 
fromArran. 

Mr. James Allan gave an account of the dredging excursion off 
Gourock on the 31st July. 

Mr. Peter Cameron gave a general description of the ovipositor 
in the Hymenoptera. 

August 17th, 1880. 

Mr. James Allan in the Chair. 

An account was given of the excursion to Manuel and Carrubber 
woods, Linlithgowshire, on the 14th instant, under the leadership 
of Mr. Broom, on which occasion many flowering plants, not 
common near Glasgow, were found, and among Fungi, Marasmivs 
rotula and Phallus impudicus. 

Prof. A. S. Wilson, M.A., B.Sc, gave an interesting account of 
a course of study in microscopic botany which he had attended 
during the summer at South Kensington. 

August SIst, 1880. 

Mr. James Allan in the Chair. 

Mr. Allan gave an account of the excursion to Kilmahew Glen 
on the 28th instant. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited a specimen of Cystopteris fragiliSy 
var. multifidaj from Glen Prosen. 

Mr. D. Gregorson read a paper on "Arran," giving an account of 
the coast from AMiiting Bay to Dippen, and treating mainly on its 
botany and geology. A list of the plants he found on the island 
of Pladda is subjoined. 

List of Plants found on Pladda, July, 1880. 

Eanunculus acris, . - - . . . . . frequent. 
„ repens, --..---.- „ 

Cardamine hirsuta, not common* 

Cochlearia officinalis, frequent. 

Viola caninay not common, 

Silene maritima, common. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBtt OF GLASGOW. 7* 

Sagi7m 2jroeumhen8, common. 

Stellaria mediae frequent. 

Cei'astium vulgaturny not common. 

„ mscosum, frequent. 

„ semi-decandrum, „ 

Geranium Robertianum, „ 

„ molle^ not common. 

Ulex JSuropaeus, rare. 

Trifolium r&pem^ frequent. 

Lotus corniczilatusj » 

major^ ---•.. not common. 

Pnmus communis^ var. spinomj frequent 

Spiraea ulmaria, - not common. 

Ruhua idaeuSy »> 

„ rJiarnnifoliuSy n 

„ corylifoUua, - - » 

Potmtilla anserinay common. 

„ Tormentilla, • ^ 

Rosa spinosissima, not common. 

Chtyledon umUlicuSy frequent 

Sedum anglicum, - - - ^ common. 

Chrysosplenium oppositifolium, rare. 

Ldgusticum Scoticum, - rare. 

Heradeum Spondyliunty frequent 

Hedera HeUx, » 

Sambucus nigra, rare. 

Lonicera Periclymenum, • - . - „ 

Galium verum, common. 

„ Apariney » 

Hypochaeris radicata, - - frequent 

Sonchus aspeTy »> 

Leontodon Taraxactmif » 

Arctium Lappa, ^re. 

Cnicus lanceolatus, frequent 

„ palustris, not common. 

„ arvensia, not common. 

Senecio vrdgaris, frequent 

„ Jacohaea, » 

Bellis pei'ennis, - -• . . „ 

Matricaria inodora, ~ »> 

Anthemis noMliSy '*^®- 

Achillea Millefolium, frequent 

Campanula rotundifolia, » 

JErica dnerea, »> 

Calluna vulgaris, - - - - rare. 

Veronica Chamaedrys, frequent 

Euphrasia officinalis, » 

Thymus Serpyllum, »> 



Digitized by 



Google 



8^ . l>RaCl9WKMW OF ISIt.. 

Teucrim^Semodonia^ common. 

PruneV^.vvlgarUy r - >» 

Scutellaria galericulaiat frequent 

Armeria v^dgckria, - - - - common. 

Plantago major^ n 

„ 1anceolatu8t ' - frequent 

„ mo^Ytma, - h 

„ Cor4Knopu8j abundant 

CfhJnopQtlPum albim, frequent 

Airiplex pattda, »» 

Rumex^erispm, » 

„ Apetom, II 

„ AceUmllay - - not common. 

Mercmnalis pei-emia^ frequent 

Urtica dmca^ w 

Iris pseud-acarusr^ frequent 

AUtum\ureinum^ h 

Junctis C(mmuni8t n 

„ maritimuSf >• 

Carex.fiteUiMay » 

„ mlgariSi >» 

Nardua strieta, - - „ 

Ardhoxanthum odoratum, »» 

Agrostia vulgaris, n 

„ alba, II 

Mdica uniflora, ^^^ 

Holcus lanafus, common. 

Airafleowmh »» 

„ praecax, >i 

DactyHsgUmeratjO, common. 

Poa anmm, »> 

Festuca avina, »i 

Bromu8miMi$9 n 

Triticm^fi^mB, frequent 

Loiium^perwne, n 

Palypodium mlgare, frequent, 

Aspidvum Oreopteris, - » 

„ FilixniaSy »> 

Agplmium Filix-foemina, »i 

„ Adiantum-nigrum, rare. 

„ marinum, frequent. 

Scolopendrium vtdgare, rare. 

Pteris aquilina, : common. 

Hth September, 1880. 
Mr. W. J. Milligan, V.P., in the Chair. 

A new station (on Lochfyneside) was reported for A^pidium 
LonchitiSy and one near Kihnamock for Rumex alpinus,. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL •HISWRT^'SOCIBTY 'OF GLASGOW. '5* 

Mr. Robert Turner gave an account of the excursion to Miln- 
gavie, where many species of Fungi were found, and amongst 
flowering plants Corydalis claviculata. 

In view of the conference of the Cryptogamic Society of Scotland, 
to be held in Glasgow in the following week, Mr. Thomas King 
read a paper on Fungi, illustrating his remarks by figures and fresh 
specimens. 

The Reports were all unanimously approved of and adopted. 

The following gentlemen were appointed office-bearers for the 
session — 

President — Professor John Young, M.D., F.G.S.; Vice Presidents 
—John A. Harvie-Brown, F.L.S., M.B.O.U., W. J. Milligan, and 
John Kirsop; Secretaries — ^Robert Mason and John M. Campbell; 
Treasurer — Robert J. Bennett; Librarian — Francis G. Binnie; 
Members of Council — Arthur Pratt, Peter Cameron, James S. 
Dixon, James Allan, James B. Murdoch, A. S. Wilson, M.A., B.Sc, 
John Young, F.G.S., Thomas King, and Robert Turner. 

Edward R Alston, F.L.S., F.G.S., &c., London, Thomas David- 
son, F.R.S., F.G.S., &c., Brighton, Dr. L. de Koninck, Li^ge, 
Belgium, Rev. John Stevenson, Glamis, Forfarshire, John 0. 
Westwood, M.A., F.L.S., &c.. Professor of Zoology, Oxford, and 
Professor Gustav Mayr, Vienna, were elected Honorary Members. 

Colonel J. S. Stirling, Rev. W. Williams, F.G.S., W. J. Sterland, 
James R. Low, M.A., David Forsyth, M.A., and Robert Brydall 
were elected Ordinary Members. 

SPECntENS BXHIBITBD. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited a fine series of tnounted marine aigfte 
from the South of England, for the Cryptogamic exhibitioli beld 
lately in the City, which he had received frdln Mr. E. N. Holmes, 
F.L.S. 

Mr. Thomas King shewed a specimen of a ftmgus which he had 
obtained at the recent exhibition in the Coal Exchange. He noticed 
it beginning to expand, and having planted it, found the growth to 
be nearly two inches in a single day. He had identified it as 
Oynophahts caninus. 

Mr. James Mahony sent for exhibition a specimen of the Otter- 
Pike, or Sting-fish, Trackmvs vipera (Cuv. and Val.), which he 
dbcantetenbed as a'mt)St diabolical Utt^efidi. It sthkes vigry aeoti- 



Digitized by 



Google 



10* PROOBBDINQS OF THS 

rately with the black coloured spines of the dorsal fiu, and the men 
who go out to fish with hand nets in the shallow sand are in constant 
terror of them, a sting from one being enough to render a person 
h/ra de combat for three weeks. When received on the hand, the 
arm swells enormously to the shoulder, and a feverish state is induced 
which prevents all work. 

There were also exhibited specimens of a small crustacean, Mysis 
ehamaeleon (J. V. Thompson), a common estuarian species often 
found far up rivers. "VMien the river Leannan was low last summer 
they existed in countless millions. Yarrell says in his "British 
Fishes" that this species occasionally inhabits fresh water. 

PAPERS READ. 

I. — On a simple Method of mounting Objects for microscopic 
Examination, 

By Mr. Peter Cameron. 

Most entomologists who have had occasion to moimt dissections 
of insect structure for microscopical examination must have felt the 
inconvenience accruing from the ordinary method, inasmuch as it 
necessitates the formation of two distinct collections — the dissection 
being kept in one place, and the insect from which the dissection 
was made in another. When it is added that, as a rule, a Codding- 
ton lens is amply sufficient to determine the structure of the various 
organs used in classification, or in the determination of species, — e.^/., 
the mouth organs, legs, anal appendages, &c., it is obvious that a 
method of mounting dissections which enables the dissection to be 
placed alongside the insect, is one worthy of attention. Such a 
method I purpose bringing under the notice of the members of our 
Society this evening. 

Some years ago I commenced moimting the larger dissections by 
gumming them on slips of cardboard, but this I found to be attended 
with certain disadvantages — it could only be used with large objects, 
and they became sooner or later obscured with dust, while also only 
the under side could be seen. The last objection was the most serious, 
but it was overcome in this way — by punching a roimd or square 
hole in a slip of cardboard, then gumming a cover glass on the 
lower side, the object being gummed on the upper side of the cover 
glass. This process was further improved by fixing a cover glass 
over the object^ which was thus made dust prool For mounting 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 5 

objects dry, this method does admirably, but it is not sufficient for 
small dissections which require to be clearly defined, and are besides 
apt to be obscured by the gum. The next development of the 
cardboard method was the employment of balsam, and that the 
latter preserving medium can be used with success, will, I think, be 
admitted by every one who examines the objects I exhibit in illus- 
tration of my remarks. 

I will now proceed to describe the process. In the first place, 
very fine cardboard must be obtained, and cut into pieces, say 9 lines 
by 6. A hole 2 J to 3 lines across is punched at one end in the 
centre, and a line and a half to 2 lines from, the edge. Xext a cover 
glass is cleaned, and is fastened to the lower side of the card by 
means of balsam, so as to cover the hole, care being taken to use 
plenty of it. These two processes — the punching of the holes and 
the fastening of the cover glass — are best done wholesale, so *^hat 
the prepared cards may be always at hand when wanted. Supposing 
then that the object to be examined is ready to be mounted, the 
next procedure is to fill up the cell in the card with balsam, to near 
the top, say within a fourth of the top. The balsam is then made 
as level as possible, and the object or objects arranged on it. Place 
this aside in some place where no dust can get near for a dhj or 
two, and then finish the business by filling up the cell with balsam 
till it overflows, and pressing a cover glass over it. Next place in 
a flat position for two or three days, when all superfluous balsam 
may be removed, the glasses cleaned, the nature of the object 
noted, by means of a crowquill, on the lower end of the card? 
and lastly, a pin being stuck through it when it is ready for the 
cabinet. I should explain that the object of not putting the top 
glass on at once, but leaving the objects to harden in the balsam 
for a time, is, that in this way they are not apt to be shifted out of 
position when the top glass is applied, or in the endeavours to get 
rid of large air bubbles. In the same way the reason of leaving the 
cards flat for two or three days is to allow the balsam to harden, as 
the objects flow down if the card is allowed to hang horizontally 
before this takes place. One thing, however, is necessary for success, 
and that is, that properly prepared balsam be used. This is done 
by dissolving Canada balsam in benzine till it becomes of the 
consistency of cream. With this there is no trouble with air bubbles, 
in fact it is scarcely necessary to drive them out, as the bubbles 
disappear of themselves in a day or two. 



Digitized by 



Google 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

The process described above I have hitherto only used with balsam, 
but certain experiments which I have made lead me to believe that 
glycerine and gelatine can likewise be employed, and the employment 
of the latter especially will be an advantage considering how trans- 
parent balsam renders colourless objects. These two would make 
the cardboard admirably adapted for mounting Acarides and other 
minute Arthropods. That it is well adapted for Acarides is shown 
by the card in the box where we have Tegeocranus lattis represented 
in three stages — the larva and pupa in balsam, and the mature 
msect gummed outside. 

That objects, mounted in this way are readily observed by means 
of a lens is clear to any one, but it might be objected that liigli 
powers cannot be employed for their examination. Such, however, 
is not the case. For examination under the compound microscope, 
all that is necessary to do is to place an ordinary glass slide on the 
stage, then put the card on its upper edge, letting it hang by means 
of the pin, the lower side of which hangs down. Should the nature 
of the stage not admit of this, then it is a simple matter to remove 
the pin out of the card. 

Thus there is no advantage, which the ordinary way of mounting 
on glass slides possesses, which is not obtained by the use of card- 
board, while the utility of having the dissection placed alongside 
the insect, (especially if it be one of use in classification), is suffi- 
cient to recommend it to the attention of entomologists. Nor must 
it be forgotten that cardboard is very much cheaper than glass 
slides, which cost something like 6/- or 7/- per gross, which is almost 
saved for the cost of the extra cover glass, and the cardboard will 
not cost anything like that. 

I may also mention that I have been making some experiments 
on the lines indicated by Schlectendal, (Ent. Nachr.), in the way of 
preserving larvae by the roasting process. After many failures I 
have succeeded in preservmg larvae under 1 inch in length very 
fairly. The darker colours keep very well, bilt the lighter greens 
fade sooner or later; yet, as one or two green larvae have retained 
their colour, it is possible that with greater experience I may find 
out the method most favourable to effect this. So far as my 
experience goes at present, two things are necessary before properly 
preserved larvae can be obtained — they must be full fed — either 
ready for pupating, or before they have moulted for the last time 
when they have the two skins on — and their stomachs must be per- 
fectly empty. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 7 

As for the method of roasting I have adopted, it is very simple. 
I take an ordinary tin canister, place the larvae to be mounted in 
an open pill-box, which is then placed in the canister, and the 
whole kept over the gas for one or two minutes-, according to the size 
of the larvae. The larvae have to be tested at the expiration of 30 
or 40 seconds to see how the hardening proceeds, and if they are 
not sufficiently hard then, great care must be taken with the further 
roasting. A little experience, however, will soon give one an idea 
of the exact time required for the various sizes of larvae. 

For the cabinet the larvae are best kept on cardboard, through 
which a short pin is passed, on the head of which the larva is 
stuck, care being taken not to cause the pin to project through its 
upper side. With a little care very interesting and instructive 
preparations may be made by drying a specimen of the leaf on which 
the larvae fed, showing its manner of eating, &c., and the pupa or 
cocoon being preserved, so that in this way the life history of the 
species may be very effectually illustrated. 

The same method of roasting preserves ApMdae admirably. 
These are first killed and mounted on cardboard before being held 
over the flame. Care, however, is necessary ill manipulating them, 
as they shrivel up on the application of a too intense heat. 



II. — On the Shell Mounds of the Noiih of Ireland, 

By Mr. James A. Mahony, Corresponding Member. 

The British and Irish coasts are marked by "links" and sand 
dunes which occupy well-defined regions, and possess a fauna and 
flora peculiar to themselves. Of such are the Western shores of 
many of the Hebridean islands and the coasts of Morayshire, Fife- 
shire, and Ayrshire, in Scotland; a considerable tract of the Eastern 
coast of England; with many parts of Donegal, Sligo, and Mayo, in 
Ireland. Their general characteristics are well described by Page, 
who says: — "The superficial or blown portion of these sandy tracts 
is chiefly composed "of fine sand and comminuted shells, with 
occasional bands of decomposed vegetation or soil. Many of them 
would seem to indicate a gradual uprise of the land from the waters 
of the ocean. The organic remains of the drift portion are partly 
terrestrial and partly marine, (the shells of the Helix occurring with 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

those of the Cockle and Mussel; the bones of marine birds and 
fishes with those of land animals, and seaweeds along with terrestrial 
plants), but in the deeper strata the remains are chiefly marine, and, 
from the incohering ^ature of the deposits, are by no means well 
preserved." 

It is on such sandy tracts, above high-water mark, that I have 
found numerous examples of the kitchen-midden, so numerous, 
indeed, that I did not attempt to catalogue them. In county 
Donegal they are to be seen abundantly on the Fannet shore, which 
stretches from the mouth of Lough Swilly to the entrance of Mul- 
roy Bay, and on the sandy strands of Mulroy Bay itself. 

In general appearance they are very similar. About 10 to 20 
feet above high-water mark, a rounded eminence is seen rising 6 or 
7 feet above the dry sand. On the summit you find an accumula- 
tion of rough unhewn stones of the district, and all about the mound 
is white with bleached shells and bones, the remains of many a frugal 
meal. The stones are evidently the ruins of the rude huts built on 
the spot, but in no single case could I find a trace of their plan, 
whether circular, square, or oblong. They must have been small, 
however, for they oecupy a limited space on the mound, often not 
more than about 20 feet square altogether. There occasionally occur 
long slabs of stone, which seemingly served for door lintels, but no 
fragments of wood have been seen. The shells are all of edible 
kinds. The first in order of quantity is the Cockle, Cardium edule; 
and next follow successively the Limpet, Patella vulgata; the 
Periwinkle, lAUorina littoralis; the Oyster, Ostrea edulis; and the 
Mussel, Mytilus edulis; the last being very rare. There are also, 
but equally rare with the last, a few odd valves here and there of 
Cardium echiniatum. Another notable character of the general 
characteristics of the Donegal Shell Mounds is that the bones of 
animals are very abundant, and form perhaps one-tenth of the whole 
bulk of organic remains, as compared with the shells. These bones 
consist of ribs and teeth of the cow and sheep, and some long bones 
of the deer; all the larger bones being split longitudinally for the 
marrow. At Dundoan, EossguU, I found a boar's tusk. 

On none of the bones did I find any trace of carving or ornamen- 
tation, such as I described in my paper on a Shell Moimd in South 
Uist.* In almost all the heaps a few fragments of burnt bones were 

* Proceedings, vol. il, p. 24. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OF GLASGOW. 9 

found, and more rarely, small portions which seem to have had their 
bony structure replaced by gradual infiltration of carbonate of lime. 

All the small stones found bore evidence of contact with fire. It 
would be difficult to get one entire; they are mostly fractured, 
and in some cases altered in colour by heat. 

An early mode of cooking was to surround the meat with hot 
pebbles, and this may account for so many burnt stones. Nothing 
in the shape of stone implements was obtained, but almost all the 
mounds contained chipped fragments of a crystalline limestone found 
in situ near Carrigart. 

The above general description applies to the following shell 
mounds, as far as I have examined them, in county Donegal. 

In Fannbtt. 

At Cooladerry, - - - . - - - 1 

At Portachaman, 2 

At Ballyheman, - 1 

At the Old Town of Ballywhorisky, - - 4 

At Port-na-luing, 2 

In Eossgull. 

Near Carrigart, 2 

Near Larginreagh, 2 

At Dundoan, 2 

At Melmore, 3 

In Doagh. 
On Dunfanaghy strand, in an island surrounded by 

water only at spring tides, - - - - 3 

In Innisbofin island, - - - - 5 or 6 

(but all at the sandy end of the island called " The 

Toberglassan.") 

So much for the Donegal Shell Mounds. One other to which I 
-would call your attention is situated about half-a-mile from Ballintoy, 
in county Antrim. It, too, is only a few yards above high-water 
mark, it is also on a sandy shore, and the shell and bone remains 
are very similar to those already described, only that there are 
more examples of the bones of the deer to be met with. Over and 
above these remains, however, there are also, in exceeding plenty, 
flint flakes and pottery. The former are so nimierous as to suggest 
that this was a flint implement factory. I have found here nothing 
more finished than some flint scrapers, used, I believe, for preparing 



Digitized by 



Google 



10 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

deer and other skins. The edges of these scrapers are beautifully 
chipped, each stroke leaving the characteristic conchoidal fracture of 
flint. Here I found a number of stone hammers, which may have 
been used for dressing the flint scrapers, &c. These hammers are just 
natural stones which seem to have been selected for their handiness 
in shape and weight, and they are to be recognised only by the 
abraded and pitted end, caused by continual hammering. 

My visit to this Ballintoy mound was only a few days after a 
storm of wind and rain, which rendered the time favourable, and 
laid bare a great deal of pottery. The largest fragments I saw were 
5 inches long by 3 inches deep; but two of these were found together, 
and the broken edges fit so well, that they may be taken as 
belonging to one crock or utensil which would measure 14 inches 
in diameter at the mouth, and 16 or 17 inches in depth. 

I have examined the pottery microscopically and find it consists 
of Lias clay — a bed of which exists in the vicinity — with an inter- 
mixture of small angular pebbles, seemingly of pounded basalt, to 
give it consistency. 

This pot was probably used for cooking purposes, and as it 
narrowed from the lip, and then swelled out, this "neck" would 
afford a suitable hold for the cord by which I believe these fictile 
vessels were moved from place to place. The pottery has evidently 
been made by hand, as none of the fragments (of which a few 
hundreds have been obtained here) show marks of the lathe or wheeL 
The inner lip of the above mentioned crock shows the trace of the 
last hand smoothing, after receiving which it was ornamented with 
three rows of angular marks, seemingly made with a smaller instru- 
ment than that used for the decoration of the outside, but of the 
same three-cornered shape. 

The bit of pottery now exhibited is of better ware and formed 
part of a smaller vessel than the crock; the ornamentation seems to 
have been made by the impress of a rough cord. 

The late Mr. Herdman, of Ballintoy, showed me a small cup made 
of the finest clay, and of a yellow colour, which he found here. It 
was only 2 inches in height, without ornamentation, and his theory 
was that it was a playful imitation of the large ware, and made by 
one of the children of the old world potter. Mr. Herdman gathered 
fully a hundredweight of bones, shells, stone hammers, flint scrapers, 
and flakes from this mound, but never found any iron or bronze 
remains. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 11 

If it be a fair inference from the situation of this Ballintoy mound, 
so resembling that of the numerous Donegal mounds in the similarity 
of its shells and split bones, and in the character of the rough stones 
which formed the hut of the dwellers, that it was synchronous with 
them, then I think I am justified in claiming for them all a high 
antiquity. The Donegal mounds have no flints or pottery — it may 
be from the absence of the raw material — but whatever their age 
may be, the pottery and flint of the Ballintoy example afford a clue 
to their place in time. 

Much of the pottery found in Crannogs has been referred to the 
9th and 10th centuries,* and it is much less archaic in taste and 
ornament than that of Ballintoy. It is possible, however, that old 
fashions and forms remained among the coast dwellers, when their 
inland brethren were advancing in the arts. The flint implements 
by themselves would popularly be ascribed to a prehistoric age, but it 
is a question whether the Antrim men of even the middle ages did 
not make copies of iron arrow heads and knives out of their abundant 
and suitable flint, from motives of thrift and economy. Be that as 
it may, I think I am safe in saying that this mound cannot be more 
recent than the 10th or 11th century, and may be very much older. 



III. — Rertiarh^ on a few Hauls with the Lh^edge, in Portree Bay^ 

Skye, 

By Mr. David Eobertson, F.L.S., F.G.S. 

Although the marine fauna of the British seas is generally much 
alike, yet some species appear to be mostly confined to particular 
districts, but not always according to theory, as they are often 
found to far overlap what is believed to be their natural boundaries, 
not contmuously, but in leaps over large intermediate tracts. 
Many notable cases of this kind are foimd amongst the moUusca, 
such as the isolated habitat of northern shells on the East coast of 
England, Saadcava (Panopoea) norvegica, Fusvs noi^egicus, Fiisus 
turtoniy ^c. 

During the month of August, 1879, the writer took a number of 

* ^^ Journal of Royal Historical and Archaeological Association of Ireland." 
vol. i., Jan., 1871, p. 867. 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 PROOBEDINGS OF THE 

Jiauls with the dredge in Portree Bay, Skye, at a depth of from 14 
to 18 fathoms, the chief object being the investigation of the 
Microzoa. The gathering of Foraminif era was very rich, numbering 
above 100 species, and mostly all being in fine condition. Many 
of the rarer forms were in considerable abundance, such as Bigenerina 
digitata, Operctdina ammonoides, Nonionina umbilicatula, Quinque- 
loculina tenuis^ Gaudryina filifo'nnisy 4"^., but at present I will only 
notice such as are new to Britain. 

Reojphax difflugiformis, Brady. Mr. H. B. Brady, in his paper 
on the Keticularian Khizopoda of the "Challenger" Expedition, 
(Quarterly Microscopic Journal, vol. xix., N.S., pi. 5, fig., 3), notes 
its occurrence at 5 different stations, one in the North Atlantic, two 
in the South Atlantic, and two in the South Pacific. In one of 
these the depth is 1900 fathoms, while in the other four it varies 
from 2200 to 2740 fathoms. 

B, nodidosa, var. ?, Brady. In the same paper, Mr. Brady says that 
the distribution of this species is very wide, and the finest speci- 
mens have been found at stations in the South Atlantic, and in the 
North and South Pacific Oceans at depths from 1400 to 2000 
fathoms. I have it also from the Clyde district. 

lAUiola (Reophax) glomeraia, Brady. In his paper on the 
Keticularian Khizopoda of the North Polar Expedition (Ann, and 
Mag. of Natural History , June, 1878), Mr. Brady records this 
species from nine different stations between lat. 78*'20 N., and 
lat. 8r41 N., and in depths from 20 to 220 fathoms. 

Dentalina hrevis, D'Orb. 

Bobertina arctica, D'Orb., I believe to be the same species as that 
discovered last summer by Mr. Joseph Wright, of Belfast, at 
Killybegs, and recorded as Bulimina arctica, new to Britain; but 
Mr. H. B. Brady now refers it to his M.S. name, B. subteres, Brady. 

Dentalina consoh-ina, D'Orb., and Bolivina dilatata, Reus., and 
another from the same place of no less interest, which Mr. H. B. 
Brady figures and describes in his paper already referred to. 

Hyperammina elongatais, as Mr. Brady remarks, one of the many 
arenaceous types brought home in 1869 by natui*alists, in the first 
cruise of the "Porcupme," but he was not aware that it had 
hitherto received a name. 

From the many species found in Portree Bay, within a distance 
of 200 or 300 yards, common with those found in the dredgings 
of the "Challenger" and Polar Expeditions, although taken at 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 13 

stations and depths greatly dissimilar, we may reasonably infer that 
there must be some similarity of conditions between these stations, 
so widely different both bathymetrically and geographically. The 
gathering from Portree Bay was greatly more diversified and num- 
erous than that taken during the same month in Stomoway Bay, 
both places having fresh water flowing into them, and, as far as I 
could judge, in about the same volume. The material of both bot- 
toms is much alike; sandy, shelly mud, more or less crowded with 
dead shells; with this difference at Stomoway, the depths dredged 
are from 5 to 9 fathoms, and at Portree, from 14 to 18 fathoms, but 
differences of moderate depths seem to be of little importance in 
controlling the habits of the foraminiferal fauna. If a solution is 
ever to be found, most likely it will be from the obscure and 
variable character of the sea bottom. 

Mr. Robertson's remarks were illustrated by a fine series of 
mounted slides of Foraminifera, which the members had an oppor- 
tunity of examining under the microscope at the close of the 
meeting. 



THE SOCIETY'S BOOMS, 207 BATH STREET, 

* 

October 26th, 1880. 

Mr. John Kirsop, Vice-President, in the Chair. 

Mr. W. K Koch, M.A., F.G.S., was elected an ordinary member. 

PAPERS READ. 

r. — Some Ajpiarian Notes for 1880, 
By Mr. Robert J. Bennett. 

Since 1861, Bee culture has perhaps never had such an unfavour- 
able beginning as this year. In my concluding remarks in 1879, 
I mentioned that that had been the worst season for 20 years, and 
I advised those who had stocks left to feed them till every hive was 
at least 30 lbs. weight. Those who did not take the precaution of 
doing so were left bee-less. During January we had several fine 
days, of which the bees availed themselves to take a cleansing flight. 

Till the middle of February the bees were often on the wing and 
breeding had commenced in most of the hives. As in former years, 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 PBOOBBDINGS OP THE 

I began stimulative feeding to aid them in promoting and bringing 
out the young brood, which so soon has to take the place of the 
aged and worn-out bees. 

March, generally the most trying month for bees, was very 
favourable till about the middle, and it was very pleasing to see 
them coming back to their hives laden with pollen. About the 
20th a sharp frost set in, which greatly retarded breeding. 

Till the 18th, April was bleak and cold, with little simshine. 
On the 9th I examined stocks, and found that most of them con- 
tained eggs, larvae, and young bees, and that the latter (unless the 
weather became milder) would soon diminish the stores, particularly 
those of the Ligurians. To prevent any sudden collapse I increased 
the stimulative feeding. The bees have rarely wintered better in 
my apiary, but my man said, " I have no notion of thae foreign 
yellow boys, (alluding to the Ligurians), they are just a parcel of 
thieves and robbers. They are getting honey some gate and I ken 
it's no mine." To this I answered, " Feed them well, and they will 
not need to go to their neighbours' hives." 

Here I would direct attention to the gross ignorance that prevails, 
notwithstanding all that has been written about bees and their 
feeding in spring. It is well known by every bee-master that the 
most trying time for his stocks is during the months of March, April, 
and May, when the hives are in a manner being repopulated, but 
instead of strengthening and keeping every stock strong by feeding, 
the bees are allowed to shift for themselves, the result being that 
thousands (especially of the weak stocks) perish from want during 
the spring, after having safely got through the winter. 

Why will our Government so long stand idle, while those of France 
and Germany pay experts to teach apiculture in their rural schools ? 
By this means the young are there awakened to the fact that a great 
source of national wealth evaporates daily (honey being merely a 
secretion) for want of bees to collect it. Who will gainsay the fact 
that half a million of money has this season been lost to Scotland 
alone by reason of its inhabitants not having a knowledge of api- 
culture and bees to collect the sweets from a thousand hiUs ! 

May opened well, and my hives soon became crowded with bees, 
but to guard against any lack of food, I kept on feeding till the end 
of the montL On the 27th Mr. Jones, of America, arrived in 
London from Cyprus and the Holy Land, where he and a friend, 
Mr. Benton, had gone for a few months, entirely at their own risk 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTT OP GLASGOW. 15 

and expense, to procure Queen Bees ! He remained in London a 
few days, to allow the bees he had brought with him to get a cleansing 
flight before shipping them for New York. His charge for a Cyprian 
Queen bee was 30/, and for one from the Holy Land, £3 3/. I 
wrote for two, which however only arrived last month, but they are 
doing very well and I hope to be able to show a pure swarm in my 
observatory hive next season. 

Our great swarming month, June, was well advanced before 
swarming commenced, owing to the extreme cold at its beginning ; 
but towards the end bee-keepers had their rewartl, and swarming set 
in all over the country. 

Bees continued to swarm till nearly the end of July, in some 
cases three and even four times, showing how quickly Nature 
reproduces herself, as but a few months before 60 per cent, of the 
entire bees in the country had perished through the neglect, or, 
what is perhaps worse, the ignorance of their owners. Towards the 
end of the month, being in London, I visited the British Beekeepers* 
Show, which certainly has made great advances during the last three 
years. There were several observatory hives that contained bees 
from Cyprian queens. Their colour is lighter than Ligurians and 
they are said to be more active in flight. Bee furniture was there 
in endless variety, and both flower and clover honey as nearly perfect 
as could be. Certainly both visitors and exhibitors got their eyes 
opened to what is really wanted by the public. Could we in Scot- 
land only be able to arouse the clergy and influence country pro- 
prietors, there would certainly be a great future for honey producers. 

Swarming over, the bees began to enter their supers and gladden 
the hearts of their proprietors. Until August, in Argyllshire, not a 
super had been entered. Towards the end of the month, noticing 
that not a single stock of Ligurians had entered their supers, I at 
once examined, and, alas ! on opening the first one discovered that 
awful curse of bee-keepers, " foul brood," to be rampant. On hearing 
this, my man, who is rather a character, said, " I never liked thae 
foreign gentry. Gie me the blacks and ye can work awa' with thae 
robbers, and we'll see wha gets the best boxes," meaning the supers. 
Strange to say, the whole four Ligurian hives were the same, while 
the black bees had entirely escaped. In searching for the cause of 
this I traced it back to the month of May, when my Ligurian stocks 
were stealing my neighbour's honey, especially from two stocks which 
had died and ought to have been removed by their careless owner. 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 PBOOBBDINGS OF THE 

Here I would say to all who complain of their hives being robbed, 
as bee-keepers often do, that it is the owner of the robbers who 
should complain, as they generally bring more disease in the putrid 
honey than can be eradicated in many months even by the most 
skilful. In this case I had to take my four strongest stocks, and 
literally bury everything but the bees, at a time when they should 
have been in splendid condition for entering their supers. 

Supers were rapidly fiUing in September, and one " Stewarton " 
hive by the end of the month had reached the enormous weight of 
165 lbs. The harvest was the finest I have ever seen, and those 
who kept their bees strong reaped the benefit. My bees have now 
paid all their outlay and original cost, and all my stocks are (and I 
trust all in the country are) put into winter quarters with more 
stores in the hives than they have had for many winters past. 

Early in October we put on winter blankets (quilts), and closed 
the entrances to winter size. Up till the middle of the month the 
weather was so mild that the bees were busy, and on the 14th one 
would have thought it was June, the air around the apiary being 
filled with their joyous hum, and the workers being busy carrying 
in pollen, especially the Ligurians, whose hives were completely 
filled with brood as if to make up for lost time. The hives were 
all clean and sweet at present, and I trust I have got rid of foul 
brood, though it is always difficult to detect the first few hundreds 
of larvae which die in a crowded hive, so that sometimes three-fourths 
of the cells may hold putrid larvae before the fact is discovered, as 
happened with me in August last. 

If all goes well, we should have early swarming in 1881. Let 
us hope that this is the beginning of a series of fine years, and that 
bee-farming will be carried on through the length and breadth of 
the land, so that as our own home honey is really the finest in the 
market, we may be able to supply the demand and thus defy foreign ' 
competition. 



II. — On Mimicry^ or Protective Resemblance among Animals, 

By Mr. A. S. Wilson, M.A., B.Sc. 

In this paper Mr. Wilson gave a sketch of the researches of Bates, 
Wallace, and Wiseman into the phenomena of mimicry and pro- 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL fflSTOBY SOOIBTY OP GLASGOW. 17 

tective coloration in animals, and more especially in insects. He 
described also how flowers had acquired their forms, colours, nectars, 
and odours for the purpose of attracting insects, and of thus securing 
the benefits of cross-fertilization. Also, on the other hand, how 
many insects had their bodies, and particularly their mouth organs 
and legs, modified in the most suitable manner for obtaining the 
nectars and pollens offered by the plants, in exchange for the benefits 
received by them from the visits of the insects. The paper was 
illustrated by a series of coloured diagrams. 



III. — Note on Astrorhiza Umicola, and on Amphidottis cordatus, 
Penn. By Mr. David Eobertson, F.L.S., F.G.S. 

There is an arenaceous Rhizopod, Astrorhiza Umicola (Sandahl), 
belonging to a class not admitted into our lists till lately. From 
Siddall and Brady's Catalogue of British Recent Foraminifera, 1879, 
it appears that this species is only known as British from the Dogger 
Bank. For the credit of our Society it may be well to record its 
frequent occurrence in the Frith of Clyde. I have dredged it round 
Cumbrae on many occasions, and at one place abundantly; also 
moderately often off St. Ninians on the west side of Bute. I 
gave Dr. Carpenter specimens of it at the Meeting of the British 
Association in 1876. 

The common Heart Urchin, Amphidotus cordatits, Penn., found so 
commonly lying dead along our sandy shores, denuded of its spines, 
has a feature in its habits that I do not know has been noticed 
hitherto. They burrow from about 4 to 6 inches into the sand, and 
when dug up and put into a vessel with sand covered with sea-water, 
the animal is seen at once to commence to throw the sand' to the 
sides, by the under, or plastron spines. By the time that it gets 
down into the sand, level with the under edges of the test, the spines 
of the body get into motion, forming into 4 or 5, sometimes 6 or 
7 ridges of spines, which stretch from back to front along the sides 
of the test, progressing upwards in wave-like fashion, and following 
each other in regular succession, till they reach the superior avenue 
or summit. Each wave as it emerges from the sides of the animal, 
brings up a roll of sand to the surface, which falls outwards, 
and this action is continued till the animal is completely covered. 

VOL. V. B 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 PROOEEDINGS OF THE 

When newly dug out of the sand, they often work rapidly down 
into it, apparently by the ventral spines, without calling into aid 
the formation of the lateral ridges of spines. 



THE SOCIETY'S ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET, 
NovBMBBR 30th, 1880. 
Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.Z.S., Vice-President, in the Chair. 
Professor John Cleland, M.D., F.R.S., and Mr. Andrew Bain, 
were elected ordinary members. 

SFEGIMBNS EXHIBITED. 

Mr. James Allan showed a fine collection of Ferns and other plants 
which he had received from Kentucky, U.S., and on which he made 
a few remarks. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., exhibited a curious comb-like organism 
from the black-band ironstone shales of the Airdrie coalfield, and 
stated that he knew of some three or four specimens obtained from 
the same beds, but hitherto it was not known to what class of ani- 
mals they belonged. Recently he had discovered that similar 
organisms had been figured and described by Professor Fritsch, of 
Prague, in his monograph of the fauna of the gas-coal and limestone 
of the Permian formation of Bohemia. Professor Fritsch calls them 
Kammplatten — i.e., comb-plates — and refers them to the genus 
Ophiderpeton of Huxley, a serpent-like amphibian, first found in 
the Kilkenny coalfield in Ireland, and afterwards in the coal-measures 
of the north of England, but which hitherto had not been identified 
from Scotland. These Kammplatten are stated to have been placed 
upon the body of the animal, near the cloaca, in imbricated series. 
They are about three-fourths of an inch in length, and rather less 
than quarter of an inch in breadtL The serrated, comb-like part of 
the plate has a curved handle-like process giving it a club-like form. 
Should the present identification of these plates with Ophiderpeton 
be confirmed by the discovery of other parts of the skeleton, this 
will be a new addition to the list of amphibian forms from the Lanark- 
shire coalfield, in which five other genera have already been noted. 

Note. — Since the above remarks were communicated to the Society, 
Dr. Traquair and Mr. Thomas Stock, of the Museum of Science and 
Art, Edinburgh, have each recorded the occurrence of Kamplatten 
in the eastern coalfield of Scotland. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL fflSTORY 800IBTY OP GLASGOW. 19 

The Secretary showed a collection of rock specimens from Arran, 
forwarded by Mr. James Napier, F.R.S.K, reading some accom- 
panying notes in reference to their occurrence and composition, also 
some specimens from a sandstone quarry at Fallside, near Bothwell, 
and drawings of a split granite boulder at the shore near Corrie, 
called the Sugarloaf from its shape. Mr. John Young explained 
the character of the various specimens, on which other members 
made some remarks. 

The Chairmaa exhibited specimens of the Glossy Ibis, Ibis 
falcineUtiSf Lin., and the Esquimeaux Curlew, NummitLS borecUis, 
Foist., lately obtained in Aberdeenshire, and made some remarks 
regarding them in reference to migration. 

PAPERS READ. 

L — Notes on the Lyre-bird (Menura superba) Davies, of AvMralia. 
By Mr. C. W. Amott Stewart. Communicated by Mr. John A. 
Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.K, V.P. 

Supposing that the habits of the Australian Lyre-bird were well 
known, I did not pay the attention I might have done to what I 
heard, especially in connection with the nest, so that about this 
part of the subject I am not very certain. The egg I sent you was, 
I believe, laid in the Spring of the year 1878, that is about 
September or October. It is one of two that I foimd in the 
possession of a Mrs. Jefferson, of Femshaw, in Victoria. The other 
egg was darker and not so well marked, and more rounded at the nar- 
row end than this one, but, being slightly cracked, and Mrs. Jefferson 
not wishing to part with both, I chose the more perfect one. 

^is egg> she told me, was found on the side of a hill, not far 
from the little town ; the nest was built not more than three feet 
above the ground, and, I believe, in the fork formed by two 
branches of a fallen tree. It was made of twigs, with an arch of 
the same material over it, resembling the broad handle of a basket. 
She had sent two of such nests, one to the museum at Hobart 
Town, Tasmania, the other to that of Melbourne, with full 
particulars of how they were to be set up; but, greatly to her 
disgust, no heed had been taken of her descriptions, and the handle- 
like covering had been allowed to sink down and fall out of place. 
Mrs. Jefferson told me that the Lyre-bird only laid two eggs in the 
year, and that the second was not laid till after the first had been 



Digitized by 



Google 



20 PROOBBDINGS 07 THB 

hatched. Whether the same nest is used for the hatching of both 
eggs I cannot say, but think it must be so, for she would not 
otherwise have known the number of eggs laid by the one bird. 
The nests too, it seems, are difficult to find, and are not plentiful 

I could not help admiring Mrs. Jefferson for the interest she 
seemed to take in natural history, such being very uncommon 
among Australians. She had succeeded in getting some of the 
young Lyre-birds, old enough to feed themselves, and had tried 
to tame them, keeping them, I think, in an enclosure fenced with 
wire netting, but they only lived for about a fortnight. 

When staying in Wahafla, the principal mining town of central 
Gippsland, I was told that Lyre-birds weye at times seen on the 
hills, and, though not common, they could hardly be said to be 
scarce. The hills immediately surrounding the town are bare, all 
timber having been cut down for mining purposes, and for fuel, but 
those beyond the town are wooded. I did not see any of the birds 
myself, being in the place only a day and a half. I also spent 
several days on a station about fifteen miles south of this. It was 
a wild place, being situated in a great forest, only a few spots at 
large intervals having been cleared of trees by settlers. The people 
I stayed with had been a very short time on the place, and only a 
few trees had been felled round the homestead. There was a creek 
running close by, and in the scrub, composed of young trees and 
bushes, which grew thickly on its banks, I heard several times late 
in the afternoon the peculiar whistle of the Lyre-bird. In company 
with one of my friends I set out early one afternoon to some 
densely wooded patches in the forest, some two miles from the 
house. The country here is high, but not very hilly, or in other 
words, deep valleys are not common. We first went through what 
very much resembled an English copse, and here found a large 
number of places where the ground had been scratched up, often at 
the roots of trees. Mounds, too, resembling mole heaps, but larger, 
neater, and smoother in appearance, were not wanting. They were 
pointed out to me as the work of the Lyre-bird, the large and 
regular mounds being their dancing beds, on which they dance and 
twirl, showing themselves off to the females. When amusing 
themselves in this manner the male bird mocks all the other birds 
in the bush, and so perfectly does it imitate their voices and cries, 
that only by its introducing its own whistle now and then, does a 
person, out of sight, know the originator of the sounds. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATtTRAL HI6TQBT BQCOm OF GLASGOW. 2*1 

I lieard a settler here describe how astonished he was to hear 
what he supposed to be so many different birds congregated in the 
same spot, and how on taking up his gun and following up the 
sounds, he had come on a Lyre-bird. 

A young fellow in Femshaw, who had often hunted them, 
described how he had crawled up to within range of a Lyre-bird 
when dancing on its mounds. Two hen birds were present watching 
and admiring his caperings ; he had his tail feathers spread out, 
and brought so far forward that they almost rested on his head; in 
this way the prettiest part of the tail, which, unlike that of the 
peacock, is the underside, was exposed to full view. So interesting 
was the sight that the spectator never thought of firing. The bird 
now and then ceased mocking ; suddenly one of the females dis- 
covered that danger was near, and gave a warning cry, when 
instantly the male lowered and closed his tail, the act of doing so, 
as my informant said, seeming to shoot him in amongst the bushes 
and undergrowth. 

Now to return to my original story. Not meeting any birds in 
the copse-wood, we tried another close by, but with no better luck ; 
we then dived into a densely wooded gully, composed chiefly of 
trees of small growth, from which many rope-like creepers hung 
down. Tree-ferns were numerous, and here and there a tall gum- 
tree rose through the smaller vegetation, towering far above, while 
in places, large logs, partly covered with moss, lay rotting on the 
ground ; the moisture in the air and under foot seemed congenial 
to mosquitos and leeches, as we found several of the latter on our 
boots. A little dog with us knew how to " bail up " the Lyre-birds, 
and very soon his barking told that he had found a " pheasant," as 
they are sometimes called. As we hurried up my companion 
passed immediately under the tree in which the bird was sitting, 
its attention being taken up by the barking of the dog, but, before 
he could fire, it had hopped on to another tree and then soared 
down the valley, where it was lost to us, nor did we find another 
that day, as they were not whistling, so we had to return home 
with an empty bag. 

When riding one evening along the ranges from Marisville, a 
town about sixty miles N.K of Melbourne, to my surprise I saw all of 
a sudden come from the wooded hill that rose on my right, a brown 
flat mass with a long tail, the end of which resembled that of a 
fish. So like was it in general appearance to a Turbot, that for an 



Digitized by 



Google 



22 PROOBBDINGS OF THB 

instant I was quite taken aback at the idea of a fish shooting 
through the air and out of a forest Directly after I saw it was a 
male Lyre-bird, its tail closed and its wings spread, but without a 
movement in either. I watched it, after dashing past directly in 
front of my face, soar down the hill-side, which here was free of 
tall scrub, and finally disappear in the bushes at the bottom of the 
valley. The two big feathers in the tail, the lyre feathers, which 
curl roimd at the ends, were what gave it the resemblance to the 
tail of a fisL 

The next morning I returned to Femshaw, where I had previously 
spent two or three days. The coach left Marisville at the early 
hour of four; the air was fresh, almost cold, and the road lay 
through forest, which, as we approached our destination, became 
more dense. It was then, about six o*clock, that we noticed three 
or four Lyre-birds cross the road immediately in front of us, and 
disappear in the valley on our right. Femshaw, which is situated 
about forty miles north of Melbourne, is closely surrounded by 
mountains. In the deep, well-watered gullies the vegetation is 
very dense. Tree-ferns grow in large numbers, and to a great 
height, sometimes reaching forty feet, while other trees, the sassafras, 
the myrtle, and here and there a giant gum-tree, add variety to the 
forest. The rough-surfaced wire-grass twines round the clumps of 
the young trees, matting itself roimd their stems, till they become 
invisible ; sword-grass hangs temptingly on the hillside, as though 
inviting you to take hold and help yourself up, but woe to your 
hands, if you do so, for its edges are sharp as knives. Under foot 
lies decaying vegetable matter, and every now and then you come 
on the slowly-rotting trunk of a fallen gum-tree, often of great size. 
As you leave the valleys and ascend the hills the bush becomes less 
dense, being chiefly composed of gum-trees, whose height surpasses 
those of California, reaching often 400, and, in one case I know of, 
500 feet These forests are the home of the Lyre-birds, which, 
during the middle of the day, seem to take up their quarters in the 
dark, wooded gullies, while it is in the evening and early morning 
that they are to be foimd in any numbers on the mountain sides. 
They appear to have a liking for the paths and roads, where they 
like, it seems, to scratch for worms. I once came on one busy in 
this way at the foot of a tree, and another time I saw two scratching 
alongside a log. The two specimens I obtained I shot on a path 
leading up the Black Spur, a hill at the north end of Femshaw, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HI8T0RT 800ISTT OF GLASGOW. 23 

they were both shot about five in the morning. The specimen I now 
have with me, a young cock, was shot as he was fluttering, trying 
to balance himself on one of the branches of a small tree into which 
he had hopped on catching sight of me.* Being a young bird, its 
tail is not perfect; only two of the feathers are skeletons. 

They are very shy birds and exceedingly quick, so it is no easy 
matter to shoot them in the bush, where there is so much cover and 
the ground difl&cult to get over, especially without making a noise. 
As the bird can only soar down-hUl, it is the custom when stalking 
them, if it may be so termed, to start at the bottom and work up- 
wards. One afternoon I set out with young Jefferson, the hotel- 
keeper's son, a boy of twelve, for a very pretty waterfall, about two 
miles distant, romantically situated in a wild, wooded valley, to 
which there was no path, and as there was some chance of coming 
on a Lyre-bird, I took my gim with me. We first passed through 
bush, thinned by what must have been a large fire, judging from 
the number of trees with blackened stems. All bushes and young 
trees had been cleared away, and the large gums and tree-ferns 
were the only ones that remained. These last, though little affected 
by fire, wither and die when they are deprived of shelter and exposed 
to the sun, so only a few of these, now miserable-looking specimens, 
remained. Passing on we turned to the right, and were following 
the spur of a hill, when suddenly to our joy we heard a Lyre-bird 
in the gully below. Listening, to make sure that the bird was not 
travelling, for in that case it would have been useless to follow, and 
finding that the sound continued to come from the same spot, and 
that the bird had now commenced to mock,t we felt sure that he 
must be dancing, and so began to descend. Having reached the 
bottom of the gully, we advanced slowly and cautiously in the 
direction from which the sound came. We crawled in among fern- 
trees and over logs, moving on while the bird mocked, and remaining 
perfectly still when it ceased. It was an exciting time, a time of 
hopes and fears, for, judging from the note, this was a full-grown 
bird. We had come to within a few yards of it, when I thought 
that as my companion knew more about stalking these birds than I 
did, I had better give him my gun ; so while I remained concealed 

* They only use their wings when sailing down -hill, in which case they 
generally hop into a tree before starting. 

t One sound that it repeated often very much resembled that made by a 
pair of castinets. 



Digitized by 



Google 



24 PBOOEBDINOS OF THB 

he walked on from tree to tree. He soon stopped and beckoned, 
so I moved up to where he stood, and he then whispered that he 
had seen its tail above the small ferns and bushes, but had not liked 
to fire. Just then one of the birds, either the male or female, poked 
its head out of some bushes, but as we kept perfectly still it did not 
notice us. Directly after, the male ran out with his tail folded, and 
passed along on a sort of pathway, running straight in front of us. 
My companion tried to fire, but somehow could not do it ; in despair 
I snatched the gun from him, and fired just as the tail of the bird 
disappeared over a rise in the ground, and a splendid specimen was 
lost. We afterwards heard another bird, and saw it pass along the 
hill&ide below us, travelling at a quick pace, hopping over logs and 
impediments, and every now and then giving its peculiar whistle, 
but it was out of range. 

Before leaving Melbourne I was told that these birds were fast 
dying out, but this does not appear to be the case, judging from 
the numbers I saw and heard. The tail of the male bird is of some 
value, fetching 7s. 6d., consequently a good number of birds are 
destroyed ; but they are now protected by law during the breeding 
season. Dogs are sometimes employed for hunting them, and are 
trained to keep the bird in the tree into which it has hopped, by 
continually barking at it. 

Later on, when on a visit to a valley in the Blue Mountains of 
New South Wales, known as the " Weather Board," I saw a Lyre- 
bird run across a little gully, and I heard several when in the 
Limestone Ranges, about twelve miles from the town of Oberon, 
S.E. of Bathurst. I was afterwards told that the Lyre-bird of New 
South Wales is rather different from that found in Victoria, but 
whether this is true or not I cannot say, nor, if true, do I know 
where the difference exists. 



11. — On the occurrence of the White-beaked Dolphin, Lagenorhynchus 
albirostis. Gray, near the Bell Rock, September, 1880, By Mr. 
J. M. Campbell. 

Although it is to be expected that many of the rarer Cetacea 
frequent our coasts, the as yet imperfect knowledge of their habits, 
the difficulty of capture, and the nature of the element in which 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTOBT BO0I8TT OF GLASGOW. 36 

they live, all militate against the rapid accumulation of facts relating 
to their occurrence. 

The species which is the subject of this paper, although recorded 
as British so long ago as 1846, has not yet been added to our list 
of Scottish fauna. Mr. Alston in his paper "On the Mammalia of 
Scotland," read to this Society in April last year, referring to this 
species, says, "The White-beaked Dolphin is another species whose 
appearance in Scottish waters is to be expected, as it seems 
frequently to visit the Faroes, and the east coast of England 
{Cunningham, P,Z,S., 1876, p. 686), but as yet its actual occurrence 
does not seem to have been recorded." 

This species was first figured and described by Brightwell in the 
^^ Annals and Magazine of Natural Hidory" (vol xvii p. 21), in 
1846, imder the name of Ddphinus tursio, Fabr., from a female 
taken by herring fishermen off Great Yarmouth, in October, 1845, 
the skin and skeleton of which are now in the British Museum. 
There is, however, a skull of one which was killed at Hartlepool 
in 1834, in the museum of Cambridge University, the species not 
having been recognised at the time. Gray, after an examination of 
Brightwell^s specimen, described it as a new species under the name 
Lagenorhynchus alhirostris. 

On the 29th December, 1862, a full-grown male was found 
stranded on "Little Hilbre," one of two closely contiguous islands 
at the mouth of the Dee, in Wales, and is described in the ^^ Annals 
and Magazine of Natural History** for 1863, p. 268, by Thomas J. 
Moore, of the Liverpool Museum, to whom it had been sent. In 
1866 one was shot on the coast of Cromer, Norfolk, by H. M. Upcher 
of Sherringham Hall, the skull being preserved in the British 
Museum. In 1867, according to Bell, a yoimg male, whose skeleton 
is in the University of Cambridge, was killed on the English coast. 
Dr. Murie, in his "Notes on the White-beaked Bottlenose" ("Linn, 
8oc. Jour,** vol XL p. 141), in 1870, describes the anatomy of a 
full-grown male, captured a few years before on the south coast of 
England, part of the viscera of which is preserved in the College of 
Surgeons, and the skeleton in the British Museum. In September, 
1875, Dr. Cimningham obtained a young female, caught off Great 
Grimsby, which he figured and described in the Zoological Soc, 
Proceedings for 1876, the skeleton of which is in the Edinburgh 
University Museum. The same volume also contains a paper by Mr. 
Clark on a young male caught on 26th March, 1876, off Lowestoft 



Digitized by 



Google 



26 



PBOOBSDINGS OF THB 



In the Zoologist for 1878, Mr. A. G. More, Museum of Science 
and Art, Dublin, says in reference to this species: "We have long 
had in the Museum here a coloured cast of a Dolphin captured some 
fifteen years ago in the vicinity of Dublin Bay, which lately, by 
comparing a coloured sketch taken from the fresh animal with the 
excellent figure given in the Proceedings of Zoological Soc lor 1876, 
p. 679, pL 64, I was able to identify as D, cUbirostris, J. E. Gray." 
The last recorded specimen was a young female captured by some 
Yarmouth fishermen on 25th August, 1879, which Mr. Thomas 
Southwell of Norwich has described in the "Zoologist^* of that year, 
the skull of which is in the Norwich Museum. 

These are, so far as I have been able to leani, all the British speci- 
mens which have been recorded. On the Continent it has been 
taken at Ostend, Keil, Bergen, Gullholmen, and Skanor. 

The individual which I now describe — a young male — was taken 
by some fishermen near the Bell Kock, on the 7th September last, 
and came into the hands of Mr. Walker, a fish merchant in Glasgow, 
who presented it to the Kelvingrove Museum on the 9th, in good 
condition. 

The following are a few measurements taken at the time: — 





Ft 


In. 




Ft 


In. 


Total Length 


5 


8 


Greatest breadth of pec- 






Length of muzzle . 





li 


toral .... 





41 


Length to eye 





Si 


Breadth of caudal . 





Si 


Length to blow-hole 





10 


Height of dorsal 





74 


Length to ears 





iiA 


Circumference of thickest 






Length to pectoral limbs 


1 


li 


part ... . 


8 


Si 


Length to dorsal^ . 


2 


54 


Width of orbit 





01 


Length of pectoral 


1 


1 


Width of blow-hole 





14 


SkuU:— 












Length, entire 


1 


Of 


Width of middle of beak 





2| 


Length of nose from front 






Width of lower jaw at 






of blow-hole 





7* 


condyles 





5f 


Width at orbit 





61 


Length of lower jaw along 






Width in front of notches 






one side, from condyles 






(base of beak) . 





H 


to symphysis 





10 



In shape and colour it resembled more closely the Lowestoft 
specimen described by Mr. Clark; the body tapering gradually from 
the dorsal fin, and, like the female described by Mr. Southwell, it 
did not exhibit the humped appearance described by Dr. Cunning- 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HI8T0BT SOOlBTT OP 0LA800W. 27 

ham. The beaked shape of the head was very marked, the upper 
lip projecting 1 J inches beyond the head, which had a gradually- 
roimd,ed outline. On each side of the upper lip were four black 
bristles, which projected but slightly through the skin. 

The general colour above was a beautiful purplish-black, the entire 
beak from the furrow dividing it from the head, and the ventral 
surface till within 21 inches from the cleft of the tail, was of a 
satiny-white, slightly yellowish on the under surface. Above the 
pectoral fins and behind the eye was a greyish-white spot, thickly 
splashed or streaked with brown; a similar linear-shaped spot ran in 
an oblique direction from slightly before the dorsal fin, in the 
direction of the vent, and a larger one, which measured about 13 
inches long and about 3 inches wide, ran along the side behind the 
dorsal. 

The earopening was very small, and could be detected with diffi- 
culty, barely admitting an ordinary pin. 

The number of teeth in the upper jaws was 23 on each side, and 
in the lower jaws 24 and 25; but some of them were barely through 
the gum, one or two at the front being mere denticles. They were 
sharp, conical, and curved inwards, and had a slight longitudinal 
groove on their anterior and posterior surfaces. They seemed to be 
quite free and movable. The lower jaw projected slightly beyond 
the upper. 

Owing to insufficient facilities for maceration, a few of the teeth 
were lost; and, for a like reason, I have been unable with certainty 
to note the number of vertebrae, some of the smaller being merely 
cartilage. Previous to maceration, I had coimted 90 vertebrae. The 
first two cervical vertebrae were anchylosed, the remainder free. 

I have not any doubt that this individual is a young Ddphinua 
albirodrisy or, more properly, Lagenorhynchus alhirostrU^ Gray. 

I may remark that the figure given by Brightwell, and copied by 
Bell in his "British Quadrupeds," is very far from correct, that of 
Mr. Clark, as I have already said, approaching nearer to the one 
now described. 

Some interesting anatomical peculiarities have been noted by Mr. 
Clark and Drs. Murie and Cunningham in their respective papers. 



Digitized by 



Google 



3S pm)qcspi^as QF TW 

THE SOCIETY'S EOOMS, 207 BATH STREET, 
Deobmber 28th, 1880. 

Mr. John Kirsop, Vice-President, in the Chair. 

Messrs. John Pesque, Wm. R Baxter, Colin A. M'Vean, Duncan 
M'Kinlay, Archd. Muir, John Scott, David Glen, jun., James 
Ballantyne, John Stewart, Duncan Thomson, and Wm. Cassels, were 
elected ordinary members. 

SPECIMENS EXHIBITED. 

Mr James J. King exhibited Llmnophilua mbcenirc^lis (Brauer) 
from Aviemore in Inverness-shire, and Molarma palpata (M*LacL), 
from Strath-Glass in the same county, two species of Trichoptera 
new to the British Lists, and showed by diagrams the points which 
distinguised these from other species. 

Mr John M Campbell exhibited a skin of the Nutria or Coypu, 
Myopotamus coypua^ MoL, from Chili, and remarked that although 
the skins of the Nutria have for many years been a recognised 
article of commerce, the animal itself has been very little known. 
Mr. Ernest Gibson, of Buenos Ayres, one of the Society's correspond- 
ing members, has already given, in vol iii of the Proceedings^ p. 344, 
an interesting accoimt of the habits and economy of this animal ; 
but as his paper was not accompanied by any specimen, some 
doubts were at the time expressed as to the identity of the species, 
and it was thought desirable to bring up the present specimen for 
exhibition. The Nutria is a true rodent, and in habits and struc- 
ture bears no little resemblance to the beaver ; but the tail, which 
in the beaver is broad and paddle-shaped, is in this species long 
and round. It is well known in Chili, Buenos Ayres, and several 
other districts of South America, on both sides of the Andes, and 
probably also in North America. In the British Museum there are 
skulls of the species so marked, though they may not unlikely be 
those of beavers. 

Mr Campbell also showed a specimen of the Indian Flying 
Gurnard, Dactylopterus orientalis (Lin.), from the Gulf of Aden, 
remarking that two kinds of fish are capable of flight owing to the 
enlargement of the pectoral fins. One genus, Exocaetus, comprises 
the more familiar Flying Fishes ; the other, Dactylopterus^ of which 
the specimen shown is a yoimg individual, is a genus of gurnards 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATUBAL mSTORT SOOIBTT OP GLASGOW. 29 

distinguished by a nearly square-shaped head, covered by bony 
plates, the scapula and angle of the praeoperculum being produced 
into long spines, the body tjovered with strongly keeled scales, two 
dorsal fins, the second little less than the first, and the pectorals 
(the flight organs) much enlarged. There are granular teeth in the 
jaws and none in the palate. They are natives of the Mediterranean, 
Atlantic, and Indian Seas. The genus comprises four species, and 
this one grows to a length of 20 inches. 

Mr John Young, F.G.S., exhibibited a specimen of a sand- 
burrowing macrurous crustacean, Calltanassa tumeriana (White) 
from Old Calabar, on the West Coast of Africa, and measuring about 
10 inches in lengtL It was presented to the Hunterian Museum 
along with a collection of shells, &c., from West Af^ca, by Mr 
Alexander Henderson, of Glasgow, who. says it is found specially at 
the Cameroons, its occurrence being only periodical, once, it is 
said, in four or seven years. With the natives of the Cameroons it 
forms part of the dowry of a woman at marriage, and should divorce 
be necessary, the shrimps must also be returned; but not being 
always obtainable, there is room enough for a good African quarrel 
among the natives. They say that it always comes down stream, but 
that the salt water kills it, and certainly myriads are to be seen float- 
ing dead in the brackish water where the shipping lie. It is edible, 
although the natives think it not worth cooking, as " nothing live 
inside," they say. 

Mr Peter Cameron exhibited a number of galls, amongst them one 
on the stem of Triticum repem^ very like that of a species of Avlax, 
except that the latter is foimd on the root of the plant. Also a 
Cecidomyia gall on the root of a Juncvs^ and one on the flower-head 
of a compositaceous plant, perhaps a gall of Cecidomyia artimesiae. 
He also showed a collection of Hymenoptera from the Sandwich 
Islands, which he had received from the Rev. T. Blackburn, Most 
of the species are peculiar to the Islands, and belong to the genera 
OdyneruSy Orabroy and Prosopis, Three of the Ants are British, 
Solenopsia geminata, Pheidoh posilla (the House Ant of Madeira, 
now common in bakehouses, &c., in this country), and Ponera 
contrada, the latter being rare in Britain. The peculiarity of the 
insect fauna of the Oceanic Islands was commented on at length, 
and their study was recommended, as before long most of the species 
will be exterminated by man's agency, or by the introduced 
i^eoiee. 



Digitized by 



Google 



30 PBOOBBDINOB OF THB 

Professor John Cleland, M.D., F.RS., Glasgow University, gave 
a long and interesting address on a collection of Human Skulls from 
India. He dwelt upon the form and arrangement of the different 
parts of the crania, and pointed out the characteristics of the several 
specimens exhibited. At the close the chairman proposed a special 
vote of thanks to Professor Cleland, which was cordially agreed to. 



THE SOCIETY'S ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET, 
January 25th, 1881. 

Mr John A. Harvie-Brown, F.RS.K, &c, Vice-President, in the 
Chair. 

Messrs. John Neilson, yr. of Drimsynie, Robert M^Lellan and T. 
J. Henderson, were elected ordinary members. 

PAPERS READ. 

I. — Remarks on the genua Synocladia and other allied forms, with 
description of a new species. By Mr. John Young, F.G.S. 

The genus Synocladia was established by Prof. King of Galway, 
in 1849, for the reception of a Permian species of polyzoa which 
previously had been named Betepora virgvlacea by Phillips, in 1829, 
and afterwards FenesteUa virgvlacea by the same author, in 1844. 
Prof. King in erecting this, polyzoon into a new genus, pointed out 
wherein it differed from the typical FenesteUa and other allied forms 
of palaeozoic polyzoa, and gives the following diagnosis at p. 39 of 
his Monograph of Permian Fossils: — "A funnel-shaped, multi- 
f oliaceous Synodadia, springing from a small root Foliations more 
or less folded and convoluted. Stems somewhat strong, often divid- 
ing. Gdlvles in from three to five furrows. Dividing ridges with 
the (?) gemmulif erous vesicles alternating with the cellule-apertures. 
Branches or connecting processes in general angulated midway 
between two adjoining stems ; furnished, for the most part, with 
two rows of cellules; and occasionally becoming modified into 
stems or ribs." 

Prof. King further states, that this beautiful coral, as the polyzoa 
were then termed, is often foimd attaining a large size, and that he 
is not aware of the existence of any other species but the one under 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOGIBTT OF OLABOOW. 31 

description, which does not appear to have been noticed in the 
Pennian strata of either Gennany or Russia. Since Prof. King 
described this genus, one or two closely allied forms of Carboniferous 
polyzoa have been referred to it by Mr. Robert Etheridge, jun., in 
the Explanation to sheet 23 of the Greological Survey of Scotland, 
p. 102. 1st, Synodadia Userialis of Swallow; 2nd, Septopora 
cetftriensis of Prout, both American species, which are thought by 
Mr. Meek to be identical ; and 3rd, a Scottish species, Synodcidia 
carbonaria, R Etheridge, jun., which he believes to be so closely 
related to the American form, as to be only a variety of it In his 
diagnosis of this species, Mr. Etheridge points out that the cell- 
apertures are arranged in two alternating rows, both on the stems 
and branches, instead of from three to five rows, as in King's Per- 
mian species, and further, that supplementary cell-apertures are 
scattered irregularly amongst the primary cell-apertures, either singly, 
or grouped in twos and threes ; and that scattered over the surface 
of the reverse face of the frond, are open wart-like projections. 
These characters have not been noticed on 8, virgvlacea of King, 
so that I am somewhat doubtful of the correct identification of the 
Carboniferous forms with the Permian genus. 

In the Proceedings of this Society, vol iii, p. 355, Dr. Yoimg 
and I briefly described another form from our Carboniferous lime- 
stone shales under the name of Synodadia (?) Scotica ; querying the 
reference to Synodadia as doubtful, preferring to leave it there in 
the meantime, imtil there is an extended examination of the whole 
group. In this species the cell-apertures, are further apart than in 
S. earbonaria, Etheridge, jun., and the small intermediate cells are 
seen to be more regjilar, and more in line with the main cells than in 
that species. I now bring under the notice of the Society another 
species which I also doubtfully refer to Synodadia (?) the following 
brief diagnosis pointing out some of its most distinguishing characters. 

Synodadia (?) fenestelliformis, sp. nov. A flattened foliaceous 
polyzoarium, of a somewhat circular form, springing from a small 
root-like base, from which proceed downwards, in some specimens, 
non-poriferous roots similar in character to those observed in some 
species of the Fenestdla, Cellulif erous face. Fenestndes somewhat 
variable in size, twice as long as broad, quadrangular in form, 
excepting at the bifurcation of the interstices, where they are tri- 
angular. Interdices straight, carinated, bifurcating at intervals, of 
the same thickness throughout the whole expansion of the frond, 



Digitized by 



Google 



32 PBOOBEDINOS OP THB 

and nearly their own diameter apart. The keel of the interstices 
bears a single row of closely-set tubercules, as numerous as the cell 
apertures. Dissepiments thin, slightly keeled, half the thickness of 
the interstices, and crossing them at nearly right angles, excepting 
at those portions of the frond where the interstices become much 
branched; they then cross obliquely, giving an angulated form to the 
fenestrules in those parts. Cells roimd, with a slightly raised lip 
on their lower or outer margin, about their own diameter apart, 
four to five in number on each side of the length of a fenestrule, 
twenty to twenty-five in five fenestrules. Cells confined to the 
interstices, excepting at those portions of the frond where the inter- 
stices become much branched, and they there encroach on the 
dissepiments. 

Supplementary cells of the same size also occur irregularly amongst 
the fenestrules, and are placed on a lower level of the interstice than 
the former, where they alternate with the other cells. These sup- 
plementary cells are very irregular in number, some fenestrules show 
none, others show from one to four, while on other interstices or 
stems, they are so regular as to show a double row of cells on each 
side of the keel, somewhat like that of the Permian Synodadia. 
Where these supplementary cells occur in ones and twos, they are 
seen to project inwards upon the open space of the fenestrules with 
crater-like mouths extending beyond the level of the upper row, and 
thus giving the celluliferous face a somewhat rough and ragged 
appearance in unworn specimens. Small secondary pores or fora- 
mina occur scattered somewhat irregularly amongst the larger cells, 
and are about four times less in diameter. One is to be seen gener- 
ally between each of the larger cells, sometimes two, the one being 
placed above or alongside the other ; while between other cells often 
none of the small pores are to be observed. 

Reverse, or non-celluliferous face. Fenestrtdes oblong, oval in 
form, caused by the junction of the expanded ends of the dissepiments 
with that of the interstices. Surface ornamented by numerous 
closely-set granular tubercules. The worn surface shows longitudinal 
striation of the interstices. Small pores or foramina. These are 
of the same size and character as those seen on the celluliferous 
face, and are scattered about in no regular order, although they seem 
to be rather more abundant on the lower portion of the fronds than 
on the upper. 

The form under description is readily distinguished from the other 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY 80CIBTT OP GLASGOW. 33 

species of Synodadia (?) formerly referred to, (1st), by the character 
of its interstices, they being all of a uniform thickness throughout 
the extent of the frond, as in Feneddla^ which it also much resembles, 
in having its fenestrules more regular. In the other Scottish species 
of Synodadia (?) the fronds have a plumose form of growth, with 
branched interstices of varying thickness, and arched or curved 
dissepiments, which produce great irregularity in the form of their 
fenestrules. (2nd), The new species also diflPers in having no cells 
upon the dissepiments, excepting at rare intervals where the inter- 
stices become much branched. It is also distinguished by the 
irregular supplementary cells of the normal size, placed on lower 
levels of the interstices than the ordinary rows of cells which border 
each side of the keel, but agreeing in all other generic characters 
with the Carboniferous Synodadia (?) in having, on both faces of 
the frond, the small irregular pores or foramina by which they are 
distinguished. 

Synodadia (?) fefnestellifomm is found in fronds varying in size 
from one to nearly three inches in diameter, but is not an abundant 
form in any of the localities where it has been met with. It occurs at 
Newfield,High Blantyre, along with 5. (?) carbonaria, Etheridge, jun., 
from which locality I exhibit fronds of both species, removed from 
the shale by the Asphalt process, so as to show the celluliferous 
face. It is also found in the lower limestone shales at Corriebum 
on the Campsie Fells, and in the upper limestone at Gillfoot, Carluke, 
where S. (?) Scotica, Y. and Y., also occurs. I have also to record 
this latter rare form from the shales of Craigenglen, Campsie, a new 
locality for the species. 

In looking over Prof. King's descriptions of other fenestrated 
forms of polyzoa in his Permian monograph already referred to, I 
was much interested in finding a description of a form which agrees 
far more closely with the character of the celluliferous and reverse 
faces of our Carboniferous Synodadia (?) than that which exists in 
his descriptions of the type specimens of S. virgvlacea from the 
Permian formation. This is a polyzoon formerly known under 
various names, but which Prof. King erected into a new genus, in 
1849, under the name of Thamniscus dubius, retaining Schlotheim's 
specific name for the organism. In this genus. Prof. King points 
out, at page 44 of his monograph, the occurrence, on casts of the 
fronds of Thamniscus, of small hemispherical bodies, amongst the 
cells of the poriferous face, which he concludes to be the homologues 

you V. 



Digitized by 



Google 



34 PROOEEDINOS OF THE 

of the gemmuliferous vesicles, often seen overlying the cell apertures 
of recent polyzoa, and, in plate v., fig. 11, he illustrates the position 
of these small vesicles or pores in their relation to the cells. He 
also, in fig. 8 of the same plate, illustrates what he terms the foramina 
or small pores, on a portion of the non-cellulif erous or reverse face 
of the frond, but he omits to say anything about these small pores 
on this face, in his description of the species in the text. There 
cannot, I think, however, be the least doubt, although previously 
overlooked, that in the occurrence of these small pores or vesicles 
amongst the ordinary cells of the poriferous face, and likewise in the 
foramina or pores on the reverse face, we have here a good character 
in this genus, that more closely allies our Carboniferous Synocladia (?) 
with the Permian Thamniacus than it does with the typical Permian 
species of Synocladia, in which these characters are absent. Tham- 
niacus, however, as pointed out by Prof. King, differs from Syno- 
cladia in its manner of branching, and in not having the branches 
or interstices connected by dissepiments, except in doubtful or very 
rare instances. The Carboniferous forms of Synocladia (?) in being 
fenestrated are likely to be yet ranked in a different genus from 
that of ThamniscuSf although, from the characters I have here 
pointed out, it will be seen that they have had a close zoological 
relationship. While discussing this subject, I may also refer to 
another Carboniferous polyzoon which Dr. Young and I figured 
and described in the Annals and Magazine of Natural History for 
May, 1875, and which we referred doubtfully to Thamniscus (?). 
I am now, however, satisfied that what we then described as T, (?) 
Bankini, must now be placed in a different genus from Thamniscus^ 
as a recent examination of many well-preserved specimens shows 
that it has none of the small pores or foramina on either face of the 
polyzoarium, which, Prof. King says, is one of the distinguishing char- 
acters of his genua T, (?) Ranhini has many external characters 
which closely relate it to the recent Homera, but this is a genus 
which has not yet been admitted into the group of Carboniferous 
polyzoa, although it would seem to be a natural and proper resting- 
place for this form. There is also another Carboniferous polyzoon 
from our strata, not yet described, and also very closely allied to 
Hamera^ so that when the time for revision arrives, we shall be 
necessitated either to admit Homera amongst the Carboniferous 
genera, or to establish a new genus for these forms. 

It will be seen from the foregoing remarks, that there is at present 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 35 

a very doubtful relationship between the Permian Synocladia and 
those Carboniferous forms placed in the same genus. On the other 
hand, the Permian Thamniscus presents us with several external 
characters, in its foramina amongst the cells of the poriferous face, 
as well as in having scattered foramina all over the reverse face — 
according to Prof. King — which relate it very closely, in the ar- 
rangement of its cell structure, to that of the Carboniferous forms 
doubtfully placed with Synocladia, It would, therefore, be very 
desirable that there should be a careful examination of well-preserved 
specimens of the Permian and Carboniferous forms, for the sake of 
ascertaining correctly, in what respects the Permian Synocladia and 
Thamniscus differ or agree with the Carboniferous forms. I sin- 
cerely hope that some palaeontologist interested in the group, who 
is able to examine well-preserved specimens from both formations, 
will be induced to take the question in hand, and clear up those 
doubtful points in their relationship. 



II. — On the structure of an Orange. By Mr. Thomas King. 

After some introductory remarks, the writer said that Goethe's 
theory of morphology — that in a flowering plant there were only 
two kinds of organs, viz., stem and leaves, modified in many ways — 
was now generally regarded as a sound one. That the sepals and 
petals of a blossom are leaves is plain enough. The stamens are not 
ordinarily leaf-like, but they are also foliar organs, as is shown in 
the cultivated rose, where they are transformed into petals. The 
pistil is also a foliar organ, as is seen in a monstrous state of the 
cherry tree — ^the pistils, which in ordinary circumstances would 
have developed into cherries, merely become leaves. The pistil is 
composed of one or more leaves, each of which is called a carpel. 
Some are formed of a single carpel, as in the pea ; others of several, 
as in the lily ; and we are generally able to tell the number of 
carpels in any pistil from the number of styles surmounting the 
ovary, or from the cavities it contains. The axis, or stem, on which 
the foliar organs of the flowers grow was next considered. The 
extremity of the axis is called the tones, or receptacle ; it is an axial 
root or foliar organ. In most flowers it presents a rounded or flattened 
appearance; while in others, such as the rose hip, which is the 
extremity of the flower stalk, it is hollowed out into a cup, which 



Digitized by 



Google 



36 PB0CBBa)m08 OF THB 

is not a fruit in the sense of being a ripened ovary, but a receptacle 
for the seed, like bodies growing on its inner walls, each of which 
ends in a style and stigma. The structure of fruits such as the straw- 
berry, fig, plum, &c., was next described, and various points con- 
nected with them brought under notice; and, applying what had been 
discussed to the orange, Mr King was of opinion that the ** liths " 
of which it is composed, which can be separated from one another 
without injury, are evidently carpels enclosing the seeds, and that 
the outer rind does not belong to the carpels at all, but is an axial 
formation — a prolongation upwards of the receptacle, forming, as in 
the case of the rose hip, a large cavity filled with carpels. 
The paper was illustrated by a number of diagrams. 



III. — On the Natural History of the Cetacea, By Mr. Thomas 
Southwell, F.Z.S., Norwich. Communicated by Mr. John A. 
Harvie-Brown, F.KS.K, &c., V.P. 

It was stated that the author had given particular attention to 
the study of this order of mammals. The various families were 
described at length — the habits, structure, and distribution of the 
different species being minutely dwelt upon. 

The paper was illustrated by plates of the various species of whales, 
and by coloured maps showing the range of their distribution. Mr. 
John M Campbell, who read the paper, had provided a series of 
specimens, consisting of skulls of the porpoise and dolphin, the ear- 
bones of various species, the straight, slender, and spirally-twisted 
teeth of the narwhal, measuring five or six feet in length, the teeth 
of the cachelot or sperm whale, and some of the economic products 
of the fisheries. 



Vf, -^Meteorological Notes and Remarks on ihs state of Vegetation 
in tJie Public Parks of Glasgow during the year 1880. By Mr. 
D. M*Lellan, Superintendent of Parks. 

It is a common saying, that one extreme is usually followed by 
another ; and, when we contrast th^ weather of the last year with 
that of the previous one, the force of the remark is appareiit 
About a year ago my notes showed a very gloomy retrospect for the 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY 80CIBTY OP GLASGOW. 37 

year 1879 ; but 1880 has been directly the reverse of its predecessor, 
as will be observed in going over the statistics of the several 
months. 

During January the weather was moderate, with a comparatively 
low rainfall of 2 '58 inches. There were 20 days on which no rain 
felL The average temperature was 35^. On 14 mornings the 
thermometer was at or below the freezing point, registering a total 
of 94 degrees of frost. The prevailing winds were west and south- 
west Out of doors, the only plant in flower was the Christmas 
rose, which should have bloomed during the previous month. 

February may be termed a dripping month, with a rather high 
temperature for the season of the year. Rain fell on 18 days, 
giving a total rainfall of 2*096 inches. The average temperature 
was 40*. The thermometer was below the freezing point only on 5 
mornings, showing 9 degrees of frost. The prevailing winds were 
south and south-west. During the month the following plants were 
in flower in the various parks, viz. : — ^Daphne mezereum, Hepatica 
alba, Erica camea. Rhododendron praecox, snowdrops, and crocus 
of sorts. 

The first eight days of March were wet ; but the remainder of 
the month was dry and favourable for seed sowing, the proverbial dust 
being plentiful The dry days numbered 23, and the total rainfall 
of the month was 2*024 inches. The temperature averaged 39°, and 
fell below the freezing point on 12 mornings, 40 degrees of frost 
being registered. The prevalent winds were from the north and the 
north-east The following plants were observed in flower in the 
different Parks: — Blue hepatica. Rhododendron noblianum, and 
Empress Eugenie, Scilla sibirica, and Narcissus bulbocodium. 

April proved to be rather a wet month, there being only thirteen 
dry days ; but the temperature was high, the average being 44**. 
Qn three mornings the thermometer was at or below the freezing 
point, only 7* of frost being registered. On the 6th of the month 
there were showers of large hailstones. The prevailing winds 
were south' and south-west. The following is a list of the plants in 
bloom in the course of the month : — ^hyacinths, Ribes sanguineum, 
Berberis dulcis, Pulmonaria officinalis, Mahonia aquifolia, Vinca 
alba, elders of sorts, tulips of sorts, violas, daisies, and forget-me-not 

May was ushered in with fine dry weather, which continued until 
about the end of the montk The total number of dry days was 21. 
The amount oi the rainfall was 1*06 inches. The temperature 



Digitized by 



Google 



38 • PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

averaged 48", and on three mornings it fell below the freezing 
point, registering in all 4° of frost. The quarters of the prevalent 
winds were the west and the south-west. Among the plants in 
flower during the month were the following : — ^Viburnum lantana, 
double cherry, bird cherry, yellow azalea, TroUius europaeus, haw- 
thorn, laburnum, lilacs of sorts, and broom. During the previous 
year all these plants were a month later than this of flowering. 

June may be characterised as a fine, genial, growing month, with 
sunshine and showers alternately, and consequently vegetation 
made very rapid progress. The average temperature was 55* ; and 
during the month there was a total rainfall of 2*01 inches, the 
number of dry days being 17. The prevailing winds during 13 days 
were from the north and north-east, and for 17 days from the west 
and south-west. The foliage on both trees and shrubs was very 
perfect, the only exception being the horse chestnuts, which received 
a blight in May, rendering many of them almost leafless. This 
was specially the case in Kelvingrove Park ; and, as it is almost 
now a yearly occurrence, it evidently proceeds from some atmospheric 
influence. 

July followed with weather much the same as the previous 
month; but with an increase of temperature and nearly double 
the rainfall — viz., 4*18 inches. The temperature averaged 58**, the 
number of dry days was 18, and the prevalent winds were from the 
north and north-east. As a result of the high temperature, combined 
with the moisture, vegetation of fill kinds made rapid strides — 
geraniums, calceolarias, stocks, and annuals of sorts all showing in 
beautiful flower. 

August proved to be the warmest and driest month of the year, 
and following upon the fine growing weather of the two previous 
months, was all that could be desired by the farmer and the gardener. 
There were 28 dry days during the month, and the rainfall only 
reached a total of '76 of an inch. The temperature averaged 60°. 
For the first half of the month the wind prevailed from the south 
and the south-west, and for the last half from the north and north- 
east. It was found necessary, during the very dry weather, to water 
several trees and shrubs. In all the Parks and also in Geoige 
Square flowers of all kinds were in the greatest perfection. 

September was a most favourable month for harvest operations, 
crops in many instances being cut and secured without a shower to 
injure them. The dry days numbered 19, and the total amount of 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OF GLASGOW. 39 

rainfall was 3 '14 inches. The temperature averaged 56® ; and the 
quarters of the prevailing winds were the west and south-west. 

October was a remarkably dry month for the season of the year, 
there being 24 dry days on which no rain fell. The total amount 
of the rainfall was only *84 of an inch. The average temperature 
was 42*^, and the thermometer was at or below the freezing point 
on 15 mornings, registering in all 52 degrees of frost The prevail- 
ing winds were from the south and the south-west 

November was certainly the coldest and most variable month of 
the season. Rain fell heavily on 10 days, and snow or sleet on 9, 
giving a total of 5*52 inches of moisture. The average temperature 
was 37®, and the thermometer was at or below the freezing point on 
12 mornings, showing 159 degrees of frost Winds prevailing from 
the north and the north-west. Snow lay on the ground from the 
14th tm the 24th. 

December was upon the whole a seasonable month, the rain-fall 
being moderate, but the temperature variable. About 4 inches of 
snow fell on the 15th, and remained on the ground for 3 days. 
The dry days numbered 18, and 3*6 inches of rain fell. The 
average temperature was 36®, the thermometer falling below the 
freezing point on 17 mornings, registering in all 96 degrees of frost 
The prevalent winds were from the west and south-west The 
following plants were in flower during the month : — daisies, wall- 
flower, marsh marigold, Jasminum nudiflorum, and the Christmas 
rose. The river Kelvin was higher in flood on the 24th than it 
has been during the last four years. 

The highest day temperature during 1880 was upon September 
4th, when the thermometer registered 82® in the shade, and the 
lowest temperature was reached on November 20th, when the ther- 
mometer went down to 10®, or 22® of frost. On 87 days the 
thermometer was at or below the freezing point, registering a total 
of 461® of frost, as against 664 degrees in 1879, and 609 degrees 
during 1878. 

It will be observed from the foregoing notes for each month that 
the year 1880 has been so favourable in every respect, that it will 
be a memorable one for this generation. It is worthy of remark 
that, although the rain-fall was in excess of the previous year by 
VI 6 inches, we were favoured with it at the most seasonable times 
for the benefit of the growing crops. Another marked feature of 
the year was the uniform high average maximimi temperature 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 PROCftBDINGS OF THB 

during May, June, July, and August — namely, 64*1'*, while for the 
same period of 1879 it was as low as 59-3*. 

The weather was especially propitious during the seed-time — 
March and April — and, combined with a high, moist temperature 
during the growing season, gave flowers and crops of all kinds the 
benefit of a good start The result was, as we all know, a most 
magnificent display of flowers in all our public parks, the like of 
which has never been equalled, and an abundant harvest, which 
has to some extent compensated our farming community for the 
heavy losses sustained during the previous year. 

It is to be noticed that many plants, termed sub-tropical, which 
are every year planted out in the parks and gardens of Paris and 
London, succeeded this summer very well in all our parks and 
squares. Among these may be mentioned Musa ensetii, or banana, 
Coleus, altemantheras, palms. Eucalyptus globulus, and the castor-oil 
plant. The tobacco plant, propagated from seed, also attained 
perfection, reaching a height of about six feet. "While we have thus 
been fortunate in the North, our Southern friends could not present 
such a show of flowers in almost any part of England. They were 
nearly a failure in very many cases from the unprecedented down- 
pours of rain and hail during July and August ; and agricultural 
crops also suflfered severely from the same cause. 

Trees and shrubs with us flowered very sparingly during spring 
months, especially the hawthorn, mountain ash, laburnum, and lilac 
Consequently there has been an almost entire absence of haws, rowans, 
and holly-berries during this season. This want has been severely 
felt by many of our birds, who depend so much upon them for 
winter food, and at all the Parks we have been feeding them during 
the past month. The reason of such a scarcity of flowers and fruit 
on our trees is not far to seek — the season of 1879 being so im- 
propitious for the growth of trees and shrubs, they only made weak 
sickly growths, and, owing to the wet cold autumn, neither the 
wood nor flower-buds were properly ripened. Accordingly, buds 
which should have contained the rudiments of flower and fruit 
remained simply wood-buds; and, in addition, a large number 
of the young unripened shoots were frosted down during the 
winter. 

In looking forward it is pleasant to note that the beneficial effects 
of 1880 will, to a certain extent, be carried forward to 1881. 
There is an abundant promise of a good bloom upon all sorts of 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL itiSTdllT SdCh&TT 6F GLASGOW. 



41 



ttees and shrubs — especially upon rhododendrons — and, as th6 wood 
was well ripened, and the buds matured during the autumn and the 
fall of the year, there is every expectation that the severe winter 
we are now experiencing will not, to any great extent, injure 
vegetation generally. 

Subjoined is the meteorological chart for the last three years, as 
kept at the Queen's Park : — 

Copy of Meteorological Record kept at Queen! 8 Parky Glasgow. 

Rain gauge above ihi sea levels 14S*9S. 





1878. 


. 1879. 


1880. 


MONTH. 


fklL 


Tbermo- 

MBTER. 


Day* 


RaiD. 
&1L 


Thkrmo- 

MKTEB. 


Days 


Rain- 
&1L 


Tbbrmo- 

MBTBR. 


Dry 
Daya 




Average. 


Average. 


Average. 




Max. 


Min. 


Max. 


Min. 


Max 


Min. 




January, 

February 

March 

ApriL 


4-65 
1-41 
1-85 
2-26 
2 73 
2-30 

•89 
2 53 
4-61 
126 
1-30 

•90 


41 
44 
49 
53 
60 
68 
71 
67 
63 
65 
41 
33 


31 
35 
32 
38 
42 
45 
48 
50 
47 
43 
30 
28 


18 
27 
18 
10 
20 
23 
29 


1-00 
•94 
2-75 
149 
144 
5 91 
337 
4-58 
337 
2-08 
152 
2-48 


34 
36 
40 
45 
54 
60 
61 
64 
57 
52 
44 
36 


24 
29 
32 
34 
38 
45 
49 
49 
44 
38 
33 
29 


25 
17 
16 
21 
22 
9 
15 
13 
10 
21 
24 
22 


2-58 
2-96 
2-24 
311 
106 
210 
418 

•76 
314 

•84 
552 
860 


38 
45 
46 
51 
57 
65 
66 
69 
64 
50 
42 
40 


32 
36 
33 
37 
40 
46 
49 
51 
48 
34 
31 
83 


20 
11 
28 
13 


Ma^..:;..:..: 


21 


Jane, 


17 


July 


18 


August, 

September, ... 

October,. 

November, ... 
December, ... 


28 
19 
24 
12 
18 




26-18 


53 


39 


225 


30 i^ 


48 


87 


215 


32*09 


53 


39 


i224 



Y.—^Third Report en Scottish Omithologtf — October Isty 1880^ to 
Aprily 1881,* Compiled by Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, 
F.R.S.E., &c, V.P. 

In pursuance of the plan of work as regards Migration of Birds, 
I am glad to say that our labours are now recognised by the 
British Association. 

*For previous Reports see Proceedings, voL iv., part ii, pp. 128, 291. 
The present Report, though read at the meeting of January, 1881, has been 
brought up to the following April, so as to include the whole winter. I 
would direct attention to Mr. R. Warren's account of Ornithology in Mayo 
and SUgo for 1880 {Zool., April, 1881). 



Digitized by 



Google 



42 PBOOEBDINOS OF THB 

At the Swansea meeting in August, 1880, Prof. A. Newton read 
a paper " On the Migration of Birds, and Messrs. Harvie-Brown 
and Cordeaux*s method of obtaining systematic observations of the 
same at Lighthouses and Lightships,'' and in it ^'ui^ed the 
Association to lend its countenance to the renewed attempts" 
which we were making, '^ and to encourage, with its approval, these 
gentlemen and their fellpw-workers, the men of the Lighthouses 
and Lightships." As a result of this, official notice reached us in 
due course that the General Committee of the Association had 
appointed Prof. Newton, Mr. J. Cordeaux, and myself, " a Com- 
mittee for the purpose of obtaining (with the consent of the 
Master and Brethren of the Trinity House, and of the Commis- 
sioners of Northern Lights) observations on the Migration of Birds 
at Lighthouses and Lightships, and of reporting upon the same at 
York in 1881, and that Mr. Cordeaux be the Secretary." 

I may add here that the schedules for 1880-81 were duly issued 
and additional stations secured in Faroe and Iceland through the, 
Scottish Meteorological Society. An abstract of the Second Beport 
of the Committee was read at the York meeting of the British 
Association in September, 1881, and the Beport has since been 
printed in extenao, 

I may here reiterate that this Beport and f onner Beports on 
Ornithology are closely related to the Migration Beports, and are 
indeed intended to supplement the latter. It would therefore be 
of great advantage if they could be issued simultaneously, as 
otherwise they lose half their value. 

Journal op thb Wintbr op 1880-81. 
On 2nd October snow lay on the hills round Callander, and on 
4th keen frost at night. Trees, which began to yellow even in 
September, threw their leaves fast in October, and hard frosts set 
in at night. From about 15th October regular night frosts con- 
tinued in Stirlingshire. Ice fonned on rivers and pools, and by 
20th remained all day, even with bright sky overhead. Severe 
snow-storms reported from various parts, nearly 5 inches lying at 
Dava, the highest point of the Highland Bailway, between the 
Spey Valley and Forres, and also between Inverness and Thurso. 
" The cold is still intense and the thermometer very low " — [Edin, 
Courant, 21. x. 80]. Snow also fell in London, and a corres- 
pondent of The TimeSy writing on " Early Snow," says, that during 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTY OF GLASGOW. 43 

48 years there is only one instance of a heavy fall at an earlier 
date than the present, and that in 1829, when, on October 7th, 
there was "a considerable fall between 1 and 3 p.m." — [Edin, 
Courant, 23. x. 80]. 

Heavy fogs impeded the navigation on the Clyde. At Kirkwall 
a severe gale on 20th, with sleet and rain. The weather in 
Stirlingshire up to 25th, clear, cold, and bright ; but in Firth of 
Forth heavy storms of rain and wind, and gales along east coast 
On 25th some rain, but on 26th again night frosts and cold north- 
east wind, which on night of 27th changed to high east wind, 
with sleet and rain, which lasted till 29th, when it was again cold 
and clear. This gale from K and N.K seemed general over the 
country, as noticed in papers of 29th. In Firth of Forth trafl&c 
suspended on 28th, and trains impeded. No such hurricane 
experienced in Stirlingshire for 5 years. Bye-roads in Fife often 
impassable from water. The Muckle Binn, west of Denny, covered 
by 12 inches of snow. Hailstones of extraordinary size fell in 
North of Scotland. At Auchterarder 2 inches of snow. Hills 
round Selkirk and southwards white for two days, also Grampians 
and Sidlaw Hills, and similar reports generally. 

While great iloods occurred in England, our Scottish rivers were 
hardly affected, as in Greenock, Stirling, and Alloa water was shut 
off from public works owing to its scarcity. In Dumfriesshire 
60 sheep snowed up and buried in one mass — [J. Dickson, of 
Saughton Mains, ex ore]. On 29th wind continued almost due 
north, and weather bright and clear. From 30th westerly winds, 
clear and fine, till 4th November, when thaw and rain on 5th and 
6th set in, with high gale on night of 6th, succeeded again by fine 
mild, clear weather. From 9th to 14th mild open weather, with 
high winds and rain, which flooded the rivers heavily. Snow 
began to fall in Stirlingshire early on 14th, lying though the 
ground was so wet, and continuing till the afternoon, when keen 
frost set in, which lasted until 16th, when north-east wind, with 
snow and rain, rose to a gale, doing much damage on east coast at 
St Andrews and on Firth of Forth. Eain melted most of the 
snow, but on 17th the ground was again white. Thereafter keen 
frost till 23rd, when another fall of snow, followed by thaw till 
24th, and this snow-storm seemed general over the country. High 
south-west winds succeeded for several days, and generally un- 
settled weather, with occasional fine days without frost 



Digitized by 



Google 



On 16. x}i 80 J7ie Scotsman said-^Afl^ several weeks of com- 
paratively mild weather for the season it has again assumed a 
wintry aspect The slight frost on Tuesday was succeeded by a 
fall of snow which lay generally over Scotland to a depth of from 
3 to 6 inches. This was succeeded by frost on the 20tb. In the 
Aberfeldy district the snow reached a depth of about 30 inches* 
There were blocks on the Highland Railway at Dalwhinnie, and 
on the Peebles branch of the North British Railway. On the west 
coast the snow on the 19th was accompanied by a fierce gale. 
Mild weather succeeded up to 22nd or 23rd. 

From the Outer Hebrides my correspondents report that there 
was very disagreeable weather most of the winter : very little frost 
or snow, but tremendous gales of wind, with rain ; the lochs only 
once frozen over, and then only for two or three days. 

Over Scotland frost set in again on 24th Dec, and with north and 
east winds continued for some time. Snow-storms of much severity, 
with drifts of great depth, occurred over the North. Blocks took 
place on the Highland line in Caithness, on the Great Northern in 
Aberdeenshire, and on the Caledonian, near Stonehaven. About 
1000 men at work on the Great Northern on the 26th clearing the 
main line and Alford branch drifts of 6 to 9 feet ; in the North 
and in Glenalmond and Glenqueich, 15 to 20 feet were noted — 
[Scotamariy 23. xii 80]. 

Up to 11th January, 1881, frost continued almost unchecked, 
and ice reached a thickness of 3 to 4 inches on still ponds and 
lochs. On that night a general snow-fall with keen frost, and on 
forenoon of 12th 3 inches fell, followed by high winds and snow 
from £. and N.E. Frost again on 13th, clear and calm. At this 
date traffic on canals became difficult, the Forth and Clyde canal 
being almost closed. — [Edin, CourarU, 13. L 81.] Papers full of 
accounts of railway blocks, suspended traffic, and gales with snow- 
drifts, all over Scotland. The great drifts were caused by the 
extreme dryness ef the snow. Frost on 12th "intense" — [Edin. 
Couraivty 13. L 81]; on night of 13th the thermometer registered 
3^ below zero. Bivers frozen completely over, except at streams. 
At Inverness and Galashiels temperature extremely low — 3* to 5**. 
Frost general 

In the Outer Hebrides the season continued unusually mild and 
open — [Inverness Courier*, &c.]. At Inverness on night of 13th Jan. 
frost intense. At 5 p.m. 23^ of frost was registered at Inverness, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL BISTORT UqOVnY OF GLASOOW. 4Q 

by 9 P.M. zero ; unequalled, it is said, in that locality in 25 years 
experience. Zero was reached at Lochloy, Nairnshire, and, indeed, 
generally over North of Scotland. At Inverness, on December 
2nd and 3rd, 1879, there were 18*^ of frost; while at Galashiels on 
these days there were 37*^, and at East Linton (both localities in 
South of Scotland), there were 34®. A well at Essich, Inverness- 
shire, not known to have been frozen during 50 years, was covered 
with ice on Thursday 13th. At Abemethy no such continuance 
of frost for 20 years — [Inverness Courier^ 15. i. 81]. A fresh fall 
of snow on 19th January. On night of 16th 34** of frost at 
Dunipace. Ice on Larbert pond 8 inches thick on 17th. 

At Annual Meeting of Meteorological Society in Edinburgh, 
25th February, 1881, it was stated that the lowest temp, recorded 
by closed thermometer was at Stobo Castle — 15**, and the next 
lowest — 13®, on 17th January. On the same date, however, it 
showed 19® at Sumburgh Head, and 17® at Stomoway. The 
month of January, 1881, was the coldest for 120 years, but in 
January of 1767 the temperature fell 1 J® lower at Butt of Lewis 
and north of • Caithness. All accounts from papers show the un- 
exampled severity of the present season — [20. i. 81]. Heavier 
snow-falls have occurred, as in 1878-9, but such intense frost has 
probably not been equalled for 20 years, nor even then did the 
severity continue for more than a fortnight. 

Several cases of frost-bite occurred near Inverness. Caledonian 
Canal obstructed with ice up to Dochgarroch Locks. Ice reported 
more than a foot thick on the Beauly, also 2 feet thick on still 
water near DingwaU. Alcaig Ferry frozen, a rare occurrence. 
Snow obstructions not bad, but 14-inch fall near Dingwall; and 
greater inland. Sheep suffering severely. Birds frozen to death, 
or stan^ed. Books, sea-gulls, <&c., feeding on the streets in 
(Jolspie. 

Each BnpWrstorm since October, of which there were five, h^ 
increased the rigour of winter. Wild fowl abundant at all open 
reaches or streams on Spey. Water ouzel nowhere at all afft^cted 
by the cold, singing lustily, as I heard it at Dunipace [18. jL 81]. 
North end of Loch Awe frozen over, and all the rivers, also a large 
pprtio4 of the Pass of Brander, which has not been frozen fp? a 
number of years past. 

On Loch Tay-side small birds reported to be suffering groatity, 
m^j f^Ilii^ dead fron^.their perches in the jqiorP e;cp9se4 P^9c^ ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 PB008BDIN08 OF THE 

and wild fowl on the loch being unusually plentiful, especially 
goosanders, scaup, golden-eye, tufted ducks, wigeon, and razorbills. 
Kabbits dead in their holes, and mere bags of bones. Wild duck 
and herons beginning to suffer much, streams being all frozen up. 

This great frost continued with hardly a check till 30th January, 
except on 22nd and 23rd, when thaw set in, clearing away river 
ice. A report from Thurso speaks of the tameness of gulls, which 
alighted on the window-sills of the houses ; the birds fed there 
regularly were starlings, robins, finches, and blackbirds. Within 
the last few days woodpigeons have come to Mr. Tait's garden 
inside the town, feeding on greens and turnip-tops. Kedwings, 
thrushes, &c., are said to have perished in great numbers during 
the frost at and around North Berwick, and woodpigeons are 
" becoming very tame." Eoads there all blocked up level with 
the hedges. 

The birds have suffered terribly during the last few weeks of 
intense cold. At one farm-house at Cawdor near Forres, after the 
snow and drift of Wednesday night, a strange sight was witnessed 
in a cleared space not 10 yards square. There were barndoor fowls, 
tame and wild pigeons, crows, partridges, blackbirds, water-hens, 
and smaller birds, picking up such particles of grain as they could 
get. The greatest harmony seemed to prevail amongst the different 
species, some of the larger being so reduced and weary that they 
might have been easily caught. The Ross-shire Journal says that 
the Cromarty Firth abounds in flocks of wild fowl, principally 
ducks, but also many geese — [Inverness Courier ^ 29. i 81]. 

Deer coming down in numbers from the hills, and white hares 
caught in gardens in Inverness. Immense flocks of larks feeding 
around Edinburgh. Many people reported frozen to death. 
Houses buried in snow-drifts in Lewis [18. i 81]. Water-hens 
which had died were brought to Mr. Sim, Aberdeen, but he foimd 
them usually in good condition. Woodcock, snipe, and partridge 
seem to have suffered most in Aberdeenshire. A correspondent of 
the Northern Chronicle at Loch Maree [26. i. 81] says : — "Coming 
along to-day I saw rather an unusual sight — two grouse perched 
on a birch tree. They seemed quite tame, and remained as we 
drove past I saw also at the mouth of Glen Grudie, quite close 
to the road, a splendid herd of deer, consisting of 50 hinds, with a 
fine stag at their head. They appeared to have been hand-fed, and 
were apparently as tame as park deer. The loch, true to its tradition, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT SOOIBTT OF GLABOOW. 47 

has refused to be subjected to the keen frost. The hills are 
almost black, the wind of Tuesday last having blown the snow 
away. From Lochmaddy the same paper reports that the stonn 
had been very severe. In a number of places groups of sheep were 
buried under the snow, and men had to be kept constantly among 
the stock to prevent loss by smothering. Groups of bemicle geese, 
woodcock, grouse, and snipe, were seen busily picking up a scanty 
morsel, only a few yards from the houses, and at the same time a 
beautiful white swan, and a number of Norwegian* and other wild 
ducks could be observed feeding quietly in the bay within 60 yards 
of the houses. 

Sheep-stock on the west coast farms between Gairloch and 
Ardnamurchan have suffered severely. Evergreen leaves shrivelled 
up in many places, as they were never known to do in former 
years. When the frost was most severe sea-gulls were missed from 
a large portion of the coast Curlews, crows, thrushes, blackbirds, 
robins, and various other species lived chiefly on the shore, striving 
to obtain some food in the ebb. The curlews seemed most success- 
ful, wading and driving their bills deep into the sand, evidently 
getting a good supply of worms in the process. A few crows were 
seen dead, and small birds were so weak that many of them made 
no effort to escape when approached. The ice on Loch Queich was 
27 inches thick.— [^co^^maw, 27. i 81.] 

Another great snow-storm occurred on February 7th, causing 
railway blocks, and is recorded as the fiercest stonn of the winter. 
A rapid wind and rain-thaw on the same afternoon cleared off 
nearly all the snow. Ice on ponds 15 inches thick, and hardly 
affected by a week's thaw [8. ii 81], Bitterly cold N.E. winds, 
followed with a few fine bright days ; thaw in the sun and frost 
in the shade. Successive falls of snow, and in Stirlingshire 
ground again white on 27tii. Curling on Larbert pond on 3rd 
March, fierce gale and snowstorm on 4th March, accounts of 
which occupy many columns in papers. This continued all night, 
and next day resulted in the deepest and most general drifts and 
railway blocks of this memorable winter. Hill-farmers find matters 
very serious, and all out-door labour at a standstill 

A short interval of fine weather, wann and genial, lasted till 
March 2l8i The Caithness block only cleared on ISth. Heavy 

•yrigison. 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 PHQOSICDIKaS OF THS 

fall of snow on 21 st in Edinburgh. Strong south-west gale and 
driving snow again on 24th in Stirlingshire, with gleams of sun- 
shine, but the snpw did not lie on lower grounds. Thereafter keen 
frost every night up to end of month and into April, reaching 
sometimes 17® of frost, and often 7° to 12°. No growth of vegeta- 
tion whatever apparent at end of March. 

During this terrible winter all birds that could go left West 
Eoss-shire, such as plover, snipe, &c. ; and also, which is unusual, 
all similar birds left Lewis. A swan, wing-tipped by Mr. O. H. 
M'Kenzie of Inverewe, was sent alive to ZooL Gardens, London. 
Thrushes did not disappear from Poolewe as in 1878-9. Only one 
pair remained to breed in 1879, and they have not yet recovered 
their numbers. No redwings for two or three years have been 
seen there. This general scarcity is, it is to be feared, the effect of 
severe winters. It would be interesting to know if they were 
scarce in Scandinavia at the nesting seasons of 1879 and 1880. 

A simimary of the foregoing notes shows that gales and winds 
continued to prevail from N.K and E. all autumn and winter, and 
this during the whole migration season. High seas have run upon 
the east shores in consequence. Data in Migration report show 
that vast numbers of birds have been carried far over the Atlantic, 
up to 1200 miles west from Iceland. Karities have reached this 
country hailing from east and west, but probably having travelled 
by the same routes, via Siberia and the East, borne forward by the 
excessive easterly gales. The great and severe frosts and snows, 
especially in January, 1881, were too late, perhaps, to aflfect the 
migration of birds to any appreciable extent, but not too late to 
do great injury to our native species, or to drive off species which 
would otherwise have wintered with us. Many birds died, say 
from IQ to 20 per cent, or more, according tp locality, Ducks got 
thin by 15th January, while pigeons and pheasants were mqre 
bunches of feathers by the end of that month. Thaw for a we^k 
hardly affected ice on still ponds, but carried off river-ice. 

it is only necessary to add here that after April, 1881, the whole 
summer remained cold, wet, and stormy, and up to the end of 
September the same wretched weather continued. A great migra- 
tion took place as early as 20th September, with strong S.K 
winds, for particulars of which see Migration Report for 1881 — [now 
preparing for press — April, 1882]. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY S0C3IBTY OP GLASGOW. 49 

MAMMALS. 

Squirrel. — A great mortality amongst squirrels is recorded in 
the South of Scotland during, the severe winter. [Mr. Cully of 
Coupland in lit to Mr. J. Hardy.] It is still my opinion that a 
succession of hard winters would materially reduce our squirrel 
population, if not extinguish it, and I look upon a former continuance 
of such seasons at the close of the eighteenth century as one of the 
causes of the decrease of the old indigenous stock. [See First 
Report, Proceedings, vol. iv., p. 142, and my essay on the Squirrel 
in Scotland, in Proceedings Roy. Phys. Soc. Edin.] 

Rabbit. — By the end of January rabbits suffered terribly in 
many districts, and the dead were carted away in great numbers 
from various places. They died in their holes, and so scarce did 
they become that the last fall of snow in February showed scarcely 
any tracks in what were well-stocked coverts a month or six weeks 
before. In Perthshire Mr. Dewar found by 20th January the 
rabbits " dead in their holes were nothing but skin and bone," and 
similar reports from aU over North of Scotland. The fine breeding 
season of 1880, however, not only made up for the deaths of 1879-80, 
but may also have assisted in counteracting the severity and loss of 
1880-81. [See Second Report, Proceedings, voL iv., pt. ii., p. 291.] 

Red Deer. — " When the recent storm was at its height, squad 
after squad of deer came down Glenshiel, passed on to Glenelg, and — 
it is said — swam across Kyleakin to Skye." [Inv, Cour,, 22. ii. 81.] 
At Fannich reports are favourable ; indeed it is reported that 
no deaths occurred. On the other hand, several young deer were 
found dead by the roadside in the adjoining forest. The north 
and north-east of Ross-shire seem to be the parts of that county 
where the deer suffered most. 

Hare. — While White Hares are reported to have been very 
destitute and hard pressed in some districts, and to have come 
down even into the gardens in the town of Inverness, in other 
parts really much wilder and more exposed they seem to have 
suffered but little. White Hares were seen at the edge of the 
loch — a rare sight in this county (Perthshire) — [Mr. Dewar, 
20. i 81]. 

BIRDS. 
Buzzard. — Buteo vulgaris. Leach. — The Buzzard is not yet 
extinct in the South of Scotland, but care will be necessary to 

VOL. V. D 



Digitized by 



Google 



50 PBOOBBDINOS OF THK 

protect it in the breeding season. Buzzards are seen nearly every 
season at Edenchip, head of Loch Earn, in Nov. This indicates 
probably an extension of the line and migration reported from 
Loch Tay by Mr. Dewar [v, 2nd Keport]. Whether they be 
Common or Rough-legged, the probability is that specimens procured 
in Forfar, seen on Lochs Tay and Loch Earn, reported again from 
Boquhan in Stirlingshire, and again from Duntreath near Campsie 
in the same county, are all individuals of the same migratory flight. 
The frequency of their occurrence along this line during migration, 
and comparative scarcity on either side of it, indicates, to my mind, 
a tolerably distinct course taken year after year by these species. 
The original starting-point probably is Scandinavia or further N.K, 
and they may or may not be joined by our home-bred specimens, 
now, alas ! getting much scarcer every year. 

RouGH-LBGGBD BuzzARD — BiUeo logopus (Gm.). — After the high 
gales on our E. coast in the end of Oct, Rough4egged Buzzards 
began to appear as usual at various stations. Two were shot in 
the Stewartry, one at Blackwood, the other at Southinch, between 
26th Oct. and 4th Nov. — [R. Service in Ut^ 4th Nov.]. One — a 
female — was obtained at Pencaitland, near Edinburgh, on 8th Nov., 
and a male at Linerleithen on the 15th Nov., whilst another was 
obtained at Saltoun Hall, Haddington, on 16th Nov. Common 
Buzzards accompanied them. Mr. George Sim, also, writing on 
26th Jan., reports that R. L. Buzzards have put in an appearance, 
and he had some sent him the previous weeL 

Rbd-lboged Falcon. — Falco vespertimiSy Lin. — One shot at 
Kinghom in Fife, on 20th Sept., passed into the possession of Mr. 
R. Small, Edinburgh, and from him to the Lidustrial Museum 
there. It proved, on dissection, to be a young male. 

Hobby. — Falco subbideo, Lin. — Note to notice of this species in 
2nd Report [VoL iv., p. 304]. — On making further inquiries regard- 
ing the alleged migration of Hobbies in the Lews, I received the 
following statement from Mr. R. Notman, gamekeeper at Eishken 
Lodge : — " The Hobby Hawk comes to the Lews in autumn, and 
I think leaves in spring again. I do not know of any one who has 
seen their nesi" Later, in a " list of the Birds of the Lews," sent 
me by Lady Matheson*s gamekeeper at Stomoway — an old and 
experienced Highland keeper, formerly in the Reay country in 
Sutherlanidi the Hobby is included alongside the Merlin, and a 
note added — '' Observed first by Mr. Greenwood, lessee of Castle 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 51 

shootings, in 1879." This identification therefore rests with Mr. 
Greenwood, who is since deceased. 

Short-Eared Owl. — Asio acdpitrintis (Pallas). — Several were 
sent in for preservation to the Edinburgh bird-stuffers about the 
20th Oct., principally from the Lothians, where they are common 
usually on migration. 

Long-Eared Owl. — Asio otvs (Lin.). — Commoner than usual 
this autumn. 

White-Tailed Eaglk — HaliaMvs alUdlla (Lin.). — An albino 
shot at Nesting in Shetland in Oct., 1880, as reported to me by 
Mr. Garrioch, who has temporarily placed it in the Museum at 
Lerwick. It was exhibited at Roy. Phys. Soc. meeting, Edin., in 
Nov., 1880. 

Swift. — Cypselvs apas (Lin.). — Mr. R. Service saw a departing 
flock of Swifts on the evening of the 4th Aug., and he did not 
observe more than a straggler or two after that. The particularly 
early arrival of Swifts has been noticed also at Brampton, Cum- 
berland, by Mr. G. Parkin, numbers breeding on the roofs of 
houses there, and in the cliffs of Gillsland. They arrived this year 
(1881) on the 4th May. 

Cuckoo. — Cucvlus canonts, Lin. — Reported as scarcer than 
usual in Islay in the summer of 1880. 

Swallow. — Hirundo rusticay Lin. — Of its latest appearance at 
various localities I have a number of accounts. They stayed very 
late this year in some places. From the Stewartry they usually 
depart about the 24th-27th Sept., but Mr. Service saw them (in- 
cluding also Martins, and Sand Martins) numerously on the 30th 
Sept., again on the 2nd Oct., and one or two on the 5th, and 
a friend saw several again on the 10th Oct. 

Swallows were reported as very scarce this summer — 1880 — in 
Islay, which is difl&cult to account for. I have also reliable record 
of the occurrence of the Swallow at Alloa as late as 13th Nov. in 
1867. 

Kingfisher. — Alcedo ispida, Lin. — Kingfishers have appeared 
again in the Stewartry by the 4th Nov., which is earlier than 
they usually come, or than they came even in the autumn of 
1878 — [see 2nd Report]. Sudden severe frost will naturally 
so affect their food supply as to force them to migrate earlier; 
and the same may be said of many species, such as the Little 
Grebe [q, v.] King-fishers frequented the Carron up to 1st Jan., 



Digitized by 



Google 



52 PROOSra>INGS OF THB 

I88I9 when I saw one, but after that tiiey were much scarcer or 
quite absent. 

Grasshopper Warbler. —Locustella naevia (Boddaert).— Amongst 
new localities for this species is near Perth, where Mr. P. D. 
Maloch found a pair in the summer of 1880. At Grant's House, 
Berwickshire, where they breed, can hardly be considered as a new 
locality, as they have long bred in Berwickshire. It is a well-known 
bird all over the district, as Mr. Hardy informs me, where the 
conditions suit, but he rather thinks it is becoming scarcer owing 
to the flat meadows near the railway, which it once frequented, 
having been thrown into cultivation. 

In 1875 my friend, Mr. D. Bruce, jun., discovered the Grass- 
hopper Warbler near Stirling, May 26th. In June of the same 
year he again met with it, and sTiot one specimen^ about a mile from 
the spot where he first heard it. In a certain copse he has since 
then " never failed " to find the birds. In 1876, he noted a con- 
siderable increase in their numbers, and covering a larger area. I 
have very full particulars from Mr. Bruce [in lity 9. iii. 81]. 

Robin. — EritJiactis ruhecvla (Lin.). — Mr. Henderson has never 
seen a Robin in South Uist, I have however observed them in North 
Uist, and more commonly in Harris. It appears that the Stonechat 
is often taken for the Robin by the inhabitants in South Uist. 

Robins suffered greatly at Ballachulish, Aigyllshire, and many 
other localities. 

Common Whitbthroat.— /Sy^wa rufa (Boddaert).— Mr. R. Warren 
sends me the following note on the Spring Migration of this species 
at Ballina, Ireland: — "I was watching most anxiously for the 
Whitethroats. Not a bird appeared in their usual hedge-rows or 
was heard until 1 9th May. The following day I heard them singing 
in all their usual haunts, as if they had all come together, and had 
at once spread over the district." 

A late Whitethroat was noted by Mr Hardy at Old Cambus, on 
the 7th September, and again on the 19tL 

The Lesser Whitethroat. — Sylvia currnca (Lin.). — A specimen 
of this species was killed at Gourdas, Aberdeenshire, on the 4th 
Nov., 1880, and another seen at Mill of Tifty, as recorded by Mr. 
G. Sim, Grourdas, Fyvie, in the Scottish Naturalist^ Jan., 1881, p. 13. 
It is perhaps needless to point out at this time, that this i& almost 
undoubtedly a migrant from the K, and not a bird bred, or breeding, 
in Abeideenahiie. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTOICr SOOnSTT OV 0LA800W. 53 

Whbatbar. — Saxicola oenantJie (Lin.). — An unusually late stay 
of this species is noticed by me at considerable length in the Zoologist 
for Feb., 1881, p. 54-55, where it is also commented upon by the 
editor and Mr. J. Cordeaux, and I have added some additional 
remarks on the species, in my Migration Keport for 1880. Some 
interest appears to me to attach to the subject of this late occurrence 
on Dec. 9th, 1880. 

Saxicola deserti, Ruppell. — This rare bird was obtained on the 
moor at the edge of Gartmom Dam, Alloa, Clackmannanshire, by 
the gamekeeper to Lord Balfour of Burleigh, on 26th Nov., 1880. 
The birdstuffer at Alloa dissected the specimen and reported it to be 
a female, but on examination by Mr. J. J. Dalgleish and myself we 
came to the conclusion that it more nearly agreed with the description 
of a young male or of a male in winter. But it has often been 
remarked that the males of this as well as of other species of 
"Wheatear are in a preponderance of eight to each female, whilst 
other naturalists aver that there is no difference in the plumage of 
the sexes ; and again the dissector may be correct enou^ if, as is 
probable, the females assume the dress of the young males in winter. 
It is further reported that this specimen had been feeding upon 
minute midge flies. The weather at the time of its capture was 
extremely mild and warm. 

This species' has been recorded in Heligoland [Seebohm, Ibis^ 
1877, p. 162] in two instances. Its distribution appears to be 
Northern Africa (specimens from Algeria being, however, according 
to Mr. J. H. Gumey, jun., in "Rambles of a Naturalist," more russet- 
coloured than those from Egypt), Arabia, N. Persia, and into India. 
It is interesting to note in this connection the lines of migration 
as shown by returns from the Light-ship Stations in the English 
Channel, during the whole autumn migratory season of 1880. All 
returns show a passage of birds from the French to the English 
coast, between Aug. 16th and Dec. 8th — being the reverse of what 
would be expected, and the revei*se of what the returns from the 
Galloper Bank showed in 1879. 

This last year we had great and long-continued easterly gales over 
the Atlantic and N. Europe, more especially during Oct. and Nov., 
during which time hundreds of thousands of small birds of European 
origin were seen 450, 500, 900, to 1200 miles W. of the Irish Coast, 
and Rook, Jackdaw, Robin, Wagtail, and other familiar European 
species were recognized or captured. The dates of these gales and 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 PBOOEEDINOS OF THB 

records at sea are lumped together principally towards the end of 
Oct., but one is given on Nov. 17th. 

About the end of Nov., Great Gray Shrikes were unusually abun- 
dant in Britain, and an unusually large migration of these birds was 
reported from Heligoland. 

About the same time Great Snipe were not uncommon in Britain. 

Earlier in Sept. [21. viiL 80], an Esquimaux Curlew* was shot in 
Kincardineshire, the N. American origin of which seems undeniable, 
and a few days later [4. viiL 80], a Glossy Ibis was killed at the 
mouth of the River Ythan, in Aberdeenshire. Both these birds 
were exhibited to the Glasgow Nat Hist Soc. by the kindness of 
Mr. Geo. Sim. 

Bohemian Waxwing. — Arrvpelia garrulus, Lin. — A fine specimen 
of the Bohemian Waxwing was shot at Howtown, near Alloa, on 
Thursday, 9th Dec, 1880. It was a male and had been flying about 
for some days previously. Its stomach was full of "thrips" of the 
Rose. 

Grbat Gray Shrike. — Laniua eaccubitor, Lin. — We have been 
informed that a number of Butcher Birds or Great Gray Shrikes 
were seen the other day on the lands of Shirva, near Kilsyth — 
[Falkirk Herald^ 13. xi 80]. 

A Great Gray Shrike frequented the Avenue and " Crow Hill " 
at Dunipace, during the 18th, 19th, and 20th Nov., .and was very 
shy and wary. I first saw it late on the 18th, on the avenue, and 
it was afterwards seen twice on the " Crow Hill " by the keeper. 
Former occurrences of the Great Gray Shrike here have been recorded 
by me, but it is noticeable that two which I saw were not very far 
off from the haunt of the present specimen. The line of three 
occurrences lies exactly in a direction between E.S.K and W.N.W. 
— the general line of migrations striking our E. Coast 

Another of this species was killed on Remony, Loch Tay side, 
by Mr. D. Dewar. It was — as usually found to be the case with 
the species — frequenting a hedge. Its stomach contained a hedge 
sparrow, the legs and claws intact. It is a fine adult bird in splendid 
plumage. 

A return migration is indicated by the capture of one at Bath hill 
wood. West Grange, Perthshire, not far from Alloa, by J. Living- 
stone, gamekeeper, on 19th March, 1881. 

*%.$, not Numeniui minor, PalL, of N. Siberia. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORT BOOIBTT OF GLASGOW. 55 

Raven. — Conms coraxj Lin. — The Raven has not entirely dis- 
appeared — or has it reappeared? — in the Stewartry, as I have evidence 
of its occurrence in 1880. Numbers were to be seen this winter 
feeding on carcases of braxy sheep which had floated down the 
Dee in the Stewartry. 

Rook. — Gorvm frtigUegiis^ Lin. — Mr. Henderson writes me that 
two years agp a good many Rooks came over to the Outer Hebrides, 
especially to S. Uist— driven over no doubt by the severe weather 
of 1878-79. Last year, 1879-80, he only saw one, but this winter 
they are more numerous than they were two years ago, and this year 
they put in an appearance very much earlier, a few arriving in the 
end of Oct., and these again were strongly reinforced about the end 
of Nov. [Compare here the returns of the Lighthouses — Monach 
Lt. House, &c., and also the occurrences of Rooks in Mid- Atlantic, 
cited in Migration Report for 1880.] Mr. Henderson bears witness 
to the carnivorous propensities of Rooks at all times, though not to 
the same extent as when other food is not procurable. He has 
known them to take young birds from a nest and devour them. He 
has shot them in the act, and taken them in traps set for vermin, 
and baited with a piece of rabbit's or other flesh. 

It is said that Rooks were introduced into Islay by the late Mr. 
Walter F. Campbell ; now they are numerous all over the district. 

At the first indication of a thaw — slight as it was — on the 22nd 
Jan. 1881, the Rooks made great demonstrations, and kept at home 
all forenoon and both that day and the next, Sunday 23rd ; but on 
the 24th, when all signs of thaw had disappeared, they went off as 
usual 

I am obliged to Mr. R. Tait, of Thurso, for the following interest- 
ing notes on the newly established Rookery there. In a few trees 
in his garden, some years ago. Rooks began to build. During the 
last two years the Rookery became too large, and the birds too pre- 
datory, so in 1880 he was obliged to pull down the nests. The 
birds finally, with the exception of one or two pairs, were driven off, 
after a persevering struggle on both sides; but then the unused 
chimneys in the town were taken possession of, and in spite of 
persecution a good many reared broods in the chimneys. Mr. Tait 
adds, " There are decent worthies in Thurso who said that I had 
made a Rookery for my own pleasure, and had dispersed it for their 
annoyance." 

The Rev. A Stewart puts the deaths amongst Rooks and Black- 



Digitized by 



Google 



5S PBOO^DOINaS 09 THB 

birds — the two species which he considers to have suffered most in 
his district — Ballachulish, Argyllshire, — at about 20 per cent 

The following incident is related to me by Mr. Maclennan of 
Fannich, on the authority of an acquaintance : — " One morning in 
Jan. he saw a Rook go into his hen-house along with the hens, and 
later on in the day the same bird began to peep in at the dwelling 
house, and at last got the length of the fireside, which he seemed 
for some time t<5 enjoy, and, having put his bill under his wing, 
looked as if he were going to sleep ; but soon he began to stagger 
as if drunk, and ultimately fell over quite dead." The poor bird 
found the reaction too great, as with the Water-hens mentioned in 
First Report. 

Starling. — Stumua vulgaris^ Lin. — Starlings, though very 
plentiful in autumn, and large flocks roosting on reeds at Lake of 
Menteith, all went away, and not one was to be seen in that dis- 
trict Li the K of Stirlingshire they did not leave, but fed all 
through the storm around Dimipace House, coming freely to 
crumbs, &c., with other species. 

Brambling. — Fringilla montifringillai Lin. — Bramble Finches 
are reported as abundant in the S. W. of Scotland during several 
weeks in Jan. and Feb., 188L Mr. Service adds, — " Usually they 
are very scarce." I can remember what multitudes frequented all 
the district around Edinburgh during the severe winter of 1860-61 
— a winter equally famous for the hosts of " Norwegian Pigeons " 
which came over. 

I cannot help thinking that the importance of daily Ornithological 
Journals is much under-estimated by local naturalists. I believe 
that were these Journals all brought together and compared 
annually, and the distribution of our autumn and winter migrants 
every year carefully mapped out, showing the areas of greatest 
abundance in each year by darker colours, and the areas of scarcity 
by lighter colours, even if confined to a study of half-a-dozen species, 
that a great aid would be given thereby to students who are working 
out the problems of migration, especially if dates and duration of 
residence were indicated, and character of weather given on the 
map. But such a map, to be reaUy useful, would require the united 
efforts of local naturalists throughout the country. A large com- 
mittee might therefore be formed, and a sub-committee appointed, 
and paid, possibly, for working out the results. 

Goldfinch. — Cardudis degansy Stephens. — This bird appeared 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HIBTORT SOCHlfrT 09 GLASGOW. 57 

unusually plentifully and early in S. W. of Scotland, as I am 
informed by Mr. R. Service — a flock of forty having been seen at 
Slogarie a few days prior to the 22nd Oct. Years ago Goldfinches 
bred regularly upon the high plane trees (sycamores) on our wester 
avenue here. This winter, in the same spot where I have before 
known the nest to be, I saw a nest again, after all the leaves had 
fallen, built in between the highest sprays of one of the trees. It 
is curious sometimes to observe how these favourite sites are thus 
reoccupied after many years* absence. I begin to think distribution 
during the breeding season greatly depends, with many species, upon 
the directions of the lines of migration, and if birds passing over 
find an old site unoccupied, they take possession. 

Siskin. — Carduelis spinvs (Lin.). — This species, not usually 
common with us, this year appeared. On 27th Sept. I saw a little 
flock of six or seven frequenting some waste ground along the river- 
baak, where thistles have lately grown up. Some of these remained 
about the same place for several weeks. It is remarked that an 
early migration of Siskins and Redpoles has been caused by early 
falls of snow in N. of Scotland — [Field, 16. x. 80, also fide J. Cor- 
deaux in lit\ In Nov. Siskins continued to frequent our alders 
and marshes, and bird-catchers were busy. 

Snow Bunting. — Plectrophanes nivalis (Lin.). — The Snow Bun- 
ting is not a common migrant at Larbert or the neighbourhood, but 
this winter they appeared along the river Carron above Larbert, and 
at Dunipace, with the commencement of the frost, in small numbers. 
They are common winter visitants, however, in other parts, both in- 
land — as on the higher Campsie and Darritch Hills — and on the 
coast. This season they are unusually abundant in Central Scotland, 
large flocks being not uncommon. They have been observed also 
in S.W. Perthshire in flocks in the lower ground, where they have 
hitherto been not very commonly observed. Generally they appear 
to be most unusually abundant this winter, and since the end or 
middle of Nov. especially, warning us of the great severity of winter 
which dates from the New Year onwards. An unusually early ap- 
pearance is also noted by Mr. W. Lawrence, in the Fair Isle, as well 
as unusually large numbers. 

From the Aberfoyle district of Perthshire they are reported as 
common up to 23rd Jan. Mr. C. C. Tunnard saw them on the 
20th, but on the 23rd only one, the rest having shifted their ground. 
Mr. Hardy notes the first appearance in £. Lothian on 18th Oct. 



Digitized by 



Google 



58 PRoeHmrew of ths 

It was dunng a heary blast of rain and wind ; only a field's-bieadth 
from the sea-side ; wind N. and tempestuous. 

WooDPiGBON. — Columba pcUumbus, Lin. — Pigeons remained yery 
plentifully about Aberfoyle until Christmas, when they all dis- 
appeared. 

Gbousb. — Lagopus scoiicus (LatL). Ptabmioan.— L. muius^ 
LeacL — Whilst all the district round about " Bonnie Aberfoyle " 
is covered with snow, we, who live in the lower part of the glen, 
have been enjoying much milder weather, and the scenery is only 
varied by a few small patches of snow. In consequence of this, 
hundreds of Grouse are frequenting the southern slopes of Craig- 
more and the adjacent hills in packs of from two to three hundred, 
almost darkening the air as they fly over one's head, and making 
a rushing noise like what one would expect from the "Flying 
Scotsman" — [Stirling Journal^ 25. ii. 81]. 

From Fannich Forest, Ross-shire, I have the report that Grouse 
look remarkably well and healthy — [J. Maclennan in lU.y 28. ii 
1881]. 

About Ptarmigan my accounts are all negative up to March, 
owing to the absolute inaccessibility of their haunts. When spring 
comes we may hear more. 

Lapwing. — Vandlus cristatus^ Meyer. — In the Stewartry they 
are in immense flocks, and have been more than usually abundant 
and early this autumn — 1880. In K Lothian they are reported 
as unusually scarce. In Ireland they began to assemble on the 
shores of Co. Wicklow by the 22nd July. 

Golden Plovbr. — Gfiaradrim pluvicUis, Lin. — Considerable 
numbers have frequented the Solway mud-flats since early in Oct 
On the mud-flats of Stirlingshire they usually arrive as early as the 
end or even the middle of Aug. This year they appeared about 
the usual time, or rather earlier. Unusual numbers frequented the 
Outer Hebrides, and Mr. Henderson writes me they were more 
numerous than in any year since he went there. 

Dotterel. — Evdromias morindlus (Lin.). — Mr. D. Dewar shot 
a pair, male and female, on the hill of Stron Chorm, above Remony, 
on 1st Oct The weather had been a little stormy, and the wind 
was from N.K There were three in company at the time. This 
hardly indicates their line of migration from their Scottish breeding 
haunts, being a comparatively new locality for their appearing. 

Glossy Ibis. — FaldneUus ig^ieua (Gm.).— Mr. G. Sim reports 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HI8T0BT 8O0IBTT OF 6LASOOW. 59 

the occurrence of a fine male specimen of the Glossy Ibis shot on 
the mud-flats opposite Newbui^h, at the mouth of the Ythan, in 
Aberdeenshire, on the 4th Oct., 1880, and which was afterwards 
exhibited to this Society, in Dec., 1880. [See also Sim in ^^ Scot 
Nat.," Jan. 1881, p. 13.] 

EsQiuifADX CuBLBW. — Numeuius btynaUs (Forst). — One shot in 
Forest of Birse, Kincardineshire, on 21. x. 80, and forwarded by 
Mr. G. Sim for exhibition, was spoken of fully at this society's meet- 
ing in Nov. 1880, and^ exhibited on 29th Dec, 1880. [F. also 
"Scot Nat.," Jan., 1881, p. 13, where Mr. Sim gives additional 
particulars.] 

Grbbnshank. — Totanvs glottis (PalL). — A very considerable ex- 
tension southwards of the breeding range of this species has been 
brought to my notice, but I do not feel at liberty to state the district 
at present. I regret to say that one was shot in June, in this far 
southern district, in distinct contravention of the Act, and I regret 
also that an example has not been made of the offender, whoever he 
may be. In many localities the Act is still a dead letter so far as 
prosecutions go, although there is no doubt that the general good 
done is considerable. 

Mr. R. Warren reports an autumn migration of Redshanks and 
Greenshanks as appearing on the shores at Ballina, on the 10th July. 

CuRLBW. — Numeniua arquaia (Lin.). Whimbrbl. — N. phaeopus 
(Lin.). — Mr. R. Warren heard a Whimbrel on the 22nd July, at 
Ballina, but whether it had come from the breeding haunts, or had 
remained about the shores with the Curlews since the spring, he 
cannot say. Numbers of Curlew remain along shore all summer, 
never going at all up to the mountain breeding haunts. 

Great Snipb. — Gailinago major (Gm.). — \y. ZooL Nov. 1880.] 
Mr. Bruce of Slogarie shot a " Double Snipe," about the 8th Oct, 
as he informed Mr. R. Service on 22nd Oct. I distinctly identified 
two of the Solitary Snipe on our own ground here, on 7th Oct, but 
though next day I searched the whole marsh, no signs of them were 
to be found. 

Jack Snipb. — Limnocryptes gallimUa (Lin.). — This bird was also 
scarce this autumn, at least in certain old haunts. Late in Dec. I 
saw one bird, but did not shoot any this season up to 15. i 81, 
after which date, however, I got a few in the ditches. 

Common Snipb. — Gailinago gallinaria (0. F. Miill.). — Our marsh 
has failed utterly in Snipe this year, principally owing to the very 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 PB00EEDIKG8 OF THS 

dry season, but partly to the deepening of a main drain ; and where, 
in many seasons Snipe were abundant, this season I think a dozen 
are all that have been seen. Similar reports of their scarcity reached 
me from Dumbartonshire, and the caase appeared to be the dryness 
of the season. In Tiree Snipe were plentiful 

WOODC500K. — Seolqpax rusttcola, Lin. — Woodcock were well in 
by the end of Oct. this autumn, considerably earlier than usual, 
and are stated to be very plentiful in many localities. In the 
Stewartry Mr. Service considers that more bred than in previous 
years. There cannot be any doubt about the increase in numbers 
of breeding birds in Scotland and England during the past twenty 
years or so. After the thaw in November, Woodcock were very 
scarce everywhere. Only one was shot in Torwood covers on the 
25th Nov., where, last year, 18 were killed in one day. The most 
I saw shot in one day was four (and about 12 seen) at West 
Grange. 

From Ardnamurchan sad accounts were received of the deaths 
amongst Woodcock and Blackbirds which succxmibed during the 
last week of the great frost in Jan. The headkeeper found more 
than 20 dead along the sea-shore and on the road-side. He sent 
none away after the 20th Jan. as they had become so reduced in 
condition, but Grouse and Partridges were reported as having stood 
the storm well 

TuRNSTONB. — StrepsUas interpres, Lin. — Mr. M Vaughan 
reports Turnstones unusually abundant in Orkney, and retaining 
their summer plxmiage until the end of the third week in Aug. 

Wild Goose. — Anset* (sp. Q. — Wild Geese arrived at the Solway 
Firth in the closing days of Sept., and, as Mr. Service informs me, 
have since increased to extraordinary numbers. Various observers, 
reporting to Mr. Service, state that never have they been known 
to arrive so ^arly there before, the beginning of Nov. being the 
time of their usual first arrival Nor have they been known before 
in such large numbers. Mr. Service believes they are Greylag 
Geese from descriptions, as the Bean Goose is seldom got there. 
This migration is almost without doubt due to the sudden and 
intense spasm of cold weather earlier than usual in the season. 
They are reported as unusually abundant in E. Lothian. 

Wild Swan. — Cygrnis (sp. ?). — Accounts reached me of the ap- 
pearance of Wild Swans at several localities. On 13th Oct. two 
were shot on a pond near Dundee. They were seen that mon^pg 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HI8T0BT BOCHBTT OF QLA8GOW. 61 

passing slowly along to the westward, as far as Bronghty Ferry, 
and were shot by another party a few hours later in the day. One 
has been placed in the Museum; the Naturalists* Society, Dundee, 
has the other. I am obliged to Mr. P. Henderson, Naturalist, 
Dundee, for notice of these Swans. 

Mr. Garrioch, Prospect House, Lerwick, sends me notice of five 
Hoopers seen passing over Gulbemich, near Lerwick, flying S., low 
and apparently tired and flagging, on 12th Jan., 1881, a late mi- 
gration. Wild Swans reported "in flocks" from Lochs Leven, 
Shiel, Sunart, &c., by Rev. Alex. Stewart. One flock of from 60 
to 60 seen on 22nd Jan., 81. 

Wild Duck. — Anas boschasy Lin. — Up to Sept. 1st, Wild Duck, 
which were mostly bred in our marsh, were unusually abundant 
I counted between 35 and 40 Mallard, and four or five TeaL 
After this the great bulk of the birds disappeared, and only a few 
remained. With the first keen frost no great accessions to their 
numbers took place, though the increase in Teal was at once re- 
markable. Between 14th and 24th Nov. only from 2 to 4 Duck 
appeared to be haunting the 2-mile stretch of river at Dunipace. 

Wild-fowl in the Outer Hebrides have been in about the usual 
nimibers during this winter. They are reported scarcer than usual 
on the Berwickshire coast, along with Curlews, up to 25. xii 80. 

During the second frost and storm, which began about the 20th 
Dec. and continued till the New Year, large numbers of Duck came 
in to the river Carron. On the 1st Jan., 1881, I counted close 
upon 30 along our stretch of river. Amongst these were 2 Golden- 
eyes, and our keeper reported seeing one "pure white Duck with a dark 
neck," which same bird he had seen about a mile further north in 
Aug. From this time onwards between 20 and 30 Duck frequented 
our stretch of river, haunting the streams after the still reaches 
were hard frozen. 

The keen frost of Jan., 1881, freezing up even our running 
streams, did not, however, banish them altogether. A few open 
holes remained, and I got a few each day I went after them until 
the more determined thaw of the week, commencing with the 
month of Feb., flooded the river and carried away the ice. They 
then disappeared for a time. 

About the middle of Jan. some Duck began to lose condition, 
and were quite poor and thin by end of the month at Lake of 
Menteith, but in better condition here. 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 PROOBBDINQS OP THE 

Wild-fowl in Islay are reported as unusually scarce. Scarcely 
a tithe of the "Wild Geese have put in an appearance. 

Teal. — Nettium crecca (Lin.). — Hitherto scarce in Stirlingshire, 
this year Teal arrived on the Carron in considerable numbers — one 
large bunch of 17 being conspicuous — on the advent of the first 
bard frost, on or about the 4th Nov. Before this only 4 or 5 had 
been seen, though Mallard were unusually abundant. Most of the 
Wild Ducks were known to be birds bred in the district. Teal re- 
mained scarce all Dec, and we had no accessions during the second 
storm, as we had of Wild Duck. Soon they disappeared, and not a 
single Teal was to be seen along the whole stretch of river during 
the whole time the storm lasted, up to end of Jan. 1881. 

Widgeon. — Mareca pendope (Lin.). — On 21st Oct., 1880, I shot 
a young male Widgeon, on the Carron, and another was along with 
it. Widgeon do not appear here every season, and can only be con- 
sidered as occasional visitants in this locality. 

GoLDBN-EYB. — Claugvla glattdon (Lin.). Tufted Duck. — 
Fvligvla crigiata (Leach). — It is always in very hard weather 
that we are visited by these species along the Carron. Thus in 
January, 1881, a few were usually about where they could find 
open water. 

Pintail. — DaJUa acuta (Lin.). — Two Pintail Ducks were 
shot near Loch Boisdale " last week " — [J. Henderson in lit,, 
16. xii 80]. 

Great Northern Diver. — Colymhvs gladalis, Lin. — A Great 
Northern Diver was captured [7. xi 80.], off Buccleuch Square, 
Newcastleton, by Michael Dagg, carter. The bird was apparently 
exhausted from want of food. It measured across the wings from 
tip to tip, 6 ft. 1 in. — [Kelso Chronicle.] This bird came into the 
possession of Mr. J. Edgar, Grocer, Newcastleton, and is being 
stuffed by the Duke of Northumberland's gamekeeper. It bit the 
man savagely who first caught it. It was offered to him by the 
second party, but was declined with thanks — [Rev. T. Gordon in 
lit. to Mr. Bruce]. 

Little Grebe. — Podiceps minor (Gm.). — This bird arrived earlier 
than usual, and earlier even than in autumn of 1878, in the districts 
around Dumfries, viz.: — ^before the 4th Nov., 1880; but though I 
walked pretty regularly along the Carron in Stirlingshire, I did not 
observe any until the 22nd Nov., 1880, when I saw one. There- 
after they were scarcely ever observed, and I cannot account for the 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTT OF QLA8QOW. 68 

scarcity, as the conditions have been on the whole similar to those 
of last season. 

Glaucous Gull. — Larm glauem, 0. F. Miill. — These birds 
visit our coasts regularly, or nearly so, every winter — more especially 
our eastern seaboard. I have seen a migratory flight arrive upon 
the coast at St. Andrews, and follow down the coast line, flying in 
and out amongst the sand-hills. On the W. coast they are not so 
abundant. A fine Glaucous Gull, apparently in the plumage of the 
second year, was shot at Shieldhill, in Dumfriesshire, the last week 
in Dec 1880, and was sent to Mr. Hastings for preservation — [R. 
Service in lit\ 

Gull. — Larvs (sp.?). — A correspondent remarked that in pre- 
vious winters, when the snow was deep and the frost severe, his 
house was wont to be visited by Sea-gulls in large numbers looking 
for food, while during all the present winter not a single Sea-gull 
has been seen. Have they found abundance of food at the sea-shore, 
or have they migrated to a warmer climate? — \lnv. Courier^ 16. i 81]. 

To this I replied that possibly the long continuing or oft-recurring 
N.E. and E. gales " washing up " constantly upon our E. coast, 
may possibly have thrown a larger supply of food upon the beach. 
Such high gales not being usually the constant attendants upon 
such severe frost as we have been experiencing, local migration of 
the gull-population would not be so pronounced in other seasons, 
and so be less noticed, if, indeed, this be the cause. But before 
one could state any reason for the phenomenon, he would require 
to be well acquainted with the situation, &c., of the precise 
locality. I learned afterwards that my supposition was probably 
correct, as numbers of frozen Garvies were found on the shore on 
which lai^e numbers of Gulls were feeding. 

In Thurso, Gulls exhibited great fearlessness during the hard 
weather, swooping down and alighting on the window sills, and 
gobbling up everything in a few minutes, as I am informed by 
Mr. R. Tait 

Amongst web-footed birds, the lesser Gulls are reported by Kev. 
A. Stewart to have " died in scores " at Ballachulish. 

Mr. Warren notes the arrival of Sandwich Terns at Ballina as 
early as the 24th March, 1880. 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 PBOOBBDIKOS OP THB 



THE SOCIETY^S ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET, 
February 22nd, 1881. 

Mr. Jolm Kirsop, V.P., in the Chair. 

Mr. Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., Norwich, was elected a Corre- 
sponding Member. 

A donation to the society's library was announced of a copy of 
the "Cobham Journals," containing the meteorological and other 
observations of Miss Caroline Molesworth, of Cobham, in Surrey, 
from 1825 to 1850. The volume was presented by Miss Eleanor 
Ormerod, F.M.S., Dunster Lodge, Isle worth, who has edited the 
work. 

SPBCIMBNS EXHIBITED. 

Mr. James Eggleton exhibited (1) a specimen of the Cape Hyrax, 
Hyrax capensisy Schreb. 

Mr. John M. Campbell said that the Hyrax, being so rabbit-like 
in its appearance, is readily mistaken for a rodent, and in fact was 
regarded as such until Cuvier pointed out the characters which 
distinguish it from members of that order. Its osteological structure 
clearly proves it to belong to the pachydermata, and although com- 
paratively a small animal, it is intermediate between the rhinoceros 
and tapir. The skull exhibits some peculiarities, the lower jaw 
being very deep and resembling that of the tapir in its structure; 
otherwise it approaches nearer to the rhinoceros, the molar teeth 
being, in fact, those of the rhinoceros in miniature. The fore and 
hind feet are divided into four and three toes respectively, protected 
by hoof-like nails, and, like the rhinoceros, are united by the skin 
to the nails. In the number of its ribs (21 on each side) the 
hyrax surpasses most quadrupeds, excepting some of the sloths. 
They are shy and timid creatures, and live in little families, posting 
a sentinel when they feed, whom the slightest movement causes to 
signal to its companions, when they at once disappear in their 
burrows. About 10 species are known to naturalists, the present 
one being found in South Africa. The species known as the Syrian 
Hyrax is probably the "Coney" of the Scriptures. 

(2) The Secretary Vulture, Seiyentariua secrdarim, Scop., from 
South Africa, which received its name from the feathers at the back 
of its head, reminding the Dutch settlers of a pen stuck behind the 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 65 

ear. No bird has so often been changed in its zoological position, 
having been placed among the gallinaceous, and also among the 
wading birds, and although bearing the name of vulture, it is more 
allied to the true falcons. Sharpe, in his Catalogue of the British 
Museum birds, places it in that aberrant group of falcons which 
approach the Turkey buzzards in their habits. It is a useful and 
valued bird for the services it renders in destroying snakes and 
other noxious reptiles, and attempts have been made to introduce 
it into other parts of the globe for this purpose. It is easily tamed, 
and almost any kind of food seems to agree with it, but its intro- 
duction to the poultr}*^ yard where young chickens are kept, is not 
desirable. Its gait is a smart run; on seeing a snake on the 
ground, it runs up to it with outstretched wings, and quickly stuns 
it with a blow from its pinions. It has also been seen to bear them 
to a height, and letting them fall, kill them outright. 

(3) An egg of the Box Tortoise, Testudo Carolina^ Lin., obtained 
from the ovary of a dead specimen. 

Mr. Peter Cameron exhibited two cases of British and Foreign 
Hymenoptera, and of preparations for the microscope, mounted in 
the manner he had described at a former meeting. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., exhibited and described some specimens 
of rocks and minerals from Aberdeenshire, forwarded by Mr. John 
A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.K, V.P., including Asbestos, a variety 
of Asbestos known as Mountain Leather, Graphite and Serpentine. 
The Chairman exhibited a thin section of Flexible Sandstone 
from India, which vibrated when held in the hand and slightly 
shaken. Mr. Young explained that this elasticity was due to the 
presence of Talc, mixed with the coarse grains of which the stone 
is composed, and which allowed it to vibrate to a certain extent 
without fracture. The Chairman also showed a flint nodule from 
Aberdeenshire which bore the impression of a species of Inoceramus, 
a typical genus of chalk fossils. These nodules are found in great 
abundance at Buchan Ness, and are thought to have been derived 
from a cretaceous deposit which at one time existed in the district, 
but which has been entirely removed by denudation. 



yo;.. y. 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

PAPER READ. 

On tlie Occurrence of the Atlantic Right Whale, Balaena biscayensis 
(Eschricht), on the East Coast of Scotland, By Mr. Tliomas . 
Southwell, F.Z.S., corresponding member. 

In collecting material for a book on the Seals and Whales of 
the British Seas which I have now in the press, a circumstance 
has come to my knowledge which cannot fail to be of special interest 
to Scottish naturalists, and which, in recognition of the service the 
Glasgow Natural History Society is rendering to British naturalists 
in publishing lists of the Fauna of the northern division of the 
kingdom, I have much pleasure in communicating to its members. 

Until Professors Eschricht and Kenihardt of Copenhagen pub- 
lished in 1861 their elaborate researches on the subject* and clearly 
established the existence of two distinct northern species of Balaena, 
the absence of Eight Whales from the temperate waters of the 
Atlantic, where in former times they had abounded, was attributed 
to the relentless manner in which they had been pursued by the 
Basque whale-fishers, together with the disturbed state of our seas 
arising from increased traffic, more particularly of steam vessels. 
These causes, it was believed, had either exterminated the Whales 
in the temperate regions of the North Atlantic, or driven them 
farther and farther towards the North till they had finally taken up 
their quarters in the icy seas of the Polar regions. When therefore 
a Right Whale appeared, or was supposed to have appeared, on our 
shores, it was always recorded as a straggler from the North ; but 
since Eschricht has shown that a Right Whale exists which is as 
strictly cjonfined to the waters of the temperate North Atlantic as 
the Greenland Right Whale is to the polar seas, it has been generally 
believed that any Balaena visiting our shores will be found to belong 
to the former species which Eschricht has named Balaena biscayensis. 

I will not trouble you with any description of this species, nor 
will I attempt to define its range, nor to establish its identity with 
the Black Whale {B. cisardica, Cope) of the American coast, as 
these subjects have already been fully discussed by Eschricht and 
others, but will at once proceed to the object of my communication, 
— the occurrence of the Atlantic Right Whale on the Scottish coast 

* «0m Nordhvalen," which appeared in the Transactions of the Royal 
Danish Society of Sciences, a translation of which, edited by Professor Flower, 
was published by the Ray Society in 1866. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. b7 

The only previous records bearing upon the subject with which 
I am acquainted, so far as Scotland is concerned, are not very- 
satisfactory or precise, and although doubtless they may refer to true 
Balaena it is quite as possible that some other whalebone Whale 
may have given rise to the reports. Sibbald records the occurrence 
of what he considers was probably a Right Whale at Peterhead, in 
1682, and Low in the "Fauna Orcadensis" states that "there have 
been several instances of late years [he died in 1795] of their driving 
ashore on our coast ;" but in neither instance does the author speak 
from personal observation, and the records are so vague and unsup- 
ported, that although of course they may have been examples of B. 
Mscayensis, I still think Mr. Alston was justified in his remark, 
[Fauna of Scot, Mammals, p. 17] that there was at the time he 
wrote "no authentic evidence of the occurrence of any Right Whale 
on our coasts m modem times," although such an occurrence from 
what has since transpired would seem to be less improbable than 
was supposed. 

Such, therefore, being the state of our knowledge with regard to 
this species in Scottish waters (and in other parts of the kingdom 
it was not more satisfactory) it was with no little pleasure I re- 
ceived a letter dated 25th Nov., 1880, from Capt. David Gray of 
Peterhead, in which he says, " There is not the shadow of a doubt 
that about the year named in your article [referring to an article on 
the Greenland Whale which he had been good enough to read for 
me] two Greenland Whales, an old cow and calf, appeared in the 
South bay of Peterhead; several boats were sent in chase; they 
could not, however, get a chance to strike the old whale, but they 
harpooned the calf." I lost no time in begging Capt. Gray to obtain 
for me every particular in his power as to the interesting occurrence, 
and he very kindly took great pains to establish the fact beyond 
doubt, and I think with perfect success. 

Capt. Gray was good enough to obtain for me the independent 
testimony of two old men, James Webster and John Allan, both of 
whom are still living at Peterhead, and were witnesses of the events 
which they relate. The two statements coincide so remarkably, 
making allowance for the lapse of years, that it is only necessary 
to give one. "James Webster, 85 years of age, remembers 
Greenland Whales coming into South Bay of Peterhead; at 
that time he would have been about 10 years of age [Jno. Allan 
says "it was in 1806 or 1807, same year as the new parish cburcb 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

was opened;" this was in 1806, and agrees with Webster's statement 
that he was 10 years old at the time]. Kemembers them being an 
old Whale and a Sucker. Saw five boats go out after them ; as far 
as he recollects, thinks it was the month of October [" in the simi- 
mer-time," Allan]. They struck the old Whale, and put three har- 
poons into her, then they struck the Sucker and killed it ; brought 
the Sucker ashore and flenched it at the South Quay. [Allan says 
" they killed the young Whale, and flenched her at the South Quay: 
she, having sunk, it was two or three days after, before they got 
her in."] After they had three harpoons in the old Whale, she went 
twice up into the head of the Bay, going so far that she turned the 
sand up, and then she stove two of the boats, and broke Mackie's, 
one of the harpooners, legs. [Allan does not remember the name 
of the injured man, and thinks only one boat was stove.] After 
this, the Whale took a run, and went out of the Bay, blowing blood. 
They followed her as fast as they could, they cut two of the boats 
from her, and left her towing one boat with their Jack blowing, 
after taking the crew out of her, and in this condition the Whale 
went out of sight, and they never saw or heard of her again." Allan 
says that when she went round the South Head, a heavy sea being 
on at the time, and darkness coming on, the boats cut and let her 
go, leaving the boat, which was stove, fast to the Whale, the flag 
still blowing, and that she went out to sea and was never seen again. 
Capt. Gray adds that " Capt. Wm. Volum, of the * Enterprise,' and 
Capt. Alex. Greary, of the * Hope,' both took part in the chase, and 
in that year the * Hope' returned from Greenland on 30th June, and 
the * Enterprise' on 30th July; consequently, it must have been 
some time after the latter date that the Whales came into the Bay; 
probably Webster is right when he names October, 

Shortly afterwards, Capt. Gray informed me of a second instance 
of the appearance of a Right Whale off Peterhead, and this time he 
was himself the witness. Whilst taking a walk round the " Heads" 
one Sunday morning before Church, to the best of his recollection 
early in October, 1872, he saw what he called a Greenland Whale 
within half a mile of the rocks off the South Head, its appearance 
and movements being exactly the same as those with which he is so 
familiar in the Spitzbergen waters. This instance is of course not 
so conclusive as the previous one, but it seems impossible for a man 
of Capt. Gray's great experience to have been mistaken. 

I think the appearance on the Scotch co^st of a species of Bight 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 69 

Whale in two instances in the present century is beyond doubt, but 
it may be said that in neither case were they proved to be B. his- 
cayends, I cannot here enter into my reasons for assuming that 
the Peterhead Whales were of this species but I have elsewhere* 
gone fully into the subject, and I may add that Capt. Gray, although 
very sceptical at first, seems fast arriving at the great improbability 
of the Whales which he goes so far North every season in search of, 
— and which even there leave him to proceed to still higher latitudes 
where he is unable to follow them — coming at the very season 
when they ought to be lost in the polar solitudes, to bathe in the 
summer-heated waters which surround our Island, and which would 
be so repugnant to the ice-loving Greenland Whale. 



THE SOCIETY'S EOOMS, 207 BATH STEEET, 

March 29th, 1881. 

Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown,r.R.S.K, Vice-President, in the Chair. 
Messrs. John Baird, John Hunt, William Gemmell, and John H. 
Fullarton, B.Sc., were elected ordinary members. 

Before proceeding with the ordinary business of the meeting the 
Chairman adverted to the death of Mr. E. R. Alston, r.L.S., F.Z.S., 
who, long a member of the Society, had always taken a deep interest 
in its welfare and progress and had done much to promote its 
interests. He was sure he had the sympathy of the members in 
expressing deep regret at the loss the Society and science had 
sustained by his removal, and he proposed that a notice of their 
deceased friend should appear in the Proceedings. The Meeting 
cordially sympathised with the remarks of the Chairman, and the 
Secretary was instmcted to insei-t a notice in the Minutes and to 
forwaixl an extract from it to Mr. Alston's nearest relatives. 



IN MEMORIAIVI. — E. R. A.—olnit March 7, 1881. 

Edward Richard Alston, the subject of this notice, was bom on 
th6 1st day of Dec, 1845, at Stockbriggs, Lesmahagow, Lanarkshire, 

* 'Seals and Whales of the British Seas,' pp. 65-67. 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 PROCBBDINGB OF THE 

being the fifth son of Mr. J. W. Alston of Stockbriggs.* He was 
never robust, even as a child, and for many years continued in very 
delicate health, so that he was never sent to a public school, but 
was entirely educated at home. How well he made use of his early 
opportunities is abundantly shewn by his subsequent literary and 
scientific work, although it entirely depended on his own self- 
teaching and self-study. 

In the summer of 1862 he went to Germany with the intention 
of learning the language under the roof of the Eev. Herr Dubbers, 
Parish Clergyman of Daudenzell. Soon after his arrival he was 
taken seriously ill with asthma, a complaint which had troubled 
him very greatly up to this period of his life, but by the careful and 
assiduous attention of an old friend he recovered sufficiently in a few 
weeks to allow of his return home. After this attack he rapidly 
gained strength and seemed to throw off much of the delicacy of 
his boyhood. A visit which he paid subsequently to Norway, in 
1871, along with his friend, Mr. Harvie-Brown, appeared still further 
to invigorate him, leaving his health apparently fully established. 

About this time Mr. Alston lived in Glasgow and for a few months 
he attended business in the mercantile house of Mathieson and 
Alston. During summer and autumn he lived in the family re- 
sidence at Stockbriggs, and there found many opportunities of 
studying the habits of animals. For this purpose he kept various 
tame examples of British Mammals — such as the Hedgehog — and 
devoted much attention to the fauna of the county of Lanark. 
Evidences of his early love for natural history pursuits and for 
literary work are at this time shewn in the pages of The Field and 
The Zoologist A volume of his "Early Letters" to these periodicals 
has, under date of Jan. 9th, 1858, his first contribution to The Field 

* Dr. Thos. Alston of Eddlewood, related to the noble fetmily of Hamilton, 
was great-grand-uncle, twice removed, of this gentleman. Besides other chil- 
dren Dr. T. Alston had a son — Charles — who between 1738 and 1769 was 
Professor of Medicine and Botany in the University of Edinburgh, and was 
also King's Botanist, dying in the latter year. A carefully prepared — though 
now faint and difficult to decipher — MS., contained in a volume of letters to 
Prof. Chas. Alston, dated 1720-1760, and at present in the Library of Edin- 
burgh University, gives very full material for a family tree dating back for 
many generations. By this MS. it appears that there were Alstons of a very 
old family of Cambusbarron in Stirlingshire, and of Cauder in Lanarkshire, 
and there was one '*Hugo de Aldston, dominus de Cauder." The descent of 
Dr. Chas. Alston from these old &milies is fully and clearly shewn. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 71 

under the mmi de plwne of " Tomtit," and which relates to the much 
disputed question as to the food of the Water Ouzel. This is fol- 
lowed by various other short notices with such titles as " Game- 
keeper's Vermin," " Dorsal Fins of Trout," " Fin-rays of Minnows," 
" Skull of the Albati-oss." His first communication to The Zoologist 
is dated 1860 \y. Zool^ 1st series, p. 6891] " On the attachment 
of the Creeper to its Nest and Eggs." From 1864 onwards he con- 
tributed regularly to The Zoologist, then under the editoi-ship of the 
late Mr. Edward Newman, but all his contributions to it could not 
be enumerated here. Some of the more important, however, deserve 
notice. In 1864 appeared some careful observations " On the Food 
of Quadrupeds," [p. 9358]. In 1865, "Ornithological Notes from 
Lanarkshire" [pp. 9439, 9653, 9678, 9708, contmued through the 
voL for 1866.], "Notes on the Wild Cattle of Cadzow" [p. 9559], 
" Notes on Quadrupeds of Lanarkshire" [p. 9647, continued through 
the vols, for 1866 and 1867]. Then follow, in 1867, his "History 
and Habits df the Eoe-deer" [n.s., p. 778], and Notes on the Folk- 
lore of Zoology [n.s., pp. 881, 921, continued in 1868, n.s., pp. 
1091, 1171]. Occasional articles of minor importance occurred 
during 1869 and 1870, but he appears to have ceased his contri- 
butions to The Zoologist* with the close of 1871. 

Thereafter he accumulated notes upon Quadrupeds, and in Jan., 
1868, he commenced a quarto note-book bearing the following title, 
" Quad. Note-Book, being a commonplace book of Notes and Ex- 
tracts regarding British Quadrupeds, by ye Study and Travaile of 
Edward Richard Alston, F.Z.S., Member of Nat. Hist. Society of 
Glasgow, Vol. L, commenced at 205 Bath Street, Glasgow, 23rd 
June, 1868." 

Another note-book, and of even earlier date, is an octavo volume 
on Quadrupeds, Birds, Reptiles, and Fish, dating from 1858 to 
1870, from which many as yet unpublished notes of interest might 
be culled. A few of these follow. Speaking of the Deers* horns 
at Schloss Zwingenbei-g, he says: — "In August, 1862, I visited 
the beautiful old castle of Zwingenberg, situated on the north bank 
of the Neckar, just above a small village of the same name. It 
has been completely restored, and is the property of the Margrave 

* To T?u Zoologist a debt is distinctly due by its nameroas readers, apart 
from strictly scientific merits ; that it has been the means in many cases of in- 
troductions between its correspondents, which rapidly ripening into friendships, 
have established connections only to be broken by death. 



Digitized by 



Google 



72 PROOBBDINGS OF THE 

of Baden, by whom it is used as a shooting box. It contains a 
very valuable collection of defonned Stags' and Roes* horns, as well 
as others remarkable for size or beauty. I made sketches of the 
most remarkable forms, which include Stags' horns twisted like 
cork-screws or Koodoos' horns; Roes' heads with three horns; Roes' 
heads with 8 to 12 points; a Stag's antlers with 22 points, &c. 
There is also the skin of a milk-white Roe, shot in the neighbour- 
hood. In one of the rooms is a large series of Riidinger's beautiful 
woodcuts of extraordinary Stags, Roes, and other sporting subjects, 
published at Augsburg in the last century. One of these repre- 
sents a Stag with 66 points, shot by King Frederick I. of 
Prussia in the Ampte Fiirsten Wald in 1696. I believe the horns 
of this splendid Stag are still to be seen at the Moritz Burg, near 
Dresden." — [See article " Cervidae " in English Cydopoedia], $ 
Again, speaking of a death of a bullock in Ceylon from the 
attack of a Panther, he writes: — "The following is an extract from 
a letter which I received from my brother Charles,* dated April 
26th, 1863, apropos of a dispute in The Fidd as to the immediate 
cause of death in animals killed by beasts of prey : — * A few days 
ago, the cattle-keeper was bringing in the cattle, and was driving 
a fine cart-buUock (which had strayed a little) past a wild jungly 
ravine, when out sprang a large " Cheetah " (the true Panther, 
Fdis pardus) on to the poor brute's neck : the man very pluckily 
ran at it, shouting and gesticulating, and drove it off; he then 
brought the brute down to the shed apparently not much the worse. 
I was sent for and examined it, and found the impression of the 
claws on each side of the neck, but no teeth marks, no vein severed, 
and but a few drops of blood flowing; the claw marks were slightly 
inflamed, and the beast trembled so that it could hardly stand, and 
at last it laid down : however, we feared no evil consequences, so 
it was made to get up, and was placed by itself for the night. 
Next mmming it was dead. Verdict, died of the violent shock to 
its nervous system. I can of course vouch for the whole of the 
above. — C. H. Alston." 

Speaking of the increase of Rabbits, he says : — " About 20 years 
ago (i.e., previous to about 1864), there were no Rabbits here (at 
Lesmahagow); the first my father ever saw here was found by the 
keeper lying dead on Todlaw Hill; now they are a perfect plague, 
although none have ever been turned out in the neighbourhood." 
Of the anatomy of the Hedgehog he writes, 22nd July, 1864: — 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OP GLASGOW. 73 

" To-day I skinned and dissected a Hedgehog, and was much 
struck by the curious development of the panniculus camosus, or 
skin-moving muscle, by means of which it rolls itself up. This 
structure is not mentioned in Prof. Bell's British QtuidrupedBy and 
is only cursorily alluded to in the English OydopoBdiaf and the 
Kev. J. G. Wood's Popular Nat, History,^* He then proceeds to 
describe this muscle, with the assistance of a rough but distinct 
sketch. 

Of the Alpine Hare he writes in 1865: — "Alpine Hare — It 
seems that a Mr. Hunter over at Glenbuck turned out a number 
of this species about four years ago, and James Taylor tells me that 
they have spread a good deal already. This winter, specimens 
have been shot both at Cumberhead and Skellyhill, but none have 
been seen at Stockbriggs yet. I suppose this is an addition to the 
fauna of Lanarkshire, if not to the South of Scotland." 

Of Birds there occur many notes also, some of much interest. 
" Several years ago a pair of Martins built against a pane of glass 
in the window of the bam. The nest was unsupported from below, 
still it seemed to stick quite securely to the glass, through which 
the old bird might be seen sitting on the eggs." Also, — "A pair of 
Martins built in 1857 against a sloping beam in the archway at 
the stables, and fearing that their nest might not have sufficient 
support, they constructed a long line of clay pellets along the beam 
on which the nest was built." This latter is illustrated by a neat 
sketch. 

On Fish there are also many notes. " In July, 1858, my 
brother Charles caught a very large minnow in a small pool near 
here. It was a female, containing spawn, and was 4f inches in 
length, weight 1 oz. This specimen is now in the Hunterian 
Museum, Glasgow." Notes occur following this upon Fin-rays of 
Fish, Minnows and Loaches, and Rare Fishes in Scotland [ex- 
hibited at meetings of the Society in 1864]. 

Besides these occur notes on Reptiles and a " List of Specimens 
of Asiatic and European Quadrupeds and allied species in the col- 
lection of Edward Richard Alston, F.Z.S.," begun in June, 1869, 
on the page and letter system now generally adopted by naturalists 
in cataloguing; and corresponding Lists of Birds and Eggs, with 
very full notes and diary. 

Mr. Alston became a member of the Natural History Society of 
Glasgow in February, 1863, and until the time of his death he 



Digitized by 



Google 



74 PROOBBDINGS OF THB 

took always an interest in its affairs, and served for some years as 
a member of council His chief contributions while a resident 
member were : — a paper on the habits of the Koe deer, and another 
on the Reptiles and Mammals of Sutherlandshire. On leaving this 
district to settle permanently in London, he was elected, in October, 
1873, a Corresponding Member. He made about this time several 
donations of valuable books to the Library. When the Society 
resolved upon issuing catalogues of the Fauna of Scotland Mr. 
Alston undertook the preparation of various lists, only one of 
which he lived to complete — ^his " Mammalia of Scotland " — which 
the Society published in 1880. It was much appreciated, and is 
accounted very complete and trustworthy, embodying as it does 
the results of many years' study and observation. At the annual 
meeting in 1880, Mr. Alston was elected an Honorary Member of 
the Society, and in acknowledging the notice of his election, he 
wrote that he considered it a high honour that had been conferred 
on him, it being the first scientific institution with which he was 
connected. 

In 1871, as already mentioned, he paid a visit to Norway, 
accompanied by his friend, Mr. Harvie-Brown, for making collec- 
tions and notes on Natural History — principally birds and mammals, 
and spent there about 1 1 weeks, viz. , from May 5th to July 25th. The 
trip was undertaken without any expectations of important results, 
and no full account of it ever appeared, but several notes and 
references to the habits, &c., of the birds observed are given in 
Mr. H. E. Dresser's " Birds of Europe." 

Another more extensive expedition was planned and carried out 
in 1872, when the same two friends left Scotland in the beginning 
of June for Archangel and the White Sea, their stay there being 
some two months, after which they returned home round the N. 
Cape, and landed at Peterhead on the 12th of August. The results 
were a short paper to " The Ibis " of 1873, entitled " Notes on the 
Birds of Archangel," and considerable additions to their cabinets 
of birds and eggs. 

Since that date Mr. Alston's travels were for the most part confined 
to Great Britain — a short visit to Norway for salmon fishing in 
1876, a stay at Nice in the winter of 1872-3, and shorter visits to 
Paris and the Continent, taken with members of his own family, 
excepted. In Scotland his trips were used more for relaxation and 
health, after his scientific work in London, than for study, and his 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATTRAL HISTORY 80CIBTT OP GLASGOW. 75 

favourite haunt, and that of a few intimate friends, was the county 
of Sutherland, and especially the district of Assynt, where so many 
lakes and streams afford ever-varying sport amidst the wildest 
surroundings. Of both scenery and sport he was a keen ap- 
preciator. It was only, however, comparatively late in life that 
he became enamoured of the gentle art, but he then soon entered 
into it with the keen zest of a bom sportsman. 

About the year 1868 he began his scientific and literary career 
in London, and after living off and on for a year or two in lodgings, 
he finally settled himself for permanent study and residence in 
1873. At this time some of his friends urged him to enter at 
Cambridge University, but his inherent love of perfect liberty 
prevented him from doing so. At one time he had thought of 
entering upon a commercial life, but, no doubt, he considered such 
a life less suitable to his constitution, and too constant confinement 
was much against his inclinations. As we all know, the sequel 
has proved that he judged well, and science has liberally benefited 
by his choice. He rapidly took his place in scientific circles in the 
great metropolis, indeed almost immediately after his decision. The 
better to instruct himself, he attended the course of lectures by 
Prof. Flower and others. In 1869 he was elected a Fellow of 
the Zoological Society, and was put upon the council in April, 
1880. He also became a Fellow of the Linnean Society, and 
latterly its Zoological Secretary. Besides doing much scientific 
work in the Proceedings of these bodies, he edited a portion of the 
new edition of " BelFs British Quadrupeds " in 1874. In 1873 
he accepted the post of one of the recorders of the Zoological Eecordf 
and carried his laborious and important duty through six volimies, 
1873-1878. He also undertook and carried out the treatment 
of the Mammalia in the great work, Biologia Gentrale Americana^ 
conducted by Messrs. Godman & Salvin; and it is a source of great 
satisfaction to his friends and in scientific circles that he was 
enabled to complete this, his principal work, before he died, the 
whole of his MS. on the subject being carefully preserved for 
publication in due course. 

Amongst the more important of his minor papers are "Classi- 
fication of the order Glires";* "Squirrels of the Neotropical 
Kegion";t "On the Specific Identity of the British Martens";! 

♦ P.Z.S, Jan. 18, 1876. 
t Op. cit, Jane 18, 1878. t Op. cit, June 8, 1879. 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 PROCtiBDIN&S OS" TfilB 

that already mentioned on the " Mammals of Scotland,** of which 
our Society is the fortunate possessor.* There also are his papers 
on " The Mammals of Asia Minor, from collections formed by Mr. 
C. G. Danford (in 1877 and 1880)". 

To his personal qualifications and social attainments, his genial 
smile and kindly disposition, and his keen and rapid sense of 
humour, which, with many other graces, combined to make his 
society so charming to all who knew him, and the knowledge of 
which caused a deep sense of personal pain and loss to weigh more 
and more heavily day by day upon his most dear and intimate 
friends when they first heard of his alarming illness and then of 
his death, more than an allusion cannot here be made; but 
memories of many happy days passed in his company compel a 
passing touch, however light — a tribute not loud but deep — 
and bear upon their cloudlands an earnest and a hope beyond the 
dim portals of the grave. 

It now only remains that thanks be returned to those sympa- 
thising friends who have assisted in collecting the necessary 
materials for the foregoing short memoir of their lost friend and 
fellow-worker. To Prof. A. Newton, of Cambridge, and Prof. 
Flower, of London; to Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown and Mr. John 
M. Campbell, as well as to the members of his own family, thanks 
are due for references to and quotations from Mr. Alston's cor- 
respondence, private papers, and published works. 

With his sorrowing relatives, the Natural History Society of 
Glasgow desires to express its earnest sympathy and deep sense of 
the loss they and his fellow-members have sustained in their 
friend's early death. 

St>BGIMBKS BXHIBITBD. 

Mr. James J. King exhibited specimens of Polycentroptis Kingi^ 
M*Lach., a new species of Trichoptera, from the North of Scotland, 
on which some remarks were made by Mr. F. G. Binnie. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited a collection of fresh Mosses, collected 
near Glasgow. The specimens were all named, some of them being 
rare, and Mr. King indicated the localities where they were obtained. 

Mr. James Allan exhibited a series of Himalayan Ferns. These 

♦ Tram, Nat. Hist. Soc, Glaa., vol iv., pt. L, p. 80. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 77 

had been collected by one who was not a botanist, and were there- 
fore not valuable as specimens for the cabinet, but were of interest 
as showing some very peculiar forms, diflfering widely from any of 
our native species. 

Mr. James Lumsden, F.Z.S., exhibited a specimen of the Sclav- 
onian or Dusky Grebe, Podiceps comutnSy Gmelin. He said that 
last year he had the pleasure of exhibiting a specimen of this bird 
beginning to assume its summer plumage, and shot on Loch Lomond 
in April, four years ago. That now exhibited, a male, was shot on 
Loch Lomond between Luss and Inverbeg last winter, by Lieut. -Col. 
Colquhoun, of Bencruaich Lodge, being the second occurrence of 
this species in the district. In the early part of the winter, before 
the Loch, was frozen over, a bird, which was thought to belong to 
this species, frequented the bay near Arden House. It was often 
seen diving, and the quickness of its movements was noticed. Some 
shots fired over it caused it to rise and fly a few himdred yards along 
the shore, where it continued its diving as before. When the Loch 
was frozen over it departed, and most likely went to the open water 
above Luss. Probably it was the same bird as that now on the 
table. This species seems widely distributed ; it is found breeding 
in Iceland and the northern parts of Norway, and is known as a 
visitant in almost every country in Europe, but is nowhere abundant. 
In Asia Mr. Dresser reports it to be found right across the Continent 
to Japan, but it does not range very far south. In North America 
it is tolerably abundant, breeding in the British Provinces and the 
northern portions of the United States. 

PAPERS READ. 

L — On some of the rarer Plants found in the Neighbourhood of 
Greenock, By Mr. Thomas Scott. 

It will be as well, at the outset, to indicate the extent of the 
district I intend to refer to in the following notes, and that is the 
ground included in a radius of about six miles, which will take in 
such localities as the Cloch, Shielhill Glen, and Kilmalcolm. 

I do not mean to take up your time by referring to any of those 
plants, which, so far as Clydesdale, at least, is concerned, may be 
termed cosmopolitan, my intention being simply to place before you 
a record of those plants whJQh may be said to be rare or unconmiaii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



78 PROCBBDINQS OF THE 

and which are known to the writer to occur, or to have occurred, 
in the included district. Such a record may serve to indicate that 
though there is "no new thing under the sun" there may be enough 
to reward the diligent and careful working up of a district which 
has been thought to have been well explored. It may also 
sometimes prove useful as an indication of the geographical extension 
of certain spec jes, and may serve as a basis of comparison for future 
investigation, just as some such records have been of use to myself. 

The surface rocks of a great portion of the country round Greenock 
are trap of various kinds, but there are many places, and especially 
nearly all along the shore of the Firth, where sandstone crops out, 
and it is interesting to observe, that while the vegetation of those 
places where the igneous rock prevails, is, with regard to phanero- 
gams, generally meagre both in genera and species, the vegetation 
where the sandstone occurs is rich, the number and variety, as well 
as the luxuriance, of the flowers, forming a marked contrast to the 
monotonous and desolate appearance of the flora of the former; 
consequently nearly all the mrer plants of the district are found 
where sandstone comes to the surface. 

The order Kanunculaceae is, with the exception of only 3 or 4 
species, represented by the most common forms. Ranunculus lingua 
is said to have been found at Gourock, though I have not seen it 
there or anywhere in the neighbourhood. E, auricomus is found 
at the old Castle of Duchal, Kilmalcolm, and R. sceleratus is plenti- 
ful a little east of Langbank. Aconitum NwpeUus^ one of the "doubt- 
ful natives" which we noticed some years ago, still grows where we 
first found it — at the "Eoman Bridge" near Inverkip. Trolliu^ 
europaeus is common, as at Kilmalcolm and Shielhill Glen. Papaver 
Argemone is occasionally found in the corn-fields and on the railway 
embankments about Kilmalcolm, but the most notable of the Papa- 
veraceae found in the district is the Common Celandine — Chelidonium 
Majus, About 18 years ago this plant was noticed at Duchal Castle, 
and the summer before last when visiting that locality along with 
some members of my botanical class we observed a most beautiful 
specimen, an evidence that this species had not become extinct, a 
fact which is the more striking when we take into consideration that 
the place is very much frequented in summer-time by picnic parties 
and others. 

Draha muralis was found for a number of years upon some old 
walls about Greenock, but these walls have now been taken down or 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OF GLASGOW. 79 

repaired and the plants destroyed. Lepidium Smithii, which is said 
to be rare, I have found in several places; it was very plentiful on 
an old road at Kilmalcolm and is still found near Fort Matilda 
and at several other places by the shore. Iberis atnara is occasion- 
ally found about the shore near Fort Matilda. One of the rarest 
plants of the West of Scotland, and belonging to the order Caryo- 
phyllaceae, should be mentioned; I refer to Geradiuin arvense^ 
which was noticed about 6 years ago by Mr. Charles Pennell of 
Greenock (a member of the Society), and which grows by the 
shore a short distance west from Fort Matilda in a field locally known 
as the Battery Field. SUene iriflata, S, noctiflora^ Lychnis ves- 
pertinOf and Githago segeium have also been found in the neigh- 
bourhood of Greenock within the last few years. Touch-me-not, 
Impatiens noU-me-tangere, is found by the shore about quarter of 
a mile west from the Cloch Light-house, growing at one place 
especially in great profusion ; 1 first noticed it about 4 years ago. 

A few plants belonging to the Leguminosae may be noted. 
Melilotvs ofidnalis, the Yellow Melilote, was found last year in 
the Battery Field by Mr. Struthers of the Watt Museum 
Trifolium arvense, well named the " Hare's-foot Trefoil," is found 
in the suburbs of Greenock; and the pretty little Oi^ithopus 
perpusillus, which I have observed for a number of summers on 
a dry bank by the side of the road on the north side of the Glasgow 
and South-Westem Railway, and about 1^ miles west from Kil- 
malcohn. These are the most noteworthy plants belonging to 
this order found in our district, but there are other two species 
which, though not found, strictly speaking, within the specified limits, 
might be noticed before passing on. These are, first, Vicia lafhy- 
roides, which I happened to find on Dumbarton Rock, in June, 
1878, and at a subsequent date. This plant cannot be confounded 
with V. angustifolia, Roth, especially when examined in fruit as 
well as in flower, its smooth pods and granulated seeds forming a 
very distinctive characteristic. I am not aware of any station 
having been found for it so near Glasgow. The second is also a 
Vetch — V. sylvatica^ which I noticed in Auchinreoch Glen, near 
Dumbarton, in 1878, when I was very much struck with its beauty. 
Among the Rosaceae, Roaa arverms is found at Gourock, and by 
the shore near Leven House below Ashton. The Grab Apple, 
Pyrvs McUus, is found a little off the Larkfield road and about 
midway between Gourock and Ravenscraig, where it forms part 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 PROCEBDINGS OF THB 

of an old hedge between two fields. Saxifraga aizaidesy 8. hyjp- 
' noides, and Chrysosplenium dUemifoUum are found in Shielhill 
Glen, the last mentioned plant being also found in various other 
localities. Hippui'is vulgaris is still found where previously re- 
corded, in a small shallow loch on the hilly moors near Kavenscraig. 
Peplis Portvla we find at Loch Thorn and other places in the 
neighbourhood of Greenock. DipsacTis sylvestris I have found 
occasionally in the Battery Field near Gourock Toll. The only 
species of theUmbelliferae I will mention is Peticedanum Ostrtdhium, 
which we find near the Eoman Bridge, near the Whinhill reser- 
voir, and about Kilmalcolm. 

Of the Compositaceae very few that may be called rare are found 
in our district. Senecio viscosus and S. st/lvaticus both occur in 
the neighbourhood of Greenock. Great-Leopard's-bane, Doronicum 
pardaliancheSf has been observed for a number of years in a wood 
near Dunrod Farm. Aviheinis arvemia has been occasionally 
found in a field at the east end of Gourock. The very rare and 
pretty little Ivy-leaved Bellflower, Campanula hederaceay need 
scarcely be alluded to here, it being already so well known to 
Glasgow botanists, were it not to notice the somewhat interesting 
fact that the only two stations as yet recorded for it in Clydesdale, 
the Cloch and Dunoon, are as nearly as may be opposite to each 
other, as if the idea of near neighbourhood was a factor in the 
arrangement of the stations. Vaccinium Oxycoccos occurs in a marshy 
hollow a little west of the station mentioned for Omithopus per- 
pimlluA, Echium vulgare and Anchusa sempervirens are the only 
rare Borages found near Greenock, the first in the western suburbs, 
the other at the Roman Bridge. Myosotis palustriSf which we 
find occasionally, is said to be a common species, and there is no 
reason for doubting the assertion so far as certain localities are 
concerned; but in regard to the district under consideration, an 
experience extending over several years tends to shew that it is 
rather scarce. No doubt the experienced botanist finds little diffi- 
culty in making out this species; but still, having on several 
occasions seen M. ripens mistaken for M, palustriSf I am inclined 
to think that its reported commonness may be due, partly at least, 
to want of familiarity with its characteristics, and consequently a 
more restrictive term than " common " would be a mol^ appropriate 
one. One of its characteristics which I have always found very oon- 
stant and very dktinot ia, that the calyx segments are shorter than 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 81 

the tube of the corolla, and therefore not bent outwards by the 
rotate divisions of the corolla, as is the case with M. repens. In 
August, 1878, 1 got Solanum niijriun on some rubbish heaps in the 
neighbourhood of Greenock. 

Of plants belonging to the order Scrophulariaceae, a few may 
be mentioned Bartsia viscosa is common in a field behind* 
Ashton. Linaria Gymhalaria I have found at various times on 
old walls about Greenock. Verhascum Thapsus is found in a 
plantation at Wemyss Bay. A plant belonging to this order, and 
which is truly a stranger to these parts, has made its appearance 
in our district of late, — V. hlattaria. Last year some very luxuri- 
ant specimens were noticed in a field between Fort-Matilda and 
Gourock; and the other day I saw in the same field some root- 
stocks which gave promise of producing specimens well worth a 
place in our herbaria. This species is said to be native in the 
south-west of England, but after standing such a winter as we are 
just now emerging from — 1880-81 — I think it is qualified to 
take its place as a sub-arctic species. Mimulus luteus, another 
plant belonging to the order, is found in a ditch about four miles 
out on the Inverkip road ; and although the ditch is cleared out 
every season, the Mimulus always comes up the following spring 
as plentifully as ever, which shews it agrees well with its location. 
The Gipsy-wort, Lycopus etiropaeus, the only rare species of the 
Labiatae occurring in our district, is found below the Cloch Light- 
house. Scutellaria galmculata, which is common on the shore below 
Gourock, is, I notice in Hooker's Flora entered as "rare in Scotland." 
Primula veris I have found both at Parklea near Port-Glasgow, and 
at Inverkip. Lysimachia vulgaris was found some years ago near 
Inverkip by Mr. Peter Mackellar, Greenock. Parietaria officinalis 
I once found growing on the Eoman Bridge. Whether I had 
injured the plant when securing a part of it for a specimen I cannot 
say, but I have not seen it there since ; this species grows plentifully 
on the old wall at the Abbey Walk, St. Andrews. 

Of the Orchidaceae few that may be called uncommon are found 
in our district. Hahenaria viridis and H. alhida are got on the hills 
behind Greenock, and one or two other places ; I have got very fine 
specimens of H. albida on the Tower hill, Gourock ; Neottia nidus- 
avis^ which used to be met with in a wood below the Cloch Light- 
house, has not been seen for a number of years. The curious little 
Listera cordata, as well as its more robust companion, L, ovata, are 

VOL. V. F 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 PROCBBDINGS OP THE 

frequent in some parts of our district, such as Shielhill Glen and 
Target Glen. 

I shall now mention a few Carices which are to be met with in 
the circumscribed area under review. ,Carex dioica is found on the 
hills behind Greenock, Shielhill Glen, and other places ; G. teretius- 
cula is got in a wet meadow by the side of the Inverkip road near 
Eavenscraig ; C, aquatilis, var. Watsoni of Syme, is found in Shiel- 
hill Glen; 0. pendvla is also found in the same glen; 0. riparia 
grows in a meadow near Dunrod Castle. A reference to a few 
Grasses will conclude the list of flowering plant. Setaria viridis 
I found on some rubbish in the neighbourhood of Greenock, being 
no doubt an outcast. Avena fatua was got in a corn-field near the 
Whinhill ; A, puhescens is found in Shielhill Glen near the middle 
of the glen. Lepturus filiformis^ var. incurvatus, grows in a meadow 
by the shore between Fort-Matilda and Gourock. I found this 
plant some years ago, and though not yet included in Kennedy's 
Clydesdale Flora, there can be no doubt about its being indigenous. 
This grass presents us with a good example of the law of compensa- 
tion ; the spikelets which are lateral have only one glume, the part 
of the rachis opposite the spikelet taking the place of the second 
glume, but the terminal spikelet, which cannot get protection from 
the rachis, has two glumes. 

I will now notice one or two of the higher Cryptogams, which 
will conclude the present list. Cryptogramma crispa I found near 
Kilmalcolm, where it was discovered many years ago, but I am afraid 
it is now almost if not altogether extinct. Aspidium angulare is got 
at Gourock and the Cloch. Asplenium viride grows in Shielhill 
Glen and by the side of the Eouten Bum near Loch Thom. We 
get the Adder's tongue, Ophioglossum vulgatum^ near the Eomein 
Bridge. The Moon wort, Botrichium Jjanaria^ is found on the hills 
behind Greenock, at Gourock, and other places in the district. The 
Royal Fern, Osmunda regalis, which used to be found near Gx^urock 
is now extinct — exterminated I should say. It is much to be wished 
that something could be done to put a stop to the extermination of 
plants for mere pecuniary gain. The only other Cryptogam I will 
mention is the Great Water-horsetail, Equisetum Telmateia, got in 
Shielhill Glen, where it grows most luxuriantly; one plant I got 
measured fully six feet in length. 

It will be observed from what has been said that a good many 
interesting plants are found about Greenock and neighbourhood, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 83 

and doubtless others will yet be added to the list, for it cannot be 
questioned, I think, that a constant redistribution is goinff on locally 
and generally, so that in a number of years rare plants may become 
commoner and common ones scarcer. Tlie watching of such redis- 
tribution is one of the pleasures of the botanist, and I should say 
not the least one. 

[Note — Dec, 1881. — Of the two following plants the first was 
overlooked in the preparation of my paper and the second was found 
after the paper had been read before the Society. 

Claytonia alsinoides, which seems to have become naturalized in 
many places, is fotmd in a small wood between Ashton and the 
Cloch, where it has by some means been introduced. It has re- 
tained its hold here for many years, and judging by its luxuriance 
it appears to find the conditions very suitable. Very probably this 
species will, ere long, have to be included amongst British plants, 
C. perfoliata having been already admitted. 

A specimen of a new introduction. Salvia ve7'henaca, has been 
shown me by i)r. J. K. Kobei-tson, of Greenock, who found it this 
summer, 1881, in a field near where the Clyde Floating Baths were 
moored. I have since gathered other specimens at the same place. 
This plant has hitherto only been found on the East Coast at Salis- 
bury Crags, and in Fifeshire from Burntisland eastwards.] 



II. — On the Protection of Wild Birds. By Mr. James C. Christie. 

The writer, while making every allowance for the pursuits of 
ornithologists who make the structure, habits, migrations, and dis- 
tribution of birds their study, deprecated the wanton cruelty and 
the wholesale slaughter which is often indulged in by sportsmen and 
collectors —often for mere amusement, and frequently for gain. He 
advocated the claims of birds to protection, not only on account of 
the pleasure to be derived from listening to their vocal efforts, but 
on account of their being amongst the best friends of man in 
destroying noxious insects and reptiles. A discussion followed, in 
which several members took part, in the course of it reference 
being made to the prevailing practice of killing favourite birds to 
provide ornaments for the head-dresses of ladies, and also to the 
wanton plundering of nests indulged in by professed oologists and 
others. 



Digitized by 



Google 



84 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

III. — A Contnhution to the Study of the British Carhoniferons 
Chitonidae. By Mr. R. Etheridge, jun., F.RPh.S.Ed.— Cor. Mem. 

With two Plates [I. and II.] 

1. INTRODUCTION. 

Although numerous papers have been written on Fossil Chitons, 
it is some time since there appeared any important account of re- 
searches amongst the Carboniferous forms. The last, and one of 
the most useful, was that by Messrs. J. W. Kirkby and J. Young,* 
in which descriptions and figures of the majority of the British 
species were given. The British Permian forms have, thanks to 
the work of Mr. Kirkby, been much more thoroughly investigated 
than the Carboniferous. With the view of showing what has been 
written I have appended a list of the more important publications 
on the subject. 

The majority of the specimens now described were forwarded to 
me for investigation by my friend Mr. James Bennie, by whom 
they were collected from the rich bed of decomposed limestone at 
Dairy, Ayrshire. This stratum has already yielded a large number 
-of minute and interesting fossils, amongst which may be mentioned 
the supposed Opercula of Gasteropoda, lately described by myself,! 
and, as in the present case, collected by Mr. Bennie. These 
collections form not the least interesting of the many I am indebted 
to his kindness for an opportunity of describing. I am also in- 
debted for an interesting series of Chiton remains from the same 
deposit, to Messrs. James Armstrong and David Robertson, of 
Glasgow, and John Smith, of Kilwinning, who kindly placed them 
at my disposal for description. 

The fossils are all in the condition of isolated plates, but are in 
a fine state of preservation, as evinced by the perfect condition of 
the surface ornament. In this feature they bear out the remark 
made by Messrs. Kirkby and Young on the non-eroded condition of 
the Scotch specimens, as compared with those from the Yorkshire 
Carboniferous series. J Our knowledge is at present scarcely 
sufficient to speak with certainty of the distribution of the 

* Oeoh Mag., 1867, iv., p. 340. 

t Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist., Jan., 1881. 

f Qeol. Mag., iv., p. 340. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OP GLASGOW. 85 

Chitonidae in the Carboniferous rocks of Scotland. Of Chiton 
proper, two species have been met with in the Upper limestone 
group, and one in the Lower group. Of Chitonellus, two, both in 
the Lower limestone group. In the present communication 
additional species of Chiton^ and four of Chitonellits are described, 
all from the Lower limestone group. 

The Carboniferous rocks of Belgium have hitherto yielded the 
largest number of forms, if we accept all the species described by 
Baron de Ryckholt. Now, however, both the Permian system of 
England, and the united Carboniferous series of Great Britain will 
compare favourably with the above. 

2. DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIES. 

Genus Chitoriy Linnaeus. 

Ohs. — Too little is at present known of the entire structure and 
appearance of the Palaeozoic Chitons to warrant any attempt at 
generic sub-division, such as is adopted amongst the recent species. 

Li the recent forms the soft parts have played an important part 
in the classification of the family, although, to some extent, the 
exoskeleton has been taken into consideration. To the Palaeontolo- 
gist the latter is naturally the only part of the Chiton-economy 
which needs consideration, but, as in the recent forms, this affords 
anything but a satisfactory basis. The following are the only 
palaeontological sub-divisions with which I am acquainted. 

1. Helminthochiton, Salter, 1847. {Quart Jour, Geol. Soc, 
iii., p. 51.) Proposed for a Silurian type, in which the plates are 
" deeply emarginate behind, and, as it were, bent backwards," a 
character very rare in living species. The apex is on the posterior 
edge, and without any expansion behind it. The full characters 
are as follows : — 

" Elongate, plates as long as wide ; subquadrate, thin ; apex of 
the anal plate remote from its front edge ; sustentacula widely 
separated ; shell but very little covered by the mantle," &c. 

The genus was divided by Salter into three groups, the genus 
proper, typified by the species H, Griffithi, Salter, and two other 
unnamed groups, containing mostly the Carboniferous species. In 
all probability HelminiJiochiton will be found to be a satisfactory 
receptacle for such forms as the type species, but the sections will, 
1 think, scarcely stand the test of investigation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 PROCEBDINGS OF THB 

2. Suleochiton, De Ejrckholt, 1862. (Jour, de ConchyL, x., p 
259.) This name was proposed by Baron de Ryckholt for a small 
buccal plate, supposed to be that of a Chiton, from the Carboni- 
ferous limestone of Vise. The plate is described as divided into 
two equal halves by a half obliterated groove, passing from the 
summit to the margin. Too little is known about this fossil to 
readily accept it as the basis of a generic division. Our species, 
Chitfjnelltis Bennieanus, has the plate similarly grooved, but other- 
wise differs from de Ryckholt's type. 

Two recent genera may perhaps be found to comprise some of 
the old species, viz., Schizochiton, Gray, and Enoplochiton, Gray. 
In the former the plates are as long, or longer than they are wide, 
with the apex of each plate situated posteriorly, and directed back- 
wards ; this will, perhaps, include Chiton pinscuSy Munster, and 
the like. 

In Enoplochiton, the valves are subcordiform, and the characters 
are very much those of the fossil Chiton Loftiisiamis, Kirkby. 

Chiton Dalriensis, sp. nov. — (PL L, figs. 1-12, 13 and 14.) 

Sp. Char. — Anterior plate nearly semicircular, very convex and 
somewhat high. Front margin, rounded, posterior margin rather 
concave, forming a shallow re-entering angle. Apex minute, most 
elevated point of the plate, quite blunt in fact, gather depressed 
than otherwise ; two indistinct radii pass towards the front, and 
faintly subdivide the plate into three areas, of which the lateral 
are by far the larger. 

Intermediate plates — (one of the) twice, or a little more, as broad 
as long, transversely elongated, varying a little in length adcording 
to the position of the plate in the mollusc ; much arched longitu- 
dinally, with a bluntly carinated median line ; the plates do not 
taper near the lateral extremities, but retain the same size at the 
latter as in the central line. The front margin is medianally 
slightly concave, and, at the side rounded ; posterior margin 
convex laterally, curving slightly inwards, and outwards to the 
apex ; extremities broadly rounded. Apex acute, and more or less 
produced, placed posteriorly, and remote from the front margin. 
A division into lateral and dorsal areas is hardly perceptible, but 
when so the lateral are small, curved, and narrow ; the dorsal bears 
the carinated ridge, becoming blunter towards the front of the 
plate, and it does not appear to be sub-divided by any sulcations. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 87 

Apophyses, rather large for the size of the plates, semicircular and 
plain, dying off towards the sides. On the interior the plate is 
divided into two almost equal portions by the ridge separating the 
face from the imbricated position ; the facets are large and placed 
on each side of the central line. Posterior plate semi-capuliform, 
convex ; apex blunt, placed at the end of the dorsal ridge in the 
middle line, but not projecting beyond the posterior margin, from 
whence the same declines rapidly and abruptly to the posterior 
margin of the plate-surface, diagonally angulate on each side to the 
lateral margin, dividing the plate into its three areas ; from the 
apex forwards the central line is ridge-like. Posterior margin 
semicircular in outline ; anterior margin gently convex throughout 
its whole course, or sometimes slightly concave in the middle. The 
ornamentation of the surface in all these plates is upon the same 
plan ; regularly and closely set granules arranged in concentric 
lines, larger and more apparent round the margm, but faintly 
present over and around the apical region, where the concentric 
character also becomes in a measure lost, but an occasional impressed 
concentric line is present. On the intermediate plates the concen- 
tric lines are rather square at the lateral angles, and the granules 
much closer on the lateral areas. 

Ohs, — I have combined in one description, and under one name, 
the three forms of plates just noticed, believing them, from their 
general appearance and ornament, to be the remains of one form. 

There is undoubtedly a very close analogy between these plates 
and those described under the name of C, Loftusianus by Prof. W. 
King,* and more in detail by my friend, Mr. J. W. Kirkby,t from 
the Permian rocks of Northumberland. The difference between the 
two forms chiefly consists in the form of the posterior plate, and the 
apophyses of attachment ; the broader anterior plate ; the absence 
of sulci on the dorsal areas of the intermediate plates; and the 
generally coarser granulation. 

It is difficult to believe, at first sight, that the series of inter- 
mediate plates (Plate I., figs. 2-8), figured as those of the present 
species, are all identical. Xotwitlistanding, however, the difference 
in outline shown in the figures, I do not see my way to separate 
them, with the material at present to hand. The ornament in all 

* Perm. Foss. of England, 1851, p. 202, t. 16, f. 9-14. 
t Quart, Jour. Oeol Soc, xviii. p. 611, t. 16, f. 31-41. 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 PROCBBDINGS OP THB 

is similar, and similarly distributed over the plates, only in Fig. 2 it 
is of a more open and less crowded nature. After all, perhaps, they 
do not differ more than do those of some recent Chitons, so, in the 
meantime this determination must suffice. 

These plates more closely resemble the intermediate ones of C. 
Loftusianus^ than do the anterior or posterior those of the same 
species. Those from which PL I., figs. 2 and 4 are taken are more 
regularly, and not so obliquely transverse as in the latter species, 
and the lateral angles are much more rounded. The originals of 
PI. I., figs. 7 and 8 are much more sinuate than the intermediate 
plates of the Pennian species, with similar rounded angles to 
PI. I., figs. 2 and 4. 

The Permian and Carboniferous forms are doubtless very closely 
allied, so far as the intermediate plates are concerned, and bearing 
this in mind I forwarded specimens to Mr. Kirkby, who replied 
that the Carboniferous plates are smaller than most examples of (7. 
Loftusianiis^ and have the lateral areas less pronounced ; he further - 
thought it would save difficulties by regarding the plates from Law 
Quarry as undescribed. Accepting the opinion of one whp has 
worked so extensively at fossil Chitons, I beg to propose for these 
plates the name of Chiton Dalriends. 

There is, again, some resemblance between the posterior plate of 
one species and that of an un-named Chiton, %ured by Messrs. 
Kirkby and Young,* but the latter is not high enough, the dorsal 
carina is too long, and the apophyses much too near the antero-lateral 
margin. 

PL I., figs. 13 and 14 represent a form of posterior plate, rather 
rare in the present collection, and which may perhaps be only a 
variety of that just described. It possesses the general characters 
of the latter, but the keel is continued further posteriorly, so that 
the immediate end of the plate, instead of forming a gentle declivity 
downwards to the margin, is abrupt and straight, or even at times 
a little concave. From the very marked apical point thus formed, 
there proceeds forwards a groove on each side, giving to the flanks 
of the plate a rather hollow appearance. Generally speaking the 
plate represented in PL I., fig. 14 has a higher appearance, and is at 
the same time longer than the corresponding plate of C. Dalriensis 
proper. Internally corresponding differences are perceptible. 

♦ GeoL Mag., 1867, iv., t. 16, f. 7, a & b. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 89 

Locality and Horizon, — Law Quarry, near Dairy, Ayrshire ; Main 
or Hurlet Limestone, Lower Carboniferous Limestone group. 

Collections, — Messrs. J. Beiinie, J. Armstrong, J. Smith, and 
others. 

Chiton Loftusianus^ King. (?)* 

C Lofttmanus, King, " Catalogue Organic Remains^ Permian 

Rocks;' 1848, p. 12. 
„ „ Kirkby and Young, Geoh Mag., 1867, iv., p. 340, 

t. 16, f. 17. 

Obs. — Through the kindness of Mr. Bennie I have been able to 
examine the intermediate plate of Carboniferous age, noticed under 
this name by Messrs Kirkby and Young. 

In the explanation of the plate attached to the above paper by 
these authors, the specimen is said to have come from Settle. In 
a recent letter, however, Mr. Bennie remarks, " Settle must be a 
mistake, as in the jcopy of the paper sent me by Mr. Young, Settle 
is scored out and Williamwood written instead, which must have 
been done by Mr. Young himseK, or, by his direction." It appears 
from this that the Carboniferous form of (7. Loftusianus must also 
be regarded as a Scotch fossil. 

When compared with the intermediate plate of our Chiton 
Dalriensisy the plate of C. Loftusianus is visibly less arcuate; 
broader in relation to its transverse length; the apex somewhat 
more produced, and placed further posteriorly; the hind margin 
more or less oblique, instead of concavely sub-parallel to the front 
mai^n, as in the Law Quarry form. Finally, the diagonal lines are 
very strongly marked in C, LoftusianuSj but not so in the other form ; 
the lines of growth strong, in the latter faint ; and square instead 
of rounded. 

Locality and Horizon. — Williamwood, near Glasgow ; in shales 
of the Orchard limestone. Upper Carboniferous Limestone group. 

Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Chiton Armstrongianus, sp. nov. — (PI. I., fig. 15.) 

CJiiton, sjy. Kirkby and Young, Geol. Mag., 1867, iv., p. 341, t. 16, 

f. 7 a-c. 
Sp. Char. — Posterior plate shield-shaped, truncated and arched 
in front, slightly attenuated behind and gradually sloping downwards. 
Central line carinate, carina extending for about half the length of 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 PR0CBBDING8 OP THE 

the plate, apex depressed, or a little inclined downwards. Front 
margin although arched, at right angles to the longer axis of plate; 
anterior lateral angles rounded ; lateral and posterior margins forming 
a continuous curve, narrowing towards the posterior end. The 
apophyses are lateral in position, broader than long, and with a 
rounded margin. On the under side the immediate edge of the 
posterior margin is a little flattened. Surface marked by from one 
to three well defined concentric grooves, which extend nearly from 
the front margin, on one side of the keel, to that on the other ; the 
ornamentation consists of close concentric lines of coarse papillae or 
granules, very regularly arranged, finer on and under the apex, and 
increasing in size towards the margins. 

Obs. — Messrs. Armstrong and Bennie have kindly lent me the 
original plates of this species described by Messrs. Kirkby and 
Young, but unnamed by them. Mr. Armstrong has also sent me 
an additional example from Cunningham Baidland. The material 
now before us is sufficient to warrant the proposal of a name for 
this evidently distinct species. I feel, therefore, much pleasure in 
associating with it the name of Mr. J. Armstrong, to whom I have 
been indebted for much assistance in the study of Carboniferous 
palaeontology. 

Chiton AmistrongiamiSj (Etheridge, jun.), may be recognised and 
distinguished from other species, first by the form ; and secondly, 
by the very coarse nature of the ornament, which resembles, more 
than anything, the teething of a rasp, or coarse file. The outline 
approaches nearest to that of Chiton humilis, Kirkby,* but it is 
more pointed behind, and less acute in front ; the impressed con- 
centric grooves less in number; whilst the portion of the plate 
posterior to the apex is a gradual slope from the latter to the posterior 
margin, and not nearly flat as in C hurailisy nor nearly equal to the 
length of the remaining portion of the plate. 

Mr. Armstrong's specimen from William wood is a perfect one, 
with the apophyses preserved, and three distinct impressed concentric 
grooves. Mr. Bennie's example from the same locality is less perfect, 
and has only one concentric groove. It is also much longer in that 
portion of the plate between the apex and the posterior margin, in 
this respect forming an intermediate link between C. Annstrongianus 
proper, and C, humilis, Kirkby. 

• Oeol. Mag., 1867, iv., p. 341, t. 16, f. 6 ac 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OF GLASGOW. 91 

The specimen from Cunningham Baidland is a good deal worn, 
and is more rounded at the posterior end than the type ; it has only- 
one concentric groove. The size of the ornamenting granules and 
their arrangement point in the direction of the Chiton plate found 
by Mr. James Thomson, at Strathavon, (noticed hereafter). More- 
over, looking at the size and general habit of the two plates, it is 
a question whether it would not be advantageous to unite them 
imder one name. 

(7. Armstrongiamis need in no way be mistaken for the posterior 
plate of C, Dalriensis. It lacks the short form, and two posterior 
diagonal ridges of the latter, irrespective of other points of difference. 
Similarly another coarsely granular species, C. gemniattis, de Koninck, 
is at first sight seen to be also quite distinct. 

Locality and Horizon. — Williamwood, near Glasgow; in shales of 
the Orchard limestone, Upper Carboniferous Limestone group. 

Collections, — J. Armstrong and J. Bennie. 

Collection, — J. Armstrong. Cunningham Baidland, near Dairy; 
shales of Lower Carboniferous Limestone group. 

Chitony sp. ind. — (Plate L, figs. 16 and 17.) 

[Compare Chiton gemmatusy de Koninck, Descrip, des Animavx 
Foss, Terr, Carb. Belgiquey p. 323 t., 23 f., 2 c] 
Ohs, — A single intermediate plate of a moderately large Chiton 
was found by Mr. James Thomson, in the Carboniferous beds of 
the neighbourhood of Strathavon, and has been generally referred 
to Chiton gemmatuSy de Kon. I am under obligations to Mr. 
Thomson for the loan of this valuable example, and beg to offer 
the following remarks on it : — 

The surface ornament is arranged like that of Chiton gemmatus, 
and at first sight the outline is similar. On a close comparison, 
however, it is evident that the lateral margins in the Scotch form 
are much more evenly rounded, and without any obliquity. More- 
over, in the latter there existed a central obtuse keel, more apparent 
towards the front or anterior margin. There is, also, an entire 
absence of the faint tripartite division of the surface visible in 
de Koninck's species. Finally, the apophyses are much narrower, 
longer, and project more from the front in the Strathavon specimen, 
whilst the anterior margin is a little more concave. 

With the plate provisionally referred to Chiton LoftudanuSy it 
need not be compared, but with our C, Dalriensis there is a close 



Digitized by 



Google 



92 PROOBEDINGS OF THE 

affinity. The outline in the two plates appears to correspond, but 
the proportional breadth is different, and the apophyses are widely 
different in form. 

Locality and Horizon, — Gallowhill, near Strathavon, Lanarkshire ; 
in shales of Lower Carboniferous Limestone group. 

Collection, — J. Thomson. 

Chiton, sp. md.— (PL II., fig. 10.) 

Ohs, — The interesting specimen represented by Fig. 10 is again 
from the cabinet of Mr. Armstrong. It is only a fragment of a 
plate, probably an intermediate one, but introduces us to something 
unusual in the way of apophyses or insertion processes. Instead 
of the usual more or less triangular, lamellar plate, we observe the 
lateral anterior margin of what must have been a larg6 plate, pro- 
longed into a simple spike-like apophysis. It is obliquely bent 
downwards, and may be described generally as spike-like, or tooth- 
like, projecting but little beyond the anterior margin of the plate. 

Locality and Horizon, — Law Quarry, near Dairy, as before. 

Collection, J. Armstrong. 

Chiton soleaformisy'^ sp. no v. — (PL I., figs. 18 and 19.) 

Sp, Char, — Acutely triangular, slipper-like, elongate, prolonged 
backwards into a fine drawn-out point, sharply carinate in the 
median line, arched. Front margin excavated, arched ; apophyses 
very delicate, simply projecting forwards, not continued laterally 
along the anterior margin. Surface microscopically granulated in 
transverse lines ; no separation into areas by diagonal lines. On 
the lower surface there is an elongately triangular, flattened in- 
curved area, extending from the pointed posterior extremity, some- 
what less than half the length of the plate, and with an unoma- 
mented surface. Interior, shoe-like. 

Ohs, — These elegant little plates have, at first sight, a resem- 
blance to those bodies described by Mr. Kirkby as the mantle 
spines of Chitonellus HancocManus,^ These, Mr. Kirkby informs 
me, are not hollow and open beneath, and cannot, therefore, have 
any direct connection with the present fossils. Furthermore, in 
certain of the recent Chitonidae, such as Chiton {CorepMum) 
aculeatus, Lin., the spines implanted along the margins of the 

* From soUa, ob, an open slipper, or sandal, 
t Qua/rt Jour. Oeol, Soc, 1869, xv., p. 622, t. 16, f. 6-8. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 93 

mantle have rounded bases, and do not appear to possess processes 
of attachment. 

I have not been able to meet with any described species of fossil 
Chiton, which would include these little plates. They must, 
therefore, so far as my researches have gone, be looked upon as 
undescribed, an opinion in which I am glad to have the support of 
Mr. Kirkby. Chiton mempiscics, de Ryckholt, is somewhat like in 
outline, but is much shorter. I therefore propose for them the 
specific name of G. solaeformisy in allusion to their resemblance to 
an open slipper or shoe, when viewed from one side. 

Locality and Hmnzon, — Law Quarry, near Dairy, as before. 

Collection, — J. Bennie. 

Chiton cordaius, Kirkby. — (PL I., figs. 20-22.) 

C cordatus, Kirkby, Qtiwi, Jour. Geol. SoCj 1859, xv., p. 66, 
t. 16, f. 25-26. 
„ Kirkby, Trans. Tyneside Nat. Field Club^ 1860, iv., 

p. 250. 
„ Kirkby and Young, Geol. Mag., 1867, iv., p. 341, 

t. 16, f. 10 a and h, II a and b. 
Sp. Char. — Posterior plate acutely cordate, acuminating pos- 
teriorly to a sharp point. Median line arcuate, the angulation 
being moderately acute. The dorsal area is defined by two sub- 
parallel ill-marked grooves, which proceed forwards from a point 
about half way between the posterior apical termination and the 
front margin. Posterior margin of plate a little flattened ; the 
anterior margin is indented in the middle line, the indention being 
caused by the projection of the two small and delicate apophyses. 
Surface ornament consists of granules arranged in transverse, and 
not concentric lines, no grooving of surface present. Viewed from 
the interior the plate is seen to be of considerable thickness 
towards the posterior, forming a smooth triangular surface of 
attachment destitute of markings of any kind. The dorsal area in 
its convexity, and the character of the defining sulci (here ridges) 
are much more marked than on the exterior. 

Obs. — Except in a few trivial points the plates I have repre- 
sented in Figs. 20-22 do not differ from Kirkby's Chiton cordattcs, a 
Permian species. The Carboniferous form appears to differ only 
in possessing a more acutely cordate form, absence of transverse or 
concentric sulcations, and the position of the sulci defining the 



Digitized by 



Google 



94 PROCBBDINGS OP THB 

dorsal area. In the Permian variety the latter proceed forwards 
from the apex itself, but in the Carboniferous form from a point 
about half-way between the posterior termination of the plate and 
its front margin. Further, G. cordatus has previously been noticed 
as a Carboniferous fossil by Kirkby and Young, which will 
strengthen the reference now made. 

Lastly, these plates have a certain resemblance to Chiton 
mempiscusj de Eyckholt, but to carry out a detailed comparison 
with this species, actual specimens are necessary. 

The terminal plate of the recent Chiton hastatm Sow., much 
resembles the plate now described. It has a similar recurved under 
portion, but the recent form lacks the arched appearance of the 
fossil species. 

Locality and Horizon. — Law Quarry, near Dairy, as before. 

Collections, — J. Bennie, J. Smith, &c. 

Chiton Geikiei^ sp. no v. — (PL II., figs. 1-3.) 

Sp. Char, — Anterior plate semi-conical, snout-like, and convex, 
anteriorly pointed, posteriorly truncately rounded ; lateral margins 
straight from the pointed extremity to the posterior lateral 
angles. The middle of the plate is a little flattened, and the sides 
somewhat bent down. Surface crowded with blunt microscopic 
tubercles arranged in transverse lines, with here and there growth 
lines; lateral margins bearing a row of acute spirelets. On the 
underside of the plate there is a recurved margin at the bhmtly 
pointed extremity, and either about the middle, or towards the 
posterior, there is a thickened transverse ridge. 

Posterior plate square oblong; anterior margin truncate; pos- 
terior margin rounded ; middle line bluntly carinate ; flanks 
directly bent down, not hollowed out. The dorsal ridge terminates 
at about two-thirds from the anterior margin in an almost imper- 
ceptible apex ; a ridge proceeds from this point downwards on each 
side, in a slightly forward direction. The surface of the plate 
behind this line is rounded, and curves obliquely downwards to the 
posterior margin. Immediately behind each of the previously 
described ridges is a corresponding groove, or sulcus. The surface 
is highly granulated, whilst a line of sharp spinelets, similar to 
those on the anterior plate, is placed along each diverging ridge. 
Apophyses small, close to the antero-lateral angles. 

Ohs, — The presence of the little spinelets, which assist to ornament 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 95 

the surface of this species is a very interesting point in the structure 
of these old Chitons, So far as my own observation has gone, it is 
not possessed by any of the other species. The partial flattening of 
the middle portion of the anterior plate, and the bending down of 
the lateral portions, give to each of them a tri-divisional appearance 
resembling the three areas met with usually on the intermediate 
plates in Chiton, 

The pointed, snout-like appearance, and the lateral spines, at once 
distinguish the anterior plates of this species from that of C, 
Dalriensis, The characters of the posterior piece are sufficiently 
distinctive in themselves. I have much pleasure in naming this 
species after my friend, Mr. James Geikie, LL.D., F.R.S. 

Locality and Horizon. — Law Quarry, near Dairy, as before. 

Collection. — J. Smith. 

Chiton, sp. ind.— (PI. L, figs. 23 and 24.) 

Obs. — One or two small plates have been found by Mr. J. Smith, 
which appear to differ from any of the others described, when care- 
fully and minutely examined. The anterior plates come nearest to 
C. Geikiei, but they are proportionately higher, longer, narrower, 
and more pointed. Lastly, the spines have not been observed. 
The posterior margin is a little concave, and the surface for some 
little distance inwards from the posterior margin is crowded with 
growth lines. The intermediate plates are small and very much 
bent. The material is too meagre to do more than casually refer to 
these plates in passing. They may perhaps subsequently be united 
with one or other of the other species. The surface is covered with 
microscopic granules of the smallest size, too small almost to be 
detected with the hand lens. 

Locality and Horizon. — Law Quarry, near Dairy, as before. 

Collection. — J. Smith. 

Genus ChitonelltLS, Lamarck, 1819. 
(Hist, des Animaux sans Vertebras, vi.) 

Obs. — The genus Chitonellus, or at any rate plates of some mem- 
bers of the Chitonidae having closer relations to it than to Chiton 
proper, flourished extensively during the Permian period, and we 
are now acquainted with several distinct forms from our Carboniferous 
rocks. The deposit at Law Quarry has yielded species of this genus. 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 PROCBBDINGS OF THE 

Mr. Kirkby has called attention to the peculiar fonn of the plates 
of the Permian Chitonelli,* and the great development of the 
processes of attachment inserted in the mantle. We now know 
similar patelliform plates of Carboniferous age, although there does 
not appear to be so large an amount of inserted surface in the latter, 
as in the former. In Chitonellics the relatively larger proportion of 
free mantle surface to that occupied by the plates is something 
remarkable. 

The plates are placed along the median line, usually separate 
from, and each independent of, the other. In a few forms, however, 
only the posterior plates are free and separate, whilst the anterior 
are close to one another, and there is a partial overlapping, indicating 
a return to the type of an ordinary Chiton. A noticeable feature 
appears to be the difference in size of the exposed 'portions of the 
plates, and that inserted in the substance of the mantle, the latter 
being, as a rule, much larger than the former, which is usually highly 
ornamented. 

Chitonellus subqtmdratus, Kirkby and Young. 
(PI. II., figs. 4 and 5). 

a subquadratus, K. & Y., Geol Mag,, 1867, iv., p. 342, t. 16, f. 5. 

Sp. Char, — Intermediate plate subquadrate in outline, much 
arched, and acutely carinate along the middle line; anterior and 
posterior margins excavate, the former much the most so, the 
posterior excavation being comparatively shallow. The inserted 
portion of the plate is greatly developed as compared with that 
exposed without the mantle. The latter resembles a more or less 
heart-shaped excrescence, with the point of the heart directed for- 
wards ; at the posterior end is a raised and slightly prominent mucro ; 
the lateral margins are well defined, and within their border occur 
scattered granules gradually becoming smaller inwards, but not 
extending over the mucro. The general surface of the inserted 
portion of the plate around the margins is marked by a series of 
diverging somewhat granular ridges. 

Obs, — I am happy in possessing the support of Mr. Kirkby's 
valued opinion in referring this plate to Chitonellus subqicadratus, 
K. and Y. It appears to differ only in the absence of the two an- 
gular diverging ridges at the posterior end, and in the possession of 
a more highly developed mucro on the exposed portion of the plate. 
• Quart. J<mr, Qeol, Soc., xv., p. 618. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OF GLASGOW. 97 

Later writers have been in the habit of eliminating from the list 
of palaeozoic Chitons, the Chiton (?) cordifer, de Koninck,* on the 
authority of Baron de Ryckholtf I would, however, join with 
Mr. W. H. Bailly m pointing out J that, according to one of his 
latest papers on this family, Prof, de Koninck by no means admits 
this abolition, § but ^retains the species under the name of 
Chitonellus, There is no doubt that the so-called C cordifer, 
de Koninck, whatever its nature, and CMtondlvs subquadrattiSj 
K. and Y., do approach one another closely, and the plate above 
described appears to combine some of the characters of both. 

The re-occurrence of a plate of this old form of Chitonellus in 
the Law Quarry bed is not one of the least interesting facts to be 
gleaned from Mr. Bennie's gatherings at that locality. 

Chitonellus, sp. ind. (?). — (PI. II., figs. 6 and 7.) 

Sp. Char, — In marginal outline almost square, but a little 
longer from before backwards than broad ; pyramidal and slightly 
arched, acuminating upwards ; lateral margin parallel, straight, 
or a little bi-convex ; anterior margin slightly rounded ; posterior 
margin concave, the angles pointed and a little produced. The 
exposed portion is represented by a patelloid cap, rather more 
anterior than posterior in position, and with a well-defined raised 
margin separating it from the inverted portion of the plate ; apex 
curved backwards, and rather depressed, but not overhanging the 
posterior margin ; within the margin two or three rows of promi- 
nent granules, succeeded by those of a second order, which gradu- 
ally die out before reaching the apex. The surface of the inverted 
portion of the plate around the exposed parts is marked by many 
radiating non-granular ridges, which are much stronger and better 
marked towards the anterior. 

Obs. — It is quite within the bounds of possibility that this may 
be only another plate in the economy of the last described species. 
The general character of the plate is the same, although the much 
squarer form hardly points in this direction. The granulation is 
likewise much more marked, and the radiating striae on the 
inserted surface stronger. 

* Descript. Animaux Foss., p. 824, t. 22, f. 5. 

t Bull de V Acad. R. de Bruxeiles, 1845, zii., pi. ii p. 60. 

t Jour, Oeol, Soe,, Dublm, 1860, viii., p. 170. 

§ Aniidls and Mag. Nat. Hist., 1860, vi., p. 95, 

VOL. V. G 



Digitized by 



Google 



98 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

If further researches should prove it distinct it might be called 
C quadratm. 

Amongst recent Chitons, ChitoneJlvs (Notoplax) spedosa^ H. 
Adams, from Tasmania, has a granular coronet like the present 
form of plate, and that described as C. subquadratus, K. and Y. 

Locality and Horizon, — Law Quarry, near Dairy, as before. 

Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Ohitonelltts (?) patelliformisy sp. nov. — (PL II., figs. 8 and 9).* 

Sp, Char, — Anterior (?) plate conical, patelliform, longer than 
wide, narrowing towards the front. Posterior margin broadly 
rounded, anterior roimded but contracted — from the apex forwards 
the plate is obtusely carinated, and gradually descends to the 
front margin. Apex blunt, scarcely recurved, situated at about the 
posterior third of the. plate, at which point the latter is also widest. 
From the apex proceeds two grooves forwards to the antero-lateral 
margins, dividing the plate into three areas, a central one forming 
the obtuse median ridge, and two others, one on each side, and 
comprising by far the largest part of the plate. From, and pos- 
terior to the apex, radiate six, and sometimes seven strong ridges to 
the posterior margin ; between these are other fine interpolated 
and quite microscopic granular striae, which are repeated on the 
flanks of the plate, and in very well preserved specimens are visible 
on the obtuse central keel also. The inserted portion of the plate 
is small, forming only a narrow rim, or belt, round the margin of 
the plate, and more highly developed towards the anterior. The 
' interior surface is quite plain, except that the posterior margin is 
convoluted by the coarse ribs and intermediate valleys. 

Ohs, — This peculiar plate, undoubtedly, resembles Chitonellm 
antiqutiSy Howse, sp.,t to which it is closely allied by its general 
character and appearance. It may, however, be distinguished by 
the presence of the double groove from the apex forwards, the 
constant presence of the six or seven posterior radiating ridges, the 
more ridge-like character of the median line anterior to the apex, 
and the broken style of ornament. 

Again, it is clearly an ally of Chitonellm mhantiqum^ K. and Y.,J 

* It is possible that fig. 17 (PI. I.) represents the posterior plate of this species. 

t Quart Jour. Geol, Soc,, xv., p. 619, t. 16, figs. 15-28. 

t Geol Mag., iv., p. 841, t. 16, f. 12, 18, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 99 

but is distinguished by the lateral position of the radiating 
ridges in the latter, and other minor characters. The relation 
between the two forms may be nearer than at first appears, as it 
is stated of C, subantiqicus, that other ridges " appear to have 
originally existed in front and behind." Mr. Kirkby has examined 
these plates, and, in a recent letter* exclaims, " surely they must 
be far-back ancestors of 0. antiquits" 

Locality and Horizon, — Law Quarry, as before. 

Collections, — J. Bennie, J. Armstrong, J. Smith, &c. 

C?iitonellu8 BennieanuSy sp. no v. — (PL II., figs. 11-13.) 

8p, Char, — Depressed or flattened patelliform, rather obliquely 
oval, inequilateral, narrower in front than behind, and often 
irregular. Apex remote from the front, scarcely differentiated from 
the remainder of the plate ; a deep furrow extends from the apex 
to the front margin. Front margin acutely rounded, more or less 
produced in the median line ; posterior margin obliquely truncated, 
or obliquely concave. Inserted portion of plate in the form of a 
narrow marginal rim, including in it the produced portion of the 
front margin. The surface is ornamented by a series of radiating 
ridges extending all round the plate, but less plainly defined on 
the anterior third ; the ridges are crenulated by the presence of 
innumerable granules, whilst between the larger, smaller ones are 
occasionally interpolated. 

Ohs, — It is quite within the bounds of possibility, although, I 
think, not probable, that these plates may have formed part of the 
shell-covering of the same mollusc as those last described. Without 
any desire merely to create a species, I have separated them on 
account of the difference in the general shape of the two plates, the 
presence of the anterior furrow in the present form, and the much 
more numerous and more widely distributed crenulated ribs. 
Should further researches prove the two forms of plates to be 
identical, I would suggest the retention of the above specific name 
in recognition of Mr. J. Bennie's careful researches and discoveries 
in the strata from which the remains are derived. 

The furrow extending from the apex to the front would tend to 
ally the present plate to that described by the Baron de Eyckholt 
as Stdcochiton, but the form and ornamentation of the respective 
plates is quite different. 

* Dated Nov. 6, 1880. 



Digitized by 



Google 



100 PROCBBDINGS OF THB 

Locality and Horizon. — Law Quarry, near Dairy, as before. 
Collections, — J. Bennie, J. Armstrong, J. Smith, &c. 

Chitonellus (?) KirkbyanuSy sp. nov. — (PI. II., figs. 14-22.) 

8p, Char, — Anterior plate conoid, except on one side, which is 
partially truncated. Anterior margin rounded ; posterior forming an 
arched re-entering angle; postero-lateral angles rounded. Apex ele- 
vated, sub-central to posterior in position, and when so, overhanging 
the posterior margin. The plate is more or less arched along the 
middle line ; from the apex to the postero-lateral angles two ridges 
proceed, which enclose a small obliquely truncated triangular 
space ; two faintly-marked diagonal ridges proceed from the apex 
forwards, one on each side. Inserted portion of plate forms a 
small unomamented margin round the edge of the plate, broader 
on the anterior. 

Second plate (?) quadrate in outline, almost as broad as long, 
very much arched. Median line obtusely carinate. Anterior 
margin a little concave in the centre, rounded at the sides; 
posterior and posterior end as in the anterior plate. Apex ter- 
minating the central keel, somewhat overhanging. The inserted 
part of the plate forms a band round the edge as usual, the broadest 
portion being at the rounded antero-lateral angles. 

Intermediate plate elongated longitudinally, and strongly arched; 
the apex placed at the posterior end of the arched keel is a little 
elevated, and the dorsal line concave. Anterior margin rounded at 
the sides, and much excavated in the middle line; posterior margin 
similar, but the excavation shallower; as in the former plates a 
small obliquely truncated area is formed at the posterior end by 
two angles from the apex to the postero-lateral angles. A faint 
diagonal sulcation passes from the apex forwards on each side 
defining, indistinctly, the dorsal and lateral areas. Exposed sur- 
face of the plate small, as compared with the inserted portion, 
more or less cordate in outline, and occupying the posterior end of 
the plate ; the inserted margin is broadest forwards, and has a few 
indistinct radii on the surface. 

The posterior plate is narrow and much elongated longitudinally, 
but patelliform in the hinder portion. Anterior margin excavated 
in the middle, projecting forwards at the sides ; posterior margin 
rounded. Middle line arched, carinate and concave, terminating in 
the elevated apex, which is within the margin. The posterior end 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 101 

slopes obliquely from the apex to the margin ; flanks of the plate 
rather pinched-in. Exposed surface proportionately larger than in 
the other plates, and with a few coarse radii from the apex round 
the posterior end of the plate; ridges variable in number, and 
alternately larger and smaller. 

The exposed surface of all the plates is microscopically granular. 

Ohs, — The large proportion of inserted or covered surface of these 
plates, as compared with the exposed, and the nature of the orna- 
mentation, will clearly place this form with Chitondlua rather than 
Chiton, At any rate this arrangement will be preferable until some 
further sub-division of the genus Chiton is proposed for the 
accommodation of the palaeozoic species of the family. The refer- 
ence to Chitondlua is borne out by the absence of apophyses, and 
by the form of the posterior plate. The latter is quite chitonellid 
in its elongated narrow outline, and so far is comparable with that 
of Chitonellus Toungianus, Kirkby, whilst the arched nature of 
the plates shews a departure towards those known as Chitonellus 
suhquadratus, K. & Y. 

The figure of the posterior plate, given by de Eyckholt,* as 
that of Chitonellus cordi/er, de Koninck, has much resemblance to 
that of the present species. 

Mr. Kirkby, who has examined specimens, believes this form to 
be imdescribed and to require separation. So far as my own 
researches have gone it is so, and I have, therefore, much pleasure 
in associating with it Mr. Kirkby's name, thanking him, at the 
same time, for the assistance he has always kindly rendered me. 

Locality and Horizon, — Law Quarry, as before. 

Collections, — J. Bennie, J. Armstrong, J. Smith, &c. 

Chitonellus Toungianus, Kirkby. — (PI. II., figs. 23, 24.) 

C. YoungianuSf Kirkby, Trans. Geol. Soc. Glasgoto, 1865, ii., 
p. 14, t. 1, f. 2. 
„ Kirkby and' Young, Geol, Mag., 1867, iv., 

p. 341, t. 16, f. 2-4. 
Obs,^^A fine posterior plate of this species has reached me from 
the cabinet of Mr. Armstrong, in which all the details are exceed- 
ingly well shewn. The plate agrees with the description given by 
Kirkby and Young, except that the exposed portion of the plate is 
rather more pointed in front than is represented in the published 
* Bull de VAcad, R, de JBruxellea, 1845, xii., pt 2, t. 4, f. 10. 



Digitized by 



Google 



102 PROOEBDINGS OF THB 

figures. The apex is also more prominent and a little abruptly 
truncated behind. The surface of the exposed region is very 
pustulose, and the posterior inserted margin strongly radiately 
ridged. On the whole, the form of this plate is that of G, 
YoungiantiSy while the minute details are quite those of that before 
referred to as C. suhquadratus^ except, of course, that one is an inter- 
mediate and the other a posterior plate. If the present specimen 
is truly C Toungianus, I think it not at all unlikely that it and C 
8uhquadratu8 are plates of one and the same form ; all the charac- 
ters point in this direction. 

One of de Eyckholt's figures* of Chitonellus cordifer^ de Koninck 
bears much likeness to the posterior plate of G, Youngianus, 

Locality and Horizon, — Cunningham Baidland, near Dairy ; 
Lower Carboniferous Limestone group. 

GoUection. — J. Armstrong. 

3. — LIST OF WORKS AND PAPERS REFERRING TO THE PALAEOZOIC 
OHITONIDAE. 

1. MiinsteTj G. Graf zu, — Beitrage zur Petrefacten-kimde. 4to, 
Beyreuth, {Ghiton jpriscus, Miinster. Heft L, 1843, p. 60.) 

2. De Koninck, L, G. — Description des Animaux Foss., Terrain 
Carbonifke de Belgique, 4to, Liege, 1842-44. (Genus Ghiton, 
p. 319.) 

3. Ryckholty Baron de, — R^sum6 g&logique sur le genre Ghiton, 
Lin. Btdl de VAcad, K de Brttxelles, 1845, xii, pt. 2, pp. 36-62, 
pis., 1-4. 

4. EyckhoU, Baron de. —Melanges Pal^ntologiques; Genus Ghiton, 
pp. 63-65, 4to. (Extrait de tome xxiv. des Mem, de VAcad. R, de 
Belgique, p. 63.) 

5. Salter, J, W, — Description of a Fossil Chiton from the 
Silurian Rocks, with Remarks on the Fossil Species of the Genus. 
Quart, Jour, Geol, Soc, 1847, iii., pp. 48-52. 

6. Eoemer, F, A. — Beitrage zur Geologischen Kenntniss des 
nordwestlichen Harzgebirges. Pala^eontographica, 1855, v., lief. 1, 
pp. 1-46. (Ghiton laevigatti8,Y,A,'R., p. 36.) 

7. Sandberger, Drs, G, ^ F, — Die Versteinerungen des Rheinis- 
chen Schichtensystems in Nassau, 4to, 1850-56. (Genus Ghiton, 
pp. 237-240.) 

8. Kirkhy, J, W, — On some Permian Fossils from Durham. 

♦ Loe, cU,, t. 4, f. 15. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 103 

Quart. Jour, Geol. SoCy 1857, xiii., pp. 213-218. (C. Howseianus, 
Kirkby, p. 216.) Trans, Tynmde Nat. Field Club, 1858, iii., pp. 
286-294, t. 12. 

9. Stevens, R, P. — Description of New Carboniferous Fossils 
from the Apalachian, Illinois, and Michigan Coal-fields. American 
Jour Science^ 1858, xxv., pp. 258-265. {Chiton carbonarius, 
Stevens, and C, parvus, Stevens.) 

10. Kirkby, J. W, — On the Permian Chitonidae. Quart. Jour. 
Geol. Soc, 1859, xv., pp. 607-626, t. 16; Trans. Tyneside Nat. 
Field Club, 1860, iii., pp. 238-263. 

11. Howse, R. — Notes on the Permian System of Northumber- 
land and Durham. Annals Nat. Hist, 1857, xix.; Trans. Tyneside 
Nat. Field Club, 1858, iii., pp. 235-285, t. 11. (Chiton Loftusianus, 
C. Howseianus and Calyptraea antiqua.) 

12. Bailly, W. H. — On the Occurrence of detached plates of the 
shell of a new species of Chiton in the Carboniferous Limestone at 
Lisbane, Co. Limerick. Jour. Geol. Soc, Dublin, 1860, viiL, pp. 
167-171. 

13. De Koninck, L. G. — Observations on two new species of 
Chitons from the Upper Silurian " Wenlock Limestone " of Dudley. 
Annals Nat. Hist, 1860, vi., pp. 91-98. 

14. Kirkby, J. W. — On some remains of Chiton from the 
Mountain Limestone of Yorkshire. Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc, 1862, 
xviii, pp. 233-237. 

15. Myckholt, Baron de. — Diagnose d'un nouveau genre de la Fa- 
mille des Chitonidae. Jour, de Conchyliologie, 1862, x., pp. 259-60. 

16. Kirkby, J. W. — On some Fossils from the Lower Magnesian 
Limestone of Sunderland. Trans. Tyneside Nat. Field Club, 
1864, iv., pp. 212-20. (Chiton Loftusianus (?), p. 216.) 

17. Young, J. ^ Kirkby, J. W. — Provisional Notice of a new 
Chiton, and a new species of Chitonellus from the Carboniferous 
Rocks of Western Scotland. Trans. Geol. Soc. Glasgow, 1865, iL, 
pp. 13-15. 

18. Thomson, J. — On a Chiton plate from Carboniferous Shale 
on the banks of the Avon, near Strathavon. Ibid., p. 15. 

19. Kirkby, J. W. ^ Young, J. — Notes on some Remains of 
Chiton and Chitonellus from the Carboniferous Strata of Yorkshire 
and the West of Scotland. Geol. Mag., 1867, iv., pp. 340-43, t. 16. 

20. Young, J. — On Chitonellus, recent and fossil. Proc. Nat. 
Hid. Soc., Glasgow, 1878, iv., pp. 322-324. 



Digitized by 



Google 



104 PBO0BEDINO8 OF THB 

DESCRIPTION OF THE FIGURES.* 
Plate I. 

Chiton DcUnermSy Etheridge, jun. 

Fig. 1. — Anterior plate of the full size, x 5. Collection. — J. 
Bennie. 

Fig. 2. — Intermediate plate, largest observed, x 4. Collection. — 
J. Smith. 

Fig. 3. — Side view of the same plate, x 4. 

Fig. 4. — A similar but smaller plate, with the apophyses in place. 
X 4. Collection. — J. Smith. 

Fig. 5. — Side view of the same plate, x 4. 

Fig. 6. — Another form of intermediate plate, probably of this 
species, in which the apex is much produced backwards, and the 
ornament partially removed from the centre, x 4. Collection. — 
J. Smith. 

Fig. 7. — A fourth form, with the granules similarly removed, and 
the anterior concavity somewhat enlarged by reason of slight 
fracture, x 4. Collection. — J. Smith. 

Fig. 8. — A very delicate and transversely elongated plate, also, 
probably, of this species, x 4. Collection. — J. Smith. 

Fig. 9. — Normal form of posterior plate, with the apophyses 
a little broken, x 7. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 10. — Interior of posterior plate, x 6. 

Fig. 11. — A posterior plate more transversely elongated in pro- 
portion to its length, x 6. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 12. — Side view of the same, x 6. 

Fig. 13. — A posterior plate presumed to be a variety of (7. 
Dalrienm, in which the apophyses are larger, and dorsal ridge 
longer, x 8. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 14. — Side view of same ; the vertical posterior end is well 
shewn, x 8. 

Chiton ArmatrongianvSy Etheridge, jun. 

Fig. 15. — An entire posterior plate of this species, with portions 
of ornamentation enlarged ; Williamwood, near Glasgow, x 3. 
Collection. — J. Armstrong. 

* Unless otherwise stated the examples figured are from Law Quarry. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTT OF GLASGOW. 105 

CMtoriy sp. ind. 

Fig. 16. — The intermediate plate referred to Chiton gemmatus^ 
de Kon. ; Strathavon, Lanarkshire. x 2. Collection. — J. 
Thomson. 

Fig. 17. — A plate which may possibly be the posterior of 
Chitcmellm (?) pateUi/ormis, — (PL II., figs. 8 and 9). x 6. 

Chiton solaeformiSi Etheridge, jun. 

Fig. 18. — A complete posterior plate of this peculiar species, 
with the apophyses preserved, x 8. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 19. — Interior view of another example, from the same 
collection, shewing the in-turned imder surface, x 8. 

Chiton cordatusj Kirkby (?). 

Fig. 20. — Posterior plate, with the apophyses preserved, and the 
strong dorsal ridge well shewn, x 6. Collection. — J. Smith. 

Fig. 21. — Three-quarter view of the same specimen, x 6. 

Fig. 22. — Interior of another example, shewing the concavity of 
the dorsal ridge and the in-turned posterior margin. x 8. 
CoUectioru — J. Smith. 

Chiton, sp. ind. 

Figs. 23 and 24. — Two small intermediate (?) plates, of doubtful 
identity, x 12. Collection. — J. Smith. 

Plate II. 
Chiton GeUdd, Etheridge, jun. 

Fig. 1. — An anterior plate exhibiting the pointed posterior end 
and the lateral spinelets. x 8. Collection. — J. Smith. 

Fig. 2. — Interior of another example with the posterior in-curved 
margin, x 8. Collection. — J. Smith. 

Fig. 3. — Posterior plate shewing the dorsal ridge, the posterior 
divaricating grooves, and the overhanging spinelets. x 8. 
Collection. — J. SmitL 

Chitonellm mbqtiadratics, K. & Y. (?) 

Fig. 4. — An intermediate plate, with the leaf-shaped non-inserted 
space and recurved apex, x 8. Collection. — J. Bennie. 
Fig. 5. — Side view of the same specimen, x 8. 



Digitized by 



Google 



106 PBOOBBDINOS OF THB 

ChitonelluSy sp. ind. (?) 

Fig. 6. — A square intermediate plate, with an oval, granular, 
exposed area, and recurved apex, x 7. Collection. — J. Bennie. 
Fig. 7. — Side view of the same plate, x 7. 

Chitondlus (?) patdliformis^ Etheridge, jun. 

Fig. 8. — A conical anterior (?) plate, with the forwardly directed 
grooves, and posterior radiating ridges. x 8. Collection. — J. 
Bennie. 

Fig. 9. — Interior of another example, from the same collection, 
x8. 

Chiton^ sp. ind. 

Fig. 10. — A small depressed plate with the remains of a peculiar 
spike-like apophysis, x 6. Collection. — J. Armstrong. 

Chitonellus Bennieanus, Etheridge, jun. 

Fig. 11. — A characteristic example, obliquely oval, and with the 
narrow inserted margin, x 7. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 12. — Another example, with the crenulated ridges well 
shewn, x 7. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 13. — Interior of a third specimen, x 7. Collection. — J. 
Bennie. 

Chitonellus (?) Kirkbyanus, Etheridge, jun. 

Fig. 14. — An anterior plate seen from above, with the laige 
marginal inserted area well shewn, x 8. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 15. — Interior of another example, x 8. Collection. — J. 
Bennie. 

Fig. 16. — Another anterior plate seen somewhat from behind, 
with the posterior oblique area exposed, x 8. Collection. — J. 
Bennie. 

Fig. 17. — Side view of the same, x 8. 

Fig. 18. — An intermediate plate, with the large inserted surface, 
strong dorsal ridge, and oblique posterior area, x 4. Collection. — 
J. Bennie. ' 

Fig. 19. — Side view of the same plate, x 4. 

Fig. 20. — A posterior plate, with its radiating ornamental ridges. 
X 8. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Fig. 21. — A side view shewing the concave dorsal line and high 
posterior apex, x 8. Collection. — J. Bennie. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTY OP GLASGOW. 107 

Fig. 22. — Another posterior plate somewhat laiger than the last. 
K 6. Collection. — J. Bennie. 

Chitondlm Youngianus, Kirkby. 

Fig. 23 — A posterior plate, with the highly granulated exposed 
area and posterior ridges, x 4. Collection. — J. Armstrong. 
Fig. 24. — Side view of the same plate, x 4. 



THE SOCIETY'S ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET, 
April 26th, 1881. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., in the Chair. 

Messrs. James Riddell, George R. Alexander, Alexander Birrell, 
John Ingram, and John Alexander Young, were elected ordinary 
members. Mr. T. E. Buckley, F.Z.S., Attadale House, Strath- 
carron, Ross-shire, was elected a life member. 

It was announced by the Librarian that four volumes of TJte 
Zoologist had been presented to the Society's Library by Mr. 
James Lumsden, F.Z.S., to whom the thanks of the Society were 
therefore cordially awarded. 

SPECIMENS EXHIBITED. 

Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., exhibited specimens of Technitdla 
legumen, Norman, and Technitella nialo, Norman, dredged at Oban 
in September, 1875. They were referred by the Rev. A. M. 
Norman to the Poriphora, and by Mr. H. J. Carter to the Rhizo- 
poda. The contention was urged for a time somewhat strongly by 
both parties, and without the dispute being settled they have lain 
over until almost forgotten. In the interval Mr. Saville Kent, 
having studied the living animals in the Channel Islands, has finally 
published {Annals and Mag. of Nat Hist, vol. ii., p. 68, pL iv.-v.) 
his descriptions and illustrations, and states that the foraminiferal 
nature of these organisms is now established beyond dispute. The 
tests of the two under notice are made up of sponge spicules, and 
from external appearance the resemblance to a sponge is very great, 
and it is not surprising that they should be mistaken for such. At 



Digitized by 



Google 



108 PBOOIBDINGS OF THE 

the same time, it shews the difficulty that exists, and the great 
care that is required in coming to correct conclusions regarding the 
true nature of these lowly forms. 

The Chairman exhibited specimens of a new species of Archaeo- 
cidaris, a fossil sea urchin, and a species of SHiqtianaj a tubular 
imivalve shell, both forms being from the collection of Dr. Rankin, 
Carluke, which was recently presented by him to the Hunterian 
Museum. The new species of Archaeocidaris is only known as yet 
by its laiger spines, which bear four rows of smaller spines or 
denticles, their peculiarity being that they are long and thpm-like, 
and stand out from the body of the main spine at nearly right 
angles, whereas the denticles on the other species of Ai'chaeocidaris 
are shorter, and clasp or point to the upper end of the spines at 
acute angles. Specimens of this species have been submitted to 
Dr. Wright, of Cheltenham, an authority on fossil sea urchins, and 
he is likewise satisfied that it is still an undescribed one. 
It has only as yet been found in the limestone shales at Gillfoot, 
Carluke, and the Chairman (Mr. Young) has provisionally named 
it after its discoverer Archaeocidaris Rankinii, The other fossils 
from Dr. Rankin's collection were referred, rather doubtfully, to 
SUiquaria, a genus which has not hitherto been identified from 
older strata than the Eocene beds of the Tertiary formation, and 
which is only represented at present by seven living species, found 
chiefly in sponges. The specimens, which are three in number, 
may be considered unique, and were found in the shales of the 
Gare limestone series at Carluke. They consist of fragments of 
tube-like whorls of a laige spiral shell, the tubes being nearly one- 
half inch in diameter, and shewing a moderately thick shell After 
a careful examination of these fragments Mr. Young could only 
refer them to the genus Siliquaria, which is characterised by having 
an open tubular shell with a continuous open narrow slit running 
along the whole length of the tube. The Carboniferous species 
seem to agree with the recent shells in this respect, and they 
further agree in having the dljt along the upper and outer sides of 
the whorls of the tubes, the shell growth being likewise seen to 
run parallel with the edges of the slit, shewing that it could not be 
due to accidental fracture. Should the identification of these 
specimens with SUiquaria be confirmed by the discovery of other 
specimens, Mr. Yoimg proposed to name this species 8. carbonaria, 
to denote the formation from which they were obtained. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTY OF GLASGOW. 109 

Mr. John M. Campbell exhibited a specimen of a Swan, on 
which he remarked as follows : — 

On the 8th February last I purchased, at a poultry shop in 
Glasgow, a Swan which had been killed about 10 miles from 
Kamelton, Coimty Donegal, Ireland. At first sight I thought the 
bird was a large specimen of Bewick's Swan, Cygnus hewickii^ but 
subsequent examination led me to doubt whether it was really the 
bird described under that name by YarrelL The chief point of 
difference from the bird described by him is that the loop-like form 
of the trachea, which lies in the cavity of the sternum, is, in this 
specimen, absent. As the bird, although slightly larger than the 
dimensions given by Yarrell, agrees in other respects with his C. 
hewickii, this alteration in the character of the trachea might have 
been an individual divergence from the normal ty^e. But similar 
sterna of reputed C hewicTdi^ examined by me, all exhibit the same 
abnormal form, and on communicating with Prof. A. Newton on 
the subject, he gave his opinion that the loop-like form of the 
trachea is not constant. What, then, is the true specific distinction 
of Yarrell's C, hewickii? That distinguished ornithologist states 
that "the principal and most obvious difference is in the trachea," 
and he very fully explains its structure* as a point of great specific 
value. If, then, in the specimens of C, hewickii^ whose sterna I 
have examined, and in the specimen now under consideration, 
which Prof. Newton states is the largest he has ever seen or heard 
of, we find the characters, on which Yarrell founded his species, 
absent, may we not be led to suppose that it is much more rare 
than is generally believed, and that a closely allied form is con- 
founded with it 1 The doubt, if any, can only be thoroughly cleared 
up by an examination of a good series of British species in the flesh, 
and of different ages. I therefore wish to draw the attention of 
the members of the Society to the question with that end in view. 

The specimen under notice, which is now in the Kelvingrove 
Museum, was a male in rather poor condition, the stomach being 
entirely empty. It weighed 12 J lbs., and measured as follows: — 
Length, 52"; girth, 30^"; stretch of wing, 79"; length of wing, 38J"; 
length of wing from carpal joint, 22^; length of leg (tarao metatarsus), 
4 J"; foot, 6i'j beak, measured along culmen, 4"; greatest width of 
beak, If"; length of tail from vent, 8^"; length of sternum from 
keel to apex, 7 J". 
* *< Hifltory of British Birds by W. Yarrell,'' 3id ed., 1856, vol. iii., p. 205. 



Digitized by 



Google 



110 PBOCBEDINQS OF THS 

Mr. Campbell also shewed a specimen of the Chilian Skua 
Stercorariiia chilensiSj Saunders, and said: — 

In a paper by Mr. Howard Saunders on the Skua Gulls, which 
was printed in the Proceedings of the Zoological Society for 1876, 
he describes (p. 323) a new species under the name of 8, chilensis, 
and which had till then been confounded with 8, antarticcL The 
specimens to which he refers were obtained at Mejillones, Bolivia, 
in latitude 23** 5' S., at the end of February or beginning of March. 
This species he distinguishes from 8, antartica by the ruddy chest- 
nut colour of the under parts, and axillaries which in the latter 
species are black ; and it agrees more nearly to 8, cataradesy the ' 
northern species. He also says, "in the absence of any reliable 
information as to its breeding haunts it would be rash to indulge in 
any speculation as to whether they are to the north or to the south 
of the equator." This point I am glad to be able to clear. up, 
having found the species breeding on several points on the east 
coast of South America, in Patagonia. I first observed this bird in 
latitude 40° 7' S., and obtained specimens of it in Desire Eiver, and 
on an islet a little way up its nest and eggs were first obtained on 
30th Nov. 1871. Subsequently it was found breeding at Port San 
Julian, Watchman's Cape, and at Port Santa Cruz. At the latter 
place, on a little island, a great many nests were found in Dec. of 
the same year. The nest was merely a sKght hollow in the ground 
in which were a few stalks of dried grass, the eggs, two or three in 
number, were about 2| inches in greatest length and 2 inches in 
breadth, and were of an olive brown, irregularly spotted and 
blotched with ashy and rusty brown spots, more particularly at the 
larger end, sometimes forming a distinct zone. The birds were 
bold, and swooped so close that their wings, at times, almost 
touched our faces., 

PAPERS BEAD. 

L_« On St. AhVs Head and its Bird Lifer By Mr. John A. 
Harvie-Brown, F.RS.E,, MB.O.U., &c.. V.-P. 

A good deal has already been written concerning St. Abb's Head 
and its bird life, more especially in the Proceedings of the Berwick- 
shire Naturalists^ Field Gluh^ which is, perhaps, the most perfectly 
organised Society in Scotland. Very little has been left undone 
in Berwickshire, and anything I have to say regarding St. Abb's 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT SOOIBTT OP GLASGOW. Ill 

Head is simply an account of a personal visit to it last summer, 
and of an endeavour to collect the materials concerning the locality 
into accessible form. Owing to the rarity of the earlier volumes of 
the Berwickshire Club'iB Proceedings, my effort may not prove un- 
acceptaWe, while, at the same time, it will serve as a continuation 
of a series of similar papers upon other rock-bird haunts in Scotland, 
which I have personally visited. A comparison of the remarks of 
naturalists — such as Selby in 1833, and Hepburn in 1850 — with 
those of the present time, is always worth making, as by so doing 
indications of the changes in the bird-population of the localities 
treated of are at once observable. 

The following is a list of the papers relating to St Abb's Head 
and the vicinity which have hitherto appeared, so far as I have 
been able to ascertain. To Mr. James Hardy, of Old Cambus, I 
wish — ^not for the first time, nor, I hope, for the last — ^to give my 
thankful acknowledgments for much assistance in the preparation 
of this portion of my paper. 

1832— Dr. Johnston's address to the Club, Sept. 19th, 1832, 
[Proc. Berw, Nat Field Club^ vol. x., pp. 5, 6,] gives a general 
account of St. Abb's Head and its winged inhabitants, and a 
confirmatory notice of the Chough from the Rev. A. Baird's obser- 
vations [p. 6]. 

. — Record of another visit \op. cit, pp. 16, 17,] notices plants 

and land mollusca. 

. — Notice of the birds observed in the neighbourhood of St. 

Abb's Head on July 18th, 1832. By Mr. P. J. Selby, F.R.S.E., 

F.L.S., &c. [op. cit., voL i, pp. 18-20]. 

1833. — Observations on the birds observed in the neighbourhood 

of Coldbrandspath* in April, and there at St Abb's Head in June, 

1833. By Mr. P. J. Selby [op. cit, voL i., pp. 20-22]. Common 

Falcon seen, and its ejrrie. Green Cormorant, &c. 

Report on the Ornithology of Berwickshire and district, within 

the limits of the Berw. Nat Fidd Club. By Mr. P. J. Selby, of 

Twizell House [op. cit, vol. i, pp. 250-262]. Lists of birds of 

Berwickshire and Holy Island and Fame Islands are added. 

1850-56. — Notes on some of the mammalia and birds found at 

St Abb's Head. By Mr. A. Hepburn [op. cit, vol. iiL, p. 70]. 

Some new birds are mentioned here, and there is a notice of a 

supposed Wild Cat becoming semi-domesticated. 
* The older name of Cockbomspath. 



Digitized by 



Google 



112 PROOEBDINOS OF THB 

1856-62. — Anniversary address by Mr. J. C. Langlands, Pres,y 
on 29th Sept., 1859, pp. 127-131. A very good account of 
St. Abb's Head, in which the local names of some of the 
rocks and promontories are given, along with notices of local 
traditions and legends, and the view from St. Abb's Head is 
described. 

1863-68.— Anniversary address on 28th Sept, 1865. By Mr. 
F. J. W. Collingwood, Glanton Pyke, Pres, A short account. 

Besides the above those who are interested in the wider district 
of Coldinghame may be referred to a " History of Coldinghame 
Priory," by A. A. Carr, Surgeon, Edin., 1836, in which a cata- 
logue of its rarer botanical productions is given, and a chapter 
upon the geology of Berwickshire. 

According to arrangement, a party of four, of which I was one, 
paid a visit to St. Abb's Head, on the Berwickshire coast, on the 
25th July, 1880, taking an early train from Edinburgh to Reston 
Junction, and driving three miles to Coldingham village. From 
this we walked to the fishing village of Coldingham shore, a 
short two miles further. There we secured the services of a 
native fisherman, William Thorbum, an intelligent, active, and 
obliging man. We first rowed round below the cliflPs, to the 
westward or " up the Firth," which are at no great distance from 
the fishing village. 

What appeared to me the finest and most densely-populated part 
of the range is a high, projecting, narrow peninsula of cliff, which 
juts out into the sea at right angles with the shore, the most 
populous face being that fronting the little village which lies within 
the bay. This peninsula is accessible from the mainland by a 
narrow ridge sloping steeply on the west side, but breaking into 
sheer precipice — in places overhanging — on the side next the 
village. At the narrowest part rises a curious pinnacled rock, which, 
whether seen from the land or from the sea, appears extremely like a 
shattered portion of some ancient keep ; and holes piercing it here 
and there make the deception almost complete, especially when 
viewed from seaward, along the westward shore. Upon the pre- 
cipitous side were many Guillemots, occupying broad table-like 
ledges, which sloped outwards and downwards. Some of these 
would be most difficult to reach owing to the formation of the cliff 
above, which projects many feet beyond. We had a good view of 
this part afterwards from the shore, getting close in underneath 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HI9T0BT SOCSBTT OF QLABOOW. ll*^ 

upon the locks at low4ide. This part of the cliff is known as 
the Castle HilL* 

Rowing round and sailing, we could not approach very near to 
the cliff-foot, as a heavy surf was breaking upon the outlying 
spurs of horizontal rock, and upon the little islets and stacks which 
stud the undercliff j but we were near enough to see the young Herring 
Gulls on the grassy tops of the stacks, or distinguish a Starling or a 
Jackdaw as it flitted across the face of the main cliff, 50 or 60 
yards further back, or popped in and out of the holes in the rugged 
precipice. 

We searched eagerly for the Chough or Red-legged Crow, both 
when on land and in the boat, but failed to observe one; but 
our failing to see them is no guarantee that they were not there, for 
as Mr. Robert Gray truly remarked to me afterwards, ** unless you 
could have been there in early morning, or about sunset, you would 
in OTdinary weatiier have but a poor chance of finding the * Red-legs ' 
at home." Mr. Gray also instanced his own disappointment on 
similar occasions, on half a dozen trips to another part of our Scottish 
coasts where they are still present. 

At the same time I may mention that both at the Lizard in 
Cornwall, and at localities in the West of Scotland, I have repeat- 
edly — day after day, in fine summer weather in the months of May 
and Jime — seen the "Red-legs " jerking away along the cliff-face, 
or sitting on a point below me, as I peered carefully over ; and 
this, both at sea-cliffs and at inland localities. Mr. Gray, how- 
ever, agrees witJi me that it is quite possible that they may not 
have returned to St. Abb's Head, though he sees no other reason to 
doubt their presence at other localities on the same coast f 

The rock scen^y of St Abb's Head, and some miles of coast-line 
stretching westwards, is very fine, broken as it is into masses, 
pinnacles and stacks, pierced by tunnels and caves, and furrowed 

* St. Abb's Head " contiats of four hills separated from each other by what 
are here called ' i4ck%' oc deep valleys. The moi^ sootliesly and lowest is 
the Castle Hill," as nbove, &om the resemblance presented by the rocks. The 
Kirkhill follows, next is Harelaw, and the largest and boldest is Headland 
[Proe. Berw, Nat. Field Club, 1869, p. 127]. 

t Dr. Oeo. Jphi^sltan, remarking on the Chough on this coast, spealcs of ita 
being " certainly ascertained to breed in the rocks," and repeats a much older 
recoxd bj B^cg^ IfifHk [" De Qrjgiiie Scotopun," 1578^ ^rwf3i;48 ven%i 
by Rev. A. Baird. 

VQIn V. U 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 PBOOBBDINaB OF THB 

by steep scaurs and rubble slopes, and interspersed with the green 
patches occupied by the Gull colonies on the tops of the outlying 
rocks. Especially did we adn;Lire the portion underneath the Light- 
house, where the precipitous stacks of Flodecarr and the Claver, topped 
with sea-pink and grass, are inhabited by a mixed colony of Herring 
and Lesser Black-backed Gulls, whose white breasts, along with the 
bright green beneath their feet, shewed in striking and peculiar 
contrast against the dark red of the cliff-face, which, in turn, is 
capped by the white walls and outhouses of the Lighthouse station. 
Near this, also, are the caves and chasms known as "Downie's 
Goate," and " The Bam Yards." 

All along this face the Guillemots and Razorbills inhabited 
patches of the cliflf-face here and there, often near the summits, but 
even when compared with the Isle of May, which I had shortly before 
visited, they could not be said to constitute a laige colony. 
According to Selby* the rocks here are porphyritic amygdaloid, and 
there are few, if any, boulders below the cliff above tide-mark. 
It appears to be pretty firm in the lower portions and to afford good 
foot-hold, but I doubt if, higher in the cliff-face, it would be safe. 
There are no regular ledges, nor flat horizontal platforms, such as those 
at Handa and Mingalay, or in the Shiant Islands, but only irregular 
nooks and crevices, as on the cliffs at Stonehaven — which I also 
visited this year along with Mr. Geoige Sim, of Aberdeen — these 
being formed by fallen rock-masses. Some of these, however, are 
of considerable size, affording foot-hold for perhaps 100 birds. A 
colony has this year chosen a new site upon the precipitous western 
side of the stack called Gimsheugh, our boatman saying that he 
did not remember its having been occupied before. 

As already mentioned, on the best available islet tops colonies of 
Herring and Lesser Black-backed Gulls were located, and we could 
see many of the little round puff-balls of down creeping about upon 
the turf-slopes, and little heads and eyes peering down at us as we 



Bounding the western end of the headland we came into the 
Cove Bay, where is a fishing station and salmon storing-house, the 
cliffs containing an interesting colony of Guillemots. We could 
here row close inshore, and dislodge the greater part of the colony. 
Before dojng so, however, I examined them carefully with my 

* Loc. cU., ToL L, p. 18. See alao " Eittory of Coldingham Priory," p. 179. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT SOCIBTT OF GLASGOW. 115 

binocular, but failed to note a single Bridled bird. This form is 
decidedly scarce here, so far as we had opportunities of judging; and 
indeed such appears to be the case at most of East Coast sea-bird 
nurseries. 

Away westwards stretched a rather fine range of cliffs, having 
little or no apparent undercliff or broken frontage like the Head- 
land, but at one part rivalling St. Abb's itself in height. We 
should like to have taken a row along this shore, but our time was 
too limited, and we therefore tacked back to the village. 

After landing, I and another of the party walked along the cliff" 
edge as far as the Lighthouse,* over slippery grass slopes, keeping 
a good look out for Choughs, but with no success. 

Mr. Seter, the Lighthouse keeper, told me that scarcely ever does 
a bird of any kind strike the lanterns, which are 224 feet above 
the surface of the water, and have a white dioptric light of the first 
order. In foggy weather a siren horn — at a height of 245 feet 
above the sea — sounds for six seconds' duration, with intervals of 
one minute and a quarter between each blast; and it would be 
interesting to know what effect, if any, the blowing of this gigantic 
horn has upon the migration of birds. It is in foggy weather that 
birds usually flit like moths round the bright lanterns, dashing 
themselves against the domes and glasses, or resting on the balconies; 
but when the unearthly roar of the fog-horn resounds every minute 
and a quarter, it would not be perhaps surprising that they fly 
away terrified into the darkness of the fog and night, t 

It is the impression amongst naturalists who have known and 
visited St. Abb's Head, as well as of the people in the locality, that 
the rock-birds have decidedly decreased greatly in number during 
the last twenty years or less. Col. Drummond Hay, amongst others, 
writes that he observed this decrease while dredging off St. Abb's 
Head in May last, 1880. He states that " Each time I have passed 
it there were nothing like the numbers of parcels of birds fishing in 
the neighbourhood that used to be in former years," but adds, ** I 
have no doubt they are steadily on the increase again." In 1850, 
Mr. Hepburn described the Guillemots as being in "countless 
thousands," and spoke of " ledge above ledge crowded with birds." 

* Built in 1862 on Harelaw, the middle hill of St Abb's. 

t Mr. Seter has since left St. Abb's Head Lighthouse, and his place is now 
taken by Mr. W. Anderson, formerly at Sumbuigh Head, Sbetlandt 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 PBOOSBDI^OS OF TBE 

Certainly no suoh spectacle presented itself to oiir yisioii, all the 
rock-birds breeding in detached companies; and in only one part of 
the cliff could they be said to be breeding even in hundreds on 
one ledge, ledges being almost absent. 

Earlier than this, in the beginning of the century, mention of St. 
Abb's Head is made in a passage of a work which may prove worth 
the trouble of reproducing. It is said, " There is a prodigious num- 
ber of sea-fowls known by the name of Scouts and Kittiwakes, with 
a mixture of Sea-gulls, that arrive in the spring yearly upon the 
high and inaccessible rocks on the south side of St. Abb's Head. 
They breed incredible numbers of young ; and about the end of 
May, when the young are said to be ripe, but before they can fly, 
the gentlemen in the neighbourhood find excellent sport by going 
out in boats, and shooting great numbers of them. When they are 
killed or wounded they fall from the rocks into the sea, and the 
rowers lift them into their boats. Their eggs are pretty good, but 
their flesh is very bad ; yet the poor people eat them. They leave 
the rocks about harvest, and none of them are ever seen here before 
the next spring. Where they go in winter nobody knows."* 

LIST OF SPBOIBS. 

Peregrine Falcon. FcUco peregrinuSy TunstaU. — Selby notes it 
at St. Abb's Head, in June, 1833, and remarks upon the antiquity 
of the eyrie. Hepburn speaks of four eyries at the date he wrote, 
1850, upon the coast between Bummouth and Fast Castle. Two 
pairs were seen in 1859 on the Field day of the Berwickshire Club 
there — 20th September. 

Kestrel Falco tinnunctUus, Lin. — Noted by Hepburn, but not 
observed on the occasion of our visit 

Sparrow Hawk. FcUco niaua (Lin.). — Not seen by us, but noted 
by other observers. 

Martin. Hirundo urUca (Lin.). — Breeds in the cliffs ; noted by 
Selby, 1833 (loc. cit). In 1880 Martins seemed to be unusually 
abundant at many cliff stations. A fluctuation of the Martin 
population at many inland localities, has long been observed and 
commented upon. The summer of 1880, it will be remembered^ 

* Forsyth's " Beauties of Scotland/' Edin., 1805. It is perhaps nQ0dles8 to 
say that the date of the yoang being " ripe " by the end of May, is somewhat 
proniataztB, as it is after this period that the yoong of most rock-birds are 
hatched out. 



Digitized by 



Google 



KATUBAL mdtOBT BOOttPTt OF OLASaoW. 117 

wfts an unusually diy one, and may have caused a temporary efflux 
of the Martins from the interior to the shore-lines. 

Wren. Troglodytes furopaeus, KocL — Selby notices the 
escape of a nest of Wrens from the face of one of the highest 
precipices of the clifT, 1833 (loc. cit.J, 

Carrion Crow. CorvTia corone^ Lin. — Several seen by Selby in 
1833 (loc. cit). 

Raven. Gorvus coraXy Lin. — Three seen by Selby in 1 833. A pair 
— " the only representatives of a once numerous and daring band of 
plunderers " — noted by Hepburn in 1850. War was waged against 
them by the natives owing to their depredations amongst young 
lambs. Two pairs observed on the Field day of the Berwickshire 
Field Club at St Abb's in 1859— ^^ John Charles Langlands. 

Jackdaw. Corvus monedtUa, Lin. — Very abundant along the 
cliff-face. Mr. James Hardy, writing in 1864, remarks upon their 
rfecent colonization on the sea-cliffs, and of their increasing numbers 
in these haunts. As has often been remarked upon before, the 
increase of the Jackdaw, at sea-nurseries, appears to be the signal 
for a correspondingly rapid decrease of the following species. 

Chough Fregilus gracvlus (Lin.). — Selby notes it as " not un- 
common " at " St Abb's Head and adjoining coast " in 1833, but 
Hepburn, in 1850, says — "now extinct, except a solitary pair 
i^hich, I was informed, seldom strayed far from Fast Castle, a 
few miles to the eastward of the Head." [See remarks on this 
species, antea^ p. 113.] 

Starling. Stui'nus vulgaris^ Lin. — Abundant 

Rock Pipit. Ardhus obscurus (Lath.). — Common; noted by 
Selby, 1833. 

Rock Pigeon. Columba lima (Bris.). — Found commonly by 
Selby in 1833 (loc, cit), but attributed by Hepburn to the dovecot 
pigeons becoming wild. No doubt the flocks of coast pigeons found 
all along the coast as far as North Berwick and Tantallon Castle 
art greatly mixed with parti-coloured birds, much more so than the 
flocks found in the wild Hebrides, or even on the West Coast of 
Scotland. But I hardly think it would be safe to assert that the 
real wild " Rock " is not found at St. Abb's ; indeed, the wildness 
of the birds is only proof of the twidency to revert, and points to 
the probability of a considerable amount of real wild blood being in 
their veins. 

Common GulL Larua eanua, Lin. — Breeds on the rocks to the 



Digitized by 



Google 



118 PRO0BEDINO8 OF THB 

south of the Head (Selby, Proc, Berw, Nat F. Club, voL i, p. 21, 
1833). This colony at Emesheugh was the only one known to 
Hepburn in the South-east of Scotland. 

Kittiwake. Rissa tridadyla (Lin.). — Noted as numerous by 
Selby in 1833. Still numerous in 1850, according to Hepburn. 

Great Black-backed Gull. Ghroicocephalus icMhyaetus (Pallas). 
A siQgle pair were reported to Hepburn, by the boatman, as nesting 
annually on the Flod^arr adjoining the Skelly Rock, but he does 
not appear to have seen them himself, nor did we meet with them 
at that part, nor anywhere else in the cKflfs. 

Herring Gull. LartLs argentatus, GmeL — Abimdant on the 
grassy-topped islands and rocks of the undercliff, many of the nests 
being quite accessible from below when the sea is calm enough to 
admit of landing. 

Guillemot. Alca troile (Lin.). — Must be much scarcer now than 
in Hepburn's time — vide general remarks, antea, pp. 113-114. I 
failed to see a single Bridled bird. Hepburn mentions one being 
shot on the occasion of his visit. 

Oha. — The Black Guillemot, Uria grylle (Lin.). — Is noted by Mr. 
Selby as an occasional visitant at St. Abb's Head in winter (loc. cit. 
vol. L, p. 255). 

RazorbilL Alca tarda, Lin. — 

Pufl&n. Fralei'cula ardica (Lin.). — The Puffin appears to have 
been scarce even in Selby's time, as, in 1833, he only observed two 
or three specimens during his expedition, and Hepburn put down 
the total population at some dozen pairs. 

Green Cormorant. Phalacrocorax crisiaim (Faber). — Noted by 
Selby in 1833 (loc. cit), and a few pairs by Hepburn in 1850. 

Common Cormorant. Phalacrocorax carbo (Lin.). — Seen by 
Selby, but at a considerable distance from shore, and flying past. 
Stated by Hepburn to be commoner than the last species, but he 
seems not to have seen any number, as they tried " many a dark 
cave," but only saw two birds on the cliflfs, and some fishing parties 
off Emesheugh. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOGIBTt OF OLASGOW. 119 



II. — The Mammalia of Northrwest Perthshire, 
By Mr. William Horn. 

Having already given as complete a list as I could of the Birds 
of the North-west of Perthshire, I have now, as a supplement to 
it, written a list of the Mammals. 

Being, for the most part, a wild and mountainous country, all 
the rarer mammals were at one time well known. The Wild Cat, 
Polecat and Marten, now all but extinct, were formerly common all 
through the district, more especially in the parishes of Blair- Athole, 
Dunkeld, Fortingal, Kenmore and Killin. The Black Eat has 
been almost entirely superseded by his pugnacious rival the Brown 
Eat, which now swarms near all inhabited places. The Eabbit 
was a rare animal a hundred years ago, but now exists in countless 
numbers, many proprietors deriving large additions to their incomes 
from this source. The Squirrel, too, which had been extinct for 
some time, was re-introduced at Dunkeld by the Duke of 
Athole in 1776, and has become very numerous since large 
plantations of fir became common in the country. To such an 
extent have they increased, that, on one small estate in Strath-Tay, 
where a reward was offered for their skins, as many as three 
hundred couple have been killed in one winter. 

Besides those above mentioned, many species of wild animals 
were successfully introduced and acclimatised at Taymouth by the 
late Marquis of Breadalbane. The American Bison, many varieties 
of Deer from America and other countries, as well as a considerable 
number of other animals, might all have been seen here in one day. 
It is to be regretted that after the Marquis's death the different 
herds were dispersed. 

No one has a better knowledge of the fauna of Loch-Tay-side 
than Mr. Duncan Dewar, gamekeeper at Eemony, who has a most 
interesting collection made entirely by himself, and he has given 
me every assistance in this as well as in my former paper. I am 
also much indebted to Mr. J. A. Harvie-Brown, who allowed 
me to see his collected notes on the Wild Cat, Polecat, etc, in 
Scotland. 

The nomenclature and arrangement I have adopted are those 
followed by Mr. Edward E. Alston in his paper on the Mammalia of 
Scotland, already published by this^ Society. 



Digitized by 



Google 



IM raoonD«fO0 or 

I.— RECENT SPECIES. 
ObDBB L — CmBOPTSRiu 

Faintly: Veqperttliontdae. 

1. Long-eared Bat. Flecotus auritus (Lin.). — Pretty numerous 
in the neighbourhood of Loch Tay. 

Ohs, — Greater Horse-shoe Bat. Wiinolophus ferrtmi'eqtdnumf 
(Leach). — From the description I have received from Mr. Dewar ot 
a Bat found dead by him at Finlarig, near Loch Tay, I have but 
little doubt that it belonged to this species. It had a shoit horn 
above the nose, and was larger than any other species he had ever 
seen. Unfortunately he gave it away to Mr. Macrae, the late 
Marquis of Breadalbane's head gamekeepel', who is now de&d, aiid 
he does not know what became of the specimen. 

2. Common Bat. Vesperugo pipistreUaa (Schreb.). — Veiiy 
common. 

Ordkb IL — iKSBOnVOllA. 

Family: JSrinaceidae. 

3. Hedgehog. Ertnaceua europaeuSy Lin. — ^Veiy coininbn, but 
always killed by gamekeepers on account of its predacious habits. 
I have frequently known them trapped among pheasant coops, after 
having killed many young birds. 

Family: Talpidae, 
i. Mole. IbZpa eurqpaea^ Lin. — ^Very numeroiu in apite of 
^e enormous numbers trapped. I am informed by Mr. Dewftr 
that his information leads him to believe that they have e^ted in 
this district for at least IdO years. Formerly weasels and other 
vermin k^t them down very much, and they were not nearly so 
numerous as they are now. 

Family: Soriddae. 

5. Common Shrew. 8orex tetragonunuy Herm. — ConnnOb. 

Order III. — Carnivora. 
Family: Fdidae. 

6. Wild Cat. FdU caittSy Lin. — Formerly abundant^ but now 
extremely rare. A very large female was killed by Mr. D. Dewar 
in Finlarig Woods in 1869, and he still has it in his possessico. 
This is the last Wild Cat which I have heard of in this district. 
Thirteen years before^ in 1856, he killed a hag& male in a deep 
glen above Auchmore House, «iid ft wlui attit to tiie late Max^ws of 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATTJBAL HSMPOWr flOeWTT OT OLABOOW. 191 

Brtedalbtoe. It thus a noMe sjpeiciEaeni and, as l(&. Bewar lekM 
in a letter to Mr. J. A. Harvie-Brown, easily Imocked over las 
tenier with eaeh strdte of its paw, and turned twice upon hioosell 
when he went to save his dog. 

Mr. J. A. Haryie-Bh)wn, in The 2^oologi8ty Jim., 1861, says that 
tlM last Wild Cat killed in the district south of Glen D6chart was hj 
Malcolm Macpherson, upon Benmore, near Suie, in 1863 or 1864. 

Family: Canidae. 

7. Fox. Oands vtdpesy Lin. — Common on the hills in this 
district, where they feed on the white hares and rabbits, with aai 
oeeasionid grouse. Formerly there was a professional foxhunter in 
this part of the country who made his livelihood by killing foxes 
ami other veiinin. Now, however, he gets but little to do, and is 
(miy employed, so far as I can learn, at the head of Glen Lyon and 
in Balquidder, for the numerous keepers and shepherds now-d-days 
do all his work. They often turn out in considerable numbers with 
their dogs in autumn, and have regular foxhunts, killing frequently 
several in a day. I obtained a very fine specimen of the Mountain 
Fox, on the top of Farragbn, in 1874. 

Family: MusMidae.* 

8. iTelloW-breasted Marten. Marten sylDestriSy Nils. — One was 
killed at Eemony in 1844. In Oct., 1867, Mr. DewarMled 
a Marten at Finlarig, which he still has in his possession. 

9. Common Weasel. Mustela vulgaris, Erxl. — Common. 

10. Stoat or Ermine. Mudda erminea, Lin. — Extr^nely 
abundant It frequents old stone walls and cairns of stones. 
When in its white winter dress, with only a black tip to the tail, 
thfe fur is very pretty, and is the ermine of commerce. 

11. Polecat. Mustela putorius, Lin. — Like the Wild Cat this 
species was formerly common. Perhaps its most favourite haunts 
were the hills on the north side of Loch Tay, in Glen Lyon, and 
the country about Glen Doohart. Mr. Dewar tells me that he 
killed two Polecats, a male and female, in Feb., 1858, at Finkrig, 
aaid that these are the last he has seen or heard of. Mr. J. A. 
Barvie-Brotm has given me the following notes:— i" The Polecat 
Ijieeaaisfe extinct in Glen Queich, above Amulree, thirty years ago, 
viz., about 1850. One was killed on Ballechin Hill, in Strath- 
T^ ab&Oi the 'sa»e date, by Mr. Murray, now gamekefiper with 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 PRO0BBDINO8 OF THB 

Mr. James Stewart Robertson of Edradynate. They inhabited the 
east side of Drummond Hill in 1837. More recently, in 1880, two 
have been killed by Messrs. Duncan and Dickson, co-lessees of the 
Edinchip shootings at the head of Loch Earn. 

12. Badger. Melea taxus (Schreb.). — Still pretty common 
throughout the district, but not as much so as in former years, 
when there was less cultivation and game preserving. I have seen 
them myself among the rocks above Killiechassie towards evening, 
and have seen one taken out of a trap there. They are nearly 
extinct at the Kenmore end of Loch Tay, but are still found in 
Glen Lochay, on Morinish Hill, where Mr. Dewar has killed many 
of them, and in Glen Lyon. The old Gaelic name of the man 
employed to kill vermin was Brocan, or Badger-man. 

13. Otter. Dutra vulgaris^ Erxl. — Often seen in the Tay, 
Tummel, Garry, Lyon and other rivers, and many of the lochs in 
this district. The late Duke of Athole kept a pack of otter- 
hounds, and hunted them regularly on the Garry and TummeL 

Order V. — Artiodaottla. 
Family: Cervidae. 

14. Red-Deer. Cervus elaphus, Lin. — Common on Drummond 
Hill, near Taymouth, in Athole Forest, at the head of Glen Lyon, 
on the borders of the Black Mount, and in other places from which 
they often stray to great distances. Li Athole Forest, in 1845, 
there were said to be as many as 7000 Red-Deer.* In cold winters 
they are driven by hunger down to the low grounds, and frequently 
visit gardens and farm steadings at night, whence many never 
return to their old haunts. 

Obs, — Fallow-Deer. Cervus dama, Lin. — ^Thrives in the Park 
at Taymouth, and also exists in a semi-wild state in the large 
woods to the south of the road between Aberfeldy and Kenmore. 

15. Roe-Deer. Gapreolus capraeay Gray. — Abundantly dis- 
tributed throughout the district. 

Family: Bovidae, 

Qf)8. — White Bull Bos taunts, Lin. — A herd of white cattle 

of the same breed as those still existing at Cadzow Forest in 

Lanarkshire, and Chillingham in Northumberland, was preserved 

in Blair-Athole until the year 1834. t When the herd was dispersed 

♦ New Stat. Acct., Perthshire, p. 663. 
+ "Wild White Cattle of Great Britain." By Rev. J. Storer, Lon., 1879, p. 845. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT 800IBTY OF GLABOOW. 123 

in 1834 the Marquis of Breadalbane attempted to introduce them 
at Taymouth, and a few of the descendants of this herd still exist 
at Kilmorey House, Argyllshire, the property of Sir J. P. Orde, 
Bart. 

Ordbb VI. — Glirbs. 

Family: Sciuridae. 

16. Squirrel. Sciurus vulgaris, Lin. — Great numbers of 
Squirrels are to be found iq this district, where they were re- 
introduced, after becoming extinct, by the Duke of Athole, about 
the year 1776.* 

Family: Muridae. 

17. Black Eat. Mm rattus, Lin. — In Bell's British Quad- 
rupeds t I find that, while staying at Pitlochry in 1860, Col. 
Drummond Hay discovered a small colony of Black Eats in a drain. 
They were very shy, and decamped as suddenly as they came. 

18. Brown Eat. Mue decumanus, PalL — Now by far the 
commonest species of Rat in the country. It has almost succeeded 
in exterminating the Black Eat. 

19. House-Mouse. Mus muscvlus, Lin. — Far too common. 

20. Wood-Mouse, or Long-tailed Field-Mouse. Mua sylvaticus, 
Lin. — Very common. Does a great deal of damage to young 
plantations and gardens. 

21. Common Field-Vole or Short-tailed Field-Mouse. Arvicola 
agrestisy De Selys. — Pretty common. Mr. Dewar sent me one 
the other day for identification. 

22. Eed Field-Vole or Bank-Vole. Arvicola glareolua (Schreb. ). — 
Eare. Mr. Dewar obtained a specimen lately for me at Eemony. 

23. Water-Vole or Water-Eat. Arvicola amphibius (Lin.). — 
Both varieties of this species extremely abundant along the banks 
of the Tay, Tummel, and other streams and bums. 

Family: Leporidae, 

24. Common Hare. L^^ europaeus, PalL — Common on the 
low-lying ground in the valley of the Tay, especially at Castle 
Menzies, where they are killed in great numbers, and where they 
grow to an enormous size. At Killiechassie I have killed many of 

♦ Essay on the Squirrel, by Mr. J. A Haryie-Brown.<— .Ay^c Soy, Phy$, 

Soe., Edin., 1881. 

t 2nd ed., 1874, p. 808. 



Digitized by 



Google 



11 lbs. welgkt^ and (me of 12 Ibe. Mr. Dewar tn^&tioitt thatHi^ 
hea^iei^t he has weighed has been 11 lbs. 

2d. Mountain Hare. Lepus variabUiSy FalL — Fonnd in gteat 
numbers on all the higher hills. Mr. Dewar writes me that 31 
years ago Mr. Arch. Campbell, private secretary to the late Marquis 
of Breadalbane, killed 230 white hares with one gun, a muzzle- 
loader, at one drive, on Remony HilL Since then, in 1849, as many 
as 685 white hares have been killed on Remony Hill in a day. In 
1880, on one occasion, 500 were killed. At Ardeonaig, in 1880, 
509 were killed by the Earl of Breadalbane and his friends. The 
average weight of this species is between 6 and 7 lbs., though I have 
frequently weighed them up to 7i and 8 lbs. Mr. Dewar says 
that of all the White Hares he has weighed the heaviest Was 
7|lbs. 

26. Rabbit. Lepm cuntctduSy Lin. — Of kte years the Rabbit 
has increased to an enormous extent in the valleys of the Tay, 
Tummel, and Garry. This is especially the case at Blair Caistle. 
They Were brought to Taymouth in the year 1820 by Mr. John 
Cameron from Monzie, near Crieff, and holes were made for them 
near the river, east from Taymofuth Castle, as well as on Drumm6nd 
Hill, and in Blairmore, and Finlarig Woods to the north of Loch 
Tky. 

II.— FOSSIL AND EXTINCT SPECIES. 

Order L — Carnivora. 

Family: Canidae, 

1. Wdf. Oama lupuSy Lin. — Onfce common in the wilder parts 
of Perthshire. Li the New Stat. Acct. of Scotland,* the Ret. 
Robert Macdonald says that the Wolf, Wild Boar, and White Cow 
formerly inhabited the parish of Fortingal, and that maaiy places ill 
the district take their names from wild animak, as Rtdghe-OrTtiha- 
daidhy t.e., the haunt of the mastiff or wolf. In the Proceedings of 
the Society of Antiquaries,! the Rev. Mr. Porteous says that two 
Wolves, the last seen in Scotland, were chased from the Wbod of 
Trowan, and folldwed into the highlands where they were killed. 
Wolves were included in the game lists of the great hunting piarties 
at which the successive Earls of Athole entertained James Y. m 

* Perthshire, p. 542. 
t YoL 2. part i, titd N«w 8tit Aeet, FiBrthshire, p. 781. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HUTCNEIT 800I9ZT 01 OLASOOW. 126 

1528, and Queen Mary in 15d3, and there is abundant proof of 
tfe^ir existence in the following century.* 

Family: Uraidae, 
2. Brown Bear. Urms ardos, Lin. — ^Mr. Harting, in his 
'* Extinct British Animals/'f remarks that, in so far as history 
informs us, the Caledonian Forest was the chief stronghold of our 
British Bears, and quotes Bishop Leslie | to the same effect, as well 
as Camden, who, writing of Perthshire, observes, "This Athole is 
a country fruitful enough, having woody valleys, where once the 
Caledonian Forest (dreadful for its dark intricate windings, and for 
its dens of bears, and its huge, wild, thick-maned bulls) extended 
itself far and near in these parts.'' 

Obdbr IV. — Abtiodagttla. 
Family: Suidae, 
S. Wild Boar. Bus scrofa^ Lin. — Up to the middle of the 
1 3th century the Wild Boar was one of the favourite beasts of the 
chase in Scotland, and its popularity is attested by its name being 
preserved in many names of places in the Highlands. Li the parish 
of Fortingal, the Eev. Eobert Macdonald mentions TcmKtinrtuirc^ 
Le,y the knoll of the Boar.§ Li the " Old Statistical Account," two 
places are mentioned in Perthshire on the west side of Ben-y-gloe, 
Qarnrtoreyy and Corri64orey, — i.e., the hill and hollow of the 
Boars ; while in the same country is Loch-avrtuirc — i.e., the Boar 
Loch. II Mr. Alston, in his valuable paper on the Mammalia of 
Scotland, published by this Society in its Fauna of Scotland, says 
that he has been unable to ascertain how much later than the 
year 1263 Wild Boars existed in Scotland. II 

Famdly: Cervidae. 
(?6& — Elk. Alces maehlisy Ogilby. — In dredging Ochtertyre 
Loch for marl, very laige stags-horns have frequently been f ouiLd, 
and they have been supposed to be those of the Elk.** 

♦ Proc Nat, Hist, Soc Olas,, voL iv., part i, p. 82. t P. 20-21. 

X Be Origine, Moribus, etc., Scotoram/' 1678. 

§ New Stat. Acct., Perthshire, p. 842. 

U Old Stat. Acct. Soot., vol. ii, p. 478. 

f /Voc. NaL His^ Sac, Qlaa., voL iv. part i, p. 84. 

** New St«t, Aoot, P«rthabire^ p. 781. 



Digitized by 



Google 



126 PROOBBDINGS OF THB 

Family: Bovidae. 

4. Gigantic Fossil Ox or Urus. Bos primigenius^ Bqj. — ^The 
Rev. Mr. Macdonald of Fortingal, in his account of that parish in 
the New Stat. Acct.,* asserts that this species once existed in this 
district, and quotes the name, Dotre-norbogile, i,e.^ the thicket of 
the White Cow. 

According to Boethiusf, writing in 1526, White Cattle existed 
throughout the Caledonian Forest from Callander to Athole and 
Lochaber. A very perfect skull of this species was found at Blair- 
Athole, and is now preserved in the British Museum. J 



III. — On the Birds of the East of Sutherland, 
By Mr. Thomas E, Buckley, F.Z.S. - 

The following notes on the Birds of the East of Sutherland extend 
over a period of twelve years, from 1869 to 1880 inclusive, during 
which time I was either a resident in the county or else paid it long 
annual visits. My time in the spring was much taken up by salmon- 
fishing, and to be successful at this requires a very constant atten- 
dance at the river-bank ; when therefore I went out birds'-nesting I 
naturally gave preference to those species that had the greater interest 
in my eyes, such as hawks and waders. This will account in a great 
measure for my very scanty notes on the smaller birds ; for these, 
the south-eastern part of the county is mo^t suitable, as containing 
more cultivated ground, hedges, woods, etc., in which they delight. 

From the tameness of the eastern part of the county as compared 
with the west, the larger birds of prey are not nearly so numerous 
as might be expected, the Golden Eagle only breeding in one locality, 
or two at the most : one eyrie mentioned below having been 
deserted of late years. This was placed in an exceptionally wild bit 
of country quite unlike the surrounding district, and resembling 
much more the western division ; in this spot the last Wolf was 
killed in Sutherland, and here the Fox and Wild Cat still maintain 
a precarious footing. The Sea Eagle never seems to have bred here ; 
Peregrine Falcons used to be fairly common, but from the greater 
accessibility of their haunts h^-ve been the more easily destroyed. 

* Perthshire, p. 642. 

t "Scotorum Historiae a Prima Gentis Origme," Paris, 1674; fol. 6, 1. 68. 

X Owen'a " British Fossil Mammals," p. 498, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 127 

The same may be said of the Common Buzzard. The smaller 
Eaptores still hold their ground fairly, and the Owls are, if anything, 
increasing.* 

Among the smaller birds, I should say that, from what I can hear, 
all, with the exception of the Goldfinch, are increasing, both residents 
and migrants. This of course is accounted for by the greater extent 
of cultivated land, and also the great number of plantations springing 
up on every side, which must greatly increase the food supply, 
and may ultimately aflfect the climate itself. Hard winters, such as 
that of 1878-1879, have a great effect on the soft-billed birds; in 
he spring of 1879 I never saw a Missel Thrush at Balnacoil, and 
scarcely a Gray Wagtail; even the hard-billed birds were much 
scarcer, and there was not one Willow Wren for four of the year 
before ; the hardy little Wren, too, suffered greatly, and all the sum- 
mer visitants were much scarcer. I much regret that I was not in 
the county in the spring of 1880, as I should like to have seen if 
the exceptionally mild weather then prevailing brought the usual 
nimibers of birds back to their old breeding haunts. 

Many birds that are residents spread out into the inland woods 
during the breeding season and retire more to the coast for the 
winter, as the food supply soon dies out when the hard weather sets 
in: most of the Thrushes, Blackbirds, and even the Chaffinches 
certainly do so, while only a certain number remain about the 
houses and farm-steadings. Other birds, again, appear more 
numerous, such as the Bullfinch, and Long-tailed and Cole Tits, these, 
however, no doubt receiving large additions from abroad. Besides, 
being birds of rather retiring habits in the nesting season, they are 
more easily noticed when the leaves are off the trees. 

Amongst the Corvidae the Book and Jackdaw appear to be on 
the increase; the Raven and "Hoodie" Crow are still fairly numerous, 
especially the latter, despite every effort to exterminate it ; the Mag- 
pie is very rare now. 

When we come to the family of Grouse we find the eastern part 

♦ For some time back I have been collecting statistics of the various kinds of 
" Vermin " killed, both in Sutherland, and in Scotland generally. These lists, 
going back in many instances to a pretty early date, are most instractive to 
the student of Geographical Distribution, as regards certain species ; and at 
some future time I hope to give some account of these records. To any one 
willing to assist me it will give me pleasure to forward the necessary printed 
forms for filling up, and such lists I especially desire to receive from laige 
Highland Estates.— J. A. H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



188 PBoofflronves ov noE 

of the couBty pai^ofokrly well adi^pted for them. Ckousonevw 
80^11 to flourish really well in a mountainous country; flat or un- 
dulating ground, with hills sloping gradually down to the rivers, and 
well intersected with convenient bums, being what suits them best. 
The reason of this is partly that in a very mountainous country it 
is very rare to get a sufficient depth of peat for the heather to grow 
well in, the constant heavy floodings seemingly washing off all the 
good soiL Even when the heather looks well in such places, it will 
take seven or eight, or more, years, to grow again after burning, 
whereas on good groimd it would only take (me or two years; 
and generally a sort of rank coarse grass comes up after all. 
From my own observations I find that heather in these mountainous 
districts looks hard and sapless, but wherever you find a piece of 
good sound heather, there the Grouse are. Good ground, too, absorbs 
the wet much more quickly, and consequently the young birds are not 
drowned so often as they are on the bad grounds, where the 
water pours down every little runlet after each shower. Of course 
these high hills are the very places for the Ptarmigan, which is 
rare on the East Coast. Black Game are much more independent 
of good heather : they like a mixture of heather, brackens, rushes, 
and grass, and are fond of the vicinity of water, at least in the early 
part of the season. They should, therefore, be numerous in the West 
and in the East, where such combinations are found, but Grey-hens 
are apparwitly very bad mothers, and a heavy shower of rain when 
the birds are very young destroys numbers. 

Waders are numerous in such localities as suit them : Greenshanks, 
Curlews, and Golden Plovers on the hill ; Lapwings and Eedshanks 
on the green flats so often met with along the bum- or river-sides. 
The Greenshank is not a sociable bird, a pair here and there being 
met with throughout the hills ; the Bedshanks, on the contrary, are 
sociable, that is to say, when you meet with one pair there are 
generally one or two others not far off, at least such is my experience. 
It is singular that the Dunlin should be so comparatively rare, but 
it may be much commoner than I suppose, as it apparently likes a 
very wet "flow" to breed in, and of these there were only two or 
three in my neighbourhood, which I rarely visited during the 
breeding season. There are only two places on the East Coast well 
adapted for Waders in the winter; the first of these, the Little Ferry, 
I hi^ve often visited, rarely seeing anything, however^ but Oyi|b^- 
catchers and a very few Dunlins ; the second place, the DosQ0eh'i^ktt^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL raSTORY SOOIBTT OP GLASGOW. 129 

I have never visited, but it covers a large extent of ground, and I 
have no doubt large flocks of different species would be met with. 
Of Ducks there are great quantities in both places ; at the former 
place the flocks are comprised mostly of Widgeons, with a few Wild 
Duck, Scaup, and the ubiquitous Golden-eye. Pintail have been 
obtained here on one or two occasions ; as the spring advances large 
flocks of Teal congregate in the Fleet, where it enters the Little 
Ferry, near a place called " The Moimd," and their whistling call 
is heard on aU sides. 

The East of Sutherland is not nearly so well supplied with lochs 
as is the West, the eastern part of the parish of Kogart excepted, 
but still there is a fair number, and when we go more to the centre 
of the coimty we get to the larger lochs, such as, Baden Loch, Loch- 
an-ruair, etc. All these are much frequented by Divers, Ducks, 
Geese, and Gulls, which breed more or less numerously about the 
shores. The Geese, I am afraid, are not nearly as numerous as they 
used to be, though they are now unmolested, when formerly they 
used to be shot as " flappers." Gulls are very abundant, in spite of 
the war waged against them, both by shepherds and keepers, who 
kill them, or smash their eggs whenever they get the chance. 

I think from these few remarks it will be seen that Sutherland 
is as interesting a county as the naturalist can well visit, and I 
believe further research would bring out many new facts, and add, 
for certain, to the recorded number of species breeding in it, some 
that are now only supposed to do so. What is much wanted is the 
presence of a good resident naturalist in the county, one who is 
thoroughly well acquainted with all the commoner species, who would 
be able to detect by ear or eye a new or uncommon bird at once, 
and who could afford to give plenty of time to the pursuit, 
especially in the breeding season. 

It will be seen that in the following list, comparatively few rare 
visitants are mentioned, and this may no doubt arise in great 
measure from there being so few close observers in a district so 
wide, more than from the absence of the birds themselves. 

LIST OP SPBOIBS. 

1. Golden Eagle. Aquila chrysaetus (Lin.). — A few years pre- 
vious to 1870 there used to be two nesting-places of this bird on 
the East coast. Li one, however, one or both of the old birds used 
to be shot year after year when sitting, but two or three years 

VOL. V. I 



Digitized by 



Google 



130 fitooBm>mcte oir ftiis 

before I came to the county the place was desertied. Thid ilest Was 
placed near the Sletal Cftim,in Glen Loth, where the last Sutheriand 
wolf is supposed to have been killed. Eagles visit this place yearly, 
D(^ in spring and autumn, and I have often seen one or a pair 
soaring roipid; on one occasion I saw three together near this in the 
autumn. Ai that season Eagles are not 'uncommonly seen in 
different parts of i^e East coast. 

The other nesting-place is, I believe, still used. In 1878 one 
young bird was hatched out, and was so conspicuous that a shep- 
herd told me he could see it a mile off showing white in the nest, 
which was placed in such an accessible spot, that the same shep- 
herd said, with a little care he could have taken a horse into it. 
The birds and nest are strictly preserved here, and also in the Reay 
forest* 

My keeper once trapped an Eagle which, however, managed to 
loose the string by which the trap was fastened to a stone; the man 
pursued the Eagle for some time, getting pretty close to it (he had 
not his gun oiit that day or could easily have shot it), till at last 
the Eagle hit the trap against a stone, broke it, and so escaped. 

2. White-tailed Eagle. Hdliaetus cUbicilla (Lin.). — Much rarer 
than the Golden Eagle^ and I never heard of even an old nesting- 
place near. I have now and then seen what I thought was this 
bird on the wing, in the autumn, and one young one that was 
trapped by a friend of mine is now in the Dunrobin Museum, 
where there is also an albino specimen, shot at Auchinduich, in 
Nov. 1854. 

3. Osprey. Pandion hdliaMua (lin.). — Rarely seen on the East 
coast. I fancied I once saw one at Loch Naver in 1870 or 1871. 
In 1879 an Osprey came down to Loch Brora for a week at the 
latter end of June, and on one or two occasions I saw it fishing. 
During the time it was there I saw it every day. 

Oba. — I saw an Osprey, one Simday in the autumn of 1874, fly 
over a house on the Cromarty Firth, where I was then living. It 
was followed by a mob of Gulla 

4. Peregrine Falcon. Fdlco peregrintta, TunstalL — Still fairly 
common, though shot or trapped out in one or two of the more easily 
accessible places. A pair breeds nearly every year on Carral Rock, 
overlooking Loch Brora. One year they changed to a rocky bum 
on the other side of the Loch, where they reared one young one, 
which was tatosn; th^se was an addled egg also in the itodt. Wleh 



Digitized by 



Google 



KATURAL Qf^TO^T l=K)QP!TT pT GLASGOW. Iff} 

breeding on the Carrol side they are preaervecl, being in the Duke 
of Sutherland's forest. One bird was taken in a pole-tmp on my 
ground, but they are not often caught that way, as they are, I 
think more in the habit of perching on the side of any eminence 
than on the top of it. 

5. Iceland Falcon. Fdlco islandvsy GmeL — A fine specime^, which 
is in the Dunrobin Museum, was killed at Sciberscross, in 1868. 
Another was taken some years back at Altnaharra, and is now in 
the possession of Mr. Akroyd, who was the shooting tenant at that 
time. 

6. Merlin. Falco aesalon, TunstalL — A cpmmon bird cai the 
East coast, breeding in long heather, and returning, as I fancy most 
Hawks do, to the same place year after yeaj. In reference to what 
if said in one of Mr. Harvie-Brown's papers on the number 
of eggs in this bird's nest, I certainly never got more than four.* I 
once got only three, on May 7th, 1872, and from this n^st I shot the 
male, but it is probably that the hen had not thqn finished laying. 

7. Kestrel Falco tinnunctdus^ Lin. — Extremely pommo^. In 
a rocky channel through which the river Brora flows, there were, 
nearly every year, three or foujr nests of Kestrels within a very 
limited space. One yeai:, however, the keeper caught eight Kestrels 
in one place in a pole-trap set for Hoodie Crows, which reduced 
them a good deal, so in the breeding season I ordered the trap not 
to be set in that place again. Kestrels leave this part of the 
coimtry entirely, or nearly so, in the winter. I never rememb^ 
seeing one then. 

Ohs, — One Kestrel, or a pair, was observed for soflie time in 
the month of January, near Attadale, on Lochcarron, in the west ojL 
Ross-shire. 

8. Sparrow Hawk. Accijpiter nisvs (JAix,). — Very common in thp 
autumn, when many young birds appear about the fields on the 
coast Though, no doubt, it breeds commonly in the big woods 
about Dunrobin, I only knew of one nesting-place in the Gordon- 
bush woods, near Loch Brora. A small clump of tall spruce firs 
stood close together, and here, year after year, a pair of Sparrow- 
hawks built. I took the nest first in 1872, and after an absence of 
seven years, went back in 1879, and took the eggs again. I 
knew the hen and young ones had been shot on one or two 
occasions between these years. 

* JRroc, Jan. Slst, 1871, revised, May, 1875, toL ii, part l, p. 7(|. 



Digitized by 



Google 



132 PR00BBDIKCH9 OF THE 

9. Buzzard. Btdeo vulgaris^ Leach. — Not a common species 
on the East coast, possibly from want of suitable localities 
for nesting. I have seen them at most times of the year ; and they 
are so easily trapped that the wonder is there are so many left A 
pair once bred in the rocky part of the river Brora, referred to 
imder the Kestrel, and the eggs, two in number, were taken on the 
11th of May, 1874, and sent to me. I never heard of their breed- 
ing there before or since. The keeper told me that neither of the 
birds were killed. It seems a great pity that the Buzzard should 
be so persistently killed, as it is a comparatively harmless bird, and 
a fine looking object on the wing. 

10. Rough-legged Buzzard. Buteo lagqpua (GmeL). — I saw 
a specimen of this bird in Mr. Macleay's shop in Inverness, and 
which, he told me, had been sent from Helmsdale to be stuffed. I 
have also seen specimens from Berriedale, the Duke of Portland's 
forest, in Caithness. 

11. Honey Buzzard. Pemis apivorus (Lin.). — This species has 
certainly occurred thrice on the East coast, once at Dunrobin in 
the summer of 1878, and another example was killed in the Helms- 
dale strath, near Kildonan, and is now in the Dunrobin Museum. 
I forget the year, but it was in the early autumn. This latter is a fine 
specimen, and, if I remember rightly, is a male ; the other is not so 
good. One shot by a friend staying with me at Balnacoil on the 
11th of Sept, 1879, had still a little down adhering to the tips of 
the feathers.* 

12. Hen-Harrier. Circus cyaneua (lin.). — ^This destructive bird 
still seems to hold its ground well, the East coast being apparently 
well adapted to it. The same site is occupied year after year, 
which makes it easy for a keeper, once he knows the ground well, 
to find out every Hawk's nest on his shooting. One day I took two 
nests without any information as to where I could get them, 
containing four and six eggs respectively, and I shot the hens from 
each, missing the cock at one nest, and it, I find from a note 

* See my remarks to tbia Society upon the occurrences of Honey Buzzards 
along the East Coast of Scotland, and regarding its having once at least bred 
in Scotland. Proe., 80th Sept., 1879, yoL iv., pp. 145-7. As will be seen 
there, the birds breeding are belieyed to leave about the middle of Sept, and, 
as they are late breeders, laying in June and July, they probably do not, in 
this country at least, rear more than one brood. Eggs taken on 8rd July were 
quite fresh.— J. A. H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTOBT SOOIBTT OF GLASGOW. 133 

in my Egg-book, waa the noisier of the two. The cock is by 
no means easy to get at the nest, rarely venturing within shot, 
while the hen is almost certain to come, but he appears, however, 
to roost near it, and by stalking may be got. In May, 1879, I 
went up to a shepherd's house for a night, with a friend who was 
anxious to get a nest, and the old birds, if possible ; the hen was 
shot at once, and we set a trap in the nest for the cock, which we 
saw at a distance. A shepherd who went out late to look at the 
trap found the cock sitting near, but not on the nest, and it 
allowed him to approach pretty close, so my friend went out and 
returned with the bird. Except at the breeding season the old 
male seems to be rarely seen, whereas females and young birds are 
very common. I never saw it mentioned in any work on Natural 
History, but keepers have a theory that Hen-Harriers, and Merlins, 
almost invariably have their nests facing the north, and it is 
generally the case, as I have often proved since.* In one nest of 
the Hen-Harrier's that I took in 1879, one egg had been sucked, and 
another rolled out of the nest, by a Hoodie Crow, apparently, which 
we saw sitting on a rock not far off. 

13. Tawny Owl. Strix shidtda, Lin. — Breeds near Eosehall, 
where I have often heard it. From one hollow tree, the only one 
on the place that I was then occupying, I have twice taken the 
eggs, although I never saw the bird, the reason being that on one 
occasion my man, seeing the owl come out of the hole, hit it on the 
back with a stick. After such treatment it naturally deserted ; this 
was in 1875. In 1877 the bird again laid in the same place ; this 
time one of my setters put his head into the hole and so frightened 
the bird that she again deserted ; there was, however, no doubt of its 
being the nest of the Tawny Owl. The species would breed, I am 
sure, much more frequently were there more hollow trees for its 
accommodation. A female that I got in Sutherland was trapped, the 
bait being the inside of a rabbit ; it was one of a pair that used to 
breed near Balnacoil, where I was then living. A shepherd told me 

* Of four nests known to me in the West of Sutherland, three of which I have 
yisited myself one faces the north, and is placed in old, deep, rank heather ; 
one £su:es the east, and is placed on almost perfectly bare ground, and a third 
&ces the west, in deep heather by the side of a bum, and is only removed about 
fifty paces from a Merlin's nest, also facing the west, and on the same side of 
the bum. These nests are not actually in Sutherland^ but are across the 
Bosf-ihire march. — J. A. H.-B. * 



Digitized by 



Google 



o| its negt in a hollow tree iie<ur t^eie, but I neyer h^ time to visit 
it ^ the billing sei^^c^^ Tlus species seems to be spre^^ling much 
in Scotlfuid, 9s I have seen quantities sent in to Mr. Macleay's shop 
ij^ wiuter and spring to be stuffed. 

14. Short-eared GwL Asio acdpitrinvs (PalL).-r-I never s^iw 
this Iftrd but onc^ when I flushed it out of some long heather one 
d^kj in autumn, wh^n out stalking. The eggs masked as " Short- 
eared Owrs " in the Dunrobin Museum should be received with 
cf^tiop, as the d^tte of their capture is given as March, 1847 ; the 
bird ilself is ^rtaiply not common.^ 

15. JSTight-jar. papripivigm eurqpneus, lin.— A common sum- 
mer bird, breeding about the woods near Brora. The only nest J 
ever took was on the 16th of July, 1878 ; the eggs were quite fresh, 
and placed under a tuft of heather o^ the bare ground. 

16. Swift Cyp9^u8 a$m (Lin.).--rCouimon in the summey, 
Si^Vj^r^l pajtrs used tp breed in some old disused houses in the 
village of Brora. 

17. Swallow. HvrV(7i4o rusftca,, I^in. — Not by any piew^S com- 
mon, though a few pairs appear every summer. 

18,. Souse Martin. Chelidon whic^ (Lin.). — Appears in about 
the 8^(9 numbers as the preceding. 

19. Sand Martin. (7(p^yZenpan(jt(Lin.).-^The commonest specif 
of all the Swallow tribe, breeding in colonies in any suitable sandy 
bftnk. 

^. Tree Cieepe??. CerOiiafiwdliqns^JAxi. — Common and breeds. 
On^ nest I found wa^ under the bark of an oak tree. This bird 
used Ijhe oame place at l^ast two years in succession. 

21. Comnpn Wi^ Troglodytes panndtis, KocL-^This little 
bird seemp to frequent the very wildest places on the hill, being 
genei^y f ou^d« when inhere, aU along the bum-sides, up to their 
sources, even in the winter. 

22. Sedge Warbler. 4croceph<du8 stre^ertis, Vieill. — Com- 
m,QX^ in sviitable localities about ^l^ra and neighbourhood, where I 
have often heard its chattering notes. 

23* WhiteUiroai ^Ivia ru/Oy Bodd.— Often seen along the 
banks of the Lower Brora, and, if I remember rightly, about Dunrobin. 

* A thoroiigh ezaminatioa of the Danrobin Ma9eiim specimens appears 
desiiable. All 8pe<amen« which bear no distinct history, or about which th^ 
slightavt 4>ubt qm pif^ ^loold be rej^te<^ fnd their pla^se supplied by 
thoroughly authentic examples. — J. A H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATUBAL msTdSr SdOHttt 6f GLASaOW. 1^ 

U. Wiildw Wren. Phpttosedpns ifikhihB (LiiL).-^'fhe ¥ery 
commonest of all the warblers, and I have seen many nests about 
Balnaeoil and the neighbourhood. On one occasion I found a nest 
in the fork of a large tree, at least four feet from the ground. During 
the breeding season the mdes seem to be answering one anoth^ in 
every direction. 

26. Wood Wren. Phylloecopns sibilatrix (Bechst). — I just ob- 
served this species at Glenrossal near Rosehall, in 1875. I had 
only within the last year or two made its acquaintance in the South 
of England, so recognized it the more readily. Again when going 
through the grounds about Dunrobin, in 1877 or 1878, with a friend, 
we heard it pretty commonly, so it is evidently far from rare on l^e 
East coast. I have had no opportunities of looking for its nest^ but 
it must have been breeding, as it was towards the end of May, 6t 
the beginning of Jime, when we observed it* 

26. Wheatear. Saxicola oenanihe (lin.). — A very commoA 
species, breeding in the old dykes which are so often seen about the 
green patches of grass throughout Sutherland. I once got a nest ul 
a hole in the ground from which a stone had been removed. On 
another occasion I observed one of these birds hovering persistently 
over a spot at the roadside, and on going up found an adde)r Ijihg^ 
Which I killed. 

27. Whinchai Pratincola ruhetra (Lin.). — A common summer 
visitant all along the coast. 

28. Stonechat. Pratincola rubicola (Lin.). — As common as i^e 
kstj a certiEun nimiber remaining in favourite k>caliti^ the winter 
through.! 

29. Redstart. RuticfUla jphoenicurus (lin.). — ^Apparently in- 
creasing. There were one or two pairs breeding about Glenroesiil, 
and also at Balnaeoil, while, I believe, they are much commoner thatt 
they used to be about Dunrobin. I got a nest of seven eggs out of 
l^e garden wall at BfiJnacoil, and on another occasion found a nest 
of young ones near there, t 

* As I have elsewhere remarked already, it seems desirable to collect localities 
in Scotland where the Wood Warbler is found, as its distribution, as yet, is 
but imperfectly worked out. — J. A. H.-B. 

t The comparative distribution of these two species throughout Scotland 
would form a good subject for a paper. — J. A. H.-B. 

t Redstarts bred and reared a brood at Inohnadamph in the West for the first 
time in 1880. [The late £. R. Alston in Ut. to J. A. H.-B., 27th August, 
1880].-4. A. H*-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 PBOOEBDINGS OF THE 

30. Redbreast Eriihacus ruhectda (Lin.). — I don't think that 
in any place is this species numerous, though common enough 
in most places. It is fairly common all along the East coast. 

31. Hedge Sparrow. Accentor modularis (lin.). — About as 
common as the Robin ; the only nest I ever took contained three 



32. Great Titmouse. Parus majors Lin. — I have never seen this 
species myself, not having had the opportunity of closely examining 
the vicinity of Dunrobin, which is the most likely locality. 

33. Cole Tit Parus ater, Lin. — The commonest Tit in the 
breeding season. I got two sets of eggs from one nest in 1878; the 
first, of six eggs, on the 6th of May, and the second, of seven eggs, on 
the 13th of the same month ; the nest was in a small hole in the 
ground, and was lined with rabbit's fur almost entirely. 

34. Long-tailed Tit. AcrediUa caiidata (Lin.), — Very common in 
the winter, and no doubt breeds also. Both this and the Cole Tit 
go about in small flocks in the winter, and seem to be much more 
abundant then than at other times. 

35. Pied Wagtail Motacilla litgubriSfTemm, — Fairly common in 
the breeding season, but scarce, if not altogether absent, in the 
winter; it appears about the time of seed-sowing.* 

36. Gray Wagtail Motacilla stUphureOy Bechst — Common in 
the breeding season, and seems to nest at, or near, the same spot 
year after year. Appears to leave in the winter, or is then, at least, 
very rare. 

37. Meadow Pipit Anthus pratensis (Lin.). — ^Very common, 
and more so even in the breeding season than in the winter. 

38. Tree Pipit Anthus trivicUiB (Lin.). — ^Two pairs bred at 
Glenrossal, in 1875, and I procured one nest There may have 
been more about Rosehall, as the bit of wood in which I found 
these two pairs was very small t 

39. Rock Pipit Anthus obscurus (Lath.). — Common along the 

* Hence the names " Seed Lady/* used in Peeblesshire, and " Seed-bird," in 
Berwickshire. I have a considerable list of local names of birds, collected from 
all parts of Scotland, and would be glad to add to their number. I have also 
collected their local Gaelic names, but this list must necessarily be imperfect. — 
J. A. H.-B. 

t Rosehall at present appears to be the limit of the extension of many species 
towards the West At Inchnadamph, up to 1879, I had only met with one 
Tree Pipit— see my first paper in our Proe, vol ii, part L, p. 98.t-J. A. H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 137 

shore in winter. On the north side of Helmsdale there are very 
suitable localities for its breeding, but I have never had time to 
examine them there. 

40. Dipper. Cindus aquaticus, Bechst. — Most bums have a pair 
or more of these cheerful little birds upon them, and they breed 
pretty much in the same spot, year after year. Early in February, 
if not before, the male may be seen, singing away on a stone or 
lump of ice in the middle of the river. One nest that I found 
would most certainly have been washed away the first heavy flood 
that came in the river, if I had not taken it ; the birds never came 
there again.* 

41. Missel Thrush. Turdus viscivorusy Lin. — Common and 
increasing. They are later in building in the North than in 
England, as I find I took a nest at Glenrossal on the 18th of June, 
1875, which contained four fresh eggs. I have often seen the nest 
and old birds at Balnacoil. 

42. Song Thrush. Turdiis musicus, Lin. — Common everywhere. 
One nest I took at Balnacoil was placed on the ground among a 
tuft of rushes, and that, too, in a very damp place ; the nest was 
deserted. 

43. Blackbird. Turdm merulay Lin. — Scarcely as common as 
the Song Thrush. 

44. King Ouzel. Turdus torquatusy Lin. — ^A common species in 
the breeding season. It is a shy bird, and I . have rarely taken its 
nest. Those I procured in Sutherland contained three, four, and 
five eggs respectively. Stray specimens often remain until very 
late in the autumn. 

45. Fieldfare. Turdus pilaris^ Lin. — This species and the 
Redwing arrive in large numbers in the autumn, and the flocks at 
first remain on the hill-sides. The greater bulk, however, soon go 

* Once persecuted as a fish destroyer in the West of the county, now not so 
generally molested. 1 am glad to say I have succeeded in getting the blood- 
money removed from their heads at one place, where rewards were paid up to 
as, late as 1880. That they cannot have been common here is shewn by 
statistics which 1 have. In 1875, 10 were killed ; in 1876, 7 ; in 1878, 6 ; in 
1879, 12. Previous to 1875 no records of any being killed appear to have been 
kept, though records of other species of ** vermin," in my possession, date back 
as far as 1870, in this district. It is earnestly hoped the blood-money en these 
innocent heads will be everywhere entirely withdrawn. In the Reay country, 
in 1878, and up to the first six months of 1879, no less than 868 were 
slaughtered. This destruction has also been put a stop to.— J. A. H.-B. 

TOL. V. • K 



Digitized by 



Google 



138 PROOBBDINGS OP THB 

off further south, and only a few stragglers, or at the utmost very 
small flocks, are seen in the winter, the most of these even disap- 
pearing if the winter be very severe. 

46. Spotted Flycatcher. Mtiscicapa grisola, Hu, — Very common 
species. 

47. Pied Flycatcher. Muscicapa atricapilla, Lin. — I obtained 
one specimen near Gordonbush on the 27th of May, 1872.* 

48. Great Gray Shrike. Lanivs eoscubitor, Lin. — I have on two 
occasions noticed this bird, in both cases in the autumn. 

49. Magpie. Pica rustica (Scop.). — Getting very scarce now, as 
compared with a few years ago, so much so, that when shooting 
with a friend last year, I was asked not to shoot one if I saw it, as 
they had become nearly extinct.! 

50. Raven. Corvus coraxy Lin. — Very common, especially in 
the late spring and autumn. I do not understand where they can 
come from, as nests are scarce on the East coast ; yet, about the 
lambing time or a little later, I have often seen a dozen in a day. 
In a certain rock near Balnacoil I have seen from eighty to one 
hundred and fifty Ravens roosting; they come in detachments 
from all parts of the country. So numerous are they that, on one 
occasion, when wanting a pair for a friend, I sent my keeper to the 
rock, and though he missed the first shot, he got two with the 
second, t 

* This appears to have been the only specimen ever obtained in Sutherland 
until the spring of the present year, 1881, when an apparently decided and 
extraordinary irruption of the species took place, the individuals observed 
arriving on or about the same day that the Spotted Flycatcher and Cuckoo 
appeared — viz., the 8rd of May. I first heard of two found dead on the 
public road, and of another, bearing marks of shot wounds, which eventually 
came into my possession. The next I heard of were two apparently paired, 
which appeared near Kintradwell, Brora, as I am informed by an obliging 
correspondent, Mr. William Houston, of Kintradwell, who writes me: — " They 
are undoubtedly rare on this coast, and I have never either heard or seen of 
any with the exception of a single specimen secured by Buckley some years 
ago in a strangely desolate bum at Balnacoil." — J. A. H.-B. 

+ From tables of ** vermin " killed at Dunrobin between 1878 and 1880, I 
find that in 1873, 16 were killed; in 1874, 26. None again till 1877, when 4 
were killed; in 1878, 2; in 1879, 8; in 1880, 5; in all 56 in 8 years. 

t These large flocks of Ravens are not commonly seen in Scotland, and 
such gatherings are not general, but only very local. Other great gathering- 
places known to me are at the other extremity of Scotland, viz. , at certain 
points along the Wigtownshire coast, and also on the hills of the Stewartry of 
Kirkcudbright. ~ J. A. H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTT OF OLASaOW. 139 

51. Hooded Crow. Corvus comixy Lin. — This most mischievous 
and destructive of all birds still holds its own, notwithstanding that 
every keeper^s hand is, and rightly so, against it ; it is, however, 
slowly decreasing in most places. The nest of the Hooded Crow 
referred to before, as having begun the destruction of the Hen- 
Harrier's nest, was found placed under a stone on the hill-side 
amongst some long heather ; a position I never heard of before 

Ohs. — ISTot far from these two nests was a Merlin's, a marvellous 
collection of " vermin " so near together.* 

52. Carrion Crow. Corviis cor one, Lin. — I saw a bird that I 
took to he this, walking about with a " Hoodie " one day, when 
driving down to the river, and I heard later on that a Black and 
a Hooded Crow had been shot at one nest by one of the Dunrobin 
keepers.! 

53. Rook. Corvus frugilegusy Lin. — There is one very large 
Rookery at Dunrobin, and several smaller ones in diflferent places 
on the East coast. There would be a great increase of these birds 
if they were left alone at the breeding season, but in several places 
they are then fired at and the nests pulled down. 

54. Jackdaw. Corvus monedvlay Lin. — Another abundant, and 
very destructive species, nesting in old banks and low cliffs. These 
birds destroy most of the seabirds' eggs along the shore, and eat the 
rabbits out of the snares. Nothing seems to drive them away 
completely. 

55. Starling. Stumus vulgar is^ Lin. — A bird that, though rare 
ten or twelve years ago, is now comparatively common. A pair 
bred in the spout of my house at Balnacoil, about ten miles from 
the coast. 

56. Bullfinch. Pyrrhula europaea, VieilL — Fairly common, and 
resident. Much seldomer seen in the summer than in the winter, 
when they appear to go about in small flocks. 

* See my remarks also under Hen-Harrier, antea, p. 132. As regards the 
breeding of Hooded Crows upon the ground, this is the situation almost invari- 
ably chosen in North Uist, simply from the lack of either rocks or trees. 
I have found several such nests, usually in sloping banks of long heather, and 
I have seen a shepherd's dog there, that, besides being a good otter dog, was a 
capital bird's-nester, and actually poijUed the nests. In South Uist Kestrels 
also breed on the ground. — J. A. H.-B. 

t For an account of accumulations of Carrion Crows in the Tongue district 
of late years, and of nesting sites, see my 2nd Report on Scottish Ornithology. 
Proe., vol. iv., p. 307.— J. A. H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



140 PROOEBDINOS OF THE 

67. Greenfinch. lAgurin'ua Moris (Lin.). — Not a very numer- 
ous species. 

68. Goldfinch. Cardmlis degans, Steph. — I have never seen 
one of these birds on the East coast, though I am informed that 
they still breed at Dunrobin. They are, however, very much 
scarcer than fonnerly. 

69. Siskin. Cardmlis spinus (Lin.). — I heard of the young 
ones being taken near Dunrobin to be brought up as cage birds.* 

59b. Crossbill. Loxia curvirostra, Lin. — This interesting species 
also breeds at certain localities in the East of Sutherland.! 

60. Lesser Kedpoll. Linota rufeseens (VieilL). — Breeds rather 
commonly in some of the birch and alder woods on the East coast. 
One nest I took on the 13th June, 1877, contained four fresh eggs, 
and was made of twigs of birch and heather, then fine grass, and 
lined with hair, moss, feathers, hare and rabbit fur, and thistle- 
down ; it was placed on the very top of a birch tree. Another 
taken out of an alder contained two hard-set and two addled eggs ; 
this was on the 25th of May, 1878. 

61. Linnet. Linota cannabina (Lin.). — An abundant species, 
breeding in the whinbushes that are so common along the coast. 

62. Chaffinch. Fringilla coelebs, Lin. — The very commonest 
small bird on the East of Sutherland, and seems to be everywhere ; 
those breeding inland draw down to the coast and the stackyards 
in the winter. 

63. House Sparrow. Passer domesticus (Lin.). — Common and 
spreading. 

63b. Tree Sparrow. Passer montanus (Lin.). — 

64. Common Bunting. Emberiza miliaria, Lin. — A common 
species, some remaining through the winter, but apparently receiv- 
ing additions in the breeding season. 

66. Yellow Hammer. Emberiza citrinella, Lin. — ^Like the 
preceding, very abundant. Those that breed any distance from 
cultivation, as they do at Balnacoil, go to the coast or to the 
neighbouring stackyards in the winter. 

66. Black-headed Bunting. Emberiza mslanocephala, Scop. — 
Common in suitable localities 

* The Siskin also breeds, or used to breed, Dearer the shores of the Dornoch 
Firth.— J. A. H.-B. 

t Vide Proceedinga, voL ii, part L, page 102. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTT OP GLASGOW. 141 

67. Snow Bunting. Pledrophanes nivalis (Lin.). — A common 
winter visitant, arriving in large flocks. 

68. Sky Lark. Alauda arvensis^ Lin. — Much commoner, 
apparently, from spring to autumn than during the winter, and I 
fancy most of them migrate. They certainly leave the straths, 
and I do not now remember seeing many when shooting in the 
fields near the coast, in winter ; I have often observed them on the 
hill during the autumn, but not in the breeding season. 

69. Hoopoe. Upupa epops, Lin. — Obtained on two occasions at 
KintradwelL 

70. Greater Spotted Woodpecker. Picvs major, Lin. — An 
irregular winter visitant. 

71. Cuckoo. Cucidvs canorus, lin. — Very common summer 
visitant ; often seen chasing one another from tree to tree. One or 
two individuals used regularly to haunt the garden at Balnacoil, 
sitting under the bushes, and no doubt picking up the gooseberry 
caterpillars which swarmed there ; they were very tame. The only 
egg of this bird I ever obtained in Sutherland was taken from a 
Titlark's nest on the 27th of June, 1879. 

72. Eing Dove. Golumba pcdurribvsy Lin. — A very common 
resident species, and increasing very much. 

73. Turtle Dove. Turtur auritvs, Gray. — A specimen in the 
Dunrobin Museum is labelled Kirkton, July, 1852. 

74. Pallas' Sand-Grouse. Syrrhaptes paradoxm (PalL). — One in 
the Dunrobin Museum, taken at Dornoch, on June 6th, 1863. 

75. Ptarmigan. Lagopus miUiLS, Leach. — I am afraid from all 
accounts that the Ptarmigan is decreasing in the East of Sutherland. 
Some years previous to 1870 a few used to be found on Ben Varie, 
in Glen Loth, but I doubt if there are any left now, and they were 
also found on the Ben Griam hills, but are now extinct. A few 
still exist on Ben Armine, but I hear they are much scarcer than 
they used to be, even a comparatively short time ago. The same 
may be said of Ben Clibrick, but this is certainly their greatest 
stronghold anywhere near the East. On the 1st of June, 1869, I 
saw several on Ben Clibrick, principally cocks, but could not obtain 
a nest, and the only one I ever took was in Assynt, on the 4th of 
June, 1870 ; it contained eight eggs, and was made of moss and 
feathers placed among the stones. 

76. Bed Grouse. Lagopiis 8coticu8(LAtl[L), — In spite of the almost 
periodical attacks of disease, by a few years' rest the Grouse soon gets 



Digitized by 



Google 



142 PBOCEBDINGS OF THB 

up its numbers, at no time being more abundant than it is 
now. Although the Sutherland shootings in the East have been 
very much sub-divided of late, and consequently far more birds are 
yearly killed, no doubt the stricter preservation from vermin. 
Hoodie Crows in particular, enables them to keep up their numbers. 
They appear, however, to be much wilder than formerly, and in the 
more open moors a good deal of stalking has to be done to make 
up a bag in October, whereas ten years ago, you could shoot over 
dogs anywhere up to the end of the season; no doubt their 
increased numbers make them pack more, and so they are more on 
the alert. Early in March the cocks begin to chase the hens, and 
about the middle of April the first eggs are laid, but the greater 
bulk not until the middle or end of May, and I believe, on some 
occasions, the late nests are not hatched out till August Grouse 
vary a great deal in colouring, the cocks more so than the hens. The 
commonest variety by far is that with a black breast and a good 
deal of white down the middle, the next, that with a red breast and 
the white feathers, and the third and rarest, as it seemed to me, and 
certainly so on my shooting at Balnacoil, the real Ked Grouse with 
few or no white feathers. I have occasionally got birds with a 
black breast, and no, or at least very few, white feathers, but these 
were much darker on the back, as a rule, and were almost a true 
melanite. Many Grouse are very much marked and mottled with 
white, some very beautifully so, and this seems to run in families, 
for before our shooting season my keeper had noticed a bird that 
was very much marked with white, and this bird was shot during 
October of that year. Next season, near the same place, there was 
another covey which contained three or four of these white mottled 
birds, and I shot a very good pair, of which, however, I only kept 
the cock. It is common to meet with birds whose primaries are 
very strongly marked with white on the outside edging. Hen 
Grouse are, as a rule, much more marked with yellow spots and 
lines on the back and breast than the cocks, but not the redbreasted 
variety which is marked on the back like a cock. There are other 
varieties, but I think these are the ones most commonly met with. 
From the beginning of the season until the end of September, 
Grouse keep mostly in coveys, but after that the cocks seem to 
leave, and go about singly or in pairs, and sometimes in threes. I 
have often observed that where more than three birds were together 
in October or November, and a brace shot out of them, these were 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 143 

almost invariably hens. The niunber of eggs in a nest varies from 
seven or eight to thirteen. 

77. Black Grouse. Tetrao tetrix, Lin. — This species seems 
much more independent of wood than many people suppose. On 
the BalnacoU shooting I had no wood to speak of, and none in 
which Blackgame either bred or to which they resorted, except 
on rare occasions; and yet I had plenty of them. These birds 
like the edges of bums where there are plenty of rushes or long 
heather and brackens, especially at the commencement of the 
season. When the old cocks are moulting in August they lie very 
close in the detached patches of brackens here and there through 
the hill, and are not very easy to raise; at other times they are wild 
enough and not often caught napping. I have seen a cock in May 
still retaining many of its immature brown feathers. Greyhens 
seem to be bad mothers, often only having one young bird with 
them, and, I fancy, they do not breed regularly every year, at least 
there always seems to be a number of barren birds going about at 
all seasons. During the severe weather of December, 1878, or 1879, 
I shot one old Blackcock with lumps of ice on its feet. 

78. Pheasant. Phasianus colchicusy lAn. — Fairly common about 
Dunrobin, and has been introduced at Suisgill, on the Helmsdale 
strath, where I have often seen them. 

79. Partridge. Perdix cinerea, Charleton. — Common along the 
coast, and goes far up to the shepherds' lots among the hills to 
breed. During the storm last December, I saw several large flocks 
flying over the fields at Kintradwell, apparently driven to seek 
shelter lower down than usual, on account of the snow, 

80. QuaiL Coturnix communis, Bonn. — Has been shot on one 
or two occasions at Brora, in the autumn. 

81. Heron. Ardea cinerea^ Lin. — There used to be a small 
Heronry near Loch Brora, on the forest-side, and from it I have 
taken eggs at the end of March. On visiting the same place in the 
spring of 1879, I found it deserted, the Herons, or at least a few 
pairs of them, having crossed the loch, and breeding on the 
Gordonbush side. On an island in Loch Madie, near Altnaharra, 
I have taken fresh eggs, and seen young ones nearly able to fly at 
the end of May. 

82. Curlew. NmnenivM arquata (Lin.). — A common species, 
and very evenly distributed over the hills during the breeding 
season. The earliest nest I have taken was on the 26th of April, 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 PROOBEDIKGS OF THB 

with four eggs, but the season (1878) was very forward, the usual 
time being the first week in May. The birds begin to leave the 
shore and come up the straths about the middle or end of March, 
and soon after that the flocks break up into pairs and go to their 
breeding grounds. 

83. Whimbrel. Numenius phaeopus (Lin.). — A scarce spring 
and autumn visitant, 

84. Bar-tailed Godwit. Limosa lapponica (Lin.). — An uncertain 
autumn and winter visitant. I procured two or three specimens on 
the nth of November, 1877. 

86. Greenshank. Totaniis glottis (Pall.). — This fine and inter- 
esting wader is fairly distributed through the East of the county, 
but is nowhere common. Its eggs are difficult to find, and are a 
prize when found. I knew of four or five pairs breeding in the 
district about Balnacoil, but only succeeded in getting one nest, 
which a shepherd found for me. Sometimes these birds sit very 
close on their nests. In 1869, at Altnaharra, I took a nest which 
was placed between two stones at the edge of a loch. Passing by 
the same place, when fishing, in 1871, I happened to think of the 
Greenshank, and there, between the same two stones, sat the old 
bird on her nest, and she allowed me to touch her with my fishing- 
rod before she went ofi". The first time I took the nest it only con- 
tained three eggs, two hard-set and the other addled, the date being 
the 24th of May ; the second time the nest contained four nearly 
fresh eggs, and was taken on the 26th of May. When the young 
are hatched the old ,birds are very bold and vociferous, coming 
down close above one's head with a swoop, and then shooting up 
into the air almost perpendicularly. 

86. Redshank. Totanics calidris (Lin.). — Common the whole 
year round, and coming up the strath to breed. I used to take 
their eggs in a meadow at Balnacoil, about a mile from the house, 
where there were always several pairs breeding. The nest seems to 
be invariably placed in a tuft of grass, and like the Peewit, several 
nests are made before they finally fix on one in which to lay. They 
are very difficult to find, and during the time they are laying the 
birds never appear near the nest. The eggs are not laid on four 
consecutive days. When they go far up the hill to breed, I have 
generally noticed that they keep near any green spot, and do not 
nest in heather like the Greenshank. 

87. Common Sandpiper. Actitis hyjpoleucus (Lin.). — A very 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT SOOIETT OF GLASGOW. 145 

common summer visitor, and very conspicuous to anyone fishing 
among the lochs and rivers of Sutherland, as it is sure to be seen 
sitting on some stone by the waterside, nodding its head, moving 
its tail up and down, and whistling. This bird lays sometimes 
three, but generally four eggs, and the nest is usually placed in a 
very open place. 

88. Sanderling. Calidris arenaria (Lm.). — An autumn visitant, 
but by no means very common. 

89. Purple Sandpiper. Tiinga striata^ Lin. — A very common 
winter visitant, sometimes appearing in considerable flocks. They 
invariably alight on stones, and can stand a good knock from a wave 
without being washed offl 

90. Dunlin. Tringa alpina^ Lin. — Not a very common species 
at any time of the year, though a certain number breed on the 
hills, and I have seen their nests at Balnacoil and Altnaharr^. I 
have seen a few birds in the winter at the Little Ferry, but never 
in such flocks as one sees on the Humber, 

91. Woodcock. Scolopax rusticola, Lin. — A resident species, 
breeding all through the county, and beginning to lay about the 
middle of April. The nest is very much exposed, being generally 
a slight hollow at the -foot of a birch tree. In the evening, all 
through the spring and summer, the birds may be seen flying 
over the trees, now and then suddenly dropping down like a bat, 
and they seem to have regular roads in the air, so to speak, as 
evening after evening they take the same line. Their note is a 
sort of chirrup, and their flight laboured, very different to that of 
a 'Cock in the season when he has been flushed once or twice. 
Whinbushes are excellent cover for these birds in the winter, 
especially the larger ones open at the bottom, for they don't like to 
sit in a place where they cannot move about. During open weather 
the 'Cocks on the East coast are very much scattered through the 
hills, but the first heavy snow drives them in, where they can find 
shelter. 

92. Snipe. Gallinago gcdlinaria, O. F. Miill. — Resident through- 
out the year, imless an unusually heavy storm prevails, when they 
leave ; but they are by no means very common. They are most 
numerous when the northern migrants arrive, as they then stay a 
day or two on their way south. Should there be a slight snow- 
storm at the time, the birds are driven down to the lower meadows, 
and, on one occasion, I got seven couple at BalnacoiL 



Digitized by 



Google 



146 PR00BBDIN08 OF THX 

93. Jack Snipe. Scolopax gaXUnvla (Lin.). — A few appear in 
the late autumn, but do not appear to stop through the winter. 

94. Grey Phalarope. Phalaropusfulicanus (Lin. ). — A specimen 
was obtained at Kintradwell, in December, 1869, swimming about 
in a pool of water on the sand-hills near the sea. 

95. Turnstone. Strepdlas interpres^ Lin. — Common all the year 
round, except May, June, and July. I shot one in a ploughed field 
near the sea, when it was in company with some Grolden Plovers. 

96. Lapwing. Vandlus cristatus^ Meyer. — During the last few 
years the Peewit has remained, more or less, the whole year roimd, 
even during very severe weather, though formerly they used, I 
understand, to disappear during the winter. 

97. Gray Plover. SqtLotarola helvetica (Lin.). — I once shot a 
specimen near Kintradwell, on the 20th of January, 1871, but I 
have never seen another. 

98. 'Golden Plover. Ckaradrius plumalis, Lin. — Not nearly 
such a common species as might be expected, but still fairly plenti- 
ful during the breeding season. Their nests are very difficult to 
find, as the male bird seems to be always on the watch, and his 
melancholy whistle soon brings his mate from the nest. On the 
two occasions on which I have taken their nests, the hens flew oflP 
and did not run, this being, I think, a commoner way amongst 
most of the waders of leaving their nests, than by running, though 
they often get up an immense distance off. The first nest I got 
was on the 1 1th of June, and the hen did not get off until I was 
close to her ; the eggs being quite fresh. The other nest was on 
the 27th of April, and contained only three eggs ; the hen rose at 
such a distance that I merely saw a flash of white as she shewed 
the under parts of her wing. I walked straight to the place and 
found the nest. I have always observed that Curlews fly from their 
nests.* 

99. Ringed Plover. AEgialitia hiatieula (Lin.). — A common 
bird along the sea shore, and it also breeds inland, in, at least, one 
locality. 

* This, also, I have always noticed, but, in returning to the nest, they alight 
at a considerable distance and run to it, as, indeed, do many other species. Some 
waders, on the other hand, fly very close up to the nest, and then run quickly 
on to it. The more shy species appear to follow the first method, and the 
tamer species the latter, but no doubt in all cases something will depend upon 
the state of incubation of the eggs at the time. — J. A. H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY 800IBTT OP GLASGOW. 147 

100. Oyster-catcher. Haematopus odralegua^ Lin. — Breeds in 
considerable numbers along the shore. On one or two occasions I 
have seen or heard these birds up the Brora river, some seven or 
eight miles from the sea, but they only stayed for a day or two at 
most. The Oyster-catchers assemble by thousands, in winter, on 
the mussel scalps at the Little Ferry, near Golspie. 

101. Water Rail Rallus aquaticm^ Lin. — An autumn visitant. 

102. Corn Crake. Crez pratensisy Bechsi — A very common 
summer species. 

103. Water Hen. GalUnvla chlaropvs (Lin.). — A resident 
species, spreading out to certain localities to breed, and drawing 
down to the coast in hard weather. One favourite winter locality 
is the bum running by the Clynelish Distillery, near Brora, where 
I have seen eight or ten at a time, by the side of the stream. 

104. Coot. Fvlica atrUy Lin. — I have seen the Coot on the hill 
lochs on one or two occasions, in the breeding season, but I never 
saw a nest, nor have I seen it in the winter. 

105. Arctic Tern. Sterna macruraj Naum. — There are several 
colonies of these, or the Common Tern, breeding along the coast, 
but I have not been able to identify the species for certain. 

106. Lesser Tern. Sterna minuta^ Lin. — I have never seen but 
one pair of these Terns on the coast, and they were evidently nesting 
at the time, though I could not find the nest. The eggs in the 
Dunrobin Museum, said to be those of this bird, were merely those 
of either the Arctic or Common Tern. 

107. Ivory Gull. Pagophila ebumea (Phipps). — A fine adult 
specimen was shot at Scourie, and sent for presentation to Mr. 
Macleay, bird-stuffer, in Livemess, where I saw it. I believe it is 
now in the possession of Mr. Crawford, of Tongue. 

108. Kittiwake. Rissa tridactyla (Lin.). — Seen about the Little 
Ferry in spring. 

109. Black-headed GulL Chroicocephal'us ridibundus (Lin.) — 
A common species the year over, breeding in several colonies 
throughout the hills. These birds nearly always choose a muddy, 
reedy island to nest on, very difficult of access without a boat, on 
account of the depth of mud, but sometimes an inexperienced bird 
or two will place their nest on the edge of the loch on the main- 
land, though this appears to be rare. I once saw a single pair on a 
loch, where the only other species was Larus canus. The nests are 
made of reeds, a few heather stalks, and dead brackens. 



Digitized by 



Google 



148 ' PROOEEDINCHi OF THB 

110. Little GulL Ghrdicocephdlus minutus (PalL). — The only 
specimen I ever saw was a dried-up mummy which I picked up in 
a cart track near Bahiacoil, in 1874. 

111. Iceland GulL Larus glaucua^ 0. F. Miiller. — ^A winter 
visitor, not very rare. 

112. Great Black-backed GulL Lams marinus^ Lin. — A re- 
sident species, but not very common. A few pairs breed about the 
hill lochs, always on islands, and generally only one pair on each 
island. They lay early in May, and if the first eggs are taken they 
lay a second batch in the old nest. They apparently return to the 
same place year after year, though now and then a pair will desert 
a locality. 

113. Lesser Black-backed Gull. Larua fuscus^ Lin. — Only a 
too abundant species, being very obnoxious to game preservers and 
shepherds, who destroy them on every occasion. They are, as a rule, 
later in laying than the former species, fresh eggs being found late 
in June. These birds eat a great deal of com in the spring months, 
as may be seen by a visit to the localities in which they breed, for 
they cast up the husks in " quids," like the Rooks. They also bring 
up fish and small crabs from the shore. On two occasions these 
birds robbed me of a Goose nest which I was very anxious to 
obtain. 

114. Herring GulL Larus argerUattiSy GmeL — ^Abundant, though 
not nearly so common as Larus fuscus. The eggs are difficult to 
get on account of being laid amongst those of the last-named species, 
as there is little or no difference between the eggs of the two. 
The best way to get them is to watch the birds with a glass, at 
least this is the way I obtained authentic eggs. They breed 
indifferently on an island or on marshy ground. 

115. Common Gull. Larits canits^ Lin. — Breeds abundantly in 
the same places as the last two species, but I noticed that they were 
more often on the mainland than on the islands in the lochs. They 
lay about the same time as Larus marinus. I believe these birds 
do little or no harm, and I never aUowed them to be molested on 
my ground, where I had a very flourishing colony. 

116. Pomatorine Skua. Lestris pornatorhinus (Temm,), — Four 
birds seen at Balnacoil on the 13th of October, 1879. 

117. Richardson's Skua, Lestris crepidattis (GmeL). — Often 
seen off the coast in autumn. I understand from Mr. Houstoun of 
Kintradwell that a pair breed regularly on a very boggy piece of 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL raSTORT 800IBTT OF GLASGOW. 149 

ground on his shooting. I have never personally seen the birds in 
Sutherland during the breeding season, nor dg I know of any one 
who has, except in the above-mentioned instance. 

118. Eazorbill. Alca torda, Lin. 

119. Common Guillemot. Alca troile (Lin.). — Seen off the 
coast in winter and spring. Numbers of dead birds come ashore 
after a storm, especially in early spring, nine out of ten being Razor- 
bills and the others Guillemots, Puffins, and Little Auks. Near the 
mouth of the river Brora I got a specimen of the Guillemot which 
was swimming about in a half-stupified state. 

120. Black Guillemot. Uria grylle (Lin.). — Commonly seen off 
the coast in spring in both the full breeding and speckled plumage. 

121. Little Auk. Mergulus alle (Lin.). — Some years abundant, 
judging from the number of dead birds found on the shore. The 
only live one I ever saw was swimming about within two or three 
hundred yards of the shore, as if it could not get further out. When 
these kind of seabirds come so close in they seem either stupified or 
weak, and, I fancy, generally perisL 

122. Puffin. Fratercula arctica (Lin.). — Chiefly young birds 
picked up dead in the winter or spring. 

123. Great Northern Diver. Colyvibm gladalU^ Lin. — A 
regular spring visitant to the coast. I have a fine specimen in full 
breeding plumage, which I shot in May, on a pool in the Brora 
river, about eight miles from the mouth ; it had never left the pool 
all day, though two gentlemen who were fishing there had been 
pelting it with stones a good part of the day, under the belief 
that it was a Cormorant. 

124. Black-throated Diver. Colymhics ardicus, Lin. — A very 
common species, a pair breeding in most of the larger lochs on 
the hill, if suitable. Their usual time of laying is about May 15th, 
but, on one occasion, I saw a pair of these birds, and a young one 
pretty well grown, either in the end of May or very early in June. 
The Black-throated Divers seem to go straight to their breeding 
haunts, not loitering on any of the lower lochs by the way, and 
return, as soon as the young can fly, equally quickly. They nearly 
always have their nests at the point of some island in a loch, but 
I have, on one occasion, taken the nest on the shore of the main- 
land, the old bird being very tame, and swimming about within 
twenty or thirty yards of us. 

125. Bed-throated Diver. Oolymbua septenMonaks, Lath*— >-A 



Digitized by 



Google 



150 PROOBEDINOS OF THE 

much later breeder than the last-named, and also a much scarcer 
species. A pair bre4 on my ground on the edge of a small black 
loch, about fifty yards long and twenty broad, at the outside, and 
when visited, they rarely left the loch, merely diving from one end 
to the other ; the nest being placed on an island. I believe those 
inveterate robbers, the Lesser Black-backed Gulls, used to take the 
eggs, as I got one fresh egg, on the 12th of July, 1877, and this 
egg had been in the nest three or four days before I took it. In 
1878, the eggs were taken by a friend of mine, who wanted them 
for his collection. I have no doubt they laid again, but I did not 
trouble them further by going to see. In 1879, the birds hatched 
two young ones, which lived till they were about half -grown, when, 
I am sorry to say, one disappeared, and I have often noticed, with 
Divers, that one young one was a commoner number than two. 
There were no fish of any description in the loch, so the old birds 
must have had, at least, four or five miles to fly every time they 
wanted food, for, although there was a bum full of small trout not 
far off, I never saw them there, nor do I think they would have 
gone there, as the pools were scarcely big enough for them to rise 
easily from. 

126. Little Grebe. Podiceps minor (Gmel.). — A summer 
visitant. I once took a nest, with four eggs, on Loch Brora. 

127. Cormorant. Phalacrocorax carbo (Lin.). — A common 
species, even during the summer. One or two were generally to be 
seen sitting on a sand-bank, at the end of Loch Brora, drying their 
wings. 

128. Shag. Phalacrocorax cHstatus (Faber). — Common during 
the winter and spring. 

129. Gannet. Svla bassana (Lin.). — Often seen fishing off the 
coast, except during the breeding season. 

130. Grey Lag. Anser dnereus^ Meyer. — Even yet fairly com- 
mon in the localities it frequents. Though many birds may be 
seen in a station, I believe that out of the number only a certain 
relatively small proportion breeds, as flocks of Gi^ese may be seen 
flying about the lochs during the breeding season, and that these 
are not all males was proved by a hen being shot out of a lot of 
three or four that were flying overhead. ' Geese are early breeders, 
generally hatching out about the middle of May, and about this 
period I have often seen two old birds accompanied by, at the 
most, six young ones. On one occasion I found a brood just hatched 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT SOOIBTT OP GLASGOW. 151 

on a bog, and picked up a young one which had barely absorbed aU 
the yolk of the egg by the umbilical cord, a small bit, about a quarter 
of an inch long, still sticking to it ; the old Geese were in great ex- 
citement, walking about some forty yards from me, and cackling. 
I put the small bird down again, and it soon set off after the rest. 
On the 21st of May, 1869, 1 took a Goose egg, fresh, out of a Lesser 
Black-backed Gull's nest, containing three eggs, and the old Gull 
appeared to be fitting on all four eggs. 

131. Brent Goose. Befimida brenta (Pall.). — A few of these 
birds come to the Little Ferry every winter. 

132. Whooper. Cygrms miisictis, Bechst. — I have seen the 
Whooper on two occasions at Brora ; once on April 20th, 1871, I 
saw four fly over Loch Brora, and again in the end of March or 
beginning of April, 1878, a lot of about twenty fly over BalnacoiL* 

133. Bewick's Swan. Cygnus bewicM, Yarrell. — I saw one in 
Mr. Macleay's shop in Inverness. It had been shot at Altnaharra, 
in the winter of 1879-80. 

134. Sheldrake. Tadorna comuta, S. G. Gmel. — A common 
summer visitant, breeding in the sand-hills along the coast ; the 
species appears to be increasing. 

136. Widgeon. Mareca pendope, lain. — Common, and resident; 
numbers remaining to breed. About May, I have often seen a large 
flock of old males, in splendid plumage, in a pool near Loch Brora ; 
near here I once disturbed an old duck and her brood, and on the 
duck giving a note of alarm, the drake came and joined her; so, 
perhaps, the males of some species of Ducks do not moult until 
the young are pretty well able to take care of themselves. 

136. Teal. Nettium crecca, Lin. — Common most of the year, 
but rare, if not altogether absent in winter. 

137. Pintail. Dafila acuta (Lin.). — I have a specimen of a 
female, or young male, which was shot at the Little Ferry, on Nov. 
the Uth, 1877. 

138. Wild Duck. Anas bosehas, Lin. — Common, and resident. 
I have seen, on one occasion, thirteen eggs in a nest of this bird. 

139. Pochard. Ftdigula ferina (Lin. ) — I believe I saw this bird, 
on one occasion, on the river Brora, in the early spring of 1870, 
but it is certainly a very rare bird on the East coast. 

* They are also known to visit certain lochs near Tongue in the Korth of th« 
eonnty in spring. ~J. A. H.-B. 



Digitized by 



Google 



152 PROOBEDINOS OF THB 

140. Scaup Duck. Fuligula marUa (Lin.). — Occurs sparingly 
at the Little Ferry in winter. 

141. Black Scoter. OEdemla nigra (Lin.) — Neither this nor 
the Velvet Scoter appears to be as common as formerly, at least, in 
one locality, and this, too, since 1870. 

142. Velvet Scoter. OEdemia fuaca (Lin.). — I got a fine speci- 
men which was swimming among the breakers, near the shore, 
apparently stupified, on April 18th, 1870. They are plentiful out- 
side the Bar at the Little Ferry. 

143. Golden-eye. Glangvla glaudon (Lin.). — Very common in 
the winter and spring both at sea and on Loch Brora. The old 
males are, however, very difficult to get, though females and young 
birds are easily obtained. 

144. Long-tailed Duck. Harelda glacicUls (Lin.). — A very com- 
mon winter visitant, arriving in large flocks. They are very restless 
birds, almost for ever on the move. 

145. Redbreasted Merganser. Mergiis seiratar, Lin. — Very 
common, and resident ; a pair or two being found on most of the 
larger hill lochs. They are shot down a good deal on account of 
the mischief they do in the salmon rivers. Ten is the largest 
number of eggs I have seen in a nest ; the yolk is rather difficult 
to extract, being so very solid. At times these birds use the same 
nest as they occupied the previous year, as I took a nest of six eggs, 
well hidden under some long heather, underneath which were the 
remains of egg shells of the year before. I saw the old bird, 
with my glass, come off the nest. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



153 



O O O O O 00 t» 



00»0 Ofl000r-^0>«0©^ Ofl 

1-1 i-( i-l l-^ l-^ 1-t 



o 

00 
I 

ao 



o 






m 
H 

O 

o 
o 

o 

H 

H 
OD 

H 
O 

H 
m 
PQ 




O 

CQ O 

^ s 






Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY 

OF GLASGOW 

VOL. v.— PART II. 

1881-82. 




GLASGOW: PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY 

AT ITS BOOMS, 207 BATH STREET 
188 3, 



Digitized by 



Google 



Glasgow: Printed by Thomas Duncan, 
38 Sauchiehall Strtet 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. 



Vol. v.— Pabt II. 

Page 

Council, Report of the, Session 1880-81, 155 

Alston, Mr. Edward R., Death of, 155 

Allan, Mr. James, Death of, 155 

Pratt, Mr. Arthur, Death of, 155-174 

Librarian's Report, Session 1880-81 156 

Summer Session, 1881, Report of the Proceedings of the, . . 157 

Species, On. By Mr. P. Cameron [Abstract], . ... 158 

Morphology of Underground Stems. By Prof. A. S. Wilson, M. A. , B. Sc. , 

[Abstract] 158 

Kilmalcolm, Excursion to, Mr. R. Turner on the, . . . .159 

Shielhill Glen, Excursion to, Mr. Richard M*Kay on the, . . .159 
Innellan, Excursion to, Mr. Thomas King on the, . . . .160 
Highlands, Excursion to the, Mr. Peter Ewing on the, . . . .160 
Schiehallion and the neighbourhood of Tummel Bridge, On the Flora of. 

By Mr. R. Kidston [Abstract], 161 

Office-Bearers for Session 1881-82, 162 

Foraminifera from Cumbrae, Mr. David Robertson, F.Z.S., on, . 163 

Apiarian Notes in Argyllshire for 1881. By Mr. Robert J. Bennett, 168 

Potato, The Cultivation of the, in its Native Country (embodying a com- 
munication from Mr. John King, British Vice-Consul, Carrizal, 

Bajo, Chile). By Mr. Thomas King, 166 

Agreement between the Society and the Town Council regarding the for- 
mation and development of Collections of Plants and Invertebrata 
for the Kelvingrove Museum, . , . . . .172 

Natural History, On the Relations of, to Medicine. By Prof. John 

Young, President [Abstract], 174 

Fife and the Lothians, A collection of Plants from, Mr. Robert Turner on, 174 
Foraminifera, Carboniferous, from Beith and Dairy, Mr. John Young, 

F.G.S., on, 175 

Caddis-flies from Carluke, Mr. J. J. King on, 176 

Short Sun-fish, Orthobgoriscus mola, Lin. , caught in the Firth of Clyde, 

Notes on a. By Mr. John M. Campbell, 176 

Porpoise and White-beaked Dolphin, On the Viscera of the. By Prof. 

John Cleland, M.D., F.R.S., &c., 178 

Mwrtwpilla StaibltH, Spruce, Mr. George J. Combe on, . . . 180 



Digitized by 



Google 



IV CONTENTS. 

Horned Tnuik Fish, Ostreicum comutua, Lin , from South America, Mr. 

JohnKirsop, F.S.A.Scot, V.P., on 180 

Hymenoptera, Mr. Peter Cameron on, 181 

Brooke's Snail, Helix Brookei, from Borneo, Mr. J. M. Campbell on, . 181 

Coprinus eomcUus, Mr. R. Turner on 181 

Haskeir, off N. Uist, The Islands and Rocks of, and their Bird Life. By 
Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., &c. With a Sketch 

by the Author. [Pkte III], .181 

Collecting Natural History Specimens, On Method in. By Mr. J. M. 

Campbell [Abstract], 191 

Mosses from Innellan, Mr. Thomas King on, 192 

Fish and Crustacean Remains from Garvel Park, Greenock, Mr. Thomas 

Scott and Mr. James Steel on, 192 

Meteorological Notes,, and Remarks on the State of Vegetation in the 
Public Parks of Glasgow during the year 1881. By Mr. D. M *Lellan, 
Superintendent of Parks, . , . . .193 

Flannan Isles and their Bird Life, The. By Mr. John A. Harvie- 
Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., &c. With Two Plates [Nos. IV. and V.], 197 
Ornithological Jottings from the Neighbourhood of Loch Lomond for 

1881. ByMr. JamesLumsden, F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., . . .209 
Goniocypris mitra, Some Notes on. By Mr. Thomas Scott, of Greenock, 

Cor. Mem,, 214 

Seal and Whale-Fishery of 1881, Notes on the. By Mr. Thomas South- 
well, F.Z.S., C&r. Mem., 216 

Rankin, Dr. Daniel Reid, of Carluke, Cor. Mem., Note on the death o^ 221 
Fusus antiquu$, Lin. , var. dlha, Mr. David Robertson, F. L. S. , F. 6. S. , on, 223 
Eagle-Owl, Bitbo ignaviLs, Forst., Mr. J. M. Campbell on, . . . 223 
Birds of the North-west of Perthshire, Additional Notes on the. By Mr. 

William Horn, M.A., Ozon., Advocate, . . . . , 225 
Euppia mourUima, sub-sp. rosUUata, Koch, Mr. D. A. Boyd on, . . 227 
Mammalia of Buchan, Notes on the. By Mr. William Horn, . . 228 
Fossils found in a thin bed of impure Carboniferous Limestone at Glen- 
cart, near Dairy, Ayrshire, Notes on the. By Mr. John Young, 

F.G.S., 234 

Flora of West Kilbride and Ardrossan, Notes on the. By Mr. D. A. 

Boyd, 241 

Treasurer's Accounts for 1880-81, Abstract of, . * . . . . 246 

^ 

|ir The Plates accompanying this Part have been presented by Mr. John 
A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., &c.. President of the Society. 



Hr To this Part is appended a Report of the Proceedings of the Summer 
Session, 1880, accidentally omitted from the previous Part. It is paged 
separately, so that it may be bound in at its proper place. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROCEEDINGS 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



SESSIOISr 1881-82. 

THE THIRTIETH ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING, 
THE SOCIETY'S ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET. 

September 27th, 188L 

Professor John Young, M.D., F.G.S., President, in the Chair. 
The Treasurer submitted his Annual Financial Statement, which 
shewed a balance in favour of the Society of £15 17s. 9d. 

Report of the Council — Session, 1880-81. 

The Secretary read the Report of the Council on the business of 
the past session. The number of members reported at last Annual 
Meeting was 230. During the session 33 names had been added, 
and after making allowance for deaths, resignations and removals, 
the number on the roll at present was 246; being an increase of 
16. No special meetings had been held, but the eight ordinary 
monthly meetings had been well attended, and the interest seemingly 
fully sustained to the close. 

During the year the members have had to regret the death of 
Mr. Edward Richard Alston, F.L.S., F.G.S., &c., an honorary 
member of the Society, and also of four ordinary members: — 
viz., Mr. James Allan, who became a member on the incorporation 
of the Field Naturalists with the Society, having acted for some 
years as Secretary to that body. Mr. Arthur Pratt, who joined 
in 1875, and who for some time served as a member of Council, 
was much respected and esteemed by all who were acquainted 
with him, always proving himself a warm friend of the Society, 

VOL. V. L 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

to which he made himself in many ways useful. The other two 
deceased members, Messrs. James Smith and Alexander Kyle, 
were not generally known, having but lately been elected. 

The Council has made an arrangement with the Parks Com- 
mittee of the Town Council to provide a collection of plants and 
invertebrate animals, which is to be placed in the Kelvingrove 
Museimi, the committee of that institution providing cabinets to 
contain the collection, and material for mounting the specimens, 
which are to be named and labelled by the members, and kept distinct 
from any of the other collections. It is expected that some pro- 
gress will be made in the formation of this collection by spring, 
and as it will be accessible to members of the Society, it is hoped 
it may prove useful in assisting them in the study of natural 
history. 

At the close of last session the Society approved of a proposal to 
hold a conversazione of the members, and to have a public exhibi- 
tion of natural history objects in the city during the winter. The 
Council appointed a committee to make inquiry and ascertain the 
practicability of carrying out this scheme, but after frequent meet- 
ings and due deliberation, the committee reported that, owing to 
difficulties which stood in the way, it was not desirable to go on 
with the project at present. The Council unanimously approved 
of the report, and agreed to recommend that the matter should 
therefore be postponed in the meantime. 

Librarian's Report — Session 1880-81. 

I have to report the books all in good condition. Since our last 
report our library, as the members are aware, has been safely 
removed and duly arranged in new cases in the council-room. It 
is a matter on which we may congratulate ourselves that our col- 
lection is rapidly increasing, but it will necessitate steps being 
taken to add considerably to our present accommodation, which is 
becoming quite inadequate to meet the requirements, and I hope 
the Society will soon accord an increase of case-room. 

Serials to which we are subscribers are continued. 

We continue in active exchange relations with a large number of 
kindred societies, British, Continental, and American. Several 
important societies have been added to the list, shewing not only 
the scientific value of our Proceedings^ but a continued and increas- 
ing appreciation of our work by outside societies. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 157 

I regret that we have not been able to issue the promised com- 
plete catalogue of the library — mainly due to the now restricted 
accommodation for the proper and convenient aiTangement of the 
many valuable contributions from other societies. I hope to be 
able to say something more satisfactory on this point during the 
course of the present session. 

We have added by purchase one of the most valuable (from a 
scientific point of view) of the volumes of Sowerby's English 
Botany, viz., vol. 10, which includes the Carices and allied orders. 
This, I hope, will be appreciated by our botanical members. 

We have to accord our thanks for various donations. I may 
mention 3 volumes of the Zoologist (for 1874-75-76), presented by 
one of our members, Mr. Lumsden, and " The Cobham Journals," 
presented by the editor, Miss Ormerod. 

The issue of books to members has not equalled that of previous 
session, but I am pleased to be able to state that this is in no way 
to be attributed to a diminishing interest on the part of members, 
but from having to temporarily close the library to permit of its 
removal and arrangement in the new cases. 

The last part of the Proceedings has been duly distributed to the 
various societies, &c., and to all members who have paid their sub- 
scriptions. Francis G. Binnib, Librarian, 



The Report of the proceedings of the Summer Session was reaxi 
by Mr. James Steel, Secretary for the Session : — 

Proceedings of the Summer Session, 1881. 

17th May, 1881. 

The first meeting was held in the Society's Rooms, 207 Bath 
Street, this evening. — Mr. Peter Cameron in the Chair. 

The Chairman in his opening address alhided to the difficulties 
with which students of systematic biology in Glasgow had to* 
contend, in the want of sufficiently extensive and available collec- 
tions of properly named specimens. This was particularly felt in 
the case of the Invertebrata. The Council of the Society had 
made an effort towards remedying the evil, and had entered into an 
arrangement with the City authorities, by which collections would 
be formed and maintained in Kelvingrove Museum, so that in a 



Digitized by 



Google 



158 PROCSSDIKOS OF THB 

short time, he anticipated, almost complete herbaria of British 
phanerogamic and cryptogamic plants, and an extensive series of 
the Invertebrata would be available to students of natural history. 
He then proceeded to discuss the question of " Species." He con- 
tended that at the present time, and so far as experience is con- 
cerned, species are real entities, .and that we should be able clearly 
to separate each from the other, if all the relative physiological and 
morphological data were mastered. He adduced many instances 
of species of insects which had been confoimded, when only known 
in one stage of their lives, but had proved quite distinct when their 
larvae were discovered; and of species that had been mixed together, 
from too much attention being paid to variable characters such as 
colour, whilst structural peculiarities were neglected. He then re- 
ferred to the investigations of Weismann on the seasonal dimorphism 
of butterflies and of others on the brine shrimp, as tending to 
rectify our ideas of species, and to throw light on the causes of 
variation. In explanation of his remarks he exhibited a series 
of specimens illustrative of dimorphism in gall-flies and ants, and 
of the phenomena of mimicry. 



31sT Mat, 1881. 

Mr. Peter Cameron in the Chair. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited a series of mosses from his herbarium. 
He had made a short excursion into the Highlands a few days 
before, and reported that alpine vegetation was this year more than 
usually advanced by about two weeks. He had observed Saxifraga 
oppodtifolia and iSilene acaulis in fine fruit at a higher elevation 
than the snow patches still left. He could only attribute this to 
the persistent and imbroken coating of snow which had protected 
the plants all winter. 

The Chairman exhibited the gall and both sexes of SpatJwgaster 
verrucosus from Mugdock Wood. The galls are found on the leaf- 
buds of the oak, three or four on each, and frequently on the young 
leaves. This species has not been previously recorded for Scotland. 

Professor A. S. Wilson, M.A., B.Sc, read a paper entitled "The 
Morphology of Underground Stems," in which he explained the 
true relations of these organs. In every respect these underground 
structures agree with ordinary leaf-forming axes, and the same law 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OF GLASGOW. 159 

that determines the branching of the largest trees is concerned with 
the production of the various parts of the bulb of a lily or a narcissus, 
the tuber of a potato or an artichoke, thus affording a striking 
illustration of that unity in the midst of infinite diversity, which is 
so remarkable a feature in the vegetable kingdom. 



14th June, 1881. 

Mr. William Stewart in the Chair. 

Mr. R. Turner gave an account of the excursion to Kilmalcolm 
on the 11th instant. Amongst the noteworthy plants gathered 
were Sedum villosumj Geum intermedium^ Myosotis versicolor, and 
Trollius europaeus, A fine example of Salixpentandra was observed 
near Duchall Castle, and in the same locality Polypodium Dryopteris 
and P. Phegopteris were found. Many species of mosses were 
collected, the rarest of these being perhaps Bryum alpinum, Adoxa 
Moschatelliyia was found in fruit, and some specimens gathered 
were infested with the leaf-fimgus AEcidium albescens. Several 
other leaf-fungi were found. Hawthorn blossom was everywhere 
profuse, in marked contrast to last season. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited specimens of Anthriscus vulgaris from 
the East coast. 

Mr. David Gregorson read an interesting paper on the "Geo- 
graphical Distribution of Plants." 



28th June, 1881. 

Mr. Alex. Noble in the Chair. 

Mr. Richard M*Kay gave an account of the excursion to Shiel- 
hill Glen on the 25th instant. At Greenock the members were 
taken under the leadership of Mr. Scott, and they were afterwards 
joined by excursion parties — one of the Greenock Natural History 
Society, the other of the Geological Class imder charge of the 
curator of the Watt Museum, Greenock. The primrose was found 
to be still in flower in the glen. Among the noteworthy plants 
found were : — Trollius europaeus^ Cardamine amara, Sedum villosum^ 
Saxifraga hypnoides, Listera ovata^ L. cordata^ Carex aquatilis^ 
4,venapube8cen8^ HymenophyllumunilateraleiA(^leniumTrichomane8f ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 PR0CBJ5DINGS OF THE 

Cystopterisfragilisy Nephrodium Oreopteris, Polypodium Phegopteris^ 
P. Dryopteris, Op1iioglo88um vulgatum, Equisetum maximum^ 
Bartramia fontana, B. pmnifoTrmis, B. a^'cuata (in fruit), Brywn 
psmidO'triquetrimi, Hypmim midulatimi (in fruit), and Tetrodontium 
Broumtanum, 



2nd August, 1881. 

Mr. William Stewart in the Chair. 

Mr. Thomas King reported that an exciu^sion had been made on 
the 30th ult., to Innellan. Among the flowering plants found were 
the following: — Raphamis mantiimis, Hypericum dubium, H, 
qtiadrangidumj Agrimonia Eupatorium, Epilohium hirsutmn, 
Lythrum Salicaria^ Carum vertictUatum, Daucus Carota, Eupa- 
torium cannahinum, Grnaphalium sylvaticumy Matricaria inodora^ 
var. maritima, Melampyrum pratense, Ldnaria vulgaris, and Rumex 
viridis. The following fungi were collected: — Agaricus laccatus, 
A. infundihidifminis, A, radicatus, A. stercorarivs, Lactarivs delici- 
omi8, L glyciomnus, Russula foetens, E. heterophyllay Hygrophonia 
ccmicuSf H, chlorophanus, H, miniatus, Boletus flavus, B, scaber, 
and Hydnum repandum. 

Mr. Richard M*Kay exhibited the moss, Splachnum ampullaceum, 
collected near Milngavie, this station being the nearest to Glasgow 
yet recorded. 



16th August, 1881. 

Mr. Peter Cameron in the Chair. 

The Chairman referred to the loss the Society had sustained in 
the decease of Mr. James Allan, and spoke at some length of the 
valuable services he had rendered, and the readiness he had ever 
shewn to further the study of natural history. 

Mr. Richard M*Kay reported on an excursion he had made to 
Finn Glen, and exhibited the moss Amhlyodon dealbatus, new to 
Clydesdale. 

Mr. Peter Ewing reported that in the excursion made to the 
Highlands, nothing very unusual had been found. The following 
plants were gathered, in addition to those exhibited by him at the 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 161 

Society's meeting on the 3rd August, 1880: — Fotentilla dlpestrts^ 
Saxifraga nivalis, Junctts Mglumis, Phleum (nlpinum, Avena alpina, 
Polypodium alpestre, Gyynnostomum sqttarrosum, Encalypta ciliataf 
Raeomitrimn heterostichum, var. gracilescens, Folytrichum strictum, 
Hypnum strihtum, H, sarmentosum. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited a series of flowering plants from 
North Queensf erry, and of fungi from Bishopbriggs ; also a speci- 
men of Anacharis alsinastrum bearing male flowers, collected by 
Mr. R. Turner in a pond at the foot of the Braid Hills, near Edin- 
burgh, the only known station for the male form in Britain. It 
was discovered in this pond (the first record of its occurrence in 
Britain) by Mr. David Douglas, of Edinburgh, in the summer of 
188a 

Other specimehs, plants and insects, were exhibited by Mr. 
Renwick, Mr. Noble and Mr. Cameron. 



30th August, 1881. 

Mr. Peter Cameron in the Chair. 

Mr. Richard M*Kay gave an account of the excursion to Ben 
Voirlich on the 27th instant, and exhibited Polytrichum striatum 
(in fruit) collected on the mountain. 

Mr. M. C. Duff exhibited a beautiful specimen of the rare fern, 
Woodsia hyperborea, from a locality in the Breadalbane mountains, 
where he had f oimd it rather plentiful. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited Pvlicaria dysenterica and CkxHina 
vulgaris from the Struey Rocks, Arran. 



13th September, 1881. 

Mr. Alex. Noble in the Chair. 

Dr. James Stirton, F.L.S., exhibited a series of lichens of the 
genus Umbilicariay some of them collected at Loch Coruisk, Skye. 
Mr. Thomas King exhibited the curious fungi, Spathularia flavida 
and Torrubia militarise from Mull. 

Mr. R. Kidston read a paper "On the Flora of Schiehallion 
and the neighbourhood of Tummel Bridge." Generalizing from 
th^ results of the trip, the district cannot b^ sai(| to bQ rich iQ ra^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

plants. Schiehallion — 3,547 feet — was especially barren, and the 
few alpine plants collected on it were small and stunted. Farragon 
Hill was also visited, and though 100 feet lower than Schiehallion, 
possessed a richer flora. This hill is composed of micaceous schist, 
and is consequently more moist. The little strath through which 
the river flows at Tummel Bridge contains a great nimiber of 
common species of plants, which, being well sheltered, attain 
great luxuriance. In the bog-pools, some desmid gatherings made 
were foimd to be rich in species. The principal plants collected 
were: — Radiola miUegrana, Lyaypodmm annotinum^ UhHctdaria 
minoTy U, intermedia, Ardo8tax>hylos Uva-ursi, Epilohium alpinum, 
Thalictrum alpinum, Vicia Orohus, Oxyria renifcninis, Sedum 
Rhodiola, Sagina saxatilis, Draha incana, Arahis hirsuta, Meum 
Athamanticumj Polystichum Lonchitis, Aspleniitin viride, Nitella 
opaca, and Chara fragilis. 



These reports were all unanimously approved of, and it was 
agreed that they should be printed in the next part of the 
Proceedings, 

The election of office-bearers was then proceeded with, the 
subjoined list for 1881-82 being the result: — President — Professor 
John Young, M.D., F.G.S. Vice-Presidents — W. J. Milligan, John 
Kirsop, F.S.A.Scot., Professor John Cleland, M.D., F.RS.* 
Secretaries — Robert Mason, John M. Campbell. Treasurer — Robert 
J. Bennett. Librarian — Francis G. Binnie. Members of Coimcil — 
James B. Murdoch, F.S.A.Scot., Rev. A. S. WQson, M.A., B.Sc, 
Richard M*Kay, John Young, F.G.S., Thomas King, Robert 
Turner, John A. Harvie-Brown, F.Z.S., F.R.S.E., &c., Peter 
Cameron, and M. C. Duff. 

The following gentlemen were elected members of the Society: — 
as honorary members — Messrs. James Murie, M.D., LL.D., &c., 
Burlington House, London; and Osbert Salvin, F.R.S., F.L.S., 
&c., Cambridge; as corresponding member — Mr. John Ejng, 
British Vice-Consul, Carizal, Bajo, Chili; as ordinary members — 
Messrs. James Johnston, John Thomson, Alfred Kling, Charles 
Mackinnon Ramsay, John Hill, Alexander Martin, and Alexander 
Somerville, F.L.S. 

Mr. John M. Campbell exhibited a specimen of a variety of the 
Common Ringed Snake, Natrix torquatay Ray, which he had 
received from Cambridgeshire, He called att^ntioa to th^ Qplpuy 



^ ^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 163 

markings in this variety, the yellow collar-marking being replaced 
by one of a greenish colour. The President also made some 
observations on the specimen. 

Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., exhibited specimens of four 
species of Foraminifera from Cumbrae. (1) Hyperammina 
(Psammodendron) arlniscula, Norman. The only record of this 
species hitherto made is that brought up on the fluke of an anchor 
during the "Valorous" expedition among the Knight Islands, Green- 
land, in 20 fathoms of water. At Cumbrae it is moderately common 
in 60 fathoms, attached to stones, shells, and annelid tubes. It is a 
very remarkable form, more like a plant than a foraminifer. (2) 
Technatella legtimen, Norman. — A few of these found at Cumbrae, for 
the first time, in the Firth of Clyde, are covered with sand — a 
peculiarity that had not, so far as known, been noted before. (3) 
Hyperammina elongata^ Brady. — Mr. Robertson had exhibited 
specimens of this species from Skye before fhe Society last winter, 
it being then new to Britain. Those now got at Cumbrae are in 
better condition and more perfect, being whole at both ends, a state 
that from their brittleness they are liable to lose. (4) Felosina 
variabilis, Brady. — This species has only' been recorded by Mr. 
H. B. Brady from material obtained by the "Challenger " expe- 
dition. In a note received by Mr. Robertson that day from the 
Rev. A. M. Norman, the writer said that he had procured it 
at Tarbert, Lochfyne, some years ago, but it had not at the time 
been recognised as a rhizopod, which indicates that when our lists 
are more complete many of these obscure forms will be foimd to be 
more widely and variously distributed than is at present supposed. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited a collection of mounted specimens of 
some of the rarer flowering plants of the East coast. Among them 
were examples of Melilotua alba, Scirpua Savii, Orobanche rubra, 
Diplotaxis tenuifolia, Scabiosa Columbaria, Marrubium vulgare, 
Allium vineale, var. compacttim. Also from Ben Lawers, specimens 
of Juncus castaneus, J, biglumis, and Poa Balfourii, 

PAPERS READ. 

I. — Apiarian notes in Argyllshire for 1881. By Mr. Robert J. 
Bennett. 

In concluding my notes for 1880 I said it was the finest season 
w« had had m Scotland for many years, B^^ides the lar^e harv^^t 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 PROCBBDINGS OF THE 

gathered, the hives were put mto winter quarters with more stores of 
honey than they possessed for years, and it was well for them that it 
was so. 

On the 10th November I visited my apiary, and rarely have I 
witnessed such an interesting sight. The day was lovely, and 
the bees were sporting themselves in mid air, thousands crossing 
each other in their flight, forming myriads of angles and all manner 
of geometrical forms in very sport during their cleansing flight. 
My man remarked, " We will have a severe winter. Take a good 
look at them. It will be the last you'll see of them this year;" 
and he was right, for they were not again on the wing till the last 
day of December. The storm began on the 12th of November, by 
the 14th the whole country was covered with snow, and during 
five long months the bees were only seven times on the wing. 

January 1st, 1881, like the last of December, was very mild, so 
that the bees again came out in great force, and, strange though it 
may appear, many queens began laying at this time. This I 
account for from their having had plenty of stores, and being six 
whole weeks in total confinement. On the 2nd January frost again 
set in, and continued with greater or less severity until the middle 
of MarcL 

March 22nd, I examined stocks and was glad to see all in fair 
condition, many yoimg bees being in most of the hives, and breed- 
ing going on more or less in all of them. They were all perfectly 
dry, another proof that the use of the "quilt" with upward ventila- 
tion is almost perfect. The main reason, however, to which I 
attribute the fine condition of my bees at this time is, that they 
had gathered all their own stores, no artificial feeding having been 
given them. My observations over a number of years lead me to 
believe that for good wintering nothing succeeds so well as to allow 
the bees plenty of their own ingathered honey and pollen, and there 
need be no fear of leaving them too much. They will take good 
care of it, and, if opportunity occur, will repay your kindness with 
interest. 

During April we had very few fine days, but those we had the 
bees made the most of, working with great ardour at bringing in 
pollen. On the 18th I examined stocks and found all in good con- 
dition, but the stores were visibly diminished, and I began artificial 
feeding so that breeding should not be checked. 

May was really the finest month of 1881 for b^es, XQwar49 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTT OP GLASGOW. 165 

its end the heat was intense, the trees were covered with flourish, 
and the hives rapidly filled, and swarming commenced. Our hopes 
were raised, and we thought that the season would excel all that 
had preceded it. I waited anxiously to see a swarm of Cyprians, 
but alas, on the 28th a terrific thunderstorm came on and was 
followed by rain, which continued more or less till 15th July, by 
which time every hive was depending on artificial feeding for its 
very existence. The 15th of July was lovely, and most of the 
hives gathered on it alone from 8 to 10 lbs of honey. Bain 
again set in and continued till the end of August, so that but for 
artificial feeding most of the stocks would have perished. 

About this time I received a letter from a gentleman in the 
south of England, who wrote — "We have been slinging honey for 
five months continuously. Never before have we had such a sur- 
plus. The tables of the British Beekeepers' great show at Kensing- 
ton proved that, as there were several tons of honey exhibited. 
The yield was enormous, and beekeeping, alike to the cottar and 
honey man, has been a profitable business." 

August. We left the Cyprians in May about to swarm. They 
had not done so up to the beginninng of this month, but in the 
abnormal state of the hive we witnessed a strange phenomenon, 
over 200 queen cells being in it. At last on the 2nd they 
swarmed, and over a dozen princesses with them. Some of the 
latter were not much larger than the ordinary workers, and all were 
deposed but the finest. They worked with great vigour, but, 
strange as it may appear, the queen was not fertilized, the bees 
began to dwindle, and it was only on Saturday, 24th September, 
that I saw worker brood in the hive, although many drones had 
been hatched. I am anxious to see the result, and whether they 
will be pure or crossed. 

In September, from the 10th till the 18th, the weather was 
lovely, and the bees wrought with right goodwill, putting in on the 
average from 15 to 25 lbs. per hive. Never before had I observed 
them so jealous of their stores. On the least provocation they used 
their lances freely. 

In another week they will be all put into winter quarters, and 
from my twenty stocks I have not taken a single pound of honey, 
choosing rather to keep them strong, and trusting for a successful 
season next year. During the summer I have given them one and 
• ball hundredweight of sugar. Only last Friday I had a letter 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

from a Beekeeper in the Upper Ward of Lanarkshire, who says — 
" My bees have been costly bees to me this season, as I have had to 
feed them all summer, and the prospects are no better now. Out of 1 7 
hives I sent to the heather, one is dead, three have made from 3 to 
8 lbs., the remainder are worse than when they were taken away. 
Bings of dead lie at all our hives, and the enclosure where they are 
is strewn with their bodies." I am sorry to hear such accounts. 
Another gentleman told me a cottager was about to destroy 10 
stocks, but I told him I would willingly give him 10s. each for 
them rather than hear of such barbarity. 

Is it not time our Government were wisikening up and establishing 
experts throughout the length and breadth of the land, especially 
in Ireland^ so that honey may no longer be one of our imports, 
when, in a good season, hundreds of tons might be secured if we 
had only bees to collect it, and farmers qualified to take care of 
them. 

Although this year has been one of unparalleled honey-famine 
in Scotland, let us hope there are seven years of plenty yet in store 
for us. 



II. — The cultivation of the Potato in its Native Country (embody- 
ing a communication from Mr. John King^ British Vice-Consul^ 
Carrizal, Bajoy Chilejy by Mr. Thomas King. 

In a paper on the Flora of Chile, read before the Society some 
time ago, I had occasion to mention the potato as a Chilian plant. 
I made some remarks on its cultivation, and stated that during a 
residence of eight years in Chile I had never heard of the potato 
disease. I also suggested means by which its recurrence in this 
country might possibly be prevented. However there were some 
points on which I wished to possess more definite information, so 
last winter I wrote to my brother, who has lived upwards of twenty 
years in Chile, asking him to make inquiries. I also sent him the 
blue-book on the potato crop issued by our Government last autumn. 
He obtained the desired information, and a fortnight since I received 
from him the following communication : — 

"Carrizal, Bajo, July 27, 1881. 
" I am now able to give you the result of my inquiries regarding 
^^ cultivation of ^the potato in Chile, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 167 

"Juan de Dios Maraboli describes the mode of cultivation 
practised by the large growers for the Valparaiso and northern 
markets : — * I was bom in the province of Talca, where my father 
was a tenant farmer. I used to work on the farm till I was 18 years 
old, when I came to the north. When a field is to be planted with 
potatoes it is ploughed as soon as the previous crop of wheat or 
barley has been cut. The stubble is left long, and this ploughed 
in is the manure for the potatoes. By the time the rainy season is 
over — in September or October — the stubble has decayed and the 
ground is again ploughed, in some cases as often as five times, and 
harrowed well each time. The rainy season extends from April to 
September, that is from the autumnal to the vernal equinox. In 
November it is drilled. The distance between the drills is one step 
(about 33 inches), and they are made as deep as possible (about 16 
inches). The potatoes are planted whole, a short step apart (about 
two feet), by a man carrying a basket on his shoulder. He walks 
erect and quickly, drops a seed each step, and presses it into the 
ground with his naked foot. If when he puts his hand into the 
basket he gets a small one, he takes two seeds and plants them 
together ; if very small he puts in three. The largest potatoes are 
not planted, but middle-sized and small ones. The seed is covered 
by splitting the drills, and then the field is harrowed flat, and 
and remains so till the potatoes are dug. As the rainy season is 
now past few weeds grow, and they are soon smothered with the 
shaws, but sometimes they are cut down with hoes. If the land 
can be irrigated it is watered once or twice in January or February, 
after the shaws are well up, the leaves of which are not wetted. 
The crop is ripe in April, and is dug after the first rain, never before, 
one reason being that the ground is so hard the potatoes cannot be 
got out easily till it rains. After the potatoes have been dug they 
are spread on a high piece of ground, and repeatedly turned till they 
are quite dry. They are then piled in long heaps and covered with 
rushes. Sometimes dried rushes are put under them, but not 
always. The piles or pits are made up in the early morning, when 
the potatoes are cold, as well as dry, never in the afternoon, when 
they are warm with the sun. Trenches are dug round the heaps to 
take away the water, and the potatoes keep dry and good all winter. 
On some estates they are all taken into sheds with thatch roofs, and 
laid on wooden shelves. They keep good both ways.' 

"Felipe Diaz was also bom and bred in Talca. His statement 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 PBOOSSDINOS OF THB 

Tras almost exactly the same as that just now given. He laid great 
stress on making up the pits when the potatoes were cooL He had 
often to get up at three in the morning to do this work. 

"Don Augustin Herreros has rented an estate near Santiago 
for the last eight years, and grows potatoes for the Santiago 
market. The land is good, is irrigated from the river, and requires 
no manure. He can grow potatoes on the same ground year after 
year, but generally raises the three following crops in succession — 
1st, wheat ; 2nd, French beans ; 3rd, potatoes ; then wheat again. ' 
He sometimes plants his own seed, but usually gets it from estates 
farther south. The smaller potatoes are selected for seed, and are 
always planted whole. He never saw any disease. The details as 
to planting and treatment are nearly the same as given by Juan de 
Dios Maraboli, but he plants earlier — ^in September or October — and 
keeps down the weeds by hoeing. Near Santiago potatoes seldom 
get rain from the time they are planted till they are ripe. 

"Don Josd Bruno Gonzalez Julio. — I enclose a copy of this 
gentleman's letter. He is an engineer and farmer, and a very intel- 
ligent man. 

" 'Mariposas, Talca, July 10th, 1881. 

" * Dear Sir, — I received your esteemed letter of June 3rd, which 
I have not answered sooner, partly because I was from home when 
it arrived, partly because I had to ask information from those who 
know the subject better than I do. I am very much pleased to be 
able to say that the answers to the questions you sent me have been 
obtained from trustworthy sources. 1st Question. Is ground for 
potatoes manured, and if so with what kind of manure? Answer — 
If the ground is poor, it is manured with farm-yard manure. 2nd Q. 
Is the seed planted whole, or divided? A. The general custom in 
the coimtry is to plant it whole, but latterly, if large, to divide it. 
Great care is taken to select as seed, smooth, well-formed, medium- 
sized potatoes. 3rd Q. In a good year what is the greatest quantity 
in weight a hectarea will yield? (A hectarea equals 2^ English 
acres.) A. In free, rich soil 350 fanegas (a fanega is 200 lbs.), or, 
expressed in English terms, 12 tons an acre. 4th Q. Is special care 
taken to change the seed from one estate to another? A. It is 
not the general practice to change the seed from one estate to 
another; what is aimed at is to find the varieties best fitted 
for each district. 5th Q. Has the potato in Chile been affected 
by the disease so common in Europe, and which makes such 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT SOCIBTT OP GLASGOW. 169 

havoc in the potato-fields of Great Britain and Ireland? — I 
mean the disease caused by Perono^pora infestans, A. It has 
not been affected. We have not "had that importation. There 
are no cases in which an epidemic disease has been observed. 
6th Q. Is the potato a common article of food, and is it generally 
used by the poor in the south 1 A. In the provinces of Valdivia 
and Chilo^ it forms great part of the food of the working classes. 
In the rest of Chile it is used generally by all classes. 7th Q. 
After taking up the potatoes, is any system adopted for pre- 
serving them during the winter? A. After the potatoes have 
been dug they are exposed for a few days to the sun in order to 
free them from moisture and from the earth adhering to them when 
taken out of the ground. They are then deposited in dry places, 
where they are protected from rain and frost, but exposed to the air. 
I answer your letter with the greatest pleasure, and remain, your 
most obedient servant, Josb Bruno Gonzalez Julio.' 

"I got some valuable information from intelligent workmen bom 
and bred in the South, some of whom had wrought in the potato 
fields when young, and are now employed on the railway. One of 
them, Jose Maria Lorca, is from the island of Chilo^ (S. lat. 43). 
He thinks there are no good potatoes out of his own coimtry, and I 
believe there is some reason for this opinion. For, unUke the rest 
of Chile, the potato is there the staple article of food, consequently 
more attention is paid to the selecting of good varieties, and to the 
best modes of cooking. He said to me, *Mr. John, here in the 
north people don't know what potatoes are. They neither know 
how to cook them nor how to eat them, and the potatoes are not so 
good as in my country. There you have something worth eating — 
potatoes so mealy you can't boil them for breaking them to pieces.' 
Potatoes are roasted in the ash-pits in wood ashes. They are always 
ready there, and if a friend comes in he is offered a hot potato out 
of the ash-pit, with salt, or a piece of dried fish. They are white 
and floury and fall to pieces when the roasted crust is taken off. 
In fact Chilo6 is the Ireland of Chile as regards potatoes. Jose did 
not know much about their cultivation, but he had never heard of 
any disease attacking them. Chilo^ is very rainy. Indeed it rains 
almost continuously there while the greater part of the rest of Chile 
is dry. In the report for 1873 issued by the Santiago meteorological 
office the annual rain-fall of Valparaiso is given as 12 inches, that 



Digitized by 



Google 



170 PROOEBDIKGS OF THS 

of Ancud in Chilo6 as 62 inches. The varieties grown there thrive 
with rain, and suffer from the want of it Seed taken from Chiloi 
ought to suit Ireland and the West of Scotland and England. 

"The following is the mode of cultivation in the *chacra,' or large 
kitchen garden : — The plot of ground selected for potatoes is sown 
with barley in March or April as soon as the previous crop has been 
harvested. The barley grows till August, when it is in the ear. 
The ears are then cut off and sold for feeding horses, cows, or pigs. 
The long green stubble is ploughed or dug into the ground, where 
it soon rots, and serves as manure. In October the ground is 
prepared for planting. The seed is planted at a depth of from 
8 to 10 inches below the surface in rows one *vara' apart (33 
inches). However, the seeds are not put in singly, but in groups 
of four, and the distance between the groups is also one *vara.' 
Some people put four tmall potatoes in each group, but the newer 
improved method is to put in four sets of one eye each, cut 
from the one or two principal eyes of large potatoes. If there are 
any small eyes in the sets they are destroyed to prevent them from 
growing. After the plants are well through the ground they are 
dug all round and the ground thoroughly loosened. Some time after 
the earth is hoed up about them into round piles like big mole-hills, 
and when further grown they get another hoeing up. I am assured 
that immense crops are procured by this method — as much as 18 
. tons per English acre — ^mostly of large potatoes. The rotation in 
chacras includes maize, French beans, pumpkins, &c. I do not 
know the order, but have been told several times that you always 
get a good crop of potatoes after French beans (frijoles). 

" As regards the varieties cultivated in the country, some are 
adapted for early consumption, others for keeping through the 
winter. I have heard a good deal about * Papas Reynas.* The 
potato-men cry them in the streets of Valparaiso. They are fine 
dry, mealy potatoes, and really the best in Chile, but do not keep 
well during the winter. They become soft and black. The 
'Borrajilla,* a dun potato, keeps well. I see by the Blue-Book on the 
potato crop that Peruvian guano has been blamed for producing the 
disease, or for carrying it to Europe, and it is well to remember that 
thoughguano exists in Chile little or none is used. The soil is composed 
of disintegrated granite, the torrents descend from the mountains 
loaded with earthy matter, and where irrigation is practised the 
water, deposits part of this in the fields, so that the soil is being 



> 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 171 

constantly renewed. I have inquired about the wild potato, but 
nobody knows it. Most of the people have heard that the potato 
is a native of Chile, but think of it only as a cultivated plant, and 
have never seen it on the hills except where planted. I find that 
on the eastern side of the Andes, about Mendoza and San Juan, the 
potato is scarcely known. Jose Andino was born in San Juan, and 
lived there till he was 18. He never saw a potato till he came to 
Copiapo. People in his native place live on maize and wheat. 
Manual Flores was bom in Mendoza, and has seen potatoes grown in 
gardens to make salads like cucumbers. I do not know of anything 
else to add at present. John King." 

My object in bringing this paper before the Society is a practical 
one, to try to do something to prevent the annual recurrence of the 
potato disease. The cultivation of the potato has of late received 
special attention. A select committee of the House of Commons 
investigated the subject in the summer of last year, and in autumn 
issued a valuable report, in which it is shewn that the severity of 
the disease has been greatly mitigated by the production of new ' 
varieties, such as the Champion. Judging from the communication 
just read, it seems to me that something might be done in the same 
direction by the introduction from Chile of sound varieties. If we 
knew exactly the causes of the disease we might perhaps find a 
remedy. Of course the immediate cause is a fungus, but what are 
the remoter causes that predispose the plant to fungoid attacks 1 
We may answer this question generally by saying that by our 
methods of cultivation we put a strain on the constitution of the 
plant which it is unable to bear. But what is the nature of this 
strain 1 I am inclined to attach a good deal of importance to cutting 
the seed. By this practice we destroy the natural protection of the 
tuber — the skin — and lessen the supply of food for the young plant. 
We probably over-stimulate by manures, and in many cases store 
imperfectly for the winter. Such treatment continued through a 
course of years at last renders the plant so weak that it falls an easy 
prey to Peronospora infestans. Now, it is noteworthy that in many 
respects the Chilian methods differ from our own, and from all the 
evidence before us the disease is unknown in Chile. I do not 
think we can lay the blame on our rainy climate, for the potato has 
failed in many different climates, and we see from the testimony of 
Senor Julio that in the two rainy provinces of Chilo^ and Valdivia the' 

VOL. V. M 



Digitized by 



Google 



172 PROOBEDINGS OF THB 

potato forms the staple article of food. I find that from the 
meteorological report the annual rainfall of Yaldivia is 99 inches, 
spread over all the months of the year. 



October 25th, 1881. 

Professor John Young, M.D., F.G.S., President, in the chair. 

Mr. David Taylor, 49 Virginia Street; Mr. Robert Bullen, Royal 
Botanic Gardens; and Dr. James Adams, 49 Cambridge Street, 
were elected ordinary members of the Society. 

The secretary read the following Agreement between the Society 
and the Town Council regarding the formation and development of 
collections of Plants and Invertebrata for the Kelvingrove Museum. 

Agreement between the Natiiral History Society of Glasgow of 
the first part, and the Lord Provost, Magistrates and Council of the 
City of Glasgow, acting under the Glasgow Public Parks Act, 
Eighteen Hundred and Seventy-eight, of the second part, in regard 
to the formation and development of collections of Plants and 
Invertebrata. 

It is agreed as follows : — 

First, — The first party shall hand over to the second party, for 
the purpose of being placed in the Kelvingrove Museum, certain 
collections of Insects and Plants in possession of the first party, and 
shall supplement these and add other branches of British Inverte- 
brata and Plants from time to time, accurately named and 
systematically arranged. 

8eco7id, — The second party shall (1) supply (^a^ materials required 
fpr moimting and holding the specimens, (b) properly constructed 
dust-tight cabinets to contain the specimens, and (c) keep the 
cabinets always supplied with camphor, or other insecticide, and 
otherwise in such a way as may best preserve the contents. 
(2.) Keep a register (apart from the general register of said Museum) 
of all specimens presented, the register to contain — (a), the name 
of the species; (bj, the locality and date when found; (cj, the 
donor's name; (dj, date of presentation. Each specimen shall 
have a number on it corresponding with that in the register, to be 
labelled with the name in the case of pinned insects, and, in the case 
of carded specimens and mounted plants, the name and locality to 
be written on the card or paper on which the specimen is mounted. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 173 

Third, — In the case of duplicates not required for the collection 
proper being received from the first party by the second party, 
these shall be entirely at the disposal of the second party, who may 
exchange them for other specimens not represented in the collection, 
or otherwise dispose of them in such a manner as they may consider 
best fitted to promote the interests of the Museum. 

Lastly, — In order to secure completeness, and to prevent 
unnecessary duplication of specimens, collections already in the 
Museum, or which may hereafter be added, may be incorporated 
with those presented by the first party, but such separate collections 
shall be distinguished by special labelling and registration. In 
witness whereof these presents, duly stamped, written by James 
Boyle Lang, apprentice in the Town Clerk's Office, Glasgow, are 
subscribed in duplicate by John Laing, William Wilson, and John 
Farquhar, three members of the Town Council, and by James 
David Marwick, Town Clerk, on behalf of, and as specially 
authorised by, the said Lord Provost, Magistrates and Council in 
Coimcil assembled at Glasgow, upon the Sixth day of October, 
Eighteen Hundred and Eighty-one, before these witnesses — James 
George Monro, writer, Town Clerk's Office, Glasgow; and James 
Brown, Council Office, Glasgow; and by John Young, President; 
Eobert Mason, Secretary; and Kobert James Bennett,. Treasurer, of 
and on behalf of the said Natural History Society of Glasgow, at 
Glasgow, upon the Eleventh day of November, and year last 
mentioned, before these witnesses, William W. Christie, Medical 
Student, Thirteen Westercraigs, Deimistoun, Glasgow; and William 
Livingstone, Medical Student, Seventeen Hill Street, Wishaw. 

(Signed) John Laing. (Signed) John Young, M.D. 
,^ William Wilson. „ Robert Mason. 
(Signed) James G. Monro, Witness, 

„ James Brown, Witness. 

(Signed) John Farquhar. (Signed) Eobert J. Bennett 
„ J. D. Marwick, Town Clerk. 
(Signed) William W. Christie, Witness, 
„ William Livingstone, Witness, 

The meeting then formally approved of the signature of the 
Agreement on behalf of the Society by the President, Secretary, 
and Treasurer. 

A donation to the Society's Library was intimated of a copy of 
" The History of Salt," by E. Marlett Boddy, F.S.S., F.E.C.S^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 PB0GBSDINQ8 OF THB 

presented by Miss Kingsf ord, Barton House, Canterbury, and a vote 
of thanks was accorded to Miss Elingsford for the gift 

On the motion of Mr. Robert Kidston, it was resolved that a 
notice of the death of Mr. Arthur Pratt should be placed on the 
record, and that an extract of this portion of the minutes be sent 
to the widow and family of the deceased, with an expression of the 
sympathy of the members with them in their bereavement. 

Mr. Pratt, who joined the Society in 1875, had, in early life, 
acquired a taste for the study of nature from his uncle, who was a 
diligent collector of specimens (which were at that time looked 
upon very much as curiosities, their scientific character being little 
understood). In after life all the time at his own disposal was 
devoted to scientific pursuits. His chief study was palaeontology, and 
he had formed a well-furnished cabinet of the fossils of the district. 
Of late years his attention had been principally directed to petrology, 
and he had, with steady perseverance and considerable labour, 
made hundreds of microscopical sections of the igneous rocks of the 
West of Scotland. But, although with leanings in such directions, 
Mr. Pratt was warmly interested in all branches of natural history, 
and made varied contributions to the business of the meetings of 
the Society. He served for some years on the Council, of which 
he was a member at the time of his death. He was of an amiable 
and modest disposition, and was much regarded and esteemed by 
all who were acquainted with him, while those who enjoyed his 
more intimate friendship valued him for his many excellent qualities, 
and will long continue to lament his loss. Mr. Pratt, after a 
protracted and severe illness, died at his residence in Renfrew 
Street, on 25th August last. 

The President delivered an address "On the Relations of 
Natural History to Medicine." In the course of his remarks, he 
referred to the infectious diseases by which the stock of the 
agriculturist was decimated, and in discussing the cause of these 
diseases he argued against the theory that they were the result of 
microscopic vegetable germs. Referring to preventive medicine, 
he made numerous references to the experiments of Pasteur, 
Naegeli, and others. At the close of the address, on the motion 
of Mr. Kirsop, a hearty vote of thanks was awarded to Dr. Young. 

Mr. Robert Turner exhibited a collection of plants from Fife and 
the Lothians. Among these were many species rare or unknown 
in the Clyde district, and several seldom found in Britain, as the 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATTTRAL HISTORY SOCIBTT OF GLASGOW. 175 

male form of the Canadian Weed (Anaeharis alsinastrum), the 
Golden Dock (Rumex maritimtiaj, the German Catchfly (Lychnis 
Viscaria), the Smaller Gentian (Gentiana Amarellajy the Forked 
Spleenwort (Aaplenium SeptentrionaleJ, and the Vernal Sandwort 
(AUine vemaj; a specimen of the Brown-rayed Knapweed (Centaurea 
Taceajf of which only a very few examples have ever been found 
in Britain, and one of the Narrow-leaved Pepperwort (Lepidium 
ntdercUe) with conspicuous petals. Mr. Turner gave a short descrip- 
tion of the plants characteristic of shore, wood, ballast heap, loch, 
and sandhill, and a sketch of his excursions in the district during 
the past summer. Mr. Turner was awarded a vote of thanks for 
his interesting notes. 

Owing to the lateness of the hour other papers and specimens 
were held over till the next meeting, on 29th November. 



29th November, 1881. 

Professor John Young, M.D., F.G.S., President, in the Chair. 

Messrs. Robert Pinkerton, M.B., CM., 1 Stanley Street, Wood- 
lands Road, John M*Lellan, 8 Eaton Terrace, and John L. Steven, 
M.B., CM., 34 Berkeley Terrace, were elected ordinary members 
of the Society. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., exhibited several slides of mounted 
specimens of finely preserved casts of Carboniferous Foraminifera, 
from the weathered limestones of the Beith and Dairy districts in 
Ayrshire, and belonging to the genera Textvlaria^ Endothyra, 
ValvuUna, and Nododnella, In his remarks as to their mode of 
occTirrence, he stated that these casts were of more interest than 
the specimens that possessed the outer shell, as the casts shewed 
the chambers more clearly, as well as the space occupied by the 
soft parts of the organisms. Mr. Young also exhibited a species 
of Athyrisj shewing the spiral arms, on which he made some 
remarks. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited specimens of Climacium dendroidea, 
and said that this moss receives its name from its tree-like appearance. 
It is frequent in marshy places but fruits rarely. Mr. MacKay, 
Mr. Turner, and himself had lately foimd these specimens at 
Newmills, Lochwinnoch, a new station for it in fruit. Dr. Stirton 



Digitized by 



Google 



176 PROCBBDINOS OP THB 

had found it in the same condition years ago at Fossil Marsh, but 
though Mr. King searched there he found it very little in fruit. 

Mr. Richard Mackay exhibited GalUtriche autumnaliSy Lin., from 
Johnston Loch, Gartcosh. This plant, although found near Edin- 
burgh and elsewhere in the East of Scotland, has not yet been 
recorded as a native of this district. 

Mr. James J. King exhibited the following species of Caddis- 
flies taken at Carluke, viz.: — Stenophylax infumaivs^ M^Lachlan; 
SterU'jphylax rotundipennisy Brauer ; and Hydropsyche lepiday Pict ; 
also At^cetis ochracea, Curtis, taken at Lanark. These insects, Mr. 
King stated, were all new to Clydesdale, S. rotundtpennis being 
new to the Scottish fauna. 

Mr. J. B. Low, MA., exhibited a specimen of Black Coral, 
Antipathea spiralisy Lin,, from Manilla; also some Barnacles, Lepas 
anattferay Lin., from the Biver Tay. 

Mr. Peter Cameron exhibited a Hymenopteron and a Bug from 
South America, which in appearance closely resembled each other, 
and in the course of his remarks on the causes of their similarity, 
referred to* the theories of "Mimicry" and "Protective Resem- 
blance." 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A.Scot., V.P., exhibited a number of 
miscellaneous natural history objects from Berbice, on which the 
President made some remarks. 

PAPERS BEAD. 

L — Notes on a Short Sun-fish, Orthagoriscus mola, Lin., caught in 
the Firth of Clyde. By Mr. John M CampbelL 

The Sun-fishes, which belong to the order Plectognathi of Cuvier, 
are fishes whose skeletons are cartilaginous or incompletely ossified, 
having a small number of vertebrae, and mostly with rough scales 
or scutes. The gill-openings are narrow, the gills pectinate, the 
mouth small, and the jaws modified into a hard beak. 

The genus Orthagoriscus is, according to Glinther, represented 
by three species, two of which are British, the Short Sun-fish and 
the Oblong Sun-fish, 0. mola and 0. lanceolatus, the former being 
the more common. They are found in all the seas of the tropical 
and temperate regions. They are evidently sluggish in their habits, 
and can be easily approached when they appear, as they often do, 
on the surface. At such times they swim very slowly, and such 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORT SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 177 

examples as I have had an opportunity of observing do so jn a 
languid manner, rolling their bodies from side to side so as ahnost 
to submerge the dorsal fin, which, on these occasions, appears above 
the surface like that of the shark. Their food is sea- weeds, which 
their strong and powerful cutting jaws are well fitted to crop. 

In shape they are very remarkable, the body being compressed 
and deep in proportion to its length, young examples being 
almost circular. At the tail they are abruptly truncated, as if 
the latter part of the body had been cut away immediately 
behind the dorsal fin. With age the body assumes a more elongated 
appearance, and what was in its early stage a mere tubercle above 
the mouth, becomes a hump. Internally there are some pecuhar 
points of structure worth noting, the spinal cord being absent, or 
at least in a very rudimentary condition. Those who are interested 
in the anatomy of the Sun-fish might consult a paper by Dr. 
Cleland, our Vice-President, in the Natural History Review for 
1862, p. 183. The stomach is not dilatable, resembling a portion 
of the intestine. 

Although not what one might call a rare fish on our coasts, the 
visits of the Short Sun-fish are sufl&ciently uncommon to be worth 
recording. Balfour, Sibbald, Neill and Pamell all notice its occur- 
rence in Scotland, and it has also been taken on several occasions 
in Irish and English waters. Most of these specimens have been 
of small size; but Colonel Montagu, in his MS. notes, mentions 
one which had been caught at Salcomb in July, 1799, weighing 
300 lbs. In the Zoologist for 1876, Mr. Barker, late of the Rothesay 
Aquarium, describes one taken at Ardglass, Ireland, which he says 
was of fair average size, its total length being 3 ft 6 in., and its 
height 4 ft. 10 in. Mr. Barker also states that, probably, not more 
than three are taken yearly on our shores. Recently there has 
been quite a number recorded. On the 11th Sept, the crew of 
the Dundee Pilot Cutter caught a fish, said to be a Sim-fish, four 
miles east of the Buoy of Tay, which measured about a yard long, 
and weighed two cwts. About the same time, two Orkney fisher- 
men, fishing off Brisay, observed one basking on the surface, which, 
after an imsuccessful attempt to capture it, escaped; and in the 
beginning of October, a fine specimen, measuring 3 ft. 9 in. long, 
and 2 ft. 3 in. deep, was caught at the Little Ferry, Sutherlandshire, 
and is now in the Dunrobin Museum. 

The example which I am now about to describe was taken in 



Digitized by 



Google 



178 PROCfiBDINOS OP TffiB 

the Firth of Clyde on 10th Sept. last. It had been observed 
floundering in the shallow water off the red lamps on the Greenock 
Esplanade, and some boatmen went out to it; after no little diffi- 
culty it was landed. It was said to weigh about a ton, and lived 
for some hours out of the water. Its dimensions, taken after 
death, were as follows: — Length, 7' 9"; height, 3' 9"; snout to eye, 
10"; diameter of eye, 4^"; snout to gill-opening, V 11"; width of 
gill-opening, 3"; depth of gill-opening, 6"; snout to pectoral limb, 
2' 4f"; base of pectoral, 7J"; length of pectoral, V 1|"; snout to 
base of dorsal, 4' 4J"; width of dorsal at base, V 11"; height of 
dorsal, 2' 1"; mouth to vent, 4' 8*; mouth to anal fin, 5' 5^; width 
of anal at base, 1' 9^; depth of anal, 1' 9". The liver was absolutely 
crammed with a scolecid worm, Tetrarhynchtis reptans. 



II. — On the Viscera of the Porpoise and White-beaked Dolphin, 
By John Cleland, M.D., F.RS., &c., Professor of Anatomy in 
the University of Glasgow. 

This communication consisted of a description of specimens in 
Dr. Cleland's Museum, prepared from viscera presented to him by 
Mr. John M. Campbell. 

Stomach and intestines, — The stomach in both species is similar, 
divisible into three main compartments: a panch, lined with homy 
epithelium; a digestive stomach, highly rugose and glandular; and 
an elongated pyloric portion, with thin walls, and communicating 
with the digestive rugose stomach, by the intervention of a very 
small compartment. The panch and the second stomach communi- 
cate with a small opening, guarded by a highly rugose disposition 
of homy epithelium; and the circumstance that in both the animals 
examined the panch and gullet contained numbers of clean fish 
bones, while the succeeding course of the alimentary canal was 
free from all but pulpy contents, suggested the probability that 
these animals habitually dispose of the bones of the fish on which 
they feed by vomiting them. 

In the Dolphin it was noticed that the gall duct was thick-walled, 
sacculated, and dilated, recalling the condition figured by Camper 
in the elephant. Unfortunately this part was not preserved in the 
Porpoise. The whole length of the intestine presents longitudinal 
rugae, and has a very smooth-surfaced mucous membrane. In 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATUItAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP OLASGOW. 179 

the Dolphin, however, it exhibits also a certain slight tendency to 
transverse folding, and has a more glandular appearance. But the 
most striking contrast is in the rectum, which, in the Porpoise, is 
of much the same diameter as the rest of the intestine, and presents 
a similar smooth surface and longitudinal folds; while in the 
White-beaked Dolphin it is greatly dilated, with a much-thickened 
mucous membrane thrown into reticulated irregularities, which 
seems to shew that digestive and absorptive functions are still 
remarkably active at the very termination of the intestine. In 
both animals the narrow part in the grasp of the sphincter is an 
inch and a half in length, and of slight vascularity. Even in the 
Porpoise it is to be noted that the calibre of the intestine increases 
from the stomachic to the rectal end, and the longitudinal rugae, 
which are disposed on the unattached side, increase in number. 

Heart and great vessels, — The principal points shewn by the 
specimens were, the shortness of the auriculo-ventricular valves, the 
remarkable venous plexus surrounding the commencement of the 
pulmonary artery and falling into the coronary vein, the great 
strength of the auricular walls, and the upper end of a large rete 
mirabile on each side, which is continued back under the ribs, in 
connection with the intercostal arteries; also, the ductus arteriosus, 
which is minutely pervious, and in reference to which the exhibitor 
remarked that he had found this vessel still more widely patent 
in another diving animal, the Seal. 

Lungs, — The density of texture and want of lobation of the lung 
of the porpoise were pointed out by John Hunter. The specimens 
exhibited shewed further a sulcus at the apex of the right lung 
(found also in the Dolphin). In it lay the vena azygos, and thus 
the projection internal to it represents the supernumerary lobe 
occasionally found in man. The pleura is prolonged into a remark- 
able fringe along the costo-diaphragmatic border of the lung. It 
is thick, and exhibits a system of blood-vessels of its own, which 
in one specimen has been stripped off with it, and is seen to be 
independent of the lung 

Male genito-urinary organs, — These are similar in the two 
species. It was shewn that within two inches of the slender point 
of the penis, the combined corpora cavernosa suddenly become 
smaller, and at the same time take an abrupt turn dorsally, as if 
by loss of substance on the ventral aspect, and become very feeble 
further forwards, so that the tail-like end of the organ can no doubt 



Digitized by 



Google 



ISO ntOCEBDINOS OF TBI 

be reflected on the part behind the bend, when resistance is opposed 
to it during erection. Further, a laige dilatation, or lacuna magna 
of the urethra is seen. From these circumstances it appears 
evident that the seminal fluid must lodge in this lacuna, and be 
wiped out into the female passages in the process of withdrawal 

In the White-beaked Dolphin it was further shewn that there 
are four openings in the floor of the flrst part of the urethra, 
namely, to the sides, the two vasa deferentia, and between them 
two larger openings leading into one sinus pocularis. The exhibitor 
commented on this as a condition which he had never before met 
with, and remarkable as representing double vagina in the female. 
Each testis is attached to the corresponding pelvic bone by a 
gubemaculum, and connected with it is a laige rete mirabile, and 
the small arteries composing this come off in numbers from the aorta. 



27th Dbobmbbb, 1881. 

Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.Z S.,F.R.S.K, &c, in the CJhair. 

Mr. David Anderson, School of Art; Mr. William Goodwin, 3 
Lynedoch Street; Mr. Andrew Hogg, George Street, Edinburgh; 
and Mr. J. Young, F.Z.S., 64 Hereford Road, Bayswater, London, 
were elected ordinary members of the Society. 

Mr. George Combe exhibited specimens of MarsupeUa Siahleri, 
Spruce, a new species of Moss which had been sent to him by Mr. 
G. Stabler, for exhibition to the Society. This moss, which is 
described in the Revue Bryologique for 1881, was found at Lang- 
dale (Oxendale), Westmoreland, in June last. 

A finely-mounted collection of Fungi, chiefly Agarics, from 
Germany, were sent for exhibition by Mr. J. C. Christie. The 
specimens were all carefully prepared to shew the most important 
features in the structure of this interesting botanical group. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A.Scot., F.P., exhibited two small speci- 
mens of the Homed Trunk Fish, Ostracian comutusy Lin., from 
the South Atlantic, and stated that these little fishes belonged to a 
genus of the Sclerodermi, which had the body entirely encased in a 
carapace or bony crust, leaving only the tail, fins, and mouth capable 
of movement They are nearly all natives of the Indian and 
American seas, none being f oimd in British waters. Some of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 181 

species are used as food, and in all there is an abundant supply of 
oil, the liver being large. Mr. Kirsop also exhibited several other 
interesting objects from various places, and an ink-bottle shewing 
the- industrial applications to which natural objects are sometimes 
put, it being an epitome of the mineralogy of the Colorado district 
in the United States. 

Mr. Peter Cameron exhibited several interesting species of Hy- 
menoptera, amongst them being an ant which inhabits the thorns of 
an acacia in Guatemala, Central America. When these ants were 
found the acacias became modified in certain parts to suit their 
insect inhabitants, several different species of which are known. 
He also exhibited specimens of Tenthredopsia ntgriceps, Nematua 
Breadalbanensis, Cam., Tenthredo Scotica^ Cam., also the type 
specimens of Megaspilua mullensis, discovered by himself. 

Mr. J. M. Campbell exhibited some*t8^ecimens of Brooke's Snail, 
Hdix Brookei, from Borneo, as many of the members might not 
have had an opportunity of seeing this fine species. It derived its 
specific name in compliment to the late Sir James Brooke, Kajah 
of Sarawak. Mr. Campbell noticed some of the peculiarities of the 
genus HeltXy such as their longevity, a specimen of one species having 
been known to live for 20 years without sustenance. 

Mr. K. Turner made a few remarks on a curious circumstance 
connected with a piece of pavement, observed in Hillhead some time 
ago. About a foot square of solid asphalte pavement became 
gradually elevated in an arch till it was clear of the kerbstone, 
and a space left in which one could readily turn his hand. On 
looking into the hollow thus formed, the mystery became apparent. 
The whole space was seen to be full of growing Agarics, of an 
edible species, Coprinua comatua^ which had forced up the hard 
asphalte by their vegetative power. Many inequalities in newly 
formed pavements are due to a similar cause. 

PAPERS READ. 

L— J%e Islands and Rocks of Haskeir^ off N, Utst, and their Bird 
Life. By Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., &c. 
With a Sketch by the Author [Plate III]. 

No special papers have appeared upon Haskeir, that I am aware 
of, but numerous short notices of it are scattered about in the 
works of authors who have written on the Hebrides generally. 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 PROOBEDINGS OF TBX 

1540, — ^Thus Dean Munro mentions it as a great resort of 
" selchis," but dismisses it in four or five lines of manuscript.* 

1703. — Martin, t writing of these isles, says: — "About three 
leagues and an half to the West, lie the small Islands called 
Hawsker-Rocks, and Hawsker-Eggath, and Hawsker-Nimannich, 
trf, esty Monks^-rocky which hath an Altar in it, the first called so 
from the Ocean as being near to it, for Haw or Thau in the 
Ancient Language signifies the Ocean : the more Southerly Rocks 
are six or seven big ones, nicked or indented, for Eggath 
signifies so much. The largest island, which is Northward, is near 
half a Mile in Circumference, and it is covered with long Grass. 
Only small Vessels can pass between this and the Southern Bocks, 
being nearest to St Kilda of all the West Islands; both of 'em 
abound with Fowls, as much as any Isles of their extent in St 
Kil(kL The Coultemeb,*Gliillemot, and Scarts are most numerous 
here, the Seals likewise abound very much in and about these 
rocks." 

1751. — Haskeir is spoken of by George Buchanan as "Havel- 
schyer, to which, at certain seasons of the year, many Seorcalvea 
(or Seals) do resort, and are there taken." J They are spoken of 
also in somewhat similar terms in Monipennie's " Abridgement of 
the Scots Chronicles," under the name Haveskera, 

* I am obliged to Mr. James Macpherson for the loan of a most beautifnl 
MS. copy of Dean Monro's account — " Description of the Western Isles of 
Scotland, called Hybrides, by Mr. Donald Munro, High Dean of the Isles, 
ftc. Edinbuxgh: 1774," This work is printed in "Miscellanea Scotica," 
ToL ii., 1818. 

t " A Description of the Western Islands of Scotland," &c., 1708, p. 66. 
Eagach, notched^ indented, [FuieMacleod and Dewar*s Gaelic Dictionary.] 
The meaning toothed was also given to me, an adjective admirably descrip- 
tive of these isles when approached from the main island of Uist, as will 
be observed in the accompanying sketch. The New Stat. Acct. says: — "On 
Husker (anciently named lollen na Moinich, or Island of the Monks), are 
found several crosses, rudely cut in stone." This lollen na Moinich is the 
" Hawsker-Nimannich " of Martin, as quoted above, and the Helscher-Yetu- 
larum of George Buchanan (English Translation of 1751), and are the islands 
now known as the Monach Islands, which lie 10} miles S.S.W. i W. of the 
Haskeir group. 

Haskeir is variously spelled by authors— Hawskeir (Martin), Hyskere 
(Knox's Tour), Heisker (M 'Donald's Agricultural Survey), Havelschyer 
(Buchanan), Haveskera (Monipennie), Helskyr (Irvin), and Haskeir (modem 
writers). 

X ** History of Scothmd. " English Translation of 1751. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORT BOCDffTt OP QLASOOW. 183 

1819. — ^This Irvin repeats, and speaks of them thus: — " Havd- 
akyra: Havelskyre; an island. Hetahir Vetularum, vel Hilkyr Na- 
monich: HeUkyr Egach; and Helskir na Mevl: these are three 
little islands that lie three miles to the west of Uist, belonging to 
the lairds thereof."* 

1764. — It is also referred to by Macaulay, who had landed there 
when on his way to St. Kilda. He speaks of it as *' accessible in 
a single place only," but this is hardly correct, as I will shew later 
on. He refers also to the Great Seals, and describes the method 
by which many Cormorants were taken in the western caves which 
terminate the deep goes, and he speaks of the great abundance of 
the wild-fowls* eggs, t 

1869. — Capt. H. J. Elwes visited Haskeir in a boat from N. 
Uist on June 30th, 1868, and he gives us a short notice of it in his 
admirable paper in the Ibis for 1869. J He found breeding there a 
large colony of Sterna arctica, of which, in the beginning of the same 
month this year, I saw no trace whatever. In Newton Bay, how- 
ever, one of our men found an egg the day previous to our visit. 
Capt. Elwes succeeded in landing on Haskeir Aag, and on this 
second island from the south found fresh eggs of Cormorants, 
while on the rock also were a good many Herring Gulls and Great 
Black-backed Gulls, and one pair of Oyster-catchers. 

The Island of Haskeir, with its outlying skerries of Haskeir Aag, 
as shewn upon the Admiralty Chart, § is described in the accom- 
panying Sailing Directions|| in the following terms: — 

" Haskeir Islands, two in number, are distant from each other 
one mile in an E. by N. J N. and W. by S. J S. direction. The 
easternmost and highest, which lies N.W. ^ N., 6 J miles from 
Griminish Point, North Uist, and N.N.E. i E., 10^ miles from 

* " Historiae Scoticae Nomenclatora Latino-Yemacula. " 1819. 

t '* The History of St Kilda, containing a description of this remarkable 
Island," &c., &c. By the Rev. Mr. Kenneth Macanlay, Minister of Ardna- 
mnrchan, Missionary to the Island from the Society for Propagating Christian 
Knowledge. London: 1764. 

t ** Bird-stations of the Outer Hebrides." By Henry John Elwes, Lieut 
and Capt Scots Fusilier Guards, F.Z.S. Ibis: 1869, p. 20. 

§ Published and sold by James Imry k Son from the latest surveys. 1881. 
Two landing-places are shewn on the Chart. 

Sailing Directions for the West Coast of Scotland. Part I. Hebrides or 
Western Isles. London: 187i. 



Digitized by 



Google 



184 PROCBBDINGS OF THE 

Monach Lighthouse, is one mile in circumference, and rises at the 
West end to 120 feet; the East end is nearly as high, and between 
the two the land is very low and nearly divided by a i-emarkable 
cave or basin, 140 feet long and 34 feet broad, so that from a dis- 
tance of 5 or 6 miles the island shews two flattish lumps. Towards 
the West end are 3 or 4 acres of rich soil and coarse grass, but in 
winter the waves cast their spray over the whole surface; no 
springs could be found, but there are several pools with brackish 
water, where the Seals resort in autumn with their young. Rocks 
dry half a cable off the West and South- West points, but the East 
side is bold-to : the best landing is on the North or South side of 
the East lump according to the wind, but it can only be effected 
with safety during fine weather." 

" Haakeir Aag, the western of the two islands, may be said to 
be composed of five bare rocks, with deep water channels between; 
they are without a blade of grass or any fresh water, and can only 
be landed on in fine weather. The highest is 83 feet above the 
sea." 

Besides the above, sundry sunken rocks are indicated on the 
Chart and described in the directions, and it is stated that there 
is no anchorage in the vicinity, except on a rocky patch, with 5 to 
7 fathoms of water, " which lies S. by E. \ K, two cables from the 
highest part of Haskeir [where] an anchor might be let go in fine 
weather." This description, though necessarily concise, appears 
to be very correct, and well conveys the general aspect and situation. 

My object in this, as in other similar papers on our Bird-stations, 
is to describe their physicaL features somewhat more minutely than 
has hitherto been done, and to treat of the feathered inhabitants 
as fully as my materials and opportunities of observation permit. 

The accompanying sketch of the group [Plate III.] will give, it 
is hoped, some idea of its appearance as seen when approaching 
from the main range of the- Hebrides. Of the western aspect I 
had no opportunity of making a sketch. 

My first attempt to land upon the group was made upon the 
30th May of the present year (1881). Previous to this, we had 
enjoyed what was, perhaps, the only week of real summer weather 
Scotland has seen this year. Even when tempered by the light 
sea-airs which gently wafted our good yacht "Crusader" northward 
from Tobermory — but failed us in the narrow Sound of Harris — 
the heat was great, and was felt all the more, perhaps, that we 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY 80CIBTT OP GLASGOW. 185 

were forced to be inactive, and to spend our time in reading and 
reclining on deck. 

With a fair but very light air of wind, we left our anchorage at 
Obb in Harris, about 8 a.m. on the 30th May, to thread the some- 
what intricate Sound of Harris; the bearings, landmarks, and 
beacons appearing familiar to me from a previous acquaintance two 
years before, when, along with Prof. Heddle of St. Andrews, and 
Capt. M*Ewen, I stood in the very early morning on the deck of 
the Dunara Castle, making mental notes of the navigation, as we 
steamed towards far ofif St. Kilda. 

After clearing the westernmost beacon, and avoiding certain 
sunken rocks, we stood away for the Sound of Shillay, between 
the two islands of that name and the Isle of Pabbay. The two 
Shillays are the westernmost of the islands of the Sound of Harris. 
The wind freshened, and being favourable, we bowled along merrily 
at about 6 knots an hour. But with this freshening, the dread 
came that the wind would raise an angry sea on the Haskeir rocks 
and prevent our landing; and so indeed we found, a few hours 
later, when having reached close to them, we stood off and on for a 
time to enable us to judge of our chances. A score or so of the 
Great Grey Seal (HcUichoertis gt^yphusj tumbled off the easternmost 
points of the main island into the white churning surf, which, in a 
few short hours, had transformed the silent^ summer sea into a vast 
heaving caldron. Seeing that no more could be done that day, 
reluctantly we gave up, and ran for anchorage to Newton Bay, 
North Uist. Some days before I had met Mr. MacDonald, of 
Newton, at Loch Maddy, and he imparted to me certain ins and 
outs of the Seal Rocks at Haskeir, one of my objects in reaching 
them being, if practicable, the "annexation" of a good specimen of 
the Great Grey Seal. Though not successful in this quest, as I 
afterwards rowed past the places he described, whilst unable to 
land, I recognised the spots which he had indicated to me with 
close precision. 

On 1st June we left Newton Bay about 7 a.m., and soon hove 
to near the western rocks of Haskeir Aag. Captain MacGillivray, 
finding a considerable surf still running, and, being apprehensive of 
more wind, would not allow our pilot — Mr. MacDonald — to land 
along with us, his duty being on board the yacht; but my friend — 
XJ. and myself, accompanied by two sailors — ^both "Dan" by 
name — ^got into the gig and rowed over close to the S.£. side of 



Digitized by 



Google 



186 PROOBBDINOS OF THE 

Haskeir Aag, leaving the yacht taking off and on to await our return. 
Alas ! the surf was quite too heavy to admit of any landing here, so 
we had to give up thoughts of a Great Seal from Haskeir. We saw 
some great grey monsters bobbing about in the white surf where 
no boat dared venture; one even came within 30 yards of the boat, 
when one of the "Dans" saluted him, but did no damage. Cor- 
morants were perched and breeding in large numbers, and on No. 3 
about 50 pairs of Shags had covered the rounded and sloping top 
with excrement, whilst in the caves and on the ledges all along 
the group many more of the latter had their nests. 

After reluctantly leaving behind the rocks of Haskeir Aag, we 
dropped down upon the main island of Haskeir. On the S.E. side 
the surf was not so heavy, and more shelter was afforded from the 
Atlantic swell. Rowing past just round the N.E. extremity, 
where but few Seals were seen, we turned back and easily effected 
a landing, just below the K high "lumps," by picking an easy place 
on the rocks, though we could have landed with almost equal ease 
at many points along the shore. In a few minutes we stood on the 
rounded tops amidst forests of most luxuriant sea-pink and bladder- 
campion. 

To Haskeir, which lies about 13 miles from our anchorage of the 
two previous nights, Griminish Point — 6i miles off — is the nearest 
land, and on our voyage back after leaving Haskeir on our first 
attempt, we distinguished, at a distance of some 10^ miles towards the 
S.S.W., the pillar of the Monach Islands lighthouse. Although 
Griminish Point is nearest, most of the natives visit Haskeir from 
Obb in Harris, and Bemeray in the Sound of Harris, and occasionally 
from Hogary, near Balranald in N. Uist. After Sir John Orde pro- 
hibited the men of N. Uist from killing the seals, boats for a time 
came from Lewis, and, I was told, far more were annually killed 
then than before. About six or seven years ago, a boat's crew out 
at Haskeir were obliged to run before an easterly gale for 48 
hours, and provisions not holding out they were four days without 
food, before getting back. For landing on Haskeir the S.E. side is 
usually the best, as the Atlantic swell is there least felt, but in 
easterly winds the N.W. side is preferred, and the landing is 
generally effected at the head of a narrow goe, in which the Seals 
used to be intercepted and killed with clubs as they sought to make 
good their escape from their breeding haunt near the summit — 
a stagnant pool of rain-water or sea-spray, of only a few yards in 
circumference, situated above the west end of the island* 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 187 

Once landed on Haskeir on the narrow lower level between the 
E. and W. "lumps," one can traverse the whole island on foot, with 
scarcely any climbing at all, except of course on the sea-cliffs, and 
on a few detached rocks at the eastern extremity which are at 
times frequented by the Seals at low water, some of which animals, 
it will be remembered, we saw plunge into the surf two days 
before. 

The higher cliffs of Haskeir are on the N.W. side facing the 
Atlantic. Two ranges of high cliffs — about 80 to 100 feet — face 
the west, and run nearly across the island; but the summits of these 
are accessible towards their eastern extremities. At their base are 
deep gullies or goes, in one case terminating in a large Cormorant 
cave, and in the other running right through the island, but 
bridged over by a natural arch of rock by which one can easily 
cross and ascend to the summit of the cliff. From seaward 
two openings through the rock are visible, one being the tunnel 
above mentioned, the other a small hole caused by the falling 
in of a mass of loose rock.* About the centre of the island, 
which is the lowest part — 30 to 40 feet elevation — the rock on the 
N.W. side slopes steeply, evenly, and smoothly seawards, and up 
this long incline the great waves rush headlong nearly to the 
summit, making the rock slimy with green seaweed, and most 
treacherous footing, as I nearly found to my cost. The S.E. side 
of this central portion is steeper but more broken, and on many 
parts a landing might be effected during westerly winds. The tops 
of the higher portions — ^E. and W. — are clothed with dense hum- 
mocks of sea-pink, sea-campion, and other rock-plants, forming 
admirable ground for the innumerable Pufl&ns which burrow in 
every conceivable direction beneath. The sea-pink is particularly 
luxuriant, covering often patches of half an acre or even an acre in 
extent. Amongst these hummocks also, as well as on the barer 
and more rocky portions, Eider Ducks breed in numbers. From 
under a bunch of a dark-green rock-plant — ^the name of which I 
do not know — a Rock Pipit fluttered off its nest, which contained 
four eggs, and an Oyster-catcher ran off her nest, which had two 
eggs. This nest was quite 80 to 100 feet above the sea, and is the 
highest I remember having seen. One pair of Wheatears was 
observed a little above this. At the west end and above the Seals' 

* This is not shewn in my drawing, being out of view when the sketch 
was taken. 

VOL. V. N 



Digitized by 



Google 



188 PR0CBBDING8 OF THB 

pool, before noticed, a colony of Herring Gulls and Lesser Black- 
backed Gulls had their widely scattered nests, and Eider Ducks, 
even at this considerable altitude, were breeding commonly. In 
the various goes of smaller dimensions than the two before men- 
tioned, Shags, Guillemots, and Kazor-bills were breeding, often 
in perfectly accessible situations, and Rock Doves were also seen. 
Some of the Razor-bills had laid their eggs in very simple 
places, under big boulders* or stones on the level or sloping rocks; 
and by lying down on one's stomach, close to the edge of the cliff, 
and reaching down, others could easily be taken without a rope. 
On the lower rocks along the sea-margin, great numbers of Shags 
sat in groups, and in the surf below Eider Drakes and Ducks, and 
various rock-birds swam about. One pair of Great Black-backed 
Gulls had their nest somewhere near the west end, above the Seals' 
pool, though I could not find it. 

My friend U. scrambled over the eastern part of the rock 
which rises above the lower central portion, above a range of cliffs 
facing west, the climb being easy, and having evidently been 
often used before. He found the same birds breeding here as on 
the other portion?, and took a few more eggs. By this time, Capt. 
MacGillivray began to feel a little anxious, and shewed signs of 
impatience by blowing the horn. We heard it the third or fourth 
time and complied, but were deaf to the first two appeals, as we 
were determined to do the island as thoroughly as possible before 
leaving. Besides, I was keeping an eye upon the western ocean, 
and there appeared no increase of wind or swell to prevent our 
getting off again. 

We landed on Haskeir about 12 o'clock, and boarded the yacht 
again at 3-30 p.m., and in this time I believe we saw all that 
could be done during a land survey. We also saw the S.E. side 
well from the boat, and a portion of the S.W. side from the deck 
of the yacht on the 30th May, but we were not able to narrowly 
inspect the S.W. shore from the boat, owing to the surf. 

Bidding an unwilling adieu to "the toothed rocks" of Haskeir 

• Perhaps worthy of the notice of the Boulder Committee. Such, however, 
were scarce. I only remember two of any size, and these lay on the lower 
part of the island, near or on the summit of the sloping rocks, and facing the 
west. At the time, I neglected to take more careful stock of their situation 
and appearance, and I do not now feel certain that they were ice-carried 
bonldm 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 189 

Aag, we ran for Pabby harbour, but landed first on the larger 
Shillay, where we found little of interest — two nests of Eider Duck, 
one near the summit of the island, and a colony of Scarts. A few 
Black Guillemots were seen on the lower rocks, and two eggs 
procured. There was one large patch of loose stones and boulders 
and dhhris where probably a good many Black Guillemots bred, as 
we saw a number round the islands adjoining. It is said that 
Stormy Petrels breed upon the larger Shillay — and there are 
certainly suitable cairns and loose stones — but we heard or saw 
nothing of these birds. 

We afterwards ran for Taransay harbourage, at the entrance of 
West Loch Tarbert. passing Coppay Island, which appeared barren 
and almost birdless. 

I shall conclude this paper with a list and a few remarks upon 
the birds observed on Haskeir. I may mention here also that I 
have in preparation an account of the Great Grey Seal, which, 
however, will appear as a separate paper of this series, at a 
future time, as some trouble is required in its preparation. 

LIST OF BIRDS SEEN ON HASKEIR AND 
HASKEIR AAG. 

Whbatbar. — Scuxicola oenanthe, (Lin.). — A pair seen. 

Rock Pipit. — Anthus obscurusy (Lath.). — Not very abundant. 
One nest found, and several scattered pairs of birds seen. 

Rock Dove. — Columha liviay Bris. — Common in the caves and 
fissures. U. took one egg, and with a bit of rope could have 
taken more. 

Purple Sandpiper. — Tringa maritima^ Lin. — One seen on the 
rocks at the landing-place on Haskeir. 

Turnstone. — Strepsilas interpres, Lin. — One seen in full summer 
plumage at the same place as the last. 

Oyster-catcher. — Haematopus ostralegtis, Lin. — A few pairs. 
One nest I found quite 150 feet above the water, and 30 yards 
from the highest top of the western half of the island, or perpen- 
dicularly perhaps 30 feet. This is the highest situated nest I 
remember to have seen anywhere. It was placed on the top of a 
decaying tuft of sea-pink, brown and flowerless. The bird ran 
from the nest as I came rather suddenly in view of it. 

Eider Duck. — Somateria molUssima, (Lin.). — Very plentiful, 
breeding at considerable altitudes above the sea, indeed in many 



Digitized by 



Google 



190 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

instances close to the summit, and usually in a warm comer 
sheltered on the north and west, and facing the south and east. 
This rule appeared to hold good both here and on Shillay and 
others of the outlying Hebrides. We found some 15 or 20 nests 
in all, but only helped ourselves moderately. One nest contained 
9 eggs, but most of the others from 2 to 4. When startled off the 
nest the duck has a very nasty habit, which entitles her, according 
to an old Scotch saying, of having the name bestowed upon her of a 
very "foul bird." The smell thus raised is very pungent and very 
abominable. After a good many birds had been distiu'bed off their 
nests, we saw both males and females tossing about in the sea, 
just clear of the surf. With care, I believe an approximate estimate 
of the numbers breeding on the islands might be arrived at, but 
our hurried visit did not permit of our doing this. 

Obs, Arctic Tern. — Sterna macraray Naum. — Captain Elwes, 
in 1868, found a colony of Arctic Terns of 80 to 100 pairs on the 
low part of the island, on 30th June, at which time the eggs were 
mostly hard set. We saw no Terns at all. The usual number 
laid by this species appeal's to be two. On the mainshores of 
N. Uist, they were just beginning to lay, Dan — one of our men — 
having taken one egg on a rock in Newton Bay, the previous day. 

Oha. KiTTiWAKE. — Risaa tridactyla, (Lin.). — Captain Elwes also 
found a fair number of Kittiwakes, but of this bird I did not see 
one. 

Great Black-backed Gull. — Larus marinusy Lin. — One pair 
only made their presence known amongst a crowd of Herring and 
Lesser Black-backed Gidls, but I did not succeed in finding the 
eggs. They were breeding, however, towards the west and amongst 
the Lesser Black-backs, above the puddle of water which is fre- 
quented by the Seals in their breeding-time. 

Lesser Black-backed Gull. — Larus fuscus, Lin. — 

Herring Gull. — Lams argentat^is, Gm. — These two birds were 
seen in about equal numbers in a colony, much scattered, however, 
and the latter also in pairs in the cliffs, and on the tops. 

PuFPiN. — Fratercida ardicay (Lin.). — Apparently the most 
abundant species all over the island, tunnelling as usual amongst 
the sea-pink hummocks, or under the loose stones. With a spade 
or a pick, hundreds of eggs might easily have been gathered. 

Guillemot. — Uria trolley (Lin.). — Abundant on all the suitable 
ledges round the island; the eggs as a rule more safely deposited 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 191 

than those of the Eazor-biU, and more difficult to get at, as I 
think is usually the case. 

Bridled Guillemot. — Uria troile^ Lin., var. lacrimans (Gould). 
— I neglected, in the hurry of disembarking from the yacht, to 
take my binoculars, and so lost the opportunity of scanning all the 
further-off ledges for Bridled birds. I only succeeded in making 
out one amongst six birds on a ledge near to the archway. Though 
abundant at many west coast stations, this variety seems rare here, 
and at the Shiant Isles. 

Razor-bill. — Alca tarda, Lin. — Common also, and many eggs in 
very accessible places, under loose boulders in the dry goes, or in 
the rents in the flatter parts, or within easy reach of the tops of 
the cliffs on the upper ledges. 

Cormorant. — Phalacrocorax carbo, Lin. — A few were breeding 
on the rock — No. 4 — of Haskeir Aag. 

Shag. — PhMacrocorax cristatus, Faber. — A considerable number 
upon No. 3 of Haskeir Aag — I should say about 50 pairs. 



IL — On Method in Collecting Natural History Specimens, By 
Mr. J. M. Campbell. 

In the course of his remarks Mr. Campbell stated he had often 
with regret noticed the absence of valuable notes or particulars 
regarding specimens placed in natural history collections. He said 
that when natural history is taken up as a subject for study, a 
collection of specimens or illustrative material becomes a necessity, 
and in the formation of such a collection much may be learnt by 
due care in its accumulation. Specimens when taken ought to 
have locality, date, and any other particulars which may suggest 
themselves, attached to the objects themselves, or noted in such a 
manner that they may be "get-at-able"; otherwise the infor- 
mation will be almost worthless. He did not by this sweeping 
assertion mean to say that those who are what are called "mere 
collectors" waste their time. They may collect natural objects 
merely because such are beautiful or pleasing to their sight, and 
in these circumstances they seem to the non-observer of any rule-of- 
thumb work as much in the right as one who purchases a fine 
piece of art-work but pays no attention to the manufacture or the 
material it is made from. Those who make a collection with the 



Digitized by 



Google 



192 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

object of assisting themselves in scientific studies should not be 
content by merely being in possession of the dried skins or pre- 
served bodies of the animals themselves. These in the end will 
not only become an eye-sore to their possessors, and a species of 
white elephant which they will be as anxious to get rid of as they 
were to get, but which their friends will reject when offered to them. 



SlsT January, 1882. 

Mr. John A, Harvie-Brown, F.Z.S., F.K.S.E., in the Chair. 

The following gentlemen were elected ordinary members of the 
Society: — Messrs. James Dunlop, Woodfoot Cottage, Nitshill; 
John Wood, Hurlet; and Frank R. J. Long, 8 White vale Street. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited a number of Mosses in fruit, from 
Innellan, and most of which although common species fruit but 
rarely; amongst them were Hypnum spletidensy H. sqtmrrosum, H, 
purum, H. triquetrum, H, Schreberi, H, loreum, and H. molluscum; 
also Hookeria lucem, (frequent at Innellan), Bryum roseum^ rare, 
(Innellan being a new locality) and Dicranum squarrosum (from 
Campsie). 

Mr. Thomas Scott sent for exhibition, through Mr. James Steel, 
a fine series of the remains of fish, crustaceans, &c., from Garvel 
Park, Greenock. Interesting features in the collection were the 
remains of Cancer pagwrus and a Hyas which — along with a speci- 
men exhibited from the Raised Beach at Cumbrae — fill up the 
succession of brachyuran crabs from Permian to recent times. 
The existence of Hermit Crabs in the Post-tertiary period has 
hitherto been believed only from the occurrence of shells bearing 
evidence of having been occupied by those crustaceans. Mr. Scott, 
in finding the remains of the Crabs themselves, has thus proved 
the fact of their existence. He accounts for their rarety by the 
theory that, after death, the carapace became very fragile and readily 
broken up. 

Mr. Steel also exhibited some Mammalian Teeth and Bones found 
at the Crannoge of Lochle% near Kilmarnock. The specimens 
comprised remains of Pig, Deer, and Ox, the latter probably the 
remains of Bos scoticua, 

Mr. James Lumsden, F.Z.S., exhibited a bi-own variety of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 193 

Common Mole, Taljpa europaea, Lin., from the Loch Lomond district, 
and made some remarks on the variation in colour of this and 
other species. 

PAPERS READ. 

I. — Meteorological Notes and Remarks on the state of Vegetation 
in the Public Parks of Glasgow during the year 1881, By Mr. 
D. M*Lellan, Superintendent of Parks. 

Twelve months ago, when I had the honour of presenting a few 
notes on the weather during the year 1880, the retrospect was an 
exceedingly pleasant one. It recalled the finest year for vegetation 
that we have had for a very long period. The present report 
is as gloomy as its predecessor was cheerful, but still it possesses 
features worthy of attention. The year 1881 has proved unfortunate 
both for the gardener and the farmer. It was ushered in with 
severe frost and snow, and during the whole of the year both 
atmosphere and ground continued damp and cold, as will be 
observed from the statistics of the several months which follow. 

January was of exceptional severity both for the animal and 
vegetable kingdoms. The thermometer was at or below the freez- 
ing point on 27 mornings, and registered 315** of frost. Four inches 
of snow fell upon the 4th, and remained more or less upon the 
ground until near the end of the month. This covering protected 
the grass and smaller shrubs, but many evergreens were killed out- 
right, and others suffered considerably. The Christmas rose 
blossomed towards the end of the month and was the only plant 
in flower out of doors. The average temperature was 27°, and the 
prevailing winds were west by north. 

February was a variable month, the barometer being specially 
irregular during the first fortnight. Snow and sleet fell on 9 days, 
the remainder of the month being dry and cold. The ther- 
mometer ranged at or below the freezing point on 1 3 mornings, the 
total frost registered being 45 degrees. The temperature averaged 
36° and the rainfall was 3*66 inches. The prevalent winds were 
west by south. 

March did not shew much improvement. Snow, sleet and rain 
fell on 18 days, the total amount of the rainfall being 2*44 inches. 
The thermometer was at or below the freezing point on 1 7 mornings, 
and registered 89 degrees of frost. The average temperature was 
35°, and the prevailing winds were west by south-west. The 



Digitized by 



Google 



194 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

snowdrop flowered on the 8tli, the crocus on the 13th, and heaths, 
primroses, hopaticas, and the Daphne mezerecum towards the end 
of the month. 

April proved to be a comparatively cold and dry month, and was 
favourable for the sowing of seed. The thermometer stood at or 
below the freezing point on 13 mornings, and registered 41 degrees 
of frost. The temperature averaged 42°. No rain fell on 22 days, 
the total amount of the rainfall being 1 '33 inches. The prevailing 
winds were E. by N.E. The plants in flower were the ScUla dbiricay 
Pulmonaria officinalis^ the daffodil, the hyacinth, and the 
rhododendron. 

May was the most genial month of the year. Sunshine and 
showers came alternately, and all vegetation made very rapid progress. 
Towards the end of the month the temperature rose as high as 82** 
in the shade. There was a very good display of spring flowers, 
especially tulips and hyacinths. The hawthorn flowered on the 
25th, and the laburnum on the 27th, the ash and the oak coming 
in leaf about the same time. The cuckoo was heard at the Queen's 
Park on the 25th — a very rare occurrence in any of our city parks. 
There were 17 days during the month on which no rain fell, the 
total amount of the rainfall being 3*46 inches. The temperature 
averaged 52°, and winds prevailed from W. by S.W. 

June might be characterised as a moist and variable month. 
Hawthorns, laburnums, and lilacs were in beautiful flower during 
the early part of the month, but they suffered severely from heavy 
hail showers on the 7th. The thermometer registered 4 degrees of 
frost at Kelvingrove Park on the mornings of the 5th and 6th, and 
this considerably damaged foliage and flowers. Rain fell more or 
less on 16 days — the total rainfall being 2*26 inches. The average 
temperature was 55°, and the prevalent winds were W. by S. 

The weather during July was much the same as that of its pre- 
decessor, but with an increase in the moisture and a decrease in the 
sunshine. There were only 11 days during the month on which 
no rain fell, and the total amount of the rainfall was 3*8 inches. 
The temperature averaged 58°, and the prevalent winds were S. by 
W. Owing to the coldness and dampness of the ground, bedded- 
out plants made no progress and in very many cases disappeared 
altogether. 

August is generally looked forward to by the gardener with high 
expectation, but this year all hopes were blasted by the continued 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 195 

rains during the two previous months, and, as a consequence, the 
display of flowers in all the parks was the poorest for very many 
years. Kain fell on 14 days, the total of the rainfall being 3*33 
inches. The temperature averaged 55°, and winds prevailed from 
E. by K 

September was rather an improvement upon the last month. 
There were 17 dry days — the total rainfall being only 1*91 inches. 
Eain, however, fell every two or three days during the month, and 
the soil never got an opportunity of becomhig thoroughly dry. 
The average temperature was 54"*. For 15 days the winds were 
from E. by N., and for the rest of the month W. by S. 

October proved to be the best harvest month of the autumn. 
Rain fell only from the 8th to the 15th inclusive, giving 23 conse- 
cutive dry days. On the 15th and 22nd the thermometer register- 
ed 7 degrees of frost, which killed dahlias and other tender plants. 
Towards the end of the month there were very high winds. The 
total rainfall was 2*22 inches, and the temperature averaged 45°. 
The prevalent winds for 16 days were E. by S. and N. and for 15 
days W. by S. 

November was the wettest month of the year. Rain fell on 21 
days, giving a total rainfall of 5*03 inches. The weather, however, 
was remarkably mild, the thermometer being below the freezing 
point only on the morning of the 18th, and registering 6 degrees of 
frost. The grass was as green during the whole month as in spring, 
and the Christmas rose flowered on the 16th. The daisy, Ja«mi?iz^w 
nvdiflora^ Galtha paltistris, polyanthus, and wallflower were in 
bloom all the month. The temperature averaged 43°, as compared 
with 37° in the same month of the previous year. . The prevalent 
winds were S. by W. 

During December the same open, moist weather prevailed as in 
the previous month. There was a moderate rainfall— viz., 3*46 
inches— which fell on 16 days. The thermometer was at and below 
the freezing point on 12 mornings, and registered 53 degrees of 
frost. The average temperature was 39°, as compared with 36° in 
December, 1880. The prevalent winds were W. by S. and N. 

The highest day temperature during 1881 was upon the 29th day 
of May, when the thermometer registered 82° in the shade, and the 
lowest night temperature was on the 16 th and 17 th January, when 
it fell to zero, or 32 degrees of frost. On 86 days the thermometer 
was at or below the freezing point, registering a total of 560 degrees 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 PROOBBDIKGS OF THB 

of frost, as compared with 461 degrees on 87 days in 1880. The 
average temperature for the year was 45", as against 46** in the pre- 
vious year. 

As regards the rainfall for 1881, the return is rather interesting. 
During 1880 there were 224 dry days, and during 1881 205 dry 
days. The total rainfall for 1880 was 32*09 inches, and for 1881 
33 '30 inches. This shews an increase of 1 9 in the number of wet days, 
but only an increase of 1*21 inches in the total rainfalL The latter 
may seem somewhat small in comparison with the increase in the 
number of wet days; but throughout June, July, August and 
September, rain fell more or less every two or three days, though 
it was more continuous than heavy. 

May was the only favourable month of the summer, and plants 
bedded out in the various parks during it and June were in good 
condition, and had a fair start. Continuous rains, however, and 
want of sunshine during July and August, completely ruined them, 
and instead of flowering many of them damped off and disappeared. 
This was especially the case with violas, mignonette, and the 
majority of annuals, and it cannot be said that any flowering plant 
really did well. Foliage plants in the carpet beds, however, were 
fresh and beautiful throughout the whole season, although the true 
tints of their colours were not brought out from want of sunshine. 
In our variable and moist climate foliage plants are worthy of more 
special attention. 

Trees and shrubs in spring and early summer flowered most pro- 
fusely, consequent on the wood and buds being well ripened during 
the fine summer and autumn of 1880. This was particularly 
noticeable in the case of chestnuts, elms, limes, and planes. Many 
of the more tender evergreens were killed, however, by the very 
severe frosts in January; and others, such as Portugal laurels, rhodo- 
dendrons, and aucubas, were seriously injured. 

It is to be regretted that after such a gloomy retrospect the fore- 
cast for the coming year is not much brighter. The past year has 
left vegetation ill prepared to stand any sudden change, and the 
open winter we are having is not improving matters. Spring is 
prematurely coming upon us before winter is gone; and if a severe 
check should come, as it very probably will come, in the months 
of March and April, the outlook will be blacker still. But every 
cloud has a silver lining, and we can only hope that this may in- 
fluence the weather, and that, when another year comes round, our 
forecast may for once have been wrong. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



197 



Subjoined is the Meteorological Record for the last three years, as 
kept at the Queen's Park: — 

Copy of Meteorological Record kept at QueerCs ParJc^ Glasgow, 
Bain gauge above the sea level, 143'9S, 





1879. 


1880. 


1881. 


MONTH. 


Rain- 
fftlL 


Thrrmo- 

HETER. 


.5^ 
Day?. 


Rain- 


Thermo- 
meter. 


Dry 
Days. 


Rain- 
fall 


Thbrmo- 


Dry 
Days. 




Average. 


Average. 


Arerage. 




Max. 


Min. 


Max. 


Min. 


Max. 

32 
40 
44 
50 
62 
64 
65 
63 
61 
52 
50 
44 


Min. 

22 
32 
32 
34 
42 
46 
61 
48 
47 
39 
37 
36 




January, 

February,.... 

March, 

April, 


1-00 
•94 
276 
1-49 
144 
6-91 
8-37 
4-58 
3-37 
2-08 
1-52 
2-48 


34 
36 
40 
45 
54 
60 
61 
64 
67 
62 
44 
36 


24 
29 
32 
34 
38 
45 
49 
49 
44 
38 
33 
29 


25 
17 
16 
21 
22 
9 
15 
13 
10 
21 
24 
22 


2-58 
2-96 
2-24 
311 
1-06 
2-10 
4-18 

•76 
314 

•84 
5-52 
3 60 


38 
46 
46 
61 
57 
66 
66 
69 
64 
60 
42 
40 


32 
36 
33 
37 
40 
46 
49 
61 
48 
34 
31 
33 


20 
11 
23 
13 
21 
17 
18 
28 
19 
24 
12 
18 


•40 
3-66 
2-44 
1-33 
3-46 
2 26 
3-80 
3-33 
1-91 
2-22 
5 03 
3-46 


27 
19 
13 


May. 


17 


 " v» • 

June, 


14 


July 


11 


August, 

September, ... 

October 

November, ... 
December,.... 


17 
17 
23 
9 
16 




30-93 


48 


37 


215 


32 09 


53 


39 


224 


33-30 


62 


39 


205 



II. — TTie Flanfian Isles and their Bird Life, by Mr. John A. 
Harvie-Brown, F.Z.S., F.K.S.E. &c., With Two Plates [Nos. 
IV. and V]. 

Regarding the Flannan Isles, or as they are also called, " The 
Seven Hunters," or "Seaforth's Hunters," several authors have 
written, but noiie so fully as these islands seem to merit. The 
difficulty of landing upon their almost precipitous sides, and which 
can only be accomplished in the calmest and finest weather, and 
then only with ease upon the two largest, has no doubt interfered 
greatly with any attempt to survey them thoroughly. 

Dean Munro devotes rather more space to them than he usually 
does, and his account is not without interest. He writes as 
follows: — 

"Seven Haley Isles. — First, furth 50 myle in the Occident seas 
from the coste of the parochin of Vye in Lewis, towarts the west 
northwest, lyes the seven isles of Flanayn, claid with girth, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



198 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

Haley isles. Very natural gressing within the saids isles: infinit 
wyld scheipe therein, quhilk na man knawes to quhom the said 
scheipe apperteinis within them that Hues this day of the 
countrymen; hot M'Cloyd of the Lewis, at certaine tymes in the 
zeir, sendis men in, and huntis and slayis maney of thir sheipe; 
the flesche of thir sheipe cannot be eaten be honest men for 
f atnesse, for ther is na flesche on them, but all quhyte like talloune, 
and it is verey wyld gusted lykways. The saids isles are nouder 
manurit, nor inhabit, bot full of grein high hills full of wyld sheipe 
in the seven isles forsaid, quhilk may not be outrune; they 
perteine unto M'Cloyd of the Lewis." So much for Dean Munro's 
quaint account. 

Next comes the still more curious account of Martin.* He says, 
"To the North-west of GdUan-head and within 6 leagues of it, 
lyes the Flannan-Islands, which the Seamen call NorthrhuntersJ* 
He adds "they are but small Islands, and six in number, and 
maintain about 70 Sheep yearly." He relates also how the natives 
of Lewis "having a right to these Islands," visit them every season 
"and there make a great purchase of Fowls, Eggs, Down, Feathers, 
and Quills." The natives never attempt a landing in a west wind, 
and a novice "not vers'd in the Customs of the place, he must be 
instructed perfectly in all the Punctilio's observed here, before 
Landing," which punctilios, Martin in his own quaint language 
proceeds to describe (p. 16). "This superstitious Account," as 
Martin justly terms it, he had received viva voce from two fishermen 
who had visited the Flannans the previous year. 

In connection with the sacred character of these isles, Buchanan 
writesf: — "There are Seven Islands at Fifty Miles distance above 
Z^ww, which some call Flavanae, others the Sacred^ or sanctuary 
islands." They would appear to be sacred or St. Flann's isles, just 
in the same way that the Shiants were sacred, being the Virgin 
Mary's isles. They were, as Dean Munro tells us, "claid with girth 
and Haley isles," or they may possibly — as suggested by Mr. James 
Macpherson to me — in lit — ^have been sanctuary isles in a legal 
sense as welL Islands far out at sea, and difficult of access, often 
seem to have been held as holy isles or places of veneration. 

Wilson in his "Voyage round the Coasts of Scotland," designates 
the feeling which induced the early Christians to settle upon these 
outermost isles, "the pertinacity of devotion." St. Flann was "a 

* Martin's Description, Ac (p. 16). t Histoiy of Scotland, 1751. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL raSTORT SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 199 

patron saint said to have flourished in the ninth century. Some 
regard them (the remains of buildings) as Druidical, and therefore 
of more ancient date. These small islands are the InsiUae Sacrae 
of Buchanan." Vide also Martin (p. 19) where he relates the fact of 
these and other remote islands being considered "places of inherent 
Sanctity." 

MacCulloch gives Flann as meaning red or blood; "possibly from 
the reddish colour of the cliffs of gneiss. It was," he adds, "also 
the name of some Irish chieftains. He gives a fair description of 
these isles, which " are seven in number and lie seventeen miles 
to the north-west of the Gallan Head in Lewis. * ♦ * The 
annual rent of the whole is £10." He thus describes their coast 
line : — "These islands are bounded all round by cliffs cut sharply 
down to the sea, and almost aU bearing the marks of recent 
fracture and separation; a^ appearance arising from the little 
wearing which they undergo from atmospheric action, and from 
the obstinacy with which they seem to resist the growth of 
lichens. * * ♦ Their average height appears to be about 100 
feet." 

Talking of their geology, he says, — "The Flannan isles are all com- 
posed of gneiss traversed by numerous granite veins of different sizes, 
and ramified in all directions. * * ♦ Here everything appears 
as if it had been cut and polished by a lapidary." He remarks 
upon the utter absence of lichens, so common in most other islands 
of the Hebrides, and the consequent ease with which the "dis- 
position of the rocks" can be traced, and the abruptness and 
sharpness of the rock scenery, indicating, as already noted, recent 
fracture and separation. 

The late Mr. H. Greenwood, who rented Cam House and shoot- 
ings in Lewis, wrote me that, in June, 1879, his gamekeeper visited 
the Flannans for eggs, but, unfortunately, the weather was so bad 
that he had to leave almost as soon as he landed. He procured 
several Eider Ducks' eggs, and those of some Peregrines, besides a 
young Peregrine, and some Razor-bills and Guillemots. He told Mr. 
Greenwood that the Herring Gull bred there. 

Mr. H. Heywood Jones, lessee of Morsgail shooting in the Lewis, 
visited the Flannans in 1 880. He landed on Eilean Tigh — the same 
that we landed upon, and his experiences were somewhat similar 
as regards the unsatisfactory state of the weather, for it began to 
blow hard about an hour and a half after landing, so that he was 



Digitized by 



Google 



200 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

obliged to leave hurriedly, and it blew a heavy gale for some days 
afterwards. I shall refer later to Mr. Hey wood Jones' notes, which 
he kindly sent me, along with lists of Lewis birds. 

Dr. Heddle and I made two attempts to land upon the Flannans, 
and it was only with considerable difficulty that we managed to suc- 
ceed the second time, and then only upon the easiest of access, Eilean 
Tigh. We had previously, whilst interrogating fishermen and 
others who had landed on these islands, found that there was con- 
siderable difference of opinion as to the situations of the landing- 
places. Some said there was only one landing-place between the 
two principal islands ; others that there were several, suitable to the 
direction of the wind. Some reported that the outer islands of the 
group were never landed upon; others — and one most persistently — 
that they could all be landed upon, and that a N. wind was the 
worst for landing, and a W. or S.W. the best. 

Coming out of Loch Tarbert, and, after clearing the island of 
Scarp — whence fishermen go out to the neighbourhood of Flannan 
for deep-sea fishing — we had a pretty stiff breeze and good tumble 
of a sea on. In order to avoid the long reefs which lie off Loch 
Resort, and over which high surf was breaking, we had to tack well 
out before we could run into our night's anchorage at Loch 
Thamanabhaidh (pronounced Hamanawai) in Lewis.* The next 
day we spent fishing, as it was too stormy to attempt the Flannans. 
On the 9th June we made a fair start. A gentle summer 
" airie " took us out of Loch Thamanabhaidh about 7 a.m., but we 
were becalmed soon after till 11. With another almost impercepti- 
ble land-breeze, we came across the track of a large fishing-boat. 
They had a few Ling, Skate, one Tusk, and an enormous Halibut — 
about 80 lbs. — and we laid in a stock. Soon after this, we got 
again into the " doldrums." The men had been cleaning the fish 
on deck, and Kittiwakes had gathered round us, attracted by the 
offal. While lying in the sun, I jumped up, with an exclamation, 
" There's a Skua, and a Pomatorhine, too," rousing my companions 
— U. and Dr. Heddle — from their novels or their slumbers. 
I rushed down stairs for a certain implement and put the fact 
on record beyond cavil. " A bird hit 's history — a bird missed 's 
mystery." How curious to find the great invasion of Skua Gulls 
still lingering on our shores and seas far into our now almost arctic 

* This may be read in continuation of my paper upon Haskeir and its Bird 
life (pee page 181)».a8 it takes up the rope's-end where it was then dropped. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORT SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 201 

summers. The same day we saw others, and next day two more 
in the small harbour of Carloway, while, on the following one, 
numbers were seen by us out at sea. Fulmars, too, were not 
uncommon, and a few Gannets hovered round. . I heard a report 
that a branch colony of Fulmars had reached the Flannans, and our 
pilot — MacDonald — told me the same thing; but this statement 
would require accurate and careful investigation, which I was not, at 
the time, able to give to it. 

The Chart of the West Coast of Scotland and the Hebrides (Imry, 
1881) gives the following islands of the group. I arrange them 
from E. to W., as shewn on the chart, but some confusion seems to 
exist as to their names and relative positions. 

East 

Gealtir M6r. Gealtir Beg. 

Eilean M6r. Soraidh. 

Khodorheim. Eilean an Gobha. 

Wed. 
Bronn na cleit. 
In all, seven islands; but Gealtir M6r and Gealtir Beg are 
insignificant rocklets, with scarce enough breeding-ground for a pair 
of Oyster-catchers. This survey map makes no mention of the 
second largest island which lies close to Eilean M6r, called Eilean 
Tigh, and perfectly known and recognised by the natives of Lewis. 
The " Directions "* say ** Flannen Islands^ or Seven Hunters^ are a 
group of islands 3 miles in extent, the highest and largest of which, 
Eilean M6r. lies W. J N., 44 miles from the Butt of Lewis; 
N.N.E. i R, 46 miles from Monach lighthouse; E. by K, \ N., 
38 miles from Boreray, St. Kilda, and 16J miles from Eilean 
Molach, the nearest land of Lewis. The group consists of seven 
islands and thrice as many rocks, divided into three clusters, taking 
a triangular shape. Eilean M6r, 282 feet high, and a quarter of a 
mile in extent, produces rich grass at an early season, so that the 
sheep left here for pasture are fattened before any in the Lewis. 
* * * The best landing place is the south-west side of Eilean 
M6r ; but it should only be attempted in moderate weather." This 
last statement is at variance, as regards the situation of the landing- 
place, with the reports of some of the natives, and does not seem to 
be in accordance with the conclusions we drew after cross-question- 
ing a number of them. As will be seen, we landed without very 
* Otters, Admiralty. Parti. Hebridea. Fottar: London. 1874. 



Digitized by 



Google 



202 PROCEBDINGS OF THE 

serious difl&culty on the E. side of Eilean Tigh, and the weather 
could hardly have been designated moderate. Imry's "Directions/* 
however, which profess to be copied or compiled "from recent 
Admiralty Surveys," as stated on the title page (1875), mention 
Eilean Tigh "possibly of 50 acres." They also recommend the 
south-west side of Eilean M6r as a landing-place. 

Approaching the Flannan Islands from the E.N.E. their first 
appearance strikingly reminded me of Haskeir, but a little later 
this view quickly changed, and it was seen that the group was of 
more circular or triangular shape, unlike the long single strait ridge 
which the Haskeir island and rocks present. 

Gealtir M6r, translated the big white (bright or dear) landy 
and Gealtir Beg, the lesser white land, are only small spray- 
washed rocks, not a cable's length from the larger masses of Eilean 
M6r, and Eilean Tigh, which latter is nearer to them than the 
former.* 

Eilean Mbr — the big island — is the highest and largest of the 
group, and has a fine precipice facing E.S.E. and a deep goe from 
top to bottom, with what appears at a distance a feasible but 
difficult landing-place on the left or S. side of the goe, and another 
equally difficult, still more to the 8., and beside a small triangular- 
shaped cave. These, however, are not landing-places, though they 
appear possible from the sea, and the recognised landing-place is 
on the N. side. 

Eilean-an-Tigh — the island of the house — is the second largest; 
and is next to the two Gealtirs in position from the Lewis. 
Upon it are the remains of an old house, standing at the inner 
extremity of a large goe, which cuts into the full height of the 
cliffe — about 120 feet? — from the west side, and of which we 
could see the further dark clifF-top above the top of the nearer 
and somewhat lower cliff facing it. 

The island is a roundish "lump" with a fine green sloping top 
facing E.S.E. I am now describing the aspect from the sea, but 
will say more of it later after landing. One more point, however, 
should be noted now, and that is, the long peninsula which juts 
out towards the E.S.E. and which, however, is better seen to 
be a peninsula when approached from a more southerly direction. 

As we kept on along the N. side of Eilean M6r, passing two 

* The best map I have seen of the group is a very careful one in Mnir's 
* < Charaeteristics of old Church Architecture of Scotland, " p. 178. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 



203 



or three goes where apparently there were fewer birds than on 
the E.S.E. side, the outer portion of the group began to open out, 
but before speaking of them Soraidh, — -farewell island — comes 
next to be mentioned. It is composed of three main "lumps," and 
two smaller semi-detached residences of sea-fowl at either end. 
These are separated by apparently deep water channels, and the 
landing appears to be difficult on any of them. They form 
rounded "lumps," rather than stacks, with precipitous sides. Sor- 
aidh is the furthest south of the group, and hence, perhaps, has 
received the name from mariners leaving the islands. 

Besides the above, between Eilean Tigh and Eilean M6r there 
is a stack — a square comparatively low mass some 60 or 80 feet in 
height — ^in mid-channel, and beyond appears an island of some- 
what similar shape to another of the Western Islands, and which 
forms a stack close to the W. side of Eilean M6r, but has no 
name on the Chart, though from its size, it appears to have equal 
claims with the outlying skerries of Gealtir. 

The next which come into view are the following: — Rhodorheim, 
probably an adaptation of Rvdha dbruinriy meaning anguish pointy 
lies most to the northward of the western group. Bronn na cleit — 
the jprotuberance (or bdly) of the reef — which agreeably with its 
name rises in peculiar shape and abruptness from the centre of 
what from this view appears a long reef, is really three detached 
islands, and many skerries, of which Bronn na cleit is the 
westernmost. Eilean an Gobha — th^ smithes island — is the 
southernmost of the western group. These three open out past 
the end of Eilean M6r, and, as I have said, appear at first like one 
large island. Penetrating the lower end of Rhodorheim, is a 
small tunnel in the shape of an erect parallelogram, bridged over 
by apparently a square block of rock, as shewn in my sketch, 
[Plate lY.] and rising from the sea passage beneath is a small 
pinnacle of rock in the centre. 

There are thus, therefore, six islands, two named rocks, and 
numerous skerries, which really constitute the group. 



In Maps. 

Flannan Isles. 
Seven Hunters. 
Seaforth's Hunter& 
VOL. v. 



Correct Gaelic. 

Eilean Flannan 

or 
Eilean an Flannan. 
o 



Meaning. 

St Flannan's Isle. 
The Flannan 
Islands. 



Digitized by 



Google 



204 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 



Eastemmost of the group lie the skerries of 



Gealtir M6r 

and 
Gealtir Beg 



Gealtir M6r. 



The Big White 
(bright or dear) 
Land. 



Gealtir Bheag. 

Next and more to the north lies 

Eilean M6r. | Ant Eilean M6r. | The Big Island. 

Next it on the left is 
Eilean Tigh. | Eilean an Tigh. | Island of the House. 

At some distance off, southward, are several rocks constituting 
the Isle of 

Soraidh. | Soraidh. | Farewell Island. 

which is the most southern of the group. Then about a mile 
further west lies the western group. The northern island is 
Rhodorheim. | Rudha dbruinn. | Anguish Point. 

Between this and Eilean Gobha appears 

The Protuberance (or 



Bronna Cleit. Bronn na cleit 



belly) of the Reef. 



But this, however, is really the westernmost of the group. To 
the south then comes 

Eilean Gobha. | Eilean an Gobha. | The Smith's Island. 

and between Bronn na cleit and the other two islands are innumer^ 
able reefs and skerries lying in a narrow sound, perhaps 150 yards 
in width. 

Writing to me concerning the names of these several islands, 
Mr. James Macpherson says: — "There is no reason to doubt 
Martin's assertion that the island (or islands) derives its name from 
St. Flann. The martyrologies record no less than half-a-dozen 
Saints of the name from which to choose. Flann is a word that 
I have never heard used for rerf, although the dictionaries give it 
in a very restricted form. QecdUre (a coward) appears to me to 
be a very absurd name for an island. The nearest approach to the 
word is Geal, literally white. This is often used in a much more 
extended sense, indicating intense fondness and affection, and 
applied to an inanimate object, might also mean veneration — vide 
Martin's notice on the inherent sanctity of the islands. Grealtire 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY 80CIBTT OF GLASGOW. 205 

may also mean fair and fertile, as opposed to black, bare, and barren 
rock."*   

"Soraidh," continues Mr. Macpherson, "is a very appropriate 
name, though the termination ay or ey has a suspicious sound. 
I read in your writing Bhodorheim, and I give the only Gaelic form 
which occurs to me, which is almost similar in sound. There 
can, I think, be little doubt as to the correctness of the name of 
Bronn na cleit. * * * *Hebridean names are very puzzling, 
there are so many elements of corruption.*" 

Our view was, of necessity, a hurried one, as we had shortly to 
put about, the wind springing up fast from the southward and 
rapidly freshening, and the S. sky looking dark and "dirty." 
We ran for it and made Loch Carloway early in the morning. 
On June 10th we fished, as it continued stormy. In the harbour, 
as already noted, two Pomatorhine Skuas were busy. Some boys, 
questioned, said they had never seen such birds here before, and 
wondered what they were, although some men afiirmed that they were 
always seen about these seas in summer ; but did these fishermen 
not confoimd them with Richardson's Skual Are these barren 
birds, or yoimg birds not yet breeding ] All I have seen, however, 
this summer appear to have reached the adult stage, and the 
peculiar tail-feathers were fully developed. Going out again to 
the islands, we saw more, and one followed the vessel for miles, 
flying on ahead and then resting on the water, until we again 
came abreast of it. 

We interviewed Mr. Macaulay, postmaster and fisherman at 
Carloway, who has often visited, and often landed on the Flannans, 
and we arranged that he should accompany us as pilot and guide 
next day if the weather turned out to be suitable. But during 
the afternoon it blew harder than ever, and by night he said 
it would be impossible to land, and that it would take two or 
three days to lull the new swell, which being from N.K by K". 
would blow and roll right into the S.E. landing-places, known to 
and approved of by him. Two cross seas had got up the day 
before, from N. and S., and now there was a newer swell blending 
with the old N. one, and coming from N.E. by E. Mr. Macaulay 
said that it would be no use, but we arranged to pay another visit, 

* In the case in question, this last cannot be the meaning, as both Gealtir 
rocks are mere skerries shewing white if there is much surf on them ; and that, it 
appears to me, they probably deserved the name of the white land. 



Digitized by 



Google 



206 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

and go as close round the islands as possible. This we did, with 
the unexpressed hope that "after all we might manage to land." 
On the 11th June, therefore, about 8 a.m., we again laid on a 
course for the Flannans, with light airs of wind, and it was 3 p.m. 
before we reached off the nearest isles, and then stood away past 
Eilean M6r by the northward, with a heavy swell from N.E., and 
a fresh breeze. Captain MacGillivray would not stand closer to the 
lee shore than half a mile, though with a steam yacht we could of 
course have run in much nearer. Indeed a sailing yacht is not 
at all suitable for visiting those far isles. We noticed, as we 
passed, a colony of rock-birds near the eastern extremity of the 
peninsula of Eilean Tigh, and several considerable colonies on 
Eilean M6r, and we saw the landing-place on the latter, and how 
utterly impracticable it was to-day. 

The average height of the whole group is about 100 feet, but 
Eilean M6r reaches an altitude of 280 feet, and has an area of grass 
of some 80 acres; whilst Eilean Tigh is computed to have about 50. 
Only three sheep were visible on the former. 

We then tacked through the sound between the two groups, in a 
channel about 1 J miles wide, and ran close under the cliffs of the 
windward shore of Eilean an Gobha, so that we could hear the loud 
mutterings of the rock-birds, and could easily identify the species 
with our binoculars. On Rhodorheim — the most northerly — two 
Wild Geese were distinctly made out, standing in profile against the 
sky. The gneiss rock was curiously seamed, especially on Eilean 
an Gobha and Bronn na cleit, by numerous felspar and quartz veins; 
and on the summit of Eilean an Gobha, above a round-edged goe, a 
huge boulder about 15 tons in weight, or possibly much more, lay 
a few feet ^m the edge of the cliff. Numerous rocks and skerries 
lie off the isles of Rhodorheim and Eilean an Gobha, and between 
these and Bronn na cleit, and are visited by Seals and innumerable 
Scarts. 

After sailing southwards, clear of Soraidh, we tacked «gain to 
try to effect a landing on Eilean Tigh. On Eilean M6r, on the 
grass slope, we saw the remains of the chapel of St. Flann, and 
on Eilean Tigh those of the dwelling-house formerly mentioned, 
at the head of the western goe. On Soraidh, on the S. side, 
were several colonies of rock-birds, with a few Eittiwakes. We 
got into the gig, taking a few provisions, in case of landing and 
not getting off easily, and approached the reputed landing-place 



Digitized by 



Google 



KATURAL HISTORY 80CIBTT OF GLASGOW. 207 

on the S.E. side, which is sheltered by the projecting spur, or 
peninsula, and a skerry of some altitude. We then ran in on the 
curl of the surf, between the skerry and Eilean Tigh, into an 
embayed piece of smooth water ; but here found no landing prac- 
ticable, so pulled out again by rapid, strong rowing on the slack of 
the waves, and lay ofT the only apparently feasible landing-place, 
to watch the surf After a time, our men backed the boat in, and, 
watching the wave, gave U. a chance, and he landed easily. 
Next rise I landed, carrying the bag and Dr. Heddle's hammer; 
but he remained in the boat, as the waves now again resumed their 
turbulence. U. and I climbed up and spent about an hour, 
or less, on Eilean Tigh, and traversed the whole top surface. 

We took a few eggs of Eazor-bills, Puffins, Eider Ducks, Oyster- 
catchers, &c., and could have taken many more had time permitted, 
but any change in the tide might, within a few minutes, alter the 
conditions of our getting off. We got off comfortably; but Dr. 
Heddle, in landing to chip off a bit of a quartz vein, and, having 
leather-soled boots without nails, instead of india-rubber-soled shoes, 
slipped and came upon his knee, hurting it rather severely.* 

Hereafter the breeze sprung up briskly, and we had a splendid 
run for the Sound of Harris, pleased, but not fully satisfied, with 
our experiences of the Flannan Isles. 

It now only remains for me to give a list of the birds which 
were clearly identified, and to refer you to the accompanying 
sketches of the different aspects of the group from different points of 
view, as outlined by me from the deck of our yacht, and afterwards 
enlarged and shaded in Indian ink. 

LIST OF BIRDS OBSERVED AT THE FLANNAN ISLES. 

Rook Pipit. — Anthus dbscurus (Latham). — Common on Eilean 
Tigh, and probably on the other islands also. 

Peregrine Falcon. — FaUo peregrintis, Tunstall. — I saw nothing 
of this bird, but Mr. Greenwood mentions it as breeding there 
a year or two ago. 

Otstbr-oatcher. — Haematopus ostralegtis, Lin. — A few pairs 
observed, and eggs taken on Eilean Tigh. 

Ejttiwake. — 'Bissa tindactyla (Lin.). — Scattered colonies on 

* Query : As the " Punctilios " of Martin were not adhered to on our first 
landing, was this not just retribution upon our heads ! 



Digitized by 



Google 



208 PBOCBBDINGS OF THB 

N. side of Eilean M6r and on the skerry near the landing-place 
on Eilean Tigh, and doubtless others we did not see. 

Grbat Black-backed Gull. — Larm marinm, Lin. — A few pairs, 
or a single pair, on all the islands, I believe. Seen upon Bronn 
na cleit, Eilean Gobha, and Eilean Tigh. 

Lesser Black-backed Gull. — Larus fusem^ Lin. — ^A few on 
Eilean Gobha and Bronn na cleit, and scattered over the whole group; 
a colony on Eilean Tigh. 

Herring Gull. — Lama argmtatua, Gmel. — A good many observed 
on Bronn na cleit and Eilean Gobha. 

PoMATORHiNE Skua. — StercoTarius pomotorhimts (Temm.). — One 
of these handsome birds I shot during the passage out to the islands; 
two more were seen in the harbour of Carloway ; and during the 
summer others were seen at different parts of the western seas. 

Fulmar Petrel. — Fulmartis glacixilU (Lin.). — Several Fulmar 
Petrels were seen in the neighbourhood during my visit, and one 
close to the islands. Numbers are seen at times ofT Coppay Island 
in the Sound of Harris, but this is no proo^ of course, of their 
breeding anywhere nearer than St Kilda. 

Razor-bill. — Alca torda, Lin. — The most abundant species of 
the true rock-birds on Bronn na cleit, but also very plentiful in the 
goes of all the islands, and in most of the suitable places. 

Guillemot.— CTria troile (Lin.). — Common in the goe-clififs, 
especially in the %vestern goe of Eilean Tigh, and next to the 
Eazor-bill in numbers. On the south side of the stack, which 
lies in the channel between Eilean Tigh and Eilean M6r — as seen 
from seaward on the N. side — and on the cliff-face of the eastern 
promontory of Eilean Tigh. 

Bridled Guillemot. — Uria troile (Lin.), var. lacrimans (Gould). 
— I only saw one bird as it flew past at Bronn na cleit, but a closer 
inspection of the cliff-faces might, no doubt, disclose more. 

Puffin. — Fratercula arctica (Lin.). — Comparatively scarce on 
Eilean Tigh, yet common enough in scattered colonies. They 
occupied the sea-pink tufts closest to the slopes, but the firm fine 
grass turf was little disturbed or tunnelled by them. In the large 
gbe facing the west, amongst the debris and cairns and mixed green 
tufts, they were fairly abundant, and also under the stones of the old 
dwelling-house or hut. But on the rounded slopes of Eilean M6r, 
the rotten turf, as seen by me across some 200 yards of water, bore 
evidences of much larger numbers. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATTTRAL HISTORT BOGUTTY OF GLASGOW. 209 

EiDBR DuOK. — Samateria molliwima (Lin.). — One nest found 
on Eilean Tigh. Probably dispersed over the islands in som^ 
numbers, as they were seen in the water at various places. 

Cormorant. — PhcUaerocorax carbo (Lin.).— The only ones seen 
were high up on the pinnacles of Bronn na cleit, whence about 
three or four pairs flew off at the report of the gun. 

Shag. — Phalacroeorax cristaius (Faber). — Common in all the 
suitable places. 



IV. — Ornithological Jottings from the neighbourhood of Loch 
Lomond, for 1881. By Mr. James Lumsden, F.Z.S., M.B.O.U. 

The year 1881 has been one of considerable ornithological 
interest in the Loch Lomond district. Although an arctic winter 
and a wintry summer deprived us of many of the more delicate 
species, we have, perhaps owing to the same causes, had more than 
the usual number of rare visitors. 

ScLAVoNiAN Grbbb. — Podiceps auritus (Lin.). — As already 
reported at a former meeting, a Sclavonian Grebe was shot on 
the Loch, near Luss, by Colonel Colquhoun. 

Glaucous Gull. — Larm glaucm, Miill. — An immature Glaucous. 
Gull was obtained at the head of Glen Luss early last spring. It 
was in the company of some other gulls when killed, but the 
gamekeeper who shot it thinks they were not of the same species. 
In my List of the Birds of Loch Lomond, published in the 
Proceedings of this Society, I stated that this species had been 
once obtained in the district, but qualified the statement by giving 
my authority for it — viz.. Rev. F. 0. Morris, in his "History of 
British Birds." With the exception of this doubtful specimen 
recorded by Mr. Morris, and by him alone, the bird has never 
before been met with in the Loch Lomond district. Although not 
uncommon nearly every winter on the East coast, this species is 
not often seen in the West, and still more rarely in any of the 
inland districts. It is a northern species, and breeds chiefly within 
the Arctic circle. 

Tawnt Owl. — Symium aluco (Lin.). — On the 22nd of April, 
I found a nest of the Tawny Owl on the ground at the foot of a 
large larch tree on the banks of the river Fruin. The nest, which 
was only a hollow between two of the roots of the tree, contained 
three eggs. From two the young birds were almost out, and the 



Digitized by 



Google 



210 PROCEBDINGS OP THB 

third was chipped. So like the colour of the tree was the old bird, 
that I would most likely not have noticed her had she not got off 
the eggs as I passed within ten yards of the spot. Like a 
thoughtful housewife she had prepared for the expected increase 
of her family, for her larder contained a half-grown rat and a 
shrew mouse. On the 24:th I again visited the nest, and found 
all the young birds out, and as lively as could be. Their appetites 
seemed to be good, and a supply of eight young rats was waiting 
for their next meal. Three days later the rats were all gone, and 
there was nothing in the nest but a mouse with its head eaten off. 
The birds continued to thrive, but some one having discovered the 
nest, they were taken away as pets, and one of them is still alive, 
preying on the mice in a hay-loft of a farm near at hand. 
Instances of the Tawny Owl breeding on the ground are very rare, 
the usual place for the nest being a hole in some large tree. I have 
since, however, been told by a friend, who lives not far from Loch 
Lomond, that one bred on the ground at the foot of a spruce fir 
not far from his house, in 1879. We have all heard of birds 
changing their breeding habits from necessity, but in both of those 
cases there were trees of exactly the kind in which Owls delight to 
build close at hand; and it would be interesting could we tell what 
logical reasoning had induced the bird of wisdom to leave the 
safety of the tree for the danger of a nest on the ground. 

Common Buzzard. — Buteo vulgaris^ LeacL — The following 
note, recently communicated to the Field by Colonel James 
Colquhoun, son of the author of "The Moor and the Loch," is of 
interest: — "On a precipitous rock at the head of the rugged Glen- 
Finlas, on Loch Lomond side, a Common Buzzard has yearly built 
its nest from time immemorial Not having a good specimen of 
this bird in our collection, I straggled down last spring (1881) to 
the nest, which is simply a lilliputian eyrie. Having shot the old 
hen, I found that in place of eggs (as I had expected) there were 
three young ones in the nest. Thinking that the old male bird 
would not attempt to rear the brood, aQd in order to preserve the 
pair in the same case, I three times made the rough ascent to the nest 
in company with the head keeper, but not even at two o'clock in the 
morning was the wary bird at home. Li the meantime, my father 
wrote to me certainly to give the male a chance of bringing up the 
nestlings. On returning to them two days afterwards one of the 
young birds had disappeared, its remains shewing that it must 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCHTTT OF GLASGOW. 211 

have been devoured by its cannibal kin. The remaining pair of 
young birds, however, seemed hale and hearty, and were so well 
cared for by the widower, that they left the nest in full plumage 
and perfect condition about the end of June." 

Tufted Duck. — Fvligvla cHstata (Leach). — In the Proceedings 
of the Royal Physical Society, vol. iv., p. 73, Mr. A. B. Herbert 
reports having found a nest of the Tufted Duck "on a rocky island 
in an inland lake in Fifeshire." At the February meeting of this 
Society in 1879, Mr. R. J. Long reported a nest having been got 
in Perthshire, and exhibited the birds and eggs. Those two 
instances, are, so far as I know, the only recorded cases of the breed- 
ing of this species in Scotland. I am now able to record that at least 
two pairs of Tufted Ducks bred last spring on a small loch not far from 
Loch Lomond. Three pairs of birds were identified by me on the 
loch on the 29th of April, and in June I saw at least two broods of 
young i)irds. I have neither eggs nor birds to shew as proof, 
and perhaps on that account some sanguinary naturalists may doubt 
my word. I did not see the nests, as they must have been on one 
of the small islands of the loch, and then inaccessible, but I can 
answer for the birds, which I saw and identified beyond doubt. I 
trust therefore this case will be admitted as an authentic record, 
although I produce no tangible proof. 

Shbldrakb. — Tadoma comuta (S. G. GmeL). — In some notes on 
the Birds of Loch Lomond, which I read to the Society in December, 
1879, I stated that a young Sheldrake had been shot on the Loch 
in 1877. Since then I have never heard of or seen the species 
wild in the district; but on the 14th of June last, a dead bird of 
this kind was picked up by a man on the shore, near Arden. The 
man who found it said he had seen it alive on the loch some days 
before. It had no shot marks, and was in very poor condition. 
It is qxiite possible it might have been an escaped tame bird, 
but it had not the appearance of one that had been in confine- 
ment. 

Corn Crakb. — Grex jpratensis, Bechst; and Water Bail. — 
Rallus aquatictiSf Lin. ' —More than usually abundant this season; 
the latter, which is rather rare in the district, having been shot on 
several occasions. 

Spotted Crake. — Porzana parva (Scop.). — Two Spotted Crakes 
were shot by Sir George H. Leith Buchanan on the 10th of 
October. This species is seldom met with in any part of Scotland, 



Digitized by 



Google 



212 PROCEEDINGS OF TQE 

although specimens have once or twice been got on the banks of 
Loch Lomond, as before recorded in the Proceedings of the Society. 

Gbat Phalabopb. — PhcUarqpus fidicaritia (Lin.). — I have now 
to record the occurrence of the Gray Phalarope, for the first time^ 
in our district. On the 14th of December, Mr. Robert £. Findlay 
of Boturich, picked up a dead specimen of this spedes on the shore 
near Boturich Castle. On dissection it proved to be a male, and 
its stomach was found quite empty. like many other northern 
birds, the Gray Phalaxt^ is much more common on the East of 
Scotland than on the West As a breeding species it has its home 
in the Arctic regions, and it has never been met with in this 
country except in winter, and in its winter plumage. Its summer 
plumage is of a rich chestnut colour. 

Great Gray Shrike. — Laniue excubitor, Lin. — ^As before re- 
corded, the Great Gray Shrike has several times occurred on the 
shores of Loch Lomond, but it is by no means a common ^pecies. 
Within the last two months I have seen two specimens in the flesh 
from the district. One, killed at Arden on the 30th of December, 
was a male, and its stomach contained the feathers of a Golden- 
crested Wren. 

Gannet. — Sula baasana (Lin.). — Gannets are seldom seen on 
fresh water, and I was therefore much surprised, when told by 
Sir Geoige Leith Buchanan a few days after the violent gale of 
last October, that he had seen a Gannet on the Loch. But sure 
enough it was one, for a few days afterwards I got within 100 
yards of it, or rather it came within 100 yards of me as I was 
standing on the shore. With my glass I could see that it was a 
fine old bird in full plumage, the yellow on the head being very 
distinct. It has often been seen since then, both by Sir Geoige 
and myself, but neither of us have ever seen it feeding. One 
stormy day I watched it for a long time, and several times it rose 
high in the air as if about to dive, but as often it seemed to change 
its mind, for it never entered the water. 

This ends my Jottings for 1881, and rough and meagre as they 
are, I hope they may be of some interest to the members of the 
Society. I have taken the Loch Lomond district as my special 
charge, for I feel convinced if we are ever to have a perfect know- 
ledge of the bird-life of our country, it is only by having many 
workers, and by each worker having a special district. In this 
way scraps of information, which would otherwise be passed over, 



Digitized by 



Google 



KATTJBAL HISTORY SOCIETT OP GLA800W. 218 

are secured, and these, when published, in due time become of 
value. 



28th Fbbruart, 1882. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., Vice-President, in the Chair. 

Mr. Thos. Scott, 7 Caddlehill Street, Greenock, was elected a 
corresponding member, and Messrs. Donald Farquhar, 32 Govanhill 
Street, and John Lockhart, 271 Bath Street, were elected ordinary 
members of the Society. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited cones of the Douglas Pine, Abies 
Douglaaii, Ldl., grown at Innellan, and made some remarks on the 
growth of this and other allied species. 

Mr. Robert Mason exhibited cones and a section of the wood of 
the Cedar of Lebanon, Cedrus Libam\ Loud., and made some 
interesting observations on the geographical distribution of the 
species. 

Mr. Thomas Scott reported the finding of the English Sage, 
Salvia verhenaca^ Lin., at Batteryfield, Greenock. This plant is not 
indigenous in the West, and Mr. Scott considered it to be a probable 
garden escape. He illustrated his remarks with specimens of the 
same species from Burntisland. 

The Chairman exhibited a collection of Botanical Plates illus- 
trating the Flora of Japan, also a snout of a Sawfish, PristiSy sp., 
the siliceous anchoring fibres of a Hycdonema^ and some other 
objects of interest. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., exhibited several con^Boi Lepidostrohua 
from the Bathgate coalfield, and pointed out the resemblance to a 
recent species figured in one of Mr. Kirsop's plates. He also made 
some remarks on different species of recent and fossil cones. 

Mr. J. J. King exhibited specimens of the Long-tailed Blue 
Butterfly, Lyeaena boetica, Lin., taken at Ardrossan, and of the 
Crimson-speckled Tiger Moth, De'iopeta pvlehdla, Lin., taken at 
Whitevale — the former in July, 1881, and the latter in January last 
In referring to their occurrence in Britain, Mr. King thought that 
probably they had been accidentally introduced. 

Mr. J. M Campbell exhibited living specimens of the Sharp- 
backed Emys, Graptemys pseudogeographica, Less., from Belize, and 
of the Blood-spotted Swanka, Swanka cruentata, D. et B., from 



Digitized by 



Google 



214 PBOOBEBINOS OF THB 

Truxillo, and made some remarks on these and other species of 
aquatic reptiles. 

Mr. J. B. Low, M.A., exhibited a species of Oorgonia from 
Jamaica, on which Mr. John Young, F.G.S., made some remarks. 

PAPERS BEAD. 

L — Some Notes on Goniocypris mitrou By Mr. Thomas Scott, of 
Greenock, Corresponding Member. 

The study of the Fresh-water Ostracoda is often a means of 
spending a leisure hour both pleasantly and profitably. Notwith- 
standing that water of questionable purity is often their habitat, they 
in many instances appear to enjoy life so thoroughly, and to be 
so much at home, though in confinement, that it is often a decided 
relief, after the toils of the day, to sit quietly and watch their busy 
life, either swimming about in their own peculiar way, or running 
in and out of the soft mud, or over the aquatic vegetation. Some 
of them no doubt appear to be of a more meditative turn, and love 
ignoble ease rather than the busy hurry-skurry life of their neigh- 
bours, but this difference only adds to the interest with which we 
view them. One great fault of theirs (of course it is taken for 
granted that, like other creatures of Earth, they are not faultless), is 
that they are cannibals. I do not exactly mean to say that they will 
attack a healthy neighbour and make a meal of him, but that they 
do eat up a sickly one I have seen proved by ocular demonstration. 

It is only within comparatively recent years that this interesting 
order of the Crustacea has been wrought out with anything like 
systematic thoroughness, and I need scarcely say that the worker 
who has done more than any other to increase our knowledge of 
these organisms is the respected member of this Society, Mr. David 
Kobertson. 

One result of the increased interest taken in the Ostracoda has been 
the addition of not a few fresh-water species. Among these 
additions is a form which was got in some parts of England, and 
some years ago a station in Scotland was also foimd for it, vii., a 
loch near Edinburgh. The specimens from both England and 
Scotland were not perfect enough, however, to allow of a satisfac- 
tory knowledge of the structure and habits of the organism being 
arrived at, but it otherwise appeared to all intents and purposes to 
be an Ostracod, and from its peculiar three-angled bishop's-mitre- 
like form was named Goniocypris miira. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL BISTORT SOOIBTT OF GLASGOW. 215 

Towards the latter end of last September (1881) I dredged a part 
of the Glasgow and Paisley canal a little east of Elderslie, and when 
examining the material brought up, I was pleased to find what 
appeared to be this rare form. I submitted specimens to Mr. 
Robertson, who identified them as Goniocypria, thus adding a new 
station for it for Scotland. 

A friend, who happened to be with me when dredging, knew 
something about where the Swan Mussel, Anodonta cygnea, was 
f oimd in the canal, and as we were in the neighbourhood of where 
it was known to be, proposed searching for it. We secured a 
few specimens, and wishing to learn something of their habits 
I kept mine alive. About two months afterwards they began to 
take on an unhealthy appearance, and so that I might examine their 
structure, I killed one of them. In cutting it up I observed a mass 
of granular-like substance, covered by a thin membrane, and lying 
close to the branchial plates. Placing some of this granular sub- 
stance on a slide, and looking at it with my botanical lens, I was 
surprised to find objects closely resembling Goniocypria mUra, and 
more careful examination proved the two to be identical, and 
that Goniocypris was the ova or fry of Anodonta cygnea, 

I communicated to Mr. Robertson what I had observed, as I 
knew he would be glad to know the true nature of this organism, 
and he has, with his usual kindliness, informed me that this 
discovery, as he is pleased to call it^ will be acknowledged in the 
monograph of the Ostracoda, now in preparation. 



U.— Notes on the Seal and Whale-fiahery of 1881, By Mr. 
Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., Corresponding Member. 

I am mainly indebted to Capt. David Gray, of Peterhead, and 
Mr. David Bruce, of Dundee, for the following particulars of the 
Seal and Whale-fishery of the season of 1881. Hoping they may 
prove of interest to the naturalists of that portion of the United 
Kingdom to which this branch of commerce is now entirely restricted, 
I beg to submit them to the members of the Natural History 
Society of Glasgow. 

The Newfoundland Seal-fishery has hitherto, so far as Great 
Britain is concerned, been confined to the port of Dundee, from 
whejiee the . vessels sail for St John's about the first week in 



Digitized by 



Google 



216 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

February, and having made up their full complement of hands 
clear out from that port on the 10th March. They are allowed to 
take Seals as soon after that date as they can come up with them. 

'!f he close time terminates on the 2nd April The main take of 
Seals is speedily over, but some of the vessels continue to shoot 
old Seals, or go south to Iceland to look for Hooded Seals, till the 
20th May, when they take their departure for the Whale-fishery, 
for which purpose they proceed to Davis Straits, or to the ice be- 
tween Greenland and Spitzbergen. The Newfoundland vessels, if 
successful in getting a cargo early, land their produce at St. John's, 
and make a second trip to the ice before also going north to the 
Whale-fishery. 

From Dundee, last season, there were six powerful steamers at 
the Newfoundland sealing, and 139,885 Seals were taken. This 
was considered a successful season so far as the Dundee vessels 
were concerned, but I believe the total catch was not more than 
an average. The export of Seal-skins from Newfoundland and 
Labrador for the year ending 31st July, 1881, was 447,903. 

In the Greenland fishing there were nine steamers from Dundee, 
and three steamers and two sailing vessels from Peterhead. These 
fourteen Scotch vessels took 24,084 Seals, but they formed only a 
small part of the total fleet, of which the ships of other nations, 
more particularly the Norwegians, form a part 

The weather proved very unfavourable, and many fewer Seals 
were captured than would otherwise have been the case. The ice 
was driven out to sea by heavy northerly gales, and the young Seals 
were washed from their resting-places, and otherwise so scattered 
that it was impossible to find them. Captain Gray's Log indicates 
a constant succession of gales from the N. and N.E., with fogs and 
snow. He met with Seals first on the 5th April; on the 8th he 
killed his first Seals; between 5 A.M. and 10 p.m. on that day, 
counting old and young, 1353 were secured by him; on the 9th, 
1164; on the 10th, 439; and on the 11th, 97 were captured. 

With regard to the close time which came into operation in 1877, 
Captain Gray assures me that it is working beneficially, although 
slowly, in improving the fishing, but that it will require many 
years to remedy the mischief produced by the unfair and cruel 
manner in which the Seals have been killed off, more particularly 
since the introduction of steam. 

The state of the ice during the past year has been most unusual, 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 217 

if not unprecedented. Captain Gray in a communication to the 
Royal Geographical Society {Proceedings Roy. Geog. Soc., voL iiL p. 
741,) says, that for the last two years there has been very little 
southerly drift, probably owing to the severity of the weather. 
This caused the lanes and pools of open water rapidly to be 
covered with bay ice, thus keeping the ice closed, and preventing 
the wash of the water from cutting into it and causing its rapid 
disruption and consequent disappearance. In the chart accompany- 
ing Captain Gray^s communication the ice, in the months of April 
and May, 1881, is shewn to extend in a N.E. direction from the 
east point of Iceland to Bear Island, where it takes a rapid bend to 
the E.S.E., reaching within 2^** of the North Cape. 

On the 23rd May, Captain Gray was imbedded in the floe-ice, 
with only a small hole of water to be seen here and there, and 
with 300 miles of ice to force a passage through before he could 
hope to reach the Spitzbergen "land-water" which formed his 
destination. Should the prevailing winds this winter in these 
latitudes be northerly. Captain Gray is of opinion that in the 
spring the ice will be met with approaching the Faroe Islands on 
the west and the coast of Norway on the east. I am not aware 
that there is any record of so remarkable a "south ice" year as that 
of 1881. Notwithstanding this barrier, the "Eclipse" was in the 
"land-water" on the 3rd June, saw her first whales on the 5th, 
and on the 7th made her first capture. 

The Seal which occurs in such enormous packs in the Greenland 
seas is known by the sealers as the Saddleback or Harp Seal 
{Phoca groerUandica, Fab.). At all times restless and gregarious 
in its habits, this species migrates to the ice in the Greenland 
seas in countless numbers to produce its young; this takes place 
with great regularity, and the sealers know almost to a day when 
the old Seals will be found upon the ice. The young are almost 
all bom by the 1st of April, and on the 3rd the slaughter 
takes place. Captain Gray gives a very charming picture of the 
interesting liabits of the Seals when on the ice tending their young. 
He says, "Towards night the old Seals take the water to feed, 
returning to their young in the morning, and lying on the ice with 
them the whole day. From what I saw, the young one draws upon 
its mother for nourishment at least once every hour, apparently to 
the old one's great relief. It is very interesting to watch them 
togethwi they seem to be so attached to one another* When aa 



Digitized by 



Google 



218 PROOBBDINOS OF THE 

old one takes the ice, even supposing there may be eight or ten 
young ones besides her own upon the same piece, she never takes 
her nose from the ice, but runs along until she catches the scent of 
her own. When she comes to it, there is a great display of kissing 
and other demonstrations of affection. It usually occurs, when 
there are a number of young ones lying together, that some of them 
will draw in about, to see if they can get a share of this attention. 
The old one immediately throws up her head and scolds very 
significantly, and if this has not the effect of driving them off, she 
will use her teeth and claws very freely until she gets quietness. 
The young one will now poke its mother on the side with its nose 
until she turns over to it, when it immediately fixes on the teat; 
but if it has any difficulty in finding the place, the mother will 
direct it by scratching it back with her fin, or hitching herself 
forward, and there the cub will remain for half an hour, the very 
picture of enjoyment. The supply seems to be so abundant that 
the milk can be seen flowing past the mouth of the young one. 
After it is satisfied it will roll about on its back, walloping its fins, 
or crawl away under the lee of its hummock to have a sleep. It 
occasionally happens that an old one loses its young for a short 
time, and her state of distress is very apparent; nmning over all the 
pieces round about, screaming until she finds it. I have often 
watched the mother enticing her pup away from the neighbourhood 
of a ship. What patience she displays before she can get her 
young one to take the water, and then coaxed away little by little 
to what she considers a safe distance.'^ Later in the season, the 
Greenland ice is invaded by large numbers of Seals from the 
Labrador ice, on the breaking up of which they travel northward, 
still along the margin of the ice, resting as they go, till they reach 
latitude 76*; they then niake for the south end of Spitzbergen, 
and even pass on to the shores of Xovaya Zemlya. 

Between Iceland and Greenland the Hooded Seal (Gystophora 
^ristataj Erxleben) is met with in considerable numbers in the 
month of June after the Labrador ice has disappeared, and since 
1877 they have been hunted with considerable success. These 
chiefly fall to the Norwegians, though some of our ships also take 
a part in the pursuit, but this locality has of late years offered 
another inducemefnt to the whalers which I shall mention shortly. 
The sealing voyage over, most of the vessels return to port and 
lefit ior the whaling voyage, to either the Greenland seas, lying 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 219 

70^ and 80° N. latitude, and 20° W. and 10° E. longitude, or to 
Davis Strait. 

In the past season twelve Dundee ships went to the Davis 
Strait fishing, capturing 48 Whales; one went to Greenland for 5 
Whales, and two of the Peterhead vessels took 23 Eight Whales, 
also in the Greenland seas. The total number of vessels employed 
in the Seal and Whale-fishing, was fifteen from Dundee and five 
from Peterhead; but as will be seen above, they did not all go to 
the Northern fishery. 

When the whaling was first prosecuted at Spitzbergen, or Green- 
land as it was then called, the Whales were so plentiful and easy 
of approach that they only required to be killed; there was very 
little skill in whaling in those days. In 1697, 188 vessels killed 
1959 Whales. The island of Spitzbergen was like a fair all 
through the brief summer, and the various nationalities engaged 
in the whaling all had their stations on the shore. To these they 
brought the blubber and tried it out, employing carriers to take 
home the oil and bone. This did not last long, however, and the 
scared WTiales soon left the shore and had to be foUow^ed farther 
afield. At a later period, the Danes had settlements on the west 
coast of Greenland, from which for many years they pursued the 
Whales from the shore as they passed on their spring migration. 
These stations, I believe, are now of very little importance, and 
are chiefly of service for collecting the native produce of Seals and 
Walruses. There is no reason to believe that the Greenland Right 
Whale was ever found much south of its present habitat, and its 
greater scarcity is probably due to actual extermination. In the 
early days of the fishery from Peterhead, 20 or 30 was no uncom- 
mon take for one vessel, and in 1814 seven vessels brought home 
163 Whales, Capt. J. Suttar, of the "Resolution," heading the list 
with 44 fish. Such catches are never heard of now. 20 Whales for 
one vessel is a very successful voyage; in 1880 the average was about 
8, and in 1881, 5 whales per ship. The consequence is that the 
captains give their attention to much smaller game than formerly, 
and do not disdain to secure White Whales to help to fill up. 
The demand for "porpoise" hide renders these creatures very 
acceptable, as their skins fetch a good price in the market. 

Of late, however, quite a new feature has sprung up in the 
Whale-fishery — I allude to the pursuit of the Bottle-nose Whale 
(Hyperoodon rostraticsj. The whalers have long been in the habit 

P 



Digitized by 



Google 



220 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

of taking an occasional Bottle-nose, and many years ago the 
"Chieftain," of Kirkcaldy, caught 28 of them off Frobisher 
Strait; but it was not till 1877, when the "Jan Mayen," then 
of Peterhead, having missed the Seals, succeeded in taking 10 
Bottle-noses, that their pursuit attracted much attention. Since 
that time, however, they have been more sought for, and now most 
of the smaller vessels hunt for them every season, while some of 
the larger vessels, in the interval between the finish of the Seal- 
fishery and the commencement of the whaling, go south to the 
north-east coast of Iceland for the same purpose. In 1880 Captain 
Gray, of the " Eclipse," killed 32 of these Whales, and in 1881 
he secured 39, and but that his hands were new to the work, he 
might have obtained a still larger number. They yield about a 
ton of oil each, but, of course, no bone. 

The occurrence of this species in large numbers in the northern 
seas is of great interest. On our coasts it is generally met with in 
late autumn, probably on its return south from its summer 
quarters. It is then almost always solitary, Or the adult female is 
accompanied by its young one. It has long been a question whether 
there are one or two northern species of Hyperoodon; in some 
skulls the maxillary crests being developed to an extraordinary degree, 
and flattened out in front. This form of skull is supposed by some 
to belong to a distinct species, which has been called Hyperoodon 
latifrons, but the creature which owns it has never been examined 
in the flesh by a competent naturalist; by others the peculiar 
maxillary development is believed to be a sexual peculiarity 
existing only in the adult males. It is doubtful whether the adult 
male of H, rostratus has ever occurred on our coasts, and there is no 
evidence of a female of the latifrona type having been met with. 
Until a female of the latifrons form is met with, or an adult male 
of the rostratuSy the matter must remain doubtful ; now, however, 
that these creatures are captured in such abundance, and the atten- 
tion of Capt. Gray has been called to the matter, we may hope for 
a speedy solution of the question. Capt. Gray met with a " herd " 
of Bottle-noses on the seventh day out from Bressay Sound, and 
saw them almost daily afterwards ; most of his captures were made 
in about latitude 68" N., and longitude 3" to 8° West. Of the 
39 individuals which he captured in 1881, the sexes of 19 were 
noted — 8 being males, and 11 females. The whole of these 39 
were taken between the 19th April and the 20th May. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



221 



It is difficult to predict the future of the Whale and Seal-fisheries, 
but already the number of vessels sailing from Peterhead has been 
reduced from twenty-eight in 1859 to four or five, and the trade is 
gradually concentrating itself in the port of Dundee, which, with its 
fleet of fifteen vessels, is the only other town of the United 
Kingdom which still takes part in this peculiar industry. At the 
commencement of the present century most of the principal ports 
in the southern division of the kingdom sent out their one or two 
whalers, and it would be a work of great interest if anything like a 
complete history of the rise and final extinction of the Whale-fishery 
in such ports as HuU and Whitby could be written ; I commend 
this task to the consideration of the members of the Yorkshire 
Naturalists' Union. 

[NoTB.— Since this paper w^ read, Capt. Gray has conclusively 
proved the supposed Hyp&roodon latifrom to be the adult male of 
K rostratus. See Flower, Tram. Zool Soc, 1882, pp. 723-726, 
and Southwell, Trans. Norf. and Norw, Nat Soc, vol. iii., 
pp. 476-481. J. S., .7th July, 1883.] 



28th March, 1882. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A.Scot., Vice-President, in the Chair. 

The following gentlemen were elected ordinary members of the 
Society:— Messrs D. A. Boyd, 225 West George Street; WilHam 
Watson, 245 Main Street, Eutherglen; and Kenneth John Morton, 
High Street, Carluke. 

Mr. J. B. Murdoch drew the attention of the members to the 
forthcoming Fisheries Exhibition in Edinburgh. In the course 
of his remarks he referred to the prizes to be given for essays on 
various natural history subjects in connection with the exhibition, 
and hoped that some of the members would be able to enter the 

competition. 

On the motion of Mr. John Young, F.G.S., seconded by Mr. J. B. 
Murdoch, it was unanimously agreed to place on record the regret 
of the members at the death of Dr. Eankin of Carluke, a corre- 
sponding member of the Society, and long known as a cultivator 
and promoter of natural, geological, and archaeological science. 

On the 21st of this month died Dr. Daniel Reid Rankin, of 
Carluke, a member of the Faculty of Physicians and Surgeons in 



Digitized by 



Google 



222 PROCBBDINGS OF THE 

Glasgow, and a corresponding member of the Geological Society of 
Glasgow. He was also a corresponding member of this Society, and 
contributed to the Proceedings several palaeontological papers of 
interest* He took a lively interest in geology generally, but had 
an especial interest in that of his own district, and his fine collection 
of fossils was almost entirely local, some of the specimens being 
very rare — indeed, unique. About 1880 he presented it to the 
Hunterian Museum of the University. When the celebrated Agassiz 
was in Scotland he visited Carluke to see Dr. Rankings collection 
of fish remains, naming several of those new to science after their 
possessor and discoverer. In 1843 a Sketch of the Geology of 
Carluke, by Dr. Rankin, was published in the Transactions of the 
Highland and Agricultural Society. He was also an archaeologist 
of some note, and wrote a very interesting history of Carluke, but 
which, however, was printed for private circulation only, and its 
circulation confined to his friends and acquaintances. In all 
movements which had for their object the moral and intellectual 
advancement of the people of his native parish, Dr. Rankin was 
a leading spirit — his efforts being untiring in connection with the 
Parish Savings Bank, while he originated the Useful Knowledge 
Society, which also has been productive of good results. He was 
possessed of conversational powers of a high order, and had a very 
keen appreciation of humour. In his dress he was rather peculiar, 
wearing a surtout of antique cut, Hessian boots, and hair flowing over 
his shoulders. He was bom on 8th April, 1805, and, therefore, at 
the time of his death, was within a fortnight of completing his 
seventy-seventh year. He was the son of Mr. James Rankin, 
shoemaker, Carluke, and practised as a surgeon in his native parish 
for half-a-century — ^his patients being mostly the better-class people 
of the parish; while to the poor his advice was given gratuitously. 
As a kindly representative of the old school — few of whom yet 
survive — Dr. Rankin will be much missed in the district of Carluke, 
and amongst the circle in which he moved. 

• The titles of theae papers are subjoined. It is the more necessary that 
they should be pointed out here from the fact that, owing to the author's 
retiring disposition, they were published without his name. 

** Notes and Observations on Injured or Diseased Crinoids," vol. iii., p. 91. 

** Notes and Observations on Injured and Diseased Crinoids; also some 
Short Notes on Fossils," vol. iii., p. 388. 

'* Notes and Observations of Adventitious Structures on Crinoid Stems. 
By a Corresponding Member," vol iv., p. 78. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 223 

Mr. David Eobertson, F.L.S., r.G.S.,|Sent for exhibition a line 
specimen of Fusus antiquvsy Lin., var. alha^ from the Isle of Man, 
and remarked that what is most interesting in these varietal 
forms is the fact that although they may be locally common 
they are generally confined to circumscribed areas. Dr. Jeffreys, 
in his "British Conchology," says that this variety of Fimis 
seems to be confined to the Cheshire coasts. The specimen shewn 
was taken by trawlers off the Isle of Man, where the species is 
sold in the fish market, together with the smaller typical species, 
as food, and is said to be greatly esteemed by the inhabitants. Mr. 
Robertson exhibited another varietal example, Pecten opercuiai^y 
Lin. var. lineata^ which, although frequently met with off the 
shores of Hastings, is by no means common, whereas the typical 
form is abundant all round our coasts; also a curious turreted 
variety of Littorina littorea^ common on the muddy flats of Belfast 
Harbour, and met with rather plentifully in Loch Carron, though 
otherwise it may be considered a rare shell. In conclusion, Mr. 
Robertson remarked that many of these varietal forms can be traced 
to the conditions of their habitat, but others cannot be so accounted 
for, as in the case of Pecten opercularis, var. lineata^ that beautiful 
variety holding good while associated with the typical form, which 
shews no tendency to blend with the variety. Perhaps the solution 
of the problem of divergence may be found in the organisation of 
the animal itself. 

Mr. J. M. Campbell exhibited specimens of the Natterjack Toad, 
Bufo calamita, Laur. and a closely allied species, Bufo viHdiSy 
D. et B., the former from England and the latter from Venice. He 
also exhibited a specimen of the Pope or Ruffe, Acerina wlgarits^ 
Cuv. et Val., a fresh-water fish allied to the perch, and found in 
the rivers and canals of England. Mr. Campbell made some 
remarks as to their habits and geographical distribution. 

Mr. J. M. Campbell also exhibited a fine specimen of the Eagle- 
Owl, Bubo igiiavm^ Forst., on which he read the following 
remarks ; — 

This noble bird, the largest of the owls, is of rare occurrence in 
Britain, and I am therefore glad to be able to record its occurrence 
in Scotland. It is a native of the northern parts of the Old World, 
and is occasionally found in Northern Africa. Its food consists of 
large game, such as fawns, hares, and grouse; but mice, rats, and 
moles form no inconsiderable pai-t of its diet. It is a well-known 



Digitized by 



Google 



224 PROOBEDIKGS OP THE 

species, and is often kept in confinement — ^no menagerie with any 
pretensions to size or quality being complete without one or more 
specimens of the Eagle-Owl. Like many other birds of prey in a 
similar state, it will, with a moderate amount of care and attention, 
live to a good age; and it has also been bred and reared in aviaries, 
notably at Norwich, and elsewhere. 

In England, the Eagle-Owl has been obtained in Kent, Sussex, 
and Devonshire, and at Hampstead, near London, and is said to 
have occurred in the counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Oxford, Derby, 
York, and Durham, and also at Swansea, in Wales. In the autumn 
of 1873 a male was shot by Mr. Reynolds, of Hermitage Farm, 
Bridgenorth; was stuffed by Mr. Edwards of Wolverhampton; 
and, in April, 1874, was in the possession of Messrs. Cooke, 
naturalists, Liverpool. In July, 1876, two farm servants caught 
one on the edge of Bombald Moor, near Ilkley, Yorkshire. 

According to Newton, the only record of the appearance of this 
species in Ireland " rests on an unsatisfactory statement, quoted by 
Thompson, to the effect that once, after a great storm, four such 
birds paid a two days' visit to Donegal, but were not seen again." 

In Scotland, notices of the occurrence of the Eagle-Owl are very 
few. Pennant records an example killed in Fif eshire in the last 
century. Sibbald states that it inhabits the Orkneys, where it 
is known as the "Stock-Owl," and a specimen, recorded by 
Baikie and Heddle, was obtained on Sanday in 1830. Saxby states 
that, in Shetland, it was " at one time oftener to be seen than at the 
present time," but had not been observed for several years until the 
autumn of 1863, when one was seen in Unst. In March, 1871, 
Saxby himself saw one in Balta, sitting on a stone. It flew off 
when he approached, but was afterwards observed on the small 
island of Hunie, a little to the southward, in which also rabbits 
abound. Mr. Robert Gray mentions, on the authority of Mr. 
Angus, the capture of one in Aberdeenshire, in February, 1866. 
There is no British-killed specimen in the National Collection in 
London. 

This specimen, which I am enabled, through the kindness of the 
Messrs. Eggleton, bird-stuffers, Glasgow, to exhibit, was trapped on 
the estate of Colonel Malcolm, of Poltalloch, near Ardrishaig, and 
was seen by me in the flesh on the 23rd inst. It is a male, in fine 
condition, and its dimensions are as follows : — Total length, 2 feet 
If inches; girth, 1 foot 9 inches; stretch of wing, 5 feet 3 J inches; 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTT OP GLASGOW. 225 

length of wing, 2 feet 4. inches; length of wing from carpal, 1 foot 
6J inches; tail, lOJ inches; beak, over the culmen, If inches; 
gape, 1| inches; leg, 3 inches; foot, 3 J inches; weight, 4 lb. 6Joz.; 
colour of the irides, yellow. Of course, like all our hawks, eagles, 
and owls, the Great Eagle-Owl is under ban, and is killed as vermin 
by keepers and game-preservers, so that its occurrence will be less 
frequent from year to year; and there is little probability that it will 
ever be recorded as a species found breeding (unless in captivity) in 
either Great Britain or Ireland. 

The Chairman exhibited a Horn of a Rhinoceros and a large 
collection of Polished Agates and other minerals, together with a 
small collection of Fossils from the Paris Basin, on which he made 
some appropriate remarks. 

Mr. Peter Cameron exhibited slides illustrating the microscopic 
structure of the tongues of several species of South American Wild 
Bees and several specimens of other American Hymenoptera. 

PAPER RBAD. 

Additional Notes on the Birds of the North-west of Perthshire. 
By Mr. William Horn, M.A., Oxon., Advocate. 

Since my paper on the birds of this district was printed — see 
Proceedings, vol. iv., page 54 — I have received a good many addi- 
tional notes, chiefly from Mr. Duncan Dewar, gamekeeper at 
Remony, recording the occurrence of rare birds near Loch Tay. 
I am now able to add seven new birds to the list formerly printed, 
as well as to give additional instances of the occurrence of several 
birds not common in the district. I am also indebted to Col. D. 
Hay's paper on the Birds of the Tay and its tributaries, published 
in the Scottish Naturalist, 1879-80-81. 

Whitethroat. — Sylvia rufa, (Boddaert). — Very common alx>ut 
Dunkeld, according to Mr. Brooke, of Cardney, whose authority is 
quoted by Col. D. Hay. 

Great Grey Shrike. — Lanivs excubitor, Linnaeus. — A specimen 
was obtained by Mr. D. Dewar, on the 15th November, 1880. It 
was shot on a hedge at Remony, and the contents of the stomach 
were the remains of a large sparrow, claws and legs being nearly 
intact A male bird, in splendid plumage, measured 10 J inches 
from point of bill to tip of tail. — Oban Times, 18th December, 1880. 

Bramblino. — Fringilla montifri.ngiUa, Linnaeus. — In the last 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



226 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

week of December, 1880, Mr. D. Dewar shot a Brambling at 
Remony. It is a rare bird in the district. 

Marsh Harrier. — Circus aeniginosua (Linnaeus). — CoL D. Hay 
thinks it possible that this species may still exist in some of the 
wilder parts of Rannoch Moor. He saw one lately in the hands of 
Mr, Malloch, Perth, in the flesh, shot in this district. 

Iceland Falcon. — Falco islandieiut, Gmelin. — In the beginning 
of the summer of 1880 an Iceland Falcon was shot by a keeper in 
Glen Dochart, and sent to Mr. D. Dewar to stuff. 

Dotterel. — Eitdromias morindlus (Linnaeus). — Two out of a 
flock of three were shot by Mr. Dewar on Stron Chorm on 1st 
October, 1880. They were male and female, and were the first seen 
by him for twenty-five years. 

Black Guillemot. — Uria grylle (Linnaeus). — One was shot on 
Loch Tay, by Mr. Dewar, on the 7th November, 1881, and was 
sent to me for identification. 

Ohs, Crested Grebe. — Podiceps cridatus (Linnaeus). — Col. 
D. Hay remembers seeing a pair obtained near Dunkeld, which, he 
believes, were shot on Loch Ordie. 

Ohs, Ked-necked Grebe. — Podiceps rubricollis, Latham. 

Obs, Horned Grebe. — Podiceps comuttis (Gmelin), — Two 
Grebes were shot by Mr. Dewar on Loch Tay during the winter of 
1880-81, and from careful drawings and measurements made by 
him, they belonged, I have no doubt, to the above-mentioned 
species. 

Little Grebe. — Podiceps minor, (Gmelin). — One was shot at 
Killiechassie, on the Tay, by Mr. J. C. Shairp in 1879. Often 
seen on the long, still pools of the Tay at Logierait. 

Stormy Petrel. — Procellaria pelagica, Linnaeus. — One was 
picked up dead by Mr. Dewar's son on the shore of Loch Tay, 
having been driven against a hedge by the storm on 12 th December, 
188L 



25th April, 1882. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F. S.A.Scot., Vice-President, in the Chair. 

Mr. William A. Eattray, 3 Mansfield Place, was elected an 
ordinary member of the Society. 

On the motion of the Chairman the Society unanimously agreed 
to put on record their regret at the death of Dr. Charles Darwin, 
F.R.S., the eminent naturalist. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY 80CIBTY OF GLASGOW. 227 

Mr. D. A. Boyd exhibited specimens of Ruppia maritima^ Lin., 
sub-sp. rofstellata, Koch. Mr. Boyd stated that in a small marsh 
on the seashore, directly below the fann of Chapelton, West 
Kilbride, he had observed last summer, in several of the stagnant pools 
among the turf, considerable quantities of a submerged aquatic 
plant which at first sight resembled one of the smaller species of 
Fotaniogeton. On a closer examination, however, he found the 
plant to be the above species, which is rare in the West of Scotland, 
and had not, so far as he had been able to learn, been hitherto 
reported from the district. In the New Statistical Account of 
Scotland (1845), vol. iv., p. 671, the late Rev. Dr. Landsborough, 
a well-known Ayrshire botanist, includes Ruppia maritima in a 
list of the rarer plants found in the parish of Dundonald. In 
the census of the British Flora, contained in Watson's "Topo- 
graphical Botany," voL ii., p. 407, Ruppia maritima has been 
reported from 48 of the 112 " counties " in Great Britain, 
of which 15 are Scottish, and. include, on the West coast, 
Kirkcudbright, Ayr, Westemess, Cantyre, South Ebudes, and 
Hebrides. It must be kept in view, however, that in these 
reports Ruppia maritima is treated as a single species, and no 
reference is made to the two sub-species, spiralis, Hartmann, and 
rostellatay Koch, into which it has been divided. The former is 
reported from 6 "counties," of which Kirkcudbright is the sole 
Scottish representative ; while the latter is reported from 21" counties, " 
7 of which are Scottish, and include Kirkcudbright, Cantyre, 
and South Ebudes on the west. Of these 21 "counties," only 7 
were vouched "by the cited names of personal authorities." 
The seventh edition of the "London Catalogue of British Plants" 
does not record any further addition to these numbers. 

Mr. Boyd also exhibited a teratological specimen, shewing 
phyllody of sepals in Primula vulgaris, on which he made 
some remarks. 

Mr. Mason exhibited several miscellaneous specimens, amongst 
them being mounted specimens of Gnaphalium leontopodium ; mal- 
formed fruits of the Walnut, Juglans regia; fruits of the Nutmeg 
tree; also a Scorpion, Scatpio afer, and several specimens of 
Coleoptera from Penang; which he had from time to time received 
from members of the Society. 

The Chairman exhibited a large Fossil Nautilus, and also a 



Digitized by 



Google 



228 PROOBBDINOS OF THB 

Concretionary Nodule of carbonate of lime, which had been found 
in the bed of the Clyde. Bemarks were made on these specimens 
by Mr. John Young, F.G.S. 

Mr. James Steel exhibited (on behalf of Mr. Thomas Scott, 
Greenock), the following land shells found at the Cloch, viz., 
Acmaea lineata, Pupa ringensy Vertigo edentvla, and Helix lameUata, 
He also exhibited a specimen of Helix virgata, found at the Central 
Railway Station, and supposed to have been accidentally conveyed 
there amongst vegetables or other articles brought from England. 

FAPBBS RBAD. 

I. — Notes on the Mammalia of Bvchan, By Mr. William Horn. 

In the following list of Mammals which occur in the district 
of Buchan, I have enumerated in all thirty-four species. Besides 
my own notes, I have been very much indebted to Mr. Duncan, 
gamekeeper at Brucklay Castle, who, in addition to giving me all 
the information he could, procured some notes from Mr. Thomas 
Edward, of Banff, and as both have spent the best part of their 
lives in the district, and are close observers of nature, I could 
scarcely have had better assistance. Most of the mammals are 
rapidly decreasing in numbers, while some are extinct More than 
thirty years ago the Fox was very numerous in all the covers in 
Buchan, a dozen having been seen in quest of prey at one time, 
at a breeding place of the Black-headed Gull. The Polecat and 
Badger were by no means rare, but are now all but extinct. The 
Hedgehog and Squirrel were formerly unknown in the district, 
and old men remember the j&rst appearance of the former, saying 
that "the prickly beast was thought to be uncanny." After a 
severe winter, such as we had last year (1880-81), the Hedgehog 
is always less numerous than usual, many being frozen to death, 
or suffocated in their winter quarters. The Squirrel has only 
recently made its appearance, but is spreading so fast that it bids 
fair soon to overrun all the well-wooded parts of the district 

My list is very incomplete so far as marine mammals are con- 
cerned. Many varieties of Seals and Whales have, at different 
times, been caught or stranded on the Buchan coast, but I find it 
is very difficult to get anything like reliable information regard- 
ing them. For any notes which I have received on this subject 
I am indebted to the Fishery and Coastguard officers at Fraserburgh 
and Penman, through !Mr. Barclay of Aberdour House. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCISTT OF GLASGOW. 229 

Order I. — Chiroptbra. 
Family: VespertilionicUie. 

1. Long-eared Bat. Plecotus auritus (Lin.). — Not so common 
as in the south of Scotland, but occasionally met with. More of 
a country than a town species. 

2. Common Bat. Vesperugo ptpisfrellzts (Schreber). Not so 
common as they used to be. 

3. Daubenton's Bat. Vesperttlio Daubentoni, Leisler. Quite 
familiar to Thomas Edward, of Banff, who says that he would 
rather call it the Water Bat from its habits. It is the only Bat 
he ever saw skim the water when catering for food, like the swallow. 
It was first correctly identified as a Scottish species by Mr. William 
Macgillivray, who took it in Aberdeen Cathedral in 1840,* and 
John Macgillivray captured eighty individuals in two clusters in 
the same building, t The capture of this Bat has been reported 
several times from other parts of Aberdeenshire. Specimens, 
which were not collected near Aberdeen, were deposited in the 
British Museum by Mr. John Macgillivray. One was taken in 
1861 in the church of Peterculter, some distance up Deeside 
from Aberdeen. J 

Order II. — Inseotivora. 
Family: Erinaceidae, 

4. Hedgehog. Erinaceus europaevSy Lin. — The Hedgehog is 
increasing rapidly in Buchan, where it was quite unknown fifty 
years ago. 

Family: Talpidae. 

5. Mole. Talpa europaea, Lin. — Like the Hedgehog, the Mole 
has increased in numbers during the last few years, and this is all 
the more to be wondered at, considering the endless war raged 
against it by farmers. White specimens sometimes seen. Local 
name Movdiewort. 

Family: Soricidae, 

6. Common Shrew. Sorex tetragonurus, Herm. Rather common. 
Local name Thraw Mouse, Mr. Edward says, in a letter to Mr. 
Duncan, gamekeeper, Brucklay Castle, that in his opinion the 

* Edin. FhU, Joum., voL zxxi, p. 206. 
t Ann, and Mag. Nat, Hist,, vol. viiL, p. 280. 
t " Bell's British Quadrupeds,'* 2nd ed., p. 64. 



Digitized by 



Google 



230 PiU>GBBDINOS OF THi: 

wholesale destruction for some years back of Hawks, Owls, Pole- 
cats, Weasels, etc., is enabling all kinds of field mice to increase. 

7. Lesser Shrew. Sorex minutusy Lin. — Mr. Edward says that 
he once met with a small Shrew, which, at the time, he thought 
belonged to this species, but that he never was able to satisfy 
himself as to the fact. He foimd it in the Den of Auchmedden. 
Mr. John Macgillivray first identified it as a Scottish species, and 
considered it to be as abimdant as the Common Shrew near Aber- 
deen.* Rev. G. Gordon records its occurrence in Morayshire, t 

8. Water Shrew. Oroaaopus fodiem (Pallas). — Mr. Duncan 
tells me that he has often seen this species on the hills about 
Aberdour, and that he once saw one attack a frog. Mr. Edward 
at one time thought that he had discovered two species of Water 
Shrew at the bum of Melrose, Gamrie, and that of King Edward 
at Castleton, as well as at other places. The one was jet black all 
over, while the other had a white breast and belly. He is led now 
to think, however, that they are one and the same species. 

Order IIL — Carnivora. 
Family: Canidae. 

9. Fox. Cants vulpes^ Lin. — ^The Fox was very common about 
sixty years ago, I am informed by Mr. Edward, but now it is so 
rare that many country people do not know it. The Old and 
New Statistical Accounts of Scotland include the Fox in the list 
of animals foimd in most of the parishes of this district. | As no 
hounds hunt this part of the country, foxes are generally shot 
when seen. 

Family: Mustelickie, 

10. Common Weasel. Mvstda viUgaiis, Erxleben. — By no 
means rare, but not nearly so common as it used to be. In Smiles 
Life of Thomas Edward will be found some interesting anecdotes, 
showing the fearless and pertinacious disposition of this ammal.§ 

11. Stoat or Ermine. MtcstelaermineaylAa, — About as numerous 
as the last-named species. 

12. Polecat. Mudela putoriusy Lin. — Formerly very common, 
and still occasionally killed among the cliffs on this rock-bound 

* Ann, and Mag. Nat. Hist., vol. viii., p. 28. 

t " Mammalia of Scotland," by Mr. E. R. Alston, p. 10. 

X *• Old Stat. Acct. Scot.," vol. xvl, and ** New Stat Acct.," vol. xii 

§ Smiles' " Life of Edward," p. 111. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 231 

coast. It is included in the lists of mammals in most of the 
parishes of Buchan, contained in the Old and New Statistical 
Accounts of Scotland. Mr. Duncan tells me that he often used to 
kill them, but not for the last fifteen or twenty years, say not since 
1860. He heard lately of one being killed near Rosehearty, but 
he thinks it must have been a brown Ferret. I was informed by 
Mr. Barclay, factor on the Brucklay estates, that one was killed near 
Peterhead within the last two years (in 1879 or 1880). 

13. Badger. Meles taxfus (Schreber). — Very rarely met with 
now. Rev. Dr. Moir, in the Old Statistical Account (1792), says, 
that he once saw a Badger killed in the parish of Longside, only 
a few miles from Peterhead. Mr. Duncan says there used to be 
Badgers killed in the Den of Auchmedden, and that he has killed 
them there. He killed one at Glasslaw, near Aberdour, about 
1860, and it is preserved in the collection at Brucklay Castle. 

14. Otter. Lutra vulgaris, Erxleben. — Tolerably common; 
sometimes seen at the Loch of Strathbeg and on the banks of the 
rivers Deveron and Ugie. There is little doubt, however, as Mr. 
Edward says, that if it were not for the sea, and the shelter they 
find along this rocky coast, they would soon be exterminated. 

Family: Phocidae. 

15. Common Seal. Phoca vitidina, Lin. — Several species of 
Seals have been found at different times on this coast; but Mr. 
Edward says that the Common Seal is the only one he can name 
with certainty. 

Order IV. — Cbtacba. 
Family: Balaefwpteridae, 

16. Common Rorqual, or Razor-back. Balaenqptera muscvlus 
(Lin.). — This species, commonly called the Finner among the fisher- 
men, is occasionally stranded on the coast of Buchan. One was 
washed ashore at Penman about fifteen years ago, say 1866 or 
1867, and another was towed into Peterhead in 1871, a portion of 
its skeleton being preserved in the Museum of the University of 
Aberdeen.* 

Family: Physeteridae, 

17. Common Beaked- Whale. Hyperoodon rostratvs (Chemnitz). 

* Proe, Nat, Hist, Soe, Olasgow, vol. iv., part L, Alston's ''Mammalia of 
Scotland," 2nd ed., p. 17. 



Digitized by 



Google 



232 PROCBBDINGS OP THE 

— Occasionally seen off the Buchan coast during the herrmg Ushing, 
on the autl^ority of Mr. James Couper, the Fishery officer at 
Fraserburgh. 

Family: Ddphinidae, 

18. Narwhal. Monodon monocerosy Lin. — Last summer, I am 
informed by the Fishery or Coastguard officer at Penman, a White 
Whale was seen disporting itself in the bay at Penman, and that 
Col. Garden Campbell, of Troup, fired several shots at it. It 
disappeared, however, and was seen about an hour afterwards by 
the salmon fishers at Aberdour, making in the direction of Fraser- 
burgh. This is the only White Whale known to have been seen 
on this coast. 

19. Killer or Grampus. Orca gladiator (LacepMe). — Very 
common on this coast during the herring-fishing. Several have 
come ashore at Penman of late years. One measuring twelve feet 
in length came ashore at Nethermill about twelve years ago, and 
one at Gamrie three years ago. 

20. Pilot-Whale. Ghhicephalus mekis (Trail). — Mr. Couper, 
of Fraserburgh, tells me that the Pilot- Whale is frequently seen 
during the fishing season off this coast. 

2L Porpoise. Phocoena communis, F. Cuvier. — Seen in great 
numbers while the herring are off the coast. 

Order V. — ^Artiodactyla. 
Family: Cervidae. 

21. Fallow-Deer. Gervus dama, Lin. — The Fallow-deer thrives 
well in the extensive woods at Pitfour House, and strays often to 
neighbouring places. One stayed for some time in the woods 
about Brucklay Castle a year or two ago. 

22. Roe-Deer. Cap'eoltis capraea, Gray. — Pretty numerous at 
Pitfour, where there are large woods, and generally a few at 
Brucklay Castle. A stray pair occasionally may be seen at other 
places, such as Rattray House, in the parish of Crimond.* 

Ordbr VI. — Glirbs. 
Family: Sciuridae. 

23. Squirrel Seiunis vulgaris, Lin. — Until lately the Squirrel 
was quite unknown in Buchan. In Mr. J. A. Harvie-Brown's 
very interesting paper on the distribution of the Squirrel in 

• New Stet. Acct, vol xii, p. 706. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 233 

Scotland,* it is stated that the Squirrel first appeared at Lathers, 
parish of Turriff, about 1865-66, and about 1867 at Fyvie and 
Delgaty, in the parishes of Turriff and Fyvie. Two Squirrels, I 
am informed by Mr. Duncan, have been shot since then upon the 
Aberdour portion of the Brucklay estates, in a deep wooded glen 
called the Den of Glasslaw. but they have not yet been seen at 
Brucklay Castle, where there are extensive woods. Aberdour is 
close to the sea, and adjoins the estate of Troup, where a few are 
also reported to have appeared. 

Family: Muridae, 

24. Black Rat. Mm rattvs^ Lin. — Up to April, 1839, the com- 
mon species at Brucklay was the Black Rat. About this time Mr. W. 
W. Cameron, vermin-killer, Inverurie, says that he first observed 
the Brown Rat to be at all common. After this, along the coast- 
line of the Buchan district, he only occasionally killed a Black 
Rat, and that, generally, an old male. Now there is not one to be 
seen near the coast, but he believes that in old houses in the 
interior it may be still found. Mr. Duncan tells me that when he 
first came to Brucklay in the year 1837, th« Black Rat was very 
common, and that another lad and he used to go into the byre, and 
with a stick kill them by the half-dozen. Now he never sees any. 

25. Brown Rat. Mus deeumanuSj Pallas. — ^Too common every- 
where. Rev. G. Gordon dates the first arrival of the Brown Rat 
in Morayshire at 1814,t and it would appear to have arrived in 
Buchan at about the same time, for in 1832, when Mr. W. W. 
Cameron first visited Brucklay, there were a few Brown Rats, and 
they would take some time to spread inland from the sea-port 
towns. 

26. House-Mouse. Mtia museuLvSy Lin. — In spite of the war 
waged against it by cats and traps, the House Mouse is common 
wherever there are houses. Mr. Edward says that musical indi- 
viduals are not uncommon in this species, and that he has kept them 
himself and derived much amusement from them. 

27. Wood-Mouse, Long-tailed Field-Mouse. Mus sylvattcua, 
Lin. — Common in fields and gardens, but occasionally visits stacks 
and even houses. 

28. Harvest-Mouse. Mu8 minutuSy Pallas. — Mr. Edwards says 

* Proe, Royal Fhys. Soe, JSdin., vol. v., 1880, p. 162. 
t Zoologist, 1844, p. 424, 



Digitized by 



Google 



234 PROCBEDINGS OF THE 

that it is long since this animal was first taken near Gamrie. Mr. 
W. Macgillivray first records the capture of this interesting little 
animal in Aberdeenshire.* 

29. Common Field- Vole, Short-tailed Field-Mouse. Arvicola 
agrestis, De Selys. — Exceedingly common in fields and gardens. 

30. Bed Field- Vole, Bank-Vole. Artncola glareolus (Schreber). — 
Not so common as the last-named species. Is found chiefly in old 
natural grass and marshy pastures. 

31. Water- Vole or Water-Rat. Arvicola amphibitis (Lin.). — 
I have never myself seen any but the black variety of this species 
here, but Mr. Cameron, who has had a large experience in trapping 
vermin of all kinds, says that brown ones are occasionally met with. 
He has seen some with the black tinted with brown, and has found 
a young brown one in the same litter with three black ones. Mr. 
Duncan also says that he sees them of a brownish hue. 

Family: Lepryndae. 

32. Common Hare. Lepus europaevs, Pallas. — Very numerous 
until the passing of the late Act of Parliament, which gave farmers 
the right to kill ground game. 

33. Mountain Hare. Z^pm variabilis, Pallas. — The White 
Hare is occasionally found on the few hills in the district of 
Buchan, but is not known to breed in the district It is probably 
driven down by the snowstorms in winter from the higher hills in 
Banffshire. 

34. Rabbit. Lepus eunicultis, Lin. — Extremely abundant along 
the coast in the sandy hillocks covered with bent grass, as well as 
in the large woods at Pitfour, Brucklay, etc. In one year upwards 
of 12,000 Rabbits were killed in the policies round Pitfour House. 



11. — Xotes on the Fossils found in a thin bed of impure Carbonifer- 
(ms LivMstone at Glencart, near Dairy, Ayrshire. By Mr. John 
Young, F.G.S., Vice-President. 

In a former paper read before this Society at the meeting of 24th 
September, 1878, and printed in the Proceedings, voL iv., p. 5, 
"On a group of fossil organisms termed Conodonts," I called 
attention to an interesting and peculiar deposit at Glencart, near 

♦ " Naturalists* library," vol xxii., p. 267. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 235 

Dairy, which had been recently discovered by Mr. John Smith, of 
Kilwinning, and in which he had obtained Conodont remains, as 
well as numerous sponge spicules of various forms, besides the shells 
of a small but very interesting group of univalve and bivalve 
molluscs, many of which, from the peculiar manner in which they 
have been preserved, were found in a very perfect condition. Since 
that period I have several times visited Glencart with Mr. Smith 
and various members, obtaining a quantity of the rotted material 
in which the organisms are found, and during intervals of leisure I 
have carefully examined it. 

In the following notes I intend to point out — first, the geological 
position of the Glencart strata, and the conditions under which the 
fossils are found ; and second, the genera and species I have been 
able to obtain during my researches so far as they have gone. I 
have not yet, however, had time to investigate the whole of the 
finer material of the deposit for the smaller organisms it contains, 
though I expect to do so ere long. 

The thin stratum at Glencart, which has yielded the fossils in 
question, was accidentally exposed during the cutting of a branch 
railway to an ironstone pit. The strata passed through belong to 
the Upper Carboniferous limestone series of the Ayrshire coalfield, 
in which lie the Highfield and Linnspout limestones of the Dairy 
district. From quarries formerly opened in these upper limestones 
and their accompanying shales many fine fossils have been ob- 
tained, and plenty of material still exists in the old weathered shale- 
heaps, from which microzoa and other larger organisms may be 
obtained in abundance. The outcrop of limestone strata at Glen- 
cart, in which the fossils were found, lies on the south side of the 
railway, which, near the pit, has been excavated to the depth of 
from eight to ten feet, exposing several thin beds of varying 
mineral composition, all more or less weathered, or highly rotted, 
especially those which seem to have been originally slightly 
calcareous. In one of these weathered calcareous shale-beds Mr. 
Smith observed numerous small, irregularly-formed cavities, vary- 
ing in size from a boy's marble to that of a man's closed hand. 
These were partly filled with a greyish-white soft plastic clay, 
not unlike some of the commoner varieties of pipe-clay, and 
not difiering very much in colour from the rock itself in which the 
cavities were found. At the time he was on the outlook for 
fossiliferous weathered shales which might be washed for microzoa, 



Digitized by 



Google 



236 PROOKKPINGS OF THE 

and fortunately he was tempted to collect a quantity of this 
unpromising-looking clay from the cavities. After being dried and 
washed it was found to be moderately fossiliferous, containing a 
group of sponge spicules of varied forms new to our Carboniferous 
strata, as well as various small molluscan remains and Conodonts, 
several also new. These sponge spicules and shells are of a fine 
creamy-white colour, and, as formerly stated, are generally in an 
excellent state of preservation. Indeed, if one did not know the 
genera or species to which they belong, he would never suppose 
that they had been obtained from so old a formation as that of the 
Carboniferous limestone, for they look more like a group of organ- 
isms from recent Tertiary strata, such as those of the Paris basin. 

In explanation of the peculiar conditions imder which they 
are found, it has been conjectured that the cavities now filled with 
clay were originally calcareous nodules, which had been segregated 
in the calcareous shale by the drawing together of the lime of 
the deposit into nodular masses through chemical attraction while 
the rock was still in a soft condition, and after the same manner in 
which it is believed nodules of clay-ironstone, and nodules of flint 
were formed.* These calcareous nodules would enclose the organ- 
isms lying in the stratum wherever they were segregated, while the 
lime present in their composition would, perhaps, tend to the better 
preservation of the organisms than in other portions of the bed. 
Be this as it may, we now find that it is only the organisms 
enclosed within the walls of the cavities originally filled by the 
nodules which are now well preserved ; those found in other por- 
tions of the stone being all in the form of casts, or so firmly com- 
bined with the rocky matrix that they cannot be extracted. 

In the lapse of time these beds were brought to the surface of the 
ground through denudation of the overlying strata, the calcareous 
matter was probably removed by the passage through the beds 
of water containing carbonic acid, so that the lime originally form- 
ing the nodules was entirely dissolved away, leaving behind only 
the clay formerly combined with it, and the organisms at the 
same time were left in such a state of freedom in the argillaceous 

* Recently, I have found calcareons nodules, enclosing similar fossils, in a 
bed of shale in the upper limestone series of the same neighbourhood, and 
probably on the same geological horizon, but there the strata have not suffered 
from the same corroding action as that which has robbed the Glencart beds of 
all their lime. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Natural history society of Glasgow. 237 

matrix that they can now readily be separated from the clay by 
washing. 

Similar calcareous nodules, enclosing fossils, are not uncommon 
in the limestone strata of our Scottish coalfields, but I know of no 
strata containing them which has been acted upon in the same 
peculiar manner as that observed at Glencart. It might have been 
supposed that, as the shells of the mollusca in the Glencart nodules 
were originally calcareous, they would also have been acted upon 
by the carbonic acid which has removed the lime, but such is not 
the case, as the shells retain their form and all their original fine 
markings. The reason why they have been so wonderfully 
preserved, under such, apparently, unfavourable conditions, is 
to be found in the fact that the lime which originally entered 
into their composition has been replaced by other mineral 
elements, such as silica and alumina in part, with probably a 
little sulphate of barytes, and which have resisted the action 
of the carbonic acid. There is every reason to suppose that 
this mineral change was effected on the shells prior to the strata 
being acted upon by the waters containing the dissolving in- 
gredients. The causes which led to these changes in the mineral 
composition of the hard parts of the organisms may be both difficult 
to trace and to clearly explain ; but it may, perhaps, have been due 
to heat derived through igneous action, which, we know, was con- 
temporaneous in this district of country with much of the strata 
belonging both to the lower coal and ironstone series, and those 
of the upper limestone group. The Geological Survey officers, in 
the Memoir explanatory of sheet 22 of the Ayrshire coalfield, 
notice both beds of trap tuff and sheets of basalt, which alternate 
with these two divisions of strata in the Dairy district. 

In the section at Glencart there is found overlying the bed con- 
taining the nodular cavities, a thin band of a grey siliceous deposit 
which has a flinty or horny texture. This stratum, which appears 
to be a true homstone, has been, I am inclined to think, 
deposited chemically by heated waters, which held the silica 
in solution, and which had their origin in a spring, probably 
issuing from some of the fissures connected with the volcanic 
vents then active in the neighbourhood. The changes now 
observable in the mineral composition of the fossils were^ in 
all likelihood, effected during this period, and it is also probable, 
that at some after period, springs charged with carbonic acid, 



Digitized by 



Google 



238 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

also the result of igneous action, dissolved the calcareous nodules 
and rohhed this section of strata of the whole of its lime, though 
whether this took place in times previous to, or subsequent to, the 
denudation of the overlying strata, is now' very difficult to say. 
There can, however, be no doubt that it was this agent which, at 
one time or other, deprived them of their lime, and left the strata 
in the same rotted condition as that in which we now find them. 

In the quarries around Beith and Dairy, other beds containing 
rotted limestone are not uncommon, but in them the rotted material 
is found filling vertical fissures and horizontal partings between 
the several layers of the unaltered rock through which surface 
water has percolated in recent geological times; and they are all 
of a quite different character from those beds seen at Glencart*^ 



List of Fossils from the rotted clay filling the nodular cavities 
in the limestone at Glencart. 

Genera and Species. Kbmares. 

Sponoidae. 
ffolasUrella con/erta. Carter. Common, and in fine preservation. 

Other forms of spicnles indicate the 
existence of Sponges belonging to 
the Renierid and Lithistid groups ; 
while other trifid, fork-like, and 
acerate spicules appear to be related 
to Sponges of the genus Geodia, 

OSTEACODA. 

Bairdiasubelongata. Jones &Eirkby. Rare; generally in the form of casts. 

„ submucroncUa, „ „ Do. do. do. 

Beyrichia radiata. „ „ Do. do. do. 

POLYZOA. 

Fmestella muUiporcUa, M*Coy. Rare; in the form of casts. . 

BhaMomeson gradle. Phill. Do. do. 

* On our last visit to this interesting section, we found that the beds had 
become very much obscured, partly through the rapid weathering of the 
exposed portion of the strata, and partly by the removal of that portion of 
the bed in which the nodular cavities existed, this having been effected in the 
extension of the railway to another pit in the same locality. We were, there- 
fore, unsuccessful in obtaining any of the fossiliferous rotted clay, nor is it 
likely to be again obtaineii, except by cutting through the beds at this spot 
in a new line of section. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY Of GLASGOW. 



239 



Brachiopoda. 
Produdtu latisdmus, J. de C. Sow. 



Streptorhynchus crenistria. Phill. 



Fragments of this species and other 
Producti occnr somewhat rarely in 
the nodular cavities, but ^nerally 
too imperfect for correct identification. 

Rare ; in fragments. 



Lambllibkanchiata. 
Avicula, Sp. ? 

Aviculopectm, Sp. 1 
Cardwmorpha oblonga. Sow. 
Cypricardia. Sp. ? 

Nueula lineata, Phill. 



Ungtdma, Sp. ? 
Vmu8, Sp. ? 



Small form ; rare ; undetermined ; pro- 
bably a variety of ^. gibbosa, M 'Coy. 

Kare ; in fragments. 

Kare. 

A small form, in fine preservation; 
moderately common. 

Common; finely preserved; small in 
size; some valves perforated by a 
boring mollusc. 

One small perfect valve ; genus new to 
our strata. Recorded by M'Coy, 
from the Irish Carb. limestone. 

Rare ; finely preserved. 



Gasteropoda. 
Dentalium priscum. Goldf. 
„ inomcUum. M'Coy. 

Buomphaltis aerpula, De Eon. 

„ carhonariua? Sow. 

Elmchua antiquua f M'Coy. 
„ suhulatus? M*Coy. 



Evlima PhUlipsiana, De Eon. 
M r Sp.? 

Loosonema scalaraidea, Phill. 

,) rttgifera, PhilL 
MacrocheUus cuyuius. Sow. 

,, imhriccittui. Sow. 



Murchisonia angulaia, Phill. 

,, elongata. Portl. 

,, quadricarivata, M'Coy. 

,, striatula. De Eon. 

., Urei. Flem. 



NcUicopsia variata. PhilL 
„ tabtUata, PhilL 
„ eUiptioa, Phill. 



Moderately common. 

Moderately common; some perforated 
by a boring mollusc. 

Rare ; generally In fragments, but well 
preserved ; species new to our strata. 

Rare. 

The two species here noted are rather 
rare, and are of small size. They are 
doubtfully identified with M 'Coy's 
species, as the tooth in the pillar lip 
is more strongly developed in the 
Gle'ncart specimens. 

Rare. There is another shell with 
smooth, flat whorls which I doubt- 
fully refer to this genus provisionallv. 

Moderately common ; small, but finely 
preserved. 

Rsu*e ; generally in fragments. 

Rare ; small, but finely preserved. 

Rare. There are other two small forms 
referable to this genus not yet deter- 
mined, and which are probably new. 

Rare. The following species are all 
well preserved. 

Rather rare. 

Common. 
Do. 

Common. Besides the species here 
noted, there are other three that are 
left undetermined, and which are 
probably new. 

Rare. 

Rare. This species is new to oue strata. 

Rare. 



Digitized by 



Google 



240 



i^llOGBBDlKGS Of THB? 



Niao Smiihdana.* J. Young. Rare; genus newtoCarboniferous strata. 

The specimens shew distinctly the 
perforated columella. 
Pleurotomaria cuuta, Phill. Rare. This species is new to our strata. 

„ Frenoyana, De Kon. Rare. 

„ granuhxta, De Eon. Rare; not formerly recorded from our 

strata. 
„ interstridlis, PhiU. Do. do. do. 

„ Yvami, L^v. Rare; one other small species (common) 

left undetermined, probably new. 
Trochus biiemUus. Phill. Rather rare.t 



Hetebopoda. 
Bellerophon DumorUiu T>* Orb. 
„ decusicUus. Flem. 

„ Urei, Flem. 

PorceUia amuUa. De Yememl. 

Cephalopoda. 
Orihoceras attentuUum, Flem. 
„ einetum. Sow. 
Sp. ? 



Cyrtoeeras Oemeri, Mart. 

Pisces. 
CoefUiodus. Sp. ? 
ffelodus. Sp. ? 
Foeeilodus. Sp. ? 



Rare. 

Common; small in size; finely pre- 
served. 
Do. do. do. 

Rare ; fragment of shell. 



Rare ; generally found in fragments. 
Do. do. do. 

Rare. A very small, slender species, 
smooth, with cential siphuncie, and 
perfect to the point of tne shelL 

Rare ; a fragment of the sheU. 



Various fragments of palatal teeth, re- 
ferable to the genera noted, have been 
found, as well as various forms of 
Conodont teeth, and small vertebral 
bones. These, however,. require care- 
fril investigation before they can be 
identified with any of the described 
forms, as probably many of them are 
new. 



* I have much pleasure in naming this species of Niso after Mr. John 
Smith, the discoverer of the deposit at Glencart, and the following short 
description will serve to distinguish the species: — 
Description- Small, acutely conical ; spire composed of from eight to nine 

smooth flat whorls, suture small, mouth oval, pointed above, outer lip 

thin, axis of columella perforated. Length, two and a half lines ; width 

of last whorl, one line. 
Remarks — Prof. De Koninck has seen specimens of this shell, and is quite 

satisfied as to the correct identification of the genus, of which only one 

Carboniferous species is known. 

t Several forms of calcareous operculae are found along with the above 
group of Gasteropoda. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 241 

III. — Notes on the Flora of West Kilhride and Ardrossan, By 
Mr. D. A. Boyd. 

The botany of the valley of the Clyde has of late years received 
80 much attention, that probably little remains to be done in the 
way of adding to the list of flowering plants and higher cryptogam 
which grow in the neighbourhood of Glasgow. The district which 
lies along the shore of the Firth, between Fairlie and Ardrossan, 
and which, prior to the opening of the Fairlie railway a few years 
ago, was comparatively isolated and inaccessible, seems, however, 
to have been in this respect somewhat neglected. With the 
exception of the lists compiled by the late Rev. Dr. Landsborough, 
a well-known Ayrshire botanist, no attempt appears to have been 
made to preserve a record of the rarer plants which have from 
time to time been observed in the parishes of West Kilbride and 
Ardrossan; and as the district is probably known only to a few 
of the members of the Society, the following notes on its Flora 
may contain some information which has not hitherto been brought 
under their notice. The natural conditions of this district, as 
regards climate and soil, are undoubtedly favourable to the growth 
of a great variety of plants, especially those of a maritime 
distribution; aud to these conditions a passing reference may be 
made, as their influence is of considerable importance. 

The climate of West Kilbride, especially the portion of the 
parish which extends along the sea-shore, is very mild; and in 
winter the frosts are less severe than in inland districts. A range 
of hills which runs along the line of the coast from above Green- 
ock to Ardrossan, afibrds considerable protection from east winds. 
At Seamill, which is one of the mildest spots on the whole coast, 
several half-hardy shrubs, such as Escallonta, grow luxuriantly in 
the open air. From Ardrossan southwards the country is, for 
some distance, bleak and unsheltered, and therefore less favourable 
to plant life. 

The soil of the district is on the whole light and sandy, and in 
favourable seasons the crops come to very early maturity. A 
portion of both parishes on the eastern side is uncultivated, 
consisting of hilly moorland. The whole district is well watered 
by numerous streams which descend from the hills, passing through 
wooded glens. There are no lochs of any size, although the moors 
are generally moist and boggy. 



Digitized by 



Google 



242 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

On referring to one of the larger maps it will be observed that 
the coast line consists of a series of sandy bays, of which the most 
important are Hunterston Bay between Fairlie and Portincross, 
and Ardneil Bay between Portincross and Seamill. As the 
prevailing rock is red sandstone, the shore is generally sandy; but 
where, as is frequently the case, the sandstone is interrupted by 
trap dykes forming points and promontories which have withstood 
the action of the sea, the shore is turfy and abounds in salt marshes. 

At Pencebay, below Fairlie, a wide expanse of muddy sand is 
left uncovered at low tide; and hei*e, as observed by Dr. Walker 
Amott, Zostera nana grows in great abundance, "covering hundreds 
of acres." At the mouth of the Glen Bum Fetasites vulgaris grows 
sparingly under the shade of some alder trees. Although too 
abundant in the neighbourhood of Glasgow, and indeed common 
in neighbouring parishes, this plant becomes less frequent towards 
the sea-shore, as is also the case with Trollius europaeus, Arenaria 
trinervisj Potentilla Fragariastnim, and several others. A short 
distance further along the shore Ranuncuhis sceleratiis grows plen- 
tifully on the wet sand ; and on drier spots above high-water mark 
a few plants may be observed of Eryngium mantimum, which is 
sparingly distributed over this part of the coast. The shore 
between Hunterston and Portincross is particularly rich in maritime 
plants, among which are OEnanthe Lachenalii, Salicomia herhacea, 
Stiaeda maritima, SaUola Kaliy Scirpus maritimiis, Blysmus rufus, 
and most of the common plants of the sea-shore. In the stagnant 
pools among the turf towards Portincross Ranuncvltts sceleratiut 
again occurs in abundance and attains a considerable size. 

Portincross is a very attractive place on account of its picturesque 
surroundings and old weather-beaten castle, while to the botanist 
it is no less interesting as the richest spot in the whole parish. 
Along the steep wooded bank at the foot of the cliffs will be found 
Agrimonia Eupatoriay Cotyledon Umbilicus^ Anagallis tenella, 
Juniperus communis, Asplenium rtiarinum, Aspidium angulare, 
and many plants which are not common in other parts of the 
district. Scolopendrium vulgare is here very luxuriant in the 
genial shade, its fronds attaining a great length. One or two plants 
of Osmunda regalis formerly grew on this bank but were discovered 
and carried off by collectors. On the rocks at the iron gate, locally 
known as "the Throughlet," the beautiful Geranium mnguineum 
grows in abundance with Silene maritima, Ldgusticum scoticum. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 243 

AUium vinecUe^ Avena jpuhescensy and Koeleria cristata, A short 
distance beyond Portincross Spergvlaria marginata and Juncm 
maritimm are to be found growing on the edges of some brackish 
pools. 

The sandy shore from Portincross to Seamill yields a large 
proportion of the common ammophiloiis plants; and the adjacent 
sandy fields contain many note-worthy species, among which may 
be noticed Teeadalia niidicanlis and Omithopus perptmllus, which 
are very abundant in a sandy field directly below Yonderfields farm; 
Vicia lathpvides^ which is also common; TrifoHum striatwny a 
plant rarely met with m the West of Scotland but which occurs 
plentifully between Yonderfields and Seamill; and Scirpius Savi% 
which grows on the moist sides of ditches in several places. Ononis 
arvensis and Scutellaria gdlericulata are both found in Ardneil Bay, 
but seem to be scarce in the district. 

At Seamill Senebiera coronopm, Teesdalia nudicatUis, TrifoHum 
striatum and Carum verticillatum occur; but the latter plant is 
much more abundant in damp pastures in the upper portion of the 
parish. Botrychium Lunaria makes its appearance every year in 
a grassy field on the west side of the village. A solitary tuft of 
Seneeio saracenicus grows on the side of the Kilbride Burn about 
half a mile above the village; and at Crosbie Castle, two miles 
farther up the stream, the wooded banks are white in early spring 
with the flowers of Galanthus nivalis. Cotyledon Umbilieics is 
abundant on the roadside near Tarbert Hill; and Peplis Portula 
occurs sparingly in a small marsh on the east side of the hilL In 
the wood behind Chapelton Farm Asplenium marinwm grows on 
the face of the sandstone rock, and Aspidium aculeatum and, -4. 
angulare in the shade; while in the salt marsh directly below the 
Farm two rare plants are to be foimd: Ruppia rostellata, which 
is abundant in several of the turfy pools; and Lepturus filiformis, 
which grows near the centre of the marsh. A short distance 
farther along the shore, Eryngimn m^ritimum, one of the most 
beautiful plants of the sea-side, grows luxuriantly on the dry sand. 
From Chapelton to Ardrossan, a distance of three miles, the 
road runs along the sea-shore, and at Glenfoot the stream which 
divides the parishes of West Kilbride and Ardrossan is crossed. The 
banks of this stream for some distance upwards are gay in spring 
with the flowers of Narcissus Pseudo-narcissus, which however is 
becoming less abundant year by year. Alyssum caJycimim was 

K 



Digitized by 



Google 



244 • l»llOC5BBl)tNGS Olr TrfliJ 

gathered a few years ago in a field at the foot of the road which 
leads to Montfode Farrti. Senebiera Gororiopus and Mdilotus par- 
viflora grow on the Inches below Ardrossan Eailway vStation; and 
on the rocks at the Castle Hill a few stunted plants of Asplenium 
Ruta-muraria, which is scarce in the district, were observed a fe^r 
years ago. Lychnis vespertina grows abundantly on the sides of 
the Fairlie railway above the junction near Ardrossan Station. 
Sedum villomm, Hippuris vulgaris^ and one of the Utriculariae, 
occur sparingly in a marsh at the foot of Knockewart Hill on 
the east side of the parish, but have not been noticed elsewhere. 

The following list contains a summary of the rarer plants which 
have been recorded as occurring in the Parishes of West Kilbride 
(including Lesser Cumbrae) and Ardrossan : — 

Ranunculus scderatvs^ L. Shore between Fencebay and Portincross. 

Glav^ium luteum^ Scop. "West Kilbride," Landshoi-ough ; Lesser 
Cumbrae. 

Alyssum ccUycinum, L. Montfode, Ardrossan. 

Camelina sattva, Crantz. Shore at Seamill, &c., occasional; 
"Ardrossan," Lands, 

Teesdalia nudicaulis, Br. Seamill; Yonderfields, abundant. 

Senebiera Coronopus, Poir. Seamill; Inches, Ardrossan. 

Lepidium Smithiiy Hook. Yonderfields, West Kilbride. 

Lychnis vespertina, Sibth. Fairlie Railway near Ardrossan. 

Sagina subulata, Wimm. Tarbert Hill, West Kilbride. 

Spei^gvlaria marginata, Syme. Portincross; Chapelton, West Kil- 
bride. 

Hypericum calydnum, L. "West Kilbride," Lands, 

Lavatera arborea, L. „ „ 

Malva moschata, L. „ „ 

Geranium sanguineum, L. Portincross. 

MeMlotus parvifioray Lam. Inches, Ardrossan, 

Trifolium striatum, L. Seamill to Chapelton, abundant. 

Omithopuspfftpusillus, L. Common. 

Vicia sylvatica, L. "West Kilbride," Lands, 

V, lathyroides, L. Sandy pastures, &c., West Kilbride. 

Hippuris vulgaris, L. Marsh at Knockewart Hill, near Ardrossan. 

Cotyledon Umbilicus, L. Roadside at Tarbert Hill; Portincross. 

Peplis Portula, L. Marsh, east side of Tarbert Hill. 

Uryngium maritimum, L. Shore near Fencebay; Chapelton. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Natural history society of Glasgow. 245 

Cicuta virosa, L. "Ardrossan," Lands. 

Gamin vei'ticillatnm^ Koch. Seamill, Scc] "Ardrossan," Lands. 

Slum latifolium, L. "West Kilbride," Laryh 

OEnanthe Lachenaliiy Gmel. Poiiiincross ; Chapelton, il^c. ; 

"Ardrossan," Lands. 
Ligusticum scoticum^ L Portin cross. 
Anthriscics wlgaris. Pars. "West Kilbride," Lands. 
Dipsa^vs sylvestris^ L. "Ardrossan," „ 

Anthemis arvensis, L. Montfode, Ardrossan. 
Senecio saracenicusj L. Kilbride Bum. 
Vaccinium Vitis-Idaea, L. "Ardrossan," Lands. 
V, Oxycoccos, L. „ „ 

Lycopvs europaeiis, L. „ ,, 

Mertensia marttima, Don. "West Kilbride," Lands. 
Pinguicula lusitanica, L. „ "Ardrossan," Lan/fs. 

Lysimachia thyrsiflora, L. "Ardrossan," Lands. 
Anagallis tendla^ L. Portincross ; Yonderfields ; "Ardrossan, " Lands. 
Ruppia rostellata, Koch. Chapelton, West Kilbride. 
Zostera nana, Koth. Hnnterston shore. 
Narcissus Pseudo-narcissicSy L. Glenhead. 
Galantkns nivalis^ L. Crosbie woods. 
Allium vineale, L. Portincross. 
Juncus maritimus, Sm. Portincross. 
Blysmns rufusy Link. Fencebay ; Portincross. 
Scirpus Savitj Schultes. Yonderfields, West Kilbride. 
Qarex dioica, L. Common. 
G. vesicaria, L. "Ardrossan," Lands. 
Avena pubescenSf L. Portincross; Seamill. 
Koeleria cristatay Pers. „ 

Leptwras JUiformisy Trin. Chapelton, West Kilbride. 
Hyinenophyllum unilafpi'ale, Willd. "West Kilbride," Lands. 
Asplenium marinuniy L. Hunterston; Portincross; Chapelton. 
Aspidium angidare, Willd. „ „ „ 

Botrychium Lunaria, Sw. Seamill; Ardrossan; Saltcoats. 



Digitized by 



Google 



246 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



00 

d> 

00 
00 



o 



CO 



H 

§ 

O 
O 

o 
< 

o 

H 

w 

H 

OD 

H 
O 

< 

H 






»o eo 



"^ to 



% 




O 03 

pes O 

Eh 



 % 



PC 



00 t^ o o 
CO 0<1 o o 



O O rH «> 
O kO kO t^ 
rH »0 CO rH 



^ 




Digitized by 



Google 



Itateal Jist0rg Catkin ai (Slasgoto. 



LIST OF MEMBERS—SESSION 1882-83. 



JOHN A. HARVIE-BROWN, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., Dunipace 
House, Larbert. 

JOHN KIRSOP, F.S.A. Scot., 6 Queen's Crescent. 

Professor JOHN CLELAND, M.D., F.R.S., Glasgow University. 

ROBERT MASON, 6 Albion Crescent, Dowanhill. 

Secretary. 
JOHN M. CAMPBELL, Kelvingrove Museum. 

Treasurer. 
R. J. BENNETT, 50 Gordon Street. 

Xilbrartan. 

JAMES J. F. X. KING, 207 Sauchiehall Street. 

Members of ©ounctl. 



John Young, F.G.S. 
Thomas King. 
Robert Turner. 
George J. Combe. 
Peter Cameron. 



M. C. Duff. 

James B. Murdoch, F.S.A. Scot. 

Richard Mackay. 

Peter EwiN(i. 



T/ufse marked * are Life Members, 



.^onnrarij. 

1 85 1 William Ferguson, F.L.S., F.G.S., &c., of Kinmundy, near Mintlaw, 

Aberdeenshire. 
1851 Robert Gray, F.R.S.E., Bank of Scotland House, Edinburgh. 
1880 Thomas Davidson, LL.D., F.R.S., F.G.S., &c., 9 Salisbury Road, 

West Brighton. 



Digitized by 



Google 



248 

i88o John O. Westwood, M.A., F.L.S., Professor of Zoology, Oxford. 
1880 Professor Gustav Mayr, 75 Haupt Strasse, Vienna. 
1880 Dr. L. G. de Koninck, F.G.S., &c., Liege, Belgium. 

1880 Rev. John Stevenson, Glamis, Forfarshire. 

1881 James Murie, M.D., LL.D., F.L.S., &c., Burlington House, Piccadilly, 

London, W. 
1881 Osbert Salvin, M.A., F.R.S., F.L.S., &c., Brooklands Avenue, 
Cambridge, 

i^orrespcttding. 

1852 T. B. Grierson, M.D., Thomhill, Dumfriesshire. 

1 86 1 John Shaw, Ph.D., Principal of the Gymnasium, Colesbur, South 

Africa. 
1863 Rev. H. W. Crosskey, F.G.S., Birmingham. 
1866 Right Hon. The Earl of Haddington, Tyninghame, Prestonkirk. 
1866 James A. Mahony, Ramelton, Donegal, Ireland. 
1866 Robert Macdowal, Surgeon, Panama Steam Navigation Company, 

Panama. 

1866 Rev. James E. Somerville, B.D., Broughty Ferry. 

1867 Thomas Edward, A.L.S., Curator of the Museum, Banff. 

1867 John Buchanan, of the Government Survey, Wellington, N.Z. 

1868 Rev. Dr. Gloag, Galashiels. 

1869 George S. Brady, M.D., M.R.C.S., F.L.S., C.M.Z.S., Sunderland. 
1869 Alexander Innes Grant, London. 

1869 Rev. James Keith, Forres. 

1869 Capt. W. H. Feilden, C.M.Z.S., Junior United Service Club, London. 

1869 Rev. John Ferguson, New Pitsligo. 

1870 James Hardy, Old Cambus, Berwickshire. 

1 87 1 Alexander Gray, Chartered Bank of India, Batavia. 

1 87 1 Edwin Lees, F.L.S., F.G.S., Greenhill, Summit, Worcester. 

1873 Sir George Hector Leith Buchanan, Bart., Ross Priory, Dumbarton- 

shire. 

1874 Francis G. Binnie, 3 Douglas Terrace, St. John*s Road, Huddersfield. 

1875 Robert Hill, Berbice, British Guiana. 

1876 William Hamilton, Yokohama, Japan. 

1877 H. B. Bailey, Newton, Mass., U.S. 

1877 Robert Etheridge, Jun., F.G.S., &c., British Museum, London. 

1878 Ernest Gibson, Buenos Ayres. 

1879 John Smith, Stobbs, Kilwinning. 

1879 Thos. Scott, 7 Caddlehill Terrace, Greenock. 

1 881 John King, British Vice-Consul, Carrizal, Bajo, Chili. 

1881 Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., Earlham Road, Norwich. 

Qrdinary. 

1881 Adams, James, M.D., 112 Cambridge Street. 

1872 Aitken, David, 14 Robertson Street. 

1881 Alexander, G. R., 42 Sardinia Terrace, Hillhead. 



Digitized by 



Google 



240 

1863 Alexander, John, Menstriebank, Dowanhill Gardens. 

1879 Algie, Matthew J., Norwood, Langside. 
iSSi Anderson, David, School of Art. 

1868 Angus, William Craibe, 159 Queen Street. 

1877 Armstrong, James, 16 Albert Drive. 

1872 Arrol, Archibald T., Millgrove House, Alloa. 

1880 Bain, Andrew, Clydesdale Iron- works, Holytown. 

1862 Bain, Sir James, F.R.S.E., F.R.G.S., 3 Park Terrace. 

1881 Baird, John, 12 Walworth Terrace. 

1879 Balfour, J. Bayley, D. Sc, Professor of Botany, Glasgow University. 

1880 Ballantyne, James, 52 Virginia Street. 

1863 Balloch, Robert, 88 Union Street. 

1875 Baxter, William, 16 Gibson Street, Hillhead. 

1880 Baxter, William R., 175 West George Street. 

J877 Bayne, Andrew Malloch, i Hamilton Terrace, Partick, East. 

1878 Bayne, James, Jun., 306 St. Vincent Street. 
1872 Beckett, John, 11 Windsor Terrace, West. 

1877 Bell, George, Jun., 4 Viewfield Terrace, Hillhead. 

1869 Bennett, Robert J., Treasurer^ 50 Gordon Street. 

1881 Birrell, Alex., 69 Nicholas Street, Greenock. 

1879 Black, Malcolm, M.B., CM., 5 Canning Place. 

1872 Blackie, Alfred, 6 Thornville Terrace, Hillhead. 

1870 Blackstone, Alan Cornwall, M.A., 16 West Princes Street. 
1868 Bott, Frank, 93 Douglas Street. 

1882 Boyd, D. A., 225 West George Street. 
1879 Boyle, Thomas, 4 Montrose Street. 
1863 Brodie, Robert, 16 Kew Terrace. 

1879 Broom, John, 69 Abbotsford Place. 

1877 Brown, R. Bennett, Bendarroch, Garelochhead. 

1876 Bruce, James, 36 West Nile Street. 

1880 Brydall, Robert, 35 Woodside Quadrant. 

1873 Buchanan, Thomas D., M.D., 24 Westminster Terrace. 
*i88i Buckley, T. E., F.Z.S., Millerton House, Inverness. 

1 88 1 Bullen, Robert, Royal Botanic Gardens. 

1878 Burns, George, A., 30 Jamaica Street. 
1878 Burns, James, Kilmahew, Cardross. 

187 1 Cameron, Peter, 23 Exchange Square. 

1878 Campbell, Archibald, 23 Hyde Terrace, Leeds. 
1870 Campbell, John M., Secretary ^ Kelvingrove Museum. 

1877 Campbell, Thomas M., 10 Carrick Street. 
1877 Campbell, Thomas M., Jun., 10 Carrick Street. 

1879 Carson, David S., C.A., 150 St. Vincent Street. 

1880 Cassels, William, 2ro Saracen Street, Possil Park. 

*i879 Chalmers, John C, Minehim Lodge, Craig- Adam, Dalbeattie. 
1879 Christie, James C, Teacher, Hamilton. 
1870 Clark, Henry E., M.R.C.S., 9 Elmbank Street. 



Digitized by 



Google 



250 

i88o Cleland, John, M.D., F.R.S., V.P., Professor of Anatomy, Glasgow 

University. 
1866 Combe, George J., 34 Dundas Street. 
1 85 1 Connal, Michael, 43 Virginia Street. 

1875 Cooke, Stephen, F.C.S., Veterinary College, Buccleuch Street. 
1879 Cooper, James, 45 Virginia Street, 
1866 Coutts, James, 44 Dorset Street. 
1879 Crawford, W. P., 72 M'Kinlay Street. 
1874 Crosby, John, 106 North Frederick Street. 

1865 Dairon, James, 4 Garden Street. 

*i877 Dalgliesh, J. J., M.B.O.U., 8 Athole Crescent, Edinburgh. 
1879 I^ay, St. John Vincent, 115 St. Vincent Street. 
1864 Dennistoun, Alexander, F.Z.S., Roselea, Helensburgh. 

1866 Dickson, Alexander, M.D., Professor of Botany, Edinburgh University. 
1868 Dixon, James S., 19 Elmbank Crescent. 

1868 Dougall, James D., 39 Gordon Street. 
1879 Dougall, John C, 39 Gordon Street. 

1869 Drew, Alexander, Jun., Lower House, near Burnley, Lancashire. 
1879 Duff, M. C, 12 Holyrood Crescent. 

1874 Duncan, James, 65 Hamilton Drive. 

1882 Dunlop, James, Woodfoot Cottage, Nitshill. 

1879 Eggleton, James, 449 St. George's Road. 
1879 Eggleton, James, Junr., 449 St. George's Road. 
1879 Erskine, James, 8 M*Aslin Street. 
1879 Ewing, Peter, 97 M*Aslin Street. 

1879 Farquhar, John, 352 South Wellington Street. 
1882 Farquhar, Donald, 32 Govanhill Street. 

1879 Fash, John H., 48 York Street. 

1878 Fergus, Freeland, M.B., 3 Elmbank Crescent. 
1878 Ferguson, James Archibald, 28 St. Vincent Place. 

1877 Ferguson, William, 36 Hill Street, Garnethill. 

1878 Fleming, D. M., 4 Lome Terrace, PoUokshields. 
*i873 Fleming, James Nicol, Keile, by Campbeltown. 

1872 Fleming, John, Wood Lane, Broomielaw. 
*i875 Flemyng, Francis P., LL.D., F.R.G.S., Sgor Bheann, Dunoon. 

1878 Fogo, Edward L., Manse of Row, Dumbarton. 
1876 Forrest, Thomas S., Holm wood, Langside. 

1880 Forsyth, David, M.A., 19 Great Western Road. 

1881 FuUerton, John H., B.Sc, 164 Woodlands Road. 

1 88 1 Gemmell, William, 13 Richmond Street. 
*i872 Gilchrist, Archibald, 11 Sandyford Place. 
187 1 Girvan, James Graham, 186 West George Street. 

1879 Glaister, John, ]\LD., 71 N. St. Mungo Street. 
1870 Glen, David C, C.E., F.G.S., 14 Annfield Place. 



Digitized by 



Google 



251 

i88o Glen, David, Jun., ii Rose Street, Garnethill. 
1879 Glen, W. H., 14 Annfield Place, Dennistoun. 
1 88 1 Goodwin, William, 3 Lynedoch Street. 

1876 Grahame, James, 12 St. Vincent Place. 
1879 Grant, Archibald, 118 Onslow Drive. 
1879 Grant, W. R, 3 Hampden Terrace. 
1879 Gregorson, David, Scotstoun. 

1875 Grieve, Henry, 10 Willowbank Crescent. 

1856 Grieve, John, M.D., 212 St. Vincent Street. 

1S76 Gurney, J. H., Jun., F.Z.S., Northrepps Hall, Norwich. 

1872 Hadaway, Thomas S., 122 Wellington Street. 

1866 Harvie-Brown, John A., F.Z.S., F.R.S.E., M.B.O.U., President, 

Dunipace House, Larbert. 
1881 Henderson, T. J., 24 Florence Place. 
1879 Higgins, William, 15 New City Road. 

1875 ^i^^ Alexander, Langside. 

1881 Hill, John, 5 Maxwell Street, Partick. 

1877 Hill, Thomas N., 209 St. Vincent Street. 

1879 Hogarth, A. A., M.D., Winton Terrace, Ardrossan. 
1881 Hogg, Andrew, 33 George Street, Edinburgh. 

1880 Holbrook, William, 22 Willowbank Crescent. 
1879 Horn, George, 57 Bell Street, Calton. 

1877 Horn, William, 3 Rothesay Place, Edinburgh. 
1879 Home, R. R., 150 Hope Street. 

1 88 1 Hunt, John, East Bank, Lenzie. 

1 88 1 Ingram, John, Mitchell Library, Ingram Street. 

1879 Johnston, Allan, 210 Kelvinhaugh Street. 
188 1 Johnstone, James, 50 St. George's Road. 

1879 Kay, William, 46 W. George Street. 
1872 Kidston, David, 27 Blythswood Square. 

1879 Kidston, R., 24 Victoria Place, Stirling. 

1872 King, J. J. F. X., Librarian^ 207 Sauchiehall Street. 

1878 King, Thomas, no Hill Street, Garnethill. 

1 87 1 Kirsop, John, F.S.A. Scot., F.P., 6 Queen's Crescent. 

1881 Kling, Alfred, 123 W. Graham Street. 

1872 Knox, David N., M.A., M.B., 23 Elmbank Crescent. 

1880 Low, James B., M.A., 17 Elgin Terrace, Dowanhill. 

1879 Ligat, David, Jun., Hillside, Barrhead. 

1882 Lockhart, John, 371 Bath Street. 
1882 Long, Frank R. J., 8 Whitevale Street. 
1879 Long, John Jex, Whitevale. 

1876 Long, Rowley Jex, 727 Duke Street. 

1870 Lumsden, James, F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., Arden, Alexandria, N.B. 
1876 Lyle, James, lii Finlay Drive, Dennistoun. 
1872 Lyle, John, 7 Broompark Terrace, Dennistoun. 



Digitized by 



Google 



252 

879 Macbrayne, David, 17 Exchange Square. 

876 Macdonald, Alexander, 99 Renfield Street. 
879 Maclay, Wm., ii May Terrace, Mount Florida. 

875 M*Farlane, John H., Auchenfroe House, Dumbartonshire. 

878 M*Intyre, Alexander C, 16 Dalhousie Street. 

879 M*Intyre, John, 52 Weaver Street. 

868 M*Kay, John, 10 Great Hamilton Street. 

879 M*Kay, Richard, 26 George Street. 

871 M*Kerrow, James, 461 St. Vincent Street. 

854 M*Kinlay, David, 6 Great Western Terrace, Western Road. 

880 M*Kinlay, Duncan, 319 Sauchiehall Street. 

879 M*Kinlay, George, 97 West George Street. 
875 M*Lean, John A., Union Bank, Doune. 
863 M'Lellan, Duncan, 7 Kelvingrove Terrace. 

881 M*Lellan, John, 8 Eaton Terrace. 

881 M*Lellan, Robert, 10 Church Street, Partick. 

880 M*Vean, Colin A., C.E., 42 Belmont Gardens, Hillhead. 
860 Manford, John, Wellfield, Partickhill. 

859 Manford, Stuart, 5 Dixon Street. 

877 Marshall, David, Calder Grove, Blantyre. 

875 Marshall, James, Carlston, Western Road. 

876 Marshall, Peter, 6 Park Grove Terrace. 
874 Marshall, Richard A., 170 Hope Street. 

876 Marshall, Robert, 214 Kent Road. 

877 Marshall, Robert, Calder Grove, Blantyre. 

881 Martin, Alexander, 24 Hutcheson Street. 

872 Martin, Donald T., 142 St. Vincent Street. 
877 Martin, John M., Bloomhill, Cardross. 

863 Mason, Robert, V.P,j 6 Albion Crescent, Dowanhill. 
879 Mathie, John, M.D., 33 Monteith Row. 
866 Millar, James, 17 Monteith Row. 

858 Miller, Gavin, 10 Windsor Terrace, West. 
879 Milligan, W. J., 180 West Regent Street. 

877 Morison, Samuel M'Culloch, 2 Broomhill Drive, Partick. 

859 Morton, James, M.D., 199 Bath Street. 

882 Morton, Kenneth John, High Street, Carluke. 

877 Morton, Robert, 73 Mitchell Street. 
863 Mossman, John, 21 Elmbank Crescent. 
881 Muir, Archibald, 243 Sauchiehall Street. 

878 Munro, John, 87 Wellington Street. 

851 Murdoch, James Barclay, F.S.A. Scot., Hamilton Place, Langside. 

851 Napier, James, F.C.S., F.R.S.E., Maryfield, Bothwell. 
881 Neilson, John, Yr., Ruchill. 

879 Niven, Andrew, 140 Victoria Street, Hillhead. 
879 Noble, Alexander, 9 William Street, Greenhead. 

1876 Orde, Sir John P., Bart., F.Z.S., Kihnory, Lochgilphead. 



Digitized by 



Google 



258 

1871 Park, James, 115 St. Vincent Street. 

1872 Paterson, George E., 82 St. Vincent Street. 

1876 Paton, James, F.L.S., Corporation Galleries. 
1879 Pearson, David, 15 Carnarvon Street. 

1870 Peebles, James W., 80 Calder Street, Govanhill. 

1879 Pennell, Charles, 23 Partick Street, Greenock. 

1880 Pesqu^, John, 175 West George Street. 

1866 Rae, John, 106 Union Street. 

1 88 1 Ramsay, Charles Mackinnon, 196 Sandyford Street. 
1861 Ramsay, James, 159 Eglinton Street. 

1882 Rattray, William A., 3 Mansfield Place. 
*i858 Reid, John Eaton, 10 Newton Terrace. 

1875 Rennie, George, 1 1 Nelson Terrace, Hillhead. 
1879 Rennie, John, 22 West Nile Street. 
1879 Renwick, John, Mary's Place, Maryhill. 

1877 Riddell, David, 12 Graham Square. 

1 88 1 Riddell, James, The Academy, Forfar. 

1875 Robb, Jokn, 74 Gordon Street. 

1 87 1 Robertson, Archibald, 33 Granville Street, Newton Terrace. 
1852 Robertson, David, F.G.S., F.L.S., Glendale, Uddingston. 

1876 Robertson, David, Jun., 329 Sauchiehall Street. 
1876 Robertson, John, Vale View Terrace, Langside. 
1875 Robertson, Joseph, no High John Street. 
1879 Robertson, Robert, Builder, Thornliebank. 
1879 Robinson, Wm. B., Ruchill Bridge, Maryhill. 
1859 Russell, Thomas, Cleveden, Hillhead. 

1879 Sandison, William, 237 North Street. 
i879'[Schulze, Adolph, i St. James' Street, Hillhead. 

1875 Schuman, Sigismund, 4 North Court, Royal Exchange. 

1872 Scott, James, 6 Wilton Crescent. 

1880 Scott, John, 4 India Street. 

1879 Sherry, Christopher, Botanic Gardens. 

1879 Smith, John Guthrie, Mugdock Castle. 

1881 Somerville, Alexander, F.L.S., 5 Hillhead Street, Hillhead. 

1876 Sommerville, Joseph, 76 Henderson Street. 

1880 Steel, James, 32 Govanhill Street, Govanhill. 

1 88 1 Steven, John L., M.B., CM., 3 Berkeley Terrace. 
1868 Stewart, James, William wood, Cathcart. 

1880 Stewart, John. 76 Wilson Street. 

1879 Stewart, William, 128 Wellington Street. 

1880 Stirling, Colonel J. S., Gargunnock House, Stirling. 

1865 Stirton, James, M.D., F.R.C.S.Ed., F.L.S., 15 Newton Street. 
1859 Sutherland, Alexander, 97 Buchanan Street. 

1 88 1 Taylor, David, 49 Virginia Street. 

1879 Taylor, James, Jun., 129 High John Street. 



Digitized by 



Google 



254 

iS79 Thorn, R. Wilson, Barremman, Roseneath, 

1880 Thomson, Duncan, 56 Gibson Street, Hillhead. 
i860 Thomson, James, F.G.S., 3 Abbotsford Place. 

*i877 Thomson, James, I.A., 88 Bath Street. 
1879 Thomson, John, Deaf and Dumb Institution, Crossbill. 

1 88 1 Thomson, John, 64 Sauchiehall Street. 
1879 Todd, Thos., 34 Union Street, Greenock. 
1868 Tumbull, John, 50 West Regent Street. 
1879 Turner, Robert, 122 Hospital Street. 

1879 Waddel, Laurence, M.D., Western Infirmary. 

1879 Walker, R., Sardinia Terrace. 

1866 Walker, Theodore C, Roseneath, St. James' Road, Leicester. 

187 1 Watson, Alexander James, 10 Kew Terrace. 

1868 Watson, James, 2 Florentine Gardens, Hillhead. 

1879 Watson, William, Newfield House, Johnstone. 

1882 Watson, William, 245 Main Street, Ruthei^len. 
1877 White, James, 56 Rose Street, Garuethill. 

1880 Williams, Rev. W., F.G.S., ii Royal Terrace, CrossMll. 
1879 Wilson, Rev. A. S., M.A., B.Sc, 124 Bothwell Street. 
1875 Wilson, Daniel, 85 Wellington Street. 

1863 Wingate, John B., 7 Crown Terrace, Dowanhill. 
1882 Wood, John, Levern School, Hurlet. 

*i852 Young, John, F.G.S., Hunterian Museum. 

1866 Young, John, M.D., F.G.S., Professor of Natural History, Gla^ow 
University. 

1881 Young, John, F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., 64 Hereford Street, Bayswater, 

London. 
1881 Young, John Alexander, 6 Pitt Street, Edinburgh. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY 

OF GLASGOW, 

VOL. v.— PART III. 

1882-83. 




GLASGOW: PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY 
AT ITS ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET. 
^^ 1884. 



Digitized by 



Google 



"Glasgow: Printed by Thomas Duncan, 
SauchiehaU Street 



Digitized by 



Google 



COiNTENTS. 



Vol. v.— Part III. 

Paqr 

Report on the Business of Session 1881-82, 247 

Summer Session, 1882, Report of Proceedings of, 248 

Office-Bearers for Session 1882-83, 256 

President's Address. By Mr. John A. Harvie- Brown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., 

M.B.O.U., 257 

Pine Marten (Martes sylvestrisj. Notes on. By Mr. AV. Craibe Angus, 265 

JSucdnea ohlongay Notes on. By Mr. James Steel, .... 267 

Apiarian Notes in Argyllshire in 1882. By Mr. Robeit J. Bennett, . 269 

Experiments with Chilian Seed- Potatoes. By Mr. Thomas King, . 269 
Collection of Mosses for Kelvingrove Museum, Remarks on. By Mr. 

Richard M'Kay, 272 

Sterna hirundiriacea, Notes on Eggs of. By Mr. J. 1^1. Campbell, . 274 

The Flora of Ben Laoigh. By Mr. Peter Ewing, 274 

Notes on the occurrence near Glasgow of the Kingfisher, Alcedo ispida^ 

Lin. By Mr. James Steel, 289 

Notes on a New Process of Preserving Larvae and Pupae. By Mr. Peter 

Cameron, 289 

Land Shells from the Greenock District, Notes on. By Mr, Thomas 

Scott, 290 

Pectoral Sandpiper (Tringa maculatajy Notes on. By Mr. James 

Lumsden, F.Z.S., 291 

The Seal and Whale Fishery of 1882. By Mr. Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., 292 

The Hetercecism of the Uredines. By Mr. Robert Turner, , . . 293 

Bye-Laws of the Natural History Society of Glasgow, .... 301 
Meteorological Notes and Remarks on the State of Vegetation in the 

Public Parks of Glasgow during the year 1882. By Mr. D, M*Lellan, 

Superintendent of Parks, 303 

An Unusual Variety of Helix nemoralis, Notes on. By Mr. Thomas 

Scott, 308 

Land Rail (Orexpratensis), Notes on. By Mr. W. Craibe Angus, . 308 
. Three Human Skulls from Peru, Notes on. By Mr. Henry E. Clark, 

M.R.C.S., . . . , 308 

Shells from the Glasgow and Paisley Canal, Notes on. By Mr. Thomas 

Scott, 310 

Abstract Statement of Accounts, Session 1882-83, 313 

List of Societies, &c., with which Publications are exchanged, . . 314 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



PROCEEDINGS 

OF THE 

NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 

SESSIOnsr 1882-83. 

THE THIETY-FIRST ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING, 
SOCIETY'S ROOMS, 207 BATH STREET. 

September 26th, 1882. 

Professor John Young, M.D., F.G.S., President, in the Chair. 

The Treasurer submitted his Annual Financial Statement, which 
shewed a balance in favour of the Society of £54 10s. Id. 

The Secretary read the report of the Council on the business of 
last session. 

Report of the Council. 

The Council have to report that the number of members added 
to the roll during last session was as follows : — Honorary members, 
2; Corresponding members, 3; Ordinary members, 25. After 
deductions for deaths, resignations, and removals, the total numbers 
at present are — Honorary members, 9; Corresponding members, 29; 
and Ordinary members, 260, or an increase of 13 over last session. 

The usual monthly meetings were well attended, the average 
gathering numbering about 46. The papers read and specimens 
exhibited were fully up to the average in point of interest. 

Early in the session the agreement between the Society and the 
Town Council, "in regard to the formation and development of 
collections of plants and invertebrates" to be kept in Kelvingrove 
Museum, was duly approved of by the Society, and signed on its 
behalf by the President, Treasurer, and Secretary. 

vol,. V, 9 



Digitized by 



Google 



248 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

During the session the Society lost by death three of its number 
among them Dr. Pinkerton, who, although not generally known 
to the members, having joined during the session, gave promise of 
good work for the future. Regret has also to be expressed at 
the death of Dr. Rankin of Carluke, a corresponding member, who 
had always taken a warm interest in the welfare of the Society, 
and had contributed various papers to its Proceedings. 

The last sheets of the Proceedings for the session 1880-81 are in 
the press, and it is expected they will be on the table at next 
meeting. 

The meeting of the British Association which was held this year 
at Southampton was attended by Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., 
V.P., as a delegate from the Society. 

In conclusion, the CouncU beg to express their warmest thanks 
to those members who have contributed to the work of the past 
year, and to express the hope that a like spirit will pervade the 
session now about to begin. 

The Librarian reported : — That during the past winter 71 volumes 
were issued to members, and during the summer session 98 volumes, 
or in all, 169 volumes, as compared with 52 issued during the 
previous session. During the year about 260 volumes, or parts of 
volumes, were added to the Library, only 25 of which were 
purchased. The additions this year have been much larger than 
usual, as some of the arrears due to the Library have been made 
up, and thanks are due to the donors and to the Societies which 
have made exchanges. The Committee are pleased to be able 
to intimate that the Catalogue is now ready for publication and 
only awaits the sanction of the Council to have it printed. The 
Library contains 455 bound volumes which are in circulation, besides 
a large number of valuable works that, owing to their unbound 
condition, it is not advisable to lend out. 

Mr. Robert Turner, Secretary for the Summer Session, read the 
following 

Report of the Sxtmher Session 1882. 

9th May, 1882. 

The first meeting was held in tlje Society's Rooms this evening — 
Mr. Peter Cameron in the Chair. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETT OF GLASGOW. 249 

The evening was entirely devoted to* the exhibition of miscel- 
laneous microscopic objects, the instruments and specimens being 
provided by several members. Mr. Thomas King and Mr. J. C. 
Christie each exhibited a series of beautiful slides. Mr. P. 
Cameron shewed numerous examples of insect preparations 
mounted by himself on a new system, which admits more readily 
of the slides being kept in entomological cabinets beside the 
insects to which they relate. Mr. Robert Turner exhibited some, 
slides illustrative of the potato disease. A magnificent collection 
of rock-sections, prepared by the late Mr. Pratt, attracted much 
attention. Living objects were shewn by Mr. J. Sommerville — who 
devoted himself to the exhibition of some of the infusoria — and by 
Mr. W. Goodwin, who had specimens of Nitella in which cell- 
circulation was going on actively. 



23rd May, 1882. 

Mr. John Broom in the Chair. 

Mr. T. Boyle reported that the first excursion of the season had 
been made on the 6th instant to Possil Marsh, thence along the 
canal to Cadder Wilderness, and over the Kelvin to Balmore and 
the Torrance of Campsie. The weather was fine, but considering 
the mildness of the past winter, it was noted that vegetation was 
not in a forward state. 

Mr R. Turner reported that the second excursion had been made 
on the 20th instant to Vaut and Castlecary Glens. The weather 
was bright and breezy, but the strong east wind was unfavourable 
for the collection of insects. Among the plants observed were 
Paris qtutdrifolia, Polypodium Ih'yopteris, P, Phegopteris, 
Ophioglo88um v^ulgatum, Symphytum tuberomm and Stellarta 
nemorum. Several leaf-fungi were gathered, OEddium Violae, 
Uredo confluens, Uromyces intrusa^ &c. 

Mr. D. A. Boyd read a paper entitled "Notes on the Flora of 
West Kilbride and Ardrossan," postponed from the April meeting — 
[See vol. v., part ii., page 241]. 

Mr. R. Turner read a paper on " The Flora of the Edinburgh 
district," giving a list of the plants he had found, and referring 
especially to the striking contrast between the character of this 
flora and that of Clydesdale, 



Digitized by 



Google 



250 proceedings of the 

13th June, 1882. 

Mr. W. J. Milligan, V.-R, in the Chair. 

Mr, K. M*Kay reported that an excursion had been made, jointly 
with the Geological Society, on the 3rd inst., to Benbowie, near 
Helensburgh. About the base of Benbowie Hill Trollivs europaeus 
was observed to be abundant and in full flower, and several species 
of Carex were gathered. Asplenium viride was found near the top 
of the hill, Valeriana pyrenaica by the roadside, and the moss 
FoHinalis antipyretica (in a fruiting state) in some pools. 

Mr. D. A. Boyd exhibited specimens of Trifolium striatum from 
West Kilbride; Mr. C. Sherry, a fossil ammonite found in the 
soil of the Koyal Botanic Gardens ; Mr. P. Ewing, the rare moss 
0)iJiothecium n/fescens from Tyndrum. and Hellebonts viridis from 
Newmilns; Mr. Noble, a series of rock-specimens collected by him 
on the Malvern Hills ; and Mr. Gregorson, a very beautiful patch 
of Marchantia polymorpha covered with male receptacles. 

Mr. J. Broom gave a geographical sketch of the Avon Valley, 
Linlithgowshire — a subject possessing a special interest from the 
fact that the next excursion of the Society was to be made to that 
district, where a meeting had been arrange*d with the Edinburgh 
Naturalists* Field-Club. 

Mr. W. Goodwin read a paper on " Diatoms," explaining their 
structure and life-history. 



27th June, 1882. 

Mr. Peter Cameron in the Chair. 

Mr. D. A. Boyd reported that an excursion had been made on 
the 17th instant to Manuel, Linlithgowshire, where the members 
of the Society had met those of the Edinburgh Naturalists* Field- 
Club, and proceeded, under the leadersliip of Mr. J. Broom, to 
Carrubber Glen. Among the plants observed were Linaria vulgaris, 
NeoUia Nidus-avis, Hieradum aurantiacuvi, Geranium lu>cidum, 
(Campanula latifolia, Epipactis latifolia, Origanum vulgare^ 
Geranium sylvaticum, Doronicum pardalianches, Knautia arvensis, 
Carex sylvatica, Mdica nutans, Mdica uniflora, Milium effusum^ 
Ranunculus auricomus, Vicia sylvatica, Asplenium Trichomanes, 
Asplenium Ruta-muraria, Cystopteris fragilis, Astraniia major^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 251 

Aquilegia vulgaris, G^rydalis hitea, Chdidonium majtus, and 
Chenopodium Bonus-Henricics. A visit was made to Manuel Mill, 
where there are some venerable yew-trees of great girth. Mr. J. J. 
King captured in the burn and milldam at Manuel, among others, 
the following water-beetles : — Haliplvs ruficolUs, Brychim elevatus, 
Hyjphydncs ovatus, Hydropwiis inaequalis, H, lepidus, H. rivalis, 
H septentrioTialis, H. Davisi, H. depi^ess^is, H.asdmiliSj H, paliifttris, 
&c. ; Colymhetes bistriatus ; Eyidus fuUghwsus, Elmis aenetis, E, 
parallelqpipedtts, and Limnius titberculatiis. Of water bugs he 
collected in the milldam, Cm-ixa Geoffrnyi, C, praeusta, C, striata, 
Velia currens, &c. 

Mr. J. Kenwick exhibited Lepidium Smithii and MimiUus luteus 
from Skelmorlie ; and Mr. C. Sherry, a number of Alpine plants, 
collected on the hills above Ardlui, Loch Lomond. 

Mr. P. Cameron reported that he had recently observed, at 
Ballantrae, Vicia sylvatica and Echium wlgare, growing in abund- 
ance on the banks of the Stinchar. 

An exhibition of microscopic objects, illustrative of Botany, 
followed. Mr. Goodwin shewed a series of beautifully finished 
slides of Diatoms, and several living species of Fleurostgnia, the 
movements of which were watched with much interest. Messrs. 
Cameron, Coutts, T. King, and White also exhibited many 
interesting objects. 



1st August, 1882. 

Mr. John Kirsop, V.-R, in the Chair. 

Mr. P. Ewing exhibited some rare mosses and lichens collected 
on Ben Laiogh; Mr. D. A. Boyd, some interesting flowering plants 
from Killin; Mr. J. Broom, Sedum refieocum from Prestonpans, 
Verhascum Thapsus, and other plants from Manuel, and a curious 
doubleheaded monstrosity of Lemdodon Taraxacum; Mr. C. Sherry, 
some abnoraial forms of Trifolium repens and Drosera rotundifoUa, 
Mr. Thomas King shewed specimens of Lactuca muralis from 
Innellan — the first recorded instance of the occurrence of this plant 
in the Clyde district ; Mr. K. Turner, a series of Swedish plants, 
rare or unknown in Britain; Mr. J. Coutts, slides of recent 
polyzoa, beautifully mounted ; and Mr. J. Kirsop, a species of cock- 
chafer from Barrhill, Ayrshire. 



Digitized by 



Google 



252 PBOOEEDIKGS OF THS 

Mr. P. Cameron delivered an address on " Microscopic manipula- 
tion and mounting," in which he gave full instructions as to the 
instruments required, and the best mode of procedure, with many 
useful and practical hints as to the preparation, at a small cost, of 
implements which would serve all ordinary purposes in microscopic 
dissection and examination. He exhibited a handy form of dissect- 
ing microscope which he had constructed at a trifling expense, and 
which he had found of great service in making preparations of 
insects. 



15th August, 1882. 

Mr. P. Cameron in the Chair. 

Mr. J. Steel reported that the members had made the fifth 
excursion of the season on the 12th instant, to Bute. Proceeding 
in a steam-launch from Craigmore, they dredged along the coast 
for four hours. The day was fair, the weather favourable, and the 
trip a most eiyoyable one ; but from a scientific point of view the 
results were not very satisfactory. Few living molluscs were 
brought up; but ordinary and brittle starfishes, and sea-urchins 
were got in considerable abundance. Diatoms were not awanting 
in the mud, but foraminifera were almost entirely absent. Among 
the molluscs found were Scrohicularia prtsf7iattr.a and Turritella 
terebra. 

Mr. D. A Boyd exhibited a few rare plants collected on the 
West Kilbride shore of the Firth, below the farm of Chapelton. 
One of these, Lepturus filiformis^ was not known to occur in the 
Clyde district till a few years ago, when it was discovered by one 
of the members, Mr. Thomas Scott, of Greenock, growing in 
abundance in salt marshes on the shore above Gourock ; another, 
Scirpus Savii, though distinctly a AVest Coast plant, is only very 
local in its occurrence* 

Dr. James Stirton, r.L.S., exhibited a species of lichen, 
Stereocaulon, from the Tararua Mountains in New Zealand. The 
pale-bluish bodies known as cephalodia, which are seated on its 
main stem, have so far been a puzzle to scientific men, their exact 
function in the economy of the plant being unknown, and some 
even holding the opinion that they are distinct parasitic organisms. 
He then exhibited a lichen usually classed with the genus 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OP GLASGOW. 263 

Sphasrophororiy but which, from certain distinct peculiarities, he 
considered should more properly be ranged under a new sub-genus, 
and which he had named Thysanocaulon Pink&rtoni, the specific 
term being given in honour of the late Dr. Pinkerton, an esteemed 
member of the Society. On this species, also, pale-bluish cephalodia 
are observed in great abundance. He then shewed, and described 
at some length, specimens of all the known kinds of the lichen-family 
Sphaerophoron, One of these, Sphaerophoron compressum, is probably 
the most cosmopolitan of all lichens, being found alike in the Old 
World and the New, at the Antipodes and at home, on the tops of 
lofty mountains and at sea-level, in icebound lands and in the 
tropics. He brought before the meeting examples of this lichen 
from Dunoon and from New Zealand. He exhibited specimens of 
Sphaeroplhoron australe from the southern hemisphere, and also 
from this country, the latter collected by the late Mr. M*Kinlay. 
In a patch shewn S, cornpressum and S, australe were growing 
together, and from this circumstance, in connection with others, 
Dr. Stirton said he had come to the conclusion that the latter was 
not a true species, but merely a form of the other. 

Mr. D. Gregorson read an interesting paper on " Ben Ghnuis," 
Arran. Ho described its situation and rugged grandeur, and 
referred to the magnificent prospect to be had in clear weather from 
its summit. Besides treating the subject from a geological aspect, 
he made many interesting remarks with regard to the animals and 
plants observed on the mountain. The Tawny Owl is not uncommon, 
and is sometimes troublesome and aggressive. The flora includes 
Saxifraga stdlaris, Alchemilla alpina, and other mountain plants. 
Both Dro8&i*a rotundifolia and Drosera anglica are found, and he 
had noted as a curious fact that they did not there grow together, 
but in separate belts or patches. 

Mr. P. Cameron exhibited a collection of insects, arranged on an 
admirable principle, so as to shew together the food-plant, the 
larva, the imago, the cocoon, and dissections of the various organs. 



29th August, 1882. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., in the Chair. 

Mr. Thomas King reported that on Saturday, the 26th, the 
members had made an excursion to Torrance Glen, East Kilbride. 



Digitized by 



Google 



254 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Gircaea luMiana grew luxuriantly in some parts of the glen. The 
ripe, ruby-like, somewhat insipid fruit of Ruhus saxatilis was 
gathered. Polypodium Dryopteris was not uncommon. Among 
the mosses foimd was Hookeria lucens in fruit. The abimdance of 
agarics and other large fimgi drew, however, most attention. Of 
such plants the following were collected : — Agmi^us vaginatus^ A, 
rubescens, A, rutilaiw, A. teireus, A, laccatics, A, epixanthus^ A, 
fascicvlaris ; Lactariu^ insulsus, L^ hlennius, L. quiehis, Russula 
nigricans, B, adusta, E. heterophylla, R. foetens, K emetica, R, 
fellea, Cantharellus cibarius, Boletus flavics, Pohjporus betuUnus, 
Jlydnuin r&pandum. Several leaf-fungi were observed, Puccinia 
Saniculae being especially plentiful. The Chantarelle and the 
Hydnum were collected for cooking purposes. Several of the 
members explained to the meeting the modes of cooking they had 
adopted, and expressed their satisfaction with the two kinds made 
use of, as pleasant and wholesome articles of diet. 

Mr. T. Boyle exhibited a piece of grey chalk obtained in boring 
the Channel Tunnel, and containing a profusion of foraminifera. 
Mr. P. Ewing exhibited a white-flowered form of Centaurea ?iigra, 
some other abnormal plants, and a curious gall growing on a 
Hieracium, that of an insect of the genus Anlax. Mr. D. Gregorson 
shewed specimens of Carduus acanthoides from Scotstoun ; and Mr. 
Thomas King, a series of rare mosses which he had collected on the 
Ochils, on the 22nd of August, including Leskea rufescens, 
Encalypta ciliata, Bryum julaceum, and Diphyscium foliosum. 

Mr. Thomas King read a paper on the Equisetaceae. He 
explained their structure and the morphological significance of the 
different parts, and described the way in which the branches are 
disposed in whorls at the nodes. The sheath is generally con- 
sidered as being formed of leaves united at their base, but Sachs 
regards it as simply a leaf-sheath toothed at its margin. He 
described very fully the internal structure of tlie stem, and referred 
to the fossil representatives of the family. 

In the discussion tliat followed, the Chainnan, Mr. Young, 
described some interesting fossils lately discovered in Liddesdale, 
which are considered to belong to the same group of plants. 

Mr. R Turner read a paper on " Spring Rambles in Sussex.'* 
He described the Chalk formation as observed at Lewes, and entered 
more fully into the geological features of the cliffs at Hastings, 
which belong to the Wealden series, exhibiting fossils and rock- 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 256 

specimens from the district. He also spoke of the early spring 
flora of Sussex, shewing specimens which he had collected there 
of some plants unknown in Scotland. 



September 12th, 1882. 

Mr. Peter Cameron in the Chair. 

Mr. Thomas King reported that the members had made an 
excursion to Troon on the preceding Saturday, and the profusion of 
rare plants found had been a sufficient reward of their journey. 
Most of these were introduced plants, growing on the ballast heaps; 
but some were undoubted natives. The resemblance of the flora 
to that of similar places on the East Coast is very striking. The 
following list will prove what a rich field Troon is: — 

Ranunculus scelei^atus, Cakile mantima (specimens of extra- 
ordinary size), Dij)Iotaxis muralis (plentiful — not given in Hennedy^s 
"Flora") Lepidium Draha (not in Kennedy's ** Flora" — seems to 
be spreading in Scotland), Senebiera Coronopus ("very rare" — 
Kennedy), Senebiera didyma (not in Kennedy's " Flora," and not 
mentioned by Kooker as occurring in Scotland ; a native of South 
America), Sagina maritima^ Spergularia tmbra, Malva rotundifolia^ 
Erodium cictctarium, Vicia liybrida, Potentilla reptans, Ligustimim 
8coticum,Cardmi8 tenuifimus ("very rare" — Kennedy), Convolvulus 
arvensis (plentiful, "very rare" — Kennedy), Lycopsis arvensis 
(a weed in station garden), Anagallis caet^lea, Atrip)lex Bahingtoniy 
Salsoli Kali, Polygonum Raii (plentiful), Phalaris Canariensis (not 
native), Poa rigida (not given in Kennedy's " Flora "), Hardeum 
murinum (plentiful by wayside — not given in Kennedy's "Flora"), 
Psamma arenaria. Of molluscs, Bulimus acutus was very 
common on the sandhills, and Helix capefrata was found in abund- 
ance and in very fine condition. 

Xn exhibition of microscopic objects, illustrative of zoology, 
followed. Mr. Sommerville and Mr. Goodwin shewed living 
objects, while several other members had some beautiful slides 
on exhibition. 



23rd September, 1882. 

The last excursion of the season was made this day to the Bridge 
of Weir. The weather was unfavourable, and after a few hours 



Digitized by 



Google 



256 PROCBBDINOS OF THB 

spent in the woods, during which many fungi and mosses were 
gathered, the members took tea in the Eanfurly HoteL 

During the summer session there was a good attendance at both 
meetings and excursions. The largest attendance on any evening 
was about fifty, the lowest nineteen, the average of the eight 
meetings being 30 members. 

Mr. Peter Cameron, Convener of the Museum Committee, re- 
ported as follows : — 

The Committee are not yet in a position to announce that any 
material has been, placed in the custody of Mr. Paton and his 
assistant Mr. Campbell, as it was considered best not to hand over 
specimens to the Museum until a fairly representative collection 
was brought together. Considerable progress has, however, been 
made in arranging specimens in various branches; and it is expected 
that before the New Year more or less extensive collections will be 
fully mounted, named, and catalogued. In Mosses the work is so 
far advanced that the specimens only require cataloguing, so that 
by November the Committee hope to deposit in the Museum a 
collection which will be fairly complete as regards the British 
species, and which will contain the greater part of the Scottish Mosses. 
The Committee have also to report that the botanical ijiembers 
arranged, and to some extent, critically examined, two Cabinets of 
plants which belonged to the old Botanical Society of Glasgow, and 
which now form part of the Kelvingrove Museum collections, 
having been presented to that institution by the few surviving 
members of the above-named Society. 



The reports were all unaninaously approved of. 

The Chairman, Professor Young, before retiring from office, gave a 
short address on the Progress of Zoology in Scotland. 

The following Office-Bearers for the session were then elected : — 
President, John A. Harvie-Brown, F.Z.S., F.K.S.E. <fec.; Vice- 
Presidents, John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot.; Professor John Cleland, 
M.D., F.R.S.; and Robert Mason; Secretary, John M. Campbell; 
Treasurer, Robert J. Bennett; Librarian, J. J. F. X. King; members 
of Council, John Young, F.G.S.; Thomas King, Robert Turner, 
George J. Combe, Peter Cameron, M. C. Duff, J. B. Murdoch, 
F.S.A. Scot., Richard Mackay, and Peter Ewing. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTT OP GLASGOW. 257 

Mr. Peter Cameron read a note of alterations, proposed by him, 
in the Society's Kules. These were unanimously remitted to the 
Council for consideration and. to be reported on at a future meeting. 



October 31st, 1882. 

Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.KS.E., F.Z.S., M.B.O.U., 
President, in the Chair. 

The following were elected ordinary members of the Society : — 
Dr. AlexanderHamiltonHowe, F.K. A.S., &c.,Hullerhirst, Stevenston; 
John Brand, 6 Gayfield Street; George G. Mackenzie, 111 Cathcart 
Koad; James Noble, 29 Stanley Street; Miss. Adelaide Broadhurst, 
Park School, Lynedoch Street; and Miss Josephine M*Kean, Park 
School, Lynedoch Street. 

The Chairman then gave the following address: — 

Address by Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.K.S.E., F.Z.S., 
M.B.O.U., President. 

Gentlemen, — My first pleasing duty is to thank you cordially 
for the honour you have just conferred upon me by electing 
me your President. My second, in accepting the honour, is to 
express the hope that I may be able to carry out the Presidential 
duties to your satisfaction, though I had honestly hoped that some 
other member of our Society, with more general natural history 
tastes and less marked specialities than I possess, would have been 
proposed and elected to the honourable position. 

I propose to-night to glance at the work done by our Society 
during the past two sessions, 1880-81, and 1881-82. Necessarily 
I must limit this part of my address to an almost bare enumeration 
of the titles of papers. Thereafter I propose to throw out some 
hints for consideration regarding future work, indicating certain 
headings in vertebrata as worthy of attention. 

At the meeting in October, 1880, Mr. Peter Cameron read a 
paper on "A Simple Method of Mounting Objects for Microscopic 
Examination," and Mr. Mahony contributed an interesting paper 
" On Shell Mounds in the North of Ireland." At this meeting Mr. 
Thomas King read a record of the proceedings of the summer 
session just concluded, shewing the work done at the various 



Digitized by 



Google 



258 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

meetings and excursions of the season — chiefly botanical — and 
giving summaries of the various papers read. 

At the second meeting, also in October, Mr. E. J. Bennett gave 
us his annual "Apiarian Notes," for 1880, and Mr. A. S. Wilson 
read a paper "On Mimicry, or Protective Resemblances among 
Animals," a subject of vSst interest, as has been abundantly shewn 
by the writings of the greatest naturalist of the age — the late Dr. 
Charles Darwin. 

At the November meeting, Mr. C. W. Amott Stewart con- 
tributed an interesting account of the habits of the Australian 
Lyre-bird. Prof. J. Cleland described a collection of Human 
Skulls from Calcutta, while our valued Secretary, Mr. J. M. 
Campbell, gave us a record of the occurrence of the White-beaked 
Dolphin, near the Bell Rock, in September, 1880. 

At the December meeting, the exhibition of the Indian Human 
Skulls at the previous meeting was now supplemented by an 
elaborate paper on the subject by Prof. Cleland. 

At the January (1881) meeting, Mr. John Young read a paper 
upon the genus Synodadia, a Carboniferous polyzoon, and described 
a new species ; Mr. D. M*Lellan gave us his Annual Report on the 
state of the Public Parks, with Meteorological Observations for 
1880 ; and Mr. Thomas King gave a practical exposition of the 
Structure of an Orange. Mr. Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., correspond- 
ing member, contributed a paper " On the Natural History of the 
Cetacea," while I, myself, read " Ornithological Notes for 1880-81." 

At the February Meeting, Mr. T. Southwell gave us a record of 
the occurrence of the Atlantic Right-Whale on the east coast of 
Scotland. 

At the March meeting the papers read were " On some of the 
rarer plants found in the neighbourhood of Greenock," by Mr. 
Thos. Scott ; " A contribution to the study of the British Carbo- 
niferous Chitonidae," by our valued corresponding member, Mr. 
Robert Etheridge, jun., and an amusing essay, "On the Study 
of Ornithology," by Mr. James C. Christie, which gave occasion 
for a somewhat animated discussion on cruelty to animals. 

At the last meeting of this, the thirtieth session, in April, papers 
read were " On St. Abbs Head and its Bird Life," by myself ; "On 
the Birds of the East of Sutherland," by our newly-elected Life 
Member, and well-known ornithologist — Mr. T. E. Buckley ; and 
" On the Mammalia of North- west Perthshire," by Mr. Wm. Horn. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 259 

At the first meeting of the 31st session, in September, 1881, Mr. 
R. J. Bennetl read his " Apiarian Report" for 1881, and Mr. ^Thomas 
King read a paper on the cultivation of the Potato in its native 
country, Chile. The report of the summer session was submitted 
by Mr. R. Turner, and our thanks are due to him for the careful 
and elaborate way in which he has drawn it out. It refers chiefly 
to botanical discoveries and records of excursions, and contains 
abstracts of the papers read. 

At the October meeting, our valued late President — Dr. John 
Young — delivered an able address upon " The Relations of Natural 
History to Medicine." 

The papers read at the November meeting were Mr. J. M. 
CampbelFs " Notes on a short Sun Fish," caught in the Firth of 
Clyde ; and Prof. Cleland's " On the Viscera of the Porpoise and 
White-beaked Dolphin." 

At the December meeting I gave a locally descriptive paper on 
" The Islands and Rocks of Haskeir, and their Bird Life," while 
Mr. Campbell read " Remarks on Method in Collecting Natural 
History Specimens." 

At the January (1882) meeting, of papers read there were Mr. 
D. M*Lellan's "Meteorological Notes for 1881, and remarks on the 
Vegetation of the Parks;" " Ornithological Notes from the Loch 
Lomond district for 1881," by Mr. James Lumsden ; and " On the 
Flannan Isles and their Bird Life," by myself. 

At the February meeting Mr. Thomas Southwell, F.Z.S., of 
Norwich, corresponding member, contributed a paper " On the Seal 
and Whale-fishery of 1881," and Mr. Thomas Scott, " Notes on 
Goniocypria mi&a" 

At the March meeting Mr. W. Horn read " Additional Notes on 
the Birds of the North-west of Perthshire." 

At the concluding meeting of the 31st session, in April, Mr. W. 
Horn gave a paper on the "Mammalia of Buchan ;" Mr. J. Young, 
'* Notes on the Fossils found in a thin bed of impure Limestone, at 
Glencart, near Dairy ; " and Mr. D. A. Boyd, " Notes on the Flora 
of West Kilbride and Ardrossan." 

Besides the papers enumerated, there were, at each meeting, 
numerous exhibitions of specimens, many of exceeding interest and 
value, and frequently introduced by notes which, though not so 
characterized, might, with all propriety, have been described as 
" papers." These, as well as the papers I have mentioned, ranged 



Digitized by 



Google 



260 PROCBBDINGS OF THB 

over many brauches of natural history, mammalian, ornithological, 
icthyological, reptilian, entomological, palaeontological and botanical, 
and shew the wideness of the field over which our members are at 
work. 

I may now be allowed to indicate what may be admitted as part 
of our legitimate future work, restricting, however, my remarks to 
one branch of the vertebrates which appears to me to be that 
most deserving of attention, and, at the same time, the least 
attended to. 

I think there can be little doubt amongst naturalists that of all 
the divisions of the vertebra ta. Fish are at present the most deserv- 
ing of special study. A much larger field is hei-e opened to 
scientific workers, and also to field naturalists, than in any other 
division of the animal kingdom, while, perhaps, less is known 
about fish, even of our fresh-water species, than about the members 
of any other group. 

I have myself paid some attention to our Salmonidae, more 
especially during the past two seasons, and have realized what an 
immense field remains fallow and unworked. Vast strides, it is 
true, have been made in our knowledge of the salmon and common 
trout, and many other species, both from an economical and from a 
scientific standpoint ; witness the successful labours of Sir J. G. 
Maitland at the Howietoun Fisheries, and those of other breeding 
establishments, and the scientific work of Dr. Francis Day, Dr, 
Giinther, and others. Witness, also, the importance attached 
now-a-days to exhibitions illustrative of everything connected with 
fish and fisheries ; such as the Norfolk and the Edinburgh Exhi- 
bitions have been, and the Great International Fisheries Exhibition 
of London mil be in 1883. 

I have a hope, therefore, that what I am about to lay before you 
may sufficiently interest some of our members so as to set them 
thinking and working, both in the field and in the study, to do 
something in this fertile field of enquiry and to keep moving 
with the times. Although I had some idea of many of the 
questions respecting fish and fisheries still awaiting solution, 
yet I have not trusted myself to speak as one having authority, 
and I therefore asked my friend. Dr. Francis Day, of Chelten- 
ham, to roughly sketch out the more salient points. The 
following notes are therefore mainly his ; and the thanks of our 
members are due to him for the hints which, I trust, will prove 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. • 261 

valuable starting points, and will be quickly and promptly taken 
up by such of our workers as can find time and opportunity to 
follow them up. 

Amongst subjects almost too numerous to include or catalogue, 
relating to the Natural History of Fish, and which still require 
attention, the following are perhaps somewhat prominent : — 

a. Local Lists — care being taken to distinguish the species, and 
to append the vernacular name or names. If more names than one 
are known the reasons of the difference should be indicated, and 
whether they are due to age, size, colour, sex, season, &c. Thus in 
Salrno salar — our common salmon — we find various names at 
different ages and seasons, and these varying at different localities 
and on different rivers ; and it is desirable to collect lists of 
names in order to clear up much still-existing confusion. We find 
varieties of trout also in certain localities bearing distinctive local 
names, such as the " Fossae " of the west coast of Sutherland, a 
trout which has betaken itself to the tidal waters and the mouths 
of rivers. Much might be learned too, I believe, from the 
Gaelic names of British fishes, if such could be collected by a Gaelic 
scholar. The English Dialect Society are at present preparing a 
glossary of fish names. Could we not have a Gaelic one ] 

b. The Breeding of Fish. — Where are the eggs of each species 
deposited? Under gravel (ex. salmon), in strings (ex. perch), in 
mud (?carp and roach), in nests (ex. stickleback), attached to the 
valves of dead shells (ex. lepidogaster), floating on the sea (ex. 
cod), &c., &c. 

c. The Number of Eggs deposited by each species, and whether 
dependent on size, or age of fish; at what season they are deposited. — 
I may state here that in a certain inaccessible loch in Sutherland- 
shire, I have killed trout in June and July full of highly-developed 
ova, and these were far from uncommon. The loch is directly fed 
from streams containing much melted snow in most seasons, and 
after severe winters — such as 1879-80, and 1880-81 — large masses 
of snow lie unmelted, or slowly melting through, or far into, the 
summer. Have the ova been retarded in their development in 
these trout by the temperature 1 Hence arise the queries — How 
long do eggs of various species remain prior to hatching ? What 
are the effects of temperature, and of accidents to the fish, on their 
hatching powers 1 What are the effects of changes of water, either 
as to quality, depth, &c. ? What are the results of rapid vicissi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



262 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

tudes of temperature'? Our ignorance of these matters is still 
profound. 

d. Enumerate the Enemies to Fish Eggs. Do they consume them, 
injure them, poison them (as in the case of pollution)? Do injuries 
to the embryo, or accidents at the time of fecundation, have any 
effects, and, if so, what are they^ — During the past year or two I 
have collected a good many deformed trout, keeping them in 
spirits. In one loch in Islay occur the deformed trout usually 
known as tailless trout of May. All the trout in this loch possess 
this peculiarity, which is simply an anchylosing or welding together 
of the tail-rays, and has been anatomically treated of by Dr. 
Traquair of Edinburgk* In another loch, in Kirkcudbright, 
exactly the same deformity occurs. Both these lochs are about 
1600 feet above the sea, and cannot be subject to any pollution. 
In a stream in Lanarkshire again, the same deformity occurs, and is 
extended to the back fin. This stream runs directly from numer- 
ous lead mines, and the trout grow fat and rich in flavour. This 
is suggestive of arsenic poisoning. In the river Carron this 
deformity has begun to appear — or a modified form of it — within 
the last few years, or if it existed prior to this has only lately 
assumed noticeable proportions. The Carron is much polluted by 
paper mill refuse — esparto grass, and chemicals. 

e. Is the Distribution of Fish affected by mammals or birds carry- 
ing fertilised ova from one locality to another? — Thus a trout 
might swallow fertilized salmon or trout eggs, and a bird of prey 
might catch this trout and carry it to some secluded tarn, loch, or 
stream, to prey upon it ; and if the fertilized ova fell into the 
water, might not the young fish be born and populate the water 
previously barren? So, perhaps, might ova be carried in the fur of 
water animals. May not the land-locked true salmon found in 
certain lochs of New Brunswick — Salmo gloveri — have been thus 
introduced ? In this place I may instance the very rapid increase 
that is possible in lochs and streams which have become stocked 
with trout for the first time, having had considerable experience of 
this, by personal experiments in Sutherland. In 1878 our angling 
party stocked a chain of barren lochs with about 6 or 8 dozen small 
bum trout. The following: year the bum connecting these lochs 
swarmed with the fry. Trout grew from \ lb. to 1 lb. the first 

* Proc. Royal Phys. Soc. Edin. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 263 

year, and up to 4 J lbs. the second year. By 1882, these lochs all 
abounded with trout, but so small as to be not worth catching. 
The original food supply was marvellously plentiful, tadpoles and 
fresh-water shrimps abounding, hence the rapid growth. The 
spawning ground was equally fine and extensive, hence, assisted by 
the absence of natural enemies, came the increase in numbers ; and 
hence also the reaction, the too rapid increase of the fish, and rapid 
deterioration in size, from the consequent decrease of food. Another 
loch we stocked had poor spawning ground, but a fine extent of 
good feeding. Here, between 1878 and 1882, trout grew from 
J lb. to 4 J lbs., or larger, whilst a fair average is still maintained — 
viz., about J lb. 

In a loch near Durness, where formerly there were no fish, — 
situated at the head of the bum which finally falls down into the 
dark depths of the Smoo Cave, which was fishless above the fall, 
but contained trout below it and in the cave, and in the stream 
of 30 or 40 yards between it and the sea, — there are now abundance 
in both loch and bum. This year I got 29 trout, 7| Iba, out of 
bum and loch together. Six trout were caught about 6 years ago 
below the fall, carried up and placed in the bum, by a native — Mr. 
MacNeil Campbell, of Smoo. The crofters, while working at their 
peats, have seen the fish rising on the loch; but the above 
basket was the first ever taken out by anybody. I may have more 
to say upon this subject at another time, and there are some curious 
facts relating to peculiar coloration which are deserving of special 
treatment. One more instance I will relate. Our party stocked 
the upper water of a limestone bum, formerly fishless, above a 
certain fall, by putting in about a dozen trout from below the falL 
This was in 1880. In 1882 they had become fairly plentiful, and 
reached a fair average size, but did not grow so rapidly as others 
introduced to larger sheets of still water. This experiment appears 
to me to have a bearing upon a question, as to relative growth of 
fish in rapidly running water, and in still dead reaches, ponds, or 
lochs. The feeding in this case was undeniable, and quite equal 
to that in some of the lochs referred to above. 

/. Observations upon Fish Life-history, and the changes from the 
period of their birth to that of maturity. — In other words, the 
history of the development of each species. 

g. Observations upon Fish kept in Aquaria, rate of growth, 
variations caused by changes to distant localitieis (as trout to the 

VOL. V. T 



Digitized by 



Google 



264 PBOGBBDINGS OF THE 

Antipodes). — I can instance the almost marvellous change upon 
trout taken from a peaty bum and put in water coming from granite 
and limestone, and the silvery beauty of the trout of Loch Crass- 
pul, near Durness, where the water is blue, and the bottom pure 
white sand. The results of fish being kept in large and small 
pieces of water should be noted ; effects of running streams through 
fish-ponds upon the rapidity of growth ; the fecundity or sterility 
of fish in ponds ; observations on transport of living fish. On this 
I may remark how invaluable is a piece of water-weed taken from 
the place minnows are caught, and placed in the minnow can, 
and how imnecessary and often deleterious it is to change the 
water if the weed is used. I have kept minnows alive for weeks 
and months in aquaria, never changing the water. I have carried 
minnows north, and kept them alive for 10 days in an ordinary 
minnow-case. Ten thousand young fish came alive to the Edin- 
burgh Fishery Exhibition from Eussia. 

h. The Migrations of Fish, more especially of marine forms, whether 
diurnal, seasonal, or for breeding purposes ; whether due to atmo- 
spheric changes, or consequent upon presence of food, &c. 

i. The Food of Fish. — All fish should be opened to find what 
they have been feeding upon, some being carnivorous, others 
herbivorous. — But feeding often changes, and is due to circum- . 
stances. Some ^h feed at the bottom, some at midwater, some 
at the top. Here is a large field of observation for the angler- 
naturalist. 

Besides the above there are innumerable headings, a few of which 
only can be mentioned here. Some of these are: — How do fish 
live below ice? The effects of sound and of electricity upon fish; 
tenacity of life in certain forms; insensibility to pain; recovery 
from injuries ; attraction by light ; production of soimds ; affection 
by extremes of cold and heat, and the nature of their suspended 
animation. 

The vastness of the material for the study of the British Fishes 
alone is, it will thus be seen, a rich field in itself, to the exclusion 
of all the other vertebrates. I had hoped to have found space to 
speak of the Eeptilia and Mammalia, but must leave these groups out 
for the present. Ornithology I have not touched upon, because it 
is my own speciality, and you may perhaps hear more about it at 
some other time. 

In conclusion, I may again impress upon you my belief that 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 265 

Ichthyology is undoubtedly the branch most clamant for attention 
at present. With Dr. Francis Day's assistance I have endeavoured 
to give you new fields to conquer, new steps in the ladder of 
science to surmount, and have called your attention to what and 
where to observe, and how to record some unravelled points in 
this field, and I hope some fruit may be borne in the future from 
these young shoots, to our own profit and to the advantage of the 
Society. 

Mr. W. Craibe Angus exhibited a very fine specimen of the Pine 
Marten, MaHes sylvestris, Nilsson, killed near Arrochar, on which 
he made the following remarks : — 

I am indebted to Mr. MacCulloch for the opportunity of shewing 
in the flesh this very beautiful example of the Maries foina of 
MacGillivray, which may be regarded as one of the rarest of 
British mammals. It was received by Mr. MacCulloch from Mr. 
Glen, of Stronafyne, Arrochar, from whom I have the following 
notes on its capture: — 

On a morning in December 1882, while Mr. Glen was on his 
rounds in Glenloin, at the head of Loch Long, attended by his 
shepherds and their helps, he was startled by the barking of the 
dogs, which were struggling to get under a pile of branches and 
rubbish in proximity to a cairn much frequented by foxes and 
swarming with rabbits. On their approach, the Marten was 
discovered boldly faciug the dogs, and making a snarling, hissing 
noise. While thus engaged, one of the shepherds felled it by a 
blow on the head with his staff. 

Some thirty years ago, another example was killed by a fox- 
hunter on Saccoth, the farm adjoining Stronafyne. My informant 
states that before leaving last spring he observed tracks or foot- 
marks, which an examination of the well-rounded foot of the 
Marten enabled him to identify. He is therefore of opinion that 
these animals still exist in the locality, and that the cairn referred 
to was a breeding place of the species last season. It is gratifying 
to add that he has heard of no depredations of the Marten 
among domestic animals, so that here at least there can be no 
reasonable excuse for its extermination. 

The present specimen is a male, which, I think, has been bred 
this year. Its length is 19 inches, and the tail measures 10 inches, 
with the fur extending 4 J inches beyond the point. The teeth 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 PROOBBDIKGB OF THB 

are pure white, and the claws sharp and not worn as I have seen 
them in adults. 

This mammal is of great elegance and beauty. When in action 
its movements are so rapid that motion alone is visible, the form 
not being distinguishable. It is a swift runner, a good swimmer, 
and can spring a great distance. An old keeper in Mar forest 
informed me that he had often seen the Marten swim across the 
Dee and return with rabbits to its young, but that it crossed the 
mountain streams at a bound. 

In repose, the great beauty of the species consists in the relation 
of its bushy tail to the length of the legs. The hind legs are 3^ 
inches longer than the fore, and the tail, including the fur, about 4 
inches longer than the hind legs. The head is triangular, and the 
nose protrudes considerably beyond the lips. The head and fore 
parts would look weak, if not insignificant, but for the colouring of 
the throat. In the example before us, which does not differ greatly 
from four others from Aberdeenshire which I have examined in 
the flesh, the throat is of a rich orange yellow brown, harmoniously 
blending with the flesh tints of the lips and inner surface of the 
ears; and this, I am satisfied, is in part effected by a change of 
colour, and not wholly by a change of fur. The change is here 
almost complete, but the throat being dotted with greyish brown — 
the colour in the cub state — it is sufficiently incomplete to shew 
the transition. The colouring is richest in midwinter, and then 
in some measure resembles the colouring of the breast of the 
Merganser. In examples killed in summer I have seen the throat 
faded to a dry silvery white; while two adults, killed in winter, 
had the teeth broken and irregular, and the throat colouring silvery 
brown, thus corresponding with the description of the Buck Marten 
of British authors. 

I am satisfied that these variations, considerable though they be, 
depend upon the season, and the age of the individual; also that 
they are not greater than in the fox, and other mammals that 
might be named ; and that the Pine and Beech Marten are the 
same species. This opinion has been confirmed by a Htter of cubs 
I saw in Glentanner, in which the throat was hardly lighter than 
the general colouring of the body. 

The outer fur, which is of considerable length and of a deep 
lustrous brown, is lighter on the line of the back and crown of the 
head, and becomes darker towards the nostrils. The legs, tail, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 267 

lower parts are darkest, ajid the general variation is chiefly pro- 
duced by shadows. The inner fur is short, thick, and of a greyish 
tint at the roots. 

The stomach of the Arrochar specimen contained flesh, but this 
was so far digested that it could not be identified. The Mar 
forest keeper, already referred to, kept a Marten in confinement, 
and fed it chiefly on porridge and milk. It was easily tamed and 
became very affectionate. 

Mr. James Steel exhibited specimens of Succinea oblonga^ Drap., 
obtained plentifully on heaps of limestone shale at Auchenskeith, 
Dairy, in July 1880, and on these he made the following remarks: — 

The day was very hot, the sun beating on the heaps with 
iminterrupted vigour from morning till night ; and it surprised me 
very much to see such small animals alive and in good health under 
such conditions, there being no moisture nearer them than the 
Dusk "Water, fully a quarter of a mile off. This locality is of 
some interest, as the general habitat given is "dry ditches near the 
sea-coast;" and Dr. Jeffreys says,* "Mr. Waller discovered this 
shell among turf-bogs at Finnoe, Co. Tipperary," but mentions no 
other inland locality. The only Scotch locality, where the species 
is said to have been found by Mr. Kenyon, is indefinitely stated 
as " near Glasgow," there being no date. Dr. Jeffreys also states 
that this shell is very local in England. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., exhibited a small collection of 
recent Gasteropod shells, including specimens belonging to the 
allied genera Patella, Fismrella, Parmophorusy Galypiraeay Gr&pi- 
dtda, Pileopsis, Hipponyx, Chiton, Chitonellvs, Dentalium, &c. Mr. 
John Young, F.G.S., described the geological range of these 
molluscs, and referred to the occurrence of several of the genera in 
the carboniferous limestone strata around Glasgow. 

The Secretary (Mr. J. M. Campbell) exhibited specimens of the 
European Pond Tortoise, Emys Etiropaea, Schn., from Prussia; Eggs 
of Einged Snake, Natrix torquata, Ray; and Epiphragm of Roman 
Snail, Helix pomatia, L., on all of which he made some remarks. 

Mr. J. C. Dougall exhibited a fine specimen of the Golden 
Eagle, Aquila chrysaetvsy L., killed at Strachur, Loch Fyne, on 
27th September last. 

Mr. Robert Mason read some notes on Anacharis alsinastrum. 
This plant, which was introduced from America, has spread very 
* "British Concbology," vol i., p. 165. 



Digitized by 



Google 



268 PROOEBDINGS OP THE 

rapidly over all the country. Mr. Mason described the methods 
by which its distribution might be effected, and gave instances 
of the annoyance caused by the rapid growth of the weed, choking 
up what might otherwise be open pools or lakes ; and in the course 
of his remarks he referred to the operations at present going on for 
its removal from Hogganfield Loch, near Glasgow. 



28th November, 1882. 

Professor John Cleland, M.D., F.RS., Vice-President, in the 
chair. 

The following gentlemen were elected Ordinary Members of the 
Society: — Messrs. Seton M Thomson, Kinnaird House, Stirling- 
shire; James Brown, Bendarroch, Garelochhead; John Ehind, 82 
Hill Street, Gamethill; William Buchanan, 34 Steeple Street, 
Kilbarchan; and George Douglas Gordon, 394 Duke Street. 

Mr. David Eobertson, F.L.S., F.G.S., exhibited some Foramini- 
fera, new to Britain. Mr. Eobertson stated that in looking over 
some of his old moimtings of Ftyraminifera he had found a few 
which, from various causes, had not been determined. By the kind 
assistance of Mr. H. B. Brady, F.RS., he was now able to exhibit 
the following species, all of which were new to Britain : — 

Miliolina contorta, D'Orb. L, aperta, Sequenza. 

M. Auberiana, D'Orb. Polymorphina sororia^ var. 

M, vemtsta, Keuss. cuspidata, 

M, labiosa, D'Orb. P. rotundata, Bomeman. 

Lagena Rizzae, Sequenza. P. lanceolata, Eeuss. 

The Chairman exhibited as specimens of spiim bifida, illustrating 
laws of growth, the skulls and vertebral columns of three newly- 
born infants. After explaining fully the causes which had led to 
the divergence in the specimens from the normal character, he 
remarked that there were always two factors in growth : first, the 
influence which is internal and transmitted by heredity; and 
secondly, the influence of external surroundings, sometimes of ,an 
accidental description, yet very constant in action. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., exhibited a large and finely preserved 
specimen of a recent Echinoderm, allied to Echinometra, The 
specimen, which had been taken in the Eed Sea, measured ten 
inches in diameter across the spines. Mr. Young stated that it had 
recently been presented to the Hunterian Museum. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 269 

PAPERS READ. 

I. — Apiarian Notes in Argyllshire in 1882, 
By Mr. Eobert J. Bennett. 

In this paper the author, after referring to the past season, com- 
mented on the qualities of the recently introduced Cyprian bees, 
which he hoped would improve the stocks in this countiy. He 
then gave a detailed account of the work done by the bees during 
the past summer, and in conclusion strongly condemned the prac- 
tice carried on by some unscrupulous bee-keepers of adulterating 
the honey with sugar. 



II. — Experiments with Chilian Seed-Potatoes, 
By Mr. Thomas King. 

Last year I read before the Society a paper by Mr. John King, 
Corresponding Member, residing in Chile, entitled "The cultivation 
of the Potato in its Native Country." In that paper the writer 
clearly shewed that the potato disease has pever been known in 
Chile. This naturally gives rise to the question — Why is the 
disease present here and absent there 1 Two answers may be given 
to this question : first, the potato disease fungus, Peronospora in- 
festanSf has never been introduced into Chile, and so the potatoes 
there have had no opportunity of becoming diseased; or second, 
the potatoes, if attacked by the disease in that country, are able to 
resist it. As bearing on the first alternative, I will read the fol- 
lowing extract from the Gardeners' Chronicle: — ".The exotic origin 
of the fungus which destroys our potatoes has never been doubted, 
and all known facts point to the neighbourhood of Peru as its 
home. The potato fungus attacks other Peruvian and Chilian 
plants, such as the tomato, the petunia, and the schizanthus." If 
this be so, we must adopt the second alternative, namely, that 
Chilian potato plants, though attacked by the disease, do not fall 
victims to it. Taking this for granted, we may now ask — Why do 
Chilian potatoes possess a disease -resisting power which European 
potatoes do noti That is a question \rhich has not yet been satis- 
factorily answered; but before making the experiments I am about 
to describe, I was of opinion that the true cause was to be found 
in the difference between the methods of cultivation pursued in 



Digitized by 



Google 



270 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Britain and Chile respectively. Speaking generally, in Chile the 
potatoes are planted whole and a considerable distance apart. They» 
are not heavily manured, and are carefully dried in the sun before 
being stored for the winter. Under this treatment they have con- 
tinued quite healthy up to the present time. As regards their 
treatment in Britain, I was of opinion that our modes of cultivation 
and storing, continued through many years, had so enfeebled the 
constitution of the potato plant as to render it an easy prey to the 
potato-disease fungus. I therefore thought that if we were to get 
some perfectly sound tubers from Chile, they would produce a 
disease-resisting crop here; and, accordingly, I wrote to my brother 
a year ago, asking him to send me some potatoes — ^not wild ones, 
but a good cultivated variety. Now, as Chile extends a great dis- 
tance north and south, it has many different climates. • I therefore 
obtained the seed-potatoes from Uanquehue, in the south, where 
the climate somewhat resembles our own. In the southern hemis- 
phere, however, the seasons do not occur at the same time as with 
us; and at Uanquehue potatoes are dug in the month of May, 
while here they are only planted in March or April. The seed- 
potatoes were not therefore obtained in the best condition, as they 
had to be taken up when half grown, and after all they arrived 
here too late. They .were small red potatoes — some round, others 
long, many rather imshapely, but all quite free from disease, and 
very clean as if grown in a loose soiL No name was sent with 
them; but 1 believe they were of the variety called "Borajilla," or 
borage-leaved. 

Some of my acquaintances, living in the country, kindly planted 
small quantities, and reported on them at the end of the season. 
Some were put into the ground during the second half of May, and 
others not till the beginning of June, so that they cannot be 
regarded as having had a good chance. They grew luxuriantly, 
however, producing great tall stems with broad flat leaves. One 
terminal leafl,it I measured was eight inches long by six broad. 

I will now give some details regarding the different lots. I had 
received about twenty-four stones altogether; and of these Mr. 
Eobert Howie, farmer, Netherauldhouse, Pollokshaws, planted ten 
stones. The ground — the common clay soil of the district — had 
been intended for cabbages, and was already drilled up in twenty- 
eight inch drills. The potatoes were planted whole, and at a dis- 
tance of fourteen inches apart. They grew vigorously both above 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 271 

and below ground. The drills, however, were too narrow, as the 
underground shoots came through the sides into the furrows between; 
The summer proved very unfavourable to the potato crop; and in 
the month of July I was disappointed to see, even on the leaves of 
the Chilians, the peculiar flocculence of the Peronospora infestans. 
As to the yield of these ten stones, it is very small, being about 
two and a half bags of fairly good potatoes, and half a bag of dis- 
eased ones. 

A stone of the seed was sent to Mr. Eobertson, Dublin, a gen- 
tleman who has taken much interest in the cultivation of the 
potato; and now, at the end of the season, he writes: — "The 
Chilian potatoes have turned out an entire failure, and they have 
done the same with a neighbour of mine." 

Mr. William Lindsay, Farmer, Craigends, Fenwick, planted a 
stone on peaty ground that had not been cropped within the memory 
of man. They sent up strong, rank stems, with great broad leaves ; 
but, when the shaws were at their best, a storm of wind came on 
which broke them down. Mr. Lindsay writes that, leaving out the 
tubers too small to plant next year, the crop is about equal to the 
seed. 

I also sent some to my brother, Mr. Eobert King, Wolverton, 
Buckinghamshire, and he gave them to friends. He writes that 
the weight of the crop is about twice that of the seed ; and that 
the potatoes are small, bave rather deep eyes, are of a pretty, clear, 
pinkish red colour, and are qiiite free from disease. He adds : — 
" All say they have not had a fair chance, as they were planted too 
late, and being late had not well-selected ground." 

Mr. John Barbour, Farmer, Bisk, Lochwinnoch,. planted whole 
about a stone and a half on good soil of a somewhat peaty nature. 
The crows took away some of the seed, but the yield is about 
seven stones. The tubers are very pretty, but soft and small, the 
largest being about seven inches in circumference. In an unpicked 
sample of a hundred I counted only seven diseased ones. Other 
small quantities planted around Glasgow have given similar results. 

As a consequence of these experiments, I feel less certain than I 
did a year ago either as to the cause or the cure of the potato disease; 
but I am now satisfied that we cannot expect to get rid of it by the 
siimple expedient of importing sound seed. "We must not, however, 
consider the trials as finished till next autumn^ at the earliest; for, 
as we have seen, the seed was planted six weeks too late and dug 



Digitized by 



Google 



272 PBOOBBOINOS OF THE 

before it was ripe. This, together with the unfavourable weather, 
may have lowered the vitality of the plants, and so have predisposed 
them to the attacks of the fungus. 



9th January, 1883. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., Vice-President, in the chair. 

The following gentlemen were elected Ordinary Members of the 
Society : — Messrs. Alexander Yuill, 259 Hope Street ; Robert 
Philson, 41 Robertson Street ; and George R. Lawson, A. T. & C. 
Bank, Golspie. 

Mr. Richard M*Kay exhibited a collection of Mosses, prepared 
by the Museum Committee for the Kelvingrove Museum ; and, in 
handing over the collection, he read, on behalf of the Museum 
Committee, the following statement : — 

The Sub-Committee for Mosses, in submitting the mounted 
collection which they have prepared, trust that it may prove the 
nucleus of a complete one, so far as British species are concerned. 

Its value from a scientific point of view may be held to depend 
mainly on tjie number of representative specimens it includes, and 
on the way in which these have been manipulated, so as to afford 
the utmost possible facility for public reference. The Committee 
are confident that, considering the limited period during which they 
have been at work, the number of species and varieties — 544 in all 
— comprised in the collection constitutes a decided success — ^a first 
adventure towards supplying our Glasgow Museum with satisfactory 
herbaria of British plants. This reference collection of Mosses can 
hardly fail to be of great service to all who wish to study these 
beautiful little plants ; and the very fact of its existence ought to 
increase the number of such students, and stimulate and incite 
those who have already set themselves to the work. There is 
another matter of some interest from a personal point of view, and 
one not wholly without an educational bearing as welL Many of 
the specimens have been gathered by men who have won immortal 
names for themselves in this and kindred departments of Botany, 
— men such as Dr. Greville, Dr. W. Wilson, Professor Dickie, and 
Professor Schimper ; others by some who may not have obtained 
such widespread fame, but whose work speaks of their desert, — 
several of these of our own city and Society, who, having gone from 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 273 

among us, have left memories " that smell sweet and blossom in 
the dust," as Roger Kennedy and Alexander M*Kinlay, whose work 
and worth were well known to all Clydesdale naturalists. Of the 
others who have had a considerable share in gathering the specimens 
in the collection we may mention G. E. Hunt, G. Davies, Dr. J. B. 
Wood, J. Shaw, George Stables, J. Sadler, Dr. Carrington, T. Lyle, 
J. Norvell, and W. Gait. In these names there is a guarantee of 
accuracy which the Committee feel cannot but give confidence to 
students, while the recollection of the good work such botanists 
have done can hardly fail to kindle enthusiasm and revive lagging 
zeal. The members of the Committee, besides their work of 
examination and arrangement, contributed not a few specimens; 
while the mounting of the whole collection, and the preparation of 
the catalogue were undertaken by one of their number, Mr. Eichard 
M*Kay. A large proportion of the specimens — 268 in all — was 
gathered by one man alone, Alexander M*Kinlay ; and for these, 
as well as for many others, the Committee are indebted to Dr. 
Stirton, who kindly placed a very extensive series of duplicates at 
their disposal. A few specimens from abroad have been included 
till such a time as they can be replaced or supplemented by British - 
ones. In conclusion, the Committee earnestly trust that their work 
may be the means of fui'thering the study of these beautiful forms 
of vegetation, and of thus widening the area in which an ever-fresh 
pleasure may extend itself into human life, bringing with it 
increased knowledge and broadened comprehensions of Nature. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited the following species of Hypnum 
in fruit, a condition in which they are not often found : — 

H, tamariscinum, JEed. H, purum, Dill. 

H, splendens, Dill. H, triquetrum. Dill. 

H. Schreheriy Dill. H, loreum, Dill. 

These, he stated, had all been collected at Innellan during the 
Christmas holidays. Mr King also exhibited a drawing of a very 
fine specimen of a cephalopod, LoUgo vulgaris^ Lam., which had 
been found on the beach at Innellan. This "squid," as it is 
commonly called, measured twenty inches in length. Although 
tolerably common, there is no record of the occurrence of the species 
in the Clyde. 

Dr. Freeland Fergus exhibited two specimens of the parasitic 
nematode Tnchina spiralis^ Owen, found in the muscles of a patient 



Digitized by 



Google 



274 PROCEEDINGS OP THE 

who had died in the Glasgow Boyal Infirmary; and in the course 
of some descriptive remarks he stated that the symptoms arising 
from the presence of these animals were apt to he confounded with 
the indications of rheumatic or typhoid fever. 

The Secretary (Mr. J. M. Camphell) exhibited eggs of Sterna 
hirundinacea, Less., collected by him at the Port of Santa Cruz, 
Patagonia, in 1871. He made some remarks on the habits and range 
of the species, which he stated he had found breeding very abun- 
dantly on a little island at the mouth of the Santa Cruz Eiver. Mr. 
Campbell also exhibited a skull of a variety of the black rat, 
showing a peculiar malformation of one of the upper incisors which 
had grown in a spiral direction until it had again entered the skull. 

The President (Mr. J. A. Harvie-Brown) sent for exhibition an 
extensive series of one of the so-called "coal unios," Anthracosia 
robusta^ Sow., obtained in the upper coal measures of the Dal- 
mellington district, Ayrshire, where this shell is abundant. 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., made some remarks descriptive of the 
genus and its affinities. 

Mr. David Robertson, F.L.S., F.G.S., exhibited specimens, 
dredged in Loch Fyne, of Nonionina orbicularis, Brady, a foraminifer 
new to the British fauna, and first described by Mr. H. B. Brady, 
F.R S., from soundings obtained in the Austro-Hungarian North 
Polar expedition in 1872. He also exhibited a beautiful specimen, 
dredged off Cumbrae, of Lagena curviUneata, Blackwill and Wright, 
a species new to the Scottish fauna. 

PAPERS READ. 

I. — The Flora of Ben Laoigh. By Mr, Peter Ewing. 

Ben Laoigh, (sometimes spelled Lui), forms part of the Grampian 
range, and is situated about twenty-five miles south-west of Ben 
Lawers, its altitude being 3708 feet, — only 276 feet lower than 
that mountain of world-wide fame. 

Although I have headed this "The Flora of Ben Laoigh,'* my 
investigations have as yet been wholly confined to the north-east 
and north-west water-sheds; but I have no doubt that with very 
few exceptions the flowering plants on these parts of the mountain 
will be found recorded in the following list. The list of Mosses 
and Hepaticae^ however, I do not believe to be in any way complete. 

As to the list of flowering plants, 253 in number, 7 of our rarer 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 275 

alpine species, recorded for Ben Lawers, will be missed; but 5 will 
be found which I never gathered, or know to have been gathered, 
on that mountain. To this list I have appended some remarks to 
show the distribution of certain species on the mountain; and 
where no remark is made the plant may be understood to be 
generally distrij^uted. I have only given the altitude where I 
regarded it as interesting. 

As to the list of Mosses, 179 in number, 19 will be found which 
are not recorded for the county in the London Gatalogtte of British 
Mosses, including 7 not there recorded for Scotland. 

As to the list of Hepaticae, 83 in number, 13 will be found 
which are not recorded for the county in the London Catalogue^ 
including 7 not there recorded for Scotland. 

No doubt this list in itself is of little scientific value; but if 
some of our members would take up the investigation of the botany 
of a mountain, and collect and preserve the plants found upon it, 
keeping also in view their distribution, such lists would be of very 
great value indeed. No one can have any idea of the number of 
species occurring on a mountain till his observations have taken this 
form. 

PHANEEOGAMS. 
Thalictrum alpinum, Linn. 
Anemone nemorosa, Linn. 

Eanimculus hederaceus, Linn. One patch observed. 
Lingua, Linn, 
acris, Linn, 
repens, Linn. A few plants occur here and there 

round the foot of the mountain. 
Ficaria, Linn. Common at the base. 
Caltha palustris, Linn. Common at the base. I have never 

observed the alpine form. 
Trollius europaeus, Linn. 

Cardamine pmtensis, Linn. Frequent, flo weiing in the end of July, 
hirsuta, Linn. Fi-equent. 
sylvatica. Link. Eare. 
Arabis thaliana, Linn. Rare. 

petrsea, Lam. 
Cochlearia officinalis, Linn., var. alpina. 
Draba incana, Linn. 
Capsella Bursa-pastoris, Moench. Common at the base. 



Digitized by 



Google 



276 PROOKBDINGS OP THE 

Yiola palustris, Linn. 

sylvatica, Fries. Frequent 
lutea, Huds, 

var. amoena. 
Drosera rotundifolia, Linn. 

anglica, Huds. Common at the base. 
Polygala depressa, Wender. 
Silene acaulis, Linn. 
Lychnis diuma, Sibth. 

Flos-cuculi, Linn. 
Cerastium triviale, Link., var. alpestre. 
alpinum, Linn., var. lanatum. 
pubescens. 
Stellaria media. With. 

Holostea, Linn, 
glauca, With, 
graminea, Linn, 
uliginosa, Murr. 
Cherleria sedoides, Linn. 
Sagina procumbens, Linn. 

saxatilis, Wimm. 
Montia fontana, Linn., var. rivularis. 
Hypericum pulchrum, Linn. Frequent. 
Linum catharticum, Linn. 
Geranium pratense, Linn. Frequent 

Kobertianum, Linn. Frequent. 
Oxalis Acetosella, Linn. 
Trif olium pratense, Linn. 

repens, Linn. 
Spirsea Uhnaria, Linn. 
Alchemilla vulgaris, Linn. 

var. montana. Frequent, 
alpina, Linn. 
Sibbaldia procumbens, Linn. 
Potentilla Tormentilla, Schenk. 
Rubus saxatilis, Linn. 

Chamaemorus, Linn. 
Geum urbanum, Linn. 

rivale, Linn. 
Dryas octopetala, Linn. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 277 

Epilobium montanum, Linn. 

tetragonum, Linn. Bare. 

palustre, Linn. 

alsinif olium, Yill. Bare. 

anagallidifolium, Lam. 

alpinum, linn. 
Sedum Rhodiola, DC. 
Saxifraga oppositifolia, Linn. 

nivalis, Linn. 

stellaris, Linn. 

aizoides, Linn. 

hypnoides, Linn. 
Chrysosplenium oppositifolium, Linn. 
Pamassia palustris, Linn. 
Biinium flexuosum, With. 

Angelica sylvestris, Linn, Frequent to 3000 feet. 
Heracleum Sphondylium, Linn. Frequent to 2500 feet. 
Comus suecica, Linn. Rare. 
Galium boreale, Linn, 
saxatile, Linn. 

palustre, Linn., var. Witheringii. 
Asperula odorata, Linn. Frequent. 
Valeriana officinalis, Linn. Rare. 

Scabiosa succisa, Linn. Rare, and not observed in flower. 
Carduus palustris, Linn. One large patch at 2500 feet 
Saussurea ^Jpina, DC. 
Gnaphalium supinum, Linn, 
dioicum, linn. 
Solidago Virga-aurea, Linn., var. cambrica. Frequent, 
Tussilago Farfara, Linn. 
Hypochoeris radicata, Linn. 
Leontodon hispidus, Linn. 

autumnalis, Linn., var. pratensis. 
Taraxacum officinale, Wigg., var. palustre. 
Crepis virens, Linn. 

paludosa, Moench. 
Hieracium Pilosella, Linn. 

holosericeum, Backh. Very common on this and the 
adjoining mountains. 

nigrescens, Willd. 



Digitized by 



Google 



278 PROOEBDINGS OP THE 

Hieracium pallidum, Fries. 

murorum, lonn. 

vulgatum, Fries. 

rigidum, Fries. 
Campanula rotimdifolia, Linn. 
Vaccinium Oxycoccos, Linn. 

Yitis-idsea, Linn. 

uliginosum, Linn. 

MyrtilluB, Linn. 
ArctostaphyloB Uva-ursi, Wimm. 
Erica TetraUx, Linn, 
cinerea, Linn. 
Calluna vulgaris, Salisb. 

Pyrola rotundifolia, Linn. Although this plant is common from 
2000 to 3500 feet, it seldom flowers. Five flowers were seen in 1882, 
and six in 1883. 

Gentiana campestris, Linn. 

Menyanthes trifoliata, Linn. 

Veronica humifusa, Dicks. Frequent 

Euphrasia officinalis, Linn. 

Bartsia alpina, Linn. 

Ehinanthus Crista-galli, Linn. Found at 3250 feet. 

Melampyrum pratense, Linn., var. montanum. 

Thymus Serpyllum, Fries. 

Prunella vulgaris, Linn. 

Pinguicula vulgaris, Linn. 

Lysimachia nemorum, Linn. 

Primula vulgaris, Huds. 

Trientalis europsBa, Linn. 

Armeria maritima, Willd. 

Plantago maritima, Linn. 

Kumex Acetosa, Linn. 

Acetosella, Linn. 
Oxyria reniformis, Hook. 
Mercurialis perennis, Linn. 

Urtica dioica, Limi. A patch 975 feet above the farm. 
Alnus glutinosa, Linn. 
Betula alba, Linn. 
Myrica Gale, Linn. 
Salix aurita, Linn. . 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HI8T0BY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 279 

Salix phylicifolia, Linn., var. Davalliana. 
nigricans, " Sm." 
repens, Linn., var. prostrata. 
ascendens. 
Arbuscula, Linn., var. prunifolia. 
venulosa. 
vaccinifolia. 
herbacea, Linn, 
reticulata, Linn. Eare. 
Potamogeton natans, Linn. « 

polygonifolius, Pour., var. Kirkii. 
Triglochin palustre, Linn. 
Orchis mascula, Linn, 
maculata, Linn. 
Gyninadenia conopsea, Brown. 
Habenaria viridis. Brown. 
Narthecium ossifragum, Huds. 
Tofieldia palustris, Huds. 
Luzula pilosa, Willd. 
sylvatica, Beck, 
campestris, DC. 

multiflora, Koch., var. congesta. 
spicata, DC. 
Juncus trifidus, Linn. 

castaneus, Sm. About fifty plants. 

triglumis, Linn. 

biglumis, Linn. Bare. 

conglomeratus, Linn. 

effusus, linn. 

acutiflorus, Ehrh. 

lamprocarpus, Ehrh., var. nigritellus. On the road past 

the farm, 
supinus, Moench. 
bufonius, Linn, 
compressus, Jacq. 
squarrosus, Linn. 
Khyncospora alba, Vahl. 
Scirpus palustris, Linn. 

pauciflorus, Lightf. 
csBspitosus, Linn. 
VOL. V, U 



Digitized by 



Google 



280 PROCBBDINGS OP THE 

Scirpus setaceus, Linn. Frequent beside the streams up to 1500 

feet. 
Eriophorum vaginatum, Linn. 

angustifolium, Roth. 
Kobresia caricina, Willd. Very abundant. 
Carex dioica, Linn. 

pulicaris, Linn. 

pauciflora, Lightf. 

stellulata^ Good. 

curta, Good., var. alpicola. 

ovalis, Grood., var. bracteata. Growing along with the 

typical form, 
atrata, Linn, 
acuta, Linn, 
rigida, Good, 
vulgaris, Fries. 

glauca, Scop., var. stictocarpa. 
pilulifera, Linn, 
pallescens, Linn, 
panicea, Linn 
vaginata, Tausch. 
capillaris, Linn, 
binervis, Sm. 
f ulva, Good. 

flava, Linn., var. lepidocarpa. 
CEderi, Ehrh. 
ampullacea, Good, 
pulla, Good. 
Anthoxanthum odoratum, Linn. Frequent to 3000 feet. 
Alopecurus geniculatus, Linn. 
Phleum pratense, Linn., var. nodosum. Bare. 
Agrostis canina, Linn. 

vulgaris. With. 
Aira csespitosa, Linn., var. brevifolia. 

pseudo-alpina. 
flexuosa, Linn., var. montana. 
prgecox, Linn. 
Avena pratensis, Linn., var. alpina. 
Holcus mollis, Linn, 
lanatus, Linn. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 281 

Triodia decumbens, Beauv. 
Koeleria cristata, Pers. 
Molinia caerulea, Moench. 
Glyceria fluitans, Brown. Frequent. 
Poa alpina, Linn. 

Balfourii, Bab. Bare. 
Cynosurus cristatus, Linn. % 

Festuca sciuroides, Both. 

ovina, Linn., var. tenuifolia. 

rubra, Linn., var. duriuscula. 
Lolium perenne, Linn. 
Kardus stricta, Linn. 

FEBNS. 

Hymenophyllum unilaterale, Willd. 
Pteris aquilina, Linn. 
Cryptogramme crispa, Brown. 
Lomaria spicant, Desv. 
Asplenium Trichomanes, Linn. 

viride, Huds. 
Cystopteris fragilis, BemL, var. dentata. 

montana, Link. This plant is being fast rooted out. 
Aspidium Lonchitis, Sw. 
aculeatum, Sw. 
Xephrodium Filix-mas, Bich.^ 

dilatatum, Desv., alpine form. 

Oreopteris, Linn. 
Polypodium vulgare, Linn. 

Phegopteris, Linn. 

Dryopteris, Linn. 

alpestre, Hoppe. 
Botrychium Lunaria, Sw. 

LYCOPODS. 

Lycopodium clavatum, Linn. 

alpinum, Linn. 

Selago, Linn. 
Selaginella Selaginoides, Gray. 

EQXnSETA. 

Equisetum arvense, Linn. On the debris at the mines. 



Digitized by 



Google 



282 PROOBBDINGS OF THB 

' Equisetum pratense, Ehrh. 

var. alpestre. 
palustre, Linn. 

var. subnudum. Frequent 
limosum, Linn., var. fluviatile. About twelve plants, 
variegatum, Schleich. 

MOSSES. 
Sphagnum acutifolium, Ehrh. 

var. deflexum, Schpr. 
rubellum, Wils. 
quinquefarium, Lindb. New. 
elegans, Braithw. New. 
squarrosum, Pers. 

rigidum, Schpr. New to Scotland, 
subsecundum, Nees. 
tenellum, Ehrh. 
papillosum, Lindb. 
cymbifolium, Ehrh. 
Andresea petrophila, Ehrh. 
alpina. Turn, 
falcata, Schpr. 
crassinervis, Bruch. 
Gymnostomum rupestre, Schwg. 

curvirostrum, Ehrh. 
commutatum. Mitt. 
Weissia viridula, Brid. 
Weissia mucronata, Bruch. 
crispula, Hedw. 
cirrhata, Hedw. 
Ehabdoweissia fugax, Hedw. 

denticulata, Brid. 
Cynodontium virens, Hedw. 
Dicranella squarrosa, Schrad. 
subulata, Hedw. 
heteromalla, Hedw. 
Dicranum fulvellum, Sm. 

Starkii, W. & M 
falcatum, Hedw. 
Blyttii B. & S. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORY SOOIBTT OF GLASGOW. 283 

Dicranum arcticum, Schpr. 
fuscescens, Turn, 
scoparium, Linn, 
majus, Turn, 
palustre, Bry. Brit. 
Campylopus atrovirens, De Not. 
flexuosus, Brid. 
paradoxus, Wils. New. 
fragilis, B. & S. 
Ditrichum homomallum, Hedw. 

flexicaule, Schwg. 
Barbula muralis, L. 

unguiculata, Dill, 
fallax, Hedw. New. 
rigidula, Dicks, 
convoluta, Hedw. 
tortuosa, Linn, 
fragilis, Hook, 
subulata, Linn. 
Ceratodon purpureus, Linn. 
Distichium capillaceum, Linn, 
inclinatum, Hedw. 
Encalypta rhabdocarpa, Schwg. 

ciliata, Hedw. 
Grimmia apocarpa, Linn, 
pulvinata, Dill. 
Schultzii, Brid. New. 
torquata, Grev. 
Doniana, Sm. 
Khacomitrium patens, Dicks, 
aciculare, Linn, 
protensum, A. Braun. 
sudeticum, Funck. 
heterostichum, Hedw. 

var. gracilescens, Bry. Eur. 
fasciculare, Schrad. 
lanuginosum, Hedw. 
canescens, Hedw. 
Ptychomitrium polyphyllum, Dicks. 
Amphoridium lapponicum, Hedw. 



Digitized by 



Google 



284 PBOCEBDINGS OF THE 

Amphoridium Mougeotii, £. & S. 
Ulota Bruchii, Homsch. 

intennedia, Schpr. New. 
phyllantha, Brid. 
Orthotrichum afl&ne, Schrad. 
Lyellii, H. & T. 
leiocarpum, B. & S. 
(Edipodium Griffithianum, Dicks. 
Dissodon splachnoides, Schwg. 
Tetraplodon mnioides, Hedw. 
Splachnum sphaericum, Linn. 
Funaria hygrometrica, Linn. 
Amblyodon dealbatus, Dicks. 
Meesia uliginosa, Hedw. 
Catoscopium nigritum, Hedw. 
Bartramia ithyphylla, Brid. 
pomiformis, Linn. 
Halleriana, Hedw. 
QCderi, Gunn. 
Conostomum boreale, Swartz. 
Philonotis f ontana, Linn. 

var. falcata, De Not. New to Scotland, 
cdcarea, B. & S. 
Breutelia arcuata, Dicks. 
Webera acuminata, Hoppe. 
polymorpha, Hoppe. 
elongata, Dicks, 
nutans, Schreb. 
cnida, Schreb. 
camea, Linn. 
Zieria julacea, Schpr. 
Bryum pendulum, Homsch. 
iuclinatum, bwartz. 
pallescens, Schleich. 
erythrocarpum, Schwg. 
alpinum, Linn. 
ciBspiticium, Linn, 
argenteum, Linn, 
uapiilare, Luin. 
paiiens^ Swartz. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATXTBAL HISTOBT SOCIBTT OF GLASGOW. 285 

Bryuin pseudo-triquetrum, Hedw. 
Schleicheri, Schwg. 
filiforme, Dicks. 
Mnium undulatum, Hedw. 
hornum, Linn, 
serratum, Schrad. 
punctatum, Hedw. 
Aulacomnium palustre, Linn. 
Tetraphis pellucida, Linn. 
Tetrodontium Brownianum, Dicks. 
Oligotrichum hercynicum, Ehrh. 
Atrichum undulatum, Linn. 
Pogonatum nanum, Neck, 
aloides, Hedw. 
umigerum, Linn, 
alpinum, Linn. 

var. campanulatum, Homsch. 
Polytrichum sexangulare, Floerk. 
strictum, Banks, 
commune, Linn. 

var. humile, Schpr. 
fastigiatum, Lyle. 
Diphyscium foliosum, Linn. 
Fissidens osmundoides, Hedw. 

adiantoides, Hedw. 
Hedwigia ciliata, Dicks. 
Antitrichia curtipendula, Linn. 
Neckera pumila, Hedw. 
crispa, Linn, 
complanata, Linn. 
Homalia trichomanoides, Schi-eb. 
Cylindrothecium concinnum, De Not. 
Thamnium alopecurum, Linn. 
Isothecium myurum, Dill. 
Orthothecium rufescens, Dicks. Fruits freely in July and 

August. 
Homalothecium sericeura, Linn. 
Brachythecium Starkii, Brid. 

rutabulum, Linn, 
rivulare, B. & S. 



Digitized by 



Google 



286 PROOBBDINOS OF THE 

Brachythecium plumosum, Swartz. 
Eurhynchium myosuroides, Linn. 

Swartzii, Turn. 
Plagiothecium pulchellum, Hedw. 
denticulatum, linn, 
imdulatum, Linn. 
Amblystegium serpens, Linn. 
Hypnum revolvens, Swartz. 
uncinatum, Hedw. 
filicinum, Linn, 
commutatum, Hedw. 
falcatum, Brid. 
hamulosum, B. & S. 
cupressiforme, Linn. 
moUuscum, Hedw. 
ochraceum, Turn, 
stellatum, Schreb. 
cordifolium, Hedw. 
giganteum, Schpr. 
sarmentosum, Wahl. 
cuspidatum, Linn. 
Schreberi, Ehrh. 
purum, Linn, 
trifarium, W. & M. 
scorpioides, Linn. 
Hylocomium splendens, Dill. 

squarrosum, Linn, 
loreum, Linn, 
triquetrum, Linn. 

HEPATICiE. 
Marchantia polymorpha, Linn. 
Preissia commutata, Nees. 
Conocephalus conicus, Linn. 
Frullania dilatata, Dum. 

fragilifolia, Tayl. 

Tamarisci, Dum. 

var. atrovirens. 

germana, Tayl. New to Scotland. 
Lejeunea serpyllifolia, Mich, 

patens, Lindbg. New. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATUBAL HISTORY SOOIBTT OF GLASGOW. 287 

Badula complanata, Linn. 

commutata, Gottsche. 
Porella laevigata, Schrader. 
platyphylla, Linn. 
Pleurozia cochleariformis, Weiss. 
Lepidozia reptans, Linn. 

setacea, Mitten. New. 
Bazzania trilobata, Linn. 

tricrenata, Lindbg. 
triangularis, Schl. New. 
Odontoschisma Sphagni, Dicks. 
Cephalozia divaricata, Sm. 

bicuspidata, Dum. 

multiflora. Spruce. New to Scotland. 
Lammersiana, Hiibn. New to Scotland. 
Lophocolea bidentata, Linn. 

heterophylla, Schrad. New. 
Chiloscyphus polyanthos, Linn. 
Saccogyna viticulosa, MicL 
Kantia Trichomanis, Linn. 
Trichocolea tomentella, Ehrh. 
Blepharozia ciliaris, Nees. 
Herberta adunca, Dicks. 
Anthelia julacea, Lightf. 

Furatzkana. Only once before found in Britain, viz. 
by Mr. West, an English botanist, on Ben Lawers. 
Blepharostoma trichophyllum, Linn. 
Scapania subalpina, Dum. 
undulata, DilL 
nemorosa, Linn, 
resupinata, Dumort. 
purpurea, Can. 
planifolia. Hook, 
curta, Mart., var. rosacea, Nees. 
Diplophyllum albicans, Linn. 
Plagiochila asplenioides, Linn. 

spinulosa, Dicks. 
Jamesoniella Carringtoni, Balf. 
Mylia Taylori, Hook. 
Eucalyx obovata, Nee^. 



Digitized by 



Google 



288 



PB00EBDIN68 OF THB 



Eucalyx hyalina, LyelL 
Jungermannia crenulata, Sm. 

var. gracillima, Sm. 
lurida, Dum. 
sphaerocarpa, Hook, 
cordifolia. Hook, 
riparia, Tayl. 
Miilleri, Nees. 
barbata, Schreb 
Floerkii, Wob. & IMolir. 
(j[uin(iiiedentata, Web 
lycopodioides, Wallr. 
ventricosa, Dicks, 
bicrenata, Lindenb. 
incisa, Schrad. 
alpestris, Schleich. 
inflata, Huds. 
turbinata, Ead. New. 
minuta, Crantz. 
Nardia emarginata, Ehrh. 
Funckii, Xees. 
compressa, Gray, 
scalaris, Schrad. 
Gymuomitrium concinnatum, Coi-da. 
crassifolium, Carr. 
crenu^atum, Gottsclie. 
Blasia pusilla, Linn. 
Pellia epiphylla, Linn. 

calycina, Tayl. 
Aneura pinguis, Linn. New. 

sinuata, Dicks. New to Scotland, 
multifida, Gray. 
Metzgeria furcata, Dum. 

pubescens, Schrank. New. 
conjugata, Lindbg. New to Scotland. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOOIBTY OP GLASGOW. 289 

II. — Notes on the occurrence near Glasgow of the Kingfisher, Alcedo 
ispida, Lin. By Mr. James Steel. 

The author stated that on 23rd September last he had observed 
an example of the Kingfisher on the Clyde at Cambuslang, and a 
pair near the railway bridge above the Clyde Ironworks. He was 
informed by Mr. J. M. Campbell that a specimen had been obtained 
on the Ronken burn, near Thomliebank, and Mr. James J. F. X. King 
had also observed this beautiful bird on the Kelvin at the Botanic 
Gardens. Mr. James S. Dixon, in a paper read before the Society 
on ** The Birds frequenting Possil Marsh," * remarks : — " During 
the winter of 1 864 1 several times saw the Kingfisher {Alcedo ispida) 
fishing for sticklebacks, and darting along the surface of the ditches 
which intersect and flow from the Possil Marsh and the neighbour- 
ing Lochbumie." 



30th January, 1883. 

Mr. Jolin A. Harvie-Drown, F.R.S.E., F.Z.S., Piesident, in the 
Chair. 

Messrs. John Forsyth, 40 Dalmamock Road, Parkhead, and 
James Dalrymple Duncan, F.S.A. Scot., 211 Hope Street, were 
elected Ordinary Members. 

Mr. D. Gregorson exhibited bifurcated fronds of Hart's-tongue, 
Scolopendj'ium vulgar e, Sm., obtained from ferns in cultivation, and 
he explained the manner in wliich the plants had been treated. In 
the course of some discussion as to the probable causes of this 
abnormal growth, Mr. James Ramsay stated that he had frequently 
observed ferns, after producing for a time bifurcated fronds, return 
at length to their original condition. Professor John Cleland, M.D., 
F.R S., made some remarks on the tendency in animals and plants 
to diverge from their ordinary forms. 

»Mr. Peter Cameron exhibited some larvae and pupae preserved 
by a new process, the medium used being a solution of chromic acid. 
After describing tlie j)rocess, which consisted in steeping the larvae, 
&c., in a weak solution of the acid for some days, he said that the 

* Proceedings^ ii 161. 



Digitized by 



Google 



290 PB00BBDING8 OF THB 

advantages of this method were that the objects retained their form 
without any distortion, and every detail of structure could be made 
out, while the colour was not any more changed than would have 
been the case had the objects been kept in spirit. If not immersed 
too long in the acid, the larvae, &c., were quite flexible, and their 
limbs could be moved without breaking. The method, in fact, 
appeared to him to possess all the advantages of the old plan of 
keeping the larvae in spirit, without any of its disadvantages, while 
it also seemed to be quite as good as the methods of preserving the 
larvae by inflation or roasting over gas. 

Mr. Thomas Scott, Corresponding Member, exhibited some species 
of Land Shells from the Greenock district, on which he made the 
following remarks : — 

The species of Land Shells now exhibited were collected during 
various botanical rambles in the neighbourhood of Greenock and at 
Skelmorlie. Besides these species a number of more common forms 
are also found ; but, as I intend ere long to prepare a full list of the 
Land Shells known to occur in the district around Greenock, I 
have made no reference to them at present 

LimaxfiavuSy L. I have as yet found only one or two specimens 

in the neighbourhood of Greenock. 
L, marginatuSf Miill. Common in gardens in the district 
L. maximu8, L. Frequent. Li handling half-grown specimens 
I have observed that when irritated they lifted repeatedly 
the edges of the mantle. This operation imparts a very 
peculiar appearance to the slug.* 
Zonites radiatvlusy Alder. This pretty species occurs at the 

Cloch and in one or two other places in the district 
Z. excavatus. Bean. Cloch, Shielhill Glen, and other places. 
Hdix lamellata, Jeff. One specimen of this species was obtained 

at the Cloch by my son, Mr. Andrew Scott 
H, aculeata^ MiilL Cloch. This Heltx^ though small, appears 

somewhat formidable on account of its spiny epidermis. 
H, rufescensy Penn. Plentiful near Greenock. 
H, sericea, Miill. Tower Hill, Gourock; not uncommon at 

Skelmorlie. 
H, fusca, Mont. Cloch, Shielhill Glen, and other places. 
H, caperata, Mont., with var. major. At Skelmorlie, which 
appears to be the nearest locality to Greenock. 

* 1 hud that Dr. Jeffreys incidentally refers to this habit. Brit. Conch. ^ i. 138. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OP GLASGOW. 291 

Pupa ringena^ Jeff., and var. pallida. This interesting species 
occurs at the Cloch, Shielhill Glen, and Eottenbum Glen 
(west end of Loch Thorn), where I also find the variety. 

Vertigo pygmaea, Drap. Very common in Eottenbum Glen. 
„ „ var. pallida. Eottenbum Glen, occasional 

F. substriataf Jeff*. Eottenbum Glen, rare. 

V. edentula, Drap. Shielhill Glen, ClocL 

Balia pei^veraa, L. Skelmorlie. 

Acme lineatay Drap. One specimen of this shell was obtained 
at the Cloch in May, 1882, by my son, Mr. Andrew Scott. 

Mr. J. M. Campbell exhibited a young living Alligator, Alligator 
mississippiensisy from the Mississippi ; and in the course of some 
remarks he described the characters which distinguish the Alligators 
from the Crocodiles and Gavials. 

Mr. James Lumsden, F.Z.S., in exhibiting a Pectoral Sandpiper, 
Tringa maculatay shot at Loch Lomond by Sir George H. Leith 
Buchanan, Bart., Corresponding Member, said that during the year 
1881 several new species had been added to the list of Loch Lomond 
birds, but for 1882 there was only one to add, and that the Pectoral 
Sandpiper. On 24th November, 1882, Sir George H. Leith 
Buchanan obtained a specimen of this rare species when out snipe- 
shooting on the banks of Loch Lomond, near the mouth of the 
Endrick ; and he (Mr. Lumsden) trusted the following extract from 
Sir George's letter would satisfy those naturalists who object to any 
rare birds being shot, that the present specimen was obtained by 
accident. "On the 24th November I shot a specimen of the 
Pectoral Sandpiper of America. It rose from some rushes, and I 
took it for. a Jack-snipe until I picked it up. As it was blowing 
very hard at the time with snow and rain, I could not see distinctly." 
The specimen was a female, and its stomach contained small insects. 

This species has only once been recorded from any part of Scot- 
land, a specimen having been shot at the mouth of the Don, in 
Aberdeenshire, in October, 1867, as mentioned by Mr. Gray in the 
Birds of the West of Scotland^ who includes it on the authority of 
Mr. Angus. In England it is more common, about twenty instances 
of its occurrence being on record. The home of the Pectoral Sand- 
piper is America, and it is met with in Europe only as a rare 
straggler. It is widely distributed over North America, is recorded 
from South America as far south as Brazil and Pern, and is very 



Digitized by 



Google 



292 PROCEBDINOS OP THE 

well known in the West Indies. According to Dr. Coues it is 
seldom seen in flocks, but scattered singly or in pairs. In some 
parts of America it receives the name of " meadow-snipe," " short 
neck," and "fat bird." In other districts it is also called "jack- 
snipe." 



1,—Tlie Seal ami Whale Fishery of 1S82, By Mr. Thomas 
Southwell, r.Z.S. 

In this paper it was stated that the Newfoundland sealing in the 
season of 1882 opened under the most unfavourable circumstances, 
owing to the vast accumulation of ice in the Atlantic. All through 
the spring, and quite into the month of June, reports represented 
the Newfoundland seas as bristling with huge icebei^s, whilst from 
Cape Breton to 200 miles S.R of Cape Race stretched a tremendous 
pack of heavy ice, which the sealers on their arrival in vain tried 
to penetrate, efTectually closing the port of St. John's. On the 2nd 
March five of the Dundee vessels were reported still fast in the ice, 
and they only reached St. John's on the 9th March, barely in time 
to make their arrangements for sailing on the 10th, the day fixed 
by law for their departure. 

On the 21st May H.M.S. "Teredos" reported the ice to be nearly 
solid from Cape Breton to Newfoundland ; twenty-one ships were 
locked in the ice N.W. of Cape Race, one large ship of 1000 tons 
resting forty feet above the water ; and at the end of the month 
there were still many ships imprisoned in the vast ice-field off Cape 
Breton. It was not surprising, therefore, that the Dundee vessels 
should have been much less successful than in the season of 1881, 
the take of Seals having been only 63,204, against 139,985 in the 
previous year. The "Arctic" and the "Thetis" were the most 
successful, the former taking 24,663 and the latter 10,598 Seals, 
the remaining four vessels securing 27 ,943 Seals between them. The 
"Wolf" was also reported "full," and^the "Proteus" and "Walrus" 
(all three belonging to British owners), the former with 8000 and 
the latter with 7800 Seals. The Newfoundland voyage, notwith- 
standing the difficulties which the vessels encountered, might, so 
far as the British vessels were concerned, be said, upon the whole, 
to have been a successful one, although far short of the exceptional 
season of 1881. The "Thetis" proceeded from St. John's direct 
to the Greenland Seal fishery, and succeeded in shooting 3317 old 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 2 9 

Seals and eight Bottle-nose Whales, thus making a very successful 
voyage. It is believed that fourteen vessels belonging to British 
owners, in addition to the Dundee sealers, left St. John's Harbour 
on the 10th March. 

Only eight of the thirteen Scotch vessels which sailed for the 
northern sealing voyage were successful, the total take being 22,142 
Seals, against 23,894 in the season of 1881; but as the Norwegian 
vesse's took even more Seals than our own, it is probable that the 
whole brood was destroyed, and that, had more ships been present, 
it would only have resulted in a lower average. 

The old Seal-fishing in April is reported to have been a perfect 
failure, partly owing to the weather, and partly to the heavy ice 
being surrounded by thin bay-ice, which prevented the boats from 
getting near the Seals. 

The Dundee vessels, nine in number, which went on to Davis 
Straits in search of Eight Whales, were rewarded with 78 of these 
valuable monsters, which produced 770 tons of oil and 582 cwts. 
of bone, which, with oil at £33 per ton and bone at £1150 per ton, 
would yield a return of £58,876. 

The notable feature in the fishery of 1882 was the capture of a 
large number of Bottle nose Whales, Hyperoodon rostratum, 463 
of these animals having been secured by the Scotch vessels alone. 
203 of these fell to the lot of the "Eclipse;" and the cargo was 
estimated to yield something like 230 tons of Bottle-nose oil, which 
has been proved to be little if at all inferior to true sperm oil, being 
worth about £60 per ton. It is to be feared that their value 
having become fully known, it will in future go hard with the 
Bottle-noses. A considerable number of these Whales were also 
taken by the Norwegian fleets. 



II. — The Hetercecism of the Uredines. By Mr. Robert Turner. 

As some considerable time has elapsed between the reading of the paper 
and its publication, a few notes have been added. — R.T., August, 1884. 

We have long been aware that many of the parasitic entozoa of 
man and brute, after living for a time in one creature, transfer 
themselves and their havoc to another. To understand the object 
of migration in the case of these parasites is not very difficult. 
The living morsels lie patiently await in some animal likely to be 



Digitized by 



Google 



294 PROOEBDINOS OF THE 

devoured by another, till, as a happy consummation for them, they 
are gulped into a ravenous maw where they find a congenial climate 
and awake to new activities. The dog pleasurably gorges himself 
with rabbit, but often worries up at the same time a sufficiency of 
these included morsels to mar his future. In the same way the 
best mousers among cats are in danger of most misery. Cow, sheep, 
and pig harbour parasites that produce various species of tapeworm 
in man, when human wisdom — in the shape of boiling, roasting, 
and the like — is at fault in thoroughness. The parasite ordinarily 
assumes a different form in each of the animals which it inhabits ; 
but sometimes all its metamorphoses are completed in the same 
animal — as is the case with trichince — and then carried out de now 
in the next suitable iiesh-eater in which it gains a settlement. 

I remind you of these facts, as my subject is one of a kindred 
nature to which much attention has only been turned in recent 
years, the heteroecism and dimorphism of certain vegetable parasites, 
the Uredines, that infest the leaves, stems, flowers, and fruits of 
plants. The conclusions of many competent observers have been 
to the effect that some parasitic fungi can, for the furtherance of 
their own interests, migrate from plant to plant and take different 
forms if needful. Though a few able botanists are still disinclined 
to admit that such heteroecism is clearly established, it seems to me 
that its existence in many instances can hardly be doubted, though 
many details still await confirmation or correction. The different 
forms which these parasitic fungi assume at various stages have led 
to their being referred to several distinct species, as iEcidium, 
Uredo, Puccinia — a classification similar to what that of the larva, 
pupa, and imago of an insect as distinct species would be. In any 
fresh classification there arises the difficulty of settling which of 
the names the species should bear ; and, as sexuality* in these plants 
has not yet been established, all nomenclature is in the meantime 
provisional. In recent classifications the name given to the resting- 
spore stage, as the most advanced yet known, is generally adopted. 
Should it be established, however, that the cluster-cup stage is a 
sexual generation, as has long been surmised and is highly probable, 
this nomenclature would undergo extensive changes, as that condition 
would then be recognised as the most complex, so that what is now, 
for instance, generally called Puccinia would be termed iEcidium. 

A typical ^Ecidium, I may remind you, has mycelium that 
ramifies in the interior leaf-tissue and produces on the under surface 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 295 

of the leaf peridia fringed with recurved teeth. These peridia are 
either scattered over the surface or collected in tufts and clusters. 
Sometimes they are elongated (as in Roestelia and Peridermium\ 
and open hy lateral fissures or a lacerated mouth or burst irregularly. 
Inside the cups moniliform chains of spores are produced. Growing 
from the same mycelium, usually appearing before the peridia and 
on the upper side of the leaf — though sometimes on the same 
surface as the peridia — are flask-like bodies known as spermogonia, 
which are clothed with very fine threads that protrude like a brush 
from the mouth, and which contain besides a very minute dust, 
spemiatia. These spermogonia have long been surmised to be 
connected with the sexual reproduction of the fungus, but as yet 
all their bearings on the life-history of the plant have eluded obser- 
vation. The largest spermatia that have been examined are only 
 ^-^jfu inch long by xijv}iruu ^^^^ across ; but the length of many is 
not more than this width. 

On cereals and other grasses, and generally on many plants in 
early summer, examples of Uredo or rust are frequent. From the 
mycelium tufts of branches are given out towards the surface, and 
each of these bears a roughish spore at its tip — not a chain of spores 
as with JEcidium — and, from the mass of such spores, rusts are 
usually very conspicuous. These spores are most frequently brown, 
but sometimes yellow. 

Later in the season teleutospores appear. K these are single- 
celled, the parasite is known as Uromyces; if two-celled, as Puccinia 
or Oymnosporangium ; if there are three cells side by side, as 
Triphragmium ; if three or more cells in a row, as Phragmidium, 
These spores usually germinate after a period of rest. The mildew 
on wheat (Puccinia graminis) is one of the best known examples 
of this stage. Its spores grow from the same mycelium as the rust 
ones (Uredo linearis)^ but, while these rust spores are orange, 
roundish, and somewhat rough, the others are elongated, club-shaped, 
and — though brownish under the microscope — black in mass to the 
naked eye. 

So long ago as the end of last century the barberry bush had 
been almost extirpated in some parts of England, as farmers had 
become convinced that it was a fruitful source of mildew in wheat. 
'Botanists were, however, inclined to regard this as a vulgar error. 
About seventeen years ago Prof, de Bary of Strasbourg, by 
experiment and observation, satisfied most continental botanists 

VOL. V. X 



Digitized by 



Google 



296 PROOEBDINGS OF THE 

that Uredo linearis and Pucdnia graminis of wheat were but stages 
in the development of .^idium Berberidis of the barberry. Till 
recently his results were usually ignored, denied, or doubted in 
Britain. In 1881 Dr. Charles B. Plowright, of King's Lynn, 
instituted a series of experiments which he has continued during 
last year, and these have verified the accuracy of de Bar/s obser- 
vations. He adopted every precaution to guard against error, and 
his results, I need hardly add, may be implicitly relied on. Not 
only did he sow spores of ./Eddium Berberidis on wheat, but of 
Puccinia graminis on barberry, and in the one case came up Uredo 
linearis, in the other, JEcidium Berberidis, In the light of. this 
knowledge it is interesting to trace the life-history of the parasite. 
First, growing in hedge or copse is a barberry bush. On the under- 
side of its leaves appear cluster-cups, on the upper-side the flask- 
like spermogonia. The cluster-cups ripen and the spore at the tip 
of each chain goes off and is superseded by the one next it, which 
has in turn to make way for its successor, and so on. The secidio- 
spore thus thrown upon the world either finds some kind of grass 
on which it can grow or perishes without fulfilling its mission. 
Should it fall in with a young blade of wheat, it begins work, 
sends out a filament that searches about till it hits on a stoma, into 
which it insinuates itself. The part of the germinating filament 
inside the leaf thereupon swells out and branches, the contents of 
the spore flow through into this enlarged space, and thus the 
parasite gets inside to work havoc. Its mycelium spreads through 
the tissue, and in about a week it sends up every here and there 
multitudinous tufts of thread-like branches towards the surface of 
the leaf, which burst through the epidermis, producing spores that 
fill the ruptured parts in reddish mass. The minute roughening on 
these spores probably helps to fix them to any blade of wheat on 
which they may fall, and their lightness permits every breath of air 
to disperse them. During nearly the whole season they are pro- 
duced and dispersed, and, falling on wheat plants, give out tubes 
that bore their way inside, and plunder, and, from their mycelia, 
reproduce spores of a similar kind. But towards the end of the 
season, when a chill comes into the air and a rigidity to the grasses, 
we could almost imagine that the parasite had become stricken with 
a presentiment of futurity. It gives up producing rust spores, and, 
to save itself from annihilation, slips into another alternation of 
generation. It produces dark, hard, heavy teleutospores, attached 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL mSTORT SOOIBTT OF GLASGOW. 297 

by a stem to the tissues of the host-plant, as they are not meant to 
be thrown off and to germinate immediately like the rust ones. 
They lie quiet for months awaiting springtime. Then they germin- 
ate, sending out a filament from each of their two divisions. The 
upper part of this filament gives off three simple tapering branches, 
each bearing a clear yellowish spore-like body at the tip. Off on 
the wind float these sporidia, and some at last reach a haven of rest 
on a barberry bush. Falling on a leaf they do not take the trouble 
to hunt out a stoma, but bore right through into the interior, where 
they send out mycelial threads, and in about a week cluster-cups 
are produced. The cluster-cup spores will not —so far as known — 
germinate on the barberry, nor will these clear yellow spores on 
grasses. In the barberry seems to lie for this parasite as a species 
the secret of renewed possibilities of vigorous mischief. There it 
would appear to touch afresh the torch of life, and through 
mysterious sexuality — as I have already remarked, a sexuality as 
yet only surmised — to develop latent force. The youthful spore 
is thrown off full of vital zeal, and its fresh vigour infuses itself 
into the threadlets of destruction which it sends into the grasses. 
Rust and mildew may perhaps be able to propagate themselves for 
years in some milder makeshift way without fresh cluster-cups ; but, 
when the spores from such cluster-cups come, ruin comes with them. 
They set to with a will, and the wheat stalk often dies green, and 
rarely produces more in the shape of grains than shrivelled starve- 
lings. We can then say with Shakespeare — 

** The green com 

Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard." * 

Many other instances illustrative of heteroecism may be adduced. 
The cylindrical peridia ( Peridermium Pint) that sometimes occur 
on the young leaves of Scotch Fir send out spores that are said to 
produce the golden rust ( Coleosparium SenecionisJ on the under side 
of groundsel leaves. The tufts of minute tassels (Rcestelia lacerata) 
on the leaves and fruit of the hawthorn are a phase in the life of 
the parasite on the common juniper (Podisoma Jtiniperi); those 
on pear leaves (Rcestelia cancellata), of the parasite of Savin 

• Further details on this interesting subject will be found in the various 
papers by de Bary, and in his book, " Neue Untersuchungen iiber Uredineen," 
Berhn, 1866; in the English translation of Sachs* "Textbook of Botany," 
2nd Edition, page 380; and in "Grevillea," "The Gardener's Chronicle," 
" Science Gossip," and other English serials for 1881, and since. 



Digitized by 



Google 



"Zm PROOEEDINGS OF THB 

Juniper (Podisoma Sabince), The curious little horns (Rcestelia 
comuta) on the leaves of the rowan-tree produce spores from which 
on the common juniper proceed the gelatinous orange fungus known 
as Gymnosporangium Juniperi. In the same way a cluster-cup on 
the nettle is associated with a puccinia that appears on various 
carices, while cluster-cups on Echium vulgare, Rhamnua FraTigida, 
Orchis mamUata, Tussilago Farfara^ and many other plants, in a 
further stage become puccinia on various grasses. 

These discoveries of the identity of species formerly considered 
distinct have led some continental botanists, Winter and Schroter 
especially, to attempt a classification of the Uredines more in 
harmony with the facts ascertained. 

Note, — This classification in a modified form is given by Dr. Plowright in 
** Grevillea " for March, 1883, to which I beg to refer you. The following is 
(in an abridged form) the arrangement of 

Ubomyoes and Puccinia. 

1. Leptnromyces. 1. Leptopnccinia- j Tele^tospores only, germmating 

2. Micmn,myces. 2. Micropnccmia- | '^^i?re^:^rri^^^^^^ 

3. Hemiuromyces. 3. Hemipupcinia — Uredo and teleutospores. 

4. Uromycopsis. 4. Pucciniopsis — iBcidio and teleutospores. 

5. Eu-nromyces. 5. Enpnccinia — ^idio, nredo and teleutospores. 

(a) All three spore forms on same host plant. 
(h) Spermogonia and secidiospores on one host plant, uredo and 
teleutospores on another. 

The plants included in the 5th division, section 5, are those with which we 
are now interested. Of these the following is a list so far as known, and of 
the plants on which they are found : — 

Uromyces Dactylidis, Otth. ^cidiospores on Eanunculus bulbosus. Teleuto- 
spores on Dactylis glomerata and some other grasses. 

Uromyces Poa, Rabh. ^id. on Ecmutieulus Ficaria and R ripens, TeL 
on Poa nemoralis and Poa prcUensis, 

Uromyces Jtmci, Desm. iEcid. on Inula dysenterica. Tel. on Juncus 
ohtusifolius. 

U. pisi, Pers. Mcid, on Euphorbia Cyparissias. Tel. on Ficia Craeca and 
various species of Pisum and LcUhyris. 

Puccinia graminis, Pers. ^cid. on Berberis vulgaris, TeL on cereals and 
other grasses. 

P. rubigo'vera, DC. ^cid. on Lycopsis arvensis, Echium vulgare, Sym- 
phytum officinale. Tel. on various grasses. 

P. coronata, Corda. .£cid. on Rhamnus FrangulaQJid.R catharticus, TeL 
on various grasses. 

P. MoliniM^ Tnl. Mai^, on Orchis and Listera, Tel. on Molima ccfrulea. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OP GLASGOW. 299 

P. Poarum^ Kiel, -ficid. on Tumlago Farfara. Tel. on Poa annua and 
P. pratensis. 

P. Magnusiana, Kom. iEcid on Humex Eydrolapaihum, Tel. on Phrag- 
miles communis. 

P. sessilis, Schneid. ^cid. on Allium ursinum. Tel. onPhalaris arundi" 
nacea. 

P. caricis, Schnm. -^id. on Urtica dioica. Tel. on yarions carices. 

P, sylvatica, Schrot. ^id. on Taraxacum officinale. Tel. on Caress 
muricata. 

Assuming that the main facts of this plant heteroecism are 
correct, it is probable that only a few of the connections and 
relations have been traced, and that, as our knowledge grows, inter- 
communications at present undreamt of may be discovered. For 
instance, JS^acftwm Grosmlarice, which is ranked under section 
Pucciniopsis, is probably heteroecismal. Though common in this 
country, yet here no teleutospores have been observed in connection 
with it on the gooseberry; but such is stated to have occurred on 
the Continent, and hence it is classed under Pucciniopsis. It is 
difficult to conceive that an ^Ecidium spore can survive from 
season to season, and the inference from this would appear to be 
that the relations of this parasite are as yet problematic. Again, 
the wheat-mildew is by no means limited to districts where the 
barberry is found, so that it is highly probable that that plant is 
not the only one on which the secidiospores are produced. Another 
instance might be adduced in Coleosporium Senecionis, which, is 
frequently found in situations miles distant from fir-trees. Such 
cases would appear to indicate that much still remains to be dis- 
covered in this branch of investigation. Some errors of observation 
have, besides, possibly taken place, owing to imperfection in the 
modes of investigation, and to the obscurity of the relationships of 
these low organisms. ^Notwithstanding all this, I think there can 
be no doubt of the reality of the heteroecism itself in many of the 
Uredines, and thus a new field lies before us for study and obser- 
vation. As to the very restricted nature of the heteroecism, as 
between two, or at most a very limited number of host plants, 
there seem to be many facts — some of which have already been 
referred to — that point to relations existing over a wider area. 

At the heart of the mystery of this heteroecism lies, no doubt, a 
good and sufficient reason. The problem is hard ; but you may, 
perhaps, pardon me if I hazard a guess. Cluster-cups are never 
very injurious to the plants on which they grow, while rusts and 



Digitized by 



Google 



300 PROOKBDINGS OF THB 

mildewy are. A destructive parasitic fungus could not so readily 
survive on living plants, if it confined all its operations to one, for 
destroying the species it would itself perish. It seems, besides, to 
be of advantage to such a parasite to have a secure retreat at one 
stage of its existence, where, without proving very injurious to the 
host plant, it may develop its cluster-cups ; and, if we assume 
these to be the sexual generation, the importance of such a nesting- 
place is apparent. Having obtained a certain stability of this 
kind it can -freely exert its destructive powers on plants other than 
this host, without danger to its own existence as a species. Para- 
sites, like Ustilago segetvm, that usually only attack a limited 
number among many plants of the same kind, or that are not very 
destructive, may pass ^their whole life on one individual without 
bringing their existence as a species into peril This moderation 
is for them a path of safety. The more destructive parasites, 
however, have an advantage in being heteroecismal, and by curbing 
themselves at one time of their life may safely break through all 
restraints at another. Parasites must have powers of destruction 
co-ordinated with the security of their own existence as species, or 
they must perisL Cluster-cups commonly attack temporary organs 
— leaves generally — as if they meant no permanent harm to their 
host-plants; while rusts and mildews are usually destructive of 
the plants themselves on which they prey. For instance, Rcestelia 
comuta does little harm to the rowan-tree, only attacking the 
leaves ; but the Gymnosjporangium affects the juniper differently, 
as it preys on the permanent parts of the shrub, and year by year 
silently but surely brings it to destruction. 

It suggests itself as a coincidence worthy of note, that while 
among the Lepidoptera, which depend for food on living vegetation, 
the caterpillar subsists on a plant usually different from that in 
which the winged insect finds its food of nectar, among the 
Coleoptera that depend on decaying matter, beetle and larva 
alike generally feed on the same substance. The reason for this 
arrangement seems clearly to be that it would prove awkward were 
a voracious caterpillar forced to restrain its appetite for the plant 
on which it preys, lest it should damage its chances of food when 
it becomes a creature with wings. Thus, it is arranged that the 
caterpillar shall fill its place in the world as a glutton, and that when 
it reaches the perfection of winged existence it shall sip nectar 
from plants that, as a caterpillar, it never attacked. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 301 

I think there can he little douht that this suhject of plant 
heteroecism is one in which there is yet room for much discovery 
hy patient ohservation and investigation, and one worthy to 
interest any intelligent mind. 



27th February, 1883. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., Vice-President, in the Chair. 

Messrs. James "White, Free Church Training College, and 
Andrew P. Dron, 18 Windsor Street, were elected Ordinary 
Members. 

The Secretary read the following Bye-Laws of the Society, 
passed at a meeting of Council held on 30th January, 1883 : — 

BYE-LAWS 

OF THE 

NATUEAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



Svjpjphmentary to Rule VIL — All names of Memhers intended 
to be proposed as Office-bearers shall be sent in writing to the 
Secretary, at least 8 days before the General Meeting in September, 
shall be submitted to a Meetirg of Council, and shall be printed, 
with the names of their proposers and seconders, in the Circular 
calling the General Meeting. 

Supplementary to Rule XIL — Theie shall be a Summer Session 
extending from May to September, for excursions to places of 
interest and for Meetings at which specimens may be exhibited and 
short papers read, but at which no general business of the Society 
shall be competent. 

The Council shall appoint a Committee to take charge of the 
Summer Session, and shall issue, in April, a Syllabus with dates of 
the Meetings and Excursions, &c., which shall be deemed sufficient 
notice thereof. 

A Member of the Society shall be appointed each year by the 
Council as Secretary of the Summer Session. He shall record the 
proceedings in a Minute-book provided for the purpose, and shall 
prepare a Report of the work to be read at the following General 
Meeting in September. 

Supplementary to Rule XV IL — The second sentence of this 
Rule shall refer only to the election of Members (Rules iv., v. and 



Digitized by 



Google 



302 PRO0EBDING8 OP THB 

vi.), to the removal of Members (Kule xvi.), and to motions affect- 
ing the Constitution (Rule xx.). 

Supplementary to Rvle XVIII, — All subscriptions and entry 
monies shall be due upon election, and thereafter on 1st September 
of each year. Should a Member be a second year in arrears of his 
subscription, the Treasurer shall twice send him notice to that effect, 
and if payment be not then made, his name shall be removed from 
the roll 

At the January Meeting of each year, and thereafter during the 
Session, the Treasurer shall place in the Rooms a list of Members, 
having all arrears of subscriptions marked upon it. 

Supplementary to Rule XXL — No volume shall be retained for 
a longer period than four weeks, when it must be returned to the 
Librarian ; the loan may, however, be renewed for a similar term, 
provided no other application has been made for the work. 

No Member shall be allowed to borrow more than two volumes 
at one time, without special permission from the CounciL 

Mr. James J. F. X. King exhibited 35 species of Trichoptera 
and a group of Neuroptera-planipenniay intended to form the 
nucleus of a collection, which he stated had been prepared by the 
Museum Committee for the Kelvingrove Museum. 

Mr. Thomas King exhibited specimens of Mnium undulatumy 
Hed., found by him in fruit at Innellan on 24th ulto.; and he 
stated that the moss, although common in most districts, is rarely 
found bearing capsules. 

Mr. Peter Ewing exhibited flowers of coltsfoot, Tussilago Farfara^ 
L., and made some remarks on the changes of position which the 
heads assume before and after the period of flowering. He also 
exhibited specimens of a hepatic, Lophocolea bidentata, N., in fruit. 

Mr. James Steel exhibited a Peregrine Falcon, Falco peregrinus^ 
shot near Bowling. After referring to the infrequency of the 
species in the district, he drew attention to the specimen, which 
possessed only one leg, and remarked that the absence of a limb 
did not seem to have interfered with the predatory habits of the 
bird, as it was found to have struck down a grouse just before 
being shot 

PAPERS READ. 

I. — On Sea-weeds, By Mr. D. Gregorson. 
An interesting description was given of the groups of marine 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIBTY OP GLASGOW. 303 

AlgoBy and the characteristics of many of the species found on our 
coasts. The author also referred to the best method of preserving 
these plants, and in illustration of his remarks he exhibited a large 
collection containing many beautiful specimens. 



IL — Meteorological Notes and Remarks on the State of Vegetation 
in the Public Parks of Glasgow during the Year 1882. By Mr. 
D. M'Lellan, Superintendent of Parks. 

In my closing remarks upon the weather of the previous year, 
which was a very unpropitious one, I expressed a hope that this 
year would turn out brighter and better for all concerned in the 
cultivation of the soiL This wish has, fortunately, to a certain 
extent been realized, as the following short summary of the statis- 
tics of each month will show : — 

January was an exceptionally mild month for the season of the 
year — there being only 3" of frost registered, and the thermometer 
being below the freezing-point only on three mornings. Many 
plants were in flower out of doors at the various public Parks in 
the city, among them being daisies, polyanthus, marsh marigold, 
hepaticas, jasminum, Daphne Mezereum, rhododendron, snowdrop, 
and Christmas rose. The total rainfall was 3*065 inches, and 
there were 18 days on which no rain fell. The average temperature 
was 40*5°, compared with 27° as the average temperature during 
the corresponding month of 1881. On the 6th of the month there 
was a very violent storm of wind, which did very considerable 
damage to trees and shrubs. The prevailing winds were from the 
south-west. 

During the month of February there was a continuation of the 
same weather — mild and open — as was experienced during the 
preceding month; but towards the end of the month the wind 
was from the east, and very cold. In addition to the plants in 
flower during January, the blooms of the crocus, JErica herhacea, 
Pulmonaria oficinalis, and mahonia were to be seen. The ther 
mometer was only at and below the freezing-point on two morn- 
ings, and there was 1° of frost registered during the whole month. 
The temperature averaged 43*6**, while, in the month of February 
1881, it was as low as 27\ The total rainfall was 3*089 inches, 
and the dry days numbered 13. The prevalent winds were south- 
west. 



Digitized by 



Google 



304 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

March was also a mild, moist month, and many more plants 
appeared in flower. Among them were the hyacinths, daffodil, 
hybrid rhododendrons, coltsfoot, Scilla sibirica, Eibes sanguinea, 
and Bulhocodium vemvm, while a number of trees and shmbs 
were nearly in leaf. Only 6" of frost were registered during four 
mornings; and the average temperature was 43°, as compared 
with 35** in the corresponding month of the previous year. The 
total rainfall during the month was 3*06 inches, and there was no 
rain on 12 days. "Winds were prevalent from the south-west. 

April commenced with cold east winds, which continued during 
almost all the month ; and as vegetation was very far advanced, 
owing to the mildness of the weather during the first three months 
of the year, it received a rather severe check. The horse-chestnuts 
suffered especially, and lost all the young tender leaves which had 
burst out in the beginning of the month. The white rhododen- 
drons were in magnificent bloom during the first week of this 
month, but were entirely blighted on the evening of the 10th, 
when the thermometer fell below the freezing-point. The average 
temperature was 43° — the same as in the preceding month — and 
9° of frost were, in all, registered. The rainfall was comparatively 
small, being only 1*99 inches, and there was no rain on 21 days. 

May came in, as the saying is, " like a lion, and went out like a 
lamb." The first fortnight of the month was very cold, and there 
were many heavy showers of sleet and hail which materially 
injured and retarded vegetation. But towards the end of the 
month the weather was much warmer and finer, which, to a certain 
extent, counterbalanced the bad effects of the first half of the 
month. This is the month during which many of the flowering 
trees and shrubs come into bloom, and the double cherry, thorns, 
lilacs, and laburnums gave a poor display of blossom. The oak 
came into leaf on the 8th and the ash on the 18th — these being 
the latest of our trees to put forth their leaves. The temperature 
averaged 50% the total rainfall was 2*041 inches, and the dry days 
numbered 17. The prevalent winds during the first half of the 
month were from the north-east, and during the last half from the 
south-west. 

June may be characterised as a genial, growing month, during 
which all vegetation made very rapid progress, and flowers were 
promising a good display of bloom for the month of August. Eain 
fell more or less on 18 days during the month, giving a total rain- 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 305 

fall of 3*022 inches, and the average temperature was 55°. The 
prevalent winds were from the south-west. 

During the month of July there were only 8 days on which 
no rain fell, and the rainfall reached the large total of 4*03 inches. 
The average temperature was 59° — a very low figure for a month 
which is usually one of the warmest in the year. With this extra 
amount of moisture, the great want of sunshine, and the consequent 
low temperature, flowering plants did not make the progress which 
is expected during this month, and which is necessary to mature 
their growth, and to produce a good display of flower. The preva- 
lent winds were from the south-west. 

August was an improvement on the preceding months, there 
being 19 days on which there was no rain, and the total rainfall 
being only 1 -82 inches. The average temperature was not high — 
59** — being the same as last month; but during the first fortnight 
the weather was warm, and there was a fair amount of sunshine. 
Flowers, accordingly, made up a little of the way which had been 
lost during the preceding month, and during the last fortnight there 
was a fair display of blossom in the various Parks and Squares. 
Vegetation in general, however, had made good progress, and the 
foliage on trees and shrubs was very good. 

September was, upon the whole, a good harvest month, with 14 
dry days, and a total rainfall of 3*46 inches. The temperature 
averaged 53", and the prevalent winds were from the south by west. 
Flowers began to show signs of decay towards the end of the month, 
as the plants had never got properly matured for the want of sun- 
shine and heat. 

The weather during the month of October continued much the 
same as during the preceding month, but there was more continual 
dripping. There was one continuous week of good weather, how- 
ever, from the 23rd inst. to the 29th, which gave farmers an 
opportunity of getting in any crops which were still in the fields. 
The total rainfall during the month was 3*36 inches, and there 
were 15 dry days. The average temperature was 48°, and the 
thermometer was at or below the freezing-point on three mornings 
towards the end of the month, registering in all 10° of frost. 

November proved to be the wettest month of the year, as the 
rainfall amounted to no less than 5*05 inches, with only 11 days 
on which there was no rain. There was also a very considerable 
faU in the average temperature, which was 38**, and the thermometer 



Digitized by 



Google 



306 PROOEEDINGS OF THB 

was at or below the freezing-point on 11 mornings, registering in 
all 14' of frost. The prevalent winds were south by west. 

The month of December was the most variable of the whole 
year, extremes of heat and cold recurring often within twenty-four 
hours. The temperature was at or below the freezing-point on 21 
days, and 146' of frost were registered. On 6 days it never rose 
above 32®, the freezing-point Kain, sleet, or snow, fell upon 18 
days, giving a total of 4*042 inches of moisture for the month. 
The average temperature was 33°, as compared with 39' for the 
corresponding month of the year 1881. The prevailing winds were 
south by west on 16 days, and north by east and west on 15 days. 

The following summary and comparison with the previous year 
may be of interest: 

The highest day temperature during the year 1882 was upon the 
18th May, when the thermometer registered 77' in the shade. In 
1881 the highest day temperature was 82' in the shade, upon the 
29th May. 

The lowest night temperature was on the 15th December, when 
the thermometer fell to 9', or 23° of frost. In January 1881 the 
lowest point reached was zero, or 32' of frost. 

On 38 days during the year the thermometer fell below the 
freezing-point, registering a total of 193' of frost, as compared with 
560' on 86 days in 1881. The average temperature was 46° in 
1882, as against 45' in 1881. 

Rain fell more or less on 192 days, giving a total rainfall of 
41*035 inches, as compared with 160 days, and a rainfall of 3303 
inches during 1881. The rainfall during 1882 was thus in excess 
of the previous year by about 8 inches, and the number of wet 
days was increased by 32. 

Although these statistics prove that the year 1882 was through- 
out an exceptionally wet season, still the temperature was fairly 
high throughout the year. Accordingly vegetation made rapid 
progress during the latter part of May and June; and as the months 
of August and September were fairly good, there was a display of 
flowers in the Parks which was greatly superior to that in the 
previous year. 

Trees and shrubs flowered very sparingly during the spring 
months owing to the immature state of the buds and wood — a 
result of the wet, unfavourable weather during the previous autumn. 
The unprecedented mild weather during the early spring months 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 



307 



brought on vegetation prematurely, and it received a severe check in 
the beginning of May. The early trees, such "as the lime and 
chestnut, suifered most severely; and although they pushed out 
new leaves and wood, and recovered to a certain extent, the con- 
stitution of the trees is materially impaired. 

Altogether the year 1882 has not been such a gloomy one as 
some of its predecessors, although the florist at least cannot look 
back upon it as a bright spot. Still the weather was suitable 
generally for the farmer, and this certainly is a matter of great 
congratulation. Sunshine was somewhat sparingly given us during 
the summer months; but we had a fine dry autumn, and the crops, 
which were generally heavier than usual, were got in safely and in 
good condition. It is a long road which has no turning, however, 
and as the two previous years of 1881 and 1882 have not been so 
bright and pleasant as some of their predecessors, we have every 
reason to hope that 1883 may be numbered among the good, 
prosperous, and prolific years. 

Subjoined is the Meteorological Eecord for the last three years, 
as kept at the Queen's Park, Glasgow : — 

Copy of Meteorological JReco7'd kept at QueerCa Park, Glasgow, 
Rain Gauge above the Sea Level, 143 '95. 





1880. 


1881. 


1882. 


MONTH. 


Rain- 
falL 


Thermo- 

METJIR. 


Dry 
Days. 


Rain- 
faU. 


Thermo- 
meter. 


Dry 
Days. 


Rain- 
faU. 


Thermo- 
meter. 


Dry 
Days 




Average. 


Average. 


Average. 




Max. 


Min. 


Max. 


Min. 


Max. 


Min. 




JaDuary, 

February, ... 

March, 

April, 


2-58 
2-96 
2-24 
311 
1-06 
2-10 
4-18 

•76 
3-14 

•84 
6-62 
3-60 

32-09 


38 
46 
46 
61 
67 
66 
66 
69 
64 
60 
42 
40 


32 
36 
38 
37 
40 
46 
49 
61 
48 
34 
31 
33 


20 
11 
23 
13 
21 
17 
18 
28 
19 
24 
12 
18 


•40 
3-66 
2-44 
1-33 
3*46 
2-26 
3-80 
3-33 

r9i 

2-22 
6-03 
3-46 


32 
40 
44 
60 
62 
64 
66 
63 
61 
62 
60 
44 


22 
32 
32 
34 
42 
46 
61 
48 
47 
89 
37 
36 


27 
19 
13 
22 
17 
14 
11 
17 
17 
23 
9 
16 

206 


3-65 
3-89 
8-60 
1-99 
2-41 
3-32 
4 03 
1-82 
3-46 
3-36 
6-60 
4-42 

41-36 


43 

48 
48 
49 
60 
66 
Q7 
68 
61 
64 
44 
38 


88 
39 
38 
37 
40 
46 
61 
60 
44 
41 
33 
28 


18 
13 
12 
?!1 


Muy 


17 


June, 


1^ 


July, 


8 


August, 

September, ... 

October 

November, ... 
December,.... 


19 
14 
16 
11 
13 




63 


39 


224 


33-30 


62 


39 


53 


40 


173 



Digitized by 



Google 



308 PBOOBBDINOS OF THE 

27th March, 1883. 

Mr. John A, Harvie-Brown, F.RS.E., F.Z.S., President, in the 
Chair. 

Mr. James J. F. X. King exhibited 1 2 species of Odonata, part 
of the Collection in course of preparation by the Museum Committee 
for the Kelvingrove Museum. 

Mr. Thomas Scott, Corresponding Member, exhibited an unusual 
variety of Helix nemoralis, L., found one day last month in " Scott^s 
Glen," in the neighbourhood of Greenock, by Mr. T. Fisher. Mr 
Scott stated that this variety is smaller than the typical H, nemoralis, 
is of a uniform greenish-yellow colour, and has a prominent white 
ridge, the shell being so thin that the ridge is distinctly seen through 
it. The tubercles on the body of the animal are rather coarser than 
usual, and there is a distinct white line extending down the back 
from near the bases of the upper tentacles. At each side of this 
white line there is a brownish band, then a band of lighter colour, 
the margin of the foot being darkish grey. This variety differs 
from the typical form in being smaller and having a white rib, and 
from the variety hortensit! in having the shell of a uniform colour 
instead of banded. It may be identical with the variety mentioned 
in Science Gossip for January, 1883, and named alho-ldbris^ Crowther. 

Mr. W. Craibe Angus exhibited a Land Rail or Com Crake, 
Or ex pratensis, Bechst., shot, during a very severe storm, in Tiree, 
on the 23rd November, 1880. This bird was part of the 
" bag " of a party of three guns, the bag containing some 250 brace 
of birds — redshanks, water-rails, godwits, and snipe — the great 
majority being snipe. It had a wound in one of the wing bones, 
and this, although healed, made the wing stiff and somewhat con- 
tracted. The maimed wing doubtless explains why the bird had 
not accomplished its autumnal flight; and the gun had probably 
saved it from death by starvation. Although there are several 
records of the Com Crake being shot in Scotland in winter, 
some of these are open to doubt; few of the birds having fallen 
into the hands of those capable of identifying the species. The 
bird, which belonged to Mr. Angus, has been presented to the 
Kelvingrove Museum. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., V.P., laid on the table three 
volumes of Hepaticce Britannicce, collected by Dr. Benjamin 
Carrington, Eccles, and Mr. William H. Pearson, Pendleton. 
Mr. Henry E. Clark, M.E.C.S., exhibited three human skuUs 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL raSTORT 800IBTY OF GLASGOW. 309 

from Peru which had been sent to him for examination by Mr. 
John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., V.P. One of these was quite entire, 
but the other two had been divided vertically so that only the face 
and anterior portions of the cranium remained. The teeth were 
sound and well-preserved, but showed marked evidences of attrition, 
possibly the result of the grain on which their owners fed being 
ground in mills formed of soft stone, the flour being thus mixed 
with traces of sand. All three skulls were greatly compressed 
antero-posteriorly, the forehead shelving backwards and upwards 
from the superciliary ridge. The complete skull resembled 
very closely the most compressed Peruvian skull figured in 
Morton's Crania Americana, but was even more distorted than 
that is represented to have been ; and it had a capacity of 85 cubic 
inches, as compared with 90 cubic inches, the measurement of the 
average British skull. The occipital region showed very marked 
flattening, as did also the frontal region, but in the latter there was 
a central rounded prominence, probably due to the presence of a 
hole in the anterior compressing-board. Mr. Clark described the 
means by which this compression was exercised, and mentioned 
that only the children of the chiefs were subjected to the process ; 
as far as could be ascertained it did not affect the mental qualities 
of the persons; and the skulls exhibited were of fair average 
capacity, giving no evidence of any arrested development. He 
also referred to the wide distribution of this singular custom, and 
remarked that it had prevailed in tribes the most diverse, between 
whom it was impossible to conceive that there had ever been any 
communication. The mutilated skulls exhibited were partly covered 
by the dried scalps ; and the hair was long, dark, and straight, and 
not brown, as would have been the case had the skulls been buried 
amongst lime. The vertex of each of these imperfect skulls had 
been pierced, and through the hole passed a rope terminating in a 
rude tassel, showing that they had at one time been suspended, 
either as the trophies of a successful war, or more probably in the 
process of burial, for when whole skeletons had been found in 
Peruvian burial-places they were always in the sitting posture. It 
was noticeable that while the hole in the vertex had been made 
with some fine instrument, the vertical division had been done 
very roughly, appearing as if effected by means of a club or axe. 
Mr. Clark gave a brief summary of the evidence in support of the 
view that these skulls belonged, not to the race of Incas^ but to an 



Digitized by 



Google 



310 PROCBBDINGS OF THE 

older race which inhahited Peru at a remote period, hut did not 
hecome totally extinct till some centuries after their conquest hy the 
Incas. Their hurial-places are of enormous extent, and show 
evidences of no small civilization. 

Mr. John Kirsop, F.S.A. Scot., V.P., described the articles found 
along with these skulls, which consisted of pieces of coarse cloth, 
netting, fish-hooks, and rude needles. In some instances gold and 
other ornaments had also been found in the burial-places. 

PAPEBS BEAD. 

From Bahia Blanca to the Rio Negro. By Mr. Ernest Gibson, 
Corresponding Member. 

In this paper the author described his experience of a short trip 
to the Sierra de la Ventana range in the early part of 1881, with 
notes on the Fauna and Flora of the route. 

A paper was also read by Mr. John A. Harvie-Brown, F.R.S.E., 
F.Z.S., entitled The N, W. Coasts of Suthe^'landshire and their Bird 
Life, including the Islands of Garhh and Bulgie, 



24th April, 1883. 

Mr. Robert Mason, Vice-President, in the Chair. 

The following gentlemen were elected Ordinary Members of ths 
Society, viz.: — Messrs. Ernest E. Barker, 10 Grafton Square; 
David Rattray, 136 Mains Street; George Leslie, M.B., CM., Old 
Manse, Falkirk ; and Alexander Whyte, 140 Mains Street. 

Mr. Thomas Scott, Corresponding Member, exhibited some Shells 
from the Glasgow and Paisley Canal, upon which he made the 
following remarks : — 

Some time ago I happened to visit that part of the Glasgow and 
Paisley Canal a little east of Elderslie railway station ; perhaps I 
should rather say the bed of the canal, for ere this the canal had 
been drained as far west as Elderslie for the purpose of allowing 
the formation of the new railway from Glasgow to be proceeded 
with. 

"Walking eastward along the bed of the canal, I was sorry to 
observe the great "slaughter of the innocents" that had taken 
place. Anodonta cygncea, L., was lying about in great abundance, 
and could be gathered in nearly all stages of growth from the ova 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OP GLASGOW. 311 

(in shells recently dead) up to the mature mollusc ; and one could 
have filled a wheel-barrow with them in a very short time. The 
larger shells were nearly all half-buried in the mud, in the position 
in which the animal had lived. Sphcerinm corneurrij L., and 
Bythinia tentaculata, L., were in countless numbers; other species 
of aquatic shells were lying here and there, and among these the 
rare Limncea auricularia, L. I am not aware that this species of 
Limncea has before been recorded from the Paisley Canal, but I 
understand that Mr. J. M. Campbell of the Kelvingrove Museum 
used to find it here many years ago. 

Among Anodonta cygncea were one or two varieties which may 
be worth recording, viz.: — 

var. radiata, Mull. This variety when full grown is the 

finest of all the forms of the swan- 
mussel, measuring fully 5| inches. 
I found it to be rather rare. 

var. incrassata^ Shepp. This variety, which is easily distinguish- 
able from its great thickness across 
the umbones, I found to be the pre- 
vailing form among those I saw in 
the canal bed. 

var. minor (?) This form, of which I got a few speci- 

mens, is very stunted, and although 
evidently adult it measures not more 
than 3 to 3J inches in length. It 
will be observed from the specimen 
exhibited that in form it resembles 
var. incrassata; but being so decided- 
ly smaller than usual, I have, for the 
sake of reference, named it "var. 
minor J*^ 

Professor John Young, M.D., F.G.S., made some remarks on the 
characteristics of the large and variable group of fresh-water 
Unionidoiy referring more particularly to the genus Anodonta. 

Mr. Donald Farquhar exhibited a number of lizards, snakes, 
molluscs, and other objects from Port Elizabeth, South Africa, 
collected by his brother, Mr. John Parquhar, formerly a member of 
the Society. He also made some i em arks on the distribution and 
habits of the various species. 

VOL. V. Y 



Digitized by 



Google 



312 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 

Mr. John Young, F.G.S., exhibited a specimen of Produdus 
ecabriculusy from Highfield, Blantyre, showing a broad marginal 
fringe ; and he stated that this abnormal feature was very rare in 
species of the genus Productvs, So far as he was aware this was 
the first time it had been met with in P. scahriculus, 

Mr. George J. Combe laid on the table some large specimens of 
Fetasites alba, collected by him at Kippen, Stirlingshire. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HISTORY SOCIETY OF GLASGOW. 



313 



00 



00 
00 



5z; 
o 



m 
I 

m 
H 

O 
o 
o 

< 
o 

H 

;^ 
< 

H 
m 

H 
O 

H 
00 

PQ 
<1 



CO 


Oi 


O 


o 

rH 


o 


rH 


(N 


t^ 


o 


OS 


o 


O 






o 


?o 




<N 





•~ 


O 




^ 


Ti 












u 


•M 




pW 










i 


% 
1 




00 

1 


% 

pq 


2 








4i^ 




c3 


1 


3 








1 


fS 


•§ 


.9 


J 


.a 

d 








>> 


















PQ 


" 


" 


** 


"^ 


** 




- - 
















HN 


-*» 




<N 


t^ 


o 


o 


o 


o 


t^ 


o 


VK 




"^ 


CO 


»o 


o 


o 


t^ 


^ 


lO 


O 




»--< 






r-K 


T-\ 


rH 


rH 








^ 


l-» 


o 


<M 


<N 


kO 


<N 


1— 1 


r-( 




r-( 




'^ 


rH 










00 1 




•^ 
















•^ 




C5 


-^ 








; 









HN 




<N 




O 


525 


rH 




OO 




•^ 






P^ w 




. H 




Q-QQ 




S 525 




, Si 








T3 




Ol 




a 




^ 






I 




Digitized by 



Google 



314 PBOCEEDINGS OP THE 

LIST OF SOCIETIES, &c., WITH WHICH 
PUBLICATIONS ARE EXCHANGED. 



Alnwick. — Berwickshire Naturalists' Field Club. 

Amsterdam. — Koninklijke Akademie van Wettenschappen. 

Barrow. — Naturalists' Field CJub. 

Basel. — Naturforsohende Gesellschaft. 

Bath. — Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club. 

Belfast-Naturalists' Field Club. 

Natural History and Philosophical Society. 
Birmingham. — Philosophical Society. 
Bonn. — Naturhistorischer Verein der Preussischen Eheinlande 

und Westfalens. 
Bordeaux. — Soci^ti^ Linneenne. 
Boston. — Society of Natural History. 
Bremen. — Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein. 
Brighton. — Brighton and Sussex Natural History Society. 
Bristol. — Naturalists' Society. 
Briinn. - Naturforschender Verein. 
Brussels. — Societe Entomologique de Belgique. 

Societe Malacologique de Belgique. 

Societe Ro3^ale de Botanique de Belgique. 
Budapest. — Kiralyi Magyar Term^szettudomdnyi Tarsulat. 
Cambridge, Mass. Entomological Club. 

Nuttall Ornithological Club. 
Editors of " Science." 
Cassel. — Verein ftir Naturkunde. 
Cherbourg. — Soci^t^ Nationale des Sciences Naturelles et Math^ 

matiques. 
Chester. — Society of Natural Science. 
Christiania. — Royal University of Norway. 
Cincinnati. — Society of Natural History. 
Cordoba. — Academia Nacionale de Ciencias. 
Danzig. — Nat urforschende Gesellschaft. 
Davenport. — Academy of Natural Sciences. 
Dorset. — Natural History and Antiquarian Field Club. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HIBTOBY SOOIBTT OP OLASOOW. 315 

Dresden. — Naturwissenschaftliche Gesellschaft " Isis." 
Dublin. — Royal Dublin Society. 

Dumfries. — ^Dumfriesshire and Galloway Natural History and Anti- 
quarian Society. 
Durham. — Tyneside Naturalists' Field Club. 
Eastbourne. — Naturalists' History Society. 
Edinburgh. — ^Botanical Society. 
Geological Society. 
NaturaHsts' Field Club. 
Royal Physical Society. 
Elberf eld. — Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein. 
Essex. — Epping Forest and Essex Naturalists' Field Club. 
Florence. — Societk Entomologica Italiana. 
Frankfurt. — Senckenbergische Naturforschende Gesellschaft. 
Gent. — Natuurwetenschappen. 
Glasgow. — Archaeological Society. 
Faculty of Physicians. 
Geological Society. 
Industrial Museum. 
Mitchell Library. 
Philosophical Society. 
Stirling's Library. 
Giessen. — Oberhessische Gesellschaft fiir Natur und Heilkunde. 
Gorlitz. — Naturforschende Gesellschaft. 
Graz. — Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein fiir Steiermark. 
Grief swald. — Naturwissenschaftliche Vereine von Neu-Vorpom- 

mem und Rtigen. 
Halifax. T-Nova Scotian Institute of Natural Science. 
Halle. — Naturforschende Gesellschaft. 

Hamburg. — Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein fiir Hamburg- Altona. 
Heidelberg. — Naturhistorisch-medicinischer Verein. 
Helsingfors. — Societas pro Fauna et Flora Fennica. 
Konigsberg. — Physikalische-okonomische Gesellschaft. 
Leeds. — Naturalists' Club and Scientific Association. 

Yorkshire Naturalists' Union. 
Leipzig. — Naturforschende Gesellschaft. 
Li^e. — Soci^t^ Royale des Sciences. 
Liverpool — Naturalists' Field Club. 
London. — British Museum Library. 

Editors Entomologists' Monthly Magazine. 



Digitized by 



Google 



316 PBO0BEDING8 OF THE 

London. — Entomological Society. 

Royal Geographical Society. 

Geologists' Association. 

Hanipstead Katuitdists' Club. 

Linnean Society. 

Quekett Microscopical Club. 

Eoyal Microscopical Society. 
London, Ontario. — Entomological Society of the Province of Ontario. 
Lyons. — Soci6t^ Linn^enne. 
Madrid. — Sociedad Espafiola de Historia Natural 
Metz. — Soci6t^ d'Histoire Naturelle. 
Manchester. — Field J^aturalists* and Archaologists' Society. 
Geological Society. 
Literary and Philosophical Society. 
Scientific Students' Association. 
Moscow. — Soci^t^ Lnp^riale des Naturalistes. 
Monster. — Westfalischer Provinzial-Verein fiir Wissenschaft und 

Kunst. 
KeuchdteL — Soci^t^ des Sciences Naturelles. 
Newhaven, Conn. — Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
New York. — LinnsBan Society. 
Northampton. — Natural History Society. 
Norwich. — Norfolk and Norwich Naturalists' Society. 
Niimberg. — Naturhistorische Gesellschaft. 
Padua. — Societk Veneto-Trentina di Scienze Naturali. 
Paisley. — Free Library. 
Paris. — Soci^t^ Entomologique de France. 

Soci^t6 Zoologique de France. 
Passau. — Naturhistorischer Verein. 
Perth. — Perthshire Society of Natural Science. 

Scottish Naturalist. 
Philadelphia. — Academy of Natural Sciences. 
Plymouth. — Plymouth Listitution, and Devon and Cornwall Natural 

History Society. 
Poughkeepsie. — Vassar Brothers Institute. 
Prague. — KonigL-Bohm. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften. 
St. Louis, Miss. — Academy of Science. 
Salem, Mass. — Essex Institute. 
Schaffhausen. — Society Entomologique Suisse. 
'Sgravenhage. — Nederlandsche Entomologische Vereeniging. 



Digitized by 



Google 



NATURAL HIBTORY 8001BTY OP GLASGOW. 317 

Staffordshire.— North Staffordshire Naturalists' Field Club. 

Stettin. — Entomologische Zeitung. 

Stuttgart. — Verein fiir Vaterlandische Naturkunde in Wiirtemberg. 

Trieste. — Societk Adriatica di Scienze Naturali. 

Truro. — Koyal Institution of Cornwall. 

Vienna. — Kaiserlich-Konigliche Zoologisch-botanische GeseUschaft. 

Omithologischer Verein. 
"Washington. — Smithsonian Institution. 

United States Geological and Geographical Survey. 
Watford. — Herefordshire Natural History Society and Field Club. 
Wellington, N.Z. — New Zealand Institute. 
Winnipeg. — Historical and Scientific Society. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Proc. Nat.Hist. Soc. Glasgow. 1881. 



Yol.V-PII 




CARBONIFEROUS CHITONS. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google \ 



I . 



Proc.Nat. Hist. Soc. Glasgow, 1881. 



Voi.Y. PI n. 




^# 



CARBONIFEROUS CHITONS. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 














,1-^-;  -"^S-r^7:2^#^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



The Fli 




*iir :l ^^— 



Soiaidh. 




-^'S^ ^;,>*-U^*^c>i^''."V*8*.v. 



Eflan Tigh. 







£ilan Gobha: 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Nat. Hist. Soc. of Glasgow: VolV, Plate V. 




. '/^-m^^ 



*,^«K -!;•—. ♦^ 



,..*;-«--X>,-i^-C^-' 



u ngh. 







Digitized by 



Google 



\ 



\ 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 




3 2044 106 268 253 



Date Due 



HOV 



\a'67 



1 



Digitized by 



Google 






nnr^: 



l/^^S^^v^^^ 



lAv-N 



Tmm 



r\'r\ 



mmd 









A'/: 









^ y-v 



rNA 



l\AA 



-m. 



^m^mr 



AiiA /" ; 



A'A' 






^Hmmuuij 



















^^S^ 



Q^A 



Daa 



r^A¥^i^^JMM/i, 







