GENERAL VIEW 
OF THE 
WRITINGS 
O F 
L I N N U S.
By RICHARD PULTENEY, M.D.
& F.R.S.
LONDON; 
FrINTBP for T« PAYNE, AT THB MEWSrGATES 
AN© B, WHITE, Flest-Street.
FREDERICK M.
BAYER 
ADVERTISEMENT 
AS the 'Writer of this volume could not, for very 
obvious reafons, entertain the moft diftant inten- 
tion of ftanding forth the profefled Biographer of LiN- 
NiEUS, he wifties to preclude any undue expectations, by 
obferving that, the few memoirs relating to the life of 
this celebrated ProfefTor, which will be found inter- 
fperfed in the firft part of this VieWy were almoft wholly 
collected from LiNNJEUs's own writings, and other printed 
works ; and ferve, principally, to relieve the tedioufnefs of 
a bare account of books, and to connect in a better man- 
ner the feries and occafion of his publications.
He re- 
grets that his fources of intelligence have no^t been fuf- 
ficiently copious to enable him to render thefe memoirs 
more equal to his wifhes, and more worthy the accept- 
ance of the public.
To thofe who are converfant with 
the wbrks of LiNNiEUS, he is perfectly aware that thefe 
pages can afford but little amufement and ftill lefs in- 
formation, and can have no merit in their eye, beyond 
that of recalling to their remembrance, a fucceffion of 
faCts and obfervatioris, with which they were before ac- 
4quainted.
They will, however, concur with him in 
wifhing to difFufe the knowledge of the writings of fo 
great a mafter, and in endeavouring to excite an emula- 
tion in younger minds, for that fcience which they cul- 
tivate.
All the works of Linnjeus, as far as they have come 
to the Author's knowledge, are noticed in the fucceeding 
pages; but, as moft of them were fubfervient to his 
great objed the System ^/Nature, the outlines oi th^t 
work bear a principal part in this View of his writings.
The Classification <?/ Diseases, is but a fmall 
prt of his works 5 yet, as LiNNiEUs was an early writer 
on 
[ iv ] 
on that fubje£^:, which has fince excited the attention of 
many phyficians, and is at this day not fufficiently dif- 
cuffed, it hath therefore been exhibited more largely than 
many of his other writings.
The Amoenitates Academics, although ftrii^ly 
fpeaking they are not Linnjeus's own works, have yet fo 
large a fhare of his authority ftamped upon them, are fo 
intimately conneded with his writings, and, it is pre- 
fumed, are fo much Jefs known than they deferve to be, 
that it was judged proper to give a brief account of thp 
-whole colledlion.
The Pan Suecus having been firft prefented to the 
Englifly reader feveral years ago, by the Author of this vo- 
lume, in a periodical publication, is here fubjoined, with 
additional obfervations, and fome improvements in the 
general arrangement of the tables.
Few or no criticifms oi) the Linrtaa^ fyftem.
will be 
found in thefe pages.
No fyftem yet invented pan ftand 
a rigorous examination through all its parts, and LiNr 
NiEUS was, perhaps, better acquainted than any other 
man with the defe£ls of his own.
The ftudy of nature 
on fcientific principles, notwithftanding the manifold 
improvements of later years, may yet juftly be confidered 
as in its infancy, and all arrangements hitherto propofed, 
have, in their turns, given way to others.
At prefent 
the fyftem of Lini^jeus poffeffes the advantage of a gene- 
ral fuperiority in the public approbation : hpw long it 
may enjoy this pre-eminence, time only can difcover; 
in the mean while, it would be a more agreeable employ- 
ment, to endeavour to ftrengthen its bafis, fupply its de- 
£ciences, and candidly corredl its errors, than to objeSf to 
thofe anomalies and imperfedlioi^s, which will moft likely 
be ever infeparable from artificial arrangements ; and as 
natural method, it is as yet fo far unknown, that, in the 
vegetable kingdom Botanifts themfelves are not agreed q|| 
what principles it ought to be eftablifhed, 
5 A GEN?^ 
GENERAL VIEW 
OF THE 
WRITINGS 
OF THE LATE CELEBRATED 
L I N N ^ U S, &c.
CHARLES VON LINNE, the fon of a 
Swedijh divine, was born May 24, 1707^ 
at Roejhult^ in the province of Smaland^ in Sweden 
of which place his father had the cure, when this 
fon was born, but was foon after preferred to the 
living of Stenbrihult^ in the fame province, where 
dying in 1748, at the age of 70, he was fucceeded 
in his cure by another fon.
We are told, in the 
commemoration-fpeech on tliis celebrated man, de- 
livered in his Swediflj majefty's prefence, before 
the royal academy of fciences at Stockholm^ that the 
anceftors of this family took their firnames of 
LiNNitus, LindeUuSy and 'Tiliander^ from a large 
lime-tree^ or linden-tree^ yet (landing on the farm 
where Linnaeus was born ; and that this origin of 
firnames, taken from natural objeds, is not very 
uncommon in Sweden.
I B This 
[ 2 3 
This eminent man, whofe talents enabled him 
to reform the whole fcience of natural hiftory, ac- 
cumulated, very early in life, fome of the highcft 
honours that await the moft fuccefsful proficients 
in medical fcience j fmce we find that he was made 
profejfor of phyftc and botany^ in the univerfity of 
Upfal^ at the age of 34 and fix years afterwards,, 
phyfician to his fovereign^ the late king Adolphus ; 
who in the year 1753 honoured him ftill farther, 
by creating him knight of the order of the Polar 
Star.
His honours did not terminate here, for in 
1757 he was ennobled j and in 1776 the prefent 
king of Sweden accepted the refignation of his 
office, and rewarded his declining years by dou- 
bling his penfion, and by a liberal donation of 
landed property, fettled on him and his family.
It feems probable, that his father's example firft 
gave Linnaus a tafte for the iludy of nature-, 
who, as he has himfelf informed us, cultivated, as 
his firft amufem.ent, a garden plentifully ftored with 
plants.
Young Linn^us foon became acquainted 
with thefe, as well as the indigenous ones of his 
neighbourhood.
Yet, from the ftraightnefs of his 
father's income, our young naturalift was op the 
point of being deftined to a mechanical employ- 
ment : fortunately, however, this <iefign was over- 
ruled.
In 1 7 17 he was fent to fchool at fFexJiOy 
where, as his opportunities were enlarged, his 
progrefs in all his favourite purfuits was propor- 
tionably extended.
At this early period he paid 
attention to other branches of natural hiftory, par- 
ticularly to the knowledge of infedts : in which, as 
is manifeft from his oration on the fubjecl, he muft: 
very 
OS 
t 3 ] 
very early have made a great proficiency, fmce we 
find that he was not lefs fuccefsful herein, than ia 
that of plants, having given them an arrangement, 
and eftablilhed fuch charaders of diftindion, as 
have been univerfally followed by fucceeding ento- 
mologifts.
The firft part of his academical education, Lin^ 
naus received under profeflbr Stoh^eus^ at Lund^ in 
Scania^ who favoured his inclinations to the ftudy 
of natural hiftory.
After a refidence of about a 
year, he removed in 1728 to Upfd, Here he foon 
contradled a clofe friendfhip with Artediy a native 
of the province of Angermannia^ who had already 
been four years a ftudent in that univerfity, and, 
like himfelf, had a ftrong bent to the ftudy of na- 
tural hiftory in general, but particularly to Ich^ 
thyology.
He was moreover well Ikilled in chemiftry^ 
and not unacquainted with botany, having been the 
inventor of that diftindtion in umbelliferous plants^ 
arifing from the differences of the involucrum^ 
Emulation is the foul of improvement, and, heigh- 
tened as it was in this inftance by friendfhip^ 
proved a moft powerful incentive.
Thefe young 
men profecuted their ftudics together with uncom* 
mon vigor, mutually com.municating their obferva- 
tions, and laying their plans, fo as to aflift each 
other in every branch of natural hiftory and 
phyfic.
Soon after his refidence at Upfd^ our author 
was alfo happy enough to obtain the favour of 
feveral gentlemen of eftablifhed charader in litera- 
ture.
He was in a particular manner encouraged 
in the purfuit of his ftudies by the patronage cf 
t 4 1 
Dr. Olaus Celfius^ at that time profeflbr of divinity^ 
and the reftorer of natural hiftory in Sweden ; fince 
fo diftinguifhed for oriental learning, and more 
particularly for his Hierobotanicon^ or Critical Bif- 
fertations on the Plants mentioned in Scripture, This 
gentleman is faid to have given Linn^us a large 
ftiare of his efteem, and he was fortunate enough 
to obtain it very early after his removal to Upfal.
He was at that time meditating his Hierobotanicon^ 
and being ilruck with the diligence of Linn^eus^ in 
defcribing the plants of the Upfal garden, and his 
extenfive knowledge of their names, fortunately 
for him, at that time involved in difficulties, from 
the narrow circumftances of his parents, Celfius not 
only patronized him in a general way, but admitted 
him to his houfe, his table, and his library.
Un- 
der fuch encouragement, it is not ftrange that our 
author made a rapid progrefs, both in his ftudies, 
and the efteem of the profeflbrs : in fadl:, we have 
a very ftriking proof of his merit and attainments, 
inafmuch as we find, that after only two years re- 
fidence, he was thought fufficiently qualified to 
give ledlures occafionally from the botanic chair, 
in the room of profeflbr Rudbeck.
In the year 1731, the royal academy of fciences 
at Upfal having for fome time meditated the dcfign 
of improving the natural hiftory of Sweden^ at the 
inftance particularly of profcflbrs Celfius and Rud- 
becky deputed Linn^us to make the tour oi Lap- 
landy with the fole view of exploring the natural 
hiftory of that ar^lic region to which underta- 
king, his reputation, already high as a naturalift, 
and the ftrength of his conftitution, equally re- 
^ commended 
[ 5 ] 
commended him.
This tour had been made for 
the firft time, with the fame view, by the elder 
Rudbeck^ in 1695, at the command of Charles XI 5 
but untortunately the whole fruit of that expedi- 
tion, except two or three copies of the Campi Elyfii^ 
perifhed in the dreadful fire of Upfal^ in 1702.
As this expedition could not take place till the 
fucceeding fummer, LiNNi5:us fpent his winter with 
his friends and relations in the Ibuth ; and particu- 
larly paid a vifit, in January 1732, to his former 
preceptor Stoheus^ at Lund \ whom he left in Fe- 
bruary, to vifit his native province of Smaland^ and 
returned to Upfal about the middle of April, to 
prepare for his journey.
He left Upfal the 13th of 
May, and took his route to Gevalia^ ov Gevels, the 
principal town of Geflrida, 45 miles diftant from 
Upfal.
Hence he travelled through Helfingland^ into 
Medalpadia^ where he made an excurfion, and af- 
cended a remarkable mountain, before he reached 
Hudwickfwald^ the chief town of Helfmgland, From 
hence he went through Angermanland^ to Hernofand^ 
a iearport on the Bothnic gulph, feventy miles dif- 
tant from Hudwickfwald, When he had proceeded 
thus far, he found it proper to retard his journey, 
as the fpring was not fufficiently advanced \ and 
took this opportunity of vifiting thofe remarkable 
caverns on the fgmmit of mount Skula^ though at 
the hazard of his life, 
When LiNN^^us arrived at Uma^ in Wefi Bothnia^ 
about 96 miles from Hernofand^ he quitted the 
public road, arid took his courfe through the 
woods weft ward, in order firft to traverfe the moft 
fouthern parts of Lapland, Being now come to 
B 3 the 
C ^ 3 
the country that was more particularly the objedt 
of his enquiries, equally a ftranger to the language 
and to the manners of the people, and without 
any affociate, he committed himfelf to the hofpi- 
tality of the inhabitants, and never failed to expe- 
rience it fully.
He fpeaks in feveral places, with 
peculiar fatisfadion, of the innocence and fimpli- 
city of their lives, and their freedom from difeafes.
In this excurfion, he reached the mountains to- 
wards Norway^ and, after encountering great hard- 
fliips, returned into IVeJl Bothnia^ quite exhaufted 
with fatigue.
He feems to have been much ftruck 
with the fmgular ufe that the Laplanders make of 
the Pinguicula vulgaris^ which we call Butterwort^ or 
Yorklhire Sanicle : They receive the milk of the 
rein-deer upon the frelh leaves of this plant, which 
they immediately ftrain off, and fet afide, till it 
becbmes fomewhat acefcent, and the whole ac- 
quires, in a day or two, a confiftence equal to that 
of cream, without feparating the ferum ; and by 
this method it becomes an agreeable food.
When 
thus prepared, a fmall quantity of the fam-C has 
the property of rennet, in producing the like 
change on frefh milk.
But to return : Our tra- 
veller next vifited Vitha and Lula^ upon the gulph 
of Bothnia.^ from which latter place he took again 
a weftern route, by proceeding up the river of that 
name, and vifited the ruins of the temple of Jock^ 
mock^ in Lula-Lapland or Lap-Mark ; thence, he tra- 
verfed what is called the Lapland Defer deftitute 
of all villages, cultiyation, roads, or any conve- 
niences ; inhabited only by a few ftraggling people, 
originally defcended from the Finlanders^ and who 
fettled 
f 7 1 
fettled in this country in remote ages, being en- 
tirely a diftind people from the Laplanders.
In 
this diftrid he afcended a noted mountain called 
Wallevari^ in fpeaking of which he has given us 
a pleafant relation of his finding a fingular and 
beautiful new plant (Andromeda tetragona) when 
travelling within the ar6tic circle, with the fun in 
his view at midnight, in fearch of a Lapland hut.
From hence he crofTed the Lapland Alps into 
Finmark^ and traverfed the fhores of the North fea.
as far as Sailers, 
Thefe journies from Lula and Pitha^ on the 
Bothnian gulph, to the north fliore, were made on 
foot, and our traveller was attended by two Lap- 
landers \ one his interpreter, and the other his 
guide.
He tells us that the vigour and ftrength of 
thefe two men, both old, and fufficiently loaded 
with his baggage, excited his admiration, fmce they 
appeared quite unhurt by their labour, while 
he himfelf, although young and robuft, was fre- 
quently quite exhaufted- In this journey he 
was wont to lleep under the boat with which 
they forded the rivers, as a defence againft rain, 
and the gnats, which in the Lapland fummer are 
not lefs teazing than in the torrid zonrs.
In de- 
fending one of thefe rivers, he narrowly efcaped 
periihing by the overfetting of the boat, and lofb 
many of the natural produdlions which he had 
colie6led.
LiNN^us thus fpent the greater part of the 
fummer in examining this ar6lic region, and thofe 
mountains, on which, four years afterwards, the 
B 4 French 
i 8 ] 
French philofophers fecured immortal fame to Sir 
Ifaac Newton.
At length, after having fufFered 
incredible fatigues and hardfliips, in climbing pre- 
cipices, pafllng rivers in miferable boats, fuffering 
repeated viciffitudes of extreme heat and coJd, 
and not unfrequently hunger and thirft ^ he re- 
turned to Tornoa in September.
He did not 
take the fame route from ^ornoa as when he 
came into Lapland^ having determined to vifit, 
and examine, the country on the eaftern fide 
of the Bothnian gulph : his firft ftage, therefore, 
was to W^, in Eafi Bothnia from thence to Old 
and New Carkhy, 84 miles fouth from Ula, He 
continued his route through Wafa^ ChriftianftedtT^ 
and Biorneburgby to Abo^ a fmail univerfity in Fin- 
land, Winter was now fetting in apace, he there- 
fore croffcd the gulph by the ifland of Aland., and 
arrived at Upfal in November, after having per- 
formed, and that moftly on foot, a journey of ten 
degrees of latitude in extent, exclufive of thofe de- 
viations which fuch a defign rendered neceflary.
The refuh of this journey was not publiflied 
till feveral years afterwards, during his refidence 
in Holland.
For the prefent he only gave in to the 
academy a Fkrula Lapponica^ confifting of a very 
few pages in the A5ia Upfalienfia for the years 1732 
and 1734.
In this little catalogue the plants are 
difpofed according to the fyflem which was after- 
wards called the Jexual ; and which we fliould not 
have mentioned here, but to prove how early Lin- 
naus had laid the foundation of that method, which 
he afterwards wrought up to fuch perfection.
In 
f 9 ] 
In 1733 he vifited and examined the feveral 
xnines in Sweden, and made himfelf fo well ac- 
cjuainted with mineralogy, and the docimajlic art, 
that we find he was fufficiently qualified to give 
leftures on thofe fubjedts, upon his return to the 
univerfity.
The outlines of his fyftem on mi- 
neralogy appeared in the early editions of the 
Syftema Naturae but he did not exemplify the 
whole until the year 1768.
In the year 1734 Linn^us was fent by Baron 
Reuterholm, governor of Dalekarlia, with feveral 
other naturalifls, into that province, to inveftigate 
the natural produdions of that part of the Swedijh 
dominions.
Each gentleman had hi^" particular 
department afligned ; and they noted daily the ob* 
fervations made relating to geography, &c.
; but 
particularly, and as their principal objed, the eco» 
nomical and natural hiftory, and mineralogy.
A 
full account of thefe obfervatipns was intended to 
have been publilhed, but the defign was laid afide.
It was in this journey that our author firft laid the 
plan of an excellent inftitution, which was after- 
wards executed in a certain degree at lead, by 
himfelf, with the afljftance of many of his pupils, 
and the refult publifhed under the title of Pan 
Suecus, in the fecond volume of the Am^enitates 
Academics, 
After the completion of this expedition, it ap- 
pears that LiNNu5ius.
refided for a time at Fallun^ 
the principal town in Dakkarlia ; where he tells 
us that he taught mineralogy, and the docimajlic 
grt, and pradifed phyfic ; and where he was very 
liofpitably treated by t)r.
More^ the phyfician of 
the 
the place.
It alfo appears, that he con traded at 
this time an intimacy with one of that gentleman's 
daughters, whom he married about five years 
afterwards, upon his fettling as 2.
^hyfician 2X Stock- 
holm.
In this journey he extended his travels quite 
acrofs the Dalekarlian Alps into Norway \ but vsfc 
have no particular account of his difcoveries in 
that kingdom.
From its fituation, however, in 
the fame parallels of latitude and of longitude, 
nearly, with Sweden^ as well as from the face of 
the country, but little variety could be expected 
and from the Flora Norwegica of Bp. Gunner^ 
fince publiflied, the vegetable produ6tions of na- 
ture appear to be nearly the fame, except that 
the Norway coafl: abounds with fuci or fea- wracks, 
not known in the Baltic, 
In the year 1735, Linnaeus travelled over many 
other parts of Sweden^ fome parts of Denmark and 
Germany^ and fixed in Holland^ where he chiefly 
refided until his return to Stockholm^ about the 
year 1739.
He here took his doctor's degree in 
phyfic, in June 1735.
How clearly the great 
Boerhaave faw his merit will appear hereafter.
On the prefent occafion he fuftained a the/is under 
the title of Hypothesis nova de febrium inter- 
mittentium caufa.
It is an enquiry into the caufes 
of the frequency of that diftemper in Sweden^ 
particularly in Upland^ and the fouth-eaft parts of 
that kingdom ; which he was inclined to attribute 
to a local caufe, after the mod minute fcrutiny 
into the foil and fituation of thofe places where 
this diftemper was fo remarkably prevalent and 
obftinatej 
C It ] 
^ obftlnate ; and finally propofes, Whether it 
might not be owing to the ftrong impreg- 
nation of the water with argillaceous particles ?
Whether or not he afterwards adhered to this 
opinion, we are uncertain, as it is but juftice 
to obferve, that he did not republifh this traft 
h|mfelf, fmce it was placed at the head of the 
flfrft volume of the Amanitates^ printed at L(?y- 
den^ as we believe, without his knowledge, by 
Dr. Veter Camper, In the mean time we may 
obferve, that howfoever infufficient this hypothejis 
may be to folve the difficulties that have at- 
tended the fearch into the remote caufes of this 
difeafe ; the advocates of the modern theory, re- 
lating to it, may think the author's fa6ts, of its 
frequency in low fituacions, confirm and iiluftrate 
in no fmall degree their own, according to which 
it is imputed to miafmata arifing from moift and 
marfhy ground.
In this year Linn^^us alfo publiffied the firfl: 
(ketch of his Syftema Natur^^ in a very com- 
pendious way, and in the form of tables only, 
in twelve pages in folio.
By this it appears, 
that he had at a very early period of his life (cer- 
tainly before he was 24 years old) laid the bafis 
of that great ftrudure which he afterwards raifed, 
not only to the increafe of his own fame, but to 
that of natural fcience.
In r736, Linn^us came into England^ and vi- 
fited Dr. Dillenius, the late learned profefibr at 
Oxford^ whom he juftly confidered as one of the 
firft botanifts in Europe, He mentions with par- 
ticular refpeft the civilities he received from him, 
and 
C 12 1 
and the privileges ^le gave him of infpe^ling his 
own, and the Sherardian colledions of plants.
It 
is needlefs to fay, that he vifited Dr. Martyn^ Mr.
Rand^ and Mr. Miller^ and that he was in a more 
lingular manner indebted to the friendfhip of Dr.
Jfaac Lawfon.
He alfo " contra6ted an intimate 
friendfhip with Mr. Peter Collinson, which 
*^ was reciprocally increafed by a multitude of 
good offices, and continued to the laft without 
" any diminution." Dr. Boerhaave had furqifhed 
him with letters to our great naturalift Sir Hans 
Sloane j but, it is with regret that we muft ob- 
ferve, they did not procure him the reception 
which the warmth of his recommendation feemed 
to claim.
Dr. Boerhaave^ s letter to Sir Hans Sloane^ on this 
occafion, is preferved in the Britifh Muleum, and 
runs thus — " Linn^^us, qui has tibi dabit littros^ eH 
mice dignus te videre, unice dignus a te videri *, qui 
" vos vide bit fmuU vi debit hcminum par^ cuijimile 
vix dabit orbis,''' — This encomium, howfuever 
quaintly exprefled, yet was in fome meafure pro- 
phetic of Linn^us's future fame and greatnels, and.
proves how intimately Boerhaave had penetrated 
into the genius and abilities of our author •, and, 
{trained as this parallel might be thought, it is 
likely however chat the opening of the fexual fyftem, 
fo different from Ray'Sy by which Sir Hans Sloane 
had always known plants, and particularly the in- 
novations, as they were then called, which Lin- 
K^us had made in altering the names of fb many 
genera^ were rather the caufe of that coolnefs with 
which he was received by our excellent naturalift.
Probably 
[ 13 i" 
Probably we have reafon to regret this circnm- 
fbance for otherwife Linn^^ius might have obtained 
an eftablifhment in England^ 'as it has been thought 
he wifhed to have done ; and doubtlels his op- 
portunities in this kingdom would have been much 
nifjre favourable to his defigns, than in thofe arcfbic 
regions where he fpent the remainder of his days.
In the mean time, we may juftly infer the exalted 
idea i\i2ii Linnaeus had of England^ as a land eminently 
favourable to the improvement of fcience, from that 
compliment which, in a letter to a friend, he after- 
wards paid to London^ when, fpeaking of that 
city, he called it " Pun5lum /aliens in vitello orbis.^* 
However, the Englijh naturalifts may now con- 
gratulate themfelves on having adopted a molt 
excellent difciple of the Linn^an fchool ; who, 
with an illuflrious aflbciate, fliared the perils of 
a navigation round this globe, incited by thidt of 
knowledge alone \ and who now enjoys that general 
eftcem among us which is due to his extenlive 
fcience, and to his fingular liberality of mind and 
manners.
j 
One of the mofl agreeable circumftances that 
happened to Linn^us, during his refidence in 
Holland^ arofe from the patronage of Mr. Clifford^ 
in whofe houfe * he lived a confiderable part 
of his time, being now as it were the child of 
fortune : — Emvi patrid triginta fex nummis aureis 
dives'^^VQ his own words.
With Mr. Clifford^ 
• The country feat and garden of Mr. Qlifford was at 
M^irHt^m^f about thre^ roiks from Ha^rtmn 
however, 
t 14 3 
however, he enjoyed pleafures and privileges 
fcarcely at that time to be met with elfewhere in 
the world ; that of a garden excellently ftored 
with the fineft exotics, and a library furnifhed 
with aimoft every botanic author of note.
How 
happy he found himfelf in this fituation, thofe 
only who have felt the fame kind of ardour can 
conceive.
Whilft in Holland^ our author was recom- 
mended by Boerhaave to fill the place, then va- 
cant, of phyfician to the Dutch fettlement at Suri- 
nam ; but he declined it, on account of his hav- 
ing been educated in fo oppofite a climate.
He 
recommended, however, to that department a 
young German phyfician of great merit, who had 
the misfortune to fall a facrifice, partly to the 
climate, and partly perhaps to ill ufage from the 
governor, in half a year after his arrival : A 
circumftance which Linn^^us has very pathe- 
tically lamented in the Flora Suecica^ N® 515, when 
treating of a plant to which he has given this 
gentleman's name.
Befides being favoured with the particular 
patronage and friendfhip of Boerhaave and Mr.
Clifford^ as is above-m^entioned, our author had alfo 
the pleafure of being contemporary with, and of 
reckoning among the number of his friends, many 
other learned perfons, who have fince proved orna- 
inents to their profeffion, and whofe meric has 
moft defervedly raifed them to fame and honour.
Among thefe we may properly mention Dr. John 
Burman, profefifor of botany at Amfterdam^ whole 
name and family are well known in the republic of 
letters.
t n ] 
letters, to whom our author dedicated his Bihlk- 
theca Botanica^ having been greatly affifted in com- 
piling that work, by the free accefs he had to that 
gentleman's excellent library, John Frederick Grono^ 
vius^ of LeydeUy editor of Clayton's Flora Virginica^ 
and who very early adopted Linnaus\ fyftem ; 
Baron Van Swieten^ late phyfician to the Emprefs 
Queen \ Ifaac Lawfon^ before-mentioned, after- 
wards one of the phyficians to the Britifh army^ 
who died much regretted at Oofierhout^ in the year 
1747, and from whom Linnam received fingular 
and very important civilities ; Kramer^ fince well 
known for an excellent treatife on the Doci- 
maftic Art \ Van Royen^ botanic profelTor at 
,^Leyden Lieherkun^ of Berlin^ famous for his fl^iil 
in microfcopical inftruments and experiments.
On 
this occafion it is not foreign to our plan to 
remark, that Linn^us, being prefent with feveral 
of thefe gentlemen, at a meeting when the latter 
was exhibiting the animalcules in femine mafculino^^ 
openly declared his opinion, that thefe molecula^ 
were not true animalcules ; and he appears ever 
afterwards to have retained the fame opinion re- 
lating to them.
To thefe may b^ added alfo the 
names of Alhinus and Gaubius^ and of others, were 
it requifite, to fliew that our author's talents had 
very early rendered him confpicuous, and gained 
him the regard of all thofe who cultivated and 
patronized any branch of medical fcience ; and to 
which, doubtlefs, the fingular notice with which 
Boerbaave honoured him, did not a little contri- 
bute.
Early in the year after Lj^nn^us had left 
J Mr.r 
[ i6 ] 
Mr. Clifford^ and, as it fhould feem, when fic re- 
iided with Van Roy en ^ at Ley den he had a long 
and dangerous fit of ficknefs ; and upon his re- 
covery, went to Parts, where he was properly 
Entertained by xht Juffieu's^ at that time the firft 
botanifts*'in France.
The opportunity this gave 
him of infpedling the Herbaria of Surian and ^our- \ 
nefort., and thofe of the above-named gentlemen, 
afforded him great fatisfa6lion.
He had intended 
to have gone from thence into Germany^ to Vidt 
Ludwig^ and the celebrated HALi^ER,' with whom 
he was in* clofe.
cofrefpondence ; but he was 
not able to 'compleat' this part of his intended 
route, and was obliged to return without this 
gratification, 
Our author did not fail to avail himfelf of 
every advantage, that accefs to the feveral mufeums 
of this country affbrded him, in every branch of 
natural hiftory ; and the number and importance 
of his publications, during this abfence from his 
native country, fufficiently demonftrate that fund 
of knowledge which he muft have imbibed before, 
and no lefs teftify his extraordinary application; 
As thefe works laid the foundation of his future 
fame, and diftinguiflied character, it will be incum- 
bent on us to enumerate them, and give a brief 
account of each, as nearly as we cart in the order 
of time in which they were publifhed,^^ before we 
accompany our author into Sweden whither he 
returned to receive at length the reward of his 
merit.
The firfl of thefc was the Systema Natur^^;, 
f^ve regna tria Nature fyfiematic^ fro^oftta^ per 
claJJeSy 
C 17 ] 
clajfes^ or dines ^genera et fpecies.
Lngd.
Bat. 1735.
fol.
pp.
14, in Latin, with the Swedijh names annexed.
As this is little more than the, general outlines of his 
work, we (hall referve a fuller account of it till we 
come to the enlarged editions ; in which it was fully 
exemplified by the introduction of the fpecies, 
FuNDAMENTA BoTANicA, qu^ majoTum operum 
prodromi inftar^ theoriam Scientiie Botanices per breves 
Aphorifmos tradunt, Amfi.
1736, 12**, pp.
35.
The 
fcience of botany is in this work reduced to 365 
aphorifms, or canons ; and what ^ethus Calvifms 
has faid of Ptolemy^s canon, mutatis mutandis^ may 
be truly faid of this work.
— Omni auro pretiofwr ejiy 
fi dudum innotuijfet^ nec adeo in diver fas fe5fas Bota- 
Nici aUifent^ fed Res Botanic^e, multo melius fe 
haherent.
It pafled through feveral editions, and 
was publiflied with a comment upon each aphorifm 
in 1751, under the title of Philofophia Botanicay 
hereafter to be noticed.
Bibliotheca Botanica, recenfens lihros plus milk 
de plantis hucufque editos^ fecundum Syftema Au5forum » 
naturale in claffes^ ordines^ genera et fpecies difpojitos^ 
additis editionis loco^ tempore^ forma^ lingua, Amft.
1736, I2^ pp.
153, and afterwards in 8% 1751, 
much enlarged.
Botanic writers are in this work 
diftributed into 16 clafles, and it is by no means 
fo unentertaining as might be expeded from the 
general idea of a catalogue merely ; as the author 
has frequently fubjoined Ihort charadlers of the 
books ; and at the beginning of each clafs, as alfo 
in the orders or fubdivifions, takes occafion to ex- 
plain ieveral of his terms ufed in his fubfequent 
C writings.
t 18 ] 
writings.
The preface contains a fliort hiftory of 
the rife and progrefs of botany, and an acknow- 
ledgment of the aid the author received in the 
compilation of this work, by his free aecefs to the 
libraries of Mr. Sprekelfen at Hamburgh^ Dr. Gro- 
novius at Leyden^ and particularly to thofe of his 
patron Mr. Clifford^ and Dr. Burman^ profeffor of 
botany at Amjlerdam.
Authors are claffed in this 
work as follows : 
1. P aires, 9.
Peregrinatores.
2. Comment at ores, 10.
Philofophi, 
3 Ichniographi.
li.
Syftematici, 
4. Befcriptores, 12.
Nomenclatoresl 
5. Monographi, 13.
Anatomici.
6. Curioji.
14.
Hortulani, 
7. Ado7iifta, 15.
Medici.
8. Florifia, 16, Anomali, 
Subjoined to the lafl: edition, we have a biogra- 
phical table, exhibiting, in chronological order, the 
names of 139 botanic authors, from the time of 
Avicema in 981, to Mr. Catejby in 1749, fpecifying, 
wherever it was poffible, the year of their birth 
and death.
The flowering of the Plantain or Banana {Mufa 
paradifiaca) this year, a thing not feen in Europe 
before more than thrice, in the garden of our au- 
thor's patron M.
Clifford^ produced a compleat hif- 
tory of that plant from Linn^us's pen, under the 
title of MusA Cliffortiana florens Hartecampi 
i^j '^6 prope Harlemum, Lugd.
Bat. 4% pp.
46.
This 
piece is drawn up with the utmoft preciflon, ac- 
cording to the author's own Methodus Dmonftrandi., 
printed 
[ 19 1 
i^nnted at the end of tht Syftema^ and is a iriodfel 
for Monographers in this way.
It is embellifiied 
with two plates, one reprefenting the plant at large^ 
the other, the parts of fru6lification feparately.
Genera Plant arum eorumqii^ CharaSleres nai 
turales fecundum numerum^ figuram^Jitum^ et proportion 
nem^ omnium fru5tificationis partium, Lugd.
Bat. 1737, 
8% pp.
384.
In this work, which exiubits what 
LiNN^us has called the natural charaUers of the 
genera of plants, the claffes are eftablifhed upon 
the number or fituation^ or both conjointly, of the 
fiamina^ analogically confidered as the male parts ; 
and the orders or fubdivifions of the clafles, upon 
thtpiftils^ analogous to the female parts : and xht 
genera themfelves from the agreement of all the 
parts of frudlification compared with each other^ 
as they agree in number^ figure^ fttuation^ and pro- 
portion.
Hence the Linnaan characters of plants 
are applicable to any claffical method founded on 
the parts of fructification alone, in which refped: 
they have the advantage over thofe of all foregoing 
writers, and will probably ftand firm, even al- 
though the clajfical part of the fyftem fhould be fet 
afide.
This is to be confidered as one of the capital 
of Linnaus^s works.
He tells usj that before the 
publication of the firfl: edition, he had examined the 
charaders of 8coo flowers.
Thofe alone who have 
been accuftomed to examine plants with a fcientific 
viewj can judge how arduous this undertaking 
muft have been, and how great the application 
thathe mufl" neceflarily have beftowed thereon, and 
that at an early period of life.
Neither can any 
Others fufficiently admire that accuracy with which 
C 2 fo 
I 20 ] 
fo great a number of flowers have been examined 
and compared, or fee the aptitude of that affem- 
blage of terms, which were invented by Linnaeus, 
to exprefs the different figure^ fttmtion^ and po- 
fortiori^ that exift in fuch a variety of fubje6ts.
If 
this was a proper place to expatiate upon this fub- 
jedt, by extending the idea to all that LiNNiEus 
has done, refpe6ting every other part of plants, as 
confidered in their fpecific diftin6lions, it muft ftill 
farther exalt the merit of the author, and place him 
above all praife.
At the latter end of this work 
was given the general plan of a fyftem invented 
by LiNNyT:us, and founded upon the different 
kinds ^ and arrangement^ of the calix or cup of the 
flower, in plants : but this was omitted in the lat- 
ter editions.
Alfo a fragment of that primum et 
nltimum in botany, the natural method.
The firft edition of this book contained 935 
genera: the fixth and lafl, at Stockholm^ in 1764, 
hath extended the number to 1239, and the 
Mantiffce flnce to 1336.
It has been thought 
by fome, that the firft idea of the femal me- 
thod was received from the writings of Jungius^ 
a learned profeiTor, firft at Helmjladt^ and after- 
wards re5ior of the Gymnafium at Hamhurghy 
where he died in 1657, and whofe works contain 
an uncommon difplay of original obfervations on 
the fubjed of plants ; and prove him to have been 
a moft accurate obferver of nature.
He has not 
only difcriminated with peculiar nicety, the ftruc- 
ture, and feveral parts of plants, but he hath alfo, 
with equal judgment, ftiewn the impropriety of 
many of the old generical and fpecifical diftinc- 
tions.
C 21 3 
tions, and has given rules for forming them anew, 
that have been of the greateft fervice to his fuc- 
ceflbrs in the fcience, and of which they have not 
failed to avail themfelves.
But Jungius did not, 
however, exhibit any plan, by which it appears 
that he laid the bafis either of the fexual, or any 
other fyftem.
Berore the conclufion of the fame year (1737) 
our author publifhed the Corollarium Generum, 
cut accedit Methodus sexualis, in 8° ; the for- 
mer contained only the addition of fixty new genera 
of plants; all which were taken into the next 
edition of the foregoing book ; and the latter ex- 
hibits a brief view of the fexual fyftem, as far as 
refpe6ls the clajfes and orders.
Neither would it be of 
importance to mention a fmall piece publifhed in 
the fame year, during his refidence with Mr. Clif- 
ford^ under the title of Viridarium Cliffortia- 
NUM, were it not incumbent on us to mention all 
that came from our author's pen.
In this year, 1737, appeared likewife the refult 
of the Lapland expedition, as far, at leaft, as re- 
lates to the plants of that country ; for we are now 
deprived of the expe6lation of ever feeing the 
Lachejis Lapponica^ intended to complete our au- 
thor's hiftory of this country through all its parts.
This volume includes the plants of a trad of 
country not lefs than 100 Swedijh miles (nearly 
equal to 600 EngUJh) in length, and 50 in breadth, 
under the title of Flora Lapponica, exhib ens Plan- 
ta$ per Lapponiam crefcentes^ fecundum Syjlema female^ 
colleElas in itinere impenfis Societatis regia hitter arine 
€t Scientiarum Suecia An, 1732 infiituto^ additis fyno- 
G 3 njmis^ 
- C 22 ] 
f!ymiSy et loots natalihus omnium^ defcriptionihus ei 
figuris rariorum^ viribus medicatis et ceconomicis pluri- 
marum.
Amft.
1737, 8% pp, 372, tab.
12.
This 
work is much more than a bare enumeration of 
fynonyms ^ the preface contains an account of the 
author's journey, and his acknowledgment to the 
members of a literary fociety, by whofe munifi- 
cence this work was adorned with the plates, ori 
which are engraven 58 of the more rare, and 
chiefly alpine plants.
This is preceded by ad- 
ditional Prolegomena, in which the geographic and 
natural defcri prion of the country is fet forth, and 
the difference between the Alps and the Defart^ diU 
tindtly marked ; concluding with fome obfervations 
on alpine plants in general.
The work is interfperfed 
with many very curious obfervations relating to 
the inhabitants, their fimplicity of life and man- 
ners, their difeafes ^ the animals of the country 5 
the medical fand economical ufes of many of the 
plants ; defcriptions at l^irge of fuch as were not 
well defcribed before ^ and critical obfervations, in 
a botanical way, upon others.
To inflance briefly a few only of our author's 
obfervatipns.
Under 
N** i6.
The drppfy very frequent in Eajl Both- 
via ; owing to the intemperate ufe of fpirits.
N° 22.
The down qf the Cotton Grafs^ ufed for 
bedding among the poor, inftead of feathers.
N° 62.
Aftonifhing growth of the Great Plantain.
The fpikes 4 or 5 feet high.
|n Pther fituations,, 
the whole plant not an inch.
N*^ 80, The wretched inhabitants fometimes 
pbliged to make bread of the roots of the Marfi 
frefnl 
C 23 ] 
Trefoil The fcurvy unknown in Lapland-, although 
vegetable produdions have fcarcely any fliare in 
the Lapland diet, which is almoft wholly the recent 
flelh of the rein-deer : a fadl which Sir John Pringle 
has made good ufe of, among others, in his dif- 
courfe " On the means of preferving the health of 
" mariners." 
101.
Symptoms of the CoJica Lapponica^ 
(Sauvag.
Nofol.
II.
p. lo^^) a moft excruciating 
difeafe, for which the Laplanders ufe the root of 
Angelica, 
103.
The deleterious efFc6ls of the Cicuta 
virofa^ Water Hemlock, largely difcufled.
N* 136.
The pernicious efFeds of xh^ Anthericum 
cffifragum^ Lancafiiire Afphodel, on fheep.
N* 143, 144, 145.
Manifold ufes of the black 
and red Whortleberries, and Cranberries.
N** 160.
Various economical ufes of the Andro^ 
meda polifolia^ Marfh Ciftus.
N° 200.
Obfervations on the gout, whether owing 
to the ufe of fpirituous and fermented liquors.
Refledions on the health and vigour of the Lap^ 
landers.
N° 3 1 1 .
The Achillea Millefolium^ Yarrow, ufed 
fomctimes in Dalekarlia inftead of hops^ and faid 
to render the drink very intoxicating.
328.
Singular economical ufes of the Carices^ 
or Sedges, amongft the Laplanders.
N** 341, 342.
Ufes of the Birch-tree-, and the 
Dwarf Birch y beyond almoft all others.
The thick 
woods of this tree frequently fet on fire by light- 
ning, and confumed for miles.
Moxa of the Lap- 
C 4 landers 
C 24 3 
landers prepared from a part of this tree : their 
nniverfal remedy in painful difeafes.
N° 345.
The leaves of Sparganium mtans^ Bur- 
reed, preferred by horned cattle and horfes to other 
grafs.
Obfervations on the immenfe number of 
Water Fowl^ and Waders^ in Lapland^ and on their 
migration.
N** 395.
Ufes of the Polytrichum commune^ or 
Golden Maidenhair j and N° 415, thofe of the 
Sphagnum Paluftre^ or Bog-Mofs, among the Lap* 
land women ; to which he has annexed fome curious 
obfervations relating to the ftate of the menftrual 
evacuations in the fex, in thofe northern regions.
N° 437.
Obfervations on the rein-deer, and their 
food, the Lichen rangiferinus.
N** 445.
On the Lichen ijlandicus^ on which 
M. Scopoli has of late written largely.
N** 517.
In treating on the Agarics, he recites 
the baneful effects of the Oeftrus 'Tarandi^ Gadrfly, 
on the whole economy of the rein-deer.
More 
largely difculTed in the Amcenitates, — -^Buc to re- 
turn : 
In this work, moreover, our author has firft 
exemplified, what he ever afterwards laboured to 
bring to its greateft perfection, in all his writings, 
and particularly in the Species Plantarum^ a work 
not publifhed till fixteen years afterwards, the fpe- 
cific names of plants^ not taken, as had been cuftom- 
ary with former authors, from the colour of the 
flower, relative fize of the plant, fmell, tafte, place 
of growth, time of flowering, name of the dif- 
coyerer, virtues, ufes, duration \ none of which are 
fufficiently 
[ 25 ] 
fufficiently permanent : but from thofe invariable 
and eflential parts, which fully and clearly diftin- 
guifh each fpecles under the fame genus, and in 
the compafs of ten or twelve words convey fuch 
an idea of the plant intended, as will more effec- 
tually diftinguifh it, than the verhofe defcriptions of 
many foregoing authors.
Linnaeus has taken in- 
credible pains with this part of his fyftem, which 
is certainly as difficult as any that leads to the 
perfedion of the fcience, fmce it depends upon a 
nice infpedlion of every /pedes belonging to each 
genus y and of every a^fual variety belonging to each 
/pedes.
, The plants of Lapland are but few, not amount- 
ing to more than 537 fpecies ; and in this number 
are included upwards of an hundred difcovered by 
Linnaeus in this journey, not known to be natives 
of Sweden before ; and of which fome were non- 
defcripts : among the former, there feems to be a 
propriety in mentioning fpecially tiie Campanula 
/erpylli/olia^ or thyme-leaved Bell-flower, which, 
as it turned out to be a new genus^ was appropriated 
to our author by Dr. J, Gronovius^ and engraved 
in this volume by the name of Linn^^ia.
No part of Linn^us's writings had given more 
offence to the contemporary botanifts, than the 
liberty he had taken in changing tht generic names 
of plants, which had neceffarily taken place in 
many inftances, from the rules eftablifhed by the 
Fundamenta.
Even Dillenius was by no means 
reconciled to this innovation.
Linn^us, who had 
entertained an high opinion of our Engli/h pro- 
feffor, having faid of him-^^^nulks ejl in Jnglia qui 
[ 26 ] 
genera curat ^ vel intelligit praterquam Dillenius'^ 
probably, therefore, dedicated to him his next 
publication, the Critica Botanica, in qua No- 
mina Plantarum generica^ et fpecifica^ et variantia exa- 
mini fubjiciuntur^ fele£iiora confirmantur^ indigna re- 
jiciuntur^ fmulque do^irina circa Denominationem Plan- 
tarum traditur, Lugd.
Bat. 1737, 8°, pp.
270.
This 
is a large comment upon the 7th, 8th, 9th, and loth 
parts of the Fundamental from Aphorifm 2 10 to 324 
inclufive ; in which he has amply explained all his 
reafons for thefe alterations ; and there were at that 
time many who faw the juftice of his remarks.
Ludwig fays, when fpeaking of this work — " rigo- 
rofus quidem, fed fepijjime f^lix hotanicorum cenfor eji'^ 
The work is rendered very applicable to ufe, by 
two excellent indexes.
LiNNi^:us printed, at the end of this volume, 
Difcurfus de introducenda in fcholas et gymnafia Hifto- 
ria naturalis leElione^ pp.
24, written by Dr. Bro- 
wallius^ who afterwards defended very ably the 
fyftem of Linnaus againft profefTor Siegejbeck 'of 
Peterjburgh, 
In 1737 was likewife publifhed the moft fplendid 
of all our author's writings, the Hortus Cliffortianus 
Plantas exhihens quas in Hortis tar/i vivis quam ftccis^ 
Hartecampi in Hollandia^ coluit Vir Nob, et Gen. Geor- 
gius Clifford^ J.
U, D, redu^is varietatibus ad /pedes, 
fpeciebus ad genera^ generibus ad clajfes^ adje5lis locis 
plantarum natalibus^ differ entiif que fpecierum.
Amft.
1737, fol.
pp.
501, t.
32.
As this book was 
printed at the expence of Mr. Clifford^ it is orna- 
mented with an elegant frontifpiece, and adorned 
with fome of the fineft engravings of plants that 
are 
[ 27 ] 
are extant, the drawings for which were made with 
all poffible accuracy by the late Mr. Ehret, By 
the munificence of Mr. Clifford^ many of the cele- 
brated botanifts received a prefent of this book.
How rich this garden was in plants, the book will 
teftify.
They are arranged, as in all our author's 
fucceeding works, in the fexual method ; the varie- 
ties are reduced to their feveral fpecies, the natural 
places of the plants are particularly noticed, many 
new genera^ and fpecies under former genera, are 
introduced, with their defcriptions at large, and 
curious obfervations interfperfed throughout the 
whole.
And, what muft have been more efpeci- 
ally acceptable to thofe who began to relifh our 
author's fyftem, was, the farther exemplification 
of his fpecific chara5lers^ which the vaft number of 
plants included in this work necefiarily led to.
Add to this, that from the copious number of 
fynonyms, it is almoft a pnax of every plant thereia * 
mentioned j and on this account, as well as others, 
will yet retain its value, though fuperfeded in a 
great degree by the Species Plantarum.
To the 
curious and critical botanift alfo it is no fmali 
fatisfadtion now, to fee in this volume, compared 
with later works, the progrefs of the author's own 
knowledge, manifeft by the removes and altera- 
tions that better information enabled him to 
make.
In the dedication our author enumerates 
thofe patrons who have cultivated botanical gar-f 
dens fo greatly to the emolument of the fcience i 
he gives a lift of the differ tian library, and an- 
nexes two tables, with explanations of all the 
Variety q£ leavesji according to his new method 
C 28 ] 
of defining them.
This addition was very necef- 
fary, as the number of plants fynonymed in this 
volume amounts to near 2,500.
We conclude 
with Gefnefs opinion of this work, in a letter 
to the celebrated Haller : " Opus fane egregium 
" et acerrimi Judidi, nec minoris eruditionis, quo dif- 
" ficulter hotanicus carehit.
— Mihi perpkcet ah eo in 
" nominibus fpecierum notas earum ejfentiaks exhiheri^ 
quod ante vix quifquam hot aniens re^e prajiitit'* 
The lad book which Linn'^us publifhed of 
his own, during his flay in Holland^ was the 
Classes Plantarum, feu Syftemata Plant arum om- 
nia a fruBificatione defumta^ quorum 16 univerfalia 
€t 1 3 partialia^ compendiofe propofita fecundum claffes^ 
or dines et nomina generica^ cum clave cujufvis methodi 
et fynonymis genericis .
Lugd.
Bat. 1738, pp.
656.
This work is a very large illuftration of the fecond 
part of the Fundamental from aphorifm 53 to 78, 
and contains a compendious and ufeful view of 
all the lyftems of botany, or methods of clafTing 
plants, both general and partial, from Cafalpinus^ 
in 1583, who is confidered as the inventor, to 
LiNNi5:us himfelf in 1735.
To the generical 
name in every fyftem, he has added that by which 
it {lands in his own, which is a great advantage 
in the ufe of this book.
A new edition, with 
the requifite additions, would be very acceptable 
to the public even now.
The fyftems at large 
that are difplayed in this book, are thofe of C^fal- 
pinus^ Morifon^ Ray^ Knaut^ Herman^ and Boerhaave^ 
founded on the fruit : Rivinus^ Ruppius^ Ludwig^ 
and Knaut^ on the number of petals in the flower : 
^ournefort and Pontejeray oxi the figure of the 
feme : 
[ 29 1 
fame : and of Magr.ol and LiNN^^^uSj on the cup 
of the flower.
After thefe follow LiNNi^:us's 
fexual fyftem, and his fragments of the natural 
method.
We fay nothing of the arrangement of 
particular clalTes, fuch are the compqfite flowers, the 
tmhelliferous plants, the graminaceous^ the ferns^ &C.
A very large index, referring to every genm in 
each fyftem, concludes the volume.
LiNNiEus, whiift in Holland^ fuftained a very 
fevere lofs in the premature death of his friend 
and fellow ftudenc Artedi \ with whom, as has 
been before obferved, he had contra6i:ed the firmeft 
friendfhip whiift they refided at Upfal \ infomuch 
that they had, in cafe of death, mutually be- 
queathed to each other their manufcripts and 
coliedions in natural hiftory.
Artedi had been 
particularly afllduous in arranging anew, and 
defcribing all fuch fifties as had fallen under his 
. own infpedion \ and had taken a voyage to Eng^ 
land in 1734, to give more perfedlion to his plan.
^ Our author, after his death, procured, though with 
fome difliculty, all Artedi's papers, and put the 
finiftiing hand to them, and publiftied them at 
Leyden in 1738, in odtavo, under the title of 
Petri Artedir^ Sued Medici^ Ichthyologia : five 
opera omnia de pifcihus^ fcilicet Bibliotheca Ichtbyo- 
logica Philofophia Ichthyologica \ Genera Pifcium ; 
Synonymia Specierum ; Defcriptiones Specierum, Om» 
Hia in hoc genere perfe^iora quam antea ulla, Poft- 
hima vindicavit^ recognovit^ cooptavit^ et edidit^ Caro- 
lus LiNNi^us.
In this work fifties are arranged 
in an entire new method, and which our author 
adbpted with little or no variadon, and continued 
through 
[ 30 3 
through all the former editions of his Syftem to 
the tenth ; when he removed the cetaceous order 
into the clafs of the mammalia \ and inftead of re- 
taining in the remaining orders the diftindions 
arifing from the hony or cartilaginous texture of 
the fMS 5 he eftablifhed them on the fituation of 
the ventral fins^ which he confiders as analogous 
to the feet in other animals, as they are placed 
either before, underneath, or behind the fe^loral 
fins.
In this work Artedi has exhibited an inftance of 
genius, labour, and application, that cannot fail 
to excite the greateft regret at his early death.
He has given to Ichthyology that degree of perfec- 
tion, which his friend afterwards extended through 
all the animal kingdom, and which muft remain 
a lading monument of his abilities.
In parti- 
cular, his defcriptions of the indigenous fifhes of 
Sweden^ are fcientific to a degree that had never 
before been feen ; and we cannot fufficiently ad- 
mire the pains he muft have taken to extricate 
the fynonyms from every author on the fubjed.
Artedi^ after his return from England^ was re- 
tained, at the recommendation of Linn^us, by 
Seba of Amfterdam^ to complete that part of his 
Thefaurus relating to fifties, and was unfortunately 
drowned in one of the canals in that city.
Lm- 
N^us, in a fliort account of the author's life, has 
lamented his untimely deceafe, in a manner which 
does no lefs honour to his friend than to his owa 
feelings.
We muft now accompany our author into 
Sweden^ whither he returned about the latter end 
of 
i 31 ] 
of the year 1738, or the beginning of the next, 
and fettled as a phyfician at Stockholm, where he 
feems to have met with confiderable oppofition, 
and was opprefTed with many difficulties ; all of 
which at length he overcame, and got into ex- 
tenfive practice ^ and, foon after his fettlement, 
married the lady before fpoken of.
By the 
intereft of Count Teffin, who was afterwards 
his great patron, and even procured medals to 
be ftruck in honour of him, he obtained the 
rank of phyfician to the fleet, and a ftipend from 
the citizens for giving ledtures in botany.
And 
what at this time efpecially was highly favourable 
to the advancement of his chara6ter and fame, 
by giving him an opportunity of difplaying his 
abilities, was the eftablifhment of the Royal 
Academy of Sciences at Stockholm \ of which Lin- 
Ni5:us was conftituted the firft prefident, and to 
which eftablifhment the king granted feveral pri- 
vileges, particularly that of free poftage to all par 
pers direfted to the fecretary.
By the rules of the 
academy, the prefident held his place but three 
months, at the expiration of which, he made 
his Oratio de memorahilibus in lnfe5lis, Od:.
^, 
1739 j in which he endeavours to excite an atten- 
tion and enquiry into the knowledge of infefe, by 
difplaying the many {m^Xd^x phenomena that occur 
in contemplating the nature of thofe animals, and 
by pointing out, in a variety of inftances, their 
ufefulnefs to mankind in particular, and to the 
economy of nature in general.
During all this time, however, Linnaeus appears 
to have had his eye upon the botanic and medical 
chair 
[ 32 ] 
chair at Upf^U this time occupied by RuSeck, 
who was far advanced in life.
We learn in- 
deed that he was fo intent on purfuing, and per- 
feding^ his great defigns in the advancement of 
his favourite ftudy of nature, that he had deter- 
mined, if he failed in procuring the profeiTorfhip 
at Upfaly to accept the offer that had been made 
to him by Haller^ of filling the botanic chair 
at Gottingen, However, in courfe of time, he 
obtained his wilh.
In the year 1741, upon the re- 
fignation of Roberg^ he was conftituted joint pro- 
feffor of phyfic, and phyfician to the king, with 
RofeUy who had been appointed in the preceding 
year on the death of Rudbeck.
Thefe two col- 
leagues agreed to divide the medical departments 
between them ; and their choice was confirmed by 
the univerfity.
Rofen took anatomy, phyfiology, 
pathology, and the therapeutic part.
Linn^us, 
natural hiftory, botany materia medica^ the dietetic 
part, and the diagnofts morborum.
During the interval of his removal from Stock- 
holm to Upfal^ in confequence of this appointment, 
our profeflbr was deputed by the ftates of the 
kingdom, to make a tour to the iflands of Oeland 
and Gothland^ in the Baltic^ attended by fix of the 
pupils, commillioned to make fuch enquiries as 
might tend to improve agriculture, and arts, in the 
kingdom \ to which the Swedijh nation had for 
fome time paid a particular attention ; awakened, 
as it were, by the defolating wars of Charles the 
Xllth, to extend their commerce, and cultivate 
the arts of peace.
The refult of this journey was 
very fuccefsful, and proved fully fatisfadory to 
Q the 
I 
[ 33 1 
thp StateSj and was afterwards communicated to 
the public.
LiNN^us, on his return, entered upon the pro- 
fefforfliip, and pronounced before the univerfity his 
Oration de Peregrinationum intra Patriam necef- 
Jjtate^ Od. 17, 1 741 3 in which he forcibly difplays 
the ufefulnefs of fuch excurfions, by pointing out to 
the iludents that vaft field of objeds which their 
country held out to their cultivation ; whether in 
geography, phyfics, mineralogy, botany, zoology, 
or economics ; and by fliewing the benefit that 
muft accrue to themfelves and their country as re- 
wards to their diligence.
That animated fpirit 
which runs through the whole of this compofition, 
renders it one of the moft pleafing and inftrudive 
of all our author's produclions.
That intimate 
knowledge which Linn^us himfelf had acquired 
of his own country by his repeated travels (fraught 
as he was too with every requifite for m.aking ufe- 
ful obfervations) enabled him to point out with 
the utmofb precifion the moft proper objeds of 
inveftigation, in every part of nature ; and his 
love to his country gave a zeal to his wifties, that 
Ihewed him on this occafion to great advan- 
tage \ not to add, the aid arifing from that felf- 
congratulation, which he muft feel, having juft 
gained, by his late appointment, the fummit of his 
wilhes.
; ; .
The Iter CElandicum et Gotlandicum, in 
8% pp.
284, were printed at Stockholm^ in 1745, 
-in the Swedijh language; as was alfo the Iter 
ScANicuM^ in 1751, 8% pp.
435.
We cannot 
help regretting that thefe Itinera have not made 
D their 
[ u 1 
their appearance in the Englijh^ or fome other 
language befides that of Sweden ; for though, in 
country cultivated like ours, many hints, perhaps,, 
might not be drawn from thefe volumes, of real 
Importance to agriculture here\ yet they are fo 
replete with curious and philofophical obferva- 
tions, that they could not fail to be an acceptable 
prefent to the public ; as the general fcope of 
thefe volumes is to adapt natural hiftory to eco- 
nomical purpofes.
In the Iter Gothlandicum et 
CElandicum^ Linn^eus's inftruflions were di- 
reeled principally to thefe particulars: — He 
was to endeavour to find fome kind of earth 
proper for making pottery-ware in imitation of 
the porcelaine of Chi7ia : he was to notice every 
produdlion of nature that might fuperfede the- 
neceflity of the importation of any article, 
ufed either in phyfic or manufadlures : and in 
fine, he was to have a regard to every part of 
natural hiftory.
In the execution of his plan^ 
however, he went much farther than his commif- 
fion extended, having interfperfed a number of 
obfervations relating to the antiquities of thefe 
iflands, the mechanic arts, to the manners of the 
people, their fifhery, and various other articles.
He was, as might reafonably be expe6bed, un- 
fuccefsful in the firft part of his commiflion, 
fince the two iflands are almoft entirely conl- 
pofed of limeftone, or coral rocks, which abound 
in a remarkable degree in the Baltic.
As a jproof of the little attention that had been 
paid to natural hiftory in Sweden^ we may obferve^ 
tliat 
[ 55 3 
that our author in this journey dircovered above ari^ 
hundred plants, which before were not known to 
be indigenous 5 many of which were fuch as are 
ufed in phyfic, and in dyeing.
He pointed out to 
the natives feveral plants of great ufe in ruftic 
economy, and fhewed them the advantage of 
planting the Sea-reed grafs (Arundo arenaria) to 
arreft the fand, and form foil on the fliores \ to 
which it is extremely well adapted by the length 
of the roots.
In the Iter CElandicum there 
occurs a curious remark in vegetation, confirming 
the annual increafe of the v/ood in an oak-tree, 
in which was perfe6lly diflinguifhed the hard 
winters of 1578, 1687, and 1709, by the narrow- 
ncfs of the circles in thofe years.
He defcribes 
the procefs for making tar, as praclifed by thefe 
iflanders ; and further, interfperfes many obferva- 
tions relating to mineralogy in general; to iroa 
in particular, with which Sweden abounds ; de- 
fcribes the iron mountain Taherg^ (See PhiL 
'Tranfa5l, vol.
xlix.
p. c^o.) the alum mines of 
Mockleby *, the Poma chryftallina^ or aetites marmo^ 
reus^ which illuftrates the formation of chry& 
tals, ^c.
In the Iter Scanicum, performed in 1749^ 
our author treats largely on the culture of marfhy 
grounds ; on the ufefui and noxious herbs, for 
inftance, the Stakan^ fuppofed to be the Phellan* 
drium aquatkum^ or Water Hemlock^ which it is 
believed renders horfes that eat it paralytic ; on 
the Gramen Mann^^ or Fejiuca fluitans^ the feeds 
of which are fo particularly ufefui in fattening: 
geefc J on -the ^garicus mufcarm, dcc^ 
D 2 la 
[ 36 1 
In 1743, on occafion of conferring a degree on 
Dr. J, JVeJiman^ the profeflbr delivered his third 
Oratio^^ de ^elluris habit abilis i?i€remento : an 
elaborate and ingenious defence of that hypo* 
thefis, which Sir Ifaac Newtvn^ and feveral other 
philofophers, have inclined to, *' That the pro- 
portion of water on the globe of this earth is 
conftantly decreafing." This leads the pro- 
fefTor alfo to difcufs the i^ad fedion of the 
Fbilofophia— Initio rerum ex omni fpecie viventium 
iinicum ferns par creatum fuijfe fuadet Vatio.
— ^The 
vifible receffion of the waters of the fea in divers 
parts of the earth, particularly apparent in the 
Baltic^ had inclined the Swedijh philofophers to 
this opinion of Sir Ifaac Newton's.
The pofition 
of xkit Philofophia^ he thinks naturally deducible 
from the foregoing hypothefis, and neceflarily fo 
from the Mofaic hiftory.
In folving the difficul- 
ties attending the latter part of the hypothefis, he 
is led by his fubjed to enter largely into a part of 
the economy of, nature, which renders his dif- 
courfe highly interefting, independently of all con- 
jedlures relating to the main argument : this re- 
lates to the various ways in which vegetables are 
diffeminated, and by which they find their way 
to every part of the globe.
To this efFed winds, 
rain, rivers, the fea, animals, &:c.
are all fubfer- 
vient, as well as the various ftrudlure and pro^ 
perties of the feeds themfelves ; in illuftrating 
which laft affair the profefTor has taken great 
pains, and conftruded tables of the genera, founded 
on thefe different properties of the feeds.
In the 
introduftion to this oration, our author turns the 
attention 
[ 37 ] 
attention of his readers to fome of the more re- 
markable difcoveries that had lately been made 
in natural hiftory and philofophy fuch were 
thofe relating to the Polype Rattlefnake^ and the 
Senega^ &:c.
; among others alfo, he mentions a 
remarkable fa6b that had been communicated by 
Sauvages of Montpelier^ refpeding the efFed of the 
berries of the Coriaria myrtifolia^ Spec.
pL 1467 
(Myrtle-leaved Sumach) in occafioning inftant 
epilepfy.
The three orations of Linn/eus are fubj.oined 
to the fecond volume of the Ammitates Academic^^ 
printed in 1752.
In 1745, the profeflbr publiflied his Flora 
SuEcicA exhihens Plant as per Regnum Sueci^ cref- 
centes^ fyfiematice cum differentiis fpecierum^ fynonymis 
autorum^ nominihus incolarum^ fob locorum^ ufu 
Pharmacopceorum^ 8°, Holm.
pp.
392, 1745 ; and 
again, with many additions, in 1755, pp.
464; 
The firfl: edition contains 1140 plants.
In the 
fecond they are increafed, by his own, and the 
difcoveries of his pupils, to 1296.
No generical 
charadlers are introduced into this work, but re- 
ferences made to them as they ftand in the Genera 
Plantarum^ before fpoken of.
A number of fele6t 
fynonyma is added to his own fpecific name, under 
each plant and not only the SwediJIj names in 
general, but the provincial onQs : highly worthy this 
of imitation in works of this kind, and quite ne- 
ceflary in fo extenfive a kingdom.
Many of the 
rare plants are defcribed at large, and botanical 
criticifms added to many others.
In the laft edi- 
tion the author has interfperfed a great number 
. D 3 ' of 
C 3S ] 
of curious obfervations relating to the economical 
and medical ufes of the plants and has particu- 
larly noted thofe that are capable of being ap- 
plied to the purpofes of dyeing.
The author 
moreover never fails to mention euporiftic medi- 
cines, which he feems to think, perhaps very 
juftiy, have not been attended to by phyficians 
as they deferve.
The plan of this work has been 
a pattern for all fucceeding writers of local cata- 
logues, more efpecially thofe who have followed 
the hinn^an fyftem, and has been very little im- 
proved by any ; perhaps excelled by none.
The 
plants of Lapland are all included in this work ; 
and the preface, befides the account of Swedijh 
authors on botany, contains a curious divifion of 
the feveral provinces of the kingdom, in refpeft 
to their different foils and fituation, as adapted 
to particular plants, fpecifying under each pro- 
vince the plants found therein.
In 1746 appeared the Fauna Su ecic a, J/flens 
Animalia Suecice Regni : Mammalia^ Aves^ Amphu 
hia^ Pifces^ Infe^a^ Vermes , diftributa per claffes et 
cr dines ^ genera et fpecies^ &c.
Stockholm 1746, 8°; 
und again, greatly augmented, in 1761, pp.
556.
The firft edition contained 1350 fubjeds, the 
latter comprehends not lefs than 2266.
Neither 
in this work are any clajfical^ ordinal^ or generical 
notes given at large.
The world had never feen 
fo compendious, and it may be truly faid, at the 
fame time, fo complete a zoology before.
Here, as 
in plants, the author has given to each animal a 
new fpecific name, exprellive, as far as pofTible, 
of its effentjal charadter.
The fynonym are added, 
3 ot 
I 39 1 
or referred to, from almoft every author on the 
fubjedt, and almoft every animal is moreover com- 
pendioully defcribed.
Infers make a very confi- 
derable part of this catalogue ; near 1 700 fpecies, 
ail found in that kingdom, are enumerated, diftin- 
guifhed, afjd methodized, in a manner entirely 
new, and which has been adopted by nearly every 
writer on the fubjed fince.
We fhall fpeak more 
fully of the ciaflification in the abftra6t intended 
£0 be given of the Syftema Nature.
A compendious 
manual of Englijh Zoology on this plan, is a work 
much wanted 5 though we think it could not fail 
to enhance its value, if the tables of the genera 
were prefixed to each clafs, and the charaders to 
each genus, as in the Syft.em of our author.
Two 
plates, of fome of the rarer birds chiefly, accom- 
pany this volume, on which are explained the 
technical terms ufed in ornithology.
The number 
of each clafs of animals ftands thus : 
1. Mammalia - 59 
2. Aves - - - 195 
3. Amphibia - 25 
4. Pifces - 77 
5. Infeda - 1691 
6. Vermes - 198.
An accident having thrown into the hands of 
the profefTor an Herbarium^ confifting of five large 
volumes of plants, he difcovered that it was the 
colledion of the famous Dr. Paul Herman, which 
had been made in the ifland of Zeylon, by that 
gentleman, at the expence of the Butch Eaft India 
Company.
This Herhariim had been loft for up- 
wards of half a century, until chance threw it 
into the hands of M.
Gunther^ apothecary to the 
]fAng of Denmark^ who fent it to Linn^us, re- 
D 4 quefting 
[ 40 ] - 
quefting the profefTor to examine it, and affix the 
names to the plants of this fuperb colledlion.
Its 
great value, as being coUedled by fo eminent a 
man, induced our author to examine the whole ' 
with great attention ; and he was thereby enabled 
to form many new genera^ and fettle many doubt- 
ful fpecies.
He publiflied the refult of his la- 
bour under the title of Flora Zeylanica, Jijlens 
Plant as indie as Zeylona Inful^e, qua olim 1670—1677 
le^a fuere^ a Paulo Hermanno Profejfore Botan.
Ley^ 
denji ; demum pofi 70 annos ah A.
Gmthero orbi 
reddit^.
Holm.
1747, 8% 'pp.
254, tab.
4. 
This work is yet of ufe as a pnax of thefe 
plants, and as a Linnaan catalogue of Burman's 
'Thefaurus Zeylanicusj publiflied in 1738, and illuf- 
trated with the figures of upwards of 200 of thefe 
plants.
Many of the rare fpecies are defcribed, 
and a very copious number of fynonyms added 
to feveral of the Eaft Indian plants.
The Her- 
barium confided of about 660 plants, of which 
the true places in the fydem are affigned to up- 
wards of 40O5 and the remainder were too im- 
perfe(5b to admit of diftin6tion.
This volume is 
rendered valuable by a concife hiftory of the pro- 
grefs of botany, from the reftoration of learning 
in the i6th century; a natural hiftory of the 
ifland, and its general produce ; the life of Dr..
Hennan\ a fhort account of J.
Uartog^ who was 
fent by Dr. Sherard to make collections in this 
ifland and' of Bur man'' s "Thefaurus Zeylanicus., 
LiNN^us authenticates this Herbarium to have 
been Herman's^ by ftiewing that the numbers, and!
[ 41 ] 
the plants, anfwer to his Mufeum Zeyknkum', putr- 
lifted in 17 1 7.
We now fee Linn^^^us fixed in the fituatioa 
that was fo well adapted to his charafter, his tafte, 
and abilities, and which feems to have been the 
objed of his ambition, and center of his hopes.
Soon after his eftablifhment, he laboured to get 
the Academical Garden, which had been founded 
in 1657, put on a better footing, and very foon 
effeded it ; procuring alfo a houfe to be built foF 
the refidence of the profeffor.
The whole had 
been in ruin ever fince the fire in 1702, and at the 
time Linn^us was appointed profefibr of botany, 
the garden did not contain above 50 plants that 
were exotic.
His correfpondence with the firft 
botanifts in Europe^ foon fupplied him with great 
variety.
He received Indian plants from Jujfieu of 
Paris ^ and from Van Roy en of Ley den ; European 
plants from Haller and Ludwig ; American plants 
from the late Mr, Collinfon, Mr. Catejhy^ and others ; 
and variety of annuals from Dillenius : in fhort, 
how much the garden owed to his diligence and 
care, in a few years, may be feen by the catalogue 
publiflied under the title of Hortus Upsaliensis 
eMhens Plantas exoticas horto Upfalienjis Academi^e a 
fefe (Linnseo) illatas ab anno 1742, in annum 1748, 
addiiis, differentiis fynonymis^ hahitationibus, hofpitiis^ 
rariorumque defcriptionibus^ in gratiam ftudiofa ju- 
ventutis.
Holm.
174B, 8**, pp.
306, tab.
3. By 
this catalogue it appears that the profefibr had 
introduced 1 100 fpecies, exclufive of all the 
Swedijh plants, and of varieties ; which latter, 
in ordinary gardens, amount not infrequently 
to 
[ 42 3 
to one third of the whole number.' The 
preface contains a curious hiftory of the cli* 
mate at Upfak and the progrefs of the feafons 
through the whole year.
From thefe obferva- 
tions we learn, that the greateft degree of heat, in 
the fummer of 1747, at Upfal^ was on the fecond 
day of July^ when Celfius's thermometer ftood at 
30 degrees above o ; that the greateft degree of 
cold, on the 25th of January 1740, was 28 de-^ 
grees below o« In this thermometer the freezing 
point is o, and boiling water 100.
From feven 
years obfervations on the leafing of the oak, it 
was found never to pufli before the 6th of 
or to be retarded beyond the 2 2d.
About this period it was, that LiNNiEus made a 
remarkable difcovery, relating to the generation of 
pearls in the river Pearl- Mufcle (My a.
Margariiifera^ 
Syft.
1 1 12.) This fhell-filli muft not be confounded 
with what is called the Mother of Pearl Shelly as that 
belongs to another genus, is a fea-fhell, and an 
inhabitant of the warmer countries only.
The 
fliell-fifli in queftion is found in rivers^ in all 
the northern parts of the world ; in Norway and 
Sweden it abounds j it is found in the rivers of the 
county of Tyrone in Ireland^ and in thofe of Done- 
gall}, in Scotland^ the Don is faid to abound with 
it and it is not unfrequent in the rivers of Eng- 
land, This fifh will bear removal remarkably 
well ; and it is faid, that in fome places they form 
tefervoirs for the purpofe of keeping it, and 
taking out the pearl, which, in a certain period 
of time, will be again renewed.
From obferva- 
tions on the growth of thefc fhells, and the num* 
ber 
I 43 ] 
ber of their annular lamin£^ or fcales, it is fup-^ 
pofed the fifli will attain a very great age 50 or 60 
years are imagined to be a moderate computatipn.
The difcovery turned on a method, which Lm- 
NiEus found, of putting thefe mufcles into a 
ftate of producing pearls at his pleafiire ; though 
the final effect did not take place for feverai 
years : he fays, that in 5 or 6 years after the 
operation the pearl ^^^-hmt, acquired the fize 
of a Vetch, We are unacquainted with the means 
by which he accompliH^ed this extraordinary ope- 
ration, but it was probably publilhed at the 
time, and confidered as important, fmce it is cer- 
tain that the author was rewarded with a munifi« 
cent pr^mium^ from the States of the kingdom, 
on this account.
We regret that we cannot 
fpeak more fully on this head ; but may ob- 
ferve, that it is probable, from a paper publilhed 
many years afterwards in the Berlin Acts, that the 
method confifted in injuring the (hell externally, 
perhaps by a perforation ; as it has been obferved^ 
that thefe concretions in Ihell-fifh are found on 
the infide, exadily oppofite to perforations and 
injuries made from without by ferpula^ and other 
animals.
From the time that Linn^us and Rofen were 
appointed profcfTors at Vpfal^ it Ihould feem 
that the credit of that univerfity, as a fchool 
of phyfic, had been increafing ; and the fa6l in- 
deed is certain, that numbers of ftudents re- 
forted thither from Germany^ attraded by the 
chara6ler of thefe two able men : and certainly in 
Sweden itfeif^ many young men were invited to 
i:he 
C 44 ] 
the ftudy of phyfic, by the excellent manner in 
which it was taught, who otherwife would have 
engaged in different purfuits.
We mufl not 
deviate into the line of Rofen\ department : fuf- 
fice it to fay^ that thefe two eminent men, by 
their united zeal and abilities, failed not to exalt, 
together with their own fame, that of their uni- 
verfity, Linn^^us, in teaching the diagnofts mor- 
horum^ had adopted the plan, with fome alteration, 
of M.
Sauvages's Nofology, of which we fhall be 
led to give fome account hereafter.
In the year 
1749, he publilhed, for the ufe of his ftudents, 
Materia Medica, Lii^er L de Plantis digeftus 
Jecundum genera^ loca^ nomina^ qualitates^ vireSy dif- 
ferentias^ durationes, Jimplicia^ modos, ufus^ fynony^ 
ma, culturas, pr^parata, potentias^ compofita.
Holm.
1749, 8% pp 252.
The compendious method 
in which this work is executed, and the feveral 
^ ufeful preliminary papers annexed, render it a 
very ukful and inftrudlive manual to (ludents in 
medicine.
A materia medica of the vegetable lyng- 
dom, in which every fmiple was afcertained by 
fo able a botanift as Linnaeus, was a very con- 
fiderable acquifition to fcience.
In this volume 
Ere arranged 535 fubjeds, and feveral are for the 
firft time reduced to their proper genera fuch are 
the Ipecacuanha^ Pareira hrava^ CocuU Indict^ and 
others.
The method purfued in this volume is 
as follows.
The author gives, 
1. His own fpecific chara6ler of the plant.
2. C Bauhine^s fynonym : or, if the plant was 
unknown to him, that of the firll difcoverer.
3. The country where it is produced.
In 
the 
[ 45 ] 
the fame line is exprefled, by a' fingle epithet; 
whether it be an herb^ Jhruhy ox tree : whether it 
be annual^ biennial^ ox perennial : alfo, whether it 
be indigenous ; or if not, whether it thrives well hj 
common cultivation in gardens, or requires de- 
fence from the cold of the winter in Sweden s or 
whether it will not endure that climate.
4. The Swedijh officinal name, what part is in 
ufe, or what preparation of it, if any i and the 
dofes of each.
5. The fenfthle quality of the plant ; whether 
bitter^ aromatic^ acid, ajiringent^ &c.
; whether /r^?- 
grant, foetid, or inodorous \ whether gummy ^ refinous^ 
ox milky.
Its reputed quality whether uncertain^ 
well-known, and approved ; or whether to be cau- 
tiouQy ufed.
Whether chiefly ufed in phyfic, or 
for culinary purpofes.
6. Its reputed effeds on the human body,' 
whether purging, emetic, diuretic, &c.
7. The difeafes in which it is moft frequently 
prefcribed.
8. The compound medicines into which it en-?
ters in the Swedijh difpenfatory.
At the end of the volume is an index morborumi 
with the fimpies appropriated to each : and an 
index virium, adapted to a preceding claflification, 
founded on their qualities or effeds, either on the 
folids or fluids of the human body.
In the year 1749 was pubiifhed the firft volume 
of a coliedion of Thefes in 8°, under the title of 
Amcenitates Academical, feu Differ tationes vari^e, phy-^ 
ftca-i medico, et botanic a.
This publication has 
been 
f 46 ] 
been continued, from time to time, to the com-^ 
pletion of the feventh volume in the year 1769.
Holm.
Thefe volumes, as foon as publiftied, 
were conftantly reprinted in Germany and HoU 
land.
As thefe academical dilTertations were 
fuftained under Linn^us in his profeflbrial 
chara6ler, and were feleded by himfelf, they 
have been regarded as of equal authority nearly 
with his own writings ; and many of them^ 
do in a particular manner extend and exemplify 
divers parts of his works, the fubjeds having 
been pointed oiit by himfelf, in many inftances, 
for that purpofe.
For thefe reafons we fhall, in 
the courfe of this volume, give a very brief ac- 
count of the purport of each differtation, fmce they 
contain a great variety 6f curious intelligence on 
the fubjedls of phyfic and natural hiftory, every 
where digefted in the moft fcientific tafte.
Whilft LiNNi^ius was meditating one of hisf 
capital performances, which had long been ex- 
peded, and greatly wifhed for, he was interrupted 
by a very long and painful fit of the gout, which 
left him in a very weak and difpirited ftate ; and, 
a^ccording to the intelligence that his friends gave 
of him, nothing was thought to have contributed 
more to the redoration of his fpirits, than the 
feafohable acquifition, at this jundure, of a col- 
lection of rare and undefcribed plants.
Upon the recovery of his health, he publiflied 
his book Philosophia Botanica in qua expli^ 
cdntur fundament a botanica cum defmitionibus fartium^ 
fxemplis terminorufn^ cbfervationibus rariorum^ ad-- 
E 47 ] 
je^is figuris amis.
Stockh.
et Amft.
1751, 8% ppi 
362, tab.
II.
This mnft be confidered as the in- 
ftitutions of the Linnaan fyftem of botany, and is 
a work which none, who wilh to be acquainted 
with the fexual fyftem, can be without, as it is the 
author's own comment on his Fundamental firft 
publifhed in 1736, and which are comprized in 
365 aphorifms, divided into 12 chapters.
The 
author's original intention was to have explained 
all thefe aphorifms at large, in the manner that 
had been done in the Bibliotheca Botanica^ Clajfes 
Plantarum^ Sponfalia Flantarum^ Critica Botanica^ 
and Vires Plantarum\ but he fays his numerous 
avocations did not allow him requifite time.
Ch. I.
Exhibits a fyftematical diftribution of 
the principal botanical writers, and is that part 
which is treated of at large in the Bibliotheca.
Ch. 2.
Syftemata.
A view of all the botanical 
fyftems, being a compend of the Clajfes Plantarum^ 
but here brought down fomewhat later, fo as to 
comprehend the general view of Van Royen\ 
fIaller*Sy and Wachendorf's, 
Ch. 3.
Plants, Explains the terms ufed in de- 
fcribing the different kinds of roots, ftalks, and 
icaves of plants.
Ch. 4.
FruElificatio, Defcribes the parts of 
fru6lification, and defines all the terms ufed re* 
fpeding their number^ figure^ proportion^ fituation^ 
and ufes, 
Ch. 5.
Relates to the fexes of plants, a fubjeft 
which is more copioufly treated in a paper called 
Sponfalia Plantarum^ printed in the firft volume of 
the Ammitates AcadmiCie^ 
Ch, 6.
[ 48 ] 
Ch, 6.
Chara&eres, Rules and • defirritions for 
eftabiiftiing the charaders of chjfes^ orders ^ and 
genera, 
Ch. 7.
Nomina, Rules for rightly forming ge- 
nerical names, and thofe of orders and clajfes, 
Ch. 8.
Different^, Rules for eftablilhing the 
fpecific chara6lers of plants.
Ch. 9.
Varietates, Rules for diflinguiftiing va- 
rieties among plants.
Ch. 10.
Sy7tonyma, Rules relating to the right 
difpofition of fynonymical names in botanic writ- 
ings.
The four chapters laft mentioned make the fub- 
je£t of the Critica Botanica, in which work 
every aphorifm is much more largely explained 
than in the prefent.
Ch. II.
Adumhrationes, Rules for properly de- 
fcribing and naming the fpecies^ and for giving 
their complete hiftory in a fcientific manner.
^jgCh'.
12.
Vires, Relates to the virtues of plants, 
as deducible from their agreement in their charac- 
ters, as of the fame genus^ the fame natural order^ 
or clafs.
The fubjedt of this chapter is treated 
in a more comprehenfive manner in the Vire^ 
Plantarum^ printed in the firft volume of Amceni- 
tates Academics, To give a few inftances how- 
ever as illuftrations : — The Scammony, Me- 
choacan^ Turbith, and Sea Bindweed, are all 
[pedes of the genus Convolvulus^ and all agree in 
poffeffing a .purgative quality.
The Mallow, 
Marfh-mallow, and Cotton-bufli, are fo many 
diftind genera^ under a natural order, called 
columniferouSy and agree in being all mucilaginous.
Of 
t 49 j 
Of the umbelliferous plants^ fuch as gfow in Airji 
places are aromatic, and confidered as fudorifics 
and carminatives : thofe growitig in watery places^ 
on the contrary, are moftly of a quality to be 
juftly furpe6ted3 and not a few of them quite 
noxious.
Plants of the papilionaceous clafs are all 
excellent food for cattle.
The fyngeneJioUs^ com- 
monly Miters, The coniferous clafs, all evergreens 
and rejinous^ are confidered as diuretics.
Ten explanatory plates are added to this vo-*^ 
lume, on which are defcribed the different leaves, 
and their fituations ©n the ftalk, £5fr< different 
ftalks, roots, P.owers, ^c.
The firft part of thefe 
plates, relating to the leaves, had been given in- 
trodudlory to t-he Hortus Cliffortianus.
Some new 
terms in botany, which have been invented fince 
the publication of the Philofophia^ may be found 
in a paper under the title of T ermini Botanici, in 
the 6th volume of the Amt^nitates.
In this work of Linn^us it is difBcult to de- 
termine, whether we ought moil to admire the ge- 
nius of its author in his inventive power, or that 
exquifite fcientiiic arrangement which he has given 
to the whole ; and whichj both together, conftitute 
this a moft excellent performance.
At the end of the volume we meet with feveral 
curious fragments : fuch are, 
1. Diredlions to botanic pupils.
2. The method of conftrudting an herharium, 
3. Method of condu(5ting botanical excurfions* 
4. Method of laying out a botanic garden.
5. Plan for naturalifts in travelling and con* 
E ftru£ting 
1 
[ 50 J 
flruding their journal ; with an enumeration of aM 
thofe kibjeds that demand their attention.
6. Idea of a compleat botanift.
Some of the 
principal botanifts are here enumerated.
7. A compend of the philofophy of vege- 
tation.
17531 appeared the Profeflbr's Opus 
" maximum et aternumy^ the Species Plantarum 
exhihentes Plant as rite cognitas^ ad genera relatas^ cum 
differentiis fpecificiSy mminibus trivialibus^ fynonymis 
fele5lis^ locis natalihus^ fecundum fyftema fexuale dl- 
gefias, Tom. II.
Holm.
8% 1753, pp.
1200 ; and 
a fecond time in 1762, pp.
1684.
To give this 
work its utmoft perfedion, had been the author's 
objedt for many years, and to this all his other bota- 
nic produ6lions are in fome meafure only prepara- 
tory ; efpecially the catalogues ; as the rightly 
afcertaining the /pedes is the great obje6t of all me- 
thod.
In this work Linn^us takes in every plant 
that had come fufficiently under his own infpec- 
tion ; feldom admitting any on the authority of 
others ; and wherefoever he has done it, the plant 
is diftinguifhed by a proper mark.
The plan of 
this work is, in general, agreeable to that of all 
his other local catalogues ; no other part of the 
fyftem being exemplified except the fpems : and 
as it is entirely botanical, none of the uks 
of the plants are here introduced.
Every plant 
has its fpecific name, conftrudted according to the 
rules eftabliflied in the eighth part of the Philo^ 
fophia Botanica^ with a reference to all, or any of 
his own works, in which it has been mentioned be- 
\ fore 5: 
[ 51 J 
fofe i and the fynonym is given, if it be different 
from the prefent.
Then follow the fynonyms of 
the beft authors, and conftantly, where the plant is 
at ail rare, or newly-difcovered, there is a reference 
to the beft figures.
The country in which the 
plant grows is then added, and frequently a fym- 
bol, expreffive of its duration, whether annual, 
biennial, or perennial.
In this work, for the firft time, the profefTor 
has given to each plant, what he calls a trivial 
name : that is, a fingle epithet, which may be ex- 
preffive, as far as poffible, of the ejfential fpecific 
difference, among the fpecies of the genus : this, 
however, can take place but rarely in other in- 
ftances it is expreffive of fome, the moft ftriking 
and obvious difference ; and not feldom it is a lo- 
cal term ; or the name of the firft difcoverer.
The 
latter method^ could it have taken place, would 
have had the advantage of conveying, fomewhat 
like a chronological hiftory of each plant, and at 
the fame time perpetuating due credit to the dif- 
coverer.
Thefe trivial names are printed in the 
margin, to catch the eye inftantly, which is a great 
advantage.
The invention of trivial names, the 
hint of which was probably borrowed from Riviniy 
by affifting the memory, has much promoted the 
knowledge of plants, and muft be confidered as a 
capital improvement.
Their ufe in fpeaking of 
plants, and forming compendious catalogues, has 
been acknowledged by every botanift fince the 
introdudtion of them.
In the preface the author gives an ample ac- 
count of the affiftances he received^ and of the 
E 2 pains 
I- 
C 52 ] 
pain^ he had taken, to bring this work to its pre- 
fent ftate.
To this end, he fpecifies, the coun- 
tries he had travelled over ; the many botanic 
gardens he had vifited ; the various excellent her" 
laria that he had examined, in Sweden, Holland, 
England, and France •, the names of his pupils 
educated under him, and their various peregrina- 
tions from all which he reaped great advantages, 
as from thefe he received various new plants : 
and, finally, he acknowledges the many liberal 
communications of feeds and fpecimens, fent to 
him from all parts of the world by the firft bota- 
nifts of the time.
As this work contains all the plants of the known 
world which had come to Linn^us^s knowledge, 
or rather infpe6tion which, at the publication of 
thefe volumes, appear to have amounted to about 
7,300 fpecies, all varieties excluded, the profefled 
botanift has only to regret, that it could not have 
been extended by the author himfelf, to a com- 
pleat pinax, and hijlory of every plant therein de- 
fcribed.
In this year alfo Linnaeus publilhed Museum 
Tessinianum, ^j/j^-r^///.
ComitisC» G.
Tessin, Regis 
Regfilque Senaions, See, &c.
colie5ium.
Holm, 1753* 
foL pp.
90.
tab.
12.
This is a defcription of the 
cabinet of Linn^^us's firft patron and great friend 
Count T ejffin^ at that time preceptor to the Prince 
Royal, now King of Sweden, who had fpared no 
cxpence in colleding a rich mufeum, principally 
confifting of fubjeds in mineralogy, and particu- 
cularly abounding in foffils of the figured or ex- 
traneous kind.
The work is in Swedijh and Latin 5 
3 and 
[ 53 ] 
and the tables reprefent feveral fcarce and very 
valuable figured fojfils^ not to be feen elfe where.
The petrifadlions or figured foflils in this work, 
are arranged in four orders, founded on the dif- 
ferent modes of the formation of them.
1. Fqffiliay commonly fo called, lliells, corals, 
animal remains, unchanged, except by being de- 
prived more or lefs of the connefting animal 
gluten.
2. Redintegrata, Earthy, ftony, or chryftalline 
foflils, formed within any cruftaceous or teftaceous 
body, as in a mould ; thus retaining the caft, 
without the external coat.
3. Imprejfa, Impreflions only : as of fifhes and 
capillary plants, or ferns, ^c.
4. ^ranfuhfi;antiata.
Perfe6t petrifafbions, in 
which the original organic parts are perfectly filled 
up with ftony particles, and retaining the exa6t 
ftrudure, externally and internally, of the origi- 
nal body.
In 1754 was publiftied Museum Regis Adol- 
PHI Suecorum^ ^c, in quo Animalia rariora^ imprimis 
€t exotica ^adrupedia^ Aves^ Amphibia^ Pifces^ In- 
fe5la^ V ermes defcribuntur et determinantur^ Latine et 
Suetice.
Fol. 1754, pp.
135.
tab.
33.
This fplen- 
did volume is frequently referred to by our author 
in his Syjlema^ on account of the figures of fo many 
of the rarer ferpents, and fifiies, here engraven.
Of the former there are 48 fpecies, and of the lat- 
ter 32 ; fpecimens of which are all preferved in 
fpirits in the royal mufeum, in the palace of 
WrickfdahL 
The fame which our author had now acquired 
E 3 by 
f 54 ] 
by his Syftema Nature, of whicfi a fixth edition,' 
much enlarged, had been publifhed at Stockholm^ 
in 1748, in 8°, pp.
232, with eight tables, expla- 
natory of the claffes and orders ; and which was 
alfo republifhed by Gronovius at Leyden ; had 
brought, as it were, a conflux of every thing rare 
and valuable in every branch of nature, from all 
parts of the globe, into Sweden.
The king and 
queen of Sweden had their feparate colle61;ions of 
rarities ; the former at Ulrickfdahl^ as hath juft 
been mentioned ; the latter, very rich in exotic 
infedls and fhells, procured at a great expence, at 
the palace of Drottningholm.
Thefe our author 
was employed in arranging and defcribing.
Be- 
fides thefe, the mufeum of the royal academy of 
Upfd had been augmented by a confiderable do- 
nation from the king, whilft hereditary prince, in 
1 746 i by another, from Count Gyllenhor^^ the year 
before ; by a third, from M, Grill, an opulent 
citizen of Stockholm, The contents of thefe three 
colledions are given in the firli volume of the 
Amcenitates Academics.
We mention them here 
only to fliew that Linn^us now began to enjoy 
ample refources in every branch of natural hiftory 
at home ; befides that many ingenious men, who 
had been educated under him5 were now difperfed 
into various quarters of the globe \ and that 
from their letters he received great intelligence 
and fatisfadion.
Seeds and fpecimens of plants 
were fent him from Siberia, by Gmelin from 
America^ by Dr. Mitchel and Governor Coldin^ham | 
from England, by Mr. Collinson-, Mr» Ellis-, as alfo 
from his friends in Holland^ and various other parts 
of 
C 55 3 
JDf Europe^ And thus it will be feen, that he be- 
gan fcarcely to feel the difadvantages of his 
northern fituation.
We lhall now alfo begin to fee the profefTor 
in a more elevated rank and fituation in life.
His reputation had already procured him ho- 
nours from almoft all the Royal Societies in Eu- 
rope, Into the Imperial Academy^ he had been J very 
early received, and diftinguifhed, according to the 
cuftom of that inftitution, with a claflic name, 
having moft aptly been called Dioscorides fecun* 
dus : and in the year 1753 he received this honour 
from the Royal Society of London ; and his own 
fovereign, truly fenfible of his merit, and greatly 
efteeming his charader and abilities, favoured him 
with a mark of his diftindlion and regard, by 
creating him a Knight of the Polar Star.
Ic 
was now no longer Laudatur et alget.
His emo- 
luments kept pace with his fame and honours ; his 
pradice in his profeflion became lucrative, and 
we find him foon after pofiTefifed of his country 
houfe and gardens at Hammarhy^ about five miles 
from Upfal He had moreover received one of 
the moft flattering teftimonies of the extent and 
magnitude of his fame, that perhaps was ever fiiewn 
to any literary charader, the ftate of the nation 
which conferred it, with all its circumftances, 
duly confidered.
This was an invitation to Ma- 
drid^ from the king of Spain^ there to prefide as a 
naturalift, with the ofi^er of an annual penfion for 
life of 2000 piftoles, letters of nobility, and the 
perfedt free exercife of his own religion.
An ofi^er 
l*at readily parallelled in the hiftory of modern 
E 4 times!
E 56 3 ' 
times !
That he did not accept of it is ceri 
tain, having, after the moft perfedl acknowledge 
ments of the lingular honour done him, returned 
for anfv/er, that, if he had any merits, they were 
^- due to his own country." 
In the year 1755, the Royal Academy of Sciences 
at Stockholm honoured our profefibr with one of 
the firft premiums, agreeably to the will of Count 
Spcirre \ who had decreed two gold medals, of ten 
ducats valup each, to be annually given by the 
academy, to the authors of fuch papers, in the 
preceding year's Stockhohn A6ls, as (hould be ad- 
judged moft ufefui in promoting agriculture par- 
ticularly, and all branches of rural geconomy, 
This medal bore on one fide, the arms of the County 
with this mollO'^ Sup erfte 5 in Scientiis amor Frede- 
RiciSpARi.}:— LiNN/Eus obtained it inconfequencc 
of a paper de Plantis^ oucs Alpium Sue cic arum in-' 
digen^^ magno rei (economics et medico emolumenta 
fieri pojfint^ and the ultimate intention was to re- 
commend thcfe plants, as adapted to culture in 
Lapland, This paper was Jnferted in the; Stockholm 
A&s for 1754.
Vol. XV.
LiNN^us alfo obtained tht premium centum au-?
reorum^ propofcd by the Imperial Academy of 
Sciences at Peterjhurgh^ for the beft paper written 
to ejiablijh, or difprove^ by new arguments, the doc- 
trine of the fexes of plants.
On this occafion the 
profeffor wrote his Disqujsitio de quafiione ah Acad.
Imper, Scient.
Petrop.
in annum 1759 pro pr^mia 
fropofita: Sexum Plantap.um arguraentis et experi- 
mentis novis^ prMer adhuc jam cognita^ vel cqrrohorare 
vel impugnare^ pramijfa e^cpoptom hifiorica et phyfica 
omnium 
t 57 ] 
$mnium Plants partium^ qu^ aliquid ad f^cundationem: 
et perfe^ionem feminis, et fru5fus conferre credun- 
tur \ ah eadem Academia die 6 Sept, J 7 60, in con- 
ventu publico pr^mio ornata, Petrop, 1760, 4% 
pp.
32.
Apart from all foregoing arguments, fafbs, and 
experiments, brought in fupport of this queftion, 
the profeffor has in this little trad fufficiently 
proved, by a feries of new fadis, that the duft of 
the Anthera^ analogically called the male parts, is 
abfolutely necelTary to be fhed on the fligma or 
female part, in order to render the feed fertile.
His theory of vegetation, prefixed to this paper, 
is explained more at large in the Prolepjis Planta* 
rum^ printed in the 6th volume of the Ammitates.
It was, if poffible, an additional glory to Lijj- 
Ni^:us to have merited this premium from thtPeterf-- 
lur^h academy inafmuch as a profeffor of that 
fociety, a few years before, had with more thaa 
common zeal, although with a futility lil<:e that 
of the other antagonifts of our author, endeavoured 
to overturn the whole Linn^ean fyftem of botany, 
by attempting to fhew that the do6lrine of the 
fexes of plants, had no foundation in nature, and 
was unfupported by fa6ls an4 experiments.
The great charader of Linn^us, and that of 
his colleagues, particularly of Rofen^ in the 
medical departments, and their united endea- 
vours, had very confiderably raifed the credit of 
the univerfity of UpfaU as we have before ob- 
ferved.
It is certain, that the number of ftu- 
dents are, at this time, nearly double what they 
are faid to have been in accounts writtei> 30 and 
40 years 
[ 58 ] 
40 years ago.
The emulation excited among the 
ftudents amply rewarded thofe gentlemen for their 
pains, by the vaft harveft of ufeful information 
flowing in, particularly on the fubjeds of natural 
hiftory, from their pupils, now difperfed in every 
part of the world.
Many of thefe young men, 
after being properly grounded in the principles of 
phyfic, had, with an ardour which nothing but 
the ftrongeft love of fcience could infpire, volun- 
tarily undertaken the moft diftant and perilous 
voyages, fupp©rted by the munificence of parti- 
cular patrons or focieties, to gratify their tafte in 
the purfuits of natural hiftory, and other ufeful 
knowledge.
Several of thefe young men perilh- 
ed, from change of climate, or various other 
caufes, and much of the fruit of their labour was 
loft with them.
Such was the fate of I'ernftroem^ 
at Pulicandor, in 1 745 of Haffelquift^ who went 
into Mgyp and Palefiine^ and died at Smyrna^ in 
1752 of Loefling^ who died in Cumana^ in 1756.
Of the firft of thefe we have no remains.
The 
papers of Ucjjelquift were redeemed by the queen 
of Sweden^ and publifhed by Linnaeus, under 
the title of Iter Pal/estinum, in 1757, in 8*; 
and thofe of Loefling^ under the title of Iter 
HisPANicuM, in 1758; to each of which is pre- 
fixed a ftiort account of the author.
We have alfo 
the fruit of KaMs journey in N.
America^ and of the 
voyage of Ofieck and Toren^ who both went chap- 
lains to Swedijh Eaft India ftiips.
Thefe are here 
mentioned particularly, as they are all tranflated, 
and publifhed fince in the Englijh language.
We yet 
deplore the more recent fate ^ of Forjkal^ 2indLhh' 
unfortunate 
t 59 ] 
unfortunate aflbciates, in Arabia^ and the more fo,' 
fince his pofthumous pieces, publillied at Copen- 
higen in 1775?
are fufEcient to convince us, that 
the fruit of that expedition would have been rich 
and large, had it not been fo unfortunately 
blafted.
There were alfo feveral others, who made lefs 
remote journies for the fame purpofe ; .fuch were 
Z'.
Montin^ who vifited Lula-Lapmark in 1749 5 
Af. Kcehler^ who travelled into the fouthern part of 
Italy in 1752; Dr. Solander, who vifited Pitho^ 
Z^apmark^ and 'Torno-Lapmark^ in 1753, where he 
made feveral difcoveries, and brought back divers 
rare plants, and other fubje6ls in natural hiftory, 
which had efcaped the diligence of his great 
mafter *, Z).
Rolander^ who vifited Surinam and St.
Euftatia^ in 1755; A, R.
Martin^ who fearched 
Greenland in 1758, as C.
Alftroemer did the 
fouthern parts of Europe in 1760.
We do not 
mention others, who re- vifited the ifle of Gothland 
in 1752 and 1760, d.fiGr Linnaeus' s own tour into 
that place.
The travels of thefe gentlemen afforded 
great fources of information, and furniflied ma- 
terials for our author, that proved very favour- 
able to the laft editions of his Syjiema Natur^y 
and Species Plantarum : infomuch, that we Ihall fee 
him exemplifying, in a much more perfe6t and de- 
tailed manner, his Syjtem of Nature* 
This work, as far as refpedled the vegetable 
kingdom, had been feparately and largely exhi- 
bited, as before mentioned, in the Genera Plan- 
iarum, and the /pedes given in the feveral Florae of 
our 
[ 6o 3 
our author, and finally in the Species Planlamm.
As yet, however, although it had paffed through 
nine editions, little more had appeared in the ani- 
mal kingdom than the generical chara6lers, with 
a fingle fpecific name infomuch that the ninth 
edition at Leyden^ in 1756, was contained in a 
fmall odavo of 226 pages.
This it muft be ob- 
ferved notwithftanding, was only a republication 
of the author's fixth edition in 1748.
The fcheme 
therefore cannot be confidered as perfedled by the 
author, until the publication of the loth edition, 
in 1758, the firft part of which, relating to the 
animal kingdom, makes a volume of 821 pages-, 
and the fame part, in the 12th and laft edition, 
is augmented by the addition of new fubje6ts to 
1327 pages.
This work therefore, publifhed in 
two volumes at Stockholm^ in 1766 and 1767, is to 
be confidered as having received the author's 
finifliing hand, as far as poflible, fince he pro- 
fefles to defcribe only fuch animals as had fallen 
under his own infpedlion, except in fome inftances, 
wher;^ his dependence upon other authority ren- 
der^^d it juftifiable.
The title of this enlarged 
edition runs thus : 
1 Systema Nature per regna tria Nature fecun- 
dum claJJ'es^ ordines^ genera et fpecies^ cum charac^ 
teribus^ differ entiis J fynonytniSy locis, Holm.
1766, 1.
1767,11.
1768, III.
TOM.
I. fhe Animal Kingdom.
In this volume, after a philofophical hiftory of 
the animal kingdom in general, our author pro^ 
ceeds to the eftablifliment of the claflical cha- 
radlers s 
[ 6I ] 
racers ; previous to which, he prefents us with 
the nalural divKion of animals, arifing from their 
different internal ftruBure ; an arrangement partly 
cftablillied by Ariftotk^ and of which our own 
great naturalift Mr, Ray has made confiderable 
ufe, in the introdudlory part of his Synopfts Ani- 
fnalium.
By this divifion all the animal kmgdom 
naturally falls into fix clalTes, as follow : animals 
having the 
Heart furniflied with 
Two ventricles andf^^, , T\/r a n/nv/r a t ta^ 
. , j V iviparous.
MAMMALIA, 
auricles: — ~\ .
tjtot-ic 
, A \ Oviparous.
islKDb.
Blood warm and red.
L ^ 
One ventricle f ^^fpii"^tio^ 1 ^j^pj^Igj^* 
auricle: — — s voluntary.
S 
Blood cold and red.
(.Breathing by Gills.
FISHES.
One ventricle, with- r 
out auricle : — \ Antennated.
INSECTS.
Sanies^ cold and co- 1 Tentaculated.
VERMES.
lourlefs.
L 
He then gives the natural charaflers at large of 
each clafs, taking in with the foregoing internal 
ftrudure, all the differences arifing from the lungSy 
or other organs of refpiration, as gills : from the 
maxilUy jaws or mandibles : the organs of genera-' 
tion : thofe of fenfation : the tegumentSy or outward 
covering : and the fulcra^ or legs, wings, &c.
Our plan does not admit of introducing thefe at 
large.
At the head of each clafs is given a concife 
and moft inftrudive defcription of the clajffical cha- 
rader lb methodically conftruded, as to include 
at the fame time an explanation of all the terms 
appertaining 
t 62 i 
appertaining to that clafs, concluding with a ge-^ 
neral mention of the beft authors thereon.
After this, our author proceeds to the eftablifhment 
of the natural characters of each order of the clafs 
refpe6lively.
Thefe alfo we muft omit, as incon- 
fiftent with our compendious view of the fyftem, 
and more efpecially the latter claffes of this king- 
dom, where the fubjedls are fo numerous : but 
in the torn firft clafles we propofe to give the 
artificial generical characters as they fland at the 
head of each order.
Clafs I.
MAMMALIA.
This clafs comprehends not only all the 
animals which we call ^adrupeds (the Lizard 
genus, or rather the reptiles Pedati^ excepted) but 
alfo the cetaceous order, or Whales, Cachalots, and 
PorpefTes. This arrangement of Whales with 
Quadrupeds, which did not take place in the firft 
editions of this work, has not been relifhed by 
fome very refpedlable Zoologifts who wrote be- 
fore LiNN^us ; but our author thinks himfelf 
fully juftified on account of the agreement of 
thefe animals in the ftru5iure of the heart, in 
the refpiration by means of lungs, in their hav- 
ing moveable eyelids, ears, in being viviparous^ m 
being furniflied with teats, and in other parti- 
culars, by which they differ fo materially from 
fjhes, as to more than balance that fingle agree- 
ment in living in the fame element.
The Mammalia are divided by our author into 
feven orders the diftinClions of which are, in this 
artificial arrangement, principally eftabliflied on 
the 
«' 
of the three kinds of teeth, namely, the primores 
or indfores^ called fore-teeth^ or cutting teeth ; the 
Icmiarii or caniniy called dog-teeth, canine^ or lace- 
rating teeth ; and the molar es^ double teeth or 
grinders, Linn^us, notwithftanding, does not 
entirely negled the feety as will appear from his 
defcription of the natural charaders of the orders^ 
as well as from the follomng Jyjlematic arrangement, 
of this clafs.
I. Digitated.
Fore-teeth, none — BRUTA.
S.- 
Fore-teeth, two.
Canine none GLIRES.
4.' 
Fore-teeth, four.
Canine fingle PRIMATES.
2. Hoofed.
Fore-teeth, above and below - BELLU^.
6, 
Fore-teeth, none above — PECORA.
5. 
3. Deftitute of hoofs or claws* • 
We fliall give the chara5fers as they ftand at 
the head of each order ; and then enumerate the 
genera^ adding to the latter only the abbreviated 
charaders.
I. PRIMATES.
Animals furniflied with fore' 
teeth, or cutting teeth: four above; parallel.
Two pedoral teats.
II.
BRUTA.
No fore-teeth.
III.
FERiE.
Six, fharp fore-teeth in the up- 
per jaw.
One canine tooth on each fide.
There are exceptions in this order.
The Di- 
Fore-teeth, 6, 2, 10.
conical.
Canine fmglc 
FERiE.
Teeth, various ; in the different 
genera — — 
delphis 
I 64 1 
Mph's hath 17.
The Sorex hath 19.
And the 
Erinaceus 20.
IV.
GLIRES.
Two fore^teeth in each jaw, 
clofe together i but remote from the grinders.
No canine teeth.
V. PECOR A.
No fore-teeth in the upper jaw : 
fix or eight in the lower jaw, very remote from 
the grinders.
Hoofed feet ; inguinal teats.
VI.
BELLUA.
Fore-teeth truncated.
Hoofed 
feet.
VII.
CETE.
Breathing apertures on the head, 
Pedoral fins.
Tail placed horizontally.
No 
claws.
Abbreviated generic charadters.
I. PRIMATES.
: 
Howfoever the pride of man may be offended 
at the idea of being ranked with the beafts that 
perifli, he neverthelcfs ftands as an animal^ in the 
fyftem of nature, at the head of this order ; and as 
fuch is here defcribcd, with his feveral varieties 
obfervable in the different quarters of the globe, 
in a manner, and with an accuracy, peculiar to 
our author, and which we may venture to fay, is 
no where elfe to be met with.
But man is not left 
by LiNN^us, to contemplate himfelf merely 
fuch-, but he is led to the confideration of what 
he ought to be, as an intelligent and moral beings in 
a comment on the Grecian Sage's didtate, Kno\// 
THYSELF : by the true application of which, he 
cannot but be fufficiently elevated above every 
humiliating idea which can otherwife arife fromi 
fuch an affociatjon, 
2, SlMIA^ 
t 65 ] 
2. SiMiAii Ape, Canine teeth, feparate- 
33 fpecies.
a. Without tails.
2" rue Apes.
3 J 
b. With fhort tails.
Baboons.
6» 
c With long tails.
Monkeys, 24; 
3. Lemur.
Maucauco, Fore-teeth below 6.
5 fpecies.
Mongoz^ Black Mau-^ 
cauco^ Ringtailed M.
&c.
4* Vespertilio.
Baf. Fore- toes elongated, and 
conneded by mem- 
branes, performing the 
office of wings.
Vampyre^ Common Bat^ Long- 
eared^ &c, 6 fpecies.
ii.
Brut a.
5i Elephas.
Elephant, Tulks and grinders only : 
long probofcis.
6i Trichechus.
Walrus, Tulks above only j 
grinders formed of a 
rugged bony fubftahce; 
hinder feet formed into 
fins.
The Morfe^ the Manatu 
7* Bradypus.
Sloth.
Grinders only ; firft grind- 
ers long ; body hairy.
2 fpecies.
8. Myrmecophaga.
Ant-eater, No teeth y body 
hairy.
4 fpecies.
'9.
Manis, Mmis.
No teeth j body fcaly, 
2 fpecies, 
F JO.
Dasypu-s: 
[ 66 ] 
10.
Dasypus.
Armadillo, Grinders onlv • body 
cruftaceous.
6 fpecies.
III.
FERiE 
11.
Phoca.
SeaL Fore-teeth above 6j below 4» 
3 fpecies.
Urftne^ Leonine^ Com- 
mon, 
12.
Canis.
Dog. Fore-teeth 6; and 6: middle 
ones above i lobated.
Faithful^ with all its varieties.
lVolf<i Hy^ena^ FoXy ArBic FoXy 
Jackal^ &c.
9 fpecies.
13.
Felis.
Cat. Fore-teeth 6 i and 6: lower ones, 
equal : tongue very 
rough.
Liofiy Tyger^ Panther^ Cat^ Lym^ 
&c.
7 fpecies.
14.
VivERRA..
Civet.
Fore- teeth 6 \ and 6 : mid- 
dle ones below fhort.
6 fpecies.
Ichneumon or Mungo^ 
Coati Mondiy Civet^ Genet ^ &c.
15.
MusTELA.
WeefeL Fore-teeth 6; and 6: 
lower ones clofe toge- 
ther ; 2 placed inwards.
Sea-Otter^ Otter, Lejfer Otter^ 
the Glutton^ Martin, Pole-cat^ 
Ferrety Sable, Stoat, or Er- 
mine.
" The Glutton is 
" thought by Mr. Pennant 
to be the fame animal with 
chc Urjiis LufcuSi or Quick- 
'1 hatch.
t 67 3 
" hatch, of Linn£UL^^ 1 i 
fpecies.
i5.
Ursus.
Bear.
Fore-teeth 6; atid 6 : upper 
ones hollowed.
Black Bear, White Bear, Badger^ 
Raccoon, ^ick- hatch or IVoU 
*verene, {the fame animal called 
Glutton,) 
17.
DidelPhis.
Opojfum.
Fore-teeth above laj 
below, 8.
Virginian, Philander, Seia's Ma* 
rine, Dorfigerous, 
18.
TaLpA.
Mble.
Fore-teeth 6 above j 8 below* 
2 fpecies.
fg.
SoREX* ^hrew* Fore-teeth 2 above ; 4 be^' 
low.
Crefted, Minute, the leaft of all 
quadrupeds; weighs idrachm.
Water, Murine, Fcetid or com- 
mon.
20.
Erinaceus.
Hedgehog, Fore t^eth 2 above> 
2 below.
Common^ American, Afiatic.
IV.
GLIRES.
tu HysTRix. Porcupine.
Body covered with 
quills.
Canada, Long-tailed.
82.
Lepus.
Hare.
Fore-teeth above, double.
Common Rabbet, Cape Rabbet^ 
Brajilian Rabbet.
F a 23, Castor; 
C 68 ] 
23.
Castor, Beaver* Fore-teeth above truncatecf, 
and hollowed* 
Common^ Mujky Zibet.
24» Mus. Rat, Fore-teeth above fubulated., 
21 fpecies.
C^'z;)', called G«/«^^- 
Tigy Aguti^ Javan^ Earlefs^ 
Lemmings Marmot^ Earth Raty 
Water R, Common R, Moufey 
Dormoufe, Jerhua^ &c.
25.
SciuRUS.
Squirrel, Fore-teeth above, cu- 
neated below, com- 
prelTed.
Common^ Blacky Grey^ Palm^ 
Striated, Glis, Flying, Java^ 
Flying Cat, 1 1 fpecies.
26.
NocTiLio.
^No^itde, Fore-teeth, below bi- 
lobated ; fore-toes elon- 
gated, and connected by 
membranes, perform- 
ing the oiEce of wings.
American, i fpecies.
V. PECORA.
27.
Camelus.
Camel No horns feveral canine 
teeth on each fide.
Camely Ba5lrian or Dromedary, 
Glama, Pacos.
28.
MoscHUS.
Mufi.
No horns; canine teeth 
fmgle on each fide; 
upper ones (landing 
out of the mouth.
^ihetMuJkfiuinsaMuJk^anAntelopi 
of Mr, Pennant, Pigmy Mujk: 
29.
Cervus*.
C ^9 ] 
2.g, Cervus, Deer.
Horns folid, branched, de- 
ciduous ; no canine 
teeth.
CamelopardyElk^ St ag^ Rein Deer ^ 
' Buck^ Roebuck^ Guinea.
30.
Capra.
Goat.
Horns hollow, ered ; no 
canine teeth.
^ame Goat^ Wild Goat^ Chamois^ 
Rock Goat^ Gazelle Egyptian 
Antelope of Mr. Pennant^ Com- 
mon Antelope^ Bezoar^ Dorcas^ 
Ammon^ &c.
12 fpecies.
31.
Ovis.
Sheep, Horns hollow, bending back- 
wards no canine teeth.
Ram and its varieties ; Guinea^ 
Cretan \ thefe two are alfo 
varieties, according to Mr.
Pennant.
32.
Bos, Ox. Horns hollow, extending out- 
wards ; no canine teeth.
Bull'i BonafuSy the fame in a 
wild ftate, according to Mr.
Pennant ; Bifon, Grunting^ 
Buffalo^ Dwarf or Indian.
VI.
B E L L U iE.
33.
Equus.
Horfe.
Fore- teeth 6 above, and 6 
below.
Horfe^ Afs^ Zebra.
34.
Hippopotamus.
Hippopotame.
Fore-teeth 
above 6, below 4.
River Horfe* Mr. Pennant de- 
fcribes this animal as having 
F 5 4 cutting 
C 70 ] 
4 cutting teeth only above 
and below.
35.
Sus, Bog* Fore-teeth above 4, below 6.
Common ; Guinea^ confidered as 
a variety ; P^r^ry ; Capyhara^ 
^hick-nofed T dpiir of Pennant ; 
Babyroujfa, 
|6.
Rhinoc-EROS.
Fore-t^eth 2 above, and 2 be- 
low.
Ons-horned, Variety with tw6 
horns.
See Dr. Parfons on 
this fubjea:, Phil.
Tranf.
vol.
xlii.
p. 523, and vol.
Ivi.
p. 32.
Linnaeus thinks this 
may be removed into the 
order of Bruta.
VII.
C E T E.
j^.
MoNQDON.
Narwal.
Two long ftrait teeth in 
the upper jaw, perfo- 
rating the lip.
Sea Unicorn, 
38.
Bal^na.
Whale.
Horny laminas in the up^ 
per jaw.
JVhalehone Whale., Fin-fijh., Hump- 
backed or Pike-headed^ Round- 
lipped^ 
19.
Physeter.
Cachalot.
Teeth in the lower jaw 
only.
Round- headed^ Spermaceti, Crooks 
ed- toothed.
Plane-toothed, 
40.
Delphinus, Dolphin.
Teeth in both jaws.
Porpefs^ Dolphin^ Grampus.
This 
t 71 ] 
This part of the fyftem, taking in a few fpecies 
defcribed in the appendiic of the third Tome, and 
in the Mantiffa of 1771, contains about 230 fpecies.
Mr. Pennant^ in his Synopfts of ^adrupeds^ and our 
learned friend Profejfor Martin, in his Elements of 
Natural Hijiory^ by including fome animals that 
were unknown to LiNNi^:us, and giving the rank 
of fpecies to feveral that were confidered by our 
author as varieties, have extended the number of 
Mammalia to 289 fpecies.
Clafs II.
AvES.
BIRDS.
Thefe are divided by Linn^^us into fix orders^ the 
diftin6lions of which are chiefly taken from the 
beak^ but in fome genera it has been neceffary 
to call in the tongue^ nares or nopils^ and, in fome 
inflances, the feet, and other parts.
We fliall 
give the characters of the orders as they (land at 
the head of each ^ and fubjoin the abbreviated 
generical charaders, enumerating the number of 
fpecies under each genus.
I. ACCIPITRES.
Rapacious.
Birds having 
the upper mandible of the beak furnilhed on each 
fide with an angular procefs.
II.
PICiE.
Pies.
Birds having the beak fome- 
what comprelTed on the fides and convex on the 
upper part.
III.
ANSERES.
Web-footed.
Birds having 
a fomewhat obtufe beak^ cloathed with a thin flcin ; 
gibbous at the bafe underneath, v/ide at the 
end ; the faux or edges of the bafe denticu- 
lated ; the feet palmated or webbed, and formed 
for fwimming.
F 4 IV.
GRALL^.
C n 3 
IV.
GRALL^.
Waders.
Birds having the 
leak fubcylindrical, and rather obtufe ; the tongue 
entire and flefhy j the thighs naked for fome fpace 
^bove the knees.
V. GALLING.
Gallinaceous.
Birds.
having 
the upper mandible convex, or arched, and re- 
ceiving the edges of the lower \ nefirils half cover- 
ed, by means of a convex, fomewhat cartilaginous 
membrane ; the reElrices^ or tail-feathers, {mox^ 
than twelve \ the feet cloven, but the toes 
connected by a membrane as far as to the firft 
joint.
VI.
PASSERES.
Passerine.
Birds having a 
conical acuminated beak \ the noftrils ovated, open, 
and naked.
Abbreviated generic charaders.
I. ACCIPITRES.
41.
VuLTUR.
Vulture.
Beak hooked; head naked.
Condor^ Harpy ^ King of Vultures^ 
&c.
8 fpecies.
42.
FAi,coi Eagle* Beak hooked, and bordered 
with a cere at the bafe.
Eagles^ Hawks^ Buzzards^ Spar- 
row-hawk.
32 fpecies.
43.
Strix.
OwL Beak hooked ; capifirum^ or 
feathers of the fore- 
head, thrown over the 
beak.
Horn Owlsy Grey Owl, Screech 
Owl, Little Owly &c.
12 
fpecies.
44.
Lanius^ 
C 73 3 
44.
Lanius.
Butcher-Urd^ or Skrikf.
Beak near^ 
ly ftrait ; upper man- 
dible on each fide, near 
the end, notched, and 
fiirniftied with a den- 
ticle.
26 fpeeies, 
11.
PIC IE.
a. Feet with three toes before, and 
one long one behind, formed for 
walking.
$6.
Trochilus.
Honey-fucker, Beak incurvated, 
filiform, forming a tube 
at the extremity.
22 fpecies.
65.
Certhia.
Creeper, Beak incurvated, acumi- 
nated.
25 fpecies, i only Englijh.
64.
Upupa.
Hgopee.
Beak incurvated, fomewhat 
obtufe.
3 fpecies, i Englijh, 
48^ BuPHAGA.
Beef-eater of Mr. Pennant.
Beak 
ftrait, quadrangular.
I fpecies.
6p.
SiTTA, Nut-hatch Beak ftrait 5 cuneated at 
the end.
3 fpecies, i EngUfh, 
52, Oriolus?
Ow/(?.
Beak ftrait, conic, very acute^ 
Golden "Thrufh-i &c.
20 fpecies, 
all exotic.
^li CoRACiAS.
jSi'/Zifri Beak cultrated (fharp pr 
cutting) 
[ 74 3 
^i'^-x^Z      incurved at the 
end.
6 fpecies, i EngUJh.
Gkacvla, Crackle.
Beak cultrated, equal, 
, - naked at the bafe.
Mino of Edwards^ Saulary, Mair- 
bird America^ &c.
8 fpecies.
50.
CoRVUS.
Crow.
Beak cultrated 5 capiftrum 
reverfed, 
Raven^ Crow^ Rook^ Royjlon-Crow^ 
:Ji : Jack-Daw^ Jay^ Nut- cracker^ 
o'i   Mag-pye^ Cornijh Chough^ ^c* 
19 fpecies.
54, ParadiS/©a.
Paradife-bird.
Beak fub-^cultra- 
ted capiftrum or fore- 
head covered with down.
Mamcodiata of Edwards^ Ray^ 
&c.
3 ipecies.
^ 
b. Feet with two toes before, and two 
behind, formed for climbing^- 
46, Ramphastos.
toucan.
Beak ferrated ; tongue 
fringed on the edges, 
8 fpecies, all American, 
55, Trogon.
Curucui, Beak ferrated, hooked at 
the end.
3 fpecies, all American^ 
45.
PsiTTACus* Parrot, Beak covered with the 
cere ; tongue flefhy.
MaccawSy Parr^ts^ JParro^uets,, 
Lory, 47 fpecies - 
"49".
€rotophaga.
fick-eater.
Beak rough, upper 
mandible 
[ 75 ] 
mandible angulated on 
each fide.
Ani of BrafiL % fpecles.
59.
Picus.
TVoodpcker, Beak angulated \ tongue 
vermiform.
21 fpecies.
58.
YuNX.
Wryneck, Beak fmooth ; tongue ver^ 
miform.
Englijh.
I fpecies only.
57.
CucuLUS.
Cuckow.
Beak fmooth ; noflrils 
maro-inated, 
22 fpecies, all exotic except one.
56.
Bucco.
Barhet of Mr. Pennant, Beak fmooth, 
emarginated, and hook- 
ed at the end, 
I fpecies.
c. Feet, with the middle and exterior 
toe joined together, nearly the whole, 
length.
47.
BucEROS.
Horn-hill of Mr. Pennant.
Beak fer- 
rated, furnifhed with a 
protuberance, or horn, 
at the bafe of the up* 
per mandible.
4 fpecies.
62.
Alcedo.
Kingfi/her, Beak trigonal, ftrait.
1 5 fpecies, all exotic except one.: 
63.
Merops.
Bee-eater, Beak incurvated, fome- 
what comprelTed.
^ 7 fpecies.
61, Topos, Tod^^ Mr. Pennant.
Beak linear, 
ftrait, and fomewhat de- 
prelTed.
American.
2 fpecies.
III.
ANSERES.
t 76 ] - 
.'4 
III.
AN SERES.
a. Beak denticulated.
67.
Anas.
Duck, Beak furniflied with membrana- 
ceous denticles, and nail 
at the end.
Swan-i Burrow-duck^ Goofe^ Ducky 
Mallard^ Tufied Ducky &CC.
45 
fpecies.
68.
Mergus.
Merganfir, Beak furniflied with 
fubulated denticles and 
nail.
Goofeandery SmeWy Lejfer Dun Di- 
very Sec, 6 fpecies.
74.
Phaeton, tropic Bird* Beak cultrated.
2 fpecies, 
73.
Plotus.
Darter of Mr. Pennant.
Beak fubu- 
lated.
b. Beak edentulous.
78.
Rhyncops.
Skimmer of Mr. Pennant, Upper 
mandible much fliorter 
than the lower.
Sea Crow of Ray, 2 fpecies 5 
nearly allied to the Gull genus.
71, DiOMEDEA.
Albatrofs, Lower mandible trun- 
cated.
Alhatrofsy Black-legged Penguin.
2 fpecies.
65; Alca^ AuL Beak wrinkled tranfverfely,' 
Auksy Puffiny &c.
5 fpecies.
70, Procellaria.
Petrel Npftrils fuperincum* 
bent,' 
t 77 3 
bent, and fubcyllndri- 
cal.
Storm-finch^ Fulmar y Shear-Water^ 
&c.
6 fpecies.
72.
Pelecanus.
Pelecan.
Face entirely naked 
round the bafe of the 
beak.
Pelecan^ Corvorant^ Shag, Garnet^ 
Booby y &c.
8 fpecies.
76.
Larus.
Gull.
Beak gibbous under the apex.
Gullsy Herring Gulk Ar^ic GuU^ 
&c.
II fpecies.
77.
Sterna, fern.
Beak fubulated, comprefled 
at the apex.
7 fpecies.
75.
CoLYMBus. Diver.
Beak fubulated^ Ibmc- 
what coraprefTed on the 
fides.
Guillemots^ Divers^ Grebes^ &c.
II fpecies.
IV.
GRALLiE.
a. Four- toed.
79.
Ph^nicopterus.
Flaming.
Beak incurvatcd, 
as if broken ; denticu* 
lated : feet webbed.
So. Platalea* Spoonbill, Beak flattened, and wide 
at the end.
3 fpecies.
81, Palamedea.
Screamer of Mt. Pennant.
Beak 
acutely hooke4 at the 
end.
^nima and Cariama of BraJiL 
82e Mycteria^ 
[ 78 j 
82.
Mycteria.
Jahiru, Lower mandible thick, 
and turned upwards.
American, i fpecies.
85.
Tantalus, Ibis.
Beak arcuated; throat 
pouched.
Ibis of Mgyp^ Guara^ &c» 
7 fpecies.
84.
Ardea.
Heron.
Beak ftrait, lharp-pointed.
Demoifelle^ Crane^ Stork^ Heron^ 
Egret^ Bittern^ White Heron^ 
&c.
26 fpecies.
; 
89.
Recurvirostra.
Avofet.
Beak fubulated, 
thin, deprefled, and re* 
curved.
I fpecies.
86.
ScoLOPAX.
Curlew, Beak ftrait, round, rather 
obtufe at the end.
Curlew^ JVhimbril^ Woodcock^ 
Snipes^ Stone Plover^ Godwit.
18 fpecies.
87.
Trinca.
Sandpiper, Beak roundifli obtufe j 
hinder toe very fliort, 
and placed high, 
Ruffe^ Lapwings Knoty Purr, &c* 
23 fpecies.
gi, FuticA.
Coot.
Beak rifmg at the forehead 
and bafe.
Cooty Water Hen^ Sec, 7 fpecies.
92.
Parr A.
Jacana.
Beak at the bafe and the 
forehead carunculated* 
Chavary of Jacquin, Sec. 5 fpe- 
cies.
93, Rallus* 
[ 79 ] 
93.
Rallus.
Rail Beak fomewhat carinatedj 
body comprefled.
Land Raily Water Rail^ Small 
Spotted Rail^ &c.
lo fpecies.
94.
PsoPHiA.
Trumpeter, Beak fomewhat arched 
or convex 5 noftrils 
ovated.
American.
S3.
Cancroma.
Boat -bill of yiv.
Pennant.
Upper 
mandible very gibbous- 
Tamatia of BrafiL 2 fpecies^ 
b. Three-toed, formed for running.
90.
HiEMATOPus. Oyjler-Catcher, Beak fomewhat 
comprefled, ending in a 
wedge.
Sea Pie. 1 fpecies.
88.
Charadrius.
Plover.
Beak round, obtufe.
Sea Lark^ Dotterel^ Sanderling^ 
Green Plover^ Long-legged Plo* 
ver.
12 fpecies.
95.
Otis.
Bujlard, Upper mandible convex or 
arched ; tongue emar- 
ginated or bifid.
4 fpecies.
96.
Struthio.
OJirich.
Beak conical 5 wings unfit 
for flying.
OJlrichy Cajfowary.
American^ 
V. GALLINJ*:.
97.
DiDus. Dodo.
Beak ribbed and fulcated acrofs 
3 t-hc 
t So ] 
the upper mandible | 
face naked.
Hooded Swan of Ray. i fpecies 
only.
98.
Pavo.
Peacock.
Head crefted; beak naked.
Pea-cocky ChinefeT wo-fpurredPea^ 
cock^ &c.
3 fpecies.
99, Meleagris.
Turkey.
Head covered with ca- 
runcles.
Turkey^ ^an^ Horned Pheafant of 
Bengal.
- 400* Crax.
Curajfo* Cere invefting the whole bafe 
of the beak.
Cujhew Birdy Curajfoy Sec. 5 fpe* 
cies.
tou Phasianus.
Pheafant, Lege: and knees 
naked.
Common Cocky Pheafant^ Painted, 
&c.
6 fpecies.
103.
Tetrad.
Grous.
Naked papillofe membrane 
above the eyes.
Cock of the Woody Black GamCy 
White GamCy PartridgCy ^ail^ 
&c.
20 fpecies.
102.
NuMiDA.
Pintado, Carunculated wattles, hang- 
ing from each fide of 
the face.
Guinea Hen.
VI.
PASSERES.
a. With thick beaks.
Craffiroftref.
109.
LoxiAf QrofS'heak.
Beak conical and ovated.
QrofS'iiU;, Grofs-beak^ Pine Bull^ 
t 8i ] 
f neb ^ Bull finch ^Ciiirdinal^Green^ 
finch^ &€.
48 Ipecies, 
ii2.
Frincilla.
Chaffinch, Beak conical and 
acute.
Chaffinch^ Brambling^ Gold-finch^ 
Canary-bird^ R ed .
Pole, Sparrotv^ 
&c.
39 fpecies.
iio.
Emberiza, Bunting, Beak fubconical ; lower 
mandible the broader, 
a little infle)ced and 
narrowed in on the 
fides.
Sea Lark, Bunting, Tellow Ham- 
mer, Reed Sparrow^ &c.
24 
fpecies.
b. With the liipper mahdible incurved 
at the end, Curvirofires.
kl8.
Caprimulgus.
Gcatfucker.
Beak incurved; 
deprefied, ciliated about 
the bafe ; noftrils tubu- 
lar.
2 fpecies.
U7.
HiRUNDO.
Shallow, Beak incurved, depret 
fed.
Chimney Swallow, Marten, Sand 
Marten, Swift, Pratincole of 
Kramer.
12 fpecies.
lis.
PiPRA.
Manakin, Beak incurved^ fubulated; 
J3 fpecies, chiefly S.
American', 
a beautiful genus of birds !
G c.
With 
t 82 ] 
t. With the upper mandible emargu 
nated, or notched near the apex, 
Emarginatirojires^ 
107.
TuRDus. Thrujh.
Beak notched, fubulated, 
comprefled at the bafe.
Miffel-hird, Field-fare^ Red-wing^ 
fhroftle^ Black bird^ Ring-oufely 
Rofe-coloured Oufel^ &c.
28 fp.
ioS.
Ampelis.
Chatterer, Beak notched, Tubulated, 
depreflfed at the bafe.
Silk-tail of Ray^ Pompadour of 
Edwards^ &c.
7 fpecies.
J II, Tan AGRA, Manager, Beak notched, fubu- 
lated, conic at the baf«, 
24 fpecies, moftly American.
113.
MusciCAPA.
Fly-catcher.
Beak notched, fubu- 
lated, bafe ciliated, or 
briftled.
Pied Bird of Paradife of Ray^ Sec, 
21 fpecies.
d. With ftrait, entire, fmall, flender 
beaks.
Simplicirojires, 
1 16.
Parus.
"Titmoufe.
Beak fubulated j capiftrum 
reverfed j tongue trun- 
cated.
Ox'Eye^ Blue Titmoufe^ Colemoufe^ 
Black Cap^ Leaft Butcher Bird^ 
&c.
14 fpecies.
114, MoTACiLLA.
Warblers, Beak fubulated ; 
tongue jagged j claw of 
[ 83 ] 
the hind toe moderately 
long.
Nightingale, Hedge- Sparrow ^Sedge* 
birdy White 'Throaty Wheat Ear^ 
Black Cap^ Red Starts Rchin^ 
Wren^ G olden- crejled Wren^ &c.
49 fpecies.
105.
Alauda.
Lark.
Beak fubulated ; tongue 
bifid \ claw of the hin- 
der toe very long.
Sky 'Larky Tit- Lark ^ Wood-Lark^ 
&c.
11 fpecies.
106.
Sturnus.
Starling, Beak fubulate, but flat-" 
ted at the apex, and 
marginated.
Starlings Water Oufel^ Sec, 5 fpe* 
cics.
104.
CoLUMBA* Pigeon, Beak rather arched, orl 
convex ; noftrils gib- 
bofe, and half covered 
with a membrane.
Wood Pigeon^ and its defcendant 
the Common, Ring Dove^ T ur-^^ 
tie Bovey Migratory^ dec, 40 
fpecies.
The fpecific charafters in the clafs of birds are 
deduced from a great variety of particulars.
la 
feveral, as in the Falcon genus, the colour of the 
cere, or naked tunic that furrounds the bafis of 
the beaky and the colour of the legs, alTifl in diftin-.
guilliing the fpecies.
The colour of the bird in 
general is fubjecb to great variation in different 
countries, as well as in the fame country at dif- 
G % ferent 
[ 84 3 
ferent feafons in the year, as is more particularly 
feen in the ardic regions •, not to mention that of 
the fexes in almoft all kinds.
Our author therefore 
does not truft to this^ wherever a more permanent 
mark can be found.
It muft, however, be con- 
fefied, that in too many inftances, it is necefTary 
to truft entirely to this diftin6tion, howfoever un- 
liable.
The form of the tail^ as it happens to be 
eveuy cuneated^ or forked^ is an excellent and firm 
note in the Parrot genus its length, as Jhorter or 
longer than the body, is of great fervice.
In others, 
the colour of the beaky a naked or crefted head^ con- 
tribute to form the note of diftindlion.
And in 
fine, nature has ftamped upon others fome pecu- 
liarity, which points them out immediately as, 
the receptacle of the lower mandible, in the Pelican ; 
two long tail-feathers^ in the Tropic-bird-, the di- 
riedion of the mandibles in the Crofs-beak^ &c.
Among the common marks, none more frequently 
occur than the differences of colour in the quill- 
feathers and thofe of the tail.
This clafs compre- 
hends upwards of 930 fubjedls.
Clafs III.
AMPHIBIA.
This clafs is fo called by Linn^us, not becaufe 
all the fubjeds of it are, ftridtly fpeaking, ca- 
pable of living either in air or water ; but prin- 
cipally from their power of fufpcnding or per- 
forming the fundlion of refpiration in a more ar- 
bitrary manner than other anim.ais.
This clafs is 
divided into four orders : 
I. REPTILES.
Reptiles.
Amphibious ani- 
mals breathing through the mouth by means of 
lungs 
C 85 ] 
lungs only and fnrnifhed with four feet.
II.
SERPENTES.
Serpents.
Amphibious 
animals breathing through the mouth by means of 
lungs only ; deftitute of feet, fins, and ears.
III.
MEANTES.
Gliders.
Amphibious ani- 
mals breathing by means of gills and lungs j fur- 
nifhed with arms and claws.
IV.
NANTES.
Breathing Fishes.
Amphi- 
bious animals breathing at will by means of gills 
and lungs.
The rays of the fins cartilaginous.
Abbreviated generic charaders.
I. R E P T I L E S.
119^ Testudo.
*Tortoife, Body covered with a 
fhell.
Coriaceous 'T ortoife^ Green Turtle^ 
Hawk/bill T urtle^ Common Gre- 
cian or African 'T ortoife^ 5" ejfe* 
lated'Tortoife, &c.
15 fpecies.
121.
Draco.
Dragon, Body wmged.
Flying Lizard^ of BonUu'Sy p.
57.
2 fpecies.
122.
Lacerta, Lizard, Body naked, furniflied 
with a tail.
a. With a comprcjfed tail : 
Among thefe is the Crocodile^ 
b. With a verti ciliated tail : 
The Lizard, Stellio, 
c. With a round imbricated rail : Jhorter 
than the body.
The Chameleon, the Geeko^ the 
SkinL 
5^ X^ '^ d.
With > 
i 8^ I 
d. With a round imbricated tail, longei^ 
than the body.
The Iguana, the Guernfey Li- 
zarcj.
e. With the ,b^jr fipooth : fo.ur xoes 
on the fore feet.
Common Swift, Water Eft or 
Newt^ Salamander.
4g fpecies.
|20, Rana.
Frog.
Body naked : no tail.
Surinam Toad, Common T oad, Su^ 
rinamFrog-fiJh. See Phil.
Tranf.
"ool.
li, p.
653.
Common Frog^ 
T ree Frog^ Bull Frog of America, 
See Kalm ii.
.170, &c.
17 
fpecies.
II.
SERPENTES.
J 23.
Crotalus.
Rattlefnake.
Body and tail un- 
derneath cloathed with 
fmail Ihields s tail ter- 
minating in a horny 
rattle.
Rattlefnake, &cc.
5 fpecies, all 
American, and all venomous.
J 24.
Boa, Serpent* Body and tall underneath- 
cloathed with fmall 
fhields ; no rattle.
Gigantic Serpent, or ConJtri5ior.
Fide Adanion's Senegal, p.
2y4.r 
Hog-nofed Snake of Catejhy, 2, 
t. 56, &c.
10 fpecies ; not 
jfurniflicd 
I 87 ] 
furniflied with venomous 
fangs.
12$.
Coluber.
Viper.
Body underneath cloathed 
with fmall Ihields ; tail 
cloathed with fcales.
T rue Viper of Egypt ^ Horned Viper.
See Phil.
Tranf.
vol Ivi. t.
14.
Berus^ or Englijh Viper ^ 
Natrix or Common Snake^ Naja 
or Hooded Serpent of K^mpf.
p. 565 •, Black Snake, Kalm ii.
p. 202.
97 fpecies, of which 
1 8 are known to have veno* 
mous fangs, 
i%6, Anguis.
Snake.
Body and tail underneath 
cloathed with fcales 
only.
Javan fourfooted Snake, an ano- 
maly ; Common Slow JVorm^ 
&c.
16 fpecies.
1^7.
AMPHiSBi5:NA, Annulated' Snake.
Body and 
tail compofed of annu- 
lar fegments.
2 fpecies, both American.
CECILIA.
Tmtaculated Snake.
Body and tail 
wrinkled ; not fcaly ; 
upper lip furnifhed with 
two feel-ers, 
Z fpecies.
III.
M E A N T E S.
SmtN.
3iren, Body biped, and furnifhed 
with a tail, 
G 4 Lizard 
[ 8S ] 
Lizard Siren or Mud Inguana of 
Carolina, See Phil.
T ran f.
'voL 
Ivi. 189, t.
9. For this un« 
common animal Lin N/Eus was 
obliged to form a new order.
See Syft, Nat. torn, L ^^i- 
dend, 
IV.
N A N T E S.
a. Such as have feveral branchial holes 
on each fide.
^ 
129.
Petromyzon.
Lamprey.
Seven branchial 
apertures on each fide of 
the neck.
Lamprey., Lejfer^ Lampern, 
130.
Raja.
Ray, Five branchial apertures on 
each fide the neck un- 
derneath.
9^ orpedo., Skate, Sharp-no fed Ray., 
Rough Ray., Sting Ray^ Thorn'- 
hack, 9 fpecies.
13 ?• Sq^ALUS.
Shark, Five branchial apertures 
on the fide of the neck, 
f i(;ked JDog-fiJh., Angel-fijh^ Ba- 
lance-fijh_, Tope^ Dog^fijh^ White 
Shark., Blue Sharky Sauu-fijhj 
&c.
1 5 fpecies.
132.
Chimera.
Chimera, Single branchial aper^ 
ture, dividing into four 
within.
2 fpecies.
}i.
Such as have a fingle branchia} 
hole on each fide.
133.
LOPHIUS, 
[ 89 1 
133.
LoPHius.
Fijhing'frog.
Two ventral fins; 
mouth furnifhed with 
teeth.
"Toad'fijh, 3 fpecies.
134.
AciPENSER.
Sturgeon* Two ventral fins 5 
no teeth.
Sturgeon^ Strelet or Cavear-fijhy 
Hufo.
139.
Cyglopterus* Lump'fijh.
Two ventral fins 
nearly uniting into one 
orbicular fin.
^ fpecies.
135.
BAI.ISTES.
Old Wife Fijh, Single ventral 
fin, or carene.
Sea Unicorn^ Old Wife Fijh^ &c, 
8 fpecies.
136.
OsTRAGiON.
Bonyjkin Fifh.
No ventral fins ; 
body entirely cloached 
with a bony covering.
triquetrous Ofiracion^ 'Three- horn-' 
ed^ Four-horned^ &c.
g fpecies* 
137.
Tetrodon.
Sun-fifh, No ventral fins ; belly 
rough or muricated.
Ocellated Sun-fifh^ Common Mole 
or Sun-fiflj^ &c.
7 fpecies.
I3.8,.
DiODON.
Porcupine-fifh.
No ventral fins ; 
body fet with acute 
moveable fpines.
Spherical, Oblong.
2 fpecies.' 
140.
Centriscus, Trumpet-fifh.
Ventral fins united ; 
a long moveable fpine 
on the back, near the 
tail, 
§cQlopax 
t 90 ] 
i^cokpax of Gefnery fee.
p. 83S.
2 fpecies, 
141.
Syngnathus.
Fip-fijh, No ventral fins; 
body articulated.
I^eedle-fijh^ Pipe-fijh^ Hippocampus 
or Sea-horfe, 7 fpecies.
142* PfiCASys. Dragm-fijh, Two ventral fins ; upper 
raandible or beak den- 
ticulated, or ciliated.
Fifing Dragon of A^nhoina^ &c.
* 3 fpecies.
This part of the Syftem contains upwards of 
290 fubjedls.
In the Reptiles order, the fpecific charadlers 
of the ^ejludo genus are deduced principally from 
the difference in the Jhells^ and tht feet \ which in 
the Turtles are pinniform, and in the 'Tortoifes di- 
gitated.
In the Lacerta genus, from the taik head^ 
toes^ and various other parts ; and in the Randy 
from the diverfity in the make of the hody^ and 
number of the claws on the fore or hinder 
feet.
In the Serpentes order, the fpecific diftindlions 
have ever been matter of great difficulty with 
naturalifts, as they were commonly taken from 
the colour^ which is fubje61: to an almoft infinite 
variation.
Hence it has happened that Seha^ de- 
pending on the colours alone, hath, in the opinion 
of our author, figured the Boa ConJtri5lor^ or Gi- 
gantic Serpent, ten times, as fo m-any diftind fpe- 
cies and the Coluber Naga^ or Hooded Viper^ 
fourteen.
Linnaeus at length difcovered a much 
9 morf 
i 9i 1 
^ore certain and permanent note, upon wliuJk 
ills fpecific charaders are folely founded : it was 
^rft exemplified in the Amphibia Gyllenborgiana^ and 
he has fince retained it in all his works, fenfiblc 
however that it is yet liable to failure : this arifes 
from the number of the fmall Jhields and fcales^ or 
rings and rug^ of the belly and tail ; and the pro- 
portion thofe numbers bear to each other in the 
different fpecies : for example, in our Common 
Viper the floieUs of the belly are ufually about 146, 
and the fcales of the tail, that is all below the 
anus, about 39 or 40 : the Jhields in our Common 
Snake about 170, and the fcales about 60.
in the Nantes the fpecific charaders are fliort, 
but very various in the different genera, as to the 
parts of the animal from which they are deduced* 
in the 'Petromyzon and Rata, from the mouthy fins^ 
teeth, &c.
> in the latter vei7 much frpm the bdd^ 
itfelf : in the Squalus, from a variety of parti- 
culars : in the Acipenfer, from the cirri or beard, 
and the dorfal Jhields, or Jquama : in the Balijies^ 
from the fins and tail : in the OJiracion, from the 
different angulated form of the body : in the Tetrodon^ 
from differences in the body chiefly and in the 
remaining genera, from the form pf the body, an4 
the differences in the fins.
Clafs IV.
PISCES, Fishes.
In the earlier editions of the SyJiema Natura^ 
our author, in the diftribution of Fishes, had 
followed the method of his friend and fellow 
collegian yfr/^<^/ j whofe Jcthyologyh^ had publifhed 
^ during 
during his.refidence in Holland, in 1738.
This 
method, which took in the Cetaceous order, 
now among the MAMMALIA, and the Nantes, 
now referred to the AMPHIBIA, was eftablifhed 
on the ftrudure or rather fituation of the tails in 
the cetaceous order ; and in others, on the difference 
in the gills, and the rays of the fins, whether r^r* 
tilaginous or bony.
In the two laft editions, ano- 
ther difpofition is attempted : after having dif- 
rniffed the cetaceous order to the Mammalia, and the 
Chondropterygii or Cartilaginous Fifhes, and 
the Branchiojlegi to the Nantes, our author forms 
four orders of the bony fifhes (which refpire by 
means of gills only) from the fttuation of the 
'ventral fins; which he analogically confiders as 
the feet of the animal, according as they are 
placed either before, under, or behind the perioral 
or gill fins, or as in one order wanting the 
ventral fins.
I. APODES.
Apodal.
Fifhes deftitute of ven- 
tral fins.
II.
JUGULARES.
Jugular.
Fifhes having 
the ventral fins placed before the peroral fins, 
III.
THORACICI.
Thoracic Fifhes hav- 
ing the ventral fins placed underneath the pec- 
toral fins.
IV.
ABDOMINALES.
Abdominal.
Fifhes 
having the ventral fins placed on the abdomen 
l)ehind ihe pedoral fins.
Abbreviated 
i 93 I 
Abbreviated generic Chara6lerS.
I. A P O D E S.
IA7.
MuR^NA.
Eel. Apertures of the gills 
placed behind the pec- 
toral fins.
Sea Serpent, Eel, Conger Eel, &cc.
7 fpecies.
lU Gymnotus.
Gymnote.
Back deftitute of any 
fin.
Carapo of Braftl, Ele5lric Eek 
Beaked, &c.
5 fpecies.
145.
Trichiurus.
Needle-tail Subulated tail 
without any fin.
Much of the Braftlians.
147.
Ammodytes.
Lance.
Head much fienderer 
than the body.
Sand Eel.
146.
Anarchicas.
Wolffijh, Grinding teeth 
rounded.
Sea Wolf.
In the foflil ftate fre- 
quent, called Bufonites.
148.
Ophidium.
Snake-fifh.
Body enfiform.
Bearded Ophidion, Beardlefs Ophi- 
dion.
149.
Stromateus.
Pampus.
Body ovated.
Pampus of Sloane.
2 fpecies.
150.
XiPHiAS.
Sword-f/b, Upper mandible ter- 
minating in an enfiform 
beak.
Sword'fifid of all authors.
II.
JUGULARES.
f 94 1 
IL JUG UL A RES.
151.
Callionymus.
Dragonet.
Breathing fpi- 
racks on the hinder part 
of the head.
fthe Harp^ &c.
3 fpecies.
152.
Uraitoscofus.
Star-gazer.
Mouth flat, 
opening upwards.
Scabrous^ 1 fpecies.
153.
Ts-ACttiNUS.
Weever, Anus near the breafl:, 
Draco of the old authors.
I fpecies.
154.
Gadus.
Cod. Pedloral fins flender, and end- 
ing in a point.
With 
a. Three dorfal fins, and the jaw 
bearded.
Haddock^ torjk^ Cod-Jijh^ Bib, 
JVhitingy Pout^ Poor.
b. Three dorfal fins; jaw not bearded.
Whitings Cole-fijh^ Pollack^ &:c, 
c. Two dorfal fins only.
Hake^ Lingy Burbot.
^ d.
One dorfal fin.
Mediterranean.
17 fpecies.
155.
Blennius.
Bknny.
Ventral fins oftworays^ 
fmall, and not prickly.
Crefted^ Gattorugine^ Smooth^ Spot" 
tedy Viviparous.
13 fpecies.
III.
THORACIC!.
156.
Cepola, Cepok.
Mouth opening upwards^ 
body enfiform.
^enia^ &c, 2 fpecies.
157.
ECHENEIS.
r 96 1 
igy.
EcHENEis. Sucking-fijh.
Top of the head 
flat, marginated, and 
tranfvcrfely fulcated.
Remora^ Naucrates, 2 fpecies.
158.
CoRYPHuENA'.
Dolphin, Anterior part of the 
head very obtufe or 
truncated.
Dolphin of 
mariners.
River Dolphin^ Parrot-fifh^ Scc^ 
12 fpecies.
i'gg, GoBius.
Goby, Ventral fins united into one 
ovate fin.
Black Goby^ Spotted Goby.
8 
fpecies.
160.
CoTTUS.
Bullhead.
Head broader than the 
body.
Pogge^ Feather Lafier^ Miller'* $ 
^humb^ &c.
6 fpecies.
161* ScoRP/ENA.
Scorpen.
Head fet with prickles 
or beards.
Forcus^ Scrofa^ Horrida or T over^- 
fijh.
162, Zeus.
Doree.
Upper lip projefting, or for- 
nicated by means of a 
tranfverfe membrane.
Doree ^ Silver -fifh of Brown ^ &c, 
4 fpecies.
163.
Pleuronectes.
Rlaife, Both eyes on the 
fame fide of the head.
With the eyes, 
a-.
On the right fide.
' Holibuty Plaife^ Floundery Dab^ 
Sole.
:* .:\ b.
On 
I 95 ] 
b. On the left fide; 
The Pearly the "turioty &Ci i;^ 
fpecies.
164.
CH.ETODOM.
Pilot J^.
Teeth very fine^ 
thick fet, very hume* 
rous, and flexile.
Jaculator-fijh, Vide Phil.
Tranf; 
vol liv.
t. 9.
Pilot -JiJIjy &c.
23 fpeciesi 
165.
Sparus, Gilt-head.
Teeth veryftrong; fore 
teeth fharp; grinders 
clofe fet, and obtufe.
Sea Bream^ &c.
26 fpecies.
166.
Labrus.
JVraJfe. Conneding membrane of 
the dorfal fin extending 
beyond the extremity 
of each ray, in the form 
• of filaments.
Wraffe^ Bimaculatedy &c.
41 fpe^ 
cies.
167.
SciiENA.
Cavalbas.
A groove in the back ta 
receive the dorfal fin.
Umhray Jaculatriit, Vide PhiL 
Tranf.
vol Ivi. p.
186, t.
8. 
f. 6, All Mediterranean.
5 
fpecies* 
168.
Perca.
Pearch.
The gill-covers jagged oi* 
fer rated* 
Pearch^ Bajfe^ Sea Pearch^ Ruffe*.
36 fpecies.
169.
Gasterosteus.
Stickle-back.
Body at the 
tail carinated on each 
fidej fpines on th^ 
back 
t 'Q7 3 
back diftinft from the 
fins.
^hree-fpined Common Stickle -back^ 
Ten-fpined^ &c.
ii fpecies.
170.
ScOMBERi MackreL Body towards the tail 
carinated on each fide ; 
fpiirious fins, in moft 
fpecies, near the tail.
Mackrel^ Bonety ^unny, Horfs.
Mackrel^ Sec. lo fpecies.
171.
MtJLUJS.
Surmullet.
Head and body covered 
with large deciduous 
fcales.
Red^ Striped, Beardlefs.
172.
Trigla, Gurnard, Several diftind appen- 
dages placed at the 
pedoral fins.
Piper, Gurnard, Red Gumatd^ 
. Tuh'fifh, d^c, 9 fpecies.
IV.
ABDOMINALES.
IJS^ CoBiTis, Loche: Body nearly of an equal 
width quite to the tail.
Loche, Sand Loche of ToJJil Loche, 
See Phil.
Tranf vol.
xliv.
p. 451, t.
2. U I, &c.
5 
fpecies.
1*74.
AMiA.
Mud fijh.
Head rough, bony, and 
denudated.
175.
SiLURUS.
Sheat, The firfl: ray of the dorfal 
and pectoral fins den- 
tated, 
H Sheah 
I 98 1 
Sheat-fijhy Callichthys \ Pifi faysi 
" In dry feafons this fifh 
travels over fmall tradts of 
land in fearch of frefli- 
water." 21 fpecies.
176.
TEUTHisi Liver-fi/b, Head anteriorly flat, 
and as if truncated^ 
2 fpecies.
177.
L0P.ICARIA.
Helmet'fijh.
Body invefted as 
with a ftielly crilft, 
fet with points.
2 fpecies.
17S.
Salmo# Salmon.
Pofterior dorfal fin adipofe, 
and without rays.
a. Trouts ; body variegated 5 teeth, 
manifeft.
Salmon^ Grey^ Salmon Trout, 
% Trout ^ Char, 
b. Smelts ; dorfal and anal fin op- 
pofite.
Smelt^ Saurus, 
c: Teeth fcarcely perceptible.
Gwiniady Umber, 
d. With four branchioftegous rays 
only.
29 fpecies.
179.
FiSTULARiA.
foba£co-pipe Fijh.
Very long 
cylindrical beak or 
mandible, with the 
mouth at the end.
Tabacaria^ Chinenfis.
180 flsOXi 
[ w V 
\ I So. Esox.
Pike, Lower j dw Ae longeft 5 punc- 
tated.
PikCy. Sea Pike^ Stc, g fpeciesi 
18 1.
Elops.
Sean-Jijh, Branchioftcgous membrane 
double ; exterior one 
fmail, of five rays.
Saurus of Sloane, t.
251.
i. 
182.
Argentina.
Jrgentim, Vent placed very 
near to the-tail.
So called from the filvery Jkin of 
the air-bladder, 2 fpecies.
li^, ArtrRiNA.
Atherine, The lateral line fiK 
vary.
2 fpecies.
184.
MvciL* MulleL Inferior mandible carinated- 
inwards.
Mullet^ Alhula of Cattjby-, 
185.
ExocETus. Flying-fijh, Pe6toral fins nearly 
the length of the body, 
2 fpecies.
. 186.
PoLYNEMirs.
Finger-fijh.
Several diftin6t 
proceiTes or appendages 
placed with the pe6loral 
fins.
Paradife fijh of Edwards^ &:cJ 
3 fpecies.
187.
MoRMVRUs. Mormyre.
Branchial aperture 
linear, and no cover to 
the gill.
Cafchive of the Arabians^ &c.
2 
fpecies.
188, Clufea.
Herring.
Belly ffiarp or keel form, 
and fer rated." 
H 2 ilerringy 
t lOO • ] 
Herrings Sprats Shad, Anchovy^ 
&c.
II fpecies.
189.
CypRiNus. Carp.
Three branchioftegous 
rays.
a. Jaw bearded or cirrofe.
Barbel^ Carp^ Gudgeon^ ^ench.
b. Tail fin entrre, 
Carajfe^ Chub.
c. Tail fin trifid.
Gold-fijh.
d. Tail fin bifid.
Minnow^ Dace^ Roachy Rudy 
Bleak y Bream.
The clafs of Fifhes contains about 400 fpecies, 
but very great additions have been made to this 
clafs by later difcoverics : among which thofe 
made by Dr. Forjkaly in Arabia^ are not the leaftj 
as appears by his fragments lately publiftied.
Great pains were taken by Artediy and fince 
by GronoviuSy and our author, to diftinguifli 
the fpecies by the number of the rays in the fins ; 
and although, from repeated obfervations, they 
are found to agree in many fpecies very re- 
markably ; yet, in others, they vary fo much 
as not to eftablifh a fufficient charafter.
At 
prefent, in this fyflem, the fpecifical charafters 
are taken from a great variety of particulars ; 
amongft which, however, the number of the rays in 
the fins is frequently the moil diftindive, and whe- 
ther fo or not, it is fubjoined to moft fpecies, and 
ufually, as they have been obferved by different 
authors.
The form of the taily the cirriy or beard 
at the mouthy the length of the jaw^ the fpots and 
lines 
[ loi ] 
lines on the body, &c.
all confpire in their turn to 
the fame end, 
Clafs V.
I N S E C T A.
Insects.
, zx 
No part of the fyftem of nature has undergone 
a greater change than this clafs ; neither does our 
author Hand more unrivalled, than in the excel- 
lent arrangement he has given to this branch of 
natural hiftory which, before his time, was nearly 
without method.
It comprehends 87 genera, 
difpofed into feven orders^ founded, in moft of 
them, on the differences obfervable in the number 
and texture of the wings.
Our intended brevity 
will not permit a detail of the genera^ in the fuc- 
ceeding parts of the fyftem •, we muft, therefore, 
now that we are defcended to the inferior parts 
of the animal kingdom, only give the definitions 
of the feveral orders^ with a few obfervations.
The firft order is called, 
I. CoLEOPTERA.
Infefts having the wings co- 
vered with two cruftaccous cafes, divided by a 
longitudinal future.
This order is the moft numerous ; it contains 
almoft all thofe infeds which go under the gen^eral 
name of Beetles: and includes upwards of 900 
fpecies, ranked under 30 genera.
Among thefe 
are the Chafers, Stag-beetles, Leather-eaters, Car- 
rion-beetles, Tortoife-beetles, Lady-flies, Honey- 
beetles, Weevils, Mulk-beetles,Glow- worm.
Spring- 
beetles, Water-beetles, Blifter-beetle, Rove-beetle, 
Earwig, and feveral other genera, 
IL Hemiptera.
Half- winged infefts ; having 
{he flieils or cafes femi-cruftaceous, not divided by 
:[ 102 ] 
M flraight future, but incumbent oD ^ac^h other in 
the margin.
The beak curved inwardsi 
This order contains about c^§q fpecies, under 
12 genera % among thefe are the Cockroach, Camel- 
cricket, Locu{l5 ^nd Common ,C ric leasts, , |^an- 
thorn-fly, Flea-locuft, Eoat-flj, ,^c.
Bug, a na- 
merous genus ; Aphis, or Curr^tTjojaJe ; Cochi- 
ceal-infedlj^pd ptiiers.
n-fn- 
III.
LepidopterA.
Infects with four wings, 
imbricated or cloathed with fine fcales or feathers : 
tpngue fpiral, and coiled up ; body hairy.
...
This order contains only three gcneru ; but the 
fpecies are very numerous, nearly 8oo.
The But- 
terflies, Hawk-moths, and the Moths or Phalen^, 
Of the latter, Linn^.us enumerates 460 fpecies.
This being the moft beautiful tribe of infefts, has 
been much fought after, and later entpmologifts 
have confiderably increafed this number.
IV.
Neuroptera.
Infects with 4 naked, trans- 
parent, or reticulated wings ; tail in moft kinds 
without a fting.
Upwards of 80 fpecies in 7 genera among thefe 
^re the Dragon-fly, May-fly, Spring-fly, Pearl-fly, 
Scorpion-fly, &c.
V. Hymenoptera, Infedls v^ith 4 membra- 
naceous wings, excepting fom.e few fpecies, which 
aredeftitute of wings j females with the tail armed 
with a fl:ing.
This is a numerous order; it contains 320 in- 
fe<5ls in \o genera -, among thefe are the Saw-fly or 
Tenthredo^ Tailed- wafp.
Ichneumon-fly, Ich.^eii- 
mon-wafp, Wafp, Bee^ Ant, and Golden Wall- 
fly, &c.
VI.
DiPTERA.
t ] 
VL DiPTERA.
InTefts with two wings; fur- 
niflied alfo with a balance or club behind each 
wing.
This order, under lo genera^ contams near 270 
fpecies, among which are the Gad-flies, Gnats, 
Common Flefh-fly, Wafp-fly, Horfe-fly, Bee-fly, 
and others.
VII.
Aptera.
Infeds without wings, in either 
fex.
This order contains 290 fpecies under i^genera^ 
and falls eafily into three divifions.
1. With 6 legs : The Sugar-mite, Ground-flea, 
Death-watch, Loufe, Common Flea.
2. With 8 to 1 1 legs ; The Tick-fpiders, Scor- 
pion, Crab, King-crab, and Millepede.
3. With numerous legs : The Centipede and ' 
Gallyworm.
In forming the genera under each of thefe or- 
ders, the antenna hold a principal rank, and par- 
ticularly in the Coleoptera ; but the author 
does not trufl: to them alone ; the elytra or out- 
ward cafes, the head, the roftrum or mouth, the 
thorax, and tail ; and indeed in almoft every genus^ 
fome or other of them are called in to afiift in 
forming the character.
In the He MI FT ERA, the roftrum gives a note of 
primary ufe j but here the antenn^^ wingSy and 
feet come in alfo.
In the Lepidoptera, the antenna and wings 
form the charadler.
In the Neuroptera, the rrvouth^ wings, and 
tail.
H 4 In 
f TP4 ] 
In the Hymenoptera, the mouth, the wings, 
and the fting.
In the DiPTERA, the month or prohofcis alone.
In the Aptera, the eyes, the tail, and the num- 
ber of the feet, &c.
Clafs VL VERMES.
The fi^th and lad clafs contains the VERMES, 
which are divided into five orders.
LiNNi5:us 
very early adopted the new fyftem of PeyfonneU 
Juffieu^ and fome others, in introducing the corals 
and corallines into the animal kingdom, under the 
names of Lithophyta and Zoophyta.
This 
fyftem has had great light thrown upon it by the 
late excellent Mr. Ellis, in his hiftory of Coral- 
lines, and feveral papers printed in the Philofophi- 
cal Tranfadions.
As this is by far the moft anomalous of all the 
clafles, the charaders of the orders are very va- 
rious, 
I. Intestina, Animals fimple, naked, defti- 
tute of limbs.
This order includes j genera \ among which are 
the Guinea-worm, Afcarides, Earth-worm, Gourd- 
worm^ Leech, &c.
It contains but 24 fpecies.
II.
MoLLuscA.
Animals fimple, naked, not in- 
cluded in a fhell, but furnifhed with limbs.
This order includes 18 generuy containing 110 
fpecies.
Among thefe rank the common naked 
Snail, Sea Hare of Rondeletius^ Doris^ Sea Moufe, 
J^lereiSy Afcidia^ A5linia^ or Sea Anemone, Tethys^ 
Cuttlerfifh, Sea Lungs, or Blubbers, Star-fifh, and 
EcbimSy .called Sea Hedge-hog, and others.
III.
Je^tace^I 
t 105 ] 
in.
Test^cSa. Animals, generally of the 
foregoing order, but included in a (hell.
This order takes in the whole tribe of (hells, 
confifting of upwards of 800 fpecies, under 36 
genera^ and difpofed in a method entirely new.
The three firft genera are the muUivalves^ the next 
fourteen bivalves^ and the remainder univalves, 
IV.
LiTHOPHYTA.
Compofite animals, affixed 
to, and fabricating a fixed calcareous bafe, called 
CoraL 
This order contains 59 fpecies, under {our gene-* 
ra : the Tubipora^ red tubular Coral ; Madrepores or 
Brain Stones 5 Millepores 5 and another called Cel- 
Upore, 
V. ZoopHYTA.
Animal compofite, refembling a 
flower, and fpringing from a vegetating ftem.
This order contains 14 genera, of which nine 
are fixed, and the other locomotive : amongft the 
former rank the Ifis or red Coral, Sea Fan, Al- 
cyonium^ Sponge, Corallines, &c.
: among the 
latter, the Polype, Sea Pens, T^nia^ Furia^ and 
laftly the a(remblage of chaotic, or microfcopi- 
cal Animalcula, The fpecies under this order are 
156.
The generical diftindions among the Intestina 
arife from the diverfity of the body of the animal, 
almoft folely.
In the MoLLUscA, from the body and feelers, 
f:alled tmtacula^ and from other parts.
In the Testacea, the included aqimal, the 
general differences between the (hells themfelves, 
J)ut principally the cardo or hinge iii the bivalves^ 
#nd 
\ to6 3 
arrd the aperture in the univalves, iFurriifli the ge* 
neric note.
In the LiTHOPHYTA, the inhabitant animal, and 
the form of the coral itfelf : and in the Zoophyta, 
the animal, and the very different forms Of the 
fabrifications, lay a foundation for the generic 
notes.
After having thus exhibited a view of the 
Gaffes^ it remains that we give a general account 
of the method purfued in treating on each fpecies.
To this end it muft be obferved, that throughout 
the whole fyftenty the claffical character, that of 
the order^ and the generical note, always make a 
part in the defcription of each /pedes.
After 
-thefe, our author begins with his own fpecific 
name for the animal, eftabliflied upon the moft 
eflential difference obfervable between that and 
every other fpecies of the genus \ and here it muft 
be allowed, that he has, in general, happily fuc- 
ceeded, by giving, in the fpace of two or three 
lines, a dillin<5lion that rhore immediately points 
out the animal fought for, than the long and la- 
boured defcriptions of many foregoing authors.
If the fpecific name is the fame that is adopted 
in any of his former writings, he refers to it.
He has, however, in many parts of this enlarged 
edition, formed new names to animals notited in 
the former edition, and in the Fauna Suecica, 
"Where indeed the efTential or fpecific diftindticn 
is the point in view, this muft frequently be the 
cafe, fo long as new fpecies continue to come in 5 
for, as the eftential charafter of each fpecies refults 
from 
C it^7 1 
irom the moft careful comparil^m of the whofe 
gems, the introdudlion of a new one miift, in 
many inftances, fo clalli with the old, as to re- 
quire, perhaps, a total alteration in every fpecifc 
mmt of the g€nus.
After his own fpecific name, he gives the 
jynonyms, and page of the moft reputed and au- 
thentic writers in each clafs and particularly re- 
fers to :thofe who have beft figured his fubjeft ; 
then the locus natalis^ and in many inftances, 
more efpecially among the Mammali-a and Aves^ 
a fliort but comprchenfive hiftory reipe6ling the 
nature, economy, and ufes of the animal.
To 
every animal the author has afHxed his trivial 
name, expreflive, moft commonly, of place where 
it is found, of its colour, form,, or fome quality or 
attribute, defcriptive, as far as may be, of the ani- 
mal or, in a great variety of cafes, where the 
fubjefl has been well known by a fingle term, 
he retains that as his trivial name.
To inftance 
in the Partridge and Quail, which both belong to 
his genus eftabliflied under the name Tetrao : he 
therefore calls the former Tetrao Perdix^ ^nd the 
Jatter 'Tetrao Coturnix.
It has been objedled to LiNNi^:us's claffification 
in various parts of his fyftem, that he has thrown 
together fubjedls too different in their general 
appearance and economy, by keeping too clofely 
to one charadler to inftance particularly in the 
Mammalia, by confining himfelf to the teeth.
To this it may be anfwered, in general, that if 
mly quadrupeds were to be cjafled, no fyftem 
needed 
t 108 ] 
needed to ha^e been built, as their number is fo 
fmall : but when it is recolleded, that all Nature 
was under his eye, and that therefore the fubjedts 
were almoft infinite, it became neceffary to form 
the bafis of every great divifion or clafs, as far as 
foffthle^ on one fimple foundation.
And perhaps it is 
the obfervance of this rule that has given Lin- 
N^us's fyftem fo greatly the advantage over all 
foregoing writers.
For, as nature does not feem 
to have obferved any fyftem, ours muft be artificial, 
and will ever have its anomalies.
As an artificial 
fyftem therefore, that muft have the preference, 
which will moft readily lead to the fubjed under 
inveftigation ; in which cafe it is of fmall im- 
portance where it is placed, and how far removed 
from others with which it feems to bear a fimilar 
and general appearance.
^j^We fhall clofe this brief view of the arrangement 
of animals, by exhibiting the number of fubjeds 
enumerated, all of which are fynonymed by thq 
author, in the 12th edition of his Syfiem.
Mammalia 
219 
Infers 
3075 
Birds 
931 
Vermes 
1163 
Amphibia 
291 
Various, I 
Fifties 
398 
from the 
1* 140 
MantifTaeJ 
Total 
6217.
With the firft tome of the Syjiema Nature is in- 
timately connedled a work of the profeflbr's, pub- 
liftied under the title of Museum Ludovica XJlric^e 
Regin^^, in quo anim^li^ rariora exoticay imprimis 
infe^O; 
[ 109 ] 
infeBa^ et conchy Ua defcribuntur et deter minantur pf6^^ 
dromiinftar editum.
Holm.
1764, 8% pp.
720.
This 
was drawn up, and publifhed, by order of the 
'queen of Sweden^ who had conftrufted a copious 
and rich cabinet of natural hiftory, at the palace 
of Drottningholm ; the fubje6ls of which, as hath 
been obferved, Linn/eus had been appointed to 
arrange.
The great expence her majefty had be- 
ftowed in procuring, particularly infeds and fhells, 
had given this colle6lion an advantage that proved 
very favourable to our author, by throwing in his 
way a multitude of fine and very expenfive objeds, 
which otherwife, probably, he could have had no 
opportunity of defcribing; and thefe were, for- 
tunately, all coUeded before the publication of the 
enlarged editions of the Syftem.
In this work the exotic infeds and fhells only are 
introduced ; of the former, 436 ; and of the latter, 
434, with tv/enty-five of the Mollufca, The in- 
feds chiefly confift of the large and beautiful 
Lepidoptera and the Ihells abound with all their 
elegant varieties.
Thefe are defcribed at large, 
with all that precifion, brevity, and accurate ar- 
rangement of the feveral parts, which every where 
manifefts itfelf fo happily in our author's writings.
Both in entomology and conchology a new language is 
introduced ; and thefe defcriptions may well fland 
as models for future writings.
Annexed to this work is the fecond parr, or 
rather only the prodromnsy of the Museum Adolphi 
Frederici Regis, in quo animalia rariora^ imprimis et 
exotica, aveSy amphibia, pifces defcribuntur, 1764.^ pp.
110.
iio.
In this additional volume a're' dercribed at 
large 156 fubjedls of the animal kingdom, all be* 
longing to the firft four clafles ; and all acquired 
fince the publication of the firft part in 1754, 
Throughout the whole Syjiemy Linnj&vs has 
referred to thefe books for delcriptions at large to 
all the exotics : and nothing could be more ac* 
ceptable to the critical zoologift, than to fee the 
plan of this volume perfeded through the whole 
hiftory of animals.
T O M.
II.
The Vegetable Kingdom.
The fecond part of the Sypma Natur^^ relating 
to vegetables, in all the editions prior to the 
tenth, was very compendioufly exhibited ; the au- 
thor havings after his Ckvis Claffium^ only given 
the names of the genera^ with their e£ential or ab- 
breviated charadlers, without touching at all on 
fpecrfic diflinclions, which were referved for the 
prefent enlarged edition of the Syftem, and for the 
Species Plant arum, a work before fpoken of.
This volume contains upwards of 560 pages j and 
in the twelfth edition of 1767, by the acceflion of 
new materials, is enlarged to 731.
It contains, in 
a moft compendious manner, a view of the whole 
vegetable kingdom, as far as the fubjefts thereof 
had come under our author's own infpedlion, dif- 
pofed according to that fyflem of which LiNNi^:i/s 
had been the inventor, founded, as to the clafiical 
part, upon the fexes of plants ; a fyftem now al- 
moft univerfally received.
It is in this branch 
9 of 
[f 141 ]1 
of the ftudy of nature, that this great natiiralift hat 
fo diftinguifhed himfelf.
From YlWt, botuny boafts 
new ara% ^rA Haller, one of the firft writers of 
this age, in the fame line of fcience, and who alone 
might dare to rival him, has, with a liberality of 
mind becoming a great man, allowed this fupe^ 
riority to LiNN^fius.
Before we proceed to a particular account of 
this part of the fyftem, it may not be improper to 
premife fome obfervations on methods of botany in 
general, before our author wrote.
It is needlefs 
to urge the neceffity of method in the ftudy of na- 
ture, as it is the very foul of fcience ; and, amldft 
fuch a multitude of objeds which the vegetable 
kingdom affords, all attempts towards the acqui- 
sition of knowledge without it, muft end in un* 
certainty and conf^^fion.
We have fufficient proofs 
of this in the writers upon plants before the in- 
vention of fyftems, and fee and deplore the want 
of them, in the lofs of many valuable articles, not 
only in the Materia Medica^ but in the Materia 
Pi^foria^ and 'Tin5ioria of the antients.
Articles, 
the virtues and properties of which appear to have 
been well alcertained, are now loft to us, for want 
of a more fcieotific arrangement of the fubjeds, 
and accuracy in the defcriptions of them.
Botanic writers chofe very different methods 
of arranging plants, not only before, but fince, 
the invention of fyft'ematic botany.
The al- 
phabetic has been much followed, efpecially in 
local catalogues.
Some have difpofcd the plants 
according to the time of fiowering •, as Pauli^ in his 
^adripartitum 
t 112 J 
§uadripartitum Botanicum^ publiflicd in 1639 J 
Bejler^ in the Hortus Eyjiettenfis^ 1640-, and £)/7- 
knius^ in the Cata'ogus GiJfenfiSy 1719.
Others have 
arranged them according to the different places of 
their growth ; as the authors of the Hijioria Lugdu- 
nenjis^ in 1587 : and feme according to their virtues in 
medicine.
Others again, obferving that numbers of 
vegetables agreed with each other in their general 
habit and appearance, or had a certain harmony 
and proportion in the form and difpofition of their 
roots, leaves, flowers, or fruit ; in their particular 
mode of growing, flowering, or foliation, faw that 
they naturally fell as it were into clafl^es, agree- 
able to fuch diftindtions.
Hence their divifion of^ 
trees, into pomifera^ prmifera^ haccifera^ nucifera^ 
glandifer^y &c.
; of herbs, into hulhofa^ filiquofa^ 
umbellifera^ verticillata^ papilionacea^ &c.
Thefe 
were fo many claffes or orders^ which nature had 
fo charadterized that they could not efcape their 
notice and, could all the fubjeds of the vegetable 
kingdom be properly reduced to fuch combinations, 
and the whole chain properly conne£fed^ we fliould 
then fee what is meant by the natural method, 
that uUimum et defideratum of botany, of which our 
author favs, however, " Nec fperare fas eft, quod 
noftra Mtas fyftema quoddam naturale videre queatj 
" et vix feri nepotes,'' Neverthelefs the beft 
writers of the laft century, fuch were John and 
Cafpar Bauhine, endeavoured to preferve the above- 
mentioned arrangement, although it was in a 
rude manner.
In this they were followed by 
our own countrymen Gerard and Parkinfon, but as 
[ "3 ] 
they eftabliflied no precife definitions to their 
claflfes, fo in their fubdivifions, or chapters, they 
paid little or no regard to the minuter parts of 
diftindion, taken from the frii6tification ; hence, 
nothing like generical notes can be difcovered in 
their methods : fo that the only refoiirce, in find- 
ing many of their plants, was, to read over their 
long and tedious defcriptions, which, after all, 
were frequently infufiicient to diftinguifti the plant 
fought for.
That great naturalift Ci?;^r^i/^GESNER, who died in ^ 
1 565, in his 50th year, appears to have been the 
firft who thought, with any precifion, of a method 
of claffing plants from the flower^ or fruit ; but he 
only flightly touches thereon in his epifcles; he lived 
not to bring any thing to perfeftion in this way.
It was referved for C^efalpinus^ phyfician to Pope 
Clement VIII.
to be the firft author who arranged 
plants in a true fyftematic manner, in his Lihri de 
Flantis^ publifhed in 1583, in which he eftablifhes 
the characters principally from the fruit, Ic is 
wonderful, that after his time, though fo many 
eminent botanifts flourifhed, among whom were 
the two Bauhines-i no one ever thought of purfu- 
ing the plan he laid down, until Morifon and 
Ray^ who both publifhed, nearly together, 
their feparate fyftems, founded alfo upon dif- 
tintflions principally drawn from the fruit.
Since 
their time, others have laboured to bring their 
fyftems to perfedion ; as Knaut in Germany ; 
Paul Herman^ and Boerhaave^ in Holland \ and 
PUkmuSy late profeflbr at Oxford^ had ft ill far- 
I tUer 
t 114 3 
tker perfe(5i:ed Mr. method, as is evident 
from fhe arrangement he has given to the Britijk 
plants, in the third edition of that author'$ 
Sympjis, 
Several elegant fyflems have alfo been formed 
from the flower^ as the bafis of the claffical cha- 
rafler; in confidering which, both xht regularity 
^nd irregularity^ as well as the numher of the petals^ 
have been made the principal diftindion, Rivini^ 
at Leip/tc^ in 1690, was the firft who took the 
flower as the foundation of his method, as did 
Ruppius in 17 18.
But no one carried this me- 
thod to fuch perfe6tion as ^ournefort^ in 1694, who 
forms his claffical charadler from the figure of the 
flower^ and eftablifhes his 07'der^ or fubdivifions on 
the different fituation of the fruity whether above 
or below the empalement or receptacle.
Befides thefe methods, in which the aifthors 
have confidered one part* only, either fiozver or 
fruity as the bafe of their fyftems, feveral others 
have b^en conflruded of late years, in which ve- 
getables have been arranged, as far as poffible, 
according to what have been called the natural 
claffes\ the foundations of which take in a nu- 
merous fet of characters, arifing from a combina- 
tion and agreement in the habit of the plants^ 
as well as their harmony in the effential parts of 
fruEiification.
Among thefe, that of Van Royen^ late 
profeiTor at Leyden^ is among the mod elegant at- 
tempts towards this ultimum in botany.
This is 
exhibited in the Prodromus Flora Leydenjis^ 1740* 
Jle is followed by Gmelin, in the Flora Sibirica^ 
[ 1^5 ] 
I747i Thefe authors, as alfo L.
Ge^^ard., 
in his Flora Galh provincialis, Paris 1761, preferve 
the natural generkd charaUen of Linn^^us almoft 
entire through their fyftems ; and the latter writer 
has, with fome variations, taken the 'orders of a 
natural method, conftruded by 5.
Juffieu, for his 
daffes.
Haller alfo planned, and brought to 
great perfection, a method of this kind, as is 
exhibited in his Enumeratw Stirpium Helvetia ^ 
1742, and in the Hortus Gottingenfis, ^ISZ-* which 
he has fince ftill more elaborated, in a work of 
infinite labour and merit, the Hijloria Stirpium 
Helvetia, ^ torn.
fol.
1768.
LiNN^us himfelf very early attempted a na- 
iural method ; but it is evident he thought there 
were too many links wanting in the chain, to ren- 
der it the readied guide to botanical fcience; 
fince he foon deferted it, although he continued 
to improve it to the laft : however he only reduced 
the genera into orders, but did not venture fo far as 
to form the clajfical part of a fyftem on that plan.
The prefent learned and indefatigable profelTorDr.
Hope, at Edinburgh, whofe zeal and fuccefs in 
cultivating and difrufing the principles of the 
hinnaan fyftem are well known, has conllru6led 
perhaps the moft elaborate attempt of this kind 
that the botaniils have ever feen.
We join with 
many others in wifhing that he may be enabled to 
give it all that perfection which may encourage 
him to prefent it to the public.
Methods have alfo been formed from the dif- 
ferent fpecies.and arrangement of the calyx^ or cup 
I ^ .
^ of 
t ii6 3 
of the flower in plants.
ProfelTor Magnoly of 
Montpelier^ publifhed in 1720 on this plan; and 
LiNN^us himfelf in 1737, but he did not purfue 
it.
Every method of arrangement hath its advan- 
tage in fome refpedl or other; and it is furely 
rather to be regretted, howfoever the flower may 
claim the preference, that a method founded in 
the diflin6lions of xht fruity fhould not alfo have 
as it were a fecondary place in common ufe *, for, 
as all artificial methods are only fuppofed to be fo 
many fuccedanea to the natural one, a due attention 
to each might tend to illuftrate the natural clafTes, 
to conned them, and reduce the anomalies, and 
fo far pave the way to the accomplifhment of that 
fcheme, which, however, will yet by many be 
confidered as quite impradicable in botany.
LiNN^us was the firfl who conilituted the 
fiarnina and piftils as the bafis of an artificial me- 
thod of arranging plants ; and he tells us, in his 
Classes Plantarum, he was led to this by 
confidering the great importance of thefe parts in 
vegetation.
They alone are the effentials necef- 
fary to frudlification all other parts, except the 
mthera and ftigma^ being wanting in fome flowers ; 
and the prefent philofophy of botany regards the 
former as the male^ and the latter as the female 
organs of generation in plants.
As fuch indeed 
they mufl be confidered analogically^ and in a phi-, 
lofophical view yet, perhaps, the Unncean fyilem, 
admirable as it is, would not have been kfs ac- 
ceptable had the clafEcal terms been exprefTive 
only 
C "7 ] 
only of number and fituation^ without regard to 
the offices of the parts in framing the terms.
Ludwig^ of Leipfic^ who has endeavoured to com- 
bine the fyftems of Rivinus and Linn^us, by 
taking his dajfes from the method of the former, 
and his orders from that of the latter, has avoided 
this mode of expreffion, in fubftituting the terms 
monanthera^ monoJiyU^ &c.
&c.
The author begins the new and enlarged edition 
of the Syftema Vegetahilium of 1767, by premifing 
a compendious view of the philofophy of vege- 
tation, and then proceeds to what he calls Delineatio 
Plant^^ fomething analogous to what he had en- 
titled, in the editions prior to the loth, Methodus 
Demonjirandi Vegetahilia.
Here he introduces all 
the terms he makes ufe of in defcribing plants, 
and, by a methodical and apt difpofition of them, 
really explains them at the fame time.
After this, 
he gives the Clavis et Chara5ieres ClaJJium^ and then 
comes to the fyilem itfelf.
The prerogative of any artificial fydem in 
botany, is fuppofed to confift in its keeping toge- 
ther, as much as poffible, the genera^ in what are 
called the natural dajfes or orders, and thus fo far 
approaching to the fyftem of nature.
All artifidal 
fyftems being founded on forne^ or other^ or all 
the parts of fru^ifica^on^ without regard to habit, 
will be found in many inftances to break the order 
of the natural ciaiTes, and disjoin genera^ which 
nature feems to have claiTed. The more fimple 
and uniform the clafTical charadiers of any fyftem 
arc, the more they are likely to interfere in this 
refpedj neverthekfs, it is plealing to obferve, how 
.13 well 
t 118 3 
Well many of the natural clafles are kept together 
in the Linn^an (yi!ttm'^ the charaders of which 
enjoy the advantage of being very fimple, and 
eafy to retain in the memory^ and of being found- 
ed on the parts of plants as little fubjed to vari- 
ation as any whatever: yet, like all other me- 
thods, it has its defects ; of which no one was 
more fennble than the author himfelf.
There 
are many inftances of particular fpecies that break 
through the genertcal and claffical charadlers of 
the fyftem itfelf : but for thefe defed^s there is no 
other remedy^ at prefent, than that which our au- 
thor has applied, in the volume under confidera^ 
tion, and which ought ever, in arrangements of 
this kind, to be rigidly obferved.
Wherever thefe 
anomalies take place, they are mentioned among 
the fi^hious characters, under the clafs and order 
to which the number of Jlamina or fiJUls^ entitle 
them to a place.
The fexual fyftem briefly is as follows All 
known plants are divided into 24 CLASSES the 
charaders of which are eftablifhed upon the mm" 
ler^ or different fituation, or arrangement of the 
Jlamina or m.ale organs ; and the Orders, or fub- 
divifions, of thefe clafles, as far as poflible, on a 
fimilar number, fituation, or arrangement, of the 
pftitsy or female organs.
The firil twenty clalTes contain what the author 
calls hermaphrodite flowers, or fuch as have the fia- 
mna and fifiils both within the fame cup ox petals y 
or (landing on the fame receptacle^ where thofe are 
.wanting.
Of thefe twenty, the firfl ten clafTes pro- 
ceed in an uninterrupted feries^ from Monan* 
DRIA 
C "9 ] 
PRiA to DfiCANDRiA ; the plants of each havirig ai 
many ftamina as the title exprefles.
The iith clafs is Dodecandria, as there arc 
no plants yet difcovered which have only eleveii 
llamina.
The i2th^ IcosANDRiA ; fuch plants as have 
about 20 ftamina, or more ; but always arifing 
from the calyx or corolla^ and not from the recep^ 
tack.
The i3thj Polyandria ; fuch as have from 
twenty to even a thoufand ftamina % but always 
ariling from the receptacle.
The 14th clafs, DidynaMia ; fuch as have four 
ftaminaj two long and two ftiort.
The elTential 
charadter of this clafs does not confift in the hum-^ 
her of ftamina, otherwife the plants might be re- 
ferred to the tetrandria clafs \ but, in having two 
of the ftamina ftiorter than the other, one piftil 
only, and an irregularly-ftiaped corolla.
The 1 5thj Tetradynamia plants with^;v fta- 
mina, four long and two ftiort.
The 1 6th, Monadelphia; fuch as have the 
ftamina not diftind at the bafe, but united into 
one body.
The 17th, D1ADELPHIA5 fuch as have the fta-- 
mina united at the bafe into two bodies.
The 1 8th, Polyadelphia •, fuch as have the 
ftamina united.
at the bafe into feveral bodies.
The 19th, Syngenesia j fuch as have the anther 
r^j but not the filaments, coalefcing together, fo 
as to form a tube or cylinder, through which the 
piftil is commonly tranfmitted.
i 4 Thf!
[ I20 ] 
The 20th, Gynandria ; Yuch as have the fta- 
mina fpringing from the piftil itfelf.
The 2ift, MoNOEciA J fuch as have feparatd 
male and female flowers on the fame plant.
The 22(1, DioEciA ; fuch as have feparate male 
and female flowers on feparate plants.
The 23d,PoLYGAMiA ; fuch as have confl:antly, 
befides hermaphrodite flowers, others, either male 
or female, on the fame plant.
The 24th, Cryptogamia ; containing thofc 
plants the mode and organs of whofe frudlification 
are not yet fufHciently afcertainedj heretofore 
called imperfe6l plants.
The fecondary part of the fyfl:em, the OR- 
DERS, or fubdivifions of the foregoing clafles, arc 
eftabliflied on the number of the piftils or female 
parts, through a confiderable part of the fyftem ; 
but in other parts, from various charaders.
Thus, 
The arrangement from number is purfued no 
farther than through the firft thirteen clafl!es : that 
is, fo long as the clajfical character, uninterrup- 
tedly, depends on the numher of ftamina^ fo long 
the orders likewife depend on the number of piftils : 
but, when fjtuation or different arrangement take 
place, the orders are mofl: commonly founded on 
other diftinflions, which we fliall briefly fpecify.
The 14th clafs, or Didynamia^ is divided into 
Gymnospermia and Angiospermia : the former 
having four naked feeds ; the latter having the 
feeds inclofed in a feed-veffel.
The 1 5th, T Hradynamia^ has two orders, accor- 
ding 
[ 121 ] 
ding to the fize and fhape of thQ pod or Jhale \ Sl- 
LICULOSA, fhort; and SiLIQUOSA, lottg.
The orders in the three next claffes, MonadeU 
fhia^ Diadelphia^ and Polyadelphia^ are formed 
from the number of the ftamina, 
Thofeof the Syngenejia clafs are fix : in five of which 
the plants are Polygamic, and in the remaining 
one MoNOGAMi^ ; and the difi^erences in the orders 
of the former, arife from the different ftrudure or 
fex of the flofcules^ conftituting the whole flower.
In the 2oth clafs, Gynandria^ the arrangement 
of the orders arifes from the number of the Jla^ 
mina^ as in the i6th, 17th, and i8th clafles.
In the 21ft and 22d clafTes, the Monoecia and 
Dioecia, the claffical charaders of the foregoing 
parts of the fyftem are adopted as charadiers of 
the orders^ as far down as to the Monoecia^ clafs it- 
felf.
Thus the firft order of thofe clalTes contains 
MoNANDRous plants, and the laft Gynandrous.
The 23d, the Polygamia clafs, is divided into 
three orders, as the plants are Monoecious, Dioe- 
cious, or Trioecious.
The 24th and lali clafs, Cryptogamia^ is divided 
into four' orders, containing the Filices, Musci, 
AhGM^ and Fungi.
Somi 
[ 122 ] 
Some Eyiampks of Plants, throughout all the Clajfes and 
Orders of the Linn^an Syfiem ; fpecifying alfo the 
Number of Genera under each Order, and the 
Number of Species in each Clafs^ fynonymed in the 
Species Plantamm, 
CI.
I. MoNANDRiA.
34fpecles.
Monogynia, 1 1 Genera ; among which are, Canna, 
Indian Reed, Glafs-wort, Mares Tail.
Digynia, 4 Gen. Star- wort.
Berried Orach.
2. DiANDRIA.
186.
Monogynia.
29 Gen. Jafmine, Privet, Rofemary.
Digynia.
1 Genus.
Vernal Grafs.
'Trigynia, 1 Genus.
Pepper.
3. Triandria.
412.
Monogynia, 29 Gen. Valerian, Saffron, Iris.
Digynia, 29 Gen. Moft of the Grafles and Grain, 
Sugar-cane.
^trigynia.
11 Gen. Blinks, ^Snuartia, Poly carpon.
4. Tetrandria.
,^5.
: : ' 
Monogynia.
61 Gen. Teafei, Scabious, Madder^ 
Digynia.
6 Gen. Purfley Piert, Dodder.
Tetragynia, 7 Gen. Holly, Pondweed, Pearlwort.
5. Pentandria.
976, 
Monogynia.
138 Gen. Comfrey, Campanula, Hen- 
bane, Buckthorn, Ivy, Periwincle.
Digynia.
170 Gen. Gentian, Carrot, Hemlock.
Trigynia.
16 Gen. Elder, Fi/^^r;^^;;^, Chick weed • 
^etragynia.
2 Gen. Grafs of ParnaiTus.
Pentagynia.
9 Gen. Flax, Sun-dew.
Folygynia.
i Gen. IVtgufe-tail.
6. Hexandria; 
I m 1 
6. Hexandria.
330.' 
Monogynia.
56 Gen. Narciflus, Lilly, Tulip* 
Digynia, 2 Gen. R\cq^ Jtraphaxis.
Trigynia.
9 Gen. Dock, Colchicum.
Tetragynia.
i Gen. Petiveria, or Flenwecd.
Polygyria, i Gen. Water Plantain.
7. Heptandria.
6, 
Monogynia.
2 Gen. Horfe Chefnut, Trkntalis.
Digynia.
1 Gen. Limeum, 
^etragynia.
i Gen. Saururus^ or Lizard's Tail.
Heptagynia.
i Gen. Septus, 
8. Octandria.
169.
Monogynia.
3 1 Gen. Indian CrefTes, Heath, 
J)igynia, 4 Gen. Mi^bringia, Weinmannia, 
Trigynia.
5 Gen. Knotweed, Mangrove-grape.
Tetragynia.
3 Gen. Paris, Mofchatel, 
9. Enneandria.
19.
Monogynia.
4 Gen. Bay, Anacardium.
trigynia.
i Genus.
Rhubarb.
Hexagynia, i Gen. ButomuSy or Flowering Rufh.
10.
Decandria.
425.
Monogynia.
50 Gen. Rue, Bead-tree, Arbutus.
Digynia.
12 Gen. Saxifrage, Soap-wort, Pink, 
f rigynia, 1 1 Gen. Bladder Campion, Catchfly.
Pentagynia, 14 Gen. Sedum, Lychnis, Cockle.
Decagynia.
2 Gen. Phytolacca^ or Pokeweed.
II.
Dodecandria.
131.
Monogynia, 20 Gen. Afarabacca, Spiked Willow- 
herb.
Digynia.
2 Gen. Agrimony, Heliecarpus, 
trigynia, 2 Gen. Dyers Weed, Spurge.
Pentagynia.
i Gen, Glinus, 
Dodecagynkl 
[ 124 ] 
Dodecagynia, i Gen. Houfe-lcek.
12.
ICOSANDRIA.
2 1 8.
Monogynia, lo Gen. Myrtle, Almond, PlumbJ 
Bigynia, i Gen. White- thorn and White Beam- 
tree.
5^ rigynia, 2 Gen. Service-tree and Quicken-tree.
Pentagynia.
6 Gen. Apple-tree, Medlar, Drop* 
wort.
Tolygynia, 9 Gen. Rofe, Strawberry, Cinquefoil.
13.
POLYANDRIA.
269.
Monogynia, ^5 Gen. Poppy, Lime-tree, Ciftus* 
Bigynia, 4 Gen. Peony, Calligonum, 
^rigynia, 2 Gen. Lark-fpur, Aconite.
Tetragynia, 3 Gen. Bug- wort.
Pentagynia.
3 Gen. Columbine, Nigella.
He^agynia, i Gen, Water-aloe.
Polygynia, 18 Gen. Anemone, Ranunculus.
14.
DlDYNAMIA.
465.
Gymnofpermia.
35 Gen. Mint, Hore- hound, Thyme.
Angiofpermia, 62 Gen. Eyebright, Toad-flax, A- 
canthus.
' 15.
Tetradynamia.
215.
Siliculofa.
14 Gen. Crefles, Scurvy-grafs.
Siliquofa, ly Gen. Muftard, Rhadi(h, Kale.
16.
Monadelphia.
181.
Pentandria, 4 Gen. Hermannia^ Melochia.
Becandria, 3 Gen. European Geraniums.
Endecandria.
i Gen. Browne a ^ or Porto Bello 
Rofe.
Bodecandria.
i Gen. Pentapetes.
Polyandria, 17 Gen. Mallow, Hibifcus.^ 
17.
DiadelphiaJ 
[ ] 
1*7.
DiADELPHIA.
512.' 
Pentandria, i Gen. Monnieria, 
Hexandria, 2 Gen. Fumitory.
OBandria.
2 Gen. Milk-wort.
Becandria.
27 Gen. Broom, Furze, Lupin, Peafe^ 
18.
POLYADELPHIA.
37.
Fentandria, 2 Gen. Monfonia^ Cacao, or Cho- 
colate.
Icofandria, i Gen. Orange-tree.
Polyandria, 7 Gen. St.
John's Wort.
19.
Syngenesia.
905.
Polygamia equalis.
Florets all hermaphrodite.
40 
Gen. Lettuce, Dandelion, Thiftle, Hemp, 
Agrimony.
Polygamia fuperflua.
Florets of the difk, hermaphro- 
dite ; of the radius, female.
37 Gen.
Groundfel, Tanfy, After, Chamomile.
Polygamia fruftranea.
Florets of the difk, herma- 
phrodite ; of the radius, neutral.
7 Gen.
Sun- flower, Rudheckia^ Centaurea^ Knap- 
weed.
^ Polygamia necejfaria.
Florets of the difk, male ; of 
the radius, female.
13 Gen. Marigold.
Polygamia fegregata.
Florets in feparate cups, with- 
in a common calyx.
6 Gen. Globe Thiftle.
M-onogamia, Simple flower, 7 Gen. Cardinal- 
flower, Violet, Balfam.
20.
Gynandria.
20c.
Diandria, 9 Gen. Orchis, Satyrium.
Triandria, 4 Gen. Ferraria^ Sifyrinchium.
^etrandria.
i Gen. Nepenthes, 
Pentandria* 3 Gen. Ayenia^ PafTion-fiower.
9 iitsuindrial 
t 126 J 
'TJemndria: 2 Gen. Birthwort.
Becandria.
2 Gen. Heli5leres, 
Dodecandria, i Gen. Cytinus, 
Polyandria.
8 Gen. Arum, Grafs-wrack.
21.
MoNOEciA.
290.
Monandria, 5 Gen. Horned Pond-weed, Elaterium.
Diandria, 2 Gen. Anguria^ Ducks-meat.
Triandria, 12 Gen. Bur-weed, Sedge, Sea Laurel.
Tetrandria.
8 Gen. Birch, Box, Nettle, Mulberry.
Pentandria, 9 Gen. Xanthium^ Amaranthus.
Hexandria, 2 Gen. Zizania^ Pharus, 
Heptandria, 1 Gen. Guettarda, 
Polyandria.
13 Gen. Arrow-head, Oak, Hafel.
Monadelphia.
15 Gen. Pine-tree, Cyprefs, Ricinus.
Syngenefia, 6 Gen. Gourd, Cucumber, Bryony.
Gynandria, 2 Gen. Andrachne, 
22.
DioEciA.
157.
Momndria.
i Gen. Najas.
Diandria, 3 Gen. Vallifneria^ Willow.
Triandria, 5 Gen. Berry-bearing Heath.
Tetrandria, 5 Gen, MifTelto, Gale, Sea Buck,- 
thorn.
Pentandria.
12 Gen. Spinach, Hemp, Hops.
Hexandria, 6 Gen. Black Bryony, Poplar.
Enneandria.
2 Gen. Mercury, Frog-bit.
Decandria.
4 Gen. Schinus^ Myrtle-leaved Sumach.
Dodecandria, 2 Gen. Moon-feed, Cretan Hemp.
Polyandria, i Gen. Cliffortia, 
Monadelphia.
6 Gen. Juniper, Yew.
Syngenejia, 1 Gen. Butcher's Broom.
Gynandria, 1 Gen, Clutia, 
3 
23.
POLYGAMIAi 
[ 127 ] 
23- POLYGAMIA.
l6g.
Monoecia, 22.
Gen. White Hellebore, Oracli, 
Maple.
Dioecia, 10 Gen. GleditJIa^ Aih-trec, Tupelo.
^rioecia, 2 Gen. Fig-tree, Carob.
24.
Cryptogamia.
657^ 
Filices, 18 Gen. Horfe-tail, Adders Tongue, Fern.
Mufci, 1 1 Gen. Wolfs- Claw Mofs, Goldilocks.
Alg^e.
12.
Gen. Liverwort, ByfTus, Fucus.
Fungi, 10, Agarics, Mufhrooms, Morels.
App, Palm^.
1 1.
9 Gen. Date, Coco-nut, Cabbage-palm.
The Genera are eftablifhed upon the aflem- 
blage of all the parts of fru6lification compared 
together, according to their number^ figure^ pro- 
portion^ and fttuation.
Of thefe we have fpoken 
before, as they conftitute a large volume in oc- 
tavo, to which we refer.
But, befides thefe Natural Characters, or 
Genera at large, our author has invented, for 
brevity's fake, two other kinds of chara6i:ers, 
which he calls Factitious and Essential.
The 
former ferve to diftinguifh each genus from other 
genera of the fame artificial order only, by enume- 
rating the moft remarkable differences : thefe 
greatly facilitate the labour of a young botanift.
The essential chara6lers, could they be rendered 
perfedb, are defigned to diftinguifh the genera from 
leach other in the natural orders ; but they are not 
pmplete as yet, except in a few inftances ; and 
poflibly 
[ 128 ] 
poffibly they exift but in a fmall number : never- 
thelefs, they are attempted through the whole 
fyftem, to fave the trouble of turning over the na- 
tural characters at large.
As this volume was intended to contain all the 
plants hitherto known, confequently xkit natural 
characters could not be introduced \ but the fie- 
tltious and ejfential ones are placed, the former at 
the head of each clafs^ and the latter before each 
genus.
With each generical name the author 
refers to the number where it is exhibited at 
large, in the laft edition of the Genera Plant arum^ 
in 1764, and to the page of the Species Plantarum 
of 1762, where the fpecies are detailed and the fy- 
Ttonyms added ; as he gives in this volume only the 
Ipecific name invented by himfelf.
Tn forming the laft branch of the fyftem, the 
Specific names, Linnaeus has done more than all 
the writers on the fubjed had done before him, 
and taken the utmoft pains to fix them upon 
diftinctions as permanent and invariable as pof- 
fible.
This is indeed the ultimate objed of all 
method and on this plan he has given new fpe^ 
iific names to all the plants that have come to his 
knowledge : names, not taken (as had been cuf- 
tom^ry before) from that of the difcoverer, the 
likenefs of the plant to other fpecies, place of 
growth, time of flowering, its fize, the colour of 
the flower, or of the plant, fmell, tafte, or vir- 
tues in medicine, or any other fuch vague, in- 
definite, or mutable circumftance ; but from 
fome remarkable difference in the root, trunk, 
ftalk^.
t i2§ ] 
ftalk, and particularly the leaf, foliation, ramifica- 
tion, or fome other abiding diilinftion.
Befides thefe fpecific names or defcriptions, Lm- 
^j^ijs has invented, and, in all his works, after 
the firft edition of the Species Plantarum in 1753, 
has applied what he calls Trivial names to each 
plant, confifting of a fingle adjunfl to thegenerical 
name, expreffive, if poffible, of fome effential dif- 
tin6lion of the fpecies : as for inftance, integrifo- 
Iia<i laciniata^ ere£fa^ rep ens ^ aquatic montana^ &c.
: 
fometimes, of the name of the inventor and 
where, from the laws of his Fundamenta Botanica^ 
he has been obliged to change the generi'cal name 
of a plant well known before, and efpecially if it 
was an officinal one, he frequently retains the old 
generical name as his trivial epithet.
Thus as the 
Penny-royal, or Fulegium^ really belongs to the 
Mentha genus, according to his characlers, he 
therefore calls it Mentha Fulegium.
The Horfe- 
radifh, known by the old name Armoracia^ as it 
agrees with the Cochkaria genus, he calls Cochle- 
aria Armor acia.
The Varieties of plants, which, for want of 
fixing true fpecific charadersj had almotl: increafed 
the number of plants double what Linn^us thinks 
they really are, in this work, as in the Species, are 
totally excluded.
Cur author has inde€d, in the 
opinion of many of his contemporary botanifts, 
carried this matter too far, in difallowing the name 
of fpecies to many plants that are thought to have 
fufficiently permanent diftindions.
To conclude, the fpace of tim.e elapfed fince the 
publication of the Genera and Species Plantarum^ to- 
K geth^r 
gether with the vaft quantity of new materials aS 
quired from all parts of the world, enabled our 
author greatly to elaborate this laft edition, and to 
amend very many generical and fpecific charaders ; 
as alfo to make many removes, tending greatly to 
the advancement and perfedlion of his work.
Among thefe removes, many have taken place, 
particularly in the Monoecious^ Dioecious^ and Polyga- 
mous clafTes ; which is the lefs to be wondered at, 
fince obfervations have confirmed, that there arc 
plants of thefe claffes which, in their younger fiate, 
have produced only male flowers, afterwards both 
male and female, and at length only female.
The Species Plantarum contains near feven thou- 
fand three hundred plants.
In this volume, the 
number is augmented by the addition of new 
plants, and fuch as were unknown by our author 
before, to above feven thoufand eight hundred.
It is proper to remark, that this fecond tome 
of the Syftem was immediately preceded by Man- 
tissa Plantarum Generum, editionis fext^e^ et Specie- 
rum editionis fecund^.
Holm.
1767, pp, 142.
in 
which are defcribed, as in the Genera Plantarum^ 
the natural charadters at large of forty-four ^^;/^r^, 
newly conftrudled.
Thefe are followed by an enu- 
meration of upwards of four hundred and thirty 
new fpecies, with their fynonyms, as in the Species 
Plantarum.
All thefe plants are included in the 
volume of the Syftem of which we have juft given 
the account.
ToMf 
t 131 3 
Tom. III.
The Fossil Kingdom.' 
We are now to accompany our author into tfie 
Pojfil kingdom ; in whichj though he very early 
gave a fpecimen of his method of claffing, he did 
not fully exemplify, as in vegetables, until the year 
1768, when the third tome of the 12th edition of 
the Syftema was publiflied, containing theRECNuivi 
Lapideum.
This volume makes 222 pages, and 
is concluded with a fhort appendix of fome unno- 
ticed, or not well defcribed animals and vegetables ; 
together with a general index of the author's own 
genericai names throughout every part of the Syftem, 
diftinguifliing by a different type the fubjeds of 
the three kingdoms^ the whole amounting to 1820 
genera.
In arranging FofTils, there have been various me- 
thods invented ; each of which have had their pa- 
trons, and, for different purpofes, each have their 
advantage.
Some have founded the bafis of their 
fyftem on the figure^ colour^ firu6iure^ and other ex- 
ternal and vifible charaders yet, fcarcely ever 
trufling folely to thefe, they called in the aid of 
chemiftry, fo far at leail, as the mineral acids 
would affifl: them.
Others, as the profefled che- 
mifts and metallurgifls, have efcabliflied their ar-- 
rangement chiefly on chemical principles^ as more 
immediately leading to the origi?i of fofTil bodies in 
general on which it mufl be acknowledged, th^ 
befl bafis for a fyilem muil be built, when we are 
Jhappy enough to get fufEcient light for this pur- 
pofe : and at prefent, mineralogiils throughout tht 
world feem more intent on this view than ever : 
K 2 and 
[ 133 ] 
and probably the due confideration and extenfion 
of the volcanic fyftem, will open new foufces of 
information in this way.
This volume begins with Linn^us's own 
theory of the origin of fofiil bodies in general, 
and their feveral combinations into thofe forms in 
which we meet with them in the body of the 
earth.
The methodical and abbreviated manner 
in which our author has here given his philofophy 
of fofTil bodies, renders it incapable of an ab- 
ftrad.
He then proceeds to give a fynoptical or 
claflical view of the feveral fyftems of arranging 
thofe bodies, as they ftand exhibited in the beft 
authors on the fubjed, beginning with Bromelius^ 
who publifhed in 1730, and enumerates WaU 
lerius in 1747, Wolterfdorf in 1748, Cartheufer in 
1 755) J^^fi^ '^151') Ayiomymus \Cronftedt\ in 1758, 
and concludes with Vogel'm 1762.
To each of 
thefe he has fubjoined fhort remarks relating to 
their methods, and theory of foflil bodies, and 
concludes this introdu6tory part with an ex- 
planation of the terms of art ufed in his own 
work.
In thefe termini artis^ our author, with his ufual 
precifion, has defined a fet of terms equally new 
and curious, which are principally adapted to, and 
ufed in, the ultimate and moft difficult part of the 
Syftem, the fpecific chara61:ers.
They are happily 
framed to exprefs all differences in the figures of 
folTil bodies-, in their cruft^ or outward appear- 
ance their fuperficies \ their component particles^ or 
fibres ; in their texture^ whether plated, filTile, ^c, \ 
in their hardnefs-^ or in their colour: the alterations 
they 
C 133 ] 
they undergo by foktion^ whether by acids, or by 
fire.
It has been doubted by fome of the moft 
refpedlable mineralogifts, whether we ought to 
defcend below what are called generical diftindlions 
in the folTil kingdom, fo infinitely do the fubjedls 
thereof vaiy, and fo imperceptible in general is 
that gradation by which they run into each other, 
in the various combined forms, in which they 
are found in the earth.
In the mean time, fome 
diftindlions of this kind feem quite necefTary in 
fyftems eftablilhed principally on external cha- 
raders.
Thofe which have for their bafis the 
elementary or conftituent principles of bodies^ as ana- 
lyzed, may ftand with propriety in the form of 
fynoptical tables, as exemplified in Cronftedfs mi- 
neralogy.
LiNN^us and Wallerius were among 
the firft who attempted the arduous taflc of fixing 
the fpecific charaders : whether future mineralo- 
gifls will adhere to, and improve this part of the 
fcheme, time only muft Hiew.
In all fyftems of the foffil kingdom, writers 
have been more particularly embarrafled by the 
earths and ftones^ efpecially when thofe have been 
more or lefs reduced to the flate of ores^ by the 
admixture of metallic principles.
Salts^ inflamma^ 
bles, and melals, generally falling more eafily, and 
almofl naturally, into their feveral claiTes, or or- 
ders.
The chemical fyftematics and metallur- 
gifls, begin ufually with the earths^ confidering 
them as the bafis of ftones : Linn^^ius begins 
with the latter, profeffing to take a middle way 
between the mere metalkrgijl., and thofe who 
K 3 ch^rafteri^c 
t 134 ] 
characlerize from external appearance only.
He 
divides the whole Regnum Lapideum into three 
clafTes, under the names of Petr^^ Minera^ and 
pojjilia^ each being fubdivided into feveral orders, 
the whole comprehending 54 genera.
We muft 
only give a general account of his clajfical cha- 
raders, and thofe of the orders \ and enumerate 
the genera under each, with forpe of the moft dif^ 
tinguiflied fpecies, 
Clafs I.
P E T R iE.
Stones.
Foflil bodies originating from a terrene princU 
pie by cohefion : 
Simple^ as being deftitute of faline, inflammable 
and metallic principles, as component parts there- 
of : 
Fixed^ as not being entirely and intimately f®* 
luble : and.
Similar^ as confifting of homogenous component 
parts.
Order I.
HuMOSi^.
Originating from vegeta- 
ble earth : combuftible, and leaving grofs light 
^ afhes..
Order 11.
Calcarj^.
Originating from cal- 
careous marine animal bodies : becoming light 
and porous in the fire, and falling into an impal- 
pable powder.
Order III.
Argii^lace^.
Originating from 
the vifcid fediment, of the fea : fomewhac unduou^ ^ 
%o the touch, and hardening in the fire.
Orderly.
Arenat^.
Originating from the 
precipitation of rain-water: extremely hard, ftrik- 
ing 
C X35 ] 
ing 'fire with fteel, and by triture yielding a very 
rough powder.
Order V.
Aggregate.
Originating from a 
mixture of the foregoing, the interftices ufually 
filled up with quartz, fpar, or glimmer.
Genera of Stones.
I, H U M O S ^.
Slaty Stones] 
%. ScHiSTUs, Slate.
Bafe ; vegetable mould : 
breaking into.
Fragments j fiflile, horizon- 
tal, plane, opakc, yield- 
ing to the knife, and 
combuftible.
II.
C A L C A R E iE.
Calcareous Stones.
2, MARMORi Marble.
Bafe ; animal earth.
Fragments indeterminate, 
irregular, yielding to 
the knife.
Effervefcing with acids, 
though not completely 
foluble therein ; but 
eafily falling into lime.
3, Gypsum* Plaifter.
5^y^; calcareous earth, fa- 
turated with acid.
Fragments indeterminate, 
irregular, yielding to 
the knife, component 
particles impalpable.
K 4 Fixed \ 
t 136 i 
Fixed'^ not effervefcing with 
nor foluble in acids.
4. Stirium: Fibrous alabafter.
Bafe-^ gypfeous 
earth.
Fragments-, clofe, parallel, 
yielding to the knife, 
'5.
Spatum.
Spar, Bafi j calcareous earth, from 
a diffolved ftgte, form- 
ed into.
Fragments 5 rhombeous, 
plane, and poliflied, 
III.
A R G I L L A C E JE.
Argillaceous Stones.
5, Talcum.
Soap-earth.
Bafe\ indurated clay: 
P<^r/iV/^j; impalpable, yield- 
ing toj the knife, and 
fomewhat undluous to 
the touch ; hardening 
in the fire.
7. Amiantus.
Afbeft, earth flax.
Bafe clayey 4 
Fragments ; thready, 
8, Mica.
Talc, Bafe-^ clay from a diflblved 
ftate, formed into.
Particles ; membranaceous 
fhining, tough, fepa- 
rable.
IV.
ARENATJE.
Sand Stones.
Free Stone.
<).
Cos. Whetftone, Bafe ; fand conglutinated \ 
Fragments ; irregular, fub- 
ppake, ftriking fire 
with 
c 137 i 
with fteel : breaking 
into.
Particles % granulated.' 
Jp: QuARTZUM.
Quartz.
Originating from wa^.
ter: 
Fragments ; indeterminately 
angular and acute : 
particles ; uniform, and 
pellqcid, 
11; SiLEX.
Flint; Bafe-^ chalk or animal earth 
conglptinated into an 
uniform fubftance.
Fragments \ indeterminate,' 
but convex on one fide, 
and concave on thg; 
other : 
Particles I uniform^' 
V. AGGREGATE.
Compound Stones] 
11.
Saxum.
Rock-ftone.
Bafe-, heterogeneous; 
compounded of par- 
ticles of the foregoing 
orders, varioufly con* 
glutin^ted.
Species 
[ X38 1 
Species of Stones^ 
The PETRiE are divided into five orders^ 
I. H U M O S ^.
Slaty Stones.
I. ScHxsTus. Slate.
13 fpecies ; among 
which are, 
Tabularis ; TaMe 
5. Ardefia ; Blue Houfi 
Slate, 
9. Nigrica Black Crayon.
Slate.
3. Atratus 5 Black Shale 
JL CALCARI^.
Calcareous Stones.
2, Marmor.
Marble, 15 fpecies.
1. Schiftofum ; Black 
Jlaty Marble, 
2. "Nohiky ParianMarble, 
and all its varieties 
in colour and va- 
riegation.
3. Florentinum ; FloreH- 
tine Marble, 
6. Rude; White-grain 
Limefione, 
7. Micans ; Scaly Lime^ 
Jlone.
3. Gypsum.
Plaifter Stone.
3 fpeciesi 
t. Ufuale-, Common Plai- I 3.
Alabaftrum ; Ala^ 
fier.
I bafter.
4. Stirium.
Fibrous Alabafter, 4 fpecies; 
I. Gypfeum ^ Fibrous Gyffum^ or Englifli Talc, 
5. Spatum.
Spar.
14 fpecies, 
a. Soluble in aqua fortis.
5. Compadtum; Sub-dia^ 
'pbanous compa£i 
1. Speculare ; Soft Spar-, 
of different colours.
2, Duplicansj Refracting 
Spar.
Spar^ of different 
colours.
0, Tinftunj % 
[ 139 
0. Tinflrum ; Pellucid co- 
3 
rious Topaz, Emerald^ 
Imred Spar ^zsfpu- \ Sapphire, 
b. Not foluble in aqua fortis.' 
12.
Campeftre Felt- Spat.
III.
ARGILLACE^.
Argillaceous Stones^ 
6. Talcum.
Soap-earthp 12 fpecies.
Stone.
7. Nephriticus ; Nephri-^^ 
tic Stone.
. 
9, Corneus ; Horn-hlend* 
Rubrica ; Ruddle.
4. Smt6kA%\ French Chalk-, 
Soap- earth.
6. Serpentinus ; Serpent 
7, Amiantus.
Earth Flax.
10 fpecies; 
I. Afbeftus ; Afbeftos.
%, Piumofus \ Plumofe 
AM' 
8. Mica.
Talc.
10 fpecies.
7. Suber; Mountain Cork.
9. K}iViX.2i\ Mountain Lec(f^ 
ther.
|. Membranacea ; MuJ- 
covy Glafs.
4. Aurata; Gold Glimmer^ 
7. Talcofa ; Green T ale.
IV.
ARENAT^.
Sand Stones.
9. Cos. Whetftone.
16 fpecies.
1 5.
Molaris ; Mill Stonel 
I, Cotaria*, Grind-ftone.
|0.
Filtrum j Filtring 
Stone.
16.
Fundamentalisj5/^//i- 
ing Stone.
10.
QuAP-TzuM.
Qiiartz.
8 fpecies.
Hyalinum ; Pellucid 
Rock ^artz.
Coloratum ; Coloured 
Rock ^artz, yel- 
low, red, blue, 
3. Ladleum ; Milky 
^artz.
6, Cotaceum; Granulated 
^artz.
8. 'HohW^y Pebble^artz.
II, SiLEX, 
E 140 ] 
XT* SiLEx, Flint.
16 fpecies 
a. Vague or loofe Flints.
1. Cretacens Common 
Flint, 
Pyromachus ; Gun 
Flint, 
4. H^machates ; jEgyp- 
tian Pebble^ Mocha 
Stone.
b. Rock Flints.
loJ Achates J Agate.
I 13.
Jafpis 5 Jafper, 
«i.
Petrofilexj Chert, \ 
v. AGGREGATiE.
Rock Stones, Compound 
Stones.
12, Saxum..
Rock Stone.
39 fpecies.
6. Opal us ; Opal, 
7. Onyx; Cameyeu, 
8. Chalcedonius ; ChaU 
cedony, 
9. Carneolus \ Came- 
1. Porphyrius'; P^irp^jry, 
of different co- 
lours.
2. Trapezum 5 ^rap 
Stone.
19.
Granite ; Granit^ 
20.
Fu fo ri u m ; Founder's 
Granite, 
39.
Silicinum ; Pudding 
Stone, 
Thefe ftones are compofed of heterogeneous 
particles from the foregoing orders, conglutinated 
in a various manner.
ClafsII.
MINERiE.
Minerals.
Foffil bodies originating from a faline principle 
by chryftallization, 
Compound^ as confifling of a bafe, united with 
faline, inflammable, or metallic principles, 
Soluble^ perfectly, in tKe appropriate menftruum.
Qrde^ 
Order 1, Salia.
Sapid bodies foluble in waters 
diftinguifhed from each other by their different 
effedls on the organs of tafte.
Under this order are arranged, to the great of- 
fence of moll mineralogifts, all the Gems or pre-^ 
cious ftones, notwithflanding their texture and in- 
folubility, as alfo many other lapidofe chryftallized 
bodies.
To this our author tells us he was led, by 
confidering that all regular polyedrous figures or 
bodies in the mineral kingdom, are the refult of 
chryftallization, which can only take place under re- 
quifite and certain degrees of fluidity and therefore^ 
whether they are faline or lapidofe chryflals, they 
muft owe their figure to the fame uniform prin- 
ciple operating on them in either cafe, while in 
the fluid flate ^ hence, from the fimilarity of the 
figure, with the chryilals of nitre, Mountain 
Chryftal hath a place in the fame genus : the Topa^a 
with the Borasc : the Diamond and Ruby with j^Ium.
LiNN/Eus hath given his reafons more at large in a 
paper publiilied in the fir ft volume of the Am^^nit ate s 
Academic te : and hath fince added " Chryftallos quo4 
" fubjecerim falibus ne quemquam offendat mutet 
" vocem falis in chryftalli, ii magis placeat, in 
verbis erimus faciles." 
Order II.
Sulphura.
Inflammable bodies; 
flaming and odorous while burning ; foluble in oil ; 
diftinguifhed from each other by their different 
efFcd on the organs of fmelL 
Order III.
Metalla.
Metals ; fhining heavy 
bodies, fufible in the fire, and foluble in appro- 
priated acid menilrua : diflinguifhed from each 
other by infpeclion.
Genera 
t 142 ] 
Genera of MineralsJ 
I. SALIA, Salts or Chryftals; 
13.
NiTRuM.
Nitre, at mofpherical, pungent 
A peculiar acid, 
Chryftal: an hexaedral prifm, 
with hexaedral pyramids.
Tajie : cold and pungent.
In the fire : fufible and de- 
tonating.
14.
Natrum, Natron; Sali : calcareous, fub-al- 
kaline, 
Chryftal: peculiar; a te- 
traedal prifm, of penta- 
gonal planes, two broad 
and two narrow, alter- 
nately vertical : each 
pyramid or extremity 
forming two plane pa- 
rallelograms.
Tafte : bitter.
In the fire : liquefying,' 
15.
Borax, Borax.
Salt: alkdl'me (doukful whe-^ 
ther it is a natural fait,) 
Chryftal : odaedral, prif- 
matic ; both pyramids 
truncated.
(Chryftal fometimes dif^ 
ferent,) 
Tafte : mild.
In the fire: bubbling : vi- 
trefcent, 
16.
MvRIAi 
C 143 1 
1 6.
MuRiA~ SeaS^lt, Salt: muriatic, neutral; 
Chryftal : hexaedral j or 
cubic* 
Tajle : auftere.' 
In the fire: cracklihg, 
17.
Alumen^ Alum, Mt: earthy, acid.
C&r^j^^j/ ; odaedral, com- 
pofed of trigonal planes.' 
^afie : ftyptic.
In the fire: frothing^ 
18.
ViTRiOLUM.
Vitriol metallic, acid,earthy; 
Chryfi;al: a polyedrous, 
rhombic teflera ; but 
fubjed to variation.
^afie : ftyptic.
In the fire : calcinable*^ 
II.
SULPHURA.
Inflammables; 
19.
Ambra.
Ambergreafe.
The Sulphur: inert.' 
Fume : In fmell \ ambrofiac.
In colour j grey.
20.
SucciNUM.
Amber.
The Sulphur : inert^ 
Fume : In fmell \ fweet.
In colour ; brown, 
21.
Bitumen.
Bitumen.
Tht Sulphur : inert.' 
Fume : In fmell unpleafant.^' 
In colour % black.
22.
Pyrites.
Sulphur.
The Sulphur : charged 
with vitriol.
Fume: In fmell-, pungent and 
acid.
In tajie \ falc.
C 144 3 
In colour yellow^ 
Flame : blue.
SoMk ; in oil.
23.
Arsenicum.
Arfenk.
The Sulphur : metallid; 
Fume : In fmell ; like garlic.
In tafie \ fweet; 
In colour \ white.
ISoluhle \ in heated water, and 
other liquors.
ill.
METALLA.
Metals.
c a.
Semi-metals^ not malleable* 
24.
Hydrargyrum.
Mercury.
fluid, dry^ 
white.
//^^ fire : volatilizing 
before ignition.
Solution: in aqua fortis,' 
white.
25.
Molybdenum.
Wadd.
Metal: not fufible; 
grey, colouring the 
fingers, (fcarcelyametaL) 
In the fire : not fufible.
Solution : 
Glafs: fub- ferruginous co^ 
loured.
26.
Stibium, Antimony.
Metal: friable, white, 
fibrofe.
In the fire: volatilizing 
after ignition.
Solution: in aqua regia, 
white.
Clafs: 
t 145 3 
Glafs : red with a yellov^ 
tinge.
ZiNCUM.
ZinCj Tutenag.
Metal: fomewhat 
malleable, but eafily 
breaking ; blueifli^ 
white j dull found.
In the fire : melting before 
ignition, and burning 
, .
: with a yellowifh green 
flame into a white light 
calx.
Solution : in aqua fortiSj^ 
white.
^8.
ViSMUTUM.
Bifmuth.
Metal: fomewhat mal- 
leablej but very fra- 
gile^ laminofe, yellow- 
ifh white.
In the fire : fufible before 
ignition.
Solution : in aqua fortis, 
water coloured : in 
aqua regia, yellow.
Glafs : yellowifh brown.' 
29.
CoBALTUM.
Cobalt.
Metal: fragile, light grey.' 
In the fire : not fufible.
Solution : in aqua fortis 
and aqua regia, red.
Glafs: blue.
b. Metals.
Malleable.
30, Stanihim.
Tin. Metal: eafily malleable^ 
white, crackling on 
flexure, not fonorous.
1- In 
t 146 ] 
In the fire : fufible be^ 
fore ignition.
Solution : in aqua regia, 
yellow ; (in aqua fortis 
it difTolves, and pre- 
cipitates into a white 
powder.) 
Glafs : white and opaline, 
difficultly produced.
31.
Plumbum.
Lead.
Metal: eafily malleable, 
blueifli- white : not fo- 
norous.
In the fire : fufible before 
ignition.
Solution : in aqua fortis, 
clear water colour.
Precipitate : white.
Glafs : yellow, 
32.
Ferrum, Iron.
Metal : very hard, and dif- 
ficultly malleable j ob- 
fcure blueifh grey co- 
lour : fonorous.
In the fire: not fufible 
till after ignition, and 
throwing off fparks in 
a ftronger fire.
Solution : in aqua fortis, 
brown.
Glafs: brown, with a 
flight greenilh tinge.
33.
Cuprum.
Copper.
Metal: hard, malleable, 
red, fonorous, 
3 M 
t 147 1 
In the fire: fuHng after 
ignition, with a green 
flamcw / 
Solution : in aqua fortis, 
blue : in aqua regia, or 
the vegetable acidsj 
green.
Glafs : unmixed ferrugi- 
nous coloured, other- 
wife of a bright blue.
ARdENTUM, Silver.
Metal: very malleable,' 
bright white, fonorous^ 
perfedb, 'and indeftruc- 
tible.
In the fire : fufing after 
ignition.
Solution in aqua fortis,' 
white.
Glafs : opaline: 
AuRUAi; Gold; ikf^/^/; extremely malleable,' 
yellow, not fonorous^ 
perfed, and indeftrue- 
tible,' 
in the fire : fufing after 
ignition, with a blueiih 
hue.
Solution : in aqua regia^ 
yellow.
Glafs : purple,' 
Speciis 
t 14S 3 
Sp*ecies of Minerals.
The MINERi^l are divided into three Orders^ 
I. SALIA.
Salts or Chryftals.
13.
NiTRUM.
Nitre.
9 fpecies* 
a. Saline.
I. Nativum ; Native Salt Petre.
b» Quartzofc^ 
2. Chfyftallos montana; 
Mountain Chryjlal.
3. Fluor ; Coloured Chry- 
fial : from the va- 
rieties of which are 
the true Hyacinth^ 
the falfe T opaz^ 
Ruhy^ Amethyft^ 
Sapphire.^ Beryl^ E- 
merald.
c. Calcareous.
5. Truncatum j Hexago- I 8.
Suillum-, Sparry Swine 
nal^ truncated Spar, \ Stone* 
14.
Natrum.
Natron.
14 fpecies.
a. Saline.
J. Antiquorum ; Native^ 
mineral Alkali, 
2,'Muxon\m',Jp^ronitrum, 
3. Fontanum j Epfom 
Salt.
b. Lapidofe, 
6. Criftatum ; Spatofe^ 
decaedrous Natron* 
S. Glaciale, Gypfeous^pel- 
lucid, fuftform Na- 
tron.
9. Selenites $ Selenite \ 
rhombic Natron.
13, Hyodon ; Pyramidal^ 
or D^g- - tooth 
Spar.
15.
Borax.
f 149 I 
15.
Borax.
Borax.
6 fpecies, 
a. Saline.
I. Tincal.
Native Borax.
b. Lapidofe.
2. Gemma Nobilis La- 
pidofe^ prifmatic^ 
fellucid Borax ^ with 
truncated pyramids : 
yellow.
Topaz : 
pale green, Chryfo- 
lit^ : fea green.
BeryL' deep green.
Emerald.
3. Bafaltes ; Co^kk^ qr 
Shirl.
4. Eledlriciis ; the Tour- 
malin* 
5. Granatus-, the Qarnet, 
|6.
MuRiA.
Sea Salt.
9 fpecies^ 
a. Saline, 
I. Marina j Sea Salt, (3.
Montana ; FoJ/il Salt, 
b. Lapidofef 
6. Phofphore^-, Bononian 
Stone, 
7. Chryfolampis ; Sparry 
Fluor ^ ovDerhyJhire 
Spar.
ly, Alumen.
Alum.
6 fpecies* 
a. Native.
I. Nativum \ Native Alum^ Plumofe^ &c, 
b. Soluble.
Commune 1 Alum 
Slate.
3, Romanum ; Stone 
Alum^ or calcareous 
Alum Stone.
i £ 
L 3 
c, Lapidofe,' 
t 150 3 
c. Lapidofe, 
g-.
Spatofum ; Spat of e 
Alum^ or falfe 
Amethyft, 
6. Gemma pretiofajD/^- 
mond^ Ruhy^ Sap^ 
pbire.
18.
ViTRiOLUM.
Vitriol.
8 fpecies.
a. Simple, 
1. Martis •, of Iron.
j 3.
Album j of Zinc.
with friable Stone 
fuch are, red Chal- 
citis ; grey Sory ; 
2. Cyprinum , of Copper- 
b. Compound.
J. Triplum ; Vitriol of 
Iron^ ZinCy and 
Copper, 
8. Atramentarium j F/- 
/n^/f , mineralized 
black Melanteria ; 
yellow 
c. Lapidofe.
Tetraedrum j Spatofe Vitriol of Zinc, 
II.
SULPHURA.
Inflammables: 
19.
Ambra.
Ambergreafe.
2 fpecies.
I. Ambrbfiaca; Grey, \ 2.
Vulgatior; Brown.
20.
SucciNuM.
Amber, 
?6lricum ; - 
diaphanouSj 
I. Eledricum ; Amber ^ j pake, white, yel 
ms, o- 1 low, brown.
2i> Bitumbn; 
[ 151 3 
21.
Bitumen.
Bitumen.
lo fpeeies.
1. Naptha; Naphta^ 
2. Petroleum ; Rock 
Oil.
3. Maltha Jews Pitch.
5. Afphaltum j Fojftl 
Pitch.
6. Ampelites ; Peat.
7. Lithanthrax ^ Common 
Coal, or Schiftofe 
Bitumen, 
8. Gagas ; Jet.
9. SuillumjC^/f^^zr^^'^j/^- 
//i Bitumen, com- 
padt, granulated, 
fquamofe, fpati- 
form, chryftalline.
22.
Pyrites.
Sulphurs; 7 fpeeies.
1. Nativum; Native Sul- 
phur.
2. Auripigmentum ; Or- 
pim.
nt.
3. Chryftallinus ; Chryf- 
tallifed ^Pyrites, 
Marcafite.
4. Figuratus; FiguredPy- 
rites, 
5. Ferri ; Iron Pyrites.
6. Cupri; Copper Pyrites, 
7. Aquofus J Liver-co- 
loured, 
23.
Arsenicum.
Arfenic.
8 fpeeies.
I. Teftaceum; Solid tef- 
taceous Arfenic, 
4. Sandaraca Red Arfe- 
nic, mineralized 
with ^Sulphur* 
5. Sulphuratum ; Arfe- 
nical Marcafite.
6. Albicans; M;/^r^//2^rf 
*witb Ircih 
L 4 IIL METALLA, 
[ 152 ] 
III.
METALLA.
Metak.
24.
Hydrargyrum.
Quigkfilver.
5fpecies^, 
1. Virgineqm ; Native 
2, Chryftallinum-, Cui^ic^ 
chryftallized ^ick- 
filver, 
'3.
Cinnabaris; Cinnabar^ 
lamellated, granu- 
lated, chryftalli- 
zed.
5. Crepitans j pyritlcal, 
cupreous.
Stone 
Mercury.
25.
Molybdenum.
Black Lead.
3 fpecies.
i. Plumbago ; Black 
Lead^ or Wad^ 
fulphur faturateu 
with iron and 
tin.
X5.
Stibium.
Antimony.
4 fpecies.
2. Magnefia; Black Mane 
ganefe.
3. Spuma Lupi Re4 
ManganefCi or Wol- 
fi 
.|.
Nativum-, Native Re- 
gulus of AntimO' 
ny.
1, Chryftallinum;, Cy^ry/- 
t(iUized Stibium, 
3. Striatum ; Fibrous or 
26.
ZiNCuPvi. Zinc.
1. Chryftallinum-, C>&ry/- 
tallized Zinc.
2. Mineralifatumj Mi- 
neralized^ withSul 
phur and Lead, 
or Iron.
common Antimo- 
ny.
4. Rubrum Red Antiz 
mony^^ mineralized 
with Sulphur and 
Arfenic.
8 fpecies.
3. Swabii ; Mineralized 
with fulpburated 
Iron.
4. Stibiatum 5 Fibrofi 
Zinc.
5. Calaminaris \ Cala-^ 
mine i 
I 153 1 
mine ; Sione Zinc^ 
orZinc mixed with 
martial Qchre.
6. Sterilum ; Blend 
Mock-leady black 
Jack, or femi-tef- 
felated black Zinc.
§. Rapax ; Red Zinc^ or 
micaceous, liver- 
coloured Zinc.
27.
VisMUTUM.
Bifmuth.
4 fpecies, 
3. Martialej Mar Hal Bif- 
muth.
4. Incrs ; Bifmuth^ mine- 
ralized with Sul- 
phur only.
I. Nativum ^ Native 
Bifmuth 
Z, Commune ; Common 
Bifmuthy minera- 
lized with Sul- 
phur and Arfenip.
28.
CoBALTUM.
Cobalt.
4 fpecies.
and Iron.
3. Pyriticofum Pyriti- 
cofe Cobalt.
4. Scoriatum ; Slag-Co-^ 
halt.
1, Chryftallinumj C^ry/- 
iallized Cobalt^ 
with Sulphur y Arfe- 
niCy and Iron.
2, Arfenicale ; Minera- 
lized with Arfenic 
30.
St ANNUM.
Tin. 4 fpecies.
I. Chryftallinum \Chryf' 
tallized ^in^ov Tin- 
Grains.
3. Amorphum; TinStone.
4. Spatofum ; Spatofe 
Tin.
31.
Plumbum.
Lead.
10 fpecies 
Native 
3. Galena j Cubic Lead^ 
mineralized^ with 
fulphurated Sil- 
Uad^ chryjlallized* | ver, Galena.
5. Sti- 
I, Nativum ; 
Lead.
«• Chryftallinum Cubic 
t 154 1 
5. Stibiatum ; Stibiated 
Lead Ore, 
7. Virens Greenijh^Arfe- 
nicalLead Ore, 
9. Spatofum ; Sparry, 
Arfenical Lead 
Ore.
32.
Ferrum.
Iron.
27 fpecies." 
A. I.
Nativura, Native Iron ^ in grains.; 
B. Chryftallized, 
Tefielar t Chryjtallized Iron, 
C, Such as obey the magnet,' 
4. Chalybeatum ; Steel- 
grained Iron Ore, 
8. Sele6tum ; Fine grain- 
ed Iron Ore, 
10.
Commune j Common 
Iron Ore^ 
11.
MMt^Pyriticofelron 
Ore.
12.
Talcofum ; Talky 
Iron Ore.
13.
Calcarium i C<!?/^:^r(?- 
ous Iron Ore.
17.
Smiris j Emery.
D. Such as do not obey the magnet.
18.
Micaceum j Red mi- 
caceous Iron Ore.
2,2.
Haematites j Blood- 
ftone.
23.
Rubricofum ; Red 
Blood-ftone.
26, Spatofum 5 Spar 'like 
Iron Ore.
. 
E. Magnetical.
2r7.
Magnes 5 the Magnet.
33.
Cuprum.
Copper.
16 fpecies.
t. Prcecipitatum ; Cop- I 2.
l^ditivMm*, Native Cop- 
per precipitated up- 
on Iron.
per.
3. Chryftallinum, 
talUzed 
C 155 ] 
12, 
talUzed^ oEiaedral 10.
Copper, 
4. Fulvum ; Pyfiticofe^ 
yeUowiJh'green Cop- 1 1 .
per Ore, 
5. Purpureum ; Pyriti- 
cofe^ purple Copper 
Ore, 
6. yitratum ; Sofi, pyri- 
tkofe^ grey Copper 
Ore, i4« 
7. Cinereum; Sooty ^pyri- 
ticofe^ arfenkalCop- , 
per Ore, 15, 
S. hX\i\di\xm\White,,arfe 
nical^ pyriticofe Cop 
per Ore, 16.
9. Rubrum ; Indurated,, 
ochraceous^ red Cop- 
per Ore \ fometimes 
liver-coloured.
34.
Argentum.
Silver.
I. Nativum | Natm Sil- 
ver^ in various 
forms.
a. Corneum Horn Silver 
Ore^ fliining, fub- 
malleable, and 
fomevvhat diapha- 
nous, mineralized 
with Sulphur and 
Arfeniq.
Cotaceum ; Sandy, 
ochraceous Copper 
Stone, 
Schiftofum ; green^ 
and blue Copper 
Slate, 
Lazuli Lapis La- 
zuli ; doubtful, 
mixed with Silver 
and Iron.
Armenus-, Lapis Ar- 
menus-, blue calcare- 
ous Copper Stone, 
Malachites ; Mala- 
chites^ green gypfe- 
ous Copper Stone, 
Nickel urn ; Nickel, 
or Copper minera- 
lized with Sulphur, 
ArfeniCy and Iron, 
9. Species.
Vitreum ; Glafs Silver 
Ore, lead- coloured 
malleable Silver Ore, 
mineralized with 
Sulphur.
Rubrum ; Red Silver 
Ore, mineralized 
with Sulphur and 
Arfenic.
Album J IVhite Silver 
Ore, 
C 156 3 
Ore, mineralized 
with ArfeniCjCop- 
per, and Sulphur.
6. Cinereum ; Grey Sil- 
ver Ore, minera- 
lized with Sul- 
phur, Antimony, 
Copper, and Iron.
7. Arfenicale; Silver Ore, 
mineralized with 
Arfenic and Iron.
8. Zincolum-, SilverOr^^ 
mineralized with 
Sulphur and Zinc.
9, Nigrum ; Sooty Silver 
Ore, mineralized 
with Arfenic and 
Copper, 
35.
AuRUM.
Gold.
I. Nativum Native \ 
a, 
b. 
c. 
various forms, 
GqU s found in | 
In thin plates or leaves.
Solid, or in thick pieces.
In a chryftalline form.
Gold is alfo found inbedded in Quartz, in Tal 
and Cinnabar 5 and in Rivers, in loofe grains and 
lumps, called Gold Duft.
2. Mineralifatum ; Mi- j Gold Ore.
neralized fyritical \ 
Clafs III.
FOSSILIA.
Fossils.
Foffil bodies, originated from different modifi- 
cations of the fubjeds, comprehended in the forg- 
going clafTes.
Order I.
Petrificata.
Such foflil bodies 
as reprefent in figure certain animals or vegetables, 
or parts thereof.
What are called Petrifaftions are of various 
kinds : 
I. The 
[ ^57 i 
1. The true petrifadions are fuch as have 
the texture and organic parts of the bodies en- 
tirely filled up with ftony particles, either of a 
calcareous nature, as is commonly the cafe: or jiinty: 
and not unfrequently it is marcafiticaL 
2. Preferved only and unaltered, as feemlng to 
have loft little except the animal gluten.
3. Others are only bodies incrujiated with fta- 
ladtite or calcareous matter.
And, 
4. Frequently they are only impreflions received 
ift their foft ftate.
Order II.
Concreta.
Slight conglutinations 
of different kinds of earths.
The fpecific differences of thefe bodies arife 
from the nature principally of the componecit 
parts, whether ochraceous, calcareous, gypfeous, 
fpatofe, argillaceous, arenaceous, 
Order III.
Terr^^:.
Foffii fubftances not 
conglutinated, but ufually in a flightly cohering 
or pulverized ftate.
Genera of Fossils, 
I. PETRI FI CAT A.
IL CONCRETA.
The generical charadters of thefe two orders arc 
Very brief, and they occur in the fubfequent ar- 
rangement of the fpecies.
Iir/TERRiE.
C 158 ] 
III.
TERRM.
50.
OcHRA.
Ochres.
Earth: precipitated caljc 
or earth of metals.
Particles: coloured, and 
extremely minute.
51.
Arena.
Sand.
Earth: originated from wa- 
ter* 
Particles: diftinft, granu- 
lated, hard, and fca- 
brous : neither pene-^ 
trable nor congluti- 
nable by water.
(Not 
foluble in acids.) 
52.
Argilla.
Clay.
Earth : originated from the 
vifcid fediment, or mud, 
of the fea.
Particles : irregular, im- 
palpable, foftj tough, 
and lubricous.
In water : becoming foft, 
undluous, and plaftic.
In the fire : hardening.
53.
Calx.
Chalks.
Earth : of animal origin.
Particles : dry, farinace- 
ous, friable, colouring 
the fingers : tinging 
water: moftly foluble 
in acids, and effervef- 
cing therein, efpecially 
when calcined or burn- 
ed.
54.
Humus.
[ 159 1 
54' Humus.
Mould.
Earth : of vegetable ori- 
gin.
Particles : dry, light, in the 
form of fine pawder.
In water : fwelling.
In fire : combuitible, and 
leaving aDies.
Species of Fossils.' 
The FOSSILIA are divided into three Orders.: 
I. PETRIFICATA.
Figured or extraneous 
Fomis, 
36.
ZooLiTHUs. PetrlfaSIions of MsLmmdMa.
1. Hominis ; Bones of 
Men ; and in one 
inftance of the 
whole body.
2. Cervi ^ remains of the 
Cervus T arandus^ 
or Rein Deer, dug 
up in Ireland.— 
Vide Lowthorp^^ 
Abridgment, vol.
ii.
p. 432.
3. Ebur Foffile ; Fofftl 
Ivory, 
4. Turcofa; "Tur^uoife, 
teeth tinctured by- 
Copper.
37, Ornitholithus.
Petrifa5fions of Birds, 
and their Nefts, 
Thefe are fcarce, and are ufually Jiala5iitical 
incruftations only.
38.
Amphi- 
t i6o ] 
38, Amphibiolithus 
phibia.
1. Teftudinis ; of an en- 
tire Tortoife, 
2. Ranae; of a 'Toad.
3. Lacertse \ Skeleton of 
a Crocodile, 
4. Serpen tis ; of an entire 
Serpent, 
39.
Igthyolithus.
i'.
Schifti ; Entire Skele- 
tons^ with the Fins^ 
in Slate^ of feveral 
genera.
2, Marmorisj in Mar hie ^ 
. Petr if alliens of Am- 
5. Nantis ; of various 
Nantes^ as of the 
Raja,Baliftes, £s?r.
6. Gloflbpetra ; Sharks 
Teeth^ very com- 
moHi 
Tetrif anions of Fiflies.
of various genera.
Bufonites ; Grinding 
eeth of the Anar^ 
chichaSy or Wolf- 
filh.
40.
Entomolithus.
Petrifa5fions of Infeds.
1, Cancri; Petrified Crah^ 
Lohfter, &c.
2. Paradoxus ; of an^m- 
known Infe5i ; per- 
haps a Monocu- 
lus.
3. Succineus ^ Infers in- 
clofed in Amber ^ not 
proper petrifac- 
tions.
41 .
Helmintholithus.
PetrifaElions of Vermes.
1. Hammonites ; Cornu 
Ammonis^ various 
kinds.
2. Orthocerotes; Straight 
Nautilus ; both 
thefe unknown in 
the recent ftate.
Conchidium ; of an 
unknown hihcular 
fhell ; perhaps a 
Patella.
Anomites j of various 
Anemia^ unknown 
in a recent ftate.
5. Hyfte-' 
f 3 
5. Hyfterolithus; 
6. Craniolaris.
7. Gryphites.
Crow- 
fione, 
thought to be 
fpines of Echini.
10.
Echinites.
14.
Madrcporus ; Ma- 
drepores^ of various 
kinds/ 
17.
Entrochus/ 
1 8.
Afteria Columnarls ; 
Star Stones ; parts 
of anEncrinus^hte- 
ly difcovered in 
the recent ftate.— 
See Phil.
TranC 
vol.
Hi. p.
357.
23.
Belemnites.
42.
Phytolithus.
Petri/anions of Plants.
1. PlantiE ; of the entire 
Plants in Coal Slate, 
2. Filicis.; of Ferns^ in 
Slate, 
3. Rhizolithus-, of Roots, 
in Marble.
4. Lithoxylon ; of Wood, 
in vario,us ftates ; 
as5ofLimefl:one,of 
Agate, of Flint, of 
Sand-ftone, and of 
Slate.
5* Folii ; of Ledves., in 
Slate and Marble.
6» Antholithus; of Flow- 
ers^ in Slate, re- 
fembling the fpike 
of a Phalaris^ or 
Canary Grafs.
7. Carpolithus;^/jPmVx, 
in Coal ftrata ^ 
comlnonly cones 
of the Pine, Nuts, 
Acorns, &c.
43.
Graptolithus.
6'/^?mrefcmblingPidlures.
8 fpecies.
Among which are.
2. 
Ruderalis ; Florentine 
Marble or Slate, 
reprefenting ruins.
Dendrites \ reprefent- 
ing woods, land- 
fcapes, £ffr.
arifing 
from vitriolic folu- 
M 
tions, infinuated 
between the places 
of filTile ftones, or 
in Marble.
This 
procefs is now 
well imitated by 
art.
IL CON- 
II.
CONCRETA.
Concretes of various kinds'.
44.
Calculus.
Animal Concretions.
8 fpecies.
1. Urinarius ; Stone in 
the Kidney or Blad- 
der.
2. Salivalis ; Tartar of 
the ^eeth, 
3. Tr2iche2£', of the Lungs.
4. Bezoar ^ Bezoar Stones^ 
formed in iheJI?o- 
mafus, or fourth 
ftomach of the Pe- 
coray or ruminat- 
ing animals.
5. iEgagropila Hair 
Balls^ formed in 
the firft ftomach, 
6. Felleus ; Bile Stones.
7. Margarita ^ Pearls.] 
8. Oculus©-, Crabs Eyes, 
45.
Tartarus.
Vegetable Concretes, 
I, Faex J Teaft.
2. Vini J White diViA Red 
Tartar.
46.
i^lriTES.
Concretions within the Cavity 
of Stones, 
a. True Etites, having a loofe Nucleus.
Geodes; w/Z^i^/^^^^r/^y j 2.
Aquilinus ; with a 
Nucleus.
j Jldny Nucleus.
b. Spurious Etitesv 
Hsemachates ; Flinty 
Mtites^ with a fixed 
chryftallineNucleus^ 
of quarizofe nitre; 
or Melon of Mowit 
Carmel, 
4. Marmoreus ; Marble 
jEtites, including 
Dog' tooth Spar.
5. Cretaceus ; echinited 
jEtiteSy including 
Fluor Chryftals.
47.
PuMEXi 
[ 1^3 ] 
47' PuMEX.
Concretions by Means of Fire.
1. Vulcani Black Slate 
Pumice, 
2. Ferri ; JVhite Pumice^ 
of Iron Furnaces.
3. Cupri ; Red Copper 
Pumice, 
4. Fuligo 5 Soot.
5. Cinerarius \ AJhes of 
Volcanos, 
5. Mo\ds\%',RhenifhMilU 
fione, 
7. Vitreus ^ Vitreous Pu- 
mice^ or Mack and 
green Iceland Agate, 
48, Stalactites.
Concretions by Means of 
Air.
1. Incruftatum ; Vege- 
table Incruflations.
2. Stillatitius ; Drop- 
ftone, 
3. Solid us ; Solid marmo- 
reous StalaBite, 
4. Flos Ferri ; Branched 
marmoreous Stalac- 
tite.
7. S'pzto^us'; Solid fpatofe 
Stala5lite, 
9. Quartzofus.
10.
Pyriticofus.
11.
Plumbiferus.
12.
Zeolithus \ Red fpa- 
tofe Stalactite or 
Zeolite.
49.
Tophus.
Concretions in Water.
22 fpecies.
a. Metallic Tophs.
1. Ludus \ Marly Toph- 
fione, 
2. Pertufus ; Tubular^ 
marly^ ochraceous 
T oph-fione.
3. Marinus *, Sandy ochra- 
ceous Seal' oph-flone.
5. Tubalcaini ; Bog Iron 
Ore J in various?
forms.
b. Simple Tophs.
10.
Alnminaris; Almn 
Toph, 
12, Lebetinus ; Ccncre^ 
tions of Tea Kettles, 
M 2 14, Ooli- 
£ i64 ] 
i4» Oolithus ; Pea-ftone^ Tranf.
1745, p.
of Hot Springs.
378.
16.
Ofteocolla ; Bone- 21.
Lenticularis ; Solid 
binder.
Vide Phil, j black fchiftofeToph, 
III.
TERRiE.
Earths, 
50.
OcHRA.
Ochres.
Earths of Metals.
15 fpecies.
a. In the form of Powder.
I .
Ferri Ochre of Iron, 
3. -/Eris ; Green Ochre of 
Copper, 
4. Cnpri Blue Ochre of 
Copper.
7. Plumbi ; Native Ce* 
rufs, 
8. Cobalti; Ochre of Co- 
balt.
b. Plumofe, or germinating Ochres.
12.
Cuprigo ; Copper 
Blue^ Plumofe 
Copper.
13.
Stibigo; Flowers of 
Antimony.
14.
Argentigo ; Plumofe 
Silver Ore^ with 
fulphurated Anti- 
mony and Arfe- 
nic.
51.
Arena.
Sands.
14 fpecies.
1 1.
Micacea ; Micaceous 
or Glittering Sandy 
writing Sand.
12.
Aurea j Gold Sand.
13.
Ferrea ; Iron Sand.
14.
Silicea j Flint Sand.
X. Mobilis ; Sea Sand.
2. Colorata j Coloured 
Sands.
6. Glarca; Sand of Heaths.
9. Sabulam 5 Common 
Sand.
52.
Argil« 
i 165 ] 
52.
Argilla.
Clays, Boles, Maries.
21 fpecies.
1 .
Apy ra; Porcellain Clay.
2. Leucargilla \ l^obacca- 
pipe Clay.
3. YoxztW2S\2i\ China Toy- 
cellain Earth, 
6. Lemnia ; Lemnian 
Earth, 
7. Fullonica;, Stone Mar- 
row ^FulhrsE^nh, 
a. Simple.
8. Tripoli tan a ; Tripoli^ 
or Rotten Scone.
9. Communis Brick 
Clay, 
10.
Figulina ; Potters 
Clay.
13.
Bolus ; Boles of diffe- 
rent colours.
h. Mixed.
15.
Tumefcens ; Fer- 
menting Clay, 
17.
Marga Marie, 
18.
Umbra'; Umhre, 
19.
Nilotica; Marie of 
the Nile, 
53.
Calx.
Chalks.
9 fpecies.
a. Soluble in acids.
1. Creta ; Chalk, 
2. Marmorea \ Mineral 
Agaric, 
3. Conchacea ; Shell 
Chalk,, or mmlder- 
ed Shells, 
b. Not foluble in acids, 
5. Paluftris ; 'True Mi- 1 6, Gur; Gypfeous Gw\ 
neral Agaric.
\ or Lac Luna, 
M 3 c, Granu- 
[ J&6 3 
c. Granulated, or fandy.
Chalk, 
8. Teftudinea ; Soluble 
Arenaceous Calx of 
the IJle of Afcen- 
fion.
9. Lenticularis ; Lenticu- 
lar granulated Cah, 
54.
Humus.
Moulds.
I. 
Dasdalea ; Impalpable 
Vegetable Mould, 
Ruralisj Common Black 
Mould', 
Pauperata ; Depaupe- 
rated Mould of 
Heaths, 
EfFervefcens ; Spongy 
Mould of Marfjjcs.
14 fpecies.
5. Alpina \ AlpineEatth 
6. Turfa ; Turf.
7. Lutum ; Mould of 
LakeSy Mud-mould, 
10.
Damafcena j Red 
Mould, 
14.
Animalis ; Animal 
Mould, 
Three very inflriidive tables, exhibiting diffe- 
rent views of the feveral faline and other chryftal- 
lized bodies, arefubjoined, accompanied by copious 
and methodical defcriptions of the figures of each ; 
and references to thefe bodies, as they occur in 
the work itfelf.
GENERA MORBORUM, or Classification 
of Diseases.
W E mufl now look backwards a few years, to 
confider our author in another part of his Profef- 
forial charader.
It has been obferved, that after 
his efbablifhment at Upfal^ one of his departments, 
as a profeffor, was that of teaching the Biagnofts 
Moriorum ; and to this end he drew up a fyftem, 
9 in 
C 167 ] 
in which, as in natural hiftory, all dlfeafes were 
difpofed into clajfes^ orders^ and genera^ founded 
on diftindtions taken from the fymptoms alone, no 
regard being had either to remote, or proximate 
caufes.
Before v/e proceed to a particular view 
of LiNNiEus's method of claffing difeafes, it will 
be proper to premife, that a nofology on this plan, 
the great obje6t of which is to pathognomonics to 
every difeafe, had been long wiflied for by feme 
writers of the firft character in the profeflion : fuch 
were Baglivi, Boerhaave^ GorUr, Gauhius^ and Syden- 
ham \ the latter of whom has thus exprefTed himfelf 
on this fubje6t, in the preface to his works : Ey.pe- 
" dit ut morbi omnes ad definitas ac cert as fpecies revo- 
centur^ eadem prorfus diligentia ac ocxpiI^skx^ qua 
id fa^um videmus a hotanicis fcriptorihus in fuis 
phytologiisy Yet, amidft that almoft infinite 
variety and complication of appearances which 
are feen in difeafes, the difficulty of obtaining fuf- 
ficient diftindlions, by which the genus and fpecies 
may be accurately difcriminated, muft be allowed 
to be very great; and pofiibly is in many inftances 
unfurmountable.
Hence, fome of the moft emi- 
nent phyficians have been led to reje6t all fuch 
arrangements as futile, and impradlicable.
This, 
however, hath not deterred others from paying 
attention to the fubjed, more efpecially fome of 
thofe, who, from their province as profelTors, are 
led to teach the rudiments of the art ; and to 
whom method, in fome form^ is abfolutely necef- 
fary.
Syftematic writers had ufed various me- 
thods in the difpofition of their fubjed:.
Some 
M 4 had 
[ i68 ] 
had ehofen the alphabetic if that deferves ths 
name of an arrangement : others, after the ex- 
ample of Aretaiis^ and CAius Aureliams^ had di- 
vided difeafes, from their duration, into actitey 
and chronical.
Some had preferred the anatomical 
order which, as it prefuppofes a knowledge of 
the feat of the difeafe, mufl, not unfrequently, 
prove fallacious : Sennertus's is an inftance of this 
kind.
However, the aitiological arrangement has 
been moft followed by the beft writers among the 
moderns ; fuch as Hoffmann^ and Boerhaave j al- 
though perhaps not much lefs fallacious than the 
anatomical, fince it is m many inftanccs founded 
on an hypothecs of the writer : and though Fdi^^ 
Platerus^ in his Praxis Medic a, publifhed in 1602, 
had given an imiperfect flcetch of a nofology on 
the fymptcjnatic plan, yet no writer ventured to 
purfue his idea, for more than a century after his 
time ; difcouraged as it fliould feem by the diffi- 
culty of the attempt.
At length the late profef- 
for M.
Sauvages of AIo-ntpeMer^ after communi- 
cating his fcheme to Boerhaave^ publifhed in 1731, 
in 12"?^ the outlines of fuch a work, under the 
title of Nouvelks Qajfes des Maladies., in which he 
profelTes to define difeafes, from their confiant and 
evident fymptpms only.
In the year 1763, the au- 
thor augmented his work, by the addition of the 
fpecies under each genus^ into 5 volumes in S^*'.
Sauvages may be confidered as having fpent his life 
in giving to this defign a certain degree of perfec- 
tion, having enlarged it into 2 quarto volumes, 
iv^ which form- it v/as publifhed after his death ia 
1768.
[ i69 3 
1768 : A work, it is to be prefumed, now in the 
hands of moft phyficians.
It will eafily be imagined, that an arrangement 
of this kind was too congenial to Linn^us to be 
negleded by him.
In fad, it appears that he 
very early correfponded with Sauvages on this 
fubjed, that he foon adopted it, and framed a 
fet of inftitutes, under the title of Genera Mor- 
30RUM, as a bafis of his ledlures in this depart- 
ment.
LiNNiEus's fcheme was firft publifhed in 
a the/is in 1759 , but he had taught it in his 
clafs for ten years preceding that time.
In 
1763, he publilhed it himfelf in a fmall quarto; 
though we do not find that he ever enlarged it by 
the addition of the /pedes, ; > 
The fymptomatic plan of arranging difeafes has 
fince been followed by fome other profeflbrs of 
phyfic ; Dr. Vogel of Gottingen having publifhed, 
in 1764, his Definitiones Generum Morhorum.
Dr.
Qullen alfo, who at this tiaie fills the p radical 
chair at Edinburgh with fuch deferved reputation, 
has publifhed a Synopfts nofologia methodic^^ and 
has made it the bafis of his Firft Lines of thePra^ice 
of Phyftc, In 1776, Dr. Sagar^ a phyfician at Ig^ 
in Moravia^ publifhed a Syftema Morborum fym- 
tomaticmi, 8vo.
Vien, pp..
756.
His work, allow- 
ing for fome alterations and additions, may be ac- 
counted an ufeful abridgement of Sauvagesh : the 
Author, all theory apart, has described the fpecies 
under every genus^ and fubjoined the method of 
cure.
Dr. Cullen, by omitting many genera^ and 
^?ducing others to the rank oi fpecies only, has fo 
confiderably 
# 
[ 170 ] 
coniiderably abridged the whole, as not to have 
retained more than half the number of genera^ 
^at the foregoing writers enumerate ; and in this 
form he has publiflied it, anne^ced to thofe of the 
four abovementiond, by which difplay of each, 
their feveral merits may be compared, and a judg- 
ment formed of the praitlicability, and ufe of the 
fcheme in general, which, it muft be confefied, af- 
fords a very ample Held for cultivation ; yet, from 
that reform which Dr. Cullen has already made in 
various parts, it is not, perhaps, too much to 
hope, that it is capable of receiving a much higher 
degree of improvement, in the hands of thofe 
whofe genius and induftry may prompt them to 
extend the defign of thefe writers.
Of LiNN^us's method we are led by our plan 
to exhibit a general view ; to which end, although 
our prefcribed brevity will not admit of giving his 
definitions at length, yet it will be neceflary to 
enumerate the names of all his genera^ fince no- 
thin?; fliort of a view of the whole colleftively, 
could enable the reader to form a jufl: idea of the 
author's fcheme.
Under each clafs we (hall ob- 
ferve wherein Linn^us differs materially from 
Sauvages^ and note the alterations which Dr. Cullen 
has made in the difpofition of the hme genera^ 
LiNN^us, in the claflification of difeafes, has 
pretty nearly retained the arrangement of M.
Sau- 
vageSy although he has altered his terms, and con- 
flituted one more clafs, with which he begins his 
method ; the ExanthematiCy or eruptive fevers, 
which, in the fyftems of Sauvages and Dr. Cullen^ 
form 
C 171 3 
form only an orier^ or fubdivifion of a clafs.
He 
has alfo changed the order of the clalTes, and re- 
ferred the Vitia^ or local external diforders^ which 
are principally the objeds of furgery, to the end 
of his fyftem.
In this he has been followed by 
the two fucceeding nofologifts.
Dr. Vogel and Dr.
Cullen.
The claflical diftribution is, however, 
confefledly not the primary confideration ; that of 
fixing the generical charadler, and determining 
what fliall conftitute the fpecifical^ being the firft 
objeft of every fyftem.
To this end a ftill farther 
redudion of the number of genera and /pedes ^ will 
probably not a little contribute.
Clafs I.
EX ANTHEM ATICI.
Fevers attended 
with eruptions on the fkin.
I. CoNTAGiosi.
Contagious* 
1. Morta.
Veficukry Fe- 
2. Pettis.
*Ihe Plague, 
3. Variola.
Smallpox:, 
4. Rubeola.
Meafies, 
5. Petechia.
Spotted Fi?- 
ver, 
6. Siphylis, Venereal Dif- 
eafe.
2, Sporadici.
Sporadic fevers j not conta- 
gious.
9. Aphtha.
Aphthous Ft- 
7. Miliaria, Miliary Fe- 
ver, 
8, Uredo.
Nettle Fever.
ver.
3. SoLiTARii. AfFedling a part of the body 
only.
10.
Eryfipelas.
Stn Antbony^s Fire.
In 
V 
[ 172 1 
In this clafs, as the difeafe is complicated of 
fever and eruption, the genus is defined from the 
nature of each.
To infcance, the Variola^ or Small 
pox, is defined, " A difeafe attended with puf- 
tules of an eryfipelatous, fuppu.rating, efcha- 
rotic kind j at length drying off, and leaving a 
cicatrix ; accompanied by a fever of the ardent, 
and malignant kind, with head-ach and pain 
** of the loins." The term Puftula^ and the others 
in this clafs, expreffive of the diflTerent kinds of 
eruption, have their definition in another part of 
the fyftem.
Such as appear in the Morta, are 
called Phly5!en^ ; in the Pedis, Anthraces^ or Bu- 
hones *, in the Variola, Puftul^ ; in the Rubeola, 
FapuU i in the Petechia, Siidamina, 
This clafs conftitutes the firft order of Dr. Sau- 
vages's PHLEGMASIA, and the third of Dr.
Cullenh PYREXIA clafs.
In- both, thefe genera 
are preferved nearly alike, except that the M?r/^ 
of LiNN^us is the Pemphigus of thofe authors, 
and the Petechia is gonfidered by Dr. CuUen as only 
a fymptom* 
Our author ftands alone in bringing the Syphilis 
into the febrile exanthematig clafs.
He thinks 
himfelf juftified, by confidering it as attended, in 
the advanced ftate at lead, by fever and eruptions.
It certainly however ranks better with the Im- 
PETIGINES.
Clafs 
[ 173 ] 
Clafs II.
CRITICL Critical Fevers, 
I. CoNTiNENTEs. Continual Fevers.
11.
Diaria.
Diary Fever, ' 
12.
Synocha.
Ardent 
Fever.
13.
Synochus.
MaUg- 
nant Fever, 
14.
Lenta.
Slow Fevir^ 
2. Intermittentes.
Intermittinoj Fevers.
15.
Quotidiana.
^oH- 
dim.
16.
Tertiana.
"Tertian.
17.
Quartana.
^artan.
18.
Duplicana.
DouMs 
Tertian, 
19.
Errana.
Erratic Fs" 
ver.
3. ExACERBANTES.
Remitting Fevers.
20.
Amphimerina.
Con- 
tinued ^otidian* 
21.
Trit^Eus. Continued 
T ertian.
22.
Tetartophya.
Con- 
tinued ^artan, 
23.
Ha£niitrit:Ea. Semi- 
Tertian, 
24.
Hedica.
HeBic Fi- 
ver.
The Genera of the Continentes are determin- 
ed from the different duration of each fimply.
Thofe of the Intermittentes from the dura- 
tion of the intermiflions.
The ExACERBANTES, fuppofed to be compound- 
ed of the two foregoing, have their charaders 
acordingly.
Our author allows the T ertian to be the root of 
all the FEBRES CRITIC!, although he has, in 
the foregoing divifion, kept pretty clofe to Dr.
[ 174 3 
Sauvages^s method in retaining the diftinftions.^ 
In this they are not followed by Dr. Cullen^ who 
denies the exiftence of a continent fever, and has 
greatly fimplified this divifion, having reduced all 
the CRITICAL fevers to fix genera, and allowing 
the He&ic to be fymptomatic only.
Clafs III.
PHLOGISTICI.
Infiammations.
I. Membranacei.
Membranous Inflamma- 
tions.
28.
Gaftritis.
Of the Sto- 
mach.
29.
Enteritis.
Of the 
Bowels, 
25.
Phrenitis.
Of the 
Meninges of tha 
Brain.
26.
Paraphrenitis.
Of 
the Diaphragm.
27.
Pleuritis.
The P leu- 
rify.
30.
Proditis.
Of the Anus.
31.
Cy (litis.
Of the 
Bladder.
2. Parenchymatici.
Vifceral Inflammations.
32.
Sphacelifmus.
Of 
the Brain* 
33.
Cynanche.
^infey.
34.
Peripneumonia.
Of 
the Lungs.
35.
Hepatitis.
Of the 
Liver, 
36.
Splenitis.
Of the 
Spleen.
37.
Nephritis.
Of the 
Kidneys.
38.
Hyfteritis.
Of the 
Uterus.
3. MuscuLORi Mufcular, or external Inflam- 
mation.
39.
Phlegmone.
In- 
flammation of an 
external part.
4 
t 175 ] 
LiNNiEus defines the Phlegmon to be " a tenfe 
throbbing tumour, or enlargement of a part, 
" accompanied by fever, and attended with heat 
" and rednefs." This he confiders as fuggelb- 
ing alfo the idea of all the foregoing internal in- 
flammations.
The generical charader in the Fhlogiftk clafs of 
our author, does not arife whplly from the part 
affedted fuppofed to be the feat of the difeafe, 
but from the gems of the attending fever alfo.
Thus he defines " the Hepatitis to be the Amphi- 
" merina^ attended with a difficult refpiration, 
cough without ,expe6loration, hiccup, and a 
fenfe of heat and tenfion in the right J:)ypO' 
" chondre.'*' " The Nephritis is a Synochus^ attend- 
" ed with naufea, hiccup, eru6lation, urine vari- 
" ous, coftivenefs, burning lumbago, and numb- 
" nefs down ihe thigh." 
In this clafs Linn^:us has followed Sauvages in 
dividing the difeafes into Membranacei, and 
pARENCHYMATici, a divifion neglefted by Dr, 
Cullen, from the difficulty of determining the feat 
of the inflammation.
The Phlegmone^ being external, is ranked by 
Sauvages among his VITIA.
On the other hand.
Dr. Culkn gives it the firll: place in his order Ph leg- 
MASi-^E and has reduced thirteen genera of Lin- 
N^us's, and twelve of Sativages's, to the rank of 
[pedes ^ under the term Fhlogofts \ further, account- 
ing Abfcefs^ Puftide^ Gangrene^ and Sphacelus^ af?
cfFeds only of Phlogofis^ and therefore not entitled 
[ 176 ] 
to the feparate chara6ler of genera.
Numerous 
inftances of this kind afford a ftriking proof of the 
difficulties attending .thefe arrangements, in de- 
termining what diftindions fhall take place be- 
tween genus and fpecies, 
Clafs IV.
DOLORES.
Painful Difeafes.
I. Intrinseci.
Of 
40.
Cephalalgia.
Head- 
ache 
41.
Hemicrania.
Me- 
griniy or pain of 
one fide of the 
head only.
^42.
Gravedo.
Dull pain 
of the Forehead, 
43.
Ophthalmia.
Pain 
of the Eye, 
44.
Otalgia.
Ear-ach, 
45.
Odontalgia, ^ooth- 
ach, 
46.
Angina.
Fain in the 
Fauces^ with a fenfe 
of choaking, 
47.
Soda.
Burning pain 
in the Throaty with 
rancid Eru5fations 
48.
Cardialgia.
Pain at 
the Heart, 
49.
Gaftrica.
Pain of the 
the internal Parts.
Stomach.
50.
Colica.
Colic, 
51.
Hepatica.
Pain of 
the right Hypo- 
chondre, 
52.
Splenica.
— of the 
left Hypochondre, 
53.
Pleuritica.
Pain of 
the Side, 
54.
Pneumonica.
Weighty 
or load on the 
Cheft.
55.
Hyfl-ralgia.
Pain of 
the Uterus.
56.
Nephritica.
Pain of 
the Kidneys, 
S7^ Dyfuria.
Pain in the 
Bladder.
58.
Pudendagra.
Pain in 
the genital Parts, 
59.
Prodica.
Pain of 
the Anus, 
2, EXTRINSECI.
2. ExTRiNSECi. Of the Limbs.
60.
Arthritis, ^he Gout.
61.
Oftocopus.
Fixed 
Pain in the Bones, 
62.
Rheumatifmus.
The 
Rheumatifm.
63.
Volatica.
Flying Paitp 
of the Limbs, 
64.
Pruritus.
Excejfivc 
Itching.
Our author does not take into the chara<5lers of 
thefe genera the idea of fever ; and there are feveral 
of them ufed by him as auxiliary terms, in the de- 
finition of other genera.
Dr. Sauvages has a clafs of five orders under 
the term DOLORES, difpofed in the anatomical 
method ; under which, moft of the {ovQgoing genera 
are comprehended.
Dr. Qdlen having no fuch clafs as the DOLO- 
ROSI, is necefTctrily led to arrange thefe genera in 
different parts of his fyftem bat, with him, the 
greater number are either /pedes only, or lymptoms, 
he having admitted only three to the character of 
genera^ in his Phlegmasia.
Thefe are the Oph- 
thalmia^ Arthritis or Podagra, and Rheumatifmus: 
Clafs V.
MENTALES, Difeafes in which the 
Fundions of the Mind are difturbed.
I. Ideales.
Thofe in which the Judgment 
is principally affected.
'^5.
Delirium.
Sympto- 66.
Paraph rofyne.
Tr^;/- 
matic., or febrile fttory Infanity with- 
Delirium, out Fever.
N 
67.
Amentia^ 
t 178 
Idiotic 
] 
^7.
Amentia.
Infanity.
68.
Mania.
Madnefs.
69.
Demonia.
Melan- 
choly^ with Idea of 
PoJfeJJion.
70.
Vefania.
T ranquil^ 
•partial Melancholy.
Melancholia.
Fi:Aed 
Melancholy, 
72, 
73' 
74.
2. Imaginarii.
iThofe in which the Imagi- 
nation is principally afFedled.
75 
Syringmos.
Imagi- 
nary Sound in the 
Ear.
Phantafma.
Valfe 
Vifion, 
Vertigo.
Giddinefs^ 
or falfe Idea of 
Gyration in Ohje5fs, 
3. Pathetici, Thofe in 
and Paflions are pri 
78.
Citta.
Unnatural 
Longings, 
Bulimia.
Voracious 
Appetite, 
Polydipfia.
Eiccef- 
five Thirft, 
SatyriaPiS.
Erotomania.
83.
Noftalgia.
Swifs Ma- 
lady, 
JB4, Tarantifmus.
79.
So.
81.
82.
Panophobia.
Falfe 
fear of Evil, 
76, Hypochondriafis.
Hypochondriac Dif- 
eafe, 
77.
Somnambulifmns.
Hight-walking^ or 
No 51 ambulation .
which the Appetites 
ncipally afFedled.
85.
Rabies.
Canine Mad- 
nefs, 
86.
Hydrophobia.
Hor- 
ror of Drinking^ 
with PJgor and 
Sardiafts, 
87.
Cacofitia.
Fixed A- 
verfwn to Food, 
88.
Antipathia.
Averfion 
toparticularOhje5ls.
89.
Anxietas.
Reftleffnefs.
In 
# 
t 179 ] 
In this clafs, which anfvvcrs to the VESANIiE 
of Dr. Sauvages^ the genera fband nearly the fame 
as in that author's arrangement.
They coniticute, after great redudion, the 
fourth order, under the term Vesani^, of the 
clafs NEUROSES, in Dr. Ctdlen's fyftem, com- 
prehending four genera.
Of the Ideales of LiNNy^:us, Dr. Cullen only 
ranks t\\e Amentia, the Mania^ and the Melancholia, as 
genera the Delirium and Faraphrofyne being fymp- 
tomatic.
The Bemonia, Vefania, and Panopho- 
hia, rank with MelanchMy ; under which he has 
alfo brought the Erotomania and Noftalgia, from 
the Pathetici.
Of the remaining genera only 
the Hypochondriafts, and the Hydrophobia, are ad- 
mitted as fuch ; the former in the Adynami/e, 
and the latter among the Spasmi, The Syrigmus^ 
and Thantafria, are referred to the LOCALES 
clafs and the Somnambulifmus to the Oneirodynia^ 
in the order Vesani^^:, The Citta, or Pica, the 
Polydipfia, Satyriafts^ and Bulimia^ belong alfo to 
the LOCALES, in the order Dysorexi^.
It is 
juftly doubted whether the 'Tarantifmus exilts ; 
and the Rabies can fcarcely be feparated from the 
Hydrophobia, 
Clafs VI.
QUIET ALES.
Difeafes in which 
the voluntary, and involuntary Motions, and 
the Senfes, fuffer a Diminution.
I. Defectivi.
Defers of the vital Powers.' 
90.
Laffitudo.
Mufcular 191.
Languor.
Debility 
Debility.
\ of Spirits.
N 2 92.
Afthenia.- 
[ i8o 
92.
Aflihenia.
E:xtreme 
Behility, 
93.
Lipothymia.
Faint- 
ing, 
94.
Syncope.
Swooning, 
3 
95.
Afphyxia.
Long fai- 
lure of vital and 
animal Tower as 
from 'Drownings 
Mephitifnty &c.
2. SopoRosi.
Soporofe AfFedions \ or Di- 
minution of Senfe and Motion.
96.
Somnolentia.
6^^?;;^- 
nokncy, 
97.
Typhomania.
Coma 
Vigily of authors.
98.
Lethargus.
Lethar- 
gy ; febrile Som- 
nolency.
99.
Cataphora.
Coma 
Somnolentum^ of 
authors.
100.
Carus.
Sopor and 
Infenfihility^ with 
quiet Refpiration, 
101.
Apoplexia.
Apo- 
plexy \ Sopor y and 
InfenfiUlity ^ with 
Snoring, 
102.
Paraplegia.
Talfy^ 
of all the Limbs, 
103.
Hemiplegia.
Palfy^ 
of one Side.
104.
Paralyfis.
Palfy^ 
of a particular Part.
105.
Stupor.
Tranfttory 
Numhnefs.
3. Privativi.
Diminutions of the Senfes.
106.
Morofis.
Befe5l of 
toy, Oblivio.
Defe^ of 
Memory.
108.
Amblyopia.
03- 
fcure Vifiony without 
apparent\Defe^ in 
the Organ.
Cataradla.
Priva- 
tion of Sight y with 
109.
apparent Defe5i in 
the Organ.
1 10.
Amaurofis.
Priva*.
tion of Sights with- 
out apparent Defe5^ 
of the Organ.
111.
Scotomia.
^ ranfitory 
Blindnefs.
111.
Cophofis.
Deaf" 
nefs.
113.
AnofmiaJ 
[ i8i ] 
113.
Anofmia.
Befell of 
Smelling, 
114.
AgeuHia, DefeSf of 
Tap, 
115.
Aphonia.
Befe^ of 
Voice, 
116.
Anorexia.
Want of 
Appetite, 
117* Adipfia.
Want of 
"Thirji.
118.
Ansefthefia.
Defe5f 
of Feeling, 
119.
Atecnia.
Befe5l of 
venereal Appetite, 
120.
Atonia.
Atony \ 
Defeat of mufcular 
Power, 
The difeafes of this clafs very nearly correfpond 
with the DEBILITATES of Sauvages ; and the 
two firft orders, the Defectivi and Soporosi, 
with the CoMATA and Adynami^e, of the clafs 
NEUROSES, in Dr. Cullen's fyftem.
The three firft genera of the Defectivi, Dr.
Cullen takes no notice of ; the three laft he in- 
cludes under his Syncope, as different degrees only 
of the fame diminilhed power of the fundions.
Among the Soporosi of our author.
Dr. Cullen 
ranks the Carus and Cataphora under the Apo- 
plexia ; and alfo confiders the 'Typhomania and Le- 
thargus, as fymptomatic of the fame.
For the like 
reafons he accounts the Paraplegia, and Hemiple- 
gia, as different degrees of the fame difeafe, in- 
cluding them all under Paralyfis, 
The Privativi rank under the two firft orders 
of Dr. Cullen^ LOCALES, as far as he allows 
them to hold the charader of genera.
The Morofis 
and Oblivio he refers to his Amentia, The Scoto-- 
mia he does not notice.
The Cophojis he calls 
Dyfoecia ^ the Anorexia ftands under his Byfpepjia 
N 3 genus.
genus, among the Adynamic •, the Atonta as a 
/pedes of Palfy, The Amblyopia under Amaurofis \ 
the CataraBa under his Caligo.
The Anofmia^ 
Ageiiftia^ Aphonia^ Anoje:>$ia^ Adipfia^ and An^fthe- 
fia^ under their refpediive names feparately ^ and 
the Atecnia under that of Anaphrodtfia.
Clafs VII.
MOTORII.
Spafmodic Difeafes 
Difeafes attended with involuntary Motion.
I. Spastici.
Spafliic, or Tonic Difeafes.
121.
Spafmus.
Cramp.
112.
Priapifmus.
Pria-r 
pifm, 
123.
Borborygmi.
Rim- 
Ming of the Bowels.
124.
Trilmos.
Locked 
Jaw.
12^.
Sardiafis.
Involun- 
tary or convulfive 
Laughing, 
126.
Hyfteria.
Hyfieric 
Affe5iion, 
127.
Tetanos.
Rigidity 
of the Spine^ with 
Senfihility, 
128.
Catochus.
Rigidity 
of the Body with- 
out Senfihility.
129.
Catalepfis.
Cata- 
lepfy.
130.
Agrypnia.
Intenfe.
Watching.
The 
Pervigilium of 
Authors.
2. Agitatorii, Convulfive or Clonic Difeafes.
131.
Tremor.
^rem- 
hling^ without the 
Senfation of Cold.
132.
Palpitatio.
Palpi- 
tation of the Heart.
133.
Orgafmus.
Suhful- 
tus of the Arteries^ 
134.
Subfultus.
Switch- 
ing of the 'Ten^ 
dons.
135.
Carpologia.
Deli- 
rious Fumbling.
136.
Stridor.
Grating cf 
the Teeth 
137.
Hippos, 
r 183 ] 
138, 
139- 
140.
141 
Hippos.
Mdrbid 
N imitation.
Pieililmus.
Stam- 
mering.
Chorea.
St, Vitus^s 
Dance, 
Beriberi.
tre- 
mor of the Limbs 
and Body^ with 
contraSled Knees^ 
attended with Stu- 
por and Hoarfenefs, 
Rigor.
Shaking or 
T remor^ with a 
Senfe of Cold.
142, 
143.
144.
145- 
Convulfio.
Convul' » 
Jion, 
Epilepfia.
Epilepfy.
Convuljions attend- 
ed with Infenfihility^ 
oppofed to the 
foregoing.
Hieranofos.
Conti- 
nued Convuljions 
without Pain^ or 
Lofs of Senfibility.
Raphania.
Spajiic 
Contraction of the 
Limbs^ with Con* 
'uuljions and Fain.
Mpft of the difeafes of this clafs ftand in the 
corrfeponding one of Sauvages^ called SPASMI, 
except the Borborygmus^ and the Agrypnia^ the lat- 
ter of which is referred to the anomalous VESA- 
NI^.
He alfo confiders the Sardiafis and Stridor 
of LiNN^.us as fpecies only of the Trifmos ; and 
the Siihjultus he calls Carpologia* 
In Dr. Cullen'-.
fyftem the MOTORII of Lm- 
N^us make the third order of his NEUROSES, 
called SpASMi. Of the Spaftici he has the 'Trifmos^ 
Hyjieria^ and "Tetanos^ only as diftin6l genera,, un- 
der their refpedive terms.
The Catochus he refers 
to the Tetanos,, and the Catalepfis is his Apoplexia 
Cataleptica, The others are not noticed by him.
Of the Agitatorii, the Tremor Dr. Cullen ac- 
counts rather as a fymptom of various diforders.
The Beriberi^ which he had heretofore ranked with 
N 4 the 
[ 1^4 3 
the Varalyfts^ he has omitted in the lafl edition of 
his Synopjis : the Chorea is admitted as a genus, and 
the Hieranofos ftands under the idiopathic ConvuU 
fio.
The Pfellifmtis is removed to the LOCALES 
clafs ; and of the remainder, the Palpitatio^ Epi- 
lepfia^ and Raphania only, retain their place in 
his fyflem, under their refpedive names.
'« 
Clafs Vin. SUPPRESSORIL Affedions and 
Difcafes arifing from, or attended with Oppref- 
fion of the Organs, and impeded Excretions.
I. SuFFOCATORii. Difcafcs attended with 3 
Senfe of Suffocation.
Refpiration from 
Narrownefs of the 
Fauces.
146.
Raucedo.
Hoarfe- 
nefs, 
147.
Vociferatio.
Sq^ueal- 
148.
Rifus.
Laughing.
149.
Fletus.
Weeping, 
15a.
Sufpirium..
Sighing.
151.
Ofcitatio.
Yawn- 
ing.
152.
Pandiculatio.
Stretching, 
153.
Singultus.
Hiccup.
154.
Sternutatio.
Sneez- 
ing.
155.
Tuffis.
Coughing.
156.
Stertor.
Snoring, 
i^y, Anhelatio.
Pant- 
ing.
158.
SufFocatio.
Difficult 
159.
Empyema, — from 
an Ahfcefs in the 
thorax, 
160.
Dyfpnoea.
Lahori- 
ous^ panting Refpi- 
ration^ without a 
Senfe of Narrow- 
nefs in the Fauces, 
161.
Afthma.
Chronic^ 
laborious.^ wheez- 
ing Refpiration, 
162.
Orthopncea.
Acute^ 
fighing, fuffocating 
Refpiration, 
163.
Ephialtes.
Night- 
mare, 
2. Con- 
[ i85 ] 
2. CONTSTRICTORII.
Conftridion.
1*64.
Aglutitio.
Impeded 
Deglutition, 
165.
Flatulentia.
Fla- 
tulence.
166, Obftipatio.
Cof- 
tivenefs, 
i6j, Ifchuria.
Impeded 
or fupprejjed Mic- 
turition, 
Difeafes attended with 
168.
Dyfmenorrhoea.
Suppreffion of the 
Menfes.
169.
Dyflochia, Suppref- 
fion of the Lochia, 
170.
Agladtatio.
Defe^ 
of Milk, 
171.
Sterilitas.
Barren- 
nefs.
Under xhQ genera of the Suffocatorii our au- 
thor has departed fconv his ufual rule, in having 
fubjoined to each a note exprelTive of the intention 
of Nature in exciting thefe afFeftions.
Thus^, to 
inftance, after defining Sufpirium to be " a deep^ 
" Jlow^ agitating infpiration^^"* he adds, that the 
effed is, " that of expelling the blood from the lungs'^ 
Moil of the Suffocatorii have a place in Sau- 
vages's fyftem among' the ANHELATIGNES, 
but the CoNSTRicTORii are fcattered in various 
parts of his fyftem.
Dr. Cullen hath not introduced into his fyftem 
the lighter afi^edions under the Suffocatorii ; 
which feem to have been defined and explained 
by LiNN^us, principally to ufe them as auxili- 
aries in other parts of the work.
In Dr. Cullenh fyftem tlie Raucedo has a place, 
as fymptoniatic only, under the Catarrh ; and 
again, in another part,^ as a fpecies of Para- 
fhonia.
C i86 3 
phonla.
The Tujfis is alfo received under the Ca- 
tarrh ; and the Empyema is confidered as a confe- 
quence of Pieurify or Peripneumony.
The Ortho- 
fncea^ as z genus ^ is not noticed by Dr. Culkn.
The Dyfpnoea is admitted in the laft edition, which, 
with the Afthma^ are the only genera he receives 
from this ord.er^ as he has made the Ephialtes a 
fpecies of his Oneirodynia^ under the Vesani^ in 
the clafs NEUROSES.
In the CoNSTRicTORii order, the Flatulentia 
of LiNN^us comes under the Byfpepjia of Dr.
CuUen ; and the Ohftipatio^ Ifchuria^ and Dyfmenor- 
rhcea^ enter into the fourth order of the LOCA- 
LES, called Epischeses \ the latter under the 
term Amenorrhcea, 
Clafs IX.
EVACUATORII.
Difeafes attended 
with increafed Excretion and Difcharges.
I. Capitis.
Of the Head.
174.
Coryza.
Mucous 
171.
Otorrhcea.
Puru- 
lent T>if charge from 
the Ear, 
172.
Epiphora.
Lachry- 
mal Flux.
173.
Hsemorrhagia.
Bleeding of the 
Nofe.
2. Thoracis.
Of the Breaft 
Difcharge from the 
' Nofe, 
175.
Stomocace.
Bleed- 
ing of the Gums.
176.
Ptyalifmus.
Saliva- 
tion.
177.
Screatus, Hawking, 
178.
Expedloratio.
Ex- 
p§5loration.
179.
Hsmoptyfis.
Spit- 
ting of Bloody with 
Coughing, 
180.
Vomica, 
[187] 
i8o.
Vomica.
Purulent Lungs, 
Dif charge from the 
3. Abdominis.
Of the Belly.
Eru£fa- 
381.
Rudlus 
tion.
182.
Naufea.
Naufea, 
183.
Vomitus.
Vomiting- 
184.
Hasmatemefis.
Vo- 
miting of Blood.
185.
Iliaca.
Iliac Pajfion, 
186.
Cholera, Vomitings 
with Colic and 
Purging, 
187.
Diarrhoea, 'Dejec- 
tion of liquid F^ces.
J 8 8.
Lienteria.
Bejec- 
tion of undigejled 
Aliment, 
189.
Coeliaca.
Beje£!ion 
of Chyle.
190.
Cholerica.
Bloody 
Flux^ without Co^ 
lie, 
191.
Dyfenteria.
Bloody 
Flux^ with Colic 
and 'Tenefmus, 
192.
Hsemorrhois.
Bleed- 
ing Piles, 
193.
Tenefmus.
Need- 
ing and frequent 
Dejc^ion of Mucus, 
194.
Crepitus.
Deje£iion 
of Flatus, 
4. Genitalium.
Of the Genital PafTages.
195.
Enurefis.
Involun- 
tary MiBurition.
ig6.
Stranguria.
Stran- 
gury.
197.
Diabetes.
Diabetes.
{98.
Hcematuria.
Bloody 
Urine.
199.
Glus.
Mucous U- 
rine* 
ibo.
Gonorrhoea.
Gleet.
Mucous Flux from 
the Urethra.
201.
Leucorrhosa, 
Whites.
202.
Menorrhagia.
Inor-- 
dinate Flux of the 
Menfes.
203.
Parturitio.
Labo- 
rious Parturition.
204.
Abortus.
Abor- 
tion.
205.
Mola.
Falfe Con- 
ception.
5. Corporis 
C i88 3 
5. Corporis Externi.
Of external Parts.
206.
GalacShitia: Over- j 207.
Sudor.
Inordinate 
flowing of Milk, \ , Sweating.
This clafs ftands nearly the fame as our au- 
thor found it in Sauvages's arrangement, under 
the term FLUXUS; except that Linn^us has 
introduced three or four genera not in that author j 
fuch are the Screatus ^Vomica^ which is a fpecies 
of Sauvages\ Anacatharfis \ the Rutins Glus^ 2l fpe- 
cies of his Pyuria \ Parturitio^ and Mola, He has 
alfo taken his orders from the anatomical divifion of 
the parts whereas Sauvages divides them accord- 
ing to the nature of the difcharge, whether bloody 
or ferous, which mull be allowed to be equivocal 
in many inftances.
It has been objefted, thatP^r- 
turition is not a difeafe ; Linnaeus however feems 
only to confider it as fuch when it proves labori- 
ous, protraded, or unnatural.
Dr. Cullen does not admit more than about a 
third part of the difeafes of this clafs into his fyf- 
tem.
He has the Epiphora^ PtyalifmuSy Enurefis^ 
and Gonorrhoea^ under their refpedive names, in 
zvi.order^ called Apocenoses, belonging to the 
clafs LOCALES.
Hamorrhagia is fynonymous 
tb his Epfiaxis \ Coryza to his Catarrhus under 
which he confiders Expe^foratio as only fymptoma- 
tic i and Vomica as the effedl of Pleurify, or Peri- 
pneumony.
Naufea^ and Vomitus^ come under Dyf- 
pepjia j the Iliaca^ vmder Colica ; the Cholerica^ Cce- 
liaca^ and Lienteria^ as different fpecies of Biar- 
E 189 ] 
rhcsa\ Leucorrhcea^ and Abortus^ under Menor^ 
rhagia-, Stomacace^ Hamatemefis^ and H^maturia^ 
as fymptomatic only.
Hcemoptyfis^ Cholera^ and 
HamorrhoiSy form diftind genera in both fyftems.
eiafs X.
DEFORMES.
Difeafes occafioning 
external Deformity of the Body.
I. Emaciantes.
[Such as emaciate the Body.
208.
Phthifis.
Confump- 
tion.
Wafting with 
he6t ic Fever, Dyf- 
pncea, and puru- 
lent Expedora- 
tion.
Tabes.
Wafiing^ 
with hedic Fe- 
ver, but without 
Expeftoration.
Atrophia, yf/r^?- 
^^jy.
Wafting, with 
Atony, without 
Hedtic, or Ex- 
209.
210.
pedoration.
211.
Marafmus.
Waft-^ 
ing^ without Ato- 
ny, Hedic, orEx- 
pedoration.
212.
Rachitis.
Rickets.
Wafting of the 
Flefh, with En- 
largement of the 
Head and Joints, 
attended fome- 
times with Flexi- 
lity of the Bones.
2. TuMiDosi.
Such as enlarge the Body, or 
Parts thereof.
213.
Polyfarcia.
Corpu- 
lency, 
214.
Leucophlegmatia.
Emphyfematofe In- 
tumefcence, 
215.
Anafarca, Oedema- 
10 
tofe Intumefcence.
216, Hydrocephalus.
Oedemat of e Enlarge^ 
ment of the Head^ 
with Gaping of the 
Sutures.
217.
AfcitesJ 
[ I90 ] 
217.
Afcites.
Bropfy^ 
Oedematous En- 
largement of the 
Abdomen, 
218.
Hypofarca.
Fixed^ 
partial 'Tumour of 
the Abdomen, 
219.
Tympanites.
/F/W- 
Dropfy, 
220.
Graviditas.
Extra- 
ordinary Biftention 
of the Abdomen du- 
ring Pregnancy.
ECOLORES, Such as deform, and chang-c 
the Colour of the Skin.
jE2i.
Cachexia.
Cachexy, 
Oedeniatofe Pale- 
nefs.
222.
Chlorofis.
[Green- 
Jicknefs.
223.
Scorbutus.
Scurvy.
224.
Iderus.
Jaundice.
225.
Plethora.
Rednefs 
of the Skin from 
Fullnefs of Bloody 
attended with Byf 
pncca.
This clafs anfwers to the CACHEXIA Sau- 
vages, and Dr. Cullen-, and mod of the^^;^^r<^ are 
admitted into the fyftem of the latter under three 
correfponding orders alfo.
The Marafmus is not 
diftinguilhed by Dr. CuUen from the Atrophy.
The 
Phthijis has been clafled before as the confequence 
of Hamoptyfis.
The Chlorofis Hands in the Ady- 
*NAMi^ order, in the clafs NEUROSES^ The 
Graviditas., Cachexia^ and Plethora^ have no place in 
Dr. Culkn\ fyftem.
Clafs XL VITIA.
Cutaneous, external, or pal- 
pable Difeafes.
The clafs which correfponds to this in the Sau^ 
vagefian fyftem, ftands firft under the fame term, 
and 
[ 1 
and is there profefledly intended to contain fuch 
diforders as are more immediately the objeds of 
furgery.
This character is not fo ftridly appli- 
cable to that of LiNN^us's, or of Dr. Culknh 
LOCALES, fince both thefe contain genera which 
come under the province of the phyfician, inde^ 
pendent of manual operation or afliftance.
In all 
the fyftems it is the mofl: comprehenfive clafs.
The congruity of the orders will be noted in our 
progrefs through the clafs.
!• HuMORALiA.
Difcafcs attended with vi- 
tiated, or extra vafated f luids.
226.
Aridura.
IVafting 
and withering of 
a Part^ or Limb.
227.
Digitium.
Dry 
Whitlow, 
228.
Emphyfema.
Windy 
humour, 
229.
Oedema.
Watery 
"Tumour, 
230.
Sugillatio.
chymofis.
231.
Inflammatio.
In- 
jlammation.
232.
AbfcefTus. Abfcefs.
233.
Gangrsena.
Gan- 
grene, 
234.
Sphacelus.
Mortifi- 
cation, 
In xht genera of this order, the appearance of the 
external part, and that of the contained fluid, 
conjointly form the character.
In Sauvages the Aridura^ Gangr^na^ and Sphace- 
lus^ or Necrofis^ belong to his clafs of CA- 
CHEXIiE.
The Digitium is a fpecies of his Pa- 
ronychia^ and ftands with the remaining genera of 
this order among the VITIA.
Dr.
[ 192 ] 
Dr. Cullen negledls the Aridura and Dtgitium : 
the Emphyfema h his Pnetmatofis the Sugillatio his 
Ecchymoma *, and the four remaining genera of 
LiNN^us come under his Phlogofis, 
2. DiALYTicA.
Solutions of Continuity ; 
Fra6lures, Wounds, ^^c.
235- 
236, 
237- 
238, 
239- 
240, 
241.
Fra6lura.
Frac- 
ture ; and, 
Luxatura.
Bijlo- 
cation of a Bone, 
Ruptura.
Rupture 
of a 'Tendon.
Contufura.
Con- 
tufion, 
Profufio.
Flux of 
Blood from Biffo- 
lution of Suhflance, 
Vulnus.
A Wound.
Amputatura.
'A 
Wound from the 
entire Separation of 
a Part from the 
Body.
242.
Laceratura.
Lace- 
ration, 
243.
Pun6tura.
Punc- 
ture of a 'Tendon.
244.
Morfura.
A Ve- 
nomous Bite, 
245.
Combuftura.
A 
Burn, 
246.
Excoriatura.
E:x- 
coriation^ or Abra- 
fion of the Skin.
247.
Intertrigo.
Erofion 
of the Cuticle, 
248.
Rhagas.
Dry Fif- 
fure of the Skin, 
This order nearly conftitutes the feventh of 
the VITIA clafs in Sauvages's fyftem, called 
Plag^ ; and the feventh of the LOCALES clafs 
in Dr. Cullen's^ under the name of Dialyses.
\] nditr Vulnus are comprehended the three fucceed- 
ing^^;^^r^ alfo of Linn^us's.
The Fra5fura confti- 
tutes a feparate genus : the Luxatura belongs to 
the Ectopia order of Dr. Cullen'i^ j the Profufio 
to 
I J 93 ] 
to the Apocenoses the Intertrigo and Comhujlura 
to the Ph LOGOS IS genus : the rema.ming genera are 
not noticed in the CuUenian fyftem.
ExuLCERATiONES.
Ulcers ; purulent or 
ichorous Solutions of Continuity.
249.
Ulcus.
A fuppu- 
rated Wound of a 
flejhy Part.
250.
Cacoethes.
A 
fpreading^ fuperfi- 
' dalj weeping Ulcer .
251.
Noma.
A deep., ef- 
chnroticy cicatriz- 
ing Ulcer, 
252.
Carcinoma, Cancer.
253.
Ozaena.
An Ulcer 
of the Antrum 
Highmori.
254.
Fid u la.
A finous., 
paginating Ulcer., 
with Callofity.
255.
Caries.
An Ulcer 
of the fuperficies of 
the Bone, 
Moft of thefe^^;?^r^ rank with the Plag^^: of Dr.
Sauvages's clafs.
The Paronychia however comes 
in among the Phymata \ and the Prefjura and 
Ar^ura of Linn^us are fpecies only of the Paro- 
nychia^ as the Pernio is of the Erythema in the fame 
fyftem.
O The 
256.
Anthrocace.
An 
Ulcer of the Cavity 
of the Bone^ with 
Caries.
257.
Cocyta.
Pungent 
Pain^ from an Ani- 
malcule lodzed in 
the Part.
258.
Paronychia.
V/hit- 
low.
259.
Pernio.
Kihes, 
260.
Preffura.
Phleg- 
mon of the Fiftger 
End: from the ef- 
fect of Cold.
261.
Ardiura.
Inflam- 
mation of the Naily 
from Curvature 
thereof.
[ 194 ] 
The firft fix ^^enera in this order are clafTed irt 
Dr. CulkfCs fyftem under Ulcus the Caries is a 
diilinct genus the Arthocace^ Paronychia^ and 
Pernio^ rank under the Phlogofts \ and the others 
are not noticed.
4. ScABiESu Cutaneous Difeafes.
262.
Lepra.
Leprofy.
26^.
Tinea.
Scald Head, 
264.
Achor.
Cr lift a Lac- 
tea^ of Authors.
265.
Pfora.
//^fi'.
266.
Lippitudo.
eyedrtefs, 
267.
Serpigo.
"Tetters , 
Ring -worm, 
268.
Herpes.
Shingles, 
269.
Varus.
Pimples.
270.
Bacchia.
i^^^^jy- 
/^<r^, Rofea, • 
271.
Bubo.
^ 5^^^?.
272.
Anthrax.
ACar^ 
huncle, 
273.
Fhlydxna.
y^-^;^- 
Pimple.
274.
Puftula.
Pufiule.
275.
Papu 1 a .
yf Z?^r J 
flamed Pimple, 
276.
Hordeolum.
^ 
277.
Verruca.
AlVart.
278.
Clavus.
A Genu 
279.
Myrmeciurn.
^ 
280.
FSchar a.
An Efchar, 
In Sauvages^s fyftem moft of thefe genera ftand in 
the correfponding clafs under the orders Phymata 
and Effloresc£NTi/e ; but the Lepra^ Tinea^ and 
Pfora^ are referred to the Impetigines, in the 
clafs CACHEXIA.
The following are diftindl genera in Dr. Cullen'*^ 
fyftem: the Z^/^ri^ under the Impetigines ; the 
Tinea^ Pfora^ and Herpes^ under the Dialyses.
The Btiho^ Verruca^ and Clavus^ form diftind ge- 
7teray in the fame order with the Phly^ena or Hydatis^ 
being 
t 195 ] 
being all referred to the Tumores.
Almoft all the 
others rank under the Phlogofis^ as different fpecies 
of that genus.
Lippitudo^ Serpigo^ Myrmechim^ and 
Efchara^ have no place in the Cullenian fyftem.
The characters of the genera in this order are 
well adapted to diftinguifh the different kinds of 
Pujiules ; and are of great ufe as auxiliary terms, 
in defining other genera in different parts of the 
fyftem.
5. TuMOREs. Tumours.
281.
Aneurifma.
Aneu- 
rifm, 
282.
Varix.
Varix, 
28:^.
Schirrus.
Schirrus.
284.
Struma.
Struma.
285.
Atheroma.
JVen.
286.
Anchylofis.
Afiiff 
Joint, ^ 
287.
Ganglion.
Tumour 
of a 'Tendon, 
288.
Natta.
Tumour rooU 
ed in a Mufcle, 
289.
Spinola.
Spina bi'^ 
fida.
290.
Exoftofis, Bony 
Tumour, 
The three firfl, and the lafl of thefe genera^ 
Hand in the correfponding clafs of the fyilems of 
Sauvages and Dr. CuUen under the fame names.
LiNN^us's Struma is their Scrofula^ and his Spi- 
nola the Hydrorachitis.
The Atheroma is the Lupia 
of Dr. CuUen, The Ganglion is a Condyloma of Sau- 
vages^ but ilands in the Cullenian fyflem under 
LiNNiSus's term.
The Natta is negleded by Dr.
Cullen^ but belongs to the Sarcoma of our other 
nofologiil.
6. Proci-^ 
I 196 ] 
6. Procidentia.
Tumours arlfing from Dif- 
location of fiefliy or membranous Parts.
291.
Hernia.
Rupture.
292.
Prolapfus.
Pro- 296.
lapfus, 
293.
Condyloma.
Con- 
dyloma, 297.
294.
Sarcoma.
Fungus 
295.
Pterygium.
Web 
in the Eye, 
Edropium.
Re- 
verfwn of the under 
Eye -lid.
Phymofis.
Swell- 
ing of the Prepuce.
Clitorifmus.
The Hernia^ Prolapfus., and EBropium^ called 
Blepharoptojis by Sauvages., ftand among the Ecto- 
TiJE of his fyftem ; the Phymofis with the Phyrnata \ 
and the remaining genera among the Excrescen- 
Dr. Cullen receives into his Ectopi/e only the ' 
Hernia^ and Prolapfus, The Sarcoma he refers to 
the TuMORES,?and the o\}mx genera are not admitted 
into his fyftem as fuch.
7. Deformationes.
Diftortions of particu- 
lar Parts, and other Deformities.
299.
Contra6i:ura.
Ri- 
gidity of a Joint 
300.
Gibber.
Gihhofity 
of the Chefl, 
301.
Lordofis.
Incur- 
vation of the 
Bones, 
302.
Diftortio.
Biflor- 
306.
Nyda- 
tion of the Bones, 
303.
Tortura.
JVry- 
mouth, 
304.
Strabifmus.
Squint- 
ing, 
305.
Lagopthalmia.
Re- 
tratfion of the up- 
per Eye-lid.
306.
Nydlalopla.
Night- 
307.
Prelbytia.
Long- 
fight.
308.
Myopia.
Near- 
fight.
Pore-biind- 
nefs.
309.
Labarium.
Loofe- 
nefs of the T eeth ; 
as in the Scurvy, 
31b.
Lagoftoma.
Hare- 
lip.
[ 197 ] 
312.
3I4.
3^5- 
316, 
Apella.
Ahhrevia* 
tion of the Prepuce, 
Atreta.
Imperf ora- 
tion of a natural 
Tajfage.
Plica.
Plica polonica.
Hirfuties.
JJnnatu- 
ral Hairynefs of the 
Body.
Alopecia.
Baldnefs, 
Trichiafis.
Diftor- 
tion and Inverfioi^ 
of the Eye-lajhes.
Thefe genera are placed in very different parts 
of his fyftem by M.
Sauvages : the Contra^ura^ 
for inftance, and the Strabifmus., very improperly, 
as it fliould feem, among fpafmodic difeafes ; the 
Gibber^ or Giboofitas^ and the Lordofis^ among the 
ExcRESCENTi^ of the VITIA ciafs ; the Ny^falo- 
pia^ and the two g&nera fucceeding ir, 2s fpecies 
oi Amblyopia^ in the clafs of DEBILITATES, as 
is the Lagoftoma^ as a fpecies of Pfcllifmus the 
Plica under the name of 'Trichoma^ with the Ca- 
cHExi/E j and the 'Trichiafis, as a fpecies of Op- 
thalmia.
Dr. Cullen receives only five of thefe genera : the 
Contra5lura^ Strabifmtis ; the Prepytia^ and A^y- 
opia\ the two latter as fpecies of his Dyfopia^ all 
under the LOCALES clafs : the Plica under his 
genus Trichoma^ among the Impetigines in the 
CACHEKI/E clafs.
%. Macule, 
[ 198 ] 
8. Macule.
Blemiflies on the Skin.
517.
Cicatrix.
A Scar, 
318.
Nsevus.
A Mole.
319.
Morphcea.
Scmf, 
320.
Vibex.
Purple 
Spots and Wheals 
under the Skin.
321.
Sudamen.
Tranji- 
tory^ red^ flinging 
Spots on the Skin, 
322.
Melafma.
Black 
Blotches j on the 
Legs, or other 
Parts iinexpofed 
to the Air.
323.
Hepatizon.
Brown 
itching Morphew.
324.
Lentigo.
Freckles.
325.
Ephelis.
Siin-hurn, 
Thefe lighter afFe6i:ions ftand in Sauvages*s fyf- 
tem either among the Maculae or Efflorescen- 
TijE^ but he does not allow them all the rank of 
genera.
The Cicatrix is a /pedes of his Leuco?na^ 
as the Morphea and Melafma are of his Vitiligo j 
and the Vibex^ and Sudamen^ of the Ecchymoma, 
The Navus ftands under the fame generic name 
in both ^ but the Lentigo of Linn^us is a fpecies 
of Sauvages^s Ephelis.
Dr. Cullen has not given a place to thefe genera 
in his fyftem.
Our author has fubjoined to this diftribution 
of difeafes, a brief view of his 'Theory of Phyjic, de- 
livered in that terfe, concife, and methodic man- 
ner, fo peculiar to himfelf ; and which, as it ap- 
pears to have been intended entirely for the ufe of 
his pupils, nothing lefs than the author's own 
comment can do fufiicient juftice to.
We fhould 
not therefore have taken notice of it, in our plan, 
had it not been necelTary in order to explain feveral 
papers 
[ 199 3 
papers hereafter to be mentioned in the Amcenitates 
Academics, Briefly, therefore, the Linnaan prin- 
ciples of phylic fuppofe the human body to confift 
of a cerebrofe medullary part, of which the nerves 
are fo many procelTes, and which we call the ner- 
vous fyftem ; and, a cortical or vital part, includ- 
ing the vafcular fyftem and contained fluids : 
the former, being the animated parr, or that in 
which the fentient^ moving principle peculiarly 
refides, is confidered as deriving its nourijhment 
from the fubtleft fluids of thevafcular fyftem, and 
its energy from an eledrical principle inhaled by 
the lungs.
Farther, this theory fuppofes the cir- 
culating fluids to be capable of being vitiated, by 
principles which the author chufes to conflder 
either as acefcent^ or putrid ferments ^ the former 
acting on the ferum^ and being the exciting caufe 
. of critical fevers ; the latter, on the blood pro- 
perly, or craffamentum^ and exciting phlogijiic dif- 
eafes.
The e^canthematic clafs is fuppofed to be 
excited by fome external caufes, v/hich we call 
Contagion^ and which hypothetic ally he propofes as 
being animalcula.
From the inceflant attrition of 
the cortical or vafcular fyftem, it requires perpe- 
tual reparation ; this is to be effeded by an appro- 
priate diet.
From an impropriate diet, or regi- 
men, fpring the difeafes of this part of the fyftem, 
originally and more particularly ; thefe are to be 
remedied by fapid medicines, as thofe of the medul- 
lary fyftem are by olids.
Hence arifes the author's 
general divifion of all medicines, as difcoverable 
by their fenfxble qualities, to the tajle^ and fmelling, 
O 4 The 
[ 200 ] 
The Sapids^ according to this theory, ailing pecu- 
liarly on the cortical part, as the Olids do^immedi^ 
ately on the jnedullary^ or nervous fyftem.
In or* 
der however to obtain a more complete idea of the 
ertecls of each of thefe general clafies of medicines, 
each niuft be viev/ed in its mofl fimple (late, by 
which Sapids will appear to be rather what we call 
Nutritives \ and Olids^ more (Iridlly fpeaking, Me^ 
dicines.
A table of of the feveral qualities of medi- 
cines, acording to thefe two general divifions, 
cloies the Genera Morhorum, 
In 1766, LiNTN/iLus publiflied a fmall piece, un- 
der the title of Clavis Medici n/e dinplex^ exterior 
et interior.
Holm.
8vo.
pp.
29.
This fmall trad: 
may be ccnfidered as a fyllabus of his leclures.
It is an enlarged view of the theory juil mentioned, 
connecting it with general Pathology^ and the the- 
rapeutic part of phyfic.
In the latter part all 
fimples are arranged in thirty orders^ according to 
their lenfible qualities, agreeably to the theory ; 
which is difplayed more at large in two papers 
printed in the Ainomtates Academic^., under the 
titles of Sapor es., et Odorcs Medicament or ur/i.
It appears from feveral parts of the writings of 
LiNN^us, that the dietetic part of phyfic had 
been an objeCi to which he had paid much atten- 
tion and he has explained himfelf in the follow- 
ing manner relating to it: — In his me^ delici^^ in 
his plura collep^ qu am quod novi alius ullus : — but, 
whether our author's obfervations on this fub- 
jed may hereafter be publillied, we- are yet to 
4 
[ 201 ] 
In 1 77 1 was publifhed Linn^us's lafl work, 
being the continuation of the Mantiffa^ in which the 
work is carried on to 588 pages, under the title of 
Mantissa altera.
Near one half of this volume 
comprehends additional new genera and fpecies^ and 
the remaining part a variety of emendations, with 
fome confiderable augmentation to the animal 
kingdom.
Thefe will greatly enrich a future 
edition of his works \ and in the preface he has 
earnefcly intreated fucceeding editors to pay a pro- 
per regard to them.
Befides his feparate works, which we have now 
broup*ht to a conciufion, Limn^us wrote a preat 
number of papers on the fubjeds of phyfic and 
natural hiftory, which were publifhed in the A&a 
Literaria Upfalienfia^ and in the Stockholm A5ls.
The finr of thefe works was begun by Olaus 
Celfius in 1720, and continued to the year 1750, 
and is in Latin, in 5 volumes, quarto.
The lat- 
ter publication is in the Swedijlj language, in the 
odiavo form, and has been continued ever fince 
the eftablilhment of the academy at Stockholm^ in 
17^:59, by Vmg Adolphus.
Many of thefe papers 
are fuperfeded by the fubfequent works of our 
author, neither would it be within our plan to 
give a particular detail of them : we are therefore 
only to fubjoin a catalogue of thefe detached 
pieces, and regret that it is not in our power to 
make it more complete or to add fuch, if there 
be any, as may have been given by Linn^^us to 
foreign academies.
In 
[ 202 ] 
In the A5ia Upfalienjia are the following papers^ 
written by Ltnn^us.
Florula Lapponica^ in 1732.
This, as is before 
obferved, was our author's firft publication, and 
confifts only of a bare catalogue of the Lapland 
plants, digefted into the order of the fexual fyftem^ 
of which it is the firft fpecimen.
The fecond part 
of this lift appears not'till the year 1734.
Animalia Kegni Sueci^^ in 1736.
Orchides iifque affines^ in 1740.
This catalogue 
is accompanied by a copious coUedion of fyno- 
nyms to each fpecies.
- 
G mer a Plant arum Nova ^ in 1741.
Euporifia in Fehribus intermittentibus.
This pa- 
per, as likewife feveral others, if we miftake nor, 
was publifhed, agreeably to a laudable cuftom of 
that country, in the yearly KalendarSy by which 
means ufeful intelligence finds its way into the 
moft remote and obfcure recelTes of every king^ 
dom, in 1742.
Euporijia in Dyfenteria^ in 1745, 
Pini ufus csconomicus^ in 1743.
Ahietis ttftis ceconomicus^ in 1744.
The manifold ufes of thefe trees, fome of which 
were not fufficiently known m divers parts of 
the kingdom of Sweden^ induced our author to 
throw together all that his extenfive journeys had 
enabled him to colle6l thereon, in thefe two papers.
Sexus Plant arum ^ in 1744.
Sexus Plantarum ufus (sconomiciis^ in 1 745.
The 
pradical ufe of this paper is more particularly an 
objed of all who have the care of gardens, to 
whom 
[ 2Cg ] 
whom the fex of plants is no longer a matter of 
mere fpeculation.
"The^ Potus^ in 1746.
Scabiof^ nova Spedei Befcriptio, in 1744, after- 
wards called by our author, in his Species Plant a- 
rum, Scabiofa Tatarica.
Pentborum, a new genus of plants, from Virgi- 
nia^ defcribed and figured, in 1744.
Cypriyii pinna ani radiis xi, pinnis alhentihus^ de- 
fcriptio.
(Cyprinus Griflagine, Syd. p.
529, J 
A fifh of the lakes of Weft Bothnia.
After the inititution of the Royal Academy of 
Sciences at Stockholm., of which Linn^us was the 
firft president, his communications were chiefly 
made in the AEls of that body.
In thefe the fol- 
lowing papers occur.
Cultura Plantarum Naturalis.
Vol. I.
for the 
years 1739 and 1740.
This is an attempt to re- 
duce the art of gardening to fcientific principles.
Gluten Lapponum e Per ca.
ib.
p, 221.
Oejirus Rangiferinus., in 1740, p.
121.
A de- 
fcription, accompanied with figures, of the Gad- 
fly, (Oeftrus Tarandi^ Syft.
Nat. p.
969.) which 
is bred under the fkin on the backs of the rein- 
deer, and from which a third of the fawns not un- 
frequently perifh.
The Glue of the Perch is made from the (kins, 
which are fcraped off, put into a bladder, and 
boiled to a proper confiflence.
Picus pedibus tryda^lylis.
ib.
p. 222* A defcrip- 
tion of the three-toed Wood-pecker, before that 
time unnoticed, fmce figured by Edwards^ tab.
II45 
[ 204 ] 
114, ^nd named by our author, in his Syftem, Pictis 
trida5iylus^ p.
177.
Ic is fopnd alfo in Hudfon's Bay\ 
and defcribed by Mr. Forftef\ Phil.
Tranf.
Vol.
Ixii.
p. 388.
Mures Alpini Lemur es.
ib, p.
326.
^The Mus 
Lemmus of the Syftemj p.
80, or Leming, the well- 
known pell of the North.
P offer Nivalis, ib.
p. 368.
(Emheriza Nivalis^ 
Syfc.
p. 308.) Greater Brambling, or Snow Bunt- 
ing ; fince more fully known and defcribed.
Pifcis Aureus Chinenfium, ib.
40 5.
The Gold- 
fifh, or Cyprinus Aur{?tus^ Syft.
527.
Fundament a CEconomi^e.
ib.
p. 411.
Formicarum Sexus.
Vol. 11.
1741, p.
37.
This 
paper contains the defcription and hiftory of five 
fpecies of Ants found in Szveden^ and throws much 
light on the oeconomy of thofe infe6l.s.
Officinales Suecica Plants, ib, p.
81.
In this 
paper our author informs his countrymen of feve- 
ral articles of the Materia Medica growing indi- 
genouQy in Sweden^ and which they had unncqef- 
farily imported.
Centuria Plant arum in Suecia r art or urn.
ib.
p, 
179.
Thefe were all rare plants not obferved in.
Sweden before, 
PhntdeTinElori£ indigent.
Vol. Ill, 1742, p.
20, 
The difcovery of plants adapted to the art of dye- 
ing was one of Linn/t:us's objedls profefTedly, 
in his Iter Gothlandicum^ of which wx have fpoken 
before.
Amaryllis FormoftJJima.xh.
p= 93.
The Jacobaea 
Lilly defcribed and figured.
Gramerk 
[ 205 1 
Gramen SMng. ib.
p. 1 46.
A defcription of, 
and perfuafive to, the culture of the ^riglochin 
Maritimum^ Sj3€c.
Plant, p.
48^, or Sea fpiked 
Grafs^ which is the delight of horned cattle.
Focnum Suecicum, ib.
p. 191.
A recommenda- 
tion alfo of the culture of the Medicago falcata^ 
Sp. PL p.
1096 ; or Yellow Medic^ as a fubftitute 
for Lucern in Sweden, 
Phafeoli Chinenfis fpecies.
ib.
p. 206.
Epilepfi^ Vernenfis caufa, ib.
p. 279.
Jackas Hapuch, Vol. IV.
1745, p.
291.
(Ar- 
butus Uva Urft^ Sp. PI.
p. 566.) Bear-berries.
A plant of ufe in Sweden, both in dyeing and tan- 
ning, and frequently fmoked with tobacco ; bet- 
ter known fmce in other parts of Europe, by the 
reputation it acquired, for fome time, in calculous 
cafes.
Fagopyrum Sibiricum.
Vol. V.
1744, p.
117.
Polygonum tataricum^ Sp. PL 521.
A kind of 
Buck-wheat, which is cultivated, and fupplies the 
want of other grain for bread, in divers parts of 
^artary and Sibiria, 
Petiveria, ib.
p. 287.
Petiveria alliacea, Sp. PL 
p. 486, defcribed and figured.
An acrid, and even 
cauftic plant, of which the Guinea-hens, in the 
Weft Indies, are faid to be extremely fond ; thence 
called Guinea-henweed, 
Pajfer procellarius.
Vol. VI.
1745, p.
93.
A 
defcription of the Procellaria pelagka, Syft.
p. 212.
The Little Peterel of Edwards^ t.
90.
or Storm- 
finch, 
Limnia* 
[ 206 ] 
Limnia.
Vol. VlL 1746.
p. 130.
Claytonia 
Sibirica^ Sp. PI.
294.
A curious plant, difcover- 
ed by Steller in the moil eaftern parts of Sibifia^ 
and in the iflands which lie fcattered between that 
part of Afia and North America.
Coluber (Cherfea) /cutis ahdominalibuS 150 /quamis 
fubcaudalibus 34.
Vol. X.
1749.
p. 246, t> 6.
A mod 
venomous llnali Simke^ found in ofieries and willow- 
holts, the bite of which is frequently fatal, and 
much dreaded, particularly in Smoland.
It is a 
fmall animal, not more than fix inches long, and 
is called by the Smolanders^ Afping.
Avis Sommar Guling appellata.
Vol. XL 1 750, 
p. 127.
The Oriolus Galbula^ Syft.
p. 160, or 
Golden nru/h \ defcribed and figured : fingular in 
being a native both of northern Europe and of 
Bengal.
In/e5lum quod /rumenti grana interius exedit ; de^ 
fcribed afterwards in the Syftem, under the name of 
Mu/caFrit^ N° 994.
ib.
p. 179.
Our author thinks 
that every tenth grain of barley is deftroyed in 
Sweden by this infe6l ; and that the damage occa- 
fioned thereby, cannot amount to iefs than an 
hundred thoufand ducats annually.
Emberiza Ciris^ Syft.
p. 313, or Painted Finch 
of Cate/by.
I. t.
44 ^ defcribed and figured, ib.
p. 278.
De CharaEleribus anguium .
Vol .
XIII.
1752, p.
206.
It has been obferved before, that Linn^us 
jBrft attempted to fix the charaders of the Serpentes 
from the number of the Jhields and /cales of the ab- 
domen and taih He here obferves, that this cha- 
10 rader 
i 207 ] 
radler is not fufBciently permanent \ but that what 
is wanting to complete the number in one, will 
ufually be found in the other.
^ Novce dua "Tahaci fpecies.
Vol. XIV.
1753, ?• 
57 defcribed and figured.
They ftand in the 
Species Plant, p.
259, under the names of NicoHana^ 
paniculata and glutinofa.
Be Plantis^ quce Alphm Suecicarum indigin^ fieri 
pojfmt.
Vol. XV.
1754, p.
182.
An enumera- 
tion of fuch plants, as the author thought might 
ufefully be cultivated on the Lapland and Swedijfj 
Alps.
Simics^ ex Cercopithecorum genere^ defcriptio.
ib, 
210 called in the Syftem, Simia Biana^ p.
38.
Mirabilis longiflor^ (Sy ft.
p. 252.) defcriptio, A 
Mexican plant, now well known in our Englijh 
gardens.
Vol. XVI.
p. 176.
Lepidii (Cardamines, Syft.
899.) defcriptio, A 
new plant, fent to our author from Spain^ where it 
was found by M.
Loefling, ib.
p. 273.
Ayeni^ (Pufill^, Spec.
1354.) defcriptio.
Vol.
XVII.
1756, p.
23.
An elegant plant, fent by 
Mr. Miller to our author.
It is figured by Miller^ 
tab.
118 ; and by Sloane^ tab.
132.
Gaur^ (biennis, Spec.
PI.
493.) defcriptio.
A 
new plant, from feeds fent by Mr. Collinfon.
ib.
p. 222.
Loeflingia et Minuartia.
Vol. XIX.
p. 15.
Two 
new genera of plants, fent by M.
Loefling from 
Spain.
Entomolithus paradoxus (Syft.
Natur.
III.
p. 160.) 
defcriptus.
Vol. XX.
1759.
p- 19.
accompanied 
witk 
t 208 3 
with figures, A curious folTil, from Count 
fir^% mufeum.
Gemma^ Fenna pavonts^ ^x^MXVi, ib.
p. 23.
Our 
author thinks this foffil is formed from the carti- 
lage or hinge of the Fearl Mufcle, He has called 
it in the Syftem, Helminth olithus (Androdamas) 
My till margaritiferi cardinis^ viridis^ p.
165.
Coccus Uvde Urji^ (Syfl: p.
742.) ib.
p. 28.
This 
cochineal-infe6t is very like the Polijh kind, found 
at the roots of the Knawel^ but is double the fize, 
and yields a very fine red colour.
De Ruho arBico -plantando.
Vol. XXIII.
1762, 
p. 192.
Tht Rubus ar^icus^ Sp. PI.
p. 708, much 
valued for the fake of the berries \ is difficultly 
cultivated in the fouthern parts of Sweden.
This 
paper contains the refult of fome trials made to 
inure it to a more fouthern clime : they are too 
operofe to prove of general ufe, 
Obfervationes ad Cerevifiam pcrtincntes.
Vol 
XXIV.
1763.
p. 50.
Animalis Brafilienfis, '(Muris Aguti^ Sy[l.
p. 80.) 
defcriptio.
Vol. XXIX.
1768.
p. 26.
Long- 
nofed Cavy of Pennant.
Viverr^ naric^^ (Syft.
p. 64.) defcriptio.
ib.
p. 
140.
An American animal, nearly allied to the 
Coati-mondi of Brafil.
Simia Oedipus.
(Syfl.
p. 41.) The Little Lion- 
monkey^ defcribed.
ib.
p. 146.
Gordius Medinenjis^ (Syft.
p. 1075;) or Guinea- 
worm.
One of thefe animals, half an ell long, 
was difcovered in a living flate at Gottenburgh^ and 
communicated 
[ 209 3 
feommunicated by the King of Sweden to our ^3* 
thbr.
ib.
Calceolaria:^ pinnat<£ (Syft.
Nat. ed.
i^.
p. 6o.) 
defcriptio.
Vol. XXXI.
1770.
p. 2 85.
A Peru- 
vian plant, of the Diandrous clafs, with a labiated 
fiower^ 
It has been before itientioned, that our authot 
has interfperfed, in the Flora Lapponica^ a great 
variety of curious particulars, relating to the 
country, and its inhabitants, their marirlers, their 
economy, difeafes, &c.
: and in the preface he 
tells us, that he had it in meditation to give the 
remaining part of the natural hiftory.
This was 
to have appeared under the title of Lachejis Lappa-- 
nica ; but it is with great regret that we mufl now 
give up the expectation of this work.
Mr. Pen^ 
nant has informed us, that he once reminded him 
of it, and received for anfwer, — nunc Jtimis fera 
inciperem: 
Me quoque dehilitat feries immenfa Idhorum^ 
Ante meum tempus cogor et ejfe fenex, 
Firma fit ilia licet^ folvetur in ^squore navis^ 
nimquam liquidis ficca careUt aquis.
We know not of any other publication of 
LtNNi^us's after xht Mantijfa altera^ in 1771 ; and 
indeed, the preface to that work is fuilicient to 
preclude the expedation of any new performance, 
if his advanced age had not, of itfelf, rendered 
it fufficiently improbable after that period* 
P In 
[ 2IO ] 
In the fpring of the year 1772, Dr. Murray^ 
Frofeflbr of Phyfic and Botany at Gottingen^ a 
Swede by birth, who had been educated under 
LiNN^us, and had long enjoyed a great ftiare of 
his confidence and efteem, paid his Preceptor 
a vifit : he found his faculties unimpaired, and 
his ardor for the improvement of fcience as ftrong 
And vigorous as ever: He fpeaks with great de- 
light of the fatisfadlion he received from his com- 
pany, and in the contemplation and infpe6lion of 
his mufeum at Hammarhy ; but regretted much to 
find, that Linn^us had no farther thoughts of 
publifhing a new edition of his Syfiem of Nature ; 
purpofing only to give a fupplement.
However, 
before Dr. Murray left Upfal^ he prevailed on him 
to promife that he would tranfmit to him his ad- 
ditional obfervations to the Syftema Vegetabilium^ 
in order to enable him to give a complete edition 
of that work.
This the Profeffor did j and Dr.
Murray performed it in the year 1774, very much 
to the fatisfadion of all who purfue the Linn^ean 
method.
The manufcript additions communica- 
ted on this occafion by our author, together with 
thofe coile6led from the feveral Addenda^ and from 
the Mantife^ enabled Dr. Murray to extend this 
volume to above one hundred pages beyond that 
,of the 1 2th edition publifhed in 1767.
It appears thatLiNN^us, upon the whole, • en- 
joyed a good conftitution.
At times, however, he 
had been feverely afflidted with an hemicrania \ and 
had not been exempted from the gout.
How 
much he fuffered from this latter diftemper^ w^e 
have 
C 2X1 ] 
liave before mentioned, when treating on the PM2 
lofophia Botanica, And notwithftanding the found 
ftate in which Dr. Murray left him, v/e find, that 
very foon after, his memory became fomewhat 
impaired.
The confcioufnefs of this defed was 
faid to have induced him to decline all thoughts of 
further publications, and to tranfmit to Dr. Mur* 
ray fuch materials as were in readinefs to compleaC 
future editions of his Syftem.
In the fummer of 1776, it was known here that 
his ftrength was declining apace, and his infirmi- 
ties in general much increafed, he being unable to 
take his ufual walks in his garden without affiftance.' 
At the latter end of the year he was feized with an 
apoplexy^ which left him paralytic ; and at the be- 
ginning of the year 1777 he fuffered another ftroke, 
which very much impaired his mental powers* 
Thefe attacks, at his advanced ftage of life, fliew-' 
ed that diflblucion was not far ofi\ But the dif- 
eafe, which was faid to have been the more imme- 
diate caufe of his death, was an ulceration of the 
urinary bladder.
Neverthelefs, he languiflied 
through the year, and died on the i ith of January^ 
1778, aged 70 years and 8 months.
To the lovers of fcicnce it will not appear 
ftrange, nor 'will it be unpleafant, to hear, that 
uncommon refped was fliewn to the memory 
6f this great man.
We are told, that, " on his 
" death, a general mourning took place at Upfal], 
" and that his funeral prpceflion was attended by 
the whole univerfity, as well profeflbrs as ftu- 
Vi dents, and the pall fupported by fixteen dodora 
P 2 - of 
f 212 ] 
" of phyfic, all of whom had been his pupils." The 
King of Sweden^ after the death of Linn^us, or- 
dered a medal to be flriick, of which " one fide 
exhibits Linn^eus's buft and name, and the 
other Cyhele^ in a dejedled attitude, holding in 
*' her left hand a key, ahd furrounded with ani- 
*^ mals and growing plants, with this legend— 
Beam lu5lus angit amijfi beneath, — poft 
oUtum UpfalU, die x.
Jan. M.DCC.LXXVIIL 
*' Rege jubente,'*^^Tht fame generous monarch 
not only honoured the Royal Academy of Sciences 
with his prefence when Linn/eus's commemora- 
tion was held at Stockholm^ but, as a ftill higher 
tribute, in his fpeech from the throne to the 
afTembly of the ftates, lamented Sweden^ lofs by 
liis death.
Nor was he honoured only in his 
own country.
The prefent learned and worthy 
profeflbr of botany at Edinburgh^ not only pro- 
nounced an eulogium in honour of Linn^us, 
before his ftudents, at the opening of his 
ledtures in the fpring of 1778, but laid alfo the 
foundation-ftone of a monument to be raifed to his 
memory; which, while it perpetuates the name 
and merits of Linn^us, will do honour to the 
founder, and, it may be hoped, prove the means 
of raifing an emulation favourable to.
that fcience 
which this illuftrious Swede fo highly dignified and 
improved.
This monument confifts of a vafc, 
fupported on a pedeftal, with this infcription, 
LiNN^ffio posu.T J.
Hope.
The 
C 213 3 
The high reputation which this great man has long 
held among the naturalifts throughout the world, 
might readily perhaps preclude any encomium 
from our pen fmce, to all lovers of natural fci- 
cnce, his name itfelf is eulogy, and will doubtlefs 
very long be infeparable from the idea of his ex- 
traordinary merit.
Might we, neverthelefs, be 
indulged fo far, we hope the following brief efti- 
mate of his talents will be thought juft, and eafily 
deduced from an impartial view of his writings.
Nature had, in an eminent manner, been liberal 
in the endowments of his mind.
He feems to have 
been polTefled of a lively imagination, corre6ted 
however by a ilrong judgment, and guided by the 
laws of fyflcm.
Add to thefe, the moft retentive 
memory, an unremitting induftry, and the greateft 
perfeverance in all his purfuirs as is evident from 
that continued vigour with which he profecuted the 
defign, that he appears to have formed fo early in 
life, of totally reforming, and fabricating anew the 
whole fcience of natural hiftory : and this fabric 
he raifed, and gave to it a degree of perfedion 
unknown before ^ and had moreover the un- 
common felicity of living to fee his own ftruc- 
ture rife above all others, notwithftanding every 
difcouragement its author at firft laboured under, 
and the oppofition it afterwards met with.
Neither 
has any writer more cautiouHy avoided that com- 
mon error of building his own fame on the ruin 
of another man's.
He every where acknowledged 
the feveral merits of each author's fyftem and no 
man appears to have been more fenfibleof the par- 
P 3 M 
[ 214 ] 
Hal defers of his own.
Thofe anomalies which had 
principally been the objeds of criticifm, he well 
knew every artificial arrangement muft abound 
with J and having laid it down as a firm maxim, 
that every fyftem muft finally reft on its in- 
trinfic merit, he willingly commits his own to the 
judgment of pofterity.
Perhaps there is no cir- 
cumftance of Linn^eus's life, which fliews him 
in a more dignified light, than his condu6l to- 
wards his opponents.
Difavowing controverfy, 
and juftly confidering it as an unimportant and 
fruitlefs facrifice of time, he never replied to any, 
numerous as they were at one feafon.
To all who fee the aid this extraordinary man 
has brought to natural fcience^ his talents muft 
appear in a very illuftrious point of view ; but 
more efpecially to thofe who, from fimilarity of 
tafte, are qualified to fee more diftindly the vaft 
extent of his original defign, the greatnefs of his 
labour, and the elaborate execution he has given 
to the whole.
He had a happy command of the 
Latin tongue, which is alone the language of 
fcience ; and no man ever applied it more fuccefsf ully 
to his purpofes, or gave to defcription fuch copi- 
oufnefs, united with that precifion and conc^fenefs, 
which fo eminently charadlerlze his writings.
In the mean time, we are not to learn, that it 
has been objedled as derogatory to his learning 
in no fmall degree, that he has introduced a num- 
ber of terms not authorized by clafTical authority.
But, granting this, it ought to be recoUeded, 
that LiNN^uSj in the inveftigation of nature, has 
difcovered 
t 215 ] 
difcovered a multitude of relations which were 
entirely unknown to the antients ; if therefore 
there be any force in the objeflion, it fliould firft 
be ihewn, that the terms which he has introduced 
to exprefs thefe relations, are not fairly and analo- 
gically deduced from the language ; fince it muft 
furely be granted, that Linn^^ius could not have 
fpoken the language of natural hiftory^ as it is 
known at this day, in that of Pliny^ or of any claC- 
fical writer whatever.
The ardor of LiNNi^:us's inclinations to the 
ftudy of nature, from his earlieft years, and that 
uncommon application which he beftowed upon 
it, gave him a moft comprehenfive view, both of 
its pleafures and ufefulnefs, at the fame time that 
it opened to him a wide field, hitherto but little 
cultivated, efpecially in his own country.
Hence 
he was early led to regret, that the ftudy of natural 
hiftory, as a public inftitution, had not made its way 
into the univerfities \ in many of which, logical dif- 
putations, and metaphyfical theories, had too long 
prevailed, to the exclufion of more ufeful fci- 
ence.
Availing himfelf therefore of the advan- 
tages which he derived from a large (hare of elo- 
quence, and an animated ftyle, he never failed to 
difplay, in a lively and convincing manner, the 
relation this ftudy hath to the public good ; to 
incite the great to countenance and protedl it ; to 
encourage and allure youth into its purfuits, by 
opening its manifold fources of pleafure to their 
view, and fhewing them how greatly this agreeable 
employment would add, in a variety of inftances, 
P 4 both 
[216] 
both to their comfort and emolument.
His ex- 
tcnfive view of natural hiftory, as conneded with 
almoft all the arts of life, did not allow him to 
confine thefe motives and incitements to thofe only 
who were defigned for the pradice of phyfic.
He 
alfo laboured to infpire the great and opulent with 
a tafte for this ftudy ^ and wilhed particularly 
that fuch as were devoted to an ecclefiaftic life 
fliould lhare a portion of natural fcience, not 
only as a means of fweetening their rural fitu- 
ation, confined, as many are, perpetually to a 
country refidence, but as what would almoft in- 
evitably lead, in a variety of inftances, to difco- 
veries which only fuch fituations could give rife 
to, and which the learned in great cities could 
have no opportunities to make.
Not to add, that 
the mutual communication and enlargement of 
this kind of knowledge among people of equal 
rank in a country fituation, muft prove one of the 
ftrongeft bonds of union and friendftiip, and con- 
tribute, in a much higher degree than the ufual 
perifhing amufements of the age, to the pleafures 
and advantages of fociety.
LiNN^us lived to enjoy the fruit of his own 
labour in an uncommon degree* Natural hif- 
tory raifed itfelf in Sweden^ under his culture, 
to a ftate of perfedion unknown elfewhere, 
and was from thence difieminated through 
all Europe.
His pupils difperfed themfelves all 
over the globe, and with their mafter's fame, ex- 
tended both fcience and their own.
More than 
this,( he lived to fee the fovereigns of Europe 
cftablifh 
[ 217 ] 
eftablifti feveral public inftitutions in favour of 
this ftudy, and even profeflbrfliips eftablilhed in 
divers univerfities for the fame purpofe, which 
do honour to their founders and patrons, and 
which have excited a curiofity for the fcience, 
and a fenfe of its worth, that cannot fail to further 
its progrefs, and in time raife'it to that rank, which 
it is entitled to hold among the purfuits of man- 
kind.
Were it in our power minutely to defcribe the 
perfon of our author, in conformity to the cuftom 
of biographers, it would be a matter of fmall mo- 
pient, as the endowments of his mind, and his 
great talents, have fo fuperior a claim to atten- 
tion.
In the commemoration-fpeech, delivered 
by his friend Dr. B^ck^ phyfician to the king 
of SiJ^eden, Linn^us's ftature is defcribed 
being diminutive \ his head large ; hig 
" look ardent, piercing, and apt to daunt the 
beholder.
His ear not fenfible to mulic ; his 
" temper quick ; his rnemory good, though in 
" the latter period of his life liable to fail him fome- 
times ; his knowledge of languages confined^ 
" yet no interefting difcovery efcaped him.
In 
" fummer he ufed to fleep from ten to three 
^- o'clock, in winter from nine to fix, and ipftantly 
to ceafe from his labours when he found him- 
" felt not well difpofed for them.
He was an 
^' agreeable companion, of quick fenfibility, but 
eafily appeafed.*' Thofe who would be gra- 
tified by forming an idea of his perfon, may 
\>t acquainted, that there are extant three half- 
length 
C 2l8 ] 
length prints of Linn^us in his works.
Two 
of thefe are in odlavo, and the other in a half- 
Iheet, or rather large quarto.
The firft was pre- 
fixed to the Leipftc edition of the Syftema Naturae, 
printed in 1748, and reprefents Linn^us, as we 
apprehend, in about the fortieth year of his age ; 
another, to the fecond edition of the Species Plan- 
tarum^ in 1762 and the larger one to the fixth 
edition of the Genera Plantarum^ in 1764.
In the 
firft and the laft of thefe, which are by much the 
better engravings, he is figured in an undrefs, 
rcfting upon a volume of the Syjlema^ and holding 
in his hand a fprig of the Linn^^^a, a plant fo 
called by Dr. Gronovius^ in honour of his name.
In that of 1762, he is reprefented in a full drefs, 
with the inftgnia of the Order of the Polar Star at 
his breaft, and Aurivilliush infcription under- 
neath : 
Hie ilk eji^ cui regna volens natura redufit^ 
^amque ulli dederat plura videnda dedit.'^ 
' The Academy of Sciences at Stockholm have, at 
their own expence, direded that an engraving of 
his portrait {hould be made at Paris^ from an ori- 
ginal pidlure by the famous Swedijh painter Rojlin, 
There is a ftriking likenefs alfo exhibited on a large 
medallion, aH' antique^ of almoft two feet in dia- 
meter, by M.
V Archeveque, In England we have 
an elegant fmall medallion, fabricated by thofe 
excellent artifts MefT.
Wedgwood and Bently, It 
reprefents Linn^us in profile, when far advanced 
in years.
The buft is white, upon a light-blue 
ground.
t 219 ] 
ground, and the Linn^a placed at the breaft.
This is faid, by all who knew the profelTor, to 
bear the greateft likenefs.
We regret that it is 
not in our power to defcribe the medals which were 
ftruck in honour of Linn^^us by order of feveral 
noblemen of the firft diftindion in Sweden, parti- 
cularly that by Count T effin's diredion, fince that 
nobleman was among the firft who difcerned and 
patronized the merit of our author, and ever bore 
to it the moft public and honourable teftimony.
This LiNN^^us hath acknowledged in the warmeft 
effufions of gratitude.
It hath been obferved before, that the profeflbr 
married the daughter of Dr. More, the provincial 
phyfician of Balekarlia, foon after he fettled at 
Stockholm, in 1739- This lady furvived him; 
and he has left a fon, named Charles, and four 
daughters.
The younger Linn^us was demonftra- 
tor in the botanical garden at Upfal, fo early as 
the year 1762 having in that, and the fucceeding 
year, publiflied two Decads of rare Plants, lately 
raifed there, accompanied with the figures.
Not 
long after he was conftituted joint profeflbr in the 
botanical chair with his father ; and of late years 
entirely occupied that department.
Since the, death 
of his father, we learn that he has obtained fome 
of his employments, particularly the profeflbrfhip 
of the theory of phyfic ; and has refigned that of 
botany in favour of Dr. Thunherg.
It has been faid, 
that he intends to publifti a Mantissa tertia, 
which his father left nearly finifhed alfo feveral 
colledions of plants v^hich had been fent to Lin- 
N^US, 
[ 220 ] 
N^us, not long before his death, from tht Cape 
of Good Hope^ and from feveral other parts of the 
world.
Elizabeth Chrijiina^ one of the daughters of our 
author, made herfelf known to the Jearned world, 
in 1762, by a difcovery which was publilhed 
in the Swedifh A5ls of the fame year.
It re- 
lated to a curious, and before quite unobferved 
appearance, in the flowers of the Indian Crejfes^ 
(Tropsolum majus) which flie had perceived to 
emit fpontaneoufly, at certain intervals, fparks 
like thofe of eledtricity, or rather fuch as arife 
from a fulminating powder.
This was only vifible 
in the dulk of the evenings, and ceafed when total 
darknefs came on.
She had fhewn this Angular 
appearance to her father, and other philofophers, 
particularly to Mr. Wikke^ a celebrated eledrician, 
who was inclined to believe that it was an ele6lri» 
cal phenomenon.
A BRIEF 
[ 221 3 
A 
BRIEF ACCOUNT 
OF THE 
AMCENITATES ACADEMICS.
THE colleflion known under this title con- 
fifts of feven volumes in 8vo, and contains 150 
thefes.
It is fuppofed the firft volume was not 
originally colle6led by Linn^us himfeif; but 
he at leaft reprinted it very early, and, that 
he might not be defrauded of the advantage 
of thefe publications, became the editor of all 
the fucceeding volumes.
Something has been 
faid relating to this collection in the courfe of 
thefe memoirs; to which we have only to add, 
that we beg the reader to regard the following 
pages, as little more than an enlarged table 
of contents, intended only to excire a due at- 
tention to this part of Linn^eus's works, which 
the compiler prefumes to be lefs known than it 
defer ves ^ and at the fame time to entreat him to 
confider, that it is impoffible, by mxans of any 
abridgment, to give an adequate idea of that 
merit, and excellent arrangement of the fubjeCts 
in thefe volumes, which cannot but render them 
an agreeable and ufeful mifcellany, and ornament 
to the library of every naturalift, phiiofopher, and 
phyfician.
AMCENI- 
AMCENITATES ACADEMICS.
Vol. I.
Holm.
1749.
pp.
610.
I. Betula nana.
Z. M Klafe.
1743.
In this difTertation is exhibited a complete hif- 
toryi accompanied with a figure, of the Betula 
(nana) foliis orhiculatis crenatis.
Spec.
Plant, pp.
1394, or the Dwarf Birchy which cloaths the Lap- 
land alps in great quantities, and is of fignal ufe 
in the oeconomy of the inhabitants of that ardic 
region.
The branches furnifh them with their 
chief fuel, and the feeds are the food of the ptar- 
migans, or white partridge, (Tetrao Lagofus^ 
Syft.
274.) Thefe birds, being much efteem(^d, 
make a confiderable part of the fuftenance of the 
inhabitants : great quantities are caught in the 
winter feafon, and fent to different provinces.
Before Linn^^ius made his Lapland expedition, 
this Birch had been confidered as a variety only of 
the common tree of that name; but its diftind 
fpecific charaders have fince been eftabliflied.
This tree has within thefe few years been added 
to the Flora Britannica^ having been found in the 
highlands of Scotland.
^ 
2. HisTORiA naiuralis et medica Ficus.
C. He- 
gardt, 1 744.
From the earlieft times, the cultivation of 
the fig-tree has been an important objed in all 
the oriental countries.
In this difTertation we 
are prefented with a hiflory of this genus^ of which 
9 the 
I ^^3 1i 
the writer has enumerated 22 fpecies : Linn^^ius 
has however greatly reduced this number, in his 
Species Plantarum, fince many are varieties effeded 
by culture.
That part of the hiftory of this tree, 
which for many ages was fo enigmatical, and which 
nothing but the dodbrine of the fexes of plants has 
completely cleared up, namely the hufbandry or 
caprification^ as fit is called, is more particularly 
worthy of attention, not only as a lingular pheno- 
menon in itfelf, but as it has furnifhed one of the 
moft convincing proofs of the reality of the fexes 
pf plants.
Our limits will not allow us to detail 
this fubjed ; in brief it is this : — It is now known, 
^hat the flowers of the fig-tree are fituated within a 
pulpy receptacle, which we call the Fig^ or fruit 
of this tree ; of thefe receptacles, in the wild fig- 
tree, fome have male flowers only, and others 
have male and female, both diilind, though 
placed in the fame receptacle.
In the garden, or 
€ultivated fig, thefe are found to contain only fe- 
male flowers \ which are fecundated by means of 
a kind of gnat, (Cynips Pfenes^ Syft.
Nat. 919.) 
bred in the fruit of the wild fig-trees, which pierces 
that of the cultivated^ in order to depofit its eggs 
within ; at the fame time diffufing within the re- 
ceptacle xht farina of the male flowers.
Without 
this operation the fruit may ripen, but no effe^ive 
feeds are produced : hence the garden fig can only 
be propagated by layers and cuttings, in thefe 
countries, where the wild fig is not known.
The 
jprocefs of thus ripening the fruit, in the oriental 
countries, is not left to nature, but is managed 
with 
[ 224 ] 
with great art, and different degrees of dexterity^' 
fo as to reward the fkilful hufbandman with a 
much larger increafe of fruit than would other- 
wife be produced.
A tree of the fame fize, which, 
in Provence^ where caprification is not pra6lifed, 
may produce about 25 pounds of fruit, will, by 
that art, in the Grecian iflands, bring ten times that 
quantity.
3. DissERTATio de Peloria.
D. Rudherg* 1744.
A defcription, with the figure, of a very ex- 
traordinary variety of the common yellow 'Toad 
FlaXy (Antirrhinum Linaria^ Sp. PI.
858.) which 
was found in feveral parts of Sweden^ and fmce in 
Germany^ and engaged the attention of the bota- 
nifts very greatly at the time.
Indeed its variation 
is uncommonly fingular.
The flower, inftead of 
the ringent, tetrandrous flower of the Linaria^ with 
a fingle, corniculated Ne^arium^ was found with 
a regular, monopetalous, pentandrous tube, from 
the bafe of which proceeded five Ne^aria ; yet, 
uncommon as this proved, Linnaeus difcovered 
it to be no other than a monfter, or hybrid plant, 
fprung from the Linaria^ though it does not ap- 
pear to this day that its origin on the other fide 
has been fufficiently afcertained.
The habit of 
the plant, and its fenfible quality, agree with thofe 
of the Linaria, 
4. CoRALLiis Balticis.
H. Fougt.
1745.
In this trad the author, after having traced the 
hiftory of Corals from the remoteft period of natural 
hiftory.
[ 225 ] 
liiftory, and confidered the feveral theories that 
have at different times prevailed relating to the 
produ6lion of thefe bodies, acquiefces in the 
modern one^ which afcribes their formation to 
Polypes, and which the late Mr. ElUs^ and feve- 
ral other writers, have much confirmed and illuf- 
trated.
He then gives a copious defcription of 
twenty fpecies, all found in the Baltic % of which 
an excellent engraving is fubjoined.
Thefe bodies 
are found iri immenfe riiafTes in feme parts of this 
fea : on the coaft of Gothland there arc flrata of 
corals extending through tracts of feveral miles.
5. Amphibia Gyllenborgiana.
B.R.HaJl, iJ4.'^l 
A detailed defcription of 24 fpecies of animals, 
all of the Amphibia z\2X^^ which were prefented by 
Count Gyllenborg to the univerfity of Upfal^ of 
which he was at that time chancellor % and to 
which he had been a munincent patron, having inte- 
refted himfelf, in procuring to be built and fur- 
niihed, an aftronomical obfervatory j in reftoring 
to a ftate of ufefulnefs the botanic garden, which 
had been in ruins for many years \ in caufing 
ftoves to be ereded, and a houfe built for the 
demonftrator : and finally, in having prefented to 
the univerfity his own mufeum^ colieded at a great 
expence, and confiding of rare amphibia^ infe^ls, 
corals, minerals, and moreover of many elegant 
works of art.
In this trad is exhibited the firfl fpecimen of 
LiNNi^us's method of zoological defcription at 
large 5 
C 226 3 
large ; as alfo the firft attempt to form the fpe- 
cific charadler of the Serpentes order, from the 
" different number of the rings and fcales of the 
" body and tail, taken conjointly." Former 
authors generally had recourfe to colour alone in 
diftinguilhing thefe animals, which was found at 
length to be too unliable, and had given rife to a 
moft enormous multiplication of the fpecies.
This 
mode of diftin6lion has been fmce adopted by 
others, and is retained in the Syjlema Nature.
6. PLANTi^: Martino-Burserian^.
Martin.
1745.
J. Burfer^ a moft diligent difciple and friend of 
Cafpar Bauhine^ and afterwards profefTor of phy- 
fic at Sora^ in the kingdom of Naples^ who had 
travelled almoft all over Europe, and had particu- 
larly fought for rare plants in the.
Alps, had col- 
ledted in thefe journeys an Hortus Siccus, contained 
in 25 volumes, which, after various fates, was 
given by M.
Coijet to the univerfity of UpfaL 
The purport of this tradt is to illuftrate the moft 
rare plants contained in this collection, and fuch 
particularly as were obfcurely known to the collec- 
tor, and to add to thefe the fpecific names, ac- 
cording to the principles of the Linn^an method : 
with this view 240 fpecies are here enumerated.
7. FIortus Upsaliensis.
S.Nauckr, 1745.
Botanical gardens began to be founded in Eu- 
rope, fo early as the middle of the fixteenth century: 
the 
[ 2^7 3 
the firft was that of Padua^ in 1540.
The gar- 
den of Upfal was founded in 1657, by Charles 
Gufiavus^ under the diredion of the elder Rudheck.
How much this garden owes to Linn^us, we 
have already faid, in the account of the catalogue 
of plants publifhed by himfelf in 1748.
This 
hiftory of the antient and modern ftate of the 
garden given by Naucler^ contains a variety of curi- 
ous matter on the fubje6b, and is illuftrated with 
a ground-plot and view of the garden j lifts of the 
fucculent plants and others •, and, what is more 
particularly acceptable^ the lives of the Rudbecks^ 
father and fon, whofe literary fame is founded, 
not on botany alone, but on anatomy, and the 
knowledge of antiquities.
s 
8. De Passiflora.
J, G.
Hallman.
1745.
A very methodical hiftory of that beautiful and 
much-admired genus of plants, which the Catho- 
lics, who firft faw it in America^ and from the 
fancied refemblance of the crofs which they per- 
ceived in the flower, called PaJJion Flower ; and 
which foon held a diftinguiftied rank in the Euro- 
fean gardens.
M. Hallman^ after a chronological 
lift of thofe writers, who firft exhibited the feveral 
fpecies, from Peter Ciltza and Monardes^ down to 
DillemuSy defcribes at large 22 fpecies, and gives 
their feveral fynonyms, adding afterwards a lift of 
many which are dubious.
He fubjoins the ufes, 
which the natives of America make of thefe plants, 
principally borrowed from Pifo.
The whole is 
0^2 ornamented^i' 
[ 228 ] 
ornamented, and rendered much more ufeful, by 
a plate, on which are engraven different views of 
the flower, and a figure of the leaf of each 
fpecies.
The PaJJion Flomer belongs to the gynandrous 
plants with five ftamina, and the number of 
fpecies, as they now (land in the fyftem, is aug- 
mented to 26, without mentioning two others, de- 
fcribed and figured as new, by M.
Jacquin^ who 
brought them from Carthagena, All the Fajfion 
Flowers yet known are natives of the warmer parts 
of America only, and not found in any other parts 
of the globe.
9. De x^lNandria.
E. Z.Ttirfen, 1745.
The hiftory of a Angular Siberian plant, which, 
during the time of flowering, was found not to 
open the calix ; and was called Anandria by pro- 
feflbr Siegejbeck^ of Peterjhurgh^ who had fancied 
that it was deftitute of ftamina^ and having de- 
clared himfeif a flirenuous oppofer of the fexual 
fyRem, thought, by the inftance of this plant, to 
have overturned the whole do6lrine of the fexes of 
plants ; having v/ritten a treatife, in which he had 
ailerted, that the fiamina did not conftitute the 
ejjential parts of the plant, and that the feed would 
become fertile without the influence of the Folleii 
Antherarwn, This plant is fyngenefwiis^ and of thac 
genus which we name Coltsfoot, It fl:ands in the 
Syfl:em under the name of ujfilago ( Anandria) 
fcapo unifioro^ fuhfqiiamofo ere^o^ foltis lyrata-ovatis % 
jind fubfequent obfervations proved , that in a 
warmer 
[ 229 3 
warmer fituation than its native one, the cali:>i would 
open, and iliew a radiated flower.
The contro- 
verfy, which was managed in behalf of Linn^us 
by Dr. Gkditfcb of Berlin^ much extended the 
knowledge, and favoured the eftabiifhment of the 
Linn^an fyftem, at that time unwillingly received 
by many of the older botanifts.
ID.
De AcROSTico.
J, B.
Heiligtag, ly^J.
A botanical diflertation on a genus of plants 
belonging to an extenfive natural order, placed in 
the Cryptogamia clafs, which we call Ferns ; and 
which were known to former botanifls by the name 
of Epiphyllofpermous plants, fmce they chiefly pro- 
duce their parts of frudification on the back of the 
leaf, or frons.
After fome general obfervations on 
the plants confl:ituting this order, which have alfo 
been called Capillary plants, and fliewing the place 
they hold, and their charaElers in the feveral fyftems 
of Ray^ Morifon^ TGurnefort^ and Linn/eus, the 
writer proceeds to an ample defcription of the 
fpecies of Acroftica^ of which he enumerates feven- 
teen, with their fynonyms.
This genus is difl:in- 
guiflied by having the frudification fpread all over 
the furface of the leaf ; and the number of fpecies, 
in the lad edition of the Syfliem, is augmented to 
thirty.
They are m.oftly of American produce, 
three only being European^ of which two are fpar- 
ingly found in Britain.
They are a Angular let 
cf plants, and have much excited the attention of 
botanifls.
A plate accompanies this tra6b, on which 
five of the uncommon fpecies are delineated.
0^3' II.
Museum 
[ 1 
11.
Museum Adolpho Fredericianum.
L* Balk* 
The fubjed of this paper is ftridly zoological ?
It contains a particular defcription of 65 of the 
rarer kinds of animals, which v/ere prefented to the 
mufeum of the univerfity by the late King Adolphus 
of Sweden^ at that time hereditary prince.
Thefe 
defcriptions being drawn up with fufficient accu- 
racy, and regard to the rules of the Limaan fyf- 
tem, and referred to in the fubfequent zoology of 
LiNNiSus, yet retain their value.
Amphibia^ and 
Fifhes, form the greater part of this colledion : 
among the former we mention particularly an ex- 
cellent defcription of the Chameleon, (Lacerta 
Cham^Ieon^Sy^t.
346.) ; of xh^ AmphiJbcenaFuliginofa^ 
Syft.392 ; of the Crotalus Horridus^ or Rattle Snake : 
and among the latter, of the Torpedo^ which has 
fo lately excited anew the attention of eledlricians, 
as alfo of that remarkable fifh called Soldigo by the 
Portiiguefe (Sihirus Callichthys^ Syft.
506.) which 
Marcgrave and Fifo fay will travel in dry feafons 
acrofs the land from rivulet to rivulet in queft of 
water.
Two copper-plates accompany this tradt.
12.
Spoxsalia Plantarum.
J, G.
Wahlbom.
1746.
Whoever would fee all the arguments for, and 
the refult of, thofe experiments, on which the doc- 
trine of the fexes of plants is founded, are refer- 
red to this differtation ; as containing, by far, the 
moft clear, comprehenfive, and yet copious view 
of 
9 
[ 231 3 
of that fiibjed.
It is profeffedly a commentary 
upon the 5th chapter of Linn.^us's Fundamental 
or Philofophi a Botanica, from fedion 132 to 150 
inclufive, and contains 49 pages.
It is out of our 
plan to produce any detail of thefe arguments 
fuffice it to fay, that although, from the writings 
of Hheophraftus and Fliny^ we learn that the antients 
had fome idea of an analogy in this refpect, 
between the animal and vegetable kingdom, 
drawn perhaps principally from the artificial mode 
of foecundating the date-tree^ yet, fo crude and 
erroneous were their ideas, that in many inftances 
they called thofe plants male or female, which 
modern difcoveries have taught us are exadly the 
reverfe.
Indeed it does not appear, that any very 
precife ideas on this fubje6l were eftablifhed till 
late in the laft century ; and, were it a matter of 
importance to determine to whom applaufe is due 
for this difcovery, the EngUJh miight perhaps with 
juftice claim this honour, and bellow it on S'w'ThO' 
mas Millington^ Savilian profefibr, who appears to 
have been the firft that gave the hint to Dr. Grew ; 
fince whofe time this do6lrine has received fo 
much light, that we prefume few people can now 
doubt the following pofition, which briefly con- 
tains the whole of what is underilood now by this 
analogy namely, That the influence of the 
" farina from the anthers of flowers upon the 
Jligma^ is eifentiaily ncceiTary to give fertility to 
" the feed." If there are any who yet wifh to fee 
what arguments may be adduced agaiv.ft this doc- 
trine, they are referred to the Anthologia of Ponte^ 
0^4 ^ra^ 
[ 232 ] 
dera^ and to the late Dr. Aljhn's Diflertation on 
Botany.
It hath been before obferved, that Lin- 
N^us was honoured with a premium from the 
Royal Academy of Sciences at Peterjburgh^ for his 
excellent Treatife on the Spnfalia Plantarum^ in 
which he is thought to have moit irrefragably 
proved his pofition.
13.
Nova Plant arum Genera.
I C.
M, Daffow, 
1747- 
In this paper are defcribed and eftabliflied the 
natural charaders of 43 new genera^ all which 
vv-ere afterwards taken into the 5th edition of the 
Genera Plantarum of Linn^us, publifhed in 1754.
14.
Vires Plantarum.
F, Haffelqulft, 1747.
Pradlical phyficians have wiflied, and fome have 
formed the idea that it is pofTible, to deduce tjie 
virtues of plants from their agreement in fimilar 
characters of frucftification, in habit or agreement 
in natural orders^ or clafTes. Mr.
P ether ^ long 
fmce, was among the firfl that hazarded fome re- 
flexions on this fubject : fee Philofophical Tranf- 
adtions, N° 255, and Lcwthorp^s Abridgment, 
vol.
ii.
p. 704, And the very eminent Dr.
Hoffmann has a profeiTed diifertation on it, in 
the fifth volume of his v/orks, p.
58.
It is the 
intention of the prefent paper, written by this in- 
genious but unfortunate difciple of Linn^^us, to 
extend and illuftrate the fame idea, by this com- 
mentary on the 1 2th chapter of the Philcfophia 
Botanica j which contains the general dofirine af 
this 
C 233 3 
this attempt, and an enumeration of thofe natural 
or artificial orders in botany, which are fuppofed 
to illuftrate and confirm the poffibility of attain- 
ing this defirable end.
To mention a few in- 
ftances of this agreement in charadler and qualities: 
The ftellated clafs, in Ray^s fyflem, are moftly 
diuretics \ the afperifoli^^ are chiefly demulcents ; 
the umbelliferous plants, which grow in dry places, 
are aromatics^ particularly the roots and feeds ; 
but if growing in wet iituations, ufually partake 
more or lefs of a deleterious quality.
The Icofan- 
drous plants of Linn^us abound with pulpy and 
efculent fruits : the Polyandrous are many of them 
poifonous : the Syngenejious^ in frequent inftances, 
intenfe bitters^ &c.
It moil not be concealed, how- 
ever, that there are not wanting thofe who confider 
both xh^ natural method in botany, and the deduc- 
tion of the virtues of fimples from thefe congruities^ 
as the philofopher's ftone of the fcience ^ notwith- 
ftanding which, there is no attempt in the im- 
provement of botany, or its true application to 
the ufes of phyfic, which ought more ftrenuoufly 
and unremittingly to be purfued, than that of 
bringing to all poffible perfedion the purpofe of 
tkis difTertation, 
15.
De Chrystallorum Generatione, 
M. Kahler, 1747.
In this tra61: is difcuffed at large, that opinion 
which LiNN^us early imbibed^ and which led 
him to afcribe to the operation of one and the 
fame 
C 234 ] 
fame principle, the regular polyedrous figure of 
all thofe bodies, called Chryjlals^ ading upon them 
during their fufpenfion in an aqueous menllruum ^ 
and this he conceived to be equally the cafe, 
whether thefe bodies are what we ufually call fa- 
line^ or whether they are lapidofe^ pyriticofe^ or 
arfenical\ or finally, whether they are fuch as are 
termed metallic falts.
Hence arofe his arrange- 
ment of figured Spars ^ Selenite^ quartzofe Chryfials^ 
including all the gems under that genus of fait, to 
which their agreement in figure entitled them to a 
place.
This opinion gave fo much offence to mi- 
neralogifts, that, moft probably, it rendered his 
Syftem in the mineral kingdom, much lefs accept- 
able than the other parts of that work had been.
In this paper lapidofe chvy^dih only are confidered ; 
many of which are figured, and defcribed, and 
referred to the feveral falts with which they agree 
in figure.
Linn^eus's idea on this fubjed has 
been lately taken up, and purfued in a very ex- 
tenfive manner, by M.
de Rome de Ltjle^ in an 
Effay printed at P^ym, in 1772.
It muft be con- 
fefied, however, that the greateft difficulties attend 
the folution of this matter : how far the further 
confideration of the volcanic fyftem, which is gain- 
ing ground in the minds of fome philofophers and 
mineralogifts, may elucidate the origin of certain 
figured bodies, which are faid to have a chryftaU 
line or vitreous bafis, time only muft fhew ; hi- 
therto it feems to bid fairer towards folving fomq 
difficulties, than any foregoing hypothefis.
I^.
SURINAMENSIA 
[ 235 1 
16.
SuRiNAMENSiA Grilliana.
P. Sufid.
i74^.
The defcription at large of 25 fubje6bs of the 
animal kingdom, chiefly Serpentes^ colleded at Suri- 
nam by Mr. Gerret^ famous for being among the 
firll who introduced, and fuccefsfully cultivated, 
coffee in America^ and who fent thefe curiofities to 
M. Grilk an opulent citizen of Stockholm, by which 
means they came finally into the mufeum of UpfaL 
We here meet with an excellent account of the 
Rattle-fnake \ and particularly a defcription and 
figure of tht BoaConfiri5lor, that gigantic ferpent, of 
which we have fuch copious and aftonllhing ac- 
counts mJdanfon, Pifo^ K^mpfer, and others.
The 
plate alfo prefents a figure of the C^ciliaTentaculata, 
Syft.
293; of the Coluber Ammodytes, Syft.
376; 
and of the Egyptian Locuft, Gryllus CriftatuSy Syft.
699.
all which are amply defcribed.
17.
Flora Oeconomica.
E. A/pelin, 174S.
There is fcarcely any morfel in this colledlion 
more worthy of regard, or that has a more ufe- 
ful tendency, than this paper which is in- 
tended to difplay, and really contains, in a com- 
pendious way, the ufes of the indigenous plants 
of Sweden, whether in Agriculture, rural O economy 
in general, in the Arts, or in culinary ufes.
It does 
not profefs to deliver their medicinal qualities, 
that not being a part of the plan.
The plants are 
enumerated in the order in which they are found 
in the Flora Suecica, but no botanical diftin6lions or 
difquifitions are here introduced.
We have no 
work on this plan extant in England^ and are per- 
3 fuaded 
I 236 ] 
fuaded that fomething of this kind^ on a more 
extended fcale, written in the language of the 
country, and adapted to common ufe, could not 
fail to meet with a favourable reception, and 
would certainly be highly beneficial, not only by 
difclofing matter of real and inftant information 
to many who are ignorant of the various appli- 
cations that have already been made of plants 
which are daily negle6led, but, by exciting a fpirit 
of invefligation in general, would doubtlefs lead to 
new difcoveries.
An economical Flora ^ or Herbal^ 
is what we have never yet feen \ our works that 
bear the name of Herbals treat on plants and trees, 
as if their utility was alone confined to the pur- 
pofes of phyfic, and even here, in a variety of 
inftances, attribute to them virtues which neither 
their fenfible qualities have juilified, nor experi- 
ence has afcertained.
We have obferved that this work is confined 
to the native plants of the country, out of which, 
as an inftance of the variety of fubjeds that are here 
mentioned as objedls of economy in various ways, 
there are not lefs than three hundred that have a 
place in this catalogue.
18.
De CuRiosiTATE Naturali.
0. Soderhergy 
1748.
This concluding paper of the firft volume, is a 
difcourfe intended as an incitement to the ftudy 
of natural hiilory, by a train of well- connected 
arguments and obfervations, drawn from that ad- 
mirable difplay of wifdom^ and goodnefs manifefl 
throughout 
t 237 1 
throughout all nature ; and from its dignity and 
importance, as fo immediately conneded with uti- 
lity to mankind : from all which confiderations, 
the author thinks it entitled to one of the mofi 
diftinguifhed ranks among the objeds of human 
enquiry ; and that, fo far from being a frivolous 
purfuit, it is in every view one of the worthieft 
employments of the human mind.
AMCENITATES ACADEMIC.^.
Vol. IL 
1752.
pp.
468.
ig.
Oeconomia Nature.
\J,J.Biberg.
1749.
It is impoflible in an abftrafl to do any proper 
juftice to this excellent production ; the defign of 
which is entirely phyfico- theological, and confe- 
quently its fcope is various and extenfive.
The 
writer firft confiders, in general, the Stru^fure of 
the Earthy its feas, mountains, &c.
and the effects 
of the change of feafons on all parts of its farface, 
and on the elements : the difpofition of the FofftV 
Kingdom^ and the various origin of its feveral bo- 
dies, with their gradual tranfmutation \ from 
v/hence, in many inftances, arife their different 
denominations with us i in the Vegetable Kingdom^ 
the various means by which the diflemination of 
feeds is effedled, thereby cloathing in every climate 
the whole furface of the earth, and conducing to 
the prefervation of animals : in the Animal King^* 
dom itfelf, the extraordinary increafe of fome, the 
paucity of others their means of prefervation, 
and 
[ 238 3 
and their ufe, even in their deftrudllon, to the 
general economy of nature : all thefe pofitions he 
has illuftrated and confirmed by apt examples, 
and finally draws this conclufion — that all nature 
is moft harmonioufly arranged, and adapted to 
produce, upon the whole, reciprocal good.
This 
paper is among thofe tranflated by Mr. StilUngfleet.
20.
De T^NiA, G.
Dubois, 1748.
At the time this treatife was written, the fub- 
je6t had more than ufually engaged the attention 
of the SwediJlD naturalifts and phyficians, and par- 
ticularly of LiNNi5:us, and his colleague Dr.
Rofen^ the family of the latter having fufFered 
much from this dangerous animal, as appears by 
his treatife on the Difeafes of Children^ lately ren- 
dered into Englijh by Dr. Sparmann.
The author has here defcribed and figured four 
fpecies, all of which are found in the inteftines of 
animals, chiefly in thofe of carnivorous quadru- 
peds ; and unhappily two of thefe kinds, but 
more particularly the jT.
Solium^ too frequently 
infeft the human body.
The fpecific difi^erences 
of the ^aniee arife from the number and Jituation of 
the mouths or fuckers in each link of this com- 
pound animal, the hiftory of which has employed 
the pens of many ingenious men, and is notwith- 
ftanding yet involved in confiderable obfcurity.
The Tape-worms moft commonly infelling the 
human body, are thofe defcribed by Linn^us 
under the names of 'T cenia Solium^ and ^enia Vul- 
garis^ Syfl.
Nat. p.
1323, both of which are not 
unfrequently 
t 239 1 
unfrequently found extended from the duodenum^ 
almoft through the whole trad of the inteftines.
Much controverfy has been fpent in determining 
whether thefe animals have any part that is analo- 
gous to the brain or head in other animals ; our 
author affirms the contrary, confidering them as 
compound animals, conlifting as it were of a chain, 
every link of which is a perfe6l animal, furnifhed 
with a mouth, and all its proper organs, and ca- 
pable, when feparated from its original chain, of 
propagating its fpecies, as if -by a vegetative 
power, and independent of any oviparous or vivi- 
parous procefs.
In this idea he is oppofed by Dr.
^yfon, who has figured the head of the I'^nia Solium 
in the Philofophical Tranfadions ; (fee N° 147, and 
Lowthorp'' s Ahndgmtni^ Vol. iii.
p. 130-,) as alfo 
by Pallas, in his Elencbus Zoophytorum, and by fome 
other authors.
The Vermes Cucurbitini, or gourd- 
worms of foregoing writers, are now however allow- 
ed to be the defcending or pofterior links of the 
^ania Solium, and thefe, according to Linn^^us, are 
again capable of extending themfelves, and pro- 
ducing another chain.
According to Pallas, and 
others, thefe joints are pregnant with ova.
In 
either cafe the reafon is at once feen why thefe 
noxious creatures are with fuch difficulty expelled 
from the human body.
Linn^us however does 
not deny that they are capable of propagation by 
ova too and fays, they are found, though much, 
fmaller, in muddy fprings ; to which Pallas with 
difficulty alTents.
Linn^^ius's opinion however is 
confirmed by fubfequent obfervations \ and in- 
deed 
[ 240 ] 
deed we cannot but obferve, that without allow- 
ing them to exid elfewhere than in the inteflines of 
animals, it is exceedingly difficult to account for 
the locality of the difeafe arifing from thefe worms.
We cannot enlarge on this treatife confident 
with our plan it mull be fufficient to obferve, 
that this dilfertation, befides being in itfelf highly 
fatisfadlory, may be confidered as an inde^c alfo 
to thofe writers that are mofl worthy of being con- 
fulted on the fame fubjed.
21.
Lignum CoLUBRiNUM.
J, A, Barelius.
1749.
This is a critical enquiry to determine the fpe- 
cies of that drug called Lignum Colubrinum^ which 
it is faid the Indian Ichneumon^ Weefel^ or MungoSy 
(Viverra Ichneumon^ ^.
Lin. Syft.
63.) firft point- 
ed out to the Indians, This wood the Zeylanefe 
ufe as an antidote to the poifon of the Hooded 
Serpent, or Naja^ called alfo Cohra de Capello ; 
(Coluber Ndja^ Syft.
382.) of which K^mpfer hsis 
given fo extenfive an hiftory, as the moft poifon- 
ous of all ferpents.
Darelius prefixes to his en- 
quiry the hiftory of both thefe animals, of which 
too m.any marvellous things have been related ; 
he then examines into the pretenfions of that drug, 
which had ufually been fold in Europe under the 
name of Lignum Coluhrinum^ (fee DaUs Pharmacol .
kg.
p. 358.) which is the Strychnos Colubrina^ 
Spec.
Plant.
271.
and rejeds its claim, inclining 
at length to beftow it on the plant defcribed by 
K^empfer^ under the name of Radix Mungo^ p; 557.
This plant was received into the Syftem among 
the 
[ 241 ] 
the Pentandrous tribe, under the name of Ophior^ 
rhiza Mungos^ and is figured in the Materia Me* 
dica of our author.
The root is exhibited in India 
and in Zeylon, not only as an antidote againft the 
venorn of this ferpent, but againft the bite of the 
mad dog, as alfo in putrid fevers.
Grimmius^ 
who lived long as a phyfician at Columbo^ in Zey- 
lon^ profefTes to have made great ufe of it.
Our 
author fubjoins feveral preparations from this 
fimple^ and, from hochm\ prefents us with the 
formula of the famous Lapis de Goa^ in which the 
Mungos root ftands as the firft ingredient.
He con- 
cludes with an enquiry into the efFeds of the fpu- 
rious drug of this name, the refult of which fuffici- 
ently agrees with what is related of the Nux Vomica^ 
to which genus it is referred according to the fexual 
fyftem, 
22.
Radix Senega, j.
Kiernander, 1749.
As the terror of the Naja is difpelled, in Afia^ by 
the Ophiorrhiza^ fo is that of the Rattle-Snake^ ia 
America, by the Senega.
After premifmg the hif- 
tory of the Rattle-Snake, (Crotalus Horridus^ Syft.
372.) chiefly borrowed from Catejhy\ Dr. Kiernan- 
der gives a full botanical and medical hiftory of 
this famous plant, which for fo long a time the 
Indians concealed from the Europeans, The au- 
thor then recites ten different vegetables, of 
which the Europeans, during their endeavours 
to come at the true Rattle-Snake root, tried the 
effeds againft this fubtie venom.
Some of thefe 
are faid to have been not quite unavailing : at 
length Dr.
"Tennent difcovered the fecret, and 
R found 
{ 242 J 
found the plant to be a fpecies of Milkwort^ which 
Hands now in Linn^us's works under the name 
of Polygala Senega^ (Spec.
PI.
990.) and of this 
genus there are not fewer than 26 fpecies known.
The defcription of the Senega is accompanied by 
a figure of the plant.
The root, v/hich is the 
part alone ufed in medicine, affords an acrimony 
on the palate, perhaps unexampled in the whole 
Materia Medka» The author gives the analyfis of 
the root, enumerates its effedVs as a fialagogue^ diu- 
retic^ and expe^lorant ; the various preparations, 
.and their ufe in inflammatory difeafes, dropfy, 
gout, rheumatifm ; in a difeafe which he mentions 
as endemic in Virginia^ under the name of Ma- 
rafmus Virginicus^ and finally as the great fpecific 
to the venom of the rattle- fnake i to which end 
the Indians inftantly chew it, fwallow the juice, 
and apply the mafticated root to the pundure.
The root of the Polygala vulgaris^ which grows fo 
plentifully in England^ appears from experiments 
to pofTefs the qualities of.
the Senega^ but in a far 
weaker degree.
23.
Genesis Calculi.
J, O.
Hagftrom, 1749.
Before Dr. Hagftrom comes to the immediate 
confideration of the origin of the Calculus of the 
urinary bladder, he premifes fome obfervations 
on calcareous fubflances in general % and enume- 
rates, the feveral kinds of calculous concretions^ 
and their fituations in the animal body : fuch are 
she CfJcuks Urina y Saliva j Pulmomm Gajiru:us ; 
C U3 3 
Feiiis ; an<^ the Calculus Podagra, He then Confix 
fiders the component parts of that F^x Chyli^ or 
Lixivium^ the Urine^ and the changes to which it 
is liable, in fmell, tafte, and colour, by the dif- 
ferent ingefta ; under which article he mentions a 
fmgular fa6l of a gentleman, who after having 
laboured under an inveterate acidity at the fto- 
mach, for which he had taken large quantities of 
chalk, found his urine altered fo as to have entire- 
ly a milky appearance.
In confidering the im- 
mediate generation of the Calculus^ he adopts the 
Boerhaavian theory, and afcribes it to chryjlalliza- 
tion : tl>is leads him to confider all thofe circum- 
ftances which favour and accelerate this mode of 
concreting, and to feek for fomewhat analogous 
thereto in the human body, as predifpofing caufes 
to this malady; which he finds in Atonia^ and the 
wfe of acid and fermented liquors.
He finilhes 
the theory by fome curious and apt refledions on 
the great analogy between this diforder and the 
gout, and their tranfitions.
In the therapeutic part, notwithftanding all that 
had been written relating to the power of alkaline 
medicines in diffolving the conneding' gluten, 
and thus promoting the decompolition of the CaU 
tuluSy the author does not allov^ them fo much 
merit as hath been attributed to them by many 
writers.
He is inclined to give more efficacy to 
bitters, particularly as Prophyla5fics^ from the idea 
of their ftriking more immediately at the Atonia j 
and adduces two examples, communicated to him 
•by the Prefident LiNN^us himfelf, of the ufe of the 
R 2 EJfentia 
I 244 ]   
Ejfentia Ahfinthii in this dreadful difeafe.
This 
difquifition concludes with an obfervation, on a 
milk-diet in the ftone and gout, the efficacy of 
which he confirms by two well-adapted cafes j 
which however, agreeably to foregoing obfervations, 
prove the necelTity, in the gout, of adhering to 
the regimen, when once adopted, throughout life.
One of thefe affords a melancholy Icflbn of the 
danger of deferting it, in the cafe of a French ge- 
neral, who, after twenty years freedom from the 
difeafe, at the age of 70, died in confequence of 
a fit brought on by one plentiful meal of animal 
food.
24.
Gemm^ Arborum.
p. Lotfling.
1749.
This gentleman, who afterwards, at the recom- 
mendation of LiNN^g^us, obtained a penfion as 
naturalifc to the King of Spain^ and died in his 
fervice in America^ has here given us a curious and 
elaborate difquifition on the Buds of trees, a part 
in vegetables which, till this time, had been lefs 
attentively examined than many others.
Gems or Buds are fmall rounded parts, made up 
of fcales, differently arranged, fituated commonly 
on the ftem, or branches of trees, and containing, 
in epitome, the rudiments of either the future 
flower fingly, the leanjes fingly, or both flower 
and leaves.
Analogous to the flower^ and leaf» 
hearing Gem^ which is the moil common, is a Bulb 
placed at the root of many plants, inafmuch as 
both contain a future perfect plant, requiring only 
envelopement, by the genial efFed of heat, Thefe 
t 245 3 
€ems and Bulbs are called by Linn^^us Hyherna- 
xula^ as inclofing the embryo during the winter, 
and the former are ahnoft confined to trees of the 
colder countries.
After a requifite account of the 
fubje6t in general.
Dr. Loefling exhibits a claffifica- 
tion of theC^mof jo8 fpecies of trees and fhrubs, 
founded on the different firu^ure and fjuation of 
the various kinds.
In confequence of this ar- 
rangement, the fpecies of any of thefe trees is fup- 
pofed to be capable of being difcovered in the 
winter feafon, and Hate of defoliation, by the buds 
alone.
25.
Pan Suecus.
iV.
L. Hejfelgren.
1749.
The originality, and Angular good tendency and 
<iefign of this paper, induced the writer of this 
volume, feveral years ago, to throw it into a form 
more immediately adapted to an Englijh reader, by 
referring to Englijh authors, and it was then laid 
before the public in the Gentleman's Magazine 
for the year 1758, accompanied with fome notes 
and general obfervations.
This has enabled him 
to annex it, in a ilill more enlai ged form, to this 
volume.
26.
Splachnum.
L. Mo7itin.
1750, 
Mr. Montin^ at the inftance of Linn^us, had 
made an expedition the preceding fummer into 
Lapland^ and, amongfl other natural produdtions, 
had brought back this curious and uncommon 
niofs, and in this paper gives a complete botanical 
hillory of its gems, called Splachnum, the firft 
R 3 fpecies 
[ 246 ] 
fpecies of which, fingular for the elegant form of 
the heads, had been firft difcovered by an Engltjh.- 
fnan^ in Norway^ and communicated to Mr. Petiver.
There ^re three others, of which a lefs fpecious 
kind is not uncommon on our bogs in England, 
Mr. Montin^ in this journey, had an opportu- 
nity of confirming an opinion, which Linn/eus 
had before conceived, relating to the caufe of a 
moft excruciating colic^ to which the Laplanders.
^re often fubjedled, and which he defcribes very 
particularly in the Flora Lapponka, p.
69.
when 
treating of the Angelica^ which, ^mong other 
fimples, is ufed as a remedy.
Mr. Montin thinks 
it clear, that it arifes from fwallowing in their 
waters the Gordius Jquaiicus^ a fpecies of worm dc- 
fcribed in the Fauna Suecica., N*^ 2068, well known 
to Gefner^ and the older writers, under the name 
of VHulus Aq^uatieus^ and Seta Aquatica^ as being 
jio thicker than a horfe hair.
27.
Semina Muscorum.
p. J, Bergius, 1750.
Dr. BergiuSy fince profeflbr of pharmacy and 
natural hiftory at Stockholm^ has, in this tradt, 
thrown conf;derable light on the fructification of 
the fecond order of vegetables in the Cryptogamia 
clafs : much more however has been done fince the 
time he wrote, and it is now thought that the tribe 
of MoITes have feparate male and female flowers ; 
the former of which ufually ftand on long 
pedicles , the latter are as yet, in mofl.
genera^ 
very obfcurely invefligated : and Linnaeus him* 
felf appears to be doubtful, whether the ^uft which 
we 
C 247 11 
wc obferve in the heads of mofTeSj is the Pollen 
4ntherarum^ or the f^ds themfelves.
28.
Materia Medica e Regno Animai^j.
K. J.
Sidren, 1750.
This enumeration contains 67 fubjeds, and is 
executed exactly on the plan of our author's Ma^ 
tcria Medica e Plantis^ of which we have before 
fpoken.
29.
Pj.ant^ Camschatgenses rasliores, 
J, p.
Halenius, 1750.
A defcription at large of 26 new Siberian plants, 
fent to Linnaeus by Dr. Gmelin, who had fpent 
almoft 10 years, by the con^mand, and at the 
expence, of the Emprefs of Rujfta^ in inveftigating 
the natural hiftory of that kingdom.
Amongft 
thefe, we may particularly remark that foetid plant, 
called Cimicifuga fmida (Syfb.
Nat. ii.
659,) fo 
pffenfive, and even poifonous, to thofe infedls from 
which it receives its name.
A decodion of this 
draftic herb is ufed in Siberia (as Gmelin informs 
us, Flor, Sib, iv.
p. 183.) with great fuccefs in 
dropfies.
It is a curious remark which is fuggefted by our 
author, that in journeying eaftwards in Kamtchatka^ 
- the botanift fees his nearer approach towards 
North America^ by the habit of many of the plants ; 
and hence arofe a prefumptive proof of the vici- 
nity of the two continents, before real difcoveries 
|i^d confirmed the truth of it.
The author has 
^ 4 giyea 
r 24S 3 
given a lift of feveral plants, that are afbu ally the 
fame as are found in North America, 
3P.
Sapor Medigamentorum.
J. Rudherg, 
After having prennifed fome general obferva- 
tions on all the antient fe6ls of phyficians, and 
felicitated the prefent age on the rejection of all 
hypotheles and opinions not fupported by expe- 
riments ; and confidered the general phyfiology 
of the human body, Dr. Roberg proceeds to his 
fubjed, which may be regarded as a very inftruc- 
tive comment on the '^6^(\ Aphorifm of the Rhi- 
lofophia Botanic a, " Sapida in fiulda et folida cigunt 
under which all vegetable fimples are arranged 
into eleven clalTes, founded on diftin6lions arifing 
from their fenfible qualities, principally as they 
afFed the tafte, as follows : 
1. Sicca.
2. Aquofa.
3. Vifcofa.
4. Salfa.
5. Acida.
6. Styptica.
7. Dulcia.
8. Pinguia.
9. Amara.
10.
Acria.
11.
Naiifeofa, 
Under each of thefe heads refpedive fimples are 
arranged, and the comment is fubjoined, explain- 
ing the mode of their a^ion^ and effe^ls^ both on the 
JqM$ and fluids ; and frequently fpecifying the par- 
ticular difeafes in which they are employed.
A 
fet of apt corollaries arc added \ and, upon the 
whole, this little trad is by no means unworthy 
the 
t 249 ] 
the attention of medical ftudents in general, and 
cfpecially of thofe who wifh to con^.prehend the 
Linnaan theory of phyfic.
To this volume of the Amm'itates are fubjoined 
the three orations of Linn^us, which, as they 
make part of his own proper works, have been 
fpoken of in the foregoing pages of this volume* 
AMOENITATES ACADEMICS.
Vol. IIL 
1756.
pp, 464.
31.
Nova Plantarum Genera.
Z. J, Chenon.
1751.
Chiefly a defcription of new genera and fpecies of 
plants, brought from North America by Dr. Kalm^ 
who had fpent three years in that country.
Pre- 
vious to the defcriptions, we have a brief mention 
made of thofe who had treated upon the plants 
of North America before Kalm.
Thefe were Cor- 
nutus^ the firft writer, in 1625 ; Banifter^ in Raf^ 
hiftory^ 1680; Pkkenet^ in 1691 j Bohart^ in 1699; 
Ray^ in his fupplement, 1704; Catejhy^ i73ii 
Gromvius^ or rather Clayton^ 1739 Dr. Mitchell^ 
1748 ; Governor Colden^ i743- By the induftry 
of thefe writers, botany had been augmented with 
77 new genera^ to which Kalm added eight.
As 
Dr. Kalm's plants are all now received into the 
Syftem, any further account of this paper is fuper- 
feded.
A plate is added, on which are engraven 
feven of the rarer fpecies.
32.
Plants 
[ 250 ] 
32.
Plants Hybrids, J, Haartman.
1751.
The fubjedl of this paper is very interfcing in 
botanic fcience j and being as yet fomewhat pro- 
blematical, has exercifed the pens of feveral inge- 
nious men, but of none perhaps more fuccefsfully 
than that of the late Dr. Gmelht, in his Sermo aca- 
demicus^ denovonm vegetahilium ortii.
Tubing, 1749.
Mr. Uaartman allows thepoflibility of this origin or 
new creation of vegetables, arifing from the influ- 
ence of the farina of one fpecies upon the fifiil of 
another, either of the fame or of a different gems>i 
thus producing what is called a Hybrid plant.
In- 
ftances of this admixture, and produ£lion of mon- 
fiers in the vegetable kingdom, have been fre- 
qiient j but, as in the animal kingdom, the^ have 
not ufqally been found to perpetuate themfelves 
by producing fertile feeds.
The general effect of 
culture, and the immenfe number of fpecies, with 
which, particularly, many of the African genera 
abound, fuch as the Geranium^ Erica^ Mefemhry- 
mthemurn^ &c.
very much favour this hypothefis, 
A catalogue is given of 34 fpecies of well- 
Known plants, fuppofed to have originated in 
this manner, fpecifying thofe alfo frorn which 
they are fufpeded to have fprung and a compa- 
rifon is made between the feveral parts and habit 
of each, with the correfponding hybrid offspring, 
to ihew the probability of this origin.
Another lift 
of many other plants follows, in which the traces 
are not fo flrongly marked.
Among the Englifh 
indigenous plants^ thought to have thus originated, 
we 
C 251 ] 
wc mention the Veronica Hybrida^ or Welch Speed* 
well, which is believed to have arifen from the 
Officinalis and the Spicata ; as the ^ihthorpia Euro- 
faa is from the Golden Saxifrage, and Marfl^ 
pennywort.
53.
Obstacui^a Medicine, J, G.
Beyerften; 
1752- 
An enquiry into, and a brief difcufTion of, the 
caufes that have hitherto impeded the progrefs of 
phyfic.
An ingenious and well -conduced plan, 
and moil laudable defign, which all thofe who wilh 
well to the art would defire to fee ftil'i farther illuf- 
trated, by fome fuch charafler as v/ould command 
attention, and give the fubjeft that importance 
which it demands.
Among other obftacles, the 
writer mentions— the force of cuftom in direcfling 
prefcription theories founded on hypothefes \ 
negled of nofology ^ too little attention to reputed 
poifons ; timid prefcription ; too fmall dofes ; ig- 
norance of apothecaries in botany, and the Materia 
Medica ^ ufe of compound medicines ; ignorance 
of the natural clafTes of plants ; i^c.
—all which 
pofitions are confirmed by fuitable reflexions, and 
examples, 
34.
Plants Esculents Patri^.
J, Hiorth, 
1752.
A lifl of fuch native plants of Sweden as have 
been, or in fome way or other may be, objefls of 
culinary ufe, principally as aliments ; to which 
^re added Gopdiments, and Succedanea^ to feveral 
of 
[ 252 ] 
of thofe articles of exotic luxury, which the opu- 
kot nations of Europe import from diflant parts of 
the world.
It is happily not an obje6l of importance, 
much lefs of neceffity, to confult fuch a catalogue 
in this nation ; but it would be matter of pleafure 
and furprife to many, to fee the great number of ve- 
getables, which, in a country from its fituation far 
from fertile, may fupply the want of bread.
The 
fubjedts of this trad amount to 127, many of 
which would demand a place in an economical 
berhaly adapted to a much milder climate.
35.
Euphorbia.
J. Wiman, 1752.
A complete botanical hiftory of one of the moll 
cxtenfive genera of plants, feveral of which have a 
place in the Materia Medica^ which, in the Lin- 
naan fyftem, Hands in the Do decandrous clafs, and 
furnifhes greater inftances of anomalies in the ha- 
bit of the fpeciesy than perhaps is elfewhere to be 
inet with % as it contains not only the Euphor- 
iium^ the Efuhy and Cataputia of the fliops, but 
alfo all the ^ithymali^ or Spurges, of authors.
Fifty-three fpecies are defcribed in this dilTertation, 
and their fynonyms delivered, together with a 
general account of their ufes in phyfic.
In the 
Species Plantarum this genus is augmented to the 
number of 62 kinds, to which probably more 
might be added from Burman's Flora Indica.
At 
this day, the Euphorbia are but little ufed inter- 
nally, fcarcely ever : their extreme acrimony, and 
draftic powers, being too unmanageable.
36.
Materia 
[ 253 ] 
30.
Materia Medica e Regno Lapideo.
J, Lindhult.
1752.
Under 72 heads.
Dr. Lindhult has comprifed all 
the fimples of the Materia Medica from the foITil 
kingdom, digefted exadly in the method obferved 
by LiNN^us himfelf, in his feparate publication 
of the vegetable Materia Medica.
37.
MoRBi EX Hyeme.
S. Brodd.
1752, 
Preceding the hiilory of the difeafes arifing from 
winter cold in Sweden, Dr. Brodd gives a general 
account of the effedls of intenfe cold on the ani- 
^lals of the country, in changing their colour, 
diminilhing the fize of the breed in various fpe- 
cies ; and in Lapland, he thinks it is inftanced in 
the human race itfelf : the ftate of the atmo- 
fphere ; the production of meteors ; differences 
obfervable in the particles of the fliow ; effeds of 
various and additional degrees of cold on the ice of 
lakes, y^".
; extraordinary appearance of the Aurora 
Borealis ; prognoftics of fevere winters ; and ligns 
of the approaching remiffions of cold ; with other 
curious particulars.
The difeafes of the winter feafon in Sweden are 
more particularly fuch as follow : Perniones, or 
Kibes, unufually painful and untradable ; for 
the cure, among other applications mentioned, is 
the diluted marine acid, recommended by Lin- 
K^us himfelf, who had found it ufeful among 
the faiiors when he was phyfician to the fleet ; but 
this cannot be ufed when the difeafe is advanced 
to 
C 254 ] 
to its ulcerated ftate.
Paronychia, or Whitlow, 
of various kinds, very frequent, and not feldom 
attended with dangerous confequences.
Congeftio 
Hyemalis^ a fpecies of Catarrh extremely common, 
and the fource of worfe diifeafes, ufually arifing 
from fudden tranfitions from heat to cold, and 
incautious expofure to the latter: obfervations 
on this diforder from the Iter Wefiro-gothicum of 
LiNN^us.
Coughs, univerfal, fometimes to the 
entire difturbance of all public affemblies.
Fleu- 
rifles, efpecially among the country people, who 
indulge in ftrong liquors.
Peripneumonies, parti- 
cularly confidered as endemic with the inhabi- 
tants about the copper mines.
The trad con- 
cludes with a compendious view of the efFeds of 
cold, and the phasnomena of winter feafon, in a 
fet of corollaries, and a mention of the hard win- 
ters in in 1586, 1665, 1684, 1709,1740, 
1752.
In the latter, the loweft point of the ther- 
mometer, at Upfal, was 3 1 of Celfius^s^ equal to 
about 24 below o in Fahrenheit.
38.
Odores Medicamentorum.
a. Wahlin.
1752.
An ingenious illuftration of the dodrine, which 
teaches, that thofe different fenfations excited in 
the organs of fmell by different odours, will lead 
to the explanation of the qualities inherent in fuch 
bodies ; and that from thence they may be clalTed, 
and their general effedls on the human body de- 
duced.
After a train of general explanatory and 
ghyfiological obfervations, Mr. Wahlin introduces 
[ 255 ] 
Sir Francis Bacon^s contrail between youth and old 
age, in order more clearly to illuftrate (which he 
does in a familiar, but ftriking manner) the elfed'S 
of wine and fpirituous liquors in their various and 
progreflive operation on the nervous fyftem, froni 
their firft exhilarating efFedl in a moderate quantity, 
to their intoxicating and fatal iffiie.
This he 
makes, in fome meafure, the bafis of his reafon- 
ing on the efFefts of other odorous fubftances, 
which he at length arranges into feven claffes.
1. Aromatici.
Cinnamon; Seeds of Amomum,^^.
2. Fragrantes, Saffron; Jafmin Flowers, i^c, 
3. Amhrofiacl.
Muflc ; Mufk Crainfbill, 
4. AUiacei.
Garlic ; Afla Fcetida, ^c.
5. Hircini.
Plerb Robert Stinking Orach.
6. Tetri.
Opium; Henbane; Corianders.
7. Naufeoft.
White and black Hellebore ^ To- 
bacco.
The fpecific effedls of each of thefe clafTes are 
then briefly explained, and their reputed mode of 
operation.
This paper may be confidered as a 
comment on feclion 362 of the Philofophia^ and 
properly accompanies the Sapor Medicament orum^ 
before-mentioned.
39.
NocTiLucA Marina.
C.F,Adkr, 1752.
Mr. Adler^ who went as furgeon in a Swedijb 
Eaji India Ihip to China^ in 1748, firft gives an 
account of thofe authors who have treated on the 
luminous appearance of the fea water in ftorms, 
and in the current occafioned by the courfe of 
5 ihipsj 
i 256 ] 
fliips ; and then proceeds to inform ns, that it was 
not till the year 1749, that this phr^nomenon was 
certainly difcovered to be owing, at leafl: in many 
parts of the ocean, to an inconceivable number of 
minute infe6ls.
One of thefe is the fubje6t of this 
paper, and is completely defcribed, and a figure 
given, as augmented by the microfcope.
It is of 
the Vermes clafs, and the Mollufca order, and Hands 
in the Syjiem under the name of Nereis No5liluca^ 
p. 1085, being the firft of eleven fpecies there de"- 
fcribed.
Its real length does not exceed the 6th 
part of an inch.
Later writers have thrown more light on this 
difcovcry, by exhibiting a great variety of thefe 
living Phofphori.
40.
Rhab ARB ARUM.
S, Ziervogel, 1752.
A botanical and medical hiftory of the Rheum 
Undulatum^ Sp. PI.
531.
defcribed here under the 
idea of its being the true Rhuharh^ having been 
fent from Rujfia as fuch by ProfelTor Gerber to 
Conful Sprekelfen at Hamburgh^ and by him intro- 
duced into many gardens.
The medical hiftory 
therefore of this plant muft be transferred to the 
Rheum Palmatum^ which is now generally believed 
to be the true Rhubarb^ of which a defcription 
and figure may be feen in the Phil.
Tranf.
vol.
Iv.
p. 290.
communicated by Dr. Hope, profefTor of 
botany at Edinburgh^ who raifed it from feeds fent 
him by Dr. Mounfey^ in 1763, and under whofe 
culture the plant has greatly thriven, and yielded 
large quantities of good Rhubarb.
Mr. Pennant 
has^ 
t 257 ] 
lias told us, in his late "Tour^ that the Duke of 
Athol has produced it in great perfedion, and pro- 
bably, if particular interefts did not militate 
againft it, the importation of this root might foon 
become unnecefTary, It is not wonderful that the 
former plant fnould have been taken for the t7'ue 
Rhubarb, as both grow in China^ and about the 
famous wail.
41.
Ctrl Bono ?
C, Gedner, 1752." 
To what purpofe are all the refearches of the 
naturalift ?
A qiieftion which only ignorance or 
incuriofity can di£late.
We will not pay our 
readers fo ill a compliment, as to fuppofe they 
need the convidion here referred to.
Neverthe- 
lefs, if there are any who wifii to fee what reafons 
may be alledged by the naturalift, againft thdfe 
who objed the frivoloufnefs and inutility of his 
refearches, they vv^ill moft probably receive fome 
fatisfadion from an attentive confideration of this 
paper, which is incapable of abridgment, and 
may be properly read with the i8th, Curiqfitas Na- 
turalise and 20th Oeconomia Nature, The author 
has introduced a pleafant and inftrudive allegory, 
which LiNN^^us himfeif was wont to ufe on thefe 
Dccafions, 
42.
NuTRix NoYERCA.
F. Lijidhcrg.
1752;' 
This trad is very recommendable, as contain- 
ing a compendious view of every material argu- 
ment that has been urged to prove the propriety 
and advantage of mothers nurfmg their infants at 
S their 
C 258 ] 
their own breaft.
Several obfervations on thedlf- 
eafes of children are interfperfed, and fome local ob- 
fervations, which lofe their force in this country.
This fubjed has been fo ably difcufled by feve- 
ral mafterly pens in this kingdom, that we fliall 
only obferve, refpefting the prefent trad, that Dr.
Lindberg allows more force, than fome of our own 
writers, to thofe arguments which admit of dif- 
eafes and temperaments being tranfmifTible from 
nurfes to their fofter-children.
43.
HospiTA Insectorum Flora.
J.G, ForsJkahL 
1752.
The author of this paper begins by giving a 
general hiftory of all the material writers on Infedls, 
and the method in which they have treated the 
lubje(5t, whether in relation to the metamorphofes 
and economy principally, in the manner of Swam- 
merdam\ or by giving a detail of the /pedes at large 
alfo, as Ray^ Reaumur^ and Be Geer^ have done.
He then does due honour to the Queen of Sweden^ 
on account of the magnificent mufeum which her 
majefty had conftrufled at the palace of Brottning- 
holm^ which is very fuperb in Infe^fs^ Shells^ Corals^ 
and Chryftals^ &c.
He next exhibits his plan ; it 
confifts in arranging all fuch infers as are natives 
of Sweden^ each under the plant on which it is 
found, or on which it feeds ; the references being 
made to the Fauna^ and Flora Suecica of Linn^us.
It would be highly acceptable to thofe who culti- 
vate this branch of natural hiftory, to fee this ar- 
rangement augmented by the numerous difcoveries 
that 
[ 259 1 
that have been made fmce the publication of this 
tradt, as it is a part of the hiftory of infects riot 
fufficiently attended to before ; and nothing would 
conduce more to extend and facilitate the know- 
ledge of it, or lead more efieclually to the meanS 
of deflroying the noxious fpecies.
44.
MiRAcuLA Insectorum.
G, E, Avellft, 1752.
Intended to awaken curiofity, and excite atten- 
tion to the ftudy of infects, by pointing out the 
extraordinary inftinds and properties with which 
particular kinds are endued j many of whofe 
Operations were inexplicable^ and frequently attri« 
buted to other caufes.
Nothing exemplifies this truth more than the 
hiftory of a minute infedl, or rather worm, of 
which we have, in this difTertation, the firft proper 
intelligence j it is very curious, and worthy of 
notice.
In Finland^ Bothnia^ and the northern 
provinces of Sweden^ it was not unfrequently that 
people were feized with a pungent pain, confined 
to a point, in the hand, or other expofed part of 
the body, which prefently increafed to a mofi: ex- 
cruciating degree, and hath fometirries been fud- 
denly fatal.
This diforder was more particularly 
obferved in Finland^ efpecially about boggy and 
marfliy places, and always in autumn.
At length 
it was difcovered, that thi^ paiii inftantly fucceeded 
fbmevVhat that dropped out of the air, and in a 
rnoment penetrated and buried itfelf in the fiefh.
The Finla?iders had tried variety of apiplications to 
no purpofe^ until at length a poultice of curds, or 
S 2' chcefe^ 
[ 26o 3 
cheefe, was found the moft efFedtual in eafing the 
pain ; and the event confirmed, that the infect was 
allured by this application to leave the fiefh ; as- 
on its removal, this worm, no longer than the 
fixth of an inch^ was found in it, and thus the 
caufe of this painful difeafe explained.
Lin- 
N^us himfelf once fuffered from this animal 
the effed here fpoken of : but we owe the com- 
plete hiftory of it, and its place in the Syftem, 
to Dr. SoLANDER, who gave it in to the Royal 
Academy of Sciences at Upfal.
This worm ftands 
in the Syftem under the name of Furia Infernalis^ 
p. 1325 ; but by what means this creature is raifed 
into the air, is as yet unknown.
45.
NoxA Insectorum.
M. a.
Baeckner.
1752.
A curious and ufeful paper, particularly fpeci- 
lying all thoft infeds that are more immediately 
hurtful to animals and vegetables.
They are clafled 
in eleven divifions, according to the feveral fub- 
jtcls on which they prey, or to which they bring 
devaftation.
1. Such as are particularly offenfive to man.
Under this head, the author feems inclined to- 
favour that opinion v/hich Mr, St, Aftdre^ and feme 
ether French^ phyficians and philofophers have 
held, in afcrrbing to Acari the caufe of many cu- 
taneous and contagious difeafes.
2. Such as are deilrui^live within doors, ta 
furniture, cloaths, grain, ^c.
Among thefe is 
particularly mentioned the Seed Beetle, (Bruchus 
Pifiy Syft.
604.) the caufe of great deftrudtion to 
peaf^ 
[ 26i 3 
peafe in Penfykania^ Sec, and which has found its 
way into fouthern Europe* See alfo Kalm's Tra- 
vels, i.
p. 176, Engll/b edition, 
3. To fruit-bearing trees and culinary herbs, 
4, To trees, woods, ftove and green -houfc 
plants.
5. To corn-fields, paftures, &c, 
6, To horfes, horned cattle, and other ani- 
mals, 
The fubjeds of thefe three laft papers are of 
great importance in rural economy, and would 
come with all poffible propriety into an Economical 
HerhaU that fhould fpecify, in treating upon each 
plant, the fpecies of infed: which inhabits or feeds 
on it.
46.
Vernatio Arborum.
H, Barck.
1753.
A curious elfay, perhaps the firit on the fub* 
je<rc, relating to the Leafing of 'Trees in Sweden^ 
being the refult of a variety of obfervations, made 
at the requeft of Linn^^us himfelf, in almofl all the 
provinces of that kingdom, and intended to lead, 
as if by the didates of nature,, to the true time of 
committing the grain to the earth.
A table is ex- 
hibited, fhewing at one view the days on which 19 
fpecies of trees, all natives of Sweden^ put forth 
their leaves in three fucceffive years.
The fame 
table fhews alfo the day on which Barley was fowrv 
and reaped in all the fame provinces.
From an- 
other table it appears, that at Pitha^ which lies in 
about 63 degrees north, from the average of 12 
years, there intervene 85 days between the fowing 
S 3 of 
[ 262 3 
of barley and its harveft and at Upfal^ in 60 de-?
, grees, the average of fix years turned out to be 
105 days.
It is concluded, upon the whole, that 
in Upland^ the leafing of the Birch tree Ihould di-> 
re6l the time for fowing barley but, that diffe- 
rent trees will beft indicate the time in different 
places.
Another curious obferyation follows from 
this paper : that^ notwithftanding the difference 
in the number of days between the ripening of 
barley in Lapland and in Upland^ it will be found 
that the greater length of days in the former coun- 
try, gives a balance of fun equal to the greater 
number of days in the latter.
47.
Increment/!
BoTANicES.
J.Biuur, 1^55, 
A concife hiflory of the rife, fate, and progrefs 
of botanic fcience, from the firil traces of it to 
the prefent time; divided into four periods or 
epochs.
The firft includes only the antients, by 
whom are underftood Arlftotle^ Jheophraftus^ Diof- 
corides^ and Fliny \ who, as compilers chiefly, did 
little but deliver the tradition of the times j and 
whofe plants, after the commentaries of a century, 
canhoc be known by their defcriptions to this day, 
fo little had they extended their ideas to fpecific 
diflin6lions ; yet we muil venerate their writings, 
as the only remains of this fcience tranfmitted to 
our times.
^ The fecond period commences with 
the reftoration of letters, after the taking of Cm- 
Jiantinople by the I'urh^ beginning with Brunfel- 
fius^ and ending with the Bauhines, The third, 
which is called the period of Syflematics^ is con- 
tinued 
[ 3 
tinued to the time of Linn^us, who effefted that 
great reformation in the whole fcience, by which 
it is fixed as on a new bafis.
The conclufion of 
this paper contains fome information relating to 
the introduflion of figures cut in wood for the old 
herbals ; whence it appears, that Plantin^ the fa- 
mous printer of Antwerp^ monopolized almoft all 
the figures of this kind during his time, and be- 
came the principal printe^n his day tor botanical 
books.
By fuch means Norton^ the primer of 
Gerard*^ herbal^ procured from Frankfort all the 
figures we fee in his book, which had before 
ferved for an edition of f ah^rmmont anus's herbal 
in 1588.
48.
Demonstrationes Plantarum.
J. G.
Hojer.
Intended principally for the ufe of thofe pupils 
who attended the botanical leclures in the Upfal 
garden, confiding chiefly of a lift of the exotics 
therein cultivated, as they ftood in this year, 
amounting to near 1450 diftind fpecies, which, in 
59 <^^g- 5^ latitude, is no inconfiderable 
number j all double flowers and varieties being 
entirely excluded.
After the invention of trivial 
names, this lift is the firft fpecimen of the ufe of 
them in forming compendious catalogues, and is at 
once an evidence of the utility of them.
There is an 
obfervation in this paper which may appear fomewhat 
paradoxical to fome readers : feveral of the plants 
that are natives of fouthern Europe^ produced feeds 
this year, without fliQwing any corolla j fuch were 
S 4 two 
[ 264 ] 
two Cifti^ &c.
It may feem ftrange too that: 
Lapland and alpine plants fhould perifli in the 
lame fituation through cold, but it is true ; and 
the fa6l is, that in their native fituations, they are, 
at the change of feafon, inflantly covered with 
fnow, and thus defended from injury.
49.
Herbationes Upsalienses.
a. iV.
Fornander^ 
As the foregoing catalogue comprehends thofe 
of the garden, this exhibits the indigenous plants 
of the neighbourhood of Upfal^ as they occur in 
the fmipling excurfions which the profefTor made 
with the botanical ftudents, and were ufually per- 
formed in about eight days during the courfe of 
each fummer.
50.
In ST RvcT 10 Mvs^i, D.
Hultman.
lyss- 
The method of conftruding a mufeam for the 
purpofes of natural hiflory in all its branches, 
.with dire6lions for colleding, preferving, and dif- 
pofing the fubjecls.
An enumeration of the beft 
repofitories of this kind in Sweden : fuch is that 
of the §ueen^ rich in fhells, infeds, and corals : 
that of the Kingy in amphibia, fiihes, animals 
of the Vermes clafs, in fpirits ; and the birds of 
Sweden: that of Count 'Tejin, abounding in foffijs 
and gems, fhells, pidures, ^c.
: that of Chan- 
cellor Gyllenhorg : that belonging to the Royal 
Academy : Stoh^us^^ at Lunden \ and Ziervogel's at 
Stcckholm, The method of drying and preferving 
plants 
[ 265 1 
plants for an Hortus Siccus : thofe of former cele^ 
brated botanifts enumerated.
A method, perhaps 
more curious than ufeful, of calling an artificial 
plant, by forming a mould with plaifter over a 
real plant placed in a veffel, then burning the in- 
clofed plant to aflies, which are to be ihook out, 
and the cavity filled with melted fil\^er.
This little trad has been publifhed in Hollandy 
for the ufe of merchants who deal in the fubjeds of 
natural hiftory ; and fomething of the fan^e kind 
has been lately done here.
AMCENITATES AC ADEMICiE.
Vol. IV.
1760.
pp.
600.
51.
Plant^^: Officinales.
N, Gahn.
175^.' 
The fcope of this paper is entirely pbarmaceuti- 
fa!
; and howfoever it may be fuperleded at prefent, 
it muft have been very ufeful at the time of its pub- 
lication, having been drawn up for the benefit of the 
apothecaries in Sweden^ in confequence of fome new 
regulations intended by the royal coileg- phy- 
ficians, under the prefidentfliip of Dr. Bceck : and 
it was alfo highly acceptable to others, as being 
probably the firfl; lift of the medicinal plants, to 
which the Linnaan fynonyms had been accommo- 
dated.
This paper contains, 
I. A catalogue of the vegetable fimples of the 
Materia Medica^ amounting to near 580, fpecify- 
ing the parts of each ufed in medicine ; to which 
is oppofed the Linn^an generical and trivial fpe- 
(ific name, from the Species Plant arunfk\ marking 
alfo.
E 266 ] 
alfo, by a different charadler, all fuch as the au- 
thor thinks might be expunged.
Then follow 
directions for rightly gathering and preferving the 
feveral plants, or fuch parts of each as are in 
ufe.
2. A lift of fuch Jimples as grow fpontaneoufly 
in Sweden j many of which had needlefsly been 
imported.
3. Lifts of fuch as might advantageoufly be 
cultivated for medicinal purpofes ; to which is 
finally added, a lift of fuch drugs as are imported 
from the feveral diftant quarters of the globe, 
^2.
Censura SiMPLiciuM.
G, J .
Cavlbohm.
lys^, 
A very inftruftive paper, confifting, after fome 
pertinent obfervations, principally of two lifts of 
fimples : The firft, fuch as the writer think$ 
might without detriment be expunged from the 
Materia Medica, The fecond, fuch as might advan- 
tageoufly be received into that catalogue ^ their vir- 
tues having been fufficiently afcertained to juftify 
fuch an introduction .
To this latter, the author 
has fubjoined, under every artfele, the quality of 
the fimple, and his authority in general for allow-^ 
ing each its defigned rank.
A paper of this ten- 
dency is not unworthy the obfervation of all thofe 
who would improve and enrich the Materia Me- 
dica ; and probably confiderable additions might 
be made to this lift.
We add the names of thefQ 
fimples.
AcmellaJ 
[ ] 
Acmella.
Alkannse rad.
Baccas Norlandicas.
Bella donna.
Britannica herb, 
Chamasmori hacc^e, 
Campefcaniim Ugn, 
Camphoratas herb, 
Caffin^ folia.
Ceanothi rad.
Collinfonia.
Coridis herb, 
Conyz^ herb, 
Cotul^e herb, 
Diervilla, 
Dulcamara.
Elateriiim album.
Faba Ignatii.
Fungus melitenfis.
Galium luteum.
Geum paluftre, 
Hypociflis.
Juglandis/r^^.
f 
Lobelia rad.
Lapathi fanguinel raH^ 
Lauro-cerafi folia, 
Linum catharticum.
Linnsse herb 
Melifla canarienfis; 
Mentha piperita.
Monardse herb, 
Mufcus caninus.
Mufcus cumatilis.^ 
Myrti brabantici herbl 
Pedicularis.
Peraguse/d?//^.
Phytolaccce fuc.
Profluvii rad, 
Ribes nigrum.
Sabadillas fern, 
Saponaria nuclei.
Scrophularise aquat, K 
Senega rad.
Serpen turn rad.
Sophora.
Uvs Urfi/tf/.
Vitis Ids^ bac.
Vulvari^ herb.
S3' Canis Familiaris.
E, M.
Lindecrantz.
ij^^.
This natural hiftory of the Bog, was one of the 
firft complete exemplifications of zoological de- 
fcription, according to the pnnciples of the Lin^ 
n^an fchool, as laid down in the Methodus Demon^ 
firandu The writer confiders the whole race as 
reducible 
[ 268 ] 
reducible to one fpecies, and diftinguifhed from 
other congenerous animals, fuch as the wolf^ fox^ 
hy^na^ &c.
not only by the curvature of the tail, 
which is ufually to the left, but by the difpofition 
of the Suture Velleris^ or ridges formed by the .
meeting of the feveral courfes of hair on divers 
parts of the body ; and the number and fituation 
of the Verruca^ or warty rifmgs in the face.
In 
thefe diftindions, heretofore unnoticed, all the 
varieties of this animal agree.
Eleven varieties of 
the J^'^-kind are here fpecified, after which the 
properties and ufes, together with the whole of 
the economy of this faithful animal, are fully fet 
forth, and his difeafes defcribed.
Our author 
tells us, that the Laplanders and Dalekarlians are 
in pofTeflion of fome fecret by which they inftantly 
difarm the moil furious dog, and oblige him to 
fly with all his ufual figns of fear, becoming filenc 
at once, and dropping his tail.
This art, how- 
ever, is faid not to be unknown in England, 
54.
Stationes Plantarum.
a, Hedenberg, 1754.
The intention of this paper is to prove, that 
the knowledge of the Natale Solum^ the natural 
places of growth of plants, is the true foundation 
on which the art of gardening fuccefsfully muft 
he built.
The author laments that botanifts and 
writers of Florae have been too remifs in their ob- 
fervations of this kind ; v/hence numbers of exotic 
feeds and plants have failed to produce flowers, or 
to perpetuate themfelves in gardens.
He mentions 
g remarkable iaftance in the Nitrari^ Schoheri^ 
(Spec, 
[ 26g ] 
(Spec.
PI.
638.) which remained deftitute of 
flowers for 20 years in the Swedijh gardens at 
length LiNN^us rendered it fertile, by means of 
fait fcattered about the roots.
The knowledge 
of the Stationes Plantarum is alfo equally ufeful to 
the pradlical botanift, in affifting his refearches.
Every plant has its natural fituation and foil, in 
which alone it will thrive, and out of which, in 
many inftances, no care or culture will preferve it 
alive.
The knowledge of this axiom, as far as 
refpe6ls indigenous plants, is applicable to pur- 
pofes of agriculture, and with this view the au- 
thor has given an arrangement of the Swedijh plants, 
divided into fix clafTes, according to their feveral 
places of grov/th, as follows : 
1. Aquatics.
^ 4.
Upland plants.
2. Alpine.
5. Mountainous.
3. Wood-plants.
6. Parafitic.
Thefe are again fubdivided ; the aquatics, into 
marine^ maritime^ marjh, hog plants^ &c.
after 
which follows the definition of the terms, ex- 
plaining the nature of thefe different foils and 
fituations.
55.
Flora Anglica.
J. O.
Grufberg, 1754^ 
At the time of the publication of this paper, the 
Linn^an fyftem of botany had made but fmall 
progrefs in England , to fuch however as had 
adopted it, this muft have been a very acceptable 
prefent, as being the firfl: arrangement, in the Lin- 
n<ean method, that had been given to the EnglifD 
^ plants I 
[ 270 ] 
plants 'y as alfo tlie firft of thofe compendious F/or^y 
in which the newly-invented trivial names had 
been exemplified, and which have fince been 
much ufed, greatly to the emolument of the 
fcience.
The author firft difcuffes the utility of fucfi 
local catalogues, and of adhering to the trivial 
names : he then briefly defcribes the climate of 
Britain, and its different foils and elevations, as 
favouring the growth of particular plants enu- 
merating fome of thofe which are peculiar to Eng- 
land ; and in what way thofe of Sweden differ from 
ours.
He fays Sweden abounds more in alpine^ 
upland^ and wood-plants^ than England^ which ex- 
cels in marine plants, and fuch as affed a chalky 
foil, of which latter Sweden is almoft deftitute.
Having given due praife to the Englijh botanifts, 
and particularly to Mr. Ray, he fubjoins the cata- 
logue ; in which there is a reference from each 
Uinn^ean name, to the plant as it ftands in the 
laft edition of i^^j's Synopfis by Billenius, This 
i^/^r<^ contains nearly a thoufand plants, theMoffes 
and Fungi not being introduced.
Such as are not 
found in Sweden^ are diftinguifhed by the Italic 
type, and of thefe there are nearly three hundred* 
A lift of upwards of an hundred, which the au- 
thor could not inveftigate, concludes the whole.
56.
Herbarium Amboinense.
O. Stickman, 1754.
The Herbarium Amhoinenfe is one of the greateft 
and moft magnificent botanic treafures the ivorld 
ever faw j and which we owe to the fingular zeai 
and 
C 271 3 
and induftry of Rumphius, who lived upwards of 
40 years in Amhoina^ and was conful there under 
the Butch Eaji India company.
He fweetened the 
leifure hours of his life by an uncommon and fuc- 
cefsful application to the fludy of natural hiftory, 
which he purfued in ail its branches, but particu- 
larly in botany.
He had the misfortune to lofe 
his family by the fatal earthquake of 1674; and 
fome years after, having colleded his materials 
for this work, and meditated his return to 
Europe^ fuffered the lofs of his fight from a 
cataradl, in which ftate he lived 20 years, and 
died in 1706.
This work comprehends the plants of Amhoina^ 
Malacca^ Banda^ and the neighbouring iflands ; 
and, allowing for the time when it was written, 
contains excellent defcriptions of the feveral vege- 
tables of the Eajl Indies^ with a copious account 
of their ufes ; and though inferior to the Hortus 
Malaharicus as to the engravings, excels it in the 
hiftory of the fubje6i:s.
There are nearly one thou- 
fand vegetables defcribed in this work, of which a 
great number were entirely new to the European 
botanifts : of this number upwards of feven hun- 
dred are engraved.
The manufcript was 30 years in the pofleflion of 
the Dutch Eafi India company, and was refcued 
from oblivion by the intereft and extraordinary 
zeal of the editor, Profeflbr Burman^ oi Amfierdam ; 
who, with great induftry and fkill, has alfo ex- 
tricated the fynonyms as far as poftible, and fub- 
joined them to each defcription.
He began this 
publication 
t 272 ] 
publication in 174I3 and finiflied it in 1750, m 
feven volumes folio^ except a fmall fupplement, 
which was not publifhed until 1757.
i7^9> 
the editor rendered his work ftill more ufeful, by 
the publication of an alphabetical index to thefe 
volumes, with the Linn^an fynonyms together 
with a like one adapted to the Hortus Malaba- 
ricus.
The pupils of the Linn^an fchool much re- 
gretted, that the Herbarium Amhoinenfe had not been 
completed before the publication of Linn^^^us's 
Species Plant arum^ that the fynonyms might have 
been introduced.
To remedy this defedt was the 
intention of Mr. Stickman's-ipaptr^ in which the fub- 
jedts are arranged in the order of the original work, 
with the Linn^an name annexed to each ; and 
afterwards, as many as could be extricated, are 
thrown into a Flcra^ according to the Sexual fyftem/ 
It is to our neighbours the Butch that the bo- 
tanifts are obliged for two of the moft valuable 
performances that are yet extant in the hiftory of 
foreign vegetables : this of Rurfiphius^ and the 
Hortus Malabaricus of Rheede, But we hope that 
it will not be long before they will be more indebted 
to an illuftrious Englijhrmn^ who, in purfuit of the 
fame objed, has encountered the perils of a cir- 
cuit round this globe, for a v/ork, which, from 
his tafte, his liberality, and zeal for the promo- 
tion of fcience, may be expeded to furpafs thofe 
above-mentioned, as well in extent, as in gran- 
deur, and elegance of execution.
57.
Cervus 
C 273 ] 
i;;.
Cervus Tarandus.
C, F.
Hoffberg.
1754* 
In this tra6t we have a complete hiftory of the 
Rein-deer^ {Cervus 'Tarandus^ Syft.
Nat. p.
93.) 
an animal which almoft folely conftitutes the 
riches, not only of the Laplander^ but of the other 
ardlic inhabitants of the globe.
In Lapland more 
particularly, the whole res pecuaria refpe(51s this 
animal, as it is in that country in a more efpecial 
manner domefticated.
In fummer the Rein-deer 
feed on various herbs, but rejed a confiderable 
number that are eaten by others.
Of the parti- 
cular fpecies thus refufed, the reader is prefented 
with a catalogue, from the experiments of a curi- 
ous obferver.
In winter, they are folely fuftained 
by the Rein-deer liverwort, {Lichen Rangiferinus).
or Coralline Mofs^ with which the alps of the north 
are covered.
The Rein-deer are obnoxious to 
many difeafes, which are all here diftinclly de^ 
fcribed, and particularly thofe arifing from the 
Gad-fly^ called after its name, {Oeftrus ^arandi^ Syflr.
Nat. 969.) which depofits its eggs on the back 
of thefe animals, and in confequence of w:hich 
immenfc numbers of the Deer perifh yearly.
See 
alfo Flor, Lappon, p.
360.
58.
Ovis.
J, Palmyras, 1754, 
This diflertation contains the natural hiftory of 
the Sheep, on the fame plan as that of the forego-^ 
ing paper, and abounds with many curious ob* 
fervations.
The genus, fpecies, and varieties arc 
defcribed, and many phyfiological obfervations 
T given.
C 274 ] 
given.
A lift of thofe plants which the fheep 
does not eat, amounting, from the experiments 
of the Pan SuecuSy to upwards of 140 fpecies \ 
fome pointed out that are particularly grateful,' 
of which number are the Sheep's Fefcue Grafs^ (Fef- 
tuca Ovina^ Sp. PI.
p. 108.) the Thlafpi Bur/a 
Fq/lo?is, or Shepherd's Purfe and an enumera- 
tion of fuch as are highly noxious and poifonous 
to this animal ; fuch are.
Corn Plorfetail, ( Equi- 
fetum Arvenfe 0 Spearwort, (Ranunculus Flam- 
mula \) LancaJJoire Afphodel, {Anthericum Offt- 
fragum -,) Moufe-ear Scorpion-grafs, (Myofotis 
Scorpioides P •,) Wood Anemony, {Anemone Nema- 
rofa ;) Dog's Mercury, {Mercurialis Perennis.) 
In treating on the difeafes of fiieep, the author 
enquires particularly into the Dropfy^ or Rot, oc- 
cafioned by worms in the liver, ( Fafciola Hepatica^ 
Syft.
p. 1077.) which he thinks are fwallowed 
by the animal in marfti water ; and propofes fait 
as a preventive of their effedls.
[See the pathology 
of this difeafe by Dr. Nicholls^ in the Phil.
Tranf, 
vol.
xlix.
p. 247.
We can only add, that this 
paper cannot be lefs acceptable to naturalifts, and 
lovers of rural economy in England^ than the fore- 
going to an intelligent Laplander,^ 
59.
Mus PoRCELLus. J, J.
Nauwan, 1754.
A zoological tradl relating to the animal ufually 
with us called Guinea Pig^ the Indian Rabbet of the 
old authors, and the Cavia of" the Brajilians \ which 
LiNN^us ranks under the Murine genus, by the 
name of Mus Porcelhs^ Syft.
p. 79.
10 The 
t 275 1 
The writer treats largely on the manners and 
whole economy of this little refllefs quadruped : 
his obfervations are evidently the refult of long 
acquaintance and attention.
He fays they are deli- 
cate food.
60, HORTICULTURA AcADEMlCA.
J, G.
Wolkath^ 
J 754* 
This paper is intimately connefled with N* 
54, the Stationes Plant arum.
It exhibits a com- 
pendious fyftem of the principles of gardening, 
particularly as applicable to botanical or aca- 
demic gardens.
In the beginning it is laid down 
as an axiom, that the whole depends on a per- 
feft knowledge of the climate of each plant, and 
the foil in which it fiouriHies in its own climate,"' 
As a ftriking inilance of the neceflity of paying re- 
gard to proper foil, and to induce curious people 
who tranfmit feeds and plants to Europe, to be more 
accurate in this particular, the writer mentions that 
of the Ricotia Mgyptiaca, (Spec.
PI.
p. 912.) 
which no management could bring to flower and 
fruit, until Linn/eus fuo-o-efted mixing the Ar- 
gilla Nilotica, the clay of the Nile, with the earth 
in the pot, and which very foon fully fucceeded.
The Linnaan terms applicable to the feveral 
kinds of gardens are defined, the heat of the dif- 
ferent climates afcertained by Celfms's thermometer, 
and the various foils and fituaticns proper to each 
enumerated.
T 2 61.
Ckinensia 
[ 276 3 
6 1, Chinensia Lagerstromiana.
y. L.
Odhelius.
i754.
At the time that Linn^us's great patron.
Count 
TeffiHy was chancellor to the King, and prefident 
of the Royal Academy of Sciences, he obtained, by 
the concurrence alfo of M, Lagerfirom^ then coun- 
feilor of the chamber of commerce, and dire6i:or 
of the Swedip Eaft India company, an order, that 
eachfiiip fhouid be provided, at the expence of the 
Connpany, with a naturalift wholly devoted to his 
proper purfuirs.
To this infiiitution we owe the 
difcoveries made by Ter^flrom, ^oren^ and OJheck i 
and in confequence Mo Lagerftrom^ who was him- 
felf a man of letters, and a friend to fcience, pro.
cured, at his own expence, a great number of 
natural curioiities from China and the Eafi Indies^ 
\¥hich he prefented to the mufeum of the univer- 
fity at Upfd, Among thefe particularly was a 
collection of the medicinal plants preferved in the 
apothecaries (hops in China j alio a Chinefe herbal, 
in 36 volumes in Svo, of which two confift en- 
tirely of figures.
The tradl before us is a fcientific defcription of 
more than 50 fubjefts of natural hiftory, chiefly 
birds and fifhes, colledled from China by M.
La- 
gerftrom.
It is ftill of value, as being referred to 
from the Syflem of our author.
62.
Centuria Plantarum.
u^.
Ti.JuJlemus, 1755.
63.
Centuria II.
Plantarum.
jE.
"Tomer, 1756.
Thefe trads contain the defcriptions of very 
rare, or heretofore ug^defcribed plants, fent to 
LiNNiEUS 
[ 277 ] 
LiNNT^us from various parts of the world.
Thofe 
defcribed in the fecond century were tranfmitted 
by Seguier from Verona \ by Salvages from Mont- 
feller^ by Dr. Burman., who had received his 
from the Cape of Good Hope and fome by Mr.
Miller of Cbelfea, The time elapfed fince the 
publication of thefe papers hath not iefiened the 
ufefulnefs of them, fince they are clofely connedled 
with the Species Plantarum^ are referred to in that 
work, and remain as fo many illuftrations of the 
fyftem of LiNN^us.
64.
SoMNus Plantarum.
p. Bremer.
1735.
The fubjecft of this paper, at the time of its 
publication, excited the attention of the curious 
throughout Europe.
That no6lurnal change to 
which certain plants are liable, and which is 
here analogically called Sleeps is more particularly 
manifefted in thofe vegetables tkat are furniihed 
with pinnated leaves, and of thefe; the Diadel- 
phous clafs affords the greater number.
The 
change condfts in the different pofition which the 
folioles^ or fmall leaves, alTume in the mght-iimQy 
from that which they exhibit by day.
Slight no- 
tices of this faculty are met with in the antients ; 
in this paper the obfervations have been extended 
fp far, as to take in upv/ards of 40 fpecies, which 
are here enumerated, and divided into ten clalFes, 
according to the differences obfervable in the po- 
rtion of the leaves, during this keeping ftate.
The late Dr. Hilk t>y a welLinftituted fet of expe- 
rimentSj fully confirmed the idea^ that this change 
T 3 was 
[ 278 3 .
was owing to the abfence of light.
His experU 
ments were made with the Abrus Precatorius^ or 
fcarlet hidian Pea, in which plant this change 
had been obferved by Profper Alpinus^ and in 
which it is remarkable.
[The novelty of this paper induced the author 
of this volume, foon after its publication, to give 
the fubilance of it an EngllJIo drefs, and it was pub- 
lifhed in the Gentlematis Magazine for the year 
1757, p.
315; to which the Englifh reader, who 
wifhes for further information, is referred.] 
65, Fungus Melitensis.
J, Pfeiffer, 1755, 
This plant, notwithftanding the name it bears, 
is very far removed from the Fungus tribe, fince 
it produces perfedly diftin6l flowers, and belongs 
to the Monandria order of the Monoecious clafs, and 
is called by Linn^us, Cynomorium Coccineum^ Sp.
jPl- 1375' The Maltefe Fungus is a parafitical 
plant, fmgular in its form, which is little more 
than that of a fimple ftatk, about a finger's thick- 
nefs, and fix or feven inches long, and in its ftate 
of frudlification, the whole plant may be confi- 
dered as an Amentum^ or Catkin.
It is found on 
the coaft of Barhary^ in Sicily^ and fparingly \n 
Malta^ fpringingfrom the roots of trees and fhrubs,.
as does the Afarum Hypocifiis^ with which it alfa 
agrees in its fenfible equalities and effects, and is 
much efteemed, and ufed in the countries above 
mentioned as an aftringent medicine.
The writer 
of this paper gives us, from the A^a Bononienfia^ a 
detail of experiments made wi|h thi^ and feveral 
pthef 
• [ 279 ] 
other fubjeds of the fame clafs, to determine their 
comparative aftringent and antifeptic powers on the 
human blood ; from the refult of which, he tells 
us, that the author was led to confider this fmple 
as one of the fafefl: and moll powerful aftringcnts.
66, Metamorphosis Plantarum.
N,E.
Dahlherg, 
The fubjedt of this paper will fcarcely admit of 
an abridgment, agreeable to our contradled plan.
In 
order the more clearly to underftand what the author 
calls the Metamorphojis Plantarum^ he delivers, in 
a brief way, the Linn^an do6lrine of the phyfio- 
logy of plants ^ which fuppofes, that the flower is 
no other than the expanfion or evolution of the 
trunk or ftem, in the following arrangement : 
namely, that the Cortex^ or outer Bark, is ulti- 
mately fpent in forming the Perianthium^ or Cup ; 
the Liher^ or inner Bark, in forming the Corolla or 
Petal •, the Lignum^ or woody part, in forming the 
Stamina or Chives ; and the Medulla^ or pithy parr, 
in forming the Piftillum^ or Pointal.
Hence, what- 
foever caufes candifturb the ufual, natural, and re- 
gular expanfion and evolution of thefe parts, may 
be fuppofed to occafion great variety, and changes 
in the appearance of plants ; and that fuch effeds 
are brought about by change of climate, different 
foil, fituation, air, culture, and perhaps various 
other yet unknown caufes, is certain.
To thefe 
fources muft be traced the varieties we obferve in 
the leaves, flowers, and roots, whether permanent, 
gs is the cafe in fome inllances, or not.
This 
T 4 do(5lrine 
[ 28o ] 
doflrine is here illuftrated and confirmed by nu- 
merous examples ; and the young and inexperi- 
enced botanift is guarded againft the delufion, 
frequently occafioned by the operation of thefe 
caufes \ which are very extenfive in the vegetable 
creation, 
67.
Calendarium Flor^.
a. M.
Berger.
1756.
The Calendar of Flora is intended to exhibit the 
progrefs of the feafons, as they are man if .(led by 
the times of the flowering of vegetables ; which 
in each fpecies appears to be determined from 
fome fixed law of nature ; and from the due ob- 
fervance of which, after a fufficient courfe of ex- 
periments had been made, the author thinks, that 
the fowing of grain, and many other branches of 
rural economy, dependent on the feafons, might, 
in every country, be better regulated, than by the 
rules in common ule.
The tables in this traft 
were formed from obfervations made on the com- 
mon plants of Sweden^ in the Upfal garden, in 
1755.
This affair is alfo connected with the re- 
turn and departure of migrating birds, and fur»- 
niflies many curious and ufeful hints ; but we do 
not enlarge, as this thefts was tranflated, and pub- 
iiilied v/ith an Englijh Calendar of Flora-^ by the 
late Mr. Stillingfieet^ to which we refer our readers 
for more ample fatisfadiion.
See alio the^ Vernatio 
Jrborum, W 46.
of this coUedion, a paper ftridUy 
connefted with the Calendar of Flora, 
68.
Fi,0R4 
I 281 ] 
68.
Flora Alpina.
N. N» Amann.
1756.
The alps of Europe produce a fet of vegetables 
very different from, and incapable of culture in, 
the lower fituations.
The author of this trad, 
who was a native of one of the provinces border- 
ing on the alps of Lapland^ with a laudable zeal 
for the improvement of his country, enquires what 
kinds of veo-etables might be cultivated in thofe 
defart reo-ions to the moft advantage, where fo 
few thrive, where Ihrubs fcarcely ever attain even 
a moderate fize, and where a tree will hardly grqw 
€re6i:.
To this end; he firfl enumerates all the alpine 
parts of Europe^ and gives a lift of 400 plants pe- 
culiar to thofe fituations.
He expreffes a wifh, 
that at the royal, or public expence, a garden 
might be planted in the alps^ to determine 
with precifion what exotic plants would bear 
introdu6lion into Lapland ; and concludes by 
pointing out fome of the efculent and medicinal 
Jcinds, as alfo fome that are applicable to dyeing, 
and other arts, which he thinks might be culti- 
vated to advantage in that northern region.
69.
Flora Pal^stina.
B. J.
Strand, 1756.
Many commentators have employed themfelves 
in determining the plants of the facred writings, 
among whom none are thought to have been more 
fuccefsful than the late learned ProfelTor Olaus Cel- 
fiws^ in his Hierohotanicon ; who was not only well 
qualified by his fi^ill in the learned languages, and 
particularly 
[ 282 ] 
particularly in the oriental, but was himfelf alfo 
an excellent botanift.
He lamented, that by a fm- 
gular fate, whiift the miffionaries of the Romifb 
church had, in various other parts of the world, 
been very inftrumental in improving natural fcience, 
Falaftine had been totally negle6ted ; hence he was 
doubly folicitous to recover the colledion of his 
countryman HaJTelquifi ^ and much rejoiced that 
it was at laft redeemed % as he hoped a view of 
the fubjeds would throw great light on his 
favourite purfuit of iliuftrating the Phytology of 
the fcriptures.
Hajfelquift had particular inftruc- 
tions to attend to this point : how well he 
performed this function, is proved by the pre- 
lent Flora^ which is chiefly drav/n from his dif-^ 
coveries.
This catalogue is compiled in the fame com- 
pendious method as the other Fkr^ of thefe vo- 
lumes, after i\\t generic al^ only the trivial UTimt be- 
ing cited.
The author has alfo availed himfelf of 
other helps from thofe travellers, whofe Ikili ia 
this part of knowledge was indifputable : fome 
plants he has introduced on the authority of Rati- 
wolfj Profper Alpinus^ Shaw^ Pocock^ and Grono- 
vius.
The whole number amounts to fix hundred 
fpecies.
Mr. Strand has applied Celjius's names to 
his lift, wherefoever it was poffibie ; but the curi- 
ous will regret, that the learned author of the Hie- 
robot anicon did not live to give the public another 
edition of his work^ after fuch new rhaterials had 
come to his hands.
70.
Flora 
[ 3 
70.
Flora Monspeliensis.
'T.E, Nathhorji.
175^- 
The happy climate, and variety of foil and fitua- 
tion of Montpelier^ renders this Flora one of the 
moPc copious of any.
The vicinity of fome con- 
fiderable mountains and forefts, and the maritime 
fituation of the place, confpire to favour the 
growth of the plants of northern Europe^ and of , 
northern Africa^ many of which are common to 
the Eaft alfo.
This catalogue is compiled from 
the Botanicon Monfpelienfe of MagnoU 1688, and 
the Methodus Foliorum of Sauvages.
The Flora 
Monfpeliaca has fince been greatly enriched by the 
publications of Gouan.
71.
FUNDAMENTA Valetudinis.P, Engfirom, lys^- 
The author of this thefis derives the foundation 
of firm health and vig-our of conftitution from two 
fources : ift, Good fiamina tranfmitted by pa- 
rents.
2dly, Care taken in the education, from 
the birth to the perfedl ftate of adolefcence.
From 
the firft, he thinks, that flrength in the nervous 
fyflem and from the fecond, that ftrength in the 
wafcular fyftem, muft be derived.
In confidering 
his firfl: pofition, he has, in a concife m.anner, 
thrown together a variety of arguments, which he 
endeavours to confirm by the moft refpedabie 
authorities, to prove that various diforders are 
tranfiniifible to the offspring ; alfo, that (inde- 
pendent of the fpecific diforders thus tranfmitted 
from the parent) others arife in children from 
enervated and debauched progenitors.
To the 
firft^ 
[ 2U ] 
firfl: clafs he refers Mania^ Epilepfy, Gout, Stone, 
and fome others ^ to the latter^ particularly the 
Rickets.
In confidering his fecond pofition, he 
prefcribes the appropriate regimen to the mother 
during pregnancy, and for the nurfe, whom he 
would always fuppofe to be the mother : and 
iifially, concludes with fome forcible perfuafives 
to young men, not to defeat thefe defirable ends^ 
by a courfe of intemperance.
72.
Specifica Canadeksiitm.
7. Von Coelln, 
1756.
In the firft chapter of this tradV, the writer, 
after prefenting us with a view of the progrefs of 
medical fcience through the feveral fchools and 
feds of phyficians, and condemning that farrago 
of compound medicines, with which the practice of 
phyfic hath been fo long burthened^ confiders the 
return to a more fim.ple mode of prefcribing as in- 
timately connec!:ed with its improvement.
This , 
leads him to his fubje6l, which is intended to exhibit 
and recommend to the notice of phyflcians, a num- 
ber of fimples frorn the vegetable kingdom, ufed 
by the natives of North Ammca^ in the cure of 
their difeafes, fome of which may be worth the 
notice of European phyf^cians, Thefe may be 
confidered as conflituting the Materia Medica of 
the Indians^ among whom, as with other barbarous 
nations, all that can be called phylic depends en- 
tirely on the empirical application of fimples ; nor.
can it be doubted, that long experience hath con- 
firmed the efEcacy of many to them.
This .
[ 285 ] 
This catalogue is chief!/ compiled from 
Mr. Barlrmn's appendix, CoMen^s papers in the 
Up/a!
Acfs^ and from the communications of 
Peter Kalm.
It is not within our plan to de- 
tail the fub]e<5ls of this paper.
Among thofe men- 
tioned by Bartram, we have the exa6b method of 
exhibiting the LoMia Sipbylilka^ Sp. Plant.
1320^ 
the Indian fpecific for the venereal difeafe, as deli- 
vered to Sir William John/on^ who purchafed it of 
the Indians at a great price : this is much more 
largely treated of by Kalm, The virtues of many 
of thefe plants are confirmed by Colden.
The 
Spigelia Anthelmintica^ or Indian Pink ; the Phyto- 
lacca Americana^ Poke- weed ; Polygala Senega \ arc 
all confidered, and the Geum Rivale^ or Mountain 
Avens, which is ufed inftead of Peruvian Bark, 
aod that with great confidence, in North America.
The catalogue contains near 40 plants, and the 
author finifhes by propofing a certain number of 
thefe, which appear to be mofi: worthy of regard, 
to be cultivated in Europe for medicinal purpofes j 
fuch are the 
Aralia Nudicaulis ; naked baftard Angelica.
CoUinfonia Canadenfis ; .called Horfe-weed.
Lobelia Siphylitica ; blue Cardinal Flower.
Rumex Britannica ; Virginian Water- dock.
Polygala Senega ^ Rattle-fnake Root.
A5Itea Racemofa ; capfular Herb Chriflopher.
Phytolacca Americana ; Poke- weed.
Geum Rivale j Mountain Avens.
73.
ACETARIA," 
C 286 ] 
73.
AcETARiA.
H. Von der Burg, 175^.
This writer, after having pointed out the advan- 
tages and difadvantages of eating crude vegetables, 
fhevving to what conftitutions fuch food is adapted, 
and having treated largely on the qualities of Oil 
and Vinegar^ gives a catalogue, and defcribes the 
fenfible qualities and powers of the different vege- 
tables eaten in the various parts of Europe as 
Sallads.
Eighteen different forts are here enume- 
rated ; moil of which are fuperfeded among us 
by Lettuce^ Endive^ Crejfes^ and Celleri, the latter 
of which our author thinks particularly hurtful 
to fuch as labour under nervous diforders.
74.
Phal^na Bombyx.
J, Lyman, 1756.
The hi (lory of the Silk- worm, (PhaUna Mori^ 
Syft.
Nat. p.
817.) its culture, and fome account 
of the feveral fpecies of Mulberry on which the 
infe6t feeds : of thefe the white is mod acceptable, 
then the red^ and black Mulberry.
The writer 
thinks it probable that fdk was firfl wrought by the 
Chinefe from whom the art might pafs to the Per- 
fians.
The Emperor Jufiinian attempted to intro- 
duce this worm into Italy^ but it did not then fuc- 
ceed ; neither was the true culture of it brought ta 
perfedion, until about the year 11 30, in Sicily^ 
from whence it fpread into other parts of Europe.
The author mentions a fpecies of Bombyx^ (Pha- 
lana Atlas ^ Syft.
Nat. p.
808.) the coccoons of 
which are abundantly larger than thofe of the Silk- 
worm^ and the filk much ftronger ; but it is to be 
regretted that they are difficult to wind, and are 
therefore 
I 287 ] 
therefore commonly fpun.
We fear that M.
Ly- 
man is rather fanguine in thuYking that the culture 
of the Silk-w0rm may fucceed in fo northern a cli- 
mate as Sweden, 
75.
MiGRATioNES Avium.
C. D.
Ecmark, 1757.
This paper is confeiTedly one of the moft com- 
plete that has been publifhed on this curious fub- 
jed, which is yet involved in confiderable obfcu- 
rity 5 the caufe of thefe migrations, virith refped to 
feveral birds, and the places of their refort, being 
yet unknown.
With refped to the greater number, 
it cannot be doubted but that the facility of find- 
ing their appropriate food in diftant countries, in 
the different feafons, and their fecurity during in- 
cubation, have the principal lliare in this part of 
their economy.
Mr. Ecmark obferves, that the greater number 
of migrating birds belong to the flat-billed order 
(Jnferes), particularly to the Goofe and Merganfer 
genera •, and to the Waders, ( GralU) : the former 
moftly breed in the extreme north, where, from 
the relation of Linn^^ius, their number almoft 
darkens the air, and they are driven fouthward by 
the freezing of the lakes and rivers.
Numbers 
alfo of the fmall- billed birds (Pafferes)^ efpecially 
thofe with flender hiUs^ are of the migrating clafs.
The infe5livorous retire fouth wards when our winter 
advances, as others in that feafon vifit us for the 
fake of berries.
It is no fmall merit in Mr. Remark^ that in this 
paper he brings together, in one view, more com- 
pletely 
[ 288 ] 
pletely than any other writer had done, all the?
known fpecies of migrating birds, whether exotic, 
or indigenous to Sweden.
He gives a lift of all 
fuch as are mentioned in the writings of Catejbyy 
KleWy and HaJJelquifi but the moft confiderable 
part of his trad: is employed in a methodical enu- 
meration of the indigenous birds of Sweden^ under 
each of which he mentions, as fully as is yet pof- 
fible, the particular times of their feveral migra- 
tions, the places whither they refort, their food, 
and interfperfes many other remarks, equally 
curious and fatisfa6l:ory to thofe who wifh for in- 
formation in this part of natural hiftory.
AMGENITATES ACADEMICS.
Vol. V, 
1760.
pp.
483.
76.
MORBI EXPEDITIONIS CLASSIC/E, I756.
P. Bierchen.
iJo^j.
. The author of this tra(5l v/as phyfician to the 
fleet of obfervation, which was fitted out in the 
beginning of the lafl: war between E?tgland and 
France^ by the Swedes, to adt in conjundion with 
the Danes, in the north fea.
The Swedtjh fqua- 
dron confifted of eight fhips of the line, befides 
frigates.
When M.
Bierchen took his appoint- 
ment in Augufty he found not fewer than 1900 men 
on the Tick lift 5 and that the principal difeafes 
were Fluxes, Fevers, and the Scurvy.
The firft 
were attended with great pain in the bowels,, 
extreme weaknefs, fever, and a very weak puife.
The Fevers were of that kind which has beea 
called 
t 2^9 1 
called the Upfal Fever^ from its having iDeen r<*- 
markably epidemical in that city and neighbour- 
hood.
This difeafe was evidently of that clafs 
which is called putrid^ and was much more 
acute in fummer than in autumn.
It was at- 
tended with frequent and obftinate hemorrhages 
from the nofe, early in the difeafe ; a quiet kind 
of delirium ; trembling tongue twitching tendons ; 
ieafnefs ; petechia and vi bices on the {kin.
As 
the heat declined, hemorrhages were not fo much 
obferved , the diforder attacked with pain and laf- 
Jitude of body, vertigo and pain in the head^ cough 
and oppreffion of the breafl ; and was afterwards 
attended with cardialgia^ naufea^ vomitings- turbid^ 
and fometimes in the decline, bloody urine.
Alfo 
great profiration of ftrength, weak pulfe, and fub- 
fultus tendinum^ were fymptoms of this fever ; and 
many were feized in the beginning with violent 
fiuxes.
The Scurvy feems to have been attended 
with no other than the ufual fymptoms.
Our author appears to have been very folicitous 
in his endeavours to find out the caufe of the ex- 
treme prevalence of this difeafe in the fleet.
In the 
Scurvy^ befides the ufe of faked meats, he attri- 
butes much to the waiit of fufficient exercife on 
board the fliips ; and confirms the obfervations of 
fome other writers, that the difeafe, independent 
of regimen or diet, decreafed when the fleet was 
out at fea, and confequently the fliips more agi* 
tated by wind and waves, and the men more em- 
ployed j and that it augmented when they were in 
a ftate of inaftion in port.
He condemns the ufe 
U of 
[ 2^0 ] 
of fat and lard, as difficult of codtion, and favour^ 
able to the difeafe.
In the cure, he recommends 
acids ; and fays, he ufed principally the vitriolic : 
but above all he celebrates the praifes of four' 
krout \ for the efficacy of which he alfo cites the 
authority and experience of Sir John Pringle.
He confiders the Fevers as arifing from impeded 
perfpiration, co-operating with the effedls of cold, 
moifl, and foul air and in this expedition^ he 
thinks, the infufficiency of proper cloathing dur- 
ing the watches might not unfrequently be found 
a predifpofmg caufe.
He is of opinion that the 
difeafe was contagious j and fays, many were 
cured by the early exhibition of emetics.
In the 
general method of cure, the pra6tice laid down by 
our later writers in England was fuccefsfully pur- 
fued.
The Fluxes and Byfenteric diforders he afcribes 
particularly to the prevalence of faline and putrid 
acrimony in the food of feamen ; aided by foul air,, 
and want of exercife, and propagated at length 
by contagion too.
Our author concludes, by fuggefting that there 
are two caufes, of a general and permanent nature, 
which predifpofe to thefe difeafes in all naval ex- 
peditions.
Thefe are, impure air^ and a conftanc 
dcpreffion of fpirits in feamen, not hitherto fuffi- 
ciently attended to, and inducing a degree of real 
Noftalgia, He feems to be fufficiently aware 
of the importance of corredting the firft, and re- 
commends ftrongly the ufe of ventilators ; to the 
other it is not eafy to apply a remedy.
He informs 
us, that both Swedes and Swifs find the greateft 
relief.
[ 291 ] 
relief^ in the Maladie du pais^ next to their return 
home, from ftrong exercife : however he hints his 
wifhes, that the pay of the men was advanced, as 
one of the beft means of infpiring them with chear- 
fulnefs and hilarity, heceffary to counterbalance 
this evil, at leaft in fome degree.
To conclude, the fubje6t of this paper has been 
fo well treated by feveral later judicious writers 
amongft us, that the Englijh phyfician cannot ex- 
pe6b to meet with much new matter in this dif- 
fertation ; but it is neverthelefs very worthy the 
regard of all who wilh to make themfelves acquaint- 
ed with the difeafes of the navy* 
77.
Febris IJpsALiENSis. A, Bofirom.
1757.
The fever here defcribed, which had been re-' 
markably epidemical in divers parts of Sweden^ 
but particularly at Upfal^ for feveral years before 
this time, and which had by many been fuppofed 
to be a new diiiemper.
Dr. Bqflrom confrders as of 
the Remittent clafs, and common in all other parts 
of Europe.
He has determined its type to be that 
of the Hemitrit^a of Linn^us, (fee Gen. Morh^ 
23.) or the Semitertian of authors.
In fome 
years indeed, he obferves, that it feemed to have 
changed its form, was attended with Petechia., and 
became contagious, under which appearance it 
was named Fehris Petecbizans, and Febris Nervofa^ 
when attended particularly v^ith delirium and fpafms.
In its milder ftate, efpecially in the fpring, it af- 
fumed a regular quotidian^ or continued tertian 
type.
U 2 In 
t 292 ] 
In feeking the caufes of the frequency of this 
fever, in Upfal particularly, our author accedes 
to that opinion which attributes intermitting and 
emcerhating fevers to the efFcdls of mQift and foul 
air, and thinks, from the fituation of the city of 
XJpfal^ the clofenefs of the ftreets, and efpecially 
from the ftagnating canals and waters, that its pre- 
valence in that city may fairly be referred to this 
caufe.
To confirm his opinion, he cites two re- 
markable inftances of cities rendered free from thefc 
fevers, by leading off, and drying up, ftagnant 
and putrid waters.
In the Prognoftics^ he fays, a ftiffhefs of the neck 
was not uncommon, and that it ufually betokened 
a long continuance of the difeafe ; and frequently 
ended in convulfions, or other dangerous affec- 
tions of the nervous fyftem.
The cure of this fever was ufually begun by 
giving gentle emetieSy and repeating them for 
a few days occafionally ; without which it was 
obferved, that the bark^ and other remedies, failed 
to have their proper efFe^l.
Gentle paregorics 
and faline medicines were interpofed, and the 
following preparation of the bark exhibited:— 
One ounce was infufed in five ounces of red wine 
for a few hours, the refiduum boiled in water to 
eight ounces, and three ounces of fyrup of oranges 
mixed with this tindlure and decoction.
Of this 
a dofe was given every two hours.
Dr. Bojirom 
entirely forbids bleedings having commonly found 
%% hurtful^ 
7&.
Flor4 
» 
[ 293 ] 
yB.
Flora Danica.
G. T, Holm, 1757.
This Linn^an catalogue of the plants of Den-- 
marky is formed principally from the Viridarium 
Danicum of P.
KylUng^ publilhed in 1688, which 
comprehends eleven hundred fpecies.
A few are 
introduced into this lift from Burfer^s Herbarium^ 
and fome from the author's own obfervations.
Dr. Holm was made Profeflbr of Economy at 
Copenhagen^ and died much regretted in 1759.
The plants of Denmark are nearly the fame with 
thofe of England, [In that fplendid addition to 
botanic fcience, which his DaniJJj majefty has made 
by his patronage of the Flora Danica^ begun in 
1762, of which 840 plates are delivered, nearly 
four fifths are Britijh,'] 
79.
Panis DiiETETicus.
J. Suenjfon, 1757.
The author begins his differtation by enume- 
rating the feveral forts of grain ufed for Breads 
adding briefly their general qualities, and the efti- 
mation in which they were held by the antients.
He then fpecifies the various kinds of bread, whe*- 
ther leavened, unleavened, or fermented ; con- 
fiders it as it is the general food of man the nar 
ture of it as a nutriment, and the different tenden- 
cies to acefcency in the feveral kinds ; condemning 
the too liberal ufe of it by the ftudious, perfons 
of weak habits, and fuch as are troubled with fla- 
tulency —defc ants upon every part of the procefs 
of making it j — treats on mill-ftones, and repro- 
tgte§ ftrongly fuch as are formed of fand-ftone ^ 
U 3 ' H^^o^^^g 
[ 294 ] ' • 
quoting inftances of their pernicious effeds ; fays,^ 
thofe are beft which are of a tdky texture : — the 
effedls of fermentation, kneading, and the diffe- 
rent degrees of baking bread, bifcuir, cakes, ^c.
; 
— the qualities of the unfermented kinds ; and con- 
demns in ftrong terms the ufe of hot new bread.
He concludes by briefly reciting the qualities of 
fuch as is prepared from Ricc^ "Turkey -wheats MilleU 
and Sago ^ and mentions the fubftitutes for bread 
in various parts of the world ; fuch are, the Caf- 
fava, (Jatropha ManihoU Spec.
PI.
1429 Pota- 
toes ; Yams; Roots of the Sea Rufh, (Scirpus 
Maritimus^ Sp. PI.
74-,) thofe of Drop wort, {Spiraa 
Filipendula^ Sp. PI.
702 •,) of the Clowns-allheal, 
(St achy s Paluftris^ Sp. PI.
8u ;) the Lichen Ijlan- 
dicus^ Sp. PI.
i6ii ; the Bark of the Wild-pine, 
yet in ufe in Dalekarlia ; Chefnuts ; the Seeds of 
Spurrey, (Spergula Arvenfis^ Sp. PI.
630 0 and 
various others, for which fee the Plants Efculentce^ 
in the third volume of this work, N* 34.
80.
Natura Pelagi.
J,H,Hager, iJ5J* 
A general view of the contents of that vaft ex- 
panfe of element, the Ocean \ and a comparifon 
between its inhabitants and thofe of the Earth ; 
intended to excite the young and curious voyager 
to a more clofe and diligent inveftigation of thi^ 
hitherto almoft unknown, but fruitful field of 
fcience.
In the vegetable kingdom, Mr. Hager turns the 
reader's attention to the Sargazo, (Fucus Natans^ 
Sp. PI.
1628) which, fwimming in a vegetating 
ftate.
[ 295 ] 
ftate, covers the deep in fome places for hundreds 
of leagues.
See Kalm and Ojbeck, The Madre- 
pores and Millepores^ which incruft as it were the 
bottom of the Ocean, and form banks, that at 
length rife into iflands.
The Corallines, and Sea- 
fans, ^c, are fpread over them, as Grafs on the 
Earth.
But what words can exprefs the myriads that be- 
long to the Vermes clafs !
the Nereides^ which illu- 
minate the Ocean ; the Meduf^^ or Blubbers, food 
for whales ; the Afterice \ the Scyllaa Pelagica^ feed- 
ing amongft the Fucus ^ the Sea Pens ; the Holo- 
tburia Phyfalis^ Befanties j the SepU , the Argo- 
nauta^ &c.
It were endlefs to attempt the Fijhes, The va- 
rious kinds of flying Fiflies the Bonito ; the Albi- 
core the Tunny \ the Pilot- fiQi, (Gafterofteus Buc- 
tor^ Syft.
489 0 the Sucking-fiili, (Echeneis Re- 
mora^ Syft.
446 •,) the fplendid Dolphin ; the fpiny 
Oftracion^ &c.
affording perpetual entertainment 
and inftrudlion to the curious eye.
Among the Amphibia^ the whole Turtle genus, 
fleeping on the furface of the wave ; the voracious 
Shark, thofe tygers of the ocean ; the Toad-fifli ; 
the Fifhing-frog of America^ rioting in the paf- 
tures of Sargazo^ and feeding on the Scyllaa Pela^ 
gica ; called, by the failors, the Sea Hare.
Above the feathered tribe, the Tropic-bird, 
(Phaeton Mthereus^ Syft.
219,) foaring beyond the 
reach of the eye; the Albatrofs, (Diomedea Em- 
lanSy Syft.
214;) the Man of War-bird, (Peleca- 
ms AquiluSy Syft.
216 0 the Shearwaters, (Prccel- 
U 4 laria^) 
[ 2g6 ] 
lari^,) flcimming the furface ; and laftly, the nii-^ 
merous genera of Divers^ &c.
Of the Mammalia^ we admire the enormous 
Whale J the voracious Grampus ; and the un- 
wieldy Porpefs \ the armed Morfe ^ and the balk- 
ing Seal.
Finally, thefe^ which occur even to the 
mod incurious eye, afford but a fmall fample of 
what this element offers to the contemplation of 
the more curious and inquifitive obferver.
8 1.
BuxBAUMiA.
A. R.
Martin.
1757.
The hiftory, accompanied with figure?, of a 
fmall plant of the Cryptogamia clafs, (Buxhaumia- 
Aphylla^ Sp. Plant.
1570,) fmgular in being defti- 
tute of leaves : it was firfl: difcovered nGRr J/lracan^ 
by Mr. Buxhaum^ profeflbr of botany, and member 
of the royal academy at Peterpurgh % fmce that 
time, in divers other parts of Europe \ apd was 
named after the difcoverer, by Haller^ in confide- 
ration of his having enriched natural hiilory with 
many new plants, from his expedition into the 
countries around the Cafpian fea for that purpofe.
82.
Exanthemata YivA.
J.CNyander, 1757.
The origin of contagious difeafes has exercifed 
the pens of many ingenious phyficians, and vari- 
ous theories have been invented, all of which are 
briefly recited in the beginning of this difquifition.
The author had been led by fome lingular circum- 
llances-to incline to that of Kircher, which afcribes 
them to Animalcula^ and who has had many fol- 
lowers, efpecially in France, 
[ «97 1 
He next proceeds to fliew the feveral analogies 
that fubfift in the iymptoms of contagious difeafes ; 
and as Animalada have been demonftrated in the 
Jtch^ and, as he thinks, in the Byfentery too ; fo 
he tells ns, they have been feen in the MeaQes, 
by Langius j in the Peflilence, by Kircher ; in the 
Siphylis, by Hauptman\ in Petechice, by Sigler\ 
in the Smali-pox, by Lufitams and Porcellus ; as 
alfo in the Serpigo, and other cutaneous afFedtions.
He then proceeds to adduce ail that occurs in de^ 
fence of this theory, from the confideration of 
fadts arifing in the following difeafes ; the 7/^*^; 
Pyfenteryy Hooping-cough^ Small-po^c^ Meajles^ Plague^ 
jand Siphylis.
In the Itch^ the exiftence of the Acarus Sir&f 
Syft.
p. 1024,) is acknowledged, and he thinks ic 
not lefs certain, that a fpecies of this genus exifts 
as the caufe of Byfenteries : to this opinion the au- 
thor was led by a fingular fad, that occurred to 
Dr. Rolander^ during his refidence in ProfefTor 
LiNN^us's houfe ; he had been infefted with the 
Dyfintery for fome time, and had been relieved 
twice by taking rhubarb, but the difeafe recurred, 
commonly, at the end of about eight days.
He 
was the only one in the houfe thus affedted ; and 
was put by the ProfelTor, upon examining his 
egejia^ with a view to prove the truth of Bartho- 
line's affertion, w^ho relates that he had feen the 
alvine dejedlions full of the moft minute infedts 
in this difeafe.
Dr. Rolander's obfervation on his 
own ftatc confirmed the fa6l ; and he afterwards 
^ifcoveredji %\\2iX thefe Animalcula were conveyed 
into 
[ 298 } 
into his body in water, received from a vefiel made 
of juniper wood.
This Acarus is defcribed in the 
Syftem^ p.
1024.
Our plan will not allow us to 
follow the author through the whole of his dif- 
quifition, it muft fuffice to fay, that it is ingenious, 
and well worthy the attention of all thofe who wifh 
to be acquainted with the dodrine which it 
favours.
83.
Transmutatio Frumentorum.
B* Hornhorg.
' 
^757' ^ .
The purport of this diflertation is to combat, 
and abolifh a long-eftablifhed vulgar error, which 
neverthelefs prevailed until the time of Harvey^ 
among fome m.en of confiderable knowledge, and 
even now ftill fubfifts among the vulgar, in fome 
parts of Europe ^ namely, that one kind of grain 
was convertible, by different foils, into an inferior, 
diilin6l, and more ufelefs fpecies : thus, that 
Wheats in an impoverifhed foil, would change to 
Kye: this, to Barley : Barley^ into 'Darnel: this, into 
Brome-grafs : Brome-grafs^ into Oats» Some of the 
antients carried their belief farther, fuppofing, on 
the other hand, that in fertile lands, the reverfe 
would take place.
As thefe ideas were repugnant 
to truth, fo they were in many cafes unfriendly to 
improvement.
This author, after having ob- 
ferved, that among the Romans the Res Rujlica was 
held in fuch eftimation, that even the men of quality 
themfelves difdained not to cultivate agriculture, 
laments that in modern times it is too much ne- 
glcded by the great j he therefore urges gentle-* 
mea 
f 299 3 
men to purfue the hiftory and philofophy of 
vegetables, through the whole extent of them, 
as the foundation of pradlical improvements.
With this view, he refers them to the many- 
excellent papers thereon, contained in this collec- 
tion : and from the phyfiology of plants, the confi- 
deration of the mechanifm of them, and particu- 
larly that of the parts of fru6lification, he ffiews 
the futility of the opinion, which he had under- 
taken to confute, and particularly levels his argu- 
ments againft that part of it which has gained 
the moft belief, and remained longeft in the minds 
of his countrymen and the peafants, that Oats are 
mutable into Rye, 
No notice is taken in this difTertation of the 
Secak Cormtum^ or Ergot, which, with other viti- 
ated grain, has been fuppofed to occafion the 
Necrcjis Uftilaginea^ (vide Sativagefs Nofolog, vol.
ii.
p. 623.) and which lately engaged the attention 
of the learned in England.
See PhiL 'Tranfa5i.
yol.
Iv. p.
106 — 126, and vol.
lii.
p. S'2.2~5Z3,* 
84.
CuLiNA MuTATA.
M. G.
OJleman, 
In a former paper was exhibited a lift of vege- 
tables that are eaten in a crude ftate, as fallads.
The prefent is intended to fhew the change which 
has taken place, fince the time of the antiepts, in 
the choice of vegetable aliments ; by fubftituting, 
inftead of what were then ufed, a number of more 
blandj agreeable, and nutritive plants, 
la 
C 300 ] 
In this review of the alteration, which this part 
of the culinary fyftem has undergone, the author, 
iinder each article, gives a comparative fl^etch of 
the qualities of each, and fhews the fuperiority of 
the modern fubftitute : to mention fome of the 
moft material ; 
The Acorns and Nuts of the primitive days have 
given way to all the variety of fweeter farinaceous 
feeds and roots.
To the Malvaceous tribe of plants, fo much ufed 
by the Greeks and Romans^ hath fucceeded the 
more grateful Spinach, And to the Blite^ the Gar-- 
den Orach.
The rough Borage is fupplanted by the acefcent 
Sorrel \ and Afparagtis has banifhed a number of 
roots, recorded by the Roman writers under the 
name of Bulhs^ though at this day it is not eafy to 
determine the feveral fpecies.
Our author, however, thinks that the Parfnip 
has undefervedly ufurped the place of the SkirreL 
The Bean of the antients, improperly fo called, 
being the roots as well as other parts of the Nym- 
fh^ea Nelumbo^ Sp. PI.
730, or Water Lilly, 
is fuperfeded by the Kidney-bean.
The Garden Rocket^ ( Brajica Eruc^^ Sp. PI.
932.) 
eaten with, and as an antidote againft, the chilling 
Lettuce^ is baniflied by the more agreeable Crefs^ 
iand 'Tarragon, The Apium by the meliorated Cel- 
Jery^ the Pompion^ and others of the Cucurbit aceou^ 
tribe, by the Melon j and the Sumach Berries by the 
fragrant Nutmeg, 
The Silphium^ or Succus Cyrenaicus^ which the 
Romans purchafed from perjia and fydi^y^ at a great 
price^ 
C ] 
price, and is thought by fome to have been the 
Afafcetida of the prefent time, is no longer ufed in 
preference to the Alliaceous tribe.
To turn from the vegetable to fome of the 
animal fubftitutes, we may mention the Carp 
among Fijhes^ as having excluded a great number 
held in high eftimation in antient Rome, 
The change of Oil for Butter ; of Honey for Su- 
gar \ oi Mulfa^ liquors made of wine, water, and 
honey, for the exquifite JVines of modern times ; 
and that of the antient Zyihus^ for the improved 
Malt Liquors of this day, are all recited ; not to 
mention alfo the Calida of the Roman T* averns^ ana- 
logous to our bewitching Tea and Coffee.
85.
Spigelia Anthelmia.
J. G.
Colliander; 
1758.
A botanical and medical hiftory of the Indian 
Pinky or Worm-grafs, which has been fo much 
ufed, and fo greatly celebrated, for expelling 
worms from the human body.
Dr. CoUiander does more than barely treat of the 
plant, having enumerated the feveral kinds of 
worms infefting the human fpecies ; the Afcaris 
VermiculariSy and Lumhricoides, Syft.
p. 1276, the 
LumbricusTerreJiriSy y.
ib.
and the ^T^^i^, Syft.
1324.
He then gives a diftind account of the fymptoms 
that indicate their prefence in the human body, 
and the difeafes which they too frequently occa- 
fion : then follows a diftindt catalogue of all the 
fuppokdAntbelmintbics from the vegetable and mi- 
xieral claffes j and before he comes to the hiftory 
of 
E 302 ] 
of the plant in queftion, he recites the feveral fimptes 
which have been confidered as Specifics : among 
thefe we may note particularly the Fern^ mentioned 
by Biofcorides as anthelminthic, and lately publifhed 
in France^ as fuch, at the expence of the king.
The hiftory of the Spigelian with a figure annex- 
ed, is then delivered at large, nearly as it ftands 
in Browne's Hiftory of Jamaica^ and in the Ejjays 
and Obfervations phyjical and literary^ by Dr. Linings 
vol.
i. p.
386.
The fuccefs of this remedy among the negroes 
and Indians introduced it into pradice.
Dr. Browne 
adminiftered it in decodlion ; the North American 
phyficians give the powder of the root on which 
occafion ^ye may obferve, that fubfequent obferva- 
tions have proved the South American and North 
American Spigelia to differ in fpecie : the former is 
figured in Browne^ and the latter in the EJfays above- 
mentioned, vol.
iii.
p. 154.
See their botanical 
diftindions alfo.
Linn.
Syft.
Nat. ed.
xiii.
p. 166.
86.
MedicamentaGraveolentia.
J,T.
Fagraus^ 
175^' 
It is a poftulatum in the philofophy of LiNNi^:us, 
that the qualities of medicines are, in a general 
way, to be determined by their effed on the or- 
gans of tafte and fmelling." And further, that 
the Sapida, or thofe which more fenfibly ftrike 
the tafte than the fmell, do principally operate oa 
the vafcular ^nd vital fyHem and that the " Olida^ 
or thofe which more fenfibly ftrike the organs of 
fmelling, operate on the medullary or nervous fyf- 
tem.'!
The Sapor Medicament orum of this collec- 
tion.
t 3^3 1 
tion, 30, may be confidered as a comment od 
the firft part of this general diflribution of medi- 
cines, diftinguifhed by the term Sapida and the 
prefent t-bejs as an explanation of a large divifion 
of the Olida, here called Graveolentia^ from their 
flrono; and ungrateful fmell.
The combinations of Sapids and Olids are innu-^' 
merable but that fimples, ftri6tly of the latter 
kind, do, in a fudden and extraordinary manner, 
exert their influence on the nerves, is certain ; 
though our author contents himfelf with the fadl, 
without enquiring whether the fundions of the 
nerves are performed by means of animal fpirits, 
by vibration, the medium of eledlricity, or by any 
other way.
And from the Graveolentia^ which are 
the fubjed of his thefis, he juftly obferves, thac 
we derive fome of the mofl: powerful remedies.
Of thefe he gives a catalogue, dividing them into 
three clafles : i.
Subinsipid.
2. Acrid.
3. Bit- 
ter : each of which is fubdivided into two orders, 
as the fubjeds differ in degrees of ftrength.
The 
Subinjipid contains chiefly the Narcotics : the Acrid 
feveral of the purging, and fetid roots ; the fetid 
gums, and carminative feeds : the Bitter con* 
tains others of the purging roots and leaves ; and 
fome of the bitter herbs.
Under each, the au- 
thor fpecifies, in technical terms, very briefly, the 
quality, and the difeafes to which it has been ap- 
propriated.
He then prefents us with a concife, but very in- 
ftrudlive theory, of the operation of this divifion of 
the Olida ; leaving to the confideration of others, 
the Suaveokntia : after which, follows a general 
pathology 
[ ] 
pathology 6f thofe difeafes which are remedied by 
the Graveokntia.
In treating on the ufe of external applications^ 
Dr. Fagraus appears to be diffatisfied with the 
common theory of repellents, which are ufually 
drawn from the ftyptic clafs \ and thinks, that the 
fir ft claf$ of Graveolentia^ the Narcotics^ which he 
fuppofes to induce a relaxation, or temporary 
palfy, in an inflamed part, more efFedlually pro- 
mote a return of the ftagnating and accumulating 
fluids into the circulation, than any ftyptics can 
poinbly effed, and are therefore more juftly en- 
titled to that term.
57.
Arboretum Sueticum.
D. D.
Pontin.
1759; 
58.
Frutetum Suecicum.
D. M.Firgander, jys^* 
The dcfign of thefe papers nearly coincides with 
that of the Flora Oeconomica, (N* £7.) having for 
its objed the culture of the native trees and flirubs 
of Sweden^ and fome of exotic origin, which time 
hath naturalized, amounting to 106 fpecies.
In 
thefe excellent papers, no botanical defcriptions 
are given, the name only by which they ftand in 
the Linn^an fyftem being introduced ; the pro- 
vinces in which they are moft plentifully found 5 
the foil in which they beft thrive ; their times of 
leafing, flowering, and ripening their fruit ; their 
duration ; the bcft methods of fowing or propagat- 
ing each 5 and their ufes as applicable to the arts, 
but particularly in rural economy, are concifely 
and diftindly treated of.
At the end of the Arhoretim are fubjoined fome 
giueral rules, to fecure the propagation and growth 
[ 305 J 
of trees : and at the conclufion of the Frutetm 
the author has pointed out the proper kinds of 
Ihrubs for all forts of hedges^ adapted to differeat 
fituationS and foils.
89.
Pandora Insectorvm* E, O.
Rydheck, 
1758.
Mr. Rydheck purfues the plan of the Hofpita 
Infe5lorum^ N* 43, the completion of which can- 
not but be fubfervient to the art of gardening, 
agriculture, and the economy of cattle, in a 
variety of inftances and is even neceflary to faci- 
litate the enquiries of the entomologift.
The author, in his preliminary fedlions, prefents 
his reader with a hiftory of the metamarphojis of 
infeds, from the worm or maggot, through that of 
the chryfalis, to the perfedl ftate, when it comes out 
in its full beauty, and performs all the fundlions 
of its being.
The catalogue, as that of the Hofpita^ exhibits 
a lift of the vegetables of Sweden^ arranged in the 
fexual method, and under each is given the infe6t 
which it nourifhes.
It has this advantage beyond the 
former thefis, that the infedts are better defined, by 
the more complete addition of the trivial names, 
taken from the enlarged edition of the Syjiem of 
Nature^ which had been publilhed in the interval 
of thefetwo papers.
It is accompanied with a 
plate, containing near 50 of the more rare fpecies, 
with references to the numbers in the tenth edition 
of the Syfiem, 
X 
90.
Senium 
I 306 ] 
90, Senittm Salomoneum.
J.Pilgren.
1759.
A paraphrafe and coniment on Solomon^s defcrip- 
tion of old age, which has To frequently employed 
the pen both of medical and theological critijcs.
With the reader's leave, this may be called a phyfio- 
logicaland pathological explanation of the text ; not 
that the author has failed to interfperfefuitable moral 
reflexions.
Sokmon^s allufions are probably tooob- 
fcure, at this diftance of time, to admit of uncon- 
troverted explanation* The prefent attempt muft 
be allowed to be an ingenious one, and worthy of 
the regard of thofe who v/ifh to turn their atten- 
tion to this fubjed.
91.
AucTORES BoTANici.
A. Loo, lJo9* 
We are here prefented with an alphabetical cata- 
logue of botanic writers, amounting to upwards 
of 350, on the following plan :— After the name of 
the writer, follows the time of his birth ; his rank 
or profefTion ; the period in which he flourifhed, 
commonly taken from the date of his firft publi- 
cation, the title of which is given in brief; and 
laftly, the year of his death.
The catalogue takes 
in fome authors yet living.
Such as have been eminently confpicuous for 
their merit, are, in this lift, denoted by an afterifk 
affixed to the name.
After the alphabetic cata- 
logue, other arrangements of the fame authors 
take place; in one, particularly, they are arranged 
. according to the countries of which they were 
natives.
The catalogue concludes by pointing 
out 
i 307 3 
ibut fuch capital writers as are indifpenfably necef- 
fary to fuch as would make any conliderable pro- 
grefs in the knowledge and hiftory pf botany.
92.
Instructio Peregrinatoris.
E,^.
Nordblad* 
1759' 
After fome pertinent inftrudlions to the young 
traveller for his condu6l in foreign countries, and 
ufeful hints relating to thofe requifite qualifica- 
tions, in which, it is to be regretted, too many 
who travel are deficient, we arc prefented with the 
complete method of keeping a journal, on the 
moft extenfive fcale, pointing out whatfoever is 
worthy of obfervation.
It is not eafy to conceive 
a plan of inftrudtion on this head more perfedly 
defcribed in which the traveller will not only- 
find his memory much afTifted, by having proper 
obje6ts of inquiry fuggefted to him, whether in 
nature or art, but the method of arranging them 
alfo, greatly facilitated.
One part of his advice is of the utmofl import- 
ance, without the due and regular obfervance of 
which, nothing will efFedually be done.
Nulla 
dies fine Unea.^* He muli, if he would excel, moft 
ftridlly obferve to enter and arrange the obferva- 
tions of each day, before the next arrives.
93.
Plant^e Tinctori^.
E. Jorlin, 1759.' 
Intended to bring into one general view all the 
vegetable fubftances, whether indigenous or im- 
ported, ufed in the art of dyeing.
The author 
determines the exa6t plant from which each is 
X 2 produced.
[ 3o8 ] 
produced) adding fliort obfervations on the co- 
lours they yield, and the methods of extracting 
them.
In this Materia Tin^loria occur many of 
the indigenous plants of England^ not commonly 
known to be polTefled of any colouring quality ; 
and though their ufe, at prefenc, may be fuper- 
feded by the facility of procuring better from 
abroad, yet thefe neverthelefs remain fit objedts 
of inquiry with the encouragers of arts.
The ca- 
talogue confifts of ICO articles, exclufive of a 
* few from the animal kingdom.
We fubjoin the 
names of thofe Englijh plants, under the feveral 
colours which they are faid to yield.
Rhamnus catharticus^ 
— — — Frangula, 
Berberis vulgaris, 
Prunus domeftica.
Pyrus Malus.
Carpinus Betulus, 
Thali5frum flavum, ' 
Urtica dioica, 
Serratula tin5ioria, 
Hieracium umhellatum* 
Bidens tripartita, 
Myrica Gale, 
Salix pentandra.
Betula alba, 
Stachys fylvatica.
Polygonum Perftcaria.
Herb, 
Yellows.
Bark of Buck-thorn, 
Berry-bearing -j 
Alder, J 
Berbery, 
Plum-tree, 
Apple-tree, 
Horn-beam, 
Rootof Meadow Rue, 
Common Nettle, 
Herb, Saw-wort, 
BufhyHawk-weed, 
Hemp-agrimony, 
Gale, or Dutch!
Myrtle, \ 
Sweet Willow, 
Birch-tree, 
Hedge-nettle, 
Spotted- arfmart, 
% 
C 309 1 
Herb, Yellow Loofe- 1 r r t r • 
J Lyfimachia vulgaris.
Devils -bit, Scabiofa Succifa, 
Kidney-vetch, Anthyllis Vulneraria, 
Common yellow 1 _ .
, 
Liverwort, \ ^^chen farietmus.
Flowers of St. John's 7 77- .
^ r .
^ Wort J Hypencum perforatum, 
Reds.
Koots of Ladies Bed- 7 r> r 
^   > Gahum verum, 
it raw, J 
''^ roof I" Afperula tinBoria.
Sorrel, Rumesf Acetofa.
Tormentil, T ormentilla ere5ia, 
PurpleCinque-| Qomarum paluftre.
Purples.
Herb^ or ^ Origanum fylveftrt.
Blues, 
Bark of the Afh, Fraxims excelfiof.
flowers of Larkfpur, 'Delphinium Confolidai 
Bell-flower, Campanula rotundifoli^^ 
ferries of Black Heath, Empetrum nigrum.
Greens.
Herb of Ragwort, Senecio jacob^a* 
Cow- weed, Ch^erophyllum fylvejire* 
fanicleof Brome-grafs, Bromus fecalinus.
Comir^on Reed, Arundo phragmites.
3 Blacks.
[ 3IO 3 
Blacks.
Bark of Oak, ^ercus Rohm, ' 
Water Horehound, Lycppus europaus,, 
94.
Animalia Composita.
A. Back, 1759, 
Under the term Animalia Compofita are compre- 
hended the two laft orders of the clafs of Vermes^ 
making the laft links in the chain of animal na-.
ture and thus conne6ting it with the vegetable 
kingdom.
Thefe (in oppofition to thofe of the 
three foregoing orders of the fame clafs, which 
jive fmiple and feparate from each other) are called 
Compound Animals^ as being conne6ted together by- 
one common bafe or fupport, either in the form 
of irregular or rudely-branched ftcny maffes, of 4 
calcareous nature, as the Lithophyta^ or Corals % 
or, as fixed to one common ftalk more or lefs 
branched^, as the Zoophyta^ or Corallines, and fome 
others.
In order to give a more perfedt idea of the na- 
ture of thefe animals, the author holds forth the 
general analogy between animals and vegetables, 
principally to fhew that the former are not, like 
the latter, endowed with that multiplicative power 
of propagating themfelves without the particular 
energy and exertion of the generative fundion ; 
whereas the Animalia Compofita feem to unite thefe 
powers, fince they not only appear to propagate 
by eggs^ or 'vha foholes^ but alfo by progreffive 
extenfiqn and ramification.
The animals of the Lithophyta, like the 
fejlacsai fabricate their owia bafe of calcareous 
matter^ 
C ] 
aiatter, forming the whole mafs into tubes, each 
ending on the furface, in pores or cells, according 
£0 their fpecific difference, where alone the animal 
^eems to dwell, and extending thefe habitations, 
progreffively, in the manner of vegetables, leaving 
the bafe at length to perilh.
The animals of the Zoophyta^ containing tlie 
Corallines, i^c.
particularly the/;c^iones, approach 
much nearer than the foregoing to vegetables, .
both in their texture and form in general, arifing 
as if from a root, and forming a ftem and branches, 
which are befet at the extremities and articulations 
with the animals, or Polypes^ appearing by the 
help of glaffes like fo many flowers.
Since this trad was written, the fubjedb has re- 
ceived much farther illuftration from the difcor 
yeries of the late Mr. Ellis, 
95.
Flora Capensis.
C. H.Wannman.
1759.
In the time of the Romans it was a trite proverb, 
that Africa was the land of ^venders \ and it ftill re- 
mains true, as in thefe days it affords, both in the 
animal and vegetable kingdoms, fome of the moft 
ftupendous and Angular productions of nature.
From the firft difcovery of the Cape of Good Hope^ 
from whence Europe has chiefly been furniflied with 
the plants of Africa^ their uncommon afped, fo 
very different from thofe of Europe^ has attracted 
the notice, not only of naturalifl:s, but of all man- 
kind and as the mildnefs of that climate allowed 
of their cultivation here, they foon became fa- 
vourites in the Engliffo gardens.
X ^ , Sonic 
t 312 ] 
Some of the firft Cape of Good Hope plants that 
were brought to Europe^ we owe to J.
Heurnius^ 
who fent them to his brother, a profeflbr at Ley^ 
den \ and they are figured in Bodeus d Stapel's Theo- 
fhrajlus^ p.
3:^3 among thefe were the Indian 
Reed, (Canna Indica)^ the H^manthus Coccineus, 
Stapelia^ the Aletris Uvaria^ and a few others.
But the firft botanift who vifited the Cafe was Paul 
Herman j he colleded 800 fpecies, then unknown 
in Europe : after him H, B, Oldenland, a Dane, and 
y. Hartog^ a Dutchman, both made coUedions of 
African plants, which at length falhng into the 
hands of the prefent able profeflbr of botany at 
Amfierdam^ Dr. John Burman, he publifhed en- 
gravings of ten decads of the more rare kinds.
From thefe materials chiefly the prefent Flora is 
compofed, according to the ufuai plan, with the 
trivial names only.
Among the plants of the Cape, there are 38 
genera peculiar to that part of the world, feveral 
of which excel all others in the number of fpecies, 
3swell as in their uncommon and fuperb appearance.
The vaft number of fpecies under the fame genus, 
fo frequently met with in that country, ftrongly 
favours the idea of the perpetual new origin of 
plants ; and thar many, which elfewhere are only 
hybrid, there propagate and become permanent.
But Caffraria^ beyond all other countries, abounds 
v/ith extenfive genera of plants : the fucculent 
kinds, particularly, cover the fandy foil, where 
pothing but the fad could convince us that vege- 
tation would in any degree fucceed.
Such are the 
C 313 ] 
FIg-marygolds, (Mcfemhryanthema)^ Aloes, Purf- 
laneSy &c.
Among the others, we are aftoniflied 
with the variety of the Heaths^ (Ericse), C^rania^ 
Frot££^ and Gnaphalia, 
Since the publication of M.
Wammar^^ thefis, 
great difcoveries in botany have been made ia 
fouthern Africa by I'hunherg and Sparmann^ and by 
Mr, Majfon •, and we have reafon to exped a com*, 
plete account of the plants of that country from 
Dr. Laurence Burman^ fon of profeflbr J.
Burman^ 
who has already given us a compendious lift of 
th^m in his Flora Indica, 
96.
Flora Jamaicensis, C.
G. Sandmark, 1759.
The author begins his Flora with a general 
account of the geography of the ifland, and its 
produce ; fpecifying particularly fome of the moft 
ufeful articles thence imported : as, Cmiacum^ 
Fuftic^ Ebony^ Logwood^ Brafiletto^ Mahogany^ In- 
digo^ Sugar ^ Coffee^ Cot ton ^ Pimento^ and Ginger, 
He then fubjoins an account of the two principal 
works, from which his catalogue is compiled ; 
thefe are Sir Hans Sloane's Hiftory and Dr. Browne's, 
The former of thefe writers appears to have been 
the firft naturaliji who vifited that ifland, and he 
brought back with him 800 fpecies of plants.
The 
latter is faid to have made a colie(5lion amounting 
to 1200, which, after the publication of his Hif- 
tory, he prefented to Linnaeus.
As Dr, Browne 
followed the Linn^ean fyftem, his book is referred 
$0 in this Flora.
97, PuqiLLus 
t 314 3 
97.
PuGiLLus Jamaigensixtm Plantarum, 
G. Elmgren, 1759.
A defcription of one hundred and thirty fpecies 
of the more rare among the foregoing plants, made 
from Dr. Browne's colledion, which was in the 
hands of profeflbr Linn^^ius.
98.
NoMENCLATURA Plantarum.
B. Berzcllus, 
1759- 
Contains the vernacular names of the genera of 
plants, p2Lnicu\ar\y of European and garden kinds, in 
Italian^ French^ Englijh^ Dutch, and German^ placed 
in columns, oppofed to the Latin name.
It would 
have been an acquifition to have had the plan of 
this paper extended much farther, fo as to have 
included not only the name of the^*?;^^^, but that 
by which each fpecies is known in the feveral coun- 
tries a thing too much negleded by almoft ail 
writers of local catalogues, although highly necef- 
fary to render them more extenfively ufeful.
Nay 
farther, even the provincial names, if poffible, 
fliould be colledled, as they are frequently very 
different for the fame plant.
Linn^us, in his 
Flora Suecica^ is almoft the firft and only one who 
has taken due notice of, and fupplied this defici- 
ency.
There is extant on this fubjecc the Indent 
Plantarum Polyglottus of Mentzelius, publiihed in 
1682 ; but the writer of this Nomenclator found it 
infufRcient to his purpofe : neither indeed can the 
plan be completed, otherwife than by the united 
endeavours pf botanifts throughout the world.
99.
AEIi 
[ 315 ] 
gg, Aer Habitabii^is.
J, F.
Siefvert, 1759.
The comprehenfive nature of the fubjed, and 
the concife manner in which the hiftory of the air 
is treated in this dilTertation, rpnder it impoflit>le 
%o give a proper abftradl in our confined plan.
This element is here confidered in all the various 
changes to which it is fubjeft , its properties un- 
der the different and oppofite alterations difcuffed ; 
its effeds on the earth in the various quarters of 
the globe ; and its influence on the health and eco- 
nomy of life, and manners of the inhabitants.
1. With refpedl to its heat and cold in the diffe- 
rent quarters of the earth : of thefe the general re- 
fult is given according to the computation of the 
Swedijh thermometer, or Celjius^s^ in which (o) is 
the point of congelation, and (100) that of boil- 
ing water ; five degrees in this being equal to nine 
of Farenheifs.
2. Its drynefs and tnotfture^ and the general effedls 
of thofe qualities pointed out.
The torpid ftate of 
the inhabitants of hot countries during fummer: 
heat in thofe countries defoliates trees, as cold does 
in temperate climes.
3. Its gravity^ and the different degrees and 
leifeds of it confidered, 
4. The effeds of the different winds ^ and their 
falutary and pernicious tendencies.
That of Calms 
alfo.
In the I fie of St. Thomas there 'is a dead 
calm for two months, during which the worft 
difeafes prevail.
5. The effeds of an hot atmofphere farther il- 
luflrated by the ftate of the Indians, Difeafes 
r thereby produced in more moderate climates.
6. T^mper^te 
[ 3i6 ] 
6. Temperate air, and its exhilarating qualities 
on the animal creation, ^c.
7. Moifi air^ and the difeafes thence arifing.
8. j^r impregnated with exhalations of various 
kinds ; a comm on caufe of fevers, dyfenteries, 
head-ach, ^^c, 
9. Stagnant air^ in vaults, in fubterraneous gra- 
naries, and mines.
10.
Effluvia from burning fubftances : inftances 
of their pernicious effeds, largely treated of.
Mineral 
.:vapours ; thofe from wine, ^c.
Premature deaths 
of the inhabitants of a village in Wermland^ attri- 
buted to ftagnant and putrid water.
11.
The advantages to valetudinarians of chang- 
ing the air, particularly to arthritics, hypochon- 
driacs, and others.
Finally, although the intel- 
ligent reader may not meet with much new matter 
in this tradl, yet he will fee fadls fo well illuftrated 
by pertinent obfervations, that we may v»?ature to 
pronounce this fhort h-'iiory and phiiofophy of this 
element, a ufeful parcr, and will worth attention.
100.
Sus ScROFA.
J. Lindh, 1759.
A comt'iete natural hillory of the Hog^ as it 
appears pai'ticularly in its cultured and tame 
ftate; in which the whole economy alfo of the 
animal, and its ufes to mankind, are perhaps 
more completely treated of, than in any other pub- 
lication, and which cannot fail to be acceptable 
and ufeful to thofe who make this animal an objedt 
of merchandize.
AMCENITATE5 
t 317 1 
AMCENITATES ACADEMICS.
Vol. Vt.
1764.
pp.
486.
10 1.
Ge'NERaTio Ambigena.
C. L.
Ramjirom, 
^759- 
The author begins his fubjeft with a concife 
view of the antient and modern theories relating to 
this obfcure affair He obferves, that the antient 
dodlrine of equivocal generation prevailed in gene- 
ral, until Harvey exploded it, and taught that 
every animal is generated ex ovo and that his fyf- 
tern may now be confidered as including a double 
hypothefis : firft, that taught by himfelf, which 
fuppofes the entire rudiments of the future fc^tus 
to be prefent in the ovum^ and only waiting for 
animation from the vivifying principle, or aura 
genitalis mafculina j the other, that of the feminal 
animalcule entering into the ovum^ according to the 
theory arifmg from Lewenhoeck's microfcopical 
difcoveries.
We have before obferved that Lin- 
naeus very early forfook Lewenhoeck\ theory, in 
confequence of attending Lieherkuhn^% demonftra- 
tions.
The argument of the prefent hypothefis 
tends to (hew, that both fexes are equally efficient 
in this work ; leaning however to the following 
opinion, " that the external form, as well as the 
fpecific energy, of the vital functions, are princi- 
-pally derived from the male parent." This is 
partly the opinion alfo of the very eminent Dr.
HalleTy Phyf.
§ 786.
Our intended brevity does 
mt allow us to purfue our author through all his 
arguments 
t 318 J 
Arguments in behalf of his hypothefis ; we mull 
reft fatisfied with obferving, that after drawing a 
phyfiological analogy between vegetables and ani- 
mals, he thinks it evident that in both, the male is 
moft commonly confpicuous in the external form : 
and this he iiluftrates by feveral examples of hybrid 
fpecies in both the vegetable and aninral king- 
dom.
102.
PoLiTiA Nature.
H, C, B.
JVilcke.
1760.
Intended to difplay that perfe6i: order and jufl?
fubordination of all the feveral parts of nature, 
by which they are rendered mutually fubfervient 
to the confervation of each other^ and of the 
whole ; and which, collectively confidered, our 
author, not unaptly^ has named the Police of 
Nature; 
This phyfico-theological defign is purfued near- 
ly on the fame plan as that of the Oecononiia Na- 
tura^ N* 19, by exhibiting, 
I, A general view of the Fo£il kingdom, as con- 
ftituting the furface of the globe, and as difpofed 
into land and water, hills, mountains, vallies, ^c, 
. 2.
That innumerable variety of Vegetables^ with 
which the furface of the earth is cloathed and 
adorned, as adapted to the different foils, climates, 
and elevations ; and again, as affording nutriment 
to animals of various kinds.
3. In tht Animal kingdom, a general view of 
their relations to each other, and the proportion 
they bear in the fcale through the feveral clalTes, 
from the Vermes up to the higheft and ,moft per- 
fed; 
I 
C P9 1 
(td: in which are confidered their fpecific ufes in 
the general economy.
Our author has illuftrated his fubjed, by addu- 
cing numerous examples from all parts of the Fe- 
getable and Animal kingdom, to fhew how ad- 
mirably the whole is ordained, to contribute to 
the generation, nutrition, and due proportion 
of each, in the grand fcheme of nature and 
providence.
103.
Theses Medico.
J, C.
D. Schreher, iy6o* 
In this diflertation.
Dr. Schreber delivers a brief 
view of the Linn^an dodlrine, relating to the ana- 
tomy and phyfiology of plants, in which he endea- 
vours to fuftain the following thefes :— That all 
plants confift of a medullary and cortical fubftance ; 
in the former of which is manifefled the life of the 
plant, and through which it is perpetuated, either 
by feeds or buds, which are confidered as the ulti- 
mate extenfion of this part.
The cortical part is 
confidered as the organ of nutrition to the whole.
—That, as in a number of certain fpecies of 
plants, which in artificial fyftems form a genus^ we 
fee a fimilar proportion and agreement of the parts 
of frudification, howfoever different the external 
form of the whole plant-, and as we not unfrequent- 
ly fee hybrid plants produced, he therefore pxopofes 
it as a matter worthy of fpeculation, whether, ori- 
ginally, all the fpecies have not been produced in 
the fame way, by the various admixtures of the 
farina.
From this power in the medullary part, 
of perpetuatipg itfelf, and modifying the whole 
5 internal 
[ 320 ] 
internal ftriifture, the author alfo deduces the 
fimilar qualities which are commonly found in 
plants of the fame genus, as manifefted by the tajle 
and fmelL 
104.
Flora Belgica.
C, F, Rofenthah 1760.
A Linn^an Flora of the indigenous plants of the 
United Provinces^ compiled from the catalogues of 
Commeline, printed in 1709, and of Dr. David de 
Gorter^ printed in 1745, at that time profeflbr at 
Harderwick^ and afterwards phyfician to the Em- 
prefs of Ruffia, The author refers to the page 
for each plant in both thefe works.
He premifes 
a general account of the country, with refped to 
its divifions into provinces, the climate, the inha- 
bitants, the commerce *, enumerates their univer- 
fities and gardens ; then gives concife lifts of the 
plants found in particular fituations, in the canals, 
for inftance, on the dykes, in the woods, ofieries, i^c* 
The plants of Holland^ as far as foil and fitua- 
tion admit, are nearly thofe of England-, but as 
the country is deftitute of mountains, rapid rivers, 
alps, and chalky foil, a great variety are necellarily 
excluded.
Thefe works are fuperfeded by an enlarged 
edition of Dr. Be Gorterh book, under the title of 
this thefis, printed in 1767 j and which contains 
iipwards of 1050 fpecies.
105.
Anthropomorpha.
CE.Hoppius, 1760.
The hiftory of the Simia genus, efpecially as it 
jefpeds thofe fpecies which fo nearly approach the 
human 
I 321 ] 
human form aiid feature, is yet involved in no frriall 
obfcurity.
After a general account of the manners 
of thefe animals, the reader is here prefented with 
an hiftory of four remarkable fpecies.
1. Simia Pygm^us, the Wild Man of the Woods, 
defcribed and figured by Edwards^ t.
213.
(Simia 
Satyr us ^ Syft.
p. 34.) 
2. Simia Satyrus^ of Tulpius^ which LiNNi^ius 
Confiders as the farne animal with the foregoing, 
differing only in having the abdomen more promi- 
nent, and lefs furnifhed with hair.
3. Simia Lucifer ^ or Homo Caudatus of Bontius^ 
iaid to exift in Java and Nicohar^ of which tra- 
vellers have related ftrange ftories.
The author 
defcribes this animal on the authority and tefti- 
mony of Koping^ a Swede, who afTerts that he had 
feen both male and female ; neverthelefs it may 
juftly be fufpefted, that there is fomewhat of fable, 
or much exaggeration, mixed with this relation.
The reader may fee more relating to this animal 
iand Koping's book, in a letter from Linn^us 
himfelf to the author of The Origin and Pro- 
grefs of Language," vol.
i. ed.
2d, p.
260, note, 
4. Simia Troglodytes, or Orang Outang of Bon- 
iius ; the Homo No5furnus, or T roglodytes of the 
Syft.
Nat. p.
33.
Concerning thefe the author 
takes great pains to prove that they are really 
children of darknefs, and incapable, from the ex- 
treme dilatation of the pupil, of feeing in the day- 
time.
[The length of the arms would incline pne 
to rank this creature with the Gibbon of M.
Buffon^ 
or that of which an account, accompanied with a 
figure^ was tranfmitted by Mr, Be Vifme from Can- 
Y ton^ 
f 322 3 
ioHy and publifhed in the Phil 'tranf, vot fe, 
p. 72.
t. 3.
See alfo Mz;//.
alter, p.
521.3 
Figures of thefe feveral animals^ taken from the 
refpedlive authors, accompany this differtation.
. 
106, Plants Africans rariores.
J.P'ri'ntz, 
* 1760, 
Of all the quarters of the globe, no one dif- 
plays fuch luxury ^nd variety in the produdlion 
of plants as fouthern Africa ; from whence the 
European gardens have derived their mod fviperb 
and ornamental fpecies.
This catalogue contains 
the defcription of a century of the moft rare^ fome 
entirely new, and others before imperfe6lly noticed.
It was drawn up by the author from an infpeflion 
of the plants themfelves, in a colledlion, fent from 
the Cape of Good Hope \ with a view of which Dr.
Laurence Burman gratified Linn^us, when he paid 
him a vifit in the fummer of 1760.
Extremely 
different as the plants of the Cape are from thofe of 
Europe^ many of the latter neverthelefs thrive well 
in that climate.
The author has prefixed a lift 
of 70 kinds, which occurred in looking over this 
eolleftion.
He concludes this paper with a.
lift of 
Afrkan plants, as an Appendix to the i%r^ Ca^ 
$enfis^ N*' g5, before publiflied in this colle6tion.
It comprehends near 200 fpecies from Oldenland^s 
Herbarium^ made in 1695.
Mr. Pnte's catalogue 
is yet of ufe, as being referred to from our author's 
Species Plantarum, 
107.
Macellum Olitorium.
P^Jerlin.
1760.
Under this title our author includes the plants 
of the kitchen-garden 5 and we are here prefen ted 
with 
i ] 
with a catdogiie, amounting to 77 kinds, of culi- 
nary herbs, principally fuch as are found fponta- 
lieoufly growing, or are eafily cultured.
It is 
drawn up on the fame plan with Linn^us's Ma- 
teria Medica^ fpecifying briefly the duration of 
each, whether annual, biennial, or perennial ; the 
part of the plant in ufe ; and the rrjode of drefling 
it : after thefe follows a brief indication of the 
tafle or other fenfible qualities, and their reputed 
effedts on the human body.
The author divides the culinary herbs into three 
clafles.
1. Roots : and thefe into fufiform^ and tuberous.
2. Stalks : comprehending particularly the young 
and blanched fhbots ; as Afparagus : and the dijk 
of the flower j fuch is the Artichoke.
3. Leaves : divided into Olera^ or boiling herbs, 
fprouts, and greens ; and Accetaria^ or fallads, 
eaten crude.
Our author commends Parfnips^ in preference to 
Turnips and Carrots, as being lefs flatulent, and 
more nutritive.
He condemns the ufe of Mu/h* 
rooms : fays the di/k^ and the young ftalks of the 
Cotton Thiftle, (Onopordon Acanthium) may be 
eaten, and refemble Artichokes.
It is here re- 
peated, that Cellery is prejudicial to people fubje<5i* 
to nervous diforders.
The contents of this papeu 
would enrich an Economical HerhaL 
rh 
108.
Meloe Vesicatorius.
C. a, Len^us.
iy62!'?
A complete hifl:ory of the Meloe Vejicatorius^ 
Syft.
p. 679, or the Bliftering Fly or Beetle, an 
Y 2 infea: 
I 3^4 1 
infedt of the Coleopterous order ^ with filiform an- 
tennae, and diftinguifhed from the other genera by 
the rounded thorax, and gibbous inflexed head.
The fpecies in common ufe is found all over Eu- 
rope^ more or lefs, on the Privet^ the AJh^ and the' 
Elder ; but there are alfo three others endued with 
the fame veficating acrimony, two of which are 
European^ and the other common all over the Eaft^ 
and particularly in China^ where it is ufed in the 
(hops ; and there are many reafons mentioned by 
our author to prove, that this laft (the Meke 
Cichorii, Syft.
680.) is the true Cant harts of Diof- 
corides.
After a copious natural hiflory of the infeft, 
our author gives the form of fcveral veficating 
plafters, and prefcribes the places and mode of 
application.
In his laft chapter, which is profef- 
fedly medical, he treats on the internal and external 
ufe of Cantharides^ principally confidering how far 
they are fafe and ufeful as diuretics, when admini- 
ftered internally : under this head he introduces 
a cafe, which furnifiies a caution againft the ufe of 
them as Aphrodijiacs.
After pren'^ifing fome general 
obfervations on the adlion and ufeof blifiiers, he con- 
cludes by enumerating all thofe difeafes in which 
they are falutary, and thofe in which they are par- 
ticularly contra- indicated.
In England^ where it 
is thought the ufe of blifters is better afcertained 
than in fome other nations, the intelligent phyfi- 
cian will not exped to meet with much new matter 
on this fubjedt.
109.
Dl^TA 
I 3^5 ] 
109.
Dii5:TA AciDULARis, E.Vigelius.
It is not furprizing, that in a country abounding 
with iron, chalybeate waters (hould be frequent.
In fa6b, thefe Acidul^e are fo in Sweden^ and their 
efficacy has been known, and much extolled in 
that country, as our author obferves, from the 
moft antient times.
He thinks the inhabitants 
of thofe northern climes were led to the frequent 
ufe of the AciduU^ by long experience of the 
falutary effeds of them as diuretics and tonics^ 
in remedying the inconveniences arifing from 
a long winter's diet of faked meats, which dif- 
pofed the conftitution to fcorbutic, cachedic, and 
dropfical diforders.
The later phyficians of Sweden 
have regulated the ufe, and confirm.ed the good 
effeds of them : and Mr. Figelius, in this difler- 
tation, has, in a concife, elegant, and perfpi- 
cuous manner, prefcribed the regimen adapted 
to fuch as enter upon a courfe of thefe waters, 
digefted under the fix well-known heads of the 
^on- naturals, 
no.
PoTus Coffee.
H, Sparfchuch.
1761, 
A very circumftantial, botanical, and medical 
hiftory of the Coffee-tree, and its fruit, (Coff^a 
Arahica^ Sp. PI.
p. 245.) The writer is one of 
the laft of 20 authors who have written profeffedly 
on this flirub, all of whom he enumerates by name, 
with the date of their writings, fro;*; 1621 to 
1^0lm\ treatife in 1755.
T % Coffee^' 
C ] 
Coffee, originally the produce of Arabia Felk^ 
where the beft is now moft fuccefsfully culti- 
vated, is called, by the Egyptians^ Bon^ and is 
firft mentioned by the Arabians about the year 
900.
Our author fay§, it was brought into Eu- 
rope about the year 1645, and that the firft public 
coffee-houfc was fet up at Marfeilks in 1671.
The 
fhrub itfelf was introduced into the European gar-r 
dens about the year 1710, by means of feeds pro- 
cured from Arabia^ by Governor Van Hoorn of 
Batavia^ who alfo firft cultivated it in America^ 
at Surinam.
We are next prefented with the clafTical, gene- 
rical, and fpecific charadler of this plant ; tq 
which fucceeds a copious lift of fynonyms, and 
the defcription at large, as it ftands in the Hortus 
CUfforiianus.
The culture of the fhrub ; the pre- 
paration of the berry ; the different times and 
modes of drinking this liquor^ which cuftom hath 
eftablifhed in the various nations ; and the fucce- 
danea to this berry, are then difcufled.
Among 
the latter are mentioned Feafe^ Beans^ Beech-nutSy 
Almonds^ Maiz^ Wheats and the feeds of the Sun- 
flower^ [Helianthm Annuus), Vide Gouan.
Flor.
Monfp.
p. 456.
Of thefe he prefers Almonds, but 
he obferves that they difpofe to flatulency much 
more than Coffee.
In fpeaking of the qualities and virtues of Cof- 
fee, our author thinks it fhould rather be claiTed 
with medicines, than confidered as a nutritive ar^ 
tide in diet.
He appears to be no friend to its 
frequent and indifcriminate ufe : he thinks it de- 
ftroys rather than creates appetite : that it occafion$ 
watchfulnefs 
t 327 '] 
tv'atchfulnefs and promotes flatulence and indigeflhn^ 
inftead of relieving them, as is generally believed: 
that it debilitates the nerves^ and occafions tremblings.
On this occafion he thinks it worth enquiry, whe- 
ther it may not contribute to thofe fudden deaths 
which are frequent at Stockholm about the winter 
folftice, as they have been obferved to happen to 
fuch as were inordinate drinkers of this liquor : 
that it is mtiaphrodifiac^ he fays, is generally al- 
lowed \ and he illuftrates and confirms this qua- 
lity by a pleafant tale from Olearius^^ Travels : 
that it weakens the fight \ is noxious to melancholic^ 
hypochondriacal and hyfterical people : that it pro- 
.motes hemorrhages of all kinds ; and that a free 
indulgence in the ufe of this liquor cannot be fafe, 
except to the corpulent.
Confidered as a medicine, from its heating qua- 
lity it is forbidden in fevers.
From its fliimulating 
and drying quality, allowed by all phyficians, is 
deduced its ufefulnefs in corpulency^ and in the 
ieucorrh^a.
It has been confidered as an antheU 
minthic \ but its ill effedls on the tender habits of 
children, more than balance any good ones in that 
way.
In foporofe affeQions^ in phlegmatic and cor- 
pulent habits, our author allows its ufe ; and from 
its known effedl in promoting hemorrhages, it 
muft be confidered as an emmenagogue.
That 
head-achs are frequently relieved by Coffee, is con* 
firme;d by daily experience ; and our author relates 
that LiNN^us himfelf found it fingularly ufeful in 
taking off a cardialgia^ with which he was affedted 
at the time he Was phyfician to the fleet, in 1740 ; 
pd which he attributed to the effluvia of the hof- 
Y 4 pital, 
[ 328 ] 
pital, as it conftantly fucceeded his morning vifnai 
to the fick.
III.
Inebriantia.
0,R'Alander.
1^62.
Inebriant$ are almofl univerfally derived frotr^ 
vegetables.
They are defined hy our author to 
be fuch things as affedl the nerves in a particular 
and agreeable manner, and through them alter and 
difturb the fundions of the mind.
They are pro- 
properly divided into native and artificial \ the for- 
mer chiefly in ufe among the oriental and other 
nations, the latter principally throughout Europe, 
Of native Inehriants the following are enumerated, 
and the mode of adminiftration and effedls of 
them defcribed.
1. Opium ; in ufe all over the Eaft, aqd of whiqh 
the Turks^ through cuftom, fwallow a drachm.
2. Peganum Harmala^ Sp. PI.
638.
Syrian Rue.
The feeds are fold in Turkey for this purpofe; and 
with thefe, as Bellonius relates, the T* urkijh Emperor 
Solyman kept himfelf intoxicated.
Majlac^ of the ^urks^ or Bangue^ of the Per^ 
fians \ prepared from the duft of the niale flower of 
Hemp^ or from the leaves.
4. Bangue^ of the Indians.^ from the leaves of 
the Hibifcus Sahdariffa^ Sp. PI.
978.
5. Seeds of various fpecies of the Datura^ or 
I'horny Apple^ of which fee Rumph.
Herb.
Amb, 5.
P- 243- 
6. Pinang^ or Betle of the Indians.
7. Roots of Black Henbane^ (Hyofcyamus Niger ^ 
Sp. PI.
257).
8. The 
C 329 ] 
S. The Hypfcyamus Phyf abides^ Sp. PL 258.
9. Berries of the deadly Nightfhade.
Jtropc^ 
Bella Bonna^ Sp. PI.
26Q.
10.
Leaves of Millfoil^ {Achillea Millefolium) 
are ufed by the Dalekarlians to render tl|eir beer 
intoxicating.
Set Flpr, Su^c.
N* 770.
11.
Ta^acpOy and feveral others lefs material, are 
mentioned ; fiich ar^ Clary^ Saffron, and Darnel, 
Artificial Tnebriants are fermented Liquors from 
farinaceous feeds \ Wines and Spirits drawn by 
diftillation.
With thefe our author ranks the 
Ne5lar of the gods, and the anodyne medicine of 
Homer, commonly called Nepenthes ; and the fpells 
by which Medea and Qrce produced their inchant- 
ments.
He then, in a moll ftriking and lively 
inanner, introduces a fable to illuftrate the effeds 
of intoxicating liquors on the human frame and 
pafiions, and after having fhewn when they may 
be fafely allowed^ concludes with cautions and 
ej^hortations againft the abufe of them.
II?, MoRsuRA Serpentum.
J, G.
Acrell, 1762.
In this tracft on the venomous bites of Serpents^ 
after a general defcription of the ftrucSture of this 
order pf 4^phihia, and fome obfervations relating 
to the Boa Confiri^or, Syft.
373, (Gigantic Serpent 
of the Eafi Indies) and its capacity of ingorging 
large animals ; of the fafcinating power of the 
Rattle Snake, with which alfo, he fays, the Coluber 
Berus, Syft.
^77, or Viper, is in fome degree en- 
dued \ the author defcribes the mechanifm of the 
jaw, and the venomous apparatus in Serpents 5 
^nd thefe are illuftrated with a figure: He th?i| 
gives 
[ 330 ] • 
gives an abftradl of RsdPs Experiments, and dif- 
cufTes the theory of the operation of the virus^ in 
the explication of which, he inclines to that of the 
mechanical theorifts, in attributing the effedls 
rather to an almoft inftantaneous alteration induced 
in the fluids, than to its immediate adliort on the 
nervous fyflem.
The fymptoms enfuing the punc- 
ture of the various fpecies are then defcribed i 
thofe from the yiper particularly ; and thole of the 
Jfp^ which kills by inducing fopor and lethargy.
Three Jfps are mentioned by the antients ; that 
called PiyaSy he fuppofes to be the Coluber Aw- 
modytes of the moderns.
See Syft.
p. 376, de- 
fcribed and figured in the Surinamenfm Gril- 
liana of this coUedion, N° 16.
Befides thofe of 
the Rattle Snake genus, there are eighteen of the 
Viper genus, furniflied v/ith venomous organs •, of 
which a lift is fubjoined.
Among thefe none ftrike 
more fuddenly fatal than the Coluber Naja^ called 
Cobra de Capello, 
This author next treats briefly on the various re- 
medies in ufe among the antients, and notes their 
general inefRcacy.
He then comes to difcufs the 
three noted antidotes of Europe^ Afia^ and America^ 
which are regarded as fpecifics, againft: the venom 
of the moft dangerous kinds, in the refpedive 
quarters of the globe : fuch are, Oil of Olives^ againft 
the Viper of Europe ; the Ophiorrhiza Mungos^ againft 
the Ndja of Afia^ (vide N** 21 of this colledlion ;) 
and the Senega^ againft the Rattle Snake of America, 
There is neverthelefs a fmall venomous Viper {Co- 
hiher Cberfea^ Syft.
p. 377.) in Sweden^ againft the 
bite of which the oil of olives failed to produce its 
ufual 
[ .131 3 
ufual good effedts, and the patient died.
The author 
mentions a fuccefsful cafe of the admin ifbration of 
the Senega in Sweden, He concludes with defcant- 
ing on the Pfylli of the Eaft, or the Charmers of 
Serpents j and tells us that M.
Jacquin of Vienna 
purchafed a fecret of this kind in the IVeJi Indies, 
1 13.
Termini BoTANicr.
J. Elmgren.
1762.
This paper is incapable of abridgment ; it is ^ 
methodical arrangement and complete explanatior^ 
of all the terms^ amounting to 673, ufed in defcri- 
bing plants, according to the Linn^an method of 
botany.
Somewhat of the fame kind was begun 
in the Hortus Cliffortianus^ and is alfo prefixed to 
the enlarged editions of the Syjlem, Thefe terms alfo 
neceffarily occur, and are explained, in our author's 
Philofophia Botanica, In this paper the whole is 
amplified, improved, and methodiled in fo excellent 
a manner, that no one who would gain precife ideas 
on the fubject would wifli to be without it.
114.
Planta Alstromeria.
7. p.
Fdk, 1762.
This plant is of American origin, and belongs 
to the Hexandrous clafs and Monogynous order of the 
Syftem, There are three fpecies, the two firft of 
which were defcribed and figured by Pere Feuillee 
in Peru^ who ranked them with the Hemerocallis^ or 
Day Lily.
Linn^us received the feeds of this 
fingular and beautiful plant from Cadix^ by means 
of C.
AlfiromeTy fon of a gentleman of that name, 
counfellor of the College of Commerce in Sweden ; 
and finding it a new genus, gave it his name.
5 .
The 
I m ] 
The fpecies, here fo completely defcribed and 
figured, is thq Aljlromeria Pelegrina, Sp. PI.
461.
The virtues of this fpecies are not afcertained, 
but the fenfible qualities of the root rank it with 
the Sarfaparilla \ and it appears by Feuillee^^ ac- 
count, that there is a third fpecies in CM/, which 
the natives ufe as a fubftitute for the above plant ; 
^nd LiNN^us has hence given it the trivial name 
pf Salfilla, 
115.
Nectaria Florum.
B, M.
HalL 1762.
Dulci dijlendunt ne5iare cellas, Virgil.
Georg.
iv.
164.
Hence Linn^^us gave the term Ne5larium 
to a particular gland or repofitory, which in moft 
plants contains the honey.
This part in flowers 
had been but little noticed before Linn^us raifed 
it to importance ; and, ip his Syftem, it affords an 
excellent mark of diflindion, in divers genera and 
fpecies.
Our author premifes fome Ihort obfervations 
relating to xh^ glands of plants in various clafTes, 
which are rnoftly fituated on the leaves or petioles.
He then proceeds to the direct defign of his tra6b, 
which is to point out the feveral kinds of Ne^aria 
in flowers, and to fpecify the diff^erent fltuation of 
this part in different claflfes, orders, or genera.
It 
is therefore an inflrudive paper to thofe who would 
attain a more complete idea of this Angular, and 
heretofore negleded part, the ufe of which, how- 
ever, is as yet imperfedly afcertained.
Il6, FUNDAMENTUM 
[ m ] 
Il6.
FUNDAMENTUM FrUCTIFICATIONIS, 
y, M, Grab erg.
1762.
Having briefly dated th« improvement of bo- 
tany, and defined it as a fcience, M.
Graherg 
proceeds to the explanation of his term.
Under 
the word Fru5iification^ he includes not merely the 
Corolla^ Pericarpium^ and Semina^ fimply confider- 
ed, as Tournefort had done, but alfo the Calyx^ 
Ne5iarium^ Stamina^ and Pijlilla, All thefe parts, 
therefore, conftitute the organs oi fr unification^ and 
on which x}:^^ foundation of all true fyftem mull be 
laid.
He then briefly traces the rife of fyftem from 
Gefner^ through the improvements of C^efalpinuSy 
Columna, Morifon^ and Tournefort^ down to Lin- 
naeus, who, by defining, as above, the parts of 
frudification, firft laid the bafis of true generical 
diftinctions.
He then inlarges on Jpecifical dif- 
tindlions, and fhews what conftitutes varieties in 
plants.
He proceeds to confider the generation 
of hybrid plants, concerning which he favours the 
opinion laid down in the Generatio Ambigena^ N* 
10 1 of this colledlion j that the internal ftruc- 
ture, or parts of frudtification in hybrid plants, 
refemble the impregnated plant, and the habit, or 
external parts, that which furniflied the farina 
fcecundans, A Angular inftance of this kind is 
broughtfrom xhtVerbafcum genus.
Finally, he pro- 
pofes a queftion, whether all the fpecies may not 
have fprung from one original in each genus^ by hy- 
brid impregnations.
He thinks the contempla- 
tion of the numerous fpecies, under many African 
and 
C 334 J 
Slid American genera^ adds weight to his hypd- 
thefis.
On the whole, this paper abounds with curious 
matter for fpeculation on this fubjed, and is highly 
worthy the regard of thofe who would enter more 
minutely into the knowledge of botany.
Il7.REF0RMATI0B0TANICES.7.Mi?<f//^^*^/J.
iy6ii 
We are here prefented with a very entertaining 
hiftory of the rife, progrefs, and prefent improved 
ftate of botany.
To this end it is divided 
Into three epochs : i.
Under the founders of the 
fcience after the reftoration of letters.
2. Under 
the fyftematics.
And, 3.
under the aufpices of the 
great Swedijh botanift.
I, Among the reftorers of botany, BrunsfelfiuSi 
5" ragus^ Gefner^ Fuchjius^ and Cordus^ Hand foremoft 
in the lift.
They may be faid to clofe with Cafpar 
Batihine^ who by his incomparable Pinax^ in which 
}ie colledled all their fynonyms into one work, 
gave ufe to their writings and improvement to the 
ftiidy, which otherwife it could not have acquired; 
- 2.
Bauhine having laid this foundation, the 
knowledge of plants made a rapid progrefs in the 
feventeenth century, and received vaft addition 
from the difcoveries of Cornutus^ Marcgrave^ and 
Pifo^ in America •, from thofe of Herman^ Rheede^ 
and Commelin, in AJia \ from Sloane^ Plukenet^ Pe^ 
tiver^ and Sherard from 'Tournefort^ and Plumier : 
during which period alfo it was reduced to fyftem^ 
from the hints of Gefnery firft, by C^falpimSi 
and afterwards, more fuccefsfully, by Morifon^ Ray, 
zndTmrnefort, 
3. This 
C 335 ] 
3. This author dates the epoch of reformattQH 
from the firft publication by Linn^us in 1735 5, 
and then colleds together into one view the im.
provement it has received from the labours of this 
great man.
He enumerates the feveral difciples 
of Linnaeus, who afiifted him, by their travels into 
foreign parts j adds a lift of thofe writers th-at 
have followed his method and clofes with a fketch 
of what is yet wanting to give further perfedion 
to the fcience.
," 
118.
Prolepsis Plantarum.
H.Ulmark, 1760.
, 
The theory of vegetation built hy^' Malpighi zni 
Grew^ on the anatomy of plants, and that of Hales 
and others, drawn from what may be called their 
phyfiology, has not been followed in the Unndean 
fchool.
LiNNi^us early conceived the idea of aa 
analogy between plants and animals, and fpeaks 
pf vegetables alfo, as confifting of a.;;2^i?//Z^ry anc^ 
cortical fubftance^ (in the former of which the pro- 
per life and principle of vegetation refides, apd by 
which alone it is propagated) confidering the latter 
as the organs of nourifliment to the former.
This, 
idea feems alfo to have led him to adopt the opinion 
of C^efalpinus^ relating to the evolution of thele 
two parts, in the order which is mentioned in the 
66th thefis namely, that the Cortex^ or outer Bark, 
is ultimately fpent in forming the Perianthiumy or, 
Cup of the flower, befides which, it muft be ob« 
ferved, that the leaves arc produced from the cor- 
tical fubftance only the Liher^ or inner Bark, ia 
the Corolla or Petals j the Lignum^ or woody part, 
in 
C 336 1 
in the Stamina or Chives ; and the Medulla^ of 
pithy part, in the Piflillum and Seed.
Principally to confirm and illuftrate thefe data 
is the defign of this tbefis^ which in fa6l is a com- 
ment on a part of the 24th fedlion of the Introduc- 
tion to the fecond tome of the Syftem^ p.
9, con- 
taining a concife view of this dodrine.
Before the 
authoi" proceeds to his immediate fubjedl, he reca- 
pitulates, with the forementioned, fome other prin- 
ciples, relating to the life and organization of 
vegetables, and then endeavours to prove, by 
appearances obfervable in plarits, that this arrange- 
ment of parts, and this evolution actually exifts.
As this cannot be fo aptly illuftrated in annual 
and other plants, on account of the tender texture, 
and quick growth, the author endeavours to 
exemplify it from obfervations made on the bud- 
bearing trees in which he obferves, that the full 
evolution of the parts, from the origin of the bud 
to the expanfion of the flower, as the final adb of 
vegetation in each, is a progreflive work, the ac- 
complifhment of which requires five or fix years^ 
and that it takes place in the following orders 
That the Leaves^ which are unconneded with the 
medullafy fubftance, and derive their origin from 
the cortical^ are the produce of the firft year ; and 
in plants and trees that are furnifhed with Bra^e^ 
or floral Leaves, that fuch are the iffue of the 
fecond year ; and the Perianthium^ or Cup of the 
flower, of the third ; the Petals of the fourth the 
Stamina of the fifth and the Piftil^ &c.
of the 
fixth.
Our author endeavours to fuftain this theory 
by 
L 537 1 
t?y k nurtiber of fads and obfervations, tending 
to corroborate the dodrine advanced in this dif- 
fertation* 
119.
Fructus EscuLENTi. J.Salkrg, 1763, 
The defign of the Plants Efculent^^ N* 34, Ace- 
iaria^ N*73, and the Macellum Olitorium^ N* 107, 
is in this paper purfued, and extended to the efcu- 
lent fruits, which are here enumerated to the num- 
ber of 133, and their nature and ufes briefly 
pointed out.
To which end they are difpofed into 
fix clafles, as follow : 
T. Berries.
2. Plumbs.
g. Pomaceous Fruits.
4. Podded Fruits, 
5. Grain.
6. Nuts.
i20.
Prolepsis Plantarum.
J,J,Ferher.
iy6^, 
Mr. Ferber^ who is probably the fame per- 
fon that has publiihed Fhyfico -geographical 'Tra- 
vels into Italy ^ endeavours, in this paper, as 
Mr. Ulmark hath done, to iiluftrate and con- 
firm the theory of vegetation received in the Up^- 
fal fchool.
He firft treats on the food of plants-, which,' 
without entering into any fubtle difquifitions re- 
lating to its elementary principles and compofition, 
is defined to be the watery tinclure of the foil, re- 
ceived by the roots, and tranfmitted to the medullary 
by the vafcular part of the cortical fubftance.
He 
eftablifhes it as a fa6l, that too great an afBux of 
nutriment thrown into the cortical part, retards the 
fruftification, by comprefiTing the medullary.
He 
Z think?
C 338 3 
thinks this is proved by the ftate of luxuriant 
plants in general, and by the efFedls of depriving 
them of this fuperfluity : on which head he 
quotes the experiments of Mr. Fitzgerald^ re- 
corded in the Philof, UranfaEl, vol.
lii.
p. 71, 
as confirming the truth of the theory here ad- 
vanced.
After having eftabliihed the cortical part as the 
organ and depofit of nutriment, he proceeds to 
Ihew, that heat alone excites to adlion and vigour, 
the life or protrufive and expanfive force of the 
medullary part 5 which is ever fpent in propagat- 
ing the plant, by forming hudsy hulbs^ or feed^ as 
its final and moft perfedl ifiue : and that this in- 
tention of nature fucceeds in a proportion equal to 
the degree of nutriment afforded by the cortical, 
to that of the heat adminiftered to the medullary 
part refpe6tively.
In the fecond chapter, M.
Ferher treats on the 
origin and evolution of buds; in which he accedes 
to the dodlrine of the progreffive perfedion of them^ 
mentioned in the difTertation juil reviewed.
The lafl chapter is appropriated to the Involu- 
tion of Plants in the Seed, Buds, and Bulbs in 
which he afTerts, that in the feeds of the Nymph^a 
Nelumboy the very leaves of the future plant are 
vifible.
In bulbs the rudiment of the next year's 
plant is alfo confpicuous : in like manner buds 
contain the perfedl plant, although the evolutioa 
in thefe requires a longer procefs.
Thofe who would attain a complete idea of the 
theory of vegetation, advanced in the works of 
our authors are referred more particularly to the 
following 
C 339 ] 
following papers In th^ Ammitates Academic^^'^* 2^, 
Gemmatio Arhorum^ 63.
Metamorphofis Plantarum^ 
lb I.
Generatio AmUgena^ 118, 120.
Prolepfis Plan- 
tarum j and to the tntroduBion to the Vegetable Syftento 
[It may be obferved, that there is a fet of ex- 
periments made by M.
Mtifiel^ printed in the Phu^ 
Tranf vol.
Ixiii.
p. 126, Vv'hich feem to favour 
the theory of vegetation here advanced, as far at 
leaft as relates to the cortical fubftance being the 
depofit of nutriment, and the effed of warmth 
on the expanfive and protrufive force of the me- 
dullary.
Yet it muft be ailowed that too many- 
difficulties attend every theory on this obfcurc 
fubjea.] 
121.
GentI^ria ti^SECTORuM.
B.J'ohanJfoH, 176^, 
Infedls were fcarcely noticed before the time of 
Conrad Gefner, whofe comprehenfive mind extended 
over the whole field of nature.
He, together with 
Mouffet, and Aldrovand, may be faid to have laid 
the foundation of entomological fcience.
To thefe 
fucceeded another fet of writers^ who were princi^ 
pally em.ployed in inveftigating the economy and 
furprizing metamorphofes of infers ; fuch were 
Geodart, Lifier, Swammcrdam^ and Reaumur^ to whom 
may be added Madam Merian, who took a voyage 
to Surinam, with the fole view of gratifying a tafte 
for this branch of natural hiftory.
Neverthelefs, after all the refearches of thefe in- 
genious perfons, and the labours of our excellent 
•Mr. Ray, a defed of fyflem rendered this fubjea 
the moft difficult to ftudy of any part of na- 
^ 2 tural 
C 340 } 
tural knowledge : and it will eafily be granted,, 
that the true sera of this fcience commences 
with LiNN^us, who very early turned his at- 
tention to it, and has eftablifhed that method, 
which has been fmce univerfally followed, and by 
which the hiftory of thefe minuter animals has been 
greatly extended.
The prefent catalogue contains the defcription 
of an hundred rare, and moftly undefcribed fpecies, 
fent to LiNN^us from Carolina^ Penfylvania^ Su- 
rinam^ and Java, 
As all thefe zoological defcriptions are fupple- 
mental to, and illuftrative of, the author's Syftema 
Natur^e^ they yet retain their value and cannot 
be fuperfeded, but by a general hiftory of animals 
on the fame plan.
122.
Lignum Qvas^ije.
C. M.
Blom, 176^.
The Raffia Amara (Spec.
Plant, p.
552, and 
p. 1679) or Bitter AJh^ as it is called in the Weft In- 
dies^ is a tree of the decandrous clafs, the root of 
which was brought into ufe firft at Surinam^ by a 
negro, named ^ajfi^ who revealed its virtues.
The medicine was known, but the fpecies and 
true hiftory was long undefined, till at length a 
branch of the tree, with the flower and fruit, was 
fcnt to LiNN/Eus from Surinam.
The root is the 
part ufed ; and appears to be the moft pure and 
intenfe of all bitters.
At Surinam it has acquired 
a high charader in curing the intermitting, exa- 
cerbating, and malignant fevers, fo endemial to 
that country and this (as the author afferts) in 
cafes 
C 341 ] 
cafes where the ^inquina has failed.
It is given 
in any form, but moft commonly in an aqueous 
infufion, in the proportion of one drachm to a 
pint, the dofe of which is one ounce.
The hiftory of this drug is accompanied with 
a figure of the leaf, and parts of frudification.
Three cafes of its good effeds (from trials made 
in Sweden) are inferted, and which are not con» 
fined to fevers only.
[There is a confirmation of its virtues in febrile 
cafes from Mr. Farley of Antigua^ inferted in the 
PhiL 'Tranf, vol.
Iviii.
p. 8t, in circumftances 
where the Peruvian bark would not (lay on the 
^omach.] 
123.
Raphania.
G. Rothman.
1763.
The difeafe here defcribed is defined in the Ge- 
nera Morborum of our author to be " a fpaftic con- 
" tradion of the limbs or joints, attended with 
convulfions, and excruciating periodical pains." 
The author gives a full defcription of this difeafe 
from the two moft capital Szvedijh Vv'riters on the 
fubjed.
He had feen it hinifelf, and obferves, 
that it had frequently been epidemical in that 
country : moreover, that fome phyficians had 
thought it a new difternper.
He has however 
traced it in the writings ot a numerous fet of au- 
thors, from the year 1596 to 1727 ^ by which it 
appears to have been comm.on to other parts of 
Europe, 
This dreadful diftemper fometimes held the fick 
for three or four weeks, and thofe who perifhed 
Z 3 generally 
[ 342 ] 
generally funk under a diarrhoea, or died in con- 
vulfions.
Valerian^ Caftor^ Camphor^ and Antifpaf- 
modics of the like kind, appear to haye been the 
moft beneficial remedies.
He next brings together in one view the hypo- 
thefes of the various authors, relating to the caufe 
of this malady, fome of whom fuppofe it owing 
to a certain conftitution of the air, others to viti* 
ated grain, Darnel, or the Secale Cornutum which 
were all rejeded as unfatisfadory by Dr. E.
Rofen^ 
one of the laft and moft intelligent writers on the 
fubjedt.
Our author fays, that in Sweden it al- 
ways commenced in autumn, was frequent only 
among the lower order of people, and confequent 
upon eating bread made of the new corn.
Hence 
he fought for its origin in impure admixtures with 
the grain, and finally his own hypothefis attribute^ 
it to the feeds of the Raphanus Raphmijirum^ (Sp, 
Plant, p.
935) or Charlock ; and hence the name 
siven to the difeafe.
The difiertation clofes with 
a figure and botanical defcription of the plant.
The hand of a mafter is no where more vifible^ 
than in the fcientific manner obferved by Dr. Rothr 
man in drawing up the hiftory of this difeafe ; an4 
it may be propofed as a model in its kind* 
124.
Genera Morborum.
J. Schroder, 1759.
Of this arrangement of difeafes, as it ftands in 
LiNN^us's own publication made in the year 1763, 
a detailed account hath been given before, to which 
the reader is referred, 
AMOSNITATES 
[ 343 ] 
AMCENITATES ACADEMICS, Vol. VII.
1769.
pp.
506.
125.
MOTUS POLYCHRESTUS.
C. Lddo, 1 763.
-There are few who do not require rather to 
be reminded, than convinced of the many be- 
nefits arifing from proper exercife.
Its fignal ufes, 
both as a prefervative and reftorer of health, are, 
in this diflertation concifely, but very ftrikingly 
delineated.
After fome general phyfiological obfervations 
on the effeds of exercife, the writer difpiays 
its efficacy as a prefervative in ftrengthening the 
body, procuring the moft genial warmth, helping 
digeftion, incrcafing perfpiration, and promoting 
all the excretions in due time and proportion \ in 
procuring the moft refrefhing fleep, and, in vale- 
tudinary habits particularly, fubduing that fruit- 
ful fource of difeafe, acidities in the firil paf- 
fages.
He then enumerates thofe difeafes in which ex- 
ercife is to be confidered in a medicinal view.
In 
hypochondriac cafes, habitual debility, languid 
appetite, obftriidiions of the vifcera, confumptions, 
afthma, and in various difeafes from laxity, its 
ufe has been indifpenfable.
In fpeaking of the Hemicrania^ he relates that 
LiNN/£us himfelf had been fubjed to violent pa- 
roxyfms of that kind, which ufually held him 24 
hours, with intervals rarely of little more than a 
week \ and that thefe fits were excited by very flight 
caufes, even fuch as the drinking only a fpoonful 
of wine : and that after trying inelFcdually various 
Z 4 remedies, 
C 344 ] 
remedies, the profefTor attributed the reftoratioi^ 
of his health to the ufe of daily morning exercife, 
after drinking a large draught of pure water.
A 
cafe is alfo related of one who, from his infancy to 
his 25th year, had never been free from Afcarides^ 
but he entirely got rid of them by taking a journey 
on horfeback, as far as 'Tornoa^ in Lapland, 
126.
HoRTus CuLiNARis. J .
C. 'Tenghorg, ijG^, 
Exhibiting a view of all thofe vegetables, which 
are, or which the author thinks might, advantage- 
oufly be cultivated in the fields and gardens of 
Sweden ; and defcribing, in a fuccind way, the 
manner of propagating the feveral kinds of grain j 
hops, tobacco, faffron ^ kitchen or boiling herbs^, 
fallads, pot-herbs •, fruit-trees and fhrubs j and 
finally, plants for ornament their proper foil, 
and the methods of guarding them againft the fey^- 
rity of the climate.
127.
HiRUDO Medicinalis.
Z).
Wefer.
1765.
There are nine fpecies of Leeches defcribed iq 
the Syftema Natur^^ p.
1079.
That ufcd for me- 
dicinal purpofes is diftinguiihed under the name 
of Hirudo (Medicinalis) deprejfa nigricans^ fupra li- 
neis flavis fex : inlermediis nigro-arcuatis fuhtus 
cinerea nigro-maculata.
The anatomical ftru6ture 
and natural hiftory of this worm, the opinion of 
the antients relating to it, the proper time of pro- 
curing it, the method of preferving and applying 
it, are all difcufled.
After this, the author points 
out thofe difeafes in vv'hich the mode of blood-letting 
/ 
C 345 ] 
by nieans of Leeches hath been preferred to others?
previous to this, however, he quotes Zacutus Lujl- 
tanus for a cafe, where the Leech, during its ap- 
plication, made its way into the ReBum^ and take^ 
occafion to recommend, in any fimilar inftance, 
the immediate injeftion of fait water; and thinks 
it would be equally efficacious in the ftomach, if 
the animal has unwarily been fwallowed, which 
Jaas fometimes fatally happened.
128.
QpoBALSAMUM Declaratum.
Le Moifie.
1764.
Among feveral articles of the Materia Medica^ 
of the produdion of which phyficians had a very 
imperfed: knowledge, none excited more curiofity 
than this drug, called alfo Balm of Gilead, and Bal- 
Jam of Mecca^ from the place of its growth : a drug, 
the virtues of which were highly extolled through- 
out all the Eaft, from the moft antient times.
Near twenty authors are here mentioned, who have 
written profelTedly on this produ6lion, but few had 
feen the fhrub that produced it.
Profper Alpinus 
fays, he faw the plant grov/ing in a cultivated 
ft ate in gardens near Cairo but it is now doubt- 
ful whether that he faw was the true fpecies, 
though of the fame genus.
We owe the full dif- 
covery of the fhrub which yields it to Dr. Forjkal^ 
one of thofe unfortunate gentlemen, who were fent 
to Arabia Felix^ on the expedition planned by Pro- 
fefTor Michaelis^ which did fo much honour to the 
late Frederick V.
of Denmark, He faw it growing 
plentifully in that country, particularly about 
Medina^ 
r 346 ] 
Medina^ and tranfrnitted a branch to Linn^us in 
1763.
It is now known to be a plant of the Mo- 
nogynous order, in the OEiandrous clafs, and belongs 
to the fame genus with the plant that in America 
yields the gum Elemi.
It now (lands in the Syf- 
tem under the name of Amyris (Gileadenfis) foUis 
ternatis integerrimis ; pedunculis unifloris^ lateralihus^ 
Mant.
65, Syft.
Nat. Veg.
xiii.
p. 299.
A com- 
plete hiftory of the ftirub, and the virtues of the 
balfam, are exhibited concerning which we need 
only obferve, that modern phyficians have found 
a fubftitute in other natural balfams^ and therefore do 
not entertain fo high an opinion, as the antients did, 
of the wonderful reftorative powers of this drug.
The prefent age hath made us acquainted with the 
plants which afford the Gum Elemi^ Anim^^ and 
Copaiba j we yet wait for the full difcovery of the 
Balfam of Peru, Ammoniacum^ Caranna^ Myrrhy 
Bdellium^ and Sagapenum.
This tra6t clofes with 
a defcription of the plant, which Linnaeus ho- 
noured with the name of Forjkalea.
It is figured 
in Plukenefs Phyt, t.
275, f.
6, and ilands among 
the Becandri^e Pentagyne^^ next to the Spergula.
129.
Dii^TA JEtatum.
B. J, Ohrquiji.
1764.
A fuccin6l view of the changes which the hu- 
man body pafTes through, in the feveral ilages 
from the birth to extreme old age, inculcating the 
due obfervance of all thofe rules refpeding diet 
and regimen, which are befl adapted to give vigour 
to the conilitution, and permanence of health, 
during 
[ 347 3 
lluring thefc vicifiitudes.
Pointing out alfo, under 
each period, the diforders incident thereto, and 
laying down proper inftrudions how beft to efcape 
?;he influence of them.
I go.
MoRBi Artifigum.
Skragp.
1764.
It is too well known that artificers in various 
trades are almoft necefTarily fubje6t to dangerous 
and fometimes lingering difeafes, which frequently 
Ihorten the period of their lives.
Miners, hewer$ 
of free-ftone, -vyorkers of metals, painters, and 
yarious others, are notorious inftances of this truth, 
]But, as our author obferves, they are not the 
only fufferers in this way, inafmuch as a too clofe 
application to any bufinefs or profeflion, will ever 
be attended with infalutary effedls.
In this con- 
pife view of the difeafes of tradefmen, the author 
profefTes to have made all poflible ufe of Ra- 
mazzini's work on the fubjed but he has ex- 
tended that author's catalogue, and availed him- 
felf of fubfequent obfervations from various au- 
thors, and interfperfed feveral of his own.
In 
brief, by confining his view, through the feveral 
employments of mankind, to the immediate ope- 
ration of caufes, and their effeds, he has rendered 
this trad at the fame time agreeable, inftrudive, 
and intereiling.
131.
Lepra.
J. Uddman.
lyS^.
The diftemper here defcribed has been long 
endemial in Norway, and in feveral parts of Sweden, 
particularly on the eaftern coaft of the BothniaH 
Gulph, 
r ] 
Gulph, and in Finland ; alfo in the iflands of Odand 
iind Gothland.
Solongfmce as the year 1631, a peft- 
houfe was erefted in the parifh of Cronehy^ for the 
reception of the fick of that neighbourhood.
Our 
author defines the Lepra from Linn^us's Genera 
Morhorumy as " a diftemper fhewing itfelf in 
puilules, throwing off dry fcales or fcurf ; at- 
tended with moveable difcoloured nodes in the 
fiefli, and rhagades or dry fiiTures on the fkin." 
272.
Whether the diftemper he undertakes 
to give the hiftory of be the fame with the Lepra 
Arahur/i or Alexandrina^ the Javanenfts^ and the 
Americana., of all which he has given the charac- 
ters, he does not abfokitely determine, as he inclines 
to think it a difeafe various in its appearance.
Being 
a native of Bothnia., he had frequent opportunities 
of inrpe61:ing it, and defcribes it under the followr 
ing appearances in that country.
It fhewed itfelf in tubercles., or nodes, fixed in 
the flefhy parts, in the foreheaci, cheeks, arms, 
hands, and thighs ; thefe were indolent, moveable 
with the finger, and of a livid hue.
There were 
alfo tubercles of a livid, or fometimes brown- 
ifh-yellow caft, in the mouth, palate, fauces, and 
about the root of the tongue \ ulcers in the nof- 
trils ; tumours or thickenings of the edges of the 
outer ears thick lips ; feet and hands enlarged and 
inflamed.
And in fome, ulcers, or rather fiJfureSy 
on the fiiin, creeping, broad, and deep, with cal- 
lous edges, bleeding from flight preflfure or hand- 
ling, but defl:itute of pain, as were all the nodes 
and tubercles^ as far as the author ever obferved ; 
but, 
E 349 1 
but, he fays, they were inclined to itch roun# 
their bafes.
We cannot purfue our author through his en- 
quiries into aii the hypothefes relating to the caufe 
of thisdiforder, howfoever ingenious; it muft fuf- 
fice to obferve, that he favours the theory of Exan- 
thematic Animalcula^ and, from the frequency of this 
diforder on the fea-coall, where the inhabitants 
live much upon filh, and particularly herrings, 
which abound with the Gordius Marinus (Syft, 
1075) or Sea Hair-worm, adduces a train of argu- 
ments to fliew, that this diftemper probably origi- 
nates from thefe worms.
In the cure, he defcants upon the viper-hrotb of 
the antients ; and remarks, that the famed viper 
of the Eaft is a different ferpent from ours.
He 
next treats on the inefficacy of mercurials as 
vermifuges, and quotes Dr. Scopoli as obferving, 
that no people are more troubled with worms than 
thofe that work in the quick filver-mines of Car- 
mola.
At length, againft this obftinate and for- 
midable malady, Dr. Uddman informs us, that 
Dr. Rujfelh method of cure, which confifts in giv- 
ing large quantities of fea-water, afTifted by the 
other part of the procefs, to which were joined 
fridlions with warm and acrid oils, had been at- 
tended with more fuccefs than any other.
132.
FUNDAMENTA OrNITHOLOGICA.
J, P.
Back- 
man.
ij6^.
To all lovers of Ornithology this muft have 
been an acceptable morfel, as containing the rudi- 
ments 
t 350 1 
mcnts of the fcience according to the LinnceaH 
method, and a full explanation of the terms thereirr 
employed.
It is divided into four parts.
In the 
firft, the author gives a brief hiflory of Ornitho- 
logifts, amongft whom he places Belon and Gefner, 
as the firft authors worth attention, defcending to 
AldrovanduSy Marcgrave^ Willoughby, and Ray, 
before any thing like fyftem was introduced.
To 
thefe fucceed Ritdheck^ whofe collcdion of paint- 
ings, yet unpublifhed, are in the hands of M.
de 
Geer-y jilbin^ Catejby^ and Edwards^ the laft of 
whom, from his unwearied diligence, and the op- 
portunities that his fituation at London afforded 
him, had excelled all others.
To thefe muft be 
added M.
BnjJ'on\ publication of Reaumur\ col- 
ledion, as alfo Klein^ Brimniche^ and Barrere.
In the fecond part, the anatomical ftrudure and 
external form of this order of animals are defcribed, 
Firft, the form in general ; then the particular 
parts, explaining under each the terms ufed in 
defcribing them, and in forming iht generic al and 
fpecific characters.
This part is illuftrated with a 
plate, which has been copied into feveral fucceed- 
ing works on this fubjed.
The third treats on the hiftory of birds ; re- 
fpeding their habitations, migrations, incubation, 
and the whole of their natural economy.
To which 
is fubjoined the method of conilrucling fcientific 
dcfcriptions, and generical characters.
r 
The fourth exhibits a general view of the ufe of 
birds in the police of nature j in diet, and their utility 
to man : and here we cannot but note the Chavaria.
of 
7 
[ 351 ] 
o^Jacqum^ a fpecies of the Parra (Syft.
p. 260) 
which is trained by the Indians in the neighbour- 
hood of Carthagena^ who breed large flocks of 
poultry, that ftray in the woods, to defend them 
againft the numerous birds of prey, no one of 
which will dare to encounter this bird.
ItMs never 
known to defert the flock, and returns every even- 
ing to rooft.
Our author touches on the prog- 
nofl:ics of birds in prefaging weather, fo well un- 
derfl:ood by feamen \ and finally, as beautiful and 
pleafurable objeds to man.
133.
FUNDAMENTA EnTOMOLOGI^.
A, J.
Bhdh.
1767.
The knowledge of infeds may be faid to be the 
laft branch of natural hifliory that raifed its head ; 
notwithflanding which, it has of late attained a 
high degree of perfection : nor can it be too much 
to attribute this to the excellent arrangement of 
LiNNi^Lus, under whofe aufpices it has extended it- 
felf beyond all other parts of zoology.
The plan of this paper is exadlly that of the 
foregoing, and will amply fatisfy thofe who wifli 
to enter on the fl:udy of infedls.
In his firil chap- 
ter, Mr. Bladh gives a chronological lift of 32 
writers on the fubjed, beginning with Moiiffet^ 
who publifhed in 1634, and ending with Schafftr 
in 1767.
But the fubftance of this difl^ertation has 
been tranflated and publiflied in Englijh by Mr.
Curtis^ fo that any further account of this work h 
now fuperfeded.
134.
FUNDAMENTTA 
t 3S2 J 
1^4.
FuNf£>AMENTA Agrostographi^.
H. Gahfi 
1767.
M. Gabn profefles to have undertaken this trad, 
partly with a view to aid the good defigns of thofe 
focietiesy which, to the honour of their founders, 
have been eftablifhed in feveral parts of Europe^ 
for the advancement of agriculture with which 
the fubjedl of this paper is intimately conne6led.
In this large natural clafs of plants, called Gr^- 
mina^ are comprehended alfo the Cerealia or Grain^ 
and, including all that are hitherto known, do not 
amount in the Syftem of our author to fewer than 
430 fpecies ; in that of others to many more.
Such a number of plants, fo nearly alike in their 
habit as thefe, muft require numerous fubdivi- 
fions, and nice diftindions, to difcriminate each 
fpecies.
To effed: this is the intention of this 
trad, in which, after fome curious preliminary 
obfervations, relating to the ftation and ufes that 
nature feems to have afligned to fome particular 
fpecies, and a lift of the common graffes, clalTed 
according to their native places, the author pre- 
fents us with an hiftorical account of the prin- 
cipal writers who have treated feparately on this 
clafs, exhibiting under each a brief view of their 
fyftems of claffification.
Thefe are C.
Bauhina^ 
RuSecky Ray^ and above all, Scheuchzery who 
with incredible labour has defcribed all the fpe- 
cies.
To thefe might be added feveral other 
writers, who have alfo illuftrated this branch of 
botany, particularly Morifon and Haller, Then 
follows the defer iption of the natural charader 
and 
C 353 ] 
and habit of a plant of tWis clafs, intenr^ed to con- 
vey a full explanation of the terms, referring to   wo 
explanatory plates, on which is engraven a flower 
of each genus.
Various have been the methods invented to clafs 
this tribe j our author here gives them a ntw dif- 
pofition, entirely independent on the fexual fyftem, 
eftabliftied on the fgure and number of the valves 
compofing the Glume or Calix ; and thofe of the 
flower^ clafled under two general heads, as they 
grow either in the form of Spikes or Panicles, 
In all natural clajfes the diftindlions of the genera 
depend on minute differences, which require very 
nice difcriminations ; the author therefore proceeds 
to point thefe out in feveral inftances of this tribe : 
he has alfo added the exceptions that arife under the 
feveral genera in various fpecies, an imperfcdion 
that attends all fyftems.
He concludes with a full 
explanation of his tables, which are better adapted 
to convey to a learner a true idea of this clafs, 
than any that we are yet acquainted with ; fince 
Scbreber's tables are not adapted to common ufe in 
England.
135.
Varietas Ciborum.
a, F.
JVedenberg, I'jSj.
The immenfe variety in food, which cuftom, 
necelFity, and luxury have introduced, is here in 
a concife way difplayed : the fimplicity of fome 
nations, whether arifing from penury or from cli- 
mate, the Apician luxury of others, and the vari- 
ous effeds of the culinary art, are alfo briefly 
pointed out ; then follows a divifion of aliments 
into clades, thus, 
A a I.
Watery, 
[ 354 J 
t. Watery, 6.
Bitter.
2. Dry. 7.
Vifcous^ 
3. Pinguious; 8.
Salt.
4. Styptic.
9- Sweet.
5. Acid.
10.
Acrid.
Under each are fubjoined fonimary obfervations, 
relating to the effedts of a regimen, in which any 
of thefe clafles form the prevailing part ; and to 
its tendency in producing particular difeafes.
The 
author then fpeaks oa the great power of cuftom 
on the habit, and concludes wioh inculcating the 
Ne quid nimis\ an axiom of much higher impor- 
tance than any of thofe nice difcriminations relating 
to the wholejome and unwholefome^ which fo often 
perplex the minds, and diflurb the peace of many 
well-meaning people.
136.
P'ervidorum ei Geli'Doruiwt usrrs.
€. Ribe, 1765.
Dr. Ribe fixes the heat of the human body be-^ 
tween 35 and 37 of the Celfian thermometer, and 
pronounces all foods and drinki which arife to 
40, to be fervid.
He confiders the conftant and 
daily ufe of hot aliments as an abufe that calls 
for the ftrideft animadverfion ; and fhews, by the 
efFedls of them on the folids of the human body, 
their tendency to produce a variety of chronical 
difeafes, which he here fpecifies.
Man is the only 
animal accuftomed to hot foods,, and is almofl 
alone alfedled with carious teeth.
Hence he takes 
occafion to condemn, in a forcible manner, the cuf- 
tom of drinking hot tea, coffee, and chocolate, and 
difiuade 
t 555 3 
difluade his countrymen from the praftice of* eat- 
ing hot bread, boiled rice, puddings, and other* 
like foodsj to which perhaps, from the feverity 
of the climate^ the Swedes are more addided than 
fome other nations.
He does not however con- 
clude this part without pointing out thofe cafes 
where tepid^ and even /^m^^ liquors, are both al- 
lowable and beneficial ; fuch are fome fevers, feve^ 
ral of the fpafmodic difeafes, and thofe refulting 
from rigidity of the fibres.
In the fecond part, the author reprobates >the 
ufe of iced creams, jellies, and drinks ; and difiuades 
efpecially from a fort of food, unknown among 
us, though frequent in Sweden: this is congealed 
oyfters.
The pernicious quality of thefe he endea- 
vours to prove by feveral cafes.
He is alfo not 
iefs decifive in condemning a kind of iced malt- 
liquor, drunk in Sweden in the fummer months.
Obfervations on the difeafes occafioned by the 
abufes of all thefe, and a recital of the advantages 
of fimply cool liquors, conclude this diflertation.
137.
PoTus The^.
p. C.
Till^us.
1765, 
At the time of its publication, this treatife had 
perhaps the merit of being the mofl complete hif- 
tory of this fiirub 5 occafioned by the lucky inci- 
dent of its arriving fafe in a vegetating ftate in 
Sweden^ through the care and ilcill of Capt.
Ekehergy 
who is faid to be the firil that fucceeded in the 
feveral attempts that had been made to introduce 
it into Europe, Linn^us had fuggefted the put- 
ting the feeds into earth jufl as the fliip left China ; 
A a 2 and 
3 
C 356 ] 
and the fuccefs confirmed the propriety of his 
method.
Tea is now known to be the leaves of a pTant 
of the monogy nous order ^ belonging to the polyandrous 
clafs ; the flower of which is fucceeded by a trkoc- 
cous Capfule.
The writer defcribes the Ihrub at 
large, gives all the fynonyms, and mentions thofe 
authors who have given figures of it : among thefe, 
K^mpfer\ is the only exa6b one.
It was long be- 
lieved that there was but one fpecies- ^ but the 
Green Tea> is nowfaid to be the produce af another, 
which differs from the Bohea^ in having nine pe- 
tals in the flower, whereas the Bohea hath but 
fix.
It is not known to grow fpontaneoufly elfe- 
wherc than in Japan and China, in which latter 
kingdom it is cultivated in all the provinces from 
Cam on to Pekin.
Mr. Tiliey delivers the mode of preparing the 
leaves, of which we have a difufe and mofli exad: 
account by K^mpfery who^ having refided two 
years in Japan, was enabled to give the mofl: com- 
plete information.
The origin of the ufe of Tea 
in thofe cofcintries is too remote to be afcertained, 
and commerce has now extended its ufe to almoft 
every corner of the globe.
The high price of Tea, 
at its firft introdud:ion, induced many phyficians 
to think of a fubftitute; and it is well known that 
Simon Fault thought the MyrkaGale, Sp.Pl. p, i453r 
to be the flirub itfelf.
Other fuccedanea are men- 
tioned alfo by our author 5 luch as the leaves 
of the 
Prunus fpinofa, Sp. PI.
681.
Sloe Tree.
Origanum vulgare^ Sp. Pi.
824, Wild Marjorum.
Rubu^ 
[ 557 ] 
Ruhus ar5lkus^ Sp. PI.
708.
Ar<5tic Bramble.
Veronica officinalis^ Sp. PI.
14.
Male Speedwell.
VeronicaChamadry3^^j^^\, 17.
Wild Germander.
Cbenopodium Amhrofioides ^ Sp. PI.
320.
Mexican 
fweet Elite.
Capraria bijlora^ Sp. PL 875.
Sweet- weed or 
Goat- weed.
To this part of our author's treatife may be ad- 
ded the well-known fophiftication of Tea prac- 
tifed by the fmugglers, in fome of the fouthern 
parts of .this kingdom, who hav4^ reduced to- a 
reguJar procefs the management of the leaves of 
the AJh and Elder particularly ; which, when pre- 
pared, is called Smou€b, and mix^d, as is faid, in 
the proportion of one third, with the ordinary 
l^eas.
To what an extent the trade in this fophifti- 
cated Tea had been carried, to the detriment of 
the trees, may be imagined, when the reader is 
informed, that an adb of parliament has lately been 
obtained to prohibit it, under very fevere penal- 
ties.
But to return to our author.
He next confiders the fenfible qualities of Teay 
its fragrant odour, and ftypiic tafte and from 
*its place in the Syftem, botanically confidered, 
with refped: to the natural orders^ he thinks it 
highly probable, that what Kampfer relates of its 
narcotic quality, when green, is confonant to truth.
And, from fimilar inftances, he proves that this 
quality may readily be thrown off by that degree 
of heat which the fudden exficcation of the leaves 
require.
In difcufling the virtues of Tea, he obferves, that 
the Chinefe recommend the ufe of it in all lethargic 
A a 3 difeafes.
C 358 ] 
difeafes, btit Gdiidemn it in ophthalmies, colics, and 
palfies.
From Kalm^ he tells us, the Indians of 
North America knew not the inconveniences of 
Carious teeth, debilitated ftomachs, nor the wo- 
men difficult labours, until the introdu6tion of 
• Tea attlong them.
That the phyficians at Ham- 
lurgh^ Amfterdam^ &c.
attribute the frequency of 
the Leucorrhdea among the women of condition to 
their indulgence in this liquor.
And further, that 
Boerhaave afcribed to the fipping hot Tea, a 
fchirrofity in the glands of the cefophagus, which 
he met with on difledion, and which he thought 
^ difeafe not known to the antients.
The author fubjoins fome obfervations on the 
important and extenfive influence of Tea in a mer- 
cantile view, and as an article of luxury; and.
concludes with the hiftory of the introdudion of 
the living plant into Europe^ as above mentioned, 
hinting alfo at the pofTibility of naturalizing it in 
other countries^ A plate of the Bohea ^ea Ihrub 
is annexed.
138.
PoTus Chocolate.
A, Hoffman.
1765, 
We are now come to the lad, and what oqr aq- st 
thor thinks the moft falubrious, of the three ele- 
gant articles of luxury that the moderns have ac- 
quired by the difcovery of the Eaji and Weft Indies* 
Chocolate is the produce of an American intertro- 
pical tree, flowering twice in a year, and lingular 
in producing its fruit frorri the body or trunk, and 
not from the branches.
It belongs to the Pentan-^ 
drous order gf the Polyadelphous clafs ; and is dif- 
tinguid^ed by the name of l^heohroma (Cacao) 
foliis integerripiis^ Sp. PI.
i xoo> 
We 
f 359 1 
"We are prefented with three methods of prepar- 
ing Chocolate, as pradlifed by the Indians^ by the 
Spaniards^ and by others, as follow : The Indians, 
to one pound of the r0afte<i nuts, put half a pound 
of fugar, difTolved in rofe-water, a«d half a pound 
of flour of Mays, or Indian corn.
The Spaniards^ 
to fix pounds of the nut, add three and an half of 
fugar, feven pods of vanillas, one pound and an 
half of flour of Indian corn, half a pound of cinna- 
inon, fix cloves, one drachm of capficum, and 
whatfoever is thought requifite of the roucou-nut 
to improve the colour, together with amber- 
greafe or muflc, to impart an agreeable fcent.
In 
the other ^ and more common way, to feventeen 
pounds of nuts are added ten pounds of fugar, 
twenty-eight pods of vanillas, one drachm of am- 
bergreafe, and fix ounces of cinnamon.
ThtVanillas are the pods filled with minute feeds, 
from a parafitical climbing plant, defcribed under 
the name of Epidendrum Vanilla, Sp. PI.
1347, 
belonging to the Gynandrom clafs, with the Orchides, 
and like them reputed an aphrodifiac.
Spices 
ane added to give pungency, and mitigate the 
oleaginous quality of the nut.
Having detailed the hiftory of the mit, the au- .
thor confiders Chocolate as an aliment, and in a 
medicinal view.
He recommends it in emaciating 
difeafes, both as aliment and medicine; and next 
very ftrenuoufly in hypochondriacal cafes, and in 
confirmation adduces that of Cardinal Richelieu, 
who, he fays, was refl:ored to health by living on 
Chocolate.
He is not lefs copious on its good 
effects againfl: the Hemorrhoids ; in aid of which he 
A a 4 ^ relates 
[ S6o ] 
relates a fingular cafe, communicated to him by 
the Prefident himfelf.
139.
Spiritus Frumenti.
P, Bergius.
1764.
The Arabians have the credit of inventing the 
alembic, and the diftillation of ardent fpirits ; which 
they are faid to have nfed principally, if not at 
firft entirely, as folvents only, to extrad the vir- 
tues of fimples, and exhibit them in the form of 
tindures.
Our author obferves from Raymond 
Lilly ^ that they were unknown in Europe at the 
commencement of the 14th century-, but the dif- 
tillation of fpirit from fermented grain is attributed to 
Arnoldus de Villa Nova^ about the year 1 3 1 5.
Soon 
after this time Brandy was made in Sicily^ firft from 
fpoiled grapes, and very early became an article 
of great commerce at Venice, 
Having enumerated the properties of this in- 
flammable fluid from Boerhaave\ chemiftry, and 
defcribed a method of preparing the grain for dif- 
tillation, as pradifed in Sweden^ which is different 
from ours, the author difcuffes the falutary effedls 
of Spirits^ medicinally taken, as analeptic, diuretic, 
cordial, and flomachic \ under all which heads, 
he lays down appofite rules for their ufe.
Diluted 
with coffee, he recommends brandy as a diuretic 
in calculous cafes.
He much prefers it to wine, 
as a prefervative againft contagious dyfentenes \ 
and afTerts, that this was clearly proved among 
the feamen of the Swedifh fleet, in the expedition of 
1742c He then confiders the imprudent ufe of it 5 
and, from its power in coagulating the fluids and indu- 
rating 
[ 36« ] 
rnting the folids^ deduces its effedls in producing in- 
flammatory fevers, confumptions, dropfy, jaundice, 
hemorrhoids, tremors, p^ renfy, ^c, and concludes 
with fome well-digefted obfervations on the general 
abufe of fermented liquors, and upon their influence 
on fociety, both in a political and moral view.
140.
MENTHi?: Usus C.
G. Laurin, 1767.
Mint is one of thofe vegetables which have re- 
tained their charader in medicine from the earlieft 
ages, it having been ufed by the Greeks and Romans, 
England^ above all other countries, abounds with 
plants of this genus, of which there are not lefs 
than eleven fpecies mentioned by the EfigliJJj bo- 
taciifts as indigenous, the Pulegium^ which is a true 
fpecies of Mint, being included.
In the natural orders of botany.
Mint is among 
the verticillated plants, which are in general fup- 
pofed to have refolvent and nervine qualities : and 
from thefe powers arife the good efFed:s ufually 
afcribed to this plant, in a variety of diforders 
here particularly fpecified.
141.
PuRGANTiA Indigena.
P. StTandman.
1766.
After fome preliminary obfervations relating to 
the opinions of the empirical and dogmatic fedls in 
medicine, as connedted with his fubje6t, and fome" 
encomiums on the inftitution of hofpitals, as af- 
fording a field of obfervation and experiment to 
the phyfician, which private pradice does not 
allow, the writer prefents us with a catalogue of 
fuch 
[ 3^2 ] 
fuch vegetables as are endued with a purgative 
quality, confining his trad to fuch as are either 
indigenous, or cafily cultivated in the gardens of 
Sweden.
Under each he mentions the place of 
growth, the part ufed, its preparation, the dofe, 
the efFeds, and the difordecs in which it has prin- 
cipally been employed as a purgative.
We fub- 
join a fummary catalogue.
1. Rhamnus Frangula^ Sp. PI.
p. 280.
Frangulae 
Cortex.
Bark of berry-bearing Alder, 
2. Rhamnus Catharticus^ Sp. PI.
279.
Spince 
Cervinse Baccae.
Buckthorn Berries.
3. Linum Catharticum^ Sp. PI.
401.
Purging 
Flax.
^^ 4.
Eupatorium Cannabinum^ Sp. PI.
1173.
Hemp- 
agrimony.
Leaves.
Root.
5. Genifta Tin^oria^ Sp. PI.
998.
Dyers-weed.
Seeds and Flowers.
6. Prunus Spinofa^ Sp. PI.
p. 681.
Acacix 
Noftratis Flores.
Flowers of Black-thorn^ or Sloe- 
tree, 
7. Berberis vulgaris^ Sp. PI.
471.
Berberry Bark.
8. Convolvulus Sepium^ Sp. PI.
218.
Root of the 
great Bindweed.
9. Valeriana officinalis y Sp. PI.
45.
Valerian Root.
10.
Bryonia alba^ Sp. PI.
1438, Bryony Root.
If, Sambucus EbuluSy Sp. PI.
385.
Root of 
Dwarf Elder.
12.
Lichen Aphthofus, Sp. PI.
1616.
Fine green 
Liverwort, or aphthofe Liverwort.
The author 
relates the cafe of a young woman, to whom this 
medicine had been given as an anthelminthic, 
* , 3 who 
V 
t 3(^3 1 
who voided under its operation, inftead of the 
^fual inteftinal worms, a large quantity of the 
Larvae or Maggots, of the Phalena Pinguinalis^ a 
fpecies of Moth, defcribed in the Syftem, p.
882.
> 13.
Lycopodium SelagOy 1565, Firr Club-mofs.
14.
^haliMrum aquilegifolium^S^.Vl. 770.
Feather^ 
cd Columbine, or Meaaow Rue. The Root.
15.
Polypcdium vulgare^ Sp. PI.
1544.
Polypody.
z6.
Viola odcrata-i Sp. PL 1324.
Root.
DoubtfuL 
17.
Gratiola officinalis^ Sp. PI.
24.
Hedge Hyffop.
18.
Afarum europmm^ Sp. PI.
633.
Afarabacca.
19.
Rheum palmatum^ Sp. PL 531.
Rhubarb.
20.
Mirabilis longiflora^ Sp. PL 252.
The au- 
thor thinks it probable that the Jalap of the Ihops 
is a root of this genus.
Some Englijh botanifts 
have rather fuppofed it to be a Convolvulus, 
21.
Momordica Elaterium^ Sp. PL 1434.
Wild 
or Spirting Cucumber.
The fecula of the Juice.
The Hedge Hyffiopy and Afarabacca^ are emetics ; 
and the author thinks the root of the Sweet Violet 
is endued with the fame quality as the Ipecacuanha^ 
which is now pretty well determined to be of that 
genu5.
See Syft, Nat, 2d ed.
xiii.
p. 669, 
142.
Siren Lagertina.
A,OJlerdam> iy66, 
A complete hiftory of the Lizard Siren^ or Mud- 
Inguana, of Carolina^ a new amphibious, biped, 
eel-fhaped animal, furnilhed both with ;gills and 
Jungs j the former placed entirely v/ithout the 
body.
This animal is fo fingular in its ftrudure, 
as to have occafioned Linn^us to form a ne\y 
6rder^ under the term Meantes^ which is placed 
between the Amphibia and Nantes.
It is fometimes 
feen 
/ 
C 364 ] 
feen two feet long, and fends forth a cry fomewhat 
like that of the young of the Duck kind, but more 
acute and clear.
It is defcribed and figured by 
Mr. EUis^ in the Phil, Tranf.
vol.
Ivi. p.
189.
143.
Metamorphosis Humana.
J, A, Wadftrom, 
1767.
An ingenious and elaborate diflertation on the 
changes which the human fyftem undergoes in the 
feveral ftages of life, from the birth to extreme old- 
age, divided into twelve periods.
Under each ofthefe, 
Man is confidered, with refped to all thofe changes 
which fucceed each other, in the ftrudlure and dif- 
charge of the feveral functions of the body ; 
or othcrwife, both anatomically and phyfiologi- 
cally ; with refped: to the difeafes of each ftage \ 
and finally, he is throughout contemplated in re- 
gard to the powers of the mind, the afFedions, 
and the paflions.
, This detailed view is fucceeded by tables, in 
which, under the fame periods, is delineated the 
different temperature of the body-, the different 
degrees of mufcular ilrength ; the powers of mo- 
tion ; the appetites \ affetlions pafTions the ex- 
ercife of the mental faculties, and their aptitude 
to works of genius, fcience, and judgment; the 
powers of fpcech and oratory •, and the whole 
clofes with a Scala JEtatum^ containing all the 
tables brought together, and fcicntifically oppofed 
to each other.
This paper is clofely conne6led 
with, and properly accompanies, the Senium Salo- 
mpneumy N* 90, and the Di^ta jEtatum^ N* 129.
144.
CURA 
[ 3^5 ] 
144- CuRA Generalis.
J.G.Bergman.
iy66.
In a foregoing part of thefe memoirs, a fliorc 
account was given of Linn/eus's 'Theory of P by fie ^ 
or his Clavis Medicine ; in which was obferved the 
diftindion that he has made between the cortical 
and medullary^ or in other words, the vafcular and 
nervous fyftems of the human body.
The prefent 
diflertation is a comment on the firft part of the 
C/^wV, relating to the difeafes of the vafcular fyftem.
Dr. Bergman traces the immediate effects, both upon 
the folids and fluids, of any excefs or defedl in the 
yf/V, Nourijhment^ Motion and Reft^ Sleep and JVatch- 
ing^ Excretions and Retentions.
The PaJJicns^ as be- 
ing more immediately conneded with the medullary y 
or nervous fyftem, do not belong to his fcheme.
Having difcufled the ill confequences of thefe 
errors to the conftitution, and remarked the dif- 
eafes originating from thence, he turns to tfie con- 
fideration of the old canon, that difeafes are 
cured by their contraries," and, agreeably to the 
theory of his mafter, that fuch as fpring from 
thefe errors are principally the objeds of dietetic 
medicine, and are to be cured by Sapids^ he pro- 
duces the feveral clafTes of Aqitofa^ Sicca^ Acida^ 
Amara^ Pinguia^ Styptica^ Dulcia^ Acria, Mucofa^ 
Salfa^ and fhews their power in preventing and 
curing difeafes concluding his tract with the 
diftindion between the rational and empirical phy- 
fician.j 
In mentioning the fcurvy, and the effeds of 
faked meat, he relates a memorable inftance of 
an 
[ 366 1 
an arthritic patient, who, after taking, 5n orre 
fummer, 1800 boles of Mrs. Stephens^ medicine, 
became in the higheft degree afflidted with the 
genuine fcurvy, which he thinks might fairly be 
attributed to the quantity of alkaline fait contain- 
ed in that medicine.
145.
Usus MuscoRuM.
A, H, Berlin.
iy66.
The ufes of this clafs of vegetables in well- cul- 
tivated countries, and in benign climates, can be 
but little known in the northern regions they are^ 
confpicuous.
The writer, after having mentioned 
thofe botanifts who have particularly attended to 
this clafs, and given due praife to the matchlefs work 
of Billenius on the fubjed, difplays the particular 
advantages of mofles in the general economy of 
nature for inftance, the terreftrial Liuer-worts lay 
the firft foundation of foil on barren rocks, as the 
Sphagnum^ and many other bog mojfes^ do in marlhy 
and boggy places.
In human economy, nothing 
is more remarkable than the utility of the rein- deer 
mofs^ in the ardic regions.
Many of the liver- 
worts are ingredients in dyeing ; and feveral mofles 
have their place in medicine, among which parti- 
cularly may be mentioned the Uchen IJlandicus^ 
Sp. PI, 161 1.
Iceland, or Eryngo-leaved Liver- 
wort, of the virtues of which, in confumptions* 
Dr. Scopoli has written a diftind treatife, publifhed 
in the Annus 2*^^' Hiftorico-naturalis , Lipf.
1769.
The reader will find a paper, written by the au- 
thor of this volume, on the ufes of this order of 
plants^ 
[ 367 1 
plants, in the Philofophical T ranfaBions for the year 
1758, vol.
1. p.
652— -687.
146.
MuNDus Invisibilis.
J, C.
Roos, I'jS'J.
The fubjedts of this thefis have been much agi- 
tated of late years by the philofophical literati^ who 
have been (killed in the ufe of microfcopes.
It 
turns principally on the difcoveries of the Baron 
Munkbaufen, relating to the fmut of wheat and bar-, 
ley, and to the duft of the Lycoperday or Puff-balls ; 
Agarics^ and other Fungi ; which he has afTerted to 
be no other than the ova of ammalcula : from 
whence had arifen a doubt, whether muflirooms 
fhould be ranked with vegetables or animals, 
LiNNi^us adopted, though with great hefitation, 
the Baron's opinion, as appears from his Syflema 
Nat, p.
1326 ; but his fentiments on this fubjed, 
after the experiments made by our late Mr. ElliSy 
who, at his requeft, inftituted a courfe profefTedly 
to determine this point, do not appear.
The re- 
fult of Mr. ElUs^s enquiry proved the negative, as 
may be feen by his papers, publifhed in the Phil, 
^ranf, vol.
lix.
p. 138, and Gent, Magazine for 
1773, p.
316.
Much curious matter on this fub- s 
Jed occurs in Mr. Roos^^ paper but we conclude 
with an important fa6t, related from the Baron's 
book, who recom.mends the feed wheat to be wafhed 
in a lye made of lime and fea-falt ; by which prac 
tice, for twenty years, he had fecured his crop from 
fmut, although his neighbours around him had 
fometimes loft a third part of theirs.
In the lat- 
ter 
[ 368 ] 
ter part of the thefis, the author defcants on ex- 
anthematic animalcula^ and appears to tavour that 
hypothefis ; candidly confeffing, however, the dif- 
ficulties that occur, and concluding with a firing 
of doubts, propofed by way of queries, relating 
to this abilrufe point, 
147.
Usus HisTORiiE Naturalis.
M,Aphomn^ 
iy66.
This ingenious difcourfe, written by a young 
Ruffian nobleman, a iludent at Upfal^ is one of the 
inoft entertaining and beft-digefted papers on the 
fubje6t, that this colledlion affords, and cannot 
fail to carry convi6lion with it.
It is divided into 
two parts : in the firft, he difplays the neceflity 
of a knowledge of natural hiftory at large, in 
leading the way to improvements in all branches 
of agriculture, and in gardening : the utility efpe* 
cially of being acquainted with the indigenous 
plants of the country, an objedt greatly negleded, 
and which, if more attended to, muft lead, as he 
endeavours tofhew, to the improvement of woods, 
hedges, the culture of barren ground, wet mea- 
dows ; to the extirpation of hurtful plants, and 
the better adapting paftures to the feveral kinds 
of cattle.
To illuftrate this latter pofition, he 
mentions a memorable fa6l, related by Linnaeus 
in the Iter Scanicum^ oi, a number of goats which 
were perifhing in an ifland that abounded with the 
Reed Bent Grafs, (Agroftis armdinacea) a plant 
on which horfes feed with avidity, and thrive 
greatly.
[ 3 
greatly.
Thus alfo, on the other hand, goats 
will riot and fatten on the Meadow Sweet, (Fili- 
pendula Ulmaria), whilll hoi'-fes, and horned cattle 
efpecially when they are young, will not touch it.
The fecond pare abounds with curious obferva- 
tions concerning the economy of domedicated ani- 
mals ; in treating on which he points out both the 
moft nutritive and noxious herbs to eacli fpecies ; 
defcending afterwards to domeftic fowls, and the 
inferior parts of the animal creation, which are 
more particularly the objects of hufbandmen.
A 
plate is added, on which is engraven, together 
with a rare fpecies of Heni?ane, the J^<:ea Cimici' 
fuga^ Sp. PI, 722, famous in Ruffia and Tartary^ 
beyond all other things, for expelling bugs, and 
fome other noxious infects.
148.
Necessitas Historic Natur^lis Rossis/ 
A. Tie Kar amy f chew, iy66.
This paper is alfo written by a Rujfian noble- 
man, and is intended to excite his countrymen to.
a diligent cultivation of the ftudy of natural hif- 
tory, as a fcience eminently beneficial to a rifing 
people.
To this purpofe he endeavours to raife 
their emulation, by fliewing the progrefs it 'has 
made in the eailern nations of Europe^ difplaying 
its beneficial influences ; and by exhibiting the 
vail field which the empire of Ruffia affords.
He 
then gives fome biographical anecdotes of thofe 
who have improved the natural hiftory of that 
country, under the patronage and command of 
jheir fovereigns, from the time of Peter the Firft.
[ 370 ] 
Such were Mejjerchmtdius^ Bmhaum^ Gmelin^ the 
laft of whom fojourned in Siberia from 1733 to 
1743.
Krafcheninnikow^ Martin^ S teller, Amman, 
and others.
He then recites, from the Mufeum 
Petropolitanum, a lift of zoological fubje(5ls for 
further inveftigation, which, although natives of 
Rujfia and Siberia^ are yet very imperfectly known.
He endeavours to perfuade his countrymen to the 
<:ulture of a number of ufeful vegetables, by pre- 
fenting them with a long catalogue of exotics, that 
have been in fome fort naturalized at Abo in Fin- 
land, under the care of ProfefTor Kalm.
His trad 
concludes with a lift of plants which are natives of 
Siberia^ extraded from the MS S.
of Heinzellmanny 
Gerber, Lerche, and Schober-y all which MSS.
were 
in the hands of Linn2^:us.
A figure of a fpecious 
Siberian plant accompanies this trad.
It is the\ 
Fumaria Spe^abilis^ Sp. PI p.
933.
149.
Rariora Norwegi^.
H. Tonning^ 1768.
The pen of a learned, ingenious, and fkilful 
naturalift is vifible in this agreeable fpecimen of 
natural hiftory.
The writer firft traces the origin 
of the fcience among the DaneSy whofe monarchs 
have lately been its celebrated patrons.
Among 
the principal modern writers ftands Gunner, the 
late Biftiop of Dronthem, who, to the higheft merit 
in his facred profefTion, alfo added an exquifite 
tafte for natural hiftory, and a confummate know- 
ledge in that fcience, as his writings fully teftify.
Neither is Mr. J.
Strom forgotten, who publiflied, 
in 17623 a natural hiftory of Sondmorc^ in the diocefe 
Qf 
t 371 ] 
of Bergen.
After this literary introdudHon, the 
principal intention of the writer is to exhibit lifts 
of the more rare fubjedls of nature, efpecially fuch 
as are not common in Sweden.
Agreeably to this 
defign, we have a catalogue of the peculiar plants 
of Norway^ the alpine, fome other rare fpecies, and 
particularly of the Fuci, or Sea Wracks, Vv^ith 
which the coaft of Norway abounds.
Alfo a lift, 
from theDronthem A^Sy torn.
II.
of all the American 
fruits, which are thrown on the iVl?^^^ fhore every 
year, and which have raifed much fpeculation 
among the curious, to account for their tranfmiC- 
lion fo particularly to that part of Europe.
The 
author alks the folution of this difficulty from the 
learned ; inafmuch as they are fometimes found in 
no inconfiderable quantity, and fo recent as to 
germinate, upon being properly fecured from the 
climate.
Thefe fruits are ufually the Cajfia Fiftula : 
Anacardium, or Culhew Nuts : Cucurbits Lagenari^e^ 
Bottle Gourds : Pods of the Mimofa Scandens^ 
Sp. PL p.
1 50 1, called Cocoons in the Wejl Indies : 
Pods of the Pifcidia Erythrina^ called Dog- wood 
Tree by Shane : and Coco-nuts.
The author next purfues his catalogue through 
all the clafies of animals, ufing only the Linn^ean 
trivial names, and referring to the Fauna Suecica, to 
Gunner^ and to Strom.
It may be obferved, that the 
latter writer thinks that what deceived the fifhermen, 
and by their means Biftiop Pontoppidan^ under the 
appearance of a ferpent of the extraordinary length 
defcribed in his Hijlory of Norway^ was no other 
than a ftring of fturgeon, which, at the ftated time 
of the year, follow each other in a line in immenfe 
B b 2 numbers^ 
f 372 ] 
lumbers, with only their backs above water; which 
might fuggeit the idea of the waving motion of a 
fcrpent.
The remaining part of the trad chiefly refpeds 
the medicinal plants, and the difeafes of the coun- 
try.
An account of fome vegetable produdtions^ 
T^hich form an article of commerce, being exported 
in confiderable quantities, among which are reck- 
pncd the Cloud-berry, (Rul?us Chamamorus^ Sp.
708), and the Uchen Ijlandicus^ mentioned in 
the account of the Ufus Mufcorum^ N* 145.
Then 
follows a lift of medicines cafily obtained, or fuch 
as are in ufe among the country people.
Among 
thcfe the good efFeds of the Linnaa horealis^ Sp. PI.
980, in rheumatic diforders, are well known, and 
rnuch celebrated.
He relates, on the authority of 
the Irefident himfelf, that two men, who had 
i)een confined to their bed for feveral months by 
ifchiatic pains, were cured in three days by ^ 
flrong decodion of it.
Its operation appears to 
Jiave been of the fedative kind, fince the patient^ 
were thrown into a fleep, which lafttd fixteen or 
twenty hours.
He confirms ^-he opinion of the 
TjCpra arifing from the Hair Worm^ as mentioned 
in N* 131 of this colkdion ; and has fome obfer- 
vations relating to the Colic a Lapponum^ defcribed 
in M.
Montin's thefis, N* 27.
The differtation 
clofes with the defcription of an African plant, 
called by Linn/£us Gunner in honour pf th^ 
^ilhop of Dronthm, 
E 373 ] 
150.
Iter in Chinam.
A> Sparrmanl iy6^.
We prefume this is the fame perfofi who af- 
terwards made the voyage round the world with 
Dr. Forjier^ in Capt.
Cook's fhip^ and has fince 
travelled over a large trad of country in fouthern 
Africa^ in purfuit of thofe gratifications which his 
zeal for natural hiftory enabled him to enjoy.
The 
prefent voyage, which was begun Dec, 28, 1765, 
and finifhed July 21, 1766, was made with Capt.
Ekeherg^ who has been mentioned as havin^y firft 
introduced the tea llirub into Szveden.
This epi- 
tome of the voyage confifts of little more than an 
enumeration of thofe fubjedts of natural hiftory^ 
which occurred to the journalifl, both at land and 
at fea •, for as he makes ufe of the trivial names, 
all defcriptions are fuperfeded ; except that, in the 
notes, fome of thofe imperfedlly known are more 
amply detailed.
E 374 1 
OBSERVATIONS, tending to fhew the 
Utility of botanical Knowledge in Relation to 
Agriculture, and the feeding of Cattle : accom- 
panied with a Tranflation of Linn^us's Pa7J 
Suecusy accommodated to the EngU/h Plants^ 
with references to Authors, and to Figures of the 
Plants.
TH E fcience of botany certainly holds its 
moft dignified ftation when fubfervient to 
medicine but its utility does not terminate in this 
alone, though it has too long been confidered as 
having no other connedlion.
This, notwithftand- 
ing, is but a partial, nay even an injurious idea 
of it, for nothing has more retarded its ufefulnefs 
than this contradted notion.
It has a relation, in 
a variety of ways, to many other arts and fciences.
Among which may be mentioned the art of paint- 
ing and dying ; but of all others Agriculture cer- 
tainly claims the ftrideft relation, fome of its moft 
important branches being greatly dependent upon 
it, and others, from an happy application of it, 
being perhaps capable of further emolument.
The 
fubfequent paper, it is prefumed, will, in fome 
meafure, illuftrate this truth.
But howfoever great 
the real dignity and importance of this art, yet, 
it muft be allowed, that it has not been cultivated 
fufficiently on fcientific principles, nor advanced 
in equal proportion with other branches of know- 
ledge.
It is not many years fince Dr. Home ob- 
I ferved, 
L 575 ] 
ferved, that Virgil and Columella^ old as thef 
are, remained almoft the only writers worth con- 
fiilting upon this fubjed.
The writings of Mr.
Hart^ Dr. A.
Hunter^ Lord KaimSy Mr. Toung^ and 
of many others fince publifhed in our own nation, 
we hope have fuperfeded Dr. Home's rematk ; and, 
from that laudable fpirit now diffufing among us 
throughout Great Britain^ for the improvement of 
Arts and Sciences, under the protedlion of our pub- 
lic inftitutions, we may expefl to fee every branch 
of agriculture ftudied as it deferves, and attended 
with that fuccefs which commonly refults from 
the right application of knowledge to the pur-^ 
pofes of human life.
On the continent, the Swedes 
are making large and daily progrefs in the im- 
provement of this branch of economics.
In France^ 
Mr. Du Hamel has rendered himfelf confpicuous 
by his writings on this fubjed ; and in various 
parts of Europe^ focieties have been formed with 
a profelTed view to this end.
We cannot help 
mentioning, with peculiar pleafure, that of Padua, 
over which Dr. Arduin preiides, v/ho, by the mu- 
nificence of the Venetian ftate, has a garden allotted 
for the cultivation of fuch vegetables as they wifh 
to fubjed to experiments in agriculture, dyeing, 
and other arts, A noble inftitution, and worthy 
of imitation !
Amidft that almoft infinite variety of vegetables, 
with which the beneficent hand of nature has re- 
plenifhed our earth, thofe which go under the 
general name of Grajjes form the principal food 
of our cattle; next ro thefe, among the natural 
clajes of plants, none are more acceptable than the 
B 4 iiadel^hQus 
[ 376 1 
diadelphous or leguminous herbs : of this clafs Is- 
the Clover^ fo much cultivated in England j the 
Saint Foin^ or Cocks-head and the Lucern^ or Medic- 
fodder, in France, Befides thefe, our horfes, 
horned cattle, fheep, ^c, will all, in their turn, 
eat with equal pleafure, and fome with more avi- 
dity, a great variety of other vegetables.
Nume- 
rous inftances occur where one fpecies of animals 
will feed greedily upon thofe herbs which others 
refufe to touch, and will even almoft familh rather 
than eat.
Some plants are highly noxious, and even 
poifonous, to certain kinds of animals, while they 
are eaten by others without the leaft fubfequent 
ill effect ; to inftance, the Cicuta Virofa^ or long- 
leaved Water Hemlock, the moft virulent plant 
which grows fpontaneoufly in England^ (but hap- 
pily is not common) is fatal to cows, when, 
through fcarcity of food j they are obliged to eat it j 
yet (heep and horfes feed on it with impunity, and 
goats even greedily devour it.
Videre licet pinguefcere f^pe Cicuta 
Barhigeras pecudes^ homini qu^e eji acre venenum, 
LircR.
Fadls of this kind muft, in fome meafure, have 
been obvious to the mjdft incurious of mankind, 
even in the earlieft ages.
The firft race of fhep- 
herds had daily inftances, among their flocks, of 
the fele6lion and refufal of particular hefbs, and 
fubfequent obfervations muft have multiplied and 
confirmed them.
But they were ftill only known 
in the general, and no experiments had been infti- 
tuted^ to afcertain the preci/e fpecies thus eaten or 
rejeded^ 
s 
[ 377 1 , 
rejefted.
The fafts are, at this time, undeniable^ 
It is well known that Flag-flowers^ Hounds-tonguey ^ 
Henbane, Mullein, Nightjhade, Hemlock, feveralD^^f^j, ' 
Arfmart, Agrimony, Celandine, feveral Crowfoots^ 
Marjh Marigold, Horehound, Figwort, many ThiftleSy 
Fern, and other plants, are commonly negledled 
by our horfes, and horned cattle, and ftand un- 
touched, even in paftures where it might be ex- 
pelled that necefiity ftiould conftrain them to ear 
any thing.
Thefe are but a few out of many in- 
ftances there are more than is commonly imagin- 
ed, and it was defirable, in confequence of thefe 
obfervations, that a courfe of experiments iliould 
be inftituted to elucidate this inftind, in that part 
efpecialiy of the brute creation which is fo imme- 
diately fubfervient to mankind.
The utility of 
fuch experiments muft be evident, ^ they muft 
neceffarily lay the foundation of farther improve- 
ments in the economy of cattle.
The intelligent 
hufbandman would, by this means, have it in his 
power to rid his paftures of noxious and ufelefs 
plants, and give room for the falubrious ones.
In this view of the affair, it will be feen that 
phyficians are not the only perfons who may ftudy 
botany to advantage^ muny others would find, 
not only a fund of pleafurc from this ftudy, but 
numberlefs other advantages refulting from the 
knowledge of the plants of their own country.
In 
the inftance before us, fcience has opened the way, 
and furely it is not too much to fay, that it evi** 
dently points to greater improvements, in one of 
the moft important branches of agriculture, as it 
relates to the economy of cattle.
More than thifs 
©ught 
C 373 ] 
ought not to be cxpedled from its aid.
It is to the 
intelligent grazier and the gentleman, well verfed 
in the knowledge of the indigenous plants, fraught 
with careful obfervation, and pradifed in the eco- 
nomy of cattle, that the reft muft be owing.
No- 
thing but the want of this knowledge, in fuch 
gentlemen as refide in the country chiefly, can de- 
prive us of the benefit which might otherwife ac- 
crue from reducing it into practice.
The eradi- 
cating from paftures poifonous and ufelefs weeds, 
would be but one, although indeed no mean one, 
among many other advantages.
Further than this, 
the hufbandman would be better enabled to fuit 
his feveral forts of cattle to the different paf- 
tures in his pofTeffion, more to their benefit, 
and confequently his own.
Even in marfhy 
grounds, where it is a difficult undertaking to 
mend the foil, the growth of many plants might 
be encouraged, and the feeds of others fown, 
which are highly acceptable to different kinds of 
cattle^ By degrees too we fhould undoubtedly be 
led to the cultivation of other vegetables befides 
(lover, as fodder , .
and the foregoing obfervations 
imply, that this might be done in foils and fitua- 
tions where that would not thrive.
Our hay 
would in confequence be much improved ; for al- 
though cattle will eat thofe herbs among hay, 
which they reje6t while green and growing, yet it 
does not follow that all are in their dried ftatc 
equally nutritive and wholefbme.
The benefits, in 
fine, which would arife from a diligent and general 
purfuit of thefe hints, would undoubtedly be vari- 
ous and extenfive, and many more, in all probabi- 
lity, 
C 379 1 
lity, in a courfe of years, than can at prefent be 
thought of.
j\greeably to thefe ideas, a beginning has bech 
made, under the aufpices of our celebrated author, 
whofe attempt was truly laudable, and worthy of 
himfelf.
To this end, it is indeed certainly the 
province of the botanift to make the plants of 
his own country the principal objefks of his atten=.
tion.
This has been eminently the cafe with Lin- 
N^us, and his country will continue to reap the 
fruit of his labours.
The refult of thefe experi- 
ments may be feen in a paper, called Pan Suecu^Ss, 
printed in the fecond volume of the Ammitatts 
Academk^y the fubftance of which, fo far as the 
experiments were made with plants common to 
this country, will be exhibited in the fubfequent 
pages.
LiNN^us conceived the firft defign of this in- 
ftitution from obfervations made in his Dalekarlian 
journey, which has been mentioned in the courfe 
of the preceding pages : he obferved, that his 
horfes left untouched, among other plants, Mea-^ 
dow-fweet^ Great Wild Valerian^ Lilly of the Valley^ 
Angelica^ Rofe-hay Willow Herb^ Marjh Cinquefoil^ 
Mountain Crowfoot Crane'' s -billy Globe Crowfoot ^ and 
various fhrubs.
It was not till feveral years after, 
that thefe experiments were inftituted ; in- which 
a number of his pupils were engaged ; eight or 
nine of whom he mentions by name, and he had 
himfelf a large fhare in direding and conducing 
them.
More than two thoufand experiments were 
tried upon the horned cattle ^ goats ^ fheep^ horfes^ and 
hogs : many were repeated ten, and fome twenty 
times.
[ 5So ] 
times," with the fole view of determining what' 
vegetables thefe feveral animals would eat or re- 
ject.
It is eafy to fee that numberlefs difficulties 
muft arife in the profecution of this fcheme, and 
that imperfedion, in a variety of inftances, muft at 
laft attend their greateft accuracy.
In the mean 
time, care was taken, as far as circumttances 
would admit, that the experiments were made as 
unexceptionably as poffible ; and it muft be con- 
cluded, that the refult upon the whole is true, as 
they have a real foundation in thofe unerring laws 
of inftin6b, to which nature has fubjedled the whole 
brute creation.
The plants were all frefti gather- 
ed, not bruifed in colleding, nor offered to the 
cattle when they were cither almoft famiftied, or 
glutted with variety nor yet in the fpring-time^ 
when many of them greedily devour almoft any 
vegetable they can get, fometimes fuch as are fatal 
to them, and which at other times they will not 
touch.
The plants were alfo, in many examples, 
.offered to feveral individuals of the fame fpecies.
Thefe trials were made only with the indigenous 
plants of Sweden^ which are (at leaft three fourths) 
the fame as ours in England, The plants growing 
fpontaneoufly in Sweden^ exclufive of the molTes 
and fungufes, amount to about 900 fpecies.
Of 
fuch a number, in every country, many muft ht 
very rare ; it is not therefore to be expeded that 
all thefe could be brought to trial.
Some, although 
plentiful in one part of the country, would be 
very fparingly found in another.
From the fefult 
it appeared, that the horned cattle eat of the plants 
which were offered to then^^ only 276 fpecies^ and 
[ 3^1 ] 
that they reje61:ed 218.
The goats^ of 449 kinds,' 
refufing 126.
The Jheep, of .^^S;, refufing 141.
The borfes^ of 262 fpecies, refufing 212.
And of 
thofe which were offered to fwine^ they eat 
kinds, and refufed 171.
The Pan Suecus, it may be prefumcd, is but in 
few hands, at lealt of fuch whom the fubjed: moft 
concerns.
It is written in Latin, and put into the 
moft compendious form imaginable, by inferting 
only the trivial names of the plants, and referring 
to the number in the Flora Suecica^ where the fy- 
Bonyms are given.
In this form it is almoft ufe- 
lefs to perfons unacquainted with Linn^us's writ- 
ings, and from an Englijh reader is entirely hid.
It appean-d of importance enough to be thrown 
into an Englijh drefs, to which end it was neceflary 
to give It a form different from the original.
So far as the trials were made with plants which 
are common to both countries, the refult may be 
feen in the following pages, and they amount to no 
very inconfiderable number.
Being taken nearly 
in the order in which they ftood in the original 
paper, fo the fexual fyftem is of courfe preferved.
Yet perhaps a more apt difpofition of them might 
have been given, by arranging them accoi-ding tp 
their ufual places of growth.
In order to render it more generally intelligible 
and acceptable, the Englijh name of the plant 
is firft given, then the Linn^an generical and 
trivial name, by which it may inftantly be found, 
either in Linn^us's own works, or in Mr. Hud- 
Jon^ s Flora Anglica, To thefe follow three columns.
The firft contains the reference to the page in Dr.
I 38.
3 
HilPs Britijh Herhal^ which it may be prefumed is in 
many hands, and which has now fuperfeded, in a 
great meafure, the Herhals of Gerard and Parkinfon^ 
being better accommodated to the purpofes of bo- 
tanic intelligence, and furniflied alfo with 6gurcs.
The fecond column refers to the page in Ray's 
Synopjis of Britip Plants^ where the fynonyms of the 
two BauhineSy and thofe of Gerard and Parkinfon^ 
are quoted.
By this means the reader is very 
compendioufly diredlcd to a variety of authors on 
each plant.
For the fake of thofe who wifli to fee 
an accurate figure, a reference to the Flo7'a Danica 
is added, a work coming out at the expence of 
the King of Denmark^ and intended to contain 
all the indigenous plants of that kingdom, of 
which 840 plates are already done.
Of thefe above 
500 are natives of this kingdom, on which account 
it fupplies, fo far, the want of a work of the fame 
kind here.
It muft, however, be obferved, that 
in this column, under the Grajfes^ thofe excellent 
tables in Morifon's Hiftoria * Plantarum Oxonienfis 
are referred to.
The columns on the other 
page contain »the refult of the experiments, for 
brevity's fake expreffed as in the original, by nu- 
merical charafters, which it will be neceffary to 
illuftrate.
There is a column retained for every 
* On this head it is much to be regretted, that thcfc 
tables are not republiftied feparately, with the hiftory of 
the Graffis and Grain annexed ; a work which, if executed 
by a proper hand, could not but be acceptable to all lovers 
of rural economy.
This view might be rendered ftill more 
complete, by extending it to all thofe plants which are par^* 
t5<iularly the objects of this paper.
^ fpecics 
C 383 ] 
fpecies of animals with which the experith^iits were 
made in Szveden ; for, although goats are not fo 
commonly kept with us, as in that country, yet it 
will at leaft: be matter of entertainment, if not 
of utility, to fee what choice of vegetables they 
will make.
When this figure ( 1 ) is made ufe of, it denotes 
that the plant is eaten by that animal to which the 
column is appropriated-, (0.) horned cattle or 
Oicen-, (G.) Goats ^ (Sh.) Sheep (H,) Horfes (S,) 
Swine.
Two units, thus (11) denote that the ani- 
mal is very fond of the plant.
When the cypher 
(o) occurs, we are to underftand that the plant is 
rejedled by that animal.
When both are found 
together in a column, thus (10), or (01), they 
denote that it was fometimes eaten and fometimes 
rejedted : the former is fuppofed to fignify, that it 
Was generally eaten, but fometimes refufed ; the 
latter, the reverfe.
Where no figure occurs, it is 
to be underftood that no opportunity had been 
taken of making a trial of that plant upon thofe 
animals.
The native place of each plant is added, 
and the month in which it flowers, in as compen- 
dious a manner as pofllble, as this feemed to be a 
requifite addition alfo its duration, whether an- 
nual (JJ^ biennial (Bj, or perennial (Pj, To 
the whole are colleded and fubjoined, from the laft 
edition of the Flora Suecica^ the Flora Oeconomica^ 
Ray*s Hijioria Flantarum^ Halle r's Enumeratio 
Stirpium Helvetia^ and others, a few notes, point- 
ing out particularly the noxious plants, or direding 
the reader's obfervation to any other article that 
ftenied worthy of riegard, 
TABLES 
C 3«4 ] 
T A B L E S of the Pa N SuECtrs, 
3- 
4- 
5- 
6. 
7- 
S. 
9- 
lo.
31.
JZ.
14.
15- 
16.
17- 
iS.
19.
MoNANDROtrs Plants^ 
JOINTED Glafswort.
Salicorma Eu- 1 
ropaa.
A. .
S 
Mare's Tail : Paddow Pipe.
Hippur 'ts njul- ?
garis, P.
• 5 
DiANDROus Plants.
Privet Bufh.
Ligujirum njulgare 
Inchanter's Nightfhade.
Circaa lutetiana.
P. 
Male Speedwell.
Feronica officinalis.
P. — 
Wild Germander.
V. Chamadrys .
P. — 
Germander Speedwell.
V. agrejiis.
A. — 
Ivy-leaved Speedwell.
V. hederifclia.
A, — 
Common Brooklime.
r. Becabunga.
P. — 
Long-leavedBrooklime.
F. Anagallis aquat.
P. 
Narrow-leaved Brooklime.
V. fcuteilata, P.
Butter wort, Yorkfhire Sanicle.
Finguicula 
'vulgaris.
P. — - 
Vervain.
Ferbena officinalis.
P. 
Water Horehound.
Lycopus Europceus.
P. — 
Vernal Grafs.
Anthoxantbum odoratum.
P. 
Triandrous Plants.
Great wild Valerian.
Faleriana officinalis.
P. 
Marfli Valerian.
^. dioica.
P. 
Lambs Lettuce : Corn Sallet.
F. Locujla.
A. 
Flag-fljwer : Yellow Flower-de-luce.
Iris 1 
Pfeud Acorus.
P. i 
Stinking Gladwyn.
l.fatidiffima.
P. — 
Hill.
Ray.
_ 
482.1.
136.1.
4<> I.I .
136.
519- 
,•38.
289.
91.1.
2 2S I .
91.3.
281.
92.6.
279.4.
92.5.
280.7.
95.1.
280.8.
95.2.
280.9.
95'3- 
280.10.
107.
1. 
2oI.I» 
356.
236.
J J J 
2 ;6, 
4^9.
398.
:40.i.
200.1.
JT J 
200.
i.x.
t42.I.
201.
1, 
472.1.
374.
+73-3.
i75-3- 
504.1.
426.4.
426.5.
504.1.
i.28.1.
504.6.
429.7.
506.
+35- 
497.1.
393'2- 
500.
400.1.
Grasses.
«"*2p Long-rooted Baftard Cyperus.
Schanus Ma- 7 
r'lfcus.
P. 3 
10.
Millet Cyperus Grafs.
Scirpus Jyl'vaticus.
P. 
ai.
BullRufh.
S.lacujiris.
P. 
az.
Club K ulli, or Aglet-headed Rufli.
S. pahjlris 
11.
Cotton Grafs.
Enophoron polyjiachion.
P. — 
^4.
Mat Grafs.
Nardus JiriSla. P.
— = — 
Reed Canary Grafs : Great Reed Grafs, with } 
chaffy heads, fhalaris arundinacea.
A. i 
5. Male Speedtvell.
Gunnery in the Flora Nortmgtcay fays this fpecies is more parti- 
cularly acceptable to ftieep.
The fame author obfei ves, that all the animals on whom 
ihefe experiments were tried, greedily eat the Paul's Bttony : Veronica jtrpylitfoiiay which is 
sot uacommon on our dry p3ftures.
12.
Butter-ioorti or Torhpire S ankle.
Wherever this plant is found, it is a certain 
Indication of a boggy foil.
It has long had the reputation of being noxious to flieep, 
among our country people, who believe it gives them the rot^ whenever they eat i^ 
which they will not, but from great nece/Tity : they hence called this plant IVhite Rot.
ParkirfeSt 
15.
Vernal Grafs.
Fine hay owes much of its grateful odour to the abundance of this 
grafs amongft it, Scheuchx.
It is one of the firft flowering grafleSj in the fpririg, and is 
Tcry common in our fertile pa(^ures.
19.
Flag-Jiower.
This ever remains untouched by all thefe animals except goats, 
ihcygh ev?iy herb arQUJ>4 it bs coafuq^ed to til?
groand, l<in^ Tkc fame obferyation we 
[ 385 ] 
accommodated to the English Plants.
0. 
Sh.
H. 
s. 
1 
0 
0 
0 
I 
2 
0 
1 
0 
0 
c 
3 
] 
J 
0 
1 
5- 
I 
6. 
1 
7- 
] 
8. 
] 
1 
9- 
; 
I 
0 
10.
I 
0 
0 
11.
1 
12.
0 
0 
0 
13- 
0 
c 
1 
0 
14.
0 
I 
0 
315 
1 
I 
16 
I 
0 
c 
17 
1 
18 
1 
19 
G 
1 
0 
0 
0 
*20 
0 
Q 
**20 
20 
I 
1 
I 
0 
21 
0 
1 
0 
I 
22 
0 
I 
0 
I 
23 
0 
I 
0 
0 
^4 
10 
I 
I 
I 
0; 
*5 
I 
1 
I 
I 
0 
In fait marfhes, common.
8, 9.
In ftanding waters and nonds.
5. 
In hedges and woods.
5. 
[n woods and thickets.
6, 7.
In dry paftures and woods.
5. 
[n meadows and paftures, very common.
4— 6» 
In dry paftures, common.
5 — 8.
[n corn fields and fallow ground.
4—6.
In (hallow waters, common.
6, 7.
With the foregoing.
7, 8.
In watery places, not common.
6. 
On bogs, efpecially in the North.
5, 6, 
By way fides, and wafte places, i, 7.
By ditches and brooks, common, 7.
In meadows and paftures every where.
5. 
In woods, hedges, and by waters.
6. 
In moift and boggy meadows.
7. 
Amongft corn, and on corn grounds.
4, 5.
In watery places.
7, 
Under hedges and bufties, in the South.
7. 
On bogs, and in fait marlhes.
7, 8.
By rivers and brooks.
7. 
In waters.
7, 8.
In brooks and watery grounds.
7. 
On bogs.
6 — 8.
On dry paftures and heaths.
6, 7.
By waters, very common.
7. 
have made relating to the Sthkitig Gladwyn, which is not uncommon In lanes, and under 
hedges, in the Weft of England.
**20.
Bajiard Cyperus, This plant is faid to be very noxious, and even fatal to cows 
that €at it.
Gunner.
21.
Bu/l Rujh.
The peafants of Sweden, in defe£l of hay, fodder their cows with 
SttllRuihes.
aa.
Cluh Rujb.
Swine are extremely fond of the roots of this kind of Rufh, and feek 
it with great avidity J and the peafants of Sweden ftock themfelves with thefe roots for 
ivinter food for thefe animals.
23.
Cotton Grafs, Both horfes and cows will eat this plant in its young ftate, before U 
throws out the Qotton.
Gunner.
25.
Reed Canary Grafs.
Cows are very fond of this grafs, and the peafants in the 
fouthern provinces of Sweden are fenfible of it, and mow two crops in a year for theU; 
»fc FA^ff, 
C s « Cat> 
[ 386 ] 
• 46.
a6.
sy.
•27.
28.
19.
SC- 
SI- 
3.2,.
33' 
34.
35- 
36.
37.
3B.
59- 
40 
41.
42.
43- 
44- 
45- 
46.
47.
48.
49.
fO' 
5»" 
5^' 
5V 
54.
55' 
56.
57.
58.
59< 
Cat's -tall Grafs : Tim ofhy- Grafs.
Phleum 7 
pratenfe.
B.   j 
Meadov/ Fox- tail Grafs.
Alopecurus pratevjis.
P. 
Flote Fox-tail Grafs, y^.
genkulatus.
P. — 
Rough Cocks-foot Grafs.
Da£iyl'u glotneraia, P.
Millet Grafs.
Milium effujum.
A. 
Melic Grafs.
Melka nutans.
P. 
Silky, or Corn Bent Grafs.
Jgrofiis ^picaFenti.
A. 
Brown Bent Grafs.
A. cuvina.
P. 
Red Bent Grafs.
A, rubra, (nunc Miliuvi len- ( 
digerum) A» — \ 
Creeping Bent Grafs.
A. Jlolonifera.Y , - 
Fine Bent Grafs.
A. capillari;.
P. ^ 
Turfy Hair Grafs.
Air a cafpitofa.
P. 
Mountain Hair Grafs.
A. jiixuofa.
P.   
Water Hair Grafs, A.
aquaiica.
P.   
Purple Hair Grafs.
A. cterulea, (^nunc Melica 
carulea) P.
Meadow So-ft Grafs, holcus lanatus.
Y, — 
Creeping Soft Grafs.
H. mollis.
P. 
Reed Meadow Grafs.
Foa aquatica.
P. — 
Creeping Meadow Gi afs.
P. coniprejja.
A. — 
Suffolk Grafs : Annual Meadow Gi als.
Annua.
K. 
Great Meadow Grafs.
Poa prat£?^fis.
P. 
Common Meadow Grals.
P. tri-zialis.
P. — 
Narrow-leaved Meadow Grafs.
/ •.
amgvf iJoUa.A 
Quaking Grafs.
Eri-za niedja.
P. 
Cretted Dog-tail Grals.
Cjnofurru crijlatus.
P. 
Blue Dog-tail Grafs.
C.carulsus.
P. — — 
Field Brome Grals.
Brovius mcllis.
A. 
Corn Brome Grafs.
B. arnjen/is.
P. 
Wall Brome Grafs.
B. te8orum.
A. — 
Spiked Brome Grafs.
B. pinnatus.
P. .
Barren Brome Grafs.
B. Jierilis.
A, .
Sheep's Ftfcue Grals.
Fejiuca o'vina.
P. — 
Hard and Purple Fel(:ue Grafs.
P. rubra.
P. 
Small Fefcue Grafs.
P. decumbens.
P. — 
Tail Meadow Fefcue Grafs.
P. elatior.
P. — 
Flote Felbue Grafs.
P.fiuitans.
P. 
Meadow Oat Grafs.
A^vena pratenfis.
P. — 
MorfC 
Hill.
iiUJ .
Kay, 
§ 8.
398.1.2.
f.i.
'. Q 6 .
I .
i 8 
4-9S.
; 96.2.
502.33.
l-oo.a.
'..38.
500.
\Ot.'i, 
5.10.
500.6.
: L03.6.
'^.49.
300.4.
^.05.
17.
5.1.
394.4.
5 
!.02.2.
7 
} 
104.9,10, 
4-02.4.
4.03.5.
-(-O7.8.9.
7.9- 
-00.2.
I-O2.3.
4-04.8.
5.22, 
4.04.14.
501.24.
il I.l 3.
5 .2 c.
CQ.C.
7 J 
501.
,08.1.
i:.2i.
+OQ .
1 .
5 • J.
0 • 
4OQ.
2. 
too.
4..
1 • ?
• 
502.
J.I 2.
I .
6. AC.
4-99« 
;q8.2.
499.' 
;qq.4.
'77 ~ 
501 .
3.5.
7.r8.
4.14.8.
7.16.
413.2.
' J 
.4...
4.12.
1. 
7,1 I .
501.
IIO.Q.
oOI.
41 3.4.
,501.
,4.08.11.
1.6.
COI .
z. « i» 
,501.
.1.12.17.
.3.16.
501.
4.05.1.2.
^ ♦26.
Notwithftanding the charaaer this grafs acquired from Le Rogue's recommenda- 
tion, fheep diliike it, neither are cows or horfes fond of it.
26.
Miadoio Fox-fail Grafs.
This is amongft the moft grateful of all grafifes to cattle, 
4c.
Creeping Scft Graf.
This is one of the grafles ftrongiy recommerded for culture by 
M. Sihreler, Profeflbr of Economy at Erlavg ; in his book on this fubjtdt, he fajs it is pe» 
culiarly grateful to cattle, and particularly to fheep.
41.
Reed Meadoio Grafs.
Linnaus ftrenuouily recom.mends the culture of this grafs, 
which is common by our river fides, as a moil excellent food, and what horfes, cows, and 
flieep, are exceedingly fond of, 
43—45.^ Meadoiv Graffcs.
Amongft that variety of grafles with which our country 
abounds, thefe are the moft frequent in all thofe paftures that we call fertile and good : 
there are fcarceiy any paftures that do not alfo contain a variety of other graffes, many of 
which are equally acceptable to cattle.
54.
Shtep\ Fefcue Grafs.
Of all others this grafs is the peculiar delight of the iheep; 
wid ihcy will feled it witii the greatell care.— de^Uuti coUes aut triuta nec cvibus 
grat» 
[ 387 3 
0. 
Sh.
rl.
v3.
•zS.
J 
] 
0 
a6.
I 
1 
10 
27.
•ay.
ag.
I 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
«9- 
] 
1 
30.
0 
I 
31- 
0 
32.
.0 
J 
33- 
• 
34- 
I 
I 
35- 
36.
I 
I 
10 
I 
1 
37- 
I 
I 
3<>- 
I 
39- 
I 
1 
J 
I 
40.
I 
I 
I 
J 
41.
I 
I 
I 
42.
^ 
I 
1 1 
1 
43- 
I 
I 
I 
44- 
I 
) 
I 
45' 
46.
J 
i 
I 
1 
I 
1 
I 
I 
1 
47.
48.
I 
' 
I 
1 
' 
49- 
I 
1 
0 
50.
1 
I 
I 
51- 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
52- 
I 
53- 
I 
1 
I 
54.
n 
55- 
56.
I 
57.
58.
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
59.
1 .
1 
J 
In paftiii es, and on the borders of fields.
7. 
In meadows and paftures every where.
5, 
in watery places, very common.
6 — 8.
n meadows and paftures every where.
6— S, 
In woods and thickets.
6, 7.
11 woods and dry paftures.
6, 7.
In corn fields, among ftandingcorn.
7. 
in low paftures, common.
7, 8.
In low paftures, not common.
^. 
In meadows and about thickets.
8* 
Oti hilly paftures every where.
8. 
[n woods, paftures, in rnoift places.
7, 8.
On dry paftures.
7,8.
In marftiy wet grounds, not common.
6, 7, 
Dn bogs, heaths, and marfties.
8. 
in meadows and paftures every where.
6, 7« 
In woods and hedges.
7, 
A.bout waters, common.
7,8.
In dry places, and on walls.
6. 
In meadows and paftures every where.
5 — 9.
With the foregoing.
6, 7, 
vVith the foregoing.
6, 8.
In hedges and wojds.
7. 
Ill meadows and paftures every where.
6, 
(n paftures every where.
8. 
n mountainous paftures, not common.
7. 
In meadows and paftures every where.
5, 6.
On the borders of fields.
7. 
On dry paftures, not common.
5. 
On dry paftures.
6. 
\bout hedges, very common.
6,7.
On hilly and mountainous paftures.
6, 7.
On dry paftures, common.
6. 
On barren moift paftures, near the fea.
8. 
[n meadows and paftures, not uncommon.
7. 
[n ditchts and watery places every where.
6, 7, 
On heaths, dry meadows, and paftures.
7. 
grata erant.— This is not the obfervation of LiriKaus alone : Gmelln has confirmed it ; he tells 
us, that theT^/-;<2r;, who live a migratory life, tending their flocks and herds, alvkfays in the 
fummer-time choofe places where this grafs abounds, on account of its acceptablenefs, 
efpecially to the ftieep.
It is found on dry mountainous paftures in moft parts of Europe, 
and in England is common on downs and uplands.
The fuperiority of our wool in fome 
parts of England may poflibly be owing to a particular food which the fheep meet with in 
different places j and it might be worth enquiry, whether this grafs may not have a great 
ihare in producing this effeft.
In general, we know that wool to be the fineft which is 
bred on high paftures ; but all fuch paftures are not equal in this refpedl.
Until a better 
reafon be afligned for this difi^erence, may it not be afcribed to the difference of their 
food?
57.
Tall Meadoiv Fejcue Grafs.
Wherever this grafs Is found, it indicates the beft of 
foil, and it is among the naoft acceptable of all to cattle.
Its culture is much enforced by 
^(brtbtr.
60.
Bearded 
C 388 ] 
60.
Bearded Oat Grafs : Haver.
A^jena falud.
P 
Ci. Tall Oat Grafs.
A W«/zV.
P. — — 
62.
Yellow Oat Grafs.
A. fia^vefcens.
P. • 
63.
Common Reed.
Arundo phragjnites.
P. • — 
64.
Branched Reed Grafs.
A, Calamagrojiis.
P. — 
65.
Corn Darnel.
Lolium temulentum.
A. 
66.
Perennial Darnel Ray Grafs.
perenne.
P. — 
67.
Dog's Grafs, Couch Grafs, or V/heat Grals.
? 
Triticum re pens.
P. S 
68.
S)t2L hymt Grzh^ Slymus arenarius.
P. — 
69.
Water Chickweed.
Montta palujiris.
A. — 
7a.
Wall Barley.
Hordeum 7nuriniim.
A. — • 
7T.
72.
73- 
74- 
75- 
76.
77.
78.
79- 
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
S8.
SO.
91.
92.
93' 
94, 
Tetrandrous Plants.
Field Scabious.
Scabiofa ar-venfis.
P. — 
LefTer Field Scabious.
.S".
columbaria.
P. — 
Devil's Bit. S.fuccifa.
P. 
Little Field Madder.
Sberardia ar'venfv.
P. 
Woodroof.
Afperula odoraia.
P. 
Squinancy-Woit.
A. cynanchica.
P. 
Ladies Bed-Straw.
Galium njerum.
P. — 
Great Battard Madder.
G. Mollugo.
P. 
CrofTwort Madder.
G. boreale.
P. 
CrolTwort : Mucrwecd.
FalantiaCriidata.V .
Goofe Grafs : Cliver?^ Galium Aparine.
A. 
Great Plantain.
Plant ago major.
A. — 
Hoary Plantain.
P. media.
P. 
Ribwort Plantain.
P. lanceolata.
P. 
Buck's-horn Plantain.
P. Coranopus.
A. — 
Sea Plantain.
P. tnaritiyna.
P. 
Burnet.
Sanguiforba officinalis.
P. — - 
Dogberry Tree.
Cornus fanguinea.
— 
Ladies Mantle.
Alckemiila 'vulgaris, P.
Cinquefoil Ladies Mantle, A.
alpina.
P. — 
Broad-leaved Pondweed.
Potamogeionnatans.
P 
Perfoliated Pondweed.
P. perfoliatum.
P. — 
Long-leaved Pondweed.
P. luc-ens.
P. — 
Pearl Wort.
Sagina procumbens.
A, — ~ 
Hill.
501.
500.
Pentandrcus Plants.
55.
Moufe-ear Scorpion Grafs.' Mjofotis fcorpi- ?
oid€s.
a. P.
- • i 
96.
Water Scorpion Grafs.
M. palujlris.
b. 
97.
GromwelL Lithofpermum officinale.
P. 
98.
Baftard Alkanet.
L. ar'venfe.
A. 
99.
Hound's -tongue.
Cj?iogloJfu?n vulgare.
P. 
181.
16.
464.1.
464.2.
464.3.
396.
398.
399.
397- 
397-I.
397.2.
396.
398.
1 52.1.
153.2.
153.3- 
153.6.
I53-5- 
346.
517.
.492.
492.
488.
488.
489.
226.2.
391.
391.
390.
387.
386.
Ray.
589.
+06.4.
^ 
407.5.
401.1.
401.2.
395.1.
395-»« 
390.1.
390.3.
3S2.
39X.1.2.
T91.1.
191.
2. 
191.3.
225.
224.
225.
224.
223.1.
224.3.
223.
225.1.
3 14.
1. 
314.3- 
3H-5- 
315.8.
315-7- 
203.2.
i6o.
158.
1. 
158.2.
148.
1. 
149.4.
148.2.
34-5-2- 
229.1.
229.4.
228.
227.3' 
226.1.
64.
Branched Reed Grafs.
Cows will fometimes eat this grafs, but it Is hurtful to tlien|r 
•n account of its purging quality.
67, Couch Grafs h to be found in great plenty in feme parts' of Europe In the corn- 
:Selds, even to the obftrudtion of the plough.
Gunner fays he has feen horfes and horned 
cattle, accuftomed to it, eat the roots v?ith avidity j and that they are coUeded for thif 
|arpofe by the hufbandmen.
85, Ladies Mmile* Dr, Hallepy in his Iter Meheticumy tells us, that the aflonifhlng 
[ 389 ] 
0. G.
Sh.
H 
S. 
I 
1 
I 
I 
w2t 
I 
I 
63.
I 
I 
0 
0 
64.
!0 
•00, 
I 
IC 
1 1 
€7.
I 
I 
0 
1 
T 
0 
69.
0 
0 
c 
70' 
I 
' 
10 
I 
72.
73- 
J 
' 
0 
74- 
0 
0 
75- 
7 
J 
I 
I 
76.
I 
c 
77- 
f 0 
f 
0 
78.
^ 
' 
I ; 
79- 
I 
I 
c .
%o.
1 
I 
c 
2SI.
3 
I 
S2.
0 
f 
I 
c 
J 
83, 
0 
I 
84.
c 
1 
; 
] 
-Q _ 
<00« 
: 10 
! 
«7« 
I 
I 
I 
0 
' 
I 
lO 
i 
1 
3 
0 
c 
^ » • 
i 
] 
0 
c 
92.
G 
0 
c 
c 
93- 
0 
0 
0 
94.
I 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
96.
0 
0 
0 
97- 
0 
) 
0 
98.
10 
I 
0 
c 
99- 
0 
1 
0 
0 
In corn fields, not very common.
^. 
About hedges and buflies every wherci 7.
In palhires every where.
7. 
In rivets and lakes, common.
7, 
About hedges.
Sec. in moift places about woods.
6, 7* 
Among tlie corn.
7^ 8.
In paiiuies, and by the way fides.
5^ 
In fields, and about hedges.
6 — 8.
On the fea coall, not common.
5, 6..
About fprings and brooks.
4. 
In meadows, and by way fides.
4 — ^8., 
About corn fields, common.
"8.
In dry paliures, common.
6, 7.
In meadows and pafKucs, common.
6 — S.
Oil plowed or fallow lands.
7, 8.
in woo;is.
5. 
On upland chalky grounds.
7, 8.
In mtadows, and the borders of fields.
7. 
in hedges, very common.
6, 7.
On upland padures in the North.
6 — 8.
In paltures, and about hedges and bufties.
5, 6, 
About hedges, very common.
5 — 8.
3y way iides every vvhere j in paftures.
6, 7.
v.Vith the foregoing.
7, 8.
[n meadows and paikues every where.
6, 8.
\n gravelly ground, and on the fea coaii, 7, 84 
[n lea marlhes.
6, 7.
In padures, common.
6, 7, 
in woods and hedges,.
6, 
[n upland paftures and meads.
6, 8.
[p, mountainous grounds, not common., 
[n wa'ers, common.
S. 
in riven:, frequent.
6, 7.
m rivers and (landing waters.
€^ 
On fandy paftures.
6,« 
In dry paferes* 4—?.
About brooks, fprings, and ditclies.
4 — 8< 
By the road fides : dry paftures.
5, 6.
In corn fields.
5, 6.
In lanes, and by road fides.
6. 
rkhnefs of the milk in the famous dairi'es of tbe ^'ps, defcribed by Scheuckxer, Is attrl- 
|)Uted entirely to the plenty of this plant, and that of the R'lbivort Plantain, 
95.
Mouje-ear Scorfjcn Grafs.
Conftantly refufed by all thefe animals.
96.
Water Scorpion Grafs, This is confidered as only a variety of the former, owing to 
its place of growth, which renders the plant larger in all its parts, and deftroys the hairy- 
refs of its leaves.
It is common in watery places, and the peep will fometimes eat it, 
io which cafe it is frequently fatal to them, as Linnaus difcovsred in hi$ Iter Gotlandkum.
C c 3 100.
Comfrey.
[ 39° ] 
100.
Comfrey.
Symphytum majus.
P. — 
101.
Small wild Buglofs.
Lycopfis ar<venjis.
A. — 
102.
Viper's Buglofs.
Echium vulgare.
F. •— 
103.
Primrofe and Cowflip.
Primula.
'vulgaris.
P. 
104.
1P5- 
J 06, 
107.
108.
109.
110.
III.
112.
114.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
329.
130.
531.
132.
M3- 
134.
335- 
136.
138- 
J39- 
J40.
X41.
142.
Bird's Eye. P.farinofa.
P. 
Buck-bean.
Menyiunthes trifoliata.
P. — 
Water Violet.
Hottonia falujiris.
P. — 
Water Pimpernel.
Samolus P'alerandi.
P. 
Yellow Willow Herb.
Ly/imachia 'vulgaris.
Money Wort.
L. Nummularia.
P. — 
Red Pimpernel.
Anagallis arnjenfis.
A. — 
Small Bindweed.
Convolvulus arvenfis.
Great Bindweed.
C. fefium.
P. 
Round-leaved Bell Flower.
Campanula 
tundifolia.
P. — 
Giant Throatwort.
C. latifolia.
P. 
Great Throatwort.
C. Trachelium.
P. — 
Henbane.
Hyofcyamus niger.
A. 
Great White Mullein.
Ferbafiufn I'hapfus.
B 
Black Mullein.
^. nigrum.
P. 
White-flowered Mullein.
Lychnitis.
B. — 
Common NiohtHiade.
Solar.um nigrum.
A. 
Woody Nightfhade.
S. Dulcamara.
P. — 
Ivy. He J era Helix.
^ 
Honeyfuckle.
Lonicira CaprifoHum.
Buckthorn.
Rha?nnus Catharticus.
Black Berry-bearing Alder.
R. Frangula.
— 
Spindle Tree.
Euonyrnus Eiiropceus, 
Goofebcrry Bull).
Ribes Grcffularia.
— 
Red Currants.
R. rubrum.
Sweet Currants.
R.alpinvm.
Sea Milkwort.
Glaux maritima.
P. 
Autumnal Gentian.
Gentiana Amarella.
A. 
Centoiy.
G. Qentaurium.
A. 
Dodder.
Cufcuta Europaa.
A. — — 
Prickly GlalT.vort.
Salfola Kali.
A. — 
Common Englifti Meicury.
Chencpodmrn 
Bonus Henricus.
P. —     
Goofefoot, or Sowbane.
C. murale.
A. — 
Common Orach.
C. album.
A. 
Maple-leaved Blite.
C. hybriJum, A.
Stinking Orach.
C. olida.
A. 
Round-leaved Blite.
C. polyfpermum.
A. — 
Common Elm. Ulmus campejiris.
- 
Marlh Pennywort.
Hydrocotyle vulgaris, P.
Hill.
Ray.
591.
387.1.
388.1 
69.1.
78.
)6.
65.
67.
57.2.
57.1.
70.1.
-4.1.
^8.4.
^8.3.
;26.3 
3261.
^16.
5.6.
-20.
S20.
521.
78.
5 1.
2. 
62.1.
490.
490.
490.
1.9 o.
490.2 
4-90.9- 
522.
419.
130.
227.
227.
285.
285.
285.
Z83.
282.
.83.
282.1.
275.2.
275.1.
277.5.
.'.76.2.
Z74.
187.1.
188.4.
i87.3.
165.4.
Z65.I.
4-5 9' 
158.
;-66.
^65.
168.
456.1.
1-56.2.
^85.
^7 5.
?86.
^8x.
: 
C59.
156.
154.2.
'54 I- 
156.13.
157.18.
468.
222.
117, TVhtte Mullein, called alfo Coiv^s Lung-wort, from the great reputation it had for- 
jnerly with our country people for inveterate coughs among the horned cattle.
Parkinfon 
lells us it was uled in his time, in fuch cafes, w th great fjccefs, and it yet retains the 
fame credit in fome parts of Europe.
Gunner.
Loefel.
125.
Black Berry.
bearing Alder.
The bark of this tree is fald to be the moft certain 
pvrge for the horned cattle in obftinate conftipations of the bowels.
Lin. Gunner fays, 
horfes do not eat the leaves, but that cows fometimes will, and that it greatly increafca 
she milk.
i 3 $' Ergli/b Mercury, Common about farm-yards.
The country people give the root 
[ 391 ] 
0. 
G. 
Sh 
H. 
s. 
100.
I 
0 
— 
— 
0 
— 
JO J , 
I 
I 
c 
X'02 • 
Q 
103.
OJ 
I 
I 
0 
0 
0 
J 
3 0 C.
0 
J ' 
1 0 
c 
0 
106.
IC7.
c ' 
1^8.
1 
I 
10 
c' 
c 
JO 9.
I 
10 
I 
c 
110.
1 
0 
Ill, 
I 
I • 
1 
I 
0 
S I 2r.
J 
IJ3.
I 
i; 
I 
I. 
0 
I 
lie.
I 
0 
s 16.
0 
0 1 
0 
117* 
Q 
c 
1 iS.
0 ' 
1 0 
c 
"J 
t 1 Q.
0 
0 
0 
0 
c 
1 2O.
0 
Q 
0 
0 
c 
X 2 I .
I 
] 
c 
0 
S22.
Q 
0 
I 
S-23.
^ 
c 
1 
} 
I 2 C.
0 
326.
c 
I c 
i 
128.
I 
J 
I 
1 0 
529.
I 
I 
1 
130.
I 
I 
c 
132.
10 
I 
01 
I 
c 
I 
s 3+.
0 
c 
) 
c 
c, 
1-3 5- 
I 
10 
IC 
) 
c 
c 
I 
I 
I 
c 
I 
117.
f 
I 
I 
c 
1 1 
138.
I 
1 
I 
1 39.
J 
140.
I 
0 
I 
c 
HI.
I 
I 
I 
I 
142.
in moid places and by river fides.
5—8, 
In corn fields and fallow land.
6 — 9, 
On fallow ground, and by way fides.
7> ?.
[n hedges and paftures.
3 — 5.
On boggy movintains in the Noith, 5.
L\ watery pits and bogs.
6, 7..
Ln ditches, bogs, and marllies.
7, 8.
i'n moilt meadows and marfhes near the fea« 5.
By waters.
6, 7.
Ln wet -meadows, and about ditches.
6, 
la com fields, and on fandy places.
5 — 8.
n corn fields every where, 6,7.
In hedges, efpecially in moift places.
7, 8* 
On dry barren paftures, and on heaths.
8, 
In bufhes a-nd hedges, not common.
8. 
In woods and hedges.
7, 8.
In waftti places, rarm yards, about villages^i 6.
By way fides, in lanes.
7. 
By way fides, not very common.
7, 
In fandy and chalky foil, not common.
7. 
About dunghills, common.
6, 7.
In wet hedgrs, and wood?.
6, 7.
In hedges, and woods and thickets.
9, io« 
fn hedges and woods.
5, 7, 
In woods, and hedges and thickets.
4, 5.
In woods, &c.
4, 5.
Ln woods and hedges.
4, 5.
Ill hedges.
5. 
In woods ajid hedges.
5. 
In hedoes in the North, not common.
On the coalt, in fait marflies, 7.
On upland paftuies.
7, 8.
With the foregoing.
6 — 8.
On heaths, among corn.
7. 
On the fea coaft.
7, 8.
[n farm yards, and wafte places, common, S, 
About dunghills and manured fpots.
8. 
In cultivated places, and among corn.
8» 
In walte places and cultivated fpots.
8. 
In like places with the foregoing, 8.
In wafte places, and on dunghills, 8.
In hedges, &c.
4. 
On bogs and marfiiy grounds, 5.
to their fheep in obftinate coughs.
Lift, 
136.
Goofefoot, or Sowbane.
This has the charafler of being polfonous to fwine ; yet It 
appears that thefe animals will eat it.
Almoft all the old writers give it the charafter of a 
polfonous plant, and yohn Baubine particularly avers, that it iS fo to thefe animals 3 as do 
alfo fome of the more modern writers.
142.
Marjh Pennywort.
It does not appear that any experiments v?ere made with this 
plant.
It is very common in marfhy grounds with us, and our farmers are of opinion that 
\t gives /Keep the rot, and thence call it White Ret, In this light Parkinfon mentions it.
C £4 
14.5.
Sanicle.
C 392 ] 
X4.5.
Sanicle.
Sanicula Europaa.
P. — 
144.
Wild Carrot.
Daucus Car at a.
B. • 
145.
Hemlock.
Con'ium maculatum.
A. 
146.
Cow Parfnip.
Heracleum Spondyl'mm.
B. — 
147.
Wild Angelica.
Angelica jylnjejhis, P.
— 
148.
Great Water Parfnip.
Stum latifoliufn.
P. — 
149.
Water Dropwort.
Oe?ianthe jiftulofa.
P. — 
150.
Hemlock Dropwort.
O.crocata, P.
351.
Water Hemlock.
Phellandr'ium aquat.
B. — 
152.
Long-leaved Water Hemlock.
Ciciita njirofh.
153.
Fools Parfley.
JEthufaCynap'ium,.
A. 
S54.
Hemlock Cherv^il.
Scandix Anthrifcus.
A. — 
155.
Wild Cicely, or Cow-weed.
Cbarophyllutn 7 
fyh'efire.
A.   I 
156.
Wild Chsml.
C.temulum.
A. 
J 57.
Burnet Saxifrage.
PimpineUa Saxifraga.
P. 
158.
Herb Gerard: Gout- weed.
/Egopodium Poda- 1 
graria.
?. ' S 
159.
Smallage.
Aphim palujire, B.
160.
Water Elder.
Viburnum Opulus.
16.1.
Common Elder.
Sambucus nigra.
• 
J62.
Dwarf Eider.
S.Ebulus.
P. 
363.
Grafs of ParnafTus. Parnajia pahjiris.
P. — 
364.
Thrift: Sqz GiWl^io^Ntv.' Static e Ar me ria.
P. 
365.
Sea Lavender.
5. Limonium, P.
366.
Purging Flax.
Linum Cathariicum, A.
— 
*j66.
Sun- dew.
Drofera rotundifolia.
B. ' 
Hexandrous Plants.
367.
Ramfon.
Allium urfiKum. P.
— — .
368.
Crow Garlick.
A. njineale.
P. — — 
369.
Lancafiiire Ai'phodel.
Antbericum offifragum.
P. 
370.
Lilly of the Valley.
Con<vallaria majaiv, — 
171.
Wild Sparagus.
Afparagus q^.cinalis, P.
— 
372.
Sweet-fmelling Flag.
Acorus Calamus.
P» — 
373.
Common foft Rufh.
Juncus fffufus.
P. ~ 
374.
Common round-headed Rufii.
J.congljmeratus.
175.
Bulbofe RuHi. J.
bulbojiu.
P. 
176.
Toad Grafs.
J. bufomus.
A. — 
377.
Common hairy Wood Ku{\\.=f J.
pilofu-.
P. — 
378.
Small hairy Wood Ruili.
J. cainptfiris.
P. 
379.
Barberry Bufh.
Berberis 'vulgaris.
380.
Water Dock.
Rumex aquaticus.
P. 
Hill.
Ray 
Flor.
Dan.
22 
. 
283.
415.
21 
8. 
7^3' 
ATI.
2 1 
Art T .
20 
5.1.
405.
20S.
408.
21 
246.
407.
210.
407.
210.
412.
215.
409.
21 
2.7.
208.
i-I I .2.
Z I 
5-^ 
416.7.
220.7 
404.2.
20 
7. 
404* ^ • 
20 
7. 
ii 
3- 
669.
405.
20 
8. 
670.
411.
2T 
4- 
790.
460.
661.
518.
461.
545- 
« I 8 
46 
I .
'92.
3 55- 
584.
34S' 
20 
3- 
aoi.
315- 
^6 
2. 
187.
356.
±67.
c .
r 
0.5.
757.
, 
4.67 .
1 .
9.1.
375- 
42.
5 22.
264.
525.
267.
805.
507.
437- 
CD r .
43 
2.4 
«:o c .
43^-5 
505.
434.
J 
I. 
431- 
505- 
43 
4 I 
502.
416.3.
441.
502.
41 
6.1 
520.
46 
5» 
485.
14 
0.1 
146.
C010 Parfnip.
The cows are known to be particularly fond of this plant j and 
Mr. Ray obferves that the rabbits are no lefs fo.
151.
Common Water Hemlock.
This plant is very common \n England.
It is a well- 
Jcnown fa£l in Sweden, that hoifes will eat it, and that it frequently proves fatal to them 
by inducing a palfy : - this effect, neverthelefs, is judged to be owing to an infedl, which 
inhabits in great plenty the ftaJks^f this herb, and from this fingular eifed is called by 
LiNN/Eus, Curculio paraplefiicus, when in its perfefl ftate, as the Lafva only exifts in this 
vegetable.
The fame caterpillar is found in the Water Parfnip alfo in England.
152, Long-leaved Water Hemlock, Happily this plant is not very com.Tion in England : 
_ the roots are the moft virulent vegetable poifon that is indigenous here.
Linn/eus, in 
the Flora Lapponka, N° 103, gives a dreadful account of the havock it frequently made 
among the horned cattle in Lapland, where it is common in the meadows near the fea, 
»nd where thefe cattle will frequently eat it, upon being firft turned to grafs in the fpring, 
though they afterwardf refofe it : yet they wiii eat the roots at all times^ which are the 
[ 393 3 
0. 
G. 
Sh.
H. 
S. 
10 
I 
0 
144.
I 
I 
I 
145.
0 
0 
I 
0 
146.
I 
I 
I 
1 0 
I 
147.
1 
1 
0 
I 
148.
0 
0 
01 
1 
I 
14.9.
0 
0 
150.
0 
I 
0 
151.
0 
1 
I 
I 
01 
1 5Z.
0 
1 
1 
I 
1 
I 
1 
I 
154.
I 
I 
ass- 
10 
10 
xo 
10 
0 
ise.
' 157.
1 
I 
I 
3 
I 
i5».
I 
i'59.
10 
I 
0 
160.
I 
I 
I 
0 
j6u 
0 
0 
I 
0 
162.
0 
0 
0 
c 
0 
i6i.
0 
10 
I 
0 
164.
0 
1 
I 
0 
165.
I 
t66.
X 
I 
01 
167.
I 
168.
I 
I 
I 
169.
1 
0 
J 
0 
I/O.
0 
» 
I 
c 
0 
.171.
1 
I 
I 
0 
0 
I7Z.
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
173- 
I 
1 
174.
I 
01 
175.
I 
I 
I 
1 
176.
\ 
177- 
0 
I 
I 
i 
178.
I 
I 
1 
179- 
I 
I 
0 
0 
180.
0 
0 
I 
0 
0 
In woods and hedges, common.
5, 6.
In meadows and padures, common.
6,7.
By hedges, and on the banks ot ditches, 6, 7, 
About hedg-es, rivers, and in pafturfes,.
7. 
In moid woods, in vv'atery places.
6, 7.
In rivers, ponds, and marftiy places.
7,2.
In marHies, and in ditches, common.
7. 
By the fides of rivers and brooks.
6,7.
in rivers and ditches, common.
On the banks of rivers and ponds, &c.
7 — 9.
In corn iieids, and on banks of ditches.
8. 
Hedges, wafie places j among corn-, every where.
5, 6, 
About hedges, very common: orchards.
5, 6.
With the former, every where : orchards.
7, 2, 
On dry paftures.
g. 
In hedges, and often the peft of gardens.
6, 
About waters, efpecially near the fea.
8. 
In moiil woods, and hedges.
5, 6.
In moili: hedges.
4. 
In hedges by way fides, in church yards.
7, 
In mardiy vneadows, not common.
8. 
In fait marflies, common.
7,8.
On the fea coafc, and with the foregoing.
On diy and upland paflures.
5, 6.
On bogs and heaths.
7. S.
In woods, hedges, and tliickets.
5. 
In meadows and pailures, 5.
On boggy grounds, not very frequent.
! 
Ill vv'oods, not common.
5. 
About the coaft, and in i'ait raarlhes.
7, 
In rivers, fcarce.
5. 
In and about waters.
5 — 8, 
Wet paftures, and woods.
In moift raan'hes and heaths, common.
: 
In gravelly foil, about Handing waters.
In tliick woods.
4, 5.
In dry turly meadows and paftures.
4. 
In woods and hedges.
5. 
In and about rivers and lakes.
7, 8.
mofl: viruleat parts of the plant.
Bi&op Gunner and Gmelln both confirm thefe bad ef- 
fects.
It is yet doubtful whether horfes are hurt by it ; and certain that goats are de- 
lighted with it, and eat it wichont any fubTequent ill effe6l : and the roots are collefted 
by the Norwegian peafants as fodder for those animals.
^53' Fooh Parjley, This is deleterious to the human race, although eaten by thefe 
quadrupeds.
*>i66.
Sun-de^.
Sun-dew is called by the country people i?(fJ rc^, on account of its 
deftruftive quality to fheep.
Ray.
169.
Lancap'ire AJphodel.
This plant is afo thought to be very noxious to fheep, when- 
ever through poverty of pafture they are neceltitated to eat it, although they are faid to ina- 
prove much in their flefh at firft, and aftervv'ards to die with the fymptoms of a difeafed 
liver.
This is the plane of which fuch wonderful tales have been told by Pauli, Bartbo- 
Ime, and others, of its foftening the bones of fuch animals as ate it 5 and which they 
thence called Gramen olfifragum% Horned cattle eat it without any ill effect.
Gunr^r, 
[ 394 ] 
183.
3S4.
186.
3S7.
188.
189.
190.
391.
192.
193.
394.
195- 
396.
397.
398.
199.
lOD.
Curled Dock.
R. crifpus.
P. * 
Common Sorrel.
R. aceiofa.
P. 
Sheeps Sorrel.
/?.
acetojella.
P. 
Arrow-headed Grafs.
7'riglochin falujlre.
P. 
Sea fpiked Grafs.
T. marit'imum.
P. 
Water Plantain.
Al'ifma Plant f.^o aquatica.
P. 
OCTANDROUS PlaNTS.
Rofebay Willow-herb.
Efilobiuni angufif.
— 
Hairy Willow-herb.
E. birfutum.
P. 
Smooth Willow-herb.
E, montaymm.
B. — 
Common Heath, or Ling.
Erica ^vulgaris, — 
Whorts : Whortle-berries.
Vaccinium ViUs 7 
Idaa, 5 
Black Whorts: Bilberries.
Niyrtiilus.
— 
Cranberries.
^. Oxycocctis.
• 
Golden Saxifrage.
Chryfofplenium.
P. — 
Perennial Arfiiiart.
Poijgcnum amphibium.
— 
Dead or fpotted Arfmart.
P, Perjicaria.
A. 
Water Pepper.
P. Hydropiper.
A.   
Knot Grafs.
P. a<vicularc.
A. 
Black Bindweed.
P. Hclxine.
A. • 
Heib Paris, One Berry.
Paris quadrifolia, P.
ENxNEandrous Plants.
201.
Flowering Ru-lh.
Butctnus umbcUatus.
P. 
ao2.
2103.
204.
1205.
S06.
ao7.
208.
209.
210.
231.
232.
'^212.
1X3.
214.
215.
216.
217.
218.
239.
Decandrous Plants.
Winter Green.
Pjrola rotundifoUa, P.
Marfh Cilius.
Atuircjneda polijolia.
P. 
Maiden Pirk.
Dinntbus deltoides.
P. 
Knawel, Scleranthus annuus.
A. 
White Saxifrage.
Saxifraga granulata.
Bottle Cairpioji.
Cuciibalus Behen.
P. 
White and Red Campion.
Lycknis dicica.
Chickweed.
Alfine media.
A. 
Purple Spurrey.
Araiaria rubra- A.
Com Spurrey.
Spergu>a ar'vetifis.
A. 
Sea Chickweed.
Arenaria peploides.
Moufe-ear Chickweed .
Cerojihtm njifcofum 
MarOi Moufe-ear Chickweed.
C, aquaticur 
Cockle.
Agrofunvna Githagc, A.
Meadow Pink.
Lycbnis Flos Cuculi, P.
Wood Sorrel.
Oxalis Ac-eiofella.
P. 
Orpine.
Sedum Telef hium.
P. — 
Stone Crop : Wall Pepper.
S. acre.
P. 
White-flowered Srone Crop.
S. album.
P. 
P. 
P. 
A. 
FIoi 
Hill.
Ray.
Dai 
485.
143.3.
4^5- 
143.
485.
1 4-.
SOS- 
435.
490.
SOS- 
4-35- 
306.
22.
257- 
561.
147.
J. 
310.
- 0 
2K9, 
147.2.
311.
347- 
147.3.
311.4, 
677.
5^3- 
470.1.
C16 I 
457-3- 
40.
516.3.
457.2.
3^4- 
267.
80.
491.
158.
365.
487.
145.9.
282.
4S7.
145.4.
702.
487.
144.
1. 
487.
.46.
803.
486.
144.
744- 
323.
264.
139.
35- 
273- 
604.
85.1.
363.1.
110.
523.
4.72.
54^ 
1 62.
335- 
577.
49 3- 
159- 
504.
189.
354- 
514.
164,2.
337.2.
166.8.
339-9- 
792.
I79-I.
347-6.
525- 
184.2.
351.9.
740.
184.1.
35'-7.
181.14.
351.12.
624.
18 J.
2. 
34S.3- 
179-2.
347-4- 
166.6.
33!^-5- 
576.
^65.
4. 
338-4.
590.
80.
283.
36.3, 
265.
686, 
38.6.
270.5.
38.3.
271.7.
66.
150.
313' 
725- 
218.3.
367.1.
671.
DODECANDROUS PLANTS.
*219.
Sun Sj'urge.
Euphorbia Heliojcopia.
A. — 
220.
Purple Ipiked Looftftrife.
Lythrum Salicaria.V.
185.
Sea fpiked Grafs, Cows are extremely fond of this grafs; as indeed they are of 
many other maritime plants : and etjually fo of the foregoing fpecies.
190.
Common Heath, or Lir.g. The bees are thought to get more honey from L'ltig than 
Stom any other plants 3 but what is produced from it has a reddiih caA, and is therefore not 
id much vahied.
407, Bottk Camphn.
This plant is common with us on the borders of corn-fields, and 
E 395 ] 
0. 
G. 
f 
Sh.
H. 
0 
0 
182.
1 
I 
I 
J83.
I 
I 
184.
I 
I 
185.
t I 
I 
1 
186.
0 
I 
0 
1 
187.
1 1 
I 
Q 
188.
ro 
1 
1 
189.
1 
10 
190.
1 
iO 
10 
J 
1 0 1 .
I 
1 
I 
igz.
0 
1 
0 
0 
193- 
0 
I 
0 
0 
19^.
ro 
0 
c 
195.
0 
J 
I 
I 
196.
0 
I 
197.
c 
0 
0 
0 
198.
] 
1 
I 
I 
199.
I 
1 
0 
0 
200.
0 
I 
I 
0 
aoi.
0 
0 
0 
0 
ap2.
0 
I 
0 
0 
203 .
0 
I 
0 
0 
204.
1 
1 
I 
1 
205.
0 
1 
I 
206.
0 
I 
0 
0 
207.
1 
I 
1 
I 
ao8.
I 
I 
1 
I 
209.
1 
0 
lO 
I 
210.
I 
1 
211.
10 
0 
I 
1 
21Z.
1 
I 
1 
•^212.
0 
I 
I 
213.
I 
I 
214.
1 
1 
1 
215.
1 
I 
3|6.
01 
I 
I 
0 
217.
0 
218.
0 
I 
0 
0 
219.
1 
0 
^219.
0 
01 
01 
I 
220.
I 
I 
I 
I 
In meadows, paftures, and by way fides.
6, 7, 
In meadows and padures, common.
5, 6.
On downs, uplands, fallow fields, &c.
In moill and marfhy meadows.
7, 8.
In fait marfhes, common.
5, 6.
In waters, plentifully.
6, 7.
In woods and hedges, in the f^orth.
7> 8.
In watery places, about rivers, &c.
7. 
In woods and wet places.
6. 
On barren mountainous ground.
6 — 9.
On mountains and heaths, in the North.
4, 5.
On heatiis, and in woods.
4. 
On turfy boggy grounds, in the North.
5. 
In Aiady thick woods, and about fprings.
4. 
In and about riveis and ditches.
6, 7.
In meadows, wafte places, corn fields, &c.
8, 9.
In and about ditches and molft places.
7, 8.
Ey the way fides, wafte places, very common.
6, 9, 
Corn fields, gardens, manured places.
6 — 5, 
In fliady woods and thickets.
5, 6.
In waters.
6. 
In woods and groves, In the North.
6, 7.
On bogs and wet turfy grounds, in the North.
4. 
On heaths and dry paftures, not common.
6, 7.
In corn fields and gravelly grounds.
8. 
In dry meadows and pastures.
5, 6.
On fallow lands, and among corn.
7. 
In woods, and about hedges, every where.
5— /♦ 
Every where in moift and fliady places.
Dry fandy grounds, and on the fea coafts.
6, 7.
Among corn, and on fallow ground.
8. 
On the fea coaft.
6,7.
In meadows and pafture=!, very common.
5. 
In moift places about ditches and rivers.
7, 
Among the corn, very common.
6, 
In moilt meadows and paftures.
6. 
In woods, and under Hiady hedges.
4. 
About hedges, old walls, and in paftures.
8« 
On wails, on rocks and mountains.
6. 
On wails, thatch, &c.
not common.
6, 7.
In kitchen gardens, and fometimes in corn fields.
7, 
By the Banks of rivers and lakes.
7. 
Gunner fays it is among the mp4 accepta' le herbs to cows.
Its cultivation has on thts ac- 
count been recommenae4-4flrfbreign publications.
208.
JJ^bite and Red Campion.
The fame author relates that this plant is thought by 
feme of the peafants in Norway to caufe ftaling of blood in the horned cattle.
211.
Corn Spurrey.
This plant has been cultivated as food for cattle, and is thought by 
*OKie writers on agriculture to deferve more notice than has hitherto been paid to it.
C 396 3 
'z20.
Dyer*s Weed.
Refeda Luteola.
A. 
S2I.
Agrimony.
Agrimonia Eupatorla.
422.
223.
224.
225.
226.
227.
228.
229.
230.
231.
232.
233- 
^34- 
235- 
236.
237.
238.
239.
240.
241.
242.
443' 
244.
245- 
246.
247.
24S.
249.
250.
251.
252.
253« 
• ^54- 
a55- 
256.
257.
258.
ICOSANDROUS PLANTS.
Black-thorn.
Prmus ffinofa.
> 
Bird's Cherry.
P. Padus.
— .
Wild Service Tree.
Cratagus iorm'inalis .
— 
Haw- thorn.
C. Oxyacantha, 
Quicken-tree : Mountain Afti.
Sorbus aucufaria.
Wild Pear Tree.
Pyrus communis.
Crab Tree.
P. Mains.
. 
Dropwort.
Spiraa Filipendula, P.
— — 
Meadow Sweet.
S. Ulmaria.
7. 
Common Briar, or Dog Rofe.
Rofa Canma.
Burnet Rofe.
K. fpmofjjima.
Rafpberry Bufh.
Kuhm Idaus.
> - 
Con^non Bramble.
R.fruticofus.
— 
Dewberry Buih.
R. c^fius.
— 
The Wood Strawberry.
Fra^aria <vefca.
P. 
Silver Weed.
Potefitilla Argentina.
P. — 
Cinque.roii.
P. reptans.
P. i 
Spring Cinquefoil.
P. 'verna.
P. — 
Torjnentil.
Tormentilla ereBa. P.
Purple Marfh Cinquefoil.
Comarum palttjlre.
P. 
Avens : Herb Bennet.
Geutn urbanum.
P. — 
POLYANDROUS PLANTS.
Yellow Water Lilly.
Nympha:a lutea.
P. — 
White V/ater Lilly'.
alba.
P. 
Red Poppy.
Paf a^ver Rbaas.
A.   
Long roug;h- headed Poppy.
P. Argemojze.
A. 
Greater Celandine.
Chelidomum majus.
- — 
Herb Chriftopher.
A^aa Chrijiophoriana.
P. 
Lime Tree, TUia Eur op eta.
Dw^arf Ciltus.
dftus Beliantbemum.
P. — 
Lark Spur.
Delphinium Confolida.
A.   
Cel.umbires.
Aquikgia 'vulgaris.
P. — 
Water Aloe.
Stratiotis Abides.
P. 
Pafque Flower.
Anfricne Pulfatilla.
P. — 
Wood Anemone.
A. neynorofa.
P. "     
Meadow Rue. ThaliBrutn fanjum.
P. — 
Leffer Spearwort.
Ranunculus ¥la?nmida.
— 
Pilewort.
R. Ficaria.
P. — 
Sweet Wood Crowfoot.
R. auricomus.
P. — 
Hill.
Ray 
Flor.
Dan.
208.
366.
345- 
202.
588.
51S.
462.
51S.
463.
205.
514.
453- 
798.
515- 
453« 
<^34.
514.
452.
5H' 
452.
514.
452.
24.
^35.
23.
259.
547.
515- 
454.
555' 
515- 
455- 
398.
521.
467.4.
788.
521.
467.1.
521.
467.3.
2. 
254-1.
6. 
256.
544' 
3- 
255.1.
3. 
i55-3' 
7- 
257.
589.
5. 
256.2.
636.
8. 
253.1.
672.
223.
368.
603.
223.
368.
602, 
142.
308.
143' 5* 
308.
146.
309.
542.
320.
262.
498.
523.
473.
553* 
170.
34X.
lOI, 
42.
273.
683.
41.
*73.
695.
1 40,'.
290.
337« 
10.
260.
I <;3.
12.
259- 
549.
347- 
203 .
17.10.
250.
575- 
10.
246.
499.
t6.6.
248, 
665.
229.
Common Drofioort.
Swine are extremely fond of the roots qf this plant, and will 
make great devaftation in paftures where they find it.
227.
Sil-ver Weed.
The fame aBim.als are net lefs fond of the roots of this plant, 
which have fomevi hat the tafle of parfnips j and Ray informs us that they were formerly 
eaten in this country, as they ftill are in lefs happy climates.
Gunner.
240.
Tormentil.
The roots of Tormentii being an excellent aftringent,* are ufed by the 
farmers!
n Holland as a remedy agalnft the ftaling of blood among their cattle, 
243.
Telloiu Water Lilly.
It is remarkable that fcarcely any animals, except bogs, 
will touch this plant, and they will eat both roots and leaves, and fatten by their 
Flor, Oeconomic* 
%\%.
Mcrk 
[ 397 ] 
0. 
Ky.
Sh, 
H. 
S. 
*a2o.
0 
C 
c 
c 
In wafte places in chalky grounds.
6. 
221.
0 
3 
0 
0 
About hedges and the boi"ders of fields, 6, 
_ 
22*.
I 
I 
In hedges, common.
3, 4.
223.
TO 
I 
0 
1 
In woo<1s and hed<2;es, not common.
5. 
224.
1 
I 
In woods and hedges, not common.
4, 
225.
J 
I 
I 
I 
In he'iges.
5. 
226.
r 
I 
I 
I 
In woods and hedges, c.
227, 
I 
I 
With the foregoing, 4.
22S.
I 
I 
With tlie foreeoing.
5. 
229.
I 
I 
1 
0 
On upland paliures.
7. 
230.
I 1 
I 
0 
1 
In moift meadows, and by rivers and brooks 
231.
I 
I 
I 
0 
1 
In hedges.
5,6.
232.
J 
1 
I 
0 
1 
!n heaths, among furze, in gravelly foil.
6. 
233.
01 
I 
0 
[n woods and mountainous places.
5, 6.
234.
I 
I 
In hedges every where, and thickets.
5 — 9.
*35' 
I 
I 
I 
0 
With the former in moift places.
6, 7.
736.
10 
I 
0 
0 
In woods, and imder hedges.
4, 5.
*37' 
J 
T 
I 
By the road fides \ in low paftures.
6 — 8.
238.
J 
1 
In like places with the foregoing.
6, 
239.
I 
On dry barren palhires.
5, 6.
240.
J 
; 
; 
0 
[n dry woods and paftures, cornmon.
6, 7, 
241.
01 
10 
0 
0 
In bogs and ;narfhes.
6. 
242.
10 
I 
In hedges, woods, and thickets, common.
6- 
243.
0 
01 
0 
0 
] 
In rivers, ponds, and ditches.
8. 
444.
0 
oi 
0 
With the torcgoing, but not fo common.
7. 
*45' 
I 
1 
0 
In corn fields, arable ground.
6, 7, 
246.
I 
0 
On arable lands.
6. 
247.
0 
0 
0 
0 
In wafte places.
5, 6.
242.
0 
J 
0 
0 
In woods, in the North, c, 6.
249.
I 
J. 
1 
In groves and viftas cultivated.
7. 
afo.
1 
I 
0 
On dry, and particularly chalky downs.
7. 
251.
c 
, 
TO 
0 
Among ftanding corn, rare.
6. 
252.
0 
I 
01 
0 
c 
In woods, in the North.
6. 
*S3- 
0 
I 
In the fenny countries.
6. 
254.
G 
J 
0 
0 
In mountainous paftures.
4. 
255.
10 
1 
0 
0 
In woods, thickets, and hedges.
4. 
256.
1 
I 
I 
10 
In wet paftures, and by river fides.
6, 7.
257.
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
In marrtiy grounds, common.
6 — 9.
258.
0 
1 
I 
0 
In meadows and paftures every where.
4. 
259.
1 
I 
0 
0 
In woods and hedges.
4. 
248.
Herb Chr'tjiopber, This Is one of the polfonous herbs to cattle, but is happll3r 
fcarcein England, and not found eifewhere than in woods.
249.
The leaves of the L'meTrte are in feme parts of Europe laid up as fodder for 
Jheep and goats.
Bees get their fineft honey from thefe trees.
Coivs are fond of the leaves, 
but they are faid to vitiate the milk.
255.
Wood Anemone.
Horned cattle, when removed from higher grounds into woods 
and woody pafturage, frequently eat this herb, and many obfervations have pTOved that it 
•aufea the bloody flux among them.
Lifl.
Gunner, 
fl6o.
Bound- 
[ 398 ] 
a6o.
KotTncl-leaved Water Crowfoot.
Ranunculus ?
feeler at us.
A. \ 
a6i.
Upright Meadow Crowfoot.
R. acris, P.
— 
a6a.
Creeping Crowfoot.
R. repens.
P. 
263.
Bulbous Crowfoot.
R. bulbofus.
P. 
264.
Various-ieaved Crowfoot.
Aquatilis.
P. • — 
265.
Marfh Marigold.
Caltka falujiris.
P. — 
a66.
Globe Flower.
Trcllius Europaus.
P. 
DiDYNAMous Plants, ^vith naked feeds.
467.
Bugle.
Ajuga reptans.
P. 
a68.
Water Germander.
Teucrium Scordium.
P 
269.
Wild Thyme, 'thymus Serpyllmn.
P. 
270.
Wild Baiil.
T. y^czW.
A. - 
271.
Great wild Bafii.
Clinopodium 'vulgare.
P- 
272.
Wild Marjoram.
Origanum 'vulgare.
P. 
273.
Corn Mint.
Mentha arnjenfis.
P. - 
ft74.
Water Mint.
M. aquatica.
P. - 
275.
Ground Ivy. Glechcma hedcracea.
P. ~ 
276.
Stinking Horehound.
Ballot a nigra.
A. 
277.
Common Horehound.
Marrubium 'vulgare.
278.
Cat-mint.
Nepeta Caiaria.
P. — 
279.
Betony.
Betonica officinalis.
P. - 
280.
Hedge Nettle.
Stachys (yl'vatua.
P. - 
281.
Clowns Alheal.
S.palufiris.
P. 
282.
Nettle Hemp.
Gaieopfs 'TetrakH.
A. 
283.
Narrow-leaved Alheal.
G. Ladanum.
A. 
284.
White Dead Nettle.
Lamium aWutn.
P. 
285.
Red Archangel.
L. rubrum.
A. — 
286.
Great Henbit.
L. amplexicaule.
Ac ~ 
287.
Motherwoit.
Leonurus Cardiaca.
B. — 
288.
Self-heal.
Prunella 'vulgaris.
P. 
289.
Hooded Willow Herb.
Scutellaria galericu 
Lata.
290.
291.
292.
293.
494 
295.
296.
- njuith capfules.
Toad Flax.
Antij rhinum Linana.
P. 
Lealt Toad Flax.
/Lminus.
A. 
Yellow Rattle, or Cock's-ccmb.
Rhinanthus ?
Crifa Gain.
A. — 5 
Comrron Loufewort.
Pedicularis Jyl'vatica.
— 
Marfh Louiewoi t.
P. palvftris.
P. 
Crefied Cow wheat.
Melampyrum crijiatum.
A. 
Common Cow-wheat.
M. pratenfe.
A. — 
Flor.
Hill 4 
j\ay .
10.
0. 
249.1.
571.
16.4.
248.4.
15.2.
247.
795.
15.1.
247.
55T.
n- 
249.
376.
34- 
272.
668.
33.
272.
3 3 
372.
245.
373' 
246.
J 7 J 
350- 
230.
3^2.
238.
814.
364.
239.
357- 
336: 
638.
351.
1. 
232.1.
512.
352.
^33- 
673.
369.
7.43.
789.
370.
'44.
563.
239.
360.
237.
580.
361.
238.
726.
359* 
237.
367.
242.
366.6.
368.
242.
365.
240.
594* 
365* 
240.
523.
365.
240.
752- 
164.
239.
727.
362.
238.
370.
244.
637.
108.
281.
I 12.
283.
502.
I2I>.
284.
120.
T. 
284.3.
225.
120.2.
284.
124.2.
286.
124.
286.
145.
260 — 264, Crciivfeefy or Butter Cups.
Scarcely any of thefe plants are relifhed by the 
cows or horfes, from their biting tafte; the Round-leaved Water Crcivfoet, the Upright 
Meadow Crouufooty and particularly the Vorious-lea-ved Crowfoaty are conflantly left un- 
touched, while growing.
The acrimony in thefe plants appears to be diffipated in the hay> 
into which they often enter in a large proportion.
265.
Marjh Marigold, It has been conjectured that the yellownefs of the butter is in 
many places owing to the cattle having fed on the large yellow flowers of this plant; which 
is however a great error, as cows do not touch the plant, although they pare the ground 
around it.
273, 274..
Mints.
All Mints are thought to have the property of retarding or prevent- 
ing the curdling of milk.
Hence it is that in fome places, towards the latter end of the 
year, when herbage is fcarce, and the cows are necellitated to eat thefe plants in more coa^^ 
Udeit^bk (^uantitieSj the dairy- woman has diiTiculty to make her cheefe.
aSo, iledg€ 
[ 399 ] 
0. 
Sh.
26o.
0 
I 
0 
ao I .
0 
I 
z6z.
I 
26 .
c 
464.
0 
0 
0 
265.
0 
I 
206.
0 
I 
2 0 7 • 
0 
I 
I 
20 5 
_ < „ 
209.
I 
270.
) 0 
0 
I 0 
271.
272.
c 
I 
27 3.
0 
0 I 
274..
275.
0 
0 
I 
270.
0 
0 
0 
277.
0 
0 
0 
27X.
0 
0 
^ 
279.
0 
I 
250.
01 
I 
I 
2 0 I .
0 
0 
I 
2S2.
0 
I 
283.
T 
I 
284.
10 
* 
28 C.
0 
2!?6.
X 
2?7.
01 
I 
I 
288.
I 
1 
289.
I 
290.
0 
10 
01 
291.
I 
0 
I 
292.
10 
I 
I 
293.
0 
294.
0 
1 
0 
295.
1 
I 
I 
296.
1 1 
I 
I 
s. 
[n watery place?, common.
5, 6.
[n meadows and paftures, common.
6, 7.
In meadows and paliuies every where.
5, 6, 
With the fuiegoing every where.
5. 
In rivers, ditchi^s, ponds, Sec. 4 — -S.
In moill meadows and brooks.
4. 
In mountainous palluits, in the North.
5, 5.
In molft meadows and paftures, and woods.
5, 6, 
In the fens, common.
8. 
On dry paiUnes, common.
7, 8.
On chaiky, giavelly downs.
7, 8.
A-bout hidges, anci In dry paftures.
7. 
A-bout hedges and bufties.
7. 
On arable land and corn grounds.
8, 9.
In watery places, and by rivers, ponds, &c.
Jnder fliidy hedges, and in woods.
5, 6.
in wafte places and by hedges, every where.
7. 
On arable land, dry paltures, and wafte places.
By hedges, and on upland paftures.
7. 
On heaths and in woods, common.
7, 8.
In hedges and woods every where.
7, 8.
In wateiy places, and about rivers.
8. 
On arable grounds, and borders of fields.
8. 
On arable grounds.
7, 8.
\bout hediies, and in wafte places.
5, 6, 
in walte places, and on aiab'e land.
5. 
On arable grounds, very common.
6. 
On dunghills, and among lubbilh 7.
In meadows and paftures every where.
8. 
About waters, and watery places.
8, 9.
o About hedges, and dry barren paftures.
7, 
On arable land, and among corn.
6 — 9.
In meadows and paftures, common.
6, 7, 
In boggy marfliy meadows and heaths.
6, 7.
In moift nnd marftiy meadows and paftures.
6. 
In woods, not common.
7. 
In woods, very common.
7, 8.
280.
HeJge Nettle, Horfes abominate this plant.
Cows, notwithftanding its fcetid 
ftnell, will eat it, and Gunner fays it undoubtealy increafes their milk greatly.
281, CI01011S A^heal.
The roots of this plant are among the acceptable food of fwlne : 
they are indeed fapidenougia to have fupplied in fome feafons the want of bread to the hu- 
man fpecies.
293, 294.
Loufeivorts.
Thefe plants are very noxious to cattle, when through penury, 
or other caufes, they are induced to eat them.
Gunner affirms, that it is very commt)n for 
cattle, that are removed into paftures where the Marjh Louje-wort abounds, to die fuddenly 
from ftaling of blood.
He obferves, that fuch as are bred where it is plentiful, either do 
not eat it, or are not hurt by it.
It is too common with us.
296.
Coiv-ivhear.
Cows are extravagantly fond of this plant, and the richnefs, as well 
as yellowncfs, of the butter, in fome places, is with great reafon attributed to the abundance 
•f this plant in the paftures, Flor, Lap% 240, 
^ ' 257.
Common 
C 400 ] 
297.
Common Eye-briglit.
Euphra/ia officinalis.
— 
298.
Red Eye-bright.
E. odontites.
A. 
299.
Broom rape.
Orohanche major.
P. 
300.
Knobby-roote(i Figwoit.
Schrophularia nodofa.
301.
Toothwort.
Lathraa Jquamaria.
P. 
302.
303.
304- 
305- 
306.
307.
308.
309.
310.
3"- 
312.
313- 
314- 
315- 
316, 
317.
318.
319- 
37.0, 
321 .
322, 
3*3' 
324- 
325- 
326, 
327.
3^8.
3^9- 
331- 
332.
33: 
Tetradynamous Plants.
Whitlow Grafs.
Draha uerna.
A. 
Mithridate Tvluftard.
Thlafpi cavipcjlrc.
A. — 
Shepherds Purfe.
T. Burja Faj:ori>.
A. — 
Dittsnder : Pepperwort.
LepidiuTn latifoliupn.
Narrow-leaved wild Crels.
L. ruderale.
A. 
Scurvy Grafs.
Cocblearia officinalis.
B. — 
Horfe Rhadidi.
C. Armoracia.
P. 
Gold of Pleafure.
Myagrum fati<vum.
A. — 
V/oad.
Ifatis tinSioria.
B. 
Great Tower Muflard.
Turritis glabra.
A. 
Wild Navew, or Rape.
Braffica Napns.
B. 
WildMuftard, or Charlock.
Sinapis arnjenfis.
A 
Water Rhadifli.
Sifymhrium a?7iphibiu7n.
P. — 
Flix Weed.
S. Sophia.
A. 
Hedge Miiftard.
Erjfunum 'vulgare.
A. — 
Treacle Wormfeed.
E. ckeirantboides.
A. — 
Winter Creffes, or Rocket.
E. Barbarea.
— 
Jack by the Hedge : S^uce alone.
E. Alliaria.
P. 
Cuckow Flower.
Cardamhie prdter.fis.Y .
• — 
Bitter Creffes.
C. amara.
P. 
White and Yellow fiowered Charlock.
Ba- 1 
phanu; Baphanijlrum.
A. S 
Sea Rocket.
Bunias Cakile.
A. 
Sea Colewort.
Crambe maritima.
P. 
MONADELPHOUS pLAXTS.
Crow footCrar.es bill.
Gerariium praienfe.
P. 
Herb Robert.
G. Robertiaman.
B. 
Round-leaved Cranes-bill.
G. rotundifolium.
A. 
Common Dove's foot Cranes-i.ill.
G.wMle. A.
Hemlock-leaved Cranes-bill.
G, cicutarium.
A. 
Common Mallow.
Mnl^a fyivef.ris.
B. — 
Dwarf Mallow.
M. rotundijcha.
A. 
Vervain Mallow.
M. Alcea.
P. 
DiADELPHOUs Plants.
Common Fumitory.
Fumaria cffi.cinalis.
A. 
1 
r 1 or < 
1 Hill.
Ray.
Dan.
122.
1. 
28J..
122.2.
284.2.
625.
127.
288.
1,14.
283.2.
iz8.
288.
lid 
2 £;q.
202, 
260.
3'-' J • * • 
260.
306.
729.
261.
104..
557* 
268.1.
303.
184..
266.
302.
261.
301.
zG-i.
3 
302.
254.
307.
240.
293.
809.
240.
^ Jo' 
242.
295.
678.
26 c.
J 
301.
251.
2 8.
<2S.
238.
298.
560.
250.
298.
/ J * • 
^37.4' , 
297.
235- 
^93- 
299.
246.2.
Z99.
244.
296.
257.2.
307.
2 <;7.
1 .
i^/ • 
310.
• 198.
360.
196.
358.
604..
I q6 .
J CO.
10.
196.
359.1 1.
670.
: 199- 
357-i- 
2 S • i • 
J 
' 25,2.
251.
721.
27.
2 C2.
348.
204.
' 81.
287.
516, 
523.
.474.
526, 
2Q3.
3z6.
290.
3^5» 
3^5.
Dyers Weed.
Genijla tindoria.
336.
Liquorice Vetch.
AJlrag-alus glycyphyllus.
322.
Charlocks.
The peils of our corn-fields, and whicii have been thought to give a 
ynoft unv/holefome quality to bread when the feeds abound in grain.
326.
Herb Robert.
This plant is in great reputation with fome farmers, on account of 
its prevailing virtues againft ftaling of blood, and the bloody flux in cattle : in which cafes it 
is fatd to be the beft among a great variety of means commonly ufed upon fuch occafions.
D 'tadelfbous Plants.
A general view of this clafs fhews at once how very acceptable they 
are to almoft all cattle.
Cows and iheep refufed none, and horfes Jiot more than three out 
of the whole number with which they wer^ tried.
They afford Uac^richeft food for cattle, 
and 
[ 401 ] 
0. 
G. 
Sh.
H. 
S. 
1 
I 
0 
198.
I 
I 
I 
300- 
0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
301.
0 
» 
I 
0 
0 
10 
1 
I 
I 
0 
303- 
10 
1 
0 
0 
1 
304- 
1 
1 
305.
I 
c 
306.
1 
I 
0 
0 
307.
0 
0 
308.
0 
0 
0 
309.
I 
I 
I 
310.
0 
0 
3".
i 
I 
0 
I 
31*.
1 
I 
313.
I 
I 
X 
xo 
1 
3H.
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
315- 
1 
01 
I 
I':.
0 
316.
T 
I 
0 
0 
3»7.
I 
> 
1 
I 
318.
TO 
0 
0 
31Q.
.0 
0 
0 
320.
10 
I 
1 
0 
0 
321.
f 0 
I 
0 
0 
1 
3*3- 
324.
1 
I 
1 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
3*6.
1 
0 
1 
0 
3»7- 
0 
1 
1 
0 
32^.
1 
1 
3*9- 
1 
10 
I 
330- 
I 
1 
331- 
01 
0 
I 
1 
33a.
I 
I 
I 
I 
333.
I 
10 
I 
0 
0 
334- 
I 
0 
335- 
1 
1 
1 
1 
336.
I 
I 
I 
1 
0 
337.
I 
I 
In meadows and paftures, very common.
X, 9.
On the borders of fields, and on arable ground, 8, 9.
In dry paftures.
5, 6.
[n woods and moift hedges.
7, 8.
In fliady places at the foot of mountains : rare.
On mo'e hills, in dry paftures.
4..
On arable land, and in corn fields.
6, 7.
Every where in fi^ilds and wafte places, 3, 4, 
In meadows and paftures : rare.
6, 7, 
On the Tea coafts : rare.
6, 
On the lea coalts.
4, 5.
In w?\ke places, and about ditches.
5. 
In flax fields.
6. 
On the borders of fields, and on arable land: rare.
7, 
In paitures, particularly of a gravelly foil.
5. 
On the banks of ditches, and among corn.
5. 
The pell of arable land and ftanding corn.
5. 
In watery places, meadows, and brooks.
6. 
in orchards, about ruins, highways, and commons.
7. 
By the way fides, and under walls, wafte places.
5. 
In corn fields : fcarce.
7, 
In ditches and watery places, very common.
On banks about hedges, very common.
5. 
In moiit meadows and paftures, every where.
4. 
With the foregoing j el'pecially on boggy foil.
4. 5*1 
The peft of corn fields in Englafid.
6, 7.
On the fea fiiores.
6. 
On the fea fhores, 5.
On the borders of moift fields, meadows, &c» 6, 7.
Under fhady hedges, and in woods.
4 — 6.
About hedges, way fides.
7. 
With the foregoing, and about hedges, common, 5, 6.
By the way fides, borders of corn fields.
4 — 6.
Every where by hedges and in wafte places.
5—10.
In the like places with the foregoing.
6 — lo.
In lanes, hedges, and the borders of fields.
7 — 9, 
In corn fields, arable land, on banks, &c.
4 — 
On upland paftures and heaths, common.
5, 6^ 
On coarfe paftures, and the borders of fields.
In meadows, paftures, and about hedges.
On dry, chalky paftures.
7, 8.
and arc cultivated In divers parts of Europe with all poflible attention.
With us the Com' 
rtott Purple Trefnl^ or Clover, is moftly fav\rn.
Lately fome trials have been made with th« 
Saint Foin, 339, and fome have thought it anfwers better than Clover.
I fay nothing o# 
the exotic Lucem.
Among thefe Plants, the Kidney P^etcb, 3Z7, is particularly acceptable to fheep, infomucK 
that feparate cultivation pf it hag Vesn recommended j but it will not (^cceed well except on 
chalky ground*.
- 
Wood 
C 402 ] 
339- 
340.
341- 
34a- 
343.
344- 
345- 
346.
347.
348.
349- 
350- 
35'- 
35^- 
353- 
354.
355- 
356.
357' 
Wood Peafe ; Heath Peafe.
Orohus tuberofus.
P. 
St.Foinj Cockfhead.
He.iyfarumOnobrichis.
P. 
Narrow-leaved Eveilalbng Pea. Latbyrus 7 
fylnjcftris.
P. S 
Common V^el'.ow Vetchling.
L.fratenfis.
P. 
Common Vetch, or Tire.
Vic'iu fat'tva.
A. — 
Bufh Vetch.
V. Sephim.
P. — 
Tufted Wood Vetch.
V.fylnjaUca. P.
— 
Common tufted V.
tch.
V .
Cracca.
P. 
Smooth-podded Tine Tare.
Er^vum tetra- 
fpermum.
A. 
Hairy podded Tine Tare.
E. hirfuium.
A. 
Sea Peafe.
Pifum marinum.
P. 
Bird's-foot Trefoil.
Lo'us corniculata.
P. — 
White Trefoil.
Trifoliuni repens.
Hon eyfuckle Trefoil, or Clover.
T.pratenfe.
Hop Trefoil.
T. agrarlu??!- A.
— - 
Leiier Hop Trefoil.
T. procumbens.
P. 
Meliiot.
T. Melitotus ofidnaHs. B.
Yellow Lucern, or Mediclc.
Medicago falcatu 
MelilotTrci .il.
M. lupulina.
'etra- ^ 
Reft-harrow, or Can;mock..
Ononis aruenjis.
P. 
Polyadelphous Plants.
358.
St. Peter's Wort.
Hypericum quadrar.guJum.
359.
St. John's Wort.
H. perforatum.
P. 
360.
Hairy St. John's Wort.
H. hlrfutum.
P. — 
36T.
J62.
3^3- 
364- 
365.
366.
367.
368.
369.
370- 
371.
372.
373- 
374- 
375- 
376.
radi' ^ 
SYNGENtSIOUS PLANTS.
Dandelion.
Le'-ntodon Taraxacum.
P. 
Rough Dandelion.
hirfutum.
P. 
Hawkweed witn bitter root^.
L. autiimnale.
P 
Long- rooted Hawkweed.
Hypochctrts radi- 
cata.
P. 
Spotted Hawkweeil.
H. maculafa.
P. — 
Creeping Moufe-car.
Hieraau?n Pilofella.
Broad leaved bufliy Hawkweed.
H. fabaudum.
Succory Hawkweed.
Crepis teBorum.
A. — 
Sowthittle.
Sonchus oleraceus, A.
Tree, or Corn Sowthiftle.
.S".
arvenjls.
P, — 
Ivy-leaved wild Lettuce.
Fhrenanthes mura- ?
lis.
p. , S 
Yellow Goatfbeard.
'Tragopogoii pratenfe.
B. 
Nipplewort.
Lapfana commMnis.
A. 
Wild Succory, or Endive.
Cichorium Intybus.
B. 
Burdock.
Ar£iium Lappa.
B. 
Carline Thillle.
Carlina fylvefiris.
B, — 
Hill.
Ray.
Flof 
Dan 
28Q.2.
324 
781.
293.
317 
T Sit 
319 
325* 
280.
320 
5*7.
283.
320 
.1.
522.
289.
J 
320 
.2.
600.
285.4.
^22 
4- 
277.
285.3.
322 
•3- 
804.
205,2, 
322 
2. 
95- 
28q.I.
522 
. I.
639.
278.
319 
338.
^14.
334 
301.
I. 
327 
. I.
502.
328 
^07.
330 
558.
101.
330 
796.
308.
33 » 
311.
3^3 
^33- 
308.
331 
.2.
310.
332 
175-7- 
H4 
7- 
640.
.74.1.
342 
175.4- 
343'4- 
802.
44T .
17a 
442.3- 
171 
3- 
438.
164.
1. 
501.
43X.2.
165 
.6.
150.
439.11.
167.17.
149.
441.
170 
440.
167 
.1.
165.9.
437' 
163 
682.
437.7.
163 
606.
436.4..
i6z 
•5- 
509.
442.
171 
443* 
173 
500.
443.
17a 
43»* 
197 
642.
449- 
\ 
341.
Common Tel/ov* Vetcblifig.
Uncommonly grateful to cattle j as is alfo the 
345.
Common tiifud Vcuh, Both thefe are very common in our beft meadowl and 
paftures.
35c.
V/h\te trefoil.
\Vherever this plant pfcurs fpontaneoufly, and abounds, it is always 
confidered as an indication of the goodnefs of the foil j and this is a thing well known to 
all farmers.
The richnefs of all meadows and paftures is naturally owing to their abounding princi- 
pally with the Trefoils f and others of the fame ciafs, with a due mixture of the more ac- 
ceptable CraJ'es.
6 356.
MiUlot 
[ 403 ] 
0. 
0. 
Sh.
H. 
S. 
X 
J 
In woods ; and fometiiTies in mendows, &c.
5, 
339.
1 
I 
J I 
On chalky meadows and paltures.
7. 
340.
i 
T 
in woods and hedges.
7, 8.
j-^ 
341.
I 
I 
1 
I 
In ivoodsj hedges, meadows, and pnftures, every wh 
34a.
I i 
I 
I 
I I 
C'Jitivated : and often wild in corn liekb.
343.
' 1 
I 
fn i.ieadows, j^afliires, hedges, and woods, 5.
1! Zl / .
J 
'n hedi'cs nnd vv'oods.
7, 8« 
345.
1 
I 
I 
0 I 
In woods and hedges, common, and in padui es 
* 
346- 
^ 
- 
On tilled grounds, and among corn.
6. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
vVIih the foregoing.
6. 
34-^' 
} 
J 
I 
1 
On the fea fncres.
7. 
34-9.
1 
I 
I 
1 0 
['I meadows, pafturcs, woods, every where.
7^ 8.
35°' 
J 
1 
r 
T 
c 
The prids of meadows and paftures.
5 — 9.
35»- 
( i 
I 
1 
V/;t'i the fcnner.
5 — 9.
both perennial.
35-' 
J 
J 
J 
In Tandy paliures, corn fields.
6. 
353- 
I 
In mt-adcws and paliures, common.
5 — S.
3 54-" 
\ 
In hedge?, and in the borders of corn fields, 6, 7, 
155- 
J 
On the borders of fields, not common.
7. 
?n paliures every where.
5 — 8.
357- 
J 
ri 
c 
On barren paftures, way fides.
6 — 8.
358.
3 
in moi^i hedges, and the bank?
of brooks.
359- 
- 
0 
c 
fn he.ig£S and bufhes, common.
7, 
360c 
c 
In hedges and bufiies, very common.
7. 
361.
0; 
TO 
c 
I 
In meadows and paliures, every where.
4. — 6, 
3 6 2 • 
^'^jth the foj fTier evtry where.
^, 6.
3^3* 
1 
I 
With the foregoing, very common.
8. 
30+' 
In meadows anu paaures, common, ^ — -7, 
365- 
1 
2 
01 
3 
I 
fn mountainous paftures : fcarce in England, 7.
366.
:i 
I 
10 
0 
On uplands and dry paftures, common.
5. 
367.
I 
I 
I 
X 
In hedges and woods, common.
7, S.
368, 
^   
1 
1 
I 
In meadows and paftures, very common.
6 — 9.
i6q.
67 
I 
I 
1 
In manured prounds, corn fields, wafte places.
370.
I 
I 
ri 
fn corn fields and aboat hedges.
7. 
371- 
I 
II 
i 1 
In findy hmes and woods.
7, 8.
37*' 
I 
xo 
I 
1 
1 1 
In meadows and paftures.
6, 
37S- 
0 
I 
I 
In hedges and wafte places, kitchen gardens.
6, 
374- 
I 
I 
I 0 
1 
On the borders of corn fields.
7, 8, 
375- 
I 
0 
0 
0 
By the way fides, v/afte places, &c.
7, 8.
376.
0 
I 
On diy paftuies.
6. 
356.
MelMot I'refoll, This plant, which is exceedingly common, Is notwithftandinj 
much lefs agreeable to cattle than the reft of the Trefoils.
This obfervatlon occurred to 
Plukenety who called it Medica prattnfts lutea non grata jumenth ; and Linnaus has informed 
us particularly that future obfervations have confirmed the remark.
V 357, Rtji'barroiv, or Cammoch.
A decodlion of this plant has been much recommended 
to horfes labouring under a floppage of mine.
It is the peft of feme corn-fitlds ; bu..
;n its 
younger ftate, before the plant has acquired its thcrns, is a moft acceptable herb to Tneep.
366.
Creeping Moufe-ear, Very common on our dry paftures, and fometimes eaten by 
Pisep J to which »inimal8 Ra^ fays it is very hurtful from ita powerful aftringent quality.
V ^% Cotton 
[ 404 ] 
377.
378.
379- 
380.
381.
382.
383.
384..
385- 
386.
387.
389.
390.
391- 
39*- 
393- 
394- 
395- 
396.
397- 
398.
399- 
4-00.
40I.
/^o^.
403- 
4.04.
405.
4o6.
407.
408.
409.
4.10.
4.11.
4T2.
414.
415- 
416.
4^7.
4.18.
419.
420, 
421.
42a.
4*3- 
Cotton Thiftle.
Ompordcn Acanthium, B.
— 
Spear Thiftle.
Carduus lancccdatus.
B. — 
MulkThiftle.
C. nutans.
B. 
Dwarf Carline Thiftle.
C. acaulis.
P. — 
Soft or gentle Thiftle.
C. heterophjlUis, — 
Thiftle upon Thiftle.
C. crifpus.
A. 
Marfti Thiftle.
C. palujlris.
P. 
Saw-wort.
SerratulatinSIoria.
P. 
Corn Saw-wort, or Way Thiftle.
S. ar^venfis.
P. 
Trifid Water Hemp Agrimony, hidem tri- ?
partita.
A. i 
Whole -leaved Water Hemp Agrimony.
7 
B. cernua.
A. — 3 
Dutch, or Hemp Agrimony.
Eupatorium 7 
cannahinum.
P. — — S 
Tanfy.
Tanacetum 'vulgare.
P. 
Mugwort.
Artemifia 'vulgaris.
P. ' 
Wormwood.
A. Ahjinthium.
P. • 
Sea Wormwood.
A. maritlma.
P. — 
Mountain Cudweed.
Gr.aphaiium dioicum.
Upright Cudweed.
G .
fyl-^jaticunt, B.
— 
Biack-headed Cudweed.
G. ultguiofum.
A. 
Coltsfoot.
Tuffilago Varfara.
P. — — 
Butter-bur.
fetafitcs.
P. • 
Golden Rod. Sclidago V'lrga aurea.
P. — 
Ragwort.
Senecio Jacobaa.
P. 
Groundfel.
S. ^vulgaris.
A. — — 
Blue flowered Fleabane.
Er'igercn acre.
— 
Elecampane.
Inula Helemujn.
P. 
Middle Fleabane.
/. dyfenterica.
P. ' 
Small Fleabane.
/. Pulicaria.
A. — 
Sea Star-wort.
After Tripolium.
P. .
Corn Marigold.
Chryfanthemum fegetum, — 
Great Daifie.
C. Leucanthemum.
P. — — 
Sweet Chamomile.
Anthemis mhilis.
P. —   
Stinking Mayweed.
A. Cotula.
A. 
Corn Chamomiie.
A. ar'venjis.
B. 
Feverfew.
Matricaria Parthenium, B.
Corn Feverfew.
M. ChamotniUa. A.
— 
Milfoil : Yarrow.
Achillea Millefolium.
P. — 
Sneeze-wort: Goole tongue.
A. P tar mica.
P 
Common Daifte.
Bellis perenn':s.
P. — 
Great Knapweed.
Centaurea Scakiofa.
— 
Common Knapweed.
C. nigra, P.
— — 
Blue Bottle.
C. Cjanus.
A. < 
Common Cudweed.
Pilago germanica, A.
— 
Leaft Cudweed.
F. tnontana.
A. - 
Hairy Sheeps Scabious.
Jaftone montana.
A. 
Dogs Violet.
Viola canlna.
P. — 
Panfies j Hearts Eafe.
V, tricolor, A.
Hill.
4.30- 
429.
428.
449.
4^8.
419' 
429.
43t- 
428.
461.
461.2.
453- 
46T.
^63.
462.
462.
454.
453-*.
454.5.
446.
45^.
H9- 
450- 
451.
448.
449- 
447.
447.
448.
456.
459- 
459- 
460.
459-1- 
460.
459.
458.
457- 
459- 
433.
433.
433- 
453- 
454- 
71.6.
204.
405.
Ray.
1 96.
'95' 
193.
195.
93-I- 
194.2.
.94.4.
1 96.
194.
187.
187.
179.
188.
190.
188.
188.
181.
i8o.2.
181.
6. 
173- 
179.
176.
177.
,78.
175- 
76.
174.
174.2.
J75- 
[82.
184.1.
185.2.
185,3.
185.4.
187.
184.1.
183.
183.
184.
198.
198.
198.
180.
181.
27S.
364.
365-9.
406.
Corn Marigold.
This plant infefts the corn-fielcs in many parts of Europe, and ia 
Denmark there was a law enforcing the farmers to rid their fields of it.
407.
Great Da'ifie.
Very common in our paftures, but unacceptable to cows j neither Ii 
the common Va fie relilhed by them.
417.
Common Krapiveed.
A harfh and ungrateful plant to cows and flieep^ but impolTible 
tc be extirpated, though very common In our bcft meadows and paftures.
419.
Cud<iuteJf 
t 405 ] 
0. 
G. 
Sh.
H. 
S. 
'Ml' 
0 
0 
0 
578.
01 
01 
0 
1 
0 
379.
10 
0 
0 
1 
380.
0 
0 
381.
1 
I 
X 
I 
0 
38a.
I 
I 
I 
383.
1 1 
384- 
0 
I 
10 
0 
385.
10 
I 
1 1 
I 
0 
3S6.
I 
0 
I 
0 
0 
587.
0 
388.
0 
0 
0 
389.
I 
0 
I 
0 
0 
39°- 
1 
10 
0 
1 
0 
391.
I 
10 
I 
I 
0 
39*.
0 
0 
0 
1 
393- 
0 
0 
I 
1 
I 
S94-.
1 
395- 
0 
0 
396- 
10 
I 
I 
0 
0 
397- 
I 
I 
X 
I 
398.
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
399' 
I 
400.
I 
I 
0 
0 
I 
401.
0 
0 
402.
0 
I 
0 
I 
0 
403.
01 
0 
0 
404.
0 
0 
I 
0 
405- 
I 
I 
10 
I 
0 
406, 
407.
0 
I 
I 
I 
0 
408.
I 
I 
1 
0 
409.
0 
01 
01 
0 
0 
410.
I 
I 
10 
411.
41a.
I 
1 
I 
0 
0 
4*3- 
10 
10 
I 
I 
1 
414.
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
415.
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
416.
0 
I 
I 
I 
1 
417.
10 
I 
ro 
I 
10 
418.
X 
I 
I 
0 
0 
419.
0 
0 
420.
0 
0 
X 
4x1.
4»a.
I 
1 
X 
0 
I 
4a3- 
I 
0 
0 
10 
Tn wafte places : and on fallow grounds, jt 
Wafte places, about hedges ; fallow lands.
On uplands and fallow grounds abundantly.
On dry paftures t heaths and downs.
7* 
In marfhy paftures, not very common.
About ditches and hedges, common.
6. 
'n fnarfhy paftures, and in woods.
7. 
In woods, and barren paftures.
7. 
iiy the way fides, and on fallow groundl.
In marihy grounds, and about waters.
7, 8» 
In ditches, and watery places.
7, 8.
About waters, and moift hedges.
7, 8.
[South % 
On high paftures in the North, and by rivers in the 
About hedges, corn fields, and waftes.
8. 
In wafte places, and by road fides.
8, 9.
On the fea coaft.
8. 
On dry upland paftures in the North.
5. 
In dry woods and paftures.
8. 
(n watery places, and where water has ftagnated.
S« 
fn moift wafte places, and among corn.
3, 
In moift meadows by rivers and brooks.
3, 4, 
In woods, hedges, and among fur/e, on heaths.
\n meadows, paftures, and by way fideS, 7.
In manured wafte grounds every where.
On upland dry paftures, among bufties.
In hedges of moift meadov s.
7, 8.
In watery places ; about banks of rivers.
In moift places, and where water has ftagnated* 
In fait marfties.
8. 
Among corn too plentifully.
6, 7.
In meadows and paftures, every where.
5. 
In damp places on heaths, &c.
7, 8, 9, 
In and about corn fields : farm yardi.
With the former.
7, 8.
In wafte places, and abcut hedges.
6* 
In corn fields.
6. 
In meadows and paftures.
5 —7.
In moift woods and meadows.
2. 
In every pafture.
In and about corn fields.
6, 7.
In meadows and paftures, common.
7, 8* 
Among the corn.
7. 
By the way fides, and in dry paftures., 6, 7* 
On fandy heaths.
6, 7.
On downs and heaths.
6, 7, 
On heaths.
4. 
On corn grounds.
5— *9.
419.
Cudtoeedf fo called becaufe huftandmcn formerly gave it to cattle that did not rttmU 
note freely.
A general view of the fyngtriefious clafs, (hews at once the vaft difference between thl» 
and the diadelphoui j of the former we fee great numbers are rejected by cows, and by ihe«p 
more particularly.
424.
Swetjt 
[ 406 ] 
424..
Sweet Violet.
Viola odorata.
P. 
4ic.
Hairy violet.
V. birta.
P. n 
426: Touch me not.
hnpatiens noli met 4 ngere.
A. 
4Z7.
4^8.
429.
430.
432.
433- 
434- 
435- 
436.
437- 
438.
439.
44c.
441 • 
442.
44 3 J 
444.
445.
446.
447.
448.
449.
450.
45^- 
452.
453- 
454' 
455- 
Gynandrous Plants , 
Male Orchis Salep.
Orchis m£^' .iJa. P.
Female Orchis.
O. mcrio.
P. — 
Male handed Orchis.
O. lati/ilia.
P. — 
Ked handed Orchis.
O. conoii>fea.
B. — 
Female handed Orchis.
O. maculata.
P. 
Frog Orchis.
Satyrium ^jiride^ P.
— 
Twaybiade.
Ophrys O'vata.
P. — 
Grafs Wiack.
Zofiera marina.
P. — 
Monoecious Pla>3ts.
Spiked Sedge.
Carex -vulpina.
P. — 
Prickly Sedge.
C. muTicam.
P. — 
Baltard Sedge.
C. Pfeudo-Cyperus.
P. — 
Bladder Sedge.
C. njeficaria.
A. — 
Great brown Carex or Sedge.
C acuta.
P. 
Burr-reed.
Spargcinium ereSium.
P. — 
Cats-tail.
Typha palujiris.
P. 
Common NeStlei Urtica dioica.
P. 
Leffi-r Nettle, U.
urens.
A. — 
The Aider Tree.
8e tula Alms.
— 
The Birch Tree.
B. alba.
— 
Arrow Head.
Sagittaria Sagittifolia.
P. 
Feathered Water Milfoil.
Myriophyllum fpi- 
cat urn.
P. 
LeHTer Burnei.
Poierium Sanguiforha' P.^ 
Common Oak Tree, ^.e^'cus Robur.
-- 
TiieBeach.
Fcgus Jyhoatica .
— 
The Hcrr.-beain.
Carpinus Betulv', — 
The Hafel Nut-tree.
Corylus /I'vellana.
Scotch Fir. Pinus fylvejlrh.
— 
Common Fir, or Pitch Tree.
P. Mies, — 
White 'Bryony, Bryonia alba.
P. — 
456.
457- 
459- 
460.
462.
463.
464.
465.
Diorcious Plants.
Bay-leaved Sweet V/iliow.
Salix pentandra.
Common White Willow.
Salix alba.
Hcibaceous Wiliov/.
S. kerbacea.
P. — 
T'he Oljer, S.
-jiminalls.
The common Sallov/.
S. capraa.
— 
Sea Buckthorn.
Hippcphds Rhajraioides.
Sweet Willow Durcii Myrtle.
Myrica Gale.
Ccan-non Hop. Ih/mdus Lupulus.
P. 
White Poplar.
P'opulus alba.
— — 
Black Poplar.
P. nigra.
— 
Hill.
Ray.
Flor.
Dan.
204.
364.1 
309* 
205.
365.8 
207, 
316.
^82.
474- 
37^-3 
457* 
474- 
377-4 
253- 
474- 
3^0.19.
476.21.
3S1.2 
I. 
i:;4.
476.20.
381 .2 
0. 
476.22.
381.2 
2. 
77- 
478.
385.
^37* 
533- 
52.1.
15- 
503.28.
423.
S 
308.
503,32.
424.12.
284.
503.12.
419.12.
503-I4' 
420.14.
647.
503.^' 
417.
1. 
506.
437.
506.
436.
645- 
484.
139.
746.
484.
140.
7 1Q.
510.
44-1- 
510- 
443.
21.
253.
17a.
469.
150.
681.
346.
203.
I. 
509- 
440.
509- 
439' 
513- 
451- 
509- 
439.
510.
441.
510.
44I' 
193- 
111.
261.
813.
513- 
449.
513.
447* 
513- 
448.7.
117.
•|5i3- 
450.21.
5^3- 
450.
16.
245.
. 512.
445' 
265.
510.
443* 
327.
- 4S2.
137 
- 5^2- 
446.
- 512- 
446 
434.
Grafs Wreck.
Eefides the utility of this plant as an excellent manure in certain 
places, arid tor making mounds or wslis (which will fcand, when well conftrudled, for a vaft 
jiumber of years) cows and horfes will frequently leave their pafturcs to feed in the fea- 
v.ater itfclf upon this plant.
Cj^wwer refers to an inftance of fome horned cattle that were 
very well fufiained, through a fevere winter, by the help of this plant only.
Its utility for 
mcrunds againfi: the encroachment of the fea, in apt fitu^tions, is well Jkpown, and there arc 
C 407 ] 
0. 
G. 
Sh.
H. 
s. 
4.24- 
Tn hedges and ditches J In woods.
3. 
425.
I 
I 
vVith the forinei'a 3* 
0 
^ 
0 
0 
fn moill fhady places in the North.
8. 
427.
In meadows and paitures ; among^ buih?s.
423.
I 
0 
In nnoilt mcfidows and pHUuieSj common.
429.
I 
0 
In meridows and piiluies.
5, 6, 
430.
I 
X 
0 
With the foregoing.
6, 7.
431.
) 0 
I 
0 
ill IIJUUl lilCiil-lUWis liJlU pj.llaICSj aliU WUUUa. Oo 
432.
I 
\\\ div paftures.
5, 6.
4-3 3* 
in iDU'il.
VVOUlia diiU lillL-rwLL^.
Kj U.
434- 
0 1 
I 
In the flialiow fslt wateis abundantly.
435* 
A -^fs 
4-55.
In marfliy meadows and woods.
437' 
J 
(In l"nf* iiripc f\f viv^rc t 
\J\\ lUC llCICo Ul iiVCis* y» 
43 s.
Xil WdLCiy pidt-Cbj ailu dWUlll IlVCIa. 0« 
439- 
^ 
I 
Common m watery places about nvers-j &c» 
440 • 
0 1 
^ 
111 ILalZLilllv d.nCi llOW illllUllJbi WdlClb. y* 
441.
0 
In hke places with the foregomg, 7> ^» 
442.
0 
0 
0 
0 
In wafte places every where.
7. 
443- 
0 
0 
0 
0 
[n wafte grounds, and arable land.
8. 
444.
1 
I 
I 
0 
In moirt woods and hedges.
7. 
445* 
0 
In like places with the rormer.
7* 
4^ 
0 1 
Tn wafpfij and ulirmf ditrhp<5 pnd fiver?
fij 
447.
0 
0 
In ftagnant waters.
6, 7.
445.
W M Lit J W Iib^ ClUt-LlclIiy lU d.
t.titiiK.Y  ' ^ » *   / * 
449.
I 
45^^' 
In hedges 3nci woods.
^« 
451.
In woods, and copfes.
5, 
452.
0 
ill vk'iJUUoj CvJpiCi>j J.liLl PiC--*i^Co» ^* 
453- 
10 
Ol 
0 
Wild in Scotland, 5.
454* 
J 
0 
455* 
0 
Q 
Tn hpHcrpQ vunnric ^^nd f}^^rL• p^c: rnmmon £?.
45°* 
I 
rictiLiciiL in tiie rv\>'Lii 01 jL./iviciriu.
4* 
457' 
' 
By watersj and m woods and hedges.
4* 
43 • 
I 
459* 
J 
Xjy WdLCI S.
iLm 
460.
I 
J 
I 
1 
VV^ith the former.
4? 5* 
461.
0 
I 
I 
On the Tea coaft, not common.
4. 
462.
0 
I 
0 
I 
On bogs, in heathy grounds.
5. 
463.
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
In wet hedges.
6. 
464.
10 
I 
I 
In hedges about rivers.
3. 
465.
1 
I 
About rivers, and in v/atery places.
3* 
inftances of its having ftood In this way for upv/ards of eighty years.
415 — 439- '^^dges are coarfe and unwholefome food for thofe cattle that are obllgect te 
eat them, and are faid fometimesto occafion great flatulence, and diforder.
442- — 43* ^^ettles are eaten by fheep and cows, while the plants are young.
458.
Herbaceous W'tlk'w, Acceptable to cows and horf«:s, C?fc»##^ fays the Utter will 
leave grafs to feed upoa it.
D d 4.
46$.
Afp, 
[ 4o8 3 
466.
Afp, or tremhling Poplar.
Vopulus tremula, 
467.
Dogs Mercury.
Cynocrambe perenms, P.
468.
French Mercury.
C. annua.
A. - 
Biack Bryony.
Tamiis communis.
P. 
Common Juniper.
Juniperus communis.
Yew Tree, Taxus baccata, — ^ 
469 
470 
471 
Polygamous Plants.
474.
Sea Purflane.
Atriplex portulacoides.
473.
WildOrache.
A. kajlata.
A. 
474.
Narrow-leaved Orache.
A. patula.
A, 
475.
The A(h Tree.
Fraxinus excelfior.
476.
Black-berried Heath.
Empetrum nigrum.
477.
478.
4-79- 
480.
481.
48z.
483.
484.
485.
486.
487.
488.
489.
490.
491- 
Cryptogamous Plants.
Corn Horfe-tail.
Equifetum awenfe.
P. 
Wood Horle-tail.
£. ^Az,Y2/zV«w.
P. 
Mardi Horfe-tail.
E. paiufre.
P. 
River Horfe-tail.
E. flwviatile.
P. 
Smooth Horfe-tail.
E. limofum.
P. 
Female Fern, or Biakes.
Pteris aquilina.
Common Polypody.
Polypodium <vulgare.
Common Male Fern.
P, Filix mas.
Stone Fern.
P, fragile.
•   
Hart's Tongue.
Afplenium Scolopendrium, 
Adder's Tongue.
Ophioglojfum 'vulgatum.
Common Fucusy or Sea Oak. F.
<veficuloJus, 
Sweet Fucus.
Fucus faccharinus, - 
Thread Fucus.
F. Filum.
. 
Brown Boletus.
Boletus bonjinus, ~ 
HHl.
'14.
4.81.
3(9.
511.
512.
490.
4^9- 
489.
5x1.
531.
531.
531.
531.
53»- 
528.
5z6.
527.
528.7.
5^5* 
530- 
Ray.
446.
^38.
139- 
262.
444* 
445* 
153.11, 
151.
1. 
151.2.
469.
444.
130.2.
130.4.
131.
9. 
130.
1. 
1 31.10.
124.
117.
120.
125.
116.
128.
40.4.
39.1.
40.3.
1 1.2.
467.
Degs Mercury is abfolutely poifonous to flieep, which will fometimes eat it.
Our 
own obfervations, many times repeated, have taught us that horfes will not touch it.
469.
Black Bryovy.
This is not a ASwe^i/^ plant j it is common in our hedges, but 
horfes refufe it.
471.
Ttiu Tree, That the Ten) is pcifonousto horned cattle and horfes, is proved be- 
yond all doubt.
Several cafes of its fatal effefts have fallen under our own knowledge.
A 
memorable one occurs alfo in the Pkil.
TravJ.
vol.
xlvii.
p. 195.
477.
Corn Herje-tail is faid to be very noxious to horned cattle and Acep, both by Cunver 
[ 409 3 
0. 
G. 
Sh.
H. 
4.66, 
I 
I 
0 
467.
0 
I 
46g.
469.
I 
470.
1 
f 
471- 
0 
I 
I 
0 
47».
1 
I 
I 
473' 
I 
474- 
I 
I 
I 
475.
I 
I 
I 
-) 
476.
0 
10 
0 
0 
477.
c 
I 
10 
0 
47?- 
I 
1 1 
479- 
I 
480.
I' 
I 
11 
I 
481.
0 
I 
c 
48Z.
c 
Jt 
0 
0 
4S1.
0 
484.
0 
I 
0 
485.
I 
I 
I 
486.
c 
0 
0 
487.
0) 
01 
488.
1 
I 
489.
I 
490.
I J 
491.
II 
I 
s. 
In woods, particularly in boggy foils.
In woods and thickets, and under hedges, 4, 5.
In wafte manured places : gardens.
9, 
In woods, thickets, and hedges.
6. 
On heaths and mountains in the North.
On mountainous grounds.
3, 4.
On the fea fhores, common.
8. 
About dunghills ; and on the fea fhores.
9* 
In wafte places, and about hedges.
8. 
In woods and hedges.
3, 4.
On mountainous boggy places in the North.
4) 5.
On moift corn land.
3, 4.
In ftiady moift woods.
4, 5.
In marfties.
6. 
In watery places, and about rivers.
5. 
In (hallow waters and marfhes.
6. 
In woods, and on heaths, very common* 
On old walls, and ftumps of trees.
In woods, hedges, and ftiady lanes.
In rocky places in the North.
In fliady, ftony boggy places under hedges.
In moift meadows and paftures.
On the fea coaft.
On the fame.
On the fame.
Not uncommon in our woods.
and others } and Loefellus fays it brings on abortion, if pregnant ewes eat it.
478.
TVood Horfe-tail.
Horfes are extremely fond of this, and where it is abundant, as It 
the cafe in fome of the northern parts of EuropCy hay of this alone is made for their ufe ; 
as alfo of the River Horfe-taU, which the cows like, and it is thought to encrcafe their milk.
488—90.
Fucus.
All thefe Fucufes are eaten by cows } but Gunner fays the Tbrtai 
Fucus is not only acceptable to them, but very wholefome.
491.
Brown Boletus.
Horned cattle are fond of this Fungus, and eat it greedily j but it 
is believed that it vitiates the milk, and Isflfens the <)uantity of it.
A CAtA- 
C 410 ] 
A 
CATALOG UE 
OP THE 
Writings and Publications of LINN-SUS: 
With References to the Pages in which they are 
mentioned in this Volume.
gysTEMA Nature five Regna trla Naturs 
fyftematice proporita, per Clafles, Ordi- 
nes Genera & Species.
Edition i.
Lugd, 5^/.
fol.
maxim.
17^5- — i^.
This is comprized in twelve pag^s ; and is the out- 
lines only of the fucceeding editions.
The SnMcdifo 
names are annexed.
2- Holm.
8vo.
page ^o.
1740.
Revifed and augmented by LIN^^/Eus himfelf, with 
the addition of the generical charaders, and names to 
the fubjeds of the animal kingdom.
3. Hal^e.
4to.
oblcng.
p. 70.
1740.
By J, Langen, in Latin and German* 
4. Parifds.
8vo.
p. 108, tab, r.
1744.
By Bernard J vjpeu ; with the addition of the French 
names 5 othcrwife the fame as the fecond edition.
5. HaU.
[ 411 1 
5. Hal^, 8vo.
p. 88.
J747J 
By M, G.
Agmthkr, With the German names ; other- 
v/ife the fame as the fecond edition.
Page 
6. Holmice.
8vo.
p. 232.
tab.
8. 
1748.
— — 6a 
Embellifhed with a print of the Author.
Aug- 
mented by the introdusflion of the eflential charaders 
of the genera of plants ; and by the addition of the 
fpecies to the animal and foffil kingdoms.
7. Lipfi£.
8vo.
p. 232.
talD.
8. 
1748.
By a Bookfeller; with the German names.
8. Holm.
8vo.
p. 136.
1753/ 
In the Swedijh language.
The vegetable kingdom 
by Haartman ; the folfil by MoUer, 
9. Lugd.
Bat, 8vo.
p. 228.
t. 8.7 60.
175^ — ^ — i 54- 
By Dr. Groito'vius, with a few additions to the ani- 
mal kingdom ; otherwife copied from N° 6.
This edition was alfo printed at Lucca^ in 1758.
10.
Holm, 8vo.
2 torn.
1758.
— 5o.
Tom. I, p.
821.
Animal kingdom.
Enlarged by 
the addition of the fynonyms.
Tom, 2.
p. 560.
Vegetable kingdom.
Enlarged by 
the addition of the fpecies under each genus.
11.
Lipfice.
8vo.
very faulty.
12.
Holm.
8vo.
3 torn.
1766, 1767, 
1768.
'Tom. I.
in 2 parts, p.
1327.
Animals.
60.
Tom. 2.
p. 736.
Vegetables.
— * no.
Tom. 3.
p. 236, Foflils, — 131.
yindol\ 
t 412 ] 
Vindoh.
8vo.
3 torn, i, 1767.
2, i^, 1770.
From the foregoing ; the pages correfponding.
13.
Gottingce et Gotha.
8vo.
1774.
21a.
7Qfn, 2.
only, by Dr. Murray^ with Linn<eus\ ad- 
ditions and emendations.
Hypothesis nova de febrium intermittent 
tium caufa.
Harderouic.
\x.o. 1735.
— 10.
Alfoy in the firfl: volume of the Amanitates Aeade- 
ntic^, printed at Ley den, 1749.
— — 
FUNDAMENTA BOTANICA.
Amft.
1 2 mO.
p. 36.
1736.
— —17.
Abo^e.
4to.
p. 32.
1740.
Stockholm.
8vo.
p. 23.
1740.
Amft.
8vo.
p. 51.
1741.
Pari/lis.
8vo.
p. 26.
1744.
i/^/^.
8vo, p.
31.
1747.
BiBLIOTHECA BOTANICA.
Amjl, I2m0.
p. 153.
i/^?/^.
8vo.
p. 124.
1747.
AmJlaL 8vo.
p. 220.
1751.
— 17.
MusA Cliffortiana., ^^/.
4to.
1736.
18.
Genera Plant arum.
Lugd, Bat. 8vo.
p. 384.
935- genera.
1737.
— 20.
Lugd.
Bat, 8vo.
p. 527.
102 1.
p:enera, 
1742.
Fariftis, 8vo.
p.413.
102 r.
genera.
1743.
Hal^.
8vo.
p. 441.
1090.
genera.
1752.
Holmi^, 8vo.
p. 580.
1 239.
genera.
1 764, 20.
Vienna.
8vo.
1767, 
VlRIDARIUM 
C 413 ] 
ViRTDARiuM Cliffortianum.
Amft.
8vo.
1737- — — 
CoROLLARiuM Generum : et Methodus 
SEXUALis. Lugd.
Bat. 8vo.
1737.
~ 
Flora Lapponica.
Jmft, Svo. ly^J- 21 
Critica Botanica: cui accedit Browallii 
difcurfus, de introducenda in fcholas hif- 
toriiE naturalis ledione.
Lugd, Bat, 8vo.
1737- — — — 
Hortus Cliffortianus.
Amft, fol.
1737.
Ariedi ldc\\yQ\og\2i.
Lugd.
Bat. 8vo.
1738.
Classes Plantarum.
Lugd.
Bat, 8vo.
1738.
Oratio de memorabilibus in insectjs.
In the S'wedijh tongue.
Holm.
8vo.
1739.
In L01V Dutch.
Lugd, Bat. 1 2 mo.
1741.
-^n S^edtjh : enlarged.
Holm.
Svo. 1747.
In Latin : with the two fucceeding, in the Jmm* 
nitates Jcadem, vol.
ii.
1751.
— ~« 
Oratio de peregrinationum intra patriam 
neceffitate.
Upfal.
4ro.
1742.
— - 
Lugd.
Bat. Svo.
1743.
Oratio de Telluris habitabilis Incre- 
mento.
Lugd.
Bat. Svo.
1744.
— 
Iter Oelandicum et Gotlandicum.
In the S'wedijh tongue.
Holm, Svo. p.
344.
tab.
2. 1745.
— 
Flora Suecica.
Holm.
Svo; p.
392.
tab.
i. 
1745- 
Holm, Svo. p.
464.
tab.
i. 1755.
— .
[ 414 ] 
Page 
Anlmalia Sueci£.
Holm, 8vo.
1745.
Defcribed, and the fynonyms annexed.
Fauna SuEciCA.
Holm.
8vo.
p. 411.
tab.
2. 
1746.
Holm.
8vo.
p, 559.
tab.
2. 1761.
— 38.
Flora Zeylanica.
Holm.
8vo.
tab, 4, 1747.
40.
Iter Westrcgothicum.
Holm.^wo.
p. 284.
1747.
tab.
5. 
In the S-xvedifi language.
HoRTus Upsaliensis.
Holm.
8vo.
1748.
41.
Materia Medica, de plantis.
Holm.
8vo.
1749.
~ — — 44- 
Liffia, 8vo.
1772.
Vindohcn.
8vo.
1773.
Amcenitates Academics.
7 torn.
8 vo.
~ 45.
Tom. I.
Liigd.
Bat. tab.
15.
1749.
220.
Lipfi£.
tab.
17.
1749- 
Tom. 2.
Holm, et y^;^/?.
t. 4.
1751, 
1752.
— — 237, 
Tom. 3.
//i?/?;^.
ttAmJl, t.
4. 1756.
249.
Tom. 4.
i/i?//;?.
et yf;?;?/?.
t. 4.
1760.
265.
Tom. 5.
et Amjl, t.
3. 1760.
288.
Tom. 6.
Holm, et An^fi.
t. 4.
1763.
317.
Torn.
7. Holm, et v^;?;^/.
t. 7.
1769.
343.
Philosophia BoTANicA.
8vo.^i75i.
46, 
Vienna, 8vo.
1755.
Viennce, 8vo.
1763.
Vienna, 8vo.
1770.
Berclin, 8vo.
1779.
By 7.
G. Gleditch, 
Iter Scanicum.
//i?/;^.
8vo, p.
434, t.
6. 
1751.
— • — ~ 35« 
In the Swedijh language.
Species 
t 4t5 ] 
Pag« 
Species Plantarup^.
2 torn.
Holm, 8vo.
2 torn.
/i'i?/;;^.
8vo.
1762.
~ 50.
2 torn.
Vindob.
8vo.
1764.
From the Stockholm edition, the pages corre- 
fponding.
Museum Tessinianum.
Holm.
fol.
1753.
52.
Museum Regis Adolphi.
i7<5/;;^.
fol.
max.
1754-   — — 55- 
^^/f/^?^/^ii,IterPalj£ftinum.
8vo.
1757.
58.
Loeffiingii, Iter Hifpanicum.
i^i?/;??.
8vo.
1758.
58.
puhlijhed by hiiiHJEifS,/rom pofihumous papers ; 
in the S'wedip tongue, 
Oratio regia* in SwediJJo^ Upfal.
fol.
1759.
' 
DiSQuisrno de fcxu Plant arum.
Petrop; 
4to.
1760.
— — 56.
Genera Morborum.
L7/)y22/.
4to.
176^, — 166.
Museum Regin^ Ulric^^: : et MuseiRe* 
CIS Adolphi.
Tomi 2di prodromus.
Holm.
8vo.
1764.
— — 108.
Clavis Medicine.
Holm.
8vo.
1766.
— • 200.
Mantissa Plantarum, Generum editionis 
fext^e, et fpecierum editionis fecundse.
Holm, 8vo.
1767.
1^0." 
Mantissa altera, cum Appendice Regni 
Animalis.
Holm, 8vo.
1771.
— 201.
The feparate papers written by Lin- 
N/Eus, and publiihed in the A£la Upfalienfm^ 
'fro:n the years 1732 to 1744, are enumerated 
in page — — « 202; 
Thofe which were publiihed in the Stocks 
holm 
t 416 ] 
Page 
; holm A8s^ from the year 1739 to 1770, arc 
enumerated — — 203—209.
In ^Novi Commentary Academic Scien- 
tiarum Imperialis Petropolitan.
Tom. vii.
p. 315—320.
an.
1758, 1759, 4to.
1761, 
a paper, 
De NiTRARiA, planta obfcura explicata.
268.
DISSERTATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE 
AMCENITATES ACADEMICS.
I. Botanical.
I. Botanical and Medical Hiftories of particu- 
lar Genera or Species of Plants.
Page.
1. j^ETULA nana.
Dwarf Birch -tree.
222.
2. Ficus.
Hiftory of the Fig-tree 
Genus.
— 222.
3. Peloria.
Hybrid kind of Toad-flax.
224.
8. Pajfiflora.
Genus of Paffion Flower.
227.
9. Anandria^ Coltsfoot with a connivent 
Caly^, — — 228, 
10.
Acrojikum^ 
[ 417 ] 
Pagf 
lo.
Acrofticum^ Acrofticum Genus de- 
fcribed.
— — 229.
21.
Lignum Coluhrinum, Officinal Snake- 
wood.
— — 240* 
22.
Senega.
Rattle-fnake Root.
— 241 ; 
26.
Splachnum.
Splachnum Mofs defcribed.
245.
35.
Euphorbia, Hiftory of the Euphorbium 
Genus.
— — 252: 
40.
Rheum, Hiilory of the Rhubarb Plant.
256.
65* Cynomorium, Maltefe Fungus defcribed.
278.
81.
Buxbaumia.
Buxbaum's Mofs.
— • 296.
85.
Spigelia, Hiftory of Worm-grafs, or 
Indian Pink.
— — 301.
110.
Coffea.
Hiftory of the Coffee Shrub.
325.
1 14.
Aljlromeria, Genus Alftromeria de- 
fcribed.
— ~ 3.^I• 
I22.
Raffia.
Hiftory of the Quaffi Root.
340.
128.
Opobalfamum, Balfam of Gilead Shrub.
345.
137.
"Thea.
Pliftory of the Tea Shrub.
— 355, 
138.
Chocolata.
Chocolate Tree and Nut. 358.
2. Particular Colle6lions of Plants.
29.
Plant^e Camtchatcenfes.
Rare Plants from 
Kamtchatka.
— — 247." 
62.
Cent.
I. rarior, Plant.^ ift Century of 
rare Plants.
— — 276.
63.
Cent.
II.
rarior.
Plant.
2d Century of 
rare Plants.
— — 276, 
97.
Pugillus Jam. Plant.
Rare Jamaica 
Plants.
~ — 314; 
106.
Planta Africana.
Rare African Plants.
Ec 
^. Florae; 
C 418 ] 
3. Flora i or Lifts of the Plants of particular 
Countries, fyftematically arranged.
Page 
55.
Flora AngUca. The Plants of England.
269.
56.
Flora Amhoinenjis, The Plants of Am- 
boina.
— — 270.
68.
Flora Alpina.
Alpine Plants.
— 281.
69.
Flora PaUJiina.
The Plants of Palefline.
281.
70.
Flora Monfpelienfis.T htFhnts of Mont-- 
pelier.
— — - 283.
78.
Flora Danica, The Plants of Denmark.
293, 
95.
Capenfis, The Plants of the Cape 
of Good Hope.
— 311.
96.
Flora Jamaicenjis, The Plants of Ja- 
maica.
— ~ 313* 
104.
Flora Belgica, The Plants of Holland.
320.
4. Mifcellaneous Botanical Papers.
6. Plants Burferian^, Burfer's rare Plants.
226.
12.
Sponfalia Plant arum.
The Sexes of 
Plants.
~ — 230.
13.
Genera Plant, nova.
New Genera of 
Plants.
— — 232.
24.
Gemmae Arhorum, Buds of Trees.
— 244.
25.
Pan Suecicus.
The SwediHi Pan.
— 245.
27.
Mufcorum Semina.
Seeds of MolTes. 246.' 
31.
Genera Plant, alia, Ne^^ Genera of 
Plants.
— ' —   249.
32.
Plants Hyhridif, Hybrid Plants de- 
fcribed.
— — 250.
46.
Vernatio Arborum, Foliation of Trees.
261.
48.
Demonjirationss 
[ 419 ] 
Page 
48.
Demonftrationes Plant, Demonftration of 
Plants in the Upfal Garden.
263.
49.
Herbationes Upfaliens, Plants of the Bo- 
tanical Excurfions round Upfal.
264.
54.
Stationes Plantarum, Natural Soils of 
Plants.
—   — 268, 
64.
Somnus Plantarum.
Sleep of Plants, 277, 
66.
Metamorphofts Plant.
Caufe of Varieties 
in Plants* — • — 279.
67.
Calendarium Florid, The Kalendar of 
Flora.
— — 280.
83.
^ranfmutatio Frumenti, Tranfmutation 
of Grain.
— 298.
91.
Au5iores Botanici.
Lift of Botanic 
Writers.
— — 306.
98.
Nomenclatura Plantarum.
Vernacular 
Names of Plants.
314.
113.
termini Botanici, Terms of the Lin- 
naean Botany explained.
— 331.
117.
Reformatio Botanices, Improvements in 
the Science of Botany.
— 334.
134.
Fundamenta Agroftographia, Scientific 
Hiftory of the Genera of Grain and 
Grafles.
~ 352.
47.
Jncrementa Botanices, Origin and Hif- 
tory of Botany.
^ — 262, 
115.
NeSlaria Florum, Honey Glands of 
Flowers.
' ^ ^^^l 
1 16.
Fundamenta FruSfificationis, Eflential 
Parts of Fru6tification demonftrated.
333,' 
}i8.
Prolepfis Plantarum, Philofophy of Ve- 
getation, — 335' 
E e 2 120.
Prckpfi^ 
[ 420 1 
Page 
^20.
Prokpjis Plantarum.
Philofophy of Ve- 
getation.
— — 337* 
11, LiTHOLOGICAL PaPERS.
4. CoralliaBaltica.
Corals of the Baltic Sea. 224.
15.
Chryftallorum Genera, Formation of 
Chryftals.
— — 2^3.
III.
Miscellaneous.
7. Hortus Upfalienjis, Hiftory of the Upfal 
Garden.
— — 226.
17.
Flora Oeconomica, Economical Ufes of 
Plants.
—   — 235.
18.
Curiofttas Naturalis, Reafons for the 
Study of Natural Hiftory.
— 236.
19.
Oeconomia Nature.
Economy of NcLtm^.
237.
41.
Cui Bono ?
To what Ufe, Natural Hif- 
tory anfwered.
— — 257.
50.
InJiru5iio Mufeu Method of conftrud- 
ing Mufeums for Natural Hiftory.
264.
60.
Horticultura Academica.
Science of Gar- 
dening.
— — 275, 
S7.
Arboretum Suecicum, The various ufes 
of the indigenous Trees of Sweden.
304.
. 88, Frutetum Suecicum.
The various Ufes of 
the indigenous Shrubs of Sweden.
304, 
92.
InJiru5iio Peregrinatoris.
Inftrudlions for 
Travellers.
— — 307; 
53.
Planta tinElaria, Vegetables ufed in 
dyeing.
^ — 307.' 
102.
Politia Natura.
Police of Nature.
— 318; 
J 45' W^^^ Mufcorum, Ufes of Moffes.
— 366.
J 47.
Ufui 
C 421 ] 
Page 
147.
Ufus Hiftoria Naturalis.
Ufes of Na- 
tural Hiftory.
— — 368.
148.
Neceffitas Hijl.
Nat. Roffia.
Neceffity 
of promoting the Study of Natural 
Hiftory in RulTia.
— — 369.
149.
RarioraNorwegi^, The more rare fub- 
jeds of Natural Hiftory in Norway.
370.
1 50.
Iter Cbinenfe.
Natural Produdions in a 
Voyage to China.
—   373* 
IV.
Medical Papers.
14.
Fires Plantarum.
Virtues of Plants de- 
termined from their natural Cha- 
racters.
• —-232..
23.
Calculi Generatio, Origin of the Stone 
in the Bladder.
— -— 242.
28.
Materia Medica ex Animalihus.
Animal 
Subftances ufed in Phyfic.
— 247.
30.
Sapor Me die amentorum.
Virtues of Plants 
determined by the Tafte.
— 248.
33.
Ohftacula Medicine, Impediments to the 
Improvement of Phyfie.
— 251..
36.
Materia Medica ex Lapidibus.
Foflil 
Subftances ufed in Phyfic.
253.
37.
Hyemis Morhi, Difeafes of the Winter 
Seafon.
— — 253^ 
38.
Odores Medicament orum.
Virtues of 
Plants determined by the Smell.
— 254.
34.
'Plants efculenta.
Efculent Plants of 
Sweden.
— 251^ 
42.
Nutrix Noverca, Perfwafive to Mothers 
to nurfe their own Children.
— 257/ 
51, PlanU 
[ 422 ] 
Page 
51.
Plants officinales.
Lift of the officinal 
Plants of the Swedifti Mat. Medica 265* 
52.
Cenfura ftmplicium.
Articles to be ex- 
punged from, and introduced into 
the Materia Medica.
— 266.
71.
Fundamenta Valetudinis, Foundation of 
good Health and a ftrong Confti- 
tution, — ~ 283.
72.
Specifica Canadenjla.
North American 
Plants of fmgular Virtues.
— 284.
73.
^c^/^n^Ci^^m.
The Sallads of Europe.
286.
76.
Morbi Nautarum, Difeafes of Seamen.
288.
77.
Fekis Upfalienfts.
The Upfal Fever.
— 291.
79.
Panis Di^teticus.
The different kinds 
of Bread.
— — 293.
82.
Exanthemata Viva.
Exanthematic Ani- 
malcula.
— — 296.
84.
Culina mutata.
Change of Vegetable 
Aliments fince the Times of the 
Antients.
— — 299.
86.
Medicamenta graveolentia.
Foetid Medi- 
cines.
— — 302.
90.
Senium Sakmoneum.
Solomon on Old- 
age, explained.
— — ^06.
99.
y^^r;&^^//^^i//J.
Brief Hiftory of the Air. 315.
X03.
nefes Medico.
Medical Proportions.
319.
107.
Macellum olitorium.
Culinary Herbs.
322.
109.
Diata acidularis.
Regimen under the 
ufe of Chalybeate Waters.
— 325.
111.
Inebriantia, Narcotics and Inebriants.
328.
112.
Morfura Serpentum, The Bite of ve- 
nomous Animals.
~ 329- 
119.
Frum efculenti.
Efcuknt Fruits.
— 337- 
r 123.
Rapbania.
[ 4^3 ] 
Page 
123.
Raphanla.
Acute epidemic Epilepfy.
34^.
124.
Genera Mcrhorum, Claffification of Dif- 
eafes.
— — 166 — 206.
125.
Motus polychrefius.
Benefits of Exercife.
343.
126.
Hortus culinaris.
Culture of Kitchen ^ 
Garden Plants.
— — 344, 
129.
Bi^ta Mtatum, Regimen for the dif- 
ferent Stages of Life.
— 345.
130.
MorbiArtifcum, Dik3.{es of TrsLdefrnm, 3471 
131.
Lepra, Leprofy of Bothnia and Finland.
347, 
136.
Fervida et Gelida, The Ufe and Abufe 
of hot and cold Food and Drink.
354, 
139.
Spiritus Frumenti, Spirituous Liquors.
361, 
135.
Varietas Cihorum.
Effeds of Variety in 
Foods.
— ~ _ 3^^^ 
140.
C7/^j.
Virtues of Mint.
~ 3$^^ 
141.
Furgantia indigena.
Vegetables of a purg- 
ing Quality indigenous in Sweden.
361.
143.
Metamorphofis humana.
Changes incident 
to Man in the different Stages of life.
364, 
144.
Curageneralis.
Cure of Difeafes by the 
Regulation of the Non-naturals.
— 365.
V. ZoOLOCICAt.
I. Defcriptions of particular Animals.
^ 
20.
Taenia.
Hiftory of Tape Worms.
— 238.
39.
Nomiuca Marina.
Phofphoreal Nereis.
255, 
53.
Camsfamiliaris, Natural Hiftory of the 
^^g- — ~ 257; 
57.
Cervus Tarandus.
Of the Rein-Deer.
275.
58.
OwJr/V^.NaturalHiftoryoftheShcep.
273!* 
59' Mus 
C 424 ] 
Page 
59.
Mus Porcettus.
Of the Cavy, or Guinea 
Pig.
— — — 274.
74.
PhaUna Bomhyx, Of the Silk-worm.
286.
100.
Sus Scrofa, Natural Hiftory of the Hog. 316.
108.
MeldeVeJicatorius, llx^oxy of ihthYiditX' 
ing Beetle.
— — 323^.
127.
Hirudo Medicinalis.
Natural Hiftory of 
the Leech, — — 344, 
142.
Siren lacertim.
The Siren, or Mud- 
Iguana.
— — — 3^3- 
2. Defcriptions of particular Colledlionj.
5. Amphibia Gyllenborgiana, Count Gyllen- 
borg's Cabinet of Amphibious Ani- 
mals.
— — 225.
II.
Mufeum Principis.
Rare Animals pre- 
fented to the Univerfuy Mufeum 
by Prince Adolphus, defcribed.
— 230, 
16.
Surinamenfia Grilliana.
Mr. Grill's Su- 
rinam Serpents.
— 235*.
61.
Chinenfta Lagerftromiana, Chinefe Pro- 
du6tions in Natural Hiftory — 276.
105.
Anthropomorpha, Animals of the Simia 
Genus defcribed.
— • — 320- 
121.
Centuria Infe^orum.
A Century of rare 
Infcds.
— — 339- 
3. Mifcellaneous Zoological Papers.
yg.
Mgrationes Avium.
The Migration of 
Birds.
— — 287.
43.
Hofpita Infe^lorum.
Infeds referred to 
the Plants gn which they are found.
258.
44.
Mracula 
C 425 3 
Pag« 
44.
Miracuh InfeEiorum.
Properties of fome 
extraordinary Infedls defcribed.
259*' 
45.
Noxa Infe5lorum.
Noxious Infedts enu- 
merated.
— — 260.
89.
Pandora InfeBorum, Infedls referred to 
their appropriate Plants.
— 305, 
80.
Natura Pelagi, View of the Contents 
of the Ocean.
— 294.
94.
Animalia compofita.
Structure of Corals 
and Corallines, 5tc.
^lo* 
10 1.
Generatio ambigena.
Theory of Genera- 
tion.
— — 317.
132.
Fundament a Ornithologia, Inftitutions of 
Ornithology.
— — 317.
133.
Fundament a Entomologice, Inftitutions of 
Entomology.
— — 351; 
•146.
Mundus invifihilis.
DifTertation on Mi- 
crofcopical Animalcula.
: — 3^7; 
F£ 
M I S TA K £ S.
o 
MISTAKEN.
Pajc 14, line »o.
after Suecicat add Edit, t* 
J 7, .
15.
for abiijenty read abiiJJ'enU 
aj.
— — 15.
for 346, read 364.
43.
JO.
dele would have.
122.
19.
for 335, read 235.
2^0.
• 16.
for granite, read Granites, 
^02.
— - 30.
for yVxaf, read fexus.
203.
30.
for trydaSiylisy read tridaffjliu 
205.
-— 5.
for Fanum, read Fcetium.
207.-—— 8.
for inJtgi/ia,Tezd indigen^r.
aog.
— — 19.
for nciperemyTQzd inciperem, 
8. de/e given.
240..
47.
for 358, read 327.
240.
30.
for 557, read 577.
^ 
3^0.
— 2.
for interfting, read interefting.
301.
24.
for 1276, read 1076.
2 J J, 18.
for Acetariat read Acetaria.
27.
for BraSlCj read BraBea.
3^6.
— « 21.
for Forjkahoy read ForJkobUa, 
370.
18.
for 933, read 983.
-84..
34.
coi.
3. for 1.15.
read 11.15.
fbid, a6.
tol, 3.
for 87, read 687.