Google 
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online.
It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain.
A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired.
Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country.
Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.
Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you.
Usage guidelines 
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible.
Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians.
Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you: 
+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes.
+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us.
We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.
+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search.
Please do not remove it.
+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal.
Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries.
Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed.
Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world.
Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.
About Google Book Search 
Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful.
Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences.
You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
at |http: //books .google .com/I 
600037887/ 
mm 
1 
f 
SYSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT 
J OP 
BRITISH PLAJSTTS.
IN FOUR VOLUMES.
/ 
»* :• • I ' 
I 
\ 
H. Baldwin and Son, Printetf^ 
N«w Bridge-stieet, Londoiu 
§YSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT 
OF 
BRITISH PLANTS; 
WITH AN EASY 
« 
INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF BOTANY.
ILLUSTRATED BY COPPER.PLATES.
BY WILLIAM WITHERING, M.D. F.R.S.
Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences at iMbon; Fellow of 
the Linnean Society ; Honorary Member of the Koyal 
Medical Society at Edinburgh,, SfC, 
THE FOURTH EDITION, IN FOUR VOLUMES : 
CORRECTED AKD EKLARGED 
BY WILLIAM WITHERING, ESQ.
Of the College of Glasgow and University of Edinburgh ; Extra' 
ordinary Member of the Royal Medical Society ; 
Fellffw of the Linnean Society, SfC, 
* 
'* Primttsgcadussapientiasestresipsasnosse." Lxuh.
•* Increscunt quotannis Scientiae, cmendantur quotidie, ct ad festigium 
suum optatum sensim jensimque, plurium vironun opera etstudUi 
3 unctisy feliciter pruperant.
' ' thunbzrc.
VOL.
I. 
^ ' r 
LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR T.
CADELL, JUN.
AND W.
DAVIES, G, AND J.
ROBINSON, WYNNE AND 8CH0LEY, J.
WALKER, J.
^ CVTUZht, AND JAMES WALLIS.
1801.
ADVERTISEMENT.
^f^Hmmrtti^^mimtft^miimmm 
JL HE unexpectedly rapid sale of the Third Edition 
of this work has compelled the Editor df the pre« 
S^ent Edition to submit it to the Public under 
several very unfavourable circumstances^ which it 
is here unnecessary to particularize.
Nevertheless^ he trusts^ the discriminating Bo** 
tanist will think the numerous corrections and 
additions sufficient to justify the publication^ espe- 
cially when it is considered that the last thoroughly 
reformed Edition was nearly ten years in prepara- 
tion^ this only three.
Beside the many respectable names contained 
in the list affixed .
to the Preface^ several other 
correspondents have liberally contributed their 
assistance : particularly 
Mr. Geoi]ge Qaley, StrangewaySy near Manchester.
Mr. W.
EvANS^ Tildsley^Chaddock^ Lancashire.
Sir Tho. Frankland^ Bart.
Thirklelyy near York.
Mr. Garnier^ Wickhamj near Fareham, Hants.
Rev. Tlio.
GisBORNEj Yoxall Lodge, near Litchfield.
Rev. John Harriman, EgUstme, near Barnard^ Castle, 
county of Durham.
VI ABVERTISBMENT.
Tho. Andrew Knight^ Esq. EUoriy near huMow.
Rev. Jelinger Stmons> Vkarage, Hackney y Author of 
the Pocket Flora.
Mr. Travis^ Surgeon^ Scarborough.
Dawson Turner^ Esq. Yanmmth.
The Larcrss, near Blrnungliani?
October 1800» 
• • - .* 
PREFACE 
TO THE THIRD EDITION, 
xiiNCovRAGED by the public reception of the for- 
mer editions^ the Author has spared neither labour 
nor expence^ to render this as perfect as his op- 
portunities and abilities would permit.
The pro- 
gress of botanic knowledge is so rapid, and the 
discoveries so numerous, both at home and abroad, 
that this^ may rather be regarded as a new work 
than as a re-publication of an old one.
On this 
account, a short enunieration of the more important 
changes may possibly be expected by the reader.
The Genera are now taken from Schreber's 
G&KERiL Plant ARUM^ published at Frankfort ia 
1789, and 1791.
The structure of each Genus is 
illustrated by references to such figures as are best 
calculated to give an idea of it, particularly those .
in the Institutims of Tournefort, the works of ' 
Gjertner, and the Cryptogamia of Hedwig.
The 
exceptions and observations at the end of each 
Genus are also considerably augmented » 
ft 
The characters oi the species have been com- 
pared with the third edition of the Species Plan- 
/<?r«;«, and with Gmelin's^S^j/^;;/^ Naturae published 
Vlll PREFACE.
at Lcipsic in 1791.
Many of the Specific Ctii-» 
racters^ particularly in the more difficult tribes^ 
are entirely new, and mahy have lindergone con- 
siderable alterations- The Author has ;iot hesi- 
tated in these attempts at improveit^eht, because 
he is fully convinced that neither the amendment, 
nor the entire change of these characters can pro* 
duce confusion in the science, so long ds the trivial 
Aaihes remain inviolable.
Many of the additional descriptions taken front 
foreign Authors have been discarded, to make 
toom for others made by the Author or his friends 
from recent examinations of the plants as they gro\V 
in this island : other descriptions are shortened, 
Especially where the plants are v^ell known, and 
indubitably distinguished by the specific character.
The references to figures so ably executed by 
Dr. Stokes for a great part of the secoild editiotf, 
are mostly preserved in this, though ndt without 
some changes in the order of excellence, the era(- 
sure of a few which were found to ht erroneous^, 
and of others which were thought too bad to bt 
quoted.
The historical facts relative to the older 
figures, stating which are copies and which originals, 
though perhaps thought curious by some few peo- 
ple, are omitted, partly because they are foreign to 
the purpose of this work, and partly to make room 
for additional references noiv given to infiniteljr 
better figures,* in the continuations of jAcatJi!^, 
PRSFACB.
a 
BuLLiAHD^ Hbdwig^Dxckson, Retzius, Seouier, 
Hoffman^ the Flora Rossica, the Flora Danica, thd 
Flora Londinensisy and the Transactions of the Lin*^ 
man Society % besides many from other writers^ 
before omitted, and from the following Books not 
before noticed, viz.
Allioni Flora Pedemontanay, 
Hoffman's Historia Saticuniy Kniphoff*s coloured 
impressions, Smith's and Sowerby's characteristic 
figures, St AC KHousE andVELLEY on Marine Plants^ 
and Woodville's Medical Botany ^ Swayne's Gra- 
tmna pasctta ^LndDiCKso:^'^ Fasciculi of dried plants 
are also referred to.
The English reader will perceive that consi- 
derable changes have been made in the Terms, by 
a nearer approach to the Linnean language ; but 
in this point the Author rather willingly follows 
than presumptuously attempts to lead the public 
taste ; and as the Explanatory Dictionary of terms 
is much enlarged and improved, he hopes that no 
person will have cause to regret the change.
The classes Gynandria, Monoecia, Dioecia^ 
and Polygamia are now incorporated with the other 
Classes; that is, the plants they contained are 
distributed, each in its proper class, according to 
the number of Stamens* This alteration in the 
System has not been made without thf approbation 
of Professor Thunberg, the worthy successor of thp 
great Linnaeus ;.
and it meets the concurrence of 
most of the first botanists of the age.
X pAefack.
The reader will find in the present edition^ 
many Species added to the British Flora, some of 
them non-descript : A few have been discarded be- 
cause confessedly not indigenous, but some dotibt- 
ful ones are yet retained, upon the principle, that 
their retention can produce no inconvenience, 
whilst their omission might be a real defect,' 
In the Cryptogamia class, and in some other 
parts where the Species are very numerous, new 
arrangements have been attempted, in hopes of 
facilitating their investigation.
The system of 
Agarics formed for the second edition, has been 
improved, and considerably augmented : and lastly, 
to gain more room, the uses of the different plants 
have been thrown into Notes at the foot of the 
page- 
The Author cannot conclude without expressing 
his gratitude for the very liberal assistance he has 
experienced, and his hopes of its continuance ; con- 
scious that the efforts of any individual would avail 
but little towards perfecting the botany of the 
British Islands.
Besides the list of contributors to the present 
edition he begs leave more particularly to mention 
the respectable names of, Mr. Afzelius,* Demon- 
strator of Botany in the University of Upsal, whd 
iooked over great part of the Author's collection.
PREFACB* XI 
and afforded many valuable observations concern*- 
ing the identity of several Swedish and English 
Species; — ^the Rev. Samuel Dickenson, who 
sent several curious observations on the difficult 
genus Agrostis; — Mn James Dickson, who 
fumi^ed many specimens and answered sever;^ 
queries respecting plants of the Cryptogamia class, 
in which he so particularly excels;— the Rev, 
Dr. GooDENOUGH, who, in addition to his masterly 
elucidation of the genus Carex in the Tmns.
of 
the Linn.
Society, sent sevejral specimens of the 
rarer kinds, and ascertained several doubtful species 
both in that genus and also in the Fuci ; — ^J.
W* 
GaiFFiTH, Esq. whose numerous and instructive 
specimens and observations have greatly enriche4 
the catalogue of Mosses and Lichens; — ^Dr, 
Hope, whose specimens from his own collection^ 
and from that of his late worthy father, the Pro- 
fessor of Botany at Edinburgh, have much contri- 
buted to elucidate the Flora of Scotland; — ^the 
Right Hon. Lady Elizabeth Noel, who furnished 
the first Byssus ever observed in fiructificatidn :-^ 
Dr. PuLTENET, whose specimens and remarks 
assisted in correcting some mistakes respecting 
some of the plants in the Southern Counties ;— 
Mr. Edward Rob son, who has enriched the work 
with more new Species, and several valuable obser* 
vations on the Plants of the Northern Counties ; — 
the Rev. Richard Relhan, whose indefetigable 
researches have greatly increased the Catalogue of 
:JCll PREFACE.
English plants; — Dr. J.
E.Smith, who has ever 
shewn the utmost readiness to answer such en- 
quiries as the Author has been led to make, parti- 
cularly such as depended upon the inestimable 
Herbarium, so happily for science, in his possession; 
—John Stackhouse, Esq. who, with tjie ut- 
most liberalty, contributed by every means in his 
power to illustrate the Fuci and ConfcrVaB;'-^thc 
Rev. G.
S WAYNE, whose practical knowledge 
of the Grasses enabled him to furnish many ob- 
servations of high importance to agriculture ;•— 
Sir Charles Thunbekg, who, in the most hand- 
some manner, sent a collection of Swedish plants, 
which have not a little assisted in clearing up doubts 
respecting some species insufficiently discriminated 
by LinnsBus ;— Thomas Woodward, Esq. the 
fruits of whose accurate and unceasing researches 
need not be particularly mentioned ; they are con-* 
spicuous in almost every page of the work.
It would be easy to add the names of several 
other persons whose friendship and assistance would 
appear highly honourable to the Author, but some 
he is restrained from mentioning, and others will be 
found in the following List, and also affixed to 
their respective communications.
A List, pf the Names of those who have favoured 
this Edition with their Assistance.
Addm Avt^EiAVSi A.
M. .
Demonstrator of Botany in tkc 
University of Up^aL^ &fc.
iieverend Arthur Aikin.
Pn Thomas Arnold, Felhw of the Royal College pfPhy^ 
sictanSf and of the Royal Medical Society of J^cfyh' 
Inrgky Physician ^t Leicester.
Mr. William Atkinson, ofDalton in Ijancaskire* 
4 
Hev. W.
Baker, of Stout's Hill, Gloucestershire* 
G. Bourne, Esq. of Grimley, IVorcester shire* 
^r.
Brown, Surgeon^ Edinburgh, 
Reverend Samuel Dicksn60n, L.
L, B.
Rector ifBlymhill^ 
Staffordshire, 
Mr, James Dickson, F.
L. S.
Author of the Plant Cryp^ 
tosam.
BritannicB, andptiblisher of Fasciculi of dried 
fUmts.
Dr. J.
Evans, Physician ai Shfewslmry.
Davies Giddy, E§q.
Tredrea^, Cormuolh 
Rev, SapfiueJ Goodenough, L.L.D, F.R,S, &F.L.S, 
Mr. John GpuGH, Kendal, Westmoreland.
J. Wynne Griffith, Esq. of Gam, ntar D^bigk* 
Mr. Isaac Hall, of Newton Cartmel, Lancashire* 
Mr. J.
A. Hunter, Nurseryman, Perry Jiill, near Bir^ 
mingham.
Thoms^s Ch. Hope, M.
D. A.I^.S. Professor of Chemistry 
in the University of Edinburgh.
Matthew Knappe, Esq. Shenley, Buckinghamshire^ 
Matthew Martyn, Esq.
Mr. Thomas Milne, late Curator of the Botmic Garden at 
Oxford, 
f xiv 3 
James Norris^ Esq. Nonsuch Houses Devizes^ JVtlishire.
Bichard Pulteney^M,D.
F. R.
S. S.
Lon; apd Edin.
arid 
Y.lt.S, Blandford, Dorsetshire^ 
Mr, Edward Robsok, A.
L. S.
Darlington^ Dwhant^ 
Rev. Richard Relhan, A.
M. F.
R, S, and F, L.
S. 
J. E.
Smith, M.
D. F.
R. S.
P. L.
S. &c.
* .
' .
John Sneyd, Esq. Belmont, Staffordshire.
John Stackhouse, Esq. F.
L. S, AiUhor of the , Nete^s 
Brit<tnmca.
Reverend George Swayne, A..M* Author of the Grainina- , 
Pascua, 
Rev. T.
Thompson, Penzance, CormvalL 
Sir Charles P.
Thunberg, Professor of Botany and Me- 
dicine in the University' of Upsal, fife.
(^c.
Thomas VELtEY, Esq, Author of the Coloured JigurjBS cf 
Marine plants.
. ^ 
Thomas J.
Woodward, Esq. F.
L. S.
Bungay^ Suffolk.
• V 
AN EASY 
INTRODUCTION 
*rO THE 
STUDY OF BOTANY.
Of ikf Paris of a Floweu x 
X AIDING it for granted, that no person can be at 'a lofs to 
distinguish a Vegetable at first sight, from an Anima], or a 
Fo^U and tlifll all Yegelables are capable of producing Flowers 
and Fruit,* we shall immediately enter upon a description of 
the parts coihposij!ig a Flower; ioi as the Liniuean System of 
Botany is chieAy founded upon the mimftfr, 9hiKpe^ situation, and 
prf^fortwn of these parts, ao accuiittte knowledge and discrinu** 
nation of them is necefsary to understanding the Elements 
jpf the Sciencei 
« ' >   
#* Calyx (or Ewpafemen^) 
-I Blossoh (or Corolla,) 
, J Stamens {ot Chives.) 
A FLbVEU ttfnsist?
of the-J Pistils {orPointals.) 
I Seed-vessel (or Pcnc«r/?/w7«.) 
tSEE0s (or-iScw/yia.) 
To these may be added, the Nectary (or Honey-cvp,) and 
the Rsc£pta€LE, (or Receptaeulum,) 
. • 9y Ffwt '»^r« meimt fffffct Stids^ whetlvit (CCompMied, or not, 
Vol.1.
B 
2 INTRODUCTION TO 
Some flowers pofsefs all these diiferent parts^ whilst others 
are delicient in some of them ; but either Stamens or Pis- 
tils, or both, are to be found in every perfect flower.
The Calyx is formed of one, or more, green, or yellowish 
green leaves, placed at a small distance from, or close to, the 
blofsom.
The different kinds of Calyx are (1) a Cup, or Pmanthmn ; 
(2) an Involucrum, or Fence; (3) a Catkin, ot Jmenium ; 
(4) a Sheath, or Spatha; (5) a Husk, or Gluma ; (6) a 
Veil, or Calyptra; (7) a Curtain, ovVolva; but the most 
common Is the Cup, For an explanation of these see the 
Dictionary of Terms ; or look at a Rose, and the green cover- 
ing which incloses and supports the blofsom, is called the 
Cup. PL 3.
fig.
1. {a.
a. a, a.
a.) The Cup of a Polyanthus 
is represented in pi.
3. fig.
10.
According to Linnaeus, the Calyx is formed by the outer 
barkof the plant.- 
The Blossom is that beautifully coloured part of a flower, 
nvhich attracts the attention of every one* It is composed of 
one or more Petals, or Blofsom-leaves.
If it be in one piece, 
ss in the Polyanthus or Auricula, it is said to be a blofsom of 
cue Fetal; but, if it be composed of several parts, it i& 
nccordingly said to be a blofsom of one, iwOj three, &c.
or 
many parts or Fetals, Thus the blofsom of the Tulip is formed 
of dc Petals.; and the Garden Rqses bear blofsoms composed 
of many Petals.
The blofsom is supposed to be an expansion 
of the inner bark of the plant.
The Stamens arc slender thread-like substances, generally 
placed within the Bloisom, and surrounding the Pistils.
A 
Stamen is composed of two parts, the Filament (or Thread) and 
the- Anther ; but the Anther is the efsential part.
Stamens 
are formed of the woody substance of the plant.
The Pistils are to be found in the center of the flower: 
they are composed of three parts, the Germen (or 5cerf-6«rf), the 
Style (or 6'Affff),-aiid the Summit (or Stigma;) but the Style is 
often wantinjj.
Some flowers hav9 only one Pistil; others 
THE STUDY OF BOTANY.
5 
hav^ two^ three, four, &c.
and some have more than can be 
easily counted.
Linnaeus says, the Pistils are formed of the 
pith of the plant.
The Seed-vessel.
In the newly-opened flower, this part 
was called the Germen ; but when it enlai^es, and approaches 
to maturity, it is called the Seed-vefsel.
Some flowers have 
no Seed-vefsels : in which case, the seeds are said to be naked ; 
the Cup, however, generally incloses and retains the Seeds until 
they ripen ; and in the Tribe of Grafses, this office is frequQtitly 
performed by what was before called the Blofsom.
Seeds are sufficiently well known ; the substance to which 
they are affixed within the seed-vefsel is called the Receptacle 
of the Seeds.
Nectaries are those parts of a flower which are destined 
to contain or prepare a honey-like liquor.
The tube of the 
blofsom serves the purpofe of a Nectary in many flowers, as 
in the Honey-suckle r but in other flowers there is a peculiar 
organization Created for this purpose.
See pi.
5, fig.
1, 2, 3, 4* 
—It must be acknowledged, that the term Nectary is fre- 
quently given to parts which do not appear to contain, or to 
secrete any honey-like liquor; but until the uses of these 
parts be better ascertained, and the oeconomy of vegetable life 
more fully understood, an attempt to limit the use of the 
term, and to create new ones, would be premature.
The Receptacle is the Seat or Base to which the above- 
mentioned parts of a flower are fixed.
Thus, if you take a 
flower and pull off the Calyx, the Blofsom, the Stamens, the 
Pistils, and the feeds, or- Seed-vefsels, the remaining part at 
the top of the stalk is the Receptacle.
In many flowers the 
Receptacle is not a very striking part, but in others it is veYy 
large and remarkable : thus in the Artichoke, after we have 
taken away the leaves of the Calyx, the blofsoms, and the 
bristly substances, the paf't remaining, and so much esteemed 
as food, is the Receptacle.
Having thus briefly mentioned the difierent parts which enter 
into the composition of Flo^imnj let us, for the sake of illus- 
% .
INTIIODUCTION TO 
tration exatnine ^ome well-known instance.
Suppose it be a 
flower of the Crowk IsiPEaiAL* 
CROWN IMPERIAL.
Ca lyx None.
Blossom.
. .
. Six Petals.
(PI.
3, fig.
2. a, a.
a, a, a.
a,) 
Stamens.
, .
. Six.
(PI.
3, fig.
2. be.
be.
be.
be, be, be) Fila^ 
mmts six ; shaped like an awl.
(PI.
3, fig.
2. 
b, b, b.
b, 6.
b,) 
Anthers oblong ; four-cornered.
(PI.
3, fig.
2.^ 
c. c.
c. c.
c. c) 
Pistil Single.
Gcrmen oblong: three-coraered.
(PL 3, fig, 
2. d.) 
Stxjh longer than the Stamens.
(PI.
3, fig.
2.^.) 
Suntmit with three divisions.
(PI.
3, fig.
2^f.) 
S££D-v&9S£X..
An oblong capsule, with three cells and three 
valves.
(PI.
3, fig.
4.) represents the Seed- 
vefsel cut acrofs to shew the three celU ift 
which the seeds are contained.
.Seeds Numerous ; fiat.
By considering this description with some attention, and 
coitiparing it with the flower itself, and likewiso with the 
engraved figures, we shall soon attain a pretty good idea of the 
different parts of a flower.
If a Crown Imperial be not at 
hand, a Tulip or a Lily will correspond pretty well with the 
above description.
But if we examine the Crown Imperial, we 
shall find at the base of each Petal, a cavity or hollow, filled 
with a sweet liquor : this is the Nectary.
In pL 3, fig.
3, is a 
representation of one of the Petals separated from the rest, to 
$hew the Nectary at (A) and one of the Stamens (A.
i.) 
It is natural to ask the uses of these different parts— A full 
reply to such a question would lead to a long disquisition, 
curious in itself, but quite improper in this place.
Let it 
therefore sufiice to observe, that the production of perfect 
Seed is the obvious use of the flower ; that for this purpose 
the Gejcmen, the Sunnnit, ai^ the Anthers, are all that are ef- 
limtially nj5ce6ary j and pjwrhaps the Summit might be dispensed 
TUB STUDY OF BOTASY.
5 
with.
The fine dust, or Pollen, contained in the Anthers^ is 
thrown upon the Summit of the Pistil.
This Summit is moist, 
and the moisture acting upon the-particlcs of the PoUen, occa- 
sions them to explode, and discharge .
a very subtile vapour- 
This vapour pafsing through tJic minute, tubes of the Pistil, 
arrives at the Embryo Seeds- .
in .
the Germcn, and fertilizes 
them.
The seeds of many plants have been observed to be- 
come, to ^11 appearance perfect, witiiout this copamunication : 
but these seeds are incapable of vegetation.
In p], 9, fig.
5> 
at/, one of the Anthers is represented dischai^ging its Pollen r 
and at fig.
8. you see a particle of this Pollen greatly magnified 
and throwing out its vapour.
, The. Calyx and -the Petals seem 
primarily designed as covers, to .protect the .
mpre.
efsential 
parts ; and perhaps it is not too vain an imagination to believe, 
that a display of beauty was in some measure the design of the 
Cieator.
- Independent however of these uses, the Botanist takcfi advan-^ 
tage of the different number, figure, size, and situ&tiQnpf thesa 
parts, and afsumes them as the foundation of a systematic 
arrangeoicDt* He divid0$ all the v^etable productions upon 
the surface of the globe into Qlafses., Orders, Genera, Species, 
and Varietiesi The Clafsesr #r^ coi^poscd of Orders ; the 
Orders arc compofed of Genera ; the.
Genera of Species ; and 
the Species admit of Varieties.
Clafsification explained.
We are accustomed to consider the productions of Nature 
.as forming three distinct parts, called the Animal, tlie Vege- 
table, and the Fofsil or Mineral Kingdom.
Therefore, taking the matter up In this familiar languaj;e, let 
us endeavour to attain, au jdca.pf Clafses, Orders^ ^'C.
.by 
continuing the allusion.
Let us coinpare 
The Vegetable Kingdom to the Kingdom of Exgland^ 
....
Classes.
to the Counties ; 
....
Orders to the Hundreds ;.
....
Genera • • to the Parishes ; 
....
Species to the Villag es ; 
,•., Varieties,, ,..•,,.• to the Houses.
fi INTRODUCTION TO > 
Some have aptly enough compared 
A Class .
. • « .
to an Armt ; 
An Order ...
to a Regiment'^ 
A Genus ....
to a Gompant ; 
And a Species to a Soldier.
But no comparison can be more in point, tban that which 
considers the Vegetables upon the face of the globe, as ana« 
logons to the inhabitants ; thus, 
Vegetables resemble the Inhabitants in general j' 
Classes.
. .
. resemble the Nations ; 
Orders • • .
. resemble the Tribes ; 
Genera ....
resemble the Families ; 
Species ....
resemble the Individuals ; 
And Varieties are the same /ii(/m(&<a& in different cir- 
cumstances.
All the Vegetables in Great Britain are divisible, according 
to the System of Linnaeus, into' twenty-four Clafses.
These 
have, of late, been reduced to nineteen, as will beinore parti* 
cularly noticed hereafter.
The characters of the Classes are taken either from the 
nvm&er, the Ungtky the coanec^^, or the situation of the Sta- 
ikiENS ; but those founded upon the difference ofsituation^ are 
now given up ; the Genera and Species formerly so arranged, 
being now dispersed through the other Clafses, according to 
the number of their Stamens.
The characters of the Orders are most frequently taken 
{rom tiie number of the Pistils; but sometimes from some 
other circumstances, eitber of the Stamens or Pistils, as will 
be noticed in the proper place.
The ^sentid characters or marks of the Genera, a»d taken 
from ;5ome particulars in the flower, before unnoticed ; but 
generic descriptions are designed to contain an accotmt of all 
the most obvious appearances in every part of the flower.
THE* STUDY^ OF BOTANY.
7 
The Species are mostly characteriised from peculkrkies in 
the Stem or Leaves ; sometimes from parts of the Flower ; 
rarely from the Roots, ' > 
rflWeftW.— Both leaves and ftowtrs are subject to variations ; 
some of themevidently dependent upon* soil and situation : but 
others owing to causes hitherto (iDascGrtained.
Th«8 the leaves 
of the Ranunculus aquatilisy or Water ^Crowfoot, growing 
beneath the surface of the water; arcihuch more divided than' 
those which grow above the eurfads ; so that a person unac- 
quainted with this circumstance, would hardly bdieve .they 
belonged to the same plant.
Again ; the leaves of the Poly^* 
gonum amphibium, or 'Amphibious' Snakeweed, In wet situa- 
tions, are smooth ; but, in dry and wann situations, rough.
Some authors, therefore, have reckoned them as distinct 
species ; but, let them change srtudtioiis, and the appearances 
will be changed likewise.
But why the leaves of Mint arc 
sometimes curled, those of Holly or Mezereop v«^ricgated with 
white, &c.
is a more difficult matter to determine ; seeing that 
slips from these plants, though transplanted into different soils, 
do not lose their peculiarities : but youiig ones raised from 
seeds return to their original form.
It is evident, therefore, 
that these, however different in appearance, are not to be con- 
sidered distinct species, but only varieties.
No vkriations are more common than those of colour ; but 
desirable as these changes are to the Florist, they have little 
weight with the Botanist, who considers them as variable acci- 
dental circumstances, and therefore by no means admifsible 
in the discrimination of species.
It must, however, be allowed, 
that in some plants the colours of the flowers are not liable to 
variation, and that they' often afford the readiest marks of 
distinction ; on which account they are generally mentioned in, 
the course of this work^ 
Many flowers, under the influence of garden culture, become 
double ; but double flowers are monsters, and therefore can 
only rank in a System of Botany, as varieties.
When we 
consider, that every plant is composed of an outer bark, an 
inner bark, a wood, and a heart or pith ; and that flowers are 
formed by an expansion of these parts ; when we recollect 
9^ INTROPVCTiON TO 
tgoy lllaidnSUnemaieibraie4of Ukewood^siidiMaace; and 
ftfe tok}» Uut this woody sabsUnce was oiigiiialiy formed ^f 
many coats jc^' the inner baik consolidated, we skill not be at 
a I(^ to account for the production of douMe flowers.
TLe 
woody substance, nostead of bdi^ fonned into Stamens, is 
^cpanded into Petals.
Tbissceifta to be dfectad by too aoflKli 
saccnfonl nourishment, which prcients the wood beoouniig 
sufficiently sofid.
Hence, ft -i% that the flowns with many 
StaHTtts are uioce apt lo bgco n ie doable, and to a peater 
degree, than those which have few; as appeals in the Ane- 
none, the Ranunculus, the Poppnr, and the fiose.
Where tke 
Petals are so much mukiplied As to exdade.aU the Si 
the flowers ncce^afily become banen* .
.. 
w .' 
Of Qjfsis^ Orders^ and Genet a f' 
\0r CLASSES.
« 
By looking over the following Table of the Clares ; hj 
referring to plate I ; and sometiines by havizj^ recourse to the 
plants mentioned as examples, ' the learner will soon couamit 
the names and characters.
of the Cla&cs to memory, so Ihatt 
upon the first s^t of a flower, it will be no didicult matter for 
him to refer it to its proper Clais.
The examples are adduced 
by their English names, as being more obvioas to the young 
Xn^hsh Botanist, who will readily find the correspoadir^ 
linnaean names, by turning to the Genenl Index, at the end 
of the third resume.
In a lew instances, these examples, to 
fllustrate the Claises, are taken from forvi^a Genera; and 
fl^efcfore are net to belbundin the Index ; bus they are pLinu, 
very genoalh- known, and may be fbond ia almo:it e\er^- 
guden^ The Barnes of these are printed ia Italic* 
/ o front f^.
TOBSTDDT OF BOTAHY.
^ 1= « i sill • il ^ 
I" ':li^ III llj'^ =l|l « 
s-illl 3 5 S J.^il Sb^I   f'^ .
•; 
i.-jS d 
^5- 
D ^ u)(o t_so OlO -  
la's 
I :6-g 
SS|of 
|||||||||o g'^.^^^l^ ol.i 
Syu4uuuyrti5oS00B0a.-S'~ = (5 
.^ .^ .S -t; .5: .S rt; ,K .^ "-'?; = ^ -: = ct «  " o F t 
rc.s-?
;^§ 
g-2 fe-5-§ I >.:i£.| i -J 
o .2 -g ^ ^ -5 -c ;e 
s 
10 .
INTRODUCTION TO 
OF ORDERS.
A knowledge of tjbe Orders will very readily be attained, by 
observing, that 
In the Clafs DidySt amia, they depend upon the Seeds having 
a Seed-veisel, or not.
TzTAADYN AMiA, upon the shapc of the Seed- 
▼efsel.
» , .
Syxgex ESiA, upon the structure of the Florets.
(See the Introduction to that Clafs.) * 
« CaYPTOGAifiA^ upon the natural afisemblages of 
plants resembling one another* 
• 
And that in all the other Clafses, not particularly specified, 
theOrders depend upon the ntmber of the Pistils only» In 
determining the number of Pistils, count the Styles, as they 
appear at their bottom part, or base ; but if the Summits are 
Bot supported upon Styles, then count the Summits.
OF GENERJ.
Before we can understand the Characters of a Genus, %ve 
must again consider the different parts; which enter into the 
structure of flowers, and learn how these different parts may 
be modified.
As for instance.
THE STUDY OF BOTANT.
11 
The Calyx 
isay be either^ 
"Cup CPerimthmmJ fixed near to the flower; 
as in.th^.Rose^ the Cowslip, or die Fo&' 
glove.
IxvoLUcauMLy remote from the flower; 
generally belonging to the Rundle-bear- 
ing, or Umbelliferous plants ; as Hem- 
lock, or Carrot.
When it surrounds the 
base of the Umbel, it is called the general 
Involucrum ; but, when it surrounds the 
base of an Umbellule, or little Umbel, it 
is called the partial Involucrum, or Invo* 
lucellum.
Catkin, (Amentum) as in Willow, or 
Hasel.
Sheath, (Spatha) as in Snowdrop, or 
Daffodil.
' ' 
Husk, (Glump,) as in Wheat, Oats, or other 
different kinds of Grafses.
Ve I L,rCa/j(pfrflJ covering the fructification 
of some of the Mofses, and resembling an 
extinguisher.
Curtain, (Vdva) surrounding the Stems, 
and attached to the Pileus of many of 
the Fungi.
For a further explanation of these terms, and for references 
to the plates, examine the Dictionary of Botanical Terms, 
placed at the close of this introductory part.
- 
r of one Petal, asihe Foxglove or Primrose ; 
The Blossom j of many Pet a ls, as the Rose or Anemone; 
maybe either J but in many flowers tlie Petals are alto« 
C gether wanting.
For a more full explanation of the modifications of Petals 
and Blofsoms, see the Dictionary, and likewise plate 4, 
The St A MENS and Pistils have been sufficiently explained 
before; but it is necefsary here to remark^ according to 
l» 
nrrtiODtJCTiON to' 
tlie Linnaean System, which from its being fdunded upon tlie 
distinction of the sexes -of plants, ^is also cilled the Sexual 
S^'stem, that the Stamens are considered as the male, and the 
Pistils as the female parts ; so th Jlt flowers containing only the 
former, are sometimes called nfiale flowers, and such as have 
ohIv the latter, arc called female flowers; bn^ as the greater 
part of flowers contain both StamOns and Pistils, they are of 
course called Hermaphrodites.
i 
A Seed- 
V ESSEX, may .
• be either 
*- 
pa Capsule^ (Capstda) tnembranaccons, 
opening variously; as in Poppy, Cohvol-t 
vulus, Pimpernel.
a Pod, (Siliqua) momhrinaceous, of "2 
valves, the Seeds fixed tp each seam ; as 
in Wall-flower, and.Hontsty.
a Leg u MEN ; membranaceous, of 2 .valves, 
the Seeds fixed to one sdam only ; as in 
Pea and Broom.
, \ 
an Am-B A,G, fFoUiculusJ membranaceous, 
distended, of I valve, opening by a seam 
at o^c sid<?, no.t embracing the Seed ; as 
in Pcriwinkrc.
..   i 
a Berry, f Eac,c«^J pulpyi without valves; 
the Seeds separate; as in Gooseberry, 
Currant, .and Elder.
a Drupa, pulpy, and without valves, in- 
closing a hard niit, or stone, as the Chcrr}',- 
or the Peach." ' ' 
a PoMUM, fleshy or pulpy, covering a cap- 
sule containing the seed'; as in the Pear, 
or Apple.
^ a Cone, (Strohilus) tiled ; a^- in Fir, or Pine, 
These Terms will be found, more fully explained in the 
dictionary, and illustrated in plate.^* > ^ 
A Receptaclb (ReceptactdumJ is cither peculiar to one 
flower, as.
in the Rose, Lily, a^d Polyanthus ; or common t(} 
Tlowers may be 
collected into 
THE STUDY OF BOTANY.
13 
nany doWers^ as in the Daadelion, Hawkweed, and Artichoke^ 
(Sec the Dictionary.) 
"a Spike, (Spica.) 
a Panicle, (Panicula,) 
a Cory M BUS, (or broad-topped spihe.) 
a Bunch, (Racemus.) 
an Umbel, (Umhdla,) 
a Tuft, (Cyjna.) 
a Whirl, (VerticUlus.) 
.Catkin, (Amentmn,} 
Each of these terms may be found in the Dictionary, whert 
they arc explained by familiar examples, and by references to 
the plates.
« 
For a proper understanding of Compound Flowers, the 
reader is likewise referred to the Dictionar}^, and to the ex- 
planation of the 4th plate.
The reader having now, it is supposed, attained tolerably 
precise ideas of the constitution of Clafses and OrderSj^ and 
likewise of the parts upon which 'the Generic Characters are 
founded ; we shall select a few instances of well known plants, 
and, after investigating them systematically, we shall hardly be 
at a lofs to investigate others which we do not know.
Rules for Investigation, 
First, When a plant offers itself to our inspection, the dnt 
thing to be determined is the Clafs to which it belongs.
This 
is to be^ done by examining the number of the Stamens, aqd 
referring to the preceding Table of the Classes, Should 
there be a difficulty in ascertaining the number of the Stamens, 
on account of the number appearing different in different * 
lowers, though belonging to the same plant, it is advisable to 
, examine one or more of the flowers which are yet unopened, 
U INTRODUCTION TO 4 ^ 
for the Anthers are in that state more distinct, and we maj 
be certain that none of them have been lost.
Having fixed 
Upon the Clafs which we believe to be right, let iis turn to the 
Introduction to that Ciafs, in this volume, and if the perusal 
of this gives us no reason to alter our opinion, we are pretty' 
certain of being so far right.
It is best not to trust to the 
examination of one flower only ; for we shall sometimes find 
the number of Stamens to be really dlft'erent, in different 
flowers upon the same plant ; but in that case the clafsic 
character must be taken from the terminating flower.
Second, Having thus determined the Clafs, we must next 
refer to the beginning of that Clafs in the second or third 
volume, where we shall find the Synopsis of the Genera con- 
tained in that Clafs.
Here also we must look of how 
many Orders the Clafs consists ; and after observing the cir- 
cumstances by which the Orders are determined, we must 
compare these with the plant before us.
If the Order we refer 
it to has any subdivisions, we shall soon perceive under which 
of the subdivisions we should expect to find the Genus, 
T/«VJ.
After comparing the Flowers with the Characters of 
the different Genera contained in the Order, or in the par- 
ticular subdivision of the Order, we shall soon perceive with 
whicn of them it best corresponds.
We now turn back to the 
description of that Genus in this volume, and if the description 
agrees pretty exactly with our specimen in all the leading 
characters, we conclude that we are now certain of the Genus.
Doubtful matters will sometimes arise ; but these are for the 
most part made clear by observations subjoined to the generic 
descriptions.
In consulting the generic descriptions, the learner is desired 
' to pay particular attention to the structure of the Pistil, and 
especially to that of its Gcrmen, when it begins to ripen into a 
Seed-vefsel; because these parts being most efsential to the 
continuation of the species, they are lefs liable to variation 
than the other lefs important parts.
Fourth, If none of the Generic Characters at the beginning 
of the Clafs agree with the Flower, we must then look at tB9 
THE STUDY OF BOTANY.
15 
Md of the Order, or subdivision of the Order, to which we 
had referred it, and see what plants are there mentioned and 
included between crotchets.
If we have not found the plant 
before, it must be some one of these ; therefore looking for 
these in the Index to this volume, and comparing the generic 
deseriptions with the spetimen in hand, we shall not only dis- 
cover the Genus, but likewise the circumstance which occa- 
sio^d our perplexity.
Jfhe young Students are desired to practise the investigation 
of .Genera only, for a considerable time, before they attempt 
to ascertain a Species; and when by this means they have 
attained a pretty accurate knowledge of Clafses and Orders ; 
abo of the parts composing a flower, and its subsequent state 
pf fraitj or fructification, and likewise of the tenns employed 
in describing them, they may next proceed to determine the 
Species.
OF SPECIES.
« 
Fifth, Either in the second or third volume, we shall find 
the name, and the Efsential Character of the Genus, followed 
• by the several British Species which belong to it.
Wlienever 
the Species are numerous, they arc subdivided.
Consider,* 
then, with which of these subdivisions it agrees ; and having 
determined that, compare it with the several Specific 
Characters.
. Your plant will probably agree with some one 
of these.
If you still are in doubt, guided by the references to figures 
which follow the Specific Character, turn to such figures as 
you pofsefs ; and, to make the point still more certain, com- 
pare your plant with the descriptions which follow the refer- 
ences tp figures; for these will remove many an existing 
-doubt, and obviate many a pofsible mistake.
i* 
. If the plant in question be any remarkable Variety^ you will 
probably find it introduced after the additional descriptions 
mentioned above.
Sixth.
Make it an invariable rule, not to pass over a single 
term, the precise meaning of which you do not thoroughly 
understand, without consulting the Dictionary.
By this mean 
jrott wiU very soon be ab^e, to dp without consulting it ^t ^11.
; 
$6 INTRODUCTION TO ' 
. S^eniJt^ When you gather pii»Ais tor tskamhaivonflcS&dat m 
considerable numbeif of the FioMrcffl,, and if polsibleyisome just 
openings others fully ox})aiKied, ^d others wkh the Seed'* 
vefsels almost ripe; lake care ^al^oto gather at least onr 
Specimen of the plant as perfect a^d a3 entire as pofsible* 
It "was thought necc&ary to give a varii^ty of examples for 
investigation* > 1.
Because only.stMfne of l^ietji are to be found 
at any one season.
2. Because plants cgmtnon iA vno Country 
are not Equally common in all.
' 3* ikcau90,the Student is hot 
supposed previously to be acquainted wit^ many, plants^ and 
4»uch as he does know are probably only a icv/ of' the more 
common kind.
4» lie is not desired to, examine and compare 
dl the examples : peiiiaps itwill be better he should sometin^ 
try his strength^ by examining onknown Fb>wers which be;ma/ 
pick up in his walks.
- > - •• ..-•»..
Explanatory Examples.
. .
. 
EXAMPLE I.
LIGUSTRUM, (Privet.) ' V ' ' ' 
The Privet is a shrub comfnow'iti hedge*?
'atid'ihr^bbewes Sn 
many parts of England, ft generally blofeoms in Jane, and its 
blofsoms are white., Let tis siippodea branch of it in bloftoni 
before us: that we arc ignorant what plant it is ;'ttnd'' are 
required to in\«eAtigatC' iti We look into several of the Blof- 
soms, and find 2 Stamens in each.
This circumstance informs 
us it belongs to thcClafs Diandria.
Ttrmiig to tfie beginning 
of that Clafs in tlie second Yolnmc, we find it contains two 
.Onlers, atid that the Orders depend ^upon the number of 
• Pistils : therefore looking again at the Flo^'ers, we find 1 Pistil 
in each : so that our plant belongs to tlie Order Monogynia.— 
We find this Order sufedfvidod into eight parts '^ and, ofcservihg 
what these subdivisions depend upon, see that in our specimen 
the Blofsom is formed of one regular Petal fixed beneath the 
*Germen.
These circumstances correspond only with the first 
-subdivision, which subdivision contains only one Genus; so thtft 
there can be no doubt but the |)lant is a Ei^stmm.
We^nd 
too that IheBlefeom is cloven ihtV lour parti, andtlwit ^^ 
THE STUDY OP BOTANY.
17 
succeeded by a Berry containing 4 Seeds.
Looking therefore 
to the Genus lagustrum, in this volume, we compare it with 
the generic description, and have the satis&ction to find it 
agree with that.
Being now pretty certain of the Genus, we 
look forward^i to the Species, and as there is only one' Species, 
we soon determine that it must be the Ligustrum vulgare of 
Linnseus, or the commofi Privet.
EXAMPLE II.
ARUN<DO.
(ReedO 
Upon the banks of rivers, in wet ditches, and upon the 
borders of pools the Reed is sufficiently common.
It is a 
sort of large grafs, five or six feet high, and flowers in June.
Having gathered a specimen of this, we proceed to examine it 
systematically.
At first sight we observe that the Flowers 
grow in panicles, and that each Flower contains 3 Stamens.
We therefore turn to the beginning pf the third Clafs, and find 
that Clafs divided into three orders, which depend upon the 
number of Pistils.* Each of our flowers contains 2 Pistils, 
which brings us to the Order Digynia.
This Order is subdi- 
vided into four parts.
The 1st subdivision contains the plants 
' with Flowers scattered, or irregularly disposed, one only in 
each Calyx.
Our plant agrees with the first circumstance, 
but not with the last, for we find ^ve flowers in each Calyx* 
The 2d subdivision contains only 2 flowers in each Calyx ; 
therefore we pafs that over, and come to the 3d, with scat-* 
tered flowers, and several in each Calyx.
Before we proceed 
further, we just lool^ at the 4th and last subdivision, but find- 
ing those ftwaers in form of a Spike on a long and slender 
Beceptacle, we immediately recur to the 3d subdivision.
This 
subdivision contains 6 Genera, and we compare the Character^ 
of each with the plant in hand.
The want of an Awn, and the 
wooUinefs at the base of the blofsoms, determines us to call 
it Anindo.
Turning therefore to the Genus Arundo, we com- 
pare it accurately with the Generic description, and find it 
* N.
B. Once for all, let it be obstrved, that the Student should 
accustom himtelf to read over very att^tiveiy the Introduction to the 
Clafses, nntillie he perfectly acquainted with the constitution of each, 
sad the caBctptions wiiicb jure most likely to tnyolvc him in difficulties.
Vol. I.
.C 
18 INTRODUCTION TO 
correspond with it.
But as the parts constituting the Flower^ 
of Grafses are frequently very minute, we make use of the 
Botanical Microscope and the Difsecting Instruments, to dis- 
play them more clearly ito the eye;* and likewise take the 
advantage of comparing them with the figures in the plate of 
Grafses.
Having determined it to be an Arundo or Reed, it 
remains for us to ascertain the Species.
We see that only 
four species of Arundo are natives of Great Britain ; and the 
circumstances of the five Florets in each Calyx, added to the 
flexibility of the Panicle, whfch we had observed whilst grow- 
ing to be waved about with every wind, leave us no room to 
doubt that it is the Arundo pbragmites of Iinnaeus> or the 
common Reed.
EXAMPLE III.
PLANTA'GO.
(Plantain.) 
The Plantain flowers in June and July.
It is very common 
in mowing Grafs, and on the sides of roads.
It is frequently 
stuck in the cages of Linnets and Canary Birds, who are fond 
of the seeds.
Upon examining a specimen of this, we find 
that each flower contains 4 Stamens, nearly of the same length ; 
therefore we refer it to the fourth Clafs.
We find this Clafs 
contains 4 Orders, dependent upon the number of Pistils.
Each of our flowers contains only one Pistil* and therefore 
belongs to the first Order.
This Order admits of ten subdi- 
visions.
The specimen we have, contains Blofsoms of one 
Petal ; and this Petal is fixed beneath the Germen.
From 
these circumstances wc look for it in the third subdivision, 
and finding by cutting acrofs the Seed-vefsel, that it is divided 
into 2 1 cells, we conclude that it is a Plantago.
We now 
* N.
B. The Botanical Microscope and Difsecting Instruments are 
figured in Plate XII.
They may be had of the Publishers, or of the 
Country Booksellers, price 15s.
This Microscope is now in afomi more 
convenient for the Pocket, and is at the same time made to stand more 
steady when in use.
. 
f To judge whether a Capsule consists of one oc more Cells, the best 
method is to cut it through bbrixontally with a sharp knife, then care- 
fully to pick out the seeds, leaving the dividing membranes entire.
It it 
be very minute, cut off a thin slice horizontally, place it on the stage of 
the microscopCi view it through the magnifier, and at the same time difscct 
it with the iastnuaentf.
THE STUDY OP BOTANY.
19 
tiMBpare it with the Generic description, and finding it agree, 
we try to determine the species.
In the 2d volume we fiiid 
there are five species of Plantain, natives of Britain.
These 
species are not subdivided, therefore we b^n with the first ; 
the Plantago major ; but the leaves are not egg«-shaped ; nor 
are the stalks cylindrical.
The Plabtago media, which is the 
second, agrees pretty well ; but the leaves are not pubescent, 
nor is the spike of Flowers cylindrical.
With the third species, 
it agrees in every particular ; therefore we call it the Plantago 
lanceolata of Linnaeu^, or the Ribwort Plantain.' 
EXAMPLE tV.
BETULA.
(Birch.) 
The Birch is a tree very generally known.
The ilowek's are 
disposed in Catkins, which appear in April and May. Some 
of these Catkins contain only Stamehs within their Scales, 
and others on the same tree only Pistils.
In the former, each 
floret contains 4 Stamens, and in the latter 2 Pistils.
These 
circumstances direct us to the Clafs Telrandria, and to the 
Order Digynia.
This Order contains 4 Genera, the second 
and third of which bear the Male and Female flowers in sepa- 
rate Catkins, as we had before observed to be the case in our 
plant.
An attention to the other parts of the characters 
induces* us to believe it a Betula, and a comparison with the 
Generic description, removes every pofsible doubt* The Spe- 
cies are only three, and the shape of the leaves decides us to 
call our pknt the Betula alba, or common Birch Tree.
EXAMPLE V.
LONICE'RA.
(Honey-suckle.) 
This plant is common in our hedge-rows, and is very uni- 
versally known ; but let Us suppose a person, who* never saw 
it before, struck with the beauty and the fragrance of its 
blofsoms, carrying a piece of it home for examioation.
Find- 
ing 5 Stamens in each flower, and the Anthers not united, he 
refers it to the fifth Clafs.
The Orders in that Clafs being 
determined by the number of Pistils, he knows it belongs to 
t^c Order Mono^'nia, for he observes only one Pistil in each 
c2 
OT , INTRODUCTION TO 
jkmfr.
This Order i^ subdivided into seven parts.
The want 
of the 4 naked Sceds^ juid the rough Leaves, immediately 
determine him to reject the 1st subdivision.
The blqfsom being 
fixed beneath the Germemj not corresponding with his fiower, he 
rejects the Sd, and paises on to the 3d subdivision, vrhere he 
finds (d) Flowers of 1 Fetd wperior ; end the Seeds m a vefseL 
» 
This Flower consists of I Petal, and this Petal i» fixed svpc" 
rwr tOy or abact the Germen.
This subdivision containing 4 
Genera, he observes the 3 first have Capsules ; but in the last 
the Seed-vefsel is a Berry with 2 Cells ; this circumstance, 
added to the inequality of the Bloisom, ai)d the knob at the 
top of the Pistil, induces him to believe it to be a Lonicera.
He looks for the Generic description, and comparing the 
flower with tliat, is confirmed in his opinion.
Under this 
Genus he finds only two Species ; he compares it with the 
Specific Character of each, and readily determines it to be 
the Lonicera Periclymenum, or Wood-bine Honey-suckle.
A 
still more attentive examination will now convince him of the 
propriety of the remark subjoined to the Generic description.
, EXAMPLE VI.
DAU'CUS.
(Carrot.) 
We select this as an example of the Umbelliferous or Rtnr- 
SLE-bcaring plants.
C^ee the uitrodMCtum to the 5th Clafo.) 
The 5 Stamens with Anthers not united, and the ^ Pistils, 
evident in each Floret, determine us to look for it ia the Order 
Digynia, of the 5th Clafs.
This Order admits of four subdi- 
visions.
(1.) Fhwers incomplete.
The Genera here do not at all 
accord with our plant ; Xanthium has the Male and Female 
flowers separate ; the Ulmus bears a dry berry, and a Cal3rx 
of 1 leaf; the Ilumulus has the flowers Male and Female on 
different plants ; and the other ^y<i^ Genera have only one seed 
in each flovvor.
— 2.
Flowers of 1 Fetal; beneath.
But our 
plant has five Petals ; therefore we go to the 3d, Flowers if 5 
Petals ; beneath.
The Florets in hand have 5 Petals, but the 
Petals are not placed beneath the Germea.
This subdivisioo 
contains only a reference to the Staph^lea ; therefore we pro- 
ceed to the 4tb, Flomers of $ Petab ; tnostli/ af^ Seeds.
Uai- 
J 
THE STUDY OF BOTANY.
. Si 
BELLiFSEOtJS.
All these circumstances agreeing with the 
plant before us, we must look for it here ; but observing that 
this subdivision of the Order is farther divided into.
Plants that 
have the Involucrum both general and partial ; into plants with 
the Involucrum only partial ; and into plants tt»Mo«^ any Invo- 
lucrum ; we examine the specimen, and find an Involucrum to 
each Uumbel or Rundle, and likewise an Involucellum to each 
Umbellule, of Rundlet.
The unequal size of the Petals ; the 
winged involucrum, and the prickly Seeds, agreeing with 
DaucuSy we tuph to that Genus.
Finding our plant agree with 
the Genertc^escription, we readily know it to be the Daucus 
Carota, or Wild Carrot 
EXAMPLE VII, 
GALANTHUS.
(Snow-drop.) 
The Snow-drop, though not frequent in a wild state, is to 
be found in almost every garden, and is among the first of our 
spring flowers.
When we look at it attentively, the first cir* 
cuinstance which strikes us is the want of a Cup, but instead 
of that we find upon the fruit-stalk, a sheathing substance^ 
which covered the blofsom in its infant state.
The 6 Stamens 
direct us to the Hexandria Clafs, and the single Pistil fixes us 
to the first Order of tliat Clafs.
This Order is subdivided 
into, 
( 1 .) Flowers with a Cup and a Blofsom.
(2.) Flowers with a Sheath or Husk, 
(3.) Flowers naked, 
(4.) Flowers without Petals.
The want of a cup, and the presence of the sheath, teach us 
to expect it in the 2d subdivision, which contains 4 Genera.
In the Allium the blofsom is fixed beneath the Germen, but in 
our plant it is above it.
In the Narcifsus there is a bell-shaped 
nectary and 6 petals, but our plant has 6 petals only, and no 
such bdl-shaped nectary.
The circumstance of 3 inner petals, 
shorter and^ notched at the end, is sufficiently observable in 
our plant, and clearly distinguish it from the Leucojum ; sp 
that it can be no other than a Galanthus.
The Generic 
22 , INTRODUCTION TO 
description* agrees with our flower, but there it appears that 
the 3 inner and shorter petals may be considered as a Nectary.
As there is but one species^ it must therefore be the Galauthus 
nivalis^ or common Snow-drop, 
EXAMPLE VIII.
DAPH'NE.
(Mezereon.) 
In February the Mezereon is in bloi^om, and, though rarely 
found wild, is often met with in the garden.
Its Stamens being 
8 in number, we turn to the Clafs Octandria, and its single 
Pistil confines our enquiries to the Order Monogynia, This 
being divided into complete and incomplete flowers, we conclude 
that the flower before us belongs to the latter subdivision, 
because it wants a Calyx.
The character of Daphne corre- 
sponds with our Flower, and there is no other Genus in that 
subdivision.
The examination of the Generic description, 
confirms our determination.
We find two British Species, 
but in that before us, the flowers arc sitting, and grow by 
threes ; it must therefore be the Daphne Mez^reum, or common 
Mezereon, 
EXAMPLE IX.
LYCH'NIS.
(Cuckow-flower.) 
White or Red Campion ; Batchelors Buttons ; Lychnis : it 
grows wild in woods and ditch-banks^ flowering all summer.
After examining several of the flowers, finding }0 Stamens in 
each, and the Filaments not united^ observing also no vestige 
of any Pistil, we begin to suspect ^at it is one of those plants 
in which the Stamens and Pistils are contained in separate 
flowers, and upon distinct plants.
In this state of doubt wc 
go to the place where the plant was gathered, and* after ex- 
amining several, at length find that the Flowers containing^ 
Stamens, and the Flowers containing Pistils, do grow upon 
distinct plants.
Directed by the number of Stamens, we there- 
* N.
B. Until a little faixuliarizcd with the disposition of the System, 
the learner is desired to consult the Index at the end of the first volume, 
to find the Generic descriptions ; and the General Index at the end of thQ 
third volume to find the Species.
THE STUDY OF BOTANY.
2S 
fore turn to the Decandria Clafs, and finding the Orders of that 
Ciafs founded upon the number of Pistils, we look for it in the 
Order Pentagynia, 5 Pistils being the number we count in the 
Female Flowers.
This Order contains 7 Genera, the first 
three of which have 5-celled Capsules ; but in the Female 
Flower beore us, the Germen cut a-crofs, or the Capsule, if we 
happen to have got s^ ripe one, appears to have only one cell.
Cerastium and Spergula are mentioned to have a five-leaved 
Calyx, whilst the flowers before us have a Calyx of one leaf.
They must therefore be referred either to Agrostemma, or to 
Lychnis.
But the difference between these two Genera is not 
very obvious in the artificial characters now before us ; we 
therefore turn to the Generic descriptions of Agrostemma and 
Lychnis ; compare all the parts of the flower carefully with 
both these, and find reason to believe it a Lychnis.
The Obs.
subjoined to that Genus support this conclusion, and amongst 
the species of Lychnis we find the Lychnis dioica, with the 
Stamens and Pistils on diflcrent plants.
EXAMPLJg X.
PY'RUS.
(Pear.) 
Finding about 20 Stamens in each flower, we conclude that 
it belongs either to the 12th, or to the 13th Clafs.
The introduction to the 12tl?, or Icosandria Clafs, informs 
us, that the number of Stamens alone, will not sufiiciently 
distinguish it from the Clafses, Dodecandria and Polvandria ; 
we therefore attend to the directions there delivered, and 
finding in our Plant that the Calyx is formed of a single concave 
Leaf; that the Petals are fixed to the sides of the Calyx ; and 
that the Stamens do not stand upon the Receptacle, we con- 
clude that we are at the right clafs ; and seeing each Flower 
furnished with 5 Pistils, we look for the Genus under the 
Order Pentagynia.
This /Order contains three Genera.
Iij 
the last Genus the Calyx is fixed beneath the Germen, but in 
our Plant it is above the Gormen.
In that and in other re* 
spects, it corresponds with the two first Genera.
The Calyx 
being cloven into 5 parts, and the Blofsom being composed of 
5 Petals, are circumstances common to both.
But the fruit 
of the first is a Berry, containing 5 seeds, and the fruit of th© 
24 INTllODUCTION TO 
second is a Pomuto, or Apple, with 5 Cells, and many seeds.
Hence, it appears that our plant is undoubtedly the Pyrus ; and 
turning to the Generic description, we are confirmed in this 
opinion.
We next compare it with the only two British 
Species, and are soon enabled to' determine whether we ba^e 
got the Pyrus communis, or the Pyrus malus, i.
e. the Pear 
or the Apple.
EXAMPLE Xi.
RANU'NCULUS.
(Crowfoot.) 
The beautiful shining yellow Blofsoms of Crowfoot, and the 
frequency of it in pastures in the months of June and July, 
will probably attract our notice ; especially as cattle leave it 
untouched, even when the pasture is bare.
We therefore 
collect some of it ; and finding a great number of Stamens in 
each Blofsom, we refer it to the Polyandria Glafs.
The intro- 
duction to this Clafs tells us, that the Stamens stand upon the 
Keceptacle, and not upon the Cup or the Blofsom.
As this ap- 
pears to be the case, we next examine the' Pistils, and finding 
them more than can readily be counted, we refer to the Order 
Polygynia.
This Order includes eleven Genera, Of these 
only Sagittaria, Ranunculus, and Adonis, have a Cup to the 
Flower, The first eight that occur have no Calyx ; but our 
Flower has a Cup of 5 Leaves, It is clear then, that it must 
be one of these three.
Sagittaria it cannot be, because there 
the Flowers are Male and Female on the same plant, but 
those before us are all Hermaphrodite.
Upon an accurate 
examination, we observe a little Pore or Nectary, within the 
claw of each Petal, and governed also by the number pf 
leaves forming the Cup, and of Petals composing the Blofsom, 
we turn to the Generic description of the Ranunculus, Quite 
satisfied about the Genus, we observe the Species are nume- 
rous, and arranged according as the Leaves are divided, or not 
itvided.
In our specimen the Leaves are divided.
We then 
compare it with each of the Species, and, from its open or 
expanded Calyx, its cylindrical Fruit-stalks, its Leaves with 
3 divisions, many clefts, .&c, find it to be the Ranunculus 
acris, or upright Crowfoot.
THE STUDY OF BOTAKY.
85 
EXAMPLE XII.
A'RUM.
(Cuckow-pint,) 
Or Wake-robin; or Lords and Ladies* Not unfrequent in 
stiff soils* It generally grows in rough shady places, and at 
hedge bottoms.
It flowers in May.
There is something so very peculiar and unusual in the 
structure of this plant, that we find ourselves at a lofs how to 
set about the investigation of it.
What shall we call this long 
purplish substance which stands upright within the sheathing 
conical Calyx ?
We remove the Sheath to inspect the lower 
part, and there we find this purple substance surrouinded at its 
base by a number of Germens.
It must therefore be a sort 
of a Fruit*stalk, or a Receptacle of an unusual length.
On a 
further examination we observe a number of hair-like fibrest 
or threads, but without any Anthers, and between these and 
the Germens, we perceive a number of Anthers without any 
Filaments* 
As the Anthers are numerous, we turn to the Clafs Poly- 
andria, and the Germens being more thun 6, we look in the 
Order Polygynia.
Zostera and Arum are the only Genera in 
which the existence of a Blofsom is not mentioned ; and as 
our plant shews nothing like a Blofsom, it must be one or 
other of these.
The conical Sheath of one Leaf, and indeed 
all the other circumstances mentioned, assure us that it is am 
Arum.
The Generic description, and the subjoined observa* 
tions, fully explain the structure of this wonderful and extra- 
ordinary plant.
The shape of the leaves accords with the 
Specific Character, and we pronounce it to be the Arum 
iiiaculatum, 
EXAMPLE XIII.
LA'MIUM.
(Archangel,} 
Or White or Red Deadnettle, It grows every where upon 
ditch-banks, amongst rubbish, and in orchards* 
Upon opening the Blofsom we observe 4 Stamens, and as 2 
of the Stamens are considerably longer than the other two, we 
expect to find it in the Clafs Didynamia* After reading tho 
introduction to that Clafs^ we have no doubt of having claised 
28 INTRODUCTION TO 
it therefore with the Generic description of Spartiuth, and still 
further confirmed by the Efsential Character, we find it must 
be the Spartium scoparium, or common Broom ; which happens 
to be the only English' Species belonging to that Genus.
EXAMPLE XVII.
LEONTODON.
(Dandelion,) 
Or Pifs-abed.
This plant is in Blofsom during great part 
of the spring and summer ; it grows in pastures, road sides^ 
4nd the uncultivated parts of gardens.
At the first view wc 
perceive its structure to be very different from any we have 
examined before ; we hardly know what to call Stamens, or 
what Pistils.
The fact is this: it is a true Compound 
Flower, or a flower formed of a number of little flowers (or 
florets) sitting upon one common Receptacle, and inclosed by 
one common Calyx.
Turning to Compound Flowers and 
Florets in the Dictionary, and reading the explanation of 
Compound Flowers, with references to the fourth plate, we soon 
attain a true idea of the matter ; and therefore separating one 
of the Florets, and examining it carefully, wc find 5 Stamens 
with the Anthers united ; and the Pistil pafsing through the 
cylinder formed by the union of the Anthers.
We therefore 
refer it to the Clafs Syngcnesia.
By carefully studying the 
introduction to that Clafs, we understand still more clearly the 
nature of Compound Flowers, and the Florets which compose 
them.
We learn too how the Orders are constituted ; and, 
upon examining the Flower before us, and finding that all the 
Florets are furnished with Stamens and Pistils, we perceive 
that it belongs to the first Order.
From the shape of the 
Blofsoms of the Florets, which are all long and narrow, we 
know that we must look in the first subdivision of that Order.
Perceiving that the Receptacle is an important circumstance 
in the character of Compound Flowers, we pull off all the 
Florets in one of the Flowers, and expose the Receptacle to 
view.
We find it naked ; that », not beset with chafly or 
bristly substances.
We find too, a sort of down adhering to 
the Seeds y^ and observe the scales of the Calyx laid one over 
♦ 
* The Down attached to the Seeds in the Compound Flowers is either 
formed of vmfle hairs, or of hairs set with other finer hairs \ in the 
THE STUDY OF BOTANY.
55 
another like the tUes on a roof, the outer scaks loose, flexible, 
and turned back.
These characters corresponding pretty 
well with the Leontodon, we fix upon that as the Genus.
Now we look forward to the Generic description for furthfi^ 
information ; with this it perfectly agrees, and in the Obserta-* 
TiONS subjoined, we are told that in the Leontodon Taraxacum 
the Down of the Seed is supported on a long pedicle, which 
we had already remarked in the flower before us.
We now 
read the characters of the different Species ; and, from the deq^ 
notches in the leaves, judge our plant to be the Leontodon 
Taraxacum, or common Dandelion.
It will he very proper for the learner thus to examine scv<^al 
more Genera of this Clafs, as the Coltsfoot^ the Burdock, the 
Thistle, the Tansy,v the Daisie, and the Groundsel ; for, by 
doing this, he will soon overcome the difEculties which present 
themselves; and when any of the books are at hand which are- 
mentioned in Italic print, after the Specific Character, it will 
l>e satisfactory to turn to them, and to compare the plant in 
question wth the figures referred to.
It may not be amifs for him to be^n with a Sunfiower, 
which, though not an English plant, and therefore not to be 
found in this book, may yet, from' the large size of its Florets 
enable him to form a good idea of the structure of Compound 
Flowers in general.
By paying a proper attention to the nature of Compound 
Flowers, we soon learn to distinguish them from double Flow- 
ers ; and when by accident or cultivation any of the true 
Compound Flowers become double, we shall always find it 
depends upon the multiplication of some of the parts, and the 
exclusion of others.
These examples will, it is supposed, afford sufficient instruc- 
tion to the learner, but, if he wishes for others, he may examine 
such plants as are mentioned in the Table of the Clafses.
It still remains to say something of the Cryptogamia Clafs, 
The plants in that Clafs are not arranged like the other parts 
former case, it is said to be balr-Iike ; in the latter it is said to hefeatke^tJ, 
Now as these circumstances must be attended to, in forming Generic 
Distinctions, it is necefsary to apprise the learner, that the Down must 
be exposed to the air a little time before he can pronounce whether it be 
hair-like, or feathered ; for whilst it is moist in the flower, the lateral 
hairs often lie so close as not to be visible.
30 INTRODUCTION, &c, 
of the system, and thierefore cannot be investigated rn the 
same manner* We can only recommend a careful perusal of 
the Introduction to the Clafs, and an intimate acquaintance 
with the terms* ' This being done, the industry of the student 
cannot fail of its proper reward* 
After conducting my Pupils in this familiar manned through 
the different parts of the System, I must suppose that they no 
longer stand in "need of my assistance, and that they wiU soon 
find themselves ^qual to the investigation of every British 
plant which may c^ome before them.
But this is not aU : they 
will find that the Study of Nature is ever attended with pleas- 
ing reflections : that the Study of Botany^ in particular^ inde- 
pendent of its immediate use, is as healthful as it is innocent.
That it beguiles the tediousnefs of the road, that it furnishes 
amusement at every footstep of the solitary walk, and» above 
al)» that it leads to pleasing reflections on the bounty, tho 
wisdom^ and the power of the great CREATOR.
• */ 
DrRECTIONS 
FOR 
DRYING AND PRESERVING 
SPECIMENS OF PLANTS, 
M. 
ANY methods have been devised for the preservation of 
Plants ; we shall relate only such as have been found most 
succefsful* 
First prepare a prefs, which a workman may make' by the 
following directions.
Take two planks of weil^seasoned wood, not liable to waip.
-The planks should be two inches thick, eighteen inches long, 
twelve inches broad.
Get four male, and four female screws;* 
such as are commonly used for securing sash windows.
Let the 
four female screws be let into the four corners of one of the 
planks, and corresponding holes made through the four comers 
of the other plaiik for the male screws to pafs through, so as 
to allow the two planks to be screwed tightly together.
It 
ivill not be amif^ to face the bearing of the male screws upon 
the wood, with iron plates ; and, if the iron plates went acrofs 
from corner to comer of the wood, it would be a good security 
against warping.
When a prefs is not at hand, the specimens 
may be dried tolerably well between the leaves of a large folio 
book, laying other books upon it to give the necefsary prcfsurc; 
but in all cases too much prefsure must be avoided.
. Secondly, get a few sheets of strong card pasteboard, and 
half a dozen quires of large, soft, spongy paper : such as the, 
stationers call blofsom blotting paper, is the most proper.
The plants you wish to preserve should be gathered in a dry 
day, after the sun has exhaled the dew : taking particular care 
* Wedges of thin well-seasoned wood, pafsing through uprights 
affixed to each end of the lower plank, and rising through the upper one, 
have been since found more manageable wd efficacious.
32 DRYING ANP PRESERVINa 
to collect them in that state wherein their Generic and Specific 
characters are most conspicuous.
Carry them home in a tin 
box, which may be made about nine inches long, four inches 
and a half wide, and one inch and a half deep.
Get the box 
made of the thinnest tinned iron that can be procured ; and 
let the lid open upon hinges.
The box should be painted, or 
lacquered, to prevent it rusting.
If any thing happen to 
prevent the immediate use of the specimens you have collected, 
they will be kept fresh two or three days in this box, much 
better than by putting them in water ; but the Blofsoms of 
some plants are so very delicate, that they shrivel in a very 
short time, and often before you can well examine them.
In 
this case, put the stems in water, cover the whole with a glafs 
bell, like those used in gardens, or the receiver of an air-pump 
will do ; expose them to the sun, and in half an hour, you 
will find them completely expanded: When you are about to 
preserve them, lay them down upon a pasteboard, as much 
as pofsible in their natural form ; but, at the same time, with 
a particular view to their Generic and Specific characters.— > 
For this purpose it will be advisable to separate one or more 
of the flowers, and to display them so as to shew the Generic 
character.
If the Specific character depend upon the flower, 
or upon the root, a particular display of that will be like* 
wise necefsary.
When the plant is thus disposed upon the 
pasteboard, cover it with eight or ten layers of the blotting 
paper, and put it into the prcfs.
Exert only a small degree 
of prefsure, for the first iyfo or three days ; then examine 
it, unfold any unnatural plaits, rectify any mistakes, and, after 
putting fresh paper over it, screw the prefs a little harder* 
In about three days more, separate the plant Irom the paste- 
board, if it be sufficiently firm to allow of a change of place ; 
put it upon a dry fresh pasteboard, and, covering it with fresh 
folofsom paper, let it remain in the prefs a few days longer.
The pteis should stand in the sun-shine, or within the influ-*> ' 
cnce pf a fire, for nothing is so destructive to the beauty of the 
Speciinens as a long continued dampnefs.* Shrubs and many 
* One of my correspondents afsures me, that he finds old broad doth * 
better than paper, for absorbing the moi»ture of the plants i but I buTC 
not had ^cask>n to try it.
SPECIMENS OP PLA^rTS.
S$ 
of the harder perennial plants will lie much neater in th^eHer- 
bariuray if the bark of the principal Stem be slit up with the 
point of a sharp knife, so as to allow the inner woody part to 
be extracted.
When it is perfectly dry, the usual method is to fasten it 
down with glue, or paste, or gum water, on the right hand inner 
page of a sheet of large strong writing-paper.
It requires some 
dexterity to glue the plant neatly down, so that none of tlie 
gum or paste may appear to defile the paper.
Prefs it gently 
again for a day or two, with a half sheet of blofsom-paper be- 
tween the folds of the writing-paper.
When it is quite dry, 
write upon the left hand inner page of the paper, the name of 
the plant ; the specific character ; the place where, and the 
time when it was found ; and any other remarks you think 
proper.
Upon the back of the same page, near the fold of the 
paper, write the name of the plant, and then place it in your 
cabinet.
A small quantity of finely powdered arsenic, or cor- 
rosive sublimate, is frequently mixed with the paste or gum- 
water, to prevent the devastations of insects ; but the seeds of 
Staves-acre finely powdered, will answer the same purpose, 
without being liable to corrode or to change the colour of the 
more delicate plants.
A little Alum added to the paste makes 
it keep longer, and a little very coarse brown Sugar dissolved 
in the gum-water, renders it less brittle when dry.
Some 
Botanists put the dried plants into the sheets of writing-paper, 
without fastening them down at all, which I think much the 
most useful way : others only fasten them by means of small 
slips of paper, pasted across the stem or branches, and others 
again sew them to the paper with a needle and fine thread.
Another more expeditious method is to take the plants out 
of the press, after the first or second day ; let them remain 
upon the pasteboard ; cover them with five or six leaves of 
blofsom paper, and iron them with a hot smoothing iron, until 
they are perfectly dry.
If the iron be too hot, it will change 
the colours ; but some people, taught by long practice, succeed 
very happily.
This is quite the best method to treat the 
different species of Orchis and other slimy mucilaginous 
plants.
I am indebted toT.
Velley, Esq. of Bath, for the following 
improved method of drying plants, which, being the result of 
VoL.L D 
34 DRYING AND PRESERVING 
much experience, cannot but prove axiceptabte to the practical 
Botanist.
« I place the plant when fresh, between several sheets 
«< of blotting paper, and iron it with a large smooth heater, 
^* pretty strongly warmed, till all the moisture /is difsipated.— ^ 
<* Th^.
flowers and fructification I fix down with gum, upon th#^ 
*^ paper on which they are to remain, and iron them in that 
<* state, by which means they become almost incorporated into 
" the paper in their proper forms.
Many colours I have been 
" able to fix, which frequently forsook the flowers during the 
« aradual and tedious procefs of sand-heats, and other methods 
« which I had before tried.
" Some plants require a more moderate heat than othersr^ 
« experience .must determine this : and herein consists the 
" nicety of the experiment.
The forms and colours seem to 
<* remain more perfect by this mode than by any other I have 
« been able to try." " If the mucilaginous and succulent 
« plants do not succeed so well with respect to their colour, 
« under the hot smoothing iron, I have always found that they 
" failed full as much or more, when preserved by other means.
« The colours of the blofsoms in the clafs Didynamia, 1 could 
«* never fix by a sand-heat.
Several of these, as well as of 
« the rough-leaved plants, I have preserved tolerably well by 
** ironing.
" It is necefsary to observe, that in compound flowers, or in 
" thofe of a solid and more stubborn form, as the Centaurea, 
« &c.
some Utile art must be employed in cutting away the 
«« under part, by which means the profile and form of th« 
" flowers will be more distinctly exhibited, provided they are 
" to be pasted down/'-^ — " After all, it must be remembered 
« that a plant, when preserved in a most perfect state, is a 
** kind of Hygrometer, and if exposed for any time to a moist 
« atmosphere, or laid up irt a situation which is^not perfectly 
" dry, will imbibe a degree of humidity that must soon prove 
^« injurious to the beauty of the specimen." 
Major Velley sent me some plants dr^ed by these means, 
which arc the most beautiful specimens I have seen.
The 
facility of drying plants by ironing, must render this method 
particularly acceptable to the travelling Botanist.
In addition to die methods of preparing a Hortus siccus 
SPECIMENS OF PLANTS.
^ S5 
already pointed out, I am desired by my friend Mr. Wfaateley, 
Siugeon, in London, to insert the following account of a 
method which he has used with the greatest advantage ; and 
fucb of my readers as observe his rules, and execute them with 
•droitnefsi will find their attentions weU rewarded* 
An Approved Method of Preparing Plants for an 
Herbarium.
" PREVIOUS to the drying of Plants by t|his plan, it will 
l»c necefiiary to procure the following apparatus : 
1. '^ A strong oak box of the si^e and shape of those used 
^* for the packing up of tin plates.
2. " A quantity of fine dry and searced sand of any kind» 
** sufficient to fill the box.
3. " A considerable number of pieces of pliant paper, from 
^' ojoe to four inches square, 
4. '^ Some small flat leaden weights, and a few small bound 
?* books.
** The specimen of any plant intended for the Herbarium, 
•* should be carefully collected when dry and in the height of 
*^ its flowering, with the different parts as perfect as pofsible, 
*' and in the smaller plants the roots should be taken iip.
It 
** should then be brought home in a tin box well closed from 
•< the air.
— ^The plant should be cleared from the decayed 
** leaves and dirt, and afterwards laid upon the inside of one of 
** the leaves of a sheet of common cap paper.
The upper 
« leaves and flowers should then be covered in an expanded 
** state by * pieces of the prepared paper, which may be placed 
« in any irregular way, and, kept down by the fingers till these 
« parts of the plant are entirely covered by them : and after 
^* that, let one or two of the leaden weights be placed upon the 
-•* papers.
The parts of the plant below should then be covered 
• As the beauty of the Specimen depends very much upon this part of 
the pjocefs, each large peul oughtio be laid flat separately with a piece 
©f paper, and the utmost care taken that every part of the plant be laid 
down without fold^t which may be done in general in a short time.
d2 
4< 
36 DRYING AND PRESERVING 
^' with the pieces of paper^ and likewise with the weights, and 
<^ thus the whole plant sh6uld be laid in its proper expanded 
'^ form by the same method* The weights should then be 
^ carefidly removed, and the other leaf of the sheet of paper 
applied to its opposite one, having the loose pieces of paper 
and plant between them.
After which, one or two of the 
^' books should be placed on the outside of the paper, and 
^^ remain there till as many other plants as are intended to be 
** preserved, have been prepared in like manner.* A layer of 
** sand an inch deep should then be put into the box^ und 
^^ afterwards cfne of the plants with the books placed upon it, 
" which last should be removed after a sufficient quantity of 
** sand is put upon the paper, to prevent the plant from varying 
'' its form.
All the other plants may then be put into the box 
** in the same manner, with a layer of sand about an inch thick 
" between each, wheqn the sand should be gently prefsed dowi^ 
" by the foot, and the degree of prefsure in some meas^ure 
" regulated by the kind of plants in the box.
If they are stiff 
** and firm, as the Holly or JFurze, much prefsure is required* 
** If tender and succulent a lefser degree is better, for fear of 
** extravasating the juices, which would injure the colour of the 
'^ plant ; but particular care should be taken to make a suffi* 
*^ cient degree of prefsure upon the expanded blofsoms of 
" plants, that they may not shrivel in drying.
The box should 
^' then be carefully placed before a fire, with one side a little 
" raised or occasionally flat, as maybe most convenient, alter* 
" nately changing the sides of the box to the fire, twice or 
thrice a day ; or, when convenient, it may be put into an 
oven in a gentle heat.
In two or three days the plants will 
" be perfectly dry.
The sand should then be taken out with 
*^ 2L common plate, and put into a spare box, and the plants 
" carefully taken out also, and removed to a sheet of writing 
" paper.
" This method of.preserving plants is, from much experience, 
'^ found preferable to any other, and has every advantage at« 
*^ tending it that can be wished ; it dries most of them of an 
^^ exceeding fine natural and durable colour, as well in the 
* Those of the Genus Potamogeton, and such like, ought to be put 
into the sand without lofs of time and well prefsed, otherwise they art 
apt to dry too fast and shrivel.
(( 
u 
SPECIMENS OF PLANTS.
Sj 
^ (lowers as leaves.
It will be found upon trial, that a dif* 
•^^ ferent degree of heat is suitable to different plants, the exact 
** knowledge of which will be easily acquired by a little expe* 
*^ rience» and that some will dry much better than others.
I 
'* have always found the fewer plants there were in the sand at 
'^ a time, and the quicker the heat, the abetter the colours 
** were.
Those plants that have coloured flowers should be 
** placed uppermost, otherwise their colour will be injured by 
** the slow difsipation of the moisture from the others.
*' Plants are most fit for future examination when preserved 
** loose within the paper, and if they are kept in a very dry 
*' room and unexposed to the air, they will presei*ve their beauty 
** a great number of years ; but it will be necefsary to inspect 
'^ them once a year, to destroy any of the small insects that 
^' may breed among them, and this will be fully sufficient foe.
** their preservation." 
In whatever method the plants are dried, the precautions 
mentioned in the last paragraph of Mr. Whateley's account, are 
indispensable to their preservation.
They may be most con- 
veniently kept in a Cabinet made for the purpose, with the 
drawers open in front, excepting only a shallow ledge at the 
bottom of each ; placing the species of each Genus together, 
and keeping each Clafs separate.
In the Clafs Cr3^togamia, a different management may be 
adopted with advantage, except in the Filices (or Ferns) and 
these may be dried and disposed as the plants of the other 
Clafses ; but the Musci (Mofses,) which constitute the second 
order of theCryptogamia clafs, being very numerous, and mostly 
very minute, may be kept in papers folded to the octavo si;te.
It is sufficient to place them in the papers, and to give them a 
moderate prefsure for a short time.
They dry readily and are 
not apt to spoil.
The preservation of the Alga, or third Order of this Clafs, 
requires some further directions.
The Lichens require no care in drying ; they should not 
even be prefsed, or put into papers, but placed in shallow close 
drawers which are divided into small partitions.
The CoNFERVJ£, and the finer leaved Fuci, cannot be 
advantageously laid down in the common way, but should be 
floated in a large shallow dish of water, so as to separate and 
58 DRYING AND PRESERVING 
expand theit delicate branches.
A stiff piece of writing ptfper 
may thien be made to slide under them, and, with a little ad- 
drefs, the paper may be drawn out of the water so as to bring 
cut the plant upon it; in its^ beautiful and expanded state.
If ^ > 
the'whole be then dried between blotting papers, under a gentle 
prefsure, the plants will in general adhere to the writing paper 
so as to preserve their form.
The Sea weeds must all be 
soaked in large quantities of fresh water, so as to extract the 
salt before they are laid down to dry.
If the collector has not 
time to examine and lay them down while at the sea side, 
nothing more should be done at them, than allowing theni to 
dry moderately in the open air, and tying them up loosely in 
strong brown paper.
They may thus be carried without injury 
to any distance; and when macerated in fresh water, will 
expand as fully as before, so as to admit of their being ex- 
amined and preserved at leisure.
The Fungi (Fungufses) may be preserved pretty well by 
the method described in the 2d volume of the Transactions of 
the Linnean Society, at page 263, to which I might refer the 
Reader ; but as a longer continued attention to the subject 
has given rise to some little improvement of the method, since 
that memoir was communicated^ I shall subjoin tlie following 
directions : 
Take 2 ounces of vitriol of copper reduced to powder ; pour 
upon it about a tea cup of cold water, stir them with a piece 
of stick, or a quill, for about a minute, then pour off the water 
and throw it away.
On the remaining vitriol pour a pint of boiling water, and 
when the whole is difsolved and grown cool, add to it half a 
pint of rectified Spirit of Wine.
Filtre it through paper ; keep 
it in a bottle closely corked, and call it the fkkle.
To 8 pints of pure spring water, add a pint and a half of 
rectified Spirit of Wine.
Keep tliis in corked bottles, and call 
it the stronger liquor.
To 8 pints more water, add one pint of Spirit of Wine, and 
call it the weflArer.
liquor.
Be provided with a number of wide^mouthed glafs jars, of 
various sizes, capable of holding from 2 ounces to 2 pints ; all 
very well fitted with corks.
Whatever Fungus, whether Agaric, or Botetus, &c, y«ou wish 
SPECIMENS OF PLANTS.
39 
to preserve, should be suffered to lie upon your table as long as 
it can be trusted without danger of its decaying, so as to allow 
some part of its moisture to evaporate ; the thick and fleshy 
plants should lie the longest, but the deliquescent ones, and 
those which are very thin and delicate, should be put into 
pickle almost immediately after they are gathered.
Pour some of the Pickle into a spare jar, and into this im- 
merge the specimens to be preserved..
The Specimens should 
remain in the pickle from three hours to three days, according 
to their bulk atjd fleshinefs.
Then remove each specimen into 
the jar in which it is to be kept, suiting the size of the Jars 
to the size of the Specimens.
If they are of the large, juicy, 
and fleshy kind, fill up the jar with the stronger liquor, but 
the weaker will suffice for the smaller and thinner plants.
Whichever liquor be used, the jar must be quite filled with it, 
and immediately corked very tight.
Cover the cork and the 
top of the jar with Venice Turpentine, by means of a painter^s 
brush.
In three or four days the turpentine will become 
nearly dry, and then tie a piece of wetted bladder very tight 
over the top of the jar.^ These precautions are necessary to 
prevent the accefs of air, and the evaporation of the liquor : 
because, if either of these happen, the specimens will soon be 
spoiled.
The Boleti are in general mere di^cuit to preserve 
than the Agarics, and such of either as abound with a milky 
juice, are apt to foul the liquor, which must then be changed.
Mofses and Lichens may be preserved in great perfection^ by 
this method of pickling.
L 
DICTIONARY 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
THE following Alphabetical list of the Terms employed by 
LiDnxus, as well as of those used in this work, and by other 
modern Authors, will be extremely useful to the learner, 
as he will thus be enabled to understand other botanical 
boqks which he may wish to consult.
The ladies too, who, in spite of the obstacles attenduit upon a 
dead language, often have recourse to linnxus in tbe 
original Latin, will find their researches facilitated by it.
^nk.BBREVIATUS, see short, 
Abortivi (flosculi) abortive.
See barren.
Abrupt (abruptus) when a wiuged leaf ends abruptly ; i.
e. 
without a tendril or a little leaf.
Fl. 8.
fig.
53.
AcAULis, stem-lefs.
AcEROSUS, chatfy.
AcicuiARis, needle-shaped.
AciNAciFDRMis, scymctar-shaped.
Acini, granulations.
Acorn, the seed of the Oak.
V. B.
The plants referred to in thii Dictionary, for the lake of illus- 
trating the ditfeient Tirms, are for the most part natives of thii island, 
and are quoted by their most common Engli&h names, because the reader 
who recollecti them will immediately, and without further trouble, be 
able to form the right idea which the term is intended to convey ; and ai 
these names are inseried in the Index, he may eai'tly turn to them.
ThB 
insuncn taken from exotic plants, are chiefly such as are cultivated in 
almoit eveiy garden, and are introduced only when an English plant was 
wanting to which the term could be properly applied, or when it was 
thought that the exotic was more commonly known, and more easily 
attainable than the native.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
41 
AcoTTLEDOKBSy seeds without lobes, and of coiirsei when 
they vegetate, they produce no seminal leaves.
AcuLEATUSy prickly.
Ac u LEI, prickles.
AcuMiif ATUM, (fol.) tapering to a point.
Acute (acutus) tapering gradually to a slender, but not a 
prickly or a thorny termination, as the leaves of the JeuQ' 
ndne^ or the segments of the cup of the Primrose.
See 
pi.
3. f.
10 ; or pi.
7. f.
49.
Acutus, acute.
Adnatus, connected.
•Adp&essus, contiguous, prefsed to, or laid to.
Apscendeks, ascending.
^QUALis, equal.
AoGREOATE (aggregatus) when a number of little flowers or 
florets, are so disposed as to form one compound flower : 
all of them either inclosed within one common calyx, or 
situated upon one common receptacle ; so that none of 
them can be taken away without destroying the uniformity 
of the whole.
Thus, the flowers of Thrift, Parsley, TeaslCf 
ScctbiouSy Daisicy are aggregate ; several small flowers or 
florets, combining to form one large flower.
Air-Bao, (foUiculus) a distended bladder-like seed-vefsel, 
opening on one side, as in the Periwinkle, or Bladder-Sena* 
It is also used to signify other kinds of distended air- 
vefsels, 
Al£, wings.
Alatus, winged seed, stem, or leaf-stalk.
Albuenum, a soft white substance, found in trees, between 
the inner bark and the wood, composed of layers of the 
former, which have not yet attained the solidity of the 
latter.
In this state, dealers in timber call it the sap.
Algje, the name of the third order of the clafs Cryptogamia.
Alternate (altemus) branches, or leaves, or flowers, spring- 
ing out regularly one above another, as the leaves of 
Borrage, or Chequered Daffodil.
PL 9.
f. 3.
(</.
d. d.
d, d.) 
PL 8.
f. 54.
Alveolatum, see favosum.
Amentum, catkin.
Amplexicaulis, embracing the stem.
An c EPS, two-edged.
Androgyna (planta) bearing some flowers with stamens 
only, and some with pistils only, on the same root, without 
any mixture of such as are hermaphrodite.
Of this we 
have examples in the melon and cucumber, 
Anoiospermia, seeds in a capsule, as in the second order of 
the clafs Didynamia.
Angular (angulatus) stem, &c.
having edges or corners ; 
opposed to cylindrical.
A stem or stalk may have 1, 2, 
1 
42 DICTIONARY OF 
d> 4*9 or more angles or comers.
The White Jrckangtl 
hath 4.
Angular Capsule, as in Flower de Luce or Flag, 
Angustifolius, narrow-leaved.
Annual (annuus) living only one yearj as the Larktpur, 
Annulusj ring.
Annuus, annual.
Anomalous (anomalus) irregular, subject to no certain order.
Anther, or Tip (anthera) a part of a stamen fixed upon the 
iilament, and containing the pollen.
In Dogs Mercury it 
hath one cell ; in Hellebore two ; in Orchid three ; in JW- 
tillary four ; see stamen.
PL 3.
f. 2.
(c.
c, c.
c. c.
c.) f, 5.
(6.
b, b.
b. b.
b.) f.
6. {h).
Anthera, Anther.
A PET ALUS, without a petal.
Apex, the point, end, or termination of a leaf, &c.
Aphyllus, leaflefs.
Apophysis, excrescence.
Appendiculatus, appended, mostly applied to exprefs an 
additional small leaf.
Approaching, see converging.
Approximatus, near to, or near together.
Arachnoideus, cobwebbed.
Arborescens, arborescent, gradually becoming firm and 
woody.
Arboreus, tree-like ; having a permanent woody sten^ 
Arcuatus, bowed.
Arillus, seed-coat.
Arista, awn.
• 
Arista T us, awned.
Arm (brachium) see measure.
Arm A, weapons of defence.
Arrow-shaped (sagittatus) Leaf, shaped like the heaS of 
an arrow, as the leaves of Sorrel; the Small ox Great 
Bindweed.
PI.
7- f.
13- 
' <   Anthers, as in the Crocus* Elder.
I Stipulji, as in the Pea, 
Articulatus, jointed.
Articulus, joint.
Ascend ENS, or Adscendcns, ascending.
Ascending (ascendens) growing first horizontally , and then 
bowed upwards.
It is applicable either to Leaves j to Stalks, 
to Stems, as in spiked Speedwell, or to Stamens, as in all 
the Speedwells.
See the Stamens next below (a) in pi.
1. f.
8, 
AsPBR, rough.
AsPERiFOLiA, rough-leaved.
AssuRGENS, rising.
Attenuatus, growing slender.
AucTus, Calyx, when the Calyx had the addition of another 
smaller Calyx.
4 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
43 
AvuicutATTJSi ear-shaped : also liaying an appendage* 
AvENis, without veins.
Amtl-shaped (subulatus) slender, and becoming finer towards 
the end, like an awl.
PI.
7. f.
8. PL 5.
f. 15.
(a) as the 
leaves of Rock Stone-crop, 
— FiLAMBKTy as in Crocus, Borrage.
Daffodil.
Hawthorn.
Seeds, as ih Shepherd's Needle, 
Awn (arista) the slender sharp substance growing to the valves 
of corn or grass, and ^equently called a beard.
It is 
remarkable enough in Oats and Barley.
It is sometimes 
used to signify a sharp point terminating a leaf, &c.
PL 
2. f.
21.
(6.6.) f.
23.
(b.b.) 
AwN^ED (aristatus) having an Awn.
Awn LESS (rauticus) without Awns.
Axillary (axillaris) aV the base or bosom of the leaves, or 
branches, on the upper and inner side.
Bacca, berry.
Bacci; EKVS, bearing berries.
Barbatus, bearded.
Bark (cortex) the universal covering of the stems, roots, and 
branches of Vegetables.
^ It is generally spoken of as 
inner and oteter.
A Blofsom is an expansion of the inneTf 
and a Calyx is a continuation of the outer bark.
Barren (masculi; abortivi) Flowers or Florets, such as 
produce no perfect seeds.
The barren dowers are gene- 
rally such as have Stamens, but no Pistils ; these are also 
called male flowers.
Flowers which have only Pistils, are 
sometimes barren, owing to the absence of other flowers 
which bear the Stamens.
In the Umbelliferous flowers 
(Clafs V.
Order \L) it is not uncommon to have several 
of the florets barren, though they are furnished both with 
Stamens and Pistils ; perhaps owing to some imperfection 
in the Pistils ; but future observation must determine this 
matter.
PL 1.
f. 21.
a ; 22.
a. 23.
Base (axillaris) that part of a leaf, &c.
nearest to the branch 
or stem.
— of the Leaves or Branches.
Flowers or fruit-stalks 
are often said to grow at the base of the leaves, or the 
branches ; that is, when they are placed at the bottom of 
a leaf, or branch, and on the inner side^ where it joins to 
the stem.
The same as Axillary.
PL 9- f» 5.
(w.) the 
fruit-stalks of the Common Pifnpemel; the Great Peri^ 
winkle, and the Flowers of the Common Caliminty are ex- 
amples.
Ba'ttledore-shafeb (spatulatum).
See pi.
8. f.
64.
Beaded (granulatus) consisting of many little knobs con- 
nected by small strings.
As the root of the White Saxi-' 
frage.
BeaKi or Bill (rostrum) a long projecting appendage to some 
< 
ii .- DICTIONARY 0» 
Ee«ds, like the beak of % bird ; remaricftbls in the Gera- 
mum.
See pi.
5.f. 15.
Bearded (barlMitus) beset with straight parallel hairs.
BsLL-auAFEP (cainpanulatus) the idea this term is intended 
to convey cannot well be mistaken: examples of it occur in 
the Cvp of the Cherry ; in the Blofionu of the CoKDoimdta w 
Ijiy of the Galley ; and in the Nectary of the WUd DqfodU, 
PI.
5. f.
l..(a)Pl. 4.
f. 2.3.4.5.
Bellying (vemricosus) distended in the middle.
Beneath (ioferus) a Blossom is said to be betieatk, when it 
includes the Germen, and is attached to the part imme- 
diately below it, as the blofaom ot Sage^; Barrage; Con- 
volvulus ; Polyanthus.
Ill a Gehhen is sitid to be beaeath when it is plac<Nl 
below the attachment of the blofsom, and therefore not 
included within it; as in the Hatey-iucklf ; Currant; 
Hawthorn.
Bent (cernuus) Feuit-stalk ; so much bent that the flower 
faces the earth, and so stiff that it cannot be straightened 
without breaking : as in CVoum Jntptriai.
Bent inwards (inflexus) as the leaves, pi, 9.
f. 5.
(a.
a.) 
BfcftRY (bacca) a pulpy seed-vefsel without valves ; in which 
the seeds are naked, as in the Goos^Krry or Elderberry.
PI.
5. f.
19.
BiCAPsuLAHis, having 2 Capsules.
BicoRNES, 3-horned.
Biennial (biennis) plants or roots ; are those which coDtinu« 
alive two years.
'BiFARius, poitiling from opposite sides.
BiFiDUs, cleft, or cloven into two.
BiFLORUs, 2-flowered.
BiGEMiNUH, twin-fork, 
BiJUGUU, in 2 pairs.
BiLABiATA, 2-hpped, (blofsom.) 
BiLODiru, 2-lobed, (leaf.) 
BiLOCULARE, 2-celW, (seed-vefscl.) 
BiNATUS, in pairs.
BiFARTiTUH, deeply divided into 3 parts.
BiPiNNATUM, doubly winged, (leaf.) 
BiRD-f OOTED (pedatus) bearing some resemblance to the feet 
of land'fowl ; as the leaves of the Fafsiim Flffwtr, or the 
seed-vcfsel of the Bird's-Jhot Trefoil.
PI.
7. f.
49- 
BiTERNATUS, doubly three-fold.
Bitten (prasmorsus) not tapering to a point, or ending in any 
oven regular form, but appearing aji if bitten off; as in 
the root of DevU'i-lnt ; and the pciaisol Common MailoKi, 
&ni Marshtnaitoivs.
PI.
7. f.
IS.
Bill (rostrtun) a long awl-shapcd substance attached to a 
seed, resembling the bill of a Woodcock ; as in S&tphtrtl'ti 
Utedie : or Craae'A-biU, PI.
5. f.
15.
(a.) 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
45 
BtvALTE, 2-valved (seed-vefsel.) 
Bladders (vesiculae) a kind of Air-bags found on some spe« 
cies of Fucus, - 
Bladder-shaped (inflatus) inflated or distended like a blown 
bladder ; as is the Cup of the Bladder Campiorif and th« 
blofsom'of the Figtoort.
Blistered (bullatus) when the surface of a leaf rises high 
above the veins » so as to appear like blisters.
Blossom (corolla) one of the parts of a flower.
It may con- 
sist of one or more Petals ; and is formed by an expan- 
sion of the inner bark of the plant.
PI.
4. It is some- 
times diflScult to say, whether we should call this pro- 
tecting cover to the Stamens and Pistils, a blofsom or a 
cup.
In most instances the former is coloured, and the 
latter green ; but that is not always the case, for there 
are green blofsoms and coloured cups; but Linnaeus 
remarks, that the blofsom has its Petals, or its Segments 
placed alternately with the Stamens, whilst the leaves or 
segments of the cup stand opposite to them.
If this rule 
be adopted, the blofsom or Corolla of the Tulip, and 
several other bulbous rooted plants^ must be considered 
as a Cup.
Blunt (obtusus) opposed to acute, as the leaves oiXhe Spiked 
Speedwell ; the cup of the Convolvulus ; and the capsule 
of the Yell&w Rattle, See the leaf, pi.
7« f» 39.
Boat-shaped (navicularis) like a little keel-bottomed boat ; 
as are the valves of the seed-vefsels of the Wood and the 
Mithridate, PL 5.
f. 13.
and the keel or lower petal of 
many of the butterfly-shaped blofsoms.
Border (lamina) the upper spreading part of a blofsom of 
one Petal ; as in the Primrose and Auricula.
It is some-, 
times used to signify the thin membranaceous part of a 
seed, or seed-vefsel.
PI.
4. f.
1. {b, b,) 
Bordered (marginatus) having a border.
Bowed (arcuatus) bent like a bow.
inwards (incurvatus.) 
Brachiatus, see crofs-pairs.
Brachium, an arm; see measure.
Bractea, floral-leaf.
Branched (ramosus) having lateral divisions.
Bristles (setae) strong, stiff, cylindrical hairs.
Bristle-shaped (setaceus) slender, and nearly cylindrical, 
of the size of a bristle, as the straw of the least BuUrush : 
the leaves and stipulae of the Asparagus.
Broad-topped-spike, seeCorymbus.
Bud (gemma) a protuberance upon the stem or branches, 
generally scaly, and gummy or resinous.
It contains th« 
rudiments of the leaves, or flowers, or both, which are to 
be expanded the following year.
46 DICTIONARY OP 
Bulb (bulbus) may be considered as a Bud placed upon the 
root.
It contains the rudiments or embryo, of a (uture 
plant.
Bulbs sometimes are found upon the ^tem, as in 
some species of Garlic.
A Bulbous Root (bulbosus) is either 
Solid, as in the Tulip, PI.
11, f.
3. 
Scaly, as in the lAly. PI, li.
f. 4.
or 
Coated, as in the Onion.
PL 11* f.
2. 
Jointed, as in the Adaxa a,nd Latknsa..
Bulging (gibbus) swollen out, not regularly, but on some 
one or more sides, as the under part of the blofsom of 
the Foxglofce, the blofsom of the Honeysuckle, the Calyx of 
the Turnepi Cabbage, and Wallflofwer.
PI, 4.
f. 12.
(6.) 
Bullatum, blistered (leaf.) 
Bunch (racemus) a fruit-stalk furnished with short lateral 
branches.
The Grape^ the Currant, and the Barberry are 
instances.
PI.
6. f.
8* 
Bundle (fasciculus) when several flowers stand on their 
respective fruit-stalks, which grow nearly from the same 
point, and rise to the same height ; as in the ^eet Wil" 
Ham.
Bundled (fasciculatus) Leaves, when they arise nearly from 
the same point, and are crowded togeth'e;: ; as in the 
Larch.
PI.
9. f.
3. (/.) 
Roots ; a sort of tuberous roots in which t^e knobs 
are connected without the intervention of threads, as jn 
the Faony.
BuTTERFLY-sflLAPED (papilionaceus) from an imaginary re- 
semblance that some blofsoms bear to that insect.
The 
Fea and the Broom furnish examples.
See the introduction 
to the Clafs Diadelphia ; and also pL 4.
f, 13.
14.
}5.
i^^ 
Caducus, shedding.
CiESPiTosus, matted together.
Calcaratus, having a spur.
Caliculus, seed-coat cover.
Calyculatus, double Cal^Oi:.
Calyptra, veil.
Calyx, or Empalement, Is a continuation of the outer bark 
of a plant, constituting a part of the flower.
It is either 
I a Cup, (perianthium) as in the Primose ; pi.
3. /• 10.
- an In /olucrum (involucrum) as in Carrot; pL 6* 
f. 9.
(c.
c.) 
»—« a Catkin (amentum) as in Hasel; pi.
6. f.
12.
— a Veil (calyptra) as in several Mcfses ; pi.
1. f.
D. (a.) 
— a Husk (gluma) ; as in Oats; pi.
.2.
f. 21.
(a.
a.) f.
1. 
(a.
0.) 
*- a Sheath (spatha) as iwNarcifsus; pi.
3. f.
9« (^'^O ^^ 
a Curtain (volva) as in several Fwignif^s^ Pl« 1* 
f. H.
(c.) See those terms.
Campanulatus, bell-shaped.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
47 
Cakaliculatum, channelled (leaf.) 
CAKCEiiLATuSy latticed.
Capillaris, hair-like.
Capitatus, growing in heads.
Capitulum, knob, or little head (of flowers.) 
Cap&eolus, see Cirrus and Tendril.
Capsule (capsula) a dry hollow » seed-vefsel, which opens 
naturally in some determinate manner ; as at the side by 
a small hole in Orchis and Campanula ; horizontally in 
Fimpemel; longways in Convolvulus; at the bottom in 
Arrowgrass ; or at the top, as ia most plants.
See pi.
5. 
f. 6.
9. 14.
Carina, keel.
^ 
Carinatus, boat-shaped, or keeled.
Carkosum, fleshy (leaf.) 
Cartilagineum, gristly (leaf.) % 
Catkin (amentum) is a composition of flowers and chafl", on 
a long, slender, thread-shaped receptacle, the figure of 
the whole resembling a cat's tail.
The Willow^ the Hasel, 
and the Reedmace^ are instances.
PI.
6. f.
12.
Cauda, tail.
Caudex, stem, or trunk ; particularly applied to a tree.
Caulescens, having a stem.
Caulinus, belonging to the stem..
Caulis, stem ; a term of more general signification than either 
a scapus or stipes ; which see..
Cavis, hollow« 
Cell (loculamentum) having cells (locularis) a vacuity in the 
capsule for lodging the seed.
Capsules have either one 
cell, as in Primrose ; two as in Thomapple ; three as in 
JJly : four as in Spindletree ; five as in Rue; six as in 
Asarabaccay &c.
PI.
3. f.
4. When a capsule has several 
cells, with a single seed in each, it is sometimes called 
Cocca ; thus a 2-celled and a 2-seeded Capsule is called 
Capsula dicocca ; but its application seems limited to Cap-> 
sulcs which have external protuberances corresponding 
ivith the internal cells, and these protuberances being so 
strongly marked, as to give the appearance of so many 
Capsules united together, rather than one single Capsule.
•—It also signifies the cavity in the Anthers which contains 
the Pollen.
Central (flores flosculosi) Florets ; those which occupy 
the middle part of a compound flower; as the yellow ones 
in the middle of a common Daisy ; pi.
4. f.
24.
(6.) and 
it likewise is used to signify the florets in the middle part 
of an Umbel.
—   *      Leaf-Stalk is fixed not to the base, but to the 
middle part of a leaf, as in the garden Nasturtium^ and 
Marsh Pennywort* PI.
9* f« 4-.
(a.) 
48 DICTIONARY OP 
Cerkuus, bent, (fruit-stalk.) 
Chaff (palea) a thin membranaceous.
substance growing tipoA 
a common receptacle, to separate the florets from each 
other, as in Teasel ; Scabious ; WiUaw ; Burdock, 
Chaffy (acerosus) Leaves; these are hard, dry, strap- 
shaped, permanent, surrounded at the base by a kind 
of membranaceous chafF-like substance.
The leaves of 
the Fir, the YetOy the Pt«e, and the Cedar are so called.
PI.
9» f.
3. (c.) , 
Receptacle, Flower, or Husk (paleaceus) set 
with a substance like chaff.
Channeled (canaliculatus) Leaves, Leaf-stalk, or 
Fruit-stalk ; having a deep furrow or channel extend* 
ing from the base to* tne end.
Chive, see Stamen.
Cicatrisatus, scarred.
Ciliatus, fringed.
CiNGENS, binding round.
Circular (circularis) round and flat ; nearly in the form of 
a circle, as are the leaves of the Aldexy or the petals of 
XYiQ Strawberry 2iXidi Hanjiithoim, PI.
f. f.
2. 
CiRCUMCissA, cut round.
Circumference, (circulus) the part of a circle most distant 
from the centre.
Thus in a shilling or half crown, the 
inscription is round the circumference.
It is used in 
botany to exprefs the florets that are furthest from the 
centre of a compound flower ; as the white ones which 
surround the yellow ones in the Common Daisicy or the 
florets in the outer part of an Umbel.
PI.
4. f.
24« 
(a* a» a* a.) 
CiRRosuM^(fol.) terminating in a tendril.
Cirrus, tendril.
Clammy (viscosus) adhesive like bird-lime ; as are the leaves 
of the Alder ; or the stalks oiFraxinella ; and Gwn Cistus* 
Clasper, see tendril.
Class (clafsis) see the introduction.
Clausus, closed.
ClavaTus, club-shaped.
Clavicula, the same as Cirrus.
Claw (unguis) blofsoms that are composed of several petalsy 
have frequently those petals so formed as to admit of two 
distinct names ; the claw and the limb.
The claw is the 
lower part, or that next to the base ; thus if you take a 
FhiJcy a Campion, or a WaUflowerj and draw out one of the 
petals, the lower and the slender part by which it was 
connected, and which was included within the cup, is the 
part which is called the Claw.
PI.
4, f.
1 1.
(a^ o.) 
Cleft, see cloven.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
49 
CI.IMBTNO (scatidens) a term applied to plants which take the 
advantaige of some acyoiiiing body to support and raise 
themselves ; as the Ivy, 
Cloathing (pubes) every species of hairiness on the surface 
of plants.
See Cotton ; Hair; Wool; Bristles, In^ 
more extended sense,it also includesviscidmatter^glandsy&c.
Closb (cQ^lomeratus) when a branching Aruit-stalk bears its 
flowers closely compacted together, but without regularity.
Clovek (iifsus) divided half way down, as are the summits of 
Ground Ivy^ and Jacob's Ladder ; the petals of Campion ; 
and the leaves of WorfmMod% 
" Anthers ; see pL I.
f. 3.
(a^ a, a,) 
Club-shaped (davatus) thinner at the base atod thicker up« 
wards» as is the long i-eceptacle of the Cuekawpint^ and the 
fruit-stalk of the ^rkan Marigolds 
Cluster .(thyrsus) a collection of flowexs somewhat in an 
egg'-shaped form, as those of the Liiac and Butterbur^ 
CoA DUN AT us, joined together at the base.
CoARCTATUS> compact* 
Coated (tunicatus) root ; composed of layers one over an^* 
other> a,s in the onion » 
Cobweb BED (arachnoideus) covered with a substance resem^ 
bling a Cobweb.
CoccuMi see Cell.
Coccus, a name given to a Capsule when 2 or more arcjoined 
together.
If 2, dicoccus i if d> tri^-cocouS) &c.
MercuriaUs 
{Dog's Mercury) is an example of the dicoccus Capsule* 
CoChleatum (pod) convoluted like a snail-^shelK 
CoLORATuSt coloured^ 
Coloured (coloratus) wh^n a leaf or cup is any other colour 
than green ; as the floral-leaves of Golden Saxifrage, 
Column (coluranella) the upright little pillar in the center of 
some CapsulOs to .which the seeds are fixed.
Columnar (teres) differs from cylindrical by tapering up- 
wards, like the shaft of a column ; and is thus apphcatiie 
to stems, some leaves, &c.
Columnella, column.
. 
Coma, comb.
Comb (coma) a collection of fioral4eavcs> terminating the 
flowering stem, as in Sage and Crown Imperial; it is 
remarkable also in the Fi^e Apple.
CoMB-LiKE (pectinatum) a sort of winged leaf) the leasts of 
which are like the teeth of a.
comb.
Common Calyx (calix communis) including several flowers ; 
see the introduction to the clafs Syngenesia^ We have a 
well known instapce in the Dandelion and in all the 
TAwrfwl— FA.
4, if.
20.
. 
'     '     ii ./RECfePTAOLE (receptaqulum commune) a seat for 
. several, flowt^rs Ot florets included within ope conimoh 
Vol. I.
E 
M DICTIONARY OF 
Calyx ; aft is the cAsle with most of the plants iti the clafi 
Syngenesia.
The Dandelim h an example.
Pi. 4.
f. 
23.
(a.) 
Common Fruitstalk, bearingseveral flowers.
Communis (common.) 
COMPACTUS, firm.
Compact (coarctatus) growing close^ and as it were pre&edi 
together.
Completus, complete flowers^ such as have both a cup and 
a blofsoro.
CoMPLiCATUS, doubled together.
Compositi (compound.) 
Compound Flowers; (compositi flores) consist of many 
florets or little flowers, upon one receptacle or seat, and 
included within One common Calyx ; as most of those in 
the dafs Syngenesia ; nThistle is a familiar example.
Pi. 4; 
•f.
19.
24.
25.
Sometimes, but with lefs propriety, the 
flowers which grow in Umbels are called compound, as 
those in the second order of the clafs Pentandria ; of which 
the Carrot is a well-known instance.
Compound Umbex.
(umbella composita) when each umbel is 
subdivided into other little umbels or umbellules.
PL 6.
f. 9.
BuNCKy composed of several lefser bunches, 
'Spike, cottiposedof several little spiked or spikets.
ConeiYMBus, composed 'Of several small corymbs.
Leaf,.
when each leaf'-stalk supports more than one 
leaf ; or when one leaf 4s inserted into anotkofi as in Wood 
Horsctml.
PI.
7. f« *7.
49- PU 8.
f. 52.
43.
54; 56.
56; 
PI.
9* f- 3.
(ff.) See also daMy compound: triply compound.
Berry, when one large berry iscomposed «f several 
small ones ; as, for instance^ the Bxtspb^rvy.
Compressed (comprefsus) a term applied to a cylindrical 
substance more or lefs flatted.
Thus suppose a straw to 
be the cylindrical sub&latnce ; if this be preiJied between 
the thumb and finger so as to flatten it,' we should then 
• say it was comprefsed.
The cup of i^GUhJloeoser or the 
Wallflower is comprefsed, and so is the bldisom of the 
RattlCy and the pod of the Ladysmock* 
«    I • Leaf, one that is thicker than it is .broad.
Concave (concavus) hollowed out like a bowl ; as -are the 
petals of the Cherry or the lUnotham; the leaves of Bwmic^ 
leaoed Plantain : or hollowed in a more geoaral sense, as 
the valves of the grafscs; 
Conckptaculum, see Air-bag.
Co Ni>up Lie A Tus, folde<i o^ doubled together.' • • ' 
r'oNE (strobilus) a species of seed-vefsel^forteedbj^d Catkin 
with hardened scales ; OQHtBininga ^seed withifl-the iMtse 
of each scale ; exemplified^ ^ Pins and Ytr. PL 6.t IS.
BOTANICAL TERMS, M 
CovlisHAFED (cucullatus) leaf» a term applied to leaves which 
are rolled up, as the grocers roll paper to put sugar or 
spices in, like a hollow conCk 
CoNFERTUs, crowded.
. , 
Confluent (confluentia folia) running one into another at 
the base.
CoNGESTUS, heaped together^ 
CoNGLOMERATi^s, Congregated^ 
Congregated (glomeratus) when several little spikes or 
panicles are crowded together somewhat in a globular 
fonn.-'-Examples are not uncommon among the Grafses > 
Hough Cocksfoot is one* 
Conical (conicus) the shape of the Aljnne Strawberry ; nearly 
resembUng the form of a sugar loaf* 
CoNJUGATUM, a winged leaf with only 1 pair of leafitSk 
CoNNATUM, united at the base.
CoNNECTEPy (ac|natus) Leaves or Stipda:^ such as have their 
upper surface at the base growing^to the stem or branch^ 
CoNNivENS, converging or approaching; closing.
Contiguous (adpref&us) when a leaf, branch, or seed^vefsel 
* rises up so perpendicularly as to stand almost parallel and 
close to the stem, as if prefsed to it» The pods of the 
Common Mustard furnish an example ; and the leaves of 
. the Crqfs Mitkridate.
PL 9- f.
6. 
Contra RiuM, see Tranaversum.
Converging (cpnnivens) approaching each other at the top.
I    I .I. L.E4 vsSy bent inwards towards the stem.
PL 9* 
f. 5, (a.
a.) 
Petals, leaning towards the center of the 
flower, as in the Fctony and Globe-^/tower.
Filaments, as in Borage, 
Anthers, leaning towards each other, as in 
Gillf and White Archangel or Deadnettk^, 
Convex (convexus) opposed to concave.
Rising like the sur« 
iace of a globe^ The receptacle of the garden Tamey is 
convex.
CoNTOLUTUS, rolled or twisted spirally.
CoRCULUM, corcle, or heart of a seed.
> • 
CoRDATVif , heart*-shapedk 
CoRlACSvs, leatb»-like.
Corn UT OS, horn-shaped^ 
Corolla, blofsom.
Corona, crown ; see crowned^ 
Cortex, bark^ 
Co&YMBUS, differs from a spike in having the Howers of which 
it is composed not sitting, but standing each on its proper 
fruitstalk, each of which again springs out of one common 
* froitstalk.
They are unequal in length, the lowermost 
being the longest^ the others gradually shorter as they 
18 
f 
52 DICTIONARY OF 
ascend, so that the whole collection of flowers forms nearly 
a flat and broad surface at the top.
See Pt. 6.
f. 7 ; or 
look at a Fear Tree when in flower.
CoSTATUM, ribbed (leaf.) 
Cotton (tomentum) Cottony (tomentosus) or downy ; co- 
vered with a whitish cotton-like substance, as the le^ve^ 
of the Great Mullein and of the Marsh^malhw, 
Cotyledon ES, seed-lobes.
Creepino (repens) Stem; creeping along the ground, and 
sending forth little roots ; the Vtolet and Ivy are instances.
PL 10.
f. 8.
— — • Root, as in the Spearmint.
PL 10.
f. 7.
Crenatus, scollopedi 
Crescent-shaped (lunularis) (lunatus) shaped like a new 
moon ; as are the Anthers o( the Straivberry.
Leaf.
PL 7.
f. H.
Crested (cristatus) flowers, furnished with a tuft or crest, as 
is the common Milkwort, 
Cristatus, crested.
Crookedly bent back (retrorsum-slnuatum.) See PI.
7, 
f. 27.
Cross-pairs (decussatus) when leaves grow in pairs, and 
each pair points in a different direction to the pair npxt 
above or below it.
Thus, if one pair point East and 
West, the pair next below it point North and South ; the 
third pair crofses the second, the fourth the third, and so 
. on.
PL 9.
f. 1.— Bracchiatus seems to apply to 
branches growing in the same manner.
Cross-shaped (cruciatus) (cruciformis) Flowers; are 
those which have four petals disposed in the form of a 
crofs.
The GiUifhwtry Cantfytuffy and Cabbage, are fami- 
liar instances.
PL 4.
f. U.
f. 12.
Crowned (coronatus) Seed ; is a seed to which the Calyx 
adheres, as in Teasel; or it is a seed furnished with down, 
as in Dandelion.
PL 4.
f. 22.
f.27.
—       Berry, is a berry with the Calyx adhering; as ii> 
the Honeysuckle.
Cruciatus, crofs-shaped.
Cruciformis, see crofs-shaped.
Cryptooamia, see the introduction to the Clafs so called.
CucuLLATUS, cone-shaped.
Cubit, about half a yard; see measure.
Culm us, straw.
Cuneiform IS, wedge-shaped.
, 
. Cup (periuiithium) a species of Calyx contiguous to the other 
parts of the flower.
It cither includes one flower, as in 
the Convolvulus and GiUyfhwer ; ox several florets, as in 
the Sunflower and Daisk.
PL 3.
f. i.
f. 10.
f. 5.
(ci) FL*4.
I 7, (^•.) f.
12.
ip.) f.
13.
14.
18.
(a.
a. a.) 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
53 
:Ctjp, Double (calyculatus) when one Cup has another sar* 
rounding its base.
Curled (crispus) Leaves; as in Endive and Curled Mint.
PI.
8. £.67.
CuRTAiK (volva) the Calyx of Agarics and Boleti.
It is some- 
times fibrous, but generally like thin white leather.
It 
surrounds the Stem, and is.
attached to the Pileus.
When 
torn by the growth of the former and the expansion of the 
latter, the part surrounding the Stem often remains, and 
.in that state it is called the Ring.
See PI.
1, f.
II.
(a,) 
Cuspid ATU8, prickly-pointed.
Cut-round (circumscifsus) when a seed-vefsel does not open 
longways, in the usual manner, but in a circle surround- 
ing it, like a snuff*box or an ivory egg ; as in FimperneL 
PL 5.
f. 9.
Cyathiformis, glafs-shaped, 
Cylixdrical or round, (teres) like a walking stick ; 
the form of the TRVNKof a tree.
' ' of a Straw ; Bullrmk^ 
of a Stalk ; Great Plantain, 
» of a Stem ; Jtparagus.
^. of a Lea F ; Wild Garlkk ; Onion.
PI.
8. f, 68.
» of a Cup ; Pink.
I Catkin ; Reedmace; Haxk, 
^YMA> tuft.
, 
Daggei^-pointed (mucronatus) not gradually tapering to a 
point, but ending suddenly in a sbarp-<pointed substance, ' 
like the blade of a dagger from its handle ; as in the Calyx 
of Pkleum, 
Debilis, feeble.
Decagynia, 10 Pistils.
Decandria, 10 Stamens ; sec the introduction to the Clafs 
so called.
Decaphyllus, 10 leaved; (cup.) 
Decemfidus, with 10 clefts, (cup*,) 
Decemloculare, 10 celled, (Capsule.) 
Deciduous (deciduus) Leaves ; those which fall off at the 
approach of winter, 
Calyx or Cup; falling off before the blofom; as 
does that of the Tkorn^apple^ the CabbagCy the Lad^smock^ 
and the Poppy, 
>• Seed-vessel ; falling off before it opens^ as in the 
Sea Rocket and Wood.
Declining (decUnatus) bent like a bow, wrth the arch, down- 
wards ; as the seed-vefsel of the Water Crefiet ; the fila- 
ments of the Buglo/s, See the lower Stamens in pi.
1, 
f. 11.
f. 12.
D£coMPOsiTUs, doubly compound, 
Decvmbens, lying down.
54 DICTIONARY OF 
Decvrsekt (decurrens) leaf; when there is no leaf«stklk, bilt 
the base of the leaf runs down the stem.
The WhiW 
MvUein and Mmk Thistle are examples.
PU9.
f. 4, (e.) 
Decvhsivum (leaf) when the leaiits of a winged leaf are 
decurrent upon the leaf*stalk, 
Decussatus, crofs pairs, 
Deflexus, bending outwards in a small degree.
De^loratus, spoken of Anthers which have shed their Pollen, 
Dehisceks, opening or standing open.
Peltoideus, triangular spear«shaped, or trowel-^^haped, 
Demersus, see submersus, 
Dekdroides, shrub-like.
DentatO'Sbrratus, tooth-^serrated.
Denta'po-sikxtat ITS,, toothed and indented, 
Dentatus, toothed.
Dented (retusus) a blunt leaf, &c.
With a dent or hlUnt 
notch at the end ; as in the Broadikaceti Sea Henth, ' 
Denticulatus, set with little teetbf 
Dependens, hanging down, 
Depressus, deprefsed.
Depressed (deprefsus) when the surface of a leaf, &c, is in 
a smaU degree .concave«««prefsed down««<^f)atted, 
Diadelphia, see the introduction to the clafs so named.
Diamond-shaped (rhdmbeuB) applied to kaves which -re-* 
semble the figure of a diamond as painted on cards, ' 
DiANDRiA (2 stamens) the napie of the second clafs, 
DicfiOTOMUs, forked, 
Dicoccvs, Q, capsules united, each with I cell, 
DiDYMA, double.
DiDYNAMiA, see the introduction to the clafs so named, 
D1FFORM13, irregular in shape; of different shapes, 
DiFFcrsus, spreading.
DiGiTATUS, finger-like, 
D16TKIA (2 Pistils) the name of several of the lannaean Orders, 
DiMiDiATUs, half round, extending halfway round.
Dimpled (umbilicatus) having a little dollow dot ; as in the 
fruit of the Barberry^ 
DxOecia, signifies that the flowers bearing Stamens, and those 
bearing Pistils, grow on different plants.
Thus in the Y^w 
TreCf if you find it in flower, and one of the flowers is 
furnished with Stamens, all the flowers upon that par-f 
ticular tree have ottfy Stamens and no Pis^ls ; but if ymi 
find a flower with a Pistil and no Stamens, then ^1 the 
^wers upon that tre^ will be found e(}aally destitute of 
Stamens.^^Pl. U f, 22, 
Di-PEi'>ALA, 2 petaled, 
DiPHYLLus, 2 leaved.
Discus, disk.
DiSKi of a leaf| signifies its surface, either upper or under* 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
55 
Disk, oompound or i&cojrpomt^ flower, signifies the ceatraL 
part only* Thus in a DaUy^ the minute yellow florets 
. form the Disk, and the larger white strap-shaped florets 
the Rays.
DisPERMUS, 2 seeded, 
DiSftxcrvM, see laciniatura.
DiasEPmENTUMi partition.
D1S8X1.XENS, bursting suddenly asunder.
Distant (dtstans) far asunder ; as the Stamens of the Mint ; 
' or the whirls of the flowers in the Corn Mwt, 
DiSTEN TED (ventricosus) or bellying, as the cup of the JRc»f| 
or the under part of the blossom of the Foigkve.
PI.
4^ 
f. 4.
DrsTrcff uai 2 rowed.
Distinct, unconnected, separate from each other, 
DivARiCATUS, straddling.
Div£&G«i2^G (clivergens) sporeadii^ wide from the stem almost 
horizontally.
This term is opposed to compact.
DivisLoi^s..
See die next article.
Divided (partitus) applied to a leaf,, a cup, or a petal ; it 
signifies that it is parted more than half way down ; as 
the petals of Chkkwud ; the cup of Cotnfr^f or Bor4ig€m 
PL 7.
f. 28, 
DoDECAKDRiA (12 stamens) the title of a clafs, which see.
DoDRANS, a palm ; about a quarter of a yard.; see measure.
DoLABEiFonifE (leaf) hatchet-shaped.
DoRSALis,iixed to the back.
Dotted (punctatus) marked with little hoUow dots ; as are 
the leaves of the Sea Chamomile ; and the receptack of 
some of the compound flowers.
PI.
4. f.
23.
Doubled together (conduplicatus) as are the leaves of the 
Black Cherry before they unfold.
Double (didymus) applied to the anthers of several flowers^ 
when upon one filament there are two anthers united, like 
a dopble nut ; as in the.
Ranuncultts^ Anemone^ Celandine^ 
Pkmby Cherry J PI.
5. f.
6. (A.) 
Calxx (duple.x or calyculatue) when the calyx of a 
flower hath another outer cdyx surrounding' it, as in the 
MarsUkaUoWy and Hollyhock, 
Germen, when two Germens are united together.
as in Goose-grcjs or Cleavers, 
Doubly-compound (decompositus) Leaves, haying th^ 
primary leaf-stalk divided, so that each division forms a 
compoitnd leaf.
They are of three different kinds.
1. Twii9FoaK (bigeminus) when a forked leaf-stalk bears 
several leafits at the end of each division or fork.
PI.
10.
f. 4.
2. Doubly-threefold (bi-ternatus) wh6n a leafrstalk with 
three divisions bears three leafits upon the end of eack 
division.
PL 8.
f. b7.
S6 DICTIONARY OP 
$♦ DouBLY-wiNOBD (du|«licato-pinnatum) (bi-|»Biiattim) 
whon a leaf-stalk ba8 lateral ribs, and each of these ribs 
forms a winged leaf; example Tansey, Yarr&tOy PL 8.
f. 56.
For leaves more than dovbly compatmdj see Triply Com- 
pound.
Down (pappus) the fine hair or feather-like substance cf own- 
ing the seeds of some plants, and enabling the wind 
to scatter them abroad.
In Sow-thistle it consists of 
simple or undivided hairs, but in the Goatsheard it is 
branched, and then is (^Wed feathered down.
PI.
4. f.
22, 
(/.) PL 6, f, 2.
(fl.
*0 
Dow^Y (leaf) sec Cottony.
-» .
Drooping (nutans) for such is the most exact meaning of 
the term when applied to a Panicle, as it frequently i* 
when speaking of theOrafses, whose spikets' often bang 
down in a beautiful pensile form, 
Drupa, a pulpy seed-vefsel without valves, consisting ^a hard 
nut or stone, oncompafscd by a pulpy substance'; exem- 
plified in the Plumb, ^e Cherry y and thb Feach, PLd.f. 21* 
DuPLiCATUS, doubled.
DupLiCATO-CRENATUM, dottbly scollope4 ; .
'     " • ' - ' I ' .
' i PiNNATUM, doubly winged^ .
— Serr AT UM, doubly serrated.
» Tern AT UM, doubly three-fold, .
Dust, see Pollen.
Dusted (pulveratus) some plants appear as if covered with a 
kind of dust or powder ; e.
g. the English Mercury, and the 
leaves of the Auricula.
Bar--shap£i> (auriculatus) somewhat resembling a human 
ear.
It is alsa uied to exprefs a little appendage at the 
base of a leaf or leafit.
Ebracteatus, without any floral leaf.
Ecalcarata, without a spur or hoi^.
Echinatus, set with prickles.
Egg-i-shaped (ovatus) signifies a shape resttmbling the solid 
substance of an egg, as the seed^bud of Jacob's Ladder ^ 
and the seeds of Fennet; or it implies only the form of an 
egg, if divided longways, as in the- leaves of the Beech- 
tree or Peppermint, PL 7- f- 3.
Eog-spe^r-^haoped ' (ovato-lanceolatum«) See spear-egg* 
shaped.
Elliptigum, see oval.
Ema'rginatum, notched at the end.
Embracing (amplexicaulis) the Stem ; when the base of a 
leaf nearly surrounds the stem, as in Sohmon's Seat^ 
• F^PPHj ^nd Sotrage.
PL 9* f.
4-.
(/.) 
Empalement, see Calyx.
£kervium, nervelcfs.
^irsrEAGVxiA.
9 Pistils.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
57 
EliTNEAiTDRTA, 9 Stamens.
£iroDis, jointk^, or without Joints.
£nsifokm£ (leaf) sword-^aped.
£ktir£, ^integer) Leaf, or Petal ; this tcnn is opposed 
to cloven, gashed, indented, &c.
but it does not signify 
that it is not serrated or sfcoUopped.
When a leaf is said 
to be very entire (integerrhnus) we understand that it is 
not even scollopped or serrated.
The leaves of a Nettie arc 
entirty but those of a Lilac are very entire.
PI.
7* iig.
31.
35.
entire leaves, f.
39.
40.
very entire leaves.
Equal |aequalis) sometimes signifies regular; all alike; as 
the blcffsoms of Angelica.
The florets forming the com- 
pound' flowers of the first Order of the Clafs Byngenesia 
are ssud to be equal : that is, they are all alike in being 
equally furnished both with Stamens and Pistils.
EQtriTAirs, folded one upon another; laminated.
Erect us, upright.
Erosum, gnawed.
Essential Character (character cfsentialis) is a single 
circumstance serving to distinguish a genus from every 
other genus.
Thus the Crowfoot (Ranunculus) is distin- 
guished from other genera by the Nectary at the base of 
each petal ; and the Colewort is known from all the other 
genera in the same natural order, by the four longer 
threads being forked at the top.
EvE^ (laevis) Surface, level, regular ; in opposition to 
scored, furrowed, or other inequalities, occasioned by 
deficiency of substance, or by the presence of hairs, &c« 
Ex A RAT ITS, see furrowed.
Excrescence (apophysis) a substance growing from the seat 
of the flower in some of the Mofses.
Expanding (patens) standing in a direction between upright 
and horizontal; as the petals of the StrauAerryy the 
branches of most plants, and the leaves of the Broaklmc 
Speedwell.
PI.
9. f.
5. (c.
c.) 
ExsERTus, protruding; opposed to inclosed, 
ExTiPULATUb, without StipulaB.
Extra Fo LI ACE us, underneath the leaves.
Eyx (hilum) the external scar upon a seed by which it was 
fixed to the seed-vefsel ; it is very remarkable in a Btan^ 
PL 6.
f. 3.
(e.) 
Farctus, filled full, ^ 
Farina, see Pollen.
Fasiculus, a bundle.
Fastigiatus, flat topped.
Fathom (orgya) see measure* 
Faux, mouth« 
5« DICTIONARY OF 
Favosum, honey-combed.
Feathered, (plumosus) the down of ^eads, scmetimes consist!!
of fine simple or undivided ImifS) in otlHnhs it sftnds out 
lateral hairs^ and then it.
is said to be featkeiied, PL 4« 
f. 22.
(L) PL 6.
f. 5.
(6.) 
FsE'Bi.lt (debilis) not strong enough to stand upri^t.
'Female Flowers, or Florets; such- as coatain one or 
more Pistils, bat no'' Stamens.
Femineus, see Female.
Fence, see Inyolucnim; and Involucellum.
Ferns,' see FiLiC£3.
Fertile Flowetis (fertiles vel ieminei.florcs) the^e that pro- 
duce seed clipable of vegetation ; as is vciy ^neralijr the 
case tin' fk>wers which have both Staihens and Pistils.
Flovverd that hove only Stamens never can produce seeds ; 
and flowars that hate only Pistils mwt be barren, if they* 
are so situated as to be out of reach of the Pollen, fsotti 
the Anthers of the stameniferous flowers : in some in- 
stances they will indeed, produce seeds to all appefiraHC«i 
perfect, but these seeds will never vegetate.
Fibres (oorvi) woody strings or nerves,* running undivided 
from the base to the extremity of a leaf; as in the broad 
and narrow-leaved Phntain.
PL 7* f* 46.
Tlnese kind 
of fibres, whether branched or not, have been iudifferently 
called nerves, and veins, but without mttch proof that 
they are destined to the office of either.
Perhaps they 
ought only to be considered >as ribs, formed to strengthen 
the leaf.
. ' 
Fibrous (dbrosus) Roots ; composed of smaUi threads or iibres.
PL 10.
f. 7.
Fiddle-shaped (panduriformis) oblong, but nartowVsd lin the 
middle and' broader below, as is the leaf of one species of 
Dock, supposed to resemble a violin, therefore called a 
Fiddle Dock.
Fi^^ament, or thread (filamentum) the thread-sbapfed part of 
a Stamen supporting the Anther.
See Stamen ; see aLsof 
PL 3.
f. 3.
(//.) f.
6. ig.) and PL 1.
f. 19.
{a.
a.) 
Filices, Ferns, the name of the natural afsemblage of plants 
constituting the first Order of the Clafs Cryptogp^mia* 
FiLitORMis, tliread-shaped.
Fimbriatus, sec fringed.
FissuM, cloven.
FisTULOsus, hollow.
Five-cornered (quinquangnkre) leaf.
See pL 7» fig.
20.
• 
Flaccidus, limber, feeble; see debilis.
Flagkllum, a Runner.
Flatted, see comprefsed.
Finger-like (digitatus) a species of compound Leaves, re- 
sembling the expanded tingcrs of a man's hand; so that 
I 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
69 
two or more leaves ate jcaiied to the end of An undivided 
leaf*stalk, e.
g. those of the Wild Biack Htlkhore^ Lupine^ 
and J^orse ChesntU, PU 7* f- 4^* 
FxNGER-LiKE, they may be in pairs (binatus) with two tei^ 
minating leafits.
PI.
7* f* 50.
IK THREES (ternatus) with thie^ 
terminating leafits.
PI.
7* f ^1* 
'-^ IN FIVES (qninatos) iiith five 
MMMMI^ 
terminating leafits.
Firm (compactus) applied to the texture of a leaf/ 
Fi'AT-TOPPED (fastigiatus) rising to the Sfame he^ht, so as to 
form a fiat, or nearly fiat surface at tho top.
Fleshy Seed-vessel, see Poraum.
• ' "   Leaf, or Hoot (carnosum) a» the leaves of 5e(fii» 
Dasyphyllam, 
more solid than pulpy ; as the fruit of the Apple ; the 
'' robt of the Turn^; and the leaf of the JBUmnd4e€a>ed 
*St(mecrop.
Flexible (fiexilis) readily bending without breaking, 
Flexuosus, zig'ZSLg ; without angles ; gently winding.
Floating (natans) applied to aquatic plants, whose leaves or 
flowers float upon the surface of the water : .
e. g.
Waters 
Floral-leaves (bracteae) differ in shape or colour from the 
other Ic^aves of th& plant; they are generally placed on 
the fruit-stalk, and often so near the flower as in some 
instances to be easily mistaken for the Calyx; but the 
Calyx dries or withers when the fruit is ripe, whereas the 
fioral leaves endure as long as the other leaves of the 
plant.
Examples of fioral leaves may be seen in the 
Fansie, the Utnetree^ the HeUeborty the Famon-^lawerj 
the Sage^ the WUd Marjoram; and many others.
PL S» 
f. 8.
(a.
a.) 
(fiorale fol.) means also, sometimes the leaves more 
»   ^ 
immediately approaching the fiower, though not properly 
floral-leaves.
Floret (fiosculus) a little flower, one of the small flowers 
composing a compound or incorporated flower.
See the 
introduction to the Clafs Syngenesia.
They are Tubu- 
XAH ; that is, formed of a tube cloven into ^ve parts at 
fee border, as in the Tame; or Narrow, when the 
blo&om is long and strap-shaped, as in Dandelion.
In 
the Daisie and Sun/lowery the florets in the centre are 
Tubular, and those in the circumference Narrow, 
or Radiate.
PI.
4. f, 21.
f. 24.
f. 26.
In the second 
Order of the Clafs Pentandria, which contains the Um- 
belliferous plants, the -florets composing the Umbels are 
0ach formed of five Petals.
When ^he petals are all of 
the same size and shape, the florists are said to be equ a l i 
60 DICTIONARY OF 
as in Angelica and Ctllery ; but when the outer petals are 
larger than the others, the iiprets are said to be Radiate; 
as in Skqfherd^a Netdk and Carroty 
-Flo», flower.
Flosculus, florets.
Flosgulosus, a tabular floret.
...
Flower (flos) a temporary part of a plant appropriated to the 
production of seeds : it ia composed of seven parts ; the 
Calyx; the Blossom; the Stamens; the Pi.<iTiLs; 
the Seed-vessel ; the Seeds ; and the Receptacle.
To these perhaps we may add an eighth , viz.
the Nbc- 
TART.
It is DOt nccefsary that all these parts should be 
present to constitute a flower.
Incomplete flowers are 
deficient in one or more of the parts.
The Hyacinth, and 
Tulip have no Calyx.
The Misktoey Gale^ Hop^ .
F^ra?, 
Bog'^a Mercury f Nettle ; and the flowers of the .plants 
bearing Catkins, have no blofsoms.
The Ground Jvy^ the 
White and B/ed Deadiiettle, and all the plants in the first 
Order of the Clafs Didynamia, have no secd-vefsels.
Foliaceus, leafy.
FoLiOLUM, leafit* 
Folium, leaf.
FoLLicuLus, air*bag.
Foot (pes) see measure.
Forked (furcatus) (dichotomus) dividing and often subdividing 
into forks, as the branches of most of the Spurges; the 
fruit-stalks of the Common Catamiut^ and the Vink ; the 
Style of the Currant.
PI.
10.
f. 4.
FoRNiCATus, vaulted.
It also signiiies closed, when applied 
to the blofsom of the rough-leaved plants in Pentandria 
Monogynia, meaning that the top of the tube is shut, or 
closed.
FoiIr-cornered (tetragonus) as the stem of the Deadnettle, 
FaiyoBD (ciliatus) as the blofsom of the Buckbean, and the 
Garden Nasturtium ; or the leaves of the Crq/s-leaved Heath, 
PI, 7 .
f. 43.
The term fimbriatus has also been used to 
exprefs the fringe of a blofsom, but it seems an uselefs: 
distinction.
Frons, frond, a term designed to signify that the stem, root, 
and leaf, arc all in one, as in the Ferns, the Fuci, dic^ 
but there is no groat use in such a term, neither docs it 
• strictly apply iu all cascs^ according to its original in- 
tention.
FaucTus, fruit, .
Frutkx, a shrub.
Fruit (fructus} a part of a flower consisting of the Seed- 
vessel, the Seed^ and the Receptacle.
Fruit-stalk (pcdunculus) a part of a stem or branch, bear- 
ing flowers but wot leaves.
PL <).
f, 5.
(/w^ f, 8« {c.)pl.
6. 
f, J, ((7.
a. a.
a, a, a.) 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
61 
Frxjticosus, shrub-like.
Fulcra, props.
FuLiGiNosus, sooty.
Fungi, the last Ocder of the Clafs Cryptogamra.
FuNNEL-stTAPT.D (infundibuliforiiiis) applies to a bjofsoni of 
one petal ; the lower part of which is tubular, the upper 
part conical, as in Hound's Tongue^ Bvghfsy CoKslipSf 
PI.
4. f.
7. 
Cup; as in Thrift.
FuRCA, fork.
FuRCATUS, forked.
Furrowed (sulcatus) marked with deep lines ninniiig length- 
ways.
FusiPORMis, spindle-shaped* 
Galea, helmet.
Gaping (ringens) (personatus) Blossoms ; so called from the 
resemblance to a gaping mouth, when squeezed on each 
side.
Toadflax and Snapdragon are instances.
PI.
4. f.
S. 
9, JO.
Gelatinous, jelly-like.
Geminis, in pairs.
Gbmma, bud.
GfiMSRAL Involucre (involucrum) a species of Calyx 
placed at the base of a general Umbel, as a Carrot, An- 
gelica^ or LoDoge.
It consists of one or more leaves.
P(.
0*.
f. 9- (c- ^0 
/-• -, ^, « «\ i See the Introduction.
IjENERA, 3 
Generic Description consists of an accurate description of 
the different parts composing a flower; and all thos<^ 
plants whose ftowers agree with this description, are spc* 
cies of the same genus.
(See the Introduction.) 
Geniculatus, knee-jointed.
Geniculum, knee-joint; sometimes it also signifies simply a 
knot or joint without implying any bend.
Germ EN, or Seed-bub, the lower part of a Pistil.
It is the 
rudiment of the seed-vefsel, or of the embryo fruit.
See 
Pistil.
PI.
3. f.
2. (rf.) f.
5. (c.) f.
7. (/.) 
G IBB us, bulged, or bulging.
Gills (lamellae) the thin plates on the under side of the 
Pileus or Hat of an Agaric.
Well kno^vn in the common 
MuUtraom, 
Gi.ab£R, smooth.
* 
Glands (glanduls) secretory vcfsels, differently situated in 
different plants.
In the Willow they are placed at the 
margins of the leaves ; in the Birds Cherry and Almond 
Tret at the base of - the leaves ; in Butterwort and the 
Sundeww^w the surface of the leaves, and in the Flumh 
on the inner side of the Calyx.
PI.
lU.
f. 6*.
(c.
c.) pi.
ll.
k 1 (a.
a. a.
a J 
/ 
62 DlCriONABY OP 
Glass-shapei) (cyathiformis) tubular, but dilated towards 
the top like a drinking-glafs ; as the cup of Jacob's Ladder; 
the summits of the Field Southern-woid ; the Nectary of 
the Nettle.
OtAUCovs (gjaucus) a kind of hoary^ or grey bluish green, 
as the back of a Cabbage leaf.
It is frequently called 
sea-green, •.
Glob OS us, globulah 
Globular (globosus) like a ropnd.
ball ; as the cup of the 
Burdock ; the seed^vefsel of the Flax; the seed of the 
Pea ; the capsule 6f the Poppy.
PL 5» f.
3» 
GLOCHiSy a barbed point.
GLOMERATUSj/:ongregated* 
Glum A, husk.
Glutinositas, glutinous.
Glutinous (glutinosum) covered with a slippery or adhesive 
slime.
Glossy (nitidus) smooth and shining, as the fruit of the Sweet 
Briar-: the leaves of the Holly y ity, and Box* 
Gnawed (erosum) as when an indented leaf appears as if it 
had also been gna\ved or bitten at the edges.
PI.
7. f.
21.
Grain (granulum) an excrescence upon the valves of the 
Calyx of some pf the Docks, in size and shape somewhat 
like a grain of corn.
It is also caUed a Bead* 
Grained (graniferus) bearing a grain, or bead.
Gramina, grafses.
Granulations (acini) the small berries, which joined toge- 
ther compose a large one, as in the Malherryy Blackberry, 
and Bjo^pberry.
Granulatus, beaded.
Gristly (cartilagineus) as in the edge of some leaves, being 
stronger and more transparent than the rest of the leaf.
Gymnospermia, seeds naked j the title of the first Order of 
the Clafs Didynamia.
Gynandria, Stamens on the Pistils.
The 20th ClaC> of the 
Linnasan System, but ]Lhe plants of that clafs ^re now 
arranged amongst the remaining clafses, according to the 
number of their Stamens.
IIabitatio, the natural place of growth of a plant in its 
wild state* This is now generally exprefsed by the word 
Habitat.
Hair-like (capiliaris) slender, undivided, and cylindrical ; 
as the filaments in Plantain^ Raygrafs, Rsed^ and most.
of 
the grafses.
Hairs (pili) are supposed to b^ sec^rietory ducts.
Hairs- breadth, see measure^ 
Halrbrt'SHapbd (hastaj^us) sts the fiorai-le^ives of the 
Pansi€ ; the leaves of tiksefs Sorrel and Cvokow^int.
Pl* 7* 
f. 15.
, - 
BOTANXCAL TERMS.
ga 
Mamosus, hooked.
Hamus, hooL 
HA?n)s-BR£Ai)TH, palmus* 
Hand-shaped (palmatus) reserabliDg a human hand with 
the fingers expanded ; as the leaves of W/ike Briony; 
Fafsiofvflorwer ; and the roots of ^potttd Orchis.
PL 7- 
f. 22.
Hastatus, halberd-shaped.
Hat (pileus) the upper broad expanding part of Fungusses, 
In Mushrooms the hat is often called the flap.
PI.
1. 
f. H.
(c.) 
flATCH£T-SHAPSD, Lbaf (dolabiiforme) and like a hatchet 
or axe of unequal thicknefs.- 
Headed (capitulus) Stalk ; when a stalk supports one com- 
pact knob or head of flowera upon its ex^remitVy as in 
Thrift.
Heads (capitatus) of Flowers ; when flowers grow together 
in compact knobs ; as in Feppermint^ Watcnninty Common 
Thyme^ 
Heart (corculum) that part of a seed which is a future plant 
in miniature.
PL 6.
f. 3.
(6.) 
Heart-shaped (cordatus) a term used to exprefs the form 
of a petal, a leaf, &c.
the leaves of Waierlibfy Deadnettk^ 
Burdock^ and Violet y are heart-shaped.
. PL 7.
f. 10.
Heart-arrow-shaped (cordato-sagittatum) applied to.ex- 
prefs the shape of a leaf.
PL ?• L l^- 
Helmet (galea) a termto exprefs the upper p&rt of a gaping 
biofsom,' which bears some resemblance to a helmet.
Sec 
the introduction to the Clafs Didynamia.
Hemispherical (bemisphericus) in the-shape of hajf a globe"; 
as the cup of the Tan&oy.
Heptakdria, seven-stacnened.
The name of the seventh 
clafs.
( 
Herbacevs (herbaceus) Stem ; one that is supculent and 
tender, in opposition* to one that is w^oody : it perishes 
annually down to the root.
The Fea and the Kettle ate 
instances.
The stem of the Gilliflower is somewhat woody.
Hermaphrodite (hermaphxoditij flowers or florets ; such 
as contain one or more Stamens, and also one or mor^ 
Pistils, a^ is the case with the greater part qf {lowers.
Hexagonus, hexagonal, or 6-sided.
Hexagykia, having 6 Pistils.
Hexakdria, six-stamened.
The name of the sixth Claf>.
Hexapetalus, 6-petaled.
Hexaphyllus, 6-leaved.
HtAKS, open ^ in opposition to closed..
HiLVM, eye, of a seed.
Hirsutus, rough with strong hairs ; shaggy.
HiRTus, rough-haired.
HisPiDUiS^ hispid; rough with stiff bristly hairs.
64 DICTIONARY OP .
Hoary (incanus) covered on one or both sides wkh a very 
fine white silvery looking substance.
Hollo IV (cavus) as is a straw.
HoKET^coMBED (favosum, alveolatam) a receptacle divided 
into cells, open at the top^ with a seed in each ceil« 
HoNEY-cup, see Nectary.
Hooded, see cone-shaped.
HooF-SHAPED (ungulatus.) 
Hook (hamus) a thorn or a bristle is sometimes hooked at the 
vnd.
Horizontal (horizontalis) a leaf or branch which grows 
from the stem pointing to the horizon, and parallel to th# 
surface of the earth.
PL i^.
f. 5.
(d.
d,) 
HoRif-SHAPED (cornutns) like the Nectary or spur of the 
Larkspur.
PI.
5» f.
4. (a.) 
Hunched, see bulging.
Husk fgluma) the Calyx and the blofsoms of Grafses are 
called husks ; they are thin, dry, and semi-transparent, 
like chaff ; a husk consists of one or more leaves, called 
ValveSy and, when contiguous to other parts of the flower, 
inclosing the Stamens^ and Pistils, answers the purpose 
of a Bhfsvm: but, when placed on the outer side, and 
inclosing the inner valves, as well as the Stameps and 
Pistils, it is called the Calyx.
This kind of Calyx fre- 
quently contains several florets.
See the plate of Grfifses, 
Hybrida, a plant produced by the Pollen of one flower fer- 
tilizing or impregnating the Gecmen of another flower, of 
e different species.
These productions arc called Hybrids, 
or Mules.
Hypocrateriformis, salver-shaped* 
Jagged (laciniatus) Leaves ; such as are variously divided 
into lobes, and these lobes again divided in an irregular 
manner.
The Pansie is an instance.
PI.
7* f* 24.
IcosANDRiA, 2()-stamened ; the name of the 12th Clafs in 
the Lihnsean System, but now incorporated with the Clafs 
Polyandria.
Imtberbis, bcardlcfs* 
Imbricatus, tiled* 
Imperfect (imperfcctus) flowers^ such as want either Anther 
or Pistil, or both* 
Inaqua LIS, unequal.
In AN IS, pithy.
Incanus, hoary.
Inch (pollex) sec measute* .
« 
Incisus, snipt..
In c LIN a Ns, leaning* 
Includens, inclosing* 
Inclusus, inclosed* 
IkcomfxetuSi incomplete* 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
€5 
|ncomfl£T£ (incampleti) Fjlovers ; such as want either the 
cup or the blofsom.
The Tulip wants a cup ; and the 
Nettle is without a blofsom.
Incrassatus, thickest upwards.
Incumbers, fixed by the side when applied to Anthers ; lean- 
ing or resting against, when applied to Stamens, 
IncurvatuS} bowed inwards.
Indskted (sinuatus) Leaf ; the edges of an indented lekf 
are hollowed^ or deeply scolloped, the lobes standing 
asunder as if part of the leaf had been cut out.
The leiS* 
of the Oak or the Turnip are familiar examples.
See also 
pi.
7. f.
26.
iNDiiiTiNCT (obsoletus) not well defined.
Individual (proprius) Blossom ; the blofsom belonging to 
a single floret in a compound flower.
Thus in a Carroty 
each floret is composed of five petals, which constitute 
the blofsom of that individual floret.
Th# individual 
blofsoms in Tamey are all tubular; in Dandelion they are 
all long and strap*shapcd.
In the Sunflower they are 
tubular in the centre, and sti-ap-shaped in the circumfe* 
rence.
PI.
4. f.
21.
f. 26.
Ikdivisum , leaf undivided, 
Inxrmis> unarmed.
Inferus, beneath.
Ikflatbd (inflatus) distended) as if inflated like a blown up 
bladder.
IkfLatus, bladder-shaped ; or inflated.
Inflexible, see rigid.
Ikflexits, bent inwards.
Ikflorescibktia, mode of flowering.
Seethe Introduction* 
Infundibuliforhis, funnel-shaped.
iKTEOERy entire.
IiTTXGERRiMUS, very entire.
See endre.
Ifterkodium, the space between the joints.
Interrupted (interruptus) broken in its regular form ; as 
the spike of Wood Detony; the leaves of some species of 
the Ladiea Finger, A spike may be interrupted by the 
intervention of leaves, or smaller sets of flowers, or by the 
naked stem appearing ; a winged leaf may b^ interrupted 
by the intervention of smaller pairs of little leaves.
P1.8.
f.55« 
Iktorsio, twisting.
iKTRAFOLtACEus, within the leaves, 
Interssly-hbart-shaped (obcordatus) with the point of 
the heart next to the stem ; as the seed-vefsel of the 
Shepherds Purse ; the petals of Geranium or Marskmallow ; 
and the leaves of some of the Trefoils.
PI.
8. f.
69- where 
each of the leafits is so shaped.
IvvoLUCELLUM, or partial Involucrum, is the Calyx surround- 
ing the base of an Umbellule.
PL 6.
f. 9- {d, d, d, d,) 
Vol. L F 
66 DICTIONARY OF 
lNvoLUCRiTM,or Fence, the Calyx of aiv Umbel.
It is placed 
at some distance from the flowers.
It is either General or 
Partial, The Carrot furnishes instances of both.
The 
General Invohicrum is placed under the Umb^; the Partial 
under the Umbellules.
PL 6.
f. p.
(c.r.) {d.
d. d.
d,) 
Involutus, rolled inwards.
Joint, articulus.
JoiXTED (articulatus) Stem; a wheat straw is an instance 
familiar to every one, PI.
10.
f. 3.
' Le A VE» ; as in the Indian Fig, PI.
9- f.
3. («.) 
J0GA, pairs; Bi-juga, 2 pairs, Tri-juga, 3 pairs; applied to 
the leafits of a compound leaf.
Irregular (irregularis) a term applied to compound flowers 
wherein the florets are not uniform ; as in the Carrot and 
Coriander.
— — - Blossom.
See Regular.
Keel (carina) a name given to the lowermost petal in a but- 
terfly-shaped blofsom, from its supposed resemblance to 
the keel of a ship ; see the introduction to the Clafs Dia- 
delphia.
See also pi.
4. f.
17- and f.
13.
(rf.) 
Keeled (carinatus) bent like the keel of a ship or boat ; as 
the Style of the Pea; the Calyx of Canary Grq/i.
PL 2.
f. 10.
(a.
a.) 
Kidney-shaped (reniforme) as the seed of the French BeaUf 
the Anthers of the Malhw ; the leaves of Ground Jvy, 
Golden Saxifrage, and MeadowboiU, PL 7» f- 9» 
Knee-jointed (geniculatus) when a straw or stem is a little 
bent at the joints.
PL 2.
f. 21.
the Awns.
Knob (capitulum.) See Head.
Knot (nodus) a joint; remarkable in the stems or straws of 
Grafses.
La HIATUS (flower) having lips.
Labium, lip.
Lacerus, ragged.
Lacinia, segments.
Laciniatus, jagged.
Lactescent (lactescens) abounding with a milky juice.
Lacunosum, pitted.
^ ^ 
La vis, level ; as a smooth even surface of a stalk or leaf, &c 
La MELLiE, gills.
Lamina, a thin plate, or border.
Laminated (equitans) when the flat surfaces of leaves lie 
close one upon another* 
Lana, wool.
Lanatus, woolly.
Lanceolatus, spear-shaped.
Lanceolato-ovatum, spear-egg-shaped.
Lanugo, soft wool, or down.
Lateral (lateralis) Branches, growing from the sides of 
the stem ; opposed to termnating.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
6t 
Lateral Flowers ; those which grow from the sides of the 
^ems or stalks ; thus the spikes of flowers in the Commou 
Specthoeli grow on lateral fruit-stalks, or on fruit-stalks 
proceeding from the sides of the stem.
Latticed (cancellatus) open like lattice-work.
Laxus, limber or loose, in opposition to crowded or compact.
Leaf (folium) the green leaves which are the lungs of plants, 
and the organs of motion.
The leaf of a flower is called a 
petal.
Leatit, or little leaf (foliolum) one of the single leaves of a 
compound leaf.
Leaf-stalk (petiolus) the foot-stalk of a leaf.
It supports 
the leaves but not the flowers.
In the Great FeriumkU 
the leaf-stalks are very long.
PI.
g. f.
4. (a.
b, c.) 
Leafy (foliaceus) furnished with leaves.
Calyx (auctus) when the base of aCjalyx is surrounded 
by a series of leaves, different from those which form the 
Calyx.
Seed ; a seed that is surrounded by a thin leafy edge, 
as in C(yw*s Madnep.
Leather-like (coriaceus) tough and pliable like leather; 
e. g.
the cup of the Com Cockle, and most of the plants in 
the flfth division of the 24th Clafs.
Legumew, or shell ; a seed-vefsel of two valves, wherein the 
seeds are fixed to one seam only ; as in the Pea, and most 
of the plants in the fourth order of the Clafs Diadelphia.
It is not unusual in common language to call these Legu- 
minous Plants.
PL 5.
f. l6.
Lenticulare, spherically convex on both sides; resembling 
the seed of a Lental.
Leprosus, rough like the skin of a leper, generally applied to 
exprefs the ground or crust on which are formed the 
tubercles or saucers of the crustaceous Lichens.
Level (festigiatus) when several branches or fruit-stalks grow 
to equal heights, so as to form a flat surface at the top ; 
as in the flowers of the Sweet William, 
Liber, the inner bark« I 
Lid (operculum) a co^er to the Capsules of several of the 
Mofses; as in the Bogmqfs.
PL 1.
f. D.
(6,) 
LiGNOsus, woody.
LiGULATUs, strap-shaped.
Does not seem to differ from 
linearis,* nnlefs it is that the latter is applied to the leaves, 
&c.
and the former used exclusively to petals.
Limb (limbus) the upper spreading part of a petal, in blofsoms 
composed of more than one regular petal.
Thus in the 
WaU-florwer^ the upper flat broad part of the petal is called 
♦ The Brxtish C«itic saiys/the terms liguiatus and linearis differ in 
this respea; the foonei is cut ofl at the top, and the latter Is drawn to a 
poiat tlicre.
JP2 
6S DICTIONARY OF 
the limb ; the lower slender part included within the cu^ 
is called the claw.
PI.
4. f.
11.
(6.
b. h.
6.) f.
12.
(a.
a.a.a.) 
Limber (flaccidus) Fruitstajlk^ bending with^ the weight of 
its own flowers.
LiMBUS, limb.
Line (linea) the breadth of the white part at the root of the 
middle finger nail ; about the tenth of an inch ; see 
Measure.
Linear, strap-shaped.
LiNEARi-cuNEiFORME, strap-wcdgc-shaped.
1 see spear- 
Lineari-lanceolatum, strap-spear-shaped.
>egg-shapedy 
LINEARI-SUBUX.ATUM, strap-awl-shaped.
J &c.
LiNEATUs, streaked.
LiNGUiFORME, or lingulatum; tongue-shaped.
Lip (labium) the upper or under division of a gaping blofsonv.
The Deadnettle and the greater part of the plants in the 
Clafs Didynamia furnish examples.
See the introduction 
to that clafs.
See also pi.
4. f.
8. f.
9* ^i^d f.
10.
Little Fruit-stalk (pedicellus) the little foot-stalk that 
supports an individual flower, when there are several 
flowers upon one common fruit-stalk.
PL 6.
f. 7* (a* o*'* 
a, a* a.) 
LoDED (lobatus) divided nearly half way down, into lobes 
which are convex at the edges and distant from each 
other ; as the leaves of Ladies-Mantk and Water-Eldtr, 
P. 7.
f. 19.
Lobes (lobum) the divisions of a lobed leaf; see Lobed.
Lobes are rounded at the edges, and stand distant from 
each other.
The leaves of the Hopj Anemone^ Hepaiica^ 
and SycainorCy furnish examples.
PL 7* f» !?• f» 19- 
Loculamentum, cell.
Long (longus) a cup is said to be long, when it is equal in 
length to the tube of the blofsom.
Lopped (truncatus) appearing as if cut off with a pair of scis- 
sors : the leaves of the Great Bindweed are lopped at the 
base, the petals of the Periwinkle are lopped at the end.
PI.
8. f.
63.
Lucid UM» transparent.
LuNATUM, } crescent-shaped.
Lunulatum, i *^ 
Lyratus, see 
Ly re-s h a p e d (lyratus) as the leaves ofHerb Beimef ,or P1.8.f.62.
Male (masculij Flowers, are such as contain one or more 
Stamens, but no Pistils ; see barren.
M ARjCEscENS, shrivelling.
Marginatus, bordered.
Masculi, male, (flowers.) 
Matted (csespitosus) thickly interwoven together, as the fibres 
in turf-bogs.
Sometimes abo, it signifies many stems 
rising from the same root.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
6^ 
MsASURESywhen used to cxprefs the size of any particular parts 
of plants, are generally exprefsed by mentioning the pro*, 
portion which those parts bear to other parts, but jTome- 
tiines reference is made to certain^tandards of measure: as 
A Hairs-breadth, a 12th part of a line.
* ALiKE(linea) the 12th part of an inch, or the breadth 
of the white at the root of the nail of the middle finger.
A Nail (unguis) about f an inch.
An Ikch (poUex) the breadth of the broadest part 
of the thumb.
A Hakds-breadth (palmus) about 3 inches, or 
the breadth of the four fingers.
A Span (spithama) the space between the end of the 
thumb and the fore-finger, when extended ; about 7 inches.
Pa LM(dodrans) the space between the end of the thumb 
and the end of the little finger, when fully extended ; about 
9 inches.
This is nearly the palm of foreign nations, and 
is something more than a quarter of the English yard.
A Foot {pes) from the outer bend of the elbow to the 
lower joint of the thumb ; or from the inner bend of the 
arm, to the second joint of the thumb ; about 12 inches.
A CiTBiT (cubitus) from the outer bend of the elbow 
to the end of the middle finger; about 18 inches, or half 
an English yard.
An Arm (brachium) from the armpit to the base of 
the middle finger ; about 24- inches, or two feet.
A Fathom (orgya) about 6 feet, or the space be- 
tween the ends of the fingers when the arms are both 
widely stretched out.
Medulla, pith.
Membranaceous (membranaceus) thin, skinny, and semi- 
transparent, like parchment.
Stem ; when the edges of the stem are 
bordered with a thin leafy substance, as in fVater Figworf, 
and BroadiLeaved Pease Everlasting.
Mensura, measure, 
MiD-Ri^, the principal ner\e which runs froni the base towards 
the end of a leaf, along its middle.
MoNAD£LPHiA,united threads or filaments; the name of a clafs 
in the Linnxan System ; see the introduction to that clafs.
MoNANDRiA, one Stamen ; the name of the first clafs in the 
Linnaean System.
MoNOECiA, one house ; the name of the 21st clafs in the 
Linnaean System.
In the plants of this Clafs the Stamens 
and Pistils are in different flowers, but on the same plant.
These plants are now distributed among the other Clafscs, 
according to the number of their Stamens.
MoNOGTN^iA, one Pistil in each flower.
This circumstance 
characterizes an Order in several of the Clafses.
7 
70 DICTIONARY OF 
^ovoFETALAy luonopctalous.
MoNOPETALOUS (fiower) having a blofsom consisting of only 
one petal, as the Convolvulus or the Primrose.
MoNOPHYLLUS, onc-lcafcd.
MoNOSPERMA, one-seeded.
Mi^NOSTACUYOS, a single spike.
^ ^ 
Mosses (musci.) 
Mouth (faux) the upper and opening part of the tube, in 
blofsoms consisting of a single petal; as BorrageyHonnds- 
tongue, Deadnettle, PI.
4. f.
9« (^» ^0 
MucRONATUM (Icaf) sharp pointed at the end.
Dagger- 
pointed.
Mules, see Hybrid.
MuLTANGULARis, many-corncrcd.
MuLTiriDAM, many-clefted.
IVJLuLTiFLORES, many-flowered.
MuLTiLocuLARE, many-celled.
Multipartita, having many deep divisions.
MuLTivALvis, niany-valved ; more than two.
Muricatus, covered with sharp points.
Musqi, Mofses ; the name of a natural afsemblage of plants 
constituting the second Order of the Clafs Cryptogamia.
^luTicus, awn-lefs.
Nail (unguis) see Measure.
Narrow (ligulatus) the florets in some species of compound 
flowers are tubular at the bottom, but flat and narrow like 
a strap or fillet at the top.
In Dandelion the florets are all 
narrow : in the common Daisie the florets in the circum- 
ference only, arc narrow.
PL 4.
f. 10.
f. 21.
f. 24.
The 
term linearis (strap-shaped) seems to convey the same idea, 
but has been more particularly appropriated to leaves.
Naked (nudus) destitute of leaves; as the stalk of the Tulip 
-or Cotalip.
Mouth : when the mouth of the tube of a blofsom is 
not closed by valves or hairs.
The moutb\ftf the blofsom 
of Barrage is closed by five valves, or teeth : but that of 
GromxDtU is open and naked.
Receptacle ; neither chaffy nor hairy ; as that of 
the Deisie, 
Leaves ; leav<*s destitute of hairs.
Nap, or Nappy, sec Cottqpy, from which this term does not 
appear to differ.
Natans, floating.
Navicularis, boat-shaped, 
Nectarium, nectary.
JIectary, or HoNEY-cuP, a part of a flower designed to se- 
crete and contain honey.
In flowers that have only one 
petal, the tube of the blofsom contains the honey ; or else 
it is contained in a sort of horn-shaped appendage, as in 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
71 
the Butterwort.
In the Violet^ the Larkspur^ the Cdwn* 
hme, and the Fumitory, it is a sort of spur, or horn.
In 
the Ramnciibigj the Lily, and the Crown hnperialy it is a 
hollow cavity in the substance of the petals.
In the 
Daffodil and Hellebore it is tubular.
In the Fraxinella and 
Campanula it is fixed to the Anthers ; in the Gill^owcr 
and the Turmpf it is placed on the Germen in form of a 
gland.
Its structure is no where more singular or beau* 
tiful than in the Grafs of Parnafsus.
PL 5.
f. 1.
(a.) f.
2. 
(a.
a, a.
a. a.) f.
3. (a.
a.) f.
4. (a.) 
Nekvosum, fibrous (leaf.) 
NjsuTRAL flowers or fiorets ; such as contain neither Stamens 
nor Pistils, and of course produce no seeds.
NiDULANTiA (seminaj seeds dispersed in pulp.
NiTiDus, glofsy.
Nodding (nutans) Flower; when the fruit-stalk is bent near 
the end, as in the Chequered Di^odU, Narcifsus, and Jon- 
quU.
PI.
3. f.
9. but in a smaller degree than is meant by 
the term crooked.
Nodus, knot.
Notched (emarginatus) at the End; as the petals of the 
Smcdl Campion and tkmes-foot Crane's-bill ; tiie little leaves 
of Vetch; the leaves of the common Maple.
PI.
7, f.
16.
36.
^0TCH]PD (runcinatus) Leaves; the edges cut something like 
the teeth of a large timber saw.
Dandelion , Broad-kaved 
Watercrefsy Long-rooted Hatvke's-eye, and Smooth Succory 
Hawkweed^are examples.
Nucleus, a kernel.
NuDus, naked.
Nutans, nodding ; but applied to a panicle more properly 
drooping.
Nux, nut.
Nut (nux) a seed covered by a hard woody shell; e.
g. the 
'Hasel Nvt. This woody shell is sometimes covered by a 
soft pulpy or fleshy substance, as in a Veach or Apricot^ 
and then it is called a stone.
PI.
5. f.
21.
(b, b.) 
Ob, inversely ; thus, 
Ob-conicum, signifies inversely conical.
Ob-cordatum, inversely heart-shaped ; which sec, 
Obliquus, slanting.
Oblong (oblongus) considerably longer than broad, and nar- 
rowed, though rounded at the ends ; as the leaves of the 
Dame; the Anthers of the Honeysuckle.
Pi. 7'-^» ^* 
Oblongiusculus, rather oblong.
Oblongo-ovatum, oblong-egg-shaped.
Obl6kg-£GG-shaped, oblong at the base, but egg-shaped 
more towards the end.
Ofi-aTATUM, inverscly-egg-shapcd ; that is, egg-shaped, but 
with the small end downwards.
Obsoletus, indistinct.
72 DICTIONARY OF 
Obtusus, blunt.
Obtusiusculus, bluntish.
OcTAKDRiAy 8-stamened.
The name of a Ciafs.
OcToriDus, $-clefted.
OcTOGTKi A, 8 Pistils ; the nameof some of the Linnaean Orders.
OcTO-PARTiTUS, having 8 divisions* 
Open (patulus) standing open, or spreading wide, 
Operculatum, covered with a lid.
Operculum, lid.
Opposite (oppositus) growing on the opposite sides of the 
stem, but at the same height from the ground, as the leaves 
of the Nettle.
In pL 9.
f^ 5.
all the leaves are opposite, 
Oppositifolium, opposite the leaf.
Oppositus, opposite.
Orbiculatus, round and flat.
Ordo, order ; see the Introduction, ' 
Ore (peranthii), rim of the cup.
Orgy A, a fathom.
OssEUS, hard as bone.
Oval (ovale) leaf; as the leaves of Box, PI.
J. f.
4. 
OvATO-LANCEOLATUM, egg-spear-shapcd, 
OvATO'-OBLONGUM, egg^-ghaped, but lengthened out towards 
the end.
OvATO'SUBULATA (capsulc) cgg^awl-^shaped.
That is, egg- 
shaped at the base, but tapering into awl-shaped towards 
the other extremity.
Pa GIN A, surface of a leaf.
Pairs (binatus : geminus) leaves, or fruit-'Stalks, sometimes 
grow in pairs.
Pl. 7« f- ^0.
See also Jug a* 
Palate (palatum) the inner part of the mouth of ghping 
blofsoms.
PI.
4. f.
10.
(c.) It is frequently closed, or 
nearly so, by a projecting plait of the lower lip ; thi% 
part is called the palate.
Pl. 4, f.
10.
(c.) 
Pal^a> chaff, 
Pal]e;aceu8, chaffy.
Palm (dodrans) see measure, 
Palmatus, hand-shaped.
Palm us, hands-breadth., 
Panduriformis, fiddle-shaped.
Panicle (panicula) an afsemblage of flowers growing without 
any very regular order, upon fruit^stalks which are vari- 
ously subdivided ; e.
g. Oats.
PL 6, f.
6. It is said to be 
m „   I I I- Spreading ; when the partial fruit-stalks diverge 
and stand wide asunder, as in the Commoa and Reed 
MeadofW'grafs.
Compact; when they stand near together, as in the 
Sheeps Fescue^ and Purple Hairgrafi.
Panicled (paniculatus) Bunch ; an afsemblage of flowers 
partaking the properties of a panicle and a bunch.
See 
those terms.
Golden Rod may serve as an ejcample.
BOTANICAL TERMS, 73 
Pakxclxd Spik£ ; sinxifsemblage of flowers partaking thepit^* 
perties of a panicle and a spike; as the JVall Fescue, and 
^ the Manured Canary Grafiy in which the collections of 
florets resemble a spike in their general appearance, but 
tiie florets are furnished with fruit-stalks, shorter than 
themselves.
Papilionaceus, butterfly-shaped.
Papiilosus, pimpled.
Pappus, down.
Parallelvs, parallel.
Parasitxcax.
(parasiticus) Vegetables; not taking root 
in the earth, but growing upon other vegetables.
Thus 
Misieioe is found to grow upon the Apple Tree, the Pear, 
the lime, the Elm, the Poplar, the Hawthorn, and the.
Buckthorn, but never upon the gi'ound.
Partial (partialis) exprefsive of a part, not of the whole.
Thus the Umbellules, or small Umbels, composing a large 
Umbel, are sometimes called partial Umbels ; and the 
Involucellum or fence at the base of these partial Umbels, 
is sometime^ called the partial Involucre.
See pi.
6. f.
p. 
{d, d,dm d,) 
Partition (difsepimentum)the substance dividing seed-vefsels 
into diflerent cells.
Thus the seed^vefsel of Jacob's Ladder 
is divided into three cells ; and if you cut a Lemon acrofs, 
you will plainly see the partitions that divide it into nice 
cells.
See also pL 5.
f. 12 (6.
b^ f.
14.
(b, b.
k b.) 
Partitus, divided.
Patens, expanding, 
Patcjlvs, open.
Pectinatum, comb-like, leaf.
PsDATUMf bird-footed.
Pedicellus, little fruit-stalk, or pedicle.
Pedicle, a little fruit-stalk, or partial fruit-stalk, being that 
part of a compound or branched fruit-stalk, which is the 
immediate support of a single flower or floret, or spiket.
It is also sometimes used to exprefs the little pillar which 
supports the down in some of the compound flowers.
Pedunculatus, growing on a fruit-stalk, opposed to sitting* 
Pedunculus, fruit-stalk.
Pelta, target.
Pelt at 17 M, target-shaped (leaf.) 
Pexcil-shaped (penicilliformis) like a camel-hair pencil; as 
the summits of MiUeiy or the appendages to the blofsoms 
of the Meadow Milkwort, PI.
2. f.
11.
(c.
c.) 
Penicilliformis, pencil-shaped.
Pendant (pendulus) hanging down; as the bunches of theEei 
Curraia; the cones of the Scotch Hr ^ the flowers of th^ 
Columbine, 
Pkntagonvs, 5<omered« 
74 DICTIONARY OF 
Pkntaoy NiA, 5 Pistils ; the name of au Order ia several of 
the Clafses.^ 
Pek tandria, 5*s^mened ; the name of one of the Cla&es.
Pentapetala, 5-petaled« 
Pentaj^hyllus, 5'leaved (cup.) 
Perennial (perennis) continuing for several years; at least 
more than two.
Perfect (completus) Flower, having both tv cup and a 
blofsom ; and also one or more Stamens and Pistils.
Perforated (perfoliatus) Leaves ; when the stem seems to 
go through the leaves ; as in the Round^leceoed I'koroMgk- 
ivax, PL 9.
f. 4.
(g.) 
Perfoliatum, perforated leaf.
Perianthium, cup.
pERiCARPiuM, seed-vefsel.
p£RiCH£TiuMy an Involucrum surrounding the base of the 
fruit-stalk in Mofses.
Peristoma, the fringe at the mouth of the Capsule of Mofses.
Pi. U.
f. 27.
(a.) 
Permanent (p^rsistens) Cup, remaining till the fruit is ripe 5 
as in Barrage ; Currant : Pink ; and Deadnettle.
Persist ENS, permanent.
Person ATUs, gaping (blof:}Om.) 
Pes, a foot ; see Measure.
pETALiFORMis, resembling a petal.
Petals (petala) the leaves which constitute the blofsom arc 
called Petals, to distinguish them from the other leaves 
of the plant.
See pi.
3. f.
2. {a, a.
a.,fl.
a, a.) PL 4.
f. 12.
(a, a, a, a,) 
Petiolaris, fixed to.
the leaf-stalk.
Petiolatus, having leaf-s talks.
Petiolus, leaf-stalk, 
PiLEUS,or Cap ; the spreading part which forms the top of several 
of the Fungi, and covers the fructifications.
Thus in the 
common Mitskroom it covers the gills, and is* sometimes 
also called the Hat, and, when fully expanded, the Flap.
Pi LI, hairs.
PiLOSUs, hairy.
Pillar (stipes) the little shaft or pedicle upon which the down 
of some seeds is placed, as in Dandelion, PL 1.
f. H.
(b-) 
PL 4.
f. 22.
(i.) PL 6.
f. 2 (rf.) Stipes is also used to 
exprefs the stem of an Agaric, &c.
Pimpled (papillosus) beset with pimples, or hard little protu- 
berances.
Pinna, a leafit of a winged leaf.
PiNNATiFiDus, with winged clefts, 
Pinnatus, winged, leaf : whereas alatus relates to the stem, 
or LEAF-STALK.
Pxnnulatus, when aleafit of a winged lecif is again subdivided^ 
i-- 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
75 
Pistil, orPoiKTAL ; a part of a flower, composed ^of theGEa-'.
MBN, the Style, and the Summit.
Look into the blos^ 
som of a Plumb or Cherry ^ and in the centre you will see, 
the Pistil surrounded by the Stamens.
In the blofsom of 
the AfpUy or Fear^ you will perceive fiy^ Pistils in the 
centre.
In the DeaSiettle you will find the Pistil covered 
by the upper lip, and forked at the top.
In the centre of 
the blo&om of the White lAly^ the Pistil stands surrounded 
i by six Stamens.
In this flower the Germeh, which is the 
lower part of the Pistil, is loi^g, cylindrical, and marked 
with six furrows ; next above tb^s part is the Style, which 
is long and cylindrical ; and, at the top of the Style is the 
Summit, which is thick and triangular.
See pi.
3. f.
% 
(rf.
e./) f.
7. (i.
*. /.) f.
5. {c.
d. e.) 
PiSTiLLiFERous flowcrs or florets, such as contain one or 
more Pistils, but no Stamens.
PiTCHEE-suAPED (urccolatus) swelling or bellying out like a 
common jug.
Pith (inanis) a soft spongy substance filling up the cavity in 
some plants ;, as in the Rush and the Elder, 
Pitted (lacunosum) when the surface of a leaf lies in hollows 
between the veins.
Plaited (plicatus) folded ia plaits; as the blofsom oiCmvoU 
vulus; the cup of Thrift; and the leaves of Ladies-^mantle^ 
PI.
7. f.
37.
Planus, flat.
Plenus (flos) a double-blofsomed flower.
Plicatus, plaited.
Plumosus, feathered.
Pod (siliqua) a seed-vefsel of two valves, within which the seeds 
are fixed alternately to each seam.
When long, it is 
called a long pod, as in GiUi/lawer; when broad and shorty 
it is called a short pod, or pouch, as in Honesty zxidShep^ 
herd's Purse.
PI.
5. f 10.
f. 11.
f. 12.
f. 13.
Point A l, see Pistil.
Pointing from two opposite Lines.
Sec two-rowed.
-* one Way (secundus) as the flowers of the Foxglove^ 
theCodt^s^foot, and the Sheep's Fescue Grafs.
PI.
2. f.
13.
(rf.) 
Pollen, Farina, or D\^st, a fine powder contained in the An- 
thers of flowers; it is too minute for the naked eye to 
examine, but by the afsistance of a microscope, it appears 
very different in diflerent plants: Thus in the Bloody Gera- 
nium it is a perfbrated globule; in the MarshmaUaw like the 
wheel of a watch ; in the Pansie it is triangular ; in the 
Narci/sus kidney-shaped ; and in Comfrey the globules are 
double.
PL 3.
f. 5.
(f.) An Anther discharging its 
pollen ; f.
8. a particle of the pollen greatly magnified.
Pol LEX, an inch ; see measure.
Polyadelphta, Stamens in 3 or more sets, being united by 
the filaments.
The title of a Clafs, which see.
76 DICnONARy OP 
t 
Poly ANDRT A, many stamens.
The title of a Clafs, which see.
PoLTGAMiA, the title of the SddClafs in the Linnasan system.
The plants it contained are now diatributed amongst the 
other clafses according to the number of the Stamens.
PoLTG AMI A-NECESS ARIA, the title of the 4th Order of the 
Clafs Stngevesia.
See introduction to that Clafs, as 
also for 
' .£qualis.
— — SuPERFLUA.
' ' Fritstranea.
And Segregata.
PoLYPETALUS, many petaled, (flower,) having more than one 
Petal.
PoLYPHYLLUs, many leaved, (Calyx, &c.) of more than one 
leaf, 
PoLYSPERMA, many seeded.
Poi^YSTACHYus, many spiked.
PoMUM, a fleshy or pulpy seed vefsel without valves, covering 
a, Capsule which contains the seeds ; as ift the Apple and 
Pear.
PL 6.
f. 20.
Pores (pori) little holes.
At the inner side of the base of the 
petals, in all the species of Raitunculus or Crowfoot^ are 
little pores filled with honey.
See also pi.
3. f.
3. {k.) 
Posticus, hinder part.
Pouch, a short pod ; see Pod.
Pr amors us, as if bitten ofl*.
Pressed to (adprefsus) see Contiguous.
Prickles (aculei) sharp-pointed weapons of defence, formed 
from the bark, and not from the woody part of a plant.
The prickles of the Rose are a familiar example, PI.
UK 
f. 2.
(a.
a) and (b, b,) 
Prickly (aculeatus) aimed with prickles.
Prickly-pointed (cuspidatus) ending suddenly in a hard 
sharp point* 
Prismaticus, see 
Prism-suaped (prismaticus) difiering from cylindrical in the 
circumference being angular, as the cup of the Ftdmonaria.
Procumbeks, trailing.
Proliferous (proliferi florcs) Blossoms ; when one grows 
out of another, as is not uncommon in the Polyanthus.
Proliferous Shoots; when one ^hoot springs out of an- 
other, as in the Hi/pnum prol^emm.
Stem ; when an otherwise un branched stem 
sends out a number of branches from its top.
Promine;^ s, projecting (partition) when it standi out beyond 
the valves.
Prominei^t (prominens) the partition of a secd-vefsel is said 
to be prominent when it projects beyond the valves, as in 
Cabbage f and many other plants of theTctradynamiaCiafh, 
Pronus, the un4cr surface of a leaf.
BOTANICAL TERMS, y/ 
Proprius, belonging to an individual* 
Profs (fulcra) these are of 7 kinds, via.
Stipulae, Floral-leaves, 
Thorns, Prickles, Tendrils, Glands, and Hairs.
See 
those Terms.
Protruding (cxsertus) standing out of the blofsom as do the 
Stamens of some of the Erica's.
Protuberances (torosus) in seed-vcfsels; occasioned by the 
swelling of the inclosed seeds.
They are sufficiently cvi* 
dent in the pods of Mustard^ and in some sorts of Beans.
PuBES, cloathing.
Pubescent (pubescens) cloathed with soft wool or hair.
PuLPOsus, pulpy.
Pulpy (pulposus) soft and tenacious.
A Cherry is pulpy, but 
an Apple is fleshy.
Seed-vessel, see Drupa.
PuLVERATUS, dusted.
PuNCTATUS, dotted.
PuR8E-SH APBN (scrotiformis) like a purse that draws together 
with strings at the top ; as the seed-vefsel of the tnrpte 
Marshlocksj or the Nectary of the Satyrion, 
QuADRAKOULARis, 4-corned, (stem.) 
QUADRIDENTATUS, 4-tOOthed» 
QuADRiFiDus, 4-clefted.
QuADRiLOBUM, 4-lobed.
QuADRiLOCULARB, 4-celled.
QuADRiFARTiTUM, with 4 divisions.
QuADRiVALVE, 4-valved.
QuATERNA, by fours ; as the leaves PU 9^ f* 3.
(c.r.) 
QuiNA, by fives.
QuiNATUM, 5-leaved.
QuiNQUANOULARE, 5-cornered.
QuiNQUEFiDUM, 5-clefted.
QuiKQUBLOBUM, 5-lobed.
QuiNQUELOCULARE, 5-ceIled.
QuiNQUEPARTiTUM, with 5 divisions, 
QuiNQUBVALVE, 5-valved.
Racemus, bunch.
Rachis, spike-stalk.
Radiate (radiatus) a sort of compound flowers in which the 
florets of the centre differ in form from those in the cir-* 
cumference.
Thus the D<dsie and Sw^iower are radiate 
flowers ; the florets in the centre being all tubular, but 
those in the circumfei-ence are narrow or strap-shaped.--^ 
PI.
4. f.
24.
Umbelliferous flowers are also called ra* 
diated when the florets in the circumference of the Umbel 
or Umbellule are larger than those in the center* In this 
case too, the outer petals are larger than the inner petals 
of the same floret.
^ Summits,' placed in a circle; as in the Poppjr- 
PL 5.
f- 5.
{b.) 
rSf DICTIONARY OP 
Kadicalis, issuing immediately from the root.
Radicans, striking root..
Radii, rays ; the outer florets in a radiate compound flowcn 
They may be called the florets of the circumference, and 
the inner ones the central florets.
— Spokes, the fruitstalks of an Umbel or Umbellule; 
vrhich jsee.
Radix, root.
Ram £ US, belonging to a branchy 
Ramosus, branclied.
RamoSissimus, very much branched.
Ramus, a branch.
Ramulus, the branch of a branch.
R£C£PTACLB (rcceptaculum) one of the parts nccefsary to 
compose a flower.
It is the base, or seat, upon which the 
other parts of a flower are placed.
PI.
4. f.
1 1.
(c.) f, 23.
(a.) The inner part of a Capsule to which the seeds are 
attached is also called a Receptacle.
PI.
5. f.
7- f.
9* 
Reclinatus, reclining.
Reclining (reclinatus) bent back a little, so that the extremity 
is lower than the base; as the leaves in PI.
9* f- 5.
(e.
e.) 
Rectus, straight.
Recurvatus, recurved, or bowed back.
Reflected (reflexus) bent back, rather angularly ; as the 
segments of the cup of the Currant ; the petals of the 
Flower de Luct ; the blofsoms of the Ht/acinth and JVhite 
hill/.
PI.
4. f.
5. 
Refractus, beat back as if broken.
Regular (regularis) ^lossom ; one that is regular in the 
%ure, size, and proportion of its parts ; as the J^sanme 
and Syringo, 
Remote (remotus) Whirls ; when there is a considerable 
length of stem between each whirl.
PI.
6« f.
11.
{a, a, a,) 
Ren I FORME, kidney-shaped.
Repandum, serpentine.
Repens, 7 
Reptans, {c'^P'ng' 
Replica t US, folded or plaited, so as to form a groove or 
channel ; as in the legumen oi Astragak»hypoglottis^ 
Resupinatum, horizontally turned upside down.
Reticulata, veined like net^work.
RETROFRACtus, broken back.
Retrorsum (sinuatura) crookedly bent back.
' '   (serratum) inversely serrated.
Retusux, hluntly notched at the end; but it sometimes 
means merely blunt, as the seeds of the Lycopsk.
RBYOLU'rus, rolled back.
RiiOMBEUS, diamond*shaped.
Ahomboidbus (rhomboidal) nearly diamond-shaped, but 
broader one way than the other.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
79 
Rigid (ri^us) inflexible; not easily bending: opposed to 
limber and flexible.
RiMOsus, fuH^f cracks.
Ring (annulus) the remains of the Curtain surrounding the 
Stem of an Agaric or a Boletusj after the oth^ir part has 
disappeared.
PI.
1. f.
H. (a.) 
Ring EN Sy gaping.
Rising, upwards (afsurgens) differs from ascending, in first in- 
clining downwards, and then gradually rising upwards.
Rod-shaped (virgatus) having many slender, and nearly 
straight parallel branches or shoots.
Rolled back (revolutus) with respect to the leaf in general, 
rolled downwards, as the ends of the leaves of &t»eet Wil- 
liam: pi.
9. f.
5. Cf*f') with respect to the edges, rolled 
under towards the rib of the leaf, as in the leaves of Hose- 
maryy and the young leaves of the Ositr ; with respect to 
Summits^ it signifies rolled back spirally, as the Summits of 
the Pi«/:.
PI.
1. f.
19.
(c.
c.) 
Root (radix) may be JFi^ottf, Bulbous^ Tuberous^ Bundled ^ Beaded^ 
Spindk'shapedyOX Creeping.
See those terms.
See also pl.t 1.
Root-leaves (radicalia) the leaves which proceed immediately 
from the rooty without the intervention of a stem.
They 
often differ in shape and size from the other leaves.
The 
Field BeUJlorwer furnishes an example.
PL 9* f^ 7• 
RosTELLUM, thedescending part of the heart orcorcleof asecd.
RosTRATUM, having a bill.
Rostrum, a bill, or beak.
RoTATA, wheel-shaped, (blofsom.) 
Rough, asper, 
Round (globosus) like a ball, see globular* 
(orbicularis) round and flat.
PI.
7* f* 1* 
Ruffle, or Ring, the part of the Curtain of an Agaric which 
adheres to the Stem after the outer part of it has vanished.
Ruoosum, wrinkled.
RuNCiNATUM, notched.
RuNDLE, see Umbel.
RuNDLET, see Umbellule.
Runner (flagellum) a barren twig or shoot, lying upon the 
ground, as in the Garden Strcnobernf, and Stone Bramble.
—They are sometimes called Wires.
Running (along the Stem) see t)ecurrent 
Sagittarum, arrow-shaped.
SALVER-siiAPED (hypocrateriformis) the shape of a blofsom.
of one petal, the lower part of which is tubular, the upper 
part flat and expanded ; as the bio£>om of the Periwinkle, 
and the Mouserear Scorpion Grqfis, PI.
4. il i.
Sap, see Alburnum.
Sarmentosus, having runners.
Saucer (scutellum) a sort of fr uc ti fication of some of the lichens ; 
it is circular and concave, like a china saucer.
PI.
U f« f\ 
to DICTIONARY OP ^ 
ScA'B Ell, rough like a file.
ScABRiTiEs, roughnefs.
Scaly (squamosus) like the skin of a fish ; as the cups c^ 
Bui^dock, PL 4.
f. 25» (fl.) 
ScANDEiJS, climbing.
ScAPUS, stalk; such as supports the flower, but not the leaves 
of a plants and rises immediately from the root; as in 
Narcifius^ Itjfacinth, &c.
PL 6.
f. 4.
ScARiosus, skinny.
Scarred (cicatrisatus) marked with scars where the leaves 
have fallen off, as are the Stems of some of the Spurges.
ScROBiFORME, likc fine saw-dust, as are the Seeds of tho 
Orchis.
ScROTiFORME^ pursc-shapcd* 
ScoLLOPPED (crenatus) inspect the edges of the leaves of 
Bird*S'eye and Gill, and you will have a true idea of this 
term ; see also PL 7* f> 38^ 35.
and 34.
Some leaves are 
doubly scollopped, as in PL 7.
f- 33.
Scored (striatus) marked with superficial parallel lines, as the 
cup of a Pinky or the stems of Butchersbtoom.
Scurfy (squarrosiis) applied to a cup in compound fiowersy 
the scales of which are bent outwards at the ends, so as to 
give the whole a rough ragged appearance.
ScuTELLUM, a saucer.
ScYM&TAR-SHAPED, leaf (acinaciforme) a long fieshy leaf, 
thick and straight at one edge, thin and arched at the other.
ScYPHiFER, glafs-shaped ; as is the fructification of some of 
the lAchtns.
- 
Sea-green, see glaucous.
Seam (sutura) the line formed by the uilion of the valves of a 
seed-vefsel.
Thus the pod of a Pea is a seed-vefsel of two 
valves, and the two seams where the valves join are suf* 
ficiently conspicuous : As also in pi.
5. f.
6'.
Secundus, pointing one way.
Securiform IS, shaped like an axe.
Seed (semen) a deciduous part of a vegetable, containing the 
rudiments of a new plant.
It consists of the Heart, the 
, Seed-lobes, the Eye, and the Seed-coat.
See those 
terms.
Sometimes it is crowned with the cup of the 
fiower, and sometimes it is winged with a down, or with a 
thin expanded meipbranci, which enables the wind to waft 
it abroad.
See pi.
4. f.
22.
and pL 6.
f. 3.
Seed-bud, seeGennen.
Seed-coat (arillus) the proper coat of a seed which falls oflf 
spontaneously.
It is remarkable in the Spindle-tree, Hound's 
Tonguey the Cucumber^ the FraxmelUiy and the Mallow."-^ 
Some seeds have only a dry covering or skin, as the Bean.
PLS.f.l.
(c.
c.) 
Seed-cover (calyculus) the real cover of the seed.
Seed-IE A VES, see Seminal-leaves.
! 
BOTANICAL '?f»MS.
H 
SfiED-LOBES (cotyledones) the pcrUh^i^l^ P^rta.of a^^jl, cle« 
signed to afford nourishment to the young plant ^b^ it 
first begins to expand.
Th^y furnish the Sewkinal ks^vea* 
A Bean, after being soal^ in w^t^r> or ipoist 9artb,^94ily 
parts with its external skin, and divide^ into Iw9 parts» 
called the Seed-lobes.
PI.
Q, f.
3. (a.
4.) 
Seed-vessel (pericarpium) a vefsel to cont^Q the seed.
It is 
of several kinds ; as a Ca^i^vle; 9, Pop ; n LE^viiBif; 
an Air-bag ; a Drvpa, including a not or ^ton^; € 
Pqh^m; ^9bb,«,y; ^i^d^CQl^B* Seo thorn terms.
See 
also pi.
5. from f.
5. to f.
21.
SsaM^¥v (i^f^^iupa) tjie sm^l parte of a l^af^ cgp» or peuJf 
iftclvided befwe^ thj?
iocisipafi, 
Segregata (polygamia.) See the introduction to the clafs 
§yftgpn«*ift-' 
Semen, seed.
SB]WJrAM]?:^l#l.<?^uti4.hftlf»prin.p«rtorfy,embraciBgtheStem 
l^j^M^rGiff.i.vQiJB^ifiiAi' (§emi*»t^r§s]i if the trunk oi a tree was 
, $^vq4 l^^th^i^ tlirough the middle, each pact would be 
semi-cylindrical.
The stalk qf Rmimw^ is in this shape.
l^j(Hj(-Y^o9C^LQ^I, 9, terin u^ed to exprefs such cctrnpaund 
flowfrs of the clafs SyngeQe9ia.as are wholly composed of 
,^trap-shs^)Qd florets.
. Seisin a;.-le4*v^i^ ; those\fhJch curiae immediately from a seed; 
or rather from the seed-lobes.
Semi-orbiculatum, in the shape of half a globe.
SsMi-s agitata, shaped ttke half thf head of an arrow, as are 
the Stipule of some plants* 
SEMi-TEaES, sfn^i-cylinidric^l.
S£M?^RViRS)^8, evergreen.
Sen^s (foliis) growing in sixe^* 
S^PA^AT^ (m9nQfH:ia) Stamens and Pistils are aak) to be 
separate when they are found upon the same plant, but in 
different flowers.
Thus in.
the Boxj the Bird, the Cucmvp' 
betf ar^d the Melon, some of the flowers contain Stamens, 
dind ^tber^ contain Pistils ; b\^t noHQ of them contain both.
together.
PU 1.
f. 2K 
Sericeus, silky..
$:pa?Pif Tl?f 9 (r^pand\^§) the 0dg0 of some leaves is formed like 
a serpentine lin^; without e^y angles or corners.
PI.
7. 
Serrated (scrratus) like the teeth of e common saw ; as are 
the edges of the leaves of the 4ppkf the Pear^ the Sptar^ 
fi^mt* %h».Jk<fdmmfi the Smpimvort or Goa&ttangmy &o.
PI.
7* ^- 31.
Some leaves are Doubly-serrated; that 
i§9 Uie l^th ai^ e^Hi^n Qut into other li^fe teeth.
The 
. Cfmmft9 ¥k^ isau ^x^ii^ple.
PI.
j. f.
as.
Serrulated (serrulatnm) very minutely serrated.
• VoL.L G 
»2 DICTIONARY OF 
•SbtaCETTS, bristle-shaped.
S^TMf bristles.
Setosus, bristly, or set with bristles.
S£XANGULARE,6-6ided, OF Cornered.
Sex-fIdus, 6 cleft.
/ 
Sex-locularis, 6-celled.
Shaft, see Style.
Shaggy, (hirsutus) rqjugh with stiff hairs.
Sharp, see Acute.
Sharp-pointed (tnucronatuin) taperfng into a hard sharp 
point.
Sheath (spatha) aspecie^ of Calyx, exemplified in the Crocv;, 
the Iris, and the DaffodU^ PI.
3. f.
9. (a.
a) See also the 
Introduction.
Sheathed Fruit-stalk (spadix) one thatts furnished with 
a sheath.
PI.
3. f.
9. (rf.) 
ShIbath-scalb, a membrane found at the top of the sheathes 
which surround the stem of Grafses, just where the sheath 
ends, and the proper leaf begins.
It is generally white; 
tender and brittle when dry.
Sheathing (vaginans) Leaves ; when the base of a leaf 
enfolds the stem ; as in most of the Grtfies.
PI.
9* ^* 4'.
(t.) 
Shedding (caducus) continuing but a short time.
Applied to 
a Calyx, it signifies that it falls off before the blofsom; as 
in Voifpy.
Shell, see Legumen.
Shoot (surculus) the branch of a ^ofs.
Short (abbreviatus) a cup is said to be short, when it is shorter 
than the tube of the blofsom, as in pi.
4. f.
7- (^0 
Shrivelling (marcescens) fading and withered, but not fil- 
ing off.
c. g.
the blofsoms of Plantain and Stkkwort.
Shrubrt (fputicosu9) somewhat woody and peremaal, as the 
stems of the Rose, 
Si Lieu LA, a broad and short pody or pouch.
Siliculoaa, the name of the first Order of the Tetradynamia 
Clafs, containing the plants with a broad short pod or 
pouch.
SiLiQUA, a pod, or moxe particularly along pod.
-SiLiQUOSJE, the secdnd Order of the Clafs Tetradynamia^ 
containing the plants whose seed-vefsel is a long pod.
Silky (sericeus) set mih very soft hairs lying close, so as 
hardly to be felt* 
Simple (simplex) undivided.
Stem ; one that is undivided : or only sending out small 
branches.
Leaf ; when there is only^one upon a leaf-stalk.
Cup ; one that consists of a sing^ series of segments : 
e. g.
Ooafs^ard, 
Stalk ; undivided, as the stalk of the TM^y and that 
of Thrifi.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
S3 
S1HPI.ICXSSIHUS, very simple, absolutely undivided.
SiKOLi (unicus) one flower only upon a stalk, as the TtiSf^ 
SiKtrATO-ANGULOSUM, indented and angular.
SiKUATO-DSKTATUMi indented and toothed.* 
SiNUATUSy indented.
SiTTiiro (sefsilis) Leaves have no leafstalk, as j^ffnm^ and 
Haimds-tonffte.
PL 9.
L 4.
((/.) 
I   Flowers, are those which have no Fruit-stalk, 
as the flowers of Mezereon, 
SKiNNTyOr Skik-lire (scariosus) tough, thin, and semi-trans* 
parent, like gold-beater's skin ; as the cup of Thr^* 
Slantiko (obliquus) straight, but in a direction between 
horizontal and perpendicular.
Smooth (glaber) surface smooth to the touch, without any 
hairineis, or any rough inequalities ; opposed to rougky ' 
prickfyf or other inequalities occasioned by prominencies 
on the surface.
Snipt (incisus) cut at the edges without any regularity.
Solid (solidus) Stem ; without a cavity; opposed to hollow.
Root ; fleshy and uniform, as that of a Tumep.
Solitary (solitarius) only one in a place; as but one flower 
on a fruit-stalk, or only one fruit-staUi proceeding from 
the same part of a plant.
Sooty (fuliginosus) dark and dirty as if sooted, as are some of 
the Lichens, 
Spadix, a sheathed fruit'-stalk.
Sfah (spithama) a measure of nearly 7 inches; see Measure, 
Sparsus, scattered.
Spatha, sheath.
Spatulatus, battledore-shaped.
Species, see the Introduction.
Spear-shaped (lanceolatus) as iht\eB£ of Ribwort Plantmn^ 
and Spearmint.
PL 7* f- 6, 
Spear-egg-shaped (lanceolato-ovatum) applied to a leaf, 
&c.
. signifles that it is shaped like a spear towards the 
base, and like an egg towards its extremity.
So in the 
following, and other compound terms of this kind, the first 
term apj^ies to the base of the leaf, or the part next the 
stem or branch, the second term to the part towards the 
extremity.
Thus ffoatO'Umceolatumf ^-spear-shaped, is 
just the reverse of spear-egg'-shaped.
Likeari-lakceo* 
LATUM, strap-spear-shaped, &c.
Specific Character; one or more circumstances of aplant, 
su^eient to distinguish it from every other plant of th^ 
same genus.
The Specific Characters are generally taken 
from the leaves or stent ; sometimes from the flowers, but 
seldom from^ the roots, 
Spherical (spseriqa)^g.]^u]§r.
l«'ui.A,]«**P"'«*'^^*«*' 
o2 
84 DICTIONARY OF 
Spike (spica) a composition of flowers placed alternately on 
«nch sida of a common simple fi-uit-stelk, atitl notftanding 
upon little fruit-stalks.
Great Mtdleinj A^tnom/, and 
many of the Grafin have their flowers collected into 
spikes.
P. 6.
f. 5.
S»iKET'(«piciilft) or LiTTLB Spike, constituting a part of a 
larger composition of florets.
Its use is mostly confined 
to the Grajsts, and to esprefs the composition of their 
florets contained within one common Ca\jx.
Spike-stalk (rachis) a long, rough, slender receptacle, upon 
which the flowers composinji a spike are placed.
Take a 
spike, (or as it is frequently called, an ear) of wheat ; 
pull off all the seeds and chatf ; what remains is a Spir£- 
STALK.
Pl.2,f.
2+.
(c.c.) 
SptKA, a.
thorn.
SPi»i>LE~BH&PBn (fusiformU) a gradually tapering Root.
e. g.
a Carrot, or Radish.
PI.
11.
f. 6, 
Spixescenb, becoming hard and thorny.
Sfikobus, thorny.
Spiral (spiralis) twisted like a corkscrew.
PI.
10, f.
fi.
fa- a.) 
Spithama, avpan.
Spokes (radii)the fruit-stalks offlowersccJIected into Umbels, 
orUMBELLULES ; see those terms.
They BpriTig from one 
point, and diverge like the spokes of a wheel, PI.
6, f.
g. 
(r.e.e...) 
SpHEADiNQ (ditfusus) not rising high, but spreading wide upon 
the ground ; as the stems t>i Fwidtory v.nA Panat.
Some- 
times also applied to a panicle, wherein the little spikes and 
fruit-stalks stand wide and distant.
Spur (calcar) shaped like the spur of a cock, as the Nectaries 
of the Larkspur.
Squamatus.J , 
Squarhosus, scurfy.
Stalk (scapus) that species of trank which elevates nnd sup- 
ports the flowers, but not the leaves of a plant.
It differs 
from the Fritit-stalk, for that springs from the stem, or 
farancties ; but this rises immodiatdy from the root ; as in 
Jfian-ifstM, JJty Of the Valky, and Hgacinth.
H. 6.
f. 4.
Stauen, or Chive; open the Hofsom ofa TVApor aLi^,and 
you nilt see six long threads or filaments, placed round 
the ci'ntral pillar, with an Anther on the top of each.
One 
of thwe filaments, together with its Anther, is called a 
Siuncn.
PI.
3. f.
2.-(ft.
J. fc.ft.
6.6.)f.3.
(ft.i.)f.
6. 
Stamemteroos Flowers; or Florets, such as contain one 
ormoreStamens^buf tm Pistils.
l^esearenecefsarily barren.
Stas D.i R D (vcxillum) tiie upright pctJil erf a bntterfly-shaped 
btolsom, very reraarkahlom tbeJ***.
See the introdac- 
(ion to the Clafs Diadcl{(liia.
See alsa {di 4.
f. 12.
(dj 
f. i+.
(i.J f.
15.
. 
BOTANI€AHEftMS.
S4li 
Starkt (flatus) plants vhose leaves grow in vhlrls rpuad 
the 8t^;.a$..pc Croo«efr^» Cheese-rennet y and several 
other plants in the fourth clafs.
PI.
9» ^' 3.
(fi, 6.) .
STELL'ATJty starry* or sfar^ike.
Stbk (caulis) the proper trunk of a plant supporting the leaves, 
. brsAche^, apd i^owisrs* It rises immediately frqin the root.
Stjbm (stipes) formerly; called the pillar, whicli supports the 
pileys9fsomeof the Fuqgi.
PI.
1- f.
H- (fi.) 
St£M-claspik6 (amplexicaulis) sec embracing the Stem.
STEM^LEAVBfs (caulina) such as grow immediately upon thp 
$ten|i, without the interveiUion of branches.
Stbm-i.£^s (acauUs) without a stem.
STfi&ii,is, barrels* 
Stiff, see rigid.
Stigma, summit.
Stimuli, stings.
Stings (stimuli) sharp-pointed substances conveying ppisou 
into the part they penetrate, few people ane igno;:iuU of 
the sting of a Nettle.
Stipes, a pillar, or pedicle.
,Also the-stem of somekiuHof 
JFungi.
8tipitaxp3>9 sjtaiidi^g on a pillar, or pediclev 
Stipulje, asort of props; small leaves or scales situated on each 
side the base of a leaf-stalk or fruit-stalk, for i;he puxpo^e 
of supporting them at their first appearance.
TLey are 
sufficiently evident in the Garden Pea. PL 10.
/. 6..
(6.
b.) 
Stolo, a £ucker.
Stoloniferus, putting forth sucJcers.
Stone; see Nut.
STRAi>Di.iir6 (divaricaius) i>ranches standing wide from eack 
other.
Straioht (rectus) jaiot bending, 
Strap-bhaped (linearis) long and narrow like a strap or a' 
fillet ; as the leaves of Tkri/i, CrocuSf and Rosemary.
PL 7.
f. 7.
when the same shape is exprefsed as exis^ting in a 
floret of a compound flower, linnsus uses the terni Mgu^ 
lotus.
PL 4.
C 21.
Strap-spear-shapjed ,(lineari-]ianceolatum) se^ Spear-qgg- 
shapcd.
Straw (culmus) a kind of trunk proper ^to Grafses.
PL X0^f.3» 
Streaked, marked with deprefsed, butnot always paxallelJlues.
Striatus, scored.
Strict06, stiff and straight, 
Strig£, strong spear-shaped bristles, or thorns.
STRieoevM, furnished with Strigae.
Strings (nervi) see fibres ; as in the broad anduarraw-rleaved 
Plantain.
PL 7- f* 46.
Strobilus, a cone.
Stboeixiformis (spica) a spike like atione.
«6 DICTIONARY OF 
Style, or Shaft, is a part of a Pistil standing upon the ger- 
men, and supporting the summit.
See Pistil.
I^L^.
f. 2.(e.)f.
5. ((/.) f.7* (*.) 
Sub, is prefixed to many of the Linnsan terms, and signifies 
that the term is not precisely and exactly applicable in its 
strictly defined sense, to the subject spoken of, but that it 
must be understood with some latitude.
Thus tub- stftUis^ 
signifies nearly sitting ;^^v6-roiffm(/tfff, roundish, or nearly 
round ; sub-ovatus, nearly egg-sh$Lped, &c.
This modification of meanings occasions much difficulty to 
the learner, and its inaccuracy is a reproach upon the sci- 
ence.
It is much to be wished, that Botanists would avoid 
it as far as may be, which a little attention would often 
enable them to do.
' 
SuBDivisus, subdivided.
SuBMERSUs, under the surface of the water.
SuBRAMOSUS, a little branched.
SuBROTUNDUS, nearly globular.
SuBULATUS, awl-shaped.
SuccuLENTUM, succulent, juicy; 
Suckers (stolones) shoots which rise from the ro6t, spread 
along the ground, and then take root themselves ; as iir 
the Sweet Violet, 
SuFFRUTicosus, somewhat woody, nearly shrubby.
5flge and 
Lavender are examples.
* 
SuLCATus, furrowed.
SuMJH IT (stigma) the upper part of a Pistil.
Sec Pistil.
See 
also pi.
8. f.
2. (/:) f.
5. (e.) f.
7. (/.) 
Superficies, the surface.
SufERFLUA, superfluous; see Polygamia superflna, in the 
introduction to the Clafs Syngenesia.
Superior (superus) Cup or Blossom; when the cup or 
blofsom is situated above the Gerpen, it is said -ta be 
superior ; as in the Honeysuckle^ Currant, and Canymnula^ 
Superus, superior, above.
SuPiNUS, the upper surface.
• 
SuPRA-DBCOMPosiTus, morc than doubly compound.
SupRA-F0#ACEU8, placed above the leaf.
SuRCULUS, a shoot; the branch of a Mq/s.
Sutura, seam.
SwoRD-SHAPED (cnsiforme) as the leaves of the TriSy or 
Flower de huce.
Syngenesia, united Anthers; the name of a Clafs; which see.
Tail (cauda)a sort of slender pointed appendage to some seeds.
Taper (acuminatum) Leaf, gradually tapering to a point, 
PI.
7. f.
41.
>   (attenuatus) a fruit-stalk, growing slender.
Target (pelta) a kind of fructification on the leaves of some 
of the Ldchens, v^icb is circular and a little convex* See 
Saucer.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
87 
Takoet-shapeb (peltatum) applied to a leaf hdving its leaf- 
stalk fixed, not at the e^ge, but nearly in its centre ; as.
in 
IVater lAfy. PL 9.
f. 4.
(a.) 
. ' " "   SuJiMiT, 6ne that is circular and flat.
Tendril (cirrus) a spiral shoot or string, by means of which 
some plants support themselves against adjacent bodies.
It is well known in the Vine and Fea. PL iO.
L 6.
PL 8.
f. 58.
Tenuis, thin, slender.
TERESt, columnar.
Teketiusculus, roundish.
TfiKGi&iiiNUM (leaf) doubly-twii^rk.
Terminalis, temiinating.
Teri^xnatin.g (terminalis) (opposed to lateral) standing at 
the end of the stem or branches ; as the .
fruit-stalks of 
Barrage^ the blofsoms of GrouAdstL 
Ternatis (leaves) growing three together from the same 
point.
PL 7* f* 47.
and 51.
Ternis, by threes ; three in a place.
Tesselatum, chequered.
Tetradynamia, four Stamens longer; the Utle of one of the 
Clafies; which see.
Tetragon.us, 4-cotnered.
Tetragtnia, 4 Pistils; a circumstance which g^ves title to 
an Order in several of the Clafses.
Tetrandria, 4 Stamens; the title of th^ fourth Clafs; which 
see.
Tetra-petala, 4-pelaled.
Tstra-phyllvs, 4-leaved.
Tetra-sperma, 4-seeded.
Thalamus, the same as Receptacle; whkh see.
Thorn (spina) a sharp-pointed projection growing from the 
woody substance of a plant ; as in Gont and Blackthorn, 
PL 10.
f. 1.
Thread, see Filament.
Thread-shaped (filiformis) of the same tbicknefs from top to 
bottom, like a piece of packthread.
Take for example the 
leaves oiFennely or the style of the Crocus^ or Uoneysuck, 
Three-edged (trigonus) or three-cornered ; a stem having 
three corners or angles, and the sides not flat.
Three-fibred (trinervatus) having three veins or nerves 
running from the base to the end of a leaf, without 
branching off.
Three-lobed (trilobatum) PL 7.
f. 17.
' 
Thronging (confluentia) afsembled in close parcels, with 
intervening naked places* 
Thyrsus, cluster.
Tiled (imbricatus) one leaf or scale partly covering another, 
like the tiles on a house, e.
g. the cup of DandcUxm^ or of 
Burdock.
PL 4.
f. 25.
(a.) and PL 9* f* 2* « 
S$ DICTIONARY OP 
Til^, ste Anther.
ToMEifi'osvsi cottony.
TOMENTUM, cotton.
. -^ 
ToNGVE*aiiAPfiD (linigulatuifi} applied to exprefe a t hi c k fl e sl iy 
leaf, ^omeNvhat in the shape of a tongue.
TooTHfeb (dentatu^) whcivthe edges of a ^l^f are iet with little 
teeth; at sdme didtance hom feach oth^t, not pointing 
towards the end, as in the serrated leaves, nor toil^r4s the 
base, as in the inversely serrated leaves.
CcfntMn Efjthlrigkt^ 
Primrose, Cowslips, and Mountain Will(noherh,\k&V^ toothed 
leaves.
PL 7.
f. 30.
' 
TooTH-SERRATED (denkt^^^serratuiT)) when th^ odgeof n l^af 
is set with teeth, and these teeth arc serm^.
. ?rol?-^HAPEt>, (turbinatus) neatljt conical ; tomt Feuf^ Arfe of 
.*- Ibh^fbfto.
ToROSUs, protuberating, 
To«txjLosvs5 a Unle^tv^lling but.
Tort I LIS, twisted.
Trailing (procumbens) SifeMfi; lying dongupdnthe-gi^ilftcl^ 
and not sending out roots, e.
g. Co^HMMMI Sp¥illloSi^ Reu 
Traksversum, placed acrofs, or croftwise, as vrheii di^ par- 
tition of a seed-vefsel is not pl^cod in the $tfme' dir^etiob 
- or planed with the valves, but perp^dicular to th«ifi« 
Tr A PEziFORME, the shape of a fllit le^having 4 trhtqual «ides.
Triandria, three Stamens ; the name of the third CHafe.
Triangular (triangularis) exprfefiang the'fbnii <!|f 'a leaf, 
stem, or stalk, with three sides, and three angles, Of ci>r* 
ners.
PI.
7- f 12.
TaiANGULAiC-SMsAtt^^tf A^ftiD (deltoide«s) iMVes 11) thidlcfriti 
are broad at the base, and nearly triangular^ but spear*- 
shaped at the point.
^. g.
Black P^piar.
PI.
f. f.
45.
The 
term deltoideum, applied to thick fleshy leaves, beb.rs a 
different meaning, but no such leaf occura amongst tlie 
Bdlish plants.
TltitHdt6M«f8, dividing by tlirees* 
Tricocca, 3*ceHed, aftd'3-sceded, fcwelliAg out, 
TkicusHDATUs, 8-pointcd.
Trifidus, S-clefted, 
TRi^oiirtrs, S-cornered.
TutGYNiA, 34^istils ; giving ttattte to an Order in several of 
the Ciafses, 
Trilobatum, 3-lobed.
't-RlLocuLAtiE, 3-ceUed.
Trinerve, 3-fibred, 
Tripartitus, with 3 divisfons.
T^iple-thorn (triple.s) PL 10.
f, 1.
{h.
6, 6.) 
TR*i*»HYLtiy8, 3-leaved.
Tripinnatum, triply-winged.
BOTANICAL TERMS.
89 
TriplY'^ompoui^d LfiAVKsffoUasuprafdecom^ilitflk) are of 
three kinds, viz.
1. DouBLE-TWiNFORK (teigeminus) leaf-'Stalk, with twtf 
leafits at the end of each^ and two more, afr the divisioV 
of the fork.
PI.
8. f.
5?.
S* TftiPLT-tH&ssFOLD (tntenkatos, tripHoatQ-tcmatus.}' 
PI.
8. f.
59* the divisions of a triple kafnstalk again 
subidivided into Mi«d9> and three ' ieafito jat .
ib» jend Ot 
bath 1^bdivi^ion« * 
- 9.
T&iFXiT-wsKGSD (tripinnBta^;'tiiplicato piiinatas)when 
the lateral ribs of k dmiblj ^wingedlettf have themselves 
other leafostalks witiiiMringed teave^.
PI.
8. f.
60.
6X.
T&iQtr8T&&^ with 3 fiat ^idn^^as'thr stem i>f the P^mar.
t 
TRiSPERMAf S'-seeded..
1 ^ ' 
TftXTERiiA'nDrM, tripiy-thwefold.- 
TatVAtVE, 3-valwd.
Trivial Name, a name added to th« Generic Daine» for the .
mord ready discrimination of spedes of the same Genus.
TROWBS.*-SHAPRt), Or TRIAiri»VliARXT<*SPEAR-SHAPED (del- 
toideus) which see.
TrvkgaiuM) ifspped^ 
Trukciis, trunk, 
Trvkk (truncus) the main body of aplant; it ts either a Stem, 
41 SiTAtK, or a Straw.
- See those terms.
TtJ&fe <TtjavB) the lower pait of a blofsom of one petal is 
frequently lengthened out into a tube, as in Crocu$, and 
Pofyantkui.
PL 4.
f. 1.
<«.) f; ?• («.) 
TuBBRCi^t (tuberculus) a little solid pimple.
TVR&Re^iiATi, tubercled.
A name ^ren to the plants of one 
division of the Genus lAckmB^ on accouaC of iheir bearing 
s6iid warts or tubercles.
TuBULOsus, jt^^^^ar.
Tubus, tube.
Tuberous (tuberosus) Root; consisting of many roundish 
knobis collected into a bundle, as the root of Pwmj/ and 
Dropwort, PI, 11.
f. 7.
tTuBUXAR (tubulosus) in the shape of a hoilc^ tube, as the 
cup of Privet, the blofsom of the Honeyimcklc, or the nec- 
tary of the SeUdkire, 
Florets, in compound flowers of the Syngenesia 
Clafs are shaped like a hollow tube, and the top ^ each 
floret is cloven into 5 segments.
In the Tanm all tha 
florets are tubular, but, in the Swtflofoer and the DaUie^ 
only those in the centre.
PI.
4. f.
26.
Tuft (cyma) a composition of flowers in which a number of 
fruit-stalks proceeding fr6m one common centre, rise to 
the same height ; ai>d these again shoot out other little 
fruit-stalks, which do not proceed from one central point.
' J -.
!*>• 
sa DlCnON-SRY OF 
The EideTy tfaeGdcfer Eaf^,^nd the LaurmHnmf ate.
in* 
stances.
PI.
6. f.
10.
TrNiCATus,coated.
' 
TtTRBiNATVs, top-(skaped ; nearly conicah 
TuRG I Dus, swollen, tnrgid.
. I 
TvRio, a youiig uiiexpanded shoot, as is the -A^faroigus in the 
state it is gathered for eating.
> 
Twining (volubilis) twisting.
rofui^d other boidies,and ascending 
in a spiral line* Some plants twine :£rom the left to the 
right, thus, ^ in tiie direction oC the sun's appaseAt no- 
tion, whenl^ spectator &ce0 the South, as Hapy Honey- 
suckUy and Black Briomf, OihfirS' twine frorii the right to 
the left, thuS' }) contrary to the sun's apparent motion>as 
Bindweed and Scarlet Kidmy Bean..
PI.
10.
i. 5».
Twin-fork (bigeminus) see.DotyBXYCoMPOVNP Lsayes.
Two-edged (anceps) as the stem of 2V#(z», and the Sta^t" 
smeUrng'Sohmon's Seal.
. '' ^ 
TwO'-RbwED (distichus) like the teeth in a double box, or ivory 
comb.
The leaves of the common J^iVy and .the flowers.of 
Sweet Cyperus, are examples.
Umbel (umbella) a composition of flowers in wbich.a number 
of slender fruit-stalks proceed from the same centre, and 
rise nearly to the same height^ so* as to form a regular sur* 
face at the top.
Hemloekj Carrot,, and Com-parmepy are 
examples.
These are said to be.umhelliferous plants.
PI.
6. 
f. 9.
Um CELLULE (umbeHula) .
a little Umbel.
The fniit-dtalks or 
spokes which compose an umbel are often divided at the 
top into several smaller fruit-stalks, and these smaller sets 
of jflowers are called UmbeUides : Hemlock, Carrot, and 
Angelica, furnish instances.
The fruit-stalks of an Umbel 
are called Spokes.
PI.
6. f.
9- (^» b, b.
b,) Those of an 
Umbellule, Spokets, or little Spokes.
Umbilicatus, resembling a navel; dimpled, 
Un-angulatus, one-edged.
Unarmed (inermis) without weapons of defence.
See 
Weapons.
Uncinatus, hooked at the end.
Undatits, waved.
Under-shrub (suffrutex) like a shrub in its woody texture 
at the bottom, but the top shoots herbaceous, tender and 
dying in the winter.
Lavendar is an example.
Undivided, see simple.
Unequal florets (radiati) when an Umbel is not composed 
of equal florets, but those in the circumference are larger 
than those in the centre, and the outer petals are larger 
and different in shape from the inner petals.
As in the 
Carrot and Cow-parsnep, See Radiate, for Linnseus uses 
the same term {radiatus) to exprefs the difsimilarities of 
the florets in the umbelliferous plants of the Clafs Pentan- 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
91 
dria, as well bs tbose of 'the compound ftowen of theClaft 
Syngenesis.
Unguis, a nail, see Measure.
Also the claw of a Petal; see 
aa^.
IJivovLAT^s, hoof-sbaped.
. 
Ukicus, single ; only one* 
UiriFLORDS, one-flowered.* • 
Uniform (equalis) a term applied to compoand flowers when 
the florets which compose them are aU alike ; as those of 
Fennelj Ltttuce^ and Burdock.
UNiLATERALiSy growing from one side only.
Uniloculars, i^celled.
Univalve, 1-valved.
Universalis, general.
United (connatus) Leaves, two opposite leaves growing to« 
gether at the base.
PL 9* f* ^* (A* ^0 
Upright (erectus) standing upright, or nearly so, as the cups 
of Periwinkle ; the anthers of Poh/mUk^j the stalks of 
Tui^; the stems of Spar agus.
It is also applied to 
leaves.
PI.
9. I 5.
(b.
b.) 
Urceolatus, pitcher-shaped.
Urens, stinging.
Utriculus, a little bag or hollow vesicle.
Vagina, a sheath formed by a part of a leaf, distinct from 
the SheaUi (Spatha) which is a species of Calyx.
It is yery 
• frequent in the Grafies, 
VAGiNA"tfs, sheathing.
Tagikatus, sheathed.
Valve (valviila}the diflerent pieces that compose a capsule are 
called valves.
Thus in the Thortutpple there are four 
valves.
PL 5.
U 14.
(c.
c. c.
c.) In the fjoosestrife ten, in 
Jacob's Ladder^ DigodU, and Hyacvak three.
PL 5.16.
f. 12.
(o.
a.) 
— The Petals and Calyxes which constitute the flowers of 
Gra&es, are called valves ; thus in the Common Meadom 
Grafs the cup is a dry chafly husk, composed of two 
valves, and the blofsom is formed of two other valves; See 
pi.
2. f.
1. (a.
a.) (6.
b.) and most of the other figures in 
that plate.
>   The mouth of the tube of a blofsom is frequently closed 
by several projecting substances ; thus in the blofsoms of 
Borrage and Jacob's Laddery the tube is dosed by five of 
these substances, and these also are called valves.
Vane-like (versatiUs) turning about like a vane, or weather- 
cock, as is the case with the Anthers of Geranium and 
Crown ImperuU, 
Variety (varietas) is applied to such individual plants as dif- 
fer in some circumstances from others of the same species, 
but not differing so efsentially or so permanently as to 
induce us to reckon them as distinct species.
9« .
DiqTIQHABy OF.
: 
9 
YAXJi/rttf (Mm<*tjw) like tJie.it^af ofoii^*s.nio*rfh*.
,Thp up- 
per lip of many of tlie gaping blofsoms is?vai|Uedi>e.
g, 
. lUd tnd W*ii^ Deacbimle, ..
.\ .^ti ^x^* J 
Veil (calyptra) the Galyx of Mo/ses, covering the vapsules.
It is generally in a conical foxitijt'^lce'aA exiipgui^b^r^^-* 
PI.
l.f. D.
(fl.) .:: '.
^/ 
Veined (venosum) a leaf is said t<^ he veined wjiefi Us- fibres 
are braliofaetly aa m Fl. F> &;44» : -.
^ .
> *• :i 
Vekosum (leai) yeined, .
, ,; ..
Ventricosus, distended ; bellying.
• •.
. \ / .
; ^ 
Verrucosus, warty.
, -t.-j- : 
Versatilis, vane-like.
. .
Verticillati, growing in whirls.
.   .
, 
Verticilli, whirls.
Vb$ic|Ui.j6« bladders.
, 
Vexillum, standard.
o .
, .
Villi, soft bair^* .
. ..
^ .
: .;.
.i tj 
ViLiX>6vs> $oft fciired.
. ^ * , 
ViM»K» a sknder and flexible, twign • • , ^.V 
ViRGATUs, rod-shaped.
.♦ .
.r » (• , : , ^./ 
Viscid, or clammy, (viscidus.) .
.^j ,; ,, ,,- ..'t 
ViscosiTAS, clamminefs.
i^ , .^ »» 
Viviparous (vivipai^u^) a- ^<9m i^piplie4; to s(epGi% f)^ -^t^^l 
|)todiicitig imibs that are c^pabfe of vlgetaUon.j I^ XooUf 
. »drf and iSf ar ^Betih»i ^let^- bji^s Ai)e fo^iid at the 
base of the leaves ; in &mall B^s^surfi,^!^ the low«r> p^t of 
the spike; in some species of Garlic At, the o£igiiii>f tii^ 
Umbel of flowers ; and upon the 6pik«& of saqae of, th^ 
Graises» as thet Cat's^taH Canar^^ It. 4^ also Msed whef9 
tiie Seeds laUing upon .%ot^ part of the pareot PJant, 
^germiiiftle and produoe a young plmU .
* ^ 
Voi:,u»itts, twining.' 
VoLVA, Curtain.
It is used also by some A»tfeors,.
but not 
by linoiaeiis, to aignify the Wra|^er, , .
...
Wa&tt (verracosus) kaving li|tle liard lamps or warts, iipon 
tbe surface.
IVdiVSD (undatjLis) when the surface of a leaf towards the -edge 
4oes not lie flat, but appears waved, and ful^ hke a man's 
ruffle.
The leaf of the IVater Caltrops is anemirople.
PI, 
«. f.
^. 
WsAPOHs (an«a) are either Prickles, Thorks, ofStikgs.
PI.
10, See those tenps.
Wedge-suaped (cuBeiformis) as the leaves of the Garden 
Sfmge^ and the Gardm rurslmn, PL 8.
f. 65* 
Wfi££<^sHAF£D (rotatHs) a term used to exprefs^ blofsom of 
one petal, with a flat border and a veiy short tube.
Bor^ 
v«gt aad Sffe^dvxU are familiar examples.
PI.
4. f.
^. 
Whirls (verticilki) of Brakches, Leaves, or Flovers.*— 
The brasphes of the /rr, the leaves oi Laiia Bed-straw^ 
and the flowers of the DtadMttkf grow in whirls round 
BOTANICAL TERMS.
53 
their respective stems.
They somewhat resemble th6 
spokes round the nave of a wheel.
PI.
6. f.
11« 
Wings (als) the lateral petals of a butterfly-shaped blofsom ; 
e. g.
in the Pea. See the Ii^troduction to the Clafs Dia- 
delphia.
See also pi.
4. f.
13.
(c.
c.) and f.
1$ 
WiVG£i> ^alatus) Leaf-stalk, flattish, with a thhi mombrane 
or leafy border on each side.
Winged (pinnatus) Leaf; when an undivided leaf-^stalk hath 
many little leaves growing fr6m eadi side/ lis' in Jacob's 
Ladder, Bladder Sena, Ash, and Pea. PL 8.
f. 52.
53.
54', 
&c.
— ^The reader is -desired particularly td study this 
plate with its annexed explanation, in order to obtain 
good ideas of the different kinds of winged leaves.
Winged (alatus) Stem, or Leafstalk, such as have a thin 
fiat membrane on each side, as the leafstalk of the Orange.
Wise-Ci.tiT (f>innatifidas} is applied to a feaf that is cut ami 
divided so deeply on each side, down towards the middle 
rib, as almost to resemble a winged loaf.
The Com Poppy 
and the Polypody are examples ; an^ so are the root-leave* 
of the Shepherd's Purse.
PI.
7. f.
23.
Winged shoots (surculi pinnati) when the shoots strikeout 
from the sides,' like the pluTnage along the sides of a quill.
Instances will be found in several species of the Teatktr- 
mqfs, or Hypnum.
Wires (flagelli) see Runners.
WoopY (arboreus) opposed to Kerbaceotts.
The main stems 
of the Wallflower or GiUy/loiver are woody.
Wool (lana) a kind of curly haired cloathing upon the surface 
of some plants.
The leaves of Horehoundf Great MvUein 
and Gorze are woolly.
Woolly (lanatus.) • 
WttAi'PER (volva) but not the volva of Linnseus ^ a tougk 
membrane which invelopes the whole plant ot'some of the 
Pungtifses in its younger state.
See the Introduction io 
the Cla£i Cryptogamia ; -see also pi.
1^- ^g> F".
m. m, nu 
m. m.
' ^ 
Wrinkled (rugosus) as are the leaves of Sage, Primrose^ 
Wood Strawberry, and Jl'asel, 
^IQZ AG (flexnosus) ha^ng liAfany contrary turnings and bentU 
ings, as the stems of Rough Bindweed and Woody Night^ 
shade^ or the branches of Golden Rod.
V 
. .'.
EXPLANATION OP THE PLATES.
PLATE III.
farts composing a Flower.
Fio. 1.
JlX Back View of a Rose, to shew the Calyx or Cap, 
a, a, a.
a. a, the Segments of the Cup.
• 
Fio. 2* A figure of the Crown Imf£Rial> to shew 
a. a.
a, a, a, a, the.
Petals.
b* h.
h^ b, b.
b* the Stamens.
. ; « .
c. c.
c. c.
c. c.
the Anthers.
. 
d* c,f.
the Pistil.
, .
. 
d. the Gerraen.
. 
r, the Style.
) a 
yi the Summit.
. 
FiG»3.
^. a Petal of the Caown Imperial separated from 
the Flower.
...
k. u a Stamen; h, the Filament ; L the Anther.
k. a nectariferous Pore.
Fig. 4.
The Seed-vefsel of the Crown.
Imperial, qut arcrofs* 
to shew the three Cells.
During the existence of the 
Blofsom this was called the Germen.
Fig. 5.
A Flower, with the Cup, the S^tamens, and the Pistils ; 
but the Petals taken away.
a. the Calyx, in this ca§e called a Cup.
b. b»b.
b. b.
b^ the Anthers of the Stamens.
c. the Germen.
d. the Style.
r. the Summit.
f. one of the Anthers discharging its pollen.
Fig. 6, ^.
h. a Stamen taken out of a Flower.
g. the Filament; A.
the Anther; which, in this instance, 
is double.
Fig. 7* t.
k. I, a Pistil taken out of a Flower; t.
the Germen; 
k. the Style ; /.
the Summit.
Fig. 8.
a. a particle of Pollen greatly magnified ; b, the vapour 
escaping from it, which , is supposed to pa& through 
the Style, to fertilize the Germen.
Fig. 9.
A Daffodil and its she^thingCalyx; qm, the Sheath ; 
d. the sheathed fruit-stalk.
Fio.lO.
A Cup which is the Calyx of a Polyanthus, with 
five sharp teeth in the rim.
PLATE IV.
BLOSSOMS.
Fig* 1.
A Blofsoip of one Petal; salver-shaped.
a. the Tube ; b.
b. the Border* 
Fig. 2, A bell-shaped Blofsom, 
EXPLANATION Of THE ELATES.
» 
Fxo. S.
A tubular bdl-skaped Blc^som.
Fio. 4.
A Blofsom bell-shaped, but distended, or bellying.
Fio« 5.
A Blofsom with six reflected Segments.
Fig. 6.
A back view of a wheel-shaped Blo&om, to shew the 
. .
shortnefs of the tube.
Fig. 7* A funnel-shaped Bloisom; a.
the Tube ; b.
the Border ; 
c« the Cup.
Fig* 8.
9- Gaping Blofsoms.
a. a.
the Upper Lip.
b. 6.
the Lower Lip.
c. c.
the Tube.
d. d.
the Mouth.
Fig. 10.
a gaping Blofsom ; a.
the Upper Lip ; 6.
the Lower 
Lip ; c.
the Palate.
Fip. 11.
A crofs-shaped Blofsom, with the Cup taken away, 
to shew a.
a. the Claws of the 'Petals; b.
b, 6.
b, the ^ 
Limbs of the Petals ; c.
the Receptacle.
Fig. 1^.
A crofs-shaped Blofsom, with the Calyx or Cup ; 
a, a, a.
a, the Petals; b, the Cup, hunched at the base.
Fig. 13.
14.
Two views of butterfiy-shaped bloisoms; a.
a. the 
Cups ; b.
b, the Standards ; c.
c. the Win^.
d. the 
Keel.
Fig. 15.
The Standard of.
a butterfly-shaped Blofsoon separated 
from the other Petals ; c.
the Claw.
Fie. l6.
One of the Wings of a butterfly-shaped blofsom sepa- 
rated from the other Petals ; m, the Claw.
Fia. 17.
The Keel, or lower-most Petal of a butterfly-shaped 
Blofsom separated from the other Petals.
Fig. 18.
The Cup, Stamens, and Pistil, of a butterfly -shaped 
Blofsom, after the Petals are taken away ; a, the Cup ;.
h. the Stamens ; L the Pistil.
COMPOUND FLOWERS.
Fig. 19> A Flower of Dakdbliov, as an example of a com- 
pound Flower, in which all the Florets are strap-shaped.
Fig. 20.
The common Calyx, or Cup, of a compound Flower, 
composed of upright Scales, d.
d» and reflected Scales, 
c, c.
Fig. 2 1 .
a strap-shaped Floret taken out of a compound Flower ; 
e. the Blofsom ;/.
the Germen ; g.
the Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder, through which pafses the Pistili 
with the two reflected Summits, L 
Fig. 2$.
k, the Seed of a compotrnd Flowed; t.
the Pillar.supl- 
porting the feathered Down, /.
Fig. 2S.
A naked,' dotted receptacle of a compound Flaweri; 
a. the Receptacle ; b.
the Calyx reflected..
Fio. 24.
The Flower of a Daisic, a^ an example oi a Radiate 
.compound Flower; a.
a. a, a, the strap-shaped Florets 
in t)^ CircuiftferenGe ; b, the- tubular Florets jnotUe 
Centre* 
9$ .
EXPM^ATIOlior 
FiO.
2p..The Flower of Bt7K9dcic» as an example «f s com* 
pound PloVi'et in which all tiie Florcits a^-e^tiibular; 
, a, the' scaly tile^^alvx ; b.
(Mie of the Sda!es with- its 
hookM point-; c.
c. the tubular Horcts** • 
FiQ.
25.
Qne of the tubular Florets separated fooni the rest ; 
c?.
the Blofsom j c, the Gernien.) f, the Pistil..
Fig. 27.
One of the Seeds ; rf.
the pyraraidail secd^crowned by 
the short down, ^.
';•>.'• 
. .im • •   } •' .
,, 
PLATE V.
. 
* * NECTARIES.
Fia. 1.
The Blofsoni of a Daf£OI>il> with the fcelHh^petf 
Nectary.
/ !- ., x 
Fig. 2.
The Blofsom of the pAKif assia to sbev tke Necta- 
ries; a» a, a.
a, a.
whioh- aie littile Glob^.^vf^pgr^fl 
upon Pillars.
FiG.'S.
«.«.
The horned Nectaiiep of the Woi»fS»4if?.i i5.
J. 
the foot-stalks which support thein.
< : .,.
) 
Fig. 4.
a. The horn-shaped Nectary of the Lark$JBUR; b.
c. 
c/4 e.yi tkd Petals.
...
SEED-VESSELS.
Fig* 5* e.
c. The globular Capsule of a Poppy; a.
a. the holes 
through which the Seeds escape ; b.
the radiated summit.
Fig.
(J.
A Capsule with t^ree Valves, opening at the top; 
a. a, a.
the Valves.
Fig. 7» A Capsule cut open lengthwise, to shew the Recep- 
tacle, with the Seeds fixed to it.
Fig. 8.
A Capsyle opening by holes at the sides ; a.
a, holes 
through which the Seed« escape.
Fig. 9.
A Capsule which opeQs Uk^ ^.sni)Lff-box, qr ;is if it W93 
cut round; a« the Cc^psul^ entire ; 6.
the Capsule open ; 
c; the Bfceptacle, 39 it ^ppoars after t]^9;'Sec»ds:&re 
t xemoved.
...
Fig. 10.
An inversely heart-shaped Pouch, or short Po<l, notched 
St the end.
. - * 
Fig. 11.
a chrcular Pouch, or shprt Pbd, not<?he4 at the end.
F10..12.
A Pouch, or short Pod, opened ^ )ittle to shQ^ a.
q. the 
Valves ; b^ b, the Partition l»atWisen tb^ Valy^s.
Fia.
.1$.
A Capsule with two boa4i-Erhaped Valves, luid one Cell; 
fl.
a. the Valves, op^nipg length wise.
JRxa.* 14.
lA.
Capsule 4:ut op^ hori^Qn^ally to »hew c.
t, c.
c.thc 
Vabes ;•]&.
i.^d.'|b<^ p^kjrtiti^ns: (/..
th[e Column in the 
^ centre, to wfaicJi tb^ Pait>^iQi^ ^re^ 9^)^^c^d ; f^a.^ a.
die Receptacles unsi Soed?*.
: o • > ' 
SiQ.
15.Siifid6 of Gemnimn, wiA.ft ji$«uU^iil 9^ P^ ; b.
the 
Seeds ; a.
the Beak.
THE PLATES.
97 
Pio. 16.
A Legumen, or Seed-vefsel, of two Valves, in which 
tlie Seeds are fixed to the upper Seam only ; a, b, the 
Valves.
Fig. 17.
A Pod, or Long-pod, a Seed-vefsel of two Valves, in 
which the Seeds are fixed to the two Seams alter- 
nately, a.
b. the Valves ; d.
d. d, d, c.
c, c.
the Seeds.
Fig. 18.
AConej cut through lengthwise, to shew the Scales, 
and the Seeds.
Fig. 19.
A Berry cut acrofs to shew a.
a. the Seeds ; b, b, the 
Pulp ; c.
c. the Coat.
Fig, 20.
A fleshy Capsule, orPomum, cut acrofs to shew b.b,b, 
b, b.
the five Cells.
Fig. 21.
A Di*upa, or pulpy Seed-vefsel cut acrofs ; a.
a. the 
pulpy part ; b, b, the Nut or Stone.
PLATE VI.
SEEDS.
. 
Fig. 1.
The Seed-vessel of the Spindle-tree, to shew the Seed- 
'coat; a.
a. the Valves of the Capsule ; b.
a Seed ; c.
c, 
the Seed-coat opened to shew the Seed.
Fig. 2.
A Seed with its Down.
a. hair-like Down ; b.
feathered Down.
d. tlie Pillar or Pedicle, supporting the Down ; c.
the 
Seed.
Fig. 3.
The Seed of a Bean split in two, after being soaked a 
little while in water, to shew 
a. a, the Seed-lobes.
b. the Heart.
c. the descending part of the Heart.
d. the ascending part of the Heart.
e. Uie Eye.
^ 
FRUIT-STAt-KS.
Fig. 4.
A Stalk.
It supports the Flowers, and springs directly 
from the Root.
Fig. 5.
A Spike; a, b» c.
d, the Spikets,Spiculsj or little Spikes» 
Fig. 6.
A Panicle.
Fig. 7.
A Corymbus ; a.
a. a.
a. a.
a. the little Fruit-stalks.
Fig. 8.
A'Bunch.
Fig. 9.
An Umbel ; b, b.
b. b: Umbellules ; c.
c. the General 
. Involucrum; d.
d d.
d. the Involucellum ; c, €, e« c, the 
Spokes of the Umbel.
Fig. 10.
A Tuft.
Fig. 11.
Whirls of Flowers; a.
o. a, the WhirL 
Fig. 12.
A Catkin.
Vol.1.
' H 
9» 
EXPLANATION OF 
PLATE VII.
LEAVES.
Fio.
1 Round.
2 Circular.
3 Egg-shaped.
4 Oval.
5 Oblong.
6 Speaj:-bhaped.
7 Strap-shaped.
8 Awl-shaped.
9^ Kidney-shaped.
10 Heart-shaped.
11 Crescent-shaped.
12 Triangular.
13 Arrow-shaped.
14 Ileart-arrow-shaped.
15 Halberd-shaped.
16 Notched at the end.
17 Three-lobed.
18 Bitten.
19 Gashed.
20 Five-cpmered.
^1 Gnawed.
22 Hand-shaped.
23 Winged Clefts.
24 Jagged.
25 Indented.
26* Indented and toothed.
Fig.
27 Barbed.
2S Divided.
29 Serpentine (at the edge.) 
SO Toothed.
31 Serrated.
32 Doubly serrated.
33 Doubly scolloped.
34 Sharply scolloped.
35 Bluntly scolloped.
36 Sliarply notched at the end.
37 Plaited.
3S Scolloped.
39 Blunt.
40 Acute.
41 Tapering to a point.
42 Blunt»but ending in a point.
43 Fringed.
44 Veined.
45 Triangularly spear-shaped.
46 Fibrous.
47 Growing by threes upon 
leaf-stalks.
48 Finger-like.
49 Bird-footed.
50 In pairs.
61 By threes.
PLATE Vm.
LEAVES.
Fig.
52 Winged, with an odd Icafit 
at the end.
53 Abruptly winged.
. 
54 Winged, with the leaiits 
alternate.
55 Interruptttdly winged.
56 Doubly winged.
67 Doubly thpee-fold.
58 Winged, and terminated 
by a tendril.
59 Triply three-fold.
60 Triply winged, without atl 
odd leafit at the end.
Fig.
61 Triply winged, with an odd' 
leafit at the end.
62 Lyre-shaped.
63 Lopped at the end.
6*4 Battledore-shaped* 
65 Wedge-shaped.
66 Waved at the edgew 
67 Ciirkd.
68 CyHndyical.
69 Inversely heart-shaped.
The pLvtes.
99 
PLATE IX.
DISPOSITION and DIRECTION of LEAVES.
Fig. 1.
Leaves in crofe pairs.
Fig, 2.
Tiled Leaves.
Fig. S.
a* A jointed Leaf.
b, b.
Starry Loaves.
c. c.
Leaves growing by fours.
d, d, d, </.
d. Leaves alternate.
In fig.
5» all the Leaves 
are opposite.
e. Chaffy Leaves.
/. Leaves in a bundle.
Fig. 4.
a. A Target-shaped Leaf.
b» A Leaf with its Leaf-stalk, c, 
d, A sitting Leaf.
f .
A decurrent Leaf.
f» A L«af embracing the Stem.
g, A perforated Leaf.
A, h.
United Leaves.
i. A sheathing Leaf.
Fig. 5.
a, a.
Leaves bent inwards.
6. b.
Upright Leaves, 
c* c.
Expanding Leaves.
J. d.
Horizontal Leaves.
e. e.
Reclining Leaves.
/./.
Rolled back Leaves, 
m. An Axillary Fruit-stalk.
Fig. 6.
Leaves prefsed to (the Stem.) 
Fig, 7* Root-ieaves ; a.
the Root ; b.
b. h.
the Leaves rising 
immediately out of it, without the intervention of any 
Stem.
Fig. 8.
a, a.
Floral Leavl^s ; different from b, b, the other 
Leaves of the plant ; c.
a Fruit-stalk.
PLATE X.
WEAPONS.
Fig. 1.
a.a,aM.
Simple Thorns.
Fio. 2.
a, a.
Simple Prickles*.
b, b, b.
A triple Thorii.
6. 6.
Forked or triple 
prickles.
STEMS, &c.
Fig .
3. A jointed Straw.
[aM.a.
) b.
b. Stipulae.
The Joints.
c. c.
Concave Glands.
Fig. 4.
A forked Stem.
Fig. 7.
A creeping Root.
Fig. 5.
A twining Stem.
Fig. 8.
A creeping Stem.
Fig. 6.
a. a.
A Tendril.
H 2 
100 EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.
PLATE XL 
Fig. I.
a. a.
a. a.
Glands supported upon Foot-stalks.
m 
ROOTS.
Fio. 2.
A coated bulbous Root, cut a-crofs, to shew the Coats 
which compose it.
JFiG.
3. A solid bulbous Root.
Fig. 4.
A scaly bulbous Root.
Fig. 5.
A branching Root.
Fig. 6.
A Spindle, or Carrot-shaped Root.
Fig. 7.
A tuberous Rootr 
PLATE XIL 
BOTANICAL MICROSCOPE.
Fig. 1.
Represents the Botanical Microscope in its present 
improved state.
Fig. 2.
Is a Magnifying Gl^fs, to be held in the hand, and 
applied close to the eye, whilst the object to be 
examined is brought immediately under it, at such 
a distance as shall be found to give the most distinct 
vision.
Fig. 3.
Shews the Difsecting Knife, the Triangular Needle, and 
a pair of small steel Plyers.
These instruments are 
useful in the difsection of flowers, even when the 
plants are so large as not to require magnifying.
When the parts in question are very minute, and require a 
nice and careful difsection, place the microscope upon a table, 
and raise it, if necefsary, on a book or two, so that the eye may 
be applied with ease immediately over and close to the glafs {b.) 
Lay the object to be examined on the dark stage (a.) and turn 
the screw at (c.) until you see the object upon the stage perfectly 
distinct.
With the needle in the left, and the knife in the right 
hand, the elbows resting on the table, proceed in the difsection 
at the same time that the eye is.
applied to the glafs.
{b.) 
When the microscope is shut up, the instruments and the 
liand-glafs are to be put into the cells destined to receive there, 
and the whole forms a shape and size convenient to carry in 
the pocket.
This Microscope may be had of the publishers of the book.
tf 4 
. V 
* • • *• ♦ ' 
<r ^— • • 
r 
V 
-« #>«b.
% «rfA 
h M^f •• « « • 
« 
' / 
> ^ 
; \ ' 
~> •»• 
• •* f * 
• *• • 
% • ♦ ^-•^••* »*•  
i 
V 
». 
t 
\ 
/ 
, **^ 
./ 
.•.-*«.
rf.
►•••^fcji'i,^, ''*—»• a^-V*** -*^.»«r I '<>*«» —•# sJT^f*/** .».
f«».- A .rf 
r«W*ir ««^HMB «^*«^IWHIW'A'*^ 
n2 / 
\ 
> .
V .
/\ ^ 
y 
•^ ..
• 
./ 
it 
r 
*f 
»^»*»^ 
.« 
.4 
•«  %• ' »^>»>i" » 
T ^Wfl>> «»!>•' >.
.^ 
.J%/,v K 
« « • 
\ 
r: 
•» .^r« »wWUMnq^K««i#*«WMM«M» 
\ 
• J 
I 
i 
r 
I 
I 
f 
y 
\ 
\ 
« < 
y ^ 
m ••» •«• A 
CATALOGUE OF BOOKS 
CONSULTED AND aEFERRED TO 
IN THIS EDITION.
A. 
.BBOTS Flora Bedfordiensig.
1 vol.
8vo.
1799- 
Act, vps.
Nova acta reg.
societatis scientiarum Upsaliensis.
Tom. I.
1773.— II.
1777.-111.
17.— 
Adanson.
Adanson families des plantes.
Tomes II.
8vo.
AUion.
fi.
AUionii flora Pedemontana.
Tom. III.
foL 17S5.
AUion, stirp.
ped, AUionii rariorum Pedemontii stirpiuia 
specimen I.
4to.
17^5.
Alpin.
Egypt.
1. Alpini historia Egypti naturalis, pars I.
and II.
4to.
1735.
Amman, Aramani stirpium rariorum in imperio Rutheno 
sponte provenientium icones Sc descriptiones.
4to.
1739.
Aman.
Acad.
Amoenitates academical, seu difsertationes 
variae physicae^ medicae, botaiiiicae.
Tomi IX.
8vo.
1783.
Afso.
Afso synopsis stirpium Arragonia^.
4to.
1779* 
Barr» Barrelieri plantaB per Galliam Hispaniam & Italiam 
obscrvatas, iconibus aeneis exprefsas.
fol.
1714.
Bast, Basteri opuscula subseciva.
4to.
Tom. I.
I762.— 
11.
1765.
Bath Society, Letters and papers on Agriculture.— Vol.Svo.
Batsch.
Elenchus fungorum.
Fasc.
III.
4to.
1789.
Battar.
Battarrae fungorum agri Ariminensis historia.4to* 
1759.
Beleoaly opuscules (published by M.
Broufsonett,) 1785, 
8vo.
' 
,BeUon. Bellonii observationes in Clus.
exot.
Bergen dealoi'de.
Francof.
ad Viadr, 1753, 4to.
Bergen flora Francofurtana.
1730.
12m0f 
102 CATALOGUE OF 
Bergii materia medica.
8vo« 
Berkenhoufs clavis anglica linguae botanicae Linnxi, or bo- 
tanical lexicon.
1766« 12mo, 
'   Outlines of the natural History of Great 
Britain and Ireland.
Vol. 2d.
1770.
8vo.
Blackst.
Blackstone specimen botanicum quo plantarum 
plurium rariorum Angliae indigenarum loci natalis illustrantur, 
12mo.
1746.
Blackst, cat.
Blackstone catalogus plantarum circa Hare- 
field.
1737.
8vo.
Blackw.
Herbarium Blarkwellianum emcndatum et auctum 
a Trew.
Tom. I.
U. UL fol.
1757.— Tom. IV.
176O.— Tom.
V. 176.5.— Ilcrbarii Blackwelliani auctarium aLudwig.
Tom.
VI.
1773.
Blair's botanic cfsays.
8vo.
London.
1720.
Boccon, rar, Boccone icones & descriptiones rariarum 
plantarum Sicilian, Mclitae, Galliac, & Italiae.
^to.
Oxon.
iGj^m 
Boehm, Boehmeri, flora Lipsiae indigena.
1720.
^to.
Boerh, Boerhaavii index alter plantarum quae in horto 
academico Lugduno Batavorum aluntur.
pars I.
1720.
4to.
Bolt.
Bolton's Alices Britannicae, or history of British 
proper Ferns.
1786.
4to.
by James Bolton of Halifax.
Ap- 
pendix to the above.
4to.
1790.
BoUm^ Bolton's Fungusses.
3 voL 4to« 1788.
Breyn.
cent.
Breynii exoticarum aliarumque minus cog- 
nitarum plantarum centuria I.
1678.
foU 
Breynii pr» Breynii prodromus fasciculi rariarum planta- 
rum.
II.
ordus.
1689.
4to* 
Bruz Bruz Ladislaus de Festuca fluitante.
Difsert.
inaug.
ViennjB.
1775.
8vo.
Bryant.
Bryant's historical account of two species of Ly- 
coperdons.
1783» 8vo.
Bulliard.
Champignons de la France, par ^I.
BuUiard.
fol.
Buxb.
Buxbaumii plantanim minus cognitarum centuria.
I.— V.
4to.
1728—1730.
Buxb.
enum.
Buxbaumii enumeratio plantarum Italise 
Magdeburg.
1721.
Cam, epit, Camerarii de plantis epitome Matthioh novis 
plane &c ad vivum exprefeis iconibus, &r.
1586.
4to.
Catn.
hort.
Camerarii hortus medicus & philosophicus.
1588.
4to.
Catalogvs plantarum horti medici, Oxonicnsis.
12mo.
l648.
C. B»Pifi, Caspari Bauhini pin^x thcatri botanici.
l623.4to.
C, B,pr, Caspari Bauhini prodromus theatri botanici.
1 6*20.
4to.
C. B.
tk, Caspari Bauhini thcatri botanici sive historia 
plantarum.
Liber I.
1 658.
fol.
Chabr.
Chabiaji stii*pium sciiigraphia & icones.
l677.
fol* 
BOTANICAL WORKS.
103 
Ckenal.
Dc la Chehal obscrvationcs botanico medicse.
177^.
4to.
CUis. Clusii rariorum plantarum historia.
l60l, foL 
Clus.
€Xot. Clusii exoticorum.
libr.
x. 16'05.
fol.
Clus.
sppm (Ut. Ad rariorum plantarum historiam Clusii 
altera appendix.
Clus» cur.
Clusii curse posteriores.
l6ll.
Col, ecphr.
Columnae minus cognitarum rari6rumquc nostro 
ceolo orientium stirpium ^nffMrn, l6l6, 4tio.
Col. Phytob.
Columnae ^vro /S^w^foj.
1744.
4to.
Cord, Coi-di Valerii Stirpium.
Norimbergiae.
1753.
fol..
Craniz.
crucif.
Crantz clafsis cruciformium cmendata.
1769.
avo.
Crantz.
Crantz Stirpium Austriacarum partes.
VI.
176^.
4to.
Crantz, umb* Crantz clafsis umb^lliferarum emendata.
1767.
8vo.
Curi, cat.
Curtis's catalogue of British medicinal, culi- 
nary, and agricultural plants, cultivated in the London botanic 
garden.
1783.
12mo.
Curt.
Curtis's Flora Londincnsis, or plates and descrip- 
tions of such plants as grow within the environs of London ; in 
all 68 Nos. 1776 to 1795.
fol.
Curt, obs.
Observations contained in a catalogue of certain 
plants growing wild, chiefly in the environs of Settle, Yorkshire, 
observed by W.
Curtis, London.
Published in the Fl. Lond.
Nos. 45 and 48.
Deer.
Deering cat.
plants, &c.
about Nottingham.
1738.
8vo.
Dicks, h.
s. Dickson's Hortus siccus, or a collection of 
dried British plants, fol.
Fasc.
6. 1794'.
Dicks.
Dickson fasciculus plantarum cryptogamicarum 
Britanniae.
I. 1785.
II.
III.
4to.
1793.
DiL elth.
Diilenii horti Llthamentis plantarum rariorum 
icones & nomina.
Ludg.
Bat. 177^* f<^l* 
Dill.
Diilenii historia Muscorum.
Oxon.
4to.
1741.
Pioscoridis Ubri octo.
Paris.
1549.
8vo.
Dad. Doddnxi stirpium historia pemptades sex sive libri 
XXX.
l6*l6.
fol.
Escltenboch observation cs botanica?, Lijjsiae.
1784.
4to.
Evelyn.
Sylva, or a discourse on forest trees.
Lond.
I670.
folio.
Fabric, helm.
Fabricii enumeratio methodica plantarum 
horti medici llelmstadicnsis.
177^.
12mo.
FL dan.
Icones plantarum sponte nascentium in regnis 
Daniae & Norvegiae in ducatibus Slesvici & Holsatiie, ' &c.
ad 
illustrandum opus Flora?
danicse nomine inscriptum.
Fasciculi 
XVIII.
1766--I79O.
fol.
\ 
lot CATALOGUE OF 
Fl. lapp.
Linncei flora Lapponica exhibcns plantas per 
Lapponiain cresccntes.
1737.
8 vo.
H. Rxfu Flora Rofsica.
Petropoli.
pars I.
1784.
pars II, 
1788.
folio.
Fl. suec.
Linnzi flora Suecica, exhibens plantas per Tegnum 
Suecix cresccntes.
ed.
II.
\7b5.
8vo.
FtiscA.
Fuchsii de historia stirpiuro comeiitarii, insignes, 
&C.
Ii42.
fol.
GiTrtn.
Gsrtner de fructlbus et seminibiu plantarum.
2 vol.
4to.
1788 & 1791.
Garid, Histoire des plantes qui nairsent aux environs 
d'Aix, & dans plusieurs autrcs endroits de la Provence; par 
M. Garidel.
1715.
fol.
Gars.
. Les (igures de« planleg & des animaux d'usage ea 
medicine, decrits dans la maliere medical de M.
GeofTry, des- .
siniis d'apics nature,, par M.
de Gatsault.
Tomes V.
(176*.) 
Svo.
Gen. pi.
Linnxi genera plantarum, edente Itcichard.' Fran- 
cofF.
1778.
8vo.
Gmt.Mag. Gentleman's Magazine, from 1731 to ISOO.Svo.
Ger. Gerard's historie of plants.
1597.
Ger. em.
Gerard's herball, or generall historie of plantes, 
very much enlarged and amended, hy Thomas Johnson.
l636.
folio.
Ger. pro, Gcrardi (Ludovici) flora, Gallo Provincialis.
1761.
8vo.
Germ.
Syn. Vollstandiges systematiches verzeichnifz aller 
gewasche I'eutschlandes, &c.
Erster Band.
Leipzig, Svo.
1782.
Gesn.
hist.
ConradiGesneri fasciculus llistorix plantarum ; 
by Schmidel.
Nuremberg.
1759.
fol.
Gesn.
op, Conradi Gesneri opera Botanica; by Semi del • 
Nuremberg.
i754.
fol.
Gisek.
Giseke & Schulze icones plantarum.
1777- folio.
Giseke.
Index Linnjeanus in Plukenetii opera, & Dillenii 
bistorjam muscorum.
1779.
4to.
Giseke.
Dissertat.
inaugural.
Gied.
Gleditschii roethodus fungorum.
1753.
Svo.
Gfcd(V«:ii»iyj(«na plantarum Berolini.
1764.
Svo.
— .
I Considerato Epicriseos Sieges bockians.' 
Bcrol.
12mo.
1745.
G7Bcl. Gmelin flora sibirica, sive historia plantarum Sifai- 
riie, Tomi IV.— 1747.— 17*9.— 1768.— 1 769.— *to.
Gm€}fuc.
Gmelin (Samuel Gottlieb) historia fucorum.— 
1766.
4-to.
Gmel.
Ivb. Gmelin (J.
Fred.) enumeratio stirpium agro 
TuSingemindigenarum.
1776.
ISmo.
Cadfndi ecumeratio Spirpiuro Silesia, 
iBOTANICAL WORKS, JOS 
Gorter ingr.
Flora Ingrica exschedulis Stephani Krasche-' 
ninnikow confecta, & propriis observationibus aucta a Dav« de 
Gort€r.
1761.
8vo.
Ooaanji, Goiiani flora Monspeliaca.
1765.
8vo.
Gouan, hort, Gouani hortus regius Monspeliensis* 1762, 
8yo.
Gouan, ill, Gouani illustrationes 6c observationes botanicae.
1773.
fol.
Gram.
pasc.
Gramina Pascua, Specimens of 'Pasture 
Grafses, with descriptions and remarks by the ReVo G.
Swayne, 
A. M.
folio.
Bristol, J 790.
Gunn» Gunneri flora NoiTegica.
Pars L & II.
1766.
1772.
fol*.
Hagen tentamen historiae lichenum.
1782.
8vo« 
HaH.
biblio.
Halleri bibliotheca botanica* Tomi U.
I77I9' 
3772.
4to.
HaU, gott.
Halleri enumeratio plantarum horti regii & 
agri Gottingensis.
1753.
12mo.
HaU, opusc.
Halleri opuscula botanica, 1749- I2mo.
Htdl.
hist, Halleri historia stirpium indigenarum Helvedse.
Tomi III.
1768.
fol.
Hall, enum.
Hallen enumeratio methodica stirpium HeL 
veti© indigenarum.
Tomi II.
174'2.
fol.
Happ, Happ^ icones plantarum cryptogamis.
Decuria I.
II.
III.
fol.
1782.
Harimann primse lineas institutionum botanicarum.
1766* 
8vo.
• Hedm.
lust.
Hedwigii fundamentum historian muscorum 
frondosorum.
Pars.
I. & II.
4to.
Lipsise.
1782.
Hedgw.
6tirp» Cryptogamicae Fasc.
Vol. L II.
III.
& 
Fasc.
1. 2.
of Vol. IV.
Lipsiae.
1785.
179^.
Hedgxv, theoria.
Generationis & fructificationis plantarum 
cryptogamicarum.
4to.
Petropoli.
1784.
Herm, hort, Hermanni horti acadcmici Lugduno Batavi 
catalogus.
L687* 8vo.
Herm, par, Hermanni paradisus Batavus.
1698.
4to.
Hist, de V Academ, Histoire de 1' Academic Royal des 
Sciences.
Paris.
H, ox.
Morisoni plantarum historia universalis Oxoniensis.
pars II.
168O.
fol.— 'pars HI.
quam explevit & absolvit Jacqbus 
Bobartius.
l699.
fol.
Hqffm, Hoffmanni enumeratio Lichenum, Fasc.
I. II.
III.
1784, 1785, 178& 4to.
Hqffm.
Sal. Hoffmanni Historia Salicum* Vol. L & Vol.
11.
Fasc.
1. Lipsiae 1787, 179 J.
Hoffin-lich.
Hoifmanni Descriptio et Adumbratio Planta- 
rum quae Lichenes dicuntur.
Vol. I.
II.
Lipsias 1791* fol* 
Hort»vps.
Linnaei hortus Upsaliensis ; exhibens plantas exo-* 
ticas horto Upsaliensis academical a scse iUatas* 1748, 8vo« 
106 CATALOGUE OF 
Iluds.
IluUsani fiora Ai^ica.
ed.
11.
Tomi II.
17f8.
tvo.
--cd I.
1762.
Hunt, ccd.
Sylva, or a discourse on Forest Tree* by J.
EveWn, with notes by A.
Hunter, M.
D, 17/5.
4to.
ed.
I.— 
17S6.
4to.
1 vols.
ed.
II.
Jack, mum.
Jacquin enumeratio stirphim pleraninjque 
quae sponte crescunt in agro Viadobonensi, montibueque con- 
finibus.
1762.
12mo.
Jacq.fi, Jacquin flora Austriaca sive plantarum sclectanim 
in Austria Archiducatu sponte crescentium icones.
Tomi Y.
1773, &c.
fol.
Jacq, hort, Jacquin hortus Vindoboneneis.
Tojni III.
1770, 
1772, 1774.
fol.
Jacq.
ic.
Jacquin Icones Plantarum rarionim.
Vol. I.
Vindobon«.
1781 to 1786.
fol.
Jacq, misc, Jacquin miscellanea Austriaca.
Tomi II.
1778» 
&c.
4to.
Jacq, colL Jacquin Collectanea.
Vol. IV.
4to« Vindobo- 
uae, 1786 to 1790.
Jacq, obs, Jacquin observationes botanies.
Partes IV.-— 
1764 to 1771.
fol.
J. jS.
llistoria plantarum universalis auctoribus Johannae 
Bauhino &; Chcrlero, quam recensuit & auxit Cbabraeus, juris 
vero publici fecit Graffenried.
Tomus I.
\6oO, 
Jonst, Jonstoni dcndrograpliia sive historia naturalis de 
arboribus k, fructicibus.
1662.
fol.
Knipk, KniphofF Botanica in originali.
Cent.
12.
fol.
Kolpin florae Gryphicae supplementum.
17^9.
12mo.
Kram, Kramer elenchus vegctabilium & animalium Au* 
striae inferioris.
1756\ 8vo.
Lammersdorff de Filicum fructificatione.
1781.
8ro.
Leers flora ilerbonensis exhibens plantas circa Herbonam 
I^afsoviorum crescentes.
177^.
8vo.
Leys, Leyseri flora Halcnsis.
8vo.
ed.
ult.
1783.
Lightf.
Flora Scotica, or a systematic arrangement of the 
native plants of Scotland and the Hebrides, by the Rev. John 
Lightfoot, A.
M. 2 vols.
1777.
8vo.
lann, Linnaeus's works.
lAnn, Oman acad.-^^, lapp."^, snec.
— gen, pL — horf, ups, 
»^mant.
pL^'^^mat, med'^sp, pL — syst, nat,'^syst, pi, — phil, boU 
Sec the separate articles of annen.
acaJ, &c.
Uniusi fundamenta botanica, 1747.
8vo.
Philosophia botanica.
8vo.
176'3.
- Flora ^eylanica.
8vo.
174-7.
Unittti Genera plant, cura Schrebcr.
Frankfort.
1789.-* 
2 Vols.
8vo.
Jjnncei Syst.
Naturae, cura Gmelin.
Lipsiae.
1791.
8vo.
Lmruti bibliotheca botanica, 17 4^7 • 8vo.
BOTANICAL WORKS.
ipy 
linnm clafses pUntarum, VJ^7.
Svo.
Ltnnai termini botanici a Hope, editi.
Edinb.
Svo.
' * ' Rotheram editi.
1779.
12mo.
Giseke, 1781.
Svo.
lAnn, (the son) or supp, Linnaei (filii) supplcmentum plan- 
,tarum.
178I.
Svo.
lAfm.
(the son) dec, Linnaei (filii) decas plantarum ran- 
orum horti Upsaliensis, decas L & II.
17^2, 1763.
fol.
linn, (the son) fasc, Linnaei (filii) plantarum rariorum 
horti Upsaliensis fascic.
I. fol.
JJnH.
Trans.
Transactions of the Linnaean Society.
2 vols, 
4to.
Upp enchiridium botanicum.
1779* Svo.
Lob, adv, UObel (Jacobi I.
Mag. Brit.
Fran.
& Hib. regis 
Botanographi, sive plantarum historise physica tarn indigenarum 
& Britanniae inquilinarum quam exoticarum scriptoris) adver- 
saria, eorumque pars altera 6c illustramenta.
Lond.
16O6, fol.
p. p.
549.
Lob. obs, Lobel plantarum seu stirpium observationes.
foL 
1576.
Iiob.
ic, (Lobelii) plantarum seu stirpium icones.
1581.
Lob^ adv.
nova stirpium adversaria, auct.
P. Pena, addit* 
Oal. Rondeletii.
Fol. Antverpise.
1576.
Loefl, Plantae iiispanicae & Americana?.
Lon* Loniceri botanicon, plantarum historiae, 1565.
fol.
Ludw.
Ludwig ectypa v<^etabilium Fasc.
VIII.
176O to 
1764.
fol.
Lyons fasciculus plantan^m circa Can tabrigiam.
I763.
Svo.
Magn.
bot, Magnol botanicum monspeliense sive plantarum 
circa Monspelium nascentium w^mreyvifftfWf, 1676, 12mo.
Mant.
pi, Linnaei mantifsa plantarum generum editionis 
VI.
& spccierum editiones II.
1767.
Mapp.
Mappi historia plantarum Alsaticarum.
1742.
4to« 
Marshalh Arbustrum Amcricanum.
Philiadelph.
1785., 
Mart, Martyn catalogus horti botanici Cantabrigicnsis.— 
1771.
Svo.
— Mantii^a plantarum horti botanici Cantabrigien- 
gis.-1772.
Svo.
Mat, med, Linnaei materia medica, curante Schrebero.— • 
1772.
Svo.
Matth.
Matthioli commcntarii in Dioscorixlcm.
1565.
fol.
Matth.
a C.
B, Matthioli opera a Casparo Bauhino.
1674.
fol.
Mattuscka cnumeratio stirpium in Silesia sponte crcscen- 
tium.
1779- 8vo.
Mirr.
Merrett pinax rerum naturalium Britannicarum.
1666.
12mo.
Mich, Micheli nova plantarum genera.
1729.
fol.
Mieg, Specimen 11.
observationura botanicarum.
1776.
4to.
108 CATALOGUE OF 
Mill.
Miller's (Philip) abridgment of his gardener^s dic- 
tionary.
1771.
4to.
Mill, ic.
Miller's plates to the folio edition of his gar- 
dener's dictionary.
2 vols.
fo\.
I76O.
MaIL ill.
Miller's (John) illustration of the sexual system.
1777.
fol.
Mill.
off.
Miller (Jos.) botanicura officinale, or a com- 
pendious herbal.
1722.
8vo.
Miln^s botanical dictionary.
8vo.
Milne's indigenous botany.
Moenck enumeratio plantarura indigenarum Hafske prae- 
sertim inferiores.
Pars I.
1777.
8vo.
Mont.
Monti catalogi stirpium agri Bononiensis prodro.
mus, gramina ac hujusmodi affinia complectens.
1719.
4to.
Moris umb.
Morison plantarum umbelliferarum distri- 
butio nova.
1672.
fol, 
Mnll.
Flora Fridrichsdalina sive methodica descriptio 
plantarum in agro Fridrichsdalina simulque per rcgnum Danise 
crescentium.
1767.
8vo.
Murr.
prodr» Murray prodromus designationis stirpium 
Gottingensium.
1770.
12mo.
Muntingius de vera hcrba Britannica.
I68I.
4to.
Munt, Muntingii phytbgraphia ruriosa edente Kiggelaer, 
Pars I.
II.
17t>2.
fol.
Nat. delin.
Nature delineated, 4 vols.
1740.
12mo.
Neck.
Necker methodus muscorum.
1771.
8vo.
Neck.
gaUo'belg.
Necker deliciae Gello-Belgicae sylvestres.
1768.
12mo.
Neck, pkt/s, Necker physiologia muscorum.
1774?.
8vo.
Nomenclator Botanicus.
Lipsiae.
1782.
8vo.
Fork.
par.
Parkinson's Paradisus tcrrestris, or a garden of 
all sorts of pleasant flowers, &c.
1629.
fol.
Park, Parkinson's theatrum botanicum ; the theatre of 
plants.
1640.
fol.
Pena.
See Lobel.
Fenn.
Scotl.
— Mebir.
— Woks, Pennant's tours in Scotland 
and Wales, and voyage to the Hebrides.
Pet. llay'-s English herbal illustrated by figures, by Jamesr 
Petiver, (composing the former half of the 2d vol; of his Opera 
in fol.) 
Pet. concord.
Graminum, muscorum, fungorum, subma- 
rinorum, &c.
Britannicorum concordia ; a methodical concord- 
ance of.
British grafses, &c.
Pet, gaz.
Petiver gazophylacium naturae" & artis.
Pet. mus.
Museum Petiverianum, l695.
8vo.
Pet. pter, Petiveri pterigraphia.
In the latter half of the 
2d volume of his works.
Phil.
bot.
Linnaei philosophia botanica.
1751.
8vo.
Philos, Trans» Philosophical Transactions.
Loudon.
BOTANICAL WORKS.
169 
Fhytologia Britanmca* l650.
Lonely 12mo« 
Fitt.
General view of the agriculture .
of the county of 
Stafford, by Mr. William Pitt.
4to.
1795.
Plot Oxf, Plot historia naturalis Oxoniensis.
fol.
Plot Staffs Plot's natural history of Staffordshire.
I68& 
folio.
Pluk.
Plukenetii phytographia.
I69I.
Tom. I.
of his 
works in vol.
W. 1769.
4to ; and the latter ends of Tom. IIL 
and IV.
Pluk^ aim* Plukenetii almagestum botanicum^ 1696* (Tom.
II.
of his works.
) 
Pluk.
amalth.
Plukenetii amaltheum botanicum, 1705.
(Tom. IV.
of his works.) 
Pluk, mant.
Plukenetii almagesti botanici mantifsa.
17OO.
(Tom. III.
of his works.) 
Pollich historia plantarum in palatinatu electorali sponte 
crescentium.
Tomi III.
1777- Svo.
H. sifn.
Raii synopsis methodica stirpium Britannicarum 
editio 3tia.
1724'.
8vo.
ii.
cat.
Raii catalogus plantarum Angliae & insularum ad- 
jacentium.
ed.
I. I670 ; ed.
II.
I677.
12rao.
R. hist.
Raii historia.
Tomi III.
I686, and 1704.
fol.
Kdch,fl* Reichard flora moeno-francofurtana enumerans 
stirpes circa Francofurtuni ad moenum crescentes.
Pars I.
1772 ; pars II.
1778.
Reich, kort, Reichard enumeratio stirpium horti botanici 
Senkenbergiani qui Francofurti ad Moenum est.
1782.
12mo.
Reich.
Reichard sy St. plant.
Linn.
4 vol.
8vo.
178O.
Reich, syh Reichard sylloge opusculorum botanicorum.
1782.
8vo.
ReVi. Relhan florae Cantabrigiensis exhibens plantas agro 
Cantabrigiensi indigenas.
1785.
8vo.
Relh, svppL Relhan florae Cantabrigiensis supplementum.
1786.
8vo.
ibid, alter.
1788.
Renealmi specimen historiae plantarum.
1611.
4to.
Retz^Jl. Retzi florae scandinaviae prodromus.
1779* 8vo.
Retz.
or Rttz, obs, Retzii observationes botanicae.
fasc.
VI.
folio.
Reyg.
Reyger tentamen florae gedanensis.
Dantisci 1764* 
12mo.
Rtr. Rivini ordines plantarum flore monopctalo, & tetia« 
petalo.
Lipsiae.
lUyO and 1691.
fol.
Riv. pent.
Rivini ordo plantarum flore irregular!
penta- 
petalo.
Lipsiae.
1690.
fol.
Roi. Du Roi difsertatio inauguralis observationes bota- 
nicas sistens.
1771- 4to.
ilotfe'* elements of botany.
17!^5.
8vo.
R(fth.
betyr.
Roth betyrage 2ur botanick.
Bremen 1782.
12mo.
. .
"^ 
no CATALOGUE OF 
Rotk.
vers, Iloth vcrzeichnifs dcrgenigen pflan^n.
Alten- 
burg.
1781.
12mo, 
Itosseau's letters on botany, bvT.
Martjn, B.
1).
1785.
S\o.
Rottli.
UotlUiill ili'scriptiormiii & tconuni rai-iorcs & pro 
maxime parte novas plantas illustrantiunt, 1773> fol.
luring ordiiips naturalcs plantarum.
Goetting.
177-*- 8to.
Ruppii flora jenensis sive enumcratio plantarum lam sponte 
circa Jcnam ct in locis vicinis nascentiutn, (]ua]n in hortis ub- 
Tiarum.
1726".
13nio.
Rvpp.
ab Hall, Ruppii flora jencnsiscdcntc llallero.
1745.
12mo.
Rutl/s cfsay towards a natural history of the county o£ 
Dublin.
2 vols.
1773.
8vo.
Sabbnf, Sabbati hortusromanus SPcundum systemaTojirnc- 
fortii.
Tom. IV.
1772—1777- foiio- 
Schieff.
Sdi^effcr fungorum k]ui in.
Bavaria & Palatinatu 
circa Ratislionam nascuntur icones.
Tomi IV.
1762 to 177+.
4to.
Scheiich.
Schcuchzeri agrostograpliia, sivc graminum, jun- 
corum, cyperorum, cyperoidura iisfjue aifinium liisi«ria, cdcntc 
Hallcro.
1775.
*to.
fifkaicA.
it.
J. Jacobi Schcuclizeri itinera pirr HdvetiEB.
ftlpinas regiones.
1723.
4to.
Schmid, Scmidel iconcs plantarum & analyses partium, 
rurantc & cdcntc KtUer pictorc norimbergensi.
I762.
fol.— - 
Manipulus II.
curante et edente Bischoff chalcographo iwrira- 
bergcjisi.
1776'.
fol.
Schmid.
bias.
Schmidel de Blasin, 1759.
4to.
Schmd.
buxb, Schmidel dc Buxbauraia, 1758.
4to, 
Sthmid.jimgtrm.
Schmidel dc .lungermania, I76O, 4to.
SchoUer flora barbiensis.
IJps, 1775, 8vo.
Schreb.
Schrcber Bcschrcibuiig der Graser, Plates 1 to 
40.— (in German.) Leips.
1774.
fol.
Sdtr^.
ic, Schreber icones & descriptiones plantarum 
minus cognitarum.
Decas I.
1756.
fol.
Sc/irrt.
mant.
Schrcber mantifsa cditioni quarts Unnxi 
matutise medico.
1782.
8vo.
Sc/ircL phase.
Schreber de phasco.
177*^- 4to.
Schreb, «p(e." Schrcberi sjiicik'nium flora lipsics.
1771.
8vo.
ScArtb.
Tert.
Schrcberi plantarum verticillatarum unila- 
biatarum genera et species.
1 774.
4 to.
Scop, Scopoli flora carniolica exhibens plantas Camiolie 
indigenas, Tomi II.
1772.
8vo.
Scop.
ann.
Scopoli annus I.
II.
& III.
historico-naturalis.
1769; IV.
1770 : V.
1772.
small 8vo.
Scop, tabt, Scopoli planlie subterrancce.
13mo.
Seopoii Introduclio ad hist, naturalem.
8vo, Pragae.
1777- 
Sf^uiVri plant-e veroncnsis, seu stirpium quse in agro Vero-' 
ncnses rcpenubtur melhodica synopsis.
Tomus II.
17-t5.
8vo.
BOTANICAL WORKS, ill 
Sheldr, Sheldrake's herbal of medicinal plants, fol.
Sibbald.
Sibbaldi, Scotia illustrata.
foU l684.
Sibthorpe* Flora Oxoniensis.
8vo.
Smith, Dr. J.
E. difsertation on sexes of plants.
8vo.
— English Botany ; the figures by X Sowerby.
No3« 
8vo.
Spicilegium botanicum.
fasc.
iii.
fol.
. 
Iconcs pictae plantarura rariorum.
fasc, fol.
— - Iconcs.
plantarum ineditae.
fasc.
iii.
fol.
—   tour on the Continent.
3 vols.
8vo.
1793.
Sole, Menthae Britannicae ; or a new arrangement of 
British Mints, by W.
Sole.
1. vol.
fol.
Spalowsky dissertatio inauguralis de Cicuta, Flammula Jo- 
vis, Aconito, Pulsatilla, Gratiola, Dictamno, Stramonio, Hyos- 
cyamo, & Colchico, 1777* 8vo.
Sp. pV.
Linnaei species plantarum, exhibentes plantas rite 
cognitas ad genera relatas.' Editio 2da.
Tom. I.
I'j62\ II.
17^3.
8vo.
Stackk, Nereis Britamiicae ; or descr.
of the British ma- 
rine plants, fol.
1795?
by J.
Stackhouse, Esq.
Stechnann de Artemisia.
1775.
4to, 
Stillhtg.
Stillingflect's miscellaneous tracts* 1762.
8vo.
Stoerck.
[See Spalowsky.] 
Swayne.
[See Gram, pascua.} 
Swert.
Swertii florilegium.
Tomi II.
fol.
Frank.
l6l2.
Symons.
Pocket Flara of Great Britain, 12rao.
Syst, nat.
Linosei systema naturae, ed.
XII.
Tomi III.
1766, 
and 1767* 8vo.
Sy9t, pL Linnan systema plantarum curante Reiphard.
Tomi IV.
1779 & 1780.
8vo.
Syst» t'fg.
Linnwi systema vegetabiliura, editio XI V^ 
Murray, 1784.
' 
TkaL Thalii sylva Hercynia sive catalogus plantarum 
sppnte nascentium in montibus et locis vicinis Hercyniae qua?
Fcspicit Saxoniam.
1588.
small 4to.
(published with Camerarii 
hort.) 
Theopkrasti opera.
Lugdun.
Batav.
fol.
Tkunb, Thunberg flora Japonica.
,1784.
8vo.
Tilli catalogus plantarum horti Pisani.
1723.
fol.
Tmirn.
Tournefort institutiones rci herbaria;.
Tom. III.
1700.
4to.
* 
Tragm Tragi de stirpium maxirae vero earum quai in 
Germania nascuntur commentarii, interprete Kybcro.
1552.
small 4to.
Trew, rar.
Plantae rariores edente Keller.
17^3.
fol.
Trew, editor of the Nuremberg edition of BlackwcU.
[See 
Blackwell.] 
VmlL Vaillant botanicon Parisiense ou denorabrcment 
par ordre alphabetique des plantes qui se trouvent aux environs 
de Paris.
J727.
fol.
112 CATALOGUE OF BOTANICAL WORKS.
VandelU Fasciculus plantarum.
4to» 177 L 
Veil, Coloured figures of marine plants, with descriptions^ 
by T.
Velley, Esq. Bath, 1795.
fol.
Volck, Volckameri flora Noribergensis, sive catalogus plan- 
tarum in agro Noribergensi tarn sponte nascentium, quam exo- 
tkrarum in viridariis ac medico horto enutritarum.
170O.
4to.
Wcdc.
Walcott flora Britannicse indigena.
No. L to XIV.
Wallace, Account of Orkney.
8vo, Lond.
17OO.
Walther, Designatio plantarum quas hortus Waltberi pa- 
thologist profefsoris Lipsiensis complectitur.
1735.
8vo.
Warner plantse Woodfordienses ; a catalogue of the more 
perfect plants growing spontaneously about Woodford in EfseX.
1771, 12mo.
Weber.
Weberi spicilegium floras Goetingensis plantas im- 
primis crytogamicas Hercyniae illustrans.
1778.
8vo.
Werner^ observationes botan.
4to.
Weig.Jl, Weigel flora pomerano-rugica exhibens plantas 
per Pomeraniam anteriorem suecicam &; Rugiam sponte nas- 
centes.
17^9- 12mo.
Wdg.hort.
Weigil hortus Grypbicus, 1782.
4to.
Weis, Plantas Cryptogamicae Florae (Grottingensis.
8vo.
1770.
Wieg, Wiegel observationes botanicae.
1772.
4to.
Wiggers primitiae florae Holsaticae.
1780.
8vo.
Wilcke flora Gryphica exhibens plantas intra miliare sponte 
nascentes.
17^5.
12mo.
WUldenofO) Flora Berolinensis.
8vo« 
Willkh obs.
Willich observationes botanicae de plantis qui- 
busdam observationes.
Gotting, 17^2.
Willich ilL Willich illustrationes quaedam botanicas.
Gat- 
ting.
1766.
Woodv, Woodville's medical botany.
4 vols.
4to.
1793.
jFw^.
flora borufsica.
1765.
8vo.
Zanon.
Zanonii rariorum stirpium historia,edente MontiQ.
Bonon.
1742.
Zinn (catalogus plantarum horti academic!
& agri Cottin- 
gensis.
1757- 8vo, 
t 113 ] 
ABBREVIATIONS.
VyAL.
Calyx.
Bloss.
Blossom.
Stam.
Stamen.
PiST.
Pistil.
FiLAM.
Filaihent.
S. Vess.
Seed-vessel.
' 
Gekm.
Germen.
Caps.
Capsule.
Nect.
Nectary.
Recept.
Receptacle.
Ess. Char.
Essential Character.
A. annual; enduring for a year or less.
B. biennial ; enduring two years.
P. Peramial; enduring many years.
S. Shrub.
T. Tree.
Jan« January.— * Feb. February.
— Aug. August.
— Sept.
September.
— ^Oct. October — ^Nov. November.
— ^Dec.
December.
M • male^ or stameniferous flower.
P. Female^ or pistilliferous flower.
H. Hermaphrodite flowers; such as contdn both stamens 
and pistils.
N. Neutral flowers; such as contsdn neither stamen nor 
pistil.
tim>lucr.
invohicrum.
Invoiucell.
Involucellum.
Vol. I.
[ 114 ] 
RULES 
FOR THE 
PRONUNCIATION OF THE LINNiEAN NAMES.
1 • X HE English reader is desired to observe, that the 
accent, or the force of the voice, is to be thrown 
upon that syllable or letter which precedes the 
mark.
Thus in Ar'hutnSy the Ar is to be the 
accented or strongly sounded syllable, and not the 
luy as is commonly, though erroneously, the case ; 
and in Feroni'cay the Nils to be the accented syl- 
lable, and not the Ro, which is also a commofi 
error.
2. That the letter e at the end of a name is always to be 
sounded ; thus, the word Elat'lne, .is to be pro- 
nounced E-lat'^ti-ney with four syllables, and not 
E-la-tine.
i 
3. That in words ending in ideSy the i is always to be 
pronounced long.
4. That ch is to be pronounced Aarii, like the letter k.
5. That in words beginning with see and sciy the c is to be 
pronounced soft; though it is allowed that some 
few words derived from the Greek are exceptions to 
this rule.
6. That in such words as have schy the c is to be pro- 
nounced hard.
Thus Sckce^nus is to be proDoiuiced 
as if it were written Ske'nus.
*! 
7. That c and gy before e and z, and before cs and cb, are 
to be pronounced softy but before the other vowda 
and diphthongs, hard* 
• « 
THE 
GENERA 
t < 
•> 
OF 
• 1 
BRITISH 
NTS.
! t 
18 
[ 116 1 
CLASS I.
MONANDRIA.
Containing Jhwers with 1 Stamen only.
X HE flowers arranged under this class contain only one 
stamen.
It might be supposed^ that flowers containing 
only one stamen^ and one^ or at most^ two pistils^ must^ 
from the simplicity of their structure^ be easy to investi- 
gate ; and undoubtedly they would be so, were it not for 
the minuteness of their parts.
It fortunately happens, 
however, that the inexpenenced botanist is not likely to 
encounter them at the commencement of his progress ; the 
Salicornia is only found on the sea coast; the Hippuris 
is not very common ; the Zanichellia and Chara are lesSt 
rare, ana the Callitriche is 'frequent enough in watery 
ditches and very slow streams, but neither of them are 
likely to attract attention, until a habit of accurate obser- 
vation has been formed.
The Aphanes, tho only remaining 
Grenus, may occasion some difficulty from its want of 
agreement with the Generic description ; but the observa- 
tions subjoined t6 that description will obviate every pos- 
sible doubt.
MONANDRIA (l Stamen.) 
MONOGYNIA (1 Pistil.) 
Ckara.
Hippuris* 
Salicornia^ 
Aphanes.
DiGYNiA (S Pistils.) 
Cidlitriche* 
Tetragynia (4 Pistils.) 
2k[nniclieliia.
MONANDRLd. MONOCfirNIA.
uf 
MONOGYNIA.
i .
CHA'RA.
SchmiM.
tab.
.14.
Gartner ^^JA^.
^4.
Male flower at the base of the femalej ^ the out- 
side the calyx.
. ' ' 
Calyx none.
r* ' ., , » 
BjlossoM none.
Stamen^ Fitament npne.
Anther globular, placjed be- 
fore file germen on the outer side, and at me1)ase' of 
. thexialyxf pf one cell^ not opening.
'. 
Female' ^ow€t.
Caltx.
Ciij?
4 leaves; Zsa/?/^ J^wl-shaped, unequal, per* 
manent.
Sometimes tneire is no calyx.
Blossom none.
. ' 
Pistil.
Germen turban-shaped, marked witli 5 spiral 
grooves.' Style none.
, Simimus 5, undivided.
Seed-vessel; Berry egg-shaped, but oblone^ spirally 
grooved, of one cell, mclosing Uie seeds within a very 
thin crust.
^> .
y r 
Seeds numerous, spherical, extremely small.
' Observation.— For iSttm»»f* 5, we should" rather read 
with 5 ckftsy a§ in the former editions of the genera ; but the 
fact is, that the parts are so very minute as scarcely to allow of 
this point being' ascertained.
In this doubtful ease, the seed-- 
vessel having onfy one cell, determines its [4a€« iathe order 
Monogynia.
. « » 
ATHANES.
Gcertn.
73.
. , ^ 
Calyx.
Cup I leaf, tubular, permanent : Mtmik fia^^ 4-> 
clefted.
Bloss.
None, 
Stamen^s; Filaments 4; upright; awl-shaped; very small; 
standing upon the rim of the calyx.
Anthers roundish* 
Pistil ;" Germen egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped ; as long 
as the stamens ; growmg from Ae base of the germen.
Summit somewhat globular.
, 
S. Vess.
None; the Rim of the calyx closing, confines 
the seeds.
SEEtMngg-shaped; tapering; compressed; as long as tht 
style.
Obs. It is nearly allied to the Alchemilla.
It has some- 
times only.l pistil and 1 seed.
Linn.— It seems now pretty 
118 MONANDRIA/ MONOGYNIA.
generally agreed that the flowers contain only 1 stamen, 1 
pistil, and 1 seed ; so that notwithstanding its natural affinity 
to the genus Alchemilla, in the class Tetrandia, it ought in an 
artificial syj^t^m to occupy jts, present plstce; ^ .
; ; .
. 
SALlCOK'NlA.
Toumefort, 485.
Oartner^ 127.
Calyx 4-comered ; lopped; bellying; perm^q:it.
Blqss.
npne.
...
SrAMETjf' '^ifament single, undivided, loiiger than the 
cup.
'*^i^;i^Aer double, oblong, upright.
^ ,, ![.
Pistil.
Germen oblong-egg-sniaped.
' Style undivided, 
standing under the stamen.
Summit cjoyen.
S. VE^s:^n6ne, The calyx bellying and in^ated contains 
the seed.
. .
, .
Seed single..
....
« i.
- I * .
- ♦ .
.^ • 
Obs. The number of stamens is not vi?ry, , certain ; some- 
tinges tl^ere'aire 2 in each flower, Linn ♦., ' .
. 
i .
. .
. 1 .
• ; .
' .
' 
HIPPUTIIS.
Gear/w.
84, 
; .
. , ..
. .
.; .
Calyx a ?-lobed rixn, crowi^ing the germea* .
. 
Bloss.
hone.
' ♦ .,-.
. 
Stam£i(.
Filament single, upright, fixed within the outer 
lob^jof the calyx.
Anther roundish, coi^pressed.
Pistil,!
GeraTteTz.oblong, beneath.
Style siaa^ley upright, 
awUshaped, longer than the stamen, fixed to the inner 
lobe of the calyx.
Summit acute.
S. Vess.
none.
Seed single, roundish, naked.
•'.*...
Qbs. Mr* Curtis describes the stamen as staiidfn|r upon the 
top of the germen ; and says, that at the close of stimmer, he 
has found flowers without a stamen ; and ScopoH.
(las' observed, 
that such ilowers arc sometimes intermixed with the others.
. 
DIGYNIA, 
CALLITRICHE.
Gcertn.
68.
Calyx none.
Btoss.
Petals 2, bowed inwards, channelled, opposite to 
each other.
Stamen.
Filament single, lon^, bowed.
Anther simple.
PisT.
Germen nearly round.
Styles 2, hair-like, bowed.
MONANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
119 
Summits acute.
S, Vess.
Capsule roundish, compressed; with 4 angles, 
and 2 cells* 
Seeds solitary, oblong.
Obs. Seeds 4, naked, with a membranaceous border on the 
outer edge.
(Gaertn.)-^in the Callitriche vernay the stamens 
and pistils are found in separate flowers, but growing on the 
same plant.
Likn.
But sometimes even in this species, flowers 
are found which contain both stamens and pistils.
.' 
TETRAGYNIA.
ZANNICHEL^IA.
MicA.
34.
Gcertn.
\g.
Mfffc flower.
' .
Cal. non^.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filarneni^^iTi'^t, simple, long, upright.
Anther 
arrow-shaped, upnght.
Female flowers placed near the other.
CAt. Cup 1 leaf, hardly perceptible, bellying, with 3 teeth.
Bloss.
none.
PisT.
Germens 4 to 8, homed, approaching.
Styles 4 to 
8, simple, rather expanding.
Summits egg-shaped, 
flat, expanding outwardly.
S. Vess.
* Capsutes upright, but expanding ; compressed, 
crooked, tuberclea on the back, the reclining style 
forming a beak; crust leather-like, of 1 cell, valve-less.
Seed solitary, oblong, bulging on one side.
Male flowers solitary, scattered.
Cal. Cup of i leaf, mouth slanting, very entire, acute 
at the Dack.
[ ISO } 
CLASS II.
DIANDRIA.
Containing Flowers with 2 Stamens duly.
X HIS class does not present any particidiir .difficulty to 
the young botanist^ except such as arises from the sinmilar 
structure of the flowers in the genera Orchis, Opfirys, 
Serapias, SatyriunJ, and Cypripe&ira ; and thip difficulty 
consists in distinguishing the h.p of the nectary irom the 
petals.
A reference to the figures of Orchis and Ophrys, 
jn plate XII.
will explain the matter, and i^ is necessary 
it should be well understood, because the discrimination 
of the s})ecies depends very much upon the lip of the 
nectary.
In explaining the structure of the Viola, and 
some other genera, linnasu?
considered the expanded lip 
of the nectary as one of the petals, and the horn-shaped 
projection behind it as the nectary.
Had he done the 
same in the instances now under consideration, no peculiar 
difficulties would have arisai.
PI.
Xli. Fig.
A. A front view of the flower of the Orchis 
masada.
B. A side view of the same.
p. p.
p. p.
The upper expanded petals, be- 
fore and within which may be seen the 
inner approaching petals.
L L the lip of the nectary, n.
n. its pro- 
jecting horn.
g. the twisted germen.
m. m.
floral leaves.
Fig. C.
a front view of a flower of the Ophrys 
myodes.
D. A side view of the same.
p. t,p.
p. the petals.
/. h /.
L The lip of the nectary.
g. The twisted germen.
PIANDWA.
jMONOGYNIA, m 
In the 5 genera mentioned above^ though the germen 
is sufficiently obvious^ the style and the summit are very 
indistinct.
The stamens are evidoitlv turo.
The anthers 
are composed of a number of elastic fiores united together; 
60 that you may forcibly extend them to twice their 
natural lengthy but on releasing them^ they instantly 
eonbract agam.
These elastic fibres are simple or branehed^ 
and each terminates in a minute body^ but not containing 
pollen* From these singularities or structure^ it is pro^ 
Dable that ihe generation of these plants is effected in 
tome mode not yet undersjbood.
The seeds are numeroua^ 
though very small $ but I believe no person has yet been 
able to raise plants from thooi.
DIANDRIA.
(2 Stamens.) 
MONOGYNIA (1 Pistil.) 
Ligustrumn 
Circcea.
Veronica.
Pin^icula.
Utrtcuiaria.
Lycofms.
Salvia.
Orchis, 
Satyrium* ^ 
Opnrys.
Malaxis* 
Serapias.
Cypnpedium^ 
iJenma.
Saliic.
Praxinus.
DiOTNiA (d IHsUls.) 
Anihoxanthum, 
r 
Hi OIAMDRIA.
MOtiOGYNUu 
. D I A N D R I A.
MONOGYNU.
' .
LIGUSTRUM, Toum.
367.
Gisrtn.'QQ.
CAtYx. Cup I leaf, tubular, very small, with 4 upright 
bluiit teeth in itB rim.
£ros$.
1 petal, ftmnel-shaped^ Tube cyliiMirical, longer 
a than the cup.
jBor£i!^'txpanded> divided ^into '4.
egg» 
shaped segments.
.. i..'; ^ - !; .v..:i.
• : -..«-.
STAMENS.
Filamenis 2, simple, opposite.
Anthers up- 
right, nearly as lon^ a^ the l^io8$om.: - 
Pistil.
Germen nearly round.
"" Style very short.
Sum^ 
mit thick, blunt, cloven.
S. Vess.
Berry globular, smooth,, of 1 cell.
Seeds 4, convex on one side, angular on the other.
Obs. Berry 2-celled, lined with a tlijn membrane.
Seeds, 
2 in each celL Gjertn.
, ' 
I 
CIRCLE 'A.
Tourn.
155.
G^t^i.
24.
• ,1 
Calyx.
Cup l leaf, superior,, deciduous.
. Ttile thread- 
shaped, very short.
Border, with 2 divisions, seg- 
ments sharp, egg-shaped, coisicave, bent outwards.
Bloss.
Petals 2, inversely .
heait-^haped, expanding, 
equal, mostly shorter than die Qjip.
Stam.
Filaments 2, hair-liiie, upright, as long as the cup.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen turban-shaped, beneath.
Style thread- 
shaped, as long as the anthers..
Summit blunt, notched 
at the end.
S. Vess.
Capsule betwixt ^g and turban-shaped, covered 
with strong hairs, with 2 cells and 2 valves, opening 
from the base upwards.
Seeds solitary, oblong, narrow towards the base.
Obs. Calyx properly 2-leaved.
VERONFCA.
Taum.
60.
Gcertn.
54.
Cal. Cut with 4 divisions, permanent.
Segments spear^- 
shapeo, acute.
DIANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
IM 
Bloss, wheel-shaped, of 1 petal.
Tute nearly as long^as; 
the cup.
Border flat, divided into 4 e^-shaped seg- 
' ments.
Lower SegmerU nsurrowest, that opposite to it- 
the broadest.
Stam.
Filamenis^^ thinnest at the bottom, ascending.' 
Anthers oblong.
BiST.
Germen compressed* iS/y& .thread-shaped, declin- 
ing, as long as the stamens..
Summit undivided.
S. Vess.
Capsule inversely heart-shaped, compressed at 
the point, with 2 cells and 4 valves.
Seeds severid, roundish.
Obs. The tube of the blossoAi is generally very short; less 
so in the first 3 species.
Li^n.
In Veromcs, mont ana, \\ie 
seed-vessel is roundish, with a notch at the base, and at the 
top, (Reich.) and in V.
hcderifoUaj it is like 2 united globes.
PINGUECULA.
Tmm.74.
Gicertn.
112.
Cal. Ckip gaping, small, acute, permanent.
Upper Lip 
upright, With 3 clefts; Lower Lip reflected, cloven.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Longer Lip straight, blunt, 
with 3 clefts, failing back ; Shorter Lip cloven, some- 
what blunt and expanding.
Nectary horn-shaped, 
being a production of tjie lower and hinder part of the 
petal.
Stam.
Filaments 2, cylindrical, crooked, ascending, 
shorter than the cup.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Germen globular.
Style very short.
Summit with 
2 lips; Upper Lip largest, flat, reflected, covering the 
anthers; Lower Lip shorter, very nsurow, upright, 
cloven.
S. Vess, Cdpsule egg-shaped, of 1 cell, compressed, and 
opening at the pomt.
Seeds many, cylindrical.
Receptatle loose.
UTRICULA'RIA.
Fl. dan.
128 and 138.
Cal. Cup 2 leaves, leafits equal, very small, egg-shaped, 
concave, deciduous.
Bloss.
1 petal, gapiiig.
Upper Lip flat, blunt, upright.
Lower Lip larger, flat, entire.
A heart-shaped Palate 
standing prominent betwixt the lips.
Nectary a little 
horn, projecting from the base of the petal.
[ 
I<r4 DIAKDBIA.
MONOGYMIA.
SxAM.
Fikukenis^, ^tr^,Aqr%'htoi laY^mb.
Anihers 
smalli and adhering togethot^ , 
PisT.
Germen ^obnlar.
Stah threaiirshaped^ aft long as 
the cup.
Summit conical.
'. « 
S; VJBSSa Cafrnds Uai^^ glofanlar^ of 1 cdl.
. * .
Seeds several.
Ob».
The plants of this gcniis are very remarkable ; the 
roots being loaded with small membranaceoofi bladders.
LY'COPUS.
Tourn.
89.
Cal. Cup 1 tubular leaf, with 5 sbajlo'w clefts \ S^gm^ents 
narrow and acute.
Bloss.
1 petal, irrcjgular.
Tube cylindrical,, 9s flong as the 
cup.
Border with 4 clefts, blunt, open ; Segments 
nearly equal, but the loujermost somewhat smaller; the 
uppermost broader, and notched at the -end.
' .
Stam.
Filaments 2, generally longer than the blossom 
and bending under Us upper se^ent.
ArUhers small.
PiST.
Gernlen with 4 clefts.
S/^femread-shaped, straight; 
as long as the stamens.
SummU cloven, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Seeds 4, roundish, blunt, at the bottom of th(e cup.
SAL'VIA- Tmm. 83.
69.
Gcertn.
66.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, scored, enlarging gradually 
upwaras, and compressed at the top^ Rim upright, 
with 2 lips ; Lower Lip with S teethe 
Bloss.
1 petal, irregular.
Tube compressed,, enlarging 
gradually upwards.
Border g<Hping* U/^)er Lip coq« 
cave, compressed, bowed inwards, notched at the end* 
Lower Lip broad,-with 3 clefts.
The Middle Segment 
largest, roundish, notched at the end.
Stam.
FUaments 2, very short, supporting 2 others cross- 
wise by the middle, which have Glands at the lower, 
. and Anthers at the upper end.
PiST.
Germen with 4 clefts.
Style thread-shaped, very 
long, adjoining the stamens.
Summit cloven.
S. Vess.
none, the Cup closing a little, contains the seeds 
in its bottom.
S^eds 4, roimdish.
r 
DIANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
125 
Obs. Tbe singular forked' filaments constitute' the essential 
character of this genus.
Lilkn.
The rudiments r of - 2 stamens 
appear in the mouth of the blossom^ but th^y ha^e no anthers.
The glands in most species are callous, but in a few they appeflf 
like anthers, a:nd sometimes contain a small quantity of pollen.
OR'CHIS.
Faill.
tab.
3l".
Toum.
247.
Cal. Sheaths scattered.
Fruit-stalk undivided* 
Cup none.
Bhoss.
Petals 5^ outer ones 3i inner ones ^, approaching 
upwards, so as to form a helmet.
Nectary 1 leaf^ fixed by the lower side to the receptacle 
between the division of the petals.
Upper Lip upright, 
very short.
Lower Lip large, expanding, broad.
Tube 
standing behind^ shaped uke a horn^ hanging a little 
down.
Stam.
Filaments 2, very slender, and very short, stsmdt 
ing on the pistil.
Anthers inversely eggr^baptd, up- 
right, covered by a fold of the upper lip of tiie nectary, 
forming 2 cells.
. : 
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong, twisted.
Style fixed to 
the upper lip of the nectary, very short.
- Summif 
compressed, olunt.
^ 
S. Vess.
Capsule oblong, with 1 cell, 3 keels, 3 valves, 
opening in 3 [places under the keels, continuing con- 
nected at the base and at tbe end.
Sebds numerous, very small, Uke saw dust.
. 
SATVRIUM.
Faill.
30.
/. 6.
Cal. Sheaths scattered.
Frmt-stalk undivided.
Cup 
none.
Bloss.
Petals 5, oblong ^^-shaped, 3 more outwards, 
the 2 iTtner approaching above, in form of a helmet.
. Nectary of 1 leaf^ fixed by the lower side to tjie recep- 
tacle, between the division of the petals.
Upper Lip 
.,; very short, upright.
Lower Lip flat, peadent, with §1 
bag like a double pur9e projecting behind.
3tam« FitmnentsSy very slender, very short, standing on 
; the pisul.
Anthers mverselye^-fihaped, covgrw^ by 
a fold of the upper lip of the nectary, formiffiig 2.
-cells.
PiST.
Gflr?w,e7a beneath, oblong, twisted* S/yi^very.shoil^ 
."^ fixed to the up^er lip of W2 nectary.
/Swi/wti/' com- 
pressed, blunt.
" ^ .
. : -j 
JS6 DIANDRIA.
.MONOGYNIA.
S. Vbss.
Capsule oblongs with 1 cell^ 3 keels^ 3.
valves, 
opening in 3 places under the keels^ connected at the- 
base and at the end.
Seeds numerous, very small, like saw-dust.
(yPHRYS.
Taurn.
250.
Cal. SA^a/A^ scattered.
Jpnw/-5^aZfc5 undivided.
Ci^pnone.
Bloss.
Petah'5^ oblong, approaching upwards, o^ual, ^ 
of them placed outwards.
Nectary longer than the petals, hanging down, behind 
only slightly Keeled.
Stam.
Filaments 2, very short, standing on the pistil.
Anthers upright, covered by the inner edge of the 
nectary.
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong, twisted.
Style fixed to 
the inner edge of the nectary.
Summit indistinct.
S. Vess.
Capsuie somewhat egg-shaped, 3 -edged, blunt, 
scored, with 3 valves, and 1 cell, opening at the keeled 
angles.
Seeds numerous, like saw-dust.
Receptacle strap-shaped^ 
growing to each valve of the seed-vessel.
Obs. In Ophrys CoraUorUza there are 4 Stamens, viz.
2 in 
eacb cell.
(R.) 
MALAX1S.
{Swartz.) E.
lot.
72.
Cal. Sheath none.
Cap none.
Bloss.
Petals 5, 3 outer y 2 above and 1 below, spear- 
shaped, blunt, expanding; 2 inner strap-shaped, acute^ 
bent round the germen.
Nectary in the centre of the blossom, smaller thaii 
the petals, concave with* convex edges, tapering to a 
point behind, cloven in front.
Stam.
Anthers 2, egg-shaped, with scarcely any fila- 
ment, fixed to the edge of the hollow of the pistil, 
with 2 little cavities at the bottom.
•PlST.
Germen on a little fruit-stalk, roundish beneath.
Style, a little cup-like hollow in the centre of the nec- 
tary, very short, expanding, extending halfway round, 
with the stamens fixed to its hinder edge.
Summit 
in fixAit of the hollow, near the stamens.
5* Vess.
Capsule oblong, 3-keeled, of 1 cell, opeiung 
under the keels, but continuing united at each end.
Seeds extremely minute.
DIANDRIA.: MQNOGYNIA.
m 
Obs. Dr.
Smith considers the blosspm in this genus as 
being reversed, the odd Petal of the 3 outer ones being lower- 
most, and that this has therefore been erroneously called the 
lip ; and that the most striking character is the 2 upright petals 
at the top, instead of the single one in all our other Orchises.
The nectary, moreover, points upwards, embracing the stamens 
and style.
See £.
bot.
p. 7^« 
* SERATIAS.
Gaerln.
14.
Tourn.
249.
Helleborine.
Cal. Sheattis scaXttTed. Fniit'StalkundWidcd.
Cup nons, 
Bloss.
Petals 5y oblong egg-shaped^ open^ but rather 
' upright^ approaching upwards.
Jyeciary as long as the petals^ hollowed at the base^ 
filled with honey, egg-shaped, bulging beneath, cloven 
into 3, segments acute, the middlemost heart-shaped, 
blunt, cloven at the seam of the base, with 3 teeth, 
Stam, Filaments 2, very short, fixed to the pistil.
Anthers 
upright, under the upper lip of the nectary.
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong, twisted.
Style growing 
to the upper lip of die nectary.
Summit indistinct.
S. Vbs. Cabsule inversely esg-shaped, with 3 blunt 
edges, 3 keels growing to tnem, and 3 valves opening 
uxioer the keels, 1 celled.
S^SDS numerous, like saw-dust.
Receptacle strap-shs^ed, 
growing to each valve of the seed-vessel.
CYPRIPEOIUM.
Tourn.
249.
Calceolus.
Cal. Sheath scattered.
Fruit-stalk undivided.
Cup none.
Bloss.
Petals 4 or 5, spear-shaped, very long, expand- 
ing, upright.
jNectary within the lower petal, shaped like a slipper, 
blown up, blunt, hollow, shorter and broader than the 
petals; the Upper Lip small, egg-shaped, fiat, bent 
inwards.
Stam.
Filaments 2, very short, standing on the pistil.
Anthers upright, covered by the upper lip of the nec- 
tary.
PiST.
Germen beneath^ long, twisted.
Style very short.
Sowing to the upper lip of the nectary.
Summit in« 
stinct.
S. Vess.
Capsule inversely esg-shaped, with 3 blunt 
edges, and 3 seams, under wmch it opens at the angles; 
Valves 3; Celli.
128 1>IANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
» 
Seeds numerous, very small.
Receptacle stes^-dmnii 
growixig lengthwise to each valve ot the seed-vessel.
LEM'NA.
Mich.
11.
3, 
» Male flower.
Cal. 1 leaf, circular, opening at the side, obliquely di- 
lated outwardly, blunt, expanding, depressed, large, 
entire.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 2, awUshaped, crooked, as long $is the 
calyx.
Anthers double, globular, short, permaiient.
Pist.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style short.
Summit indis- 
tinct, 
S. Vess.
barren.
Female flower on the same plant.
Cal. as above.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen somewhat ^g-shaped.
Style shon, per* 
manent.
Summit simple.
. , ^ ' 
S. Vess.
Capsule globular^ tapering to a point ; with 1 
cell.
Seeds several, oblong, acute at each end^ nearly as long as 
the capsule, scored on one side.
Obs. Perfect hermaphrodite flowers have sometimes been 
observed.
(Schreb.J 
SA'LIX.
ToMftt, 364.
Maleflowers, 
Cal. Catkin oblong, tiled on every side.
JbwdieGrum 
forming a bud, which is composed of 
Scales, inclosing a single flower, oblong, flat, ex- 
panding.
' 
Bloss.
Petals none.
Nectary a cylindrical gland, very small, lopped^ con- 
taining honey, placed in the centre of the flower.
Stam.
Filaments 2, straight, thread-shaped, longer than 
the cup.
Anthers double, with 4 cells.
Female flower.
• 
Cal. Catkin as above.
Scales as above.
Bloss.
none, • 
PIANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA; IS9 
PisT.
Germen egg-shaped^ taperine into a Style hardly 
distinct from me germen^ rather longer than the scales 
of the calyx.
Summis ^5 cloven, upright.
S. Vess.
Qtpsule es^-awl-gh^ped^ with l cell> and 2 
valves.
Vdlves romng back.
SfiEDs numerous^ egg-shaped^ very small^ crowned with 
undivided hair-^liki down.
Obs. Stamens in some species 3 or &» unequai in length.
In the S.
kermaphroditica the stamens and pistils are within the 
same calyx.
Link— In some species the filaments, in others 
the anthers, are united.
ScH&EB.*— Ip S.
monandria there is 
only 1 stamen.
FRAX'INUS.
ToMcw. 343.
GiErin.49* 
Hermaphrodite flowers.
Cal. none, or a Cup of 1 leaf^ with 4 divisions^ upright^ 
small, acute.
Blos.
none 5 or Petals 4, strap-shaped, long, acute, up- 
right.
St AM.
Filaments 9, upright, much shorter than the 
blossom.
Anthers upright, oblong, with 4 furrows.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped, compi€ssed.
Style cylii^drical, 
upright.
Summit rather thick, cloven.
S. Vess.
spear-shaped, compressed> membranaceous, with 
1 cell.
Seed spear-shaped, compressed, membtanaceous,of 1 cell.
Femafe flowers.
Empal.
Bloss.
PtsT.
S. Vess.
and Seed as above.
Obs. In Frax.
excelsior, the hermaphrodite flowers are fre^ 
quently interspersed with female ones, 'and the reverse.
This 
has neither blossom nor calyx.
Likn.-— Capsule, egg^obiungi 
leaf-like upwards, 2-celled,but 1 cell barren.
Gartn.
DIGYNI4.
ANTHOXANTHUM, PI.
II.
fig.
\. 
Cal. Husky 2 valves containing 1 flower* Valves con- 
cave, eeg*shaped, taper, the innermost the largest.
Bloss* Husk Q valves, the length of the larger valve of 
the calyx.
Each valve sends out an awn from its back, 
at the lower part, and 1 of the awns is jointed* JVexv 
tary 2 leaves, very slender, cylindrical.
The leaves 
nearly egg-shaped, and one enfolding the other.
Stam.
Filaments 2, hair-like, very long.
Anthers ob- 
long, forked at each end.
VolTi* K 
136 DIAKDRIA.
MONOGYNtA.
AsT.
derfken^AAbng.
Sif^^ 9> lliread-shaped.
SummtU 
undWided.
S, Vess.
The Husks of the blossom grow to the seed.
%B&t> single^ nearly cylindrical^ tapering at each end.
Obs. It was very justly remarked to me by Miss Giddy,* 
that the valves 6f the blossom are shorter than the calyx, and 
so they are figured very properly in the Flora Danica^ 6S6 ; 
and less distinctly s0 in the iig.
referred to above^ 
asatts 
CLASS III.
TRIANDRIA.
Contamng Piamts^ with 3 Stamem in each Flmver, 
X HIS Qass cott^rehends, besides other plants, the 
greater part of the G&assrs, and some other vegetables 
nearly allied to them* Although the flowers in these are 
generally disregarded,, they will not, to an attentive ob* 
server, appear less curiously constructed^ than those which 
boast of gayer colours ana more conspicuous parts.
The great solicitude of Nature for the preservation of 
grasses la evident from this^ that the more the leaves are 
consumed, the more the roots increase^ The great Author 
of Nature designed^ that the delightful verdure of these 
plants should cover the surface of me earth, and that they 
should afford nourishment to an almost infinite number of 
animals.
But what increases our admipation most> is, that 
although the Grasses constitute tbepriAcipal food of her-- 
bivorous animals, yet, whilst they are left at llb^y in the 
pasture, they leave untouched the straws which support 
the flowers; that the seeds may ripen and sow themselves.
Add to this, that many of the seemingly <kyand dead 
leaves of Grasses revive, and renew their verdure in the 
spring.
And on lofty mountains, where the summer heats^ 
are hardly sufficient to ripen the seeds^.
the most comnvjn 
TRIANDRIA.
131 
Grasses are, the Fbstuca ovina, the Poa alphia^ and the 
AiRA aespitosaj all which are viviparous, and consequently 
propagate themselves without seeds.
In general, the leaves fiimish pasturage for cattle ; the 
smaller seeds are food for birds, and the larger for men.
But some are preferr^ to others; as, the Festuca for 
Sheep ; the Poa for Oows ; the Phalaris for Canary- 
birds and linnets ^ -the AvENA for Horses; theSECALB^ 
HoRDEUM, and Triticum for Man.
Variety of Insects also derive their nourishment fiponi 
grasses ; as the Papi/io miBrayPap.^geria, Pap. Galathea, 
Fap. Jurtiria^ Pap. Cinxiaj Phaksna qttercifma, Ph, Po- 
tatoria.
Ph. culmellay Ckrysomela Graminis, and several 
others, which will be mentioned under the different species.
No part of Botany appeared to m^ more difficult than 
the study of Grasses; but the method of accurate dissec- 
tion and observation once adopted, no part was more cer- 
tain or more easy.
However, when the great importance 
of the subject is considered, we cannot labour too much to 
fix the public attention to it, by rendering it as easy as 
possible: for which reason the exceptions are carefully 
noted under such subdivision of the orders, and in the fol- 
lowing plate an example is selected from each genus, taken 
from the Amoenitates Academics of Linnoeus.
To gain a 
clear idea of the structure of the flowers, they must be 
examined just before the Anthers discharge their Pollen ; 
and by comparing^ them in that state with the figures in 
the plate, and with the generic description, the principal 
difficulties will soon be surmounted.
The Botanic Mi- 
croscope will be found extremely usefol in dissecting the 
minuter parts.
EXPLANATION of PLATE II.
Ite. 1, Az^tHOXAN'TBUM.
a a husks of the calyx, b ^c 
awn of the inner valve of the blossom, twisted 
and jointed, c the straight awn of the outer 
valve of the blossom, d ci the two anthers.
e e the two styles.
Fxo« 9.
Schgs'nus.
The six petals, the tl>ree stamens^ 
and anthers ; the germens, the style, and the 
summit cloven into three parts.
182 TRIANDRIA: 
Fig. 3.
Cype'rus.
a the tiled spike pointing from two 
opposite lines, b the scale of the calyx, ccc 
the anthers, d the style, e e e the summits^ 
FiGr 4.
SciR^pus.
If the tiled spike, a the scale of the 
calyx, cc e the stamens and anthers, d the 
germen^ a little woolly.
Fig. 5.
Erioph^orum.
a. the woolly tiled spike, b the 
scale of the caljrx including the hairy germen, 
the stamens^ and the pistil.
* 
Fig. 6.
Nar'dus.
A the spike pointing one way.
err 
the blossoms.
£ one of the florets a little 
magnified, a the lower and larger valve which 
embraces the smaller valve b, which is here 
drawn out of its natural situation, ccc the 
anthers.
Fig. 7.
Pan'icum.
b b the two equal valves of the 
calyx, a the third smaller and outer valve.
€ c the valves of the blossoms, id d the aur 
thers.
e e the downy summits of the styles.
Fig. 8.
Alopecu^rus.
a a the valves of the calyx.
b the single valve of the blossom, -with the awn 
c proceeding from its base, ddd the anthers.
FiG.
9. Phle'um.
a a the husks of the calyx, opened 
and magnified to shew the blossom, b the 
floret in its natural state to shew the two points 
at the top of it.
ccc the anthers.
Fig. 10.
PhaWris* a a the keeled husks of the calyx..
b b the husks of the blossom, c c the anthers* 
Fig. H.
Mil'ium.
a a the husks of the calyx, ii i the 
anthers, c c pencil-shaped summits.
Fig. 12.
Agro'stis.
a a the two-pointed valvea of the 
calyx, b b the two valves of the blossom.
ccc the anthers.
Fig. 13.
Dac'tylis.
tf the outer and larger valve of the 
calyx, b the shorter valve, c the keel -shaped 
valve of the blossom, ee.e the ahthers.
d the 
panicle pointing one way.
Fig. 14.
Sti'pa.
a a the valves of the calyx.
^ -the 
outer valve of the blossom, with the awn 
jointed at the base and twisted, c the inner 
valve of the blossom., d d the downy awn.
e e 
the hairy shafts and summits, fffthe anthers .
Fig. 15.
Ai'ra.
a a the calyx, b b the blossoAua, 
without the rudiment of a third betwixt them.
TRIANDRIA.
133 
Fio« 16.
Mel^ica.
a a the calyx, b bihe fertile blos-» 
soms with e the rudiment of a third blossom 
^ betwixt them.
Fig. 17.
Bri'za.
a a the valves of the calyx, b bb b b 
the blossoms^ of which the outer valves only 
are visible.
B one of the blossoms taken out 
of the little spike, c c the outer heart-shaped 
valve of the blossom, dd the inner valve 
inversely egg-shaped.
Fig. is.
Po^a.
A an entire little spike, a a the two 
husks of the calyx, tbbvb the blossoms.
B 
one of the florets separated from the little spike.
c the outer valve, d the inner valve of the 
blossom, ee e the forked anthers, ff the 
woolly summits.
Fig. IQ.
Festu'ca.
a a the valves of the calyx, blbbbbl 
the blossoms of the little spike terminating in 
acute points, c the inner valve of one of the 
blossoms.
Fig. 20.
Bko^Mus. a a the calyx, h bb\h& blossoms, 
the outer valves only of which are visible, 
with the awns growing from beneath the 
point.
Fig. 21.
Ave'na.
a a the valves of the calyx, bib 
the florets, the outer valves of which are fur- 
nished with a twisted jointed awn, growing 
from the back, d dd the inner valves, cccc c£ 
the anthers.
Fig. 22, Arun^do.
a a the valves of the calyx, b b h 
the woolly blossoms.
Fig. 23.
Seca'le.
a a the valves of the calyx, bb bb 
the blossoms ; the inner valve of which is flat, 
but the outer concave and furnished with 
an awn.
c c the spike-stalk with its little 
teeth.
Fig. 24.
Trit'icum, a a the blunt valves of the calyx, 
embracing the three blossoms b b b^ the outer 
valve only of which is seen, furnished with an 
awn.
c c the spike-stalk.
Fig.
^5.
HoR^DEUM.
aaaaaa the six valves of the 
calyx, two of which belong to each of the 
blossoms bbb.
ccc the long awns of tl)e outer 
valves of the blossoms, e e the naked spike- 
stalk as it appears after the florets are pulled ofi*.
134 TRIANDRIA, 
Ti<i.
S6.
E^LYMUs. aaaaaa the valves of the calyx^ 
two of which belong to, each little spike hoh^ 
e the calyx as it appears after the little spikes 
are taken away.
Fig. 27.
Lo'uuM.
a a a the calyxes of one valve.
b h b the little spikes consisting of several 
florets, c one of the florets opened to shew 
the two valves of the blossom.
Fig. 28.
Cynosu'rus.
(A) the spike pointing all one 
way, composed of the florets (B) in which a 
represents the involucrum with many clefts ; 
b b the valves of the calyx, containing several 
florets, and c c the florets.
Fig. 29.
Ca'rex.
a the tiled catkin, c the scaly 
calyx of the fertile floret, d the nectary clo- 
ven at the top.
b the germen, and s the 
styles taken out of the nectary: hhfi the 
summits, e the scaly calyx of the barren floret, 
with the three stamens/ //*.
Fio. 30» Hol^cus.
a a the barren florets on short 
pedicles, b the fertile floret, ftimishedwith 
stamens and pistils.
Fig. 31.
Rottbol'lia.
aaaaa joints of the spike- 
stalk, be be be be valves of the calyx placed 
outwards, the edges of one lapping over those 
of the other.
FiQ.
32.
Lagu^rus.
a an entire spike, b a floret apart.
c the bloss.
containing the seed.
j_, GRASSES F/, jr.
bfivnt J-.
V34-: 
J/ .
/. 'J ti'iif/ aM/> .1^6.
I. 
X. 
i t 
w ^ -r' 
TRIANDMA.
135 
TRIANDRIA (3 Stamens.) 
MONOGYNIA ( 1 Pistil.) 
Valeriana.
Scirpus* 
Bryonia.
Cyperus^ 
Ruscus.
SchoBnus.
Crocus.
Carex.
Iris.
Typha.
Nardus.
Sparganium.
Eriopkorum* 
DiGTNtA (9PiStiIsO 
Phcdaris.
Dactylis.
Pamcim.
Cynomrus.
Pfdeum.
Festuca.
Ahpecurus.
Bromus.
Milium.
Stipa.
Asrostis, Avena^ 
liolcus.
Amnio.
Aira.
Lolium» 
Melica.
BoUioUia.
Sesleria.
Elymus.
Poa. Hordeum.
Briza.
Triticum.
Trioynia (3^ Pistils.) 
Amaranthus.
Hohsteum^ 
Montia..
Polycarpon* 
Tillcea.
Enneaoynia (9 Pistili.) 
Empetrum.
136 TRIANDRIA.
MONDGYNIA, 
T R I A N D R I A.
MONOGYNU.
VALERIANA.
Toum.
52.
Gcdrtn.
86.
Cal. hardly any, but a border on th^ germen.
Bloss.
Ttibe beUied on the under side, containing honey.
Border with 5 clefts.
Segments blunt, 
Stam.
3, or fewer than 3, awl-shaped, upright, as long as 
the blossom.
Anthers roundish.
PiST, G^9ii«n beneath.
S/v2?
thread-shaped, as long as 
the stamens.
Summit thickish.
S. Vess.
a crust, not opening, deciduous, crowned* 
SsEDs solitary, oblong.
Obs. There is a wonderful diversity in the parts of the 
flowers in different species of Valerian, as well in number as in 
figure.
Linn.— Thus, in Valer.
rubra, the flowers have only 
1 stamen ; in Val. dioica, the stamens and pistils are on dif- 
ferent plants.
BRYONIA.
Toum.
28.
Goertn, 88.
M(de flowers.
^Ai«« Cuf 1 leaf, bell-shaped, with b awl-shaped teeth.
Bloss.
with 5 divisions, bell-shaped, fixed to the cup« 
Segments egg-shaped.
Stam.
Filaments 3, very short.
Anthers 5, only 1 onjthe 
. 3d filament, but & on each of the others growing 
together.
Fenude flowers on the same plant, 
Cal, Cup as above, superior, deciduous, 
Bloss, as above.
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Styh with 3 clefts, as long as the 
blossom when open.
Summits notched at the end| 
spreading.
S. Vess.
Serrv roimdish, smooth.
Seeds few, enclosed in distinct cells, 
Obs, In the Bryonia dioica the stameniferous, and pistil- 
liferous, or male and female flowers, are found on different 
plants.
TRIANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
137 
RUS'CUS.
Tmmi.
15.
Gaertn.
10.
. 
Male flowery.
Cal. Cub with 6 leaves^ upri^ht^ but expanding.
Leqfits 
egg-snaped^ convex^ the edges at the side r^ected.
Bloss.
none, unless you consider every other leaf of the 
. cup as such.
riectary egg-shaped, central, as large as the cup| 
blown up, open at the rim, upright, coloured.
Stam.
FiUments none.
Anthers 3, expanding, placed 
upon the end of the nectary, united at the base» 
Female flowers.
Cal. Bloss.
and Nectafijy as above.
PiST.
Germen oblong egg-shaped, hidden within the nec- 
tary.
Style cylindrical, as long as the nectary.
Summil 
blunt, OTOjectinff through the mouth of the nectary.
S. Vbss.
jBerni globular, with 3 cells.
Seeds S, globmar.
Obs. In this and other genera nearly related to it, it i$ 
seldom that all the seeds come to perfection ; for the most 
part one seed takes to enlar^re, and by pressure destroys the 
othen* 
CRO'CUS.
Taum.
184.
CJal. Sheath 1 leaf.
Bloss.
Tube simple, long.
Border with 6 divisions, 
. upri^t.
Segments equiu, oblong, egg-shaped.
Stam.
Filaments 3, awl-shaped> shorter tna^ the blossom.
Anthers anow-shaped.
i 
PiST.
Germen beneath, roundish.
Style thread-shaped, 
as long as the stamens.
Summits 3, rolled in a spiral, 
serrated.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, with 3 lobes, 3 cells, and 3 
valves.
Seeds severalj, round.
FRIS.
Tmm. IS6, 188.
GiBrtn.
13.
Cal. Sheaths 2 valves, separating the flowers, permanent.
Bloss.
with 6 divisions.
Segments oblong, blunt.
The 
3 outer ones reflected, the other 3 upright, more acute, 
all connected together by the claws, so as to form a 
tube.
138 TRIANDRIA.
MONOGYIflA.
Stam.
Filaments 3, awl-shaped, lying upon the reflected 
s^ments.
^72/A^i^..Qblox>g}.8traight,vaeprqps^« 
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong.
Style simple, very short.
Summits,3y very large, resembling petals j keeled with- 
in, farrowed on the outside, leanmg on the stamens, 
2-lipped, outer lip small, notched at the end ; inner 
lip la^er, cloven, a little bent inwafds.
S. Ves, Oapsule oblong, angular, with 3 cells and 3 'valves.
Seeds several, large.
Obs. In some species the nectary is a long line marked oi> 
the base of the reflected petals, and set with hair-like sub- 
stances, in others there are 3 nectariferous dots at the base of 
the flower on the outside.
In some the capsule has 3, in others 
6 angles.
Linn.
— ^The outer lip of the summit performs the 
proper ofRce of the summit.
(Schkuhr.
from Schreber.) .
NAR'DUS.
PI.
2. f.
6. Schteh 7.
F. G.
E. D.
C;H.
Cal. none.
3los.
2 valves.
Otiter valve lonff, spear^strap-shaped, 
sharp pointed, enclosing the Lesser Valve, which is 
strap-shaped, and sharp pointed.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-liKe, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Gei-men oblong.
Style single, thread-shaped, long, 
downy.
Summit undivided.
S. Vess.
none; the blossom adheres to the seed, witHout 
opening.
Seed single, enclosed in the blossom, long and narrow, 
tapering to a point at each end, the upper part narrowest.
ERKyPHORUM.
PL XL f.
5. Gcerfn.
2. 
Cal. Spike tiled on every side.
Scales separating the 
florets, ^g-oblong, flat, but bent inwards, membra- 
naceous, limber, tapering to a point.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like.
Anthers upright, oblong.
PiST.
Germen very small.
Style thread-shaped, as bng 
as the scale of tne calyx.
Summits 3, longer than the 
^tyle, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Seed 3 -cornered, tapering to a point, furnished with soft 
hairs, which are longer than the spike.
TRIANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
I3§ 
Obs. The presence of the stamens and pistils is diffbrent in , 
some of the species ; in some they are as described above, in 
the same floret ; in others in different florets on the same or 
on different plants.
(Schreb.) 
SCIR'PUS.
PI.
11.
f. 4.
Tmrn.
300.
Gce^tn.
2. 
Cal. Spike tiled on every side, the florets separated by 
ScaleSy which are egg-shaped, flat, but bent inwards.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 3, which continue growing longer.
' Anthers oblong.
Fist.
Germen very small.
Style thread-shaped, long.
Summits 3, hair-like.
S. Vess, none.
Se^o sii^Ie, 3-comered, taper pointed, sometimes fur- 
nished with soft hairs, whicl^ are shorter than the 
calyx.
Obs. Soft hairs in some species grow to the point, in others 
to the base of the seed.
Linn.
— In Scirpus palustris, there 
are only 2 summits.
(Leers.) In >thi$ genus all the scales con- 
tain fertile florets, whilst in the Schoenus the lower scales arc 
always barren.
CYPE'RUS.
PI.
II.
fig, 3.
Tourn.
299.
Gcertn.
2. 
Cal. Stoike 2-rowed, tiled.
Scales egg-shaped^ keeled, 
flat, out bent inwards, separating the florets.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 3, very short.
Anthers oblong, fur- 
rowed.
PiST.
Germen very small.
Style thread-shaped, very 
long.
Summits 3, hair-like.
S. Vess.
none.
Seed single, 3-comered, tapering to a point, without hairs.
. SCHCENUS.
PI.
II.
f. 2.
Cal. Husks chaffy, of 1 valve, crowded together.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like.
Anthers oblongs upright.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped, somewhat 3-comered, blunt* 
Style bristle-shaped, as long as the husks.
Summit 
slender, with 2 or 3 clefts.
S. Vess.
none.
Seed single, roundish, within the husks.
IM TRIANDRIA- MONOGYNIA, 
Obs. In some species the seeds are surrounded by small 
bristles growing to the proper receptacle.
LiNN.^-Outer husks 
hard, stiff, short, empty.
Upper or inner husks soft, longer, 
fertile.
St. Lower husks barren, upper ones fertile ;.
but in 
the genus Scirpus, they are all fertile, and this seems the best 
distinction of the two genera.
(Scop.) 
CAHEX.
PL IL fig.
29.
Tourn.
300.
Cyperoides.
G<;er/n.2.
Male flowers forming a spike.
Cal. Catkin oblong, tiled, consisting of Scqles, each in- 
cluding a single floret, spear-shaped, acute, concave, 
permanent.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 3, bristle-shaped, upright, longer than 
the inclosing scale.
Others upright, long, strap- 
shaped.
Female flowers the sa^e, but sometimes (m distinct 
plants.
Cal. Catkin as above, 
Bloss.
Petals none.
Nectary inflated, oblong egg-shaped, with 2 or.
3 
teeth at the end, contracted towards the upper part, 
mouth open, permanent.
PiST.
Germen 3 -cornered, within the nectary.
Style 
simple.
Summits 3 or 2, awl-shaped^ bent inw^ds, 
long, tapering to a point, downy.
S. Vess.
none.
The nectary enlarging contains the seed.
Seed single, egg-shaped, but pointed, 3 -cornered, one of 
the angles generally smaller.
Obs. In some species the male and female florets are.
in separate spikes, though on the same plant.
Linn.
In 
others, on distinct plants, and in others again in the same 
spike.
What in the flowering state Linnasus calls the nectary, 
in its mature state performs the office of a seed-vessel, and is 
then called a capsule.
It has an open mouth, through which 
the summits issue from the top of the germen; this mouth 
sometimes closes, sometimes remains open ; in some species it 
is entire, in others it has 2 pointed teeth at the end.
TYTHA.
Tourn.
30\.
Gcertn.^.
Male flowers numerous, forming a catkin at the end 
' of the straw.
Cal. Catkin cortimon, cylindrical, very closely set, con- 
sisting of Individual Calyxes with 3 leaves, bristle- 
riiapcd.
tRIANDRIA.
DIGVNIA- Hi 
Blo8s.
none.
Stam, Filaments 3, hair-like, as long as the calyx, jin- 
tkers oblong, pendent.
Female nowets numerous, set exceedingly closi^ 
forming a catkin, which surrounds tlie stem.
Cal. none.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Gennen sitting on a little bristle, egg-shaped.
Style 
awl-shaped.
Summit hair-like, permanent.
S. Vess.
none.
Fndt very numerous, and forming a 
cylinjder.
Seed single, egg-shaped, furnished with a style sitting on 
a bristle.
Down hair-like, fixed to the bristle which 
supports the seed, fj-om its base to its middle, as long 
as the pistiL 
SPARGA'NIUM.
Tour?i.
302.
Gcprtn.
19, 
Male flowers numerous, collected into a little head.
Cal. Common Catkin roundish, tiled very closely on every 
side, consisting of Proper Cups with 3 leaves, strap^ 
shaped, deciduous.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like, as long as the cup.
ytn^ 
ihers oblong.
Female flowers.
Cal. as above.
Common Receptacle roundish.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Gennen egg-shaped, ending in a short awl-shaped 
Style, Summifs 1 or 2, acute, channeDed, pennanent.
S. Vess.
DrMj&a juiceless, turban-shaped, but terminated 
by a point, angular beneath.
Seed a Nuty hard as bone, oblong, e^^shaped, angular^ 
Obs. The seed in some with .1 cell, in others with 2.
TovRN.
quoted by Linnaeus.
DIGYNIA.
PHAL'ARtS.
PI.
II.
f. 10.
Qferin.
80.
Cal. double, containing 1 flower.
Outer Husk 2 valves, compressed.
Valves boat- 
shaped, compressed, keeled, acute, nearly equal ; edgcp 
straight, parallel, approaching.
ti2 TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
tnnery 2 valves.
Valves spear-shaped, acute, small, 
pubescent, resting against the back of the blossom at 
the base^ 
Bloss.
2 valves, smaller than the calyx.
Valves oblong, 
concave, sharp ; the innermost the smallest.
Nectary 2-Ieaved 3 leafits spear-shaped, tapering to a 
point, transparent, greenish, bulging at the base.
Stam.
Filaments 3^ hair-like.
Anthers oblong, forked.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Styles^^ hair-like, united at 
the base.
Summits woolly.
S. Vess.
none.
The blossom grows to the seed like a 
crust, and does not open.
Seed single, egg-oblong, tapering to a point, smooth.
Obs. In our Pbalaris arenaria (thePhleum arenarium of 
linnasus) the calyx is single, but not being lopped, or furnished 
with 2 spit-points, accords less with the genus Phleum tham 
with that of Phalaris.
PA^NICUM.
PI.
II.
f. 7.
Gcertn.
I. 
Cal. Htisk 2 valves, contsdning 2 florets.
Valves nearK^ 
egg-shaped, fibrous, the outer rather lower, very ^mall.
One floret hermaphrodite, the other either male or 
neutral.
Bloss.
of the hermaphrodite floret, aifiks&of 2 valves j 
valves nearly egg-shaped, gristly; Outer convex, its 
edges embracing the Inner Valve, which is smaller and 
flatter.
Neutral or Male floret, a Husk of 2 valveg, tfie Outer 
(placed in the bosom of the smaller valve of the calyx) 
flattish, fibrous; Inner valve membranaceous, flat, its 
edges turned inwards, generally small.
rTectary 2-leaved, very small, bulging.
In the 
neutral floret none.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like.
Anthers oblong.
PisT.
German roundish.
Styles 2, hair-like.
Summits 
feathered.
S. Vess.
none; the blossom adheres to the seed, and does 
not open.
Seed single, covered, roundish, but flatted on one side.
, Oiafs.
Overlooking the inner valve of the neutral floret, the 
outer seems to belong to the calyx, so that most Botanists have 
mentioned the calyx as having 3 valves, one of them very 
small.
— Valves generally 4.
The 1*^ or outermost; the Znd 
opposite to the outermost, and covering the outer valve of the 
tRIANDRIA.
blGYMA.
us 
blossom 5 the 3/*rf opposite and similar 'to the 2d J the Ath 
between the 3d and the inner valve of the blossom, flat, mem- 
branaceousy and generally smaller than the 1st.— *Mr. Curtis 
has seen and figured it in the f.
Cnisgalli, f.
5,6,; but calls it 
a membrane between the calyx and bloss.
It exists in the 
P. glaucum, viride, fniliaceum, capillare, patens^ and even in the 
sanguinale^ where, still observing its proportion to the.outer 
valve, it is with difficulty discovered.
In the patenSy with the 
assistance of the 3rd valve, it performs the office of a blossom, 
inclosing 3 naked stamens.
In the P.
Dactj/hn there are only 
2. St.
PHLE^UM.
PL II.
f. 9.
G^tn.
K 
Cal. Husk 2 valves, including a single floret; obfong,' 
stra{>-shaped, compressed ; open at the end, and fur- 
nished with 2 dagger points.
Valves equal, straight, 
tjoncave, compressed | one embracing the other ; 
lopped ; with a sharp point at the end of the keel.
Bloss.
2 valves, shorter than the calyx; Outer Falvfi 
embracing the Inner Valve^ which is smaller* 
Nectary^ leaves ; leafits egg-shaped, concave, acute 
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3 ; hair-like ; longer than the calyx*^ 
Anthers oblong, forked at each end.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Styles 4\ hair-like ; reflected..
Summits feathered.
S. Vess.
none.
The calyx and the bloss.
inclose the 
seed.
Sebd single ; roundish.
Ob8.
In Phleum armarium the florets are e^-spear-shaped 
and the calyx not lopped, on which account it is now referred 
to the genus Phalaris.
ALOPECU'RUS.
PL II.
f. 8.
Gcertn.
1. 
Cal. Husk 2 valves, containing 1 floret.
Valves egg- 
spear-shaped, compressed, equal, united at the base.
Xloss.
1 valve, egg-spear-shaped, concave^ rather shorter 
than the calyx, its edges united at the base.
Awik 
twice as long as tl>e blossom, jointed, fixed on the 
back of the bloss.
towards its base.
Nectary none.
Stam.
Filaments 3j hair-like, flattish at the bottom, 
longer than the calyx.
Anthers forked at each end.
144 tRIANDRiA* DIGYNIA.
PisT.
Qermen roundish.
Styles 2, hsur-like, united at 
the ba^> longer than the calyx.
Summits woolly* 
S. Vbss.
none; the blossom inclosing the se^d^ 
Seeu egg-shaped^ covered*^ 
ObS.
In Alop; agrestis the calyx is of one piece, divided 
'i^thcr more than half way down* Alop* mtmspeliensis and 
panicdis have S^^alved blossoms.
MFLIUM.
'Pi. IT.
f. 11.
Toufn.
298.
Cal. Htisk 2 valves inclosing a single floret.
Valves egg- 
shaped^ tapering to a point, nearly equal.
Bloss.
2 valves, smaller than the calyX.
Valves egg- 
shaped ; 1 smaller.
Nectary 2 egg-shaped blunt leaiits, bulging at the 
base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like, very short.
Anihers 
oblong» 
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Styles 2 5 hair-like.
Sutmniis 
pencil -shaped.
S. Vess.
The blossom incloses thfe seed, which is very 
smooth.
Seed single, covered, roundish.
Obs. Blossom in thq M.
efusum nearly as long as the 
«alyx.
St, 
AGRO'STIS.
PI.
11.
f. 12.
Cal. Husk 2 valves, inclosing 1 floret, tapering to a 
point, somewhat smaller than the blossom.
Bloss.
2 valves tapering to.
a point, one Value larger, 
bulgng at the base.
(Schreb.) 
rfectary 2 acute leafits, 
Stam.
Filaments three ; hair-like; longer than the bloss.
Anthers forked.
Pist.
Germ^ roundish.
Styles Q; reflected, woolly.
Summits set lengthwise with stiff hairs.
S. Vess.
The blossom adheres to the seed without opea* 
Seed single; cylindrical, but tapering towards each end.
Obs. Scopoli says the Agr. capillaris has only 1 petal: but 
with us it has 2, though the smaller one, from its minuteness^ 
might easily be overlooked.
In all our Species the calyx is 
' longer than the blossom.
TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
145 
HOUCUS.
PI.
II.
f. 30.
Hermaphrodite florets, sitting.
Cal. Husk of 2 valves, nearlyegg-shaped, blunt, leather- 
like, awnless, containing 1 floret.
Valves, outer one 
large, concave, with about 3 teeth at the point, embrac- 
ing the inner valve, which is oblong, the edges rolled in.
Bloss.
Husk 2 valves, delicate, woofly, smaller than the 
calyx.
Outer valve smaller, placed within the inner 
valve of the calyx, mostly cloven, awned.
Awn 
growing out of the deft, longer or shorter, jointed, 
twisted ; sometimes absent.
Nectary of 3 leafits, 2 of them gristly, lopped ; the 
third opposite, egg or spear-shaped, woolly.
Stam.
tiiaments 3, hair-like, very delicate.
Anthers 
oblong, cloven.
PiST.
Ger?7ie72 egg-shaped.
S/yfe 2, hair-like, diverging.
Summits oblong, downy.
S. Vess.
none.
The husks of the blossom and of the 
calyx inclose the seed.
Seed solitary, e^-shaped, covered, easily shedding, armed 
with the awn of the blossom.
Male florets smaller, on foot-stalks, solitary or in 
pairs, standing by each hermiaphrodite floret.
Cal. Husk 2 v3ves.
ydlves egg-spear-shaped, rather 
acute, chaflf-like, awnless.
OtUer valve concave, em- 
bracing the inner, w;hich is narrower.
Bloss.
Husk 2 valves, smaller, delicate.
Outer valve 
within the iianer valve of the calyx, shorter, with 2 
teeth, awnless.
Inrier valve with its edges turned in.
Nectary as above.
Stam.
Filaments 3, as above.
PiST.
Germen small, angular, barren.
Styles 2, like 
. bristles.
Summits none.
Obs. In the Holcus lanatus, the blossom of the male flower 
only is awned, and in the H.
mollis, both florets are herma- 
phrodite, the upper one only awned.
AaRA.
PI.
II.
fig.
15.
G(Ei'tn.
1. 
Cal. Husk 2 valves, containing 2 florets.
Valves egg- 
spear-shaped, equal, acute.
Bloss.
2 valves, resembling those of the calyx.
No rudi- 
ment of a flower betwixt the florets.
Vol. I.
L 
146 TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
Nectary 2 leafits, acute, bulging at the base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3y hair-like, as long as the blossom.
Anthers oblong, forked at each end.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Stifles 2, like bristles^ ex-^ 
pandiitg.
Summits pubescent.
S. Vess.
nohcr The blossom incloses and adheres to the 
seed.
S££i> nearly egg-shaped, covered.
Obs.^ Flprets from 2 to 3 in each calyx.
(Reich.) The 
species with awns have the structure of Avena, those without^ 
that of Poa» so that this may be considered as an artificial 
genus.
St.
ME'LICA.
PLIL fig.
16.
Gcsrtn, 80.
Cal. Husk 2 valves, containing 2 floret*.
Valves egg- 
shaped, concave, nearly equal.
Bloss.
2 valves.
Valves egg-shaped, awriless, one con- 
cave> the pther flat and smaller.
Betwixt the 2 florets 
there is a small turban-shaped substance standing on a 
pedicle.
Nectary 1 leaf, fleshy,, horizontal, surrounding the 
germen.
Stam.
Filaments 3 y.
hairJike, as long as the blossom, 
thicker, and united at the base.
Anthers oUong^ 
forked at each end.
PisT.
German inversely egg-turban-shaped.
S^les 2, 
like bristles, expandmg, oaked ^t the base.
/Summits 
oblong, woolly.
S. Vess.
none, the blossom incloses- the seed until it ripens.
Seed single, egg-shaped, farrowed on one side.
Obs. The rudiment of a third floret standing upon a little 
fruit-stalk betwixt the other two florets, gives the essential cha- 
racter of this genus.
It consists of two rudiments^ or florets^ 
lopped, alternate.
The husks rolled spirally inwards,^ and pel- 
lucid.
Linn.— To this may be added, the union of isbe stamens 
art the base, and the nectary of I leaf.
(Schreb.) When ther« 
is only one floret in each calyx^ the rudiment is placed be- 
tween the inner valve of the calyx and the blossom.
SESLE^RIA.
(Scop.
Arduin.
Adanson.
HAtL.) 
Jacq.
ic.
i. Cynosurus.
Cal. Involucj-um, 2 leaves at the bottom of the ^ik^ or 
bunch.
Husk 2 valves, containing I, 2, or 3 flor€ts.
Valves egg-shaped, taper pointed, nearly equal.
TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
147 
Bloss.
Valves Qy oblongs compressed^ about the length 
of the calyx } tlie outer concave, embracing the inner, 
toothed at the end, the keel running out mto a short 
awn ; inner fiat with the edges folded in, cloven at the 
end.
Stam.
FUcmmts 3, hair'^like, longer than the blossom* 
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
of the length of the fflameiits.
Germen inversely 
^g-shaped, hairy^ Styles 9, bristle^shaped, upright, 
ISmnmits pubescent.
S. Vess.
/The blossom inclosing the seed.
Seed single, hairy.
Obs. The above descriptions were made from a collective 
view of the Sesleria sphaerocephala.
Arduin.
spec.
ii.
t.l7.
Hall.
ji^p.
Scheuch.
app.
ii.
m 30.
and the Sesl.
cserulea.
3t« 
PO'A.
PI.
II.
fig.
18.
Cal. Husk 3 valves, awnless ; containing several florets 
pointing from 2 opposite lines, and collected into an 
oblong e^-sbaped spike.
Vabm egg«shaped, tapering 
to a point.
. 
Bloss.
2 valves.
Falves egg-shaped, rather acute, con- 
cave^ ciKnnressed, somewhat longer than the calyx, 
skinny at tne edges* 
Nec(a$^ 2 leaves; leafits acute or ragged, l}ulging, 
at the base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Fihments 8, hair^like.
Anthers foi^ked at each 
end.
PisT.
Germen roundish.
Style 9, bent back, woolly.
Summits like the styles.
S. Vess.
The blossom adheres to the seed without open^ 
ing.
Seed single, oblong, compressed, tapermg at each end, 
covert by ^ biossom.
Obs, Different q^cies vary, much in the number of florets 
in each calyx, viz.
from 2 to 10, or more, and even in the 
same species the number is not very constant.
BRFZA.
H. II.
fig.
17.
Gisrtn.
l. 
Cal. ttisk d valves, expanding, containing several florets 
pointing from two opposite Imes, collected into a heart- 
shaped spiket.
Falves blunt^ heart-shaped, concave, 
equah 
l2 
148 TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA, 
Bloss.
2 valves, ^Laiver Valve the size and figure of the 
calyx.
Superior Valve small, flat, roundi«h, closing 
the hollow of the other.
Nectary 2 strap-shaped leafits, a little scolloped.
(Schreb.) 
St AM.
FiZflwe»^5 3, hair-like.
Anthers iMotkg.
. 
PisT.
Germen roundish.
Styles 2, hair-like, bent back.
Summits feather-like.
S. Vess.
none.
The blossom imchanged, contains the 
seed until it is ripe.
Seed single, very small, roundish, compressed.
# 
DACTYLIS.
PI.
II.
f. 13.
Cal. Husk 2 valves, containing many florets collected 
into an egg-oblong spiket.
Valves concave, keeled, 
convex, broader, and half egg-sh2U)ed on one side, 
narrower on the other ; inner valve larger.
Bloss.
2 valves.
Loner valve large, concave, acute, 
pointed or awned; inner valv^ spear-shaped, acute, 
cloven, scarcely shorter than the othep.
Nectaries 2, spear-shaped, tapering to ^ point, bulg- 
ing at the base.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair*tike, longer than tht blossom.
Anthers oblong, forked at each end.
PisT.
Getmefi egX'Shwped.
Styles 2, expanding.
Sum- 
mits feather-Tike.
S. Vess.
non^.
The blossom closes upon the seed imtil 
it is ripe.
Seed single, oblong, furrowed on oiie side.
^ • 
Obs. In some species there is only.
1 floret in each calyx, in 
others 9, 4, or more.
CYNOSU'RUS.
PI.
II.
f;28.
GcBrin.1.
Cal. Common Receptacle unilateral, often leafy.
Involu^ 
erum (sometimes) of 1 leaf, lateral!
Husk 2 valves, 
containing several florets.
Valves strap-shaped, equal, 
tapering to a point.
Bloss.
2 valves j mder concave, longer ; vmer flat, awn- 
less.
^ ^ 
Nectary 2 egg-shaped acute leafits, bul^ngatthe 
base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like.
Anthers oblong.
TtllANDRIA, DIGYNIA.
uq 
ViST.
Germ^ turban-shaped.
S/^fe^Sy woolly, reflected.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
none.
The blossom closely wrapping round the 
seed, and not opening.
Seed single, oblong, tapering at each «nd.
Obs. IrvDolucrum in most species with winged clefts, or like 
a comb.
Linn.— The number of florets is variable.
(Reich.) 
FESTU^CA.
PI.
II.
f. 19.
Cal. Husk 2 valves, upright, containing several florets 
collected into a slender spiket.
FdLues awl -shaped, 
tapering.
Iriferiar Valve the smallest.
Bloss.
2 valves.
Lozc^er and larger vaJve the figure of the 
caJyx, but larger, roundish, tapering, endmg in an 
acute point.
Nectary 2 leaves, leafits egg-spear-shaped, acute, 
bulging at the base; sometimes oT \ leaf, which is plano- 
concave, horizontal, notched at the end.
(Schreb.) 
St AM..
Filaments 3, hairJike, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
GlBTTnen turban-shaped.
Styles 2, short, reflected.
Summits simple, 
S. Vess.
none, the blossom closely invelopes the seed, and 
does not open again.
Seed single, slender, oblong, very acute at each end, 
marked with a longitudinal furrow.
Obs. In Festuca the outer valve of the blossom gradually 
narrows into an awn, in Bromus and Trificum, the awn is in- 
serted as it were, .
below the point of the valve, or the wlge of 
the valve swells out into a thin membrane on each side of tlu^ 
base of the awn.
In Fesfttca, the awn is an extension of the 
whole valve, in Bromus and Tritkum, only of the keel or mid- 
rib, as in Avena.
St.
BRO'MUS, PI.
II.
f. 20.
Cal. Husk 2 valves, expanding, containing several florets 
collected into a spiket.
Palves oblomg-egg-shaped, 
taper, awnless ; the Inferior Valve smaller.
Bloss.
2 valves.
The Infervor Valve large, the size and 
figure of the calyx \ concave, blunt, cloven, seiidii^g 
out a strsught Awn from beneath the end.
The Sitp^- 
rior Valve spear-shaped, small, awn-less..
150 TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
Nectary 2-leaved ; leqJUs ^g-shaped;^ acute^ bulg- 
ing at the base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3^ bair^-like^ shorter than the blossom.
Anthei's oblong, 
PiST.
Germen turbari<*8hapedy ending in 2 leafits, es^^ 
shaped^ delicatCj greenish and transparent^ notchea at 
the end, upright.
Styles 2, shorty reflected, woolly.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
The blossom shuts close upon, and adheres to 
the seed.
Seed single, oblongs eovered, convex on one side, furrowed 
on the other, 
STITA, PI.
II.
f. 14, 
Cal. Husk 2 valves, tapering to a point, flexible, inclos- 
ing 1 floret.
Bloss.
2 valves.
Outer Valve, its point terminated by a 
very long, straight, twisted awn, jointed at the base« 
Inner Valve strap-shaped, without an awn, as long as 
the outer valve.
Nectary 2-leaved ; leafits strap-spear-shaped, mem^ 
branaceous, bulging at the base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like.
Anthers strap-shaped.
PisT.
Germen oblong.
Styles 2, hairy, united at the base.
Summits downy.
S. Vess.
The husk adhering.
Seed single, oblong, covered, 
AVE'NA.
PI.
IL f.
21, Toum.
297.
Cal. Husk 2 valves, most frequently containing several 
florets loosely collected.
Valves large, loose, spear- 
shaped, bellymg, acute, awnless, 
Bl«Oss. 2 valves.
Inferic^ Valve the size of the calyx, but 
harder, somewhat cylindrical, bellying, tapering to 
a point at each end, sending out from its back an^u/», 
spirally twisted, and bent back as if jointed.
Nectary 2-leaved ; le^i^fits sp^sar-sbaped, bulging at 
the base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like, Archers obloi^, forked at 
each end.
PisT.
Germen blunt.
Styles 2, reflected, hairy.
Sum^ 
mits simple.
TRIANDHIA, DIGYNIA- 151 
S« Vess.
The Blossom shuts close xxpoa^ and adheres to 
the seed without opening again.
Seed sin^e, slafider, oblong, tapering to a point at each 
end, marked with a fiirrow lengthwise* 
Obs. The Awn proceeding from the back of the blossom 
and being twisted and jointed^ constitutes the essential cha* 
xacter ofthis genus* LinK.
LAGU'RUS.
PI.
II.
f. 32, G^tn.
u 
Cal. Husk l-flowered, 2-valved, Valves long^ strap- 
shaped, opea^ very slender, each ending in a downy 
awn.
Bloss.
^-valved, stronger than the calyx.
Owf^r valve 
longer, ending in 3 small straight awns.
Inner valve 
sm^dl, tapering to a point.
Awn from the middle of the 
back of tne outer valve of the blossom, twisted and bent.
Nectary ^kaved^ leqfiU spear-shaped, blunt, bulg- 
ing at the base.
Stam* Filaments 3, hair-like.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Germen turban-shaped, ^yles 2, bristle-shaped^ 
woolly.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
none.
The blossom adheres lo the seed.
Sbep single, oblong, covered, awned.
ARUN^DO.
H. 11.
fig.
22.
Cal. Husk 2 upright valves, contaiah^ 1 or more florets, 
Falves oblong, tapering to a point, awnless.
One Falye 
shorter.
Bloss.
2 valves, Falves as long as the calyx, oblong, 
tapering to a point, with soft down rising from the base, 
and nearly as long as the blossom.
Nectary 2-leaved, very minute.
(Schreb-) 
Stam.
FUanwnts 3, hair-iike.
Antners forked at each 
end.
^ 
PisT.
Germen oblong.
Styles 2, hair-like, reflected, 
woolly.
Suminits simple.
S. Vess* The blossom ailheres to tbe seed without opea- 
mg.
Seed sinde, oblong, tapering to a point at each end, fur^ 
nishea with long do\ni at the base* 
152 TRIANDRIA, DIGYNIA.
LO'LIUM.
PI.
11.
f. 27.
Cal. Common Receptacle lengthened into a spike.
The 
florets pointing from 2 opposite lines, and each pressed 
close to a bend in the straw.
Hitsk 1 valve, awl -shaped, permanent 3 standing op- 
posite to a bend in the receptacle.
Bloss.
2 valves.
Inferior Valve narrow, spear-shaped*, 
rolled inwards, tapering to a point, as long as the calyx.
Superior Valve shorter, more blunt, strap-shaped, con- 
cave on the upper part.
Nectary 2-leaved, leafits egg-shaped, blunt bulging 
at the base.
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filainents 3, hair-like, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Germen turban-shaped.
Styles 2, hair-like, re- 
flected.
Summits downy.
S. Vess.
none.
The blossom encloses the seed until it is 
ripe.
Seed single, oblong, compressed, convex on one side, flat 
and furrowed on the other, 
Obs. The angles in the spikc-rstalk lying in the same plane 
with the spikets of florets, supply the defect of inner valves to 
the calyx.
Linn.
But sometimes the calyx has a minute 
inner valve, as in the Lolium temulentum, 
ROTTBOULIA.
PI.
II.
f. 3.
(Linn.
fiU) 
Commjon Receptacle a long jointed spike-stalk, in a 
cylindrical spike; the joints alternately hollowed, and 
set with florets of 2 kinds ; one with a caljrx of 1 valve, 
hermaphrodite, sitting on the thickened projection of 
the receptacle ; the other 2-valved ; one on each side of 
the former, but rather lower, and alternating with it.
These are something smaller, and are either herma- 
phrodites or females, though in some species they are 
only of one of these 2 kinds.
Hertnapkrodites^ of 1 valve.
Cal. Htisk 1 valve, including 1 floret.
Valve gristly, 
egg-oblong, lopped at the base, often notched at the 
end, scored, closmg the hollow in the spike-stalkjoint 
like a, cover; the iiollow serving the purpose of an* 
other valve.
TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
153 
Bloss.
Husk % valves^ parallel to that of the calyx, and 
shorter.
Valves spear*sbaped, acute^ concave^ mem- 
branaceous, transparent and greemstu Ojiter valve 
longer^ its edges turned inwards.
Efectary 1 -leaved, spear-shaped^ blunt, membrana- 
ceous, transparent and greenish, longer than Xhtgermen* 
St AM.
Filaments 3, hair-Tike.
Anthers oblong, cloven at 
each end.
PiST.
Germen xMoTMg. S/yfes 2, thread-shaped.
Summlil^ 
obloi^, dpwuy, expanding, protruding.
S. Vess.
none.
The valve of the calyx confines the seed 
in the hollow of the spike-stdk, until the latter sepa- 
^rates at the joints.
Seed single, oblong.
. Hermaphrodite florets with 2 husks.
Cal. Husk 2 valves, containing 1 floret, placed trans- 
versely.
Valves gristly, oblong, sharp-pointed, scored; 
outer valve somewhat shorter 3 with a short awn.
£!X.oss.
Hiisk 2-valved, placed transversely.
Valves spear- 
shaped, membranaceous, shorter than the calyx; outer 
concave, longer 5 inner edges rolled inwards.
Nectary as abo^e, or else of 3 spear-shaped leafits, 
t^fjering to a point.
St AM.' as above.
PiST.
. Germen oblong, (or egg-shaped.) Styles 2, hair- 
like.
Summits as above.
S. Vess.
none.
The calyx and blossom protect the seed, 
which is fixed to the spike-stalk, until it separate at 
the joints.
Seed single, egg-shaped, or oblong.
Obs. The R.
incurvata has all the florets with 2 husk?, and 
the nectary of 2 leafits.
Sen re b.
. E'LYMUS.
PI.
II.
f. 26.
Cal. Common Receptacle lengthened into a spike.
Husk 4 leaves, pointing from two opposite lines, 2 of 
the leaves, which are awl-shaped, belonging to each 
little spike.
BiLOSs. 2 valves.
Outer valve large, tapering to a point, 
furnished with an awn.
Inner valve flat.
Nectary 2-leaved, lecifits oblong, acute, fringed.: 
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3 ; hair-like^ very short.
Anthers ob- 
long, cloven at the base.
154 TRIANDRIA.
DIGYNIA: 
PisT.
Germentasbaxi'Aiwped* S/^&f 2^ stmddfing^ hairy, 
bent inwards* Summits simple.
S. Vess.
none.
The blossom incloses the seed.
Seed single, strap-shaped, convex on one side, covered.
Obs. The calyx may be considM^d as a S-leared husk, 
«nd 2 of these husks growing together.
HORT>EUM.
PL II.
f. 25.
Toum.
^95* 
Ckyfjimon Receptade lengthened into a spike.
Cal. Husk 6 leaves^ containing 3 florets.
Florets sitting.
Leaves strap-shaped, tapenng to a point, distant, m 
pairs.
Bloss.
2 valves.
Lower Valve longer than Ae calyx, 
bellying, angular, e^^shaped, but pointed, ending in 
a long awn.
Inner Valve spear-shiiped, flat, smaller.
Nectary 2 -leaved ; fcq^5 egg-shaped, acute, fKnged.
(Schreb.) The length of the germen.
(St.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3, hairJike, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Germen egg-turban-shaped.
Styles 2, woolly, 
reflected.
Summits the same.
S. Vess.
none.
The blossom grows round the seed with- 
out openinff .
Seed sinde, oblong, bellying, angular, tapering at each 
end, furrowed on one side.
Obs. In some species all the 9 florets tliat grow together 
are fertile, and have both stamens and pistils ; but in others, 
the middle floret alone is fertile, and furnished with stamens 
and pistils; the lateral florets having only stamens.
LtKK.
TRITICUM.
PI.
II.
f. 24.
Toum.
292,293.
Gcertn^Hl,^ 
Cal. Common Receptacle lengthened into a spike.
Husk 
2 valves, containing about 3 florets.
Valves egg-* 
shaped^ bluntish, concave.
Bloss.
2 valves, nearly equal, the size of the calyx.
Outer 
Valve bellying, blunt, but pointed.
Inner Vaive^Bi.
Nectary 2-leaved ; iea^s acute, bulging at the base* 
(Schreb.) 
Stam.
Filaments 3 ^ bair4ike.
Anthers oUong, forked 
at each end.
PisT.
Germen turban-shaped.
Styles ^, hair4ike, re- 
flected.
Summits feather-lxke.
TRIANDBIA.
TRIGYNIA.
isi 
S. Vess.
none, Tlie blossom contains the seed until it is 
ripe.
Seed sii^Ie^ ^^^-oblong, blunt* at each end^ convex on 
one side, furrowed on the other* 
Ob8.
The outer valve of the blossom- in some species is fur« 
nbhed with an awn ; in others not.
The ifdddie iioret is fre^ 
quently male.
Linn.— The disposition of the spikets constitutes 
the only difference between this genus and Bromus.
Scop* 
TRIGYNIA.
AMARAN'THUS.
Tmrn.
1 18.
H. I.
K. L.
Male flowers on the same plant with the female one& 
Cai«, Oup, leaves b or 3y upright^ coloured, permanent^ 
spear-shaped, acute* 
Bloss.
none ; unless the calyx be considered as such* 
Stam* FiUmenis 5 or 3, hair-like, upright, but standing 
rather open, as long as the cup* Antners oblong, turn- 
ing about* 
Female flowers in the same bunch with the others.
Cal* Cup the same as the other* 
Bloss* none* 
PisT.
Germen eg^-shaped* Styles 3, short, awl-shaped« 
Summits simple, permanent* 
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, somewhat compressed, as 
is also the cup ; oi the size of the cup which contains 
it, and coloured like that, 3-beaked,cut round, 1 -celled.
Seed single, globular, compressed, large* 
Obs. There is only one species native with us, and that has 
but 3 stamens in a flower.
MONTI A.
Mich.
13.
Cal. Cup 2 leaves ; leqfits egg-shaped, concave, blunt^ 
upright, permanent* 
Bloss.
l petal, with 5 divisions; the 3 altemate segments 
smaller, and supporting the stamens* 
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like, as loi^ as the blossom, into 
which they are inserted.
Anthers sniall.
PisT* Germen turban-shaped.
Styles 3, woolly, expand- 
ing.
Summits simple.
S* Vess* Capsule turban-shaped, blunt, covered, of i cefl 
and 3 valves.
Seeps 3, roxmdish* 
Obs. The cup has fr^uently 3 leavesi and then there are 
often 5 stamens.
Linn.
156 TRIANDRIA.
.TRIGYMU; 
TILLiE'A.
Rose 2.
2. Gtsrin.
112.
. , 
Cal. Cwp with 3.
divisions, flat.
Segments egg-^haped^ 
large.
{Segments pointed, concave, approaching.
Rose.) 
Bloss.
PetcUs 3, e^-shapeid, pointed, nat, mosUy smaller 
than the cup.
petals cohcave.
Rose.) > 
Stam.
Filaments 3, simple, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers small.
- 
PiST.
Gennens 3.
Styles simple.
Summits h\\xnU 
S. Vess.
Capsules 3, oblong, tapering, reflected, as long 
as the blossom, opening lengthwise upwards.
Seeds 2, egg-shaped.
Obs.' THe T.
muscosa being the only species yet found with 
«s, and' its structure leading us to this class, it is placed here; 
hut the three foreign species having 4 stamens, 4 pistils, and 4 
capsules, the genus is properly arranged by linila^s, in tlie 
class Tetrandria, order Tetragynia.
' The fig.
of Gsrtner re- 
ferred to above, and also by.Schreber, is theT.
mmcosam its 
cultivated state, when it bears flowers with 5 stameps, 5 pistils, 
and 5 capsules.
• ,   _ » .
,1 
HOLO'STEUM.
JE.
&>/.
27.
. .
Cal. Qip 5 leaves.
Leqfits egff-sl\aped, permaneilt.
•feLOSS.
Petals 5, deeply dividea, blunt, equal.
' * 
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like, shorter than the blossom.
' ^n/Aer^ roundish.
' * •' 
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Styles 3, hair-like.
Summits 
bluntish.
S. Vess.
Capsule 1 cell, rather.cylindrical, opening at the 
top.
Seeds several, roundish.
Obs. H.
umbeU-atum has petals with 3 or 3 teeth ; stamen^ 3 
or 5; styles 3 or 4; capsule with 6 valves at its apex.
(Sclircb.) 
POLYCARTON.
Cal. Cvp 5 leaves.
Leafits egg-shaped, concave, keeled, 
ending in a sharp point, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, very short, egg-shaped, notched at the 
end, alternate, permanent.
Stam.
Filaments 3^ thread-shaped, half the length of the 
calyx.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Germen egg-shaped.
Styles 3, very short, Stim^ 
mits blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, of 1 cell and 3 valves.
'Seeds many, egg-shaped.
TRIANDMA.
ENNEAGYNIA, 157 
ENKEAGYNIA.
EMTETRUM.
Towm.
421.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cup with 3 divisions.
Segments egg-shaped^ per- 
manent.
Bloss.
Petals 3, oblong-egg-shaped, narrowest at the 
base, larger than the cup, shrivelling.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-hke, very long, hiuaging down.
Anthers upright, short, cloven.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cup as above.
Bloss.
Petals as above.
PiST.
Germen depressed.
Style hardly any.
Summits 9, 
bent back, but expanding.
S. Vess.
Berry round and flat, depressed, larger than the 
cup, with 1 cell.
Seeds 9, placed in a jointed circle, bulging on one side, 
angular on the other.
Obs. Sometimes, though very rarely, flowers have been 
found containing both stamens and pistils.
[ 158 , ] 
CLASS rv.
TETRANDRIA.
X HE Stamens in this dass are 4^ and all of the same 
length ; whereas in the class Didynamia^ which is like-^ 
wise composed of flowers of 4 stamens, the dtamens are 
unequal in length, 2 of them being long, and ^ short.
' *"'.i""i I 
TETRANDRIA (4 Stamens.) 
MONOGYNIA (i Pistil.) 
Dipsaciis* Centuncidus* 
Scabiosa, Sangulsorla* " 
Eriocauhn.
Epimedium.
SKerardia.
Cornus.
Asperula^ Parietaria.
Galium.
Urtka.
Hubia.
Viscum.
tiittorella.
Hipt)ophae4 
Plantago» Aicnemilla.
DiGYNiA (2 Pistils.) 
Buffonia.
Myrica.
Bettda.
Cuscuta.
Trigynia (3 Pistils.) 
Buxns.
Tetraoynia (4 Pistils.) 
Ilex.
Ruppia.
Potamogetcn, Sagina.
TETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
l*j> 
TETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNU.
DIPSA'CUS.
Tourn.
S65.
Geerln.
86.
Cal. Common Cup of many leaves containinjg many florets* 
Leqfits longer than tne florets, flexible, permanent.
Proper Cup superior, scarcely perceptible.
Bloss.
general, regular.
Individuals ox 1 petal, tubular.
Border with 4 clefts, upright; the outer Segment larger 
and more acute.
Stam.
Filaments 4, hair-like, longer than the blossom.
Aniliers fixed sidewise.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Style thread-shaped, as long a» 
the blossom.
Summit sunple.
S. Vbss.
none.
SvED solitary, resembling a square piUar, crowned with 
the entire margin of the proper cup.
Receptacle com- 
mon, conical.
Florets separated by long chaiT.
SCABIO'SA.
Team.
263.
264, Gcertn.
86.
Cal. Common Cup of many leaves, expanding, containing 
many florets.
The Leqfits sit ui>on, and surroimd the 
receptacle in several rows, the inner ones of which 
become gradually smaller.
Proper Cup double, superior.
Outer Cup shorter, membranaceous, plaited, per- 
manent.
Inner Cup with 5 divisions.
Segments awl -shaped, 
but very slender.
Bloss.
general^ regular, but mostly composed of irr^^ar 
florets.
Indwidaab of 1 petal, tabular, with 4 or 5 clefts, 
espsl or unequal.
Stam.
Filaments 4, between awl and hair-shaped^ limber.
Anthers oblongs fixed sidewise.
PiST.
Germen beneath, rolled in a proper sheath, like % 
little cup.
Style thread-shaped, as long as the blossom.
Summit blunt, obliquely notched at the end.
im TETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
S. Vess.
none.
Seed solitary, egg-oblong, rolled in a cover, variously 
crowned ty the proper cups.
Receptacle common, convex, chaffy or naked.
Obs. Outer blossoms generally larger and more irregular.
Seeds crowned differently in different species.
The florets hav- 
ing 4 or 5cleftSy afford a primary specific distinction.
Linn.
» * « 
ERIOCAU^LON.
PhiL Trans, vol.
59.
p. 246.
t. 12, 
Male and Female florets in a terminating hemis- 
pherical head; the former in the centre, me latter 
forming 2 rows in the circumference .
Cal. cominojiy scales numerous, roundish, concave mem- 
branaceous, black, fringed towards the top.
, 
JVfaZe florets, central, numerous..
Cup ^proper) 2 -leaved 5 leafits wedge-shaped, con- 
cave, fnnffcd.
Bloss.
I pet3, funnel-shaped, mouth 2-lipped, fringed.
Stam.
Filaments 4, thread-shaped, as long as the blosscmi.
, Anthers roundish.
Fewa/i?
florets in the circumference.
. .
.' 
Cup (proper) 2-leaved; leafits qgg-shaped^ con- 
cave, black, fringed at the top, tapenng at the base 
into a narrow claw.
Bloss.
2-petaled; petals oblong, concave, tapering atthe 
base mto narrow claws, fringed at the top ana on the 
back.
PisT.
Gerwiffw roundish, but flatted.
Style ^hon.
Sitm^ 
mits 2, thread-shaped, long.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, but compressed, fi-celled; 
Seeds sinootn, 1 in each cell.
Obs. This generic character is taken from the very excel- 
lent description of the Eriocaulon, given by Dr. Hope in' the 
59tlk vol.
of the Philos.
Trans, and though it may not apply to 
the whole genus, yet as the foreign species have not hitherto 
been sufficiently examined, whatever may be its place in the 
system hereafter, it was judged proper at present, to insert it 
where aa Engtish botanist would expect to ind it.
Mr. Hudson 
has sincecalled it Nasmtthxa, and^ven a genencdeisciTption 
which corresponds with the above, except in the following, par-r 
ticulars; Filaments shorter than the blossom.
Female florets 
in the circumference very numerous.
Oermen superior, double.
Style bristle-lrke, divided.
Seeds roundish.
TETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
I6i 
t 
SHEKARDIA.
Gcertn.
24.
Cal. Cup small ; with 4 teeth, superior, permanent* 
Bloss.
1 petal^ fimnel-shaped.
Tvhe cylindrical, long.
Border with 4 divisions.
Segments flat, acute.
Stam.
Filaments 4^ situated at the top of the tube.
An^ 
/iers* simple.
PisT.
Germen beneath, dquble, oblong.
Style thread- 
shaped, cloven at the top.
Summits little knobs.
' S.
Vess.
none.
Fruit oblong, crowned, separable length- 
wise into 2 3eeds.
Sbbds 2 ; oblong convex on one side ; flat on th^ other ; 
with 3 sharp points at the top.
Obs. The Sberardia arvensis has generally 5 or 6 teeth on 
the cup.
ASPE'RULA.
Cmt.Q4.9..
Cal. Cup small, 4 toothed, superior.
Bloss.
l petal, fimnel-shaped.
Tube long, cylindrical.
Border with 4 divisions^ segments oblong, blimt, 
reflected.
Stam.
Filaments 4 ; situated at the top of the tube.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen beneath, double, roundish.
Style thread- 
shaped, cloven at the top.
Summits knobbed.
S. Vess.
2 dry globular hemes adhering together.
Seeds solitary, roundish, large.
Obs. The dj^tinction between Asperula end GALiusf, 
taken from the jength of the tube' of the blossom, is sufficiently 
obvious in their respective extremes, but in some of the former, 
it becomes so short, that the 2 genera seem to run into one.
(Wigg.) 
GALLIUM.
Tmrn.
39- Gcerin.
24.
Cal. Cup very small, with 4 teeth, superior.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shaped, with 4 divisions, acute, 
without a tube.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, shorter than the bloss.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen double.
Style thread-shaped, cloven half 
way down, as long as the stamens.
Summits globular.
S. Vess.
2 dry globular berries ; united.
Seed solitary, large, kidney-shaped.
Vol. I.
M 
1«8 TETRANDRIA*.
MONOGYNIA.
Obs. In G.
cruciatum male flowers are sometimes found, 
and the number of stamens vanes, as likewise do the divisions 
of the blossom, from 3 to 5.
RU'BIA.
Toum.
38.
Cal. Cup very small, with '4 teeth, superior.
Blosts.
1 petal, bell-shaped, with 4 divisions, without a 
tube.
Stam .
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, shorter than the blossom .
Anthers simple.
PisT.
Germen beneath, double.
Style thread-shaped, 
cloven at the top.
Svmmits knobbed.
S. Vess.
2 smooth berries^ united.
Seed solitary, roundish, with a hollow dot.
Obs. The blossom has frequently 5 divisions.
Linx.
EX^ACUM.
G(ertn.
114.
Cax. Cup 4 leaves ; lecifits egg-shaped, blunt> upright but 
expanding, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, permanent.
Tule globular, as Ibng as 
the calyx.
Border 4 cleft.
Segments roundish, ex- 
pandinjgl 
Stam.
Fuaments 4, thread-shaped, fixed to the tube, as 
long as the border.
Anthers roundish.
^ 
PisT.
Germen roundish, filling the tube.
Style thread- 
shaped, upright, as long as the border.
Summit a 
knob.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, compressed, 2-furrpwed, 
2-celled, as long as the calyx.
Seeds numerous, fixed to the central receptacle.
LITTOREULA.
FLdan.
170.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves, upright.
Bloss.
Petal 1.
Tme as long as the cup.
Border with 
4 divisions, upright, permanent.
Stam.
Filaments 4, thread-shaped, very long, inserted 
into the receptacle.
Antliers heart-shaped.
Female flowers on the same plant.
Cal. none.
Bloss.
Petal 1, conical, mouth mostly with 4 clefts, 
permanent.
XETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
163 
PisT.
Germen obloisig.
Style thread-like^ very long, 
SumTfiit acute* 
S. Vbss.
The blossom investing the seed* 
Seed.
Nut of l cdl.
Obs. It has the flower of the Plantago, but not the fruit.
LiKN.
— Blossom with 3 ill-defined clefts.
Syst.pl.
and Hudson.
PLANTA'GO.
Taum.48.
Gcertn.
51.
Cal. Cup 4-clefted, very short, upright, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, permanent, shrivelling.
Tube cylindrical, 
but somewhat globular.
Bofider 4-cIefted, reflected.
Segments egg-shaped, acute.
Stam.
Filaments 4, hair-like, upright, exceedingly long.
Anthers rather long, compressed^ fixed sidewise.
PisT.
Geriw^n egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, half as 
long at the stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, with 2 cells, cut roimd.
Fartition' \oost.
» 
Seeds several, oblong.
Ofis.
The calyx in'some species is equal, in others unequal.
Link.
CENTUN^CULUS.
G^tn.
50.
Cal. Cupvnxh 4 clefts, expanding, permanent* Segments 
acute, spear-shaped, longer than the blossom.
Bloss.
l petal.
Tube somewhat globular.
Border flat, 
with 4 clefts,.
Scg 77^^7^f5 nearly egg-shaped.
Stam.
Filaments 4, nearly as long as the blossom.
Anthers 
simple.
PiST.
Germen roimdish, within the tube of the blossom.
Style thread-shaped, as long as the blossom, permanent.
Summit simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule globular, of 1 cell, cut round.
Seeds several, roimdish, very small.
SANGUISOR'BA.
M. don.
97.
Cal. Cup 2 leaves.
Lectfits opposite, very short, shed» 
ding.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shaped, with 4 divisions.
Segments 
egg-shaped, blunt, united by the claws.
^TAM.
Filaments 4, broader upwards, as long as the blos- 
som.
Anthers small, roundish.
M 2 
164 TETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
PiST.
Germen 4-comered, situated between the cup and 
the blossom.
S^y/e thread -shaped^ very short.
Summii 
blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule small^ with 2 cells, 
Sekds smalU 
Obs. The blossom has sometimes 5 clefts.
EPIME'DIUM.
Taitm.
117.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves.
Leqfits egg-.shaped, blunt^ concave, 
expanding, small^ placed directly under, not alterziating 
with the petals, shedding.
Bloss.
Petak 4, egg*shaped, blunt, concave, expanding.
Nectaries 4, as large as the petals,, leaning against 
them, glass-shaped, rounded at the bottomj, fixed to the 
receptacle by the rim of the mouth.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, pressing on the style.
Anthers oblong, ^upright, 2-celled, 3-valved, opening 
from the base upwards, the partition loose.
' PisT.
Germen oblong.
Styles shorter than the germen, 
as long as the stamens.
Summit simple.
S. Vess.
Pod oblong, tapering to a point, 1 -celled, 2« 
valved.
Seeds many, oblong.
COR'NUS.
ToiiTn.4lo.
G€erin.^.
Cal. Involucrum generally 4 leaves, including several 
florets.
Leqfits egg-shaped, coloured, deciduous, 3 
opposite, smaller, uttp very small, 4-toothed, superior, 
deciduous.
Bloss.
Petals 4, oblong, acute, flat, smaller than the in- 
volucrum.
Stam.
filaments 4, awl-shaped, upright, longer than the 
blossom.
Anthers roundish, fixed sidewise.
PiST.
Germen beneath, roundish.
Style thread-shaped/ 
as long as the blossom.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Drupa nearly globular, dimpled.
Seed a heart*shaped or oolong nut, with 2 cells.
. PARIETA'RIA.
Tmm. 289.
Two Hermaphrodite flowers inclosed within 1 flat 
involucrum of 6 leaves j the 2 opposite and outer leafiti 
the largest.
TETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
163 
Cal, Cup 1 leaf with 4 clefts, flat, blunt, the size of half 
the involucrum.
Sloss.
none, unless the cup be considered as such.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, longer than the cup, 
bursting it open, permanent.
Anthers double.
PiST.
GerwCTi egg-shaped.
iS/^& thread-shaped, colbured.
Summit pencil -shaped, with a knob.
S. Vess.
none.
The, Cup becoming longer, larger, and 
bdl-shaped, and its segments approaching, closes upon 
the seed.
Seed single, egg-shaped.
One Female flower placed between the other 2, 
within the same involucrum.
Cal. as above.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
as above.
S. Vess.
none.
Cup slender, inclosing the fruit.
Seed as above.
URTFCA.
Town.
308.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves, circular, concave, blunt.
Bloss.
Petals none.
Nectary in the centre of the flower, glass-shaped; 
entire, narrower at bottom, very small.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, as long as the cup, ex- 
panding, 1 placed within each leaf of the cup.
Anthei's 
with 2 cells.
Female flowers upon the same, or upon a different 
plant.
Cal. Cup with 2 valves, egg-shaped, concave upright, 
permanent.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen ege-shaped.
Style none.
Summit woolly.
S. Vess.
none, tfup closing.
Seed single, egg-shaped, compressed, blunt, shining.
VIS'CUM.
Toum.
380.
Gcertn.
27- 
Male flowers.
Cal, Cup with 4 divisions^ haves egg-shaped, equal.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
4. Filaments none.
Anthers oblong, taperiog^ I 
fixed to each leaf of the cup.
166 TETRANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
Female flowers mostly growing opposite the other, 
Cal. Cup 4 leaves^ egg-shaped, small, sitting on the 
germen, deciduous.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong, 3 -edged, indistinctly 
crowned with a border with 4 clefts.
Style none.
Summit blunt, a little notched.
' 
S. Vess.
Berry globular, with 1 cell, smooth.
Seed single, inversely heart-shaped, compressed, blunt, 
fleshy, 
HIPPOTHAE.
Tmim.^Sl', Bhamnoides.
G(Brtn.4Q.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cup l leaf, divided into 2 parts, forming 2 valves, 
but joined at the base.
Segments circular, blunt, con- 
cave, upright, but the points approaching, open at th^ 
sides.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 4, very short.
Anthers oblong, angular, 
almost ^ long as the cup.
Fem>ale QjQwers.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, egg-oblong, tubular, club-shaped, cloven 
at the rim, deciduous.
, 
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Gerrhen roundish, small.
Style simple, very short.
Summit rather thick, oblong, upright, twice as long as 
the cup.
S. Vess.
.P^ny nearly globular, with 1 cell.
Seed single, oblong.
Obs. In H.
Rhamnoides, an hermaphrodite flower has some- 
times been found amongst the male flowers.
(Schreb.) 
ALCHEMIL^LA.
Tmrni.
289.
Gtertn.
73.
Cal. Cup l leaf, tubular, .permanent.
Rim flat, with 8 
divisions ; every other Segment smaller, 
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 4 awl-shaped, upright, small^ standing 
on the rim of the calyx.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
S^yfe thread -shaped, as long 
as the stamens, standing on the base of the germen* 
Summit globular.
TirrRANDRIA: DIGYNIA.
167 
S, Vess.
none.
The neck of the cup closes upon the 
seed, and does not open again.
SSED solitary, oval, compressed.
Obs. The Alchemilla vulgaris has sometimes 2 seeds.
DIGYNIA.
BUFFO^IA.
Cal. Cup 4-leaved, upright, permanent.
Leafits awl- 
shaped, keeled, membranaceous at the edges.
Bloss.
Petals 4, oval, upright, equal, notched at the 
end, shorter than the calyx.
Stam.
Filaments 4, equal, as long as the germen..
Anthers 
double.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped, compressed.
Styles 2, as long 
as the stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule oval, compressed, of 1 cell and 2 valves.
Seeds 2, oval, compressed, but marked with a little pro- 
tuberance ; convex on one side.
Obs. Loefling thought he once found 4 stamens, but after- 
wards altered his opinion.
Alstroemer often found 4.
Gerard 
sometimes 4, sometimes 2, rarely 3.
Linn.
BETULA.
Toum.
a60.
359.
Gcertn.
go.
Male flowers.
Cal. Catkin tiled on every side, limber, cylindrical.
Scales 3 -flowered, with 2 very minute scales, one on 
each side the larger scale.
Three equal florets fixed 
to the centre of each scale of the calyx.
Cup to each floret, of 1 leaf, small, entire, but with 
3 or 4 divisions.
Segments egg-shaped, blunt.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 4 (3, oi: 2) to each floret; very small.
Anthers roundish.
Female flowers on the same plant.
Cal. Catkin cylindrical, roimdish, tiled.
Scales 2- 
flowcred.
Bloss.
none.
PisT.
Germen to each flower, compressed, very small, 
. 2-seeded.
Styles 2, like bristles.
^ immits simple.
S. Vess.
none ; each scale of the catkin protects the seeds 
of 2 florets.
Seeds solitary, egg-shaped, 
\ 
1S8 TETRANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
Obs, In Betula albOf andB.
nana, the catkins are cylindrical^ ^ 
the scales 3-forked, and the seeds with a double lateral border.
In BMlntiSf the catkin forms a, kind of roundish cone, the scales 
arc circular, and the seeds are angular, not bordered.
Linn.
MYRFCA.
Gcertn.
39.
Male flowers.
Cal. Catkin ^g-oblong, tiled on every side, limber, con- 
sisting of iS:a/ei inclosing a single flower, crescent-, 
shaped, tapering to a blunt pointy concave.
Proper Cup, none.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 4, (rardy 6) thread-shaped, short, 
upright.
Anthers large, aouble, with cloven lobes.
Female flowers.
Cal. as above.
Bloss.
none.
PisT.
Germen somewhat egg-shaped.
Styles 2, thread- 
shaped, longer than the cup.
Summits simple, 
S. Vess.
Berry of 1 cell.
Seed single.
Obs. In Myrica Craky diere are 4 stamens.
The berry id 
dry, or like a leathery crust, compressed at the end, and 3" 
lobed.
Linn.
CUS'CUTA.
Towm.
422.
Gcertn.
62.
CJal. Cup 1 leaf, glass-shaped, 4-clefted, blunt, fleshy at 
the base.
Bloss.
1 petal, egg-shaped, a little longer than the cup.
Mouth 4-cIeft, olunt.
Nectary 4 scales, strap-shaped, cloven at the end, 
acute, imited to the blossom at the base of the stamens* 
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, as long as the cup« 
Anthei's roundish.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Styles 2, upright, short.
Sum^ 
mits simple.
S. Vess.
fleshy, roundish, 2-celled, cut round.
Seeds in pairs.
Obs. In some species five is the prevailing number in the 
partsof the flower.
LiN^r^ 
TETRANDRIA, TETRAGYNIA.
16» 
BUX'US.
T(mrn^345.
Male flowers projecting from the buds of the tree, 
Cal. Cup 3 leaves : leqfits circular, blunt, concave, ex- 
panding.
Bloss.
Petals' Q, circular, concave, resembling the cup,' 
but larger* 
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, upright, but expanding, 
generally longer than the cup, -^w^Aers upright, double..
PiST- Germen only a rudiment, without style or summit* 
Female flowers in the same bud with the others, 
Cal, Cup 4 leaves ^ leqfits circular, blunt, concave, ex- 
panding, 
BuOss. Petals 3^ circular, concave, resembling the cup, 
but larger, 
PisT.
Germen roundish, with 3 blunt edges, ending in 3 
very short permanent S/yfes.
Summils hXvjxt, rough 
with hair.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, with 3 beaks and 3 cells, 
opening elastically in 3 directions.
Seeds 2, oblong, roundish on one side, flat on the otha:.
TETRAGYNIA.
I'LEX.
Tourn.ZTli Aquifolium.
Cal. Cup 4-tqothed, very small, permanaat.
JBloss, 1 petal, with 4 divisions, wheel-shaped.
Segmenis 
roundish, concave, expanding, rather large, adhering 
by the claws.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, shorter than the blossom- 
Anthers small.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Styles none.
Summits 4, blunt.
S. Vess.
Berri/ roimdish, with 4 cells.
^ 
Seeds solitary, hard as bone, oblong, blunt, bellyiilg on 
one side, angular on the other.
Obs,.
Great variations take place in the flowers of the Ilex 
€tgidfolivm ; sometimes the stamens and pistils are found on 
distinct plants ; sometimes on the same plant, but in different 
flowers; sometimes again the flowers have 5 stamens; and 
frequently there' are male and female, as well as hermaphrodite 
flowers, on the same, or on different plants.
170 TETRANDRIA.
TETRAGYNIA.
POTAMOGETON.
Tmm. 1Q3.
Gcertn.
84.
Cal. none.
Bloss.
Petals 4, nearly circular, blunt, concave, upright, 
furnished with a little claw^ deciduous.
Stam.
Filaments 4, flat, blunt, very short.
Anthers dou-w 
ble, short.
ViST.' Germens 4ty egg-shaped, but tapering to a point.
Style none.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess, none.
Seeds 4, roundish, taper pointed, bulging on one side, 
flatted on the other, and angular.
RUFPIA, Gisrtn.S4.
Cal. Sheath, hardly any but what is formed by the base 
of the leaves.
Stieathed Fruit-stalk awl-shaped, undi- 
vided, straight, bending when the fruit ripens, beset 
with flowers which point in 3 opposite directions.
Cup none.
Bloss, none, 
Stam.
Filaments none.
Anthers 4, sitting, equal, some- 
what roundish, rather double.
Fist.
Germens 4 or 5, somewhat egg-shaped, approach- 
ing.
Style none.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
The seeds are supported upon little foot- 
stalks, thread-shaped, and as long as the fruiti 
Seeds 4 or 5, egg-shaped, oblique, terminated by a flat 
circular summit, 
SAGFNA.
Curt.
iii.
97.
&136,& 291 .
Cal. Cap4-leaved.
Leo^^i egg-shaped, concave, greatly 
expanded, permanent.
Bloss, Petals 4, egg-shaped, blunt, expanding, shorter 
than the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 4, hair-like.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Germen somewhat globular.
Styles 4, awl-shaped, 
bent backwards, downy.
Summits simple.
S^ Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, straight, with 4 cells and 
4 valves.
Seeds numerous, very small, fixM to the receptacle.
Obs. Sagina procumbens has flowers with or without petals.
S. apetala has no petals ; and in S.
ertcta the cup leatits are 
spear-shaped, tapering to a point.
(Reich.) The S.
apetala is 
not destitute of petals^ but they are very minute.
St.
t m } 
'- J 
CLASS V, 
PENTANDRIA.
X HE first division of the first Order of this class^ in- 
cludes the plants with Rough Leavcs ; which, Linnseus 
says, are mucilaginous^ and esculent.
Phil.
hot.
340.
A$ 
there is no seed vessel, the cup does not fall ofJ^ but re- 
mains after the blossom decays, and contains the seeds.
In the second division of this order, those plants which 
bear berries, and have a blossom composed of one petal^ 
are generally poisonous.
The third division of the Second Order consists of 
plants whose flowers are disposed in UMSELSor Rundles.
These are divided into such as have both a general and a 
partial Involucrum, such as have only a partial one, and 
such as have none at all ; but as the involucrums are 
not very constant, and in some species are apt to fall ofii 
and as the blossoms, stamens, and pistils, are so much 
alike as to afford but little assistance in the determination 
of the jgenera and species, the student is desired to pay 
particular attention to the seeds, which furnish the most 
unequivocal generic characters, and often come powerfully 
in aid of the specific character.
On this account, it is 
necessary to gather some specimens in which the seeds are 
nearly ripe, and others but just opening into flower.
The Umbelliferous Plants in dry situations are aromatic 
and carminative; in moist ones, acrid, and sometimes 
poisonous.
The greatest virtues are cont^dned in the seeds 
and roots.
Many of them are eaten at our tables, as the 
roots of Carrot and Parsnep, and the leaves of Celery.
Tbe seeds of Coriander and Caraway are used in con« 
fectionary.
172 PENTANDRIA^ MONOGYNIA.
PENTANDRIA, (5 Stamens.) 
MONOGYNIA.
(1 Pistil.) 
Myasotis.
liithospermum.
Anckusa.
Ch/noglo^stun, 
Pumimaria, 
Symphytum.
Borago.
Asperu^o.
Echmm.
Primula* 
Sfclamen, 
enycmthes.
Hoitonia^ 
Lysimachia.
Anasallis.
Axduea.
Convolvulus.
Folemxmium» 
Campanula.
Phyteuma.
Lobelia.
Samolus.
Lomcera* 
Jasione.
Verlascum.
Daitera.
Hyoscyamm.
Afropa.
Solanum.
Chironia.
Rhmmus.
Eumymus.
Viola.
Impfttiens, 
Riles, 
Hedera.
Illecelrupi* 
Glaux^ 
Thesium^ 
Vinca.
DiOYNlA.
(3 Pistils.) 
Hermaaria* 
Chenopodium, 
Atriplex.
Beta.
Saisola.
Vlma.
Swertia.
Gentiana.
Xantkium.
Eryfigium.
Hydrocotyk^ 
SanicuJa.
Bupleurum.
£chinophora.
TcrdyUum* 
Caucalis.
Daucus.
Bumum.
Conkim.
Selinum.
Athamanta.
Peucedanum.
Crithmum.
Heracleum* 
lAgusticum.
Angelica.
Stum.
Sison.
Oenantke.
Phellandrium* 
Cicata.
JEtkusa.
Coriandrum, 
Scandix.
Chcsrophyltum.
Imperatoria* 
Pastinaca.
Smyrmum.
Anethum.
Carum.
Pimpinella.
Apium.
j^gopodium* 
Vihurmim, 
Samlmmss* 
Trigynia.
(3 Pistils.) 
Staphylceat 
Tamartx^ 
Cdrrigicla.
Alsine, 
PENTANDRIA.
itoNOGYNIA- 
iTS^ 
Pamassia.
Statice.
Sibbaldia.
Myosurus.
Tetragynia.
(4 Pistils.) 
Pentagynia.
(5 Pistils.) 
Linum.
Drosera* 
PoLYGTNiA.
(many Pistils.) 
PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNU.
MYOSOTIS.
Gartn.6S.
Cal. Cup with 5 shallow clefts, oblong, upright, acute, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, salver-shaped.
Tuhe cylindrical, short.
Border flat, with 5 shallow clefts.
Segments blunt, 
notched at the end.
Mouth closed with 5 convex, pro- 
minent, approaching valves.
Stam.
Filaments 5, very short, in the neck of the tube.
Anthers very small, covered.
PiST.
Germans ^» Style thread-shaped, as long as the 
tube of {he blossom.
Summit blunt.
6. Vess.
none.
The Cup enlarged and upright contains 
the seeds within it.
8££DS 4, egg-shaped, tapering to a point, smooth.
Obs. In some species the seeds are smooth, in others set 
with hooked prickles.
LITHOSPER'MUM.
Tmm. 55.
Gcertn.
67.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, oblong, straight, acute, per- 
manent.
Segments awl-shap^d, keeled.
Bloss.
1 petal, mnnel-shaped, as Ibng as the calyx.
Tule 
cylindrical.
Border with 5 shallow clefts, blunt, up- 
nght.
Mouth open, naked.
114 PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYKIA* 
Stam.
Filan^ents 5, very short.
Anthers oblongs in the 
mouth of th^ blossom « 
PiST.
Germen 4.
Style thread-shaped, as long as the 
tube of the blossom.
Summit blunt, cloven.
S. Vess.
none.
The seeds are contained" in the bottom 
of the open cup, which is longer than the seeds.
Seeds 4^ egg-shaped, tapering^ hard, smooth.
ANCHU^SA.
Tmrn.
53.
Buglosum.
Geertn.
67* 
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, oblong, cylindrical, acute^ 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, funnel-shaped- Tube cylindrical, as 
long as the cup.
Border with 5 shallow clefts, blunt, 
a little expanding.
Mouth closed by 5 convex, pro- 
minent, oblong, approaching valves.
Stam.
Filaments 5, very short, in the mouth of the bloss.
Anthers oblong, fixed sidewise, covered (by the valves 
of the tube.) i 
PiST.
Germens 4.
Style thread-shaped; as long as the 
stamens^ Summit blunt, notched at.
the end.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup growing larger and upright in- 
closes the seeds.
Seeds 4, rather long, blunt, bulging.
Obs. When the blossom is fully expanded it is nearly 
salvcr-shaped.
CYNOGLO'SSUM.
Tomji.
57 & 58, OmpModes.
Gcertn.
67.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, oblong, acute, permanent.
Bloss.
l petal, funnel-shaped, as long as the cup.
Tvle 
cylindrical, shorter than the border.
Border with 5 
shallow clefts, blunt.
Mouth closed by 5 convex, pro- 
minent, approaching valves.
Stam.
Filaments 5, very short, fixed to the mouth of the 
blossom.
Anthers roundish, naked.
PiST.
Germens^.
S^yfe awl-shaped, as long as the sta?- 
mens, permanent.
Summit notched at the end.
'S.
Vess.
none, but the seed-coats of the four seeds, de- 
pressed, roundish, outwardly more blunt, rough, not 
opening, flattish upon the outer side 5 fix^dby their 
points.
PENTANDEIA.
MONOGYNIA.
176 
Sbsds 4, somewhat egg-shaped, bulging, tapering to a 
point, smooth.
Obs. The essence of this genus consists in the 4 seed-coats 
^xed to the style, each containing a single seed.
Link.
• 
PULMONA'RIA.
Toum.
55.
Cal, Cup 1 leaf, with 5 teeth, a 5-sided prism, per- 
manent.
Bloss.
1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Tube cylindrical, as long ; 
as the cup.' Border with 5 shallow clefts, blunt, up-, 
right but expanding.
Mouth open.
Stam.
Filaments 5, very short, in the mouth of the tube.
Anthers upright, approaching.
PiST.
Germens4.
S^^/<?
thread-shaped, shorter than the ' 
Clip.
Summit blunt, notched at the end.
S. Vess.
none.
The Calyx unchanged contains the seeds 
in its base.
Seeds 4, roundish, blunt.
SYMPHYTUM.
Tourn.
56.
Gcertn.
67.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, and 5 corners, upright, acute, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1- petal, bell-shaped.
Tube very short.
Border 
tubular, distended, thicker than the tube.
Rim with 5 
blunt reflected teeth.
Mouth of the Tube furnished with 
5 valves, spear-shaped, toothed at the edge, shorter 
than the border, approaching so as to form a cone.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, alternating with the 
valves in the mouth of the tube.
Anthers upright^ 
acute, covered.
PisT.
Gei'mens 4.
Style thread-shaped, as long as the 
blossom.
Summit simple.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup grows larger and wider.
Seeds 4 3 bulging, tapering, approaching at the points, 
BORA'GO.
Tourn.
53.
Gcertn.
67.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shaped, as long as the cup< Tube 
shorter than the cup.
Border with 5 divisions, wheel- 
shaped, flat.
Mouth crowned with 5 prominencies, 
which are blunt and notched at the end.
ire PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped^ approaching.
Anthert 
oblong, apj)roachinff, fixed to the inner side, and about 
the middle of the filament.
PisT.
Germens 4.
Styles thread-shaped^ longer than the 
anthers.
Summit simple* 
S. Vess.
none.
The cup grows larger, and inflated.
SEEIXS4, roundish, wrinkled, keeled outwardly towards 
the point, globular at the base^ lying lengthwise in a 
hollow of the receptacle.
1 Obs* The shape of the segments of the cup, and the size of 
. the tube of the blossom, are apt to vary^ Lin jf.
ASPERU'GO.
Tmim.
54.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, permanent, with 5 upright unequal 
segments.
Bloss.
I petal, funnel-shaped.
Tvle cylindrical, very 
short.
Border with 5 shallow clefts, blunt, small.
Mouth closed by 5 convex, projecting, approaching 
valves.
Stam., Filaments 5, very short, fixed in the mouth of the 
tube.
Anthers rather oblong, covered.
Fist.
Ge^rTwew^ 4, compressed.
S^yfe thread-shaped, short* 
Summit blunt.
.S. Vess,.
none.
The Cup very large, upright, compressed, 
the sides flat and parallel, indented.
Seeds 4.
oblong, compressed, in di&tant pairs.
LYCOP'SIS.
G4sertn.
67.
Cal. Gup with 5 divisions, permanent.
Segments ohlongy 
acute, open.
Bloss.
1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Tube cylindrical, crooked, 
Border with 5 shallow clefts, blunt.
Mouth closed by 
5 prominent, convex, approaching valves.
Stam.
Filaments 5, very small, fixed to the bend of the 
tube.
Anthers small, covered by the valved.
PiST.
Germens 4.
Style thread-shaped, as long as the 
stamens.
Summit blunt, cloven, 
S. Vess.
none.
Cup verylarge> bladder-shaped.
Seeds 4, rather long.
Obs. The essential character of this genus consists in the 
curvature of the tube of the blossom.
Likn, 
PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA; FTT 
fe'CHIUM.
Tourn.
54.
Cal. Cap with 5 divisions, upright^ permanent.
Seg^ 
ments awl-shaped, upright.
Bloss.
1 petal, oell-shaped.
Tube very short.
Border, 
gradually widening, with 5 clefts, blunt, upright.
Seg^ 
ments generally unequal, the 2 upper being the longest; 
the hwer smaller, acut^, reflected.
Mouth open.
St AM.
Filaments 5, as long as the blossom, awl-shaped, 
declining, unequal.
Anthers oblong, fixed sidewise.
PiST.
Germens 4.
Style thread-shaped, as long as the 
stamens.
Summit blunt, cloven.
S. Vess.
none.
The cup becoming more rigid^ contains 
the seeds.
Seeds 4, roundish, obliquely tapering to a point.
Obs. In the Echium italicum the blossom is nearly regular.
Linn.
PRIMULA.
Tourn.
47.
Giertn.
50.
Cal. Involucrum small, many leaved, including sev^al 
flowers.
Cup I leaf, tubular, acute^ upright, perma- 
n^it, with 5 angles, and 5 teeth« 
Bloss.
l petal.
Tube cylindrical, as long as the cup, ter* 
. minated by a short hemispherical neck.
Border expand- 
ing, with 5 shallow clefts.
Segments inversely heart- 
shaped, notched at the end, blunt.
Moufli open.
Stam.
Filaments 5, very short, within the neck of the 
blossom.
Anthers upright, approaching, tapering to a 
point, within the tube.
PiST.
Germm globular.
Style thread-shaped, as long as 
the cup.
Summit globular.
S. Vess.
Capsule cylindrical, nearly as long as the cup, 
which covers it, of 1 cell, opening at the top with 10 
teeth.
Seeds numerous, ^ roundish.
Receptacle oblong, egg- 
shaped, loose.
CY'CLAMEN.
Timm.
68.
Cal. C^with 5 shallow clefts, roundish^ permanent.
Segments egg-shaped.
Bloss.
l petal 5 Tube nearly globular, twice the size of the 
cup, small, nodding.
Border reflected upwards, verv 
Vol. I.
N 
17ft PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA- 
large, with 5 divisions.
Segments spear-shaped.
Neck 
protruding.
Stam.
Mlaipents 5, very small, in the tube of the Uos- 
som.
Ant Iters straight, acute, approaching^ in the 
neck of the blossom.
Fi$t.
Oermen rovmdisli.
,$tyle thread-shaped, straight, 
longer, than the stamens.
Summit acute.
S. Vess.^, Berry globular, of 1 cell, opening at the top in 
5 directions, covered by a shell like a capsule.
Seeds many, somewhat egg-shaped, but angular.
Recjep- 
tacle egg-shaped, loose.
MENYANTHES.
Tmm. 15, ^67, Nymphmdes.
Gcertn, 114.
Cal. Cup 1-leaf, with 5 divisions, upright, permanent.
Bloss; 1- petal, funnel-shaped.
Tuve short, somewhat 
cylindrical at bottom, out funnel-shaped upwards.
Border cloven more than half way down into 5 seg- 
ments.
Segments blunt, reflected and expanding;, re-t 
markably snaggy.
Stam.
Filaments 5> awl-sbaped, short, ^n/i&^rs acute^ 
upright, cloven at the base.
PisT.
Germen conical.
• Stifle cylindrical, nearly as long 
' as the btessom.
Summits cloven, compressea.
S. Vess.
Capsfule egg-shaped, of 1 ceU, bound round by 
the cup.
Seeds many,.
egg-shaped, minute.
Obs. In the M.
nymphQides, the petals are fringed at the 
edge, but no-t liaiiy on their upi>er surface.
Likk» 
HOTTO'NIA.
Curt.
i. 4.
Cal. Cwp 1 leaf, with 5 divisions.
Segments strwp^shzped, 
upright, but expanding.
/ 
Bloss.
1 petal, salver-shaped.
Tule as long as the cup.
Border with 5 clefts, flat.
Segments egg-oblong, 
notched at the end.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, short, upright, standing 
upon the tube, and opposite to the segments of the 
blossom.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Germen lobular, but tapering to a point.
Style 
thread- shaped, short.
Summit globular.
S. Vess.
Capsule globular, tapering to a point,, of 1 ocU^ 
' .standing upon the cup.
PENTANDWA.
MONOGYNIA.
IJi 
Seeds many^ roundish.
Receptacle globular^ larj^.
Obs. In the Hottonia palustris, the flowers have sometimes 
6 stamenSy and then the cup and blossoms have 6 divisions.
LYSIMA'CHIA.
Taurn.
59.
Gartn.
50.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, acute, upright, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shaped.
Tiibe none.
Border with 
5 divisions, flat.
Segments egg-oblong.
• 
Stam.
Filaments d, awl-shaped, opposite the segments of 
the blossom, -/in/ Aer^ tapering.
PjST., Germeh roundish.
Style thread-shaped^ as long 
as the stamens.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess, Capsule globular, sharp-pointed, of 1 cell and 
10 valves.
Skeds several, angular.
Receptacle very large, globular, 
dotted.
Obs. In some species the stamens are united at the base.
(Schreb.) In L.
thyrsiflora the segments of the cup and the 
blossom vary from 5 to 8> as does likewise the number of 
stamens.
ANAGAL'LIS.
Tourn.
59.
Gcertn.
50.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, acute, permanent.
Segments 
keeled.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shapred.
Tvle none.
Border with 
5 divisions, flat.
SegTnents egg-shaped, but rounded, 
connected by the claws.
Stam.
Filaments 5, upright, hairy towards the bottom, 
shorter than the blossom.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Oermen globular.
Style thread-shaped, rather lean- 
ing.
Summit knobbed.
S. Vess.
Capsule globular, of 1 cell, cut round.
SsiEEDS several, angulw.
Receptacle very large, globular.
AZA^LEA.
Gartn.63.
Cajl.
Cup with 5 divisions, acute, upright, small, co- 
louredf, permanent.
Bx«os$.
1 p^tal, bell-shaped, with 5 shallow clefts.
Seg^ 
ments vnth the edges bent inwards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, thread-shaped, growing on the re-» 
ceptacle, loose.
Anthers simple.
ISO PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Style thread-shaped^ as loflg 
as the blossom, permanent.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, with 5 cells and 5 valves.
Seeds many, roundish, 
Obs. The blossom in some species is funnel-shaped.
In 
some the stamens are very long, and declining.
Linn.
CONVOL'VULUS.
Tourn.
17.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, approaching, egg-shaped, 
blunt, small, permanent- 
Blos»« r petal, belUshaped, expanding, laige^ plaited* 
Border slightly 5-lobed.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awUshaped, half the length of the 
blossom.
Anthers egg-shaped, compressed.
Fist.
Germen roundish.
Style thread-shaped, as long a?
tRe stamens.
Summits 2, oblong, broadish.
S. Vess.
Capsule inclosed by the cup, roundish, of l cell, 
with 1, 2, or 3 valves.
Seeds 2, roundish.
Obs. The blossom has generally 10 notches, but sometimes 
only 5; and in some species it is funnel-shaped.
Lin^.
POLEMO'NIUM.
Tmm.6\.
GtBrtn.
62.
Cal. Cup beneath, of 1 glass-sli£^ed leaf, permanent, 
acute, with 5 shallow clefts.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shaped.
Tz^fc shorter than the cup, 
closed oy 5 valves, placed at the top of it.
Border with 
5 divisions^ large, flat.
Segments^ roimdish, blunt.
Stam.
Filaments 5, thread-shaped, inclining, shorter tham 
the blossom, standing upon the valves of the tube.
Anthers roundish, fixed sidewise.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped, acute, superior.
Style thread-* 
shaped, as long as the blossom.
Summit with 3 clefts, 
rolled batk.
S. Vess.
Capsule covered, egg-shaped, but with 3 angles, 
3 cells, and 3 valves, opening at the top.
Partitions 
opposite to the valves.
Seeds several, irregular, rather acute.
Obs. In p.
casrulewn, though the capsule is seamed as if 
composed of 3 valves, they only open at the top.
PENTANDRIA.
MONOGTNIA.
JBJ 
CAMPA'NULA.
Tourn.
37.
Gcertn.
31.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, acute, upright but expanding, 
superior.
Bloss, 1 petal, bell-shaped, with 5 shallow clefts, imper*- 
vious at the base, shrivelling.
Segments broad, acute, 
spreading.
Nectary in the bottom of the blossom, composed of 
5 valves, acute, approaching, covering the receptacle.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short, growing upon 
the points of the valves of the nectary.
Anthers com- 
pressed, longer than the filaments.
PiST.
Germen beneath, angular.
Style thread-shaped, 
longer than the stamens.
Summit thickish, oblong, 
with 3 divisions, which are rolled backwards.
S.Vess.
Cflp^wfc roundish, angular, of 3 or 5 cells, and 
letting out the seed at as many lateral holes.
Sebds numerous, small, fixed to a columnar receptacle.
Obs. Hie figure of the seed-vesselis uncertain...
In Camp.
Trachelium, it is 3-celled, wjoolly, and rough ; m C.
Rapunculu^ 
it is 3-celled, (^-shaped, and smooth ; in C.
kyhrida, it is 
3-celled, columnar, and prism-shaped.
141 kit.
PHYTEU'MA.
Tmm. 38, Raputiculus.
Gcertn, 30.
Cai..
Cup 1 leaf, with 5 divisions, acute, not quite up- 
right, but expanding, superior.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shaped, expanding, wkh 5 divisions.
Segments strap-shaped, acute, bent back.
Stam.
Filaments 5, shorter than the blossom • Anthers 
oblong.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Style thread-shaped, as long as 
the blossom, bent back.
Summit with 2 or 3 clefts, 
oblong, rolled back.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, 2 or 3 celled, opening at each 
by a lateral hole.
Seeds several, small, roundish..
. LOBE^LIA* Tourn.
51, Rapuntium, Ga*rtn, 25.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 clefts, very small, embracing the 
germen, shrivelling.
Little Teeth nearly equal, the 2 
upper ones pointing more upwards.
Bloss.
Petal \, irregular.
TTwZ'e cylindrical, longer than 
the cup, above divided lengthwise.
Border with 5 
I8i PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
divisions.
Segments spear-shaped^ the 2 Upper Ones 
smaller, more reflectea, more aeeply divided, forming 
the upper lip.
The 3 Lower Ones generally larger, 
and more expanding.
Stam, FilamerUs 5, awl-shaped, as lon^ as the tube of 
the blossom, united at the top.
Anthers connected so 
as to form an oblong cylinder, opening at the base in 
5 different directions.
PiST.
Germen beneath, tapering to a point.
Style cy- 
lindrical, as long as the stamens.
Summit blunt, rough 
with hair.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, with 2 or 3 cells, and 2 or 
3 Valves, opening at the top, encompassed by the cup.
Partitions opposite the valves.
Seeps many, very small.
Receptacle conical, 
SA'MOLtrS.
Tourn.
60.
Geertn.
30.
^ 
vCal. Cup with 5 divisions, superior, blunt at the base^ 
permanent.
Segments upright.
3toss.
1 petal, salver-shaped.
Ttibe open, very short, as 
long as the cup.
Border flat, blunt, with 5 divisions.
VaTves very short, approaching, fixed to the bottom of 
the clefts, in the border.
Stam.
Filaments 5, short, protected by the scales of the 
blossom.
Anthers approaching, covered.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Style thread-shaped; as long as 
the stamens.
iSummi^ knobbed.
S. Vess.
Capsule ^g-shaped, of 1 cell, and 5 valves, 
bbund round by uie cup.
Seeds many, egg-shaped, small.
Receptacle large, globular.
LONICE'RA.
Tourn, 378, Perklyrflenum.
Geertn.
27.
Cal. Cup superior, with 5 divisions, small.
Bloss.
1 petal, tubular.
Ttil^ oblong, bulging.
Border 
with 5 divisions.
Segments rolled backwards, 1 seg- 
ment more deeply separated than the others.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, nearly as long as the 
blossom.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Germen beneath, roundish.
Style thread-shaped, 
as long as the blossom.
Summit a blunt knob.
S. Vess.
Berry with 2 celjs, dimpled.
Seeds roundish, compressed.
PENTANDRJA.
MONOGYNIA.
iss 
Obs« In the Lonicera Periclytjiemtrnf the segments of the 
blossom are cut nearly to an equal depth, and the berries arc 
distinct.
LiKK, 
I 
JASIO'NE, Gcerin.
30.
dit.
Common Cup of 10 leaves, pennanent.
LeqfUs alter- 
nate, the inner narrower, inclosing several flowers 
upon very short fruit-stalks.
Proper Cup with 3 clefts, superior, permanent.
Bloss.
Individuals of 1 petal, regular, deeply divided into 
5 parts.
Segments spear-shaped, upright.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaj>ed, short.
Anthers 5, oblong, 
united at the base.
PisT.
Oermen roundish, beneath.
Style thread-shapec^ 
the length of the blossom.
Summit cloven* 
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, of 5 angles, and 2 cells, 
crowned with the proper cup^ opei>ing with a circular 
hole at the point.
Partition divided down the middle.
Seeds many, somewhat egg-shaped.
Receptacle nearly 
globular, loose, on a little foot-stalk at the base of the 
capsule.
Obs. The central florets are frequently barren, in which 
case the summit is club-shaped and undivided.
Linn.
VERBAS'CUM.
Toum.ei.
Gcsrtn.
55, 
Cal. Cup 1 l^f, with 5 divisions, small, permanent.
Segments upright, acute.
Bloss.
l petal, wheel-shaped, somewhat Unecjiual.
Tube 
cylindrical, very short.
Border with 5 divisions^ ex- 
panding.
Segments egg-shaped, blunt.
Stam.
FiSiments5, awl-snaped, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers roundish, compressed, upright.
PisT.
Germen roundish.
Style thi^ead-shaped, leaning, 
as long as the stamens.
Srnnmit rather thick and 
blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, with 2 cells and 2 valves, 
opening at the top.
Receptacle the slwipe of half an 
egg, fixed to the partition.
Seeds numerous, angular.
Obs. In most species the stamens are leaning, unequ49 
and the lower part of the filaments cloihcd with.sot't>coil9ured 
huir$.
Link.
.1 
' '- — "^ ••* 
184 PENTANDRIA.
RJONOGTNIA.
DATUTIA.
roam.
43, ^ 44.
Strammitm.
Cal, Chip 1 leaf, ob!ong, tubular, bellying, with 5 angles 
and 5 teeth, separating horizontally near the base, the 
remaining part irregular, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Tute cylindrical, gene- 
rally longer than the cup.
Border upnght but expand- 
ing, almost entire, with 6 angles, 5 tapering teeth, 
and 5 plaits.
Stam.
FilameTits 5, awl-shaped, as long as the cup.
jin- 
tkera oblong, blunt, compressed.
PisT.
Germen t^-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, straight.
Summit thick, blunt, composed of 3 flat plates.
S. Vess.
Capsule nearly egg-shaped, with 3 cells and 4 
valves, standing upon the remains of the cup.
Recep- 
tacle large, convex, dotted, fixed to the partition.
Seeds numerous, kidney-shaped.
Obs. The smootliness or thorny state of th« capsules is 
subject to vary.
LlXN.
HYOSCY'AMUS.
Toum.
42.
Geerln.
76.
Cal. Cap 1 leaf, tubular, bellying in the lower part.
Rim with 5 cleftS] acute, permanent.
Bloss.
l petal, funnel-shaped.
Tuhe cylindrical, short, 
Border upright, but expanding, with 5 shallow clefts.
Segments blunt, 1 broader than the rest.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awUshaped, leaning.
Anthers 
roundish, 
PisT.
GemiCTi roundish.
S(wfe thread-shaped, as long as 
the stamens.
Summit a knob.
S. Vess.
Capsule e^-shaped, blunt, marked with a 
groove upon each side, of 2 cells formed by 2 capsules 
closely pressed together, cut round, and with a lid 
opening horizontally.
Receptacle half egg-shaped, 
fixed to the partition.
Seeds numerous, unequal, 
ATBOPA.
Toum, 13.
Belladonna.
Cal. Cup l leaf, permanent, with 5 divisions, bulging.
Segments acute, 
Bloss.
l petal, bell-shaped.
Tube very short.
Bwder 
bellying, e^-shaped, longer than the cup.
Mouth 
smalt, with 5 clefts open.
Segments nearly equal.
?ENTANDRIA.
v MONOGYNIA.
1 85 
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped^ fixed to the base of^ and 
as long as the blossom^ ap{)roaching at the base^ but 
bowed outwards, and divei^ing towards the top.
An^ 
thers rather thick, rising.
PiST.
German half-egg-snaped.
Style thread-shaped, 
leaning, as long as the stamens.
Summit knobbed, 
transversely oblong, rising, 
S. Vess.
Berry of 2 cells, globular, sitting upon the cup, 
which enlarges.
Receptacle fleshy, kidney-shaped, 
^convex on both sides.
Seeds numerous, kidney-shaped^ 
SOLA'NUM.
Taum.
62.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts^i upright, acute, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, wheel-shaped.
Tule very short.
J5or- 
der large, plated, with 5 shallow clefts, turned back 
and flat.
,Stam.
Fthments 5, awl-shaped, very small.
Anthers ob* 
lon^, approaching, a little united, with 2 open pores 
at me end.
PiST.
Ger7?2^ roundish.
S/^Ze thread-shaped, longer than 
the stamens.
Summit burnt.
S. Vess.
Berry roundish, glossy, with a hollow dot at the 
end, and 2 cells.
Receptacle convex on both sides, 
fleshy.
SeEDs several, roundish, dispersed among pulp* 
CHIRCyNIA.
Towm.
48, Centaurium.
Gcertn.
114.
Cal. Cup l leaf, with 5 divisions, permanent, little leaves 
oblong, upright, acute.
Bloss.
1 petal, equal.
Tube narrower.
Border with 5 
divisions, expanding.
Segments egg-shaped, equals 
Stam.
Filaments 5, broad, short, growing from the top 
of the tube.
Anthers oblong, upnght, large, approach- 
ing, spirally twisted when £eir pollen is shed* 
Fist.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, a litde 
longer than the stamens.
Summit knobbed, rising up.
S. Vess.
Berry egg-shaped, of 1 cell, or Capsule 2-valvcd 
half divided into 2 cells.
Seeds numerous, small, fixed to the receptacle by the % 
opposite sides, or to the seam.
186 PENTANBRIA.
MONOGYNTA.
Obs. The seed-vessel jn some spedes is a berry, m^^tbers 
a capsale.
Link.
In Chironia caUaurium and pidchelia the 
bloss.
is funnel-shaped, and the summits bcine^hoc-shaped.
RHAM'NUS.
Toum.
366, & 383.
Frcmgalar.
Gcertn.
106.
Cal. Cup none, except the blossom be considered as such.
Bloss.
l petal, funnel-shaped, closed at the base,, rough 
outwardly, but coloured wit;Jiin.
Tube turbaii-shaped, 
cylindrical.
Border expanding, divided, acute.
Scales 
5, very small, 1 at the base of each division of the 
blossom, approaching inwards, 
Stam, Filaments as many as the segments of the blossom, 
1 awl^-shaped, rrowing upon the bloss.
under the scales.
Anthers small.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Sifyfc thread-shaped, as long as 
the stamens.
Summit blunt, divided into fewer seg- 
ments than the blossom, 
S. Vess.
Berry roundish, naked, divided into fewer cells 
than the blossom has segments.
Seeps solitaiy roundish, bulging on one side, compressed 
on the other.
^ Ob^s.
Rhamnus catharticvs has a 4-cleft summit and blos- 
som, and bears a 4-seeded berry, it also bears male and female 
flowers on separate plants.
Rh. Frangula has a 5-cleft blossom, 
a 4-seeded berry, and a summit notched at the end.
EUO'NYMUS.
Tmim.
388.
Gcertn.
113.
Cal. Cup I leaf, with 5 divisions, flat.
Segments roundish, 
concave.
Bloss.
Petals 5, egg-shaped, flat, expanding, longer than 
the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, upright, shorter than the 
blossom, standing upon the germen, as on a receptacle.
Anthers d6uHt.
PiST.
Germen tapering to a point.
' Style shorty simple.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule succulent, coloured, with 5 sides, 5 
* angles^ 5 cells, and 5^ valves.
Seed solitary, egg-shaped, inclosed ih a berry-like seed- 
coat.
' ' .
' 
PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA, is?
Obs. In some species 4 is the prevailing number in the parts 
of the Dower and fruit, aiid in others there are no filaments 
except the tapering points of thegermen* Likk.
VFOLA.
Toum.
236.
. , 
Cal. Cup 5-leaved, short, permanent ; fca^/5 egg-oblong; 
rather acute at the end, blunt at the base^ fixed above 
the base, equal but variously disposed ; 9 support liie 
upper petal^ Q the Q lateral petals^ and 1 supports the 8 
lower petals.
Bloss.
Petals 5, irregular^ unequal, the Upper straight, 
facing downwards_, Droader and blunter than the rest, 
notched at the end, terminating at the base in a blunt 
hom-like Nectary j projecting between the leaves of 
the cup.
Lateral Petals 2; opposite, blunt, straight.
Lower Petals 2 ; larger, reflected upwards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, very small, the 2 near the uppermost 
petal furnished with little appendages which enter the 
nectary.
Anthers genelrally unitecl, blunt, with mem- 
branes at the end.
PiST.
Germen roundish, superior.
Style thread-shaped, 
projecting beyond the anthers.
Swnmit oblique.
S. YESS.
Capsule egg-shaped, 3-edged, blunt, with 1 cell 
and 3 valves.
Seeds many, egg-shaped, fiimished with appendages, 
fixed to the vsuves.
Receptacle narrow, running like a 
line along each valve.
Obs. In some species the summit is a simple reflected hook» 
in others a little concave knob, perforated at the end.
. IMPATIENS.
Tourn.235, Balsamina.
Gcertn.
113.
* > 
Cal. Cup 2 leaves, very small.
Leqfits circular, but ta- 
Eering to a point, equal, placed at the sides of the 
lossom, coloured, deciduous, 
f LOSS.
Petals 5, gaping, imequal.
Upper Pe/a/ circular, flat, upright, with 3 shallow 
segments, tapering to a ..point, forming the Upper Lip.
Lotver Petals S, bent back, large, oroadest on the 
outer part, blunt, irregular, forming iht Lower Lip.
. 
IBS PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
Intermediaie Petals Q^ opposite^ from the base of the 
upper petal.
Nectary 1 leaf iike a hood^ receiving the bottom of 
the flower, mouth oblique^ rising outwards^ the base 
ending in a horn.
St AM.
Hlaments b, very shorty narrower towards the base, 
bent inwards.
Anthers 5, united, but separate at the 
base.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped, but tapqring to a point.
Style 
none.
Summit simple, shorter than the anthers.
S. Vess.
Capsule 1 cell, with 5 valves, which, opening- 
with a spring, roll up into a spiral.
Seeds many, roundish, fixed to a pillar-like receptacle.' 
Obs. In some species the intermediate petals arc wanting ; 
in others the nectary has no horn.
Capsule in some species 
long, in others egg-shaped.
RFBES.
Toum^ 409, Grossularia, Gcertn, 28.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts, belljang, perma- 
nent.
Segments oblong, concave, coloured, reflected.
Eloss.
5 petals, small, blunt^ upright, growing to the 
edgeof the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, upright, standing on the 
cup.
Anthers fixed sidewise, compressed, opening at 
the edges.
PiST.
Gerwew beneath, roundiiih.
5/yfe cloven.
Summits 
blunt.
S. Vess.
Berry globular, of 1 cell, dimpled.
Receptacles 
2, opposite, fixed to the sides, extending lengthwise, 
Seeds several, roundish, somewhat compressed.
Obs. In the Ribes alpinum^ the male and female flowers 
are sometimes found on ditfcrcnt plants.
(Leers.) 
HE'DERA.
Tourni 384.
GcBrtn.
26.
Cal. Invobicrum of the simple umbel very small, with 
many teeth.
Cup very small, with 5 teeth, binding 
round.
the germen.
Bix)S9.
Petals 5 J oblong, expanding, bent inwards at the 
points.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, upright, as long as the 
blossom.
Anthers fixed sidewise, forked at the base.
Pi ST.
Gerwe« turban-shaped,' bound round by the cup.
Style simple, very short.
Summit undivided.
PENTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
isd 
S. VESff. Berry globular, with 5 cells, 
SfiBDS 5, lar^^ bulging on I side, angular on the other^ 
covered with a seed-coat.
Obs, With us the bcrrj' has rarely more than 4 cells, and 
in general only 2 or 3 seeds attain perfection ; but sometimes 
I have found it with 5 cellsi, and 5 perfect seeds.
ILLE'CEBRUM, Toum.
288, Paronychia, 
Cal. Cup 5 leaves and 5 angles, gristly.
Letifits coloured, 
tapering to a point, distant at the points, permanent* 
Bloss.
none, 
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, within the cup« Anihers 
simple.
PiST.
Germen ^^-shaped, acute, ending in a short cloven 
style.
Summit simple, blunt.
S* Vess.
Cefsule roundish, tapering at each end, with 5 ^ 
valves and 1 cell, covered by the cup.
Seed single, very large, roundish, but acute at each end.
Obs« The fruit varies in several species.
Linn.
m 
GLAU'X.
ToMfTi. 60.
Cal. none, unless you consider the blossom as such.
Bloss.
Petal single, upright, with 5 divisions, bdl- 
shaped, permanent.
Segments blunt, rolled back.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, upright, as long as the 
blossom.
Anthers roimdish.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, as long 
as the stamens.
Summit a knob« 
S. Vess.
Capsule globular, tapering to a point, of 1 cell 
and 5 valves.
Seeds 5, roundish.
Recettacle very large, globular, with .
hollows where the seeas Ue.
THE'SIUM.
Jojcq.cmstr.^x^^ 
Cal. Cup \ leaf, permanent, turban-shaped, with 5 shal- 
low clefts.
Segments half-spear-shaped, upright, blunt.
Bloss.
none, unless yoii consider the cup as such, from 
its being coloured on the inside.
Stam.
Fthments 5, awl-shaped, inserted at the base of 
the se^ents of the cup, shorter than the cup.
Anthers 
roundish.
190 PBaSTTANDRIA.
DIGYNU.
« 
PiST.
Germen beneath, at the bottom 'of the cupi Siyk 
thread-shaped^ as long as the stamens.
Summit rather 
thick and blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
The cup contains the seed in its bottom^ 
without opening.
Seed single, roundish, covered by the closing cup* 
Obs. In the Thesium alpinum there are only 4 stamens in 
/ each flower.
Linn.
VIN'CA.
Town.
45.
Cal. Clip with 5 divisions, upright, acute, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, salver-shaped.
Tube longer than the cup, 
cylindrical in the lowep part, wider above, marked with 
5 grooves, and 5 angles at the moudl.
Border with 
5 divisions, horizontal.
Segments connected to the top 
of the tube, broadest at the outward edge, and obliquely 
lopped.
' - " 
Stam.
FildmerUs 5, very short, first bent inwards, and 
then backwards.
ArUhms membranaceous, blunt, up- 
right, but bowed inwards, with the pollen at the 
margins.
PiST.
Germans 2, roundish, with 2 roundish bodies lyings 
contiguous to them.
Style 1, common to both ger- 
mens, cylindrical, as long as the stamens.
Summit a 
concave knob, sitting on a flat circular substance.
S* Vess.
2 Air^hags^ cylindrical, long, tapering fo a point, 
upright, of 1 valve, opening'lengthwise.
Seeds numerous, oblong, cylindrical, furrowed, xiaked.
DIGYNIJ.
HERNIA'RIA.
Tourn.
288.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 divisions, acute, expanding, 
coloured, within, peraaanent.
Btoss.
neme.
Stam, Filaments 5, awl-shaped, minute, within the seg- 
ments of the cup.
Anthers simple.
There are 5 other 
barren filaments alternating with the segments of the 
cup.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style hardly any.
Summits 
2, tapering to a point, as long as the style.
PENTANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
igt 
S. Vbss.
Capskle small^ at the bottom of the cup> covered^ 
scarcely opening.
Sbed solitary, egg-Siaped, but tapering to a point, shining^ 
Obs. The II.
lenticulata is a little diflerent fronx the above 
character.
(Reich.) 
CHENOPCyDIUM.
Tourn.
288.
Gcertn.
75, 
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, concave, permanent.
Segmetits^ 
egg-shaped, concave, membranaceous at the edges.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl -shaped, as long as the s^inents 
of the cup, and standing opposite to thcpi.
Anthers 
roundish, double.
, 
PisT.
Germen round and flat.
St^le short, deeply divided.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
The cup closing upon the seed, has 5 
sides, and 5 compressed angles, deciduous.
Seed single, round, flatted, superior.
Obs. In some species the style has 3 divisions.
ATRIPLEX.
Tourn.
$86.
Gcertn.
75.
Hermaphrodite flowers.
Cax. Cup 5*leaves, concave, permanent.
Segments e^- 
shaped, concave, membranaceous at the edge.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, opposite to the leaves of 
the cup, and longer than them, jinthers roundish, 
double.
PiST.
Germen round.
Style deeply divided, short.
Sum- 
mits reflected.
, ' 
S- Vess.
none.
The cup closing, with 5 sides and 5 angles, 
the angles compressed, deciduous.
Seed single, rounaish, flatted and depressed.
Female blowers on the same plant.
Cal. Cup 2 leaves.
Leqfits flat, upright, egg-shaped, 
acute, large, compressed.
Bloss.
none.
PisT.
Ger?wen compressed.
S/y/e deeply divided.
Summits 
reflected, acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The valves of the cup, which are large 
and heart-shaped, inclose the seed betNVcen them.
Seed single, roimdi^h^ compressed.
195 PENTANDRIA* DIGY^IA.
Obs. There is a very great affinity between Atriplex, stnd 
Chenopodium ; the presence of the .female Jhwers in the 
Atriplex is the only mark of distinctioi} ; for if the ChUngpo' 
PIVM had these flowers, it would be Atriplex ; and the 
AxRiPLi^X without them would be Chenopodium.
Link.
HU^MULUS.
Tmm. 309> Lupukts.
Gcerin.
75.
Male flowers.
Cal, Cup 5 leaves^ oblong, concave, blunt* 
Bloss.
none.
$TAM.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very^ short.
Anthers ob- 
long.
' 
Female flowers.
Gal. General Involucrum with 4 clefts, acute.
Partial Involucrum, leaves 4, ^g-shaped, inclosing 
8 florets, each of which is furnished with a 
Cup of I leaf, egg-shaped, very large, flat on the 
. outer side, approaching at the base.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen very small.
Styles 5, awUshaped^ bent 
back, and standing wide.
Summits acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The cup closing, contains the seed in it* 
base.
Seed l, roundish, covered by a coat.
BETA.
Tourji.
286.
Gcertn.
75.
Cal. CS^pwith 5 divisions, concave, permanent.
Segments 
egg-oblong, blunt.
, 
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, as long as the s^ments 
of the cup, and opposite to them.
Anthers roundish.
Pist.
Germen in a manner below the receptacle.
Styles 
2, very short, upright.
Summiis acute, 
S. Vess.
Capsule in the bottom of the cup, of 1 cell, 
deciduous.
Seed single, kidney-shaped, compressed, enfolded in the 
cup.
- SAUSOLA.
Tourn.
128, Kali.
Gcertn.
J5» 
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions.
Segments egg-shaped^ con- 
cave, permanent.
Bloss.
none, imless you call the cup the blossom* 
PENTANDRIA, DIGYNIA.
193 
St AM.
Filaments 5, very shorty standing upon the seg- 
ments of the cup.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Germen globular.
Style short, with 2 or 3 divisions.
Summits bent back.
S. Vkss.
Capside egg-shaped, of 1 cell, lapped up in the 
cup.
Seed single, very laige, spiral like a snail shell.
Obs. Some species have 3 styles.
(Reich.) 
ULTtfUS.
Toum.
372.
Gcertn, 49.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, turban-shaped, wrinkled, permanent.
Border with 5 clefts, upright, coloured within.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, twice as long as the cup.
Anthers with 4 furrows, upright, short.
PiST.
Germen roundish, upright.
Styles 2, reflected, 
shorter than the stamens.
Summits downy.
S. Vess.
Berry owaly large, juiceless, compressed, winged 
with a membrane, of 1 cell.
Seed single, somewhat globular, but a little compressed.
Obs, The number of stamens varies, from 4 to 8.
(See 
Schreb.) - • 
SWERTIA.
Gcertn.
114.
• 
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, flat, permanent.
Segments 
spear-shaped.
Bloss.
l petal, wheel-shaped.
Border flat, with 5 divi- 
sions.
Segments spear-shaped, larger than the cup, 
connected by the claws.
Nectaries 10, consisting of 2 hollow dots in the inner 
side of the base of each segment of the blossom, en- 
compassed with small upright bristles.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, upright, but expanding, 
shorter than the blossom.
Anthers fixed sidewise.
Fist.
Germen egg-oblong.
Style none.
Summits 2, 
simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule cylindrical, tapering to a point at each 
end, with 1 cell and .2 valves.
Seeds numerous, small, fixed to the seams of the capsule.
Vol. I.
O 
19* PENTANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
* GENTIA^NA.
Tmrri.
40.
Gcertn.
114.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions^ acute^ permanent* Segments 
oblong.
Bloss, 1 petal^ tubular below.
Tuhe closed^ with.
5 clefts.
upwards, flat, shrivelling, and variously shaped.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped> shorter than theblbsfioin.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen oblong, cylindrical, as long as the stamens.
Styles none.
Summits 2^ egg-shaped.
S. Vess.
Capsule oblong, cylindrical, tapering^ sli^tly 
cloven at the end, of 1 cell, and 2 valves.
Seeds numerous, small, fixed to the sides of the capsule 
on every part.
Obs. The figure of the fruit is constant ; but the flowers 
vary in different species, both as to the number and shape of 
the parts.
In one species the throat of the blossom is open, 
in another it is closed with soft hairs.
In some, the segments 
of the blossom are fringed : in others, the border is bell-shaped^ 
upright, and plaited.
Some have a starry appearance, with 
small segments betwixt the larger ; others are funnel-shaped, 
&LC» Link.— In Gentiana campestris^ and G.
^iifomns^ the 
blossoms have' only 4 clefts^ but the latter is now removed to 
the genus Exacum.
XANTHIUM.
ro«r«.
252.
Male flowers compound.
Cal, Cup common to many florets, formed of many 
leaves, tiled with slender scales, as long as the florets, 
equal.
Bloss.
Compound^ uniform, tubular, equal, formed into a 
hemisphere.
Individual peid 1, tubular, funnel-shaped, upright, 
vnth 5 clefts.
Stam.
Filaments 5, forming a hollow cylinder.
Anthers 
upright, parallel, not united.
Recept.
Common^ next to none, the florets being separated 
by chaff.
Female flowers beneath the others, on the samB plant, 
2 together.
Cal. Involucrum containing 2 flowers, formed of 2 leiaves, 
opposite, each divided mto S sharp lobes, the middle 
lobe projecting farthest, set round with hooked prickles, 
surrounding and entirely covering the germens to 
which they are fixed.
Littk Segments loose.
I 
PJOTANDRIA.
DIQYNIA, 195 
Bx.089.
noi^.
' 
PisT.
Germen oval, rough with hair.
Styles 2, wmilar, 
hair*-like.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Berry dry, ^g-oblong, cloven at the end, 
Entirely covered with hooked prickles.
Seed, i^^ with scdls.
• ' •' 
''"-'    '   .
' 
ERYNGIUM.
taum.
173.
G(Brtn.
20.
Cal. Cofrmrnn-Recepiojcle conical, florets sitting, separated 
by chafF.
hwotucrum of the receptacle flat, many- 
leaved, taller than the florets.
Cup 5 leaves, upright, acute, taller than the blossom, 
sitting oti the germen, '  ^ ' 
Bloss.
Generaly uniform, roundish.
Fl&rets all fertile.
Individuals of 5 oblong petals, with the points bent 
inwards towards the base/ and contracted by a line 
running lengthwise.
Stam.
Fuaments 5, hair-like, straight, taller than the 
florets.
Anthers ohlong, 
PiST.
Germen beneath, rough with hair.
Styles 2, thread- 
shaped, straight, as long as the stamens.
Summits 
simple.
S. Vess.
Fruit egg-shaped, divisible into 2 parts.
Seeds oblong, nearly cylindrical.
Obs. In some species the seeds escape from the crust of 
the seed-yessel^ in others they continue inclosed.
HYDROCOTYLE.
Taum.
IJ3.
Gartn.
22.
Umbel simple.
Cal..
Involucrurn frequently of 4 leaves, small.
Cvp 
hardly perceptible.
Bloss.
GfeawoZ, uniform in figure, but not in situation.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals of 5 petals, egg-shaped, acute, entire, 
expanding.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers very small .
Fist.
Germen beneath, upright, compressed, round, tar- 
get-shaped.
Styles 2, awl-shaped, very abort.
Summits 
simple.
o 2 
id6: PENTANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit compressed, round, divisible, cross* 
wise into 2 parts.
Seeds 2, compressed, in the shape of a half moon.
r 
•4 • I 
SANFCULA.
Tourh.ns.
Gartn.
QO.
Cal. Umbel with very few spokes (generally 4.) l^- 
lellules with many spokes crowded mto hiMuls.
General Involucrum going half way roiind, on the 
outer side..
Partial j7wolucrum going quite round, 
shorter than the florets, 
Cz^ scarcely perceptible.
Bloss.
GeTi^a/, uniform.
The florets in the centre barren.
Individuals^ petals 3,' compressed, bent inwards, so 
as to close the flower..
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple,, uj)nght, twice as long as the 
petals.
Anthsrs roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath, rough with stiff hairs.
Styles 2, 
awl -shaped, reflected.
Summits acute.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit egg-shaped, but acute, rough, 
dividing into 2.
Seeds 2, convex and prickly on 1 side, flat on the other.
BUPLEUOIUM.
fourn.
163.
Gcertn.
22.
Cal. Umbel with fewer than 10 spokes* Umbellules with 
about 10 upright expanding spokes.
General Involucrum of many leaves.
Partial Invo^ 
lucrum larger, of 5 leaves.
Leqfits expanding, e^- 
shaped, acute.
Cup indistinct.
B|.oss.
General, uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals, petals 5, very short, entire, rolled in- 
wards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, reflected, small.
Sum^ 
mits very small.
S; Vess.
none, Fi-uit roundish, compressed, scored, divi- 
sible into 2.
Seeds 2, egg-oblong, convex and scored oh one side, flat 
on the other.
Obs. In most of the species the partial Involucrum is 
shjowu> and generally taller than the blossom.
Linn.
PENTANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
i97 
ECHINCPHORA.
Toum.
433.
Ol. Umlel of many spokes, the middlemost shortest.
Umbellules of many florets, those in the centre sitting, 
wnth germens amongst the little fruitr-stalks.
General Involucrum of several acute leaves.
Partial Involucrum turban-shaped, of 1 leaf, with 6 
clefts, acute, unequal.
• Oup very small, with 5 teeth, permanent.
Bt'Oss* Generaly irregular, radiated.
Male florets barren.
Female florets central.
Individuals of 5 unequal petals, standing open.
Stam.
Fiiamenis 5, simple.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong, wrapped in the involu- 
crum.
Styles 2, simple.
Summits simple.
S« Vess.
none ; but instead thereof the involucelhim grows 
hard and sharp pointed, and incloses the seed.
Seed single, egg-oblong.
TORDYLaUM.
Toum.
IJO.
Gcertn.2i.
Cal. ITmicZ unequal, of many spokes.
Umbellules xm- 
equal, of many parts, very snort, flat.
General Invotucfum i me little leaves slender, undi- 
vided, frequently as long as the umbel.
Partial Invo- 
lucrum going half way round, outwardly longer than 
the umbellufe.
Cup with 5 teeth.
Bloss.
General, irregular, radiated.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals in the centre, with 5 equal petals, heart- 
shaped, but bent inwards, those of the circumference 
like the others, but the outermost petal very large, and 
deeply divided.
Stam.
Filaments hair-like, 5 in every floret.
Anthers 
simple.
PiST.
G^m^TZ beneath, in all the florets roundish.
Styles 
2, smalL Summits blunU 
S. Vess.
Fruit roundish, almost flat, a litde scolloped at 
the edge, divisible into 2 parts.
Seeds 2, roundish, almost flat, but raised and scolloped at 
the edge.
Obs. In Tord.
Anthriscus, the umbel is but little radiated*.
and the florets of the centre are barren.
Linn.
198 PENTANDRIA.
MGYNIA.
CAU'CALIS.
Tourn.
171.
Gcertn.
20.
CAt. Umbel unequal, of very few spokes.
UmbeUules 
unequal, with more spokes, the 5 outermost of which 
are the longest.
General Iwoliicrum^ leafits a» many, as the spokes, 
undivided, membranaceous at the edge, e^-shaped, 
short.
Partial Involucrum with leaves simuar to the 
foregoing, longer than the spokes, generally 3 in 
number.
Cup with 5 teeth, standii)^ out.
Bloss.
General^ irregular, r3diated.
Florets, in the centre 
barren.
Individuals in the centre, male, small, petals 5, equal, 
heart-shaped, but bent inwards; in the circurnference 
hermaphrodite.
Petals 5, heart-shaped, bent inwards, 
the outermost very large, and cloven.
Stam.
Filaments hair«like, 5 in all the florets.
Anthers 
small.
PiST.
German beneath, in the florets of the circumference 
oblong and rough.
Styles 2, awl-shaped.
Summits 2, 
blimt, expanding.
S. Vess.
Fruit egg-oblong, scorqd lengthwise, rough 
with bristly hairs.
Seeps 2, oblong, flat on 1 side, convex on the other, 
armed with awl-sliaped prickles placed along the scores.
Obs, The general iBvolucrum is sometiibes absent.
(Reich.) 
. DAU^CUS.
Taum.
I6l.
Gcertn.
20.
Cal. Vmlel of many spokes, flat while in flower, but 
when in ihiit concave and approaching.
Umbelhdes 
similar to the foregoing.
General Invobiaiim of many leaved, as long as the 
umbel ; Leafits strap-shaped, with winged cleni.
Par- 
tial Involucrum more simple, as long as the umbeUule, 
Cup hardly perceptible.
Bloss.
General, irregular, somewhat radiated.
Florets in 
the centre barren.
Individuals, petals 5, heart-shapedj bent inwards, 
the outermost the largest.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers simple.
PisT.
Gerwicw beneath, small.
S/yfe 2, reflected.
Summits 
blunt.
PENTAMDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
199 
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit egg-shaped^ divisible into 2, gene- 
rally rough with inflexible hairs.
Sbbos Qy somewhat egg^shaped^ convex^ and rough with 
hairs on one side^ flat on the other.
BU'NIUM.
Toum.
l6l, Bulbocastcmum.
Cal. Umlel with fewer than 20 spokes.
Umlelhdes very 
short, crowded.
General Invobicrum of many strap-shaped short 
leaves.
Partial Involucrum like bristles, as long as the 
umbellule.
Cup hardly discernible.
Bloss.
General, uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individualsyjpttdls 5, equal, heart-shaped, bent in- 
wards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, shorter than the petals.
AntJiers 
simple.
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong.
Styles 2, reflected.
Sum- 
mits, bluiit.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit ^g-shaped, divisible into 2 parts.
Seeds 2^ e^-shaped, convex on one side, flat on the other.
CCXNIUM.
ToMHi. 160.
Cicuia.
Gcertn.
22.
Cal. Umlel of many spokes, expanding.
Umbellules 
the same.
General Involucrum of many leaves, very short, une*- 
qual.
Partial Invohcrum of 3 leaves^ going half way 
round.
Cup hardly perceptible.
Bloss.
Genertd, uniform.
Indiuidmds, petals 5, unequal, heart-shaped^ but 
bent inwards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, reflected.
Summits 
blimt.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit nearly globular^ with 5 scolloped 
ridges, divisible into 2 parts.
Seeds 2, convex on (Hie side, almost hemispherical, scored^ 
flat on the other side.
,. \.
*♦-.-..
**-• 
-*irt% 
200 PENl'ANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
SELI'NUM.
Geertn.
21.
Cal. Umbel of many spokes^ flat, but expanding ; Um- 
lellule similar.
General Involucrum, leaves several, 
spear-strap-shaped, bent back, the partial similar, 
expanding, as long as the blossom.
Cup hardly discernible.
Bloss.
General^ uniform.
All ih^t florets fertile.
Individualsy petals 3, heart-shaped, equal.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, bent back.
Summits 
simple.
S. VEss.none.
Fruit compressed and flatted, oval-oblong, 
scored on each side along the middle, divisible into 2.
* Seeds 2, oval-oblong, flat on each side, scored along the 
middle, edges membranaceous.
Obs. The figure of the seeds and the number of leafits form- 
ing the Involucrum, is apt to vary, (Reich.) 
ATHAMANTA.
Toum.
169.
Oreosclimm.
Cal. Umbel of many spokes, expanding.
Umbelluks with 
fewer spokes.
General Involucrums many strap-shaped leaves, a 
little shorter than the §pokes.
Partial Involucrum 
strap-shaped, as long as the spokes.
Ct^ not discernible.
Bloss.
Generaly uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals^ petals 5, heart-shaped, bent inwards, 
and notched at the end, not quite equal.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, as long as the petals.
An- 
thers roundish.
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, distant.
Summits blunt.
. S.
Vess.
none.
Ftmt egg-oblong, scored, divisible into 2 
parts.
Seeds 2, egg-shaped, convex and scored on r side, flat on 
the other.
PEUCE'DANUM.
Toum.
I69.
Gc^tn.
21.
Cal, Umbel of many very long, slender spokes.
Umbel- 
lules expanding.
General Involucrum of many leaves, strap-shaped, 
jmall, reflected.
Partial still smaller.
Cup with 5 teeth, very small.
PENTANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
soi 
Bloss.
General unifonn.
Florets in the centre banren.
Individuals, petals 5, equals oblongs entire, bent in- 
wards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong.
Styles 9, small.
Summits 
blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit egg-shaped, divisible int6 2, scored 
on each side, encompassed round by a membranaceous 
border.
Seeps 2, ^g-oblong, compressed, convex on one side;, 
and marked by three rismg rid^s; edge'surroimded 
by a broad, flat membrane, notcned at tne end.
CRITH^UM.
TWti. 169.
Cal. Umbel of many spokes, hemispherical.
Umlellules 
the same.
General hwohwrum many leaves, leqfUs spear-shaped, 
blunt, reflected.
Partial hwohwrum spear -&trap-* 
shaped, as long as the umbellule.
Cup hardly perceptible.
Bloss.
General^ uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals, petals 5, egg-shaped, bent inwards, 
nearly equal.
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple, longer than the petals.
An-" 
thers roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2; reflected.
Summits 
blunt.
S. Vess.
none* Fruit oval, compressed, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2, oval, compressed and flattisb, scored on one side.
HERACLE'UM.
Tourn.
170, Sphondylium.
Gcertn.
21.
Cal. Umbel very large, many-spoked.
Umlellules flat.
General Invohicrum many leaves, shedding.
Partial, 
going halfway round on the outer side; leyits from 3 
to 7, strap-spear-shaped, the outermost longest.
f 
Cup indistmct.
Bloss.
General irregular, radiated.
Florets nearly all fer- 
tile.
Individuals of the centre, of 5 equal petals, bent and 
hooked inwards, notched at the end : of the circum* 
WB PENTANDRIA.
DIOYNLftu 
ference, of 5 unequal petals^ the outer petals largest^ 
with the deepest notches, hooked, oblong.
St AM.
Filaments 5, longer than the petals.
Jnihers 
small.
PisT.
Germens beneath, somewhat e^-dbaped.
Styles 
Qy short, approaching.
Summits simple.
S» Vess.
none.
FVmt oval, compfessed^ scored akm^ the 
middle on each side, notched at the end^ bordered.
Seed 2, egg-shaped, compressed, with a leafy .edge.
Obs. In some species the florets in the circumference have 
only pistils without stamens, and produce seeds ; the central 
florets hdve stamens without pistils, and are barren.
. In the 
H. Sphondylium the florets have all stamens and pistils.
The 
general Involucrum is sometimes altogether wanting.
LiN?r.
In 
the British species the flor<ct$ are generally all itiidiated, though 
they are said sometimes to have been found otherwise.
L.IGUSTICUM.
Tmm. 171, ® Ciadaria, 171.
Cal, Umbel of many spokes.
Umlellules the same.
' 
General Involucrum J unequal membranaceous 
leaves.
Partial of about 4 membranaceous leaves.
Cup of 5 teetli, but indistinct.
Eloss.
General, uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals^ petals 5y equal^ ilat^ entire^ rolled in- 
wards, keeled on the inside.
Stam.
Filaments 5, h^r-Uke, shorter than the petals.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
German beneath.
Styles 3, approaching.
Sum- 
mits sin^)le.
S. Vess.
none.
Frwi^ oblong, angular, with 5 furrows, 
divisible into 2, 
Seeds S, oblong, glossy, marked on one aide with 5 
ridges, flat on the other.
Obs. Male florets have sometimes been observed.
(Reich.) 
ANGELaCA.
Riu. 17.
Cal. Umbel of many spokes, nearly globular.
VMellules 
exactly globular whilst in flower.
General Involucrum small, of 3 or 5 leaves : Partial 
small, of 8 leaves.
Cup with 5 teeth, hardly discernible.
^ 
BLOSSt General^ uniformt Florets all fertile.
. ' ,la4i^SdmIs, peiiab |5> spear*sfaapecf^ rather flat^ %ut 
a little bent inwards^ shedding; .
, 
SfTAM* ' FUarnents 5, ^kafl^j longer ^tiaxi the petals.
JbU' 
thers simple.
PisT.
Germen beneatii.
Styles $j bent back.
SwmmM 
blunt.
iS.
Vess.
none.
P/z^ i^nandish^ angular^ solid^ divisible 
into 2.
SiSJ3S ^y ^g'Shaped^ flat on (me jiide and encompassed 
with a border^ on the other convex^ with 3 furrows.
Obs. In Angelica sf/hestrk the geberal Involuctum is not 
always to be found.
SrUM* Tmm. 162.
Gcertn.
23, 
Cal.
. Ikhhel different in diffei'ent species.
Umlellules 
flat^ expanding.
General InvakHctum many reflected leaves^ shorter 
than the umbel ; leafiis spear-shaped ; Pariud many 
' leaves : strap-shaped^ smalK 
Cup hardly perceptible.
Bloss.
Generqly uniform, Ftoreis all fertile.
Individuals^ petals 5^ equals heart-shaped^ bent 
inwards.
Stam.
Fikments 5, simple.
Anthers simple..
PiST.
Germen beneath, very small.
Styles 2^ reflected.
Summits hhmt.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit nearly egg-shaped, scored, small, 
divisible into 2.
Seeds 2, nearly egg-shaped, convex and i^cored on one 
side, flat on the other.
Obs. In the Sium nodjflonim the general' Involucrum is 
frequently wanting.
Link.
SrSON.
Jacq.
Jwrt.
iii.
17, » 134.
Cal. Umlel unequal, with fewer than 6 spokes.
UmheU 
lules imequal, witli fewer than 10 spokes.
General Involucrum mostly of 4 leaves, unequal : 
Partial the same« 
Cup hardly perceptible.
Bloss.
Generate uniform* Florets all fertile.
ea4 PENTANDRUL.
DIGYMA.
Individuals, equal^ of 5 '- pefak^ spear-^shfLped^ flat^ 
but a litde bent inwards.
'/•..'- 
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like> as long as.the petkls.
An^ 
thers simple.
PisT.
Germen beneath, neatly, igg-shaped.
Styles 3, 
reflected.
Summits blunt.
S. Vbss.
heme.
jFm^ e^-shaped; scored, divisible 
into 2.
SsBDS 2, egs-shaped, convex and stored on one side, flat 
. on the!
otner.
- .
• 
Obs. S.
inundaiutn has no general Involucrum.
' 
OENAN^THE.
Taum.
166.
Gartn.
22.
» * ^ m 
* r , 
Cal. Umlel with few spokes.
Umbellules \^\th m^y very 
short epokesy cro\;\Jded;tQgethervoft0tx wrtljiout'spQkcs.
General Involucrum many leavies, sifliple, shorter 
than the unibcl : Partial, mwxy l«&.ves, small.
. 
Cig&with :5,awl.shapedA6^th> pent?^neQt, ...
' 
Bloss.
General, irregular, irradiated.
Florets in the cir- 
cumference barren.
Individuals in the centra herttitaphrodite, petals 5, 
nearly equal, heart-shaped but bei?it j^wards, inthecir^ 
cumjerence male, with 5 very large, unequal, petals, 
bent iawards, cloven.
* 
Stam.
Fiia«iew/5 5,.
simple.
Anther sroxxadA^Yi.
. 
PisT.
GerT^^ beneath.
S^y 7^5 2, awl-shap^d, permanent.
S2^wmi/5 bUmt.
.\ .
S. Vess.
none.
Fimt nearly egg-shap^, crowned with 
the cup land the pistils, divisible into 2 parts.
Seeds 2, somewhat egg-shaped, convex on oi^e side, 
scored, flat on the other^ toothed at the point.
Obs. In this genus the cup is more evident than in the 
other plants of the umbelliferous tribe.
In some of the species 
the Involucrum is often wanting.
Linn.
PHELLANDRIUM.
Tmm. i6i, 
Cal. Umbel with many spokes.
Umlelhdes the same.
General Involucrum none.
Partial of 7 leaves j leajits acute, as long as the 
umbellule.
Cup of 5 teeth, permanejit.
PENTANEIRIA.
DIGYNIA/ ^qs 
Bloss.
Geheraly nearly uniform.
Morris all fertile^ those 
of the centre smaller.
Jndividmls unequal^ Petals 5, tapering to a pointy; 
heart-shaped, but bent inwards.
Stam.
FilameT^s', 5^ hair-like; longer than the petals.
-/^w/Aer^ roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, awl-shaped, upright^ 
permanent.
Summits blunt.
* 
S. Vess, none.
Ftuit egg-shaped, smooth, crowned with 
the cup and the pistils, divisible into two parts.
SEEDs2,egg-sh*apedysrfi6oth.
* 
CICUTA.
FL dm.
208.
Cal. Umbel roundish, with many equal spokes, Rundlets 
roun^^Ji, with many equal, bristle-shaped spokes.
Generatlnvolticrum none.
Partial many leaves ; 
leqfits like bristles, short.
Cup scarcely evident.
Bloss.
General^ uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals, petals 5, egg-shaped, nearly equal, bent 
inwards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, longer than the petals.
Anthers simple.
Fist.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, thread-shaped, longer 
than the petals, permanent.
Summits knob-like.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit nearly egg-shaped, furrowed, divi- 
. sible into 2.
Seeds 2, somewhat egg-shaped, convex and scored on one 
side, flat on the other.
iETHU'SA.
Tourn.
165, Meum.
Gcertn.
22.
Cal. L55?ifcZ expanding, the inner spokes gradually shorter, 
those in the centre tlie shortest of all.
Umbellules small, 
expanding.
General Involucrum nohe.
Partial going half way 
round, upon the outer side; leqfits 3 or 5, strap- 
shaped, very long, pendant.
Cup hardly perceptible.
Bloss,' Ghsneral, nearly uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals, petals 5, unequal, heart-shaped, bent 
inwards.
Stam.
Filaments.
5, simple.
Anthers roundish.
9Cd I^NTANORIA.
DIGYNUi 
PlsT.
Germen beneath.
• Styles' 2, vsRicteA.
)Si«»ai£f 
blunt.
' ''  
S. Vess.
none.
Frttirrpundish^egg-shaped, scored, divi- 
sible into 2.
^'.
. .
Seeds 2, roundisli, scored: on the^tsther side, which i^ 
about a third part, flat.
• • » / ^ 
r I ( 
CORIAN'DRUM.
Tourn.
168, G<er/n.
sr2» 
Cal. Umbel of few spokes.
. Umlisllules of many.
^ General 
Involucrum sometimes a single leaf.
Partial 3 strap-shaped leaves, going halfway round.
Cup with 5 teeth, standing out.
. , 
Bloss.
Gewera/, irregular, radiated.
Florets in tlw centre 
barren.
Individuals dfit\e centre male, ^ials 5, equal, notched 
at the end, beiit inwai*ds.
Individuals of the cvrciimfe'^ 
rence hermaphrodite.
Petals 5, heart-shaped, but bent 
y inwards, the outermost very large, divided,^ those on 
each side of it more deeply divided.
' 
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple.
Anthers roundish..
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, distant.
Summits in 
the florets of the circumference, knobbed.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit globular, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2, hemispherical, concave.
f 
SCAN^DIX.
Toum.l73.
Gartn.23,ChisrophyUum.
Cal. Umbel long, with few spokes.
UmbelluleswiXh more, ' 
General Involucrum none.
Partial of 5 leaves, as long as the umbellules.
Cup indistinct.
Bloss.
Generaly irregular in its shape, radiated.
Florets 
in the ceritre barren.
Individuals, .petals 5, heart-shaped, bent inwards, 
the inner ones small, the outer one larger.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath, oblong.
Styles 2, awUshaped, 
distant, permanent, as long as the smallest petal.
Summits m the radiated florets blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit awl-shaped, very long, divisible 
into 2.
Seeds 2, awl-shaped, convex and furrowed oji 1 side, flat 
on the other.
RESTANnMA.
DIGYNEA;!
2Dr 
Obs. In Scandix odorata the seeds are angular, and the 
InvoUicrum shedding.
In S.
Pecten the' seeds are thread- 
shaped, with u kernel or nut at the base.
In theS.
certfqlmm^^ 
the seeds are egg-awl-shaped, scored, the Involuetum green and 
permanent, the florets all hermaphrodite.
Linn, and in the 
^CBXidvi.anthrisqm the seeds ar^ prickly, as in the genus Caucalii, 
' * 
CILERqPHYULUM.
tmm.
166.
Gcertnlnz.
Myrrkis.
• .
- 
Gal. Umbel expanding.
Umlellides with nearly the same 
number of spokes.
General Involucrtimnone.
Partial of zboui S leaves, 
lecffits spear-shaped, concave, reflected, neariy as long 
as the umbellules.
Cup indistinct.
Bloss.
General, pretty uniform.
Florets in th^ centre 
barren.
Individuals, petals 5, heart-shaped, bent' inwards, 
, flattish, with a sharp point bending inwards, the outer^ 
most petals rather the largest.
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple, as long .
as the umbellules.
. u^&ers roundish.
PlsT, Germen beneath..
Styles 2, reflected.
Summits blunt.
S. Vbss.
none.
Fn^i^ oblong, tapering to a point, smooth, 
divisible into 2* 
Seeds 2, oblong, growing smaller upwards, convex on 
'.' one side, flat on the other.
Obs. Seeds of the centre often barren.
Figure of ihe fruit 
yariable.
Linn.^ 
IMPERATCKRIA.
Gcertn.^l.
Cal. Umbel expanded, flat ; umbellules unequal.
General Involucrum none.
Partial of 1 or 2 leaves, 
very slender, nearly as long as the umbellule.
Cup indistinct, 
Bloss.
General, uniform, all tht^fioreis fertile.
Individuals, petals 5, bent in, nicked, nearly equal.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, ^w^^er^ roundish.
Fist.
Gerwww beneath.
Styles Q,htntha,ck» Summitshlunt, 
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit roundish, compressed, bulging in 
the middle, bordered, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2, egg«-shaped, marked on the outside with 2 fur* 
rows, edged with, a broad margin.
tod PENTANDBIA.
DIGYNIA* 
PASTINA'CA.
Tmfn.
no.
Gcertn.
21.
Cal, Umbel of many spokes^ flat.
UMMules of many 
spokes.
Involucrum none.
Cup indistinct.
Bloss.
General, uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals, petals 5^ spear-shaped, entire, rolled 
inwards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers roundish*' 
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, reflected.
Summits 
blunt.
S. Vkss.
none.
Fruit oval, compressed and flat, divisible 
into 2.
Seeds 2, oval, nearly flat on each side, encompassed with 
a border.
SMYR'NIUM.
Towrw.
168.
Gc^tn.
22.
'' 
Cal. Umbel unequal, daily growing larger.
Umbettules 
upright.
Involucrum none.
b .7 >.
\ 
CSp hardly perceptible.
. > 7\ ../ • 
Bloss.
G^wera/, uniform.
JF?bre/5 in the centre barren.
Individuals, petals 5, spear-shaped, keeled' under- 
neath, slightly bent inwards.* 
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple, as long as the petals.
^71- 
thers simple.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, simple.
Summits 2, 
simple.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit oblong, scored, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2, crescent-shaped, convex on one side, and 
•marked with 3 angles, flat on the other.
ANETHUM.
Tmtrn.
164, Fcenicidum.
Gcertn.
23.
Cal. Dm^'e/of many spokes.
Urnhelkdes ihi^ ^axQ&.
In- 
volucrum none* 
Cup indistinct.
Bloss.
General, vmiform.
FUyrets all fertile.
Individuals, petals 5, rolled inwards, entire, very short.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers roundish* 
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, placed close together 
but not very discernible.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit nearly egg-shaped, compressed, 
scored, divisible into 2.
JFENTANDRIA.
PI6YNIA.
fO§ 
Seeds neatly egg-shaped> bordered^ convex and scored on 
one side^ flat on the other.
Obs. In the Anethum Famicultim the seeds are without a 
membranaceous border.
CA^RUM.
Taum.
160> Carui.
Gcertn.
23.
Cal. Umbel with 10 spokes^ long, and often unequal.
Umlellules crowded.
General Invobicrum often of 1 
leaf.
Partial none.
Cup hardly perceptible.
Bloss.
Generaly uniform.
Florets in the centre barren.
Individuals unequal.
Petals 5, unequal, blunt^ keeled^ 
bent inwards, and notched at the eiid.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like^ as lone as the petals, shed- 
ding.
Anthers very small, roundish.
PiST.
Crermen beneath.
Styles 2, very small.
Summits 
simple.
Su Vbss.
none.
Fruit e^-oblong, scored, divisible into 2.
Seeds ^^ egg-oblong, convex on one side^ and scored^ flat 
on the o3ier, 
Obs. The central florets have sometimes neither stamens 
nor pistils.
Likn.
PIMPINEL'LA.
Taum.
163, Tragoselinum.
Cal. Umbel of many spokes.
Umbellules of still more.
Invobicrwns none.
Cup not very distinguishable.
Bloss.
General^ nearly uniform.
Fhrets all fertile.
Indiotdmlsy petals 5, nearly equal, heart-shaped^ 
but bent inwards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple, longer than the petals.
Anthers > 
roundish.
Fist.
G€rm£n beneath.
Styles 2, very minute.
Summits 
nearly globular.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit egg-oblong, divisible into two.
Seeds 2, oblong, narrower towards the top, flat oh one 
side^ convex and scored on the other.
Obs. In the Pimpinella imcay the petals are not notched 
at the end; the male and the hermaphrodite flowers are on 
distinct plants.
Link.
Vol..
T. P 
ffiO EESmifDRIA.
TKIGYNIA.
A'PIUM.
Towm.
ido.
Gc^tn.
22.
Cal. Umbel with few spokes.
Urnbelltdes with many.
General Involucrum none; or else of one or more 
leaves.
Partial the same.
Cup indistinct.
Bloss.
Generalj xxmhrm.
Florets almost a2I fertile 
Individuals, petals circular^ equals bent inwards.
5tam.
filaments 3^ $imple.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Cr^rTwen beneath.
S/yfe^ 2, reflected.
Swiwmf/i blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit egg-shaped.
Scored, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2, egg-shaped, scored on one side, flat oil the other • 
jEGOPOT|ItJM.
¥1.
dm.6T0.
Cal. tlmlel of many spokes,, convex.
XMeltules the 
sam^, but flat, ' Involucrums none.
Cup hardly discernible.
Bloss^ <?ewer<zZy uniform.
Ffore/5 all fertile, ' 
Individuals^ petals 5 f inversely egg-shaped, equal^ 
concave, bent inwards at the' point.
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple, twice as long as the petals.^ 
-^Ti^Aers roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, simple, upright, as long 
as the petals.
Summits roundish.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit egg-oblong, scored, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2,' egg-oblong, convex and scored on one side, 
flat on the other.
TRiGYNIA.
VIBURT^UM.
To»m.376, Ofmbti, &3J1.
Gartn.Q7.
y 
Cal. CMpwith 5 divisions, superior.
Very small, pertnanent.
Bloss.
i petal, bell-shaped, with 5 clefts.
Segments Viunt, 
reflected.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, as long as the bWsom.
Anthers roundish.
Fist.
<?em^ beneath, roundish.
Stj/te tiot^ but instead 
thereor a turban-shaped gland.
Summits^.
S .
Vess .
Berry roundish, ot 1 cell .
Seed smgle, roundish, hard as borie.
SAMBU'CUS.
Tourn.
376.
Gcertn.
27.
Cal. Cup superior, of 1 leaf, very snull, with 5 divisions, 
pennanent.
PENTANDRIA.
TBIQYOTA.
fiii 
Bloss.
1 petal^^ wheel-shaped^ but concat^ with 5 elefiu, 
blunt.
Segments reflected.
St AM.
FUamentd SyB^KUsbsLf^y as Icoig as the blossom^ 
. Anihers rOuttdish.
. 
PiST.
G^'Tn^n beneath^ egg-shaped, blunt.
Style non^j 
but instead thereof a bdlving gland.
Swmtnits Sy bkint.
S. Vess.
Berry roundish, oi 1 c^.
Sfitos 3y convex on 1 side, angular on the other.
STAPHYLE'A.
Tottm.SBGyStaphyllodendron.
Gcsrtn.69.
Cal. Ckip with 5 divisions, concave, roundish, coloured, 
nearly as large as the blossom.
Bloss.
Petals 5, oblong, upright, resembling the cup.
Nectary concave, um-shaped, situated at the bottom 
of the flovra-, upon the' receptacle of the fruit.
Stam, Filaments hy oblong, upright, as long as the ciip.
Anthers simplQ..
PiST.
Germen rather thick, with S divisions.
Styles' 3 y 
simple, somewhat longer than the stamens.
^Summits 
blunt, contiguous.
S. Vess.
Capsules 3, bladder-ishaped, flaccid, joined by 
seams lengthwise, tapering at' the points, opening in- 
wardly.
Seeds 2, hard as bone, somewhat globular, obliquely 
tapering, with a circular pit at the side, near the point.
Obs. The S.
pinnata has 3 pistils, but only 2 seeds.
Link.
TA'MARIX.
Gartn.
61.
Cal. Cup With 5 divisions, upright, blunt, permanent, 
but half the length of the blossom.
Btoss.
Petals 5, egg-shaped, concave, blunt, expanding.
Stam.
FUaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers roundish.
Pkt. Germen tapering to a point.
Style none.
Summits 
3, oblong, feathered, rdiled back.
S. Vbss.
Capsule oblong, tapering to a point, 3-coraerecl, 
longer than the cup, of 1 cell and 3 valves.
Sbbds numerous, vciy small, downy.
CX>RRIGIO'JLA^ GcBrtn.15.
Cal. Cup permanent, about the si^e of the blossom, of 5 
leaves ; lecifits egg-shaped, concave, expanding, mem* 
branaceousal the edge, 
r2 
SI 8 PENTANDRU..
TETRAGYNIA.
Bloss.
Petals 5 y egg-shaped^ expanding^ scarcely larger 
tlian the cup.
.Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped^ small.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped^ 3-comered.
Style none.
Sum» 
mits 3f hlvaxU 
S. Vkss.
a dry berry; egg-shaped^ but' somewhat 3- 
cornered, within the closed cup.
Seed single, roundish^ but with 3 furrows, connected by 
a thread which rises fix)m the bottom of the seed- vessel.
ALSI'NE.
Curt.
1. 12.
Cal. Cup 5 leaves i leafits concave^ oblongs tapering to a 
point.
Bloss.
Petals 5, equal, longer than the cup.
Stam.
FiZo^Tz^n/s 5, hair-like.
^ra//2er5 roundish.
PiST.
Germen nearly egg-shaped.
Styles 3 y thread-shaped.
Summits blunt, 
S. Ve9S.
Capsule egg-shaped^ of 1 ceU, and 3^ or 6 valves^ 
covered by the cup.
Seeds numerous^ roundish.
Obs. In A.
media the stamens soon fall off, so that it is not 
unusual to find flowers with fewer than 5.
Linn.
TETRAGYNIA.
PARNA'SSIA.
Gcertn.eo.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, permanent.
Segments oblong, 
expanding.
Blos s .
Petals 5, nearly circular, scored, concave, expandmg.
Nectaries 5, each being a concave heart-shaped siib* 
stance, furnished with 13 rays set along the edge, gia* 
dually taller, and each terminated by a little dobe, (or 
with 3 divisions, rays equal, each bearing a globule.) 
Stam.
Filaments 5, aiwUshaped.
AntkersjiefressedyBxed 
sidewise to the filaments.
PisT.
Gei'men egg-shaped, large.
Style none, but instead 
thereof an open hole.
Summits' 4, blunt, permanent, 
growing larger as the seed ripens.
S. vEss. Capsule egg-shaped, but with 4 angles, 1 cell, 
and 4 valves.
Receptacle m 4 parts, growing to the valves* 
Seeds numerous, obluug* 
Ofis.
The nectary gives the essential character^ LiirK.
PENTANDRIA.
PENTAGYNIA.
313 
PENTA GYNIA, 
STATICE.
Toum.
177.
Gcertn.
44.
CAl. Common Cup different in different species.
Proper Cup 1 leaf, funnel-shaped.
Tube narrow.
Border entire, plaited, skinny.
Bloss.
funnel-shaped.
Petals 5, united, and narrower at 
the base, broader upwards, blunt, expanding, 
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, shoHer than the blossoixi, 
fixed to the claws of the petals.
Anthers fixed sidewise 
to the filaments.
PiST.
Germen extremely small.
Styles 5, thread-shapedj 
distant.
Summits acute.
S. Vess.
Capsule oblong, rather cylindrical, membrana- 
. ceous, with 5 sharp points, 1 cell, without valves, in- 
closed in the shrivelled blossom^ and that again in the 
dosed cup.
Seed single, oblong, hanging to a long thread.
Obs. The Statice Armeria has its flowers in a roundish head, 
inclosed by a triple common calyx : In the S.
lAmomum they 
are disposed in an oblong form, with a tiled common calyx.
Linn.
LITSrUM.
T&um.
176.
Cal. Cut 5 leaves, small, spear-shaped, upright, permanent.
Bloss.
funnel-shaped.
Petals 5, oblong, large, blunt, gra- 
dually expanding more, and growing broader upwards.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, upright, as long as thei 
cup, (alternating with these are the rudiments of 5 
more.) Ant/iers simple, arrow-shaped.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Styles 5, thread-shaped, up- 
right, as long as the stamens.
S^wwi/i simple, reflected.
S. Vess.
Cap^wfe globular, with 5 imperfect angles, 10 
• cells, and 10 valves, opening at the top.
Partitions 
membranaceous, very thin, connecting the valves.
Seeds solitary, egg-shaped, but flatted, tapering to a point, 
glossy.
Ous. In many species, (perhaps in all) the filaments are 
united at the base.
In the Linum Radiola^ there are only 4 
Stamens, 4 pistils, &c.
Linn.
314 PENTANDRIA.
POLYGYNU.
DRO^SERA.
Taum.
127» Ros Solis.
Gcertn.
6l.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 clefts, acute, upright, permanent.
Bloss.
funnel-shaped.
Petals 5, nearly egg-shaped, blunt^ 
somewhat larger than the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, as lopg as the cup.
Anthers small.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Styles 5, simplcj as long as the 
stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule nearly egg-shaped, of 1 cell, with 3 or 
5 valves at the top.
Seeds numerous, very small, nearly egg-shaped, rough* 
Obs. D.
rotundifolia, and D.
longifoliaj have 6 styles, and 
D. angUca 8.
SIBBA^LDIA.
Gcertn, 73.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 10 shallow clefts, upright at the 
base, permanent.
Segments alternately narrower^ half 
spear-shaped, equal, expanding.
Bloss.
Petals 5, egg-shaped, standing on the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-Kke, shorter than the petals^ 
stsffiding on the cup.
Anthers small, blunt.
Pis-y.
G^mens 5, egg-shaped, very short.
Styles as long 
as thfi^ stamens, and standing upon the sides of the ger- 
mens.
Summits somewhat globular.
S. Vess*, none.
The cup closes upon the seeds,.
Seeds 5, longish.
Obs. The pistils sometimes, though very rarely, are found 
10 in number, though other flowers on the same plant have 
only 5.
Linn.
POLYGYNIA.
MYOSU^RUS.
Gcertn.
74.
Cal. Cup 5 leaves.
Leqfits half spear-shaped, blunt, re- 
flected, coloured, deciduous, jomed together above the 
base.
Bloss.
Petals 5, very small, shorter than the cup, tubu- 
lar at the base, opening obliquely inwards.
SxAi^r.
Filaments 5, (or more,) as longas the cup.
Anthers 
oblong, upright.
Fist.
Germens numerous, sitting upon the receptacle, 
forming an oblong cone.
Styles none.
Summit sunple.
. I 
HEXANDRIA.
MONOGYMA.
Sl<5 
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle very long, shaped like a style, 
covered by the ae&ds, which sure laid one over another 
like tiles.
Seeds numerous^ oblong, tapering to a point.
Obs. The number of stamens very variable.
This genus is 
nearly related to the Ranunculus, Linnaus; who sometimes 
conside]|;ed the petals as so many nectaries resembling petals.
nesqaBtsaK 
CLASS vr.
HEXANDRIA.
Ti 
HE flowers of this class contain 6 stamens, all of \ht 
same length, whereas in theTetradynamia class, the stamens, 
though 6 in number, are uneqmltn length, 4 of them beii^ 
long, and 2 of them short ; but as the difFereuoe in their 
hength is not always very obvious, it may further be re- 
marked, that in the Hexandria class, none of the flowers 
have 4 petals, as is the case with all those of the class 
Tetradynamia.
The Bulbous Roots in this class are some of them 
noxious, as those of the Nabcissus, the HYAcyNTHU^, 
and the Fritillaria ;' others are corrosive, as Allium, 
but by roasting or boiling, they lose great part of their 
acrimony.
HEXANDRIA.
(6 Stamens.) 
MONOGYNU.
(1 Pistil.) 
GalanthtiSn 
Leticojum, 
Narassm.
Allium.
FritiUana.
Tulipa.
Ornitliogalum» 
Scilla.
Antkericum^ 
Narthecium.
Asparagus.
Comaluaria* 
jmrus.
Tamils.
Juncus.
Berberis* 
pranhenia^ 
PepUs^ 
S16 HEXANDRIA, MONOGYNIA.
Trigynia.
(3 Pistils.) 
Bumex.
, Tqfieldia.
Triglochin.
Cokhicum.
Hexagynia.
(6 Pistils.) 
Aristolochia.
PoLiGYNiA.
(many Pistils.) 
Alisma.
MONOGYNIA.
GALANTHUS.
E. lot.
19.
""Cal. Sheath oblong, blunt^ compressed^ shrivelling, 
opening at the flat side.
Bloss.
Petals 3^ oblongs blunt^ concave^ limber^ equal^ 
standing open.
Nectary cylindrical, neariy half as long as the petals, 
composed or 3 leaves resembling petals, parallel, olunt, 
notched at the end.
Stam.
Fii2»iewf5 6,hair-like, very short.
Anthers ohlongj 
approaching, tapering, and ending in a bristle.
PiST.
Germen globular, beneath.
Style thread-shaped, 
longer than the stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess* Capsule nearly globular, with 3 blunt comers, 
3 cells, and 3 valves.
Seeds many, globular.
Obs. Sheath cloven at the end.
LEUCO'JUM.
Toum.
208, Narcisso-leucojum.
Cal. Sheath oblong, blunt, compressed, opening on the 
flat side, shrivelling.
Bloss.
Bell-shaped, expanding.
.Petals 6, egg-shaped, 
flat, united at the base, thicker; and stifFer at the ends.
Stam.
Filaments 6, like bristles^ very short.
Anthers 
oblong, blunt, 4-sided, upright, distant.
HEXANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
siy 
PiST.
Germen roundish^ beneath.
Style club-shaped^ 
blunt.
Summit bristle-shaped, upright, acute, longer 
than the stamens.
S. Vess.
Capsule turban-shaped, of 3 cells and 3 valves.
Seeds numerous,' roundish.
NARCIS'SUS.
Tmm. 185.
Cal. Sheath oblong, blunt, compressed, opening upon the 
flat side, shrivelCng.
Bloss.
Petals 6, egg-shaped, tapering to a point, flat^ 
fixed on the outside above the base of the tube of the 
nectary.
Nectary 1 leaf, cylindrical below, funnd-shaped, 
upwards, border coloured.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, fixed to the tube of the 
nectary, but shorter than it.
Anthers rather long.
PiST.
Germen beneath, roundish, with 3 blunt comers.
Style thread-shaped, longer than the stamens.
Summit 
with 3 clefts, <Joncave, blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, bluntly 3-comered, with 3 
cells and .3 valves.
Seedsi numerous, globular, with little appendages.
ALTLIUM.
T(mm.
206.
Gcertn.
16.
Cal. Sheath common t6 several flowers, roimdish, shri* 
veiling.
Bloss.
Fetais 6, oblong.
' 
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, generally as long as the 
blossom.
Anthers oblong, upright.
Fist.
Germ^ superior, short, somewhat 3-comered, the 
comers marked by a grooved line.
Style simple.
Summit acute.
S. Vess.
Capsule very short, broad, of 3 lobes, 3 cells, 
and 3 valves.
Seeds many, roundish.
Obs. In some species every other stamen is broader^ forked 
at the end, and the Anther fixed in the fork.
Linn.
FRITILLA'RIA.
Tmrn.
201.
Gcertn.
17.
Cal. Cup none.
Bloss.
Bell-shaped, expanding at the base.
Petds 6y 
oblongi parallel.
ffiO tSXrJilUDmA.
TRIGYNIA.
A'PIUM.
Totem.
i6o.
Gebttn.
22.
Cal. Umbel with few spokes.
Umbellules with many.
General hwohicrwm none; 6x else of one or more 
leaves.
Partial the same.
Cup indistinct.
^ 
Bloss.
General, uniform.
Florets almost a2I fertile..
Individuals, petals circular^ equals bent inwards.
Stam.
Pilaments 6, simple.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
CrerTwen beneath.
S/yfe^ 2, reflected.
5w?2wn//^ blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Frwi/ egg-shaped.
Scored, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2, egg-shaped, scored on one side, flat On the.
other • 
jEGOPOTflUM.
Fl,(kn.6T0.
Cal. tlmlel of many spokes,, convex.
Vmleltules the 
same, but flat.
' Inuolucrums none.
Cup hardly discernible.
BtosSk General^ uniform.
Florets all fertile.
Individuals, petals 5, inversely egg-shaped, equal^ 
concave, bent inwards at the point.
Stam.
Filaments 5, simple, twice as long as the petals.^ 
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, simple, upright, as long 
as the petals.
Summits roundish.
S. Vess.
none.
Fruit egg-oblong, scored, divisible into 2.
Seeds 2,* egg-oblong, convex and scored on one side?, 
flat on the other.
TRIGYNIA.
* .
* • 
VIBUBTNUM.
Toum.S7QyOf^dus, 6^377.
Oartn.^7.
Cal. Cwpwith 5 divisions, superior.
Very small, pefhianent, 
Bloss.
\ petal, bell-shaped, with 5 clefts.
Segments\A\xntf 
reflected.
Stam.
Filaments 5, awl-shaped, as long as the blossom.
Anthers roundish.
Fist.
Germen beneath, roundish.
Style tiot^ but instead 
thereof a turban-shaped gland , Summits A .
S. Vess.
Berry roundish, of 1 cell.
Seed single, roundish, hard as bone.
SAMBU'CUS.
Tourn.
376.
Gcertn.
27.
Cal. Cup superior, of l leaf, very sn\all, with 5 divisions, 
permanent.
PENTANDRIA.
TRIOYNIA.
sii 
Bloss.
1 petal^^ whed^haped^ but concal^^ with 5 eleftd, 
blunt.
Segments reflected.
St AM.
Filamentd 5yaviUsha:pedy as Icoig as the blossom, 
Anihers roundish.
. 
PiST.
G^^maw beneath, egg-shaped, bltoit.
Style novv^y 
but instead thereof a bellying gland.
Summits S, bliuit.
S. Vess.
Berry roundish, of 1 c^.
Sfitos 3y convex on 1 side^ angular on the other.
STAPHYLE'A.
Toum.Sse^Staphyllodendron.
Gcsrtn.69.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, concave, roundish, coloured, 
nearly as ki^e as the blossom.
Bloss.
Petals 5, oblong, upright, resembling the cup.
Nectary concave, um-shaped, situated at the bottom 
of the flower, upon the* receptacle of the fruit.
Stam, Filament's 5 y oblong, upright, as long as the ciip.
Anthers siinfle.
PiST.
Germew rather thick, with S divisions.
Styles'Sy 
simple, somewhat longer than the stamens.
JSummits 
blunt, contiguous.
S. Vess.
Capsules 3, bladder-^shaped, flaccid, joined by 
seams lengthwise, tapering at' the points, opening in- 
wardly.
Seeds 2, hard as bone, somewhat globular, obliquely 
tapering, with a circular pit at the side, near the point.
Obs. The S.
pinnata has 3 pistils, but only 2 seeds.
Link.
TA'MARIX.
Gartn.
61.
Cal. CMj&with 5 divisions, upright, blunt, permanent, 
but half the length of the blossom.
Btoss.
Petals 5, egg-shaped, concave, blunt, expanding.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen tapering to a point.
Style none.
Summits 
3, oblong, feathered, rolled back.
S. Vbss.
Capsule oblong, tapering to a point, S-coraered, 
longer than the cup, of 1 cell and 3 valves.
Seeds numerous, vciy small, downy.
CORRIGICyLA, GcBrtn.15.
Cal. Cup penHai^exit, about the size of the blossom, of 5 
leaves ; lecifits egg-shaped, concave, expanding, mem* 
branaceous^aii the edge, 
r2 
jsa HEXANDRIA.
MONOGYNTA.
reforms which Ijbis.
and other species of the same geuos re* 
quired, he su^Tered it still to stand as an Anthericum.
Moeh- 
ringius, and after him Mr. Hudson, made it a distinct genus.
It- differs from the Anthericum in having a permanent hlossom, 
woolly filaments, cylindrical seeds tapering to a point each 
w^y, and ending in a long thread-like appendage.
ASPAR'AGUS.
Toum.
154.
Geertn.
16.
Cal. CzM^none.
Bloss.
Petals 6, oblong, permanent, connected by the 
claws into an upright tube.
The 3 inner petals altar*.
nate, reflected at the top.
St AM.
FilamerUs 6, thread-shaped, standing on the petals^ 
upright, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers roundbh.
PisT.
Germen turban-shaped, with 3 corners.
Style very 
short.
Summit a promment point.
. 
S, Vess.
Berry globular, with 3 cells and a dot at the end.
Seeds 2, smooth, roundish, but angular on the inside.
Obs« It is not easy to say whether the blossom is composed 
of 1 petal or of 6.
llie Flowers are pendant, though the pistil 
is very short.
Flowers either male or female, or hermaphro- 
dite.
Seeds from 1 to 3..
CONVALLA'RIA.
Towm.
14.
Lil ctmvatt^ & Poly-^ 
gonaium.
Geertn.
16.
Cal. Cup none.
Bloss.
l Petal, bell-shaped, smooth.
JBorrf^ with 6 clefts, 
segments blunt, expanding, and reflected.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, standing on the petal, 
shorter than the blossom, jinthers oblong, uprieht.
PiST.
German globular.
Style thread-shaped, longer 
than the stamens.
Su7nmitoluntj 3 -cornered.
S. Vess.
Seny globular, , with 1 cell, but with 3 divisicxis 
at the base; spotted before it is ripe.
Seeds l or 3, roimdish.
# 
Obs. In Convallaria maialis the blossom is globular, but 
open and bell-shaped at its mouth ; in the other British species 
it is tubular below and bel]-shaped upwards, and in all the 
species the unripe berry is spotted.
MEXANDRIA.
MONOGYNU.
ssi 
HYACINTHUS.
Totem.
180.
Gcertn.
is.
Cal. Cup none.
Bloss.
1 petal^ bell-shaped.
Border with 6 clefts^ ft^ 
fleeted.
Nectary, 3 pores filled with honey^ at the point of 
the gennen.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped^ rather short.
Anthers 
approaching.
PiST.
Germen roundish^ but with 3 edges^ and 3 flirrows.
Style simple^ shorter than the blossom.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish^ but with 3 comers^ 3 cells and 
valves.
Seeds 2 for the most part^ roundish.
Obs. In the Hyacinthus nan-scriptns the blossom is tubular, 
but expanding at the mouth, and its segments so deeply divided 
that it is not easy to determine whether it is formed of one, or 
of six petals ; and the 3 nectariferous pores are not to be found 
on the germen ; so that it rather ranks with the Scilla than with 
the Hyacinthus, only that the blossom in the former is decidu- 
ous, in the latter permanent.
ACORUS.
Leers 13./.
12.
Cal. Spike-stalk cylindrical, undivided, covered by the 
florets.
Sheath none.
Cup none.
Bloss.
Petals 6, blunt, concave, flexible, thicker upwards, 
and almost lopped.
Stam.
Filaments 6, rather thick, something longer than 
the ^etals,jinthers thick, terminating,double,connected.
PiST.
Germen bulging, oblong, as long as the stamens.
Style none.
Summit a prominent pomt.
S. Vess.
Capsule short, triangular, tapering each way, 
blunt, celts 3.
Seeds several, egg-oblong.
TA'MUS.
Taum.
28, Tamnus.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cuj) witfi 6 divisions.
Leqfits egg-spear-shaped, ex- 
pandmg towards the top.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 6, simple, shorter than the cup.
Anthers 
upright.
fst HEXANDRIA- MONOGYNIA* 
Female flowers.
Cal^ Cup 1 leaf, with 6 divisions, bell-shaped, expand- 
ing.
Segments spear-shaped, superior, deciduous.
!Bi»oss* Petals none* 
Nectary an oblong dot at the base of each .segment 
of the cup, ojiL the inner side, 
PiST.
Germen beneath, egg-oblong, large, smooth.
Style 
cylindrical^ as long as the cap« Summii$ 3, reflected^ 
notched at the end, acute, , ^ 
S. Vess.
JS^rry'egg-shaped, with 2 cells.
Seeds 2, globular.
JUN^CUS.
Toum.
127.
Gcertn.
15.
Cal. Husk 2 valves.
Cup 6 leaves.
Leafits oblong, tapering 
to a point, permanent.
, 
Bloss.
none, unless we consider the young and coloured 
cup as such.
Stam.
Filaments 6, hair-like, very short.
Anthers oblongi 
upright, as long as the cup.
PiST.
Germen 3 -cornered, tapering to a point.
Style short, 
thread-shaped.
Summits 3, long, thread-shaped, woolly, 
* bent inwards.
S. Vkss.
Capsule covered, 3-Comered, with 1 or 3 cells, 
and 3 valves.
Seeds several, roundish* 
Obs. HusJcshtovfiiy or approaching to black, where it is 
not.
expressed to be otherwise.
The I.
conglomeratus^ and 
L ^usus have only 3 stamens in each flower.
BER'BERIS.
Taurn.
385.
Gcertn.
42.
Cal. Cup 6 leaves, standing open; leafUs egg-shaped,.
narrowest at the base, concave, coloured, deciduous, 
alternately smaller.
Bloss.
Petals 6, roundish, concave, upright, but expand- 
' ing, scarcely larger than the cup.
Nectary Q J roundish, coloured substances, growing 
to the base of each petal.
Stam.
Filaments 6, upright, compressed, blunt, opposite 
thejpetals, Anthers 2, adhering to each side of the 
. filaments, at the end.
IH3XANDRIA..
TRIGYNIA.
SS3 
PisT.
Gminen cylindrical, ad long as the stamens.
Siyle 
none.
Summit round and flat, broader.than the germen, 
' eneomp^ed by a thki edged border.
t .
S. Ves^.
Bern/ Cylindrical, blunt, dimpled, with 1 cell.
Seeds ^ or dj| oblong, cylindrical, bhint* .
Obs. There ib a perforatien at the top of the berry.
(Gartn.) 
FRANKE^IA.
E. hot.
205.
CaL.
Cup 1 leaf, nearly cylindrical, 10-comered, penha^ 
nent.
Rm with 5 acute teeth, standing out.
Bloss.
Petals 5, the claws as long as the cup.
Border flat, 
• limhs circular and expanding.
Nectary a channelled claw, tapering to a point fixed 
to each claw of the petals.
Stam.
Filaments Q^ as long as the cup.
Ardhers it^yndish, 
double.
PiST.
Germen oblong, superior.
Style simple^ as long an 
the stfilhiens.' Summits 3, dblong, upright, blunt.
S. VesS.
Ct^suie oval, of 1 cell, and 3 valves.
Seeds mnny,- egg*shaped, very small.
PEPXIS.
GcBrt?u 51.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, bell-shaped, very large, permanent.
Rim \Vkh 12 teeth, every other tooth bent back.
Btoss.
Petals 6, egg-shaped, very minute^ fixed to the 
mouth of the cup.
Stam.
Fi2czmera/5 6, awUsh^ed, short.
^»^A^i roundish.
PiST.
Oermen egg-shaped.
Style very short.
Summut 
round and flat.
S. Vess.
Capsule heart-shaped.
Cells 2, partition op- 
posite.
Seeds many, 3 -cornered, small.
Oes. In the greater number of the flowers, of one 9,nd the 
^me plant, the blossom is altogether wanting.
TRIGYNIA.
RU^MEX.
Tourn.
287, acetosa.
Cal. Cup 3 leaves.
Leafits blunt, reflected, permanent.
, 
Bjloss.
Petals 3, egg-shaped, not unlike tne cup, but 
larger, approachmg, permanent.
€24 HEXANDRIA.
TRIGYNIA.
Stam.
Filaments 6,.
hair-like, very short.
Anthers xx^-^ 
right, double.
PiST.
Germen turban-shaped, but 3-comered.
Styles 3, 
hair-like, reflected, standing out in the spaces between 
the approaching petals.
Summits large, jagj^.
S* Vess.
none.
The blossom approaching, and becoming 
3-comered, contains the seed.
Seed single, 3 -sided* 
Ons. Rumex digynus has a third less in number of all the 
parts of fructification, except the stamens.
R. acetosa and R.
acetosella have the stamens and pistils in different flowers and on 
distinct plants.
In some species a callous grain or bead is form« 
cd upon the outside of the petals, when they close like valves 
lipon the seed.
Lin n.
In which state they are called valves.
TOFIELT)IA.
Fl. dan.
36.
(Huds.J 
Cal. none.
Bloss.
PetalsQj equal, oblong, blunt, concave, permanent.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, smooth, as long as the 
petals.
Anthers small, roundish, fixed sidewise.
. 
PisT.
Germen 3-comered, Styles 3, awl-shaped, ex- 
panding.
Summits blimt.
S. Vess.
Cdpsvle roimdish, rather 3-comered, with 3 
cells and 6 valves.
Seeds numerous, oblong, nearly 3-comered, small.
' Obs. This is the Anthericum cafyculatum of Linnseus, who 
hinted the necessity of forming a distinct genus of this and the 
A. ossifragymj but Mr. Hudson separated it from both, and I 
think with propriety ; for though it has the habit of the latter, 
the structure of the seed-vessel will not allow them to associate 
in an artificial system.
TRIGLCKCHIN.
Tarni.
142, Juncago.
Cal. Cup 3 leaves ; leqfits roundish, blunt, concave, de- 
. ciduous.
Bloss.
Petals 3, egg-shaped, concave, blunt, resembling 
the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 6, very short.
Anthers 6, shorter than 
the petals.
PisT.
Germen large.
Styles none.
Summits 3 or 6, re- 
flected, feathered.
S. Vess.
Cap^/e ^g-oblong, blunt, with as many cells 
as summits, opemng at the base.
Fdves acute« 
Seeds solitary, oblong.
HEXANDRIA.
TRIGYNIA.
s«5 
CCyLCHICUM.
Taum.
181, 182.
Gcertn.
18.
Cal. none, (except some scattered skeoths,) 
Bloss.
with 6 divisions.
Ttdte angular, extending down 
to the root.
Segments of the border spear-egg-shaped^ 
concave, uprignt.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, shorter than the blossom..
Anthers oblong, with 4 valves, fixed sidewise to the 
filaments.
PiST.
Gemien buried within the root.
Styles 3, thread- 
shaped, as long' as the stamens.
Summits j^tcV&A^ 
channelled.
S« Vess.
Capsule of 3 lobes, connected on the inside by a 
seam, blunt, with 3 cells, opening inwards at the seams.
Seeds many, nearly globular, wrinKled.
HEXAGYNU.
ARISTOLCKCHIA.
Toum.
71.
Gan-tn.
14.' 
Cal. Cup nont^.
IBloSS.
Petal 1, tubular, irr^ular, the base bellying, 
nearly globular, with protuberances.
Tide oblong, 
cylindrical, but 6-sided.
Border spreading, extending 
downwards into a long tongue.
Stam.
Filaments none.
Anthers 6, growing to axul under- 
neath the summits, with 4 cells in each.
PisT.
G^49z«» oblong, angular, beneath.
iS/y/e hardly any.
Summit nearly globular, with 6 divisions, concave.
S. Vfiss.
Capsutehrgt, with 6 comers and 6 cells.
Seeds many, flatted, fixed sidewise.
OfiS.
The ripe capsule is either long or roundish.
Linn.
POLYGYNIA.
ALIS^A.
Toum.
132, Damasonium.
• 
Cal. Cup 3 leaves; leqfits egg-shaped, concave, pennanent.
Bloss.
Petals 3, circular, large, flat, greatly expanded.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, shgrter than the blossom.
Anthers roundish.
^ 
PiST.
Gerfliens more than 5.
Styles simple.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule compressed.
Seeds solitary, small.
' 
Obs. The AlismsL Damasoruum has 6 pis^ls, and 6 capsules, 
tapering to a point.
The A.
natansy has generally 8.
Linn.
. 
The A.
plantago has from 12 to 18 capsules, an^ as many pistils^ 
Vol. I.
Q 
[ S26 ] 
i.* ^ 
CLASS VII.
HEPTANDRIA.
(7 Stamens.) 
MONOGYNIA.
(1 Pistil.) 
TRIENTA'LIS.
Cal. 7 leaves.
Bloss.
flat, with 7 
divisions.
Caps, 1 -celled.
TRIENTA^LIS.
Gcertn.
50.
Cal. Cup 7 leaves; leqfits spear-shaped, tapering to a 
point expanding, permanent.
Bloss.
starry, flat, of 1 petal with 7 divisions, slightly 
adhering at the base.
Segments egg-spear-shaped.
Stam.
Filaments 7, hair-like, growing on the claws of the 
blossom, standing wide, as long as the cup.
Anthers 
simple.
PiST.
Germen globular.
Style thread-shaped, as long as 
the stamens.
Summit a knob.
S. Vess.
Berry not unlike a capsule, dry, globular, of 1 
cell, coat very thin, opening by various seams.
Seeds several, angular, ileceptacte large, hoUowed out to 
receive the seeds.
Obs. Though 7 is commonly the prevailing number in this 
genus, it is not always so.
The fruit is a dry berry, not open- 
ing at valves like a capsule.
Linn.
Stamens 5, o, or 7> with 
as many segments in the calyx.
(Pallas.) 
[ 827 ] 
CLASS VIII.
OCTANDRIA.
(8 Stamens.) 
Epilobium, 
Oenothera.
Acer, 
MONOGYNIA.
(1 Pistil.) 
Chlora.
Faccinium.
Erica.
Populus, 
Daphne.
Corylus, 
Polygonum.
Paris.
Quercus.
DiOTNiA.
(2 pistils.) 
Trioynia.
(3 Pistils.) 
Tetragtkia.
(4 Pistils.) 
Adoxa, Elatine.
Rhodiola.
Myriophylluni.
MONOGYNU.
• EPILO'BIUM.
Toum.
1 57, Chemumerion, Gcertn.Zl.
Cal. Cup \ leaf^ with 4 divistons^ superior.
Segments 
oblongs tapering to a pointy coloured^ deciduous.
Bloss.
Petals 4, circular^ expanding, broadest on the outer 
part, notched at the end^ growing to the divisions of 
the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 8, awl-shaped, alternately shorter.
An-' 
thers oval, compressed, blunt.
PiST.
Germen beneath, cylindrical, very long.
Style 
thread-shaped.
Summit wijUi 4 clefts, thicK, blunt, 
rolled back.
Q2 
228 OCTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
S. Vess.
Capsule very IcMig, cylindrical,, scored with 4 
cells, and 4 valves.
Partitions opposite the valves.
Seeds numerous, oblong, crcfwned with down.
Receptacle 
very long, 4-comered, loose, limber, coloured, con- 
nected with the partitions, containing the seeds in a 
double row^ 
Obs. Id some species the stamens and pistils are upright, 
in others they lean to the lower side of the blossom* Lin if .
OENOTHERA.
Tmm. 156.
Omgra.
Cal, Cup 1 leaf, superior, deciduous.
Tube cylindrical, 
upright, kmg, deciduous.
Border 4-clefted ; segments 
oblong, acute, rather benditig outwards.
Bloss.
Petals 4, inversely heart-shaped, flat, inserted into 
the divisions of the calyx, as long as the segments of 
the calyx.
Stam.
FilameTvts 6, awI-sh^ped, bowed inwards, placed 
on the mouth of the calyx, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers oblonff, fixed by the side.
PisT» Germen cjnindrical,^ beneath.
Styie thread-shaped, 
the length of the stamens.
Summit 4-cleited, thick, 
blunt, .bent back rather angularly.
S. Vess* Capsule cylindrical, 4-comered, with 4 cells*.
and 4 valves.
Seeds many, angular, naked.
Receptacle colxxmnaTf loose, 
4-comered,.
A'CER, Tmm. 386.
Hermaphrodite flowers* 
Cal. Cup> 1 leaf, with 5 cl^ts, acute, coloured, flat and 
entire at the base, permanent.
Bloss, Petttis.
by ^g-shaped, broadest towards the ead, 
blunt, scarcely larger than the eup,^ expanding.
Stam.
Filaments 8, awl-shs^ped, short.
Anthers simple* 
Pollen cross-shaped.
PisT.
' Germen compressed, nearly buried m a large per- 
fbrated convex receptacle.
Styh thfead-shapcd, oaily 
growing longer.
Summits 2, tapering to a point, slen- 
' oer, bent back.
S^ Vess, Capsules as many as* the summits, (fi or 3 J 
united at the base, rouiwish, compresised, each ter- 
minated by a very krge meimbranaceous.
wiog^ 
OCTANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA, m 
SfiSDS solitary, roundish.
Male flowers.
Cal. Bloss.
Stamens, as above.
PiST.
Germen none, Styie noae.
Summit cloven.
Obs. At the first opening of the flower the Summit only 
' makes its appearance, and after some days the Style shoots 
out.
In Acer Pscudo-Platamu the blossom is' hardly distinct 
Irom the cup, and the stamens are long.
In sohie flowers in the same umbel, the lower ones have 
anthers which do not shed their pollen ; but the pistils bring 
forth perfect fruit ; and the upper ones have anthers which do 
shed their pollen, but the pistils fall oif and perish.
Likn.
CHLCRA.
E. lot.
60.
Cal. Cup 8 leaves, perman^t.
i>azie5 strs^shaped^ 
standing open.
Bloss.
l petal, salver-sh^ped.
Tube shorter than the cup, 
inclosing the germen.
Border with 8 divisions.
Sag-- 
fnents spear-shaped, longer than the tube, {lapping 
over each other.) 
Stam.
Filaments 8, (awl-shaped,) very short, fixed to the 
mouth of the tube.
Anthers strap-shaped, upright, 
shorter than the segments of the blossom.
PiST.
GerTn^n egg-oblong.
S/yZe thread-shaped, as long 
as the tube.
Summits 4, oblong, cylindrical.
S. Vfiss.
Capsule egg-oblong, of 1 celt, somewhat flatted, 
with 2 furrows, 2 valves; the sides of the valves bowed 
inwards.
Si^EDS numerous, very small.
Obs. Nearly allied to the Gentianst Link.— InChlora 
perfbliata the segments of the blossom lap over each other ; the 
filaments are awl-shaped, sometimes 9 in number, with 9 leafits 
to the cup ; and '^he summits are shaped like a horse-shoe.
VACCIN'IUM.
Tourn.
37 7 yVitisidiBa I 43l^Oxycoccus.
Gcertn.
28.
Cal. Cup very small, superior, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, bell-shaped, with 4 clefts.
SegmerUs rolled 
backwards.
Stam.
Filaments 8, simple, flxed to the receptacle.
Anthers 
with 2 horns, opening at the point, and furnished with 
Q expanding awns flxed to the back.
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Style s^ple^ l<»)gef than tbf 
stamens.
Summit blunt.
830 OCTANDRIA.
MONOGYNU.
S. Vess.
Berry with 4 cells^ globular^ with a holloa 
dimple.
Sbeds tew^ small.
Ofis« In some species, all th9 parts of fructification are 
increased I -4th in number.
The calyx in Vdccinium myrtiUui 
is very entire, in most of the rest with 4 clefts.
The new- 
blown blossom is hardly divjded, but in the V.
oxycoccMs it is 
rolled back to the base, or rather 4-petaled, and the stamens 
are sometimes 10.
ERFCA.
Toum.
373.
a. Gcertn.
63.
• # 
Cal. Cup with 4 leaves ; letifits egg-oblong, permanent.
Bloss.
Ipetal, bell-shaped, with 4 clefts, orten bellying.
Stam.
Filaments 8, hair-Iike, standing on the receptacle.
' Anthers cloven at the point.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
S/yZe thread-shaped, straight, 
longer than the stamens.
Summit resembling a little 
crown, with 4 clefts, and 4 edges.
S. Vbss.
Capsule roundish, covered, smaller than the cup, 
with 4 cells and 4 valves.
Seeds numerous, very small.
Obs. In some species the cup is double.
The figure of the 
blossom varies between egg-shaped and oblong.
The stamens 
in some species are longer, and in others shorter than the blos- 
som.
The anthers in some are notched at the end, in others 
they are furnished with 2 awns.
Likn.— The summit also is 
4ifierent in different species.
(Reich.) 
9 
POFULUS.
Tmm.365.
Male flowers.
Ol. Catkin oblonjg, loosely tiled, cylindrical, consisting 
of scales J inclosmg a single flower, oblong, flat, ragg( 
at the edge.
Bloss.
Petals nont.
Nectary 1 leaf, turban-shaped beneath, tubular, end- 
ing at the top obliquely, in an egg-shaped border.
Stam.
Filaments 8, extremely short.
Anthers 4-edged^ 
large.
Female flowers.
Cal. Catkin anfi Scales as above.
Bloss.
Petals none.
Nectary as above.
PiST.
GeywTi e^-shaped, but tapering to a point.
Styl0 
hardly discermble.
Summit ynth 4 clefts.
OCTANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
231 
$• V«ss.
Capsule ^g^shaped^ with Q cells.
Falves 2^ 
reflected.
Sbeds numerous^ egg-shaped^ furnished with down.
DAPH'NE.
Tcum.
366, ThymeUea. Gcertn.
39.
' 
Cal. Cup none.
Blojss.
1 petal, ilumel-shaped, shrivelling, inclosing the 
stamens.
Tube cylindncal, closed, longer than the 
border.
Border with 4 clefts.
Segments egg-shaped, 
acute^ flat, expanding.
I^AM.
Filaments 8, short, inserted into the tube, 4 of 
them alternately lower than the other 4.
Ant Iters up- 
right, roundish, with 3 cells.
PisT.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style very short.
Summits 
knobbed, flat, out somewhat depressed.
S. Vess.
Berry of 1 cell, roundish.
Seed single, nearly globular^ fleshy.
DIGYNIA.
CO'RYLUS.
Toum.
347.
Gcertn.
89.
Male flowers forming a long catkin.
Cal. Catkin Commjon^ tiled on every side, cylindrical, 
consisting of Scales, each inclosing a single flower, 
narrower at the base, broader and more burnt at the 
end, bent inwards, with 3 clefts.
The middle Segment 
as long, but twice as broad as the others, and covering 
them.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 8, very short, fixed to the inner side of 
the scale of the cup.
Anthers egg*oblong, shorter than 
the cup, upright.
Female flowers at a distance from the others, on the 
same plant, sitting, inclosed in the bud.
Cal. Invohwrum 1 leaf, fleshy below, turgid, upwards 2- 
lipped and torn at the edge, containing 1 flower.
Cup indistinct, superior, encircling the styles below.
Bloss.
none.
Fist.
Germen roundish, very small, with the rudiments 
of 2 seeds.
Styles 2, bristle-shaped.
Summits awl- 
shaped.
S- Vess.
none.
Seed.
Nut egg-shaped, as if rasped at the base, the end 
a little compressed, and tapering to a point.
Obs. This genus is nearly allied to the Carpinus.
Livk.
83f OCTANDRIA.
TETRAGYNU* 
TRIGYNIA.
POLYG'ONUM.
Toum.
$90 & Q9I,.
Bisioria.
Cal. Cwp turban-shaped, with 5 divisions, coloured within.
Segments egg-shaped, blunt, pennanent.
Bloss.
none, unless you call the cup the blossom.
Stam.
Filaments generally 8, awI-slu^ped, very short.
Anthers roundish, fixed sidewise.
PiST.
Germen 3-comored.
Styles generally 3, thread- 
shaped, very short.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup laps round the seed.
Sbed single, 3-cornered, acute.
Obs. In some species there are 6 or 7 stamens, and in 
others only 5.
In some the pistil is cloven.
TETRAGYNU.
PA'RIS.
Toum.
llj, Herba Paris.
CAt. Cup 4 leaves, permanent; leafits spear-shaped, acute, 
as large as the blossom, expandmg.
Bii^oss.
Petals 4, expanding, awl-shaped, resembling the 
cup, permanent.
Stam.
Filaments 8, awl-shaped, short, beneath the anthers.
Anthers long, growing to the middle of the filaments, 
and on each side of them.
PiST.
Germen roundish, but with 4 angles.
Styles 4, ex- 
panding, shorter than the stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
JBerry globular, with 4 angles, and 4 cells.
Seeds several, lymg in a double range.
• 
ADOX'A.
Toum.
68, Moschatellina.
Cal. Cup beneath, cloven, flat, permanent.
Bloss.
l petal, with 4 clefts, flat.
Segments egg-shaped, 
acute, longer than the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 8, awl-shaped, as long as the cup.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath the receptacle of the blossom : Styles 
4, simple, upright,, as long as the stamens, permanent.
SummUs simple.
OCTANDIttA.
TETRAGYNIA.
SS3 
S. Vess.
Berry globular^ between the cup and the blos- 
soni> the cup being connected with the under side of 
the berry^ ot 4 cells^ dimpled at the end.
Sbbds solitary^ compressed.
Obs. Such are the characters of the terminating flowers j 
Wt the lateral flowers have blossoms with 5 clefts, 10 stameJbs, 
and 5 pistils.
ELATINE.
Faill.l.f.6.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leqfits roundish^ flat, as large as the 
blossom, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 4, e^-shaped, blunt, sitting, expanding.
Stam.
Filaments 8, as long as the blossom.
Anthers simple^ 
PiST.
Germen large, round, globular, but depressed.
Styles 
4, upright, parallel, as long as the stamens.
Summits 
simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule large, round, globular, but depressed^ 
with 4 cells and 4 valves.
Seeps several, crescent-shaped, upright, surrounding the 
receptacle like a wheel.
QUER'CUS.
Tmrni.
349.
Geertiu 37.
Male flowers.
Cal. C(jktkin thread-shaped, long, loose.
Cup 1 leaf, with mostly 5 clefts..
Segments acute, 
often cloven.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments from 5 to 10, very short.
Anthers large, 
double.
Female flowers seated in a bud on the same plant.
Cal. Involuerumj Scales numerous, tiled, united at the 
base so as to form a little hemispherical, permanent, 
leather-like cup, containing 1 flower ; outor scales the 
largest.
Cup very small, superior, with 6 clefts, permanent.
Segments acute, contiguous to, and surrounding the 
base of the style.
PiST.
Germen beneath, very smaU^^cgs^shaped, with 3 
cells, and the rudimi^nts of 2 seeds.
Style simple, short, 
thickest at the base.
Summits 3, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Seed.
Nut ^-cylindrical, leather«-Iike, smooth, as if 
rasped at the base, of 1 cell, placed in an hemisphe- 
ntdl goblet^ which is short, and tubercled on the outside.
234 OCTANDRIA.
TETRAGYNIA.
RHODFOLA.
Fl. dan.
183.
Male flowers.
' Cal. Cup with 4 divisions^ concave^ upright^ blunt^ per* 
manent.
Bloss.
Petals ^, Mong, h\\mt, upright, but« expanding^ 
twice as long as the cup, deciduous.
Nectaries 4^ upright^ notched attheend^ shorter than 
the cup.
Stam.
Filaments S, awl-shaped, longer than the blossom.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen 4, oblong, tapering to a point.
Styles and 
Summits imperfect.
S. Vess.
barren.
Female flowers.
Cal. Cup as above.
Bloss.
Petals^, rude, upright, blunt, equal in hdght to 
the cup, permanent.
Nectaries as above.
PiST.
Germens 4, oblong, tapering to a point, ending in 
straight simple styles.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsules 4, crooked, opening on the inner side.
Seeds many, roundish.
Obs. Having been sometimes found with hermaphrodite 
flowers, with 10 stamens, and 5 pistils in each, it might be 
associated with the SedtmSf (Schreb.) of whose general habit it 
vpry much partakes.
MYRTOPHYL'tUM.
G(Brtn.63.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves; leafUs, oblong, upright, the outermost 
the largest, and die innermost the smallest.
Bloss.
none, or of 4 petals.
Stam.
FilamentS'Sj hair-like, longer than the cup, lim- 
ber.
Anthers oblongs 
Female flowers placed under the others.
Cal. Cup as above.
Bloss.
none, or of 4 petals.
PisT.
Germens 4f ohlong.
Styles none.
Sunmitsdovnxy.
S. Vess.
none.
Seeds 4, oblong, naked.
Obs. The My riophy Hum, ver^sci/Za^m often bears herma- 
phrodite flowers, the M.
spicatvm seldom.
LiKir.
[ S3S 3 tC: 
CLASS IX.
ENNEANDRIA, 
(9 Stamens.) 
Mercurialis.
DiOTKiA.
(2 Pistils.) 
Hexagynu.
(6 Pistils.) 
Buiamus.
Hydrocharis.
DIGYNIA.
MERCURIA'LIS.
Taum.
30S.
Male flowers.
Cal. Cup with 3 divisions.
Segmenis egg^i-spear-shaped^ 
concave^ expanding.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 9 or 12^ hair-like^ straight^ as long as 
the cup.
Anthers globular^ double.
^ 
Female flowers.
Cal. Chip as above.
Bloss.
none.
Nectaries 3^ awl-shaped pointed substances^ 1 placed 
on each side ihe germen^ and pressed into its furrows.
PiST.
Germen rounoish^ compressed^ with a hollow furrow 
on each side^ roush with hairs.
Styles Q, bent back^ 
horned^ rou^h wiui hair.
Summits acute, bent back.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, purse-shaped^ double, with 
9 cells.
Seeds solitary, roundish.
v-836 ENNEANDRIA.
HEXAGYNIA.
HEXAGYNIA.
BUTOMUS.
Tourv- 143.
Geertn.
19.
Cal. Inoolvjcmm simple^ of 3 leaves, short.
Bloss.
Petals 6, circular, concave, shrivelling, every 
other petal standing on the outside, smaller and more 
acute.
Stam.
Filaments 9, awl-shaped, 6 of them on the out- 
side of the others.
Anthers composed of 2 plates.
PiST.
Germen 6, oblong, tapering to a point, ending in 
styles* Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Capsules 6, oblong, gradually tapering, upright, 
of 1 valve, which op^s at the inner side.
Seeds many, oblong, cylindrical, blunt at each end, fixed 
to the side of thexapsule.
HYDRO^CHARIS.
Curt.
167.
JVfaZe flower.
Cal. Sheath of 2 leaves, oblong, inclosing 3 flowers.
Cut proper, of 3 leaves ; lec^ts egg-oblong, concave; 
memoranaceous at the edge.
Bloss.
Petals 3, circular, flat, large.
Stam.
Filaments 9y awl-shaped, upright, disposed in 3 
rows, the middlemost row in the centre sends out an 
awl-shaped little pillar, resembling a style, from the 
inner side of the base.
The other 2 rows are con- 
nected at the base, so that the outer and iimer filament 
adhere together.
.^n^A^j simple.
PiST.
Germen only a rudiment, in the centre of the flower.
Female flower.
Cal. Sheath none.
Flowers solitary.
Cup as above, superior.
Blo3S.
as above.
PisT.
Germen beneath, roundish.
Styles as long as the 
cup, compressed, cloven, and furrowed.
Summits clo- 
ven, tapering to a point.
S. Vess.
Capsmelikt leather, roundish, with 6 cells.
Seeds numerous, very small,' roundish.
1 1 '- ^*^ 
f 237 3 
CLASS X 
DECANDRIA.
(10 Stamens.) 
MoNOOYNiA.
( 1 Pistil.) 
Mmotropa.
Andromeda, Arbutus.
JPyrola.
DiOTKiA.
(2 Pistils.) 
Chrysosplenium.
Saxifraga.
Sclerantkus^ 
Saponaria.
Dianthus.
Trigynia.
(3 Pistils.) 
Cucuhalus.
Silerte.
Stellaria* 
Arenaria.
CherUria.
Pentagynia.
(5 Pistils.) 
Cotyledon, Sedum.
Oxalts, 
Agrostemma.
Lychnis.
Cerastum, 
Spergula.
MONOGYNIA.
MONOTROPA.
Fl.dan.Q32.
Cal. none, (unless you call the 5 outermost coloured pe* 
tals the cup.) 
Bloss.
Petals 10, oblong, nearly parallel but upright, ser- 
iated towards the point, deciduous, the outermost^ 
which are every otner, bulging at the base, hollow 
within, and containing honey.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, upright, simple, Au'- 
thcrs simple.
S38 decandria; Monogynia.
PiST.
Germen roundish^ tapering to a point.
Style cy- 
lindrical;^ as long as the stamens.
Summit a blunt knoo.
S. Vess* Capsule ^g-shaped^ blunt^ with 5 angles^ and 
' 5 valves.
Seeds numerous^ chafiy.
Obs. Such ai:e the generic characters of the terminating 
flower, but, if there are any lateral flowers, they contain l-5th 
less in number in all the parts.
Lin v.
ANDRCMEDA.
Gcertn.
63.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions^ acute^ very small, coloiired, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, bell-shaped, with 5 clefts.
Segments re- 
flectedf.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, shorter than the blos- 
som, to which they very slightly adhere.
Anthers 
with 2 horns, nodding.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Style cylindrical, longer than the 
stamens, permanent.
Summit blunt.
S* Vess.
Capsule roundish, with 5 angles, 5 cells, and 5 
valves, opening at the angles.
Partitions opposite th6 
valves.
Seeds rouadish, shining.
Obs. The blossom in some species is egg-shaped, but in 
others truly bell-shaped, and the anthers are eidier with or 
without awns.
This genus differs from Erica in the number of 
the parts.- Linn.
In Andromeda Dahoecia thereas one-fifth of 
the parts of the fructification wanting, on which account it is 
now removed to the genus Erica.
AR'BUTUS.
Taurn.
368 ^370, Uva Ursl Gcertn.
SQ.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, blunt, very small, permanent.
Bloss.
l petal, egg-shaped, flattish and transparent at the 
base ; mouth with 5 clefts* Segments blunt, rolled back, 
small.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, but bellying, very 
slender at the base, half as long as the blossom, and 
fixed edgewise to its base.
Anthers slightly cloven, 
nodding.
PiST.
Gei-men nearly globular, sitting upon the recep- 
tacle, which is markSi with 10 dots.
Style cylindricd, 
as long as the blossom, Summit faUier thick and' 
blunt.
DECANDHU.
DIGYNIA.
^39 
S. Vess.
Berry roundish^ with 5 cells.
Seeds small^ of a bony hardness.
Obs. The Arbutus wa ursi has only 1 seed, in each cell of 
the capsule, the other species several, Linn.
PY'ROLA.
Taurn.
132.
Gcerin.
63.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions^ Tcry smail^ permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, circular^ concave, expanding.
St AM., Filaments 10, awl-shaped, shorter than the blossom.
Anthers large, nodding, with 2 horns pointing upwards.
PisT.
Germen roundish, angular.
Style thread-shaped, 
longer than the stamens, permanent.
Summit rathar 
thick.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, depressed, with 5 angles, 5 
valves, and 5 cells, opening at the angles.
Partitions 
opposite to the valves.
Seeds numerous^ chafiy .
. 
Obs. In some species the stamens and style are upright, m 
others leaning to one side, and in others again expanding.
The 
shape of the summit is different in different species.
DIGYNIA.
CHRYSOPLE'NIUM.
Tmrn.
60.
Gcertn.
44, 
Cal. Cttp, with 4 or 5 divisions, expanding, coloured, per- 
manent^ /Segments ^g-shaped, the opposite ones nar- 
rowest .r' 
Bloss.
noae, (unless you call the cup so because it is 
coloured.) 
Stam.
Filaments 8 or 10, awl-shaped, upright, very short, 
standing upon the angular receptacle.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Gerwiew beneath, terminating by 2 awl-shaped styles, 
as long as the st^ens.
Summits blunt.
S.Yess.
Capsule viiiti 2 beaks, 2 divisions, 1 cell^ and 2 
half valves^ encompassed by the green calyx.
Seeds many, very small.
X)bs.
The terminating flower has 5 clefts, the others which 
expand later,^nly 4.
It has a very close afHnity to Saxifraga, 
but by no principle of arrangemeut can I unite them into one 
genus.
Linn.
S40 DECANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
SAXIF'RAGA.
Toam.
129.
Geertn.^d.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 divisions, short, acute, penna* 
nent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, expanding, narrow at the base.
Stam.
Fi/amen^^ 10, awl-slEiaped.
-4n^Aer^ roundish.
PiST.
Germen roundish, but tapering to a point, and end- 
ing in 2 short Styles* Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule somewhat egg-shaped, with 3 beakd, 
and 2 cells, opening between the beaks.
Sbbds numerous, minute.
Obs. In some species the Germen is beneath, in others, it 
is above.
After the flower is open, 2 of the Stamens opposite 
lo each other, bend down to the Summits^ and dischai^ their 
pollen perpendicularly over them.
The next day 2 others bend 
down, and this is continued until they have all done the same.
SCLERAN'THUS.
FL dan.
504.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, with 5 shallow clefts, acute, 
permanent, contracted at the neck.
Bloss.
none, 
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, upright, very small, 
fixed to the cup.
Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Germen roundish.
Styles 2, upright, hair-like, as 
long as the stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
none.
Seed single, egg-shaped, inclosed by the gristly tube of 
the cup.
' SAPONA^RIA.
Curt.
ii.
17.
Cal. Cup l leaf, tubular, naked, with 5 teeth, permanent.
Sloss.
Petals 5.
Claws narrow, angular, as long as the 
cup.
Border flat ; limbs broader towards the end, blunt.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, as long as the tube of 
the blossom, every other stamen fixed to the claws of 
the petals, 5 of them shedding their pollen later than 
the others.
Anthers oblong, blunt, fixed sidewise.
PiST.
Germen somewhat cylmdrical.
Styles 2, straight, 
parallel, as long as the stamens.
Summits acute.
S. Vess.
Capsule as long as the cup, oblong, of 1 cell, 
covered.
Seeds many, small.
Receptacle loose.
Obs. The figure of the calyx varies iii different species.
(Reich.) 
JMJCAMWRIA, raiGYNIA.
S4i 
DIANTHU& T<nm.
U4^ Qfxifsphyllus.
CAt. Coj^ cj4itlcWeal, tubular^ 8<x>red, p^manent^ mth 3 
teel;h al the'm^uth^ and encompassed at the base with 
4 scales^ d 'of which are opposite^ and lower than the 
others.
' 
Bloss.
Peiab 5.
Claws as Ibnjr as' the Cttp> 'tusrrdWf fixed 
to the receptacle.
Limbs SaX, broadest towards the 
end, blunt, acellopped, 
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, as l<Mig as the cup, 
standing wide towards the top.
uinifiers oval-oblong, 
compressed, fixed sidewise, 
Pl3T.
Germen oval.
5/y2e^$, awUshsgped, longer than 
the stamens; Summits n>ll^ b&cl^, tapering to a point.
S« Vess.
Capiule cylindrical; coivered, of 1 cell, opening .
at the top in 4 directions*.
Sbbds maav, oompres^edj rouiulish.
Secepiaek looscj 4<- 
comerea, only half as long as the seed*v«asel.
Ofis.
In some species the Styles are but little longer than 
the stamens ; in others the^ are yeiy long, Vv^ ro)le4 back so 
as to render any bending down of the flower unnecessary.
Liw. Scaler at tha faase of the calyx sometimes only 3, but 
they vary even in the same sfieciea.
CUCU^ALtJS.
taurn^ne.
Geertn.
77 • 
Cal. Cup- 1 teif, tubular or globular^ wiA 5 teeth, per* 
manent.
• 
Bloss.
Petals 5.
Clam as long as the cup.
B^i'^der fiat.
Limbs generally cloven, not crowned by a nectary.
Stam .
FUamens l q^ fwU^l^qpedj ^very oth^r stamen ^xed 
to the claws of the petals,.
5 of them shedding th^if 
pollen later.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
Germen rather oblong, ^les 3, awUshaped, longer 
than the stamens.
Summits downy, obloi^g^ bendmg 
towards the left.
S. Vess.
, Capsule covered, tapering to a point, with 3 cell^, 
opeiung at the pbiilt in 5 different directions.
Seed^ mapy, roundish.
Ofis.
This genus is distinguished from Sijene, by the blos- 
som not being crowned with nectaries.
The Cucubalu^ otites 
has male and female flowers on different plants.
Link.—- 
C. bacciffinu bears a berry af 1 cell.
(Schreb.) 
Vol. I.
R 
ms DECANDHIA- ' TRIGYNIA.
SILE'NE.
F;L dan^ 559: Curt.
366.
i ^ 
Cal. Ctd) I leafj bellying, with 5 teeth^ permanent.
Bloss.
Petals $» Claws narrov^/, as loo^ as the cup^ bor- 
, dered ; lianb fl^t^ blunt> (rec^uently cK>vqi.
Nectary composed oJF 2 little teeth at the neck of 
each petals and constituting a crown at the mouth of 
the tube, 
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped: every other filament 
fixed to the claws of the petals, and shedding their 
pollen later.
Anthers oblong.
t^isT.
Germen cylindrical., 5/vi!i^ 3> simple,, longei; than 
the stamens.
Summits bending to the left;.
S. Vkss.
Capsule cylindrical^ covered, with 1 or 3 cells, 
opening at the point in 5 or 6 different.
directions* 
Seeds many, kidney-shaped.
' Obs. The nectariferous crown of the blossom distinguishes 
this genus from the Cucubalus.- Linn.
'•     ,.
•> 
STELLA^'RIA.
tourn.
Ii6, Jlsine.' ' 
Cal.' ,Cup 5 leaves.
. LeafUi egg->spear^^ped^ concave, 
acute, upright, expanding,' pennanent.
Bloss.
Petals 3, deeply divided, flat^ oblongs shrivelling, 
Stam.
Fitaments 10^ thread-shaped, shorter than the 
blossom, every other sbortdr» Anthers roundish.
PisT.
Germen roundish.
Styles 9f bair-^like^ e3^panding> 
Summits hluni.
' * ' ' / 
S..
yp$s.
Capsuie egg*sbdped> €Cfy^H9^^;withi L-cdl and 6 
valvgs.
j$^D^^ti^any,.roundi^>xompressed., 3 
• ( 
r r 
^ ARENA^HIA.
Citri.
968 » srf s: ' 
Cal. Cup 5 leaves.
Leqfiis oblopg, tapering to a pointy 
expanding, pern^an^iit.
' ^ 
Bloss.
Petcd^ 5, egg-shaped, .entire.
Stam.
Pilaments 10, awi-shaped, every other more in- 
wards.
^;2^/eer^ roundish.
, Pisf.
Germen egg-shaped.
jStyles 3, "upright, but a little 
reflected.
SwtwtwzV^ rather tnick.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, covered, with 1 cell, and 
3 or 6 valves.
Seeds piany, kidney-shaped.
Obs. The number of sitameiis is variaUct (Reich.) 
decandria: ' pentaoynia.
943 
CHERLE'RIA.
Jac. cmtr.
284.
HaU.
1 14.
Cal. 5 leaves.
Leafits spear<-ahaped> concave^ equal.
Bloss.
Tetah none^ unless the calyx or nectaries be coH'- 
sidered as such.
Nectaries 5, notched at the end^ 
placed in a circle^ very small.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, every other fixed to the 
back of thenectaries.
Anthers simple.
PisT.
Germen e^-shaped.
Styles 3, serpentine.
Summits 
simple.
S. Vbss.
Capsule egg-shaped, cells .3, valves 3.
Seeds Q or 3, kidney-shaped^ 
PENTAGYNU, 
COTYlfiDON.
Tmtm.
19.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 clefts, acute, small.
Bloss.
1 petal, bell-shaped, with 5 shallow clefts.
Nectary 
a hollow scale at the base of each germen on the outside.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, strsdght, as long as the 
blossom.
AfUhers upright, virith 4 fturow^, • * 
PiST.
Germens 5, oblonc, ratlier thick, ending in awl- 
shaped styles j longer man the stamens.
Summits sim- 
ple, reflected.
S. Vkss.
Capstiles 5, oblong, bellying, tapering to a point, 
of 1 valve, opening lengthwise onthe inner side.
Seeds many, small.
SETJUM.
Toum.
lip.
Gcei-tn.
65.
Cal. Cup with 5 clefts, acute, upright, permanent.
Bloss.
Jre^aZs 5, spear-shaped, tapering to a point, flat, 
expanding.
Sectaries 5, each consisting of a small scale, notched 
at the end, and fixed on the outside the base of each 
germen.
iSTAM.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, as long as the blossom.
Anthers roimdish.
PiST.
Germen 5, oblong, ending in slender styles^ Sum^ 
mits blunt.
S. Vess..
Capsules 5, expanding, tapering to a point, com- 
» pressed, notched at the base, opening inwards along 
the seam.
R 2 
«44 DECANDRIA.
PENTAGYNIA, 
Seeds many^ very small* 
Obs. In several of the species the calyx has from 5 to 7 
clefts, the blo$M)m from 5 to 7 petab ; the stamens vary from 
10 to 1^9 and the pistils from 5 to 6.
OX'ALIS.
Tourn, IQ^Oxys* Gdertn.
113.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisioii6> acute, very short, permanent.
Bloss.
with 5 divisions^ connected by the ciaws^ upright, 
blunt, notched at the end.
Stam.
Filaments 10, hair^mce, upright, the 5 outermost 
the shortest.
Anthers roundish, mrrowed, 
PiST.
Germen with 5 angles.
Styles 5, thread-shaped^ as 
long as the stamens.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsules with 5 comers, 5 cells, and 10 valves, 
opening lengthwise at the comers.
Seeds nearly round, covered by a fleshy elaMic seed-coat.
Obs. In s<»me species the capsule is shorty and the seeds 
solitary ; in others it is long, and the seeds many ; and in others 
the filaments are united at the hase.
Link.
AGROSTEM'MA.
Cuart.sog* 
Cal. Cup l leaf, leather-like^ tubular, with 5 teeth^ per« 
manent.
Bloss.
Petals 3; claws z» long as the tube of the cup; 
limhs expanding, blunt.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awUshaped, every other staxnen 
shedding its pollen later, ana fixed to the claws of the 
petals.
Anthers simple.
PisT.
Ger«i^5 egg-shaped.
AyZe^ ^^ thread^sbaped^ up^ 
right, as long as the stamens.
Summits.svoaoX^.
S. Vess, Capsule bblong-egg-shaped^ covereo, of 1 cell 
and 5 valves.
Seeds many, kidney-shaped, dotted.
Receptacles equal 
in number to the seals, loose, the inn* ones gradu- 
ally longer.
Obs, Blossom not crowned ia A.
GUhago as it is in the 
other species.
Linn.
LYCH^NIS.
Tourn.
175.
Cal. Cup I leaf, oblong, membranaceous, with 5 teeth, 
permanent.
DECANDRIA, PENTAGYNIA.
845 
Bloss.
Petals 5 ; daws a& long as the cup^ flat^ bordered^ 
limbs flat^ frequently cloven.
Stam.
FUtmenU 10^ longer than the cup"^ alternately 
ripening later> and fixed to the claws of the petals.
Anthers fixed sidewke.
PiST.
Germen nearly-egg-shaped.
Styles 5, awl-shaped^ 
longer than the stamens.
Summits downy, bent to- 
wards the left.
S. Vess.
Capsule approaching to c^g-shaped, covered, of 
1, 3, or 5 cells, and 5 valves.
Seeds many, roundish.
Obs. The Lychnis dioica has male and female flowers on 
different plants ; the capsule has 1 cell, and 10 valves at its 
top.
In L.
viscaiia the petals are undivided, and the capsule 
bas 5 cells.
Linn.
CERASTIUM.
Tourn.
126, Myosotis.
Cal. Cup 5 leaves.
heaJUs egg-spear-shaped, acute, ex« 
panding, permanent.
Bloss.
'Petals 5, cloven, blunt, upright, but expanding^ 
as long as the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 10, thread-shaped, shorter than the 
blossom, alternately longer and shorter.
Anthers 
roundish.
PiST.
Germen ^-shaped.
Styles 5, hair-like, upright, 
as long as the stam.ens.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-cylindrical, or globular, blunt, with 
1 cell, opening at the top, with 10 teeth or 6 valves.
Seeds many, roundish.
Obs. Cerastium tem-deeaadrum has only 5 stamens in each 
flower* The species are subdivided into such as have oblong, 
and such as have globular capsules.
Linn.
SPER'GULA.
Curt.
v. 52, & 262.
Cal. Cup 5 leaves.
Leqfits egg-shaped, blunt, concave, 
expanding, permanent.
Bloss.
Pet€Us 5, egg-shaped, concave, expanding, entire, 
larger than the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, shorter than the blos- 
som.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Gerwi^ egg-shaped.
S^yfes 5, upright, but reflected, 
thread-shapeo.
Summits rather thick.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, covered with 1 cell and 5 
valves.
346 DODECANDRIA.
Seeds many^ globular^ but depressed^ oieompassed by sc 
border, with a notch in it.
Obs. This genus is distinguished from the Cerastium, by the 
entire petals.
Sperguiajien/anc/ra has only 5 stamens, Link.
CLASS XL 
DODECANDRIA.
,/jlLXHOUGH the name given to this Class would induce 
one to suppose that the flowers arranged under it contained 
only 1 2 stamens^ it is in fact an assemblage of plants whose 
flowers contain from 11 to 19 stamens, inclusive.
Such 
as contain fewer than 11, where the character depends 
upon number only, will be found in some of the preceding 
Classes, and such as have more than 19, in the class Icos- 
andria or Polyandria.
The Euphorbia, or Spurge, is the most difficult genus 
in this Class, caused by the number of stamens being 
uncertain, those which do exist standing forth only a few 
at a time, and the effusion of milky juice which piakes 
the dissection of the flowers very difficult to accomplish.
But this very milky juice which abounds in all our species, 
and the peculiar habits of the plants is such, that the young 
Botanist will soon learn to aistinguish the genus at first 
sight, and the different species by attendbg closely to the 
suodivisions of the genus, and to the following circum- 
$tances« 
"Root be annual, biennial, or perennial.
Stem be naked, cylindrical, or angular.
Leaves be opposite or alternate) and of 
what shape.
Umbel be general or partial 5 its divisions 
1171- .1.
av j and subdivisions: and the general and 
Whether the ^ partial mvolucruras.
Flowers have only stamens, or both sta- 
mens and pistils.
Petals be entire, crescent- shaped, or hand- 
shaped, &c.
[^Capsules be hairy, warty, or smooth.
DODECANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
247 
. « » 
DODECANDRIA- (12 Stamens.) 
MoNOGYNiA.
(1 Pistil.) 
Asdrum* Ceratophyllvm.
Lythrum* 
DiGYNiA.
(2 Pistils.) 
Carpinus.
Agrimonia.
» » » 
Trigynia.
(3 Pistils.) 
Fagiis.
' Reseda.
Euphorbia.
DODECAGYNIA.
(12 Pistils.) 
Sempervivum* , , ' 
MONOGYNIA.
. 
r , 
AS'ARUM.
Tourh.
286.
Gcertn.
.14.
Cal. Cfup 1 \^{f bdUshaped^ with 3 or 4 shallow clefts^ 
like leather^ coloured^ permanent.
Segments upright^ 
with the point bent inwards.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 12, awl-shaped, half as lone as the cup.
ATiihers ohlongf growing to the middle of the filamicnts.
PiST.
Germen either beneath, or else hidden within the 
substance of the cup.
Style cylindrical, as long as the 
stamens.
Summit star-like, with 6 reflected divisions.
S. Vess.
Capsule like leather, generally with 6 cells^ in- 
closed within the substance t>f the cup.
Seeds many, egg-shaped.
CERATOPHYL'LUM.
G^/7i.44.
JVfafc flowers^ 
Cal. Cup with many divisions.
Segments awl-shaped, 
equal.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments twice as many as there are segments in 
the cup,' (16 to 20,) hatdly djscernible.
Anthers oif- 
long, upright, longer than the cup.
S48 Pi:NtAN!>lftIA.
movNiA.
Female flowers on the same plant.
* 
Cal. Cup as above, 
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germ^eeg-shapedj compressed.
Style noiiQ.
Sum^ 
mit blunt^ oblique.
S. Vess.
Dri^a.^g- shaped^ tiperingto a point : coat thiipi.
Seed.
NiU oi l ceU.
LYTHRUM.
Toum.
129, Salkaria.
Gcertn.62.
Cai*.
Cup 1 leaf, cylindrical, scored, with 12 teeth, every 
other tooth smsuler, 
Bloss.
Petals 6, oblong, rather blunt, expanding, fixed 
by the claws to the aivisions of the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 12, thread-shaped, as long as the cup, 
the upper shorter than the lower cmes.' ^Anthers simple, 
rising.
PiST.
Uermen oblong.
Style awl-shaped, Aediniiig, as 
long as the stamens.
Summit round and flat, rising.
S. Vess.
Capsule^ t>bIong, tapering to a point, covered ; 
cells 2, or 1 • .
, 
Seeds numerous, smiatH.
Obs. In t*he DythrUm hjfieij^oliay there are dify iS^tamens.
DIGYNJA.
* 
CAR'PINUS.
Toum.
348.
Garin.
85.
Male flowers.
, 
Cax. C^MmcyUndrical, loosely' tiled en every ode, con- 
siding of scales^ with a single flower in «each, c^- 
shaped, concave acute, fringed* 
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments 10 or more, very short.
Anthers double, 
compressed, woolly at the end.
Female flowers on the ^me ylant.
Cal. Catkin loosely tiled, consistmg of scaleSj -^inclosing 
a sijfigle flower; spear-^^i^ed, wooliy, refected -at 
the eni.
hwohiclrum of 1 leaf, egg-shaped, pernaajaent^ with 
6 clefts.
Segments une^u^a.
Cup very smi^ll, superior, with §«nequal .teeth.
PisT.
German veiy small, s-celled^; >yftii;the rudiments 
of 5 seeds.
Style y try short.
Summits ^^ hair-like.
DODECANDRIA.
TRIGYNIA.
Mg 
S. V^ss.
lione.
Hie catildn enlaiges^ iuni contaias the 
seed ivithin the base.of ei^ch scale.
Sbbow JSlut egg'^shaped^ compressed^ covered by the per«* 
manent involucmm, which is egg-shaped^ compressed^ 
ribbed ; rim widi 6 clefts, 2 opposite teeth larger than 
theottiers.
AGRIMO'NIA.
Tonm.l55.
Gcertn.
73.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 clefts, acute, small, superior, 
permanent, surrounded by another cup.
Bloss.
Petals 5, flat, notched at the end j claws narrow, 
growing to the ctip.
Stam.
FiUiments hair-like, shorter than the blossom, fixed 
to ithe cup^ Anthers small, double, oompressed.
PiST.
Mermen beneath.
Styles 2, simple, as long as the 
stamens.
Summits blunt.
S. Vsss.
none.
The cup grows hard and closes at the neck.
Seeds 2, roundish.
Ofi3.
Th^ number of stamens exceedingly uncertain ; in 
some flowers 12, sometimes 10, frequently 7.
In the Agri- 
monia €UjMz^ona the outer cup adheres to the inner one; .the 
seeds are 2, the stamens from 12 to 20 ; the fruit surrounded 
by bristles.
LnfN.
"^Stamens from 5 to 12.
thigynia.
FAMOUS.
Towrn.
351 ^352, Coj^awa.
GcBrtn.Z1.
Mmk flowers.
. 
Cal. Catkin roundish, or cyUndrical.
, Cup 1 leaf, bdUsbaped, with about 6 clefts.
Bloss.
none.
.Stam.
Filaments many, (5 to 20,) as long as the cup, 
bristle-shaped.
Anth&rs oblong.
Femtde flowers in a bud on me same plant.
Cal. Ifwolucrum 1 leaf, with 4 clefts, upright, acutCi 
peimaiieut, inclosing 2 or 3 florets.
(ki^ cf each floret, very small, superior, with 6 clefts, 
uprignt, acute, permanent.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen somewhat 3-comered, with 3 or 6 cells, 
rudiments of the seeds in pairs.
Style very short, with 
3 or 6 divisions.
Summit simple.
950 DODECANDRIA.
TRIGYNIA, 
S. Vbss.
Capsule (heretofore the involucrum^) veiylargc^ 
roundish^ beset with thorns^ of 1 cell and 4 valves* 
Sbeds.
Nuts 2 or 3, egg-shaped^ but 3«coniered or com- 
pressed^ tapering to a point.
Obs. The Fagus Castanea has its male flowers disposed in 
a cylindrical catkin, and they each contain from 5 to 20 sta- 
mens.
The female flowers inclose 12 barren stamens; the style 
Kas 6 divisions ; the germcn 6 cells ; the nuts are 2 or 3, con- 
vex on one side, fiattish on the other.
The capsule is armed 
with stiff branching thorns.
; 
In the F.
syhatka^ the male catkins are globular, the stamens 
from 8 to 12; the style with 3 clefts, the germcn with 3 cells ; 
the nuts 2, 3-cornered ; the capsule seXwith soft thorns.
Linn.
RESEDA.
Toum.
238> « Luteolai Geertn.
76.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf) divided.
Segnf^enfs narrow^ acute^ up- 
nght> pennahent^ 2 of tb^m standing ^lore open on 
account of the nectariferous petals.
JBlpss.
Petals several, unequal, always some with 3 shal- 
low clefts ; the uppermost bulging at the base, as long 
as the cup, and containing honey.
Nectary a flat upright gland, rising from the recep- 
tacle, situated between the stamens and the uppermost 
pet^, closing with the base of the petals, which on that 
side are dilated.
Stam.
Filaments 11 to 15, short.
Anthers blunt, upright, 
as long as the blossom.
PiST» Germen bulging, ending in some very short styles.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule bulging, angular, tapering to the styles, 
' with 1 cell, opening between the styles.
Seeds many-kidney-shaped, fixed to the angles of the 
capsule.
Obs. There is hardly any genus so difficult to characterize 
as this; the different species varying so much both in figure and 
number.
The essential character consists in the petals with $ 
cleftSy 1 petal bearing the nectary in its base, and the capsules 
not closed, but always gaping open.
In. the R.
htteola the cup 
has 4 divisions»the petals are 3 ; the oppermost, containing the, 
nectary, has 6 shallow clefts.
The. iateml and opposite petals 
have 3 clefts; and there are sometimes 2 other v^ry small and 
entire petals, .
Styles 3.
Stamens mapy.
Linn, 
DODECANDRIA.
FOLYGYNIA.
951 
EUFHORfBIA.
Taum.
18, Takfmalms.
Cai- Qif 1 leaf, penii9nieiftr<4diteyewhatcoloiired, bdlying; 
momin with 4 (and in a few species with 5) teeth.
Bijoss.
Petals Af (in .a, few- species 5y) tuAan-shaped^ 
baling thick^ lopped, irr^uhily situated, alternating 
with the teeth of the cup, and fixed by thdr daws tn 
itseii^: pennanent.
. 
Stam.
Filaments many, (IS or more,) thread-shaped^ 
jointedy standing on the rec^tacfe, longet than the 
blossam, coming forth at different times, jtuhen 
double, roimdish.
PisT.
Germen roundish, 3-comered, standing on a litde 
fruit-stalk.
Styles 3, doTen. Sununits buint* 
S. Vess.
Catsule i^undish, consisting of 3 united beniesp 
and 3 cells, opening with a jerk.
S£EDS solitary, roundish.
Obs. Petals generally 4, sometimes 5.
Male and female 
flowers are often found on the same plant* CapsiUe either 
smooth, hairy, or warty.
- Lf vk.
POLYGYNU.
SEMPERVI^VTJM.
Toum.
140, Sedum.
Gartn.
6S.
Cal. Cf^ from 6 to 12 divisions, concave, acute, perma- 
nent.
Bloss.
Petals 6 to 12, oblong, spear-shaped, acute, con- 
cave, a little laiger than the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 6 to 12, awl-shaped, slender.
Anthers 
roundish.
PiST.
Germens 6 to 12, placed in a circle, upright, each 
ending in a style ; expanding.
Summits acute.
S. Vess.
Cabsule 6 to 1 2, oblong, compressed, shbrt, placed 
in a circle, tapering to a point outwardly, opening on 
the inner side.
Seeds many, roundish, small.
Obs. When of a luxuriant growth, the numbers often in- 
crease, especially the number of the pistils.
• Nearly allied to 
5ecium, but differs in always having more than ^ petals.
[ S53 J 
CLASS Xfl.
1 • • I > 
ICOSANDRIA; 
9S!
Although this i^ called the class of Twenty 
Stamensj beca!usre the flowers arran^d undor it generally 
contain about that nymber; yet the classic character is 
not to be taken merely from the mimber of stamens^ but 
from a consideration of the following circirnistances, which 
will suffictehtly distinguish it both nt>m the preceding and 
ensuing classes.
1 .
Caltx consisting of 1 leaf^ cancave, 
S. Pbtals fixed by claws to die inside of the calyx.
3. Stamens mo^re than 19 ; standing upon the petals, 
or upon the calyx ; (but not upon the Receptacle.) 
Obs. Hardly any of the plants of this class are poisonous.
The fruits are mostly pulpy and esculent.
Prunus.
pratcBgus.
Sorlms.
Mespilus^ 
KOSCL, 
Potentilla.
Dryas* 
ICOSANDRIA, (20 Stamens.) 
MoNOGVNXA, (1 Pistil.) 
Digynia^ (2 Pistils.) 
Tbigynia.
(3 Pistils.) 
Pentagynia.
(5 Pistils.) 
Pyrus.
Sph'cea^ 
Polygynia.
(many Pistils.) 
RiihiS.
Fragaria.
Tmrnentilla, Geiim.
Comarum.
ICOSANDRIA.
TRIGYNIA.
«53 
« • 
MONOGYNU.
PRU'NUS.
Toum.
398, ® 301, Cerasus.
Cal; Cup 1 leaf, bdl-shaped, with 5 clefts, deciduous* 
Segments blunt, concave.
Tihoss.
Petals 5, circular, concave, large, expanding, fixed 
to the cup by claws.
Stam.
Filamejits 20 to 30, awl-shaped, nearly as long as 
the blossom, standing on the cup.
Anthers douole, 
short.
PiST.
Germen superior, roundish.
Style thread-shaped, as 
long as the stamens.
Summit circular.
S. Vess.
nearly globular, pulpy, including a nut or stono.
Seed a Niit, somewhat globular, but compressed, seams 
projecting* 
Obs. The inside of the cup» in most of the species, is covered 
M'ith a number of small glands, which make an appearance like 
a hoar frost* St.— In P.
msititia there are someumes 2 pistiU.
DIGYNIA.
CRATiE'GUS.
Ckertn.
87, Oxyacantha.
Cal* Cup 1 leaf, concave, but expanding, with 5 teeth, 
permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, eireular, concave, sitting, fixed to the cup.
^AM .
Filaments 90, awl-shaped, fixed to the cup.
Anthers 
roundish.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 2, thread-shaped, upright.
Summits knobbed* 
S. Vws. Berry fleshy, nearly globular, dimpled.
S££D$ Q, rather oblong, separate, gristly.
Obs. In Crataegus Aria the pistils vary from 2 to 4.
With 
us, in the CraUiigus tM/u^maf there is uniformly only 1 pistil 
and 1 seed* 
TRIGYNU.
SOR'BUS.
Gartn.
S7 9 Sarlm (t Aucuparia.
CAl. Cup 1 leaf, concave, but expanding, with 5 teeth, 
permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5^ circular, concave, fixed to the cup.
354 ICOSANBRIA.
PENTAOYNIA, 
Stam.
Filaments 20, awl-shaped, fixed to the cup.
Anthers 
roundish, 
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Styles 3, thread-shaped, upright.
Summits roundhh^ 
S. Vess.
Berry soft, globular, with a.
hollow dimple.
Seeds 3, rather oblong, separate, gristly.
Obs. The number of pistils is not very constant.
. (Reich.) 
FENTAGYNIA.
MES1PILUS.
Tmm. 410.
Gi^rtn.
87.
Cal, Cup I leaf, concave but expanding, with 5 teeth, 
permanentl 
Bloss, Petals 5, circular, concave, fixed to the cup».
Stam.
FUaments^O^ awl-shaped, fixed to the cup.
Anthers 
simple.
ftsT.
GermeTi beneath.
S/yfes^ 3, simple, upright.
Summits 
roundish.
S. Vess, Berry globular, with a deep hollow nearly per- 
vading it, but closed by the cup.
Seeds 5, hard as bone^ bulging.
Obs. From the above description, it appears, tbat the 
CitAT£OUS^ SoRBUS, &nd'M£^Fli.us, are ver^ nearly allied, 
so as hardly to be distinguished, otherwise than hj.
the number 
of pistils.
The leaves of the j^^itf^re generally winged ; of 
atiQCratmgus angular; and ofrthe MespUw ex^tire, Link.
— 
The number of styles variable.
(Reich.) 
PY'RUS.
Toiirn.
404, 405, & 406.,.G€ertn.
87.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, concave, with 3 shallow clefts, perma- 
nent.
Segments expanding.
Bloss.
Petals 5, circular, concave, large, fixed to the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 20, awl-shaped, shorter than the blossom, 
fixed to the cup.
Anthers simple.
PisT.
Germen beneath.
Styles 5, thread-shaped, as long 
as the stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
a Pomam, somewhat globular, with a hoUowdim- 
pie, fleshy, with 5 cells, divisions membranaceous.
Seeds several, oblong, blunt, tapering to a point, at the 
base, convex on one side, flat on the other.
ICOSANDRU- POLYGYNIA.
255 
SPIILE'A.
Taurn.
141 Ulmaria, 150 FtUpendula, 
Gcertn.
69.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts, flat at the base.
Segments zqmXa, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, oblong, but rounded, fixed to the cup.
Stam« Filaments more than 20, thread-shaped, shorter 
than the blossom, fixed to the cup.
Anthers roundish* 
PisT.
Oermens 5 or more.
Styles the same number, thread* 
shaped, as long as the stamens.
Summits somewhat 
globular.
S« VEss. Capsules oblong, tapering to a point, compressed^ 
2-yalved.
Seeds few, tapering to a point, small, fixed on the inside 
the seam of the capsule.
Obs. In Spiraea Ulmaria^ the capsules are numerous, and 
placed in a circle ; in S.
Jilipendula they are numerous, and 
twisted like a cork-screw.
Linn.
POLYGYNIA.
RCySA.
T(mm.
40S.
Gcertn.
73.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf.
Tube bellying, narrow at the neck ; 
iorier globular, witli 5 divisions, expanding.
Segments 
long spear-shaped, narrow, (2 of which are in.
some 
species furnished with appendages on each side, and 
the other 2 alternate ones naked, in others only one 
segment has these appendages.) 
Bloss.
Petals 5, inversely heart-shaped, as long as the 
cup, and fixed to its neck.
Stam.
Filaments mBiiyj hair-like, very short, fixed to the 
neck of the cup.
Anthers 3-edged.
PlST.
Germens numerous, at the bottom of the cup.
Styles 
as many as there are germens, closely compressed by 
the necK of the cup ; fixed to the side of the germen.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Berry fleshy, top-shaped, coloured, soft, 
of 1 cell, crowned by imperfect segments, closed at 
the neck, formed by the tube of the cup.
Seeds numerous, oblong, rough with hair, adhering to the 
inside of the cup.
Obs. The S.
Vess.
is formed of the calyx, and resembles 
a berry.
Likn.
us ICX)SANDRIA.
POLYGYNIA.
RU^US.
Toum.
SS5.
Qcertn.
73.
. 
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 divisions.
Segfnenfs oblong, ex- 
panding, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, circular, .as long as the cup, ufuright, but 
expanding.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, shorter than the petals^ fixed 
to the ^up.
fathers roundish, compressed.
PiST.
Germens numerous.
Styles small, hairrlike, grow- 
ing on the sides o£ the germens.
Summits simpjc^ per- 
manent.
S. Vess.
Berry composed of little granulations, collected 
into a knob, which is convex above, and concave be- 
neath.
Each grani^lation hath 1 cell.
Seeds solitary, oblong.
Receptacle oi the seed-vessels 
conical, 
Obs. The little berries, or granulations, are united so at to 
form one compound berry, nor can they be separated, without 
tearing them.
Rubus saxatilis has a berry, in which the 
granulations are distinct, and Rubus Chamamorm bea«rs male 
and female flowers on different plants.
Link.
FRAGA'RIA.
Toum.
152.
GceHn. 73.
Cal. Cup l leaf, flat, with 10 shallow clefts.
Segments 
alternately narrower, the narrow ones on the outside 
the broad ones.
Bloss.
Petals 5, circular, expanding, fixed to the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 20, awl-shaped, shorter than the Moss, 
fixed to the cup.
Anthers crescent-shaped.
PiST.
Germens numerous, very small, forming a knob.
Styles simple, from the sides of the germens.
Summits 
simple.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle of the seeds a sort of berry, glo- 
bular egg-shaped, pulpy, soft, large, coloured, lopped 
at the base, deciduous.
Seeds numerous, very small, tapering to a point, scattered 
qn the surface of the receptacle.
Obs. The receptacle of the seeds in this case, is commonly 
called a berry., LxNN.
POTENTIULA.
Taurn.\53,Quinquefolium.
Gartn.
73, Pentaphyllum.
Cal. Cup l leaf, flattish, with 10 shallow clcfta.
Segments 
alternately smaller, reflected.
ICOSANDBU.
POLYCYNIA.
«7 
Bloss.
Petals 5y roundish^ (or heart-shaped^) expanding^ 
fixed by claws to the cup.
. ' .
Stam.
Filaments QO, awl-shaped^ Sorter than the petals^ 
fixed to the cup.
Anthers oblong-crescent-shaped.
PiST.
Germens numerous, very small, forming a knob.
Styles thread-shaped, as long as the stamens, fixed to 
the sides of the germens.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle of the seeds roundish, juiceless, 
very small, permanent, covered with seeds, inclosed in 
the cup.
Seeds numerous, tapering to a point.
Obs. This geilus agrees with the Potentilla, excepting only 
that it has one-fifth more in number in all the parts of the 
fructification, so th^t the two genera might be united.
Linx.
TORMENTIL'LA.
Tmrn.
I5a.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, flat, with 8 clefts, every other segment 
smaller and more acute.
Bloss.
Petals 4, inversely heart-shaped, flat, expanding, 
fixed by claws to the cup.' 
Stam.
Filaments l6, awl-shaped, half as long as the 
p^Cals, fixed to the cup.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germens 8, small, approaching so as to form a knob.
Styles thread-shaped, as long as the stamens, fixed to 
the sides of the germens.
Summits blunt.
Sp Vess.
none.
Receptacle of the seeds very small, loaded 
with seeds, and inclosed by the cup.
Seeds 8, roundish, naked.
GE^UM.
Taurn.
151, Caryophyllata.
Gartri.
74.
Cal. Cup l leaf, with 10 clefts, nearly upright.
Segments 
alternately very small and sharp.
Bloss.
Petals 5 ^ rounded; cZau/.; narrow, as long as the 
cup, fixed to the cup.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, awl-shaped, as long as the 
cup, fixed to the cup.
Anthers short, rather broad, 
blunt.
. 
Pi ST.
Germens numerous, forming a knob.
Styles long, 
hairy, fixed to the sides of the germens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle of the seed oblong, hairy, 
standing upon the reflected cup.
Seeds numerous, compressed, covered with strong hair<;, 
' furnished with a long awn formed by the style.
Vol, L S 
C5t ICOSANDRU.
POLYGYNLA..
DRY'AS.
GcBTtn. 74.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 8 divisions.
Segments expanding, 
strap-shaped^ blunt, equal, somewhat shorter than the 
blossom.
Bloss.
Petals 8, oblong, notched at the end, expanding, 
fixed to the cup.
Stam, Filaments numerous, hair-like, short, fixed to the 
cup.
Anthers small.
Pi ST.
Germens many, 'small, crowded together.
Styles 
hair-like, fixed to the sides of the germens.
Summits 
simple.
S. Vess.
none.
Seeds numerous, roundish, compressed, retsdning the 
styles, which grow very long and woolfy.
Obs. The calyx has from 6 to 10 segments, and the petals 
vary the same.
(Schreb.) 
CO'MARUM.
G(ertn.
73.
Cal. Cup l leaf, with 10 shaltofw clefts, very large, ex- 
panding, coloured.
Segments alternately smaller, and 
placed under the others, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, oblong, tapering to a point, 3 times 
smaller than the cup, to which they are fixed.
Stam.
Filaments 20, awl-shaped, fixed to the cup, as lon^ 
as the blossom^ permanent.
Anthers crescent-shape^ 
deciduous.
Pi ST.
Germens numerousy roundish, very small, forming 
a knob.
Styles simple, short, fixed to the sides of the 
germens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle of the seeds egg-shaped, fleabyA 
very large, permanent.
Seeds numerous, tapering to a point, covering the recep- 
tacle.
/ 
' ^ ^ 
[ ^59 ] 
CLASS XIII.
POLYANDRIA.
'" 
HE flowers of this class have, as its title implies, many 
stamens, that is, from 20 to 1000 or more, so that it is 
umiecessary to attempt to count them, further than to be 
satisfied that they amount to SO or upwards.
Theidtuation 
of the stamens, as standing upon the receptacle, is 
sufficient to distinguish it from the preceding class, in 
which they do not stand upon the receptacle, but either 
upon the sides Of the Calyx or else upon the Petals.
A 
regard to this circumstance will be a surer guide than an 
attention merely to the number of the stamens.
If the 
eye does not at once determine the exact situatiotiof the 
stamens, cttneftilly and slowly pull off the petals and the 
s^ments of the calyx, if the stamens remain in their 
places they may then be considered as growing upon the 
receptacle.
Obs. Most of the plants of this class are poisonous..
POLYANDRIA.
(many Stameiis.) 
MoNOOYNiA.
(1 Pistil.) 
Adcea.
Chelidonium, Papaver, 
Nymphcea^ Tilia.
Cistus.
Potcnum.
Delphinium* 
Aquilegia, 
DiGYNiA.
(2 Pistils,) 
Triotnia, (3 Pistils.) 
Pentac^ynia.
(5 Pistils.) 
^ 2 
260 POLYANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
Hexaoynu.
(6 Pistils.) 
Stratiotes.
PoLYGYNiA.
(many Pistils.) 
2^tera.
? Thalictrum, Hellelcrus, 
Arum.
Adorns.
Caltha.
Anemone.
Ranuncultts.
, Sagittaria.
Clemaiis.
Trollius.
MONOGYNU.
hCTJE/K.
Tourn.
154, Christophoriana.
Gcertn.
114.
Cai. Cup 4 leaves.
Leqfits circular, blunt, concave, shed* 
ding.' 
Bloss.
Petals 4, tapering eaqh way, laiger than the cup, 
shedding.
Stam.
Filaments about 30^ hair-like, broader towar4s the 
top.
Anthers roundish^ double, upright.
PiST.
Gi^rme/t ^g-shaped.
Style none.
iSummi/ thickish, 
obliquely depressed.
S. Vess.
Berry oval-globular, smooth, with 1 lurrow, and 
1 cell.
Sheds many, semi-globular, standing in a double row.
CHELIDOTNIUM.
Tourn.
Il6 & 130, Glaucmm.
Gcertn.
115.
# 
Cal. Cup 2-leaved, roundish.
Leo/f/i somewhat e^- 
shaped^ concave, blunt, shedding.
Bloss.
Petals ^y circular, flat, expanding, large, narrower 
at the base.
Stam.
Fikmients about 30, flat, broader upwards, shorter 
than the blossom.
-^//k?r5 oblong, compressed, blunt, 
upright, double.
PisT.
Germen cylindrical, as long as the stamens.
SiylB 
none.
Summit a knob, cloven.
S. Vess.
Pod cylindrical, generally with 2 valves.
Seeds many, egg-shaped, shining, adhering to the little 
stalk that connects them with the receptacle.
Becep^ 
tacle narrow, situated between the seams of the valves, 
and applied close to the seaxns through their whole 
length, continuing entire.
POLYANDRIA.
MONOGYNIA.
261 
Obs. The Ch. majus produces a long pod of 1 'cell ; the 
Ch, glaudum and Ch. comiculatum a long pod of 2 capsules, and 
the Ch. hyhridum a long pod with 3 valves.
Linn.
Ch. majus 
has a capsule resembling a pod, with knots where the seeds are 
placed, it has 1 cell and 2 valves.
The seeds are eg^-sbaped, 
with a kind of crest along the back, and fixed by each end to 
a thread-shaped receptacle, and between the edges of the 
valves.
The Ch. glaucium et hybridtmi have a very long pod- 
like capsule, compressed transversely, of 2 cells, 2 valves, and 
a partition inserted between the edges of the valves.
The seeds 
are globular, and fixed in hollow cavities to the middle of the 
spongy receptacle.
(Osertn.) 
PAPA'VER.
Taum.
11 9, 120.
GtBrtn.
60.
Cal, Oup 2-leaved^ egg-shaped^ nidced at the end.
Lettfits 
Q, somewhat ^g->shaped^ concave^ blimt^ shedding.
Bloss.
Petals 4, circular, flat, expanding, large, narrowest 
at the base, alternately smaller.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, hair-like, much shorter than 
the blossom.
Anthers oblong, compressed, upright^ 
blunt.
PiST.
Gcrmew nearly globular, large.
Style noat.
Summit 
target-shaped, flat, radiating.
S. Vess.
Capside of 1 cell, divided half way into many 
cells, opening by several apertures beneath the crown 
formed by the large and flat summit.
Seeds numerous, very small.
Receptacle consisting of as 
many longitudinal plaits as there are rays in the sum- 
mit, connected to the sides of the capsule.
Obs. The seed-vessel varies in figure, from globular to pb- 
long, and the number of rays in the summit are likewise vari- 
ous.
The species may be divided into such as have smooth and 
such as have rough hairy seed-vessels.
Linn.
NYMPHiE'A.
Town.
137 & 138.
G^srtn.
I9.
Cal. Cup beneath, 4 -leaved, large, coloured on the upper 
surface, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals numerous, (often 15,) fixed to the side of 
the germen, in more than 1 row.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, (often 70,) flat, crooked, 
blunt, short.
Anthers oblong, fixed to the edge of the 
filaments.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped, largp.
Style none.
Summit 
circular, flat, central, sitting, marked with rays, scol- 
loped at the edge, permanent.
363 POLYANDMA.
MONOGYNIA.
m 
S. Vess, Berry hard, egg-shaped, fleshy, rough, narrow 
at the neck, crowned at the top, with many cells, (lo 
to 1 5,) filled with pulp.
Seeds many, roundish.
Obs, The Nymphjca lutea has a cup composed of 5 circular 
leafits, and the petals are smaller than in the other species.
LiNlf.
TIL'IA.
Toum.
381.
Gcertn.
113.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, concave, coloured, almost a< 
large as the blossom, deciduous.
Bloss.
Petals 5, oblong, blunt, scolloped, at the end.
Stam.
Filaments many, (30 or more,)' awl-shaped, as 
long as the blossom.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Style thread-shaped, as long as 
the stamens.
Summit with 5 blunt edges.
S. Vess.
Capsule like leather, globular, with 5 cells, and 
5 valves, opening at the base.
Seeds solitary, roundish.
Obs. In general only 1 seed comes to perfection, and this 
pushes aside the others, which are barren, so that an incautious 
observer would be apt to pronounce, that the capsule has but 
1 cell.
Link, 
CISTUS.
Tmm. 136, & 198, Helianthemum.Giertn.
76.
Cal. Cup 5 leaves, permanent.
Leafits circular, concave, 
2 of them smaller, placed below, but alternating with 
the others.
Bloss.
Petals 5, circular, flat, expanding, very large.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, hair-like, shorter than the 
blossom.
Anthers roundish, small.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Style simple, as long as the sta- 
mens.
Summits flat, circular.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, covered by the cup.
Seeds numerous, roundish, small.
Obs. The essential character of the genus consists in the 
2 smaller and alternate leaves of the calyx.
Some species have 
a capsule of 1 cell and 3 valves, in others it has 5 or 10 ceUs 
and as many valves as there are cells.
Linx.
POLYANDRIA.
DIGYNIA.
S6d 
DIOYNU.
POTE^RIUM.
TVwm. 66, Pimpinella.
ticertn.
32.
Male flowers forming a spike.
Cal. CiMp 4 leaves.
Z^ea/^^^egg^shapedjcoloured, shedding.
Bloss.
with 4 divisions.
Segments egg-8ha|>ed9 concave^ 
expanding, permanent.
Stam.
Filaments many^ (30 to 50,) hair-like, very long, 
limber.
Anthers roundish, double.
Female flowers, above the male, on the same spike.
Cal. Cup 33 above, 
Bloss.
Petal 1, wheel*'shaped.
Tule short, roundish, 
closing at the mouth.
Border with 5 divisions.
Seg- 
ments egg-shaped, flat, reflected, permanent.
PiST.
Germens 2, egg-oblong, within the tube of the 
blossom.
Styles 2, hair-like, coloured, limber, as long 
as the blossom.
Summits pencil-shaped, coloured^ 
S» Vess.
Berry formed of the tube of the blossom, grown 
thick, hard, and closed.
Seeds 2.
Obs. p.
Sdnguisorba bears a berry which is angular and 
juiceless, its seeds are 4-corncred, tapering to a point at each 
end.
The male flowers produce 2 feeble pistils.
Likn.
and 
the calyx has 2, 3, or 4 leaves.
(Reich.) 
ft 
TRIGYNIA.
m 
DELPHINIUM.
7bMm.241.
G^'fn.6b.
Cal. Cw^none.
Bloss.
Petals 5, unequal, placed in a circle, the upper- 
most before bhmter than the rest, behind extended into 
a straight, tubular, long, blunt horn, the other ^g- 
spear- shaped, expanding, nearly equal.
Nectary cloven, its front standing in the upper part 
of the circle of the petals, and its hmder part inclosed 
by the tube of the uppermost petal.
8tam.
Filaments many, (15 to 30,) awl-shaped, broadest 
at the base, very small, leaning towards the uppermost 
petal.
Anthers upnghi, small.
PiST.
Germens 3 or 1 , egg-shaped, ending in styles as long 
as the stamens.
Summits simple, reflected.
S. Vess.
Capsules 3 or 1, egg-awl-shaped, straight, with 
1 valve, opening inwards.
Seeds many, angular.
264 POLYANDRIA.
PENTAGYNIA.
PENTAGYNU.
AQUILE'GIA.
Toum.
142.
Gcertn.
lis, 
Cal. Ctit noTjie.
Bloss.
Petals 5, spear-^-shaped, flat^ expanding^ equal.
Nectaries d^eqjual^sutematingwith the petals^ horned^ 
{rradually widening upwards^ me mouth ascending ob- 
iquely outwards, fixad to the receptade inwardly, ex- 
tending below into a long tapering tube, blutit at the 
end.
Stam.
Filaments many, (30 to 40,) awl^shaped, the outer 
ones the shortest.
Anthers oblong, upright, as tall as 
the nectaries.
PisT.
Germens 5, egg-oblong, ending in awl-shaped 5/yfe5, 
longer than the stamens.
Summits upright, undivided : 
10 short, wrinkled, chaffy substances separate and in- 
close the germens: ^ 
S. Vess; Capsules 5, distinct, cylindrical, parallel, straight, 
tapering to a point, with 1 valve, opening from th« 
point inwardly.
Sbeds many, egg-sh^ed, keeled^ fixed to the opening 
seam, 
HEXAGYNIA.
STRATIOTES.
Gcertn.
14.
Male flowers.
Cal. Sheath 2-leaved, containing 3 or 5 florets.
Leafits 
boat-shaped, compressed, blunt, approaching, keeled, 
nearly equal, permanent.
Cup 1 leaf, with 3 divisions, upright, deciduous.
Eloss.
Petals 3, inversely heart-shaped, upright, but 
expanding, twice as large as the cup, 
rIectarwsQO, resembbng anthers, strap-spear-shaped, 
acute, placed in a circle, standing on the receptacle.
Stam.
Filaments 12, thread-shaped, shorter than the 
nectaries, fixed to the receptacle* Anthers strap-shaped^ 
upright.
Female flowers.
Cal, Sheath as above, but inclosing only 1 floret.
Cup as above, superior.
Bi#oss, as above.
Nectaries as above, but rather larger.
POLYANDRIA.
POLYGYNIA.
26s 
'PiST* Germen beneath^ e^-shaped^ but with & angles^ 
and compressed.
Styies 6, divided down to the base.
Sunvmts simple^ bent outwards.
'S.
Vess.
Berry egg-shaped, taperinff at each end, with 
6 sides, and 6 cells 5 pulp pellucid.' 
Seeds many, oblong, cylindrical.
Ob 8.
Nectaries from 21 to 31.
Stamens from 11 to 13.
(Schreb.) The Stratiotes ahndeSy in cold climates, bears herma- 
phrodite flowers, with 20 stamens in each.
(Gaertn.) 
POLYGYNU.
ZOSTE'RA.
Gi^rtn.
19.
Male flowers.
Cal. Sheath none, except the base of the leaf.
Inclosing 
the spike-stalk, approaching, and notched on each side 
towards the.
top.
Spike-stalk strap-shaped, flat, bearing stamens on 
its upper, and pistils on its under side.
Cup none.
Bu)ss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments alternate, numerous, very short, fixed 
to the spike-stalk above the germens.
Anthers, 1 on 
each filament, egg-oblong, needing, blunt, awl-shaped 
and crooked upwards ana backwards.
Female flowers.
Cal. as above.
Cup none.
Bloss.
none.
PisT.
Germens fewer, egg-shaped, compressed, alternate, 
2-edged, nodding, fixed by the top to a little fruit- 
stalk.
Style, 1 on each germen, sample.
Summits 2, 
hair-like.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, beaked, terminated by the 
style, ratner compressed, membranaceous, transparent, 
or 1 cell, without valves, (Gsertn.) opening length- 
wise at a lateral angle.
(Linn.) 
Seed single, elliptical, compressed, scored.
(Gaertn.) 
A'^RUM.
Tourn.
69.
Gcertn.
84.
Male flowers on the same fruit-stalk with the females, 
closely crowded, between a double row of tendrils.
Cal. Sheath of 1 leaf, very large, oblong, lapped round at 
the base, approaching at tne top, compressed in the 
middle, coloured on tne inside.
266 POLYANDRTA.
POLYGYNIA.
Sheathed Fruit^stalk club-shaped^ undivided^ a little 
shorter than the sheath^ coloured^ set round with ger- 
mens on the lower part, above the germens, shrivelling* 
Cupnont, 
BLOSS.none.
* • 
Nectaries^ thick at the base, ending in thread-shaped 
tendrils, placed in two rows round the middle of the 
fruit-stalk* 
Stam.
FilcBments none.
Anthers sitting, 4-comered.
Female flowers on the lower part of the fruit-stalk, 
near together.
Cal. Sheath and sheathed Fruit-stalk as above.
r 
Ctip nont.
Bloss.
none.
Fist.
Germens each inversdy egg-shaped.
Style none.
Summit bearded with soft hairs.
S. Vess.
Berry globular, of 1 cell.
Seeds many, roundish.
Obs. The wonderful and unparalleled structure of this flower 
hath given rise to many disputes amongst the most eminent 
Botanists.
— ^The Receptacle is lengthened out into a naked club, 
with germens surrounding its base.
. The stamens^ which is truly 
wonderful, are fixed to the receptacle more witiin than the 
germens, and consequently standing less in need of hlaments to 
elevate them.
Hence it may be said to be an inverted flower.
— What are the above-mentioned threads noticed under the 
name of tendrils ?
Linn.
ANEMCKNE.
Toum.
J47 ^ U8.
Gcertn.
74.
Cal. none.
Bloss.
Petals in 2 or 3 rows, rather oblong, 3 in eaich row.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, hair-like, naif as long as 
the blossom.
Anthers double, upright.
PiST.
Germens numerous, forming a Knob.
Styles taper.
Summits blunt.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle globular, or oblong, with 
hollow dots.
Seeds many, tapering to a point, retaining the style.
Obs. The Anemone Pulsatilla has a many-cloven leafy 
Involucrum, and the tails of the seeds are hairy.
Linn.
CLE'MATIS.
Toum.
150, Clematitis.
Gcertn.
74.
Cal. Cup none.
Bloss.
Petals 4, flexible, oblong.
POLYANDRIA.
POLYGYNIA.
367 
Stam.
Fikmienis many^ awl-shaped^ shorter than the 
blossom.
Anthers fixed to the sides of the filaments.
PisT.' Germens many^ roimdish^ compressed^ ending ia 
awl-shaped Styles, longer than the stamens.
Summit 
simple.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle a small knob.
Sbeds many> roundish^ compress^^ retaining the styles 
which is variously shaped.
THALICTRUM.
Tourn.
143.
Gcsrtn.'l^^ 
Cal. Cup none, (unless we call the blossom Che cup.) 
Bloss.
Petals 4, circular, blunt, concave, shedding.
Stam.
Filaments many, broadest in the upper part, com- 
pressed, longer than the blossom.
Anthers oblong, 
upright.
Pi ST.
Germens many, roundish, often standing on little 
foot-stalks.
Styles none.
Summits thick.
S. Vess.
none.
Seeds many, furrowed, egg-shaped, without awns* 
Obs. The number of Stamens and Pistils is different in dif- 
ferent species.
Linn.
In some species there are styles of 
considerable length.
In no well known genus are the species 
niQre difficult to distinguish and characterise than in this.
ADO'NIS.
Gcertn.
74.
Cal. Cup 5 leaves.
Leqfits blunt, concave, a little co- 
loured, deciduous.
Bloss.
Petals 5 to 15, oblong, blunt, shining.
Stam.
Filaments Tmny, very short, awl-shaped.
Anthers 
oblong, bent inwards.
PiST.
Germetis numerous, forming a knob.
Styles none.
Summits acute, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle oblong, spike-like.
Seeds numerous, irregular, angular, without awns, bulg- 
ing at the base, bent back at the point with a small 
projection.
RANUN'CULUS.
Tourn, 149.
Gcertn.
74, 
Cal. Cup 5 leaves.
Leqfits egg-shaped, concave, a little 
coloured, deciduous.
Bloss.
Petals 5, blunt, shining, with small claws.
S68 POLYANDRIA.
POLYGYNIA.
Nectary a little cavity^ just above the claw of each 
petal.
Stam.
Filaments many, neariv half as long as the petals.
Anthers upright, oblong, blunt, double.
Fist.
Germens numerous, forming a knob.
Styles none.
Summits reflected, verv small.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle connecting the seeds by very 
short foot-stalks.
Seeds many, irregular, crooked at the point, figure 
various.
Obs. The essential character of this genus consists in the 
n^ctaryj the other parts of the flower are inconstant.
This 
nectary is in some species a naked pore, in others, encompassed 
by a cylindrical border, and, in others again, closed by a scale 
w'hichis notched at the end.
In the R.^cana, the cup has 3 
leaves, and the blossoms more than 5-petals.
The R.
hederaceus 
has only 5 stamens, and the R.
sceldratus an awl-shaped recep- 
tacle, and the fruit in a spike.
In some species the seeds are 
Toundish, in others depressed ; sometimes they are beset with 
prickles like a hedge-hog, and sometimes they are but few in 
number.
Linn.
TROL'LIUS.
Geertn.
118.
Cal. none.
Bloss.
Petals about 14, nearly eg^-shaped, deciduous, 3 
in each of the 3 outer rows, and 5 in the iimermost.
Nectaries 9, strap-shaped, flat, crooked, perforated 
on the inner side at the base.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, bristle-shaped, shorter than 
the blossom.
Anthers upright.
PiST.
Germens numerous, sitting, like pillars.
Styles none.
Summits sharp-pointed, shorter than the stamens.
S. Vess.
Capsules numerous, forming a knob^ e^-shaped^ 
with a crooked point.
Seeds solitary.
HELLEB'ORUS.
Tmm. 144.
Gartn.65.
Cal. Cup none, (unless we reckon the blossom such^ 
which in some species is permanent.) 
Bloss.
Petals 5, circular, blunt, large.
Nectaries many, very short, placed in a circle, con- 
sisting of one leaf, tubular, narrowest beneath.
Mouth 
with 2 lips, upright^ notched at the end, the inner lip 
the shortest.
POLYANDRIA, POLYGYNIA.
269 
Stam.
FUamenis rmmerous, awl-shaped.
Anthers com^ 
pressed^ narrowest in tfie lower part, upfight.
Fist.
Germens generally 6, compressed.
Styles awl- 
shaped.
Summits rather thick.
S. Vess.
Capsules compressed, keeled at both edges, the 
lower edge the shortest, the upper the most convex, 
opening* 
Seeds several, round, fixed to the seams.
CALTHA.
Toum.
145, Populago, Gcertn.
us.
Cal. Clip none.
Bloss.
Petals 5, egg-shaped, flat, expanding, large, 
shedding.
Stam.
FiUxments numerous, thread-shaped, shorter than 
the petals.
Anthers compressed, blunt, upright.
Fist.
Germens from 5 to 10, oblong, compressed, upright.
Styles none.
Summits simple.
S, Vess.
Capsules from 5 to 10, short, tapering to a point, 
expanding, keeled at both edges, opening at the upper 
seam.
Seeds many, roundish, with an edging, fixed to the upper 
seam.
SAGITTA'RIA.
Gasrtn, 84.
JWafe flowers, numerous.
Cal. Cup 3 leaves.
Leafits egg-shaped, concave, perma- 
nent.
Bloss.
Petals 3, circular, blunt, flat, expanding, thrice 
as l^ge as the cup.
Stam.
Filaments many, (generally 24,) awl-shaped, col- 
lected into a little head.
Anthers upright, as long as 
the cup.
JRjmafe flowers fewer> beneath the other.
Cal. Cup as above.
Bloss.
Petals 3, as above.
PisT.
Germens numerous, compressed, forming a little 
head, bulging on the outer side, ending in very short 
styles.
Summits acute, permanent.
S. Vess.
none.
Receptacle globular, and set round with 
the seeds so as to form a globe.
S£EDsnumerous,,0blong, compressed, encompassed length- 
wise by a broad membranaceous border, bulging on 
one sidcjf tapering towards each end.
C 270 1 
CLASS XIV.
DIDYNAMIA.
(2 Stamens longer.) 
X HE essential character of this Class consists in the 
Flowers being furnished with 4 stamens, 9 of which are 
Ions, and 2 short.
The short stamens stand next together 
and adjoining to the style of the pistil.
They are covered 
by tlie blossom, which is irregular in its shape.
This 
Class comprehends the whirled, the lipped] the masked, 
the §apin^, and the grinning flowers of other authors.
It 
admits ofthe following Natural Character : 
Cal* Cup 1 leaf, upright, tubular, with 5 clefts.
Segments 
miequal, pennanent.
Bloss.
I petal, upright^ the base tubular, containing 
honey, and serving for a nectary.
Border generally 
gaping, upper lip straight, lower lip expanding, with 
3 segments, the middle one the broadest.
Stam.
Filamenis 4, strap-shaped, fixed to the tube of the 
bloss.
but leaning towards the back of it.
Filaments 
all parallel, seldom taller than the blossom.
The 2 
middle ones shorter than those on each side.
Anthers 
generally covered by the upper lip of the blossom, and 
approaching each other so as to stand in pairs.
PliST.
Germen generally superior.
Style single, thread- 
shaped, bent m the same manner as the filaments, and 
I generally standing in the midst of them, but somewhat 
onger, and a little crooked at the top.
Summit gene- 
rally cloven.
S. Vess.
either none, (as in the first Order,) but when 
there is one, (as in the second Order}) it generally con- 
sists of 2 cells.
Seeds in the first Order 4, seated at the bottom of the 
cup.
In the seco?id Order many, fixed to the recepta- 
cle, which is placed in the middle of the seed-vessel.
Obs. The flowers of this class are, for the most part, nearly 
upright, but leaning a little from the stem, so that the blossom 
may more effectually cover the anthers from the rain, and the 
pollen more easily fall upon the summit.
The plants in the first 
Order of this Class are odoriferous, cephalic, and icsolvent.
None of them are poisonous.
DIDYNAMIA.
GYMNOSPERMIA* 371.
Gtmnospermia.
(Seeds naked.) 
Ajuga.
Teucrium* 
Nepeta.
Verbena.
Mentha.
Glecoma.
Lamium.
Galeopsis.
Galeobdolon.
Betonica.
Stachys, 
Ballota.
Marruhium, 
Leormrus.
Cl'mopodium.
Origanum.
Thymus.
Melissa.
Melittis.
Scutellaria.
Prunella.
Angiospermia.
(Seeds covered.) 
B<nrtsia.
Rhinanthii9* 
Euphrasia.
Melampynim, 
Lathrcea.
Pedicularis.
Antirrhinum.
Scrophularia.
Digitalis.
Linncea.
Silthorpia.
Limosella.
Orobanche.
GYMNOSPERMU.
A^JUGA.
Tmrn.
98, Bugula^ &t Chamcepitys.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, short, with 5 shallow clefts, nearly equal, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal gaping.
Tube cylindrical, crooked.
Upper 
lip very small, upright, cloven, blunt.
Lower lip 
large, expanding, with 3 segments, blunt, middle seg- 
ment large, inversely heart-shaped, lateral segments 
small.
Stam.
Filaments 4, (2 short, and 2 long,) awl-shaped, 
upright, taller than the upper lip.
Anthers double.
PiST.
Germefi with 4 divisions.
Style thread-shaped, 
agreeing in size and situation with the stamens.
Sum- 
mits 2, slender, the lowermost the shortest.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup closes and retains the seed.
Seeds 4, rather long.
S7< DIDYNAMtA.
GYMNOSPERMIA.
TEU'CRIUM, Toum.
97, ChmuBdrySy & 98.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts, nearly equal^ 
acute, bulging on one side the base, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube cylindrical, short, ending 
in a crooked mouth.
Upper Up upright, acute, deeply 
divided, even lower than its base.
Segments standing 
wide.
Lower lip with 3 clefts, expanding, lateral seg- 
ments a little upright, of the shape of the upper lip, the 
middle one large, circular.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, longer than the upper 
lip of the blossom, and projecting between its seg- 
ments.
Anthers small.
PiST* Gernten with 4 divisions.
Style thread-shaped, 
agreeing in size and situation with the stamens.
Sum- 
miis 2, slender.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup remaining unchanged contains 
the seeds within it.
Seeds 4, roundish.
Obs. The very deep .division of the upper lip of the blossom, 
and its segments standing so wide apart, give the appearance of 
a flower without any upper lip.
The T.
CkamcBdrys has a tubular 
calyx, and bears it^ flowers in the bosom of the leaves.
Linn.
NEFETA, Toum.
95, Cataria.
Gal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, cylindrical ; mmtth with 5 teeth, 
acute, upright, upper teeth the longest, the lower most 
expanded.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
TwJe cylindrical, crooked; border 
open.
Mouth expanding, heart-shaped, terminated by 
2 very short, reflected, blunt segments.
Upper lip 
uprigfit, circular, notched at the end.
Loiver lip circu- 
. lar, concave, larger, entire, a little scolloped at the edge.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 long, and 2 short, awl-shaped ap- 
proaching, covered by the upper lip.
Anthers fixed 
sidewise.
PiST.
Germen with 4 clefts.
Style thread-shaped, agree- 
ing in length and situation with the stamens.
Summit 
cloven, acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup standing upright contains the 
seeds.
^ 
Seeds 4, somewhat egg-shaped.
Obs. If we reckon the segments of the mouth as a part of 
the lower lip, that lip must then be.
considered as having three 
divisions.
Linn.
DIDYNASIIA.
GYMNOSPERMIA.
ays 
VERBENA.
Tmam.
94.
Gcertn.
66.
< \ 
9 ' 
Cal. Cup\ leaf^ angular, tubular^ slender^ .permanent^ 
with 5 teeth, 1 of the teeth lopped.
Bloss, 1 peteil^ unequal, Tii)e cylindrical, straight, aa 
long as the cup, dilated, and bowed inward towards 
. the top.
JBorefer expanding, with 5 shallow clefts.
Scg- 
rrverUs rOuiided, nearly equal.
Stam.
Filaments 4, like bristles, very short, concealed 
within the tube of the blossom, 2 of them longer.
Anthers crooked.
PiST.
Germen 4-cornered.
Style simple, thread-shaped, 
as long as the tube.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
very fine and thin, but generally none, the cup 
containing the seeds.
Seeds 2 or 4, oblong.
Obs. LinnaBus allotted a place to this genus in the class 
DiANDRiA, because some of the species have only 2 stamens, 
but as the species found with us has uniformly 4, and its struc- 
ture in other respects agreeing with the plants of this class, it 
is introduced here, where the English Botanist would expect to 
find it.
MENTHA.
T&um.
89.
Cal.
'Cup 1 leaf, tubular, upright^ with 5 teeth, equal, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, upright, tubular, rather longer than the 
cup.
Border wim 4 divisions, nearly equal.
The 
upper Segment broadest, and notched at tlie end.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, upright, distant, the 2 
next each other die longest.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen cloven into 4.
Style thread-shaped, up- 
right, longer than the blossom.
Summit cloven, ex- 
panding.
S. Vbss.
none.
Cup upright, containing the seeds.
Seeds 4, small.
Obs; In Mentha aquatica the stamens are nearly all of a 
length.
GLECO'MA.
Curt.
143., 
Cal. Cup l leaf^ tubular, cylindrical, scored, very small, 
permanent ; ririi with 5 clefts.
Segments unequal, ta- 
pering to a point.
Vol. I.
T 
274 blOYNAMlA.
GYKlNOSPERMIA.
Bloss.
1 petals gaping.
Ttibe slender^ compressed.
Upper 
lip upright, oliint, with a shallow cleh.
Lower Up 
expanding, laige, blunt, with 3 seraients^ the nudcSe 
one largest, and notched at the end.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 3 long and S short, covered by the 
upper lip.
Anthers of each pair ofstatnens approaching 
so as tx) form a cross.
PiST.
Germen cloven into 4.
Style thread-shaped, lean- 
ing under the upper lip.
Summil doven, acute.
S. Vkss.
none.
The seeds at the bottom of the cup.
Seeds 4, egg-shaped.
hA/MlVM.
Toum.
85.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, wider towards the top, with 5 
teeth, and awns, nearly equal, permanent.
Bloss.
l petal, gaping.
Tube cylindrical, very short.
Border open.
Mouth inflated, compressed, bulging, 
with a little tooth turned backwards on each side.
Upper lip vaulted, circular, blunt, entire.
Lower lip 
shorter, inversely heart-shaped, notched at the end, 
reflected.
. - ' 
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, 2 long and 2 short, co- 
vered by the upper lip.
Anthers oblong, hairy.
PisT.
Germen with 4 clefts.
Style thread-shaped, agree- 
ing in length and situation with the stamens.
Summit 
cloven, acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup remaining open contains the 
seeds in its bottom, forming a flat surface.
Seeds 4, short, 3 -cornered, convex on one side, lopped 
at each end.
. GALEOP'SIS.
E. lot.
2^07.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, with 5 teeth, ending m sharp 
awns as long as the tube, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube short.
Border open.
Mouth sonrewhat wider than the tube, and as loi^ as 
the cup.
Above the base of the lower lip on each side 
lies a little tapering tooth, hollow on the under surface.
Upper lip circular, conckve, serrated at the top.
Jjmer 
lip with 3 segments^ the lateral dnes circular^ (be 
middle one larger, scolloped, notched at the end.
DIDYNAMIA.
GYMNOSPERMIA.
475 
S^AM.
W^iomeni^^i slon^ an4 2 ghort^ awl-shaped^ co* 
vefcd by the upper lip.
Anthers roundish, cloven.
PiST.
Germen wim 4 clefts.
Style thread-shaped, pee- 
ing in length and situation with the stamois.
Swmmk 
cloven, acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The Oup stiffs straight, containing the 
seed in its bottom.
Obs. In G.
Ladanum the upper lip of the blossom is a little re- 
flected, but not very evidently scolloped.
Link.
The G.
Gale- 
obdolon has no teeth on the lower lip of the blossom, but it is di- 
vided into three equal segments, and the upper lip is entire, being 
only fringed with a few soft hairs.
On these accounts Mr. Hud- 
son made a distinct genus of it, under the name of Croleobdolon.
GALEOBDOLON.
(Huds.) Curt.
223.
Cal. Invohicrum underneath the whirls.
Leqfits strap- 
shaped, acute, shorter than the calyx.
Cup 1 leaf, tubular, bell-shaped, with 5 teeth, taper- 
ing to a point,, the upper tooth upright, distant, the 2 
lower expanding.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube cylindrical, short.
Upper 
lip oval, vaulted, nearly entire, fringed, woolly.
Lower lip shorter, with 3 clefts, unequal, the lateral 
Segments egg-shaped, tapering to a point, the outer 
edge bent back, the middle Segments longer, straight, 
tapering to a point.
$TAM.
Fikiments 4, awl-sh.aped, covered by the upper lip, 
2 of them longer.
Anthers in pairs, oolong, double, 
convex above, concave underneath.
PiST.
Germen with 4 divisions.
Style thread-shaped, of 
the length and situation of the stamens.
Summit 
cloven, acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup unchanged contains the seeds in 
its bottom.
* 
S^EDs 4, short, 3 -square, lopped, (Huds.) 
BETONTCA.
Toum.
96- 
CUx. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, cylindrical, 5-toothed, awned, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube cylindrical, crooked.
Upper 
Up circular, entire, flat, upright.
Lower lip with 3 
s^ments, the middle one broader, circular^ ^notched 
at the end.
T2 
276 DIDYNAMIA.
GYMNOSPERMIA.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 3 long and 2 shorty as long a» tbe 
mouth of the blossom, and.
leaning towards the upper 
lip.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen with 4 divisions.
Style in shape, size, and 
situations, resembling the stamens.
Summit cloven.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup Contains the seeds.
Seeds 4, egg-shaped.
STA'CHYS.
Tourn.
86.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, angular, with 5 shallow clefts, 
permanent, teeth awl -shaped, tapering to a point, 
nearly equal.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tule very short.
Mouth oblong, 
bulging downwards towards the base.
Upper lip up- 
right, somewhat egg-shaped, vaulted, generally notched 
at the end.
Lower lip large, with 3 segments, the 2 
outer segments reflected, the middle one very large, 
notched at the end, and folded back.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 long and 2 short, awl -shaped; 
after flowering, bent to the sides of the mouth.
An- 
thers simple.
PiST.
Germen with 4 divisions.
Style thread-shaped, 
agreeing in length and situation with the stamens.
Summit cloven, acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cupy but little changed, contains 
the seeds.
Seeds 4, ^g-shaped, angular.
Obs. ItiS.
arvensis the upper lip of the blossom is very entire.
BALLCyTA.
T(mrtt.'B5.
Cal. Involucrum beneath the whirls, formed of strap- 
shaped leaves.
Cup 1 leai^ tubular, salver-shaped, regular, with 5 
corners, and 10 scores, oblong, upright, permanent.
Rim acute, open, plaited, with 5 teeth.
Bloss.
1 petal gaping.
Tube cylindrical, as long as the 
cup.
L^per/Jp upright, egg-shaped, entire, scolloped, 
concave.
Lower tip with 3 segments, blunt, the middle 
one the largest, notched at the end, 
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 long and 2 short, awl-shaped, lean- 
ing towards and shortei; than the upper lip.
Anthers 
olJlong, lateral.
DIDYNAMIA- GYMNOSPERMtA.
Q71 
PiST.
-Germen with 4 clefts.
Style thread-shaped, in 
shape and situation similar to the stamens.
Summit 
slender, cloven.
, .
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup unchanged contains the seeds.
Seeds 4, egg-shaped.
Obs. It has the involucrum of the Clinopodium, the calyx 
of the Marrubium, and the blossom of the Stachys, but is 
most nearly allied to the Marrubium.
Linn.
L MARRU'BIUM.
Tottr/i.
91.
Cal« Clip 1 leaf,, salver-shaped, tubular, with ^0 scores.
, Rim equal, open, generally with 10 teeth; ^e^^A alter- 
nately smaller.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube cylindrical.
Border open.
- Mimth long, tubular.
Upper lip upright, narrow^ 
acute, cloven.
Lower /tp oroader, reflected, with 3 
shallow segments, middle segment broad, notched at 
the end ; me lateral s^ments acute.
St AM.
Filaments 4, 2 long and S short, shorter than the 
blossom, covered by the uppar lip.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germe?i with 4 clefts.
Style thread-shaped, agree- 
ing in length and situation with the stamens.
Summit 
cloven.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup closed at the neck, but expanded 
at the rim, contains the seeds.
* < 
Seed?
4, rather oblong.
LEONU'RUS.
Tew/m..87.
Cal. Cup- 1 leaf, tubular, cylindrical, but angular with 5 
edges, and 5 teeth, permanent.
.. 
Bloss.
l petal, gaping.
Tube narrow.
Border opening, 
with a long mouth.
Upper Up the longest, semi-cylin- 
. drical, concave, bul^ng, roundish and blunt at the end, 
entire, covered with soft hairs.
Lower lip reflected, with 
3 divisions.
Segments spear-shaped, nearly equal.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 long and 2 short, covered by the 
upper lip.
Anthers oblong, compressed, cloven half 
way down, fixed sidewise, sprinkled with very small, 
solid, shining, elevated, globular particles.
PiST.
Germens^.
Style thread-shaped, agreeing in length 
and situation with the stamens.
Summits cloven, acute.
V 
srrs DIDYNAMIA.
GYMNOSPERMDL 
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup remamiiig unchaooged <^ntaina 
the seeds within it.
• • 
Seeds 4, oblongs convex on one side, angular on the 
other.
Obs. The lip of the blossom varies in dififcretit species.
(Reich.) in L.
Cardiaca it is egg-shaped.
CLINOPO'DIUM.
Toum.
92.
Cal. Invobwrum of many bristle-^aped, leares^ as long 
as the cup, placed under the whirls.
Cup 1 ksu> cylindrical, very slightly cdrVed. MouiU 
with s lips.
Upper Up broader^ with 3 segttie;nts, acute, 
reflected.
Lciver lip deeply divided, slender, bent 
inwards.
Btoss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube short, gradually widening 
into a mouth.
Upper lip upright, conc^e, blunt, 
notched at the end.
Lcnver Up with 3 clefts, blunt.
Middle Segment broader, notched at the end.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 3 long and 3 short, covered by the 
upper lip.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen with 4 divisions.
Style thread-shaped, 
agreeing in length and situation with the stamens.
Summits cloven, "acute, compressed.
S. VE$ls«.none.
The Cup closing at the neck, and bellying 
out in the body, contains the seeds.
Seeds 4, egg-shaped.
ORIG^ANUM.
Tourn.
94.
* 
Cal. Invohicrum spike-like, tiled with Floral-kaves, egg- 
shaped, coloured, compound.
Cup uneaual, various.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tule cylindrical, compressed.
Upper lip upnght, flat, blunt, notched at tne end.
Lower lip with 3 clefts, segments nearly equal.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 long and 2 short, thread-shaped, as 
long as the blossom.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen with 4 clefts.
Style thread-shaped, leaning 
towards the upper lip of the blossom.
Summits very 
slightly cloven.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup closing a little contains the seeds.
Seeds 4, ^-shaped.
\ 
PIDYNAMIA.
GyMNOSPERMIA.
97^ 
Obs. The Involucrwn of the cups constitutes its essential 
cliaracter.
The cup, in some species, is nearly equal, with 5 
teeth ; in others it consists of 2 lips, the upper lip large and 
entire, the lower lip hardly perceptible ; in others again, the 
cup is formed of 2 leaves.
Linn.
THYMUS.
Tmrn.
93.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubiikr, cloven half way down into 2 
lips, permanent.
Mouth closed by soft hairs.
Upper 
lap broader, flat, upright, with 3 teeth*.
Lower lipvnih 
^ bristles, of equal length* 
Bloss.
1 petal, ga^nn^.
TuLe as ion^as the dup.
Mouth 
small.
Upper lip short, flat, upright,, notched at the 
" end, bliait.
Lmver lip loi^, expanding broader, with 
3 segments, blunt; middle Segment broadest.
Stam.
rikiiments4y S long, and @ short, crodced.
Anthers 
small.
PisT.
Qermen with 4 divisions..
Style thriead-shaped.
Summit cloven, acute.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup becoming narrow at the neck 
incloses the 'seeds.
. .
Seeds 4, small, roundish.
« • 
MELIS'SA, Toum.
91 ^ 92, Calami^tha.
Cal. Cup l leaf, somewhat bell-shaped, dry ai^d skinny, 
a little expanding, angular, scored, permanent.
Mouth 
with 2 lips.
Upper lip with 3 teeth, reflected, expand- 
ing, flat, Jjower lip shgrt, rather pointed, divided.
Bloss.
1 petalj gaping.
Tule cylindrical.
Mouth opeu^ 
Upper lip short, upright, vaulted, roundish, cloven.
Jjmj&r lip with % clefts^ the v^iddle Segment largest^ 
heart-shaped.
Stam.
Filaments 4, awl-shaped, 2 as long as the blossom, 
the other 2 but half as lojng.
Anthers small, leaning 
together in pairs.
PxsT.
Germen with 4 clefts.
Style thpead-shaped, as long 
as the blossom, leaning along with the stamens under 
the upper lip of the blossom.
Summits slender, cloven, 
reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup unchanged^ but enlarging, con- 
tains the seeds.
Seeds 4, egg-shaped.
380 DIDYNAMIA.
GYMNOSPERMIA.
MELITTIS.
Curt.
68.
Cal. Cvp 1 leaf, b^ll-shaped, cylindrical^ straight.
Mouth 
' with 2 lips.
Upper lip tall, notched, acute.
Lower Up 
shorter, cloven, acute.
Segments standing wide^ 
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube much more slender than 
the Cup. Mouth but little thicker than the tube.
Upper 
lip upright, roundish, entire.
Lower Up exp^mng, 
with 3 segments, blunt; middle, Segment.
larg&y flat, 
entire.
Stam, Filaments 4, the middle ones shorter than the outer 
ones, awUshaped, standiiig imder the upper lip.
Anthers 
blunt, clovsen, each pair forming a cross.
PiST.
airmen bUmt, with 4 clefts, covered witfi soft hairs.
Stales thread-shaped, agreeing in length and situation 
with .the stamens.
Stmnnit cloven, acute.
• 
S. Vtess.
.none.
The Cup unchanged contains the seeds.
Seeds four.
Obs. The lower lip of the calyx' is sometimes scolloped.
Linn.
SCUTELLA'RIA, Toum.
64, Cassida.
Cal. Cup l leaf, very short, tubular.
Rim almost entire, 
after floWering closed by a lid, which is formed by an 
expansion of uie upper part of the cup.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tuhe very short, bent backwards.
Mouth long, compressed.
Upper lip concave, 3 -cleft.
Middle Sej^ment concave, notched at the end.
Lateral 
Segments flat, acute, placed under the middle segment.
Lower lip broad, notched at the end.
Stam.
Filarnents 4, 2 long and 2 short, concealed under 
the upper lip.
, Anthers small.
PiST.
Germen witl^ 4 divisions.
Style thread-shaped, 
agreeing in.
length and situation with the stamens.
Summit simple, crooked, taper.
S. Vess.
none.
The Cup 3-comered, covered with a lid 
resembling a helmet, answering the purpose of a cap- 
sule, and opening at the lower margin.
Seeds 4, roundish.
• .
Obs. This genus is abundantly distinguishable from all 
others by its lingular and beautiful calyx, which, inclosing the 
seeds as a seed-vessel, resembles, in its external appearance, a 
helmet with its crest.
^1 
/ • 
I' 
DroVNAMIA.
ANGIOSPERMIA.
281 
NEL'LA.
Tourn.
84.
^ leaf, with 2 lips, mouth short, permanent, 
\ "'at, broad, lopped, with 3 very small teeth.
^ "ight, narrow, acute, with a shallow cleft.
• N -ring.
'Tube short, cylindrical.
Mouth 
''/) c6n(iaye> entire, nodding.
iLmver 
.ant, with 3' segments, the middle Seg- 
^st, notched at the end, serrated.
Aments 4, 2 a little longer than the other 2> awl- 
^ cd, forked at the end.
Anthers simple, fixed to 
ae filaments beneath the top, and only to one of the 
divisions of the fork.
PlST.
Germen with 4 divisions.
Style thread-shaped, 
leaning along with the stamens towards the upper lip.
Summit notched at the end.
• 
S. Vess.
hone.
The Oup closes and contains the seeds.
Seeds 4, somewhat e^>-shaped; 
Obs. The essential character consists in the forked iila- 
ment; as in the genus Crambe.
Linn.
ANGIOSPERMIA.
BARrSIA.
Lightf.
14.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, permanent.
Mouth blunt, 
cloven.
Segments notched at the end, points coloured.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Upper lip upright, slender, en- 
tire, longer.
Lower Up reflected, with 3 clefts, blunt, 
very small.
Stam.
Fthments 4, 2 a little shorter than the other 2, 
bristle-shaped, as long as the upper lip.
Anthers oblong, 
approaching, standing under tne top of the upper lip.
PisT.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, longer 
than the stamens.
Summit blunt, nodduig.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, compressed, tapering to a 
point, with 2 cells and 2 valve^, partition opposite to 
the valves.
Seeds numerous, angular, small.
Obs. This genus is a sort of connecting link between the 
Rhinanthus, Euphrasia, and Pedicularis, but distinguished by 
its coloured calyx.
Linn.
— If the coloured calyx be admitted 
as an essential generic mark, nearly half the Order must be 
placed in it.
(Mr. Woodward.) — And the Bartsia viscosa has a 
calyx not at all coloured, (Mr. Giddy.) 
262 piDYNAMIA.
ANGIOSPERMIA.
RHINANTHUS.
Toum.
77^ Pedicularis.
G^erin.
54.
Cal* Cup^ 1 leaf^ roiuuUsh^ mflaMi coix^essed^ with 4 
clefts, permanent* *   • .
. 
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Title u^Iy. cylindjrical^ as long 
as the cup* Bor&r open^ n coi^pires^ecli at the ba3e.
Upper lip helniet-shape4i compie^sed^^ notched at the 
cna, narrower, ixu^^ Zippp^^.^^tj with S.^l^a^ow* 
clefts, blunt ; the middle iS^f 9ne»/ th&{)raadef>t.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 loog aal^^ short, ^early as loi^ as 
the upper Up which cohce^s tiiem.
Anthers ^xed side- 
wise, cloven at one end, hairy; 
PisT.
Germen e^-shaped, compressed.
$f]/Je thread- 
shaped, ^reemg in situation with the stap^ieps, but 
longer, ^mmit blunt, beat inwards.
S. Vess.
Cap^z^ blunt, upright, compressed, cells 3., valves 
S, partition opposite to the valves, opting, at the edges.
Seeds many, compressed.
, , , .
Obs. Rhinanthus Crista.
galli has a bordered capsule; seeds 
surrounded by a loose meraSranc j and a caly^ equal, with 4: 
clefts.
Linn.
EUPHRA'SIA.' TTww. 78.
Gtertn.
54.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, cylindrical, with 4 clefts, unequal, per- 
manent.
Bloss.
1 petal, giving.
Tule^as long as the cup.
Upper 
lip concave, notched at the end.
L/nver lip expanoing, 
with 3 divisions.
Segments equal, blunt.
Stam.
Filaments 4, thread-shaped, leaning under the 
upper lip.
Anthers 2-lobed, the lower lobes of the 
lower anthers tapering into a little thorn.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style thread^shaped, iagreeing 
in shape and^situation vl^ith the stamens.
Summit 
blunt, entire.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-oblong, compressed, 2-celled.
Partition opposite to the valves.
Seeds numerous, very small, roundish.
Obs. This description applies to the Euphr.
Odoniites^ but 
the Euphr.
Officinalis admits of the following remarks very justly 
made by Mr. Hudson.
Cup tubular, bell-shaped; segments 
tapering to a point, equal, Bloss, lower lip with three shallow 
clefts, segments cloven, the middle one the largest.
Anthers 
cloven at the base, the lobes at the base tapering into an awn.
Summit a knob.
Capsule 4-cornered at the base, nicked at the 
tO|,.
DIDYNAMIA.
ANGIOSPERMIA.
383 
MELAMPY'RUM.
Toum.
78.
Gtertn, 53.
...
Cal. Cup 1 leaf^ tubular^ with 4 shallow clefts.
SegmerUs 
slei>def^ pennaoent.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping* Tule oblong, bent back.
Border 
compressed, tipper Zip < helmet-shaped, compressedj^ 
xiotcned at the end ^ latecal margins bent back* Lower 
Up flat, upright, a^ king as the upper,, with 3 shallow 
segments, munt, marked with 2 projections in the 
middle* 
SxAM • Fikanents 4, 2 long and 2 short, awUshaped, crookedj 
concealed under the upper lip.
Anthers oblong.
PiST.
GcrwTi tapering to a.
point.
S/^Ze simple, agreeing 
. ii^ l^gth and situation with the stamens.
Summit blunt; 
S. Vjs^ss.
Capsule oblong, oblique, tapering to a point, 
coniipressed } upper edge, convex, lower edge straight; 
; cells Q^.waiiwesQf partition opposite to the valves, open* 
ipg at the upper seam.
Seeju^ 2, ^-shaped, bulgi:f;ig, bprdered at the base.
LATHRfi^'A.
Tourn.
454, Clandestina.
Gcertn.
52.
Cal. Cup l leaf, bell-shaped, straight.
Mouth with 4 
deep clefts.
BLdss.
i petal, gtiping.
TtJ^e longer than the cup, iSor^ 
der gaping, bellying.
Upper lip concave, helmet- 
shaped, broad, with a narrow hooked top.
Lower lip 
smaller, reflected, blunt, with 3 clefts.
Nectary a gland notched at the end, depressed on 
each side, very short, situated upon the receptacle of 
the flower, at one corner of the gcrmeli.
Stam.
Filaments 4, avvl-shaped, as long as the blossom, 
concealed under the upper lip.
Anthers blunt, depress* 
ed, approaching.
PiST.
G^wen globular, compressed.
S^yZ^ thread-shaped, 
agreeing in length and situation with the stamens.
Summit lopped, nodding.
S. Vess.
Capsule roimdish, blunt, but furnished with a 
small point, with 1 cell, and 2 elastic valves, surrounded 
by the cup, which is large and expanding.
Seeds few, globular, fixed to the middle of uie valves.
^ 
Obs. On account of its nectariferous gland, it approaches 
near to the Orobanche.
Link.
384 DriDYNAMIA.
ANGIOSPERMIA: 
"•' r 
PEDICULA'RIS.
Toiirn.
77/ A, D.
£• H.
I. K.
L. 
G^'tn.
53.
- ' •••(,' 
Cal. Cup.l leaf, roundish, bellying.
Mouth'^ith 5 clefts, 
equal, permanent.
. ' 
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube oblong, btilging.
Upper 
lip helmet-shaped, upright, ' compressed, narrower, 
notched at the end.
Lower lip expanding, flat^'with 
3 shallow segments, blunt.
Middle Segment the har- 
. rowest.
,. 
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 long and 2 short, nearly as long as 
the upper lip, under which they lie concealed.
'Anthers 
fixed, side wise, roundish, compressed.
' * , ' 
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Style thread-shaped, 'agreeing 
in situation with the stamens, but lojiger.
Smimit 
blunt, bent inwards.
,   r - ♦;, 
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, sharp-pointed, obKqiie^ 2-celled, 
opening at the top, P(zr/eVion opposite to the valvi?s.
. 
Seeds- many, egg-shaped^ angular.
Receptacles ticatrly 
globular, in the base of the capsule.
-Obs. Capsule for the most part oblique.* In some, species 
tfie cup is cloven at the rim into 2 parts.
. ANTIRRHrNUM.
Taurn.,75 & 76, Unaria.
Gcertn.
53.
» 
Gal. Cup with 5 divisions, permanent.
Segments oblong, 
the 2 lower more expandmg.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube oblong, bulging.
Border 
with 2 lips.
Upper lip cloven, reflectecT sidewise.
Lower lip with 3 clefts, blunt.
Palate convex, mouth 
generally closed by a projection of the lower lip, which 
i» channelled on the under side.
Nectary projecting backwards from the base of the 
blossom.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 short and 2 long, nearly as long as 
the blossom, and inclosed by the upper lip.
Anthers 
approaching.
Fist.
Germen xo\\nd\^h.
S^yZe simple, agreeing in 'length 
and situation with the stamens.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, blunt, cells 2.
Figure and 
manqer or opening different in different species.
Seeds many.
Receptacles kidney- shaped, solitarj'', fixed 
to the partition.
DIDYNAMIA.
ANGIOSPERMIA.
285 
Obs. The nectary and the seed-vessel differ greatly in the 
different species.
In same, the former is long and awl-shaped, 
and the latter opens equally.
In others, the necttiry is blunt, 
scarcely protuberating; the capsule unequal at the base, open- 
ing at the top obliquely ; and, in others again, still different.
SCROPHULA'RIA.
Toum.
74.
Gcerin.
53.
Cal. Cut) 1 leaf, with 5 clefts, permanent.
Segments 
rounaed, shorter than the blossom.
BloiSs. 1 petal, imequal.
Tube globular, large, inflated.
Bordefyery small, with 5 divisions.
The 2 upper Seg- 
ments larger than the others, upright ; the 2 lateral 
ones open ; the lower reflected.
Stam.
Filaments 4, strap-shaped, declining, as long as 
the blossoms ; 2 of them ripening later than the other 
2. Anthers double.
PiST.
Geriraew egg-shaped.
S/yfe simple, agreeing in length 
and situation with the stamens.
Summit simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, tapering to a point, cells 2, 
valves 2, partition formed by the edges of the valves 
turning in, opening at the top.
Seeds many, small.
Keceptacle single, roundish, extending 
itself into each cell.
Obs. In the mouth of the blossom, beneath the upper seg- 
ments, lies another little segment resembling a lip ; but this is 
99t common to every species.
The blossom^ in this genus, should 
be considered as reversed.
The upper Up smaller, bowed back, 
rounded, the stamens bowed down towards it ; the lateral segj 
ments scolloped, rounded, equal to the upper; the lower lip 
larger, open, with 2 divisions ; the intermediate lip very small, 
placed in the fore part.
LiXN.
— When ripe, an oval opening 
appears in the partition.
(Gaertn.) 
DIGITA'LIS.
Toum.
73.
Gcertn.
53.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions.
Segments roundish, acute, 
permanent, the upper narrower.
Bloss.
1 petal, bell-shaped.
Tube large, expanding, 
bulging on the under side, cylindrical and narrow at 
the oase.
Border small, with 4 clefts.
Upper Segment 
most expanded, notched at the end.
Lower Segment 
largest.
Stam.
Filaments 4, 2 long and 2 short, awl-ishaped, fixed 
to the base of the blossom, declining.
Anthers cloven, 
tapering to a^ point at one end.
S86 PIDYNAMIA.
ANOIOSPERMIA.
PiST.
German tapering to a point.
Style simple^ standing 
along with the stamens.
Summit acute.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped^ as long as the cap, tapering 
to a point, cells 2, valves 2, tearing open in.
2 direc- 
tions.
Partit'um double^ formed by the edges of the 
valves, turned in.
Seeds many, small.
LINNiE'A.
Fl.dan.S.' 
Cal. Cup double.
Cup of the Fniit beneath, 4 -leaved : 2 leafits oppo- 
site, very small, acute, the other 2 elliptical, concave, 
upright, rough with hairs, embracing the germen, 
converging, permanent.
Cup of the Flowers superior, of 1 leaf with 5 divi- 
sions, upright, slender, acute, equal.
Bi*oss« 1 petal, heH-shaped, with 5 shallow clefts, blunt^ 
nearlv eqi^ial, twice the size of the flower cup.
Stam.
Piktments 4, awl-shaped, fixed to the bottom of 
the-blossom,.
S very small, the other 2 near together, 
longer, but shorter than the blossom.
Anthers com- 
pressed^ vasie-like»..
Fist.
Germen roundish, beneath.
Style thread-shaped, 
straight, leanbg', as long as the blossom.
Summit 
globular.
S. VESS.
JBerry juiceless, egg-shaped, 3-celled, covered by 
the rough hairy glutinous cup of the fruit, deciduous.
Seeds 2, roimdish.
SIBTHOR'PIA.
Gcerfn.
55.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, turban-shaped, with 5 divisions, expand- 
ing 5 leafits egg-shaped, permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, with 5 divisions, expanding, equal, as long 
as the cup.
^^ments rpupded.
' • .
Stam.
Filcments 4, hair-like, 2 of them approaching.
Anthers heaart-oblong.
PisT.
Germen roundish, compFeased.
Style c)^drical, 
thicker than, the filamaits, a/s long a$ the bloflsom.
Summit a simple Jmob, de|>resfled» 
S. Vess.
Capsule compressed, round and flat, bellying on 
each side, .^dges acnte^ .valyel ^.
cells 2, partiiioii 
transverse.
. ..u. i ^ 
I. tk i w .
DroVNAMIA.
ANOIOSPERMIA.
287 
Sebps several, roundish-oblonff, convex on one side, flat 
on the other.
Receptacle globular, fixed to the middle 
of the partition.
LIMOSEL'LA, Gcertn.bO.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts, acute, upright, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, bell-shaped, upright, equal, with 5 shallow 
clefts, acute, small.
Segments expanding.
Stam.
Filaments 4, uprignt, 5 leamng to the same side, 
shorter than the blossom.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
German oblong, blunt, of 2 cells.
Style simple, as 
long as the stamens, declining* Summit globular.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-shaped, half inclosed in the cup, 
with 1 cell, and 2 valves.
Parfi^iem divided bdow.
Seeds many, oval.
Receptacle egg-shaped, large.
> 
OROBAN'CHE.
Toum.
81.
Cal. Cup l leaf, with 2 or 5 clefts, upright, coloured, 
permanent.
Bloss.
1 petal, gaping.
Tube leaning, large, bellying.
Border expandea.
tjpper lip concave, open, notched at 
the end.
Lower lip reflected, with 3 clefts, unequal at 
the edge.
Segments nearly equal.
Stam.
Fuaments 4, 2 long and 2 short, awl-shaped, con* 
cealed under the upper lip.
Anthers upright, approach- 
ing, shorter than the border.
jNectary a gland at the base of the germen.
PiST.
Germen wAoag.
Style simple, agreeing in length 
and situation with the stamens..
Summit with a shal- 
low cleft, blunt, thick, noddijag.
S. Vess.
Capsule egg-oblong, tapering to a point, with 1 
cell, and s valves.
Seeds numerotis,"very small.
Receptacles 4, strap-shaped, 
lateral, connected.
Obs. Each segment of the summit notched at the end 
LlNy. Calyxaiti blossom different in different species.
(Reich.) ^ 
[288 3 
CLASS XV.
TETRADYNAMIA.
Q Stamens shorter; 
Xn the flowers pf this Class there are 6 Stamens; 4 of 
them long, and 2 short.
(It is also worthy of observation, 
that the flowers of this Class have uniformly 4 Petals.
An 
attention to this circumstance will probably save the learner 
some trouble, as the difference of length in the Stamens is 
not always very obvious, and especially as the plants of the 
Hexandna Class have none of them 4 Petals.) 
The Orders are 2, and are distinguished by the figure 
of the seed-vessel, which, in the 1st Order is a broad and 
short Pouch ; that is, a roundish flat seed-vessel, furnished 
with a Style, which is frequently as long as the seed-vessel 
itself.
In the 2d Order, the seed-vess3 is a long Pod ; 
that is, a very long seed-vessel, without any jremarkable 
Style.
The Plants of this Class admit of the following 
Natural Character.
Cal. Cup ohiongj of 4 leaves, deciduous.
Leqfits egg- 
oblong, concave, blunt, approaching, st^ding in op- 
posite pairs, bulging at the oase.
The Nectary is formed of the calyx, which on this 
account bulges at the base.
• 
Bloss.
cross-snaped.
Petals 4, equal.
CUnvs flattish, 
awl-shaped upright, generally longer than the cup.
Border flat.
Limbs broadest towards the end, blunt, 
hardly touching one another at the edges.
The petals 
fixed in the same circle with the stamens.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl -shaped, upright, the 2 opposite 
ones as long as the cup, the other 4 somewhat longer, 
but shorter than the blossom.
Anthers rather oblong, 
tapering to a point, thickest at the base, upright, but 
witli the top bent outwards.
TETRADYNAMIA.
qs» 
Nectwriferous glands^ which differ in different genera^ 
grow near the stamens^ and are mostly fixed at the 
base of the shorter filaments, which are generally bent 
outwards, to prevent the compression oT the glands, 
and therefore appear shorter than the others.
PiST.
Germen superior, daily growing taller* Style the 
length of the longest stamens, but in some genera there 
is no style.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Pod with 2 valves, often with 2 cells, opening 
from the base to the point.
Par/i//(m projecting, be- 
yond the points of the valves, and occupying the place 
of the style.
Seeds roimdish, inclining downwards, lodged in the par- 
tition lengthwise and alternately.
Receptacle strap- 
shaped, surrounding the partition, and lodged in the 
seams of the seed-vessel.
Obs. This class is truly natural, and has been considered 
as such by all the best systematic writers, nevertheless, they 
have thrown into it one or mcfre genera that do not naturally 
belong to it ; but this we have avoided.
The plants of this 
Class are universally called Anti-scorbutic : their taste is acritj 
and watery ; they lose most of their virtues by drying.
None 
of them are poisonous.
In moist situations, and wet seasons, they are most acrimo- 
nious.
Thus theCociiLEARiA Armoracia (Horse-radish) grow- 
ing near water, is so very acrid, that it can scarcely be used ; 
and Brassica Rapa, (the Turnep) whose root in a dry sandy 
soil is so succulent and sweet, in wet stiff lands is hard and 
acrimonious.
TETRADYNAMIA.
(4 Stamens longer.) 
SiLicuLOSA.
(Pouch, or broad Pod.) 
Myagrum^ Vella.
Thlaspi.
Bunias.
Sulrularia, Cochlearia, 
Crambe.
Drala.
Ileris.
Isatis, Lepidium.
SiLiauosA.
(long Pod.) 
Dentaria* Cheiranthm.
Brassica.
Cardamine.
Hesperis, Sinapis.
Sisymbrium.
Arabis.
Rqpnamis.
Erysimum., Turritis, 
Vol. I.
U .
t90 TIETRADYNAMIA.
SILICULOSA.
SILICULOSA.
MY'AGRUM.
Tcwmz.
99.
Gcerttu-lAl.
'Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leafits egg-oblbng, concave^ standing 
open, coloured, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals flat, circular, 
blunt ; claws slender.
Stam.
Filaments 6, as long as the cup, the 4 opposite 
ones rather longer than the other 2.
Arahers simple.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style thread^shaped, as long 
as the cup.
Summit blimt.
S. Vess.
Pouch inversely heart-shaped, somewhat com- 
pressed, entire, rigid, terminated at the point by a rigid, 
conical style.
Valves 2.
(Some of the cells often 
empty.) 
Seeds roundish.
Obs. Myagrum sativum is the only British plant that has 
been referred to this genus, but it ill accords with its charac- 
ters ; on which account Professor Gmelin has constituted a 
new genus called Mcenchia, which includes the Myagrum 
satixmniy Draba aizoides^ Alyssum inccummy and campestre^ 
BU'NIAS.
Tmm. 103, Erucago.
Giertn.
142* 
CAt. Cup 4 leaves ; leafits egg-oblongs expanding, de-?
ciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals inversely egg- 
shaped, twice as long as the cup ; claws taper, upright.
Stam.
Filaments 6, as lonff as the cup, the 2 opposite 
ones not quite so long.
Anthers upright, cloven at the 
base.
PisT.
Germen oblong.
Style none.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Pouch irregular, egg-oblong, with 4 ^des, edges 
with 1 or 2 projecting points^ not opening, deciduous.
Seeds few, roundish, 1 placed under each point of the 
pouch.
CRAM'BE.
Toum, 100 ^ 99^ Rafnstrum.
Gcertn.
142.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leafits egg-rshaped, ch^nndled, rrther 
expanding, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals Izret^ blunt, 
' broad, expmding ; claws upright, but standing rather 
open, as long as the cup.
TETRADYNAMIA.
SILICULOSA.
sgr 
St AM.
Filaments 6, ?
of them as long as the cup, the other 
4 longer, and cloven at the end.
Anthers simple, fixed 
to the outermost division of the filaments.
Nectariferous Glands placed on each side, between 
the blossom and the longer stamens.
Pjst.
Garmen oblong.
Style none.
iSz^mmt^ rather thick.
S. Vess.
Berry dry, globular, of 1 cell, deciduous.
Seed single, rounuish.
Obs. The cloven tops of the filaments constitute the essen* 
tial character.
Linn.
rSATIS.
Tourn.
lOO.
Gcertn.
142.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leafits egg-shaped, rather expanding, 
coloured, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals oblong, blunt, 
expanding, gradually tapering into claws.
Stam.
Filaments 6, upright, biit expanding, as long as 
the blossom, but 2 of them shorter.
Anthers oblong, 
lateral.
Pist.
Germen oblong, 2-edged, compressed, as long as 
the shorter stamens.
Style none.
iSz^mmi/ a blunt knob.
S. Vess.
Pouch oblong-spear-shaped, blunt, compressed, 
2-edged, with 1 cSl, not opening.
Fidves 2, boat- 
shaped, compressed, keeled, aeciduous.
SsBD single, egg-shaped, in th^ centre of the seed-vessel.
VEULA.
Gartn.
141.
, 
Cax. Cup 4 leaves, upright, cylindrical 5 leafits strap- 
shaped, blunt, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals inversdy egg- 
shaped, expanding ; claws as long as the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 6, as lon^ as the cup, the 4 opposite 
ones a little longer than the other 2.
Anthers simple.
Fist.
Ger^n^Ts egg-shaped.
Style conical.
Summit sinx'ple.
S. Vess.
Pouch globular, entire.
Cells 2.
Partition twice 
as large as the pouch ; the part extending beyond the 
pouch egff-shaped, and upright.
Seeds several, ]:oundi8h» 
V8 
S92 TETRADYNAMIA.
SILTCULOSA, 
SUBULA'illA.
FL dan.
35.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leqfits egg-shaped^ concave, a little 
expanding, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals inversely egg- 
shaped, entire, rather larger than the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 6, shorter than the blossom, the 2 stand- 
ing opposite still shorter.
Anthers simple* 
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style shorter than the pouch.
Summit blunt.
S, Vess.
Pouch egg-shaped, somewhat compressed, entire, 
furnished with a very short style.
Cells 2.
Partition 
placed in a contrary direction to the valves, which are 
egg-shaped and concave.
Sjeeds several, very minute, roundish.
DRA'BA.
Gcertn.
141.
Cal. Clip 4 leaves ; leajits egg-shaped, concave, upright 
but expanding, deciouous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross; pe^aZ^ oblong, rather 
expandmg ; claivs very minute.
Stam.
Filaments 6, as long as the cup, 4 opposite ones a 
little longer than the other 2, upright, expanding.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style hardly any.
Summit a 
flat knob; 
S. Vess.
Pouch oval-oblong, compressed, entire, without 
a style.
Cells 2.
Partition parallel to the valves.
Valves flat, but a little concave.
Seeds many, small, roundish.
Obs. In some species the petals Sire divided down to tie 
base, in others they are only notched at the end, and in others 
again they are quite entire.
The essential Character consists 
in the pouch being oval-oblong, compressed, and almost without 
a style.— These circumstances readily distinguish it from the 
Alyssum, the Subularia, and the Lunaria.
Linn* - 
UEPIDaUM.
Tonm.
103.
Gcertn.
141.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leajits egg-shaped, concave, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross; petals inversely egg- 
shaped, twice as long as the cup; claws narrow.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, as long as the cup, the 2 
opposite ones shorter than the others.
Anthers simple.
TETRADYNAMIA.
• SILICULOSA, 293 
PiST.
Germen heart-shaped.
Style simple, as long, as the 
stamens.
Summit hlxxnt.
S. Vess.
Pouch heart-shaped, notched at the end, com- 
pressed, sharp at the edge.
Cells 2.
Falves boat- 
shaped, keeled.
Partition spear-shaped, placed in a 
contrary direction to the valves.
Seeds several, egg-shaped, but tapering to a point, nar- 
rower at the base, inclining downwards.
Obs. L.
rvderak has only | seed in eachycell.
(St.) The 
Lepidiuxn anglicum has either 2 or 4 stamens only, as is also 
the cas^ with the L, ruderal^.
THLAS'PI.
Toum.
101.
G(ertn.
141.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves 5 leafits egg-shaped, concave, upright, 
but expanding, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross ; petals inversely egg- 
shaped, twice as lon^ as the cup ; clau/s narrow.
Stam.
Filaments 6, hSf as long as the blossom, the 9 
opposite ones shorter than the others.
Anthers taper- 
ing to a point.
PiST.
Germen circular, compressed, notched at the end.
Style simple, as long as the stamens.
Summit blunt.
• 
S* Vess.
Pouch compressed, inversely heart-shaped, notch- 
ed at the end, the depth of the notch being equal to 
the length of the style.
Cells 2.
Partition spear-shaped.
^^v^iDoat-shapea, bordered with a keel.
Seeds many, inclining, fixed to the seams.
Obs. InThlapsi Bursa-pastoris the pouch is inversely heart- 
shaped, but without a border ; but in some other species it is 
surrounded by a sharp border.
Linn.— In T.
campestre ther« 
is only one seed in each cell.
St.
COCHLEATUA.
Toum.
lOl.
Cal. Cz^P 4 leaves; /ea/?/5 egg-shaped, concave, standing 
open, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals inversely egg- 
shaped, expanding, twice as large as the cup ; claivs 
narrow, shorter than the cup, standing wide.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, as long as the cup, the 2 
opposite ones shorter than the others, Anthers bluntji 
compressed.
294 TETRADYNAMIA.
SIUQUOSA.
PiST.
Germen heart-shaped.
Style 'Simple, very shor^ 
permanent.
Summit blunt.
S- Vess.
Pouch heart-shaped, bulgii^, turgid, 2 -celled, 
notched at the end, mmished with a style, rough.
Valves bulging, blunt.
Seeds, about 4 in each cell.
FBERIS.
Gcertn.
141.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leqfits inversely ^g-shaped, concave, 
expanding, small, equal, deciduous^ 
Bloss.
4 petals, unequal.
Petals inversely egg-shaped, 
blunt, expanding, the 2 outer ones much larger, equal, 
the 2 irmer small, reflected ; claws oblong, upright.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awlnshaped, uptight, the 2 lateral 
ones shortest.
Anthers roundish.
PiST.
Germen roundish, compressed.
Style simple, short.
Summit blimt.
S. Vess.
Pouch upright, nearly circular, compressed, 
notched at the end, encompassed by an acute border.
Cells 2.
Partition spear-shaped.
Palves boat-shaped, 
keeled, compressed.
Seeps several, somewhat egg-shaped.
SILIQUOSA.
DENTA'RIA.
Tourn.UO.
/ 
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; le(ifits egg-oblong, approaching to- 
wards the top, blunt, deciduous.
Bloss* 4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals circular, blunt, 
very slightly notched at the end, flat, ending in claws 
as long as the cup.
Stam.- Filaments 6, awl-shaped, as lorig as the cup, 2 of 
them shorter.
Anthers heart-oblong, upright.
PiST.
Germen oblong, the length of the stamens.
Style 
very short and thick.
Summit blunt, notched at the end.
S. Vess.
.Pod long, cylindrical; cells 2.
Valves 2, opening 
with a jerk, and the valves rolling back.
Partition 
rather longer than the valves.
Seeds many, somewhat e^-shaped.
TTTRADYNAMIA.
SILIQUOSA, 29s 
CARDAM'INE, Tourn.
109.
Gcertn.
143, 
Cal. Cup 4 leaves; lecifits egg*oblong^ blunt^ rather open^ 
bulging^ small, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals oblong-egg- 
shaped, greatly expanoed, ending in clawsy which are 
upright, and twice as long as the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, the 2 opposite ones twice 
as long as the cup, the other 4 still longer.
Anthers 
small, heart-oblong, upright.
PiST.
Germen slender, cylmorical, as long as the stamens.
Style none.
Simimit a blunt knob, entire.
S. Vess.
Pod long, cylindrical, but compressed.
CeUs S.
Valves 2, when they open rolling back in a spiral.
Sbeos many, roundish.
Obs. One species is often found destitute of the 2 shorter 
stamens ; in some others the petals are wanting.
In C.
petrcea 
the valves open at the base^ but do not roll back.* Linn.
SISYM'BRIUM.
Tmm. 109.
> 
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; lec^ts spear-strap-shaped, expanding, 
coloured, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals oblong, expand- 
ing, generally smaller than the cup ; daws very 
minute.
Stam.
Filaments 6, longer, than the cup, the 2 opposite 
ones, somewhat shorter^ Anthers simple.
PisT.
GerTnen oblong, thread-shaped.
Style very short.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Pod long, crooked, bulging, cylindrical; cells 
2. Valves 2, nearly straight when open, rather shorter 
than the partition.
Seeds many, small.
Obs. S.
Sophia has the petals shorter than the cup ; and 2l 
very long and very slender pod.
In S.
sylvestre and S.
ampU- 
biunty the pod is bulging, and very short.
Linn.
S96 TETRADYNAMTA.
SILIQUOSA.
ERYSIMUM.
Toum.
ill.
Gc^tn.
143.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leaHts ^^-oblong^ parallel^ but ap* 
proaching^ coloured, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petcds oblong, flat, very 
blunt at the end ; ctaws as long as the cup, upright.
Nectariferous Gland double, on the inner side ofuie 
shorter filament.
Stam.
Filaments 6, as long as the cup, the 2 opposite ones 
shorter than the others.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen strap-shaped, 4-edged, as long as the sta- 
mens.
S^yfc very .short.
Summit 2.
svciaiX knob, per- 
manent.
S.Vess.
Pod long, strap-shaped, stiff, and straight, exactly 
4 -cornered, with 2 valves, and 2 cells.
Seeds many, small, roundish, 
CHEIRANTHUS.
ToumAor , Leucojum.
GiBrtn.US.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves, compressed ; leqfits spear-shaped, con- 
cave, upright, parallel, but approaching towards the 
top, deciduous, the 2 outer bulging at the base.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals circular, longer 
than the cup ; claws as long as the cup.
Stam.
Filam£nts 6^ awl-shaped, parallel, as long as thfe 
cup, 2 of them shorter and bulging at the base, within 
. the cup.
Anthers upright, cloven at the base, acute 
and reflected at the top.
A Nectariferous Gland surrounding the base of the 
- short stamen on each side.
PiST.
German prism-shaped, with 4 edges, as long as the 
stamens, with a small tubercle on each side the base.
S/«& very short, compressed.
Swwwi^ oblong, divided, 
reflected, thick, permanent.
S. Vess.
Pod long, compressed, the 9 opposite angles ob- 
literated and marked with a little tooth ; cells 2, 
valves 2, furnished with a very short style, and an 
upright cloven summit.
Seeds many, pendant, alternate, somewhat egg-»shaped, 
compressed, with a membranaceous border.
Obs. The little tooth on each side of the germen, in some 
species, almost disappears, in others it grovys larger.
In tho 
Cb« tricuspidatus the pod has 3 points at the end, Linx.
. 
TETRADYNAMIA.
SILIQUOSA.
297 
HESTERIS.
Tmm. 108- 
Cajl* Cup 4 leaves $ leqfits spear-strap-shaped^ parallel, 
approaching tow|irds the top, and lying on each other, 
wide at the base, deciduous^ the 2 (^po5z7e ones bul^ng 
at the base.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals oblong, the length 
of the cup a litde bent obliquely to the left, ending in 
idptr claws which are as long as the cup.
. 
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, as long as the tube, 2 of 
them only half as long.
Anthers strap-shaped, upright 
reflected at the top.
^Nectariferous Glands tapering to a point, placed 
between the shorter stamens and we germen, surround^ .
ing the stamen.
PiST.
Germen as long as the cup, prisjm-shaped, with 4 
edges.
Style none.
Summit divided, placed inwards, 
oblong, upright, forked at the base, approaching at the 
top, shrivelling, 
S. Vess.
PodhnSf compressed and flat, stiff and straight, 
of 2 cells.
Vmves 2, as long as the partition, 
S£BDS many, egg-shaped, compressed, 
AR'ABIS.
E.lot.
178.
Curt.
ii.
13* 
Cal. Cup 4-Ieaved, deciduous ; leqfits parallel, and ap- 
proaching at the top, 2 of them opposite, egg-oblong, 
acute, larger, a little prominent at the base, bul^ng, 
concave 5 the other 2, strap-shaped, upright.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross, petals egg-shaped, ex- 
panding, ending in clcavs as long as the cup.
Nectaries 4, each composed ot a little, reflected, per- 
manent scale, fixed to the receptacle at the bottom, and 
on the inner side of the leaves of the cup ) reflected, 
permanent.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, upright, 2 as long as the 
cup, 4 twice as long.
Anthers heart-shaped, upright.
PiST.
Germen cylindrical, as long as the stamens.
Style 
none.
Summit blunt, entire.
S. Vess.
Pod compressed, very long, strap-shaped, un- 
equal from protuberances occasioned by the seeds.
Values mostly as long as the partition.
Seeds many, roundish, compressed.
Obs. The nectaries and the summit demonstrstte that it b 
neither a Cheiranthus nor a Hcspcris.
Linn.
^98 TETRADYNAMIA.
SILIQUOSA.
TURRITTS.
Gcertn.
143.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves ; leafits egg-oblong, parallel, but apt 
proaching towards the top, deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals egg-oblong, 
blunt, upright, entire; cZtzzf 5 upright.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, upright, as long as the 
tube, 2 of them shorter.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen as long as the blossom, cylindrical, a little 
compressed.
Style none.
Summit blunt.
. 
S. Vess.
Pod exceedingly long, stiff and straight, with 4 
edges, but 2 of the edges, which are opposite, almost 
obliterated, and somewhat comipressedj cells 2.
Fakes 
2, rather shorter than the partition.
Seeds very numerous, roundish, notched at the end.
BRAS^SICA.
Toum.
106 ^ 113, Rapa.
Gcertn.
US.
Cal. Cup 4 upright leaves; leafits spear-strap-shaped, 
concave and channelled, bulging at the base, pardld, 
deciduous.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals nearly egg- 
shaped, flat, expanding, entire, gradually tapering into 
clawsj which are nearly as long as the cup.
Nectariferous Glands 4, egg-shaped, 1 placed between 
each short stamen and the germen, and 1 between each 
pair of the longer stamens and the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, upright, the 2 opposite 
ones as long as the cup, the other 4 longer.
Anthers 
upright, tapering to a point.
PiST.
Germen cylindrical, as long as the stamens.
Stifle 
short, as thick as the germen.
Summit a knob, entire.
S. Vess.
Pod long, nearl)^ cylindrical, but depressed on 
each side.
Partition projecting at the end, cylindrical ; 
cells 2.
Valves 2, shorter than the partition.
Seeds many, globular.
Obs. In Brassica Rapa the cup and the blossom a];c of the 
same colour.
Linn.
SINATIS.
ToMm. 112.
G^^r^w.
143.
Cal. Cup 4 leaves, expanding ; leajits strap-shaped, con- 
cave, channelled, standing crosswise and expanding, 
deciduous.
TETRADYNAMIA.
«ILTQUOSA- 299 
Bloss.
4 petals^ forming a cross.
Petals circular^ expand- 
ing, entire; cZai^/^ uprigbt>-strap-shaped, rather shorter 
than the cup, sitting.
Nectariferous Glands 4, egg-shaped, 1 between each 
shorter stamen and the pistil, and 1 between each pair 
of longer stamens .and the cup.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shapecf, upright, the 2 opposite 
ones as long as the cup, the other 4 longer.
Anthers 
upright, but expanding, tapering to a point.
PiST.
Uermen cylindrical.
Style as lone as the germen^ 
and as tall as the stamens.
Summit a Knob, entire.
S. Vess.
Pod oblong, with protuberances on the lower 
part, rough; cells Q.
Valves Q.
Partitionlaxgey com* 
pressed, generally twice as long as the valves.
Seeds many, globular.
Obs. Differs from the Brassica in having the claws of the 
'petals upright, and the leafits of the calyx expanding.
Linn« 
RAPH^ANUS.
Toum.
114 & 115, Raphanistnm.
Gcertn.
143.
Gal. Cup 4 leaves, upright; leqfits oblong, parallel^ ap- 
proaching, deciduous, bulging at the base.
Bloss.
4 petals, forming a cross.
Petals inversely heart- 
shaped, expanding ; claws a little longer than the cup.
Nectariferous Ulands 4, 1 between each shorter sta- 
men and the pistil, and 1 on each side, between the 
longer stamens and the oup.
Stam.
Filaments 6, awl-shaped, upright, 2 opposite ones 
as long as the cup, the other 4 as long as the claws of 
the blossom.
Anthers simple.
PiST.
Germen oblong, bellying, slender upwards, as long 
as the stamens.
Style hardly any.
Summit a knob^ 
entire.
S. Vess.
Pod oblong, but pointed, bellying with protu- 
berances as if jointed, round.
Seeds roundish, smooth.
Obs. The Raph.
Raphanistrum has a jointed pod, which 
separates at the joints* Likn.
t 300 ] 
CLASS XVI.
MONADELPHIA.
J.N this Class the filaments are all united together at the 
bottom, but separate at the top.
The Orders are deter- 
mined by the number of stamens.
The flowers admit of 
the following 
Natural Charactbr.
Cal, Cup always present^ permanent, in many instances 
double.
Sloss.
Petals 5, inversely heart-shaped, the edge of one 
Ijdng over the edge ot the next, from the ri^t to the 
left.
Stam.
FHaments united at the bottom, separate at the top; 
the outer ones the shortest.
Anthers fixed sidewise.
'PiST.
Receptacle of the fruit projecting in the centre of 
the flower.
Germens upright, surrounding the top of the recep- 
tacle in a jointed circle.
Styles united at the bottom 
into one body with the receptacle, but separated at the 
top into as many parts as there are germens.
Summits 
expanding, slender.
S. Vess.
Capsules divided into as many cells as there arc 
styles 5 or various figures in different genera; and often 
composed of the same number of sead-coats united.
Seeds kidney-shaped.
Obs. The plants of this natural class were considered by 
Tourn.
as having only 1 petal.
But all the petals are distinct 
at the base, though by the intervention of the united filaments, 
they cohere all together as one body ; on which account they 
may more properly be considered as having 5 petals.
MONADELPHIA* TRIANDRU.
SOt 
The fruit does not afford sufficient marks whereby to distin- 
guish the genera, in this class; but the co/jfxis of the utmost im- 
portance, and furnishes invariable characters.
Likn.
The 
petals are truly a continuation of the cylindrical sheath, formed 
by the united filaments, which incloses the styles and germens 
as it descends; when rising upwards, it spreads out into petals* 
MONADELPHIA.
(Filamenls united.) 
Triandria.
(3 Stamens.) 
Juniperus.
Decandria.
(10 Stamens.) - 
Geranmm.
PoLTANDRiA.
(many Stamens.) 
AUhece.
Malva.
Lavatera.
Taacus.
Pinus, 
30* MONADELPHIA, DECANDRIA^ 
TRIANDRU.
JUNIFERUS.
Tourn.
361.
Gcertn.
gu 
Male flowers.
Cal. Catkin conical^ consisting of a common spike-stalk, 
in which 3 opposite flowers are placed in a triple row, 
and a 10th flower at the end.
At the base of each 
flower is a 
Scale; broad, shorty fixed sidewise to a little pillar 
like a foot-stalk.
Bloss.
none.
^TAM.
Filaments (in the terminating ^ower) 3, awl-shaped, 
united at the bottom into one body; in the lateral 
flowers hardly perceptible.
Anthers 3, distinct in the 
terminating flower; but in Hiq. lateral flowers fixed to 
the scale of the calyx.
Female flowers.
Cal. Chip with 3 divisions, very small, growing to the 
germen, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 3, rigid, acute, permanent.
PiST.
Germen beneath.
Styles 3, simple.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Berry fleshy, roundish, marked on the lower 
part with 3 opposite tubercles which were formerly the 
cup, and marked at the top by 3 little teeth which 
were originally the petals.
Seeds 3, bony, convex on one side, angular on the other, 
oblong.
DECANDRIA.
GERA'NIUM.
Tmim.
142.
GcBrtn.
79.
Cal. Cup 5 leaves, or 1 leaf with 5 divisions ; leajits egg- 
shaped, acute, concave, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, inversely heart-shaped, or egg-shaped, 
expanding, large.
Stam.
Filaments 10, awl-shaped, united at the base, so as 
to form a sort of cup, expanding towards the top^ alter- 
nately longer and shorter, shorter than the blossom.
Antners oblong, turninjg about like a vane.
PiST.
Germen with 5 angles, beaked.
Style awl-shaped, 
longer than the stamens, permanent.
Summits 5, re- 
flected.
J 
MONADELPHIA.
POLYANDRIA.
303 
S. Vess, Capside 5-seeded, beaked, cells opening inwardly, 
each terminated by an awn-like tail, very long, and 
rolling up spirally.
Seeds solitary, rarely in pairs, egg-oblong, 
Obs. In some species the blossom is irregular; in others it 
is regular, and the union of the filaments is not very evident.
In the G.
cictUariumj pimpinellifolmny moschatuniy and mariti- 
muniy the flowers grow in umbels ; the cup consists of.
5 leaves ; 
the blossom is not quite regular ; glands are placed betwixt the 
petals; the filaments are 10, but only every other filament is 
furnished with an anther ; the awn of the seed is hairy.
In 
the other (British) species, the flowers are solitary, oi; in pairs; 
the cup has 5 leaves ; the petals are regular, with glands placed 
betwixt them ; the stamens are 10, distinct, all bearing an- 
thers ; the awn of the seed is smooth.
Linn.
In the Geranium 
ptisUlum 5 of the fllaments are without anthers, and the awns of 
ihe seeds are covered with fine hairs.
POLYANDRIA.
ALTHiE'A.
Tourn.
23 & 24, Malva.
Gcertn.
136, 
Cal. Cup double.
Outer cup of 1 leaf, ^mall and permanent, with 6 to 
Q clefts.
Segments very narrow.
Inner cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts.
Segments 
broader, more acute, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, united at the base to the tube fornied by 
the union of the filaments, inversely heart-shaped, 
bitten, flat.
' 
Stam.
Filaments numerous, united at the bottom into a 
cylinder, separate at the top, and on the surface of the 
tube.
Anthers nearly kidney-shaped.
PiST.
Germen round and flat.
Style cylindrical, short.
Summits numerous, (about 20,) oristle-shaped, as long 
as the styles.
S. Vess.
Capsule round and flat, composed of many cells, 
(as many as tliere were styles,) 2-valved, disposed in a 
whirl round the pillar-like receptacle ; when quite ripe, 
separating.
Seeds solitary, kidney-shaped, but compressed, 
MAL^VA.
Gcertn.
136.
Oal. Cup double.
Outer cup 3 leaves, narrower ; leqfits heart-shaped, 
acute, permanent.
Inner cup T leaf,, with 5 shallow 
clefts, larger, broader, permanent.
S04 MONADELPHIA^ POLYANDRIA.
Bloss.
Petals 5y inversely heart-shaped^ bitten^ flat, united 
at the base to the tube of the stamen^ 
Stam.
Filaments numerous, united at the bottom into a 
cylinder, separate at the top, and on the surface of the 
tube, -^in^/i^j kidney-shaped, 
PiST- Germen tound and flat.
Style cylindrical, short.
Summits many, bristle-shaped, as long as the style.
S. Vess.
Capsule-roundish, composed of several cells (as 
many as styles,) 2-valved, disposed in a whirl round 
the pillar-like receptacle ; at length falling off.
Seeds solitary, (sometimes, though rarely 2 or 3,) kidney- 
shaped.
Obs. All the species of this, as well as of the Genera Althaea 
and Lavatera, are mucilaginous and emollient.
The Farina is 
a pretty microscopic object, appearing toothed like the wheel of 
a watch.
Linn.
It is globular and covered with prickles, 
which give it the toothed appearance.
LAVATE'RA.
G(urtn.
136.
Cal. Cup double.
Outer cup I leaf, with 3 clefts, blunt, shorter, per- 
manent.
Inner cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts.
Segments 
• more acute, upright, perpianent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, united at the base to the tube of the 
stamens, inversely heart-shaped, flat, expanding.
Stam.
Filaments numerous, united at the oottom into a 
cylinder, separate at the top, and on the surface of the 
tube.
Antfiers kidney-shaped.
PiST.
Germen round and flat.
Style cylindrical, short.
Summits many, (7 to 14,) bristle-shaped, as long as 
the style.
S. Vess.
Capsule round and flat, composed of as niany 
cells as there were summits, 2-valved, placed in a 
whirl round the pillar-like receptacle } at length fall- 
ing off".
Seeds solitary, kidney-shaped.
TAX'US.
Tourn.369.
Gcertn.QU 
Male flowers.
Cal. none, except the Bud^ which resembles a cup with 
4 leaves.
Bloss.
none.
MONADELPHIA.
POLYANDRU.
305 
Stam.
Filaments numerous, united bdow into a column 
longer than the bud.
Anthers depressed, blunt at the 
edge, with 8 clefts, opening all round at the base; after 
shedding their pollen, flat, target-shaped, and the clefts 
in the edge become more remarkable.
FemaU flowers on another plant.
Cal. as above.
Bloss.
none.
PisT.
Germen egg-shaped, but tapering to a point.
Style 
none.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Berry an expansion of the receptacle, succulent 
and globular, open at the end, coloured.
In course of 
time it grows dry, decays, and disappears.
Seeds single, egg-oblong, its top standmg out of the open 
end of the berry.
Obs. This species of berry is very singular, and, strictly 
speakings it ought not to be called a seed-vessel.
Link.
PI'^US.
Tmm.356.
Gcertn.gi.
Male flowers forming a bunch.
Cal. none, but the gaping scales of the bud.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments many, united below into an upright pil- 
lar, divided at the top.
Anthers upright, naked.
FemcUe flowers on the same plant.
Cal* Cone somewhat c^-shaped, composed of 
Scales, with Q flowers in each, oblong, tiled, perma* 
nent, inflexible.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen very small.
Style awl-shaped.
Summit 
simple.
S. Vess.
none.
The Scales of the cone, which before stood 
open^ closing upon the seed.
Seed.
Nut enlarged by a membranaceous wing, larger 
thaxi the seed, out smaller than the scales of the cone, 
oblong, on one side straight^ but rounded on the other.
Vol. I.
( 308 ] 
CLASS XVII.
DIADELPHIA.
JL HIS Class comprehends the butierfij/shapedYlowtiSf 
and the LeguminmLS Plants of some Authora, linnsut 
takes the Classic character from the disfmitim^ and the 
character of the Orders from the mimler of the stamens.
From die title of this Class^ the young Botanist will be 
led to imagine, that the filaments are always formed into 
two sets^ but this is by no means the case ; in many m- 
stances they are unitea into cm det» The InMctr/ly^-sluipe 
of the blossom will, therefore, be a ^urer guide.
If the 
student will get the flower of a garden pea, and compave it 
with the foUowing.NATURAL Character, there w31 oo 
longer remain any difficulty in pronouncing, at fysX sights 
' wh^her a plant bdong to this class or not.
Natural Craractsr.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, bell-shaped, shrivelling, bulging at tie 
base, the lower part connected with the nruit-stalk, 
upper part blunt, containing honey.
Jim with ^ 
teeth, acute, upright, oblique, ipiecjial.
Tlie lowers 
most tooth longer ; 2 nfper teeth shorter, s^nd standing 
further asunder.
The fcottom of the cup indpsing tb^ 
rec^tade, moistened with a liquor-like nonev- 
Bl'oss.
Imtterfly^shapedf unequal, each petal havmg a dis- 
tinct name.
Thus the 
Standard, is the largest petal, lying upon, and cover- 
ing the others.
It is flat, horizontal, fixed by a daw 
to the upper edge of the, receptacle ; that part of it 
which stands out of the cup nearly circular and entire; 
a rising line, marking it lengthwise, particularly towards 
the endy as if it had been pressed down at the sides.
That part of the petal next the base is somewhat Uke 
DlAPELPHU.
W 
half a cylinder^ and it incloses the parts which lie 
under it.
llie border is dq>ress^ on each side^ but 
the sides next to the edge are turned upwards^ where 
the half cylinder terminates.
At the ccMnmencement 
of the border there are s concave impressions^ promi- 
nent on the undor side^ and compressing the wings 
which lie beoieath them.
The 
Wings are 3 equal petals ; 1 placed on each side of 
the ilow^ under the standard.
The borders incum- 
bent^ parallel^ rounded^ and oblong, broadest outwards, 
the upper edge pretty straight, the lower extended and 
rbunaed.
Trq base of each wing is cbven, th& lower 
segment extending into a claw, fixed to the side of the 
receptacle, and.
about as long as the cup; th^ upper 
segment shorter, and bent inwards.
The 
Keel is the lowermost petal, generally deeply divided, 
placed under the standard, and oetween the wings.
It 
IS boat-shaped, concave, compressed at the sides, placed 
in the position of a boat upon the water, {t is muti- 
lated at the' base, the lower part extending into a claw 
as long as the cup, and fixed to the receptacle.
The 
upper and lateral segments shorter, and enfolded with 
those parts of the wines which resemble them in 
shape.
The sides of the keel are riiaped like the wings, 
ancl have a similar situation, only lower and more m- 
ward.
The line that forms the keel, in this peta], is 
straight as far as the middle, and then gradually rise$ 
in an arch ; but the marginal line runs straight to the 
extremity, until it meets with, afid is lost ui th^t of 
the keel.
Stam.
Pilqments united into 2 sets, differing in shane* 
The lower ^filament inclosing the pisdl } the upper ^^^ 
ment lying upon it.
Lower Jilhrnent inclosing, sheathing the germen, 
manbranaceous bdow ^e middle^ and cyhndrical, 
opening upwards and lengthwise, terminating in 9 awl- 
shaped filaments, bent like the keel, and equal to it in 
length, alternately 2 longer and 2 shorter.
Upper Filament awl or bristle-shaped; similar in 
situation to, and lying upon the opening of the cylin* 
drical part of the lower filament, simple, apd a little 
shorter than that: separated from the others at the 
baae, so as to give a vent on each side for the honey.
jdnthers 10, 1 upon the upper filaotient, upon the 
lowor, «maU, equal in size, terminating.
X8 
308 DIADELPHIA.
PisT# single, superior.
Germen oblong, nearly cylindrical, slightly com- 
pressed, straight, as long as the cylinder of the lower 
filament, which incloses it.
Style awl-shaped, or thread-shaped, ascending, agree- 
ing in length and situation with the divisions of the 
lower filament, and placed in the middle of them, 
shrivelling.
Summit downy as far as it is turned upwards, placed 
directly under the anthers.
S. Vbss.
Legumen oblong, compressed, bkint, with 2 valves, 
and a seam running lengthwise both above and below; 
both seams straight^ but the upper seam falling near 
. the base, and the lower seam rising towards the end.
It opens at the upper seam.
S££DS several, roimdish, smooth, fleshy, pendant, marked 
with a prominence caused by the young plant near the 
insertion of the eye.
When the yoUng plant is ex- 
cluded, the side lobes retain the figure of half the seed.
Receptacles proper to the seeds ; small, very short, 
slender at the base, blunt and oblong at the part by 
which they are fixed.
Inserted lengthwise in the 
upper seam OTiiy of the pod, but alternately, so that the 
valves being separated, the seeds adhere alternately to 
each valve.
Obs. This class is perfectly natural^ and the structure of 
the flowers extremely singular: their situation is generally 
obliquely pendant.
The figure oftheLEGUMEN is not of so much consequence 
in ascertaining the genera as some have imagined ; but the Cup, 
which has been hitherto thought unworthy of notice, is of the 
greatest use.
The Leaves never should be considered in 
forming the characters of genera.
The Seeds of this class furnish food Iqr men^ aud other 
animals : they are farinaceous and flatulent.
The Leaves are 
food for cattle.
None of them are poisonous 
Dr. Pultcney, in a note added to his translation of the Pan 
Succicus, says, " A general view of this class shews at once how 
** very acceptacle its plants are to almost all cattle ; cows and 
** sheep refused none, and horses not more than three, out of 
** the whole number with which they were tried.
They afford 
** the richest food for cattle, and are cultivated in divers parts of 
" Europe, with all possible attention, ^th us, theTaiFOtiuM 
" pratense (or Clovtr) is mostly sown.
Lately some triak iavc 
." been made with the.
Hedysarum (kiobn/ddsj (Scmtfom) 
^^ and some have thought tiiat it answers {better, than clover.
I 
DIADELPHIA.
309 
** say nothing of the exotic Luc^m.
Among these plants the Ak'^ 
** THYlLis vulneraria is particularly acceptable to sheep ; in- 
^' son»uch, that the separate cultivation of it has been recom- 
^' mended, but it will not succeed well except on chalky 
^* grounds." (See Dr. Pulteney's accurate and judicious work, 
.fiftdtled, " A General View of the life and Writings of Lin- 
" naeus.)" 
DIADELPHIA.
(Filaments in 2 sets.) 
Hexandbia.
(6 Stamens.) 
Fumctria.
Polygala.
OcTANDRiA.
(8 Stamens.) 
Spartium.
Genista.
Ulex, 
Ononis.
Anthyllis.
Pisum.
Decandria.
(10 Stamens.) 
Orobtis.
Latkyru^.
Vida.
Ervum.
Omithopus.
Hippocrepis.
Hedysaram^ 
Astragalus * 
TrifoUum.
Lotus.
Medicago.
Sio DIADELPHIA.
OCTANDRIA, 
HEXANDRU.
t'UMA'RIA.
Toum.^37.
Gear tn.
115.
Cal. Cup S leaves ; leaSts opposite^ equal^ lateral^ up* 
rights acute^ small^ deciduous.
Bloss.
oblong; tubular^ g^ping^ palate projecting and fill- 
ing up the mouth.
Upper lip fLdX, blunt^ notched at the end, reflected.
{The Standard.) 
The Nectary is the base of the upper lip projecting 
backwards, blunt.
Lower lip altogether similar to the upper lip, towards 
the base keeled.
{The Keel.) 
Nectary at the base keeled, but projecting less than 
in the other.
Month 4-comered, blunt, cloven perpendicularly.
{The Wings.) 
Stam.
Filaments 2, equal, broad, tapering, one inclosed 
within each lip.
Anthers 3, at the end ot each filament.
PiST.
Germen oblong, compressed, tapering to a point.
Style short.
Summit round, compressed, upright.
S. Vess.
jPo«cAwith 1 cell.
S££Ds roimdish.
Obs. The stafhens are almost the only invariable part in 
this genus.
The Fumaria qfficintdii has a roundish pouch, 
generally containing a single seed, deciduous.
Likn.
lu 
¥. dauiculata the seed-vessel is an oblong, taper-pointed pod.
OCTANDRIA.
POLYG'ALA.
Tmm. 79.
Gcertn.
62.
Cal. Cup 3 leaves, small ; lecfits egg-shaped, acute, per- 
manent, 2 placed beneath, anal above the blossom, 
the 2 middle leafits nearly egg-shaped, flat, large, co- 
loured, (the Wings) deciduous.
Bloss.
nearly butterfly-shapedr 
Standard generally cylindrical, tubular, short.
Rim 
reflected, small, cloven.
Keel concave, compressed, bulging towards the end.
Appendages to the keel (generally) 2 pencil-shaped 
substances, with 3 divisions, fixed towards the end of 
the keel.
DIADELPHIA, .
DECANDRIA.
3 1 1 
Stam.
PS0mekts 8, muted, indosed ia ibt keel« Anthers 
S, simple.
PiST.
Germeti oblong.
Style simple, upright.
Summit 
terminating, rather thick, doren.
S. V^ss.
Capsule inversely heart-shaped, compressed, 
acute at the e^e; cdls^.
Valves^.
Partition ^hxxA 
crosswise to the valves, opening at the edge on each side.
Sbbds solitarjr, e^^shaped.
Obs. The appendages to the keel are different in different 
^des^ and ia many they are not to be found.
Lis y.
DECANDRIA.
SPARTIUM.
Taurn.AU.
Genista.
Gartn.\53.
Cal. Cup I leaf, heart-shaped, but tubular, small, co- 
lourea, the upper margin very short, the \o\Kg- towards " 
the ^id set with 5 litue teeth.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped* Petals 5.
Standard inversely heart-shaped, entirely reflected, 
very large.
Wings egg-shaped, oblong, shorter than the standard^ 
connected m the filaments.
Keel^ petals 2, spear-shaped, oblons, longer than the 
wings, connected at the keel-shaped margin by soft 
hairs, fixed to the filaments.
Stam.
Filaments 10, connected, unequal, adhering to the 
germen, the uppermost very short, and from that grow.
inggradually longer; the lower cloven into 9 parts.
Anthers rather oblong.
PlST.
Germen oblong, hairy.
Style awl-shaped, rising 
upwards.
Summit fixed to the upper side of the end 
of the style, hairy.
S. Vbss.
Legimen cylindrical, long, blunt, with 1 cell and 
2 valves.
Seeds many, globular, but somewhat kidney-shaped.
GENISTA.
Tmrh.
4\Q, Spartium.
Gcertn.
151.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, small, tubular, 2-lipped.
Upper Up with 
2 teeth, more deeply divided than the lower lip, which 
has 3 teeth nearly equal.
Bloss, butterfly-shaped.
312 DIADELPHIA.
DECANDRIA.
Standard oblong, distant from the ked^ entirely bent 
back.
tVings oblong, flexible, shorter than the other petals.
Keel straight, notched at the end, kmger than the 
standard.
Satm.
Filaments 10, connected, rbing out of the keel.
Anthers simple.
PisT.
Germen oblong.
Style simple, rising upwards.
Sum- 
mit acute, rolled mwaras.
S. Vess.
Legumen roundish, turgid, with 1 qell and 2 valves.
Seeps solitary, generally kidney-shaped.
Obs. In G.
pilosa there are 2 or more seeds ; in G.
artgiica 
from 3 to 14, and many in G.
tinctoria^ 
U'LEX.
Taum.
412.
Gcertn.
51.
Cal. Cup 2 -leaved, permanent ; leafits e^-oblong, con- 
cave, straight, equal, a little shorter than the keel, the 
upper with 2 jfeeth, the lower with 3.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped, of 5 petals.
Standard mversely heart-shaped, notched at the end, 
upright, very large.
Jvings oblong, blunt, shorter than the standard.
Keel of 2 petals, straight, blunt, approaching at the 
lower edge.
Stam.
Filaments 10, united, (l simple, and 1 with 9 
clefts.) Anthers simple.
PiiSt. Germen oblong, cylindrical, hairy.
Style thread- 
shaped, rising upwards.
Summit blunt, very small.
S. Vess.
Legumen oblong, turgid, little longer than the 
cup, straight, with 1 cell and 2 valves.
Seeds few^ roundish, notched.
ONO'NIS.
T(w/r?i.
229, ^TKWw. G^cr^n.
154.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, nearly as long as the blossom.
Segments strap-shaped, tapering to a point, a lilde 
bowed upwarcls, the lowest under the keel.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
StoTzdard heart-shaped, scored, the sides depressed 
more than in the rest.
Wings egg-shaped, half as long as the standard.
Keel tapering to a point, generally longer than the 
wings.
Stam.
Filaments 10, united and forming a complete undi- 
vided cylinder.
Anthers simple.
DIADELPHIA.
DECANDRIA.
. 313 
PiST.
Germen oblon^^ woolly.
Style simple^ rising up- 
wards.
Summit blunt.
S. Vess.
Lemimen diamond-shaped, tui^d, a little woolly^ 
with 1 cell and Q valves, sitting.
Seeds few, kidney-shaped.
ANTHYL'LIS.
Toum.
211, Fulneraria.
GcBrtn.
145, 
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, egg-oMong, bellying, woolly; rm with 
5 unequal teeth, perman^t.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
Standard longer, with reflected sides, and a claw as 
long as the cup.
fvtngs 2, oblong, shorter than the standard.
JKip^/compressed, as long as the wings, and like them.
Stam.
Filaments 10, connected, rising upwards.
Anthers 
simple.
?IST.
Germen oblong.
Sf^Ze simple, ascending.
Summit 
blunt.
S. Vess.
Lcg^TTiew roimdish, inclosed in the cup, very small, 
with 2 valves.
Seeds l or 2.
Obs. The singular structure of the filaments in the Anthyllis 
vainer aria merits attention.
The top of each filament is dis- 
tended like a hollow bladder, in form of an inverted pyramid, 
and the anther is fixed in the centre of the base of the pyramid- 
This hollow vesicle probably answers the purpose of a nectary, 
PrSUM.
Tcum.
215.
Gcertn.
152.
Cal. Cup l leaf, with 5 clefts, acute, permanent, the 2 
upper Segments the shortest.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
Standard very broad, inversely-heart-shaped, re- 
flected, notched at the end, with a point between.
tVings 2, circular, approaching, shorter than the 
standard.
Keel compressed, half-moon-shaped, shorter than 
the wings.
Stam.
Filaments 10, 1 simple, superior, awl-shaped, but 
flat ; 9 awl-shaped, united from the middle downwards 
into a cylinder, which is cloven towards the top.
An^ 
thers roundish.
PiST.
Germen oblong, compressed.
Style ascending, tri- 
angular, membranaceous, keeled, tne sides bent out- , 
3 14 DIADELPHIA.
DECANDRIA.
w^rd^.
Summii fixed t6 the supetior aii^e^ oMoog, 
woolly.
S. Vess.
Legumm lofgRi lang, somewhat cyKndricsd^ or 
compress^ undem^u^ } .
me gomt tapermg upwards^ 
1 cell, 2 valves* 
Seeds many, globular.
OR'OBUS.
Tomt.
SU.
Ckertn.
Ui.
Cal* Cup 1 leaf, tubular, blunt at the base ; rhn obfique, 
very short, with 5 teeth, the 3 lower the sharpest, the 
2 upper shorter, deeper, and more bluntly divided, 
shrivelling.
Bi«OBs. butterfly-shaped.
Standard inversely heart-shaped, longer, Tefiected at 
the end and at the sides.
tVings Q, oblong, nearly as long as the standard, 
rising upwards, approaching.
Keel evidently cloven in the lower part, tapering to 
a point, rising upwards, edges approaching, parmlel, 
compressed, the bottom bellying.
Stam.
Filaments 10,ascendii^, Qunited.
-4«/Aer5roundish.
PisT.
Gerfnen cylindrical, compressed.
Style thread- 
shaped, bent upwards, upright.
Summit strap-shaped, 
on the inner side downy from the middle to the end 
of the style.
S. Vess.
Legwmen cylindrical, long, tapering to a point, 
ascending at the end, 1 cell, 2 valves.
Seeds many, roundish^ 
LATHTRUS.
Tmrn.
21(5, 217, f^ ^^3, Jphaca.
GiBrtn.
152.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, bell-shaped, with 5 shallow clefts.
Scg- 
ments spear-shaped, acute, the 2 upper shortest, the 
s lower one longer.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
Standard inversely heart- shaped, very large, reflected 
at the end and at the sides.
JVtngs oblong, crescent- shaped, short, blunt.
Keefhdli^.
circle, as large as the wings, but broader, 
opening inwardly at the middle.
Stam* Fuaments \0j rising upwards, 9 united.
Anthers 
roundish.
DUDELPHIA.
DECAKDRIA.
sis 
PxsT.
Ge)-fnen compressed/ oblcmgy stntp-ahaped.
Style 
upright^ flat^ broader towards the top^ acute at the 
ead.
Summit extending from the middle of the st^ 
to the end^ woolly along the fore part.
S. Yess.
^Ltegumen very long, cylindncal, or compressed^ 
tapering to a point.
FiUves 2.
CeU 1 « 
Seeds many, either cylindrical, or globular, but somewhat 
angular.
Obs. This Genus is nearly allied to Pisum, but its style is 
evidently different.
VrCIA.
Toum.
212.
Gcertn.
151.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, upright, with 5 shallow clefts, 
acute, the upper teeth shortest, approaching, all the 
teeth equal in breadth.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
Standard oval, with a broad oblong claw, notched at 
the end, with a sharp point in the middle, reflected at 
the sides, compressed and raised in a line running 
lengthwise.
n^ings 2, oblong, upright, in the shape of half a 
heart, with an oblong claw, shorter than the standard.
Keel with an oblong cloven claw, the belljring part 
compressed, in the shape of half a circle, shorter than 
the wings.
Stam.
Filaments \0y 9 umieA.
^72fAer5 upright, rotmdish, 
with 4 furrows.
Nectary glatid short, tapering to a point, arising from 
the receptacle, and situated between the united fila- 
ments and the germen.
PiST.
Gej-men strap-shaped, compressed, long.
Styb 
thread-shaped, shorter, bent upwards, at a right angle* 
Summit blunt, bearded across the under side below the 
end.
S. Vbss.
Legumen long, like leather, with 2 valves and 1 
cell, termmated by a point.
Seeds many, roundish.
ER'VUM.
Towm.
221.
Gcertn.
151.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions, as long as the blossom.
Seg^ 
ments tapering to a point, nearly eq^ual* 
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
I \ 
di« DIATOELPHIA.
DECANDRIA.
Standard ^at, a little reflected, circular, large.
Wings blunt, half as long as the standard.
Keel shorter than the wings, tapering to a point.
Stam.
Filaments 10, rising upwards, 9 united.
Anthers 
simple.
PiST.
Germen oblong.
Style simple^ rising upwards.
Summit blunt, without a bear^.
S. Vess.
Lesumen oblong, blunt, cylindrical, .with protu- 
berances formed by the seeds.
Seeds 4, nearly round.
Obs. It differs from Vicia solely in the summit, hmi's.
In 
E. tetraspermum the cup has 5 unequal teeth ; and the summit, 
when viewed through a microscope, appears bearded, so that it 
should be arranged with the Viciee.
In £.
hirsutum there are 
only 2 seeds.
ORNrTHOPUS.
Tmim.
224, Omithopodium.
Gcertn.
155.
Cal. Umlel simple.
Cup 1 leaf, tubular j rim with 5 teeth, nearly equal, 
permanent.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
Standard inversely heart-shaped, entire.
Wings egg-shaped, straight, hardly so large as the 
standard.
iTeeZ compressed, very small.
Stam.
Filaments 10, 9 united.
Anthers simple.
PisT.
Germen strap-shaped.
Stijle bristle-shaped, ascend- 
ing.
Summit a dot at the end of the style.
S. Vess.
Legumen awl-shaped, cj^Hndrical, bowed, jointed, 
separated by transverse partitions^ separating at the 
jomts.
Seeds solitary, roundish, 
HIPPOCRETIS.
Toum.
225, Ferrum equiniim.
Cal. Umbel simf]e.
Cup 1 leaf, with 5 teeth, the 2 upper conjoined and 
less deeply divided, permanent.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
Standard heart-shaped, with a claw as long as the 
cup.
Wings egg-oblong, blunt.
iCeercrescent-shaped^ compressed.
DIADELPHIA.
DECANDRIA; 317 
Stam.
Filaments 10, 9 united, ascending.
Anthers 
simple.
PiST.
Germen slender, oblong, ending in an awl-shaped 
style J ascending.
Summit undivided.
S. Vess.
2>gM?»ew compressed, membranaceous, very long, 
crooked, deeply indented along one seam into roundish 
hollows, so that it appears as if composed of many 3- 
edged blunt joints, connected together by the upper 
seam.
Seeds obloog, crooked, 1 in each joint.
Obs. The Ess. character consists in the Legumen being 
shaped like a horse-shoe.
Linn.
HEDYS'ARUM.
Tmcrn.
225 & 211, Onolrychis.
Gcertn, 155.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, with 5 shallow clefts.
Segments awl- 
. shaped; upright, permanent.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped, scored.
Standard reflected and compressed, egg-oblongj 
notched at the end, long.
Wings oblong, iwrrower than the other petals, 
straight.
Keel straight, compressed, broader at the outer part, 
and transversely blunt, cloven from the base to the 
bulging part.
Stam.
Filaments 10, 9 united, bent at a right angle.
Anthei's roundish, compressed.
PiST.
Germen slender, compressed, strap-shaped.
Style 
awl-shaped, bent like the stamens.
Summit undivided.
S. Vess.
Legumen with roundish joints, compressed, with 
2 valves and 1 seed in each jomt.
Seeds kidney-shaped, solitary.
Obs. The Hedysarura onobrychis has a legumen of only 1 
joint, and a single seed.
Linn.
ASTRAG'ALUS.
Tourn.
233.
Gcertn.
154.
Cal. Cup 1 leaf, tubular, with 5 acute teeth, the lowei; 
teeth gradually smaller.
/ 
£i«oss.
butterfly- shaped.
Standard longer than the other petals, reflected at 
tbie sides^ notched at the j^nd, blunt, straight.
318 DIADELPHIA.
PECAKDRIA.
Warns oblongy shorter than the standard* 
KeecBS long as the wings, notched at the end* 
Stam* Filaments \0, almost straight^ 9 united* Aiithers 
roundish.
PiST* Germen nearl^r cylindrical* Style awUshaped^ 
ascending.
Summit blunts 
S* Vess* Legumen witli 2 cells, the cells bending to one 
ride* 
Skeds kidney-shaped.
Obs. The Legumen differs in different species^ 
TRIFO'LIUM.
Toiirn.
228 & 229, Meltlotusi 
GcB7'tn.
153.
Cal. An Uinbellule or little heady upon a common recep- 
tacle.
Cup 1 leaf, tubular, with 5 teeth, permanent.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped, generally permanent, shrivelling.
Standard reflected.
Wings sKorter than the standard.
Keet^hoxXjtx than the wings.
Stam* Filaments 10, 9 united.
Anthers simple.
« 
PiST.
Germen somewhat egg-shaped.
Style awl-shaped^ 
ascending.
Summit ^im^t.
S* Vess* Legtimen scarcely longer than the cup, with 1 
valve, not opening, deciduous.
Seeds very few, roundish.
Obs. It is, perhaps, more diflficult to give a true and essen- 
tial character to this genus, than to any other that I know, 
aotwithstanding the general habit, which is at once perceived, 
and the properties of the plants which compose it shew that it 
is a natural one ; and those who have attempted to divide it, 
have not been able to fix any certain limits to their sub-divi- 
^ons.
Link.
LOTUS.
Toum.
227* Gcertn.
153.
Cai^ Umbel simple.
Cup 1 lear, tubular, with 5 shallow clefts : teeth 
acute, equal, upright, permanent.
Bloss.
butterfly-snaped.
* 
Standard citcuiaT, bent downwards, claw oUongp 
ccmcave.
Wmgs circular, ^rUr thaa the standard, boad, 
approaching upward.
DIADELPHIA, DECANDRIA- 319 
Keel bul^ng in the lower part^ closed above^ taper- 
ing to a pointy ascending, short.
Stam.
Filaments 10^ ascending, Q united^ broadish at the 
. ends.
Anthers small, simple.
PiST.
Germen cylindrical, oblong.
Style simple, ascoid- 
ing.
Summit a dot, bending inwards.
S. Vess.
Legumen cylindrical, stiflF and strsdght, filled full, 
longer \hm the cup, valves 2, cdU many.
Seeds many, cylindrical.
MEDICA'GO.
ToMm. 231.
Gcertn.lbb.
Caj..
Cup 1 leaf, strjught, bdl-shaped-cylindrical, with 
b shallow clefts, tapering to a pomt, equal.
Bloss.
butterfly-shaped.
Standard ^g-shaped^ entire, bent inwards at.
th^ 
edge, entirely Dent back.
vhngs egg-oblong, fixed to the appendage of the 
keel, approaching at the sides imder the keel.
i^^roblong, cloven, expanding, blunt, bent down*- 
wards by the pistil, and with the standard forming a 
gaping mouth.
Stam.
Filaments 10, umted almost the whole lengths 
Anthers small.
PiST.
Germen standing QQ a little fruit-stalk, oblongs 
bowed inwards, compressed, inclosed by the filaments, 
bursting out of the keel, and pressing back the standard, 
ending m a styU which is shorty a^^-shaped, generally 
straight.
Summit ternMpatinjg, venr smml.
S. V^$.
hegfimm compressed, bogy o^t inwards.
Seeds many, kidney-shapedi or ajogular* 
Osft.
Hitt LegumeD in some specks is bent lik« a €«€kle ; 
in others it is spiral like a siiatl<-s]iell.
Link.
[ 320 ] 
CLASS XVIII.
POLYADELPHIA.
xsas 
JL HIS Class comprehends the plants whose flowers have 
stamens united by the filaments into 3 or more sets.
The 
Orders depend upon the number of stamens.
We have 
only a single genus belonging to this Class, in some species 
of which the filaments are so far separated, that unless 
they are examined quite down to the bottom, the young 
Botanist would be apt to search for them in the classes 
Icosandria or Polyandria.
POLYJNDRU.
HYPE'RICUM.
Towm.
131 ® 128.
AndsroscBmum.
Gcertn.
62.
Cal. Cup with 5 divisions.
Segments somewhat egg- 
' shaped, concave, permanent.
Bloss.
Petals 5, oblong-egg-shaped, blunt, expanding, 
bending from left to right.
Stam.
Fuaments numerous, hair-like, connected at the 
base into 3 or 5 sets.
Anthers small.
PiST.
Germen roundish.
Styles 3 ^ (sometimes 1, 2, or 5,) 
simple, distant, as long as the stamens.
Summits simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule roundish, with as many cells as there 
, are styles.
Seeds several, oblong.
t 821 ] 
CLASS XIX.
SYNGENESIA.
T 
HIS Class compreheilds those flowers which Botanists 
have very generally agreed to call compotmd.
The essential 
character of a Compound Flower consists in the An- 
thers being united so as to form a cylinder, and a single 
SEED.being placed upon the receptacle, under each floret.' 
The Dandelion and the Thistle are compound flowers ; 
that is, each of Aese^fiowers are composed or compoxmded 
of a number of small flowers, called Florets'.
Character of the Flower.
A Compound Flower is composed of many fhretsy sit- 
ting upon a Common Receptacle, and inclosed by 
1 Common Calyx, The 
Surface of the Receptacle is either concave, flat, convex, 
pyramidical, or globular.
Itisdther, 
Naked, that is, marked only with little dots, as in DanPB- 
lion; or 
Hairy, covered with soft upright hairs as in Thistle; or 
Chqjffy, beset with awUshapeo, narrow, compresseq, up- 
right, chaffy substances, separating the florets, as in 
Chamomile or Yarrow.
The Common Calyx is a Cup which surrounds the flo- 
rets and the common receptacle.
(When the florets 
have blossomed it contracts ; but when the seeds are ripe 
it expands, and falls back J It is either 
Simple, when formed with oidy a single row of scales or 
Leaves, as in Goats-beard ; 
Tiled, when the scales are numerous, the outer ones gra- 
dually growing shorter, and lying upon the inner ones, 
like the tiles upon a house, as in Artichoke ; 
Vol. I.
Y 
322 SYNGENESIA, 
heafy^ when a single row of equal and longer segments 
stands next to the florets, and another row of very 
small scales surrounds the base only of those segments^ 
as in Daisey.
The structure of the Flobbts which compose a com- 
pound flower, will be best imderstood by pulling to pieces 
the flower of a Thistle, of Dandelion, or of the Sunflower^ 
and comparing the florets with the following 
Istatural Character of a Floret.
Cal. none, but the crown of the seed sitting upon the top 
of the germen.
Bloss.
1 petal* Tube very slender and long, sitting upoa 
the germen.
{It is either) 
1 .
Tubular.
Border bell-shaped^ with 5 clefts.
Segments 
reflected and expanding, as in Thistle or Burdock.
?, Narrow.
Boraer strap-shaped, flat, turned outwards, 
lopped at the end, which is either entire, or marked 
with 3 or 5 teeth, as in Dandelion or Endive.
3. None, border wanting, and sometimes the petal is 
altogethe^deficient.
Stam.
FiloTnents 5, hair-like, very short, fixed to the 
neck of the little blossom.
Anthers 5, upright, strap- 
shaped, united at the sides so as to form a hollow cylin- 
der, as long as the border of the blossom, and marked 
at the top with 5 teeth.
PiSt. Germen oblong, standing under the little blossom 
upon the common receptacle.
<S/yZe thread-shaped, 
upright, as long as the stamens^ passing through the 
hollow cylinder formed by the anthers.
Summit di- 
vided, the segments rolled back and expandingi 
S. Vess.
properly speaking, none; ,though^ in Osteosperma 
and Strumpfia, (foreign genera) there is a sort of 
leathery crust over the seed.
Seed single, oblong, frequently vdth 4 edges, generally 
narrower towards the base.
CroumedWi\h Down, which either consists of many undi-^ 
vided hair-like spokes, placed in a circle, or of spokes 
that are branched or radiated.
This doum^ again, is 
either supported upon a little pillar , or else sitting im- 
mediately upon the seed.
Dandelion.
Thistle.
' with a small Cup, which has generally 5 teeth, 
and is permanent.
neither with a Cup, nor with down.
Tanssv.
Obs. In examining' the minuter florets, the Dissecting In- 
struments and the Botanic Microscope, will be found extremely 
useful.
.. The disposition of the stasaeus and pistals^ varying^ 
occasions the foUowilig 
Distinctions ^Fi-ORBTS.
Flohbt.
Tubular, Hermaphrodite, containing both Sta- 
mens and pistils.
'   ' ' Male, containing stamens but no pis* 
tils.
—- — — — Female, containing a pistil but no sta* 
mens.
' Neutral, contaihing neither stamens 
nor pistil.
— — Strap-shaped, Hermaphrodite, as above.
* Male, ZB above.
Female, as above.
- Neutralj as above.
From considering these different structures of the florets.
It is evident, that these compound flowers diay be com- 
posed either 
'^ 1 • Florets tulnifar in the centre^ with stamens and pis^ 
tils.
Tidmlar in the circumference, with staQiens 
and pistils.
2. Florets tubular in the centre, with stamens and pis- 
tils.
Twiw/ar in the ch-cumference^withwily pistils.
3. Florets ^2£to^r in the centre, with stamens and pis- 
tils.
Tubular in the circumference, with neither 
stamens nor pistils.
4. Florets tubular in the centre, with stamens and pis- 
tils.
Narrowin.
the circumference, with stamens 
and pistils.
5. Florets tubular in the centre, with stamais and pis- 
Of^ tils.
2Varroi^/ in the circumference, with only pistils.
6. Florets tubular in the centre, with stamens and pis- 
tils.
Narrow in the circumference, with neither 
stamens nor pistils.
7. Florets tubular in the centre, with stamens and pis- 
tils.
Pw/i/5 in the circumference without blossoms, 
8. Florets tulmlar in the centre, with stamens and im** 
perfect pistils.
Pistibia the circumference with- 
out blpssoms.
9. Florets narrow in the centre, i^th stamens and pis- 
tils.
Narrow in the circumference, with statnen$ 
and pistils* 
y 2 
&n SYmGENESUu 
The Orders J therefore^ according to the system we 
have adopted, wUl be as follows : 
I. PoLYGAMiA JEOUAhis; (flofets all hermaphrodite.) 
That is^ when all the florets are furnished with stamens 
and pistils, (9.
1. 4.
of the preceding table,) 
II.
PoLYGAMiA supERFLUA.
(Florcts of the circumference 
female.) That is, whdi the florets in the centre have 
both stamens and pistils ; but the florets in the circimi- 
ference only pistils.
(2.
5. 7.
of the preceding table.) .
' III.
PoLYGAMiA FRUSTRANEA.
(Florets of the circum- 
ference neutral.) That is, when the florets in the cen- 
tre have both stamens and pistils ; but the florets in the 
circumference neither.
(3, 6.
of the preceding tabic) .
IV.
PoLYGAMiA NECESSARIA.
(Neccssary femSe florets.) 
That is, when the florets in the centre have both sta- 
mens and pistils ; but, from some defect in the pistils, 
produce no seed.
The florets in the circumference 
have pistils only,*and produce perfect seeds.
(8.
of the 
preceding table.) 
V. PoLYGAMiA Segregata.
(Separated florets.) That 
is, when several florets, each having its own proper 
cup, are inclosed within one common calyx, so as to 
form altogether but one flower.
(The British Flora does not furnish any example of 
this order.) 
The plants of this class are supposed to have various 
specific virtues.
Most of them are bitter^ none of them 
poisonous, except, perhaps, the Lactuca virosa^ when 
growing in shady situations.
' 
The elasticity of tjie calyx in the Picris, Carouus, 
and many other genera, is too remarkable to pass unnoticed 
by the slightest observer.
It seems as if the expansion of 
the florets first burst the calyx open, and when these 
wither it closes a^ain.
The downy hairs that crown the 
seeds, before upright, now begin to expand, and, by this 
expansion, again open the leaves of the calyx, and bend 
them ^uite back.
The seeds now escape, and the calyJi, 
becoming dry and withered, no longer retains its elastic 
power.
The hairy, or downy appendages of the seeds, occasion 
them to be wafted about m the air, and disseminated far 
and wide.
- The structure of this down deserves our no- 
tice : there is hardly a child that is insensible to its beauty 
in the Leontodon or Dandelion^ 
SYNGENESIA.
325: 
SYNGENESIA.
(United AnthfeVs.) 
\ 
PoLroAMiA jEauALK* (Florets all Hermaphrodite.) 
^ragopogon.
Picris, 
Sonckus.
Laciuca, 
Prenanihes, 
Letmioion.
Hieracium» 
Crepis.
Ih/oseris^ 
Hypochceris.
Lapsctna* 
Cichorium.
Arctium, 
SerratulcL* 
Carditus.
"^ 
Onopordon.
Cortina.
Bidens.
Eupatorium.
Santolim.
' 
»'.
Poi^TOAMiA sunzRFLVA.
(Florets of the Cireumference 
Femsde.) 
Tanacetum.
Artendsia.
GnaphaJium* 
Conyxa* 
Erigeron, 
Tussilago, 
Seneciom 
Aster* 
SoUdago, 
Cineraiia.
Inula, 
Doromcum, 
Bellis.
Chrysanthemum* 
Matricaria* 
Anthemis* 
Achillea, 
PoLTOAMiA FRUSTBANBA.
(Florets of the Circumference 
Neutral,) 
Centaurea, 
PoLTOAMiA NECBssARiA.
(Nccessary FeQxale Florets.) 
Calendula.
Filago^ 
\ 
• 
3M SYNGENESIA; POLYQAMIA iEQUALIS, 
POLYGAMIA MQUALIS.
TRAGOPO'GON.
Toum.
270.
Gcertn.
159.
CAt. common, simple, with 8 IfeaVeS ; leqfits spear-shaped, 
equal, every other standing n>ore inwards, all united at 
the base.
Bloss.
compound^ tiled, uniform.
Morels hermaphrodite^ 
numeirous, the outer rather longer.
Individtiak of 1 petal, strap-ahaped, lopped, with 5 
teeth.
Stam, Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers forming 
a cylinder.
PiST.
Germen oblong.
Style thread-shaped, as long as 
the stamens.
Summits 2^ rolled back.
S. Vsss^.
ft6ne, the ealyx closing^ tapering' to a pomt, as 
long as the seeds, a little bellying.
Seeds solitary, oblong, tapering towards each end, angu* 
lar, rough, terminated by a long awl-shafied piUar 
supporting thfe dowuy which is feathered and flat, with 
about 35 spokes.
Recept.
tiakea^'flat, rough.' 
Obs. tn some species the seeds are straight, aiid the cup 
' longer than the blossoms; in others, the seeds crooked, and 
' the cup shorter than the blossoms.
...» ' > • • ' .
' 
PFCRIS.
Gcertn.
159.
Cal. ctynvnum, double, the outer very large, with 5 leaves ; 
leafits heart-shaped, flat, flexible, approaching; the 
hmer tile<i> erg-shaped.
* 
Bx^oss.
compouTha, tiled, uniform.
Florets hermaphrodite, 
numerous.
Individuals of 1 petal, narrow, strap-shaped, lopped, 
with 5 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen nearly egg-shaped.
Style as long as the 
stamens.
' Summits 2, reflectjed.
S. Vess.
none.
The calyx unchanged, at length reflected.
Seeds solitary, bellying, blunt, furrowed transversely, 
Down feathered, standing on a pedicle, 
Becept, naked.
SYNGSNEStA.
POLYGAMIA ^QUALIS.
897 
SON'CHUS.
Toum.
268.
Geertn.
158.
Cal. common^ tiled, bellying.
Scales many, strap-sbaK>ed, 
unequal.
* 
Blos^.
compound j tilcd> unifonn.
Ffore^^ hennaphrorfite, 
nuxn^rous, equal.
Individtuds of 1 petal, narrow, strap-shaped, lopped; 
with 5 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like; very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Gefwiew somewhat egg-shaped.
S^yZe thread-shaped, 
as long as the stamens.
Summits 2, reflected.
S. Vess.
none, the calyx closing forms a compressed globe, 
but tapering to a point.
Sebds solitary, rather long.
Damn hair-like, sitting.
Recept.
naked, 
LACTU'CA.
Tourn.
267.
Geertn, 158.
Cal. common tiled, cylindrical, scales many, tapering to 
a point, membranaceous at the edge.
Bloss.
ccmipouhdy tiled, unifortn.
Fhrets hermaphrodite, 
many, equal.
Ipdiviauals ol 1 petal, strap-shaped, lopped, with A 
or 5 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anth&rs form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen somewhat egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, 
as long as the stamens.
Sumniits 2, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx closing, egg-shaped, cylindrical.
Seeds solitary, egg-shaped, tapenng to a point, com- 
pressed, smooth.
Down hair-like, on a long pedicle, 
tapering downwards.
Recept.
naked.
Obs. The L.
scariola and L.
virosa have furrowed seeds.
PRENANTHES.
G^tn, 158.
Cal. common, double, cylindrical, smooth, scales' of the 
cylinder equal in number to the florets ; scales of the 
base few, unequal, very short.
Bloss.
compound, generally consisting of a single row of 
florets.
Florets 5 to 8 or more, hermaphrodite, equal, 
standing in a circle.
Individuals of 1 petal, strap-shaped, lopped, with 4 
teeth.
328 SYNGENESIA.
POLYGAMIA MQVALIS.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short- ArUhers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder, 
PiST.
German nearly egg-shaped.
Styh thriead-sbaped, 
longer than.the stamens.
Summit cloven, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx cylindrical, closing a little at the 
rim.
Sbbds solitary, heart-shaped.
Doum hair-like, sitting.
Recbpt.
naked.
Obs. In some species the down is supported on a pedicle.
Linn.
LEONTODON.
T<mm.
266.
Cal. comrrwriy tiled, oblong ; inner scales strap-shaped, 
parallel, equal ; cuter scales fewer, and generally re« 
fleeted down to the base.
Btoss.
compound^ tiled, uniform.
Florets hermaphrodite, 
numerous, equal.
Individuals of 1 petal, strap-shaped, narrow, lopped, 
with 5 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form* 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PisT.
Germen nearly egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, 
as long as the florets.
Summits 2, rolled back.
S. Vess, none.
Calyx oblong, straight, at length reflected.
Sbeds solitary, oblong, rougn.
Down hair-like, supported 
on a pedicle.
Recept.
naked, dotted.
< 
Obs, In Leontodon Taraxacum the down is supported on a 
long pediclcyin all the other English species it is sitting, except 
in the L.
auiumnale, where, as has been observed by Leers, in 
the seeds of the circumference it is sitting^ but in those of the 
centre it sometimes stands on b, short pedicle.
HIERA'CIUM.
roMm.267.
Gcertn.Xh^.
Cal. common^ tiled, egg-shaped ; scales many, strap-shap- 
ed, very unequal, wring lei^thwise one over another, 
Btoss.
compound, tilea, uniform.
Florets hermaphrodite, 
numerous, equal.
Individuals of I petal, narrow, strap-shaped, lopped, 
with 5 -teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
.Aniliers form* 
ing a hgllpw cylinder.
SYNGENESIA.
POLYGAMIA JEQUALIS.
32$ 
PiST.
Germm nearly egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, 
as long as the stamens.
Summits 2, bent back.
S.Vess.
none.
CaZyx closing, ^-shaped.
Seeds solitary, with 4 blunt edges, short.
Dawn hair- 
like, sitdng.
Recept.
naked.
CRETIS.
G/:Brtn.
158.
C'aj..
comnrn, double.
Outer very short, open, deciduous.
Inner egg-shaped, simple, furrowed, permanenU 
Scales strap-shaped, approaching.
Bloss.
compound, tiled, uniform.
Florets hermaphrodite, 
many, equal.
Individuals of 1 petal^ narrow, strap-shaped, lopped, 
with 5 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder, 
PiST.
Germen nearly ^g-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, 
as long as the stamens.
Summits 2, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
CaZyo; roundish.
Seeds solitary, oblong, Down hair*-like, standing on a 
pedicle.
Jl^CEPT.
naked, 
Ocs. In C.
tectorum and C.
biennis the down is sitting.
(St.) 
HYO'SERIS.
Gcertn.
160.
Cal. common, cylindrical, angular, of about 8 leaver, per- 
manent.
Scales spear-shaped, upright, equal, acute, 
the lose closely surrounded with a htde calyx, com- 
posed of a few very short scales.
3loss.
compound, somewhat tiled, uniform.
Kore/5 her- 
maphrodite, many.
Individuals of 1 petal, narrow, strap-shaped, lopped, 
with 5 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PisT.
Germen oblong.
Style thread-shaped, as long as 
the stamens.
Summits 2, reflected.
S. Vess.
none j common calyx straight, or expanding.
Seeds solitary, oblong, membranaceous, scored on the 
middle of one side, about as long as the calyx, those of 
830 SYNGENESIA, POLYGAMIA iEQUALIS; 
the circumference covered by the scales of the calyx, 
broader or narrower than the others, 9-sided, crodked, 
Down sitting, hair-like, surrounded by awned chaff, 
which in the seeds of the circumference is very short.
Recept.
naked.
HYPOCHiE^RIS.
GcBTtn. 160.
Cal. common, roundish, tiled, bellying at th^ base.
Scales 
spear-shaped, acute.
./ .
Bloss.
compound^ tiled, uniform.
Florets hermaphrodite.
equal, nuiherous.
Individtmls of 1 petal, narrow, strap-shaped, lopped, 
with 5 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
AnthersioTm^ 
ing a hollow cylinder, 
ftsT.
Oermen egg-shaped.
Style threads-shaped, as long 
al9 the stanuens.
Summits i, ttStcled, 
S. Vess.
none, the calyx becoming globular, but tapering, 
closes on the seeds.
. 
Seeds solitary, oblong.
Down feathered, standing on a 
pedicle.
Recept.
chaffy.
CAo^spear-strap-shaped, as long as the 
seeds.
Obs. In H.
glabra the central seeds have the down on a 
pedicle, but not so those of the circumference.
(Haller.) 
LAFSANA.
Toum.
272.
Gcertn.
157.
Cal. common^ double, egg-shaped, angular.
Scales of the 
tube 8, equal, strap-shapea, with a hollow channel, 
keeled, acute.
Scales of the base 6, tiled, small, every 
other smaller.
Bloss.
compound, tiled, uniform.
Florets hermaphrodite, 
about 16', equal.
Individuals of 1 petal, strap-shaped, lopped, with 5 
teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen rather oblong.
Style thread-shaped, as long 
as the stamens.
Summit cloven, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
,CaliJx egg-shaped, closing.
Seeds solitary, oblong, cylindrical, but with 3 edges, 
scored.
Doi^w none.
Recept.
naked, flat.
SYNGENESIA.
FOLYGABHA i£aUALllS.
83E 
CICfiO'RIUM.
Toam.
273.
Ce^tn.
157.
CiU^ comrrumy double^ cylindricaK Scaks 8, nanow^ 
spear-shaped, eanal, fonning a cylmder^ 5 of them 
snorter than^ ana lying upon the others.
Bloss.
compcundy flat, uniform.
P/or^/y hermaphroditei 
My placed in a circle.
Indmduah of 1 petal^ strap*shaped^ lopped, deeply 
divided into 5 teeth* 
Stam.
Pihtments 5y haiNlike, Very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder, with 5 edges.
PiST.
Germen oblong.
Style thread-shaped, as long af 
. the stamens.
Summits 2, rolled back.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx cylindrical, closing at the top.
Seeds solitary, compressed, with about 5 acute angles.
Doum like chaiF, the chafly substances very small^ 
numerous.
Recspt.
somewhat chaffy.
ARCTIUM.
Toum.
^56, Lappa.
Gcertn.
182, 
GAt. com97ton, globular^ tiled.
iScoZe^spear-shaped^endrng 
in awl-shaped prickles, Jong, and hooked at the points.
Bi'Oss. cOmpoimdy tubular^ uniform.
Florets hermaphro-' 
dite, equal.
Indimduals of I petal, tubular.
Tuie slender, very 
long.
Border ^g-shaped, with 5 clefts.
Segment$ 
strap^shaped, equal.
Spam.
Filaments 5, hair-rlike, very short.
Anthers form-* 
ing a hollow cylinder, as long as the blossom, with 5 
teeth.
PisT, Germen oblong, with soit hairs at the end.
Style 
thread-shaped, longer than the stamens.
Summits ciO« 
ven, reflectfed.
S. VesiS.
none.
Calyx closing.
Seeds solitary, like .an inverted pyramid, the 2.
opposite 
angles indistinct, bulging on the outer side.
Doixm 
simple, shorter than the seed.
Recept.
chaffy, flat, CAo^ like bristles.
SERRATULA.
Gcertn.
162.
Cal. commxmy oblong, rather cylindrical, tiled.
Scales 
spear-shaped, acute, or blunt, without awns.
I 
fsc SYNGENESIA.
POLVGAMIA JEQ.VAUS, 
Bloss.
compound, tubular, unifoim.
Florets henasphTO- 
dite, equal.
Individuals of I petal/fumKl-shuKd. Tule b^it 
inwards.
Border bellying, with A clelts.
Stam.
Filaments S, blur-like^ very short.
Anthers fonn- 
ing a hollow t^lmder, 
PisT.
Germm e^-shaped.
Style thread -shaped, as long 
as the stamens.
Summits s, oblong, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Cailyx unchanged.
SsEDs solitary, inversely egg-shaped.
Doum sitting, 
feathered.
JIecspt.
chafiy, flat.
Obs. The Down in some species is fcallicred, in others bat 
little so.
Carduus is distinguished from &EKRATnLA by the 
receptacle twing hairy ; the calyx bellying, its scales thorny, 
SDd the summit not so deeply cloven.
LtxN.
CAK'DUUS.
Gcertn.
!fi2.
Cal. c(namott, ^bellying, tiled.
Scales numerous, spear- 
shaped, tapering to a point, thorny.
Blosg.
compoiaid, tubular, uniform.
Florets hemupbro- 
dite, nearly equal, reflected.
Indiuidatals of I petal, liinnd-shaped.
Tube very 
slender.
Border upright, egg-shaped at the base, with 
5 clefts.
Segments strap-shaped, equal, 1 more de^ly 
divided.
Stam.
PV^aMwnf* 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder as long as the floret, with 5 
teeth at the rim.
PiST.
Germea egg-shaped.
Sitfle thread-shaped, longer 
than the stamens.
Summits simple, awl-shaped, naked, 
notched at the end, 
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx closing a Itttlc.
Seeds solitary, inversely egg-shaped, with 4 angles, be- 
like, S opposite ones mdistinct.
Down sitting, very 
long.
Recept.
hairy, flat.
Ofis.
Several species arranged by Liiuixus under this genus 
liave the Dinen feathered.
(Scbreb.) 
SYNGENfiSIA.
POLYGAMIA ^QUALIS, 33* 
ONOPORDON, Totirn.
Q53, Cardnus.
Gcertn.
I6l.
Cae. common, roundish^ bellying, tiled.
Scales numerous, 
thorny, projectinff on every side.
Bloss.
compound^ tuoular, uniform.
Florets hermaphro- 
dite, equal.
Individuals of 1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Ttibe very 
slender.
Border upright, bellying, with 5 clefts.
Seg^ 
ments equsiy 1 more deeply divided.
Stam.
Fila79€ents 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder as long as the blossom, with 5 
teeth.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped.
Style thread-shaped, longer 
than the stamens.
Summit crowned.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx closing a little.
Seeds solitary.
Down hair-like, sitting.
Recbpt.
chaffy.
CAo^ lopped, but sharp-pointed, sjiortor 
than the seeds, united so as to form cells.
CARLI^A.
Tourn.
285.
G^/w.
163.
Cal. common^ bellying, radiate, tiled.
Scales numerous, 
flexible, acute, the inner in a circle, very long, expand-* 
ing, shining, coloured, forming rays to the compound 
flower.
Bloss.
compound, uniform, tubular.
Florets hermaphro- 
dite, equal.
Individiials of 1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Tube slender.
Border funnel-shaped, with 5 clefts.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PisT.
Germen short.
Style thread-shaped, as long as the 
stamens.
Stimmit oblong, cloven or entire.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx unchanged.
Seeds solitary, rather cylindrical.
Down divided into 
rays, somewhat chaff-like, branched, feathered.
Recept.
flat, chaff-bristle-like, membranaceous, and a 
little united at the base, forming cells, with many clefts, 
rays awl-shaped.
Bristles somewhat longer than the 
chaff, and club-shaped, are intermixed with it.
BFDENS.
Tmrn.
262.
Gcertn.
167.
Cal. common, tiled, upright ; leqfits nearly equal, oblong, 
concave and channelled.- 
334 SYNGENESIA.
POLYGAMJA MQVALlSi 
Bloss.
compound, uniform^ tubular.
Florets hermaphrO' 
dite, tubular.
Individuals of 1 petals funnel*8haped4 Border with 
5 clefts, upright.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form* 
ing a hollow cylinder, 
PisT.
. Germen oblong.
Style simple, as long as the sta* 
mens.
Summits 2, oblong, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx unchanged.
Seeds solitary, blunt, angular.
Down 2 or more, awns, 
oblongs straight^ acute, rough with hooks turned back- 
• wards.
Rbcept.
chaffy, flat.
CAo^ deciduous, flattish.
EUPATO'RIUM.
Tourn.
259.
Gcertn.
166.
Cal. common, oblong, nearly cylindrical, tiled.
Scales 
strap-spear-shapeo, upright, unequal.
Bloss.
compound, uniform, tubular.
Florets hermaphro- 
dite, equal.
Individuals of 1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Border^ with 
5 clefts, open.
. 
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Genwew very small.
iS/yZe thread-shaped, very long, 
cloven down to the stamens, straight.
Summits slender.
S.^ Vess.
none.
Calyx unchanged.
Seeds solitary, oblong.
Down long, hair-like, or feathered* 
Recept.
naked.
SANTOLFNA.
Tourn.
260, Gcertn.
l65.
Cal. common, hemispherical, tiled.
Scales egg-oblong, 
acute, laid close.
Bloss.
compound, uniform, longer than the calyx.
Florets 
hermaphrodite, equal, numerous.
Individuals of 1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Border with 
5 clcfts(, toWtd back.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
German 4-cornered, oblong.
Style thread-shaped, 
as long as the stamens.
Summits 2, oblong, depressed^ 
loppea.
SYNGENESIA.
POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.
335 
S. Vess* none.
Calyx unchanged.
Sbeds solitary, oblong, 4-comed.
Doum none.
Recept.
chaffy, flattish.
Chaff concave.
POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.
TANACETUM.
Taum.^^l.
Gcertn.
165.
Cal. cmn/numy hemispherical, tiled.
Scales acute, compact.
Bloss.
compound^ tubular, convex.
Florets hennaphro* 
dite, numerous, tubular, placed in the centre.
Florets 
female, a few in the circumference.
Individual hermaphrodites, funnel-shaped.
Border 
with 5 clefts, reflected.
Individual females with 3 clefts, more deeply divided 
on the inner side.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PisT.
Germen in the hermaphrodites, obloi^, small.
Style 
thread-shaped, as long as the stamens.
Summit cloven, 
rolled back.
Germen in females oblong.
Style simple.
Summits 2, 
reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx imchanged.
i)EEDs solitary, oblong.
Down a sort of border.
Recept.
convex, naked.
ARTEMISIA.
Toum.
260.
Gcertn.
164.
'CAL.cof727»07z, roundish, tiled.
Scales rounded, approaching.
Bloss.
compound.
Florets hermaphrodite, many, tubular, 
placed in the centre.
Florets female, generally without 
any petal in the circumference.
Individual hermaphrodites funnel-shaped.
Border 
with 5 clefts.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers fQrmitig 
a hollow cylinder, with 5 teeth in the rim.
\ 
PiST.
Germen in the hermaphrodites, small.
Style thread* 
shaped, as long as the stamens.
Summit cloven, rolled 
back.
Germen in females very small.
Style thread-shaped, 
longer than in the others.
Summit the same.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx but little changed.
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, naked.
Recept.
flat, naked, or woolly.
Ob 8.
In some species the receptacle is naked : in the Arte- 
rDAs,\a.Absinthiym it is woolly, and the calyx is more globular.LiNN* 
SdS SYNGENESIA* POLYGAMIA SUPERFLuA.
GNAPHA'LIUM.
Taum.
Q59,Elychrysuni.
GcertnAQb^ 
Cal. common^ roundish, tiled, bordering.
The 5cafe5 round- 
ed, skinny^ coloured.
Eloss.
compound.
Florets hermaphrodite, tubular, some* 
times mixed with female florets without petals.
Individual funnel-shaped.
Border with 5 clefts, re- 
flected.
Individual females, without any petal.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Antliers form* 
ing a hollow cylinder.
Pisr.
Germen in the hermaphrodites, egg-shaped.
Style 
thread-shaped, as long as the stamens.
Summit cloven, 
Germen in the females, egg-shaped.
Sfi/le thread- 
shaped, as long as in the other florets.
Summit cloven^ 
* reflected.
S» Vess.
none.
Calyx permanent, shining.
Seeds in all the florets solitary, oblong, small, crowned 
with down, which is hair-hke or feathered.
Recept.
naked.
Obs. In Gnaph.
dioijcum the male and female florets are on 
distinct plants; a circumstance very unusual in this class.
Linn.
CONY^ZA.
Gcertn.
166.
Cal. common f tiled, oblong, scurfy; scales acute, the 
outer a little expanded.
Bloss.
compound^ tubular.
Florets hermaphrodite, nume- 
rous, tubular, in the centre.
Florets female, numerous^ 
like the others, in the circumference.
Individual hermaphrodites, funnel-shaped.
Border 
with 5 clefts, open.
Individml females, funnel-shaped.
Border with 3 
• clefts.
, 
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen in the hermaphrodites, oblong.
Style as 
loi^ as the stamens, thread-shaped.
Summit cloven.
Germen in the females oblong.
Style thread-shaped, 
as lon^, but more slender than in the other florets.
Summits 2, very slender.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx closing.
Seeds in all the florets sohtary, oblong.
Down simple* 
Receft.
naked, flat.
SYNGENESIA, POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.
337 
ERIG'ERON.
Gasrtn.
170.
Cal, common, oblong, cylindrical^liled.
iSco&f awl-shaped^ 
upfight, gradually longer, nearly equal.
Bloss.
coi/ipoundy radiate.
Florets tiermaphrodi^y tubular, 
in the centre.
Florets female, strap-shaped in the 
circumference.
Individual kermaplvrodites funnel-ahaped.
Border 
with 5 clefts.
Individual fem/iles narrow, between strap and awl- 
shaped, upright, generally very entire.
Stam.
Filaments 5^ hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen in the hermaphrodites, very «mall, crowned 
with a^own longer tbm the blossom.
Sifyfc thread- 
shaped, as long as the down.
Summits 2, oblong, 
rolled back.
GeffTtenin females, very small, crowned with down, 
nearly as long as its blossom.
Style hairJike, as long 
as the down.
Summits 2, very slender.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx closing.
Seeds in all the florets oblong, small.
Doimi long, hair- 
like.
flkcEPT.
naked, flat.
Obs, There are sometimes a few male florets in the centre.
TUSSILA'GO.
Tourn.
258, Petasites.
Gcertn.
170.
Cal. ccwwTWon, cylindrical.
Scafe strap-spear-shaped, equal^ 
(15 or 20,) somewhat membranaceous, even with the 
top of the flower.
Blos$.
cmnpoundj various.
Florets hermaphrodite , in some 
species all tubular, in others only tubular in the centre.
Florets female^ in some species strap-shaped, in 
others entirely wanting.
Individual hermapkrodites fimnel- shaped.
Border 
with 4 or 5 clefts, acute, reflected, longer thanthe calyx.
I?ulividual females either none at all, or strap-shaped 
and very narrow, entire, longer than the calyx.
Stam.
Fi/a?7ie7i/5 5, hair-like, very short, jintners form-^ 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
GerweTzin the hermaphrodites, short.
S^yZe thread- 
shaped, longet than the stamens.
Summit thickish.
Germen m the females, short.
Sti/k thread-shaped^ 
as long as the other.
Summit thickish, cloven.
Vol. I.
Z 
338 SYNGENESIA.
POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx but little changed.
Seeds in all the florets solitary ; oblong, compressed.
Down hairy^ standing on a pedicle.
Recept.
naked.
Obs. In T.
hyhrida and T.
Fet antes there are no strap- 
shaped florets in the circumference^ but there are female 
florets, without blossoms.
The T* Fmfara has always strap- 
shaped florets in the circumference, which are female.
Linit* 
SENE'CIO.
T(mn.
260.
Gcertn.
166.
Cal. ccmvnum, double^ conical, lopped.
ScaZ^i awl-shaped, 
numerous, contiguous, equals dead at the ends, parallel^ 
contracted above, into a cylinder^ the base tiled by a 
few scales.
Bloss.
compoundy taller than the calyx.
Florets herma" 
phrodite tubular, numerous, in the centre.
Florets 
jemcdey (if any) in the circumference, strap-shaped.
Individzuil hermaphrodites funnel-shaped.
Border 
reflected, with 5 clefts.
Individual females (if any) oblong, with 3 indistinct 
teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very small.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen in fcoth sorts of florets egg-shaped.
Style 
thread-shaped, as long as the stamens.
Summits Sty 
oblong, rolled back.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx closing so as to form a cone.
Seeds in both sorts of florets solitary, egg-shaped.
Down 
hair-like, loM.
Recept.
naked, flat.
Obs. In some species the Borets are all tubular, in others^ 
the florets of the circumference are strap*shaped» Linn* 
ASTER.
Toum.
274.
GtBrtn.
170.
Cal. commmiy tiled, the inner scales standing out at the 
points, the lower open.
Bloss.
compound^ radiate.
Florets hermaphrodite^ nume- 
rous, in the centre.
Florets females^ 10, or more, strap- 
shaped in the circumference.
Individual hermaphrodites, funnel-shaped.
Border 
with 5 clefts, open.
SYNGENESIA.
IPOLYGAMIA SUPfiRFLUA.
339 
Individual females^ narrow^ spear-shaped^ with 3 
teeth^ (at length rolling up.) 
Stam.
Filaments 5y hair-like, vefy short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
German in the hennaphrodites, oblong* Style thread^ 
shaped, as long as the stamens* Summit cloven-ex- 
. , panding.
Gerpien in females, oblong.
Style the same as the 
other.
Summits 2, oblong, rolled back.
S. Vess.
none.
Qdyx but little changed.
Sbbds in all the florets, solitary, oblong or egg-shaped.
Down hair-like.
Recept; naked, flattish..
SOLIDA'GO., TWw. 275, Ftrgaaurea.
Gcertn.
170.
Cal. common^ oblong, tiled ; scales oblong, narrow, taper- 
ing to a point, straight, approaching.
Bloss.
compouTidy iradiate.
Florets hermaphrodites, tubular, 
numerous, in the centre.
Florets female, strap-shaped, 
fewer than 10, (mostly 5) in the circumference.
/ 
Individual hermaphrodites, funnel-shaped^ Border 
with 5 clefts, open.
Individual Jemale, narrow, spear-shaped, with 3 
teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 3, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen in hermaphrodites, oblong, ^tyle as long 
\ as the stamens, thread-shaped.
Summit cloven, ex- 
panding.
Germen in the females, oblong.
Style thread-shaped, ' 
as long as the other.
Summits 2, rolled back.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx but little changed.
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, inversely ^g-shaped, 
oblonff.
Da2i;;z hair-like.
BscBPT.
flat, naked.
CINERA'RlA.
Gcertn.
IIQ.
Cal. tommJcm, simple, of niany leaves.
Leafits^Visl.
Bloss.
compound, radiate*.
Fwrets herniaphrodites, equal, 
numerous, in the centre.
Florets female, strap-shaped, 
equal in number to the leaves of the calyx, in the cir- 
cumference* 
Z2' 
340 SYNOENESIA, POLYGAMIA SUPERPLUA.
InSimdwBtl herfru^kr^fes, itmneUshaped^ with 5 
clefts, upright.
> Individual fef/Mtkus^ d^htow^ spear-shaped, fkidy 
toothed at the end.
Stam« ^lameffU$ S, thread^baped, short.
Anthers form* 
ing ahoUow tylinder^ with 5 clefts at Ae top, 
ftsT, G^Twe/i in hermaphrodites, oblong.
$fy«?
thread- 
shaped, ^ Xtsfog as the Stinnetts.
Sammks 9, rather 
upright.
Germen in females, oblong.
Stple thUftad-shapcd, 
short.
Stwt$mis e, eblong, rather bWt, rolled bat;K.
S .
Vess .
none .
Calyx unchanged .
^ 
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, strap-shaped, with 4 
angles.
Down hair-like, in large quantity.
Recept.
naked, rather flat.
INSULA, iJ^ertn.
170.
Cal. wmmo^j tiled.
Leafits ^iWe, opeft, ih^ tniter ones 
the largest, eoual iti length.
BlosS'.
wmpaundy radiate, broad, florets ftertnaphrodites 
e^ual3 v^ numerous, in the centtfe.
Florets female, 
strap-shaped, numerous crowded, in the circuimerence.
Indmiud hMnapJtrodi^s fiintid-fehaped.
Border 
with 5 clefts, somewhat upright.
fniividuaifeniahs, narrow, strap-shaped, vfery emire.
Stam.
Filaments 5, thread-shaped, short.
Amkehrs 5, 
narro-wr, united, formittjg; a hoUottr cyBndet, tach an- 
ther endihg at the baee in $ straigjht btisdes, as long 
as the filaments.
Pis'T.
Gerfken ^ henwaphrbdites, 16ng, Siy!^ itfe Jong as 
the staiwen*, thrcad-i^ajjed.
Stmtm^ cloreh, Nearly 
upright.
Gervnm in females liong.
Style thiiead-shapfcd, ti 
little cloven.
Summits upright.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx unchanged.
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, strap-shaped, with 4 
angles.
Down hair-like, as long as die seed.
Recept.
naked, flat.
Ob5« The 10 >)ristles at tls?
iiasle of Hie *cy Under #Mvndd ly 
the anthers is stt^icfeat io "distiiigui^k i^ ({ro4R «aosl ott)»r 
genera.
Linn.
, , 
« X 
SYNCBNESIA.
POLYGAMTA fiUPERFLUA.
34 1 
DORCyNICUM.
T<nim.^7.
Geprtn.
173.
equal, upright, in 2 rows^ <rftien as long as |j[^ rays of 
the blossom.
Bloss.
compound j radiate.
Florets hermaphrodite, tubular, 
numierous, in the centra.
Flpreisferuw, Straj^-shaped, 
equal in number to the leaves of the calyx, in the cir- 
cumferenee.
ladividtnd hermaphrodUes, iimnd-sbaped.
Border 
with 5 cleft3, segments open.
Indk/idtud fowales, narrow, spear-shaped, with J 
. teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-lUce, very short.
Anthers imited, 
ferming a hollow cylinder.
PiST.
Germen in hermaphrodites, oWong.
Style thread- 
shaped^ as long as tlie stamens* Sutmmit notched at the 
end.
Germen and Sh^ in fiamales, the samie.
Summits e, 
bent hack.
S. V^ss: none.
The Cf%x slightly closing.
Seeds in hermaphrodites solitary, inversely egg-shaped, 
corapessed, nirrowed.
Doum hair4ike.
In /emails the same, only slightly compressed .
Down 
none, 
Recbpt.
naked, flat.
BEL'US.
T(Mm. 280.
Gcsrin.
168.
Cal. comnum hemispherical, upright.
Leajiis from 10 tqi 
20, placed in a double row, spear-shaped, equal.
Bloss.
compouridy radiate.
Florets hermaphrodite, tubular, 
numerous in the centre.
Florets female stsrap-^shaped, 
more in number than the leaves of the calyx, in the 
circumference.
hidividual hermaphrodites, funnel-shaped, with 5 
clefls.
Individual females, narrow^ spear-shaped, very 
slightly markecl with 3 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
mg a hollow cylinder.
PisT.
Germen in hermaphrodites, egg-shaped.
Style 
simple.
Summit notched at the end.
34e SYNGENESIA, POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA.
Germen in females eg^-shaped.
Style thread-shaped* 
Summits Qy stBiidirig yrhie.
. - 
S. Vess.
none.
Cah/x unchanged.
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, inversely egg-shaped^^ 
compressed.
Dom/w none.' i 
Recept.
naked, conical.
CHRYSANTHEMUM.
Tourn.^BO.
GcBrtn.
168.
Cal. conimouj hemispherical, tiled.
Scales lying dose 
upon each other 3 the inner gradually larger ; the very 
innermost tenninating in a stanny seale.
BlLOSS.
compmndy radiate.
Florets hermaj^rodite, nume- 
rous, tubular, in the centre.
Florets female, 12 or 
more, in the circumference, ' 
^ Individual hermaphrodites, fimnd-shaped, with 5 
clefts, open, as long as the cup.
j72^z?;2£lz^ZfemaIes,.strap-shaped,oblong^with3.teeth.
St AM.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers forming 
a hollow cylinder, generally shorter than the blossom.
PisT.
Germen in hermaphrodites, egg-shaped.^ Style 
thread-shaped, longer than the stamens.
Summts\ 
rolled back.
Germen in females, egg-dha^ed.
Style thread-rshaped, 
as long as the other.
Summits 2, blunt, rolled back.
S. Vess.
none.
Ca/yji; imchanged.
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, oblong.
Down none, or 
only a border.
Recept.
naked, dotted, convex.
Obs. In the first division of the species, the feniale florets 
are spear-shaped, ^nd tl^e membranes of.
the calyx narrow ; 
but in the second division egg-shaped and lopped, and the 
membranes of the calyx egg-shaped.
Linn, 
MATRICA'RIA.
Toum.
281.
Gcertn.
168.
Cal. commony hemispherical.
Scales strap-shaped, tiled, 
not quite equal ; not skinny.
Bloss.
compoamdy radiate.
Florets hermaphrodite, tub\ilar, 
numerous, in the centre, whiqh is hemispherical.
Florets 
female many, in the circumference.
Lidividwl hermaphrodites, fonnel-sbaped, with j 
clefts^ expanding.
Individual females oblong, with 3 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
-4wMer5 form-* 
ing a hollow cylinder, 
SYNGENESIA.
POLYGAMIA SUPERFLUA, 3*3 
PxsT.
Germen in hermaphrodites, obloiig, naked.
Style 
as long as the stamens, thread-shaped.
Summit cloven, 
expanding.
Germen in females^ naked.
Style thread-shaped, 
nearly as long as in the others.
Summits 2, rolled back, 
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx unchanged.
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, oblong.
DCum none.
Recept.
naked, .convex, 
ANTHEMIS.
Tourn.
QQly Chamcemelon.
Gartn.
169- 
Cal. commjoriy hemispherical.
Scales strap-shaped, nearly 
equal.
Bloss.
compound, radiate.
Florets hermaphrodite, tubular, 
numerous, in the centre, which is convex.
Florets 
female, more than 5, in the circiunference.
Individual hermaphrodites, funnel-shaped, with 5 
teeth, upright.
Individual females narrow, spear-shaped, sometimes 
with 3 teeth.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers form- 
ing a hollow cylinder.
Fist.
Germen in hermaphrodites, oblong.
Style as long 
as the stamens, thread-shaped..
Summits 2, bent back.
Germen in females oblong.
Style the same as in the 
others.
Summits 2, rolled oack, 
S. Vess.
none.
CeUyx unchanged.
Seeds in all the florets solitary, oblong.
Down none, or 
only a border.
Recept.
chafiy, conical or convex, 
ACHILI^E'A.
Tourn.
283, Millefolium.
Gcertn.
168.' 
Cal. common, ^g-shaped, tiled.
Scales e^-shaped, acute, 
approaching.
Bloss.
cowpoi//?rf, radiate.
F/ore/5 hermaphroditcj tubular, 
in the centre.
Florets female, 5 to 10, strap*shaped, in 
the circumference.
Individual hermaphrodites funnel-shaped, with 5 
clefts, open.
Individual females strap-shaped, inversely heart- 
shaped*^ expanding, cloven mto 3 segments, the middle- 
most the smallest.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers forming 
a hollow cylinder.
344 SYNGENESIA.
POLYGAMIA FRUSTRANEA.
PiST.
Germen in hemu^uodites small.
Style thread- 
shaoed, as long as the^stamens.
SummU Uunt, notched 
at the end.
Germen in females small.
Style thread*shaped^ as 
long as the other.
Summits Q, biunt^ bent bacK.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx but little changed.
Recettcucle thread- 
sh^ed^ lengthens out when loaded with tne seeds^ e^- 
shaped, and twice as long as the calyx* 
Seeds in all the florets, solitary, egg-shaped, woolly.
Down none.
Rbc^pt.
cbaiflfy, elevated* Chaff spear-shaped, as long as 
the florets.
POLYGAMIA FRUSTRANEA.
CENTAURE'A, Tourn.
254 & 256.
Gcertn.
I6l, 
Cyamis.
Cal. common, tiled, roundish ; scales often .
terminating 
variously.
Bloss.
cornpoundy^oreU all tubular, but of diiferent shapes* 
Florets hermaphrodite, many, in the centre.
Florets 
female not so many, larger, more flexible, in the cir- 
cumference.
iwc/wMfwa/ hermaphrodites of 1 petal.
r^Je thread- 
shaped.
J?orrfer bellying, oblong, upright, tenninating 
in 5 strap-shaped upright segments.
Indmdttal iemales of 1 petal, funnel-shaped.
Tule 
slender, gradually becoming wider, bent backwards.
Border oblong, oolique, unequally divided.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers forming 
a hollow cylinder, as long as the blossom.
PiST.
Germen in hermaphrodites small.
Style thread- 
shaped, as long as the stamens.
Summit very blunt, 
(in many cloven) with a projecting point.
Germen in females very small.
Style, next to none, 
Suntmit none« 
S. Ves».
none« Co/yj?
unchanged, closmg.
Seeds in the hermaphrodites solitary.
Down mosdy fea- 
thered, sometimes hair-like.
Recept.
bristly.
Obs. The scales of the calyx, and the down of the seeds, 
are difltrent in driferent species.
Link.
SYNGENJESIA.
POLYGAMIA NECESSARIA, 345 
POLYGAMIA NECESSARIA.
CALENDULA.
Tourn.
284^ Cdtha.
Gcertn.
168.
Cal. cmnman, simple^ of many leaves, rather upright.
Seg^ 
ments strap-spear-shaped, 14 to 20, nearly equal.
Bloss.
compound, radiate.
Florets, hermaphrodites many, 
in the centre.
Florets, females many, very long, in the 
circumference ; as many as the scales of the calyx.
Individtials, hermaphrodite, tubular, with 5 shallow 
clefts, as long as the calyx.
Individuals, females, strap-shaped, very long, with 
3 teeth, without nerves, woolly at the base.
Stam.
Filaments 5, hair-like, very short.
Anthers united 
so as to form a hollow cylinder, as long as the blossom.
Pi ST.
Germen in the hermaphrodites, oblong.
Style thread- 
shaped, hardly so long as the stamens.
Summit bliint, 
cloven, straight, 
Germen in the females, oblong, 3 -sided.
Style 
thread-shaped, as long as the stamens.
Summits 2, ob- 
long, tapermg to a point, reflected.
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx closing, roundish, depressed.
SsEDS in the hermaphrodites in the centre, none : more 
outwardly, few, solitary, membranaceous, inversely- 
heart-shaped, compressed.
Females (in the circumference) solitary, larger, ob- 
long;, bent inwards, triangular, membranaceous at the 
angles, marked on the outer side lengthwise, as if en- 
graved with the figure of a plant.
Doum none.
Recept.
naked, flat.
' .
FILA'GO.
Gcertn.
166.
Cal. common, cylindrical or 5 -cornered, tiled.
Scales 
outer, egg-spear-shaped, acute, cottony ; inner shining, 
coloured, tapering to a point.
Bloss.
compound.
Florets, hermaphrodites, few, tubular, 
in the centre.
Florets, females tubular, numerous, sur- 
rounding the fonner.
Other females, mostly without 
petals, tewer, placed immediately within the scales of 
the calyx.
Individuals, hermanphroditt, funnel-shaped.
Border 
with 4 clefts, expanding.
346 syngenesia: polygamia necessaria.
Individualsy female, immediately surroimding the 
preceding, tunnel- shaped.
Ttihe very slender, swollen 
at the base.
Border cloven, acute.
Stam.
Filaments in, the hermaphrodites 4, very short.
Anthers forming a cylinder.
Fist.
Germen in the hermaphrodites, very small, abortive.
Style hair-like, as long as the border.
Summits 2, 
upright, but standing vi^ide.
Gerrrmi in the females immediately surrounding the 
above, oblong.
Style hair-i-like, longer than the border.
Summits 2, open.
Females immediately within th^ calyx.
Germen ob- 
long.
Style hair-like, longer than the border.
Summits 
2, long, expanding, 
S. Vess.
none.
Calyx unchanged.
Seeds of the hermaphrodites barren, crowned with down.
-: of the innei' females oblong, crowned.
Down short, 
simple.
- of the outer females oblong, naked.
Eecept.
nak^, 
Obs. This generic description is taken from the observa- 
tions of the very accurate and admirable Leers ; it accords 
with qui: species, which is by no means the case with that given 
by LinnaBus, who is said to have formed it from a view of tho 
f ilago acaulis, 
L 
^ ^•iiiB 
mm 
[ 347 3 
CLASS XX.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
Xt is well known^ that the attention of Linnaeus was 
much less engaged by the Class Cryptogamia, than by the 
other Classes which are formed of plants with more obvious 
fructifications.
It was his glory to have established a system 
upon the organs of generation, (the stamens and pistils) 
of all others the most essential parts of a plant, and this 
system he has wrought up to such a state of perfection, 
that little, compared to what he himself has done, remains 
for his successors to do ; except the additions it may receive 
from more extended researches in countries imperfectly, or 
not at all Explored before.
But the plants of the Crypto- 
Samia Classy not falling under his peculiar system, were to 
im less interesting, and therefore, probably, were less 
attended to.
Of the four natural Oniers into which he 
divided this class, he seems chiefly to have improved our 
knowledge of the Pilices.
The Musci and the Algjb 
had been so successfully explored and so excellently figured 
by Micheli and Dillenius ; and Gmelin having done much 
on the subject of the Fuci, there remained, in these 
extensive tribes, but little more for Linnaeus to do, than to 
distribute and characterize them according to his own ideas.
The Fungi, at one time, attracted his attention, but the 
difficulty of preserving them in a state fit for comparing 
together, and the impracticability of transporting his oooks 
jilong with himself in his various journies, seem to have 
checlced his pursuits ; neither could he benefit, as we now 
do, by th^ almost innumerable figures which have been 
published since the formation of his system.
From these 
causes he has done but little in the Fungi, and that little 
has been ill understood.
Our countryman, the excellent 
IIay, paid great attention to these subjects ; but for want 
of figures, or more extended descriptions, it is often diffi- 
cult, sometimes impossible^ to determine his species.
348 ' ' CRYPT0GAMIA.
It has just been observed, that we are indebted for the 
knowledge we have of the Mosses, the Lichens, and most 
of the other genera of the Algae, to the indefatigable in- 
dustry of Dinenius, land the sdgaeious scrutiny ot Michdi, 
from these authors Jtherefore, as well as from the Historia 
Fucorum of Gmelin, the read^v will find the most impor- 
tant parts of the description's e^ftracted and subjoined to 
each species.
These can hardly fail to be considered as 
acceptable additions to the present work, not only because 
none can be expected to dcficribe these plants better than 
those who have figured them so well, but also on account 
of the great scarcity of the original work of Dillenius, 
which few are so happy to possess.
The cc^ies pnnteil 
were only 250, vcA of these, but few Temain m England.
Impressioas of his {dates are easily obtsdned, and the 
scarcity of the letter-press ^'iU, hereafter, in this country, 
be the Iqss regretted.
Nor have the labours of Jacquin, or 
HoffmaiQ, of Wicgcl, or of Batsch, of PoUich, or ^ Weis, 
been neglected ; they, and several others, now contribute 
occasionally to the illustration of the species, and to the 
instruction of the Eo^ish Botaioist.
It must be observed 
that, on these occasioo6> the author has not aimed at a 
literal translation : he has endeavoured to catch the ideas of 
the writers, and to communicate them to his readers in as 
small a compass as the English language would well p^» 
mit ; cardiJiy assigning to each the share they have coti- 
tributed.
But in bringing my readers to an acquaintance 
with this Class, it would be unpardonable to make no 
mention of the illustrious H£nwio, who has immortalised 
his name by the accuracy of his researches, and the splen- 
dour of his discoveries, ni these obscure families of plants.
He communicated the result of his observations to the 
Academy of Sciences at Petersburgh, in the year 1783.* 
As this work is but.Uttle known to the English Botanist, I 
shall subjoin the following compendious view of the sub- 
ject, confining myself principally to the discoveries more 
immediately relating to the parts of fructification.
Those 
who wish for further information, cannot fail of being 
highly gratified by an examination of the original work, 
and by a perusal of this very ingenious author's subsequent 
publications.
He introduces his subject with an account of the views 
of his predecessors in this branch of Natural History and 
* See Theorja Ceneratlonis et Fructtficationls plwitarum Crj'pto- 
gamicarum Linnaei.— Petropoli.
17S4.
quarto.
CKYPTOGAMIA.
349 
though he mentions the mistakes in which many of them 
had been invoived, he does ample justice to those who had 
anticipated him in any part of his discoveries 
TheCitTPTOGAMiA Class maybe considered as con- 
taining a number of \'egetables whose flowers and fructifi- 
cation are but little or very imperfectly known, and whose 
stamens and pistils are too minute to admit of that mode of 
investigation which prevails through the preceding classes* 
The structure, too, of these vegetables, differs considerably 
from that of other plants.
Tliey may be divided into the following orders or 
assemblages: 1, MISCELLANE/E; 2, FILICES : 3.
MUSCI; 4, HEPATICiE; 5, ALGiE; 6, FUNGL 
Concerning each of these we shall now speak more par- 
ticularly.
MISCELLANEyE.
(Schreb.) Miscellaneous.
The plants comprized in this Order, are such- as are 
mcapabte of arranging imder any of the subsequent Orders, 
neither do they agree one with another.
They are redu* 
cible to some one of the following Genera.
Eqidsetum.
Lycopodmm» Pilularia, Isoeies, 
EQUISETUM.
Hbdwio illustrates the structure of 
dais geoias by a particular examination of the EauisETUM 
flvaticumy and E.
palustre.
The former, as well as the 
. arvense^ protrudes its club-shaped head out of the earth 
eariy in the spring.
Round this head are placed, in circles, 
target-shaped substances, each supported on a pedicle, aixl 
compressed into arigles in consequence of resting against 
each other previous to the expansion of the spike.
PL xiii.
R 1.
"C'f* Beneath each of these targets we find from 4 
to?
conical substances, with their points leaning a little 
inward towards the pedicle, fig.
2./.
They open on the 
inner side, and upon shaking them^ver.a piece of paper, a 
greenish powdery mass falls out, which at first is nill of 
motion, but soon after looks like cotton or tow.
So far 
may be discerned by the naked eye, but a good miqroscope 
discovers green oval bodies, and attached to each of them^ 
350 CRYPTOGAMIA- 
generally 4 pellucid and veiy slender filaments^ spoon* 
shaped at the end.
f« 3.
4. These are almost constandy in 
motion, contracting upon the least breath of moist air, and 
when, wet with water rolling round the oval body.
f. 5.
In the Equisetum palustre the filaments are broader, 
and the green oval or globular subtance more pointed, f.
6. 
This is undoubtedly the Seed,^ for it gradually increases in 
bulk, and when it falls, the spike shrivels.
Its projecting 
point is the Summit^ and the conical substances imder the 
targets are the capsules.
The scales which surround the flowering stalk at cer- 
tain distances after its protrusion, served whilst it was yet 
young, as a general fence to the spike.
Hence it appears, that the genus EauisETUM contains 
both stamens and pistils, within the same calyx.
The flowering Spike, or general calyx, scauy and tiled ; 
the partial calyx target-shaped.
Filaments 2* Antheis 4, one at each end of the filament.
Summit single.
Capsule a target of 4, 5, 6, or 7 cells.
Seeds numerous, egg-shaped or globular ; jplaced upon, 
and lapped up within the filaments.
For the other three genera in this assemblage, tJie 
res^ier is desired to look forward to their respective generic 
characters." 
ft 
FFLICES.
(Ferns.) 
The plants of this Order have their flowers generally 
disposed in spots or lines on the under surface of the leaves, 
as in the Asplenium, (plate I.
B.) but sometimes in 
spikes, as in the Osmunda, 
Male flowers.
Anthers sitting, or supported on a very short filament, 
egg-shaped or globular, scattered on the under surface 
orthe leaves.
Female flowers, uniting so as to form a spihcy or 
collected into a hunch ; or forming lines or dots, whicn 
are found undemfeath the leaves, dthef on the surface, 
at the edge, or at the point ; and in some instances 
entirely covering the whole under surface.
Calyx none, or onty a scale formed from the leaf, opening* 
containing globules.
CIIYPTOGAMIA.
351 
Bloss.
none.
PisT.
A globule sitting, or supported on a pedicle.
Style 
none.
S. Vess.
Capsule sitting, or on a-pedicle, nearly globular ; 
in most instances surrounded by an elastic and jointed 
ring which is produced from the pedicle ; opening 
transversely when ripe, and discharging the seeds.
Seeds many, very minute, globular.
(Schreb.) 
In the months of September and October this curious 
mechanism is very evident in the Common Brakes, 
(PTE'RIS,) or in the Hart's-tongue, (ASPLE'NIUM 
ScolopJ by the assistance of a good single Microscope with 
a reflecting Speculum.
The sudden jerk of the springing 
cord frequently carries the object out of the field of view, 
so that it requires some patience to observe the whole of 
the process.
As there are no certain distinctions in the flowers them- 
selves sufficient to establish the Genera, these are known 
by the disposition of the seeds under their covers.
OPUIOGLOS'SVM vulgaium.
Examining the spike 
in its advanced state, with a moderate magnifier, we find 
ccJumns on each side, with cavities opening transversely, 
scattering a powder, and beset with innumerable eminences 
tiled one upon another like scales ^ With a very fine 
knife slice off" a portion, so as it may have a little of the 
column on each side.
Examine this in a good compound 
microscope, reflecting the light through it.
Transverse lines 
will then appear, which, as well as me interstices between 
them, are more opake than the part on each side.
PI.
xiii.
f. 7.
It is easy to scrape off some of the eminences with 
the back of a knife ; put them into a little water, and use 
higher and higher magnifying powers ; you will then dis- 
cover simple and compound bodies, mostly oval, surround- 
ed with a more pellucid line, and containing a granulated 
substance within, f.
8. 
Others may decide whether the leaf in this plant an- 
swers the purpose of an Involucre or Calyx whilst it is in 
flower ; but I consider the spike as bearing both Stamens 
and Pistils ; the Anthers occupying the interstices of the 
Germens^ which are furnished with a transverse Summits 
352 CRYPTOGAMIA.
It may be remarked that the Spike is at first yellowish, 
changing to brown, when the Capsules open and discharge 
their powder.
This powder is trie real seed, for after its 
discharge the plant gradually perishes^ though new shoots 
are sent out the ensuing year* 
0SMUN''DA5/)ica«^ Hedwig thinks this undoubtedly 
belongs to the Genus Acrostichum^ but we rather refer it 
with Dr. Smith to the Blechnum.
Early in the spring the flowering leaves come up, al- 
most rolled into a ball^ and not the leaves only, but the 
leaiits also are rolled up.
f. 9.
On the back side of each 
of these leafits there are two white lines^ extending fix)m 
the base of the leafit to the point ; thfey are bordered with 
green, and depressed in the middle, t.
10.
These white 
lines are fine membranes^ and on carefiilly separating them 
at their union with the leafit, we discover very mbute 
pellucid bodies, supported upon footstalks, f.
1 1 .
c. r.
In the younger leafits, by the assistance of high mag- 
iiifiers, we may discover smaul bodies of a brownish cast, 
composed of two parts, the one very slender and pellucid, 
proceeding from the rib, the other a coloured oval globule 
standing upon it.
PL 13.
f. 11.
When the leafit is fiJly 
unfolded, and the lines become more turgid, these cor- 
puscles upon the rib disappear.
(Hedwig.) 
POLYPO^DIUM Thely^teris.
This, as Hedwig ob- 
serves, does not well rank with the Acrosticha, to which 
Genus Linnaeus referred it.
The disposition of its firucti- 
fication accords with the Polypodiums.
Schmidel.
Icon, plant, t.
xi.
13.
p. 45.
has delineated 
and described this plant so accurately, that nothing remains 
to be added, but that the vesicles of a shining, yellow 
colour, viz.
the Anthers, are found upon the rib, and its 
ramifications, as well as upon the projecting edges of the 
membranes which cover the clusters of seed vessels.— 
(Hedwig.) 
POLYPO'DIUM F, fcemina.
When it first springs 
Out of the earth, and is yet in its curled state, we find by 
the assistance of a good Microscope, the back side of the 
leafits covered with turgid capsules, f, 1 2 , On the other side^ 
CRYPTOGAMIA.
354 
abundance of spherules of a milky colour^ supported upon 
pedicles.
Under the highest magnifier, these substances appear 
to consist of a very pellucid and tender pedicle, supporting a 
iiearly opake globule, filled with a granulated mass.
f. 13.
When the leafits and leaf are quite unfolded, all these 
substances disappear, whilst those on the under surface 
gradually enlarge, and ripen their seed.
(Hedwig.) 
ASPLE'NIUM Trichomanes.
Whilst this springs out 
of the ground, and is yet rolled inwards, the leafits are 
very mmute and fledhy.
On their under surface, when 
highly magnified, crescent-shaped membranes may be 
perceived covering the minute grains, which afterwards 
become capsules, r.
14.
At the same time, but chiefly 
towards the middle nerve of the leafit, white shining glo- 
bules are found.
These put into a drop of water, and 
viewed with the highest magnifier, will be seen to consist 
of a thick and very transparent foot-stalk, supporting a 
globule filled with a granulated mass.
f. 1.
It b unnecessary to be particular respecting the 
AsPLBNiUM Scolopendrium, Aspl.
Ruta^murariaf Foly- 
PODIUM F.
Mas, PoLYPOD.
Pheegcffterisy Polypod.
DruQpteriSy all which I have examined in a recent state, 
lincf in all which I have found similar organs, at the time 
the leaves first put forth.
The membranaceous scaly productions upon the stalks, 
so plentiful in some species, nave probably been the cover- 
ings of the now expanded parts, during the winter seasons.
There can be no doubt as to the uses of the other parts 
described above.
None of these are found in the fiill 
grown plant.
It is well known that whilst perennial 
plants npen their seeds, the formation of new fructifications 
IS going on.
It is shewn, that the EauiSETA perform 
their impregnations before they spring up.
When the 
curled-up leaves of the Ferns b^n to unfold, the Capsules 
are generally swollen; this is particularly obvious in the 
OsMVNOA regaliSf whose fertile leaves shoot up early in 
the spring, and ripen their capsules in July.
There can be no doubt that these Capsules are real 
Seed-vessels, sometimes opening vertically, and sometimes 
horizontally into two hemispheres, which are surrounded 
by an elastic ring.
(Hedwig.) 
Vol. I.
A A 
$54 CRYPTOGAMIA.
Explanation of the Plate idmging to the 
FIUCES.
PLxiii.
Fig. l.
A fruit bearing head of the Equisetum 
sylvaticum o\ its natura} size/ beginning 
to disperse its seeds, 
2. A Capsule bearing Target, with its fruit- 
stalk magnified.* 
3. An unripe Seed, with its stamens.
4. A ripe Seed, with the dust of the An- 
thers scattered on the filaments.
5 .
A Germen, with the Stamens rolled round 
it in their natural position.
6. A Seed of the Equisetum pcrZz^^re.
7. A particle from me side of the Stalk of 
the Ophioglossum vulgare^ whilst very 
young, (laj the convex part, bearing 
both the Stamens and Pistils, fbj a por- 
tion of the skin, with a little of the pulp, 
from the outer side of the stalk.
(i.J 
the same from the inner side.
8. Anthers of the same plant simple and 
compound.
9. A back view of a leafit of the Blechnum 
spicant^ of its natural size.
10.
A particle of the leaf with a single leafit, 
^(laj the leafit.
fbbj Scales, fccj membra- 
naceous coverings of the Capsules.
i 1 .
A particle of the same more highly mag- 
nified, faj the rib, with the Stamens up- 
on it.
("bbj the membrane turned back 
each way.
fccJ the rudiment of the fruit.
12.
An extremely small leafit of the Polypo- 
dium Filixfcem.
carefully expanded to 
shew the Stamens.
1 3 • Two of the Stamens taken out.
14.
Leafits of the Asplinmim Trickomanes 
from the yet unfolded extremity of the 
* To prevent repetition, it is always understood that the 
parts arc more or less magnified, unless wheo the contrary is 
particularly expressed.
I'he Author used a good compound 
Microscope^ with six magnifying powers.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
335 
leaf.
The Globules supported on foot- 
stalks are the Stamens^ the oblong spots 
the membrane covering the pistils.
Fio. 15.
Two of the Stamens taken out.
16« A particle of the receptacle of the female 
florets, (a) the receptacle, (b) the skiii 
of the leafit^ with its air ductSr 
The Uses of the Filices are but litde known \ few 
of them are esculent.
They have a disagreeable heavy 
smell.
In large doses they destroy worms, and some of 
them are purgative.
The ashes produced by a slow inci- 
neration or the green plants, contain a considerable por- 
tion of vegetable alkaly, and in this kingdom are very 
nerally sold under the name of Ash-balls^ to make lye 
or scouring linen.
^^ In the hot-house they become evergreens, and their 
** beauty is greatly improved in colour and delicacy.
The 
^' leaves, ir cut down when fiilly grown, and properly 
'^ dried, make a thatch more durable than tha^ or any 
** kind of straw.
^' In most of the Genera of the second subdivision, 
*^ the seedling plants require a succession of seasoni before 
^' they produce their fructifications.
The^r^^ year a single 
•^ leal is produced, which seldom attains to more than an 
*^ inch in height, is thin, semi-transparent, and ipost com- 
*^ monly entire.
The second year two or three are pro- 
** ducea, one larger than the other.
The third year, four 
^^ or five are produced, and Xhit fourth year, more in num- 
'^ ber proportionable to the richness of the soil and the 
•* suitableness of the situation.
In moist fertile soils, 
*^ shaded situations, mossy dripping rocks, or near currents 
** or rills of spring water, the leaves are thin, light and 
^^ semi-transparent 3 larger and more numerous, and apt 
*^ to become monstrous m shape or size.
On dry rocks, 
*' and in barren soils exposed to air a|id sun, the leaves 
*' are few, short, firm and opaque, producing seeds in 
*^ fewer years from the first springing up, and they gene- 
^* rally retain their own proper figure." Bolt.
A A2 
$56 CRYPTOGAMIA, 
MUS'CI.
(Mosses.) 
The female parts of fructification are inclosed in a 
Veil^ which adheres to the top of the ripe capsule^ and 
covers it» Capsule (rarely entire) opening transversely.
Stems leafy.
Leaves membranaceous, reticulated, after 
being drieci reviving, when soaked in water.
Male flowers.
Cal. common, of many leaves.
Leafits in structure re- 
sembling those of the plant, but generally broader, 
sometimes coloured, open and expanding like the rays 
of a star or the petals of a fuU blown rose, or else 
closing and approaching like a bud.
A few Mosses 
have no appearance of a calyx.
Bloss.
none.
SxAM.
nimierous, within the common calyx, mostly sepa- 
rated by succulent threads or chaff-like substances.
Sometimes they unite so as to form a little knob, or are 
placed in the bosoms of the upper branches.
Filament 
short, thread-shaped.
Antliers sometimes heart or eg^- 
shaped, but mostly cylindrical, 1 -celled, opening at tne 
top, and dischargmg granulated pollen.
Female flowers on the same or on a different plant, 
sometimes intermixed with the males.
Cal. Perichaetium many-leaved, heofits various, gene- 
rally inclosing several pistils intermixed with succulent 
threads.
Bloss.
Veil cylindrical or conical, investing the germen 
and fixed to its top, united at the base to the sheath of 
the fruit-stalk, but not elsewhere attached.
PiST.
GerTTiCTi cylindrical or conical.
S/yfo slender, stand- 
ing on the veil.
Summit lopped.
S. Vbss.
Capsule standing on a fruit-stalk which is sheath- 
ed at its base, when unripe crowned by the veil which 
separates at its base, adhering to the point of the cap- 
sule, but falls off when that becomes ripe.
The cap- 
sule then opens horizontally, the lid separating.
Lid with or without a nn^, single; or double, the 
outer one cartilaginous, sometimes swollen, or else con- 
tracted at the base, forming a kind of excrescence called 
Apophysis.
Mouth of the capsule either naked, or closed with an 
outer fringe.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
35*7 
Outer firmge with from 4 to 32 teeth, which are 
upright or reflected, straight or twisted, triangular, 
spear-shaped, or bristle-shaped ; acute or blunt.
hmer JSringe finer, either closely adhering to the 
outer, or joined to it by threads from its inner side, or 
loose and imconnected, or fixed to the pedicle on its 
little bulb.
Mouth naked, or covered with a membrane 
or net-work of the inner fringe, or variously jagged, or 
* closed by distinct and regular teeth.
Cohmn extending 
from the base to the point of the capsule, thread-shaped, 
straight, passing through the lid into the style, and 
often giving the lid a pointed appearance.
Sbbos numerous, minute, spherical, smooth or rough.
Such is the general character of the Mosses, which 
Schreber has made out from the discoveries and observa- 
tions of Hedwi^, but we shall now introduce some more 
particular remaps from Hedwig himself.
Hedwig defines Mosses, as being vegetables in which 
the female parts of ihictification are furnished with a veil- 
like petal, bearing a style.
He divides them, into two 
Orders : 
1 .
Capsule either entire^ lidded, and opening transversely : 
JrondosL 
2rf Capsule with 4 valves, opening lengthwise ; hepaticL 
These definitions ei^clude theLrcopoDiA from amongst 
the Mosses.
Perhaps they should rank with the Osmun- 
da ; but their fructification has not yet been sufficiendy 
examined.
The Musci hepatici are now formed into an 
assemblage of themselves, separate from the proper Mosses.
See the fourth Order.
Olservations on the proper Mosses, or Musci ofLinrnBus.
If we except the Bryum pomiformey sulndatum of 
Haller, — trkhodes, and a few other non-descript species, 
the Mosses bear the stamens and pistils in separate flowers^ 
either on the same, or on distinct plants.
358 CRYPTOGAMIA.
The time of flowering generaDy coincides with that of 
the fruit attaining maturity^ as happens in other evergreen 
perennials* Thus^ in tne Polytrichum urmgeruviy 
fAi^iVM fimtammiy hcmum^ punctatmn, unMahmi Brt*- 
t7M tricnodesy ccespiticium^ Seethe veils fall oflF early in the 
spring, and the seed is scattered abroad ; whilst at the 
same time the less obvious unimpregnated gennens^ and 
the male or stameniferous flowers are per fo rming their 
respective fitnetions.
This circumstance has caused these 
ripe capsules to be mistaken for anthers^ and the seeds for 
the poiIen« 
Calyx ar Pehiciurtium.
Both the MalK and Female flowers are fiimished 
with an Involucnim, which gives the outward figure to the 
flower.
This Involucrum in Mosses has attained the ap- 
propriate name of Perichaetium.
It varies more in the 
male than in the female flowers ; and is more to be at- 
tended to.
The radiated disks of the Polytricha and 
the Mnia, are very remarkable, and the scales composiiig 
them differ in many respects from the other leaves of the 
plant.
The heads which put forth at the extremities of 
the Brya have been hitherto urmoticed, though they 
contain the parts of fructification, and are composed of 
leaiits or scales, different both in shape and size from the 
stem-lekves.
Thus in the Bryum ruiale, they are not 
terminated by hairs, and are shorter than the stem-leaves ; 
in the Br. pellucenSy Br. scoparmn, Br. heteromaUum, 
Br. aciculare, &c.
they are broader than the other leaves, 
and more hollow at the base.
Where the disk-like sub- 
^stances form a kind of bud, as in almost all the Hypna, 
the Bryum extinctiorium^ Br, suhtdatum, Br. pulvinatum.
Br. hypnoideum, &c.
they are much smaller than the 
leaves ; they are also concave, egg or spoon-shaped, and 
destitute of^ the hairs which adorn the real leaves of the 
plant.
These thorefore are truly the calyx, and as they 
include the florets with stamens only, we call them the 
Perichaetia of the male Florets.
Upon an accurate inspection of the Mosses which bear 
capsules towards their extremities, i, e.
female flowers, we 
ebserve that the leaves adjoining to the fiuit-stalk are 
muQh ipore beautiful than thos^ on the stems* Bat some* 
CRYPTOGAMIA.
^5d 
tiities the inner leaves become gradually smaller^ and those 
nearest to the flowers so very minute^ that v^iUiout a mi» 
cpdseope it is not possible to dissect theih away so as to 
expose theflowef.
Thus pi.
xiv.
f. 19.
exhibits a plant of 
the Br^um pgrifbrmey (a) contains the male, (h) the fe- 
XtiAt flower ; f.
SO.
shews the female flower laid bare to 
the Ia»t conspicuous leaf, within which the flower lies 
hidden, but this being removed, other still smaller scales 
come into view.
f» 21 .
These, therefore, are to be considered as the Involu- 
crums of the female flowers, surrounding and embracing 
the germen.
These Involucrums, like those in many other 
wdl known plants, often grow larger as the capsule ad- 
vances to maturity.
PL xiv.
f. 17.
A small plant of the 
Brvum erAmctd^num^ with the lower leaves taken away, to 
shew the bud-like calyx of the male floret, (a,) 
f. 18, A plant of the Bryum pulvinatvm, with the 
leaves taken away to shew the flowering buds, (a) the ^ 
male, (b) the female flower.
f.19.
Afemale and a male j^lantof theBRYt7MjD^r^/brm^, 
f. 20.
The femak floret mclosed within its innermost 
leaves.
f. 21 .
The same, with all but one of its leaves removed.
Mqley or stameniferous flowers.
The ANTHKfis.are almost universally cylindrical, and 
either straight or crooked^ but in the Sphagnum pahistrej 
and the Mnium cmdrogyrmm^ they are egg-shaped and more 
or less tapering to a point.
Their colour is a very dilute 
green, almost white.
When viewed under the highest 
magnifiers, and strongly illuminated by reflected light, 
they are found to contain a granulatea substance ; but 
their tops are very pellucid, and this pellucid part expands 
into a rising vesicle, at the time the pollen is about to be 
discharged,, as at (c) pi.
xiv.
f. 22.
The top then opens 
and the pollen is ejected, the space from which it issues 
becoming more transparent.
This pollen, when evacuated, 
seems to explode in the drop of water, in which these ob- 
sen^ations ought to be made.
See f.
23.
Besides the Anthers, included within the same Involu- 
crum, we find some very delicate succulent bodies, of 
various shapes.
In the Polyteichum conemune they are 
360 CRYPTOGAMIA.
I 
club-shaped^ but tapering to a point; in the MNiUMyon-> 
tanum, and palustre, the Bryum mrale and unduMumy 
they are jointed and bluntish.
In the Brtum homum the 
last joint is acute.
In Mnium serpyllifoHum^ punctatum, 
cuspidatumy and Bryum pyrrforme^ they have a jointed 
stem terminated by a globule, f.
24.
In the Mnium hygro^ 
metricwn they have different shapes in the same floret ; in 
SDme they are thread-shaped, and more or less pointed; 
in the Sphagnum palustre they encircle the antlier.
Sometimes they are much longer than the anthers^ as in 
the Bryum pellucidum and pyriforme^ at other times 
shorter, as in Buxbaumia sessilis^vnA Bryum pulvinatum.
We must add, respecting the shape of Uiese barren 
florets, that in the Polytricha and Mnia some are 
like disks, others like roses, and some like stars, when in 
a fiiU/ expanded state.
In the stellated Polytrichums, the 
scales are placed in concentric circles.
In Mnjum hor^ 
nam, palustreyfontanum, &c.
they are more like a rose or 
a disk.
After the pollen is dispersed, these roses or stars 
become more expanded, but previous thereto, they are 
generally so open as to admit a view of the parts they 
contain.
In some Mosses the flowers terminate the 
branches, as in Mnium pyriformey Bjxdpu^pureumi Bryum 
pellucidum^ acicularey scopariumy heteromcdlumy viridulumy 
simpleXy &c.
in such^ though a little open, they are not 
enough so to allow a sight qT the anthers, ufitil the flower-* 
ing be past.
Some florets are like buds, and sit in the 
boson) of the leaves, and others in the tiled and thickened 
termination of the branches, as in the Sphagnum.
Two stamens of the Bryum extinctoriumy (cj one ready 
to burst, fd) one throwing out its pollen, (e.
e. ej succu- 
lent vessels.
PI.
xiv.
f. 22.
f. 23.
An Anther of the Bryum truncatulum viewed in 
the Solar Microscope whilst it throws out its pollen.
f. 24.
An Anther of the Bryum pyrifomwy with (iaaj 
the succulent vessels, 
Female flowers.
« • 
These are fnmish^ with the usual female organs, viz, 
a Germen, a Style, and a Surtimit, pi.
xiv.
fig.
25 ; but 
being accompanied by other substances much resembling 
them^ tljey are.
difficult tq be.
distinguished until the ger- 
CRYPTQGAMJA^ 36i 
men b^phs to swdl^ in ams^uence of, its im|»regnation« 
These substances^ of whose m^ I acknowledge m)^sdf igno* 
rant, may for the present be.
called .n^cemi^/}^ pistils ; see 
fig.
96.
They are so like the fe^l pistils^ that one might 
r^ily believe nature had formed the flowers with many 
pistils^ in order that some might have the better chance ^ 
impregnation.
But there are several circumstances which 
refute this supposition.
Probably they are intended to 
supply the flowers with moisture in dry weather.* 
Tne rudiment of the fruity qt pistil of the Buxbaumia 
4essilis.
PI.
xiv.
f. 25.
f. 26* A female flower of the Bryum ' extiactormm^ 
with the succuleni pistils.
Of the Capsule and the Caltptra or Veil.
The pistils, after impregnation, daily growing larger, 
and rising upwards, shew the part well known by the 
name of Calyptra or Veil.
It may be considered as a 
kind of petal, which is perforated at the top by the style of 
the pistil.
This style is sonietimes permanent, fallii^ off 
with the veil j but where it is not so, the remains of it are 
always to be found.
f. 27.
A Capsule of the Bryum pulvinatumj with a 
part of the fruit-stalk.
The Veil being thrown off, the 
King and the Peristoma, or Fringe, become visible, 
f. 28.
The Ring when separated and expanded.
f. 29.
The Veil.
f. 29.*The Veil of the Jungermannia jbw^i/fa.
Of the Capsule ar Seed-vesseL 
From what has been alledged, it is evident that what 
Linnaeus called the Anthers, are really the Seed-vessels, 
and by sowing the seed which they contain, I have re- 
peatedly procured a crop of young plants, in all respects 
similar to their parents; 
The Capsules of Mosses are always supported upon a 
fruit-stalk, though sometimes it is very short] and except- 
~ * These substances may aptly be compared to the florets 
iivith superfluous pistils in the order Polygamia superflua of 
the class Syngenesia, or to the barren florets in the umbel- 
liferous plants of the Pentandria class ; and their uses may 
probably be the same, whatever those uses may be.
m CtLWfOGAUlA.
ing only in^'thei plp^A&miU pdusire, this frtdt^sulk i^ 
sheathed and corned at its' bdiae* The CA'Psevau vary in 
shapie^ size^ and eotisistefnce.
> In some species there is an 
elasftic ring between tbe' capsule and tbt yeil^ p.
xiv.
£* 2d« 
which, when the seed is mfe, thfo#s oiFfhe veil with more 
or less force.
The Veil, r.
39, being thrown off, we find 
certain fringe-like processes or j^rc^ections, f.sy.
(a) vary- 
mg greatly in size, shape, Btructurej^nmnb^^ and dispou 
sition.
Tbey surround- the- opening of the capsi^le id a 
single or douole, rarely it a triple' series.
These substances 
I shall beg leave to call the *PERiSTOMrA, or Fringe.
The use otthis Peristoma, or Fringe, seems to be to defend 
the seeds in wet weather.
In dry w«alher it i^cpands and 
leaves the mouth of the capsule open, but upon the least 
moisture, even that of one's breath, it closes, again.
seeds: 
The seeds of Mosses are spherical, generally smooth, 
sometimes dotted as in BnVtTM extinctorium^ sometimes 
prickly y as in Bryum pyriformey or heteromallum.
They 
are brown, yellow, or greenish.
(Hedwig.) 
« I 
r « 
t 
Uses.
— ^Mosses thrive b^t in barren places.
Most of 
them love cold and moisture.
TrljSiug and insignificant as 
many people think them, their uses are by no means incon- 
siderable.
Tbey protect the more tender plants when 
they first begin to expand in the spring, as the experience 
of the gardener can testify, which teaches him to cover with 
moss the soil and pots which contain his tmderest plants; 
for it equally defends the roots against the scorching sun- 
beams and the severity of the frost.
In the spring, when 
the sun has considerable power in the day time, .
and the 
frosts at night are severe, the roots of youilg trees and 
shrubs are fiable to be thrown out of the ^ound, particu- 
larly in light spongy soils.
But if they are covered with 
moss, this accident never can happen.
Those who are fond 
of raising trees from seeds, will find their interest in attendii^ 
to this remark.
* On the varying structure of the Peristoma, and the figure 
and disposition oi the barren floretsiy the author proposes to 
e^iiibiish the (jeneva of Mosses.
CRYPTOGAMIA, a63 
Mosses' retmn moisture a long time without being dis- 
posed to putrefy.
The angler takes advantage of this cir« 
cumstance to preserve his worms, and the gardener to 
keep moist the roots of such pls^its as are to be transported 
to any considerable distance.
It is a vulgar error to suppose that Mosses impoverish 
land.
It is true they grow upon poor land which can sup- 
port nothing disc 5 but their roots penetrate very litde, iu 
general hardly a quarter of an inch into the earth.
Take 
away the Moss, and instead of more grass you will have 
less ; but manure and dnun the land^ the grass will incresse 
and the Moss disappear.
The Sphagnum paJmirey the Mnium iriqtietTwn, the 
Bktvm pdudosum and cestivum, theHrpNUM adtmcnm, 
scorpoides, npatiwm and cuspidatum grow upon the sides 
and shallower parts of pools and marshes ; and in process 
of time, occupying the space heretofore filled with water^ 
are in their half decayed state, dug up and used as fuel, 
under the name of Peat.
These marshes, drained partly 
^b"y human industry, and partly by the long continued 
ooerations of vegetables, are at length converted into fer- 
tile meadows.
Very few Mosses are eaten by cattle.
The Bishop 
Moth, and the Brussels Lace Moth feed upon some of 
them.
Their medicinal virtues are but little known, and 
less attended to.
I think it probable, that on account of 
their astringent properties, some of them might be worth 
trying as a substitute for oak bark in tanning leather.
HEPATICM.
Female fructifications inclosed in a veil, which splits 
(^en at the top, and discharges the capsule.
Capsule opening lengthwise, mled with seeds.
Seeds numerous, fixed to an elastic cord, formed of one 
or two spiral threads.
Some plants are referred to this subdivision on account 
of their agreement in general habit, though the female 
fructification has no veil, but is placed upon, or immersed 
in the substance of the leaf.
The leaves are mostly lobed, exhibiting a network of 
vesicles, and though driea, reviving again when moistened 
with water.
364 CRYPTOGAl^IA.
Hedwig observes that all the female florets have a dou- 
ble calyx, or a Cup and a Blossom* In shape and struc* 
tare he says they greatly resemble the proper Mosses, but 
that he never found the succultot tlireads ; the PistiUlike 
substances are however found, accompanying both the 
germen and the ripened capsule; but not in all me species.
The Capsule, like tho^ of the fH^ecedin^ Mosses, is 
inclosed in a Veil, to which the style adheres 5 but this Veil 
is not as in them, loosened at its attachment and raised 
along' with the growing Capsule, it tears open in two^ 
three, or four places, and has therefore been sometimes 
considered as a petal.
. 
All these Mosses agree in ripening their fruit, which 
is raised upon an elongated fruit-stalk, and opens into 4 
Valves, fiUed with the seeds, attached to elastic cords.
These seeds proved upon trial to reproduce their respective 
plants.
JUNGERMAN'NIA nemofea.
It bears its male, or 
barren flowers, which are of a reddish brown colour, at the 
summit or extremity of the Stem, in one plant, and its 
female florets at the extremity of another plant.
PI.
xiv.
f. 30.
A male plant of its natural size.
f. 31.
The flowering summit of the male plant.
f. 33 • The germen of the female plant, with its pistil, 
and 3 pistil-like bodies at its base, taken frum the calyx 
leaves at the top of the plant.
JUNGERMANNIA asplenioides.
The extremity of 
the male plant forms a beautifiil tiled, two-rowed Involu- 
crum of leafits, very concave at the base, within each of 
which are found 2 or 3 stamens of a milky colour.
The female flowers are on a distinct plant, included 
also in a leafy calyx or perichaetium, at the top of the plant.
f. 35.
A male plant of its natural size, 
f. 36.
The tiled leaves at the extremity of the plant, 
which includes the anthers.
f. 37.
An anther taken out of the Perichsetium or leafy 
calyx.
f. 38.
An anther open at the end, after shedding \i9 
pollen.
• 
f. 39.
A female plant of its jiatural size.
CRYPTOGAMIA, 365 
f. 40.
The germen with its style and accompanying 
pistil-like vessels, taken out of its Perichaetium at the ex- 
tremity of the plant.
f. 41.
The Seeds, with the elastic threads to which 
they are attached* 
JUNGERMANNIA pusilla.
The stamens very 
much resemble those of the Sphagnum palustre; they are 
placed upon the Stem, in the bosom of the leaves ; their 
colour greenish, changing to yellow.
The female flower 
is found towards tiie top of the same plant, in a perichas-* 
tium, but by the growth of the plant during the ripening 
of the Capsules, they are at length found about its middle.
f. 42.
The plant of its natural size.
PI.
XV.
f. 43.
The same magnified, to shew the 4 
stamens at its base, and the female flower at its summit.
PI.
xiv.
f. 44.
A Stamen more highly magnified.
f. 45.
The germen and style taken out of its peri- 
chsetium.
f. 29.* The Veil separated from the ripened capsule.
f. 46.
A Seed, with its elastic thread.
JUNGERMANNIA palmata.
The flowers with sta- 
mens are found at the extremities of the branches ; after 
flowering, they fall ofi*, and give the branch the appear- 
ance of having been lopped.
The female flower is gene- 
rally at the base of the branches, but sometimes also at 
their sides, on a distinct plant.
PI .
xiv, f.
47 .
A male or barren plant of the natural size 
PI.
XV.
f. 48.
The same magnified, to shew the barren 
florets (aaj (c) one of them open at the end.
PI.
xiv.
f. 49.
Two stamens separated.
f. 50.
A fertile or female plant of the same species 
magnified, with the Capsule open, its valves tiuned back^ 
ana the elastic threads at its extremity.
f. 51.
The elastic thread, with the seeds.
JUNGERMANNIA furcata.
The male flowers of 
this are found concealed in the substance of its trunk ; the 
female ones are on the same plant, and possess nearly a 
«milar situation.
PI.
XV.
f. 52.
The plant of the natural size.
f. 53.
A small' bit of it highly magnified, to shew the 
two male florets (aaJ and the female floret (Ij.
SfiS CRYPTOGAMIA.
f. 54.
A male floret turther magnified.
f. 35, A Stamen Beparated.
f. 56.
The PcrichasUum of ihe female floret cut through 
lengthwise.
I. 57- The ripe Capsule open, and the Seeds adhering 
to the dasUc threads.
JUNGERMANNIA epiphyUa. The male florets form 
protuberances on the upper surface of the leaves.
The 
iemale flcvets are formed at the extremity of the leaf, but 
as they ripen, the growth of the leaf continuing, they ulti- 
mately appear on its disk.
Want of attention to this cir- 
cumstance bas given rise to errors respectmg the species of 
these plants.
f. 58.
The plant somewhat magnified, to shew more 
distinctly the dots of male florets, and the feniale floret 
concealed under its scaly calyx at the end of the leaf, at (d.J 
f. 59, The female floret taken out of its calyx.
MARCMANTl \po?i/morpha.
Early in the spring we 
find upon this plant certMn glass-shaped cups, containing 
lentil e- shaped substances ; these are perfect young plants, 
either formed at once from the parent plant, or else grow- 
ing from seeds deposited thereon.
Soon after we may 
observe some entire targets formed ; and as these rise upon 
their foot-stalks, on other plants, either on the same, or 
on a diflcrent tuft, stellated targets appear, which grow 
taller than the entire ones.
The entire tai^ets, when cut 
through, vertically, are found to contain the stamens; sur- 
rounded by their succulent vessels.
The stellated targets 
contain the germens, two of three of which are found un- 
der each of the rays, invested with its membrane, out of 
which the pistil projects previous to the impregnation of 
»he germcn.
These germens do not ripen aH at the same 
time.
In a favourable situation this plant flowers again 
in July.
From what has been said, it is evident that in 
this species the male and female florets are to be sought 
for on distinct plants.
PI.
XV.
f. 60.
A target of male flowers cut perpendi 
cuUrly down through the foot-stalk.
f. 6i.
A follicle of stamens taken out and more mag- 
iiitied, to shew its surrounding ring.
i. 62.
A Gennea with its projecting style.
, CRyPTOGAMIA.
^67 
f. 63, A Capsule, with itfl 3 suceuleiH fibres, 
f. 64.
An elastic Cord taken out of the ripe Capsule, 
§^kh oae of the seeds.
- MARCHANTIA contca.
The male' flowers are sit- 
ting; in every other respect they so exactly resemble those 
of the preceding species^ as to render any further descrip- 
tion of them unnecessary ; but the female flowers have a 
^ii^lajr structure in respect to the pistils.
At the time 
the stamens attain perfection, the conical assemblage of 
female flowers displays within their proper mQn:ibranes> a* 
many pcrinted styles as there are geriRens.
On account of 
their tender structure, it is very difficult to examine them^ 
but, when nicely dissected, the style appears to proceed 
from the base ot the germoi, and to bend upwards towards 
its point.
The capsiile is furnished with a veil, which does 
not fali off, but bursts by the expansion of the capsule^ 
wUch at length, when quite ripe, opens with 4 valves, 
which roll back.
PL XV.
f. 65.
A Disk of male florets cut down perpen^ 
dicularly.
f. 60.
Six female flowers taken from the common 
fruit-stalk, with the six styles bent back.
f. 67.
A ripe Capsule opened by the rolling back of 
the.
Valves (i.J shewmg the seeds fixed to the elastic 
Cords fij 
ANTHOCE^ROS IcBvis.
The stamens, covered by the 
outer skin of the leaf, form spots of a yellowish green co- 
lour, and somewhat raised.
As they approach to maturity, 
the skin bursts and contracts into an oval sh^e, forming 
a kind of calyx.
Each of these spots contains three or 
more follicles of Stamens, of a reddish yellow colour.— 
Each Stamen is furnished with its filament, and surrounded 
by a jointed succulent vessel.
At the same time the female 
flower assumes an elevat^ conical figure, supporting a Veil 
on its extremity, furnished with a very short Style.
When 
^ipe, it changes to a dark brown colour, divides into two 
valves, scattering its seeds with an explosive power.
The Anthoceros punctatum resembles this species in 
its parts of fructification.
PI.
xvi.
f. 68.
A part of the leaf magnified, to shew 
vme .female, and four male florets.
i6^ CRYPTOGAMIA.
PI.
XV k f.
69« Two of the Stamens taken out of a male 
floret.
L 70.
A perpendicular section^ to shew the Capsule 
just emer^ng from its sheaths^ and supporting its veil.
PI.
XVI.
f. 71» The ripe Capsule opened^ with the co«* 
lumnar receptacle^ and a few remaining seeds.
f* 72.
A ripe Seed^ prickly^ and its elastic membrane.
BLA^SIA pusilla.
It flowers in the beginning of May 5 
at which time the leaf is narrow^ and the stamens appear 
very near to its rib ; but as th^ membranaceous parts ex- 
pand with the growth of the leaf, they at length appear at 
a distance from the rib.
The anthers are yellowish, rather 
protuberating, inclosed in a follicle, from which they are 
with difficulty extracted* Towards the end of the plant 
we discover the pistil, with its summit sitting on the rudi- 
ment of the fruit, but it is very fugacious.
As the fruit 
ripens, the place before occupied by the style appears as a 
tube, not unlike the conical horn or the Anthoc^x)S.
The 
capsule now becomes more h^art*shaped, and its narrow 
pomt looks towards the root of the plant.
At length the 
globular seeds in its cavity become visible, and when ripe, 
they are pushed out of the mouth of the tube either by their 
own expansion, or by the contraction of the capsule, and 
sticking there, have an appearance like the male floret of 
the Mnium androsynum.
f. 73.
The plant magnified, to shew the dots of the 
male florets, and the two female florets.
PI.
xvi* f.
74.
A Stamen taken out of a male floret.
f. 75.
An unripe Capsule divided perpendicularly to 
shew the seeds.
RIC^CIA slauca.
The leaf has no rib, but seems com- 
posed of vessels equally dispersed.
When magnified, it 
appears covered with tubercles, and amongst these we ob- 
serve distinct shining globules.
One of these globules^ 
when nicely dissected, and exposed to the highest magni- 
fying power, in a drop of water, appears of a granulate4 
texture.
I consider those as the anthers, for nothing else 
appears like them.
The female flower lies imbedded in 
the substance of the plant, where it ripens its fruit.
They 
who reflect how small a part of a body is dedicated to the 
purposes of generation, in comparison of its whole bulk 
CRyPTOGAMIA.
a6Q 
^ill' condeivei Ae difficulty of observing the verjr minute 
pistil of this plants buried as it is iii the substance of the 
plant, its summit only, opening on its surface.
As the 
capsule swells, it becomes more apparent, and by a per-- 
pendicul^r section through the substance of the leaf, we 
discover the style of a beautiful brown colour, ascending 
from the capsule to its surface.
The seeds are at first 
white, afterwards greenish, but nearly transparent, and 
surrounded with a very transparent white border.
• The 
capsules, when ripe, open on the surface of the plant, 
forming a black spot, visible to the naked eye.
They are 
generally observable towards the base of the leaf.
f.'76.
The plant of its natural size.
> 
f. 77.
Part of the same magnified, to shew the more 
isuperficial spots containing the stamens, and the deeper 
seated female flowers Y(tt^.
f. 78.
A follide of anthers separated, and highly mag- 
nified.
, ' ' 
' f.
79.
A perpendicular section through the substance 
of tji^ plant, to shew the ripening capsules^ and their styled 
rising up to the surface of the leaf.
« 
^80.
A Capsule taken out, together with its style.
The plants comprized under this division scarcely ad- 
mit of a distinction of root, stem, and leaf; much less are 
we enabled to describe the parts of the flowers.
The 
Genera, therefore, are distinguished by the situation of 
what we suppose to be the flowers or seeds, or by the re- 
semblance of the whole plant to some other substance we 
are well acquainted with.
PI.
1 • £• and F.
represent li- 
qhens, and C.
a Pucus.
The female Jructificaiions are either to be found ia 
saucers or tubercles, as in Lichens; in hollow bladders, as 
in Fucus, or dispersed through the substance of the plant, 
as in Ulva.
The substance of these plants varies much ; it is flesh- 
Uke, or leather-like ; membranaceous, or fibrous ; jelly- 
Jike, or horn-like ; or resembling calcareous earth.
Some of them possess irritability, or an appearance of 
sensation.
. .
. 
Vol. I.
6 b 
370 CRYPTOGAMIA.
Hedwie has done less to ducidate this Order than those 
which we have already spoken of; but shapeless and un* 
organlzed as some of the Lichens i^eem to be^ his genius^ 
aided by indefatigable industry^ has explored the hereto* 
fore latent secrets of their mictification^ as will appear 
from the following account of the 
LIC^'HEN ciliaris^ The fringes from the extremities 
destined to take root, and the downy matter on the surface, 
have nothing to do with the real parts of fructification* 
These are to be found in the concave saucers, or convex 
targets or warts^ either on the same or on a diflerent plant: 
7hey both arise from a kind of knot on the under surface 
of the plant.
The warts change to a brown, and then to a 
black colour at the top ; but before they become brown, a 
perpendicular section through one of them, discovers a 
single or double cell buried in the tender pulp of the plant, 
and filled with a granulated substance.
Whenever the 
top of this wart or tubercle turns black, the granulated 
mass has then escaped through it, and only a kind of jelly 
remains in the cells; which, however, soon vanishes, whilst 
the whole tubercle becomes black and hard.
This process 
is performed in a short time.
The rising particle, which is destined to form a con- 
cave saucer, becomes hollow and green at the top, through 
which, if we make a perpendicular section, we find fibres 
radiating from its centre, mi forming a semi-circle, bound- 
ed by a more opake line.
As this continues growing, the 
saucer becomes larger, and more and mor6 open.
Its cavity 
is at first reddish, gradually becoming darker* At lengtn 
it becomes a perfect saucer, either sitting, or supported on 
a short foot; its border scolloped or entire, black within 
when moist, and greyish when dry.
If now we cut the saucer.through, and examine a ver- 
tical section of it in a little water, we shall find immedi- 
ately under the black crust at the top, the seeds disposed 
in straight perpendicular colunms.
When verv highlv 
magnified, these seeds appear e^-shaped, but marked with 
a distinct groove transveiBely.
No unprejudiced person 
oan therefore doubt that the warts with the olack tops are 
the male, and the saucers the female flowers.
The saucers, in all the species of lichens, resemble the 
above in the mode of flowering, and ia the same disposi* 
CRYPTOGAMU^ ^71 
tion of th^r ihiit.
The male flowers are also si^lar^ 
whether contained like those of the L.
cilia^ixi the sub- 
stance of the plants or as in others^ on its surface iti some 
species^ as in the L.
physodes^ they are found on the extre- 
mities of the bcanidhes; in others on the edges^ as in the 
L. farinaceusi Jraxmezcs} in others agiun on the under 
surface^ as in the L.
pulmcmarius, apthastis, &c.
where 
ihey sometimes fonn circles somewhat resembling saucers^ 
9S in the L.
steliaris.
PI.
xvi, f.
81.
Part of the plant magnified to shew 
(boo) the male^ and (mj the female flower, (n nj the 
fringes which strike root ; some of them expanding at the 
end.
f. 82.
The section of a stamemferous flower cut through 
perpendiculm-ly.
f. 83.
The seccion of an unopened flower « 
f. 84.
Section of a flower, with the ripe seeds.
f. 85.
Ripe seeds taken out.
LICHEN physodes.
f« 86.
The male, or barren plant of its natural size.
f. 87.
Its stameniferou9 eictremity highly magnified* 
Some of the Fuci aii4 Conferve have been lately 
illustrated by the accurate enquiries of Major Velley ; * 
and my friend Mr. Stackhouse has undertaken the history 
of the Fuci, the Ulvse, and the Confervas of the British 
shores, particularly with a view to the discovery of their 
modes of fructification;:!: so that we may hope soon to 
attain a more scientific knowledge of these obscure tribes 
of plants.
Uses.
— Some of the Fuci are used as food, and all of 
ihem, as well as the Confervae, are an useful manure, of 
the greatest importance to our farmers on the sea coast.
The lichens, though generally looked upon as unwor- 
thy of notice, are of great consequence in the oeconomy of 
nature^ and dSoxA the first foundation for v^tation.
The 
* See coloured figures of marine plants, with descriptions 
and observations, by Thomas Velley, Esq. fol.
1795^^ 
t Nereis Britannica, or a Botanic Description of the British 
Marine Plants, with drawings from nature, by John Stack-* 
house, Esq. F.
L. S.
fol.
\79S.
BB 2 
37* CRYPTOGAMU.
ciusta^eous' kinds fix upon the barest rocks, and are nou- 
riahed by such slender supphes as the air and the rains 
afford them.
When these die, they are converted into a 
very fine earth, in which the tiled Lichens find nourish- 
Dioit, and when these putreiy, and £all:to dust, various 
Mosses, as the Bkyum, Hvpnum, &c.
occupy their place; 
and in length of time, when these perish in their turn, 
there is a sufficiency of soil, in which trees and other 
plants take root.
This process of nature is sufficiently 
^parent upon the smooth and barren rocks upon the sea 
shore.
Many of the Lichens are a gratefiil food to goats ; 
and the rdn-deer, which constitutes the whole oeconomyof 
the Laplanders, and supports many thousand inhabitants^ 
lives upon one of the species.
Many of the species ailbrd 
colours for dying.
One of them, brought from the Canary 
Islands, viz.
the Orchel, or Ai^l, makes a very consider- 
able article of traffic.
It is not improbable, that some of 
the species growing in our own island, may afford very 
beautiful and useful colours ; but this matter has not been 
sufficiently examined.
Mr. Hellot gives us the following 
process, for discovering whether any of these plants will 
yield a red or purple colour.
" Put about a quarter of an 
ounce of the plant in questicm into a small glass, moisten 
it well with equal parts of strong lime water, and spirit of 
Sal Ammoniac ; or the spirit ofSal Ammoniac made with 
3uick lime, will do, without lime water.
Tye a wet blad- 
er close over the top of the vessel, and let it stand three 
or four days.
If any colour is likely to be obtained, the 
small quantity of liquor you will find in the glass will he 
of a deep crimson red ; and the plant will retain the same 
colour when the liquor is all dried up.
If neither the 
liquor nor the plant have taken any colour, it is needless 
to make any further trials," 
FUNGI 
This Oixler consists of plants mostly of a cork-Iikc 
texture, of short duration ; Bearing their seeds either in 
gills or tubes, or attached to fibres, or to a spongy sub- 
stance.
As we know but little of their fructification, the 
(-icncric characters are taken from their external form, or 
from the disposition, of their seeds.
An Agaric is repre- 
\ 
gryptogamia; ^73 
I 
Sfented in pi.
1. at H.
to shew fa) the Ring- 5 -flj the- 
Stem 5 (cj the Pileus.
. ; 
The follo\ving are the principal discoveries of Hedwig 
on the subject of Fungi.
AGA'RTCUS fAnumita) arlorea mollis, cohris exacte 
croceif DHL Giss.
p. 182.
On dividing a plant of this species longitudinally 
through the middle, before the curtain had began to sepa- 
rate from the edge of the Pileus, the whole inner surface 
appeared white; but whilst my attention had been arrested 
by some still whitar lines observable in the flesh of the 
Pileus and of the stem, the upper and inner surface of the 
curtain changed to a violet, and in a short time to a 
brownish colour.
On nicely raising a small portion of 
this surface, and viewing it under high magnifiers, I dis- 
covered pellucid succulent vessels, and innumerable oval 
globules connected therewith, of a dilute brown colour.
The part from which this portion had been taken away 
did not change colour again.
I next examined a portion taken from one of the gills, 
whilst it was yet white.
It was divisible, though not rea- 
dily, into two^laminae.
The lower edge was thickly set 
with tender cylindrical substances, some of which had a 
globule at their extremities, but others not.
The gill 
Itself appeared of a reticulated structure, with larger and 
more distinct spots, a little raised.
In another older plant of the same species, wherein the 
curtain was torn, the pileus pretty frilly expanded, and the 
gills turned yellow, the upper part of the stem began to be 
tinged by a brown powder shed from the gills.
It was 
evident, on examination, that this brown powder was the 
seeds, and that it proceeded from the larger spots before 
observed in the gill, the two laminae of which now readily 
separated.
PI.
xvi.
f. 88, A view of the plant cut down length- 
wise.
f. 89.
Strings of the Stamens very much magnified.
f. 90.
A portion of the Gill, to shew the unripe seeds.
f. 91 .
The ripe seeds.
There is therefore reason to believe- that the stamen$ 
are the globules attached to the threads found within the 
574 CRYPTOGAMIA.
curtain.
After these vanish^ the f)Iant continues to grow^ 
until it scatters its seeds^ and then it dies* 
. We learn from these observations^ that the full expan- 
sion of the pileus indicates the maturity of the seeds, and 
that the fructification is performed previous to the rupture 
of the curtain.
On examining the curtains and the rings of different 
Agarics and Boleti, I have always found the above-men- 
tioned globules on their upper or inner surface.
In some 
of the yellow Agarics, they are so numerous on the upper 
surface, as to stain the .fingers when touched, but the under 
side is smooth, and entirely -destitute of them.
Some few 
Agarics seem to have only a row of these threads beset 
with globules at the edge of the Pileus, whilst it is in con- 
tact with the stem, and upon this expansion they shrivel 
and drop off.
It is true that in many Agarics we neither find curtain 
nor ring, nor these threaas at the edge of the pileus; but 
when this is the case, the threads are placed upon the stem, 
and may readily be found by examping the plant in its 
very young state, before the edge of the pileus separates 
from the stem.
This structure takes place m many of the 
Agarics, the Hydnum irnlricatum, and the Boleti, which 
are rarely furnished with a curtain.
After the pileus in 
these is expanded, and the stem grown longer, its upper 
part where the stamens were seated, becomes reticulated.
^ The seeds of the Boleti are found within the membrane 
that lines the tubes.
The stemless Agarics and Boleti present similar ap- 
pearances about the edge, and at the base.
I have also 
found something of the same kind in the Peziza cyiUhoides, 
whose seeds appear to be inclosed in a kind of pod ; aiyl 
likewise in one or more of the Lycoperdons ; but these 
have not yet been sufficiently examined.
Whether the succulent vessels in the margin, fig.
QO.
or th^ ^urface of the gills, or the mouths of the tubes be, 
or be not^ styles and summits ; or whether they are de- 
signed for any other purpose, I shall not determine.
It isy however, sufficiently evident, that the Agarics, 
and the Boleti, are vegetables, and that they bear.
their 
Stamens and pistils on the same plant.
(Hedwig.) 
For the practical purposes of investigation, it is there- 
fore'evident, that the minutiae of the fructification can 
avail us but little.
/ 
••• V 
/; 
I 
r 
1 
1. 
I Vol.i.tofront p.ojJ.
D. Pljcni 
/ 
/ 
a 
- '^   - 
A 
CRYPTOGAMIA.
375 
The AffArics axid the Boleti^ numerous and beautiiul 
tribes of plants, are now arranged in a method which the 
author hopes will be found sufficient to obviate the princi- 
pal difficulties which have attended the study of them^ 
and to render the investigation of the species, at l^t as 
easy as any other part of the system.
He therefore requests 
the attention of the reader to the following explanation of 
the principles on which they are arranged, reterring him, 
for the preservation of the specimens, to what has been 
already said at page 38 and 39* 
AGARICS are composed of a Cap, or Pileus, with 
Gills underneath, and have either Stbms or no Stems.
l^e Stems are eith^ central or lateral : hence arise 
3 prinianr divisions of the Genus, already in use, and 
adopted by Linnaeus.
A. Stems central.
B. Stems lateral.
C. Stemless.
They have also a Root, more or less obvious, and 
some or them, in a yet unfolded state, are wholly enclo^d in 
a membranaceous or leather-like case, called a Wbapper.
Some of them have a Curtain, or thin membrane, ex- 
tending from the stem to the edge of the pileus ; this cur- 
tain tears as the pileus expands^ aud soon vanishes ; but 
the part attached to the stem often remains, forming a ring 
round it.
This Ring is more or less permanent, as its 
substance is more or less tender, but some of the species 
appear some years with, and other years without a Ring,* 
so that though it forms a very obvious character, it cannot 
be admitted as a ground of specific distinction.
PI.
19, fig.
(F.) (borrowed from M.
Bulliard,) shews a 
vertical section of an Agaric of the more compleat kind, in 
its egg-state, in order to demonstYate all the parts mentioned 
above.
— (m.m.m.m.m.) the Wrapper.
— (n.n) the Pileus.
— (o.
o.) the Gill.
— (p.) the Stein, before it shoots up.-* 
(q.
q.) the Curtain.
On the section of a Stem at (B.) 
e. g.
Ag. aBniginosus.
376 CRYPTOGAMIA, 
may be seen the remains of a Curtdiri, then called a Ring.
The Curtain and the Ring must be rejected in forming 
characters of Agarics, for the reason just now mentioned, 
and the Wrapper is not easily accessible, nor is it very 
often found, so that it does not afford much aid in the dis- 
crimination of the species.
The Curtain and its remnant 
the Ring, are common to all bur secondary subdivisions of 
Agarics writh central Stems, but the Wrapper deems to be 
confined to the plants with solid stems only ; nor has it 
been found attendant even upon those when the Gills are 
decurrent.
The Stem of an Agaric is cither solid, or hollow.
The solid Stem is represented at (A.) the hollow Stem at 
(B.) When an Agaric is to be examined, cut the stem 
across about the middle, with a sharp knife, and it must 
immediately appear whether it be sofid or hollow.
Let it 
be remarked, however, that the solid Stem varies much in 
degree ; it may be as solid as the flesh of an apple, or as 
spongy as the pith of an elder stick, or a sun-flower stalk, 
but still it is solid, i.
e. there is no regular hollow pervad- 
ing its whole length ; though the more spongy and larger 
Sterns jsometimes shew irregular and partial hollow piaces 
from the shrinking of the pithy substance >yhen the plant 
grows old, but this can never be mistaken for a regular, 
uniform, and native hoUowness, (B.) represents a hollow 
Stem.
The width of this hollow part varies much in dif- 
ferent species, and is by no means always proportioned tQ 
the size of the Stem ; though it is uniform and regular 
throughout its whole length, except perhaps at the bottom, 
where it changes to a root.
This hollow is sometimes 
entirely empty, sometimes loosely filled with a pithy subr 
stance, but its regularity is not affected by that circum- 
stance.
Next to the Gills, the Stem of an Agaric is the 
part least liable to variation.
When its shape is not that 
of a cylinder, its diameter, as expressed in the descriptions, 
must be understood to be the diameter of its middle part.
The GiLi/S are the flat, thin substances, found under^ 
iieath the Pileus, and attached to it ; they are of a texture 
evidently different from that of the Stem or the Pileus, they 
assume different colours in different species, and vary much 
in their respective lengths.
Each Gill consists of two 
aaembranes, and between these the "Seeds are fomied.
dRYPtOGAMlA; S7f 
The Gills are always attached to the P3eus, and sometimel 
to that only, as at fig.
(E.
c. c.) They often shoulder 
up against the Stem, and axefijced to it, as at fig.
(A.
b.) 
and nfequently they are not merely fixed to the Stem, but 
extended along it, downwards, as at (a) in the last men- 
tioned figure.
This is what we shall call a decmreni 
Gill.
The Jixed and decurrent Gills are attached to the 
Stem tm/y by their ends, which are next to the centre of iht 
Rleus, not by their edges, as is sometimes the case in sopie 
of the Agarics whose Pilei or Caps are nearly cylindrical^ 
In some of these the edges of the Gills are pressed close to 
the Stem, and even adhere to it more or less in the young 
fitate of the plant, but separate before it attains its full ex- 
pansion.
This, therefore, is a very different kind of attach- 
ment to that which we mean to express by the iorms Jixed 
<yr decurrent.
Our secondary subdivisions of the Agarics, are fouiided 
upon what has been just now explamed, and are a9 
'follows : 
C 1 .
Gills decurrent.
STEM solid ; < 2.
Gills fixed.
Gills loose.
4. Gills decurrent.
STEM hollow i<5.
Gills fixed.
Gills loose.
But the Gills containing the fructification of these 
plants, are of the utmost importance, and therefore demand 
more particular notice.
They vary very much in lengthy 
for though they all extend to the edge of the Mens, they 
do not, except m a few instances, all reach to the Stem ; 
moreover they are sometimes forked or divided, and some- 
times connected or anastomosing one with another.
All 
these circumstances are explained by the two circular figures 
at the bottom of plate XIX.
— ^Thus, 
(d) Gills uniform.
These uniform Gills sometimes seem 
connected t(^ether at the edge of the Pileus, as 
represented below (d.) 
S78 CRYPTQGAMIA.
(e.) Gills in pairs.
(f,) Gills 4 in a set.
(g.) Gills 8 in a set^ 
(E.) Gills irregular^ that is^ no determinate number in ^ 
(i.) Gills branching.
(k.) Gills branching and anastomosing.
C, Gills loose from the stem^ but the inner ei>d fixed to a 
Collar which surrounds the top of the Stem, 
though not in contact with it.
These various circumstances df the Gills seem at first 
6^ht well adapted for subdivisions of the species, and also 
for the formation of specific characters 5 but they are so 
much subject to variation, that no use can be made of them 
for either purpose.
Thus, the Gills called wtiformy are 
seldom strictly so, a shorter Gill now and then interven- 
ing.
The Gills in pairs have place only in a few species, 
and are subject to vary ; the Gills 4 i» a set^ occupy by 
far the greater part of the species, and those which have 
4 in a set in the younger plants, are very apt to shew d 
when more fully expanded, some of the longer Gills tear- 
ing from the Stem.
Moreover, though 4 in a set be the 
predominant number in many of these plants, we often find 
but three, or even two, owing to the absence of one or more 
of the smaller Gills.
The colour of the Gills is fortunately 
an obvious, and at the same time a permanent circumstance ; 
and when we reflect, that their colour is principally, if 
not solely, caused by that of the Fructifications or Seeds 
within tnem, we might (a priorij have expected, what 
experience has taught me to be the case, that it is the most 
fixed, the most certain characteristic, on which to foimd 
the distinctions of the species; and that this, t<^ether with 
the structure, will be at all times sufficient to afford per- 
manent specific dist'mctions.
It is allowed that these co- 
lours change when the plant begins to decay, but no 
Botanist would complain that the characters are wanting 
in a subject collected in a rotten state.
The colour of the 
flat sides of the Gills is what I wish to be attended to, be- 
cause the colour at the edge, in some plants, is different, 
through all the stages of growth, and in others it changes 
sooner than that ofthe sides, evidently from the discharge 
of the Seeds when ripe.
The colour ofthe whole ofthe Gill 
being sometimes influenced by the ripened Seeds^ it is clear 
C2RYPT0GAMIA.
37* 
tbai this colour ought to be described^ where k Is liable to 
such achange, not only in the perfect and vigorous state of the 
plant, but £USO in its mature and neady decaying state, tak* 
ing its character from the former.
Thus in several of the 
daiquescent Agarics^ especially such as dissolve in decay 
to an inky liauor, the plants, when very young, have white 
Gills ; these oecome grey when the Seeds are formed, and 
hkuck when quite npe, and the plant diss^ves in decay.
These circumstances may be properly noticed in the his- 
tory of the plant, but no one would think of taking its 
character from its yet but half unfolded state, any more 
than from its state of decay ; such a plant, therefore, must 
be placed amongst others whose Gills are grey.
The Stem is a less variable part than the Pileus ; its 
shape, the proportions of its Icfngth to its breadth, and 'of 
both to the Pileus, afford tolerable distinctive marks, and 
its colours, though more changeable than those of the 
Gills, are, perhaps, rather more fixed than those of the 
Pileus.
The Pileus, or Cap, is the part of an Agaric the last 
to be attended to, and the least to be depended on.
..J[ts 
shape is either conical, convex, flat, pr hollowed at the top 
like a frinnel y* it is constantly varying in the same plants 
but is pretty uniformly ^e same in the same species wheo 
the plant is in perfection, that is, when fully or nearly fully 
expanded, but nefore it exhibits symptoms of decay.
The colour of the Pileus is often extremely uncertain, 
and in that case can no further be admitted into a charac- 
ter, than as it may serve to mark the varieties.
The Viscidity^ or clamminess on the surface of tha 
Pileus and Stem, frequently observed in some Agarics, has 
been made a part of their character ; but it is not much to 
be depended on ; for in xlry weather some of the viscid 
species shew no symptom of a moist or even adhesive sub- 
stance, and in a moist atmosphere, many, at other times 
dry to the feel, become more or less viscid.
* (£.) represents a col}ical> (D.) a convex Pileus* 
989 cryptogamia; 
The Lactescent, or milky juiced Agarics, at one time 
seemed to force themselves mto observation, as laying 
claim to a well-founded subdivision; but further experience 
demonstrated, that neither those with a mild, nor thosewith- 
an acrid milky juice, were invariably milky; This was 
an unexpected circumstance, nor does it yet appear upon 
what it depends.
Some plants, apparently healthy and' 
vigorous, shall shew no signs of milk when wounded, 
whilst others of the same species on the same spot, and at 
the same time, shall pour out their milk in abundance.
It 
must be acknowledged, that this difference is not very 
common, but it certamly does take place.* 
Such are the grounas of the present attempt to reduce 
the Agarics to a System ; an attempt, which, if established, 
will greatly facilitate the investigation of the species, and 
if it tail to merit the countenance of the public, will pro^ 
bably give birth to another and a better.
The author is sensible that some of the specific charac- 
ters may be thought too long, whilst a few may be found, 
too short ; but these cannot be ultimately adjusted until 
the discovery of new species shall ceas.e. That many new 
ones still remain to be ascertained, is highly probable, since 
80 many have occurred within his own observation, and 
that of his correspondents, 
A few, and only a few exceptions have occurred to the 
general laws of the System ; and it will be right to men- 
tion them here.
The Agaricus velutipes, and the Ag.
sulcattiSj have such a striking resemolarice, that they 
must be pronounced to be the same, were not the Stem 
hollow in the one, and solid in the other.
Can such a dif- 
ference of structure be supposed to exist in the same spe- 
cies ?
If this question be answered in the affirmative, the 
exception must be allowed, and extended to one or two 
more of the minuter species.
The other exception de- 
pends upon the different colours of the Gills of the Agari- 
cus cuiranthis.
This sportive species disdains the rules of 
the System, and exists under almost every kind of colour 
that can be imagined; the chief variations, however, to 
obviate difficulties, are inserted where the investigating 
Botanist would be led to look for them.
In the execution of the preceding plan, the references 
to figures are not very numerous, because peculiar care 
* The Agaricus rubescensy and Agaricus x^rampelimiSy arc 
instances of this kind of deviation.
cryptogamia; asi 
h^s been taken to avoid doubtfiil references.
What use 
can there be in the insertion of a.
figure or a synonym witk 
a note of interrogation at the end of it ?
Ir the Author, 
with all his attention collected upon the subject^ and possi- 
bly with the plant before him, cannot decide, why perplex 
his readers by desiring them to do it ?
In some cases 
' it may be useilil to refer to a figure which it is well 
known was not drawn for the plant in question.
Thus^ 
when a new species occurs, or one which has never yet 
been figured, a reference to a drawing which resembles it 
in size, and in habit^ may be useful, if care be taken to 
announce the circumstance, and to point out the dissimi- 
litudes.
The reader will find, on turning to other authors, that- 
a number of references to the species before known, are.
omitted in this work ; but he is not hastily to conclude, 
that this has been in consequence of careless inattention.- 
He may be assured that they have been examined, and are 
not omitted without a cause.
Sometimes circumstances, 
made it necessary more directly to point out these errors, 
bat it was an invidious.task ; and believing, that notwith- 
standing his utmost care, the present w;ork will still be- 
liable to errors of the same nature, he has felt unwilling 
to censure his predecessors, to whose labours he should 
have thought himself greatly indebted, even were their 
errors ten told what they are.
. The specific character of Linn^us is always added, 
where no doubt existed of the identity of the species, and 
it was the Author's wish to have quoted aU the Agarics of 
Mr. Ray under their proper heads, but the want of figures, 
and the brevity of the descriptions, deterred him from 
assigning a place to many of them.
Here it may be ob- 
served, that where the descriptions of that admirable Bota- 
nist are sufficiendy full, or where he could refer to a figure, 
the Agarics of the present day appear to be precisely what 
their predecessors were a hundred years ago.
This it was 
thought necessary to remark, to quiet the apprehensions of 
some who have been deterred from the study of these sub- 
jects, by a prevalent idea that they were for ever changing, 
and were consequently incapable of anj^ fixed or settled 
character.
It would not be diflScult to point out the origin 
of this opinion, but it is sufficient to say that it is not true.
3SX CRYPTOGAMIA.
and that no part of the Vegetable System is less Hable to 
fehange^ or more steady to the rules of a well formed me- 
thod thian tlie Agarics aiK.
It must however be allowed, that new species of Fm^ 
are daily discovered ; but this may be owing partly to the 
greater attention that has of late been bestowed upon these 
subjects, and partly, as Major Vsllkt su^ested to me, 
to the introduction of so many exotic ttees.
It remains now only to speak of the trivial names.
This has been a much more arduous labour than can well 
be imagined.
Much of the difficulties of Botanists, and 
many of the confusion^ of writers, have been owing to the 
application of different names to the same species, or of the 
same name to different species.
The extent of ^is evil is 
hardly credible.
Some species have ax or eight different 
names, given by as many difierent authors, and in several 
instances the same name has been applied to ten or a 
dozen different plants.
Surely it is time to put a stop to 
this useless increase of difficulties.
In the execution of 
thb work, the following rules have been adopted, and they 
are submitted to the consideration of others who may be 
engi^ed in similar pursuits.
1st.
When a well-known species occurs, to continue the 
name given it by its first inventor, unless obviously and 
highly improper, or unless a long continued attachment 
to another name had quite superseded the use of the 
former, or unless the former name had been previously 
appropriated to another species.
Sd. Never to change a name adopted by lamueus, except 
where his name included more than one species, and 
then to assign it to that which he has more partlculaily 
described.
3d.
In naming a non-descript species, to use the most ap- 
propriate term that occurs, provided it be such aa has 
not before been attached to any well-established 
species.
The discoverer of a new species may find some trouble 
in complying with these rules, but he will be'rewarded by 
considering, how much more trouble hewill save to others, 
and how much his fellow labourers in the science will fed 
themselves obliged by his attentions.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
dSd 
The Genus Boletus, and the other Genera of the 
Order of Fungi, reauire no particular explanation, for the 
System adopted in the Agarics has been applied to them, 
as far as it was applicable, and imperfect as our knowledge 
of these plants at present is, such is the ardour of numbers 
in enquiries concerning them, that we may soon expect to 
strike out more perfect characters of the Genera, a3 well 
as a more judicious distribution of the species.
I. Miscellanea.
(Miscellaneous.) 
Equisetum.
Isoetes.
OpMbghsstm, 
Osmunda.
Acrosticjmm.
Lycopodium, Pilularia.
"II.
FiLICES.
Pieris.
Asplenium.
Blechnumn 
(Ferns.) 
Poh/podium.
Adtantum.
Trichomanes* 
Phascum, 
^hagntm.
Splachnum^ 
III.
Musci.
(Mosses.) 
Polytrichum.
Mnium.
Bryum.
Hypnurriy 
FuntinaUs* 
Buxbaunda.
Marchaniia.
Jungermarmia.
IV.
Hepatics.
Tarsionia.
Blasia.
Antnoceros, Riccia.
Tremelku 
V. Alga.
Viva.
Fucus.
Conferva.
Byssus* 
IMerulkis, 
Agariais, 
Fistulina, 
Boletus.
Hydnum.
Itelvella.
VI.
Fungi.
(Fungusses.) 
Auriculctria, 
Peziza.
Nidularia.
Phallus.
Clavania.
Tuber.
Lycoperdon.
Reti^laria.
Sphceria.
irichia.
Mucor.
^8i CRYPTOGAMIAl 
MISCELLANEA.
EQUISE^TUM.
PI.
1. A.&P1.
13.
f. 1-6.
!Fructifications forming an egg-oblong, club-like ter- 
minating spike.
PI.
13.
f. 1.
Individuals in whirls, on foot-stalks, target-shaped, 
flat, many-sided, furnished underneath with tubes.
Tubes rrom 4 to 7> parallel to the foot- stalk, angular, 
rounded at the end, opening on the inner side, con- 
taining a powdery mass.
PI, 13.
f. 2.
LYCOPO'DIUM.
PI.
1. C.
Fructifications forming oblong spikes, tiled with scales, 
or leaves, the fruit sitting within the bosom of the 
scales.
. 
Capsules kidney-shaped, 1 -celled, with 2 elastic 
leaves.
- 
Seeds very numerous, and extremely minute; 
PILULA'RIA.
Dill 79.
i .
Fructification globular, sitting within thq.
leaves at 
each joint.
. ^ 
Calyx comrmmy globular, woolly, 4 -celled ; each cell in- 
closed within Its own thin membrane, which opens in 
4 directions.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments none.
Anthers in the upper part of each 
cell, numerous, inversely conical or pyramidal, taper- 
ing downwards, membranaceous, 1 -celled, opening 
crosswise.
Pollen spherical, copious.
Fist.
Getmens in the lower part of each cell, numerous, 
obliquely spear-shaped, fixed by the slender end.
Style 
none.
Summit on the crown of the thicker end, coni- 
cal, furrowed.
S. Vess.
none, except the oblique pear-shaped membrane 
empty in Uie lower, but inclosing the seed in the upper 
part.
Seeds globular.
Receptacle fleshy, fixed to the outside of each cell in 
the space between the 2 partitions^ supporting the pi^ul 
and anthers.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
ISOETES.
3»5 
ISCyETES.
Dill.
80.
Male flowers solitary^ within the base of the inner 
leaves.
^ ' 
Cal. Scale heart-shaped^ acute^ sitting.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filament none.
Anther l-ceUed> roundish* 
Female flowers solitary, within the base of the outer 
leaves of the same plant.
Cal. as above.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen egg-shaped, witliin the leaf.^ — Style.
— 
Sv/mmit.
— 
S. Vess.
Capside somewhat egg-shaped, 2-celled, con- 
cealed within the leaf.
Seeds numerous, globular.
FILICJES.
J. 
* Capsules without an elastic ring* 
OPHIOGLCySSUM- PI.
13.
f. 7.
8. Toum.
325.
'--II   • 
• CabIbules numerous, united by a membrane into a S- 
rowed spike, nearly globular, opening crosswise when 
ripe.
Seeds numerous, very minute.
OSMUNIJA.
Toum.
324.
Capsules distinct, either forming a 1 -rowed bunch, or 
crowded on the back of a leant, or a segment of the 
leaf, sitting, nearly globular, 2- valved, opening cross- 
wise, (or lengthwise.) 
Seeds numerous, very minute.
* * Capsules roundish, on foot-stalks, surrounded with a jointed 
elastic ring, and opening irregularly into 2 parts.
ACRO'STICHUM.
Bolton 8, ^Fl. dan.
60.
Capsules accumulated upon the under surface of the leaf, 
so as entirely to cover it.
^ 
Vol. I.
C c 
jg6 CKwroGAmA.
nvsci.
PTE'RIS.
BoU.
10.
Cj»sm}EsAiBp(Mi in a }me ti&d^r die^dge of ifte leaf; 
which is turned back.
ASPI£^NHJM.Pl.a3.f.i4.
I5.ifl.
TcKm.siS.3rg.
CA>stfUs dl^b^i^ In *itraight 'scattered Imes oh the under 
surface of the Itaf.
Ctf sviJBS disposed in lines patyiel to th)s rib ^f the tesf ; 
approaching^ 
POLYPCyDIUM.
PK 13.
f. 12, 13.
Taum.
314.
316* 
Capsules disposed in circular sp6ts on the under surface 
of the leaf.
ADIAN^lBf. Toum.BlT.
Capsulei^ crowded into oval spots underneath tbe.poii^ 
of the lea^ whicTi are rolled back; 
TRICHOTMANES.
Fei. pier.
13/13.
Capsule a turban-shaped scale, solitary, on the very edge 
of the leaf.
MUSCL 
PHAS'CUM.
(Schreb:) 
« 
Capsule <*^-sl*lipied, sitting, dr ott'a^bH'peafide, *)me- 
times with the rudiment of a* lid, cksed to all sides, 
not opening.
Male either star-^Hke and tehnil^iig, aor^'b^^e and 
axillary.
vCBYPTOGAMIA.
WJSCL 99t 
SPHACNUM.
Dill.
32.
i. 2.
3. 6.
Capsules sitting in a circle^ terminating the fruit-stalk, 
ohea surpoi^ed at bottom by an imperfect veil* 
fVtftgeaone* 
Male, axillary'in the upper branches.
SPLACH^NUM.
Hedw.
stirp.
ii.
13.
14.
15.
Capsule cylindrical, sitting on a hollow nearly globular 
oriuxibreQa^shaped receptacle.
Fringe simple, wit^i 8 
teeth, in pairs.
M^E.
a, bud witjh a star-like t<>p; .those, cm £ruit^$|talks 
only, fertile.
POLYTRICHUM.
Dill.
54.
1. 
Capsule oblong, soinetimes 4-sided, sitting on a 4-sided 
receptacle, rringe double, the outer with 32 short 
crooked teeth, united at the base j the inner a flat 
transverse membrane, adhering 4b the ends of the teeth 
of the outer.
Veil hairy.
i/lfAfiiE star-like.
MNFUM.
Dill.
31.
1. 2.
Hedw.
stirp.
l 37- 
.Cavsulb .with aHd. Keii smooth.
Fringe with 16 teetb^ 
isoooeti^nes with 4.
Male a circular bud, somdtimes though rarely a Jmob ; 
generally on a separate plant.
iBRY^UM.
Hedw.
stirp.
i. 20.
^APSU^E egg-oblpng.
.Fringe double, the puter with 16 
broad, acute teeth 3 the inner membranaceous, plaited, 
j^e^ed, jjagged 3 s^^ents alternately broader and nar- 
rpiyer.
ffij^J^ ^ knob, pr ,a star, or a bud, pn the same or on a dis- 
ipcjt.pUnt.
JjreP^NUM.
Hedw.
stirp.
Iv. 15.
Gapsule oblong.
Fringe double, the outer with 1,6 
.)>roadi^ teeth ; the inner membranaceous, equal, jag- 
ged ; s^ments broa4isb> with hair*like segments be- 
twixt them.
Mau bud-lik^, on distinct plants.
CC2 
is& CRYPTOGAMIA.
HEPATICiE.
FONTINA'LIS.
Hedw.
stirp.
iii.
12.
Capsule oblong, enveloped by a tiled PenGhastium, and 
sitting on a short pedicle.
Fringe double, the outer 
with ir^rbroadish teeth, the inner like hetwork.
Male bud-like, axillary.
. BUXBAU^MIA.
mU.
32.
13.
Capsule ^g-shaped, oblique, depressed, bellying on one 
side; in one species bordered.
Fringe double, the 
outer with 16 teeth; lopped; the inner membranaceous, 
plaited.
Male star-like.
HEFATICM.
. MARCHANTIA.
PI.
15.
f. 60-67.
DiU.
76.
6. 
Male flowers either sitting or on a pedicle.
Cal. Cup a membranaceous border, openi lobed or entire^ 
permanent, pimpled in the centre.
Bloss.
none.
* 
Stam.
Filaments riKXi^.
u^n/Aer^ numerous, pear-shaped, 
1 -celled, buried in the substance of the casyx, but with 
- a tube opening upon its surface.
Female flower, on the same, or on a diffecent plant.
Cal. common^ large, star-like, conical or hemispherical, 
bearing the flowers underneath, the florets looking 
downwards.
Proper eiip sitting bell-shaped, with 4 or 5 teeth', 
membranaceous, coloured, tender.
Bloss.
Veil sitting, shorter th^ its proper cup, globular 
or oblong, membranaceous/ tender and delicate, crown- 
ed with the style, at length tearing open at the top iht6 
2, 3, 4 or 5 segments, the style remaining on the top 
of one of the segments.
PiST.
globular, but oblong, sitting, encompassed by the 
veil.
Style either straight or bent, shorter, protruding 
through the top of the veil.
Summit simple.
S. Vess.
Capsules sitting on a short and slender pedicle, 
inversely egg-shaped, 1 -celled, opening at the tbp with 
fron> 5 to 10 teeth, tltie teeth at length rolling back.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
HEPATIC^, 389 
Seeds many, globrilar, fixed to dastic spirally convoluted 
threads.
Obs. The Marchantia of the author, from whom it 
took its name, has the male calyx on a foot-stalk, -its centre 
marked with rays, and its border cut into 8 segments.
The 
female calyx has 8 or 10 divisions, the segments >roundish, with 
ab equal number of 2-valved involucres, containing many 
flowers placed underneath, and alternating with the segments.
Besides these flowers, there are also little bud-bearing cups, 
toothed at the edge.
The LuNtJLARiA of Micheli has the male calyx sitting, 
extending only half round ; the female with 4 divisions forming 
across, the segments involving the florets.
The Hepatica of Micheli has the male calyx either sitting, 
or on a foot-stalk, roundish ; the female hemispheric-conical, 
with the cells underneath, 1 flower in each cell.
JUNGERMAN^IA.
Pi. 14.
f. 29* to f.
59.
DHL 
71.
18.
, 
Male flowers sitting, crowded together on the stem 
or the leaves.
'Cal. hardly any.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments hardly any.
Anthers egg-shaped, 1- 
celled,, opening at the top.
Female flower oh the same or on a different plant.
GaI.
Cup upright, tubular^ lopped, scolloped or jagged.
Bloss.
Feil sitting, smaller than the cup, nearly globule, 
closed on all sides, membranaceous, delicate, crowned 
by the style, at length opening at the top.
PiST.
Germen oblong, wrapped in the veil, sitting.
Style 
short, straight, protruding through the top of the veil.
Summit simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule sitting on a long and slender fruit-stalk, 
globular, 1 -celled, opening at length longwise with 4 
equal, expanding, permanent valves.
Sebds many, globular, adhering to elastic twisted threads^ 
fixed to some part of the valves of the capsule.
Obs. a single cup often contains several germens, but only 
1 of these attains perfection..
The stemless Jungermanpias have the anthers within the 
substance of the leaves, and the female flowers have no calyx, 
therefore it may be doubted whether these really belong to the 
genus.
390 CRYPTOGAMIA.
HEPATICiEj 
TAHGKyNU- Mich.
3. 
Male flowers soUtaxyj at the end of the leaf or seg- 
ment.
Ca;..
none.
Blos^.
none.
Stam.
Filaments none.
Aitthers somewhat cylmdricalj 
clustered together.
Female flower solitarv, under the point of the leaf.
Cal. 2-valved, compressea.
!6loss.
Veil nearly sitting, almost globulstr, membrana- 
ceous, closed on all sides, crowned with the style j 
opening, 
PisT.
Germefi wrapped .
in the veil.
Style short, rather 
bent.
Summit lopped.
S. Vess.
Capsule nearly sitting, globular, 1 -celled; open* 
ing at the top ; with 4 or more teeth.
Mich.
Seeds many, globular, fixed to twisted d^tic threslds.
Obs. I have never seen the capsule open, but ean hardly 
doubt that it does open when the seeds are ripe.
ANTHO'CEROS.
PI.
15 and 16.
f. 68 to 72- Mich.
Mate flowers within the substance of the leaf.
Cal. 1 leaf, entire, or cut into segmfents.
Bloss.
none.
' ^ 
StAM.
FiUmients hatdly arty.
Anthers from 3 to 8, in- 
versely egg-shaped, at the bottom of the calyx.
Feinale flowers ort the same plant.
^ 
Cal. I leaf, cylindrical, lopped, the rim entirfe df toothed.
Bloss.
Feil fibrous, crowhed with the style.
PiST.
Gerwe?2 short, cfanical.
Sif^fe vfery short.
Summit 
simple.
S. Vess.
Cap^ttZe veiry long, awl-shajied, g-valved; parti- 
ti'oii loose, ireaehing fk)m end to end.
Seeds ma^y, globular, prickly, each fixed to an elastic 
twisted thread connected with the valvfes or v^ith the 
partition.
BLA'SIA.
PI.
16.
f. 73.
74.
75.
bill^i.
7. 
Male flowers solitary, scattered through the sub- 
stance of the leaf, 
Cal. none.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Filaments none.
Anikers nearly globular^ buried 
in the leaf^ covered with a thin skin.
Female flowers on the same plant.
Cal. none.
Bloss.
none, 
PisT.
Germen egg-shaped, oblique, ending in an upright 
tube.
Style very short and slender, fixed on tb^ tube, 
^wnMiQgoff.
B^miit simple.
Si« Vs§s.
Capsuk egg-shapedj| sjantii;igj^ 1 -celled, crowned 
on the outer side with a short tube> wliich i| logged and 
open a,t the end.
S5?BS maAy, TQundisl\^ W\ cpn^pj^essed^ esc^iag ^ou^ 
the tube.
RIC'CIA.
PI.
16.
f. 79 le Wt *««(* +4 ^ 45.
Male flowers; sitting on the surface of the.
leaf.
Cal. none.
Bloss.
none.
Stam.
Anthers^ eonieal, lopped, sitting, opening at the 
top.
Female flqwers qa the same or on % different plant.
Cal. none, except a membranaceous cavity within the 
substance of the leaf.
Bloss.
none.
PiST.
Germen turban-shaped.
Sijile threadrsbaped, up- 
right, reaching to or above the surface of the leaf.
SuTiimit simple.
S. Vess.
Capsule ^ohulBjp, !-cdled, crowned by the style* 
3e£P$ infLny, hemispherical, on pedicles.
Obs. The little substances lyhicl} Mjcl^eli considered as 
anthers, much resemble, excepting only in size^ the other 
pimply substances shewn by the microscope on the upper sur» 
face of the leaves, and appear too solid to be anthers.
But 
having observed the tube on the top pf ^he germen full of small 
granules, I have considered them as the pollen, and the tube 
as the anther.
I^t others <^ecide thi^ n^atter, but Jet them 
examine the fructification before the gormea becomes sphe* 
rical.
* - 
39S CRYPTOGAMIA.
ALG^.
ALGM.
LIC'HEN.
PL 1.
E. F.
PI.
16.
f. 81 to 87- 
Male flowers.
Veskles in heaps^ extremely minute^ like meal^ either 
thick set or scattered on the surface, the edge, or the 
points of the leaves.
Female flowers j on the same or on a different plant.
Receptacle roundish but flatted, either a convex 
ttilercley a concave saucer ^ or a target with the edge 
rolled back, and fixed to the leaf.
These are often of 
a different colour td the leaf, and contain within them 
the seeds regularly disposed.
TREMEL'LA.
Dill.
lo.
14.
SuLstance uniform^ membranaceous, jelly«likej pel- 
lucid.
UL'^A.
Fructifications in a transparent membrane* 
Growing in water.
FU'CUS.
Pi. 1.
G. 
* 
Male flowers.
Bladders smooth, hollow, with hairs on the inside.
Female flowers.
Bladders smooth, filled with jelly, sprinkled with 
perforated granules containing the seed.
Seeds solitary.
CONFERVA.
DHL 2.
f. 4.
6 « 5.
f. 25.
Fibres simple, uniform, hair-like, or thread-like.
Obs. These fibres are either uniform or jointed.
BYS^SUS.
Dm. I.
Fibres simple, woolly.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
FUNGI.
39?
FUNGI.
MERU'LIUS.
Fl. dan.
384.
PiLBUs with rising veins underneath^ of the same substance' 
with the rest of the plant* 
AGA'RICUS.
PI.
1. H.
PI.
19.
PI.
16.
f. 88 to 91.
PiLBCJS with gills underneath.
Gills differing In substance from the rest of the planL 
composed of 2 lamina.
Seeds numerous^ between the 2 lamina or plates which 
constitute each gill.
FISTULFNA.
Bull.
464.
PiLEUs with distinct ^(e;5 underneath.
Seeds in the tubes.
BOLETUS.
BulLeo.
PiLEUS with united tubes underneath.
Seeds in the tubes.
HYiyNUM.
BuU.
34.
Curi.
19O.
PitEUS horizontal^ with awl-shaped^ solid^ soft^ prickle- 
like substances underneath.
Seeds on the surface of the prickle-shaped substances* 
HELVEULA.
Bull.
466 d^ 190.
PiLEUs smooth on both sides* 
AURICULA'RU.
Bull.
274.
Ftmgus flat^ membranaceous^ fixed by its whole 
under surface^ but at length becoming detached and 
turning upside down.
j 
6§i CRYPTOGAMIA.
FUNGI.
Sbeds discharged slowlv from what was the upper^ but 
now become the unaer surface.
t « • 
PEZrZA.
Bull.
497.
Fungus concave, sitlliBg, or on a stem.
Seeds on the edgps.
and the upper surface^ discharged by 
jerks.
NIDULA'RIA.
Buil.
488.
Fungus bell-shaped, leather-like, sitting.
Capsules large, flat, feed by pedicles to &e bottom of 
the bell.
PHALXUS.
Cmt/.
199.
PiLEUs on a stem, smooth underneath, with a fleshy net- 
work, on its upper surface.
Seeds in the network.
CLAVA'RIA.
Schmid.
15.
Fungus upright, smooth, oblong, surface unifonn.
Seeds emitted from every part oif the surface.
TU'BER.
Bull.
356.
Bolt.
116.
Fungus stemless, solid, fle8hy,not becoming powdery, 
not opening at the top.
LYCOPER'DON.
Bolt.
117.
Fungus roundish, opening irregularly at the top, full 
of powder-like impalpable seeds intermixed with wool- 
like filaments, 
RETICULA'RIA.
Bull.
476.
1. Bolt.
134.
Fungus soft and gelatinous, becoming firm and 
friable, opening indiscrtminately.
SvEDS eatan^ed in wool-like fibres, netwoik membranes, 
or leather-like cases.
CRYPTOGAMIA.
FUNGI.
39s 
SPHJBiaA.
Bok. iMi 
Fungus of various shapes.
Fructificaticm mostly spiwrical^ filled with' a pow« 
dery mass^ without fibres.
Obs. The capsules are oft^n immersecl in the substance of 
file plant, so that their orifices only are visible* 
TRrCHlA.
JStt/Z.
505.
1. 
Capsules sitting or on a steni^ globular or oblongs mostfy 
fixed to a membranaceous base.
Sb^ds escaping from the whole surface of the cdpsufai 
through the interstices of the fibres.
MU'COR.
Mich.
91.
s efgb.
Fi£f^gus consisting of vesicles on firuit-stalks^ 
taining a number of seeds.
INDEX TO THE GENERA.
A. 
jTICER, 
228 
Anthericum, 
219 
Achitlea^ 
343 
Anthoceros, 
367, 390 
Acorus, 
221 
Anthoxanthum, 
129 
AcTostichum, 
' 385 
Anthyllis, 
313 
Actaea^ 
260 
Antirrhinum, 
284 
Adiantum^ 
386 
Aphanes, 
117 
Adonis^ 
267 
Apium, 
210 
Adoxa, 
232 
Aquil^ia, 
264 
iEgopodium, 
210 
Arabis.
297 
-^thusa.
205 
Arbutus, 
238 
Agaricus, 
373> 393 
Arctium, 
331 
Agriiiiouia, 
249 
Arenaria, 
242 
Agrustemma, 
244 
Aristolochia, 
225 
Agrostis, 
144 
Artemisia, 
335 
Aira^ 
145 
Arum, 
265 
Ajuga, 
Ajchemilla, 
271 
Arundo, 
151 
166 
Asarum, 
247 
Alisma^ 
225 
Asparagus, 
220 
Allium^ 
217 
Asperugo,' 
Asperula, 
176 
Alopecurus, 
143 
161 
AIsine> 
212 
Asplenium, 
353, 386 
Althaea, 
303 
Aster, 
338 
Amaranthus, 
155 
Astragalus, 
317 
Anagallis, 
179 
Athamanta, 
200 
Ancnusa, 
174 
Atriplex, 
191 
Andromeda, 
238 
Atropa, 
184 
Anemone, 
Q66 
Auricnlaria, 
393 
Anethum, 
208 
Avena, 
150 
Angelica, 
Anmemis, 
202 
Azalea, 
179 
343 
B 
1. 
Rallota, 
276 
Betula, 
167 
Bartsia, 
281 
Bidens, 
33a 
Bellis, ^ 
341 
Blasia, 
368, 390 
Berberis, 
222 
Blechnum, 
386 
Beta, 
192 
Boletus, 
393 
Betonica, 
275 
Borago, 
175 
INDEX.
397 
Brassica^ 
298 
Bunlum, 
199 
Briza^ 
147 
Bupleurum, 
i^9 
Bromus, 
149 
Butomus, 
. 23S 
Bryonia^ 
. 136 
Buxbaumia, 
388 
Bryum, 
387 
Buxus, 
I6d 
Bufibnia^ 
167 
Byssus.
392 
Bunias^ 
29Q 
C. 
Calendula^ 
345 
Cistus, 
268 
Callitriche, 
118 
Clavaria, 
394 
Caltha^ 
269 
Clematis, 
2'66 
Campanula^ 
181 
Clinopodium, 
Cochlearia, 
278 
Cardamine^ 
293 
29s 
Carduus^ 
332 
Colchicum, 
225 
Carex, 
140 
Comarum, 
258 
Carlina^ 
333 
Conferva, 
398 
Carpinus^ 
248 
Conium, 
,1^ 
Carum^ 
209 
Convallaria, 
220 
Caucalis^ 
198 
Convolvulus, 
180 
Centaurea, 
344 
Conyza, 
33§ 
Centunculus^ 
163 
Coriandrum, 
20§ 
Cerastium, 
245 
Comiis, 
!64 
Ceratophyllum, 
247 
Corrigiola, 
511 
Chara, 
117 
Corylus, 
231 
Chaerophyllum^ 
207 
Cotyledon, 
•,.243 
Cheiranthus, 
296 
Crambe, 
290 
Chelidonium^ 
260 
Crataegus, 
253 
Chenopodium^ .
191 
Crepis, 
329 
Cherleria, 
243 
Crithmum, 
201 
Chironia^ 
185 
Crocus, 
137 
Chlora, 
229 
Cucubalus, 
241 
Chrysanthemum, 
342 
Cuscuta, 
168 
Chrysosplenium, 
239 
Cyclamen, 
177 
Cichorium, 
331 
Cynoglossum, 
174 
Cicuta, 
205 
Cynosurqs, 
148 
Cineraria, 
339 
Cyperus, 
139 
Circaea, 
122 , 
Cypripedium, 
127 
Dactylis^ 
E 
148 
Datura, 
184 
Paphne, 
231 
Daucus, 
198 
Ddphiniom^ 
S03 Doronicum, 
Dtantaria^ 
994 Diaba, 
I>ianthu8, 
941 Drosera^ 
l^talis.
985 Di^as^ 
D^psacus^ 
1&9 
197 Erioeaulon^ 
Echinophora> 
Echium, 
177 I-riophoriun, 
jBbtint, 
' ♦fiS^ Ervum, 
Elymus, 
1 59 £ryngiuin.
Smpetrum^ 
JEpilobiuin, 
157 £rysimum, 
997 £uonyiuu9.
jEpimedium^ 
164 £upatonum^ 
£^uisetum^ 
340^ 384 Euphorbia^ 
£nca^ 
5130 Eqphrasia^ 
£tigeron^ 
337 Ex^cum^ 
^agus.
249 Frankenia^ 
<Festuca^ 
149 ^raxinus.
jFilago, 
345 Fritillaria, 
iFistulina, 
393 Fucus, 
Fontinalis^ 
388 Fumaria^ 
fragaria^ 
956 
G. 
jGalanthus^ 
216 .Geranium, 
Xialeobdolon^ 
275 Geum, 
.Galeopsis^ 
274 ,Glaux, 
Xraliuin, 
161 Glecoma, 
JGrenista^ 
311 .Gnaphaliuni, 
.Centiana^ 
194 
, H.
Redera^ 
188 'Hesperis^ 
Hedysarum> 
317 Hieracium, 
Helleborus^ 
q6^ Hippocrepis, 
Hdvella, 
393 Hippophae, 
"Heracleum^ 
901 Hippuris, 
190 Holcus, 
4Senuaria> 
S4t 
«99 
914 
S58 
160 
138 
31^ 
.19$ 
99$ 
»l 
#89 
923 
190 
91T 
310 
308 
957 
,139 
273 
336 
997 
398 
316 
166 
118 
445 
I^EX.
859 
Hdosleum, 
156 
gydrocotyle.
t95 
•Mordeiim, 
154 
Bfyoscyamus, 
IM 
Hottonia, 
178 
flyoseris.
B59 
Bumulus, 
19« 
'Hypericum, 
390 
Hyacinthus^ 
i2Sl 
•Hypnum, 
3€Br 
Hydnum, 
393 
Hypocharis, 
390 
Hydrocharis, 
S36 
Jasione, 
I 
183 
Iris, 
* 
137 
Iberis, 
£^ 
Isatis, 
^gi 
Ilex, 
169 
Isoetis, 
385 
Illecebrum, 
189 
Jimcus, .
222 
Impatiens, 
1^7 
•Jungeniianma, 
JS6A^3^ 
Imperatoria, 
£07 
Jumperus, 
20a.
Inula, 
340 
I 
• 
•• 
• 
• 
LacJtuda, 
32f7 
linum.
«I3 
Lagurus, 
151 
Lhnosdla, 
2S7 
T^amium, 
274 
Lithospermum^ 
littorella.
173 
Tiapsana, 
330 
162 
T^thraea, 
383 
.Lobelia, 
iSl 
l^thyrus.
3U 
.Lolium^ 
lii2 
Lavatera, 
304 
Lonicera^ 
:1B2 
Lcmna, 
1^8 
Lotus, 
3M 
lieontodon.
3S8 
Lychnis, 
2A4: 
l-eonunis, 
277 
Lycopeidon, 
304 
XiepidiiiiTi, 
292 
Lycopodium, 
.3B4 
'Leucojum, 
216 
Lycopsis, 
176 
Lichen, 
370, .392 
Lycopus, 
IM 
'Lagusticum^ 
202 
Xysimachia, • 
179 
ligustrum.
122 
Xy thrum.
M8 
liimaea.
286 
• 
M. 
'Malaxis, 
1^6 
Melica, 
146 
'Malva, 
303 
'Melissa, 
.979 
"Marchantia, 
9«6, 388 
'Melittis, 
280 
^Manubium, 
•277 
" Mentha, 
'213 
Matricaria, 
342 
'Menyanthes, 
IW 
^Medicago, 
319 
Mercurialis, 
235 
MeUmpyrum, 
-^83 
^Merulius, 
•^93 
4Q0 
INDEX.
MespiliM^ 
254 
Myagrum, 
29a 
Milium^ 
144 
Myrica, 
168 
Mnium, 
387 
Myriophyllum, 
234 
Monotropa^ 
237 
Myosotis, 
173 
Montia^ 
155 
Myosurus, 
214 
Mucor, 
395 
N. 
Narcissus, 
217 
Nepeta, 
Nidularia, 
272 
Nardus^ 
138 
394 
Narthecium;^ 
219 
Nymphaea, 
261 
1 
Oenanthe, 
O. 
204 Origanum, 
278 
Oenothera, 
228 
Onuthogalum, 
218 
Ononis, 
312 
Omithopus, 
316 
Onopordon, 
333 
Orobaiiche, 
287 
Ophioglossum, 
351, 385^ 
Orobus, 
314 
Ophrys, 
126 
Osmunda, 
352, 385 
Orchis, 
125 
Oxalis, 
244 
• 
Panicum, ' 
P. 
142 Pifium, 
313 
1 
Papaver, 
261 
Plantago, 
163 
Parietaria, 
164 
Poa, 
147 
Paris, 
232 
' Polemonium, 
180 
Pamassia, 
212 
Polycarpon, 
156 
Pastinaca, 
208 
Polygala, 
310 
Pedicularis, 
284 
Polygonum, 
232 
Peplis, 
223 
Polypodium, 
352, 386 
Peucedanum, 
200 
Polytrichum, 
387 
Peziza, 
394 
Populus, 
230 
Phalaris, 
141 
Potamogeton, 
170 
Phallus, 
394 
Potentilla, 
256 
Phascum, 
386 
Poterium, 
263 
Phellandrium, 
204 
Prenanthes, 
327 
Phleum, 
143 
Primula, 
177 
Phyteuma, 
181 
Prunella, 
281 
Picris, 
326 
Prunus, 
253 
Pilularia, 
384 
Pteris, 
386 
Pimpinella, 
209 
Pulmonaria, 
175 
Pinguicula, 
123 
Pyrola, 
239 
Pinus, .
305 
Pyrus, 
254 
INDEX* 
401 
i^ercus^ 
sda 
B 
Kanunculus^ 
Raphanus, 
Keseda^ 
Reticularia^ 
l^amnus^ 
Rhinanthus^ 
Rhodiola, 
Ribes^ 
Sagjna^ 
Sagittaria> 
Sancomia^ 
Salix^ 
Salsola^ 
Salvia, 
Sambucusi^ 
Samolus, 
Saii^isorba^ 
Sanicula^ 
Salitolina, 
Saponaria, 
Satyrium^ 
Saxifraga^ 
Scabiosa, 
Scandix, 
Schasnus^ 
Scilki 
Scirpua, 
Scleranthus^ 
80N3phularia^ 
Scutellaria^ 
Seduxn^ 
Selinum^ 
Sempcrvivum/ 
Senecio^ 
SerapiaSj 
Serratula^ 
Sesleria, 
Vox..
I. 
567 
Riceia^ 
391 
299 
Rosa, 
255 
250 
Rottboellia> 
]52 
394 
Rubia, 
163 
186 
'Rubus, 
^^^ 
882 
Ruinex, 
223 
233 
RHppia, 
170 
188 
Ruscus^ 
137 
s 
170 Sherardia^ 
161 
269 
Sibbaldia, 
214 
118 
Sibthorpia^ 
286 
128 
Silene, 
242 
192 
Sinapis, 
298 
124 
Sison, 
203 
210 
Sisyinbriuln^ 
295 
182 
Slum, 
203 
163 
Smymium, 
208 
196 
Solanum, 
185 
334 
Solidago, 
339 
240 
Sonchus, 
327 
123 
Sorbus^ 
253 
240 
Sparganium, 
141 
130 
Spartium, 
311 
206 
Spergula, 
245 
139 
Sphasria, 
395 
219 
Sphagnum, 
387 
139 
Spirsea, 
255 
240 
Splachnunij 
387 
285 
Stachys, 
276 
280 
Staphylsea, 
211 
243 
Statice, 
213 
200 
Stellaria, 
242 
251 
Sdpa, 
150 
338 
Stratiote^, 
^ti4 
127 
Subularia, 
292 
331 
Swertia, 
193 
146 
Symphytum 
ns 
Dd 
40S 
INDEX.
Tamarix, 
211 Tragopogon, 
328 
Tamus, 
221 Tremella, 
392 
Tanacetum, 
33i Trichia, 
395 
Targionia, 
390 Trichomanes, 
386 
Taxus, 
304 Trientalis, 
226 
Teucriuro, 
272 Trifolium, 
318 
Thalictrum, 
267 Triglochin, 
224 
Thesium, 
189 Triticum, 
154 
Thlaspi, 
293 TroUius, 
268 
Thymus, 
279 Tuber, 
394 
Tilia, 
262 Tulipa, 
218 
Tiltea, 
156 Turritis, 
298 
Tordilium, 
197 Tussilago, 
337 
Tofieldia, 
224 Typha, 
140 
Tormen tilia.
•257 
U 
IJlex, 
312 Urtjca, 
165 
Ulthus, 
193 Utricuhiria, 
1S3 
Ulva, 
392 
V 
Vaccinium, 
229 Viburnum, 
210 
Valeriana, 
136 Vicia, 
313 
Vella, • 
291 Vinca, 
190 
Verbascuro, 
1 83 Viola, 
187 
Verbena, 
273 Viscum, 
16S 
Veronica, 
122 
Xanthium, 
X 
194 
Zannichellia, 
119 Zostera,.
865 
END OF THE EIRST VOLUME.
{!• Baldwin and S09, Printtrsi 
Kew Bridge-street, London.
;<   
t * 
^ aft 
.T^ 
». •  
N 