.; .1 
* 7» «** 'WStSB 
mm 
wlllll^ 
SLWiW!
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2013 
http://archive.org/details/newbritishtravel01dugd 
3H 
DU ©BALE'S BRITISH TEAYElLlLElfe 
FMOIfTIS PIECE.
_^/hr;w/s'/s/   V^vv/, #i 
[, O .Y I.) O >' .
< 3U&fd*J> / </ J.ROJtlVS toC?.
'-///-t'on M>:>.>,.
</,_ ,, y f 'r„,-, /A, /,-/,<<>.>/< I ^W 
I « 1 f > .
k 
5 ^ Xt,,L THE NEW 
BRITISH TRAVELLER.
OR, 
MODERN PANORAMA 
OF 
€nglmttr an* Wate: 
Exhibiting, at one comprehensive View, 
AN AMPLE, ACCURATE, AND POPULAR ACCOUNT, 
HISTORICAL, TOPOGRAPHICAL, AND STATISTICAL, 
Of this most Important Portion of 
THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
DESCRIPTIVE OP 
ITS SEVERAL COUNTIES, CITIES, TOWNS, AND OTHER SUBDIVISIONS; THEIR SITUATION, 
EXTENT, CLIMATE, SOIL, AND PRODUCTIONS, NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL : 
IMPROVEMENT AND PRESENT STATE OF 
THE ARTS, SCIENCES, MANUFACTURES, 
AGRICULTURE, COMMERCE, POPULATION, AND SOCIETY.
Forming a complete Survey of 
SOUTH BRITAIN; 
COMPRISING AUTHENTIC INFORMATION ON EVERY SUBJECT OF A LOCAL OR GENERAL NATURE, 
AND INTERSPERSED WITH 
Biographical Particulars of Eminent arid Remarkable Persons.
BY JAMES DUGDALE, LL.
D. 
ILLUSTRATED BY A COMPLETE SET OF CORRECT MAPS, VIEWS OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS, 
ANTIQUITIES, &c.
&c.
^ 
VOL.
I. 
LONDON: 
PRINTED BY AND FOR J.
AND J.
CUNDEE, 
IVY-LANE, PATERNOSTER-ROW, 
3>SS" 
yj.\ 
preface* 
CAMDEN's elaborate, and truly estimable performance, intituled Britannia, was 
th< first work of note, devoted to the history and description of this " happy island." 
Tie veracity of its general details remains unimpeached : it may be consulted, 
wth advantage, by the historian and the antiquary ; it will ever be regarded as 
anoble monument of scholastic perseverance and literary research ; yet, in propor- 
tfrn to the time which has elapsed, since its original appearance, since its translation 
ad enlargement by Gibson, and even since it received the important additions and 
enendations of Gough, its descriptions have necessarily become, in a certain degree, 
(bsolete and imperfect; and a Modern Survey of England has been regarded as a de~ 
ideratum in the field of British literature and science.
The truth of this position is alike obvious ; whether we contemplate the improved 
ate of agriculture, throughout the island ; the novelty, the increase, the immense 
xtension, of our manufacturing processes ; the alterations in the face of the country, 
esulting from the new roads, and canals, which, of late years, have been rendered 
ecessary, by the increase of trade, commerce, and population ; the decay of public 
uildings, and other performances of human art, which have crumbled, or are 
rumbling, into their primitive atoms ; the numerous splendid edifices, which, 
hcenix-like, have risen, or are rising, from the ashes of annihilated grandeur ; the 
ancient families which, disappearing in the lapse of time, have resigned their places 
and possessions to successors of other names ; or the new candidates for wealth,.
power, and fame, who are daily presenting themselves to the notice of the world.
Nor can the vast influx of strangers, drawn to England by the return of peace, and 
by a consideration ofthehigh— the unprecedentedly elevated — station which Britain has 
attained, by her unparalleled exertions, in support of order, of liberty, of all that is 
dear and valuable to man, be regarded as a slight motive for the production of a Mo- 
dern Survey and Panoramic Picture of the country.
Where is the traveller, of rank, 
of opulence, or possessing a spirit of literary and philosophical enquiry, who will not be 
desirous of visiting a land so highly favoured, so proudly distinguished amongst the 
nations?— All will be anxious to see, and to know a country so justly designated 
Great !
This, point alone, therefore— were there no other in view— might be ad- 
mitted as a sufficient stimulus to exertion.
7 The 
4 PREFACE, 
The nature and objects of The New British Traveller, which its patrons will 
duly appreciate, are too evident to require much explanation.
In its progress, it will 
be lound to supply the desideratum alluded to above ; and, marking, with sedulous at- 
tention, every improvement that has been effected in the agriculture, and in the manu- 
factures of the country — carefully laying down, and describing, the numerous roads, 
and canals, by which the transit of goods, and the conveyance of passengers, are 
now with so much facility, accomplished — preserving, from the ravages of time, the 
history and description of our } r et existing relics of Gothic magnificence — and fath- 
fully pourtraying the virtues and exploits of departed greatness — of those who hive 
passed " that bourne from which no traveller returns" — it constitutes at once a topo- 
graphical library for the native resident, and an admirable vade mecum for the ten- 
porary sojourner.
The respective subjects of the work are illustrated by the Maps, Views, and otfor 
graphic embellishments, with which it abounds.
By way of Introduction, a concise historical and geographical account of Englanl 
will be prefixed ; exhibiting, in a popular manner, the various changes which th 
country has undergone, from the earliest periods ; its situation, extent, climate, soi 
and productions, natural and artificial ; its government, laws, population, and naval an 
military force ; and presenting much useful information, on various other misce 
laneous topics.
This Introduction, the result of much labour and research, will nc 
fail to be considered as a most interesting and invaluable portion of the performance 
but, that the description of the respective counties, agreeably to alphabetical arrange 
ment, might not be interrupted, and that the Introduction itself might be renderec 
more complete, it has been found expedient to defer its appearance, in the order o 
publication, till the close of the work.
The utility and importance of this will be tht 
more apparent, when it is considered, that the happy return of peace will occasion ma- 
terial changes in every department of the State, and in every branch of our manufac- 
tures and commerce.
The numerous statistical calculations, 8cc.
which are essential in 
a performance of this nature, with ample notices of national alterations and improve- 
ments, will thus be compared and contrasted with those of former times, and will be 
brought down to the latest possible period.
As a whole, The New British Tra- 
veller will, it is confidently presumed, be found to answer the most sanguine expec- 
tations of enlightened readers ; — will be regarded as a noble monument of the great- 
ness of the nation to which its records are devoted.
THE 
|£^L 
fcn«, i'"^ 
g|-j 
S. 
J& 
T^ 7ZZ 
Sfci* 
'. 
i_ 
4 
_. 
^ 
INTRODUCTION ; 
OR, 
GENERAL SURVEY OF SOUTH BRITAIN, 
TOPOGRAPHICAL, HISTORICAL, AND POLITICAL.
CHAP.
I. 
Geographical Situation of Britain.
— Total extent, in miles.
— Scotland ; with its contents in 
respective proportions of tillage, pasturage, and waste.
— England.
— Wales.
— Beneficial consequences of a 
maritime coast.
— Capes, promontories, bays, harbours, fyc.
— Rivers.
— The Thames, Trent, Tt/ne, Ouse, Tweed, 
Tees, Stoure, Orwell, Eden, Lone, JVeever, Bee, Severn, Taw, Towridge, Camel, Ex, Wey, Alaun, Avon, 
Tise, Lavant, Rother, Stour, Medwaij, New River, S^c — Canals.
ALTHOUGH it is intended, in the present work, to describe only the southern part of Britain, or that which is 
"•enerally denominated England and Wales, it will facilitate the comprehension of the subject to the reader, if a 
general outline be given of the whole island.
The geographical situation of Great Britain, is on the Western Ocean, opposite to France and Germany.
Its southern 
extremity lies in latitude 49° 57'; and its northern extremity, in 58° 45': in longitude, its most western point is 12°, its 
most eastern, 19° 16' to the eastward of Ferro.
Caesar, who employed his sword in subduing, and his pen in describing this island, represented it as triangular; and 
later surveys have proved, that his description was correct.
It has three promontories : the Land's End, shooting out 
towards the west ; the Kentish, or North, Foreland, towards the east; and Caithness, towards the north.
It is divided 
from Ireland, to the west, by the Irish Sea; on the -north, it is bounded by the Northern Ocean; on the east, where it 
faces Germany, by the German Ocean ; and on the south, towards France, by the British Channel.
Its length, from north 
to south, is about 560 miles; its breadth is various; and, in compass, its three sides have been found to contain, allow- 
ing for the sinuosities of the coast, about 1800 miles.
The southern side, extending from the North Foreland, in Kent, 
to the Land's End, in Cornwall, contains about 300 miles; the western side, from the Land's End, to the most northern 
point of Scotland, about 800 ; and the eastern side, about 700.
Considering the island as a perfect triangle, formed by 
three right lines, the aggregate length of its three sides is about 1500 miles.
Scotland, or North Britain, lies to the north of the River Tweed, and is bounded on all sides by the sea; excepting 
on the south east, where it is joined to England.
In length, it extends about 280 miles; its breadth, in some places, is 
150 miles, but in others net more than 30.
According to the most recent surveys and calculations, it contains an area 
of 27,794 miles ; having about 12,151,471 acres of cultivated, and 14,218,224 acres of uncultivated land ; the remainder 
of the surface being occupied by rivers and lakes.
England, the southern, and most considerable part of Great Britain, extends from 50 o to 55° 40' north latitude, and from 1°50' 
past to 6° west Ion., from Greenwich.
It is bounded, on the north, by Scotland; on the east, by the German Ocean; on the south, by 
the English Channel ;and, on the west, by the Atlantic, by Wales, and by the Irish Sea. Its shape is nearly that of a triangle.
Its longest side, from Berwick, in the north, to the Land's End, Cornwall, in the yowth west, is 425 miles; from Berwick, 
to the South Foreland, Kent, 345 miles ; and, from the South Foreland, to the Land's End, 300.
It is estimated to con- 
tain 50,210 square statute miles, or 32,150,000 square acres; of which, about 10,500,000 acres, or nearly one third, is 
in cultivation for tillage, and about 14,200,000 acres in pasturage.
Of the number of acres in tillage, 3,000,000 annually 
njuy be estimated to remain as fallow, or in a course of turnips, &c.
; 3,500,000, to be occupied by barley and oats ; 
2,000 000, by pease, beans, buck-wheat, vetches, &c.
; and the remaining 2,000,000 by wheat.
Of the uncultivated part 
a 
ii INTRODUCTION.
of tlie county, it is believed that 3,000,000 more of acres are capable of being brought into a state of cultivation.
On 
these points, however, it is impossible to be accurate; particularly with respect to the waste lands, which as appears from 
the following remarkable and gratifying facts, are becoming less in quantity every year.
From the commencement of 
Queen Anne's reign, to that of George III.
there were 234 enclosure acts passed, comprising 237,877 acres; from the 
accession of George III.
Jo the year 1810, there were no fewer than 1502 similar acts, for 2,804,197 acres; since that 
period, numerous other enclosure acts have been passed ; and among the rest a plan is in active progress, under the ex- 
press patronage of his majesty, George IV.
for the cultivation of Dartmoor Forest, in Devonshire, consisting of 60,000 
or 80,000 acres.
The Principality of Wales, which forms a part of South Britain, and is now generally understood to be included in 
England, is bounded, on the north and west, by the Irish Sea; on the east, by the English counties of Chester, Salop, 
Hereford, and Monmouth; and, on the south, by the river Severn and the Bristol Channel.
It is, in length, from north 
to south, about 150 miles ; and, in breadth, from east to west, from 50 to 80; comprehending an area of 8125 square miles, 
or 5,200,000 acres ; of which, 900,000 are arable, and 2,600,000 in pasturage; having 1,700,000 in a state of waste.
Of 
these, however, about 700,000 are thought to be capable of being brought into a state of cultivation.
According to an elaborate calculation of the learned and ingenious Dr. Halley, the aggregate contents of England and 
Wales, deduced from geographical miles, upon a single map, amounted to 38,660,000 square acres.
On a strict compu- 
tation of the several counties, each separately examined, he fixed the total at 39,1)38,500 acres.
The same writer com- 
puted the whole of Encland and Wales to form a three thousandth part of the globe; and a fifteen hundredth part of the 
inhabited world.
Modern discoveries may somewhat impeach the accuracy of the latter part of the calculation.* 
The great extent of coast which this island enjoys may be reckoned amongst its chief prerogatives.
The beneficial 
consequences which necessarily result from an extensive sea coast, have been celebrated by all intelligent authors, ancient 
and modern, who have treated of such countries as were possessed, in any remarkable degree, of that blessing.
It was 
the genuine source of industry, wealth, and splendour, to the ancient Arabians; it was the instrument of Egypt's great- 
ness; it rendered the Phoenicians conspicuous through a long course of ages; and, wherever it is properly improved, it 
is physically impossible, that the inhabitants of the country should not attain greater opulence, and be in all respects, in a 
better condition than their neighbours.
It is indeed true, that the wisdom and industry of man", taking hold of some 
peculiar circumstances, may have rendered a few inland cities and countries very fair and flourishing.
In ancient history, 
we read of Palmyra, and the surrounding district, becoming a luxuriant paradise, in the midst of inhospitable deserts.
But 
this was mere temporary grandeur; and, for ages, the glories of Palmyra have been levelled with the dust.
— In Europe, 
from the freedom and industry of their inhabitants many of the large cities of Germany, for a time made a great figure, and 
diffused ease, plenty, and prosperity, throughout the circumjacent districts ; but, from inevitable accidents, long before the 
spoliations of Buonaparte, that most merciless of destroyers, even long before the first horrors of the French Revolution, 
they were so much reduced, as to he but shadows of what they had been.
They continued to exist, but existed only as the 
melancholy monuments of their own misfortunes.
It may, therefore, be inferred, that all the pains and labour which can be 
b stowed, in supplying the defect of situation in this respect, are likely to prove but tedious, difficult, and dangerous 
expedients.
* " The total population of the earth has been variously estimated, at from 400 to 1000 millions.
Mr. Cary, a missionary in the 
East Indies, considers it to be 731 millions; of which there are, of Pagans, 420 millions ; of Mahometans, 130 millions ; of Roman 
Catholics, 100 millions; of Protestants, 44 millions; of Greeks and Arn.inian-, 30 millions; and of Jews, 7 millions.
Taking 
the population at 800 millions, and considering this entire number to be renewed every 32 years, 25 millions of human beings 
must, upon an average, die and be born every year ; which is equal to 3000 every hour, or 50 every minute!
What must have 
been the aggregate number since the creation !
How eminently does such a statement excite our admiration and astonishment at the 
goodness of the Almighty, in bringing into existence so many myriads of beings, most of them for purposes of happiness and en- 
joyment here, and, through his divine mercy', for eternal felicity hereafter '.
— Another calculation gives the superficial contents of 
the earth at 199,512,595 square miles ; of which 4,456,065 are apportioned to Europe ; 10,768,823, to Asia ; 9,654,807, to Africa ; 
14,110,874, to America ; 160,522,026, to seas and unknown parts.
— Mr. Br is ted, in his recently published "able of population and 
territory of the present civilized world, gives to China 200,000,000 of population, and 1 ,200,000 square miles of territory ; to Great 
Britain, 20,000,000 of population, and 100,000 square miles; and, to the United States of America, 10,000,000 of population, and 
25,000,000 miles of territory; so that the United States have the largest home territory of all the nations except Russia.
The 
entire population of the world, Mr. Bristed estimates at 435,800,000 ; and of territory 9,687,000 square miles.
Britain possesses 
150,000,000 of subjects in her colonial empire, and covers a dominion' equal to nearly one fifth of the whole surface of the globe!
It is considered that, in Europe, there are 34 inhabitants to each square mile ; in Asia, 36; in Africa, 16 ; and in America, 3 ; in 
Russia, 17 ; in Italy, 1 70 ; and in the Netherlands, 275.
This great disproportion arises from the difference with respect to climate, 
agriculture, commerce, Sec."— Hartley' s Principles of the Sciences.
INTRODUCTION.
iii 
It is not, however, merely from the possession of an extended coast, that all the desired effects can arise.
That coast 
must also be distinguished by olher, natural advantages; such as capes and promontories, favourably disposed to break the 
fury of the winds, deep bays, safe roads, and convenient harbours.
Without these, an extended coast is nothing more 
ihfft) a maritime barrier against the naval force of other nations, as is the case in many parts of Europe.
Indeed, one of 
the principal reasons why Africa derives so little benefit from a situation which has so promising an appearance, is, there 
being so many considerable tracts upon its coasts equally void of havens and of inhabitants; a circumstance which offers 
but slight encouragement to any attempt to amend their present desolate condition.
It is a much less inconvenience, and, 
in some cases, no inconvenience at all, if, in a greatly extended coast, there should be some parts difficult, or dangerous 
of access.
In almost every part of the English coast, bays, creeks, and inlets of the sea, arc to be found.
On the eastern side, 
the most considerable are, the Humber, an arm of the sea, into which many rivers pour their streams; the Wash, a broad, 
but much shallower inlet, the sands of which., for the most part, are bare at low water; the mouth of the Thames, opening 
into a sort of funnel, produced by the retiring coast of Essex on one hand, and by that of Kent on the other; and the 
Straits of Dover, where England approaches so near towards France, with a singular conformity of coast, that various 
writers have been led to conjecture, that our island once formed a part of the continent, from which it must have been sepa- 
rated by some extraordinary convulsion of nature.
— The Isle of Wight, Portsmouth harbour, and the creek which runs up 
to Southampton, also break the regularity of the southern coast; which afterwards, forms several bays, and semicircular 
sweeps, in the progress to the Land's End — On the western side appears the most remarkable of all the inlets — the spacious 
St. George's, or Bristol Channel; which, with the wide mouth of the Severn, cuts deeply into the broadest part of the 
island.
The Welsh coast, opposite to the county of Somerset, is broken by various bays and indentions ; and, beyond the 
next turn of the land, is the large and deep bay of Cardigan.
The Isle of Anglesea next repels the waters of the Irish 
sea, and gives a new direction to the coast, which, running inwards, forms an immensely extensive bay, with the Lanca- 
shire and Cumberland coasts, into which several broad and shallow mouths of rivers disembogue, and which is protected, 
sea-ward, by the Lie of Man. Solway Frith may be considered as terminating the English coast, and forming a natural 
boundary on part of the Scotch border, which is nearly completed by the Cheviot hills and the Tweed.
It may farther be observed, that the eastern shore of England is sandy, from the mouth of the Tweed to Bamborough.
From Bamborough Castle to Flamborough Head, extend principally low cliffs of limestone, and other materials; whilst 
those about Sunderland are composed of a peculiar kind of stone, which is used for building, and which appears to be the 
work of marine insects.
— Scarborough stands on a vast rock, which projects into the waves, but Flamborough head is a 
far more magnificent object, formed of limestone, of snowy whiteness, and stupendous height, and visible from a great 
distance at sea.
Hence to the Humber, the shore consists in general of clay cliffs.
The extensive coast of Lincolnshire, 
has, in the opinion of the celebrated Pennant, been gained from the sea ; though, in some parts, its waves have invaded 
the land, and forests are visible beneath its waters.
The county of Lincoln belongs to the low countries of Britain, where 
churches, and not hills, serve for land-marks on its coast.
The shores of Norfolk and Suffolk, are diversified with preci- 
pices of loam or clay, sandy hillocks, and low flat spaces.
Hunstanton cliff, composed of chalk and friable stono, and 
resting on a base of farcilite or iron-coloured pudding stone, rises to the height of about eighty feet, and projects into the 
sea.
The coast of Essex is generally low ; but, southward of the Thames, rise continued cliffs of chalk, variegated with 
layers of Hint.
The North Foreland is a lofty, chalky promontory ; and Shakespear's faithful picture of Dover cliff is 
familiar to every reader.
From the figure, in some measure, of the island, but chiefly from the inlets of the sea, and the very irregular intended 
line which forms its shore, the sea-coast of Britain, allowing for those sinuosities, comprehends, as we have before ob- 
served, about 1800 miles.
It may hence, in this respect, be considered as superior to France, though that is a much larger 
country ; and equal to Spain and Portugal, though Britain is not half the size of that noble peninsula.
The same causes 
which render our sea-coast so extensive, render it, as we have seen, so much more commodious; as, exclusively of the 
havens, which are formed by the mouths of navigable rivers, we possess as many large and safe bays, secure roads, and 
convenient ports, arising from natural dispositions of sea and shore, as any country in Europe.
This, in conjunction with 
our other advantages, completes the felicity of the island, as it places it incontestibly in the power of its inhabitants to 
cultivate and improve it in every part.
Indeed, the benefits arising from a maritime situation are, of all others, most 
capable of producing a country well cultivated, and fully peopled ; consequently, arc the natural sources of strength, opu- 
lence, and grandeur.
Their loss, or deficiency, can never be compensated by an addition of territory, howsoever rich or fer- 
tile; because, though that might prove a means of obtaining wealth., it might so operate without exciting industry; and, 
whensoever that happens, though individuals may thriv •, society at large must suffer.
We offer these remarks, as of a generally elucidatory nature ; but, in preceeding through the respective counties, we 
shall particularize the different hays, harbours, promontories, &c.
in the order that they occur.
iv INTRODUCTION.
Navigable rivers, of which Great Britain possesses an ample portion, constitute another source of power and plenty.
In 
In the distribution of these sources, England is not surpassed by any region of the globe.
Its extent, indeed, will not ad- 
mit of such a length of course, as to enable them to vie in magnitude with the rivers of the continent; but, in beauty or 
utility, the most majestic of those do not surpass them.
— By these streams, domestic trade is sustained; their mouths 
form havens, which attract foreign commerce ; and, consequently, their number and extent are objects of national grandeur.
Independently of this, and of the quantities of fish which they furnish, rivers are exceedingly conducive to health, and to 
cleanliness, and supply the means of irrigating numerous districts through which they pass.
From the circumstance, that most rivers of note run through several different counties, we shall here succinctly describe 
the principal ones which have their origin in the southern parts of Britain ; commencing with the Thames, as of the first 
importance.
The sources of this famous stream are four rivulets, which rise in different parts of the Cotswold hills, in Gloucestershire, 
viz, the Lech, the Coin, the Churne, and the Isis.
The chief spring, however, or that which is called the Thames Head, is 
about four miles south west from Cirencester.
Having touched Wiltshire, and joined their waters in one channel a little be- 
low Lechlade, a town on the borders of Oxfordshire, they form a deep and copious stream, which there becomes navigable 
for large barges, and is constantly, after it leaves this place, called the Thames.
From Lechlade it proceeds into Oxford- 
shire ; and, having visited the city of Oxford, continues to divide that county from Berkshire.
At Abingdon, it receives 
the Ock, and at Dorchester, the Thame.
Passing on to Wallingford, and leaving Reading to the right, it receives the Ken- 
net, a little below, and soon after, the Loddon.
It then passes Henley, Marlow, Maidenhead, Windsor, Staines, and 
Chertsey, where it receives the Coin.
At Weybridge, it receives the Wey ; then passes Kingston, Richmond, and Brent- 
ford, where it receives the Brent; Hammersmith, Fulham, Battersea, Westminster, London, and Greenwich, a little below 
which it receives the Lea ; Woolwich, below which it receives the Roding, from Essex; opposite Purfleet, it receives the 
Darent; it then passes by Gravesend ; and, at the Nore, where it joins the Med way, opens into the sea, with a mouth 
nearly sixty miles broad.
In the course of its passage, the Thames receives no fewer than six remarkable rivers, which are 
not navigable, and eleven that are, which affords a vast communication within-land.
Its course has been computed at about 
one hundred and forty miles, of which it is navigable nearly a hundred from its mcath.
In what is called the Pool, and which 
is properly the port of London, upwards of one thousand ships have been known to lie commodiously ; and it is universally 
allowed, that in no haven in Europe, vessels lie more safely, take in their ladings with greater ease, or are delivered with 
superior dexterity and despatch.
Several navigable canals have been made, and are still making, to open a more extensive communication between this 
river and different parts of the kingdom : from London, to Hertford and Biggleswade ; from Brentford, by Uxbridge, and 
Rickmansworth, to join the Oxford Canal, at Braunston ; from Weybridge, by Guildford, Godalmin, Petersfield, &c.
to the 
sea, between Gosport and Southampton ; to Basingstoke, and thence to Southampton Water; by the Keunet, to Hun- 
gerford ; from Abingdon, to Lechlade ; from Oxford, to Coventry ; from Lechlade, to Stratford-upon-Avon; from Lechlade, 
to the Severn, below Gloucester, &c.
The Trent, which divides England into two parts of unequal size, thereby creating the distinction of north and south 
of Trent, rises out of New Pool, in conjunction with two springs, near Mole Cap and Harton Hay, in the north-west part 
of Staffordshire.
Taking a south-east direction, it crosses the county, to the borders of Leicestershire and Derbyshire ; it 
then takes a north-east direction, and crosses the counties of Derby and Nottingham, to Newark.
Its direction then 
becomes nearly due-south, till, after passing a small part in the north of Lincolnshire, it joins the Ouse, and falls into the 
Humber, about twelve miles above Kingston-upon-Hull.
— The direct course of the Trent is altogether about 100 miles.
It 
is of itself navigable, from Burton, in Staffordshire, in passing through which county alone it receives sixteen rivers.
Several canals have also been constructed, for the purpose of opening a communication between this river, and various 
parts of the country : viz.
from the mouth of the Idle, below Gainsborough, to Redford and Chesterfield ; to Lincoln, and 
thence to Tathers»a!l, Horncastle, Seaford, Bostou, and the sea; from near Nottingham, to Cromford and Winster; from 
the mouth of the Derwent, one branch through the counties of Derby, Stafford, and Cheshire, to the Mersey, which is 
joined by another branch, to Coventry and Braunston, where it meets with the canal from Brentford : other branches join 
the Thames at Lechlade, the Avon at Warwick, the Severn at Worcester, &c.
The Tyne is a river composed of two streams, of the same name; viz.
the North Tyne, which rising at a village called 
Tynehead, on the borders of Scotland, runs south-east about thirty miles, and is then joined by the South Tyne; which, 
having its source in Cumberland, almost on the borders of the bishopric of Durham, runs north-east about forty miles.
From their junction, a little above Hexham, each having been swelled by several little rivers in the way, the Tyne, passing 
near the great town of Newcastle, which stands upon its north bank, falls into the German sea at Tynemoulh, the two rivers 
having run together about thirty miles.
The Ouse, which rises near Fretwell, in Oxfordshire, proceeds thence into Buckinghamshire; and, passing by Buck- 
INTRODUCTION.
v 
ingham, goes on to Be J for J, where it becomes navigable; it then proceeds fchraogl) lEiuitiugdonsTiirc, Cambridgeshire, and 
the Isle of lily, into the county of Norfolk, where with a full fraught tide it fails into the German sea, a little below 
Lynn.
It receives in its course the river Nene, from Northampton and Peterborough; the Cam, from Cambridge; the 
Lesser Onse from Norfolk ; and the Mildcnhall from Suffolk; all of them navigable Rivers; by which most convenient, 
and, in all seasons, valuable situation, Lynn became, even in early times, a very considerable place ill respect to strength 
and trade.
The entire course of this river is estimated at about 109 miles.
Another river, called the Ouse, is formed by the union of the \Jre and the Swale, about four miles from Boroughbridge, 
in the county of York, which passes by Aldborough, York, Selby, &c.
and joins the Trent, on the borders of Lincoln- 
shire.
There is also a river of the same name, in the county of Sussex, which passes by Lewes, and runs into the sea, below 
Newhaven.
Besides the rivers of South Britain already mentioned, which fall into the German Ocean, there are some ollrers that 
ought not to be passed over; such as the Tweed, which, rising on the borders of Clydesdale, and running through Twee- 
dale, divides the shire of Mers from Tiviotdale aud Northumberland ; and having received several streams in its course, 
falls at length iuto the sea, a little below Berwick.
The Tees rises on the confines of the county of Cumberland, and, running eastward, separates the county or bishopriek 
of Durham from Yorkshire, falling into the ocean six miles below Stockton, called from thence Stockton-upou-Tees.
The Stour rises on the west side of Suffolk, on the borders of Cambridgeshire ; aud, running eastward, so as to divide 
Suffolk from Essex; passing by Sudbury and Neyland, and having received the Burton in its passage, it rolls into the 
German Ocean.
The Gipping rises almost in the centre of Suffolk ; at Ipswich, it meets the Orwell, the name of which it then assumes • 
and, running south-east with a full stream, it meets the waters of the Stour, at Harwich, and falls likewise into the 
German Ocean.
On the west side of South Britain there are perhaps as many rivers as on the east ; yet of those there are but few that 
run a long course.
There are some, however, which afford very spacious and commodious harbours.
Solway Firth, which 
divides South from North Britain, receives iuto it several rivers, the most remarkable of which is the Eden.
This river, 
rising in Westmorland, not much beyond Appleby, falls into the sea, after a course of forty miles, about three miles 
below Carlisle.
The Lone rises also in Westmorland ; and, passing by Kirkby Lonsdale, after being swelled by many small.
streams, 
waters the town of Lancaster, which, is supposed to receive its name from thence, and falls into the Irish Sea about four 
miles below it.
The Weever springs out of Ridley Pool in Cheshire ; and, running south-east to Wrenbury, it receives two little streams 
by the way ; then, running east, it is joined by a somewhat larger rivulet from Shropshire.
After this it directs its course 
north, passes through Namptwich, and so proceeds to Norlhwich, where it receives the river Dane from Middlewich; and 
half a mile below the town, the Peever.
Iu its passage thence, it receives three rivulets out of Delamere forest; and, 
having run in the whole about thirty-three miles, it discharges itself into the great river Mersey, at Weston.
The last mentioned river rises at a place called the Wood-head, amongst the Peak hills, keeping a south-west course, 
and dividing Derbyshire from Cheshire ; then entering the last mentioned county, it admits the Tame, and thenceforward 
divides Cheshire from Lancashire.
At Flixton, it is augmented by the Irwell, from Manchester ; and, in its passage to 
Warrington, where there is a bridge over it, by several smaller streams ; thence proceeding to Weston, its waters, joining 
those of the Weever, become above a mile broad; and, continuing its majestic course, it receives the Gowy ; after this 
accession, through the elosiog of a rocky coast, it is somewhat straitened in its passage, and at length falls into the sea 
a little below Liverpool.
The Dee rises in Merionethshire, in North Wales, and runs at first north-east into Denbighshire; tfience directing its 
course more to the east, it passes through Flintshire; having touched the edge of Shropshire, it turns to the north; and, 
dividing Flintshire from Cheshire, after a course of between fifty and sixty miles, falls into St. George's Channel, sixteen 
miles below the city of Chester.
This river, at its mouth, is sixteen miles broad, and would afford Chester a noble port, 
if it were not for the bar at the entrance, which renders it difficult.
The Severn, which our ancestors, the Britons, called Havren, and the Romans, Sabrina, rises out of a large bog, on the 
top of a high mountain in Montgomeryshire, called Plinlimmon, or Plynllymon ; whence running south-east, it receives 
two small rivulets; and then, turning directly north, passes through Llauidios, where, receiving the waters of five other 
streams, aud running north-east to Newtown, it continues its course more to the northward, till it enters Shropshire, and 
being joined by several brooks by the way, at last reaches Welsh Pool ; having, in the space of twenty miles, become, 
from a slender silver stream, a very deep and copious river, and is uavigable from thence to its mouth.
From Welsh PooL 
b 
vi INTRODUCTION.
the Severn runs north; and then, turning to Ibe east, after washing the town of Shrewsbury, runs south-east to Bridge- 
north ; and thence, declining still more to the south, enters Worcestershire, and proceeds to Bewdly.
The Severn, swelled 
with concurring streams, entirely traverses that county, and having watered, amongst other places, Worcester and Upton, 
il passes forward to Gloucestershire, and so rolls on to Tewksbury ; whence, having visited Gloucester, it travels forwards ; 
an J meeting still with fresh accession of waters, becomes of such a size, as to be styled the Severn Sea, pouring its tide, 
after a progress of more than one hundred and thirty miles, into the Bristol Channel.
Within these few years, a communication has been opened between this river and the Thames, the Trent, the Dee, the 
Mersey, and other rivers, by means of canals.
One of the most remarkable rivers that fall into the sea, on the west side, and on the south front of the island, is the 
Taw, 'vhich rises about the middle of the county of Devon, and, running a north-west course of upwards of twenty miles, 
and receiving by the way several auxiliary streams, passes by Barnstaple.
The Towridge rises within a mile of the Taw, runs the same course, turning only a little more to the west, and so reaches 
Biddeford; and about two miles from thence joins its waters with those of the Taw, with which it forms what is called 
Barnstaple Bay.
In Cornwall, the river Camel, so called in the ancient language of the country from its winding course, (in Latin Com- 
blana, whence the modern name of Alan) rises in the north-east part of the county, within three miles of the sea, into 
which it falls ; and, running in a manner directly south, for the space of twelve miles, then turns north-west, and, after 
a course of somewhat more than twenty miles, falls into the sea two miles below Padstow.
The Ex — the Isk of the Britons, the Ixa of the Romans, and the Exe of the Saxons — rises in Exmoor, in Somerset- 
shire, within three miles of the Severn Sea; and, pursuing its course into Devonshire, passes by Tiverton, receives in its 
progress seven fair and pleasant streams (amongst which are the Creden from Crediton, vulgarly Kirton,) and the Columb 
from Columhton and Bradnich, and reaches the large and opulent city of Exeter.
The little river, Wey, rises between the Froom and the Piddle, at Uphill, in Dorsetshire; and, after a short course of 
about four miles, it falls into the sea, between Weymouth and Melcomb Regis.
The Alaun, called also the Avon, and the Stour, rises near Wincanton, in Somersetshire, and runs into the English 
Channel, at Christchurch, in Hampshire.
We have several other rivers bearing the name of Avon : one, that passes by Bath and Bristol, and runs into the Severn, 
at Kingroad ; another, that rises in Northamptonshire, passes through Staffordshire and Worcestershire, and joins the 
Severn, at Tewkesbury, in Gloucestershire; and a third, in Wales, that runs into the Bristol Channel.
The Tise, or Anton, rises in the north of Hampshire, near Church Okeley, and running first west, then south, nearly 
thirty niiles, falls into what is usually called Southampton Water, °n the west; as the river Aire, or, as it is commonly 
called, Itching, having run twenty miles, and watered Winchester, does on the east of Southampton.
The Lavant is a pleasant stream, which almost surrounds the city of Chichester, in Sussex, anciently the capital of the 
South Saxon kingdom, and falls into the sea at Dell Kay, about four miles below it.
The Arun rises in the west part of Sussex, on the confines of Hampshire, runs directly east to Pulboro, whence it is 
now navigable; and there, turning directly south, falls into the sea a little below Arundel.
The Rother rises in the northern part of Sussex ; and running first east, till, by dividing its stream, it encompasses the 
Isle of Oxney, then turning south, it falls into a bay of the sea near Rye, once a fine harbour, and still a member of one 
©f the Cinque Ports.
In addition to the rivers of the name of Stour, already noticed, there is one in Kent, which runs into the sea at Sand- 
wich.
The last river of importance, that we have to notice, is the Medway, which is supposed to derive its name from the 
British words, Mad Hog iiisc ; meaning a beautiful body of water.
It runs through the heart of Kent, and is indeed one 
of the finest streams in the island.
It is generally said to have four heads; the first at Crowhurst in Surrey ; the second 
from two springs, one at Fant, the other at Steward's Mead, in Sussex; the third at Goldwell, in great Chart; and the 
fourth at Biggenheath, in Lenham, both in Kent.
This last joins the body of the river in Maidstone, up to which town 
the tide flows, and the river is navigable thither for barges, and other vessels, of the burden of upwards of fifty tons.
There are some little rivers, of minor note, which will be mentioned in subsequent parts of the work.
The New River is merely a fine artificial stream, which, at a vast expense, has been brought from Hertfordshire, to 
supply the metropolis with water.
The history of this beneficial undertaking will also be duly noticed hereafter.
Of the rivers of England, in general, it may be observed, that those of the southern and middle parts present a striking 
contrast to those of the north.
The former pursue a sluggish course over mud, between level banks, through extensive 
meadows ; while the latter roll their pellucid torrents over beds of gravel, between elevated banks and rocky precipices.
The cutting of canals has, for several years past, been going forward to an almost incredible extent; and, as it has, in 
INTRODUCTION.
vii 
many places, materially altered the face of the country, it requires, in a performance of this nature, considerable atten- 
tion.
These stupendous efforts of labour will, however, fall more completely under our observation, as we proceed, than in 
the present succinct description.
CHAPTER II.
Climate of England.
— Face of the Country.
— Mountains.
— Forests.
— Paries.
— Brine Springs.
— Mineral Springs.
— Cold Baths.
— Hot Baths.
— Lakes.
— Soil.
— Tin Mines.
— Copper.
— Lead.
— Iron.
— Calamine.
— Gold and 
Silver.
— Bismuth.
— Cobalt.
— Menachonite.
— Black Lead.
— Coal.
— Rock Salt.
— Stone.
— Natural Curiosities.
Vegetables.
— Beasts.
— Birds.
— Fishes — Insects.
The climate of England, notwithstanding the frequent and sudden changes of the weather, is temperate and salubrious.
The rigour of winter, and the parching heats of summer, are felt here in a much slighter degree than in parallel climates 
on the continent; the breezes of the sea tempering the severities of the opposite seasons.
The sea ports of Holland and 
Germany are almost every winter locked up by frost; hut those of England are never known to suffer that inconvenience.
— The western shores of the kingdom are much more exposed to rain than the eastern, from the heavy clouds of the Atlan- 
tic, which are intercepted by the hills in their passage across the island; but, on the other hand, the eastern parts are 
more frequently involved in fogs.
High winds are not uncommon ; yet they are seldom of such violence as to produce any serious calamity.
* The same 
observation may be extended to hail storms, so destructive in France, to lightning, thunder, f and earthquakes.
From the 
last, as well as from pestilential diseases, we are almost wholly exempted.
The uncertainty of our seasons has been proverbial, for ages; yet there seems to be much justice in the remark of 
King Charles II.
whose opinion, after he had resided in Holland, Flanders, Germany, France, and Spain, ought to 
possess some weight.
" After all the complaints," said he, " against the inclemency and uncertainty of our weather, it 
may be with truth affirmed, that there is no country in Europe where a man can be out of doors with pleasure so many 
Lours in a day, or so many days in a year, as in this." j 
It has been asserted, even by men of observation and of science, that, within the last thirty or forty years, a material 
alteration has taken place in the temperature of our island.
They contend, that the summers are more wet, and conse- 
quently colder ; and that the winters are more humid, milder, and less frosty than formerly.
Mr. Williams, a late writer 
upon this subject, attributes the pretended change to the increased evaporating surface of the country, occasioned by the 
enclosing of the open fields and wastes; to the multifarious intersections of them by fences, especially with hawthorn ; and 
to the increased luxuriance of our crops, by a general system of improvement in the agriculture of the country.
" To 
these," he continues, " I may with propriety add the late increase of pasturage, productive of a serious disproportion 
between that and tillage ; to the numerous plantations, more especially of foreign trees, and such whose exhaling power is 
prodigiously great ; and the immense bodies of nearly stagnated water in the numerous canals that have been cut within the 
assigned period." 
* The most dreadful storm recorded in British history, is that which took place on the 26th of November, 1703, and which 
was emphatically denominated (he great storm.
It arose in the west-south-west, about eleven o'clock at night, attended by dread- 
ful Hashes of lightning and peals of thunder, and continued with unabating fury till about seven the next morning.
In this storm, 
thirteen sail of men of war were lost, and 1519 seamen were drowned ; amongst whom was Rear-Admiral Beaumont, who was at 
anchor in the Downs, where his ship foundered.
The mischief which was done in London alone was computed at not less than 
1,000,000/.
; and the city of Bristol suffered to the extent of upwards of 150,000/.
A public fast was observed with gYeat solemnity ; 
and an order in council appeared in the Gazette, for the payment of the bounties, and advanced wages, to the families of such 
officers and seamen as had perished in the storm in the same manner as if they had been killed in battle.
f Occasional instances, however, are upon record, in which very melancholy effects have been produced by the electric fluid.
One of the most remarkable is that which occurred on a Sunday, during the time of divine service, at Church-Lav. ton, in 
Cheshire, in June, 1652.
— The sermon had just commenced, when an explosion took place, which was more particularly heard in 
the bell-house ; and, in that part of the church, eleven men and boys were struck dead upon the spot.
Several others were hurt, 
but not materially.
— In this case, the lightning had evidently been attracted by the bells.— Mercurius Politicus.
The summer of 1806 was also remarkable for an unusual number of fatal accidents, by lightning.
% It is estimated that, upon an average, in London, there are about 209 days in the year without rain, and 156 in which it rains 
or snows: about 12 is the average of days in which it snows or sleets ; and the number of cloudy clays, when the sun scarcely ever 
appears, is about 50 or 60 out of the 209.
viii INTRODUCTION.
Much specious argument, for a change of climate, might indeed be drawn from old books of horticulture, where seeds 
&c.
are directed to be planted at seasons in which we know that they would now perish; and where fruits are said to ripen 
at seasons, in which we know that they are now never ripe.
But this argument will not stand the test of examination • 
for it should be recollected, that, before the change of style, at the period when the authors of the works alluded to pro- 
mulgated their remarks, more than a third part of what is now called June, belonged to May, and so on throughout the 
year; and, therefore, when we are told, that may-duke cherries, and strawberries, are ripe in May, we should do well to 
remember, that May then extended into the middle of the second week in June.
If the reality of the alteration, for which Mr. Williams contends, were established, some of the assigned reasons for that 
alteration would appear to possess a considerable degree of plausibility; but that is not the case.
That a threat increase or 
decrease, of the woods of any country, must have a considerable influence on the climate, is obvious to every person who 
has at all investigated the subject; but that this cause must operate differently from what is asserted, is equally obvious to 
every man of common observation.
It is true that many wastes and common fields have been enclosed ; but it is a funda- 
mental canon of modern enclosers, to have their fields, like their farms, large, the hedges kept short, and no trees in them.
The devastation of our ancient woods, however, within the last thirty, or even within the last forty or fifty years, has not 
been such as to produce any material change in the climate; nor can the modern plantations, if they contain double the 
the number of trees destroyed, have yet gained a sufficient size to be either very noxious or very salubrious.
— As to out- 
springs being more humid than formerly, on account of the increase of pasturage (which loads the earth with grass early in 
the year) and the consequent decrease of arable land, the cause is not adequate to the supposed effect ; for <*rass never 
acquires sufficient thickness to shade the ground completely before a field of wheat would be clothed with a much greater 
profusion of vegetable substance.
With respect to the humidity of the atmosphere having b3en increased by the numerous canals which have been cut of 
late years, the supposition seems to be scarcely deserving of notice.
The distance at which they are mostlv placed from 
each other, when compared with the whole surface of the country, must render their effects upon the atmosphere extremely 
trivial indeed.
But reasoning, however plausible, is of no avail, when opposed by the stubbornness of fact.
If it were possible to offer 
any thing like an average of the weather in this uncertain climate, as well from recollection of our own times as from the 
melereological adages of our aucestors, it might be said, that mild winters are more frequent than hard ones, by the pro- 
portion of something more than two to one; that cold and wet summers are more frequent than hot and dry ones; that 
dry easterly winds generally blow early in the spring, and are reckoned inimical to animals, and friendly to subsequent 
vegetation; and that much rain frequently falls towards the middle of July.
This appears to have been the general opinion 
of the weather in the times of our ancestors, and seems perfectly warranted by modern experience.
That our winters are 
often mild, and our summers cold, is the case now, and was undoubtedly the case centuries ago.
However, Mr. Williams's 
theory requires no further confutation, than a recurrence to the long, hot, and dry summers of 1808, 1811, and 1819; to 
the long and severe winter of 1813; and to the extraordinary cold experienced in the month of January, 1820.
The winter 
of 1806 was eminently distinguished for its uncommon mildness.
It would be impossible to record all the instances which 
might be adduced of its extraordinary temperature, but the following will serve as a sufficient record of the fact : on the 
1st of January, 1807, a fine dish of broad-beans was produced from a garden at Osleworth, in Gloucestershire, for the enter- 
tainment of a party assembled to celebrate the commencement of the year.
At Alcombe, near Minehead, in Somerset- 
shire, strawberries of the Alpine sort, in high perfection, were gathered on Christmas-day.
In the same garden were 
then in full flower and beauty, roses and geraniums in the open ground, and myrtles in all the luxuriance of summer; 
single anemones, hepaticas, ten-week stocks, wall-flowers, and many other plants, were flowering as in April, as was also 
the double catch-fly which blows in June.
In a village near Leicester, and at Lide in Wiltshire, apple-trees were seen in 
full bloom in December, and the same month a gentleman at Lichfield produced on his table green peas raised on the open 
ground.
Cauliflowers were also cut in gardens near that town in as high perfection as in summer.
In the same month a 
gooseberry-tree at Hereford, and a plum-tree at Shoreham, were covered with abundance of fruit.
On Christmas day, Mr.
Relhan, botanist of Cambridge, counted forty-nine species of indigenous plants in flower.
Among the animal evidences 
of the mildness of the season, it may be mentioned that near Reading, a robin's nest, with two e»gs, was found in Decem- 
ber, and in January, a rookery at Chaldon, near Bere Regis, in Somersetshire, contained a nest of young rooks, nearly 
fledged.
— All this, however, was surpassed in the winter of 1818.
On the 14th of July, 1808, at Hayes, in Middlesex, 
Fahrenheit's thermometer stood at 92 £°; in Kent, at 98°; in various parts of London, at nearly 100°; and, exposed to the 
sun, at its greatest heat, 147°.
For the preceding thirty years, the heat of that day had not been equalled, by 10°.
The length, dryness, and beauty of the summers of 1811 and 1819, will ever be memorable; and, in each of the sum- 
mers of 1818 and 1819, a few remarkably hot days occurred.
In the autumn of IS19, there were numerous instances of 
second, and even of third crops, on fruit-trees of almost all descriptions.
— On the coldestday, in December, 1796, the mer- 
INTRODUCTION.
i* 
cury, in Fahrenheit's thermometer, fell to 4°, or 28° be/ow the freezing- point; but, on the morning of tlie I5lh of January, 
it fell, in many parts of the island, to 6° and even 8° below zero ; that is, 38° and 40° below the freezing point.
It had 
not been so low before, since the years 1786 and 1789,* 
Situated as England is, in the northern part of tbe temperate zone, it cannot be expected to enjoy such a portion of the 
cheering influence of the sun, as is necessary to mature the rich productions of more southern climes.
— We shall dismiss 
this subject, however, with remarking, that, in general, spring cannot be said to commence before April, which is, mostly 
a mild month ; but May is often accompanied by a sharp easterly wind which threatens destruction to the early promise of 
the year.
The four succeeding months constitute the summer of our island.
Frosty nights, indeed, are not uncommon in 
September, and, in October, domestic fires become indispensable.
There is seldom any severe weather before Christmas, 
and the month of January is generally the coldest portion of the year.
It is generally admitted, that the face of the country, in England, affords every beautiful variety that can be found in the 
most extensive tracts of the globe.
Here, the eye is gratified by verdant plains extending as far as the sight can reach, 
watered by copious streams, and covered with innumerable herds of cattle.
There, the pleasing alternations of gently rising 
hills and bending vales, fertile in corn, waving with wood, and interspersed with meadows, present the most delightful 
landscapes of rural opulence and beauty, that the imagination can conceive.
Whilst some tracts abound with prospects of 
lofty mountains, craggy rocks, deep narrow dells, and tumbling torrents, of the most romantic description, others present 
the gloomy features of black barren moors, and wild uncultivated heaths.
The middle and southern parts of the island are generally the richest ; towards the north, the land is rather sterile ; and, 
on the eastern coasts, many parts are sandy and marshy.
To the west, the whole country of Wales is a mountainous tract, 
but interspersed with vales of great fertility.
England, though it abounds with pleasing eminences, contains few that can aspire to the appellation of mountains.
In 
the north the Cheviot hills form the boundary between Northumberland and Scotland.
A range of> rude and lofty bills, 
sometimes rising into mountains, extends from the borders of Cumberland, running perpendicularly from north to south 
through the centre of the island, and forming a natural division between the eastern and western sides of the kingdom.
Cumberland and Westmorland present many detached mountains, such as Skiddaw and others, which cannot be reduced to 
any distinct arrangement; but those of the West Riding of Yorkshire, as Wham-side, Ingleborough, and Penni-gent and 
Pendle on the eastern boundary of Lancashire, belong to the central chain which proceeds southward through the county 
of Derby, and, with some small interruptions, nearly to the south coast of the island.
Another rauge, nearly parallel to the former, commences in the North Riding of Yorkshire, near the mouth of the Tees, 
where it receives the denomination of the Wolds, and running southward to the Humber again makes its appearance on the 
other side of that river, extending throughout the counties of Lincoln, Leicester, and Warwick, and terminating in Oxfordshire.
A third chain begins on the north coast of Norfolk, and is continued, in the Gog-magog and Chiltern hills, through the 
counties of Cambridge, Hertford, and Buckingham, to Henley, in Oxfordshire.
The southern part of the island is inter- 
sected with numerous irregular ridges, which, after forming the hills of Kent, Surrey, and Hampshire, extend to the torrs 
and wilds of Dartmoor in Devonshire, and the rugged uplands of Cornwall; and, having passed this last rocky province, 
expire in the islands of Scilly.
Water abounds in mountains, especially in the northern provinces.
In the north, Snowdon, a mountain of eminent height 
and fame, commands the first attention ; its summit presenting a view over the counties of Chester and York, of part of 
Scotland aud Ireland, and of the islands of Man and Anglesea.
From Snowdon, a line of mountains extends by the sea to 
Plinlimmon, a boundary of North Wales, whence issue the noble rivers Severn and Wye. Of these hills, Urrou Seth, Cader 
Idris, and Mojle Vadiau, are the most remarkable.
In the eastern part of North Wales the hills are far from attaining 
such considerable elevation, and gradually decline to the hills of Shropshire, of which the Wrekin is one of the most noted.
A chain of inferior height proceeds due south nearly to Cardiff in South Wales ; aud a small branch diverging to the west 
consists of Cwn Cothy, Mynydd, Carreg, Brisley, and Cwm Kerrun hills.
In the southern and eastern mountains and hills, chalk forms a principal material, while it is unknown in those of the 
north aud west.
Mr. Pennant observes, that a line drawn from Dorchester in the county of Dorset, to Norfolk, would form 
the boundary of the vast stratum of chalk which intersects the kingdom; none being formed in any quantity to the uorth 
or west of the line.
The northern mountains principally consist of limestone, freestone, and slates, with mines of lead or 
coal; those of Derbyshire are composed of vast masses of limestone, intersected by thick strata of toadstone, and numerous 
fossils and minerals.
The summit of Skiddaw presents white shivery slate, or argillaceous schistus; but some of the West- 
* 
At 45° below the freezing point mercury freezes.
On the28lh of December, 1819, at St. Petersburgh, the mercury was down 
to 67£° below the freezing point; a temperature 165*° below blood heat, and 2795" helow that of boiling water.
c 
x INTRODUCTION.
morland mountains contain siliceous schistus, and it is not improbable, that granite exists in the Cheviot bills.
The vast 
base of Ingleborougb, nearly thirty miles in circumference, consists of limestone; on the east side it is full of shells almost 
to the summit, which is of grit, and sandstone flag.
The fossils it yields are black and brown marble, tripoli, or rotten- 
stone, and some lead ore.
Such is the remainder of this chain to its termination ; while farther to the south the elevations 
are wholly calcareous, as the Mendip hills in Somersetshire.
At Dartmoor, in Devonshire, commences the granite, which 
continues through Cornwall, where it is found of various colours ; the grey -granite, or moor-stone, the red, or oriental, 
the white, the yellow, and the blueish, or pigeon coloured.
Near the Lizard are rocks of serpentine and stealite, and here 
also the petunsi, or china-stone, used in making fine porcelain, is seen in the form of a decomposed granite.
From the 
similarity between the substances of the Welsh mountains and those of Wicklow in Ireland, M.
Coquebert, a French tra- 
veller, infers a primitive junction of the two islands.
These mountains abound in various granites, with large masses of 
quartz and serpentine.
While the chalk is succeeded by lime-stone on the eastern shores of the island, granite and other 
primitive rocks are found on the opposite coast of Wales.
The Wrekin is principally composed of reddish chert or petro- 
silex, with siliceous sandstone, basalt, and a species of granite.
The great coal district of Colebrook-dale, rests on 
indurated clay, while that of Kingswood, near Bristol, is accompanied by black freestone, and even the calcareous free- 
stone, near Bath, is intermixed with numerous veins of coal.
Lastly the Malvern hills, on the south west of Worcester- 
shire, afford many specimens of granite rocks, with chert and bornblend slate.
Although the word forest conveys the idea of a region covered with thick and lofty woods, yet in Englaud, the tracts to 
which this appellation is given, are sometimes bare of trees, or perhaps present only a few withered oaks : nay the term is 
even applied to upland downs and heaths.
As early as the time of the Anglo-Saxons many of the forests were considered 
as royal demesnes.
The Norman monarchs were so much addicted to the chace, that, at one time, more than sixty forests 
belonged to the crown.
Of these the principal that yet remain are, the forests of Dean and Sherwood in the county of 
Gloucester and Nottingham; Windsor in Berkshire; and the New Forest in Hampshire.
Other districts still retain the 
name, as Dartmoor forest, in Devonshire; Enfield chase, in Middlesex; Witham, Epping, and Hainault forests in Essex; 
Lacy, Wittleborough, and Rockingham forests in Northamptonshire ; Peak forest in Derbyshire ; Malvern chase and Wyne 
forest in Worcestershire ; Cannock chase and Needwood forest in Staffordshire ; the forests of Mogg, Clun, Hays, and 
Mocktree, in Shropshire ; of Macclesfield, in Cheshire; Netherdale forest, and Langston chase, in the West Riding, and 
the forest of Galtres, Arkengarth, Stainmore, and Leyne in the North Riding of Yorkshire; of Teesdale and Weredale in 
Durham; of Rosendale in Lancashire; of Sleddell and Martindale in Westmorland; and of Gellsdale and Inglewood in 
Cumberland.
We have every reason to believe that in the remote periods of antiquity the greatest portion of our island was covered by 
extensive woods.
These, as the inhabitants increased in number and advanced in civilization, were gradually destroyed 
to make way for productions more essential to the support of human life.
The timber trees of which our woods are com- 
posed, and which are either aboriginal, or have been long naturalized to our soil, are the oak, the chesnut, and the beach ; 
the birch, the alder, the hornbeam, the abele, the black-poplar, and the aspen ; the sycamore, the maple, and the ash; the 
lime, the elm, and wych hasle.
Between the timber trees and shrubs, the hasle and the numerous species of the willow hold 
a middle station.
The pulpy fruit-bearing shrubs are the currant and gooseberry, the elder, the barberry, the cornel or dog-wood, the buck- 
thorn, the guelder-rose, the mealy tree, and the mezereon.
The fruit of the four first is wholesome and agreeable to the 
palate; but that of the rest is either noxious or insipid.
Four kinds of heath form the most splendid ornaments of our bogs 
and moors.
Among our native evergreens, the box, the pine, the yew, and the holly, are the most valuable ; those of inferior import- 
ance are the juniper, the ivy, the cranberry, and those extremely ornamental plants the red-whortle and bear-berry.
From Domesday-book, and other ancient records, we find that parks were in use amongst our Saxon ancestors, who bred 
and preserved in them such foreign animals as were remarkable for their utility or beauty.
Many of these valuable appen- 
dages of wealth and family honours still remain.
No country abounds more in springs of various kinds, many of which are of an exceedingly curious nature, than Eng- 
land.
— In several counties, there are brine or salt springs ; and it is conjectured that, were due search to be made, many 
others might be discovered in different parts of the kingdom.
These springs, in all probability, acquire their property by 
passing through extensive beds of fossil salt, beneath the surface of the earth.
The virtues of our medicinal springs, or mineral waters, have been well established, by the repeated examinations of the 
most skilful physicians, and by long experience, the infallible test of truth.
The frequency of these salubrious springs 
may with propriety be attributed to the lixivious quality of our rain water, to the variety of rich soiis, with the spoils of 
which, from their decomposing power, they must be fraught, and to the admirable chemistry of nature, by which they art 
ijo happily impregnated, as to become the surest remedies for some of our most dreadful diseases.
INTRODUCTION.
*i 
To cnumerale all our springs, of inferior consequence, would be nearly impossible.
A brief notice of the most important 
must here suffice.
The waters of Bath still retain the celebrity which they possessed in the time of the Romans.
Next to 
that place of fashionable resort may be mentioned the Hot Wells of Bristol, those of Tunbridge in Kent, and of Buxton, 
Harrowgate, aud Scarborough in the counties of Derby and York.
The waters of Cheltenham, in Gloucestershire, and 
those of Leamington, in Warwickshire, have, of late years, risen into great repute, and are esteemed particularly beneficial 
in scorbutic cases.
Chalybeate wells occur, at least, in every county, and new waters are continually starling into notice.
With baths, which result from rivers, and from springs, England is also very copiously supplied.
Cold bathing, or im- 
mersion in cold water, has long been known to be the best preservative against the sense of cold; a circumstance which 
renders it extremely probable, that it was practised by the naked Britons, as a defence against the rigour of the climate.
This opinion is strengthened by the knowledge, that the remotest northern nations, to the present day, continue its use.
Without going so far back, however, it may be remarked, that the salubrious and medicinal effects of bathing were well 
known to the Romans.
The Emperor Alexander Severus, who lived to an old age, used the cold bath frequently, or rather 
constantly; and, as he resided long in this island, his example might recommend it to the Britons, who, by that time had 
acquired a considerable polish, and affected the Roman manners.
Cold bathing was also common in the days of the Saxons, 
who most likely had been accustomed to it in their own country.
Soon afterwards, religion began to participate in the 
practice; and those places in which the first preachers of Christianity to the Saxons, who, in the next ages, were all 
canonized, had generally baptized their converts, were supposed to have a certain degree of sanctity, and were from thence 
styled holy wells.
Of these there are many yet in existence, not only in England, but in Scotland, and in Ireland.
The 
monks, a class of men which has ever been found ready to take advantage of the credulity of the people, in their fictitious 
legends, next attributed miraculous properties to certain springs, in some of which perhaps they had distinguished medicinal 
virtues.
Indeed, the natural qualities of many of our springs were extremely favourable to the imposture of the monks, 
as it is now known, that nitrous purging waters, and smooth oily bituminous waters, eficct surprising cures by bathing.
Alabaster waters, marl waters, and such as run through chalk and limestone, heal ulcers, and are otherwise highly 
salutary ; and the miners of Cornwall are well aware, that the water which runs from mundick ore lias a great effect in 
curing fresh wounds and cuts.
Hot baths are not altogether so numerous in England, as they are in some countries upon the continent; but they vary 
much in their natures, and have, all of them, very salutary effects, in the mitigation or removal of many obstinate 
maladies.
The lakes of England are but few and insignificant.
The principal of them are situated in the north western counties of 
Cumberland, Westmorland, and Lancashire.
Of these Winander or Winder-mere, which lies between the two last men- 
tioned counties, is the largest and most celebrated.
It is about ten miles in length, and half as much in width, and contains 
five islands, which, being covered with turf or trees, add greatly to the beauty of its appearance.
A little to the north- 
west of Derwent water, is Bassenthwaite, a long narrow lake, at the extremity of which is the remarkable fall of Lowdore.
Ulleswater, next in magnitude to Winder-mere, is nearly equally divided between the two counties of Cumberland and 
Westmorland ; and, not far from it, in the latter, is the inferior lake of Broadwater.
In Huntingdonshire there are several 
lakes and standing waters, the principal of which are Whittlesea-mere, and Ramsey-mere.
The only lake in Wales that is 
entitled to particular notice is that of Bala or Pemble-mere, in the county of Merioneth.
It is generally agreed, that the waters of lakes are less wholesome than those of springs, or of rivers; but this opinion 
holds good only with respect to such as do not receive or discharge rivers, of which we have but few.
Admitting the alleged 
inconvenience, however, lakes are not without their utility.
The vapours which arise from them being warm, serve, par- 
ticularly in northern countries, to temper the rigour of the winter season.
They also abound with fish, and frequently with 
such as are not to be found in other places.
It is probable, that any kind of fish which might be found in foreign lakes, 
would thrive in ours, could they be transported hither.
The soil of this country is rich, and excellent; consisting of vegetable mould, black, grey, brown, and red; of loam 
and sand, of several kinds; and of clay, of which there are at least between twenty and thirty different sorts : amongst 
these are, brick-clay, tile-clay, potters'-clay, tobacco-pipe-clay, clay for making crucibles and glass-house pots, &c.
In mineral aud fossil productions, England is particularly prolific.
While the surface of her vales and plains is richly 
covered by the bounteous hand of nature, the bosom of her hills teems with objects which either add to our comforts or 
administer to our necessities.
The tin-mines of Cornwall are not only venerable from their antiquity, but are supposed to be the richest in the world.
— 
Tin first gave celebrity, and, as some of the learned contend, its appellation, to this island.
The Scilly Isles, Devonshire, 
and Cornwall, were formerly all famous for its production; but it is now chiefly confined to Cornwall.
Tin-mines are 
generally formed on the sides of hills, though veins sometimes pass through vallics or brooks, between two hills, from 
one to the other.
Tin is Axiiid iu Sasony, and in Sweden, and Bohemia, hut only in small quantities, and much inferior 
xii INTRODUCTION.
in quality to ours ; a circumstance which occasions a constant and considerable exportation of the metal, both ia a 
wrought and unwrought state.
Copper also is found in Cornwall, and in Yorkshire, and Staffordshire; but no where in such abundance as in the island 
of Auglesea.
Our copper mines, though known long before, have not been wrought much above two hundred and fifty 
years.
The metal is sometimes found pure, or nearly so, and in such large pieces, as to render it necessary to break them 
in the mine before they can be conveniently raised.
The mines are wrought to a very great depth, sometimes to more 
than a hundred fathoms, often through very hard rocks, and consequently with much labour and expense.
The veins, 
or lodes, are much wider, thicker, and richer, than those of either tin or iron : on the first opening of a mine iu Cornwall, in 
the year 1757, it threw up, as the miners term it, as much copper in a fortnight as sold for 5700/.
; and iu the next three 
weeks and two days, as much more as came to 9600/.
This, however, was a very extraordinary case.
Lead is a metal for which this island was always famous.
It is found in the Mendip hills in Somersetshire, which also 
yield calamine, and manganese.* In the lead mines of Derbyshire, the metal is accompanied by veins of beautiful fluor } 
which is manufactured into various kinds of ornamental articles.
At Aldston, on the eastern border of Cumberland, are 
considerable lead mines; and in general the northern portion of the central chain of mountains abounds in lead-ore.
Some of our lead mines are supposed to have been wrought by the ancient Britons; and, that they were by the Romans, 
is certain ; Piiny having assured us, that, whilst it was obtained with much difficulty and labour in France and Spain, Hie 
produce was so great in Britain, as to render it necessary to fix the quantity that should be raised.
The Saxons followed 
the example of the Romans ; and, iu all ages, our lead mines have been amongst the acknowledged sources of our national 
wealth.
— Mines of lead are generally found on the declivity of hills: they are wrought from ten to seventy fathoms deep; 
great labour and expense attending the cutting.
No metal has so many various uses and is so widely diffused through tlie globe as iron.
England contains rich and nu- 
merous mines of iron, and from the abundance of fuel and the ingenuity of her inhabitants, excels all other nations in its 
fabrication.
The most remarkable iron-mines are at Colebrook-dale in Shropshire, Dean Forest in Gloucestershire, with 
some in the north of England, particularly in the West-riding of Yorkshire, and near Ulverston, in the county of Lancaster.
It is probable that the Romans were the first who wrought our iron mines; many of their medals having been found in 
the adjacent heaps of glass and cinders, which are the only monuments remaining of their industry in this respect.
Of gold and silver, we have not any mines at the present day that may be properly so termed.
Some pieces of pure 
silver, however, are occasionally found in our copper, lead, and tin mines; and the tinners in Cornwall sometimes pick up 
considerable quantities of gold, in very small grains, in their works.
Gold lias also been found iu several other parts of 
the island.
Bismuth, which is exceedingly useful in the amalgamation of all metals, with mercury, and for various other purposes, 
is found in several parts, and in considerable quantities, in most of the mine counties of England.
We have also a portion of cobalt, from which arsenic is produced, and for which the finest blues for enamelling, are ob- 
tained ; and, recently, the substance which is denominated menachanite.
Plumbago, or hlack-lead, is plentifully found in the ridge of Borrodale, in Cumberland.
But the most beneficial of all the mineral productions of Britain is indisputalbly coal — not inaptly denominated black 
diamonds, An ingenious French traveller, Faujas de St. Fond, who a few years since visited this country, has not hesitated 
to ascribe all the opulence and prosperity of England to her coal, as being the very soul of manufactures and consequent 
commerce.
The principal mines are found in the western, central, and northern parts, but especially in the latter, about 
Newcastle.
The cannel-coal of Lancashire is so beautiful that by some it is suspected to be the gagates, or jet, which the 
ancients ascribed to Britain, f 
* Calamine, Lapis Calaminaris, or Cadmia Fossilis, is a substance from which, when prepared with copper, we obtain the 
finest brass.
Other countries possess this mineral in as great abundance, but our calamine is richer, and of a superior quality to any 
that comes from abroad.
f Coals, though employed in several manufactures for hundreds of years, were not brought into common use till the reign of 
Charles I., and were then sold in London for about seventeen shillings a chaldron.
Some years after the Restoration, as we learn 
from the writings of Mr. Evelyn, Sir P.
Pet, Dr. Chamberlayne, and others, there were burned in the metropolis about 200,000 chal- 
drons; in the year 1670, about 270,000; at the Revolution, upwards of 300,000 ; and, at present, full 700,000.-»-Itis calculated that the 
sum expended in materials for boring and sinking for coal, such as wood, iron, ropes, Sec. independently of the money paid for 
exclusive privileges of working, amounts, in some collieries, to upwards of 30,000/.
per annum.
It has also been calculated, that 
64,724 persons are employed by the coal trade on the rivers Tyne and Wear.
The capital employed in the same trade is estimated 
as follows :-In the collieries, 1,Q30,0P0/.— In shipping, 1,400,000/.- Supplied by London coal merchants 700,000/.
INTRODUCTION.
xiii 
In the enumeration of Hip mineral riches of England, the rock-salt, obtained from the immense mines of Noithwich in 
Cheshire, must not he omitted.
Salt springs, which also afford large quantities of that useful article, occur in various dis- 
tricts of our island, at Namptwich and Middlewich, in Cheshire ; at Droitwich, in Worcestershire ; and at Weston in Staf- 
fordshire.
Marble and freestone, or calcareous sand-stone of various colours and textures, supply, in many places, an elegant or 
useful material for building.
The most celebrated quarries of the latter are those of Portland and Purbeek.
Fine alabaster 
appears in Derbyshire, and fullers'.
earth, a substance highly beneficial to our cloth manufactures, is.
found in Bedfordshire 
and some other counties.
Amongst the natural curiosities of Britain, to which we now proceed, those of Derbyshire challenge the first place.
The 
wonders of the mountainous region known by the name of the Peak, have long since been celebrated by Hobbes and others ; 
aud its surprising chasms and caverns have deservedly excited the admiration of the traveller.
The cavern at Caslleton, 
now known by the more decent appellation of the Peak's Hole, is of vast extent, and exhibits singular aspects; while 
Poole's Hole, near Buxton, is celebrated for its lofty dome, and its curious stalactites.
Helen Hole, is a chasm of extra- 
ordinary depth, which has never yet been fathomed ; and Mam Tor, a hill composed of loose stones, is continually moulder- 
ing away, and has been said, though incorrectly, to suffer no perceptible diminution.
These caves are often intersected 
by subterraneous waters; to which cause mineralogists are inclined to ascribe their formation, the rock being co mposed of 
calcareous stone.
In that part of the northern rid«e of English mountains which pervades the western extremity of Yorkshire, are found 
other remarkable caverns of a similar description.
Yordas Cave, in the vale of Kingsdale, and that of Nethercot, near 
Ingleton, are distinguished by their subterraneous cascades.
The vast limestone cave of Ingleborough is perforated in all directions like a honey-comb ; and several of the rivers in 
this district, as the Greta, the Ribble, and the Aire, disappear near their origin, aud pursue their course for miles under 
ground.
Among the curiosities in this neighbourhood must not be omitted Hurtlepot, a deep circular cavity, nearly forty 
yards in diameter, almost surrounded by perpendicular rocks, and rendered gloomy by the trees which overhang its sable 
waters.
Malham Cave is a sort of amphitheatre of smooth perpendicular limestone, about two hundred and eighty feej; 
high in the centre ; and near Settle is our of the most remarkable ebbing and flowing wells in the kingdom.
In the grand 
features of nature, this district exceeds any other in the southern division of our island.
The sub-marine relics of a forest on the coast of Lincolnshire deserve a place among the most remarkable natural curio- 
sities.
At Brnsely, in Shropshire, was discovered, during the last century, a well so impregnated with bitumen or petrolem, 
that, on the application of a candle, its waters would take fire ; but on the opening of a coal-pit in its vicinity this pheno- 
menon disappeared.
A similar appearance and event occurred at Ancliff, near Wigan, in Lancashire.
But Shropshire still 
possesses a remarkable bituminous well, at a place, thence denominated Pitchford.
The Mendip hills, in Somersetshire, are not without their caverns.
Wokey Hole is not less than six hundred feet in 
length, and is remarkable for the various apartments into which it is divided.
A considerable cavern, near the little village 
of Berrington, where a number of human bodies are gradually incorporating with the limestone-rock, affords a still richer 
subject of curiosity.
Penpark Hole, a few miles from Bristol, is a horrible chasm, rendered particularly interesting by the 
melancholy fate of Mr. Newnham, who fell into its gulph while measuring its depth.
From the natural curiosities of England, we pass on to its vegetable and animal productions.
Of the former, both for importance and variety, the family of grasses demands the first consideration.
It is these which 
form the chief covering of the richest, as well as of the most barren, tracts, that are not under tillage; to them we owe the 
luxuriant verdure of our pastures, the close velvet carpeting of our downs and sheep-walks, and the more scanty clothin"- 
of our mountainous districts.
Twenty-seven genera, comprehending one hundred and ten species of grass, are natives of 
England.
All those without exception, either fresh or dried, have been found to afford a grateful food to our domestic 
cattle.
Most of them are of common occurrence in every kind of situation.
Bui some few are peculiar to the light sandy 
soils, especially of the eastern and southern coasts, and to the sidas and summits of our mountains.
Eight genera, comprising about ninety species, nearly resemble the grasses in general habit.
These are natives of moors 
and bogs, where they serve to give consistence to the deep mud, or peat, in which they are rooted.
Several of them are 
also used for malting, thatching, and various purposes of domestic economy.
The stately bull-rush is one of the principal 
ornaments of our fens and pools, and many a dreary tract of bog is enlivened by the gratefully pendant tufts of the various 
species of cotton-grass.
The leguminous, or papilionaceous plants, form a very important class of British botany.
Of these, nineteen genera are 
subdivided into sixty-four species.
Several of them, as clover and vetches, are largely cultivated as food for cattle, to 
which the herbage of this whole class is a most grateful repast.
d 
xiv INTRODUCTION.
The umbelliferous plants consist of tliirty-five genera, comprising about sixty species.
Though the roots and seeds of 
those kinds which grow on dry light soils are frequently aromatic, yet such as are natives of marshes and damp situations 
are, in general, more or less poisonous.
The most actively deleterious are the various species of hemlock.
The hooded or labia ted plants hold a conspicuous place in the English Flora.
Many of them yield a strong aromatic 
smell, and possess other active properties; as the spear-mint, pepper-mint, marjoram, common and lemon thyme, basil- 
thyme, penny-royal, and horehound.
Only one poisonous plant, the fox-glove, is found in this class, to which beloii"- 
our most esteemed pot-herbs : many of these are natives of England.
It contains not many showy plants, but two or three 
species of snap-dragon and the fox-glove, both purple and white, are eminently beautiful.
Of the liliaceous plants, which are found wild in England, botanists reckon only eleven genera and twenty-eight species, 
and most of these, as the spring and autumnal crocus, the snow-drop, the various species of the narcissus, the tulip, and 
the lilly of the valley, are rarely found in a wild state, being more familiar to us as ornaments of our gardens, than as 
natives of the woods and pastures.
The British rosaceous plants comprehend twelve genera and forty-one species, including the class Icosandria of Linnaeus.
Some of them are herbaceous, and others are deciduous trees and shrubs.
To the first division belong the meadow-sweet, 
the wood-strawberry, and the common tormentil ; in the latter are enumerated the black-thorn, the haw-thorn, the crab, 
and the mountain-ash, several species of the wild rose, and the bramble.
The cherry, the medlar, the service aud pear 
trees, whose fruit, when wild, is of little account, though rendered so valuable by cultivation, belong also to this class.
The cruciform plants compose a large natural class, the individual species of which have so many common features of 
resemblance, that it is a difficult task to ascertain their specific differences.
These vegetables are all more or less acrid in 
taste, and possess valuable properties as antiscorbutics.
Twenty-three genera and sixty-two species are natives of Britain.
Among these are some of our culinary herbs and roots, as the field-cabbage, turnip, horseradish, mustard, and water- 
cress.
Woad is worthy of notice as a dyeing drug, used by the ancient Britons for the purpose of staining their skins, and 
is still held in some estimation as a substitute for indigo.
The radiated or compound flowered plants, are one of the largest of the natural classes of English vegetables, comprising 
forty genera and one hundred and twenty species.
It is remarkable that out of so large a number of plants only one, the 
salsafy, should be applied to the sustenance of man, and not even a single one should be cultivated for the use of cattle, 
more particularly as the strongly scented lettuce is the only species possessing deleterious properties.
Of all our native 
vegetables they are the most common, thriving by neglect and multiplying under persecution.
The burdock, the different kinds of thistle, the groundsel, the dandelion, the colt's-foot, daisy and butterflower, are the 
most frequent ; and the two latter, as the harbingers of spring, are beheld with greater satisfaction than more showy plants.
A few, as the wormwood, camomile, colt's-foot, and elecampane, are employed in medicine.
The British vegetables belonging to the tribe of Orchis form five genera, and between thirty and forty species.
They 
are all either singular or beautiful plants, of no account for cattle ; but the roots of the bulbous kinds abound in a mild 
farinaceous substance, which might be used as nutriment by man.
The flowers of some of these species are remarkably 
fragrant.
The county of Kent is particularly rich in this class.
The ferns comprehend a number of elegant plants, the utility of which has been but little investigated.
Eleven genera 
and forty-four species are natives of Britain.
They grow chiefly in uncultivated places.
The larger and more abundant 
kinds, such as common fern, are collected and burned for the pot-ash, which is thus obtained from them ; and the roots of 
most yield a mild, sweetish mucilage.
Mosses, the smallest of vegetables, are at the same time the most numerous ; ten genera and nearly two hundred species 
are found in the British islands.
The class of lichens, scarcely inferior in number to the mosses, is, however, of greater 
use to man.
Some species are of a nutritious quality, and others are employed in dyeing.
Archis, which furnishes a beau- 
tiful but fugitive crimson dye, is prepared from the lichen parellus and lichen calcareous.
The class of fungi includes seventeen genera and several hundred species of native vegetables, all of which, excepting 
the mushroom, the chanterelle, the morell and the truffle, are in England abandoned to neglect, though in some countries of 
the continent several other kinds are collected for the table, and reckoned among its principal delicacies.
Of the last class of English vegetables, the sea-weeds, four genera aud between two and three huudred species are found 
upon our shores.
Many of these furnish the farmer with a valuable manure, while others are burned into kelp, and in that 
form employed in the making of glass and soap.
With respect to the Zoology of Britain, this subject has been treated at due extent by an eminent naturalist.
Mr. Pennant 
enumerates twenty genera of animals, from the horse down to the seal and bat.
The birds extend to forty-eight, the reptiles 
to four, and the fish to forty genera, exclusive of the crustaceous or shellfish.
Of that noble and useful animal the horse, many mingled breeds are found in England, though most other countries 
INTRODUCTION.
xv 
produce only one kind.
Our race-horses, a breed not excelled in tlie world, are descended from Arabian stallions, and the 
genealogy faintly extends to our hunters.* The English draught-horses derive their strength and size from those of Ger- 
many, Flanders, and Holstein.
The horses of Yorkshire are celebrated for their spirit and beauty, and those of Wales, 
though small, are remarkably hardy.
In short, native horses may be found adapted to every purpose of pomp, pleasure, 
and utility.
The speed of Childers was computed at a mile in a minute, and such is the strength of a Yorkshire pack- 
horse, that he will usually carry more than four hundred pounds; and a mill-horse will support, for a short distance, double 
that weight.
The indigenous breed of horned cattle is now known to exist only in Needwood forest in Staffordshire, and at Chilling- 
ham castle, in Northumberland.
They have long legs, are wild, like deer, of a white colour with black muzzles, ears and 
tails, with a stripe of the same hue along the back.
The breed of our horned cattle vary almost as much as those of our 
horses.
The kinds produced in Wales and Cornwall are diminutive, while those of Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, and the 
northern counties in general, are remarkable for their size.
In the south, we find the elegant breed of Guernsey, in general 
of a small size, but celebrated for the richness of their milk.
Wool having been for ages the staple commodity of cur island, it is hence easy to conceive that the number and value of 
sheep in England must be very great.
Of this most useful animal, we have also many different breeds ; those of Here- 
fordshire, Devonshire, and the Cotswold downs are noted for the fine quality of their fleeces, while the Lincolnshire and 
Warwickshire are remarkable for the quantity.
The South Down, so called from being principally bred on the downs of 
the Southern counties, are in high repute both for the value of the fleece and the flavour of their meat.
The Teesdale breed, 
in Durham, yield beautiful wool, but the length of their legs depreciates them in the eyes of the butcher.
The mutton of Wales, on the contrary, is highly esteemed, but the wool is coarse.
The Norfolk sheep are remarkable 
for black faces and legs; and those of Leicestershire, which are very large, for being without horns.
The Dorsetshire 
breed surpass all the others in fecundity, being capable of producing twice a year; and it is by them that the tables of 
the opulent, and the markets of the metropolis, are supplied with lamb at Christmas, or sooner.
The goat, even in the mountainous regions of Wales, now yields to the superior utility of the sheep.
As to swine, we 
have many different kinds, and from the attention which has of late years been paid to the breeding and feeding of this, 
as well as every other domestic animal, it has been produced of a weight and magnitude truly astonishing.
England abounds in breeds of dogs, some of which were celebrated even in the times of the Romans.
The bull- 
dog and mastiff are animals of surprising strength and courage.
The breed of the former declines, from the disuse of the 
savage practice of bull-baiting; and the latter begins to be supplanted by the Newfoundland dogs, of more useful and 
generous qualities.
In the various breeds of dogs employed in the chase and in the sports of the field, as the grey-hound, 
the fox-hound, the harrier, the beagle, the setter, the pointer, our island is unrivalled by any other country.
The turn- 
spit, which formerly exhibited uncommon dexterity in the occupation whence it derived its name, is now exploded ; and 
the spotted Dalmatian has grown into estimation as an elegant attendant on an equipage.
The cat, one of the most universal of animals, is still found in a wild state in the most mountainous and woody parts.
It is three or four times as large as the domestic cat, and is the most ferocious and destructive of our savage beasts.
The 
wolf has long been exterminated in England, but the fox abounds.
It is sufficient to mention the badger, the otter, the 
dormouse, the rat, and various kinds of mice.
The mole, hedgehog, and bat are becoming more scarce, and the seal 
is found chiefly on the coast of Wales.
The roe, with which the parks of the great were formerly stocked, is now extinct, and has given place to the fallow 
deer and red deer ; but the latter, which are much more vicious than the other, are becoming more uncommon.
The chief of British birds of prey, the golden eagle, is sometimes found on Snowdon ; the black eagle has been seen 
in Derbyshire ; but the osprey, or sea-eagle, seems to be extinct in the southern division of our island.
Various kinds 
of hawks breed in England, and the peregrine falcon in Wales.
Our poultry seems to originate from Asia; the peacock 
is from India; the pheasant from Colchis; the guinea-fowl from Africa.
Of turkeys, originally from America, vast 
numbers, and of great size, are reared in Norfolk and Suffolk.
The smallest of our native birds is the crested wren, and the largest is the bustard, some of which weigh twenly-fivt 
* The improvement of these breeds in our island is said to have been commenced by the Spanish horses which came on shore 
in various parts of Scotland from some of the ship-wrecked vessels belonging to the far-famed Armada.
The establishment of races 
and the assignation of prizes as the reward of swiftness, completed what that fortunate accident began, and produced that attention 
to <he breeding of these useful animals which lias supplied the kingdom with horses of every description of such excellence .is not 
to be equalled by those of any other country.
xvi INTRODUCTION.
pounds, and are found, but now very rarely, indeed, in tie open countries of the south and east.
A singularity relative 
to the nightingale, the chief of our rural songsters, deserves to be mentioned.
This bird is not found in North Wales, 
nor in England much farther to the north than Doncaster, nor does it travel so far west as Devonshire and Cornwall — a 
limitation the more remarkable, as nightingales are found in the more inclement climate of Sweden.* 
Of reptiles, we have the coriaceous tortoise, the frog, the toad, and several kinds of lizards.
Among our serpents the 
viper alone is venomous.
Passing now to the fish, it may be observed, that the whale and the dolphin seldom appear near the English shores; but 
the porpoise, and others of the same genus, are not uncommon.
The basking shark is sometimes seen off the coast of 
Wales.
Our coasts and rivers afford an abundant supply of numerous edible fish.
Some of the most celebrated are the 
turbot, doree, soal, cod, plaice, smelt, mullet, herring, mackerel, pilchard — all gifts of the seas which wash our shores.
The tribute yielded by our rivers and lakes consists of the salmon, the trout, the lamprey, which though an inhabitant of 
the ocean, is chiefly found in the Severn; the char, the samlet, the umber or greyliug, the pike, the barbel, the carp, 
the tench, the perch, the roach, the dace, and the gudgeon.
Of crustaceous and shell fish, the principal are the lobster, the craw-fish, the crab, and the oyster.
The English 
oysters were highly esteemed by the epicures of ancient Rome, and they still maintain their reputation.
The entomology of England, or that part of its natural history which relates to insects, though but imperfectly culti- 
vated, possesses considerable interest.
— The far greater part of insects are so minute, as not to be distinctly seen without 
the assistance of a microscope ; and, no doubt, myriads elude our researches by their extreme minuteness.
The prodigious 
number, however, which we meet with on the surface of vegetables, the singularity and diversity of their forms, the beauty 
and richness of their colours, are sufficient to entice a rational mind to a closer investigation of so vast an empire ; an 
empire the most populous, luxuriant, and splendidly adorned of any on the face of the globe.
Of coleopterous insects, or those which have the crustaceous elytra covering the wings, we have thirty genera, com- 
prising fifty-six species.
Of the beetle, or scarabeus, the cockchafer is extremely well known, and all the varieties 
agree in their way and manner of life; their colours depending en sex, age, health, &c, The Gyrinus, or water-flea, is 
one of the most singular insects we have.
It is that little creature which describes circles on the surface of the water, 
by running on it with great swiftness.
It is difficult to be caught, and plunges into the water when attempted to be taken.
The Cassida, so uamed because it conceals its head under the margins of its thorax, in form of a helmet, is very curious.
Its larva, by the help of the two prongs, which are to be found at its hinder extremity, makes itself, with its own excre- 
ment, a sort of umbrella, which shelters it from the sun and rain.
The colours of the Curculus are eminently beautiful.
" In this tribe," says M.
Barbut, " lavish nature sports gorgeously in the mingled riches of indescribably refulgent colours* 
proof against a continuance of the visual ray, and makes the eye-lids dance, while the optic nerve aches at the splendour." 
The larvae of these insects are exceedingly destructive in corn lofts, &c.
The Capricorn, or goat-fly, is a genus which 
affords very beautiful insects.
They are met with upon the willow, where tliey shed an odour, much like that of the rose, 
•which is so powerful as to pervade a whole meadow where a few of them may happen to be settled.
The Lampyris, fire- 
fly, or glow-worm, is well known.
It is met with towards evening, iu the month of June, in woods and meadows.
It is 
the female only from which the light emanates.
The genus Cantharis contains a number of beautiful insects, whose colours 
chiefly depend on sex, season, &c.
They frequent flowers ; and their larvae are to be found in the decayed trunks of old 
trees.
The Ciccndela, or sparkler, from the great brilliancy of its colours, is a very fine subject for the microscope.
The 
Carabus Gramulatus, a species of the bull-head, is at once one of the largest, and one of the most brilliant in this 
country.
It is commonly to be met witii in damp places in gardens, understands, and heaps of rotten plants.
There are in England twelve genera, comprising thirty-one species, of hemipterous insects, in which the mouth and pro- 
boscis are inflected and bent inwards towards the breast.
Belonging to this order is the Blatta, cockroach, or black- 
beetle, a domestic insect well known in kitchens, bakehouses, &c.
; the Gryllus, or cricket; the Cicada, frog-hopper, or 
flea-locust; and the Chnex, or bug, of which there are eleven species, f likewise belong to the hemipterous order.
Of lepidopterous insects, or those which have four wings, imbricated with scales, we have three genera : the Papilio, 
or butterfly ; the Sphinx ; and the Phakna, or moth ; comprising, altogether, seventeen species.
Some of the varieties of 
the butterfly, which are exceedingly numerous, are eminently beautiful.
Of neuropterous insects, having four membranaceous naked wings, reticulated with veins, England possesses seven 
• Among our water fowl, the most useful is the wild duck, which is chiefly caught in the fens of Lincolnshire.
The numbers 
sent to the metropolis alone almost exceed belief.
| The cimex kctularius or common bed-bug, is the only one of the genus that has neither wings nor elytra.
INTRODUCTION.
xvii 
genera, including ten species.
The libelluhi grandis, produced from a water-worm that has six feet, is the largest that 
this country affords.
The Rhaphidia is remarkable for the singularity of its form, having an oblong head, shaped like a 
heart, with its point joined to the thorax, and the broad part before.
Of hymenopterous insects, having four membranaceous wings, and, excepting the males, most of them carrying stings, we 
have ten genera, comprising twenty-two species.
The varieties of the bee, and of the wasp, belong to this order.
The 
Sphex, or savage, which carries a sharp sting, is the fiercest of all flies, and will attack insects much larger than itself.
It 
may be termed the tyger of the insect world.
The Sphex seizes boldly on its intended victim, which it strikes with amazing 
force, after which it falls down as though itself were killed.
It keeps a steady eye upon the insect which it may have struck, 
and, as soon as it is dead, it drags it to its nest to feed the young.
The Chrysis ignita, or flaming gold-fly, is beautified 
with the most resplendent colours.
The fore part of its head is green and gold, and the hinder of a lovely azure.
The 
thorax is likewise azured over, with a mixture of green, and terminates at its extremity with sharp spires on both sides.
The abdomen is green and gold before, and of a coppery red behind, imitating molten copper highly polished.
The whole 
insect is dotted on its upper part, which gives it a great resplendency of colour.
It is often seen issuing from the holes of 
walls, where it resides.
— The varieties of the ant, the males and females of which are winged, but the neuters without, also 
belong to this order.
The dipterous class of insects, having two wings, and a poiser under each, are comprehended in ten genera, and twelve 
species.
The Oestrus, or gad-fly, which deposits its eggs under the skins of animals, is well known.
Of this there are 
many varieties.
The Musca, of which the common house-fly is a variety, is one of the most numerous genera of insects.
Variety runs through their forms, their structure, their organization, their metamorphoses, their manner of living, propa- 
gating their species, and providing for their posterity.
Some of them are oviparous, and others viviparous.
The Culex, 
or gnat, belongs to the dipterous class.
The apterous class, which is the last that we have to notice, is particularly distinguished from all the others, by the insects 
which belong to it not having wings in either sex.
Of this class, to which lice, fleas, spiders, &c.
belong, England contains 
fourteen genera, comprehending twenty-four species.
This branch of natural history, as we have before observed, has hitherto been very slightly cultivated in England, but a 
spirit of research is now operating; and, as new species, and new varieties of insects are constantly falling under the notice 
of philosophical observers, much additional information, conducive to the expansion of science, may be rationally expected.* 
CHAPTER III.
Derivation of the word Britain.
— England.
— Wales.
— Original inhabitants of the island.
— Picts.
— State of the 
country at the time of the Roman invasion.
— Caesar's account of the Ancient Britons.
— British deities.
— Druids.
— Bards.
— Mysteries.
— Opinions and belief of the Bards.
— First appearance of Christianity in Britain.
— 
Caractacus.
— Roman walls.
— Divisions of the Island.
— Military government of Britain, under the Romans.
— 
Military roads.
— Establishment of the Saxons.
— Origin of the Angles.
— Heptarchy.
— Retreat of the Welsh.
— 
Lazes of Howil.
— Annexation of Wales to England.
— Irruption of the Danes.
— Norman invasions.
So numerous, so various, and so contradictory, are the derivations which have been assigned to the name of Britain, 
that, in the present day, it would seem a hopeless effort, to adduce any thing, either new, or absolutely satisfactory, upon 
the subject.
It has, by different writers, been deduced from almost every word in every language to which it has any 
similitude, either in orthography or sound.
Some have derived it from Brutus, the name of a Trojan, supposed to have 
subdued the island; and given his name to it 1108 years before the Christian era.
Camden, taking it for granted, that the 
island was first called Britain by the ancient Greeks, conjectured that the word was formed of Brith or Brit/ton, painted, a 
name which the ancient inhabitants are supposed to have given themselves, because it was the custom to paint their skins ; 
and tania, a greek termination, signifying a country, to express the country of the Briths or Brithons.
Humphry Lluwyd, 
a celebrated antiquary, was of opinion, that the name was wholly British, and that it was originally Prydcain, or Prydhain, a 
Welsh word for white, supposing the island to have been called white by those who first settled upon it, from the colour of the 
cliffs on its coast.
The most probable conjecture seems to be, that the Phoenicians, who are known to have traded to the western 
* The newest work upon this subject, the second and last volume of which came out about two years ago, is " An Introduction 
to Entomology, or Elements of the Natural History of Insects: with plates, by William Kirby, B.
A. F.
L. S.
Hector of Barham, 
and William Spence, Esq. F.
L. S." 
xviii INTRODUCTION.
coasts, principally for tin, called it Bratanaek, which in their language signifies the Land of Tin; and it is remarkable that 
Meney, the name of part of Cornwall, is of Phoenician derivation, and signifies bounded by the sea* There is in this 
peninsula a lake, called Enth, which is the Phoenician word for lake; Godolian, the name of a hill there, signifies plenty of 
metal, in the same language; Penn.nhill, comes also from the Phoenician, Penna, and Tra, from Tena, a castle, two words 
which oceur often in the names of Cornish places; Penrose, Pensance, Pengarsick, Peuwarren, Pendennis, Penwin, Trewose, 
Trenowth, Tregenno, Trevascus, Trenora, Treworgan, and many others.
Albion is another name of Britain, the origin of which is equally doubtful.
Some suppose it to have been so called by 
the Greeks, from Albion, the sen of Neptune; as they named Italy Hespcria, from Hesperus, the son of Atlas; others 
imagine that they formed it of Axpov, white, and others suppose it to have been originally Albion, from ox/Sio;, happy.
England, the name of the southern part of Britain distinct from Wales, is supposed to have betn originally Angeland, the 
land of the Angles; a Saxon people, who are thought to have given this name to the country, when, alter having invaded 
and subdued it, they united the kingdoms, into which it before was divided, into one monarchy, f 
Wales, the name of the western part of Britain, distinct from England, is a Saxon word, signifying the land of Strangers ; 
a name which the Saxons gave to that part of the country, into which they had driven the native inhabitants, when they 
took possession of the other.
— The name of England is generally used for all South Britain, including Wales.
Another point, involved in equal obscurity with the etymology of its name, is, who were the original inhabitants of Britain, 
and from what part of the world did they come ?
— After the general deluge, according to the sacred historian, the three sous 
of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, having each a numerous issue, retired from the mountains of Armenia, where the ark 
rested, to different parts of the world, and propagated nations throughout the universe.
Agreeably to the authority of 
Thcophilus of Antioch, the inference is fair, that, in the gradual dispersion of their families, some of them reached our island.
" For whereas/' says that author, " there were anciently but few men in Arabia and Chaldea, after a division of tongues 
they gradually increased and multiplied.
Some went eastward, and some to ports of the greater continent, others northward 
in quest of settlements, and ceased not to possess themselves of the earth, till they got even to Britain in the northern 
climates." Divines call the isles of the nations those which are most remote, and Wolphgangers Muscutus supposes the 
nations and families proceeding from Japhet to have occupied first the islands of Europe, such as England, Sicily, &c.
Josephus, and other historians, as well as divines, have told us, that Europe fell to the lot of Japhet and his posterity ; and 
Isidore, from an ancient writer, says, " The nations of the families of Japhet, who possess from Mount Taurus to the north, 
the middle of Asia, and all Europe to the British ocean, left their names to places and people, of which many were after- 
wards altered, the rest continue as at first." 
Within these few years, since the exertions of Sir William Jones, and others, have thrown so much light upon the stores 
of eastern literature, strong reasons have been adduced, in favour of a belief, that the ancient inhabitants of our island, 
and consequently those of some parts of the European Continent, from whom they are more immediately derived, descended, 
as a colony, from some of the nations of the east.
This opinion is much strengthened, by the knowledge, that many of the 
ancient Persian proberbs, when literally translated, exactly accord with ours ; a coincidence which can neither be the result 
of chance, nor can it have proceeded from our commercial intercourse with that nation, within any known period.
It is 
remarkable, that the Sacred Scriptures contain many allusions to circumstances known to have been connected with druidical 
institutions; and the researches which, within these few years, have been made in oriental literature, seem to establish the 
point, that the Druids of Britain, and the Bhramins of India, had a common origin.
The question is, which were the more 
ancient?
Did our Druids migrate from the east, in the early ages; or, did the mysteries of Druidism originate in Britain, 
and thence diffuse themselves over the greater part of the ancient world ?
This question was curiously discussed in a paper 
which, a few years ago, was read before the Asiatic Society of Bengal ; and the natural inference seemed to be, that the 
Bhramins are descendants from the Druids.
Caesar assures us, that the southern part of Britain was peopled from Gaul.
This is also the opiuion of Tacitus, as well 
as of the most judicious of modern and ancient authors; and is founded on the similarity of customs, manners, language, 
and religion; form of government, mode of warfare, &c.
Tacitus supposes the more northern Britons to have been a colony of Germans; and Csesar states that they were aborig- 
gines; by which we may at least understand, that their language, manners, and customs, were different from those who 
came from Gaul.
* Ptolemy uses the distinctions of Great and Little Britain : Camden supposes, that by Great Britain he meant England, Scotland, 
and Wales, and that by Little Britain he meant Ireland : others have entertained the opinion, that, by Great Britain, he designated 
only England and Wales, and by Little Britain, Scotland.
f By the French, England is denominated Jngleterre; by the Italians, Inghilterra; by the Germans, Engellandt ; and, by the 
Spaniards, Ingluterra.
INTRODUCTION.
x ; x 
Bede tell us, that the Picts, who inhabited the ancient part of Britain north of the Tyne, came out of Scythia, or 
Scandinavia, now comprehending; Norway, Denmark, and Sweden.
The learned Slillingfleet, agreeing with Sector 
Boetius, thinks it not improbable that the Picts were descended from the Agatharsi, who migrated originally from Sarnntia 
into the Cimbrica Chersonesus, and thence to Scotland.
No Roman author mentioning the Picts before Amianus Marcellinus, who wrote towards the end of the fourth century, 
some writers suppose them to have been really Britons, who had withdrawn themselves from those who united with and 
adopted the manners of the Romans.
In support of this opinion, they allege the authority of Camden, who endeavours to 
show that the names of places possessed by the Picts in the south and west parts of Scotland are British, and that their 
language was the same.
Bede, however, insists upon the contrary.
He tells us, that in his time God was served in five 
several languages in this island, viz.
those of the Angles, Britons, Picts, Scots, and Latins ; which last was the language 
generally used in the churches; and it is certain, that the Picts were for several ages a separate and distinct nation, differing 
both from the Scots and Britons, not only in language, but in their laws and customs.
The contrary opinion is founded on 
the conformity of the name Picts with the Latin word Picli ; but Verstegan, and some other writers, derive tho name from 
a word in their own language, which signifies warrior.
The Scots called them Pehita, which, by some antiquaries, is 
thought to answer to Picti ; but this seems scarcely allowable, as the Scots were too short a time under the dominion of 
Rome to have conferred on their neighbours a Roman name.
Buchanan, who takes the name to be Roman, supposes that the Picts were descended from some Gauls who had settled 
in Thrace, where they painted their bodies, as well as the Britons and the Scots.
But in this he is contradicted by Bede; 
and John Major, one of the most ancient of the Scotch historians, states, that, in his time, almost half Scotland spoke the 
Irish language, which they had brought with them from that island.
What the state of Britain was, previously to its conquest by the Romans,* cannot be ascertained, with any probable 
degree of accuracy.
Caesar unquestionably found the island populous, and well stocked with cattle.
Of its inhabitants, 
he gives the following account, with which most of the ancient historians agree: — '* The Britains use brass money, or iron 
rin^s of a certain weight, instead of it.
They think it not right to eat hares, poultry, or geese, though they breed them 
all for amusement.
Of all the natives, the most civilized are the inhabitants of Cantiura, (or Kent) all that country lying 
on the sea-coast, and the manners of this people are not very different from those of the Gauls.
The inland inhabitants 
for the most part sow no corn, but live on milk and flesh, and for clothing wear skins.
All the Britains stain themselves, 
with woad, which produces a blue colour, and gives them a more horrible appearance in battle.
They wear the hair of 
their head long, but close and bare on every part of their body, except their head and upper lip.
They have wives in 
common between ten or twelve of them, especially brothers with brothers, and parents with children : but the issue by these 
wives belong to those who married them when virgins.
Most of them use chariots in battle.
They first scour up and 
down on every side, throwing their darts, creating disorder among the ranks by Hie terror of their horses, and noise of 
their chariot-wheels ; and when they are got among the troops of horses they leap out and fight on foot.
Meantime the 
charioteers retire to a little distance from the field, and place themselves in such a manner that, if the others are over 
powered by the number of the enemy, they may be secure to make good their retreat.
Thus they act with the agility of 
cavalry, and the steadiness of infantry in battle, and become so expert by constant practice, that on declivities and preci- 
pices they can stop their horses on full speed, and on a sudden check and turn them, run along the pole, stand on the 
yoke, and then as quickly dart into their chariots again.
They frequently retreat on purpose, and after they have drawn 
our men a little way from the main body, leap from their poles and wage an equal war as on foot.
Their manner of fighting 
on horseback creates the same danger both to the retreater and the pursurr.
Add to this, that they never fight in bodies, 
but scattering, and at great distance, and have parties in reserve supporting one another, and fresh troops ready to relieve 
the weary." 
Strabo informs us, that the Britons were taller than the Gauls, but not so stoutly made.
Diodorus Sicnlus tells us, 
that their houses were made of reeds, or wood ; that they laid up their corn uulhraslied in their granaries, taking out only 
enough for each day's consumption ; and that they were simple and honest in their dealings, and frugal in their diet.
The whole island was divided into several states, having each a chief, dignified by authors with the name of King.
Of 
these kings, Caesar tells us there were four in Kent only.
In cases of danger one was chosen, in a general assembly, com- 
mander-in-chief of the whole of their forces.
Thus Cassibelan commanded the furces against Caesar; and in the time of 
Claudius, Caractacus, king of the Silures, was chosen general of the whole.
Respecting the authority of Caesar, it is proper to remark, that that conquerer employed his means to acquire such in- 
formation as might answer his purpose; but his purpose was chiefly military, and political.
The open and popular customs 
* Britain was first invaded by the Romans, under Julius Ca'sar, about forty-five years before the birth of Christ.
xx INTRODUCTION.
of the British, such as could be observed by traders, were all that we can suppose were reported to him, and these inci- 
dentally only.
The coasts of the island were, probably, all that was known by those who had visited it; the interior, 
its customs, rites, and rulers, required, not merely the passing observations of a traveller, if such a one were permitted 
in the country ; but the actual participation of a resident for a time, at least; more so, because we have every reason to 
believe that he who spent a summer among this people would find them employed very differently, and inhabiting very dif- 
ferent places, from what he would find who ivintered among them.
We hear so little of the affairs of Britain from the Roman writers, after the Romans had included the whole island, in a 
manner under their power, as may convince us, that the intimacy between the visitors and the vanquished was not extremely 
close ; nor did they form those endearing alliances which might induce a free disclosure of national and familiar manners by 
one party, or excite an interest in examining and recording particularities by the other.
As far as we have been able to ascertain, the religion of the Britons was like that of the Gauls : one of their deities was 
called Taran, or Taranis, which signifies Thunder ; and the oak is said to have been worshipped as the representative of this 
god.
He is considered as the Jupiter of the Greeks.
Their other deities were Dew Taith, or Tustates, the god of journies, 
and supposed to be the same as Mercury : Hesus, called also Camulus, the god of war, or Mars : Beleus, or Belinus, sup- 
posed to be the same as Apollo; called also Balatucordus.
Their goddesses were Camina, supposed to be the same as Diana; 
and Andate, or Andraste, the goddess of victory ; to whom they sacrificed their prisoners of war.
The care and direction of all religious matters, as well among the Britons as the Gauls, rested with the Druids, who were 
held in the utmost veneration, and exercised an authority, both in religious and civil matters, almost absolute.
They were 
themselves under a supreme pontiff, or arch-druid, whose office was for life, and elective at his death by a majority of 
votes.
Caesar was of opinion, that the discipline of the Druids had originated in Britain, and had been thence transferred to 
Gaul.
If so it was probably brought from Palestine, by the emigrants who escaped from their country, when invaded by 
the children of Israel, under Joshua and his successors.
Their worshipping in groves, their human sacrifices, and their 
marking or tattooing themselves, are strong characteristics of a Canaanitish origin.
It is also deserving of notice, that 
those customs have been found in all the new-discovered islands of the South Pacific ocean; they were before found, among 
the Indians of America; among the Mexicans, the Peruvians, aud the inhabitants of the West India islands: a strong 
presumptive proof of one and the same origin.
Of the Druids, there were, properly speaking, three ranks : the Bard; the Ovydd ; and the Derwydd.
The Bard; the 
Vales, or scientific Bard ; and the Druid, or Priest Bard.
Each of these orders wore an appropriate dress : that of the 
primary order, the Bard, was sky-blue, symbolizing light, truth, peace: the Ovates wore green, the livery of the earth, 
which he was supposed to cultivate : the Druid wore white, denoting purity and holiness.
The Bardic was the general 
order into which all disciples were initiated in the first instance.
It may be considered as the national establishment of the 
Britons, endowed witli peculiar privileges, in the character of a profession and mode of life.
The perpetuation of the 
system, its customs and privileges, were among the duties of this order; with the superintendance and examination of the 
institutes of learning, whether civil or religious ; and, in general, whatever concerned the interests, or might promote the 
welfare of the institution.
By the princes who governed in Britain, the reciters of songs were treated with honour; and under the appellation of 
Bards they formed a very conspicuous distinction, or order of men, in the population.
Tacitus informs us, that the Bards were not only known, but were highly esteemed in Germany, as well as in Britain.
He describes them as being the depositaries of the records of the nation.
Their songs were not merely poetical compo- 
sitions, or inventions, but were founded on real events, and were composed, usually, by such as had been partakers in 
those events, or witnesses of the exploits which they commemorated.
They were designed to instruct and amuse such guests 
as were admitted to succeeding generations of men of song, who might honour the company which they exhilirated by re- 
hearsing the heroic deeds of their ancestors ; thus indirectly reflecting a lustre of glory on those whom they addressed.
The Bards roused the souls of their auditors to deeds of martial renown, they preceded the troops which marched to 
battle, they beheld the struggles of heroes in fight, and they shouted the song of triumph, or accompanied the funeral 
dirge with plaints and lamentations.
In connexion with the characters of Bard, was that of Ovydd, Ovate, or Fates.
These we may describe as a kind of secular Bnrds, who practised particular arts or sciences.
This class included artists 
and mechanics of every description.
Under this character and this alone, the Bards were permitted to hold private 
meetings: and if craftsmen of each possession assembled together at such meetings, they might easily adopt their own 
technical terms, and retain the secrets of their craft exclusively among themselves.
In times of danger these meetings 
afforded opportunities to the Bards for mutual intercourse; and Mr. Owen, (to whom the public, with ourselves, are obliged, 
by means of Sir R.
C. Hoare, for the most correct view of the Bardic orders.) conjectures, that the origin of Free Masonry 
may be referred to these secret assemblies of the laborious division of Bards.
He says that many of the terms, arrange- 
INTRODUCTION.
xxi 
monts, and principles of Masonry are to be fpnnd in Bardism.
So that Masonry is Bardism in disguise, being so involved 
in technical terms, that it requires great application, in those who are initiated, to see through the mysterious coverings.
The Bards too had a secret, like the Masons, by which they could know each other.
The third order of Bards was that of the Druids.
If a Bard assumed the character of a Druid, he had to perforin the func- 
tions of the priesthood ; and as there was to every community a Druid, i.
e. a priest who possessed great influence, this class 
could not be otherwise than a favourite among the Bards.
We may, then, consider the Druids as the clergy of the ancient 
Britons.
That this class, being called to perforin public rites, and filling the most conspicuous offices, should be most 
noticed by strangers, is not wonderful : and hence the whole order has been called Druidical.
But in fact, though every 
Druid was a Bard, every Bard was not a Druid.
The Bards never bore arms: they engaged in no party disputes, and had, therefore, no enemies: they were sacred, as 
heralds, even amidst contending armies : they assuaged the fury of battle: they restrained the arm of slaughter: they were 
the representatives of the Deity, and were bound to exhibit bis beneficent perfections.
The Bards held, that God created this world, as well as innumerable others, for the progression of intelligence through 
all modes of beinjf approximating eternally towards himself.
They held, concerning this earth, that it was originally covered 
with water, which gradually subsiding, land animals appeared, but of the lowest species, and thus corresponding iu organi- 
zation with the then capacity of the soul.
New orders in the scales of being were successively produced after these — and at 
last man, the chief receptacle of the soul upon earth ; for in this stale the soul had so augmented its faculties as to be capa- 
ble of judging between good and evil; consequently, it was in a state of liberty and choice.
This is precisely the order 
of events in the Mosaic system of creation.
The progress is from inferior to superior, as a late writer has demonstrated 
till at length, man crowns the whole, and appears " in the image of God." The Bards held further, that the soul, by 
choosing evil, became degraded to brutal life, or inferiority : by choosing good, it was at death promoted to a superior state 
of life, which it might still further improve, rising higher and higher in the scale of intelligence and happiness, to all eter- 
nity.
Thus it appears, that hope and fear were those great principles of the human mind to which the Bards addressed 
their system.
They hoped that mankind would gradually improve, as time advanced, till, having arrived at that perfection 
of which human nature is capable, the design of this terrestrial world should be answered, and fire should be com missioned 
to prepare it for the reception of a superior order and state of existence.
This is little other than the Indian system of 
worlds of different degrees of excellence.
Whether the Bards, as the Bramins, restricted the number of probationary 
worlds to fourteen, does not appear ; but we may see a sufficient number of points of similitude to induce us, at least, to 
state it as a query, whether the Bards of Britain were not, in many things, close resemblances to the Bramins of India?
The Bards believed the existence of one Supreme Being, ineffable, immaterial ; that the human soul was a lapsed intel- 
ligence: the enjoyment of knowledge was happiness, and privation of knowledge was misery.
We have seen that the 
Bards transmitted the principles of their profession, by means of triads and aphorisms ; but they had no mythological fables, 
those fruitful sources of abominable idolatries, and monstrous malpractices!
Neither had they, originally, hieroglyphics, 
or emblems of the attributes of the Supreme Being; although, such, eventually, became occasions of error and wandering 
to the multitude.
Misapprehension, concerning the nature of God, led to an infinity of other superstitions.
At length, 
state policy became iuterwoven with the dicta of religion; the Bards assumed authority ; their sentence of excommunication, 
pronounced in the circle of their solemn assembly, was clothed with all the terrors of modem outlawry.
Nordid their bar- 
barity stop here: their doctrine of sacrifices led them to immolate, iu their great yearly assemblies, those victims of the 
human kind which included captives among the guilty ; and showed to what awful degrees of insensibility the human heart 
can debase itself, when misled by superstition, and depraved by the violence of its malignant passions.
The Bards held solemn meetings at the new and full moon : at the solstice and equinoxes; i.e. at every three months, 
were the principal meetings of the year, for the promulgation of their maxims, and for the general business of the order.
But, every three years, great national assemblies were held, in which the sanction of the whole community was given to 
what was then submitted to general opinion, and thought worthy of adoption.
These conventions were held within those cathedrals, as they may be termed, of which we still have specimens; such 
as Stonehenge, Avehury, Silbury, &c.
the remains of which structures excite our wonder.
There was also a general 
assembly of the Bards holden occasionally, called an Eisteddfod.
Christianity would, most probably, vary the principles of Bardism ; certainly it would expel its most barbarous and 
offensive rites.
The system, it is said, is still maintained, as to its general principles, in Glamorganshire ; while it has 
decayed in other parts of Wales.
So much, at least, may be inferred from a celebrated Eisteddfod, holden at Carmarthen, 
about the year 1450, against which the Synod of Glamorgan Bards protested, as totally contrary to the institution.
At what time the Christian religion was first introduced into this island, is a question on which our ecclesiastical histo- 
rians have been divided.
Most of them, however, seem to agree in fixing that event before the expiration of the first 
century ; and the testimonies of several of the ancients have been produced in support of this opinion.
f 
*xii INTRODUCTION.
Gildas, the earliest of all our British historians, informs us, that the gospel began to be published here about the time 
of the memorable revolt and overthrow of the Britons, under Boadicea, (A.
D. 60 or 61) and was followed by a long interval 
of peace.
Speaking of this revolt, with its disastrous termination and consequences, Gildas adds, " In the mean time, 
Christ, the true sun, afforded his rays, that is, the knowledge of his precepts, to this island, benumbed with extreme 
cold, having been at a great distance from the sun ; not the sun in the firmament, but the Eternal Sun of heaven." 
By the celebrated Triades, which are some of the most curious and valuable fragments preserved in the Welch language, 
we learn, that the famous Caractaeus, who, after a war of nine years in defence of the liberties of his country, was basely 
betrayed and delivered up to the Romans by Aregwedd Todding (the Carlismandua of Roman authors) was, afterwards, 
together with his father Bran, and the whole family, carried captive to Rome, about the year 52 or 53, where they were 
detained seven years or more.
All this time the gospel was preached at Rome, and Bran, with others of the family, became 
converts to Christianity.
After about seven years they had permission to return, and were the means of introducing the 
knowledge of Christ among their countrymen; on which account Bran was long considered as one of the three blessed 
sovereigns, and his family as one of the three holy lineages of Britain.
At the return of these earliest Britisli converts, 
it might be expected that some of the Christians with whom they had associated at Rome, would have been prevailed upon 
to accompany them to their native country.
As Bran and Caradoc (otherwise Brennus and Caractaeus) were Silurian princes, we may safely conclude that Christ- 
ianity made its way to Wales as early as into any part of the kingdom.
When Bran returned to his native land, some of 
his family, it is thought, staid behind, and settled at Rome.
Of these, Claudia, mentioned with Pudens and Linus, '?
Tim.
iv.
21.
is deemed to have been one, and supposed to be the same with Claudia, the wife of Pudens, mentioned by Martial, 
the poet, who wrote in those times, and speaks of her as a Briton of extraordinary virtue, wit, and beauty.
It has been 
objected that Martial, living in the reign of Trajan, cannot be supposed to speak of Paul's Claudia, who flourished in 
the reigns of Claudius and Nero.
But though he lived in Trajan's reign, he lived also and resided at Rome, in the reign 
of Vespasian, if not in that of Nero, and the epigram in which he mentions Claudia, might be written in his earlier years, 
when she was in her prime.
* 
At the time of the Roman invasion, as we have already observed, the whole island of Britain was divided into several 
states, or petty kingdoms.
South Britain, or England and Wales, was divided into seventeen states; the Danmonii, occu- 
pying Devonshire and Cornwall ; the Durotri»es, Dorsetshire; the Belgae, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, and Hampshire; the 
Attrebatii, Berkshire; the Regni, Surrey, Sussex, and part of Hampshire on the sea-coast; the Carttii, Kent; the 
Dobuni, Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire; the Trinobantes, Middlesex and Essex; the Iceni, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge- 
shire, and Nottinghamshire; the Coritani, whose country comprehended the present Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, 
and Derbyshire ; the Cornavii, who inhabited the tract now named Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Staffordshire, Shrop- 
shire, and Cheshire ; the Silures, who possessed Radnorshire, Brecknockshire, Glamorganshire, Herefordshire, and Mon- 
mouthshire; and the Demetse, who held Carmarthenshire, Pembrokeshire, and Cardiganshire.
The six counties of North 
Wales were inhabited by the Ordovices; the Brigantes, sometimes called Brigse, possessed Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, 
Westmorland, and Cumberland; and the Ottadini, or Ottatini, inhabited Northumberland.
For the purpose of securing that part of the country, which belonged to Rome, against the northern barbarians, three 
great walls, or ramparts, were erected by three of the Emperors.
Of these walls, the first was built by Adrian, and is, 
by most antiquaries, placed between Solway -firth and Tinmouth, eighty miles in length.
It was made after the manner of 
a mural hedge, with large stakes fixed deep in the ground, and fasteued together.
In the reign of Antoninus Pius, when 
the Brigantes revolted, Lolius Urbicus, then governor of Britain, having subdued and driven back the barbarians, built 
another wall of turf, or earth ; but its site is now unknown, though Camden and Brietius place it from the north of the 
Tweed, to the head of the Esk, in Eskdale, so as to secure the sea-coast, and enclose part of the territory of the Ottadini.
This opinion appears not ill founded, for Antoninus begins his itinerary from the mouth of the Tweed, as the most northern 
* The following is the epigram of Martial, here alluded to : — 
Claudia cceruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis 
Edita, cur Latiae pectora plebio habit ?
Quale decus format?
Romanam credere matres 
Ilalides possunt, Atthides esse siiam.
Since Claudia boasts a British pedigree, 
Whence comes it we a Latin person see ?
Her beauteous form, her elegance of face, 
A Roman or a Grecian maid might grace.
INTRODUCTION.
xxiii 
boundary at that time of the Roman empire; though others suppose it was made from Queen's-ferry, on the Firth, to old 
Knk-patiick, on the Clyde, about three miles from Dumbarton.
This, by some writers, is thought to have been the wall 
built by Severus; for a third wall was built by that emperor, of thirty-two miles in length, which reached from sea to sea; 
which they think could be found only here.
It is certain, however, that a wall of stone was afterwards built on that of 
Adrian, which began at Blatobulgium, now Bulness, on the south side of the mouth of the Ituna, or Soiway Firth, and 
passing by Lu»ovallum, now Carlisle, crossed Northumberland to the German ocean, at the mouth of the Tyne, between 
Newca°sile and Shields.— Camden considers this to have been the last wall built by the Romans, before they finally abandoned 
the island.
Archbishop Usher, however, and others, contend that this could not be the case ; because only one legion was then sent 
over, and that was soon recalled; and it does not appear probable that one legion, in so short a time, who were in haste to 
return, could erect a stone wall, eighty miles in length : they therefore suppose the wall then built to have been that 
already constructed by Severus, between Bodotria, near the Forth, and the Glotta, now the Clyde.
In Buchanan's 
time there were the remains of a stone wall, and at present there are vestiges known under the name of Graham's Dike.
All that we can advance with certainty upon this subject, is, that these three walls were at different times the boundaries 
of the Roman empire, separating Britannia Romana from Britannia Barbara, or that part which was not subject to Rome.
The Romans divided their portion of the island into Britannia Superior, and Britannia Inferior, or Upper and Lower 
Britain.
The former reached from the Channel, at least as far as Chester, including England and Wales: Lower Britain 
contained all that was subject to the Romans, north of Chester, to the wall which separated it from Britannia Barbara; from 
the Firth to the Clyde.
Constanline divided Roman Britain into four governments, which were called Britannia Prima, Britannia Secunda, Flavia 
Caesariensis, and Maxima Caesariensis.
— Britannia Prima lay between the channel, the Severn, and Thames; Britannia 
Secunda occupied all the country between the Severn and the Irish sea; Flavia Canadensis was enclosed within the Thames, 
the Humber, and the Severn; and Maxima Caesariensis extended from the Humber to Adrian's Wall.
— A fifth province was 
afterwards added, named Valentia, probably by the emperor Valentinian, from his brother Valens ; for in the reign of 
Valentinian, this district, extending from Adrian's Wall to the Firth of Forth, and Clyde, was recovered by Theodosius, 
father to the emperor of that name.
It is here proper to remark, that each of these provinces had a particular magistrate ; some a consular, others only a 
prases or president: they were all subject to the vicarius of Britain, as he was to the Praefectus Praetorio of Gaul, one of 
the four Praefecti Praetorio instituted by Constantine.
— The civil government was administered by the vicar, and the governors 
of the five provinces, with other inferior officers.
The military government of Britain was deputed to three officers, under the Magistrate Militum of the west; viz.
the 
Comes Britanniarum, the Comes litoris Saxonia, and the Dux Britanniarum.
The Comes Britanniarum is supposed to have 
had command over the inland and southern part of the island : the Comes litoris Saxonica, or count of the Saxon shore, 
had the superintendance of the eastern coast, opposite to Gaul and Germany, and under him were eight propositi, and one 
tribune ; commanders of legions, or cohorts quartered at different places near the sea.
The north part of the island was 
subjected to the Dux Britanniarum, and under him were fourteen praepositi.
For the purpose of maintaining an intercourse between the different stations, and for other conveniences, the troops in peaceable 
times were employed hi making roads, called viae militares, consulares, praetoriae, stratae, publicae, &c.
; and as no fewer than one 
hundred and fourteen mansions, through fifteen roads, are mentioned in the Itinerary ; and in the Notitia, forty-six garrisons, 
there must have been many highways made for passing from one place to another.
Of these, the four following are the 
chief which our historians have noticed: — VVatling Street, which extended, according to some, from Dover to Cardigan ; 
but, according to others, from Dover to the Welsh coast, over against Anglesea; passing through London.
Dunstable, Tow- 
cester, &c.
and crossing the Severn near the Wrekin, in Shropshire.
The Foss-way, so called perhaps from its not 
having been finished, but left like a ditch, which extended from Totness in Devonshire to Lincoln, and thence to Caithness.
Ikenild Street, probably so denominated from the Iceni, which led from Southampton to York, and thence to Tiiimouth.
Ermine, or Hermin Street, from St. David's to Southampton.
Each of these roads had branches, which were called vicinal roads; and we read of two others ; Julia Strata, in Mon* 
mouthshire, formed by Julius Frontinus, who subdued the Silures ; and the Strata Mawella, not far from the Julia Strata, 
formed by Ulpinus Marcellus, praetor of Britain in the reign of Commodus.
Such was the state of Britain till about the year 426, when the interruption of the northern barbarians into the Roman 
empire, made it necessary to rt-cal the troops that were in Britain; upon which the emperor Honoiius renounced his so- 
vereignty of the island, and, releasing the Britons from their allegiance, exhorted them to arm in their own defence.
It might, perhaps, have been expeciod, that, on recovering their liberties, their ancient spirit would have returned; but it 
seems that, by diverting to the Roman empire that disposition which should have rendered them zealous for the interest of 
xxiv INTRODUCTION.
their own country, their conquerors had almost entirely quenched that amor patria which had formerly animated their 
bosoms.
The bulk of the nation had been rendered indolent and inactive; and as soon as the Romans had withdrawn, and 
the unhappy Britons had been left to themselves, their weakness and inability appeared.
The Scots and Picts penetrated 
the Wall; several parts of which, that they might, enter with the greater ease, they utterly ruined, sacking the cities which 
were nearest to it, spoiling the adjacent lands, and by repeated incursions spreading such a general desolation as produced a 
famine.
Vortigern, who was then king, unable to resist his enemies, and at the same time afraid to trust his own subjects, 
had recourse to the Saxons for assistance.
These, on their first coming, repelled the northern invaders ; but not thinking 
themselves properly rewarded for so great a service, they compromised matters with the Scots and Picts, in order to turn 
their arms upon the Britons; and, multitudes of their countrymen following the first adventurers, they drove the unhappy natives 
from their homes, and compelled them to retire to the mountains of Wales, to Cornwall, and to that part of the continent 
afterwards called Bretagne.
With the Saxons, it has been said, there came over a great number of Angles, a people from whom the country afterwards 
derived the name of England.
Respecting the Saxons, the Angles, or the Anglo Saxons, and the Jutes, there has hitherto 
been a strange confusion amongst the English historians.
It is indubitably proved, however, by Suhm, a modern Danish 
author, in his History of Denmark, that, at the period alluded to, the Saxons chiefly consisted of three nations, closely 
connected and associated : the real Saxons, who inhabited Holstein, Dilraarsk, Stormarn, and part of the Vagria, (all of 
which are now comprised in the name of Holstein;) the Angles, who inhabited the country now called the Dutchy of 
Slewswic ; and the Jutes, who occupied Jutland, (the northern part of the peninsula.) The reason why Vortigern cast his 
eyes upon the Saxons, was no doubt this, that they were powerful at sea, a hardy and warlike people, and from the third 
century well known from their naval expeditions, and inroads into Gaul, Scandria, Walland, (by which is meant Zealand, 
one of the United Provinces,) and even Britain, where they had appeared sometimes as friends, and at other times as 
enemies.
At first, however, it appears, that only Jutes and Angles came over to Britain; for it is found that Hengist and 
Horsa, the first who came on that occasion, (A.
D. 449.) settled in Kent and in Northumberland; but the first of these 
counties was peopled by Jutes, the latter by Angles.
It. was some time before the real Saxons settled in Britain; and though 
they were the main people, of which the Angles formed only a branch, the latter, as being the more numerous, gave their 
name to the country.
It may also be remarked, that the first British Saxons who went to Rome were from Northumberland, 
consequently Angles, from which the Roman Missionaries were accustomed to call the whole people Angles.
From the Jutes, 
only the inhabitants of Kent, of the Isle of Wight, of some tracts of Wessex, and those of Nottingham, are descended; 
but from the real Saxons, those of Wessex, Essex, and Sussex.* 
The Saxon generals became petty sovereigns of different districts, and were perpetually committing hostilities against 
each other, till about the year 823, when Egbert, a king of the West Saxons, became the sovereign of all England.
The 
seven kingdoms, or Heptarchy, which Egbert blended in one sovereignty, were the following : 
1. Kent, which included the country so called.
2. Sussex, or the South Saxons, containing Sussex and Surrey.
3. East Anglia, comprehending Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, with the Isle of Ely.
4. Wessex, or the West Saxons, in which were Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire, 
and Berkshire.
5. Northumberland, including Lancashire, Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmorland, Northumberland, and part of 
Scotland, to the Firth of Edinburgh.
6. Essex, or the East Saxons, which comprised Essex, Middlesex, and part of Herefordshire.
7. Mercia, which contained Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Leicestershire.
Rutlandshire, 
Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Derbyshire, 
Shropshire, Nottinghamshire, and part of Herefordshire.
We have already observed, that numbers of the Britons, after the Romans had left the island, were driven from their 
homes by the Saxons.
Some of them fled into the mountainous country beyond the Severn, called, in Latin, Cambria, at 
* Suhm, the Danish historian, from whom we have derived these interesting particulars, is of opinion that the Saxons took their 
name from sax, their common weapon, a kind of short sword, with only one edge.
They were originally a branch of the Tutonians, 
and their first name was Ambrones.
They were afterwards known by that of Sasons, inhabiting at first in three islands to the north 
of the Elbe, (of which Heligoland, then much greater in extent, must have been one,) and part of the Chersonesus Cimbricus.
In the third century they lived partly to the north, partly to the south, of the Elbe, and probably along the northern coast of 
Germany, towards Holland.
The origin of the Angles is rather uncertain.
It is not improbable, however, that they are of Swevic 
descent, and lived first between the mountains of Herts and the rivers Aller, Weser, and Elbe, whence they migrated into the 
southern part of the peninsula, after them called Anglia, now Sleswie.
k 
INTRODUCTION.
xxv 
•which time, or soon after, it is said to have heen divided into six regions; each of which was governed hy its own king- 
till, In the year 843, Roderic the Great became sole monarch of Wales.
Some of the Britons retired into Cornwall, others to the southern parts of Scotland, in the neighbourhood of Carlisle, 
and settled there till the year 871, when they were driven out by the.
Scots and English, and forced lo take refuge in that 
part of Cambria called, by Latin writers, Vcnedotia, and at present North Wales.
— At first, the Britons possessed all the 
countries beyond the Dee and the Severn; two rivers which, in ancient times, divided Cambria, or Wales, from England j 
the towns on their eastern banks having been built to restrain the Cambrians from breaking into England.
At length, the 
English, having passed the Severn, by degrees seized on the country situated between that river and the Wye; so that 
all Herefordshire, and that part of Gloucestershire called the Danish Wood, (or Forest of Dean,) and such parts of 
Worcestershire and Shropshire as lie beyond the Severn, are still considered a part of England.
Some parts of Flintshire 
and Denbighshire were subjected to the kings of Mercia; and Offa, the most powerful king of that country, caused a 
deep ditch and wall to be formed as a barrier between his dominions and the territories of the Cambrians, from the 
north of the Dee, a little above the town of Flint, across mountains, vallies, rivers, &c.
to the mouth of the Wye.
Others of the Britons fled into Armoiica, which from them was called Bretagne, or in Latin, Britannia Armoiica.
After the death of Roderic, Wales was divided among his three sons into three principalities, called North Wales, 
tii Wales, and Powis Land : the last was swallowed up in successive wars, and divided between the other two.
The 
division of North and South Wales, however, still exists, each comprising six counties, but not as independent states.
Howel, the good king of Wales, succeeded to the principality of South Wales in 907, and of all Wales in 940.
Finding the laws of his kingdom in some confusion, he, " by the grace of God, prayer, and fasting, when Wales was in 
his possession, according to its boundary, summoned six men out of every comot in Wales, and brought them to him to 
the White House, together with seven score crosiers, i.
e. of bishops, archbishops, abbots, and good instructors, to abrogate 
those that were become bad before his time, and to make good ones in their places; and thus to give stability to his 
own name." 
Some of these laws, of which the following may be taken as a specimen, are exceedingly curious : — " Whoever shall 
kill a cat, which guards the house and barn of the King, her head shall be put towards the earth, and her tail held upwards, 
upon an even floor, and then he shall pour wheat about her, until the tip of her tail be covered over.
Another cat is worth 
four pence in law.
The required qualities of a cat are: to be perfect eared, perfect eyed, perfect nailed, perfect tailed, 
unmarked by fire, and killing mice, and that she devours not her kittens." 
In order to form some notion of the comparative value of money between that time and the present, we may observe, 
that the value of seven days' ploughing is two-pence; so that, when an apple tree is valued at threescore pence, it is in 
fact the value of thirty weeks' labour of a ploughman; which shows how extremely scarce valuable plants of fruit bearing 
trees must have been at this period.
Six score pence is the value of a gelding.
A foal is valued at fourpence, till August ; 
the first of December, twelvepence; the first of February, eighteen ; and its value advances till it is three years old, when 
it is worth fourscore-and-sixteen pence.
An apple tree, therefore, was worth three-fifths of a horse; and the price of a cat 
•was adequate to fourteen days' labour of a ploughman.
• 
Llewellyn ap Griffith was the last prince who exerted himself in the defence of his country, and was, after a brave 
defence and struggle, subdued by Edward I.
king of England, who created his own sq^priuce of Wales.
Since that time 
it has bei n always considered as an apanage of the heir apparent.
— Llewellyn died in the field, in the year 128&; and his 
brother David, having been betrayed into the hands of the English, was, by the command of Edward, barbarously hanged, 
as a rebel.
From that period Wales has been annexed to England ; but the union was not completed till the reign of Henry VIIL, 
when the government was formed agreeably to that of England; and all laws which were contrary to those of England 
were abrogated by act of parliament.
The Saxons, as we have seen, had acquired the complete sovereignty of England; but, softened by prosperity, they, 
after a time, became no less divided as a people, than the Britons had been : the consequence was, their subjections to the 
inroads of the Danes, the pirates of which nation were for more than 300 years lords of the ocean.
Sometimes repulsed 
by the English, and sometimes defeated, they nevertheless continued their incursions, pillaged every where, loaded themselves 
with booty, and returned home with riches, which displayed their irresistible temptations before the eyes of their country- 
men, who formed army alter army, and fleet after fleet, to partake of those spoils which British wealth afforded.
" The Danes," says Dudo de St.Quintin, a very ancient Latin writer, " poured out from Scanza (Scandinavia) like a swarm 
of bees out of a hive, and a sword out of a sheath, a motley mixture, affecting the fashions of the barbarians, and, pampered 
with luxurious living, producing an innumerable offspring.
These were no sooner grown up than they began to quarrel with 
their fathers and grand fathers about their possessions, and frequently fought with om ; another in a furious manner, the 
country they inhabited not being sufficient to contain their numbers.
Al last, assembling a number of youth, by lot they 
xxvi 
INTRODUCTION.
were, according to the ancient custom of the nation, turned out to possess themselves, by the sword, of foreign countries, 
where they might settle.
In setting out these emigrants and fighting men, they used anciently to offer a sacrifice to 
their sovereign Deity, thur, not of cattle or sheep, but of human creatures, considering them as the most precious of all 
burnt offerings, because, after the priest had appointed them by lot, they received one terrible stroke on the head with ox 
Yokes and after the brains of each person thus allotted were beaten out at a single blow, which felled them to the ground, 
they examined a particular fibre of the heart on the left side, and draining it of the blood, according to their custom, 
smeared their heads with it, and immediately unfurled their sails, and vigorously plied their oars, supposing the gods 
rendered propitious by this proceeding." 
The Danes first infested the English coasts about the year 800; destroying cities, burning churches, laying waste the 
fields and committing universal devastation.
Having massacred the kings of Mercia and East Anglia, they seized upon 
their dominions, with great part of Northumberland.
To check the ravages of these marauders, a tribute called Danegelt 
was levied upon the people, to the amount of twelvepence annually, upon every hide of land throughout the country.* 
Alfred, whose skill and bravery were unquestionable, drove the Danes out of his own territories, slew the Danish king 
of Mercia, and almost entirely expelled them from that part of the country also.
Edward and Athelstan committed great 
slaughter amongst the Danes ; after which England was at peace for fifty years ; but, on the accession of Ethelred, 
emboldened by the imbecility of the government, the Danes renewed their depredations, and compelled the English to 
purchase peace upon the most extravagant terms.
Wrought to madness by their oppression, the natives conspired together, 
and, in one night, they massacred all the Danes throughout the kingdom.
This, however, only increased their calamity; 
for Sueno, or Sweno, king of the Danes, enraged at this slaughter of his subjects, invaded England with a powerful 
army, routed Ethelred, f subdued the whole kingdom, and left it to his son Canute, j— In about twenty years, the Danish 
yoke'was again shaken off, and the government reverted to the Saxon line, in the person of Edward the Confessor.
A few years afterwards (A.
D 1066) during the reign of Harold, England was again invaded and subdued, by William, 
Duke of Normandy, sumained the Conqueror.
England suffered less by this invasion, than by any other.
The Normans, 
or northern men, which their name implies, were originally Danes, and had, about two centuries before this event, perma- 
nently fixed themselves in the French province of Neustria.
In a similar manner, the Danes had established themselves in 
England, and a considerable proportion of the population of the island was descended from those establishments.
This 
conformity between the invader and those whom he attacked had been greatly increased by the residence of Edward the 
Confessor, late King of England, in Normandy ; where he was educated, and where he had, of course, contracted an intimacy 
with the natives, and an affection for their manners.
He gave a preponderance to the Normau language ; and the politeness 
of his court was shown in its conformity to the supposed superiority of that country.
Added to this, Harold was no favourite 
of the people; and thus the views of the Norman chief were greatly facilitated.
Harold, however, fought bravely; and, 
notwithstanding the vast superiority of the enemy, in discipline and skill, it was not until he had fallen, that the battle 
can be considered to have been completely lost.
|| 
Of the changes which took place in the laws and government of the country, subsequently to this invasion, we shall 
speak hereafter.
At present it is only necessary to observe, that, with the successors of William, though not hi a direct 
line, the crown of England has ever since been vested.
* A hide of land is understood to be as much as one plough could cultivate in a year.
•)• Ethelred was forced to abandon his country and seek refuge in Normandy.
Before his departure he thus expressed his 
sentiments to his nobility, " We are not overcome by the swords, or by the courage of the enemy: but by the treason and the 
perfidy of our friends.
Our navy is betrayed into the hands of the Danes; our armies are betrayed by the revolt of our officers; 
our designs are betrayed by our counsellors, who instead of extricating us from our troubles, are continually persuading us to 
confirm infamous treaties, so that your valour and loyalty are rendered ineffectual by the treachery of your leaders!" 
+ About the year 1011.
|| The value of, and necessity of possessing, a powerful navy, is strikingly evinced by the success of this invasion.
The want 
of a navy was the fatal error of Harold.
Thus he appears to have been absolutely destitute of the necessary intelligence : his ex- 
ertions were restricted to the land ; and the event of a single battle was final.
Whereas, bad he collected a fleet which would have 
fought William on ihe water, he must have done him so much damage as to have disconcerted his measures ; possibly, too, he might 
have deprived him of some of hischief officers.
A fleet would have rendered William's situation, after he had landed, extremely 
hazardous, and would have given a decided weight to the arguments used to induce Harold to take more time : he might then safely 
have assigned the command of the first army to his brother, and have raised additional forces, as well as refreshed those which ac- 
companied him.
In spite of all the stores which William had transported, his army must have sunk under famine, had a strong 
English fleet guarded the sea, and a strong English army guarded the land.
Harold was more likely to replace losses, or to add.
reinforcements, than William was, had he taken more time, but, depending on one species of force only, he lost the battle, his 
crown, and bis life.
INTRODUCTION.
XXVll 
CHAPTER IV.
Division of England into counties, hundreds, and tythings:— Population.
— Religion.— Ecclesiastical courts.
— 
Dissenters.— English constitution.
— King.
— Parliament.
— Lords.
— Commons.
— Courts of law.
— Juries.
— Cir- 
cuits.— Punishments.
— Revenue.— National Debt.
— Army.— Local Militia.
— National defence.
— Army ex- 
penses.
— Origin, rise, progress, and present state of the Royal Navy.
— Navy expenses.
— Rodneys system of 
attack.— Battle of Trafalgar.— Patriotic fund.
THE Roman division of England has already been noticed.
Its division into shires is generally ascribed to the illustriou» 
Alfred.
The term implied parts cut off, or divisions ; and they were also denominated counties, because each was governed 
"by a distinct Ealdorman, a title corresponding with the Latin Comes, or Count.
After the conquest of the country by the 
Danes, this term was supplanted by that of Earl, from the Danish word Jarl, which, as well as Boron, originally implied, 
by way of great eminence, a man.
When these titles became hereditray dignities, about the eleventh century, the govern- 
ment of the shire devolved upon the Earl's deputy, the Vice Comes, Shire-reeve, or, according to the modern orthography.
Sheriff.
A remarkable subdivision occurs in the extensive county of York, which was divided into three parts, implied 
in the Saxon term Trythings, now corruptly denominated Ridings.
It is also generally believed, that the same monarch was the author of the subdivision of the counties into hundreds 
and tythings.
The hundred is supposed to have originally contained one hundred manors or farms, and the tything to have 
been restricted to ten; but they are now seldom mentioned, except in legal proceedings, or in topographical description.
At their first institution, the number of counties was only thirty-two ; but it was afterwards increased to forty, by the 
addition of those which are now distinguished by the names of Durham, Lancashire, Cornwall, Rutlandshire, Monmouth- 
shire, Northumberland, Westmorland, and Cumberland.
Durham and Lancashire are supposed to have been formerly in- 
cluded in Yorkshire ; Cornwall, in Devonshire; and Rutlandshire, in Northamptonshire: Monmouthshire formed part of 
Wales* and Northumberland, Westmorland, and Cumberland, belonged to the Scots.
These ibrty counties, with the addition of twelve, into which Wales was subsequently divided, make the present number 
fifty-two.
Their arrangement, with the number of inhabitants in each, according to the enumerations which were made, 
ia conformity to Acts of Parliament, in the years 1801 and 1811 stands as follows: 
Six Northern j 
f Northumberland 
J Cumberland ...
Durham....
Yorkshire .....
Westmorland....
I Lancashire 
("Cheshire .
Four bordering on Wales ; ^ 
j Shropshire 
Twelve midland ; 
Herefordshire 
^Monmouthshire ..
'Nottinghamshire .
Derbyshire .....
Staffordshire .....
Leicestershire ...
Rutlandshire ....
Northamptonshire.
Warwickshire ...
Worcestershire ...
Glocestershire 
Oxfordshire..
...
Buckinghamshire .
Bedfordshire .....
1801 
.162,300 
.121,100 
.165,700 
.887,200 
. 43,000 
.695,100 
.198.100 
.172,200 
..92,100 
..47,100 
,145,000 
.166,500 
.247,100 
.134,400 
,.16,900 
.136,100 
.215,100 
,143,900 
.259,100 
,113,200 
,111,000 
. 65,5C0 
1811 
177,900 
138,300 
183,600 
1,005,700 
47,500 
856,000 
234,600 
200,800 
973,000 
64,200 
168,400 
191,700 
304,000 
155,100 
17,000 
146,100 
236,400 
165,900 
295,100 
123,200 
121,600 
72,600 
xxvm 
INTRODUCTION.
Eight eastern; 
1801 1811 
-Lincolnshire 215,500 245,900 
Huntingdonshire 38,800 43,700 
Cambridgeshire 92,300 104,500 
Norfolk 282,400 301,800 
* Suffolk 217,400 242,900 
Essex 234,000 200,900 
Hertfordshire 100.800 115,400 
Middlesex 845,400 985,100 
fSurrey 278,000 334,700 
Kent 317,800 385,600 
Sussex 164,600 196,500 
^Berkshire 112,800 122,500 
Wiltshire 191,200 200,300 
I Hampshire 226,900 253,300 
LDorsetshire 119,100 128,900 
< Somersetshire 282,800 313,300 
^Devonshire 354 400 396,100 
(Cornwall 194,500 223,900 
fFlintshire 41 000 48,100 
j Denbighshire 62,400 66.400 
J Carnarvonshire ,.
43,000 51,000 
J Anglesea 35,000 38,300 
j Merionethshire 30,500 32,000 
^Montgomeryshire 49,-300 53,700 
fRudnorshire „ 19,700 21,600 
I Cardiganshire 44,100 52,000 
'.Pembrokeshire 58.200 62,700 
1 Carmarthenshire 69,600 79,800 
[Brecknockshire 32,700 39,000 
I. Glamorganshire 74,000 88,000* 
From the above table, it appears, that the number of stationary inhabitants, of all classes, in England and Wales in the 
year 1801, was 9,168,000 ; and, in 1811, 10,488,000.
Notwithstanding the losses which were inevitably occasioned by 
the late war, the population of the country rapidly increased, and is still increasing, f 
Christianity, as we have already seen, was planted in this island at a very early period.
On the invasion of the Saxons 
who were gross idolaters, the British church, with its people, was driven into the western parts of the country, where it 
long continued.
When Augustine, the monk, converted Ethelbert, King of Kent, and his people, to Christianity (A.
D. 
596,) he laboured strenuously to induce the British bishops to acknowledge the Pope's authority, and him as their arch- 
Seven southern; 
Three south-western ; 
Six North Wales ; 
Six South Wales ; 
* The whole of these returns are made upon the rule of adding one thirtieth part to the resident population of each county 
for absentees in the army, navy, &c.
f With the addition of Scotland, the entire population of Britain, in the year 1801, was 10,817,000 ; and, in 1811, 12,353,000.
The increase of population in this country, during the late reign of George III.
will be further apparent from the following state- 
ment:— 
POPULATION- 1760.
Great Britain 8,099,000 
India and Colonies 12,500,000 
(Omit Ireland) 20,599,000 
1812.
Total (including India and Colonies) 61,157,433 
Deduct Ireland 4,500,000 
, .
5(3,657,433 
INTRODUCTION.
xxix 
bishop ; and, on their refusal, the Saxons, at his instigation, fell upon twelve hundred monks and priests of the British 
nation, and killed them.
The Saxons and Normans acknowledged the authority of five successive Popes; and, from the time that King John 
basely subjected his crown to the papal see, with the view of emancipating himself from the power of his barons, till the 
period of I he Reformation, England was one of the tamest countries that ever submitted to the Romish yoke.
Henry the VUIth, on his dispute with the Roman pontiff", respecting his divorce from Queen Catharine, abolished the 
Pope's supremacy, seized upon all the monasteries, and other religious houses in England, and divided their lands amongst 
the nobility and gentry of the kingdom.
Henry himself assumed the title of Supreme Head of the Church; thus abolishing 
all foreign interference in the internal affairs of his kingdom, and blending the ecclesiastical with the civil administration.
This step paved the way to the change, which, under his offspring, was effected in the national religion, to the rejection of 
the errors of Popery, and the adoption of the doctrines inculcated by Luther and Calvin.
The English is the only Reformed Church which has retained the episcopal form in its ancient splendour.
The king is 
the grand fountain of all ecclesiastical honours; and next to him in power and dignity are the Archbishops of Canterbury 
and York.
The first, who is styled Primate of all England, takes precedence of all persons except the royal family.
He 
has the power of probate of all testaments within his province, and of granting, in certain cases, licenses and dispensations.
He has also four courts of judicature; that of Arches, of Audience, of Prerogative, and of Peculiars.
The Archbishop 
of York is styled Primate of England, and precedes all dukes, not of the blood-royal, and all officers of state, the Lord 
Chancellor excepted.
His province extends over the counties of Northumberland, Durham, Cumberland, Westmorland, 
Cheshire, Lancaster, and the Isle of Man, besides his own proper and peculiar diocese, embracing the greatest part of 
Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire.
That of Canterbury comprises the rest of the English counties, with all Wales, and has 
a great part of Kent for its peculiar diocese.
The prelates, as well as the bishops, are appointed by the sovereign.
On a vacancy in any see, the dean and chapter 
apply to the king, who returns what is called a Conge d'Elire, naming a chapter of the prebendaries, who are constrained 
to elect the person nominated.
The ceremony is completed by the royal assent under the great seal, and by consecration, 
which is performed by the metropolitan, or in his name.
The omission of the latter constitutes the only difference on the 
translation of a bishop to another see.
The bishops are twenty-five in number.
Their sees, together with the extent of their dioceses, are as follow : 
In the Province of Canterbury, 
1. London — containing Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hertford.
2. Winchester — Surrey, Hampshire, Isles of Wight, Jersey, Guernsey, and Alderney.
3. Lichfield and Coventry — Stafford, Derby, and part of Warwickshire and Shropshire.
4. Lincoln — Lincoln, Leicester, Huntingdon, Bedford, Buckingham, and part of Hertford, 
5. Ely — Cambridgeshire.
6. Salisbury — Wilts and Berkshire.
7. Exeter — Cornwall and Devon.
8. Bath and Wells — Somersetshire.
9. Chichester — Sussex.
10.
Norwich — Norfolk, Suffolk, and a small part of Cambridgeshire- 
11.
Worcester — Worcestershire, and part of Warwickshire.
12.
Hereford — Herefordshire, and part of Shropshire.
13.
Rochester — Part of Kent.
14.
Oxford — Oxfordshire.
15.
Peterborough — Northamptonshire and Rutlandshire.
16.
Glocester — Glocestershire.
17.
Bristol — Bristol, part of Glocestershire, and county of Dorset.
18.
Landaff— Glamorganshire, Monmouthshire, Brecknockshire, and Radnorshire.
19.
St. David's — Pembrokeshire, Cardiganshire, and Carmarthenshire.
20.
St. Asaph— The greatest part of Flintshire, Denbighshire, Montgomeryshire, and part of Shropshire.
21.
Bangor— Anglesea, Carnarvonshire, Merionethshire, and part of Denbighshire and Montgomeryshire.
In the Province of York.
22.
Durham — Durham and Northumberland.
23.
Carlisle— Great part of Cumberland and Westmorland.
24.
Chester — Cheshire, Lancashire, and part of the counties of York, Cumberland, and Westmorland- 
25.
Sudor and Man — Isle of Man.
h • 
xxk INTRODUCTION.
All these prelates, excepting the Bishop of Sodor and Man, have seats in the House of Lords, as barons and peers of 
the realm, by three different claims ; in right of the baronies attached to their sees, as barons summoned by writ, and as 
barons by patent, a form which accompanies their consecration.
Their privileges approach the regal; tbey are sole judges 
in their own courts, and issue writs in their own names, instead of the royal style used in other courts.
They may depute 
their authority, which no other judges can do; and their episcopal power of conferring orders extends to any christian 
country.
The Bishop of London, as presiding over the capital, has the precedence of all the others.
The see of Durham 
constitutes a county Palatine, with great powers and prerogatives ; the bishop, of course, possesses very extensive patronage 
and authority, and the king's judges sit in his diocese only by his permission.
The Bishop of Winchester is the third in 
dignity, but esteemed the first in opulence.
These three precede all the rest, who take place according to the seniority of 
consecration.
The bishops alone, may ordain deacons or priests, consecrate churches and burial-grounds, and administer confirmation.
Their episcopal jurisdiction formerly extended to the licensing of physicians, surgeons, and schoolmasters, and to the con- 
junction of small parishes.
At present their attention is chiefly confined to their clergy, to the probation of wills, and other 
subjects of a similar nature ; so that, except in parliament, they rarely interfere in secular matters.
To every cathedral in England belong several prebendaries, as canons, who constitute the chapter, assist the bishop in 
ecclesiastical affairs, and possess various privileges superior to the common or minor canons.
At the Reformation their 
salaries were mostly Converted into money ; but those of Durham chose to retain the ancient portion of land assigned them, 
which, having increased prodigiously in value, are now styled golden prebends, and are worth from eight to twelve hundred 
pounds a year.
Next in order come the arch-deacons, whose number is about sixty.
Their duties consist of the visitation of the churches, 
the reformation of slight abuses, and the induction into benefices.
Subordinate to them were formerly arch-presbyters, also 
styled rural deans, but they are now unknown in England.
The lowest class of the clergy consists of priests and deacons.
Priest's orders cannot be canonically received before the 
age of twenty-four years, and those of a deacon require twenty -three.
The office of the latter is restricted to baptisms, 
reading in the church, and assisting the priest at communion.
The benefices of the inferior clergy are now freehold, but 
in many places their tylhes are impropriated, or transferred into secular hands.
Where this is the case the priest is termed 
a vicar, but if the tythes be entire he is styled rector.
The number of parishes in England and Wales is 10,674; of which, about 4000 are vicarages, and the remainder are 
rectories, perpetual curacies, &c.
The clergy in general enjoy some peculiar privileges.
Their goods are free from tolls in fairs and markets ; they cannot 
be compelled to serve any office, civil or military, and are exempt from assessments for robberies committed in the hundred, 
as well as from those collected for watching, warding, and highways.
Some of the ecclesiastical courts still retain considerable power.
The convocation, which, in its constitution, bears a 
great resemblance to the parliament, is composed of the archbishops and bishops, with a lower house of one hundred and 
fifty members.
They are convoked at the same time with every parliament, and their business is to consider the state of 
the church, and to call those to account who have advanced opinions inconsistent with the doctrines of the church of Eng- 
land.
During the reign of Queen Anne, the power of this assembly was raised to a height that was incompatible with the 
principles of religious toleration, or even of civil liberty ; so that her successor thought fit to exert the prerogative of the 
crown in dissolving it, and since that period its members have not been allowed to deliberate.
The Court of Delegates, to whom appeals lie from the highest metropolitan court, consists of persons delegated or ap- 
pointed by special commission under the great seal.
The Court of Arches, the most ancient consistory of the province 
of Canterbury, is so styled, because it was held in the old church of St. Mary le Bow ; but after the destruction of that 
edifice, in the great conflagration of 1666, it was transferred to the great hall in Doctor's Commons.
All appeals, in eccle- 
siastical matters, from the judgment of inferior courts, are directed to this, in which none but doctors of the civil law are 
allowed to plead.
At the Court of Audience the Archbishop always presides in person, deciding any doubts respecting the 
admission of benefices and the dispensation of the bans of matrimony.
The Prerogative Court judges of estates fallen by 
will, or intestate; and the Court of Peculiars relates to certain parishes which have a jurisdiction amonjj themselves by the 
probate of wills, and are, therefore, exempt from the authority of the bishop.
Every bishop has his Consistory Court j 
every arch-deacon, and the dean aud chapter of every cathedral, also have their respective courts.
Such is a general outline of the economy of the church of England, the principles of which are truly characteristic of 
tolerance and moderation.
The adherents of no religious sect are here prevented from worshipping God in the manner most 
agreeable to themselves.
Though severe laws were enacted against such Protestant Disseuters as refused to subscribe to 
the articles of the established church, they were not enforced; and, in 1779, religious liberty received a considerable aug- 
mentation by an act which was then passed for granting legal toleration to dissenting ministers and school -masters, without 
subscription.
INTRODUCTION.
xxxi 
All those who differ in tenets and forms from the established church might with propriety he called Dissenters; but the 
term is more strictly applied to the Presbyterians and Independents.
These two classes have considerably relaxed tha 
strictness of their discipline, and are now intermingled with the Unitarians, so denominated from their belief in the unity 
of the Godhead.
The other principal classes of Dissenters are the Roman Catholics, Methodists, Quakers, Anab iptists, 
BJid Swedenborgians.
The English Catholics, who still number many distinguished families, display great moderation, 
which has naturally been increased by the privileges lately extended to them.
The Methodists are a very numerous, and, 
generally speaking, a respectable body, though the extravagant enthusiasm of some of their adherents, rind the gross 
irregularities of others, have e;iven occasion for much scandal and obliquy.
They allow the propriety of the creed and 
government of the national church, but require a stricter life, more fervent devotion, and more frequent and serious 
attendance on divine worship.
A philosopher may admire the rich creed, the universal charity, and the fraternal love of 
the Quakers and Moravians, but he must confess, with a sigh, that a nation of such people could not exist, unless all other 
nations were of the same persuasions.
The Anabaptists renounce infant baptism, substituting for it the immersion of the 
adult.
The Swedenborgians, who also style themselves the New Jerusalem church, derive their former name from a 
Swedish nobleman, who exchanged his native country for a residence in England.
His speculations, evidently the result 
of a disordered imagination, were penned by him in Latin, and filled more than twenty large quarto volumes.
One of the 
leading tenets of his doctrine is the continual intercourse of spirits with mankind.
In others, especially in the representation 
of the connubial pleasures and other enjoyments of a future state, it bears a near resemblance to Mahometism.
Many of 
the Protestant sects are scattered over the country; and the Jews, to whom belong some of the more opulent individuals in 
the kingdom, are permitted to practise unmolested all the ceremonies enjoined by the Mosaic dispensation.* 
The constitution of England, the peculiar glory of the country, and an object of admiration to other states, is a limited mo- 
narchy, counterpoised by two legislative assemblies, one of the hereditary peers, and the other of representatives elected by the 
people.
The power of enacting laws is inherent in the King, Lords, and Commons; and to this effect the concurrence of 
all three is absolutely necessary.
The title to the crown is hereditary ; and the sovereign, when he receives it, solemnly 
swears to govern his people according to the parliamentary statutes, and the laws of the realm; to maintain the Protestant 
religion; and to preserve the legal rights and privileges of the established church.
The king combines in his person the dignity of chief magistrate with the sanctity of the priest, and the title of sacred 
majesty appears to have been assumed with the functions of the head of the church.
So august is his person, that it is 
high treason only to imagine or intend his death ; and ho is deemed incapable of doing wrong, the law taking no cognisance 
of his actions, but transferring all the criminality to his ministers and advisers.
The royal prerogatives have never been 
accurately defined; they are, however, acknowledged to embrace the power of making war or peace, of forming alliances 
and treaties; of levying armies and equipping fleets.
To the king also belong all the magazines, forts, castles, and ships 
of war: and he has likewise the management of the coinage.
The prerogative also extends to the summoning, adjournment, 
prorogation, and dissolution of parliament; to the nomination of the great officers both of church and state; and to the 
disposal of all honours of nobility or knighthood.
The royal assent is necessary, to impart validity to an act of parliament ; 
but, without the consent of both houses, the king can neither enact new laws nor impose fresh taxes.
He may not only 
increase the House of Peers, but also that of Commons, by empowering any town to send burgesses to parliament; but this 
prerogative appears to have become obselete.
Being the fountain of justice, as well as of honour, he may pardon any 
offence, or mitigate the penalty ; and, as head of the church, he may call a national or provincial synod, and, with its consent, 
issue canons relating either to faith or practice.
Such are the principal prerogatives attached to the person of the sovereign ; 
others, more minute, are rather adapted to jurisprudential enumeration.
The parliament, or great council of the nation, has the next claim to notice.
The House of Peers may be said to have 
existed from the earliest period of our history, and it may even be traced back to the deliberative assemblies of our German, 
ancestors.
Originally both the nobles and commons met in one house; and it is a singular circumstance, that we are 
without any information relative to the time or occasion of the division into two houses; a circumstance on which rests the 
foundation of English liberty.
To the difficulty of finding halls large enough to accomodate our parliaments, which at 
that time frequently shifted the scene of their deliberations, is this division perhaps to be ascribed.
Some writers have asserted, that the Commons formed a part of the wittena gemote, or the assembly of sages of the 
ancient Saxons; while others maintain that there is no appearance of their parliamentary existence prior to the forty-ninth 
year of Henry III., the date of the first authentic records concerning them.
It is, however, admitted that the present 
constitution of parliament was sketched out as early as 1215, in the celebrated charter granted by King John.
The reader, who may wish for a complete view of the numerous sectarists which are tolerated in England, is referred to Evans's 
" Sketch of the Denominations of the Christian World;" a work which, eminently distinguished by its amiable liberality of religious 
sentiment, has, within these few years, been most extensively circulated through Great Britain, America, and several parts of tha 
Continent.
xxxu 
INTRODUCTION.
The peers of England only require the full age of twenty-one years to become hereditary senators, in their several 
degrees of duke, marquis, earl, viscount, and baron, formerly created by investiture, but latterly by patent.
This, however, 
must'be understood to relate only to those who profess the established religion ; the heads of several noble families, who 
still adhere to the Catholic faith, are consequently disqualified to sit in the grand legislative assembly of the nation.
The 
various orders of nobility have been preserved more pure in England than in any other country, which is partly owing to the 
laws of primogeniture, partly to the senatorial office, and partly to the institution of the Heralds' College, The peers are 
privileged from personal arrest, except for treason, felony, and a few other high offences, and can be tried only by a jury of 
peers, who give their verdict not upon oath, but upon their honour.
Every peer may appoint a proxy to vote for him in the 
senate, a privilege unknown to the Commons.
In the House of Peers is placed the royal throne, but it is never occupied, except at the meeting or prorogation of parlia- 
ment, when the king proceeds to the house in great state.
The lord chancellor presides in this assembly.
The woolsacks 
on which that officer and the other judges, when called for their advice, are seated, constitute a remarkable feature, esteemed 
symbolic of the staple commodity of the country.
Besides the English peers, sixteen peers of Scotland are members of 
the upper house.
Since the union between Ireland and Great Britain, it has received a further accession of twenty-eight 
Temporal, and four spiritual peers, for that country.
The number of peers is continually subject to variation, from the ex- 
tinction of old titles or the creation of new ones.
Its progressive increase will be seen by the following table: 
Dukes 
In 1760.
In 1780.
In 1800.
In 1820.
23 
22 
19 
25 
Marquisses 
1 
1 
11 
17 
Earls 
56 
78 
86 
99 
Viscounts 
11 
14 
16 
22 
Barons 
57 
72 
12 
135 
The House of Commons consists of knights, citizens, and burgesses, chosen by counties, cities, and boroughs, in con- 
sequence of royal writs directed to the sheriffs.
To be eligible to represent a county, it is necessary to possess a clear 
estate, freehold or copyhold, of six hundred pounds a year; and to restrict the tumult inseparable from popular elections, 
it was enacted, under Henry VI.
that none should vote for knights of the shire, but proprietors of freeholds, rated at least 
at forty shillings a year within the county.
The qualification of a representative for a city or borough is the possession of 
an estate of three hundred pounds a year; the elections for these are regulated by their respective charters and customs; 
in some cases only a few citizens, and in others all the inhabitants, having a right to vote.
Persons holding certain places of profit or emolument under the crown, are disqualified to become candidates for a seat in 
parliament; and for some time the clergy have been in the same predicament.
The total number of the House of Commons is 658.
Of these, 489 are returned for England, 24 for Wales, 45 for Scot- 
land, and 100 for Ireland.
The individuals composing this branch of the legislature enjoy several important privileges.
They are exempted from arrest, 
in civil cases, forty days before the meeting of parliament, during their attendance, and forty days after the prorogation : 
they also possess the right of franking letters, and enjoy the freedom of speech, which is regularly demanded of the sove- 
reign at the opening of every new parliament; so that they cannot be questioned, out of the house, for any sentiment they 
have there uttered.
The commons, as a body, form the grand inquest of the realm, and may impeach or accuse any sub- 
ject however exalted in rank or station.
But their chief privilege, of which they have ever been deservedly jealous, is the 
right of levying money.
Accordingly, all grants of taxes and parliamentary aids must originate with the commons, and 
be first bestowed by them, on the principle, that as these supplies are raised upon the mass of the people, it is therefore 
proper that they alone should possess the power of taxing themselves through their representatives.
This amounts almost 
to a prohibition of any public measure, especially of war, unless it has previously obtained their sanction.
From sickness, important offices, and indispensable avocations, seldom more than two-thirds of the members are assem- 
bled, and that only on extraordinary occasions.
At the meeting of every new parliament, a speaker, or president, is chosen, 
to preserve order, and to enforce the observance of the forms which are so necessary in every popular assembly.
This 
office requires a perfect or ready knowledge of these forms, and considerable abilities, which are rewarded by a salary of six 
thousand pounds a year, besides other emoluments.
Acts of pailiamcnt, which constitute the statute law of the kingdom, may originate in either house, but they usually 
make their first appearance in the House of Commons.
Any member may move for a bill, (the term act is not applied till 
all the stages are complete,) which being seconded, the mover and those who support him are ordered to prepare i t..
W hen 
presented, and leave has been given to bring it to the table, it is read by the clerk, the clauses are debated, and a day.
is appoinfe"rf-- 
for a second reading.
After the second reading, it is committed ; that is, if important, it is referred to a committee of the 
INTRODUCTION.
xxxiii 
whole house, when the speaker leaves the chair, and another member sits at the clerk's table as chairman; or, if the sub- 
ject be: of little moment, to a private committee, which meets in a separate chamber.
In these committees every clause of 
the bill is debated, the blanks are filled up, and amendments made.
The chairman then reports it to the house, which 
re-considcrs the bill, and the <)uestion is put upon every clause and amendment.
Having undergone such modifications as 
the house mav think fit, the bill is engrossed; that is, fairly written on parchment; and, having been read a third time, 
the speaker holds it in his hand, and inquires if it shall pass.
If agreed to, it is carried to the House of Lords fur their 
concurrence, by one of the members, who, attended by several others, presents it at the bar of the peers, and there delivers 
it to the speaker, who leaves the woolsack to receive it.
If the bill be rejected, it cannot be moved again during the same 
session.
In the upper house, a bill passes through the same forms as in the lower ; and if any difficulty arise in the pro- 
gress, a conference is demanded in a chamber appropriated to the purpose, where it is debated, and the difference is com- 
promised, or the measure abandoned.
When a bill has passed both houses, it is always deposited in the House of Peers, ex* 
ccpt in the case of a money bill, which, after receiving the concurrence of the Lords, is sent back to the Commons.
A silent 
vote in the latter is given by aye or no, and in the former by content and not content.
The bill having passed both houses, nothing but the consent of the sovereign is wanting to give it the authority of an 
act.
This is imparted either by the King in person, or by commission.
To public bills, the clerk repeats: Le Roy le 
veut ; to those of a private nature ; Soitfait comme il est desire.
The refusal of the royal concurrence used to he signified 
by Le Roy s'avisera : but it has not been necessary to withhold it, since the management of the senate has become the 
professed ofrke of the minister It cannot fail to appear extraordinary that these forms of expression, which originated with 
the kings of the Norman line, should still be retained.
Nothing but the veneration attached to antiquity can be pleaded in 
their favour; and on the contrary, the dignity of a great and independent people seems to require that above, all things its, 
public acts should be executed in the national language.
The House of Commons is justly esteemed the palladium of English liberty, and the attention of the nation is chiefly 
directed towards it, on the discussion of any grand question relative to its exterior relations, or affecting the constitution of 
the country.
On Midi occasions the utmost powers of eloquence are exerted ; so that models of every kind of oratory, worthy 
of the most illustrious names of Greece or Rome, may be produced from the specimens exhibited in the British senate.
Besides the high court of parliament, the King is assisted by subordinate ministers and officers, who are responsible for 
their adviie and conduct.
The Privy Council, composed of members chosen by the King, is chiefly summoned to deliberate 
on affairs of sudden emergency, on peace and war, and special provinces of the royal prerogative.
On any change of admi- 
nistration, their names are seldom erasevl from the list, but the members in opposition cease their attendance.
They are 
styled Right Honourable, and are sworn to observe secrecy ; the lowest at the board pronounces his opinion first, and the 
King, if present, concludes with declaring his judgment.
At a remote period, when the sovereign retained in his own hands a great share of the administration of public affairs, 
there were intervals in winch he delegated the chief management of business to some person eminent for his talents and 
qualifications.
To give more weight to this substitute he was generally appointed Lord Chancellor, was president of the 
House of Peers, and was supported by the royal influence in that august assembly.
Since the House of Commons became 
the chief object of the attention of the crown, the chancellor of the exchequer, as superintendant of the public revenue, 
is considered as prime minister, \-hich term, however, is unknown to the English constitution.
Next to him in authority 
are the secretaries of state, whose office is divided into three distinct departments.
These are followed by the treasurer of 
the navy, the president of the council, the paymaster of the forces, the lords commissioners of the admiralty, and treasury, 
aud other persons holding high and important trusts.
Perhaps the most beneficial and popular effects of the English constitution are such as arise from the mode of adminis- 
tering justice, which for precision and purity is worthy of the highest applause.
It is, indeed, to be regretted, that the 
multitude and confusion of the statutes envelope Hie study of the laws in peculiar difficulty, and that the number of officers 
attached to every court swell the expenses of a suit to a prodigious amount.
Of the courts of law, the next in dignity to the legislative assembly of the nation, is the Court of Chancery, in which 
the Chancellor himself is the sole ju ige.
This court, judges causes in equity, and is designed to moderate the rigour of the 
law, to protect the helpless from oppression, and especially to extend relief in the three cases of fraud, accident, and 
breach of trust.
The Chancellor possesses very extensive patronage, influence, and authority.
To him belongs the ap- 
pointment of all justices of the peace; he is patron of all livings in the gift of the sovereign under the annual value of 
twenty pounds in the king's books ; and also the general guardian of all infants, idiots, and lunatics.
The Master of the 
Rolls, who presides in the absence of the Chancellor, is keeper of the important papers, enrolled in chancery, an office of 
great dignity, and considerable patronage.
The Court of Kinsr's Bench is so called, either because the monarch in former.
times occasionally sat there in person, or because all matters determinable at common law between the king and the subject 
fall under its cognisance.
The presiding judge, who is assisted by three others, is denominated Lord Chief Justice of 
i 
xxxiv INTRODUCTION.
England, denoting that his jurisdiction extends to the whole kingdom.
The Court of Common Pleas judges of common 
suits between subjett and subject; and lues all civil causes, real, personal, or mingled.
The Court of Exchequer, so 
termed from the ancient mode of accounting on a ohecquered board, decides all causes relating to the royal treasury, revenue, 
and customs.
The Lord Treasurer, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, may ue considered as honorary presidents ; but the first 
acting judge is the Lord Chief Baron .Three other judges, likewise styled Barons, ami many officers, belong to this court.
The trial by jury is a glorious feature of English jurisprudence, transmitted from the Saxon times, and justly considered 
as the safeguard of the lives, liberties, and property of the nation.
All trials upon common and statute law are determined 
by a jury composed of twelve men, chosen as unobjectionable from a larger number summoned by the sheriffs.
— They have 
their place in the court near the judges.
After the examination of the witnesses, and the pleadings, are ended, a judge recapitulates the evidence and arguments, 
and states the law; on which the jury, if they have any doubt on the subject, withdraw into a room, where they are 
locked up till they are unanimous in their verdict, which is pronounced by the foreman on their return.* 
Never did any constitution so amply provide for the security of personal liberty, as that of England.
Every prisoner has 
a right to bring a writ, called his Habeas Corpus, before a judge.
If, upon considering the cause of his confinement, the 
judge shall find that the offence is bailable, the prisoner is immediately admitted to bail, till he is brought to Iriul in a proper 
court of justice.
The sovereign himself cannot deprive the meanest individual of his liberty, unless he has forfeited his 
right to it by some illegal act, of which he is accused upon oath ; or except the public safety renders it necessary that he 
should be empowered to confine persons on suspicion.
This can only be done by the concurrence of the other two branches 
of the legislature, in the temporary suspension of the Habeas Corpus act, a measure never resorted to but in times of great 
difficulty and danger.
To make the judges as independent as possible of the crown, the constitution secures to them their offices for life, ami 
not during the pleasure of the sovereign ; and their salaries are so ample as to place them above the temptation of a bribe.
The jury are as little dependant on the judge, as the latter is on the monarch ; they are out of the reach of his vengeance, 
should they assert the innocence of a man, whom he might wish to find guilty.
It is to the distinct attributes possessed 
by the different branches of the judicial as well as of the legislative system, and to their perfect independence on the will of 
each other, that England owes all the pre-eminent advantages which characterize its constitution.
The courts already enumerated are all stationed in the metropolis.
For the more commodious and general distribution of 
justice, England is divided into six circuits, which are visited by the judges twice a year, when they sit and determine all 
causes of importance, civil and criminal.
These several circuits, with the counties which they embrace, are subjoined.
Home Circuit — Essex, Hertfordshire, Surrey, Sussex, and Kent.
Norfolk Circuit — Buckingham, Bedford, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Norfolk, and Suffolk.
Midland Circuit — Warwick, Leicester, Derby, Nottingham, Lincoln, Rutland, Northampton.
Oxford Circuit — Berks, Oxford, Glocester, Monmonth, Hereford, Salop, Stafford, Worcester.
Western Circuit — Hants, Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Cornwall, Devon.
Northern Circuit — York, Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Lancashire, 
Middlesex and Cheshire are not included in any of the circuits, the former containing the supreme courts of justice, and 
the latter being a county palatine with judges of its own.
Wales is divided into four circuits, which with their respective limits are as follow : 
North-east Circuit — Flint, Denbigh, Montgomery.
North-west Circuit — Anglesea, Carnarvon, Merioneth.
South-east Circuit — Radnor, Brecon, Glamorgan.
South-west Circuit — Pembroke, Cardigan, Carmarthen.
The judges for the first of these circuits are also judges for Cheshire, and the first of them is usually styled Chief Justice 
of Chester.
While cases of importance are referred to the decision of the judges at their periodical visitations, those of less import- 
ance are determined by the justices of the peace, who may be traced back to the fourth year of Edward III.
Their 
* The trial by jury is of very remote antiquity in the north, and owed its establishment to Odin.
About fifty years before the 
birth of Christ, when Odin settled in Sweden, on the bank of the lake Malaren, the principal men of his company were twelve, 
according to the number and the names of the great Northern Gods.
Of these twelve, Odin constituted a society of judges; and 
thence it was afterwards continued to have twelve judges, or twelve men to judge in every case.
In the time of Ragnar Lodbrog, 
King cf Denmark, who died in 795, this institution seems to have gone into neglect, for it is found that he re-established it, 
ordering that twelve wise men should judge in all causes.
Hence we also find that the number of twelve was much used in the 
North, in taking of oaths, and on other solemn occasions.
INTRODUCTION.
xxxv 
office is chiefly to commit offenders to prison, to inspect the execution of some particular laws relating to the poor, high- 
ways, and oilier matters of a similar nature.
They hold a commission under the great seal, and, once in three mouths, 
hold what is called the quarter sessions.
The grand inquest or jury of the comity is summoned to inquire into the cases of all persons charged with the commission 
of crimes, when those who appear to he guilty are ordered to gaol for trial, at the next circuit, or assizes.
For the more effectual execution of the laws, a high sheriff is annually appointed hy the King for every county, except 
•where the office has been made elective, as in Middlesex ; or hereditary, as in Westmorland, in the noble family of TuftouJ 
or is confem-d by charter, as in Cornwall, where the appointment is vested in the Prince of Wales, when not a minor.
The duty of the sheriffs is to execute the royal mandates, to impannel juries, to bring persons to trial, and to superintend 
the execution of their sentences ; to collect fines, to remit them to the exchequer, and to preserve the tranquillity of 
the country.
On the circuits, the sheriff attends the judge with a retinue of officers and servants ; and he also presides at the county- 
court, for the decision of all civil causes under forty shillings.
The names of the sheriffs are annually pricked hy the King 
with a gold needle, out of a list of six gentlemen of the county, drawn up by the judges who go the circuit.
Every hundred had formerly a bailiff, but the office is now rare, or as fallen into disuse.
The constables, of whom 
each parish has one, personally assist in the preservation of the peace, and execute the warrants of the justices.
Every 
county has two coroners, whose duty it is to inquire, by a jury of neighbours, into cases of violent or sudden deaths, and 
likewise concerning shipwrecks.
Such are the principal magistrates in the country.
Cities and towns are generally governed by a mayor, aldermen, and 
common council; or by similar officers under different appellations, whose juridical power, however, little exceeds that of 
justices of the peace.
In the villages, the lords of the manor hold courts leet, and courts baron, and still retain various 
relics of feudal jurisdiction.
Indeed, to use the words of an intelligent writer, '* every little village hath almost an epitome 
of monarchical government, of civil and ecclesiasticaLpoiity, within itself ; which, if duly retained, would render us a very 
happy people." 
It cannot be expected that the various punishments inflicted by the laws of Englaud should be here enumerated.
It has 
been objected, and not without reason, that their general tenor is too sanguinary, and hence they have been said to be 
written with blood.
Were death confined to the crimes of high-treason and murder, the relaxation would probably prove 
beneficial to the community with whom the frequency of capital punishments weakens the effect which they are intended to 
produce ; that of impressing terror.
Much, however, to the credit of Sir James Macintosh's humanity, and correct notious 
of justice, several bills are at this time (June, 1820,) in their progress through parliament, having for their object the general 
improvement of our criminal judicature, and the remuneration of those who may happen to he declared innocent after trial.
* 
The state of the public finances of England is such as must convey a high idea of the national prosperity.
The sums 
annually raised to meet the exigencies of the government must appear immense when contrasted with the small extent and 
population of the country.
In former times the royal revenue principally arose from the domains or lands appropriated to the crown, from fines civil 
and criminal, which were paid into the treasury, and from goods imported or exported.
The expenditure was not much increased by war, as each soldier wns then obliged to maintain himself, for a certain time ; 
* The mild administration of our laws is a subject particularly deserving of notice; as it is well known, that the number of crimi- 
nals, who actually suffer the final infliction of the law, is extremely small, in proportion to the number of those who are executed.
An official return, printed by order of the House of Commons, presents in one view an accurate representation of the state of crimes 
made capital by the law in the several years from the year 1805 to the year 1818 inclusive.
From this it appears that the total num- 
ber of persons convicted were as follows : 
Convicted.
Executed.
For Burglary 1874 199 
Larceny (value 40s.) 1119 17 
Forgery 501 207 
Horse-stealing 852 35 
House-breaking 761 17 
Murder 229 202 
Highway robbery '.
848 118 
Sheep-stealing 89G 43 
Othercapital offences 1350 197 
8430 1035 
xxxvi INTRODUCTION.
and on extraordinary emergencies a contribution was raised with the consent of parliament.
In latter periods, subsidies were 
granted on landed income, to the amount of a fifteenth, or a tenth, and a proportionable rate was levied on moveable uoods.
As commerce and manufactures became more flourishing, taxes began to be imposed on the materials employed in them, and 
hence arose that vast increasing fabric of taxation, which, in the opinion of many, must crumble to pieces from its own 
weight, and overwhelm the nation in its ruins ; while other politicians maintain that its structure is too solid to justify 
any such apprehensions.
The most productive branches of the permanent revenue are the excise, customs, duties and stamps.
Other supplies 
arise from the Post Office, the East India Company, lotteries, and various other sources.* 
A great portion of our immense revenue is absorbed in the interest of the national debt," which began in the reign of 
William III.
and grew into what have been denominated the funds, or slocks.
To alleviate the increasing burden, a sinking fund was instituted in 1788, with the surplus of the revenue; and, by its 
operation, a large proportion of the debt has since been redeemed, f Some innovations, however, have lately been made 
upon the original plan ; and, within the last two years, a considerable sum has been appropriated to meet the exigencies of 
lie govern ment.
* The following is an abstract of the net produce of tlie revenue of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, in the 
years ending the 5th of January, 1817, and 5th of Januaiy, 1818.
Year ending Year ending 
5th Jan. 1817.
5th Jan. 1818.
Consolidated 6,306,448 8,373,770 
Annual Duties 2,393,201 2,871,505 
"War Taxes 1,00S,366 
Total Produce of Cash £.
9,708,015" £.11,245,284 
Consolidated, including Assessed Taxes, Ireland ...20,161,318 18,501,503 
Annual Duties 534,124 258,131 
Total Produce of Excise £.25,157,516 £.21,856,947 
Stamps 6,472.106 6,857,687 
Post Office 1,498,001 1,390,230 
Assessed Taxes 5,783,322 6,127,529 
Property Tax 11,185,584 1,268 i58 
Land Taxes 1,127.929 1,163 320 
Miscellaneous 444,688 688,930 
Unappropriated Duties 374,006 1,062,073 
Pensions, &c.
Ann. Duties 4,016 
£.26,889.624 £.13.563,227 
Total Net Revenue L.
61,755,155 £.
51,665,457 
f The following; was the amount of the Public Funded Debt of Great Britain, distinguishing the redeemed and unredeemed !
together with annual charge thereon, and the sinking fund applicable to the discharge thereof, on the 5th of January, 1818:— 
Great Britain, including Ireland, funded therein, consolidated per 56 Geo. III.
c. 98.
Public Funded Debt L.
1,106,759,615 
Dent Redeemed 35^,557,624 
Debt Unredeemed...
748,201,991 
Chnrge.
exclusive of Sinking Fund, estimated at L.
27,S66,439 
Sinking Fund, estimated at , 13,847,137 
Total Ann. Charge, estimated at L.
41,713,576 
It has been calculated.
that 'he national debt, in 1/.
Bank of England notes, taken at the round sum of 800,000,0002.
only, and at 
the rate of 5 12 to the pound, will be found to amount to the enormous weight of 618 tons, 2 qrs.
and 9 lbs.
; which, allowing2 cwt.
2 c|is.
to each man, would require upwards of 5,500 able bodied porters to carry away — or more than 200 waggons, with four 
bosses.
INTRODUCTION.
xxxvii 
The civil list, or the revenufc of the King in his distinct capacity, amounts to about one million annually.
The expenses 
to be defrayed by it are those which in any shape relate to civil government; as the salaries of officers of state, judges, 
end ambassadors, the maintenance of the Queen and royal family, the private expenses of the King, secret service money, 
pensions, and other bounties.
All these have sometimes so far exceeded the revenues appropriated to them, that repeated applications have been made 
to parliament to discharge the debts contracted in consequence of the deficiency.
The principal causes of the enormous public expenditure are, in England, as in every other state, the army and navy.
Such, until very lately, was the situation of the country and of Europe, that it was thought necessary to increase the force 
of both to an unprecedented degree.
The threat of invasion held out by the ruler of France, in 1805, served to arouse the 
spirit of the people, and to create an additional defence, in the persons of the volunteers, who enrolled themselves in 
such numbers as to supersede the necessity of enforcing the act for calling out the whole population capable of bearing arms.
A regular standing army is not, strictly speaking, acknowledged by the laws and constitution of the kingdom.
The only 
force provided by them for the preservation of the public security, consists of the national militia, formed by a certain 
portion of inhabitants of each county, chosen by lot, and officered by the lord lieutenant, the deputy-lieutenants, and the 
principal land-holders of the respective counties, under a commission from the crown.
In peace they are exercised at stated 
times, and are not compellable to leave their counties; but during war they may be marched to any part of the kingdom.
Farther they cannot be sent unless with their own concurrence.
When in actual service, they are subject to the rigour of 
martial law, like the regular army, to which they may be regarded as very little inferior.
The volunteers, on their original formation, chose their own officers, and the expense of their clothing was defrayed by 
the individuals themselves, or by subscriptions collected in the towns or parishes to which they belonged.
They were not 
liable to be called into service unless in case of actual invasion.
In consequence of the critical situation of the country, a fourth species of force was proposed to be provided, by what was 
denominated the Training Act, which was to enable the King to assemble and exercise all the males, of a certain age, fit to 
bear arms.
This measure originated with the ministry over which Mr. Fox was considered to preside; but, as it had not 
been found sufficiently effective, when a new administration came into power, it was thought expedient to devise other means 
for the protection of the realm.
Accordingly, in the spring of 1808, Lord Castlereagh brought forward a plan, which, with 
certain modifications, was carried into effect, for raising a local militia, of 60,000 men.
The mode of raising this force 
was assimilated, in a great measure, to the old county militia system : the men are engaged for a certain term; no substi- 
tutes, unless under very particular circumstances, are admitted ; the men are not to quit their own county, except in case of 
invasion ; at the commencement of the service, they are trained twenty-eight days ; and, in each succeeding year, unless 
otherwise directed, they are called out for twenty-one days.
— When the whole of this plan had been carried into effect, the 
total force, of every description, for the defence of the country, stood as follows : — 
Regular army for home defence - — 200,000 
Militia— British 330,000 
Irish 70,000 
400,000 
Local Militia 60,000 
Making a regimented fcrce for home defence, independent of 
the volunteers, of.......
660,000 
Volunteers 290,000 
Total of the force for home defence ...«-« - 9-50,000 
According to the returns which were made under the Training Act, the number of men, liable to serve, in England and 
Wales, was 820,420.
Lord Selkirk, however, founding his calculations upon the returns which were made under the Popu- 
lation Act of 1801, estimated the number of males from the age of nineteen to twenty-six, who might be considered as 
competent to military service, in defence of the country, at 324,394 ; which, with 58,428 for Scotland, made an aggregate 
of 382,822.
Upon the same principle, according to the returns of 1811, the aggregate force of Great Britain would be 
437,182.
The sum appropriated by government, for the expenses of the army, must necessarily be very great.
In the year 1807, it 
amounted to 18,223 ,786/.
; and, in 1808, the army expenses were estimated at 19,439,189/.
; presenting an increased expen- 
diture of upwards of 1,000,000/.
in one year.
Fortunately the return of peace has relieved the country from a great portion 
k 
xxxviii INTROD UCTION.
of this burden; as, in the year 1818, the number of troops to be provided for was only 94,847; the charge for which 
was 6,494,290/.
10s.
Ad.*- 
With respect to the character of the English soldiery, it may not be improper to remark, that though they may yield 
in experience to those of some other nations, yet, in courage and intrepidity, they are surpassed by none.
Scarcely an 
instance is on record, of their having sustained a defeat, when opposed to numbers approaching to an equality with their 
own; and many brilliant examples might be adduced from our annals, of their having routed enemies vastly superior iu 
strength.
Agincourt, Cressy, and Waterloo, are names that, will never be forgotten, in England.
The natural courage of 
English soldiers is seconded by extraordinary muscular power, which gives them an important advantage in all battles that 
are to be decided by the bayonet.
Our great moralist, Johnson, in his considerations on the bravery of the English common soldiers, observes, that, " our 
nation may boast, beyond any other people in the world, of a kind of epidemic bravery diffused equally through all its ranks.
We can show a peasantry of heroes, and fill our armies with clowns, whose courage may vie with that of the general." He 
observes that this quality proceeds neither from long habits of regularity, great exactness of discipline, nor confidence in 
superiors.
•' It is not to any great esteem of the officers," continues he,'-' that the English soldier is indebted for his spirit 
in the hour of batlle ; for, perhaps, it does not often happen that lie thinks much belter of his leader than of himself.
The 
French Count, who has lately published the Art of War, remarks how much soldiers are animated, when they see all their 
dangers shared by those who were born to be their masters, and whom they consider as beings of a different rank.
The 
Englishman despises such motives of courage; he was born without a master; and looks not on any man, however dignified 
by lace or titles, as deriving from nature any claims to his respect, or inheriting any qualities superior to his own.
" Whence then," proceeds the philosopher, " is the courage of the English vulgar ?
It proceeds, in my opinion, from that 
dissolution of dependance which obliges every man to regard his own character.
While every man is fed by his own hands 
he has no need of any servile arts; he may always have wages for his labour; and is no less necessary to his employer, 
than his employer is to him.
While he looks for no protection from others, he is naturally roused to be his own protector; 
and having nothing to abate his esteem of himself, he consequently aspires to the esteem of others.
Thus every man that 
crowds our streets is a man of honour, disdainful of obligation, impatient of reproach, and desirous of extending his repu- 
tation among those of his own rank ; and, as courage is in most frequent use, the fame of courage is most eagerly pur- 
sued." 
But it is her navy which constitutes the chief rampart and supreme glory of Britain.
In the size, strength, and num- 
ber of ships, it as far exceeds the naval establishment of the most flourishing maritime nation that ever existed, as the 
hardy sailors who man it surpass all others in public spirit, intrepidity, skill, and perseverance.
" An English man of 
war," it has been emphatically observed, " can speak all languages ; she is the best interpreter, and most profound politician 
in this island ; she is the wisest minister of state that ever existed, and never tells a lie — nor will she suffer the proudest 
Frenchman, Spaniard, or Dutchman to bamboozle her, or to give her a saucy answer." 
From the insular situation of this country, it was, even in a very remote period, a considerable naval power.
As early 
as the times of the Saxons, we find mention made of the numerous fleets of the small vessels then in use.
Alfred directed 
a powerful naval armament against the Danish invaders.
The fleet of Edgar is also celebrated; it was computed by Wil- 
liam of Malmsbury at four hundred vessels; but the author of the Saxon Chronicle assures us, that the fleet equipped by 
Ethelred II.
exceeded any that England had ever beheld.
In the reign of John we find the commencement of that 
maritime rivalship which has ever since subsisted between England and France : it is commemorated by a signal victory 
obtained, by the aid of the Flemings, over the fleet of Philip Augustus, computed at seventeen hundred vessels.
In the pride of his triumph, John ordered the salute to be paid by foreign vessels to the national flag ; a command 
which is enforced to this day.
From that time the fleet of England has maintained its superiority over those of all other 
powers.
The glory of the English navy, however, may properly date its origin from the reign of Henry VII.
That monarch 
built the first large ship, called the Great Harry, which cost him about 14,000/.
This ship was accidently burnt at Wool- 
wich, ill the year 1553.
Henry VIII., in whose reign the sea service became a distinct and regular profession, materially 
increased the royal navy, which, at his death, consisted of from 10,550 to 12,455 tons.
At the close of the short reign 
* The number of English troops, in France, at that time, was 22,993 ; and, in India, 19,899.
The whole of those in France 
have since returned, an»l many of them have been disbanded.
An official return of the strength of the British army on the 25th of 
January, 1819, laid before the House of Commons, states the general total at 109,810 non-commissioned officers and privates, and 
5,852 officers; of which amount fheie are serving in Great Britain 15,248, exclusive of 5,516 Foot Guards ; Ireland 18,923; East 
indies 18,821 ; troop-horses 11,276.
INTRODUCTION.
xxxix 
of Edward VI.
the tonnage appears to have somewhat decreased: the total number of ships, gallies, pinnaces, and 
row-barges, at that period, was 53, o:ily 28 of which were above 80 tons.
At the death of Queen Mary, in 1553, the 
number of ships and vessels was reduced to 2fci or 27, and.
the tonnage to about 7110 tons.
The enterprising genius of 
Elizabeth ra ; sed the British navy from this deplorable state; during the last five and twenty years of her life, she almost 
doubled its force, and at her death she le't 42 ships, comprising 17,055 tons, and employing 8346 men.
In the reign of 
Queen Mary, it was computed that, after 14,000/.
had been applied to the use of the fleet, for repairing and victualling, 
10,000/.
per annum would answer all necessary charges, but in Elizabeth's lime, the expanse of the navy was estimated 
at 30,000/.
a year.
In the peaceable reign of James I.
14 ships were added to the royal navy, besides from three to Ave 
that were rebuilt; and the increase of tonnage, from the death of Elizabeth, was about 2345 tons : the number of ships, 
however, upon the whole, had decreased from 9 to 11.
In the year 1616, King James issued a proclamation, forbidding 
any English subject to export or import goods in any but English boltoms; the good effects of which were soon expe- 
rienced, as it occasioned much larger ships to be built for the merchants' service, and also a great increase of trade.
Charles I.
built, at the least, 22 ships and vessels.
At the death of Cromwell, in 1659, there were 157 ships, carrying 
4390 guns, and 21,919 men ; exclusive of guns and men for four ships which were building.
Cromwell obtained an annual 
grant of 400,000/.
for the expense of the navy.
From the year J 669, to 1670, the charge of the navy never amounted to 
less lhan 500,000/.
a year.
In 1677, the sum of 586,000/.
was voted for building 30 ships ; 300,000/.
having been pre- 
viously voted, in 1675, also for the purpose of building.
Notwithstanding these grants the navy greatly declined during 
the reign of Charles II.
; though, at the decease of that monarch, in 1685, in consequence of the 30 new ships which had 
been built, its total number of ships was 179, bearing 103,558 tons.
Some very effective measures were adopted for the 
repairs of the navy, whilst James II.
occupied the throne ; nevertheless, at the period of his abdication, there was a decrease 
of six ships.
In the second year of William III.
an act was passed for building 30 more ships ; 17, of about 1100 tons each, 
to carry 80 guns ; 3, of 1050 tons, to carry 70 guns; and 10 of 900 tons, to carry 60 guns.
In the course of the war, 
which began in 1689, and ended in 1697, 50 ships, carrying 1112 guns, were taken by the enemy, beside several that 
were lost by accident; yet, at the latter period, the King asserted, in his speech from the throne, that the naval force of 
the kingdom had been increased to nearly double what it was at his accession.
The total was 325 ships; and at the close 
of 1698, several vessels having been disposed of at the end of the war, the number was 266.
This increase was in part 
owing to the number of ships which had been taken from the French.
At the death of King William, in 1702, the number 
of ships was 272; that of tons, 159,020; being an increase, in his reign, of 99 ships, and 57,128 tons.
The number of 
ships fluctuated in the time of Queen Anne ; and, at her decease, there was a decrease of 25 ships, though an increase 
of 8199 tons.
The number of ships also decreased during the reign of George I.; hut, in consequence of their enlarged 
size, the tonnage increased.
At his death, there was 233 ships, bearing 170,86 L 3 tons.
In 1730, there was 233 ships; 
in 1742, 271 ; at the end of 1744, 302; at the end of 1748, 334; at the beginning of 1750, 282; at the beginning of 
1753, 291 ; at the beginning of 1756, 320 ; and at the death of George II.
in 1760, 412.
Of this grand-total, consisting 
of 321,104 tons, 127 were ships of the line, and 285 of 50 guns and under.
Thus, at the commencement of the reign of 
George III.
our navy was in the most flourishing state ever known.
By the latter end of 1762, the number of ships had 
increased to 432.
From the year 1755, to 1762, inclusive, 200,000/.
had been annually voted for the building and repairing 
of ships, but, in the preceding war, no money had ever been voted for those services : 26 sail of the line, and 82 smaller 
ships and vessels, were built in merchants' yards in the course of the war which ended in 1762, or were building in those 
yards at that time : and 24 sail of the line, and 12 smaller ships, were launched in the king's yards, between the declaration 
of war in 1756 and the proclamation of peace in 1763.— ^After the etid of the war, the navy was of course considerably re- 
duced, but chiefly in the small ships and vessels.
At the commencement of the American war, in 1775, we had 340 ships; 
in 1777, we had 396 ; and in 1778, 450, of which 131 were of the line.
At the general peace, in 1783, we had 617 ships, 
of which 174 were of the line : their tonnage was estimated at 500,781 tons.
Subsequently to this period, great improvements were adopted by the Navy Board : all the artificers were retained in the 
dock-yards, and employed extra time, even in the winter months, instead of being discharged, as had been the case at the 
close of former wars.
— At the latter end of the year 1792, just before the late war commenced, the stores in hand, at the, 
respective dock-yards, were valued at 1,812,982/.; a circumstance entirely owing to the wise regulations which we have 
already noticed.
As soon as it was determined to arm, the most vigorous measures were adopted by government ; and so 
rapidly did the equipment of ships proceed, " that, at the end of nine months, there were 60 sail of the line in commission, 
as ships of war, and 74 of 50 guns and under, exclusive of sloops and small vessels, more than at the beginning of that 
period ; a degree of dispatch, almost astonishing, as nothing to be compared with it had ever been done in any former 
war." — In the course of 1 703, the navy was increased, as to frigates and smaller vessels; and, on the 1st of September, 
in that year, the total number of ships wa 498; bearing a tonnage of 433,226 tons.
On the 1st of January, 1795, the 
number of our ships was, 599; on the 1st of January, 1797, 691; on the 1st of January, 1799, 803 ; and at the signing 
xt INTRODUCTION.
of the preliminaries of peace, on the lsl of October, 1801, the number had increased to 864.
Out of these, 703 were in 
commission ; consisting of 144 of the line, and down to 54 gun-ships, inclusive; 242 50 and 44 gun-ships and frigates; 
and 317 sloops, hired armed ships, &c.
At the close of the war, in October, 1801, we had 247 more ships than at the close 
of the preceding war in 1783.
At the recommencement of hostilities, in May, 1S03, we had 770 ships; on the 1st of January, 1805, 919; on the 
31st of January, 1807, 10G1 ; and, in the year 1808, of our immense naval force, it was highly gratifying to.
observe, 
that no fewer than 68 sail of the line were prizes taken from the enemies of this country at different periods, besides 21 ships 
carrying from 40 to 50 guns each ; 62 ships from SO to 40 guns each; 15, carrying from 20 to 30 guns each ; and 66 
from 10 to 20 guns each — making a total of 232 ships, without adding thereto nearly 20 sail of the line, besides smaller 
vessels, then in our service, built on the bottoms of prizes, in lieu of such as had been casually lost.
For such a navy, the number of seamen, and the attendant expenses, were necessarily great.
For the year last men- 
tioned, 99,000 seamen, and 31,000 marines, were voted ; and the sum which was set apart for the naval service of that 
year was, 17,496,047/.
Subsequently to the ever memorable battle of Trafalgar — a battle which may almost be said 
to have exterminated the naval enemies of Britain — a gradual reduction of our maritime force was effected.- On the 1st of 
November, 1815, after the general peace of Europe, the total number of ships of war, in commission, .vas only 262; on 
the 1st of January, 1816, the number was further reduced to 248 ; on the 1st of June, 1816, the number was 217 ; of which 
there were 22 of the line, 5 fifties, 63 frigates, 89 cutters, &c.
12 guard-ships, 6 troop-ships, 12 store-ships, and 5 yachts.
On the 1st of October, 1816, there were 207 ships in commission; 378 in ordinary and repairing; and 33 building; 
making a total of 618.
In 1818, the aggregate was 625.
In 1817, the total ordinary expenses of the navy were 
1,953,171/.
16*.
3d.; in 1818, 2,071,475/.
17*.
3d.; and the ordinaries and extraordinaries together, 4,357,604/.
17*-.
3d.
It has already been remarked, that the present glory of the English navy must date its origin from the reign of Henry 
VII.
— Spain was effectually humbled by the destruction of her vaunted armada in 1588; the naval conflicts under Crom- 
well and Clrules II.
crippled the force of the Dutch; and by their defeat off La Hogue, the French irrecoverably lost the 
trident of the ocean.
During the war of 1756 victory contiuued faithful to the English flag; in the American war her 
navy was not less successful; but all its former achievements are eclipsed by the brilliant actions which have followed in 
rapid succession since the commencement of hostilities in 1798.
The bloody conflict of Trafalgar annihilated the united 
navies of France and Spain, and consecrated the name of Nelson — a name transcending every other that has yet appeared 
in the annals of naval warfare — to the everlasting gratitude of his country, and the admiration of the world.
* 
* Notwithstanding our physical superiority, it is deserving of remark, that, prior to the defeat of the French, by Admiral Rod- 
ney, in 1782, above thirty years had passed, without the achievment of any conspicuous naval victory.
Ship engaging ship, the 
English always succeeded; but, from the superiority of the enemy's naval tactics, the advantage did not extend to general engage- 
ments.
Rodney set the first example of attack to leeward, and cutting of the line; and since that time, in all general battles, we 
have uniformly triumphed.
As, however, some invidious attempts have been made, by Dr. Beatson, and others, to deprive the 
gallant Rodney of the credit to which he is most justly entitled, by attributing his manoeuvre rather to accident than to design, we 
shall take the liberty of quoting a passage from the life of Cumberland ; a passage which, in clearing up this disputed point, will 
both gratify and amuse the reader.
" It happened to me," says Mr. Cumberland, " to be present and sitting next to Admiral Rodney at table, when the thought 
seemed first to occur to him of breaking the French line, by passing through it in the heat of action.
It was at Lord George 
Germain's house, at Stoneland, after dinner, when having asked a number of questions about manoeuvring of columns, and the 
effect of charging witli them on a line of infantry, he proceeded to arrange a parcel of cherry stones, which he had collected from 
the table, and forming them as two fleets, drawn up and opposed to each other, he at once arrested our attention, which had not 
been very generally engaged by his preparatory inquiries, by declaring he was determined so to pierce the enemy's line of battle, 
(arranging his manoeuvre at the same time on the table,) if ever it was his fortune to bring them into action.
I dare say this passed 
with some as mere rhapsody, and all seemed to regard it as a very perilous and doubtful experiment; but landsmen's doubts and 
difficulties made no impression on the Admiral, who having seized the idea, held it fast, and in his eager animated way, went on 
manoeuvring his cherry stones, and throwing the enemy's representatives into such utter confusion, that already in possession of that 
victory in imagination, which in reality he lived to gain, he concluded his process, by swearing that he would lay the French ad- 
miral's flag at his sovereign's feet, a promise which he actually pledged to his Majesty in his closet, and faithfully and gloriously 
performed.
" That he carried this projected manoeuvre into operation, and that the effect of it was successfully decisive, all the world knows.
My friend, Sir Charles Douglas captain of the fleet, confessed to me that he himself had been adverse to the experiment, and, in 
discussing it with the Admiral, had stated his objections ; to these he got no other answer, but that, * his counsel was not called 
for, he required obedience only, he did not want advice.' Sir Charles also told me, that whilst this project was in operation, (the 
battle then raging,) his own attention being occupied by the gallant defence made by the Glorieux against the ships that were pouring 
INTRODUCTION.
xli 
Before the revolution of 1683, the impressing of men, even for the land service, was legal ; and, in earlier periods, it 
was usual to impress workmen to build royal caslles, artists to decorate tliem, and even singing boys for the cliapel.
Amidst 
the wide diffusion of liberty, and that personal security which is one of the greatest blessings of our constitution, it has been 
found impossible to abandon the impressing of seamen, when a sufficient number do not voluntarily offer themselves.
The special superintendance of the navy is committed to the Board of Admiralty, composed of five members ; though the 
principal direction of affairs is in the hands of one of their members, thence called the first Lord Commissioner of the 
Admiralty.
This board nominates all officers, or confirms them when named ; and under its commission are held all trials 
upon life and death in maritime affairs.
Besides the magnificent asylums at Chelsea and Greenwich, appropriated to the reception of soldiers and seamen dis- 
abled in the service of their country, numbers, whom those establishments are incapable of containing, receive pensions 
from the state.
Subsequently to the commencement of the second war of the French revolution, in 1803, additional re- 
wards have been bestowed on the meritorious defenders of Britain, from a fund, most characteristically denominated the 
Patriotic.
It was formed entirely by the voluntary subscriptions of private individuals, for the avowed purpose of " assuaging 
the anguish of wounds, or palliating, in some degree, the more weighty misfortune of the loss of limbs; of alleviating the 
distresses of the widow and orphan ; of smoothing the brow of sorrow for the loss of dearest relatives, the props of un- 
happy indigence and helpless age; and of granting pecuniary rewards, or honourary badges of distinction, for successful 
exertions of valour or merit." Such an appeal to a nation famed for humanity and generosity could not fail of producing a 
powerful effect; and in less than four years, nearly four hundred thousand pounds were thus raised for the purposes which 
have been stated.
CHAPTER V.
National character of the English.
— Animal food.
— Ale.
— Tea.
— Punch.
— Wine.
— Domestic architecture.
— 
Ancient and modem dress.
— Progress of refinement.— Language.
— Bardic poetry.
— Literature.
— Education.
— 
The arts.
— Amusements.
— Agriculture.
— Gardening.
— Roads.
— Manufactures and commerce.
— Fisheries.
— 
Cod.
— Herring.
— Salmon.
— Imports and exports.
— Capital of the Country.
— Political importance.
— France.
— 
Austria.
— Prussia .
— Holland.
—Russia.
— Denmark.
— Sweden.
— Portugal.— -Return of peace.
— New reign.
— Conclusion.
To exhibit a complete and finished picture of the genius, manners, customs, and national character of the inhabitants 
of England, would be an effort which the limits of this introductory survey would not permit us to accomplish.
A well 
defined outline is, indeed, all that is here necessary, or that can with propriety be expected.
The character of the English has been so frequently drawn, as well by foreigners as by natives, that, to attempt any 
thing new upon the subject, would be rather impertinent than satisfactory.
Chamberlayne, a well-known writer, at the 
commencement of the last century, says : — 
" The natives of England are generally of a middle stature : they are fair, especially the women : the men are strong, 
courageous, warlike, resolute, enterprising, liberal to prodigality, open-hearted, easy to be provoked, yet when exaspe- 
their fire into her, upon his crying out, ' Behold, Sir George, the Greeks and Trojans contending for the body of Patroclus.' The 
Admiral, then pacing the quarter-deck in great agitation, finding the experiment of his manoeuvre, which, in the instance of one 
^ ship, had unavoidably miscarried, peevishly exclaimed, ' Damn the Greeks!
and damn the Trojans !
I have other things to think 
of.' When, in a few minutes after, his supporting ship having led through the French line in a gallant style, turning with a smile of 
joy to Sir Charles Douglas, he cried out, ' Now, my dear friend I am at the service of your Greeks and Trojans', and the whole of 
Homer's Iliad, or as much of it has you please; for the enemy is in confusion, and your victory is secure.' This anecdote, correctly 
as I relate it, I had from that gallant officer Sir Charles Douglas, untimely lost to his country, whose candour scorned to rob his 
Admiral of one leaf of his laurels ; and who, disclaiming all share in his manoeuvre, nay confessed he had objected to it, did in the 
most pointed and decided terms, again and again repeat his honourable attestations of the courage and conduct of his commanding 
officer on that memorab e day." 
From the above, it is indisputably evident, that we are indebted to Rodney for that particular mode of attack which 1ms obtained 
for us so many victories.
The battles ot Howe, of St. Vincent, of Duncan, and of Nelson— with the e-.c p' d of the 
the Nile, where the French fleet was at anchor, and that of Trafalgar, in which an improvemen of ' >st importance 
adopted — may all be considered as having been fought upon the system of R > e 
xlii INTRODUCTION.
fated, storaachful till satisfaction be given, and then easy to be reconciled.
Sumptuous and splendid, great lovers of 
-hospitality, magnanimous and beneficent, learned.
They are thought to be wanting in industry, (excepting mechanics, 
wherein they are, of all nations, the greatest improvers,) caution, suspicion, craft, obsequiousness, and whicb is most of 
»!1 to be deplored, content.
But these wants are supplied by many eminent qualifications, as dexterity, sagacity, eloquence, 
fidelity, friendship, public spiritedness.
" The daringness of the soldier, the profoundness of the scholar, the magnificence of the gentry, and the robustness of 
the labourer, are not surpassed, if equalled, by any people in the world.
" The women are not without vanity, pretensions to satire, raillery, and the like; which vices they have borrowed from 
their neighbours, the French : but no women outdo 'em in modesty, patience, charity, providential care, temperance, wit» 
.good humour, cleanliness, and that which crowns all the rest, iu the sincerity and zeal of religious devotion.
* Good nature is a qualification peculiar to the English, so peculiar, that, as a noble writer observes, there is no word for 
it in any other language.
" The inhabitants are generally of solid parts, apprehensive and subtile; successful in finding out new discoveries; but 
most of all in improving of old, especially mechanics; there being few curiosities of art brought over from beyond sea, but 
are here improved to a greater height." 
Misson, a French author, who wrote about the same time as Chamberlayne, speaks in the following handsome terms of 
the English : — 
" The inhabitants of this excellent country are tall, handsome, well-made, fair, active, robust, courageous, thoughtful, 
devout, lovers of the liberal arts, and as capable ofthe sciences as any people in the world.
I cannot imagine what could 
occasion the notion that I have frequently observed in France, that the English were treacherous.
'Tis strauge, that they, 
of all nations in the world, should lie under this scandal ; they, whose generosity cannot so much as bear that two persons 
should fight without au equality of arms, offensive and defensive; he that should venture to use either cane or sword against 
a man who had nothing to defend himself with but his hands, would run a risk of being torn to pieces by the apprentices 
of the neighbourhood, and by the mob.
'Tis certainly great injustice to reckon treachery among the vices familiar to the 
English.
Other nations also accuse the common people among the English of incivility, because they generally accost 
one another without putting their hands to their hats, and without that flood of compliments that usually pours out of 
the mouth of the French, Italians, &c.
But they take the thing in a wrong light; every one follows his own ideas, and 
the idea of the English is, that civility does not wholly consist of these outward forms, which are very often hypocritical 
and deceitful.
The manners of the English, generally speaking, are very different from ours; ami I doubt not but all the 
neighbours say the same.
As it is the constant practice with men to blame every thing that is not conformable to their 
own customs, we must not wonder that the English and French, who live together, arc continually criticising each other.
Men of sense, who look upon things with other eyes, and are convinced, that whatever depends wholly upon fashions, is in 
itself indifferent, do not trouble themselves about such niceties.
When they are at Rome, they live as they do at Rome ; 
and always remember that these customs are like farthingales and high-crowned hats, which are becoming in one place, at 
the same time that they are ridiculous in another.
I am willing to believe that the English are subject to certain faults, 
as no doubt all nations are; but every thing considered, I am satisfied by several years' experience, that the more strangers 
are acquainted with the English, the more they will esteem and love them.
What brave men do I know in England !
What moderation !
What generosity !
What uprightness of heart!
What piety and charity!
Yes, there are in England 
persons that may truly be called accomplished ; men who are wisdom and goodness itself, if we may say so much of any 
thing besides God. Peace, and prosperity be eternally upon England !" 
We have yet to record the testimony of an intelligent German writer,* who visited this island a few years ago ; who 
seems to have studied the character of the people with much attention, and to have seized its more prominent features with 
considerable success, 
«< Were a person acquainted," says this author, " with the richness and fertility of the country which the English 
inhabit, with the climate, and the manner of living which these people have adapted to it ; had be seen the mode of education 
pursued with the English youth, both in the private houses of their patents and in the public schools — finally had he studied 
the constitution of the country, originally a paragon of excellence and wisdom, — he would not be at a loss to comprehend 
how these islanders have acquired all the singularities by which they are so strongly distinguished from the rest of man- 
kind.
Nay, the philosopher would be, on the contrary, highly astonished, had the English, under the iufluence of these 
circumstances, become any other than what they actually are.
* Joachim Henry Campe, of Brunswick, a gentleman whose productions are uuiversally admired in France and Germany.
INTRODUCTION.
xliii 
" The first thing that strikes a foreigner in this country is the fresh and healthy look of the majority of the persons he 
•ees.
Most of those who have not destroyed their constitutions by dissipation and excesses, appear strong and robust, 
without being fat or unwieldy.
This applies not only to the higher and middle ranks, but particularly to the lowest classes, 
which, in all the countries that I have visited, except this, exhibit so many pallid faces, so many wretches emaciated and 
bowed down by care, poverty, and want.
" This is still more striking in the country than in the metropolis.
I seldom passed through a village but a blooming 
male or female face appeared at the door or window ; and 1 do not recollect to have seen among them one of those care- 
worn, sallow, and ragged creatures, that are so commonly met with in other countries, especially among the peasantry.
Whoever would see the human figure in the full bloom of health, must visit the rustics of England.
In Paris and other 
great capitals the case is reversed ; a proof that the country people of England are more easy in their circumstances, and 
more happy, than those of most other lands." 
The English have generally been reputed to exceed all other nations in the use of animal food, but more correct obser- 
vation seems to impeach the truth of this position.
* Malt liquors, the principal beverage of both high and low, they take, 
it is true, in such quantities as to excite the surprise of foreigners who have been accustomed to the lighter wines of the 
continent.
Our ancestors prided themselves in the variety and richness of their ales, which are perpetuated in those of 
Burton, Dorchester, Taunton, and other [daces; to these, modern ingenuity has added porter, a malt liquor peculiarly 
English, which is held in high estimation, from the banks of the Delaware to the shores of the Ganges.
The prodigious 
consumptiou of tea is another singularity, in the diet of the English.
It would be difficult, if not impossible, to find, in any 
other country, a character such as Dr. Johnson has given us when he describes himself as " a hardened aud shameless 
tea-drinker, who has for twenty years diluted his meals with only the infusion of this fascinating plant, whose kettle ha* 
scarcely time to cool, who with tea amuses the evening, with tea solaces the midnight, and with tea welcomes the morning." 
Punch is another national beverage, but its use seems to be upon the decline, though eminent medical men have esteemed 
ita salutary potation in a moist and variable climate.
The English have been accused of excess with respect to spirituous- 
liquors; it is to be lamented that such frequent instances should justify the charge, but yet it is notorious that every northern 
nation far surpasses them in this particular.
Foreigners are struck with the simplicity of the English cookery, as far as relates to their animal and vegetable diet.
It is acknowledged that they understand better than any other people how to dress the former in such a manner as to lose 
none of the nutritious juices, either in boiling or roasting.
In this they are assisted by the strong heat of the coal fires, 
which enables them to perform every culinary operation in a much shorter time.
In the enjoyment of the pleasures of the table, the English differ from the rest of Europe.
A Frenchman, for example, 
drinks his wine during dinner, but Gibbon remarks, that the luxury of a daily table in England permits a gentleman to 
taste half a dozen sorts of wine during dinner; and to drink his bottle of claret afterwards.
The red wine of Portugal is 
a greater favourite than that of France, the astringent and antiseptic qualities of the former being more salutary in a moist 
climate.
It is fortunate, however, for the lovers of freedom and ease, that the annoying custom of drinking healths at table, so 
prevalent not many years ago, is now so far modified, as to be wholly unattended by its former stiff and obtrusive for- 
mality, f 
In observing the houses of the English, it may, with the strictest truth, be asserted, that domestic architecture has here 
* The consumption of sheep and lambs in London, during the year 1818, amounted in number to one million sixty two thousand 
seven hundred.
The number of horned cattle slaughtered, was one hundred and sixty four thousand; and by the inspector's return, 
it appears, that the number of horse hides produced at J.eadenhall market, amounted to tivelve thousand nine hundred.
•J- Misson, the French author from whom we have already quoted, thus describes the odious custom alluded to, as it existed in 
England about a century ago : — 
"To drink at table," says he, " without drinking to somebody's health, especially among middling people, would be like drink- 
ing in a corner, and be reckoned a very rude action.
There are two principal grimaces which are universally observed, upon this 
occasion, among persons of all degrees and conditions: the first is, that the person whose health is drunk, if an inferior or even 
an equal, must remain as still as a statue while the drinker is drinking, if, for instance, you are about to help yourself to some- 
thing out of the dish, you must stop suddenly, lay aside your fork or spoon, and wait without stirring any more than a stone till the 
other has drunk : after which, the second grimace is to make him a low bow, to the great hazard of dipping your peruke in the sauce 
upon your plate.
I own, that to a stranger these customs seem ridiculous; he thinks nothing can be more pleasant than to see a 
man that is just going to chew a mouthful of victuals, cut a piece of bread, wipe his fingers, or any thing of that nature, in a moment 
put on a grave serious face, keep his eyes fixed upon the person that drinks his health, and grow as motionless as if be were taken 
with an universal palsy, or struck with a thunderbolt.
As civility absolutely requires this respectful immobility in the patient, so 
there is some caution to be used on the part of the agent.
When you would drink a man's health, you should first keep your «ye 
xliv INTRODUCTION.
attained the highest excellence.
The chief study of their inhabitants is comfort; a word unknown, in the same signifi- 
cation, to any other language.
An accurate delineation of the character of the English, as displayed in their houses, is 
thus given by the German traveller, Campe: — 
" What particularly astonishes a stranger," says he, "at the first sight of an English town, and commands his admiration, 
is that pleasing appearance, not only of cleanliness, but also of convenience and opulence ; an appearance which is so 
universally exhibited in the exterior as well as the interior of their habitations, as to convey a high idea of the prosperity 
of this country, and the happiness of its inhabitants.
No where do you observe any thing that bespeaks poverty; any 
thing dirty, neglected or decayed ; signs of wealth and good management are evinced in the high degree of order, cleanli- 
ness, neatness, and excellent preservation of every object.
The inside as well as the outside of the houses in England, 
betrays, in these respects, the prevailing disposition of this people.
Had I been conveyed blind-folded into this country, 
without being told whither I was going, I am convinced that, on recovering my sight, I should have known, from the mere 
view of the streets and the houses, to what region I had been conducted.
From the pleasing simplicity, cleanliness, con- 
venience, and regularity that are here universally apparent, I should instantly have discovered that I was in England.
This 
peculiarity in the national character of the English commands our highest esteem, and deserves to be held up as a pattern 
for the imitation of all other nations." 
Dress is, in this country, an ever-fluctuating object.
Before the descent of the Romans, clothes were almost unknown 
fn England: even the inhabitants of the northern extremities of the island went as naktd as those of the southern parts; 
whilst the natives of the continent, under skies that were ten degrees milder, were covered from head to foot.
— Such is 
the force of custom, that no inconvenience was then found from the want of clothing, even in the severest winters; whilst 
the successors of this hardy race can scarcely keep themselves from perishing under all the wools and furs of Europe and 
America.
At a subsequent period, some of the Britons wore loose skins hanging over their shoulders; but these were soon changed 
for long jackets, and, their heads, excepting the crown, were shaven.
By degrees, as they became more civilized, the 
Roman dress prevailed among them.
Previously to the Norman invasion, William of Malmsbury informs us, that the English " wore garments that reached 
only to their knees, their hair cut close, their beards shaved, except the upper lip, which was covered with thick hair, 
their arms loaded with golden bracelets, their flesh beautified with painted marks, immoderate in their indulgence of the 
pleasures of the table; the clergy contented themselves with a smattering of learning, scarce able to mutter out the 
words of the service, &c." 
Robert, the eldest son of the Conqueror, wore short hose, or stockings, and from thence derived the name of Court-hose, 
he being the first that introduced them in this island.
Henry I.
abolished many parts of the fashions of his juvenile years, 
which he considered as indecent.
These, we apprehend, consisted of a kind of doublet with short skirts, and of breeches 
and stockings all of a piece, which fitted very tight upon the body, displaying its mouldings too exactly for the eye of 
delicacy.
He also prohibited the wearing of long hair, with false locks or perriwigs.
The short mantle was introduced by Henry II.
and from thence he derived the name of Court- mantle.
It was at this 
period that silk was first brought from Greece into the northern parts of Europe, and silken dresses soon after took place.
Embroidery was also at this time transplanted from Italy, into England, and ornamented the court habits of Henry II.
From these improvements in the luxury of dress, arose that pomp and magnificence which were displayed in the corona- 
tion robes of kings, the mantles, the dalmatica with sleeves, the hose and sandals, the honourable habiliments and robes 
of state, as well as the sacerdotal garments.
The extravagance of dress now became so great, that many statutes were made to prevent the abuses of it, as we find 
in an ancient historian named Eulogium.
He says, " the commons were besotted in excess of apparel, in wide sercoats 
reaching to their loins, some in a garment reaching to their heels, close before, and strutting out on the sides, so that on 
the back they make men seem women, and this they call by a ridiculous name, gown : their hoods are little, tied under the 
chin, and buttoned like a woman's, but set with gold, silver,, and precious stones ; their lirrippes reach their heels, all gagged.
They have another weed of silk, which they cal I pallock ; their hose are of two colours, or pied, which with latchets, which 
they called herlols, they tie to their pollocks without any breeches.
Their girdles are of gold and silver, some worth 
' twenty marks ; their shoes and pattens are snouted, and piked more than a finger long, crooked upwards, which they call 
upon him for a moment, and give him time, if possible, to swallow his mouthful, that you may not reduce him to the perplexing 
and uneasy necessity of putting a sudden stop to his mill, and so sitting a good while with hts mouth crammed with a huge load of 
victuals, which commonly gelling all to one side, raises his cheek as high as an egg, so forming a large kind of a wen, often shining 
with grease* equally distorted and unseemly.
The usual kick is, for the men to drink the women's health, and the women the men's ; 
and if any one in company should break this law, 'twould be reckoned intolerable rudeness." 
INTRODUCTION.
xl» 
crackowes, resembling the devil's claws, which were fastened to the knees with chains of gold and silver.
And thus were 
they garmented who, as this author says, were lions in the hall, and hares in the field." — The book of Worcester reported, 
lhat, in the year 1369, they began to use caps of different colours, especially red, with costly linings, and, in 1372, they 
first began to wanton it in a fiew round short garment, called the cloak.
Hence we may trace the origin of caps, cloaks and gowns, though it may be reasonably supposed their predecessors wore 
garbs and covering somewhat similar, though under different names.
Historians are, indeed, very sparing in their accounts 
of the dresses and fashions of their times ; and it is somewhat unaccountable, that we may form a better idea of the habits 
Loth civil and military in the time of King John, Henry III.
and the succeeding ages, from their monuments, old glass 
windows, and ancient tapestry, than from the writings of the most accurate historiographers of those periods.
In the time 
of Richard II.
a gown, called a git, or jacket without sleeves, a loose cloak like a herald's coat of arms, called a tabard, 
short breeches called a court pic, and a gorget called a chevesail, were first introduced, prior to the use of bands, which 
they afterwards wore about their necks.
Side-saddles for women were brought in by Anne, wife of Richard II.
Before this time the ladies rode astride like the 
men: she also introduced the high head-dress that resembles horns, anJ long gowns with trains; so that she may be con- 
sidered as the most celebrated leader of female fashion to be met with in history.
In the time of Henry IV.
the long pocketing sleeve took prace; and a few years after, the foot became the principal object 
of fashionable attention, when a proclamation was issued, that the men's shoes should not be above six inches in breadth over 
the toes.
At this period the women, not to be less ridiculous than the men, raised their hips by fox-tails under their 
clothes, which resembled the hoops worn a few years ago : the men, piqued to be rivalled in absurdity, shortened their 
garments so much, that it was judged expedient to enact, that no person, under the dignity of a lord, should wear from that 
time any gown or mantle that was not of a certain length, in the penalty of twenty shillings for every default.
Even the 
clergy caught the fashionable infection, though it is asserted, lhat the clergy of England never wore silk or velvet till they 
were introduced by Cardinal Wolsey.
Dress, as well as manners, experienced great alterations in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Descanting on the luxury of 
attire, Holinshed says, " I have met with some in London so disguised, that it hath passed my skill to discern whether they 
were men or women." He adds, " neither was it ever merrier with England than when an Englishman was known by his 
own cloth ; and contented himself with his fine carsie hose, and a mean slop ; his coat, gown and cloak of brown, blue or 
puce, with some pretty furniture of velvet or fur, and a doublet of sad-tawney or black velvet, or comely silk; without 
such garish colors as are worn in these days, and never brought in but by the consent of the French, who think themselves 
the gayest men when they have most diversity and change of colors about them." * 
It was considered by Colbert as a stroke of policy to make the French language and fashions prevalent throughout 
Europe, and he in a great measure succeeded.
The more recent dresses may accordingly be considered as under the reign- 
ing French modes, with but few deviations.
Large periwigs, long waists, and short coats, fringed gloves, and laced cravats 
were the fashion in the beginning of the last century.
The women wore high-forked caps, with round hoops; and patches 
and paint were first introduced among the British ladies at this period.
Patches were routed towards the close of Queen 
Anne's reign, as Addison insisted upon it that every patch argued a pimple; and to wash away their impression an inun- 
dation of cold creams and lotions rushed in from the continent.
The men now began to curtail their wigs, and the women to diminish the height of their caps: but to counterbalance 
these losses, the former added a large weighty bag hanging on their shoulders, and the latter stiffened and extended their 
petticoats with an additional quantity of whalebone.
The men now judged, that a sword under their elbow, instead of 
hanging at their knee, was more convenient and portable; and conscious of the hostility of the weapon, they endeavoured 
to hide it by the length of their skirts, which reached to the middle of their legs.
The signal was given, and short coats 
coming only to the first button of the breeches knee, long swords hanging entirely under the coat, with sword knots that 
reached almost the top of the shoe, now took place.
Hats of a most enormous size, cocked with a fierce point before, and 
6hoes with heels and tops of an immoderate height, were the prevalent dress.
The ladies turned their hats up before and behind, to look as bold as the men ; they wore their hair hanging in ringlets be- 
hind to appear still more Amazonian, and the extent of their hoops was almost as immeasurable as they were inconvenient.
Presently the men cropt their hats, diminished their bags, raised their swords, and extended their skirts almost down to 
their shoes.
* In the reign of Henry VIII.
beards had been prohibited at the great table, under pain of paying double commons.
Eliza- 
beth, in the first year of her reign, confined them to a fortnight's growth, under the penalty of 3s.
4d.
; but the love of beards 
prevailed so strongly that the prohibition was repealed, and those venerable excrescences were not limited to any particular form, 
size, or growth.
xlvi INTRODUCTION.
The ladies, piqued at tlie false delicacy of the men, who nearly hid all their legs with their skirts, shortened their petti- 
coats to their ancles, and displayed their bosoms without reserve.
Gentlemen who frequented the boxes at the theatre appeared at that lime full dressed with bags and swords.
Cocked 
hats were also universally worn, in undress, which are now set apart for full dress, except by military gentlemen or foreigners.
The ladies appeared with gigantic heads, and much false hair was at this period consumed : whether tiie weight affected 
the brain, or that their height exposed them to ridicule, cannot be ascertained ; but these towns suddenly fell, and mothers 
as well as daughters appeared with flowing locks.
An addition, however, was necessary, and, therefore, it \v;is put behind, 
which hinder protuberance was formed by an invention called the bussels ; but this was soon changed for one before, called 
the pads, which gave young ladies such a motherly appearance, that it was soon dropt.
The other sex we find equally 
fickle in their taste : first the buckle was remarkably small, then remarkably large, and then entirely abolished for strings.
The transitions of fashion are equally striking in the coat.
The buttons were at first so united behiirJ as to give it a military 
appearance, and afterwards so divided as to remind us of a Monmouth ciit.
The collar was made to euine up so high, as, iu 
the words of Allscript, in the Heiress, to " give a man the sense of the pillory." Afterwards it was made to fall prepos- 
terously ; but the neck is still kept warm with a cravat, and stiffened shirt-collars, up to the nose and ears.
Spencers, or little great coats, have had their day ; but pantaloons, or trowsers, from theii comfort and neatness, though 
of French origin, seem likely to keep their ground.
To the historical sketch which we have here given, of the progress of dress in England, we shall merely subjoin the fol- 
lowing observations of our friend, Mr. Campe: — 
" One point/' he observes, " in which London differs from nil the great and populous cities with which I am acquainted, 
is the creditable appearance of by far the greatest number of the persons that crowd its streets.
In -all other places of the 
kind that 1 ever saw, the great majority of pedestrians consisted of people, who, if not dirtily, were, however, shabbily 
dressed; of people, in whose countenances might often be clearly traced the characters of poverty, care, and distress* 
Here, on the contrary, faces of that description, and in general persons iu dirty or shabby apparel, belong to the excep- 
tions.
By far the great number of those who here cover the pavements, are well fed, and well or at least decently dressed 
people, whose looks proclaim, that, from their infancy, they have been strangers to the pressure of want.
" The English have, indeed, a sense of cleanliness and of propriety in dress peculiar to themselves.
Of propriety, I 
say, not of splendour and magnificence.
In these the Englishman may easily be surpassed, because he despises them.
He seeks not to shine; but he is desirous that everything he possesses, his house, his furniture, his apparel, shall be 
distinguished by their intrinsic good quality, convenience, cleanliness, and neatness.
This trait in the character peculiar 
to the English, is, in my opinion, not one of the least important.
To the foreigner it presents itself even in the streets, 
so universally, and in such a striking manner, that he needs not to be a very keen observer in order to perceive it." 
Before the middle of the 16th century, the English, like their neighbours the French, were considered as barbarians 
by the more polished Italians, but the reign of Elizabeth seems to have produced a wonderful effect in civilizing the man- 
ners of her subjects.
The transition has been ably described by ah ancient writer, whose delineation of the manners of 
the preceding ages cannot fail to interest the reader.
" There are old men," says Holinshead, " yet dwelling in the village where I remain, who have noted three things that 
are marvelously altered in England within their sound remembrance.
One is, the multitude of chimuies lately erected ; 
whereas in their young days there were not above two or three, if so many, in many uplandish towns of the realm, (the 
religious houses and manor places of their lords, always excepted, and peradventure some great personages,) but each one 
made his fire against a vere dosse in the hall, where he dined and dressed his meat.
The second is the great amendment of 
lodging; for, said they, our fathers and we ourselves have lain full oft upon straw pallets, covered only with a sheet, under 
coverlets made of dagsivain and hopharlots, (I use their own terms,) and a good round log under their heads instead of a 
holster.
If it were so that our fathers, or the good man of the house, had a maltrass or flock bed, and thereto a sack of 
chaff to rest his head upon, he thought himself to be as well lodged as the lord of the town, so well were they contented.
Pillows, said they, were thought meet only for women in child-bed.
As for servants, if they had any sheet above them, 
it was well ; for seldom had they any under their bodies, to keep them from the pricking straws that ran through the canvas, 
and razed their hardened hides.
" The third thing they tell of is the exchange of wooden platters into pewter, and wooden spoons into silver or tin.
For 
so common were all sorts of wooden vessels in old time, that a man should hardly find four pieces of pewter (of which one 
was, peradventure, a salt-seller) in a good farmer's house; and yet, for all this frugality, if it may be justly so called, 
they were scarce able lo live and pay their rents, at their days, without selling of a cow, or a horse, or more, although 
they paid but four pounds, at the uttermost by the year.
Such also was their poverty, that if a farmer or husbandman, 
had been at the alehouse, a thing greatly used in those days, amongst six or seven of his neighbors, and there in a bravery 
to shew what store he had, did cast down his purse, and therein a noble, or six shillings in silver, unto them, it is very 
INTRODUCTION.
xlvii 
likely that all the rest would not lay down so much against it; whereas in my time, although peradventure four pounds of 
old rent be improved to forty or fifty pounds, yet will the farmer think his gains very small, toward the midst of his term, 
if he have not six or seven years' rent lying by him, therewith to purchase a new lease; besides a fair garnish of pewter 
on his cupboard, three or four feather-beds, as many coverlets and carpets of tapestry, a silver salt-seller, a bowl for wine, 
if not a whole nest, and a dozen of spoons to furnish up the suit.
This also lie taketh to be his own clear; for what stock of 
money soever he gatheretb in all his years, it is often seen that the landlord will take such order with him for the same 
when he reueweih his lease (which is commonly eight or ten years before it be expired, since it is now grown almost 
a custom, that if he come not to his lord so long before, another shall step in for a reversion, and so defeat him out- 
right,) that it shall never trouble him more than the hair of his beard, when the barber hath washed and shaven it from 
his chin." 
Were it possible for the honest chronicler to witness the improvements which have been made since his time in the arts 
of life, to behold conveniencies and luxuries unheard of in his day, now universally diffused among the poorest classes of 
the people, he would assuredly want words to express his astonishment.
Most of the European languages are derived cither from the Latin or the Gothic, but the English participates in both 
those grand sources, combining the melody of the one with the force and energy of the other.
Hence no living language 
is at once so copious, so sonorous, and so emphatic.
The construction of the English is peculiar, and renders tho study 
of it difficult to foreigners.
It abounds also with anomalies which are too deeply rooted to be ever eradicated by grammatical 
rules.
It is, however, to be regretted, that we have as yet no standard of our language, the result of the united intelli- 
gence of men eminent for learning and philosophical attainments, to which reference might be had in doubtful or disputed 
cases.
It has been considered as improbable, that there should be any traditionary verses of the ancient druids in existence.
There is Welsh poetry extant, however, of a date as far back as the early part of the 12th century.
The following little 
piece, denominated " The Choice," was sung by the bard Hywel, the son of Owain, in the year 1169 ; — 
•3 
" My choice is a lady, elegant, slender, and fair, 
" Whose tall white form is seen through the thin blue veiT; 
" And my choicest faculty is to muse on superior female excellence, 
" When she with diffidence utters the becoming sentiment ; 
" And my choicest participation is to become united with the maid, 
" And to share mutual confidence as to thoughts and fortune : 
" I choose the bright hue of the spreading wave.
" Thou who art the most discreet of thy country with the pure Welsh speech, 
" Chosen by me art thou : 
" What am I with thee— 
" How !
dost thou refrain from speaking i 
" Fair is thy silence !
" I have chosen a maid, so that with me there should be no hesitation • 
•• It is right to choose the choicest fair one." 
From the above, which appears under the disadvantages of a mere literal translation, it is sufficiently evident that the 
language of our ancestors was not deficient in either elegance or strength.
English literature is a proud ami extensive subject, of which a very rapid sketch must here suffice.
Excepting Gildas 
iu the 6th and Bede in the 8th century of the Christian era, England had little literary talents to boast till the reign of 
the great Alfred.
That prince not only aspired to Latin composition, but translated some useful works, as the histories of 
Orosius and Bede, into the Anglo-Saxon language.
From this period a dearth of genius seems to have pa-vailed for several 
aq:es.
The Saxon Chronicle, however, is a noble and neglected monument, and the only civil history of England for a 
space of four hundred years.
At length, in the 13th century, English literature began to advance with a firm and steady 
pace, and the genius of Roger Bacon shone pre-eminent among his contemporaries.
A numerous train of historians, poets, 
and other writers, in continual succession from that time fill the pages of biography.
The introduction of printiii"-, and th 
reformation in religion, powerfully promoted the progress of genius and the diffusion of its productions; so that, durim 
the last two hundred years, England may exhibit a proud list of names eminently distinguished in every branch of learning 
and science, and many of them challenging a competition with the most illustrious writers and sages both of the ancient 
and modem world.
Those of Bacon, Shakespeare, Milton, Locke, Newton, would alone he sufficient to justify this bold 
assertion.
In the various branches of mathematical knowledge, the English have displayed superior talents.
Medicine and surgery 
anatomy, chemistry, and all the arts or studies for preserving life, have been carried by them to a high degree of excel- 
a 
e. 
xlviii INTRODUCTION.
lence.
The clergy, who far surpass in learning those of any other country, have ever cultivated classical literature with 
extraordinary zeal and predilection.
It was observed by one of our old writers, that, during the civi'^war, about the middle of the 17th century, there were 
more good and more bad books published in the English tongue than in all the vulgar languages of Europe.
Germany now 
probably bears away the palin in this respect, but the prodigious number of diurnal and periodical publications, indicate the 
vast extent of modern English literature.
* 
In the view of any country, education forms a most important topic, its consequences being intimately connected with 
the well-being of the community.
The value of a good education is no where more highly appreciated than in England ; 
accordingly the higher and middle ranks spare no expense in that of their sons, either by private tutors in their own houses, 
at the public seminaries, at boarding-schools or day-schools.
Of our public academical institutions, the most eminent are 
those of St. Paul's, Westminster, Eton, Harrow, and Winchester, which boast of having assisted in forming some of the 
most distinguished ornaments of their country.
In due time the scholars proceed from them to the universities of Oxford 
and Cambridge, foundations of an extent and grandeur that impress veneration.
The Charter House, and Christ's Church 
or Hospital (the Blue-Coat-School, as it is usually denominated from the dress of the pupils) are likewise deserving of 
particular mention.
There is scarcely a provincial town of any note, without its grammar school and boarding schools.
Most of the former, and many of the latter, are superintended by divines of eminent learning and talents.
Charity-schools, 
for the gratuitous instruction of the children of the poor, abound in every part of the kingdom, and the munificence dis- 
played in some of them, for example, Bancroft's in the metropolis, would reflect honour even on a princely founder.
These 
establishments, numerous as they are, being, however, found inadequate to the instruction of the rising generations portion 
of which was necessarily excluded from a share in their benefits, the plan of Sunday-schools was, about thirty years ago, pro- 
jected, and generally adopted throughout the country.
This benevolent institution affords to all an opportunity of acquiring, 
at least, the rudiments of learning, and just notions of their moral duties.
Some, adopting the celebrated sentiment of 
Pope, have contended that its effects are more prejudicial than advantageous ; but though the limited knowledge derived 
from Sunday instruction, may have been perverted by individuals to mischievous purposes, still its national utility appears 
self-evident, inasmuch as it cannot fail of increasing the mass of national happiness.
It cannot be doubted that where the 
common people are best instructed, there they will be found, the most quiet, contented, and virtuous.
Connected with the education of the poor, Mr. Lancaster's school, situated in St. George's Fields, is particularly de- 
serviug of notice.
" It is founded upon a system," says a modern writer, " which is supposed to have originated with the 
ancient Egyptians, who taught reading and writing by assembling children on the strand of the Nile, and making them 
trace on the smooth beach the successive letters of the alphabet.
For a considerable time the system has been successfully 
practised in Switzerland; and Dr. Bell, a late superindent, and director of the Male Asylum at Madras, some time a»o 
suggested its introduction into England.
Mr. Lancaster has recently carried it into effect.
The children, we understand, 
learn to read and write the alphabet at the same time, by forming the letters in sand with their fingers, as each letter is 
successively called by the monitor; and, with great precision and rapidity, they afterwards learn to read and write mono- 
syllables in the same manner.
Throughout this process, the senior classes instruct the junior, and emulation, in every 
class, is excited by rewards and promotion.
To such excellence has the plan been carried, that it is said, upwards of a 
thousand children may be taught and governed by one master only, at the inconsiderable expense of five shillings per 
annum each child.
His Majesty most benevolently subscribes 200/.
a year to Mr. Lancaster's institution, which may be 
visited at any time, free of expense.
It is not, however, without its opponents ; as, by not adhering to any particular 
* The following statement, respecting the newspaper press, is from " The Picture of London ;" but we have reason to believe 
that it is far below the truth: — " The circulation of newspapers varies from 750 to 6,000 each per clay, and they give employment 
to a great number of persons in the characters of reporters, collectors of news, editors, translators, printers, newsmen, &c.
The 
first expense of establishing a successful paper is from 2000/.
to 5000/.
The sources of profit, besides that which arises from the sale 
and the advertisements, are very great, from paid paragraphs, puffs, esparte statements of trials, reports of particular speeches, 
criticisms, and interested notices ; and also from the suppression of information adverse to particular interests.
Of the morning 
papers, there are sold together about 15,000 daily.
Of the daily evening papers, about 13,000: and of those published every 
other day, about 10,000.
There are also about 26,600 sold of the various Sunday papers, and about ; 20,000 of the other weekly 
papers.
In all, the enormous number of 240,000 copies per week, yielding to their proprietors from the sale 5,800/.
and from ad- 
vertisements, and paid paragraphs, 2,200/.
more, of which the revenue to government is full 4000/.
and the net proceeds to the 
proprietors about 1000/.
the remaining 3000/.
affording employment and subsistence to about 50 writers and reporters, 300 printers, 
100 venders, and 100 clerks and assistants; besides paper-makers, stationers, type-founders, &c.
full 200 more.
— If to these London 
papers, be added 250,000 copies of provincial papers, yielding 10,000/.
per week, and supporting the industry of 1500 persons, 
what a wonderful idea is afforded of the agency and influence of the press iu this empire." 
INTRODUCTION.
xlix 
religious establishment, it is considered as likely to detach children from the Christian faith.
Another institution has, there- 
fore, been founded in Westminster, as to its mode and instruction so modified, as strictly to include the principles and 
doctrines of the established church." — Since the above was written (about ten years ago) the systems of Bell and Lan- 
caster have been so amazingly extended, that there is scarcely a town or even village of any size, throughout the kingdom, 
in which there is not one or more schools, conducted thereon.
The members of the church of England generally patronize 
the former, and the Dissenters the latter.
— It is important to add, that, in the first year of the reign of George the lVtli, 
Mr. Brougham introduced a bill into the House of Commons, the express object of which was the improvement of the system 
of educating the poor throughout the United Kingdom.
From this bill, should it pass, of which no doubt is entertained, 
i advantages, of the most salutary nature, may be expected to arise.
Female education is conducted in England with great elegance and expense.
Even in the middle ranks of life, girls, 
are generally taught music and drawing, to the surprise of foreigners, who seldom teach those arts, except in cases of 
decided propensity.
Though they are often of no service in future life, they contribute to cultivate the mind, and to pre- 
vent the danger of idleness.
On the other hand, it is undoubtedly owing to this system, that we find such a number of 
English females raising themselves to eminence in the walks of literature and the fine arts.
In both sexes, indeed, the progress of the arts in England has been rapid beyond example, and their present state is 
worthy of a country so opulent and refined.
Some faint traces of painting occur as early as the 13th century.
In the 
reigus of our first and third Edwards, the magnificent castles erected in Wales, and the stately palace of Windsor, attest the 
genius of the architects, whose individual fame, excepting that of the celebrated William of Wykham, is, however, lost in 
obscurity.
Though the neighbouring country of Flanders had long produced many native painters, England continued, till 
the commencement of the last century, to import her principal artists from abroad, as Holbein, Rubens, Vandyk, Lely, Knel- 
ler, and many others.
In miniature and engraving, there were, it is true, artists of distinguished merit in the 17th century ; 
and the same age was graced by two eminpnt English architects, luigo Jones and Sir Christopher Wren.
In the beginning 
of the 18th century, the arts appeared on the decline, till Hogarth displayed examples of characteristic painting, which 
have deservedly excited universal admiration, though his fame, it is true, rests rather on inventive genius, than on the 
execution of his performances.
The distinguished patronage which has been bestowed, during the institution of the Royal Academy, and the annual 
exhibitions of painting and sculpture, have been the means of forming an exuberance of artists of high reputation.
Rey- 
uolds, Gainsborough, and Wilson, have been succeeded by West, Beechey, Copley, Northcote, Opie, Morland, Barry, Lau- 
rence, Westall ; and, more recently by Lawrence, Dawe, Wilkie, Bird, Hewlett, Haydon, and a multitude of others in 
every department.* 
At the same time Strange, Woollet, AVorlidge, &c.
established the national fame for engraving, in which line they have 
been followed by such a number of excellent artists, that, in this branch, England surpasses every other country, and the 
prints executed in London are universally admired and imitated.
Architecture and sculpture also boast of many distin- 
guished native names, but in music we are obliged to acknowledge the superior skill of the Italians and Germans.
It has been observed, both by native and foreign writers, that no country contains so many original or eccentric characters 
as England.
The cause of this must undoubtedly be sought partly in the political constitution, by which each individual 
is permitted to indulge any humour or caprice, however extraordinary, provided it be not injurious to his fellow citizens ; 
and partly in the system of education, which leaves every one at liberty to cultivate in his own way the talents and abi- 
lities which he may possess.
From the number of these humourists, it naturally follows that the English novels and 
dramas are much richer in new and extraordinary characters of this description than those of other nations.
The English have various amusements common to most nations, such as those of the theatre and of the field, with various 
* The patronage which the arts have received, from private individuals, within the last few years, is particularly deserving of 
notice.
The Marquis of Stafford is justly entitled to the honourable and distinguishing praise of being at the head of those 
public-spirited characters, whose collections and bouses are open for the encouragement of merit.
The Marquis of Stafford's col- 
lection, by some considered as the finest in England, was principally formed from the works which once composed the celebrated 
Orleans gallery, and which, at the breaking out of the revolution in France, were brought into this country.
His Lordship within 
a few years has materially added to this collection, by the expenditure of several thousand pounds.
He purchased the entire collec- 
tion of a celebrated patron of the arts, in Hertfordshire ; and at the annual exhibitions of the British Gallery, in Pall Mall, he has 
bought many of the productions of modern art.
Lord Stafford, however, possesses a more exalted merit than that of a mere col- 
lector of pictures.
Besides lending some very valuable paintings to the British Gallery, for the improvement of the young artists 
who study them, his rooms are, during certain months of the year, open to painters and to the public in general, by making proper 
application for tickets.
Visiters are also furnished with descriptive catalogues of the collection.
1 INTRODUCTION.
games of skill or chance.
Of horse-races and the cliace many are fond even to infatuation.
Cock-fighting, bull and bear 
baiting, are barbarous diversions, too common in this country, but at present they appear to be upon the decline.
Pugilistic 
matches, though prohibited by the legislature, are still frequently made and numerously attended, notwithstanding the fatal 
consequences which they often produce.
The active diversion of cricket is still kept up in the southern, eastern, and western 
parts of England ; and people of high rank not only encourage but partake of this pastime.
Cudgelling, wrestling, skittles, 
quoits, and other athletic exercises, though not so much in vogue as formerly, are still practised.
Sailing and rowing are 
amusements peculiar to the English, as is also the ringing of long peals, with many changes on the bells of the churches, 
to the no small annoyance of those who are so unfortunate as to live in the neighbourhood.
We now pass to the consideration of the various branches of industry, in which the English have displayed their enter- 
prise, perseverance, and talents, commencing with agriculture.
In no country is that science so well understood, or 
pursued on so grand a scale.
The numerous agricultural societies established in almost every county, the erection of a 
national board, the efforts of the late and present Duke of Bedford, Lord Somerville, Mr. Coke, and many other public- 
spirited individuals, have contributed to diffuse a wide and lasting knowledge of this important branch of national economy.
The nobility and gentry, who generally reside on their estates in the summer, often retain considerable farms in their own 
hands, and encourage every agricultural improvement.
An example which cannot but tend to promote these laudable pur- 
suits has been exhibited by royalty itself.
It cannot, therefore, appear surprising, that with all these stimulatives, and that 
yet more powerful motive of interest, the various departments of agricultural science have been brought almost to perfection.
The intermixture of green crops with those of grain, the use of turnips for cattle, the regular substitution of crops suit- 
able to the state of the land, the irrigation of meadows, the art of draining on scientific principles, may be reckoned among 
the recent advances of knowledge ; nor must the improvements in the breed of cattle and sheep, by Bakewell, Cully, and 
others be forgotten.
* 
Amidst these subjects of just exultation, it is mortifying to reflect, that we arc under the necessity of annually paying 
vast sums to foreign states for grain, to supply the deficiency of our crops, while, at the same time, such a large proportion 
of our island consists of unprofitable wastes.
To whatever cause it may be owing, whether to excess of pasturage, a growing population, increasing luxury, or other 
circumstances, certain it is, that in England, a country which was accustomed to export grain to a considerable amount, 
the consumption has, for the last 50 years, exceeded the produce, and that this evil has gradually increased to an alarming 
extent.
On the average of eleven years, ending with 1793, the annual deficiency amounted to 587,163 quarters, and in 
179& the scarcity required a further supply of 1,177,000 quarters.
This gives an average yearly deficiency of about 
700,000 quarters, which might be abundantly compensated by the cultivation of only one third of the waste acres in South 
Britain, that are fit for tillage; computing the produce of each acre at three quarters, and allowing a sufficiency for fallow 
and the rotation of crops.
It would, however, appear that this calculation cannot pretend to perfect accuracy, for it would 
infer a deficiency of no more than one twenty-eighth part of the whole, which is probably much under the real amount.
This inference is justified by the price of bread, which of late years has been doubled.
The subject has often occupied the 
attention of the legislature, and though much has been written on it, no effectual remedy has yet been applied to an evil 
so alarming.
Sir John Sinclair, however, in an address which he delivered to the Board of Agriculture eight or ten years 
ago, has some interesting observations on the subject.
" No country," says he, " can have stronger inducements to attend 
to its agricultural interests, than Great Britain at the present moment.
Secluded from so large a portion of the globe, and 
its commerce crampt in every direction, it must, in a great measure, rely on its own internal resources for its security and 
strength.
Fortunately, in these resources it has a mine of wealth, which cannot be exhausted.
We have only to pay the 
necessary attention to the improvement of our own soil, and we may despise the efforts of our enemies, however numerous 
or powerful.
We are told, indeed, ' that from the slate of our foreign relations, and the consequent probability that our 
usual supply of grain from grain countries may fail us, that measures of precaution are necessary, which may eventually 
ward off so great an evil, as a scarcity of provision.' But the best precaution is to extend our agriculture, to increase the 
production of our soil, to ameliorate the mode of its cultivation, and to remove every obstacle hostile to its improvement.
By these means, judiciously applied, instead of importing from foreign countries, we might soon again become an exporting 
country ; and the commerce of grain, instead of being the means of impoverishment, would become a source of wealth."— 
At Mr. Coke's grand Agricultural Meeting, at Holkham (July, 1820,) an increased production was strongly insisted on as 
the best remedy, the removal of taxation excepted, for the present distress of the agricultural part of the community.
* In proof of the extraordinary progress which has been made in this branch of rural economy, it may be sufficient to state, that 
the weight of cattle sold in Smithfield market has been far more than doubled within the last hundred years.
In 1770 the average 
weight of oxen was 370 pounds ; of calves 50 ; of sheep 28 ; and of lambs, 18 pounds.
In 1800 it stood thus : oxen 800 ; calves 
140 ; sheep 80 ; lambs 50.
INTRODUCTION.
li 
Horticulture, or the art of gardening, is pursued in England with extraordinary assiduity and success.
The annual 
consumption of vegetables and fruits in the metropolis only, is computed, in value, at more than one million sterling.
This 
prodigious supply, and the high prices given for early produce, occasions such a spirit of cultivation, that each acre thus 
employed is supposed to yield about 120/.
per annum.
The fruit and kitchen-gardens in South Britain are calculated by 
Mr. Middlcton at 50 000 acres, while he allows 44,000 for hop grounds, 10.000 for nursery grounds, and 20,000 for plea- 
sure-grounds ; that is, such parts of the latter as yield no profit to the proprietors, the rest affording either pasturage or hay.
Of ornamental gardening the English are deservedly considered the inventors.
Rejecting the uncouth affectation of 
the Dutch style, which had before prevailed, Briduman began, about a century ago, to lay out gardens with a due attention 
to the beauties of nature.
These improvements were successfully prosecuted by Kent, under the patronage of many per- 
sons of rank and taste.
Kent was followed by Biown, who has been succeeded by Repton, and other masters of great 
abilities.
This style has not only been generally adopted in Britain, but has been diffused in the regions of the continent, 
where gardens, laid out in conformity with its principles, are characterized by the appellation of English Gardens.
The roads of England are justly admired for the excellent order in which they are kept, for the facilities which are 
thus afforded to travellers, and for the transit of goods.
Of late years, by the construction of iron railways, &c.
great 
improvements have been effected in this branch of public economy, and others are still in contemplation.
On the manufactures and commerce of England, many ponderous volumes have been written ; but to present a general 
and circumscribed view of them is all that will be here attempted.
— Tin was the earliest staple commodity of England, 
and was introduced into commerce by the Phoenicians, at least five or six hundred years before the Christian era.
This 
source of wealth, though cultivated by the Romans, was neglected at ^subsequenl periods; and, in the reign of John, its 
produce was so inconsiderable, that the Cornish tin mines were formed to Jews for a hundred marks.
In the time of 
Henry III.
those mines again yielded a large profit, which has almost ever since been increasing.
Wool was regarded as 
a grand staple of England, as early as the 12th century ; but, till Edward III.
encouraged the settlement of Flemish manu- 
facturers, it was chiefly exported in an unwrought state.
It soon became the standard of private property ; taxes and 
foreign subsidies being estimated by sacks of wool : Great quantities of the raw material continued to be exported to the 
Netherlands and Hause Town, till the reign of Elizabeth, when it began to be extensively manufactured at home, and the 
annual exportation of woollen cloths was then valued at 1,500,000/.
The exportation of raw wool was at length prohi- 
bited ; and, from that period, our woollen manufactures have been of great importance.
— England is distinguished for its 
manufactures of copper, iron, and steel.
English sword-blades in particular, are now considered as superior to those of 
any other part of the world.
Our steel ornaments, clocks, watches, &c.
are also much admired, and are manufactured in 
considerable numbers.
Wedgwood's earthenware has, for many years, been in high repute; and, at home, foreign china 
has long been giving way to that which has been produced in our own country.
The cotton manufacture of England, 
which forms a grand source of industry and prosperity, is very extensively diffused, but that of linen is less cultivated.
Amongst the elegant productions of the country, of which vast numbers are annually exported, engravings, from the works 
of the first masters, ancient and modern, should not be forgotten.
To enumerate the whole of our manufactured articles, 
would be tedious and unnecessary ; but the following rough estimate will show, pretty correctly, their present extent and 
importance, with the number of persons whose employment they provide for : — 
Annual value.
Persons employed.
Woollen 16,400000 440,340 
Leather 10.500,000 241,240 
Cotton 11,000,000 347,271 
Silk 2,700,009 65,000 
Linen and Flax 3,000,000 95,000 
Hemp 1,600,000 35,000 
Paper 900,000 30,000- 
Glass 1,500,000 30,000 
Potteries 2,000,000 45,000 
Iron, Tin, and Lead, 10,000,000 200 000 
Copper and Brass 3,600,000 60,000 
Steel, Plating, &c 400,000 1,665,429 
L. 63,600 009 3,254,280 
lii K INTRODUCTION.
The annual value of otlier manufactures, of minor importance, may probably be estimated at about 4 or 5,000,000/.
and the number of persons employed in them at about 100,000.
The English fisheries are exceedingly productive, but they are capable of much improvement ; particularly the herring 
and the salmon fisheries.
In the great fishery of cod, which is carried on upon the Banks of Newfoundland, Great Britain, 
and America, at the lowest computation, annually employ 3000 sail of small craft; on board of which, and on shore to cure 
and pack, the fish, 100,000 hands are employed; so that it is not only a very valuable branch of trade to the merchant, 
but a source of livelihood to so many thousands of poor people, and a most excellent nursery to the royal navy.
This 
fishery is computed to increase the national stock 300 000/.
a year in gold and silver, remitted to us for the cod which we 
sell to the North, in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the Levant.
The abundance of cod, both on the great bank, as well as 
on the lesser ones, which, lie to the East and South East of this island, is inconceivable; and not only cod, but several 
other species of fish, are caught there in abundance, all of which are in equal plenty nearly along the shores of Newfound- 
land, Nova Scotia, New England, and the isle of Cape Breton, and very profitable fisheries are carried on upon all these 
coasts.
Thus it may be observed, that where our colonies are thinly peopled, or so barren as not to produce any thing from 
the soil, their coasts make us ample amends, and pour in upon us a wealth of another kind, and no way inferior to that 
arising from the most fertile soil.
With respect to the salmon fisheries, some of them are upon the decline, and are almost exhausted, which deficiency 
seems to be occasioned by the great difficulty that the fish meet with in their return from sea to the banks of the.
rivers 
where they spawn, and to the too- great covetousness of the inconsiderate lock owners, who have it in their power to 
take them every one as they come up.
If they would permit greater numbers to pass upwards, in order to lay their spawn, 
the consumption and profit might be a hundred times as much as it is at present ; for the natural increase of these fish is 
prodigious and almost beyond conception.
At the present period, the commerce of England is immense; and, notwithstanding the restrictions to which it was sub- 
jected during the late war, it extended then, and extends now, to every region of the globe.
Our usual imports, from the 
states of North America, are tobacco, rice, indigo, timber, hemp, flax, iron, pitch, tar, lumber, &c.
From the West Indies we 
import sugar, rum, cotton, coffee, ginger, pepper, guaicum, sarsaparilla, manchineal, mahogany, gums, &c.
From Africa, 
gold-dust, ivory, gums, &c.
From the East Indies and China, tea, rice, spice, drugs, colours, silk, cotton, salt-petre, 
shawls, and other products of the loom.
From our remaining settlements in North America are imported furs, timber, pot- 
ash, iron, &c.
; in addition to which, we receive numerous articles of utility and luxury from the various states of 
Europe.
In closing our remarks upon the commerce of this island, our national feelings will not suffer us to withhold the follow- 
ing character, which Mr. Campe has drawn of us, as a commercial people : 
" The English tradesman and shop-keeper," says he, " are as far from that excessive and cringing politeness by which 
many in other countries seek to secure a purchaser, as from the incivility and rudeness by which others drive away their 
customers.
Another quality, still more commendable, for which the English merchant, tradesman, and artisan are distin- 
guished, is integrity.
' Honesty is the best policy/ is an English maxim, the truth of which is exemplified in their 
traders, whose probity obtains them that unlimited confidence without which prosperity cannot be expected in commercial 
concerns.
This quality has undoubtedly contributed more than any other cause to raise their trade over the whole surfaee 
of the globe to such a degree of elevation as cannot be contemplated without the highest admiration and astonishment.
" A spirit of enterprize is another characteristic of the English nation.
No undertaking is too great and too bold to 
deter them from engaging in it, if it can be demonstrated that it is practicable, that it is advantageous to the public, and 
also that it is likely to prove a profitable speculation to the parties concerned." 
At the commencement of the 18th century, Gregory King estimated the value of England and Wales, at 650,000,000/.
At the commencement of the 19th, the landed property of Great Britain, collectively, was computed at the rental of 
33,000,000/.
which, at thirty years' purchase, would yield 999,000,000/.; the rental of houses in England and Wales, at 
7,436.000/.
andestimating that of Scotland at.
about a sixth, the valueat fifteen years' purchase might be about 130,000,000/.
The cattle and farming stock might be about 100,000,000/.
the furniture, apparel, &c.
26,000,000/.
The navy and merchant 
ships have been valued at 16,000,000/.
; the goods in the hands of the merchants and others, at more than 13,000,000/.
and 
those in the hands of manufacturers and retail traders at more than 22,000,000/.
Including the money, of which the estimate 
is far from certain, the whole capital of Great Britain may be taken at upwards of one thousand two hundred 
millions.
Dr. Colquhoun, in his valuable *' Treatise on the Wealth, Power, and Resources of the British Empire," published in 
the year 1814, presents the following as a recapitulation of his very copious details of the property that is annually created 
in this kingdom : — 
INTRODUCTION.
liii 
Agriculture 216,817,624 
Mines and Minerals 9,000,000 
Manufactures 114,230,000 
Inland Trade 31,500,000 
Foreign Commerce and Shipping .....
46,373,748 
Coasting Trade 2,000,000 
Fisheries (exclusive of the Colonial Fisheries of Newfoundland) ..2,100,000 
Banks, viz.
Chartered Banks and private Banking Establishments.
_-3,500,000 
Foreign Income * 5,000,000 
Total L.
430,521,372 
In fifty-three colonies and dependancies, 
Annual produce of labour ....
50,740,470 
Possessions in India...
— .
.....
— .....
— .
21 1,966,494 
Grand Total L.
693,228,336 
This statement, wonderful as it appears while standing- by itself, is yet more astonishing when contrasted with that of 
Monsieur le Compte Chaptal, in his work, " de V Industrie Francoise," published in the year 1819, in substance as 
follows : 
England.
France.
Agriculture, including fisheries L.
218,917,624 L.
194,946,203 
Manufactures, including mines and minerals 123,230,000 75,837,600 
Commerce, inland and foreign 88,373,748 26.542,122 
L 297,325,925 
Total L.
430,521,372 
A display like this, particularly when we reflect that it is from the pen of a Frenchman, furnishes sufficient matter for 
whole pages of comment, and of exultation, would our limits permit.
Such, indeed, is the national and commercial wealth 
of England, that her influence may be considered as extending throughout the globe; for, wheresoever money is capable 
of operating, there is her power perceptible.
It has justly been remarked, that the union of Scotland with England delivered the latter country from the perpetual 
check, which politicians both ancient and modern had practised, of exciting an enemy from behind, and thus dividing the 
power of an antagonist.
Since the days of the Pretender, Scotland has been nearly as much distinguished for its loyalty 
as any other part of Britain.
The union with Ireland, there is every reason to believe, will, ultimately, be productive of 
equally happy consequences; but it is to be regretted, that a number of turbulent and factious spirits, as well in this 
country as in the sister island, are constantly endeavouring to sow the seeds of discontent amongst those whose real interest 
it is to be firm, collected, and unanimous.
Formerly, the most important continental relations of England were those which she held with France; and, though 
that terrific and destructive volcano, the French revolution, by spreading devastation and ruin throughout an entire hemis- 
phere, materially altered those relations, France continues, and is likely to continue, the object of her most serious atten- 
tion.
The geographical situations of these respective powers seem to have rendered them the natural enemy of each other ; 
and, for many centuries, the most jealous rivalship has existed between them.
There is no probability that this rivalship 
should cease; for, though the new dynasty of Buonaparte has been destroyed, and the family of the Bourbons has been 
restored, the natural opposition of French and English interests must continue to operate in full force.
If, to balance and divide the enmity of France, it had been formerly found necessary for England to maintain a strict 
alliance with some other continental state, such an alliance was, during the late war, more than ever necessary.
Previously to the French revolution, Austria was a valuable ally of England ; and her possession of the Nether- 
lands tended greatly to our safety.
Next to that with Austria, an alliance with Prussia was desirable; and, 
though its power was only adequate to a slight diversion, a connexion with Savoy, was even found useful.
The 
friendship of Holland was of vast importance to England, as presenting a good depot of trade with the continent; and, in 
a commercial point of view, the amity of Russia was also highly deserving of cultivation.
The friendship, or enmity, of 
Denmark and Sweden were of lighter moment; but, from the long-continued, gallant, and determined resistance of the 
latter power to France, until the abdication of Gustavus, and' the virtual succession of Bemadotte to the throne, it was 
evidently to the interest of England to furnish it with the requisite support.
Our intercourse with Portugal was so mutually 
o 
liv INTRODUCTION.
advantageous, lhat, had it not been for the bitter enmity, and preponderating force of Buonaparte, there was no probability 
of its being interrupted.
It frequently happens,, however, that malignity and oppression overshoot their mark ; and, from 
the forced removal of the Portuguese government to Brazil, a new channel of trade was opened for England, and our com- 
munications with the mother country were renewed to all their former extent, and with all their former confidence.
Austria, in the course of the war, was stripped of the Netherlands, and her territorial limits were closely circumscribed, 
by the overwhelming power of France; by the same destructive engine, Prussia was rendered an inefficient state, and the 
minor principalities of Germany were converted into so many nominal enemies ; Holland, to her bitter, but well-merited 
regret, was totally precluded from our connexion ; Denmark, to her cost, was compelled to take a feeble and uninjurious part 
against us; and even Russia, the Colossus of the north, was hurled into the general vortex.
Under this view of our foreign relations, how essentially necessary was it for us to snatch at every opportunity of insti- 
gating and supporting such divisions, as might be practicable, against the great Corsican destroyer.
The immortal Pitt, in the last year of his illustrious life, projected and matured a plan, for crushing, or circumscribing 
the overgrown power of this tyrant; and though, from a variety of causes, it failed — as all human schemes are liable to 
failure — it will be contemplated, in future ages, as one of the proudest, one of the most glorious monuments of political 
exertion!
Pitt lived to hear, and to rejoice in, the news of the glorious victory of Trafalgar; but death had closed his 
eyes, and given him repose in " another and a better world," long before the equally glorious battle of Waterloo — a battle 
for which his counsels paved the way — had restored peace to the earth, and good will amongst men.
" Spirit of PITT!
if, yet, thou hoverest near — 
If, yet, thou viewest this dull terrestrial sphere — 
If the dear land, to which thy all was given, 
May claim one thought within thy happier Heaven— 
O, bless the proud result through thee obtained !
A world in peace .'—A paradise regained !" 
The genuine, long-looked-for advantages of peace were not immediately felt ; nor are we yet in full possession of their 
enjoyment.
The revulsion occasioned by a sudden change, combined with other causes, produced a degree of agricultural 
and commercial distress, unparalleled perhaps in the annals of Britain, unless at the close of the American revolutionary war.
The evil has not yet been wholly removed; but, thank Heaven, the prospect is daily becoming brighter — the disease will 
work its own cure.
The country has now arrived at a new era.
The commencement of a reign — the commitment of the 
remains of one king to their native earth, and the elevation of a successor to his throne — must, in every instance, consti- 
tute an awful moment in the history of a nation.
Never, perhaps, could such an event call more imperatively for attention 
than at this time.
Not that our present situation is to be regarded with apprehension or terror; for, on the contrary, hope, 
and well-founded expectation, combine to enliven the view before us.
It is true, that the country — the agricultural as well 
as the commercial interest — is yet labouring under great distress; but we are not without the consolatory assurance of 
those who are best informed upon the subject, that the foreign trade is improving ; and, if the foreign trade improve, it is 
almost a self-evident proposition, that our manufactures will more than keep pace with its advauces.
The truth of the 
position, that manufactures and agriculture act reciprocally on each other, is every day becoming more apparent : if either 
be depressed, the other must participate in its suffering ; if one of them flourish, the other cannot fail of profiting by its 
success.
Thus, their interests are evidently and essentially the same.
Give the farmer a remunerating price for his corn, 
and he will liberally pay his labourers, and as liberally encourage the manufacturing and trading classes; let the manu- 
facturer thrive, and he too will handsomely pay his workmen, who can then afford to purchase the fruits of the earth in 
abundance.
These mutual advantages obtained — and that they will ultimately be obtained, we are not permitted to doubt 
— and the pecuniary distresses of the country will vanish, carrying with them a long train of moral and political evils.
Turning from the cloud by which we have been temporarily overshadowed, and considering what England, the queen of 
the ocean, has performed; reflecting upon the vast extent of her present wealth and power, notwithstanding, for a series 
of years, she has supported, single-handed, as it were, a most unequal contest, on land as well as on the sea, well may 
we exclaim, in the words of Mirabean to the French National Convention — " England is ruined, you say ; ah!
great God, 
what dreadful news!
Where or by what means is England destroyed ?
By what earthquake or convulsion of nature has that 
famous island been swallowed up ?
That abounding theatre of great action, that classic ground of liberty.
No — England 
still flourishes for the eternal instruction of the world ; England developes every species of industry, and traces every source 
of human prosperiiy." 
^^Rhdidm 
x 
la 
Jkui<?<c Corner 
Sharnhrook* 
b>?
. -» ..
7/1.
A .- -=^- 
lb 
o 
* 
/'iiMs/k;,' f>vj, Ki'l'inr.
( 
Prf/b h Y f.ant .l<tn' /"ifiifl 
THE NEW 
BRITISH TRAVELLER.
BEDFORDSHIRE.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
BEDFORDSHIRE is an inland county, bound- 
ed on the north and north-east by Northamp- 
tonshire; on the east by Huntingdonshire, 
Cambridgeshire, and Hertfordshire ; and on the 
west by Buckinghamshire, and part of Northamp- 
tonshire.
Its limits are winding and irregular, its 
only natural ones being the Ouse, for a short space, 
on the east and west, and a rivulet on the south-west 
border.
Its greatest length is about 32 miles, and 
its breadth 22 ; and, according to the author of the 
General View of the Agriculture of this county, its 
circumference is 145 miles, inclosing an area of 
307,200 acres.
The air of Bedfordshire is mild and salubrious.* 
The face of the country is in general varied with 
small hills and values, affording a few extensive 
level tracts.
On the south, a ridge of chalk hills 
rises to a considerable height, and frequently pro- 
jects abruptly into the vallies in a very striking man- 
ner.
Under these hills is a large tract of hard sterile 
land, which gives this part a dreary and uncom- 
fortable appearance.
From the south-eastern cor- 
ner of the county, to the middle, runs a line of good 
dairy land, which, to the north, is terminated by 
some sandy hills.
The western side is chiefly fiat 
nnd sandy ; and, about Woburn, in the south-west, 
are large tracts of deep barren sand, capable of but 
little improvement, except from planting.
The soil 
of this county is indeed well described by Fuller, 
who says that it is a deep clay, with a belt or girdle 
of sand about or rather athwart, the body of it, 
from Woburn to Potton.
There is every soil, how- 
ever, and every mixture of soil, to be found in the 
founty of Bedford.
* In theXXYIlIthVoltmeof the Philosophical Transactions, 
we find an account of Mr. Slarc, the grandfather of Dr. Slave, 
n gentleman of this county, who bad all his teeth strong and firm 
at the age of SO ; and who, five years afterwards, had a new set.
J lis hair also, which had grown w liite, turned darker about the 
same time.
lie remained in good health and strength till the 
VOL.
I. — NO.
I. 
Planting has made considerable progress in this 
county, within the last few years.
The chief plan- 
ters have been the Duke of Bedford, the Lord of 
Upper Ossory, Lord Carteret, and T.
Moore, Esq.
In Lord Ossory's park at Ampthill, are some aged 
oaks, of a remarkable size ; Woburn park is well 
stocked with oak, and other timber trees ; and ther© 
are some woods of considerable extent, in the neigh- 
bourhood of Southill, Warden, Chicksand, and 
Hawnes.
Very few situations in this county are entitled to 
the epithet picturesque ; but there is some pleasing 
scenery about Aspley-Guize, Ridgmont, and War- 
den ; the view from Ridgmont, over Buckingham- 
shire, is very extensive ; and the prospect from 
Millbrook Church-yard over the vale of Bedford, 
that from Toternhoe Castle over a great part of 
Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, and the ride 
along the DoAvns from Stretley to Barton, looking 
over Wrest park and towards Hertfordshire, are de- 
serving of particular attention.
Some handsome 
steeples of churches enliven the scenery of this 
county.
Bedfordshire has been long celebrated for its 
abundant produce of fine wheat and barley ; but 
the cultivation of wood, which was formerly very 
extensive, has long been entirely laid aside.
In some 
parishes, garden vegetables are raised in consider- 
able quantities ; and in the southern part of the 
county are many large dairy farms, the butter from 
which is chiefly sent to the London markets by land 
carriage.
Rivers.] — -The Ouse, or fee, the chief river of 
Bedfordshire, is supposed to have received its ap- 
liundredth year of his age, and then died in consequence of 
a plethora, or fullness of hlood.
This surprising instance of 
longevity, however, i=; attributed, we know not with whit pro- 
priety, to the frequent use of sugar, of which Mr. Slare was a 
great eater.
b pellation 
6 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
pellation from Isis, one of the names of Prosperine, 
whom the ancient Britons are known to have wor- 
shipped.
It rises in Northamptonshire, and enters 
Bedfordshire on the western side, running out of 
Buckinghamshire, between the villages of Brayfield 
and Turville ; whence it passes between Carlton 
and Harold, between Odel and Chillington, near 
Felmersbam, Sharnbrook, Belsoe, Milton- Ernest, 
and Oakley, and after a winding course through a 
number of fine meadows, passes through Bedford, 
where it becomes navigable.
Thence it takes an 
eastward direction near Goldington, Willington, 
Barford, Tempsford, Roxton, Little Barford, and 
Eaton- Socon, and at length quits the county, at St.
Neot's, on the confines of Huntingdonshire.
The 
principal bridges over the Ouse are Carlton, Rad- 
well, Stafford-bridge near Oakley, Bromham, Bed- 
ford, Barford, and Tempsford.
The great road 
from London to Glasgow passes over the last men- 
tioned bridge.
The Ouse is remarkable for the slowness of its 
motion, and for the many windings which it makes 
in its short course of about 45 miles.
It divides the 
county in two parts, and in a wet season is liable 
to sudden and great inundations.
In the year 1256 
the town of Bedford suffered great injury from the 
overflowing of this river, and again in 1570.
In 
1399, between Sullistone and Harewood, the Ouse 
suddenly stopped and parted, leaving its channel 
dry for three miles ; and a similar phenomenon hap- 
pened in the month of January, 1648.
By the su- 
perstitious, the former of these events has been re- 
garded as presaging the subsequent civil war, and 
the latter as referring to the death of King Charles.
The average depth of the Ouse is considered to be 
about ten feet ; at Sharnbrook it is not less than 25 
feet, and in few places less than 4 ; notwithstand- 
ing which it has several fords.
This river abounds 
with a variety of fish, as pike, perch, bream, chub, 
bleak, cray-fish, fine eels, dace, roach, and gudgeon.
The river Ivil rises near Baldock, in Hertford- 
shire, and enters this county near Stotford, not far 
from Arlesay : after receiving a small stream called 
Hiz, it passes, near Henlow, to Langford, and is 
there joined by another small river.
At Biggles- 
wade the Ivil becomes navigable, and passing from 
thence near Sandy and Blunham, it falls into the 
Ouse a little above Tempsford.
The Lea, whose course is principally through 
Hertfordshire, rises at Houghton-Regis, in this 
county, and runs through the parish of Luton.
The Ousel rises near Whipsnade, leaves Eaton- 
Bray on the right, and in its course to Leighton- 
Bosard, separates the two counties of Bedford and 
Buckingham.
Minerals.] — The only mine heard of in this 
county, is one of gold, which is said to have been 
discovered at Pollux Hill, about the year 1700.
It 
was seized for the king, and granted by lease to 
some refiners ; but, though they produced gold from 
the ore, they found the quantity so small, that it 
was not equal to the expence of separation.
Wood- 
ward, in his History of Fossils, mentions " a mass 
of shining yellow talc, with a yellow matter mixed 
with it," as having been found at this place, which 
probably was the substance mistaken for gold, by 
unskilful mineralogists.
Mineral Springs.] — Bedfordshire contains se- 
veral mineral springs, at the following places, but 
none of them are in much repute : Barton ; Bed- 
ford, (near the Friars) ; Cupwell, at Blestoe (near 
the Falcon) ; Poplar Well, at Blunham (near Bar- 
ford-bridge) ; Bromham (near Web's-Lane) ; Bush- 
mead ; Clapham ; Cranfield ; Hulcot ; Milton Er- 
nest ; two at Odell ; Chadwell, at Pertenhall ; a 
well called Ochres, at Resley ; Selsoe, at a farm 
called New Inn ; Turvey in Dovehouse Close ; and 
the spring which supplies the cold bath in Wrest 
Gardens.
Dr. Yeats, who analized the water from Clap- 
ham, Wrest Gardens, Bromham, Oakley, and Tur- 
vey, says : " the two first evidently contained iron.
In the Wrest Garden water, iron appears to be held 
in solution by the carbonic acid ; in the Clapham 
water by the vitriolic acid, forming the ferratn vitri- 
olatum.
They both of them eontain also the sulphat 
and muriat of lime, as likewise the su/phat of mag- 
nesia, or Epsom salts.
The Bromham water con- 
tains no iron, but holds in the solution the different 
salts just mentioned, the muriat of lime being in a 
considerable quantity." 
The spring at Oakley is remarkably clear and 
transparent, and contains the same salts in small 
quantities, but is not ferruginous.
A very large 
proportion of lime held in solution by a superabun- 
dance of carbonic acid, is found in that at Turvey.
Fossils.] — This county is nearly as barren in fos- 
sils, as it is in minerals.
The greater part of those 
of an extraneous nature, are found in the stratum of 
lime-stone, which follows the course of the Ouse.
In this stratum are found different sorts of shells, 
and other marine productions.
In the Toternhoe 
quarries, in the stratum of stone which lies above 
that which is used for building, are found fornua am- 
monis, and other shells.
From Woodward's cata- 
logue, we learn that nautili and other shells have 
been found in a chalk-pit at Caddington ; shark's 
teeth, ammotiistes belemnites, &c.
in a light coloured 
clay near Leighton ; and echini in the fields near 
Eaton-Bray.
The fullers' earth pits, in the vicinity of Wo- 
burn, have been generally described as belonging 
to this country ; but this is a mistake, as they are in 
Buckinghamshire, in the parish of Wavendon or 
Wandon, as it is usually called.
They are two 
miles north of Woburn, and about one furlong on 
the western side of the Northampton-road.
The most ancient pit, it is true, is in the county 
of Bedford, in the parish of Aspley, which adjoins 
that of Wandon ; but that has been disused for up- 
wards of a century, and it now has large trees 
growing in it.
Fuller, 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Fuller, and most of our ancient writers, mention 
a petrifying spring, which flowed in the parish of 
Aspley-Guise, and Camden speaks of a wooden 
ladder, shewn at Woburn Abbey, which by lying 
in the earth had been converted into stone.
The 
spring no longer exists ; but great abundance of pe- 
trified wood, together with gryplutes, belemnil.es, &e.
is found under the stratum of fullers' earth at As- 
pley.
Plants.]— The Rev. Dr.
Abbot, of Bedford, 
who has published a very ample Flora, of the indi- 
genous plants, of this county, mentions the follow- 
ing as amongst the most rare : 
Ornithogalum Pyrenaicum, which grows near 
Eaton Socon.
Anemoni Apennina, in the woods near Luton Hoe.
Astiugulus Arenarius, on both sides of Barton 
Hills, four miles from Luton.
Bupleurum tenuifohum ; in meadows and pastures, 
near Etesley in the road from Cambridge to St.
Neot's.
Convallaria maialis, in the woods near Woburn.
Campanula Latifolia, and Eriophoton polystachion, 
found near Dunstable.
Centvncu/us Minimus, near Ampthill.
Diantluis De/toides, on sandy hills not far from 
the Roman Camp.
Gentiana Asmarella, on Barton Hills, above men- 
tioned, and in the neighbourhood of Dunstable.
Geranium phocum, near Eversholt.
Hippocrepis Comesa, on the Chalk Hills.
Hyosserris minima, near Aspley and Ampthill.
Lythrum Hyssopifolium, grows plentifully in the 
fields between Oakley and Clapham.
Malaxis paludosa, grows in the neighbourhood of 
Potton.
Mclampyrum Christatum, in the woods near Blun- 
ham.
Monotropa hypopilhys, in the woods universally.
Pimpenilla Major, in the woods and hedges on a 
lime stone soil.
To these may be added ; Hypocharis glabra ; Safix 
rubra ; Alisma ranunculoides ; Inula Helenium ; Tri- 
folium ochroleucum ; Curex Strigosa, and Phlaum 
Paniculatum.
Etymology.] — This county derives its name from 
Bedford, its principal town.
It has been said that 
the ancient British name of Bedford was Lisieider 
or Letlidur ; but Camden is of opinion that Letti- ' 
dur is rather a modern translation of the English 
name Bedford.
He has, however, assigned no 
other reason for this opinion than that the significa- 
tion of Lettidur and Bedford is the same : Lettidur, 
says he, is the British word for inns upon a river, 
aod Bedford implies, beds and inns at thejord.
Bedford, however, in the time of the Saxons, 
* Bellinus is supposed to have been a common name for 
prince, or governor ; the governor of the Cassii was therefore 
culled Cassibelinus ; and it has been conjectured that from 
Cussibelinus, or Casskellaunus, the Greeks might form the 
was called either Badan-jord, a word of precisely 
the same signification ; or, according to Dr. Sal- 
mon, Jiedicanford, signifying the fortress on thejord, 
and said to be derived from the fortifications which 
had been constructed on the banks of the Ouse.
General History.] — At the period of the Ro- 
man invasion, Bedfordshire, and the adjoining coun- 
ties of Buckingham and Hertford, were inhabited 
by the people named Cattieuchtani, or Cassii; whose 
chief, Cassivellaunus, or Cassibelinus, was chosen 
by the unanimous consent of the Britons to lead 
their armies against Caesar.
Camden supposes, 
they obtained the name of Cassii from Gessi, which 
in the language of ancient Gaul, signifies brave or 
warlike.
That they had the reputation of good sol- 
diers, he adds, is plain from their having reduced 
part of the Dobuni.* 
During the government of the Romans, Bedford- 
shire formed part of Britannia Superior ; afterwards 
of Britannia Prima ; and under the Emperor Con- 
stantine in the year 310, it was included in the third 
division, called Flavia Caesariensis.
From the time that the Romans abandoned the 
island, until the year 571, or 580, history is silent 
respecting this county.
At that period, in a great 
battle fought near Bedford, the Britons were sub- 
dued by Cutha, or Cuthwlf, the brother of Ceau- 
tine, king of the West Saxons ; and the county was 
afterwards made part of the kingdom of Mercia.
About two hundred years after the Saxons had been 
in possession, the Danes began to invade this island, 
and in the reign of Edward the elder (son of king 
Alfred) Bedfordshire frequently became the scene of 
action in the wars between that victorious monarch, 
and the invaders.
About the year 919, according to the most correct 
information, this monarch came to Bedford, staid 
there four weeks, received the submission of all the 
neighbouring country, and built a fortress on the 
south side of the river.
In 9*21 the Danes seized 
Temesford, now Tempsford, and stationed them- 
selves there.
In an excursion from this place they 
attacked the town of Bedford, but were repulsed, 
with great slaughter.
Their fortress at Tempsford 
was, however, destroyed during the same summer 
by king Edward, who put their king, aud a great 
number of his nobles to death.
In 1010 the Danish 
army burnt Bedford and Tempsford ; and in the 
following year this county submitted to the dominion 
of the Anglo-Saxon king Ethelred.
Some further historical particulars, relating to 
Bedford, will come with more propriety under our 
account of that town.
In the reign of Charles I, during the war between 
that monarch and his Parliament, Bedfordshire was 
one of the first counties that declared against the 
word Cettticuchlani, or Cattutllani, as a name for the people 
who were governed by a prince whom they had heard called 
Cassivellaunus.
t king ; 
ft 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
king ; being within that district, known by the name 
of the Eastern Associates.
It is observed by Lord 
Clarendon that Bedfordshire was one of the counties 
in which the king had no visible party, nor one fixed 
quarter.
From the same author, we learnt that, in October 
1643, Prince Rupert was sent by the king into Bed- 
fordshire, at the head of a strong party of horse and 
foot.
With this force the prince surprised and took 
Bedford, which was occupied as a strong post by 
the enemy.
This expedition was principally de- 
signed to countenance Sir Lewis Dyves, whilst he 
fortified himself at Newport Pagnell, where he 
hoped to fix a garrison.
None of the subsequent 
military transactions in that war appear to have 
been in any way connected with this county ; nor 
has it, at any later period, made any conspicuous 
figure in history.
Antiquities.] — Several remains of Rorr.r.n, Sax- 
on, and Norman antiquities have been discovered 
in this county, but they are not of great importance.
At Sanday, or Salndy, near Biggleswade, supposed 
to be the ancient Salenae, there was- once a British 
fort, near which the Romans afterwards had a camp.
Many urns of glass, and one of a red substance 
like coral, with an inscription, were dug up in a 
field called Chesterfield, about forty or fifty years 
ago.
They all contained ashes.
Many Roman 
coins and urns were also dug up near the camp, 
nbout the year 1670, some of which were presented 
to the University of Oxford.
In the early part of 
the la B t century a ring waB found by a poor woman, 
;;s she was weeding.
She presented it to the Rev.
Mr. Hooker, who was then Rector of Sanday.
It 
was exceedingly light, very black, and exquisitely 
polished ; but its substance could never be ascer- 
tained.
It had a seal, on which was represented 
a crucifix, with a figure in the posture of worship 
on each side.
Round the seal was written, in let- 
ters of gold.
li In hoc signo viWes" The figures 
of the seal were also in gold.
The fort ot Sanday 
was destroyed by the Danes, when they took win- 
ter quarters in this county.
In the peat on Maiden Moor, about the year 1798, 
an anrpho'ci was found, together with several urns 
of different forms and sizes, containing bones, ashes, 
and fragments of the red pottery, enriched with fi- 
gures and other ornaments.
Roman coins have also 
been found near Dur.st iplo, and at Market-street.
The Lord Bishop of Cloyne, who has taken great 
pnins in the investigation of Roman roads and sta- 
tions, has furnished Messrs.
Lysons, the industrious 
compilers of the new Magna Britannia, to whose 
researches we are greatly indebted, with some in- 
teresting particulars, relating to this branch of an- 
tiquarian science.
He describes the county of 
Buckingham as being crossed by three roads of un- 
doubted antiquity : the Ikening-Street, the Wat- 
ling-^troet, and a considerable Roman road, Which 
came from Hertfordshire, to the station near San- 
day.
The first of these is supposed to be of Bri- 
tish origin.
After passing through Cambridgeshire 
and a part of Hertfordshire, it enters this county 
on its south-westerly borders, and crosses the turn- 
pike road from Luton to Bedford, about the six- 
teenth mile-stone ; thence a branch seems to bear 
to the right, through Great Bramingham and 
Houghton, to the British town of Maiden Bower ; 
the principal road continuing on the side of the hills 
between Great Bramingham and Limberly, over 
Seagrave Marsh, through Dunstaple, where it 
crosses the Watling- Street, and soon after enters 
Buckinghamshire.
The Watling Street is another British track-way.
Its enters this county at the 33d mile-stone, in its 
way from St. Albans to Stony Stratford, keeping 
nearly in the track of the modern Irish road, from 
which it is not to be distinguished.
With this road 
also it leaves the county a little beyond the 4"2d mile 
stone, having passed through one itinerary station 
on it, which is generally agreed to have been at 
Dunstaple.
The third ancient road, which was the Roman 
military way, enters the county near Baldock, in 
the line of the present North road, with which it 
continues as far as Stretton, between the 44th and 
45th mile-stones.
There the modern turnpike road 
turns off to the left to pass through Biggleswade, 
while the Roman road proceeds directly forward to 
Chesterfield.
Leaving the British camp near San- 
day, which Ave have already mentioned, on the left 
hand, it crosses the road from Everton to Temps- 
ford, passes Tempsford Marsh, and at length makes 
its way to the village of Gadmanchester, which is 
allowed to be a Roman town.
A considerable military way has also been ob- 
served coming from the Isle of Ely to Cambridge, 
and tending to the borders of Bedfordshire in a di- 
rect line for Sanday.
This road is supposed to 
have passed through Hatley and Potton, to the post 
at Chesterfield.
The monasteries, hospitals, &c.
belonging to the 
county of Bedford, which may be classed amongst 
its antiquities, were the following : the Benedictine 
Nuns had an abbey at Elstow ; the Cistercian 
Monks, abbeys at Warden and Woburn ; the Austin 
Canons, priories at Dunstaple, Bissemcde, or Bush- 
mead, Caldwell, and Newenham ; the Austin Nuns, 
a priory at Harold ; the Gilbertines, a priory at 
Chicksand ; the Grey Friars, a house at Bedford ; 
the Black Friars, at Dunstaple ; and the Knights 
Hospitallers, a preceptory at Melchbourn.
At 
Grovebury, in the parish of Leighton Bosard, was 
an alien priory, subject to the abbey of Fontevralt 
in Normandy ; at Milnbrook and Clophill, were 
cells to the Benedictine abbey of St. Albans.
At Ruxox in Flitwick, a cell to the priory of 
Dunstaple, and at Leighton-B;is .rd, a cell to Wo- 
burn Abbey.
These cells seem to have been all re- 
moved at an early period.
At Northill was a col- 
lege of priests.
There were ancient hospitals at 
Dunstaple, Farleigh, Hockliffe, and Foddington, 
and 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
and two at Bedford, dedicated to St. John and St.
Leonard.
Excepting those of Dunstaple Priory, 
however, and Elstow abhey, there are now but few 
monastic remains of any consequence in this county.
Part of the building's of the monastery, at Dunsta- 
ple, are to be seen in the house of Colonel Mad- 
dison, consisting 1 of some rooms with groined roofs 
of stone.
Adjoining the south-west corner of the 
Conventual church at Elstow, is a small building, 
having a low groined roof, which rests upon a sin- 
gle pillar, Avith a plain capital and base, in the style 
of the earliest Gothic architecture.
At Bedford, 
there are some slight remains of the Grey Friars, 
consisting of a part of the cloisters, and what is 
supposed to have been the refectory : the latter is 
now a barn.
Chicksand Priory, now the seat of 
Sir George Osborn, is supposed to have been con- 
verted into a mansion-house soon after the Dissolu- 
tion.
Part of the cloisters, with rich Gothic win- 
dows, remain entire : and on the west side, is a 
range of rooms on the ground floor, with stone roofs 
vaulted and groined.
Of the buildings of Woburn 
Abbey, or of the priories of Newenharn and Cald- 
well, no parts now exist ; but the sites of the two 
last may be traced.
There are some small remains 
of Warden Abbey, consisting of a brick building.
The refectory of Bush-mead Priory has been con- 
verted into a stable and offices ; and that of Harold 
Priory, which is now a barn, retains the original 
wooden roof.
There were formerly several castles, and castel- 
lated mansions, in Bedfordshire ; but those buildings 
have been all demolished.
Considerable earth works, 
however, remain on their sites ; the most remarkable 
of which is that of Toternhoe castle, about two miles 
to the north-west of Dunstaple.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Divisions.] — Bed- 
fordshire, at the time of the Norman survey, was di- 
vided into nine hundreds, and three half-hundreds.
The latter have since been absorbed in the former ; 
and the modern names of them are as follow : Bor- 
ford, Biggleswade, Clifton, Flitt, Manhead, Red- 
borne, Little Stoddon, Willey, and Wixamtree.
The county lies within tin diocese of Lincoln, is 
under the jurisdiction of an arch-deacon, and is di- 
vided into the six following deaneries : Bedford, 
Clopham, Dunstaple, Eaton, Flitt, or Fleete, and 
Sheffbrd ; at present, the number of parishes is 
121 ; of which 63 are vicarages : the great titles of 
these, with few exceptions, having been formerly 
appropriated to religious houses, are now in Lay 
hands.
Bedfordshire sends two members to parliament ; 
and Bedford, the county town, which is the only 
parliamentary borough in the county, returns two 
members.
In their election, the Russel, Osborn, 
and Whitbread families have a preponderating in- 
fluence.
Dunstaple was made a royal borough 
by Henry I.
but it never sent representatives to par- 
liament.
Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Seats.] — Of 
VOL.
I. — NO.
1. 
these, the most particular of which will be respec- 
tively noticed in our subsequent description of the 
principal towns and places in the county, we shall 
here do little more than mention the names of 
their owners.
The noble family of Russel possess- 
ed the magnificent abbey at Woburn, and a beauti- 
ful Villa at Oakley, which was the chief residence of 
the present Duke of Bedford, before he succeeded 
to the title.
Luton Hoo belongs to the Marquis of 
Bute ; and Ampthill Park is in the possession of the 
Earl of Ossory's family, who settled there in the year 
1736.
Lady Lucas inherits West Park, as the re- 
presentative of the ancient and noble family of Grey, 
who settled there in the fourteenth century.
Melch- 
bourn is the present family residence of Lord St.
John-Bletsoe.
The former seat of this family, into the 
possession of which they came by marriages with 
the Pevelys and Patshulls, is now a farm-house.
Lord Carteret's ancestors purchased Hawnes Park 
in the year 1667.
Bronham, which with other es- 
tates, was purchased by Lord Trevor about a cen- 
tury ago, is inherited from him by Lord Hampden.
Sir Samuel Ongley, an opulent merchant, whose 
father changed his name from Henley, purchased thtf 
seat at Worden, which is inherited by Lord Ongleyj 
about the year 1690.
Earl Spencer's family 
have had considerable estates in this county for 
nearly two centuries, but they have no residence.
Houghton Park, the seat of the Earls of Aylesbury, 
is in ruins ; and Toddington-house, which after it 
had belonged to the Cheneys, became a seat of 
the Wentworth family, has been nearly pulled 
down.
Odell Castle, belonging to Mr. Alston ; Southill, 
the seat of Mr. Whitbread, one of the members for 
Bedford ; and the seat of William Lee Antony, Esq.
M. P.
are the most distinguished seats of the gentry 
in this county.
Besides these, however, may be enu- 
merated the following : 
At Arlesey, the seat of.
Edward?, Esq.
Blunham Mrs. Campbell.
Bushmead Rev. H.
W. Gery.
Egginton F.
More, Esq.
Fenlake Barns A villa of Mr. Whitbread's.
Fhtwick George Brooks, Esq. occupied 
by Robert Trevor, Esq.
Harold Robert Garstin, Esq.
Henlow Geo. Edwards, Esq.
Hinwick Richard Orlebar, Esq.
Hockliffe Richard Gilpin, Esq.
Houghton Regis Henry Brandreth, Esq.
Howberry J.
Polhill, Esq.
Ickwell-bury John Harvey, Esq.
Ickwell C.Fyshe Palmer, Esq.
Kempston Robert Dennis, Esq.
Leighton Bosard Hon. Mrs.
Leigh, occupied by 
Mr. Dickinson.
Muggor Kanger Godfrey Thornton, Esq.
Ridgmont Dr. Macqueen.
Stockwood John Crawley, Esq.
Tingrith CD.
"Willaume, Esq.
Turvey John Higgins, Esq.
Turvey Abbey John Higgins, Jun. Esq.
c Market 
10 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Market Towns.] — The last edition of Camden 
gives eleven market towns to this county ; but the 
markets at Shefford and Toddington having- been 
since discontinued, the present number is only nine.
A hundred years ago Toddington had one of the 
most considerable markets in the county ; and, at 
earlier periods, as appears by their respective char- 
ters amongst the records in the Tower, Arlesey, Asp- 
ley-Guise, Blunham, Silsoe, Flitton, Marston-Mor- 
teyne, Melchbourn, Odell, Sundon, Worden, and 
Westoning ; had markets, but they have all been 
long since discontinued.
The market-house at Tod- 
dington was pulled down in the year 1799.
The following are the present market towns : — 
Ampthill, Bedford, Biggleswade, Dunstaple, Ha- 
rold, Leighton-Bosard, Luton, Potton, and Woburn.
Of these it may be remarked, that Bedford, Big- 
gleswade, and Luton are the principal markets for 
corn ; that Leighton-Bosard is celebrated for its 
abundant supply of suckling-calves ; that for some 
years past Potton has been upon the decline ; and 
that although Harokl still keeps up the name of a 
market, it is only attended by two or three butchers, 
who open shambles there on Tuesdays.
Population.] — According to a poll-tax which 
took place in this county in the year 1377, soon after 
a fatal pestilence, the population, excepting the 
clergy, children, and paupers, who Avere exempted 
from the tax, amounted to 20,239.
In 1801, the 
number of inhabitants, according to the returns 
which Avere made to Parliament, for ascertaining 
the population of the kingdom, was 63,393 ; of 
which 30,523 were males, and 32,870 were females.
Thirteen thousand eigiit hundred and sixteen were 
returned as being employed in trade and manufac- 
tures, and 18,786 in agriculture.
The number of houses, families, and persons in 
each hundred, agreeably to the more recent popu- 
lation returns of 1811, will be seen by the follow- 
ing table : 
Summary of the Population of the County of Bedford, as published by Authority of Parliament in IS 1 1 .
HOUSES.
OCCUPATIONS.
PERSONS.
Hundreds, &c.
15 
E U o_.
? <V V 
a 
T3 
V 
IS 
33 
.s 
'5 
S- a a 
15 -o a 
o U w 
V O o 
HE o-'C 
g e oo 
*-> •- a 6 
^"^ 5<£ 
« 9 y .
QJ w -*- — 
5 5 J2H 
• 2 , .
*— ,y5 D W5 
^ 8 £<-> 
-a •* «, °° 
u O U H 
° =:S;5 
= 8 a « 
Males.
Females.
Total 
of 
Persons.
V 
815 
1,261 
736 
1,644 
2,967 
1,861 
829 
1,341 
892 
940 
889 
1,418 
842 
1,828 
3,308 
2,077 
869 
1,550 
1,047 
1,099 
6 
5 
5 
22 
28 
22 
13 
12 
4 
22 
ii 
31 
15 
25 
53 
45 
6 
12 
3 
18 
674 
679 
632 
1,141 
2,017 
1,293 
706 
972 
808 
209 
183 
3^3 
183 
424 
891 
611 
127 
517 
166 
700 
32 
86 
27 • 
263 
400 
173 
36 
61 
73 
190 
2,120 
3,131 
1,897 
4,079 
7,422 
4,640 
2,019 
3,247 
2,465 
2,057 
94 
2,282 
3,295 
2,096 
4,518 
8,206 
5,252 
2,244 
3,913 
2,688 
2,548 
4,402 
6,426 
3,993 
8,597 
15,628 
9,892 
4,263 
7,160 
5,153 
4,605 
94 
Clifton 
Flitt 
Willey 
Rorou^h Town of Bedford 
13,2S6 
14,927 
139 
219 
9,431 
4,155 
1,341 
33,171 
37,042 
70,213 
: 
It should be remembered, that the Act under 
which these Population Returns were made, en- 
joined the commencement of the census to be on 
the 27th of May, and the days immediately succeed- 
ing, if one day should not be sufficient for every 
Parish.
The Houses, therefore, mentioned as 
" Building," and those " Uninhabited," in the co- 
lumns for that purpose, should be understood as in 
that state in the month of May, or early in June, 
1811.
Chief Towns, Parishes, &c] — Adopting the 
alphabetical plan in this department of the work, 
as well as in its general arrangement, we shall now 
proceed to describe the respective towns, parishes, 
&c.
in the county ; omitting such only as possess 
nothing entitling them to distinct notice.
We com- 
mence with 
Ampthill.] — This town, anciently called Ametitlle, 
is pleasantly situated, though in a sandy soil.
It 
belongs to the hundred of Redborn- stoke and dean- 
ery of Flitt.
Its market, which is considerable, is 
holden on Thursdays.
It has two fairs in the year ; 
one on the 4th of May, and the other on the 30th of 
November.
There is no town-hall, or other public 
building, but the court of the honour is holden in a 
mean old room called the Moot-house.
The prin- 
cipal streets are neat and regular, crossing each 
and, bv the removal of some 
old 
other at right angles 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
11 
old houses which stood in the market -place, and the 
erection of a new market-house, the appearance of 
the town has within these few years been greatly im- 
proved.
Near the centre of the town is an obelisk 
of Portland-stone, in which is a pump, that was 
erected for the use of the inhabitants, by the Earl of 
Upper Ossory, in the year 1785.
Through the interest of the Earl of Aylesbury, the 
assizes are said to have been holden here in 1684, in 
the Moot-house already mentioned.
The parish cluirch, a handsome Gothic structure, 
dedicated to St. Andrew, contains a mural monu- 
ment, in memory of Robert Nichols, of Ampthill, 
who was governor of Long Island after the expul- 
sion of the Dutch.
He was gentleman of the bed- 
chamber to the Duke of York, and was killed, while 
attending his Royal Highness, in the memorable en- 
gagement between the fleets of England and Holland, 
on the 28th of May 1672.
The identical cannon ball 
with which he was killed, is inlaid in the marble 
within the pediment ; and on the moulding is the 
following inscription : 
" Instrumentum mortis et immortalitalis." 
The instrujiicnt of death and immortality.
The figures of Lord Panhope and the Duchess of 
Exeter, which are mentioned by Sandford, have been 
removed from the east window of the aisle.
The benefice, valued in the king's books at ten 
pounds six and eight-pence, is a rectory, in the pa- 
tronage of Lord Ossory.
About a mile from the town, there is an hospital 
for twelve poor men, and a reader, and four poor 
women.
It was founded and endowed in the year 
1600 by Mr. John Cross, of New Inn's Hall, Ox- 
ford.
The reader has a salary of fifteen pounds, and 
the other poor people receive ten pounds a year each.
There is also a school for thirteen children.
At the time of the Norman survey, the manor of 
Ampthill, called Ampthill Park, was possessed by 
the Baronial family of Albini, and in 1441, it became 
the property of Sir John Cornwall, a distinguished 
military character in the reigns of Henry IV.
and 
Henry V.
and who in the battle of Agincourt, was 
one of the chosen officers who had the post of honour, 
with the Duke of York, in the van.
Leland says, 
" that he builded the castelle of Antehill of such 
spoils as it is said he won in Prance." In 1432, he 
was created Lord Fanhopc, and in 1433, Baron of 
Milbrook.
The manor is next to be traced to the 
noble family of Grey, who held it in the year 1524, 
soon after which it came into the possession of the 
crown, and was made an honour, by an act of par- 
liament.
In the old castle, Catherine of Arragon, the first 
Queen of Henry VIII.
resided, while the subject of 
her divorce was discussed before the commissioners 
at Dunstaple.
In reference to this circumstance, a 
neat cross, or Gothic column, has been erected by the 
noble owner of the present mansion, on the site of 
the ancient one, with the following inscription writ- 
ten by the late Lord Orford : 
" In days of old, here Ampthill's towers were seen, 
The mournful refuge of an injured queen ; 
Here flow'd her pure but unavailing tears ; 
Here blinded zeal sustain'd her sinking years.
Yet Freedom hence her radiant banners wav'd, 
And Love aveng'd a realm by priests enslav'd.
From Catherines wrongs a nation's bliss was spread, 
And Luther's light from Henry's lawless bed." 
No accounts of Ampthill castle, or its inhabitants, 
are to be discovered during the subsequent reigns.
It must have been suffered to fall to decay ; as in 
the year 1640, it appears to have been some time to- 
tally demolished.
After the Restoration, Ampthill 
Great Park was granted by Charles II.
to Mr. John 
Ashburnham, as a reward for the faithful and impor- 
tant services which he had rendered to that mo- 
narch and his father.
In 1800, John, Earl of Upper 
Ossory, became possessed of the lease of the honour 
of Ampthill, by exchange with the late Duke of 
Bedford.
The present mansion is a very superb edifice situ- 
ated near the foot of the hill, yet sufficiently elevated 
to command a fine prospect over the vale of Bed- 
ford.
It was built about the year 1604, by the first 
Lord Ashburnham.
The apartments contain a va- 
luable collection of paintings, by Julio Romano, 
Palma, Rubens, Vandyck, Carracci, Rembrandt, 
Teniers,Guyp,Loutherbourg,Gainsborough , Stubbs, 
Sir Joshua Reynolds, &c.
a handsome library, and 
a museum of ancient history.
Amongst the paint- 
ings by Sir Joshua, is a portrait of himself, one of 
Sterne, and one of Garrick.
Rising behind the house, on a steep natural bank, 
the grounds of Ampthill are agreeably disposed, and 
afford some very beautiful scenery.
The park, re- 
markable for its ancient oaks, is particularly pictu- 
resque.
A survey of Ampthill Park, taken by order 
of parliament in 1653, mentions 287 trees as being 
hollow, and too much decayed for the use of the 
navy.
These oaks, contributing greatly to the orna- 
ment of the place, remain to the present day.
The house suffered greatly by a dreadful storm, 
which spread its ravages throughout the town and 
neighbouring villages, on the 19th of August, 1800.
Some of the hail-stones, by which not fewer than 
700 panes of glass were broken in the west-front, 
are reported to have been seven inches in circum- 
ference.
Asplky Guise.] — Aspley Guise, in the hundred 
of Manshead and Deanery of Plitt, about two miles 
north of Woburn, had formerly a market on Fridays ; 
for which it had a charter granted to Ansclm de 
Gysc, Lord of the Manor in 1267, with a fair at St.
Botolph's tide.
The market has long been disused, 
but it continues to be a populous village,, and is very 
pleasantly situated.
In the parish church, dedicated to St. Botolph's-, 
are effigies in brass of one of the Guise family, iu 
armour ; 
12 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
armour ; a tomb of Sir Edwin Sadleir, the last baro- 
net of that name ; and an ancient altar tomb, with the 
effigies of a man in chain armour.
AasLEY.] — Arsley, in the hundred of Clifton, was 
anciently a market-town.
In Doomsday Book its 
market on Wednesday is recorded, and the toils va- 
lued at 10s.
per annum.
In 1270 it was confirmed 
to Stephen Edworth, then lord of the manor, with a 
fair to be held at the festival of St. Peter and St.
Paul.
Botii the fair and market have been long 
disused.
An ancient entrenchment near the road 
to Baldock, called Etonbury, was probably the ori- 
ginal site of the castle occupied by the lords of this 
manor.
It appears to have been a place of consi- 
derable strength.
The parish church contains mo- 
numents of Sir Samuel Brown, a barrister, who died 
in 1665, and several of the families of Vigerons and 
Edwards.
Richard Edwards, who died in 1691, is 
called in his epitaph the last grand reader of the 
Temple.
* Nicholas Rowe, Esq. was born in the year 1673.
His fa- 
mily possessed a considerable estate in Devonshire ; btot, with 
the view of increasing bis fortune, his father embraced the pro- 
fession of the law, of which he was made serjeant.
Nicholas 
received his first education at a private school at Iiighgate, 
whence he was removed to Winchester, and, about his twelfth 
year, he was ghosen one of the King's scholars.
He acquired 
the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin languages ; and, before he left 
the school, he gave several ingenious specimens of poetical 
talent.
His father, having designed him for the study of the law-, 
took him from school at the age of sixteen, and entered him a 
student in the Middle Temple.
He made considerable pro- 
gress, and was called to the bar ; but Homer and Virgil had 
more charms for him than either Coke or Littleton.
He was 
strongly solicited by his friends, to practise at the bar ; but no- 
thing could overcome his affection for the muses, and his first 
play, the Ambitious Stepmother, having been received with 
great applause, he resolved to make poetry his profession.
— 
He had imbibed in his youth the most noble sentiments of li- 
berty, of which he gave a specimen in his tragedy of Tamer- 
line.
This was the second play that he wrote ; and, till of late 
years, it was usual to perform it on the 4th and 5th of Novem- 
ber, in commemoration of the Gunpowder Treason, and the 
landing of King William.
His next and chief play, was his 
Fair Penitent ; in which the characters are supported with much 
judgment, and the language, though too declamatory, is ex- 
tremely elegant.
He wrote several other pieces for the stage, 
most of which met with great success.
His distinguished abi- 
lities, and courteous behaviour, recommended him to several 
noble personage;, particularly to the Duke of Queensberry, 
who being secretary of state, appointed him his under secretary 
for public affairs ; but he lost that place when the duke resign- 
ed the seals.
Mr. Rowe being out of all employment, went one day to 
wait on the Earl of Oxford, lord high treasurer of England ; 
when, amonst other things, his lordship asked him whether he 
understood Spanish, He answered in the negative ; and his 
lordship replied, that he would advise him to learn it as soon 
as possible.
Mr. Rowe, imagining that the earl intended to 
send him to Spain on some honourable commision, replied, he 
would use his endeavours, and that he did not doubt but he 
should soon be able both to speak and understand it.
He then 
took his leave, and with the sssistance of a few books, he soon 
made himself master of the Spanish tongue.
He accordingly 
waited on the earl to inform him of his acquisition, who asked 
him if he was sure he had a perfect knowledge of it.
Mr.
Barford (Great).] — This village, about six miles 
north-east of Bedford, on the road to St. Neots, 
gives name to a hundred.
The principal manor was 
formerly in the St. John family, but is now the pro- 
perty of John Franklyn, Eso r in whose family it has 
been for several generations.
It has a bridge over 
the Ouse, which was built in the early part of the 
loth century.
Barford (Little).] — This place, situated in the 
hundred of Biggleswade, is chiefly celebrated as the 
birth-place of Rowe, the dramatic poet.* 
Battlesden.] — Battlesden is a small village, 
about three miles from Wobum.
It Avas formerly 
the seat and residence of Allen, Lord Bathurst, of 
Battlesden, and the occasional resort of the celebrat- 
ed constellation of wits, of whom he was the patron 
and friend.
Bedford.
— Bedford, the county town, is an ancient 
corporation, the earliest charter of which is dated in 
1160.
It is governed by a mayor, recorder, aldermen, 
two 
Rowe answering in the affirmative, the earl burst into the fol- 
lowing exclamation : "How happy are you, Mr. Rowe, that 
you can now enjoy the pleasure of reading and understanding 
Don Quixote in the original !" 
On the accession of George I.
he was made poet-laureat, 
and one of the surveyors of the customs in the port of London.
The Prince of Wales also conferred on him the place of clerk 
of the council, and the lord chancellor, Parker, made him his 
secretary for the presentations the very day he received the 
seals, without solicitation.
These respective offices he held till his death, which hap- 
pened on the 6th of December, 1 71 8, in the 45th year of his age.
He was twice married ; first to the daughter of auditor Par- 
sons ; and afterwards to the daughter of one Mr. Devenish, a 
gentleman of fortune in Devonshire.
By the first lady he had 
a son, and by the second (who survived him) a daughter.
In his person Mr. Rowe was graceful and well made, his face 
regular, and of a manly beauty.
He had a quick and fruitful 
invention, a deep penetration, and a large compass of thought, 
with a singular dexterity and ease in communicating his opi- 
nions.— He was master of most parts of polite learning, espe- 
cially the classic authors, both Greek and Latin ; and he per- 
fectly understood the French, Italian, and Spanish languages.
Having a firm impression of religion upon his mind, he was 
fond of divinity and ecclesiastical history, in both of which he 
made considerable advances.
He expressed, upon all occa- 
sions, his full persuasion of the truth of revealed religion ; and 
being a sincere member of the established church himself, he 
pitied, but condemned not, those who departed from it.
His 
conversation was pleasant, witty, and learned, without the least 
tincture of affection or pedantry ; and his inimitable manner 
of diverting, or enlivening the company, made it impossible 
for any one to be out of humour with him.
He was altogether 
a very amiable character.
He was buried with great funeral pomp, in Westminster 
Abbey, where a handsome monument was afterwards erected 
by his wife to the memory of both him and his daughter.
On 
the pedestal, which is about twenty inches high, and stands on 
an altar, is a very beautiful bust, near which is the figure of a 
lady in the deepest sorrow : on a pyramid behind, is a medal- 
lion, with the head of a young lady in relief.
On the front of 
the pedestal is the following inscription : — 
" To the memory of Nicholas Rowe, Esq. who died in 1718, 
aged 45.
And of Charlotte, his only daughter, wife of Hen- 
ry Fane, Esq. who inheriting her father's spirit, and amiable 
in her own innocence and beauty, died in the 23d year of 
her age, 1739." 
Beneath, 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
13 
chamberlains, and thirteen common councilmen.
Whoever may have been a mayor is always after- 
wards reputed as an alderman.
The mayor and 
bailiffs are chosen annually out of the freemen.
As 
early as the year 1595, it sent two members to par- 
liament.
The mayor and two bailiffs are the re- 
turning officers.
The Duke of Bedford takes his title from this 
town, which first gave title of duke to the victorious 
prince John Plantagenet, Regent of France, during 
the minority of his nephew, Henry VI.
as it did in 
the reign of Edward IV.
first to John Nevil, Mar- 
quis of Montacute, and then to the king's third son, 
George Plantagenet ; but he dying an infant, the 
title lay vacant till Henry VII.
created his uncle, 
Jasper Tudor, Duke of Bedford, who also died 
without issue ; and thus far the title was enjoyed by 
the first possessor only of each family.
But King 
Edward VI.
making John, Lord Russell, Earl of 
Bedford, the dignity has ever since been in that il- 
lustrious house, with an advancement of it to the 
title of Duke, by King William III.* 
When Henry II.
granted a charter to the bur- 
gesses of the town of Bedford, he rendered it sub- 
ject to the payment of 401.
per annum, as a fee-farm 
rent to the crown.
Their mercantile guild and an- 
cient privileges were confirmed by the succeeding 
monarch, who also granted new privileges and im- 
Beneath, on the front of the attar, is the following epitaph, 
by Pope: — 
" Thy reliques, Rowe, to this sad shrine we trust, 
And near thy Shakespeare place thy honour'd bust.
Oh !
skill'd next him to draw the tender tear, 
For never heart felt passion more sincere ; 
To nobler sentiments to fire the brave, 
T' or never Briton more disdain' d a slave !
Peace to thy gentle shade, and endless rest, 
Blest in thy genius, in thy love too ble-t !
-And blest, that timely from our scene remov'd, 
Tli y soul enjoys that liberty it lov'd.
To these, so mourn'd in death, so lov'd in life, 
The childless mother and the vvidow'd wife, 
With tears inscribes this monumental stone, 
That holds their ashes, and expects her own." 
* The history of the noble family of Russell is curious and 
interesting.
They appear to have originated in Dorsetshire, 
and owe their greatness to an accident on thai coast.
In the reign 
of Henry \ II.
Philip, Archduke of Austria, being bound for 
Spain, the heiress of which kingdom he had married, was 
obliged by a storm to put on shore at Weymouth, where he 
was received by Sir Thomas Frenchard, of Wolverton, Knt.
who, till he could inform the court of the event, sent for his 
neighbour Mr. John Russell, then lately returned from his tra- 
vels, to entertain his illustrious guests.
The Archduke was so 
pleased with his conversation, that he recommended him to the 
king of England, who soon advanced him to several honour- 
able posts, and his son Henry VIII.
created him baron Russell 
of Cheneys, in the county of Bucks, which estate he afterwards 
acquired by marriage.
He was made by Henry VIII.
lord 
warden of the stannaries, and lord admiral of England and Ire- 
land, knight of the garter, and lord privy seal.
In the reign of 
Edward VI.
he was lord high steward for the coronation, and 
had a grant of Wobnrn Abbey, and was in the 3d of Edward 
VI.
1549 created earl of Bedford.
He had the honour to con- 
duct over to England Philip of Spain, grandson to the prince 
VOL.
I. NO.
1. 
munities similar to those enjoyed by the burgesses of 
Oxford.
Richard II.
granted still more extended 
privileges, and among others a view of Frankpledge 
within the borough.
In this monarch's charter the 
corporation are styled the mayor, bailiffs, and bur- 
gesses.
In the reign of Edward I.
the liberties of 
the town were seized by that monarch, the bailiffs 
having neglected to discharge the fee-farm rent.
In 
the reign of Henry VI.
the town being much decay- 
ed, many houses gone to ruin, and the trade of it 
brought low, and the usual issues discontinued, the 
inhabitants petitioned the King to shew them his 
grace : accordingly he granted that the yearly farm 
should be remitted in part for a time.
In the reign 
of Henry VII.
it was permanently reduced, through 
the interposition of Sir Reginald Bray, then prime 
minister, to 201.
per annum, and afterwards to 161.
5s.
8d.
Avhich rent is now payable to Lord Carteret, 
and the Rev. John Pery.
The last renewal of the 
charter of incorporation was in the reign of King 
James II.
in whose time the mayor and aldermen 
were removed from their respective offices, by royal 
mandate, for neglecting to elect two burgesses to 
serve in parliament.
The members were in conse- 
quence chosen by his Majesty's ministers.
The 
right of election was determined in 1690, to be in 
the burgesses, freemen, and inhabitants, house- 
holders not receiving alms.
The number of voters 
who first brought him to court and advancement.
He died 
1554, and was succeeded by his son Francis, who died in 1585, 
and was buried at Cheneys, as were most of his descendants.
His 
son Francis being killed a day or two before his father's death, 
by the Scotch in the marches, his son Edward succeeded his 
grandfather, and died 1627; he was succeeded by his cousin 
Francis, son of his uncle William, lord Russell of Thornhaugh, 
lord deputy of Ireland in the reign of Elizabeth.
This Francis 
was the first projector of the draining of the great level of the 
fens, called after him Bedford Level, and dying 1641, was suc- 
ceeded by his eldest son William, who after having several 
times joined both parties during the.
civil war, at last adhered 
to the royal cause, and suffered a severe loss in the death of his 
only son by the very family whom he had supported ; to com- 
pensate for which he was created by King William marquis of 
Tavistock, and duke of Bedford, and dying in 1700, was suc- 
ceeded by his grandson Wriothesley.
He, in 1711, by his son 
and namesake, and he in 1732 by his brother John, who, dying 
in 1771, was succeeded by his grandson Francis, the late duke, 
who died rather suddenly, of an illness occasioned by a rup- 
ture, on the 2d of March, 1802, in the 37th year of his age.
His brother, Lord John Russell, succeeded him in his title and 
estates.
This nobleman, so suddenly and unexpectedly raised 
to ducal honours, was born on the 6th of July, 176G ; and, on 
the 21st of March, 1786, before he had completed his twentieth 
year, he married at Brussels, Georgiana Elizabeth, the second 
daughter of Viscount Torrington.
This lady died on the 1 1th 
of October, 1801 ; leaving issue, Francis, now marquis of Ta- 
vistock, born May 10, 1783; George William, born May 8, 
1790 ; and John, born August 19, 1792.
— Shortly after his ac- 
cession to the title, his grace married a second time, Georgiana, 
the fifth daughter of the d.uke of Gordon, by whom he has 
had several children.
After the death of Mr. Pitt, when Mr. Fox and his friends.
succeeded to power, his grace was appointed Lord Lieutenant 
of Ireland ; a post which, without distinguishing himself as a 
party man, he tilled to the entire and general satisfaction of the 
public.
D is 
li 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
is nearly 1400.
Messrs.
Dysons, and most of our 
contemporary writers, have asserted that, Within 
these lew years, the population of Bedford was 
.greatly increased.
This, however, has been contra- 
dicted by Mr. Belsham, the brother of the historian, 
who resides in the town.
" Perhaps," says he, " no 
town in the kingdom has remained more stationary 
than Bedford, for several centuries past.
From 
Speed's Map, of which the date is 1608, it appears 
to have been at that period of almost the same di- 
mensions as at present.
The number of bouses, is 
somewhat diminished of late years, in consequence 
of the fire mentioned by Mr. L.
which happened on 
the 25th of May, 1802, by which about seventy ha- 
bitations were burnt down, most of them very mean 
and miserable cottages, wattled and thatched.* 
The far greater proportion of them has since been 
rebuilt, in a manner that reflects credit upon the 
town.
Many other tenements, old and ruinous, 
have also been taken down within these few years, 
and new habitations erected, to the great improve- 
ment, but by no means the general enlargement of 
the town." 
The Duke of Bedford is the principal land pro- 
prietor ; but Lord St. John and Mr. Whitbread are 
not far inferior to him.
Their united possessions in 
this small county, of which the rental is, however, in 
proportion to the extent very large, (not less than 
three hundred thousand pounds per annum) are 
estimated at more than forty thousand pounds 
3'early value ; and are probably little inferior to 
those of any other ten proprietors.
The Mar- 
quis of Bute, the Earl of Ossory, Lord Hamp- 
den, Lady Lucas, Sir Philip Monnoux, Sir George 
Osborne, and Mr. Pym, rank high in the second 
class.
Bedford is a place of great antiquity, and is sup- 
posed by some writers to have been the Lactidorum 
of Antoninus ; but Camden objects to this, on the 
ground that the town is not situated on any Roman 
road, neither have any Roman coins been found 
there.
Its situation is upon the Ouse, by which it is 
divided into two parts, in the direction of east and 
west.
This circumstance enables it to carry on a 
considerable trade with Lynn.
In the Saxons' time, Bedford was a place of con- 
siderable consequence ; as appears from its having 
been chosen by Offa, the powerful King of the Mer- 
cians, for his burial place.
His bones were interred 
in a small chapel, which being situated on the brink 
of the river Ouse, was afterwards undermined and 
swept away by the floods, during an inundation.
Bedford, as has been already stated, was also famous 
for a victory gained in the year 57*2, by Cuthwlf, 
the Saxon king, over the Britons.
The Danes once 
destroyed this town ; but Edward the Elder repair- 
ed it, and united the town on the south side of the 
* The fire was occasioned by a piece of a red-hot horse-shoe, 
from a blacksmith's forge, falling on the thatch of a house.
The 
da nagc amounted to about 20001.
but a subscription was im- 
rher, called Mikesgate, to Bedford, on the north 
side of it ; since which they have both gone by this 
name.
After the conquest, Pain de Beauchamp.
the 
third Baron of Bedford, built a castle here, encom- 
passed with a mighty rampart of earth, and a high 
wall, the whole so strong that King Stephen, who 
besieged and took it in his war with the Empress 
Maud, was glad to grant the garrison honourable 
terms.
In the barons' wars it was again besieged, 
and for want of relief, taken by King John's forces 
under Fulco de Brent, to whom the king gave it 
for a reward ; but for his subsequent behaviour he 
took it from him, and caused it to be demolished, 
though it was not quite level till the reign of 
Henry III.
An account of the siege of this cas- 
tle, as copied by Camden from the Chronicle of 
Dunstaple, is deserving of notice, as it furnishes a 
proof of the efficacy of th^ machines which were 
formerly used in warfare, for the destruction of 
man : 
" On the east side was one petraria, and two man- 
gonella, which daily battered the tower ; on the west 
side, two mangonellas, ruined the old tower ; and 
one mangonella on the south, and one on the north, 
made two breaches in the walls opposed to them.
Besides these, there were two wooden machines, 
raised above the height of the tower and castle, for 
the cross-bow men and scouts.
Also many others 
in which the cross-bow men and slingers lay in am- 
bush.
There was also a machine, called a eat, un- 
der which the miners had free passage to sap the 
walls of the tower and castle.
The castle was taken 
by four assaults.
In the first was taken the barba- 
can ; in the second the outer bail ; in the third the 
wall near the old tower Avas overthrown by the mi- 
ners, through the breach of Which they, with great 
danger, made themselves masters of the inner bail.
On the fourth assault the miners set fire to the 
tower, and when the smoke burst out and great 
cracks appeared in the tower, the besieged surren- 
dered.
The sheriff was ordered to demolish the 
tower, and the outer bail.
The inner, after it was 
dismantled, and the ditches filled up all round, was 
left for William de Beauchamp to live in.
The 
stones were given to the canons of Newnham 
and Chaldwell, and the church of -St. Paul at 
Bedford." 
The site of the castle now forms a close divided 
by a lane.
Some of its vestiges are to be seen, at 
the back of the Swan Inn, and the whele circuit may 
be traced ; the banks on two sides are very bold.
On the keep is a bowling green, formerly much fre- 
quented by gentlemen of the town and neighbour- 
hood.
In digging for stone, a part of the founda- 
tions was some time ago discovered, as well as 
several pieces of coin, and a spear of enormous 
size.
The site of the castle, with the Swan 
mediately opened, and the los of the poor sufferers was nearly 
compensated.
Inn, 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
L> 
Inn, is the property of his Grace the Duke of 
Bedford.* 
The barony of Bedford, consisting of several ma- 
nors of Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire,, was 
originally possessed by William de Beauchamp, a 
descendant of Hugh de Beauchamp, who attended 
William the Conqueror, upon his invasion of this 
country.
William de Beauchamp died in the reign 
of Edward, and tlie barony was divided between his 
three daughters, Maud, wife of Roger de Mowbray ; 
Bla, wife of Baldwin Wake ; and Beatrix, wife of 
Thomas Fitzrotes.
In the reign of Henry the 
Third, John de Beauchamp, who had joined the re- 
bellious barons, was slain in the field at the battle of 
Evesham.
The ancient family of Beauchamp were 
hereditary almoners to the Kings of England, on the 
day of their coronation.
At the coronation of Hen- 
ry IV.
this office, with its perquisites, was claimed 
by Thomas de Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, as one 
of the co-heirs of the family, by the marriage of his 
micestor with Maud de Beauchamp, and by Lord 
John Latimer, as inheriting part of the barony, 
which passed in marriage with Maud, daughter of 
Beatrix de Beauchamp, to Boletorts.
The claim 
of Lord Latimer was allowed, and Sir Thomas Grey, 
Knight, was appointed to represent Thomas de Mow- 
bray, whose lands were then in the King's hands.
They had a towel of fine linen prepared to put tlie 
silver in that was appointed to be given in alms ; 
and likewise the distribution of the cloth that co- 
vered the pavement and floors from the door of 
the King's chamber, to the pulpit in Westminster 
Abbey.
The Earl of Exeter, Sir George Blundell, and 
Thomas Snag, Esq. as being respectively seized of 
several parts of the Barony of Bedford, claimed the 
office of Almoner, at the coronation of James II.
For that time, it was adjudged the Earl of Exeter, 
with a saving right to the other two : of the fees, 
only the silver dish and the cloth in Westminster 
Hall, to the west door of the abbey church were 
allowed.
A considerable portion of the barony of 
Bedford was purchased by John, Duke of Bed- 
ford.
The manor of Bedford, which was formerly 
part of the barony, has long been vested in the cor- 
poration.
Previously to the conquest, there was a collegiate 
church at Bedford, dedicated to St. Paul.
Rohesia, 
or Roise, wife of Pain de Beauchamp, changed the 
prebendaries into canons regular.
They were after- 
wards removed by her son Simon de Beauchamp, to 
a new site in the neighbouring parish of Colding- 
ton, afterwards called Newenham, about a mile from 
* The Swan Inn and Castle Close adjoining, were purchased 
by the late duke of Bedford, soon after he came of age, of 
John Staines, Esq. of Biddenham, a village near Bedford, who 
inherited the estate from his father, to whom it was about half a 
century ago devised by the will of Mr. Henry Morton, an at- 
torney of great eminence and respectability, many years resi- 
dant at Bedford.
Bedford, down the river.
The only remains of (his 
religious house is a wall, inclosing the site ; at the 
corners of which are hills with ditches round them.
At the Dissolution its revenues were estimated at 
2921.
5s.
1 Id. per annum.
At present there are five parish churches in Bed- 
ford : St. Paul's, St. Peter's, and St'.
CutKbert's, on 
the north ; and St. Mary's, and St. John the Bap- 
tist's, on the south side of the river.
St. Paul's church is a handsome Gothic structure, 
with an octagonal stone spire, and is considered as 
the principal ornament of the town.
The tomb of 
Simon de Beauchamp was visible here in the time 
of Leland.
On the south wall of the nave is painted 
a recumbent figure of King Charles I.
under an 
open canopy, by the side of which are some indiffer- 
ent lines, alluding to his trial and execution.
In 
the chancel there is an altar-tomb, with brass figures 
of Sir William Harper and his Lady.
Sir William, 
who died in 1574, had been Lord Mayor of London, 
and was a great benefactor to Bedford, his native 
town.
The pulpit is of stone, ornamented with gilt tra- 
cery, on a blue ground.
In the church-yard is the tomb of " Shadrach and 
Patience Johnson," who had 24 children.
In 1697 Thomas Christie, Esq. presented the 
great tithes to the vicar of this church, and his suc- 
cessors, charged with the payment of one shilling 
each, to eight poor persons in the alms-houses which 
he built.
The churches of St. Mary, St. John, St. Peter, 
and St. Cttthbert, contain nothing remarkable.
In 
the parish register of St. John, are entries of the bu- 
rial of three nuns of Elstow, " Dame Anne Preston, 
Dame Elizabeth Fox, and Dame Elizabeth Napier," 
who died in 1557 and 1558.
A void space, which is opposite to St. Mary's 
church, was formerly occupied by a church called 
St. Peter's, Dunstaple.
Before the year 1400 if 
was a separate parish, but it was afterwards an- 
nexed to St. Mary's ; and in 1545, St. Peter's was 
pulled down.f 
As early as the year 1745, the Moravians, or so- 
ciety of Unitas I'\atn/m, had an establishment at 
Bedford, where they built a neat chapel in 1750.
Of late years, however, the number of these recluse 
and inoffensive sectaries has considerably declined ; 
and the house adjoining to the chapel, which was, 
formerly appropriated to the brethren and the 
sisters of the society, has been converted into u 
school.
Mr. Westley is reported to have.
said, that the 
f The old independent meeting-house in Mill-lan<\ was oii- 
g'mally established in the year 16j6, under the ministry ef 
John Gilford, who had been a major in the army of King 
Chariest.
The celebrated John Bunyan, whom we shall nn- 
tice hereafter, was ordained co-pastor of this congregation in 
1671, and continued in that situation until he died in 1688.
The chair in which he used to sit is still preserved, as a relic, 
in the Vestry of the chapel.
t - Methodists 
16 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Methodists would not flourish at Bedford, because 
they experienced no persecution.
This, however, 
has not proved to be the case.
They were esta- 
blished there upwards of forty years ago ; of late 
their numbers have much increased, and a hand- 
some chapel has been newly raised on the site of the 
old one.
Encouraged by the spirit of toleration, which dis- 
tinguishes the inhabitants of Bedford, a small Jewish 
synagogue has also been established there within the 
last four or five years.
The Jews of this place bear 
the most respectable characters.
There have been, and still are, several hospitals, 
and other charitable institutions in this town.
" There were two hospitals," says Leland, " in the 
suburbs of Bedford, the houses whereof and the cha- 
pels yet stand, both founded by the townsmen : St.
John's on the right hand, first coming in from the 
south to Bedford, and then on the other hand, a little 
aside is St. Leonard's : the grey friars stand flat on 
the north-west side of the town." 
The hospital of St. John the Baptist was founded 
in the year 1280 by Robert de Parys, for a master 
and two or more brethren priests, who were to pray 
for the souls of the founder, John St. John, Henry 
St. John, and John St. John, grandson of John ; 
and likewise for the reception and support of decay- 
ed freemen of the town of Bedford.
It appears by 
the surveys made of chantries apd hospitals in the 
reign of Henry VIII.
and Edward VI.
that the hos- 
pital and parish church of St. John had been long 
incorporated, and that there was no minister in that 
parish with the cure of souls, but the master of this 
said hospital.
The hospital consists at present of a 
master, who is rector of the church, and is presented 
by the corporation, and ten poor men appointed by 
the master, who receive a weekly allowance of 9d.
each.
Tbe ancient hall is still standing ; and the 
estate is held on lease under the master and co- 
brethren.
The hospital of St. Leonard, on the south side of 
the town, was founded sometime about the latter 
end of the thirteenth century, by a townsman of 
Bedford.
An ancient record, dated in the year 
1302, calls it " the poor-house of St. Leonard, in 
which were six freres chapleynis wearing a religious 
habit." At the Dissolution its revenues Avere valued 
at lb).
6s.
8d.
per annum.
The site, which is in St.
John's parish, is now a farm belonging to the Duke 
of Bedford.
The hospital of Grey Friars, or Franciscans, was 
founded by Mabel Pateshull, lady of Bletsoe, before 
the year 1311.
At the Dissolution the revenues of 
this monastery were estimated only at 31.
15s.
2d.
clear yearly value.
Its site was granted by Henry 
VIII.
to John Gostwick, master of the horse, and is 
at present occupied by a farm-house, the property of 
the Earl of Ashburnham.
About a quarter of a mile west of Bedford, stood 
Caldwell or Cawdwell priory, which was founded in 
the reign of King John by Simon Bauscot, alderman 
of Bedford, for brethren of the order of the holy- 
cross, or holy sepulchre, and was dedicated to the 
Virgin Mary.
At the time of its suppression, in the 
reign of Henry VIII.
it was stated to be a priory of 
the order of Austin Friars, and was then dedicated 
to St. John the Baptist, and St. John the Evange- 
list.
Its annual value was stated to be 1091.
8s.
5d.
In 1502 its site was granted to Thomas Leigh.
It 
now belongs to George Livius, Esq. In a field ad- 
joining the farm-house, some traces of the conven- 
tual buildings may yet be seen.
In the year loot?, 
Sir William Harper, whose tomb has been already 
noticed, founded a free- school in Bedford, for the 
instruction of children of the town in grammar and 
good manners.
The school-house was rebuilt in 
1767, when a statue of the founder was placed in the 
front with a Latin inscription beneath, to the follow- 
ing effect : 
" Behold, Traveller, the Bodily Resemblance 
" Of Sir William Harper, Knight ; 
" Of this School, 
" Thus Spacious and Adorned, 
" The Munificent Founder, 
" The Picture ot His Mind, 
" Is Dedicated in the Table of Benefactions." 
The warden and fellows of New College, Oxford, 
are visitors of this school, and have the appoint- 
ment of the masters and ushers.
The masters sa- 
lary is 2601.
with coals and candles ; that of the 
second master is 1601.
with the same allowance of 
fire and candle.
The writing master has a salary 
of 801.
per annum.
Sir William Harper, for the support of this ex- 
cellent institution, conveyed to the corporation thir- 
teen acres and one rood of land, lying in the parish 
of St. Andrew, Holborn, which he had purchased 
for the suin of 1801.
he also conveyed his latexlwel- 
ling house, &c.
at Bedford.
The revenues of these 
estates were also to be applied towards apportioning 
maidens of the town on their entrance into the mar- 
riage state.
In the year 1660, the corporation leas- 
ed the whole of the lands in the parish of St. An- 
drew, Holborn, for the term of 41 years, at the 
yearly rent of 991.
In the year 1684, a reversion- 
ary lease was granted for the further term of 51 
years, at the improved rent of 1501.
In conse- 
quence of granting these leases, a great number of 
houses were built, and the following streets covered 
the above-mentioned thirteen acres of meadow-land.
Bedford Street, Bedford Row, Bedford Court, 
Princes Street, Theobald's Road, North Street, 
East Street, Lamb's Conduit Street, Queen Street, 
Eagle Street, Boswell Court, Queen Street, Har- 
per Street, Richbell Court, Hand Court, Grays 
Inn Passage, Three Cup Yard, &c.
The annual 
rent from these buildings is now increased to more 
than 5,8001.
and it is expected that in a few years it 
will amount to upwards of 70001.
This extraordi- 
nary increase of revenue occasioned the trustees to 
apply to Parliament for two several acts to regulate 
its 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
17 
its disposal, and extend the objects of the charity.
By the priorism contained in these acts of Parlia- 
ment, the maintenance of the master and usher of 
the grammar-school, and the maintenance of a mas- 
ter, and two ushers, to the English school, is pro- 
vided.
Three exhibitions of 40/.
per annum, are 
given to scholars from the free school, either at Ox- 
lord or Cambridge, during* the space of six years.
The sum of eight hundred pounds per annum is 
appropriated for marriage portions, to be given by 
lot in sums of 20/.
each to 40 poor maidens of Bed- 
ford, of good fame and reputation, not under 16 
years of age, and not exceeding 50.
They are not 
to marry within two months after receiving the mar- 
riage portion, otherwise to forfeit it.
The men to 
whom they are to be married must not be vagrants 
or persons of bad fame or reputation.
A yearly 
sum of 3000/.
per annum is also appropriated by the 
last act, for the maintenance of 26 boys in an hospi- 
tal or school of industry, and 700/.
to be laid out in 
apprentice fees for 15 poor boys and five girls, to 
be chosen by lot.
The trustees have likewise, been enabled to build 
alms-houses for ten poor men, and the same num- 
ber of women.
The weekly allowance to each is 
35.
and 40s.
annually for clothing.
If a poor man 
and his wife live together, they, are allowed to 
the amount of 5s.
per week.
One hundred pounds 
per annum is appropriated to be given in sums of 
5/.
each, to 20 poor girls upon their going out to 
service.
The residue of the income is to be laid out 
in buildings, and in endowing more alms-houses, or 
building cottages to be let at a low rent to the poor.
The late Thomas Christie, Esq. erected an alms- 
house for eight poor persons, to whom he bequeath- 
ed one shilling each weekly, to be paid out of the 
great tithes of St. Paul's, and, in the year 1737, the 
Rev. Mr.
Leith and others founded a charity-school, 
for twenty children of the parishes of St. Paul and 
Cuthbert.
, 
To the north of the town, stands the Bedford 
House of Industry, a large and handsome brick 
building, begun in the year 1794, and completed in 
1796.
It is fitted up with every necessary accom- 
modation, and particular attention has been paid 
to the health, as well as to the comfort and conve- 
nience of its inhabitants.
It is open for the recep- 
tion of the poor of the five consolidated parishes, 
who are comfortably fed from the profits of a flannel 
manufactory, established in the house upon an ex- 
tensive scale.
It is satisfactory to know that the 
poor's rates have thus experienced a reduction.
The Bedford Infirmary, a handsome and appro- 
priate building, situated in St. Mary's parish, was 
first opened for the reception of patients on the 13th 
of August, 1803.
Thirty-eight in-patients are its 
full complement.
The father of the late Mr. Whit- 
bread bequeathed 4000/.
towards this structure, and 
another sum of 4000/.
towards its endowment.
The 
Duke of Bedford, the Earl of Ossory, and other of 
the nobility and gentry of the county, contribute 
vol.
i. — no.
2. 
liberally, by annual subscription, towards this cha- 
rity.
This may not be an improper place to mention, 
that lace-mnking employs a great number of the 
lower classes, both in the town unci county of Bed- 
ford.
The lace is chiefly made by women ; and 
children, at the early age of four years, are set 
down to it.
On certain days, the persons appointed 
by the dealers collect the lace of the different vil- 
lages, and convey it to the London market.
A strong stone bridge, of which Grose, the an- 
tiquary, has given two views, connects the northern 
and southern parts of the town.
" This bridge," 
says ho, " is one hundred and sixteen yards in 
length, four and a half broad, and has a parapet 
three feet and a half high ; this, it is said, was erect- 
ed in the reign of Queen Mary, out of the ruins of 
St. Dunstan's church, which stood on the south side 
of the bridge.
It has seven arches, and near the 
centre were two gate-houses; that on the north, 
being used for a prison, and that on the south serv- 
ed as a store-house for the arms and ammunition of 
the troops quartered here.
These gate-hcuscs were 
taken down in the year 1765, and six lamps set up 
on posts at proper distances." 
An act of Parliament has been obtained within 
these few years, enabling the inhabitants of Bedford 
to build a new bridge, to pave and light the town, 
to pull down the butchers' shambles, and to build a 
new market-place, with a sessions-house over it, 
and a butter-market on the site of the old gaol.
This act has been partially carried into effect, and is 
now in further progress.
When the town-gaol, which stood upon the bridge, 
was taken down, a temporary place of confinement 
was fitted up under the Town-hall, and afterwards 
a new gaol, now denominated the old one, was built 
in St. Lloyd's, near the alms-houses.
This being 
found inconvenient, was taken down, and another 
was erected to the north-west of the town, near the 
road to Kettering.
There is a new county gaol, to 
which the late Mr. Whitbread's father left a legacy 
of 500/.
The prisoners have separate sleeping- 
rooms ; and the system of solitary confinement is 
occasionally adopted.
The town-hall, or sessions-house, in which the as- 
sizes for the county are holden, is situated in an 
area before St. Paul's church.
It was erected in 
the year 1753, and is a capacious and handsome 
structure.
The principal market at Bedford, holden on Sa- 
turday, on the north side of the river, is a consider- 
able market for corn.
The Monday's market, on 
the south side of the river, is chiefly for pigs.
There are six annual fairs at this town ; viz.
On 
the first Tuesday in Lent, ou the 21st of April, on 
Old Midsummer-day, on the 21st of August, on the 
12th of October, and on the 19th of December.
In 
addition to these, a fair is annually holden at St. Leo- 
nard's farm, on the 17th of November.
Biggleswade.] — Biggleswade, a parish and 
e market 
18 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
market-town is pleasantly situated on the river 
Ivel, over which is a stone bridge about five miles 
from Bedford, on the high York road.
The air and water of Biggleswade are very salu- 
brious ; and the soil, which resembles a fine red 
gravel, produces an abundance of excellent corn.
A fire which took place here in 1785, destroyed 
a hundred and fifty houses, and occasioned damage 
to the extent of 240,000/.
The town had much in- 
creased in size, since the civil wars of Charles I.
and since the fire, the houses have been mostly re- 
built, with brick, in a modern style.
In the year 1792, a slight shock of an earthquake 
threw down some old houses here, but did no fur- 
ther injury.
The king is lord of the manor.
The church, 
which is an ancient and strong edifice, was built in 
the year 1230.
Biggleswade also contains a Bap- 
tist meeting-house, two charity-schools, several good 
inns, and a small manufactory of white thread, lace, 
and edging.
The market is held on Wednesday, 
and is reckoned one of the best in England for bar- 
ley, peas, and oats.
It has five annual fairs : on 
the 13th of February, Saturday in Easter week, 
Whit Monday, 2nd of August, and 8th of Novem- 
ber.
The petty sessions for the hundreds of Big- 
gleswade, Clifton, and Wixantree are holden here.
Bietsoe.] — Bletsoe is a small village, in the hun- 
dred of Willey, about six miles to the north-west 
of Bedford, on the road to Higham Ferrers.
At 
the time of the Norman survey, the manor of Blet- 
soe formed part of the large possessions of Hugh 
de Beauchamp.
It afterwards came to the family 
of Patshul ; and at present belongs to Henry Beau- 
champ, Lord St. John.
The greater part of the mansion-house was pulled 
down many years ago, and the remaining part has 
been converted into a farm-house.
It appears to 
have formed one side of a quadrangular building, 
some remains of which are plainly discernible near 
the house.
In the north aisle of the parish church, 
which is the burial-place of the noble family of St.
John, there is a monument with the effigies of a 
knight in armour, and his lady, intended for Sir 
John St. John, father of Oliver, the first Lord St.
John, whom he lived to see created a peer.
Blunham.] — Blunham, a little village in the hun- 
dred of Wixamtree, formerly had a market on Wed- 
nesdays, and a fair on the festival of St. James.
The manor of Blunham was some time the resi- 
dence of Charles Grey, Earl of Kent, who died 
therein 1625.
It is at present occupied as a farm.
The parish church contains several ancient memo- 
rials of the Longuevilles, and of the family of Brom- 
sall.
There is also the monument of Lady Susan 
Longueville, the daughter and heir of the above- 
mentioned Earl of Kent.
Broiviham.] — Bromham is a small village on the 
banks of the Ouse, about three miles from Bedford, 
near the road to Newport Pagnell, in the Willey.
At the time of the Norman Survey, the manor was 
part of the property of Hugh de Beauchamp, and 
upon the extinction of the male line of this family, 
it was divided, but appears to have been united 
again in the 16th century.
It was purchased of the 
Dyves family, about the year 1707, by Sir Thomas 
Trevor, afterwards Baron Trevor, of Bromham ; 
and it is now the property of his descendant, the 
Lord Viscount Hampden.
In the hall of the old mansion-house, which, 
though small and inconvenient, and subject to flood, 
from the Ouse, was many years a country seat of the 
Trevors, are several family portraits.
Amongst them 
are those of Sir Richard Trevor, a distinguished 
naval and military officer, who was knighted in the 
field, by Queen Elizabeth ; Sir Richard Trevor, of 
Placetage, a fine picture in the style of Cornelius 
Janson ; Sir John Trevor, oif Trevallyn ; Sir Tho- 
mas Trevor, Chief Baron of the Exchequer ; Tho- 
mas, the first Lord Trevor, &c.
In the chancel of the parish church is a very hand- 
some monument of Lord Trevor, an eminent law- 
yer, who had been Lord Chief Justice of the Com- 
mon Pleas, and at the time of his death, in 1730, 
was Lord Privy Seal and President of the council.
There is also a handsome monument to the memory 
of John, the third Lord Trevor, who died in 1664, 
executed in marble by Prince Hoare.
On the floor 
in the chancel are the figures in brass of Sir John 
Dyve ; his mother, who was heiress of Thomas 
Wylde, lord of the manor of Bromham, and his 
wife Isabel.
In the north aisle is a handsome mo- 
nument with the effigies of a man in armour, lying 
under a canopy, supported by four Ionic columns, 
supposed to be that of John Dyve, Esq.
Campton.] — Campton, anciently Camelton, is a 
small village in the hundred of Clifton, ten miles 
from Luton.
The manor was formerly possessed 
by the ancient family of Lisle.
Sir John de Lisle, 
who died possessed of it in 1356, was one of the 
original knights companions of the Garter.
Upon 
the estates of this family falling to the crown, this 
manor was annexed to the honour of Ampthill.
It 
is now held on lease by the Duke of Bedford.
In 
1645, the mansion-house was the property and seat 
of Sir Charles Ventris, whose narrow escape from 
assassination is recorded in the following inscription, 
still preserved on a pannel, which having received 
the contents of a musket has never been repaired.
" In the year 1645, Sir Charles Ventris, Knight 
Banneret created by King Charles for his valour in 
the civil wars, was (in the night-time, by Oliver's 
party,) shot at as he was walking in this room, but 
happily missed him." 
The house is at present occupied as a school.
In the parish church is a Calumbarium for the 
Osborn family ; and in the aisle above are the monu- 
ments of Sir John and Sir Peter Osborn, who were 
successively lord treasurers remembrancers.
These 
monuments were put up in the year 1653, by Henry 
Osborn, 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
19 
Osborn, youngest son of Sir Peter, afterwards Sir 
Henry Osborn, Knt. and one of the commissioners 
of the navy.
Cardington.] — This is a neat village, about two 
miles and a half to the south-east of Bedford, in 
the hundred of Wixamtree.
The church coutains 
several ancient monuments.
On each side of the 
altar is a monument with an open arch in the Gothic 
style : that on the south side is in memory of Sir 
William Gascoignc ; that on the north of Sir Ge- 
rard Hervey, who died in 1638.
This Sir Gerard 
was knighted by the Earl of Essex, for his bravery 
at the siege of Cadiz ; he being the first man who 
entered the town.
Here are several monuments of the Whitbread 
family, who settled at Cardington in the year 1650.
In 1799, a very splendid monument was put up to 
the memory ot Samuel Whitbread, Esq. It was 
the last work of the deceased statuary Bacon, and is 
esteemed one of his best.
The principal figure re- 
presents Mr. Whitbread as a dying man, supported 
by Religion, who points to the glories of Heaven ; 
the figure of Benevolence weeping at his feet.
In Cardington church there is also a tablet in me- 
mory of the celebrated philanthropist John Howard, 
Esq. who fell a victim to his exertions in the cause 
of humanity ; being seized with the plague at Cher- 
son in Tartary, where he died on the 21st of Janu- 
ary, 1794 He resided for some years at Carding- 
ton, in a house close to the church-yard, and in the 
year 1773 served the office of sheriff for the county.
Mr. Whitbread has an occasional residence in this 
parish, at a house, called the Barns, upon his manor 
of Fenlake, or Fenlake Barns.
Carlton.] — The village of Carlton is situated 
on the borders of Buckinghamshire, about a mile 
from Harold, in the hundred of Willey.
The ma- 
nor, which has passed through the families of Pa- 
benham, Vaux, and Hastings, is now the property 
of Thomas Alston, Esq. The rectories of Carlton 
and Chillington were consolidated in the year 1769, 
and are in the patronage of Lord Hampden.
In the parish church, appears the following epi- 
taph, recording a remarkable instance of long in- 
cumbency : 
" To the memory of Mr. Thomas Wills, who 
lived parson of Carlton and Chillington about three- 
score and ten years.
He died the second of August 
1642, aged above an hundred." 
Charlgrave.] — Charlgrave is a small village, 
about a mile from ToddingtOn, in the hundred of 
Manshead.
A manor was holden in this place, un- 
der the Beauchamps in the twelfth century, by the 
family of Loring.
In the year 1365, it became the 
principal residence and retirement of Sir Nigel, or 
Neale Loring, who was knighted by King Edward 
* This gentleman was born at Chicksand priory, in the early 
part of the seventeenth century.
His parents having an aver- 
sion for a public education, he was instructed at home, without 
ever being sent to either a school or a university.
At the be- 
Ill, for his bravery in a sea fight, at Llwys, in the 
year 1340.
He attended that monarch in his glo- 
rious campaign in France, in the year 1359, and 
was of the knights companions of the noble order 
of the Garter, at ils original institution.
Sir Nigel 
had the royal licence to inclose a park at Charlgrave.
The parish church is an ancient Gothic structure, 
appropriated in the twelfth century to the priory of 
Dunstaple, by Rose Loring, lessee of the manor.
Sir Nigel Loring founded a chantry in the church.
There are two ancient altar-tombs, one on each side 
the nave, with effigies in stone of knights in armour 
with mail gorgets.
Chillington.] — Chillington is a parish united 
with Charlton, in the hundred of Willey, about 
eight miles from the north-west of Bedford.
The 
church is situated upon a hill, from which there is 
a fine view of Odell Castle, Harold, and the river 
Ouse.
Chicksand.] — Chicksand is an extra parochial 
place, in the hundred of Clifton, about a mile from 
Shefford.
A priory was founded here in the year 
1150, by Pain de Beauchamp and his wife, for nuns 
and canons of the order of St. Gilbert of Sempring- 
ham.
Simon de Beauchamp, son of Pain, gave the 
church of Chicksand to the nuns there ; and, in 
1317, John Blondel, settled the manor with all its 
appurtenances thereon.
Upon the dissolution of 
this priory, in 1538, its yearly value was estimated 
at 2121.
8s.
5jd.
Its site was granted to R.
Snow 
in 1539, of whose family it was purchased about the 
year 1600 by Sir John Osborn, Bart.
Chicksand priory is at present the seat of general 
Sir George Osborn, Bart.
A considerable part of 
the conventual buildings still remain.
The south 
and east fronts were rebuilt or altered somewhere 
about the middle of the last century, but the whole 
retains much of the monastic appearance.
Sir 
George Osborn has filled the windows with ancient 
stained glass, and has formed a collection of anti- 
quities ; which, however, have no immediate con- 
nection with the priory, excepting two ancient tombs, 
which were dug up in its precincts.
In one of the 
walls is placed the tomb of the Abbot of Pipwell, 
in Northamptonshire.
The quadrangle within the 
cloisters is sixty-four feet by fifty-one feet six 
inches.
There is a valuable collection of portraits in 
Chicksand-house, chiefly of the Osborn family.
The 
most remarkable of which are those of Peter Os- 
born, privy purse to Edward VI.
and one of the 
commissioners for ecclesiastical affairs in the reign- 
of Queen Elizabeth.
Sir Peter Osborn, governor 
of Jersey ; Francis Osborn, the son of Sir John 
Osborn, Knt. the author of several ingenious 
works ;* Colonel Henry Osborn, slain in the battle 
of 
ginning of the reign of Charles I.
he obtained the place of mas- 
ter of the horse to the Earl of Pembroke ; and when the civil 
wars broke out, he adhered to the popular party.
He was ad- 
vanced to several employments, by the Parliament, and when.
Oliver 
«0 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
of Naseby ; and Henry Osborn, a distinguished 
naval officer, who died in 1771, Vice-admiral of 
Great Britain.
Amongst the other portraits are 
one of Sir Philip Warwick and his lady ; a fine 
whole length of Edward VI.
by Holbein, and a very 
valuable portrait of Oliver Cromwell, by Sir Peter 
Lely.
It was taken after he was protector, and is 
said to have been a present to Sir John Danvers, 
one of the judges of Charles I.
There is a state bed-chamber in this house, built 
by Sir George Osborn, in imitation of the chapter- 
house at Peterborough.
It contains a state bed, 
which belonged to James I.
and has upon it the 
initials J.
A. with the crown.
It is said to be the 
bed upon which the pretender was born, and that it 
became upon that occasion a perquisite of the cham- 
berlain, who presented it to the Osborn family.* 
Clap-ham.] — Clapham, a hamlet to Bedford, was 
formerly a chapelry to Oakley ; and it is remark- 
able that, although it has long been a distinct parish, 
the inhabitants still bury their dead there.
The ma- 
nor belongs to the Earl of Ashburnham ; but the 
old mansion-house has been for many years occupied 
as a farm-house.
Clifton.] — Clifton, about four miles and a half 
from Biggleswade, gave its name to the hundred in 
which it is situated.
In the church there is an altar 
tomb, in memory of Sir Michael Fisher, Lord of 
the manor of Clifton, who died in the year 1549 : 
the sides are richly ornamented with tabernacle 
work.
Colmworth.] — This village is in the hundred of 
Barford, about eight miles to the north-east of Bed- 
ford.
The parish church is a handsome Gothic 
structure, with a lofty spire, to be seen at a consi- 
derable distance.
It contains several ancient monu- 
ments ; among which are, the tomb of Eleanor, the 
wife of Sir Gerrard Bray broke, daughter and heir 
of Iylraer ; that of Lord St. Armand, who had 
large possessions in this county in the fourteenth 
century ; and a very magnificent moaument, erect- 
ed in 1641, by Lady Dyer, in memory of her de- 
ceased husband, Sir William Dyer, Knt. We are 
informed by the inscription, that " they multiplied 
themselves into seven children." 
The following quaint lines are also inscribed upon 
the monument : 
" My dearest dust, could not thy hasty day 
Afford thy drowsy pitience leave to stay 
One hour longer, so that we might either 
Have set up or gone to bed together ; 
15ut since thy finish'd labour hath possess'd 
Thy weary limbs with early rest, 
Oliver Cromwell took the government upon himself.
Mr.
Osborn adhered to all his measures.
He had a son, whom he 
{daced in All Soul's College Oxford, and upon the death of the 
'rotector, he went thii her to superintend his education.
Dur- 
ing his residence at Oxford, \\e published a book, intituled, 
" An Advice to a Son," which gave great offence to the Pres- 
Thy well-belov'd, .and ever faithful bride 
Shall soon repose her by thy slumbering side : 
Whose business now is only lo prepare 
My nightly dress and call to prayer, 
Mine eyes wax heavy, and the day grows old, 
The dew falls thick, my blood grows cold.
Draw, draw the closed curtains, and make room, 
My dear, my dearest dust, I come, I come." 
Coi>le.] — Cople is a small village, about four 
miles and a half east from Bedford.
In the church 
are tombs, with brass figures, of the families of 
Launcelyn, Ruland., and Grey.
The Lauucelyiis 
contributed towards the building of the church, as 
appears by their arms cut in stone on one of the 
pillars, in the chancel are two altar- tombs, with 
effigies in brass, in memory of Sir Walter Luke, 
Justice of the Common Pleas, who died in 1544 ; 
and Nicholas Luke, Baron of the Exchequer, who 
died in 1563.
Cranfielu.] — Cranfield is situated two miles to 
the westward of Marston Morteyne.
In the church 
there was formerly a guild, or brotherhood ; and it 
possessed lands, which had been given for a drink- 
ing, and for the maintenance of a camp.
Dean.] — This little village, on the borders of 
Northamptonshire and Huntingdonshire, in the hun- 
dred of Stodden, is said to have been the birth- 
place of Francis Dillingham, one of the translators 
of the bible.
The family of Dillingham appears to 
have been very numerous in this parish, but no 
record of his birth appears in the register.
Dunstaple.] — Dunstable, or as it is now more 
generally written, Dunstaple, is a considerable mar- 
ket town, in the hundred of Manshead, and in t he- 
deanery to which it gives name ; upon the great 
road from London to Chester and Holyhead.
It 
boasts great antiquity having been a British settle- 
ment prior to the invasion of the Romans, and af- 
terwards a principal station of that people, being 
situated at the intersection of the then two main 
roads the Watling and Jcening streets.
In the Itine- 
rary of Antoninus this station is called Magioiininioii, 
most likely from the British appellation of the town 
Mas Gwyn, or the white field ; which according to 
Mr. Baxter becomes Magionuiuioii, in the plural, 
exactly agreeing with its situation on a chalky soil.
According to the Monkish legends, the town took 
this name from Dun, or Dunning, the chief of a 
banditti, which infested this part of the country.
This much is certain, that Henry I.
finding the 
neighbourhood much infested by robbers, who secret- 
ed themselves in the woods, with which the country 
was then overrun, ordered the woods to be cut 
down, and grubbed up ; and having built a royal 
mansion for himself, issued a proclamatiou inviting 
byterians, who proposed to have it burnt, which, however, was 
not execvited.
He died at Oxford in (659.
* The Osborn family is supposed to have come out of the 
north, and to have first settled in Essex.
Sir George, the pre- 
sent Baronet, who was born in 174'2, is a general of his Majes- 
ty's forces, a colonel of the 40th regiment «f foot, and a groom 
of his Majesty's chamber.
his 
BEDFORDSHIRE 
21 
his subjects to come and settle near him at Dunsta- 
ple, offering them lands at a very small rent, and 
various liberties and privileges.
It is most probable, 
however, that the town derives dum from its nomina- 
tion of Dunstaple, becoming' by Henry's exertions, 
a staple or mart for commerce.
Henry kept the new town in his own hands till 
about the year 1131, when he made a grant of it, 
with all its rights and privileges, to a priory of 
black canons, founded by him near the royal resi- 
dence, where, in 1123, he kept his Christmas with 
great splendour, receiving, at that time, an embassy 
from the fort of Anjou.
This palace was not includ- 
ed in the grant to the convent.
In 1132, the king 
kept his Christmas here again, as did his successor, 
King Stephen, in 1137.
In 1154, a friendly meeting 
took place at Dunstaple, between King Stephen and 
Henry, Duke of Normandy, who succeeded him on 
the throne.
In 1204, the palace which was built by Henry I.
with the gardens, were granted, by King John, to 
the prior and convent, who on all future royal visits 
were to accommodate the monarch and his suite 
within their own walks.
On the site of the palace 
aud gardens is now a farm-house on the road to 
Luton, near Mrs. Marsh's hospital.
Whilst Henry I.
kept the town in his own hands 
it was a free borough ; the burgesses were free 
throughout England, and possessed the privilege of 
not answering before the justices itinerant out of the 
town and liberty.
Those judges were to repair to 
Dunstaple, and there determine all suits without fo- 
reign assessors by the oath of twelve of the inhabi- 
tants.
On the foundation of the priory, Henry bestowed 
upon it great privileges.
The whole manor of Dun- 
staple, with the lands pertaining to the town, viz.
four cultures of land, together with the church, mar- 
ket, and schools, of the said town, with all its liber- 
ties and free customs ; sac, soc, toe, theaur infange- 
Tiethef, giith brith haicsoone clovith, Jbrstall, and tle- 
meits-ferd, right of Covendon, Kensworth, Toten- 
hoe, and the four ways (guadraria) of the said town, 
with safe passage to the market under pain of for- 
feiting ten pounds, were included in the grant, ex- 
cepting only his own palace.
The friars were ex- 
empted from all taxes of whatsoever kind ; from 
fines, tolls, customs, secular exactions, and worldly 
services through the realm.
They had the power 
of life and death, and sat with the king's justices 
itinerant, when they came to Dunstaple on their 
circuits.
They had more than one gaol, for it ap- 
pears by the chronicle of the priory that their prin- 
cipal gaol was rebuilt in the year 1295, and they had 
a gallows at a place outside of the town, called 
Wescote.
These extraordinary privileges, which 
were confirmed by succeeding princes, caused many 
disturbances between the townsmen and the residents 
of the abbey ; and some unequal assessments having 
been made in 1229, the people were so provoked 
that, out of resentment, they withdrew their tithes 
vol.
i. — no.
2. 
and offerings, scattered the prior's corn, and pound- 
ed his horses ; and though, at the prior's request, 
the Bishop of Lincoln caused the offenders to be ex- 
communicated in the neighbouring towns and dean- 
eries, the townsmen declared that they would sooner 
" go to the devil than be taxed," and had even 
treated with William Cantilupe for forty acres in his 
field to build booths on, and to quit the town.
This 
difference was at last adjusted by John, archdeacon 
of Bedford, the town paying 60/.
sterling to the 
prior for the remuneration of his right to all tollage, 
except the misericordia of id.
and fines in cases of 
violence.
During the insurrections in the reign of Richard 
II.
in 1371, the townsmen obtained of the prior a 
charter of liberties, but it was cancelled afterwards 
as having been forcibly extorted.
In the year 1213, the town was destroyed by fire, 
but was soon afterwards rebuilt.
In 1214, the arch- 
bishop of Canterbury held a great synod at the 
priory.
In 1215, King John lay at Dunstaple, on 
his journey towards the north, and in the year 1217, 
Lewis, the French dauphin, with the rebellious En- 
glish barons, halted there one night.
A considerable number of discontented barons 
and knights assembled at Dunstaple and Luton, in 
1244, for the ostensible purpose of holding a tour- 
nament, but in reality to prosecute their political 
designs.
The tournament was prohibited by royal 
mandate, but they did not separate before they had 
given a convincing proof of their formidable power, 
by sending Sir Fulk Fitzwarren to the Pope's nun- 
cio, whose proceedings had given great offence to 
the English, with a peremptory order, in the name 
of the barons and knights assembled at Dunstaple 
and Luton, that he should instantly quit the king- 
dom.
The nuncio, finding the royal authority in- 
sufficient to protect him, was obliged to obey this 
order.
King Henry III.
frequently visited the convent.
In the year 1247, he was there with his Queen, 
Prince Edward, and Princess Margaret, on which 
occasion, their Majesties were presented with a gilt 
cup, and the prince and princess, with a golden 
buckle each, in 1265, their Majesties again visited 
Dunstaple, attended by Cardinal Attabotn, the 
Pope's legate, and Simon Montfort, Lord of Lei- 
cester, and remained there some time.
In the year 1276, the king's falconers, having 
had an affray with the chaplains and the prior's ser- 
vants, with whom they lodged, the king attended in 
person to try the matter, and summoned a jury of 
thirty-six men out of two hundred unconnected with 
the town or the convent, to enquire into the affair.
Upon the inquisition, it appeared that the affray had 
been begun by the falconers, who in the riot had 
killed one of the chaplains.
In the year 1290, when the corpse of Queen El- 
eanor was deposited one night at the priory, two 
bawdekins, or precious cloths, were given to the 
convent, and 120 pounds weight of wax.
As the 
r procession 
22 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
procession passed through the town the bier stopped 
in the middle of the market-place, whilst a proper 
spot was marked out by the chancellor and nobility 
attending 1 , for the erection of a cross ; the prior of 
the convent assisting at the ceremony, and sprink- 
ling the place with holy water.
This cross remain- 
ed until the time of the civil wars, when it was de- 
molished by the soldiers under the Lord of Essex, 
who were quartered at Dunstaple, in 1643.
In 1341, a grand tournament was held at Dun- 
staple, at which King Edward III.
and his Queen 
attended.
King Henry IV.
visited Dunstaple in the year 
1457, as did Queen Elizabeth, on lier progress in 
157-2.
When the dissolution of religious houses took place, 
the revenues of the priory at Dunstaple, were esti- 
mated, according to Dugdale's Monasticon, at 344/.
13s.
3c/.
clear yearly value.
The last prior was Ger- 
vas Markham, who with his canons subscribed to the 
king's supremacy, in 1524.
He had taken an active 
part in the proceedings relative to the divorce be- 
tween Henry VIII.
and Queen Catherine.
The 
commissioners sat at Dunstaple priory, and the sen- 
tence of divorce was publicly pronounced there by 
Archbishop Cranmer, on the 23d of May, 1553.
After the dissolution of this convent, prior Mark- 
ham had a pension of sixty pounds per annum.
He 
died in the month of September, 1561 ; and, accord- 
ing to the parish register, was buried at Dunstaple.
In the year 1554, the site of the priory was grant- 
ed to Dr. Leonard Chamberlaine ; and is at present 
the property and residence of Colonel Maddison.
The only remains of the conventual buildings (ex- 
cepting what is now the parish church,) are some 
rooms, with vaulted and groined stone roofs ; one of 
which has been converted into a parlour.
The ori- 
ginal edifice, and its remains, are thus interestingly 
described in the " Beauties of England and JVales :" 
" The priory church was originally in the form of 
a cross with a tower in the centre, supported by 
four lofty arches ; parts of which belonging to the 
two western pillars, still remain : these are of a 
large size, with clustered columns, surmounted with 
hexagonal capitals.
This fabric appears to have 
been -very extensive and magnificent.
Henry the 
Eighth intended it for a cathedral, and Dr. Day for 
the first bishop.
When this design was abandoned., 
it is probable, that a considerable part of the struc- 
ture vvas demolished, as the whole now standing 
only reaches from the west door to the cross aisle, 
or choir entrance, a space containing a nave and two 
side aisles, and extending io the length of about 
forty yards.
" These remains exhibit an interesting* combina- 
tion of ancient architectural ornaments.
On each 
side the nave are six circular and lofty arches, con- 
sisting of four mouldings, with a pilaster in the mid- 
The doorway of Malmsbury abbey, in Wiltshire, is some- 
die between each arch.
The arches of the upper 
windows are also round, as well as the groined 
arches at the east end.
The windows are of a later 
date than the building itself, which is mended with 
brick in various places.
A flat wall closes the east 
end ; and the two nearest arches on each side from 
the present choir.
A beautiful stone roof loft, of 
four pointed arches, with clustered columns, ranges 
over the west door ; beneath it is a rich wooden 
screen.
The roof is of oak, finely carved With 
knots of flowers, &c.
The beams are supported 
by angels, horizontal and perpendicular.
About 
the church are several grotesque figures.
" The west front, has been considered as ' one 
of our great national curiosities ;' from its singular 
intermixture of circular and pointed arches, and 
the curious manner in which its ornaments are ar- 
ranged.
The great door * had four pillars on each 
side with Saxon capitals supporting five mouldings, 
the outermost of which is ornamented with zigzag 
work : the second has angels and foliage I : i alternate 
ovals : the third, beasts' heads, jessant foliage : the 
fourth, a spread eagle and the signs of the zodiac, 
of which Pisces and Capricorn still remain ; the 
fifth, flowers, &c.
The capitals have David playing 
on the harp, a figure prostrate to him ; a bishop in 
pontificalibus, with mitre and crosier, and a bearded 
man in a cap : two more bearded men hold a scroll 
perpendicular, on whose top is a headless beast, 
&c.
The lesser door has seven mouldings, on five 
pillars, exclusive of the inner, composed of roses, 
and laced work, nail-headed quatrefoils.
The arch 
between the two doors is half a zigzag, and half a 
straight moulding ; and the interlaced arches within 
it, rest on capitals charged with grotesque figures ; 
one seems to have a number of souls and a devil.
The space over the small door is ornamented by va- 
rious compartments displaying flowers.
Above the 
door are three rows of arches : the first consists of 
seven flat arches, with pedestals for statues, the se- 
cond of six small and two large, open to a gallery 
leading to the bell tower, with a seventh arch be- 
tween the latter, placed over the door, all on treble 
clustered pillars.
The third row has five pointed 
flat arches, with single pillars.
Over the west door, 
under the arch, are three ornamented niches ; and 
under the west windows of the tower are four roses 
in squares.
" The tower is attached to the north-west angle, 
and has two rows of niches, now deprived of their 
statues.
Anciently another tower on the opposite 
side corresponded with this.
The Chronicle of Dun- 
staple records the falling of two towers in the year 
1221.
In falling- they destroyed the prior's hall and 
part of the church.
The body was repaired in 1273, 
by the parishioners, but chiefly at the expence of one 
Henry Chedde.
" Divers stone coffins," says Grose, " one with 
what similar, but larger, in better preservation, and more richly 
ornamented.
a chalice 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
23 
a chalice and patten have been fotiwl by different 
persons digging for stone in the scile of t!ie ancient 
eastern part of the church; particularly in 17 io, 
about two feet under ground, and about three from 
the side wall, and the feet close to a cross wall, was 
found a stone coffin ; the lid composed of four 
stones; the piece at the foot a separate one; the 
head sides and bottom, of one stone ; under the head 
an eminence instead of a pillow, in a hollow or 
niche corresponding to the head.
The skeleton was 
entire except the ribs, which had fallen" in ; the head 
inclined to the left; between the upper bone of the 
left arm and the back bone, was a glass urn fallen 
down and the lid off, stained with deep brown, on 
the inner side of that part which lay over the stone : 
about the feet were pieces of leather very rotten, 
which by the holes appeared to have been sewed 
together.
An ancient spur was found here."* 
The church contains several curious monuments ; 
many of them in memory of the Chew family, who 
were great benefactors to this town.
In the middle aisle was formerly a long slab, 
upon which was inscribed an epitaph so quaint and 
ambiguous, that it gave rise to the incredible report 
of one woman having had nineteen children at five 
births; viz.
three several times three children at ;i 
birth, and twice five two other times.
It was first 
recorded in Hakervili's Apology, page 258 ; Fuller 
in his Worthies of Bedfordshire gave currency to 
the error ; and it has ever since been continued by 
the tradition of the place.
Upon the slab were 
inlaid figures of a man and woman, in brass, both 
dressed in gowns, with their hands in the attitude 
of prayer.
At their feet was the inscription.
Be- 
neath these figures were two groups, one of boys, 
the other of girls, with the types of the evangelists 
at the corners.
The inscription, as given by Brown 
Willis, in appendix to Hearn's edition of the chro- 
nicles of Dunstaple, was in these words : —   
" Hie William Mulso sibi qnem sociavitet Alice, 
Marmoie sub cluro conclusit mors generalis, 
Ter tres, bis quinos ba?c natos fertuf habere, 
Per sponsos binos.
Deus bis deniens miserere." 
The literal translation is simply as follows ; " One 
general fate has inclosed here under a hard marble, 
William Mulso and Alice his wife; she is reported 
to have had three times three, and twice five chil- 
dren by two husbands." This conceited mode of 
informing the world that a woman had 19 children, 
undoubtedly gave rise to the mistake of their having 
been produced atjiie births.
Over the altar is a large handsome painting of 
the Lord's Supper, by Sir James Thornhill, which 
with the plate and a rich pulpit cloth, was present- 
ed to the parish by two sisters, Mrs. Cort and Mrs.
Ashton, in the year 17-20.
* In the year 1770, in digging for gravel on a down in this 
neighbourhood, some labourers found a large quantity of cop- 
/ In the church of Dunstaple there was formerly a 
fraternity of St. John the Baptist.
Mr. Edward 
Steale, in the collection made for a history of Dun- 
staple in 1714, describes a very richly embroidered 
altar cloth.
" It is made of the richest crimson and 
gold brocade imaginable, and so exquisitely and 
curiously wrought, that it puzzles the greatest art- 
ists of weaving now living, to so much as guess at 
the manner of its performance.
It is six feet four 
inches long, by two feet two inches broad ; from 
whence hangs down a border of purple velvet, thir- 
teen inches deep, whereon is lively and most richly' 
worked with a needle, Saint John the Baptist, be- 
tween fourteen men and thirteen women, all kneel- 
ing.
Under the foremost is written Henry Fayrey 
and Agnes Fayrey, between the arms of the Mar- 
cers.
Thus are the sides : at the ends is only St.
John between a gentleman and his wife.
Under- 
neath is written, John and Mary Fayrey." 
This is supposed to have been given by the above 
mentioned Henry Fayrey and Agnes his wife to the 
fraternity.
It appears from a monumental stone in 
the middie aisle of the church that this Henry Fay- 
rey died on the 28th of December 1516 ; but, not- 
withstanding its age, the pall is as fresh and beau- 
tiful as at its first making.
It is now in the posses- 
sion of John Miller, Esq. of Bedford ; and, some 
years ago, by permission of Mr. Miller's family, 
who then resided at Dunstaple, it was made as a 
funeral pall.
The house occupied by the fraternity 
belonged to the Wingate family in 1642.
In his collections, Mr. Steele also takes notice of 
some curious ornaments, about various parts of 
Dunstaple church.
" The east part of the chan- 
cel," says this gentleman^ " is raised by two steps, 
and was formerly the choir of the church, the an- 
cient stalls still remaining, where under each seat 
(visible upon turning them up when kneeling to 
prayers) is carved some extravagant fancy, plainly 
discovering the humour of those times." One of 
these is too indecent for description.
In addition to the priory, there was a convent of 
friars preachers, or black friars, at Dunstaple, in the 
year 1259, much against the will of the priors and 
canons ; and it was no doubt their hostility towards 
the intruders, which occasioned the caricatures 
above mentioned.
The friars, however, were pa- 
tronised by the court, and it was in vain to oppose 
them.
Upon the suppression of this house, its 
yearly revenue amounted to no more than 4/.
18s.
4(7.
The site was granted to Sir William Herbert.
It 
is supposed to have been in a field of Mrs. Fossey's 
near her house, situated west of the pond in the 
south street of Dunstaple.
A house or hospital for lepers, belonging to the 
priory and canons of Dunstaple, who appointed the 
wardens, existed there as early a3 the 13th century.
The town of Dunstaple is situated on the side of 
per coins of Antoninus and Constantine, with many small or- 
naments of bridles and armour.
the 
24 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
the Chiltern Hills, and consists of four principal 
streets intersecting each other in the form of a cross.
The houses are chiefly of brick, and some of them 
have a very ancient appearance.
Dunstaple was 
for a long time supplied with water for culinary pur- 
poses by large ponds, which received the rain water 
from the surrounding hills ; but at present there are 
many wells which afford plenty of excellent water.* 
The principal business of Dunstaple arises from 
its public situation.
The lower classes of the inha- 
bitants derive a considerable part of their support 
from the straw manufactory, in which they are 
thought to excel all the world.
A whiting manu- 
facture affords them some additional employment.
In the straw work a woman can earn from 6s.
to 
12s.
a week, and children from 3s.
to 4s.
Dunstaple, in former times, was famous for its 
breweries.
Hollinshead states, that William Mur- 
lie, an eminent brewer of this town, sallied out in 
the reign of Henry Vth to join the insurrection of 
the Lollards near London ; he took with him a pair 
of gilt spurs, and was followed by two led horses 
with rich trappings.
This probably gave rise to 
the report of his expecting to receive the honour of 
knighthood from Lord Cobham ; but instead of this 
he had the hard fortune to be taken and hanged with 
his gilt spurs about his neck.
By the charter of King Henry l.
there were two 
markets granted to the town, and a fair at the fes- 
tival of St. Peter; to whom the priory was dedicated.
The market was then held on Sundays and Wed- 
nesdays.
Another fair on the feast of St. Freraund 
was granted by King John.
The Dunstaple chro- 
nicle records a great loss sustained by the market in 
the year 1294, from the long stay of Prince Edward 
at Langley ; his kitchen consuming more than 200 
messes a day, and his servants taking up all the 
butter, cheese, eggs, and other commodities brought 
to the market, and even from the tradesmen's houses, 
and paying for nothing.
At present there is only one market town at Dun- 
staple, which is held on Wednesday : and four fairs, 
Ash-Wednesday, May 22, August 12, and Novem- 
ber 12.
Dunstaple in the reign of Henry II.
had a sum- 
mons to send representatives to parliament, but none 
were ever sent.
The municipal government is it present vested in 
four constables, but was formerly, according to the 
Chronicle of Dunstaple, directed by a mayor, as also 
appears from a passage in the " Customs of Dun- 
staple," published by Mr. Hearne.
The principles 
of these customs, says Mr. Hearne, are the fol- 
lowing : 
" Shopkeepers may not brew for fear of fire, nor 
drive stakes without leave of the mayor.
The 
townsmen and strangers must cany away the booths 
the same day tlmy set them up in the market.
No 
* Camden states, that water could not be obtained at a 
depth of less than 106 feet.
traders of this and other towns may buy victuals be- 
fore one o'clock, nor go to meet the sellers out of 
the town.
Bread made for sale at the price of a 
farthing must be sold at the same price ; and in like 
manner, also when four gallons are worth a pemn/.
When a widow loses her free-bench she must deli- 
ver up to the heir the fixtures fastened to the land, 
also the principal table and stools ; the best wine 
cask, tub, basons, hatchet, best cup, coulter, and 
share, and the bucket of the well with the rope.
Others chattels she may dispose of by will or gift, 
and she is not to answer for waste, unless such 
waste be done after the king's prohibition." 
In pursuance of the intention of their relation, Mr.
William Chew, who died in the year 1712, a charity- 
school has been built and endowed in Dunstaple by 
Mrs. Frances Ashton, Mrs. Jane Cort, and Mr.
Thomas Aynscombe.
By two indentures, bearing 
date 1694, and 1727, this school is endowed with 
lands in Caddington, Luton, Houghton Regis, 
Flawstidle, Toternhoe, and Whipsnade.
A salary 
of 401.
per annum is paid to the master for teaching 
40 boys, and 371.
per annum is allowed for their 
clothing.
Seven trustees have the management of 
the charity.
If a sufficient number of boys for the 
object of this charity should not be found in the 
parish of Dunstaple, they may be taken from the 
parishes of Caddington, Kensworth, Hesborough, 
Houghton Regis, or Luton.
The rents of the cha- 
rity estates have of late years so much increased, 
that the trustees are enabled to clothe, educate, and 
apprentice 40 boys, and 15 girls.
Mrs. Ashton, and Mrs. Cort, each founded an 
alms-house, for six poor widows.
The former lady 
by her will dated in 1727, bequeathed lands for the 
purpose of raising the annual sum of six pounds, to 
be paid to each of the poor women in her almshouse, 
to buy her a gown, firing, and other necessaries.
The residue, after deducting the expence of repairs, 
and discharging some other charitable bequests, to 
be divided in equal portions between the six poor 
women.
In the year 1713, Mrs. Blandina Marsh built some 
neat houses, for the residence of six decayed maiden 
gentlewomen, which, by her benefaction, and that of 
another lady, are endowed with an annual income of 
nearly 180/.
A singular appearance of the heavens is mention- 
ed by several of our ancient chroniclers, particularly 
Knyghton, Brorapton, and Hemingford, to have 
been seen at Dunstaple, in the year 1189.
The 
account, as given by the latter writer, translated into 
English is as follows : 
Of the appearance of the Cross in the ski/ at Dun- 
staple, i l i)y.
" A stupendous prodigy, which about this time 
was seen by many in England, must not be passed 
over in silence.
Upon the high road which leads 
towards 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
25 
towards London, there is a street of no mean fame, 
named Dunstabell.
There, while about noon they 
were looking - up towards heaven, they saw in the 
height of a serene sky the form of our Lord's banner 
conspicuous by its milky brightness, and the form of 
a man crucified joined thereto, such as is painted in 
the church in memory of the Lord's Passion, and 
for the devotion of the faithful.
Then, when this 
dreadful figure, had appeared a short time, and 
closely attracted the eyes and heart of the beholders, 
the form of the cross was seen to recede from him 
who seemed affixed thereto, so that an intermediate 
space of the sky might be observed, and soon after 
this astonishing thing disappeared.
Let every one 
explain as he thinks fit this wonderful sign, of which 
I am to be considered as a mere reporter, not as an 
expouuder of omens ; for what it is the divine plea- 
sure to signify I know not." 
This, there can scarcely bp a doubt, was merely 
a species of the Fata Morgana, or atmospherical re- 
fraction occasioned by vapours rising from the sea 
and floating in the air.
Such phenomena are usual 
in Italy, and on the shores of the Mediterranean, 
and have been seen in various parts of England.
Many curiousparticularsonthesubject will be found 
by referring to Huddart's Observations on Horizon- 
tal Refractions, in the Philosophical Journal, Vol. I.
page 145 ; to a paper by Ellicot, on the Phenomenon 
of Looming, Vol. I.
p. 152 ; to the Fata Morgana, 
or Appearance of Figures in the Sea and Air before 
Reggio described ; to a paper by Mudge, in the 
Philosophical Transactions for 1795, pages 586 and 
587 ; to Smeaton's Account of Eddystone Light- 
House, page 191 ; to Ilutton's Dictionary, Vol. II.
page 352, &c.
Religious persecution has repeatedly raged in 
the town of Dunstaple.
In the reign of Henry the 
Fifth, many of the Lollards were imprisoned, and 
some of them were put to death.
But it was in the 
time of Henry the Seventh, however, that a display 
of the most horrible cruelty was made.
Dr. Smyth, 
bishop of Lincoln, ordered an unfortunate person, of 
the name of William Tillsworth, to be burnt for 
talking against pilgrimages and image worship, and 
for recommending the reading of the Scriptures in 
English.
The manner of his death, however, in- 
flicted a more indelible stain on the character of his 
persecutors, than even his death itself.
The agon- 
ized daughter of the poor victim was compelled to 
light the pile that was to deprive her father of exist- 
ence !
It is deserving of remark, that Dunstaple is sup- 
posed to be the first place in the kingdom, in which 
a theatrical representation of any kind was attempt- 
ed.
A play, relating to the miracles of St. Cathe- 
rine, was performed tuereunderthesuperintendance 
of Geoffry, a secular priest, who was afterwards 
* Elkanah Settle, a well known dramatist and political writer 
in the reign of Charles II.
was born at Dunstaple in 1647-8.
He was the antagonist of Dryden; and, during the sway of 
VOL.
I. — NO.
2. 
constituted abbot of St. Allan's.
Dunstaple also 
gave birth to Elkanah Settle, a well-known dra- 
matist and political writer, the antagonist of Dry- 
den.* 
The land about Dunstaple is chiefly pasture ; but 
wheat, barley, and beans, are cultivated in those 
parts which are open fields.
The farms are gene- 
rally small, and the rent is about 3/.
an acre.
There 
are neither commons nor wastelands.
The larks in the neighbourhood of Dunstaple 
have long been celebrated for their numbers, for their 
extraordinary size, and for the richness and delicacy 
of their flavour.
The living of Dunstaple is a rectory, in the 
patronage of the king, and is of the yearly value 
of 70/.
Eaton-Brag.] — At Eaton - Brag, about three 
miles and a half west by south from Dunstaple, for- 
merly stood a castle, built by Cantilupes, Barons of 
Bergavenny, in the year 1221, Avhich was very in- 
jurious to the town of Dunstaple.
In 1513 the ma- 
nor became the property of Sir Reginald Bray.
There are no remains of the castle, nor of the manor 
of the Brays.
The chancel of the parish church 
contains a monument to the memory of Jane, wife 
of Edmund, Lord Bray, who died in the year 1558.
In the south aisle, there are the remains of some 
stone work, richly carved and ornamented with the 
royal arms, and the arms and device of Sir Regi- 
nald Bray.
Eaton-Socon.] — This is a considerable village, 
in the hundred of Barford, on the great north road.
The parish church is an ancient Gothic structure.
The windows were ornamented with stained glass, 
of which there are still considerable remains in the 
north aisle, representing subjects from the legends 
of St. Nicholas and St. Etheldreda.
Formerly there was a castle at Eaton-Socon, the 
seat of a branch of the Beauchamp family, who were 
barons of the realm from the time of Henry II.
to 
the year 1292, when Ralph de Beauchamp died 
seized of the manor of Eaton-Socon, held by ba- 
ronial service.
Leland says, " Eaton, a good vil- 
lage were be seene vestigia castelli, between the 
church and the ripe, and almost hard on the ripe : 
and at this Eaton is a little poor bridge of ease over 
the river.
Theruines of Eaton castle belonging to 
my Lord Vaulx." Edward, Lord Vaux, in 1624, 
sold the manor, &c.
to Rowland Squire.
In 1708, 
it passed to the ancestors of the Duke of Bedford, 
the present proprietor.
In this parish there was formerly a religious house 
for Austin friars, called the priory of Bissemede, or 
Bushmead, which was founded in the reign of Henry 
the Second, by Oliver Beauchamp and his son Hugh, 
and dedicated to the Virgin Mary.
At the Dissolu- 
tion its revenues were estimated at 71/.
13s.
9*d.
party prejudice, many pretended to prefer his compositions to 
those of his rival.
clear 
2G 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
clear yearly value.
The site was granted in 1537 
to Sir William Gascoigne, comptroller of the house- 
hold to Cardinal Wolsey.
Bushmead is at present 
the property and seat of the Rev. Hugh Wade Grey, 
who has in his possession a cartulary of the priory, 
very fairly written on vellum ; and some drawings 
made by Buck, of the conventual buildings, no part 
of which now remains, excepting the refectory, that 
has been converted into stables and offices.
Elstow.] — Elstow, formerly Helenstow, is a con- 
siderable village, about a mile and a half from Bed- 
ford, in the hundred of Redbornstoke.
Here was 
formerly an abbey of Benedictine nuns, founded by 
Judith, Countess of Huntingdon, in the reign of 
William the Conqueror, to whom she was niece.
It 
was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, the Virgin Mary, 
and Saint Helena, the mother of Constantine the 
Great.
At the Dissolution, its revenues were valued 
at 284/.
12s.
ll|rf.
The site was granted in the 
year 1553, to Sir Humphrey Ratcliffe, a younger 
brother of the Earl of Essex, who resided in the 
abbey-house, and died in 1556, as appears by an in- 
scription on his monument over the altar of Elstow 
church.
Of the conventual buildings, there are now but 
small remains, excepting the church, which is a very 
* A narrative of the main facts of Bunyan's life may be 
comprised in a few words.
He was born in the year 1628.
For some years he followed his father's occupation, that of a 
tinker.
In 1645, he inlisted as a soldier in the army of the 
Parliament, and was in the fiercest attacks at the siege of Lei- 
cester, where he behaved with the most undaunted courage.
His conversion, according to his own account, began in the 
early part of his life, while he was at play among his compa- 
nions ; when he was suddenly surprised with a voice which said 
to him, " Wilt thou leave thy sins and go to heaven, or have 
thy sins and go to hell?" Upon which he lifted up 1 his eyes, 
in great amazement, towards heaven, whence the voice came, 
and thought he saw Christ looking down upon him.
This had 
a great effect upon his mind ; but he grew far more serious 
upon a casual conference which he held with four poor women 
of Bedford, upon the subject of the new birth.
From that 
time he applied himself diligently to reading the Scriptures ; 
and, in 1653, he was baptised and admitted a member of the 
Baptist congregation at Bedford.
On the restoration of Charles 
II.
he was apprehended, and thrown into Bedford gaol, where 
he was confined for nearly twelve years.
While there he spent 
his time in preaching, writing books, and tagging laces for his 
support.
After his enlargement, he travelled into many parts 
of the kingdom, " to visit and confirm the brethren/-' 1 hese 
visitations procured him the nick-name of Bishop Bunyati.
When he arrived at the sixtieth year of his age, which was the 
period of his life, he had written books equal to the number of 
his years ; but as many of these are on similar subjects, they are 
very much alike.
In 1688, he went on a journey to Reading, in Berkshire, for 
the benevolent purpose of reconciling an offended father to his 
prodigal son, which he happily effected ; but, having caught a 
severe cold, it threw him into a fever, which terminated his ex- 
istence, at the house of Mr. Stcaddock, a grocer, on Snow Hill, 
London, on the 12th of August.
He was buried in Bunhill 
Fields, where a handsome monument was erected over his 
grave.
— Bunyan was a tall, strong bodied man, but not corpu- 
lent.
He wore his hair upon his upper lip.
His appearance 
was rough and stern ; but in his behaviour, he was extremely 
fine structure with a detached tower on the north- 
west.
The north door is of Norman architecture, 
and has an arch, beautifully ornamented in the zig- 
zag manner.
The three arches of the chance] are 
circular, and some of the columns are square and 
very massy.
At the south-west corner of the church, 
there is a small building, with a vaulted roof, sup- 
ported in the centre by an octagonal fluted column.
In the church are several shields in stone, with the 
cross and memorials of the Passion.
In the south 
aisle of the chancel is the tomb of Elizabeth Har- 
way, the last abbess of Elstow, with her effigies in 
brass, placed there in her life-time, with blank spaces 
for the dates.
There are also several memorials of 
the families of Crompton, Lovet, and Hillersdon, 
former owners of the manor.
Adjoining the church, a large mansion, now in 
ruins, was built by some of the Hillersdons.
The 
greater part of it was pulled down a few years ago ; 
and the whole estate now belongs to the Whitbread 
family, by whom it was purchased in 1792, of the 
daughters of the late Mr. Hillersdon.
Elstow has fairs on the 15th and 16th of May, and 
on the 5th and 6th of November.
This village was the birth-place of John Bunyan, 
the celebrated author of the Pilgrim's Progress.* 
Eyworth.] 
mild and affable, pious in all his actions, and scrupulously just, 
His works, which had been long printed on tobacco paper, by 
Nicholas Boddington and others, were republished in 1736 and 
1737, in two folio volumes ; and, since that period, they have 
gone through numerous editions.
After the numerous opinions which have been given of John 
Bunyan, as a writer, to obtrude a new one would be rather im- 
pertinent than satisfactory.
For the amusement and informa- 
tion of the reader, however, we shall draw together, as it were 
into a focus, some of the remarks which have been made by our 
most celebrated critics.
The Pilgrim's Piogress is universally allowed to be his 
master-piece.
It was conjectured, by the late Mr. Toplady, 
to have been suggested by an ingenious piece of allegory, in- 
tituled, The Isle of Man ; or, the Legal Proceedings in Man- 
shire against Sinne, which was written by the Rev. Richard 
Bernard, rector of Batcombe, in Somersetshire, and published 
early in the 17th century.
This conjecture, however, would 
apply, with more probability, to the Holy War of our author, 
than to his Pilgrim's Progress.
The latter was written in pri- 
son, when the Bible, and the Book of Martyrs, formed the 
whole of his library.
That celebrated and profound critic, Lord Kaims, says : — 
" The Pilgrim's Progress, and Robinson Crusoe, great fa- 
vourites of the vulgar, are composed in a style enlivened like 
that of Homer, by a proper mixture of the dramatic and narra- 
tive ; and, upon that account chiefly, have been translated into 
several European languages." This opinion does not appear 
to be altogether correct ; for Robinson Crusoe and the Pil~ 
grim's Progress belong to two distinct classes of writing ; the 
former being a romance, though founded upon fact, and the 
latter a religious allegory.
" Honest John Bunyan," observes the late Dr. Franklyn, 
" is the first I know of who has mingled narrative and dialogue 
together ; a mode of writing very engaging to the reader, who, 
in the moxt interesting passages, finds himself admitted, as it were, 
into the company, and present at the conversation.
De Foe 
has imitated him with success, and Richardson has done the 
same." 
Mr.
BEDFORDSHIRE.
27 
Eyworth.
— The village of Eyworth is situated l 
three miles from Putton, on the borders of Cam- 
bridgeshire.
In the church are several monuments 
of the Andersons, who have been lords of the manor 
ever since the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
On the 
south side of the chancel is the monument of Sir 
Edward Anderson, Lord Chief Justice of the Com- 
mon Pleas, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; a man 
of considerable eminence in his profession, and one 
of the judges who sat at the trial of Mary, Queen of 
Scots.
On the monument are the effigies of himself 
and his lady, under a richly ornamented arch ; he is 
represented in his robes and cap, with a collar of 
S. S.
— On the opposite side of the chancel is the 
monument of Sir Francis Anderson, eldest son of the 
chief justice, whose effigies, in gilt armour, is repre- 
sented between those of his two wives, kneeling and 
fronting the chancel.
On the south side of the chan- 
cel is the monument of Edmund Anderson, Esq. of 
Stratton, eldest son of Sir Francis, who died in 1638.
Upon it are half length figures of himself and his 
wife Alice, in white marble, their hands jointly hold- 
ing a heart, on which are inscribed these words, 
" To God." On the floor is the tomb of Alice, 
Viscountess Verulam and Baroness of St. Albans, 
widow of the great Lord Chancellor Bacon, who 
died in 1656.
Farle.] — Farle, or Farleigh, is distant about two 
miles from Luton.
At this place there was formerly 
an hospital given by King Henry II.
to the great 
foreign hospital of Sartingfied in Picardy, to which 
the master and brethren of Farleigh were made sub- 
ordinate.
In 1379, William Wenlock, the preben- 
dary of Brownswood, was master of this hospital.
It was afterwards given by King Henry VI.
upon 
the suppression of alien houses, to the provost and 
scholars of King's College in Cambridge.
Felmersham.] — The west end of Felmersham 
church exhibits a curious specimen of the earliest 
Gothic architecture.
It contains an ancient wooden 
screen, very richly ornamented, between the nave 
and chancel.
Mr. Toplady considers the Pilgrim's Progress as " the 
finest allegorical book extant: describing every stage of a be- 
liever's experience, from conversion to glorification, in the most 
artless simplicity of language ; yet peculiarly rich with spiri- 
tual unction, and glowing with the most vivid, just, and well- 
conducted machinery throughout.
It is, in short, a master- 
piece of piety and genius, and will, we doubt not, be of stand- 
ing use to the people of God, so long as the sun and moon en- 
dure.
It has been affirmed, and I believe with truth, that no 
book in the English tongue has gone through so many editions, 
the Bible and Common Prayer- Book alone excepted." 
Mr. Grainger, in speaking of this work, observes, that it 
gives us a clear and distinct idea of Calvinistic divinity ; that 
the allegory is admirably carried on ; and that the characters 
are justly drawn, and uniformly supported.
About the same time that Bunyan wrote his Pilgrim's Pro- 
gress, the learned Bishop Patrick published a small quarto vo- 
lume, intituled the Parable of the Pilgrim ; but it is not sup- 
posed that either of the authors profittcd by, or even was aware 
of, the production of the other.
In comparing them, however, 
Mr. Toplady says : — " Whoever lias patience to wade through 
Flitton.] — Flitton, situated in the hundred of 
Flitt, a mile and a quarter west of the Silsoe, was 
anciently called Flictham, Flutte, and Flitt.
The 
manor is the property of Lady Lucas.
— The church 
is an ancient Gothic structure, chiefly remarkable 
for the monuments of the noble family of Grey, 
whose burial place it has been since the reign of 
Henry VIII.
In the aisle adjoining the nave are 
the monuments of Henry, Earl of Kent, who died 
in 1614, with the effigies in their robes, of himself 
and his Countess Mary, daughter of Sir John Cot- 
ton ; Elizabeth, Countess of Kent, who died in 
1651, with her effigies in white marble; Henry, Earl 
of Kent, who died in 1651, and his second wife 
Amabel, who died in 1698, at the age of 92 : their 
effigies are in white marble, but ill executed ; and 
Lady Jane, the velic of Sir Eustace Hart, who died 
in 1671, with her effigies in marble.
Three addi- 
tional rooms were built by the Duke of Kent, which 
contain the monuments of the duke himself, who 
died in 1740, and his only son Anthony, Earl of 
Harold, who died in 1723, with their effigies in 
white marble in Roman habits.
There are also the 
momuments of his two Duchesses Jemima Crewe, 
who died in 1738 ; and Lady Sophia Bentinck, who 
died in 1748 ; his three daughters, Amabel, Lady 
Glenarchy, who died in 1727 ; Lady Henrietta de 
Grey, 1717 ; and Lady Ann Cavendish, 1733, with 
their effigies in white marble.
There is also an urn 
to the memory of Lady Mary Gregory, a fourth 
daughter of the duke, who died in 1761, and another 
in memory of the Earl of Hardwicke, who died in 
1790.
In the chancel is the figure in brass of an 
honest steward ; he is represented, dressed in a long 
cloak, trunk breeches, great ruff, and large night 
cap.
His name was Thomas Hill, receiver-general 
to the Earls of Kent.
He died May 26, 1601, aged 
101.
The following is his epitaph : — 
" Aske how he lived, and you shall know his ende, 
He dy'd a saint to God, to poore a friende, 
These linesmen know do truly of him story, 
Whom God hath called, and seated now in glory." 
ten pages of the bishop's Parable, must be fully convinced 
that his lordship's limping and unwieldy Pilgrim will never be 
able, with all his hobbling, to overtake, or even to get within 
sight of John Bunyan, by many a thousand mile : a striking 
proof, that the greatest men, when they overstep their proper 
line, appear to the greatest disadvantage ; and that exquisite 
natural ability casts a brighter and more captivating lustre than 
the deepest acquired pails, where that is wanting.
Genius can 
shift tolerably well without much erudition; but erudition 
makes no very attracting figure, unless it be grafted on ge- 
nius." 
The author of a Discourse concerning Ridicule and Irony 
which was printed in 1729, asserted that " Bunyan's Pilgrim's 
Progress had infinitely outdone the Tale of a Tub ; which, 
perhaps, had not made one convert to infidelity, whereas the 
Pilgrim's Progress had converted many sinners to Christ." 
Last, but not least, Dr. Johnson greatly commends the Pil- 
grim's Progress, as a work of original genius ; and reckons it 
one of the very few books which every reader wishes had been 
longer.
Gravenhurst 
28 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Gravenhurst (Upper.) — In this parish, about a 
mile east from Wrest Park, there was formerly an 
ancient mansion, called Ion House, the residence of 
John Sabine, Esq. who was created a baronet in 
1672.
It is now a farm-house, belonging to Lady 
Lucas.
Gravenhurst (Lower).
— The church of this vil- 
lage, adjoining the preceding, was built by Sir Ro- 
bert de Bilhemore, as appears from a French in- 
scription on his tomb, without date.
In the porch 
there is the coat of arms of the founder, a bend with 
a border engrailed.
The church contains several 
monuments of the Pigots.
Upon that of Benjamin 
Pigot, Esq. who died in 1606, is a genealogical ac- 
count of the family.
Harold.] — Harold, anciently Harwood, is a 
small market-town, situated on the Ouse, about 
nine miles from Bedford.
The market is held on 
Thursday, but is very inconsiderable.
Formerly there was a priory at Harold, founded 
by Samson Le Fort, in the year 1150, in honour of 
St. Peter, for canons and nuns of the order of St.
Nicholas of Arrouasia; but it was afterwards occu- 
pied by a prioress and a few nuns of the order of 
St. Austin's.
At its suppression its revenues were 
valued at 401.
18s.
2d.
clear yearly value.
The 
site was granted in 1544, to William Parr, and af- 
terwards in 1555, to John Chenez and William Dun- 
combe.
It is at present a farm-house, the property 
of Lady Lucas.
The only part of the conventual 
building which remains, is the refectory, now a barn, 
and known by the name of Hall Barn.
Harold Church is a handsome Gothic structure, 
with a fine spire.
It contains several monuments in 
memory of the families of Boteler and Alston ; one 
to the memory of Mrs. JolifFe, daughter of Lord 
Curve ; and another in memory of Mrs. Mead, the 
widow of Dr. Mead, the celebrated physician, who 
resided at a house near the church, now the seat of 
Robert Garston, Esq.
There is a bridge over the Ouse at Harold, with 
a long causeway.
Hawnes.] ---Hawnes, anciently Hagnes, is situ- 
ated in the hundred of Flitt, four miles north-east 
from Ampthill.
The church was given by Simon de 
Beauchamp to the priory of Chicksand.
The pa- 
tronage is now in the Osborn family.
In the church 
is a monument of Anthony Newdigate, one of the 
commissioners for the sale of abbey lands, who died 
in 1568 ; and several memorials of the Osborn fa- 
mily.
Thomas Brightman, author of a Treatise on the 
Revelations, which attracted much notice in the 
reign of Queen Elizabeth, was vicar of Hawnes.
He died in 1607.
* Dr. Castell, who had been many years a member of 
Emanuel College in Cambridge, was, in his advanced age, ad- 
mitted into St. John's in that university.
In 1666, he was 
chosen Arabic professor; to which preferment he was entitled 
Hawnes House.] — -This is the seat of the Right 
Hon. Lord Carteret, situated in the parish of 
Hawnes.
It has been modernized and in great pari 
rebuilt by the present noble owner.
It is a hand- 
some structure, consisting of two quadrangles.
There is a good collection of pictures at this house, 
chiefly family portraits ; among which are those of 
Margaret, Countess of Lenox ; Rembrandt's mo- 
ther ; Sir George and Lady Carteret, and John, 
Earl of Granville.
At the foot of the principal 
staircase is an ancient view of Longleat, the seat of 
the Marquis of Bath, in Wiltshire.
The manor was anciently part of the extensive 
possessions of the Beauchamps.
In 1563, it became 
the property of Robert Newdigate, Esq. On the 
27th and 28th of July, 1605, Queen Anne, the con- 
sort of James I.
was entertained at Hawnes, by Sir 
Robert Newdigate, his Majesty being then at Sir 
Edmund Conquest's at Houghton.
On the 30th 
both their Majesties,, with the whole court, attended 
divine service at Hawnes church.
Hinwick Hall.] — Hinvvick Hall, in the parish of 
Puddington, was formerly the seat of General Live- 
say, who died in 1717, and lies buried in Pudding- 
ton church.
It is now the residence of Mr. Wag- 
staff, a descendant, in the female line, from General 
Livesay's brother.
In the library at the house there 
is a fortulory of the priory of canons at Ashby.
Hinwick House] — Hinwick House, a short dis- 
tance from the above, is the seat of Richard Orlebar, 
Esq. lord of the manor of Puddington.
It was 
erected in the year 1710.
The site of the ancient 
manor-house, which appears to have been castel- 
lated, is at present occupied as a farm.
Higham Gobion.] — This is a small village, about 
nine miles from Luton, and two and three quarters 
from Silsoe.
It is celebrated for being the rectory, 
retreat, and burial-place of the learned orientalist, 
Dr. Edmund Castell, author of the Polyglot Bible, 
and the Lexicon Heptaglotton.
He was buried in 
the chancel of Higham Gobion church, where there 
is engraven, on a tablet of black marble, placed 
against the north wall, in a white stone frame, the 
following inscription : 
" Edmundus Castell, S.
T. D.
Regis Majestati 
Carolo II.
a sacris Ecclesis Christ i Cantuarensis Ca- 
nonicus, Lingua; Arabics apud Cantabridgienses Pro- 
fessor, Regalis Societatis Socius, Author Lexicon 
Heptaglotti, necnon hujus Ecclesis Rector.
Morta- 
litatis quod reliquum est tam ipse quam Lectissimx 
ejus conjugi Domins Elizabeths Bettesworth, Petri 
Bettesworth, Militis Aurati primo relicts, deinde Jo- 
annis Harris Arm.
(cujus lilius Willielmus una cum 
filia ejus Elizabetha hie jacent) Anno ^Elat.
Edmun- 
di 68 Da:.
Elizabeths 64— Anno Christi 1674,— Vivus 
hie legat humandum."* 
Hockliffe.] 
on 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
29 
Hockliffe.] — Hockliffe, a village in the hundred 
of Manshead, was formerly denominated, from its 
low miry situation, Hockley -in-the-Hole.
The roads 
about it have been lately much improved.
There 
was an ancient hospital or religious house at Hock- 
liffe, dedicated to Saint John the Baptist, founded 
previous to the reign of King John ; but there are 
no remains of it existing.
Houghton Conquest.] — Houghton Conquest is 
a small village, about five miles from Bedford, in 
the hundred of Redburnestoke and deanery of Bed- 
ford.
It takes its additional name from the family 
of Conquest, who were possessed of the manor be- 
fore the thirteenth century.
The remains of the 
old mansion are now a farm-house.
The building is 
of brick and timber ; and the eaves are ornamented 
with grotesque figures carved in wood.
In 1605 
James I.
visited Sir Edmund Conquest at this seat, 
where he slept on the 27th and 28th of July ; the 
Queen being at the same time at Sir Richard New- 
digate's at Hawnes.
Sir Francis Clerke, the great benefactor to Sid- 
ney Sussex College in Cambridge, founded a free- 
school, and alms-houses for six poor people at 
Houghton Conquest, in the year 1632.
The master 
of the free-school has a salary of 16/.
per annum ; 
and the poor people in the alms-houses received 8/.
amongst them, under Sir Francis Clerke's will.
— 
In 1691 Edmund Wylde, Esq. bequeathed the sum 
of 140/.
to be laid out in the purchase of lands, the 
profits of which are appropriated towards the 
repairs of the school and the alms-houses.
The 
overplus, if any, to be divided among the poor peo- 
ple.
Houghton church contains some memorials of the 
Conquest family.
In the chancel is the monument 
of Thomas Archer, rector of Houghton Conquest, 
who was inducted in the rei^n of Queen Elizabeth.
— In the parish register is the following curious en- 
try, inserted by Mr. Archer.
" Anno 1623, I caus- 
ed my grave to be made with brick ; and I made my 
on which he bestowed incredible pains and expence even to 
the breaking of his constitution, and exhausting his fortune.
He bequeathed all his Oriental manuscripts to the university 
library at Cambridge, on condition that his name should be 
written on every copy in the collection.
The following is an English version of the inscription on Dr.
Castell's monument :— 
Edmund Castell, D.D. Chaplain to his Majesty, 
King Charles II.
Prebend of Canterbury, Professor of 
the Arabic Language at Cambridge, 'Fellow of the 
Royal Society, Author of the Heptaglott Lexicon, 
and Rector of this Church.
— Also the mortal remains 
of his most excellent wife, the Lady Elizabeth Bet- 
tesworth, first relict of Sir Peter Bettesworth, after- 
wards of John Harris, Esq.
(whose son William, and 
his daughter Elizabeth, lie here.) Edmund was 68.
The Lady Elizabeth, 64.
In the year of Christ, 1674.
The living here may learn that he must die.
VOL.
I. — NO.
2. 
coffin, whereon are set these figures, 1623." The 
following epitaph is of his own writing : — 
" Instruxi vivens multos, 
Nunc Instruo cunctos, 
Quod struit una dies 
Destruit una dies.
Sic speciosa ruit 
Spatiosi fabrica mundi, 
Sic oritur, moritur, 
Vermis, inermis, homo.
O me felicem 
Qui carnis fasce solutus 
Mutavi veris vitrea 
Vana bonis.
Fui Thomas Archer, 
Capellanus Regis Jacobi, 
Rector hujus ecclesiae 
Per annos XLI.
In vita hoc posui 
Anno Domini MDCXXIX.
Anno Gratis LXXVI.
Veniet qui me in lucem 
reponetdies."* 
The effigies of the deceased is represented in ca- 
nonicals in his pulpit, with a cushion and book be- 
fore him.
— In the chancel of this church there is also 
the monument of Dr. Zachary Grey, rector of 
Houghton, editor of Hudibras, and a commentator 
on Shakespeare.
Upon the monument is the follow- 
ing inscription : — 
" Sacred to the memory of Zachary Grey, LL.D.
late rector of this parish, who with zeal undissembled 
served his God ; with love and affection endeared 
himself to his family ; with sincerity unaffected pro- 
moted the interest of his friends ; and with zeal, cha- 
rity, and extensive humanity behaved towards all man- 
kind.
He died Nov. 25, 1766, aged 78." 
Houghton Park.] — Houghton Park, known also 
by the name of Dame Ellensbury Park, has been 
some time united to Ampthill Park, through an ex- 
change made between the late Duke of Bedford and 
Lord Ossory, forming in the whole a very handsome 
demesne.
* In English, thus : — 
"Whilst I lived, I instructed many ; 
Now, I instruct all.
What one day builds, 
Another day pulls down : 
So the goodly fabric of the spacious world 
Tumbles into ruins ; 
So man, a feeble worm, 
Is born and dies.
O happy me, 
Who, released from the burden of mortality, 
Have exchanged vain enjoyments, 
For substantial good.
I was Thomas Archer, 
Chaplain to King James, 
Rector of this parish 
For forty-one years.
I put off the robe of mortality, 
Anno Domini, 1629, 
Aged 76 years.
Whoever follows me, will remain in life 
But a day.
h Houghton 
30 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Houghton Park was occupied in the early part of 
the reign of James I.
by Sir Edmund Conquest, as 
keeper, but in 1615, he assigned over his interest in 
it to the trustees for the celebrated Mary, Countess 
of Pembroke, upon whom Ben Jonson wrote the fol- 
lowing beautiful epitaph : 
" Underneath this marble hearse, 
Lies the subject of all verse, 
Sidney's sister, Pembroke's mother ; 
Death !
ere thou hast slain another 
Fair and wise and good as she, 
Time shall throw his dart at thee." 
Lady Pembroke held the park under the crown 
during her widowhood, and built a splendid man- 
sion, of which the shell only now remains.
— The ce- 
lebrated Christian, Countess of Devonshire, spent 
three years in retirement at this house, then in the 
possession of her brother the Earl of Elgin, after the 
battle of Worcester, in the year 1651.
Formerly, at the entrance of Houghton Park, 
from Ampthill, there was a lodge ; and a pear-tree, 
under which Sir Philip Sidney is reported to have 
written part of his Arcadia, and Pomfret many of his 
verses.
— Sir Philip, however, died many years be- 
fore his sister, the Countess of Pembroke, was in 
possession of this residence.
Houghton Regis.] — Houghton Regis is a small 
village, in the hundred of Manshead.
Formerly, as 
its name imports, the manor was part of the royal 
demesne.
The parish is one of the most extensive in Bed- 
fordshire ; as, on the inclosure, which took place in 
1796, the commons and waste lands were estimated 
at 4000 acres.
In the church, under a richly ornamented Gothic 
arch, is an ancient monument with the effigies of a 
man in armour.
Husborn-Crawley.] — Husborn - Crawley, is a 
small village, in the hundred of Manshead, about 
eleven miles from Bedford.
In the church there is 
a handsome monument, with effigies of a knight in 
armour, and his lady, under a canopy supported by 
Doric columns ; it has no inscription, but bears the 
arms of the Thomson family, who were lords of the 
manor in the 17th century.
Leighton-Busard.]— Leighton-Busard is a mar- 
ket-town, situated on the borders of Buckingham, in 
the hundred of Manshead, and the deanery of Dun- 
staple.
This place is said to be the Lygeanburgh 
of the Saxon Chronicle, which was taken from the 
Britons by Cuthwulph, in the year 571.
Messrs.
Lysons appear very accurately to have settled the 
etymology of its name.
" It has been conjectured," 
say they, " that the addition of Bussord or Buz- 
zard is a corruption of Beaudesert, which name in- 
deed appears in some old papers ; but in the most 
ancient records, the name of the town is written 
Leighton-Bosord, and sometimes Busord or Buz- 
zard.
The family of Bosord, or Bossord, from whom 
it seems to have derived its additional name, were 
of consequence in the county, and knights of the 
shire, in the reigns of Edward II.
and Edward 
III." 
Leighton - Busard market is held on Tuesdays, 
and is one of the most ancient in the county : at the 
time of the Norman survey, the tolls were valued at 
11.
The chief market commodities are cattle, corn, 
grocery, lace, plaited straw, &c.
The town derives 
considerable advantage from the proximity of the 
Grand Junction Canal, which passes it within a fur- 
long on the west side, where the river Ouse sepa- 
rates the counties of Bedford and Bucks.
The 
channel of the canal is of sufficient depth to carry 
craft of eighty tons burthen.
The fairs at Leighton-Busard are as follow : Fe- 
bruary 5, the second Tuesday in April, Whitsun 
Tuesday, July 26, October 24, and the second Tues- 
day in December.
Some of these fairs are noted for 
a large sale of horses.
The church is a handsome Gothic structure, con- 
taining several monuments of the families of Leigh, 
Whingate, Wells, and Wilts.
In the nave there is 
a tablet to the memory of John Putford, M.
A. who 
died in 1710.
" He made an augmentation," says 
his epitaph, " to the poor vicarage of Leighton, 
with a liberality not unworthy the greatest prelate." 
The augmentation now produces sixty pounds a 
year.
In this parish there are five hamlets : Heath-and- 
Reach, Billington, Eggington, Stanbridge, and 
Clipson.
The four first have chapels of ease.
In the chapel at Stanbridge there is a monument 
in memory of Henry Honner, and Jane his wife, 
who lived together in wedlock sixty years ; he died 
in 1627, at the age of 95 ; she in 1629, at the age 
of 86.
In the town is a beautiful Gothic cross, of a pen- 
tagonal form, which is supposed to have been built 
about five hundred years ago.
In 1650 it was pre- 
sented at the court-leet, as being in such a ruinous 
state, as greatly to endanger the lives of those per- 
sons who were passing near it ; in consequence of 
which a rate of 4.d. was levied upon every inhabitant 
to defray the charge of repairing it.
In the " Beau- 
ties of England and Wales" this relic of antiquity is 
thus described : — 
" The height of the cross is twenty-seven feet 
two inches, from the top of the stone-work to the 
basement story, which is seven feet four inches from 
the ground on the lowest side, and consists of five 
rows of steps rising from the earth.
The centre 
pillar, which supports the arch, is eight feet two in- 
ches high ; and one foot one inch and a quarter 
wide, on the side fronting the largest angle.
The 
upper story is disposed into five niches, and had 
formerly as many pinnacles at the corners ; but one 
of them is destroyed.
Within each niche was a sta- 
tue.
The first apparently is a bishop ; another 
seems like the Virgin and Jesus ; a third appears to 
be Saint John the Evangelist : the others are so 
much mutilated, that even conjecture could not be 
warranted 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
31 
warranted in assigning them a name.
The whole 
height, from the lowest base to the top of the vane, 
is thirty-eight feet.
This cross is built of stone, and 
is situated in an open area, near the market-house.
The church is a large antique structure, and by the 
various grotesque carvings which are scattered about 
it, is supposed to have been built at the same period 
as the cross ; and is constructed with the same sort 
of stone.
At the intersection rises a square tower, 
surmounted with a spire ; the whole being 193 feet 
in height." 
A cell of foreign monks was formerly established 
at a placo called Grovebury, in this parish, by the 
Abbess and Cistercian nuns of Font Everard in 
Normandy, to whom King Henry II.
granted a ma- 
nor in Leighton.
— There was also a house of Cister- 
cian monks in Leighton, which was a cell to Woburn 
Abbey.
Formerly there was a fraternity or brotherhood in 
the church of Leighton ; and some remains qf their 
hall are still standing in Broad Street, not far from 
the cross.
An almshouse for eight poor women, was founded 
here by Matthew Wilks, in the year 1630.
They 
receive three shillings each weekly, besides being- 
provided with firing and clothes.
— In 1790 the Ho- 
nourable Mrs. Leigh, who possesses the manor, built 
a house for the Sunday schools, to which she sub- 
scribes 20/.
annually.
* Lidlington is also deserving of notice, as the residence of 
the rustic poet Batchelor, author of" Village Scenes," &c.
A 
short account of this young man, upon his own authority, must 
be acceptable.
He was born at Marston ; and, between the 
age of ten and thirteen, he went to school at Ampthill.
At 
that time, fables in spelling books, were the only things that he 
could read with delight; and, for many years, Robinson Cru- 
soe pleased him beyond every thing.
After he left school, 
Quarles's Emblems became his favourite ; a book which, with 
Watts's Hymns, he conceives to have given him a taste for 
rhyme.
About the age of fourteen, Paradise Lost, Young's 
Night Thoughts, and Fenning's Dictionary, fell in his way.
From the latter lie derived nearly all his knowledge of words.
In 1792, he settled at Lidlington, where he occupied a farm be- 
longing to the Duke of Bedford.
It was his practice to read 
every thing that came in his way ; but, for several years, he 
could understand but very few lines in any well-written book, 
without the help of a dictionary.
About the year 1794, he had 
written to the amount of fifteen hundred verges, chiefly relat- 
ing to the news of the day, A few years afterwards he became 
acquainted with a book society, amongst which the Magazines 
and Reviews were circulated ; and, to the critical parts of those 
publications he paid particular attention.
In 1795, or 1796, 
whilst literally guiding the plough, he composed some short 
pieces; and, in the spring of 1799, a solitary journey through 
Marston, the place of his nativity, furnished him with materials 
for his Village Scenes.
They were commenced in March, and 
finished in November, under the discouraging circumstance of 
not having a single friend to assist him in their correction.
At 
length, however, all difficulties having been overcome, he had 
the pleasure of publishing a small volume, intituled Village 
Scenes: the Progress of Agriculture ; and other Poems, by T.
Batchelor.
Numerous passages might bp happily selected; but we con- 
tent ourselves with the following, comprising a description of 
the rising sun, the soothing influence oi sleep on poverty, and 
Amongst the religious establishments of Leighton- 
Buzzard are a society of Quakers, and a congrega- 
tion of Baptists.
On the heath, about half a mile from Leighton- 
Buzzard, is an inclosure, nearly circular, containing 
several fields surrounded by a ditch, which in many 
parts is deep, and the whole has very much the ap- 
pearance of an ancient encampment.
Lidlington.] — Lidlington is a pleasant village, 
eight miles south-west from Bedford.
The manor, 
which formerly belonged to the Goldingtons, is now 
the property of Earl Spencer.
In Lidlington 
church, there is an ancient tomb in memory of one 
of the Goldingtons, with his effigies in armour on a 
village 
The date is imperfect [148 .
. .) 
affords some very pleasing 
pros- 
brass plate.
This 
pects.* 
Luton.] — Luton is a market town, situated in the 
hundred of Flitt, 20 miles south by east from Bed- 
ford.
The market day is Monday.
It has a fair on 
the 18th of April, and another on the 18th of Octo- 
ber.
The petty sessions for the hundred of Flitt are 
chielly holden here, though sometimes at Silsoe.
Luton parish contains the following hamlets : — Bis- 
cot, Great Bramingham, Little Bramingham, Nether 
Crawley, Dallowe, Farle, East Hide, West Hide, 
Langley, Lightgrove, Limbury, Luton-Hoo, Soma- 
ries, and Stoppesley.
This town stands very pleasantly on the river 
the sleep-repelling grief of the disappointed lover and betrayed 
fair one : 
" Refracted rays of Phoebus, dawning light 
Divergent shooting, chase the shades of night, 
Prismatic colours, penciled by the morn, 
With feeble lustre orient clouds adorn ; 
At intervals, throng tides of aether, float 
Time's solemn toll, and chanticleer's shrill note; 
The bird of night shrieks on the mould' ring fane, 
And watch-dogs bay responsive to her strain : 
Yet sleep her soft oblivious sway maintains, 
And binds the village in her pleasing chains; 
Soolh'd by her hand, beneath a clay-cold shed 
Pale want reposes on a cheerful bed, 
Sickness and care confess the balmy hour, 
Nor envy pines at beauty, wealth, or pow'r: 
" But griefs there are that banish all delight, 
The charms of day, the calm repose of night, 
Wound the sad breast, and break the bands of sleep, 
To ope the eyes that only wake to weep : 
E'en now perhaps some low-desponding swain 
Heaves the deep sigh, o'ercome by cold disdain : 
With streaming eyes, some sad dishonour'd fair, 
Mourns o'er the babe that owns no father's care." 
When it is considered that such verses were written, without 
any assistance of the learned, and without any patronage of the 
great; not in the soft shades of retirement, nor under the shel- 
ter of academic bowers; but amidst inconvenience and distrac- 
tion, in obscurity and neglect, and without a Maecenas to usher 
them into the world, the candid reader will find them entitled 
to very high consideration.
Lea, 
32 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Lea, which rises in its neighbourhood, near Lea- 
Grove.
It is irregularly built somewhat in the form 
of a Roman Y ; the angles branching off from the 
market-house.
Luton church is a handsome Gothic structure, 
consisting of a choir, a nave, and two aisles, sup- 
ported by ten pointed arches, two transepts, and a 
handsome embattled tower on the west, composed 
of flint and other stones in chequer work.
In the 
corners are hexangular turrets.
The arch at the 
west door is ornamented with mouldings of various 
flowers, &c.
The chancel was built by John Whit- 
hampsted, abbot of St. Albans, in the loth century.
On the south side are four stone seats, richly orna- 
mented ; in the spandrils are the arms of Edward 
the Confessor, the kingdom of Mercia, the Abbey of 
St. Albans, King Offa, Abbot Whithampsted, &c.
Above is the abbot's motto, " Valles Abundabunt" 
On the north side of the chancel are a vestry, a 
school-room, and an elegant chapel, which from 
the following inscription, preserved in the British 
Museum, appear to have been built by Sir John 
Wenlock, some time before the year 1461, when he 
was created Baron Wenlock.
" Jesu Christ, most of myght, 
Have mercy on John de Wenlock, knyght, 
And on his wife Elizabeth, 
Who out of this world is post by death 
Which founded this chapel here ; 
Help them with your hearty prayer, 
That tbey may come to that place, 
Where ever is joy and solace." 
The above inscription, with the portrait of his 
lordship, was formerly in the east window of the 
church, but has been either removed or destroyed.* 
There are some other ancient monuments in Luton 
church.
Under one of the arches is an altar-tomb, 
on which is the effigies of an ecclesiastic in his robes, 
said to be that of William Wenlock, prebendary of 
Brownswood in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, 
and master of the Hospital of Farleigh, who died in 
1392.
The following imperfect inscription appears 
on this tomb.
On the north side : 
" In Wenlock brad I 
In this town lordschipes had I 
Her am I now fady 
Christes moder help me lady 
* Sir John de Wenlock flourished in the reign of Henry VI.
He was constable of Bamburg Castle, and chamberlain to the 
Queen.
Having amassed great wealth, he furnished his royal 
master with the loan of 10331.
6s.
8d.
for which he received an 
assignment of t lie fifteenth and tenth, granted by Parliament in 
the year 1456, and was soon after rewarded with the order of the 
garter.
In the wars between the houses of York and Lancas- 
ter, he at first loyally supported the cause of the latter, and was 
dreadfully wounded at the first battle of St. Albans.
He after- 
wards joined the Duke of York, and was in consequence, in 
1459, attainted by the Lancastrian Parliament.
He distinguish- 
ed himself in Towton Field, and was recompensed by the con- 
queror, (or all his former losses, with several important offices; 
was created a baren, employed in several embassies, and ap- 
Under thes stones 
For a tim schal I reste my bones 
Dey mot I ned ones 
Mygliltul God grant me thy wcnes." 
On the south side : — 
" illelmus sic tumalatus 
De Wenlock natus, 
In ordine presbiteratus, 
Alter hujus ville 
Dominus mens fuil ille 
Hie Licet indignus 
Anime Deus esto benignus." 
In Wenlock chapel are several altar-tombs, strip- 
ped of their brasses.
One of them was that of Sir 
Thomas Rotheram of Somerias.
In the north aisle 
are the monuments of the Rotherams of Farleigh ; 
at the west end of the.
south aisle is the mutilated 
figure of an ecclesiastic holding a cross ; and in the 
north transept is the tomb of John Ack worth, Esq.
who died in 1513.
— The following curious inscrip- 
tion, excepting the three first words which have 
been removed, remain on a brass plate round the 
verge : — 
" [O man whoe'er] thou be !
Timor mortis showlde 
trowble thee ; for when thou leest wenyst, veniet te 
mors seperare and se grave grevys, ergo mortis 
memoreris.
Jehu mercy, lady help." 
An elegant Gothic baptistery, of an hexagonal 
form, containing a font, or baptisterium, composed 
of stone, standing on five pillars, is at the west end 
of the nave.
The baptistery consists of six lofty 
pointed arches, terminated with elegant tabernacle 
work.
On the inside of the roof a vine, the emblem 
of the church, is represented guarded by a lamb, 
from the assaults of the devil, in the shape of a dra- 
gon.
Several fragments of painted glass appear in the 
south window ; and in the windows of Wenlock 
Chapel there are sufficient remains to shew the style 
of the original decorations.
They appear to have 
consisted 'of single figures and coats of arms, on a 
ground of plain glass, charged with various small 
devices, among which the broom pod and a rudder, 
accompanied by the word Hola, are most conspicu- 
ous.
— In the east window is a representation of Saint 
George and a dragon ; the saint is on foot, and has 
pointed lieutenant of Calais.
Notwithstanding all these favours, 
he again revolted, and joined the Earl of Warwick, in his at- 
tempt to restore the deposed Henry.
At the fatal battle of 
Shrewsbury he was appointed by the Earl of Somerset, the ge- 
neral of the Queen's forces, to command the middle ward of 
the army.
The Earl himself led the van, and made a furious 
attack on the enemy ; but, finding himself unsupported, and 
returning enraged to discover the cause, he found Lord Wen- 
lock, with his troops, standing in the market-place.
Whether 
a panic had seized him, or whether, through a mutability of dis- 
position, he had meditated a new revolt, is unknown; but the 
Earl, unable to repress his fury, rode up, and, with one blow 
of his battle-axe, cleft the head of the supposed traitor.
a red 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
33 
a red cross on the breast.
Underneath are five men 
in blue-furred gowns, and a woman praying.
The 
Weniock arms, within the garter, are also to be seen 
in various parts of the church.
Part of the town of Luton was given by King Offa 
to the monks of St. Albans ; the manor at the time 
of the Norman Conquest, being a royal demesne, 
was given by William to GeofTry, Earl of Perth.
In 1216 it was possessed by the famous Fulk de 
Brent, who obtained a confirmation from King John 
of the honour of Luton.
The castle at Luton, built 
in 1221, was one of the fortresses of this baron.
King Henry V.
in the year 1406, granted the 
manor to John, Duke of Bedford, regent of France.
The next possessor on record is John, Lord Wen- 
lock, who, says Leland, " left an heir-general that 
was married to a kinsman of Thomas Scotte, other- 
wise called Rotheram, bishop of York.
He had 
with her in marriage Luton in Bedfordshire, and 
three hunderheth markes of lande thereabouts, and 
a fair place within the paroche of Luton, caulyd So- 
merys, the which house was sumptuously begun by 
Lord Weniock, but not finished." The gateway 
and part of a tower are still to be seen.
The latter 
appears to have been very high and of great 
strength.
The manor was granted, in 1475, to Thomas Ro- 
theram, the bishop of Lincoln ; and it continued in 
the Rotheram family till the year 1614, when it was 
purchased by Sir Robert Napier, Bart, it is now 
the property of the Marquis of Bute.
Luton was the birth-place of Pomfret, the poet.* 
Luton-Hoo.] — The manor of Hoo, now in the 
possession of the Marquis of Bute, was the ancient 
inheritance of the family of Hoo, or De Hoo, who 
are said to have been settled there before the Nor- 
man Conquest.
This manor came into the possession 
of Sir Geffery Boleyne who was Lord Mayor of 
London, in the year 1460, by marriage.
His great 
grand-daughter, Anne Boleyne, Queen to King 
Henry VIII.
is thought to have been born here.
Her father sold Luton-Hoo to Richard Farmer, 
whose heir conveyed it to John Brocket, Esq. in 
1575.
In 1601, it was purchased by Robert Napier, 
Esq. and passed, with the manor of Luton, to its 
present possessor.
The mansion is situated about two miles east from 
the town of Luton, upon the eminence at the edge 
of the Bedfordshire downs, surrounded by a well- 
* Thomas Pomfret, the father of the poet, was first curate, 
and then vicar of Luton.
John Pomfret was born in the year 
1668.
His father taught him the first rudiments of learning?
after which he sent him to the University of Cambridge, where 
he finished his studies.
He entered minutely into the respective 
branches of polite literature, and imbibed the sentiments of the 
finest Greek and Roman classics, without losing sight of the 
pastoral office, for which he had been designed by his parents.
Having taken his degrees, and entered into holy order?, he was 
presented to the living of Maklen in Es^ex, where he distin- 
guished himself by a conscientious discharge of every duty in- 
cumbent on him as a minister of the Gospel, and as a strenuous 
asserter of civil and religious liberty.
In 1699.
he published 
VOL.
1. — NO.
3. 
wooded park, containing about 1500 acres of land.
The river Lea flows through the park, and supplies 
two pieces of water, one containing fourteen, the 
other fifty acres.
— A great part of the house was 
built by the Napiers ; some parts of it are of a more 
ancient date, but the whole was nearly rebuilt by the 
late Lord Bute, upon a magnificent plan, designed 
by the celebrated Adams.
The east and south wings, 
however, were only completed.
The principal rooms 
are spacious, particularly the library, which is said 
to be inferior only to that of Blenheim.
It is 116 
feet in length, divided into three rooms, containing a 
valuable collection of scarce and curious books.
The house also contains a large collection "f paint- 
ings, chiefly of the Italian and Flemish schools, 
partly collected by the late earl, but the finest have 
been added by his son, the marquis.
Among them 
are several by Raphael, Titian, Rubens, the Caracci, 
Corregio, &c.
Among the portraits are Margaret, 
Queen of Scots, with her second husband, Archibald 
Douglas ; the first Earl of Pembroke ; the Earls of 
Stafford ; General Ireland ; Mr. Pyin ; Mrs. Lane, 
who assisted King Charles II.
on his escape after 
the battle of Worcester ; Lord Chancellor Jefferies ; 
Ben Johnson ; Dr. Samuel Johnson, Dr. Armstrong, 
and the late Earl of Bute, by Sir Joshua Rey- 
nolds.
An extremely fine Gothic wainscot, highly enrich- 
ed with carving, intermingled with Latin sentences 
of scripture, in ancient characters, is preserved in 
the chapel.
It is said to have been originally exe- 
cuted for Sir Thomas Pole, at Tillcnhanger, in 15 18, 
and removed to Luton, in perfect preservation, by 
Sir Robert Napier.
The grounds have been considerably improved by 
art.
The river Lea meanders through the park, in 
a highly picturesque manner, and forms in its pro- 
gress the lakes, or pieces of water, already mention- 
ed.
The largest contains several small islands and 
plantations, presenting a most agreeable prospect.
From a path leading through a beautiful valley, is a 
pleasing view of a plain Tuscan pillar ; on the pedes- 
tal of which is the following inscription : 
" In Memory of 
Mr. Francis Napier." 
The pillar is surmounted with a beautiful urn.
— 
The prospect from this spot is particularly fine.
The portico of a stately mansion in brick, begun 
to 
the first edition of his Poems; and in 1703 lie was presented to 
a considerable living in Bedfordshire, and came up to London 
for induction from Bishop Compton ; but that prelate having 
taken some offence at four lines in one of his poems, called 
" The Choice," Mr. Pomfret was detained so long in town, 
that lie was seized with the small- pox, of which he died, in the 
thirty-sixth year of his age.
The lines which gave olience to 
the bishop were the tollowing : 
" And, as I near approach'd the verge of life,.
Some kind relation (for I'd have no wife) 
Should take upon him all my worldly care, 
While I did for a belter state prepare." 
It 
34 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
to be erected by Lord Wenlock in the reign of Ed- 
ward IV.
still remains complete in the wood at Luton 
Hoo.
Marston-Morte\ne.J — The parish of Marston- 
Morteyne, containing the hamlets of Nether-Shelton 
and Wroxill, is situated in the hundred of Redborne 
Stoke, four miles north-west from Ampthill.
It for- 
merly was a market-town, and had a fair at Lady- 
day.
Tne respective manors of Marston-Morteyne, 
Nether-Shelton, and Wroxill, are now the property 
of Earl Spencer, John Foster, and Mr. James Bay- 
ly.
The church is a handsome Gothic building, and 
contains several monuments of the Snagg family.
In the chancel there is an altar tomb, with the 
effigies on a brass plate of Thomas Reynes, Esq.
Lord of the Manor, who died in 1451, and his wife 
Alice.
Maiden -Bower.] — Maiden-Bower, distant a mile 
and a half from Dunstaple, is a circular earth-work, 
about two thousand five hundred feet in circumfer- 
ence.
It is only half a mile from the Watling- 
Street, at the e(\g;e of a low range of the Chiltern 
Hills, and consists of a single vallum and ditch, 
thrown upon a level plain.
To the south and east it 
has no ditch ; to the south and west only a very 
small one ; to the north-west a descent to the mea- 
dows.
The banks are from eight to fourteen feet 
high, and contain about nine acres of level ploughed 
land, producing good wheat.
By some of our anti- 
quaries, this is supposed to have been a British for- 
tification ; but Dr. Salmon imagines it to have been 
inclosed by the Saxons, as a place for female exer- 
cises ; and that it was surrounded by a vallum to 
keep the crowd at a proper distance.
Arbury 
Banks, near Ashwell in Hertfordshire, is said by 
Dr. Stukeley to be a work of a similar kind to this 
of Maiden-Bower.
After mentioning two other 
works of the same nature, one on Wilbury Hill near 
Ickleford, the other between Chipping Norton and 
Stow-in-the-Wold, and a long barrow, called the 
Mill Bank near Dunstaple, he adds, " A high pro- 
minence of the Chiltern Hills, overlooks all, called 
the Five Knolls, from that number of barrows, or 
Celtic tumuli, which are round, pretty large, ditched 
about, upon the very apex of the hill.
Close by 
is a round cavity, as often observed in Wiltshire." 
This is called Pascomb Pit, and is a great hollow in 
the downs ; where, according to tradition, a church 
was intended to be erected, but that the materials, 
as fast as they were brought together, were invisibly 
removed.
Market Street]-— The small town of Margate, 
or Market Street is situated in the parishes of Cad- 
dington* and Studham, about four miles from Dun- 
staple, on the road to London.
It is generally 
It had been insinuated to the bishop, that Mr. Pomfrel's in- 
timation in the above lines, was that he preferred a mistress to 
a wife, but the writer was at that time actually married to a wo- 
man whom he loved with the utmost tenderness.
The bishop 
was at last convinced that he had been imposed upon ; but not 
till it was too late for poor Pomfret, who had fallen a victim to 
considered as being in Bedfordshire, but in reality 
belongs in part only to that county, the remainder 
being claimed by the adjoining shire of Hertford.
These two counties here intersect each other in a 
very remarkable manner ; the boundaries being so 
irregular, that the three hamlets which compose the 
town of Margate, appear to be seated near the ex- 
treme point of a neck of land branching out from 
that portion of the county of Bedford, which is cross- 
ed by the Ikeneld Street.
This town consists of one principal street, about 
three quarters of a mile in length.
In a wood, near Market- Street, on the Hertford- 
shire side of the parish of Caddington, i3 Market 
Cell, the site of a nunnery of the Benedictine order, 
founded by Geoflry, abbot of St. Albans, about the 
year 1145, and dedicated to the Holy Trinity.
It 
was erected on some lands, which were given by the 
dean and chapter of St. Paul's, London.
In Dug- 
dale's Monasticon is the following story, relative to 
its foundation : — 
" When Geoffry was abbot of St. Albans one Ro- 
ger, a monk of that place, led a most holy hermitical 
life, near the village called Markyate, in the way to 
Dunstaple.
The latter four years of his life, he had 
in a room separated from his own, the virgin Chris- 
tina, whom he instructed in such a manner, that 
she became famous for miracles, which moved the 
said abbot to build there a residence for her and 
other nuns that resorted to her ; and the said 
building happening to be burnt, he again rebuilt the 
same." 
According to Dugdale, the revenues of this house, 
on its suppression, amounted to 114/.
16s.
Id. per 
annum.
— Humphrey, a natural son of Lord Ber- 
ners, bestowed much cost and art in building a house 
on this site, but did not live to finish it.
In the se- 
cond year of Edward VI.
the site was granted to 
George Ferrers, whose descendant Sir John Ferrers, 
died seised of it in 1640.
It is at present the pro- 
perty of Joseph Howell, Esq.
Maulden.] — Maulden is a small village, in the 
hundred of Redbornstoke, and deanery of Flitt, about 
two miles east of of Ampthill.
The manor, now the 
property of the Duke of Bedford, whose grandfather 
purchased it of the Earl of Aylesbury, in the year 
1738, formerly belonged to the priory of Elstow.
— 
The church contains some memorials of the ancient 
family of Faldo, who were settled here before the 
reign of Edward III.
Adjoining the church is an 
octagonal mausoleum, erected in the year 1656, by 
Thomas, Earl of Elgin, to the memory of Diana, his 
second wife, daughter of Lord Burleigh, and relio 
of John, Earl of Oxford- This tomb, of white mar- 
ble, is placed in the centre; on it is a sarcophagus, 
the ravages of an epidemical distemper.
The sexual designa- 
tion, in the third line, it might have been thought would have 
prevented the suspicion of a mistress.
* The parish of Caddington is in the hundred of Munshead, 
and deanery of Dunstaple.
The church, with about a fifth 
part of the parish, is hi Bedfordshire, and the remainder in 
Herts.
from 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
35 
from which rises the figure of the Countess in her 
shroud.
The common people call it the lady in the 
punch-bowl.
The mausoleum is surrounded by 
niches, intended for tbe statue of her husband, who 
died in the year 1653.
On the floor is a bust of 
his grandson, Edward Bruce, Esq. eldest son of 
Robert, Lord Bruce.
Beneath the mausoleum is a 
Columbarian, the burial-place of the Earl of Ayles- 
bury's family.
Melchborn.] — This village is situated in the hun- 
dred of Stodden and deanery of Eaton, near the bor- 
ders of Northamptonshire, about 12 miles north from 
Bedford.
It had formerly a market on Friday, and 
a fair upon the feast of St. Mary Magdalen, which 
were granted to the knights hospitallers in the year 
1264.
— Leland, who was a native of Melchborn, 
speaks of the preceptory here as "a right fair 
place, of square stones standing much upon pillered 
vaulters oi stone, with goodly gardens, orchards, and 
ponds, and a parke thereby." According to him 
the preceptory was an ancient structure ; but he says 
that the hall was built by Sir William Weston, the 
last prior of the knights hospitallers.
Upon the 
Dissolution, the preceptory was valued at 241/.
9s.
10{r/.
per annum.
In 1558, it was granted by 
Queen Elizabeth to the first Earl of Bedford.
The present mansion-house, the front of which 
has been modernized, appears to have been erected 
during the reign of King James or Charles I.
It 
has been for many years the seat of the noble family 
of St. John, and since they left Bletsoe, their chief 
residence.
The gardens have been greatly improv- 
ed by the present Lord St. John, who has erected 
several hot-houses and conservatories for the culture 
of exotics.
Melchborn church, which was modernized and 
fitted up by the grandfather of the present Mr.
Whitbread, contains several ancient monuments.
Among others a brass plate in memory of Robert 
Pavely, Esq. who died in 1377.
Lord St. John pre- 
sented an organ to the parish for the church in 1800, 
and is at the expence of maintaining an organist.
Meppershall.] — Meppershall lies in the hundred 
of Clifton, four miles east by north from Silsoe.
The parsonage-house stands in the counties of 
Bedford and Hertford.
Alluding to this circum- 
stance, a beam in the dining parlour of the old par- 
sonage-house, which has lately been removed, bore 
the following inscription : — 
" If you wish to go to Hertfordshire 
Hitch a little nearer the fire." 
At an early period, the manor of Meppershall be- 
longed to a family of that name, who held it by the 
service of attending the king in his wars with a 
horse of no fixed price, a coat of mail, a sword, a 
lance, an iron head-piece, and a little knife.
The 
manor now belongs to the daughter of the late Tho- 
mas Pointer, Esq. The manor of Polehanger in 
this parish, formerly belonged to Chicksaod priory, 
is now the property of Sir George Osborn, Bart, and 
Lady Lucus possesses the estate called Woodhall 
Grange, which formerly belonged to the monastery 
of Worders.
Milbrook.] — At the little village of Milbrook, 
situated in the hundred of Redbornstoke, about a 
mile from Ampthill, formerly was a cell of Benedic- 
tine monks, belonging to the abbey of St. Albtms.
It was removed to Modry in Hertfordshire, about 
the year 1119.
The manor, now the property of 
the town, is leased with the Earl of Upper Os- 
sory.
Milbrook church, situated upon a hill which over- 
hangs the village, commands a fine prospect over 
the vale of Bedford.
In the church windows are the 
arms of Lord Fanhope, a former Lord of the Manor, 
with the garter.
Milton-Ernest.] — This is a small village, about 
five miles from Bedford, in the hundred of Stodden, 
and deanery of Clapham.
The church contains se- 
veral monuments in memory of the families of Tur- 
ner and Rott, formerly Lords of the Manor.
In the 
year 1695, Sir Edmund Turner founded an alms- 
house here for six poor persons.
He endowed it 
with lands in Milton, Clapham, and Oakley, which 
now let for 34/.
a year.
Northill ] — Northill is a village in the hundred 
of Wixamtree, about eight miles east from Bedford.
It was anciently called North-Yevet.
There are 
several manors in this parish.
Those of Thorncote, 
Hatch, Brookend, and Budna, which formerly be- 
longed to the Broomsalls, are now the property of 
Godfrey Thornton, Esq. of Mogger-Hanger.
Up- 
per and Lower Cadicot, and Ickwell have been for 
upwards of a century in the family of John Hervey, 
Esq. the present proprietor, who has a seat in the 
parish called Ickwell-Bury, who also possesses the 
manors of Hortshall and Blundells.
Mr. Fyshe 
Palmer has a seat there.
Northill church, a large and handsome Gothic 
structure, was made collegiate in the reign of Hen- 
ry IV.
and endowed for the support of a warden or 
master, and a discretionary number of fellows, chap- 
lains or ministers, who were to pray for the souls of 
Sir John Trayley, Knight, and Reginald his son.
The lands belonging to this college, at the time of 
the Dissolution, were valued at 61/.
5s.
5d.
— In the 
chancel are several monuments of the family of the 
Herveysof Ickwell-Bury ; and the following epitaph 
upon Capel Berrow, a theological writer of some 
note, who was curate of this parish forty years : — 
" Quicquid ftiit mortale Rev. Capel Berrow, A.
M. 
lion.
Gul. Comitis Cowper a Sacris, sub hoc nia- 
more conditur ; immortale vero ut pium est credere, 
caelum conS':endit bcaloruin ordinibus ascribendum.
Quippe si quern Virtus Egregia, singularis humanita- 
tis, cuf usque minimis fervidus ac frequens merito 
commendant, hunc integerima plane vita, facile inge- 
nium ac liberate ut animus uni sceleri insensus, laudi- 
bus abunde cumularunt.
Hujus paroch.
40ciicilur 
annos pastor niiro quodam impetu verborum et de- 
lectu munus divinum illustravit; et quid verum atque 
decens 
36 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
decens non dixisse solum visus est orator sed inspi- 
rantem sui cordis tabulam etiam et transcripisse.
Pa- 
tri quidem optime promerito, 5 Cal. Nov.
1751, vita 
defuncto, Ml Anno 70.
hoc pietatU et affectus monu- 
mentum filii higentes posueie*." 
The east window of the chancel is fitted up with 
stained glass, the workmanship of the celehrated J.
Oliver.
It is over the communion table, under a 
pointed arch, with ornaments at the top, in stone- 
work, disposed in three compartments.
The centre 
contains the royal arms ; the right hand division, 
the arms of the Grocer's Company, and of the mas- 
ter and second warden ; and, the compartment on 
the left the arms of Margaret, Lady Slayney, and of 
the third and fourth wardens, with the name of the 
artist at the bottom.
Beneath the motto in the 
centre is, A.
D. 1664.
16 Caroli II.
and an inscrip- 
tion purporting that the window was glazed and the 
chancel ceiled and beautified by the Company of 
Grocers, who purchased the impropriation, and set- 
tled it for the sole benefit of the church, according 
to the trust and appointment of Lady Slayney.
The 
eolours are still perfect, aiuhthe whole in good pre- 
servation.
That agreeable writer, Mr. ArthurYoung, in his Six 
Weeks' Tour, notices the windows of the rectory on 
account of their being adorned with two small pieces 
of painted glass by Oliver, each containing a fly, so 
exquisitely executed " as to exceed the power of 
imagination to conceive." One is a common house- 
fly, painted in the centre of the dial, in common 
green glass ; the other a larger fly, with two cherries 
before it, in the middle of another dial on the same 
kind of glass.
The wings are painted on one side, 
and the body and legs on the other, which causes a 
pleasing deception.
Upon the dials are the mottos, 
" Dura spectus fugio," and " Sic transit gloria 
mundi." 
Oakley.] — This is a small village, four miles 
north-west of Bedford, where the Duke of Bedford 
has a villa, at which he resided before he succeeded 
to the title.
Oakley church, which is an ancient Gothic struc- 
ture, contains an altar tomb, upon which is the effi- 
gies of one of the family of Reynes, in robes, with 
his arms and two other coats, under an ogie arch in 
the south wall.
Odell.] — Odell, anciently called Wahul, or Wod- 
hull, lies upon the banks of the Ouse, in tine hundred 
of Withey, about ten miles north-west of Bedford.
It was formerly a market town ; and an annual fair 
- * The subjoined translation of this epitaph may, perhaps, be 
acceptable : — 
Whatever was mortal of the Rev. Capel Berrow, 
A.M. Chaplain to the most Hon. Earl Cow per, is 
concealed under this marble ; hut it is believed, that 
the pious immortal part hasasqended to join the orders 
of the blessed.
His character was justly exalted, from 
his extraordinary virtue, singular humanity, and fer- 
vent and frequent worship of God, and his evidently 
most unspotted life, gentle and liberal disposition, and 
a mind destitute of every vicious disposition held him 
is still holden here, on the Thursday and Friday in 
Whitsun-week.
Odell church is a handsome Gothic building, con- 
taining several monuments to the memory of the 
family of Alston.
The chauntry roll of Bedfordshire, 
mentions that there was before the Reformation, an 
endowment for the maintenance of a lamp in this 
church, and for a drinking-, or church ale.
At the time of the Norman Survey, this village 
was the seat of the barony belonging to Walter Flan- 
drensis, whose descendants were called De Wahul.
The manor is now the property of Thomas Alston, 
Esq. who has a seat in the parish.
Odell castle is described by Leland, who visited 
this county in the reign of Henry VIII.
as "strange 
ruins belonging to the Lord Bray." It stands on an 
eminence, which commands a beautiful view of the 
river Ouse, and the surrounding country.
Very lit- 
tle remains of the old building ; the present house is 
chiefly modern.
The south front was added by 
Lady Wolstenholme, relict of Sir Rowland Alston, 
who died in the year 1698.
Pavenham.] — The parish of Pavenham, or Po- 
vingham, in the hundred of Willey, about six miles 
north-west of Bedford, contains nothing very re- 
markable ; excepting Stafford bridge, with a cause- 
way of 36 arches, which is passable for carriages, 
but has no fence.
Pertenhall.] — Pertenhall is in the hundred of 
Stodden, about three miles from Kimbolton, on the 
borders of Huntingdonshire.
The manors of Per- 
tenhall-Howe, and Conington's-fee belonged to 
William Paget, Esq. Another manor in Perten- 
hall is the property of John Sirmay, Esq.
The advowson of the church, and an estate still 
called Knights Templars, on which is the site of a 
moated mansion, formerly belonged to the Knights 
Templars.
In the church is the monument of a cru- 
sader, with his effigy in stone.
Potton.] — Potton is a market-town, in the hun- 
dred of Biggleswade, from which it is distant about 
three miles and a half north-east by north.
The 
market is on Saturday.
It has four annual fairs : 
on the third Tuesday in January, Old Style ; on the 
last Tuesday in April ; on the first Tuesday in 
July ; and on the Tuesday before the 29th of October.
The manor of Potton is now the property of 
Mr. Whitbread, whose grandfather purchased it in 
1795.
In the year 1783, a great part of the town was de- 
stroyed by fire.
About fifty dwelling-houses were 
up to universal admiration.
He was pastor of this 
parish about 40 years.
As an orator, he displayed his 
divine gift in a singular manner, with a wonderful 
force and choice of words, and appeared to have >;r > 
ken not only that which was true and seemly, but also 
to have transcribed it upon the d< vout table; of his 
heart.
A a tribute due to the best of Fathers, who 
departed this life, Oct. 28, 1751, in the 70th year of 
his age, his weeping sons have erected this monument 
of piety and affection.
. 
consumed, 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
37 
Consumed, besides out-houses, &c.
and the loss was 
estimated at upwards of 25,000/.
A subscription 
was made for the poorest of the sufferers to the 
amount of more than 6,000/.
; and tents were erected 
for the inhabitants in the fields, till better residences 
could be got ready for their reception.
Puddington.] — This parish is situated on the 
borders of Northamptonshire, in the hundred of Wil- 
ley, 13 miles north-west of Bedford.
The manor of Puddington, or Podington, anciently 
belonged to Reginald Damartiu, Earl of Boloigne, 
from whose heirs it was taken by King Henry III.
in 1227 ; and granted to Isolda de Dover, till the 
king should think fit to restore it.
The manor now 
belongs to Richard Orlebar, Esq. proprietor of 
Hin wick-house, which has been already mentioned.
The Church contains several monuments of the 
families of Payne, Child, and Orlebar.
Radwell.] — This is a hamlet in the parish of 
Felmersham, six miles north-east from Bedford.
The manor-house is a very ancient building.
In the 
window of an old hall are the arms of the Rad wells, 
the former lords of the manor.
At this place there is a bridge over the Ouse.
Ridgemont.] — Ridgemont, anciently Rougemont, 
or the Red Hill, so denominated' from its situation 
and the colour of its soil, is situated in the hundred 
of Redbornstoke, about two milos and a half north- 
east of Woburn.
There are three manors in this 
parish, the principal of which anciently belonged to 
the abbpt and convent of Woburn, and is now the 
property of the Duke of Bedford.
On the manor of 
Sugenhoe cum Ridgemont, there used to be a castle, 
which existed as late as the year 1276, and was at 
that time the seat of the Wayhulls, who then pos- 
sessed the manor.
Formerly, also, there was a 
church at Sugenhoe, but it has been demolished.
Brogborough Park in this parish, now belongs to 
the Right Hon. Lady Frances RadclifF, relict of the 
late John RadclifF, Esq. The mansion-house has 
been long neglected.
Bickering Park is in the pos- 
session of Define RadclifF, Esq.
Rokesac] — Rokesac, or Roxox, is a hamlet in 
the parish of Flittwick, about three miles south from 
Ampthill.
Formerly there was a small monastery 
here, which appears to have been a cell to Dunsta- 
ple priory.
About the year 1170, the chapel of St.
Nicholas de Rokesac was founded by Philip de Lan- 
nerville, aad dedicated to Robert de Chesney, bishop 
of Lincoln,— William, Earl of Albemarle, and Hawin 
bis wife, granted the site of Rokesac to the canons 
of Dunstapleand the canons of Rokesac.
There are 
at present no remains of the conventual buildings.
The site is moated.
Sandy.] — .Sandy is a village in the hundred of 
Biggleswade, about nine miles east of Bedford.
It 
derives its name from the nature of its soil; It is a 
place of great antiquity, being one of the two cities 
which were described by Ptolemy, as situated in the 
country of Cattieuchlani.
Verulum, now St. Albans, 
was the other.
It was also a Roman station, the 
VOL.
1. — no.
3. 
Salinie of Ravennas, as is sufficiently proved by the 
great number of coins and other antiquities found in 
its vicinity.
Mr. Aubrey mentions glass urns, and 
one of red earth, like coral, with an inscription, which 
were found here ; and also some coins found in 
Chesterfield, a piece of ground adjoining the village, 
now occupied by gardeners.
In 1729 Mr. Degge 
shewed the Antiquarian Society, a Roman coin, of 
eight ounces, and a British gold coin, with the word 
Tascia, which were found here.
In 1728, Mr.
Bromsall shewed the same society a brass female 
head, about three inches high, which he supposed, 
though perhaps erroneously, to be that of Boadicea.
In the piece of ground called Chesterfield ahove 
mentioned, a cinerary urn was dug up, containing 
bones and ashes, with several articles of a lady's 
toilet ; particularly a hair-pin, of the kind called 
hasta recurva ; and a curious mirror, or speculum, 
about two inches square, seemingly composed of a 
mixture of copper, silver, and iron.
On a spot called Galley Hill, a short distance from 
Sandy, is a Roman encampment, overlooking the 
Roman station in Chesterfield.
It is of an irregular 
form, surrounded by a rampart aud ditch, inclosing 
an area of about thirty acres.
The north and east 
make two sides of a square ; the west projects to- 
wards the river Ivel, which passes the village ; aud 
in the middle is a tumulus, such as is seen in many 
camps, probably for the Praetorium.
At some dis- 
tance across the valley is Cscsar's Camp.
A great 
part of the ground at Galley Hill, has been broken, 
and lies in holes and hillocks, which some suppose 
to be the remains of the foundations of a city ; but 
it is more probable that they were occasioned by 
digging for stone to make the road from the ford of 
the Ivel to Bedford.
Girtford, a considerable hamlet and manor in this 
parish, in the possession of Francis Pym, Esq. has 
a bridge over the Ivel.
The Hassels is the seat of 
Mr. Pym.
Beeston, another hamlet in this parish, 
lies on the opposite side of this parish in the hundred 
of Wixamtree.
The manor of Beeston is the pro- 
perty of Godfrey Thornton, Esq.
The manor of Sandy has been for nearly a century 
and a half in the possession of the Monoux family.
It is now the seat of Sir Philip Monoux, Bart, in 
whose grounds is an extensive rabbit-warren, the 
produce of which is reckoned the most delicate in the 
kingdom.
In Sandy church are several monuments of the 
Kingsleys and Pyms.
Sharnbrook.] — Sharnbrook is situated in the hun- 
dred ofWithey, about nine miles north-west of Bed- 
ford.
Colesworth-House, in this parish, the seat of 
William Lee Antonie, Esq. is one of the most ele- 
gant mansions in the county.
It was chiefly built 
for John Antonie, Esq. chief clerk of the King's 
Bench ; and the wings were added by Mr. Lee, the 
father of the present possessor.
The principal manor of Sharnbrook, belonged to 
the Botelers for several generations.
It was pur- 
K chased 
38 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
chased of Sir Philip Boteler, Bart, by Admiral Sa- 
muel Cornish, who was created a baronet in 1765, 
and it remains in the possession of his descendants.
Sharnbrook church is a handsome Gothic building, 
with a spire, and contains several memorials of the 
families of Boteler and Antonie.
Shefford.] — This place, which was formerly a 
market-town, is situated between two brooks, which 
unite their streams not far from the town, and soon 
afterwards fall into the Ive!.
It is about two miles 
from Bedford, on the road to London.
Shefford is a chapelry in the parish of Campton, 
in the hundred of Clifton.
The chapel is a small 
mean building scarcely worthy of notice.
Shefford is a post-town, and has four annual fairs ; 
on the 23d of January ; on Easter Monday ; on the 
10th of May ; and on the 10th of October.
Sharpenhoe.] — This is a hamlet in the parish of 
Stretley, in which the family of Wingate had a seat 
for several generations ; Edmund Windgate, the 
arithmetician, is said to have been born here.
— There 
is a charity-school at Sharpenhoe, which was found- 
ed by Richard Norton, in the year 1686, and endow- 
ed with a rent charge of 10/.
per annum.
Shittlington.] — Shittlington, anciently Seth- 
lingdone, is situated in the hundred of Clifton, about 
four miles from Shefford.
The manor which was in 
the Napier family as early as the year 1651, is now 
the property of Joseph Musgrove, Esq.
Shittlington church is a large and handsome Go- 
thic structure.
The tower fell down in 1701, but 
was rebuilt in 1750, through the exertions of Mr.
George Story, then curate, by brief subscription and 
a parish rate.
There are several monuments in this 
church of the Longueville and Briscoe families ; and 
the tomb and effigies, on a brass plate, of Matthew 
de Asschton, rector of Shittlington and canon of Lin- 
coln, who died in 1400.
Souldrop.] — This village, situated about eleven 
* According to family tradition, the Whitbread family is of 
great antiquity in this county ; but the name does not occur in 
the list of gentry of the reign of Henry VI.
nor is there any 
pedigree of the family in the Herald's visitations.
It is certain, 
however, that Ion House, in Gravenhurst, was sold by William 
Whitbread, Gent, in 1639, as appears by the title deeds of the 
present possessor.
Samuel Whitbread, E<q.
grandfather of the present Mr.
Whitbread, was an extraordinary man.
He was at once the archi- 
tect of his own fortune, and the founder of a very opulent and 
distinguished family.
After receiving a plain provincial educa- 
tion, at Cardington, in the neighbourhood where he was born, 
he was articled as an apprentice to a brewer.
Dy dint of industry, 
and by some property which he came into possession of at the 
death of his father, he was enabled, in due time, to set up for 
himself.
He fixed upon Chiswell Street, London, where he 
erected a brewery, which, at that time, was far superior to any 
other establishment of (tie kind in this country ; and, even now, 
it is not surpassed by them which have adopted the latest im- 
provements.
Mr. Whitbread was extremely successful, and his 
general benevolence kept pace with the immense accumulation 
of his wealth.
His benefactions to the town of Bedford, will 
long cause his name to be revered.
Nor were hi» charity and 
benevolence confined to the inhabitants of his native county.
miles from Bedford, is in the hundred of Withey.
The manor belongs in part to Admiral Cornish, and.
in part to the Duke of Bedford.
The church is a 
modern edifice, having been lately rebuilt, except the 
spire, which being situated on high ground, is seen 
at a considerable distance.
Southill.] — This town, anciently denominated 
South Yevill, is situated in the hundred of Wixam- 
tree, about nine miles from Bedford, and two miles 
north of Shefford.
A manor, called Gatelines -Bury, 
in this parish, belonging to the monks of Worden Ab- 
bey, in the year 1369.
The chief manor is now the 
property of Lord Ongley, who also possesses the 
manor of Stamford, of Stamfordbury.
The estate of Southill, now in the possession of 
Mr. Whitbread, was formerly the property of the 
Torrington family.* It was first purchased by Sir 
George Byng, a celebrated naval officer, in the reigns 
of Queen Anne and George the First, who settled in 
this parish.
He was created a peer in 1721, by the 
title of Baron Byng of Southill, and Viscount Tor- 
rington : he died in 1733, and lies buried in the 
parish church.
His unfortunate son, Admiral John 
Byng, who fell a sacrifice to the violence of party, 
was a native of this place, and is also interred in the 
parish church.
The following inscription to his me- 
mory is in the family columbarium : 
" To the perpetual disgrace of 
Public Justice; 
The Honourable John Byng, 
Vice-Admiral of the Blue, fell a martyr t» 
Political Persecution, 
On March 14, in the year 1757, 
When Bravery and Loyalty 
Were insufficient securities 
For the life and honour 
Of a naval officer." 
Southill was purchased of Lord Torrington by Mr, 
Whitbread, in 1795 ; and it has been since so con- 
His first wife died in consequence of a cancer.
From witnessing 
the excruciating torture which this complaint produced, his 
humanity compelled him, for many years, to send anonymous- 
ly, an annual sum to one of the public institutions, (we believe 
the Middlesex Hospital,) for the special assistance of those who 
were similarly aflhcied.
On the promulgation of his will, the 
secret benefactor was discovered, by a bequest in perpetuity for 
the same generous purpose.
The son of this truly philanthropic gentleman, the late Samuel 
Whitbread, Esq. was one of the members of parliament for 
the County of Bedford, an honour which his father had before 
enjoyed.
As a political character, he was well known; and, 
amongst the adherents to the late Mr. Fox's principles, his 
talents, and general conduct, were highly respected.
After 
liis return from his travels, he entered into a matrimonial con- 
nection with the sister of his school-fellow, the Hon. Charles 
Grey, afterwards Viscount Howick, and since, by the decease 
of his father, Earl Grey.
Treading in the footsteps of hi* 
worthy father, Mr. Whitbread was greatly distinguished by his 
public spirit, and general rectitude of conduct, lie wasa most 
strenuous defender of the Princess of Wales, in conjunction 
with Mr. Percival.
After his death, occasioned by his own 
hand in a fit of delirium, he was succeeded in his estate and the 
brewery by his son, Samuel Whitbread, Esq.
. 
siderably 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
89 
siderably improved, that it now ranks amongst the 
first seats in the county.
The house was built about 
1795, after a design by Holland.
Steventon.] — Steventon, or Stevington, is situ- 
ated in the hundred of Witly, five miles and a half 
north-west by west from Bedford.
The manor of 
Steventon is the property of Thomas Alston, Esq.
In the centre of the village, there is an ancient cross, 
consisting of a tall shaft, with a capital, placed on 
tn ascent of several steps.
Some time before the 
Revolution, seven acres of land were given to the 
church of Steventon, for a drinking, or church ale.
A castle was built here by Baldwin Wake, in the 
year 1281.
It was subsequently the residence of 
several noble families, but its remains have been 
long since removed.
Stratton.] — Stratton is a parish in the hamlet of 
Biggleswade.
The manor of Stratton is the pro- 
perty of Charles Barnet, Esq. who has a seat here.
In the month of June 1770, as a ploughman was 
ridging the land pretty deep, near the site of the old 
manor-house, he struck against the upper part of a 
yellow earthen pot, containing three hunched gold 
coins of Henry VI.
They were at first sold from 
seventeen shillings to a guinea a piece ; but after- 
wards at a guinea and a half.
They were rather 
larger than a half-crown, and wanted twenty grains, 
or 3s.
and 4d.
of the weight of a guinea.
On the 
front was represented a ship, with the king in ar- 
mour, holding a sword and a shield, on which were 
the arms of France and England quarterly : on the 
side of the ship was a lion passant, between two 
fleurs de lis.
On the reverse was a cross, between 
four lions passant, crowned.
The legend upon the 
reverse was, " Jesus autem transiens per medium 
illoru ibat." 
Sir John Cotton, who died in the year 1752, 
founded a charity-school at Stratton, for the educa- 
tion of twelve poor children, of the parish of Big- 
gleswade ; and having bequeathed the sum of 1800/.
to be laid out in charitable purposes, directed that 
two-ninths of the rents should be appropriated as a 
salary for the master of the school, who is to be de- 
nominated from time to time by the Lord of the Ma- 
nor of Stratton.
Another proportion of one-ninth is 
paid to the vicar of Biggleswade, in pursuance of 
Sir John Cotton's will.
Sundon.] — Sundon, formerly called Soningdon, 
lies in the hundred of Flitt, about five miles north- 
east of Dunstaple.
It was formerly a market-town, 
with a fair by royal grant in the year 1716.
Sutton.] — This village is situated in the hundred 
of Biggleswade, about tnree miles north-east of that 
town, and a mile and a half south of Pottone.
The 
manor, which is now the property of Sir Montague 
Burgoyne, is said to have belonged to the famous 
John of Gaunt ; and a moated site in the park is 
still knowa by .the name of John of Gaunt's castle.
Of the truth of this tradition there is no positive evi- 
dence.
It is added, however, that John of Gaunt 
gave the manor to Sir Roger Burgoyne, by the IoIt 
lowing rhyming grant, said to be preserved in the 
Arches, Doctor's Commons : — 
" I Jolin of Gaunt 
Do give anil graunt 
Unto Roger Burgoyne 
And tlie heirs of his loine, 
Boll) Sutton and Potton, 
Until the world's rotten." 
Bishop Stillingfleet was presented to the rectory 
of Sutton in 1657, by Sir Roger Burgoyne, the se- 
cond baronet ; and there he wrote his " Origines 
Sacrae ; or a rational Account of the Grounds and 
Necessity of Revealed Religion," one of the best 
defences of revelation ever published.
He resigned 
the living in 1665.
Some handsome monuments of the Burgoyne fa- 
mily adorn the church of this parish.
Tebworth.] — At this place, a considerable ham- 
let in Chalgrove parish, was anciently a chapel, of 
which there are now no remains, endowed with 36 
acres of land.
Tempsford.] — Tempsford is situated in the hun- 
dred of Biggleswade, near the confluence of the 
Ouse, and the Ivel.
It is a very ancient place, men- 
tioned by our oldest historians as a Danish town, 
which was taken by King Edward in the year 921.
In 1000, being in their possession, it was burnt by 
the Danish army.
In the church are memorials of the families of 
Chetwode and Payne.
Thurley.] — In the parish of Thurley, or Thur- 
leigh, situated in the hundred of Willey, about eight 
miles north of Bedford, are the remains of an an- 
cient mansion, now a farm -house, called Blackburn 
Hall, alias Blackbull Hall, within a moated site.
It 
is at present the property of the Rev. Hugh Wade 
Grey.
Near the church is a circular mount, with 
an entrenchment, called Bury Hill, which was most 
probably the site of an ancient mansion, belonging 
to the Lords of the Manor of Thurleigh.
Tils worth.] — Tilsworth lies about three miles 
north-west from Dunstaple, in the hundred of Mans- 
head.
In the church are monuments of Sir Henry 
Chester, K.
B. who died in 1666, and some of the 
Fowler family, who, in the 16th century possessed 
the manor, and resided in the parish.
There is also 
an altar-tomb, with the effigy of an ecclesiastic, 
under a Gothic arch, and a slab with an ancient 
French inscription, in memory of Adara.de Tulles- 
worth.
Toddington.] — Toddiiigtoii is situated in tlie 
hundred of Manshead, about five miles north of 
Dunstaple.
It was formerly a considerable market- 
town ; but, tiie market having been discontinued, 
the market-house was pulled down in the year 1799, 
and the materials was sold.
It still has five annu; 1; 
fairs: on the 25th of April, on the first Monday in 
June, on the 4th of September, on the 2d ol Novem- 
ber, and on the 16th of December.
Toddington manor was given by William the 
Conqueror to Ernull'us de Ilesdiiij ancestor of the 
Earjs 
40 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
Earls of Perclie.
In the early part of the reign of 
Henry III.
it was held by Paulinus Peyvre, steward 
of the household to the king.
He was a man of low 
origin, and when he first arrived at court was not 
possessed of two carucates of land, but by means, 
lawful and unlawful, according to Matthew Paris, 
he acquired so much wealth that he soon became 
possessed of more than 500 carucates.
He built a 
most magnificent house at Toddington, with a cha- 
pel, chambers, and other buildings, covered with 
lead, to the great admiration of the beholders.
His 
workmen were paid 100s.
and more than six marks 
a week for their wages.
The site of this noble man- 
sion is not at present to be discovered.
It is possi- 
ble, that it may have been on a mount called Canger 
Hill, near the church ; a place which appears to 
have been the keep of a castellated mansion, there 
being some considerable earthworks near it.
Sir 
Paulinus Peyvre died in 1251.
The manor of Toddington afterwards passed, by 
marriage, into the possession of Sir Thomas Cheney, 
K.G.
; whose son, Henry, was knighted by Queen 
Elizabeth, in the year 1563, when she was on a visit 
to him at Toddington.
In 1572, Sir Henry was 
created Lord Cheney, of Toddington.
His lordship 
erected a noble mansion, about half a mHe from the 
church, of which the kitchen now only remains.
That 
.apartment is remarkably spacious ; it has two fire 
places, each twelve feet in width.
It appears by an 
ancient plan of the house, that it occupied four sides 
of a quadrangle, at each corner of which was a tur- 
ret; the north and south fronts were 210 feet in 
length ; the chapel was 30 feet by 24, the tennis- 
court 65 feet in length, and a marble gallery 58.
Lord Cheney died without issue in the year 1587, 
and his estates devolved to his wife, the daughter of 
Lord Wentworth.
Henrietta, the grand-d tughter 
of the Karl of Cleveland, who died in 1667, became 
Baroness Wentworth in her own right.
She resided 
at Toddington, with the unfortunate Duke of Mon- 
mouth ; and in the old plan which we have men- 
tioned, two rooms adjoining the manor-house are 
called the Duke of Monmouth's parlour, and my 
Lady's parlour.
The Duke's attachment to Lady 
Wentworth continued till his death : even on the 
scaffold, bespoke in vindication of her honour; al- 
though it was notorious, nor did he deny it to the 
divines who attended him, that they lived together as 
man and wife, alter he had forsaken the duchess.
Lady Wentworth, who died a few months alter the 
duke's execution, is said to have died broken hearted 
in consequence of that event.
Martha, Baroness of Wentworth, who attended at 
the coronation of Queen Anne, married Sir llesiry 
Johnson, a rich shipbuilder, of Poplar ; and Sir 
Henry's daughter, by a former wife, married Tho- 
mas, Earl of Strafford, who thus became possessed 
of the manor of Toddington.
it is now vested in the 
trustees of the late Right Honourable Thomas Co- 
noliy, son of the Earl of Strafford's daughter, 
Lady Anne.
The manor of Wadloes in this parish, belongs to 
Francis Penystone, Esq.
; and that of Charlton, to 
Mr. Cox, who purchased it of the present Viscount 
Howe.
Toddington church is a handsome Gothic struc- 
ture ; the frieze of which on the outside is decorated 
with various grotesque figures of animals.
In the 
south transept are some ancient monuments of the 
Peyvres.
One of them appears to have been a cru- 
sader.
There are also monuments of Ann, wife of 
Sir Thomas Cheney, K.G. 1561 ; Henry, Lord 
Cheney, 1587 ; and his widow Jane, Lady Cheney, 
1614.
On each of these were the effigy of the de- 
ceased, now much mutilated, and lying on the 
ground, mingled with the broken ornaments of the 
tombs and the dung of birds.
The costly monument of Henrietta, Lady Went- 
worth, who died in 1686, upon which 2000/.
was 
expended ; and another monument, which appears 
to have been equally magnifieent, to the memory of 
Lady Maria Wentworth, who died at the early age 
of 18, in the year 1632, are not in a much better 
state.
On the monument of Lady Maria Wentworth is 
the following epitaph, which, though its mode of ex- 
pression is quaint and extravagant, possesses much 
poetical merit : 
'* Maria Wentworth, illvstris : Thorns Comitis 
Cleveland, Filia Praemortva Prima Aniniam Virgi- 
neam Exhalavit Janver : Anno Dni, 1632.
iEtat.
sua.
18.
" And here the preciovs dvste is layde, 
Whose pevrile tempered clay was made.
So fine, that it the guest betray'd.
Else the sovle grew so fa^t within, 
It broke the outward shell of sinne; 
And so was hatched a cherubinn.
In height it soar'd to God above, 
In depth it did to knowledge move, 
And spread in breadth, in general love.
Before, a piovs dvtye shin'd 
To parents ; cvrtesie, behind ; 
On either side, an eqval mind.
Good to the poore, to kindred deare, 
To servants kintle, to frkndshipp cleare, 
To nothing but herself, severe, 
Soe, thovgh a virgin, yet a bride 
To everie grace, she justified 
A chast poligamie, and dyed," 
A monument to the memory of Giles Bruce, eldest 
son of Sir John Bruce of Winham in Suffolk, who 
died at Toddington in 1595, being on a visit to his 
sister Alice, then attending on the Lady Cheney, is 
in the chancel of the church.
In the year 1443, an hospital was founded at Tod- 
dington, by Sir John Broughton, in honour of St.
John the Baptist, for three poor men and a master, 
or chaplain, who were to pray for the souls of Tho- 
mas Peyvre, and Margaret his wife and their ances- 
tors.
There are no remains of the building ; the 
materials 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
41 
materials having been used in the construction of 
the market-house which was pulled dowu in 1799.
Toternhoe.] — Toternhoe lies in the hundred of 
Manshead, about two miles to the west of Dunsta- 
ple.
The church formerly belonged to Dunstaple 
priory.
William Beckford, Esq. is the present Lord 
of the Manor.
Toternhoe castle, which is situated on the downs 
above the village, consists of a lofty circular mount, 
with a slight vallum round its base, and a larger 
one, of an irregular form, at some distance from it.
On the south-east side is a camp, in the form of a 
parallelogram, about five hundred feet in length, 
and two hundred and fifty in breadth ; three sides 
of which are defended by a vallum and ditch, nearly 
perfect on the south-east side.
The south-west side 
being on the edge of a precipice has no vallum.
It 
is supposed that the first irregular fortress was Bri- 
tish, and that the adjoining works were added by 
the Romans, whose station of Durocobrivae have 
by some been fixed at Dunstaple.
The grouud 
round about the mount has been much broken by 
digging ; and in one place there seems to have 
been a well.
At the bottom of it passes Ikenild 
Street, on the north side of the church coming 
through Stretley.
To the east of Toternhoe castle, at a short dis- 
tance, is a large work for lime and free-stone, which 
rises in large blocks, and becomes very white, but is 
soft.
The workmen descend by winding ways to a 
great depth, and find a bed of clay under both the 
lime and free-stone.
Turvey.] —Turvey is a small village in the hun- 
dred of Willey, about eight miles from Bedford, on 
the borders ot Buckinghamshire.
The manor of Turvey was vested in the Mordaunt 
family, as early as the time of William the Con- 
queror.
In the church are monuments of Sir John 
Mordaunt, and the three first Baron Mordaunts.
Sir John was Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, 
and father of the first Lord Mordaunt.
He died in 
the year 1504, having by his will founded a chantry 
in the parish church, and endowed it for the support 
of two chaplains, to pray for the souls of himself, his 
kindred, and ancestors.
His effigies is represented 
in armour, over which is a robe with a collar S.
S. 
The effigies of his lady is in a robe .and a rich coif.
The monument of the first Lord Mordaunt has the 
effigies of himself and his lady.
He is represented 
in armour, with a robe ; she is in a robe with puck- 
ered sleeves, and has a head-dress, such as was 
worn in the reign of Henry VIII.
Upon the monu- 
ment of Henry, the second Lord Mordaunt, in the 
north chancel, is his effigies in armour, between 
those of his two wives, under an open canopy, sup- 
ported by columns of Doric order.
In the same 
chancel is a plain aitar-tomb, in memory of Lewis 
the third Lord Mordaunt.
John, Lord Mordaunt, was created Earl of Pe- 
terborough in the year 1628.
vol.
i. — mo.
3. 
Turvey Hall, the ancient manor-house, after hav- 
ing been long deserted by its noble owners, and oc- 
cupied as a farm, was sold by the present Earl of 
Peterborough to the late Wiiliam Fuller, Esq. a 
banker in London, and became the property of his 
daughters.
The manor was purchased by Charles 
Higt»ins, Esq. whose nephew, John Higgins, Jun.
Esq. is the present proprietor.
Mr. Higgins's seat is 
called Turvey Abbey.
Over the altar, in Turvey church, is a picture of 
our Saviour and his Disciples, on the road to Em- 
maus, which was given to the parish by the present 
rector.
Warden.] — This village is situated in the hun- 
dred of Wixaratree, about three miles west from 
Biggleswade, and nine south-east from Bedford.
It had formerly a market on Tuesdays, granted in 
the year 1218, with a fair on the feast of St. Peter 
and St. Paul.
In 1307, the market was confirmed, 
with a fair on the feast of St. Leonard ; but they 
have both been discontinued.
The manor, which 
formerly belonged to the abbots of Warden, is now 
the property of Samuel Whitbread, Esq.
Lord Ongley has a seat in this parish.
Warden Abbey .was founded in the year 1135, by 
Walter D'Espic, for a settlement of Cistercian 
monks, from Rievaux, in York.
It was dedicated 
to the Virgin Mary, and was called De Sartis, or 
Assartis, because it was built on the site of a.wood, 
which had been grubbed up and cleared.
In the year 1217, the famous Fulk de Brent treat- 
ed the monks of Warden Abbey with great cruelty, 
on account of a dispute about a wood, and carried 
thirty of them prisoners to his castle at Bedford.
For this offence the haughty baron, who set all civil 
power at defiance, was obliged to submit to the pa- 
ramount authority of the church ; gladly making hts 
peace by suffering manual discipline from the monks 
in the chapter-house at Warden, and at the same 
time confirming them in the possession of the wood 
concerning which the dispute had arisen.
The revenues of Warden Abbey, at the Dissolu- 
tion, were estimated at 389/.
16*.
iS{d.
clear yearly 
value.
The few remains of the conventual buildings 
are of brick, and have not the appearance of great 
antiquity The site of the monastery is now the 
property of Mr. Whitbread.
In 1669 it was the seat 
of Sir Ralph Bovey.
In the window of Warden church, is the figure of 
an abbot of Warden.
In the church is a monument 
in memory of Sir Samuel Ongley, who died in 1726-, 
with his statue, in a Roman dress ; and in the church- 
yard is the mausoleum of the late Lord Ongley, erect- 
ed by his lady.
Wl-stoming.] — Westoning, or Weston Inge, is a 
small village, in the hundred of Manshead, four 
miles smith by west from A upthill, anciently deno- 
minated Weston-Tregon, it acquired the name of 
Weston Inge, by falling into the possession oi Wil- 
liam Inge.
The mauor is now the property of Sir 
l ...
John 
At 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
John Everitt, who purchased it of the Pomfret family 
in the year 1767.
Westoning church was given by Gilbert Clare, 
Earl of Gloucester, to the Knights Templars ; and 
it afterwards belonged to the convent of Elstow.
Westoning was formerly a market-town, with an 
annual fair on St. Thomas the Martyr ; hut the fair 
and market have both been discontinued.
Wilmngton.] — Wellington, a village four miles 
east from Bedford, lies in the hundred of Wixam- 
tree.
Its former state is thus described by Leland : 
— " The village of Willington is commodiously set in 
a fair gravelly ground and fair wood in some places 
about it.
It belonged to the Beauchamps, barons of 
Bedford, and since come by partition, to the Lord 
Mowbray of Axholme.
Mr. Gostwicke being born 
here, bought this manor of the Duke of Norfolk now 
living, and hath made a sumptuous new building, of 
bricke and lyme, d Jundamentis with a conduit of 
water derived in leaden pipes.
Ther was not very 
far from the place wher Mr. Gostwicke hath builded, 
an old raaner place, wher in times past some of the 
Mulbrays lay for a start, now it is clene down, but 
the place is notably seen wher it was." — The manor 
is now the property of the Duke of Bedford.
Willington church is a handsome Gothic structure.
It contains several monuments of the family of Gost- 
wick : the most ancient is a brass plate in memory 
of Robert Gostwick, Esq. who died in 1315.
The 
monument of Sir John Gostwick, master of the horse 
to King Henry VIII.
was put up in 1541, by his son, 
soon after his purchase of the manor.
The arms of 
Sir John's monument has on the chief three horses' 
heads couped, in allusion to his office, differing from 
others of the Gostwick family.
The monument of 
Sir William Gostwick, the first baronet, who died in 
the year 1615, has his effigies in alabaster, in armour.
That of Sir Edward Gostwick, who died in 1632, is 
a mural monument, with the effigies of himself and 
bis lady in kneeling attitudes.
Wimington.] — The village of Wimington is situ- 
ated in the hundred of Willey, on the borders of 
Northamptonshire, about three miles from Higham- 
Ferrers.
The manor, in several ties, is now in the 
possession of General Livesay's representatives.
Wimington church, which was built by John Cur- 
teys, Lord of the Manor, and Mayor of the Staple 
at Calais, who died in 1391, is an elegant Gothic 
structure.
The brasses of the founder and his wife 
Albreda, on a slab of black marble, under Gothic 
canopies, are in fine preservation.
In the chancel, 
are brasses of Sir Thomas Bromflete, cup-bearer to 
King Henry the Fifth, who died in 1430, and his 
wife Margaret.
Woburn ] — Woburn, a chapelry in the hundred 
of Manshead, is distant 14 miles south-west by south 
from Bedford.
It has a market on Friday ; and 
fairs on the 1st of January, 23d of March, 13th of 
July, and 251 h of September.
The petty-sessions 
for the hundred are holden here.
Woburn suffered severely by fire in the year 1595 ; 
and, in 1754, upwards vf a hundred houses again 
fell a prey to the same destroying element.
The 
present town has been built chiefly since the latter 
period.
The streets are neither numerous, nor well 
laid out ; but they are distinguished by names in the 
corners, the same as at London.
The market-house 
was erected by John, fourth Dnke of Bedford.
It 
was finished in February, 1737.
Queen Elizabeth visited Woburn in the year 
1572 ; and, on the 26th of August, 1645, King 
Charles the First halted there on his route from 
Wales to Oxford.
His Majesty slept at the house 
of the Earl of Bedford, who was then in the service 
of the Parliament.
In the year 1145, an abbey of Cistercian monks 
was founded at Woburn, by Hugh de Bolebec.
In 
1234 it was broken up through poverty, and the 
monks were dispersed into different convents till their 
debts were discharged.
By subsequent benefactions, 
however, their revenues were so much improved, 
that, at the Dissolution, in the reign of Henry VIII.
they were estimated at 391/.
18$.
2d.
The last abbot 
was hanged at Woburn for denying the King's 
supremacy.
The site of the abbey was granted in 
the first year of Edward VI.
with many other eccle- 
siastical estates, to John, Lord Russel, afterwards 
Earl of Bedford, a gentleman who was honoured 
with several employments by Henry VIII.
and it 
has ever since been the chief seat of that noble fa- 
mily.
There are no remains of the conventual build- 
ings ; but, in Bray's Tour, we find the following 
curious statement : — " On pulling down part of the 
abbey, in 1744, a corpse was found, with the flesh so 
firm as to bear cutting with a knife, though it must 
have been buried at least 200 years.
Sometime after, 
on pulling down part of one of the walls of the 
abbey church, a stone coffin was found, which con- 
sisted of several loose stones set in the ground, and 
a very large purbeck stone was dug up, Which had 
been ornamented with brass : under it were some 
bones.
In sinking a cellar, six more stone coffins 
were found ; one of which was very large, being, in 
the inside, six feet eight inches long : they all had a 
place shaped for a head, and all, or most of them, had 
two or three holes at the bottom, their covers made 
of several stones.
Near them two pots or urns were 
found, which probably contained the bowels of those 
who were buried there.
On a skull belonging to 
some bones, which lay in a stiff blue clay, there was 
some black cloth, which might be the cawl of one of 
the monks.
Pieces of shoes were also taken up.
A 
large piece of a body had the flesh remaining, which 
looked white both on the outside and inside, as if 
time had not penetrated its.
substance, and it was 
tough when cut with a knife." 
The manor of Birchmore, in Woburn parish, be- 
longed to the abbey ; but it is now the property of 
the Duke of Bedford, whose grandfather purchased 
it of Sir Edward Pickering, in 1747.
Birchmore 
formerly had a church, to which the chapel of Wo- 
burn was annexed.
Woburn chapel, which is nof«r 
the 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
43 
the parish church, was given to the abbot and Con- 
vent in the year 1242.
The present church, in which there are several an- 
cient monuments, underwent a thorough repair in 
1800 and 1801.
The tower is detached from the 
building, at the north-west corner.
Francis, Earl of Bedford, who died ill 1582, 
founded a free-school, which adjoins the church-yard, 
In 1662, Francis, Lord Russell, gave a salary of 
10/.
a year to the master, which has since been in- 
creased to 135/.
Woburn also has an alms-house, for twelve poor 
persons, which was founded by the Bedford family, 
and endowed with 30/.
a year.
Woburn House.] — This noble mansion, which 
occupies the site of the abbey, was almost entirely 
rebuilt by Flitcroft, for John, Duke of Bedford, 
about the middle of the last century.
It is situated 
in the midst of a large park, forming four sides of a 
quadrangle.
It has experienced many considerable 
alterations and improvements, particularly during 
the time it was in the possession of his Grace the late 
Duke of Bedford.
The additional buildings were 
designed and executed under the direction of Mr.
Holland, the architect of the late Drury Lane theatre.
The west front is of the Ionic order, with an insulated 
basement.
The principal floor or suite of rooms on 
this side, consists of a samon, state bed room, draw- 
ing, and dining rooms.
The south contains the 
library, breakfast, etruscan, and duke's rooms.
The 
east the vestibule, servants' offices, &c.
and the 
north the French bed-rooms, and various other 
chambers.
The state apartments are fitted up in a 
style of costly magnificence.
The gallery exhibits a 
large and most interesting collection of portraits, 
and many fine paintings are dispersed in other rooms.
At the request of the Duke of Bedford, the late 
Lord Orford, a short time before his death, drew up 
a descriptive catalogue of them.
Mr. Pennant has 
also described the chief pictures in the collection ; 
and, from his account, we copy the following highly 
interesting remarks : — 
" The first which struck me was a lady, who de- 
fied the strictest scrutiny ; a small full-length, in 
widow's weeds, with her head on her hand, and a 
book by her ; with a countenance full of deep and 
silent sorrow ; the sad relict of the virtuous Lord 
Russeli, and daughter to the good and great Wrio- 
thesly, Earl of Southampton.
" I now turn my eyes to a lady, whose felicity 
consisted in a different fate ; in being early cut off 
from the embraces of a capricious tyrant, whose in- 
constancy and whose lusts would probably have in- 
volved her in misery, had not Heaven, in its mercy, 
taken her to itself.
Lady Jane Seymour, the lady 
in question, became queen to Henry VIII.
in 1536, 
and was released from him by death in 1537.
The 
portrait expresses the elegance of her person.
She 
is dressed in red, with great gold net work sleeves, 
and rich in jewels.
Her print among the illustrious 
heads does her little justice.
" That gloomy insipid pair, Philip II.
and his 
consort Mary, are painted in small full-lengths, by 
Sir Antonio More.
The first of these ungracious 
figures is dressed in a black jacket, with gold sleeves 
and hose : the queen sitting in a black and gold pet- 
ticoat and furred sleeves.
Her black conic cap is 
faced with gold and jewels.
A rich chain of great 
pearls and small vases, red and gold, are ornaments 
to our bigotted sovereign.
The date is 1553.
Sir 
Antonio was sent from Spain to draw her picture, so 
has placed them in a scene of awkward courtship ; 
for they were not married till the following year.
When two such sanguinary hands were joined, it is 
lucky for mankind that no issue was the conse- 
quence.
The intrepidity of the Tudors united with 
the unprincipled policy of Charles V.
and Philip, 
might have depopulated Europe, and formed as 
desolate a waste of empire as that of the Otto- 
mans.
" Another remarkable portrait, by the same pain- 
ter, is that of Edward Courtenay, last Earl of Devon- 
shire of his name ; who, for his nearness in blood 
to the crown, was imprisoned by the jealous Henry, 
from the age of 10 till about that of 28.
His daugh- 
ter Mary set him at liberty, and wooed him to share 
the kingdom with her.
He rejected the offer, in 
preference to her sister Elizabeth, for which, and 
some false suspicion, he suffered another imprison- 
ment with Elizabeth.
He was soon released.
He 
quitted the kingdom, as prudence directed, and died 
at the age of 30, at Padua.
" He is represented as a handsome man, with 
short brown hair, and a yellow beard, a dark jacket 
with white sleeves and breeches ; behind him is a 
ruined tower ; beneath him this inscription, expres- 
sive of his misfortune : 
" En peur et insons et adhuc juvenilihus annis : 
Annos bis septem carcere clusus eram.
Me pater his tenuit vinclis, qua: filia solvit : 
Sors mea sic tandem veititur a snperis.
" Fourteen long years in strict captivity, 
Tyrant-condemn'd, 1 pass'd my early bloom, 
Till pity bade the gen'rous daughter free 
A guiltless captive, and reverse my doom." R.
W. 
" Sir Philip Sydney is painted in the 22d year of 
his age, in a quilled ruff, white slashed jacket : a 
three-quarter length.
He was a deserved favourite 
of Queen Elizabeth, who well might think the court 
deficient without him ; for, to uncommon knowledge, 
valour, and virtuous gallantry, was joined a roman- 
tic spirit, congenial with that of his royal mistress.
His romance of Arcadia is not relished at present : 
it may be tedious ; but the morality, I fear, renders 
it disgusting to our age.
It is too replete with inno- 
cence to be relished.
Sir Philip was to the English, 
what the Chevalier Bayard was to the French, " Ua 
Chevalier sans peur, et sans reproche." Both were 
strongly tinctured with enthusiastic virtue : both 
died in the field with the highest sentiments of 
piety.
" Isabella, 
41 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
" Isabella, daughter to Henry Benet, Earl of 
Arlington, and wife to the first Duke of Grafton, is 
represented a half-length, in white, with long flow- 
ing hair, very handsome.
" A capital picture of the Plague.
The dead bo- 
dies appear infectious by the attitudes of the living.
To increase the horror, the artist has placed a live 
infant by its dead mother : a circumstance not un- 
known in the dreadful pestilence in London of 1665.
By Nicholas Poussin.
" A fine view of Pont Neuf, with numbers of 
figures, by Wouvermans.
" A fine landscape by Claude Lorrain, with a view 
of the sea.
The figures are shepherds and shep- 
herdesses.
" David, and Abigail averting his wrath.
Her 
beauty and suppliant looks are admirable.
By Lucca 
Jordano.
" A Landscape, by G.
Poussin, with the figure of 
an old man begging.
" Four pieces, representing Alexander's Cam- 
paigns, by old ParoceL The first is a repose after 
a inarch ; he and his companions feasting under a 
tree.
Two others are battles.
" A Landscape, by Mr. Gainsborough ; contain- 
ing cattle, figures, and an ancient tree : a piece that 
would do credit to the best masters.
" A large family picture, by Jervis, of Elizabeth 
Howland, Duchess of the first Wriothesly, Duke of 
Bedford, in her weeds, with her four children.
Above her, in the back part of the picture, hangs 
the portrait of her lord : the same who built Co- 
vent Garden Church, and was called the ' good duke.' 
" A full length of a Nobleman, in a hat with a red 
crown and feather, square black beard, red ear-rings 
and stockings ; in his robes, with a white rod in his 
hand.
This was brought from Thornhaugh, a seat 
of the family in Northamptonshire.
" Opposite to him is a portrait of a lady, in black, 
and a red and white petticoat, flat ruff", and a great 
string of pearls across her breast.
" Two children in one piece, Lady Diana, and 
Lady Anne Russell, daughters of William, first Duke 
of Bedford.
They had the misfortune of being poi- 
soned, by eating some noxious berries, which they 
met with.
Lady Anne died ; Lady Diana survived, 
and is again painted, in more advanced life : by Sir 
Peter Lely.
" A man, with his jacket grey, breeches red, short 
hair, and small beard : a stick in his hand, and hel- 
met by him.
Date 1592, aet.
28.
" Elizabeth Bruges, or Bridges, aged 11, 1589, 
painted in a flat style, by Hieronymo di Gustidio, of 
Antwerp.
She is represented in black, flowered with 
white, with full sleeves, a gold chain, a i^reat pearl 
set in gold on one shoulder, and » gold ornament on 
the other.
This lady was eldest daughter to Giles, 
Lord Chandos, and wife to Sir John Rennada, Knt.
she died childless, the whole fortune of her family 
devolved to his secoud sister, Catherine, Countess 
of Bedford.
" A full-length of that fantastic lady, Lucy, Coun- 
tess of Bedford, in a dancing attitude, dressed in as 
fantastic a habit, with an immense transparent veil 
distended behind her.
Her vanity and extravagance 
met with no check under the rule of her quiet spouse, 
Edward, Earl of Bedford, whom she survived only 
one year.
" A strange figure of a man, in half-length, in a 
close black cap, and a letter in his hand, directed 
to Pr. de Nassau.
I am informed by a very able 
herald, that, from the arms on the picture, the per- 
sonage represented is the Count de Nassau — Ura- 
nien Nassau.
" James, Earl of Carlisle, in long hair, buff* coat, 
and sash.
" Sir Edward Stradling, of St. Donet's, in South 
Wales.
A head with whiskers, a turn-over, and 
black dress.
1 imagine him to be the gentleman 
who had a regiment under Charles I.
taken prisoner 
at the battle of Edgehill, and died on his release at 
Oxford.
" The Angel hastening the departure of Lot out 
of Sodom, by Rubens.
Small.
" Lord Francis Russell, a miniature, in black 
dress.
" Rubens and his two wives.
Heads.
" A boy and girl ; Murillio.
" The Library ; 50 feet long, and 24| feet wide, 
with a coved roof, painted by Cipriani and Rebecca.
Apollo and the Muses by the first.
The other sub- 
jects by the latter.
Over the bookcases are the por- 
traits of artists ; Titian, Rembrandt, Rubens, Tin- 
toret, Teniers, and Kneller, by themselves ; the 
others principally by Vandyck.
" In the Green Room is a singular picture of 
Ignatius Loyola, in black, with a dog behind him, 
kneeling to the apparition of our Saviour in the 
clouds, by Hassan.
" Two, by Rosa di Tivoli.
" An Ascension, a fine piece, by Sebastian Ricci.
The confusion and terror of the soldiers are inimita- 
bly expressed.
*" A Battle, by Pandolfo.
" The Castle of St. Angelo, by Lucatelli.
" A Man's Head, in which is a noble appearance 
of contrition and hope, by Balestra.
" An old Woman's Head, by Guido.
" A fine full-ieugth of a Nobleman, in a black and 
gold vest, and a high-crowned hat in his hand.
On 
the back ground is a curtain, almost concealing a 
lady, of whom nothing but one hand and a part of 
her petticoat is seen.
By this is vEtatis.
1614.
Ley I.
" The Music Room is small, but elegant, stuccoed 
and gilt.
Several oval compartments, and prettily 
filled with paintings in clareobscur, by Cipriani and 
Rebecca.
" A portrait called Lucy, Countess of Bedford, in 
a white satin gown, worked with colours, a laced 
single ruff, and a long scarlet velvet cloak, hanging 
gracefully, with one arm folded in it.
Ou her head 
is 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
45 
is a pearl coronet, and pearls on her wrists.
In the 
Lack ground she appears in a garden in the true at- 
titude of stately disdain, bent halfback, hi scorn of a 
poor gentleman bowing to the very ground.
" Heads of Lions, by Rubens.
" The Israelites carrying the Ark, by Parocel.
" A Female Dwarf; dwarf to Catherine, queen to 
Charles II.
" In the Upper Dining Room is a full-length 
portrait of the well-known unfortunate Robert, Earl 
of Essex, in white.
The queen's passion for Essex 
oertainly was not founded on the beauty of his per- 
son.
His beard was red, his hair black, his person 
strong, but without elegance, his gait ungraceful.
But the queen was far past the heyday of her blood ; 
she was struck with his romantic valour, with his 
seeming attachment to her person, and, I may add, 
with the violence of his passions ; for her majesty, 
like the rest of her sex, probably 
' Stoop'd to the forward and the bold.' 
" At length Ills presumption increased with her 
favour ; her fears overcame her affections, and, after 
many struggles, at length consigned him to the scaf- 
fold ; having thoroughly worked himself out of her 
gracious conceit.
" Catherine, Countess of Bedford, wife to Francis, 
Earl of Bedford, and daughter to Giles Bruges, third 
Lord Chandos, Her dress is a pearl coronet, and 
hair flowing below her waist, a worked gown, and 
red mantle : a fine full-length.
" Edward, Earl of Russell ; sitting.
He is dress- 
ed in black and gold, with a high-crowned hat; 
Ins hand in a sash, being gouty.
This nobleman 
was an exception to the good understanding this 
family is blest with ; and unluckily was matched 
with a lady whose vanity and expences- were 
boundless.
" Lord Treasurer Burleigh, the able stateman of 
Elizabeth ; a favourite, whom she chose, as she ex- 
pressed it, not for his bad legs, but for his good 
head.
His maxims did not quite agree with those 
of the ministers of later days ; for he held, " That 
nothing could be for the advantage of the prince, 
which makes any way against his reputation ;" 
wherefore he never would suffer the rents of 
lands to be raised, nor the old tenants to be put 
out.
' This great statesman is represented sitting : his 
countenance comely, his beard grey, his gown black 
and furred, and adorned with a gold chain.
His 
mistress lost this faithful .servant in 1598, aged seven- 
ty-seven.
" His second son, Robert, Earl of Salisbury, i-s 
placed near him, standing : a mean little deformed 
figure, possessed of his father's abilities, but mixed 
with deceit and treachery.
His services to his mas- 
ter and his country, will give him rank amongst the 
greatest ministers ; but his share in bringing the 
great Raleigh to the scaffold ; and the dark part he 
vol.
i. — no.
4. 
acted, in secretly precipitating the generous, unsus- 
pecting Essex to his ruin, will ever remain indelible 
blots on him as a man.
His dress is that of the 
Spanish nation, (though he was averse to its politics) 
a black jacket and cloak, which adds no grace to hi?
figure.
" Next is the portrait of Sir William Russell (af- 
terwards Duke of Bedford,) when young.
He is 
dressed in robes of the order of the Bath, leaning on 
his sword, and by him a dwarf, aged 32.
On the 
picture is inscribed Johannes Priwezer, di Hungaria, 
fecit 1627 : a painter of merit, but whose works are 
rare.
There is another portrait of him in the gal- 
lery, a full-length, in a long wig, and, I think, the 
robes of the garter.
" Anne, daughter of that infamous pair, Robert 
Carr, Earl of Somerset, and his countess, is painted 
by Vandyck, in blue, drawing on a glove ; a most 
beautiful half-length.
She was the wife of Sir Wil- 
liam Russell above-mentioned, married to him in the 
year 1637.
She proved worthy of the alliance she 
made.
It is said she was ignorant of her mother's 
dishonour, till she read it in a pamphlet she found 
accidentally left in a window.
It is added, that she 
was so struck with the detection of her parent's guilt 
that she fell down in a fit, and was found senseless 
with the book open before her.
She died May 10th, 
1681.
The anecdote is omitted in the histories of 
the family, probably to avoid the revival of a dis- 
graceful tale.
Francis, Earl of Bedford, was so 
averse to the allianoe, that he gave his son leave to 
choose a wife out of any family but that.
Opposi- 
tion usually stimulates desire : the young couple's 
affections were only increased.
At length the king 
interposed, and, sending the Duke of Lenox to urge 
the Earl to consent, the match was brought about.
Somerset, now reduced to poverty, acted a generous 
part ; selling his house at Chiswick, plate, jewels, 
and furniture, to raise a fortune for his daughter of 
twelve thousand pounds, which the Earl of Bedford 
demanded ; saying that seeing her affections were 
settled, ho chose rather to undo himself than make 
her unhappy.
" Her father-in-law, the second Francis, Earl o{ 
Bedford, by Vandyck ; full-length, in black, with 
light hair and short peaked beard ; painted in 1636, 
aged 48.
He died in 1641, and left behind him a 
distinguished character.
He was of the popular 
party : but of such an excellent understanding, so 
good a heart, and of such great moderation, that it 
is supposed, had he lived, his influence with his 
friends would have been exerted to have composed 
the unhappy violences of the times.
This was the 
nobleman who undertook, and succeeded in the ar- 
duous attempt of draining the vast fen in Cambridge- 
shire, called the Great Level, containing 306,000 
acres.
" In the Saloon is a fine half-length of a man, by 
Titian.
" Cain slaying Abel, by Guido.
" A beautiful Young Woman washing, with an 
m old 
46 
BEDFORDSHIRE, 
old man by her.
A most pleasing picture, by Le 
Moine.
" Over the chimney is a full-length of the Earl of 
Bristol, and Sir Wiiliam Russell (afterwards Earl 
of Bedford ;) the former is in black, the other in red.
A copy from Vandyck.
" Louis the Fifteenth ; full-length.
" Angels flying ; a very graceful painting, by 
Morillio, 
" The Last Supper, by Tintoret.
" The Vision of our Saviour's Passion to admiring 
spectators.
God appears above, and angels support 
the cross.
By Luca Jordano.
" Two Landscapes, by Poussin.
" In the Blue Drawing Room is an exquisite pic- 
ture of Joseph expounding the dream to Pharoah's 
baker.
The last sitting with vast and eager atten- 
tion in his countenance.
In Joseph appears great 
concern, at his assured fore-knowledge of the fatal 
prediction.
By Rembrandt.
Near it is a portrait 
of that great painter, by himself.
" In the French Dressing Room is a striking re- 
semblance of the late Duchess of Bedford ; and in 
the Gallery is a very fine full-length of her worthy 
husband, represented sitting in his robes.
" A Madona and Child, by Guercina.
" A Magdalene, by An. Caracci.
• " Anne, Countess of Warwick, daughter of the 
first Francis, Earl of Bedford, and wife to Ambrose 
Dudley, Earl of Warwick.
The date is 1600.
She 
is in her full age, and dressed in black and gold, 
with white and striped sleeves.
" In the State Dressing Room are numbers of 
small pieces.
A fine landscape, with figures, by 
Cuyp — Oliver Cromwell, represented in a field of 
battle — two very fine views of rock and wood, by 
Salvator Rosa — a sea view, by Vandevelde — a holy 
family, by Simon de Pesaro — a child seizing on a 
crown of thorns, out of a basket of flowers, in pre- 
ference to the most exquisite of the assemblage ; the 
turn of his head beautiful — a Magdalen, by Annibal 
Caracci — and a horse in a stable, by Wouvermans — 
another Magdalen, by Trevisiani — a fine bright land- 
scape, by Claude Lorrain — two, by Salvator Rosa — 
one, by Cuyp — and two humourous Dutch pieces, by 
Both, merit attention.
" Late Lord and Lady Tavistoke.
His lordship 
in a red gown, furred.
He is again represented in 
another room, in the uniform of the Dunstaple 
hunt.
" In the Gallery is a head of Lord William Rus- 
sell, the sad victim of his virtuous design of preserv- 
ing our liberties and constitution from the attempts 
of as abandoned a set of men as ever governed these 
kingdoms.
True patriotism, not ambition, nor in- 
terest, directed his intentions.
Posterity must ap- 
plaud his unavailing engagements, with due censure 
of the Machiavelian necessity of taking off 1 so dan- 
gerous an opposer of the machinations of his enemies.
The law of politics gives sanction to the removal of 
every obstacle to the designs of statesmen.
At the 
same time, Ave should never lessen our admiration 
and pity of the generous characters who fell sacri- 
fices to their hopes of delivering purified to their de- 
scendants, the corrupted government of their own 
days.
To attempt to clear Lord Russell from the 
share in so glorious a design, would be to deprive 
him of a most brilliant part of his character.
His in- 
tegrity and ingenuity would not suffer even himself 
to deny that part of the charge.
Let that remain 
unimpeached, since he continues so perfectly ac- 
quitted of the most distant design of making assas- 
sination a means, or of intriguing with a foreign mo- 
narch, the most repugnant to our religion and free- 
dom, to bring about so desired an end.
" Over the door is Sir Nicholas Bacon, in a black 
dress, furred ; by Zucchero.
" Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.
" Sir Edward Georges ; a head.
" Another head, of Sir Josselyn Percy, seventh 
son of Henry, eighth Earl of Northumberlain.
He 
and his brother Charles were concerned in the Earl 
of Essex's insurrection.
Both received their par- 
dons ; and Josselyn survived till 1631.
" Another of a gentleman of the name of Rogers, 
comptroller to Queen Elizabeth.
I imagine him to 
have been Sir Edward Rogers ; a person of some 
consideration in the time of her accession ; for he 
was one of the few who waited on her at Hatfield, 
on the death of Queen Mary, and formed one 
of the Privy Council held there on that great 
event.
" Thomas, Earl of Exeter, eldest son to the great 
Burleigh, is painted a full-length.
" Notwithstanding this nobleman was inferior in 
abilities to his younger brother ; yet he was a man 
of spirit and parts.
He served as a volunteer at the 
siege of Edinburgh Castle, in 1578 ; distinguished 
himself in the wars in the Low Countries ; and, with 
his brother, served on board the fleet which had the 
honour of defeating the Spanish armada.
He enter- 
ed also into the romantic gallantries of the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, and was a knight tilter in the tour- 
naments performed for the amusement of her illus- 
trious lover the Duke of Anjou, in 1581.
In the 
following reign he was employed as a man of busi- 
ness ; was created Earl of Exeter ; and finished his 
course, aged eighty, in February, 1622.
" Near him is the head of Charles Brandon, Duke 
of Suffolk, son of Sir William Brandon, standard 
bearer to Henry VIII.
slain iu the battle of Bos- 
worth.
His dress is black, with red sleeves, with 
the collar of the Garter and the George.
His beard 
is white ; his countenance bluff, not unlike that of 
his master Henry VIII.
Their qualities, happily 
for the favourite, were different ; for the inscription 
with truth says, that he was " gratiose with Henry 
VIII.
; void of despyte ; most fortunate to the end ; 
never ia displeasure with his kynge." He was 
brought up with his master, and justly beloved by 
him for his noble qualities, for his goodly person, 
courage, and conformity of disposition (I suppose 
only) 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
47 
only) in all his exercises and pastimes.
He was a 
principal figure in every tilt and tournament.
In 
his younger days (1510) he appeared at Westmin- 
ster in the solemn justs, held in honour of Catherine 
of Arragon, in the dress of a recluse, begging of her 
highness permission to run in her presence ; which 
obtained, he instantly flung off his weeds, and came 
out all armed.
He signalized himself at the justs at 
Tournay, in 1511, instituted by Margaret, Princess 
of Castile, in compliment to his royal master.
The 
place was flagged with black marble, and the horses 
of the knights shod with felt, to prevent them from 
slipping.
He here won the heart of the fair foundress 
of the entertainment ; but fortune reserved him for 
another princess.
" In 1514 he performed amazing deeds of arms at 
St. Dennis at the coronation of the youthful Mary, 
sister to Henry, on her marriage with the aged and 
decrepid Louis XII.
The good king, says Henault, 
forgot his age, and met with death in her arms, in 
less than three months.
This opened the way to the 
possession of the beautiful dowager.
Her heart was 
lost to him at the preceding tournaments ; in which 
she had opportunity to compare her feeble bride- 
groom with the dexterity, the grace, and strength 
of her valiant knight ; who, at single combat over- 
threw man and horse.
The French, envious of his 
prowess, introduced into the lists a gigantic German, 
in hfl^es of bringing the English hero into disgrace.
He treated the Almain so roughly that the French 
interfered ; but, in a second trial, Suffolk caught him 
round the neck, and pummelled him so severely 
about the head, that they were obliged to convey the 
fellow away secretly ; who had been surreptitiously 
introduced in disguise, merely on account of his 
strength.
" Mary, on the death of her royal consort, pro- 
posed to Suffolk, and gave him only four days to 
consider of the offer.
This seems concerted to save 
her lover from the fury of Henry, for daring to look 
up to a dowager of France, and, what was more, his 
sister.
His master fortunately favoured the match.
He continued beloved by the king to the end of his 
life ; after seeing the following knights, and attend- 
ants on the conjugal festivities, the Earl of Devon- 
shire, Lord Leonard Grey, Sir Nicholas Carew, and 
Anna Bullein, sent headless to their graves.
But 
Charles went eff triumphant with his royal spouse ; 
carried with him her jewels, to the amount of 
200,000 crowns ; the famous diamond le mirror de 
Naples ; and secured her jointure of sixty thousand 
crowns.
He married almost as many wives as his 
master, having his fourth to survive him.
He died 
universally lamented, in August 1545, and was bu- 
ried magnificently, at the expense of his master ; his 
loss being one of the few things that touched his 
hardened heart.
* " No family," -ays Mr. Pennant, " profited so much bv 
the plunder of the church as that of Bedford.
To the grant 
" Edward Clinton, first Earl of Lincoln, sitting : 
a half-length, in black, a short ruff, bonnet, and his 
George ; by Cornelius Ketel, the whimsical artist, 
who took it into his head to lay aside his brushes, 
and paint with his fingers only ; and at length, find- 
ing those tools too easy, undertook to paint with his 
toes.
This nobleman was one of the most distin- 
guished persons of his age, and shone equally as a 
soldier and a sailor ; for during the reigns of Henry 
VIII.
Edward VI.
Mary and Elizabeth, there were 
scarcely any expeditions in which he did not signa- 
lize himself.
He was lord great admiral for thirty 
years, counsellor to three princes, and of unspotted 
reputation.
In an advanced age he married for his 
third wife the fair Geraldine, the subject of the gal- 
lant Earl of Surrey's affection and of his amorous 
muse.
Their union never took place.
It is proba- 
ble that she deserted him ; for soon after his sonnet, 
descriptive of the fair, 
" From Tuscane came my ladies worthy race, 
follow several others, complaining of his hard lot, in 
experiencing the scoru and inconstancy of his mis- 
tress ; but what affects him most is the giving the 
preference to another of meaner rank.
" I know (though she sa.y nay, and wou'd it well with- 
stand) 
When in her grace thou yieldest the most, she bare the but in 
hand.
I see her pleasant cheere in chiefest of thy suite, 
When thou art gone I see him come that gathers up the fruite ; 
And eke in thy respecte, I see the base degree 
Of him to whom she gave the heart that promised was to thee.
The lady, like many other beauties, humiliated by 
years, at length resigned the noon of her charms to 
this ancient peer, who quitted her and the world in 
1585.
" In this room is a portrait of Geraldine herself, 
a head.
Her hair yellow : her face a proof how much 
beauty depends on fancy : her dress far from elegant.
" A head of John Russel, first Earl of Bedford, 
a profile, with a long white beard, and the George 
hanging from his neck.
This gentleman was the 
founder of the family, and owed his rise to his me- 
rit and accomplishment.
Philip Archduke of Aus- 
tria, being, in 1508, driven by a storm on the coast 
of Dorsetshire, was entertained by Sir Thomas 
Trenchard ; who sent for his neighbour Mr. Rus- 
sel, who was skilled in the languages, to wait oa 
his highness.
The duke was so pleased with his 
conversation, as to insist on his going with him to 
the king then at Windsor.
Henry, at the recom- 
mendation of the duke, took him into his service.
In the following reign he advanced in fortune with 
vast rapidity.
He fortunately, was cotemporary with 
the fall of the monastic life, and obtained vast 
grants of the possessions of the church.* Edward 
the 
of Woburn, in 1547, it owes much ot its property in this coun- 
ty, and in Buckinghamshire, To that of the rich abbey of 
Tavistock 
48 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
the VI.
created him Earl ©f Bedford.
The last act 
of his life was a voyage to Spain, to bring over 
Philip II.
(grandson of the prince to whom he 
owed his rise) to espouse his royal mistress.
He 
died in March 1555, and lies buried at Chassis, in 
Buckinghamshire, with his lady ; by whom he ac- 
quired that estate.
The church of Chciie.is, from 
that time, became the a?£srna domus ©fall this great 
family, and contains a most superb collection of dif- 
ferent fashioned monuments.
" Ambrose Dudley Karl of Warwick, a head 
with a bonnet, black dress, the George pendent.
His third wife, lady Anne, daughter to Francis 
Earl of Bedford in black and white sleeves, and a 
black body.
" A half-length of Henry Earl of Southampton ; 
by Solomon de Caus : with short grey hair ; in 
black, Avith points round his waist, a flat ruff, lean- 
ing on a chair, with a mantle over one arm.
This 
nobleman was a friend to the Earl of Essex, and 
through friendship, not disaffection, attended him 
in the mad and desperate insurrection which brought 
the favourite to the block.
The plea was admitted : 
he was condemned, but reprieved ; and continued 
in the Tower till the accession of James I.
when he 
was instantly restored to his honours and estate.
— 
By reason of his love to the Earl of Essex, he was 
never on good terms with the minister, the Earl 
of Salisbury.
He was one that attended Mans- 
field's army into the Netherlands, and died in 1624, 
at Bergen-op-Zoom, of a fever contracted in this 
fatal expedition.
" Thomas Earl of Southampton, in black, with 
a. star on his mantle.
" Sir William Russell, in a black slashed vest.
He was lord deputy of Ireland in the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, in 1594 : a Avise and most gal- 
lant commander, and successful in various expedi- 
tions against the rebels ; but not brooking a divid- 
ed power with the general, Sir John Norris, was 
at his own request, recalled.
He was created 
by James I.
baron of Thornhaugh, and died in 
1013.
" His lady is painted, dressed in great sleeves.
— 
She was daughter of Edward Long, Esq. of Thin- 
g-ay, in Cambridgeshire, and died two years before 
her lord.
" Their son Francis, afterwards Earl of Bedford, 
is painted in his childhood, in white, with green 
Tavistock, vast fortune and interest in Devonshire, and to ren- 
der them more extensive that of Duukeswell was added.
The 
donation of Thorney Abbey gave Lord Russell an amazing 
tract of fens in Cambridgeshire, together with a great revenue.
Melchbum Abbey increased his property in Bedfordshire.
The Priory of Castle Hymel gave him footing in Northamp- 
tonshire : and he came in for parcels of the appurtenances of 
St. Alban's and Mount Grace, in "Yorkshire.
Not to mention 
the house of the Friars Preachers in lixeter, with the revenues 
belonging to the foundation, and, finally, the estate about Co- 
vent Garden, with a field adjoining, called the Seven Acres, 
pn which Long Acre is built." 
* " This," observe the editors of the Beauties of England 
hose ; with a hawk on his hand, and two dogs in 
couples near him.
" Another portrait of Lucy Countess of Bedford, 
exactly resembles that at Alloa.
" A full length of Catherine, wife of the second 
Francis Earl of Bedford, in black, with roses in her 
hand.
" Edward Earl of Manchester, lord chamberlain 
to Charles li.
Long hair and robes.
" Queer.
Elizabeth, full length, with a rich gown, 
white, embroidered with flowers and a fan of fea- 
thers in her hand.
I find that her majesty would 
ooa descend to accept of the smallest present, as a 
mark of her subjects' love ; for, in passing through 
a Doctor Puddin's house, on her way to the cele- 
brated wedding of Mrs. Anne Russel with Lord 
Herbert, she did the doctor the honour of accepting 
from him a fan, en passant.* 
" The first Francis Earl of Bedford, with a long- 
white beard and furred robe, and George pendent ; 
a head.
Another illustrious personage oi this house, 
who discharged several great offices in the reigns of 
Mary and Elizabeth.
Such was his hospitality 
that the latter used to say of him, that he made all 
the beggars.
He died, aged fiity-eight, on the 28th 
of July 1585, the day after his third son, Sir Fran- 
cis was slain, happily unknowing of the misfortune.
" Tliis youth, and his elder brother Edward 
Lord Russell, are represented in small full lengths, 
in two paintings ; and so alike as scarcely to be dis- 
tinguished : both dressed in white close jackets, and 
black-and-gold cloaks, and black bonnets.
The 
date by Lord Edward, is ret.
22, 1573.
He is re- 
presented grasping in one hand some snakes, with 
this motto, " Fides liomiiti, serpent ibus J'raus ;" and 
in the back ground he is placed standing in a laby- 
rinth, and above is inscribed, Fata viaiu inveiiicnt.
— 
This young - nobleman also died before his father.
" His brother Francis has Ids accompaniments 
not less singular.
A lady, seemingly in distress, is 
represented sitting in the back ground, surrounded 
with snakes, a dragon, crocodile, and cock.
At a 
distance is the sea, with a ship under full sail.
The 
story is not well known ; but it certainly alludes to a 
family transaction similar to that in Otway's Orphan, 
and gave rise to it.
He, by the attendants, was per- 
haps the Polydore of the history.
Edward seems 
by his motto, " Fides homini, scrpentibus fraus," to 
have been the Castalio, conscious of his own inte- 
and Hales, " is a very singular picture.
The maiden Queen 
is represented with a fan of feathers in her left hand, and a ring 
on iter thumb.
The canvass is so completely covered with (be 
gaudy and cumbrous ornaments of her dress, that the painter 
would have found it extremely difficult to introduce a new ob- 
ject unless he had adorned her cheek with sticking plaster.
Her 
hair is of a sandy color ; her complexion rather fair.
' A 
pale 'Roman nose/ says Horace Walpole, ' a head of hair load- 
ed with crowns, and powdered with diamonds, a vast ruff, a 
vaster fardingale, and a bushel of pearls, are the features by 
which every body knows at once the pictures of Queen Eliza- 
beth.'' This description is truly applicable to the present 
piece." 
G 
grit).
BEDFORDSHIRE.
49 
grity, and indignant at the perfidy of his brother.
The ship alludes to the desertion of the lady.
If it 
conveyed Sir Francis to Scotland, it was to his pu- 
nishment ; for he fell there on July 27th, 1585, in a 
border affray.
" A full-length of Henry Danvers, created Baron 
Dauntsey, by James I.
and Earl of Danby by Charles 
I. ; a full-length by Vandyck.
His beard square 
and yellow ; his jacket black ; over that a red man- 
tle, furred and laced with gold.
His rich armour 
lies by him, near him is written " Omnia pnecepi." 
He Avas the son of Sir John Danvers of Dauntsey in 
Wiltshire, by Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of John 
Nevil, Lord Latimer.
His eldest brother, Sir 
Charles Danvers, lost his head for his concern in 
Essex's insurrection.
James, who on all occasions 
testified his respect to that unhappy nobleman, and 
countenanced every family who suffered in his cause, 
accordingly had Danvers restored in blood.
Besides 
a peerage, he made him Governor of Guernsey for 
life.
Charles promoted him to an earldom, and 
created him Knight of the Garter.
He passed his 
life as a soldier, under Maurice, Prince of Orange, 
in the Low Countries ; under Henry IV.
in France; 
and under the Earl of Essex and Lord Montjoy in 
Ireland.
At length in 1(344, died, as his epitaph 
says, at his house of Cornbury Park, Oxfordshire, 
full of honours, wounds, (verified in.
the portrait, by 
a great patch on his forehead) and days, in the se- 
venty-first year of his age.
Besides his military 
glory, we may add that of founding the physic gar- 
den at Chelsea, in 1632 ; purchasing for that use the 
ground, (once the Jews' cemetery) and inclosing it 
with a wall and beautiful gate, at the expence of five 
thousand pounds.
" An Earl of Rutland, a full-length, in a rich 
flowered jacket, red full skirts, a single laced ruff, 
short hair and beard, brown boots : a plumed helmet 
near him.
He wears the honour of the George.
From his boots (a fashionable part of dress in the 
tipae of James I.
and Charles I.) I suspect him to 
be Francis, Earl of Rutland, who commanded the 
{hot which conveyed Charles, when Prince of Wales, 
in his return from his romantic expedition into Spain.
This nobleman died in 1(532.
" Giles, the third Lord Chandos, in a high crown- 
ed hat, white jacket, black gown, laced with silver, 
short hair and beard.
JEt. 43, 1589.
He died in 
1594.
" His lady, Frances, daughter of the first Earl, of 
Lincoln, and wife to William Ascough, son to Sir 
Francis Ascough, of Lincolnshire.
" A head of Catherine, youngest daughter to the 
treasurer, Earl of Suffolk, and wife to William, Earl 
of Salisbury.
She in a flowered dress ; her ruff 
worked with gold, and her breasts naked.
" The head of her infamous sister, Anne Countess 
of Somerset, is placed over one of the doors, dress- 
ed in black, striped with white, and her ruff and ruf- 
fles starched with yellow.
This fashion soon ex- 
pired ; for her bawd and creature, Mrs. Turner, 
VOL.
I. — no.
4. 
went to Tyburn in a yellow ruff, and put the wearers 
out of conceit with it.
1 need not enlarge on the 
well-known marriage and divorce of this lady from 
the Earl of Essex.
They are too well known to be 
insisted on ; as is her weakness in having recourse 
to the imposter Forman for philtres to debilitate Es- 
sex, and impel the affections of Somerset towards 
her.
Her wickedness in procuring the deatli of 
Overbury, who obstructed this union ; her sudden 
fall, and confession of her guilt on her trial, need no 
repetition.
Her Earl avowed his innocency ; he had 
been more covert in his proceedings.
Her passions 
were more violent, her resentment greater, and, of 
course, her caution less.
They both obtained an un- 
merited pardon, or rather reprieve, being confined in 
the Tower till the year 1622, and then confined by 
the way of indulgence, in the house of Lord Wal 
lingford.
The little delicacy which people of rank 
too frequently shew, by countenancing the vices of 
their equals, was conspicuous at this time.
The 
Countess felt their pity, and was visited even by the 
stern Anne Clifford.
Somerset lived with his lady, 
after their confinement, with the strongest mutual 
hatred ; the certain consequence of vicious associa- 
tions.
He died in the year 1645 : she died before 
him.
In her end may be read a fine lesson.
on the 
vengeance of Providence on the complicated wick- 
edness of her life.
It may be held up as a mirror 
to posterity, persuasive to virtue, and teach that 
heaven inflicted a finite punishment on the criminal, 
in mercy to her, and as a warning to future genera- 
tions.
" In this gallery is a full-length of a Nobleman, in 
a black jacket, double ruff, brown boots, and stick in 
his hand : armour by him : a manly figure, with short 
black hair, and square beard ; miscalled Carr, Earl 
of Somerset, this lady's husband.
" A portrait of a very different character, in the 
head of Lady Cook, dated 1585, a?t.
44.
She has 
on a quilled ruff, is dressed in black, richly orna- 
mented with pearls.
1 apprehend this lady to have 
been the wife of the son of Sir Anthony Cook, one of 
the tutors of Edward VI.
and distinguished by being 
father to five daughters, the wonders of their age for 
intellectual accomplishments.
" Margaret, Countess of Cumberland, is dressed 
much like the former.
She was youngest daughter 
to the first Francis, Earl of Bedford, and wife to 
the celebrated George Clifford, Earl of Cumber- 
land.
" Lady Bindloss, wife of Sir Francis Bindloss, of 
Berwick, near Lancaster, and daughter to Thomas, 
third Lord Delawar.
"Lady Wimbledon, wife of Lord Wimbledon.
" Christiana, daughter of Edward, Lord Bruce, 
of Kinloss, and wife to the second William, Earl of 
Devonshire, a small head, with long hair, her dreas 
white.
This lady, who is less talked of than others, 
was by far the most illustrious character of the age 
in which she lived.
Her virtues, domestic and pyb- 
lic, were of the most exalted kind.
Hospitality, 
n charity, 
50 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
charity, aftd piety, were in her pre-eminent.
I speak 
not of her great maternal cares ; nature dictates that 
more or less in all the sex : but her abilities in the 
management of the vast affairs of her family, per- 
plexed with numberless litigations, gave her a dis- 
tinguished character.
She at least equalled her lord 
in loyalty, and was indefatigable in inciting the no- 
bility, who had quitted the cause of majesty, to ex- 
piate their error.
After the battle of Worcester, she 
lived three years in privacy at her brother's house 
at Ampthill, and had correspondence with several 
great, personages, on the subject of restoring the ex- 
iled king.
The reserved Monk had such an opinion 
of her prudence, as to communicate to her the signal 
by which she might know his intentions on that sub- 
ject.
She lived in high esteem to a very advanced 
age ; died in 1674, and Was interred, by her beloved 
lord, at Derby.
" It is no wonder that so illustrious a character 
should attract the notice of the poets.
She had the 
honour of being celebrated by one equal in rank to 
herself.
That accomplished nobleman William, Earl 
of Pembroke, wrote several poems to her, and dedi- 
cated a collection of them to her.
' There is wit and 
ease in several ; but a great want of correction, and 
often of harmony.
The following is the least faulty; 
the subject — 
" That he would not be beloved.
" Disdain me still, that I may ever love, 
For who his love enjoys can love no more : 
The war once past, with peace men cowards prove, 
And ships returned do rot upon the shore.
Then tho' thou frown, I'll say thou art most fair, 
And still I'll love, tho' still I must despair.
As heat to life, so is desire to love ; 
For these once quench'd, both life and love are done.
Let not my sighs and tears thy virtue move ; 
Like basest metals, do not melt too soon : 
Laugh at my woes, although I ever mourn : 
Love surfeits with rewards; his nurse is scorn." 
Several of these pictures, it should be observed, 
have been exchanged for others ; and the late Duke 
added a choice cabinet collection, consisting of some 
very valuable pictures, by Cuyp, Teniers, Berghem, 
Rubens, and a celebrated cattle-piece, by Paul Pot- 
ter.
This collection is in a small room at the end of 
the library, fitted up in the Etruscan style.
In this 
room are also 13 Etruscan vases, which were pur- 
chased at Lord Cawdor's sale, who brought them 
from the Vatican at Rome.
The fate of Hyppolitus, 
by Rubens, is a small but very beautiful painting ; 
the subject of which is taken from the 15th book of 
Ovid's Metamorphoses, where Hyppolitus thus re- 
lates the manner of his death : — 
" With horror wrapt, and fierce with mad'ning fears.
The foaming horses high erect their ears, 
O'er fugged rocks the shatter'd chariot drive, 
While I to curb their fury vainly strive, 
And pull the reins, extended at my length ; 
Yet had their vigour not o'erpower'd my strength, 
But that the fervent wheel, with sudden stroke 
Whirl'd on a rugged stump, asunder broke.
Thrown from my chariot, in the reins fast bound.
My quiv'ring entrails smok'd upon the ground.
And every limb disjointed with the shock, 
Hung on the stump or bled upon the rock." 
On the south side of the mansion, a covered way,.
or piazza, leads from the Duke's apartment to the 
Green-house, a handsome building, containing a 
great variety of valuable plants.
The celebrated 
Bacchanalian vase, of which Mr. Tatham has given 
the following description, is kept here : — 
" This celebrated Bacchanalian vase was purchas- 
ed by the Duke from the noble collection of Lord 
Cawdor, in June, 1800, for seven hundred guineas.
It is of the lotus form, bell shaped, and was probably 
consecrated to the god Bacchus, as may be conclud- 
ed from the finely-sculptured Bacchanalian masks, 
and other features, that accompany it.
It must, 
therefore, have been used either as a laver, or as a 
symbol only of this part of the heathen mythology, 
and for no other use ; for it is certain that no wine 
was ever poured into it.
" This superb monument of antique decoration 
was dug up some centuries ago, among the ruins of 
Adrian's Villa, together with the fragments of three 
other vases of nearly similar dimensions, all of 
which appeared, by the situation in which they 
were found, to have occupied the same spot of 
that once extensive and magnificent emporium of art.
" It was then removed to the Villa Lanti, near 
Rome, where for many years it attracted the notice, 
and excited the admiration, both of the traveller and 
artist.
This, and one at Warwick Castle, which is 
somewhat more decorated, are the only complete 
vases of the same dimensions and antiquity extant ; 
and are, unquestionably, the most magnificent and 
noble- sculptured specimens of antique decoration of 
this kind ever discovered.
" The Lanti vase was brought from Rome, about 
twelve years (now about five-and-twenty) ago, at a 
considerable risk and expence, by the Right Hon.
Lord Cawdor, on whose classical taste and judge- 
ment it must ever confer the highest credit.
The 
removal of this grand work of art from that city caus- 
ed great jealousy among the superintendants of the 
Vatican Museum, then forming under the auspices 
of the reigning pontiff", the late Pius IV.
who, it is 
well known, in his resentment on this occasion, 
threatened several persons concerned in the removal 
of the vase, with the gallies.
" The dimensions of the vase are : diameter of the 
mole, six feet three inches ; height, with its present 
plinth, six feet nine inches." 
Some excellent statues, particularly an Apollo 
Belvidere, a group of Cupid and Pysche, and two 
figures of Venus in different positions, are in this 
Green-house.
From the east end of the Green-house, the piazza 
continues nearly a mile in length to the Dairy, a 
beautiful structure in the Chinese style.
The win- 
dows are filled with painted glass, and the situation 
is cool, shady, and pleasant.
f Mr] 
BEDFORDSHIRE, 
51 
Mr. Pennant mentioned some great stables, as 
part of the cloisters of the abbey.
These were pull- 
ed down by the late Duke, and a suite of rooms has 
been erected on their site.
The present stables form 
the wings of a very handsome building, the centre of 
which is occupied by the tennis court, and riding 
house.
The former is 108 feet in length ; the lat- 
ter, including a gallery at the end for spectators, 
130.
Woburn Park is about twelve miles in circumfer- 
ence, surrounded by a wall eight feet high.
It con- 
tains a pleasing variety of hill and dale, with some 
remarkably fine woods of noble oaks.
Winding 
through these woods, we arrive at the Duchess's 
Shrubbery, containing sixteen acres of land, beauti- 
fully laid out in the modern taste, with many of the 
largest and finest oaks in it.
Thence we advance to 
the hill at the north end, from which there is an ex- 
tensive and beautiful prospect into Buckingham- 
shire, Hertfordshire, and the circumjacent country.
Turning down the hill to the left, the ride leads to 
the evergreen plantation of above two hundred acres 
of land, which fifty years ago was a barren rabbit- 
warren, but is now a very beautiful ride on a dry 
soil, through avenues of all sorts of evergreens, of 
so noble a growth, that the equestrian may pass in 
shelter in the depth of winter, and through a perpe- 
tual verdure.
— About the middle of this plantation is 
a handsome retired temple ; and at the end is the 
lower water, covering about ten acres, with an island 
in the centre, upon which is a very elegant and light 
Chinese temple, large enough for a dinner party of 
thirty.
The park altogether contains 3500 acres of a great 
variety of soils, from a light sand to a rich loam, 
which yields a grass good enough to fatten large 
cattle.
It was greatly improved by the influence 
and example of the late Duke of Bedford, with whom 
the plan of the Park Farm at Woburn originated, 
and through whose patronage and exertions many 
improvements have been made in the different 
branches of husbandry.
The present noble possessor 
appears to take an equally lively interest in the suc- 
cess of agricultural pursuits.
Wooton.] — Wooton is a pleasant village, about 
five miles south-west from Bedford, in the hundred 
of Redbornstoke.
The manor anciently belonged to 
* " The conduct of this giddy, but accomplished woman," 
observes a contemporary writer,- " has been a theme of consi- 
derable animadversion, and much controversy.
She lias been 
blamed to the extreme of virulence, and praised to the acme 
of panegyric ; nor is the opinion of the world yet settled as to 
the degree of admiration or detestation in which her character 
should be held.
The violence of her enemies has only been 
exceeded by the zeal of her friends, and she has at once been 
the idol of worship and the fiend of abhorrence.
The evidence 
in her favour has placed her actions in the most exalted light, 
where every error appears the offspring of extrinsic necessity, 
and every virtue, the emanation ofjnterior goodness; while, on 
the contrary, the arguments to ber discredit have considered 
the shades of hell as too bright to display the atrocity of a life 
where hypocrisy lurked under a sanctified veil, and adultery 
the Beauchamps, Barons of Bedford ; but, at the 
beginning of the seventeenth century, it became the 
property of the Monoux family.
Humphrey Mo- 
noux, of Wooton, was created a baronet in 1660.
It is now the property of his descendant, Sir Philip 
Monoux, Bart, who resides at Sandy.
The parish church contains several monuments in 
memory of the Monoux family, among which are 
those of all the baronets, and that of Lieutenant Mo- 
noux, who was killed in the action with the Duke of 
Monmouth's army in 1685 ; he was first buried at 
Chard in Somersetshire, but his body was afterwards 
removed to Wooton church.
Wrest Park.] — Wrest Park, the seat of Lady 
Lucas, daughter of the late Earl of Hardwicke, is 
in the parish of Flitton, which has been already de- 
scribed.
In the year 1524, it was the seat of Sir 
Henry Grey, whose ancestor Edmund, Lord Grey, 
of Ruthin, was created Earl of Kent in 1165.
In 
1706 Henry de Grey, Earl of Kent, was created 
Marquis, and in 1710 Duke of Kent.
He died in 
1740, without leaving male issue, when the dukedom 
became extinct ; the marquasite had been entailed 
on his eldest daughter Jemima, the lady of Lord 
Hardwicke, the mother of the present possessor.
The house has been so much altered and improv- 
ed, at various times, particularly by the Marchioness 
of Grey, during her widowhood, that it retains but 
little appearance of antiquity.
It is constructed of 
white stone, and, upon the whole, is a very hand- 
some edifice.
It contains a great number of pic- 
tures, among which are many valuable portraits, 
forming nearly a complete series of the noble family 
of Grey, from Henry, Earl of Kent, one of the peers 
who sat on the trial of Mary, Queen of Scots, to the 
present time.
The following particularly merit at- 
tention : — 
Mary,Queenof Scots, represented dressed in black, 
her head reclining, in a pensive attitude, on a table.
She was beheaded in Fotheringhay Castle, North- 
amptonshire, in the year 1587.* 
James the First, Anne of Denmark, and Henry 
' their son.
This is a very fine picture.
Prince Henry 
died in the year 1613, much regretted by the country 
at large.
Elizabeth, Countess of Kent, who resided atWresI^ 
during her widowhood, and there patronised Butler ' 
and midnight murder were the heralds of pleasure.
Thu« has 
her history been reduced to a chaos of contradiction, where 
consummate censure, and unqualified praise, so mingle in the 
discordant mass, that the utmost exertions of cultivated intel- 
lect are scarcely able to distinguish the suggestions of unadul- 
terated truth from the ebullitions of malicious falsehood, ft 
has been said, and not unaptly, that, of three histories of her 
life, written in the time nearest to the age in.which she lived,.
Camden's, whose annals were revised and corrected by James 
the First, is almost wholly devoid of truth ; that Buchanan's told 
the whole truth, and more than the truth ; and that Melvil's 
related the truth, but not the whole truth.
The Reverend 
Mr. Whitakef's History of this Princess is superior to them 
iill." 
the 
52 
BEDFORDSHIRE* 
the poet.
She was frequently -visited by the learned 
Selden.
Lord Somers.
This celebrated statesman had a 
considerable share in the conduct of the Revolution 
in 1688.
Philip, Duke of Wharton ; a nobleman distin- 
guished by his talents, and by his extraordinary ver- 
satility.
Lady Jane Grey, represented in a plain -white cap, 
a handkerchief fastened under her arms, and a black 
gown.
She has a book in her hand.
The extraor- 
dinary talents and acquirements of this unfortunate 
lady are well known.
At the age of 16 years, she 
was mistress of the Greek and Latin, versed in He- 
brew, Chaldaic, Arabic, French, and Italian ; skilled 
in music ; and excellent at needle work.
Lord Chancellor llardwicke ; by Hoare of Bath.
This eminent lawyer, who was born at Dover in 1690, 
after filling the respective stations of solicitor and 
attorney-general, was appointed chief justice of the 
King's Bench, and created a peer.
On the decease 
of Lord Talbot in 1736, he.
was promoted to the of- 
fice of Lord Chancellor, which he held 20 years.
In 
1764 he was created Earl of Hardwicke, and died in 
the year 1774.
Sir William Temple, arrayed in a red vest, his 
hair black and flowing ; his whiskers small.
He 
holds in his hand the triple alliance, tine greatest act 
of his patriotic life ; but which was rendered useless 
by the profligacy of the ministry of the times in which 
he lived.
Amabel, the second Countess of Henry, Earl of 
Kent, who died in 1651.
This lady was commonly 
called the good Countess of Kent ; during her son's 
minority she redeemed and considerably improved 
the family estate.
Sir Charles Lucas ; by Dobson, a half-length.
Sir Charles is represented in armour, with a fine sash, 
and long hair.
This gentleman was brother of the 
first Lord Lucas.
. 
A very curious portrait of Lady Susan Grey, 
daughter of Charles, Earl of Kent, and wife to Sir 
Michael Longueville, is placed in the passage.
This 
lady was celebrated for her skill in needle- work, and 
1$ represented in a wedding suit of her own making.
She is said to have died in consequence of pricking 
her finger with a needle.
She appears extremely 
pale in the painting : her gown is finely flowered, 
her petticoat white and striped, her robes lined 
with ermine, her veil large and distended : her 
wedding ring hangs from her wrist by a silken 
string.
Secretary Walsingham.
— This patriot statesman 
was so attentive to the interests of his country, and 
so negligent of his own, as to die without leaving 
enough to defray his funeral expences.
His charac- 
ter, in this respect, resembled that of the late illus- 
trious William Pitt.
At Wrest Park, the pleasure grounds exhibit a 
specimen of the old style, improved by Brown, whose 
skill was particularly displayed in the noble serpen- 
tine river, which forms a principal ornament in these 
grounds.
It is a very fine piece of water, about 
three quarters of a mile in length, surrounding the 
garden, and supplied by a spring, rising at a short 
distance from the house.
At the spring head is a 
cold-bath, over which is a building in imitatiou of a 
Roman temple, after a design of Sir William Cham- 
bers.
Henry, Duke of Kent, during his residence at 
Wrest Park, adorned the gardens with obelisks and 
other ornamental buildings ; particularly a magnifi- 
cent banquetting house, which terminates a spaci- 
ous avenue in front of the mansion, and a large 
room where he passed many convivial hours with 
some of the eminent statesmen who were his cotem- 
poraries.
The pleasure grounds abound with fine large 
trees, and the park is remarkably well wooded and 
and stocked with deer.
In one part is a verv fine 
obelisk, which, from its elevated situation, is to be 
seen at the distance of several miles.
On a hermitage in this park, are inscribed the fol- 
lowing beautiful lines : — 
" Stranger, or guest, whom e'er this hallow' d grove, 
Shall chance receive, where sweet contentment dwells, 
Bring here no heart that with ambition swells, 
With av'rice pines, or burns with lawless love.
Vice-tainted souls will all in vain remove, 
To sylvan shades and hermit's peaceful cells ; 
In vain will seek Retirement's lenient spells, 
Or hope that bliss which only good men prove.
If Heaven-born truth, and sacred virtue's lore, 
Which cheer, adorn, and dignify the mind, 
Are constant inmates of thy honest breast ; 
If unrepining at thy neighbour's store, 
Thou count' st as thine the good of all mankind, 
Then welcome share the friendly groves of Wrest." 
Agriculture.] — The agriculture of the county of 
Bedford has been already slightly touched upon.
Of the 307,200 acres, of which the area of Bedford- 
shire is composed, the author of the Genera/ Vitw of 
the Agriculture of this County, estimates 217,200 
acres to be in open or common fields, rommon mea- 
dows, commons, and wastes ; 68,100 in inclosed 
meadows, pasture, and arable ; and 21,900 in wood- 
land.
The late Duke of Bedford, by his truly patriotic 
endeavours, excited a laudable emulation among the 
farmers in the neighbourhood of Woburn, and other 
parts of the county, the good effects of which are 
apparent, to an extraordinary extent.
The qualities 
of cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, &c.
have been greatly 
improved by the introduction of the most celebrated 
breeds from other counties, and the melioration of 
the land has kept equal pace with the improvement 
of the cattle.
In both departments the agricultural 
system of the county is rapidly, advancing to perfec- 
tion.
The present Duke of Bedford follows the steps of 
his late brother, in patronising experimental agri- 
culture, and keeps up all the establishments which 
had been formed for that purpose.
The park farm 
at 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
53 
at Woburn well deserves the attention of every man, 
who feels himself interested in the advancement of 
agriculture.
The farm-yard is replete with conve- 
niences for abridging and expediting labour ; be- 
sides barns, stables, fatting-houses, &c.
there is a 
mill for threshing, winnowing, grinding, and dress- 
ing wheat, &c.
In another part is a small water- 
wheel, which gives motion to some ingenious machi- 
nery, for bruising malt and cutting straw into chaff.
The water is supplied by pipes, which convej it from 
ponds situatetl on the adjoining eminences.
Most 
of these conveniences were constructed, under the 
direction of Mr. Salmon, the Duke's clerk of the 
works, the ingenious inventor of several useful im- 
provements in agricultural implements.
The late Duke established an annual sheep-shear- 
ing, which was continued by the present, until the 
year 1813.
Three or four hundred persons generally 
assembled on these occasions, to partake of the festive 
cheer of Woburn.
The meeting was held about the 
middle of June, and continued for several days.
During the time experiments were made with newly- 
invented implements of agriculture, and premiums 
were given for those which av ere judged to be of the 
most utility.
Large premiums were also given to 
those persons, who in the course of the preceding 
year, might have expended the greatest sums in in- 
troducing valuable breeds of other counties, or who 
produced the best specimens of sheep, &c.
bred in 
Bedfordshire : smaller sums were distributed for the 
furtherance of beneficial practices in husbandry.
* 
Lord Ossory, Mr. Whitbread, and many other 
private gentlemen, added their influence and example 
towards the improvement of the agriculture of this 
county ; so that throughout the whole of the culti- 
vated part of it, the best systems universally ob- 
tain.
— Truth, however, requires it to be mentioned, 
that, in 1813, when his Grace the Duke of Bedford 
thought proper to discontinue the annual sheep- 
shearing, at Woburn, he assigned, as a principal 
reason for its discontinuance, that the improvements 
which it had effected in agriculture, the breeding of 
cattle, &c.
had not been found adequate to the rea- 
sonable expectations which had been formed on the 
subject.
The remark was not very flattering to the 
Bedfordshire agriculturist.
The parish of Sandy, near Northill, is celebrated 
for its gardens : there are upwards of two hundred 
acres of land, occupied by nearly as many gardeners, 
who supply the whole country with vegetables, from 
Hertford to the metropolis.
Their soil is a rich 
black sand, two or three feet deep.
They sow car- 
rots about Lady-day, upon ground dug one spit 
deep : they hoe them very carefully three times ; and 
the work by the day comes to nearly two pounds per 
* After dinner, on the 14th of June, 1808, the second day 
of the annual meeting, Lord Somerville rose, and presented to 
the Duke of Bedford a large silver salver from the Agricul- 
turists of Great Britain.
This elegant piece of plate weighed 
about four hundred ounces, and was about eighteen inches by 
two feet in size ; its border was decorated with embossed figures, 
VOL.
I. — NO.
4. 
acre for the three hoeings, in proportion to the good- 
ness of the crop.
They set them out about eight or 
ten inches, from plant to plant, and get, on a me- 
dium, a crop of two hundred bushels upon an acre.
Parsnips are cultivated here exactly in the same 
manner, but the product never equals that of carrots 
by fifty or sixty bushels.
The price of carrots 
varies from eighteen-pence to six shillings per bu- 
shel, but the former price is very low.
They plant 
potatoes at the same time : twenty bushels plant an 
acre, at the distance of about one foot every way ; 
they hoe them three times, but not at all before they 
come up, as is practised in some counties.
The 
Midsummer dun sort is considered to yield the best ; 
a middling crop is two hundred and fifty bushels per- 
acre ; they always manure for them, either with dung 
or ashes, about twenty loads, but the preference is 
given to ashes.
They sow great quantities of onions about a fort- 
night before Lady-day ; they hoe and weed them 
always five times, at the expence of about four 
pounds per acre, and set them out six inches asun- 
der.
The average crop is about two hundred bushels, 
the price varying from two to six shillings a bushel.
They always carefully manure for them.
The gardeners at this place give from two pounds 
to five pounds rent per acre, for their land, and in 
some instances considerably more.
The soil, as we 
have already observed, is a rich loose black sand, of 
a good depth, and \ery favourably protected from 
cold winds by several considerable hills.
It is a cu- 
rious, and a very pleasing sight, to behold crops of 
onions, potatoes, French beans, and even whole 
fields of cucumbers, intermixed with crops of wheat, 
barley, turnips, &c.
Tithes.] — At the Bedford Summer Assizes of 
1810, was tried before Sir James Mansfield, Chief 
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and a spe- 
cial jury, a cause of importance, inasmuch as it 
should seem, that most land, from whence it cannot 
be proved tithes have ever beeiu taken, has been le- 
gally exempted and freed from the payment, and 
could in all cases probably be satisfactorily proved, 
as was done in this cause, where proper research 
was made.
The question arose out of an act for en- 
closing lands in the parish of Herlington, in the 
county of Bedford.
John Cooper, Esq. as owner of 
the rectory of Herlington, claimed an allotment or 
sum of money in lieu of the tithes of the farm called 
Herlington Grange, the property of Sir John Eve- 
ritt.
For the plaintiff it was proved that the rectory 
(formerly belonged to the priory of Dunstapk) was 
granted by Queen Elizabeth in the 20th year of her 
reign to the Earl of Lincoln, and was conveyed to 
the plaintiff in 1808.
For the defendant it was 
emblematical of agriculture; in the centre was the Bedford 
arms superbly engraved, with this inscription.
— " To his Grace 
John, Duke of Bedford, from the Agriculturists of Great Bri- 
tain, Anno Domini, 1807."— His Grace returned thanks in an 
elegant and animated speech.
o proved 
54 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
proved that Ralph Pyrot, formerly Lord of Herling- 
ton, gave to the ahbey and monks of Woburn of the 
Cistercian Order in the reign of King Henry II.
land, part of his see.
and that in the thirty-first year 
of the reign of King Edward I.
it was found by in- 
quisition, that Ralph Pyrot and his tenants held the 
parish of Herlington for one knight's fee, whereof 
the abbey of Woburn held part in pure alms.
That 
in the sixth year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth the 
land in llerlington, which had belonged to the abbey 
of Woburn was granted by the Queen to John Lee, 
by the description of all that our Grange called Pol- 
lox Hill, otherwise Herlington Grange, and tbe lands 
and tithes thereto belonging in Herlington, and that 
nn indenture enrolled in the Chancery in the reign of 
King James I.
the several classes belonging to the 
Grange were particularized and named ; and also 
therein stated (and the owner of the rectory a party) 
that the lands in Herlington parcel of the Grange 
had been out of mind of man holden, used, and en- 
joyed, discharged and free of and from all manner of 
tithes : which should belong to the reetory of Her- 
lington.
The cause was proved for the defendant 
by records produced on the trial by Mr. George Van- 
derzee ; and a verdict was given for the defendant.
Lancasterian Schools.] — Public schools, upon 
the plan of Joseph Lancaster, have flourished greatly 
in the county.
Early in the year 1310, Mr. Whit- 
bread opened one at Shefford, for the benefit of his 
neighbourhood.
This school proving useful, as well 
as the one established by the Duke of Bedford, at 
Woburn, gave rise to several others.
The Marquis 
of Bute established one at Luton ; Mr. Wiltshire in- 
stituted another at Hitchin ; and similar establish- 
ments have been founded at Newport Pagnall, Fenny 
Stratford, &c.
; so that all the poor of the county 
are likely to participate in the advantages of educa- 
tion.
Customs.] — Amongst the customs prevalent in, 
though not peculiar to, this county, is that of bump- 
ing.
At certain periods, the parishioners go in pro- 
cession to ascertain the boundaries of their respective 
parishes ; at which time the said procession is gene- 
rally composed of young people, and many of the 
respectable inhabitants, who are most convivially in- 
clined ; and it has been a received opinion (no doubt 
a very traditional one) that they possess a right to 
stop all persons, excepting his Majesty, a mail- 
coach, or a funeral !
At which time the said party 
exercise a pleasant and gentle mode, by way of re- 
membrance (but perhaps not very congenial to the 
feelings of an irritable man) called bumping !
and not 
till of late was its origin or authority disputed : — 
The inhabitants of Caddington parish, near Luton, 
in this county, in their procession after exercising 
their prescriptive right on a number of persons, in 
their way from Dunstaple to Luton, met with Mr.
Hill, a celebrated auctioneer of the latter place ; they 
accosted him, told him their intention, and explained 
their custom.
Mr. Hill violently resisted, and fore- 
warned them of the consequences of stopping a man 
on the King's highway.
However, the humourous 
and good-natured folks, anxious and determined to 
support a charter st> gratifying, seized, and in a trice 
unhorsed the knight of the ivory hammer !
and with 
a ' one — two — three,' and a ' going — going — going,' 
they made the same use of his seat of honour as he 
sometimes did of the ivory hammer ; or, in plain Eng- 
lish they bumped him, replaced him on his horse, 
bade him good speed, and proceeded to finish their 
task.
— Mr. Hill brought an action for an assault 
against the parties, and it was tried at the spring as- 
sizes at Bedford, in the year 1809, when he obtained 
a verdict of five pounds damages and costs.
Manufactures and Trade.] — Bedfordshire is not 
distinguished as a manufacturing county.
The inha- 
bitants are chiefly employed in agriculture ; but, of 
late years, the manufacture of straw hats has greatly 
increased, and furnishes a livelihood to the poor of 
many towns.
Lace-making is also carried on, to a 
considerable extent, and several waggon loads of 
matting, made from the rushes of the Ouse, at Ste- 
venton, are annually sent to London.
The barley which is raised in this county is chiefly 
disposed of in Hertfordshire ; the wheat, in the 
counties of Warwick and Leicester.
Bedford, the county town, being at the head of 
the Ouse navigation, carries on a considerable trade 
with Lynn, for coals, corn, timber, iron, salt, and 
various other commodities.
Fairs.] — Most, if not the whole of the fairs which 
are holden in this county have been already specified ; 
but, for the purpose of exhibiting them at a single 
view, we present the following list : — 
Jmpthill — May 4, November 30, cattle.
Bedjord — First Tuesday in Lent, April 21, July 5, 
August 21, October 11, December 19 ; cattle of all 
sorts.
Biggleswade— February 13, Saturday in Easter 
week, Whit-Monday, August 2, November 8 ; cat- 
tle of all sorts.
Dunstaple — Ash- Wednesday, May 22 ; a great 
horse fair.
August 12, November 12 ; cattle.
Elstow — May 15, 16 ; November 5, 6 ; cattle of 
all sorts.
Harold — Tuesday before May 12, Tuesday be- 
fore July 5, Tuesday before October, 10 ; cattle.
lekwcll — April 5 ; cattle of all sorts.
Leigh ton Buzard — February 5, Whit Tuesday, 
July 26, October 24 ; cattle.
Second Tuesday in 
April ; a shew of horses and all sorts of cattle.
St. Leonard's, near Bedford — November 17 ; cat- 
tle of all sorts.
Luton — April 18, October 18 ; cattle of all sorts.
Odell — Thursday in Whitsun-week ; cattle of all 
sorts.
Potion — Third Tuesday in January ; a large horse 
fair.
Last Tuesday in April, First Tuesday in July, 
Tuesday before October 29 ; cattle in general.
Shefford — January 23, Easter Monday, May 19, 
October 10 ; cattle.
Silsoe — May 12, September 21 ; cattle of all sorts.
Toddington 
BEDFORDSHIRE.
55 
Toddington — April 25, first Monday in June, Sep- 
tember 4, November 2, December 16 ; cattle.
Woburn— January 1 ; horses, cattle, sheep, hogs, 
&c.
March 23, July 13, September 25 ; cattle.
Canals.] — The Grand Junction Canal touches on 
the borders of Bedfordshire, and the neighbourhood 
of Leighton Busard, and comes up to that town - r 
but no navigable canal passes through the county ; 
a canal from Leighton, to join the Ouse, at Bedford, 
has been some time in contemplation.
^ 
Roads.] — By referring to the map of this county; 
the respective roads which pass through it will be 
easily traced.
It may, however, be proper to ob- 
serve, that the great northern road to Glasgow, &c.
enters Bedfordshire about the 41 mile-stone ; crosses 
the Ivel, at Girtford, and the Ouse, at Tempsford ; 
and quits the county about two miles from Eaton- 
Socon.
At Tempsford, a turnpike-road branches off from 
the Glasgow road, and passes through Little Bar- 
ford to St. Neot's.
The great road to Chester and Holyhead enters 
Bedford about tbe 33d mile-stone ; leaves Houghton 
Regis on the right, and Tilsworth and Stanbridge 
on the left, passes to HocklifFe, leaves Battlesden 
and Potesgrave on the right, and quits the county 
about the 42d mile-stone.
The great road to Liverpool branches off from 
this road near Hockliffe, and quits the county about 
two miles on the other side of Woburn.
From Hertfordshire, the road from London to 
Higham Ferrers and Kettering enters this county 
about the3frth mile-stone ; and, leaving Holwell and 
Hondon on the left, after a course of about twenty- 
six miles, it enters Northamptonshire eleven miles 
beyond Bedford.
A new turnpike road, from Brown's Lane, in 
Great Staughton, to the Bedford turnpike-road, in 
Lavendon, Bucks, is in considerable forwardness.
It crosses the Bedford road at Stokemill, and passes 
through Sharnbrook, Odel, and Harold.
Another road, from London to Bedford, enters 
the county at the 27th mile-stone from London, and 
passes through Luton, &c.
There is also a good turnpike-road, from Ampt- 
hill to Bedford ; another, from Ampthiil to Woburn ; 
and a third, from Bedford to Eaton Socon, on the 
south side of the Ouse, which joins the old road, on 
the north side of the Ouse, at the foot of Roxton 
Hill, beyond the village of Great Barford.
From Bedford to Olney, there is a turnpike-road, 
but it is much out of repair.
It passes over Bid- 
denham Bridge, through Bromham, to Turvey, 
where it leaves the county.
The old road, through Stagsden, towards New- 
port Pagnel, is impassable for carriages.
Some years ago, a turnpike-road was bcgun 4 
from Bedford to Kimbolton, but it is not yet com- 
plete.
Excepting in the immediate vicinity of Bedford,, 
the private roads are mostly bad.
The late Mr.
Whitbread made great improvements in the roads 
in the neighbourhood of Caddington and Elstow.
Although the distance is only five miles, there is 
no carriage-road from Dunstaple to Luton.
Table of Distance.] — The following Table is 
calculated to shew, at a single glance, the distances 
of the respective towns in Bedfordshire from each, 
other.
On the top and side are the names of the 
towns ; and the distance appears in the square 
where both meet.
* 
Ampthiil .
Dunstaple.
Harold.
Leighton Buzard.
Lute 
Potton 
Woburn.
Bedford Distance from London Miles 5f 
Ympthill 46] 
11 
18 
9 
19 
12 
14 
14 
12 
14 
14 
14 
16 
Biggleswade , ., 4.
22 
20 
28 
19 
6 
Dunstaple , 3t 
24 
3 
28 
Harold 5S 
22 
28 
21 
16 
Leighton Buzard 41 
Woburn ...43 
* As there is always some difference between distance mea- 
sured upon u road, and distance measured upon a map, one or 
two remarks here may be serviceable.
Major Rennell, in his 
Memoir of a Map of Hindoostan, observes that, seven miles 
of road measured are allowed to produce six miles in a direct 
line ; that one in eight may be a pretty just general propor- 
tion for distances of about a hundred miles; that in England, 
as far as the maps can be trusted, one in eleven is the propor- 
tion* in distances of about a hundred miles ; and that, in very 
great distances, such as Edinburgh, one in seven.
He ob- 
serves farther, by way of a general rule, that great distances 
should be broken into portions of 100 or 150 miles; and that 
one-eighth part should then be added.
For the maps which ac- 
company the present work, it will be proper, as far as relates to 
the cross-roads, to add one-seventh part to the.
rectilinear dis- 
tance.
The cross-roads, though short, are generally much 
more crooked than the great roads which lead to the metropo- 
lis, or to any of the large towns, 
BEDFORDSHIRE; 
56 
BERKSHIRE.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
BERKSHIRE, which is -an inland county, of a 
very irregular form, thought by some to re- 
semble the shape of a slipper, is bounded on the 
north by the counties of Oxford and Buckingham, 
on the east by Surrey, on the south by Hampshire, 
and on the west by Wilts.
A part of the latter 
county lies in the heart of Berkshire, including- the 
parishes of Wokingham, Hurst, Stunfield, and 
Swallowfield; a small portion of Berkshire lies 
on the north side of the Thames, surrounded by Ox- 
fordshire.
Altogether, the county of Berks contains about 
464,500 acres, including the parishes of Langford 
and Shilton, north of the Thames, and omitting that 
part of Wiltshire within the county.
Berkshire, according to Rocque's mensuration, is 
207 miles in circumference : its greatest length, 
from old Windsor to the County Cross, near Hun- 
gerford, is 42 miles : its greatest breadth, from Wi- 
tham, near Oxford, to the borders of Hampshire, 
south of Newbury, about 28 miles $ and its narrow- 
est, from the Thames, near Reading, across to the 
borders of Hampshire, in a direct south line, only 
Seven miles.
The western and middle parts of this county are 
accounted the most fertile ; the eastern is chiefly oc- 
cupied by Windsor Forest and its appendages, and 
has much uncultivated ground.
A range of chalk- 
hills runs across from Oxfordshire westward, bound- 
ing the most noted Vale of White Horse, which, 
with the other cultivated parts of the county, pro- 
duces grain in great abundance, and of excellent 
quality, especially barley, of which vast quantities 
are malted and sent to London.
On the grass lands 
in the vale are many good dairy farms ; and, in many 
parts of the county, great numbers of swine are fat- 
tened.
The southern, as well as the -eastern side of this 
county, contains a large proportion of wood-land.
Hazel, occasionally mixed with oak, beech, ash, and 
alder, is the predominant wood.
It is in the eastern part of the county, that the 
most picturesque and pleasing scenery is presented j 
particularly in Windsor Forest, on the road from 
Reading to Wallingford, and on the banks of the 
Thames, between Henley and Maidenhead.
To- 
wards Hampshire, from the high ground between 
Basildeu and Ash-hampstead, t[iere is a very rich 
prospect over the vale of Kennet ; and, towards Ox- 
fordshire, from the Downs, about Letcombe Castle, 
there is an extensive view over the vale of White 
Horse.
To mention the well-known and justly ad- 
mired prospect from Windsor Castle is sufficient to 
excite the most lively and delightful ideas.
Rivers.] — The chief rivers of Berkshire are, the 
Thames, whose course will be found fully described in 
our Introductory Sutvey, the Kennet, the Lodden, 
the Ock, the Lambourne, and the Enborn.
The 
first of these, which is indeed the First of all the 
British streams, enters the county at its northern ex- 
tremity, about a mile south of Lechdale, and pursues 
a beautiful winding course, along the whole of the 
northern side of the county, dividing it from Ox- 
fordshire and Buckinghamshire, and watering in its 
progress the towns of Abingdon, Wallingford, Hen- 
ley, Maidenhead, Windsor, &c.
There are seven- 
teen bridges over this river between Datchet and 
Lechdale, and it is navigable during the whole of its 
course.
' Pope's poetical picture of the Thames, and of his 
" sea-born brothers," is too beautiful to be here 
with-holden from the reader.
" From his oozy bed 
Old father Thames advane'd his rev'rend head ; 
His tresses droop'd with dews, and o'er the stream 
His shining horns diffus'd a golden gleam : 
Grav'd on his urn appear'd the moon, that guides, 
His swelling waters, and alternate tides; 
The rigur'd streams in waves of silver roll'd, 
And on her banks Augusta, rob'd in gold ; 
Around his throne the sea-born brothers stood, 
Who swell with tributary urns his flood : 
First the fam'd authors of his ancient name, 
The winding Isis, and the fruitful Thame ; 
The Kennet swift, for silver eels renown'd ; 
The Lodden slow, with verdant alders crowu'd ; 
Cole, whose dark streams his flow'ry islands lave ; 
And chalky Wey, that rolls a milky wave ; 
The blue transparent Vandal is appears ; 
The gulphy Lee his sedgy tresses rears ; 
And sullen Mole, that hides his diving flood ; 
And silent Dareiit, stain'd with Danish blood." 
Windsor Forest.
Barbel, pike, trout, and several other kinds of 
common fish, are produced by the Thames, in its 
course through Berkshire.
The Kennet enters Berkshire at Hungerford, be- 
comes navigable at Newbury, passes from thence 
through a rich vale, and after flowing through Rcad- 
2 i"g> 
I, 
'V 
ti 
$ 
Cj 
£ 
^ 
.•& 
R*l 
^/f« s ifl Mm) 
v.'; 
'I 
3 
BERKSHIRE.
57 
ing, unites *ts waters with the Thames.
" It is re- 
markable," says Mr. Gough, " that at Reading its 
course rises and falls with the Thames, not with the 
Kennet ; hence it is argued that the bed of the 
Thames is much lower than that of the Kennet, and 
detaches its springs under the bed of the latter." 
This river produces a great variety of fish, 
amongst which are trout, pike, barbel, perch, eels, 
cray-fish, chub, roach, and dace.
The trout of the 
Kennet have for ages been celebrated for their size 
and flavour.
A few years ago, Mr. Toonier, of 
Newbury, had three of these fish in his possession, 
which weighed fifteen pounds each.
Two of them 
had been fattened in the stew, but the other was of 
that weight when caught.
At another time, Mr.
Toomer had a trout in his stew, which attained the 
weight of seventeen pounds.
He gave it to the late 
Lord Craven, who made a present of it to her Ma- 
jesty.
The Lodden, or Loddon, the subject of Pope's 
fable of Lodona, rises near Aldcrshot, in Hamp- 
shire.
It begins to be a boundary between that 
county and Berkshire, at Blackwater, and so con- 
tinues for about eight miles, passing through Sand- 
hurst, and Yately.
It enters Berkshire in the pa- 
rish of Swallowfield, and passing by that village, 
and between Shinfield and Arborfield, crosses the 
Wokingham and Reading road at Lodden Bridge, 
and the Bath road at Twyford, and falls into the 
Thames near Wargrave.
Its course, after entering 
Berkshire, is about twelve miles.
The waters of 
this river are increased by a brook called the Emme, 
which rises near Bagshot rails, and falls into the 
Lodden at Sandford Mill.
The Ock has its source near Uffington ; and after 
an easterly course of nearly 20 miles, it falls into the 
Thames, near Abingdon.
The pike of this river are 
esteemed remarkably fine.
It also produces perch, 
gudgeon, roach, dace, and cray-fish.
The Enborn, or Anborn, rises in Berkshire, near 
Inkpen, and soon becomes a boundary between this 
county and Hampshire.
It continues an eastward 
direction for nearly twelve miles, when bending 
northward it again enters the county, and a little be- 
low Wasing, after a course of about seventeen miles, 
falls into the Kennet.
The Lambourne rises amongst the hills, near the 
town of that name ; and, after a course of about fif- 
teen miles, passing through Boekington Eastbury, 
East Garston, the two Sheffords, Weston, Walford, 
Easton, Westbrook, Bokford, Bagnor, Donuuigton, 
and Shaw, it falls into the Kennet.
This river has been much celebrated, as being al- 
ways fuller in summer than in winter.
Several in- 
genious hypotheses have been invented, to account 
for this phenomenon ; but the fact appears to be, 
that the current of the river is nearly the same at all 
times ; and the reason why the stream does not ma- 
terially increase in winter is, because there are but 
tew neighbouring eminences to pour their pluvial 
torrents into its bosom.
It is remarkable, however, 
vol.
j. — no.
4, 
that, in the great draught of the summer of 1803, its 
source was, for some months, entirely dried up.
The Lambourne abounds with the same fish as the 
Kennet : but its trout are of a paler colour, and less 
esteemed.
Besides these rivers, there is a stream which rises 
at Ginge, runs through East Hundred, &c.
and fails 
into the Thames at Sutton Courtney.
Mineral Springs.] — There are no minerals of 
value in this county ; and the only mineral springs 
deserving of notice, are those at Cumner and Sun- 
niughill : the former a mild cathartic ; the latter a 
very weak chalybeate.
Near Luckly House, in the 
parish of Wokingham, there is a strong chalybeate 
spring, called Gorrick well ; and there are some 
springs near Windsor, of the nature of the Epsom 
waters.
Fossils.] — This county is not much more prolific 
in fossils than in minerals.
In Catsgrove, a small 
field near Reading, there is a stratum of sea-sand, 
about two feet thick, in which are great quantities of 
oyster shells.
Above the sand is a bed of blue clay, 
about a yard thick ; and, immediately over the clay, 
is a stratum of Fuller's earth, nearly two feet and a 
half deep.
A shark's tooth, and echini of several 
kinds, have also been found at Catsgrove ; and 
Woodward states, that the same stratum of sand, 
with shells, is to be found, at various depths, from 
fifteen to twenty-five feet, for two miles on every 
side of Reading.
Lime-stone is to be found in various parts of the 
county, especially near Faringdon, in the stratum of 
which, fossil shells, and other marine productions, 
are to be seen in great plenty.
Twelve or fourteen years ago, a vein of free-stone 
was discovered at Hose Hill, in the parish of Burgh- 
field, on the south side of the river Kennet.
It was, 
however, found to be of too soft a texture to be ser- 
viceable.
The probability of au under stratum of 
coal being suggested, a shaft was dug to a great 
depth ; but nothing was discovered worthy of obser- 
vation, excepting a bed of cockle shells, about twelve 
feet beneath the surface, one foot in thickness.
The 
shells were firmly concreted with sand.
Some remarkable stones, called by the country 
people Sarsden-stones, or the Grey -wethers, are 
scattered over the Berkshire and Wiltshire Downs.
They are of a fine siliceous grit ; and are frequently 
used for pitching, after having been blasted by gun- 
powder ; but they are too hard to be wrought.
As 
they are found upon strata to which they evidently 
do not belong, they are supposed to have been re- 
moved by some violent concussion of nature.
The 
appellation of Grey-wethers is warranted by their ap- 
pearance at a distance, which resembles that of grey 
sheep lying upon the ground.
In digging for gravel upon Mortimer Heath, 
many bones of elks and mouse deer have been found.
A great quantity of peat is found in the vale of 
Kennet, on both sides of the river, for several miles 
above and below the town of Newbury.
It lies at 
P various 
58 
BERKSHIRE.
various depths Below the surface ; the stratum vary- 
ing in thickness, from one to eight or nine feet.
The 
peat sells for fourteen shillings per load, and the 
ashes for three-pence half-penny per bushel, to the 
farmers.
It affords an excellent manure.
Horns, 
heads, and bones, of various animals have been 
found in the peat ; beneath which there is generally 
a stratum of gravel.
Plants.] — This county is but little distinguished 
by its botanical productions.
Amongst the plants 
which occur the least frequently, are the Satix ru- 
bra, the Myrica Gale, and the Monoptra hypopijthys.
The Asarum Eiirnpa'tim has been found in the beech 
woods between Henley and Maidenhead ; the lberis 
A mar a grows abundantly, as a weed, in the corn- 
fields near Wallingford ; the Antirrhinum mom- 
pasmlanum, or Antirrhinum repens, a plant of very 
rare occurrence, is found in great plenty on the 
chalky banks of Henley hill, in the parish of Rer- 
nenham ; the Galanthis nivalis thrives in a wild 
state, in Ufton woods ; and the Euphorbia Lathyris 
is naturalised on several stony banks, in the same 
neighbourhood.
The hycopodium setago, and the 
hycopodium inundatum, are also found in a bog on 
Ufton common ; the Lycoperdum fornicatum, at 
Sulhamnted ; the Gentiona Pnenmonanthe, on Sul- 
hamsted common ; and the Astrigatus g/ycyphytlus, 
near Twyford turnpike.
Etymology.] — Numerous are the conjectures 
which have been farmed, respecting the derivation 
of the present name of this county.
By the Latin 
writers, it was anciently denominated Bercheria; 
also by the Saxons Beroc-scyre, which name Aster 
Menevensis, an ancient English historian, derives 
from Barroc, a certain wood, where plenty of box 
grew.
The latter opinion is supported by the learn- 
ed and ingenious Mr. Wise, who published a letter 
to Dr. Mead, upon the subject, in the year 1738.
He observed that till lately, the word Be) roc was to 
be seen, in the parish of Fulham, at a place called 
Boxgrove, where box grew in great abundance.
The remains of Boxgrove had been grubbed up 
about two years before ; but, long since that period, 
the box tree again grew plentifully in the adjacent 
parish of Tilehurst, in Reading hundred.
Some etymologists conceive the word Berkshire, 
to be derived from a hare oak, on Windsor forest, 
around which the inhabitants used to assemble, to 
consult upon public affairs ; and others consider it 
to have been taken from the Bibroci, a people who 
anciently inhabited a part of the county.
The Rev. John Whitaker, and Mr. Owen, the 
editor of the Cambrian Register, have thrown con- 
siderable light upon the ancient state of this county.
The former, in his History of Manchester, informs 
us, that Berkshire was inhabited by three nations 
or tribes, respectively denominated Attrebates, Bi- 
broces, or Rhemi, and Segontiaci ; and it appears 
from the derivations given by Mr. Owen, in the 
second volume of the " Cambrian Register," that 
the name of each tribe had its origin from the ge- 
neral characteristic of that portion of*the county 
they occupied.
— Thus the Attrebates, who occupied 
nearly the whole of the western parts of Berkshire, 
from the river Lodden on the south-east, the banks 
of the Thames on the north-west and west, and the 
hills of East-Ilsley, Lamborn, and Ashbury, on 
the south, would be so denominated from the roots 
Attrev, and Attrevad ; words expressive of habita- 
tions bordering on a river, or woods, or upon any 
range of hills ; as were the residences of these peo- 
ple.
The Bibroces, who occupied the south-eastern 
part of the county, from the Lodden on the west to 
the Thames on the east, would derive that appella- 
tion from Pau Brog, or their compounds, signify- 
ing, a district covered with tufts of wood, brakes, 
or thickets.
The Segontiaci, who inhabited a por- 
tion of the south of Berkshire, about the upper 
banks of the Kennet, and the north of Hampshire, 
were so called from Isgwent, hgzcentzog, Isgwcntog ; 
words implying the lower Gwent, and descriptive of 
open downs.
Berkshire, under the division of Britain by the 
Roman Emperor Constantine, was included in the 
Britannia Prima ; during the Saxon heptarchy it 
formed a part of the kingdom of Wessex or West 
Saxons ; and, in the reign of Alfred it assumed the 
present name of Berocshire or Berkshire, and was 
by him divided into twenty-two hundreds.
General History.] — Offa, king of the Mer- 
cians, who commenced his reign in the year 758, 
conquered Kinewulf, King of the West Saxons, 
and seized upon all the country, from Wallingford 
to Ashbury, which lay between the Ickeneld Street 
and the Thames.
This is the earliest historical fact 
upon record, relating to the county of Berkshire.
In 871, the Danes, having made an irruption into 
Wessex, were defeated on Englefield, by Earl 
Athelwolf ; after which they retreated to Reading, 
where they intrenched themselves ; and, in a sally 
from that place, they made a successful attack upon 
the army of King Ethelred, in which the brave 
Athelwolf fell.
A few days after this event, the famous battle of 
Ashdown was fought, in which Ethelred, assisted 
by the great Alfred, his successor, defeated the 
Danes, killed their King Bacseg, or Basregh, and 
drove them back to Reading.
The site of this bat- 
tle has never been agreed upon by historians.
Mr.
Wise, and most modern writers, consider it to be 
upon the Downs, near Ashbury, where Lord Cra- 
ven has a seat, now called Ashdown Park ; and 
that the figure of the White Horse, near Uffing- 
ton, was a memorial of the victory.
Others, how- 
ever, have adduced reasons for supposing the battle 
to have been fought in that part of the county, which 
corresponds with the modern hundred of Compton.
The chronicle of Melros records another battle 
which was fought at Reading, after that at Ash- 
down.
In 872, the Danes spent the winter in 
Reading.
Eddington, near Westbury, in Wiltshire, is sup- 
posed 
BERKSHIRE.
59 
posed by Camden, and by most succeeding anti- 
quaries, to have been the Ethandune of the Saxon 
chronicle, where Alfred gained a decisive victory 
over the Danes, in the year 878 ; but Dr. Beke, 
the learned Professor of Modern History, in the 
University of Oxford, has furnished reasons, al- 
most irrefragable, for believing the victory to have 
been obtained at Eddington, near Hunerford, in 
Berkshire.
The Danes made an irruption into Berkshire, in 
the year 1006 ; and, on their return, after they had 
burnt Reading, Wallingford, Cholsey, and a num- 
ber < of villages, they obtained a victory over the 
Saxons, near the Kennet.
lu 1011, this county was under the dominion of 
King Ethelred ; but Swain, King of Denmark, 
appears to have been at Wallingford in that year.
During the wars between King Stephen and the 
friends of the Empress Maud, the castles of Far- 
ringdon and Newbury were taken by the royal par- 
ty.
Wallingford, one of the strongest garrisons of 
the Empress, was the place of her retreat when she 
fled from Oxford.
It was repeatedly besieged by 
Stephen ; but Briars Fitz Count, its brave gover- 
nor, defended it till the termination of the war, 
when peace was made beneath its walls.
The cas- 
tles of Brightwell and Reading were then given up 
to Henry Duke of Normandy.
During King Richard's absence in Palestine, his 
brother John came over from Normandy, and seiz- 
ed the castles of Wallingford and Windsor.
The 
latter was soon retaken ; and both of them were 
afterwards placed in the hands of the Queen Dowa- 
ger.
Two amicable meetings were holden in Berkshire, 
between King John and his barons, in the year 
1213 ; the one at Wallingford, in November, the 
other at Reading, in December.
Wallingford was fortified by the King, in 1216 ; 
and, in the same year, Windsor was besieged by 
the barons.
Windsor castle was taken by Sirron de Montfort, 
in 1263.
At Reading, in the year 1389, by the mediation 
Of John of Gaunt, a temporary reconciliation was 
effected between Richard II.
and his discontented 
nobles.
In the seventeenth century, Berkshire was fre- 
quently the scene of action between the contending 
parties.
Wallingford castle, garrisoned by King 
Charles, was one of the last which surrendered.
Windsor, at which the unfortunate monarch spent 
his last Christmas, as a prisoner, was garrisoned 
by the Parliament in 1642, and continued in their 
possession the whole of the Avar.
Reading was 
garrisoned by the Parliament ; but Harry Marten, 
its governor, quitted it in October, 1642, on the 
approach of the king, whose head quarters were 
then at Abingdon.
After a siege, however, of ten 
<iays, Reading was taken by the Parliament, in 
1643.
In the month of September following, the first 
battle of Newbury was fought, in which Lord Falk- 
land, and the Earls of Sunderland and Carnarvon, 
lost their lives, both parties claiming the victory.
After the action, the Earl of Essex went to Read- 
ing, whence he halted for a few days, and then 
drew off all his forces from that town, which was 
again garrisoned for the King, under Sir Jacob 
Astley.
When the king returned to Oxford, after 
the battle of Newbury, he left a garrison at Don - 
nington Castle, which, during several sieges, was 
bravely defended by its governor, Colonel Boys.
Early in 1644, the Parliament became masters of 
all Berkshire, except the garrison at Wallingford.
The royal army, after having been quartered a 
month at Newbury, marched to Reading, and dis- 
mantled the fortifications of that town, which was 
immediately taken possession of by the Parliament.
For some days, the King's army was afterwards 
quartered at Wantage, and in the neighbouring vil- 
lages.
The infantry were then ordered to Abing- 
don, to defend that town ; but the General quitted 
it, on the approach of the Earl of Essex, without 
resistance.
Abingdon was subsequently garrisoned by the 
Parliament, under Colonel Browne, and resisted 
several attacks by the royalists.
In October 1644, a second battle was fought near 
Newbury ; in which, as at the first both parties 
claimed the victory.
King Charles, having reliev- 
ed Donnington Castle, knighted its governor, and 
marched to Lamborn ; whence he proceeded, by the 
way of Marlborough, to Hungerford, and from Hun- 
gerford through Farringdon, to Oxford.
The Par- 
liament army went into winter quarters at Abing- 
don, Reading, and the adjacent parts.
An unsuccessful attack was made upon the Par- 
liamentary garrison, at Abingdon, by Sir Stephen 
Hawkins, in 1645 ; and, about the same time, Crom- 
well, with similar success, attacked the royal gar- 
rison at Farringdon.
Cromwell was more success- 
ful in a skirmish at Radcot bridge, where he took 
Colonel Littleton, and Sir William Vaughan, with 
200 of their troops, prisoners.
In March 1646, Prince Rupert made an unsuc- 
cessful attack upon Abingdon ; and, in the summer 
of that year, Wallingford and Farringdon were sur- 
rendered to the Parliament.
In July 1647, Sir Thomas Fairfax's head quar- 
ters were at Reading.
The last military events of any consequence, 
which took place in this county, previously to the 
revolution which seated King William upon the 
throne, were a slight skirmish at Reading, in De- 
cember 1688, and one still less important, at Twy- 
ford.
Antiquities.] — The Roman roads and stations 
in this county are highly interesting to the antiquary.
Berkshire is traversed by the former, in several dif- 
ferent directions ; but it is scarcely possible precise- 
ly to fix the points to which they tend j and, out of 
t three 
BERKSHIRE.
three undoubted Roman towns, the site of Spene 
only has been ascertained.
The name of another 
(Bibrante) is known ; but its position has not been 
satisfactorily determined ; and though the situation 
of the other has been fixed, with considerable pro- 
bability, its name is totally unknown.
The most marked of the Roman roads, which 
pass through Berkshire, is that from Glevum, 
(Gloucester) to London.
It enters this county from 
Baydon, and falls into the modern high road from 
Rath to London, near the 58th mile stone, in less 
than a mile alter Avhich it must have reached the 
station of Spina:, or Spene.
From that place to 
London, its course has not been ascertained.
It 
may have taken a direction towards Silchester, 
where it would join the great western Roman road 
from Old Sarum to London ; or it may have con- 
tinued easterly, more in the course of the present 
Bath road, to Lawrence Waltham, and crossed the 
Thames at Braz, supposed by some to have been 
JBibractc.
The former course seems the more pro- 
bable.
The Ikeneld Street enters Berkshire by a ford 
over the Thames at Streatley, where it divides into 
two great branches ; one of which, under the de- 
nomination of the Redgway, continues on the edge 
of the high ground by Cuekhamsley, Letcombe, 
and White Horse Hill, into Wiltshire ; while the 
other goes by Hampstead Hermitage, towards 
Newbury and Strut, to Old Sarum.
Another very old road, probably of Roman ori- 
gin, enters Berkshire on its north-westerly borders, 
from Wiltshire, under the name of the Port-way.
It passes near Uffington, Wantage, and Hendred, 
seeming to have taken a direction to some spot south 
of Wallingford.
From this north part of Berk- 
shire, some traces of a road are visible between 
Wantage and Thatcham, under the name of the 
Old Street, whence it probably proceeded towards 
Sik'be^ter.
Two banks and ditches, running north and south 
over Greenham Heath, and another in the same di- 
rection over Mortimer Heath, arc supposed to have 
been parts of a Roman road towards Streatley or 
Waliingford.
Wallingford, where several coins of the Empe- 
rors Posthumous, Gordianus, &c.
have frequently 
been found, is supposed to have been a Roman 
town, the name of which is unknown.
Roman coins, and urns, have been found also at 
Lawrence, Waltham, St. Leonard's Hill, near 
Wiudsor, on Bagshot Heath, and at Wantage.
A 
Roman altar, dedicated to Jupiter, was dug up at 
Frisham, near Spene, in the year 1730.
A large 
Hrn, thought to have been Roman, was likewise 
found in Spene-moor, about a mile and a half-west 
of Nesbury, under a tumulus of earth, eight feet 
high.
Roman bricks, &c.
are said to have been found 
at Old Windsor ; and, in 1783, great quantities of 
Roman pottery were discovered, at a farm called 
the Roundabout, near Bagshot Park, and also at 
Wickham Bushes.
At the last mentioned place, at 
White Walthams, and in Weycock field, in the pa- 
rish of Lawrence Waltham, several traces of Ro- 
man buiidings have likewise been found.
In the year 1705, various antiquities wero disco- 
vered at St. Leonard's Hill, consisting of several 
spear heads, some pieces of a trumpet, a spur, and 
a bronze lamp, which were presented by Sir Hans 
Sloane to the Society of Autiquaries.
The latter 
was supposed to be Roman, but it has scarcely the 
appearance of such high antiquity.
On rebuilding the bridge over the Rennet, at 
Newbury in 1770, some ancient knives, spoons, En- 
glish coins, &c.
were found.
Previously to this, in 
1762, in digging a grave at Kentbury, a large quan- 
tity of Saxon coins, of Edred, Edwy, and Ed- 
mund, were found.
The different castles, abbies, churches, &c.
in 
Berkslnre, which may be regarded as so many an- 
tiquities, will be hereafter described, agreeably to 
their respective situations.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Divisions.] — When 
the Domesday Survey was taken, Berkshire was 
divided into twenty-two hundreds : the present 
number, of which the following is a list, is only 
twenty -one : — 
Beynhurst.
Bray.
Charlton.
Compton.
Cookham.
Eagle.
Fancross.
Farringdon.
Guniield.
Hornier.
Kentbury.
Lamboiirn.
M oreton.
Ock.
Heading.
liipplesmore.
Shrivenham.
Sunning.
Theale.
Wantage.
^Vargrave.
The above hundreds comprise 12 market towns, 
148 parishes, 67 vicarages, and about 670 villages 
and hamlets.
Berkshire sends nine members to Parliament, viz , 
two for the shire, two for Reading, two for Wal- 
lingford, two for New Windsor, and one for Abing- 
don.
This county is in the diocese of Salisbury, in the 
Oxford circuit.
It is an Archdeaconry, comprising 
four Deaneries : Abingdon, Newbury, Reading, 
and Wallingford.
Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Seats.] — Ash- 
down Park, the Earl of Craven's ; Witham, the 
Earl of Abingdon's ; Coleshill, the Earl of Rad- 
nor's ; East Hampstead Park, the Marchioness of 
Devonshire's ; White Knights, the Marquis of 
Blandford's ; Becket House, belonging to the Bar- 
rington family ; Benham Place, the Earl of Cra- 
ven's ; and Beaumont Lodge, Lord Ashbrook's, 
are the principal seats of noblemen in this county.
The Dowager Lady Onslow resides at Old Wind- 
sor ; and the Dowager Lady Howard, of Walden, 
occupies the seat of the late Lord Chief Justice 
Eyiv, 
BERKSHIRE.
01 
Eyre, at Ruscomb.
Lord Dorchester has purchas- 
ed Stubbins, in Bisham, for his own residence.
Amongst the most distinguished seats of the gen- 
try in this county, may be reckoned Aldermaston, 
Englefield, Buscot Park, Holme Park, Padworth 
House, Pusey House, Sandlei'ord, and Swallow- 
field.
A very numerous list of others might be ad- 
duced ; but, for the sake of accuracy, and to avoid 
a useless repetition, we shall pass them over at pre- 
sent, and notice the more important as they respec- 
tively occur.
Market and Borough Towns.] — Berkshire has 
no city : Abingdon and Reading are the county 
towns.
The Lent Assizes, and the Epiphany Ses- 
sions, are holdcn at Reading ; the Summer Assizes, 
and Hilary Sessions, at Abingdon ; the Michael- 
mas Sessions, either at Abingdon or Reading, as 
the magistrates determine ; and the Easter Ses- 
sions, at Newbury.
Abingdon, Reading, Wallingford, and Windsor, 
arc four borough towns, which return members to 
Parliament as already mentioned.
The following are the present market towns of 
Berkshire : — 
Abingdon.
Reading.
Newbury.
Windsor.
Wokingham.
Farringdon.
Hungerford.
East Ilsley.
Wallingford.
Lambourn.
Maidenhead.
Wantage.
The first seven of those are incorporated ; and the 
first five have great corn markets, sending great 
quantities of Hour, barley, and malt, to London.
Ilsley is a great market for lean sheep : 20,000 are 
said to have been sometimes sold in one day, and 
the annual average is represented to be not less than 
250,000.
Wokiue;hain is remarkable for an abun- 
dant supply of poultry.
At Farringdon, between 
the beginning of November and April, about 4000 
swine are said to be annually slaughtered for the 
London and Oxford markets.
Farringdon and 
Abingdon have great horse fairs ; and Lambourn 
has a great fair for heifers in calf, colts, &c.
Population.] — The population of Berkshire, at 
the time of the Norman survey, amounted to be- 
tween 40,000 and 45,000 souls.
In 1377, the num- 
ber was nearly the same ; as, exclusive of paupers, 
children, and clergy, the number of heads that 
were taxed Avas 22,723.
In 1700, the population 
of this county amounted to about 75,000.
Accord- 
ing to the returns under the population act in 1801, 
Berkshire then contained 100,215 inhabitants, of 
whom 38,155 were employed in agriculture, and 
16,921 in trades, manufactures, or handicraft.
The 
population of the respective parishes, &c.
agreeably 
to the more recent returns of 1811, will be seen by 
inspecting the following Alphabetical List.
Summary of the Population of the County of Berks, ax published by Authority of Parliament in 1S11.
Hundreds, &c.
Beynhurst 
Bray , 
Charlton..
Compton 
Cookhani 
Faircross 
farringdon , 
Gau field , 
Hormer 
Kintbury Eagle 
Lambourn 
Moreton 
Ock 
Reading 
Ripplesmere 
Shrivenham 
Sonning 
Theale 
Wantage 
Wargrave 
Borough of Abingdon,..
Town of Newbury 
Borough oi Beading 
Borough of Wallingford...
Borough of Wincsor 
jLocal Militia 
Totals 
HOUSES.
484 
512 
484 
424 
819 
1,268 
579 
543 
567 
1,878 
527 
1,072 
1,179 
1,457 
569 
815 
930 
917 
1,2S3 
484 
993 
995 
1,945 
363 
1,017 
2S'E 
534 
525 
535 
466 
886 
1,453 
660 
604 
'675 
2,035 
573 
1,164 
1,277 
1,657 
880 
•972 
1,020 
1,041 
1,396 
571 
1,161 
1,036 
2,281 
414 
1 ,237 
2 
CO 
1 
3 
1 
9 
14 
3 
3 
3 
12 
2 
1 
7 
2 
3 
4 
4 
4 
7 
1 
7 
4 
25 
17 
6 
6 
7 
27 
28 
27 
6 
9 
57 
12 
23 
30 
32 
15 
15 
26 
22 
40 
15 
20 
29 
58 
17 
29 
22.1C4 25,051 
126 
563 
OCCUPATIONS.
En 
s 00 
396 
294 
438 
350 
455 
1,142 
417 
490 
519 
1,309 
408 
943 
946 
1,185 
310 
7S4 
572 
796 
822 
336 
144 
24 
154 
76 
99 
13 l± " 
; r B 
3 1^ 
3 _> *"' or 
5 1): 
97 
156 
66 
91 
288 
214 
174 
74 
94 
475 
89 
172 
174 
380 
119 
135 
298 
147 
491 
14S 
801 
701 
1,595 
280 
319 
13,409 
7,584 
41 
75 
31 
25 
141 
97 
69 
40 
62 
251 
76 
49 
154 
92 
451 
53 
150 
98 
80 
87 
216 
311 
532 
58 
819 
4,058 
PERSONS.
Males.
1,412 
1,247 
1,418 
1,080 
1,987 
3,419 
1,590 
1,415 
1,626 
4,584 
1,286 
2,565 
2,802 
3,830 
1,561 
2,237 
2,382 
2,567 
3,232 
1,358 
2,244 
2,285 
4,890 
868 
2,749 
726 
57,360 
Females.
1,530 
1,357 
1,306 
1,132 
2,197 
3,324 
1,634 
1,479 
1,619 
4,840 
1,388 
2,721 
2,932 
3,972 
1,669 
2,383 
2,569 
2,564 
3,345 
1,449 
2,557 
2,613 
5,898 
1,033 
3,406 
60,917 
Total 
of 
Persons.
2,942 
2,604 
2,724 
2,212 
4,184 
6,743 
3,224 
2,894 
3,245 
9,424 
2,674 
5,286 
5,734 
7,802 
3,230 
4,620 
4,951 
5,131 
'6,577 
2,807 
4,801 
4,898 
0.,788 
11,901 
6,155 
726 
118,277 
TOL.
1. NO.
0. 
Clllff 
62 
BERKSHIRE.
Chief Towns, Parishes, &c.
Abingdon.] — Abingdon, or Abington, is a large 
market and borough town, containing two parishes 
(St. Helen and St. Nicholas) and having separate 
jurisdiction.
It is situated in the hundred of Hor- 
nier, at the conflux of the Ock and the Thames, 
26 miles north-west by north from Reading, and 55| 
miles west-north-west from London.
The assizes 
in the summer circuit are holden here, and also the 
Petty Sessions in the Abingdon division.* Pur- 
suant to a charter of Queen Mary, the corporation 
consists of a mayor, two bailiffs, nine aldermen, and 
sixteen assistants.
The origin of this town has not been accurately 
ascertained.
It appears to have been originally 
called Seovechesham or Seusham ; and was, accord- 
ing to some of our historians at a very remote 
period, a large and wealthy town, the royal re- 
sidence, and the seat of government ; and at which 
before the establishment of Christianity, the Bri- 
tons had their principal place of religious worship.
It is also said to have become the settlement of the 
Britons, on their first conversion ; to support 
which statement, the following legend has been ad- 
duced : — 
" At the time when the wicked pagan Hengist 
basely murdered 460 noblemen and barons at Stone- 
hengist or Stonehenge, Aben a nobleman's son, es- 
caped into a wood on the south side of Oxfordshire, 
where, leading a most holy life, the inhabitants of 
the country flocking to him to hear the word of God, 
built him a dwelling house, and a chapel in honor of 
the Holy Virgin, but he disliking their resort, stole 
away to Ireland ; and from him the place where he 
dwelt is called Abingdun."f 
To the Saxons, however, the foundation of the 
town is more generally ascribed ; and, according to 
Camden, as soon as Cissa, king of the West Saxons, 
founded the monastery or abbey here, it gradually 
dropt its older name, and began to assume that of 
Abbandun or Abbingdon : i.
e. the town of the abbey.
Leland, in his Itinerary, gives us the following 
description : — 
" Abingdone stands on the right side of the Isis, 
and was of very old time called Seukesham, since 
Abendune.
The abbey was first began at Bagtey- 
wood in Berkshire, two miles higher on the Ise than 
Abingdon now is ; afterwards translated to Seuke- 
sham, and there finished most by the cosies of King 
Cissa, that thereafter was buried ; but the very 
place and tomb of his burial never known syns the 
Danes defaced Abingdon." 
* From the following curious entry, in the parish register 
of St. Helen's, it appears that the Spring assizes were formerly 
holden at Abingdon : — " 1569— buried the 3 day of Marche, 
Margery Towsey, widdow, who was, at the assize then holden, 
quite of wichecrafte layde to her charge, and dyed this day in 
the streete, sodenlie as she was going on her business." 
f A famous cross is said to have been found at Abingdon, 
The abbey, or monastery, here mentioned, was 
founded by Heane, or by his uncle Cissa, one of 
the viceroys of Centwin, king of the West Saxons, 
in the year 675.
It was begun near Bagwell Wood, 
in the parish of Cumner, or according to others, 
near Bagworth, in the neighbouring parish of Sun- 
ning-well.
" There were twelve mansions," says 
Dugdale, " about this monastery at first, and as 
many chapels, inhabited by twelve monks, without 
any cloister, but shut in with a high wall ; none 
being allowed to go out without great necessity and 
the abbot's leave.
No woman ever entered the 
same ; and none dwelt there but the twelve monks 
and the abbot.
They wore black habits, and lay ou 
sackcloth, never eating flesh unless in dangerous 
sickness." 
This abbey, after flourishing two centuries, was 
destroyed by the Danes in the reign of King Alfred - 
The estates were taken by Alfred, as a compensa- 
tion to him for having afterwards vanquished the 
Danes.
It continued desolate and in ruins till 
Edred, the grandson of Alfred, restored some part 
of the possessions of the convent, and laid the first 
stone of a new monastery.
St. Ethelwold, the ab- 
bot, who was afterwards bishop of Winchester, and 
his successor Adgar, completed the work.
Suc- 
ceeding abbots encreased its splendor, and it was 
soon raised to the highest rank among the monastic 
institutions of the kingdom, becoming one of the 
mitred abbeys.
At the time of the Norman survey 
it appears that the abbots had upwards of 30 manors 
in Berkshire, in their own possession, besides se- 
veral others, which were held under them as lords 
of the fee.
After the conquest, one Fabritius, a stranger 
and physician, Avas made abbot here.
He removed 
the old church, which then stood more northerly, 
and made the east part and transept new, adorning 
it with small marble pillars.
The central tower, 
and the west front with its towers, were built by four 
abbots in the loth century.
Ethelwold brought 
the stream of the Isis close to and through the abbey.
The chief stream of the Isis before ran between An- 
derseyisle and Culham.
Henry, surnamed Beau-clerk, the youngest son 
of William the Conqueror, was educated here ; 
and, according to tradition, St. Edward the Mar- 
tyr passed Ids earlier years in this place.
His re- 
lics were kept in the abbey ; where, also, several il- 
lustrious persons were buried.
The remains of Cis- 
sa, the founder, were interred within its walls ; but 
his tomb was entirely destroyed by the Danes.
Ro- 
bert D'Oiley, the builder of Oxford Castle, a 
powerful baron in the reign of William the Con- 
by the Saxons, which had been formed from the nails of the 
cross on which Christ suffered, and which struck dead all who.
forswore themselves upon it.
Gough, one of the editors of Camden, considers Abingdon, 
to be the place at which several synods were holden in the 
eighth and ninth centuries ; the first as early as the year 742.
quer.or,.
BERKSHIRE.
queror, and Geoffry of Monmouth the historian, 
who is said to have been abbot of Abingdon, were 
also buried here.
In the year 1146, Pope Eugenius III.
confirmed 
all the grants which had been made to the abbey, 
and gave it additional privileges.
At the period of 
the Dissolution, its annual revenues were estimated 
at 18761.
10s.
9d.
At this period, the monks of 
Abingdon were charged with the grossest incon- 
tinence.
The abbot, in particular, was accused of 
supporting three courtesans, and of maintaining an 
incestuous intercourse with his own sister, by whom 
he was said to have had two children.
Perhaps 
these reports were propagated, merely to facilitate 
the designs of the rapacious Henry.
The abbey was mitred, and dedicated to St. Ni- 
cholas.
It was surrendered to the king by Thomas 
Pentecost, alias Rowland, the last abbot, who was 
among the first to acknowledge his supremacy ; a 
conduct which obtained for him a pension of 2001.
per annum, besides the capital mansion and Packet 
Cumner- (which had been his country seat as abbot 
of Abingdon) for life.
— The site of the abbey was 
granted to Sir Thomas Seymour, and afterwards 
to Sir Thomas Wroth.
It was a magnificent pile 
of building, of which the gate house, with some 
remnants among the old buildings, are now occu- 
pied as a brewery by Mr. Child.
The gate-way is 
vised as a gaol ; and Mr. Phillips, of Culham, is 
the proprietor of that part which adjoins the mills.
Camden describes the ruins of this abbey as ex- 
hibiting, in his time, evident marks of former gran- 
deur.
Offa, King of the Mercians and West Saxons, on 
an accidental visit to Abingdon, became enamoured 
of a spot called the Isle of Andersey, over against 
the abbey, on which was a building, inhabited by 
certain wealthy persons, who had taken the religious 
habit, having bequeathed their property to the 
church after their decease.
For this island, the 
king gave the abbot and monks the manor of 
Goosey, which they possessed till the Dissolution.
Offa built a palace at Andersey, for his own resi- 
dence ; and Egfuicl, his son, died there in the year 
694.
In the reign of Kenwulf, the palace was inha- 
bited only by his huntsmen, &c.
who became a great 
nuisance to the abbey ; and, at the request of Abbot 
Rethunus, and in consideration of the manor of Sut- 
ton, and 120 pounds of silver, the King restored the 
island to the monks, with a promise that it should 
never more become the site of a royal palace.
Ice- 
land states that, in his time, the site of this palace, 
or fortress, was occupied by an old barn.
Another religious establishment, called Helnestow, 
situated near the Thames, was founded at Abingdon, 
by Cissa, sister to Heane, for nuns, of which she 
afterwards became the abbess.
On the death of 
* Some particulars concerning these benefactions, ami a cu- 
rious relation of the proceedings at the building of Culham 
Bridge, appear on a tablet hanging in Christ's Hospital ; which 
7 
Cissa, the nuns were removed- to Witham, whence 
they dispersed at the commencement of the war be- 
tween Offa, King of the Mercians, and Kinewulph, 
King of the West Saxons.
The church of St. Nicholas, at Abingdon, is said 
to have been built by Abbot Nicholas, near the out- 
side of the west gate of the abbey, some time be- 
tween the years 1289 and 1307.
The circular door 
at the west end, with zigzag ornaments, appears to 
be of a much earlier age.
— Leland says that there 
was " of old tyme the chefe paroche church of Abyn- 
don, but the greatest resorte of all the towne was to 
St. Helens." The church of St. Helen's is a large 
Gothic building, with a handsome spire.
It is situ- 
ated near the river, and appears to have been alter- 
ed and enlarged at various times.' In a gallery of 
the aisle, called our Lady's Aisle, in this church, 
hangs a tablet, with a portrait of Mr. William Lee, 
who died at the age of 92.
— The portrait is accom- 
panied by a genealogical tree, and an inscription, 
which records that he had seventeen children (of 
which 15 were by his second wife,) 78 grand-children, 
and 102 great grand-children.
In the nave is a 
brass plate, which covers the bones of Geoffry Bar- 
bour, a great benefactor of the town, who died April 
21, 1417.
They were removed from the abbey alter 
the Dissolution.
The vicarages of St. Helen's and 
St. Nicholas' are in the crown.
Abingdon, according to Leland, formerly had a 
considerable manufactory ; but, before Queen Mary's 
reign, it had greatly declined, as appears from her 
charter of incorporation, granted to the town in 1556, 
stating " that the town had fallen into great ruin 
and decay by the dilapidation of houses, fulling mills, 
&c.
and was like to come and fall into extreme cala- 
mities." In consideration of the state to which the 
town was reduced, she granted the townsmen lands 
to.
the value of 1021.
6s.
7d, per annum, to enable 
them to pay their fee-farm rent, and to maintain the 
state and reputation of the town.
Previously to the construction of Burford and 
Culham Bridges, in the year 1416, the town of 
Abingdon was chiefly supported by the abbey; but 
the erection of those fabrics having occasioned the 
high road from Gloucester to London to be turned 
through Abingdon, it acquired so much additional 
traffic, as tqjrank with the most distinguished places 
in the county.
In the construction of these bridges, 
Hearne observes that, " the best artists that could 
be found were employed ; and every man had a penny 
a day, which was the best wages, and an extraordi- 
nary price in those times, when the best wheat was 
now and then sold for twelve-pence a quarter." 
The credit of these useful erections has been erro- 
neously attributed to King Henry V.
The chief 
contributor to both of them was Geoffry Barbour, a 
merchant, who bestowed 1000 marks towards their 
was founded on the site of the nunnery of Helenstow, by G.
UaiJ)our, and St. Jolyi de St. Helena.
completion r 
61 
BERKSHIRE.
completion, and the making a causeway.
-John 
Houchons, or Hutehins, however, who hud the first 
stone, on St. Alban's Day, and John Banbury, were 
zealous promoters of the work.
They purchased 
the grotmd of the abbot for 1151.
Sir Peter Besils 
gave the stones from his quarries at Besils-Legh 
and Sandford ; and by his will, in 1424, he left his 
lands and tenements in Abingdon, towards a fund 
tbr repairs.
In 1430, an Act of Parliament was 
passed, to make the bridges and road a free passage 
for ever; and, in 1153, William Hales, and Maud, 
his wife, added three arches to one of the bridges, 
the- road being still subject to occasional inunda- 
tions.
The town of Abingdon is composed of several 
streets, which centre in a spacious area, where the 
market is kept, toll free, on Monday and Friday, for 
corn.
The Market-house is a handsome building, 
of curious workmanship ; and over it is a noble hall, 
where the summer assize is held.
The county court, 
at which the members of the county are elected, as 
also the coroners and verdurers of Windsor Forest, 
is kept here monthly.
Camden mentions a cross, remarkable for its su- 
perior beauty and elegance, which formerly stood in 
the centre of the market.
It was composed of stone, 
of an octangular shape, and adorned with three rows 
of statues : the lowest row consisted of three grave 
kings ; the next of the Virgin Mary, four female 
saints, and a mitred prelate ; and the uppermost 
row of ^mall figures either of prophets or apostles.
It was also ornamented with numerous shields of 
arms carved and painted.
Mr. Gough supposes it 
to have been built by the Guild of Holy Cross, as 
the arms of Sir John Golafre, one of the commis- 
sioners by whom that fraternity was incorporated in 
the reign of Henry VI.
Avas, with many others, found 
.en it, in the year 1605, when it was repaired, and 
the shields of the then benefactors added.
This 
beautiful relic, from a model of which Coventry 
Cross was constructed, in the reign of Henry VIII.
was destroyed by the troops of Waller, the parlia- 
mentary general, on the 31st of May, 1644.
It appears that the Guild, or Brotherhood of the 
Holy Cross., above-mentioned, had established them- 
selves at a very early period in this town ; but they 
; were first incorporated by royal charter, in the year 
1442.
About that time, we learn, that " they an- 
nually made on.
the third of May, being the clay of 
the invention of the Holy Cross, a very bountiful 
feast, unto which came many of the brethren and 
sisters of the society.
They spent usually six calves, 
which in those days cost about 2s.
2d.
a piece ; 16 
lambs, which cost 12d.
apiece; above 80 capons, 
which cost 3d.
a piece ; above 80 geese, which cost 
2jd.
a piece ; 800 eggs, which cost 5d.
a hundred ; 
many marrow bones, much fruit and spice, great 
quantities of milk, cream, and ilour (wheat was good 
and cheap, bein«- sold for 12d.
a quarter, in the 33rd 
year of Henry VI.) besides all this provision, they 
had much sent them by the tenants, and by the bre- 
thren and sisters of the said fraternity.
They had 
also at their feasts, 12 priests to sing a dirge, to 
whom they gave 4d.
a piece for their pains.
They 
had 12 minstrels, some from Coventry, and some 
from Maidenhead, to make them merry, to whom 
they gave 2s.
and 3d.
a piece ; besides their diet and 
horse-meat.
They had likewise at their feasts a so- 
lemn procession, according to the blind superstition 
and zeal of those dark days, pageants, plays, may- 
games, all to captivate the senses of the zealous be- 
holders, and to allure the people to greater libera- 
lity ; for they did not make their feasts without pro- 
fit ; but those that sat at dinner paid one rate, and 
those that for want of room did stand, paid another ; 
so that they of the fraternity that governed the feast 
(who were commonly four in number) always made 
gain to the common stock for public uses.
Their 
feasts were kept a long time in Banbury Court in 
West St. Helen's Street ; afterwards in a house of 
their own, given them by Mr. William Dyer, vicar 
of Bray, in East St. Helen's Street, commonly call- 
ed the brotherhood feast house.
"* 
In the year 1547, after the Dissolution of religious 
houses, Edward VI.
at the request of Sir John Ma- 
son, f granted a new charter to some of the princi- 
pal inhabitants of Abingdon, incorporating them by 
the name of the Governors of Christ's Hospital, 
which had been built in 1446, by the dissolved fra- 
ternity ; for the reception of thirteen poor persons 
maintained by them.J 1° 1718 a new building was 
erected out of the hospital funds, in which 18 poor 
persons are maintained.
There are now 14 in the 
old hospital.
They have all 6s.
per week each, and 
clothes once in two years.
The original hospital, 
which was built in the year 1446, of timber and 
plaister, is still standing.
This town has several other alms-hous.es.
The 
* Vide Little's MS.
f This distinguished character was the son of a cow-herd.
He was born near Abingdon, towards the latter end of the 
reign of Henry VII.
.His mother being the sifter of a monk 
in the abbey, that ecclesiastic took him under bis tuition, and 
instructed him hi grammar learning ; after which he procured 
his admission into All Skills College, Oxford, where be obtain- 
ed a fellowship.
— In IJ23, when Henry VIII.
went on a visit 
to Oxford, Mason, on account of his graceful appearance and 
distinguished address, was appointed to make the compliments 
r>{ that learned body to their sovereign ; a task which he per- 
formed with so much applause, that the king was charmed with 
his uncommon abilities, and generously sent him, at his own 
expence, to finish his studies at Paris.
While abroad he ac- 
quired so much knowledge of the nature of public affairs, that 
he was employed in several embassies, and on bis return to 
England, he was knighted, and sworn a member of the privy 
council.
In the reigns of Edward VI.
and his sister Mary, Sir John 
Mason, discharged the duties of several high employments; 
and on the accession of Queen Elizabeth, he was chosen chan- 
cellor of Oxford ; a dignified station which he enjoyed till his 
death, which happened in 1566.
His remains were deposited 
in St. Paul's Cathedral.
% It was anciently called St. Helen's.
It received its mo- 
dern appellation from Sir John Mason.
sumi 
BERKSHIRE.
6* 
sums collected for charitable purposes amount to 
about 9001.
per annum ; part of which is appropri- 
ated to support a free-school, founded by Mr. John 
Royes, in 1563, for 63 poor boys.
Thomas Teas- 
dale, the first scholar on this foundation, left the sum 
of 5001.
to Baliol College in Oxford, to purchase 
lands for the maintenance of seven fellows and six 
scholars, to be chosen from Abingdou School, by the 
masters and governors of Christ's Hospital.
Baliol 
College having declined the bequest, it was given 
to Pembroke College, which was founded in 1624.
The school at Abingdon has for many years been in 
great repute : and many eminent characters have 
there received the rudiments of learning.
Among 
others may be reckoned Lord Chief Justice Holt, 
Dr. Newcome, the late Primate of Ireland, a native 
of Abingdon, and the late Rev. Richard Graves, au- 
thor of the " Spiritual Quixote," and many other 
works.
Edmund, Earl of Cornwall, built a chapef at 
Abingdon, in the year 1238, on the spot where St.
Edmund, Archbishop of Canterbury, was born.
In 
the year after it was built, wonderful miracles are 
reported to have been observed in this chapel.
It is 
supposed to have stood on the west side of St. Ed- 
mund's Lane.* 
There are meeting-houses in Abingdon for Pres- 
byterians, Anabaptists, and Quakers.
Abingdon manor, formerly belonging to the abbey, 
is now vested in the corporation.
Barton, or Bur- 
ton Court, was granted to the family of Reade, soon 
after the Dissolution, and is now the property of the 
Dowager Lady Reade.
Near Barton farm, is a 
close belonging to the corporation, called the Pry- 
tany, where the broken victuals from the abbey are 
said to have been distributed.
Shippon, a hamlet in 
the parish of St. Helen's, has been annexed to the 
Duehy of Cornwall.
Norcot, another hamlet, be- 
longs to Sir George Bowyer, Bart.
All these ma- 
nors were formerly in possession of the abbey.
Lacies Court, now a farm in the occupation of Mr.
Bowles, was formerly the property and residence of 
Dr. Peter Heylim 
Of late years, the most considerable manufacture 
of Abingdon has been sacking, biscuit- bagging, and 
floor and sail cloths, which has constituted the prin- 
cipal employment of the poor.
A great trade is car- 
ried on in malt for the London markets ; and for the 
convenience of the barges employed in that trade, a 
commodious wharf has been completed at the extre- 
mity of the town, beyond which the new cut, forming 
a small curve, joins the main river a short distance 
below Culham Bridge.
Aloermaston.] — Aldermaston is situated in the 
* Robert Rich, brother of St. Edmund, the Archbishop, 
and author of his life; and Margaret and Alice, successively 
prioresses of Catesby, and canonized as saints, were all natives 
-of Abingdon.
Amongst the remarkable persons, of later periods, who were 
torn in this town, may be mentioned Sir Thomas Smith, Latin 
VOL.
L NO.
5. 
hundred of Theale, ten miles south-west by west 
from Reading.
It has a market on Friday, '*nd three 
annual fairs.
The manor is the property of William 
Congreve, Esq.
In the church arc several monuments of the Fors- 
ters, formerly Lords of the Manor.
The most re- 
markable is a tomb of alabaster, with the figure of 
Sir George Forster, who died in 1526, and of his 
wife Elizabeth, heiress of the De la Mares.
Round 
the sides, under Gothic canopies, are small figures 
of their eleven sons in armour, and eight daughters;, 
with the angular head-dresses of that time.
In the year 1706, Robert Dixon, the minister of 
the parish, built four alms-houses for poor wi- 
dows.
Aldermaston house, the Seat of Mr. Congreve, was 
almost entirely rebuilt by Sir Humphry Foster, in 
1636.
The windows in tho hall, and in some of the 
other rooms, have a great quantity of stained glass, 
representing the arms of the families of Achard, De 
la Mare, and Forster.
The hall is lofty, and sur- 
rounded by a spacious gallery.
The house has been 
fitted up within these few years, and all the orna- 
ments restored, as they were in 1636.
Aldworth.] — Aid worth, or Alder, a village of 
very remote origin, is situated in the hundred of 
Compton, four miles and a half east by south from 
East Ilsley.
It is supposed by Hearne to have been 
a settlement in the time of the Romans.
At the time 
of taking the Norman survey the manor belonged to 
Theodoric the goldsmith.
It afterwards formed 
part of the possessions of the family of De la Becue, 
who flourished here in the reigns of the second and 
third Edwards.
The mansion-house was situated 
on an eminence near the village, and in the 12th of 
Edward III.
was fortified ; but not the least remains 
of it are now existing : its site is designated by the 
appellation of Beche Farm.
Aldworth church is a very ancient-structure, much 
celebrated for its ancient monuments.
These are 
nine in number ; three of them situated on the north 
side, three on the south, and some in the centre of 
the church, between the octangular pillars which 
support the roof.
The tombs on the north and 
south sides are disposed under enriched arches, or- 
namented with pilasters and pinnacles.
The effigies 
of six knights in armour, elegantly carved in stone, 
lie in different positions on the upper part of these 
tombs.
The seventh is a person in a common ha- 
bit, and the remaining two are females.
They are 
supposed to represent the De la Beche family, and 
appear to have been executed in the fourteenth cen- 
tury.
The workmanship is remarkably fine ; aud the 
attitude and expression of such of the figures as re- 
secretary to James I.
; George Benson, an eminent Presbyte- 
rian divine, who officiated many years at Abingdon; and Hi- 
shop Newcome, late Primate of Ireland, an eminent theolo- 
gian.
He was born in 17-9.
His lather was the Uev.,Josepli 
Newcome, vicar of St. Helen's.
R maia 
66 
BERKSHIRE.
main perfect are exceedingly graceful and appro- 
priate.
In the church-yard there is a yew tree of immense 
size, the trunk of which measures nine yards in cir- 
cumference, at upwards of four feet from the ground.
The branches spread to a considerable distance, and 
rise to a great height.
Appleton.] — Appleton, in the hundred of Ock, 
lies about five miles to the south-west of Oxford.
In 
the church is a handsome monument of Sir John 
Fettiplace ; who died in 1593, with his effigies in 
armour ; and the tomb of John Goodryngton, with 
the figure of a shrouded skeleton, in brass.
The 
latter died in 1518, and his widow became a nun, at 
Syon.
The remains of Appleton manor-house are 
deserving of notice, as affording a rare specimen of 
early architecture.
Arborfield.] — Arborfield is situated in the hun- 
dred of Sunning, about five miles south-east of 
Reading.
The manor-house, an old mansion near 
the church, was built by the Standens, Lords of the 
Manor in the 17th century.
Edward Standen, the 
last heir male of this family, was the person alluded 
.to in the popular ballad of Molly Mog of the 
Rose.
Avington.] — Avington lies in the hundred of 
Kintbury Eagle, three miles east by south from Hun- 
gerford.
Sir Francis Burdett, Bart, is Lord of the 
Manor, and patron of the rectory.
The church, 
which remains nearly in its original state, exhibits a 
curious specimen of Saxon architecture.
Within 
the walls it measures 75 feet \>y M feet and a half.
The nave is separated from the chancel by an arch 
richly ornamented with a zigzag moulding and a 
great variety of grotesque heads, springing from two 
enriched piers.
The arch is formed of the segments 
of two circles, having different centres.
Avington 
church has a very singular font of rude workman- 
ship ; it is surrounded with grotesque figures exe- 
cuted in bas relief.
BadburvHill.] — This place is remarkable as the 
site of a supposed Danish camp.
" On the top of 
Badbury Hill," says a writer in the Archseologia, 
Vol. I.
" on the north side of the turnpike-road 
leading from Faringdon to Highworth, and within 
a few yards of it, is a cam}) of a circular form, 200 
yards in diameter, with a ditch twenty yards wide.
A few years ago, in levelling the north rampart, hu- 
man bones and coals were found ; and human bones 
are found every year in digging for peat in the 
swampy ground about one mile south of the hill.
Leland, in his Itinerary, says, that he learned of cer- 
tainty, that, ' a mile out of Faringdon, towards the 
tight way to Highworth, appeared a gjeat ditche, 
wher a fortresse, or rather a camp of warre, had 
been, as some say, diked by the Danes as a sure 
camp.' Mr. Wise, in his letter to Dr. Mead, sup- 
poses that the battle of Mons Badonicus, or Bad- 
bury Hill, in the year 520, mentioned by Bede and 
Gildas, in which Arthur gained his twelfth victory, 
was?
fought near the White Horse Hill ; but if from 
similarity of names it maybe concluded that the bat- 
tle happened in this neighbourhood, there is much 
more probability of this being the spot, than the 
Wiltshire hills, as this camp is Danish, and nearer 
to the White Horse Hill, than the other in Wilts, the 
fortifications of which are Roman.
Between tha 
camp and the White Horse Hill is a plain dead flat, 
five miles wide, a very proper place for the engage- 
ment of two armies." 
Basilden.] — Basilden, or Basildon, is situated in 
the hundred of Moreton, seven miles and a half north- 
west by west from Reading.
It had formerly a 
weekly market ; and an annual fair, on the festival 
of St. Bartholomew.
This village is celebrated for the extent of its farms, 
and the richness of its soil.
Basilden house was erected by the late Sir Francis 
Sykes, Bart, who died in 1804, on an estate which 
formerly belonged to the Vere family.
This superb 
edifice was constructed from the designs of Mr. Carr, 
of York, on the principle of Wentworth-house, in 
Yorkshire.
The walls of the grand saloon were 
painted by Monsieur de Brun, in imitation of basso 
relievo ; and the ceiling is ornamented with stucco, 
very beautifully executed.
The apartments are 
splendidly furnished ; but the more elegant decora- 
tions of the fine arts have been sparingly admitted.
Basilden park, enlivened by numerous deer, and 
commanding some rich prospects of the windings of 
the Thames, and the surrounding country, is dispos- 
ed with much taste.
The gardens and the hot- 
houses are extremely well furnished.
Altogether, 
this seat possesses many local advantages ; and the 
high-road in its vicinity, skirted for several miles 
with lofty hills, covered with beech, is one of the 
most pleasant rides which the county can boast.
Benham House.] — Benham House, about a mile 
from Speen, is a regular building of the Ionic order, 
built of free-stone.
It stands upon a gentle emi- 
nence rising from a sheet of water, which flows be- 
fore the mansion.
It belonged to the late Lord Cra- 
ven, and is now the seat of the Margravine of An- 
spach.
The entrance to the park from the high- 
road is by a gate, with a handsome lodge on each 
side.
The grounds are well wooded, and from; 
many situations command extensive and beautiful 
views.
Besils-Legh.] — Besils, or Bleesells-Legh is a 
small village, in the hundred of Hornier, four miles 
north-west from Abingdon.
The manor formerly 
belonged to the family of Legh, from which it pass- 
ed, by a female heir, to that of Besils, or Blessells, 
which flourished there for several centuries.
" At 
this Legh," 1 says Leland, " be very fayre pastures 
and woodes.
The Blcsells hathe bene lords of it 
syns the tyrne of Etlwarde the First, or afore, and 
ther they dyd enhabite.
The place is all of stone, 
and stondithe at the west end of the paroche churche.
The Blesells cam out of Provence in Fraunce, and 
were men of activitye in feates of armes, as it ap- 
pearith in monuments at Legh, how he faught in 
Listcs 
BERKSHIRE.
67 
Listes with a strange knighte that chalengyd hym,.
at the whiche deade the Kyuge and Quene at that 
tyrae of England, were present.
The Blesells were 
countyd to have pocessyons of 400 marks by the 
yere." In the year 1516, the estates of the Blessells 
were carried, by the marriage of an heiress, to the 
Fettiplaces, a respectable Berkshire family, one of 
whom, Besil Fettiplace, Esq. was High Sheriff in 
the 26th of Queen Elizabeth.
The manor of Besils- 
Legh was purchased of the Fettiplaces, by William 
Lenthall, Esq. Speaker of the Long Parliament, 
whose descendants now reside at Burford, in Ox- 
fordshire.
— John Lenthall, Esq. is the present Lord 
of the Manor, and patron of the rectory.
The celebrated picture of Sir Thomas More's fa- 
mily, now at Burford, was formerly in the old manor- 
house at this place, which has been pulled down.
Binfield.] — Binfield is a small, but pleasant vil- 
lage, in the hundred of Cookham, three miles north- 
east from Wokingham.
Situated in the midst of the 
Royal Hunt, in Windsor Forest, it is surrounded by 
elegant seats, the most conspicuous of which is that 
of Onesiphorus Elliot, Esq.
Pope, the celebrated poet, was thought to have 
been born here ; but Dr. Wilson, the late rector, as- 
certained that he did not come to Binfield, till he was 
six years of age.
It is certain, however, that he 
continued to reside at Binfield, till he purchased his 
Twickenham villa ; and that the surrounding sce- 
nery of Windsor Forest suggested some of the first 
effusions of his muse.
Of this scenery, the opening 
of his poem of Windsor Forest is beautifully descrip- 
tive : — 
*' There, interspers'd in lawns and op'ning glades, 
Thin trees arise, that shun each other's shades.
Here, in full light, the russet plains extend; 
There, wrapt in clouds, the bluish hills ascend.
E'en the wild heatli displays her purple dyes; 
And 'midst the desert, fruitful fields arise, 
That, crown'd with tufted trees, and springing corn, 
Like verdant isles, the sable waste adorn," 
The site of Pope's house is now, or was recently, 
the residence of Thomas Neate, Esq. Within the 
distance of half a mile, on the edge of a common, in 
a retired part of the Forest, is a spot, of which Pope 
was peculiarly fond.
On a large tree, beneath 
which formerly was a seat, the words, " Here Pope 
Sung," are inscribed in capital letters.
A person 
•from Wokingham, at the expence of a lady of that 
place, annually revises this emphatic sentence.
Were 
it not for this " brief memorial of the muse," all re- 
collection of this fa\oured spot, so interesting to the 
admirers of departed genius, would probably have 
been lost.
In Binham church are some ancient monuments of 
the Blount, Doncastle, and Lee families.
Amongst 
those of a more modern date, is one to the memory 
of Admiral Sir Edward Vernon, who commanded 
the British fleet at the taking of Pondicherry, and 
died in 1794 ; and another to tlie memory of the ce- 
lebrated historian Catherine Macauly Graham, who 
died at Binfield in 1791.
Bisham.] — Bisham, or Bysham Montague, anci- 
ently Bistcham, or Bustleham — is situated in the> 
hundred of Barnersh, four miles and a half north- 
west from Maidenhead.
Tanner, in his Notitia Mo- 
nastica, gives the following brief historical account 
of Bisham manor, &c.
: — 
" Robert de Ferrariis, femp.Sleph., gave the ma- 
nor of Bitstlesham to the Templars, who thereupon 
made here a preceptory for the Knights of that Or- 
der.
Upon their Dissolution, temp.
Edu\ II.
this- 
seems not to have passed with the greatest part of 
their estates to the Knights of St. John of Jerusa- 
lem, for they had before granted it away in fee to 
Hugh de Spencer, Jun. afterwards it came to Wik 
liam Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, who, A.
D. 1338, 
built a priory here for canons of the Order of SL 
Austin, which was endowed, 26 Hen. VI IL, with 
2851.
lis.
Od. per aim.
Dugd.
; 3271.
4s.
6d.
Speed.
The prior and convent having surrendered 
this monastery, 5th July, 1536, King Hen. VIII., 
in the year following re-founded, and more amply 
endowed it, with the lands of the late dissolved Ab- 
bey of Chertsey, and the Priories of Cardigan, Beth- 
kelert, Ankerwike, Little Mario, Medmenham, &c.,, 
to the value of 6611.
14s.
9d.
per arm.
for the main- 
tenance of an abbot, who was to have the privilege- 
of wearing a mitre, and thirteen Benedictine monks.
But this new abbey was of short continuance, being 
surrendered 19th June, 30 Hen. VIII.
; and the 
site of it was granted, 7° Edw. VI.
to Sir Edward 
Hoby." 
The following noble persons were interred within 
the walls of St. Austin's Priory, mentioned above : — 
William, Earl of Salisbury, son of the founder, who 
distinguished himself at the battle of Poictiers ; 
John, Earl of Salisbury, who, confederating against 
King Henry IV.
was slain at Cirencester, in 1401 ; 
Thomas, Earl of Salisbury, the celebrated hero of 
Henry the Fifth's reign, who lost Ins life at the 
siege of Orleans, in 1428 ; Richard Neville, Earl of 
Salisbury and Warwick, who was beheaded at York, 
in 1460, for his adherence to the house of Lancaster; 
Richard Neville, the great Earl of Warwick and 
Salisbury, and his brother John, Marquis of Mon- 
tague, who both fell at the battle of Burnet, 1170 ; 
and the unfortunate Edward Plantagenet, Earl of 
Warwick, son of the Duke of Clarence, who, bred 
up from his cradle in prison, was beheaded in 1499, 
for attempting to taste the sweets of liberty.
Most 
of these illustrious characters had splendid monu- 
ments in the conventual church ; but they were all 
destroyed after the dissolution of the abbey.
The 
founder of the abbey is supposed to have been buried 
at the White Friars ; but, by the direction of his 
son, a monument was erected to his memory at Bi- 
sham.
The site of Bisham Abbey is now the seat of 
George Vansittart, Esq,.
; but excepting an~ ancient 
door- 
63 
BERKSHIRE, 
<loor-way, now the entranoe of the house, there 
are no remains of the conventual buildings.
Adjoining the parish church, is a chapel, which 
was built by the widow of Sir Thomas Hoby, one of 
the learned daughters of Sir Anthony Coke, of Gi- 
dea Hall, in Essex, for the sepulture of her husband.
Sir Thomas was ambassador at Paris, where he died 
in the prime of life, in the year 1566.
His body, 
having been brought to England, was interred in 
this chapel ; whither Lady Hoby caused the body of 
his elder brother, Sir Philip, who died in 1558, to 
be removed.
She erected a very costly monument 
to their memory, bearing their effigies in armour, 
and inscribed with a long epitaph, in Latin verse.
Her compositions of this nature are numerous.
In 
this chapel, there is also a handsome monument for 
Lady Hoby, who afterwards became the wife of 
John, Lord Russell ; and another for Margaret, 
wife of Sir Edward Hoby.
A window in this cha- 
pel is richly ornamented with the arms and quarter- 
ings of the Hoby family.
At the Temple Mills, in this parish, an extensive 
manufactory of brass and copper has been carried on 
for nearly a century.
Temple House is the proper- 
ty of Owen Williams, Esq.
Bray.] — The village of Bray, situated in the hun- 
dred of that name, about a mile and three quarters 
• south by east from Maidenhead, is chiefly remark- 
able for the conduct of a vicar, who possessed the 
benefice in the reigns of Henry VIII.
Edward VI.
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth.
The story of 
this time-serving sycophant, which first appeared in 
Fuller's Church History, is thus related : — when 
King Henry VIII.
shook off* the papal supremacy, 
the vicar of Bray preached in the most zealous man- 
ner against the innovations and encroachments made 
by the court of Rome ; and when the five articles 
were published, he vindicated idolatry with all the 
strength of prostituted logic.
In the reign of Ed- 
ward VI.
when the protestant religion was establish- 
ed by act of Parliament, the vicar renounced all his 
former principles, and became a strenuous advocate 
for the Reformation.
On the accession of Queen 
Mary, he again vindicated the doctrines of the church 
of Rome, and became a zealous papist, inveighing 
with great acrimony against all those worthy per- 
sons who abhorred the Romish religion.
He enjoy- 
ed his benefice until the reformed religion was esta- 
blished in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, when he 
once more changed with the times, and enjoyed his 
vicarage till his death, which happened in the 41st 
year of her reign.
This man's name was Symon 
JSymonds.
So insensible was he of every thing, that 
bore the name of moral honesty, that instead of being 
in the least affected by it, his constant answer was, 
" 1 will live and die vicar of Bray." 
Camden supposes Bray to have been the Roman 
Bibracte, and to have been occupied by the Bibroci, 
who submitted to Caesar.
In Ferrer's Tour from Dublin to London, we are 
informed that a few years ago, some workmen, dig- 
ging in a bed of stiff clay, somewhere in this neigh- 
bourhood, discovered the perfect petrifaction of si 
turtle, weighing forty-nine pounds, and measuring 
sixteen inches in its largest diameter.
There are several manors in this parish ; and, in 
the principal one, which has been from time imme- 
morial in the crown, the custom is, that, in default 
of male heirs, lands are not divided amongst females 
of the same degree of kindred, but descend solely to 
the eldest.
In the year 1627, William Goddard, Esq. founded 
an hospital at Bray for forty poor persons, who, in 
addition to their place of residence, are allowed 
eight shillings a month.
Over the door of the alms- 
house is a statue of the founder.
Bray-wich and Holyport, are considerable hamlets 
in this parish.
Bray-wich Lodge.] — This is the seat of Thomas 
Slack, Esq. It is a neat edifice, standing upon a 
gentle eminence, which counnandsapome charming 
views of a richly cultivated district, interspersed 
with meadow land, stretching to the town of Wind- 
sor, and delightfully watered by the Thames.
On 
one side, the prospect is diversified with the town of 
Maidenhead and village of Taplow, backed by the 
towering woods of Ciiefden and Hedsor ; and on 
the other, by Windsor Castle, and the picturesque 
scenery of the Forest.
Brightwell.] — Brightwell is situated in the hun- 
dred of Moreton, two miles and a half west by north 
from Wallingford.
There was formerly a castle 
here, which was delivered by King Stephen to Hen- 
ry II.
then Duke of Normandy, pursuant to an 
agreement made between them, when the peace was 
concluded at Wallingford, and probably was then 
demolished.
The Rev. Thomas Wintle, the present (or recent) 
rector of this parish, has distinguished himself as an 
Hebraist, by a very able translation of the prophet 
Daniel.
Dr. Thomas Godwyn, author of a well-known 
treatise on the Roman and Jewish antiquities, was 
rector here from the year 1629 till 1642 ; and Ed- 
ward Bernard, a learned astronomer, and Savilian 
professor of that science in the University of Oxford, 
was rector from 1691 to 1697.
Thus Brightwell 
appears to have been a favoured seat of literature 
and science.
In the church is a memorial of Dr. Godwyn, and 
another of Robert Court, some time auditor of Prince 
Arthur, who died in 1509.
Brimpton.] — At Brimpton, in the hundred of 
Faircross, six miles and a half east-south-east from 
Newbury, the Knights Templars are said to have 
had a preceptory« At the time of the Norman sur- 
vey there were two churches in this parish.
About 
a mile from the present church, there are the remains 
of an ancient ecclesiastical building adjoining a 
farm-house.
Hide-end is a hamlet of Brimpton.
Buckland.] — Buckland lies in the hundred of 
Ganfield, four miles and a half north-east by east 
from 
BERKSHIRE.
<59 
from Great Faringdon.
The principal manor in this 
parish was once in tho possession of Chaucer, the 
poet.
It is now the property of Sir John Throck- 
morton, Bart.
There is a small parochial library in 
this town ; and the late Mr. Southby left an endow- 
ment of lands, which now let at twenty pound a year, 
and 2001.
S. S.
annuities, for the establishment and 
support of a Sunday school.
Mrs. Hayton, also, in- 
fluenced by the same benevolent feelings, presented 
a farther sum of 2001.
S. S.
annuities.* 
Bucklebury.] — Bucklebury, or Burgheldbury, in 
the hundred of Reading-, lies six miles and a quar- 
ter east-north-east from Newbury.
The manor,, 
which belonged to Reading- Abbey, was granted, in 
1-539, to John Winchcombe, son of the celebrated 
Jack of Newbury.
It was once a residence of the 
famous Lord Bolingbroke, in right of his wife, the 
heiress of the Winchcombes.
At present it is the 
property of Winchcombe Henry Howard Hartley, 
the heir of the Winchcombes, by a female branch of 
the family.
Buscot.] — Buscot, anciently Burwardscot, lies 
m the hundred of Shrivenhain, four miles north-west 
by west from Great Faringdon!
Buscot House, the seat of Edward Lovedon, Esq.
forms a conspicuous object from the Faringdon 
road.
The park, which comprises about 150 acres, 
was formerly a farm.
It was repurchased by Mr.
Lovedon, after having been out of the family 150 
years.
Ctesar's Camp.] — Near East Hamstead Park, 
about three miles and a half south-east of Oaking- 
ham, there is a large irregular fortification called 
Caesar's Camp.
It is situated on the summit of a 
hill, and surrounded by a double ditch.
At a short 
distance from this camp are the remains of a Roman 
road, nearly 99 feet wide, vulgarly called the Devil's 
Highway.
Chaddleworth.] — Chaddleworth is situated in 
the hundred of Kentbury Eagle, six miles west- 
south-west from East Ilsley.
The maaor, now the 
property of Richard Walter Nelson, Esq. was given 
by William the Conqueror to Robert D'Oilly.
The 
same custom formerly prevailed here, respecting the 
recovery of free-bench, by incontinent widows, as at 
Enborne.
In very early times, at a place anciently called 
EUenfordesmere, near Lambourne, in this parish, 
there was a hermitage.
In the year 1160 a priory 
for regular canons of the order of St. Austin was 
founded upon the vspot where the hermitage had 
stood, by Ralph de Chaddleworth, who dedicated 
it to the honour of St. Margaret.
This priory was 
afterwards called Poghiil, and in the time of Ed- 
ward IV.
was endowed with 501.
per annum.
It 
* The manor of Barcot, in this parish, was formerly in pos- 
session of the Hulcotes.
\\ illiiun Ilulcote, the last of the fa- 
mily, was a very singular character.
In the reign of Queen 
Mary, he was imprisoned for his religion; but, to avoid the 
Jfire, he subscribed to the articles.
After the reformation, he b«- 
VOl. I.
— NO.
5, 
was one of the smaller monasteries dissolved by 
Cardinal Wolsey, and the annual value was then 
711.
10s.
7d.
Woolley Park, the seat of the Rev. Philip 
Wroughton, is in the parish of Chaddleworth.
The 
house was originally built by Bartholomew Tipping, 
Esq. 1690, but lias been considerably altered and 
improved bv the present proprietor, by designs of 
Mr. Jeffery Wyatt.
In the year 1720, a school was founded at Chad- 
dleworth, by Mr. William Saunders, for the educa- 
tion of eight poor children ; two of Chaddlewick, 
two of Bright vvalton, two of Leckhamsted, one of 
Fawley, and one of Great Shefford.
The children 
are clothed and apprenticed out of the funds of tho 
charity.
Mrs. Susan Winn, the sister of Mr. Saun- 
ders, also left 101.
per annum for educating ten poor 
children of Chaddleworth.
Chekburg Camp.] — Cherburg Camp, about a mil* 
from Pusey, is, according to tradition, the site of a 
palace which belonged to Canute.
It is nearly cir- 
cular, and double-ditched, much resembling Bad- 
bury Castle in Dorsetshire, but smaller.
Its longest 
diameter is 310 paces.
About a mile from this, in 
the parish of Henton Walridge, there are the traces 
of another camp, now an orchard, and between a hill 
called Windmill Hill, which perhaps might have 
been used for signals.
Childrey.] — Childrey is situated in the hundred 
of Wantage, two miles and a half west of that town.
There were three manors in this parish ; Frethorne, 
Maltravers, and Rampanes, or Rampions — at the 
time of the Norman survey, and they have continued 
separate till the present time.
Several monuments of the Fyndernes, Kingstons, 
and Waldrons, are in Childrey church.
Dr. Edward 
Pocock, the learned orientalist, who died in 1691, was 
rector of the parish.
In the year 1526, William Fettiplace, of Childrey, 
left some estates to the provost and scholars of 
Queen's College, Oxford, on condition of their keep- 
ing in repair St. Catherine's aisle, at Childrey, in 
which he had founded a chantry, and an alms-house, 
which he had built there for three poor men of the 
parishes of Childrey and Letcombe-Bussat.
They 
were also to pay the chantry priest, who was to keep 
a free-school for all the poor children of Childrey, 81.
per annum, and to allow 9d.
a week to each of the 
poor men, 3s.
4d.
yearly for a gown, and 2s.
8d.
for 
fuel.
The salary, with a residence, is still continued 
to the schoolmaster ; and the almsmen receive nearly 
three guineas a year each.
Ckolsey.] — Cholsey, anciently Ceolsey, is in the 
hundred of Reading, two miles and a half south-west 
from Wallingford.
King Ethelred founded a mo- 
came a zealous lay preacher, and, as it is said, used to mount 
the pulpit in a velvet bonnet and damask gown, and sometimes 
with a gold chain.
In a quaint and whimsical will, he -directed 
his heart to be buried at Buckland, 
aastetj 
70 
BERKSHIRE, 
nastery here, in 986, to expiate the murder of his 
brother Edward the Martyr.
It is supposed to have 
been destroyed by the Danes in 1006.
The Abbot of Reading had a seat at Cholsey, 
which was granted to Sir Francis Englefieid, in 
1555.
The manor now belongs to Lord Kensing- 
ton.
Cholsey Farm was formerly reputed to be the 
largest and most compact in England ; the rent 
amounting to 10001.
annually.
The Great Barn, in 
which the Abbot of Reading, to whom the manor 
belonged, deposited his tithes, is yet standing.
It 
measures 303 feet in length, 62 in height, and 54 in 
breadth.
The roof is supported by seventeen pillars 
on each side.
They are four yards in circumference, 
and in the centre rise to a great height, but next the 
walls are not more than eight feet high.
Near one 
of the doors, a tablet, upon the wall, records the fol- 
lowing extraordinary instance of manual labour :• — 
" In this barn John Lanesley threshed, for Mr. Jo- 
seph Hopkins, five quarters seven bushels and a half 
of wheat in thirteen hours, on March 15, 1747." — 
This man continued in the same farm, receiving full 
wages as a labourer in husbandry, till the winter of 
1804, when, in his 93d year, he became dependent 
on the parish.
Clewer.] — The village of Clewer, or Cleworth, 
in the hundred of Ripplesmere, is about a mile to 
the westward of Windsor ; but the parish extends 
into that town, of which it comprises a considerable 
part.
The manor belongs to Arthur Vansittart, 
Esq. in whose family it has been nearly a century.
The manors of Clewer- Brocas, and Didworth, or 
Dudworth Maunsell, a hamlet of Windsor, are the 
property of the Hon. Mrs.
Keppel, daughter of Sir 
Edward Walpole, and widow of the Bishop of 
Exeter.
Clewer church contains some memorials of the fa- 
mily of Hayes, of Holyport ; and there are some in 7 
different verses on a brass plate, commemorating 
Martin Expence, a famous archer, who shot a match 
against one hundred men, near Bray.
St. Leonard's Hill, the seat of General Harcourt, 
•in this parish, deserves particular notice, on account 
of its delightful situation, and the large plantations of 
oak and beech, which here form a most agreeable 
variety.
The mansion, which is situated on the sum- 
mit of the lull, was first begun by the Duchess of 
Gloucester, when Countess of Waldegrave, and 
greatly improved by his Royal Highness the Duke, 
and then called Gloucester Lodge.
It was pur- 
chased by the present proprietor, about the year 
1781.
The house is elegant, and commands an ex- 
tensive prospect over the river Thames, and a most 
beautiful and fertile country.
On the side of the hill 
is a pleasing villa, equally beautiful in its situation 
and large plantations, for many years the residence 
* In speaking of inigo Jones as an artist, the late Lord Or- 
ford observed that he was " the greatest in his profession that 
has ever appeased in these kingdoms ; and so great, that in that 
of several persons of distinction, until purchased by 
the Duke of Gloucester, as an appendage or farm to 
Gloucester Lodge.
Coleshill.] — Coleshill is in the hundred of Shri- 
venham, four miles west-south-west from Great Fa- 
ringdon.
This place seems to have derived its name 
from its elevated situation above the river Cole, 
which runs near the bottom of the village, and forms 
the western boundary of the parish.
Coleshill church is a handsome structure, dedicat- 
ed to St. Faith.
It is ornamented, at the west end, 
by a tower, with battlements and pinnacles.
The 
inside is fitted up in an elegant manner, and there is 
some fine painted glass, of modern workmanship, in 
a curious circular window in the south aisle : the 
painting represents the arms of Sir Mark Stuart 
Pleydell, and his lady.
An elegant marble monu- 
ment, executed by Rysbrack, to the memory of the 
only daughter of the above persons, and wife of the 
Honourable William Bouvcrie, afterwards Earl of 
Radnor, is in the same ausle.
There is another of 
artificial stone, in the Gothic style, in memory of Sir 
M. S.
Pleydell, Bart, and his lady.
In the east 
window of the chancel is some finely stained glass, 
purchased at Angiers, in 1787, by the Earl of Rad- 
nor, and put up here at his expence.
It represents 
the Nativity.
The Rev. John Pinsent, vicar of this parish in the* 
year 1706, gave an estate of about 151.
per annum, 
for apprenticing the children of such of the poor in- 
habitants of Coleshill and Great Coxwell, as had 
never received relief from their parish.
The sum of 
51.
to be allotted for each child.
Coleshill House.] — Near the village of Coles- 
hill, stands Coleshill House, the seat of Lord Vis- 
count Folkstone, eldest son of the Earl of Radnor.
It was built by Inigo Jones, about the middle of the 
17th century, and still retains its original form.* — 
The grounds have within these few years undergone 
a complete alteration, and have been laid out under 
the direction of the Earl of Radnor, according to 
the present improved taste of landscape garden- 
ing.
They are remarkably beautiful, possessing 
every requisite to render the scenery perfect and in- 
teresting.
Coxwell (Great).] — Great Coxwell lies in the 
hundred of Faringdon, a mile and three quarters 
south-west from Great Faringdon.
In the church 
are some tombs of the family of Mores, ancestors of 
Edward Rowe Mores, the antiquary, who collected 
some materials towards a history of this county.
In 
the chancel window are the arms of several posses- 
sors of the manor, put up by the Earl of Radnor, 
who is now Lord of the Manor, and impropriator of 
the great tithes.
The mauor-house, great barn, and 
some lands anuexed, however, belong to the repre- 
sentatives of John Richmond Webb, Esq. The 
reign of arts (Charles I.) we scarcely kuow the name of another 
architect." 
barn 
BERKSHIRE.
71 
barn is a remarkably fine piece of masohry, 148 feet 
long - , by 40 in breadth.
The walls are four feet 
thick, and the roof is supported by two rows of large 
upright timbers, resting upon massy stone pillars.
It was originally built by the abbots of Beaulieu, to 
whom, in the year 1204, King 1 John granted the 
manor.
Cumner.] — Cumner is situated in the hundred of 
Howmer, five miles and a quarter north-north-west 
from Abingdon.
The village stands upon the brow 
of a hill, commanding an extensive view over the 
counties of Oxford and Gloucester.
From a very 
early period, the manor belonged to the abbot and 
convent of Abingdon ; and, as we have before stated, 
the occupation of this estate, with the manor, was 
granted by Henry VIII.
to Thomas Pentecost, alias 
Rowland, the last abbot, for life.
After his death it 
became the seat of Anthony Forster, Esq. who lies 
buried in Cumner church.
According to his epi- 
taph, he was a very amiable man, very learned, a 
great musician, builder, and planter.
He has been 
accused, however, of having been accessary to the 
murder of the Countess of Leicester, at his own 
house at Cumner, whither she had been sent for that 
purpose by her husband.
Sir Richard Verney, one 
of the Earl's retainers, was the chief agent in this 
horrid business.
Two ancient tombs, supposed to be those of two 
abbots of Abingdon, are in the south transept of 
Cumner church ; which contains also the monument 
of Anthony Forster before mentioned, and a memo- 
rial for Dr. Benjamin Buckler, editor of the Stem- 
mata Chicheleiana, and keeper of the archives in the 
university of Oxford.
In the church- yard is the tomb of Richard Brown, 
a shepherd, aged 109, and of several other persons 
who lived to very advanced ages, also of Francis 
Drope, author of a book on the management of fruit- 
trees, and his brother John, a physician and poet, 
were both natives of this parish, of which their fa- 
ther was vicar.
The parishioners of Cumner, who pay vicarial 
tithes, have a custom of repairing immediately after 
prayers on Christmas-day, to the vicarage-house, 
claiming to be there entertained with four bushels of 
malt brewed into ale, two bushels of wheat made 
into bread, and half a hundred weight of cheese : 
Avhat may be left is given to the poor, after divine ser- 
vice, on the following morning.
The old mansion-house has, in part, been fitted 
up as a farm-house ; and the shell of the residue is 
nearly entire.
It is a large monastic building, with 
a quadrangular court in the Centre.
A chamber is 
still shewn, called the Dudley Chamber, where the 
Countess is said to have been murdered, and after- 
wards thrown down stairs, to make her death appear 
to have been accidental.
She was buried at Cum- 
ner, but her body was afterwards removed to St.
Mary's Church, Oxford.
One of the perpetrators 
of the murder being afterwards apprehended for 
a different crime, confessed this, and was private- 
ly destroyed.
Sir Richard Verney is reported to 
have died about the same time in a deplorable 
manner.
Donnington Castle.] — Donnington Castle is si- 
tuated in the parish of Shaw, in the hundred of Fan- 
cross, a little to the north of Speen.
It now raises 
its lofty head above the remains of the venerable 
oaks by which it was once surrounded.
The time 
of its erection is uncertain ; but it is said to have 
been built by Sir Richard Abberbury, who was 
guardian to King Richard IL during his minority^, 
and was expelled from court by the discontented 
lords in 1388, for his attachment to that monarch.
Geoffry Chaucer, the father of English poetry, is 
said to have purchased it of the son of Sir Richard, 
and that he retired thither in 1398, two years before: 
his death.
It is asserted, in Gibson's Camden, that 
" an oak was here standing till within these few 
years, under which Chaucer penned many of his fa- 
mous poems ;" but this is, unquestionably, a mistake;, 
and the tradition, that " he composed his pieces un- 
der an oak of his own planting," is an absolute im- 
possibility, as the Castle could not have been three 
years in his possession.
Indeed, it is the opinion of 
some, that as, towards the close of his life, Chaucer 
was not in affluent circumstances, he did not pur- 
chase Donnington Castle ; but that it was bought 
by his son, Thomas, who married a rich heiress, the 
daughter of Sir John Burgherst.
This Thomas 
Chaucer, was sheriff of the county in the 2d of Hen- 
ry IV.
his daughter and heiress married William De 
la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, who made Donnington 
Castle his occasional residence, and considerably 
enlarged the buildings.
It afterwards became vest- 
ed in the crown, and was granted by Henry VIII.
to Charles Brandon, created by him Duke of Suf- 
folk.
In the civil .wars, it was garrisoned by Charles I.
and the government was entrusted to Colonel Boys, 
being a post of great importance, commanding the 
high road leading from the west to London, and that 
from Oxford to Newbury.
It was twice besieged ; 
first on the 31st July 1644, by Lieutenant- General 
Middleton, at the head of three thousand men, who 
was repulsed with the loss of one colonel, eight cap- 
tains, one serjeant-major, and many inferior officers 
and soldiers.
It was again besieged on the 27th of 
September, in the same year, by Colonel Horton, 
who, raising a battery against it, at the foot of a hill 
near Newbury, fired upwards of a thousand shot, 
demolishing three of the towers, and a part of the 
wall.
In a sally, during this attack, the governor 
beat the enemy out of their trenches, killed a lieute- 
nant-colonel, the chief engineer, and many of the 
private men.
At length, after a siege of nineteen 
days, the place was relieved by the king, who at 
Newbury rewarded the governor with the honour of 
knighthood.
After the second battle of Newbury, 
the king, retiring towards Oxford in the night, left 
his heavy bag-gage, ammunition, and artillery, under 
the castle walls; upon which the place was sum- 
moned, 
72 
BERKSHIRE.
moned by the parliamentary generals, who threaten- 
ed that if it were not surrendered they would not 
leave one stone upon another.
To this Sir John 
Boys returned no other answer than that he was not 
hound to repair it ; but he would, by God's help, 
keep the ground afterwards.
The king, however, 
returned in a few days, from Oxford, revictualled 
the Castle without opposition, and slept in it the 
same night, surrounded by his army.
After the 
civil war was over, Mr. Packer, the proprietor, 
pulled down the ruinous parts of the- building, and 
with the materials erected the house standing un- 
der it.
Camden describes Donnington Castle to have 
been, in his time, " a small but very neat place, 
seated on the brow of a woody hill, having a fine 
prospect, and lighted by windows on every side." 
A gateway and two round towers, are now all that 
remain of the old building.
The manor of Doddington is now held under the 
king, as parcel of the honour of Wallingford, by 
William Lowndes, Esq.
The hospital at Donnington, which was founded 
by Sir Richard Abberbury, or as Leland says, by 
William De la Pole, was restored by Charles How- 
ard, Earl of Nottingham, in the time of James I.
and still subsists for a master and twelve poor men.
This hospital appears to have been the same founda- 
tion with the priory of Trinitarians, also said to have 
been founded by Sir Richard Abbex-bury.
Donnington Grove.] — Nearly opposite to the 
village of Speen, at the foot of Donnington Hill, 
on the north side of the Kennet, is a handsome mo- 
dern house, called the Grove, built in the Gothic 
-style, by the late James Petit Andrews, Esq. It 
was purchased of him by the late W.
Brummel, 
Esq. by whom it was considerably improved.
The 
situation is on a rising ground, baaked by a hill, 
crowned with wood, out of which rises Donning- 
ton Castle.
A lawn surrounds the house, and falls 
towards the Lambourne stream, which is here en- 
larged into a river, taking a winding course, nearly 
a mile long, and of considerable breadth.
There 
are three or four islands in it ; one of which is 
thickly planted, and affords shelter to many swans 
and wild fowl, which frequent the water, and at the 
same time contribute to the beauty of the place.
The country, on the opposite side ot the river, con- 
sists of corn fields, rising agreeably to the eye.
The lawn is very neat, the trees and plantations 
are beautifully disposed, and the manner in which 
the water terminates at each end, finishes the scene 
in a pleasing manner.
There is a winding gravel 
walk, through both the groves on the banks of the 
river, which opens to several recluse and pleasing 
scenes.
On one spot is a pretty rustic Gothic tem - 
pie, built of flint, near a cascade, which the river 
forms by falling over a natural ridge of stones.
The 
library of Doimiugton Grove is a large, handsome, 
-and well proportioned room, confining a good col- 
ieetion ot pictures, by some of the best masters.
Enborne.] — Enborne is situated in the hundred 
of Kentbury-Eagle, 2| miles west-south-west from 
Newbury.
There are two manors in this parish, 
both in the possession of Earl Craven ; East En- 
borne, and West Enborne, or Enborne-Cheuey.
The Spectator mentions a remarkable custom of 
these manors, which is thus described in Tomlins's 
edition of Jacob's Luw Dictionary : — In the manors 
of East and West Enbourne in the county of 
Berks, and the manor of Torre in Devonshire, and 
other parts of the West of England, there is a cus- 
tom, that when a copyhold tenant dies, his widow 
shall have her Free Bench in all his customary 
lands, dam sola et casta fuerit (as long as she shall 
continue sole and chaste) ; but if she commits 
incontinency, she forfeits her estate ; yet neverthe- 
less, on her coming into the court of the manor, ri- 
ding backwards on a black ram, with his tail in her 
hand, and saying the words following, the Steward 
is bound by the custom to re-admit her to her Free- 
bench ; the words arc these, 
" Here Jam, 
Riding on a black Ram, 
Like a JVhore as / am.
; 
And for my crincum crancum, 
I have lost my bincion bancum ; 
And for my Tail's Game, 
Have done this worldly shame, 
Therefore pray Mr. Steward, let me have my land again." 
Messrs.
Lvsons inform us, that, " at every 
court, the jury still present this as one of the an- 
cient customs of the manor : the penalty has not 
been literally enforced Avithin the memory of man, 
but it is said that a pecuniary commutation has been 
reeeived in lieu of it, which perhaps may have been 
more readily accepted, from the difficulty of pro- 
curing a proper animal for the purpose." 
Englefield.] — Englefield, ia the hundred of 
Theale, lies six miles west of Reading.
This vil- 
lage, which is pleasantly situated in a rich valley, 
extending from Pangbourn, westward nearly as far 
as Newbury, is the site of a Avell-knoAvn battle, 
which was fought between the Danes and the 
Saxons, in the year 871.
In the south aisle of Englefield church, is an in- 
teresting monument, to the memory of the second 
and last Marquis of Winchester, who so nobly de- 
fended Basing House for Charles I.
The follow- 
ing lines, Avritten by Drydcn, are inscribed on tliis 
monument :— 
" He who in impious times untainted stood, 
And midst rebellion durst be great and good ; 
Whose arms asserted, and whose suff'iings more 
Confirmed the cause for which he fought before ; 
Rests here, rewarded by an heavenly Prince 
For what his earthly could not recompence ; 
Pray, reader, that such times no more appear, 
Or if they happen learn true honour here.
Ask of thy ages faith and loyalty, 
Which to preserve them Heaven conferee!
on thee : 
Few subjects could a king like thine deserve, 
And fewer such a king so well could serve : 
6 BUst 
BERKSHIRE.
73 
iBTestking!
blest subject !
whose exalted state 
By sufferings rose, and gave the law to fate : 
Such souls are rare, but mighty patterns given 
To earth, were meant for ornaments to heaven." 
There are also several monuments of the Engle- 
field family in this church.
The seat of Richard Benyon, Esq. in this village, 
formerly belonged to the Paulet family, and is 
agreeably situated under a verdant hill, Avhich 
shelters it from the north-east-winds.
A handsome 
lawn is in front of the house, and a fine sheet of 
water, interspersed with several small islands, in- 
habited by numerous wild fowl.
Ashmole, the herald and antiquary, retired to 
the village of Englefield, in the year 1647.* 
Faringdon.] — Faringdon, or Farrendon, as it 
was anciently termed, gives name to the hundred 
in which it lies.
It is situated at the distance of 
69f miles, west by north from London, and 36 
miles, north west by west from Reading.
This town, which is small, stands very pleasant- 
ly on the west side of Faringdon Hill, about two 
miles from the Thames.
It is governed by a bailiff, 
and inferior officers.
It has a weekly market, by 
prescription, on Tuesday ; and annual fairs, on the 
13th of February, Whit Tuesday, Tuesday before 
and Tuesday after Old Michaelmas, and 29th of 
October.
Faringdon was part of the ancient demesne of the 
crown, and the Saxon kings had a palace here, in 
which Edward the elder died, in the year 925.
— 
Robert Earl of Gloucester built a castle here in the 
Teign of King Stephen, against whom he fortified 
and defended it ; but after a close siege of four 
days, it was taken and razed to the ground.
Ac- 
cording to the chronicle of Waverley Abbey, quoted 
by Camden, the site of it was, by King John, in 
* Elias Ashmole, whom Mr. Wood styles the "greatest vir- 
tuoso and curioso that was ever known or read of in England," 
had a happy facility in learning every art or science to which 
he applied himself.
He studied Astrology, Botany, Chemis- 
try, Heraldry, and Antiquities ; in all which he was a great 
proficient.
In the latter end of the reign of Charles I.
he re- 
tired to the pleasant village of Englefield, in Berkshire, where 
he amused himself with botany.
The time he spent in this 
delicious retirement appears to have been the happiest part of 
his life.
In 1650, he published under the feigned name of 
James Hasalle, Esq. his " Fasciculus Chemicus, or Chemical 
Collections, expressing the Ingress, Progress, and Egress, of 
the secret Hermetic Sciences, lac." 12mo.
His " Thesauum 
Chemiciim Britannia!
m," published in 4to.
1652, contains 
many.
pieces of our old hermetic philosophers.
This work 
gained him a considerable reputation, which was very much 
increased by his labours and accurate " History of the Order 
of the Garter," published in folio, 1672.
He has not taken 
proportionable pains in his " Antiquities of Berkshire," which 
might lave been much more complete.
He enjoyed several 
lucrative places under the government in the reign of Charles 
II.
It is well known that he, in his life time, founded the 
Museum at Oxford, which bears his name.
Ob. 18 May, 
1692, iEt.76.
f Sir Henry Unton, who was ambassador from Queen Eliz- 
abeth to France, signalized his attachment to his royal Mistress 
while in that country, by sending the following -extraordinary 
VOL.
I. — NO.
6u 
the year 1202, " by divine admonition granted with 
all its appurtenances to build an abbey of the Cis- 
tercian order." 
" These fruitful plaing, in that unhappy hour 
Of papal sway and sacerdotal power, 
Were doom'd the new-made abbey to maintain, 
And distant Beaulieu ruled the fair domain." 
Pye's Faringdon Hill.
Shortly after the dissolution of monasteries, the 
manor of Faringdon, with the other possessions of 
the abbey of Beaulieu, were granted to Thomas 
Lord Seymour, by Edward VI.
but again vesting 
in the crown by the attainder and execution of that 
nobleman, it was granted, in the second year of 
Queen Mary, to Sir Frederick Englefield, and 
attain by Queen Elizabeth to Sir Henry Unton.
f 
William Hallet, Esq. is the present proprietor.
As some labourers were digging stones in a field 
called Lamb Close, in this parish, in the year 1771, 
they discovered six human skeletons, lying there in 
a row ; under the heads of two of them were found 
some pieces of silver coin of James I.
and Charles 
I. and one of the skulls appeared to have had a 
bullet passed quite through it.
By the size of the 
bones, and the soundness of the teeth, they were 
probably young men, and soldiers, slain in the civil 
wars of Charles I.
At Radcot Bridge, situated at the extremity of 
the parish, a battle was fought between Robert 
Vere, Duke of Ireland, Richard the Second's fa- 
vourite, and the Earl of Derby (afterwards Henry 
IV.) and other confederate lords.
The duke was 
defeated, and escaped by crossing the river at the 
hazard of his life.
Faringdon church is a large and handsome build- 
ing, of the earliest style of Oothic architecture.
It 
is built in form of a cross, but with a double tran- 
challenge to the Duke of Guise : " Forasmuch as in the lodg- 
ing of the Lord Dumayne, and in public elsewhere, impu- 
dently, and indiscreetly, and over boldly, you spoke badly of 
my sovereign, whose sacred person I in this country represent; 
to maintain, both by word and weapon, her honor, which was 
never called in question among people of honesty and virtue ; 
I say you have most wickedly lied in speaking so basely of my* 
sovereign ; and you will do nothing but lie whenever you shall 
dare to tax her honor.
Moreover, that her saored person y 
being one of the most complete, accomplished, and virtuou* 
princesses in the world, ought not to be ill spoken of, by the 
malicious tongue of such a perfidious I raitor to her law and 
country as you are ; and hereupon I do defy and challenge 
your person to mine with such manner of arms as you shall like 
or choose, be it on horseback or on foot.
Nor would I have 
you think that there is any inequality of person between us ; 
1 being issued of as great a race, and noble house, in all re- 
spects, as yourself.
So assigning me an indifferent place, I 
will there maintain my words and the lie which I have given, 
and which you should not endure, if you have any courage at 
all in you.
If you consent not to meet me hereupon, I will 
hold you, and cause you to be held, for the arrantest coward, 
and most slanderous slave, that exists in Fiance.
I expect 
your answer, Sec." Sir Henry Unton was knighted, for his 
bravery at the siege of Zutphen.
He djed, while on his se- 
cond embassy to France, in I59& 
sept 
74 
BERKSHIRE.
sept.
Upon the low square tower there was ori- 
ginally a spire, which was destroyed during the 
Civil Wars.
Several ancient monuments of the 
Purefoys of Wadley, and of their ancestors, Sir 
Alexander, Sir Edward, Sir Thomas, and Sir Henry 
Unton, are in this church.
Upon that of Sir Alex- 
ander are figures in hrass of himself, and his lady, 
habited in surcoats, with their arms blazoned.
In 
the nave of the church is the tomb of Sir Marma- 
duke Rawdon, governor of Faringdon, who suc- 
cessfully defended the garrison against the Parlia- 
mentary forces.
He died April 26, 1646.
Faringdon Hill.] — In the immediate vicinity 
of the town of Faringdon, stands Faringdon Hill, 
an eminence gradually rising from the vale of White 
Horse.
Upon the summit is a small grove, which 
forms a kind of land mark for the surrounding 
counties, as it is seen at a great distance in every 
direction.
In addition to the whole of the fertile 
vale beneath, the hill commands a rich and exten- 
sive view over part of Wiltshire, Oxfordshire, and 
Gloucestershire.
Pye, the late Laureat, who died in 
the year 1813, from whose poem of Faringdon Hill 
we have already quoted, gives the following interest- 
ing and correct picture of this beautiful scene : — 
" Here lofty mountains lift their azure heads, 
There its green lap the grassy meadow spreads : 
Enclosures here the sylvan scene divide, 
There plains extended spread their harvest wide.
Here oaks their massy limbs wide stretching meet, 
And form impervious thickets at our feet.
Through aromatic heaps of rip'ning hay, 
There silver Isis wins her winding way ; 
And many a bower, and many a spire between, 
Shoots from the groves and cheers the rural scene." 
Faringdon House.] — Faringdon House, noAv 
the residence of William Hallet, Esq. is an elegant 
modern structure, which was built by the amiable 
and learned Henry James Pye, Esq. whom we have 
just noticed.
It was sold by him, with the manor, 
to the present proprietor.
The house stands in a 
small park, on the north side of the town.
During 
the Civil Wars, the ancient mansion was garrisoned 
for Charles I.
and was one of the last places that 
surrendered.
Cromwell himself made an unsuc- 
cessful attack upon it, with 600 men from the gar- 
rison of Abingdon ; a second attack, with as little 
success, was made the following year by Sir Ro- 
bert Pye, the owner of the house : Sir George Lisle 
was then governor.
It was in this last attack that 
the spire of Faringdon church is said to have been 
beaten down.
Fyfield.] — The parish of Fyfield, or Fyfhide, 
is situated in the hundred of Ock, of miles W.N.W.
of Abingdon.
In the fifteenth century, the manor 
was vested in the family of Golafre ; in the six- 
teenth, the manor and advowson of Fyfield were 
purchased of the representatives of Lady Gordon, 
by Sir Thomas White, who gave them to the pre- 
sident and scholars of St. John's College, Oxford, 
which he founded in the year 1555, Mr. Dalton Is* 
now the lessee, under the college.
In the south aisle of Fyfield church, is a curious 
monument of Sir John Golafre, who died in the 
year 1442.
His elfigy in armour lies on an open 
altar tomb, beneath which is the figure of a skele- 
ton in a shroud.
The people of the village call it 
Gulliver's tomb, and say that the figure on the top 
represents him in the vigour of youth ; the skeleton 
in his old age.
Amongst several other ancient mo- 
numents, is one to the memory of Lady Gordon, 
who died about the year 1527.
It stands under an 
arch in the north side of the chancel, and has a 
roof of rich tracery, blue and gold ; over the arch 
is a cornice of gilt foliage.
The brass plates have 
been removed from the tomb.
Garston (East).] — East Garston, belonging to 
the hundred of Moreton, but locally situated in that 
of Lambourn, is two miles and a half E.
S. E.
from 
Lambourn.
East Garston manor, now the property of Sir 
Francis Burdett, formerly belonged to John of 
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, in right of his wife 
Blanch.
. It was held by the service of finding a 
knight clad in plate armour to serve in the king's 
army for forty days, at the lord's cost, whensoever 
he should be in the territory of Kedwelly, in Wales, 
of which manor this was a member.
Garston church contains memorials of the fa- 
milies of Gastrell, and of the Elsyngs, descended 
from Henry Elsyng, clerk of the House of Lords, 
in the reign of Charles I.
and keeper of his majesty's 
records in the tower of London.
Hagbourn.] — East Hagbourn, in the hundred 
of Moreton, is six mUes and a quarter west by 
south from Wallingford.
An annual fair is holden 
here, on the Thursday before the 1 1th of October.
A cross, with a tall taper shaft, on an ascent of 
steps, stands near the church ; at Crosscot, a little 
hamlet, about half a mile distant, is another cross ; 
and a third stands by the road side, between Hag- 
bourn and Crosscot.
Hampstead (East).] — East Hampstead lies in 
the hundred of Ripplesmere, 4 miles east south 
east from Wokingham.
For a long time, East Hampstead Park was a 
royal residence.
Richard II.
went thither to re- 
create himself with hunting in August 1331.
In 
1531 Catherine, the first Queen of Henry VIII.
was there, when the king sent some of the lords 
of his council to persuade her to consent to a di- 
vorce.
King James I.
resided there in 1622 and 
1623.
Soon after that period, the manor and park 
were granted to William Trumbull, Esq. from 
whom they descended to his grandson, Sir William 
Trumbull, the friend and correspondent of Pope, 
and one of the Secretaries of State to William III.
He died, and was buried, at East Hampstead, in the 
year 1716.
Fenton, the poet, another contemporary of Pope, 
9 also 
BERKSHIRE.
75 
also died at East Hampstead, in 1732, whilst on a 
visit to Sir William Trumbull's widow.
The park and manor now belong 1 to the Mar- 
chioness of Downshire ; her father, the Honourable 
Martin Sandys, having married the grand-daugh- 
ter and sole representative of Sir William Trum- 
bull.
The late Dr. Durall, principal of Hertford Col- 
lege, was rector of this parish.
He distinguished 
himself as a learned divine, and biblical critic.
Hampstead -Marshall.] — Hampstead -Marshall 
is situated in the hundred of Kentbury Eagle, four 
miles west by north from Newbury.
The park 
affords a very fine prospect.
The manor belongs to 
Earl Craven, whose family had formerly a magnifi- 
cent seat at this place.* 
Sir Balthasar Gerbier, the eccentric architect of 
the building, died here in 1667, and was buried in 
the church, f 
Harwell.] — Harwell, or Prince's Harwell, is si- 
tuated in the hundred of Moreton, six miles and a 
half east by north from Wantage.
The manor be- 
longs to Sir John Chetwode, Bart.
In the church, is a tablet, recording the singular 
benefaction of Christopher Elderfield, an eminent 
divine, who was a native of this parish, and died in 
1652 : " he gave lands for the purpose of purchas- 
ing, in the spring of every year, two milch cows, to 
be given to two of the poorest men in the parish of 
Harwell (burthened with families) for their susten- 
tation." The land, in this parish, is chiefly arable ; 
consequently, a poor man cannot find pasture for a 
cow.
The trustees of the charity, therefore, pur- 
chase two cows, or oxen, in the winter, if the rent of 
the lands will suffice, kill them, and distribute the 
meat amongst the poor.
This is a wretched sub- 
stitute for what was benevolently intended by the 
donor.
In the year 1715, a lady of the name of Jennings, 
founded an alms-house here, for six poor widows, 
and endowed it with an allowance of 2s.
6d.
a week 
to each, and a yearly sum for clothes.
An estate, 
which now produces 321.
a year, was left by Mr.
Loder, for the education of twelve poor children ; 
and Mr. Eaton, who died vicar of Harwell, in 1772, 
gave a house to the school-master, and a benefaction 
to the poor.
Hendred.] — East Hendred, formerly a market- 
* The house was almost wholly destroyed by fire, in the 
year 1718 : " a singula* fate," observe Messrs.
Lysons, " for 
the mansion of this noble Earl, who was so celebrated for his 
activity in assisting to extinguish fires in the city of London, 
and its suburbs, that it became a common saying, that his horse, 
for he always attended on horseback at first notice, smelt a fire 
as soon as it happened." 
f Balthasar Gerbier, a native of Antwerp, came into Eng- 
land in the reign of James I.
He attended Charles I.
when 
Prince of Wales, into Spain ; and was secretly an agent in the 
treaty of marriage with the Infanta, though he only appeared 
in the character of a painter.
In 1638, Charles conferred upon 
him the honour of knighthood, and afterwards employed him 
at the Court of Brussels, where he was resident several years.
town, is situated in the hundred of Wantage, four 
miles and a half cast by north from Wantage.
The 
parish contains five manors, four of which anciently 
belong-ed to religious houses.
The church is a 
handsome fabric, in which are several memorials of 
the Eystons.
In the reign of Edward I.
John Pa- 
ternoster held a virgate of land in this parish, by the 
service of saying a paternoster every day for the 
king's soul.
The land is still called Paternoster 
Bank, upon the road leading to West Hendred, the 
adjoining parish.
Hinksey.] — Laurence Hinksey, North Hinksey, 
or, as it is more commonly called, Ferry Hinksey, 
is situated in the hundred of Horner, a mile and a 
half west of Oxford, and six miles north from Abing- 
don.
It appears to have been anciently called Hengiste- 
sigge, from its elevated situation : the exact meaning 
of the word, as defined by a modern antiquary, being 
" a pathway on the side of a lull." The parish 
church, wliich is an ancient low structure, with a 
single doorway of Saxon architecture, contains a 
memorial for Thomas Willis, Gent, who lost his life 
in the royal cause at the siege of Oxford, August 4, 
1643.
On the monument of William Finmore, of 
St. John's College, who died in 1646, is an epitaph 
with this quaint beginning : " Reader, look to thy 
feet : honest and loyal men are sleeping under them.
Here lies, &c." In the church-yard is an ancient 
cross, with a tall fluted shaft.
By a charter, granted in the year 955, by King 
Edwy, both Ferry Hinksey, and South Hinksey the 
adjoining parish, were given to the abbey at Abing- 
don, though neither of their names is mentioned in: 
Doomsday.
Dr. Piers, Archbishop of York, was a native of 
South Hinksey.
Hungerford.] — Hungerford is a small market- 
town, situated in the hundred of Kentbury Eagle, 
27 miles west by south from Reading, and 65 from 
London.
Its market is kept on Wednesday.
It 
has three annual fairs : on the last Wednesday in 
April, the last Wednesday in September, and the 
first Wednesday in October.
This town, which stands in a marshy soil, is wa- 
tered by two separate streams of the Kennet.
The 
parish is partly in Wiltshire.
It comprises the se- 
veral tithings of Hungerford, Eddington, Newton, 
He was promised the place of surveyor-general of the work 1 ?, 
upon the decease of Inigo Jones.
After the death of Charles I.
he was very attentive to the 
business of his academy, which he hail erected at Bethnal 
Green, " for foreign languages, and all noble sciences and ex- 
ercises." This institution was much ridiculed by Butler, the 
poet.
As this project did not answer his expectation, Sir Bal- 
thasar went to Surinam, in the time of the usurpation, and is 
supposed to have returned to England with Charles II.
as the 
designs of the triumphal arches, which were erected for the re- 
ception of tiiat Prince, were attributed to him.
In the year 
1663, he published a small treatise, intituled, " Counsel and 
Advice to ail Builders," to which he prefixed only forty De- 
dications !
Charman 
.76 
BERKSHIRE.
Charrnan Street, and Sandon Fee. The three first, 
with part of Sandon Fee are in Berkshire.
Hungerford was known by the name of Inglefol, 
at the time of the Norman survey ; but it also ap- 
pears to have been anciently called Ii/gleford Char- 
man Street, which Mr. Gough derives from the cir- 
cumstance of there having been a ford here of the 
Angles over Herman Street, a Roman road that 
crossed this town, in which there is still a street 
called Charman Street.
The town is ancient, and contains many well-built 
houses.
Near the centre of the principal street are 
the market-house and shambles, over which is a 
room for transacting the town business.
A curious 
piece of antiquity is preserved in this room, denomi- 
nated the Hungerford Horn, holding about a quart, 
which was given as a charter to the town, by John 
of Gaunt.
It is a bugle horn, about eighteen inches 
in length, and is kept in a large chest, with three 
locks.
On one side is the word Hungerford, and on 
the other the mutilated remains of an inscription, in 
black letter.
Another horn, made of brass, of the same form and 
dimensions, but of a more modern date, is also kept 
in the town hall.
It bears the following inscrip- 
tion : — 
John a Gaun did giue and grant the riall 
of Fishing to Hungerforde Towne, from 
Eldren Stub to Irish Stil, excepting som 
-several mil pound.
Jehosphat Lucas was Cunstable.
The right of fishing, which was granted by the 
above charter, does not at present extend more than 
seven miles.
The latter horn is blown annually on 
Hock Tuesday, to assemble the inhabitants to 
choose the constable, in whom is invested the muni- 
cipal government of the town.
This officer is also 
coroner, clerk of the market, and Lord of the Manor 
for the time being.
He is assisted in the execution 
of his office, by twelve feoffees and burgesses, a 
portreeve, a steward, town-clerk, and some inferior 
officers.
Hungerford church is an ancient structure, built 
at different times.
It is situated at the end of a 
pleasant avenue of lime-trees, in the western quar- 
ter of the town.
Among the monumental inscrip- 
tions in this church there is a curious one to the me- 
mory of Robert de Hungerforde, in Norman French, 
of which the following is a translation : " Whoever 
shall pray for Master Robert de Hungerforde, he 
shall have whilst he lives and for his soul after his 
death 550 days of pardon, granted by fourteen bi- 
shops whilst he (Robert de Hungerforde) was liv- 
ing.
Wherefore, in the name of charity, say pa- 
ternosters and ave-marias.
Obit.
28 Edward III.
A. D.
1354." 
Sir Thomas de Hungerford, the nephew of the 
.above person, was the first speaker of the house of 
Commons in the 51st year of Edward III.
His son 
Walter is the person with whom Mr. Camden begins 
Ms account of the family.
He appropriated the 
manor and advowson of Cricklade to the dean and 
chapter of Salisbury, " to keep the tall spire steeple 
of that church in repair," and was buried in the nave 
of that cathedral, under what was the mayor's pew, 
removed some years since, with the bones which it 
covered, to the south side of the choir.
In the year 1636, the Rev. Dr.
Sheaffe, gave the 
ground and house for a free grammar school, on the 
walk which leads to the church.
Mrs. Cummins, a 
widow, and Mr. Hamblin, endowed the school with 
171.
per annum, for four boys and three girls, and 
also towards providing a grammar master.
Edward 
Capps (commonly known by the name of Trusty) 
an ancient servant of the family of Hungerford, left 
501.
for the building of a new school-room, and 41.
per annum as an addition to the master's salary 
from Chantry Mead, given by the above Mr. Hamb- 
lin.
The church croft was also given for the use of 
the boys.
Hungerford manor was anciently the property of 
Robert Fitzparnell, Earl of Leicester.
In 1297 it 
was granted by Edward I.
to Edmund, Earl of 
Lancaster, from whom it descended to John of 
Gaunt.
His son Henry, whilst Duke of Lancaster, 
granted the manor to Sir Walter Hungerford, who 
died seised of it in 1448.
In the reign of Edward 
VI.
being again in the crown, it was granted to the 
Duke of Somerset, after whose attainder it was 
granted, with all the appurtenances, the park except- 
ed, to the townsmen of Hungerford.
Hungerford is not distinguished as a manufactur- 
ing town.
Some years ago, an attempt was made, 
to employ the parish poor in the workhouse, in 
weaving coarse woollen stuffs, and a loom was put 
up at a great expence ; but, owing ts> bad manage- 
ment, or to some other cause, the undertaking did 
not succeed.
The principal business of Hungerford arises from 
its public situation ; and the navigable canal from 
Newbury passing through this town, Ramsbury, 
Marlborough, and so on to Bath and Bristol, pro- 
mises to increase its general trade.
The occupiers of houses in Hungerford have a 
right of common on Hungerford Down, adjoining the 
town, according to the amount of their rental.
Hungerford Park.] — Hungerford Park, situated 
at the extremity of the above mentioned down, was 
anciently the residence of the Barons de Hungerford, 
but is at present the seat of John Willes, Esq. The 
house was built by Mr. Dalbiac, the late possessor, 
upon the site of the ancient mansion which is said to 
have been built by Queen Elizabeth, and given by 
her to the Earl of Essex.
The lands surrounding 
the house are mostly cultivated, and the pleasure 
grounds have a neat and agreeable appearance.
The south and west sides are occupied by fine 
woods.
Hurley.] — Hurley lies in the hundred of Beyn- 
hurst, four miles and three quarters west-north-west 
from Maidenhead.
Ireland, in his Picturesque View 
on the River Thames, observes, that " the fascinat- 
ing 
BERKSHIRE.
77 
ing scenery of this neighbourhood has peculiarly at- 
tracted the notice of the clergy of former periods, 
who, in spite of the thorny and crooked ways which 
they have asserted to be the surest road to heaven, 
have been careful to select some flowery paths, for 
their own private journeyings thither : among which 
ranks Hurley, or Lady Place, formerly a monastery." 
Hurley, at the time of the Norman survey, be- 
longed to Geoffery de Magnaville, ancestor of the 
Magnavilles, or Mandevilles, Earls of Essex.
It 
was granted to him by William the Conqueror, as 
-a reward for his gallant conduct in the battle of 
Hastings.
In the year 1086, he formed a monas- 
tery here for Benedictines, and endowed it with the 
manor of Hurley and other lands.
It was after- 
wards made a cell to Westminster Abbey.
At the 
Dissolution in 1535, its revenues were valued at 
1211.
8s.
5d.
per annum.
The site, called Lady 
Place (the monastery having been dedicated to the 
Virgin Mary) was granted in 1545 to Leonard 
Chamberlayne, and not long afterwards cama, toge- 
ther with the manor of Hurley, into the possession 
of John Lovelace, Esq. who died in 1558.
It con- 
tinued in his family until sold by John, Lord Love- 
lace, who is said to have been very instrumental in 
bringing about the Revolution.
The present mansion was erected in the year 
1600, by Sir Richard Lovelace, on the ruins of the 
ancient building.
This gentleman was a soldier of 
fortune, who went with Sir Francis Drake, on an 
expedition against the Spaniards.
The property 
which he thus acquired was devoted to the erection 
of this edifice.
The remains of the monastery may be traced in the 
numerous apartments, which occupy the westend of 
the present building, and in a vault beneath the hall, 
some bodies, in the monkish habit, have been found 
buried.
Part of the chapel or refectory also may yet 
be seen in the stables ; the window frames of which 
are of chalk, and, though made in the time of the 
Conqueror, appear as fresh as if they were of mo- 
dern workmanship.
Lady Place was beautified, and fitted up with 
great splendour, by the above-mentioned John, Lord 
Lovelace, in the reign of King William.
The hall 
and staircase are magnificent, and remarkably spa- 
cious.
On the principal story is the grand saloon ; 
the cieling of which is enriched with paintings of 
figures, and the pacnels are painted with upright 
landscapes ; the leafings of which are executed in a 
kind of silver lacker.
The views, which are Italian, 
are believed to have been executed by Salvator Rosa.
They are about fifty in number, coarsely painted, 
in a free style, with the lights heightened by gild- 
ing : they do not, however, bear any resemblance to 
the other works of the great master to whom they 
are ascribed.
Beneath this hall, is a vault, in which, according 
* This family was ennobled by Charles I.
who, in the third 
year of his reign, created .Richard Lovelace, Baron Hurley.
VOL.
I, NO.
6. 
to tradition, the principal nobility, during the reign 
of James II.
held frequently secret meetings for the 
purpose of promoting the Revolution of 1688.
It is 
reported also, that the principal compacts and treaties 
in this great affair were signed in the dark recess at 
the end of the vault.
When King William visited 
Lord Lovelace, after his'establishnient on the throne, 
he was taken by his host to see this vault.
These 
traditionary anecdotes are recorded on a tablet, which 
was placed at the end of the vault by the late Mr.
Wilcox.
He has also recorded a visit of General 
Paoli to this vault in 1780, and of their present Ma- 
jesties in 1785.
When the Lovelace family became extinct,* about 
the year 1736, the most valuable part of the estate 
was sold to the Greeve family, and afterwards to the 
Duke of Marlborough.
The mansion-house and 
woodlands, passed into the possession of Mrs. Wil- 
liams, sister to Dr. Wilcox, who was Bishop of Ro- 
chester, about the middle of last century.
This lady 
was enabled to make the purchase by an extraordi- 
nary instance of good fortune.
She had bought two 
tickets in one lottery, both of which came up prizes : 
the one of 5001.
the other of 20,0001.
From the 
daughter of Mrs. Williams, it descended to Mr. Wil- 
cox, son to the Bishop, in the year 1771 ; and, after 
her death, it came into the possession of Gustavus 
Adolphus Kempenfelt, Esq. brother to the unfortu- 
nate and lamented Admiral Kempenfelt, who perish- 
ed in the Royal George, at Spithead, in the year 
1782.
Mr. Kempenfelt died at Lady Place, of an 
apoplexy, in the spring of 1808, at the advanced age 
of 87.
During his life, this gentleman had been ex- 
tremely liberal, in his donations to the poor ; and, at 
his death, he bequeathed to them, in numerous lega- 
cies, upward of 11,0001.
He died a bachelor.
A portrait of Admiral Kempenfelt was in one of 
the pnrlours at Lady Place.
Hurley Church, formerly the chapel of the ruonas • 
tery, was dedicated by Osmund, Bishop of London, 
in the year.- 1086.
The circular arches at the west 
end, with zigzag ornaments, are, it is most probable, 
part of the original structure.
In the church is a 
brass plate in memory of John Doyley, Esq. with 
the date 1492, in Arabic numerals.
It also contains 
some monuments of the Lovelace family, f 
Hurst.] — Hurst is a very extensive parish, con- 
taining four liberties, in the hundred of Sunning.
Broad-Hinton, however, one of the liberties, is in an 
insulated part of Wiltshire.
There is an almshouse at Hurst, which was found- 
ed in the year 1682 by William Barker, Esq. for 
eight single persons, who received sixpence a day, 
and a gown once in two years.
The church contains some handsome monuments, 
particularly that of Margaret Lady Savile, Avife of 
Sir Henry Savile, the founder of the Savilian Pro- 
fessorship, at Oxford ; and that of Sir Richard 
f The great tithes of Hurley, formerly appropriated to the 
convent, now belong to Lord Ashbiook, patron of the viearage.
v Harrison, 
78 
BERKSHIRE.
Harrison, who twice raised a troop of horse, at his 
own expence, for the service of Charles I.
The 
figures of Sir Richard and his lady are very spirit- 
edly executed, in Avhite marble, by Stanton.
Ilsley.] — East Ilsley, or Market Ilsley, formerly 
Hieldesley, or Hildesley, is a small market-town, in 
the hundred of Compton.
It is seventeen miles and 
a half north-west by west from Reading ; and is 
situated on a gentle eminence, in a pleasant valley, 
in the centre of a range of downs, which extend 
across the county from Aston to Wantage.
The 
market is on Wednesdays ; and it has two annual 
fairs : on the 26th of March, and the 26th of Au- 
gust.
The town of Ilsley is famous for its sheep-market, 
which, next to that of the metropolis, is supposed to 
be the largest in England.
It commences on the 
Wednesday in Easter week, yearly, and continues to 
be held every alternate Wednesday in Midsummer.
The sheep are principally bought by the graziers 
coming from the counties of Hertfordshire and 
Buckinghamshire, who feed them for the London 
market.
West Ilsley, about a mile and a half to the north- 
west of East Ilsley, has two extensive breweries, the 
beer of which is thought particularly fine.
Inkpen.] — Inkpen, in the hundred of Kentbury 
Eagle, is four miles south-east by south from Hun- 
gerford.
The church contains the monument of a 
crusader ; and a cenotaph, in memory of Captain 
Thomas Butler, who was lost on board the Scar- 
borough, in the hurricane of 1780, in the West 
Indies.
Kentbury.] — Kentbury, in the hundred of Kent- 
bury Eagle, derives its name from the Kennet, upon 
which it is situated.
It is three miles and a half 
east-south-east from Hungerford.
It was formerly 
a market town, and had two fairs.
In the church 
is a monument to the memory of Sir Jemmet Ray- 
mond, who died at the age of 93.
Kingston -Bagpuze.] — Kingston-Bagpuze, or 
Bagipus, is situated in the hundred of Ock, six miles 
and a quarter west of Abingdon.
New Bridge, over 
the Thames, is in this parish, At this bridge the 
parliamentary army were repulsed, on their attempt 
to pass it, the 27th May 1644.
It was, however, 
passed the 2d of June by Waller, without opposition.
Two annual fairs are holden on the bridge ; on the 
31st of March, and 28th of September.
Kingston church is a small neat structure, newly 
built, of brick.
Lambourne.] — Lambourne, or Chipping Lam- 
bourne, is a small market-town, of great antiquity, 
pleasantly situated in an open country, 28 miles and 
a half west by north from Reading.
The market, 
which has declined of late years, is holden on Fri- 
day ; and there are three annual fairs holden at 
Lambourne ; on the 12th of May, 4th of October, and 
4th of December.
In a charter, dated 1227, granting a fair to be 
held on the festival of St. Matthew, this place is 
called Chepbtg Lambourne, a term which signifies 
market.
In the market-place is a cross, consisting 
of a tall plain shaft, with an ornamented capital, on 
an ascent of steps.
Lambourne parish is very extensive, comprising 
the whole of the hundred to which it gives name.
The manor of Lambourne was part of the posses- 
sions of King Alfred, and was given by him to his 
wife, Ealhswith, daughter of Ethelred, Earl of Mer- 
cia, who survived her husband four years, and died 
in 964.
In Edward the Confessor's reign, and at the 
time of making the Doomsday survey, it was part of 
the royal demesne.
The principal manor now be- 
longs to the Earl of Craven.
In 1644, King Charles I.
was here with his army 
soon after the second battle of Newbury.
An estate was formerly holden in Lambourne pa- 
rish, by William Hobbesport, by the service of car- 
rying the King's horn, when he came to hunt within 
the hundred of Lambourne.
According to Blount, 
in his Ancient Tenures, the same lands were holden 
by the service of keeping six " mei-ehices," alias 
harlots, at the King's charge.
The service of taking 
care of the King's mistresses, was not uncommon in 
the days of feudal tyranny.
Lambourne Church is a very handsome and spa- 
cious Gothic structure, in the form of a cross.
There are two chantry chapels on the south side, 
one of which, dedicated to St. Mary, was founded 
by John Estbury, or Isbury, who died in 1372.
The other, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, was found- 
ed by his descendant, of the same name, who died 
in 1485.
In the centre of the southern chapel is an 
altar tomb, on which is the effigies of the founder 
John Isbury, in copper, habited in a surcoat, with 
his arms enamelled.
There are also some memo- 
rials of the family of Hippesley, in this chapel ; and, 
in the north transept is the monument of Sir Thomas 
Essex, who died in 1558, with the effigies of himself 
and Margaret his lady in alabaster.
John Isbury, the son, it is probable, of him who 
founded the chapel which is dedicated to the Holy 
Trinity, founded an hospital for ten poor men, on 
the north side of the church.
This hospital was 
liable to be dissolved, at the reformation, on account 
of its Popish regulations ; but it was continued by an 
act of parliament, passed in the 31st year of Queen 
Elizabeth, under which a new set of regulations was 
ordained by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other 
commissioners appointed for that purpose.
In the 
year 1589, it was determined, that Francis Alford 
(the representative of the founder) and his heirs, and 
the wardens of New College, Oxford, should have 
the appointment of the poor men ; and that the said 
Francis Alford, and his sons, should have the ma- 
nagement of the estates.
The Rev. John Hippes- 
ley, of Stow in Gloucestershire, is now joint pervisor 
with the wardens of New College.
The alms-men 
attend divine service every morning in the south- 
ern chapel, kneeling round the tomb of the supposed 
founder's father, which is surrounded with a frame, 
desk, 
J 
BERKSHIRE.
79 
desk, and cushions, for that purpose.
A copy of the 
prayer, which is now used, hangs up in the chapel.
It is probable that it was composed by the commis- 
sioners under the act of Queen Elizabeth for the 
continuance of the hospital, or altered by them so as 
to adapt it to the reformed religion.
The original 
pension of the alms-men was eight-pence a .week 
each ; but they now receive three shillings a week 
each, besides a guinea at Christmas, and three loads 
of wood each : the reserved rents of 74 bushels and 
a half of wheat, and 51 bushels and a half of malt, 
are divided among them.
Great coats are given to 
them every other year, and they receive some other 
small payments in money.
Lambourne was the birth-place, or at least the re- 
sidence, of the poet Sylvester.* 
Longworth.] — Longworthis situated in the hun- 
dred of Ganfield, seven miles and a quarter north- 
east by east from Faringdon.
Sir Henry Martin, 
the first civilian of his age, purchased the manor 
early in the 17th century.
His " ungodly son 
Harry," as Wood calls him, represented the county 
of Berks, in the reign of Charles I.
He signed the 
death warrant of his sovereign ; and, after the Resto- 
ration, was tried, and condemned ; but his sentence 
Wfts commuted for perpetual imprisonment ; and he 
died in Chepstow Castle, in the year 1680, having 
alienated the manor of Longworth, and squandered 
the whole of his fortune.
The manor now belongs 
to the Rev. John Loder.
Dr. John Fell, Bishop of Oxford, was born at 
Longworth.
f 
Maidenhead.] — Maidenhead, anciently South 
Ealington, is situated partly in the parish of Bray, 
and partly in that of Cookham, in the hundred of 
Bray, 13 miles north-east by north from Reading.
It is a market-town, having separate jurisdiction.
* Joshua Sylvester, the translator of the " Weeks and Works 
of Dubartas," lived in the reign of James I.
He was not in 
much repute as a poet; yet Dryden tells us, that " when he was 
a boy, he thought the inimitable Spenser a mean poet, in com- 
parison of Sylvester's "Dubartas;" and was wrapped into an 
testacy when he read these lines : 
" Now when the winter's keener breath began 
To chrystalize the Baltick ocean ; 
To glare the lakes, to bridle up the floods, 
And periwig with snow the bald-pate woods." 
Alluding to the fancied peculiarity of the River Lambourne, 
already mentioned, Sylvester has left the following lines : 
•' And little Lambesbourn 
All summer long, while all thy sisters shrink, 
Then of thy waters thousands daily drink; 
Besides, shed water, which in haste doth run 
To wash the feet of Chaucer's Donnington ; 
But while the rest are full unto the top, 
All summer long thou dost not shed a drop, 
Nor send'st.a doit of needless subsidy 
To cram the Rennet's wantless treasury, 
Before her stores be spent, and springs be staid : 
Then, then, alone, thou lend'st a lib'ral aid, 
Teaching thy wealthy neighbours (mine of late) 
How, when, and where, to right participate 
Their streams of comfort to the poor that pine, 
And not to grease the still too greasy swine ; 
The market is on Wednesday.
It has three annual 
fairs ; on Whit- Wednesday, Michaelmas Day, and 
the 30th of November.
How this town acquired the appellation of Maid- 
enhead is uncertain.
Some of our old Monkish wri- 
ters have deduced its origin from a British maiden, 
one of the eleven thousand virgins said to have been 
martyred with St. Ursula, their leader, near Cologne 
in Germany.
Simordus, however, a Jesuit, has de- 
monstrated that only two virgins were put to death, 
Ursula and Undecimilla ; the name of the latter hav- 
ing been ignorantly mistaken by the monks for Un 
decim mille.
Maidenhead is most probably a corruption of 
Maideuhithe, or Maydenehithe , by which name the 
town is distinguished in the most ancient records ex- 
tant.
Maidenhithe is likely to have been the name 
of the spot where the bridge now stands, and where 
there was formerly a great wharf for timber.
The 
town was incorporated in the 26th of Edward III.
by the name of the fraternity or guild of the brothers 
and sisters of Maidenhithe.
The town of Maidenhead is situated on the banks 
of the Thames, and consists principally of one long 
paved street, the south side of which is in the parish 
of Bray.
— Before the building of the bridge, the 
great western road, which now passes through 
Maidenhead, went through Burnhain, and crossed 
the Thames near Cookham, at Babham Ferry, oppo- 
site to which is still to be seen a hollow way, now 
almost overgrown, leading up Cliefden Hill.
The 
bridge is believed to have been built some time about 
the year 1297 ; and, from that period, the town be- 
gan to flourish and increase.
A chapel was soon 
afterwards ereoted, dedicated to St. Andrew and 
Mary Magdalen.
The first bridge was of wood, 
and it appears to have been one of the principal ob- 
Neither for fame or form (when others do) 
To give a morsel, or a mite or two, 
But sev'rally, and of a selfly motion, 
When others miss, to give the most devotion." 
f This excellent man was the son of Samuel Fell, dean of 
Christ Church, Oxford.
He was born on the 23d of June, 
1625.
He received his first education at the free-school at 
Tame, in Oxfordshire, after which he was placed in Christ 
Church College, Oxford, under the direction of his father, 
where he soon made a considerable progress in every branch of 
literature; particularly the study of the holy scriptures and the 
Christian fathers.
When Charles I.
established his head-quar- 
ters at Oxford, many of the students took up arms for the royal 
cause, among whom was Mr. Fell, who was promoted to the 
rank of ensign.
In 1648, having taken his degree in the arts, 
he was turned out of the University, with many others who re- 
fused to acknowledge the then government.
He was enter- 
tained in the house of Dr. Willis, till the Restoration in lb6n, 
when he was appointed prebendary of Chichester, and soon 
after promoted to the deanery of Christ Church, where he re- 
mained several years.
Burnet says, his piety as a Christian 
was equal to his abilities as a scholar ; and adds, that some 
time before his death, being wearied out with study, he lost 
entirely the use of his intellectual faculties, and became, as it 
were a child.
He died in the year 1686, and was buried in 
the Divinity Chapel, near the clouir of Christ Church.
t jects 
80 
BERKSHIRE, 
jects of the fraternity above-mentioned, to keep it in 
repair ; for which purpose a toll was granted, and 
another for all commodities sold in the market, and 
the corporation was besides allowed annually a tree 
out of Windsor Forest.
The present bridge, a work 
of considerable merit, Avas begun in 1772, from the 
designs of Sir Robert Taylor.
It consists of seven 
semicircular arches, built with stone, and three 
smaller ones of brick at each end.
The expence of 
building amounted to 19,0001.
exclusive of the pur- 
chase of some contiguous land to render the work 
complete.
The bridge is now maintained by the 
corporation, for which they are allowed the tolls 
both over and under it.
One of the piers divides 
the counties of Berks and Buckingham.
Some time after the Reformation, the town was 
again incorporated by the.
name of the warden and 
burgesses of Maidenhead ; and James II.
granted 
them another charter of incorporation, by the style 
of mayor, bridge-master, and burgesses.
Two of 
the burgesses, who are eleven in number, are annu- 
ally elected bridge-masters.
The high steward, the 
steward, a recorder, the mayor, and the mayor for 
the preceding year, are justices of the peace.
The 
mayor is clerk of the market, coroner, and judge of 
a cou.i which is held ouce in three weeks.
The 
mayor also holds a session twice a year.
This town 
carries on a great trade in malt, corn, meal, and 
timber, which are conveyed in barges to London.
An enumeration, supposed to be more correct than 
that which was made u-ider the population act of 1801, 
makes the number cf inhabitants in Maidenhead a- 
mountto 1,100.
LTereis t gaol for debt or sand felons.
Between the bridge and the town, or, the Cookham 
side, is a, villa belonging; to Sir Isaac Pocock.
Nearer to the town are eight alms-houses, which 
were erected by James Smith, Esq. citizen of Lon- 
don, in the year 1659, for eight men and their wives, 
who are allowed four shillings a week, and one pound 
ten shillings a ^.ear for coals, also a coat and gown 
once in two years.
Monkey 1slanj>.] — This spot, which is situated 
in the river Thames, about three quarters of a mile 
from Bray, derives its name from a small rustic 
building called Monkey-Hall, which was erected 
here by the late Duke of Marlborough.
On the 
sides of the apartment are fancifully painted a num- 
ber of monkies, dressed in human apparel, and imi- 
tating human actions.
Some are fishing, others 
hunting, &c.
One is delineated gravely sitting in a 
boat, smoaking, while a female zeatermau is labor- 
ing at the oar, and rowing him across a river.
The 
ceiling and cornice are decorated with resemblances 
of a variety of such flowers as usually grow at the 
water side.
In another building, raised also at the expence 
of the Duke, on this island, named the Temple, is 
an elegant saloon, painted with green and gold, 
and enriched with figures in stucco-work supebrly 
gilt, representing mermaids, sea-lions, fish, shells, 
and other objects.
Monkey island is at present 
rented by Henry Townly Ward, Esq. who pur- 
chased the lease in the year 1787 for 240 guineas.
This gentleman has a seat in the neighbourhood, 
between Bray and Windsor, called The Willows, 
the grounds of which he has considerably improved.
A moorish swamp, formerly covered with osier, has 
been drainrd by his exertions, and converted into 
a beautiful lawn.
The pleasure grounds are con- 
nected by a subterraneous passage, with a small 
farm called Bullock's Hatch, which also belongs to 
Mr. Ward.
The prospect of the noble buildings of 
Eton and Windsor, from the Willows, is exceed- 
ingly fine.
Newbury.] — Newbury is another town having se- 
parate jurisdiction.
It is situated in the hundred of 
Faircross, in a fertile plain, watered by the Kennet, 
which crosses the town near the centre.
It lies se- 
venteen miles and a half west by south from Read- 
ing, and 56 from London.
Newbury is a market- 
town, by prescription.
The market, which is chiefly 
for corn, is holden on Thursday.
The corn is pitch- 
ed in the open market, and is also paid for on deli- 
very ; according to the old couplet : — 
" The farmer may take back 
His money in his sack." 
Four annual fairs are holden at Newbury : on 
Holy Thursday, the 5th of July, the 4th of Septem- 
ber, and the 8th of November.
This town has been 
supposed to have acquired its name from the cir- 
cumstance of its having risen into consequence, after 
the decay of Spene, a neighbouring village, thought 
to have been the Roman town of Spina.
This con- 
jecture, however, was erroneous ; as, at the time of 
the Gorman survey, Spene was only a village, Avhile 
Newbury was a town of considerable consequence, 
known by the Saxon name of Uluritone ; probably a 
corruption of Ulwardetone, from Ulward, to whom 
it belonged in the time of Edward the Confessor.
— 
After the Conquest, the manor was bestowed on Er- 
nulph de Hesdin, Earl of Perche, whose great 
grandson Thomas, being killed at the siege of Lin- 
coln, the Bisho,> of Chalons, his heir, sold it to Wil- 
liam Marshall, Earl of Pembroke, in whose family it 
continued till the reign of Henry the Third, when, 
through obstinacy, Roger Bigod, the possessor, lost 
it, with his other estates.
Newbury is known to 
have been the name of a castle, which was built by 
the Earls of Perche, who founded the neighbouring 
monastery of Sandleford ; and it is probable that 
that name was transferred to the town, instead of its 
Saxon appellation, Uluritone.
At what period 
Newbury was first incorporated, is unknown ; but, 
in the 30th year of Edward the First, it returned 
two members to Parliament ; and in the 11th of Ed- 
ward the Third, it was represented by three persons, 
in a great Council, held on account of trade at West- 
minster.
A great quantity of broad cloth is made at 
Newbury ; and in the reign of Henry VIII.
the fa- 
mous John Winscombe, commonly called Jack of 
Newbury, flourished there.
He was one of the 
greatest clothiers that had ever flourished in Eng- 
land, 
BERKSHIRE.
81 
land, keeping one hundred looms in his house.
The 
clothing trade, however, has long left the town, for 
the more western parts of the kingdom, and at pre- 
sent nothing but serge is manufactured here ; but 
the general trade of the place is still very great, in 
consequence of the ready communication which it 
has with London and Bristol, by means of the vari- 
ous navigable canals, which have been completed 
within the last two or three-and-twenty years.
At the time of the Civil War, between King 
Charles and his Parliament, Newbury, and its im- 
mediate neighbourhood, became the scene of two 
obstinate battles, which were fought in two succeed- 
ing years.
The first on a common called the 
Waste, in 1613, on the 18th of September, the 
second in the fields between Newbury, Speen and 
Shaw, on the 27th October, in 1614 : the king com- 
manding his army on both days in person ; and the 
army of the Parliament was commanded by the 
Earl of Essex.
The first battle commenced in the 
morning, and continued the whole day with such 
doubtful success that each party claimed the vic- 
tory ; for although the earl left the royal army in 
possession of the field of battle, yet he effected his 
purpose of marching with his own army to London.
On this occasion, the king sustained an irreparable 
loss, in the deaths of many of his most distinguish- 
ed officers : the Earl of Sunderland, the Earl Caer- 
naven, and Lord Viscount Falkland, were among 
the number of the slain.
In the succeeding year, the king having entered 
Newbury, for the purpose of relieving Donnington 
Castle, was waiting for the return of the Earl of 
Northampton from Banbury, when the united Par- 
liament armies, under the Earl of Essex, Sir Wil- 
liam Waller, and the Earl of Manchester, further 
strengthened by the trained bands from London, 
determined to attack the royal army.
It was how- 
ever, two days before the general battle was fought ; 
which, although the king's force was so inferior, 
was attended with various success, till at length 
the arrival of night put an end to the sanguinary 
conflict.
Each party again claimed the victory, 
but the Parliamentary army were left in possession 
of the field, whence they marched into Newbury, 
which they fortified and resolved to keep.
The 
king retreated to Oxford, where being joined by 
the Earl of Northampton, he returned to Newbury, 
* Many strange anecdotes are related of this person ; but, 
of his real history, very little is known.
In the early part of 
the reign of Henry VIII.
according to tradition, that monarch, 
together with Queen Catherine, and many of the nobility, 
were splendidly entertained by him at his manufactory.
'He 
was a native of Newbury, and appears to have been a high- 
spirited youth, fond of company ; but too much influenced by 
good sense, to suffer his love of conviviality to imbrute his 
reason.
Having been bred a clothier, he had the good for- 
tune to be entrusted with the direction and management of an 
extensive manufactory belonging to a widow, whom he at 
•length married.
Thus raised to affluence, the goodness of his 
disposition procured him many friends.; and, by industry, and 
=»0L.
J, — NO.
6. 
retook his cannon, relieved Donnington Castle, 
and supplied it with provisions without interruption 
from the Parliamentary army, who remained in 
their quarters at Newbury.
The principal streets of Newbury, which ar?.
spacious and well paved, are disposed nearly in the 
shape of the Roman Y, the angels branching orT 
from the market-place ; and the foot of the letter 
being formed by the village of Speenhamland.
The town of Newbury abounds with Dissenters, 
and contains five meeting houses, for the several 
denominations of Presbyterians, Independents, Bap- 
tists, Methodists, and Quakers.
In the charter which was granted by Queen 
Elizabeth, May 26th, 1596, Newbury is called " An 
ancient and populous borough, which had enjoyed 
divers liberties, franchises, immunities, and pre- 
eminences, by the charters of many of her ances- 
tors and predecessors, the Kings of England." 
The corporation consists of a Mayor, High Steward, 
Recorder, six Aldermen, and twenty-four capital 
Burgesses.
The Mayor is chosen annually on St.
Mathew's Day.
The Town Hall is a handsome building, over the 
market place, near the bridge which crosses the 
Rennet.
Upon the rebuilding of this bridge in the 
year 1770, a leaden seal of Pope Boniface the 
ninth, was found, together with a pix, some knives 
of a singular make, some spurs, and a few English 
coins from Henry I.
to William III.
Several mills, which supply London and Bristol 
with great quantities of flour, stand upon the banks 
of the Kennet.
Newbury church is a handsome structure, sup- 
posed to have been built in the reign of Henry VIII.
That part of it westward of the pulpit, was raised, 
together with the tower, at the expence of the be- 
fore mentioned great clothier, John Winchcombe.
A brass plate with the effigies of this gentleman, 
which was formerly placed over his tomb, is now 
fixed against the east wall of the north aisle.
It 
contains the following inscription : 
" Of your Charity pray for the 
Soule of John Smalwode, alias 
Winchom, and Alice, his wife, 
Which John died the 15th.
day of 
February, An. Dora.
1519."* 
The 
attention to the general interests of the trade, his business 
greatly increased.
He is reported to have constantly employ- 
ed upwards of 100 looms for the weaving of broad cloth only.
His public spirit equalled his private benefactions ; as, on the 
breaking out of the war with the Scots, he joined the King's 
army with 100 of his men, all armed and clothed at his own ex- 
pence.
His death was greatly lamented ; and his memory is 
still respected by the inhabitants of Newbury.
His manufac- 
tory is now divided into tenements, respectively occupied as 
a bookseller's, a hair-dresser's, and an inn ; the latter being 
honoured with the sign of Jack of Newbury.
This sign was 
copied from a picture which hangs in a room in the new Mar- 
ket House, in which the corporation hold their private meet- 
X injs 
82 
BERKSHIRE.
The number of alms-houses in Newbury is not 
less than sixty.
One of these, called St. Bartho- 
lomew's Hospital, consists of fourteen dwelling- 
houses, and is said to have been endowed by King 
John.
The original endowment has been increased 
by various subsequent benefactions.
It was for- 
merly under the superintendance of a master, war- 
den, or prior.
By the charter of Queen Elizabeth, 
the government was vested in the corporation.
The pensioners who inhabit the houses, six men, 
and six women, are allowed 3s.
6d.
a week each, 
besides which they have coats and gowns once in 
two years ; 13s.
4d.
on St. Thomas's day, and 5s.
each, arising from the tolls of the fair, held in an 
adjoining meadow on St. Bartholomew's day.
Each 
person has also, yearly, a load of peat, and another 
of faggots, for fuel.
Near the church, there are twelve alms houses, 
for the maintenance of six poor men, and six wo- 
men, parishioners of Newbury, nominated by the 
corporation.
There are twelve alms-houses, also, in Cheap 
Street, which were endowed by John Kimber, Esq.
a maltster of the town, who died in 1793.
Six poor 
men and the same number of women are maintained 
in these houses, upon an allowance of 5s.
a week 
and firing each, and clothes every other year.
In addition to the above, there are two Alms- 
houses for poor weavers, founded by Thomas 
Pearce, in 1671 ; with two others, for poor men, 
united under the direction of the Protestant dis- 
senters ; and one for three poor widows, founded 
by Thomas Hunt, in 1 729.
Three Almshouses for 
poor weavers, founded by Benjamin Robinson, in 
1754; and an Almshouse in St. Mary's Hill, foand- 
cd about the year 1656, by an unknown benefactor, 
for six old maids, endowed with an allowance of 
2s.
6d.
per week each, which has been increased by 
Mr. Kimber's benefaction to 3s.
6d.
A legacy of 40,0001.
was bequeathed to the 
town of Newbury, by Mr. John Kendrick, of Read- 
ing, who died in 1624, to be laid out in the pur- 
chase of a house and garden for the employment 
of the poor in the clothing manufactory, and pro- 
viding them with necessary materials.
A great 
part of this benefaction appears to have been lost.
At present, an income of 1601.
per annum, the re- 
maining produce of the legacy, is lent by the cor- 
poration, without interest, in sums of fifty pounds, 
to weavers, for three years.
A charity school, for the education of forty boys, 
adjoins the church.
Twelve more alms-houses stand opposite to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital.
They were erected in 
1670, and endowed by Philip Jemmet, Esq. for six 
poor men and six women inhabitants, born in the 
ings.
That picture is itself a copy from an original at Buck- 
lesbury ; hut, instead of being the portrait of the celebrated 
Jai k of Newbury, it is that of his son, John Smalwode, alias 
W.Hchcom  ?, who (lied in laa7.
Henry W'inchcombe, a li- 
neal descendant of this family, was created a baronet in 1671 ; 
town of Newbury ; each person was allowed one 
shilling per week in 1670, which has been increased 
at different times, to three shillings and six-pence.
They are also allowed one load of wood and one of 
peat in the year, and gowns and coats, the same as 
the pensioners of St. Bartholomew's Hospital.
There are twelve gardens belonging to these Aims- 
houses.
The peat, which is found in such abundance in 
the vicinity of Newbury, has been already mention- 
ed.
It is cut with a peculiar sort of spade, in long 
squares, about three inches and a half in breadth 
and thickness, and four feet in length, where the 
depth of the peat will admit.
When cut, the pieces 
are laid in regular order on the ground, to be dried 
by the sun and wind ; and as the moisture evapo- 
rates, they are turned, and broken into shorter 
lengths.
When perfectly dry, the peat is sold for 
firing, or burnt into ashes on the spot for manure.
As it lies continually in water, it is cut through 
without much difficulty.
In the first volume of the Philosophical Transac- 
tions, we find that, " some years ago, an urn, of a 
light brown color, and large enough to contain 
above a gallon, was found in the true peat, about 
eight or ten feet from the river in Speen Moor.
It 
lay about four feet below the level of the ground, 
and about a foot within the peat, and over it was 
raised an artificial hill, about eight feet higher than 
the neighbouring ground : as the whole hill con- 
sisted of both peat and meadow land mixed toge- 
ther, it plainly appeared that the peat was older 
than the urn, and that the person who raised the 
hill, must first have dug a large hole in the peat to 
bury the urn, and then formed the hill of the peat 
and meadow-ground mixed together.
Round the 
hill, where the urn lay, were several semicircular 
ridges, with trenches between them : the extremi- 
ties of the semicircles were bounded by the line of 
the river." 
Pangborne.] — Pangborne lies in the hundred of 
Reading, 6 miles north-west by west from the town 
of that name.
It is a neat village, near the Thames, 
in the form of the Roman T.
The manor of Pang- 
borne was granted by Queen Elizabeth, to Thomas 
Weldon, cofferer of her household, and his son.
By the latter, it was sold to Sir John Davis, in 
1613.
In 1671, it was purchased of the Davis 
family by John Breedon, Esq. and it now belongs 
to Dr. Breedon.
Bere Court, the scat of that gen- 
tleman, was given by Bingham, Bishop of Salis- 
bury, to the abbot and convent of Reading, in the 
year 1230.
Excepting the arms of Hugh Faring- 
don, the last abbot, in stained glass, it retains very 
few traces of its ancient designation.
Ever sinee 
the reformation, it has passed with the manor of 
but the title became extinct at his death.
Winchcombe Henry 
Howard Hartley, son of the late Henry Winchcombe Hartley, 
Esq. one of the'members for the county, is, as we have before 
had occasion to state, the present representative of the family.
Pangborne, 
BERKSHIRE.
83 
Pangborne.
There is a wooden bridge, across the 
Thames, from Pangborne to Whitchurch.
It was 
built, under an act ot Parliament, in 1792.
In the 
church, are several monuments of the Davis fa- 
mily ;* and some memorials for the families of Ro- 
binson and Breedon.
Park Place.]— Park Place, the well-known seat 
of the late Field Marshal Conway, and now be- 
longing- to the Earl of Malmsbury, is situated in 
the parish of Remenham, about a mile south-east 
of Henley.
" The many interesting objects con- 
centrated in this demesne," observes a contempor- 
ary writer, " are calculated to excite even the most 
latent energies of poetic description ; yet none of 
the magic tints which fancy blends to embellish the 
images of her own creation, are requisite to give 
lustre to the picture.
Beauty, grandeur, and va- 
riety, are the characterizing features of this estima- 
ble seat, the grounds of which display as much 
boldness of composition as any on the banks of the 
Thames.
The steep sides of the hills, with their 
chalky precipices, are overhung with grand masses 
of stately beech interspersed with evergreens, which 
extend to the margin of the stream, and, from va- 
rious points of the landscape, appear like an im- 
mense verdant amphitheatre.
The projecting lawns 
correspond with the sublimity of the contiguous 
scenery, and unite in forming a diversity of rich 
and beautiful prospects." Park Place was at one 
time the property and residence of Lord Archibald 
Hamilton, Lord of the manor of Remenham ; and 
afterwards, for a short period, of his Royal High- 
ness, Frederick Prince of Wales, father of his 
present Majesty.
— The house was considerably en- 
larged by Marshal Conway, and the grounds were 
laid out by him with great taste, and attention to 
the character of the surrounding scenery.
Park 
Place was purchased of the late Countess Dowager 
of Aylesbury, Marshal Conway's widow.
Lord 
Malmsbury iias considerably improved the house, 
which contains a noble library, partly inherited 
from his father, James Harris, Esq. the celebrated 
philologist,f and partly purchased by himself on the 
continent, during his foreign embassies.
The build- 
ing is composed of bricks, cased with a yellowish 
stucco.
In one of the rooms, is a good portrait of 
Brian Duppa, Bishop of Winchester.
Here is also 
a portrait of Oliver Cromwell, an unquestionable 
original, which descended to the present family 
from the governor of Carisbrook Castle, who re- 
ceived it as a present for his vigilance in securing 
the unfortunate Charles, after his escape from 
Hampton Court.
Ma.:y other valuable paintings 
decorate the walls of this mansion ; amongst which 
are, portraits of Catherine II.
and Paul I.
of Rus- 
sia ; a portrait of Frederick the Great ; a portrait 
of Lord Chancellor Shai'tsbury ; and portraits of 
Lord and Lady Malmsbury.
The most promi- 
nent feature of Park Place is the beautiful scenery 
of the grounds, which are dmrsified with a con- 
tinued succession of lolty eminences and low val- 
lies.
The woods partake of forest wildness, and 
being intermixed with shrubberies, produce the 
most picturesque and beautiful views.
Many of 
these scenes would delight the mind of a Salvator, 
and many others a Claude might in vain attempt to 
copy.
Some of them command an unbounded hori- 
zon, and present all the variety of English land- 
scape.
On the east of the mansion is a garden in- 
closed and laid out according to the French taste ; 
and near this is the aviary, designed on a peculiar 
plan, and furnished with a beautiful selection of the 
feathered race ; among which the silvered, pencilled, 
and gold Pheasants are particularly deserving of 
admiration, for their pleasing forms and elegant 
plumage.
A winding subterraneous passage, near- 
ly 170 yards in length, commencing in a wood 
on the summit of a hill near the aviary, leads to a 
fine valley, planted on the borders with cypress and 
other trees.
Here a grand colonnade, representing 
a Roman amphitheatre falling into decay, and ma- 
jestic even in ruin, presents itself.
This is executed 
in a manner far superior to most ornaments of this 
kind ; and its secluded situation, and mouldering 
ivy-crowned walls, render it peculiarly picturesque.
Descending the valley towards the Thames, the 
path winds under a large arch, curiously construct- 
ed with natural stones of vast dimensions, inter- 
mingled with the enormous blocks of massive wall 
brought from Reading Abbey.
This fabric, inter- 
esting from its singularity, seems very romantic 
when viewed from the water on the opposite 
bank of the river.
The high road, which passes 
over the arch, is excluded from the sight by shrub- 
beries and plantations ; and through that judicious 
management is prevented from having an uupleas- 
ing effect.
On a hill, near this structure, is an 
elegant cottage, whence the views are particularly 
fine.
On the west, the Thames glides in full stream, 
washing the skirts of the wood to the whole extent 
of the grounds.
Towards the east, the meamder- 
ings of the river are indistinctly seen through the 
verdant scenery that adorns the eminence on which 
the cottage is situated.
To the north, the church 
of Henley, and the woody hills of Oxfordshire in 
the distance, constitute an agreeable prospect.
From 
* In the reign of Elizabeth, the Sir John Davis, mentioned 
above, was patronised by the Earl o' Essex, by whom he was 
employed in some expedition, in which he greatly distinguish- 
ed himself.
At the taking of Cadiz, he was created a knight 
banneret.
Afterwards, he had the command of a successful 
expedition to the island of Terceres.
When the Earl of Essex 
fell, he also had sentence of death passed upon him, as a traitor ; 
but was respited, and ultimately pardoned.
Being an excel- 
8 
lent mathematician, and an ardent votary of judicial astrology, 
then much in vogue, he spent the remainder of his days in stu- 
dious retirement.
[ Harris's Hermes, or a Philosophical Inquiry cvncerning 
Universal Grammar, was termed, by Bisnop Lovvth, the most 
beautiful ;.nd correct example of analysis, that had been exhibit- 
ed since the days of Aristotle, wherein the greatest acuteness was 
united with perspicuity of explication and elegance of method.
the 
84 
BERKSHIRE.
the river banks in this quarter, a narrow pass, over- 
hung with trees, leads to a chalk cavern of large 
dimensions.
Proceeding southward, a solitary wil- 
low walk, on the borders of the stream, condvicts 
the wanderer's feet to an elegant tomb of white 
marble, composed in the Roman style, and perfect- 
ly in unison with the sequestered and lonely spot on 
which it stands.
At some distance is a romantic 
arch, constructed with rude stones, and rendered 
pleasing by the variety of its verdant accompani- 
ments.
The high grounds on the north towards 
Henley, are crossed by a noble terrace of great 
length, whence a complete bird's-eye view of the 
river, the town, and the surrounding country, en- 
chants the sight of the spectator.
Beyond the ter- 
race is a pleasant valley, consisting of about twenty 
acres, called the Lavender Farm, exclusively ap- 
propriated to the cultivation of that herb, and se- 
parated by a line of shrubs from a steep and rug- 
ged ravine, where the high road formerly ran, the 
sides of which exhibit a variety of rude and broken 
scenery.
Near the bottom is a small stone house, 
much admired for its simplicity.
Park Place includes an area of 400 acres ; an ex- 
tent of ground, perhaps, that comprises as great a 
variety of interesting prospects, as any of similar 
limits in the kingdom.
" On a well-chosen emin- 
ence, near the southern quarter of the ornamented 
grounds, stands a curious vestige of the man- 
ners of antiquity.
This is denominated a DruicPs 
Temple, and consists of forty -five large unhewn 
stones, which were formerly situated in the Isle of 
Jersey.
These were presented to General Conway 
by the inhabitants of the island, as a testimony of 
the respect and gratitude due to his vigilance as a 
governor, and to his amiable qualities as a man.
This singular and curious gift was accompanied 
by the following appropriate and forcible inscrip- 
tion, which is cut on a large slab, and placed among 
4he stones of the temple : 
" Cet aneien Temple des Druides, 
decouvert le 12me.
Aout, 1785, 
sur le Montagne de St. Helier 
dans l'Isle de Jersey ; 
a ete presente par les Habitans 
a son Excellence le General Conway, 
kur Gouverneur.
" Pour des siecles, cache aux regards des mortels, 
Cet ancien monument, ces pierres, ces autels, 
Ou lesang des humains, offert en sacrifice, 
Ruissela, pour des Dieux, qu'enfantoit le caprice.
Ce monument, sans prix parson antiquite, 
Temoignera pour nous a la posterite, 
" * The Latin name for the Island of Jersey." 
-f This ancient Temple of the Druids, discovered on the 
12th of August, 1785, on the Mountain of St. Helier, in the 
Island of Jersey, was presented, by the inhabitants of that 
place, to General Conway, their Governor.
This ancient monument, these stoues, these altars, where 
trie blood of human sacrifices flowed for the god's, the off- 
•SDrings of caprice, were concealed for ages from the contem- 
Que dans tous les dangers Cesaree* cut mi pere, 
Attentif, et vaillant, geneieux, et prospere : 
Et redira, Conway, aux siecles a venir ; 
Qu'en vertu du respect du a ce souvenir, 
Elle te fit ce don, acquis a ta vaillance, 
Comme un juste tribut de sa reconnoi3sance."f 
The stones which compose this temple are all 
standing, and were so carefully marked when taken 
down, as to be re-erected on this spot in their ori- 
ginal circular form.
They were discovered in the 
summer of the year 1785, on the summit of a rocky 
hill, npar the town of St. Helier, by some work- 
men who were employed to level the ground as a 
place of exercise for the militia, and before that 
time were entirely hidden with earth, which appear- 
ed raised in a heap, like a large barrow or tumulus.
The circumference of the circle is sixty-six feet ; 
the highest of the stones nearly opposite the en- 
trance, is about, nine feet.
They are from four to 
six feet in breadth, and from one to three in thick- 
ness.
The entrance or passage, measures fifteen 
feet in length, five in breadth, and four in height.
The circle opening to the area contains five cells, 
or cavities, varying in depth from two feet four 
inches, to four feet three inches.
The coverings of 
these cells, and of the entrance, are of stones from 
eighteen inches, to two feet, thick.
When this tem- 
ple was removed, two medals were found : one of 
the Emperor Claudius ; the other so obliterated as 
to be unintelligible.
The accounts of the history 
and antiquities of Jersey are very imperfect, yet it 
seems probable, that this island was once the seat 
of Druidical worship.
So lately as the year 1691, 
when Mr. Poindextre wrote some tracts concerning 
it, there were no less than fifty assemblages of rude 
stones, which that gentleman considered as Druid 
temples or altars ; yet nearly the whole of these an- 
tique memorials have since been demolished.
When, 
or by whom, the present structure was covered up, 
is unknown ; but it is supposed to have been buried 
by the Druids themselves, to preserve it from the 
violence and profanation of the Romans.
This cu- 
rious structure seems to be a combination of 'lie 
Cromlech, the Kistvaen, the stones of Memorial, 
and the pure Druidical or bardic Circle.
It is a 
very singular relic of British antiquity, and highly 
deserving of preservation as a vestige of the customs 
of remote ages." 
Peasemore.] — Peasemore, or Peysmer, in the 
hundred of Faircross, is four miles and a quarter 
west-south-west from East Ilsley.
In the church 
is an inscription to the memory of Mr. William 
Coward, lord of the manor, who, possessing only 
an income of 1101.
-per annum, built the tower of the 
plation of man.
This monument, invaluable by its antiquity, 
shall bear witness to posterity, that, in all its dangers, Jersey 
had a father in Conway, attentive, brave, generous, and success- 
ful; and shall repeat, to future ages, that, in consequence of 
the respect which is due to that remembrance, she presented 
this, which was acquired by h« vigilance, as a just tribute of 
her gratitude.
church 
BERKSHIRE.
85 
church, gave the great bell and communion plate — 
amounting to nearly three years' produce of his 
slender fortune — besides keeping a hospitable table, 
and being eminently charitable to the poor.
Purley.] — Purley is situated in the hundred of 
Theale, 4 miles north-west by west from Reading.
Purley House and manor are now the property of the 
Hon. Mrs.
Storer, sister-in-law of the late proprietor, 
Anthony Storer, Esq. That gentleman expended 
a considerable sum in ornamenting the grounds, 
preparatory to the erection of a superb mansion, on 
a spot which lie' had chosen.
Death prevented him 
from seeing his designs carried into execution ; but 
he bequeathed 15,0001.
to defray the expences of 
the building, which has since been raised, under the 
inspection of Mr. Wyatt, the architect, agreeably 
to the directions which were left in Mr. Storer's 
will.
Purley Hall, now the residence and property 
of the Rev. Dr.
Wilder, was built by Mr. Harves, 
one of the directors in the memorable South Sea 
bubble.
The building is in the heavy formal style 
which prevailed at that period.
Pusey.] — Pusey is situated in the hundred of 
Ganfield, four miles and a half east by north from 
Great Faringdon.
The manor of Pusey is said to 
have been granted to the family of Pusey by King 
Canute ; and an ancient horn is still preserved, by 
which it was held.
The horn bears the following 
inscription : 
ftpnge ftnouD geue SKUglbjam Pettw 
-tygjj Ijom to "IjoId by tljg &o»ia.
Gough one of the editors of Camden, describes 
this horn to be of a dark brown tortoise-shell co- 
lour, mounted at each end with rings of silver, and 
a third round the middle, on which the inscription 
is written, in characters of much later date than 
those of the time of Canute.
The horn is of an 
ox or buffalo ; two feet are fixed to the middle ring, 
and the stopper is shaped like a dog's head.
The 
length of the horn is two feet and half an inch ; its 
greatest circumference one foot.
The traditionary 
story is, that the person to whom the horn was ori- 
ginally given was an officer in Canute's army, and 
having informed his sovereign of an ambuscade 
formed by the Saxons to intercept him, was reward- 
ed with a grant of the manor for his intelligence.
It is certain that this estate Avas possessed by the 
family of Pusey, from the earliest period of our his- 
tory, until it became extinct in the year 1710.
In 
the reign of Edward I.
Alice Paternoster held 
lands in- Pusey, by the service of saying a Pater- 
noster five times a day, for the souls of the King's 
ancestors.
Pusey church was rebuilt at the expence 
of Mr. Allen Pusey, 
Reading.] — Reading is a market town, having 
separate jurisdictions.
It lies in the hundred of 
Reading, to which it gives name, 38 miles west by 
south from London.
It is pleasantly situated on the 
river Kennet, which consists of three very consi- 
vol.
i. — no.
6. 
derable parishes ; viz.
St. Mary's, St. Lawrence's, 
and St. Giles's, separately maintaining their own 
poor.
The principal streets are extensive, well 
paved, and lighted ; and the buildings in ge 
are remarkably handsome.
The market days are Wednesday and S: 
The Saturday's market is chiefly for corn, 
tie market is also held every Mom. n 
where there is a considerable shew oi I 
from the western parts of the county on th< rw; 
Smithfiekl.
For the convenience of the 
and to prevent forestalling, the mayor regu 
mai'ket hours, which begin at eight in the m 
and nine in the winter season.
The mart ' 
Wednesday is well supplied with all sorts oi 
visions, particularly poultry, butter, and eggs, and 
sea and Thames fish.
There arc four annual fairs 
holden at Reading : on the 2nd of February, 1st.
of May, 25th of July, and 21st of September.
Reading has sent two members to Parliament, ever 
since the 23d Edward I.
though we do not find any 
charter of incorporation older than Henry Vll.
The right of election is in the inhabitants paying 
scot and lot, the mayor being the returning officer ; 
the number of voters is somewhat more than 600.
By the charter of Charles II.
the municipal go- 
vernment of the town is vested in a mayor, recorder, 
twelve aldermen, and as many burgesses, from 
whom the vacancies in the list of aldermen are sup- 
plied.
The corporation, who possess the ancient 
manor and rights attached to it, hold four quarterly 
sessions for the trial of felonies, and a court every 
Wednesday for the consideration of smaller offences 
against the peace.
The assizes in the Lent circuit 
are holden at Reading.
Reading is a place of considerable antiquity.
Its 
origin is unknown ; nor has it been determined, 
whether, at the time of the Roman invasion, it.
were a British settlement, or whether it then be- 
came first inhabited.
Camden supposes the name 
to be derived from the Saxon word Rhea, river, or 
the British Kedin, fern ; which grew here in great 
plenty.
This etymology gathers strength from the 
circumstance of the town being generally denomi- 
nated Reddunge, at the time when Camden compil- 
ed his Britannia.
The modern way of spelling the 
word is evidently corrupt ; as, to tliis day, it is al- 
ways pronounced Redding.
Dr. Salmon has asserted, that Reading is the 
Spinas of the Itinerary ; but he has failed to produce 
sufficient evidence to establish the opinion.
Leland 
thus speaks of this place : — " There is no manner 
of token that ever the toun of Reading was waullid, 
yet it is a very auncient toun, and at this time the 
best toun of all Berkshire.
There was a castel in 
the Saxon time in this toun, and the name of Cas- 
tle-street yet remains, lying from east to west to 
pass to Newbury ; but 1 could not perceive or 
clearly learn where it stood.
But by all likelihood 
at the west end of Castle-street, and as some think 
about the place of execution.
It is very likely that 
y a piece 
86 
BERKSHIRE.
a piece of the abbey was built of the ruins of it : per- 
adventure it stood where the abbey was.
St. Ed- 
ward Martyr's mother-in-law for penance built as I 
have read a monastry of nuns in Reding.
Ther is a 
constant fame that this nunnery was wher St. Mary's 
paroch churche is now.
King Henry I.
making; an 
abbey of black monks here supprest this house as I 
heard, giving the lands thereof to his abbey.
On 
the north side of the Castle Street was a fair house 
of Grey Friars.
In the town are three paroch 
churches ; St. Jiles on this side the river, St. Mary's 
in the middle the oldest, and St. Lawrence beyond 
Kennet.
West-north-west of St. Lawrence's church 
was an alms-house of poor sisters, probably founded 
by some of the abbots.
Abbot Thorn supprest it 
Henry VII.
and gave the lands to the use of the al- 
moner of his abbey ; but Henry VII.
coming hither 
and asking what old house that was, willed him to 
convert it and its land in pins usus, and at the abbot's 
desire made it a grammar school.
The river Kennet 
runs through the town in two arms, one called about 
the quarters of the town, the halowid brooke.
Above 
the town about the Bere the abbot had a fair manor 
place of brick." * 
The earliest historical mention that is made of 
Reading, is in the year 871, when it is described to 
be a fortified town, belonging to the Saxons, but 
theri in the possession of the Danes, who had re- 
treated thither after their unsuccessful battle at En- 
glefield, with Earl Ethelwolf.
In 1006, the town 
was burnt by the Danes, and a convent of nuns, then 
existing under the government of an abbess, de- 
stroyed.
The toivn, however, appears to have soon 
recovered from this calamity ; and in the reign of 
King Stephen, it held out against the Empress 
Maud, which induced her son Henry II.
to demolish 
the castle.
He accomplished this so effectually, that 
not a single vestige of it now remains.
Leland, as we have just seen, conjectured that it 
might have stood at the west end of Castle Street ; 
but this point cannot be ascertained.
Near the ruins 
of (he abbey, are the traces of two bastions ; but 
they are known by their figure to be modern ; and 
probably constructed during the civil war in the 
time of Charles I.
and destroyed at the Revolution.
Henry I.
in the year 1121, laid the foundation of 
a magnificent abbey on the site of that which had 
been destroyed.
He completed it in 1124.
The 
charter of establishment recites that, "The abbeys 
of Reading, Chelsey, and Leominster, having been 
destroyed for their sins, and their possessions fallen 
* It may not be improper to mention, that Leland, from 
whom we so frequently have occasion to quote, was a very 
learned antiquary, who did great honour to his age and country.
He was educated under the f'amrus Lily, and successively stu- 
died at Cambridge, Oxford, and Paris.
He was library-keeper 
to Henry VIII.
being perfectly qualified for that office by his 
great skill in ancient and modem languages, and his extensive 
knowledge of men and things.
His " Collectanea, " and 
his " Itinerary" the manuscripts of which are lodged in the 
Bodleian Library, have been a most copious fund or antiquity, 
Q 
into the hands of the laity, the king with the advice 
of his prelates, &c.
had built a new monastery at 
Reading, and endowed it with the monasteries of 
Reading, Chelsey, and Leominster, together with, 
their appurtenances of woods, fields, pastures, &c.
with exemption from all tolls, duties, customs, and 
contributions." — In addition to these privileges, the 
abbot and the monks were invested with the power 
of trying criminals, and were entrusted generally 
with the conservation of the peace within the town 
and neighbourhood.
In return for these extensive 
grants, their charter provided that the monks should 
hospitably entertain the poor and all travellers, 
which part of their duty was so well performed, that, 
according to William of Malmsbury, there was 
always more expended upon strangers than upon 
themselves.
Though Henry I.
completed the abbey in so short 
a time, it does not appear to have been consecrated 
till the reign of Henry II.
or, if it were, that cere- 
mony was a second time performed, in the year 1163 
or 1164, by Thomas a-Becket, Archbishop of Can- 
terbury ; the king* and many of the nobility being 
present.
It was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, the.
blessed Virgin Mary, and St. John the Evangelist ; 
but was commonly called the Abbey of St. Mary, at 
Reading ; probably from the extraordinary venera- 
tion which was paid in those days to the Holy Vir- 
gin .
It was endowed for 200 monks of the Benedictine 
Order.
It was a mitred abbey, the abbot having the 
privilege of sitting in Parliament.
Henry I.
was so 
extremely fond of this establishment, that he conti- 
nued to heap favours upon it, until the' time of his 
decease ; Avhen, though he died at Rouen, in Nor- 
mandy, he left orders for his body to be interred in 
the chancel of the conventual church.
The body 
was accordingly embalmed, brought to England, 
and there deposited ; but Henry's heart, eyes, 
tongue, brains, and bowels, were interred beneath a 
handsome monument in the church of Notre Dame 
at Rouen.
Sandford asserts, that when the monas- 
tery was converted into a royal palace, at the Disso- 
lution, the bones of the monarch were disturbed, and 
thrown out.
This relation never obtained general 
belief; and it was supposed, by some antiquaries, to 
be entirely refuted in the year 1785, when an ancient 
coffin was found in a vault on digging the founda- 
tions of the county gaol, which has since been erect- 
ed on the site of the abbey.
Henry I.
is said to have 
been buried in a bull's hide ; and as the coffin con- 
tained the remains of a slipper, and a piece of brass, 
biography, and history, to succeeding writers.
He spent six 
years in travelling through the kingdom, being empowered by 
the king to examine the Libraries of Cathedrals, Colleges, Ab- 
bies, and Priories.
Hence it was that at a critical juncture, lie 
ravished almost an infinity of valuable records from dust and 
oblivion.
His vast mind, which had planned greater things 
than were in the power of one man to execute, at length sunk 
under its burden, and he was for some time before his death in 
a state of insanity.
He died the 18th of April, 1552.
it 
BERKSHIRE.
87 
it was at once believed to have been the depository 
of the monarch's body.
Mr. Coates, however, in his 
History of Reading, has assigned sufficient reasons 
for discrediting- this opinion.
Adelina, the second Queen of Henry, was also in- 
terred here ; and, according to some writers, his 
daughter, the Empress Maud, mother to Henry II.
On her tomb, it is said, was the folloAving inscrip- 
tion : —   
" Ortu magna, viro major, sed maxima partu, 
Hie jacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens," 
This inscription has been thus translated : — 
" Illustrious in descent, in marriage more, ^ 
But noblest in her offspring's royal power, > 
Great Henry's daughter, parent, wife, deplore." ) 
Perhaps the subjoined might convey a more clear 
idea of the brief simplicity of the original : — 
" Here lies the daughter, wife, and parent, of 
Henry ; great in descent, greater in marriage, but 
greatest in her offspring." 
It is thought by some, that the place of Maud's 
sepulture was at Bee, in Normandy.
William, eldest son of Henry II.
; Constance, 
daughter of Edmund Langley, Duke of York ; Anne, 
Countess of Warwick ; a son and daughter of Rich- 
ard, Earl of Cornwall ; and a great number of other 
persons of rank and distinction, were interred in 
Reading Abbey.
Henry II.
confirmed all the grants of his prede- 
cessors ; but, notwithstanding the obligation con- 
tained in the charter of the abbey, it appears that the 
necessities of the poor were not always attended to.
Hugh, the eighth abbot, in his deed for the founda- 
tion of a new hospital, observes, " that whereas King 
Henry had appointed all persons to be entertained 
there, yet he found that the same was performed in 
a decent manner towards the rich, but not according 
to the king's intention towards the poor, which mis- 
carriage he, as the ward to that noble charity, was 
resolved to correct." He accordingly built an hos- 
pital without the abbey gate, that those persons who 
were not admitted to the unper house might be en- 
tertained there.
By the above-mentioned deed, he 
gave the church of St. Lawrence to this hospital, for 
ever, for the maintenance of thirteen poor persons, 
in diet, clothes, and other necessaries, aud allowed 
sufficient for the support of thirteen others out of the 
usual alms.
Reading abbey continued to flourish 
till the reign of Henry VIII.
; of whom Fuller, in 
his (hunk History, relates the folloAving anecdote, 
terming it " a pleasant and true story :" — " As 
King Henry VIII.
was hunting in Windsor Forest, 
he either casually lost, or more probably wilfully 
losing himself, struck down, about dinner time, to the 
abbey of Reading, where disguising 1 himself, (much 
for delight, more lor discovery unseen) he was in- 
vited to the abbot's table, and passed for one of the 
king's guard ; a place to which the proportion of his 
person might properly entitle him.
A sirloin of beef 
was set before him (so knighted, saith tradition, by 
this Henry) on which the king laid on lustily, not 
disgracing one of that place for whom he was mis- 
taken.
" Well fare thy heart (quoth the abbot) and 
here in a cup of sack I remember the health of his 
grace your master.
I would give an hundred pounds 
on the condition I could feed so lustily on beef as 
you do.
Alas !
my weak and squeezie stomach will 
hardly digest the wing of a small rabbit or chicken." 
The king pleasantly pledged him, and heartily thank- 
ed him for his good cheer ; after which he departed 
as undiscovered as he came thither.
Some weeks 
after, the abbot was sent for by a pursuivant, brought 
up to London, clapt in the tower, kept close prison- 
er, and fed, for a short time, with bread and water ; 
yet not so empty his body of food as his mind was 
filled with fears, creating many suspicions to himself, 
when and how lie had incurred the king's displea- 
sure.
At last a sirloin of beef was set before him, 
on which the abbot fed as the farmer of his grange, 
and verified the proverb that two hungry meals make- 
file third a glutton.
In springs King Henry, out of 
a private lobby, where he had placed himself, the in- 
visible spectator of the abbot's behaviour.
" My 
Lord (quoth the king) presently deposit your hun- 
dred pounds in gold, or else no going hence all the 
daies of your life.
I have been your physician to 
cure you of your squeezie stomach, and here, as I 
deserve, 1 demand my fee for the same." The ab- 
bot down with his dust, and, glad he had escaped so, 
returned to Reading, as somewhat lighter in purse, 
so much more merry in heart than when he came 
thence." 
Whether Hugh Faringdon, the last abbot, were 
the prelate to whom the above anecdote relates, we 
know not ; but it is more probable that the incident 
occurred — if it occurred at all — in the early part of 
Henry's reign.
At the time of the dissolution of 
abbies, Hugh Faringdon, refusing to deliver an ac- 
count to the visitors of the revenues and treasures 
belonging to the foundation, was, with two of his 
monks named Rugg and Onion, attainted of high 
treason, and condemned to death.
In the month of 
November, 1339, they were all three hanged, drawn, 
and quartered, at Reading.
This happened on the 
same day that the abbot of Glastonbury suffered a 
similar sentence, for a similar provocation.
Imme- 
diate possession was taken of the abbey, where im- 
mense quantities of jewels, and other articles of great 
value were found.
The revenues amounted to 
1,9381.
14s.
3d.
The abbey church was a spacious fabric, built in 
the form of a cross.
The entire building occupied 
a space of nearly half a mile in circumference.
The 
greater part of it remained till the civil wars in the 
reign of Charles I.
when the army of the Parliament 
pulled down the upper part of the walls, considering 
it as a relic of Popish idolatry.
There are some 
ruins, however, still remaining ; from a view of 
which 
83 
BERKSHIRE.
-which a tolerable idea may be formed of its original 
grandeur.
The walls, nearly eight feet thick, were 
composed of small Hint, cemented with mortar of a 
dry bard texture, and cased with square free-stone.
Towards the east end, is a large room of a semi- 
circular form, having five narrow windows, and three 
doors.
It is arched over, and seems to have sup- 
ported a chapel, in which, it is imagined, mass was 
daily said for the souls of the great personages who 
were there interred.
Soon after the Dissolution, the hospital for the 
poor knights of Windsor was built, with the mate- 
rials from the ruins of Reading Abbey.
Queen Eli- 
zabeth, in her charter, grants the corporation liberty 
to take away 200 loads of fine stone from the abbey; 
and a considerable quantity was carried away by the 
late General Conway, for the erection of that singu- 
lar bridge at Park Place, across the high road lead- 
ing from Henley to Wargrove.
Jn the eival wars of Charles 1.
the inhabitants of 
Reading nobly defended the place against the army 
of the Parliament, under the command of the Earl 
of Essex.
That nobleman having advanced with his 
forces} consisting of 16,000 foot and 3000 horse, im- 
mediately began the siege in foim ; the garrison un- 
der Sir Arthur Aston, consisting only of 3000 foot 
and 300 horse.
At the beginning of the siege, Sir 
Arthur received a wound in his head, and being un- 
able to attend his duty, the command devolved on 
Colonel Fielding.
Information being given to the 
king, that the place was invested, his majesty consi- 
dered it of too much importance to lose, and there- 
fore detached Commissary Wilmot with a body of 
horse, who managed the affair Avith so much pru- 
dence that he assisted the town with 500 auxiliary 
forces, besides a considerable quantity of ammuni- 
tion.
Fielding, hoAvever, did not think this supply 
sufficient, and therefore agreed to capitulate; but 
before he had time to deliver up the place, the king 
marched Avith his army from Oxford, and detached 
the Earl of Bath, with 1000 musqueteers to relieve 
the place.
They, being ignorant of the capitulation, 
vigorously attacked the regiments of Lords Roberts 
and Buckley, Avho defended Caversham Bridge, ex- 
pecting to be assisted by the garrison ; but finding 
that the governor did not make any sally upon the 
besiegers, he retreated to the royal army ; and 
Fielding, having found means to escape from the 
town, went to the king, and represented the place to 
* John Bkigrave was a man of a strong head, and a benevo- 
lent heart ; and had the honour of being an inventive genius.
His " Mathematical Jewel," which is in a great measure an 
original work, is his capital performance.
He cut the figures 
for this book with his own hand, and they are well executed.
This gentleman, who possessed an independent fortune, was not 
only distinguished by his knowledge in mathematics ; he was, 
and is still known for his judicious charities.
He died the 9th 
of August^ 1611.
f John Pordage, who is placed by Baxter at the head of the 
Behmenists, was a man of much natural enthusiasm ; and hav- 
be unable to hold out any longer.
He thus obtained 
his majesty's leave to capitulate, and the garrison 
inarched out with all the honours of Avar.
In the year 1663, Avhen Charles II.
and his Queen 
passed through Reading, the corporation presented 
his majesty with fifty pieces of gold, and the Queen 
with thirty ; the fees to their servants amounting to 
371.
6s.
In 1686, a skirmish happened at Reading, called 
The Reading Skirmish ; or the Bloody Irish routed by 
the Victorious Dutch ; betAveen a party belonging to 
the Prince of Orange, and another of King James's 
troops, in which the latter were repulsed.
The affair 
gave rise to a ballad, and the day on which it hap- 
pened is still commemorated by the inhabitants.
About the same time, an alarm spread through 
the whole kingdom, that the Irish disbanded soldiers 
of King James's army, Avere ravaging and murder- 
ing Avherever they came.
Every town believed that 
the next to it Avas actually in flames ; and such a 
panic Avas raised, that every one was up in arms to 
defend himself.
It Avas soon, however, found to be 
a false report ; but, from the strangeness of the cir- 
cumstance and the consequence which ensued, it 
was aftenvards distinguished by the name of the 
Irish cry.
The churches of Reading are not entitled to very 
particular notice.
That of St. LaAvrence appears to 
have been built in the year 143*4.
In 1517, it con- 
tained some curious relics ; amongst which Avas " a 
gridiron of silver, gilt, with a bone of St, Lawrence 
thereon, Aveighing three quarters of an ounce, the 
gift of Thomas Lynd, Esq." In this church lies in- 
terred John Blagrave, the celebrated mathematician; 
his monument has his effigies, a half length, under 
an arch, habited in a cloak and ruff", holding a globe 
in one hand, and a quadrant in the other.
Under- 
neath is the folloAving inscription : — 
" Johannes Blagravus, " 
Totus Mathematicus, 
Cum Matre Sepultus." 
To the above, Mr. Blagrave's heirs added some 
English verses, not worth transcribing.
Mr. Bla- 
grave left 1001.
for the purpose of erecting a colon- 
nade on the south side of the church, which Avas per- 
formed by the corporation, agreeably to his direc- 
tions.* Dr. John Pordage, a notorious enthusiast, 
was vicar of this church in the vears 1645 and 
1646.t 
In 
ing over-heated his imagination by reading the works of Jacob 
Behmen, he, like that visionary, fancied himself inspired.
He 
pretended to know divine truth by a more clear light than that 
of the scripture, which he considered as little better than a dead 
letter.
He was accused by Christopher Fowler, a clergyman 
of Reading, before the commissioners of Berks for ejecting mi- 
nisters, of preaching antiscriptural doctrine, of blasphemy, and 
familiarity with evil spirits.
Much of the history of this strange 
enthusiast may be seen in Fowler's " Dalmonium Meridia- 
num." He acknowledges, himself, in his answer to that book, 
that he bad sensible communion with angels, and that he knew 
good 
BERKSHIRE.
SO 
In this parish, near, the west end of Friar Street, 
formerly stood the chapel of St. Edmund.
It was 
built in 120-1, by Lawrence Burgess, bailiff of Read- 
ing 1 , by permission of the abbot, on condition of his 
giving" an endowment for its support ; the founder 
built a hermitage near it, in which he died.
The 
chapel was desecrated in the fifteenth century ; and, 
about forty-five, or fifty years ago, its site was 
occupied by an old barn.
The church of St. Mary 
was built about the year 1551, of materials purchas- 
ed from the abbey church, which was then pulled 
down.
The only monument worthy of notice in this 
church is that of William Kenrick, or Kendrick, said 
to be descended, from the Saxon kings.
He left the 
sum of 2501.
to be expended in lands, for the pur- 
pose of maintaining prayers in this church, at six 
o'clock every morning.
The sum of 1001.
for the 
same purpose, was left by Mrs. Elizabeth Thome.
An Anabaptist meeting was established in this pa- 
rish, in the year 1655.
It has a small endowment, 
with a house and burial ground.
There are also 
three other meeting houses, for the Methodists and 
Independents, in St. Mary's parish.
St. Giles's church contains little that is remark- 
able.
The spire, which is 70 feet high, is made of 
wood, covered with copper, and was erected in 1790, 
at the expence of 5731.
19s.
Joseph Blagrave, an 
astrological writer, was a native of this parish.* 
In ancient times, near the abbey church, there was 
an hospital for lepers, founded by Ausgerus or Au- 
cherius, the second abbot, and dedicated to Mary 
Magdalen.
There were also several other religious 
foundations in Reading, particularly a priory or 
house of grey-friars, which in 1560, was con- 
verted into an hospital or work-house, and after- 
wards, in 1613, into a house of correction.
This 
part was the south transept of the church of grey- 
friars, the walls of which are still entire.
The grammar-school, which Leland mentions to 
have been founded out of the produce of the estates 
of a suppressed alms-house of Poor Sisters, on the 
north-west of Saint Lawrence's church, is situated 
on the cast side of the Forbury, and is now in great 
reputation under the care of the Rev. Dr.
Valpy, 
who, in the year 1790, built a new school-room, 52 
feet long, at his own expence.
Dr. Valpy has also 
considerably enlarged and improved the house, which 
was built by Mr. Hiley, a former master, for the re- 
ception of his boarders.
He has added a spacious 
hall and library.
The house is now annexed to the 
school, and is vested in the corporation, as trustees.
The lower part of the great hall of St. John's 
hospital was formerly occupied for the school -room.
good spirits from bad by his sight, and even by his smell.
He 
also acknowledges, that his house was, for a month, infested 
with evil spirits ; and that he had a visible conflict with a fiery 
dragon, which filled a large room ; " that an impression was 
made in the brick wall of his chimney, of a coach drawn with 
tigers and lions, which could not be got out, till it was hewed 
cut with pick-axes ; and another on his glass window, which yet 
reinaineth." 
VOL.
I. — NO.
7, 
In 1560, the upper part of that hospital was con- 
verted into a town-hall.
In 1672 it was repaired at 
the expence of John Blagrave, Esq. In 1785 it was 
rebuilt, and is now a very handsome room, 108 feet 
in length, 32 in width, and 24 in height.
Adjoining 
to it is a spacious council-chamber, in which are-, 
among others, the portraits of Sir Thomas White, 
Archbishop Laud, and Mr. John Kendrick, all na- 
tives of Reading, and great benefactors to the town.
Here are also portraits of Richard Aldworth, Esq.
ancestor of Lord Braybrooke, who was founder of 
the blue-coat school ; and Sir Thomas Rich, Bart, a 
benefactor to that charity.
Sir Thomas White, who 
was born at Reading, founded, at St. John's College, 
two scholarships for natives of Reading educated at 
the grammar-school.
The Vice-Chancellor of Ox- 
ford, the President of St. John's College, and the 
Warden of All Souls, hold a triennial visitation, and 
the senior scholars annually make public speeches in 
the town-hall.
The county gaol is at Reading.
The present 
building was erected about the year 1793, on the 
site of some of the old abbey buildings.
. It is a 
handsome structure, 163 feet in front, and 137 feet 
in depth ; and contains a house for the keeper, a 
room for the magistrates, a neat chapel, and an 
infirmary.
The male and female prisoners are con- 
fined in separate wings of the building, each of them 
divided into several courts, day-rooms for labour, 
and other apartments.
There are a few cells for the 
refractory, and some for the purpose of solitary con- 
finement.
The benevolent institutions of this town are ex- 
ceedingly numerous.
An annual- income, of upwards 
of 30001.
arises from the different benefactions, lega T 
ties, &c.
which have been bequeathed for charitable 
purposes.
In the year 1553, Sir Thomas White, 
whom we have already mentioned, and who served 
the office of Lord Mayor of London, placed Read- 
ing the fourth in his list of 24 cities and towns, which 
were to receive 1041.
in yearly rotation for ever, from 
lands vested in the corporation of Bristol.
This 
sum, as often as it is paid, is to be lent to four ne- 
cessitous young men, clothiers, 251.
to each, for ten 
years, without interest.
f 
Mr. Richard Aldworth, in 1658, bequeathed 
40001.
to found a blue-coat school, and maintain a 
master, lecturer, and 20 boys.
This charity has 
been increased by various subsequent donations, and 
the school is now a very respectable establishment, 
the funds being sufficient to support and educate 
from 30 to 40 children.
In December 1696, Mr.
John Hall, of London, apothecary, by his will, pro- 
* It does not appear, thatthis person was any relation to 
Mr. Blagrave, the mathematician.
+  TheFe is a portrait of Sir Thomas White, in the President's 
lodgings, at St. John's College, Oxford.
It is said, that his 
sister, whom* he very nearly resembled, sat for the face.
Sir 
Thomas White was the son of a clothier, who removed to 
Beading from Riekmansworth, 
-z vided 
90 
BERKSHIRE, 
•vided a house for a school-master.
He has 231.
a 
year, a cloak once in two years, of about 21.
value, 
and 11.
a year for shoes and stockings, to be paid 
him, to enable him to teach three boys, one out of 
each parish, of the age of fourteen, or fifteen years, 
to read, write, and cast accounts, and to maintain 
them.
Mr. Hall also gave a bible, and 61.
to each 
boy to put him out apprentice.
The school-house 
is situated in Chain Lane.
The parents of these 
children must have been parishioners of one of the 
parishes at the time of their birth, and they are elect- 
ed into it by the mayor and aldermen.
Mr. Hall 
likewise gave five messuages adjoining to the school, 
for five poor single persons, of good reputation, of 
the town of Reading ; and endowed them with 18d.
a week, 12s.
a year for fuel, and once in two years a 
cloth gown.
In the year 1782, the three vicars ol Reading in- 
stituted a charity-school for six girls, now augment- 
ed to twelve, supported by public contributions.
On St. Thomas's Day, when Mr. West's charity- 
sermon is alternately preached in the three parish- 
churches, an annual collection is made at the church- 
doors, in aid of this institution.
John West, Esq. made an endowment, by will, 
"for the maintenance and education of three boys, be- 
* William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, was the son of 
an eminent clothier of Reading, where he was born, at an an- 
cient house, now standing in Broad Street, in the year 1573.
He was first educated in the free-school here, whence he was 
removed to St. John's College, Oxford, where he took his de- 
grees, and was chosen one of the fellows of that society.
He 
was also chosen university reader of grammar, in which profes- 
sion lie was greatly followed, being admired for his extensive 
knowledge ot the learned languages.
lie obtained several con- 
siderable prefflrrrients, but remained fellow of the college, till 
he was elected master in 1611.
This election, however, was 
warmly contested, and the king (James I.) hearing of the dis- 
pute, sent for both parties to Titcbboum in Hampshire, where 
he examined the matter and gave his opinion in iavour of Laud.
He was soon after appointed one of the royal chaplains, and in 
1016 promoted to the deanery of Gloucester.
In 1621 he was 
advanced to the bishopric of St. David's, when he resigned his 
mastership to the college, and at the coronation of Charles I.
officiated as Dean of Windsor.
From that period, he was call- 
ed forth to public action, both in church and state, which ended 
in the ruin of himself and his royal master.
In 1626 he was promoted to the see of Bath and Wells, made 
dean of the chapel royal, sworn of the privy council, and next 
year translated to the bishopric of London.
In proportion as 
be possessed the royal favour, he became the object of envy, 
both to the nobility and churchmen ; and Sir James Whitelock, 
one of the judges, and a man of great experience, used to say, 
that " Laud was too full of fire, though a just and good man ; 
and that his want of experience in slate matters, and his too 
much zeal for the church ceremonies, if he proceeded in the 
way he was then in, would set the nation on lire !" 
In 1633 he was appointed archbishop of Canterbury, and the 
same year accompanie 1 the king to Scotland ; where, being 
offended with the simplicity of their worship, he projected the 
scheme ot imposing on that church the English liturgy, which 
the people considered as little better than the mass book.
His 
conduct in that affair, with his cruelty to those whom he pro- 
secuted in the star-chamber, greatly alienated the affections of 
the people from the sovereign.
On the breaking out of the 
disturbances, which afterwards unhappily ripened into Civil 
War, his palace at Lambeth was assaulted by the Loudon ap- 
tween the ages of seven and eleven years, in the 
charity-school of Christchurch, London, to be elect- 
ed by the minister, church-wardens, and payers of 
the poor-rates, out of each parish alternately on 
every vacancy ; with each of whom an apprentice- 
fee of 201.
is given by the donor, and the children 
are apprenticed out to such masters and trades as 
their parents approve.
The same donor, and Fran- 
ces his wife, gave to the cloth-workers' company, 
houses and grounds, let at 391.
13s.
4d.
a year, in 
trust, to pay the rents and profits thereof to blind 
men and women, 51.
a year each for life.
The poor 
blind in Newbury and Reading to be preferred be- 
fore those of other places.
Archbishop Laud, by deed in his life-time, gave 
1201.
a year for ever, to be employed two years suc- 
cessively in apprenticing ten boys born in Reading, 
one belonging to the parish of Bray, and one belong- 
ing to the parish of Wokingham, Berks ; and, every 
third year, to be divided into 201.
shares, and given 
to five such maid-servants born in Reading, with 
one other maid-servant born in the parish of Bray 
or Wokingham, alternately, who may have respec- 
tively lived three years in one service, in Reading, 
Bray, or Wokingham, as the mayor and aldermen 
shall direct, to promote them in marriage.* 
prentices; but, having obtained notice of their intention, he 
previously retired to Whitehall, and by that means avoided the 
fury of the rioters.
In 1640 he was impeached by the House 
of Commons for high treason ; and, at its request, was com- 
mitted by the Lords to the Tower.
His trial, however, did 
not take place till three years afterwards, when his defence was 
acknowledged to be satisfactory, even by his most determined 
adversaries.
No charge of treason could be proved agaimt 
him ; but his enemies had resolved on his destruction ; and the 
Parliament, to conciliate the favour of the Scotch, who were 
his most determined foes, parsed a bill of attainder, which the 
Lords were compelled to confirm by threats of the Earl of 
Pembroke, and l tie clamours of tiiose who had espoused his 
opinions.
Accordingly, a warrant was made out for his execu- 
tion, on the 10th of January 1644.
He was attended to the 
scaffold by Dr. Sterne, his chaplain, where after some time 
spent in devotion, his head was cut of at one blow, in the 72d 
year of his age.
Those who are strong high-churchmen, generally represent 
Laud as a martyr; while rigid dissenters consider him as a 
merciless and inhuman persecutor.
That he was a man of 
great learning is evident: not only from his learned answer to 
Fisher the Jesuit, but al«o from his judicious collections of ma- 
nuscripts, which he leit to the university of Oxford.
His assi- 
duity in the discharge of his episcopal duty was equal to his 
abilities as a scholar ; and his piety in private, as a Christian, 
appears from his diary, which was published after his deatii.
But such is the contaminating nature of pride, and so infatuating 
is the love of power, that when trusted with a person unac- 
quainted with the world, and destitute of prudence, it frequent 
ly carries him to such unwarrantable heights, as seldom tail to 
procure his destruction.
Laud was brought up in all the un- 
feeling apathy of a collegiate life ; and, when called to act in a 
public character, was utterly unacquainted with the world.
He 
imbibed high notions of episenpal authority, and was so fondly 
attached to tiie exteriors of religion, that even the papists had 
hopes of him ; and (as he says himself) actually sffered him a 
cardinal's hat.
His 'chief intention probably was, to establish 
all the ridiculous ceremonies of popery, without acknowledging 
the papal power.
A gentleman 
BERKSHIRE.
91 
A gentleman of the name of Allen, late of Har- 
field, in Middlesex, who was educated in the blue- 
coat charity-school of Reading, gave, by will, the 
Sum of 10001.
to be laid out in the purchase of lands, 
nine-tenths of the clear yearly value of which for the 
putting out of three boys, not under 15 years, one 
out of each parish in the town of Reading, appren- 
tices in London, every year, by the ministers of the 
three parishes, and the other tenth to be equally di- 
vided between the said three ministers.
Mr. Allen 
also gave ten pounds, to be distributed by the church- 
wardens, to the poor of the parish of St. Mary ; his 
monument and rails, in St. Mary's church-yard, to 
be painted and repaired, as often as there shall be 
occasion, by the three ministers, out of the nine-tenths 
of the estates above-mentioned.
By his will, dated on the 29th of December, 1624, 
Mr. John Kendrick gave 501.
one-third part of 
which he directed to be distributed to the poor of 
each parish separately, by the church-wardens and 
overseers at Christmas, yearly, for ever, which is re- 
gularly done.
He also gave 101.
yearly, issuing out 
of lands at Mattingly, and of a farm in North Street, 
in the parish of Tilehurst, Berks, purchased by the 
corporation in trust, towards the maintenance of 
morning prayers at St. Mary's Church.
The same 
gentleman bequeathed to the town of Reading, two 
other sums, one of 75001.
and the other of 5001.
Out 
of the first, the corporation purchased lands in North 
Street, in the parish of Tilehurst, and a tenement in 
Minster Street, in Reading, which cost 19001.
A 
plot of ground, adjoining the said tenement, was 
bought of Anthony Blagrave, Esq. for 321.
and in 
building the new part and altering the old, to make 
it fit for carrying on the trade of clothing, the sum of 
18461.
was laid out.
There was also laid out in 
shop-stuff 1221.
and the remainder was, by the mayor 
and aldermen, lent to such persons as had the best 
interests with them, but upon slender securities.
The people of the town, apprehensive that great 
losses might accrue to the charity, through negligence 
and partiality, petitioned the king, in council, to direct 
them whatcourse to take topreserve that great charity.
It was, therefore, left to the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, to give his opinion in what manner the said 
charity should be applied ; which was, that the mo- 
ney should be secured by the purchase of lands, and 
the profits and produce thereof to be employed in 
lending to young tradesmen, that could give good 
security for the repayment in a limitted time, with- 
out interest ; to bind out poor fatherless and mother- 
less boys to handicraft trades ; and to give to poor 
maids, that had each lived with one master or dame a 
limited time, and behaved well in her place/ and had 
no friends to give her any portion in marriage, the 
several sums specified in the decree, which are limit- 
ed, and not to exceed the sums therein mentioned.
This adjudication of the archbishop was soon after 
-exhibited in the Court of Exchequer ; and in Trinity 
Term, in the 14th of Charles I.
anno 1639, a decree 
passed in that court that the sum of 36001.
left, being 
part of the sum of 75001.
of Mr. John Kendrick's 
first gift, should be laid out in lands, and the income 
and produce of the same to be employed to the uses 
above-mentioned.
By virtue of this decree, there 
was bought with part of the said money, of Ralph 
Verney, Esq. and Mary his wife, a farm at Green- 
mer-hill, in South Stoke, and Goring, in Oxford- 
shire, which cost 10501.
There was also bought, 
with a farther part of the said money, another farm 
called Brazenhead, or Parr's Land, at Sulhamstead 
Abbots and Banisters, which cost 8071.
lis.
7d.
bought of William Parr and son.
With a farther 
part of the said money were purchased of Richard 
Knollys, Esq. certain lands called by the name of 
the Crown-fields, in Reading, which cost 11001.
These purchases altogether amounted to 29571.
lis.
7d.
so that there remained to lay out in land, according 
to the decree, the sum of 6421.
8s.
5d.
Out of this 
remainder, eight several sums, of 801.
each, were lent 
out upon security for ten years, without interest ; 
and at the end of that time, pursuant to the decree, 
to be lent to other persons for the like time, and so 
to continue, from ten to ten years, for ever.
By the 
accounts of the charity, however, the money was not 
received back and lent again in twenty years ; and 
some of it was quite lost : some of the aldermen them- 
selves, to their dishonour, formerly made use of it ; 
some without giving any security, and others upon 
very slender ones ; so that this branch of Mr. Ken- 
drick's charity is so much diminished, that one-half, 
if not more, of the said eight sums of eighty pounds, 
are totally sunk and lost.
The second gift, as be- 
fore observed, was 5001.
to be lent gratis, after the 
first nomination, to ten trading men, from three 
years to three years, they giving security for the re- 
payment of 501.
each.
For want of due care, how- 
ever, both the time and conditions were altered ; so 
that, in time, it came into the hands of Mr. Joseph 
or John Wigg, where it rested till his death; and 
then, about the year 1718 or 1719, was paid into the 
hands of a certain alderman, as chamberlain of the 
hall revenues, to which it did not belong.
Thus it 
appears, that this part of Mr. Kendrick's charity is 
not employed for the benefit of those for whom it 
was intended.
Either by negligence, or misapplica- 
tion of the managers of this charity, they were, by a 
printed publication, clearly proved debtors to it in 
the sum of 18,4391.
10s.
The building which was 
originally erected for a clothing manufactory, in 
pursuance of Mr. Kendrick's will, is now called the 
Oracle ; and is oo«upied by sacking manufacturers, 
makers of sail cloth, weavers, pin-makers, &c.
who 
are allowed the use of the building without rent.
Every year, on Good Friday, three maid-servants, 
who have lived in one service five years, are ap- 
pointed by the corporation, to throw lots in the 
council-chamber for twenty nobles, the gift of Mr.
John Blagrave, June 10, 1611.
At the nomination 
of the mayor elect, on the last Monday in August in 
every year, three other maid-servants, appointed in 
the same manner, also throw lots in the council- 
8 chamber 
92 
BERKSHIRE.
chamber for eight, pounds, the gift of the late alder- 
men, Mr. John Deane and Mr. John Richards ; and 
the sum of five pounds has of late years been given 
by Martin Annesley, Esq. brother to the member.
The late Awberry Flory, Esq. also gave by will the 
interest of 1001.
for ever, to be added to Mr. Annes- 
ley's gift, and equally divided between the two un- 
fortunate maidens.
In the year 1634, Sir Thomas Vatchell, Knight, 
founded alms-houses for six poor men, and endowed 
them with 401.
a year for ever.
In 1477, John 
Leehe, otherwise John A'Larder, Esq. founded five 
alms-houses for five poor men, and endowed them 
with twenty-pence a week ; and three others adjoin- 
ing for three poor women, with the same endowment.
These alms-houses were rebuilt by the corporation 
in 1775.
In 1663, John Webb, Esq. founded four alms- 
houses, and endowed them with two shillings a week ; 
they were rebuilt by the corporation in 1790.
Mr.
Richard Keys founded four alms-houses for four 
poor women, and endowed them with lands of 101.
a year.
There are also several charity-houses in 
Hosiers' Lane, the persons enjoying which are elect- 
ed by the minister of the parish of St. Mary's for the 
time being.
Reading has been remarkable for the birth of emi- 
nent men.
In addition to those whom we have al- 
ready noticed, may be mentioned, Sir Thomas Holt, 
Recorder of the Town ; Sir John Barnard, a cele- 
brated Alderman of London ; the Rev. James Mer- 
rick, translator of the Psalms ; Dr. Phanuel Bacon, 
author of several dramas, and humorous pieces ; 
Baker, a learned printer ; and Sir Constantino 
Phipps, Lord Chancellor of Ireland.
Remeneam.] — The parish of Remenham, situated 
in the hundred of Beynhurst, eight miles and a half 
west by north from Maidenhead, contains little that 
is remarkable, excepting Park Place, the seat of 
Lord Malmsbury, which we have already described.
Sandleford.] — Sandleford is situated in the hun- 
dred of Faircross, a mile and three quarters south- 
south-east from Newbury.
A priory, dedicated to 
St. Austin, was founded here by Geoffry, Earl of 
Perche before 1205, and deserted in the year 1480, 
when it was annexed by Edward IV.
to the collegi- 
ate church of Windsor.
Seacourt.] — Seacourt, anciently Seke-Court, is 
in the hundred* of Hormer, adjoining the parish of 
Witharo.
It was formerly a large town ; and, as we 
are informed by Wharton, in his History of Kid- 
dington, it abounded with inns for the reception of 
pilgrims, and once maintained the Roman army.
It at present consists of but five houses.
The foun- 
dations, and other remains of its buildings, may 
however still be discovered on the brink of the river, 
which separated the territories of the Attrebatii and 
Dobuni : and at low water, the fragments of a bridge 
crossing the stream to Binsey are visible.
Shaw.] — Shaw is situated in the hundred of Fair- 
cross, about a mite to the north-east of Newbury.
Shaw Place, the manor-house, is a large brick 
edifice, which was built in the year 1581, by an opu- 
lent clothier of Newbury, named Dolman, who there- 
by very much excited the envy of his neighbours, as 
appears from the sarcastic humour of the following 
lines made on the occasion : — 
" Lord have mercy upon us, miserable sinners; 
Thomas Doleman lias built a new house, 
And has turned away all his spinners." 
Mr. Dolman was sheriff of the county in the year 
1588.
Shaw Place is celebrated for having, been the 
head-quarters of King Charles, at the time of the 
last battle of Newbury.
A hole in the wainscot, in 
one of the rooms is shewn, as having been made by a 
bullet fired at the king, and which.
narrowly missed: 
the wainscot has been carefully preserved in memory 
of the circumstance.
Sir Joseph Andrews, Bart, is 
the present Lord of the Manor.
Shefford (West).] — Great, or West Shefford, 
lies in the hundred of Kentbury Eagle, five miles 
north-east bynorth fromllungerford.
King Charles's 
army was quartered here on the 19th of November, 
1644.
Shefford (East).] — Little, or East Shefford, is 
situated in the same hundred, three quarters of a 
mile farther from Hungerford.
The church contains 
a handsome monument, with figures in alabaster, of 
a man in armour, and a female.
The monument has 
neither inscription nor arms.
There is also a monu- 
ment of John Fettiplace, who died in 1554.
The 
arms of Fettiplace quartering Besils, and some 
mutilated figures of saints, are in the windows.
The manor was at a very early period possessed by 
the family of Fettiplace, one of whom married the 
heiress of Besils, and rebuilt the manor-house.
Its 
ruins yet remain, and exhibit the arms of Besils on 
the stone-work of some of the windows.
Shottesbroke.] — Shottesbroke is situated in the 
hundred of Beynhurst, five miles south-west from 
Maidhenhead.
This little parish was formerly part 
of White Waltham, and the seat of a college, found- 
ed by Sir William Trussel, in the year 1337.
Sir 
William Trussel also built the church, in which he 
and his lady were buried.
Hearne, the antiquary, 
says, " the knight lies wrapt up in lead, with his 
wife in leather at his feet, as appears by a defect in 
the wall." • 
Shottesbroke church is a handsome Gothic struc- 
ture, and besides the monument of the founder and 
his lady, contains several others of great antiquity.
In the north transept, is the tomb of Sir Richard 
Powle, K.
B. who died in 1678, and that of Thomas 
Noke, with his effigies on brass, " who for his groat 
age and virtuous life was reverenced of all men, and 
commonly called Father Noke, created Esquire by 
by King Henry VIII.
He was of stature high, and 
comely : and for excellence in artillery made yeo- 
man of the crown of England ; which had, in his life 
three wives, and by every of them some fruit and 
offspring j he deceased the 21st August, 1567, in 
the 
BERKSHIRE.
93 
the year of his age 87." The completion of the 
church is said to have been attended by a very ex- 
traordinary accident.
The architect having either 
laid the last stone of the spire, or fixed the weather- 
cock, called for some wine to drink the king's health, 
which being given him he drank it, and immediately 
fell to the ground, where he was dashed to pieces, 
and afterwards buried on the spot.
A rough stone, 
in the shape of a coffin, was placed over his remains, 
with the interjections, " O !
O !" the only sounds 
which he uttered, engraven on it.
Hearne admits 
the general validity of the story ; but, upon examin- 
ation, thought that the two oval figures, were only 
portions of the form of a cross, lie observes, that 
upon opening the grave some bones were found 
therein.
Shrivenham.] — Shrivcnham, in the hundred of 
Shrivenham, five miles and a half south-west by 
south from Great Faringdon, was anciently a mar- 
ket-town, of considerable note, with a fair on the 
festival of St. Mary Magdalen.
Both lair and mar- 
ket have long been discontinued.
Shrivenham, notwithstanding it was formerly a 
place of so much consequence, escaped the notice of 
Camden, and of all his editors : nor is it mentioned 
in the Magna Britannia, or in Ashmole's Collections.
There were several manors in this town.
That of 
Becket, or, as it is writteu, Beeote, was in a family 
of that name, in the reign of Edward III.
The fa- 
mily of Beeote held their lands in Shrivenham, by 
the service of coming before the king, whenever he 
should pass by Fowyeare's-Mill Bridge, in Shriven- 
ham, showing him a couple of white capons, and 
addressing him with the following odd speech : — 
" Ecce Domine istos duos Capones quos alias ha- 
bebitis sed non nunc." 
Behold, my Lord, these two capons, which you 
shall have another time, hut not now.
Becket-House, the family mansion, is now in the 
occupation of Barrington Price, Esq.
The hamlets of Bourton, Watchfield, Longcot, 
and Farnham, belong to this parish.
They all sup- 
port their own poor.
Shrivenham church is a large and handsome Go- 
thic structure.
Within is a double row of circular 
eolumns and arches, extending the whole length of 
the building, and forming aisles both for the nave 
and the chancel.
The tower, which is in the centre, 
is supported by four pointed arches.
In the chan- 
cel are the monuments of Sir John Wildman, John 
Wildman, Esq. his son, the first Viscount Barring- 
ton, and his son the second Viscount.
The follow- 
ing inscription is to the memory of the last-men- 
tioned Viscount : — 
" In the south-eastern part of the chancel are de- 
posited the remains of William Wildman, Viscount 
Barrington, born January 15, 1717, died February 1, 
17t>3.
His strong discriminating understanding, his 
VOL.
I, — NO.
7, 
active talents, and unremitting assiduity in public bu- 
siness, rendered him early conspicuous in the House 
of Commons, of which he was 39 years uninterrupt- 
edly a member.
During 34 years of that period, 
under the reigns of George II.
and III.
(two princes, 
whose confidence he enjoyed,) he served the crown 
with inflexible integrity, high honour, and distinguish- 
ed abilities, in the office of secretary of the admiralty, 
master of the great wardrobe, secretary at war, chan- 
cellor of the exchequer, and treasurer of the navy.
In 177S, lie retired from Parliament and public em- 
ployment, to private life; in full possession of his 
bodily and mental powers, and in the highest merited 
favour with his sovereign.
The candour of his mind, 
the soundness of his judgment, his accurate know- 
ledge of mankind, and the urbanity of his manners, 
made him the delight of every society in which he 
lived.
His zeal to promote the public good, his wish 
to diffuse happiness all around him, his benevolence 
which flowed from the heart, his kindness to the te- 
nants and poor of his estates, and his affection to his 
iamilv, secured to his character an esteem, attachment, 
veneration, and love, which it has been the lot of few 
to experience.
This monument is erected to his me- 
mory by his three surviving brothers, to whom he was 
the best of fathers and of friends." 
The Honourable Samuel Barrington, Admiral of 
the.
White, brother of Lord Barrington, who died 
on the 16th of August, 1800, distinguished himself 
by his gallant behaviour in the wars of 1741, and 
1756 ; particularly by the capture of the Count de 
Florentine, a French ship of 60 guns, the flag of 
which still remains in the chancel of Shrivenham 
church ; and by his repulse of a very superior force 
of the enemy at St. Lucie, when he had the command 
of a fleet in the West Indies in 1779.
The Admiral 
lies buried in the family vault at Shrivenham, where 
a monument, has been erected to his memory, beard- 
ing the following inscription, from the pen of Miss 
Hannah More : — 
" Sacred to the memory of the Honourable Sa- 
muel Barrington, Admiral of the White, and General 
of Marines, born February 1730, died August 1G 3 
1800." 
" Here rests the hero, who in glory's page 
Wrote his fair deeds for more than half an age ; 
Here rests the patriot, who for England's good, 
'Each toil encounter'dj and each clime withstood % 
Here rests the Christian, his the loftier theme, 
To seize the conquest, yet renounce the fame.
He, when his arm St. Lucia's trophies boasts, 
Ascribes his glory to the Lord of Hosts ; 
And when the harder task remained behind^ 
The passive courage and the will resigned, 
Patient the vet'ran victor yields his breath, 
Secure, to him who conquer'd sin and death." 
Sparsholt.] — Sparsholt is situated in the hundred 
of Wantage, three miles and a quarter west from that 
town.
The church contains some very ancient mo- 
numents.
The effigies of a knight templar in wood 
lies on the floor, having been formerly placed upon 
an ancient altar tomb, in the middle of the chapeL 
In the south wall, under arches, are two altar tombs, 
on which are two female figures in wood.
Leland,, 
in his Itinerary, says, "at Sparsholt lyeth one of the 
Orchards honourably buried in a chapel annexed,, 
2 a hard\ 
BERKSHIRE.
hard to the.
side of the paroche churche, having a 
chantry, and on echo side of him lyeth a wife of his.
Ther is a comune saying, that one of them was a 
duchess and the other a countess ; but this saying 
hath little appearance of truthe." — On the floor are 
several grave stones with brass figures, but their in- 
scriptions are not legible.
The doors of the church 
have circular Saxon arches.
A chapel of ease, dedicated to St. James, formerly 
stood in Farlow, a hamlet of Sparsholt ; but it has 
gone to decay, and a chapel has been built in lieu of 
it, at Kingston Lisle, another hamlet of this parish.
Speen.] — Speen is situated partly in the hundred 
of Kentbury Eagle, and partly in that of Faircross, 
about a mile north-west from Newbury.
It is a 
place of considerable antiquity, deriving its name 
from the Roman Spina;, which is supposed to have 
been situated in Speen-field, between the village and 
Speenham-land, a tithing of this parish, contiguous 
to the town of Newbury.
This station, though men- 
tioned by Antoninus, was apparently of but inconsi- 
derable importance, as it does not appear that any 
antiquities, or remains of buildings, have been disco- 
vered in its vicinity.
This village was one of the 
principal scenes of action, in the second battle of 
Newbury.
There is an altar tomb in Speen church, with the 
effigies in armour of John Baptist Castillon, a Pied- 
montese, who died in 1597 ; and the monument of 
• Dame Elizabeth Castillon, wife of his son Sir 
Francis, formerly lord of the manor of Wood- 
Spene.
Her effigies is represented habited in a 
fardingale, and flowered gown, with a veil almost 
covering the body.
Near the church is a Well, 
called Our Lady's Well, which has a very distinct 
and clear echo.
It repeats but once ; but at such 
intervals of time, and so loud, that a word of four 
or five syllables is heard as articulately from the 
echo, as from the voice of the speaker.
In the year 
1664, Mrs. Anne Watts founded an almshouse, at 
Speenhamland, for two poor widows, who each re- 
ceive about two shillings a week.
Stanford.] — Stanford, generally called Stanford 
in the Vale, is situated in the vale of Whitehorse, 
in the hundred of Ganfield, 4 miles east south east 
from Great Farringdon.
Stanford was formerly a 
market town, by virtue of a charter from Henry 
III.
The market has been long discontinued.
The 
church is a handsome Gothic building, the tower 
formiug one of the most distinguished objects in the 
vale.
The rose and fetlock, impaling the ragged 
staff, on the south porch, seem to indicate that it 
was built about the time of the marriage of Lady 
Anne Neville with the Duke of Gloucester.
The 
only monument deserving of notice is one of the 
Knoller family, a nephew of the first Earl of Ban- 
bury.
Steventon.] — Steventon is situated in the hun- 
dred of Ock, 5 miles south south-west from Abing- 
don.
Here was formerly an alien priory of black 
monks, a cell to the abbey of Bee Harlewin in Nor- 
7 
mandy, to which monastery the manor had been 
given by King Henry I.
It was afterwards granted 
to the abbot and convent of Westminster.
Streatley.] — Streatley, or Streatley -upon - 
Thames, is in the hundred of Moreton, five inilesi 
and a half south by west from Wellingford.
It is 
supposed to derive its name from being situated on 
the Roman highway, near the Ickneild Street, 
which here enters the county from Oxfordshire.
Sunning.] — Sunning, or Sonning-upon-Thames, 
lies in the hundred of Sunning, three miles and a 
half north-east from Reading.
This village is 
pleasantly situated on a gentle eminence, near the 
banks of the Thames.
According to Camden, it 
was formerly the see of a bishop, whose diocese in- 
cluded the counties of Berks and Wilts ; and Le- 
land asserts, that no fewer than nine bishops suc- 
cessively filled this see ; the last of whom, Har- 
rison, removed it to Sherborne in Dorsetshire, 
whence it was translated to Salisbury.
In Leland's 
time there remained " a fair old house of stone at 
Sonning, by the Thamise ripe, longing to the bi- 
shop of Salesbyrie, and thereby a faire parke.'' 
This parish is very extensive, containing, accord- 
ing to Rocque's survey, above 7000 acres, exclu- 
sive of that part, which is within an insulated dis- 
trict of Wiltshire, before mentioned.
Sunning church contains several ancient inscrip- 
tions, and sepulchral monuments ; on one of the 
latter are the following lines, to the memory of two 
infant children of the family of Rich, who long re- 
sided at Sunning : — 
" The father's air, the mother's look, 
The sportive smile, and pretty joke, 
The rosy lip's sweet babbling grace, 
The beauties of the mind :;nd face, 
And all the charms of infant souls, 
This tomb within its bosom holds." 
Holme Park, near Sunning Bridge, is the seat of 
Richmond Palmer, Esq. The hsuse, a plain mo- 
dern structure, of brick, is situated upon an emi- 
nence above the river Thames, which is seen to 
great advantage, flowing through a beautiful valley, 
and winding between the distant hills.
Sunninghill.] — Suiiniughill is situated in the hun- 
dred of Cookham, 6 miles south-south-west from 
New Windsor.
In this parish, as we have already 
mentioned, there is a mild chalybeate spring, called 
Sunninghill-wells, adjoining to which is a room, 
where public breakfasts are occasionally given.
In 
the church is a very ancient inscription, on a square 
pillar, between the nave and the chancel, comme- 
morating the decease of Livingus, a priest.
Sun- 
ninghill Park, now the seat of "Jeremiah Crutchley, 
Esq. was formerly part of the royal demesne, and 
inclosed by Charles I.
who granted it to the family 
of Carew.
Sir Home Popham, a distinguished 
naval officer, has a seat in this parish.
Near Ascot 
Heath race course, on a hill, about a mile from 
Sunninshill-wclls, are four barrows.
Thev arc on 
n the 
BERKSHIRE.
05.
the aoaith side of the turnpike road to Oakingham ; 
the nearest not above 300 yards from the road.
They stand south-east by south of each other.
The 
trenches round the large barrows or hillocks are 
aliout 12 feet wide, and two deep : from the middle 
of the trenches to the centres of the tops is about 
47 feet ; from the outside of the trenches to the 
feet of the lesser hillocks about 4-5 feet, and the hil- 
locks, which have no trenches round them, are 
quite flat at the top ; not above three feet high, and 
are about 40 feet over.
Swallowfield.] — Swallowfield lies 6 miles south 
by east from Reading, partly in the hundred of 
Charlton, and partly in the hundred of Amesbury, 
in Wiltshire.
An annual fair is holden here, on the 
9th of June.
John, Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, died 
seized of the manor of Swallowfield, in the year 
1435.
At a later period, it was in the family of 
Buckhouse.
The widow of Sir William Buck- 
house, who died in 1669, married Henry Earl of 
Clarendon, who became possessed of Swallowfield.
The Lord Chancellor, Clarendon, wrote his great 
work, The History of the Rebellion, in the family 
mansion.
Swallowfield Place was afterwards in 
the possession of Governor Pitt, generally recog- 
nized by the name of Diamond Pitt.
It has suc- 
cessively belonged to the Dods, and Beavans, and 
is now the property and seat of Timothy Hare 
Earle, Esq. Swallowfield has a parochial chapel, 
dependant on Shinfield.
— Riseley is a hamlet of 
Swallowfield.
Farley Hill, in this parish, is the 
«eat of John Walter, Esq.
Thatcham.] — Thatcham, now a small village, 
but formerly a market town of some consequence, 
is situated in the hundred of Reading, 3 miles east 
of Newbury.
Its market was holden on Sunday, 
agreeably to a charter of Henry II.
hut in the reign 
of Henry III.
in 1218, it was changed to Thurs- 
day.
Thatcham still has two annual fairs ; on the 
Tuesday after Easter week, and on the first Tues- 
day after the 29th of September.
This village is 
chiefly composed of one street, containing some 
good houses, and a small church, in which are se- 
veral ancient monuments.
There is also a good 
Charity School, which was founded by Lady Fran- 
ces Winchcomb, in the year 1707, who endowed it 
with 531.
per annum.
The income at -present 
amounts to 2001.
per annum, with which 40 boys, 
twenty of whom are of the parish of Bucklebury, 
are cloathed and educated, and six of them annually 
apprenticed with a premium of 101.
each.
The 
* This respected Divine was born on the 18th of August, 
1627 ; but, as the pariah register does not go quite so far back, 
his baptism does not appear.
He was instructed in the lan- 
guages by his father, and made so rapid a progress, that, having 
acquired a competent knowledge of the Latin, Hebrew, and 
Greek, at the age of eleven, he was entered, 1633, a student 
of Oriel College, Oxford, where he soon after took up his de- 
grees.
Averse from innovations in religion, he chose not to 
school-house was a decayed chapel, purchased by 
Lady Winchcombe for the purpose.
Dunstan House, the ancient seat of the Warings, 
and Crofts, described by Rocque in 1761, as one of 
the most magnificent mansions in the county, stood 
near the village.
It was pulled down by the pur- 
chasers of it, at Sir John Croft's sale, for the sake 
of the materials.
Excepting Lambourn, the parish 
of Thatcham is the most extensive of any in the 
count v, containing, according to Rocque's survey, 
11,491 acres ; it extends to Newbury, and includes 
some part of the suburbs of that town.
It com- 
prises the hamlets of Midgham, Greenham, Croke- 
ham, Chamber-house, Henwick, Coldash and Cold- 
thorpe.
The two first have chapels of ease ; and, 
formerly, there was one also at Crokeham.
At 
Greenham there was anciently a preceptory of the 
knights-hospitallers, to whom the manor belonged 
in the reign of Henry II.
At Greenham Mills, 
about three miles south from Thatcham, is a large 
and flourishing blanket manufactory.
Theale.] — The village of Theale, on the Bath 
road, is a tithing within the parish of Tylehurst, 
and gives name to an adjoining hundred : it had 
formerly a chapel of ease.
Tubney.] — Tubney is in the hundred of Ock, 
four miles and a quarter west by north from Abing- 
don.
It is a sinecure rectory, belonging to Magda- 
len College, Oxford.
In the time of Leland, there 
was a church at Tubney ; but no traces of it are 
left ; and, on the induction of a rector, divine ser- 
vice is performed in the open air.
Tylehurst.] — Tylehurst is situated in the hun- 
dred of Reading, adjoining Englefield, two miles 
and three quarters west of Reading.
It is a rec- 
tory ; the largest, as it is said, in Berkshire.
The 
parish of Tylehurst includes a large unproductive 
heath, the soil of which is capable of yielding the 
most excellent grain, if once broken up, and pro- 
perly cultivated.
The poor who reside in this dis- 
trict are very numerous.
In the year 1803, the 
sum of 14441.
9s.
10|d.
was collected for the parish 
rates, at 6s.
9d.
in the pound.
In Tylehurst church, 
there is a very cosUy monument to the memory of 
Sir Peter Vanlore, a rich merchant, who died in 
1627, and his lady.
The manor formerly belonged 
to the abbot and convent of Reading.
It after- 
wards passed into the family of the Kendricks, and 
is now the property of Mr. Blagrave, of the family 
of that name, at Watchfield.
Tylehurst was the 
birth-place of the learned and pious William Lloyd, 
Bishop of Worcester.* 
TWYFORD.
comply with the changes which took place during the Usurpa- 
tion, but became tutor to a nobleman's children.
In 1660 he 
was sworn a chaplain in ordinary to the king, and appointed 
prebendary of Ripon.
In 1672, the king promoted him to the 
deanry of Bangor, and soon after to the valuable living of St.
Martin's in the Fields.
In 1680 he was appointed bishop of 
St. Asaph, about which time he wrote a learned essay on the 
ancient church government in this island, which brought him 
into 
06 
BERKSHIRE.
Twyford.] — Twyford is a small village, partly in 
the hundred of Wagrave, and partly in the hundred 
of Amesbury, in the county of Wilts.
It is 5 miles east 
north-east from Reading'.
It receives its name from 
two fords, over the river Loddon, on which it is si- 
tuated, near its confluence with the river Thames.
Uffington.] — Uffington is situated in the hun- 
dred of Shrivenham, four miles and a quarter south- 
south-east from Great Faringdon.
The celebrated 
Vale of White Horse is comprised within the manor 
of Uffington, the property of Earl Craven.
Uf- 
fington castle, a large camp on the White Horse 
Hill, just above the village, is supposed by some to 
be a British, but by others a Roman relic.
From 
east to west, it is about 700 feet in diameter ; from 
north to south, about 500.
It is surrounded by a 
high vallum, with a slighter one on the outside.
The situation is commanding ; and, in every direc- 
tion, the views from the inner vallum are very ex- 
tensive.
About half a mile north west of Uffington 
Castle, above the village of Compton Beauchamp, 
stands Ilardwell Castle, another camp, nearly of a 
square form, excepting where it is interrupted by 
the broken edge of the hill.
Roman coins have 
been found in the neighbourhood, and the camp is 
generally supposed to have been a work of the Ro- 
mans.
Its dimensions are about 180 paces by 140 ; 
and it is surrounded by a double vallum, excepting 
where the steepness of the ground has rendered it 
unnecessary.
Ufton.] — Ufton is situated in the hundred of 
Theale, seven miles and a quarter south-west by 
west from Reading.
At the conquest, there were 
two manors at Ufton, then called Offeture.
These 
manors, which were afterwards distinguished by the 
names of Ufton-Nervets, or Nermits, and Ufton 
Greyshall, have long been united, and are now (he 
property of William Congreve, Esq. of Aldermas- 
ion.
They were some time in the family of Perkins, 
who resided many years at Ufton Court.
Arabella, 
the wife of Francis Perkins, Esq. was the Belinda 
of Pope's Rape of the Lock, which he dedicated to 
into a controversy with Sir Georg^jJvl'Kenzie, the Iearneil 
Scotch lawyer.
When King James M.
published the declara- 
tion for liberty of conscience, Dr. Lloyd was one of the se- 
ven bishops who refused to concur with that measure, as con- 
trary to the express letter of the statute.
They presented a 
petition to the king, praying to be excused ; but the infatuated 
prince, who looked upon himself as above law, ordered the 
seven bishops to be committed to the Tower.
At that time 
there was no Parliament, which obliged them to move the 
court of king's-bench for a writ of habeas corpus.
After many 
learned arguments before the lord chief justice Wright, and 
the other judges, the court granted the writ, and the same day 
it was served upon the lieutenant of the Tower.
On the re- 
turn of the writ, many learned arguments were used by the 
council on both sides concerning the power of the court, the 
privilege of the bishops, the king's official proclamation, and 
the nature of a libel.
When the pleadings were over, tlve 
court proceeded to give judgment, which to their indelible in- 
famy, was r " That to petition the king to redress grievances 
was finding fault with his government, and finding fault -with 
the government was, in its own nature, a libel." The charac- 
ter under her maiden name of Fermer.
This lady 
died in the year 1738.
Some monuments oi the 
Perkins family appear in the church, called Ufton 
Nervets.
The ruins of the other church, supposed 
to have been called Ufton-Grey-shall, are to be seen 
near the river Kennet, within a spacious cemetery.
Wallingford.] — Wallingford, a very ancient bo- 
rough and market town, situated on the banks of 
the Thames, lies in the hundred of Moreton, 13 
miles north-north-west from Reading, and 4o{ 
miles west by north from London.
Its markets are 
holden on Tuesdays and Fridays ; and its fairs on 
the Tuesday before Easter, the 24th of June, the 
29th of September, and the 17th of December.
Wallingford is governed by a corporation, which, 
agreeably to a charter of James 1.
consists of ;t 
mayor, high steward, recorder, town clerk, five al- 
dermen, and eighteen burgesses, or assistants, wha 
by virtue of a lease from the crown, possess the 
rents and profits of the manor, fairs, and markets.
The mayor, and live aldermen, are justices of tin- 
peace, within the borough.
This town has sent 
members to Parliament from the earliest period of 
Parliamentary history.
They are chosen by the 
corporation and inhabitants paying scot and lot, the 
number of voters amount to about 160.
The mayor 
is the returning officer.
Wallingford contains the fol- 
lowing parishes : — All Hallows, a sinecure ; St. Leo- 
nard, a discharged rectory with the chapel of Sotwell ; 
St. Mary the More, a discharged rectory ; St. Peter in 
the west, a discharged rectory ; and Wallingford 
Castle, extra-parochial.
At present there are otdy 
three churches ; St. Mary's, St. Leonard's, and St.
Peter's.
During the siege of the town in 1646, the 
two latter were laid in ruins.
St. Leonard's was re- 
paired and opened for divine service, about the 
year 1704.
St. Peter's was rebuilt about fifty 
years ago, by the exertions of Sir William Black- 
stone, who erected the spire, which is of a very 
singular form, at his own expence.
• This town is unquestionably of great antiquity ; 
but its origin has never been satisfactorily proved.
ter of these unrighteous judges is best known from what was 
said by Lord Camden, when he gave judgment upon the im- 
prisonment of Mr. Wilkes.
" Wright and Holloway (says his 
lordship) it is feared were put into office to be ready to serve 
the court ; Alliboyne was a profest papist ; and Powel, the only 
honest man among them, did not say any thing." Judgment 
having been given, the attorney-general filed an information 
against the bishops, upon which they were tried and honoura- 
bly acquitted.
On the accession of King William, Bishop Lloyd, was ap- 
pointed almoner ; and, in 1692, he was translated to the see of 
Litchfield and Coventry.
In 1699, he succeeded his learned 
friend Dr. Stillingfieet in the see of Worcester, which he en- 
joyed till 1717, when he died at Hartleiuiry-Castle, in the nine- 
ty-first year of his age.
Burnet, who was well acquainted with 
him, says, that he spent above twenty years in studying the 
Revelations.
Besides what we have already mentioned, he 
wrote a Chronological Account of the Life of Pythagoras a 
Dissertation on Daniel's Seventy Weeks, a number of Ser- 
mons, and several other works, 
Some 
BERKSHIRE.
97 
Some hare referred it to the Britons, contending 
that it is the Calleva Attrebaium of Antoninus ; 
whilst others have placed the chief city of the At- 
trebatii at Farnham, in Surrey ; at Silchester, in 
Hampshire ; and at Henley, in Oxfordshire.
The 
validity of the arguments which ascribe this town 
to a British origin, may perhaps be contested ; but 
there seems sufficient evidence to warrant the belief 
of its having been a Roman settlement.
Mr. Gough, 
in his additions to Camden, observes, " that the 
outer work of the castle is evidently Roman ; and 
in a fragment of the wall at the entrance, the stones 
are laid herring-bone fashion, just as in the walls at 
Silchester ;" and adds, that a manuscript note, in 
his possession, in the hand-writing of Mr. Gale, as- 
serts, that, " Many coins of Gordian, Posthumus, 
Victorinus, and the Tetrici, were dug up in the 
town of Wallingford, in August, 1726 ; and after- 
wards some of Vespasian and Gallienus." Camden 
himself supposes that the name Calleva was a mis- 
take of the transcriber's for Gallena, derived from 
the British Gual-Hcn, the old fortification ; which 
name, in his opinion, it still retains with the addition 
of ford ; its present name being contracted from the 
Saxon Gwlleng-a-ford.
The shallowness of the 
stream in the neighbourhood of the town renders 
this etymology plausible.
Wallingford was destroyed in the year 1006, but 
appears to have been soon afterwards rebuilt, and 
in 1013 was visited by Swain king of Denmark.
In the reign of Edward the Confessor it was a royal 
borough, in which there were 276 houses, paying 
gable tax of 11/.
to the crown.
At the time of the 
Norman invasion, the castle was possessed by Wi- 
god, a powerful Saxon, and it appears to have been 
repaired and considerably enlarged by William the 
Conqueror, eight houses having been, according to 
the doomsday-book, demolished to make roonf for 
alterations.
William is said to have encamped at 
Wallingford, after the defeat of Harold, having 
being invited by Wigod, and there he received the 
submission of Archbishop Stigand and the principal 
English barons, before he proceeded to London.
The population ©f Wallingford continued to in- 
crease, until the year 1348, when the town was vi- 
sited by the plague, which swept away great num- 
bers of the inhabitants.
In the twelfth century, in 
the wars between Stephen and the Empress Maud, 
the castle was fortified in behalf of the latter by 
Brian Fitz Count, who then possessed it.
The 
empress found a secure retreat here after her escape 
from Oxford, and Stephen several times besieged 
the castle without success.
Proposals were b at 
length made for an accommodation between the ad- 
verse parties, and a peace Avas concluded before the 
walls of Wallingford.
Henry II.
upon his accession to the throne in 
1154, took possession of the honor and castle of 
Wallingford, where, on the following Easter, he held 
a great council of the bishops and barons, in order 
to receive their oaths of allegiance to him and his 
VOL.
I. NO.
7. 
heirs.
Wallingford Castle, in the reign of King 
John, was several times the place of meeting be-« 
tween bun and the discontented barons.
Camden, speaking of Wallingford Castle, says : — 
" Its size and magnificence used to strike me with 
amazement, when I came thither a lad from Oxford : 
it being a retreat for the students of the church, it 
is environed with a double wall and a double- ditch, 
and in the middle, on a high artificial mount, stands 
the citadel ; in the ascent to which, by steps, I have 
seen a well of immense depth." The buildings of 
the keep, comprising two dungeons or prisons, 
were standing in the year 1555.
In the early part 
of the civil war between Charles I.
ami his Parlia- 
ment, Wallingford castle was repaired and gar- 
risoned for the king.
It was not surrendered till 
nearly the close of the war ; but, about four years 
afterwards, in 1653, it was so completely demolish- 
ed, and the materials carried away, that there is 
now scarcely a vestige of the buildings to be seen.
The Duke of Schomberg, who was eminent for his 
knowledge of military, tactics, after having viewed 
the keep with great attention, declared that he could 
so fortify it in a little time that it would be impossi- 
ble for an enemy to approach it ; and that he scarce- 
ly knew any place in the kingdom that might be.
made so secure as this in the time of danger or dis- 
tress : the keep is now overgrown with trees.
Some 
idea of the ancient state of the town and castle, 
may be formed from the description which is given 
in Leland's Itinerary : — 
" The town of Wallingford," says Leland, " hath 
been a very notable thing and well waulled.
The 
ditch of the town and the crest wereon the waulles 
stood be yet manifestly perceived and begin from 
the castelle, going in compace a good mile and 
more, and so cometh to Wallingford bridge, a large 
thing of stone over the Tamise.
There remain yet 
the names of these streets among others : Tamise- 
Street, Fish- Street, Bread-Street, Wood- Street, 
Goldsmith's-row.
By the patents and donations of 
Edmund Earl of Cornwall, and lord of the honor 
of Wallingford, there were 14 parish churches in 
Wallingford, and there be men alive that can shew 
the places and cemetries wherein they all stood.
At 
this time there be but three pore parish churches in 
the town.
There was a priory of black monks, a 
cell to St. Alban, suppressed by Cardinal Wolsey, 
standing hard within the west gate of Wallingford.
The town and the castle were sore defaced by the 
Danes wars.
Yet they metely refiourished in the 
time of Richard king of the Romans and Earl of 
Cornwal, brother to King Henry the Third.
This 
Richard did much cost on the castle.
It joins to 
the north gate of the town, and has three dykes, 
large and deep, and well-watered.
About each of 
the two first dykes, as upon the crest of the ground, 
cast out of them runnith an embattled wall, now 
sore in ruin, and for the most part defaced.
All 
the goodly buildings with the towers and dungeon 
be within the third dyke, 
2 » Ther* 
98 
BERKSHIRE.
" There is also a collegiate chapel among the build- 
ings within the third dyke.
Edmund Earl of Corn- 
wall, son to Richard king of the Romans, was the 
Founder and endower of this college, which one told 
me was augmented by Edward the black prince.
There is a dean, four priests, six clerks, and four 
choristers ; the late dean, before Dr. London that 
now is, built a fair stone steeple at the west end of 
the chapel." 
Of the ancient college here mentioned, the clerk's 
lodging still remains, and is occupied as a dwelling 
house ; the priest's lodging is inhabited by cottagers.
Near the south gate, without the town, there was an 
hospital for poor men and women as early as the 
beginning of the reign of Edward I.
and upon its 
suppression in 1535, its revenues were valued at 61.
per annum.
At present there are six almshouses 
for six poor women, who are allowed three shillings 
and two-pence each per week.
A convent ef Bene- 
dictine Monks, founded in the reign of William the 
Conqueror, by the abbot of St. Albans, anciently 
stood just within the west gate of the town.
The 
Jjridge, mentioned by Leland, is a substantial stone 
structure, of great antiquity, consisting of 19 arches.
It was suppressed by Cardinal Wolsey, 1535, who 
procured a grant of it for his New College at Ox- 
ford, but on his attainder it reverted to the crown.
The principal occasion of the decay of Walling- 
ford was, the turning off the Gloucester road, by 
the bridges erected at Abingdon and Dorchester, 
by which a great part of its trade was removed to 
those places and their neighbourhood.
By the zeal- 
ous exertions of Sir William Blackstone, however, 
one of the members for Wallingford, two new turn- 
pike roads were formed some years ago ; one open- 
ing a communication between Oxford and Reading, 
and the other leading to Wantage, through the vale 
of White Horse.
These roads have contributed 
much to the restoration of the business of the town, 
and its consequent improvement.
It at present con- 
sists of two principal streets paved and lighted ; 
and the population, and number of houses, are in- 
creasing.
Agriculture, and malt- making, are the 
principal employments of the inhabitants.
The 
malt-making is in a very flourishing state ; there 
being a yearly demand for upwards of 150,000 
bushels.
There is a free-school at Wallingford, 
which was founded by Walter Bigg, an alderman of 
London in 1659, and endowed by him with 101.
per 
annum.
The market house is a convenient, well-built 
structure, the upper part of which is the Town- 
Hall, where the sessions for the borough are holden, 
and, according to tradition, the assizes for the coun- 
ty have also been occasionally holden here.
In an- 
cient times, the county gaol was at Wallingford, 
whence it was removed to Windsor, and afterwards 
to Reading, as a more convenient place.
St.
Mary's church, the principal one in the town, stands 
in the market place.
Tiie poor of this parish are 
provided with food and clothing by a contractor, 
who receives 3001.
a year for that purpose ; the" pa- 
rish finding medicines, «kc.
The poor of St. Leo- 
nard's are relieved at their own habitations.
Wal- 
lingford contains four meeting houses, appropriated 
to Methodists, Baptists, and Quakers.
Criminals 
were formerly invested with a very extraordinary 
privilege in this borough ; their lives for a first of- 
fence being in their own power, provided they com- 
plied with certain barbarous conditions.
Wallingford manor Avas granted by Richard I.
to his brother John, whose second son, Richard, 
King of the Romans, Earl of Cornwall, repaired 
the castle, and celebrated his wedding in it with 
considerable splendor ; Henry the Third, his Queen, 
and many of the nobility, being present.
On the 
death of Richard, it devolved to his son Edmund, 
together with the advowsons of all the churches.
When he died, his estates became the property of 
King Edward, whom he had chosen lor his heir.
Edward the Second bestowed it, together with the 
Duchy of Cornwall, to which it had been annexed, 
on Piers Gaveston, and afterwards on Hugh de 
Spencer the elder, his unfortunate favorites, who 
were both beheaded.
Edward next presented it to 
his Queen Isabella, from whom it descended to Ed- 
ward the Third, who gave it, with other manors, 
for the support of the Dukedom of Cornwall, a title 
first conferred on his son Edward the Black Prince 
in the year 1355.
It remained vested in the royal 
family till the reign of Henry the Eighth, when 
that Monarch granted it to Wolsey for the use of 
the magnificent College of Christ church, Oxford, 
which the Cardinal had founded.
On Wolsey's dis- 
grace, the King is supposed to have resumed the 
grant.
In the year 1540, an act of Parliament was 
passed, to separate the honor of Wallingford from 
the Duchy of Cornwall, and to annex it to the ma- 
nor of Ewelme, in Oxfordshire, which, from that 
time, was to be called the honor of Ewelme.
The 
site of the castle is still annexed to this honor.
William Hucks, Esq. is the present lessee.
Richard de Wallingford, abbot of St. Alban's, 
was a native of this place.
He was a famous ma- 
thematician, and the inventor of a clock, which 
shewed not only the course of the sun, moon, and 
principal stars, but also the ebbing and flowing of 
the sea.
This machine, the most ingenious of the 
kind then in England, he presented to the abbey 
church.
John de Wallingford, a monk belonging 
to the same abbey, who wrote a chronicle, published 
by Dr. Gale, is also supposed to have been a native 
of this town.
In the neighbourhood of Walling- 
ford, the farms are large, being from 2001.
to 3001.
a year.
The chief articles of cultivation are tur- 
nips, clover, barley, wheat, and oats.
The crops 
are generally abundant.
Waltham (Laurence).] — Laurence Waltham is 
situated in the hundred of Wargrave, 5{ miles south 
west from Maidenhead.
It has an annual fair on 
the 11th of August.
This village was part of the 
possessions of Queen Emma, and was given by her 
to 
BERKSHIRE.
'99 
to the bishop of Winchester.
It is reported to have 
anciently been a place of some consequence, and 
the buildings wear the appearance of having flour- 
ished in better times : the ruins of many others are 
also visible.
The entrance to the village is through 
an ancient arched gate-way, composed of large oak 
timbers.
Several tombs of the Neville family are in Lau- 
rence Waltham church.
In a neighbouring field, 
called Weycock Highrood, anciently stood a Roman 
fortress, the remains of which were visible in the 
time of Camden.
Its site, which commands a de- 
lightful view over a very large extent of country, is 
still called Castle-acre.
On this spot many Roman 
coins have been found, chiefly of the Lower em- 
pire ; and Mr. Hearne dug up a silver one of Amyn- 
tas, the grandfather of Alexander the Great.
Waltham (White).] — This village, adjoining 
the above, is situated in the hundred of Beynhurst, 
somewhat nearer to Maidenhead.
The manor is the 
property of Arthur Vansittart, Esq. M.
P. to whom 
also the manor of Smervins, in this parish belongs.
The family mansion of the latter was for some time 
the residence of the learned Henry Dodwell ; and, 
according to tradition, it was the country house of 
Prince Arthur, son of Henry VII.
The estate of 
Windsors, so denominated from having been long- 
in the Windsor family, together with a mansion cal- 
led Hill House, was purchased by Mr. Gardiner, in 
the early part of the 17th century.
The house was 
let to Sir Paul Neile, son of the Archbishop of 
York, in 1653.
William Neile, son of Sir Paul, 
fitted up an observatory here, for carrying on his 
astronomical studies.
Mr. Neile, according to 
Hearne, Avas a man of singular talents, and parti- 
cularly skilled in mathematics and philosophy.
He 
died in 1670, gentleman of the Privy Chamber to 
Charles II.
and was buried at Waltham, where 
there is a monument to his memory.
Hill House, 
now called Waltham Place, is at present the pro- 
perty and seat of George Grant, Esq.
An entry in the parish register of \Y\altham, bear- 
ing the date of 1652, records, that " Mr. John 
Blower was vicar of this parish of White Waltham 
the space of 67 years ; namely from that of our 
Lord 1577, to the year of our Lord 1644, as ap- 
peareth from the time of his induction to the time 
of his death." He removed hither, it is said, from 
* Thomas Hearne, the son of Mr. George Hearne, the pa- 
rish clerk, was born in the month of July, 1678, as appears by 
the register.
Hearne's family was originally of Penn, in Buck- 
inghamshire, where he received the rudiments of his education ; 
but afterwards, by the liberality of Francis Cherry, Esq. an in- 
habitant of Shottesbrooke, he was sent to Edmund Hall, Ox- 
ford.
There, his attachment to the study of English antiquities 
became so fixed and permanent, that he refused some consider- 
able preferments in the church, rather than quit the spot where 
he had so many opportunities of gratifying his favourite passion.
It was in 1695, that he was entered of Edmund Hall; in 1703, he 
took his degree of M.
A. ; and, in 1714, he was appointed ar- 
chetopographus of the University.
Mr. Hearne published several ancient MSS.
and editions of 
another benefice, and when he died, he was nearly 
100 years of age.
Hearne relates that, when preach- 
ing before Queen Elizabeth, Mr. Blower addressed 
her by the appellation of " my royal Queen ;" which, 
a little while afterwards, he changed for " my no- 
ble Queen." " What !" said her Majesty, " am I 
ten groats worse than I was !" Mr. Blower over- 
heard the pun, and was so much disconcerted, that 
he resolved never to preach another sermon ; and, 
in future, he always substituted one of the ho- 
milies.
The manor of Fienes, or Feens, in this parish, is 
the property of Dr. Loveday.
In a field near the 
manor house, and at Berry Grove, near the church, 
a number of Roman coins and tiles have been found; 
discoveries which induced Mr. Hearne to conjec- 
ture, that the Roman soldiers rested some where in 
this vicinity, when passing between the stations 
Calleva and Pontes.
Hearne, the celebrated anti- 
quary, whom we have just had repeated occasion 
to notice, was a native of Littleford Green, in this 
parish.* 
Wantage.] — Wantage, anciently Wanating, is a 
market town, situated in the hundred of W T antage, 
26 miles north-west by west from Reading, and 59| 
miles west by noth from London.
It stands near a- 
brook, which runs into the river Ock, on the skirts 
of the vale of White Horse.
It was first made a 
market town about 150 years after the Conquest, 
through the interest of Fulke Fitz-Warine, on whom 
it was bestowed by Roger Bigod, Earl Marshal of 
England, as a reward for military services.
The 
market is on Saturday.
Wantage has four annual 
fairs : on the first Saturday in March, the first Sa- 
turday in May, the 18th of July, and the 17th of 
October.
The town is governed by a chief consta- 
ble.
The petty sessions for Wantage division arc 
holden here.
It was conjectured, by Dr. Salmon, that this town 
is the Glevum, or Clevum, of Antoninus ; but in this 
conjecture, we believe, he stands alone ; that name 
being generally ascribed to Gloucester.
The vallum 
of the supposed Roman station at Wantage, was 
plainly to be seen when Mr. Wise visited it about 
the year 1738, " inclosing a space on the south side 
of the brook, called, the High-Garden." A hollow 
way into the town from Faringdon, Grove Street, a 
morass, and a river, form the sides of a parallelo- 
old books; as, the Life of Alfred, by Spelman; Leland's Iti- 
nerary, 9 vols.
8vo.
; a Collection of Curious Discourses, 
written by eminent Antiquaries, &c.
He died at Oxford, in 
the year 1735.
It appears, from some letters written by his fa- 
ther, and preserved in the picture gallery at Oxford, that 
Hearne's fondness for ancient lore, prevented him from attend- 
ing to the distresses of his parent when in the vale of years.
The letters are homely, but forcibly depict the sorrow attendant 
on old age and indigence.
In one of them, dated May 23th, 
1711, the old man says, " This is the grand climacterical year 
of my life, viz.
63, and I do not expect to out-live it." Rut 
this was only the conclusion of despondency, for he lived till 
the IStb. of October, 1723, though in extreme poverty, and in 
constant expectation of his approaching end.
100 
BERKSHIRE.
gram, containing about six acres of ground.
On 
this spot, observes Mr. Wise, " stood the Saxon pa- 
lace where Alfred Avas born."* North of the brook 
is Limborough, an inclosure where Roman coins 
have been found : and between Limborough and the 
river, the remains of a building, called King Alfred's 
•Cellar, were discovered.
The building, which was 
paved with brick, appeared to have been a bath.
Near Limborough is Court Close.
Pallet's More, 
another small piece of ground, Mr. Wise conjectures 
-to have been originally Palace Moor.
Two Roman 
roads appear to have gone either through or very 
* The life of this truly great and illustrious monarch was 
first written by Asserius Menevinsis ; and first published by 
.Archbishop Parker, in the old Saxon character, at the end of 
his edition of Hassinghani's History, printed in 1674, fol.
Al- 
fred, or Aelfred, the Great, the youngest son of Elhehvolf, 
King of the West Saxons, was born at Wantage, in Berkshire, 
in 849.
At the age of five years he was sent to Rome, and the 
Pope anointed him with the royal unction.
Ethelwolf died in 
858, leaving his dominions to Ethelbald and Ethelbert, and his 
personal estate to his younger sons, Ethelred and Alfred.
Ethelbald did not long survive his father, and was succeeded by 
Ethelbert; but he dying in 866, left the throne to Ethelred, 
who made Alfred his prime minister and general of his armies.
Ethelred dying in 871, Alfred found himself, at tiie age of 22, 
in possession of a distracted kingdom.
After several actions 
with the Danes, his followers were so dispirited, that he found 
himself unable to make head against the invaders, wherefore 
laying aside the ensigns of royalty, he concealed himself in the 
cottage of one of his herdsmen.
One day as he sat by the fire 
trimming his bow and arrows, his hostess left in his care some 
cakes, which were placed on the hearth to be baked.
Alfred, 
however, was so intent upon his employment as to suffer the 
cakes to be burned ; and when the woman returned she scolded 
him heartily, saying, " he could eat the cakes fast enough, 
though he would not take the trouble of looking after them." 
He afterwards retired to the isle of Athelney, in Somersetshire, 
with a few followers, and there received information that 
Odun, Earl of Devon, had obtained a great victory over the 
Danes, in Devonshire, and had taken their magical standard.
On this, Alfred is said to have disguised himself as a harper 
and entered the Danish camp, where his skill was so much ad- 
mired that he remained a considerable time, and was admitted 
to play before the chiefs.
Having gained a knowledge of the 
state of the enemy, he directed his nobles to collect their vas- 
sals, and to meet him at Selwoud, in Wiltshire, which was done 
so secretly that the Danes were surprised at Eddington, and 
completely defeated.
Alfred behaved with great liberality on 
this occasion, giving up the kingdom of the East Angles to 
those of the Danes who embraced the Christian religion.
Hav- 
ing some respite, he put his kingdom into a state of defence, 
and increased his navy ; and having recovered London from 
the Danes he soon brought it into a flourishing state.
After a 
rest of some years, an immense number of Danish forces landed 
in Kent ; on which those who were settled in Northumberland 
broke their treaty, and fitting out two fleets sailed round the 
coast, and committed great ravages : they were, however, soon 
defeated by Alfred, who caused several of the pirates to be ex- 
ecuted at Winchester as an example.
Thus he secured the 
peace of his dominions, and struck terror into his enemies alter 
fifty-six battles by land and sea, in all of which lie was person- 
ally engaged.
Hut what makes him most an object of admira- 
tion, is his character as a reformer of laws and mariners and the 
promoter of learning.
He composed a body of statutes, insti- 
tuted the trial by jury, and divided the kingdom into shires and 
tithings.
He was so exact in his government, that robbery was 
unheard of, and valuable goods might be left on the high road 
without danger of being meddled with.
He also formed a Par- 
liament, which met twice a year.
The state of learning in his 
near Wantage, in a parallel direction, across the 
county from Wiltshire, to the Thames.
Wantage was unquestionably a place of conse- 
quence in Saxon times ; as it was a royal seat, and 
appears, together with the surrounding country, to 
have been the patrimony of the West-Saxon Kings.
The manor was bequeathed by Alfred to his wife 
Ealswith, daughter of Ethelred, King of Mercia.
When the Norman survey was taken it was part of 
the royal demesne.
By an enumeration of the inhabitants of Wantage, 
which was made by order of Cardinal Pole, it ap- 
time was so low in England, that from the Thames to the H um- 
ber hardly a man could be found who understood Latin.
To 
remedy this evil, he invited learned men from all parts, and en- 
dowed schools throughout his kingdom ; and if he was not the 
founder of the university of Oxford, certain it is he raised it 
to a reputation which it never enjoyed before: and among other 
acts of munificence to that eminent seat of learning, he founded 
University college.
He was himself a learned prince ; and, had 
he not been illustrious as a king, he would have been famous 
as an author.
His works are : — 1 .
Brcviarum quoddam, collcc- 
tum e Legibus Trogunorum, lib.
I. A Breviary collected out 
_of the laws ot the Trojans, Greeks, Britons, Saxons, and Danes ; 
in one book.
Leland saw this book in the Saxon tongue, at 
Christ Church in Hampshire.
2. Fisi Saxonum Leges, lib.
I. 
The laws of the West baxons, in one book.
Pitts tells us, that 
it is in Bennet College Library, at Cambridge.
3. Instituta 
quaedam, lib.
I. Certain Institutes, in one book.
This is 
mentioned by Pitts, and seemed to be the second capitulation 
with Guthrum.
4. Contra Judiccs iniquos, lib.
I. An Invec- 
tive against Unjust Judges, in one book.
5. Acta Magistra- 
te u?n suorum, lib.
I. Acts of his Magistrates, in one book.
This is supposed to be the book of judgments mentioned by 
Home ; and was, in all probability a kind of reports, intended 
for the use of succeeding ages.
6. Regum Fortunes varies, lib.
I. The Various Fortunes of Kings, in one book.
7 Dicta 
Sapientium, lib.
I. The Sayings of Wise Men, in one book.
8. Parabola?
et Sales, lib.
I. Parables and pleasant Sayings, in 
one book.
9. Collectiones Chromcorum, Collections of Chro- 
nicles.
10.
Epistolce ad Wulfsigium Episcopum, Yib.I. Epis- 
tles to Bishop Wulfsig, in one book.
11.
Manualc Medita- 
tinnum.
A Manuel of Meditations.
— Besides these original 
works, he translated many authors from the Latin, &c.
into the 
Saxon language, viz.
1. Bede's History of England.
2. Pau- 
linus Orosinus's History of the Pagans.
3. St. Gregory's Pas- 
torals, &c.
The first of these, with his prefaces to the others, 
together with his laws, were printed at Cambridge, 1644.
PI is 
laws are likewise inserted in Spelman's Councils.
4. Bceiius 
de Consolatione, lib.
V. Boetius's Consolations of Philosophy, 
in five books.
Dr. Plot tells us King Alfred translated it at 
Woodstock, as he found in a MS.
in Cotton Library.
5. 
JEsopi Fabulce, iEsop's Fables: which he is said to have trans- 
lated from the Greek both in Latin and Saxon.
6. Fsalterium 
Davidicnm, lib.
I. David's Psalter, in one book.
This was 
the last work the King attempted, death surprising him before 
he had finished it; it was however completed by another hand, 
and published at London in 1640, in quarto, by Sir John Sp'el- 
man.
Several others are mentioned by Malmsbury ; and the 
old History of Ely asserts, that he translated the Old and New 
Testaments.
To Alfred, also, England is indebted for the foundation of 
her naval establishment, and he was I he first who sent out ships 
to make the discovery of a north-east passage.
In private life 
he was benevolent, pious, cheerful, and affable ; and his person 
was amiable, dignified, and engaging.
He died in 901, aged 
fifty-three.
By his Queen Elswitha, Alfred had two sons and 
three daughters.
He was succeeded by Edward his second 
son, commonly called Edward the Elder.
pears 
BERKSHIRE.
101 
pears that they did not then exceed 1000.
Mr.
Pearse's Agricultural Survey of this County, taken 
in 1794, estimates them at 2100.
The entire num- 
ber, agreeably to the parliamentary returns of 1811, 
was 3036 ; of which 2386 were in the parish of Wan- 
tage, including the hamlet of West Lockinge, 224 
in Charlton, and 426 in the hamlet of Grove.
The inhabitants are chiefly employed in the ma- 
nufacture of a coarse cloth, called foul-weather 
cloth, and sacking.
On the «uthority of a catalogue of religious 
houses, attributed to Gcrvase, of Canterbury, who 
lived in the time of King John, Speed makes men- 
tion of a priory of black nuns, at a place called the 
Ham, in Berkshire.
No mention of this priory is to 
be found upon record ; but it is supposed to be Ham 
House, now the property of Mrs. Walcot, daughter 
of the late John Price, Esq.
Leland mentions Wantage, as being remarkable 
for having two churches in one church-yard.
One 
of these churches is an ancient building, now used 
as a sehoel ; the north door has a circular arch, en- 
riched with spiral mouldings and grotesque heads.
The present parish church is a spacious and hand- 
some Gothic structure, built in form of a cross.
It 
contains several ancient monuments of the family of 
Fitzwarren, who are said to have erected the church.
Captain Symonds, who visited this church in the 
year 1644, mentions the tomb of Richard Davy, the 
public executioner, who died in 1493, with a brass 
plate, containing the effigies of himself and his wife, 
and a hatchet, emblematic of his office.
The parish 
register contains the following remarkable entry : — 
" September 1598 — a strange miracle !
the 19 daye 
was buried two men children, growing together from 
the breast to the navels, having all their right mem- 
bers, each of them being the children of John Russel 
and Elizabeth his wife." 
Agreeably to an act which was passed in the year 
1598 the town lands, given in the reigns of Henry 
VI.
and Henry VII.
for charitable uses, were vested 
in twelve of the better sort of inhabitants, who are to 
appropriate the revenues to the relief of the poor, the 
repairs of the highways, and the support of a 
grammar-school.
There is also an English school 
supported out of the profits of these lands.
Mr.
Robert Styles, in the year 1600, founded and endow- 
ed an alms-house, for 12 poor persons, who receive 
3s.
6d.
a week each.
The old market-cross at Wantage bears the fol- 
lowing inscription : — 
* The Bishop was born in the year 1692, of dissenting pa- 
rents; and he was educated in a seminary of similar principles 
in Gloucestershire, where the eminent Dr. Watts became his 
fellow pupil.
Resolving to conform to the established church, 
he removed, in 1714, to Oriel College, Oxford, where he con- 
tracted an intimate friendship with Mr. Edward Talbot, son of 
the Bishop of Durham, by whose interest he was appointed rec- 
tor to the rich benefices of Houghton and Stanhope in that see.
He was afterwards made chaplain to Lord Chancellor Talbot, 
VOL.
1. NO.
8. 
" Pray for the good Earl of Bath, and for good 
master William Bamako, the builder hereof, 1580, and 
for William Lord Fitzwanen." 
The learned Joseph Butier, Bishop of Durham, 
was a native of Wantage ; and his nephew is now, 
or was recently, a governor of the town lands, and 
one of the oldest inhabitants of the parish.* 
Warfield.]— Warfield is situated in the hundred 
of Wargrave, four miles and three quarters east- 
north-east from Wokingham.
Three annual fairs 
are holden at New Bracknel, a hamlet in this parish, 
on the 25th of April, 22d of August, and 1st of Oc- 
tober.
Lord Braybrooke, Lord of the Manor, holds seve- 
ral estates in this parish.
Wargrave Grove, the 
seat of Sir John Coxe Hippesley, Bart, was pur- 
chased by him of the late Admiral Sir George Bow- 
yer.
In the parish church are several monuments ol 
the Stavertons, who anciently possessed estates in 
this parish.
Wargrave.] — Wargrave is a small village, de- 
lightfully situated on the banks of the Thames, in 
the hundred to which it gives name.
It lies six miles 
and a half north-east by east from Reading.
War- 
grave has a ferry over the Thames, but it is much 
neglected.
This was formerly a market-town, and 
part of the possessions of Queen Emma, who passed 
the fiery ordeal of the Saxons; for female chastity.
Previously to the Conquest, it was given by Queen 
Emma to the Bishop of Winchester.
It continued 
in that see till the reign of Edward the Sixth, when 
Doctor Poynett presented it to the King, who gave 
it to Henry Neville, the political writer.
Queen 
Mary resumed the grant, and again vested it in the 
see of Winchester ; but Elizabeth restored it to Ne- 
ville, from whom it descended to his posterity, the 
Nevilles of Billingsbear.
It is now the property of 
Lord Braybrooke.
Some memorials of the families of Stevens and 
Aldworth, paternal ancestors of Lord Braybrooke, 
are in Wargrave church.
There is also a monu- 
ment to the memory of Thomas Day, Esq. author of 
" Sandford and Merton," and other publications, 
who lost his life by a fall from his horse, as he was 
riding from his house in Surrey, to his mother's at 
Bear's Hill, in this parish.
The following inscrip- 
tion is on the tomb :— 
" In memory of Thomas Day, Esq. who died Sep- 
tember 28, 1789, aged 41 years; after having promot- 
ed, by the energy of his writings, and encouraged by 
the uniformity of his example, the unremitting exer- 
cise of every public and private virtue.
and clerk of the closet to Queen Caroline ; and having beeu 
honoured with several intermediate preferments, was at length 
promoted to the see of Durham ; but enjoyed his dignity only 
two years.
He died at Bath in 1752, whence his remains were 
removed to Bristol, and interred in the abbey church.
His 
writings display an enlarged and comprehensive mind ; and one 
of his publications, the " Analogy ot Religion," is regarded as 
a performance of great merit.
2 c 
" Beyond 
102 
BERKSHIRE.
" Beyond the reach of time or fortune's power 
Remain, cold stone, remain, and mark the hour 
When all the noblest gifts that Heav'n e'er gave 
Were center'd in a dark untimely grave : 
Oh !
taught on reason's boldest wings to rise, 
And catch each glimm'ring of the opening skies; 
Oil, gentle bosom !
Oh, unsullied mind !
Oh, friend to truth, to virtue, to mankind !
Thy dear remains we trust to this sad shrine, 
Secure to feel no second loss like thine." 
These lines had been written by Mr. Day himself, 
on some other occasion ; but his widow, thinking 
them peculiarly applicable to his character, caused 
them to be placed upon his tomb.* 
In the year 1692, Mr. Aldworth charged the im- 
propriate rectory of tins parish with the payment of 
51.
per annum, towards the education of children of 
the poor inhabitants.
In 1799, Mr. Robert Pigott 
gave the interest of 6,7001.
three per cent, bank an- 
nuities for the education and clothing of 20 boys and 
20 girls of Wargrave parish ; and directed by his 
will that a part of the annual income should be paid 
in weekly allowances to the parents, to encourage 
them to send their children regularly to school, and 
* The following is the substance of the information which 
we have been able to collect, respecting Mr. Day, a singularly 
eccentric character: — He was born to a competent fortune 
which he expended in a manner peculiar to himself.
Master of 
his own actions, at the age of twenty-one he displayed a rigid 
and unbending morality, at a period of life when many other 
youths commence the career of vice and profligacy.
He en- 
tertained the utmost contempt for the distinction of birth, wealth, 
or rank, and had no pity for the distresses that arose from ima- 
ginary causes, such as the vapours, &c.
but he felt the most ge- 
nuine compassion for those who were afflicted with the real dis- 
tresses of cold and hunger, and spared no exertion for their re- 
lief that could be afforded by his purse or constitution.
His 
mind was strong, his principles rigid, and he reasoned, acted, 
and dressed like a philosopher.
He was a friend to matrimony, 
and had resolved to marry as soon as he could find a woman 
with the virtues of a Cornelia, a Portia, or an Arria.
His 
search for this phenomenon, as may well be supposed, was fruit- 
less.
He attributed the timid disposition of women, and want 
of energy in the female character, to a vicious system of educa- 
tion ; and the errors and profligacy of the males to the same 
source.
Of the influence of education he had the highest idea, 
and was persuaded, that by the proper employment of this in- 
strument, a person might be brought to an extraordinary degree 
of perfection, both in mental and bodily powers.
Inorder to 
reduce his system to practice he fell upon a singular device.
Accompanied by a friend, he went to the foundling hospital at 
Shrewsbury, and from the children selected two girls, who were 
delivered to him upon conditions, that he should give a dowry 
of 5001.
to the one on the day of her marriage, and marry the 
other himself, or give her also a dowry on her marriage with 
some other person.
He solemnly engaged never to violate the 
honour of either of them, and for the performance of these con- 
ditions, his friend Mr. Bicknell, a barrister, became surety.
He immediately set off with his charge to France, where he 
continued several years in retirement, and adhered with incre- 
dible perseverance to his system of education, performing for 
the children the lowest office himself, lest they should in any 
way be corrupted by an intercourse with servants.
At length 
he returned with the young ladies, to whom he had given the 
names of Lucretia and Saberina, to England.
Saberina became 
the favourite, and Lucretia was sent to board at the house of an 
old lady of his acquaintance, whilst he continued his system of 
education with the former.
Rut he did not find it succeed ac- 
cording to his expectations, for Saberina could not be prevented 
continue them there a proper time : these allowances 
increase gradually during five years, if the chil- 
dren remain so long at school.
The late Earl of Barrymore had a beautiful seat 
at Wargrave, at which he fitted up a private theatre, 
in a most sumptuous manner, at the expence of up- 
wards of 60001.
where himself and many of the no- 
bility and gentry of the neighbourhood were accus- 
tomed to perform plays for their amusement.
By 
the expences attending these and other pursuits, his 
lordship dissipated a large fortune ; in consequence 
of which, all the scenery, &c.
of his theatre were 
brought to the hammer and sold.
The owner soon 
afterwards lost his life, by his fusee going off as he 
was stepping out of his phaeton.
Culham Court, the seat of the Honourable Frede- 
ric West, is pleasantly situated on the banks of the 
Thames, about three miles from the village of War- 
grave.
Rose Hill, a house which was built by Go- 
vernor Hart, in the Chinese style, stands within the 
plantations, at Culham.
It is the property of Mr.
West, but is in the occupation of Mrs. Rowe.
White Horse Vale.] — White Horse Vale, or the 
from roaring lustily when subjected to pain, and screaming 
when a pistol which she believed to be loaded with ball was 
fired at her petticoats, with as much good will as some ladies at 
the sight of a mouse or a spider.
He therefore gave up the at- 
tempt as hopeless, and his marriage scheme being of course set 
aside, Saberina was sent to a boarding school.
His belief in 
the infallible powers of education was now weakened, and he 
became less averse to modern refinements.
His philosophy 
could not however defend him from becoming the votary of the 
blind god.
He was smitten with the charms of a young lady, 
who told him frankly that she could not love a person who in 
his dress and manners paid so little regard to the customs of 
life.
The philosopher was so completely subdued, that for the 
sake of pleasing his mistress he went to Paris, where he conti- 
nued for the space of a year under the tuition of a dancing 
master, and such other persons as teach accomplishments of a 
similar nature, that go to the composition of a line gentleman.
But the force of habit was not to be subdued.
Mr. Day, after 
all his efforts, found that his attempts at acting the beau made 
him an object of laughter, and the mistress for whom he had 
undertaken the unpleasing task declared that Mr. Day, black- 
guard, was more tolerable than Mr. Day, fine gentleman.
He 
then returned to his old habits which were more congenial to a 
mind that had always disdained to be occupied with " trifles." 
Pie mixed, however, occasionally in society, and there acci- 
dent brought him acquainted with a woman who loved him suf- 
ficiently to enable her to leave without regret the frivolities of 
her past life, and form herself in a retirement after the model 
that existed in the imagination of her husband.
At length this 
singular man fell a victim to one of his peculiar notions.
He 
had imbibed a high idea of the docility of horses, and their at- 
tachment to those by whom they are well used, anil reared a 
colt, which he continued a long time to feed with his own hand.
The animal had learned to distinguish the sound of his voice 
and ran towards him when called.
At last he resolved to 
mount him, but the colt upon feeling the unusual weight threw 
him, and struck him after he had fallen, with his heel, a blow 
on the head, which almost immediately proved fatal.
Mrs.
Day lived two years alter this catastrophe, but it was supposed 
never during all that time saw the light of the sun; sleeping in a 
dark room by day, and in the night walking generally aoout 
her garden and indulging, in the solitary gloom, her anguish for 
the untimely fate of her husband.
Such was the character and 
end of this extraordinary mau.
Vale 
BERKSHIRE.
10$ 
Vale of White Horse, is a fine and fertile tract, ex- 
tending almost from Faringdon to Abingdon, though 
not in a direct line.
It takes its name from the most 
remarkable antiquity of the county : the figure of a 
White Horse, formed on the north-west side of a 
high and steep hill.
The horse, which is represent- 
ed in a galloping position, in the upper part of the 
hill, is 374 feet in length, and occupies nearly an 
acre of ground ; its shape is determined by trenched 
lines cut in the white chalk, between two and three 
feet deep, and about ten broad.
The head, neck, 
body, and tail, are composed of one line varying in 
width, and one line or trench, has also been made for 
each of the legs.
It is not a little remarkable, that Camden should 
have passed over this venerable monument of anti- 
quity, almost without notice ; and that Messrs.
Ly- 
sons, in their Magna Britannia, should have thought 
it deserving of only a few lines.
It appears, say the 
latter, " to be of great antiquity, and more likely to 
have been a work of the Britons than, as it has been 
usually supposed, a memorial for Alfred's victory 
over the Danes." Surely the determination of this 
point would have been interesting, if not important.
" The figure of a horse," they add, " a good deal 
resembling that above-mentioned, frequently occurs 
on the British coins." This is true ; but it is also 
known, that a white horse was the original standard 
of the Pagan Saxons.
T ia origin of this standard 
was probably of a religious nature ; as the inhabi- 
tants of the Island of Rugens, who spoke the dialect 
of Lower Saxony, and were the latest converted to 
Christianity, had a white horse attending upon their 
idol Zantivit, or Swant, which was under the ma- 
nagement of his priest, and from which they took 
presages.
Mr. Wise, in his " Observations on the White 
Horse," and " Letters on Berkshire," ascribes the 
formation of this figure to Alfred, who ordered it to 
be made as a trophy of the signal victory which he 
obtained over the Danes at Ashdown in this neigh- 
bourhood, in the year 871.
Pye, in his Faringdon Hill, and also in his epic 
poem of Alfred, follows this opinion.
In the former, 
we find the following descriptive lines : — 
" Carv'd rudely on the pendant soil, is seen 
The snow-while courser stretching o'er the green: 
The antique figure scan, with curious eye, 
The glorious monument of victory !
Then England rear'ci her long-dejected head, 
Then Alfred triumph'd, and Invasion bled." 
The reasoning of Mr. Wise, we think, is nearly 
conclusive.
He is of opinion, that this figure must 
have been the production of the West Saxons, not 
later than the age of Alfred, in whose reign the white 
horse was discarded by the Saxons for the Christian 
banner of the cross.
The particular event which 
occasions its formation, he conceives to have been 
the battle of Ashdown ; which, according to him, 
was fought in that par of the neighbourhood which 
includes the range of hills from Letcombe running 
into Wiltshire, and which is now crossed by a very 
ancient tract called the Ridge Way. The names of 
Ashes, Ashenden, Ashbury, and Ashdown, all found 
within this district, tend to corroborate the hypo- 
thesis.
" Here then," observes Mr. Wise, " I was per- 
suaded to look for the field of battle, and was agree- 
ably surprised to find my expectation answered in 
every respect.
Upon the highest hill of these parts 
north-eastward, is a large Roman entrenchment, 
called Uffington Castle, where, I suppose, the Danes 
lay encamped ; for as their marches were generally 
hasty, and more like that of plunderers than of a re- 
gular army, they had not time to throw up founda- 
tions ; nor indeed was there occasion, where they* 
found enough of them ready made to their hands*.
This place I chose for the Danes, because Asser 
says, they had got the upper ground About half a 
mile lower westward on the brow of the hill, nearer 
to Ashbury, overlooking a farm-house, is a camp 
fortified, seemingly after the Saxon manner, with 
two ditches, but not near so strong as the former, 
which has only one ; this is called Hardwell Camp, 
and here I suppose King Ethelred lay the night be- 
fore the engagement.
About a mile or more from 
hence, beneath the wall of Ashdown Park, is a slight 
roundish entrenchment, which seems to have been, 
thrown up in haste, and which, as I have been inform- 
ed, is called Ashbury Camp, and King Alfred's Cas- 
tle.
Such a signal victory as the Saxons obtained 
in this place, deserved not to pass without some 
token or memorial of it ; and such I take to be the 
White Horse, described on the hill almost under 
Uffington Castle.
Alfred in setting up this banner 
for a token did nothing but what was exactly agree- 
able to ancient practice ; and though he had not the 
opportunity of raising, like other conquerors, a stu- 
pendous monument of brass or marble, yet he has 
shewn an admirable contrivance in erecting one 
magnificent enough, though simple in its design,, 
that may hereafter vie with the pyramids for dura- 
tion, and perhaps exist when those shall be no 
more." 
The fact of the White Horse having ceased to be 
the Saxon standard in the reign of King Alfred, does 
not militate against the opinions of those who ascribe 
the formation of this monument to that Monarch ; 
for the battle of Ashdown was fought during the life 
of Ethelred, when Alfred acted as his brother's lieu- 
tenant ; consequently, before he had ascended the 
throne ; and the alteration of the banner, in all pro- 
bability, was not made till the year 883, twelve years 
afterwards ; when, according to Asser, amongst 
other relics which Pope Martin the Second sent from 
Rome, was " a large portion of that most holy and 
most venerable cross upon which our Lord Jesus 
Christ was crucified for the universal salvation of 
men." 
The fancy, for which some writers have contend- 
ed, that this figure was the work of shepherds, who 
8 having 
104 
BERKSHIRE.
having noticed the rude, yet natural, resemblance 
of a horse, when tending their flocks, reduced it to a 
more perfect shape, for amusement, rather than from 
any determinate signification, is too frivolous to me*- 
rit a moment's serious attention.
In the ardour of his imagination, Mr. Wise de- 
scribes the figure as being designed in so masterly 
a style, that even the painter's skill could not give a 
more perfect delineation of the animal which it re- 
presents ; but this praise is extremely exaggerated ; 
for, though the outline of the horse displays inge- 
nuity, the rude age in which it was formed, as well 
as its incorrectness of contour, contradict the asser- 
tion.
The horse, as we have before observed, is 
pourtrayed in a gallcpping position, on the upper 
part of a hill, where its steep situation, and the bar- 
renness of the soil, furnish complete security against 
the inroads of the plough, the stagnation of waters, 
or the grazing of cattle.
The chalk, in the hollow- 
ed spaces, being of a brighter colour than the turf 
which surrounds it, catches the rays of the sun, and 
renders the figure visible at ten or twelve miles dis- 
tance.
Its situation preserves it from all danger of 
being obliterated ; yet the peasants of the surround- 
ing country have a custom of assembling annually 
at Midsummer, for the purpose of clearing it from 
weeds, &c This is called scouring the horse, and 
is generally attended by much mirth and festivity.
In the British Museum, there is a manuscript jour- 
nal of Travels, over a great Part of England, by 
Thomas Baskerville, Esq. of SunningAvell, Berks, 
by which it appears, that the holders of the land in 
the neighbourhood of the White Horse, were for- 
merly, by the conditions of tenure, obliged to cleanse 
and repair it.
This obligation is now void ; for, 
though tradition has preserved the memory of its 
existence, the frequent changes which property has 
undergone, and the endeavours of the purchaser, on 
each transfer, to avoid restrictions, have contribut- 
ed to cancel every record which could make it bind- 
ing on themselves, or on their heirs.
Still, however, 
as we have just stated, the custom is in some mea- 
sure preserved.
Westward from White Horse Hill, about a mile 
near the Ridge Way, leading over the downs, stands 
a large tumulus, called the Wayland Smith, which 
is supposed to be a druidical remain.
The surface 
of this tumulus is covered with several of the large 
stones, called Sarsden stones, found in the neigh- 
bourhood, irregularly placed.
It is also surrounded 
with a circle of stones ; three of the largest have a 
fourth laid on them, in the manner of British crom- 
lechs.
A singular tradition, respecting this piece of 
antiquity, accounting for its present appellation, is, 
that this spot was formerly inhabited by an invisible 
blacksmith, who good-naturedly shod any horse that 
was left there, provided a piece of money was depo- 
sited at the same time to reward his labours.
Between White Horse Hill and a Roman road, 
supposed to be the Icening Way, is a large barrow, 
or tumulus, called Dragon Hill, which is conjectur- 
ed to have been the burial-place of Uter-Pendragon, 
or of some other British chief.
Many tumuli are scattered on the Berkshire 
Downs, particularly in the way from Uffington to 
Lambourne, where a group of them has obtained the 
appellation of the Seven Barrows.
More than 
twenty of them, however, may there be counted.
They are of various shapes ; one is long ; two or 
three others have a ring of earth, inclosing a small 
eminence in the centre ; and the remainder are of 
the usual form.
White Knights.] — White Knights, the seat of 
the Marquis of Blandford, about two miles south- 
east of Reading, is thus pleasingly described, in the 
Beauties of England and Wales : — " The house is a 
plain, white building, situated near the centre of the 
grounds, which are divided by an irregular sheet of 
water into pasture and arable lands.
The borders 
of the lakes are ornamented with the pendant 
branches of the drooping willow ; and the lawns, 
which slope gently to the waters, are agreeably dis- 
posed, and adorned with venerable groves of oak 
and poplar.
An avenue of fine elms leads to the 
gate at the entrance of the park from Reading ; and 
the path thence to the house is skirted on one side 
by tall elms, and by poplars on the other.
Various 
openings have been cut in the plantations which are 
interspersed through the grounds, that the eye may 
be enabled to range free and uninterrupted over the 
surrounding country, whose luxuriant and well cul- 
tivated meads allay the tumult of the wilder feelings, 
and divert the imagination to thoughts of Elysian 
vales, where peace and happiness are embosomed in 
the midst of plenty.
White Knights was one of the 
earliest examples of the Ferme Ornle ; and it still 
continues to be a beautiful specimen of the mixture 
of the agreeabk with the useful ; where nature, im- 
proved by the hand of art, smiles in the radiance of 
her most pleasing attire.
From a broad green ter- 
race, in one part of the grounds, is a fine view of 
Reading.
Caversham House and woods, and the 
groves of Shiplake, bound the prospect in front ; 
and the high point of the hill of Sunning, with the 
scarcely discernible Thames gilding at its foot, closes 
the picture on the east.
The back ground is com- 
posed of the distant hills of Oxfordshire and Berk- 
shire." 
White Place.] — White Place, the property and 
seat of George Hanmer Leycester, Esq. is situated 
in the parish of Cookham, and commands a number 
of fine views, enriched with beautiful woodland sce- 
nery.
The house is a neat, structure, built entirely 
with chalk, not a single brick having been used, ex- 
cept for the chimnies ; and, though erected thirty or 
five-and-thirty years ago, the various changes of 
the weather appear to have affected it but very 
slightly.
Windsor (Old).] — Camden supposes Windsor, 
with the adjacent country, to have been inhabited by 
the Bibroci ; and to have derived its present name 
from Windleshore, a Saxon term, expressive of 
winding 
BERKSHIRE.
105- 
winding banks, which, in this place, applies with much 
propriety to the meandering course of the Thames.
,It is thought, by some, to have been the Pontes of 
Antoninus.
Old Windsor is situated in the hundred of Rip- 
plesmere, two miles south-east by south from New 
Windsor.
The manor belonged to the Saxon Kings, 
who had a palace at Old Windsor, the site of which 
is believed to be now occupied by Mr. Isherwood's 
farm, surrounded by a moat.
The present manor- 
house was for some time occupied by the late Duke 
of Gloucester ; afterwards by Lady Holland ; and 
is now in the tenure of Sir John Harrington, Bart.
E lward the Confessor occasionally kept his court 
at Old Windsor ; the manor of which he subse- 
quently gave to the abbot and convent of Westmin- 
ster.
William the Conqueror obtained it back again, 
by exchange ; and, even after the building of Wind- 
sor Castb, the palace of Old Windsor was, at times, 
occupied by the Kings of England.
A considerable part of Windsor Park, with the 
scattered hamlet of Cow-worth, is in this parish.
The great lodge was built in the reign of Charles 
II.
and has been successively occupied by the Earl 
of Portland, the Duchess Dowager of Marlborough, 
the illustrious William, Duke of Cumberland, and 
the late Duke of Cumberland, his Majesty's brother.
It is now in the possession of his Majesty's son, the 
present Duke of Cumberland ; who also occupies 
the Little Lodge, or Dairy, formerly the residence 
of Paul Sandby, Esq. the architect, who enjoyed 
the situation of Deputy Ranger of the Park.
The 
lodge at the entrance of the Park is inhabited only 
by servants.
Beaumont Lodge, seated on an agreeable emi- 
nence, near the Thames, was originally built by 
Lord Weymouth, who died in 1705 ; it was after- 
wards the Duchess of Kent's ; the Duke of Rox- 
burgh bought it for his son, Lord Beaumont; it 
next fell into the possession of Warren Hastings, 
Esq. sometime Governor-General of Bengal; of 
whom it was purchased by Henry Griffith, Esq. and 
it now belongs to Lord Ashbrook.
The old structure, excepting a part of the west 
wing, was pulled down, and the present mansion 
built under the direction of Mr. Emlyn, architect, of 
Windsor.
The lofty portico of the grand front con- 
sists of two columns and two pilasters, on square 
bases, thirty-six feet eight inches high, composed of 
brick, stuccoed; the capitals of Coade's artificial 
stone ; and the shields and bases of Portland stone.
* This ingenious, but unfortunate lady, was born at Bristol, 
where she was educated in the seminary kept by the celebrated 
Miss More and her sisters.
Her maiden name was Darby, and 
her father was Captain of a ship.
At the age of fifteen she 
married an attorney of the name of Robinson, which precipi- 
tate step appears to have embittered the rest of her life.
Being 
reduced in circumstances she had recourse to the stage, ana 
made her first appearance at Drury Lane in the character of 
Juliet, in which she was instructed by Mr. Garrick.
Her re- 
ception was very flattering, and she continued to perform in 
vol.
I. — no.
8. 
The enrichments produce a very light and elegant 
effect from the upper gallery, which commands a 
fine view of the Thames.
Above a hundred acres of 
land, belonging to this villa, rise in an easy ascent 
from the banks of the river to the summit of the hill 
behind it, within which is a pleasant walk of nearly 
two miles, leading to a serpentine terrace, from 
which Windsor Castle, a fine mass of wood, St.
Leonard's Hill, and, in the distance, the two princi- 
pal edifices of the metropolis, furnish several very 
line prospects.
Holly Grove, formerly the seat of 
Andrew Snape Hamond, Esq. created a baronet in 
1783, now belongs to Mr. Mackay.
The Dowager Baroness Onslow occupies a little 
Gothic villa at Old Windsor, which was built by 
Mr. Bateman, the uncle of Lord Bateman.
Palling Place, now the Seat of James Bonnel, 
Esq. was much improved by Mr. Pigot, its former 
possessor, who gave the estate its present name in 
compliment to his uncle.
Mr. Bonnel has enlarged 
the grounds with two acres of common land, pur- 
chased of the parish, and has made some new walks 
and plantations.
The gardens are ornamented with 
a dairy, grotto, saloon, and hermitage.
It is situated 
near the upper road.
Old Windsor Lodge, the seat of William Webber, 
Esq.
; and Woodside House, the residence of the 
Rev. Dr.
Ogilvie, are also deserving of notice.
General flarcourt possesses an elegant villa at 
St. Leonard's Hill, in Windsor Forest.
It was 
formerly called Gloucester Lodge, having been 
greatly improved by the late Duke of Gloucester, on 
his marriage with the Countess of Waldegrave, by 
whom it was built.
The house, together with the 
pleasure ground and lawns, consisting of about 75 
acres, were purchased, in the year 1781, for 10,0001.
St. Leonard's Hill is supposed to have been a Ro- 
man encampment, many antiquities of that nation 
having been, at times, found there.
Old Windsor Church contains several memorials 
of the Powneys, and of the family of Michel, ances- 
tors of John Michel, Esq. a great benefactor to 
Queen's College, Oxford.
Inclosed within a neat 
and simple tomb, in the church- yard, beneath a wil- 
low tree, sleep the remains of the celebrated Mary 
Robinson.
For this unostentatious memorial, the 
muse of Pratt has furnished some very pleasing 
lines.* 
Winosor (New).] — New Windsor is situated in the 
hundred of Ripplesmere, twenty miles east by north 
from Reading, and twenty-two west by south from 
various characters, till lier representation of Perdita in the 
Winter's Tale attracted the admiration of an illustrious person- 
age, in consequence of which she quitted the stage.
A separa- 
tion afterwards took place, and she received a pension.
In 
1784 she had the misfortune to be attacked by a violent rheu- 
matism, which progressively deprived her of the use of her 
limbs.
She died in 1800.
Mrs. ftobinson wrote a number of 
poetical pieces, under the name of Laura Maria ; and several 
novels, romances, and dramas.
2 D 
London, 
100 
BERKSHIRE.
London.
It is a market-town, governed by a cor- 
poration, consisting of a mayor, high steward, de- 
puty steward, town clerk, two bailiffs, and twenty- 
eight burgesses.
Of the burgesses, who are chosen 
out of the principal inhabitants, thirteen are called 
fellows, or benchers, of the Guildhall : ten of these 
are called aldermen, out of Whom the mayor and 
bailiffs are elected.
The mayor and bailiffs choose 
the subordinate officers.
Windsor sent members to Parliament in the 30th 
year of Edward I.
and again in the seventh of Ed- 
ward It. from which time till the twenty-fifth of 
Henry VI.
we meet with no return ; but since that 
period it lias been regularly represented, returning 
two members.
The rna-yor is the returning officer.
The right of election was originally vested in the 
corporation, but this privilege being occasionally 
contested, in 1 690 the liberty of voting was extended 
to all the inhabitants paying scot and lot.
The num- 
ber of voters 'amount to about 280.
Windsor has three annual fairs ; on Easter Tues- 
day, the 5th of July, and 25th of October.
The 
market is holden on Saturday.
New Windsor, at the time of the Norman survey, 
was neither a parish, nor a manor ; but the Castle, 
built by William the Conqueror, afterwards became 
the seat of an extensive honour.
Under the charter 
of Edward I.
dated 1276, it was for some time the 
county town ; it being thereby granted, that the jus- 
tices itinerant for the county of Berks should hold 
their assizes at Windsor, and that the county gaol, 
which had before been at Wallingford, should be re- 
moved thither.
This alteration, however, being 
fountl inconvenient, the gaol was removed to Read- 
ing, in 1314.
The town, which consists of six large streets, and 
several inferior ones, is situated on a rising ground.
The principal street looks southward, over a long 
and spacious valley, chequered with cornfields and 
meadows, interspersed with groves, and watered by 
the Thames, which glides through the prospect in a 
clear and gentle stream, meandering in its course.
On the other side, the country swells into hills, which 
are neither craggy nor high, but rise with a gradual 
ascent ; and, where they are not adorned with trees, 
are covered with almost perpetual verdure.
The 
houses are chiefly of brick, and are mostly well 
built.
Windsor was first incorporated by King Edward 
I. who invested the inhabitants with several privi- 
leges, which were confirmed and enlarged by suc- 
ceeding monarchs.
It also had a charter from James 
I. and after the Restoration, it obtained another from 
Charles II.
which was superseded by his successor, 
but restored at the Revolution ; and has ever since 
been referred to, in the municipal government of the 
town.
Excepting the Castle, which we shall presently 
notice at some length, the Guildhall is one of the 
first objects of consideration in Windsor.
It is a 
magnificent building, supported with columns and 
arches of Portland stone.
Th^ room in which the 
corporation meet for the transaction of public busi- 
ness is spacious and convenient.
It is adorned with 
portraits of the sovereigns of England, from .James 
the First to Queen Anne ; and also with those of 
George, Prince of Denmark, Prince Rupert, Arch- 
bishop Laud, &c.
In a niche, on the north side of 
. this structure is a statue of Queen Anne, in royal 
robes, supporting the globe and sceptre.
Beneath, 
in the frieze of the entablature of the less co- 
lumns and arches, is a Latin inscription to this!
purport i — 
" Erected in the 6th year of her reign, 
1707, 
' " Sculptor!
thy art is vain : it cannot trace 
The sejpblance of the matchless Anna's grace ; 
Thou may'st as soon to high Olympus fly, 
And carve the model of some deity." 
S. Chapman, Mayor.
The corporation were at the expence of this statile, 
in gratitude to the queen, who always resided at 
Windsor during the summer.
In another niche, on 
the south side, is the statue of Prince George of 
Denmark, her majesty's consort, in a Roman mili- 
tary habit, erected by Sir Christopher Wren, in the 
year 1713; A neat free-school, for thirty boys and 
twenty girls, who are clothed and educated, partly 
by subscription, and partly by the income arising 
from several legacies, was erected on the north side 
of the church, in the year 1706.
Archbishop Laud, of whose life and actions we 
have already furnished some account, gave 501.
per 
annum to the parish of Windsor, to be employed two 
succeeding years in apprenticing poor boys ; and 
every third year, in giving marriage portions to poor 
maidens of the town of Windsor.
This charity was 
augmented by the bequest of 10001.
from Theodorw 
Randue, Esq.
; and his executors, by virtue of a dis- 
cretionary power vested in them, added a further 
sum of 2501.
with which joint sum an estate was pur- 
chased, out of the rents of which 501.
per annum is 
disposed of in the following manner : ten pounds 
each, two succeeding years, to five poor boys, who 
have been apprenticed by Archbishop Laud's cha- 
rity, and duly served their apprenticeships ; and every 
third year the same sum to three maidens, born in 
Windsor, who have faithfully lived in one service 
during three whole years.
An hospital was founded in Sheet Street, in the 
year 1503, by J.
Thomson, and W.
Huntred, chap- 
lain ; and J.
Combe, Gent, for eight poor men and 
women.
In 1510 it was endowed by Thomas Bro- 
therton, alias Hunt, and since by Richard Gallis.
The revenue of this alms-house now amounts to 351.
per annum ; and the pensioners, twelve in number, 
receive 10s.
each quarterly.
Near the Pit fields are 
four other alms-houses, founded and endowed by 
Richard Reeve, Gent, in 1676 ; the poor in these 
houses receive fifty shillings per annum each.
There 
is another alms-house in Park Street, without en- 
t dowment, 
BERKSHIRE.
107 
dowment, for twelve poor men, who arc supported 
by the parish.
Mrs. Barbara Jordan, in the year 1730, gave 11.
per annum each, to three old maids not receiving 
alms ; and, in 1732, Mrs. Arabella Reeve, gave the 
interest of 5001.
to six poor widows, lame or blind, 
being natives and inhabitants of New Windsor.
— 
There are several other charities belonging to the 
parish, and the overseers receive 1201.
per annum 
from the crown, by royal grant, in lieu of waste lands 
at various times enclosed in the parks.
Near the town are barracks for 550 infantry, and 
220 cavalry, including officers' horses ; and, in 1784, 
an hospital capable 1 of accommodating about forty 
men, was erected for the reception of sick sol- 
diers.
Windsor Church, which was originally a chapel 
to Clew er, is an ancient and spacious fabric, dedi- 
cated to St. John the Baptist.
It contains several 
handsome monuments.
That of James Pagett, Esq.
one of the barons of the Exchequer, who died in 
1588, has busts of himself and his Lady Nazareth, 
daughter of Robert Harris, of Reading.
This lady 
had been married twice before ; and, surviving Mr.
Pagett twenty-eight years, died in 1666, at the age 
of 88.
The monument of the learned Sir Thomas 
Reeve, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, 
who resided at Windsor, and died in 1736, was 
erected at the expence of Dr. Mead.
It is adorned 
with busts of the Chief Justice and his Lady, by 
Scheemaker ; the monument of Topham Foot, Esq.
who died in 1712, is adorned with a bust of the de- 
* This was in the year 1349, in the 23c!
year of his reign.
The origin of this order is involved in much obscurity.
Ac- 
cording to vulgar tradition, the Countess of Salisbury, a lady 
of great beauty, dropped her garter, as she was dancing at a 
ball, in the king's presence.
The monarch caught it up ; and, 
perceiving her confusion, gallantly made it an ensign of honour, 
and precluded any wanton surmise, which such an accident 
might produce, by choosing the motto— Hon i soit qui trial y 
pense; to him who thinks evil, let evil be.
This story has long 
worn out its credit.
Joshua Barnes, in his History of Edward 
the Third, traces its origin to the Phoenicians, who were a< cus- 
tomed to encircle their bodies with a blue or purple fillet, as an 
amulet against shipwreck.
Others ascribe it to Richard Coeur 
de Lion, who is said to have bound a leathern strap round the 
legs of his bravest warriors, as a badge of merit, at the siege of 
Aeon, on the borders of Palestine.
A third opinion refers it to 
the circumstance of Edward the Third having given Garter as 
a watchword at the battle of Cressy.
Tlve most probable cause 
is the strong passion for military glory which reigned in the bo- 
som of Edward.
The numerous complex movements which 
emanated from that prince's assertion of his claims to tiie crown 
of France, convinced him of the high importance of inspiring 
his followers with a similarity of ideas and principles, and he 
formed the design'of associating his most deserving soldiers in 
one honourable society of love and brotherhood, lie perceiv- 
ed that success in arms was dependant on unity of conduct ; and 
no mode seemed so likely to direct (he varying actions of indi- 
viduals to the same point, as that of exciting a spirit of emula- 
tion and amity.
With this view, and that he might have an 
opportunity of increasing the skill and hardihood of his knights 
by chivalrous exercises, he determined to restore the ancient 
order of the Round Table, and, by dropping the idle ceremo- 
ceased by the same artist.
There is also a tablet to 
the late Dr. William Heberden, who died in 1801.
A small, but neat theatre, was erected at Windsor, 
in the summer of 1793, at the expense of Mr. Thorn- 
ton, the manager.
It is now, we believe, the pro- 
perty of Mr. Mudie.
The Lord Chamberlain's li- 
cence restricts the seasons of representation to the 
Eton vacations ; but, of late years, the magistrates 
have granted permission for performances, during 
the time of Ascot races.
Windsor Castle.] — This ancient and beautiful 
castle is the chief boast of the town in which it 
stands.
It was originally built by William the Con- 
queror, soon after his being settled on the throne of 
England, on account of the healthfulness and plea- 
santness of the situation, and probably as a place of 
security and strength, in the beginning of his reign.
It was greatly improved by his son Henry I.
who 
added many buildings, and surrounded the whole 
with a strong wall.
In 1105 this monarch kept his 
Christmas here, and in 1107, his Easter.
He at 
length removed his court hither, and, in 1110, for 
the first time, kept the festival of Whitsuntide at 
Windsor Castle.
Henry II.
held a council here in 
1170; and King John, during his contest with the 
barons, made it his place of residence.
Edward III.
Avho was born here, caused the ancient building to 
be entirely taken down, enclosed the whole with a.
strong wall or rampart of stone, and erected the 
present stately castle, and the chapel of St. George ; 
and here also he instituted and established the most 
noble Order of the Garter.* We are informed, in 
Ashmole's 
nies of etiquette, bind them more immediately to his person, 
through the obligations of esteem and friendship.
His war- with 
France rendered it necessary for him to cultivate the assistance 
of foreign warriors; and the martial splendour so conformable 
to the spirit of the age, which the re-tstablishment of this order 
furnished him with the means of exhibiting, would, he conceiv- 
ed, induce them to visit England, and inspire them with an in- 
clination to engage in his service.
Impressed with these ideas, 
he ordered preparations to be made at Windsor for a grand 
tournament, to be held on the 19th of January, 1344.; and, on 
New Year's Day, he issued letters of invitation and safe con- 
duct to all foreign knights who were desirous of trying their va- 
lour at the ensuing festival.
Still further to promote his scheme, 
he signified in the proclamation, that himself would be present 
at the ceremony, togetber with his Queen, 300 of the fairest 
ladies of his court in their most splendid attire, and the principal 
of his nobility.
This expedient was attended by such complete 
success, that Edward resolved to have the tournament holden an- 
nually, and haU a circular building constructed in the castle tor 
the particular accommodadon and entertainment of the com- 
pany.
About the same period, Philip, King of France, who 
had penetrated the intentions of the English monarch, caused a 
Round Table to be set up at Paris, with the design of counter^ 
acting the deep laid plan of his opponent ; and Edward, con- 
vinced that the attractions of the rival establishment tended to 
decrease the influence of his own, cpiickly gave it up, and con- 
tented himself with forming an association ot a more select n: - 
ture.
This was the Order otithe Garter, which was said by <l.e 
learned Seldon, to " exceed in majesty, honour, and lame, ail 
the chivalries of the world." Previously to its complete esta- 
blishment, the King held an assembly of his calls, barons, and 
principal kuights, to consult as to the best mode of increasing its 
grandeur: 
108 
BERKSHIRE.
Ashmolc's History of this Order, " that the King 
granted bis letters patent to certain surveyors, em- 
powering them to impress as many hewers of stone, 
carpenters, and other artificers, as might be neces- 
sary to the due honest performance of the great un- 
dertaking." These letters are dated the 23d of his 
rei^n.
Four years afterwards, two commissioners 
were appointed to provide stone, timber, lead, iron, 
&c.
and privileged to seize carriages for the con- 
veyance of the materials to Windsor.
In the year 
1357 the celebrated William of Wyckham was ap- 
pointed to superintend the works, with the salary of 
a shilling daily ; and three shillings per week for his 
clerk.
The supervisor's conduct obtained the ap- 
probation of the monarch, who, in 1360, gave him 
complete authority over every thing connected with 
the castle, as well as the unlimited jurisdiction of the 
manors of Old and New Windsor.
In the year fol- 
lowing, the King issued writs to the sheriffs of seve- 
ral counties, directing them, under the penalty of a 
hundred pounds, to provide a certain number of 
workmen, and send them to Windsor within ten 
days, to be employed, at " the King's wages as 
long as was necessary." " And because divers of 
these workmen did afterwards clandestinely leave 
Windsor, and were entertained by other persons, 
upon greater wages, to the King's great damage, 
and manifest retarding of his work," the sheriffs of 
London were ordered to make proclamation, that 
those persons who should presume to employ any of 
the fugitive artificers, should be dispossessed of all 
their property.
The sheriffs were also directed to 
arrest the runaways, and commit them to Newgate.
For a year or two, the raising of the buildings ap- 
pears to have been pursued with great celerity ; but 
a contagious disorder having destroyed many of the 
Avorkmen, the King was a second time obliged to 
have recourse to writs, dated the 30th of March, 
1363 ; and his desire of completing the structure in- 
creasing with the delay occasioned by the fatal ma- 
lady, the sheriffs were commanded under twice the 
grandeur, and to assist him in forming the necessary regulations 
for its government.
The first installation was in the year 1349, 
on the anniversary of St. George, who was declared the pecu- 
liar patron of the order.
An immense concourse of people, 
many of whom curiosity had attracted from very distant coun- 
tries, attended the ceremony.
The sovereign, and the following 
twenty-five noblemen, as Knights Companions, went in proces- 
sion to the chapel, clothed in russet gowns, and mantles of fine 
blue woollen cloth, embroidered with garters, and wearing the 
whole insignia of the order: — Edward the Black Prince, Henry, 
Duke of Lancaster; Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick; 
Capdal de Buche; Ralph, Earl of Stafford ; William Montacute, 
Earl of Salisbury; Roger Mortimer, Earl of Marc.he ; John de 
L'Isle, Bartholomew Burghersh, John Beauchamp, John de 
Mohun, Hugh Courtney, Thomas Holland, John Grey, Rich- 
ard Fitz-Simon, Miles Stapleton, Thomas Wall, Hugh Wrio- 
thesley, Niel Loring, John Chandos, James de Audley, Otho 
Holland, Henry Earn, Zanchet d'Aubericourt, and William 
Pavely.
Alter the ceremonies of Installation, the Knights were 
magnificently entertained at the expense of the King.
The 
festival continued for several days ; the martial sports of the 
tournament being intermingled with the softer diversions of the 
former penalty, to send to Windsor a stated number 
of skilful masons and diggers of stone, by the fol- 
lowing Easter.
In 1364, the buildings were ready 
for glazing, and persons were appointed to purchase 
glass in every part of the country where it could be 
obtained.
Twelve glaziers were at the same time 
ordered to be impressed, and set to work at the 
King's wages.
Many carriages were also detained 
for the purpose of conveying the necessary mate- 
rials.
From 1364 to 1370, the erection of the castle 
seems to have proceeded with much rapidity, " ar- 
tificers being 1 yearly impressed for the King's ser- 
vice ;" but from 1370 to 1375, this severe measure 
appears to have been abandoned ; and, as Edward 
died in 1377, it is probable that all the main parts 
of this magnificent structure had been then com- 
pleted.
We must not in this place, omit the well known 
anecdote of William of Wyckham, afterwards Bi- 
shop of Winchester, who, as we have already 
stated, had the superintendence of the builders.
On 
the completion of the castle, he caused to be cut 
upon one of the towers, this ambiguous sentence, 
" This made Wickham," which was reported to the 
king, as though he had assumed to himself the ho- 
nour of building the castle ; and, had not the pre- 
late, by a ready address, assured his royal master, 
that he intended no meaning derogatory to his sove- 
reign, but only an acknowledgment that this build- 
ing had made him great in the favour of his prince, 
and was the cause of his present high station, he 
would most probably have fallen under the displea- 
sure of the monarch by this inscription, which in 
time might have occasioned a double interpreta- 
tion.
Great additions were made to the buildings within 
the castle, in succeeding times, by several monarchs.
Edward IV.
enlarged and rebuilt the beautiful cha- 
pel of St. George ; Henry VII.
vaulted the roof of 
the choir of that structure, and erected the spacious 
fabric which adjoins the royal apartments in the up- 
ball.
The insignia of the order are extremely magnificent : 
they consist of the garter, mantle, surcoat, hood, George, and 
collar.
These collectively are called the Habit.
The four 
first were assigned to the knights by the founder ; the George 
and collar, by Henry the Eighth.
The garter is of blue velvet, 
bordered with gold wire, and enamelled with the motto, Honi 
Soit Qui Mal y Pense.
This is worn between the knee and 
calf, on the left leg, and is generally considered as an emblem 
of the band of affection and concord which ought to unite the 
companions of the Order.
The colour of the mantle is a rich 
blue: the left shoulder is adorned with the arms of St. George 
embroidered within a large garter, and irradiated with beams of 
silver.
The collar is composed of pieces of gold, fashioned like 
garters; the ground being enamelled blue, the letters of the 
motto gold, with a red rose in the centre of each garter.
The 
George is pendant from the middle of the collar, and displays 
the figure of that saint on horseback, tilting at the dragon.
The 
whole is ornamented with precious stones.
The officers of this 
Order are, the Prelate, Bishop of Winchester ; Chancellor, Hi- 
shop of Salisbury ; Register, Dean of Windsor ; Garter, and 
King at Arms (both oflices being united in one person;) and 
the Usher of the Black Rod.
per 
BERKSHIRE.
100 
per ward; Henry VIII.
rebuilt the great gate in 
the lower ward ; Edward VI.
and Mary, his suc- 
cessor, had a fountain made in the centre of the up- 
per court, to supply the castle with water ; Eliza- 
beth raised the terrace on the north side ; Charles I.
erected a gate leading to the park, and made several 
improvements ; and Charles II.
repaired and em- 
bellished the whole structure, decorating the apart- 
ments with numerous fine paintings, establishing a 
magazine of arms, and continuing the terrace round 
the east and south sides of the upper court.
This 
walk is faced with a rampart of free -stone, and ex- 
tends to the length of 625 yards, being inferior only 
to the terrace of the Seraglio at Constantinople.
— 
That Windsor owes much to Charles II.
is certain.
He kept his court here most part of his reign, in the 
summer season, and spared no expence to render 
this princely castle worthy the royal residence.
He 
left very little to be done, except painting ; which 
was carried on by his successor, James II.
and by 
William III.
in whose reign the whole Avas com- 
pleted.
On the 3d of July, 1687, during his residence 
here, King James gave an uncommon spectacle to 
his subjects, by the public entry of a nuncio from 
the Pope.
He had the mortification, however, to 
see, that, notwithstanding the ceremony was con- 
ducted with much state and shew, it gave offence to 
the people, who chose not to be deluded by the idle 
parade of popish pageantry.
The Duke of Somer- 
set, then Lord of the Bed-chamber, in waiting at 
court, refused to introduce the popish ambassador 
to his audience, choosing rather to incur his sove- 
reign's displeasure, than to perform a task not suited 
to his high rank, and contrary to the laws of the 
krogdom.
Queen Anne made several additions to this cas- 
tle, particularly the flight of steps on the east side 
of the terrace ; and the necessary repairs of the cas- 
tle and the royal apartments were continued, as re- 
quired, in the reigns of their late Majesties George 
the First and Second, though the court seldom re- 
sided at Windsor.
The principal improvements, however, have been 
effected by his present Majesty, whose munificent 
plans for the embellishment of this structure have 
far exceeded the designs of his predecessors.
His 
Majesty has recently removed his residence from 
the Queen's Lodge to the Castle.
The improve- 
ments have been made under the superiritendance of 
James Wyatt, Esq. surveyor-general of his Ma- 
jesty's works, and consist chiefly in the restoration 
of the Gothic architecture in those parts of the build- 
ing which had been modernized in the reign of 
Charles II.
The grand staircase, has been com- 
pleted, and is very magnificent : the roof and lan- 
thorn are highly enriched with Gothic tracery ; and 
* This installation, as well as that of the Garter, is indebted 
to Edward III.
for its origin.
His great respeGt for military 
VOL.
I. — NO.
8. 
the chapel of the castle, and other parts of the build- 
ing, have been fitted up in the same style.
After this historical sketch, a concise description 
of the castle will be proper.
It is divided into two 
courts or wards, with a large keep or round tower 
between them, called the mkldlo ward, built on a 
lofty artificial mount, surrounded with a moat, and 
formerly separated from the lower ward by a strong 
wall and draw-bridge.
The ascent to the upper 
apartments is by a lofty flight of stone steps, guard- 
ed by a cannon, planted at the top, and levelled at 
the entrance.
The building altogether occupies up- 
wards of twelve acres of ground.
As a place of mi- 
litary strength, however, this castle is no longer im- 
portant : the curtain of the tower, upon which are 
seventeen pieces of cannon, being the only battery 
which is now preserved.
The castle is surrounded by a noble terrace, with 
beautiful and easy slopes to the lower part of the 
park.
Excepting the terrace of the Seraglio, at 
Constantinople, as we have before observed, this is 
justly esteemed the most magnificent walk in Eu- 
rope, as to the strength and grandeur of the build- 
ing, and for its fine and extensive prospect over the 
river Thames and the adjacent country on every 
side.
The upper court or yard is a spacious regular 
square, and coutains on the north side the state 
apartments, and the Chapel and Hall of St. George.
The east and south sides, have been fitted up for the 
residence of their present Majesties and the Royal 
Family.
In the area or middle of this court is erect- 
ed a noble equestrian statue, in copper, of Charles 
II.
in the habit of a Csesar, on a statuary marble 
pedestal, curiously carved in basso relievo, with va - 
rious kinds of fruit, fish, shippings and other orna- 
ments.
Beneath the statue is a curious hydraulic 
engine, invented by Sir Samuel Morland, who was 
appointed master mechanicorum to Charles II.
in 
1681.
The keep, or round tower, which forms the west 
side of the upper court, is the apartment of the con- 
stable or governor, built in the form of an amphi- 
theatre, on the highest part of the mount.
The 
ascent into these lodgings is by a flight of large 
stone steps : the apartments are noble, comprising a 
guard-room, or magazine of arms, for the greater 
state of this officer, who has the entire government 
of the castle, and whose office is of great antiquity, 
honour, and power.
This mount is neatly laid out 
in sloping walks round the hill, covered with ver- 
dure, and planted with shrubs and flowers.
The 
lower court is larger than the upper, and may be 
said to be divided into two parts by St. George's 
Chapel, which stands in the middle.
On the south 
and west sides of the outer part of this court, are the 
houses of the Alms, or Poor Knights of Windsor.* 
On 
honour, and the feelings of charily, which, amidst the ruder 
calls of the camp, sometimes found the way to the heart, in- 
2 e duced 
110 
BERKSHIRE.
On the north or inner side are the several houses 
and apartments of the dean and canons of St.
George's Chapel; also of the minor canons, clerks, 
and other officers, of this foundation, in this ward 
are also several towers belonging to the officers of 
the crown, when the court is at Windsor ; also to 
the officers of the order of the garter, viz.
the Bishop 
of Winchester prelate, the Bishop of Salisbury chan- 
cellor, and Garter King at Arms ; but the tower of 
this last officer is at present in decay.
A company 
of foot-guards constantly perform duty here, under 
the command of an officer, but at all times subject 
to the constable or governor of the castle, to whom 
alone pertains the sole command of the place or gar- 
rison here ; as also the magazine of arms, stores, 
and houses ; and who likewise keeps a court of record 
in the castle, and is judge of the pleas between par- 
ties within the precinct of Windsor Forest.
The 
deputy-governor has neat and commodious apart- 
ments at the entrance of the round tower.
The several foundations within the castle are as 
follow : — 
1. The Royal College of St. George, which con- 
sists of a dean, twelve canons or prebends, seven 
minor canons, eleven clerks, one organist, one ver- 
ger, and two sacrists.
2. The most noble Order of the Garter, which 
consists of the Sovereign and twenty-five Knights 
Companions, exclusive of Foreign Princes.
3. The Alms Knights, and those of the foundation 
of Sir Peter le Maire.
The houses of the dean and canons, which consist 
of very pleasant and commodious apartments, are 
on the north side of the chapel.
The dean's house 
has many large and spacious rooms ; and in the hall 
next the cloisters are the arms of the knights of the 
garter blazoned, and arranged in proper order, ac- 
cording to their installation.
The houses of the 
ducecl him to provide an asylum and maintenance for a select 
number of knights, whose circumstances had been reduced be- 
neath their condition.
These were at first called Militiea Pim- 
pcres ; but the appellation which they afterwards received, was 
(lie Alms, or Poor Knights of Windsor.
Previously to the in- 
stiuition of the Garter, their number was twenty-four ; but at 
that period they were increased to twenty-six.
By the charter 
of Incorporation, they were united with the dean and canons of 
St. George's College ; but distentions frequently arising be- 
tween the respective bodies, an act was obtained in the twenty- 
second year of Edward the Fourth, by which the clean and 
canons were for ever exempted from contributing towards the 
maintenance of knights.
Their subsistance, from that time, 
was very precarious, and their numbers continued to decrease, 
till Edward the Sixth, in pursuance of a clause in his father's 
will, vested revenues in the college, to the amount of 6001.
an- 
nually, to be employed for the use and support of a new esta- 
blishment, for thirteen poor knights only.
In the reign of 
Mary, the houses of the lower ward were built for their recep- 
tion ; and the Queen nominated nine persons to enjoy the first 
fruits of the revival of the charity.
Elizabeth, on her acces- 
sion, confirmed all the former grants, and the alms knight-; in- 
creased to the number ordained by Henry VIII.
Some rules 
were also established for their election and government, which 
are still in force.
Agreeably to these, the thirteen knights are 
" to be taken of gentlemen brought to necessity, such as have 
spent their times in the service of the prince." It is directed 
poor knights are on the south and west sides of the 
lower court, in the manner, as Camden says, of the 
Grecian Prytaneum, or residence of those who had 
deserved well of their country, by a life spent in war, 
or in the service of the crown.
The usual entrance into the royal apartments, 
situated on the north side of the castle, is from the 
upper court or ward, through a handsome vestibule, 
supported by pillars of the Ionic order, with some 
antique brass bustos in the several niches ; the prin- 
cipal of which are, a Roman vestal, and a slave in 
the action of picking a thorn out of the foot.
The 
great stair-case consists of three flights of stone 
steps, containing twelve on each flight, secured on 
the right hand by twisting iron balustrades.
Here, 
within the dome, is represented the story of Phaeton 
petitioning Apollo for leave to drive the chariot of 
the sun ; and on the stair-case, in large compart- 
ments, are the transformation of Phaeton's sisters 
into poplars, their tears distilling amber from the 
trees ; also the story of Cycnus, King of Liguria, 
who, being inconsolable for Phaeton's death, was 
transformed into a swan.
Over this, and on the se- 
veral parts of the ceiling, supported by the Winds, 
are represented the signs of the Zodiac, with baskets 
of flowers, beautifully disposed ; and at each corner 
are the elements of the Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, 
expressed by cornucopias, birds, zephyrs, flaming 
censers, water-nymphs, with fishes, and a variety of 
other representations ; also Aurora, with her nymphs 
in waiting", giving water to her horses.
In several 
parts of this stair-case, in proper attitudes, are also 
represented Comedy, Tragedy, Epic Poetry, Sculp- 
ture, Painting, Music and other sciences ; and the 
whole staircase is beautifully disposed, and height- 
ened with gold, having a view to the back stairs, 
on which is painted the story of Meleager and Ata- 
lanta.
Over the door is a bust of Venus, in black 
also, that they should be unmarried, and continue so, under 
pain of vacating their places on the wedding-day.
The annual 
allowance of the knights upon this establishment Was ISl. 5s.
and 31.
6s.
Sd. for a gown of red, and a mantle of blue or 
purple cloth, with the cross of St. George embroidered on the 
left shoulder.
These sums are to be paid from the revenues 
vested in the dean and chapter.
James the First ordered the 
pensions to be augmented by the additional sum of 181.
5s.
to 
every knight, payable from the exchequer.
The annual in- 
come therefore of each pensioner is about 401.
Liesides the 
poor knights on the royal foundation, there are five others, who 
are supported by donations bequeathed in the years 1631 and 
1635, by Sir Peter le Maire, and Sir Francis Crane.
The 
houses for their reception were finished in 1658; but the re- 
spective legacies being contested in the court of Chancery, the 
funds for tiie maintenance of the knights were not settled till 
the twelfth of Charles the Second, when the -sum of 2001.
was 
ordered to be annually distributed among them, in equal por- 
tions.
Mr. Samuel Travers, who died in the year 1728, left 
the residue of his estates for the benefit of seven superannuated 
or disabled lieutenants of English men of war, who are to be 
added to the poor knights of Windsor, and to be allowed a 
house of residence and 601.
per annum.
This legacy, like 
those of Sir Peter le Maire and Sir Francis Crane, was contest- 
ed in Chancery many years; but a decree was at length ob- 
tained in favour of the Will, and seven gentlemen were appoint- 
ed to receive the annuities.
2 marble > 
BERKSHIRE.
Ill 
marble ; and on the front of the stair-case is an 
oval aperture, adorned with the story of Cephalus 
and Procris.
The painting of the whole stair-case 
was designed and executed by Sir James Thorn- 
hill.
The first apartment is the Queen's Guard Cham- 
ber.
This room is completely furnished with fire- 
arms, guns, bayonets, pikes, bandeleers, &c.
beauti- 
fully ranged and disposed into various forms, with 
the star and garter, the royal cypher, and other or- 
naments intermixed, cut in lime wood.
Over the 
chimney is a full length portrait of Prince George 
of Denmark, in armour, on horseback, by Dahl ; 
with a view of shipping, by Vandeveld.
On the 
ceiling is Britannia, in t!ie person of Queen Cathe- 
rine of Portugal, consort to Charles II.
seated on a 
globe, bearing the arms of England and Portugal, 
with the four quarters of the world, and their re- 
spective symbols, attended by deities, presenting 
their several offerings.
The signs of the Zodiac 
are on the outer part of this beautiful representa- 
tion.
In different parts of the ceiling are Mars, Ve- 
nus, Juno, Minerva, and other heathen deities, with 
ssephyrs, cupids, and other embellishments properly 
disposed.
The ceiling, in the Queen's Presence Chamber, is 
adorned with a representation of Queen Catherine, 
attended by Religion, Prudence, Fortitude, and 
other Virtues.
Under a curtain spread by Time, 
and supported by Zephyrs, is Fame sounding the 
happiness of Britain ; and Justice driving away Se- 
dition, Envy, and other evil genii.
Among the pic- 
tures in this room are the following portraits : King 
Edward III.
by Beleamp ; King James I.
by Van- 
dyck ; Edward the Black Prince, by Belcamp.
Some of the celebrated Cartoons of Raphael Avere 
formerly disposed in the apartments respectively 
denominated the Queen's Presence Chamber, and 
the King's Presence Chamber ; and as their re- 
moval to Hampton Court is understood to be only 
of a temporary nature, for the accommodation of 
Mr. Hofloway, who is employed in executing en- 
gravings from them, we shall take this opportunity 
of noticing those chefs d'amvres of human art.
They 
represent the following interesting events from the 
New Testament : 
The miraculous Draught of Fishes : Luke, chap.
V. 
Peter and John healing the Cripple at the Gate of 
the Temple : Acts, chap.
HI.
* Numerous copies of these pictures have been made.
Those of Sir James Thornhill are esteemed the best.
They 
are ot the same size as the originals, and were purchased at the 
artist's sale in 1735 by the "then Duke of Bedford, for 200 
guineas.
His descendant, Francis, the late Duke, presented 
them to the Royal Academy in 1800.
The Cartoons have also 
been engraved by Gribelin, Dorigny, and Fitler ; and Mr.
Holloway issued proposals some time ago for engraving them a 
fourth time, and has made considerable progress in his under- 
taking.
The engravings are to be accompanied by a memoir 
of the painter, and an analysis of his works on professional prin- 
ciples.
" Their author," says Mr. Holloway, in his Prosper:, 
tus, " has frequently been styled the divine Kaphael : but epi- 
St. Paul and Barnabas at Lystra : Acts, chap.
XIV.
Elymas the Sorcerer struck Blind : Acts, chap.
XIII.
The Death of Ananias : Acts, chap.
V. 
Our 'Saviour giving the Charge to Peter ; John,.
chap.
XXI.
Paul preaching at Athens : Acts, chap.
XVII.
These Cartoons were originally designed as pat- 
terns for tapestry, to adorn the pontifical apartments 
of Leo the Tenth, at Rome.
When finished they 
were sent to Flanders, and executed in tapestry un- 
der the direction of Van Orley, and Michael Coxis.
But Leo and Raphael both dying before the work 
was completed, the tapestry was not carried to Rome 
for several years.
The original designs remained in 
the store-room of the manufactory, where, nearly a 
century after the death of the painter, they were, 
seen by Rubens, who, struck with their extraordi 
nary merit, prevailed on Charles I.
to purchase and 
have them brought to England.
Mr. Ireland ob- 
serves, that, at the sale of this monarch's effects, after 
his death, " they were purchased by order of Crom- 
well, who commissioned one of his officers to bid for 
them, and publicly to declare the bidding as for his 
highness.
Fifty pounds was the sum offered ; and 
such was the respect or dread of the name of the 
bidder, that they were instantly knocked down to 
him ; though at the same time it was known that unli- 
mited commissions were then in the room from 
France, Spain, Italy, &c.
Much praise is certainly 
due to the Protector in this transaction ; who, al- 
though no connoisseur, was Aveli aware of the high 
value of these works, which he afterwards, in a state 
of exigency, pawned to the Dutch for fifty thousand 
pounds.
They remained in Holland till the Revo- 
lution ; after which King William ordered them 
hither, when they were, deposited in a gallery, 
built expressly for their reception at Hampton 
Court."* 
The ceiling of the Queen's Audience Chamber re- 
presents Britannia in the person of Queen Cathe- 
rine, in a triumphal car drawn by swans to the Tem- 
ple of Virtue, attended by Flora, Ceres, Pomona, 
&c.
with other decorations heightened with gold.
The tapestry of this room is of a rich gold ground.
It was made at Coblentz in Germany, and present- 
ed to Henry VIII.
The canopy is of fine English 
velvet, set up by Queen Anne.
The paintings are, 
William, Prince of Orange, by Honthorst ; James 
thets can confer no additional dignity on a name, the simple 
expression of which as much denotes the Painter, as that of 
Homer, the Poet." Sir Joshua Reynolds, who perhaps of all 
others was most capable of appreciating the merit of Raphael,.
observes, in his discourses, that "the excellence of this extraor- 
dinary man lay in the beauty and majesty of his characters the 
judicious contrivance of his composition, his correctness of 
drawing, purity of taste, powers of invention, and the skilful 
accommodation of other men's conceptions to his own purposes.
Nobody excelled him in that judgment, to which he united 
his own observations on nature, the energy of Michael An- 
gelo, and the beauty and simplicity of the antique." 
the 
1.12 
BERKSHIRE.
the First's Queen, Vansomer ; Frederic Henry, 
Prince of Orange, Honthorst.
Also a fine painting, 
by Sir William Beechey, representing his Majesty re- 
viewing the third or Prince of Wales's regiment of 
Dragoon Guards, and the tenth or Prince of Wales's 
regiment of Light Dragoons.
The principal figures 
are on horseback, finely grouped in the centre, and 
on the right of the picture.
His Majesty is seated 
on his charger, and is accompanied by the Prince 
of Wales, who appears giving the word of command ; 
the Duke of York ; and the Generals Sir William 
Fawcet, Dundas, and Goldsworthy.
These figures 
are as large as life, and are generally considered to 
he good likenesses.
The manoeuvering of the troops 
is in the distance.
The size of the picture is 16 feet 
by 13 ; and is regarded, altogether, as a very grand 
and interesting performance.
On the ceiling of the Ball Room is represented, in 
the character of Perseus and Andromeda, Europe 
delivered, or made free, by Charles II.
On the 
shield of Perseus is inscribed " Perseus Britanni- 
cus ;" and Mars, attended by the heavenly deities, 
offering the olive-branch.
On the cornice of this 
chamber is the story of Perseus and Andromeda, 
the four Seasons, and the signs of the Zodiac ; the 
whole finely heightened in gold.
The tapestry of 
this room, representing the Seasons of the year, was 
made at Brussels, and put up by Charles II.
Here 
is a large silver table and stands, with a glass in a 
correspondent frame.
The paintings are, William, 
Earl of Pembroke, Vansomer ; St. John, after Cor- 
reggio ; the Countess of Dorset, after Vandyck ; the 
Duchess of Richmond, Vandyck ; a Madona, and 
Duke of Hamilton, Henneman.
The ceiling of the Queen's Drawing Room repre- 
sents the assembly of the gods and goddesses, inter- 
mixed with flowers, cupids, &c.
This room is also 
hung with tapestry, representing the twelve months 
of the year.
The paintings of J udith and Holifernes, 
by Guido ; a Magdalen, Sir Peter Lely ; Minerva 
and Lady Digby,* Vandyck ; De Bray and his 
family, De Bray ; Killegrew and Carew, Vandyck.
* There is something interesting about this picture.
It ap- 
pears, that the extraordinary beauty and singularly elegant 
iorm of Lady Digby did not exempt her from the attacks of 
malevolence and envy ; and the artist has expressed this cir- 
cumstance of her history by allegory.
A dove is introduced to 
express her innocence ; a serpent, which she handles without 
fear, to shew her superiority over the envenomed tongue 
of slander: and the figure of Calumny, double-faced, bound 
and thrown down on the ground behind her, is demonstrative 
of her triumph over the malice of her traducers.
Her husband, 
Sir Kenelm Digby, was so enamoured of her charms, that he 
tried various experiments to preserve them ; and amongst others 
prevailed on her to feed on capons fed with the flesh of vipers.
It is supposed that she fell a victim to these arts, as she was found 
dead in her bed, on the 1st of May, 1633, at the very early 
age of 33.
f This lady was the daughter of Sir George Hamilton, the 
fourth son of the fust Karl of Aberdeen.
Distinguished both 
fur beauty and accomplishments, she was one of the most en- 
gaging ornaments of Charles's court, where, in the midst of 
almost unlimited freedom between the sexes, she preserved her 
The ceiling of the Queen's Bedchamber exhibits 
the story of Endymion and Diana, from Ovid.
The 
bed of state in this room, was set up by her present 
Majesty, and is said to have cost 14,0001.
The 
paintings are a portrait of the Queen, at full length, 
with fourteen of the royal offspring, in miniature, 
by West ; six capital landscapes, by Zuccarelli ; and 
two flower pieces, by Young Baptist.
The Room of Beauties, which next deserves no- 
tice, was so named by being adorned with a collec- 
tion of the most celebrated beauties in the reign of 
Charles II.
They are fourteen in number, and were 
mostly painted by Sir Peter Lely, at the desire of 
the Duchess of York : Mrs. Knott, Mrs. Lawson, 
Lady Sunderland, Lady Rochester, Lady Denham, 
Lady Denham's sister, Mrs. Middleton, Lady By- 
ron, the Duchess of Richmond, the Countess of 
Northumberland, Lady Grammont,f the Duchess 
of Cleveland, the Duchess of Somerset, and Lady 
Ossory.
In the Queen's Dressing-Room is a painting of 
Anne of Denmark, King James the First's Queen, 
by Jansen.
Adjoining to this room is a closet, in 
which is deposited the banner of France, annually 
delivered there on the 2d of August, by the Duke 
of Marlborough, by which he holds Blenheim.
It 
contains the portrait of William, Duke of Glouces- 
ter, by Sir Peter Lely ; a portrait of Cardinal Wol- 
sey ; two heads, finely pencilled by Denner ; a pair 
of landscapes, by Teniers ; an old woman watering 
flowers, by Gerrard Dow ; and the inside of a cot- 
tage and a girl playing on a spinet, Mieris.
This 
closet, which is not open for public inspection, also 
contains the tea equipage which was used by Queen 
Anne.
The Picture Gallery, or Queen Elizabeth's Room, 
contains, amongst others, the following capital 
paintings : — the Emperor Charles V.
after Titian ; 
an Italian market, by Bomboccio ; the Battle of 
Spurs ; the Wise Men's Offering, by Paul Veronese ; 
the two Misers, by Quintin Matsys ; J a Boy with 
Puppies, &.c. formerly said to have been executed 
by 
virtue and reputation.
The Count de Grammont, whose pas- 
sion for the fair sex had induced him to rival Louis the XlVth, 
and had been the cause of his banishment from the Court of 
France, was captivated with her charms, and the solidity of her 
mental accomplishments; and, as the reward of a constancy 
which he had never before known, and never afterwards prac- 
tised, was at length blessed with her possession.
The Count 
was a man of brilliant colloquial powers ; and the readiness of 
his wit frequently relieved him from embarrassing situations.
On the eve of his departure to France, having commenced his 
journey witffout a proper conclusion of his engagements with 
Miss Hamilton, he was pursued by her brothers, who intended 
to exchange some pistol-shot with him.
Overtaking him near 
Dover, they called out, " Count Grammont, have you forgot- 
ten nothing at London ?" " Excuse me," answered the Count, 
guessing their errand, " I have forgotten to marry your sister : 
so lead on, and let us finish that affair." 
X This was the celebrated blacksmith of Antwerp; who, 
having been rejected by a girl, with whom he had fallen 
in love, because he could not gratify her vanity, by draw- 
ing her portrait, deserted his original profession, and, by inces- 
sant 
BERKSHIRE.
113 
by Murillo, tut which Mr. West asserts to be a true 
Giordano ; Anne, Duchess of York, and Prince Ru- 
pert, hy Sir Peter Lely ; the Angels appearing 1 to 
the Shepherds, by Nicolo Poussin ; the interview 
between King- Henry VIII.
and Francis 1.
King of 
France ; the converted Chinese, by Sir Godfrey 
Kneller ;* the Angel delivering St. Peter out of 
Prison, by Steenwyck ; an Indian Market, by Post ; 
the Marquis del Guasto and his family, after Titian ; 
and Rinaldo and Armida, by Romanelli.
In this 
room is a curious amber cabinet, presented by the 
King of Prussia to Queen Caroline.
The China 
closet is filled with great variety of curious old 
China, elegantly disposed, and the room finely gilt 
and ornamented.
It contains the following paint- 
ings : Prince Arthur and his two sisters, by Mabun ; 
a Woman with a Kitten ; and a Woman squeezing 
Blood out of a Sponge, 
The ceiling of the King's Closet represents the 
story of Jupiter and Leda.
The paintings in this 
room are : a Man's Head, by Raphael ; St. Cathe- 
rine, by Guido ; a Woman's Head, by Parmegiano ; 
a Landscape, by Breughel ; a Landscape, by Te- 
niers ; Holy Family, by Van Uden; the Creation, 
by Breughel ; Queen Henrietta Maria, by Vandyck, 
the best female head Vandyck ever painted ; Land- 
scape, with figures, by Breughel ; and Martin Lu- 
ther, by Holbein.
On the ceilingof the King's DressingRoom is paint- 
ed the story of Jupiter and Danae.
This apartment 
contains several fine pictures, of which the following 
are the best : — a Man's Head, by Leonardo da Vin- 
ci ; two beautiful Landscapes, with figures, by Wou- 
vermans ; HolstofF, a Dutch merchant, by Holbein ; 
Charles the Second, by Russell ; Catherine of Bra- 
ganza, Charles the Second's Queen, by Sir Peter 
Lely ; an Old Lady, with a cowl over her head, said 
to be the portrait of the Countess of Desmond, and 
ascribed to Rembrandt ; Nero depositing the ashes 
of Britannicus, by Le Sueur ; and James, Duke of 
York, by Russell.
The ceiling of the King's Bedchamber is orna- 
mented with Charles II.
in the robes of the garter, 
iThder a canopy supported by Time, Jupiter and 
Neptune holding a wreath of laurel over the mo- 
narch's head : also, attended by the deities in dif- 
ferent characters, paying obedience to the monarch, 
are Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, properly 
represented.
The tapestry represents part of the 
story of Hero and Leander.
The paintings in this 
room are, King Charles II.
in armour, when Prince 
of Wales, by Vandyck ; and Henry, Duke of Glou- 
cester, his brother.
sant labour, acquired a distinguished celebrity by the pencil.
His productions display considerable ability ; but it is probable 
tint the greatness of his fame arose from accidental circum- 
stances, rather than from superlative merit.
11^* was born in 
1460, and died in theyearl529: this picture, which is very 
elaborately finished, has been finely engraved by Earlom.
Ac- 
cording to tradition, the beautiful' steel tomb in St. George's 
Chapel was executed by Mats vs.
VOL.
|, — No. 8.
On the ceiling of the King's Drawing Room, is 
an allegorical representation of the Restoration of 
King Charles II.
who is seated on a triumphal car, 
drawn by horses of the sun, attended by Fame, 
Peace, and the Polite Arts ; Hercules driving away 
Rebellion, Sedition, Ignorance, &c.
Here is a 
magnificent glass of English manufacture, eleveit 
feet by six feet.
This apartment contains the fol- 
lowing paintings: — Peter, James, and John, by Mi- 
chael Angelo ; Queen Mary, by Sir Godfrey Knel- 
ler ; Queen Anne, after Sir Godfrey Kneller ; King 
William, by Sir Godfrey Kneller ; Our Saviour be- 
fore Pilate, by Schiavoni ; Her present Majesty, by- 
Gainsborough; Ditto, by Ditto ; St. John ; King- 
George I.
after Sir Godfrey Kneller ; St. Ste- 
phen stoned, by Rotterman ; Queen Caroline, when 
Princess of Wales, by Sir Godfrey Kneller; and 
King George II.
when Prince of Wales, by the 
same.
The ceiling of the King's Audience Chamber re- 
presents the establishment of pure religion in these 
nations on the Restoration of Charles II.
in the cha- 
racters of England, Scotland, and Ireland, attended 
by Faith, Hope, and Charity, and the cardinal vir- 
tues : Religion triumphs over Superstition and Hy- 
pocrisy, who are driven by Cupids from before the 
face of the church : all these appear in their proper 
attitudes, and the whole is highly finished.
The 
furniture, paintings, and embellishments of this 
room, except the ceiling, are all new.
The throne 
and its appendages are constructed with great taste.
The canopy and ornamental parts were wrought 
under the direction of Mrs. Pawsey, from beautiful 
paintings, by Miss Moser.
The chair of state was 
executed by Mr. Campbell ; and the drawings which 
ornament the rich gold columns, were from the pen- 
cil of Rebecca, under the direction of Mr. West, 
who painted tlve medallion with profiles of their Ma- 
jesties.
The most valuable decorations of this apart- 
ment, however, are the seven Historical Paintings 
illustrative of the principal events which distinguish- 
ed the reign of Edward 111.
These interesting pic- 
tures were executed by command of his Majesty, on 
whose taste and patronage they reflect peculiar 
lustre.
The whole of them were painted by Mr.
West in the years 1787, 1788, and 1789, and repre- 
sent the following subjects.
" The Passage of the River Somme, August the 
25th, 1346.
The principal figures in this picture 
are King Edward III.
with his crest, a lion, &c.
Lord Chandos ; crest, a Saracen's head profile, pro- 
per banded sable.
Earl of Arundel ; crest, a griffin's 
head, or, in a ducal coronet, gules.
Lord Godfrey 
* This Ms considered as one of the finest pieces which Knel- 
ler ever executed, and the painter himself appears to have had 
the same opinion ; for, when any person criticised his more 
hastv and careless production--, he exclaimed " Pho !
Pho !
it 
will "not be thought mine: nobody w ih believe that the same 
painted this and the Chinese at Windsor." 
l J r 
liarcourtj 
114 
BERKSHIRE.
Harcourt ; crest, a peacock's tail, in a ducal coro- 
net, proper.
Sir Hugh Courtnay ; crest, a pyramid 
of swan's feathers, in a ducal coronet, proper.
Earl 
of Salisbury ; crest, a griffin sejant, or, on a ducal 
coronet, gules.
The Prince of Wales ; the royal 
crest of England.
Lord Roos ; crest, a peacock in 
his pride, proper, standing on a chapeau.
" The Interview between the King and his victo- 
rious Son the Black Prince, after the Battle of 
Cressy, August the 26th, 1346.
In the centre of 
this picture is Edward III.
habited in a surcoat, 
whereon is embroidered the arms of France and 
England.
On the King's left hand is the Prince of 
Wales in his suit of black armour, from which he 
was customarily styled the Black Prince.
Behind 
them Sir John Beauchamp, bearing the royal stand- 
ard, his crest upon his helmet being a swan's head 
argent, in a ducal coronet, gules.
John, Lord 
Chandos, with his crest above-mentioned.
John, Earl 
of Oxford ; crest, a boar azure, standing ou a cha- 
peau.
Richard, Earl of Arundel, &c.
&c.
" The Battle of Neville's Cross, October the 17th, 
1843.
In the centre of this picture is the Queen 
mounted on a white horse, her arms embroidered 
upon her robes, &c.
Lord Percy is on the Queen's 
right hand ; his crest on his helmet, his arms upon 
his shield, or, a lion rampant, azure.
Behind them 
are several bishops, and a great many of the English 
nobility.
In the distance are the banners of the 
King of Scotland : or, a lion rampant, within a 
double tressureflory, counterflory, gules ; and sun- 
dry of the Scottish nobility with their heraldric 
insignia.
" The Surrender of Calais, August the 4th, 1347.
The principal figures are the King, the Queen, the 
Prince of Wales, Earl of Warwick, and Lord Staf- 
ford ; their crests on their helmets, as before.
Over 
the burgesses' heads the Royal Standard, Sir Walter 
Manny's banner of his arms : or, three chevronels, 
sable.
Lord Basset's banner : or, three piles, gules, 
and a Canton ermine.
" The Crowning of Lord Loius de Ribbermont, 
for his Valour, by King Edward III.
January the 
1st, 1319.
In the centre of this picture is the King, 
distinguished by the royal bearings upon his armour.
On the King's right hand Sir Walter Manny, with 
bis family arms upon his armour.
" The Institution of the most noble Order of the 
* Mr. Btckford, of Fonthill, who is in possession of the ori- 
ginal sketch of this picture, has made the following remarks on 
Us composition and general merit: — " Above one hundred 
figures are grouped together with such effect, and painted with 
Ao much spirit, as to raise this beautiful performance almost to a 
level with the happiest effusions of the pencils of Rubens and 
Vaodyck.
The colouring, for richness and transparency, equals 
the best works of the Flemish school.
To the utmost powers of 
execution it joins the historical interest of the subjects ; and the 
curiosity of displaying portraits of Edward III.
the Black 
Pnnce, Queen Philippa, all the Royal Children, the Fair Maid 
of Kent, and the beautiful Countess of Kildare ; with the King 
of Scots and Charles of Biois, then prisoner in the castle," 
9 
Garter, April 23, 1349.
The scene of this beautiful 
picture is St. George's Chapel, in which a great 
number of eminent persons, who were present during 
the installation, are represented.
The Bishops of 
Salisbury and Winchester are performing the cere- 
mony of high mass, and the sovereign, queen, and 
knights, are kneeling round the altar.
The queen is- 
in the centre of the picture, her robe embroidered 
with the arms of ancient France and England, quar- 
terly ; likewise those of Hanault and Flanders, quar- 
terly.
Near her Majesty are, the Princess Royal, 
having the arms of France and England, quarterly, 
on her mantle ; Joan of Kent, with her badge upon 
her left shoulder, a white hart, couchant, ducally, 
collared and chained ; or, upon a tree, proper ; the 
Duchess of Norfolk, her arms, England, with a label 
of three points, argent ; the Queen of Scotland, her 
arms on her mantle ; with a great number of others 
of the nobility.* 
" The Battle of Poictiers, September the 19th, 
1355.
The principal figure in this picture is the 
Prince of Wales ; upon his helmet a plume of os- 
trich feathers in a coronet, which was worn by the 
King of Bohemia in the battle of Cressy.
Among 
other figures are John, Lord Chandos ; his crest on 
his helmet, as before described ; his shield azure, 
on it the Virgin Mary : or, encompassed with the 
rays of the sun, argent.
William, Earl of Salis- 
bury ; crest, a griffin sejant, or, a ducal coronet, 
gules.
John, Lord Willoughby, of Eresby : his 
crest, a black's head, ducaliy crowned, proper.
Prince Philip, fourth son of the King of France : 
his crest a fleur-de-lis.
John, King of France, in 
a surcoat, adorned with the royal arms of France, 
&c.
&c.
There are nearly thirty figures in this 
picture, all designated by their respective armorial 
bearings.
" St. George killing the Dragon, by Mr. West.
This picture was painted as an accompaniment to 
the Institution of the Garter, of which order the 
Saint was constituted patron of Edward III.
The 
subject is taken from the Golden Legends of Jacobus 
de Veragine, who lived towards the conclusion of 
the thirteenth century." f 
The canopy of this room, which is of velvet, em- 
broidered with gold, very rich, was set up in the 
reign of King Charles II.
On the ceiling of the King's Presence Chamber, 
is 
f The following is the passage in Veragine's work, from 
which this painting is taken : — " Saynl George was a knyghte 
born at Capadose.
On a tyme he came into the province of 
Lybia to a cyte whyche is say'd Sylene, and by this cyte was 
a stagne or ponde lyke a see, wherein was a dragon whyche en- 
veny tried all the conlre, and the people of the cyte gave to him 
every day two sheep for to fede him ; and when the sheep fay 1- 
ed, there was taken a man and a sheep.
Thenne there was an 
ordaniunce made in the toune, that there should be taken the 
chyldren and yAng people of them of the toune, by lotte, and 
that it so happed the lotte fyl upon the kinge's cloughter, where- 
of the kynge was sory, and sayde, for the love of Goddes, take 
gold and stiver and all that 1 have) and let me have my dough- 
ter- 
BERKSHIRE.
115 
is Mercury, with a portrait of Charles II.
(an origi- 
nal, and a true likeness,) shewing the monarch to 
the four quarters of the world, introduced by Nep- 
tune ; Fame declaring the glory of the prince, and 
Time driving away Rebellion, Sedition, and their 
companions.
Over the canopy is Justice, in stone 
colour, shewing the arms of Britain to Thames and 
his river Nymphs, with the star of Venus, and this 
label, " Sydus Carolinian ;" at the lower end of the 
chamber is Venus in a sea-car, drawn by Tritons 
and Sea-Nymphs.
This ceiling is in all parts beau- 
tifully painted, and highly ornamented with gold 
and stone colour.
To this apartment belong four of 
the cartoons of Raphael before-mentioned, and like- 
wise the following paintings : 
Peter, Czar of Muscovy ; by Sir Godfrey Kueller.
This is a full length, dated 1698, the year in which 
this extraordinary personage visited this country.
In the back ground of this picture is shipping, by 
Van Diest.
The Czar is represented in armour.
— 
Prometheus and the Vulture ; by young Palma.
— 
Duns Scotus, said to have been executed by Spag- 
noletto.
Mr. Walpole, in his /Edes Walpolianae, has 
remarked that " this picture must be ideal, as Duns 
Scotus died in 1308, when there was no such a 
thing as a tolerable painter ; besides, the portrait re- 
presents him as an elderly man, whereas he was not 
34 when he died." Spagnoletto was not born till 
nearly three centuries later.
The King's Guard Chamber, a spacious and noble 
room, contains a large magazine of arms ; viz.
pikes, 
pistols, guns, coats of mail, swords, halberts, bayo- 
nets, drums, &.c. all beautifully disposed in colo- 
nades, pillars, circles, shields, and other devices, in 
a most curious manner, arranged by Mr. Harris, 
late gun-master of this castle.
The ceiling is paint- 
ter ; and the peple sayde, how Sir, ye have made and ordained 
the lawe, and our chyldren be now deed, and now ye would do 
the contraye ; your doughter shall be gyven, or else we shall 
burnie you and your holdes.
When the kynge saw that he 
might no more doo, he began to weepe, and returned to the 
peple and demanded eight days respyse ; and when the eight 
days were passed, then dyd the kyng araye his doughter lyke 
as she should be wedded, and ledde hyr to the place where the 
dragon was.
When she was there, Saynt George passed by and 
demanded of the layde what she made there ; and she sayde go 
ye your wayes fayre young man, that ye perish not also." The 
Legend then relates " that the dragon appered, and Saynt 
George upon his horse bore himself against the dragon, and 
smote hym with his speie, and threw hym to the ground, and 
delivered the layde to her father, who was baptized, and all the 
peple." 
In the additions to Veragine's work, by Caxton, the printer, 
in Edward the IVth's tyme, it is said, that iu the " noble col- 
lege in the castle of Windsore, is the hart of Saynt George, 
which Sygysmunde the Emperor of Almayne, brought and 
gave for a great and precious relic, to King Harry the Fyfth ; 
and also here is a pece of his hed." 
The real history of St. George is involved in much obscurity.
He is reported bv some, to have been born and martyred in 
Cappadocia, others have considered him the offspring of a warm 
imagination, and the history of his actions fabulous, ft is, how- 
ever, certain, that he became very early the titular Saint of 
England, his name being found in the Martyrologies of the ve- 
nerable Bede.
In Gibbon's Roman History, be is traced to a 
ed in water colours : in one circle is Peace and 
Plenty, and in the other, Mars and Minerva.
The 
dome exhibits a representation of Mars, and the whole 
room is decorated with instruments of war.
Over 
the chimney is a whole portrait of Charles XI.
King of Sweden, on horseback,' as large as life, by 
Van Wyck.
Eight paintings of battles, sieges, &c.
by Rugendas, are placed in this room on the new 
arrangement of paintings by his present Majesty.
The Knights of the Gaiter dine in great state at 
the Installation, in the absence of the Sovereign, in 
this room.
St. George's Hall is particularly appropriated to 
the honour of the most illustrious Order of the Gar- 
ter, and is perhaps the most noble chamber in Eu- 
rope.
It is decorated with some of Verrio's best 
performances.
The centre of the ceiling is a large 
oval, wherein is represented Charles II.
in the full 
habit of the Order of St. George and the Garter, at- 
tended by England, Scotland, and Ireland ; Reli- 
gion and Plenty holding the imperial crown of these 
kingdoms over his head ; Mars and Mercury, with 
the emblems of war and peace, are on each side the 
monarch : in the same oval is Regal Government, 
supported by Religion and Eternity ; Justice, at- 
tended by Fortitude, Temperance, and Prudence, 
beating down Rebellion and Faction, in a hydra of 
evil genii, in one of which the painter is said to have 
introduced the Earl of Shaftesbury^ a statesman of 
that reign, dispersing libels.
On the part of the 
ceiling towards the throne, in an octagon, is St.
George's Cross, environed with the Garter within 
the star or glory, supported by Cupids displaying 
the motto, " Honi soit qui mal y pense," with the 
Muses attending in full concert, and other embel- 
lishments, expressing the grandeur of the order.
— • 
fuller's shop in Epiphania.
" From an obscure and servile 
origin," says the historian, " he raised himself by the talents of 
a parasite; and the patrons whom he assiduously flattered, pro- 
cured for their worthless dependant a lucrative commission or 
contract to supply the army with bacon.
His employment was 
mean, he rendered it infamous ; he accumulated wealth by the 
basest arts of fraud and corruption ; but his malversations were 
so notorious that he was compelled to escape from the pursuits 
of justice.
After this disgrace, in which he appears to have sav- 
ed his fortune at the ex pence of his honour, he embraced, with 
real or affected zeal, the profession of Arianism.
He after- 
wards became Bishop of Alexandria, where, by his tyrannical 
conduct, he excited the indignation of the people to that degree, 
that, in a tumult, purposely raised, he was torn in pieces by the 
mob, and his remains thrown into the sea to prevent their re- 
ceiving the future honours his superstitious votaries were ex- 
pected to bestow.
This intention, however, was defeated by 
the absurd bigotry of his Arian disciples, who introduced his 
worship into the bosom of the Catholic Church," where, " the 
odious stranger, disguising every circumstance of time and 
place, assumed the mark of a martyr, a saint, and a Christian 
hero ; and the infamous George of Cappadocia has been trans- 
formed into the renowned St. George, the patron of England, 
Chivalry, and the Garter." 
This account of the Cappadocian martyr has met with many 
supporters; but it must not be omitted, that several literarv 
characters have contended, that the profligate Arian bishop anil 
the celebrated champion of Christendom, were different 
persons.
On 
11G 
BERKSHIRE.
On the back of the state, or sovereign's throne, is a 
large drapery, on Which is painted, as large as life, 
St. George encountering the dragon, and oh the 
lower border of the drapery, is inscribed " Veniendo 
restituit rem," (by coming he restored the state,) in 
allusion to King William III.
who is painted under 
a royal canopy, in the habit of the order, by Sir 
Godfrey Kneller ; the ascent to the throne is by five 
steps of fine marble, to which the painter has made 
an addition of five more, so accurately executed, that 
the spectator is agreeably deceived, and induced to 
believe them real.
The extent of this room in length 
is 108 feet 8 inches, and the whole of the north side 
is taken up with the triumph of Edward the Black 
Prince, son to the renowned Edward III.
in the 
manner of the Romans.
On the upper part of the 
hall is represented Edward III.
the conqueror of 
France and Scotland, seated on a throne, receiving 
John, King of France, and David, King of Scotland, 
prisoners ; the prince is seated in a car in the middle 
of the procession, crowned with laurel, and carried 
by slaves, preceded by captives, and attended by the 
emblems of victory, and other ensigns of the Ro- 
mans, with the banners of France and Scotland dis- 
played.
The painter has closed the procession with 
the fiction of the Countess of Salisbury, in the per - 
son of a fine lady making garlands for the prince, 
and a representation of the Merry Wives of Wind- 
sor, rendered famous by th^muse of Shakespeare.
In this last part of the group he has introduced him- 
self in a black hood and a scarlet cloak.
At the 
lower end of the hall is a noble music gallery, sup- 
ported by four slaves larger than life, in proper atti- 
tudes, beautifully carved in wood, bending as it were 
beneath their burthen, representing a father and his 
three sons, whom the valiant Black Prince made 
captive in his wars abroad.
Over this gallery, is the 
following inscription : — 
Antonius Vervio Neapolitans 
Non Ignobili Stirpe natus 
Augustissimi Regis Caroli Secundi 
Sancti et Georgii 
Molcm hanc Faelicissima Manu 
Decoravit.* 
The lower compartment of the ceiling in this room 
represents the collar of the order of the Garter, fully 
displayed: and the painting in the several parts of 
the wainscot is highly finished, and heightened with 
gold, representing the ensigns of the Garter.
When 
the sovereign is present at the installation, the 
* Translation : — " This grand r< 0111, belonging to (lie most 
august King 'Charles IF.
and dedicated to St. George, was 
ornamented by Anthony Verrio, a Neapolitan nobleman." 
Mr. Walpole observes, that the " exuberant pencil of this 
artist-was ready at pouring out gods, goddesses, kings, empe- 
rors, and triumphs, over those public surfaces on which the eye 
never re^ts long enough to criticise, and where one should be 
sorry to pi ice the w oiks of a belter master : I mean ceilings 
and stair-cases." The melange which is exhibited in the above 
mentioned picture, is certainly much loo absurd to attract the 
knights companions of the order dine in gi'eat state 
in this hall.
The chapel of St. George is situated in the middle 
. of the lower court or ward of the castle.
The first 
mention made of this venerable work is, that it was 
originally a chapel dedicated to Edward the Con- 
fessor.
King Henry I.
built a chapel at Windsor, 
dedicated to St. Edward the Confessor, and placed 
in it 80 canons.
This chapel was rebuilt by King 
Henry III.
who, in 1243, issued a commission to 
Walter de Gray, Archbishop of York, to expedite 
the works of the King's chapel at Windsor, direct- 
ing that the workmen should proceed as well in win- 
ter as in summer, till the whole was completed ; 
that a lofty wooden roof, like the roof of the new 
work at Litchfield, should be made to appear like 
stone-work, with good ceiling and painting ; that 
the chapel should be covered with lead, and four 
gilded images be put up in it, where the king had 
before directed images of the same kind to be plac- 
ed ; and that a stone turret should be made in front 
of the chapel of sufficient size to hold three or four 
bells.
Some remains of Henry the Third's building 
may be seen on the north side of the dean's cloisters, 
and at the Cast end of the chapel behind the altar.
King Edward II.
founded a chantry for four chap- 
lains and two clerks, and built a chapel in the park 
for four other chaplains, whom he afterwards remov- 
ed to the chapel in the castle.
Edward III.
re- 
founded it in 1332, and established it as a collegiate 
church in honour of the Virgin Mary, St. George, 
and St. Edward, King and Confessor.
In the year 
1349 he augmented the number of canons to 23, be- 
sides a warden, and appointed 24 poor knights, for- 
all of whom he built habitations, and granted land 
for their support.
In 1331 the college was settled 
upon a new establishment by the Bishop of Win- 
chester, who acted as delegate for the Pope.
It was 
now made to consist of a cusfos, or warden, 12 secu- 
lar canons, 13 priests or vicars, four clerks, six cho- 
risters, and 26 poor or alms-knights, and other offi- 
cers.
In the reign of Henry IV.
the title of warden 
was changed to that of dean.
In the reign of Ed- 
ward IV.
the college was incorporated, and four 
Tuesdays in the year were set apart for commemo- 
rating the bounty of benefactors.
In the 20th of 
Henry VIII.
their revenues were 16021.
2s.
Id.
The suppressing spirit of Edward VI.
excepted this 
free chapel from the general abolition of colleges.
It now consists of a dean, 12 canons, seven minor 
canons, 12 lay clerks, one of whom is usually the 
notice of serious criticism.
The glaring absurdity of Vcrrio's 
paintings is more strikingly apparent from their contiguity t» 
the chaste and classical designs of Mr. W esti 
Verrio, however* was employed by Charles the Second; 
and, from a memorandum of Vertue's, preserved in the Anec- 
dotes of Painting, it appears, that he received cash and presents 
to the amountof 68451.
Ss. 4d.
for embellishing the w.ills and 
ceilings oi Windsor castle.
Many of live apartments are cover- 
ed with his performances.
organist, 
BERKSHIRE.
117 
organist, and 10 choristers.
The structure owes its 
present form to Edward IV.
and its completion to 
Henry VII.
Dallaway, in his Anecdotes of the 
Arts, has affirmed, that " the choir owes its original 
building and completion, in 1508, to Sir Reginald 
Bray." This is evidently a mistake, as that emi- 
nent statesman and architect died in the year 1503.
The error may have arisen from the liberal benefac- 
tions of Sir Reginald towards finishing the body of 
the chapel.
The vaulting of the choir roof was un- 
dertaken by two free-masons, named John Hylmer 
and William Vertue, for 7001.
The roof was elipti- 
cal, the ribs and groins from the clustered columns 
supporting the ceding.
The improved, and highly elegant state in which 
this chapel now appears, is owing to the taste and 
munificence of his present Majesty, who has expend- 
ed upwards of 20,0001.
in its repairs and embellish- 
ments.
It may at present be regarded as the most 
complete and elegant specimen of what, is termed the 
florid Gothic in England.
The choir is a pattern of 
the most admirable workmanship.
The first of the new works which attracts our no- 
tice is a magnificent gallery or arcade, the airy pil- 
lars of which support the organ.
They are execut- 
ed, as is the whole gallery, in Coade's artificial 
stone.
The superior lightness and sharpness of the 
ornamental parts are immediately apparent, as no 
stone can be wrought to so exquisite a finish.
The 
style of the galleries is that of the purest Gothic ; 
and the devices, as combining with the rest of the 
structure, are emblematic of the Order of the Garter, 
and referring to the patron saint.
The organ, given 
by his Majesty, was built by the late Mr. Samuel 
Green ; and, for richness and variety of tone, it is 
said to be unequalled in this kingdom.
Its case is 
oak, wrought in the most accurate resemblance of 
the Gothic style.
The whole of the arcade, and the 
organ-case, were designed by, and executed under 
the direction of, Mr. Emlyn.
The floor of St. George's chapel is entirely new 
laid with Gloucester stone, and every part of the 
stone-work of the body of the building, with the 
nicest care, retouched, and restored to uniformity of 
colour.
The stalls of the sovereign and companions 
of the Order of the Garter, are ranged on each side 
of the choir.
Those of the King and Prince of 
Wales, on the right and left hands of the entrance, 
are new, and were executed under the direction of 
Mr. Emlyn : they are highly decorated with tracery.
In the centre of that of the sovereign are the arms 
of the king encircled with laurel, and crowned with 
the royal diadem ; the whole is surrounded with 
fleurs-de-lys, the letters G.
R. and the star of the 
order.
The pannels of the different stalls are deco- 
rated with the blazon of the various knights compa- 
* The expence of painting this window was defrayed by the 
Sovereign, Knights, Prelate, and Chancellor of the Garter, and 
Dean and Chapter of Windsor.
The King's subscription was 
nearly 1500 guineas, besides 200 for the Prince of Wales, and 
VOL.
I. NO.
9. 
nions, and the banners are suspended aloft of such 
only as have been installed.
The carved devices 
upon the latter stalls are, his Majesty going to St.
Paul's ; their Majesties seated in that cathedral ; the 
attempt upon the life of the sovereign ; and her Ma- 
jesty's bounty to children who were educated at her 
expence in Datchet Lane.
The altar forms one of the grandest spectacles 
that can be conceived.
The centre is the chef 
d'eeuvre of West, the Last Supper, treated in a 
manner at once original and happy.
" This great 
master of sacred subjects," observes a contemporary 
writer, " whose works are eminent for depicting the 
true simplicity and piety of the divine persons of the 
Christian history, has, among the groupe here pre- 
sent, bestowed all the originality of his pencil upon 
the countenance, figure, and attitude of Judas ; the 
betraying fiend has got possession of him, and every 
line of his visage is treacherous, dark, and deadly." 
Judas is going out to give the signal which be- 
trayed.
The beautifully carved wainscot which surrounds 
the altar is in the Gothic style.
The subjects are the 
various emblems of the Order of the Garter, design- 
ed by Mr. Thomas SanUy, and executed under the 
inspection of Mr. Emlyn.
This superb fabric contains several windows beau- 
tifully painted.
That above the altar represents 
The Resurrection, in three compartments.
This 
splendid production Avas executed between the years 
1785 and 1788, by Messrs.
Jarvis and Forrest, from 
the exquisite designs of Mr. West.
The expence is 
said to have been upwards of 40001.
On two win- 
dows, one on the north side of the altar, the other 
en the south, are depicted the arms of the sovereign 
and knights who subscribed to defray the above 
sum.* The east window on the south aisle is paint- 
ed with a very fine representation of the Angels ap- 
pearing to the Shepherds.
Upon the west window 
of this aisle is depicted the Nativity of Christ.
The 
west window of the north aisle represents the Adora- 
tion of the Magi.
These paintings were all design- 
ed by Mr. West, and executed by Mr. Forrest, in 
the years 179-2, 1794, and 1796.
The great west 
window, which was formerly filled with ancient 
stained glass, collected from various parts of the 
chapel, is decorated with the subject of the Cruci- 
fixion, by Forrest, from a design by Mr. West.
The iron-work, which formerly enclosed the tomb 
of Edward IV.
in the left aisle, has been, at the sug- 
gestion of Mr. West, removed to the inside of the 
choir, parallel with the altar.
This curious work, 
as we before intimated, is supposed to have come 
from the memorable hand of Quintim Matsys, the 
blacksmith of Antwerp.
St. George's chapel has been the burial-place of 
the same sum for the Dukes of York and Clarence.
The fo- 
reign Princes, who were Knights of the Order, suhscribed 100 
guineas each, and the other Knights 50 each ; and the Dean 
and Chapter gave 500 guineas, 
2 g several 
m 
BERKSHIRE.
several royal and illustrious personages.
The re- 
mains of Edward the Fourth are deposited at the 
east end of the north aisle ; and, over his tomb, is a 
beautiful monument of steel, representing a pair of 
gates between the two towers, curiously worked.
On a black marble slab, in front, is the name 
©Dtarn 313I3I3I.
inlaid in brass ; above, are his arms, 
and crown, supported by angels ; and on a flat stone, 
at the base of the monument, is inscribed, 
Stilts ©iforB 3!3!3!31 ano fjis ttstm.
<£Itjabetfj satitsbille.
On the 13th of March, in the year 1789, the work- 
men who were employed in repairing the chapel, 
perceived a small aperture in the side of the vault 
where Edward was interred ; and, on the interior 
part being laid open, the skeleton of the monarch 
was found enclosed in a leaden and a wooden coffin ; 
the latter measuring six feet three inches in length.
The head was inclined to the north side, without any 
appearance of cerecloth or wrapper, rings, or other 
insignia ; but the bottom of the coffin was covered 
with a glutinous muddy liquor, about three inches 
deep, of a strong saline taste.
Near the bones of 
the king was another coffin, supposed to have con- 
tained the body of Elizabeth Widville, but it was 
entirely empty.
Several names, written with chalk, 
appeared on the inside of the vault, the characters 
of which resembled those of the times in which it 
was made.
They had probably been inscribed by 
the workmen, or by the attendants on the funeral.
* The historical reader will recollect, that Lord Clarendon 
excited a strong feeling, respecting the interment of Charles's 
body by his account of the vain endeavours which were made to 
discover it, after the Restoration.
It was said in his time, that 
the Republicans had had the address to bury Cromwell under 
the obelisk in Red Lion Square, and to place the body of 
Charles in the coffin of Cromwell in Westminster Abbey ; so 
that when tke body of Cromwell was condemned to be hung 
on the gallows at Tyburn, the head separated from the body, 
and it was conceived that the indignity had been offered to the 
body of the royal martyr.
Such was the opinion in the time 
of Lord Clarendon, confirmed by the vain search for the body 
of Charles.
Clarendon died in 1673, and his History was not 
published till 1704.
In the interim, however, about 1700, as 
Mapletop tells us, in his History of Windsor, the vault of Hen- 
ry the Eighth was opened to deposit therein the body of a still- 
born child of the Princess Anne, and in that vault was found 
the coffin of Charles the First, on which was placed that of the 
infant.
This accorded too with the account published in 
Wood's Athenae Oronienses, and Saunderson's Life of Charles; 
yet Lord Clarendon's subsequent publication revived and con- 
tinued doubts on the subject.
However, it seems, that while 
the workmen engaged in opening the royal vaults to deposit 
the Jate Duchess of Brunswick, were making a subterraneous 
passage from the middle of the choir to the new royal mauso- 
leum, they accidentally broke away a part of the vault of Hen- 
ry VIII.
which was not then intended to be opened.
The 
precise spot of Henry's vault being thus ascertained, a strong 
desire prevailed to satisfy all doubts on the subject of Charles.
The Regent being, therefore, at Windsor, on the day after the 
funeral of.
the Duchess of Brunswick, he was consulted about 
thp mode of exploring these royal remains, which he directed 
to be immediately done in his" presence.
The leaden coffin 
was cut open by the plumber from the head to a little below the 
Henry VIII.
his Queen, Jane Seymour, and 
Charles I.
were buried in the royal vault, in the 
choir.
Lord Clarendon states, that the remains of 
the martyred monarch could not be found when 
sought for by the direction of Charles the Second ; 
but Mr Sewell, a man of probity, and who was 
chapter-clerk of the college more than forty years, 
affirmed, that, upon " opening this vault for the in- 
terment of a still-born child of the Princess of Den- 
mark, afterwards Queen Anne, he went into the 
vault, and there saw the coffins of King Henry the 
Eighth, and Queen Jane ; also the coffin of King 
Charles the First, covered with velvet, with a label 
on the cover, whereon was marked, King Charles, 
1648 ; that the velvet of the coffin and pall was 
sound, and noways rent ; that the pall laid over the 
coffin, was as at first flung in at the burial ; that the 
vault was small ; and that the new-born child was 
laid upon the coffin of the King." After the inter- 
ment of the child, the vault was not opened.
In the month of April, 1813, on the interment of 
the late Duchess of Brunswick, the curiosity of the 
public was much excited, by the discovery of the 
body of Charles the First, in one of these vaults.
The subject underwent ample investigation, in the 
presence of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, 
and the result afforded complete conviction, as to 
the identity of the martyred king.* 
At the east end of the south aisle, in a small cha- 
pel, the body of Edward Clinton, Earl of Lincoln, 
Elizabeth's 
chest, and a body appeared covered over with a cerecloth.
On 
carefully stripping the head and face the countenance of Charles 
I. immediately appeared, in features apparently as perfect as 
when he lived.
His severed head had been carefully adjusted 
to the shoulders; and the most perfect resemblance to his por- 
traits was remarked in (he oval shape of the head, the pointed 
beard, &c.
On lifting up the head, the fissure made by the axe 
was clearly discovered, and the flesh, though somewhat darken- 
ed, was found to be in a tolerably perfect state.
In the same 
vault was also found a decayed leaden coffin, containing the re- 
mains of Henry "VIII.
but they consisted of nothing more than 
the scull, with some hair on the chin, and the principal limb 
bones.
The following interesting extract from Sir Henry Hal- 
ford's Narrative of this Affair, we have much satisfaction in sub- 
mitting to our readers: 
" On removing the pall, a plain leaden coffin, with no ap- 
pearance of ever having been enclosed in wood, and bearing an 
inscription, * King Charles, 1648,' in large legible characters, 
on a scroll of lead encircling it, immediately presented itself to 
the view.
A square opening was then made in the upper part 
of the lid, of such dimensions as lo admit a clear insight into its 
contents.
These were, an internal wooden coffin, very much 
decayed, and the body carefully wrapped in cerecloth, into the 
folds of which a quantity of unctuous or greasy matter mixed 
with resin, as it seemed, had been melted, so as to exclude as 
effectually as possible the external air.
The coffin was com- 
pletely full ; and, from the tenacity of the cerecloth, great dif- 
ficulty was experienced in detaching t successfully from the 
parts which it enveloped.
Wherever the unctuous matter had 
insinuated itself, the separation of the cerecloth was easy ; and 
when it came off, a correct impression of the features was ob- 
served in the unctuous substance.
At length the whole face 
was disengaged from its covering.
The complection of the 
skin of it was dark and discoloured.
The forehead and temples 
bad 
BERKSHIRE.
119 
Elizabeth's Lord High Admiral, and that of his 
lady, rest in the silent grave.
The Earl's monu- 
ment is of alabaster, with square porphyry pillars, 
each surmounted with a ball.
On the tomb is the 
figure of his lordship in armour, lying prostrate on 
a mat curiously wrought, with his feet resting on a 
greyhound ; and by his side are the effigies of his 
wife in a similar posture, her head resting on an em- 
broidered cushion, and her feet on some animal.
The figures of their children, five sons and three 
daughters, kneeling on cushions, surrounded the 
monument.
Richard Beauchamp, Bishop of Salisbury, the 
first Chancellor of the Order of the Garter, is like- 
wise buried in this part of the aisle.
Opposite his 
tomb, in a niche, is the following inscription, which 
seems to imply that a breviary, or missal, was for- 
merly laid there : — 
'• Who lyde this booke here ?
The Reuerand Fa- 
der in God Richard Beauchamp, Bischop of thys 
Dyocesse of Salysbury.
And wherfor ?
To this in- 
tent, that priestes and Ministers of Goddis Church 
may here have the occupation therof, seyying therein 
theyr Divyne Servyce, and for alle othir that lysten 
to sey therby ther devocyon.
Askyth he any spiritual 
Mede ; yee, as moche as owre Lord lyst to reward 
hym for hys good intent ; praying euery Man wos 
dute or devocyon is eased by thys' Booke, they woll 
sey for hym thys commune orysoif, DneJhuXye; 
knelyng in the presence of thys holy Crosse, for'the 
whyche the Reuerand Fader in God aboueseyd hathe 
graunted of the tresure of the Churche, to euy Man 
xi dayys of Pardun." 
The cross referred to, with the figure of Edward 
the Fourth and Bishop Beauchamp, beside it, on 
their knees, are rudely carved on the centre stone of 
the adjoining arch.
A small chantry, lower down in this aisle, was 
erected in the year 1522 by John Oxenbridge, a ca- 
had lost little or nothing of their muscular substance; the car- 
tilage of the nose was gone ; but the left eye, in the first mo- 
ment of exposure, was open and full, though it vanished almost 
immediately ; and the pointed beard, so characteristic of the 
period of the reign of King Charles, was perfect.
The shape of 
the face was a long oval; many of the teeth remained ; and the 
left ear, in consequence of the interposition of the unctuous mat- 
ter between it and the cerecloth, was found entire.
" It was difficult, at this moment, to withhold a declaration, 
that, notwithstanding its disfigurement, the countenance did 
bear a strong resemblance to the coins, the busts, and especially 
to the pictures of King Charles I.
by Vandyck, by which it had 
been made familiar to us.
It is true, that the minds of the spec- 
tators of this interesting sight were well prepared to receive this 
impression ; but it is also certain that such a facility of belief 
had been occasioned by the simplicity and truth of Mr. Her- 
bert's Narrative, every part of which had been confirmed by 
the investigation so far as it had advanced ; and it will not be 
denied that the shape of the face, the forehead, an eye, and the 
beard, are the most important features by which resemblance is 
determined.
" When the head had been entirely disengaged from the at- 
tachments which confined it, it was found to be loose, and with- 
out any difficulty it was taken up and exposed to view.
It was 
quite wet, and gave a greenish red tinge to paper, and to linen 
which touched it.
The back part of the scalp was entirely per- 
non and benefactor to the chapel.
Over the door is 
a lion rampant, with many escalop shells, and the 
rebus of the founder's name in the obvious signs of 
an ox, the letter N.
and a bridge.
Contiguous to 
this, is King's, or, as it has latterly been called, Aid- 
worth Chapel, which, from the various devices on 
the walls, appears to have been built by Dr. Oliver 
King, Bishop of Bath and Wells, whose remains are 
said to have been deposited therein.
Opposite to 
this chapel, the oaken pannels are decorated with 
carvings of the arms and devices of Prince Edward, 
son of Henry the Sixth ; Edward the Fourth ; and 
Henry the Seventh ; whose portraits also are deli- 
neated at full length.
Near the middle of the aisle 
is Bray Chapel, erected by Sir Reginald Bray ; a 
gentleman who was highly instrumental in the ad- 
vancement of Henry the Seventh to the throne, and 
whose judicious counsels were supposed to have had 
considerable influence in the union of the rival houses 
of York and Lancaster.
His body was interred in 
this chapel.
In Beaufort Chapel, at the west end of this aisle, 
many of the noble family of that name are interred.
The monument to the memory of Henry Somerset* 
Duke of Beaufort, who died in 1699, is composed of 
white marble.
The upper part is supported by Co- 
rinthian columns, the shafts of which are entwined 
with leaves and flowers.
In the centre, on the top, 
is the Duke's coat of arms, surmounted with a coro- 
net ; and on each side is a flaming urn, embellished 
with wreaths of flowers.
On the front, the Duke 
appears reclining on a cushion ; and in relievo, in 
the back ground, are several cherubs, and two an- 
gels, bearing a crown and palm.
Below, St. George 
is represented killing the Dragon ; and between the 
columns, on the opposite sides of the monument, are 
the statues of Justice and Fortitude.
Enclosed in a screen of gilt brass-work, is another 
feet, and had a remarkably fresh appearance ; the pores of the 
skin being more distinct, as they usually are, when soaked in 
moisture; and the tendons and ligaments of the neck were of 
considerable substance and firmness.
The hair was thick at the 
back part of the head, and in appearance nearly black ; a por* 
tion of it, which has since been cleaned and dried, is of a beau- 
tiful dark brown colour; that of the beard was a redder 
brown ; on the back part of the head it was no more than an 
inch in length, and had probably been cut so short for the con- 
venience of the executioner, or perhaps by the piety of friends 
soon after death, in order to furnish memorials of the unhappy 
King.
" On holding up the head to examine the place of separation 
from the body, the muscles of the neck had evidently retracted 
themselves considerably ; and the fourth cervical vertebra was 
found to be cut through its substance transversely, leaving the 
surfaces of the divided portions perfectly smooth and even; an 
appearance which could have been produced only by a heavy 
blow, inflicted with a very sharp instrument, and which fur- 
nished the last proof wanting to identify King Charles the 
First.
" After this examination of the head, which served every 
purpose in view, and without examining the body below the 
neck, it was immediately restored to its situation, the coffin was 
soldered up again, and the vault closed." 
marble 
120 
BERKSHIRE.
marble monument, recording the memory of Charles 
Somerset, Earl of Worcester, who died in 1526, and 
his lady.
On the tomb is the figure of the Earl, 
dressed in the habit of the Garter, with his head 
resting on a helmet ; and, by his side, lies his lady 
in her robes of state.
On a marble tablet, affixed 
to the wall, is an inscription, sta,tinf, that Henry, 
Marquis of Worcester, who so gallantly defended 
Ragland Castle, in Monmouthshire, for Charles the 
First, is also buried here.
Rutland Chapel, in the middle of the north aisle, 
contains a neat alabaster monument, to the memory 
of Sir George Manners, Lord Roos, who died in the 
year 1513, and Lady Anne, his wife, niece to Ed- 
ward the Fourth.
On the tomb, lies Sir George, 
dressed in armour, his feet resting on a helmet, and 
his head on an animal ; and his lady, in her robes of 
state, by his side, her head resting on a cushion, 
supported by two angels.
On each side of the tomb 
are their sons and daughters ; and at one end, the 
family arms, displayed by angels.
Ann, Duchess of 
Exeter, sister to Edward the Fourth, and mother to 
the above lady, and Sir Thomas Syllinger, her hus- 
band, were also buried in this chapel.
In the same aisle, on the west side of the choir 
door, is a chapel which was built by Elizabeth, wife 
of William, Lord Hastings, who was put to death 
by Richard III.
in the year 1483.
His remains 
were buried here.
The chapel is dedicated to St.
Stephen, whose history is painted, in four compart- 
ments, on the south side.
There are several other small chapels in this 
building, which, as less remarkable, it is unnecessary 
to particularize.* Many eminent and remarkable 
persons have also been interred here ; amongst 
whom may be mentioned, Captain Baskerville, who 
had maintained a troop of horse, at his own cost, for 
Charles I.
and died in 1711, at the age of 106, one 
of the Poor Knights of Windsor ; Thomas Browne, 
translator of Camden's Annals of Queen Elizabeth, 
who died canon of Windsor, in 1673 ; Captain John 
Baynes, who died in 1711, aged 112; Dr. S.
Pratt, 
preceptor to William, Duke of Gloucester, who died 
in 1723 ; William Child, Mus. Doc.
who died in 
1697, aged 91 ; Nat. Giles, Mus. Doc.
who died in 
* It may not be improper to remark, that most of the small 
chapels in this and other religious structures, where the Roman 
Catholic ordinances were originally celebrated, were founded 
as chantries, and endowed with revenues for the maintenance 
of priests, whose office was daily to say mass, and other pro- 
pitiatory services, for the souls of the founder and his kin- 
dred.
f The installation, or inauguration of a knight of this order, 
consists in a conjunction of many ceremonies, established by 
the royal founder, and by succeeding sovereigns of the order.
For the greater dignity and regularity of this illustrious society, 
the sole ordering of these ceremonies of installation belongs to 
Garter king at arms, a principal officer of the order, whose pe- 
culiar appointment is to maintain and support the dignity, 
and to preserve the honour of (his most noble order of 
knighthood.
On the morning of installation, the knights 
commissioners appointed by the sovereign to instal the new, or 
6 
1633 ; Mrs. Hannah Lowther, of Maske, in Cum- 
berland, who died in 1757, aged 103 ; Theodore 
Aylward, late Gresham Professor of Music, who 
died in 1801 ; &c.
At the east end of St. George's Chapel stands an 
edifice, called the Tomb House, which was built by 
Henry VII.
and intended for his burial place, before 
he erected the magnificent chapel which bears his 
name, in Westminster Abbey.
The building, being 
unappropriated, was granted by Henry VIII.
to 
Cardinal Wolsey, who began to erect a most sump- 
tuous monument for himself, the design of which is 
said to have exceeded in magnificence that of Henry 
VII.
Benedetto, of Florence, is said to have re- 
ceived 4250 ducats for what he had executed before 
the cardinal's fall ; and the expence of gilding what 
was then finished, which was not more than half, 
exceeded 3801.
a very considerable sum at that time.
Charles I.
is said to have intended this chapel for 
the burial place of himself and his family ; but the 
unfinished tomb was demolished in the civil war.
James II.
fitted up the building, for the perform- 
ance of divine service, and actually attended mass 
there.
Verrio was employed to paint the ceiling 
and walls.
After the reign of James, the chapel 
was suffered to fall to decay, till the year 1800, when 
his Majesty gave orders that it should undergo a 
thorough repair, intending it as a place of inter- 
ment of his family.
The decayed battlements, and 
other ornaments, have been restored, and the whole 
is nearly complete.
Windsor Castle is the seat of honour of the most 
illustrious Order of the Garter ; and it is the peculiar 
privilege of St. George's Chapel, that the installa- 
tion is expressly appointed to be solemnized and 
holden therein, either by the knights in person, or, 
on allowance from the sovereign, by their proxies.
In former times, the new, or knights elect, went in 
a solemn and stately procession to Windsor, attend- 
ed by their friends and servants in the richest live- 
ries, with exceeding great pomp and cavalcade : the 
procession of the knights from their lodgings in the 
castle to the chapel of St. George has also sometimes 
been on horseback, but most frequently on foot, as is 
the present custom.
f 
The 
knights elect, meet in the great chamber in the lodgings of the 
dean of Windsor, dressed in the full habit of the order; where 
the officers of the order also attend in their habits, and the 
knights elect come thither in their under habits only, bearing 
their caps and feathers in their hands.
From the dean's hall 
the first procession of the knights is made into St. George's 
chapel, and the new knights there rest themselves behind the 
altar, and are respectively introduced into the chapter-house; 
and by the lords commissioners (Gaiter, and other officers at- 
tending) are there invested with the surcoat or upper habit of 
the order, which is buckled over with a crimson velvet, and the 
hanger and sword also girded on ; the dean at the same time 
reading the several admonitions appointed by the laws and sta- 
tutes of the order, which the knights elect here subscribe, and 
take the requisite oaths.
The procession of each knight elect, 
separately, is afterwards made, into the choir, attended by the 
lords commissioners, and other companions of the order, down 
the 
' 
TlaU I.
WffilKSi/R.raOM TlHfJE FOJREST.
Berkshire .
/>/Mj*,J tuJ*Jitm.l-r.Jlhi.>n /*>*.' LmhUh .# >/.; 
BERKSHIRE.
i2i 
The remainder of the apartments hi Windsor 
Castle are not shewn to the public ; nor are they 
open, but when the court resides there.
They con- 
sist of many beautiful rooms, with paintings by the 
best masters.
The inner, or Horn-court, so called, from a pair 
of stag's horns, of immense size, measuring ten feet 
in width, which were taken in the forest, and set up 
here, is usually looked into by strangers.
From this 
court, by a flight of stone steps, the entrance is into 
the kind's Guard Chamber.
In a cavity under 
these steps, and fronting this court, is represented a 
figure of Hercules.
On the dome over the steps is 
painted the battle of the Gods ; and on the sides of 
the staircase is a representation of the four ages of 
the world, and two battles of the Greeks and Ro- 
mans, in fresco.
The Keep, or Round Tower, was formerly called 
the middle ward, as it divided the two courts of the 
castle.
The lodgings of the governor in this part 
command a most extensive view to London, and, it 
is said, into eleven counties.
The royal standard 
is raised on this tower on state holidays, and during 
the residence of the king, or the royal family.
On 
the opposite corner of the royal building is King 
John's Tower, so named from being the apartment 
which was assigned to that prince when prisoner in 
England.
On the south side of the castle stands a modern 
mansion, called the Queen's Lodge, in which the 
royal family resided several years, during the summer 
season.
Not far distant is a house, called the Lower 
Lodge, which was formerly a seat of the Duke of 
the north aisle, and preceded by the poor knights, prebends, 
heralds, pursuivants, and other officers of the order in their se- 
veral habits ; Garter king at arms, bearing the robes, great col- 
lar, and George, of each knight, on a crimson velvet cushion.
On entering the choir, after reverence made to the altar and the 
sovereign's stall, the knights are conducted to their several seats 
or stalls, under their respective banners and other ensigns of ho- 
nour; ami with great state and reverence this most solemn part 
of the installation is performed, and here the knight is com- 
pletely dressed, at.d invested with the mantle of the order, and 
the great collar of St. George.
After the solemnity of installa- 
tion, the knights make their solemn offerings at the altar ; and, 
prayers being ended, the grand procession of the knights from 
the choir, in the full habits of their order, with their caps and 
plumes of feathers on their heads (which are frequently richly 
adorned and surrounded with diamonds) is made round the 
body of the church, and, passing out at the south door, the 
procession is continued, in great state, through the courts of the 
castle into St. George's Hall, preceded by his Majesty's music.
When the knights have rested for some time in the royal apart- 
ments, a sumptuous dinner or banquet is prepared in St.
George's Hall, if the sovereign be present; and, in his absence, 
in the Great Guard Chamber, adjoining; and the knights are 
introduced and dine in the habits of the order, a band of music 
attending.
Garter, king at arms, before dinner is ended, pro- 
claims the style and dignity of each knight, after which the 
company retire, and the evening is closed with a ball for the 
ladies in the royal lodgings.
This procession of the knights of 
the Garter, and the whole ceremony of installation, is most no- 
ble and stately.
Knights of the Garter may be elected ; but, according to the 
' statutes of the order, they are not deemed knights companions, 
VOL.
I. — NO.
9..
St. Albans.
It was purchased by his present Ma- 
jesty, and is occupied by some of the younger 
branches of the royal family.
It is said to have 
been built by the celebrated Eleanor Gwynn, mother 
of the first Duke of St. Albans.
Windsor Forest.] — Windsor Forest formerly 
comprised a part of Buckinghamshire, and a large 
district of Surrey ; at which time it was computed 
to be 120 miles in circumference.
The Vale of the 
Kennet was disforested by charter in 1226.
Nor- 
deu's map of the forest, which was constructed in 
the year 1G07, makes its circuit 77 miles and a half, 
exclusive of those parts which extended into Buck- 
inghamshire.
It. was then divided into seventeen 
walks, including Fienes Bailiwick, within which 
were situated the parishes of Remenham, Hurley, 
Wargrave, Bray, the two Walihams, Shottesbrook, 
Hurst, Ruscomb, and Binfield.
Rocque, in his map, 
describes the circuit of the forest to be about 56 
miles, including the whole of the parishes of Arbor- 
field, Barkham, Binfield, East Hamsted, Finch- 
Hamsted, Sandhurst, Sunninghill, Warfield, Wink- 
field, New and Old Windsor, together with part of 
the parishes of Bray, Clewer, Hurst; Wokingham) 
Swallowfield, and White Waltham.
A considerable 
part of Bagshot Heath is within the forest ; the 
greater part of most of the parishes within its limits 
are in a state of cultivation.
Windsor Park.] — The Great Park formerly con- 
tained 3800 acres ; but, when it reverted to his pre- 
sent Majesty, on the deatli of the Duke of Cumber- 
land, in the year 1791, it was reduced to 1800 acres, 
2000 having been brought into cultivation.
At that 
nor are they entitled to the full honours of the order, till they 
have been duly installed with the ceremonies of honour in St.
George's Chapel, at Windsor; as in the case of the late Earl of 
Halifax, who was elected a knight companion on the 23d April, 
1764, but dying before his installation, his name is not inserted 
in the catalogue of knights companions.
When a knight is 
found guilty of violating the statutes of the order he may be 
degraded, as the Duke of Ormand was in the reign ot George I.
Queen Elizabeth kept the festival of St. George at Windsor, 
in the year 1563, with great state ; and, to heighten the splen- 
dour of the solemnity, she at the same time caused peace to be 
proclaimed between England and France.
Formerly, the number of knights companions was twenty- 
five, exclusive of the sovereign and his sons; but, in January, 
1805, it was determined, that the number should be twenty-rive, 
exclusive of foreign princes ; in consequence of which, four 
new knights were elected to fill up the number.
On the en- 
suing St. George's Day, the installation took place, with much 
splendour and magnificence.
It was the first time that any ce- 
remonial had been observed on that festival, at Windsor, since 
the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
From the catalogue of the knights companions, from the first 
foundation to the present time, it appears that there is no royal 
or princely family in Europe, but has been of the company of 
this most illustrious society ; which, from its first institution, 
now more than four hundred years ago, has flourished, and • 
been the most distinguished mark of honour among the princes 
of Europe, the reward of merit, and great and heroic deeds.
— 
In the year 1813, aspecial mission was sent overtrain this coun- 
try, for the purpose of investing the Emperor ot Russia.
with 
the insignia of the order.
The Emperor of Austria and the 
King of Prussia have, we believe, been also elected.
2 h time, 
m 
BERKSHIRE.
time, the whole tract abounded with moss, fern, 
rushes, ant-hills, and swamps ; and its scanty pro- 
duce hardly afforded a sufficient support for 3000 
deer.
Its present state is very different : the wet 
parts have been rendered firm and sound by the 
Essex mode of under ground draining ; the rushes 
weakened and destroyed by draining and rolling ; 
the moss and email hillocks extirpated by harrow- 
ing ; the large ant-hills cleared by the scarifier ; the 
fern weakened by mowing ; the irregular banks le- 
' veiled ; the pits filled up ; the vallies opened ; the 
hills ornamented with new plantations ; the stiff line 
of trees, the vestiges of hedge rows, judiciously bro- 
ken; and, in its reduced extent, the park supports 
the same number of deer in much better health and 
condition.
The cultivated part of the park is disposed into 
two farms, respectively denominated The Norfolk 
and Flemish Farm.
The former, consisting of about 
1000 acres of a light sandy loam and gravelly soil, 
is divided into two parts ; one allotted to sheep 
walks, the other is disposed in arable land, managed 
in a five course shift of 100 acres in a class, and 
cropped in the following course : first, wheat or rye ; 
second, vetches, rye, and potatoes ; third, turnips ; 
fourth, barley or oats ; fifth, clover.
For the pur- 
pose of breaking up and clearing some of the strong 
land on this farm, which was found difficult and ex- 
pensive to be done in the usual way, the following 
successful experiment was made : — In the early part 
of the winter, it was ploughed to a full depth, with a 
swing plough, whose mould-board was so placed as 
to lay the turf in an inverted position.
This was 
well trodden with cattle and rolled, and the sheep 
occasionally driven over it.
In the spring it was 
harrowed and cropped with oats, which Avere no 
sooner off than the surface was again harrowed and 
dragged, so as to get as much loose earth as possi- 
ble without bringing up the turf; early in autumn 
it was sown with winter vetches, and in the begin- 
ning of June it was ploughed cross-ways, when the 
turf turned up quite rotten, and the land was got 
into a clean state by the first week in July ; both 
turnips and wheat were afterwards sown, and suc- 
ceeded beyond expectation.
The improvements which have been made upon 
the lands of this farm, have increased its value at 
least six times.
The folding or penning of sheep 
upon the fallows has considerably promoted this 
beneficial increase, from 600 to 800 Wiltshire we- 
thers being generally kept as a folding flock.
N. Kent, Esq. his Majesty's superintendant of the 
.agricultural establishment, has given the following 
description of a new mode of folding the sheep, in 
hard or wet weather : — 
" A dry sheltered spot is selected ; and sods of 
maiden earth, a foot deep, are laid over the space of 
a large fold.
It is then bedded thinly with rushes, 
leaves of trees, fern, moss, short straw or stubbles ; 
Vide Transactions of the Society of Arts, Vol. XVII.
and the flock, instead of being penned upon the clo- 
ver in the open fields, are put into this warmer fold, 
when the usual quantity of hay is given to them in 
racks ; and every night they are so penned, the fold 
is fresh littered.
When this has been continued, at 
intervals, during the winter, a lime-chalk rubble or 
ashes six inches thick is spread over the whole sur- 
face, and when it has heated together, the whole is 
turned up about the month of April, and when 
mixed, it makes the best manure that can be used 
for turnips."* 
The Flemish Farm, which contains about 1000 
acres, is situated at the north extremity of the park.
It was originally proposed to manage the land ac- 
cording- to the system of husbandry which is pursued 
in Flanders ; but the soil being found too strong 
and cohesive, a mode of culture more congenial to 
its nature was of necessity adopted.
The first year 
after breaking up, wheat is sown ; the second, cab- 
bages or clover ; the third, oats ; and the fourth, 
beans.
The arable land on this farm comprehends 
about one-third of it.
The natural beauty of this park has been much 
heightened by several valuable plantations which 
have been made on the higher grounds.
Many 
parts display a pleasing variety of hill, valley, wood, 
and water ; and, from some points, the views are 
particularly interesting, as they bear a striking re- 
semblance to the admired scenery of the New Fo- 
rest.
A cascade, executed from designs by Paul 
Sandby, Esq. and formed with large masses of stone, 
obtained from the sandy soil of Bagshot Heath, ter- 
minates Virginia Water.
The surplus waters flow 
over the top, and, by projecting stones, are broken 
into several streams.
The Little Park, which extends on the east and 
north sides of the castle, was enlarged and enclosed 
with a brick wall by William the Third.
It contains 
about 500 acres of land, plentifully stocked with 
sheep and cattle, with but very few deer.
On the 
north, the ground was laid out as a garden by Queen 
Anne, but it has since been levelled, and formed into 
a spacious lawn.
The eminence on the east, which 
Charles the Second converted into a bowling-green, 
has been considerably lowered in the present reign : 
the earth from the summit was spread on the decli 
vity of the hill, which has been planted with forest- 
trees, and surrounded by a neat paling.
The Ran- 
ger's Lodge, the Royal Dairy, and the Kennel for 
the King's Harriers, are on the south-east.
In this 
quarter of the park formerly stood a venerable tree, 
known by the appellation of Heme's Oak, which 
Shakespeare, in his Merry Wives of Windsor, has 
thus immortalized : — 
" There is an old tale goes that Heme the hunter, 
Some time a keeper here in Windsor forest, 
Doth all the winter time, at still of midnight, 
Walk round about an oak, with ragged horns ; 
And the;e he blasts the tree, and rakes the cattle, 
And 
BERKSHIRE.
123 
And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain 
In a most hideous and dreadful manner." 
According to tradition, this Heme was keeper of 
the forest, in the time of Elizabeth ; and, having 
been guilty of some offence, for which he expected 
to be disgraced, he hanged himself upon this oak.
The ignorant peasantry entertained the notion that 
his spirit haunted the spot ; and Shakespeare, from 
that circumstance, chose it as a fit scene of action 
to expose the cowardice of the lascivious FalstafF, 
who had here appointed to meet the " Merry Wives," 
in the character of Heme's ghost.
A view of this 
memorable tree, executed by Mr. Anderson, from a 
drawing which was made but a few days before it 
was cut down, is given in the first volume of the 
" Beauties of England and Wales." Some of the 
inhabitants of Windsor are in possession of tea cad- 
dies, &c.
which were made from its remains.
King William III.
about the year 1696, gave the 
rangership of both the Great and Little Park to the 
Earl of Portland ; in 1719, it was granted by Queen 
Anne, for three lives, to Sarah, Duchess of Marlbo- 
rough ; in 1746, the rangership of the great park 
was given to William, Duke of Cumberland, and 
that of the little park to the Earl of Pomfret.
The 
late Duke of Cumberland, his Majesty's brother, 
who died in 1791, succeeded his illustrious uncle ; 
and the present ranger is his Royal Highness the 
Duke of York, who succeeded his cousin, the Duke 
of Gloucester.
General Harcourt is the deputy- 
ranger.
Frogmore.] — Frogmore, the favourite residence 
of her present Majesty, is situated about half a mile 
east of Windsor, occupying part of a very fertile 
valley, which divides the little park from the forest, 
from which the venerable oaks and elms which still 
decorate the gardens, indicate it to have been sepa- 
rated.
This estate was formerly in the possession 
of Sir Edward Walpole.
It was purchased of the 
Honourable Mrs. Ann Egertou, by the Queen, in 
1792 ; and, since that period, it has been considera- 
bly enlarged and improved.
Thirteen acres of land 
have been laid out in a beautiful pleasure garden, 
diversified with a canal, winding in different direc- 
tions.
A great variety of indigenous and exotic 
trees and shrubs are scattered through the grounds ; 
and the garden is ornamented with five buildings, 
respectively denominated The Gothic Temple, the 
Rain, the Hermitage, the Temple of Solitude, and 
The Barn.
The Ruin was erected from a design by 
Mr. Wyatt ; and being seated on the water's edge, 
partly immersed in woods, and diversified with the 
creeping ivy and fractured wall, it constitutes a 
highly picturesque ornament.
The Hermitage, 
Which is a small circular thatched building, situated 
in the south-west corner of the garden, and com- 
pletely embowered with lofty trees, was constructed 
from a drawing of the Princess Elizabeth, whose 
* It is, we believe, very generally known, that a series of 
prints, intituled The Birth and Triumph of Cupid, have been 
taste and skill in this polite art are of a very supe- 
rior cast.* The surrounding scenery is judiciously 
managed, so as to assimilate with the character of 
the place.
Frogmore House, though not large, is a neat 
modern structure, and has been much improved by 
Mr. Wyatt.
It is partly built with free-stone, and 
partly cased ; and is decorated with a projecting 
colonnade towards the south, uniting the principal 
building with two uniform wings.
The apartments 
are furnished in a plain, but peculiarly light manner ; 
and one of them is embellished Avith the original 
sketches by Mr. West, and paintings by Miss Moser, 
which were copied to ornament the throne in the 
castle.
Several others are decorated with cabinet 
paintings, drawings, &c.
Winkfield.] — Winkfield is situated in the hun- 
dred of Ripplesmere, five miles and a half south- 
west by west from New Windsor.
Cranbourn 
Lodge is in this parish.
It was erected by Richard 
Earl of Ranelagh, Paymaster of the Forces in the 
reign of King Charles II.
and has since been occu- 
pied successively by Charles, Duke of St. Albans ; 
the Duke of Cumberland, his Majesty's uncle ; his 
late brother, the Duke of York ; and the late, and 
present Duke of Gloucester.
It is pleasantly situ- 
ated, and has an extensive prospect, over a fine 
plain country.
In a spacious chamber in the house, 
the military dresses of the different corps in the ar- 
mies of Europe, are painted, and regularly arranged, 
in large pannels.
Fern Hill, the seat of Francis Knollys, Esq. is 
pleasantly situated on an eminence.
It was formerly 
the seat of General Clayton, who lost his life in the 
glorious battle of Dettengen in 1743.
Winkfield Place, the property of Stanlake Bat- 
son, Esq. Winkfield Park, the property of Thomas 
Bingley, Esq. and Lovell Hill, the seat of Charles 
Shard, Esq. are also in this parish.
In the year 1710, the Earl of Ranelagh built a 
free-school for boys, and another for girls, under the 
same roof, on Winkfield Plain, and endowed them 
With the manor of Kelleagh in Ireland, and other 
estates.
Thomas Maule, Esq. in 1715, gave 2001.
to these schools, which was laid out in lands in the 
parish of Winkfield.
About the year 1780, Mr.
Hatch, who had received his education at the school, 
gave the sum of 5001.
as a grateful acknowledg- 
ment for the advantages which he had himself re- 
ceived.
In the parish church is a tablet, with the figure, 
engraved on brass, of an aged man distributing 
bread to the poor, in memory of Thomas Moun- 
tague, yeoman of the guards, who died in 1630, aged 
ninety-two ; and the tomb of Thomas Wise, master 
mason of England, 1685.
Witham.] — Witham, or Wightham, is a decayed 
village, seated at the foot of a hill, in the hundred of 
engraved from the beautiful designs of this Princess, which 
were executed with much delicacy, taste, and correctness.
7 Hornier, 
124 
BERKSHIRE.
Hormer, about three miles north-west of Oxford.
In ancient times there was a nunnery here, which 
was originally founded at Abingdon, by the sister of 
King Ceadwall, and afterwards removed hither.
It 
was deserted by the nuns during* the war between 
Offa, King of the Mercians, and Kinewulf, King of 
the West Saxons, in consequence of a castle having 
been built at Withum, and was never afterwards in- 
habited.
On the summit of the hill, the vestiges of 
this castle are still to be discovered.
The battle, 
through which Ort'a became master of this fortress, 
appears to have been fought at a place called Sand- 
field, in the neighbourhood, where, according to 
Hearne, in his Liber S/ger, armour, swords, and 
human bones, have been found.
According to tra- 
dition, one of the armies was drawn up on the de- 
clivity of VVitham Hill, near the desolated village of 
Dane-court ; and the other on the opposite side of 
Cumnor Hill ; the valley between, being the field of 
action.
The spot Avhere the battle is said to have 
commenced is called Holdesfield.
In the village of Witham is an ancient mansion, 
belonging to the Earl of Abingdon, which was erect- 
ed in the reign of Henry VI.
by Sir Richard Har- 
court, soon after he became possessed of the manor.
It is a stone fabric, within a moat, and has an em- 
battled tower in the centre, surmounted by two oc- 
tangular turrets.
The hall remains in its original 
state, and the vestiges of its former splendor yet ap- 
pear.
The church is a small building, with a boarded 
roof, supported by three wooden arches.
Against 
the wall, on each side the nave, is a series of gro- 
tesque ornaments in stone, resembling human heads, 
with caps similar to those worn by canons regular of 
the order of St. Augustine.
In the north window, 
near, the west end of the nave, are the portraits of 
Edward II.
and his Queen, supposed to have been 
placed there by some pilgrims, when travelling to 
the monarch's shrine at Gloucester.
The king is 
represented with a curled beard, the hair divided 
and hanging on each side the chin.
Each is covered 
with an open crown fleury.
Wittenham.]— Little Wittenham is situated in 
the hundred of Ock, four miles and a quarter north- 
west by north from Wallingford.
Sinoduu Hill, on 
the banks of the Thames, in this parish, is surround- 
ed by a deep trench, and was once the site of a Ro- 
man fort, which is conjectured to have been destroy- 
ed by the Danes.
The summit, which is now culti- 
vated, produces good wheat and barley.
Roman 
coins were frequently discovered, when the ground 
was first ploughed.
* This prelate was first educated in the free-school of Woking- 
ham, whence lie was removed to Magdalen College, Ox ord, 
where having taken his degrees, he entered into holy orders, 
and became chaplain to the Bishop of London, and afterwards 
dean of Christ's Church, Oxford.
Having imbibed the senti- 
ments of the reformers, he was obliged to resign his deanery in 
the reign of Queen Mary, during which time he supported 
himself by following the practice of physic.
On the accession 
Wokingham.] — Wokingham, or Oakingbam, is a 
market-town, having separate jurisdiction.
It is 
situated in the hundred of Sunning, on the edge of 
Windsor Forest, partly in Berkshire, and partly in 
an insulated part of Wiltshire, seven miles and a half 
south-east from Reading, and thirty-two and a quar- 
ter west-south-west from London.
The govern- 
ment of the town is vested in an alderman, eleven 
capital burgesses, a high steward, a recorder, and a 
town-clerk.
The market is on Tuesdays, and is 
particularly famous for its abundant supply of poul- 
try, which is chiefly purchased by the London hig- 
lers.
The fairs are oil the 23d of April, 11th of 
June, 10th of; October, and 2d of November.
The town of Wokingham consists of several 
streets, which, meeting in the centre, form a spa- 
cious area, in which the market-house is situated.
Over the market-house, which is an ancient timber 
building, is the Town Hall, wherein the public busi- 
ness is transacted.
The petty sessions for the forest 
division of Berkshire are holden here.
The inhabitants of Wokingham are chiefly employ- 
ed in agriculture, throwing of silk, sorting of wool, 
making of shoes, gauze, &c.
The Rose Inn is celebrated in the well-known 
soHg of Molly May, the daughter of the landlord.
The current tradition of the place is, that Gay, and 
some of his poetic friends, having met to dine at the 
Rose, were prevented from going abroad by the 
weather ; in consequence of which it was proposed, 
that they should write a song, each person contri- 
buting a stanza, in praise of the Fair Maid of the 
Inn. Mr.
Standen, of Arborfield, who died in 1730, 
is said to have been the enamoured swain to whom 
the song alludes.
Molly died a spinster, at the age 
of 67.
A portrait of Gay is still preserved at the 
Inn.
Wokingham church is a handsome and spacious 
structure, situated in that part of the parish which 
is in Wiltshire.
The interior of its walls is princi- 
pally chalk ; the outside is composed of flints and 
rough grout work.
In the chancel is a monument 
to the memory of Thomas Goodwin, Bishop of Bath 
and Wells, who was born in this town in 1517 : it 
has an epitaph, which was written by bis son Francis 
Goodwin, Bishop of Hereford, the learned author of 
" De Frassulibus Anglias Commentarias," inform- 
ing us that he died of an ague in 1590, at Ins native 
town, whither he had removed by the advice of his 
physicians.* 
The parish register records the burial of Thomas 
Buck, in 1682, at the age of 115 ; and of Hannah 
Lake, in 1727, at the age of 104.
of Queen Elizabeth, he was restored to his church preferments, 
and became one of the most celebrated preachers during that 
reign.
Her Majesty appointed him Bishop of Bath and Wells; 
and this office he enjo)ed till his death, which happened in the 
seventy-third year ot his age.
He was a curious siudent in 
Jewish antiquities, on which he wrote.
He also published a 
catalogue of all the Bishops of England, prior to the times in 
which he lived.
Wokingham 
BERKSHIRE.
12S 
Wokingham enjoys the benefit of numerous lega- 
cies and charitable donations.
Dr. Charles Palmer 
bequeathed '201.
yearly towards educating 1 twenty 
poor boys, and qualifying them for apprentices to 
mechanical trades.
A school lor twelve girls, called 
the Maiden, was founded in pursuance of the will of 
Mrs. Martha Palmer, who died in 1 723.
The chil- 
dren are directed to call each other sister, and to be 
taught to read, work, spin, &c.
In the year 1661, Mr. George Staverton left a 
hpuse, which now produces twelve guineas per an- 
num, for the purpose of buying a bull, to be baited 
aiul killed at Christmas : the meat to be given to the 
poor; the offal, hide, &c.
to be sold, and the pro- 
duce to be laid out in the purchase of shoes and 
stockings for poor children.
The carcass of one 
beast, however, being insufficient to supply the num- 
ber of claimants, the inhabitants are accustomed to 
purchase another, which is bated, and distributed at 
the same time.
It is sincerely to be hoped, that this 
barbarous, and horrible practice is drawing near to 
a close, throughout the kingdom.
Archbishop .Laud gave some fee-farm rents, pro- 
ducing about 401.
per annum, which every third year 
is divided between three poor maidens of the age of 
eighteen, natives of the town, and members of the 
church of England, who have served the same mas- 
ter or mistress for three years together : the other 
years the income is appropriated to the apprenticing 
of poor boys.
In the year 1451, eight small alms-houses were 
founded, by John Westerd, clerk ; and the lands 
with which they are endowed — some of which 
were left by Mr. Ralph White — now let for 161.
a year.
At Luckley, or Lockerley Green, in.
this parish; 
is an hospital for sixteen pensioners, founded pur- 
suant to the will of Henry Lucas, Esq. who died in 
1663.
The pensioners are allowed fourteen pounds 
per annum, and are chosen alternately by sixteen 
parishes in Berkshire, and the same number in Sur- 
rey.
A chaplain has apartments in the hospital, and 
a salary of 701.
per annum.
The original bequest is 
said to have amounted to 70001.
of which nearly 
25001.
was laid out in the erection of the necessary 
buildings, and the residue invested in the purchase 
of lands in Bedfordshire.
The draper's company of 
London act as trustees for this charity.
At a small distance from the hospital is Luckeley 
House, the seat of Charles Fyshe Palmer, Esq.
WooLnAMPTON.] — Woolhampton, or Wolhamp- 
ton, is situated in the hundred of Theale, seven miles 
east from Newbury.
The manor is now the pro- 
perty and residence of Mrs. Elizabeth Crewe, widow 
of John Crewe, Esq. who purchased the manor of 
Lord Fingal, about Ive-and-twenty.
years ago.
The 
peat pits, which extend by the side of the Kenneth to 
Newbury, commence here.
Yattendon.] — Yattendon is situated in the hun^ 
dred of Faircross, six miles south-east from East 
Ilsley.
It was formerly a market town, and still 
1QL.
i.— no.
9, 
has an annual fair on the 1 3th of October, Ever- 
ington is a hamlet in this parish.
» 
In the parish register is the following entry of the 
burial of Mr. Carte, author of a History of England, 
&.c. who rests here without a memorial, by Dr.
Bellas, then rector of Yattendon : — 
" The Rev. Thomas Carte, editor of Thu anas' s- 
History of his Own Times, and author of the Life of 
the Great Duke of Ormoncl, and a General History 
of England, by which, and other pieces, he approved 
himself one of the best writers ot his time, died at Cal- 
decot, near Abingdon, on Tuesday, April 2, and was 
buried at Yattendon, in a vault on the north side of 
the chance], the 11th, 1574, by me, George Bellas." 
The church was built by John Norrcys, Esq.
The only remarkable monument which it contains, 
is that of Sir John Norreys, one of his descendants, 
who died in the year 1597, bearing the following 
" epitaph ; — 
" In memory of Sir John Norreys, Knight, the se- • 
cond son of Henry, the first Lord Norreys of Kicot, 
who in the 14th of Elizabeth, being sent ambassador 
to France, and managing his business with prudence 
and honour, was by reason thereof, and his father's 
suffering for her brother's sake, advanced to a peer of 
this realme.
This Sir John 'Norreys, that valiant and 
expert soldier, so famous in his time for his valour and 
military knowledge, was first trained in those exer- 
cises in the civil wars of France, under Admiral Co- 
ligni, next in Ireland, under Walter, Earl of Essex ; 
then served in the Netherlands, under Matthias, Arch- 
duke of Austria ; after that, under John, Duke of Lo- 
reyne; and next under Count William of Nassau; 
and in the 17th of Elizabeth, 12th of August, was by 
the Queen constituted Colonel-General of all the horse 
and foot, then to pass out of England for the relief of 
Antwerp, then besieged by the Spaniards ; before the 
end of which month he had another commission from 
Count Maurice of Nassau, and the same year was em- 
powered to treat with the States General of the 
United Provinces, for the entertaining such bands of 
the English foot, as by the Queen's instructions were 
appointed to serve- in those parts.
Several commis- • 
sions he received from Robert, Earl of Leicester, af- 
ter he was constituted General of the English Auxili- 
aries in those Provinces ; viz.
two in 28 Elizabeth, ami 
one in 29 Elizabeth, in 30 Elizabeth, being then pre?
sident of the Council in the province of Minister hi 
Ireland), he had a commission, bearing date 11th of 
October, giving him authority to constitute such 
principal officers, as well by sea as land, as he should .
think fit for the withstanding all hostile attempts, and 
for the defence and protection of that realm.
In 33 ', 
Elizabeth, he was constituted Captain-General of 
those English Auxiliaries- which were sent in aid of 
King Henry the Fourth of France, against his rebel- 
lious subjects in Britanny ; and having deported him- - 
self with great prudence and courage in all those emi- 
nent employments, to the no little honour of the Eng- 
lish nation as well as his own name, he departed 
this life at his house in Yattendon, July.
3, 1597, and i 
in the (38Lh year of his age." 
Agriculture.] — The following will be found to 
be a tolerably correct statement of the agricultural 
appropriation of land in this county : — 
Acres* 
Land in arable 255,000 
2.i Meadows-* 
I2G 
BERKSHIRE.
Acres.
Meadows in various parts, and dairy land 
in the vale • .
. .
. 72,000 
Sheep-walks, unenclosed on the Chalk 
Hills 25,000 
Pasture Parks, &c 20,000 
Wastes, chiefly barren heaths 30,000 
The remainder of the land is taken up by build- 
ings, roads, rivers, &e.
In the northern part of the county, close to the 
Thames, there is a fertile line of meadow, from 
which the land rises gently towards a range of mo- 
derately elevated hills, extending from Oxford to 
Faringdon.
There is some very good corn upon 
these hills, though in som6 parts it is too sandy.
— 
Descending to the south we enter the fertile vale of 
Berkshire, which crosses the county from Shriven- 
liara on the west, to Cholsey on the eastern bound- 
ary.
The soil of this vale is in general a strong, 
grey, calcareous loam.
On the south of the vale 
are the Chalk Hills, covered with a fine tuft of sheep 
pasture.
The greatest part of the southern side of the 
county, from Hungerford to Windsor (except a part 
of Kentbury hundred, and some laud on the south 
side of the Rennet, and the greatest part of 
Windsor Forest) consists chiefly of a gravelly loam.
From Hungerford to Reading is a line, consisting 
of a bed of peat, through which the river Ren- 
net takes its course.
Near Hungerford, south 
of the Rennet, there commences a tract of poor gra- 
vel and (flay.
The tract of meadows which lies contiguous to the 
river Rennet, from Hungerford in the west, to 
Reading in the east, is particularly well watered ; 
and the quantity of hay which it produces, indepen- 
dent of the early feed, is very great.
Part of the 
.tract of meadow, however, has for its surface a gra- 
velly soil, which, of all others, is best adapted for 
water meadows.
The other part of the tract, from 
•one quarter to three quarters of a mile in breadth, 
and sixteen miles in length, consists of peat.
Such 
meadows as have peat under them are not reckoned 
so valuable to the tenant, but to the landlord much 
more so.
A single acre of land has been let for 3001.
where the purchase was limited : First, to cut no 
deeper than six feet ; Secondly, to cut and clear off 
the whole in the course of the year ; and lastly, to 
pare off the sward, that was on the acre at the time 
of the agreement, and relay it in a proper manner 
on the surface, after the tenant hadjrot out the peat ; 
in order that, when returned to the landlord, it might 
be in a state for meadow land again.
Peat, as a 
manure, is an excellent improver of grass lands, 
particularly clover leys, and sainfoin, which shew to 
an inch where the peat ash has been laid upon them.
The quantity necessary to dress an acre is reckoned 
from fifteen to twenty-five bushels, according to the 
condition of the land.
The proportion of cultivated land in this county 
ilocs not exceed the general average of the kingdom.
Respecting the various modes of management of the.
arable land, it is sufficient to observe, that the best 
systems of modern husbandry are adopted, with ge- 
neral success.
The farms are mostly large ; for un- 
less it be from some local circumstance, it is very 
rare to find a farm under 1001.
a year.
In the vale 
of White Horse some smaller dairy and grazing - 
farms are to be found ; but there are more farms of 
from two to five hundred a year than any other size.
Indeed, in the open and hilly parts of the county, 
there is a necessity for large farms ; as the soil is 
made the most of, by that kind of husbandry which 
depends on a large stock of sheep, of which the little 
farmer cannot avail himself.
The neat cattle which grazed in this county are 
generally of Herefordshire, Shropshire, Glamorgan- 
shire, and other parts of South Wales, which are 
bought in at spring and fall.
The system of fatten- 
ing with turnips is not universally adopted.
In. the 
grazing parts of the vale of White Horse, where a 
great number of beasts are annually stall-fed, they 
are generally fattened Avith hay, beans, and barley- 
meal, oil-cake, &c.
Linseed, both dry and steeped, 
is given by some graziers, and is found to answer 
exceedingly well.
The cows which are most esteemed in this county 
are those of the north country breed : they are ex- 
cellent milkers, and well adapted to the dairy-farms 
of the vale.
The dairymen keep up the succession, 
partly by rearing, and partly by buying heifers in 
calf, at Lambourne and other fairs in the county.
A considerable profit is derived from the rearing 
of horses.
Some farmers breed their own stock, 
and others buy in sucklings, which they put to work 
very early, and after using them for two or three 
years, sell them off to the brewers in London, and to 
the stage waggons, at high prices.
Berkshire has always had, and ever must have, 
from the nature of the soil, great numbers of sheep 
kept upon it : the present are not only a very use- 
ful, but a very handsome stock, and are in great re- 
pute in the neighbouring counties.
They are well 
adapted for folding, being strong and active : they 
travel long ranges during the day ; and, from their 
size and weight, are good folding sheep at night.
The Leicestershire sheep and South Down have been 
introduced into this county with considerable suc- 
cess, particularly on- the enclosed lands.
The Dor- 
set breed is also much approved.
Great numbers of swine are fattened in Berk- 
shire.
In the small town of Faringdon only, up- 
wards of 4000 are annually slaughtered lor the Lon- 
don and Oxford markets, between the beginning of 
November and the beginning of April.
This, how - 
ever, is in a part of the county where the dairy-farms 
are situated ; but, when it is considered how many 
store pigs are annually sent to the distillers and 
starch-makers in the vicinity of London, Berkshire 
receives a considerable return from this stock.
Poultry, in the eastern end of the county, become* 
very profitable, from its vicinity to London ; a great 
number 
BERKSHIRE, 
127 
immber of hitlers attending regularly on market 
days.
With respect to the situation of its markets, 
Berkshire is peculiarly well situated.
They are 
distributed so, that a distance of ten miles to a mar- 
ket is difficult to be found.
Newbury, Reading, 
Abingdon, Wallingford, and Windsor have all the 
advantages of water carriage to London, and the 
interior parts of the kingdom.
The two former 
send a prodigious quantity of flour to London, 
and the others, barley and malt to a considerable 
amount.
Of late, East Ilsley has become a sheep-market 
of the first importance, not only to Berkshire, but 
to the neighbouring counties ; and Newbury has, 
from time immemorial, been justly considered a most 
excellent corn market.
In the eastern part of the county, are some ex- 
tensive waste lands : such as Maidenhead Thicket, 
several parts of Windsor Forest, and its neighbour- 
hood.
These wastes consist principally of large 
tracts of barren heath land, amounting in the whole 
to nearly 30,000 acres.
Their improvement must 
depend, in a great measure, on the comparative 
value of money, and the produce of agriculture ; as 
it cannot be expected, that this improvement should 
be made to any great extent, unless the value of 
that produce will evidently afford to the improver a 
rent which shall sufficiently indemnify him for his 
expences.
Perhaps, however, these wastes might 
be more advantageously improved by planting, 
than by their conversion into tillage.
Mortimer Heath, a bleak dreary tract of land on 
the south side of the county, spreading far into 
Hampshire, is of little use but for grazing a few 
miserable sheep, or furnishing the neighbouring cot- 
tages with fuel.
The soil is of that sterile and in- 
hospitable nature, as to bid defiance to every attempt 
at cultivation.
Manufactures and Trade.] — In former times, 
Berkshire was one of the principal seats of the 
clothing manufacture ; but it has, for many years, 
been entirely discontinued.
At present, Berkshire 
can scarcely be considered as a manufacturing 
county.
Agreeably to the returns of 1811, 13,409 
families were employed in agriculture, and only 
7,584 in trade and manufactures.
However, there 
are some cotton manufactories, and a paper mill, 
near Newbury; another paper mill, at Bagnor ; 
and a large blanket manufactory, at Greenham 
Mills, near Thateham.
Sacking, Ike. are made at 
Abingdon, and at Wantage ; and, to a small ex- 
tent, the silk manufacture is carried on at Woking- 
ham.
The Temple Mills, at Bisham, are now 
chiefly confined to the rolling out of copper sheets, 
bolts, &c.
Fairs.] — Abingdon — First Monday in Lent, May 
6, cattle ; June 20, August 6, cattle ; Monday be- 
fore Old Michaelmas, statute ; December 11, horses 
and other cattle.
Arborjield — October 5, cattle.
Aide) maston — May 6, July 7, horses, cattle, &e.
Bracknell — April 25, cows, sheep, &c.
; August 
22, horses, cows, hog6, &c.
; October 1, sheep and 
other cattle.
Chapel liozo, near Reading — July 30, pleasure, 
toys, &c.
Cockham — May 16, cattle, pedlary, &c.
; October 
11, statute.
Bast Hagburn — Thursday before St. Michael, O.
S. October 10, pleasure.
Bast Jlsleij — Wednesday in Easter week, and 
every other Wednesday till July, August 6, sheep 
and lambs ; First Wednesday after September 29, 
Wednesday after October 17, Wednesday after No- 
vember 12, sheep, &c.
; Every Wednesday fortnight 
from Easter to Midsummer, a great market for 
sheep.
Baringdon — February 13, horses and fat cattle ; 
Whit Tuesday, ditto, ditto ; Tuesday before and 
Tuesday after Old Michaelmas, statute ; October 
29, horses, fat cattle, and large quantities of pigs.
Binchamstead — April 23, cattle.
Hungerford — Last Wednesday in April, August 
10, horses, cows, and sheep ; Monday before and 
after New Michaelmas, statute.
Bambourne — May 12, October 2, December 4, 
horses, cows, boots, shoes, and young foals.
Bong Cromarch — August 2, cheese, horses, toys, 
and pigs.
Maidenhead — Whit Wednesday, horses ami cat- 
tle ; September 29, horses, cattle, and hiring ser- 
vants ; November 30, horses and cattle.
Mortimer — April 27, horses, cows, sheep, hogs, 
and pedlary ; November 6, horses and Welch cattle.
New-Bridge — March 31, September 28, cheese 
and horses.
Neiobury — -Holy Thursday, horses and other cat- 
tle ; July 5, horses, cows, and hogs ; September 3, 
November 1, cheese and horses.
Oakingham — April 23, June 11, October 10, No- 
vember 2, horses and cattle.
Reading — February 2, horses, cattle, and pigs ; 
May 1, horses, cattle, and pigs ; September 21, 
cheese, horses, cattle, and hogs.
Thateham — Second Tuesday after Easter week, 
and first Tuesday after September 29, cattle, &c.
Txoyford — July 24, and October 11, horses, other 
cattle, and toys.
Wallingford— Tuesday before Easter, pleasure ; 
June 24, horses ; September 29, for hiring servants ; 
December 14, fat hogs.
IVadley, near Baringdon — April 5, horses, cows.
Wantage — First Saturday in March, first Satur- 
day in May, horses, coavs, pigs, and cheese ; July 
18, ditto, and cherries; October 10, 17, horses, 
cows, pigs, cheese, hops, and hiring servants.
Walt ham ISt. Laurence — April 10, horses and cat- 
tle.
Windsor — Easter Tuesday, horses and cattle ; July 
5, ditto, sheep, and wool ; October 24, horses and 
cattle.
7 
Yattvn, 
128 
BERKSHIRE.
Yatton, near Nezcbim/ — October 13.
Canals.] — The Kenoet and Avon Canal enters 
Berkshire at Hungerford, and passes on to New- 
bury, parallel with the river Kennet.
The Wiltshire 
and Berkshire Canal enters the latter county at 
Hackson Bridge, near Shrivenham, passes by Shri- 
venhara and Uffington, leaves Sparsholt and Chil- 
duz on the south, and passes by the Cballows, and 
near Wantage, to which there is a collateral cut.
Roads.] — Most of the turnpike roads in this 
county are very good ; and so are the private roads, 
in the south-eastern parts, especially in the neigh- 
bourhood of Reading ; but, in the vale of White 
Horse, they are very deep and miry, and scarcely 
passable in the winter.
The great Bath road enters Berkshire at Maiden- 
head Bridge, and passes over Maidenhead Thicket, 
to Reading, and Hungerford, and quits the county 
at about the 05th mile-stone.
The road from London to Oxford also enters 
Berkshire at Maidenhead Bridge ; and passing by 
Hurley, quits it at Henley Bridge.
The Cirencester road, which branches off at Dor- 
chester, enters Berkshire again at Abingdon ; and, 
passing through Fyfield, on to Buscot, finally quits 
the county at St. John's Bridge, near Lechlade.
The 
road from Fariugdon to Oxford quits the London 
road near Fyfield, and enters Oxfordshire at Botley.
Three other roads, from London to Reading, pass, 
for some length, through Berkshire : one enters it at 
Windsor Great Park, and goes through Winkfield 
and Binfield ; another, called the Forest road, passes- 
through the same villages, by a different course from 
Windsor ; and the third enters near the Virginia 
Water, on Bagshot Heath, and passes over Lodden 
Bridge.
The road from London to Wantage enters Berk- 
shire at Wellingford, and passes through Brightwell 
and Harwell.
A turnpike road is continued, from 
Wantage to Fariugdon.
The road from* Oxford to Winchester passes 
through Abingdon, Drayton, Steventon, East Ilsley, 
Beedon, and Newbury, about three miles beyond 
which, it enters Hampshire.
The road to Hunger- 
ford quits this road two miles beyond Steventon, ami 
passes through Wantage and West Sheffbrd.
The road from Oxford to Chichester enters Berk- 
shire at Shillingford Bridge, passes through Wal- 
lingford to Pangbourn, and quits the county a little 
beyond Aldermaston.
A turnpike road continues 
from Pangbourn to Reading.
The Basingstoke road, from Reading, passes 
through Swallowfield, and quits Berkshire at the 
entrance of Heckfield Heath.
There is a turnpike road from Lambourne to>.
Newbury.
TABLE OF DISTANCES.
The Names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square where both meet gives the distance.
Abi 
14 
Faringdon 
Faringdo 
71 
23 
17 
Hungerfc 
64 
11 
19 
15 
12 
16 
7 
53 
Lain bourne >•• 
10 
Lambourne ..
.' 67 
Maidenhead 
30 
40 
39 
25 
38 
Maidenhead ..
20 
Newbury 
20 
25 
9 
9 
13 
30 
Nevvbun 
., 56 
25 
10 
28 
25 
16 
31 
12 
18 
Reading 
39 
22 
25 
8 
18 
20 
18 
15 
Wa'lingf 
46 
9 
8 
14 
7 
8 
32 
15 
20 
14 
Wantage 
6t 
Windsor 
45 
48 
45 
36 
-51 
G 
38 
20 
25 
40 
Wi 
Wokingham 
32 
33 
32 
23 
38 
10 
25 
7 
22 
27 
9 
3i 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 
10 
Je>* 
- 
Sjj 
V » 
3o 
fTiSneltan 
.V «?
v? 
S3 
s 
^M)unslaliU 
'"'" ^f^T \ jUpr^-)"<.'p /JfMutipirn U I if;,/,!!'' 1 '' s\ 
B>?7KtdMH SJS»^J 
^fe^.ife, SaNJBO -4?' 
\ 
V 
^Qkqfesiiiry 
^|J?' '"jKiMf* '^MfSs--- »-<Berk llempficad 
"\Juna..
t/ittp</'\ 
; !
.A/t y?/>,:.
-:   
* -,!thH *•''<"''' V 7 / 
\***rrmtcJ* ...« Eg/' 
li^C^XtX^lliVM^, 
JVriluL Mies 
Bc^S a* * %: -i-^ v 
. t \ f.ml \ >«,ij ,,\/ T' IT 'it!.
^~ : -,- fii'«""jJlfl , l \ .
V, 
, f,,Yf hMimllflK \ ^— -.,/„, :J " .
t' J \v« - ,n , 
• I/,,,/,, t VA,„fc/„„ ^\ V^\o.''5feh7/;,V.v„ ..Z V ,,./ .^-^/^^ 
,' ' Maidenhead tHlMatrht ' ' I fv /.
S ^\'-'i"y'"' \ J 
^y Windsor 2» 
„,^ 
fr^ 
^6' 
"T 
CanR.'' West Jp q£ Greenwif 
ichijo J 
>; r <-li- .scu 
129 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
THE county of Buckingham is contiguous to 
Northamptonshire on the north, to Oxfordshire 
on the west, to Berkshire and a point of Surrey on 
the; south, and to the counties of Middlesex, Hert- 
ford, and Bedford, on the east.
The Thames, which 
borders its whole southern side, is its principal na- 
tural boundary ; but the Coin also separates it from 
Middlesex ; and other streams take up the boundary 
in different parts of the county.
Its figure somewhat 
resembles a crescent, but its outline, by projections and 
indentations, is very irregular.
From the south eastern 
to the north western extremity, its greatest length is 
about 45 miles ; its breadth 18, and its circumference 
138.
The Population Returns of 1811, state its con- 
tents, in square miles, at 748 ; equal to 478,720 acres.
When the agricultural survey of Buckingham- 
shire was published, in the year 1794, the num- 
ber of acres, in common fields, was estimated at 
91,000 ; and the waste about 6,000 ; but, since that 
time, several parishes have been enclosed.
The 
most considerable commons are — Wickham Heath, 
containing about 1500 acres ; Iver Heath, about 
1150 acres; Stoke Heath, about 1600 acres; Ful- 
mer Heath, about 600 acres ; and Great.
Harwood 
Common about 560 acres.
The southern part of the county, beyond the bank 
of the Thames, is principally taken up with the 
Chiltern Hills and their appendages, composed of 
chalk, and in various parts covered with woods.
— 
According to some of our ancient historians, Buck- 
inghamshire was formerly so covered with woods, 
as to be almost impassable ; till Leofstan, abbot of 
St. Albans, had several of them cut down, because 
they afforded harbour for thieves and outlaws.
The 
whole of the Chiltern district is said to have been a 
forest : the western part, bordering on Oxfordshire, 
was occupied by the forest of Ben wood, which was 
disforested in the reign of King James I.
In the 
south-west parts, the county abounds in woods, and 
it is calculated that one-sixth part of the land is 
covered with beech, requiring hut little attention, as 
the old trees shed a sufficient quantity of seed to 
keep the wood constantly full of young plants: This 
valuable wood is converted to a variety of purposes, 
and affords an abundance of fuel to that part of the 
county where coals are scarce and dear.
In Wy- 
combe parish there are supposed to be 700 acres of 
common (beech) woodland ; and in the neighbour- 
hood of Chesham, are some large thriving beech 
vol.
i. — no.
10.
woods, extremely well managed.
In the parish of 
Amersham are woods of fine beech, growing upon 
chalk ; and in the beautiful park of William Drake, 
Esq. there is a variety of thriving timber.
The 
heaths in the parishes of Wavendon and Brickhill, 
which formerly were covered with short heath, &c; 
were some years ago purchased by Colonel Moore, 
of Egginton, who, after leaving a more than suffici- 
ent allotment for the poor, enclosed the remainder, 
and planted it, in the year 1778, with Scotch firs 
and other timber trees.
Colonel Moore was pre- 
sented with the gold medal, by the Society for the 
Encouragement of Arts and Manufactures, fop 
planting the Scotch firs.
He planted 51,376 ; and, 
in 1794, after they had been several times thinned, 
17,125 fine young trees remained, from 20 to 28 feet 
in height.
These plantations, which continue in a 
very thriving state, are now in the possession 
of the Duke of Bedford, who has had rides cut 
through them, and thereby much increased their 
beauty.
Waddon Chace is divided into several coppices, 
containing, together about 2200 acres, part of which 
is kept shut up for a certain number of years, and 
then laid open to the deer, as well as to the com- 
moners, for so many years more.
The coppices pro- 
duce large oak, ash, and other timber as well as un- 
derwood ; but, from the custom of the deer and the 
commoners' cattle being suffered to depasture there- 
on without restraint, the young timber, has been 
greatly injured.
The neighbourhood of Chesham abounds with the 
black cherry, which is planted chiefly in the hedge- 
rows ; and a tract of land on the Chiltern Hills, ex- 
tending from the Beacon Hill in Ellesborough, 
across the parish of Little Kimble into that of Great 
Kimble, and containing more than 100 acres, is co- 
vered with box wood, which appears to be the natu^- 
ral growth of the soil.
There is some very agreeable scenery in this 
county.
South of the Chiltern, particularly in the 
neighbourhood of Amersham,.
and the Missendens, 
the prospects are beautifully diversified with hill and 
vale, arable, meadow, and woodlands.
By the ad- 
dition of the Thames, and the view of its opposite 
banks, between Marlow and Henley, the scenery is 
still more pleasing.
The most extensive view in the 
county is supposed to be from the town of Penn- 
church ; commanding parts of Buckinghamshire, 
2 ».
Berkshire, 
130 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, 
Essex, Kent, Middlesex, Surrey, and, it is supposed, 
Sussex, and Northamptonshire.
Other striking 
prospects are, from the hills ahove Ellesborough, 
over the fruitful vale of Aylesbury ; and from a field 
near Brill, over a great part of Oxfordshire and 
Northamptonshire.
Some fine old towers in the 
vale of Aylesbury, have been lately much disfigured, 
by having been covered with rough-cast and white- 
wash.
There are only three stone spires in the 
county ; those of Buckingham, Olney, and Wotton ; 
that of Hanslape, the great ornament of the north 
part of the county having been destroyed by light- 
ning, in 1804 ; consequently, the scenery of Buck- 
inghamshire receives but little embellishment from 
church steeples.
Woburn Abbey is seen to great 
advantage from some parts of Wavendon Heath.
Rivers.] — The Thames, as has been already ob- 
served, is the principal natural boundary of the 
county, and is also its chief ornament, on the south- 
ern side.
This river divides Buckinghamshire from 
Berkshire, during a course of about 28 or 30 miles.
In its progress it passes Medmenham, Great Marlow, 
Hedsor, Taplow, Boveney, Eton, and Datchet, and 
is navigable the whole of the way.
The Ouse, which enters the western side of the 
county, passes Water Stratford, and pursues an ir- 
regular course until it reaches Buckingham, whence 
it winds through a fertile tract of meadow land, 
passing Stony Stratford, Newport Pagnel, and Ol- 
ney ; and soon afterwards, turning suddenly to the 
east, leaves the county near Snelson, in the parish 
of Lavendon, after a course of nearly 50 miles.
On the kitchen walls of the old manor-house, at 
Tyringham, which has some time been pulled down, 
the following fish, of a remarkable size, were record- 
ed, as having been caught in this river : a carp, in 
1648, measuring two feet nine inches in length ; a 
pike, in 1658, three feet seven inches in length ; a 
bream, two feet three inches and a half; a salmon, 
three feet ten inches ; a perch, two feet ; and a shad, 
in 1683, oue foot eleven inches.
The Thame is formed by the junction of several 
small streams ; one of which near the borders of the 
county in Hertfordshire, and in its subsequent course 
through the vale of Aylesbury, is still further in- 
creased by the waters of other streams, and at length 
enters Oxfordshire near the town of Thame.
The 
mouth of this river being choaked up, and its chan- 
nel obstructed, two commissions of sewers were 
issued for cleansing it, in the early part of the last 
century ; but, in consequence of the disputes be- 
tween the commissioners and the land owners, the 
nuisance, instead of being diminished, continued to 
increase, and the neighbouring part of the county, 
at times, exhibited the appearance of a lake, delug- 
ing the hay-harvest, to the great loss of the pro- 
prietors.
In 1797, however, a new commission 
was issued, and the desired object has been ob- 
tained.
In addition to pike, perch, chub, roach, gudgeons, 
&c.
the Thame abounds with eels, which are claim- 
ed by the King.
The Colne, for about fourteen miles, forms the 
eastern boundary of the county, separating it from 
Middlesex.
It passes near Durham and Iver, 
through Colnbrook, to which it gives its name, and 
near Horton and Wyrardisbury, and falls into the 
Thames between Anker wyke and Staines.
The 
Coin produces trout, &c.
The Ousel, remarkable for fine perch, pike, and 
bream, is a boundary between Bedfordshire and 
Buckinghamshire, from Easton Bray to Linchlade, 
near Leighton Buzard ; where it enters the county, 
and, running in a northerly direction, falls into the 
Ouse at Newport Pagnel.
The little river Wyck, or Wyke, producing trout, 
and other fish, rises at West Wycombe, where it or- 
naments the grounds of Sir John D..shwood King.
From thence, passing by High Wycombe, and 
through Lord Carrington's grounds, it waters the 
village of Wooburn, and falls into the Thames, near 
Hedsor.
Minerals.] — There are no minerals of value, in 
this county.
At the time of the Norman survey, 
there were some salt works at Risborough, but they 
have long been totally disused.
Mineral Springs.] — Formerly there was a mi- 
neral spring, of some celebrity, at Cuddington ; but 
it is now unknown, and there are not any others in 
the county deserving of notice.
Fossils.] — Excepting a stratum of calcareous 
stone, which runs through the part of Buckingham- 
shire, adjoining to Oxfordshire, there are but few 
extraneous fossils to be met with in this county.
Woodward mentions bivalves having been found at, 
and near Quintin, Dinton, and Aylesbury ; echini, 
near Amersham, on Wyrardisbury Common, and 
near Marlow ; belemnites, near Lillingstone-Dayrell; 
ammonites, and <etites-geod.es, near Ellesborough ; and 
rkomboidal selenitce, in clay, near Long Crendon.
In the yellow lime-stone, near Dinton, a striated 
species of nautilus is also found in great abund- 
ance.
The celebrated Fuller's-earth pits, at Wavendon, 
on the borders of Bedfordshire, about two miles 
north of Woburn, are particularly deserving of no- 
tice.
Only one of these pits, however, is now occa- 
sionally worked, in a close shaft ; the dealers having 
got into a practice of procuring an article of inferior 
quality, from other parts of the kingdom, which 
they sell as the produce of this neighbourhood.
— 
Mr. Pennant, who, on his journey from Chester, had 
an opportunity of seeing a large pit, which had been 
excavated to a considerable extent, and was open at 
the top, thus describes the strata : " The beds over 
the marie are first several layers of reddish sand, to 
the thickness of six yards ; then succeeds a stratum 
of sand stone, of the same colour ; beneath which, 
for seven or eight yavds more, the sand is again 
continued to the Fuller's-earth, the upper part of 
which, being impure or mixed with sand, is flung 
7 aside; 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
131 
aside ; the rest taken up for use.
The earth lies in 
layers, under which is a bed of rough white free- 
stone, and under that sand, beyond which the labour- 
ers have never penetrated." 
The pit now in use belongs to the Duke of Bed- 
ford.
About thirty years ago, a pit was wrought 
on the estate of Colonel Moore ; but it has been 
levelled, and the field is now in pasturage.
The 
earth lay abour four feet from the surface.* 
Plants.] — Amongst the plants of this county, 
which Camden denominates rare, the following are 
chiefly deserving of remark: — the diaruhus caryphil- 
lus, clove pink, or July flower ; the oplnys muscifera, 
fly orchis ; the Paris quudrifotia, herb Paris, or true 
love ; the hier actum murorum, French, or golden 
lungwort ; the melampj/rum ctistatum, crested cow 
wheat ; and the jasione moiitana, hairy sheeps' sca- 
bious.
The only very rare plant, however, which is known 
to botanists, as indigenous to this county, is the 
dentaria bulbifera, or coral-wort, which grows in 
abundance, in some of the beech- woods, in the south- 
east corner ot Buckinghamshire.
Etymology.] — Various conjectures have been 
formed, respecting the derivation of the name which 
is borne by this county.
Camden conceives it to 
have been formed from the Saxon word Bucken, in- 
dicative of the beech trees with which it abounded, 
and which are still plentiful in many parts of the 
county.
Others are of opinion, that its etymology 
may be traced to the term Buccen ; Bucks, or Deer ; 
its forests having anciently afforded sustenance to 
thousands of those animals.
Spelman, and Browne 
Willis, incline to the latter opinion.
Messrs.
Ly- 
sons, however, seem to have fallen upon a more sa- 
tisfactory elucidation : " it is well known," say they, 
" that charter lands were anciently called by the 
Saxons Boch-\axid, in contradistinction to copyholds, 
which were called Jb/A-lands': in Domesday-book, 
and other ancient records, the county town is called 
Boch-ing-ham.
Many villages of the name of 
Buckland occur in various parts of the kingdom, all 
of which are called in old records JBot^-land, i.
e. 
literally charter-land : Boch-ing, under the same 
construction, will be a charter meadow ; the mean- 
ing of ham, is well known to be a mansion or vill." 
General History.] — The ancient history of 
Buckinghamshire, as of most other parts of Britain, 
is involved in obscurity.
According to Camden, 
this part of the country, together with the adjoining 
counties of Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire, before 
the invasion of Caesar, was inhabited by the Cat- 
tieuchlani, whom he supposes to be the ancient Cassii.
* It may be proper to observe, that Fuller' s-earth belongs 
to the aluminous class of fossils, and is commonly of a greyish 
ash-coloured brown ; yet it greatly varies, and is found of dif- 
ferent shades, from the very pale, to the dusky, or almost 
black: but always with a tinge of the yellowish green.
The 
descent of the pit, at Wavendon, is very agreeable, and the in- 
side very damp.
Tht- wood-work on the top and sides of the 
excavated angles is continually wet, and almost covered with 
There are, indeed, some remains of the name in 
Cas/to hundred, and Cashobury in Hertfordshire.
Their king was also called Cassibelin, or Cassive- 
laun, which signifies the king of the Cassii.
They 
were a warlike people, and had given such proof of 
their courage, in conquering part of the country of 
the Dobuni, their neighbours on the west, that, when 
Caesar landed, the Britons unanimously chose Cassi- 
belin their king, to be their generalissimo against 
the Romans, whom he so successfully opposed, that 
they were forced to retire into Gaul with little or no 
advantage.
However, though the whole of Buck- 
inghamshire, at the time of the Roman invasion, 
seems to have been in the possession of the Cat- 
tieuchlani, there is reason to believe that its westevn 
parts had, at no very remote period, been peopled 
by Ancalites, whose name appears to be derived 
from the term Uchelitwus, or the inhabitants of High 
Grounds ; thus called from their relative situation 
to the Taveini, the appellation of the tribe residing 
in the low grounds, near the rivers Thame and 
Thames.
Cassibelin, or Cassivellannus, having expelled the 
Romans, turned his arms upon his own countrymen, 
the TrinobanteSf who had favoured Caesar upon his 
invasion, and in a decisive battle killed Imanuentius, 
their king, and compelled Mandubratius his son to 
place himself under the protection of Caesar, in Gaul.
In the succeeding spring, the Romans, under pre- 
tence of reinstating their ally, arrived again in Bri- 
tain, bringing Mandubratius with them.
Cassibelin 
vigorously opposed their landing, but without suc- 
cess, and at length after several severe encounters 
being besieged in his own city he was compelled to 
sue for peace, which he easily obtained upon the 
following conditions : That Mandubratius being re- 
stored to his kingdom, should be suffered quietly to 
enjoy it ; that he should give hostages, to secure his 
submission for the future ; and that he should pay a 
yearly tribute to the Roman treasury.
Caesar then 
departed, leaving the kings of Britain in the full pos- 
session of their former sovereignty, in which they 
continued until Aulus Plautius subjected them to 
the imperial power under Claudius Caesar, and 
Buckinghamshire formed part of Britannia Prima.
It was afterwards included in the province of Flavia 
Caesariensis.
The Britons, after the departure of the Romans, 
were infested by the Picts and Scots, and thought it 
expedient to call in the Saxons for their defence, 
who finding the Britons weak, and the country 
plentiful, brought over such numbers of their coun- 
trymen, that, in a few years, they became almost 
boletus lachrymans, or dry-rot boletus.
It is to the cleansing 
qualities of this celebrated earth, that British cloth is chiefly 
indebted, for its great superiority over that manufactured by 
other nations ; as, in no other country is it found so free from 
foreign admixture.
On this account, as well as from its im- 
portance in the woollen trade, several seveYe laws have been 
made, at different periods, since the reign of Charles the Se- 
cond, to prevent its exportation.
entirely 
132 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
entirely masters of it, so far as the jurisdiction of the 
Romans extended.
The Saxons, who divided the southern part of 
Britain into seven kingdoms, included this county 
in the kingdom of Mercia, and gave it the name of 
Buckinghamshire.
At the commencement of the civil wars in the 
reign of Charles I.
this county was one of the first 
which joined in an association for mutual defence, 
on the side of the parliament ; and, in August, 1643, 
there was a grand rendezvous of the parliamentary 
army, near Aylesbury.
In 1646, Borstall-house, 
the last remaining garrison of the King, in this coun- 
ty, surrendered to the Parliament.
On the 20th of January, 1665, a smart shock of 
earthquake, attended by an unusual noise in the air, 
was felt in this county, but no damage was sus- 
tained.
Antiquities.] — The battle, in which the two sons 
of Cunobeline, or Cymbeline, were defeated by Au- 
lus Plautius, is supposed to have been fought in the 
neighbourhood of Kimble, the ancient name of which 
was Kynebel, or Cunobel, written, perhaps, cor- 
ruptly, Chenebella, in the Domesday-book.
A 
strong post, on the side of the Chiltern Hills, called 
Kimble Castle, is conjectured to have been Cymbe- 
line's Palace.
The Roman stations in this county, from the few 
visible remains, are very difficult to fix ; but, by 
comparing the distances in the Iter of Antonine and 
Richard, it appears that Magiovintum, must have 
been within the limits of this county, near Penny 
Stratford.
The site of that station is called Autd 
Fields, and abundance of coins and foundations of 
buildings have been discovered there.
Camden 
mentions a Roman town in the western part of the 
county, which he supposes to have been destroyed 
by the Danes in 914, at a place called Burgh Hill, 
and by contraction the Brill ; and adds that Roman 
coins were found there in his time.
In the year 1722, a Mosaic pavement, and some 
Roman coins, were found in Lord Shelbourne's 
grounds, at High Wycombe ; in excavating a cel- 
lar, in the High Street, in that town, a Roman ves- 
sel, and some coins, were thrown up ; in Desbo- 
rough Field, near the same place, some Roman 
coins, and other remains, have been discovered ; and 
also at Ellesborough, and near Princes-Risborough.
Several years ago, an amphora was found, in a sand- 
pit, on Wavendon Heath •> and, near Dinton, in 
1769, a small glass vessel, and some spear heads 
were discovered.
By some writers, Chersley is supposed to have 
been the site of a battle, which was fought against 
the Britons, by Cerdic and Cynric, in the year S29.
Bishop Gibson, however, observes, that he should 
rather have sought for it in the kingdom of the West 
Saxons, could any place of that name be found there, 
those commanders having gained a victory over the 
Britons, eight years before, at Ceidicesjbrd, now 
Charford, in Hampshire* 
The great cross, called White-leaf Cross, which 
appears on the side of the chalk hills, near Risbo- 
rough, is supposed, by Mr. Wise, to be th© memo- 
rial of some victory of the Saxons over the Danes ; 
and that the name of the neighbouring village of 
Bladlaw, is derived from Blod-law, the bloody 
hill.
Some of our antiquaries conjecture Ickford, near 
Thame, to have been the place where King Edward 
signed a treaty with the Danes, in the year 907 ; 
but Bishop Gibson rather supposes it to have been 
in the New Forest.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Divisions.] — Buck- 
inghamshire, which was anciently divided into eigh- 
teen hundreds, is now comprised in the eight fol- 
lowing, Avhich forms separate districts : — Ashenden, 
Aylesbury, Buckingham, Burnham, Cotslow, Dcs- 
boroUgh, Newport, and Stoke.
Desborough, Stoke, 
and Burnham, are the three Chiltern Hundreds, the 
custody of which is well known to be a nominal of- 
fice, accepted by any Member of Parliament who 
wishes to vacate his seat.
The modern hundred of Buckingham includes the 
ancient hundreds of Rouelai, Stodfald, and Lainua.
The three ancient hundreds of Bonestou, Sigelai, 
and Moleslou, are now called Dunstow, Segloe, and 
Mulso, and comprised under the general name of 
Newport Hundred.
The hundreds of Elesberie, 
Stanes, and Riseberge, now comprise one district 
called the three hundreds of Aylesbury.
The an- 
cient hundreds of Coteslau, Mureslai, and Erlai are 
included in the hundred of Cotslow.
The hundreds 
of Essedene, Votesdone, and Tichessele are com- 
prised in the present hundred of Ashendon, except- 
ing that Adstock, formerly in Votesdone, is now in 
the hundred of Buckingham, and Hoggeston and 
Crestlow in that of Cotslow.
The hundreds of Dus- 
tenburgh and Stoches are called Desborough and 
Stoke.
The hundred of Burnham preserves its an- 
cient name and extent, excepting that Farnham and 
Eton, which were formerly comprised in it, are now 
in the hundred of Stoke.
Buckinghamshire has no city ; but it sends four- 
teen members to Parliament, two for Buckingham, 
the town and county, and two for each of the bo- 
roughs of Aylesbury, Amersham, Great Marlow, 
Wendover, and Chipping Wycombe.
The summer 
assizes for the county are holden at Buckingham ; 
and the lent assizes, and the quarter sessions, at 
Aylesbury.
The county of Buckingham lies within the diocese 
of Lincoln, and is subject to an archdeacon, who 
takes his title from the county.
It is divided into 
seven deanrics : Buckingham, Burnham, Museley, 
Newport, Waddesdon, Wendover, and Wycombe.
The parishes of Halton, Monks-Risborough, Wot- 
ton Underwood, and Little Brick-hill, are in the 
peculiar jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury.
Aston, Abbots, Granborough, Little Har- 
wood, and Winslow are in the diocese of London, 
and in the jurisdiction of the Archdeacon of St. Al- 
bans, 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
I3S 
bans, to the monastery of which place they formerly 
belonged.
The present number of parishes, as nearly 
as they can be ascertained is 201, of which 79 are 
vicarages, and 29 curacies or donations.
NOBLEMEN'S' AND GENTLEMENs' SEATS.] Aslie- 
ridge, the seat of the late Duke of Bridgwater, was 
pulled down, and the materials sold, in the year 
1801 ; what remains of Chcynies, the seat of the 
Russell family, is occupied by a farmer ; Cliefden- 
house, a seat of the Earl of Inchquin, formerly be- 
longing to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, 
was burnt down in 1795 ; Twyford, belonging to the 
Wenman family, and Wing, to that of Dormer, have 
been entirely pulled down ; and the few remains of 
Winchendon, a seat of the Duke of Wharton's, have 
been fitted up for a steward.
Among the present seats of the nobility, deserving 
of notice, in this county, are the following : — Stowe, 
the seat of the Marquis of Buckingham ; Wotton, 
Earl Temple's ; Hedsor, Lord Boston's ; Ey thorp, 
Earl of Chesterfield's ; Hampden-House, Lord 
Hampden's ; Peun-IIouse, Lord Curzon's ; Bul- 
strode, the Duke of Portland's ; Ditton Park, the 
late Earl of Beaulieu's ; Taplow, the late Marquis 
of Thomond's ; Wycombe Abbey, Lord Carring- 
ton's ; Middle-Claydon, Lady Fernaugh's ; Drop- 
more, Lord Grenville's ; Peterley-House, Lord 
Dormer's ; Hitchendon, the Countess of Conyng- 
ham's ; Latimers, Lord Cavendish's ; and Baileys, 
the late Lord Godolphin's.
The seats of the principal gentry are numerous, 
and will be duly noticed in their respective plaees.
Market-Towns.J— rThe following are the present 
market-towns in this county : — 
Amersham.
Aylesbury.
Beaconsfiekt.
Buckingham.
Chesham.
Jvinghoe.
Great Marlow.
Newport-Pagnell.
Oiney.
PrincesP.isborough, 
Stony Stratford.
Wendover.
Winslow.
High Wycombe.
Aylesbury, Buckingham, and Wycombe, are the 
chief markets.
Colnbrook, and Fenny- Stratford, 
are generally mentioned amongst the market-towns 
of Buckinghamshire, but their market-towns have 
long been discontinued.
Beaconsfield, Ivinghoe, 
and Risborough, are of very little consequence.
Population.] — The population of Buckingham- 
shire appears to be considerably on the increase.
The number of persons who were charged to a poll- 
tax, from which clergy, children, and paupers, were 
exempted, in the year 1377, was 24,672.
According 
to the population returns of 1811, there were then 
21,929 inhabited houses, and 457 uninhabited houses, 
in Buckinghamshire.
The total number of inhabit- 
ants were stated to be 117,650, of whom 56,208 
were males, and 61,442 females.
Of the total num- 
ber of families (15,201) 13,933 were employed in 
agriculture, and 8,424 in trade, manufactures, &c.
The population of the respective hundreds, agree- 
ably to the above-mentioned returns, will be seen by 
the following : — 
Sumviary of the Population of the County of Buckingham, as published by Authority of Parliament in 1S1I.
HOUSES.
OCCUPATIONS.
PERSONS.
Hundreds, &c.
2 
is 
a 
Ja 
a 
1*3 
it «3 2 
"5 
to jr« 3 
.Si .5 <-> 
g g oo 
5"3-s 
s R « 
6n ** 
n l £ n 
7 5 o-2 
5 *• en 
O O 11 C 
c — ^ 
= « ~y.
<J.S £ o 
Males.
Females.
Total 
of 
Persons.
10260 
14494 
8150 
15521 
13940 
16814 
20S71 
10965 
3447 
2987 
201 
1832 
2682 
1420 
2916 
2441 
3222 
4289 
1829 
726 
572 
21959 
2217 
2970 
1736 
3216 
3043 
3562 
4785 
2238 
766 
668 
7 
14 
2 
20 
14 
37 
18 
5 
22 
55 
20 
61 
41 
71 
94 
59 
24 
10 
1868 
2273 
1330 
1632 
1691 
1585 
2008 
1117 
.232 
197 
293 
625 
250 
1305 
903 
1169 
2296 
750 
466 
367 
56 
72 
156 
279 
449 
808 
481 
371 
68 
104 
5065 
6952 
3S80 
7420 
6682 
S006 
9366 
5756 
1594 
1313 
201 
5195 
7569 
4270 
SlOl 
725 S 
8808 
11505 
5209 
1853 
1674 
Stoke 
Borough of Aylesbury....
Borough, &c.
of Buck- 
25201 
119 
457 
13933 
8424 
2844 
56208 
61442 
117650 
VOL.
I. — NO.
10.
2l 
Cmcr 
134 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Chief Towns, Parishes, &c.
Amersham.] — Amersham, anciently Agmondes- 
ham, is a market-town of 'great antiquity, situated in 
the first division of the hundred of Burnham, thirty- 
three miles south-east hy south from Buckingham, 
and twenty-five miles and three quarters west-north- 
west from London.
The market is holdeu on Tues- 
day ; and there are two annual fairs ; on Whit- 
Monday, and on the 19th of September.
The mar- 
ket-house, which is said to be the handsomest in the 
county, was built by Sir William Drake, Knt. who 
died in 1682.
Amersham, which is a parliamentary borough by 
prescription, returns two members.
It recovered 
its right of returning representatives, which had been 
disused for nearly 400 years, in 1623, through the 
exertions of William Hakeville, Esq. of Lincoln's 
Inn. The right of election is in the iords tenants of 
the borough paying scot and lot : the number of 
voters is about 70.
Edmund Waller, the poet, who 
was a native of Coleshill in this parish, sat in two 
Parliaments in the reign of King Charles I.
as mem- 
ber for the borough of Amersham, and Algernon 
Sydney, the celebrated patriot, was one of its repre- 
sentatives in 1679.
In the time of Leland, Amersham was described, 
" as a right pretty market-town of one street, well 
built with timber, standing in Buckinghamshire, and 
Chiltern, two miles and a half from Little Missen- 
den.
The Duke of Buckingham was chief lord of 
it since the king, now the Lord Russell, by gift, 
(John, Lord Russell, so created 1538, 30 Henry 
VIII.), who dwelleth at Cheneis, three miles off by 
the east.
The parish church standeth by north-east 
towards the middle of the town, and in a chapel on 
the north side of it lies buried Edmund, father to Sir 
Robert Brudenel, late Chief Justice of the Common 
Pleas." 
This town, which is beautifully situated in a vale, 
between woody hills, still principally consists of one 
long and spacious street, intersected by a smaller 
one, near the centre.
The church, standing near the point of intersec- 
tion, is a spacious brick building, covered with 
stucco.
It consists of a nave, with small aisles, a 
transept, chancel, and monumental room, and a 
tower at the west end.
Its three galleries were fitted 
up by the late Mr. Drake, who when the building 
was repaired, in the year 1778, brought a window 
of painted glass from a decayed mansion at Lamer, 
in Hertfordshire, and set it up in the chaneel.
In 
the upper compartments, the painting represents a 
lamb and a dove, and the figures of faith, hope, and 
charity, with their proper emblems ; beneath, in two 
rows, are whole length figures of the twelve apostles..
In the chancel is a monument to the memory of 
Mrs. Elizabeth Bent, who bequeathed 7001.
to pur- 
chase lands, the income of which she directed to be 
given to the officiating minister, for preaching sermons 
and administering the sacrament to the poor.
She 
""also appropriated the interest of 1001.
to the use of 
godly widows, who should have constantly attended 
divine service and received the communion.
In the 
monument room, which is paved with marble, is a 
very magnificent monument, erected to the memory 
of Montague Gerrard Drake, Esq. who died in 1728, 
executed by Scheemaker.
It is composed of varie- 
gated marble.
Mr. Drake is represented on a sar- 
cophagus, with his head reclined on his left hand : at 
his feet is a statue of his widow, seated; near his head 
is a figure of Hymen weeping, and bearing an inverted 
torch extinguished ; and over the tomb are two cu- 
pids.
There is also a very handsome monument to the 
memory of the lady of the late Mr. Drake, said to 
have been executed by Sir Henry Cheere.
The rectory of Amersham, to which a manor is 
annexed, formerly belonged to the prior and convent 
of Brecknock, in South Wales, to whom it was 
given in 1347, by Humphrey Bohun, Earl of Here- 
ford.
It is said to be one of the most valuable in 
the kingdom.
The manor of Amersham appears to have been 
vested in Ann Nevil, wife of Stafford, Duke of Buck- 
ingham, who was slain at the battle of Northampton 
in the 38th of Henry the Sixth.
In the reign of 
Edward II.
it became the property of the Great Earl 
of Warwick, whose lands were seized by the King, 
but were restored to Ann Beauchamp, the Earl's 
widow, by Henry the Seventh.
Henry the Eighth 
gave it to John, afterwards Lord Russell ; but, in 
the reign of James the First, it became the property 
of the Drake family, by an intermarriage with the 
daughter and heiress of William Tothill, Esq. The 
present possessor is Thomas Drake Tyrwhitt Drake, 
Esq. a collateral descendant.
The Drake family 
was originally seated at Ash, near Exmouth, in 
Devonshire.
Woodrew, Wood-side, and Wenon-hills, three 
other manors in this parish, have also been some 
time in the possession of the Drakes.
The manor of Raans, which has passed through 
the hands of several possessors, is now the property 
of Lord George Cavendish, who purchased it of the 
late Duke of Bedford.
Shardeloes, the seat of Mr. Drake, stands about a ; 
mile from the town.
The old manor-house was the 
occasional residence of Queen Elizabeth.
The pre- 
sent mansion, which was erected by Mr. Drake's 
father, from designs by Adams, is delightfully situ- 
ated on the brow of a hill, overlooking a broad sheet 
of water, which was planned by Richmond, and oc- 
cupies the centre of a narrow valley, covering 35 
acres.
The view of Amersham to the north-east, 
with the surrounding eminences, surmounted with- 
extensive tracts of wood, is very beautiful.
The 
principal entrance to the house is in the north front, 
under a projecting portico, supported by four fluted 
Corinthian columns.
The hall is 30 feet square.
On the right is the dining parlour, 36 feet by 21 ; 
and, on the left, is a handsome drawing-room of the 
same dimensions, containing several good paintings, 
of which the following are esteemed the best : — a 
2 three- 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
T3.5 
three- quarters portrait of Queen Elizabeth ; a small 
landscape, with figures, by Francis Van Litis, 1741; 
the Lord Chancellor Hatton, by C.
Janson ; four 
pieces representing a Storm at Sea, Sunset, a Calm, 
and Sun Rise, by Vernet ; an Engagement an Sea, 
by L.
A. Carter ; two Landscapes with Ruins, Views 
in Italy, by Van Bloemen ; and an upright Land- 
scape, with Rocks and Waterfalls, by Van Diest.
Sir William Drake, Bart, who died in 1069, 
founded an alms-house at Amersham for six poor 
widows, not under sixty years of age, who re- 
ceive four shillings each, weekly, besides clothes 
and fuel.
Dr. Robert Chaloner, rector of the parish, who 
died in 1621, founded a grammar school here, with 
an endowment of 251.
per annum : he also gave 201.
per annum, for the maintenance of a divinity lecture 
at Christ-Church College in Oxford, or for exhibi- 
tions for three poor scholars, from his school at 
Amersham.
— William, Lord Newhaven, founded a 
writing school in this parish in 1728, and endowed it 
with a rent charge of 201.
per annum.
Amersham appears to have been greatly exposed 
to the fury of religious persecution, both in the 
reign of Henry the Fifth, when many of its inhabi- 
tants were executed for professing the tenets of the 
Lollards, and in the reign of Queen Mary.
Great quantities of lace are made in this town, the 
business of which has been much increased during the 
last five-and-twenty years by the introduction of the 
cotton manufacture.
Ashenden.] — Ashenden is situated in the first 
division of the three hundreds of that name, eight 
miles west from Aylesbury, and five miles and a half 
north from Thame, in t"».e county of Oxford.
The 
manor, which is now the property of the Marquis of 
Buckingham, has been for time immemorial in the 
Grenville family.
The Marquis also holds the ma- 
nor, or reputed manor, of Little Policote, as lessee 
under Lincoln College, in Oxford.
It is said to 
have been given to the college, by John Bucktot, a 
priest, before the year 1479; and the manor-house 
was used as a retiring place for its members, at the 
time of the plague.
The manor of Great Policote anciently belonged 
to the family of Valence, Earls of Pembroke, from 
which it passed, by marriage, to the Talbots, and 
afterwards to the Staffords.
It now belongs to the 
Marqws of Buckingham, having been purchased by 
•'the Grenvilles, from the Palmers.
In Ashenden church is an ancient figure of a cru- 
sader, under a fiat arch, rudely ornamented with fo- 
liage, which according to tradition is the tomb of 
John Bucktot, of Policote.
Brown Willis was told, 
by the minister of the church, that it was the tomb 
of John Bucktot, the priest who gave the manor of 
Little Policote to Lincoln College ; but it is evi- 
dently that of a layman ; and, from the chevron on 
the shield, he appear to have been one of the Staf- 
ford family, who were anciently Lords of Great 
Policote.
. Aston-Clinton.] — Aston-Clinton, in the first 
division of Aylesbury hundreds, is situated lour 
miles and three quarters east-south-east from Ayles- 
bury, two miles and three quarters west by ncrth 
from Tring, in the county of Hertford.
The manor 
was the property of the late Lord Lake, who died in 
1808, during the trial of General Whitelocke, who 
was cashiered for his misconduct at Buenos Ayres, 
at the commencement of that year.
At St. Leonard's, a hamlet of this parish, about 
four miles from Aston church, is an ancient chapel, 
said to have been anciently a chantry chapel to the 
abbey of Missenden.
It contains, among other mo- 
numents, that of General Cornelius Wood, an officer, 
who distinguished himself in the reign of Queen 
Anne, and who died in 1712.
It is ornamented with 
a bust of tiie general in white marble, surrounded 
with military trophies.
This chapel is endowed with 
an estate vested in ten trustees, who have the ap- 
pointment of the minister.
Ashridge.] — Ashridge, formerly Eserug, is situ- 
ated partly in the first division of the Cotslow hun- 
dreds, and partly in the hundred of Dacorum, in the 
county of Hertford.
In very early times, this vil- 
lage is reported to have possessed a royal palace ; 
which, when the estate became the property of Ed- 
mund, Earl of Cornwall, son to Richard, King of 
the Romans, was converted into a college for Bon- 
hommes, or monks who followed the rule of St. Au~ 
gustine, and endowed with the manors of Ashridge,, 
Gaddesden, and Hemel-Hempsted.
A Parliament 
was holden here by Edward the First, in the year 
1291, and, though of short continuance, it was dis- 
tinguished by a spirited debate on the original and 
necessary use of fines.
After the Dissolution, the 
monastery appears to have again become the seat of 
royalty ; and Norden describes it as the place 
" wherein our most worthy and ever famous Queen 
Elizabeth lodged as in her owne, being a more 
statelie house." This Queen, in the 17th year of 
her reign, granted it to John Dudley and John Ays- 
cough, who within a fortnight conveyed it to Henry, 
Lord Cheney, whose Lady sold it to Ralph Marshal, 
by whom it was conveyed to Randolph Crew and 
others, and soon afterwards granted to Egerton, 
Lord Ellesmere, ancestor to the late Duke of Bridge- 
water; several of whose family are buried in.
the 
neighbouring church of Little Gaddesden.
The old college, the greater part of which was 
standing in the year 1800, exhibited a fine specimen 
of the Gothic architecture of the thirteenth century.
The cloisters were particularly beautiful.
The walls 
were painted in fresco, with scripture subjects.
The 
late Duke of Bridgewater, who intended to erect a 
magnificent family mansion on their site, pulled- 
down the whole of these buildings, the materials of 
which were disposed of in lots, and some of thenr 
used in mending the roads.
Ashridge Park, which contains some very fine 
oak and jjeech trees, is pleasingly varied with hill 
and dale.
It is five miles in circumference.
Aylesbury.} 
136 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Aylesbury.] — Aylesbury, the yEglesbury of the 
Saxons, is a market-town, situated near the centre 
of the county, on a small eminence, rising gradually 
on all sides, in the rich and extensive tract, denomi- 
nated the Vale of Aylesbury.
* " The town of 
Aylesbury," says Leland, " standith on an hill in 
respect of the ground thereabouts.
It is meetly wel 
provided with timber, and in it is a celebrated mar- 
ket.
It standith in the highway from Banbury and 
Buckingham to London.
There is domns curia (a 
town -hall) in the middle of the market-place, of late 
re-edified by Baldwin, Chief Justice of the 
Common Pleas, but the King gave the timber of it.
The gaol for Buckinghamshire is in this town.
There 
is but one parish chuvche, but that is one of the most 
ancientest in all those quarters.
Quarendon one 
mile and a half from Aylesbury ; also Burton and 
Alesbury in Chiltern, three miles off by south, with 
divers other hamlets, were in Alisbury parish.
St.
Osyth daughter to Fredwald was born in Quaren- 
don.
Ther was, as some say, a nunnery or other 
house of religion, where the parsonage is now, and 
record yet remaineth tliat this house should be of 
the Mat urines or fratres orpine Sancta Tnmitatis.
There was an house of Grey Friars in the town to- 
wards the south, founded about the time of Richard 
II.
The Lord of Ormond was^ in time of men's 
mind couned chief Lord of Alisbury, since Bolein, 
by partition of land.
This priory was founded by 
James, Earl of Ormond, and it was the only one for 
friars in the county.
At the Dissolution it was va- 
lued at 21.
2s.
5d.
per annum, and was granted to 
Sir John Baldwin, Lord Chief Justice of the Com- 
mon Pleas." 
Aylesbury lies in the first division of the Ayles- 
bury hundreds, eighteen miles and a half south-east 
by south from Buckingham, and thirty-eight and 
three quarters north-west by west from London.
It was originally a strong British town, which main- 
tained its independence till the year 571, when it 
was reduced by the West Saxons.
In the year 600 
it became famous as the burial place of St. Osyth, 
who was born at Quarendon, and beheaded in Es- 
sex by the Pagans.
Her relics having been interred 
in the church here, are said to have performed many 
miracles ; and a religious house was founded in ho- 
nour of her memory, said to have been situated on 
the spot where the parsonage now stands.
Her sis- 
ters, Editha and Eadburga, are also mentioned by 
historians, as liaving contributed to render Ayles- 
bury a place of religious consequence.
" Editha," 
says Camden, " having obtained it of her father 
Frewald, at the persuasion of certain religious, re- 
nounced the world and her husband, and, taking the 
veil, acquired the reputation of sanctity, in that age 
so fruitful for saints, with the additional reputation 
of miracles." 
* Drayton, in his Poly-Aibion, has the following line^, de- 
scriptive of this celebrated vale: — 
Aylesbury was made a manor royal in the time of 
William the Conqueror, who parcelled it out under 
the singular tenure : that the tenants should find 
litter, or straw, for the King's bedchamber three 
times a year, if he came that way so often, and pro- 
vide him three eels in winter, and three green geese 
in summer.
King John gave the manor of Aylesbury to Gef- 
frey Fitz-Piers, Earl of Essex, from whose family it 
passed successively, by female heirs, to the Botelers, 
or Butlers, afterwards Earls of Ormond, and to the 
Boleynes.
In the reign of Henry VIII.
it was sold 
by Thomas Boleyne, Earl of Wilts, father of Queen 
Anne Boleyne, to Sir John Baldwin, Lord Chief 
Justice of the Common Pleas, whose daughter took 
it, in marriage, to Robert Pakington, one of the re- 
presentatives in Parliament for the city of London, 
who was murdered in the year 1537, on account of 
his zeal for the reformed religion.
It. continued in 
this family till the year 1801, when it was sold by 
the present Sir John Pakington, Bart, to the Mar- 
quis of Buckingham.
How completely the manor, 
and the town itself, were in possession of the Pa- 
kington family, will appear from the following re- 
markable letter, preserved in the Chapel of the 
Rolls, among the returns of Parliament writs of the 
fourteenth of Elizabeth : — " To all Christian people, 
to whom this present writing shall come ; I, Doro- 
thy Pakington, late wife of Sir John Pakington, 
Knight, lord and owner of the town of Aylesbury, 
send greeting.
Know ye me, the said Dorothy Pa- 
kington, to have chosen, named, and appointed my 
trusty and well beloved Thomas Litchfield and 
George Burden, Esqrs.
to be my burgesses of my 
said town of Aylesbury.
And whatever the said 
Thomas and George, burgesses, shall do in the ser- 
vice of the Queen's Highness in that present Par- 
liament to be holden at Westminster, the 8th of May 
next ensuing the date hereof, I the same Dorothy 
Pakingham do ratify and approve to be of my own 
act as fully and wholly as if I were witness or pre- 
sent there.
In witness whereof, to these presents, 
I have set my seal, this 4th day of May, in the 1 4th 
year of the reign of my Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, 
by the Grace of God, of England, France, and Ire- 
land, Queen, &c." 
Aylesbury was made a borough town by a charter 
of Queen Mary, in 1554 ; and, at the same time, 
was incorporated under the government of a bailiff, 
ten aldermen, and twelve capital burgesses, in whom 
was also vested the right of electing two representa- 
tives in Parliament.
This corporation, however, 
was dissolved, not many years after the grant of the 
charter, through the neglect of the corporation to 
fill up the vacancies caused by death.
From that 
time, the right of election of members was vested in 
all the inhabitants paying scot and lot, till the month 
Aylesbury's vale that walloweth in her wealth, 
And (by her wholesome air continually in health) 
Is lusty, firm, and fat ; and holds her youthful strength." 
T>f 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
137 
«? June, 1804 ; when, in consequence of the notori- 
ous bribery which had been practised in the borough, 
an Act of Parliament was passed, by which the right 
of election was vested in the freeholders of the three 
hundreds of Aylesbury, jointly with such persons as 
had before a right to vote by the customs of the bo- 
rough.
The constables of the manor of Aylesbury, 
and the prebendal manor, in whom the municipal 
government of the town is vested, are the returning 
officers.
From time immemorial, the town of Aylesbury 
has had a considerable market, the tolls of which, in 
the reign of Edward the Confessor were valued at 
251.
per annum.
The present market, which is holden 
on Saturday, was granted by charter of Queen Eli- 
zabeth, dated 1579.
The town, which consists of several irregularly 
built streets and lanes, has been much improved 
since the time of Leland, and most of the houses are 
now of brick, instead of timber, as he describes 
them.
The improvements were principally owing 
to the munificence of Sir John Baldwin, Chief Jus- 
tice in the reign of Henry V ill.
who at his own ex- 
pence erected several public buildings, and procured 
the assizes to be holden here, instead of at Bucking- 
ham.
He also formed a causeway, three miles in 
length, on one of the approaches to the town which 
was miry and dangerous.
The county gaol is still 
at Aylesbury, but the summer assizes were restored 
to Buckingham,, through the exertions of, Lord 
Cobham, and the Grenville family, in the vear 
1758.
The County-Hall, at Aylesbury, is a handsome , 
modern structure, built with brick ; but the market-* 
place is a ruinous quadrangular building, Avhich dis- 
figures the centre of the town.
Aylesbury Church is a large and handsome Go- 
thic structure, built in the shape of a.
cross, with a 
low tower, rising at the intersection of the nave and 
transept.
It contains a monument to the memory 
of Sir Henry Lee's lady, who died in the year 1584, 
and an effigy in Avhite marble, .
found among the 
ruins of the church of Grey Friars, supposed to re- 
present Sir Robert Lee, who died in 1460.
The 
pulpit is ornamented with curious carved work.
The church-yard is very large, and is- disposed into 
several walks, which .
are planted with double rows 
of trees.
The site of the house of Grey Friars, mentioned 
by Leland, was granted, by Henry VIII.
to Sir 
John Baldwin, who made it his country seat.
It 
sustained so much injury during the civil wars in 
the reign of Charles I.
that it was never afterwards 
inhabited by the owners.
It appears, from the fol- 
lowing copy of the surrender of the house, by the 
holy brotherhood, that the monastic life was relin- 
quished by them, without much reluctance : — 
" Forasmooche as wee, the wardens and freers of 
the house of Saynte Frauncis of Ailesburie, com- 
monly called the Grey Freers in Aylesburie, in the 
eountie of Buckingham, do profoundly consider, that 
•VOL.
I. — NO.
10.
the perfection of Christian livinge dothe nottc con- 
ciste in dome ceremonies, waringe of a grei eoote, 
disgesinge ourself alter straunge fassions, dekynge 
and beckynge, in gurdynge ourselves with a gurdle, 
full of knotts, and other like papistical ceremonies, 
wherein wee have been most principally practised 
and mislet in times paste ; butt the verie true waye 
to please Godd, and to live a true Christen man, 
withoute all ypocrisie and fained dissimulation is 
sincerely declarid unto us by our Master Christe, 
his evangilists and apostolls, being' mynded here- 
after to feilowe the same, conforming ourselfe unto 
the will and pleasure of our Supreme Hedde under 
Godde in erthe, the Kynges Majestie, and nott to 
follow henceforth the supersticious tradicions of 
oni 1 brincicall potentat or poore ; with mutual assent 
and concent do submit ourselves unto the merci of 
our saide Soverayne Lorde, and with like mutual 
assent and concent do surreiulre and yelde up into 
the hands of the same, all our seide bowse of Saint 
Frauncis in Ailesburie, commonly called the Grey 
Freers, in Ailesburie, with all lands, tenements, &c.
and moost humbly beseching his moost noble grace 
to dispose of us, and of the same, as best shall stond 
with his moost gracious pleasure ; and further freely 
to graunte unto every one of us his licence, under 
wrytinge and scoalle, to chaunge our abytts into se- 
cular fassion, and to receve such maner of livinge 
as other secular prists comonly be preferred into.
And we all faithfully, shall praye unto Almightie 
Godde long to preserve his most noble grace wyth 
increase of moche felicitie and honor : and in wit- 
ness of all and singular the premises, wee the said 
warden and convent of Grey Freers in Ailesburie, to 
these presents have putt our convent sceall the first 
day of October, in the thirtyth yere of the rayne of 
our most Soverayne Lord, King - Henry the Eighths.
— Per., me Henricum Martync, Gardianum ; per 
me Gulielmum May, Vice Gardianum ; and five 
others." 
In ancient times, there was an ancient hospital at 
Aylesbury, dedicated to St. John, said to have been 
founded by several inhabitants of the town, in the 
time of Henry I.
In the 24th of Edward II L it\ 
was iu ruins, and the endowment, valued only at 
five nobles, or 11.
13s.
4d.
a year, had been seized 
by some lay-persons.
There was another hospital 
here, for lepers, called St. Leonard's, which is said 
to have been built and endowed, with tweuty shil- 
lings per annum, by the inhabitants, about the same 
time as that of St. John, with which it seems to have   
been afterwards ruined.
John Bedford, in the year 1494, granted lands to 
the town of Aylesbnry, which now produce 30001.
annually, for the repairs of the highways, and relief 
of the poor.
Mr. Henry Phillips, in the year 1714, erected a 
grammar-school in Aylesbury, and gave for its en- 
dowment, the sum of 50001.
with which was pur- 
chased the manor of Broughton Abbots, in the 
neighbouring parish of Bierton.
. 
2 m The 
1SS 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
The respective sects, of Presbyterians, Anabap- 
tists, Quakers, and Methodists, have meeting-houses 
in this town.
There are five annual fairs at Aylesbury : on the 
] 8th of January, the Saturday before Palm Sunday, 
thoSth of May, the 14th of June, and the 25th of 
September.
The only manufacture at Aylesbury, is that of 
lace-making.
Many of the inhabitants of the town, 
and its vicinity, derive support from their peculiar 
skill in the breeding 1 and rearing of ducks.
By a 
restriction of food, and other means, they prevent 
the ducks from laying, till the months of October 
and November.
Some weeks previously to the time 
that they wish them to lay, the ducks are fed with 
stimulating provisions ; and the eggs being ready, 
a hen is employed to sit, and is frequently obliged 
to continue in the nest till three successive broods 
are hatched.
The poor hen is generally exhausted, 
and dies under her compulsatory duty.
When the 
young leave the shell, they are placed near a fire, 
and nursed with particular care ; by which means 
many ducklings are sent to London at Christmas, 
and have been known to sell from fifteen shillings to 
a guinea a couple.
Beaconsfield.] — Beaconsfield is a small market- 
town, supposed to have derived its name from the 
term Beacon, either significant of the commanding 
eminence on which it is situated, or of the purpose 
to which that eminence had in former times been 
applied.
It lies in the second division of the hun- 
dred of Burnham, thirty-six miles south-east by 
south from Buckingham, and twenty-three and a 
quarter west by north from London.
Its market, 
which is of but little note, the neighbouring towns 
of Wycombe and Uxbridge having drawn away the 
greater part of its business, is on Wednesday.
It 
has two annual fairs ; one on the 13th of February, 
the other on Holy Thursday.
The town consists of four principal streets, form- 
ing a cross.
The houses are built with flint and 
bricks.
Beaconsfield manor anciently belonged to the 
Windsors.
It was afterwards in the possession of 
Burnham Abbey ; but is now the property of Ed- 
mund Waller, Esq. of Farrington, in Gloucester- 
shire, a descendant of Edmund Waller the poet, one 
of its former proprietors.
Hull Barns, the celebrat- 
ed seat of Waller, by whom it was built, is about a 
mile south from Beaconsfield, and was formerly 
considered as a magnificent abode.
It is now in 
the occupation of Mr. MaxAvell.
Amongst the pic- 
tures which it contains, is a portrait of the poet, 
* For the following interesting sketch of this illustrious and 
distinguished statesman, we are indebted to Dr. Watkins's 
Biographical Dictionary: — 
He was born at Dublin, in 1730.
His father was an attor- 
ney, and a protestant.
The son received his education under 
Abraham Shackleton, a Quaker, who kept a school at Bally- 
2 
paiuted when he was twenty-three years of age ; an- 
other, which is supposed to have been intended for 
him at a more advanced age ; and a portrait of a 
lady, said to be that of Sacharissa, the favourite sub- 
ject of his poetical writings.
Butler's Court, formerly called Gregories, also 
belonged to the Wallers ; but it has more recently 
been distinguished, as the seat of the late Right 
Honourable Edmund Burke.
The front of this 
house, which lies about a mile to the north-west of 
the town, greatly resembles that of the Queen's Pa- 
lace in St. James's Park.
The centre is connected 
with the two wings by colonnades, each supported 
by eight Corinthian columns.
The grounds, though 
not extensive, are tastefully laid out ; and the cir- 
cumjacent country is finely diversified with birch 
and coppice woods, hills, vallies, and inclosures.
The apartments at Butler's Court contain some fine 
paintings, by Sir Joshua Reynolds, and some valua- 
ble marbles.
This seat, we believe, came into the 
possession of Mr. Burke, through the friendship of 
Lord Verney and the Marquis of Rockingham, by 
whose munificence he was enabled to purchase it.
Wilton Park, also in the parish of Beaconsfield, 
was for many years a seat of the family of Basil], 
now of James Dupre, Esq. It is about a mile and 
a half north-east from the town.
The house was 
built from the designs of Mr. Jupp, late surveyor 
to the East India Company, and finished by the 
widow of the late Governor Dupre, about twenty- 
seven years ago.
The church of Beaconsfield consists of a nave, 
chancel, and side aisles, with a tower at the -west 
end.
The inside is neatly plastered and white- 
washed.
In the south aisle, a small and plain mural 
tablet records the memory of the illustrious Burke, 
who died in his retirement, at Butler's Court.
It 
bears the following inscription : — 
Near this Place 
lies interred 
all that was mortal of the 
Right Honourable Edmund Burke, 
who died on the 9th July, 1797, 
Aged G8 years.* 
In the same grave are deposited 
The remains of 
His only son, Richard Burke, Esq.
Representative in Parliament 
for the Borough of Walton, 
who died on the 2nd August, 1794.
age 35.
Of his brother, Richard Burke, Esq.
Barrister at Law, and 
Recorder of the City of Bristol, 
who died on the 4th February, 1794.
In 
tore, near Carlow, and it is recorded to the honour of Mr.
Burke, that whenever he visited Ireland, he always paid his re- 
spects to his okl tutors ; in 1746 he entered as a scholar at Tri- 
nity College, which he left on taking His bachelor's degree in 
1749, and soon after became candidate for the professorship of 
logic at Glasgow, but did not succeed.
In 1753 lie entered of 
the 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
139 
In a chapel, on tbe south side of the chancel, is 
an ancient altar-tomb, for one of the Bulstrode fa- 
mily ; and in the church itself are several memorials 
of the Wallers.
Edmund Waller, the poet, is bu- 
ried in the church-yard ; and, over his grave, is a 
table monument, of white marble, ornamented with 
a pyramid in the centre, and four urns at the corners.
On each side is a Latin inscription.
That on the 
east side is to the following effect : — 
Edmund Waller, to whom this marble is sacred, 
was a native of Coleshill, and a student at Cambridge.
His father was Robert; his mother of the Hampden 
family.
He was born the 30th, March 1605.
the Middle Temple, where he applied more to general literature 
than to the law, and supported himself by writing for the book- 
sellers.
Falling ill, through too close an application to his stu- 
dies, he removed to the house of Dr. Nugent, a physician, 
whose daughter he afterwards married.
In 1756 he published 
a pamphlet intituled, " A Vindication of Natural Society." 
This piece was purposely drawn up in the manner of Lord Bo- 
lingbroke, and for a time imposed upon the friends of that wri- 
ter as his real productions.
His next performance was the Es- 
say on the Sublime and Beautiful, published in 1757.
This 
philosophical piece of criticism, written in a fine and elegant 
style, procured the author a great reputation, and the esteem of 
the first literary characters of the age ; the principal of whom 
was Dr. Johnson.
In 1758, he suggested to Mr. Dodsley, the 
bookseller, the plan of the " Annual Register," the historical 
part of which he wrote for several years.
In 1761 he went to 
Ireland as the companion of his friend Mr. Hamilton, secretary 
to the Earl of Halifax, then Lord Lieutenant.
That gentle- 
man, who was generally known by the name of Singlespeech 
Hamilton, from the circumstance of his making only one speech 
in Parliament, but one of uncommon eloquence, procured him 
a pension of 3001.
on the Irish establishment.
On his return 
from Ireland he was made private secretary to the Marquis of 
Rockingham, First Lord of the Treasury, who brought him 
into Parliament for Wendover.
He was also enabled by the 
Marquis to purchase a villa near Beaconsfield, which continued 
to be his principal residence the remainder of his life.
The 
Rockingham party continued in power but a short time, and on 
going out of office, Mr. Burke wrote a forcible pamphlet upon 
the subject, intituled " A Short Account of a Short Admi- 
nistration," after which he became an active member of the 
opposition, as a senator and also as a writer.
A pamphlet 
of his intituled, " Thoughts on the Causes of the present 
Discontents," excited considerable interest as a bold exposure 
of court intrigues and favourites, in controling the operations of 
ministers.
In the struggle between Great Britain and the colo- 
nies, Mr. Burke bore a distinguished part as an opponent of the 
ministry.
His speeches were vehement, and had so powerful 
an influence upon the people, that the citizens of Bristol in 
1774 invited him to be one of their representatives, without his 
being at the least expence.
But at the next election in 1780, 
he was rejected by them for having supported the Irish petition 
for a free trade, and the bill for relieving Roman Catholics.
He was then returned for Malton in Yorkshire.
At this time 
he gained great popularity by his introduction of a bill for a 
reform in the national expenditure, on which he spent prodi- 
5;ious labour, but it was unsuccessful.
When the Marquis of 
Rockingham returned to power on the resignation of Lord 
North in 1782, Mr. Burke obtained the post of paymaster- 
general of the forces, and a seat in the Privy Council ; but this 
was of short duration, for on the death of his patron, Lord 
Shelbourne became First Lord of the Treasury, and Mr.
Burke, with several of his friends, resigned their places.
In 
the coalition, which for a little while succeeded the Shelbourne 
administration, Mr. Burke had his share both of emolument 
his first wife was Anne, only daughter and heiress of 
Edward Banks, 
Twice made a father by his first wife, and thirteen 
times by his second, 
whom he survived eight years.
He died the 21st of 
October, 1687.
The inscription on the west side contains the fol- 
lowing ridiculously-hyperbolical expression : — 
" Huic debet patria lingua, quod credas, si Grace, 
Latineque intermitterent Musa; loqui, amarent An- 
glice." 
" He had so improved his native Language, that 
whenever the Muses should renounce Greek and 
Latin, they would discourse in English."* 
Bechampton.] 
and abuse.
The leading particulars of his political life, after 
this, were his exertions against Mr. Hastings, in which he ma- 
nifested uncommon industry to fasten guilt upon that gentle- 
man, with no small share of personal asperity; his vigorous op- 
position to Mr. Pitt's design of forming a limited regency on 
the king's illness in 1788 ; and above all, his ardour against the 
actors, and defenders of the French Revolution.
On the latter 
subject he evinced peculiar sagacity at the outset, and when 
many worthy men were rejoicing at the prospect of rising 
liberty and happiness to the world, Mr. Burke predicted, with 
remarkable precision, the desolation, bloodshed, anarchy, and 
misery which ensued.
He displayed his detestation of the re- 
volutionists in the House of Commons, and separated himself 
in consequence from Mr. Fox, and many other of his old asso- 
ciates.
In 1790 he published his famous " Reflections on the 
Revolution in France," which attracted wonderful attention, 
and produced a surprising effect upon the public mind.
Many 
publications appeared in answer to this book; the most noted 
of which was Paine's pamphlet, intituled the Rights of Man, 
wherein the principles of republicanism were so artfully ad- 
dressed to the feelings of ordinary persons, as to excite for a 
time no small alarm to the friends of government.
Mr. Burke, 
after this, published a variety of pamphlets in support of his 
positions : as, " A Letter to a Member ofthe National Assem- 
bly ;" " An Appeal from the New Whigs to the Old ;" " Let- 
ter to a Noble Lord on the Subject in Discussion with the 
Duke of Bedford ;" " Thoughts on a Regicide Peace," &c.
His zeal on this occasion as well as his extraordinary talents, 
recommended him to the royal favour, and he obtained a pen- 
sion, which gave room for those who had been galled by his 
arguments, to reproach him, and some illiberal animadversions 
were made upon him in the senate, which drew from him that 
admirable defence, his " Letter to a Noble Lord," in which 
he retaliates upon a celebrated duke in a strain of keen irony 
and dignified remonstrance.
Mr. Burke withdrew from Par- 
liament in 1794, leaving his seat for Malton to his son, an ac- 
complished young man, who died shortly after.
This melan- 
choly event hastened his death, which happened July 8, 1797.
A little before his death, he caused to be read to him Addison's 
paper in the Spectator, on the Immortality of the Soul.
Mr.
Burke was very amiable in his private life ; of correct deport- 
ment ; faithful in his attachments ; charitable to the poor ; and 
religious without being superstitious.
He had a fine taste for 
the arts, and was fond of gardening and architecture." 
* The great Hampden was Waller's maternal uncle ; and it 
was probably through his influence, that the poet was returned 
burgess for Amersham, before he was eighteen.
Waller's con- 
duct in the early part of his .political career appears to have 
been formed on his uncle's principles, for he opposed the mea- 
sures of the court with so much noise and violence, that he was 
chosen manager of the impeachment against Judge Crawley, 
whose decision on the great question of ship-money had been 
in favour of the King.
Within two years afterwards, so much 
were his opinions changed, he engaged in a conspiracy, the ob- 
ject of which was to seize the Tower, and admit the monarch's 
forees 
140 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Bechampton.] — Bechampton is a village in the 
first division of the Buckingham hundreds, distant 
five miles and a half north-east by east from the 
county town.
The manor, after passing through 
many families, descended, by a female heir, to the 
Cecils, and is now the property of the Marquis of 
Salisbury.
The remains of the old mansion-house, 
the great hall of which is yet standing, have been 
converted into a farm-house.
Bechampton chureh contains some monuments of 
the Bennet family, anciently Lords of the Manor ; 
among which is that of Sir Simon Bennet, whose 
principal residence was at Bechampton, and who 
had been a great benefactor to the poor, and to the 
University of Oxford.
He was created a baronet in 
1627, and died in 1631.
This monument was erect- 
ed by University College, more than 100 years after 
his decease.
William Elmer, Esq. who died in 1652, by his 
will, dated in 1648, founded a free grammar-school 
in this parish.
The school-house was finished in 
1667.
The master must be a single man, and re- 
side at the school-house.
The school is endowed 
with lands (now let at 431.
per annum) charged 
with the payment of 40s.
per annum each to eight 
poor men, and 20s.
each to eight poor Avomen.
Three of each must be inhabitants of Bechampton.
Mr. Elmer also gave 51.
per annum to apprentice a 
child, and some lands for the relief of the poor, the 
repairs of the highways, kc.
Biddlesdon.] — Biddlesdon, or Bittlesden, for- 
merly a market-town of some note, is now only a 
small village, in the second division of the Bucking- 
ham hundreds, six miles and a quarter north-west 
from the county town.
Biddlesdon manor, at the time of the Norman 
survey, is said to have belonged to the Conqueror.
It afterwards became the property of Robert de 
Mapershall, who, according to Camden, forfeited it 
for stealing one of the king's hounds ; but other 
writers say, that it was forfeited to the Earl of Lei- 
cester, as his lord paramount.
The fact, as stated 
in the original record, printed in Dugdale's Monas- 
ticon, appears to be, that Robert de Mapershall, hav- 
ing been tried in the king's court for stealing a dog, 
gave this manor to the chamberlain of Henry I.
Jeffry de Clinton, for his influence in the suit ; and, 
having sometime afterwards married a relation of 
the chamberlain, he received the manor back again.
After this, having gone to reside at his native place, 
Mapershall, in Bedfordshire, he neglected to pay 
the suit and services, due to the Earl of Leicester, 
forces into the rilj ; to surprise the militia, and dissolve Par- 
liament.
The despicable cowardice which he displayed when 
the plot was discovered, and his mean and loquacious confes- 
sions, saved his life ; and, after paying a fine of 10,0001.
he was 
r leased from a twelve-months' imprisonment, and went to 
France.
The splendour of his establishment, however, having 
reduced him to distress, he obtained permission of Cromwell 
to return to England ; and, becoming acquainted with the Pro- 
tector, he wrote a panegyric on his conduct.
At the period of 
tl*c Restoration, he employed his pen villi equal alacrity for 
(as his lord paramount) for tit?
manor of Brddfes- 
don ; upon which the Earl seized the manor, and 
gave it to Ernalde de Bosco, his steward.
De 
Bosco, with the Earl's permission, gave the estate 
to the monks of Gerendon, of the Cistertian order., 
to the intent that they should found an abbey, which 
they accordingly did, in the year 1147.
It was de- 
dicated to St. Mary and St. Nicholas, and at the 
Dissolution was valued at 1251.
4s.
id.
per annum.
Its site, together with the manor, was then granted 
to Thomas, Lord Wriothesley.
As recently as the year 1712, there Mere consi- 
derable remains of the abbey and conventual church, 
consisting of part of the east side of the cloisters, 
part of a tower, a small chapel, and the chapter- 
house, a handsome room about forty feet square, 
with a vaulted roof, supported by four pillars* In 
the chapel was a monument of one of the Lords 
Zouch, and the tombs of Thomas Billing, Lord Chief 
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, who died in 
1481, one of the Lovett family, and some others.
— 
Mr. Henry Sayer, who possessed the estate in the 
year 1712, destroyed all these remains, and levelled 
the ground on which they stood.
A modern chapel, built adjoining to Biddlesdon 
House (now the seat of George Morgan* Esq.) serves 
as the parish church.
Bletchley.] — Bletchley, or Blechley, is situated 
in the second division of the Newport hundreds, a 
mile and a half west by south from Fenny Stratford.
The whole landed property of this parish was grant • 
ed, by William Rufus, to Walter GifFard, Earl of 
Buckingham ; and was inherited by Richard de 
Clare, Earl of Hertford, who married his grand- 
daughter Roesia.
John de Grey received it in mar- 
riage with Helena, the daughter of the Earl of Hert- 
ford ; and it continued in the family of the Greys 
above four hundred years.
On the attainder of 
Thomas, Earl Grey, in 1603, who was imprisoned 
on the charge of being an accomplice with Sir Wal- 
ter Raleigh, it was granted by James the First to 
his favourite Sir George Villiers, who was created 
Baron Whadden, and afterwards Duke of Bucking- 
ham.
In Oliver Cromwell's time the respective 
manors were sold, as confiscated property, to Sir 
Philip Skippon ; but, at the Restoration, George 
Villiers, the younger, Duke of Buckingham, reco- 
vered them, and, in 1674, sold them to Dr. Thomas 
Willis, an eminent physician, the father of Browne 
Willis, the celebrated antiquary.
In the year 1711, 
Browne Willis built a house at Water Hall, one of 
the manors, which has been pulled down by its pre- 
Charles the Second.
" He that has flattery," says Dr. John- 
son, " ready foe all whom the vicissitudes of the world happen 
to exalt, must be scorned as a prostituted mind, that may re- 
tain the glitter of wit, but has lost the dignity of virtue." To- 
wards the decline of life, Waller purchased a small estate at 
Coleshill, his native spot, and observes that, " He should be glad 
to die, like the stag, where he was roused." This, however, 
did not happen, for, as has been already mentioned, he died at 
Beaconslield.
sent 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
143 
sent owner, Mr. Harrison.
John Willis Fleming-, 
Esq. the grandson of Browne Willis, sold the ma- 
nors of Bletchley, Water Eaton, and Fenny Strat- 
ford, which is also in this parish, to the Rev. Philip 
Barton, of Great Brickhill, and they are now the 
property of Philip Duneombe Pauncefort, Esq. his 
devisee.
The manor of Water Hall was anciently holden 
by the service of finding' a man on a horse without 
a saddle, a bow without a string, and an arrow 
without a head.
That of Water Eaton,, lying about 
two miles and a half south-e...st from Shenl y, was 
holden by the service of keeping a falcon for flight, 
for the King's use ; and for the charges of keeping 
it the lord was entitled on the day that he carriee.
it 
to court, to a horse witli its equipage, the King's 
table, with the tressels and table clot!), all the ves- 
sels with which the King was served that day, and a 
cask of wine, as soon as the King had tasted it.
Bletchley church is a handsome Gothic structure, 
repaired and ornamented at the expence of the late 
Mr. Browne Willis, who added the pinnacles to the 
towjr, recast the bells, aud gave it a new font.
The 
internal decorations, however, on which he expend- 
ed a large sum, but ill accord with the style of the 
building ; the altar-piece and the skreen between 
the nave and the chancel are Grecian, and the pillars 
are painted to resemble veined marble.
In the north aisle is a very fine alabaster tomb, to 
the memory oi' Richard, Lord Grey, of Wilton, who, 
with his son Reginald, and Edmund, his great 
grandson, were interred here.
On the tomb is the 
figure of Lord Richard, armed ; and round the 
lower part of the armour is a collar of jewels, in the 
midst of which is a small shield, with the cross of 
St. George, in allusion to his having been made 
George 
Knight of 
the Garter by Richard the Second.
He 
appears with cropped hair, and without a beard.
The fingers of his left hand are ornamented with 
several rings.
In this aisle is also a monument, a bad imitation 
of an ancient altar-tomb, to the memory of the wife 
of Mr. Browne Willis; from the inscription on 
which, it appears that both she and her husband 
were descended from the ancient Lords of the Ma- 
nor of Bletchley, whose arms, painted on wooden 
tablets, are placed round the aisle.
Mr. Willis's 
father and mother were also interred in Bletchley 
church ; a circumstance which induced him to contri- 
bute so largely to its repairs and embellishments.
In 
the chancel is a remarkable tablet, to the memory of 
Dr. Sparke, rector of the parish, who died in 1606, 
with his portrait very neatly engraved on copper, 
and enclosed within a wooden ease.
There is also 
a remarkable monument to the memory of Mr. Ed- 
Ward Taylor and his wife Faith, with their portraits 
sketched in white, on black marble, and ornamented 
with various devices.
William Cole, the Cambridge antiquary, was 
rector of this parish, from the year 1753 to 1767.
Bledlow.] — Bledlow is situated in the second 
vol.
i. — no.
10.
division of the Aylesbury hundreds, eight miles and 
a half west by north from Great Missenden, and five 
and a half east-south-east from Thame, in Oxford- 
shire.
The manor, formerly belonging to the alien 
priory of Okeborne, was given by Henry VI.
to 
John, Duke of Bedford, and, after his death to the 
provost and fellows of Eton College, under whom it 
has been some time holden by the Badcock 
family.
The church, which is of the earliest Gothic archi- 
tecture, stands near the edge of a rock, beneath 
which, in a deep glen, overgrown with trees, issue 
some transparent springs, forming a pond called 
the Lyde.
On the supposition, that those springs 
wear away the rock, the following local proverb lias 
arisen : — 
" They who live and do abide, 
Shall.
see Bledlow church fall into the Lyde." 
Borstall.] — Borstall, in the second division of 
the Ashenden hundreds, is situated at the distance 
of fourteen miles west from Aylesbury.
It was for- 
merly a chapelry to Oakley, but was made parochial 
in the year 1418.
It still makes an annual ac- 
knowledgement of two shillings to the mother 
church.
According to tradition, the manor was given, by 
King Edward the Confessor, to one Nigel, an an- 
cestor of the Fitz-Nigels, or Fitz-Neales, for his 
services in slaying a wild boar, which infested the 
forest of Bcrnwood, to be holden by carriage or ser- 
vice of a horn ; and the mansion-house built by him 
was called Boarstall, in memory of the slain boar.
The present proprietor is Sir John Aubrey, Bart, 
whose family have been in possession of the estate 
for more than a century.
Sir John Aubrey has a 
very ancient horn, supposed to be the same by which 
this manor was originally held.
The horn, conjec- 
tured to be that of a buffalo, is ofadark brown colour, 
variegated and veined like tortoise-shell.
It is two 
feet four inches in length, in the convex bend ; the 
diameter of the larger end is three inches ; at each 
end it is tipt with silver gilt ; and it has a wreath of 
leather, by which it is hung about the neck.
A re- 
presentation of this horn maybe seen in the third .
volume of the Arclneologia.
In the year 1644, during the civil wars, Borstall 
House was garrisoned for King Charles.
In the 
spring of that year, it was evacuated by the King's 
troops, and the fortifications destroyed : it was then 
seized by the Parliament forces, and again reduced 
for the King, by Colonel Gage, who left a garrison 
there..
In 1645 it was attacked by General Skip- 
pon, and afterwards by Fairfax himself, without suc- 
cess ; but the next year, it was surrendered, after 
a siege of eighteen hours, by .
the governor Sir 
Charles Campion, who was afterwards slain at Col- 
chester.
A large gateway, with turrets at the cor- 
ners, is all that now remains of Borstall House.
Bradenham.] — Bradenham is situated in the se- 
cond divisiou of the hundred of Desborough, four 
2 n miles 
142 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
miles and a quarter north-west by north from High 
Wycombe.
In the thirteenth century, the manor 
belonged to the Earls of Warwick, and was after- 
wards successively in the families of Bradenham 
(who took their name from the village) Falwesley, 
Wiltshire, Bolder, Scot, Windsor, Pye. John 
Hicks, Esq. the present proprietor, purchased it of 
Lord Wentworth, in the year 1787.
Bradenham House was built by William, Lord 
Windsor, the second of that title, but, having under- 
gone various alterations, it has not a very ancient 
appearance.
In the year 1566, Queen Elizabeth was most 
sumptuously entertained at Bradenham, by Edward, 
Lord Windsor, whose kinsman, Miles Windsor, de- 
livered an oration on the occasion, which was highly 
commended by her majesty.
The same Lord Wind- 
sor, by his last will, directed an hospital to be found- 
ed at Bradenham for six poor men, the rector of the 
parish to be master, and to have twenty marks a 
year, as an augmentation to his living ; and he re- 
quested that letters patent might be procured, to in- 
corporate the said rector, and poor men, by 'the 
name of the master and brethren of the hospital of 
Bradenham.
His executors appear to have neg- 
lected their trust Avith respect to this hospital ; as it 
was never founded.
Bradenham Church contains nothing worthy of 
note, excepting the tomb of Joanna Mitchin, who 
died at the age of 103.
Bradwell.] — Bradwell lies in the second divi- 
sion of the Newport hundreds, three miles and a 
quarter east by south from Stoney Stiatford.
A priory of black monks, the site of which is now 
deemed extra-parochial, was founded at Bradwell, 
in the time of King Stephen, by Manefelinus, or 
Manfelin, baron of Wolverton.
It was dedicated to 
St. Mary, and was at first a cell to Luffield.
It was 
one of the small monasteries which were granted to 
Cardinal Wolsey ; and at the Dissolution, it Mas 
valued at 531.
lis.
2d.
per annum.
The site of the 
abbey, of which there ar?
no remains, is occupied 
as a farm-house.
The Bradwell Abbey estate be- 
longs to the Earl of Dartmouth.
Brickhill.] — There are three places of this 
name, Bow-Brickhill, Great Brickhill, and Little 
Brickhill, all situated in the second division of the 
Newport hundreds.
The manor of Bow-Brickhill, two miles to the 
east of Fenny Stratford, is the property of the Duke 
of Bedford.
The church is a very conspicuous ob- 
ject, standing on the edge of a steep hill.
The vil- 
lage lies on the side of the same hill, about a quarter 
of a mile lower down.
Great Brickhill, two rides and three quarters 
south-east by south from Fenny Stratford, contains 
nothing remarkable.
The manor belongs to Philip 
Duncombe Paunccfort, Esq.
Little Brickhill, two miles east-south-east from 
Fenny Stratford, though now an inconsiderable vil- 
lage, was formerly a place of more consequence, and 
more populous than Great Brickhill, the adjoining 
parish, having been a market and an assize town.
The market, holden on Thursdays, was granted by 
charter, dated in 1228 ; and a fair was at the same 
time granted, at the festival of St. Mary Magdalen.
By subsequent charters, four other fairs were grant- 
ed ; but they have all been discontinued.
The as- 
sizes for the county appear to have been holden at 
this town from a very early period.
Between the 
years 1561 and 1620 the names of 42 executed cri- 
minals appear among the burials in the parish re- 
gister.
The assizes were holden here for the last 
time in 1638.
The market of Little Brickhill has 
been long discontinued ; but, of late years, its popu- 
lation has considerably increased.
The manor is the property of George Henry 
Rose, Esq.
Brkll.] — Brill is situated in the second division 
of the Ashenden hundreds, twelve miles west from 
Aylesbury, It has an insignificant fair, holden by 
charter, ever since the year 1346, on the Wednes- 
day after Old Michaelmas Day.
The manor of Brill was part of the ancient de- 
mesnes of the crown ; and it.
is said that the Saxon 
Kings had a palace there.
Brill was also a favour- 
ite residence of King Edward the Confessor.
King 
Henry VI.
kept his court there in 1160, attended by 
Thomas a Becket, his chancellor, and again in 1162.
In 1203, Walter Borstard, the chaplain of King John, 
was appointed keeper of the royal palace at BrUl.
Henry III.
kept his court here in 1224.
At the time of the civil wars, in the reign of 
Charles I.
a garrison was established here by the 
King, of which Sir Gilbert Gerrard was appointed 
governor.
A party of the parliamentary army, un- 
der the command of Hampden, the patriot, having 
made an attack on the place, was repulsed with 
considerable loss ; but it was soon afterwards, in 
the spring of the year 1643, evacuated by the royal 
garrison.
There was anciently a hermitage at Brill, dedi- 
cated to Saint Werburgh.
It was given by Henry 
III.
in 1252, with an endowment of lands to the ca- 
nons of Chetwode, on condition of their finding a 
chaplain to officiate in the chapel of the hermitage ; 
and another to officiate in the chapel of the King's 
palace, at Brill.
Buckingham.] — Buckingham, the county town, 
is situated in the hundred of that name, fifty-six 
miles and three quarters north-wost by west from 
London.
It is situated in a -valley, upon the river 
Ouse, by which it is nearly surrounded, and over 
which it has three bridges.
This town was sum- 
moned, in the reign of Edward III.
to send members 
to Parliament, but does not appear to have done so 
till the 36th of Henry VIII.
though from that of 
Edward VI, it has sent two members regularly.
It 
was incorporated by Queen Mary, by the name of a 
bailiff and twelve burgesses.
Charles II.
in 1684, 
granted it a new charter, changing the magistrates 
into a mayor and aldermen, but the old charter was 
restored 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
143 
restored four years after, and the magistrates are 
still a bailiff and burgesses, in whom the right of 
election is vested.
The whole business of the county was formerly 
transacted at Aylesbury, but the summer assizes, as 
already stated, are now holden at Buckingham.
The 
sessions for the town and parish are holden here 
every half year ; and the corporation, consisting of a 
high bailiff, (who is always a burgess, and elected 
by a majority of housekeepers, annually, on the first- 
of May,) high' steward, recorder, twelve principal 
burgesses, town clerk, and mace-bearer, hold a court 
here once every three weeks, for the recovery of 
small debts.
This town has a weekly market, on Saturday ; 
and annual fairs, on the following days : — the Mon- 
day se'nnight after the Epiphany (old style) March 
6, May 6, Whit Thursday, July 10, September 4, 
October 2, Saturday after Old Michaelmas, and 
November 8.
Buckingham appears to have been a town of con- 
siderable antiquity, being mentioned by Bishop Ken- 
net, as the spot near which the Roman general, 
Aulus Plautius, surprised and routed the Britons 
under the command of Caractacus and Togodumnus, 
the sons of Cunobelin.
It was celebrated, in the 
early Saxon times, as the burial place of St. Rum- 
bald.
In the popish legends of his life, he is said to 
have been the son of a British king, by a Christian 
princess ; to have been born at King's Sutton, a 
little village in Northamptonshire, near Bucking- 
ham ; to have lived only three days ; but, during 
that time, to have professed himself a Christian ; 
and to have bequeathed his body to Sutton, the 
place of his birth, for one year, to Brachley, in 
Northamptonshire, for two years, and then to Buck- 
ingham, for ever.
He was then baptized, and im- 
mediately expired.
A shrine was erected at Buck- 
ingham, over his remains ; and, in that age of blind 
superstition, it became the resort of multitudes of 
pilgrims, for whose accommodation numerous inns 
were erected, much to the advantage of the town.
The shrine was rebuilt, by a sum of money which 
was left by Richard Fowler, chancellor of the Duchy 
of Lancaster, in the year 1477.
According to the Saxon Chronicle, Edward the 
Elder resided here for a short time, in the year 918, 
and caused two forts to be built and garrisoned on 
each side of the river, to repel the incursions of the 
Danes, against whom he shortly afterwards advanc- 
ed, and compelled them to sue for peace.
The Da- 
nish soldiers ravaged the town in 941, and again in 
1010, when, having plundered the adjacent country, 
they retreated hither to secure their treasure.
At 
the time of the Norman Conquest, Buckingham is 
stated by Browne Willis to have been the only bo- 
rough in the county ; yet it was then but an incon- 
siderable place, and only taxed for one hide.
In the 
reign of Edward the Third, its importance was in- 
creased by that prince making it a mart for wool ; 
but the trade being removed to Calais, it again de- 
clined, and in the 27th of Henry the Eighth it was 
enumerated amongst the decayed cities and towns, 
for whose relief an act of Parliament was then made.
About this period the assizes, which had usually 
been holden here, were removed to Aylesbury, 
through the interest of Sir John Baldwin.
In the 
year 1725, Buckingham suffered greatly by a fire, 
which consumed 138 dwelling houses, being more 
than one-third of the whole town - r the damage was 
estimated at 40,0001.
Lord Cobhain, however, in 
1758, procured an act of Parliament to fix the sum- 
mer assizes at Buckingham, and erected a gaol here 
at his own expence for the use of the town and 
county ; circumstances which are recorded by the 
following inscription over the gaol door : — 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE RICHARD GRENVILLE TEMPLE, 
LORD VISCOUNT COEHAM, 
CAUSED THIS EDIFICE TO BE ERECTED AT HIS OWN EXPENCE, 
F»R THE USE OF THIS TOWN AND COUNTY; 
THE SUMMER ASSIZES BEING RESTORED TO THIS PLACE, 
AND FIXED HERE BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT 
IN THE YEAR 1758.
The town hall, which had been built many years 
before, at the expence of Sir Ralph Verney, is a 
large brick building, at the top of which is a gilt 
swan, the borough arms.
The principal floor is 
occupied by the magistrates, for the transacting of 
public business.
The houses of Buckingham are mostly built of 
brick, irregularly scattered over a large extent of 
ground, on the side and bottom of a hill.
There are four incorporated companies here : the 
mercers, tanners, butchers, and merchant-taylors ; 
and all persons admitted to the freedom of the town 
must be members of one of these corporations.
The labouring inhabitants of this town, and its 
vicinity, are chiefly employed in agricultural pur- 
suits, or in the manufacture of lace.
Scarcely a 
house or female in the place is unprovided with a 
lace pillow, parchments, bobbin, gimps, pins, thread, 
and other requisites.
The sort of lace principally 
made is fine thread lace, black and white ; the for- 
mer commonly with a French ground or perfect 
diamond squares ; the latter with a roundish hole, 
called the point-ground.
The maker is furnished 
with a round pillow, on which a slip of parchment is 
fixed, perforated with a great number of holes «or- 
respondiug to the pattern required to be executed.
These holes are filled with pins which are placed and 
displaced as the bobbins are moved or stitches fi- 
nished.
The thread is fixed on the top of small 
bobbins, or gimps : the former are used in making 
fine, lace and ground, and the latter for coarse, to 
work in the flowers, &c.
The profits of this work 
depend on the facility of execution.
The earnings 
of different women vary, from one to two shillings 
per day.
The manufacture of lace, however, at 
Nottingham, by means of machinery, has consider- 
ably reduced the receipts of the lace-makers in this 
town.
In the middle of the town, on a very high mount, 
formerly 
144 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
formerly stood a castle, erected by the Saxon King 1 , 
Edward the Elder ; but there are now no traces of 
it remaining.
It is supposed to have been, anciently, 
a seat of the Giffords, Earls of Buckingham.
In 
1670 a bowling green was made, on the castle hill, 
which w as much resorted to by the gentlemen of the 
county.
According to Mr. Willis, the polls for 
knights of the shire were taken, and he had heard 
that the assizes were formerly holden there, in tem- 
porary booths erected for the purpose.
The spire of the old church of Buckingham, which 
stood 163 feet fr®m the ground, Avas blown down in 
a tempest, on the 7th of February, 1699 ; but the 
tower by which it was supported, remained till the 
26th of March, 1776, when that also fell down, just 
after Mr. Pennant had quitted the church.
Since 
that period, the church-yard has remained a burial 
place, with a chapel only, and a new church has been 
erected on the site of the ancient castle mentioned 
above.
The new church, which has been rendered more 
conspicuous by its elevated situation, was begun in 
1777, and completed in lour years at the expence 
of about 70001.
the greatest part of which was sub- 
scribed by the late Earl Temple.
It is built of free- 
stone, and has a handsome square tower, attached 
to its south-west end, with a spire nearly equal in 
height to that of the old church (being 160 feet from 
the ground).
The inside is finished in an elegant 
style.
The altar-piece, representing the transfigur- 
ation of Christ, is a tolerable copy of a celebrated 
picture by Raphael, given to the parish by the Mar- 
quis of Buckingham.
The arms and crests of the 
Temple family are carved in stone over the east and 
west doors.
It contains no monuments whatever ; 
nor were those of the old building of any conse- 
quence.
The area, which surrounds the church, is 
laid out in a pleasant walk, planted with trees, and 
enlivened with a view of the serpentine course of the 
Ouse.
About twenty yards to the south-west, is the 
burial ground ; where a small chapel, or room, has 
been erected for the accommodation of the clergy- 
man at funerals ; no interments being permitted in 
or near the present church, nor funeral ceremony 
allowed to be performed in it.
The inhabitants of Buckingham are divided into 
several religious sects ; and the Methodists, Pres- 
byterians, and Quakers, have each a place of wor- 
ship.
In the year 1431, John Barton founded an hospi- 
tal for six poor persons, to each of whom he gave a 
groat a week to pray for his soul.
In 1583, this 
alms-house was given to the poor by Mrs. Dayrel, 
whose family most probably obtained it from the 
crown, after the suppression of the first foundation.
It is still called Barton's Hospital.
Queen Elizabeth, in 1597, founded an alms-house 
at Buckingham, for seven poor women, called 
Christ's Hospital, on the site of an ancient hospital 
dedicated to St. Lawrence, which existed as early as 
1312.
It is but slenderly endowed.
There was anciently a gild, or brotherhood, in the 
town of Buckingham, dedicated to the Holy Tri- 
nity.
The brotherhood had also a chantry chapel, 
founded in 1268, and dedicated to St. John the 
Baptist and Thomas a Becket.
In the reign of Ed- 
ward IV.
John Ruding, archdeacon of Lincoln, 
and prebend of Durham, repaired this chapel.
The 
pews which were then erected still remain ; and also 
the door of the original structure, which is of Saxon 
architecture.
• It has long been converted into a 
free-school, said, by some, to have been founded by 
Edward VI.
and endowed A\ith a stipend of 
101.
8s.
0|d.
per annum, payable out of the Exche- 
quer.
According to other accounts, the school was 
founded in the year 1540, by Isabel Denton.
The 
master's house having been burnt down, it was re- 
built in 1U96, at the expence of Alexander Denton, 
Esq.
; and the endowment has been increased by 
several donations.
Within these few years, a Sunday school has also 
been established for the children of the poor.
The manor of Buckingham was anciently in the 
family of the Giffards, Earls of Buckingham.
It 
passed successively to the Clares, Breoses, and 
Staffords ; but, having been forfeited by attainder, 
in 1160, it was granted to Richard Fowler, Chan- 
cellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
In 1185, it was 
restored to the Staffords ; but was again forfeited 
in 1521.
It was afterwards granted successively to 
Lord Marney, and.
to the Careys ; of the latter of 
whom it was purchased, in 1553, by the Brocas fa- 
mily, who, iu 1574, let it on lease, for 999 years, to 
the corporation, subject to a quit rent of forty shil- 
lings, which is now paid to the Marquis of Buck- 
ingham, as the lord paramount.
In the town, is a capital mansion of some cele- 
brity, called Fowler's and Larabard's.
It was an- 
ciently the seat of John Barton, who in the reign of 
Richard II.
and Henry IV.
was one of the knights 
of the shire.
At this house Catherine of Arragon, 
Henry Vlllth's first queen, was entertained in 1514, 
by Edward Fowler, and in 1644 was for several 
days the residence of King Charles I.
The room 
in which he lay is still called the King's Chamber.
This seat is now the property and residence of Mr.
Box.
The manor of Boreton, or Bourton, a hamlet of 
Buckingham, formerly in the family of the Giffards, 
is now the property of Alexander Douglas, Esq.
The manor of Lenthenborough, or Lenborougb, 
another hamlet of this parish, passed with the manor 
of Buckingham, till the forfeiture of 1521, from 
which period it continued in the crown for nearly a 
century.
It then became.
the property of the Dor- 
mers ; and, in 1704, it was sold to Mr. Rogers, 
who, in 1718, conveyed it to Edward Gibbon, Esq.
the grandfather of the celebrated historian ; of 
whose family it was purchased by the late Bridge;- 
Goodrich, Esq. and it is now vested in his trust 
Lenborougb House became the seat of (be In- 
goldbys, an ancient Lincolnshire family, in 1415.
A 
great.
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
145 
great part of the old mansion-house has heen pulled 
down, and the remainder converted into a farm- 
house.
The history of the Ingoldsby family is, in this 
place, deserving of notice.
Sir Richard Ingoldsby 
married Oliver Cromwell's aunt, by whom he had a 
numerous family.
Francis, the eldest son, who re- 
presented the town of Buckingham in Parliament, 
during the Protectorate of his cousins, Oliver and 
Richard, was well received at court after the Re- 
storation, and his name was inserted in the list of 
intended knights of the royal oak.
He dissipated 
his estate, which was valued at 10001.
a year; sold 
Lenborough House to Mr. Robinson, his steward ; 
and died a pensioner in the charter-house.
Rich- 
ard, the second son, was an officer of trust in the 
parliamentary army ; was one of the commissioners 
for the trial of the King ; signed the warrant lor the 
execution of his sovereign ; was one of the chief 
confidents of his cousin Oliver, governor of Oxford 
Castle, and one oi the lords of the upper house.
Finding the cause of his cousin Richard desperate, 
he exerted himself in favour of the Restoration, ob- 
tained a free pardon — the only one of the regicides 
who had that fortune — and was made a Knight of 
the Bath.
Oliver, the third brother, also an officer 
in the parliamentary army, was killed at Pendennis 
Castle.
John, and Henry, the fourth and fifth bro- 
thers, were likewise both in the parliamentary army.
The latter followed the example of Richard ; and, 
for his services in expediting the Restoration, he 
was created a Baronet in 1661.
He died in 1701, 
and the title is extinct.
There were three other 
brothers, all of whom are supposed to have been in 
the parliamentary army.
Lenborough House was sold by the Robinsons to 
Mr. Rogers, who conveyed it to Mr. Gibbon, with 
the manor.
Burnham.] — This little village is situated in the 
second division of the Burnham hundreds, four miles 
north-west by north from Eton, two and three quar- 
ters east-north-east from Maidenhead.
It formerly 
had a market on Thursdays, granted to the abbey of 
Burnham in 1-271, together with a fair on the feast 
of St. Matthew.
The market has been long discon- 
tinued, but there are still three fairs ; on the 23d of 
February, the 1st of May, and the 2d of October.
In the year 1265, Richard, King of the Romans, 
founded an abbey of Benedictine nuns at this place, 
and endowed it with the manors of Burnham, Cip- 
penham, Bulstrode, Stoke, and some smaller estates.
At the Dissolution, its yearly value was 511.
2s.
Ifd.
The site of the abbey, of which there are some small 
* This gentleman, who cli.'l in the year 1804, at the ad- 
vanced age of 89, was educated at Eton, and at Cambridge, 
where he took the degree of M.
A. in the year 1744.
He 
was tutor to the sons of the late Duke of Marlborough, vrho 
made him his secretary, and gave him a lucrative place in the 
Ordnance olfice.
He was the author of various works; 
amongst which stands pre-emiuent, " A New System, or an 
VOL.
I. — NO.
11, 
remains, is upwards of a mile from the village, a 
little to the south of the Bath road.
Formerly, the great road to Bath and Oxford 
passed through this village ; but when Maidenhead 
bridge had been built, it was diverted to its present 
course ; a circumstance which probably occasioned 
the decay of Burnham, and the loss of its market, 
which was transferred to Maidenhead.
The manors of Burnham and Huntercombe are 
the property of Mr. Sayer : that of Cippenham be- 
longs to James Dupre, Esq. of Wilton Park.
Cip- 
penham was part of the ancient demesnes of the 
crown, and is said to have been the residence of the 
Mercian Kings.
It appears, by the foundation 
charter of Burnham Abbey, that Henry III.
occa- 
sionally resided there.
There is an ancient moated 
site near Cippenham, upon which, most probably, the 
palace was situated.
The late learned Jacob Bryant 
had a seat at Cippenham.* 
Brightwell Court, in this parish, is the sent of the 
Honourable Mr. Irby, eldest son of Lord Boston.
It was some time the residence of the accomplished 
Charles, Earl of Orrery, who purchased it of Mr.
Reeve,, an eminent lawyer of Windsor.
Burnham church contains a handsome monument, 
to the memory of the late Mr. Justice Willes, with 
a medallion, in which he is represented in his robes.
It also contains a wooden tablet, to the memory of 
John Hastings, Esq. who died in 1656, which has 
the arms of Hastings, with one hundred quartering?, 
over which are placed the arms of the family of Cage, 
the former owners of Brightwell Court, on an escut- 
cheon of pretence.
Boveney liberty, in this parish, has a chapel of 
ease, a very ancient structure.
Robert Aldrich, Canon of Windsor, Register of 
the Order of the Garter, and Bishop of Carlisle, in 
1537, was a native of Burnham.
Castletiiorpe.] — Castlethorpe is situated in the 
second division of the Newport hundreds, three 
miles north-north-east from Stony Stratford.
At 
this place formerly stood the ancient castle of the 
barony of Hanslape, which was taken and demo- 
lished by Faulkes dc Brent, in 1217, when it was 
garrisoned against the King by its owner, William 
Mauduit.
The site exhibits vestiges ot very ex- 
tensive buildings.
The manor belongs to Earl 
Spencer.
Caversi'ield.] — This little parish, situated a mile 
and a half from Bicester, belongs to the county of 
Buckingham, but lies nearly a mile from its western 
border, in Oxfordshire.
Bishop Kennet says, it de- 
rives its name from the Roman general Carausius, 
Analysis of Ancient Mythology." His " Treatise on the Au- 
thenticity of the Scriptures," is als.o truly excellent ; but some 
of h*s other works, though extremely learned and ingenious, 
are rather fanciful than useful.
He lived in a very retired 
manner at Cippenham.
lie died of a mortification in his leg, 
occasioned by a razure against a chair, in reaching a book iroin, 
off a shelf.
2o 
who 
146 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
who assumed the purple iu Britain about the year 
287, and was afterwards slain in battle on this spot by 
the treachery of Alectus.
The manor is the pro- 
perty of Joseph Bullock, Esq.
Chalfont St. Giles.] — Chalfont St. Giles is si- 
tuated in the second division of the Burnham hun- 
dreds, four miles south-east from Amersham.
This 
place is remarkable, chiefly for having been some 
time the residence of Milton, who retired hither 
during the great plague in 1665, and finished 
his admirable poem of Paradise Lost.
The first 
draught of Paradise Regained is also supposed to 
have been made here, through the suggestion of 
Elwood, the Quaker, the friend and companion of 
Milton in his retirement, who, after perusing the 
original copy of the former poem, returned it to the 
bard with these words : " Thou hast said a great 
deal on Paradise Lost ; but what hast thou to say 
,on Paradise Found ?" Milton made no answer, and, 
after a short silence, began a conversation on an- 
other subject ; but a considerable time afterwards, 
he presented his friend with the Paradise Regained, 
saying, in a pleasant tone of voice, " This is owing 
to you ; for you made it the subject of my thoughts, 
by the question you put to me at Chalfont." The 
house in which Milton resided was built by the 
Fleetwood family, former proprietors of the manor 
of Vache in this parish, as appears from their arms 
over the door : it is now occupied by a farmer.
The late Sir Hugh Palliser, Lord of the Manor, 
founded a school at Chalfont St. Giles for the edu- 
cation of 20 boys and 20 girls, and endowed it with 
801.
per annum.
Chalfokt St. Peter's.] — This parish, adjoining 
the preceding, lies about a mile farther from Amer- 
sham, on the road to London.
The manors of Chalfont St. Peter's, Brudenell, 
andNewlands, belong respectively to Mr. Whitehurch, 
Mr. Hibbert, and Mr. Croke.
Chalfont House, the seat of Mr. Hibbert, was 
purchased by that gentleman of Charles Churchill, 
Esq. who had laid out the grounds with much taste 
and judgment.
The house is seated in a luxuriant 
narrow valley, finely ornamented with wood, and 
adorned with a pleasant piece of water.
It is a dis- 
tinct property from the mauor of Brudenell.
At Gerrard's Cross, in this parish, the Earl of 
Portland built a school.
It has no endowment, but 
has always been supported by the Portland family.
The duke appoints the master, and allows him a 
•salary for teaching a certain number of boys of this 
and some of the adjoining parishes.
Mr. William Courtnay, who died in 1770, gave a 
loaf of bread weekly to each of eleven unmarried 
poor women of this parish, and one to the clerk.
Chersley.] — Chersley, or Chearsley, is situated 
in the second division of the Ashendeu hundreds, 
seven miles west-south-west from Aylesbury.
At 
this place, the ancient Britons were defeated by Cer- 
dic and Cynric.
It is mentioned in the Saxon Chro- 
•niele under the name of Cerdioeslcagh.
Chersley manor was anciently in the family of 
Valence, Earls of Pembroke, and afterwards in the 
Hampdens.
It was forfeited by attainder, in 1465, 
and is now the property of Sir Clement Cotterell 
Dormer.
Chesham.] — Chesham is a small, but populous 
town, situated in a pleasant and fertile valley, in the 
first division of the Burnham hundreds, thirty miles 
south-east from Buckingham, and twenty-nine 
north-west by west from London.
It has a market 
on Wednesday ; and fairs on the 21st of April, the 
22d of July, and the 28th of September.
The town consists of three streets, occupied chiefly 
by manufacturers of shoes, lace, and Tunbridge 
ware.
Out of a population of 2071, agreeably to the 
returns of 1811, only 77 families were employed in 
agricultural pursuits.
The women are mostly lace- 
makers.
Upwards of 50,000 pairs of shoes are said 
to be made here annually ; principally for the Lon- 
don sale shops.
The inhabitants of Chesham are principally dis- 
senters ; and, independent of the parish church, 
there are four meeting-houses in the town.
Ches- 
ham has a free-school for the children of the poor.
Lord Georjre Cavendish is the Lord of Chesham 
manor ; that, of Grove belongs to Mr. Lowndes.
Chesham church is a large Gothic structure, con- 
taining in the chancel, several monuments of the fa- 
mily of Skottowe ; among which is one from an ele- 
gant design by Bacon, for Nicholas Skottowe, Esq.
who died in 1798.
The parish comprises the several hamlets of 
Hundridge, Chartridge and Ashridge, Ashley- 
Green and Billingdon, Botley, Waterside, and La- 
timers.
The ancient name of Latimers, formerly 
considered as a distinct parish, was Isenhampstead, 
or Iselhampstead.
Hester, the daughter of Miles 
Sandys, Esq. and the wife of Sir Thomas Temple, 
of Stowe, who was born at Latimers, and died in 
1656, at the age of 87, was the parent stock of 700 
persons, whom she lived to see descend from her 
to the fourth generation.
Her own children were 
thirteen in number.
Fuller very deservedly men- 
tions her amongst his Worthies.
Latimers is the seat and property of Lord Ca- 
vendish.
Chetwode.] — Chetwode, or Chetwood, lies in the 
second division of the Buckingham hundreds, four 
miles and three quarters south-west from Bucking- 
ham.
The principal manor is the property of Sir 
John Chetwode, Bart, a lineal descendant of Robert 
de Main, who held it under the Bishop of Baieux at 
the time of the Doomsday survey.
A priory of the order of St. Augustine, was found 
ed here by Sir Ralph de Ilorwick, in the year 1514, 
to the honour of St. Mary and St. Nicholas.
The 
site of this priory and the estate belonging to it 
came into the possession of the abbot and convent of 
Nuttley, and the conventual church of Chetwode 
became parochial ; yet there still remained at this 
place a cell of a canon or two from Nuttley Abbey.
There 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
117 
There was anciently a hermitage also at Chetwode, 
dedicated to St. Stephen and St. Laurence, founded 
by an ancestor of the Chetwodes.
The conventual church, which was made paro- 
chial in the year 1480, still remains ; and, from the 
style of its architecture, it appears to be coeval with 
the foundation of the monastery.
The chancel is 
preserved in its original state, having lancet-shaped 
windows, with slender pillars, the capitals of several 
of which are highly enriched with figures of animals 
and foliage.
The old parish church of St. Martin, which stood 
about a quarter of a mile eastward of the priory, 
was pulled down in the time of Queen Elizabeth.
Chilton.] — Chilton is situated in the second di- 
vision of the Ashenden hundreds, nine miles west by 
south from Aylesbury.
The manor is in the pos- 
session of Sir John Aubray, Bart, by marriage with 
the heiress of the Carters.
Chilton is deserving of notice, as the birth place 
of Sir George Croke, the patriot Judge.* In the 
church are some monuments of the Croke family : 
that of Sir John Croke, who died in 1608, is much 
ornamented, and has his effigies in armour.
Sir 
George Croke (son of Sir John) lies buried in the 
church, without any memorial.
Easington is a considerable hamlet of this parish, 
and formerly had a chapel of ease.
Cholesbury.] — Cholesbury, or Choulesbury, is 
situated in the first division of the Cotslow hun- 
dreds, four miles north-north-west from Chesham.
Mr. Dayrell is the present Lord of the Manor.
To the north of Cholesbury, a large dyke runs 
from east to west, over Wigginton Common, 
through the parish of Toring, to Drayton Beau- 
champ.
The church, which stands within a circular moat, 
inclosing an area of about twelve acres, was formerly 
a chapel to Drayton Beau champ.
In the year 1705, 
Joseph Neale, Esq. founded an evening lecture 
here, and at Wigginton, endowing it with an estate 
at Cublington, which lets at 901.
a year.
Clavdon (Middle).] — Middle Claydon is situat- 
ed in the first division of the Ashenden hundreds, 
four miles west-south-west from Winslow.
Browne 
Willis describes this place as having been the resi- 
dence of the Verney family, for eleven generations, 
in lineal descent.
It was purchased by Sir Ralph 
Verney in 1458 ; and, in the reign of Henry the 
Seventh, they began to build a spacious mansion- 
house, which, from various improvements, made at 
different periods, became one of the finest seats in 
the county.
The late Earl Verney fitted up the 
more modern part at a great expence ; but, after his 
* This gentleman, who steadily opposed the levying of 
«hip-monev, without the authority ef Parliament, in the reign 
ot Charles the First, was descended from the ancient family of 
Le Blount, who, being attached to the Lancastrians during the 
war ot the rival houses, were obliged to conceal themselves un- 
der a fictitious name (Croke) till the accession of Henry the 
death, the furniture was sold, the state rooms not 
being used by the present owner.
The grand stair- 
case is inlaid with various woods, and the iron rail- 
ing is very richly wrought ; the state rooms con- 
tain a few portraits, amongst which is avery fine one, 
of Sir Edmund Verney, by Vandyck.
Lady Fermanagh, the niece of the late Earl Ver- 
ney, is the present proprietor of the manor.
The church, which is only a few paces from the 
manor-house, contains several memorials of the 
Verney family ; the most remarkable of which is the 
monument of Sir Edmund Verney, just mentioned.
He was standard-bearer to Charles I.
and fell at the 
battle of Edgehill, in 1642.
Sir Ralph Verney, who died in the year 1696, 
built an alms-house at Middle Claydon, for six poor 
persons ; but it has no endowment.
Claydon (Steeple).] — Steeple Claydon, which 
lies in the second division of the Buckingham hun- 
dreds, four miles and a half west of Winslow, was 
the most populous place in that division, at the time 
of the Norman survey ; but it has since dwindled to 
an inconsiderable village.
William the Conqueror gave the manor of Stee- 
ple Claydon to his niece, Judith ; but he afterwards 
resumed it ; and it continued in the crown till the 
time of Henry I.
who gave it to Robert D'Oyley, as 
part of the marriage portion of his wife Edith, who 
had been the King's mistress.
It subsequently 
passed to the Fitz-Johns, Cliffords, Burghs, and 
Mortimers ; and descended to Edward the Fourth, 
as the grandson of Edmund Mortimer, Earl of 
Marche.
That monarch granted it, in 1557, to Sir 
Thomas Chaloner, a celebrated writer and soldier, 
in whose family it continued till the attainder of 
Thomas Chaloner, one of the Judges of King Charles 
the First.
It was then forfeited, but was repur- 
chased of the grantee, by the Chaloners.
In the 
year 1705, Sir John Verney bought it of William 
Chaloner, Esq. and it is now the property of Lady 
Fermanagh.
The site of the old manor-house is 
now occupied by a farm.
The church contains a memorial for Edward Cha- 
loner, Esq. who died in the year 1766, having been 
thirty years lieutenant in the Navy.
Thomas Cha- 
loner, Esq. the regicide, in the year 1656, built a 
school-house at Steeple Claydon, which still re- 
mains, and endowed it with 1*21.
per annum.
The 
endowment has been lost, but a school-master is al- 
lowed 2s.
a week by Lady Fermanagh.
Colnbrook.] — The town of Cohibrook, situated 
at the distance of forty-six miles south-east by south 
from Buckingham, and seventeen west by south 
from London, lies partly in the first division of the 
Seventh, but afterwards retained it as a memorial of past dan- 
ger.
Sir George filled the office of Lord Chief Justice of the 
King's Bench many years; and, during the perilous time 
which preceded the civil war, he performed the duties of his 
high station with the greatest integrity.
He died on the 5th 
of February, 1641.
hundred 
148 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
hundred of Stoke, in the county of Buckingham, 
and partly in the hundred of Spelthorne, in the 
county of Middlesex ; partly in the parish of Hor- 
ton, partly in the parish of Iver, and partly in the 
parish of Langley.
Its market, which used to be 
holden on Thursdays, has been discontinued up- 
wards of twenty years.
It formerly had three fairs ; 
but it has now only two, which are kept on the oth 
of April, and the 3d of May. It was incorporated 
in the year 1543, by the style of bailiff and bur- 
gesses ; and its charter of incorporation was renew- 
ed in 1632.
This town, which is very ancient, derives its name 
from the small river Coin, upon several channels of 
which it is built, and over each of which there is a 
small bridge.
According- to Camden, it is the Pontes 
of the itinerary of Antoninus.
Gale, Baxter, and 
some others, agree with his opinion ; but Lei and 
places that station at Reading, in Berkshire ; Sal- 
mon, at Dorking, in Surrey ; and Horsley, at Old 
Windsor.
Some of the small islands, formed by the 
different branches of the Coin in this neighbourhood, 
arc supposed by Camden to have been the places 
where the Danes secured themselves from the at- 
tacks of Alfred in the year 894 ; but Bishop Gibson, 
perhaps with more probability, refers their successful 
defence to the Isle of Mersey, formed by the river 
Coin, in Essex.
The ancient chantry chapel at Colnbrook, which 
formerly stood in a narrow part of the town, in the 
parish of Langley, has been removed within these 
few years, by the commissioners of the turnpike 
roads, and rebuilt on the opposite side of the road 
in the parish of Horton.
The market-house, for 
which there was no longer any use, was taken down 
at the same time.
The inhabitants of Colnbrook are chiefly support- 
ed by the expenditure of travellers, occasioned by 
the thoroughfare situation of the town.
Crawley (North).] — North Crawley is situated 
in the first division of the Newport hundreds, three 
miles and a half east by north from Newport Pag- 
nel.
At the time of the Norman survey, here was 
an ancient monastery, dedicated to St. Firmin.
It 
is mentioned in Doomsday book ; but, being de- 
stroyed or decayed, so long before the general disso- 
lution of monasteries, no notice of it is to be found in 
any subsequent record.
There are three manors at North Crawley, all of 
them the property of William Lowndes Stone, Esq.
of Brightwell, in Oxfordshire.
The church is a large and handsome Gothic struc- 
ture, dedicated to St. Firmin, the patron of tiie an- 
cient monastery.
The chancel was built by Peter 
de Guilford, rector of the parish, who died in 1321.
Here are some memorials of the family of Hacket.
The rood loft remains between the nave and the 
chancel : the screen is of wood richly carved, and 
decorated with figures of saints, &c.
under Gothic 
canopies.
Crendon.] — Crendon, or Long Crendon, is situ- 
7 
ated in the second division of the Ashenden hun- 
dreds, nine miles west-south-west from Aylesbury.
It is a populous village, nearly a mile in length, and 
formerly had a market on Thursdays.
Here was formerly an abbey, or priory, for regu- 
lar canons of the order of St. Augustine, called 
Noctell, or Nuttley.
It was built and endowed by 
Walter Giffard, the .second Earl of Buckingham, 
and Ermengard his wife, in the year 1102.
it was 
dedicated to the Virgin Mary and St. John the Bap- 
tist, and at the Dissolution the society consisted of 
eighteen monks, whose revenues amounted to 4371.
6s.
8d.
per annum.
Richard Ridge, the last abbot, 
had a pension of 1001.
per annum, assigned him by 
the crown in lieu of his office.
The site of the ab- 
bey was granted to Sir William Paget ; and it is 
now the property of Mr. Reynolds, a farmer, who 
resides in the remains of the abbey house.
An east view of the ruins of Nuttley Abbey, was 
engraved by Buck, in the year 1730 ; but a consi- 
derable part of them has been since taken down.
The ancient roof of the hall, which was 68 feet long 
by 24 feet, was removed by the Bertie family to 
Chesterton in Oxfordshire.
Its place having been 
supplied by a common tiled roof, this room is now 
used as a barn.
On the inside of the east wall is a 
corbel table, in the style of architecture which pre- 
vailed in the time of Henry III.
richly ornamented 
with foliage.
The small remains of the cloisters are 
now a pig-stye.
Round the cornice of an ancient 
room in the farm-house is the Stafford knot, several 
times repeated, with the following inscription, in 
black letter : — 
€n lut piaisance.
The Marquis of Buckingham is Lord of the Ma- 
nor.
In the church is a handsome monument to the 
memory of Lord Dormer, formerly Lord of the Ma- 
nor, who died in the year 1626.
Datchet.] — The pleasant village of Datchet is 
situated in the first division of the hundred of Stoke, 
two miles east-south-east from Eton.
Edward the Third, in the year 1335, granted the 
manor of Datchet to William de Montacute.
It 
afterwards became parcel of the possessions of the 
castle and honour of Windsor, and is now the pro- 
perty of the Duchess of Buccleugh.
The bridge over the Thames, at Datchet, origi- 
nally built by Queen Anne, fell down in the year 
1795, and has not since been rebuilt.
In lieu of the 
bridge, the public are accommodated with a free 
ferry.
A monument of Catherine, wife of Sir Maurice 
Berkely, daughter of Lord Montjoy ; one of Chris- 
topher Barker, printer to Queen Elizabeth, who died 
in 1607 ; and several of the family of Wheeler, are 
in Datchet church.
Denham.] — Dcnham is situated in the second 
division of the hundred of Stoke, seven miles oast 
by south from Beaconsfield.
The manor of Den- 
ham was given to the abbot and convent of West- 
minster, 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
149 
minster, in the year 1209 ; and, after the Reforma- 
tion, it was granted to the family of Peckham, in 
which it continued till 1580, when it was seized for 
a debt to the crown.
In 1596, the manor, with 
Denham Court, and Denham Place, and the advow- 
son of the rectory, were demised to William Bow- 
yer, Esq. to whom they were att rwards granted in 
fee ; and Denham Court still continues in the Bow- 
yer family.
Sir George Bowyer, the son of the 
late gallant Admiral Sir George Bowyer, is its pre- 
sent possessor.
Denham Place, which, by female descent, came 
into the possession of the late Benjamin Way, Esq.
who died about the year 1805, is a large brick man- 
sion, erected by Sir Roger Hill, who purchased the 
manor of Denham in 1670.
The chapel is fitted up 
with mantled wainscot and carving, in the style 
which prevailed in the reign of Queen Elizabeth; 
and the windows are ornamented with coats of arras, 
in stained glass.
In the library, is a very curious 
picture, representing the House of Commons, with 
portraits of the members.
The dresses are of the 
age of Charles 11.
and it is probable that it was 
painted in 1679, when Sir Roger Hill was one of the 
members for Amersham.
Denham Church contains several monuments, 
both ancient and modern ; among the former are to 
be noticed some brass plates of the Durdant family ; 
that of Agnes Jordan, the last abbess of Syon ; an 
altar-tomb in memory of Sir Edmund Peckham, 
who died in 1570, with the effigies of himself and 
his lady ; and that of his son Sir Robert Peckham, 
privy councillor to Queen Mary, who died in 1569.
Being then on his travels, he was buried in the 
church of St. Gregorius at Rome ; but his heart 
was deposited at Denham, pursuant to his own 
request.
Dinton.] — Dinton is situated in the first division 
of the Aylesbury hundreds, four miles west-south- 
west from Aylesbury.
The manor was forfeited, in the year 1464, by the 
attainder of Sir Robert Whitfingham ; it was after- 
wards in the Montgomerys, the Verneys, and the 
Maynes ; and was again forfeited, on the attainder 
of Simon Mayne, one of the regicides, who died in 
prison, after his conviction, and was buried at Din- 
ton church, in 1661.
It was subsequently repos- 
sessed by the Maynes ; and, in 1727, it was pur- 
chased of the grandson of the regicide, by John 
Vanhattem, Esq. the father of the Sir John Van- 
hattem, who died in 1789, and from whom it de- 
scended to the Rev. W T i!liam Goodall, his son-in- 
law, the present proprietor.
To Dinton manor, the 
hamlets of Westlington and Ford are attached.
The 
manors of Waldridge and Aston-Molins, in this pa- 
rish, belong respectively to the Marquis of Winches- 
ter and Matthew Raper, Esq.
The manor-house of Dinton, now occupied by 
Mr. Goodall, is an ancient mansion, which, for many 
years, was the residence of the Maynes, the ancient 
owners of the manor.
Mr. Goodall has a collection 
vol.
i. — no.
11.
of extraneous fossils, from Dinton and its neigh- 
bourhood, where they are found in great abundance ; 
and some antiquities discovered in a ploughed field, 
near the road to Thame, the most remarkable of 
which is a small thin green glass, of a conical form, 
which is engraved in the tenth volume of the Archae- 
ologia.
He is also in possession of one of the shoes 
of John Bigg, an eccentric character, who was a 
native and inhabitant of this parish, and commonly 
called the Dinton Hermit.
In the earlier part of his 
life he was clerk to Simon Mayne, the regicide, who 
acted as a justice of the peace.
For many years 
before his death, which happened in 1696, he lived 
in a cave under ground.
His method of mending 
his clothes, which he never exchanged, was by sew- 
ing fresh pieces of cloth or laather, over the decayed 
parts.
The shoe, here mentioned, had been thus 
mended, till the leather had become more than ten- 
fold its original thickness : the fellow to it is in the 
Bodleian Library, at Oxford.
Dinton Church contains monuments of the Ser- 
jeant, Mayne, and Vanhattem families.
The south 
door is distinguished by a very curious Norman 
arch.
Drayton-Beauchamp.] — Drayton-Beauehamp is 
situated in the first division of the Cotslow hundreds, 
five miles and three quarters east by south from 
Aylesbury.
The manor is the property of Lady 
Robert Manners.
Amongst some ancient memorials, in the church, 
is one of brass, of one of the Cheynes, to whom the 
manor formerly belonged.
It is dated 1375, and 
has the effigies of the defunct in armour, with a mail 
gorget.
It most probably belongs to Thomas 
Cheyne, the shield-bearer of Edward the Third, to 
whom the manor was granted by that sovereign.
In the chancel is a magnificent monument of white 
marble, by Woodman, in memory of Lord Newha- 
ven, with an upright figure of the deceased in a large 
flowing peruke.
Lady Newhaven is represented 
sitting.
In the north window of the nave are eight 
of the apostles in stained glass.
Helpsthorp, a hamlet of this parish, formerly had 
a chapel of ease, but it has been destroyed.
In the 
year 15S4, Hooker, the celebrated ecclesiastical 
writer, was rector of Drayton-Beauchamp.
Edlesborough.] — Edlesborough is situated in 
the first division of the Cotslow hundreds, three 
miles Borth-east from Ivinghoe.
The church is a 
handsome Gothic structure, with a small spire ; 
and, being placed on an insulated hill, which has the 
appearance of having been an ancient fortress, it 
forms a very conspicuous object.
The north chan- 
cel contains some tombs of the Rufiord family.
There are also some brasses, of a large :«ize ; parti- 
cularly one of Sir John Swynshlde, rector of the 
parish, who died in 1390.
In the parish register is 
a record of the burial of Michael Fenn, who died at 
Edlesborough, on the 21st of April, 1695, at the age 
of 121.
Ellesborough.] — Ellesborough is situated in the 
2 i> second 
150 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
second division of the Aylesbury hundreds, two miles 
and a half west by south from Wendover, under the 
Chiltem Hills.
There are several manors in this parish, of which 
that of Chequers, so denominated from John de 
Scaccariis, or of the Exchequer, is the principal.
The mansion was built by the Hawtreys, subsequent 
possessors, from whom it descended to a younger 
branch of the Crokes, and afterwards to the Russell 
family.
Sir George Russel, Bart, the last heir 
male of the family, who died in 1804, was a lineal 
descendant of Cromwell, by the marriage of Sir 
John Russel, of Chippenham, Cambridgeshire, with 
Lady Frances, the Protector's daughter, widow of 
Robert Rich, Esq. Chequers is now the property 
and seat of Robert Greenhill, Esq. a distant relation 
of Mrs. Russel, the aunt of Sir George.
It is situ- 
ated in a very romantic and beautiful spot, amongst 
the woods, between Ellcsborough and Hampden.
Ellcsborough Church, like that of Edlesborough, 
stands on a small insulated eminence, resembling an 
ancient fortress.
On a round mount near the church, is an ancient 
fortification, called Belinus' Castle, and the inhabi- 
tants have a tradition that King Belinus resided 
there.
Above that place is another hill, which still 
retains the name of Belincsbury Hill.
Many Ro- 
man coins have been found in the parish.
Eton.] — Eton is situated in the first division of 
the hundred of Stoke, forty-three miles and a half 
south-south-east from Buckingham, and twenty- 
three and a quarter west by south from London.
It 
was formerly a market-town ; but the market has 
long been discontinued, and, of two annual fairs, it 
now has only one, holdcn on Ash- Wednesday.
The situation of Eton is extremely pleasant, on 
the banks of the Thames, in a delightful valley, and 
on a remarkably healthy soil.
It has a bridge which 
unites it with Windsor ; and, of late years, it has 
been considerably improved, many of the houses 
having been rebuilt, and others repaired in the mo- 
dern style.
It consists chiefly of one street, con- 
nected with the town of Windsor by the bridge.
Eton has been long famous for its royal college 
and school, founded by King Henry VI.
in the year 
1440, for the education of seventy youths in classical 
learning.
From this foundation they are sent to 
King's College in Cambridge, founded also by the 
same prince, where they are amply provided for, 
and at the expiration of three years, claim the fel- 
lowship of that college.
The average number of 
vacancies is about nine in two years.
At nineteen 
years of age the scholars are superannuated.
Eton 
College also sends two scholars to Merton College, 
Oxford ; where they are denominated post-masters.
It has likewise a few exhibitions of twenty-one gui- 
neas each, for its superannuated scholars, towards 
whose assistance Mr. Chamberlayne, a late fellow, 
has bequeathed an estate of 801.
per annum, after the 
death of his widow.
Besides the King's scholars, 
there are seldom less than 300 noblemens' and gen- 
tlemens' sons, who board with the masters.
The 
school, which was rebuilt in 1569, has constantly 
been the nursery and place of education of great 
numbers of the youth of the first families in the king- 
dom ; so that it has always been considered as the 
most distinguished seminary for classical learning 
and polite literativre.
The college consists of two neat quadrangles •r 
courts.
In the outermost, are the schools, and lodg- 
ings for the masters and scholars ; and on the south, 
is the college chapel, a fine structure, ornamented 
with large abutments, pinnacles, and embrasures, 
and very similar in its disposition of parts to that of 
King's College, Cambridge ; and has, therefore, by 
some, been attributed to the same architect.
On the 
front, or east end, is a part of the provost's lodg- 
ings, in which, amongst several other valuable pic- 
tures, is a portrait of Jane Shore, painted on pan- 
nel, and considered as original.
The forehead is 
large, the features small and interesting, and the 
hair of a yellowish auburn.
Her only covering is a 
thin veil, thrown loosely over her shoulders.
The 
principal argument for the genuineness of the por- 
trait, is the circumstance of the confessor of this 
celebrated favourite having been provost of the 
college.
At the same end, is a beautiful ancient tower or 
gateway, which divides the two courts : in the mid- 
dle of the first court is a statue in brass, well exe- 
cuted, of the royal founder.
The inner court forms 
the lodging and apartments of the provost and fel- 
lows of the college ; on the south side is the college 
library, one of the most elegant in the kingdom, both 
in respect to the neatness of the room, and a well- 
chosen collection of the best authors and their edi - 
tions ; given, chiefly by Dr. Waddington, Bishop of 
Chichester ; Dr. Godolphin, Provost ; the Rev. Mr.
Reynolds, late fellow ; the late Anthony Storden, 
Esq.
; and Nicholas Man, Esq. late master of the 
Charter-House.
The fine library of Richard Top- 
ham, Esq. of Windsor, with many elegant drawings 
of Greek and Roman antiquities, collected at a great 
cxpence by that gentleman at Rome, is a singular 
ornament to this library, and was presented to the 
college by Lord Chief Justice Reeve and Dr. Mead, 
his executors.
The late Rev. Mr.
Hetherington, 
sometime fellow of this college, on quitting his fel- 
lowship, presented to this library many elegant and 
capital books.
He had previously built, at his sole 
expence, a neat chapel, in the middle of the town, for 
the better accommodation of the inhabitants.
The college, anciently denominated " The Kynge's 
College of our Lady, at Etone, by syde Wyndesore," 
was originally founded for a provost, ten priests, 
four clerks, six choristers, twenty-five poor gram- 
mar scholars, with a master to teach them, and 
twenty-five poor old men.
Some of the endowment 
was taken away by King Edward IV.
and at the 
general Dissolution, out of which it was particularly 
excepted, the annual revenue was valued at no more 
than 8861.
12s.
clear.
Amongst 
H 
El 
H 
l §* 
\^ 
?* 
*4 
S 
t 
| a 
jP 
• £© 
? 
r 1 
i 
P 
M 
K 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
151 
Amongst the many eminent persons who lie in- 
terred in the college chapel, are Richard, Lord Grey 
of Wilton, henchman to Henry VIII.
; John Long- 
land, Bishop of Lincoln, confessor to that monarch ; 
Sir Henry Saville, the learned warden of Morton, 
and provost of this college, who founded the Savil- 
lian professorships of astronomy and geometry at 
Oxford ; Sir Henry Wotton, an eminent ambassador 
and statesman, who was also proTost of Eton ; * 
Francis Rouse, a distinguished writer among the 
puritans, and one of the Lords of Cromwell's Upper 
House, who died provost of Eton in 1658 ; Dr. Al- 
lertree, provost of Eton (an eminent royalist) who 
built the upper school with the cloisters beneath, at 
the expence of 15001.
and died in 1680 ; and Dr.
Nathaniel Ingelo, who died in 1683.
f A statue of 
the royal founder, in the ante-chapel, was executed 
by Bacon in 1786, at the expence of 6001.
which 
was bequeathed for that purpose by the Rev. Ed- 
ward Betham, fellow of the college, who died in 
1783.
In the ante-chapel there is also a monument 
of the young Earl of Waldegrave, who was drown- 
ed while at Eton school in the year 1794.
A singular custom is celebrated at Eton, every 
third year, on Whit Tuesday, called the Mont em.
A procession of the scholars is made to a tumulus 
(ad montem) near the Bath road, which has acquired 
the name of Salt-hill, by which also the neighbour- 
ing inns have long been known.
The chief object 
of this ceremony, which has of late years been con- 
ducted with more decorum than formerly, is to col- 
lect money for salt, as it is termed, ' from all persons 
travelling on the road.
The scholars who collect 
the money are called salt-bearers, and are dressed in 
rich silk habits of different colours.
Tickets, in- 
scribed with some motto, by way of pass-word, are 
given to such persons as have already paid for salt, 
as a security from any further demands.
The cere- 
mony has frequently been honoured with the presence 
of his Majesty and the Royal Family, whose liberal 
contributions, added to those of many of the nobi- 
lity and others, who have been educated at Eton, 
and purposely attended the meeting, have some- 
times augmented the collection to more than 8001.
The sum so collected is given to the senior-scholar, 
who is going off to Cambridge, for his support at 
the university.
The origin of this custom, which 
appears to have been co-eval with the foundation of 
the college, is unknown ; but it has very plausibly 
been conjectured to be that of the bairn, or boy- 
* Sir Henry Wotton's tomb bears the following singular in- 
scription, which may be translated as beneath: — 
" Hie jacet hujus sentential primus auctor — 
' Disputandi pruritus fit ecclesiarum scabies.' 
Nomen alias quaere." 
" Here lies the first author of this sentence: — 
He had the itch of disputation, and was the sore of the 
church.
Seek his name elsewhere." 
f Dr. Ingelo was the author of a romance, cjlled Bente- 
volio and Urania, thus alluded to in the following remarkable 
f assage of his epitaph : — 
1 
bishop ; a ceremony which anciently commenced on 
the 6th of December, the festival of St. Nicholas, 
the patron of children, and lasted till Innocents' 
Day. During the intermediate time, the boy per- 
formed various episcopal functions ; and if it hap- 
pened that he died before its termination, he was 
buried with the same ceremonials which were used 
at the funeral of a bishop.
This conjecture is 
strongly supported by the circumstance, that within 
the memory of several persons now living, it was a 
part of the ceremony at the montem, that a boy, in 
clerical attire, with a wig, should read prayers.
Another custom of the Eton scholars, which was 
abolished by the late provost, Dr. Cooke, was that 
of hunting a ram, on the Saturday of the election 
week.
It had been supposed to be an ancient te- 
nure.
Eton manor was acquired by the college, in the 
reign of Edward IV.
from the Lovel family.
The 
manor of Eton-Stockdales is the property of Johu 
Penn, Esq. of Stoke Park.
Eton church having fallen to decay, the inhabi- 
tants attend divine service in the college chapel,, 
and in the chapel of ease, which was built by Mr.
Hetherington.
Farnham Royal.] — Farnham Royal is situated 
in the second division of Burnham hundred, three 
miles and a half north from Eton.
The manor, now 
the property of Lord Francis Godolphin Osborne, 
was anciently holden by grand serjeantry, by the 
service of finding a glove for the King-'s right hand 
on the day of his coronation, and supporting his 
right arm that day whilst he held his sceptre.
In the church is a brass plate in memory of Eu- 
stace Mascall, clerk of the works to Cardinal Wol- 
sey, at the building of Frediswide (meaning Christ.
Church College) in Oxford, and for seventeen years 
chief clerk of accounts for all the buildings of King 
Henry VIII.
within twenty miles of London.
He 
died in 1567, being then Pistell reader in Windsor 
Castle.
Dr. Chandler, Bishop of Durham, lies in 
this church, without any memorial.
In the year 1664, David Saltre gave 171.
per an^- 
mini, to buy loaves and white herrings for the poor, 
and 2s.
for a pair of white kid gloves for the rector, 
on the first Sunday in Lent, as long as the world 
should last.
In 1727, Mrs. Elizabeth Hetherington gave 1401, 
towards the foundation of a charity -school in this, 
parish.
" Cujus stylus, dnm dramate pietatem ad Christi 
inorem suaviter insinuat, an ingeniosus an patheticus 
sit magis, vicissim acritur et diti contenditur ; cjuai 
lite nondum sopita, feliciter quiescit autor eruditus 
beatam praistolaas resurrection em, donee decisionis 
dies supremus illuxerit." 
Translation : — Whose style, while it cast a shade of 
piety on the drama, whether it were more ingenious 
or pathetic, has been keenly and long contested : the 
contest not yet extinct, the author happily found rest, 
expecting a blessed resurrection, until the las t» day of 
decision shall burst forth in its splendour.
At 
152 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
At Hedgerley Dean, a hamlet in Farnham pa- 
rish, are some large and deep entrenchniei\ts ; and 
the tradition of the neighbourhood is, that a bat- 
tle was fought there between the Danes and the 
Saxons.
Fawley.] — Fawley is situated in the first division 
of the hundred of Desborough, six miles and a quar- 
ter west from Great Marlow.
From the time of the Norman Conquest, till about 
the year 1400, the manor of Fawley was in the 
Sackville family ; from which it passed successively 
to those of Roke and Alford ; and was, more re- 
cently, the property of Sir James Whitlock 1 , an eminent 
lawyer, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, 
and father of the celebrated Sir Bulstrode Whit- 
lock, who filled some of the highest departments in 
the state during the protectorate of Cromwell.
Sir 
James Whitlock died at Fawley in the year 1632, 
and was buried in the church, where there is a hand- 
some monument to his memory.
He was succeeded 
by his son Bulstrode Whitlock, above-mentioned ; 
and of James, the son of that gentleman, the estate 
was purchased in 1680, by Colonel William Free- 
man, collateral ancestor of Strickland Freeman, Esq.
the present proprietor.
Fawley church was repaired and fitted up in the 
year 1748, by John Freeman, Esq. then Lord of the 
Manor.
The pews, pulpit, altar, and font, were 
brought from the chapel of Canons, the seat of the 
Duke of Chandos, which had been pulled down, and 
sold in separate lots the year before.
The present manor-house, called Fawley Court, 
is situated at a distance from the village, on the 
banks of the Thames, and was erected in the year 
1684, after a design of Sir Christopher Wren.
It 
is a spacious and handsome mansion, with four 
fonts, situated in the centre of an extensive lawn, 
terminated by some gentle eminences partially co- 
vered with beech.
From the south are seen Henley 
Bridge, the venerable tower of the church, and the 
adjacent hills of Park Place ; and the east com- 
mands a fine survey of the Thames, the village of 
Medmenh;im, and a well-planted island, ornament- 
ed with a neat temple.
Round the house, the 
grounds are rather fiat ; but the rides through the 
woods, on the brow of the hills, display the whole 
scenery of the vale, which the windings of the Thames 
contribute to render eminently beautiful.
The line 
which forms the boundary between the counties of 
Oxford and Buckingham crosses the lawn, on which 
the house is built.
The hall of the mansion contains the statues of a 
Roman Senator and Vestal, which, with several 
others placed in other parts of the house and gar- 
dens,, formerly belonged to the Arundel Collection.
In the saloon are four fine landscapes, by Cuyp.
A 
view on the Rhine, by Poussin.
A porii ait by Rem?
brandt ; and another by Titian.
And two line sta- 
tues of Venus and Apollo.
In the gallery are some 
portraits of the families of Whitelock and Free- 
man, and a whole length of the Duchess of Rich- 
mond, by Vandyck, bought at Sir Peter Lely's 
sale.
It may be proper to remark, that, during the time 
of Sir Bulstrode.
Whitlock, in 1642, Fawley Court 
was occupied by a large party ot the King's troops, 
under the command of Sir John Byron.
The sol- 
diers, notwithstanding their commander's orders to 
refrain from committing any damage upon the pro- 
perty, destroyed the furniture, books, title-deeds, 
and many valuable MSS.
collected by Sir Bulstrode 
and his father.
" They littered their horses with 
sheaves of good wheat, and gave them ail sorts of 
corn in their straw.
Of divers writings of conse- 
quence, and books which were left in the study, 
some they tore in pieces, others they used to light 
their pipes of tobacco, and some they carried away.
They also broke down the park pales ; killed most 
of the deer ; carried off or destroyed the furniture, 
and rendered the place unfit for future residence." 
Fingest.] — Fingest lies in the first division of 
the hundred of Desborough, five miles and a half 
north-west by west from Great Marlow.
This little 
village, occupyiag a flat piece of ground, of nearly 
a triangular shape, surrounded by hills, was an- 
ciently called Tinhurst or Tinghurst, signifying a 
valley among the woods.
The tower of the church is square and massy, of 
Saxon architecture, and is supposed to have been 
erected prior to the year 1100, about which time the 
manor was granted to the abbey of St. Albans.
It 
is now holden on lease by Owen Williams, Esq.
M. P.
under the prebendary of Dulting Court.
Fulmere.] — Fuhnere is situated in the second 
division of the hundred of Stoke, four miles and a 
half south-east from Beaconsfield.
The manor, 
which at one time belonged to the Darells, is now 
the property of the Duke of Portland.
The site of 
Fulmere Place, the ancient mansion, .is now occu- 
pied by a modern villa, belonging to William Fro- 
gatt, Esq.
Fulmere church was built by Sir Marmaduke 
Darell, in the year 1610.
It contains a handsome 
monument of its founder, who is represented in gilt 
armour.
His lady, who lies on his right side, is in 
a black hood.
In his epitaph, Sir Marmaduke 
Darell is styled, servant to Queen Elizabeth, in her 
wars by sea and land, and coiTerer to James I.
and Charles I.
Gothdrst.] — Gothurst, or, as it is now more ge- 
nerally called, Gayhurst, is situated iu the first divi- 
sion of the Newport hundreds, two miles and three 
quart i-west from Newport Pagnell.
"The 
manor, at the time of the Conqueror's survey, was 
held under Odo, Bishop of Baieux, by Robert de 
Nouers, whose family became possessed of it in their 
own rigbi in the reign of Henry the Second, or pos- 
sibly somewhat earlier.
In the year 1408 it passed 
to Robert Nevyll, who married Joanna, the sister 
and sole heiress of Almaric de Nouers ; his two 
other sisters, A^nes and Gracia, having preferred a 
monastic life, lathe reign of Henry the Eighth, 
Maria, 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
153 
Maria, the only daughter of Michael Nevyll, who 
had obtained possession of Gothurst on the death of 
her two.
brothers, bestowed it, together with her 
person, on Thomas Mulsho, of Thing-don, in North- 
amptonshire.
It continued in his family till the be- 
ginning of the reign of James the First, when Ma- 
ria, daughter and heiress of William Mulsho, re- 
signed herself and fortune to Sir Everard Digby, of 
an ancient family in Rutlandshire, one of the most 
handsome and accomplished gentlemen of the age, 
but whose religious bigotry induced him to engage 
in the infernal machinations which intended the de- 
struction of the King and both Houses of Legisla- 
ture by means of gunpowder.
His concern in the 
plot led to an ignominious but merited death ; yet, 
with a foresight worthy of having been exerted in a 
better cause, he prepared against the consequences 
of ill success, and, previous to the commission of 
any acts of treason, secured his property to his in- 
fant son and heirs so effectually, that the crown was 
unable to profit by the confiscation of his estates.
The disgrace, brought on the family by the atrocious 
conduct of Sir Everard, was removed by the un- 
common abilities of Sir Keiielm Digby, his succes- 
sor, whose eldest son being slain at St. Neot's, 
Huntingdonshire, in the civil wars, Gothurst de- 
scended to John, his second son, who left two 
daughters, one of whom married Sir John Conway, 
of Bodruddan, in Flintshire : the other married 
Richard Mostyn, of Penbedwr, in the same county.
These gentlemen, in the year 1704, sold this manor, 
together with Stoke Goldington, and the advowson 
of both the churches, to George Wright, Esq. son of 
Sir Nathan Wright, the Lord Keeper, in whose 
posterity it still remains."* 
The mansion-house, which is now the property of 
Miss Wright, only daughter and heiress of the late 
George Wright, Esq. was built in the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, and has undergone but little al- 
* Vide Beauties of England and Wales.
f Pennant says, " I am told (hat the ^reat snail, or Pomatia, 
is found in the neighbouring woods, which is its ir.ost southern 
residence in this island.
It is of exotic origin, and, according 
to tradition, was introduced by Sir Kenelm as a medicine for 
the use of his lady." 
X Sir Kene'm'Diiby, a "prodigy of learning, credulity, 
valour, and romance," was born in the mansion-house, at (-Jot- 
hurst, on the 11th of June, 1603.
His early education was 
entrusted to Archbishop Laud, who carefully bred him up to 
the Protestant rehgion.
lie was afterwards admitted a gentle- 
man commoner of Gloucester Hall, Oxford, and soon became 
eminent for the strength and universality of his talents.
Hav- 
ing advantageously pursued his studies for sometime, he made 
the tour of the continent, and, on his return to England, was 
knighted; soon after which, he distinguished himself as the 
possessor of a famous nostrum, since called the Sympathetic 
Powder, whose virtues are recorded amongst the observations 
of Chancellor Bacon.
On the accession of Charles the First, 
he received several naval appointments, and obtaining an ad- 
miral's commission, was sent with a small fleet into the Medi- 
terranean, where he displayed much gallantry in the attack on 
the Venetian fleet in the bay of Scanderoon.
He became a 
convert to the church of Borne, about the vear 1636, and vin- 
dicated his dereliction of principle in a small pamphlet.
This 
VOL.
I. — NO.
11.
teration as to its external appearance, though the 
interior has been completely modernized.
The 
grounds are extensive, and agreeably disposed into 
spacious lawns, and the prospects of the distant 
country, through openings of tne surrounding woods, 
are remarkably fine.
Some portraits of the Digby family still remain 
in the house ; amongst which is that of old Mr.
Digby, father of Sir Everard, mentioned above ; 
one inscribed John Digby, but which Mr. Pennant 
conjectures to have been intended for »ir Kenelm 
Digby, in his younger days ; and one of Lady Ve- 
netia Anastatia Digby, the beautiful and beloved 
wife of Sir Kenelm, of whom some account has al- 
ready appeared in our description of Windsor, f 
The portrait, which is here supposed to be that of 
Sir Kenelm Digby, is particularly deserving of no- 
tice.
It represents a full-sized young man, in a 
quilled rutf, white jacket, black cloak, purple hose, 
flowered belt, and a bonnet adorned with a white 
feather.
On a tablet, above him, appears the figure 
of a lady, in a supplicatory attitude, with a lute in 
one hand, and a purse in the other : the latter she 
appears to be offering to Sir Kenelm, who is stand- 
ing near her, with one hand on his breast, and his 
face averted.
His air and mien indicate a rejection 
of her addresses, and a sense of honour at the in- 
famy attendant on mercenary love.
Mr. Pennant 
remarks, that " the circumstance of the lady being 
painted along with him, is a strong confirmation of 
the truth of the story related by Lloyd, that an Ita- 
lian Prince, who was childless, earnestly wished 
that his Princess might become a mother by Sir 
Kenelm, whom he esteemed as a just model of per- 
fection." J 
In the hall are two finely executed busts of Lady 
Digby.
At Gothurst are also several portraits of the pre- 
sent proprietor's family ; amongst which may be 
change procured him many Catholic friends, and great influ- 
ence, which he afterwards exerted in raising a liberal subscrip- 
tion among the Papists for the use of Charles the r irst.
At the 
commencement of the civil war, he was imprisoned, by order 
of the Parliament, in Winchester-house; but, through the me- 
diation of the French Queen, was liberated in 1643, and went 
to France, where he published several ingenious treatises, On 
the ruin of the King's affairs, he returned to England, to con- 
cert measures for the satety of his property ; but was obliged, 
by the Parliament, to quit the country, under the penalty of 
losing both his life and estate.
He appears to have acted at 
this time as Chancellor to the Queen Dowager, Henrietta Ma- 
ria, who shortly afterwards sent him on an embassy to Rome.
When Cromwell came into power, Sir Kenelm again ventured ' 
to his native country, and, from endeavouring to conciliate the 
Catholics in his favour, was treated by the Protector with kind- 
ness.
This versatility of conduct seems to have done him but • 
little injury with the ministers of Charles the Second ; for he 
was well received at court; and, on the incorporation of the 
Boyal Society, he was appointed one of the council ; an ho- 
nour which he enjoyed only for a short period.
The violence- 
of a disorder (the stone) with which he had been long afflicted, .
deprived him of life in 1665, on the very day that he had com- 
pleted the sixty-second year -of- his age.
2q 
mentioned 
ioi 
BUCKING IIAMSHIRf:.
mentioned Sir Nathan Wright, Lord Keeper, and 
Sir Joseph Jekyll, Master of the Rolls, both full 
lengths, in their robes.
Gothurst church, which is a small neat edifice, 
stands at a little tlistance from the mansion.
The 
old church was pulled down in the year 1725, and 
the present structure completed in 1728, with a sum 
of money bequeathed lor the purpose by Mr. Wright, 
who had purchased the manor.
Whole length fi- 
gures of Sir Nathan Wright, and of his son, Mr.
George Wright, in white marble, are stationed near 
the entrance of the church.
The father is in his 
robes as Lord Keeper, and his sou, as Clerk of the 
Crown, in his official dress.
Their heads are cover- 
ed with enormous marble wigs.
C ren bon- Underwood.] — Grendon-Underwood 
is situated in the first division of the Ashendon hun- 
dreds, eleven miles north-west by west from Ayles- 
bury.
The manor, now the property of the Rev.
G. H.
Purefoy, anciently belonged to Ahneric de 
St. Amand, one of the godfathers to King Ed- 
ward I.
In Grendon church are several monuments of the 
Pigott family, formerly Lords of the Manor ; Rich- 
ard, Viscount Say and Sele, who died in 1781, and 
his lady, Christabella, who died in 1789, at the age 
of 94.
This lady, who was the last of the ancient 
family of the Tyrrells, preserved all the vivacity of 
youth, and partook of the amusements of the young, 
till almost the latest period of her life.
A charity school was founded at Grendon, by 
Anne, Lady Pigott, for six children.
Haddenham.] — Haddenham, formerly a market- 
town, is situated in the first division of the Ayles- 
bury hundreds, six miles and a half south-west by 
west from Aylesbury.
The manor of Haddenham, which is now in moi- 
ties, belonging to Mrs. Herbert and Miss Bertie, 
was granted to the prior and convent of St. An- 
drew, at Rochester ; and the dean and chapter of 
Rochester, are now patrons of the vicarage.
A chapel formerly stood here, dedicated to the 
Virgin Mary ; but no remains of it are now visible.
The church is a large Gothic structure, much out 
of repair, and containing nothing deserving of no- 
tice.
Hambleden.]— Hambleden, formerly a market- 
town, is now only a small village, pleasantly situat- 
ed in a valley, nearly opposite to Medmenham Ab- 
bey.
It lies in the first division of the hundred of 
Desborough, four miles and a half west from Great 
Marlow.
Previously to the Norman invasion, the manor 
belonged to Algar, Earl of Mercia, from whose son 
it was taken by the Conqueror, and bestowed upon 
Queen Matilda, after whose death it reverted to the 
Crown.
It was subsequently in the possession of 
the Clares, from whom it passed in marriage to 
Bartholomew de Badlesmere, a powerful baron, 
who obtained the grant of a market for it from Ed- 
ward the Second ; but the baron having been exe- 
cuted, and Ins estates seized, Hambleden was given 
to the elder Spencer, who, previously to the deposi- 
tion and murder of Edward II.
was deprived of life 
at Bristol, and his body cut in pieces, and given to 
the dogs.
Soon after the accession of Edward III.
the estates of Lord Badlesmere were restored to his 
son and heir, who died in 1337, when the manor became 
the property of his youngest sister.
Her grand- 
daughter married Roger de Scrope, in whose family 
it continued till Emanuel Scrope, Earl of Sunder- 
land, about 1630, divided his vast estate among 
three natural daughters, the second of whom, Eliza- 
beth, married Thomas, Earl Rivers, whose son 
Richard appears to have sold it to Robert Abbot, on 
whose decease, in 1684, it was purchased by Sir 
Robert Clayton, Lord Mayor of London.
The late 
Sir Robert Clayton, Bart, left it to his solicitor, 
R. J.
Troward, Esq. who, in 1803, sold it to Robert 
Scott, Esq. of Danesfield.
The ancient manor-house, which was for many 
generations a seat of the Scropes, is supposed to 
have stood on the site of the present elegant par- 
sonage, which was built by the late Dr. Kendriek, 
Avho was presented to the living by his brother-in- 
law, Sir William Clayton.
The present building was erected on a new site, 
about the year 1601, by the last Lord Scrope, after- 
wards Earl of Sunderland, in a similar style of 
building to that which was in fashion in the reign of 
Elizabeth.
Charles the First is said to have taken 
refuge here on April 28th, 1646, on his road from 
Oxford to St. Albans, and that he escaped hence by 
the connivance of Whitlock.
The house, of late 
years, has been much unoccupied.
Greenland, or Ewden, is another manor in this 
parish, which has been successively in the families 
of Chowne, Shipwash, Doyley, asd Whitlock.
Af- 
ter some intermediate alienations, it is now partiv 
the property of the Rev. Mr.
Hinde, and partly of 
Mr. Steers.
Greenland House was an ancient seat of theDoy- 
leys, and during the civil wars in the reign of 
Charles I.
Avas the residence of Sir John Doyley, 
whose attachment to the royal cause converted it 
into a garrison, which sustained a siege of six 
months before its governor, Colonel Hawkins, ca- 
pitulated upon honourable terms.
The house was 
nearly reduced to a heap of ruins, out of which a 
farm-house has been erected ; the ground about the 
farm still exhibiting the vestiges of the extensive 
fortifications and buildings which were raised during 
the siege.
Parmoor, the seat of John Doyley, Esq. a de- 
scendant of the Doyleys, of Greenland House, is in 
this parish.
It formerly belonged to the Knights 
Hospitallers, but came to the Doyleys by marriage 
with the Saunders family.
Hambleden church is a large and handsome Go- 
thic edifice, in the shape of a cross, and composed 
6 ot> 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
155 
of flints and chalk.
The old tower, which stood 
between the nave and chancel, was taken down in 
1703, and the present one built at the west end, 
eighteen years afterwards.
A good painting of the 
Resurrection, executed by the ingenious Mr. J.
Powell, in 1732, with the figures of Moses and Aa- 
ron at the sides, embellishes the east window.
In 
the smaller windows are representations of the Apos- 
tles as large as life, and also the arms of several of 
the Clayton family.
On the south side of the altar 
are three elegant stalls of Gothic workmanship ; and 
between the arches is the figure of a priest, and a 
bishop's head with a mitre.
Here are some memo- 
rials of the family of Scrope ; an ancient mural mo- 
nument, without either name or date, which from 
the arms, and the name of Elizabeth, which occurs 
in some verses, appears to have been set up for 
Thomas, Lord Sandys of the Vine, who married 
Elizabeth, daughter of George, Lord Roos, who 
died in 1526 ; and a tablet for Dr. Francis Gregory, 
rector of Hainbleden, who died in 1707.
He had 
been usher at Westminster school, under Dr. Bus- 
by, and was the author of several school treatises and 
controversial tracts.
In the burial place belonging 
to the Doyleys, is a handsome monument for Sir 
Cope Doyley, who died in 1633, and his wife Mar- 
tha, " who lived together in inviolated bands of 
holy wedlock twenty-two years, and multiplied 
themselves into five sons and five daughters." It 
is composed of alabaster, presenting a groupe of 
twelve figures, as large as life, kneeling, and very 
elegantly sculptured.
They represent the father 
and mother and their ten children.
On this monument, beneath the figure of the 
knight, are inscribed the following lines, which are 
supposed to have been written by Francis Quarles, 
Lady Doyley's brother : — 
Ask not of me who's buried here ?
Goe ask the commons, ask the shiere : 
Goe ask the church, they'll tell you who, 
As welt as blubber" d eyes can do ; 
Goe ask the heraulds, ask the poor, 
Thine eares shall hear enough to ask no more.
Then if thine eyes bedew this sacred urne 
Each drop into a pearl will turn, 
T' adorn his tombe ; or if thou canst not vent, 
Thou bring' st more marble to his monument.
Under the Lady is inscribed : — 
Wouldst thou, reader, draw to life, 
The perfect copy of a wife, 
Read on ; and then from shame redeem, 
That lost but honourable name.
This was once in spirit a Jael, 
Rebecca in grace, in heart an Abigail, 
In works a Dorcas, to the church a Hannah, 
And to her spouse Susanna: 
Prudently simple, providently wary ; 
To the world a Martha, to heaven a Mary.
Hampden.] — Great Hampden is situated in the 
second division of the Aylesbury hundreds, three 
miles and a quarter west-north-west from Great 
Missenden.
The manor was for many generations 
possessed by the ancient family of Hampden, which 
became extinct, in the male line, by the death of 
John Hampden, Esq. in 1754.
This gentleman, 
who, in his epitaph, is styled the twenty-fourth 
Lord of the Manor, in lineal descent, bequeathed it 
to his cousin, the Honourable Robert Trevor, who 
took the name of Hampden ; and it is now the pro- 
perty, and occasional residence of his son, Lord 
Viscount Hampden.
According to tradition, King Edward III.
and 
the Black Prince once honoured Hampden with a 
visit, and, whilst the prince and his host were exer- 
cising themselves in feats of chivalry, a quarrel arose, 
in which the Prince received a blow in the face, 
which occasioned him and his royal father to quit 
the place in great wrath, and to seize on some va- 
luable manors belonging to their host, as a punish- 
ment for his rashness.
From this story the follow- 
ing rhimes originated : — 
Tring, Wing, and Ivinphoe, 
Hampden did foregoe, 
For striking of a blow, 
And glad he did escape so.
It has been proved, however, that neither the ma- 
nor of Tring, Wing, nor Ivinghoe ever belonged to 
the Hampden family.
During one of her progresses, Queen Elizabeth 
was entertained at Hampden, by Griffith Hampden, 
Esq. who, for her more commodious access to the 
house, is said to have cut an avenue through his 
wood, which is still called the Queen's Gap.
Hampden House, the seat of the Hampden family, 
is situated on the brow of a hill, overlooking a beau- 
tiful valley.
It contains several family portraits, 
some of which are good paintings ; but the names 
of the persons whom they were intended to repre- 
sent have not been preserved.
Amongst them, how- 
ever, a portrait of Oliver Cromwell is easily distin- 
guishable ; he is delineated with a truncheon in his 
right hand, his left resting on a helmet, with a boy 
tying his sash.
There is also a portrait of the aged 
Marquis of Winchester in his robes ; and among 
the other pictures, two sets of copies of Raphael's 
cartoons at Windsor, one painted, and the other in 
red chalk.
Hampden church, which is situated immediately 
behind the house, contains several memorials of the 
Hampden family : the oldest bears the date of 1493.
The monument of John Hampden, Esq. the last 
male heir of tiie family, is ornamented with a me- 
dallion, on which is a tree, hung with shields, con- 
taining the arms of the llampdens and their alli- 
ances ; at the foot of the tree is a basso-relievo, re- 
presenting the battle of Chalgrave Field, in which 
John Hampden, the celebrated patriot, was mor- 
tally wounded : he died about three Aveeks after 
the battle, on the 24th of June, 1643, and was bu- 
ried 
156 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
ried the following day, with his ancestors, in Hamp- 
den church.* 
The village of Little Hampden, adjoining- the 
above, is a separate parish, with a chapel annexed 
to the church of Hartwell, about seven miles distant.
The manor belongs to the Right Honourable John 
Trevor, son of the late Lord Hampden.
Hanslape.] — Hanslape, or Hanslope, formerly a 
market town, is situated in the second division of 
the Newport hundreds, four miles north-north-east 
from Stony Stratford.
The market was granted to 
William Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, in the year 
1293.
At the same time, that nobleman obtained a 
grant of a fair, to last for fifteen days, commencing 
on the festival of St. James ; but the fair, as well as 
the market, has long been discontinued.
Hanslape, 
however, still has a fair on Holy Thursday.
Hanslape manor, which has passed through the 
hands of many possessors, is now the property of 
Edward Watts, Esq. who resides at Hanslape 
Park.
This village is built on the summit of a hill, from 
which there is a gradual descent on each side ; a 
situation corresponding with the reputed etymology 
of its name, from the Saxon word haen, and slope, a 
declivity.
Notwithstanding its elevated situation, Hanslope 
is generally considered as unhealthy ; a circum- 
stance which is attributed, partly, to the unwhole- 
someness of the springs and ponds, and partly to 
the sedentary employment of the females, who are 
chiefly engaged in the manufacture of fine lace, and 
who, through the dearness of fuel, in the winter 
season, associate in close rooms, and consequently 
breathe an impure air.
Hanslape church was formerly remarkable for its 
taper spire, which, together with the lofty tower en 
which it 9tood, was upwards of 200 feet from the 
ground, and formed a very conspicuous object to a 
large tract of the surrounding country.
This spire 
was erected in the year 1409, by Thomas Knight, 
the third rector, and was destroyed by lightning in 
the month of June, 1804.
It was constructed 
* The Hampden family is supposed to have been of Saxon 
origin, and the most ancient in this county, where they had 
large possessions in the reign of Edward III.
The celebrated 
Hampden, mentioned above, was born at London, in the year 
1594.
At the age of fifteen, he was sent to Magdalen College, 
Oxford, whence he removed to one of the inns of court ; 
where, though frequently associating with the gay and dissipat- 
ed, he acquired a considerable portion of legal knowledge.
The 
agreeableness of his conversation obtained him an extensive 
acquaintance ; but the extraordinary vigour of his understand- 
ing remained concealed till the period when he contested the 
legality of the rate called ship-money.
His opposition to that 
obnoxious measure immediately rendered him popular; and 
the gratitude of a whole people was excited by his conduct ; 
for, in bis steady defence of individual right, they discovered 
the safeguard and the surety of their own.
" The eyes of all 
linen," says Clarendon, " were fixed upon him as their pater 
patrice, and the pilot that must steer the vessel through the 
tempests and rocks which threatened it." Hampjden at length 
became the firm supporter of the-measures which wereemploy- 
of stone brought from Ketton in Rutlandshire.
It 
was octagonal and fluted.
In the chancel of the 
church are some remains of Saxon architecture.
Lucy, Lady Pierrepont, founded a school at 
Hanslape for four children ; and the sum of 601.
per 
annum is received by the parish for the rent of cer- 
tain estates given by Isabella Barnwell, William Fox, 
and a person now unknown, which is distributed 
among the poor on St. Thomas's day.
Hartwell.] — Hartwell is situated in the first di- 
vision of the Aylesbury hundreds, two miles west- 
south-west from Aylesbury.
From the reign of 
Henry III.
to the year 1392, or later, the manor 
belonged to the Luton family ; from whom it de- 
scended to the Hampdens ; and it is now the pro- 
perty of the Rev. Sir Charles Lee, Bart, one of 
whose ancestors married the daughter of Michael 
Hampden, Esq.
Hartwell House is a spacious old mansion, part 
of which was altered and modernized by Sir Wil- 
liam Lee, father of the present baronet.
The State 
Gallery remains with its ancient furniture, velvet 
chairs, and gobelin tapestry.
Amongst the ;ew por- 
traits which are in the Dining Room, is a fine whole 
length of Sir John Suckling, which was supposed 
by Sir Joshua Reynolds to have been painted by 
Cornelius Jansen.
There are also some views of 
the house, which were taken before the alterations 
were made.
Hartwell church was rebuilt by the present baro- 
net's father, Sir William Lee, in imitation of the 
Gothic style, with two octagonal towers.
The roof is 
richly ornamented with tracery.
The church con- 
tains some memorials of the Hampden family.
Haversham.] — Haversham lies in the second di- 
vision of the Newport hundreds, three miles and a 
half west by south from Newport-Pagnell.
The 
manor belongs to Alexander Small, Esq. In the 
church is a beautiful monument, with the effigies of 
a female, lying'on an altar-tomb, under a rich Go- 
thic canopy, supposed to be that of Elizabeth, Lady 
Clinton, the heiress of the De la Plaunches, former- 
ly owners of the manor.
ed to counteract the designs of the King ; and by his discernment, 
spirit, and address, he was soon considered as the head of his 
party.
On the commencement of the Civil War, he was one 
of the first to appear inarms, and shortly afterwards engaged 
the royallroops at Brill, in this county.
His bravery was as 
consptcuous'as his abilities; in several skirmishes he met with 
considerable success ; but, on the 18th of June, 1643, in an 
action with Prince Rupert at Chalgrave Field, in Oxfordshire, 
he received a mortal wound with a pistol bullet.
The shot en- 
tered his shoulder, and broke the bone; and, after suffering 
extreme pain for six days, he expired, to the deep regret of 
every friend to his person and principles.
In the delineation 
of his character by Lord Clarendon, his extensive capacity, 
penetration, judgment, and solidity of understanding, are 
strongly marked.
" His industry and vigilance," observes 
the Earl, " were neither to t be tired out nor wearied by the 
most laborious, nor his parts to be imposed upon by the most 
subtle anil sharp." His Lordship also observes of him, that 
" he had a head to contrive, a tongue to persuade, and a heart 
to execute, any mischief." 
Hedsor.] 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
157 
Hedsoh.] — Hedsor is situated in the first division 
of the hundred ol" Hedsor, tour miles and a quarter 
east by south from Great Marlow.
The manor, 
which belonged anciently to a family who took this 
name from the village, is now the property of Lord 
Boston.
Hedsor Lodge, the seat of his Lordship, is situat- 
ed on the brow of a hill, commanding a very beau- 
tiful view of the Thames, and some of the most pic- 
turesque parts of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire.
In the library is a curious portrait of Conral Ernest 
Copperman, a dwarf, who was page of the back- 
stairs to the Princess Dowager of Wales : he died 
at the age of 35, and was then only three feet five 
inches in height.
In the dining room is a portrait 
of William, Lord Paget, who was made Knight of 
the Bath at the coronation of Charles the First.
Lord Boston is a descendant from this nobleman, by 
the female line.
Lambert Farm, an estate in this parish, was for- 
merly holdeu under the manor, by the service of 
bringing-in the first dish at the Lord's table on St.
►Stephen's Day, and presenting him with two hens, 
a cock, a gallon of ale, and two inanchets of white 
bread.
After dinner the Lord delivered to the te- 
nant a sparrow-hawk, and a couple of spaniels, to 
be kept, at his cost and charges, for the Lord's use.
A composition is now received in lieu of this ser- 
vice.
Hedsor church, which is a very small building, 
contains some memorials of the family of Hynde and 
Parker ; and, in the church-yard are deposited the 
remains of Nathaniel Hooke, author of the Roman 
History, to whose memory a tablet has been lately 
put up with an appropriate Latin inscription, at the 
expence of Lord Boston : he died on the 2d of July, 
17(33.
Near the church is a yew tree, which mea- 
sures 27 feet in circumference.
Hillesdon.] — Hillesdon is situated in the second 
division of the Buckingham hundreds, three miles 
south by west from Buckingham.
The manor, now 
the property of Mrs. Coke, was anciently in the 
Giffards, Earls of Buckingham, and subsequently in 
the Veres, Courteneys, and Devereux.
Edward 
VI.
granted it to Thomas Denton, Esq. an ancestor 
of the present possessor.
The greater part of the 
manor-house was taken down a few years ago.
In 
the civil wars of Charles I.
it was made a garrison 
for the King, being the seat of Sir Alexander Den- 
ton, Knt. In 1643 the garrison was surrendered, 
the house plundered, and Sir Alexander imprison- 
ed : he died of a broken heart, while in confine- 
ment.
- The church, which was rebuilt in 1493, is a very 
handsome Gothic structure.
In the cast window of 
the north aisle is some very fine stained glass, repre- 
senting various scenes from the legend of St. Nicho- 
las.
Here are several monuments of the Dentons ; 
and one to the memory of George Woodward, Esq.
envoy to Poland, who died at Warsaw in 1735.
Here is also the tomb of Godfrey Boate, an Irish 
. vol.
l. — no.
12.
judge, and the subject of Dean Swift's quibbling 
elegy.
Hitchenden.] — Hitchenden is situated in the se- 
cond division of the Desborough hundred, a mile 
and three quarters north from High Wycombe.
The manor, which had been part of the possessions 
of Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, was granted by Henry I.
to Geft'ry de Clinton, who gave it to the prior and 
convent of Keniiworth.
Henry VIII.
granted it to 
Sir Robert Dormer, from whose family it passed, by 
a female heir, to the Stanhopes, of whom it was pur- 
chased by Charles Savage, Esq. about the year 1738, 
His niece, the Countess Dowager of Conyngham, is 
the present proprietor, and resides in the manor-house, 
Hitchenden church contains several ancient tombs, 
with basso-relievos, supposed to have b -en intended 
for some of the descendants of Simon de Montfort, 
Earl of Leicester, who assumed the name of Welles- 
bourn.
The arms on the shields are, I.
Gules, a 
lion rampant with two tails, argent, devouring a man 
child, Mountfort, Earl of Leicester.
2. Argent a 
lion rampant devouring a child, within an orle of 
cross crosslets, sable, Mountfort of Warwickshire.
3. Bendy of ten, or, and gules, Mountfort of Belde- 
sert.
4. Gules, a griffin segeant devouring a child, 
or — a chief cheeky, or and azure, over all a bird, 
ermine, Wellesbourn.
One oi the figures is very 
fair, and represents a crusader, in a coat of mail.
— • 
Another represents an armed man, with a sword in 
one hand, and a cross in the other.
According to 
tradition, the descendants of Simon de Mountfort 
resided in this parish, at a house called Wreck Hall, 
in the windows of which were formerly some of 
the coats of arms of the family.
Under an arch 
in the south wall of the chapel, in which are the 
above-mentioned tombs, lies an emaciated figure in 
a shroud on an altar-tomb : on this monument the 
shields are all plain.
Some coins of the Emperors Adrian, Trajan, and 
Aurelius, deposited in an earthen vessel, about 
eighteen inches below the surface, were found on 
Picket Common, in this parish, in the year 1795.
Hogshaw.] — Hogshaw is situated in the first di- 
vision of the Ashenden hundreds, four miles south- 
west by south from Wiuslow.
At this place was a preceptory commandery> or 
hospital, belonging to the knights of St. John of Je- 
rusalem, as far back as the year 1180.
After the 
general Dissolution, the manor which belonged to 
the hospital was granted to the family of Lane, by 
King Henry VIII.
It is now the property of James 
Dupre, Esq. whose mother purchased it, a few years 
ago, of the Earl of Warwick.
In the time of Bishop Gardiner, this parish was 
consolidated with East Claydon ; but divine service 
continued to be performed here, once a month, till 
the church was desecrated.
Brown Willis says : — 
" In the year 1720, Lord Brooke's trustees, God 
pardon them, gave the tenant, one Stevens, a Qua- 
ker, leave to pull down the church, for the purpose 
of building an ox-house." 
a R 
HoRTON.] 
158 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Horton.] — Horton is situated in the first division 
of the hundred of Stoke, a mile and a quarter south- 
south-west from Colnbrook.
The manor belongs to 
Owen Williams, Esq. M.
P. 
Milton passed much of the earlier part of his life 
at Horton ; and the farm-Muse, in which his mo- 
ther resided, is still in existence.
Her tomb is in 
Horton church.
Iselhampsted-Cheneys.] — This little village, 
now more generally known by the name of Cheneys 
only, is situated in the first division of the hundred 
of Burnham, five miles east by north from Amer- 
sham.
Iselhampsted formerly had a royal palace, in 
which Edward I.
and Edward III.
occasionally re- 
sided.
The latter monarch gave the manor to Tho- 
mas Cheyne, his shield-bearer.
From the Cheynes 
it passed to the Sapcotes, and afterwards to the 
Russell family, in which it still remains.
Lord 
Russell, when the estate came into his possession, 
rebuilt the greater part of the manor-houBe, and 
made it his principal seat.
" The old house of Che- 
nies," says Leland, " is so translated by my Lord 
Russell that hath that house in right of his wife, that 
little or nothing of it in a manner remaineth untrans- 
lated : and a great deal of the house is even newly 
set up and made of brick and timber, and fair lodg- 
ings be new erected in the garden.
The house is 
within divers places richly painted with antique 
works of white and black, and there be about it two 
parks.
The manor-place standith at the west end 
of the parish church, in which on the north side, as 
in a chapel, be two tombs of the Chaynes, Lords of 
the Manor there, and of the small village bearing 
there name." 
Part of this house is yet standing, but it has been 
deserted by the Russell family, ever since they fixed 
their principal residence at Woburn.
In one of the 
wings is a long gallery, containing some damaged 
pictures.
Cheneys is now occupied as a farm, and is the re- 
sidence of the Duke of Bedford's principal tenant 
on the estate.
Near the manor-house is an elegant chapel, built 
by Anne, Countess of Bedford, in 1562, which has 
become the general burial place of the family.
It 
contains several curious and handsome monuments.
The church contains some monuments of the 
Cheynes.
The celebrated couple, Philip, Earl of 
Pembroke, and Anne, Countess of Dorset, were 
married hare on the 3d of June, 1630.
In the year 1605, Anne, Countess of Warwick, 
founded an alms-house at Cheneys, and endowed it 
with 501.
per annum, for the support of ten poor 
persons, six of whom are to be of Cheneys, two of 
Northall, and two of Wotton-Undersedge, in Glou- 
cestershire.
Iver.] — Iver, formerly a market-town, with two 
fairs, is situated in the second division of the hun- 
dred of Stoke, two miles and a half north-north-east 
from Colnbrook.
It still has a small fair on the 
1 0th of July.
The opinion that this place takes its 
name from Roger de Iveri, who came over with the 
Conqueror, and had this estate among others given 
to him, is erroneous.
In the Domesday survey, it 
is called Evre and Evreham, and is described as the 
property of Robert Doiley, from whom it succes- 
sively passed to Milo Crispin, and Brien Eitz-Count, 
who kept his Christinas there in 1143.
The latter 
having entered into a religious order, the King, 
Henry II.
seized all his estates.
Richard I.
gave 
the manor of Iver to Robert de Clavering, some of 
whose descendants took the name of Eure from this 
place, and were ancestors of the Lords Eure, and 
the Eures of Axholme.
It subsequently passed 
through the Nevilles, Pagets, and others, and is uow 
the property of Henry Piper Sperling, Esq.
Iver church contains a monument to the memory 
of Sir George and Sir Edward Salter, successively 
carvers to King Charles I.
with the effigies of Mary, 
Lady Salter (wife of Sir George) rising from her 
coffin in a shroud.
It has also a monument in me- 
mory of John King, who was killed by his kinsman 
Roger Parkinson, who, in a drunken fit, struck a 
shoemaker's awl into his forehead.
About the middle of the last century, a free school 
was founded at Iver, by Robert Bowyer, who en- 
dowed it with a sum of money, which at present, 
produces an income of about 211.
a year.
This parish contains the respective hamlets of 
Thorney, Riskins, Sutton, Shredding- Green, Grist, 
Bengers, Delaford, and Huntsmore ; of which Thor- 
ney is the principal.
Riching's Lodge, the seat of the Right Honour- 
able John Sullivan, M.
P. It was formerly the re- 
sidence of the amiable and accomplished Countess 
of Hertford, (afterwards Duchess of Somerset) who 
changed its name to Percy Lodge.
In one of her 
letters, not long since published, she observes that 
on the spot where her green-house stood, was for- 
merly a chapel dedicated to St. Leonard.
She also 
mentions, that an old covered bench in her gardens 
exhibited many remains of the wit of Addison, Pope, 
Prior, Congreve, and Gay, visitors of her prede- 
• cessors.
Ivinghoe.] — Ivinghoe is a small market-town, 
situated in the first division of the Cotslow hundreds, 
twenty-two miles south-east by east from Bucking- 
ham, and thirty-two and three quarters north-west 
from London.
A market at this town, on Thurs- 
days, Avas originally granted to Henry de Blois, Bi- 
shop of Winchester in 1318.
The present market 
is holden on Saturday ; but it is so poorly attended 
as to be scarcely deserving of notice ; a circum- 
stance which probably arises from the barrenness of 
the adjacent country, which has retarded those im- 
provements that might otherwise have been expect- 
ed.
The fair on St. Margaret's day, was granted 
in 1227, and another on the assumption of the Virgin 
Mary by the charter of 1 £l8.
The present fairs are 
on the 6th of May, and 17th of October.
Edward the Confessor gave the manor of Iving- 
hoe 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
159 
hoe to the see of Winchester ; hut it was afterwards 
in the crown ; and Queen Elizabeth granted it to 
Sir John Mason.
Again reverting to the crown, it 
was given to the Lord Keeper Egerton, and was 
the property of his descendant, the late Earl of 
Bridgewater.
Berrystead House, now a farm-house, in this pa- 
rish, is said to have been the seat of Henry de 
Blois, Bishop of Winchester, brother of King Ste- 
phen.
The church, which is a handsome Gothic struc- 
ture, contains some memorials of the family of Dun- 
combe, who had a seat in this parish called Barley- 
End House, now the property and residence of their 
representative Mrs. Lucy.
On the north side of the 
chancel is an ancient altar-tomb, upon which is the 
effigies of the deceased, said to have been that of a 
brother to King Stephen ; but Browne Willis sup- 
poses it to be the tomb of Peter Chaceport.
Aston, Wardhurst, Ringshall, Clippersdown, and 
St. Margaret's, are hamlets of this parish.
In the 
last, which is a populous hamlet, about five miles 
from the town, are the remains of a Benedictine nun- 
nery which was founded by Henry de Blois, Bishop 
of Winchester, about the year 1160, to the honour 
of St. Margaret and St. Nicholas, and known by the 
name of the monastery of Muresley.
At the Disso- 
lution there were nine nuns in this place, yet the re- 
venue was no more than 141.
3s.
Id. per annum.
— 
The site, with the manor of Muresley, was granted 
to Sir John Dance.
The building, about six or se- 
ven vears ago was almost entire.
The parlour and 
hall appear to be of the age of Henry VII.
At the distance of about a quarter of a mile from 
Ivinghoe is a very fine wood, remarkable for its ele- 
vated situation, as it is seen at a very great distance 
from Portsmouth, and from Derbyshire, to the ex- 
tent of 150 miles.
The wood and hills were the 
property of the Duke of Bridgewater.
A quarter of 
a mile from the hills is one of the four old Roman 
roads, called the Ikenild Way, which runs through- 
out the kingdom from Portsmouth to Tinmonth 
Avon.
About 400 yards from this is a remarkable 
declivity, between two hills, about 300 yards in 
length, and 40 yards wide.
On each side of the 
hills is a fine green pasture, and also the bottom, 
Which is reported to have been one of the Roman 
encampments.
Several old coins having been found 
on the spot, and in the neighbouring fields, in fine 
preservation.
About two miles from Ivinghoe is a place called 
Boburn, belonging to John Sear, Esq. of Tring 
Orove.
Here is said to be the original source of the 
Hiver Thames : there are two springs, whieh divide 
within ten yards of each other, one running due east 
and the other west.
Mr. Sear has formed a fine ca- 
nal, a mile in length, for a pleasure boat.
Langley.] — Langley, or Langley Marsh (an- 
ciently Lant>;ley-Maries) is situated in the second 
division of the hundred of Stoke, two miles and a 
quarter north-north-west from Colnbrook.
Lang- 
ley Park and manor are the property of Sir Robert 
Bateson Hanvey, Bart, who purchased them of the 
Duke of Marlborough, in 1788.
Langley church, which is subject to that of Wy- 
raulisbury, contains some memorials of the Keder- 
minster family.
It has a small library of books, 
chiefly upon divinity, which was left for public use 
by Sir John Kederminster, with the express injunc- 
tion that no books should at any time be taken 
out of it.
This parish has two alms-houses, one of them 
founded by Sir John Kederminster for six poor per- 
sons, each of whom receives a weekly allowance of 
2s.
6d.
; the other by Henry Spencer, Esq. for two 
poor men and two women.
His nephew Captain 
Henry Seymour, in 1733, bequeathed the sum of 
2001.
to purchase lands for the better support of this 
alms-house.
Its inhabitants now receive 2s.
6d.
a 
week each.
Lathbury.] — Lathbury is situated in the first di- 
vision of the Newport hundreds, three quarters of a 
mile north from Newport Pagnell.
The Abbey ma- 
nor in this parish, so called from having formerly 
belonged to Lavendon Abbey, is in the possession of 
Christchurch College, Oxford.
Lathbury manor 
was formerly the seat and property of the Andrewes 
family, one of whom, Sir William, built a large man- 
sion here, and was high sheriff of the county in the 
year 1608.
The church contains some memorials of the An- 
drewes family.
A grammar-school was founded here, in the reign 
of Queen Elizabeth, by Anthony Cave, who endow- 
ed it with 121.
per annum, for a master, to be nomi- 
nated by Christchurch College.
He also gave two 
exhibitions, of 61.
each, to the scholars, one of whom 
was to be of Christchurch.
This endowment has 
unfortunately been lost.
The school-house was pull- 
ed down in 1698, and the materials used in the re- 
pairing of the curate's residence.
Lavendon.] — Lavendon is situated in the first di- 
vision of the Newport hundreds, two miles and a 
half north-east from Olney.
It was formerly a mar- 
ket-town ; a market on Tuesdays having been 
granted in 1248 to Paulinus Peyvre, together with 
a fair on the feast of the assumption of the Virgin 
Mary.
The market has been long discontinued ; 
but a small fair is still held annually on the Tuesday 
before Easter.
At this place, according to Dugdale in his Mo- 
nasticon, and Tanner in his Notitia, there was an 
abbey of the Premonstratentian order, built and en- 
dowed by John de Bidun, a baron in the time of 
Henry II.
to the honour of St. Mary, and St. John 
the Baptist.
The yearly income at the Dissolution 
was 791.
13s.
8d.
The site, together with the abbey 
manor, was granted in 1541 to Sir Edmund Peck- 
ham, and afterwards to Sir RoAvland Hey wood.
There 
are no remains of the conventual buildings, which, by 
the report of the commissioners, appear to have been 
in ruins before the monastery was dissolved.
1 The 
160 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
The site of the Castle Manor in this parish, so 
called from an old castle of the ancient baronial fa- 
mily of Bidun, of which there are no other remains 
than a moat and some vestiges of buildings, is now 
occupied by a farm-house.
The church contains a monument to the memory 
of Dr. Newton, the founder of Hertford College, 
Oxford.
Lillingstone-Dayrell.] — Lillingstone-Dayrell 
is situated in the first division of the Buckingham 
hundreds, four miles and a half north from Bucking- 
ham.
The manor, now the property of Paul Day- 
rell, Esq. has been in the Dayrells, who came over 
with William the Conqueror, and of whom the pre- 
sent possessor is a lineal male descendant, ever since 
before the year 1306.
The church contains a monument to the memory 
of Dorothy Haddon, of the Dayrell family, the mo- 
ther of Dr. Walter Haddon, one of the masters of 
requests in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
* 
Linchlade.] — Linchlade, formerly a market-town, 
is situated in the first division of the Cotslow hun- 
dreds, two miles north by west from Leighton Buz- 
zard.
About the middle of the thirteenth century, there 
was a great resort of pilgrims to a holy well at 
Linchlade ; but, in the year 1299, the pilgrimages 
and processions were prohibited by a mandate of 
Oliver Sutton, Bishop of Lincoln, who severely cen- 
sured such resort to a "profane' place; and the 
vicar, who, for his own emolument had encouraged 
the pilgrimages, was cited to appear in the Bishop's 
Court 
The manor of Linchlade is the property of An- 
drew Corbet, Esq.
Linchlade church contains a memorial of Major 
Charles Shipman, who died in 1797, aged 98.
Linford.] — Great Linford is situated in the se- 
cond division of the Newport hundreds, two miles 
* This gentleman was born at Lillingstone-Dayrell, and was 
educated at Eton school, whence he was elected to King's 
College, Cambridge.
There he chiefly distinguished himself 
by writing the purest Latin, which he had acquired from a con- 
stant perusal of the best authors, who had flourished in the 
Augustan age.
lie also studied the civil law, in which lie took 
the degree of a doctor, and read lectures thereon.
In 1550 lie 
was professor of this science, and of rhetoric, and orator of the 
University of Cambridge.
Strongly attached to the principles of the Reformation, he 
acceded to all the proposed measures ; and when Bishop Gar- 
diner was sent to the Tower, in the reign of Edward VI.
he was 
appointed to succeed him in the mastership of Trinity Hall.
Soon afterwards he was chosen president of Magdalen College, 
Oxford, which he enjoyed till the persecution began in the 
reign of Queen Mary, when he left his place, and fetired to a 
private house, where he lived till the accession of Queen Eliza- 
beth, who made him master of requests, a place of great profit 
in those times.
He was also appointed one of the commission- 
ers to visit the universities, and behaved on that memorable 
occasion so as to reflect honour on his memory.
He was one 
of the greatest civilians of his time, and the Queen appointed 
him as her commissioner to Congress at Bruges, when a treaty 
of commerce was negotiating between England and the Ne- 
therlands.
Dr. Haddon, having long been an ornament to the 
west-south-west from Newport Pagnell.
The Rev.
Henry Uthwatt is Lord of the Manor.
In the church is a monument of Sir William Prit- 
chard, an alderman of London, who purchased the 
manor in 1679.
He was president of St. Bartholo- 
mew's Hospital, where he e ected a convenient 
apartment, at his own expence, for performing the 
operation of cutting for the stone.
Sir William Pritchard also founded and endowed 
an alms-house at Great Linford, for six poor men, 
who receive Is. 6d.
each, weekly.
He likewise 
founded and endowed a school in this town, with a 
salary of 101.
per annum for a master, t 
Little Linford lies two miles and a quarter west 
by north from Newport Pagnell.
The inhabitants 
bury their dead at Haversham, excepting the family 
of the Lord of the Manor, for whom there are some 
monuments in the church.
The church was for- 
merly a chapel of ease to Newport Pagnell, and was 
given to Tickford Priory, by the Pagnells.
Ludgf.ushall.] — Ludgershall is situated in the 
first division of the Ashenden hundreds, eleven miles 
west-north-west from Aylesbury.
Kingswood and 
Tethwick are hamlets in this parish.
At this place there was anciently an alien priory 
or hospital, subordinate to the great hospital of 
Sauting Field, near Whitsand, in Picardy, to which 
three hides of land had been granted for that 
purpose by King Henry II.
This was afterwards 
given by Henry VI.
to Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge.
Luffield.] — Luffield, which is an extra-paro- 
chial place, assessed with Stowe, is situated just 
beyond the limits of the Marquis of Buckingham's 
park, partly in the first division of the Buckingham 
hundreds, and partly in the hundred of Green's 
Norton, in the county of Northampton, five miles 
north-north-west from Buckingham.
At this place there was anciently a priory of Bc- 
civil law, died in the year 1571, and was buried in Christ 
Church, London.
f Dr. Richard Sandy, alias Napier, who was presented to 
the rectory of Great Linford in the year 1589, was a very re- 
markable character.
He was the son of Sir Robert Napier, of 
Luton Hoo, in Bedfordshire ; and, having been instructed in 
physic and astrology, by the celebrated Dr. Simon Forman, he 
commenced the practice of those sciences, in conjunction with 
the cure of souls.
As a physician, his practice became very 
extensive ; it having been given out, that he held conversations 
with the angel Raphael, by means of which he infallibly prog- 
nosticated the death or recovery of his patients.
Living in a 
superstitious age, this procured him great credit; and amongst 
the persons of rank and consequence who resorted to him, for 
medical aid, was the Earl of Sunderland, Lord President of the 
North.
That nobleman, according to Howell's Familiar Let- 
ters, was under his care, at his house in Linford., for some 
months, in the year 1629.
Of this empiric divine, it was said, 
that he was so devout, that his knees grew horny by much 
praying, and that he died while kneeling at prayer, at a great 
age, in the year 1634.
The parish register contains the follow- 
ing entry of his burial: — " April 15, 1634.
Buried, Mr.
Richard Napier, Rector, the most renowned physician both of 
body and soul." Dr. Napier's papers may be seen in the 
Museum, at Oxford.
nedictine 
* i 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
161 
nedictine monks, founded by Robert Bossu, Earl of 
Leicester, about tbe year 11'24.
It was dissolved by 
King Henry VII.
on account of their poverty, and 
in 1500, according to Browne Willis, it was given 
to Westminster Abbey.
According to Camden, it 
had been before forsaken by the monks on account of 
the plague.
The site Avas granted, after the Refor- 
mation, to Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, by King Ed- 
ward VII.
and at present belongs to the Marquis of 
Buckingham.
There are no remains of the priory 
building, and the site is occupied by a farm-house.
Marlow (Great).] — Great, or Chipping Marlow, 
which has long been a market-town, by prescription, 
is situated on the banks of the Thames, in the first 
division of the hundred of Desborough, thirty-five 
miles and a half south by east from Buckingham, 
and thirty-one west by north from London.
The 
market is on Saturday ; and there are fairs at this 
town, on the 2d and 3d of May, and 29th of Octo- 
ber.
The latter is a great fair for horses.
Great Marlow sends two representatives to Par- 
liament ; a privilege which it enjoyed as early as the 
year 1299, in the 28th of Edward I.
when Richard 
le Veil was returned to the Parliament held at Lin- 
coln.
It continued to send members till the second 
of Edward II.
after which no returns were made 
until the year 1622, when its ancient privilege was 
restored by act of Parliament.
The right of elec^ 
tion is in all the inhabitants paying scot and lot ; 
and the constables, in whom the municipal govern- 
ment of the town is vested, are the returning officers.
This was formerly a corporation ; the last mention 
of the mayor and burgesses occurs about the conclu- 
sion of the 14th century.
In the year 1599, John Ro- 
* The senior (or first) department of the Royal Military Col- 
lege was established, at High Wycombe, in the year 1799, un- 
der the superintendence of Major-General Le Merchant, the 
Lieutenant-Governor, to whom the nation is indebted for the 
first suggestion of this very useful and laudable institution.
The senior department has been recently removed to Farn- 
bam, in Surrey ; and the junior department, which was esta- 
blished at Great Marlow, in 1802, has been removed to Sand- 
hurst (near Bagshot) in Berkshire.
The junior department— 
for the accommodation of which a range of splendid buildings 
has been erected at Sandhurst, after designs by Mr. Sanders- 
was founded for the purpose of affording a provision for the sons 
of officers who have fallen, or been disabled, in the service of 
their country ; and the means of education to the sons of those 
officers who belong to any regular regiments.
It consists of 
four companies, of 103 cadets each.
They are admitted upon 
three different establishments, viz.
1st.
Orphan sons of officers 
who have fallen, or been disabled, in the service, are admitted 
free of expence, except in bringing the first suit of uniform on 
their admission, and keeping up their stock of linen during 
their residence at the college.
They are provided with board, 
clothing, and education, by the establishment, free of charge.
'2- The sons of officers actually serving in regular regiments of 
the line, who pay a certain sum per annum (from 101.
to 601.) 
according to the rank of their fathers.
3. The sons of noble- 
men and gentlemen, who pay 1001.
per annum each.
Applica- 
tions for admission musi be addressed to the governor.
Every 
candidate, previous to admission, must pass an examination in 
Latin and English grammar, and the first four rules of arithme- 
tic.
No candidate car.
be admitted who is under thirteen years 
of age, or above fifteen.
There are examinations held monthly, 
vOL.
I. NO.
12.
theram, of Seymours, in the parish of Great Marlow, 
left the sum of 401.
towards procuring a charter of in- 
corporation, and reviving a market to be kept weekly, 
the profits of which he vested in the corporation ; but 
his intentions were never carried into effect.
The mar- 
ket, which has been revived, is held on Saturdays.
Marlow, according to Camden, "derives its name 
from the chalk, commonly called marie, which," he 
observes, " being on the land hereabouts, commu- 
nicates such new vigour to it that the next year it is 
fit for tillage, and yields a double increase." This 
derivation, however, is objected to by Mr. Langley, 
Avho remarks, that the learned antiquary has erred 
both in his derivation and illustration of the name, 
" for marie and chalk are two distinct substances, 
and their properties opposite ; of the former too 
small a quantity is found here to give name to a pa- 
rish, and the Saxon name of chalk cannot be strain- 
ed to this etymology.
Marlow is called in Dooms- 
day book Merlaw, which appears to me to signify a 
mere, or standing water.
And this might then be 
the situation of the place, for near the town are 
some peat moors, in which stag's horns, and other 
animal remains, have been found ; and these moors 
were probably standing water at that period." 
The town of Great Marlow consists of two prin- 
cipal streets, in the form of a Roman T, and three 
smaller ones.
It has, of late years, been greatly im- 
proved, and seems likely to continue to flourish.
The 
provisionary establishment of the second (or junior) 
department of the Royal Military College at Great 
Marlow is supposed to have greatly contributed to its 
prosperity.* It has a bridge across the Thames, a 
modern and convenient wooden fabric.
The old 
bridge 
which are conducted by the professors of the senior department, 
to ascertain the progress of each cadet, previously to his removal 
from one class to another.
There are also public half yearly 
examinations upon the same principle as those at the senior 
department, previously to the cadets receiving commissions 
from the college ; and, according to their proficiency in the 
course of studies, they have certificates of qualifications to serve 
in the army as officers, granted to them by the board of com- 
missioners, in whose presence the examination takes place.
The studies pursued at this department are as follow :— Mathe- 
matics ; fortification.; military drawing; landscape drawing; 
history, geography, and classics ; French ; German ; and 
fencing.
There are seven masters of mathematics ; four of 
fortification ; five of military drawing; four of history, geogra- 
phy, and classics; six of French ; one of German ; three of 
fencing.
Gentlemen cadets are allowed to purchase commis- 
sions at any time during their continuance at the college ; but 
no gentleman cadet can be recommended for a commission bv 
private interest, until he has made a certain progress in his 
studies.
The senior department of the Royal College, at Farn- 
ham, is intended for the purpose of instructing officers in the 
scientific parts of their profession, with a view of enabling them 
better to discharge their duty when acting in the command of 
their regiments, and at the same time qualify them for being 
employed in the quarter-master and adjutant-general's depart- 
ment.
No officer can be admitted into this department until 
he has completed -the 21st year of his age, and actually served 
with his regiment as a commissioned officer for three years 
abroad, or four years at home.
Applications for admission 
must be made to the governor, through the colonel or com- 
manding officer of the regiment to which the individual belongs.
2 s Every 
12 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
bridge was a very ancient structure.
Among the 
patent rolls in the tower are grants, dated during 
the reigns of Edward III.
Richard II.
and Henry 
IV.
allowing the bailiffs to take tolls of all goods, 
wares, merchandizes, and cattle, passing over or 
under the bridge ; the receipts to he expended in 
the repairs of the structure.
Having become very 
ruinous and unsafe, an application was made in 
1787, for the rebuilding of it ; but the magistrates, 
not considering the evidence of its being a county 
bridge to be sufficiently supported, refused to com- 
ply with the requisition.
A subscription was there- 
fore proposed by the Marquis of Buckingham, who 
himself subscribed considerably ; and in the year 
1798, the sum of 18001.
having been raised, the pre- 
sent bridge, the balustrades of which are painted in 
imitation of stone work, was erected.
Prior to the Conquest, the manor of Great Mar- 
low belonged to Algar, Earl of Mercia, from whose 
son it was taken by King William and given to his 
Queen, Matilda.
Upon the Doomsday survey it was 
found to be taxed for 15 hides, and its woods sup- 
plied pannage, or feeding, for 1000 hogs, and its 
fisheries produced 1000 eels.
Henry I.
gave it to 
his natural son, Robert de Melhent, afterwards Earl 
of Gloucester, from whom it passed to the Clares, 
Despencers, Beauchamps, and Nevilles.
It conti- 
nued in the crown from the marriage of Richard III.
with Anne Neville, till Queen Mary granted it to 
William, Lord Paget, in whose family it remained 
upwards of a century ; and subsequently passed, by 
purchase, to Sir Humphrey Winch, in 1670, to Lord 
Falkland in 1686, to Sir James Etheridge in 1690, 
to Sir John Guise in 1718, and to Sir William Clay- 
ton in 1736.
Sir William Clayton, Bart, a descendant 
of the last purchaser, is the present proprietor.
Harley-Ford, the seat of Sir William Clayton, 
was formerly a distinct manor, in the CaAvood fa- 
mily.
The first Lord Pagfft, who annexed it to the 
manor of Marlow, made it one of his seats ; and it 
has ever since continued the residence of the pro- 
prietors of the manor.
The present mansion, which was built on a simi- 
lar plan to Hurley House, on the opposite banks of 
the Thames, was erected in the year 1755, from a 
design of Sir Robert Taylor, on the site of the an- 
cient manor-house.
It is not large, but the apart- 
ments are very conveniently disposed.
The library 
is compact and elegant.
The pictures are chiefly 
family portraits.
The house is sheltered from the 
cold blasts of the north by a fine grove, in which the 
beech and fir display their contrasted verdure ; and 
Iv'ery candidate, pevims to admission must undergo such 
examination as may be deemed requisite.
The students pav 
into the funds of the college such sum annually as is determined 
by the supreme board of commissioners.
The present subscrip- 
tion is thirty guineas per annum.
They are subject to the rules 
and discipline of the army, as if serving with their regiments.
The studies pursued at this department are as follow : Mathema- 
tics in all its branches ; fortification ; gunnery ; castrametation ; 
military drawing and surveying; the reconnoitring of ground ; 
the disposition and movement of troops under all the various 
circumstances of offensive and defensive war ; rules for estimat- 
the lawn is ornamented with fine old chesnut and 
forest trees.
The walks are extensive, and afford 
many varied and interesting prospects.
Several 
small buildings are dispersed through the grounds, 
the principal of which, the Temple of Friendship, 
was a tribute of respect to the Clayton family, pre- 
sented by the late Dr. Thomas, Bishop of Rochester.
Its architecture is neat and appropriate, and its si- 
tuation is extremely well chosen.
A short inscrip- 
tion, expressive of the grateful friendship of the do- 
nor, appears over the door.
Widmer manor anciently belonged to the Knights 
Templars, subsequently to the Knights Hospitallers, 
and afterwards to the Widmer family.
About the 
year 1634, it was purchased by the Borloses ; from 
whom it passed, by marriage, to the Grenvilles.
About the year 1747, the late Earl Temple sold it 
to Mr. Moore ; of whom it was purchased, in 1766, 
by William Clayton, Esq. father of Sir William 
Clayton, Bart, the present owner.
A part of the 
manor-house, which is now a farm, is very ancient.
The chapel is used as a brewhouse.
The manor of Seymours, or Seymour's Court, ac- 
cording to tradition, was the birth-place of Queen 
Jane Seymour ; but our historians have given that 
honour to Wolf-hall, the ancient seat of the Sey- 
mours in Wiltshire.
It was anciently the property 
of the noble family of Seymour, but is now vested in 
the Dean and Chapter of Bristol ; under whom it 
is holden, on lease, by Mr. Johnson.
The ancient 
manor-house was so much damaged in the civil 
wars, that the whole of it has since been demolished.
Its situation was remarkably pleasant, commanding a 
fine sweep of the Thames, the town of Marlow embo- 
somed in trees, and an almost singularly beautiful in- 
termixture of woods, meadows, and cultivated ground.
Court Garden, now the seat of Richard Daven- 
port," Esq. formerly belonged to the Paget family.
In 1748, it was purchased of the Earl of Uxbridge, 
by Dr. Battie, an eminent physician, by whom the 
house was built.
Marlow church is a large ancient structure, dedi- 
cated to All Saints.
It consists of a body, and two 
aisles, with a transept dividing it from the chancel.
From the tower rises a wooden spire, which was 
erected in the year 1627.
Between the nave and 
the chancel is a skreen of chalk, with Gothic tra- 
cery.
The altar is of oak, handsomely carved.
The 
most remarkable monuments are those of Sir Miles 
Hobart, one of the members for this borough, who 
was killed by the overturning of his coach, as it 
was going down Holborn Hill, in 163-2 ; and of Ca- 
ing the military resources of a country ; and the German and 
French languages.
There are six professors in this department, 
viz.
one mathematics, &c.
; one fortification ; two military 
drawing; one French ; one German.
Public examinations on 
points of science are held half yearly, in presence of the colle- 
giate board, upon which occasion one or more members of the 
supreme board, not being members of the collegiate board, at- 
tend.
Those officers who have gone through the regular course of 
studies, and have passed that examination by which they may be 
duly qualified for staff appointments, receive certificates thereof, 
signed by the board, and sealed with the seal of the college.
therm*.
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
163 
therinc, wife of Sir William Willoughby, who was 
sheriff of the county in 1603.
In the chancel are a 
few brass plates, one of which commemorates some 
children of Sir John Salisbury, who died in 1383.
— 
There are also some memorials of the families of 
Clayton, Chase, &c.
The book of churchwarden's accounts contains 
some entries of sums of money disbursed for throw- 
ing in the bulwarks about the church and Duck- 
lane, and for cleaning the church, after the sol- 
diers had been quartered in it, in 1642, when the 
Parliamentary army, under Major-General Brown, 
was quartered at Marlow.
The sum of five shillings 
appears to have been paid to the ringers, when Charles 
1. passed through the town, as a prisoner, in 1647.
There are two free-schools in this town, which 
were founded by Sir William Borlase, in the year 
1624.
One of them is for 24 boys, three of whom 
are to be of Medmenham, three of Little Marlow, 
and the remainder of this parish.
The master has 
a salary of 161.
per annum, a house, garden, .and a 
large pasture field.
An apprentice fee of 40s.
is 
given to each boy, when he leaves the school.
The 
other school is for 24 girls, who, by the articles of the 
endowment, were to be taught to knit, spin, and make 
lace; but this institution is neglected, the trustees al- 
ledging that their funds are inadequatefor the purpose.
There are alms-houses for four poor widows, 
which were founded by John Brinkhurst, Esq. in 
1608, and endowed with an estate, which now pro- 
duces 421.
per annum.
The trustees have been en- 
abled by the increase of the rental, to add two more 
persons to the original establishment.
The principal charity appropriated to the town is 
that of 10001.
left by Mr. Loftin in 1759, for the pur- 
pose of apprenticing poor children.
Marlow (Little).] — Little Marlow, about a mile 
and a half east-north-east of Great Marlow, is situ- 
ated in the same division of the same hundred.
Before the Conquest, the manor formed part of 
the possessions of Edith, the Queen of Edward the 
Confessor.
King William gave it to the Bishop of 
Baieux ; but, having escheated to the crown, it ap- 
pears to have been given, by Richard Cceur de Lion, 
to his brother John, whose daughter Eleanor con- 
veyed it, as part of her dowry, to William Mares- 
chal, Earl of Pembroke, from whom it came into the 
possession of Gilbert, Earl of Clare.
Its further im- 
mediate descent is unknown ; but it fell to the Be- 
nedictine nunnery ; and, with it, at the Dissolution, 
was granted to Bisham Abbey.
After passing 
through two or three hands, it became the property 
of John Borlase, Esq. whose family was anciently 
situated in Cornwall, but came to reside here about 
lou'0, and by their hospitality soon became popular.
Sir John Borlase, Bart, the last male heir of this re- 
spectable house, died in 1688, after bequeathing his 
estates to his only daughter, who had married Ar- 
thur Warren, Esq. of Stapleford, Nottinghamshire, 
by whom she had issue, Borlase Warren, whose 
grandson, Sir John Borlase Warren, Bart, (created 
Knight of the Bath for his eminent services in the pre- 
sent war) sold it to the guardians of William Lee An- 
tonie, Esq. the present proprietor.
The manor-house 
is an ancient irregular building, standing near the 
church, but it has nothing in it deserving observation.
Danvers manor is also possessed by Mr. Antonie.
Westthorp House, now the seat of Thomas Wil- 
kinson, Esq. was built by James Chase, Esq. M.
P. 
for Marlow, in the reigns of King William and 
Queen Anne.
The church, contains an altar-tomb, 
with brass plates, for Nicholas Lid wich, the founder of 
either the church or chancel, who died in the year 1430.
The Chase and Warren families have also monuments.
Marston (North).] — North Marston, situated in 
the first division of the Ashenden hundreds, three 
miles and a quarter south by east from Winslow, is 
remarkable chiefly for a tradition relating to Sir John 
Schorne.
Its church is a handsome Gothic struc- 
ture ; and it is said, that the chancel was built with 
the offerings at the shrine of Sir John Schorne, who 
was a very devout man, much venerated by the peo- 
ple.
He was rector of North Marston about the 
year 1290 ; and it is added, that the place became 
populous and flourishing, in consequence of the 
great resort of persons to a well, which he had bless- 
ed.
Browne Willis informs us, that, in his time, 
there were people living, who remembered a direc- 
tion-post standing, which pointed the way to Sir 
John Schorne's shrine ; the annual offerings at which, 
on an average, were estimated at 5001.
; a sum equal, 
at least, to 50001.
in the present day.
Medmenham.] — Medmenham is situated in the 
first division of the hundred of Desborough, three 
miles south-west by west from Great Marlow.
Anciently there was a small abbey of the Cister- 
tian Monks, from Woburn in Bedfordshire, at this- 
place.
It was founded about the year 1204, by 
Hugh de Bolebec, and dedicated to the Virgin 
Mary.
In 1536 its revenues were valued at 201.
6s.
2d.
per annum ; the abbey, with its possessions, 
were then given to the abbot and convent at Bisham.
After the general Dissolution, the site of Medmen- 
ham Abbey, with the manor, was granted to Thomas 
and Robert Moor.
Browne Willis, who visited it ; 
in 1718, observes, " that it seems to have been a - 
very neat and stately building, well wrought with 
ashler work ; the four pillars remaining are very .
handsome, and the windows high and spacious." 
Its present state is thus described by Mr. Langley ; 
" The Abbey House, with its ivy mantled roof and 
walls, forms a very picturesque object.
The late 
addition of a ruined tower, cloister, and other cor- 
responding parts, is made with so much taste and 
propriety, that when time shall have worn off all 
traces of the rule, and blunted its sharp edges; 
when the ivy shall have continued its embraces 6 ?, and 
the recesses of various trees overspread the surface, 
some future writer will be disposed to class it with 
the more ancient pile.
Within the cloister a room 
is fitted up with the same good taste, and the glare 
of light is judiciously excluded, by the pleasing 
gloom of ancient stained glass, chiefly toroi*ets, 
roses, and portcullises.
The figure of the Virgin 
(til* 
164 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
(<he abbey seal) seated on a throne, and holding the 
infant Saviour in her arms, carved in marble, still 
remains, and is placed in a niche in the tower." 
Robert Scott, Esq. is the present proprietor of the 
site of Medmenham Abbey, which, in the last cen- 
tury, became particularly celebrated from having 
been made the retiring place of a society of men of 
wit and fashion, under the title of Monks of St.
Francis, whose habits they assumed.
It is said that 
their manners were very opposite to the strictness of 
the former inhabitants ; but the statement of the 
disgusting tenets of this new institution, contained 
in Chrysal, or the Adventures of a Guinea, was most 
probably heightened into falsehood ; for the descrip- 
tions agre % neither with the building nor its situa- 
tion.
But, whatever were the real principles of the 
society, many of their transactions were undoubtedly 
vicious and dishonourable.
The words, " Fay ce 
que voudras,"* the motto of this last order, are in- 
scribed over the door.
Danesfield, the elegant seat of Mr. Scott, is so 
tailed from an encampment on the estate, supposed 
to be of Danish origin, in the form of a horse-shoe.
The situation of the camp was particularly attrac- 
tive ; as the back part was defended by a thick 
wood, and the front, towards the Thames, strength- 
ened by a high cliff.
The circular part is fortified 
by a double vallum.
In making a walk round the 
rampart, some years ago, several warlike instru- 
ments were discovered.
Whittington farm, an estate in this parish, was 
forfeited to the crown, in the reign of Charles I.
and, at the suggestion of Archbishop Laud, it was 
given to the University of Oxford, for the mainte- 
nance of scholars from Guernsey and Jersey, Sir 
Wilfiam Clayton now holds it on lease.
Hallo wick is a hamlet of this parish, in which was 
formerly a chapel.
Medmenham church contains 
some memorials of the Duffields.
* Do as you like.
+ The Biographia Britannica states, that this gentleman was 
born at Milton (or Midnleton) in the year 1631 ; but of this 
we are not certain.
He became student of Christchurch, Ox- 
ford, in 1647 ; was presented to the living of Broad Rissington, 
in Gloucestershire ; and obtained the rectory of Middleton, in 
1657.
X Francis Atterbury was born on the 6th of March, 1662 ; 
and having received the rudiments of his education at West- 
minster school, was elected a student of Christchurch, Oxford, 
lie soon afterwards wrote a vindication of Luther against the 
attacks of the Romanists ; and, about the same time, greatly 
assisted the Honourable Charles Boyle in his dispute with 
Bentley, respecting the genuineness ot the Epistles ot Phalaris.
Anxious to display his talents in the metropolis, the attractive- 
ness of his eloquence soon obtained him an introduction at 
Court; and he became chaplain to King William and Queen 
Mary.
In the year 1713, after various promotions, he was made 
bishop of Rochester, and dean of Westminster; but all his 
hopes of higher dignities were destroyed by the death of Queen 
Anne.
In his capacity as dean, he officiated at the coronation 
of George the First, and proposed to resign the accustomed 
perquisites on that occasion ; but the olfer was rejected by the 
sovereign, with some indications of dislike to his person.
This 
Ueaioient, co-operating with the tenor of his opinion, led him 
Middleton-Keynes.] — Middleton, or Milton- 
Keynes, situated in the first division of the New- 
port hundreds, -three miles and a half south by east 
from Newport Pagnell, derived its secondary name 
from the ancient family of Keynes, Lords of the 
Manor.
William de Keynes was the person who 
took King Stephen prisoner at the battle of Lincoln.
The manor now belongs to Lord Winchelsea.
Middleton church contains the tomb of Lewis At- 
terbury, f rector of the parish, who unfortunately 
was drowned in 1693.
Middleton is chiefly remarkable as having been 
the birth-place of Francis Atterbury, % Bishop of 
Rochester (son of Lewis Atterbury) and of the Cele- 
brated philologist, Dr. William Wotton.§ 
Missenden (Great).] — Great Missenden is situ- 
ated in the second division of the Aylesbury hundreds, 
twenty-nine miles south-east by south from Buck- 
ingham, and thirty-one west by north from London.
At this place formerly stood an abbey of Black 
Canons, which, according to an old register of the 
convent, was built by Sir William de Missenden, 
Knight and Admiral, about the year 1293, in pur- 
suance of a vow which he had made on escaping 
from shipwreck.
Other accounts, however, say, 
that the abbey was in existence as early as the year 
1133 ; and an old court-book of the manor states it 
to have been founded by the Doyleys, and endowed, 
at the period just stated, by the Missendens.
Sir 
William de Missenden gave the manor of the place 
to the abbey, and his family were its patrons.
A 
short time before the Dissolution, the revenues of 
Missenden Abbey were estimated at 2611.
14s.
6{d.
clear yearly value.
At that time the site of the ab- 
bey, with the manor, was granted on lease to Rich- 
ard Greenaway.
In the year 1787, it became the 
property of James Oldham Oldham, Esq. who has 
made considerable alterations in the grounds, and 
almost wholly rebuilt the house.
7 
to join tiie opponents of ministers, whose measures he continued 1 
to combat with extraordinary vehemence till the year 1722, 
when he was arrested, and imprisoned in the town, on the 
charge of being privy to a conspiracy for restoring the Preten- 
der.
After much opposition, an Act of Parliament was passed, 
for " inflicting pains and penalties on the bishop;" and, leav- 
ing the kingdom in June 1723, he was banished for life, and 
died at Paris in 1731.
His remains were brought to England 
and interred in Westminster Abbey.
A short time before his 
death, he published a vindication of himself, Bishop Smalridge, 
and Dean Aldrich, from a charge which had been brought 
against them sf corrupting the MS.
of Lord Clarendon's His- 
tory.
§ Dr. Wotton was born at Wrenlham, in Suffolk, of which 
place his father was rector, in the year 1666.
At the early age 
of ten, he was admitted of Catherine Hall, Cambridge; m 
1679, he took his first degree, and afterwards obtained a fellow- 
ship of St. John's College; and, on entering into orders, he 
obtained the rectorv of Middleton, and the sinecure of Llan- 
drillo, in Denbighshire.
He died in Wales, in 1726; having 
published, Jst Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, 
which he wrote at Middleton, and which were ridiculed by- 
Swift, in his Battle of Books ; 2d.
An Abridgment of the Ro- 
man Historv ; 3d.
Memoirs of the Cathedrals of St. David's 
and Landafi'; and, 4lh.
A Letter to a Student of Divinity.
Peteiley 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
1(>5 
Peterlej) House, an ancient seat of the Dormer 
family, in this parish, is now occupied as an aca- 
demy.
Missenden church is a handsome Gothic building, 
but contains very little that is remarkable.
At Little Missendcn, which lies about two miles 
from Great Missenden, and two and a half from 
Amersham, on the road to London, the Earl of 
Stirling had a seat, in the early part of the last 
century.
Moreton (Maids).] — Maids-Moreton is situated 
in the first division of the Buckingham hundreds, a 
mile and a quarter north-east from Buckingham.
According to tradition, this place derives its name 
from its moorish situation, and from the daughters 
of Lord Peover, two maidens, who built the church, 
about the year 1450.
This building consists of a 
nave, a chancel, with a small vestry on the south 
side, and a curiously constructed tower at the west 
end.
The windows are in the large handsome style 
of Norman architecture, and display several frag- 
ments of painted glass.
The roof of the chancel, the 
porches, and the«tower entrance, are highly deco- 
rated with light and elegant ornaments of tracery, 
particularly the north porch, the roof of which is 
supported by six small pillars attached to the side 
walls.
The church contains some memorials of the 
Bate family.
* 
In the church register appear the following memo- 
randa : — " Anno 1642.
This year the cross, which 
had like with its fall to have beat out the brains of 
him that did it, was cut off the top of the steeple by 
the soldiers, at the command of Colonel Purefoy, of 
Warwickshire." — " Anno 1653.
This year came in 
force an act of the usurper Cromwell, that children 
ought not to be baptised, and about marriages by 
justices of peace.
But it is here observed, that not 
one in this parish complied with it, but christened 
the children in the church ; and no persons bedded 
before they were solemnly wedded in the church." 
The Marquis of Buckingham claims this manor, 
as lord of the honour of Gloucester.
Muresley.] — Muresley, formerly a market-town, 
is situated in the second division of the Cotslow 
hundreds, three miles and three quarters east by 
north from Winslow.
The manors of Muresley and Salden, formerly in 
the Fortescues, are now the property of Lord 
Eardley.
Salden House, some time a seat of the Gage fa- 
mily, has been pulled down several years.
It was a 
noble mansion, built by Sir John Fortescue, chan- 
cellor of the exchequer, who was honoured with a 
visit there by King James I.
soon after his accession 
to the throne.
The building is said to have cost up- 
wards of 30,0001.
Muresley church contains monuments of Sir John 
The celebrated Dr. George Bate, chief physician to 
Ch;irles I.
Oliver Cromwell, and Charles II.
was bom in this 
vol.
i. — no.
12.
Fortescue, who died in 1607, Sir Francis Fortescue, 
K. B.
and others of the family.
NrwTON-LoNctuEViLLE.] — Newton-Longucville is 
situated in the second division of the Newport hun- 
dreds, three miles south-west by west from Fenny 
Stratford.
Here was formerly an alien priory of Cluniac 
monks, belonging to the abbey of St. Faith, at Lon- 
gueville in Normandy, to which it was given by 
Walter Giffard, the second Earl of Buckingham, in 
the time of Henry I.
This cell was seized by the 
King during the French war, and in the 19th year 
of Henry VI.
it was granted to the warden and 
scholars of New College, Oxford, in which the pro- 
perty still continues.
The church of Newton- Longueville was rebuilt 
by the college.
At the east end of the' chancel, on 
the outside, is a figure of St. Faith, to whom the 
priory was dedicated.
Newport Pagnell.] — Newport Pagnell gives 
name to the Newport hundreds, in the first division 
of which it is situated, at the distance of fifteen miles 
north-east by east from Buckingham, and fifty and 
a half north-west from London.
This place, at the time of the Norman Conquest, 
was the property of William Fitzanseulf, a powerful 
baron, ancestor of the Paganells, or Pagnels, who 
gave their name to the town.
The Pagnels had a 
castle at Newport, the site of which is still called 
the Castle Mead, but there were no remains of the 
building even in Camden's time.
In the civil wars, in the reign of Charles I.
New- 
port Pagnell was very early garrisoned by Prince 
Rupert ; but, on the approach of the Earl of Essex, 
shortly after the first battle of Newbury, in 1643, it 
was abandoned by the royal forces, and taken pos- 
session of for the Parliament, to whom it proved a 
very useful post during the remainder of the war.
This town, which is ancient, large, well built, and 
populous, was formerly a borough, and had a week- 
ly market, either originally granted, or confirmed by 
charter, as early as the year 1270.
It was again 
confirmed in 1335, and is now holden on Saturdays.
It has fairs on the 22d of February, the 22d of April, 
the 22d of June, the 29th of August, the 22d of Oc- 
tober, and tiie 22d of December.
The assizes for the county were occasionally held 
at this town from the reign of Henry III.
to that of 
Henry VI.
At present, the petty sessions for the 
Newport hundreds are holden here.
The town is bounded on the north by the river 
Ouse, and the river Lovett divides it into two un- 
equal parts.
The inhabitants, are well supplied 
with water from the Ouse, by means of an hydrau- 
lic engine.
The greater part of the labouring inhabitants of 
Newport Pagnell • are employed in the manufacture 
parish, where he was baptized; on the 23cl of November, 1607.
His father was rector.
2 T of 
1GG 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
of lace, of which a greater quantity is made here by 
hand than in any other town in England.
Every 
Wednesday, a market is held for the sale of this ar- 
ticle ; great quantities of which are also sold at the 
fairs.
Newport manor passed from the Pagnells to the 
families of Soraery, Botetort, Bumell, and Boteler.
On the attainder of James Boteler, Earl of Wiltshire, 
it was granted, in 1 171, to Richard Neville, Earl of 
Warwick; and, in 1171, to George, Duke of Cla- 
rence.
It was afterwards restored to the St. Legers, 
representatives of the Botelers in the female line ; 
but, reverting again to the crown, it was granted to 
Sir Francis Annesley, from whose family it descend- 
ed to the Earl of JVIount-Norris, its present owner.
In this town there were anciently two hospitals ; 
one founded "before the year 12 10, dedicated to St.
Margaret; the other in the year 1*210, called the 
New Hospital.
Here was also an hospital, founded about the 
ninth year of Edward T.
by John Somcry.
It was 
dedicated to St. John the Baptist and St. John the 
Evangelist^ and at the Dissolution was valued at 
61.
0*.
8d.
per annum.
This hospital was refounded 
by Queen Anne, the consort of James I.
for three 
poor men, and three poor women, about 50 years of 
age.
It is now called the Queen's Hospital, and the 
vicar of Newport, for the time being, is master.
Dr. Lewis Atterbury, the brother of the Bishop of 
Rochester, who was born at Calcot, a hamlet in this 
parish, bequeathed the sum of 101.
per annum, to a 
school-mistress for teaching 20 girls to write, read, 
and sew plain- work.
A benefactor, now unknown, gave a close in North 
Crawley to the widow of the vicar of NeAvport ; and, 
when there is no vicar's widow living, the profits are 
appropriated to the apprenticing; of poor children.
In the church-yard are seven alms-houses, which 
were built and endowed by Mr. John Revis (citi- 
zen and draper in London) in 1703, affording a com- 
fortable asylum to four poor men and three women, 
who receive 101.
per annum each, besides clothes 
and fuel.
Newport Pagnell church is an ancient and spaci - 
ous Gothic building, dedicated to St. Peter and St.
Paul, and situated on an eminence which commands 
an extensive view over the surrounding country.
It 
contains no monuments of any consequence.
In the 
year 1619, the body of a man was dug up in the 
north aisle of the church with all the hollow parts of 
the bones filled with lead.
The lead which was taken 
out of the scull is now in the library of St. John's 
College, Cambridge.
It is in two parts, and seems 
to have filled the whole interior of the cranium.
The following epitaph, written by Cowper the 
poet, on Thomas Abbott Hamilton, who died July 7, 
1788, is in the church-yard : — 
" Pause liere, and think ; a monitory rhime 
Demands one moment of thy fleeting time: 
Consult life's silent clock, thy bounding vein, 
Seems it to say, Life here has long to reign ?
Hast thou the vigour of thy youth ?
an eye 
That beams delight ?
a heart untaught to sigh?
Yet fear; youth oftimes, healthful and at ease, 
Anticipates a day it never sees ; 
And many a tomb, like Hamilton's, aloud 
Proclaims, prepare thee for an early shroud.
\v.
couPF.K.r 
The dissenters from the established church in this 
town, are chiefly Presbyterians and Anabaptists, who 
have each a meeting-house.
Olney.] — Olney, or Oulney, is a small market- 
town, situated in the first division of the Newport 
hundreds, twenty miles north-east from Bucking- 
ham, and fifty-five miles and a half north-west by 
north from London.
Olney market is holden on 
Monday.
It has three annual fairs ; on Easter 
Monday, the 30th of June, and the 21st of October 
This town suffered considerably by a fire which 
happened in May 1786, when 43 houses were burnt 
down.
Great quantities of lace are manufactured in Ol - 
ney, and its vicinity.
The manor of Olney, which was anciently in the 
Earls of Chester, now belongs to 'die Earl of Dart- 
mouth.
Olnoy church is a handsome Gothic structure 
with a beautiful stone spire, 185 feet in height.
In 
the church-yard formerly stood a chapel, dedicated 
to the Virgin Mary, in which was a chantry, founded 
by Lord Basset.
About a mile from the town was the residence of 
the late eminent poet Cowper, the author of that 
justly admired poem, The Task.
From the conti- 
guous scenery, many descriptions in that poem wen- 
derived.
The Sofa, another of his poems, is also 
indebted to the scenery of Olney, as must be evident 
to every person acquainted with that neighbourhood, 
from the following beautiful passage : — 
There, fast rooted in their bank, 
Stand, never overlook'd, our fav'rite elms, 
That screen the herdsman's solitary hut ; 
While, far beyond, and overthwart the stream, 
That, as with molten glass, inlays the vale, 
The sloping land recedes into the clouds; 
Displaying on its varied side the grace 
Of hedge-row beauties numberless, square lowV, 
Tall spire, from which the sound of cheerful bells 
Just undulates upon the listening ear, 
Groves, heaths, and smoking villages, remote.
Descending now (but cautious lest too fast) 
A sudd*n steep, upon a rustic bridge 
We pass a gulph, in which the willows dip 
Their pendant boughs, stooping as if to drink.
Here, ancle deep in mo-s and flow'ry thyme, 
We mount again, and feel at ev'ry step 
One foot halt sunk in hillocks green and soft, 
ltais'd by the mole, the miner of the soil.
He, not unlike the great ones of mankind, 
Disfigures earth; and plotting in the dark, 
Toils much to earn a monumental pile, 
That may record the mischiefs he has done.
The poet, from his " speculative height," after- 
wards surveys the sheepfold, the hay-stacU, and the 
9 Avoodlands, 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
107 
woodlands, and thus concludes this part of his de- 
scription : — 
O'er these, but far beyond (a spacious map 
Of liill ami valley interpoa'cl between) 
The Ouse, dividing the well-water' d land, 
Now glitters in the sun, and now retires, 
As bashful, yet impatient to be seen.
It is to be lamented, that a considerable portion 
of the life of Cowper should have been passed under I 
the pressure of extreme despair, his morbid sensibi- i 
lity having induced him to cherish the dreadful idea !
that he was forsaken by his Creator.
Vet lie had i 
lived in the constant practice of all the virtues.
His 
waking reflections and midnight slumbers are said 
to have been equally haunted by the dread of abso- 
lute reprobation ; and even in the hour of death, his 
disordered mind refused to admit of comfort.
" O 
spare me!
spare me!" was his reply to a near 
Mend, who wished to assure him that happiness 
awaited his departure, " you know, you know it to 
be false!" On the 25th of April, 1800, at the age 
of 69, after twelve hours of apparent insensibility, he 
closed a peaceful, harmless, and useful life, without 
a struggle or a sigh.
Padbury.] — Padbury, or Pathbury, is situated in 
the first division of the Buckingham hundreds, two 
miles and a half south-east by south from Buck-* 
ingham.
Since the year 1442, the manor has been in pos- 
session of All Souls' College, in Oxford, under 
which it is at present holden by lease, by the Rev.
James Eyre, of Buckingham.
A detachment of the parliamentary army, under 
Colonel Middleton, was defeated at Padbury, in 
1643, by Sir Charles Lucas, who commanded a 
party of the King's troops.
The parish register re- 
cords the burial of eight soldiers, on the second of 
July, 1643.
In 1742 a bridge w r as erected at this place, by act 
of Parliament, and made a county bridge.
Penn.] — Penn is situated in the first division of 
the hundred of Burnham, three miles north-west 
from Beaeonsfield.
The manor of Penn, formerly in a family of that 
name, now belongs to Lord Curzon.
The greater 
part of the manor-house was pulled down about the 
year 1760 ; but the remainder has been fitted up as 
an occasional residence for Lord Curzon.
A house, belonging to an estate of the Baker fa- 
mily, the property of the late Baroness Howe, is at 
present occupied as a school for the sons of French 
emigrants, particularly those of the nobility, and of 
officers who may have fallen in the English service.
This establishment, which was instituted by govern- 
ment, originally consisted of sixty boys, with a head 
master and three assistants ; but, as the number has 
been long decreasing, it is expected soon to ter- 
minate.
Pitston.] — Pitston, anciently Pightlesthorne, is 
situated in the first division of the Cotslow hundreds, 
a mile south from Ivinghoe.
In the year 1283, Ed- 
mund, Earl of Cornwall, gave the chief property oi 
this place to the monastery of Asheridge, which was 
founded at the extremity of the parish.
A palace or 
castle of the founder stood at Asheridge, the keep of 
which is yet to be seen near, the site of the monas- 
tery.
In 1290, Edward 1, kept his Christmas either 
in the monastery or the palace.
He stayed there 
five weeks, and held a Parliament at Asheridge.
In the year 1300, the Earl of Cornwall died at 
Asheridge ; leaving to the monastery, amongst other 
bequests, a poition of Christ's blood, in honour of 
which it had been founded.
This pretended blood, 
which proved a mine of wealth to the monks, was 
publicly shewn at Paul's Cross, by the Bishop of 
Rochester, on the 24th of February, 1538, and was 
found to be nothing more than honey, clarified and 
coloured.
In the same year, the revenues of the 
monastery were estimated at 4161.
lis.
4d.
yearly.
Remaining for some time in the hands of the crown, 
it became a royal palace, and was the frequent vesi 
dence of Queen Elizabeth, while Princess.
resided there, when taken into custody by Sir 
She 
Ed- 
ward Hastings, and others, on suspicion of being 
concerned in Sir Thomas Wyat's conspiracy.
1ft 
1574, the whole of the lands which had belonged to 
the monastery were granted to Dudley and Ays- 
cough, who are supposed to have acted as trustees 
for Henry, Lord Cheyne, of Toddington, to whom 
they were immediately conveyed.
In the year 1600, 
Sir Randall Crewe and others purchased the estate 
of Lord Cheyne's widow ; and, two years after- 
wards, it was conveyed to the Lord Chancellor 
Ellesmere, ancestor of the present proprietor, the 
Earl of Bridgewater.
The collegiate church, containing, amongst others 
of note, the remains of Sir Thomas and Sir John 
Denham, and the Lord Chief Justice Bryan, was 
demolished in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.; but 
the great hall and the cloisters were entire in the 
year 1800.
The hall, a beautiful specimen of an- 
cient architecture, though apparently in good repair, 
was pulled down by the late Duke of Bridgewater, 
and the materials sold in separate lots.
It had a 
rich Gothic roof ; was enriohed with fluted pilasters 
on the sides ; and measured 44 feet by 22.
Pitston chureh contains nothing remarkable.
— 
Nettleden, a hamlet of this parish," about six miles 
distant, between Gaddesdon and Hemcl Hempstead, 
has a chapel of case, which was consecrated in the 
year 1470 ; and was the burial place of Sir George 
Cotton, Vice-Chamberlain to Edward VI.
who died 
in 1545.
Qcaihton.] — Quainton is situated in the first di- 
vision of the Ashenden hundreds, six miles and a 
half north-west from Aylesbury.
There are three manors in this parish : Denham, 
Dodershall, and Shipton-Lee, or Lee-Grange ; re- 
spectively in the possession of Lord Francis (jodol- 
phiu Osborne, William Pigott, Esq. and Thomas 
Quinton, Esq. Denham is the principal manor.
Quainton 
168 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Quainton church contains several monuments ; 
amongst which is one to the memory of the learned 
orientalist Richard Brett, oue of the translators of 
the Bible, and a fellow of Chelsea College, who was 
rector of Quainton from the year 1595, till his death, 
in 1637.
Here is also a tomb of John Spencer, 
vector of this parish, who died in 1485, with his 
effigies on a brass plate in fine preservation ; and 
several memorials of the Dormers and Pigots.
That of Robert Dormer, one of the Justices of the 
Court of Common Pleas, who died in 1726, displays 
his effigies in white marble in his robes, and that of 
his lady in the attitude of a mourner.
The monu- 
ment of Sir Richard Pigot, who died in 1685, is a 
massy piece of sculpture, from a design of Leoni.
In the chapel, on the north side of the church, is the 
monument of Richard Winv.ood, Esq.
(son of Sir 
Ralph Winwood, King James II.'s secretary) who 
died in 1608.
This gentleman bequeathed the sum 
of 2001.
to build eight alms-houses at Quainton, for 
four widowers, and endow them with lands in the 
parish for the payment of 2s.
a week each, and pro- 
viding them with gowns, "&c.
Qu.\RENnoN.] — Quarendon is situated in the first 
division of the Ashenden hundreds, two miles and a 
quarter north-north-west from Aylesbury.
Quarenden manor, anciently in the Fitzjohns, de- 
scended, by female heirs, to the Beauchamps.
Having been forfeited to the crown, it was granted, 
in 1397, to Thomas Mowbray, afterwards Duke of 
Norfolk ; but, on his attainder, it was again vested 
in the crown ; and, in 1512, it was granted to Ro- 
bert Lee, Esq. ancestor of Edward Henry Lee, 
created Viscount Quarendon, and Earl of Litch- 
field, in 1674.
The title became extinct in 1776; 
and the manor was sold by the representative of the 
family, Lord Dillon, in 1802, to James Dupre, Esq.
of Wilton Park.
The ancient mansion of the Lees 
was pulled down in the early part of the last cen- 
tury.
St. Peter's chapel, in this parish, is particularly 
deserving of notice.
It was founded by John Farn- 
ham, about the year 1592 ; was rebuilt, by Sir 
Henry Lee, in Queen Elizabeth's time ; but, having 
been many years disused, it is now much dilapidated 
and the costly monuments of the Lees are hastening 
fast to ruin.
The interior is entirely divested of its 
seats, ceiling, and almost every thing else that could 
preserve the memory of the holy purpose for which 
it was originally designed.
Among the most re- 
markable of the monuments are those of Sir Anthony 
Lee, who was knight of* the shire, and died about 
the year 1550, and that of his son Sir Henry Lee, 
who died in 1611.
Upon the first of these is the 
following inscription : — 
Anthony Lee a knight of worthy name 
Sire to Sir Henry Lee of noble fame 
Son to Sir Robert Lee here buried lies , 
Whereas his fame and memory never dies 
Greate in the fountain whence himself did ronm 
But greater in the greatness of his sone 
His body here his soul in heaven doth rest 
What scornde the earth cannot with earth be pres't.
Against the wall, at the upper end of the chancel, 
appears the following inscription, on a black marble 
tablet : — 
161 1.
Memoria Sacrum.
Sir Henry Lee, Knight of the most noble Order of 
the Garter, son of Sir Samuel Lee and dame Marga- 
ret his wife, daughter to Sir Henry Wiat, that faithful 
and constant servant and counsellor to the two Kings 
of famous memory Henries the Seventh and Eighth.
He owed his birth and childhood to Kent, and his 
highly honourable uncle Sir Thomas Wiat, at Arling- 
ton Castle; his youth to the court and King Henry 
the Eighth, to sshose service he was sworn at fourteen 
years old ; his prime of manhood (after the calm of that 
blest Prince Edward the Sixth) to the wars of Scot- 
land in Queen Marie's days, till called home by her 
whose sudden death gave beginning to the glorious 
reign of Queen Elizabeth.
He gave himself to voy- 
ages and travels into the flourishing states of France, 
Italy, and Germany, where soon putting on all those 
abilities that become the back and honour, especially 
skill and proof in arms, he lived in grace, and gracing 
the courts of the most renowned princes of that age, 
returned home charged with the reputation of a well- 
formed traveller, and adorned with those (lowers of 
knighthood, courtesy, bounty, and valour, which 
quickly gave forth their fruit as well in the held to the 
advantage at once of the two divided parts of this hap- 
pily united state, and to both those Princes his Sove- 
reigns successfully in that expedition into Scotland, in 
the year 1573, when in goodly equipage he repaired 
to the siege of Edinburgh, there quartering before the 
castle, and commanding one of the batteries, he shared 
largely in the honour of ravishing the maiden fort : as- 
also in court, where he shone in all those fair parts 
which became his profession and vows, honouring his 
highly gracious Mistress with raising those later olym- 
piads of her courts, justs and tournaments (thereby- 
trying and training the courtier in those exercises of 
arms, that keep the person bright, and steel to hardi- 
ness that by soft ease rusts and wears) wherein steel 
himself led and triumphed, carrying away the spoils of 
grace from his Sovereign, and renown from the world, 
as the fairest man at arms and most complete courtier 
of his times, till singled out by the choice hand of his 
Sovereign mistress for need of his worth, (after the 
lieutenancy of the royal manor of Woodstock and the 
ofiice of the royal armoury) he was called up an as- 
sessor on the bench of honour among Princes and 
Peers, receiving at her Majesty's hands the noblest 
Order of the Garter, whilst the worm of time knawing 
the root of this plant, yielding to the burthen of age, 
and the industry of an" active youth, imposed on him 
full of the glory of the court, he abated of his sense to 
pa\ his better part, resigned his dignity and honour 
of her Majesty's knights to the adventurous Captain 
George, Earl of Cumberland, changing pleasure for 
ease, for tranquillity honour, making rest his solace, 
and contemplation his employment, so as absent from 
the world present with himself, he chose to lose the 
friend of public use and action for that of devotion 
and piety, in which time (besides the building of four 
goodly mansions) he revived the ruins of this Chapel, 
added these monuments to honour his blood and 
friends raised the foundation of the adjoining hospi- 
tal, and lastly, as full of years as of honours, having 
served five succeeding Princes, and kept himself right 
and steady from many dangerous shocks, and three 
utter turns of state, with a body bent to earth, and a 
mind 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
169 
mind erected to heaven, aged 80, knighted 60 years, 
he met his long attended end, and now rests with his 
Redeemer, leaving much patrimony with his name, 
honour with the world, and plentiful tears with his 
friends.
Of which sacrifice he offers his part, that being a 
shaivr in his blood, as well as many of his honourable 
favours, and in honour of his virtues, this narrowly 
registereth his spread worth to ensuing time.
William Scott.
At a short distance from this tablet is a magnifi- 
cent altar monument, supported by surcoats and 
helmets, and adorned with battle-axes and javelins.
On it appears the figure of the knight in complete 
armour, with a surcoat, collar, and George of the 
Order of the Garter ; his head reposing on a helmet 
adorned with a plume of feathers.
Over the effigies 
of the knight is this inscription : — 
Fide & Constantia — Vixit Deo patriae & ainicis 
arm os.
Fide & Constantia — Christo spiritvm, carnem sepvl- 
chro commendavi 
Fide 6i Constantia — Scio, credo, expecto inortvvm 
resvrrectionem.* 
On a black marble tablet beneath are the follow- 
ing lines : — 
If fortvnes stoore or Natvres wealthe commende 
They both vnto his virtves praise did lende 
The warrs abroade with honor he did passe 
In covrtly jvsts his Sovereigns knight he was 
Sixe princes he did serve and in the frighte 
And change of state did keep himself vpright 
With faith vntavght spotlesse and cleare his fame 
So pvre that Envy covld not wrong the same 
All but his virtve now (so vaine is breelh) 
Tovrnd dvst lye here in the cold arms of deeth 
Thus Fortvnes gifts and gentlhle favors flye 
When virtve conquers deeth and destinye.
There are not any vestiges of the hospital which 
is mentioned in Sir Henry Lee's epitaph; nor is 
there any recollection of such a place amongst the 
neighbouring villages.
Sir Henry Lee's lady was a daughter of Lord 
Paget.
She died in the year 1584, and was buried 
at Aylesbury, where there is a monument to hrr 
memory.
After her death, Sir Henry Lee cohabit- 
ed with a lady of the name of Vavasor, who was in- 
terred at Quarendon ; and to whose memory there 
was formerly a monument, bearing her effigies, and 
the following inscription : — 
" Under this stone entombed lies a fair and worthy dame, 
Daughter to Henry Vavasor, Ann Vavasor her name : 
She living with Sir Henry Lee for love, long time did 
dwell ; 
Death could not part them, but here they rest within 
one cell." 
It appears from some church notes, which were 
taken early in the seventeenth century, that after 
Sir Henry Lee's death, this monument was defaced.
* In Faith and Constancy— He lived to God, to his Native 
Country, and to his Friends years.
In Faith and Constancy— I hare commended my soul to 
Christ, and my body to the grave.
\OL.
1 — NO.
12.
It is deserving of notice, that the great storm of the 
year 1 570, was so destructive at Quarendon, that, 
besides horses and other cattle, Sir Henry Lee is 
said to have lost 3000 sheep.
Ravenstone.] — Ravenstone is situated in the 
first division of the Newport hundreds, three miles 
and a quarter west by south from Olney.
At this place, King Henry III.
about the 39tb 
year of his reign, built and endowed a small monas- 
tery of Black Canons, which he dedicated to the 
Blessed Virgin.
This monastery was among those 
which were given to Cardinal Wolsey towards the 
endowment of his colleges, and was valued at the 
Dissolution in one account at 571.
15s.
and in an- 
other at 661.
13s.
4d.
per annum.
The manor for- 
merly belonging to the monastery, is now the pro- 
perty of the Earl of Winchelsea.
The great and eloquent Lord Chancellor Notting- 
ham, described as of this place, when he was created 
a baronet, in the year 1660, died in 1682, and was 
buried at Ravenstone church, where a most magni- 
ficent monument was erected to his memory, by 
his son.
Risborough (Prince's).] — Prince's Risborough 
is a small market-town, situated in the second divi- 
sion of the Aylesbury hundreds, six miles and a 
quarter west-north-west from Great Missenden, and 
thirty-seven west-north-west from London.
The 
HK..ts.et, which is holden on Saturdays, was granted 
by King Henry III.
who gave the townsmen many 
privileges, such as being excused from attendance at 
assizes and sessions, exemption from tolls,, &c.
There is a fair at this place, on the 6th of May.
. Prince's Risborough was so denominated, from 
Edward the Black Prince, who, according to tradi- 
tion, had large possessions and a palace there ; sup- 
posed to have been the old manor-house, which Avas ~ 
moated round, and stood near the west end of the 
church-yard.
It has long been entirely destroyed.
The spot on which it was situated is conjectured by 
Mr. Wise to have been a Saxon camp, fortified to 
check the incursions of the Danes ; it being near the 
road called the Ickneild Way. The manor, which 
has passed through many noble and illustrious fa- 
milies, is now the property of John Grubb, Esq.
The impropriator of the rectory of Prince's Ris • 
borough is obliged (agreeably to the conditions of a 
bequest made by some former possessor, said to 
have been a maiden lady) to provide annually a fat 
bull to be killed, and a boar to be made into brawn ; 
four bushels of Avheat and four bushels of malt, to be 
made into bread and beer ; the whole of which is to " 
be distributed among the parishioners at Christmas.
From the top of a hill, near Prince's Risborough, 
it is said that thirteen counties may be seen.
A coin 
of the Emperor Vespasian was some years ago found 
at the bottom of this hill.
In Faith and Constancy — 1 Know, I Believe, I Expect the- 
resurrection of the dead.
2 v 
RlSBC-nOLGlt ' 
no 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Risborotjgh (MotJk's).] — At Monk's Risborough, 
which lies a little to the north of Prince's Risbo- 
rough, there is said to have been formerly a cell of 
Benedictine monks, subjected to the monastery of 
Christchurch in Canterbury, to whom the manor had 
heen given in 991, by iEschwyn, Bishop of Dor- 
chester.
There is no proof, however, of the exist- 
ence of such a ceil.
Monk's Risborough church, which is a handsome 
Gothic structure, has a square tower ; but it 
contains no monuments deserving of particular 
notice.
At a short distance from this place, there is a high 
steep chalky hill, on the south-west side of which 
there is the figure of a cross, called Whiteleaf Cross, 
from Whiteleaf, the.
hamlet in which it stands.
It 
is formed by trenches cut into the chalk, about two 
feet deep, in the same manner as the horse on White 
Horse Hill in Berkshire, and like that is supposed 
to be a trophy of the Saxons.
The perpendicular 
line is about one hundred feet long, and the trans- 
verse line about seventy.
The breadth of the per- 
pendicular line at the bottom is about fifty feet, bat 
it grows gradually narrower, and at the top is not 
more than twenty.
The breadth of the transverse 
line is about twelve feet, and the whole is supported 
on a triangle, intended to represent the flight of 
steps gradually decreasing, on which it was usual to 
erect crosses in the public ways ; such crosses and 
steps, being also represented on some of the coins 
of the northern nations, and in subscriptions to char- 
ters granted in the early ages of Christianity by our 
Saxon ancestors.
According to tradition, the ex- 
penee of repairing this rude but durable memorial of 
our ancestors, used to be defrayed by some of the 
Oxford Colleges ; but this subject cannot be affirm- 
ed with certainty.
When it was last scoured, as the 
phrase is, it was done by the subscription of the 
neighbouring gentry.
Mr. Wise, whose arguments 
respecting the origin and signification of the White 
Horse we have previously had occasion to mention, 
observes, that, " the Horse cannot but be attributed 
to Saxons ; nor the Cross to any but Christian 
Saxons ; and that the design and meaning of each 
were the same, is clear from their situation." He 
ascribes the Cross to the age of Edward the Elder, 
when he supposes it to have been formed, to pre- 
serve the memory of a battle fought with the Danes, 
the scene of which seems pointed out in this neigh- 
boiiihood by the village named Bled/ow; thought to 
be a corruption of the term implying the Bloody 
Hill.
Shalleston.] — Shalleston, or Shalston, is situat- 
ed in the second division of the Buckingham hun- 
dreds, four miles north-west by west from Buck- 
ingh&hT.
Shalleston -church is a neat modern structure, in 
which arc several monuments of the Prirrefoys, a fa- 
mily which possessed the manor upwards of three 
hundred and fifty years.
Henry Purefoy, Esq. who 
.died ly, 1762, was the last of the family ; and he left 
the manor by will, to the Rev. George Huddlesto* 
Jervoise, the present proprietor.
Shenley.] — Shenley, situated in the second divi- 
sion of the Cotslow hundred, lies three miles and a 
quarter west-north-west from Fenny Stratford.
The manors of Church-end, and Brook-end (or 
Shenley -Mansell) in this parish, both belong to the 
Rev. Primatt Knapp ; that of Westbury is the pro- 
perty of Mr. Selby.
Shenley church contains a handsome monument, 
in memory of Thomas Stafford, Esq. of Tottenhoe, 
who died in 1607.
He founded an alms-house at 
this place, and endowed it with 351.
per annum, for 
four poor men and two women, the men to be al- 
lowed Is. 9d.
each weekly, and the women Is. 2d.
; 
the sum of 13s.
4d.
to be allowed yearly for the 
men's, and 8s.
6d.
for the women's clothing.
Slough.] — Slough is a small, but well-knowo 
market-town, on the Bath read, forty miles south- 
east by south from Buckingham, and twenty-one 
west from London.
It is situated in the first divi- 
sion of the hundred of Stoke, partly in the parish of 
Stoke Poges, and partly in that of Upton, of which 
it is a hamlet.
The market is on Thursday.
This little town is a place of considerable interest 
to the astronomer, and man of science, as it has long 
been the residence of the ingenious Dr. Herschell, 
whose important inventions in optics and mechanics, 
and discoveries in the Solar system, reflect the 
greatest honour on his name, and on that of the mo- 
narch who has encouraged and patronized him.
In 
the Philosophical Transactions for 1795, is a long 
and particular description of his forty feet telescope, 
illustrated by eighteen engravings.
It was com- 
pleted in August, 1789, on which day the sixth Sa- 
tellite of Saturn was discovered.
It is now stand- 
ing in Dr. Herschell's garden ; and several others 
have since been made, on the same principle.
SouLBtJRY;] — Soulbury, or Sulbury, is situated in 
the second division of the Cotslow hundreds, four 
miles and three quarters south from Fenny Strat- 
ford.
It contains the hamlets of Bragenham, Chclms- 
cote, Hollingdon, and Liscombe.
The manors of Soulbury, Liscombe, and Holling- 
don, formerly in the Mansells, are now the pro- 
perty of Sir Jonathan Lovett, Bart, whose ances- 
tors possessed them as eaidy as the reign of Ed- 
ward II.
Sir Jonathan Lovett's seat, at Liscombe, is a 
quadrangular building : a chapel, which, by the 
style of its architecture, appears to have been built 
about the middle or latter end of the fourteenth cen- 
tury, occupies one of its sides.
The house itself is 
of more recent date ; no part of it appearing fo be 
older than the reign of Elizabeth.
The windows 
have been modernised.
Amongst the portraits of this seat, besides several 
of the Lovett family, are the following : — Archbishop 
Sancroft ; Titus Oates ; Sir Nicholas Crispe, in 
armour ; Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk ; Sir 
Edmund Verney, standard-bearer to Charles I.
who 
was 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
171 
was killed at Edghill fight ; the first Earl of Bed- 
ford, &c.
The manors of Bragenham and Chelmsoote re- 
spectively belong- to the Honourable Mary Leigh, 
and Andrew Corbet.
Stock Grove, the seat of Edward Hanmer, Esq.
is situated at the extremity of this parish, near 
Great Brickhill.
Soulbury church contains some monuments of the 
Lovetts.
Stewkley.] — Stewkley is a large village, situated 
in the first division of the Cotslow hundreds, six 
miles east by south from Winslow.
The principal manor in this parish, which was 
formerly in the Dukes of Suffolk, is now holden on 
lease, by the Honourable Mary Leigh, of Stonely, 
in Warwickshire, under the dean and chapter of 
Windsor, who received it as a gift from John, Duke 
of Suffolk, in the year 1480.
The manor of Vauxes, 
alias Fowlers, is the property of the Rev. W.
Wod- 
ley, of Cublington.
Stewkley-Grange belongs to 
Mr. Ward.
Stewkley church is particularly deserving of no- 
tice, as affording one of the most complete specimens 
of Saxon architecture which we have remaining.
Dr. Stukeley mentions it as one of the oldest and 
most entire he ever saw.
It is constructed in the form 
of a parallelogram, 90 feet by 24.
The nave is 21 
feet 8 inches in width ; the chancel has a vaulted 
ceiling, the groins of which are diagonal, and orna- 
mented with a zig-zag moulding.
The windows are 
all small and round-headed, with the mouldings or- 
namented with zig-zag sculpture.
Half the length 
of the church is occupied by two circular arches, 
supporting a square massive tower, the upper part 
of which is surrounded by 32 small intersecting cir- 
cular arches, attached to the wall.
The two arches 
under the tower are highly enriched with zig-zag 
mouldings and grotesque heads.
The West front of 
the church exhibits some very rich Saxon orna- 
ments.
The great west door is the principal en- 
trance, a;td is more embellished than any other part.
There are three arches, the centre of which forms 
the door-way, and is supported by two pillars on 
each side, with square capitals, zig-zag mouldings, 
foliage, and figures of animals.
The tomb of the late Thomas Sheppard, Esq. who 
* Sir Edward Coke, author of the celebrated " Commen- 
t. .ry on Littleton," was born at Mileham in Norfolk, and was 
educated at Trinity College, Cambridge.
'< From his great 
knowledge and experience in the law," observes Granger, he 
• is " eminently qualified for the highest dignity of his profes- 
sion.
But these qualifications, great as they were, scarcely 
compensated for his insolence and excessive anger; which fre- 
quently vented themselves in scurrility and abuse, when he was 
fitting on the bench.
" When he presided at the trial of Sir Walter Raleigh, he call- 
ed him ' traitor, monster, viper, and spider of hell ;' and he 
told Mrs. Turner, who was concerned in the poisoning of Sir 
1 1t >mas Oveibury, that ' she was guilty of the seven deadly 
sins ; siie was a whore, a hawdj a sorcerer, a witch, a papist, 
and a murderer.' 
married the heiress of the Tourneys, of Cublington, 
is in Stewkley church.
Stoke-Goldington.] — Stoke-Goldington is a 
large pleasant village, situated in the first division of 
the Newport hundreds, four miles west-south-west 
from Olney.
; 
The manor, or manors, belong to Miss Wrighte, 
of Gothurst.
There is neither charity-school nor 
alms-house in this parish.
Eakley, which was formerly a distinct parish, is 
now united to Stoke-Goldington.
Stoke-Poges.] — Stoke-Poges is a large scatter- 
ed village, situated in the first division of the hun- 
dred of Stoke, two miles north -north-east from 
Slough.
This place received its secondary name from Ro- 
bert Poges, who received the manor in marriage 
with Amicia de Stoke, about the latter end of the 
thirteenth, or commencement of the fourteenth cen- 
tury.
The old manor-house is said, by Camden, to have 
been built by Henry, Earl of Huntingdon.
It was 
afterwards the seat of Lord Chancellor Hatton.
Sir Edward Coke next resided there, and was vi- 
sited, in 1601, by Queen Elizabeth, whom he sump- 
tuously entertained ; presenting her with jewels, 
&c.
to the value of 10001.
and here in 1634, he 
died.* It subsequently became the seat of Anne, 
Viscountess Cobham, on whose death it was pur- 
chased by Mr. Penn, one of the late proprietors of 
Pennsylvania.
John Penn, Esq. his representative, 
took down the mansion, and erected a noble seat, in 
a more elevated situation.
j 
The present mansion-house was built from designs 
by James Wyatt, Esq. and has been since consider- 
ably improved by judicious alterations and additions.
It is constructed principally of brick, covered with 
stucco, in imitation of stone, and consists of a large 
centre and two wings.
The north or entrance 
front is ornamented with a colonnade, consisting of 
ten Doric pillars, and approached by a flight of steps 
leading t© a marble Hall, The south front, 196 feet 
in length, is also adorned with a colonnade of twelve 
fluted columns, of the old Doric order.
Above this, 
rises a projecting portico of four Ionic columns, sus- 
taining an ornamental pediment.
The Marble Hall 
is oval, and contains four marble busts, supported on 
" He carried his adulation still higher than his insolence, when 
he cailed the Duke of Buckingham * our Saviour,' upon his re- 
turn from Spain.
It is remarkable that there were only fifteen 
volumes of Reports extant, when his three first volumes were 
published.
There is as great a disproportion betwixt the col- 
lective body of the law at present, and that which was in Sir 
Edward Coke's time, as there is betwixt the latter and the 
Twelve Tables.
Viner has abridged it into twenty-two folios; 
and Sir William Blackstone, like an expert chemist, has drawn 
off the spirit, and left the caput lnortuum for the benefit of the 
lawyers.
He died at Stoke Goldington, on the 3d of Septem- 
ber, 1634, in the eighty -third year of his age." 
pedestals 
172 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
pedestals of scagliola, in imitation of various colour- 
ed marbles.
The library is a noble room, extending 
the whole of the south front, and contains an elegant 
and -well-chosen collection of books.
There are several family pictures at Stoke House, 
amongst which the following merit particular no - 
tice : — The portrait of Admiral Sir William Penn, 
and that of his son, the celebrated founder of Penn- 
sylvania.
The latter is a half-length, represented 
in armour, about the age of 22.
A large picture, 
containing the portraits of four children of the Penn 
family, iu a landscape, by Sir Joshua Reynolds.
— 
Three children of King Charles the First ; a line 
original, by Vandyck.
Stoke Park is rather flat ; but it commands some 
fine views, particularly to the south, where the eye 
extends over a large sheet of water to the majestic 
Castle of Windsor, beyond which Cooper's Hill and 
the Forest Woods close the prospect.
A large lake, 
over which ia a neat stone bridge, winds round the 
east side of the house.
This lake was originally 
formed by Richmond ; but it has been considerably 
altered by Repton, under whose direction the park 
was also laid out.
About 300 yards from the north 
front of the house is a handsome fluted column, 68 
feet high, not long since erected, from a design by 
Mr. Wyatt.
On the top is a colossal statue of Sir 
Edward Coke, by Rossi.
In the time of Lady Cobham, Gray, the poet, 
whose aunt resided in the village, often visited Stoke 
Park ; and in 1747, it was the scene of his poem 
called " A Long Story ;" in which the style of build- 
ing in Queen Elizabeth's reign is admirably describ- 
ed, and the fantastic manners of her time are 
also delineated with equal truth, humour, and 
effect : — 
" In Britain's isle, no matter where, 
An ancient pile of building stands : 
The Huntingdons and Hattons there 
Employ'd the power of fairy hands.
" To raise the cieling's fretted height, 
Each pannel in achievements clothing..
Rich windows that exclude the light, 
And passages that lead to nothing.
" Full oft within the spacious walls, 
When he had fifty winters o'er him, 
My grave lord-keeper led the brawls ; 
The seal and maces danced before him.* 
" His bushy beard, and shoe-slrings green, 
His high-crown'd hat, and satin doublet, 
Mov'd the stout heart of England's queen, 
Though Pope and Spaniard could not trouble it." 
* That the reader may enter into the spirit of this stanza, it may 
be proper to observe, that Sir Christopher Ilatton was promot- 
ed by Queen Elizabeth for his graceful person and fine danc- 
ing.
Hatton's dancing is said to have been his be^t qualifica- 
tion, and it was the means of promoting him to be Lord Chan- 
cellor.
In that high station he became arrogant ; which induced 
the Queen to tell him, " that he was too much exalted by the 
indulgence ©f his fortune, which had placed him in a station for 
The church-yard of Stoke-Poges is the scene of 
Gray's justly celebrated elegy ; and, at the east end 
of it he is interred ; but without even a stone to re- 
cord his exit, or " teach the rustic moralist to die." 
Mr. Penn, however, in the year 1779, erected a mo- 
nument for him in an adjoining field, with the follow- 
ing inscription, on one of its sides : — 
This Monument, in honor of 
Thomas Gray, 
was erected A.
D. 1779, 
among the scenery 
Celebrated by that great lyric and elegiac poet.
He died in* 1771, 
and lies unnoticed in the adjoining church yard,.
under the tombstone on which he piou&ly 
and pathetically recorded the interment 
of his aunt and lamented mother.
On two of the other sides are inscribed some lines 
from Gray's Ode to Eton College ; and, on the 
fourth, a passage from his Church-yard Elegy.
This monument, which forms the termination of 
one of the views from Stoke House, is composed of 
stone, and consists of a large sarcophagus, support- 
ed on a square pedestal.
In the reign of Queen Mary, a chapel and an.
hospital were built at Stoke-Poges with a portico 
supported by pillars, by Edward, Lord Hastings j 
but it was taken down, and a new one erected upoa 
a more convenient spot, at no great distance, by the 
late Mr. Penn, in the year 1765.
This hospital, of which the Countess of Moira, 
as the representative of its founder, is the patroness, 
was originally endowed with a rent charge of 531..
9s.
10|d.
issuing out of the manor of Creech St.
Michael, in Somersetshire, and six cow-pastures in 
Stoke Park, for the support of a chantry priest, and 
four beadsmen.
Ditton, a hamlet in this parish, has a chapel of 
ease, which was formerly a chantry chapel.
There 
are several handsome seats in the parish of Stoke- 
Poges.
Ditton House, of late years the seat of Earl 
Beaulieu, who died in 1803, is at present, or was 
very recently, uninhabited.
Baylies, the seat of the 
late, and the property of the present, Lord Godol- 
phin, was anciently the chief residence of the Duke 
of Cleveland.
It was rebuilt, by Dr. Gregory Has- 
card, Dean of Windsor.
The Earl of Rosslyn, in 
whose occupation it was a few years ago, died there 
in 1805.
Stoke Place, formerly the magnificent 
seat of Sir George Howard, now of General Vyse ; 
Stoke Farm, the Earl of Sefton's ; and West- End 
House, the Rev. Dr.
Browning's, are also deserv- 
ing of notice.
which he was unfit, he being ignorant of the chancery law, and 
needing the assistance of others to enable him to do his duty." 
This reproach struck him to the heart; and he would receive 
no consolation.
When he was almost half dead, the Queen re- 
pented of her severity, and went herself to comfort the dying 
Chancellor; but it was all without effect.
Brawls were a sort 
of figure claixce, at that time in fashion.
Stoke- 
06 
5 
a 
n 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
173 
Stoke-Poges church is a small Gothic structure, 
•with a wooden spire, containing several ancient mo- 
numents of the Molins family, formerly Lords of 
the Manor.
Stowe.] — Stowe, which has long heen celebrated 
for the magnificent seat of the Marquis of Buck- 
ingham, is situated in the first division of the Buck- 
ingham hundreds, two miles and a half north-north- 
west from Buckingham.
This parish comprises the 
hamlets of Dodford and Lang-port, and the depopu- 
lated hamlet of Boycot, the site of which is within 
the grounds of the Marquis of Buckingham.
The earliest account of the manor of Stowe, which 
is justly regarded as the chief ornament of the coun- 
ty, is contained in Doomsday Book, which states 
that in the reign of Edward the Coniessor its value 
was 60s.
and it was held by Robert Doyley, and 
Roger Ivory, of the Bishop of Baieux.
When the 
bishop was dispossessed of his lands, in the year 
1088, this manor was obtained by these persons, and 
afterwards divided between them.
Stowe was re- 
tained by Doyley, who founded a church in his cas- 
tle, at Oxford, and endowed it with this estate ; but, 
in the yer.r 1129, on the removal of his foundation, 
he bestowed it on the canons of Oseney Abbey, and 
it belonged to the bishop of that place, when King 
Henry VIII.
on the dissolution of religious houses, 
erected the abbey into a cathedral, and settled it on 
Robert King, the first Bishop of Oxford.
Stowe 
followed the fortune of the abbey, till Queen Eliza- 
beth, having taken the estates into her hands on a 
vacancy cf the see of Oxford, granted this manor 
and estate, in the year 1590, to John Temple, Esq.
a gentleman of very ancient family, seated at Tem- 
ple Hall, in Leicestershire.* A park of about two 
hundred acres was inclosed by his descendant, Sir 
Peter Temple ; whose son, Sir Richard, after the 
Restoration rebuilt the manor house, and settled 
501.
a year on the vicarage, which in the hands of 
the abbots had been very poorly endowed.
This 
gentleman's son was created Baron and Viscount 
Cobham, by George I.
and dying without issue, left 
his estate to his second sister Hester, wife of Richard 
Grenville, of Wotton in this county.
t Lord Cob- 
ham died in 1749, and was succeeded by the above 
lady, who was created Countess Cobharo, a month 
alter her brother's decease.
The present noble 
owner Avas created Marquis of Buckingham in the 
year 1734.
The approach to Stowe, from Buckingham, 
through a Corinthian arch, sixty feet high by sixty 
feet wide, is remarkably grand.
The most favour- 
able view of the houses and surrounding scenery, is 
* The Temple family are said to deduce tlieir maternal de- 
scent from Leofric, Earl of Mercia.
Temple Hall, in Lieqes- 
tershire, is tiie tirst place of their settlement that is known ; but 
they possessed hauls in the county of Buckingham, as early as 
the reign of Henry VJ.
t The Grenvilles trace their descent from Rolls, the first 
Duke of Normandy.
VOL.
I. — NO.
13.
from this spot ; the whole appearing like a vast 
grove interspersed with columns, obelisks, and 
towers, which apparently emerge from a luxuriant 
mass of foliage.
The arch, which is situated at the 
distance of a mile from the south front of the house, 
stands on the brow of a hill, and was built alter a 
design of Thomas Pitt, Lord Cameiford.
Not far from this arch is one of the entrances to 
the Gardens.
These extensive and highly decorated 
grounds contain about four hundred acres, diversi- 
fied with a great number of different scenes ; each 
distinguished by taste ami fancy, and each having a 
complete character of its own, independent of other 
objects.
They may indeed be considered, as exhi- 
biting a fine specimen of what may be effected by 
art, with scarcely any assistance from nature.
They 
owe their present celebrity to the alterations effected 
by Lord Cobham, assisted by Bridgeman and Kent : 
to the latter, in particular, the grounds owe much of 
their present beauty.
J The whose is enclosed with- 
in a sunk fence, or Ha !
Ha !
§ which extends nearly 
four miles in circumference, and is accompanied by 
a broad gravel walk, skirted with rows of lofty elms.
This path leads to many of the buildings, and to se- 
veral interesting scenes, occasionally opening into 
the surrounding park, and presenting views of the 
distant country.
Near this entrance are two Ionic pavilions, origi- 
nally designed by Kent, who was consulted as an 
architect as well as gardener ; but since altered by 
Signior Borra, architect to the late King of Sardi- 
nia, lit the front of these buildings, is a fine piece 
of water, which, dividing itself into two branches, 
returns through beautiful vallies to the east and to 
the north.
The upper end of the lake is concealed 
amidst a mass of wood, where, falling over some 
artificial ruins, it again expands its broad bosom to 
reflect the surrounding scenery.
On the left the 
Shepherd's Cave, designed by Kent, is situated in 
a rising wood, on the banks of the lake.
The fol- 
lowing inscription appears on the walls : — 
To the Memory of 
Sjgniok Fido, 
an Italian, of good extraction; 
v. ho came into England, 
not to bile us, like most of ins Countrymen, 
but to gain an honest livelihood.
He hunted not after Fame, 
Yet acquired it ; 
regardless of the Praise of his Friends, 
but most sensible to their love.
Tho' he lived amongst the Grea f , 
lie neither learned nor 'latter' d any Vice.
He was no bigot, 
Tho' he doubted of none of the 39 articles.
% " Mahomet," says Mr. Walpole, " imagined an elysium, 
but Kent created many." 
§ It is conjectured, by Mr. Walpole, that this kind of boun- 
dary, not now unfrequent, was first planned by Bridgeman, 
who levelled the imprisoning walls, and let in views of the dis- 
tant country by me ns of this fosse ; which obtained the name 
of Ha !
Ha !
from the surprise expressed by people, on finding 
their progress unexpectedly checked by the concealed barrier.
2 X And 
174 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
And if to follow Nature, 
and to respect the laws of Society, 
be Philosophy, 
he was a perfect Philosopher, 
a faithful Friend, 
an agreeable Companion, 
a loving Husband, 
distinguished by a numerous Offspring, 
all which he lived to see take good Courses.
In his old age he retired 
to the House of a Clergyman in the Country, 
where he finish' d his earthly Race, 
And died an Honour and an Example to the whole 
Species.
Reader, 
This stone is guiltless of Flattery ; 
for lie, to whom it is inscribed, 
was not a man 
but a 
Greyhound.
Turning westward, the path leads to a rude pile 
of building - , called the Hermitage ; and also to the 
Temple of Venus, a square building, with circular 
arches and wings, designed by Kent.
The inside is enriched with paintings, by Mr.
Stater, taken from Spencer's Farie Queene, Book 
HI.
canto 10 ; and on the cieling is the figure of a 
naked Venus.
The following motto from Catullus, 
is upon the frieze : — 
Nunc amet qui nonduni amavit: 
Quique amavit nunc amet.
Let him love now who never lov'd before: 
Let him who always lov'd now love the more.
The statue of Queen Caroline is erected on four 
Ionic columns, on the side of a hill, completely en- 
veloped with trees.
The following inscription is on 
the pedestal : — 
Divje Carolina.
(To the gracious Caroline.) 
The path from this statue leads to the Boycott 
Pavilions, designed by Vanbrugh, and to the prin- 
cipal entrance gate, designed by Kent.
One of the 
pavilions is used as a dwelling-house, the other 
stands in the garden.
Here is a noble view of a 
bridge, with a fine serpentine river, and a road, ter- 
minated by two lodges, which form a grand ap- 
proach from Oxfordshire to the park and house.
A winding walk leads us up to the Temple of 
Bacchus, standing under the cover of a wood of 
large trees : this building was erected after a de- 
sign of Vanbrugh.
In the centre of an extensive lawn, bounded by 
wood on each side, and sloping down to the water, 
is the Rotunda, raised upon ten Ionic pillars, and 
ornamented with a statue of Bacchus.
This build- 
ing was also designed by Vanbrugh, and afterwards 
altered by Borra.
From this spot, you cross the lawn by the front 
of the house, which is nearly in the centre of the 
gardens, dividing them as it were into two parts.
In the latter division the tower of the parish church, 
embosomed in trees, the body of it wholly concealed 
from view, is one of the first things which strikes 
the eye ; and you are uncertain whether it is more 
than one of the ornamental buildings.
Passing by 
it you enter the Elysian Fields, under a Doric arch, 
through which are seen in perspective a Palladian 
bridge, and a lodge, in form of a castle.
On the 
right is the Temple of Friendship, and on the left 
are the Temples of Ancient Virtue, and of British 
Worthies.
The Temple of Ancient Virtue is a circular build- 
ing, of the Ionic order, after a design of Kent.
On 
the outside over each door is this motto : — 
Priscae Virtuti 
(To Ancient Virtue.) 
In four niches within, standing at full length, are 
the statues of Lycurgus, Socrates, Homer, and Epa- 
minandas ; under which are the following appropri- 
ate inscriptions, written by George, Lord Lyttleton.
The statues were executed by Scheeinaker.
Lycurgus ; 
Qui summo cum consilio, inventis legibus, 
Omnemque contra corruptekmi munitis optime, 
Pater Patrix, 
Libertatem rirmissimam 
Et mores sanctissimos, 
Expulsa cum divitiis avaritia, luxuria, libidine, 
In multa sa?cula 
Civibus suis instituit.
Translation.
— Lycurgus, who having planned, with 
consummate wisdom, a system of laws, firmly secured 
against every encroachment of corruption ; and hav- 
ing by the expulsion of riches, banished luxury, ava- 
rice, and intemperance, established in the state, for 
many ages, perfect liberty, and inviolable purity of 
manners.
— The Father of his Country.
Socrates ; 
Qui corruptissima in civitate innocens, 
Bonorum hortator, unici cultor Dei, 
Ab inutili otio et vanis disputationibus, 
Ad officia vilae, et societatis commoda, 
Phiiosophiam avocavit ; 
flominum sapientissimus.
Translation.
— Socrates, who, innocent in the midst 
of a most corrupt people ; the encourager of the good ; 
a worshipper of our God ; from useless speculations 
and vain disputes restored philosophy to the duties of 
life, and the benelit of society.— The Wisest of Men.
Homer ; 
Qui poetarum primus, idem et maximus, 
Virtutis praco, et immortalitatis Largitor, 
Div'mo carmine 
Ad pulchre audendum, et patiendum fortiter, 
Omnibus notus gentibus, omnes incitat.
Translation.
— Homer, the first and greatest of 
poets, the herald of virtue ; the giver of immortality ; 
who, by Ins divine genius, known to all nations, incites 
all nobly to dare and to suffer with fortitude.
Epaminondas; 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
175 
Epaminondas; 
Cujus a virtute, prudentia, verecundisk 
Thebanorum respublica 
Libertatem simul et imperium, 
Discipliuam bellicam, civilem, et domesticam 
Accepit ; 
Eoque amisso, perdidit.
Translation.
— Epaminondas, by "whose valour, pru- 
dence, and modesty, the Theban commonwealth 
gained liberty and empire, military discipline, civil 
and domestic policy '• all which by losing him she 
lost.
The Temple of British Worthies, is a semi-circu- 
lar building 1 , erected on the banks of the upper lake, 
after a design of Kent.
It contains the busts of the 
following celebrated characters, with the respective 
inscriptions beneath : — 
Alexander Pope, 
Who, uniting the correctness of judgment to the lire 
of genius, 
by the melody and power of his numbers, 
gave sweetness to sense, and grace to philosophy.
He employ'd the pointed brilliancy of wit to chastise 
the vices, 
and the eloquence of poetry to exalt the virtues of 
human nature ; 
and, being without a rival in his own age, 
imitated and translated, with a spirit equal to the 
original, 
the best poets of antiquity.
Sir Thomas Gresham, 
Who, by the honourable profession of a Merchant, 
having enriched himself and his country, for carry- 
ing on the commerce of the world, built the Royal 
Exchange.
Ignatius Jones, 
Who, to adorn his country, introduced and rivalled 
the Greek and Roman architecture.
John Milton, 
Whose sublime and unbounded genius equalled a sub- 
ject that carried him beyond the limits of the world.
William Shakespeare, 
Whose excellent genius opened to him the whole 
heart of man, all the mines of fancy, all the stores of 
nature ; and gave him power, beyond all other writers, 
to move, astonish, and delight mankind.
John Locke, 
Who, best of all philosophers, understood the powers 
of the human mind, the nature, end, and bounds of 
civil government, and with equal sagacity, refuted 
the slavish system of usurped authority over the 
rights, the consciences, or the reason of mankind.
Sir Isaac Newton, 
Whom the God of Nature made (o comprehend 
his works; and, from simple principles, to discover 
the laws never known before, and to explain the 
appearances never understood, of this stupendous 
universe.
Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Veluram, 
Who, by the strength and light of superior genius, 
rejecting vain speculation and fallacious theory, 
taught to pursue truth, and improve philosophy by 
the certain method of experiment.
King Alfred, 
The mildest, justest, most beneficent of kings; wh» 
drove out the Danes, secured the seas, protected 
learning, established juries, crushed corruption, guard- 
ed liberty, and was the founder of the English con- 
stitution.
Edward, Prince of Wales, 
The terror of Europe, the delight of England ; who 
preserved unaltered, in the height of glory and for- 
tune, his natural gentleness and modesty.
Queen Elizabeth, 
Who confounded the projects, and destroyed the 
power that threatened to oppress the liberties of Eu- 
rope ; shook off the yoke of ecclesiastical tyranny ; 
restored religion from the corruption of Popery ; and 
by a wise, a moderate, and a popular government, 
gave wealth, security, and respect to England.
King William III.
Who, by his virtue and constancy, having saved 
his country from a foreign master, by a bold and ge- 
nerous enterprise, preserved the liberty and religion 
of Great Britain.
Sir Walter Raleigh, 
A valiant Soldier, and an able Statesman ; who, en- 
deavouring to rouse the spirit of his master, for the 
honour of Wis country, against the ambition of Spain, 
fell a sacrifice to the influence of that court, whose 
arms he had vanquished, and whose designs he op- 
posed.
Sir Francis Drake, 
Who, through many perils, was the first of Britons 
that ventured to sail round the globe ; and carried 
into unknown seas and nations the knowledge and 
glory of the English name.
John Hampden, 
Who, with great spirit and consummate abilities, 
began a noble opposition to an arbitrary court, in de- 
fence of the liberties of his country : supported them 
in Parliament, and died for them in the field.
Sir John Barnard, 
Who distinguished himself in Parliament by an ztfi 
tive and firm opposition to the pernicious and iniquit- 
ous practice of stock-jobbing : at the same time exert- 
ing his utmost abilities to increase the strength of 
his country, by reducing the interest of the national 
debt; which he proposed to tin House of Commons 
in the year 1737, and, with the assistance of govern- 
ment, carried into effect, in the year 1750, on terms 
of equal justice to particulars and to the state; not- 
standing all the impediments, which private interest 
could oppose to public spirit.
In the niche of a pyramid, in the centre of this 
building, stands a Mercury, with these words sub- 
scribed : 
Campos ducit ad Elysios.' 
Leads to the Elysian Fields 
Beneath this figure, on a square of black marble, 
are the following lines : — 
Hie 
176 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Hie mamis oh patriam pugnando vulnera passi, 
QuiqiiL- pii vates, aut Piia'bo digna locnti, 
Inventas aut qui vitain excoluere per artes, 
Quique sui memores alios fecere merendo.
(Translation.) 
Here are the bands, who tor their country bled, 
And bards, whose pure and sacred verse is read: 
Those who, by arts invented, life improv'd, 
And by their merits, made their mem'ries lov'd.
Captain Grenville's Monument was erected by the 
late Lord Cobham, in honour of his nephew, Captain 
Thomas Grenville.
It is a lofty column, upon the 
top of which is the figure of Heroic Poetry, holding 
in her ha ml a scroll, with 
Non nisi grandia canto.
(Heroic deeds alone my theme.) 
On the plinth is the following inscription : — 
DIGNUM LAUDE VIRUM MUSA VETAT MORI 
(The muse forbids heroic worth to die.) 
Sororis Suae Filio 
Thomje Grenville, 
Qui navis PiKfectus Regis 
Ducente classem Britannicum Georgio Anson 
Dum contra Gallos fortissime pugnaret, 
Dilacerataa navis ingenti fragmine, 
Femore graviter percusso, 
*Perire, dixit moribundus, omnio satius esse, 
Quam inertias reum in judicio sisti ; 
Columnam banc rostratam 
Laudans et mxrens posuit 
Cobham, 
Jnsigne virtutis, eheu !
rarissimx 
Exemplum habes ; 
Ex quo discas, 
Quid viriim praefectura militari ornatum 
Deceat 
MDCCXLVII.
(Translation.) 
To his nephew 
Thomas Grenville, 
Who, 
Captain of a ship of war, 
In the British fleet, 
Commanded by Admiral Ansxm, 
In an engagement with the French, 
Being wounded mortally in the thigh, 
By a fragment of his shattered ship, 
expiring said, 
" How much better is it thus to die, 
" Than to stand arraigned 
" Before a court-martial." 
This Naval Column 
was erected 
By Richard Vhcount Cobham, 
As a monument of his applause and grief, 
1747.
From this animating example, 
Learn, 
When honoured with command, 
What becomes i 
An Oftker.
* The character of Captain Grenville was most amiable : lie 
was of true courage and conduct; a humane and generous 
commander; beloved by his officers; esteemed as a hither by 
his sailors.
The two lines commencing at Perire, &c.
relate 
to a known story, that the commander in chief threw out the 
signal for the line, and that the French fleet would have escap- 
ed, if Sir Peter Warren, seeing the danger of losing the oppor- 
On the pedestal of the monument is the following 
epitaph : — 
Ye weeping muses, graces, virtues, tell 
If, since your all-accomplished Sydney fell, 
You or afflicted Britain e'er deplor'd, 
A loss like that these plaintive lavs record: 
Such spotless honour and ingenuous truth, 
Such ripen'd wisdom in the bloom of youth, 
So mild, so gentle, so compos'd a mind, 
To ci .:c li heroic warmth and courage join'd !
He too, like Sydney, nurs'd in learning's arms, 
For nobler war forsook her peaceful charms ; 
Like him, possess'd of every pleasing art, 
The secret wish of every virgin's heart; 
Like him, cut off in youthful glory's pride, 
He, unrepining, for his country dy'd.
George, Lord Lyttleton*.
In a romantic dell, a grotto is discovered, com- 
posed of broken stones, pebbles, flints, spars, l\c.
It consists of two caverns ; from the lowermost of 
which, the water flows into a rivulet ornamented 
with several small islands, and overshadowed by a 
variety of intersecting branches.
Fossils, petrifac- 
tions, spars, and pieces of looking-gIa9S, all in 
plaister work, constitute the inside of the grotto ; 
which is also decorated with two white marble ba- 
sons, and a statue of Venus apparently rising from 
the bath.
The following beaulifully and appropri- 
ately descriptive lines, from Milton, are inscribed o\\ 
a tablet of marble : — 
Goddess of the silver wave, 
To thy thick embowered cave, 
To arched walks, and twilight groves, 
And shadow* brown, with Sylvan loves, 
When the sun begins to fling 
His flaring beams, me, Goddess, bring.
The next object which attracts our attention in 
this delightful place, is the Temple of Concord and 
Victory ; acknowledged to be one of the most chaste 
and ornamental structures in the kingdom.
It was 
originally designed by Kent, who nearly followed the 
MaisonQuaree,atNismes ; buttheinteriialdecorations 
were completed in 1763, by Siguier Borra, when it 
received the appellation which it now bears, to per- 
petuate the remembrance of the peace then ratified 
at Fontainbleau.
In the front of this temple are six 
columns, supporting a pediment ornamented with an 
alto-relievo by Scheemaker, representing the four 
quarters of the world bringing their various products 
to Britannia.
On each side is a beautiful colonnade 
often lofty pillars.
Too inside is adorned with me- 
dallions of those officers who did so much honour to 
their country, and under the auspices of the cele- 
brated Lord Chatham, carried its glory to so high 
a pitch in the war of 1753.
This temple stands on ' 
trinity, had not, though second in command, made signals for a 
chase, refusing to take them down; he was well supported in 
this by Captain (afterwards Sir Peter) D?nnis, Captain Gren- 
ville, Captain (afterwards Admiral) Boscawen, and others.
The 
commander finding Warren resolute, had magnanimity enough 
to alter his signal from that for the line, to a chace ; and pru- 
dence enough to make no complaint of disobedience.
a gentle 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
177 
a gentle rise, and below it is a winding valley, the 
sides of which are adorned with groves and clumps 
of trees, aud the open space is broken by single trees 
of \arious forms.
Some statues are interspersed.
This valley was once overflowed Avith water ; but, as 
the springs did not supply a sufficient quantity, they 
have been diverted, and it is now grass.
— " There 
is," says a contemporary writer, " a particular mo- 
ment, when this temple appears in singular beauty ; 
when the setting sun shines on the long colonnade, 
which faces the west, all the lower parts of the build- 
ing are darkened by the neighbouring wood ; the 
pillars rise at different heights out of the obscurity ; 
some are nearly overspread with it, some are che- 
quered with a variety of tints, and others are illumi- 
nated down to their bases.
The light is softened off 
by the rotundity of the columns, but it spreads in 
broad gleams on the wall within them, and pours 
full, and without interruption, on the entablature, dis- 
tinctly marking every dentil.
On the statues which 
adorn the points of the pediment, a deep shade is 
contrasted to splendour ; the rays of the sun linger 
on the sides of the temple long - after the front is over- 
cast with the sober hue of the evening, and they gild 
the upper branches of the trees, or glow in the open- 
ings between them, while the shadows lengthen 
across the valley." 
On the opposite side of the valley is Lord Cob- 
ham's Pillar, 115 feet high, surmounted with a sta- 
tue of his lordship.
Gibbs was the original design- 
er ; but the pillar has been altered by Valdre, who 
enlarged the pedestal, iu order that it might receive 
four lions which now guard the angles.
The four 
principal faces of the pedestal contain the following 
inscriptions, illustrative of the taste, talents, and 
character of Lord Cobham : —   
Ricardo Vicecomiti de Cobham, 
Exercituum Britannicorum Marescallo, 
Qui in castris, et in negotiis, 
Rempublicam sustinuit; 
Et elegantiori hortorum cultu, 
His primum in agris illustrato, 
Patriam ornavit.
MDCCXLVII.
Translation.
— To Richard Lord Viscount Cobham, 
Marshal of the British Armies, whose military and 
civil Talents saved his Country ; and who adorned it 
by a more elegant System of modern Gardening, first 
illustrated on this Spot.
L. LuculH summi viii virlutis quis?
Quani 
Multi villarum magnificentiam inaitati sunt !
Tully's Offices.
Translation.
— How many have imitated the Mag- 
nificence of the Villas of L.
Lucullus !
How few his 
Virtues !
And you, brave Cobham, to the latest breath, 
Shall feel your puling passion strong in death ; 
Such in those moments as in all the past : 
" Oh, save my Country, Heav'n J" shall be your last.
A. Pope.
VOL.
I. — NO.
13.
Consult the genius of the place in all, 
That bids the waters rise or gently fall ; 
That bids th' ambitions hills the heav'ns to scale, 
Or scoops in circling theatres the vale ; 
Calls in the country, catches op'ning glades; 
Unites the woods, and varies shades from shades ; 
Nature shall join you ; Time shall make it grow 
A work to wonder at — perhaps a Stowe.
A. Pope.
At a little distance from Lord Cobham's Pillar is 
a beautiful temple called the Queen's Building ; the 
entrance to which is by a Corinthian portico, lead- 
ing to an elegant room, decorated with scagliola co- 
lumns and pilasters supporting a trunk cieling, exe- 
cuted from the design of the temple of the sun and 
moon at Rome.
After the King's recovery iu 1789, 
this apartment was decorated, at the east and west 
ends, with two medallions of Britannia.
In one of 
them she appears dejected, and has her spear re- 
versed ; on the tablet is this inscription :— 
Desideriis icta fidelibus 
Quxrit patria Ca-sarem.
(Translation) 
A nation's prayers ascends to heav'n, 
That health to Caesar may be giv'n.
In the other, the Goddess is represented sacrificing 
to /Esculapius, on the restoration of his Majesty's 
health.
On the tablet is this inscription : — 
Oh sol pulcher !
Oh laudande canam 
Recepto Csesare felix.
(Translation.) 
With joy elate this happy day I sing, 
When heaven, to bless the people, saved the king.
The centre of this apartment exhibits a fine statue 
of Britannia seated on a fluted pedestal, support- 
ing a medallion of the Queen with the following 
inscription : — 
Charlotte Sophia?
Augusta 
Pietate Regem erga Rempublicam 
Virtute et Constants, 
In difficillimis temporibus spectatissimx, 
D. D.
D. 
Georgius M.
Buckingham.
MDCCLXXXIX.
(Translation.) 
" To the Queen, most respectable in her most 
difficult moments, for her duty to the King, and her 
attachment and zeal for the public service, George, 
Marquis of Buckingham, dedicates this monument." 
The walls of the centre compartment exhibit four 
other medallions, composed of emblematic trophies : 
first, of Religion, Justice, and Mercy ; second, of 
Agriculture and Manufactures ; third, of Navigation 
and Commerce ; and fourth, of War.
The Gothic Temple, situated on the opposite side 
of a deep valley, arrests the sight, and is the most 
picturesque and curious structure in the gardens.
It 
is a triangular building, of brownish stone, with a 
2 Y 
peatagoual 
178- 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
pentagonal tower at eacli corner ; one of which rises 
to the height of seventy feet, and terminates with 
battlements and pinnacles.
The others are sur- 
mounted with domes.
Being 1 seated on a brow of 
a hill, it forms an interesting object from many parts 
of the gardens.
The interior is richly ornamented 
with light columns, and various pointed arches ; and 
the windows present a fine collection of old painted 
glass, on which a variety of sacred subjects, and ar- 
morial bearings, are displayed.
The principal 
apartment is circular : and its dome is ornamented 
with the descents and intermarriages of the Temple 
family, in a regular series of armorial bearings, from 
the Saxon Earls of Leicester, to the late Lord Vis- 
count Cobharn, and Hester, Countess of Temple, 
his sister and heiress.
In two of the towers are 
small circular chapels, decorated with painted glass 
of the armorial bearings of different families.
In the 
other tower is the staircase leading to the gallery on 
the second story, where are two other small chapels, 
with the arms of the Saxon heptarchy.
From the 
top of the highest tower, is a very extensive view, 
comprehending the greater part of the demesne, aud 
also a wide tract of country, including several parts 
of Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Bedfordshire, and 
Northamptonshire.
Near the temple, in a woody recess, are some 
good statues, by Rysbrach, of the seven Saxon 
deities who gave names to the days of the week ; on 
each of which is a Saxon inscription.
The Palladian Bridge, so denominated from being 
built after a design by the celebrated Italian archi- 
tect Palladio, is at the bottom of a gentle declivity.
It has one large and four small arches^ and is deco- 
rated with a ballustrade on each side, and sixteen 
Ionic columns, supporting a roof.
The back wall is 
covered with a fine piece of alto-relievo, represent- 
ing the four quarters of the world bringing their 
various products to Britannia.
Here are also 
paintings of Sir Walter Raleigh, with a map of Vir- 
ginia, and Sir William Penn presenting the laws of 
Pennsylvania, executed by Mr. Slater.
This bridge 
is of the same shape and dimensions as that at Wil- 
ton in Wiltshire.
At a little distance from the Palladian Bridge, is 
the Temple of Friendship ; a well proportioned 
structure, in the Tuscan style of architecture, and 
ornamented with a portico supported by four co- 
lumns.
The emblem of friendship over the entrance, 
those of justice and liberty, and the other decora- 
tions, are executed with great taste.
The interior 
is furnished with busts of the following celebrated 
and noble personages : Frederic, Prince of Wales, 
the Earls of Chesterfield, Marchmont, and West- 
moreland ; the Lords Cobham, Gower, and Ba- 
thurst ; Richard Grenville, late Earl Temple ; Wil- 
liam Pitt, late Earl of Chatham ; and George, late 
Lord Lyttleton.
Upon the ceiling is represented 
Britannia seated, and by her side are exhibited the 
glory of her annals, the reigns of Queen Elizabeth 
9 
and Edward III.
This painting w«s executed by 
Mr. Slater.
The building is inscribed : — 
Amicitiae, i.
e. Sacred to Friendship.
On this side of the garden, the remaining objects 
are the Pebble Alcove and CongreVe's Monument, 
executed from a design by Kent.
The Pebble Al- 
cove is a neat recess very curiously embellished with 
pebbles : the family arms are also executed in peb- 
bles, and displayed in proper colours.
Congreve's Monument is an urn, which with great 
art expresses his dramatic genius ; and at the top of 
it is placed a monkey beholding himself in a mirror, 
and under him the following inscription : — 
"Vilse imitatrix, 
Consuetudinis speculum, 
Comoedia.
(Translation.) 
" Comedy is the imitation of life, and the minor of 
fashion." 
One of the sides of the monument bears the fol- 
lowing lines, to the memory of this elegant and bril- 
liant, but licentious writer : — 
Ingenio 
Acre, faceto, expolito, 
Moribusque 
Urbanis, candidis, facillimis, 
GULIELMJ CONGREVE, 
Hoc 
Qualecunque desiderii sui 
Solamen simul ac 
Monumentum 
Posuit Cobham.
MDCCXXXVI.
(Translation.) 
" To the sprightly, entertaining, elegant Wit, and 
the polished, candid, easy Manners, of William 
Congreve, this, in some respect a Consolation and 
Memorial of his affectionate RcgarJ, was erected 
by Cobham." 
In speaking of these celebrated gardens, the prin- 
cipal objects in which we have now described, Lord 
Orford observes, that " the rich landscapes occa- 
sioned by the multiplicity of temples and obelisks, 
and the various pictures that present themselves as 
we shift our situation, occasion both surprise and 
pleasure ; sometimes recalling Albano's landscapes 
to our mind ; and oftener to our fancy, the ido- 
latrous and luxurious vales of Daphne and Tempe." 
The house, which we must, now proceed to no- 
tice, is situated on an eminence rising gradually 
from the lake to the south front, which is the prin- 
cipal entrance.
The entire front of the building, 
from east to west, extends 916 feet.
The central 
part is 454 feet, and includes the principal apart- 
ments, which range on each side of the saloon : this 
apartment is said to be one of the most magnificent 
of its kind in England.
It is of an oval form, sixty 
feet in length, by forty-three in breadth, and is 
lighted 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
179 
.lighted by a dome.
On the frieze, extending 1 all 
round the room, is represented in bas-relief a Roman 
triumph and sacrifice, executed by Signor Valdre.
The principal figures are copied from the pillars of 
Trajan and Antonine, and other ancient structures 
at Rome.
The cornice is supported by sixteen ele- 
gant scagliola columns of the Doric order, rising 
from the pavement, which is composed of the finest 
inassa carrara marble, in squares of four feet.
The 
columns have white marble bases and capitals, exe- 
cuted by Bartoli.
In the intercolumniations are 
twelve niches and four doors ; in the former are 
placed eight large statues, and four bronzed and 
gilt candelabras of six feet high.
The statues are 
of Agrippina, Augustus, Hygeia, Meleager, Venus, 
Adonis, Paris, Antinous, and a Muse.
The ex- 
pences attending the execution of this apartment are 
said to have amounted to 12,0001.
Its appearance 
is eminently grand, at any time ; but, when lighted 
up, it may be pronounced transcendantly magnifi- 
cent.
On particular occasions, the fascination of 
the scene is greatly heightened by melodious strains, 
issuing from a concealed music gallery.
The hall was designed and painted by Kent.
The 
ceiling is adorned with an allegorical representation 
of the seven planets ; the ruling one, that of Mars, 
hi the likeness of King William, presents a sword to 
the late Field Marshal Viscount Cobham, in allu- 
sion to that prince having given him a regiment at 
his first entrance into the army.
Over the chim- 
ney is a very curious alto-relievo, in white marble, by 
Banks, representing the noble-minded Caractacus 
before the throne of Claudius.
In a recess of the opposite wall is another very 
bold alto-relievo, representing the tent of Darius, 
executed by Christopher Viereziux, a French artist ; 
also a statue of Paris, in white marble, and two fine 
antique vases, or marble pedestals ; one of them 
purchased from Piranese, and the other from Gavin 
Hamilton.
They are both decorated with figures 
and foliage.
In this apartment are also eight an- 
tique marble busts, four transparent alabaster urns, 
and a small marble sarcophagus.
On each side of the hall are dressing and bed- 
rooms, containing several portraits, and a few other 
pictures.
These apartments lead to the circular 
corridors, each formed with twenty-seven Ionic co- 
lumns, and one pilaster.
* Dobson was recommended to King Charles the First by 
Vandyck, who became acquainted with him through observing 
one of his pictures exposed for sale on Snow Hill.
The piece 
having merit, Vandyck inquired for the painter, and was intro- 
duced to Dobson, who was then at work in a shattered garret.
He painted many of the nobility of Charles's court; but his 
conduct being imprudent, he became involved in debt, and 
was committed to prison, whence he was liberated by Mr.
Vaughan, of the Exchequer, but died soon afterwards, in the 
year 1645, at the age of 36.
| This lady is supposed to have been the artist's greatest fa- 
vourite; as he copied her face for most of his Madonas; 
X It has been generally understood, that Douw confined his 
pencil to small pieces; and that his largest pictures did not ex- 
The western division of the house consists of 
the State Drawing-Room, State Gallery, State 
Dressing-Room, State Bed-Chamber, and various 
Closets.
The State Drawing-Room is 50 feet by 32, and 22 
high.
It contains a collection of well executed 
paintings, most of which are by the best of the old 
masters.
Among them are the following : — 
Portrait of Dobson, by himself.* 
Prince Henry and Prince Maurice of Nassau, on 
large white horses ; a fine sketch by Vandyck.
Rembrandt's Father ; Rembrandt.
Helena Forman, one of Rubens' wives ; Rubens.
t 
Rachael's Tent ; Gerrard Douw.J 
Two exquisite paintings of our Saviour, and the 
Madona, from the Colonna Palace, by Carlo Dolce.
Two Landscapes, by Gasper Poussin.
Venus reclining ; Titian.
Landscapes with Satyrs, remarkably highly finish- 
ed ; Breughel.
A large Landscape with an Ale-house, and a 
group of three figures resting on their staffs ; D.
Teniers.
This apartment has a fine Italian chimney-piece, 
in the centre of which is an antique tablet of oriental 
alabaster, representing the emblems of a sacrifice to 
Bacchus, and heads of Bacchanals : the pilasters 
are of porphyry, together with part of the entabla- 
ture ; and the remainder is of the finest white mar- 
ble.
On the mantle-piece is a most beautiful trans- 
parent vase, of oriental alabaster.
The State Gallery is 170 feet in length by 25 in 
breadth, and is 22 feet high.
Its walls are hung with 
curious pieces of tapestry ; and on the tables and 
mantle-pieces are fine bronze statues of Venus, Flora, 
Hercules, &c.
The State Dressing-Room is 30 feet by 24, and 
19 feet high.
This room is also hung with tapestry, 
wrought at the request of Lord Cobham, and some 
other officers, (serving under the Great Duke of 
Marlborough,) who raised a subscription for the 
purpose.
The different pieces represent the actions 
of the cavalry in the allied army : the largest dis- 
plays the battle at Wynendael Wood.§ 
In this apartment are, a fine portrait of the Jate 
Field Marshal Viscount Cobham, by Sir Godfrey 
Kneller ; and two capital pictures of a Burgomaster 
and his wife, by Van Hurst.
ceed three feet square.
The present performance is above five 
feet square, and is finished with that peculiar neatness, and pa- 
tient detail, for winch Douw was celebrated.
The subject is 
taken from the 31st Chapter of Genesis, where Rachael is de- 
scribed as secreting the stolen gods from Laban and Jacob.
She 
is represented sitting on a bundle of wheat, in one corner of the 
picture, with two old men and a boy behind her.
The tent is 
strewed with culinary utensils.
The composition, colouring, and 
expression, are very fine ; and the ears of wheat, and minutiae 
of parts, are touched with wonderful precision and correctness.
§ Sets were worked for the Duke of Marlborough, at Blen- 
heim ; Lord Cadogan, at Caversham ; Duke of Aigyle, at ln- 
verary; Lord Orkney, at Cliefden ; General Lumley, at Wau- 
stead ; and General Webb.
The 
180 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
The State Red-Chamber is oft feet in length by 35 
in breadth, and 18 feet high.
The ceiling is orna- 
mented with the insignia of the garter, and the mag- 
nificent bed was executed by Signor Borra.
The 
<:hairs, window-curtains, and hangings, are of crim- 
son damask.
Over the chimney-piece is a copy, by 
Sir Godfrey Kneller, of Vandyck's celebrated pic- 
ture at Hampton Court, representing Charles the 
First, on a white horse, attended by Monsieur St.
Irmin.
In the State Closet are several fine cabinet paint- 
ings, among which are particularly to be noticed : — 
A portrait of the present King of Denmark, by An- 
gelica Kauffman.
The Adoration of the Magi, P.
Veronese.
A boy and woman by candle-light, 
Schalkcn.* A Flemish piece, moonlight: Swick- 
hart.
Holy Family : Corregio.
Two sketches by 
Rubens, one of Venus and Adonis, the other of the 
Adoration of the Magi.
The Music-Room, which is on the eastern side of 
the house, corresponds in size and shape with the 
State Drawing-Room.
The walls and ceiling are 
painted in Arabesque and other subjects, in the most 
elegant and chaste style, by Signor Valdre.
The 
general design is taken from the Loggia of Raphael, 
in the Vatican at Rome.
At each end of the room 
are scagliola columns, executed in imitation of sienna 
"marble by Signor Bartoli.
The capitals, mould- 
ings, and other ornaments, are richly gilt.
At one 
end is a recess for the instruments, decorated with 
pilasters, painted on a gold ground ; and a statue of 
Apollo, richly gilt, placed on a pedestal containing 
an organ.
In the centre of the ceiling is a gilt sun ; 
which, from its judicious management, appears to 
blend its rays with the sky.
This is surrounded by 
an allegorical representation of the Dance of the 
Hours ; the Seasons ; Aurora, the Goddess of Morn- 
ing ; and the figure of Night, retiring behind a 
cloud.
The chimney-piece is Roman : the pannels 
are of Rosso-Antico, with ornaments in Or-moulu.
* Several amusing anecdotes are related of this artist ; one 
of which strongly characterises his impolite sincerity.
Lord 
Orford mentions, that, " having drawn a lady who was marked 
with the small-pox, but had handsome hands, she asked him, 
when the face was finished, if she must not sit for her hands.
' No,' replied Schalken, ' I always draw them from my house- 
maid.' " 
f This lady, as we have before had occasion to mention, 
had only four sons and nine daughters ; yet lived to see above 
700 of her own descendants.
% " That which would have clouded any victory," says 
Lord Clarendon, " and made the loss of others less spoken of, 
was the death of Sir Bevil Grenville.
He was indeed an excel- 
lent person, whose activity, interest, and reputation, were the 
foundation of what has been done in Cornwall ; and his temper 
and affections so public, that no accident which happened could 
liiake any impression on him.
In a word, a brighter courage 
and a gentler disposition were never married together, to make 
the most cheerful and innocent conversation." 
§ The following epitaph on this gentleman's tomb in West- 
minster Abbey, by Pope, faithfully represents his character: 
Statesman, yet friend to truth !
of soul sincere ; 
In action faithful, and in honour clear ; 
The Library, which is new, occupies the spac« .
that was formerly occupied by the Drawing and 
Dining-rooms.
It is of the same size and shape as 
the State Gallery, and is situated in that part of the 
building which connects the centre with one of the 
pavilions.
It contains about 10,000 volumes, many 
of which are very rare and valuable ; and a great 
collection of unpublished writings ; amongst which 
is an invaluable assortment of Irish manuscripts, 
(including all the papers of Mr. Charles O' Conner) 
some of them reported to be the productions of tin* 
7th, 8th, and 9th centuries.
Here are two globes of 
the largest size, made by Dudley Adams.
The 
celestial globe is graduated in the same manner as 
that of the terrestrial, by lines of latitude and longi- 
tude.
The. stars are of seven different magnitudes, 
distinguished by different coloured foils ; and the 
nebula are marked with silver ; the number of stars 
represented amounts to 49f4.
The Dressing and Grenville Rooms contain a 
great number of portraits, of which the following are 
the principal : — Earl Nugent, by Gainsborough.
Mrs. Siddons, Lady Buckingham, from the cele- 
brated picture of Sir Joshua Reynolds.
Edward 
Seymour, Duke of Somerset and Protector in 
the early part of the reign of Edward VI.
Tho- 
mas Seymour, Lord Sudley, high admiral and bro- 
ther to the Protector.
Queen Catherine Parr.
Anna Boleyn.
Henry the Seventh.
Charles the ' 
First.
Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury.
Peter 
Temple, the founder of Stowe, in 1560.
John Tem- 
ple.
Hester Sandys, wife to Sir Thomas Temple, 
Bart.f Lord Viscount Cobham, by Vanloo.
Sir 
Bevil Grenville, killed at the battle of Lansdown, in 
the year 1648.
\ William Pitt, first Earl of Chat- 
ham.§ Martin Luther; Hans Holbein.
Oliver 
Cromwell; Richardson the Elder.
James Craggs, 
secretary of State to George 1.
1| Dean Swift, Bin- 
don.
H James, Duke of York.
John Churchill, 
Duke of Marlborough.
Old Richard Desborough, 
Who broke no promise, serv'd no private end, 
Who gain'd no title, and who lost no friend; 
Ennobled by himself, by all approv'd, 
Prais'd, wept, and honour'd, by the muse he lov'd.
|| Seward, in his well-known Anecdotes, thus delineates the 
qualities and effect of this great statesman's eloquence: — " It 
possessed great force of light and shade : it occasionally sunk to 
colloquial familiarity, and occasionally rose to epic sublimity.
If he crept sometimes with Timxus, he as often thundered and 
lightened with Pericles.
His irony, though strong, was ever 
dignified ; his power of ridicule, irresistible ; and his invective 
so terrible, that the objects of it sunk under it like shrubs before 
the withering, the blasting, east.
Whoever heard this great man 
speak, always brought away something that remained upon his 
memory and upon his imagination.
A verbum ardens, a glow- 
ing word, a happy facility of expression, an appropriate meta- 
phor, a forcible image, or a sublime figure, never failed to recom- 
pense the attention which the hearer had bestowed upon him." 
5T A recent publication thus characterizes the witty Dean : 
" Ill-natured in his satire, petulant in his politics, and indecent 
in his wit.
A writer, whose works, though they exhibit con- 
stant examples of a powerful fancy, and comprehensive know- 
ledge, are not calculated either to give confidence to virtue, or 
corroboration to morality." 
and 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
181 
and his wife ; Dobson.
(These are highly finished 
portraits of Cromwell's sister and brother-in-law.) 
John Loche.
Mr. Pope : Hudson.
The Billiard Room is 29 feet in length, 26 wide, 
and 19 feet high.
It contains several curious and 
original portraits, among which are the following, viz.
Catherine of Braganza, wife of Charles II.* 
Eleanor Gwyn, whole length : Sir Peter Lely.
Lady Jane Grey, an original.
Mary, Queen of Scots.
f 
Mary Curzon, Countess of Dorset : Vandyck.
The Lord Treasurer Southampton : Vandyck.
% 
William, Earl of Pembroke : Vandyck.
Charles I.
and his Queen Henrietta Maria : Van- 
dyck.
§ 
Sir Francis Bacon.
Mr. Quin : Gainsborough.
Joseph Addison, Esq. Sir Godfrey Kneller.
Francis, second Earl of Bedford.
Camden.
|| 
Prince Eugene, of Savoy.
^ 
The Lord Treasurer, Burleigh.
In the New Dining-Room, among others, are the 
following capital paintings : — 
Rembrandt's wife, in the character of Minerva : 
Rembrandt.
* From having been bred to the pious observance of all the 
superstitious ceremonies of the Catholic religion, was extremely 
shocked at the licentiousness of her husband's conduct ; yet she 
loved him with an ardent and sincere affection.
Of this, the 
Count de Grammont, in his Memoirs, relates a singular and in- 
teresting anecdote.
Having been given over by her physicians, 
as at the point of death, she was visited by the King ; and, sup- 
posing it would be the last time that she should ever speak to 
him, she " told him, that the concern he showed for her death, 
was enough to make her quit life with regret ; but that, not 
possessing charms sufficient to merit his tenderness, she had at 
least the consolation in dying to give place to a consort who 
might be more worthy of it, and to whom heaven, perhaps, 
might grant a blessing that had been refused to her.
At these 
words she bathed his hands with some tears, which she thought 
would be her last.
He mingled his own with hers; and, with- 
out supposing she would take him at his word, conjured her to 
live for his sake." The sudden impulse produced by this un- 
expected kindness gave a check to the disorder, and saved her 
life.
She survived the King nearly twenty years.
In her ad- 
dress to his majesty, she is thought to have alluded to her own 
sterility, and to the fair Miss Stewart, whom, it is supposed, the 
King intended to take for his second wife.
f All the portraits of this unfortunate princess are exceed- 
ingly unlike each other, and all of them differ from the gold 
medal struck at Paris, on which she appears with her husband, 
Francis the Second.
The medal, which was in the late Dr.
Hunter's museum, represents her as having a turned-up nose.
Her figure, however, it has been observed, was so graceful, and 
her look so fascinating and heavenly, that, when carrying the 
water in the pix at the procession of the host in France, a woman 
burst through the crowd to touch her, that she might convince 
herself that the Queen was not an angel.
% The loyally of this great man and his (hree friends, the 
Duke of Richmond, and the Earls of Hertford and Lindsey, to 
Charles the First, which induced them to offer themselves as 
victims to preserve the life of that monarch, deserves comme- 
moration.
They presented a petition to the Commons, al- 
ledcing, that they alone were guilty in the eye of the law, as 
they had acted as counsellors to his majesty in the several mea- 
sures imputed to him as crimes, and ought therefore to expiate 
VOL.
I. — NO.
13.
John, the last Duke of Cleves : Rembrandt.
Verturanus and Pomona : Tintoretto.
Christ rising from the Tomb : Tintoretto.
St. Catherine, St. James, and the Holy Lamb r.
Tintoretto.
The entry of LoUis XIV.
into Paris.
The Death of Adonis : Rubens.
Orpheus and the Brutes : Bassau.
Titian's Mistress in the character of Venus : Ti- 
tian.
An ancient Sarcophagus, found on the road to 
Tivoli, and brought from Rome by Lord Bucking- 
ham, is also in this room.
It is about three feet 
long, and twenty inches deep ; on the top lies a snake 
and a human figure finely executed.
This suite of apartments is completed by the cha- 
pel, which is wainscotted with cedar, and hung with 
crimson velvet.
Over the communion table is a 
copy of Ruben's fine picture, at Wilton, called the 
Holy Lamb.
Amongst the ornaments of this cha- 
pel are some fine pieces of carving, by Gibbons.
Its 
sides are decorated with eight paintings, from scrip- 
ture history.
In quitting this highly interesting, and almost en- 
chanting place — a place which has been celebrated 
by Pope, Chesterfield, Hammond, ** Lyttleton, 
the supposed offences of the King.
On the Restoration, South- 
ampton's generous conduct was rewarded with the treasurer's 
rod ; but within a few years his services were forgotten, and the 
ingratitude of an abandoned court would have wrested the staff 
from his dying hands, if the Chancellor Hyde had not persuad- 
ed the King to wait till his death, which in a few days was 
inevitable.
He died in the year 1669, of the stone.
§ The intrepidity of this princess, whose bigotted and unwise 
conduct was the principal cause ftf the King's misfortunes, is 
strongly depicted in the following extract from one of her let- 
ters, written soon after the unsuccessful attempt upon Hull, in 
the year 1642 : — " When I was closing my letter, Sir L.
Dives 
came, and told me all that had passed at Hull.
Do not lose 
courage, but pursue the business with resolution ; for you must 
now evince that you will make good what you have undertaken.
If the man who is in the place will not submit, you have already 
declared him a traitor, and you must have him, dead or alive ; 
for matters begin to be very serious.
You must declare your- 
self: you have shewn sufficient forbearance, you must now shovr 
firmness.
You see what has happened from not having follow- 
ed your first resolution, when you denounced the five members, 
traitors ; let that serve as an example ; dally no longer with 
consultations, but proceed to action.
I heartily wished myself 
in the place of my son James in Hull ; I would have thrown, 
the scoundrel Hotham over the walls, or he should me.
I am 
in such haste to dispatch this bearer, th;t I can write to nobody 
else.
Go boldly to work : — I see there is no hope of accom- 
modation," &c.
|| Gough, in his life of this illustrious antiquary, has men- 
tioned three portraits of him, as being the only ones that sur- 
vived the fire of London : this piece, however, seems to render 
the assertion doubtful.
It bears strong marks of originality.
He is painted at half length, with a ruff, black cap, and herald's 
coat.
Under his hand is a delineation of his invaluable Bri- 
tannia, and in one corner of the picture his coat of arms.
51 This nobleman, the companion and friend of the Duke of 
Marlborough, was at one lime so much a favourite with tlie 
English, that, according to Lord Orford, an old maid bequeath- 
ed him 25001.
and a gardener 1001.
** This elegant poet died at Stowe, in the year 1742.
2z 
Pitt, 
182 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Pitt, West, and others, we cannot but exclaim, with 
the first of these writers, 
Here order in variety you see, 
Where all things differ, yet where all agree.
The manor of Doclford, one of the hamlets of the 
parish of Stowe, formerly belonged, in part, to the 
neighbouring monastery of Bittlesden ; but it has 
long been annexed to the manor of Stowe.
In Langport, another of the hamlets of Stowe, 
there were anciently two manors.
One of them was 
given to the priory of Oseney, and passed with 
Stowe ; the other, which appears to have belonged 
to the priory of Luffield, is now the property of Ed- 
mund Dayrell, Esq. whose house adjoins the grounds 
of the Marquis of Buckingham.
Stowe church contains only one monument of the 
Temple family, that of Hester, Lady Peniston, 
daughter of Sir Thomas Temple, who died in 1619.
The church-yard formerly contained a large yew- 
tree, with a remarkable extent of spreading branches, 
which is now parted off, and stands within the Mar- 
quis of Buckinghamshire's grounds.
Stratford (Fenny).] — Fenny Stratford is a small 
decayed market-town, situated in the second divi- 
sion of the Newport hundreds, partly in the parish 
of Bletchley, and partly in that of Simpson, thirteen 
miles and a half east from Buckingham, and forty- 
five north-west from London.
Here are four an- 
nual fairs : on the 19th of April, 18th of July, 10th 
of October, and 28th of November.
The town had, from time immemorial, a market 
on Mondays, which was confirmed by charter in 1609.
In 1605 Fenny Stratford suffered considerably in its 
population by the plague, of which 139 persons died.
The inns were shut up, and the roads through the 
town, for some time, were turned into another direc- 
tion.
This misfortune proved fatal to the market, 
which has never flourished since, and has now been 
for many years unattended, and nearly discontinued.
The chief manufacture of the town and its vicinity is 
white bone laoe.
The soil is excellent for all sorts 
of grain, and there are some very rich grazing lands 
in the neighbourhood.
The small River Lowfield, which runs at the bot- 
tom of the town, is well supplied with fish.
It is deserving of remark, that the Swan Inn, in 
Fenny Stratford, had the same name, as far back as 
the year 1474.
Anciently there was a gild or fraternity at Fenny 
Stratford, dedicated to St. Margaret and St. Cathe- 
rine, which was founded in 1494, by Roger and John 
Hebbes.
It consisted of an alderman, two wardens, 
and an indefinite number of brethren and sisters.
The brotherhood house is now the Bull Inn.
St. Martin's chapel, in Fenny Stratford, stands in 
the parish of Bletchley.
Having fallen to decay, 
ever since the reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was re- 
built by subscriptions, principally promoted and pro- 
cured by the exertions of Mr. Browne Willis.
The 
first stone was laid by this geutlwnan in 17:24, on 
St. Martin's day ; and the chapel was dedicated by 
him to that saint, for the whimsical reason, that his 
grandfather died on St. Martin's day, in St. Mar- 
tin's-lane.
When the chapel was finished, Mr. Wil- 
lis caused an engraved portrait of his grandfather, 
to be hung at the entrance, with the following in- 
scription : — 
" In honour of thy memory, blessed shade, 
Was the foundation of this chapel laid ; 
Purchas'd by thee, thy son and present heir 
Owe these three manors to thy art and care ; 
For this may all thy race thanks ever pay, 
And yearly celebrate St. Martin's day." 
The arms of the nobility and gentry who subscrib- 
ed towards the building, are emblazoned on the 
ceiling.
Within the railing of the communion table 
are deposited the remains of the celebrated antiquary, 
who may justly be considered as the founder ; and 
on liis tomb is the following inscription : — 
" Hie situs est Browne Willis, Antiquarius, cujus 
cl.
avi jelemae memorise Tho. Willis, Archiatri totius 
Europre celeberriivu, defuncti die Sancti Martini, 
A. D.
1675, hxc capclla exiguum monumentum est: 
Obiit 5°.
die Feb. A.
D. 1760.
jElatis Sua?.
78.
O 
Christe, Soter, et Judex, huic peccatorum primo mi- 
sericors et propitius esto." 
Here lies Browne Willis, Antiquary, to the eternal 
memory of whose illustrious grandfather, Thomas 
Willis, the most celebrated Physician of Europe, who 
died on St. Martin's day, A.
D. 1675, this little cha- 
pel is a monument : he died on the 5lh of February, 
1760, in the 78th year of his age.
O Christ, the Sa- 
viour, and the Judge, be thou merciful and propitious 
to him, the chief of sinners.
Stratford (Stony).] — Stony Stratford is a mar- 
ket-town, situated in the second division of the 
Newport hundreds, nine miles north-east from Buck- 
ingham, and fifty-two north-west from London.
Its 
market is on Friday ; and it has four annual fairs : 
on the 9th of April, 2d of August, Friday before the 
10th of October, and 12th of November.
The chief 
employment of the female inhabitants is lace-mak- 
ing ; but the trade of the town mostly arises from 
the influx of travellers, occasioned by its thorough- 
fare situation.
The town is comprised within two 
parishes ; the east side being in the parish of St. Mary 
Magdalen, and the west side in St. Giles's.
Stony Stratford stands on the ancient Roman road 
called Watling-street, and is supposed by Camden 
to have been the Lactodorum of Antoninus ; not 
only because it stands on the Roman way, but be- 
cause the name Lactodorum, if derived from the an- 
cient British language, has the same signification 
with Stony Stratford, for Leach signifies stones, and 
Re and Ryd, a ford.
Others have supposed it 
might be called Lactodorum by the Gauls, who came 
hither from the old town in Gaul called Lactorace ; 
Caesar having observed, that they gave the same 
names to towns in which they settled here as those 
had which they left behind them.
Some have sup- 
posed the Lactodorum to be at Toweester.
9 A gild 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
.133 
A gild at Stony Stratford, founded by John Edy 
and others, was incorporated in the year 1481.
A cross which had been erected at this town, in 
memory of lilleanor, Queen of Edward I.
was de- 
molished during - the civil wars in the reign of 
Charles I.
It was at Stony Stratford that King Richard III.
then Duke of Gloucester, accompanied by the Duke 
of Buckingham, seized the person of young King 
Edward the Fifth, who was then with his attendants 
at an inn.
The houses of Stony Stratford, which extend 
about a mile on each side of the road, are of free- 
stone.
Originally, the place appears to have con- 
sisted only of a few inns for the accommodation of 
travellers ; but as trade increased, a stone bridge 
was thrown over the Ouse, and the road being more 
frequented, additional houses were built for fresh 
residents.
The town has twice suffered severely by 
fire; the first time was in the year 1736, when 53 
houses were burnt down.
The second time was on 
the 6th of May 1742, when 113 houses, and the 
church of St. Mary Magdalen, which has never been 
rebuilt, were consumed.
The tower of the church, 
which escaped the flames, is yet standing.
St. Giles's 
church, on the western side, was rebuilt, with the 
exception of the tower, in a handsome manner, by 
Mr. Hiorne, architect, of Warwick, in the years 
1776 and 1777.
It was formerly a chantry, valued 
at 201.
2s.
6d.
per annum.
Near the latter church is a neat market-place ; 
but the principal business is carried on by means of 
samples displayed by the farmers in the public- 
houses.
Two of the neighbouring magistrates hold 
their meetings here on the first Friday in every 
month, to preserve the peace.
The inhabitants of Stony Stratford are divided 
into several denominations ; but the greater number 
are Baptists, who have a meeting-house iu the town.
The Independents have a place of worship at Potter's 
Perry, a village at a small distance.
An Act of Parliament was passed, in the year 
1801, for lighting and paving the streets of this 
town.
Amongst the several charities belonging to Stony 
Stratford, is one of 701.
a year, for apprenticing 
children.
In the month of June, 1786, two very 
large Sunday schools were opened here.
They were 
begun and supported by contributions of the inhabi- 
tants, and governed by the minister, churchwardens, 
and a committee of subscribers.
Upwards of 300 
children are taught the rudiments of education in 
these schools.
The income of the minister is deriv- 
ed from Queen Anne's bounty, a small donation for 
reading prayers on Wednesdays and Fridays, and 
the voluntary gifts of his parishioners.
Stratford (Water).] — Water, or West Strat- 
ford is situated in the second division of the Buck- 
ingham hundreds, three miles west by north from 
Buckingham.
The manor is the property of B.
Hayes, Esq 
Water Stratford is remarkable chiefly for the sin- 
gular doctrines of its rector, Mr. John Mason, and 
the absurd credulity of his numerous followers.
He 
was presented to the rectory in 1674, and, according 
to Granger, was a man of unaffected piety and con- 
siderable learning ; but towards the latter part of 
his life became a visionary enthusiast, having bewil- 
dered himself in the mysteries of Calvinism.
The 
fame of his preaching attracted people from all parts 
of the neighbourhood ; every bam and out-house was 
crowded with his infatuated followers ; and many of 
them disposed of their whole property, under the 
persuasion that the Millenium was approaching, and 
that faithful believers would shortly have all things 
in common.
In addition to the mysteries of Calvi- 
nism and the Apocalypse, bodily distemper appears 
to have overwhelmed his understanding, and sub- 
jected him to those internal feelings, which caused 
him to assert, that lie had seen the Lord Christ, who 
.would " appear at Water Stratford, and come and 
judge the world on the Whitsunday following." So 
impressed were the weak minds of his auditors with 
the truth of this prediction, and so firmly were they 
convinced of their own awaiting happiness, that they 
expressed their joy by the most frantic actions.
Day and night were passed in dancing and singing 
hallelujahs ; the deluded fanatics accompanying their 
absurd gestures with loud shouts of Glory, Glory.
In the midst of these revellings of delirium, Mason 
was struck speechless ; an event which Dr. Paxton, 
an eminent physician, ascribed to the violent exertion 
which he had employed to enforce his arguments.
Previously, however, to this, he had told his congre- 
gation, that when he died, he should " rise in three 
days after his decease, and with his body ascend into 
heaven." This tale also, blasphemous as it was, 
was credited by his ignorant hearers ; and as the 
loss of speech was the immediate prelude to his 
death, they awaited with the most anxious expecta- 
tion for the promised miracle.
Before the three 
days were expired, the body was interred ; and such 
was the rooted enthusiasm of his flock, that several 
of them avowed they had seen him, and spoken with 
him, after his resurrection ; nor could any of them 
be convinced of the absurdity of his tenets, till the 
Rev. Mr.
Rushwood, his successor, had the grave 
opened, and the corpse exposed to the populace.
The web of credulity, however, had been woven too 
strong to be easily destroyed ; and even this evi- 
dence proved insufficient to detach the minds of 
many of his followers from the belief of his doctrines.
For years afterwards they assembled at a place 
which they called Holy Ground, where it was assert- 
ed that he had been seen aud spoken to since his 
death.
There they sang - the same hymns, used the 
same ceremonies, and made the same extravagant 
gestures, as formerly ; and, when they were at 
length prevented from assembling in the field, they 
held their meetings at a house in the village.
Ma- 
son died in the year 1693 ; but it was not tiil about 
1740, that the sect became extinct.
Taplows.1 
18-1 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Tapt.owe.] — Taplowe lies in the second division 
of the hundred of Burnhara, five miles north-west 
from Eton.
The pleasant situation of this village 
has induced many gentlemen of fortune lately to 
make it their residence, and build most agreeable 
villas.
The manor, which was formerly in the Hampsons, 
belonged to the late Marquis of Thomond, formerly 
Earl of Inchiquin.
Taplowe Court, the manor-house, is an ancient 
and noble building, situated on the summit of a hill, 
and enjoying a beautiful prospect of the county and 
the Thames beneath.
At Taplowe stood the delightful palace of Ciief- 
den, which was destroyed by fire on the 20th of 
May, 1795.
This noble residence was founded in 
the reign of Charles II.
by the profligate Villiers, 
second Duke of Buckingham, whose wretched end 
was thus commemorated by Pope : — 
" In the worst inn's worst room, with mat half hung, 
The floors of plaster, and the walls of dung, 
On once a flock bed, but repair' d with straw, 
With tape-!y'd curtains, never meant to draw, 
The George and Garter dangling from that bed 
Where tawdry yellow strove with dirty red, 
Great Villiers lies.
Alas !
how chang'd from him, 
That life of pleasure, and that soul of whim !
Gallant and guy in Cliefden's proud alcove, 
The bovv'r of wanton Shrewsbury and Love.* 
Or just as gay, at council, in a ring 
Of mimic statesmen and their merry King.
No wit to flatter left of all his store ; 
No fool to laugh at, which he valued more.
There, victor of his health, of fortune, friends, 
And fame, this Lord of useless thousands, ends." 
Moral Essays.
Cliefden House was afterwards the residence of 
Frederic, Prince of Wales, the father of his present 
Majesty.
Some of the ablest literary persons of that 
time were sheltered under its roof.
Here was first 
sung that best of all national songs, " Rule Britan- 
nia;" and here, also, Thompson probably wrote it.
It was a stately mansion, having a noble terrace in 
front, supported by arches.
Its situation was lofty 
and conspicuous, and surrounded by extensive 
woods.
The pleasure grounds are spacious ; finely 
formed by nature into sloping lawns, hills, and val- 
lies ; and assisted with great taste by art.
The up- 
per grounds, near the house, command beautiful 
prospects ; and as these are often seen through the 
vistas of the gardens, partially screened by groups 
of majestic trees, and other rural objects, they con- 
tribute to the variety and beauty of this delightful 
spot.
The southern declivity towards the Thames 
is finely hung with natural woods, forming' a differ- 
ent, but not less pleasing, kind of Scenery, a fine 
contrast to the higher and more polished grounds.
From the sides of precipices (formed by the tailing 
of mouldering chalk, of which these hills are compos- 
ed) and from lofty banks overhung by venerable trees, 
the Thames is seen pursuing its meandering course, 
through beautiful meadows, enlivened by herds of 
cattle ; the neighbourhood adorned by clusters of 
villages, or sequestered retreats, forming the most 
pleasing landscape.
The inside of this mansion was ornamented by 
tapestry hangings, representing the victories of the 
Duke of Marlborough, in which the Earl of Orkney 
himself, one of its possessors, had a considerable 
share.
At the time of its destruction, it belonged 
to the Earl of Inchiquin, afterwards Marquis of 
Thomond, and was occupied by the Honourable 
Thomas Fitzmaurice, who married his lordship's 
daughter, afterwards Countess of Orkney.
The Earl 
of Inchiquin lost nothing more by the fire, than his life- 
interest in the house and furniture.
His daughter, 
the Countess of Orkney, lost her jewels, plate, and 
clothes, so as not to save a single diamond or 
trinket.
Thornton.] — Thornton is situated in the first 
division of the Buckingham hundreds, four miles and 
a half east-north-east from Buckingham.
Thornton church has been commodiously fitted up 
by Thomas Sheppard, Esq. the present Lord of the 
Manor, but the antiquary will regret the removal of 
the ancient monuments.
The effigies on brass plates 
of Robert Ingleton, Chancellor of the Exchequer 
who died in 1472, and his three wives, and that o 
Jane Ingleton, are all in remarkably fine preserva- 
tion ; but as the altar tombs on which they were 
fixed have been removed, they must not be expected 
much longer to escape the ravages of time.
The 
effigies in alabaster of John Barton, founder of a 
chantry at Thornton, who died in 1443, and that of 
his wife Isabella, now occupy each side of the en- 
trance to the church at the west end.
William Bredon, who died rector of Thornton in 
1638, was celebrated as a caster of nativities.
He 
also had a share in composing Sir Christopher Hey- 
don's Judicial Astrology.
Tickford.] — Tickford is situated in the first divi- 
sion of the Newport hundreds, in the parish of New- 
port Pagnell, a mile and three quarters east-south- 
east from Newport Pagnell.
Anciently, at this place, there was a cell of Clu- 
niac monks, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary, 
which was subordinate to the abbey called Marmou- 
stier, at Tours, in France, to which this priory was 
given by Fulk Painel or Paganel, in the reign of 
William Rufus.
This, among other alien priories, 
was seized by King Edward III.
during his war 
with France ; and when it was again restored to the 
church by Henry IV.
it was made subject to the 
Holy Trinity at York.
In the seventeenth year of 
Henry VIII.
it was dissolved, and with several other 
* It will be recollected, that this line alludes to the Duke's 
intrigue with the Countess of Shrewsbury, which occasioned a 
duel between him and her husband, when the latter was slain.
The Countess, disguised as a page, is said to have held the 
Duke's horse during the combat, and afterwards to have slept 
with him id the shirt stained with her husband's blood.
The 
Duke died on the 16th of April, 168S, at the house of one of 
his tenants, at Kirby-Moor Side, near Holmsly, Yorkshire.
small 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
18 5 
small monasteries, granted to Cardinal Wolsey, to 
be settled on one of the colleges, which he was about 
to build at Oxford and Ipswich.
The value was 
then 1*261.
17s.
per annum.
When the Cardinal 
fell into disgrace, it was granted to the use of King's 
College, Oxford, but was afterwards resumed and 
sold by James I.
to one Atkins, a doctor of physic.
Tickford Abbey is now the property of Mr. Hooton.
Tiekford Park, and the manor of Tickford-end, 
belong to Mr. Vanhagen.
Tingewick.] — Tingewick is situated in the second 
division of the Buckingham hundreds, two miles and 
three quarters west by south from Buckingham.
The manor of Tingewick anciently belonged to 
the Abbey De Monte Rothomago, in Normandy.
It was purchased of the Abbey by William of Wick- 
ham, and by him made part of the endowment of 
New College, Oxford.
Tingewick formerly had a weekly market, which 
was granted to the abbey in the year 1'246 ; but it 
has been long discontinued.
In Tingewick church is a curious brass plate, 
against the east wall of the chancel, commemorative 
of Erasmus Williams, who died in 1008.
He is re- 
presented in the attitude of prayer, and habited in a 
gown.
On each side of him is a pillar, on which 
hang astronomical, musical, and geometrical instru- 
ments, painting utensils, various books, &c.
On 
the top of one of the pillars is a globe, on the other 
an owl.
Several other devices appear ; such as a 
sun and rainbow, &c.
and several texts of scripture.
Beneath, the following epitaph, believed to have been 
written by Dr. Richard Haydocke, a physician, who 
was also the designer of the plate : — 
" This doth Erasmus Williams represent, 
Whom living all did love, dead all lament ; 
His humane arts beliing his attend, 
Whereon spare hours he wisely chose to spend ; 
And from Corinthian columns deck'd with arte 
Now to the Temple's pillar he converts, 
Under the rainbow arch of promise, where 
Of hoped bliss no deluge he need fear: 
He of this church did a firm pillar live, 
To whom dead his wife doth these pillars give.
Continued by his scholar and his friend 
"Who wish'd their love and lives had had one end, 
Erasmus More's encomium set forth, 
We want a More to praise Erasmus' worth.
Turville.] — Turville, or Turfield, is situated in 
the first division of the hundred of Desborough, six 
miles north-west by north from Great Mallow.
There are two manors in this parish, one of which 
was given to the abbey of St. Alban^s, in the year 
791, by Egfrid, son of Offa, King of Mercia.
It 
was granted by Henry VIII.
to Edward Chamber- 
leyne, and is now the property and seat of Thomas 
Butlin, Esq.
The other manor, formerly in the Morteyhs and 
Botilers, was purchased of Mrs. Pococke, "in 1753, 
by John Osborne, the celebrated bookseller, whose 
pon is the present proprietor.
VOL.
I. NO.
14 k 
About the year 177-2 some Roman coins were 
found here, of the Emperors Antoninus Pius, Ves- 
pasian, Trajan, Aurelius, and the Empress Faus- 
tina.
Upton.] — Upton, comprising the hamlets of 
Slough and Chalvey, is situated in the first division 
of the hundred of Stoke, one mile south-east from 
the town of Slough.
Bulstrode, the seat of the ancient family of that 
name, and now of the Duke of Portland, is in this 
parish.
The manor of Bulstrode anciently belonged to 
the abbess and convent of Burnham, who, in the 
year 1337 had the king's licence to alienate it t» 
William Monticute, Earl of Salisbury.
It was the 
same year granted by this nobleman to the monks of 
Bisham.
Subsequently it was the seat of the Bul- 
strode family ; and afterwards, it was for some 
time the residence of that infamous character Lord 
Chancellor JeiTeries, of whose son-in-law it was 
purchased by the Earl of Portland, about the latter 
end of the reign of King William.
This nobleman's 
son, who was created Duke of Portland in the year 
1710, was grandfather to the present noble owner of 
Bulstrode.
Bulstrode Park, which is well wooded, contains 
about 800 acres, and is diversified with bold swells, 
almost rising into hills, and a considerable number 
of deep sweeping vallies, crossing and intersecting 
the grounds in several directions.
The walks, to 
the west of the house, lead to flower gardens and 
shrubberies, and command many extensive and in- 
teresting views ; the Forest of Windsor and its 
Castle, with the blue Surrey Hills, melting into the 
horizon, produce the most delightful effect.
This 
park contains between four and five hundred head 
of deer.
On a hill south-east of the house is a very 
large circular entrenchment, enclosing an area of 
twenty-one acres, with some very large old oaks 
growing on its banks..
Bulstrode House, which is situated on an emin- 
ence, nearly surrounded by a valley, was built by 
the Lord Chancellor Jcfferies, in the year 1680.
It 
is a brick structure, forming three sides of a quad- 
rangle, with two wings.
The offices are the re- 
mains of an older mansion, supposed to have been 
built by the Bulstrodes.
In this mansion is a small collection of fine pic- 
tures, by the old masters ; among which the follow- 
ing may be more particularly noticed.
The Holy 
Family, by Raphael— St. Cecilia, by Carlo Dolci.— 
Orpheus charming the Brutes, by Roland Savory.
Six large pictures of Boar hunting, Stag hunting, 
&c.
by Snyders and his pupil.
— Two Lions and a 
Fawn : Rubens.
— Tower of Babel : Old Franks.— 
Virgin and infant Saviour : Vandyck.
— Inside of a 
prison, Stenwick.
— Inside of a Church : P.
Neefs.
St. John in the Wilderness : Annibal Carracci.
— 
Dutch Kitchen, Bassan.
— William the Third in his 
robes, by Sir Peter Lely.
— Henry Wriothcsley, Earl 
of Southampton, with the c&t which accompanied 
3 4 kiui 
186 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
him to the town, when he was confined there in the 
reign of Queen Elizabeth.
— William Bentinck first 
Earl of Portland, at lull length.* — A large drawing 
of shipping, finely executed by W.
V. Velde.
— Two 
Battle Pieces : Burgoyne.
— Four small Sea-pieces : 
W. V.
Velde.
— St. Anthony at his devotions : H.
V. 
Stenwick.
— A small picture with horses : Wouver- 
mans.
— Portrait of Schalchen by himself.
— Seven 
Roman Charities, by Old Franks.
The Chapel, is wainscotted with cedar, and the 
windows are ornamented with painted glass.
— There 
arc also several paintings on the walls and cielings, 
by Marco and Sebastian Ricci : and over the com- 
munion table, is a Madona and Child, by Vandyck.
Upton church, which is an ancient Saxon struc- 
ture, contains memorials of Edward Bulstrodc, 
esquire of the body to Henry VII.
and Henry VIII.
and of others of that ancient family.
In the church- 
yard are some memorials of the Lanes, formerly 
lords of the manor of Upton cum Chalvey, now the 
property of George Edwards, Esq. of Henlow, in 
Bedfordshire.
Waddesdon.] — Waddesdon is situated in the first 
division of the Ashenden hundreds, b\ miles north- 
west by west from Aylesbury.
The petty sessions 
for the Ashenden hundreds are holden in this town.
Westcote and Weodham are hamlets, or tithings, 
belonging to the parish of Waddesdon.
The manors of Waddesdon, Ham, Westcote, and 
Warmeston, formerly in the Godwins, are now the 
property of the Duke of Marlborough.
Blagrave, 
Colleck, and Cranwell, three manor farms in this 
parish, belong respectively to Charles Shaw Le- 
f'evre, Esq. M.
P. Mr. Griffith, and Richard Bard 
Harcourt, Esq.
The manor of Ethorpe,- or Eythorpe, now the 
property of the Earl of Chesterfield, belonged, as 
early as the year 1309, to the ancient family of De 
Arcubus, or Arches.
It subsequently came into 
the possession of the Denham family ; and after- 
wards, in the reign of Edward VI.
it belonged to 
the Dormers, from whom it passed by marriage, to 
the Stanhopes.
The widow of Sir William Dor- 
mer married Sir William Pelham, who distinguish- 
ed himself during the wars in the Netherlands, and 
died at Flushing in 1587.
An apartment, called 
, the armoury, in the manor house, has a sloping roof, 
-ornumented with red and white roses ; at the base 
of the rafters are angels bearing shields, with arms 
of the family of Dormer and their alliances.
It is 
hung round with a variety of ancient armour and 
accoutrements.
Waddesdon church contains the 
monument of Guy Carleton, a veteran soldier, who 
died June 1, 1608, aged 94, with the following in- 
scription : 
* This nobleman, who accompanied the Prince of Orange 
to Ei)gland in the year 1688, was honoured with the chief ma- 
aagement of the expedition.
The transport fleet, which con- 
sisted of 500 vessels, through his exertions was all hired with 
" Whilst I was young, in *ars I shed my blood, 
Both for my king and for my country's good : 
In older vears my care was chief to be 
Soldier to him who shed his blood for me." 
Sir Francis Goodwin, formerly lord of the ma- 
nor, founded an alms-house at Waddesdon, for six 
poor persons, and endowed it with 30/.
a year ; and 
in the year 1724, Mr. Lewis Fetto founded a chari- 
ty school there.
Wavendon.] — Wavendon is situated in the first 
division of the Newport hundreds, 3^ miles north- 
east from Fenny Stratford.
The fullers-earth pits, 
which have been already mentioned, are in this pa- 
rish.
Wavendon church contains some memorials 
of the family of Saunders of Battlesdon, among 
which is that of Richard Saunders, Esq. who died iu 
1039, having had 27 children by four wives.
Mr.
George Wells, who died in 1714, and his niece 
Mrs. Miller, gave the sum of 1000/.
to this parish, 
with which a Charity-school was built, and endow- 
ed with lands producing a rent of 40/.
per annum, 
for instructing, clothing, and apprenticing 10 boys.
Wendover.] — Wendover is now an inconsidera- 
ble market town, situated in a bottom amongst the 
Chiltern hills, at the entrance of the vale of Ayles- 
bury.
It is in the second division of the Aylesbury 
hundreds, 24 miles south-east by south from Buck- 
ingham, and 35| north-west by west from London.
Its market is on Tuesday ; and it has fairs on the 
13th of May, and 2nd of October.
Wendover is an ancient borough town, the Par- 
liamentary history of which is somewhat curious.
The right of election is in the inhabitants, house- 
keepers within the borough, not receiving alms ; the 
constables being the returning officers.
The num- 
ber of voters amounts to about 140.
It sent mem- 
bers to Parliament ; but for upwards of three hun- 
dred years, that privilege was discontinued, and to- 
tally forgotten, till it was restored in the 21st James 
1. by the exertions of Mr. Hakeville, a barrister of 
Lincoln's Inn, who had discovered by a search 
among the ancient Parliament writs in the Tower, 
that the boroughs of Amersham, Wendover, and 
Great Mario w, had all sent members in former 
times.
Petitions were accordingly preferred in the 
names of these places ; and notwithstanding the 
opposition of the sovereign, who declared, " that 
he was troubled with too great a number of burges- 
ses already," the commons decided in favour of the 
restoration of the privilege.
The borough of Wendover was formerly the pro- 
perty of the late Earl Verney, during whose pos- 
session some curious election incidents occurred.
All the houses were the property of the Earl, and 
the tenants in general lived rent free on condition of 
the greatest secrecy in three days.
For this, and many other 
eminent services, he was dignified by several titles, made 
Knight of the Garter, and had many estates granted to him.
lie 
died at Bulstrodc in 1709.
glVJBj 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
187 
giving their votes to such a gentleman as his lord- 
ship should nominate.
The electors, however, were 
prevailed upon in 1768, to accept a present good in 
preference to this privilege.
A Mr. Atkius, a con- 
siderable lace manufacturer in the town, had under- 
taken by a coup de main, to carry the election against 
the Earl's interest ; and he conducted his measures 
with such secrecy, that no opposition was expected 
until the day of election.
At that moment, to the 
astonishment and confusion of Earl Verney and his 
agents, Sir Robert Darling, a former sheriff of Lon- 
don, was proposed, and immediately returned by a 
considerable majority.
This disobedience to his 
lordship's wishes was punished by the voters being 
forthwith ejected out of their tenements, and obliged 
to take refuge in huts and tents, where they re- 
mained for six months, in all the sorrow of peni- 
tence, until a promise of future good behaviour so 
far softened the rigour of this nobleman's resent- 
ment, as to suffer them, with some few exceptions, 
to repossess their former dwellings.
The inhabi- 
tants keeping this severe treatment in remembrance, 
took the first opportunity to retaliate upon his lord- 
ship by a repetition of their former conduct ; at a 
subsequent election in 1784, when his lordship hav- 
ing every reason to apprehend that he should lose 
his seat for the county, offered himself and Mr. Jo- 
liffe as their candidates.
The electors, well know- 
ing the deranged state of his lordship's private af- 
fairs, took the opportunity of again putting up their 
suffrages to the highest bidder.
One individual 
engaged that two candidates should be chosen 
against his lordship's interest and influence for 60001.
This being settled, a gentleman was employed to 
go down, and, according to previous appointment, 
was met by the electors, a mile from the town.
They 
then asked, " What news from the moon ?" He 
answered, that he had brought from the moon 60001.
to be distributed among them, by the borough-agent 
and to whom the money was then delivered.
The 
electors being thus satisfied with the golden news 
from the moon, chose the candidates in opposition, 
aud received their reward accordingly.
The town of Weudover contains but few well- 
built houses ; aud is on the whole, a poor mean 
place.
The inhabitants derive their principal sup- 
port from lace-making ; but it is expected that the 
business of the town will be encreased by means of 
the branch of the Grand Junction Canal, called the 
Navigable Freedom.
The reservoir of water, which 
covers about seventy acres, and which was made to 
* This prelate was born about the year 1499.
or 1500.
He 
Was educated at Eton, from whence lie was elected to King's 
College Cambridge, of which he was chosen fellow, but after- 
wards he removed to Wolsey's new college at Oxford.
Here 
lie embraced the principles of Reformation, for which he was 
thrown into prison, but obtained his release by means of Cran- 
kier.
He was then chosen master of Eton school, and in 1543 
obtained the deanry of Christ Church, Oxford..
On the ac- 
cession of Edward VI.
be was made privy counsellor, and dean 
of Westminster ; but when Mary came to the throne he was 
deprived of his preferments, and imprisoned.
How he obtain- 
supply the canal, is very near the tewn.
Wendo- 
ver church, which is situated a quarter of a mile 
from the town, contains no monument worthy of no- 
tice.
There are remains of a chapel in the town, 
which was dedicated to St. John ; but it has long 
been disused.
Whaddon.] — Whaddon is situated in the second 
division of the Cotslow hundreds, four miles and a 
quarter south by east from Stony Stratford.
The 
manor of Whaddon, which was anciently in the 
Giffards, with the office of Keeper of the Chace, 
was subsequently in the Arundel, Fitjeffery, Mor- 
timer, and Plantagenet, families.
It was a part- of 
Jane Seymour's dower ; was afterwards given to 
the Pigots' ; and by them it was sold to the noble 
family of Grey, of Wilton.
Whaddon was the seat 
of the brave Arthur Lord Grey, who in 1568, was 
honoured with a visit there, from Queen Elizabeth.
Spenser, the poet, who was his secretary, was fre- 
quently an inmate with him.
On the attainder of 
William Lord Grey, the manor was given to Sir 
George Villiers, afterwards Duke of Buckingham, 
who took from it his title of Baron.
In 1698, oi\ 
the death of the son and successor of this noble- 
man, it was purchased by John Selby and Dr. Wil- 
lis the celebrated physician, who almost pulled down 
the old seat of the Greys.
His grandson, Browne 
Willis, the antiquary, inhabited the remainder.
From him it descended to John Willis Fleming, 
Esq. but Whaddon Chace fell into the possession o£ 
the Selbys ; and was bequeathed by the last male 
heir to William Lowndes, Esq. of Winslow, who 
has taken the name of Selby.
His eldest son, Wil- 
liam Lowndes, Esq. now resides at Whaddon Hall.
A Charity School for twenty children, endowed 
with 10/.
a year, was founded at Whaddon, by the 
late Mr. Coare, of Newgate Street.
The same 
gentleman built an alms-house at this place ; but 
death prevented him from accomplishing its endow- 
ment.
Dr. Cox, Bishop of Ely, tutor to Edward VI..
and one of the composers of the Liturgy now in 
use, was a native of Whaddon.* 
At Snelshail, now called Snalsoe Green, in this 
parish, there was formerly a small convent of Black 
Monks, dedicated to St. Leonard, built by Ralph 
Martel, before the tenth of Edward HI.
The four 
bells that were in the turret of the old building, 
which was in a ruinous state in the time of Henry 
VIII.
were removed to the church oi' Bradwell.
The 
yearly value of the priory, of which there are no 
ed his release does not appear ; but he immediately went abroad 
and settled at Strasburgh.
There was another English congn - 
gation at Frankfort, where Knox prevailed in sotting aside the 
liturgy, on which Doctor Cox went thither, and by his spirited 
exertions restored conformity.
At the accession of Queen 
Elizabeth he returned home and was made bishop of Ely, in 
which station he conducted himself in a most exemplary man- 
ner.
He died in 1581.
He assisted in forming the first litur- 
gy, and in the review of it in 1559.
He also had a considera- 
ble share in.
the Bishop's Bible..
remains, 
188 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
remains, was 18/.
Is. lid.
at the time of the Disso- 
lution, 
Whitchurch.] — Whitchurch is situated in the 
second division of the Cotslow hundreds, four miles 
and three quarters north by west from Aylesbury.
It had formerly a market on Mondays, granted in 
1 245, together with a fair on the feast of St. John 
the Evangelist, which have both been discontinued 
for many years.
A castle here, was built by Hugh de Bolebec, 
lord of the manor of which the site is plainly to be 
discovered, close to the village on the left hand, be- 
fore entering it from Aylesbury.
The hill on which 
the keep is supposed to have been situated, is partly 
surrounded by a fosse.
The manor is now the property of Dame Rebecca 
Williams, relict of Sir David Williams, Bart, and 
mother of the late Sir David Williams.
The. parish 
church is an ancient structure, with a lofty embattled 
tower.
It consists of a nave, side aisle, and a chan- 
nel.
The arches of the nave are pointed, and sup- 
ported by octagon pillars.
It contains a monument 
to the memory of Chief Justice Smith, who died in 
1682, lord of the manor, 
Winchendon (Upper.)] — Upper Winchendon is 
situated in the second division of the Ashenden hun- 
dreds, 5 miles west by north from Aylesbury.
Winchendon manor, which was given by Henry 
I. to the canons of St. Frideswide, in Oxford, was 
after the suppression of that convent, granted to 
Cardinal Wolsey.
On the fall of the cardinal, it 
was resumed by the crown ; but in 1623, was grant- 
ed to the Godwin family, from which it descended, by 
marriage, to Philip Lord Wharton.
It was the 
principal residence of his son, Thomas Lord Whar- 
ton, who in 1706, created Viscount Winchendon, 
Earl and afterwards Marquis of Wharton.
This 
nobleman enlarged the mansion-house, and made it 
a very magnificent mansion.
The gardens, which 
were esteemed superior to any then in the country, 
were particularly celebrated for a fine collection of 
orange-trees.
Philip, Lord Wharton, who suc- 
ceeded his father in his title and estates, was in 1718 
created Duke of Wharton.
Granger relates an 
anecdote of the facetious Colley Cibber, that riding 
with the Duke in his coach at Winchendon, where 
the soil is a remarkably stiff clay, and the roads very 
deep and heavy, he thus addressed himself to his 
noble companion: "Report says that your grace 
is running out of your estates, 1 am sure 'tjis im- 
possible for you to run out of this." The strange 
inconsistency of this Duke's character, is thus finely 
sketched in the Moral Essays of Pope ;— 
'.' Wharton, the scorn and wonder of our days, 
Whose ruling passion was the lust of praise : 
* The Duke of Wharton was born about the year l60p.
On the death of his father, in 1716, he discarded his tutor, and 
paid his court to the Chevalier St. George, commonly called 
the Pretender, who dignified him with the t'Hle of Duke of 
Northumberland.
Lie soon afterwards returned home, made 
Born with whale'er could win it from the wise* 
Women or fools must like him, or he dies.
Though wondering senates hung on all he spoke,-- 
The club must hail him master of the joke.
Shall parts so various aim at nothing new ?
He'll shine a Tully and a Wilmot too; 
Then turns repentant, and his God adores 
With the same spirit that he drinks and whores; 
Enough if all around him but admire, 
And now the punk applaud, and now the friar.
Thus with each gift ot nature and of art, 
And wanting nothing but an honest heart; 
Grown all to all, from no one vice exempt, 
And most contemptible to shun contempt: 
His passion still to covet general praise ; 
His life, to forfeit it a thousand ways ; 
A constant bounty, which no friend has made ; 
An angel tongue, which no man can persuade; 
A fool, with more of wit than half mankind ; 
Too rash for thought, for action too refined ; 
A tyrant to the wife his heart approves, 
A rebel to the very king he loves ; 
He dies, sad outcast of each church and state : 
And, harder still, flagitious, yet not great." 
The Duke of Wlsarton being attainted of treason, 
for acting in favour of the Pretender, his estates 
were confiscated, and Winchendon was sold to Sa- 
rah, Duchess of Marlborough.
The house and gar- 
dens, after a short-lived fame, became dilapidated 
and neglected.
The former was pulled down in 
1760 ; but some of the offices have since been fitted 
up for the residence of a steward.* 
In the parish church of Upper Winchendon is the 
tomb of Sir John Stodel, a vicar of the parish, with 
his effigies in brass remarkably well preserved.
The manor of Nether, or Lower Winchendon, 
the adjoining parish, which lies about a mile farther 
from Aylesbury, is in the possession of Scrope Ber- 
nard, Esq. the younger son of the late Sir Francis 
Bernard, Bart.
Wing.] — Wing, or Wenge, anciently Guinuga, 
is situated in the first division of the Cotslow hun- 
dreds, six miles north-west by north from Iving- 
hoe.
Cotslow, a depopulated hamlet, which gives 
a name to three hundreds, is in this parish ; in which 
the petty sessions for the hundreds are holden.
The 
parish of Wing also contains the hamlets of Ascot, 
Burcot, and Crofton.
At Ascot, about two miles from Liseombe House, 
there was anciently a cell of Benedictine monks be- 
longing to the monastery of St. Nicholas at Angiers 
in France, to which the church and other lands, 
with the minor, had been given by the empress 
Maud.
It suffered the fate of other alien houses, and 
was afterwards granted to the nuns of St. Mary de 
Pre, near St. Alban's, as part of which it came into 
lay hands at the Dissolution.
Ascot House, the seat of the Dormers, was situa- 
ted in Wing Park ; and is described by Browne 
his peace with government, and was created Duke of Wharton.
After this he joined the opposition, and distributed a weekly 
paper called the True Briton.
Having reduced his fortune By 
his extravagance, he again went abroad, where lie attached him- 
self to the Pretender, and died in 1731.
Willis, 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
\Si> 
Willis, as having a noble apartment, built by Inigo 
Jones.
After the year 1720, it was suffered to go 
to decay ; and about 1727, Sir William Stanhope 
sold the deer out of the park, and cut down the 
timber.
Mr. Willis bought some of it at eighteen 
pence a foot, for building the chapel at Fenny Strat- 
ford.
The house has been down many years, but 
the park remains enclosed.
Wing Church is supposed to have been built soon 
after the manor was given to the nunnery of St.
Mary de Pre. The north aisle contains the tomb 
of Sir Robert Dormer, grantee of the manor, who 
died in 1552 ; and in the burial place of the Dor- 
mers, are handsome monuments of Sir William 
Dormer, who died in 1575, and Robert, the first 
Lord Dormer, who died in 1617.
Dorothy Pelham, widow of Sir William Dormer, 
who married Sir William Pelham, founded an alms- 
house at Wing in the year 1596, for eight poor per- 
sons, and endowed it with 301.
per annum.
Winslow.] — Winslow, in the second division of 
the.Cotslow hundreds, seven miles and a half south- 
east from Buckingham, and i"0| north-west from 
London, is a small market-town, situated on the 
brow of a hill ; but, though of very remote origin, 
having been given by King Offa to the abbey of St.
Alban's, in a council held at Veruhim in the year 
794, it possesses no objects that can interest the 
antiquary.
The market, which is held on Thurs- 
days, was granted in 1235, to the abbot and con- 
vent of St. Alban's.
It has five annual fairs ; on 
the 20th of March, Holy Thursday, 21st of Au- 
gust, 22nd of September, and the Thursday before 
the 11th of October.
The houses are mostly of 
brick ; and the inhabitants are chiefly employed in 
agriculture and lace-making.
Winslow church is a spacious Gothic structure, 
consisting of a nave, two aisles, and a chancel, with 
a square tower embattled at the west end ; but it 
contains no monument worthy of notice.
» , 
In the year 1722, Mr. Joseph Rogers bequeathed 
a sum of money towards founding a charity school 
at Winslow.
Wooburn.]— Wooburn, in the second division of 
the hundred of Desborough, three miles west-south- 
west from Beaconsfield, is pleasantly situated in a 
narrow valley, with a stream meandering- through 
the middle of it, giving motion to several paper 
and corn mills.
It has a small weekly market on 
Friday, and an annual fair on the 14th of Novem- 
ber.
Wooburn manor, in the reign of Charles I.
came 
into the possession of Philip Lord Wharton, who 
in the latter part of his life principally resided there.
His son Thomas, Earl Wharton, is said to have 
expended nearly 100,0001.
in altering and improving 
the grounds belonging to the manor-house, which 
was surrounded by a moat, and retained its ancient 
character of feudal magnificence.
In the year 1750 
the mansion was taken down, and the materials sold 
for 8001.
VOI.
I NO.
1L 
In the vicinity of the ho.use, in an extensive wil- 
derness, a quantity of gold angels, to the value of 
501.
was discovered between 40 and 50 years ago, 
supposed to have been concealed there during the 
civil wars in the reign of Charles I.
; and there is a 
tradition that, at that period Lord Wharton con- 
cealed 60,0001.
in a wood called West Wood, and at 
the Restoration he could not recollect the exact 
spot.
The only person privy to the transaction was 
either dead or in exile ; but after clearing two acres, 
the whole was discovered.
Wooburn Church is a large old structure, con- 
sisting of a nave, two aisles, and a handsome tower.
It contains several monuments of the Bertie and 
Wlxarton families, and the font is a curious and an- 
cient piece of carved work.
On Holtspur Heath, in the neighbourhood of the 
village, was formerly a very large beech tree, in 
which was built a little wooden house, for the ac- 
commodation of the Wharton family, and their 
friends, at the annual races.
Wormenhall.] — Wormenhall is a village on the 
borders of Oxfordshire, in the second division of 
the Ashenden hundreds, 12 miles west-south-west 
from Aylesbury.
Thumley, a hamlet of Wormen-'.
hall, is in the county of Oxford.
Wormenhall had formerly a market on Thursdays 
granted in 1304, together with a fair on the feast of 
St. Peter and St. Paul, to John de Rivers, lord of 
the manor.
The manor is now the property of Ed- 
ward Home, Esq. of the Leasowes.
John King, Bishop of London ; and Henry King, 
Bishop of Chichester, a learned writer and a poet, 
were both natives of this place.
John King, Esq. son of the bishop of Chichester, 
founded an alms-house in 1675, for four poor wo- 
men, and six poor single men here, who receive 8s.
id.
each, monthly, from the donation of the founder.
The church contains several monuments of the 
King family.
Wotton.] — Wotton, or Wotton -under-wood, so 
called from its situation with respect to Bernwood 
forest, lies in the first division of the Ashenden hun- 
dreds, nine miles west by north from Aylesbury.
The manor of Wotton, the ancient seat of the 
Grcnvilles, was granted by William the Conqueror, 
to Walter Gifturd, Earl of Buckingham, in the 
year 1093 ; but, four years afterwards, by marriage, 
it became the property of Richard de Grenvylle, 
Lord of Grenville in Normandy, in right of his wife 
Elizabeth ; from whom it has descended through 
twenty generations to the present proprietor, the 
Marquis of Buckingham ; and his eldest son, Earl 
Temple, occasionally resides.
there.
Wotton House, which is very spacious and beau- 
tiful, was built in 1705, after the model ol\Buck- 
ingham House.
. The staircase and hall Avere paint- 
ed by Sir James Thonrhill, for which he received 
10001.
annually for three years.
The grounds have 
abundance of fine wood, and are well watered.
One 
of the old oaks measures twenty-four feet in circum- 
3. B lerence.
190 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
ference, and covers an area fifty yards in diameter 
with its branches.
The Church has been lately repaired, and a stone 
erected at the expense of the Marquis of Bucking- 
ham, who may justly be regarded as a princely be- 
nefactor to the county.
The Grenville chapel, or 
south aisle of the church, was built by William de 
Grenville and Mary his wife, by licence from the 
bishop of Lincoln, in 1343.
It contains several 
monuments of this family, and the windows have 
been ornamented with the arms and quarterings of 
the families of Grenville, Temple, and Chancel, 
executed in stained glass by Eginton.
Wvcombe (High.)] — High, or Chipping Wy- 
combe is a very handsome market and borough 
town, having separate jurisdiction.
It is situated 
on the banks of a rivulet, in a valley, as its name 
implies ; in the second division of the hundred of 
Desborough, thirty-one miles south-south-east from 
Buckingham, and twenty eight and three quarters 
west by north from London.
The market is holdcn 
on Friday, has been, from time immemorial, and is, 
a> great mart for corn, and other articles.
The 
prosperity of the town, however, is in a great mea- 
sure ©wing to the Wycombe Stream, which in its 
course through the parish, turns several corn and 
paper mills.
The manufacture of the latter article 
is probably carried on to as great an extent in this 
neighbourhood as in any part of England.
The 
influx of travellers, this town being the principal 
thoroughfare to Oxford, &c, is another source of its 
prosperity, and a great many of the inhabitants are 
supported by lace-making.
Wycombe, from the many antiquities found in its 
neighbourhood, is supposed to have been a Roman 
settlement.
In the grounds at Loakes, now Wy- 
eombe Abbey, in the year 1724, a tesselated pave- 
ment was found in a meadow.
It was about nine 
feet square, with the figure of a wild beast in the 
eentre, and the borders curiously ornamented with 
small square stones, artificially composed of different 
«olours.
Some coins were discovered with it, of An- 
toninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius.
Several other 
coins have been found in the neighbourhood, and 
also part of a Roman vessel, in digging a cellar, in 
the High Street.
That this town was early inhabited by the Saxons 
is certain j for, in addition to the circivnstance of 
its being called chipping ; which is a corruption of 
the Saxon term for market, we are informed, in 
L'^ngley's History of the Hundred of Desborough, 
(hat there is a strong double entrenchment, in the 
vicinity of tlie town, called Desborough Castle, 
where foundations of buildings, broken tiles, and 
bricks, have been dug up, and also a stone or win • 
dow frame of a similar shape to those used in an- 
cient churches.
These remains were in the inner- 
most part of the fortification, which is but a short, 
distance from the main road, and was probably de- 
signed to check the incursions of the Danes.
Before the Conquest, Wycombe was considered 
as the property of Edith, Edward the Confessor's 
Queen.
In the reign of Harold, it was in the pos- 
session of Wigod, the lord of Wallingford, and af- 
terwards descended, with the honor of that place, 
through Robert D'Oilly, Milo Crispin, and Brien- 
tius Fitz-Count, to Henry the First, who made it a 
free borough.
The driginal manor now became di- 
vided : Villa de Wicumbe was given by Henry to 
Geoffrey, his illegitimate son by fair Rosamond ; 
and Villa Forinseca, i.
e. the out village or town, 
was bestowed by King John on Alan Basset and 
Robert Vipont.
The whole manor was soon after- 
wards vested in the former, with the exception of 
what was held by Vipont.
The estate which had 
been given to Basset, thence called Basset sbitry, 
continued in his family till the reign of Edward the 
I. when the heiress of Philip married Roger le Bi- 
god, Earl Marshal, on the attainder of Avhose issue, 
Hugh le Despenser, in the year 1326, it reverted 
to the crown.
Edward the Third, in 1332, granted 
this manor to his cousin William de Bohun, from 
whose family it passed by marriage te Henry da 
Bolingbroke, son of John of Gaunt, and after- 
wards King by the title of Henry the IV.
In the 
reign of Edward the IV.
it was granted to the Dean 
and Canons of Windsor, and their successors, by 
whom it has been leased to various families.
Sir 
John Dashwood, Bart, is the present lessee.
The 
manors included in the grant to Vipont were de- 
mised by him to the Knights Templars, who re- 
tained the estate till the dissolution of their orders, 
by Edward the Second, in 1324.
The accounts of 
their descent from this time are incomplete, till they 
came into the possession of the Archdale family, 
and were conveyed in 1700 to Henry Lord Shel- 
burne, from whom they descended to the late Mar- 
quis of Lansdowne ; but are now the property of 
Lord Carrington, who purchased them by auction, 
about the year 1795.
The borough appears to have been first incorpor 
rated in the year 1461 ; but the mayor and aldermen 
are mentioned in a record of the reign of Edward 
III.
The earliest charter now existing among the 
records of tlie corporation, appears to have been, 
granted by Henry III.
and bears the date of 1586.
The corporation consists of a mayor, twelve alder- 
men, a recorder, and other officers.
The office of 
high-steward was annulled by the charter of King 
Charles II.
but has since that time been conferred 
on several noblemen.
High Wycombe has sent re- 
presentatives to Parliament ever since the 28th of 
Edward I.
The right of election is vested in the 
mayor, aldermen, bailiffs, and burgessos ; the latter .
being chosen at tlie discretion of the mayor, alder- 
men, and bailiffs.
The number of voters is about 
ISO.
In the year 1643, during the civil wars of Charles 
I. Prince Rupert made a successful attack on tlie 
Parliamentary forces, which were quartered at Wy- - 
combe.
At this time, Wycombe is a very flourishing town, 
L consisting 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
191 
consisting of one large and spacious street, which 
branches out into several small ones.
The Town- 
hall, situated in the High Street, is a brick struc- 
ture, supported by thirty-four stone pillars.
It was 
built in 1757, at the expence of John Earl of Shel- 
bourne.
In this hall are held the sessions for the 
town, and other public meetings.
An hospital for lepers was founded here, before 
the thirteenth of Henry III.
and dedicated to St.
Margaret and St. Giles.
Here was also, before the 
twentieth of Henry III.
an hospital for a master, 
brothers, and sisters, dedicated to St. John the Bap- 
tist, which is still in being, for four poor persons, 
under the government of the mayor, aldermen, and 
bailiffs.
One of these hospitals was valued a t the 
Dissolution at 71.
15s.
3d.
clear per annum.
In the year 1790, Mr. Bowden bequeathed the 
sum of 10001.
to be invested in the funds for the 
purpose of raising 301.
per annum, in addition to 
the salary of the master of the grammar school, 
who receives the same sum from the hospital estate, 
'and has a house and garden with an orchard of two 
acres.
The remainder of the produce of Mr. Bow- 
den's donation, is given to the poor of the hospital, 
in which there are now eight poor widows, who re- 
ceive 2s.
a week each, from the hospital chamber- 
lain.
This town, as we have before had occasion to 
state, was the original residence of the first depart- 
ment of the Royal Military College, established in 
the year 1799, under the superintendance of Major 
General Le Marchant, the Lieutenant Governor.
High Wycombe church is a handsome stone struc- 
ture, supposed to have been built before the reign of 
Henry II.
and dedicated to All Saints.
It consists 
of a nave, side aisles, and chancel.
The tower is 
at the west end, 108 feet high, and adorned with 
roses and portcullises : this part of the building was 
erected in 1529 ; but its pinnacles, and other orna- 
ments, were added by the Earl of Shelbourne, about 
the year 1755.
Over the communion table is a 
large painting, by Mortimer, presented to the church 
by Dr. Bates of Little Missenden.
It represents 
St. Paul converting the Druids to Christianity, and 
contains fifteen figures, with a little child, and a dog, 
grouped with admirable skill.
In the chancel is the 
monument of Henry Petty, Earl of Shelbourne, who 
died in 1751, by Scheemaker, erected at the expence 
of 20001.
bequeathed for that purpose.
The effigies 
of the deceased is lying on a cyst of black marble, 
with the figure of Religion, holding a book before 
him.
On the right hand are Virtue and Learning, 
represented by female figures instructing a child ; 
on the left, Charity and a Roman Warrior ; at the 
top is an urn, with Prudence and Justice on the 
* This prela'e was educated first at Eton, and then at King's 
College, Cambridge.
He afterwards studied at Oxford, and 
entered into orders ; but on the accession of Mary, he prac- 
tised physic, and kept school.
When Elizabeth came to the 
throne, he was appointed lecturer at St. Paul's, and in 1560, 
bishop of Exeter.
He died in 1570- He published a coni- 
sides.
Beneath the sarcophagus is a medallion of 
the celebrated Sir William Petty, the Earl's father, 
and over it are the family arms.
In the south aisle is 
a beautiful monument, by Carlini, for Sophia, Coun- 
tess of Shelbourne (first wife of the late Marquis of 
Lansdowne) who died in 1771, with a female figure 
reclining on an urn, with two children.
The organ, 
by Green, was erected by subscription, in the year 
1783.
The Marsh, Flackwell-Heath, .
and Loudwater, 
are the chief hamlets in this parish.
At the last- 
mentioned of these places, is a chapel of ease, which 
was founded by Mr. Davis, in the year 1791.
It is 
endowed with lands, of the yearly value' of 401.
William Alley, Bishop of Exeter,* and Charles 
Butler,f were natives of High Wycombe.
Wycombe Abbey.] — The manor-house of Loakes, 
now called Wycombe Abbey, is the seat of Lord 
Carrington.
It stands in a low situation, on the 
banks of the river, near the town ; but so entirely is 
it surrounded by its woods and groves, that every 
appearance of so near a neighbourhood is concealed.
It was formerly the seat of the Archdales.
It was 
considerably improved, enlarged, and the grounds 
ornamented, by Lord Shelbourne, and the late Mar- 
quis of Lansdowne.
The house has, however, been 
almost wholly rebuilt by the present noble proprietor, 
in a Gothic style, from designs by Mr. Wyatt.
The 
whole is cased with a hard 'sartd-stone, found in the 
neighbourhood, similar to the grey wethers on Marl- 
borough Downs.
The front of the house opens to a 
spacious sheet of water, which winds through the 
grounds for nearly three quarters of a mile, and is 
terminated by a small artificial cascade, executed by 
the ingenious Mr. J.
Lane, and claiming admiration 
from its picturesque effect, and the variety of its 
posts.
The Park, containing about 200 acres, is 
diversified with bold bills, and eminences covered .
with wood.
Wycombe (West).] — West Wycombe, anciently' 
Haningdon, is a large village, situated in the second 
division of the hundred of Desborough, two miles 
and a half north-west by west from High Wy- 
combe.
The manor of West Wycombe, which : in very 
early times, belonged to the see of Winchester, was 
surrendered to the crown by Bishop Poinet, and was 
then given by King Edward VI.
to the Protector 
Somerset.
Queen Mary restored it to the see of 
Winchester ; but, on deprivation of the bishop, it was 
resumed by the crown, and, in 1622, given to Sir 
Robert Dormer.
Charles Dormer, second Earl of 
Caernarvon, sold it to Thomas Lewis, Alderman of 
London, who in 1698 conveyed it to his brothers-in- 
law, Sir Samuel Dashwood and Francis Dashwood.
mentary on the first epistle of St. Peter, and.
translated the 
Pentateuch in the Bishops' Bible.
f Mr. Butler was -bred at Oxford; after which <he became, 
master of the free-school at Basingstoke, and vicar of Law- 
rence Wotten.
He died in 1647.
He wrote the Feminine 
Monarchy, or the History of Bees ; and a Treatise on Music.
It 
192 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
It soon afterwards became vested solely in the latter, 
who was created a baronet in the year 1707.
In 
1763,' his son, Sir 'Francis, became Baron Le De- 
spencer, in right of his brother ; and, on his decease, 
in 1781, the baronetage and manor descended to his 
half brother, Sir John Dashwood King, the father 
of Sir John Dashwood King, the present pro- 
prietor.
West Wycombe House, the seat of Sir John 
Dashwood King, -is situated in Widenden Park.
It 
was built by Sir Francis Dashwood, and much en- 
larged and highly decorated by his son Lord le De- 
spenser.
It is a spacious building, situated on a 
gentle eminence.
The south or principal front con- 
sists of a colonnade, and- logia over it, painted in 
fresco, and filled with busts and statues.
It extends 
to the length of three hundred feet.
The north front, 
which commands a delightful view of the plantations, 
a large lake, the mausoleum, and much rural sce- 
nery, is decorated with four three quarter columns, 
supporting a pediment rising from a rusticated base.
The principal apartments are very magnificently 
ornamented.
The cornice of the dining room is 
curiously carved and gilt.
The ceiling represents 
the council of the gods, and the door-frame is form- 
ed of variegated marble.
The staircase is mahogany, 
richly inlaid.
This house contains a collection of 
pictures, most of them good copies from the old 
masters.
This seat, a contemporary writer observes, " is 
deservedly celebrated for the exquisite beauty of its 
grounds, and the variety of fascinating scenery, 
which results from the harmonious intermixture and 
disposition of its woods and water.
The gardens 
were originally laid out by Lord Le Despenser, 
whose fondness for the minute and trifling decora- 
tions of temples, vases, and statues, are more than 
compensated by the easy and natural boundaries of 
the spreading lake, whose waters were first congre- 
gated under his direction.
This forms the principal 
feature of the landscape, and is adorned with several 
islands planted with forest trees, whose bold and 
towering branches flourish in luxuriant wildness.
The character of the place is animated and beauti- 
ful ; and the late removal of various insignificant 
and unmeaning buildings, has restored the appear- 
ance of the grounds to its genuine simplicity and 
nature.
One of the buildings permitted to retain its 
situation is the Music Pavilion, which, from the ele- 
gance of its design, must unquestionably be regard- 
ed as ornamental.
But the home views are not the 
only ones that embellish this demesne, many exterior 
prospects contribute to increase the pleasure which 
arises from the contemplation of rural scenery.
The 
town and church of High Wycombe, and, the wind- 
ings of the river through the vale in which they are 
seated, are seen from several points of view to great 
advantage.
The cascade should have been removed 
with the buildings ; for the tasteless, step-like dispo- 
sition of the stones over which it falls, is so abhor- 
rent to the eye accustomed to trace the wild and 
irregular manner in which Nature pours her surplus 
waters over shattered rocks, that the ideas excited 
by the view are those of disgust at the puerilities 
of art, rather than admiration at the creations of 
genius." 
The manor of Toweridge, in this parish, formerly 
in the barrels, was purchased by Sir John Dash- 
wood King, in the year 1794.
West Wycombe church is situated on the summit 
of a steep hill, at a small distance above the village, 
within the site of a circular entrenchment.
It was 
rebuilt in the year 1 763, by Lord Le Despenser, but 
the tower and chancel are parts of the ancient pile.
The present structure is in the Grecian style of ar- 
chitecture, and the ceiling is painted with mosaic 
ornaments.
There are five forms instead of pews, 
and the pulpit and desk are of mahogany, arm chairs, 
with small reading desks before them.
The chancel 
is paved Avith marble, and embellished with a paint- 
ing of the Last Supper, on the ceiling.
The altar is 
oi carved oak.
The windows are glazed with stain- 
ed glass and small scripture pieces.
The chancel 
contains monuments of Sir Francis Dashwood, and 
one of the Darrel family.
Near the east end of the 
church is a large hexagonal building without a roof, 
called the Mausoleum.
It is constructed of flint, 
and has a bridge and cornice, supported by Tuscan 
pillars, with recesses for monuments, and smaller 
niches for the reception of urns and busts.
On the 
cornice is this sentence : " To George Doddington, 
Baron of Melcombe Regis," whose legacy to Lord 
Le Despenser, for the purpose of erecting a monu- 
ment to his memory, was the cause of the building of 
this Mausoleum.
In the centre of this singular 
building is a beautiful marble altar monument, under 
a canopy, supported by four stone pillars.
On one 
side are inscribed the words "MorsSolamenMiseris," 
and on the other, " May this Cenotaph, sacred to* 
the virtues and graces that constitute female excel- 
lence, perpetuate the memory of Sarah, Baroness 
Le Despenser, who finished a most exemplary life, 
January the 19th, 1769." In one of the recesses 
there is an elegant monument of statuary marble, 
which records the memory of the husband of the 
above-mentioned lady, Lord Le Despenser, who 
was Chancellor of the Exchequer in the year 1762.
He died in the year 1781, " revered, regretted, and 
beloved, by all who knew him." In another recess 
is a small urn, containing the heart o,f Paul White- 
head, the poet, who bequeathed it as a legacy to his 
noble friend Lord Le Despenser.
It was deposited 
in the Mausoleum, with much solemnity, on the 16th 
of August, 1775, several months after Mr. White- 
head's death.
The whole of the Buckinghamshire 
militia attended.
Minute guns were fired ; and an 
incantation, ,set to music by the late Dr. Arnold, 
was sung by Vocal performers engaged for the pur- 
pose.
The urn is thus inscribed : — 
" Paul Whitehead, Esq. cf Twickenham, obiit, 
Pecember 30, 1774.
Unhallowed 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
1U3 
Unhallowed hands this urn forbear : 
No gems nor orient spoil 
Lie here conceal'd, buj what's more rare, 
A heart that knew no guile."* 
The Mausoleum also contains the monuments of 
I*ady Mary Fane, and Mary King, second and 
third wives of Sir Francis Dashwood, Bart, and 
in one of the recesses, the bust of Thomas Thomp- 
son, M.
D. 
VVyllif.n.] — Wyllien is situated about a mile and 
a half south from Newport Pagnell, on the road to 
Fenny Stratford.
The manor was bequeathed by 
Dr. Busby,f the celebrated master of Westminster 
school, for charitable purposes.
Wyllicu church, a small brick building, was erect- 
ed iu 1680, at the expence of Dr. Busby, who gave 
a library for the vicar, and endowed the vicarage 
with the great tithes.
He appointed 22 lectures on 
the catechism to be preached annually in this church, 
aud vested the advowson in trustees, directing that 
they should nominate from time to time, a student 
of Christ Church in Oxford, who had been educated 
at Westminster school.
Wyrardisbury.] — Wyrardisbury, or Wraysbury, 
is situated in the first division of the hundred of 
Stoke, three miles south-west by south from Coin- 
brook, and three miles north-west by west from 
Staines.
Wyrardisbury manor, now the property of John 
Simon Harcourt, Esq. formerly belonged to the 
priory of Ankerwicke, in this parish.
Ankerwicke 
priory was erected in the time of Henry II.
by Sir 
Gilbert de Montfichet, Knight, and Richard, his son, 
for religious of the order of St. Benedict.
There 
were five nuns in this place at the Dissolution, and 
their revenue was 1321.
0s.
2d.
per annum.
In 1550, 
Ankerwicke Priory, and the estates belonging to it, 
were given by King Edward VI.
to Sir Thomas 
Smith, the celebrated statesman.J The priory was 
for many years afterwards the seat of the Salter fa- 
mily.
There are at present no remains of the con- 
ventual buildings, which are described as wholly 
ruinous in the report of the commissioners in the 
reign of Henry VIII.
Soon after the Dissolution 
a mansion was built on the site, either by Lord 
Windsor or Sir Thomas Smith, the hall of which 
* Mr. Whitehead was born in Westminster in 1710, and re- 
ceived a liberal education.
His friend Lord Le Despenser 
procured him a patent place worth 8001.
a year.
He died in 
1774.
The best of his poems, which are not above mediocrity, 
was intituled The Gymnasiatl, a mock heroic, designed to ridi- 
cule the brutal custom of prize-fighting.
f Dr. Richard Busby, of flogging notoriety, was born at 
Lutton in Lincolnshire, in 1606, and educated at Westminster- 
school, from whence he removed to Christ Church, Oxford, 
where he was elected student.
On entering into orders he ob- 
tained a prebend in the cathedral of Wells, and the rectory of 
Cudworth in Somersetshire.
In 1G40 he was appointed master 
of Westminster-school, which office he discharged 55 years.
In 1(360 he was made prebendary of Westminster, and the 
same year took his Doctor's degree.
He died in 1695, and was 
interred in Westminster-abbey, where a monument was erected 
to his memory.
He wrote borne grammatical works.
VOL.
I. NO.
11.
still remains.
Near the house is a remarkably large 
yew tree, which, at six feet from the ground, mea- 
sures thirty feet five inches in girth.
Wyrardisbury church contains some monuments 
of the Harcourt family, and of Thomas Wright, 
Esq. and Thomas Gill, Esq. Aldermen of London, 
partners in a very extensive business as stationers, 
who died within a fortnight of each other, in the year 
1798.
Agriculture.] — As is mostly the case, in an 
extensive tract of land, the face of the country is 
much varied.
The general nature of the soil, how- 
ever, is a rich loam, strong clay, chalk, and loam 
upon gravel.
The Chiltern Hills and their appen- 
dages occupy the southerji parts ; the fertile vale of 
Aylesbury extends through the middle of the coun- 
ty ; and the more northern parts are diversified with 
gentle sand hills, entering from Bedfordshire 
The Chiltern Hills stretch across the county from 
Bedfordshire to Oxfordshire, forming a part of that 
great line of high-land frsm Norfolk to Dorsetshire.
The soil of these hills is chiefly composed of chalk, 
intermixed with flints, and though much inferior to 
that of the Northern District, has been rendered re- 
markably productive by the great attention which it 
has received.
The soil is here so very shallow, and 
the grounds so elevated, that flints seem to be abso- 
lutely necessary to keep the surface moist, and 
protect the grain from the too powerful effect of the 
sun's rays.
The vale of Aylesbury, which lies under the Chil- 
tern Hills, is proverbial for its fertility.
Fuller 
states, that a piece of pasture land, called Berry- 
field, in this vale, within the manor of Quarendon, 
belonging to Sir Robert Lee, was let for 8001.
per 
annum, and that the tenant was well satisfied with 
his bargain : the value of the land at this time, 
however, cannot be ascertained, as the extent of the 
field is not mentioned.
The late Agricultural Sur- 
vey of the county observes : — " So rich and fertile 
is the soil about Aylesbury and Buckingham, that 
we are assured it is considered a disgrace to a far- 
mer to suffer a heap of manure to be seen at the end 
of his field, to plough iu straight lines, to disturb an 
ant-hill on his pasture, or to permit more water 
than falls from the heavens to pass over his mea- 
J This gentleman was born at Walden in Essex, in 1512.
He received his t-ducation at Queen's college, Cambridge, 
where he was elected tellow, and appointed Greek lecturer, 
in which capacity he introduced a new method of pronouncing 
that language, which became general in the University, though 
opposed by the chancellor.
In 1539 he went abroad, and touk 
his doctor's degree ot law at Padua.
In 1542 lie was made 
Regius professor of that faculty at Cambridge.
By the inter- 
est of the Duke of Somerset he was knighted and maue secre- 
tary of state by Edward VI.
but in the succeeding reign he lost 
his preferments.
Queen Elizabeth employed him in several 
embassies to France, made him Secretary of State and Chan- 
cellor of the Garter.
He died in 1577.
Sir Thomas wide a 
Treatise on the Right Pronunciation of Gnek, printed at Paris 
by Stephens, in 156S ; and some other works.
$c 
duw." 
104 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
such 
degree the' advantage of obtaining water, 
farmer 
can 
flow his grounds when and 
pleases, brooks and rivulets running 
dow." In this district large tracts possess in 
a high 
that the 
where he 
through the greater part of these fine meadows, 
with few or no mills to interrupt or controul him in 
the free application of their fructifying streams ; yet, 
excepting in the neighbourhood of one or two of the 
paper mills, there is scarcely an acre of land water- 
ed throughout the county.
The soil of the northern parts of the county is 
chiefly clay.
Respecting the different crops, and their mode of 
cultivation, it may be remarked, that, wheat, barley, 
oats, beans, and sainfoin, are cultivated upon the 
Chiltern Hills, and in their vicinity ; and, where the 
soil is light, the management of the arable land is 
conducted with the greatest attention, and accord- 
ing to the most approved systems of modern hus- 
bandry.
On the contrary, in the vale of Aylesbury, 
and the more northern parts of the county, the rich- 
ness and fertility of the soil have produced such a 
strong prejudice against any improvement among 
the farmers, that, contented with the natural fertility 
which nature has bestowed upon their lands, they 
neglect every artificial means by which they might 
* be rendered more productive.
For ploughing, and the general business of agri- 
culture, horses are there preferred to oxen ; the 
flintiness of some parts of the soil, and the heavy 
quality of others, being found insurmountable ob- 
jections to the use of the latter.
The swing and 
high-wheel ploughs, drawn by four horses, two 
abreast, are chiefly used in the southern district ; 
but, in the nor thern division, the loose-handle, swiag, 
and low-wheel ploughs, drawn by five or six horses 
at length, receive the preference.
In the neighbourhood of the Chiltern Hills, every 
variety of materials that will either constitute or in- 
crease the stock of manure is carefully collected and 
preserved for use.
In that part of the county which 
borders on Bedfordshire, about Wavendon, Broiigh- 
ton, and the Brick-Hills, where the soil is a deep 
sand, a rich blue marl is found, which is very ad- 
vantageously used as a manure.
The other manures 
are peat, ash, sand, and rabbits' dung.
On some 
of the strong and cold soils, hair and ho.ofs are 
strewn with much advantage, and soot and ashes 
are found to be equally beneficial to the wheat and 
young clover.
The Buckinghamshire horses are generally of the 
strong black kind, and the coach breed.
The cows 
consist of the short-horned Lincolnshire and York- 
shire breed, but very different from those which are 
kept for milking in the environs of London.
North' 
Wiltshire wethers for store, and Berkshire ewes for 
breeding, are the prevailing sheep of the county.
The New Leicestershire breed has lately been in- 
troduced with considerable success ; but the wet- 
ness of the soil in the lower part of the county, oc- 
casioned by its tenacity and retention, frequently 
pur- 
occasions very serious loss by the rot ; a circum- 
stance which tends to discourage any extensive im- 
provements in the breed of sheep.
Oxen and cows 
constitute the principal stock of the grazing farms ; 
the former are composed of Yorkshire and Here- 
fordshire beasts, which are bought in lean from 12i.
to 151.
per head ; the latter are barren cows 
chased of the dairymen.
Every dairy-farm fattens a certain number of hog6, 
with skim-milk, and butter-milk, without any other 
assistance, except when there is a scarcity of milk, 
and then barley-meal, beans, and peas, are used as 
substitutes.
The immense quantities of butter 
which are annually made on the- dairy farms, arc 
mostly purchased by the London dealers, who con • 
tract for it half-yearly.
The average weight pro- 
duced weekly from each cow is eight pounds in 
summer, and six in winter.
In some of the dairies, 
they have a very useful machine, called a mill-churn, 
lately introduced, by which the operation of churn- 
ing is greatly facilitated, and its fatigue avoided, the 
mill being worked by a horse.
In other dairies the 
barrel churn is used, with two handles, turned by 
two men, who make from 100 to 120 pounds of but- 
ter at one churning.
In the neighbourhood of Medmenham, Great and 
Little Hampton, &c.
great numbers of calves are 
suckled.
The Pevensey Level, and Romney Marsh ex- 
cepted, perhaps no land in the kingdom is better 
calculated for grazing cattle than the vale of Ayles- 
bury.
Its amazing fertility soon makes a striking 
alteration in the appearance of the animals, and the 
extraordinary size which they afterwards attain is 
a proof of the nutritive quality of the grass which 
they feed on.
On looking over the division of the estates in this 
county, it is obvious, that they were originally in 
few hands ; consequently, that the property pos- 
sessed by individuals was large, which is indeed to 
this day in some measure the case.
But the great 
influx of wealth, and the prevailing desire of acquir- 
ing landed property, has of late years been the 
means of considerably increasing the number of 
proprietors.
The generality of farms, however, are 
from sixty pounds to two hundred and fifty pounds 
a yeai\throughout the county.
There are -not many 
farms of 5001.
per annum, and not.
mora.
than two 
or three of 10001.
It ought not to be passed over without' remark, 
that the progress of agricultural improvement in 
this county is considerably checked on many estates', 
by the injudicious restrictive conditions on which 
they are leased.
The tenants, in general, and with- 
out any reference to the quality of their land, are 
confined to two or three crops, and a fallow, with a 
prohibition of the growth of clover and green food.
These restrictions are wholly inconsistent with the 
introduction of the improved systems of husbandry ; 
and, vexatious as they are to the tenant, they are 
fully as injurious to the proprietor of the soil.
Mancfactuues 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
195 
Manufactures and Trade.] — Lace, as it must 
have already been remarked, by the reader, is the 
chief manufacture of Buckinghamshire.
In the 
neighborhood of Olney, in particular, veils, and 
other laces of the finer sorts, are made ; and it is 
understood, that great fortunes are made by the 
factors.
At Hanslape, also, the manufacture is 
very general ; not fewer than 800, out of a popula- 
tion of 1275, being employed in it, jin that parish, 
at the time of the population returns.
It is sup- 
posed that Hanslape thus derives a net annual pro- 
fit of fpom 80001.
to 10,0001.
by the manufacture of 
lace.
Children, both boys and girls, are put to it 
when about the age of five years.
Some continue 
to follow it, after they are men, and others find it a 
good resource when out of work.
The lace which 
is made at Hanslape is from 6d.
to two guineas a 
yard in value.
For upwards of a century, the manufacture of 
paper has been carried on to a considerable extent 
in the neighbourhood of Wycombe.
The majority of the population of Buckingham- 
shire, however, are engaged in agricultural pur- 
suits ; as, agreeably to the population returns, in 
1811, 13,933 families were so employed, but only 
8,424 in trade, manufactures, &c.
Fairs.] — Amersham — Whit Monday, Sept.
19; 
sheep.
Jylesbur.y—Ja.n. 18, Saturday, before Palm Sun- 
day, May 8.
June 14, Sept.
25, Oct. 12; cattle, 
&c.
Beacomfield — February 13, Holy Thursday ; 
horses, cows and sheep.
Buckingham — Monday se'nnight after the Epiph- 
any, March 7, (if Leap Year, March 6), May 6, 
Whit-Thursday, July 10, Sept.
4. Oct. 2, Sat. after 
Old Michael, statute and cattle.
Nov. 8 ; cattle.
Burtiham — Feb. 25, May 1 ; horses, cattle, sheep, 
and hogs.
October 2 ; horses, cattle, hogs, and 
hiring servants.
Chesham— April 21, July 22, Sept.
28 ; cattle.
Colnbraok — April 5, May 3; horses, cattle, and 
v>.
Eton — Ash Wednesday ; horses and cattle.
Fenny Stratford — April 19, July 18, October 10, 
Nov. 28 ; cattle.
Hamiape.
— Holy Thursday; cattle.
Iver— July 10 ; cattie, sheep, and hogs.
Ivenhoe — May 6, October 17 ; cows, sheep, 
hogs.
Lavenden — Tuesday before Easter ; a shew fak\ 
Little BrickhiU— May 12, Oct. 29 ; cattle.
Mar/ow— May 1, 2, 3, horses, cattle, &e.
Oct.
29; cheese, hops, and butter.
Netcpoit Pagnell— Feb. 22, April 22, June 22, 
Aug. 29, Oct. 22, Dec. 22 ; cattle.
Olney — Easter Monday, June 29, Oct. 21 ; cat- 
tle.
RisborougA — May 6 ; cattle.
Stozce — A weekly cattle market.
Stony Stratford — Aug. 2, Friday before Oct. 10 j 
hiring servants.
Nov. 12, cattle.
St. Peter's Chalfunt — Sept.
4 ; pedlary.
Wendover — May 12, Oct. 2; cattle.
Window — March 20, Holy Thursday, August 21, 
September 22 ; cattle.
First and Second Thurs- 
days after Old St. Michael, October 10 ; hiring ser- 
vants.
Wooburn — May 4, Nov. 12 ; horses, cows, and 
sheep.
Wycombe — Monday before New Michaelmas ; hi- 
ring servants.
Canals.] — The Grand Junction Canal enters 
Buckinghamshire near Wolverton, where it is car- 
ried across the valley, over the river Ouse, which is 
here the boundary of the county, by a magnificent 
aqueduct, of about three quarters of a mile in length.
It passes near Linford Magna, leaving Newport 
Pagnell on the north ; by the Woolstons, Wough- 
ton, and Simpson, to Fenny Stratford ; thence, 
leaving Stoke Hammond, Soulbury, and Linchlade 
on the west, it follows the course of the river Ouse 
to Grove ; leaving Leighton Busard in Bedfordshire 
on the east, and afterwards leaving Cheddington on 
the west, and Slapton, Ivinghoe, and Mansworthou 
the east.
Near the last mentioned place it quits the 
county.
An act was obtained in the year 1794, for making 
navigable cuts from the towns of Aylesbury, Buck- 
ingham, and Wendover, to communicate with the 
Grand Junction Canal.
Roads.] — It has been observed, by that learned 
and able antiquarian, the Bishop of Cloyne, in his 
communications on the subject to Lysons's Magna 
Britannia, that the ' Rdrnan stations in this county 
are little better ascertained than those in Berk- 
shire ; but that the roads are traced with more ease 
and certainty.
The Ikening Street enters its east- 
ern borders ^ear Edlesborough ; leaves Pitston on 
its right, and Tring on its left ; passes Drayton on 
the right ; crosses the high road from Aylesbury to 
London, near the 33rd mile stone ; leaves HaltOn 
to the right, and passes through Wendover ; leaves 
Ellesborough church, and Kimble Magna on the 
right, runs through Ascot, goes at the foot of 
White-Leaf Cross, and keeps both Monk's -Ris- 
borough and Prince's-Risborough on its 
right 
on 
passes through Calverton, leaves Saunderton 
the right, and enters Oxfordshire near Chinner.
The Watling Street enters Buckinghamshire with 
the modern Irish road, at the 42nd mile stone ; pro- 
ceeds through Brickhill, Fenny Stratford, and 
Stony Stratford, and crosses the Ouse into Nor- 
thamptonshire.
The Akeman Street is supposed to have passed 
by Hide Lane, near Buckingham, Stony Stratford, 
Stawton, Newport, and Bedford, to Sandy.
The 
road which in out present maps, is erroneously de- 
nominated the Akeman Street, appears to have 
come from Bicester, in a line with the modern turn- 
6 pike, 
19G 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
pike, towards the "Barry -fields, near Aylesbury ; 
and is thought to have been part of a Roman road, 
from Alcester to St. Albans, or London.
Auother 
road, proceeding from the camp at Alcester, passed 
through Bicester; and leaving Stralton Audley to 
the right, it passed by Newton Pucell and Fimnorc, 
in Oxfordshire ; crossed the road from London to 
Banbury, near the 61st mile stone ; went through 
Water Stratford, and seems to have run near Stowe 
in its way to Towcester.
Some traces of a Romau 
road, under the usual name of the Pot way, are also 
said to have been found about Stone and Hartwell, 
to the west of Aylesbury.
It is remarked, by the learned Bishop of Cloyne, 
that " the Roman stations in this county, from the 
few visible remains, appear almost as difficult to fix 
as the roads ; but the distances, in the iters of An- 
tonine and Richard, correspond so exactly, that, by 
following them, Ave cannot err much from the an- 
cient sites : at the distance of 12 miles from t'emlam 
,was the station of Durocobriva, or Forum Diana, 
which Ave have before mentioned to be at Dunstable; 
and 12 miles farther we find Magioventum, which 
will fall certainly within the.
limits of Buckingham- 
shire ; and if Ave attend to the distance on the road, 
precisely at Fenny Stratford; then proceeding 17 
miles farther, we arrive at Towcester in Northamp- 
tonshire, which must have been Lactodorum.
This 
interpretation makes the stations, on the road be- 
tween the tAvo certain points of Verulamium and 
Vennona, agree perfectly with the positions assign- 
ed them in the itinerary ; and it receives very strong 
confirmation from the remains of the Roman station 
still existing near Fenny Stratford.
The site of 
this station is called the Auld fields, about a quar- 
ter of a mile from the present village, and is on a 
small elevation, on the south side of the rivulet : it 
is the very position likely to have been chosen by 
the Romans ; and coins and foundations of build- 
ings have been dug up there in abundance.
Browne 
Willis had many of the former in his possession.
In 
treating of the Avestern part of this eounty, Camden 
mentions a Roman toAvn, which he supposes to have 
been destroyed by the Danes in 914, at a place, 
called the Burgh-Hill, and by contraction the Brill ; 
and adds, that Roman coins Avere found there in his 
time ; Avhich, though doubted by Kennet in his Pa- 
rochial Antiquities, is confirmed by Gale's M.
S. 
Aviththe observation, that such coins are called Kim- 
.brelsy in the neighbourhood ; and as this seems to 
infer, that these marks of a Roman toAvn have been 
found commonly, and in abundance, it requires some 
examination : the present inhabitants, however, have 
no knowledge of any coins, or other marks of an- 
tiquity, having been discovered in the parish ; and 
the meer existence of an ancient camp is by no means 
sufficient to establish the hypothesis of Camden." 
The modern great road, from London to Chester 
and Holyhead, enters Buckinghamshire between 
the 41st and 42nd mile stones, in the course of the 
ancient Watling Stveet ; and, passing through Lit- 
tle Brickhill, Fenny Stratford, Shenley, and Stony 
Stratford, leaves the county at Old Stratford, near 
the 53rd mile stone.
The great road to Liverpool enters this county 
about a mile beyond the town of Wooburn ; and, 
passing through Wavendon, Newport Pagnell, 
Lathbury, and Stoke Goldington, enters Northamp- 
tonshire about two miles beyond the last mentioned 
place.
The Oxford and Bath road enters this county at 
Colnbrook ; and, passing through Slough, quits it 
at Maidenhead Bridge.
The other road to Oxford, generally called the 
Wycombe road, enters this county just beyond Ux- 
bridge, and leaves it, near Stokeuchurch, between 
the 37th and 38th mile stones.
The road from London to Banbury quits the Wy- 
combe road at the 18th mile stone; and, passing 
through the two Chalfonts, Wendover, Aylesbury, 
Winslow, Buckingham, Tingewick, &c.
enters 
Northamptonshire between the 60th and 61st mile 
stones.
The road from Buckingham to Brackley passes 
by Shalleston and Wesbury.
The road from London to Aylesbury, through 
Tring, enters this county betAveen the 32d and 33d 
mile stones ; and, passing through Aston Clinton, 
joins the other road near Aylesbury.
The road from Reading, to Ware in Hertford- 
shire, enters tins county a little beyond Henley; 
passes along the banks of the Thames, through 
Medmerham, to Great Marlow ; thence to High 
Wycombe and Amersham ; and enters Hertfordshire 
a little beyond Cheynies.
A turnpike road, from Aylesbury to Bicester, 
passes through Fleet-Marston and Waddesdon, and 
leaves Buckinghamshire just beyond Ludgershall 
common.
A turnpike road, from NeAvport Pagnell to Bed- 
ford, passes through Skerrington, Emberton, Ol- 
ney, and Cold Brayfield.
Another road, passing through Weston under- 
wood, connects Olney Avith the Northampton road.
The road from Newport Pagnell to Bedford, for- 
merly the route of the judges on the midland cir- 
cuit, is now disused, and is quite impassable for 
carriages.
A new line of turnpike road, from West Wy- 
combe, through Prince's-Risborough, into the Ay- 
lesbury road, near Wendover, was projected about 
eighteen or twenty years ago ; and that end of it 
which passes through West Wycombe and Braden- 
ham has been completed.
Several neAv pieces of road have also been mad* 
in the parishes ot Risborough and Kimble.
An Act of Parliament Avas passed in the year 
1801, for making a neAv road from London to 
Windsor, through Datchet, to leave the Bath road 
near Longford, and to pass through Horton to 
Datchet.
TABLE 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
197 
S 
< 
p 
o 
g 
o 
p 
pa 
i* 
O 
>« 
H 
o * 
u 
< 
° 3 
H — 
o 
ttl u 
V .-> 
<! en 
j « 
cu 
s5 
W 
P 
E- 
co 
Q 
< 
O 
PS 
co 
CO 
O 
pS 
u 
Q 
Z 
« 
P 
H 
<! 
Ph 
U 
M 
U3 
?<« 
H 2 
2 55 
D - ^ 
JIB'S 
/) 
9 w 
§ ft 
u 
so cn 
8J " 
j3 a 
** < 
.« Z 
en 
H   
U 
1 3.2 
*J ft ±J 
< u) «j 
'£S m 
— O rti 
£ 
z 
o 
Eh 
o 
g 
5 
o 
o 
o 
H 
en 
O 
£ 
PS 
E> 
ca 
O 
O 
u 
ts 
3 
8 £ B 
c 5 u 
J3 w -5 
i-i -S ° 
Sa 
2 a 
co id 
Cu ri 
~ 7L 
t H 
o 
P 
O 
a 
H 
en 
u 
55 
PS 
P 
O 
O 
w 
1-1 
03 
H 
PS 
a 
* c/> 
°^ = 
t?2 •* 
™^ s 
in 
o 
S   
s 
-IN 
CO © 
00 
ro 
co CM 
CM 
5$ CU 
© s 
BO 
3 
o 
1^ 
Q 
PS 
O 
fc.
< 
PS 
H 
CO 
Jh 
Z 
o 
H 
CO 
O 
H 
P 
ca 
O 
o 
S 
o 
Pc2 S?
I 
p 
w 
« .
Sid 
= E'c"U 
> s^l 
MPS 
O 
PS 
P3 
Q 
O 
o 
o 
H 
OS 
P 
C2 
o 
o 
a 
P 
P 
a" 
W • 
is 
CO 
H 
S-, 
(/') 
n 
a 
X 
u 
3 
<C 
3 
>J 
c 
o 
O 
-n 
U 
o 
q 
1 
> 
—   c>» — 
_ TS 
- 50 
sj to  - 
> 3CJ 
5. 
C3 
h*3 
-o 
2oa "g 
«5 "E ^co 
c = ^ 5" 
bPcoco 
1.3 
2PS 
&c2 
3 
o 
u 
3 
i'5l 
K* 
O 
PS 
5 
P 
o 
w 
o 
H 
CO 
O 
H 
-=)• «o » O 
. ' ^- Q 
—  "  Cd 
| 00 
« i p 
gI M 
ca 
PS 
CO 
Oh 
Pm 
5 
W 
; eq 
PS P 
°^ 
«-«7 2 
4) J- C3 
"2 „ 3 
= £« 
03 S I 
0> <" 
S; ^ ° 
ra c i; 
PP o a, 
W 
•^ ^c .— c 
S 
OS- 
coO= | 
0) 1j 
co CO 
S *ba 
Is 
PS 
P 
►S Pes 
p^ 
^<t 
Cs n  =* 
cx> O) — ' t>» co CO 
C>» 
e^*t 
HNryjj^rrv* 
CO — — — ^ o« 
CO 
CO 
"c3 
CU 
^> 2 
~ en 
P 5P^ 
»— — r 3 
4) « CJ 
psho 
2> D eu 
^ o o 
"sp is « V y 
01 u rt gI^-> 
= 3-: s?^ 
u » ?
a— .
"O CU 
"2 5-„ 
5 ^-2?
a 
v 
CSShJ^P^ CO 
cq 
CU 
tu 
is 
P 
a 
Q 
2 
03 
X 
P 
o % 
p 
03 
CO 
fd 
.2-o 
^09 
S P 
o .
P £* 
o. 
E^ 
a! iJ 
Pj 
MtpS 
t; cu 
P £* 
S 9 s 5 
o ~3; 
7 
PS 
M 
cr 
. 
on 
U* 
^=co 
w 
tA 
p= • 
W 
Z "S 
4J 
ft.
s 
H 
60 
T 
PS 
"52 
psp 
: 2 
2 <ri 
a c 
— CU 
° 
I ft.
SCO 
P 
3 =5 
A J 
Jp 
W 
•^03 
^03 
-PS 
rs !- 
CU ~ 
B 
o 
P 
p — 
J3 
^J 
l-J 
B 
NM 
-hi 
CO 
mjm -.'-.
^;n 
O) CM 
CO — 
C) 
l-.w 
T* 
c rz: 
-a 
c 
tol.
r 
-NO.
ftl c « 
w cu v 
14.
OOh 
- coco 
r3 ^- +* 
"ZJZ 
•n d — -z 
wj< OU 
.gfi 
~ "3 
C3 CU 
HPS 
-a: 13 CU 
e 1 
O 
E- 
O 
PS 
H 
CO 
W 
03 
© 
O 
•o 
s 
p 
o 
cr 
en 
w 
ft.
-J 1) 
n ** 
P^ 
.-§N 
^co 
cv-r 
o£ 
cu tS 
O « 
TP 
> ^ 
^ -a 
r-i '- 
i o 
p 
J 
£zi 
p 
CO oo — - co © CD 
CO 
CM 
-H- 
CO -o 
fi 
— CO CO CO 
f 
z 
w 
US 
o 
< 
PS 
03 
o 
H 
PS 
> 
O 
Q 
Z 
53 ► 
K 
S3 
— " P 
a. 
► 
5 
rn 
-a 
g 
< 
c 
1 # 
b» — S .
CO 
_- oT 
"a; £f 
•* o 
— cu 
p f 
I a 
W 
3 2JJ 
~ „ cu < 
t- en u > 
° '5 -r- P 
*7 E"£0 
Jm 
OPS 
_r 
ea^ 
x C7) -n O) 
CM 
l^ C3> 
CM CM 
-V.-(C» 
-!n-:n-!N 
CO — -o -=* 
CO 
«oM~H 
o r3 -e 
ZC.O 
o ^ 
Ho 
-^ c 
O B 
C3P 
D 
cu 
s 
B 
CTi 
6 
g 
— 1 
c 
>l 
Cfl 
CJ 
a 
u, 
U 
"3 
S 5 
c 
!V 
— 1 
^n 
cu ^S 
'J 
T" r3 
^CJ<^ 
< 
— 1 
o 
ftl cuG?-- SXiCj-i<!
03 
. Co J= 
^5 to 
53 
en o 
8. CHEYNIB3 
19S 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
Amersham 
High Wycombe 
Handy Cross 
Great Marlow 
Medmenham 
Mill End 
Fawley Court 
Henley on Thames 
8. CHEYNIES TO HENLEY.
(S.W. byW.) 
Inn — Crown.
Inn— Red Lion.
Wycombe Abbey, LordCarrington.
5 
5 
7 
12 
2 
14 
o 
17 
3 
20 
»i 
«i 
i| 
SSj 
n 
24 
Inns— Lower Crown, Upper Crown.
L. — Harleford, Sir W.
Clayton, Bart.
L. — Strickland Freeman, Esq.
Inns— Bell, Red Lion, White Hart.
9. COLNBROOK, by Windsor and Eton, TO MAIDENHEAD.
(VV.
N. W.) 
Road to Windsor 
Datchet 
Windsor 
Eton 
Slough 
Salt Hill 
Maidenhead Borough 
Maidenhead 
1 1 
1*1 
1 ' 
* 
4 
?* 
2 
H 
1 
v 
i 
^2 
'i 
«3 
i 
7i 
4 
11| 
J 
>2i 
Entrance, on L.
— Frogmore Lodge, Her Majesty.
Eton College.
Burnhain Grove, Sir W.
Johnston, Bart.
R. — Baylis, Earl of Chesterfield, Earl Grosvenor, and 
Viscount Belgrave.
B- — Earl of Inchiquin ; and Taplow Lodge, Craw- 
ford Bruce,' Esq.
L.— Pennystone Powney, Esq. Inns— Sun, Fleece.
N. B.
The Direct Road from Colnbrook to Maidenhead is only nine miles.
TABLE OF DISTANCES.
The Names of the respective Toivns are on the top and side, and the square uhere both meet gives the distance.
26 
Aylesbury 
14 
Aylesbur 
5 
18 
Beaconslield ..
Buckingham 
32 
17 
35 
Buckingham ..
3 
13 
8 
31 
14 
7 
19 
21 
11 
7 
18 
6 
34 
10 
21 
Great Marlow 
28 
17 
33 
12 
25 
15 
36 
Olney...
33 
22 
38 
17 
30 
20 
41 
5 
Oln 
10 
6 
14 
23 
13 
24 
12 
23 
28 
Prince's Risboroug 
h 
i ^ ' 
34 
19 
37 
8 
24 
14 
37 
6 
11 
25 
.35 
1 
9 
5 
24 
22 
8 
7 
13 
20 
25 
4 
22 
Wendov 
25 
11 1 29 
7 
24 
14 
29 
8 
13 
17 
9 
16 
.51 
6 
14 
5 
31 
8 
19 
4 
25 
3G 
8 
33 
8 
25 
.29 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE 
Publish *t *r JSmm* tim&r, iihvn Pr.-u ZmuUw.J* 
190 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
CAMBRIDGESHIRE, an inland county, is 
bounded, on the north-west, by Lincolnshire ; 
on the east, by Suffolk ; on the south, by Essex and 
Hertfordshire ; and, on the west, by Bedfordshire, 
Huntingdonshire, and a point of Northamptonshire.
The limits of Cambridgeshire, in its northern half, 
arc rivers and their communicating branches, so in- 
termixed as with difficulty to be traced.
The south- 
ern half has an indented and undistinguished boun- 
dary line on the adjacent counties.
The figure of Cambridgeshire is thought to re- 
semble that of the human ear, the county of Hunt- 
ingdon, by a circular projection, cutting deeply into 
its western side.
Its greatest length, from Tydd 
St. Giles to Odsey Grange, is about forty-five miles ; 
and its greatest breadth, from Gamlingay to Ash- 
ley, about thirty miles.
Dr. Halley calculated the 
number of statute acres in this county at 570,000 ; 
Dr. Beeke estimated them at 530,000 ; the Agricul- 
tural Survey allows only 443,300 ; but the last Po- 
pulation Returns state them at 439,010.
Cambridgeshire is divided into two parts by the 
River Ouse.
The northern part is chiefly compris- 
ed in the Isle of Ely, a district possessing separate 
jurisdiction.
This "is a fenny tract, in which a few 
elevated spots appear scattered, like islands, in the 
midst of low and level marshes ; on the principal of 
which the city of Ely stands.
All the low grounds 
are naturally a bog, supposed to have been formed 
by the stagnation of water from the overflowings of 
rivers; but, by infinite labour and expence in cut- 
ting drains and raising banks, much of them has 
been rendered either rich meadows, proper for the 
fattening of cattle, or arable land, covered, in many 
parts, with some of the finest oats in the kingdom.
William of Malmsbury, who wrote about the 
twelfth century, speaks of this county as of a terres- 
trial Paradise.
He describes it as a plain, level and 
smooth as water, covered with perpetual verdure, 
and adorned with a variety of tall, smooth, taper, 
and fruitful trees : " Here," says he, " is an or- 
chard bending with apples, and there is a field co- 
vered with vines, either creeping on the ground or 
supported by poles ; in this place also art seems 
to vie with nature, each being impatient to be- 
stow what the other withhelds.
The buildings are 
beautiful beyond description : and there is not an 
inch of ground which is not cultivated to the highesc 
degree." 
It is deserving of remark, however, that he was a 
recluse at Thorney Abbey, which was the dwelling of 
other solitary devotees like himself.
He therefore de- 
scribed a place which he probably never saw, and 
which his zeal might induce him to mention in the 
most favourable terms.
It must also he observed, 
that he describes the country as a level, and men- 
tions marshes and fens, though he says the marshes 
were covered with wood, and the fens afforded the 
most stable and solid foundation for the buildings 
that were erected upon them.
It should likewise be 
remarked, that the celebrated Abbo Floriacenses, an 
historian of the year 970, in a description of the 
kingdom of the East Angles, says that it is encom- 
passed on the north by large wet fens, which begin 
almost in the heart of the island ; and the ground 
being a perfect level for more than a hundred miles, 
the water of these fens descends in great rivers to 
the sea.
These large fens, he adds, make a prodi- 
gious number of lakes, which are two or three miles 
over, and by forming a variety of islands, accom- 
modate great numbers of monks with their desired 
solitude and retirement.
That the flat country 
might easily be overflowed, to a great extent, merely 
by an accidental obstruction of the rivers through 
which the water of the fens was carried off, is very 
evident ; and that such an inundation actually hap- 
pened there is iiidkpensible evidence, yet more au- 
thentic than that of any history ; for timber of seve- 
ral kinds has been found rooted in firm earth below 
the slime and mud which lie .immediately under the 
water.
In other places a perfect soil has been found 
at the depth of eight feet, with swaiths of grass ly- 
ing upon it as they were first mowed.
Brick and 
stone, and other materials for building, have also 
been found at a considerable depth, by the workmen 
who were employed in digging drains to carry olf 
the water ; and in setting a sluice there was found, 
sixteen feet below the surface, a complete smith's 
forge, with all the tools belonging to it.
We shall 
offer some observations, more at length, upon this 
tract, when we come to treat specifically of the agri- 
culture of the county.
. 
In this part of Cambridgeshire, the air is 
damp and unhealthful; but in the southern por- 
tion .
200 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
tion of the county, the air is pure aud salu- 
brious.
The south-westerf?
part of Cambridgeshire is the 
most agreeable, possessing an elevated surface, and 
being watered by the Cam, a small river rising in 
Hertfordshire, which, after washing the town of 
Cambridge, near which it receives the Granta, falls 
into the Ouse above Ely.
About Linton, Hildersham, and other villages, 
in the valley through which the Granta runs, be- 
tween Cambridge and Bartlow, there is some pleas- 
ing scenery, enriched with a considerable number of 
elm trees.
The views from the upper part of the 
Earl of Hardwicke's park, at Wimpole, are also 
very rich : the park is well wooded ; as is Sir 
Charles Cotton's, at Madingley, and the Duke of 
Rutland's, at Cheveley.
The south-eastern part of Cambridgeshire, from 
Gogmagog-hills to Newmarket, is an open and 
heathy country, thinly inhabited and bleak, being 
connected with that vast tract of land, which, ex- 
tending south wards into Essex, and northward 
across Suffolk, into Norfolk, forms one of the 
largest plains in the kingdom.
Rivers.] — The Ouse, or Ise, now called the Old 
Ouse, enters the county between Fenny Drayton 
and Earith ; thence it runs eastward through the 
fens, till, at some distance above Denny Abbey, it 
takes a northerly direction, and, passing Streatham, 
Ely, and Littleport, pursues its course into Nor- 
folk.
The original course of the Ouse, from 
Brank Creek, is supposed to have been between 
the counties of Cambridge and Norfolk, by Wel- 
ney, Upwell, Outwell, Elme, Emneth, and Wis- 
beach, and that it fell into the sea at Cross-Keys 
wash.
The Cam, or Granta, has three branches, the 
chief of which rises near Ash well, in Hertfordshire, 
and enters this county to the west of Gilden Mor- 
den ; thence flowing to the north-east, it is increas- 
ed by the waters of several rivulets ; and near 
Granchester, has its current still further enlarged 
by the junction of its sister streams, which flow into 
this county from Essex.
Hence, taking a northerly 
course, the Cam glides through the walks of the 
principal colleges at Cambridge, and after passing 
several villages falls into the Ouse at Harrimere in 
the parish of Streatiiam.
The Cam is supposed to 
be so called from its winding course, the British 
word Cam signifying crooked ; a river in Cornwall, 
that is remarkable for its irregularity, is called the 
Camel.
In addition to these rivers, there are many chan- 
nels and drains ; for almost all the water from the 
middle of England, except what is discharged by the 
Thames and the Trent, falls into this part of the 
county.
They have been, called the Gleane, the 
Welland, the Neane, the Grant, the Middealnill, the 
Brandon, and the Stoake, besides the water called 
Moreton's Learn, navigable from Peterborough to 
2 
Wisbeach.
The Old and New Bedford Rivers 
are navigable for upwards of twenty miles, in a 
straight line, across the county, from Earith to 
Denver.
All the rivers of this county abound with fish : 
pike and eels, of a very fine quality, are particularly 
plentiful ; and, in addition to the more common sorts 
of fish, the new Bedford river affords considerable 
quantities of smelts.
Minerals.] — Cambridgeshire possesses no mines, 
nor any mineral of sufficient importance to require 
description.
In the parish of Fulmire, a stone was 
formerly dug up, in the quarries there, which pro- 
duced vitriol.
Fossils.] — Woodward mentions a marquesite, in 
texture resembling the grain of wood, which was 
found in sinking a well on Gogmagog-hills.
Py- 
rites balls, (called by the county people horse-gold) 
Echini, Vermiculi, sharks' teeth, cones of fir, petri- 
fied wood, and various other extraneous fossils, are 
found in the chalk pits of this county.
At Burwell, 
the clunch pits produce large corriua amrnonis, nau- 
tili, fyc; in the gravel pit, near Chesterford, ele- 
phants' grinders, and other animal remains, have 
been found ; and, at Milton, Samuel Knight, Esq.
in whose collection it now is, discovered a small 
tortoise, in flint.
Plants.] — The plants which are indigenous to 
this county are very numerous, and many of them 
rare ; and, as its botanical history has been amply 
elucidated, it is peculiarly interesting to the bota- 
nist.
In the year 1660, Ray, who was a member of 
the University of Cambridge, published a catalogue, 
which he enlarged in 1685 ; in 1763, Professor 
Martyn increased the number, from 626 to 829 ; 
and, in his last edition of the Flora Cantabrigiensis, 
the Rev. Richard Relhan, F.
R. S.
increased it to 
1334.
Messrs.
Lysons, in their Magna Britannia, enu- 
merate the following, as among the more rare : — 
" the Veronica spicata, growing in the neighbour- 
hood of Newmarket ; Schoenus mariscus ; Campa- 
nula Hi/brida ; Herniaria glabra, near Newmarket ; 
Cauca/is daucoides, and Caucalis latifolia, corn fields 
near Kingston, &c.
Selinam palustre, sides of the 
drains which run eastward from Prickwillow ; Jtha- 
mania libanotis, chalk pits near Hinton ; Cicata vi- 
rosa, fens between Ely and Prickwillow ; Staticc 
reticulata, Tydd marsh; Linum peienne, Gogma- 
gog-hills, &c.
Ornithogalum Pifrenaicum, Little 
Eversder ; Frankenia levis, Tydd-gote, near Wis- 
beach ; Si/ene Jnglia, corn fields near Newmarket ; 
Silene st.it.es, plentifully on the banks near Chippen- 
ham ; Lift In un In/ssopifolium, Hinton and Fever- 
sham moors, Oakington, &c.
Euphorbia striata, 
Eversdon wood ; Chelidonium Hybridum, corn 
fields ; Stratoides abides, several places in the Isle 
of Ely ; Anemone putsatilla, Gogma:; >g-hills, Bart- 
low Barrows, &c.
Thalichrum minus, about Linton, 
Bartlow, &c.
Teucrium scordium, abundantly in the 
Isle 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
201 
Isle of Ely ;* -djuga chamapitys, the borders of 
Triplow Heath ; Lconuius cardiaca, near Trump- 
ington ; Galeupsis versicolor, Aldreth causeway, and 
aearWisbeaeh ; Mutampi/ntm cristatum, Madingley, 
Kingston, &c.
Aiabis turrita, walls of Trinity and 
St. John's Colleges ; Geranium Phatum, near Fe- 
versham ; Geranium sanguiyieum, Wood Ditton, &c.
LatJiyrus aphaca, near Newmarket ; Lathyrm lati- 
J'o/ius, woody part of the Devil's ditch; Lat/tt/ius 
sylvestris, woods near Linton, Castle Camps, &c.
Lathyrus pa/ustris, Little Eversden, &c.
Asiragulus 
hyppogloltis, Gogmagog-hills, &c.
Astragiilus gly- 
cyphyllus, near Madingley, Trumpington, &c.
7 1 ijb- 
lium ochroieucnm, near Camberton, Hinton, &c.
Hippocrepis comosu, chalky hills ; Medicago J'ahata, 
about Qui, Chippenham, &c.
Lactuca sa/igna, be- 
tween Iliston and Cottenham ; Crcpis biennis, be- 
tween Bottisham and Newmarket : Hypochacris met- 
adata, Gogmagog-hills, &c.
Carduus eriophoms, 
Madingley, Hiuton, &c.
Gnaphaliy.m luleo-album, 
between Hawkstone and Little Shelford ; Gnapha- 
Uum dioicum, and Cineraria integrifolia, Gogmagog- 
hills ; Opltri/s Loeselii, moors at Hinton, Fever- 
sham, &c.
Oph/ys muscifera, about Hinton, Fever- 
sham, &c.
OpJrrus Monotchis, chalk pits near Hin- 
ton, and Gogmagog-hills ; Oph/ys arunifera, chalky 
pastures near Shelford, Abington, &c.
Ma/aais pa- 
litdaa, Gamlingay bogs, and Hinton moor ; Spar- 
gania nutans, Wilbraham moor, Burwell fens, &c.
Littorella lacustris, Gamlingay bogs.
Etymology.] — Cambridgeshire, as well as the 
counties of Suffolk and Norfolk, was inhabited, be- 
fore the descent of the Romans, by the Cenomanni, 
or Cenimagni, one of the nations of the Iceni, whose 
name, according to the opinions of Camden and 
Salmon, was derived from the wedge-like form of 
their country ; a zcedge in the British hnguage being 
termed Jken.
It has been objected against this, 
that the possessions of the Iceni did not assume the 
figure said to have given them that appellation ; and 
that the alledged etymology must consequently be 
erroneous.
Sir Henry Spelman deduces the name 
from the river Ise, or Ouse, which the Britons are 
reported to have called Ichen.
Baxter imagines it 
to have been derived from Uic, or Uiccn, i.
e. brave 
men ; but Whitaker observes, that " the genuine 
and proper name was Ceni, Y-cen-i, or Cen-ont-es, 
the head ones ; and the appellations- of Cenimagui, 
Cenimanni, or Cenomanni, signify only the head 
men ; man being equally a British and Saxon word, 
and retained in this day in the Erse." Traces of 
the Iceni are yet discoverable by the names of many 
places in the tract which they inhabited ; as Ickle- 
ton, Iksning, (now Exiling,) Ikenthorp, Iksborough, 
the leening Way, and various others, which are evi- 
dently derived from the same root.
General History.] — Tacitus represents the Ice- 
ni, mentioned above, to have been a brave nation.
* Camden speaks of it as peculiar to the isle.
Y1)L.
i. — no.
15.
They appear, at an early period, to have formed an 
alliance with the Romans, yKhich continued uninter- 
rupted till the reign of Claudius, when the proprae- 
tor Ostorius, the better to ensure their fideMty, be- 
gan, among other hostile measures, to deprive them 
of their arms.
Indignant at this insult, they com- 
menced war ; and being assisted by some of the 
neighbouring states, who were equally incensed at 
the conduct of the Romans, they took the field with 
some prospect of success; hut the superior disci- 
pline of their enemies prevailed, and, after an obsti- 
nate conflict, attended with great slaughter, the 
Britons were compelled to submit to the harsh terms 
of their conquerors.
This peace, which had been 
dictated by necessity rather tlian choice, was of short 
continuance ; for the Iceni, exasperated by new in- 
sults, again had recourse to arms, and, under the 
command of their gallant Queen Bunduica, or Boa- 
dicea, began a revolt so alarming in its conse- 
quences, that the whole power of the Romans trem- 
bled.
Prasutagus, King of the Iceni, to avert the 
ruiu of his nation, appointed the Emperor Nero his 
heir, thinkingby such submission that he shouldseeura 
his kingdom and family from injury ; but it hap- 
pened otherwise : his kingdom w'as pillaged by cen- 
turions, and his house by slaves, as if it had been 
taken in war.
His wife Boadicea was scourged, 
and his daughters violated : the principal men oi the 
kingdom, as if the whole had been given away, were 
stripped of their estates, and the royal family treat- 
ed as slaves.
The people consequently took up 
arms, in conjunction with the Trinobauti, and other 
nations, not yet accustomed to slavery.
In this war 
Boadicea, now the widow of Prasutagus, cut off 
80,000 of the Romans and their allies, and destroy- 
ed the colony of Camalodunum, and the Munieium 
of Verulam, routed the IXth Legion, and defeated 
Cains Decianus, the procurator.
About this period, Suetoniinis Paulinus, the Ro- 
man General, who, at the commencement of the in- 
surrection, was busied in destroying the temples and 
groves of Druidism in Anglesea, arrived in London, 
which still continued faithful to the Romans.
There 
he at first resolved to engage the Britons ; but more 
mature consideration determined him not to await 
their attack in so confined a spot, but rather to give 
them battle on the open plains.
This decision, 
perhaps the only one he could make with safety, 
proved the destruction of the Metropolis ; for the 
forces of Boadicea, entering the city on the retreat 
of Suetonius, put the whole or" its miserable inhabi- 
tants to the sword.
After this severe retaliation on 
Roman cruelty, they marched to the town of Verulam, 
now St. Albans, which they also conquered ; and 
all who were so unfortunate as to hill into their 
hands, were indiscriminately slaughtered.
The success which had hitherto attended the Bri- 
tons, and the vivid hopes which they began to en- 
3 E 
tertain.
202 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
tertain of recovering their native liberty, caused a 
considerable augmentation of their army, which now 
amounted to 230,000 men, while the greatest num- 
ber that Suetonius could assemble consisted scarcely 
of 10,000 ; yet with these he resolved to try the 
fortune of a pitched battle, as the only mode of ac- 
tion tbat presented the least probability of retrieving 
his affairs.
He accordingly chose an advantageous 
position at the end of an extensive plain, enclosed at 
the back with a large thick wood, which prevented 
the numerous hosts of the enemy from surrounding 
him.
There he awaited the attack of the Britons, 
who being led on and animated by Boadicca, were 
fast advancing to the combat.
Previously to the 
engagement, the Queen, standing in her war-chariot, 
ami attended by her violated daughters, rode through 
the ranks of her army, and encouraged them to fight 
valiantly in defence of the rights of their injured 
country.
She exhorted them to behave as men de- 
termined to conquer or die ; " for such," said the 
heroine, " is my resolution, who am but a woman, 
even though you, who are men, may wish to live 
like slaves." This speech inspired the Britons 
with a full assurance of victory ; and they tes- 
tified their applause by loud and repeated accla- 
mations.
In the meantime, Suetonius had been preparing 
his troops for the approaching danger.
Pie en- 
treated them not to be dismayed at the clamours of 
their barbarous foes, who, however numerous, he 
exclaimed, " will never be able to withstand the 
force of your weapons, nor your valour, which has 
so often put them to flight." The soldiers listened 
to his exhortations with joy ; and their eagerness to 
begin the fight could only be checked by the com- 
mands of their general, who ordered them to keep 
their stations till the fury of the first assault of the 
enemy should subside.
The Britons rushed to the 
combat with impetuosity, fiercely discharging their 
darts at the Roman soldiers, who sustained the 
shock with their accustomed resolution ; but when 
the greater part of their missive weapons was ex- 
pended, the ltomans made an attack with the four- 
teenth legion, and drove them back in confusion.
Suetonius then commanded his cavalry to advance, 
who with their long lances so discomfited the Bri- 
tons, that their ranks successively gave way, and 
the rout soon became general.
The retreat of the 
vanquished was impeded by their own imprudence ; 
for so confident had they been of victory, that they 
assembled their wives and children as witnesses of 
the miseries which they intended to inflict on their 
late insulting conquerors, and all the passes from 
the field were blocked up by the carts and waggons 
in which their families had been placed to view the 
battle.
The slaughter was prodigious ; and even 
the hapless women, who had been the mournful 
spectators of the defeat of their dearest relatives, 
were sacrificed by the merciless victors.
It is 
said that, on this dreadful day nearly 80,000 of the 
Britons were destroyed, while the loss of the Romans 
hardly amounted to 400.
The pursuit having ceased, the chiefs of the Iceni, 
who had escaped the sword, began to collect their 
scattered forces, and once more resolved to try the 
chance of battle ; but, finding that Boadicea, unable 
to sustain the frustration of her dearest hopes, was 
either dead with grief, or had terminated her days 
by poison, they soon dispersed ; and from this pe- 
riod, we have no records of the Iceni as a separate 
nation.
Cambridgeshire, in the first division of Britain 
under the Romans, formed a part of liritannku Su- 
pe>ior; in the second division, it was in Britamiica 
Prima ; and, under the last division, it was includ- 
ed in the district of Fluvia Casariemis.
After the 
expulsion of the Romans, it became part of the 
kingdom of the East Angles, by whom it was called 
Grauta bri/gseyr.
Uffa, a great Saxon commander, was the first 
king of the East Angles.
Egryck, the sixth king, 
became tributary to Penda, king of Mercia, and 
afterwards to the kings of Kent and the West Sax- 
ons.
The last of their kings was Edmund, who 
having for some time opposed the Danes, who, un- 
der their Generals Hunga and Hubba, had invaded 
his dominions, and besieged Thetford, was at last 
forced by them to his castle at Framlingham, where 
he was, after a short siege, taken by them, and 
murdered at Heglisdon, near Hoxne, in Suf- 
folk.
The Danes occupied the kingdom of East 
Anglia fifty years, ravaging the country and plun- 
dering the people, till King Edward the Elder, a 
warlike and victorious monarch, wrested it from 
them by force, and added it to his own kingdom of 
the West Saxons.
He and his successors commit- 
ted it as a province to the government of certain de- 
puties, of whom one Ralph, a Briton, was possess- 
ed of it at the time of the Norman conquest.
Soon after the battle of Hastings, Archbishop 
Stigand, being obnoxious to the conqueror, fled to 
the isle of Ely, whither he was followed by the ab- 
bot of St. Alban's, the Bishop of Durham, and 
some thousands both of the clergy and laity ; 
amongst whom were the Earls of Leicester, War- 
wick, Hereford, Suffolk, and Northumberland.
Thus 
assembled in considerable force, they chose Here- 
ward, a brave Knight, younger son of Leofric Earl 
of Mercia, for their general, and fortified the island 
against the King.
This was about the year 1067.
Matthew Paris, who lived in the reign of Henry 
III.
states, that a wooden fortress, then erected in 
the fens, remained till his time, and was known by 
the name of Hereward's Castle.
The King, on 
hearing of these transactions, hastened towards 
Cambridgeshire with his whole army, invested the 
isle by land and water, caused a castle to be built at 
Wisbeach, and a fortress to be made at Roche on.
the south side of the isle ; and having ordered a 
rendezvous of his army at Aldreth, where the fen 
was 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
20;i 
was four furlongs in breadth, caused a bridge or 
causeway to be made of wood, stone, and faggots 
of all kinds, with trees and great pieces of timber 
fastened underneath with cow hides ; but this struc- 
ture proved so insecure, that the greater part of his 
army in attempting to pass it were drowned in the 
fens.
He now gave over, for the present, any farther 
attempts to subdue his enemies in the island, and 
retired with the remains of his army, leaving cer- 
tain guards of soldiers on the borders of the fens, 
to prevent them from laying waste the neighbouring 
country : some incursions, nevertheless, were made 
by the islanders, in one of which they set fire to the 
town of Burnwell, and had a successful skirmish 
with some soldiers from the king's garrison at 
Rodie-.
During all this time the earls and knights were 
entertained in the refectory of the abbey at Ely, the 
earls sitting at the high table with the abbot, and 
the knights and monks at the other tables alternate- 
ly, every man with his target and lance hanging 
near him on the wall, to be ready for immediate ac- 
tion.
The King being with his court at Brandon 
in Suffolk, a few miles to the east of the isle of Ely, 
Hereward cveftt thither in disguise, and succeeded 
^ in gaining information of the measures which had 
been concerted for reducing the island.
The King 
now advanced a second time with his army to Al- 
dreth, and caused great store of wood and faggots 
to be brought thither, for the purpose of making 
another causeway ; having summoned all the fisher- 
men in those parts to meet him with their boats at a 
place called Cotingelade, to convey the materials to 
Aldrith ; Hereward, having disguised himself as one 
of that occupation, repaired thither with a boat ; 
and was among the most active in bringing mate- 
rials to the place appointed at Aldreth ; but as soon 
as they were collected together in a great quantity, 
he took an opportunity of setting fire to the whole 
pile.
The King having ordered a more strict guard 
to be kept night and day, caused certain earth- 
works to be thrown up near the causeway, which 
are supposed to be those now called Belsar's hills, 
a name which is conjectured to have been derived 
froia Belasius the Norman general.
When the be- 
sieging army was on the point of making another 
attack on the island, the inhabitants set fire to the 
reeds, which, spreading far and wide, caused a great 
• panic among the assailants, and a hasty retreat with 
much loss.
About this time, which must have been in the year 
1074, Ralph de Waher, or Guader, whom the con- 
queror had made Earl of the East Angles, rebelled 
against his benefactor, and, having encamped with 
his army near Cambridge, was joined by most of 
the chief English nobility from the island ; but on 
the advance of the king's army, under the command 
ef the bishops of Baieux and Constance, retired 
precipitately to Norwich.
Hereward with his forces 
still resolutely defended the isle, and the king de- 
spairing of succeeding in his attempts to reduce it 
by assault, seized on all the lands of the monastery, 
which were without the limits of the island, and di- 
vided them among his soldiers, who were thus ex- 
cited to more than ordinary diligence, in the service 
in which they were engaged.
No sooner had the 
abbot and monks received this unwelcome intelli- 
gence, than they resolved to send private messen- 
gers to the king, then at Warwick, with an offer of 
the payment of 1000 marks, and the surrender of 
the island, on condition that he would resume his 
grant and restore the possessions of the church : the 
offer having been accepted, they took the opportu- 
nity, while the brave Hereward, who had defended 
their island for seven years, was absent on a forag- 
ing party, to admit the king and his army, who be- 
fore Hereward' s return were encamped at Witch - 
ford, within two miles of Ely. Finding that resist- 
ance would now be vain, but disdaining to submit to 
the mercy of the Norman invader, Hereward, with 
a few followers, made good his escape, and though 
he never ceased, as we are told, to concert hostile 
measures against the conqueror, he not only had 
the singular good fortune to escape death or im- 
prisonment, but, what is more remarkable, it appears 
that his estates descended to his heirs, and continu- 
ed, although in turbulent times, for many genera- 
tions, in his posterity.
In the reign of King Stephen, at the commence- 
ment of those civil wars which distracted the coun- 
try during the greater part of that monarch's reign, 
Ely was again the scene of action.
At that period, 
Nigellus, bishop of Ely, who was attached to the 
interest of the empress Maud, built a wooden castle, 
there, surrounding it with bulwarks.
He also re- 
paired and garrisoned the castle at Aldreth, resolv- 
ing to defend the island against the King.
Stephen, 
however, succeeded in expelling him, and he joined 
the Empress at Gloucester.
Two years afterwards, 
(about 1142) the island being still in a state of re- 
volt, Geoffry de Mandeville, Earl of Essex, and 
Gilbert, Earl of Ciare, were sent thither by the 
King, to seize and imprison such of the Bishop's 
men as they should find in arms.
In the interim, 
the Bishop had returned, and repossessed himself 
of the place.
In 1144, at which time the Bishop 
was at Rome, the men of Ely, suspecting that the 
king's friends were meditating mischief against 
them, called to their assistance Geoffrey de Mande- 
ville, Earl of Essex, whom the Empress Maud had 
gained over, and committed the castles of Ely and 
Aldreth to his care.
The disaffected Earl, conceiv- 
ing himself to have been greatly injured by the king, 
laid waste the royal demesnes, and the possessions 
of those who were attached to Stephen, wherever 
he came.
Stephen, in revenge, desolated the pos- 
sessions of the Bishop ; and, in addition to these 
repeated devastations, the wretched inhabitants of 
Ely were visited by the complicated horrors of pes- 
tilence and famine.
In the mean time, the Earl of 
Essex lost his life in an encounter with the King's 
forces.
About 
201 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
About the time that the Avar between King John 
and his barons was at its height, the king appointed 
Falcasius de Brent governor of Cambridge castle.
Walter Bunck, with a party of Brabanters, now en- 
tered the isle of Ely, and plundered the monasteries, 
carrying away the monks and extorting great sums 
for their release.
Soon afterwards, the Earl of Sa- 
lisbury, Falcasius de Brent, and Savang de Mallo 
Leone, also entered the island, and plundered the 
churches of what had been spared by Bunck.
They 
entered the cathedral with drawn swords, threaten- 
ing to burn it to the ground, a fate which was avert- 
ed only by the payment of 200 marks.
Many of the 
inhabitants, however, were taken prisoners.
Nearly at the same time, the barons who were in 
London went with some cavalry into Cambridge- 
shire, and laid waste' the whole county.
The King, 
intending to wreak his vengeance on the estates of 
some of the rebellious barons, shortly afterwards 
marched into Cambridgeshire, where, Holiilshed 
tells us, he did " hurt enough." His Majesty pass- 
ed on into, Norfolk and Suffolk, and not long after- 
wards died, at Newark Castle, in Nottinghamshire.
In the interim, the barons took possession of the 
Isle of Ely, with the exception of one fortress, sup- 
posed to be Ely castle, whither the Kings's friends 
had retreated.
Shortly after the accession of Henry III.
Louis, 
the Dauphin of France, and the English barons, 
held a council at Cambridge.
In 1266, whilst the 
king was engaged in the siege of Kenilworth, John 
Dayville, with other rebellious barons, and disin- 
herited persons, having laid waste Cambridgeshire 
and Huntingdonshire, took possession of the town 
and the isle of Ely, on the eve of St. Lawrence.
The bishop, who had undertaken to keep the isle for 
the kings use, saved himself by flight ; and went 
with the news to court, where he met with a cool re- 
ception for having so ill defended his post.
The 
barons having established themselves in the island, 
fortified it on every side, and daily sent out their 
foraging parties, who plundered Cambridge, and 
committed great depredations in various parts of the 
county.
In the month of February following, the king, 
with the intention of checking these depredations, 
came himself to Cambridge, where he commanded 
gates to be erected, and a ditch to be dug round 
the town, with all possible expedition ; but uncheck- 
ed as it should seem by the King's presence, the 
Barons continued their depredations.
Whilst they 
were plundering the village of Hornsey, Sir Walter 
Cottenham, (who had been knighted by the barons,) 
with a few others of plebeian rank, fell into the 
King's hajids and were executed.
The King re- 
mained at Cambridge the whole Lent, and was there 
joined by Prince Edward, who brought with him 
from Scotland, an army of 30,000 men to his assist- 
ance.
With this reinforcement he marched to 
Windsor, his presence being more immediately 
wanted ia the neighbourhood of the metropolis, by 
reason of the rebellion of the Earl of Gloucester.
Cambridge was left undefended to the mercy of his 
enemies, who, as soon as they heard of his depar- 
ture, came thither, burnt down the house where he 
had been lodged, and destroyed the gates which 
had been put up by his command ; they threatened 
also to set fire to the priory of Barnwell, but were 
persuaded to desist at the entreaty of the Peches, 
patrons of that monastery, who were of the baron's 
party.
Shortly after this, however, Prince Edward 
effected the capture of the islaud, as it is believed, 
with scarcely any opposition.
In the year 1553, Lady Jane Grey was proclaim- 
ed Queen, at Cambridge, by the Duke of Northum- 
berland.
At the.
commencement of the war between King 
Charles and his Parliament, Cambridge and the isle 
of Ely associated under Lord Grey, of Werke, for 
the Parliament ; and Lord Clarendon speaks of 
Cambridgeshire, as one of the associated counties 
in which the King had not any visible party.
Not- 
withstanding this, Cambridgeshire seems to have 
suffered but little from the contest.
The only injury 
which it sustained, seems to have been some plun- 
der committed by the King's troops, in the year 
1645.
Two years before this, Cromwell took pos- 
session of Cambridge, for the Parliament, and many 
of the most distinguished loyalists were expelled 
from the University.
In June 1647, the Parlia- 
mentary army under Fairfax and Cromwell had their 
head-quarters at Kennet, near Newmarket ; at which 
time the King was seized at Holdenby by Cornet 
Joyce, and conveyed to Lady Cutts's house, at 
Childerley, near Cambridge, whence he was after- 
wards removed to Newmarket.
During the time that the Parliamentary army re- 
mained in Cambridgeshire, it had one general ren- 
dezvous on Triplow Heath, and another near Roy- 
ston!
It was at this time that Cromwell, who had 
obtained leave to join the army, acquired that in- 
fluence which ultimately led him to the protec- 
torate.
For several years past, no historical event has oc- 
curred, bearing any particular reference to this 
county.
Antiquities.] — Cambridge is rich in architectu- 
ral remains, and church antiquities, of which there 
will be occasion to speak more at large hereafter.
Of Roman antiquities, very few have been found 
in this county, excepting on the site of the station 
at Cambridge ; where have been frequently found 
Roman utensils, coins, urns, and earthen-ware, of 
various kinds.
Several years ago, in a gravel pit, 
in the corner of Trnmpington field, many curious 
patene of fine red ware were found ; a large vase 
three feet long, brass lagcruc, an embossed brazen 
dish, the brasses of a table book, some Roman coins, 
some large bones, and 'the handle of a sacrificing 
knife ; the whole of which were deposited at Cam- 
bridge, ia the library of Trinity College.
About the year 1713, not far from a tumulus, at 
Elm, 
• CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
205 
Elm, an urn full of Roman brass coins was taken 
up ; and a Roman altar is said to have been found 
near the same place.
In 1730, three urns full of 
burnt bones, and a pot containing 160 Roman de- 
narii, were found in the road between March and 
Ely. At Soham, also some Roman urns have been 
found.
A few years ago, several spear-heads and 
oelts were discovered in a gravel pit near Sawston, 
Some of winch are in the possession of Ferdinand 
Huddleston, Esq. of that place.
On Newmarket 
Heath, within the site of the camp at Arbury, and 
within that called Vandlebury, on Gogmagog hills, 
several Roman coins, some of them large brass ones ; 
and at the last mentioned place, in 1730, a silver 
ring was also found.
In the parish of Sutton, in the isle of Ely, three 
silver plates were discovered by a labourer at plough 
in 1634 ; one of them, which was circular, had a 
Dan.
-Saxon inscription round it, which has been 
variously interpreted.
Several large gold rings, 
and a hundred silver coins of William the Conque- 
ror were found at the same time.
Several human 
skeletons, an iron sword, spear, and umbo of a 
shield, with an earthen urn and glass vase, were 
found at Cbatteries, in a kind cf tumulus, near So- 
mershani ferry, in the year 1757.
In a tumulus, 
between Haslingfield and Comberton, a stone coffin 
was found ; and in 1778, in a tumulus on Gogma- 
gog hills, several human skeletons were discovered.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Divisions.] — At the 
time of the Norman Survey, the town of Cam- 
bridge was taxed as a hundred ; and, exclusively 
of the two hundreds of Ely (now divided into three) 
the remainder of the county was divided into four- 
teen hundreds.
The present division, into hun- 
dreds, is as follows : 
Armingford, Radfield, 
Cheveley, Staine, 
Chesterton, Staploe, 
Chilford.
Triplow, 
Ely, Weiherley, 
Fiendish, Wichford, 
Long Stow Wisbech, 
ftorth Slow, Whiltlesford.
Papworth, 
Th<* county of Cambridge returns two members 
to Parliament ; Ely, the only city in the county, re- 
turns two members ; the town, and the' University, 
each returns two members ; and there is no other 
borough in the county.
The interest of the county 
is in the Rutland and Hardwicke families ; that of 
the town, in the Duke of Rutland, as nominee of 
J. Mortlock, Esq.
: the number of the electors for 
the latter is 240.
The Doctors and Masters of Arts, 
of which there are 850, return the members for the 
University.
Cambridge, with the exception of a few parishes, 
on the east and north- east sides, which belong to 
the see of Norwich and Rochester, was taken from 
the see of Lincoln by Henry the first, in the year 1114, 
and made into a separate diocese for the newly- 
vol.
i. — NO.
15i 
erected bishop of Ely. It lies in the province ©f 
Canterbury.
Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Seats.] — Wim- 
pole, the Earl of Hardwicke's; Cheveley, the Duke 
of Rutland's ; Hare Park, Earl Grosvenor's ; and 
Gogmagog Hill, Lord F.
G. Osborne's, are the 
present chief seats of the nobility in this county.
Horsehcath, the seat of Lord Alingtou, and af- 
terwards of Lord Montfort, was pulled down in the 
year 1777 ; and Catlage, the ancient seat of the 
Norths, has lately been levelled with the ground.
At present, there is not one baronet in this coun- 
ty, who resides at the place of which he was de- 
scribed in the patent of his creation ; and it is fur- 
ther remarkable, that, out of a list of 235 families, 
recorded in the year 1433, the Cottons, of Land- 
wade, now removed to Madingley, are the only one 
that is not extinct, or has not quitted the county.
The principal seats of the respective noblemen 
and gentlemen will be described, in order, as they 
occur.
Market Towns.] — The following are the present 
market towns of Cambridgeshire : 
Cambridge 
Ely 
Linton 
March 
Thorney 
Wisbech 
Newmarket, and Royston, are only partly in this 
county.
Cambridge, Ely, Linton, and Wisbeaeh, 
are considerable corn-markets ; but those of March, 
and Thorney, are merely for butcher's meat.
About twenty-six, or twenty-Seven other place* 
in this county formerly had markets, most of them 
holden by charter ; but they have all been discon- 
tinued.
Population.] — The number of persons who were 
charged with a poll-tax, from which the clergy, 
children, and paupers, were exempted, in the year 
1377, was 27,350 ; but it has not been ascertained, 
Whether this number was exclusively of the town or 
Cambridge and the city of Ely, in each of which 
1722 persons were taxed.
If those places were 
taxed separately, the total number would be 30,794 
According to the population returns of 1801, there 
Were 16,451 houses in Cambridgeshire, of which 
16,139 were inhabited; the total number of inhabi- 
tants was 89,346, of whom 44,081 were males, and 
45,265 females.
Of this total number, 28,054 were 
principally employed in agriculture, and 11,988 in 
trade, commerce, and manufactures.
The population returns of 1811 indicate a con- 
siderable increase.
There were then 17,232 inhabi- 
ted houses, occupied by 21,022 families; 257 unin- 
habited houses, and 93 building ; the total number 
of persons was 101,109 ; of whom 50,756 were 
males, and 50,353 were females : 12,831 families 
were employed in agriculture ; and 8,191 were oc-> 
cupied in other pusuits.
This will more clearly ap- 
pear in the following table.
The scale of mortality 
The annual deaths are, in proportion to the number 
of persons, as 1 to 44.
3 r Summary 
206 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Summary of the Population of the County of Cambridge, as published by Authority of Parliament in 1S1I.
HOUSES.
OCCUPATIONS.
PERSONS.
Hundreds, &c.
M 
IS 
2 1> 4-' 
2.3*5.
M 
c 
in 
CQ 
V 
15 
n 
j= 
a 
"S 
ft) .17 V 
i'sl 
» S» 3 
'5 §" ob 
1H-045* 
V "a   f 
.i — cu h 
°q p « o 
S !£ u m 
•£ ~ *- od 
3 O J S 
"h  — .s u 
Males.
Females.
F n 
Total 
of 
Persons.
720 
493 
373 
657 
310 
604 
453 
751 
576 
558 
1336 
585 
532 
388 
5977 
1991 
928 
17232 
1025 
666 
531 
879 
398 
821 
582 
936 
705 
658 
1585 
778 
708 
552 
6930 
2324 
944 
3 
2 
4 
3 
4 
1 
2 
5 
5 
11 
1 
6 
3 
26 
16 
1 
4 
4 
2 
19 
2 
2 
2 
10 
15 
12 
22 
6 
7 
7 
95 
26 
22 
841 
498 
330 
610 
296 
638 
475 
694 
550 
470 
1114 
584 
588 
444 
4213 
80 
406 
148 
146 
no 
185 
64 
150 
78 
no 
125 
99 
335 
152 
82 
99 
1558 
1600 
262 
36 
22 
91 
84 
38 
33 
29 
132 
30 
89 
136 
42 
38 
9 
1159 
644 
276 
2428 
1516 
1215 
1991 
S90 
1888 
1451 
2144 
1710 
1586 
3574 
1751 
1464 
1102 
15775 
5283 
2034 
2946 
2459 
1581 
1274 
2149 
913 
1781 
1402 
2106 
1832 
1641 
3777 
1852 
1612 
1274 
16665 
5820 
2215 
4887 
3097 
2489 
4140 
1803 
3669 
2S53 
4250 
3542 
3227 
7351 
3603 
3076 
2376 
32443 
,11108 
4249 
2946 
Chilford 
Radfield 
jStaploe 
iWetberley 
Whittlesford 
[sleof Ely 
Borough and University ) 
City of Ely 
Local Militia 
.. .
21022 
93 
257 
12831 
5303 
2888 
50756 
50353 101109 
Chief Towns, Parishes, &c.
Abijjgton in the Clay.] — Abington in the Clay, 
or Abington Pigotts, is situated in the hundred of 
Arminglbrd, five miles and a half west-north-west 
from lioyston.
The manor was in the Pigott family, 
at least as far back as the year 1428, till the death 
of the late Granado Pigott, Esq. F.
R. S.
in 1802.
His son-in-law, the Rev. William Foster (now Fos- 
ter Pigott) is the present Lord.
Arrington.] — Arrington, anciently called Ermin- 
ton, is situated in the hundred, of Wetherley, 5| 
miles south-east from Caxton, near Lord Hard- 
wieke's park.
At this place, in October, 1721, the 
skeletons of sixteen human bodies were found in 
digging for a water course, within two feet of the 
surface.
Some pieces of iron were also found, which 
seemed to have been pieces of swords ; and, from 
their situation, it was conjectured that the skeletons 
were the remains of persons who had been killed, in 
endeavouring to obtain possession of the pass over 
the river, during the civil wars.
Babraham.] — Bubraham, anciently Badburham, 
is situated in the hundred of Chilford, four miles 
north-west by west from Linton.
This place, which was one of the manors of Al- 
gar, Earl of Mercia, at the time of the Norman sur- 
vey, formerly had a market on Mondays.
About 
the year 1576, the whole manorial property in the 
parish fell into the possession of Sir Horatio Pala- 
vicini, a Genoese.
According to the tradition of th« 
neighbourhood, this gentleman was collector of the 
Pope's taxes in England, in the reign of Queen 
Mary, on whose death, and the consequent change of 
religion under Elizabeth, he converted the Pope's 
money to his own use, and settled in this country.
This tradition is corroborated by the following 
whimsical epitaph, printed in Lord Orford's Anec- 
dotes of Painting, from a manuscript in the posses- 
sion of Sir John Crewe, an eminent herald and an- 
tiquary, of Utkinton, in Cheshire •.
— 
" Here lyes Horatio Palavazene, 
Who robb'd the Pope to lend the Queene.
H e was a thiefe— A thiefe !
Thou lyest : 
For what !
He robb'd but Antichrist.
Him Death wyth hesome swept from Bab' ram 
Into the bosom of ould Abraham ; 
But then came Hercules with his club, 
And struck him down to Belzcbub." 
Sir Horatio was in great favour with Queen Eli- 
zabeth.
He was naturalised, by patent, in 1586; 
he commanded one of the English men of war in the 
great battle with the Spanish Armada, in 1588 ; and 
he was employed by the Queen, in her negotiations 
with the German Princes.
Sir Horatio died at Babraham, on the 6th of July, 
1600.
His family were baptized and buried in this 
t village 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
207 
village, as appears- Ijy the Register, -which also re- 
cords the marriage of Sir Horatio's widow with Sir 
Oliver Cromwell, the Protector's uncle, exactly a 
year and a day after her husband's decease.
The 
building in which Sir Horatio resided was called 
Babraham Place, and is mentioned by Mr. Gough 
as being a noble Gothic structure, one of the best 
and largest houses in the county.
From the reign 
of Charles the First it belonged to the Bennet fa- 
mily, several of whose monuments are in the church.
Alexander Bennet, Esq. who married a daughter of 
Sir Peter Burrell, sold the house, pictures, and 
estate, in the year 1765, when the mansion was 
wholly taken down.
Robert Jones, Esq. purchased 
the estate of the person to whom it had been sold 
by Bennet, and, on the site of tiie ancient mansion, 
erected the present edifice, a large square brick 
building, now occupied by General Adeane in right 
of his wife, the daughter of Mr. Jones.
The Park 
is pleasant, and tolerably well wooded, but is not 
extensive.
The poor of this parish are partly maintained by 
a bequest of 971.
a year, expended under certain 
restrictions imposed by the donor.
Here are an alms-house and a free-school found- 
ed by Levinus Bush, Esq. and his sister Mrs. Ju- 
dith Bennet ; and the yearly sum of 251.
is appro- 
priated to the apprenticing of children.
In the year 1665, a -great flood occurred in this 
village, and another in 1749.
Balsham.] — Balsham, in the half hundred of 
Radfield, three miles and three quarters north by 
east from Linton, is recorded in history, as the place 
where the Danes committed great barbarities in the 
year 1610.
Henry of Huntingdon speaks of the 
Gogmagog hills, which are situated partly in this 
parish, as " the most pleasant hills of Balsham." 
Balsham formerly had a market and fair, both 
long discontinued ; but it still has an annual feast, 
or wake, which is kept three successive days, begin- 
ning on the 6th of July.
Leofleda, the daughter of the Duke of Brithnoth, 
and wife of Oswy, gave the manor of Balsham to 
the church of Ely ; and, after the foundation of the 
-see of Ely, it was one of the manors assigned to the 
bishop.
It continued annexed to the see till the 
year 1600, when, having been alienated by Bishop 
Heton, in an exchange with the crown, it was pro- 
cured by Mr. Thomas Sutton, the founder of the 
Charter-House, and made part of the endowment of 
that noble institution, in the governors of which it 
continues to be vested.
The manor of Oxcroft, in the parishes of Balsham 
and West Wrathing, is the property of Lord 
Francis Osborne, who purchased it of Earl Gros- 
venor.
Balsham is celebrated for the 
great 
revenues of 
* Hugh tie Balsham-, founder of the Peter House, Cam- 
bridge, was bor» at Balsham.
William de Boltesham, or Bol- 
sam, who was made Bishop of Bethlehem, in the Holy Land, 
its rectory, winch is in the gift of the Charter- 
House.
^John de Sleford, Master of the Wardrobe to Ed- 
ward III.
and rector of Balsham, who died in 1401, 
built the parish church, and erected the oak stalls in 
the chancel, which still remain.
His tomb, and that 
of John Blodwell, who died in 1462, are very richly 
ornamented with brass plates.* 
Bassingbourn.] — Bassingbourn is situated in the 
hundred of Armingford, five miles and a half north- 
west by west from Royston.
It formerly had a 
market on Mondays, and a fair for eight days, at the 
festival of St. Peter and St. Paul.
The market has 
long been discontinued, but the fair is still kept up 
for the hiring of servants.
At the west end of the north aisle of Bassingbourn 
church is a parochial library, which was founded by 
Edward Nightingale, Esq. in 1717.
The church 
contains some monuments of the Nightingales (of 
Kneesworth, a hamlet of Bassingbourn) ; amongst 
which is that, of the late Sir Edward Nightingale, 
Bart, who died in 1804.
We learn, from Messrs.
Lysons, that " there is an antient book of church- 
wardens' accounts in this parish, which contains 
many particulars worthy of notice : the earliest date 
is 1497.
In that year several entries of church- 
ales occur, the profits of which are carried to the 
parish account.
In the year 1511, " the playe of 
the holy martir Seynt George," appears to have 
been represented at Bassingbourn, with much cele- 
brity, on St. Margaret's day ; several neighbouring 
villages, both in Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire, and 
Hertfordshire, seem to have joined in the expences ; 
some individuals contributed labour, others gave 
provisions, as wheat, malt, and sheep ; six sheep 
and three calve* were purchased by the parish, be- 
sides chicken, " for rhe gentlemen ;" the players 
and the musicians were hired for the occasion, the 
latter came from Cambridge.
Hobard, a brother- 
hood priest, appears to have been the prompter.
On the first of March preceding, the sum of 31.
8s.
3{d.
was collected, towards the making of a new 
image of St. George." 
Kneesworth, the hamlet already mentioned, for- 
merly had a chapel of ease; but it has long since 
been dilapidated ; and the door-way, which is the 
only part remaining ol the building, now forms the 
entrance to Sir Charles Nightingale's home barn.
Kneesworth House, the seat of Sir Charles Night- 
ingale, is an ancient brick structure, very pleasantly 
situated.
Bottisham.] — Bottisham is situated in the hun- 
dred of Staine, five miles and a quarter west-south- 
west from Newmarket.
A small priory of Austin canons w r as founded at 
Anglesey, in this parish, by Henry I.
; the revenues 
of which, at the time of the Dissolution, were valued 
by the Pope, in 1385, and who was afterwards Bishop of Ro- 
chester, was born either at Balsham or Bottisham.
208 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
at 124.1.
19s.
a year.
The site of the priory, and the 
manor of Anglesey, or Anglesey cum Bottisham, 
which is the paramount manor, were at that time 
granted to John Hinde, Esq. from whom they soon 
afterwards passed to the family of Foulke.
Thomas 
Jlobson, the carrier, became possessed of them in 
1627, and conveyed them in 1629 to the Parker fa- 
mily, in which they remained upwards of a century.
In 1736, the manor was sold to Sir George Down- 
ing, Bart, of whose heirs it was purchased, in 1793, 
by the present proprietor, the Rev. G.
L. Jenyns.
The site of the priory, now also the property of the 
Rev. G.
L. Jenyns, was sold by Mr. Parker to Sa- 
muel Shepheard, Esq. of whose grand-daughter it 
was purchased by the widow of the late Soame Je- 
nyns, Esq. in 1793.
The site of the priory is occu- 
pied by a farm-house, in which some of the remains 
of the conventual buildings are visible.
The manor of Ulingtons likewise belongs to the 
Rev. G.
L. Jenyns.
Bottisham Hall, the seat of that gentleman, was 
rebuilt a few years ago, on or near the site of an 
ancient mansion, formerly, for many years, the resi- 
dence of Mr. Soame Jenyns.* 
Bottisham church contains the tomb of the cele- 
brated Eiias de Bekingham, Justicias of England, 
in the reign of Edward I.
a man whose name has 
been transmitted with honour to posterity, as dis- 
tinguished by uprightness and integrity, at a time 
when, with a single exception, all his brethren were 
convicted of the most shameful corruption.
This 
church also contains some other memorials of the 
" honoured dead ;" amongst which may be particu- 
larly mentioned, a handsome monument, of white 
marble, with whole length figures, in memory of Sir 
Roger Jenyns, Knt. who died in 1740 ; and in 
memory of Soame Jenyns, whom we have already 
mentioned, by Bacon, with the following inscrip- 
tion : — 
" Near this place are interred the remains of Soame 
Jenyns, the only son of Sir Roger Jenyns, Knt. and 
dame Elizabeth his wife, one of the daughters of Sir 
Peter Sctame, of Heydon, in the county of Essex; 
he sat in Parliament 38 years, and as one of the lords 
commissioners of trade 25 years: he was twice mar- 
ried, first to Mary, the sole daughter of Colonel 
Soame, of Dereham, in the county of Norfolk; after- 
wards to Elizabeth, the daughter of Henry Grey, Esq.
of Hackney, in the county of Middlesex : she sur- 
vived him.
He was born the 3 1st of December 1703, 
and died, leaving no issue, the 18th of December 1787.
His amiable and benevolent temper, the superior 
powers of his understanding, accompanied with an 
uncommon brilliancy of the truest and chastest wil, 
* This gentleman, celebrated as a writer, was born in Lon- 
don in 1703, and educated at a private school, from whence he 
vva^ sent to St. John's College, Cambridge..
In 1728 he pub- 
lish.
-.1 a poem on the Art of Dancing.
He was elected into 
Parliament in 1741, and enjoyed a seat in that house till 1780.
In 1753 he was appointed one of the lords of trade, which place 
he held till that board was abolished.
He died in 1787.
His 
.works are: 1.
Poems, 2 vols.
l2mo.
2. Free Enquiry into 
his exemplary moral character, his able defence of 
Christianity, whose rule he uniformly practised, were 
all such excellencies in him as will survive with an 
affectionate and deep regret for his loss in the remem 
brance of those with whom he lived.
When they are 
no more, posterity will know from his writings the 
justness of the sketch here drawn of his character.
This memorial was erected by his afflicted widow, 
who, having passed her life in the exercise of those 
virtues which rendered her sex amiable, died July 
25th, 1796, aged 94." 
Sir Roger Jenyns, mentioned above, founded a 
school at Bottisham, and endowed it with 201.
a year, 
for the education of twenty children.
Giles Breame, Esq. in the year 1621, founded an 
alms-house at Eastham, in the county of Essex, for 
six poor persons, three of whom were to be pa- 
rishioners of Bottisham.
In 1795, the estate with 
which this alms-house had been endowed was let at 
nearly 501.
a year, a moiety of which was given to 
the poor of Bottisham, besides a small rent for three 
of the apartments, as it had been found incouvenient 
to till up the vacancies with parishioners of Bottis- 
ham, at so great a distance.
In ancient times, various benefactions were given 
for the maintenance of lights in Lode Street, Long 
Meadow, and Bottisham Street, for the purpose of 
directing travellers in the night.
Bourne.] — Bourne, in the hundred of Stow, is 
situated a mile and three quarters south-east by east 
from Caxton.
In the year 870, this place, accord- 
ing to Blomefield, was the Lordship of Morcar, who 
had a numerous and warlike family, most of whom 
were killed in battle, by the Danes.
It was after- 
wards the seat of the barony of Picot de Cambridge, 
sheriff of the county, in which he held very large 
possessions, at the time of the Norman survey.
He 
had a castle at this place, of which the moat and 
other vestiges still remain.
It was subsequently in the 
Peverells, Peches, Riggesbys, Hingreths, Ellises, 
and Leyells ; and is now the property of the Earl of 
Delaware, whose father married the only daughter 
and heir of Henry Leyell, Esq. who died in 1803.
The manor-house stands on a rising ground, to 
the south-west of the church, in the middle of the 
ancient works which formerly surrounded the castle.
Bourne church is a capacious Gothic structure^ 
with a large square tower.
Boxworth.] — Boxworth is situated in the hun- 
dred of Papworth, four miles and a half north-east 
by north from Caxton.
Dr. Nicholas Saunderson, 
the celebrated blind mathematician, lies buried iu 
Boxworth church.
f 
Burgh.] 
the Origin of Evil, 12mo.
3. A View of the internal Evidence 
of the Christian Religion, 12mo.
4. Political Tracts : all col- 
lected into four vols.
12mo.
with his life prefixed.
f This gentleman was born in the year 16S2, at Thurlston, 
in Yorkshire.
He lost his sight when twelve months old bj 
the small pox ; but was sent to the free school tl Penhiston, 
where he made a great proficiency in classical learning.
At 
the age of eighteen he was introduce J to Mr. West, a gentle- 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
209 
Burgh.] — 'Burgh, or Bur rough -Green, is situated 
in the hundred of Radfield, four miles south from 
Newmarket.
Prior to the Conquest, the manor belonged to 
Editha, Queen of Edward the Confessor, who had 
large possessions in Cambridgeshire.
She is sup- 
posed to have had a palace here, for her occasional 
residence.
The church contains some mutilated monuments 
of the Burgh and Ingoldesthorp families.
In the year 1734, Dr. Samuel Knight founded a 
school here, for the children of the poorest inhabi- 
tants, and such others as may be nominated by the 
rector or curate, to be taught free of expence.
The 
estate with which this institution is endowed, now 
lets for upwards of 541.
a year.
Burwell.] — Burwell is a large and populous 
village, situated in the hundred of Staplehoe, four 
miles north-west by west from Newmarket.
It con- 
sists chiefly of one irregular street, upwards of three 
quarters of a mile in length.
The houses are built 
with a peculiar sort of stone, obtained from the 
neighbouring pits, that is celebrated for making ex- 
cellent lime.
Burwell Castle, of which the moat and other con- 
siderable vestiges yet appear, a little to the west of 
the church, is supposed, from the nearness of its si- 
tuation to the Devil's Ditch, the reputed boundary 
of the kingdom of the East Angles, to have been 
built jn the time of the heptarchy.
It appears to 
have belonged to the abbot and convent of Ramsey, 
to which were attached a large estate and manor in 
this parish.
In the confusion of King Stephen's 
reign, it was vigorously attacked by Geoffry de 
Mandeville, Earl of Essex, who is said to have been 
slain by an arrow, before its walls.
Burwell is memorable for a most calamitous event 
which occurred there in the year 1727.
Nearly 80 
persons, who were assembled as spectators at a pup- 
pet-show, which was exhibited in a barn, lost their 
lives in consequence of a fire which destroyed the 
building.
This melancholy and distressing accident 
is thus recorded iu the parish register : — " 1727, 
September 8.
N. B.
About nine o'clock in the 
evening a dismal fire broke out in a barn, in which 
a great number of persons were met together to see 
a puppet-show : in the barn there were a great 
many loads of new light straw : the barn was 
thatched with straw, which was very dry, and the 
inner roof of the barn was covered with old dry 
dobwebs, so that the fire, like lightning, flew round 
the barn in an instant : and there was but one small 
door belonging to the barn, which was nailed up, and 
could not easily be broken open ; and when it was 
opened, the passage was so narrow, and every body 
man of fortune, and a lover of the mathematics, who instructed 
him in algebra and geometry, and he made such a progress 
that his friends sent h in to Cambridge, where be delivered 
tenures, ob, mathematics to crono I audiences.
Having been 
created master ol arts b) royal mandate, he was appointed Eu- 
rasian professor of mathematics in 1711; and in 17-'S hete- 
VOL.
I. NO.
15.
so impatient to escape, that the door was presently 
blocked up, and most of those who did escape, which 
were but very few, were forced to crawl over the 
heads and bodies of those that lay on a heap at the 
door; and the rest, in number 76, perished instant- 
ly : and two more died of their wounds within two 
days.
The fire was occasioned by the negligence of 
a servant, who set a candle and lanthorn in or near 
the heap of straw which was in the barn.
The ser- 
vant's name was Richard Whitaker, of the parish of 
Hadstock in Essex, near Linton in Cambridgeshire, 
who was tried for the fact at the assizes held at Cam- 
bridge, March 27, 1728, but was acquitted." 
Amongst the sufferers were several children, and 
young ladies of fortune.
From other collective evidence it appears, that 
nearly two-thirds of the barn were filled with trusses 
of oat-straw, and that the barn was only separated 
from a stable, where many other trusses were heap- 
ed up, by a partition of lath and plaster.
In the 
stable were two horses belonging to Mr. Shepherd, 
the master of the puppet-show, which were under 
the care of Whitaker, who went to feed them after 
the entertainment had been begun ; and, being de- 
sirous of seeing it without paying the price of ad- 
mission, he became, through his eagerness to re- 
move the straw, which impeded his view, the unit*?
tentional cause of the complicated misery which en- 
sued.
When the roof fell, which was scarcely half 
an hour from the commencement of the fire, the 
shrieks and anguish of the helpless sufferers were 
momentarily ended in universal silence and death.
The bodies, reduced to a mass of mangled carcases, 
half consumed, and wholly undistinguishable, were 
promiscuously buried in two pits, dug for the pur- 
pose in the church-yard.
This dreadful catastrophe 
was noticed on the Sunday following, in a sermon 
preached by the Rev. Alexander Edmondson, the 
vicar of the parish, from the following most appro- 
priate text, selected from the fourth chapter of La- 
mentations.
" Their visage is blacker than a coal : 
they are not known in the streets : their skin cleav- 
eth to their bones : it is withered, it is become dry 
like a stick." 
Burwell formerly had two parishes, and two 
churches : one dedicated to St. Mary ; the other, to 
St. Andrew.
Henry VIII.
gave the tithes of the 
former to the University of Cambridge ; and those 
of the latter, which was called the dilapidated rec- 
tory of St. Andrew, were purchased by the Univer- 
sity about a century afterwards.
The ruins of the 
west end of St. Andrew's church have been removed 
within the last forty years, and the church-yard con- 
verted into pasture ground.
The church of Burwell St. Mary is a remarkably 
ceived the degree of doctor of laws when the King visited the 
university.
He died in 1739.
His Elements of Algebra were 
printed at Cambridge in 1740, in two vols.
4to.
; and his 
Treatise on Fluxions was also printed afler his death, in one 
volume octavo.
3 G 
nandsome 
210 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
handsome Gothic building, erected about twenty 
years after the foundation of King's College Chapel, 
Cambridge, and probably by some of the artificers 
who were employed in the construction of that fa- 
bric.
The windows are extremely large, and have 
a very noble appearance ; and the tower, which is 
embrasured, and ornamented with elegant pinnacles, 
adds greatly to the general effect and grandeur of 
the edifice.
Over a fine arch, which separates the 
nave from the chancld, is a beautiful piece of crocket- 
work, in stone, forming a sort ef rose window, very 
elegantly diversified.
The roof is of oak, finely 
carved with animal heads and figures ; and over the 
window, nearest the chancel, on the north side, is a 
piece of sculpture, representing the Virgin Mary 
between two angels, with roses in their hands.
The 
altar is a-neat piece of modern workmanship.
The 
wall between the nave and the chancel, and the roof 
of the nave, were completed in the year 1404, at the 
expence of the Rennet family, as appears by an old 
Latin black-letter inscription, which is still remain- 
ing in the church.
A circumstance remains to be noticed, which re- 
dounds very highly to the credit of the Rev. II.
E. 
Turner, B.
D. the present resident minister at Bur- 
well.
When that gentleman took possession of his 
benefice, between thirty and forty years ago, the 
church was much out of repair, particularly the win- 
dows, which were greatly defaced, and the crocket- 
work nearly filled up with stones and mortar.
On 
inquiry, he discovered that the revenues of one hun- 
dred acres of arable land had been given to adorn 
the church, and keep it in good order ; but that the 
money was appropriated to very different uses.
After considerable trouble he succeeded in recover- 
ing the estates, though the writings relative to the 
donation had been burnt, with a view of diverting 
the income from its proper destination ; and, since 
that time, by the judicious expenditure of the annual 
receipts, the church has been thoroughly repaired, 
and restored to its primary elegance.
The names 
of the persons who gave the hundred acres are sup- 
posed to have been William Sygar, Thomas Catlyne, 
and Foster.
Cambridge.] — Cambridge, the county town, is 
situated in the hundred of Fiendish, 51 miles north 
by east from London.
It stands upon an elevated 
ground, on the north-west of the river Cam. Under 
the same meridian, or a few minutes to the east of it, 
was anciently a Roman station, of an irregular pa- 
rallelogramical figure, containing nearly thirty acres, 
surrounded on all sides with a deep entrenchment, 
great part of which is yet remaining, towards the 
south-west side, and in the ground behind St. Mary 
Magdalen's College, which has been converted into 
a terrace for the exercise of its fellows.
The origin, of both the town and university, is 
involved in the mist of very remote antiquity.
Ac- 
cording to vague tradition, wholly undeserving of 
credit, Cantaber, a Spaniard, and son-in-law to 
Gurgunt, King of Britain, built several citieSj and, 
among others, Caergrant, ncv Cambridge, where 
he established a seminary for the instruction of youth, 
and appointed teachers from the philosophers and 
astronomers whom he had sent for to Athens, where 
he had himself been educated.
Anaximander, it is 
added, and after him Anaxagoras, travelling to this 
country, became teachers of philosophy at Cam- 
bridge, which thenceforth was called the City of 
Scholars ; that Cassk'ellaunus bestowed on it the 
privileges of a sanctuary ; that Julius Caesar depriv- 
ed it of some of its professors, and conveyed them 
to Rome, where they afterwards were greatly cele- 
brated ; that, in the reign of King Lucius, 3000 of 
its students were baptized at one time ; and that in 
the days of Dioclesian, according to Cantalupe, in 
his Origin and Antiquity of the University, " this 
renowned city, the mother of philosophy, beautiful- 
for dwelling-houses, fortified on all sides wHU 
towers, and encompassed with walls of square 
stones," was consumed by fire.
It cannot fail to strike even the most cursory 
reader, that these traditions indicate a far more ad- 
vanced state of civilization than the united testimo- 
nies of the Greek and Roman writers will suffer lis 
to believe existed in this country at such an early 
period ; consequently, they are accompanied by their 
own confutations ; and any attempt to display ab- 
surdity, would only be to lose time.
It is evident, 
that both the disciple of Thales, and Anaxagoras 
himself, must have been consigned to their native 
dust many years before the reputed founder of the 
university could, according to the above relation, 
have been landed in Britain.
Cambridge, there is great reason to suppose, was 
a British settlement ; and the high artificial hill 
within the bounds of the entrenchments near the 
castle, is by many persons supposed to be a specimen 
of British labour.
That it was a Roman station is 
also evident.
'* The site of the Roman Granta," 
says Dr. Stukeley, " is very traceable on the side 
of Cambridge towards the castle, on the north-west 
side of the river, of an irregular figure, containing 
thirty acres, surrounded by a deep ditch, great part 
of which yet remains on the south-west, and in the 
grounds behind Magdalen College.
At this time 
the ditch is nearly filled up, but the banks may in 
several places be discovered ; and the Roman agger, 
in the garden of Magdalen College, which has been 
converted into a fine terrace for the exercise of the 
fellows, is* in excellent preservation.
The river, 
which, from the deeds in the Cottonian Library re- 
lative to the foundation of St. Giles's Church, seems 
to have bounded the terrace, now flows from 150 to 
300 yards eastward.
Within the works, which in- 
clude the north -west end of the town, are the re- 
mains of three considerable bastions, which were 
raised by the orders of Cromwell ; the gateway of 
tiie casti,*, now used as the county prison, and the 
churches of St. Giles and St. Peter.
St. Peter's 
church was repaired some years ago ; at which time, 
many Roman bricks are reported to have been found 
in 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
211 
fh the decayed walls.
Numerous fragments of urns 
have also been picked up iiv the -d joining fields, and 
many Roman coins of Vespasian and the later em- 
perors." From these circumstances, it seems suffi- 
ciently clear, that the Roman Qranta was at Cam- 
bridge ; though some writers have affirmed, that 
that station was two miles distant, at Grantchester, 
which T>r.
Cains, in his " De Antiquitate Canta- 
brigiensis Academiae," conjectures to have extended 
on the west of the Cam towards Chesterton, " foun- 
dations of buildings having been ploughed up be- 
tweeen Grantchester and Cambridge ;" and which 
Bede's History represents as a small desolated city, 
so situated that it was visited in large boats (navi- 
giis) by the people of Ely, It is probable, from the 
latter remark, that Bede's Granta was at Cam- 
bridge, as the state of the river seems to render the 
assertion problematical, of its being navigable so far 
as Grantchester so early as the year 700, The 
situation of the ancient roads, which crossing from 
Haverill to Godmanchester, and from Ely to Ash- 
well, near Baldock, intersect each other at Cam- 
bridge, is an additional proof in favour of the opi- 
nion ; and the derivation of its name from the bridge 
crossing the river is evident, Sir Simon De Ewes 
inferred the great antiquity of Cambridge, from the 
considerable figure that Caergrant makes in the 
lists of British cities which was given by Gildas and 
Nennius.
The university is generally believed to have been 
founded by Sigebert, King of East Anglia, who 
about the year 631 instituted a school for the in- 
struction of youth, which most authors have agreed 
to place at Cambridge.
This, however, should ra- 
ther be considered as a grammar school than as a 
classical and learned seminary.
How long the in- 
stitution lasted is unknown ; but it is probable that 
it had been destroyed, or had fallen to decay, before 
the burning of the town, by the Banes, in the year 
871.
Little doubt, indeed, can be entertained, that 
Saxon divisions, and Danish ferocity, had succeed- 
ed in banishing all knowledge from this part of Bri- 
tain, before the accession of Alfred, whose complaint, 
that he could find no teachers when he had youth 
and leisure to be instructed, seems to be a proof that 
the university was not then in existence.
Edward 
the Elder erected halls for the students, and chairs 
and seats for the doctors, at his own charge ; he 
also appointed professors ; seems generally to have 
attended to the most necessary measures of securing 
* This castle is generally supposed to have been erected 
partly on the site of a Danish fortress.
" ft was a stone build- 
ing," says Camden, " and had a magnificent hall.
Only the 
keep and gate remain, and two bastions, with part of a third, 
cast up in the civil war.
The gate now standing svas built in 
the time of Edward I.
or Henry III.
who made a ditch round 
the town called the King's Ditch.
In 1291; Edward I.
lay 
two nights in Cambridge Castle, as before that time, says 
Stowe, never any king had done 1 that could be remembered.
He had at that time a great stable of horses at Barnwell : Adam 
the stability of the university, of which he may be 
considered as the restorer.
In the year 1050, Cambridge was again plunder- 
ed, and destroyed with fire, by the Danes, but had 
in some degree recovered its ancient splendour at 
the period of the Survey, in the reign of William the 
First.
It then contained 373 houses, 27 of which 
were shortly afterwards removed, to make room for 
the castle erected by the Conqueror ; or rather, as ~ 
Fuller observes, "re-edified."* In this fortress he 
soon afterwards received the submission of the monks 
of Ely, whose resistance to his power appears to 
have been the principal inducement for erecting it.
In the year 1083, in the reign of William RhI'us., 
the town and county of Cambridge were ravaged 
with fire and sword by Roger de Montgomery, in 
revenge for an affrout which he had received from 
the King.
The university wa3-for some time aban- 
doned : but to repair the damage, and induce the 
vrundering students to return, Henry the First in- 
vested the town with several valuable privileges.
Ir* 
the year 1101, he exempted it from the power of the 
Sheriff', and made it a Corporation, on payment to 
the Exchequer of 100 marks annually, the same sum 
which the Sheriff had paid when he possessed the 
juri»diction.
The ferry over the river, was now also 
fixed near Cambridge ; a circumstance which, it is 
said, occasioned some additional trade to the town, 
The university, however, continued in a very lan- 
guid state, till Joftrid, Abbot of Croyland, " sent to 
his manor of Cottenham, near Cambridge, Gilbert, 
his fellow monk and professor of divinity, who, with 
three other monks, that had followed him to Eng- 
land, and were well versed in philosophical theorems, 
and other primitive sciences, repaired daily to Cam- 
bridge, and having hired a public barn, made open 
profession of their sciences, and soon collected a 
great number of scholars.
The second year after 
their coming, the number was so increased, as well 
from every part of the county as the town, that the 
largest house, barn, or church, was insufficient to 
contain them."t They consequently separated ; and 
at different quarters of the town, and different hours 
of the day, taught grammar, logic, and rhetoric, 
with divinity on Sundays and holidays.
" Thus out 
of this little fountain, increased to a great river, we 
see how the city of God has become enriched, and 
England rendered fruitful by the many masters and 
teachers going forth from Cambridge as from Para- 
dise." % 
de Kiston being master thereof.
Edward Hi. employed part 
in rebuilding the kind's hall, now part of Trinity "College.
The stones and timber of the hall were begged of Henry V.
by the master and fellows of King's Half towards building 
their chapel.
Mary gave the other materials to build 1 rinity .
Hall Chapel.
And Sir John Huddleston, who built therewith 
his house at Sawston." 
•J- Vide Appendix to In^ulphus, by Petrus Ble3ensis.
t Ibid.
The 
£12 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
The prosperity of the university was again doom- 
ed to be retarded ; as, in the yeafr 1174, it 'was con- 
sumed by a fire, so merciless, says Fuller, " that it 
only stopt for want of fuel to feed' its fury." Most 
of the churches, as well as the houses, which were 
tii -n of wood, were partly* burnt ; and Trinity Church 
was entirely consumed.
During the contest between the Barons and King 
Johhyin 1214, the town of Cambridge was plunder- 
ed by the former, and the castle taken by assault ; 
and in the following year it was again pillaged by 
the forces of the King, under the command of Wil- 
liam, Earl of Salisbury, and Fulco de Brent.
Tournaments were about this time frequently 
liolden at Cambridge ; and as this was a species of 
amusement which suited the warlike genius of the 
age, the assemblies were so numerous, that the 
scholars, who then had neither colleges nor endow- 
ments, were much straightened both for provision 
and lodging.
To remedy this inconvenience, Henry 
the Third forbade tournaments to be kept within 
five miles of the town ; and Ralph de Kamois was 
soon afterwards fined a considerable sum for violat- 
ing this edict.
About the year 1249, some serious differences 
arose between the scholars and the townsmen ; and, 
in 1*261, the peace of the university was again inter- 
rupted by some high disputes, which divided the 
students into parties, denominated the Northern and 
the Southern Men. Much rioting, and some blood- 
shed, ensued, which occasioned a commission to be 
issued, to try and punish the principal offenders, be- 
tween twenty and thirty of whom were found guilty, 
and condemned, but were afterwards pardoned by 
the King.
Many of -the students at this time quitted 
Cambridge, and associating with some Oxford scho- 
lars, who had left, that town on a similar occasion, 
commenced a university at Northampton ; but this 
institution was of short continuance ; for Henry, 
fearful that it might injure the university of Oxford, 
recalled the students to Cambridge in the year 12^5.
Soon afterwards, intending to fortify the town, he 
had two gates built ; and a ditch, connected at each 
end with the river, was made to encircle the principal 
buildings on the east side.
The gates have been 
long destroyed ; but part of the ditch, bearing the 
name of the King's Ditch, still remains.
From this period till the reign of Richard the Se- 
cond, the annals of Cambridge present little that is 
remarkable, excepting the establishment of various 
colleges ; and the frequent squabbles which arose 
between thetownsmen and the university respecting 
their distinct rights.
In the year 1281, these dis- 
putes terminated in open war.
The towns-people 
assembled at their hall, and having chosen John 
Grantcetar, as their leader, compelled him to swear 
that he would execute whatever the bailiff and bur- 
gesses should command^ after which, they went to 
•Corpus Christi College, and breaking open the doors, 
. carried away all the charters and other papers ; then 
proceeding to the house of the Chancellor, they 
obliged him, as well as all other persons whom they 
met with, belonging to the university, to renounce, 
under pain of death, all the privileges- which had 
ever been granted to them, and also to deliver up 
whatever letters patent were in their possession.
They then broke open the university chest in St.
Mary's Church, and taking out ali the records, burnt 
them in the market-place, together with the papers 
which they had before collected.
Many other acts 
of violence accompanied these proceedings.
A pro- 
clamation was issued by ti.e mob, to deprive the 
bedell of the university of life, after having destroy- 
ed his house by fire.
They also did great damage 
to the priory of Barnwell ; and, to secure their owh 
safety, when the tumult should be allayed, and the 
civil power in a condition to notice these infringe- 
ments on the public peace, they compelled the offi- 
cers of the.
university to sign a bond, which vested 
its entire future government in the burgesses of the 
town ; and which contained an acquittance from all 
actions which might be brought against them on ac- 
count of the present tumults.
This usurped power 
was soon afterwards wrested from their hands by 
Henry Spencer, Bishop of Norwich, who casually 
entered Cambridge with some soldiers.
Several of the 
principal leaders of the disturbances were imprison- 
ed during life ; the mayor was deprived of his office ; 
and the liberties of the town, which were declared to 
be forfeited, were bestowed on the Vice-Chancellor, 
in whom they remained till the reigns of Henry the 
Seventh and Eighth, when the corporation was re- 
stored.
Several of its former privileges, however, 
were retained by the university.
In the year 1388, Richard II.
held a Parliament 
in Cambridge, from its being the most conveniently 
contiguous place to the eastern counties, which were 
at that place in a state of insurrection.
In this Par- 
liament a statute was made against wanderers, or 
students of either university, who traversed the 
country begging alms without license, a very com- 
mon practice at that period.
The university renounced the supremacy of the 
Pope, on the 2d ef May, 1534, and, the next year, 
surrendered all its charters, statutes, and papistical 
muniments, into the hands of the Lord Cromwell, 
whom the King had appointed to receive them.
These records were restored in about a twelvemonth, 
and the university reinstated in the full exercise of 
its privileges.
From the death of Henry the Eighth till the ac- 
cession of Queen Elizabeth, Cambridge was in al- 
most continued commotion.
John Dudley, Duke of 
Northumberland, and Chancellor of the University, 
was arrested at Cambridge, whither he had advanc- 
ed with an army with the intention of seizing the 
Princess Mary ; and, on the execution of that unfor- 
tunate nobleman, Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, 
was made Chancellor.
About six years ;i)te,r.
the Commencement of Queen 
Elizabeth's reign, that Princess visited Cambridge, 
continued there five days, inspected all the colleges, 
7 and 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
213 
and was entertained with various dramatic exhibi- 
tions, besides orations, disputations, &c.
When 
she left the town, the Queen, in an elegant Latin 
speech, recommended the university to make the re- 
sult of their studies public ; lamented that the gifts 
of her predecessors had so provided them with splen- 
did buildings, that she was placed in the situation of 
Alexander, who Avas grieved when he had no more 
provinces to bestow ; but promised to retain then- 
interest in her memory till circumstances admitted of 
her making a provision for them adequate to her 
wishes and their merit.
In the year 1576, through the influence of Sir 
Thomas Smith, principal Secretary of State, an act 
was passed, by which the revenues of the two uni- 
versities were essentially benefitted.
According to 
this act, one-third of the rents of all leases granted 
by the colleges, was in future to be paid in corn, or 
in money proportioned to the market prices ; the 
wheat then being at six and eight-pence, and the 
barley at five shillings, a quarter.
In 1604, James I.
conferred the privilege of send- 
ing two Members to Parliament from the University ; 
the right of election being vested in the Doctors and 
Masters of Arts.
His Majesty, some years after- 
wards, visited Cambridge, and, during his stay, re- 
sided at Trinity College, Avhich had also the honour 
of entertaining Charles the First and his Queen.
In 1630, Cambridge was visited by the plague, 
which occasioned the business of the university to 
be wholly suspended, all the students having liberty 
to retire to their respective homes.
The number of 
persons who fell victims to its ravages, amounted to 
between three and four hundred.
During the con- 
tinuance of the malady, the summer assizes were 
holden at Royston, the commencement was post- 
poned to October, and there was no Sturbridge fair.
In the civil wars of Charles the First, the univer- 
sity very early declared themselves on the side of the 
King, and sent their plate to be converted into mo- 
ney for his use, a few days before the erection of his 
standard at Nottingham.
These proceedings occa- 
sioned the arrest of many of its members ; and the 
remainder were ordered to contribute towards the 
support of the Parliament ; but refusing to comply, 
some of them were imprisoned, and a general mea- 
sure of expulsion determined on, the execution of 
which was entrusted to the Earl of Manchester.
Thus, every person who refused to take the Cove- 
nant was expelled, and commanded to leave the 
university within three days, by a formal writ of ex- 
pulsion, in the following words : — " Whereas by 
ordinance of Parliament, entitled, an Ordinance for 
regulating the University, &c.' power is given to 
me, to eject such fellows of colleges as are scanda- 
lous in their lives and doctrines, or such as have 
forsaken their ordinary places of residence within 
the said University, or that do, or have opposed the 
proceedings of Parliament : By virtue of which au- 
thority, I do hereby eject Mr. Chandler, Mr. Wi- 
cherley, and Mr. Whitehead, Fellows of Queen's 
voi .
i — no.
16.
College, for refusing to come and take the solemn 
League and Covenant, and for other misdemeanors.
First of June, 1644.
Manchester." 
Cowley, the poet, Dr. Isaac Barrow, Sir Charles 
Scarborough, and Seth Ward, the mathematician, 
afterwards bishop of Salisbury, also suffered upon 
this occasion.
These proceedings necessarily caused a great 
change among the residents of the colleges, as the 
students turned out equally with the masters ; but, 
on the Restoration, many of the exiled members 
were restored to their offices.
The most material events transacted at Cam- 
bridge, since the period here mentioned, are connect- 
ed with the description of the colleges, to which we 
shall now proceed.
The university is governed by the Chancellor, 
High Steward, Vice- Chancellor, two Proctors, an 
equal number of Taxors, Moderators, and Scruta- 
tors, a Commissary, a Public Orator, the Caput, and 
the Senate.
The office of Chancellor is thought to 
be nearly as ancient as the university, as it is men- 
tioned in some of the oldest records extant.
Before 
the creation of Vice-Chancellors, the duties of their 
office were executed by the Chancellor, who was.
then chosen annually, and his election confirmed by 
the Bishop of Ely. This mode of appointment, 
which was sometimes the occasion of considerable 
delay, and was considered as both expensive and 
troublesome, was interdicted by Pope Boniface the 
Ninth, who deprived the Bishop and his successors 
of the power of confirmation, and resolved that the 
election should be sufficient to invest the person, 
chosen with all the privileges of the Chancellorship.
At the same period, the Bishop of Ely ordained, that 
the Chancellor should only remain in office for two, 
or, at most, three years ; but the university, regard- 
ing this frequency of change as inconvenient, in the 
year 1504, elected Joseph Fisher, Bishop of Roches- 
ter, and continued him in office durante vita.
They 
reserved, however, the right of removing their Chan- 
cellor at the expiration of the same terms as for- 
merly ; or by a tacit acquiescence, to permit his re- 
maining in office during their pleasure.
. 
The chief magistrate and governor of the univer- 
sity, is the Chancellor, whose duties are to defend 
and preserve its rights, to convoke assemblies, to 
distribute justice, and to seal the diplomas, or letters 
of degrees, provisions, &c.
His court possesses 
exclusive jurisdiction over all suits and civil actions, 
where a scholar, or privileged person, is one of the 
parties, (excepting in tliose cases where the right of 
freehold is concerned,) and has authority, by the 
university charter, to try and determine causes, 
either according to common law, or their own local 
customs.
The High Steward, who is chosen by the Senate, 
holds his office by patent from the university : his 
duties are to assist the Chancellor, to hear and de- 
termine capital causes, &c.
The office of the Vice-Chaucellor, who is elected 
3 w annually, 
214 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
annually, is to superintend the execution of the 
Chancellor's authority ; to govern the university 
agreeably to its statutes ; to see that its laws are 
observed by the officers and students ; to observe 
that, courts are duly called ; and to transact business 
in the absence of the Chancellor.
Indeed, the entire 
management of the university generally devolves 
upon this office, as the Chancellor, who is generally 
chosen from the nobility, or from persons employed 
in the state departments, is prevented by other du- 
ties from a regular attendance.
In the year 1587, 
an act was made, that, in future, no other than the 
" Heads of Houses should be chosen Vice-Chan- 
cellors." 
The Proctors are selected annually from the re- 
gent Masters of Arts, according to an established 
rule, or cycle, by which it is known who will be the 
Proctors for several succeeding years.
The duties 
of these officers will be the discipline of the Bache- 
lors and Under Graduates, to keep order in the 
university, assist in the business of the school;, ap- 
point days for disputations, and determine the man- 
ner of them ; search houses of ill-fame, and commit 
women of loose and abandoned character ; read the 
graces in the Senate- house, attend at taking of de- 
grees, register the votes in the Whitehood House, 
and punish all violators of the statutes of the uni- 
versity.
The Taxors, who were originally appointed to re- 
gulate the price of the students' lodgings (the exor- 
bitant charges of the house-keepers falling so heavily 
on the scholars, that they threatened to leave the 
town, and search for a place wherein they could be 
accommodated on more reasonable terms,) are ap- 
pointed at the same time as the Proctors.
Their 
chief business at present is to regulate the markets, 
take cognizance of weights and measures, &c.
The Moderators are nominated and paid by the 
Proctors, and act as their substitutes and assistants; 
superintending the exercises and disputation of the 
questions in philosophy, and the examinations pre- 
viously to conferring the degree of Batchelor of 
Arts.
They are generally, or at least ought to be, 
of the most eminent rank in mathematical science.
The Scrutators are chosen yearly from the Non- 
Regents, or Black-hoods, whose votes they are ap- 
pointed to take, and also to read the graces in the 
.Lower House.
The Commissary, who is an officer under the 
Chancellor, acts as assistant or assessor to the Vice- 
Chancellor in his court ; and also holds a court of 
record for all privileged persons, end scholars under 
the degree of Master of Arts, where all causes are 
determined by the civil and statute law, and the 
customs of the university.
The Public Orator is appointed for life.
This 
officer is, on all occasions, the voice of the univer- 
sity, whose letters he is empowered to write, and 
also to present noblemen to their degrees with an 
appropriate speech.
The office was instituted in the 
year 1511, by Nigellug Thorndon, a physician of 
Cambridge, who granted some small tenements for 
its support ; and its possession is esteemed one of 
the highest honours in the university, though the 
annual salary, exclusive of fees and perquisites, is 
only forty shillings.
The Caput consists of the Vice-Chancellor, a.
Doctor of each faculty, Divinity, Law, and Physic, 
a Regent, and Non-Regent, Master of Arts.
This 
holy is to consider and determine what Graces are 
to be laid before the Senate, as none can be ottered 
without its unanimous approbation ; every member 
being privileged to give a negative vote, without 
being called upon to assign a reason.
The Caput is 
chosen annually in the Senate-House, by tiie Vice- 
Chaucellor, the Heads of Colleges, the Doctors, 
and Scrutators, out of three lists of names prepared 
by the Vice-Chancellor and the Proctors.
The Senate, which is composed of all the Doctors, 
and Masters of Arts in the University, is divided 
into two bodies or houses ; the first of which con- 
sists of Regents, or those who have not been Mas- 
ters of Arts live years : they are also called White- 
hoods, from the hoods of their official dresses being 
lined with white silk.
The second house consists of 
Non-Regents, or those who have taken the degree 
of Master upwards of five years, but have not ad- 
vanced to the degree of Doctor ; and of the Bache- 
lors of Divinity : these are called Black-hoods, from- 
their official dresses being lined with black silk.
The 
Doctors under two years standing vote solely in the 
Regent-House ; but all others, with the Public 
Orator, may vote in which house they please; and 
either house is competent to reject a question.
The 
election of all the officers, the appointments of the 
magistrates, the admissions to degrees, and all the 
other important business of the university, is trans- 
acted in the Senate-House.
The resolutions which 
are submitted to the consideration of the Senate, are 
always drawn up in Latin, and oaths administered, 
and degrees conferred, in the same language.
On the different foundations of the university, up- 
wards of 1100 persons arc maintained; amongst 
whom are various Professors in the departments of 
Divinity, Civil Law, Physic, Hebrew, Greek, Ca- 
suistry, Arabic, Mathematics, Music, Natural and 
Experimental Philosophy, Chemistry, Botany, Ana- 
tomy, Modern History and Languages, Mineralogy, 
Astronomy, and Common Law ; about 400 Fellows,, 
and 700 Students.
The great body of students are 
admitted members of their different colleges, either 
as Pensioners, or Sizars.
Out of both these bodies, 
the scholars are indifferently elected.
The Pen- 
sioners are generally noblemen, or persons of a cer- 
tain rank or distinction, and Fellow Commoners ; 
these live entirely at their own expence.
The Scho- 
lars derive some emolument from the revenues of the 
college to which they belong ; and the Fellows are 
selected out of the Bachelors, or Masters of Arts, 
who have been Scholars.
The Pensioners are al- 
lowed to have exhibitions; but, correctly speaking, 
they have no part of the revenues of the college.
Tbv 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
215 
The Sizars are persons of inferior fortune, who ;ire 
assisted in the expenses of their education by exhibi- 
tions, and other benefactions.
According to their seniority, -or proficiency in 
learning, the Students are entitled to the degrees of 
Bachelor and Master of Arts, Bachelor and Doc- 
tor in Divinity, Physic, and Law. The time re- 
quired by the statutes for studying in the university, 
before they can be qualified for taking the said de- 
grees, is four years for a Bachelor of Arts, and 
three more' for a Master of Arts.
Seven years after- 
wards the Student may commence Bachelor of Di- 
vinity ; hut an additional term of live years is requi- 
site to his taking the degree of Doctor.
In Law 
and Physic, six years are required for a degree ; hut 
the student in either may be admitted Doctor at the 
expiration of four years more.
The Students in 
each decree are distinguished by their dresses.
Previously to the erection of colleges, the Stu- 
dents of the university resided in hostels, or inns, 
prepared by the townsmen for their reception ; all 
the charges of education and maintenance being paid 
by themselves ; though the scholastic degrees and 
government were, according to the report given of 
the ancient statutes, nearly the same as at pre- 
sent.
Fuller, in his History of Cambridge, makes the 
number of the hostels amount to thirty-four ; but 
some doubts are entertained of the accuracy of his 
list, as, in the ninth of Richard the Second, they 
amounted only to sixteen.
Several of these build- 
ings are attached to the different colleges ; and 
some others may yet be found in the town, which 
still answer their primary destination of inns and 
lodging-houses.
The extravagant rent which the 
Students were obliged to pay for their apartments 
in these hostels gave rise to the present colleges, 
which we shall now describe in the order of their 
foundation, as follows : — 
founded.
Peter House 1357 
Chare Hall 1326 
being burnt was rebuilt 
in 1342 
Pembroke Hall..
1343 
Gonville and Cains 
College, built by E.
Gonville 134s 
enlarged by Dr.Caius 1557 
Trinity Hull i3jn 
Corpus Cliristi or Be- 
ne't College 1351 
founded.
7. King's College 1441 
8. Queen's College 1448 
9. Catherine Hail" 1475 
10.
Jesus College 1496 
11.
Christ College 1505 
12.
St. John's College ...1507 
13.
Magdalen College...
1509 
14.
Trinity College".
1546 
15.
Emmanuel College..
1 5S4 
16.
Sidney Sussex Col- 
leg*' 1594 
17.
Downing College ....
1807 
St. Peter's College originally consisted of two 
hostels, which in the year 1237, 'were purchased by 
Hugh de Balsham, Sub-Prior of Ely, and appro- 
priated to the use of Students, to relieve them f'iom 
the exactions of the townsmen, in 1284, alter he 
became Bishop of Ely, be endowed \m new touiSr 
dation for the support of a Master, fourteen Fellows, 
twenty-nine Bible Clerks, and eight poor Scholars : 
the number to be increased or diminished according 
to the fluctuation of the revenues ; and at his death, 
he bequeathed 300 marks to be expended in enlarg- 
ing the College, which was repaired between fifty 
and sixty years ago, and the buildings of the inner 
court neatly cased with stone.
* In 129 J, the Chan- 
cellor and Masters of the University, to evince their 
respect for the zeal with which de Balsham had at- 
tended to the interests of learning, decreed in full 
assembly, that a solemn congregation of the Re- 
gents, should be annually holden to offer up prayers 
for his soul.
The income of this College has been 
considerably augmented, since the decease of the 
founder, by numerous benefactions, and the Fellow 
and Scholar-sbips have been proportionally increas- 
ed.
In the list of benefactors is Lady Mary Ram- 
sey, who is reported to have offered a very large 
property, nearly equal to a new foundation, to this 
College ; but unluckily making the change of its 
name into " Peter and Mary's" an indispensible 
condition, she was thwarted in her intentions by 
Dr. Soame, the Master.
" Peter," observed he, 
" has been toe long a bachelor to think of a female 
comrade in his old age." " A dear-bought jest for 
so good a benefactress," says Fuller, " for Lady 
Ramsey, disgusted at his refusal, turned the stream 
of her benevolence into a different channel." 
This college stands on the west side of Trump- 
ington Street.
The master's lodge is a detached 
building on the opposite side of the street.
The Chapel belonging to the college, is a very 
handsome structure, with embrasures and pinnacles.
It was erected by subscription in the year 1632, and 
neatly embellished ; but was deprived of many of 
its ornaments in the Civil Wars.
The report of the 
pious commissioners contains the following words : 
" We pulled down two mighty angels with wings, 
and divers other angels, the four Evangelists, and 
Peter with his keys on the chapel-door, together 
with about 100 cherubims, and many superstitious 
letters in gold.
Moreover we found six angels on 
the windows ; all which we defaced." The painted 
glass now replaced in the east window, was, pre- 
viously to this visitation, removed, and concealed 
in boxes.
It represents the Crucifixion, and is in 
some parts very richly coloured.
The principal fi- 
gures are copied from the famous picture of Rubens 
painted for the high altar of the Reeollect's church 
at Antwerp, and the groups at the sides are 
from a design by Lambert Lombard.
The Library 
contain* some ancient and valuable books.
* 
The famous Cardinal Beaiuort, Bishop of Win- 
chester ; John Whitgitt, Archbishop of Canterbury ; 
and John Cosyns, Bishop of Durham, are among 
the learned prelates who have been educated at St.
Peter's College..
Roger Marshall', an eminent ma- 
thematician, and physician to Edward the Fourth ; 
George Joy, one of the translators of the Bible ; 
John Parry, author of Martin Mar-Prelate ; Sir 
Samuel Garth, author of the Dispensary ; and the 
2- poet 
2-1(5 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
poet Gray, are also numbered among its stu- 
dents.* 
Glare Hall, or College, which is here synony- 
mous, was built on the site of University-Hall, a 
small college, founded in the year 1326 by Dr. Ri- 
chard Baden, or Badew, Chancellor of the Univer- 
sity.
The original structure was consumed by an 
accidental fire about sixteen years after its erection, 
but was rebuilt in 1344, by Elizabeth de Burgh, 
third daughter and heiress of Gilbert, the last Earl 
of Clare.
By that lady it was named Clare- Hall, 
and endowed with lands for the maintenance of a 
Master, ten Fellows, and the same number of 
Scholars.
Richard the Third augmented the en- 
'dowments, which have also been increased by the 
valuable donations of Thomas Cecil, Earl of Exe- 
ter ; John Freeman, of Great Billingford, Esq.
William Butler of Ipswich ; Samuel Blythe, &c.
The present revenues maintain seventeen Fellows, 
and between thirty and forty Scholars.
Clare Hall one of the neatest and most uniform 
houses in the University.
The west front, which 
consists of two rows of pilasters of the Tuscan and 
Ionic orders, is finished with an entablature and 
handsome ballustrade ; the middle tier of windows 
is adorned with pediments ; and the entrances to the 
quadrangular court included by the buildings are 
lofty arches.
The whole College was rebuilt by 
subscription, with Ketton-stone, in 1638.
The 
chapel, which is more modern, was erected in 1703, 
from a design by Sir James Burrough.
Its interior 
is very pleasingly ornamented with stucco work, and 
a neat wainscotting ; and, over the altar, in a beau- 
tiful alcove, is a painting of the Salutation by Cy- 
priani.
The Ante-Chapel is an octagon, lighted 
by an elegant dome.
The outside is ornamented 
with Corinthian pilasters, rising from a rustic base- 
ment, and supporting a neat cornice, crowned with 
a ballustrade.
The Hall, which is connected by a 
gallery with the combination room, is nearly thirty 
three feet square : it is wainscotted with oak.
The 
Library which opens from this apartment, is nearly 
* It may here be proper to mention, that the principal 
buildings of each college are, the apartments tor the Students 
and Fellows, the Maker's Lodge, the Chapel, the Library, 
the Hall, and the Combination Room.
The Students and Fel- 
lows dine at the same time in the Hall, but at separate tables.
The Combination Room is the apartment where the Fellows 
meet to participate in the " feast of reason, and the flow of 
soul." 
f This unfortunate Divine, whose premature end must yet 
be in the recollection of many of our readers, was born 1729, 
at Bourne in Lincolnshire, ot which parish his father was vicar.
In 1745 he went to Clare Hall, Cambridge, where he proceed- 
ed to his degrees in arts.
In 1753 he entered into orders, and 
became a popular preacher in the metropolis, where he ob- 
tained a considerable reputation by his zeal in promoting chari- 
table institutions, particularly the Magdelen hospital.
Dr.
Squire, bishop of St. David's, made him his chaplain, and 
gave him a prebend in the church of Brecon.
In 1706 he 
took the degree of LL.
D. at which time he was chaplain to 
the king.
In 1771 he published Sermons to Young Men. The 
year followiug he obtained the living of Hockloff in Bucking- 
of the same dimensions.
It is very neatly fitted up 
with Norway oak, and ornamented with appropriate 
carving.
Hence there is a passage to the Master's 
Lodg-e, a convenient and handsome apartment, con- 
taining miniature portraits of Peter Gunning, bishop 
of Ely, and John Tillotson, the celebrated arch- 
bishop of Canterbury ; both of whom were Masters 
of this Hall.
In the Combination Room is a neat 
copy, by Freeman, of Lady Elizabeth Clare, the 
foundress ; and an excellent whole length of Tho- 
mas Holies, Duke of Newcastle, arid late Chancel- 
lor of the University.
Amongst the eminent writers who were instruc- 
ted in this college, are the above-mentioned bishops 
Gunning and Tillotson ; George Ruggle, author of 
Ignoramus ; Abraham Whitlock, who translated the 
New Testament into the Persian language ; Ralph 
Cudworth, author of the Intel/ectual System ; and 
the late Dr. Dodd.f 
Pembroke Hall, consisting of two courts, situa- 
ted on the east side of Trumpington Street, nearly 
opposite Peter House, was founded in the year 1343, 
by Mary, third wife of Audomer de Valencia, Earl 
of Pembroke, who was killed at a tilting-match on 
his wedding-day.
This distressing accident induced 
his virgin widow to renounce the world, and devote 
her possessions to acts of benevolence.
She accord- 
ingly obtained a charter of incorporation from Ed- 
ward the Third, and endowed the college for a Mas- 
ter and six fellows ; giving it the appellation of Ma- 
ria de Valencia, the family name which has since 
been changed for that of the title.
The original es- 
tablishment has been greatly increased by succeeding 
benefactors, but more particularly by Henry the 
Sixth, who augmented it with the rich living of So- 
ham, and other rectories.
In that monarch's char- 
ter, it is termed, " the most noble, renowned, and 
precious College, which, among all others in the 
University, was ever wonderfully resplendent." The 
present number of fellowships is sixteen, the scho- 
larships about seventy.
The buildings have but a 
mean appearance, with the exception of the Chapel, 
hamshire.
The rectory of St. George, Hanover-square, be- 
coming vacant in 1774, he sent an anonymous letter to the 
chancellor's lady, offering 30001.
for the presentation.
The 
writer of the letter being discovered, his Majesty caused him 
to be struck out of the list of chaplains.
On this he went 
abroad, and meeting his pupil, the present earl of Chesterfield, 
at Geneva, he gave him the living of Winge in Buckingham- 
shire.
But (he shame he had suffered did not cure him of his 
extravagance, and his difficulties increasing, he forged lord 
Chesterfield's nanve to a bond (or 4,2001.
in hopes of being able 
to take it up before it was due, but the fraud was discovered, 
and he was tried and condemned February 24, 1777.
Great 
exertions were made to save his life, but in vain, and he was 
executed at Tyburn, June 27th following.
He expressed deep 
contrition for 'his crimes, and for the scandal which he had 
brought on his profession.
Me published a translation of the 
poems of Callimachus ; four volumes of sermons on the Mi- 
racles and Parables ; a collection of Poems ; Retkctions on 
Death, 12mo ; Comfort for the Afflicted, 8vo.
; and after his 
death appeared his Thoughts in Prison, with his life prefixed.
winch 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
217 
* Dr. Long, in the second volume of* his " Astronomy," 
thus describes this machine:— " This sphere is eighteen teet in 
diameter, wherein above thirty persons may sit conveniently.
The entrance into it is over the south pole by six steps.
The 
liaine of the sphere consists of a number of iron meridians, not 
complete semi-circles, the northern ends of which are screwed 
to a large round plate of brass, with a hole in the centre of it : 
through this hole, from a beam in the ceiling, comes the north 
pole, a round iron rod, about three inches long, and supports 
the upper part of the sphere to its proper elevation to the lati- 
tude of Cambridge.
The lower part of the sphere, so much of 
it as is invisible in England, is cut off: and the lower, or south- 
ern ends of the meridians, or truncated semi circles, terminate 
on, and are screwed down to, a strong circle of oak, of about 
VOJL.
I NO.
16.
which was erected by Bishop Wren, from a design 
by his nephew, Sir Christopher.
It was consecrat- 
ed on the 21st of September, 1665.
The following portraits are in the Combination 
Room : — Roger Long, D.
D. master : three fourths, 
by Wilson.
Benjamin Laney, D.
D. bishop of Ely, 
1667 ; three fourths.
Matthew Wren, D.
D. bishop 
of Ely, 1638.
Edmund Grindall, archbishop of 
Canterbury, 1575, on wood ; half-length.
Edmund 
Spencer, the poet, half-length ; a copy, supposed 
to be by Wilson.
In the Lodge ; a Feast of the 
Gods.
A large picture of the School of Rubens.
A School : the same with a picture at Wilton, which 
they attribute to Gonzales Coques.
A portrait of 
Mr. Gray, half-length, small.
The Twelfth Night 
King and Queen, a very old Flemish picture, on 
board.
Monkies, barbers, small.
Nearly the whole of the north side of the first 
court is occupied by the Library, which is a hand- 
some room, and well furnished with useful books.
In a brick building, erected purposely for its recep- 
tion, in the inner court of this college, is shewn a 
curious astronomical machine, or hollow sphere, 
invented by Dr. Long, and constructed by him- 
self and Mr. Jonathan Munn, an ingenious tin-plate 
worker, of Cambridge.
The entrance is by steps 
over the south pole, and the floor is surrounded by 
a seat, on which thirty persons may conveniently 
sit.
It is now out of repair, much damaged, part 
of the sheathing destroyed, and the remainder co- 
vered with rust and verdigris.
The keeper of the 
key is allowed 61.
per annum, bequeathed by Dr.
Long, to keep the " instrument and place" in a 
proper state of repair."* 
The following portraits, amongst others, decorate 
the hall : — Sir Benjamin Keene, painted at Madrid, 
when he was ambassador at the court of Spain in 
1740 ; Bishop Ridley, and John Bradford, Mar- 
tyrs, copied from prints in Holland's Horologia ; 
Nicholas Felton, bishop of Ely ; and Mary de Va- 
lencia, the foundress.
The last is a modern copy, 
by Marchi, but appears, from its character, to have 
been executed from an original resemblance.
The 
lady is arrayed in a surcoat, and represented kneel- 
ing, with her hands clasped, and a prayer-book ly- 
ing on a cushion before her.
In the Lodge is a large painting of the Feast of 
the Gods, from the school of Rubens ; a curious 
Flemish piece, on board, called the Twelfth Night 
King and Queen ; and a small half-length of Mr.
Gray, who resided at Pembroke Hall, when the 
mischievous pranks of the Students had caused him 
to desert Peter House.
Many celebrated men have belonged to this col- 
lege ; amongst whom may be mentioned, the arch- 
bishops Grindall, and Whitgift ; the bishops Fox, 
Ridley, Andrews, and Prettyman ; John Rogers, 
who translated the Bible, and was the first person 
put to death by Queen Mary ; Thomas Stanley, 
Esq. author of a History of Philosophy ; and editor 
of Eschylus ; Dr. Long, the late master ; Spencer, 
Gray, and Mason, poets ; and the late William Pitt, 
Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Corpus Christi, or Bene't College, was establish- 
ed by the union of two guilds, or societies, respec- 
tively intituled the Guilds of the Body of Christ and 
of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
It was begun in 1344, 
by the Society of Corpus Christi, who being soon 
joined by the Guild of the Blessed Virgin, advanced 
rapidly with their building, which appears to have 
been completed through the interest of Henry Plan- 
tagenet, Duke of Lancaster, whom the brethren 
had chosen as their first Alderman.
By the liberali- 
ty of Sir John Cambridge, and his son, the re- 
venues were considerably augmented, and finally 
appropriated, on the 21st of March, 1356, to the 
maintenance of a Master, eight Fellows, three Bible 
Clerks, and six Scholars.
Other benefactions since 
that period hare enlarged the endowments sufficient- 
ly to support twelve Fellowships, and nearly sixty 
Scholarships.
Its name of Bene't, or Benedict, 
College arose from its proximity to the church.
of 
that saint.
It is situated a little to the east of 
Trumpington Street, and consists principally of a 
court about 115 feet by 90.
Matthew Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, was 
the greatest benefactor to this college.
Besides re* 
covering several of its lost rights, and founding* 
two Fellowships and five Scholarships, he bestowed 
on it the valuable library of Stoke Clare College, 
Suffolk, which he also augmented with many print- 
ed books, and manuscripts-.
This collection, which 
chiefly relates to ecclesiastical affairs, is extremely 
difficult of access ; as oven a Fellow of the college 
is not permitted to enter it unaccompanied by ano- 
ther Fellow or Scholar, who must remain with him 
thirteen feet diameter, which, when the sphere is put into mo- 
tion, runs upon large rollers of lignum vita', in the maimer- thai 
the tops of some windmills are made to turn round.
Upon the 
iron meridian is fixed a zodiac of tin, painted blue ; w hereon 
the ecliptic and heliocentric orb.ts of the planets are drawn, and 
the constellations and stars traced.
The Great and Little Bear, 
and Draco, are already painted in their places round the north 
pole, the rest of the constellations are proposed to follow.
The 
whole is turned round with a small winch, with as little labour 
as it takes to wind up a jack ; though the weight of the iron, 
tin, and wooden circle is above 10001 bs.
When it is made use of 
a planetarium will be placed in the middle thereof : the whole, 
witli the floor, is well supported by a frame of large timber." 
3 i 
duriuj 
21S 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
during his stay.
If a single book be missing, ac- 
cording to the will ol the donor, they lose the wholes 
for which reason they arc examined every year, by- 
two persons ol another college.
M The bow windows 
of the Hail are ornamented with painted glass of 
the arms of many of the Masters and bencfactoxs ; 
which has been removed from the chapel.
The 
chapel itself is a neat building, with an elegant altar 
piece of carved wainscot.
It was erected chiefly by 
the beaefsacikm.
of the Lord Keeper, Sir Nicholas- 
Bacon.
An ancient drinking horn, which belonged to the 
Guild of Corpus Christi, is still preserved amongst 
the college plate.
This college is very ancient, and it has been some 
time in contemplation to rebuild it.
Among its portraits are those of Erasmus ; Car- 
dinal Wolsey ; Thomas, Lord Cromwell ; Sir Tho- 
mas More ; Robert, Earl of Leicester ; Matthias 
Mawsou, Bishop of Ely, by Heins ; John Fox, the 
Martyromgjwt ; Archbishop Parker ; Samuel Brad- 
ford, by Enoch Zeiuan ; and William Coleman, by 
Romney.
Archbishop Parker, author of Antiqui- 
tates Britannia ; Richard Cavendish, physician, and 
translator of Euclid's Elements ; Nathaniel Salmon, 
author of the Antiquities of Hertfordshire and Es- 
sex ; Benjamin Hoadly, author of the Suspicious 
Husband ; Robert Masters, author of the History of 
Bene't College, an Answer to the Honourable Ho- 
race Walpolc's Historic Doubts, &c.
and Richard 
Gough, Esq. the learned topographer, and last editor 
of the Britannia,* may be mentioned as some of the 
eminent men whom it has produced.
Gonviile and Cains College, vulgarly denominat- 
ed Keys College, was first founded in the year 1348, 
on the spot which is now occupied by the garden and 
tennis-court of Benc't's, by Edmund Gonviile, Rec- 
tor of Terrington and Rushworth, in Norfolk.
It is 
•ituated on the west side of Trumpington Street, 
and at present consists of three courts.
The origin- 
al .founder did.
not liv«; to effect his plan ; but, on his 
death he left a sufficient sum for its completion, at 
the disposal of William Bateman, Bishop of Nor- 
wich, who, about that time, bfing engaged with his 
own foundation at Trinity-Hall, removed the site of 
Gonville's and having fixed it near his own, en- 
dowed it with lands and tenements for the support 
of a Master, four Fellows, and two Scholars.
In 
the succeeding century, different benefactors increas- 
ed the Fellows to eleven ; and William Ffyshwyke, 
Esquire, Beadle, added an hostel,, called after his 
own name, and governed by a distinct Principal.
Previously to the year 1557, the revenues of Gon- 
viile Hall were augmented by many donations ; and, 
at that time John Caius, Physician to Queen Mary, 
procured a confirmation of its- privileges, and a 
* Some account of this gentleman, who ilied in the spring of 
J-S09, will he given in a.
subsequent part of this work.
f Dr. Gains, an erudite but somewhat pedantic scholar, was 
W« at Norwich, iu the year 15 »0, and became Student when 
charter of incorporation, in which its name was' 
changed to Gonviile and Caius College.
Caius also> 
increased the endowments considerably, built a new 
court, and tlvree remarkable nates of different archi- 
tecture, by which, he evidently intended to inculcate 
a moral lesson* The first gate, through which the 
college is entered from the town to the north of the 
Senate House, is in a very simple style, and bears 
the following inscription : 
" Hcmilit at^ : ,r The Gate of Humility.
The second, which is a noble portico in the mid- 
dle of the college, forms the communication between 
the two courts : on one side Ls written, 
" Yirtutis :" The Gate of Virtue.
On the opposite side appears the following sen- 
tence : 
" Jo. Caius Posuit S apienii*." 
John Cuius bnilt this in Honour of Wisdom.
The third gate, which leads to the Public Schools^ 
is executed iu a more ornamented style, exhibiting 
specimens of the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian or- 
ders : this is inscribed, 
•• IIonokis :" The Gate of Honour : 
which, it seems to have been the opinion of the Doc- 
tor, all who might pass this gate to taint their de- 
grees should have attained.
Since the decease of 
Caius, the Fellows have been increased to twenty - 
nine, and the Scholars to nearly one hundred.
At the time when the chapel of the college was- 
rebuilt, early in the last century, the monument of 
Dr. Caius was removed from beneath the altar, 
where it had been buried by his own desire, to the.
situation which it now occupies ; and it is said, that, 
in removing it, the workmen raised his body, which 
was whole and perfect, and the beard long, enough* 
it had been interred almost 150 years.
His epitaph, 
from its quaint yet expressive turn, deserves no-r 
tice : — 
" Fur Caius.
VjVIT I'OST t'UNER* VWUUS.'" 
I was Caius.
Virtue our Death survive*.
Cains College Library is small, but it contains 
some highly valuable books and manuscripts, par- 
ticularly on heraldry and genealogy.
Portraits of 
all the Masters from- the re-founding of the college, 
excepting William Dell, who was chaplain, in tho 
Parliament's army in the Civil Way, are in the 
Lodge.
The following are the most deserving of 
attention : — 
Dr. John Caius, an original, on board,, with his 
anus, and a long Latin inscription.
f Thomas 
Legge-, 
very young in Gonviile Malls whence he went to Italy, and 
studied Physic in the University of Padua, under the famous 
John Baptist Montanus,.
of Verona.
lie there delivered the 
Greek Lectures, and wrote and translated many esteeind me- 
dicav 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
2i3 
Legge, LL.D' 1573, some time Professor of Civil 
Law, Dean of the Arches, and Master of Chan- 
cery ; Thomas Batchcroft, 1).
D. 1025, who was 
deprived of his office by the Parliament in 1059, hut 
was restored in 1000, and resigned the same year.
Robert Brady, Regius Professor of Physio to the 
University, ami autlior of a " Complete History of 
England." Sir Thomas Cooeh, Barf, and Bishop 
of Fly ; Sir James Btirrough, Knt. by Heins ; .John 
Smith, D.
D. by Sir Joshua Reynolds ; Robert 
Trapps, Alderman of London, and his wife Joanna, 
who united in giving lands for the support of four 
Scholars; both said to have been painted by Hol- 
bein ; and two small portraits on copper, of Sir 
Walter Raleigh, and Rembrandt.
The Hall was embellished and improved a few 
years ago, with an elegant cove ceiling.
Among 
other portraits which it contains, are those of Wil- 
liam Harvey, M.
D. Fellow, who discovered the 
circulation of the blocd; Nicholas Sanderson, LL.D.
the blind Professor, and autlior of a valuable Trea- 
tise on> Algebra- ; and Jocosa Frankland, daughter 
to theabovo-mvntioiied Robert and Joanna Trapps, 
foundress of a Hebrew Fellowship, and one of the 
chief benefactors to the College.
Dr. Branthwaite, one of the translators of the 
Bible ; William Watts, editor of Matthew Paris, 
and assistant in Spehnan's Glossary ; Sir Charles 
Scarborough, an eminent mathematician and ana- 
tomist ; Henry Wharton, author of Angliea Sacra ; 
Le Neve, an ingenious herald and antiquary ; Sir 
Henry Chaucey, author of the Antiquities of Hert- 
fordshire ; Sir Thomas Gresham, founder of the 
Royal Exchange ; Francis Blomeheld, author of 
the Topographical History of Norfolk ^ and many 
eminent Physicians, may be classed with the eminent 
men who have been instructed in this college.
Trinity Hall, originally one of those hostels in 
which the Students resided at their own expence, 
was purchased by Richard Crowder, Prior of Fly, 
in the reign of Edward the Third, as a study and 
lodging-house for the monks of Ely, when the af- 
fairs of the church might afford leisure for their im- 
provement at Cambridge.
Richard Ling, Chan- 
cellor of the University, afterwards enlarged it ; and 
in the year 1351, it w;is transferred in exchange for 
the advowsons of certain rectories, to Bishop Bate- 
man, a learned Civilian, who having obtained the 
Kind's licence to erect it into a College, dedicated 
it to the Holy and Undivided Trinity, and.
appoint- 
ed a Master, three Fellows, and two scholars, to 
be Students in the Canon and Civil Law. He in- 
tended to augment this number to twenty, but dy- 
ing before the foundation was completed, the en- 
dowments were thought insufficient to support -any 
dical treatises.
On his return to England in 1351, he greatly 
exerted himself to allay the ravages of the sweating sickness"; 
and about five years afterward*, he published a History in Latin 
of that dreadful disease.
He then applied la the erection of.
Sis college, and .labored, with much anxiety to effect i ; com-!
more.
Numerous benefactions, however, since that" 
period, have increased the Fellowships to twelve, 
and the Scholarships to fourteen.
The altar-piece in the Chapel, which is a large 
painting of the Presentation in the Temple, is much 
admired for the fineness of its colouring and the spirit 
of its expression.
The Hall contains an excellent portrait of Sir 
Nathaniel Lloyd, Knight, with whose bequest of 
30001.
towards improving the college, that apart- 
ment was principally built ; and a fine bust of the 
late Earl of Mansfield, by Nollekens.
The figure 
on his Lordship's monument in Westminster Abbey,., 
is understood to have been taken from this bust.
The Library, which is neatly classed, contains a', 
complete and extensive collection of Civil and Coir.r 
nion Law books ; this seminary being peculiarly ap»- 
preprinted to the study of that profession.
The Lodge, and the Combination Roomy, con- 
tain portraits of the following celebrated persons, 
who have belonged to this college : — (Moment Cor- 
bet, Master in 1011 ; Stephen Gardiner, the Popish 
Bishop of WU&phester ; Philip Dormer Stanhope, 
the celebrated Earl of Chesterfield ; and John 
Andrews, LL.D. who in the year 1717 bequeathed 
•20,0001.
to the college, after the- decease of two 
maiden sisters, for improving the buildings, and es- 
tablishing six additional Fellowships, and as many 
Scholarships; and Samuel Johnson, LL.D.
Amongst other learned characters educated hero, .
may be named Thomas- Tosses* .successively a mu- 
sician, schoolmaster^ husbandman^, and poet ; Dr.
Gabriel Harvey, a celebrated poet and orator ; Dr., 
Cowell, famous for his lustitutioues Juris Angli- 
canar ; Sir Peter Wyche, inventor- of.
the Geo- 
graphical Cards; Sir Robert Naunion, autlior of 
the Fragmenta Regalia ; Sir James Marriut r Knt.
late Judge of the Admiralty ; tlui Right 'Hon. Sir 
W. Wynne, Supreme Judge of the Ecclesiastical 
Courts; Sir B.
Hotham ;..Sir Nash Grose, one of 
the late, and Sir Simon.
Le Blanc, one of the pre- 
sent, Judges of the Court of King's Bench.
King's College, which is a trul> magnificent foun- 
dation, derived its origin, from the gener.nl segard 
to the interests-ol" literature possessed by Henry the 
Sixth, and the maxims of piety which his ambitious 
preceptor, , Cardiual Beaufort, to answer bis own 
purposes, effectually succeeded in impressing upon 
bis mind.
. That monarch at first instituted a small 
seminary on this spot, for a Rector and tv> »lv,e Fel- 
lows ; and on December the sixth (his birth-day.) 
1411, he dedicated it to the Virgin Mary and St.
Nicholas.
Within two years, however,, he entirely 
changed its- form, and endowed it for a Provost, se- 
venty Fellows- or.
Scholars, (the latter to be supplied, 
plete establishment.
In 15(>S, he published Ins " De Antiqui- 
tate CarKabrigieu-iis/' in which,.
as we conceive, lie erroneous- 
ly endeavoured to dedu e the origin ot the .Universi'y from 
Caniaber.
Me. died in the year 137 3.
;ii'' 
'220 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
in regular succession, from Eton, established nearly 
at the same time,) three Chaplains, six Clerks, six- 
teen Choristers, and a Music Master, who now pos- 
sesses the office of Organist ; sixteen Officers of the 
foundation, twelve Servitors for the senior Fellows, 
and six poor scholars.* Had the building of this 
College been finished according to the plan of the 
founder, its architecture would have rivalled the 
most splendid palaces of Europe, or perhaps the 
World ; but the calamitous events which, ripening 
into civil war, filled the kingdom with discord and 
misery", distracted the King's atteution, and unwill- 
ingly forced him to delay the execution of his de- 
signs, which at length an untimely death prevented his 
ever completing.
Enough, however, has been ef- 
fected to record his munificence ; and though the 
chapel of King's College, " a work," says Lord 
Orford, "  alone sufficient to ennoble any age," was 
not completed till many years after his death, yet 
the whole merit of commencing the undertaking on 
the plan, by which, with some trivial alterations, it 
was ultimately finished, must unquestionably be as- 
cribed to him." 
" This magnificent structure," justly observe the 
Editors of the Beauties of England and Wales, " has 
been always considered as a perfect specimen of Go- 
thic, or English Ecclesiastical architecture.
When 
viewed from the outside, the massive stone with 
which it is composed, and the immense buttresses 
that support it, raise an idea of the most uncommon 
solidity, but this dwells but a short time on the 
mind ; the height and magnitude of the building, its 
open-worked battlements, and finely proportioned 
pinnacles and towers, exalt the fleeting emotions 
that arise from the consideration of its strength, into 
the sensations that emanate from the contemplation 
of its sublimity and grandeur.
The interior vi«w is 
yet more impressive.
The vast arched roof, un- 
sustained by a single pillar, with its voluminous 
stones, displaying all the elegance of fan-work, and 
seeming to hang in air, as if art had taught them 
to forget nature, and weaned them of their tenden- 
cy to gravitate, at once astonishes and confounds." 
The extreme length of this superb edifice is 316 
feet, the breadth 84 feet, the height from the ground 
to the summit of the battlements 90 feet, to the top 
of the pinnacles somewhat more than 101, and to the 
summit of the corner towers 140 feet 6 inches.
The 
space inclosed by the wall is 291 feet in length, 78 
feet in height, and 45 feet 6 inches in breadth.
The 
choir is separated from the ante-chapel by a wooden 
screen and organ gallery, enriched with carvings in 
alto relievo, erected in the year 1534.
The western 
side is ornamented with several true lovers' knots ; 
and a pannel near the wall, on the right, displays the 
* It appears, from Kaworlh's University Calendar, that some 
peculiar privileges appertain to this college.
" The Provost," 
it is observed, " lias absolute authority within the precincts; and 
by a special composition between this Society and the Univer- 
sity, its Under-Graduatcs (under certain restrictions) are ex- 
arms of the ill-fated Anna Boleyn impaled with those 
of the King.
On another pannel is a fine piece of 
sculpture, representing the Almighty hurling the 
Rebel Angels from Heaven.
Over the screen is u 
stately and fine-toned organ, put up at the expenee 
of the college, a few years ago.
The walls on the 
inside of the ante chapel are ornamented with carv- 
ed stone, of excellent workmanship, representing 
the arms of the houses of York and Lancaster, with 
numerous crowns, roses, portcullises, and fleur-de- 
lis.
In the centre of one of the roses at the west end.
is a small figure of the Virgin Mary.
The view 
from the screen at the entrance of the choir, is ex- 
tremely grand and beautiful.
On each side are two 
rows of stalls of carved wood ; on the pannels, at 
the back part of the upper rows, are the arras of 
all the Kings of England, from Henry the Fifth to 
James the First ; the arms of the Universities of 
Cambridge and Oxford, and of the colleges, King's 
and Eton.
These arms are carved with considera- 
ble skill ; and the supporters are in the boldest basso 
relievo.
The carving of the St. George and the 
Dragon at the back of the Provost's stall, is also 
very finely executed.
The choir is paved with mar- 
ble from the bottom of the stalls.
The east end of this chapel remained unfinished 
till about eight and thirty years ago ; but it is now 
completed in a style of excellence nearly corres- 
ponding with the general magnificence of the build- 
ing.
Under the inspection of the late Mr. James 
Essex, F.
S. A.
a grand altar-piece was erected 
about the year '1770, and has since been embellished 
with an excellent painting of the Descent from the 
Cross, presented to the Society by the present Earl 
of Carlisle, who was educated at this college.
It 
was purchased by his Lordship, when travelling on 
the Continent, as the work of Daniel de Vojterra ; 
but some connoisseurs have adjudged it to have 
been executed by his scholar, Giacomo da Pun- 
tornio.
" The disposition of the materials of the beauti- 
ful stone roof of this fabric," observe the writers 
whom we just now quoted, " and the ingenuity dis- 
played in its construction, may be justly classed 
with the most happy efforts of architectural skill.
On each side of the chapel are eleven buttresses ; 
and at each corner an octangular tower, tcrminating 
in a dome.
The roof is divided into twelve parts, 
the separations being made by the eleven principal 
arches which spring from the buttresses.
The re- 
maining part of the roof is filled with elegant groin 
arches, springing from the capitals of columns 
which occupy the inside of each buttress ; in the 
centre of every four groins is suspended, as an or- 
nament, a massive stone, at least a ton in weight, 
empt from the power of the Proctor, and other University of- 
ficers, within the limits of the College : neither by usuage do 
they keep any public exercises in the Schools, or are any ways 
examined for the Bachelors of Arts degree." 
and 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
*21 
and a yard in thickness.
There are twelve of these 
stones, which, though of such vast weight, by hav- 
ing their under parts carved into roses and portcul- 
lises in alternate succession, correspond with the 
other parts of the building, in exciting those ideas 
of magical airiness to which we have before alluded.
Thus the buttresses and corner towers support this 
immense roof, in which are hung twelve stones, of 
a ton weight each, as mere ornaments : the sides 
and ends of the building contribute nothing towards 
their support ; and doubtless they might be remov- 
ed, without the least endangering the roof.
These 
contrivances exemplify the cause of the admiration 
of Sir Christopher Wren, who, according to tke 
tradition transcribed in Walpole's Anecdotes of 
Painting, " went once a year to survey the roof of 
the chapel of King's College, and said, that if any 
man would show him where to place the first stone, 
he would engage to build such another." Over the 
inner, or stone roof, is another of wood, covered 
with iead.
Between the roofs is sufficient space for 
a man to walk upright.
These are not the only circumstances that have 
promoted the fame of this chapel ; an additional 
cause of its celebrity may be found in the exquisite 
beauty of its painted windows, which are in the 
Gothic form, and each of them nearly fifty feet high.
The subjects are expressive of the most interesting 
scriptural events, particularly the Life, Death, and 
more memorable actions of our Saviour, with cor- 
responding incidents from the Old Testament, and 
are one hundred in number.
The side windows are 
separated by mullions into five lights ; these are sub- 
divided into upper and lower compartments by a 
stone transom.
In the central light of each division 
is depicted an Angel and a Saint, exhibiting scrolls 
and labels, descriptive of the events represented in 
the other lights, which are occupied by four subjects 
in each window, each being contained in two lights.
In the arrangement of the subjects, a peculiar order 
has been observed, and something like a concord- 
ance attempted ; the delineations in the upper di- 
visions being in general selected from the Old Tes- 
tament, and the paintings immediately underneath 
from correspondent circumstances in the New Tes- 
tament.
Thus in the upper compartments of one 
window is the Queen of Sheba offering presents to 
King Solomon, and Abraham performing the cere- 
mony of Circumcision : in the divisions beneath, 
the Wise Men's Offerings to Christ, and the Cir- 
cumcision of Christ.
" The East and West windows differ from all the 
others ; the glass of the latter is not painted ; wliy 
it is-not, is a mystery, since in the Indenture which 
the college entered into, to set up eighteen of these 
windows, the West window is particularly mention- 
ed as one of them.
The east window, which is fifty- 
three feet high, by twenty-eight feet wide, is embel- 
lished with paintings of almost inconceivable beauty.
The upper and lower divisions of this window are 
divided by a transom, and separated by two elegant 
vol..
i. — no.
10.
buttresses into six compartments, each containing a- 
subject : these compartments are again subdivided 
by mullions into three lights.
The six subjects are 
all taken from the New Testament, and represent 
the Crucifixion, and the most material events imme- 
diately connected with it.
" In the lower division on the right, is Christ ex- 
posed to the People ; " And Pilate &aid, behold the 
man." Jesus is represented on a balcony, with his 
hands tied, a napkin round his waist, and his coun- 
tenance beaming with the utmost humility and re- 
signation.
The attitudes, and virulent eagerness in 
the countenances of the chief Priest and Elders of 
the JeAvs, are finely expressed.
" The centre compartment of the lower division 
represents Pilate washing his hands-, and declaring 
himself innocent of the death of Jesus.
Pilate is 
seated under a magnificent canopy.
Below the 
judgment-seat is Christ bound, with a crown of 
thorns on his head ; and surrounded by several fi- 
gures, who are characterized by strong expression : 
the features of one of them display all the savage 
brutality of an assassin : another has a whip uplifted, 
and his left hand entwined in the hair of the unre- 
sisting Jesus, who is turning to his unfeeling per- 
secutor with a look of considerable meekness.
" The left lower compartment represents Christ 
bearing the Cross.
In this picture, all the hurry and 
bustle of an execution are well delineated.
Pilate, 
whose countenance strongly expresses a mind rapt 
in thought, appears on horseback, accompanied by 
the unfeeling High Priest, and many attendants.
Jesus, nearly sinking with fatigue, is receiving a 
napkin from a female, whom he surveys with grate- 
ful benignity : with a rope round his waist, he is 
hauled along by a soldier, whose features are ex- 
pressive of the most ferocious brutality.
Near him 
is a man carrying a hammer, and apparently view- 
ing the scene around him with deep and malignant 
exultation.
On the road is the Virgin Mother, St.
John, and others ; and in the distance, Mount Cal- 
vary.
" On the right, in the upper division, is the Nail- 
ing of Christ to the Cross.
In this piece Pilate is 
again introduced, with a strong expression of an- 
xious sorrow, and feelings bordering on remorse, for 
having permitted an innocent man to become the 
victim of hardened cruelty.
Jesus is extended on 
the cross, which is lying on a broken ground strewn 
with rocks, whose dark masses contrast with, and 
give the figures a bold relief.
His body appears 
drawn up, and lying hollow, from the violence of 
the pain arising from the nails being driven through 
his hands.
The attitude and expression of the man 
employed in this horrid business are admirable.
lit 
the fore-ground is a soldier with a pike and ropes ; 
and another with a basket of tools, who seems to 
have been at work on the Cross.
The ferocious 
triumph displayed on the countenance of the latter 
is extremely fine.
" In the centre of the upper division is the Cru- 
3 k cifixioij.
2-22 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
cifixion.
Jesus is represented on the Cross between 
the two Thieves.
The countenance of the penitent 
thief finely expresses both mental and bodily an- 
guish ; and that of his hardened companion is a^ 
strongly marked with derision and mockery.
Be • 
neath the penitent thief is a soldier on horseback, 
piercing the side of Christ with a spear.
Below the 
Saviour is Mary Magdalen embracing the Cross ; 
and in the fore-ground three soldiers casting lots for 
his garment.
The expression of one of them is 
very fine ; he appears pointing his finger to the dice, 
which are marked with deuce-ace, and exulting at 
the ill success of his comrade, who had last thrown.
On the left is St. John and the Virgin : the face of 
the former displays uncommon feeling, united with 
devout resignation to the decree of the Deity ; that 
of the latter, heart-rending anguish.
It may be 
worthy of remark, for being the only attempt at al- 
legory introduced in the paintings of this window, 
that above the head of the penitent thief, is the sun 
rising in splendor ; over the head of the other, the 
moon in her wane.
" In the left and remaining compartment is the 
Taking of Christ from the Cross.
This painting 
represents the removal of the body of Jesus, every 
muscle of which appears to be relaxed by death.
On 
the left is the Virgin and St. John.
The former is 
portrayed fainting, and sinking to the ground ; while 
a female figure, with much tenderness, is endeavor- 
ing to support and comfort her.
Most of the fi- 
gures introduced in this piece have an air and ex- 
pression of deep sorrow." 
It has been remarked, that the same discrimina- 
tion of character, excellence of composition, and 
beauty of colouring, which distinguish the east win- 
dow, are with some exceptions, equally exhibited 
by the painting in the other windows of the chapel, 
a brief account of which we shall here subjoin : — 
Second Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
— 
These two lights represent an offering which was 
presented to God by Joseph and Mary before their 
marriage.
— Right Side.
— The espousals of Tobias 
and Sarah.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Jephthah offering .
his daughter.
Right Side.
— The espousals of Jo- 
seph and Mary.
Third Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
— 
The temptation of Eve. Right Side.
— God appear- 
ing to Moses in a burning bush.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— The salutation of 
the Virgin Mary.
Right Side.
— The birth of 
Christ.
Fourth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
— 
The ceremony of Circumcision first performed by 
Abraham.
Right Side.
— The Queen of Sheba of- 
fering presents to King Solomon.
Lower Division, Left Side.
The circumcision of 
our Saviour.
Right Side.
— The wise men offering 
gifts to Christ.
Fifth Window : Upper Division, Left Side.
— The 
Institution of the Purification of Women.
Right 
Side.
— Jacob, to avoid the fury of Esau, is sent to 
Haran.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— The Purification of 
the Virgin Mary.
Right Side.
— Joseph, to avoid the 
fury of Herod, travels with Christ into Egypt.
Sixth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side — The 
children of Israel worshipping (a false god) .
the 
molten calf.
Right Side.
— Pharaoh's cruelty to- 
wards the Hebrew children.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Simeon blessing (a 
real God) Christ in the Temple.
Right Side.
— lie- 
rod's cruelty towards the Jewish children.
Seventh Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
— 
Naaman washing in Jordan, whereby he was cleans- 
ed from his leprosy.
Right Side.
— Esau tempted 
to sell his birthright.
Lower Division, Left Side.— Christ baptized by 
St. John in Jordan.
Right Side.
— Christ tempted 
in the Wilderness.
Eighth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
— 
Elisha raising the son of the Shunamite.
Right 
Side.
— David returning from battle in triumph, with 
the head of Goliah; women meeting him, and play- 
ing on their harps.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Christ raising Laza- 
rus from the dead.
Right Side.
— Christ riding in 
triumph to Jerusalem.
Ninth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side..
— 
Manna falling from Heaven for the murmuring Is- 
raelites.
Right Side.
— The casting down of the re- 
bellious angels.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— The Last Supper of 
our Lord.
Right Side.
— Our Saviour praying in 
the garden : the apostles asleep.
Tenth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
— 
Cain slaying his brother Abel.
Right Side.
— Noah 
drunk with new wine ; one of his sons 
garment over him.
casting a 
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Judas betraying 
Christ ; Peter smiting the High Priest's servant.
Right Side.
— Christ bound and blindfolded.
Eleventh Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
Job tempted by Satan.
Right Side.
— Christ's es- 
pousals to the church.
Lower Division, Left Side.
Christ crowned with 
thorns.
Right Side.
— Christ scourged.
: 
The Grand East Window.
The subjects deline- 
ated upon this admirable window arc selected from 
the New Testament only.
Lower Division, the 
three lights on the left.
— Christ exposed to the peo- 
ple.
The three middle lights.
— Pilate pronouncing 
sentence on our Saviour, and declaring himself in- 
nocent of his blood, by washing his hands.
The 
three lights on the right.
Our Saviour bearing the 
cross.
Upper Division, the three lights on the left.
— The 
nailing of Christ to the cross.
The three middle 
lights.
— Christ crucified between two thieves ; the 
Soldiers casting lots for his garments.
The three 
lights on the right.
— Joseph of Arimathea taking 
down Christ from the cross.
Fourteenth 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
223 
Fourteenth Window ; South side.
^ Left Side.
— 
The lamentation of Mary Magdalen and others for 
the death of Christ.
Right Side.
— The lamentation 
of Naomi and her daughters, for the death of their 
husbands.
The lower part of this window is not illumi- 
nated.
Fifteenth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
Joseph cast into a Pit by his brethren.
Right Side.
The passage of the Israelites from Egyptian sla- 
very.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Christ laid in his 
Grave by Joseph of Arimathea.
Right Side.
— The 
passage of Christ, into the region of departed 
souls.
Sixteenth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
— 
Jonah coming forth from the Whale's belly.
Right 
Side.
— The Angel discovering himself to Tobit and 
Tobias.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Christ rising from 
the dead ; the Soldiers keeping watch arcund the 
sepulchre.
Right Side.
— Jesus discovering himself 
after his resurrection, to Mary Magdalen.
Seventeenth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
Reuben coming to the pit to seek for his brother Jo- 
seph.
Right Side.
— Daniel in the lion's den, and 
King Darius amazed at finding him alive.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— The women going to 
the sepulchre to seek for Jesus.
Right Side.
— 
Mary Magdalen mistaking our Saviour for the gar- 
dener.
Eighteenth Window, Upper Division, Left Side.
An angel appearing to Habakkuk.
Right Side.
— 
An angel holding Habakkuk, by the hair, over the 
lion's den.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Christ appearing to 
two of his disciples in the way to Emmaus.
Right 
Side.
— Christ breaking bread to two of his disciples 
at Emmaus.
Nineteenth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
The prodigal son acknowledging and renouncing his 
licentious life.
Right Side.
— Joseph meeting his 
Father and Brethren in Egypt.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Thomas acknow- 
ledging and laying aside his incredulity.
Right 
Side.
— Christ appearing to his eleven apostles.
Twentieth Window ; Upper Division, Left Side.
Elijah taken up to Heaven in a chariot of fire, and 
Elisha catching his mantle.
Right Side.
— The law 
given to Moses from Sinai ; some of the Israelites 
fallen on their faces at the foot of the mountain.
Lower Division, Left Side.— Christ ascending in- 
to Heaven, Right Side.
— The Holy Ghost given to 
the Apostles.
Twenty-First Window ; Upper Division, Left 
Side.
— Peter and John restoring a lame man to his 
feet at the beautiful gate of the Temple.
Right 
Side.
— The Imprisonment and scourging of Peter 
and John.
Lower Divison, Left Side.
— The beggar, restored 
to the use of his feet, walking before Peter and 
John towards the Temple.
Right Side.
— The death 
of Ananias; 
Twenty-Second Window ; Upper Division, Left 
Side.
— The conversion of St. Paul.
Right Side.
— 
Paul preaching and disputing at Damascus.
A small 
figure of Paul, whom the disciples are letting down 
from the walls of Damascus in a basket.
Lower Division, Left Side.
Paul and Barnabas 
about to be done homage to as Gods.
Right Side.
Paul stoned.
Twenty-Third Window ; Upper Division, Left 
Side.
— Paul casting out a spirit of divination from 
a woman.
Right Side.
— Paul before King Agrip- 
pa.
Lower Division, Left Side.
— Paul's friends dis- 
suading him from his intended voyage to Jerusalem.
A very beautiful figure of a ship, representing the 
vessel in which Paul sailed from Ptolemais to Cre- 
sarea in Palestine.
Right Side.
— Paul before the 
Roman governor Felix.
The subjects of the other two windows are not 
sufficiently distinct to be understood, or accurately 
described.
" The arches of all tho windows," con- 
tinue the Editors of the Beauties of England^ and 
Wales, " are divided into small compartments, call- 
ed crockets, illuminated with the arms, and other de- 
vices, of the monarchs who contributed towards the.
building.
Who were the persons that gave the ori- 
ginal designs, is uncertain.
By some they have been 
ascribed to Julio Romano, who flourished when the 
windows were executed : others have imagined that 
the drawings of the great Raphael were resorted to 
for proper subjects, as one of the finest paintings is 
evidently " the story of Ananias and Saphira, as 
told by Raphael in the Cartoons." Perhaps the 
true mode of solving the difficulty, would be to eon-, 
sider them as the productions no( of one only, hut of 
many artists, whose best pieces were selected, per- 
haps, by Julio Romano, and from which the paint- 
inns were executed.
The names of the Glaziers 
who undertook to execute the windows are all that is 
preserved in the Indentures, yet extant, respecting 
these beautiful productions.
" In one of these Indentures, dated May the 
third, in the eighteenth of Henry tho Eighth, be- 
tween Master Robert Hacoinbleyn, the Provost, &o.
on the one part, and Francis Williamson, of South- 
wark, Glazier, and Simon Symonds, of St. Marga- 
ret's, Westminster, Glazier, on the other : the latter 
agree substantially, curiously, and sufficiently to 
glaze four windows of the upper story of the church 
of King's College, Cambridge, '*' with good, clene, 
sure, and perfyte glasse, and oryent colours and 
imagery of the story of the Old La we, and of the 
New Lawe, after the forme, maner, goodness, cury- 
ousity, and clenelyncss in cvry poynt of the g3as.se 
wyudows of the Kynge's Newe Chapell at Westmin- 
ster ; and also accordingly and after suche maner as 
oon Barnard Fflower, Glasyer, late deceased, by In- 
denture stode bounde to doo ; and also accordyngly 
to suche patterns, otherwvse called vidimus, as by 
224 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
the seid Master Robert Hacombleyn, &c.
to the seid 
Ffrancis Wyllyamson and Symondes, or either of 
them, shall be delyvered," &c.
By the same In- 
denture, the money to be paid for the glass is fixed 
at sixteen-pence a foot ; and the contractors agree 
to " sette up" two of the windows within two years, 
and the others in three years.
" Another Indenture, between the same Robert 
Hacombleyn, &c.
on the one part, and Galyon 
Hoone, of the parish of St. Mary Magdalen, Gla- 
zier ; Richarde Bownde, of St. Clement's Danes, 
Glazier ; Thomas Reve, of St. Sepulchre's Glazier ; 
and James Nicholson, Glazier ; on the other part ; 
provides for the setting up, glazing, and painting 
eighteen windows, with the same " oryent colours 
and imagery" as those mentioned in the former deed : 
the said contractors to " suerly bynde all the said 
wyndows with double bands of leade for defence, of 
great wyndes and outragious wetheringes ;" " after 
the rate of two-pence every ffoote." Six of the 
windows to be set up within twelve months.
By 
this Indenture it is also agreed, that the Glaziers 
here mentioned should provide Williamson and Sy- 
monds, those named in the former one, with four 
patterns, «>r vidimuses, at a reasonable price.
The 
Indenture is dated the last day of April, in the 
eighteaiit'i of Henry the Eighth." 
It is much to be regretted, that, by the repairing 
of the lead-work of these windows, at different times, 
the glass has, in several instances, been misplaced.
The fault, however, being wholly ascribable to the 
ignorance of the glaziers, the merit of the painters 
remains unimpeached.
Two of the windows on the 
south, and one on the north side, at the west end of 
the chapel, appear more mutilated or misplaced than 
any others, so that the events which they were in- 
tended to-represent can hardly be understood.
These 
pieces have been thought by some to have been com- 
posed from the painted glass erected in the east 
window in the reign of Richard III.: they are not 
equal to the others.
An erroneous opinion formerly prevailed, that all 
the windows of the chapel were taken down, and con- 
cealed, during the time that the fanaticism of the 
Long Parliament employed commissioners to remove 
and destroy whatever they deemed superstitious or- 
naments.
The following entry of the commissioners 
in the journal, seems to imply that their fate was 
determined : " 1643, December the 26th.
Steps to 
be taken down, and 1000 superstitious pictures, the 
ladder of Christ and thieves to go upon, &c." The 
thousand superstitious pictures can scarcely refer to 
any thing but the paintings of the windows, which, 
it is thought probable, might be preserved from the 
general ruin by the use which the military made of 
the chapel, for training and other exercises, who 
chose rather to endure the sight of the pictured saints 
than be exposed to the weather.
The merit of sav- 
ing them, is sometimes ascrihed to Dr. Whicholt, 
whom the Long Parliament had appointed provost ; 
and, at others, to Oliver Cromwell, who, from hav- 
ing been educated at the university, is said to have 
entertained a respect for the place.
The royal founder of this college, when he com- 
menced the building, granted to the PrOvost and 
Fellows, for ever, a stone quarry, situated in the 
lordship of Heselwode, in Yorkshire.
He also vest- 
ed a part of the duchy of Lancaster in feoffees, for 
carrying on completing the structure.
It does not 
appear to be accurately known, how far it was pro- 
ceeded with during the life of Henry VI.
but it is 
probable that it was carried no higher than where 
the white- stone reaches, which, though pretty high 
at the east end, gradually declines to the west.
An 
entire stop was put to the work in the year 1 640, for 
Edward the Fourth confiscated the duchy of Lan- 
caster, as well as all the other revenues of the col- 
lege, rcgranting, however, a sufficient sum for the 
maintenance of the provost and scholars, but not 
any thing towards the completion of the building.
After an interruption, however, of sixteen years, it 
was resumed through the interest of Dr. Field, war- 
den of Winchester College and provost of King's.
The sum of 12961.
Is. 8d.
was expended on the cha- 
pel, in the four following years.
From the 14th of 
June, 1 483, till the 22d of March in the following 
year, the work again stood still.
At that time, Ri- 
chard III.
appointed Thomas Cliff overseer of the 
works, who continued so till December ; but nothing 
material appears to have been done ; the expences 
in the nine months only amounting to 7461.
10s.
9d.
of which sum Richard is supposed to have given 
7001.
The work was again suspended till May, 
1508, when it was re-commenced by Henry the Se- 
venth, whose remorse at the severities of his reign 
induced him, in the decline of life, to depart from his 
avarice.
Henry VII.
died in the year 1509; but 
he left directions to complete the chapel, and invest- 
ed his executors with sufficient authority to defray 
all necessary expences.
From this period, the 
building advanced with rapidity, and the case of the 
chapel was finished on the 29th of July, 1515.
The 
money for- defraying the charges, appearsto have been 
delivered to the provost and scholars by the execu- 
tors, in sums of 50001.
each.
In addition to the indentures already mentioned, 
relating to the workmanship of this building, there 
is one which provides for the construction of the 
roof.
It is an agreement between Master Robert 
Hacombleyn, Provost, &e.
and John Wastell, Mas- 
ter Mason of the Works, and Henry Semerk, one 
of the Wardens, in Avhich the latter agree " to make 
and sett up, or cawse to be made and sett up, at their 
cost and charges, a good, suer, and sufficient vawte 
for the grete churche there, to be workmanly 
wrought, made and set up after the best handlynge 
and form of good workmanship, accordyng to a plat 
thereof made and signed with the hands of the Lords 
Executors to the Kyng of most famous memory 
Henry the Seventh;" the said John Wastell and 
Henry Semerk " to provide and fynde, at the cost 
and charges, as moche good, sufficient, able ston of 
f, Weldon 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
225 
Weldon Quarryes, as shall suffice for the perform- 
ing the seid vawte, together with lyme, sand, scaf- 
foldyng, cinctores, moles, and ordinaunees, that shall 
be required or necessary for the performance of the 
same ;" and " to performe and clercly fynysh all 
the said vawte within the terme of three years next 
ensuyng, after the tyme of ther begynnyng upon the 
same ; and for the good and suer performyng of all 
the premysses as is afore specyfyed, the seid Pro- 
vost, &c.
covenaunte and grante to pay unto the 
seid John Wastell and Henry Semerk 12001." An- 
other Indenture, between the same parties, relates 
to the vaulting of two porches, &c.
of the chapel ; 
and a third to making- and setting up " the finyals 
and buttresses of the church ; a toAver at one of the 
corners of the said church ; and finishing and per- 
forming the said tower with finyalls, ryfaots, gablets, 
battlements, orboys, and cross quarters, and every 
thing belonging to them." By this Indenture, 
61.
13s.
4d.
is agreed to be paid for each buttress, 
and 1001.
for the tower.
The architect of this fine structure is generally sup- 
posed to be Mr.Cloos, of whom scarcely any thing ap- 
pears to be known but his name, or his son Nicholas 
Cloos,ene of the first fellows of this college, and after- 
wards Bishop of Litchfield.
Both these persons were 
probably concerned in it, but more particularly the 
latter ; as a manuscript quoted by Lord Orford, men- 
tions Bishop Cloos as " a person in whose capacity 
King Henry the Sixth (who had appointed him fel- 
low in 1443) had such confidence, that he made him 
overseer and manager of all his intended buildings 
and designs of this college." 
In the archives of Caius College, however, an In- 
denture was discovered by the late Master, Sir James 
Burrough, more ancient than either of those above- 
meutioned, being dated in the 16th of Edward the 
Fourth.
This records the name of " John Wul- 
rich" as " Maistr Mason of the Werkes of Kyng's 
College." To him then, as well as to John Was- 
tell, who engaged to execute the roof, ought to be 
given a considerable share of that credit which has 
been hitherto engrossed by Bishop Cloos.
On each side of this building, between the but- 
tresses, are nine small chapels (20 feet by 10) which 
were probably erected as chantries, four of them 
beiug known to have been so appropriated.
These 
ehapels, for the most part, communicate with each 
other.
Several of them, on the south side, contain 
the College Library, which is well furnished with 
valuable and scarce books.
The second chapel from 
the west on this side was consecrated to religious 
uses by Provost Hacombleyn, by whom it was orna- 
mented more than any of the others, and afterwards, 
by his own desire, made his burial-place.
In the 
window is a portrait on glass of Henry the Sixth, 
tolerably well executed ; and in the centre of the 
chapel a large table monument of marble, on the top 
of which is a flaming urn ; and, on the east and west 
sides, cherubs supporting the family arms.
vol.
j. — no.
16.
On the north side of this chapel appears the fol- 
lowing Latin inscription : — 
M. S.
" Pracstantissimi Nobilissimique 
Johannis Churchill, Marchionis De Blandford, 
Illustrissimoruni Johannis et Sarje, Ducis et Ducissas de 
Marlborough, Filii ; 
Quern summa Parentum Nobilitate inter Primos 
clam in, 
Virtutibus fuisse non minus celebrem, Corporisque ac 
Animi dotibus paucos habuisse, 
Pares, et priorem neminem, ex altero latere hujusce 
marmoris cognosces." 
(Translation.) 
Sacred to the Memory of the Most Excellent and 
Most Noble 
John Churchill, Marquis of Blandford, 
Son of the most illustrious John and Sarah, Duke and 
Duchess of Marlborough ; 
who, of the first renown for the exalted rank of his 
parents, 
Was no less eminent for his personal virtues, and had 
few equal, 
and none superior to him, in the endowments of body 
and mind, 
As the other side of this tablet testifies.
This amiable and accomplished youth, who was a 
student of the college, where he died on the 20th of 
February, 1702, only iived five weeks beyond the 
completion of his 16th year.
In August, 1801, a plain white marble tablet was 
erected against the east wall of this chapel, to the 
memory of the celebrated Dr. Glynn, who was buried 
in the vault near the north door of the great cha- 
pel.
The tablet bears the following Latin inscrip- 
tion : — 
Roberti Glynn Clobery, M.
D. 
Ex veteri in agro Cornubiensi prosapia oriundi, 
Hujus collegir LXIII annos socii, 
Morum antiquorum et Literarum Bonarum 
Cultoris, Patroni, Vindicis ; 
qui collegio 
Amplissimam pecuniae summam 
ad studia juventutis promovenda 
ad novas atdes astruendas 
Legavit.
©Wit VIII id.
Feb. MDCCC.
a:t.
LXXXL 
hanc Tabulam 
In nietatis et desiderii Testimonium.
P C 
ex publico decreto 
Collegium.
(Translation.
J 
This Tablet 
The College, by a public decree, 
caused to be erected, 
As a testimony of their regard and 
regret for 
Robert Glynn Clobery, M.
D. 
A descendant of an ancient family 
in Cornwall, 
Sixty-three years Fellow of this College, 
And the Cultivator, Patron, and Protector 
of primitive Manners and 
3 L sound 
2-20 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
sound Learning.
For the Promotion of the Studies 
of the Youth, 
And the Erection of New Buildings, 
He bequeathed to the College, 
a very large sum of mouev.
He died Feb. 6, A.
D. 1S00, aged 81.* 
The edifice belonging toihis college, called the 
New Buildihg, was commenced in 1721, the first 
stone being- laid on the twenty-fifth of March.
An 
inscription, engraved on a plate of copper, and in- 
serted in this stone, affirms, that it had remained in 
the adjoining court from the reign of Henry the 
Sixth, who had intended it as the foundation stone 
of his new college.
The elevation of this structure, 
when seen from the fields, has a noble appearance ; 
but the Doric portal in the centre is far from beau- 
tiful.
The apartments, twenty-four in number, are 
disposed very conveniently.
The whole length of 
the building is 230 feet It was erected with Port- 
land stone by Gibbs.f When the workmen were 
digging the foundation, they discovered an earthen 
pot, which contained many gold pieces of the coin of 
Henry the Fifth.
The Provost's Lodge is by no means prepossess- 
ing, in its exterior, but some of the apartments dis- 
play much grandeur.
In a small chamber is a cu- 
rious portrait of Jane Shore, on board.
Also a half 
length of Sir Robert Walpole, by Dahl ; and a good 
portrait of the late Dr. John Sumner, father of the 
present Provost.
Queen Elizabeth took up her 
abode in this Lodge, when she visited the univer- 
sity in 1.564.
The hall was her guard chamber, the 
dining-room her presence chamber, and the gallery 
and adjoining rooms her private apartments.
An 
antique chair still in the gallery, is said to have been 
used as her chair of state.
Among the principal statesmen and literary cha- 
racters, who have received their education at this 
college, may be named, William Coningsby, Esq.
Justice of the King's Bench in the reign of Henry 
the Eighth; Edward Hall, Author of the History 
of the Wars between the Houses of York and Lan- 
caster ; Dr. Giles Fletcher, Ambassador to Russia 
from Queen Elizabeth ; Sir John Osborne, Author 
of the Remembrancer ; Sir Robert Morton, Knt.
Secretary of State to James the First ; Sir William 
Temple, Knt. Author of a Commentary on Ramus ; 
Sir Francis Walsingham ; Dr. Robert Hacombleyn, 
Provost ; William Oughtred, B.
D. Author of Cla- 
vis Mathematical ; the Poet Waller ; Dr. Stanhope, 
* Dr. Glynn,- an English physician and poet, was born at 
Cambridge, and educated at Eton and King's College, where 
he took his degree of doctor in medicine in 1752.
lie con- 
tinued to reside in his college, universally respected for his wit 
and learning, till the period of his death.
Dr. Glynn wrote an 
excellent poem on the Day of Judgment, which obtained the 
Seatonian prize in 1757, and has frequently been printed.
f " Gibbs's Building," observe Messrs.
Lysons, " though 
handsome as a distinct structure, unfortunately docs not at all 
Author of the Paraphrase, kc.
on the Epistles and 
Gospels ; Dr. King, Editor of Euripides ; Sir Ro- 
bert Walpole ; Charles, Lord Viscount Towns; :id ; 
the Great Earl Camden ; the Earl of Carlisle; and 
Sir William Draper, so famous for his controversy 
with J unius.
Qbeen's College was founded in the year 1448, 
and endowed with revenues to the amount of 2001.
per annum, for the support of a principal and four 
fellows, by Margaret of Anjou, Queen of Henry the 
Sixth.
The first stone of the chapel was laid for 
the Queen by Sir John Wenlock.
The civil wars 
soon afterwards commenced, and interrupted the 
work ; but the prudence of Andrew Ducket, whom 
Queen Margaret had chosen Master, so conciliated 
the favour of the house of York, that, besides ob- 
taining benefactions for his College from George 
Plantagenet, Duke of Lancaster, Lady Cicely, Du- 
chess of York, and the illustrious Ladies Margaret 
Roos, Joanna Inglethorp, and Joanna Borough, he 
prevailed on Elizabeth Widville, or Grey, the Queen 
of Edward the Fourth, to complete what her pro- 
fessed enemy, Margaret, had begun ; and the num- 
ber maintained on the foundation was advanced to a 
master, nineteen fellows, and forty-five scholars.
Elizabeth has since been annually celebrated as a 
co-founder.
Richard the Third made the very con- 
siderable grant to this college, of all the estates of 
John de Vcre, 13th Earl of Oxford, which had been 
forfeited for his adherence to the Earl of Richmond ; 
but that nobleman, afterwards Henry the.
Seventh, 
annulled the grant, and restored the Earl's patri- 
mony, as soon as he came to the throne.
The en- 
dowments have since been increased by various be- 
nefactors.
This College, which is situated to the west of 
Catherine-Hall, on the banks of the river, consists 
of two courts.
The entrance to the outer court is 
under a small tower gateway.
The inner court is fur- 
nished with cloisters, and extends to the very banks of 
the river, over which is a curious woolen bridge of 
one arch, supported by abutments of rustic stone 
work.
It was rebuilt in the year 1740, when much 
ingenuity was displayed in its construction.
The 
gardens, which are pleasant and extensive, lie on 
both sides the river, and are adorned with some fine 
elms.
The hall is a well-proportioned room, con- 
taining the three following portraits, by Hudson ; 
presented to the society, by the three sons of the 
Earl of Stamford: — Sir Thomas Smith; half 
length ; dressed in a fur cloak, and leaning on a 
harmonize with the chapel : and, among other plans for the 
improvement of the college, it was recommended by Mr. James 
Wyatt, either to alter its external appearance, or to remove it 
entirely, substituting in its place a building more in unison with 
that venerable edifice, and to complete the whole with magni- 
ficent buildings in a corresponding style.
Mr. Wyatt's designs 
are at the provost's lodge, but nothing has been determined 
either as to the plan of the building or the time of its com- 
mencement." 
adobe.
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
22: 
globe.* Elizabeth Widville, Queen of Edward the 
Fourth ; a very fine painting.
The face is pleasing, 
lr.it not intelligent ; displaying 1 more sweetness of 
disposition tb.au strength of character.
Erasmus, 
seated, in a fur cloak, at a table, writing.
The hand 
which is guiding the pen is exceedingly well exe- 
cuted.
When Erasmus visited England, at the in- 
vitation of his friend Bishop Fisher, then Chancellor 
of the University, he chose this college as his place 
of residence, having his study at the top of the 
south-west tower of the old court.
Two other por- 
traits of Erasmus are preserved in this college ; one 
of which is thought to he an original from the pencil 
of Holbein.
' 
The Lodge contains a curious altar-piece on three 
pannels, in high preservation, much in the style of 
Martin Schoen.
The subjects are, Judas betraying 
Christ; the Resurrection ; and Christ appearing to 
the Apostles after the Resurrection.
Many valua- 
ble portraits are also scattered through the apart- 
ments, particularly an old painting of Elizabeth 
Widville, on board ; Daniel Wray, by Dance ; Ad- 
miral Caleb Barnes, 1605 ; General Monk ; and Sir 
George Saville, Bart.
The most celebrated writers of this College are 
the above-mentioned Sir Thomas Smith ; the Bishops 
Fisher, Poynett, Davenant, and Robinson ; Dr.
John Fuller, Author of The Worthies of England, 
&c.
John Weever, Author of the Funeral Monu- 
ments ; Bishop Patrick, writer of the learned Com- 
mentary on the Old Testament ; Simon Ockley, D.D.
Author of the History of the Saracens ; Joseph 
Wasse, B.
D. Editor of Sallust ; Thomas Brett, 
Author of a learned Discourse on Church Govern- 
ment ; John Hatsell, Esq. Clerk of the House- of 
Commons ; and Strong, Translator of Hero- 
dotus.
Catherine-Hall, situated on the west side of 
Trumpington Street, was founded about the year 
1174, and dedicated to St. Catherine, by Robert 
Woodlark, third Provost of King's College, and 
Chancellor of the University.
The endowments were 
originally for a master and three or more fellows, in 
proportion to the revenues ; which now support a mas- 
ter and five fellows.
In addition to these, here are 
eight bye fellowships ; six of which were founded by 
Mrs. Mary Ramsden, of Norton, in Yorkshire, who 
also founded ten scholarships : the whole number of 
ihe latter, is twenty-six.
The buildings of this col- 
lege occupy three sides of a quadrangle: the fourth 
of which is open towards the street, with handsome 
iron pallisadoes, and a piece of ground planted with 
elms.
The chapel stands on the north side, and is 
* This eminent character was born at Saffron Waldron, in 
Essex, in the year 1512, and received his education in this col- 
lege.
Having acquired considerable celebrity, he was sent to 
Italy, at the King's charge, to complete his studies; and, on 
his return, he was chosen Public Orator and Greek Professor.
On that occasion he endeavoured to introduce a new method 
of reading Greek.
In the reign of Edward the Sixth he was 
made Secretary of State, knighted, and sent Ambassador to 
a neat brick structure.
In the hall is a good paint- 
ing of Robert Woodlark, the founder ; and, in the 
Combination Room, are portraits of Thomas Sher- 
lock, D.
D. Bishop of London, and John Gostlyn, 
M. D.
a benefactor to the College.
Here is also a 
fine painting of St. Catherine, which was brought from 
Venice by Sir Charles Bunbury.
The Library, 
which is over the Combination Room, was fitted up 
by Bishop Sherlock, who bequeathed his own valua- 
ble collection of books to the College, with a stipend 
for a Librarian.
The Master's Lodge is a lofty and 
spacious edifice, which, with the new building erect- 
ed by Mrs. Ramsden, forms the south side of the 
court.
It contains several pictures-, principally the 
gifts of the above lady ; four of them are portraits, 
by Sir Godfrey Kneller.
The following are some of the eminent Avriters of 
this College :— John Strype, the famous Church 
Antiquary ; Dr. Lightfoot, the Oriental Linguist, 
and author of Hone Hebraicaj ; Archbishop Dawes ; 
Bishop Long, editor of the Cambridge Terence.
; 
Benjamin lloadly, Bishop of Winchester ; and Tho- 
mas Sherlock, Bishop of London.
Jesus College Was erected on the site of an an- 
cient Benedictine nunnery, which had been founded 
about the year 1130 ; but was more amply endowed 
by Malcolm, the fourth King of Scotland, and, with 
the addition of a new conventual church, was dedi- 
cated to St. Rhadagund, in 1160.
The nunnery 
flourished for several centuries ; but, through the 
illicit conduct of its inmates, it was dissolved by 
Henry the Seventh, and Pope Alexander the Sixth.
Its possessions Avere granted to John Alcock, Bishop 
of Ely, who, in 1490, founded this College for a 
master, six fellows, and six scholars.
The endow- 
ments have since been increased by various benefac- 
tors, and now supply maintenance for sixteen fellows, 
and nearly fifty scholars.
Jesus College is situated at a little distance from 
the town, on the east, towards the Newmarket road.
Near it is a grove of considerable extent, and some 
fine meadows.
The south or principal front is about.
180 feet in length.
The chapel, which was the an- 
cient conventual church, has a transept, and a large 
square tower, rising from arches at their intersec- 
tion with the nave.
The chancel is neatly fitted up 
for divine service.
The altar-piece represents the.
" Presentation in the Temple," by Jouvenet, and was 
given, in 1796, by Dr. Pcarce.
In the cross aisle, 
the tomb of one of the mtiis is yet remaining, with 
this inscription, " Moribus ornata jacet hie bona 
Berta Rosata."t The hall is a handsome room, as- 
cended by a flight of steps : at the upper end are 
Brussels; but was deprived of his dignities by Queen Mary, 
on account of his religion.
On the accession of Elizabeth, he 
was again employed in state affairs, and conducted several em- 
bassies with great success.
He died in the year 157~' ; .and on.
his death bequeathed all his Latin and Greek books to the col- 
lege, and also a great globe made by himself.
f Translation.— Here lies the good Bertha Rosata, a lady of 
excellent qualities.
half 
228 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
halflengths of the following persons : Tobias Rus- 
tat, Esq. portrayed sitting, with large worked ruffles, 
and laced neck-cloth;* Thomas Cranmer, Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, copied by Sir Joshua Rey- 
nolds, and presented to the Society by Lord Cajys- 
fort in the year 1758 ; and Richard Sterne, Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury.
In the Lodge are two an- 
cient paintings of the Archbishops Cranmer and 
Bancroft , on board.
The Library contains many 
scarce and valuable editions of the classics.
In addition to the Bishops here mentioned, the 
following men have belonged to this College : — 
Bishop Bale, Author of Libri de Scriptorilms Bri- 
tannicis ; Sir Thomas Elliot, Author of a Dictionary; 
Christopher, Lord Hatton ; Sir Richard Fanshaw, 
Knight ; John Flamstead, Regius Professor of As- 
tronomy ; the Poet Fenton ; John Worthington, 
D. D.
and the late Gilbert Wakefield.
Christ's CoLLEGE,situated in St. Andrew's Street, 
near the church, was built on the site of an hostel 
called God's House, which had originally been set- 
tled near Clare Hall, and endowed by William Bing- 
ham, Rector of St. John Zachary, London, for 
twenty-four grammar scholars, in the year 1442.
That foundation was removed hither by Henry the 
Sixth, who intended to augment the number of scho- 
lars to sixty, but was prevented from accomplishing 
his purpose by the civil wars which ensued.
His 
maternal sister-in-law Margaret, Countess of Rich- 
mond and Derby, mother to Henry the Seventh, ob- 
tained a license from her son to complete what her 
half-brother had projected ; and in 1506 she changed 
the name of the institution from God's House to 
Christ's College, and endowed it for a master and 
twelve fellows.
In consequence of some superstiti- 
ous objections having been made to this number, as 
alluding to Christ and the twelve Apostles, Edward 
the Sixth added a thirteenth fellowship ; and two 
others have since been founded by Sir John Finch, 
and Sir Thomas Baines.
The scholarships, which 
were originally fifty-three, have also been increased; 
and the persons now maintained by the endowments, 
are a master, fifteen fellows, and abdut seventy 
scholars.
The ancient buddings of this College, which have 
been repaired, and cased with stone, inclose a small 
quadrangular court ; behind which is a more modern 
and regular pile, designed by inigo Jones, about 
350 feet in length, commanding an extewsivc pros- 
pect of the adjacent country.
The garden, which is 
well laid out, contains a neat summer-house, and a 
bath surrounded by a small wilderness.
A large 
mulberry-tree, planted by Milton, when he was a 
student here, is still preserved in the Fellows' Gar- 
den.
The trunk 4s much decayed ; but the fellows, 
with a feeling which does them the highest honour, 
have endeavoured to shield it from further harm, by 
covering the damaged parts with sheet lead.
* This gentleman, who established eleven scholarships here, 
The Chapel is neatly ornamented, and floored with 
marble.
On the north side of the altar is a hand- 
some monument of white marble, erected to perpe- 
tuate the memory and friendship of Sir John Finch 
and Sir Thomas Baines, who were educated toge- 
ther in this College.
Sir John died at Constanti- 
nople, whither he had been sent on an embassy, in 
the year 1682.
His body was brought to England, 
and interred here by his friend, who died in 1682, 
and was buried in the same vault.
In the east Win- 
dow are some well-executed whole length portraits 
on glass, of Henry the Seventh, and some other re- 
lations of Lady Margaret, the foundress, whose own 
likeness is also preserved in this Chapel, by an an- 
cient painting on board.
In the Combination Room 
is another portrait of the foundress, a half length, 
on board : and in the Lodge is a small drawing of 
Dr. Ralph Cudworth, Author of the Intellectual 
System, and Master of this College, who died in 
1688.
John Leland, the celebrated Antiquary ; Bi- 
shop Latimer, the Martyr ; Richard Hall, Author of 
the Life of Bishop Fisher ; Arthur Hildersham, a 
zealous Puritan ; Dr. Seth Ward, one of the trans- 
lators of the Bible ; Francis Quarles, Author of the 
Emblems ; Milton, the Poet ; Dr. Thomas Burnet, 
Author of the Theory of the Earth, &c.
Sir Robert 
Raymond, Lord Chief Justice ; Laurence Echard, 
the Historian ; Dr. Paley, the celebrated Author of 
the Principles of Moral' and Political Philosophy ; 
and Joseph Mede, and Henry More, two of the most 
learned men of their time, may be enumerated 
amongst the eminent characters who have, either 
wholly or in part, received their education in this 
College.
St. John's College was erected on the site of a 
dissolved hospital for canons regular, dedicated to 
St. John the Evangelist, the origin of which has 
been generally, though erroneously, ascribed to Ni- 
gcllus, second Bishop of Ely. The hospital was in 
fact founded about the year 1131, by Henry Frost, 
a burgess of Cambridge ; but Nigellus, having 
granted a license of confirmation, obtained the ho- 
nour of being regarded as the original patron.
In 
1281, Hugh de Balsham, Bishop of Ely, procured 
a license from Edward the First, to convert the hos- 
pital into a college for students ; but this design 
was abandoned on the establishment of Peter-House, 
and it remained in the possession of the canons re- 
gular till nearly the end of the reign of Henry the 
Seventh.
At that time, the ill conduet and vices of 
the members had so considerably reduced the re- 
venues, that they supported only three persons.
Margaret, Countess of Richmond, who had founded 
Christ's College, about this period conceived an in- 
tention of extending her benevolence to the sister 
university ; but was prevailed on by her confessor, 
John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, to confine her 
munificence to Cambridge, and, with the possessions 
was particularly distinguished for his great wealth and extensive 
charities.
which 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
220 
which she had appropriated to charitable uses, to 
found and endow a college upon this spot.
She ac- 
cordingly procured permission from the King, and 
the Bishop of Ely, to dissolve the ancient hospital, 
and vest its remaining income in the new institution.
Previously to the execution of the necessary deeds, 
however, both the King and Lady Margaret died.
By the will of the latter, certain estates in the coun- 
ties of Devon, Northampton, and Somerset, were 
devised to support the intended establishment ; but 
the bequest being annexed in a codicil to the will, 
and not officially sealed, the lands were resumed by 
Henry the Eighth, who also refused to consent to 
the dissolution of the hospital.
The executors, who 
applied to Pope Julius the Second, after Considera- 
ble expence and trouble, obtained a decretory bull, 
dated the eighth of the calends of July, 1510, which 
authorised them to dissolve the old house, and establish 
the new college; and thus privileged, they commenced 
the present structure, Avhich was completed in about 
four years, under the direction of Robert Shirton, 
the first master.
The costs of building amounted to 
between 4000 and 50001.
The charter of foundation, 
bearing date April the ninth, 1511, was granted in 
the names, and by the authority, of the executors ; 
and the college was opened in the year 1516, in the 
presence of Bishop Fisher, then Chancellor of the 
University, who, in pursuance of the will of Lady 
Margaret, appointed a master and thirty-one fellows.
At this time, the income allotted for their mainte- 
nance, consisted of little more than 701.
which the 
King had granted from a decayed foundation in 
Kent, in lieu of the possessions which he had resum- 
ed, and the revenues of the suppressed hospital, 
which were estimated at 811.
Is. lOd. Numerous 
benefactions have since increased these endowments, 
and 61 fellows, and 114 scholars, making a total of 
175, are now supported.
The buildings of this college are disposed into 
three courts, principally of brick.
The east, or en- 
trance court, 228 feet by 216, is ornamented with a 
spacious portal, furnished with four towers.
On the 
north side stands the chapel ; and on the west, the 
hall ; in the angle between these buildings is the 
Master's Lodge ; and the remainder of the court is 
occupied by the apartments of the students.
The 
centre court, which is more extensive than the for- 
mer, measuring 270 feet in length, and 240 in 
breadth, is chiefly appropriated to the use of the fel- 
* Bishop Fisher, characterized by Erasmus, as a man of deep 
learning, integrity, sweetness of temper, and greatness of soul, 
was born at Beverley, in Yorkshire, in the year 1459, and re- 
ceived his education at Cambridge.
On enteiing into orders, 
he became confessor to the Lady Margaret, and was afterwards 
chosen Chancellor of this University.
In 1504, lie was ap- 
pointed Bishop of Rochester; a see which he could not be pre- 
vailed on to relinquish, observing, that his bishopric was his 
wife, and he never would part with her because she was poor.
At the time u hen the question of divorce between Cathei ine 
and Henry the Eighth .vas agitated, he spoke freely in the 
Queen's behalf, and steadily defended the Pope's supremacy.
For this conduct, and the part which his credulity had induced 
VOL I.
NO.
17.
lows, excepting the principal floor on the north side, 
which forms a picture-gallery, connected with the 
Lodge and Chapel on the east, and on the west with 
the library.
The latter occupies the north division 
of the third court, which is considerably smaller than 
the others.
Its outer walls are skirted by the river, 
over which is a handsome stone bridge, of three 
arches, leading to the students' walks.
These are 
exceedingly pleasant, and ornamented with rows of 
noble elms ; and the fellows' garden, at the end of 
the principal walk, contains a neat summer-lufuse 
and bowling-green.
St. John's College suffered greatly during the 
civil wars, when it was pillaged of many valuable 
articles, particularly a rich and extensive collection 
of silver coins and medals.
The communion T plate 
was also carried away ; and the outer 'court was 
converted into a prison for the adherents of the 
King.
Within these few years, the Chapel has been re- 
paired, and a new roof added.
The interior is neatly 
fitted up, and separated into two parts by the organ 
gallery.
Its entire length is 120 feet.
The altar is 
embellished with a painting of St. John preaching 
in the Wilderness, by Sir Robert Ker Porter; a young, 
but promising artist.
The Lodge contains a numer- 
ous assemblage of portraits, and a few other pieces ; 
the principal of which are the following : — John 
Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, set.
74 ; a half length, 
by Hans Holbein.
The prelate is represented in a 
gown with furs : in one hand is a staff; in the other 
a glove : a ring on his finger is marked H.
H.* 
" Margareta Mater Henrici VII.
Comitissa Rich- 
mondie et Derbie, Fundatrix Collegior, Chri.
et 
Joan.
Ob. Ann.
Dom. 1509, Kalend Julii." This 
painting, which is a small three-quarter length, on 
wood, together with another portrait of the Countess 
of Richmond, also preserved here, must be regarded 
as extremely curious.
Both pieces represent the 
Countess kneeling, with her hands clasped, and a 
book lying on a cushion before her.
One of them 
appears to be an original ; and the other is probably 
by Holbein, who is known to have repeatedly copied 
the portrait of this lady.
Robert Shirton, the first 
master, and builder of the College, represented in a 
fur cloak, with the arms of Pembroke Hall, to which 
he had formerly belonged.
This is dated 1511.
Queen Elizabeth, small, on board.
Cecil, Lord 
Burleigh, half length, on board, with his arms and 
him to act in favour of Elizabeth Barton, the visionary pro- 
phetess of Kent, he was imprisoned in the i ower, and treated 
with much rigour.
While there, Clement the Seventh, tore- 
ward his adherence to Papacy, conferred on him a cardinal's 
hat, which Henry prohibited being brought into the kingdom;, 
but sent Cromwell to inquire of his prisoner, if he intended to 
accept it.
The Bishop answering in the affirmative, the King 
exclaimed, " Yea, is he so lusty ?
Well, let the Pope send 
him a hat when lie will.
Mother of God !
he shall wear it on 
his shoulders then ; for I will leave him never a head to set it 
on." Henry kept his word, and the Bishop was beheaded in 
the year 1535.
3 M 
motto ; 
2se 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
l-iotto, « Cor unum et una via ;"" One heart and one 
way.
Mary, Queen of Scots, set.
20, dated 1561, 
half length, on board, in a close dress, with slashed 
sleeves.
Edward Benlowes, Esq. a benefactor to 
the Library, and the author of several esteemed 
poems on sacred subjects.
Sir Thomas Egerton, 
Chancellor of England in the reign of James the 
First ; and ancestor to the late Duke of Bridge- 
water.
Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, 
iu x armour, with a rich shawl.
Mary, Countess of 
Shrewsbury, who erected the chief part of the se- 
cond court.
She is represented in a vast fardingale, 
with a high ruff, and her dress ornamented with an 
abundance of jewels.
Peter Gunning, Bishop of 
Ely, dated 1061 ^ in his robes.
The Massacre of 
the, Innocents, supposed to have been copied f«-oin 
Rubens.
John Lake, BishopW Chichester in 168-5 ; 
a half length.
Lawrence Fogg, Dean of Chester ; 
a half length.
Lucius Cary, Lord Viscount Falk- 
land, half length, in a black habit, with slashed 
sleeves, and a paper in his hand.* Thomas, Earl of 
Stafford, in armour, copied from the original, at 
Wentworth Castle," Yorkshire, by Vandyck.
Rich- 
ard Neile, Bishop of Durham, small, on board.
Edward Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, three 
quarter length, by Mrs. Beale.
Matthew Prior> the 
poet and statesman ; portrayed with a full face, in 
his ambassador's robes, richly decorated.
A small 
Kitchen Scene, with the story of Martha and Mary 
in the distance.
Robert Heath, Lord Chief Justice 
of the Common Pleas.
Thomas Baker, the cele- 
brated antiquary, in his gown and band.-f William 
Piatt, Esq. the founder of several fellowships ; small, 
on board.
An apartment in this Lodge contains a curieus set 
of chairs, said to have been presented to the Society 
by Charles the Second, about the year 1680.
One 
of them is a large elbow-chair, ornamented with 
beautiful carvings of cherubs, lions' -heads, and other 
fanciful embellishments.
The Library is a spacious room, erected at the 
charge of John Williams, Archbishop of York, who 
was fellow of this College in the year 1603.
The 
collection of books is extensive and valuable : one 
* This nobleman fell at the battle of Newbury, in the reign 
of Charles the First.
On the morning of the engagement, he 
called for a clean shirt, observing, that the enemy should not 
find his body in foul linen.
The distress of his mind at civil 
bloodshed, impelled him to court death, and involved him in 
the heat of the battle, where his existence was terminated by a 
musket ball.
Such was the spotless integrity of his heart, that 
neither state policy, nor private advantage, could ever induce 
him to deviate from the principles of truth and probity ; and, 
when he fell, lie fell lamented, even by his foes.
Early in life, 
lie had opposed the assumed prerogatives of the Crown ; but 
as the breach increased between the King aivd his Parliament, 
he occasionally supported the Koyal cause.
When the dispute 
Jiad ripened into war, he raised troops to defend the Throne ; 
but the word peace was frequently heard to burst emphatically 
from his bosom.
f Mr. Baker was born at Lanchestrr, in the county of Dur- 
ham, on the I4ih of September, l6jG.
He obtained a know- 
ledge of the rudiments of classical learning at the free-school 
class, consisting principally of French historical 
works, was given by Matthew Prior.
In a small 
apartment, detached from the Library, some curio- 
sities and interesting manuscripts are preserved : 
among them is a copy of Baker's History of this 
College.
Here is also shewn a skull filled with lead, 
part of a complete skeleton, found in the church of 
Newport Pagnell.
The Hall, 60 feet by 30, is embellished with seve- 
ral good portraits, particularly a highly finished 
likeness *>f Lady Margaret, similar to those in the 
Lodge ; and another of Thomas Wentworth, the un- 
fortunate Earl of Stafford, by J.
Richardson, a whole 
length.
Roger Ascham, preceptor to Queen Elizabeth ; 
Bishop Taylor, one of the Compilers of the Liturgy ; 
Sir Thomas Wyatt, the elder ; Cecil, Lord Bur- 
leigh ; Dr. John Dee, the celebrated mathematician, 
and reputed magician ; Bishop Morgan, the first 
translator of the Bible into Welsh ; Ben Jonson, 
the dramatist ; Henry Briggs, a mathematician, 
and author of a Treatise concerning a North-West 
Passage ; Ambrose Phillips, author of the Pastorals ; 
Bishop Stillingfleet ; Martyn Lister, an eminent 
naturalist ; John Smith, D.
D. a very erudite cha- 
racter ; Thomas Otway, the Poet ; Hilkiah Bed- 
ford, author of the Hereditary Right of the Crown 
asserted ; Francis Peck, compiler of the Desiderata 
Curiosa ; William Lee, inventor of the ingenious 
machine for weaving stockings ; Thomas Stack- 
house, author of the History of the Bible ; the late 
Marquis of Rockingham ; John Home Tooke, Esq.
and Lord St. Helen's, may be enumerated amongst 
the eminent men who have been educated at tins 
College.
Magd.\lf/n College, the only College which 
stands on the north side of the river, occupies a por- 
tion of the site of a priory for canons regular, dedi- 
cated to.
St. Giles, and built by Picot, a Norman 
(Baron of Bourne in this county) through the per- 
suasion of his wife, Hugolina, in the year 1092.
The inmates of this house were removed to Barn- 
well Abbey about twenty years afterwards ; and, in 
the year 1300, the premises were purchased by the 
at Durham, and was admitted, at the age of eighteen* into this 
College, of which, in the year 1079, he was chosen fellow.
In 
1G87, having been advanced to the degree of Bachelor in Divi- 
nity, he was collated to the rectory of Long Newton ; but, in 
little more than three years, he was obliged to relinquish his 
benefice, for refusing to take the oaths enjoined at the Revolu- 
tion.
The high sense which he entertained of the sacred nature 
of an oath, deprived him of every opportunity of preferment; 
and his refusal to subscribe to the proffered tests, occasioned 
his expulsion from his fellowship in the year 1717.
]lc conti- 
nued, however, to reside in the College till his death, being 
chiefly maintained by an annuity of 401.
yearly, left him by his 
father.
He died oh the 2d of July, 1740, esteemed and la- 
mented by all wlw knew him.
tie bequeathed most of his 
printed books to the Library of this College ; but his valuable 
collection of manuscripts, in forty-two volumes, he divided 
between the University Library and Lord Oxford.
The 
twenty-three volumes which were given to the latter are now in 
the British Museum.
associated 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
231 
'Jrssociated monks of Ely, Ramsey, and Walden, as 
* retreat for their studious brethren who were desi- 
fous of improving in knowledge at Cambridge.
A 
part of the building in which they resided is still 
supposed to remain in the southern angle of the 
College.
In the reign of Henry the Eighth, the 
monks disposed of their possessions to Edward 
Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, who erected part 
of the present fabric, and intended to endow, and 
name it from his own title ; but, in consequence of 
his attainder, his designs were frustrated, and his 
possessions reverted to the Crown.
In 1542, Tho- 
mas, Lord Audley, Chancellor of England, obtain- 
ed a grant of it from the King, and a charter of in- 
corporation, which named the Society, " The Mas- 
ter aud Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen College." 
At the same time he endowed it for a Master and 
four Fellows ; a number which has since been in- 
creased to seventeen.
Several scholarships have 
also been added.
The mastership continues in the 
gift of the possessor of the estate at Audley End, 
in Essex, now Lord Bray broke.
Magdalen College consists of two courts ; in 
the largest of Which is the Hall, Master's Lodge, 
and Chapel • and in the second, the apartments of 
the Fellows, the Bibliotheca Pepysiana, &c\ The 
Hall is a Very handsome room, containing tolerably 
good paintings, by Freeman, of Lord Audley ; 
Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham ; Lord 
Chief Justice Sir Christopher Wray, Knight ; and 
Edward Rainbow, Bishop of Carlisle ; from ori- 
ginals : another of Bishop Cumberland, by Rom- 
ney ; and a whole length of Henry Howard, Eavl 
of Suffolk, by Gibson.
In the Lodge is the origi- 
nal portrait of the Duke of Buckingham, which 
was given to the College by Dr. B.
Willis.
The 
Chapel is exceedingly neat : the altar-piece is of 
plaster of Paris, and represents the two Marys at 
the Sepulchre after the Resurrection, in alto-relievo, 
by Collins.
\ 
This College possesses two Libraries ; the principal 
of which was given by Samuel Pepys, Esq. Secre- 
tary to the Admiralty in the time of Charles the Se- 
cond.
It contains many valuable publications, and 
also some curious manuscripts on maritime affairs, 
collected and written by Mr. Pepys.
Here arc also 
several volumes of scarce and curious prints ; among 
which arc the twelve Caesars and their Wives from 
Titian, engraved by Sadlier, in very tine preserva- 
tion.
A largo folio volume, in this collection, con- 
tains what may be regarded as a scries of scraps, se- 
lected a .
specimens of various hand-writings, from 
about the year 900.
In some of them the writing 
is so exceedingly minute, that it appears like a tine 
hair lying across the paper, and cannot be read with- 
out a magnifier : but with the aid of the glass, the 
letters appear as distinct and legible as fine printing.
In the same book are some manuscript imitations of 
printing, so admirably correct as "to require consi- 
derable attention to detect the deception.
The fac- 
shnilies of the signatures of many eminent charac- 
ters, whose letters were among the papers of Mr.
Pepys, are preserved here in a small octavo volume; 
and in another volume of the same size, are various 
unpublished particulars of the escape of Charles the 
Second after the fatal battle of Worcester ; also the 
original account of that event, written in short- 
hand by Mr. Pepys, from the King's own words ; 
together 'with the narrative at length, translated 
from the short -hand into English.
An unique col 
lection of ancient ballads is likewise preserved here, 
to which Dr. Percy, Pinkerton, and others have 
had access.
In this Library are three portraits of 
Mr. Pepys ; one of them a half length, said to be by 
Sir Peter Lely.
Amongst the distinguished literary characters who 
have been educated here, may be mentioned Henry r , 
Lord Stafford, heir to the original founder ; Sir 
Orlando Bridgman, Chief Justice of the Common 
Pleas ; Sir William Howell, author of the Medulla 
Historian AngHcame ; Bishop Cumberland, editor 
of the Phoenician History ; Samuel Pepys, Esq.
; 
Daniel Waterland, Archdeacon of Middlesex ; Sir 
Robert Sawyer, Attorney-General ; Peter Peckard, 
late Dean of Peterborough ; and Edmund Waring, 
an eminent mathematician, &c.
Trinity College is a noble and magnificent esta~ 
blishment, which occupies the site of seven hostels, 
and of the two ancient and considerable societies, 
St. Michael's and King's Hall.
St. Michael's Hall was founded by Harvey Aun- 
gier, of Stanton, in Suffolk, who was successively 
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Chief Justice of the 
Common Pleas, and Chief Justice of the King's 
Bench.
He purchased a spacious mansion, which 
stood near the south-west corner of the great court 
of the present College, in the seventeenth of Ed- 
ward the Second ; and in the succeeding year, with 
the consent of the King, and the Bishop, and Con- 
vent of Ely, he endowed it with the small parish of 
St. Michael's, in which it stood, and two tenements, 
for the maintenance of a Master and four Fellows.
In the reign of Edward the Third its possessions 
were considerably augmented by John de ULjgh, 
one of the founder's executors, and Alica, relict of 
Sir Thomas llesillarton ; and through these and 
other benefactions, the Society was enabled to pur- 
chase the advowsons of several parishes, and also 
to enlarge the site of the College, and improve the 
buildings, of which a specimen may yet be seen in 
the Hall, now converted into the spacious Kitchen 
of Trinity College.* Agreeably to the statutes pro- 
vided by the founder, the Society was to be increas- 
ed whenever the revenues would allow.
In its most 
flourishing state, it consisted of a Master, ten'Fel- 
lows, and four Bible Clerks, besides Students.
King's Hall originated in the munificence of Ed- 
ward the Third, who endowed it for a Master and 
thirty Fellows, and placed them on the north side 
of the present College, in a spacious mansion, which 
was afterwards much enlarged.
The court of Ri- 
chard II.
was held here when that Monarch assem- 
bled 
232 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
bled his Parliament at Cambridge.
The royal foun- 
der, in addition to the regular funds of the Society, 
ordered that the members should receive cloth and 
furs from the Royal Wardrobe suitable to their se- 
veral degrees ; an indulgence which they continued 
to possess till the time of Henry the Sixth, when an 
assignment in money, payable at Barnwell Abbey, 
was made in lieu thereof.
Henry VI.
gave them the 
appropriated rectory of Chesterton, and a conduit 
of fine water, which had formerly belonged to the 
Franciscans.
The nomination of all the members of 
this College was originally in the Crown, but this 
monarch transferred it to his foundations, King's 
and Eton.
Edward the Fourth however, resumed 
the right, and the vacancies continued to be filled 
accordingly, till the College was surrendered.
Amongst the principal eminent characters edu- 
cated in this Society, may be mentioned Robert 
Fitzhugh, Bishop of London ; Richard Cawdrey, 
Dean of St. Martin's-le-Grand, and ambassador 
from Henry the Sixth to the Papal See ; Ghristo- 
pher Urswyck, Counsellor to Henry the Seventh ; 
Cuthbert Tunstall, employed in several embassies 
by Henry the Eighth, and successively Bishop of 
London, Ely, and Durham ; John Redman, one of 
the compilers of the Liturgy.
At the dissolution of religious houses, many of 
the Students at Cambridge, fearing a general decay 
of learning, represented their fears in a letter to the 
King, who, on this occasion, relaxed from his ac- 
customed sternness, and informed them, that in- 
stead of seeking the destruction of Colleges, it was 
his intention immediately to erect a magnificent one ; 
and, as a preliminary measure, he required the sur- 
render of the above establishments, which were ac- 
cordingly conveyed to him, on the 29th of October, 
in the 38th year of his reign.
To the revenues of 
these houses he made great additions, and erected 
the present spacious College by charter, dated De- 
cember the 19th, 1546, and dedicated it to the Holy 
and undivided Trinity.
The chief purposes of its 
institution, as declared in the charter, were " the 
enlargement and stability of the true Christian Re- 
ligion ; the extirpation of errors and false opinions ; 
the increase of piety and good letters ; the know- 
ledge of tongues ; the education of youth in piety, 
virtue, good manners, and letirning ; and the relief 
©f the poor and needy." Queen Mary augmented 
the endowments of Henry ; and the persons they 
now support, are upwards of four hundred : viz.
a 
Master, Vice-Master, sixty Fellows, sixty-nine 
Scholars, three public Professors, four Conducts, 
and various other officers and servants.
Trinity College incloses two spacious quad- 
rangular courts, the principal of which is 33 1 feet 
by 325 east and west, and 287 by 256 north and 
south.
The magnificent tower gate-way at the en- 
trance, which is ornamented with a statue of Hen- 
ry the Eighth, had formerly an observatory on the 
summit, erected for the studies of the immortal 
Newton ; but it was removed in the year 1797.
On 
8 
the north side of this court is an elegant Chapel, 
which was erected by the sister Queens, Mary and 
Elizabeth.
The style is Gothic, and displays much 
genuine simplicity and taste.
The interior is 204 
feet in length, 33 feet 8 inches broad, and about 44 
feet high.
The Ante-Chapel is separated from the 
choir by an extensive gallery, which contains one of 
the largest organs in England.
The altar-piece, by 
West, represents St. Michael binding the Devil..
It is placed under a magnificent roof of Norway 
oak, supported by Corinthian pillars ; the pediment 
is richly carved, with flaming urns on the summit, 
and decorated with wreaths and flowers, sculptured 
in a very beautiful style.
On each side of the choir 
are rows of very elegant stalls for the Fellows, with 
seats belows for the Scholars.
The Ante-Chapel 
contains a most admirable piece of statuary, execu- 
ted by Roubilliac, at the expence of the late Dr. Ro- 
bert Smith.
It is the figure of the great Newton, 
in white marble, standing on a pedestal, in the gown 
of a Master of Arts, with a prism in his hands, and 
his benignant countenance turned upwards, with a 
look of profound and abstracted meditation.
The 
drapery is graceful, and well disposed ; and the cast 
of features is probably the most judicious which the 
sculptor could have adopted.
On the pedestal is the 
inscription, Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit ; 
importing, that he exceeded all men in wisdom : 
Absorb'd in thought great Newton stands !
Such was his brow, and look serene, 
His serious gait, and musing mien, 
When, taught on eagle wings to fly, 
He trae'd the wonders of the sky ; 
The chambers of the sun explor'd 
Where tints of thousand hues are stor'd.
The Master's Lodge, which contains some very 
grand and spacious rooms, where the Sovereign re- 
sides whenever he visits Cambridge, is between the 
west end of the chapel and the ball.
The apart- 
ments in this building contain a numerous collec- 
tion of portraits, of which the following are the 
most interesting : — Robert Devereux, Earl of Es- 
sex, half length, in black, with the George pen- 
dant from his neck, and a sword in his left hand ; 
painted by Mark Garrard.
Queen Elizabeth, in a 
ruff', with large sleeves, and a flowered petticoat : 
the whole dress richly ornamented with lace.
Ed- 
ward the Third ; a curious and very old painting.
Sir Walter Raleigh, a small head.
Robert Cecil, 
Earl of Salisbury, with his arms and motto, Herd 
sed Send (late but seriously).
Henry the Eighth, a 
large and remarkable picture by Lucas de Heere.
The figure of the Monarch is between nine and ten' 
feet high, and the limbs in proportion.
The face 
seems to have been repainted ; but the rest of the 
picture is highly finished, and in good preservation.
It has sometimes been ascribed to Holbein.
Ed- 
ward the Sixth, a small whole length on board.
Thomas Neville, Dean of Canterbury, half length, 
with bis arms and motto, Ne vile, vet is, (form no 
mean 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
233 
mean wish).
Scaliger, by Paul Veronese, given to 
the Society by Dr. Bentley.
Queen Mary, on board.
Sir Isaac Newton, half length, by Vanderbank.
Prince William, the present Duke of Gloucester, 
by Romney ; Dr. Mansel, the Master.
Here is al- 
so a bust of Galilei, generally called Galileo, by 
Carcini, which was presented to the College by Dr.
Robert Smith.
Contiguous to the Lodge, on the west side of the 
court, is the Hall ; a very spacious building, with 
buttresses and pinnacles, and a very deep bow-win- 
dow on each side.
Its extreme length is upwards 
of 100 feet, its breadth 40, and its height about 50.
This apartment is decorated with several whole 
length portraits of persons who have been instruct- 
ed, or studied in the College : amongst winch, the 
following deserve particular attention.
Dr. Robert 
Smith, by J.
Freeman ; William, Lord Russel, by 
I. N.
Ilorne ; John Dryden, by I.
Hudson ; Abra- 
ham Cowley, the poet, by Stephen Slaughton ; Hen- 
ry Spehnan, Esq. by I.
N. Ilorne ; John Ray, and 
Richard Bentley, both by Hudson.
The south end 
of this side of the court was some years since neatly 
rebuilt, and it has been proposed to rebuild the en- 
tire quadrangle in the same style.
The new Com- 
bination Rooms are in this part of the building.
The largest of these apartments has been handsome- 
ly fitted up, and ornamented with the portraits of 
Charles Seymour, Duke of Somerset, and many 
years Chancellor of the University, by Dance ; and 
John, Marquis of Granby, by Sir Joshua Reynolds ; 
both of which were given to the College by the late 
Charles, Duke of Rutland, who represented the 
University in Parliament.
The rest of the build- 
ings in this court are occupied by the apartments of 
the Fellows, &c.
Near the centre of the court is a 
large octagonal conduit, which supplies the College 
and its neighbourhood with excellent water, brought 
by a subterraneous channel from a spring about a 
mile to the westward of the town.
The inner court which is more elegant, but less 
spacious, than the former, measures only 228 feet 
by 223, north and south, and 148 feet by 132, cast 
and west.
This is generally called Neville's Court, 
from Dr. Thomas Neville, at whose expeuce it was 
principally formed, in the year 1609.
A magnificent Library has since that time been 
erected at the west end ; and the south and north 
sides, which contain the Students' apartments, have 
been almost wholly rebuilt.
The east side is formed 
by the Hall ; in the front of which is a terrace, with 
a handsome ballustrade and flight of steps.
The 
building of the Library was first projected by Dr.
Isaac Barrow ; and the subscriptions with which it 
was erected, amounting to nearly 20,0001.
were 
principally collected through his exertions : Sir 
Christopher Wren was the architect.
The outside 
of the edifice is ornamented with pilasters, carved 
chapiters, and architraves ; with a stone ballustrade 
surrounding the summit.
Over the east front are 
lour statues, intended to represent Divinity, Law, 
vol.
i — no.
17.
Physic, and Mathematics ; deserving- of considera- 
ble praise from the excellence of the workmanship.
They were executed by Gabriel Cibber (father of 
Colly Cibber, the actor and dramatist) who ac- 
quired so much celebrity by his admirable figures of 
Raging and Melancholy Madness, over the gates of 
Bedlam in London.
This front is decorated with a 
bas-relief of Ptolomy receiving the New Version of the 
Scriptures from the Seventy Interpreters.
The in- 
terior of the building is perhaps unequalled hy any 
apartment appropriated to a similar purpose in Eu- 
rope.
A spacious stair-case, with steps of black 
marble, and wainscotted with cedar, leads from un- 
der a piazza to the entrance at the north end, whence 
the elegance and grandeur of the room burst full 
upon the eye.
The length of this room is nearly 
200 feet, the breadth 40, and the height 38 ; and the 
south end is terminated by a window of painted 
glass, for the performance of which five hundred 
pounds were bequeathed by Dr. Robert Smith, the 
late master.
The design of this painting is one of 
the most absurd that could well be imagined.
It re- 
presents the Presentation of Sir Isaac Newton to 
His Majesty George the Third, who is seated under 
a canopy, with a laurel chaplet in his hand, and at- 
tended by the British Minerva, apparently advising 
him to reward merit in the person of the great Phi- 
losopher.
Below the throne is the Lord Chancellor 
Bacon, in his robes, with a pen and book, apparently 
preparing to register the reward about to be be- 
stowed on Sir Isaac.
The original drawing, by 
Cipriani, cost 100 guineas, and is preserved in the 
Library, agreeably to the directions of the Doctor's 
will.
The artist being a foreigner, it has been ob- 
served, may in some degree stand excused for that 
ignorance of English history, displayed by the in- 
troduction of three characters, Avho never were co- 
temporaries, into one picture.
This is no excuse.
It is the business, and duty of an artist, to make 
himself thoroughly acquainted with his subject.
This apartment is floored with marble, and orna- 
mented at each end with marble pedestals, support- 
ing the busts of Ray, Willoughby, Bacon, and 
Newton, by Roubiliac.
In the physical class at the 
upper eud, is a curious antique statue of iEscula- 
pius, which was found at Sama?, near the lake called 
Speculum Diana?, about fourteen miles from Rome, 
and given to the Society by Sir C.
Wintringham, 
Bart.
M. D.
A globe, universal ring- dial, quadrant, 
and compass, which formerly belonged to Sir Isaac 
Newton, are also preserved here ; likewise a quiver, 
of arrows, employed by Richard the Third against 
Henry the Seventh at the battle of Bosworth Field; 
a Chinese pagoda ; a skeleton of a man in minia- 
ture, cut by a shepherd's boy ; the body of a lizard, 
supposed to have been the largest ever seen in En- 
gland ; a calculus taken from the intestines of the 
wife of a lock-smith at St. Edmund's Bury, and 
which originally weighed upwards of thirty-three 
ounces and three penny-weights, but was broken 
into two pieces to gratify the curiosity of Charles 
3 n the 
231 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
the Second, who desired to see it at Newmarket ; an 
Egyptian Mummy, in very fine preservation, with 
the outside curiously gilt and painted ; an Ibis ; and 
the dried body of one of the Gaunches, or aborigin- 
al inhabitants of the Madeira Islands, in appearance 
like dried seal-skin : the countenance is shrivelled, 
the features are horribly distorted, and the whole fi- 
gure is much shrunk, of a dingy colour, and con- 
siderably diminished in height.
These miserable re- 
mains of what once was human, with many rarities 
brought by Captain Cook from the South Sea Is- 
lands, were presented to the College by the late 
Earl of Sandwich ; together with the Mummy and 
the Ibis ; which his Lordship himself had brought 
from Egypt.
Amongst the portraits, arc whole lengths, by Va- 
lentine Ititts, of Dr. Isaac Barrow ; Dr. Neville ; 
Sir Henry Puckering ; Monk, Duke of Albe 
marie; and Charles Montague, Earl of Halifax, by 
Sir Godfrey Kneller.
Here is also an original half- 
length of Shakespeare, by Mark Garrard.
The 
books, which are separated into thirty classes, are 
disposed in cases of oak; and on the top of each 
case is a well-executed marble bust of some dis- 
tinguished literary character, either ancient or mo- 
dern.
In addition to the books, here are some very 
curious and interesting manuscripts, particularly a 
thin folio, enriched with a variety of pieces in the 
hand-writing of Milton.
These estimable relics 
ivere discovered amongst the papers of Sir Henry 
Puckering, by the learned Professor Mason.
They 
consist of the original copy of the Masque ef Co- 
raus ; two draughts of a letter to a friend who had 
importuned him to enter into orders ; several plans 
of Paradise Lost, composed at the period when he 
intended to make that subject the ground-work of a 
tragedy ; sketches of several other tragedies from 
Scripture, and the English and Scottish histories ; 
the poems of Lycidas, Arcades, and several smaller 
pieces ; all in his own hand.
A few of his sonnets 
are contained in the same volume in the writing of 
other persons.
On the Landing-place, near the entrance of the 
Library, isian original portrait of Sir Isaac New- 
ton, in a loose gown, with one hand in his bosom, 
and the other on a book, which is lying before him, 
painted by Valentine Ritts.
At the bottom of the 
stairs is an interesting collection of various ancient 
t> tones with inscriptions.
The greatest part of these 
memorials of former ages was given by Sir John 
Cotton, whose present is commemorated by a tablet 
affixed to the wall, inscribed with a Latin sentence 
to the following import : " These Roman Monu- 
ments, collected from every quarter of the northern 
part of England by the eminent antiquary Sir Ro- 
bert Cotton, and deposited at his seat of Conning- 
ton, in Huntingdonshire, were removed hither in 
the year 1750, at the expence of Sir John Cotton, 
of Stratton, Bart." The .famous Sigeum Inscrip- 
tion, which was bequeathed to the Society by Ed- 
ward Wortley Montague, is" preserved with these 
rarities, together with a bust of that eccentric cha- 
racter, executed at the expence of his sister Mary, 
Countess of Bute, by Scheeiuaker.
Here is also 
an ancient stone, with a Greek inscription, which 
was brought from the Archipelago, a few years ago, 
and presented to the College by Mr. Hawkins, of 
Cornwall, A.
M. and a Roman mile-stone, given by- 
Richard Goug-h, Esq. The hitter present was ac- 
companied by a long Latin letter, to the following- 
effect : — " The Roman mile-stone, presented to 
Trinity College May the 27th, IV j9, was found on 
digging a drain near Water Newton, about five miles 
from Stilton.
It bears the name of the Emperor 
Marcus Annius Florianus, who succeeded his bro- 
ther Tacitus in the year of our Lord 276, and reign- 
ed only two or three months, being murdered by his 
own soldiers.
From the short period of this Em- 
peror's reign, it is probable that this mile-stone is 
the only memorial of him in England.
It is cer- 
tainly a scarce and valuable relic of antiquity.
The 
inscription is 1523 years old." 
On each side of Neville's Court, beneath the Li- 
brary, is a spacious piazza, from which three wrought 
iron gates open towards the river.
Over which is 
an elegant cycloidal stone bridge of three arches, 
designed and executed by the late Mr. James Essex, 
F. S.
A. This bridge leads to the walks, which are 
about one third of a mile in circumference, and are 
skirted with chesnut and lime trees.
Amongst 
the most distinguished Students or 
this College, 
Members of this College, may be mentioned, Sir 
Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam ; Lord Chief Justice 
Sir Edward Coke ; Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke ; 
Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex ; Sir Robert Fil- 
mer, author of the Patriarcha ; the poet Cowley ; 
Sir Robert Cotton, founder of the Cottouian Li- 
brary ; Sir Henry Spelman, author of the Glossary; 
Bishop Wilkins, author of the Universal Character; 
John Ray, and Francis Willoughby, the celebrated 
naturalists ; Dr. Thomas Gale, an eminent anti- 
quary, who wrote the inscriptions on the monument; 
Roger Cotes, a mathematician, and author of Har- 
monia Mensurarum ; Nathaniel Lee, the dramatist ; 
Andrew Marvell, Esq. poet and statesman ; the 
poet Dryden ; Sir Isaac Newton; Dr. Isaac Bar- 
row ; Dr. Richard Bentley ; Dr. Conycrs Middle- 
ton ; the present Bishop of Landaff ; the Duke of 
Rutland ; Sir Elijah lmpcy ; and Earl Spencer.
Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop* Wilkins, Bishop Pear- 
son, Dr. Isaac Barrow, and Dr. Bentley, were mas- 
ters of Trinity College.
Emanuel College, situated in St..
Andrew's 
Street, was erected on the site of a Dominican 
friary, which had been founded about tiie year 1280, 
by some private persons, and afterwards augmented 
by Alice, widow of Robert Vere, second Earl of 
Oxford.
On the Dissolution it was granted to Ed- 
mund Ebrington, and Humphrey Metcalf, of whose 
heirs or assigns it was purchased by Sir Walter 
Mildmay, Chancellor of the Exchequer and Privy 
Counsellor to Queen Elizabeth, of whom he obtain-- 
ed 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
235 
ed a charter of incorporation for this College in the 
year 158 J, and endowed it for the maintenance of a 
Master, three Fellows and four Scholars.
The re- 
venues have since that time been enlarged by various 
donations, and the persons now supported by them, 
are 15 Fellows, and nearly IQO Scholars and Exhi- 
bitionists.
The principal court is surrounded by the Clois- 
ters and Gallery, the Hall, Combination Room, 
Master's Lodge, and a modern and uniform struc- 
ture of stone, adorned with a ballustrade and para- 
pet.
At the upper end of the Hall, which is neatly 
fitted up, and furnished with a Music Gallery, is a 
fine painting of Sir Wolstan Dixie, Knight, the 
founder of two Bye-Fellowships, and two Scholar- 
ships.
The Lodge and Gallery are embellished 
with many portraits, of which the following appear 
to be the most curious : Sir Walter Mildmay, the 
founder, by Vansomer, 1558, full length.
Sir An- 
thony Mildmay, Knight.
Thomas Holbeach, D.
D. 
Archbishop Sancroft, by P.
R. Sens.
Mr. Francis 
Ash, supposed by Dobson.
Rodolph Symonds, the 
architect of the Colleges Emanuel and Sidney, in a 
hard style, but curious.
John Fane, Earl of West- 
moreland, and Baron Burghersh, by Romney.
Dr.
Richard Farmer, the late Master, and well-known 
commentator on Shakespeare, by Romney.
Dr.
Parr.
Charles Jackson, Bishop of Kildare, by 
Gainsborough.
Sir William Temple, supposed by 
Sir Peter Lely.
Mr. Hubbord, many years Tutor in 
this College, and Registrar of the University, sup- 
posed by Gainsborough.
The Chapel, with a marble flooring, and ceiling 
ornamented with stucco-work, is a very elegant 
structure, was designed, and commenced in the year 
1668, by Archbishop Sancroft ; but was not com- 
pleted till the Mastership of Dr. Holbeach, in 1677.
The expences were defrayed by subscription.
At 
the entrance of the chapel is a memorial for Law- 
rence Chaderton, the first master of the College, 
and one of the translators of the Bible.
He died 
in 1640, at the age of 103.
Over the altar is a 
painting of the Prodigal's Return, by Amicioni.
In 
the cloister, near the chapel door, is a tablet in me- 
mory of Dr. Farmer.
The Library is small, but the books (chiefly di- 
vinity) are well chosen.
One of them, which is ex- 
tremely curious, and in fine preservation, is Tully's 
Offices, printed by Faust in 1465 : it appears to have 
belonged to Prince Arthur, brother of Henry the 
Eighth, his arms being pourtrayed on the title-page.
The gardens, which are pleasant and extensive, are 
provided with a neat bowling-green, and a cold 
bath, for the use and i-ecreation of the Members.
Some of the most eminent characters, who have 
belonged to this College, are as follows.
Bishop 
Hall, one of the commissioners sent by James the 
First to the.
Synod of Dordt ; Richard Kidder, 
Bishop of Bath and Wells, killed in his bed in 1763, 
hy the fall of a stack of chimnics at his palace at 
Wells ; Joshua Barnes, editor of Euripides and 
Anacreon ; Sir Robert Twysden, Bart, an anti- 
quary, and author of the Historical Defence of the 
Church of England ; John Morton, author of a 
Natural History of Northamptonshire ; Sir William 
Temple ; Matthew Poole, writer of the Annotations 
on the Old and New Testaments ; Sir Francis Pem- 
berton, Chief .Justice of the King's Bench ; John 
Wallis, the mathematician ; Anthony Blackwell, 
author of the Defence of the Sacred Classics ; and 
the late Dr. Richard Farmer.
Sidney-Sussex College, situated on the east 
side of Bridge Street, near the end of Jesus Col- 
lege Lane, was built on the site of a monastery of 
Franciscans, or Grey Friars, originally established 
in the town about the reign of Henry the Third, 
but removed hither by Edward the First.
This 
monastery was famous from being the place where 
the public exercises were kept previously to the es- 
tablishment ef the Schools.
On the suppression of 
religious houses it was granted by Henry the Eighth 
to the Master and Fellows of Trinity College, of 
whom it was purchased by the executors of France.-* 
Sidney, Countess of Sussex, and widow to Tho- 
mas Radcliffe, third Earl of Sussex.
This lady, 
by will, dated December the 6th, 1588, bequeathed 
50001.
and some other property, to found a College 
for a Master, ten Fellows, and twenty Scholars ; 
but the bequest being found insufficient to defray 
the cost of the buildings, and to support so large 
an establishment, the Fellows were reduced by her 
executors to seven ; but have since been increased 
by additional endowments to the original number.
The first stone of the College was laid on the 20th 
of May 1596, and the building, which consists of 
two courts, was completed in little more than three 
years.
The Chapel, (originally the Friars' dormitory) 
and the Library, were rebuilt about the year 1780, 
when various other alterations were also made, un- 
der the direction of Dr. Elliston, the late Master, 
who was elected in 1760.
The Chapel is remarka- 
bly neat, and reflects considerable credit on the taste 
and judgment of the Doctor, who was his own 
architect.
The altar-piece is sometimes called the 
Nativity ; but it is evidently a Repose during the 
Flight into Egypt.
It was executed by Pittoni, a 
Venetian, and was purchased at Venice, purposely 
for the Chapel, by Mr. Smith, the English resident.
The composition and colouring are excellent.
At 
the other end of the Chapel is a neat gallery for the 
Master's family, who have access to it through the 
Library.
The Hall is a very handsome room, with a Musie 
Gallery, supported by pillars forming a vestibule at 
the entrance, with a handsome bow-window at the 
upper end ; and the ceiling and walls are neatly or- 
namented with fret-work.
The Lodge consists of 
several convenient apartments ; one of which con- 
tains an original portrait, in crayons, of Oliver 
Cromwell, by Cooper, said to be the same from 
which that artist painted his miniatures of the Pro- 
6 tector.
236 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
tector.
It is esteemed a correct likeness, and has 
been frequently copied.
Its size is about eighteen 
inches by twelve.
Here is also a full length of Lady 
Sydney, the foundress, in very remarkable drapery ; 
a good head of Dr. Hay ; a whole length of Wil- 
liam Wollaston, author of the Religion of Nature ; 
and six excellent views of Venice, by Gwedyr, a pu- 
pil of Canaletti.
In the Library, which is conveniently contrived as 
a study to the Master's Rooms, are several curious 
objects.
One of these is a part of an incrustation of 
a child's skull, found in the Isle of Crete, about ten 
feet beneath the soil, and brought to England in the 
year 1627.
The teeth are white and sound, and re- 
main unchanged ; but the other parts resemble a 
hard sand-stone.
The skull, when first deposited in 
the College, was whole ; but it was afterwards bro- 
ken, and some parts lost.
Here is also a bust of 
Cromwell, executed by Bernini, from a plaster im- 
pression taken from Oliver's face after death, and 
sent to Italy.
This bust was presented to the Col- 
lege a few years ago, by the Rev. Thomas Martyn, 
Regius Professor of Botany.
The countenance bears 
a strong resemblance to the portrait by Cooper, but 
has been absurdly coloured, and rendered disgust- 
ing and hideous by the introduction of glass eyes ; 
which, however, the good taste of Dr. Elliston re- 
moved, as well as the glaring tints which overspread 
the features.
A remarkable natural curiosity, is preserved in a 
cabinet in this Lodge.
This is an animal calculus, 
between eight and nine inches in diameter, origi- 
nally of a globular form, and in substance and ap- 
pearance similar to chalk.
It was taken out of the 
body of a mare, supposed to be with foal, and which 
for a considerable period had seemed to be in ex- 
treme pain, but was discovered one morning stran- 
gled between two trees, as though the greatness of 
her agony had caused her to commit suicide.
When 
first taken from the animal's stomach, it weighed 
fourteen pounds, and was extremely hard : but hav- 
ing been kept for some time in a damp cellar, it be- 
came somewhat softer.
On the death of the person 
(a miller) who owned the mare, the calculus was 
given by his daughter to the Rev. Mr.
Martyn, 
(brother-in-law to Dr. Elliston) who sawed it into 
two parts, and in the centre found a very small piece 
of mill-stone, round which the remaining part of the 
substance had concreted.
The inside is of different 
degrees of texture ; the density varying in circles, 
being alternately hard and solid, and soft and por- 
ous.
This difference, according to a conjecture, of 
Dr. Elliston's, was occasioned by the variation of 
the mare's food, in the different seasons of the year.
The piece of mill-stone, scarcely half an inch in dia- 
meter, is also preserved.
The grounds which belong to this College are 
laid out with great taste.
In the Fellows' garden 
* Cromwell was admitted in the year 1616.
is a spacious bowling-green, a pleasant summer- 
house, and a shrubbery.
A few of the eminent persons who have belonged 
to this establishment, are as follow : — Oliver (J 
well,* the Proctor ; Bishop Seth Ward ; Charles 
Alleyn, author or Poems on the Battles oi Ciessy, 
Poictiers, and Bosworth Field ; William Wollaston ; 
Sir Robert Atkins, Chief Baron of the Exchequer; 
Sir Roger L' Estrange ; Thomas Comber, author of 
a Vindication of the Divine Right of Tythes j and' 
Richard Reynolds, Bishop of Lincolu.
Downing College, which is now building, in 
pursuance of the Avill of Sir George Downing, Bart, 
received (he sanction of a royal charter in the year 
1800.
Sir George Downing, in the year 1717, de- 
vised several valuable estates in the counties of Cam- 
bridge, Bedford, and Suffolk, to his nearest rela- 
tions, Sir Jacob Downing and his three sons ; with 
remainder to their issue in succession ; and in case 
they all died without issue, he devised the estates to 
trustees, who, with the approbation of the Arch- 
bishops of Canterbury and York, and of the Masters 
of St, John's and Clare Hall, were to found a Col- 
lege within the precincts of the University, to be 
called Downing College.
The testator died in the 
year 1719, and his property descended to Sir Jacob,, 
who, on the death of his sons without issue in his 
life-time, became the sole inheritor, and at his de- 
cease, in 1764, bequeathed his possessions to his 
lady ; but the estates devised by Sir George Down- 
ing were claimed by the University for the use of 
the proposed College.
The validity of the original 
will immediately became a subject of legal inquiry ; 
but, after many years litigation, was at length esta- 
blished ; and the charter for the incorporation of 
the new College having been fully examined by the 
Privy Council, and approved by his Majesty, the 
great seal was affixed to it by the Lord Chancellor 
Loughborough, on the 22d of September, 1800.
This College, very recently finished, consists of a 
Master, a Professor of the Laws of England, a Pro- 
fessor of Medicine, and sixteen Fellows: Scholars and 
Pupils are admitted andeducated as in other Colleges.
The Fellows vacate their Fellowships at the expi- 
ration of twelve years, unless under particular cir- 
cumstances they obtain a license to hold them for a 
longer term.
The Master, the Professors, and three 
of the Fellows, were named in the charter ; and 
the remaining Fellows were appointed under the 
King's sign manuel after the College was built.
A spot of ground had for some time been fixed on,, 
and marked out, for the site of the College : some 
plantations had also been made; and, on the 18th 
of May, 1807, the first stone of the building was 
laid, with great solemnity.
The work was carried 
on from the designs, and under the directions, 
of Mr. Wilkins, Jun.
The public schools of this University were origi- 
nally 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
237 
nally hold in private houses, hired for the purpose 
every ten years : this mode oi' engaging 1 apartments 
bein»- found inconvenient, the schools were com- 
menced in the year 1443, on or near the spot Where 
they now stand, ut the cxpence of the University, 
assisted by liberal benefactions.
These buildings 
surround a small court.
On the west side are the 
Philosophy Schools, where disputations are held in 
term time.
On the north or right hand of the court 
is the Divinity School; and on t'e.e left, or south end 
of the court, is that for Law and Physic, where the 
candidates for Bachelors' or Doctors' degrees, perform 
the exercises required by the statutes, in their several 
faculties.
( hi the east is the Lecture Room, which was 
handsomely fitted up for the Norrisian and other 
Professors in the year 1795.
Connected with the 
north end of the Philosophy Schools, is an apartment 
containing a rich collection of fossils, ores, minerals, 
and other rarities, presented to the University in the.
year 17-27, by John Woodward, M.
D. who founded 
a Professorship to promote the knowledge of minera- 
logy, with a salary of about 1501.
per annum.
This 
collection has been considerably augmented by John 
Hailstone, A.
M. 
The University Library, which occupies the whole 
quadrangle of apartments over the schools, was ori- 
ginally erected at the charge of Rotheram, Archbi- 
shop of York, and Tunstal, Bishop of Durham, 
about the year 1480.
The cast front, containing 
what is denominated the New Library, was rebuilt 
by subscription previously to the year 1769.
The 
Library was furnished by the above-mentioned Pre- 
lates with a number of choice books, few of which 
are now to be found.
The present collection is 
large, and valuable, having been augmented by many 
scarce and curious editions of esteemed authors, 
given by various benefactors.
George the First in- 
creased the assemblage by the gift of the entire Li- 
brary of Dr. Moore, Bishop of Ely ; and also pre- 
sented the University with 20001.
towards the ex- 
pence of erecting the classes to contain them.
Many 
curious and valuable manuscripts are preserved here ; 
particularly a fine folio copy of the Koran, written 
in a very beautiful hand, on paper made of cotton ; 
a large quarto Hebrew Bible, written in the year 
856 ; the Four Gospels and the Acts of the Apos- 
tles,* su pposed to have been written in the third or 
fourth century, and given to the University by Theo- 
dore Beza ; and a very beautiful Persian volume, 
intituled The Wonders of the Creation, and dated 
1388.
The work itself, however, appears to have 
been originally composed about the middle of the 
eleventh century.
Some particulars concerning it 
are mentioned in a paper Which is bound up with the 
manuscript, and written in Latin, to the following 
••fleet : " This celebrated Persian volume is to be 
* A very fine facsimile of thi^ rare manuscript, which is 
Conjectured to be one of the oldest extant, has been printed 
under tiie direction of Dr. T.
Kipling, at the cxpence.
of the 
University, in two (oho volumes.
vol .
I. NO.
17.
valued more than gold ; not only from the excellence 
of the style, and hand in which it is written, but 
likewise from the elegance oi its pictures, its orna- 
ments, and its binning.
The author's name was 
Zacharia Ben Mohammed Elcasuini ; so called, be- 
cause he was born in the city oi' Casbin, in Persia.
He died in the year of the Hegira, 674 ; of Christ, 
1059.
This book contains a very long Preface, and 
two Treatises ; the first of which relates to the re- 
mote objects, such as the Heavens, Stars, and Me- 
teors : the latter displays those things which are 
near to us.
as the Earth, Waters, Metals, Animals, 
Birds, Fishes, ccc.
ami also some Particulars of the 
Occult Sciences, Talismans, and other Branches of 
Natural Magic." The leaves of this elegant manu- 
script are of cotton paper, and many of them are 
embellished with drawings, in square compartments, 
of beasts, birds, reptiles, monsters, and other figures, 
to illustrate the descriptions.
Some of them are 
finely executed, and are as fresh as if they had been 
but lately finished, being rendered peculiarly bril- 
liant by the use of the ultra-marine and gold : the 
binding is extremely superb.
This volume was pur- 
chased in the city of Casbin, and given to the Uni- 
versity, in the year 1770, by the son of Dr. George 
Lewis, late Archdeacon of Meath, who was himself 
a considerable benefactor to the Library, and aug- 
mented its value with a cabinet of Oriental manu- 
scripts.
It is deposited in an elegant square apart- 
ment, which occupies the south-west corner of the 
quadrangle, and is furnished with a richly ornament- 
ed dome, in the cabinet, besides the articles «>iven 
by Dr. Lewis, are six small port-folios of Chinese 
manuscripts, presented to the University about thirty- 
five years ago, by Dr. William Burred.
It also contains 
a book written on reed, with a stylus ; a pack of 
Chinese playing-cards, consisting of eight suits on 
tortoise-shell ; and various other curious articles.
Amongst the printed books are many of the first 
editions of the Greek and Latin classics and his- 
tories ; such as the Catholicon, printed by Faust, in 
1460 ; Tully's Offices, at Mentz, in 1466; Cicero's 
Orations, 1470 ; and Tully's Epistles, on vellum, 
1471; both printed by Cornelius Jansen : The Book 
of Chess, by Caxton, in 1474 ; this was the first 
book printed in England ; and Pliny's Natural His- 
tory, on vellum, printed in 1476, with a very beauti- 
ful letter.
Some collections of curious drawings 
and prints are also preserved here : among the 
latter is a large folio of Rembrandt's etchings, va- 
lued at 5001.
Among the principal portraits in the Library are 
those of Charles the First, supposed to have been 
painted by Vandyck ; Anthony Shepherd, late Pro- 
lessor of Experimental Philosophy; John Moore, 
Bishop of Ely; Charles, Lord Townshend,f Secre- 
f It is said, that this nobleman was the first person who in- 
troduced the use of turnips into this country, tie brought the 
seed from Hanover, and cultivated the turnips at his family seat 
in Norfolk.
3 o 
tary 
238 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
tary to George the First ; and Prince Charles, son 
of James" the First ; probably by D.
Myteus.
On 
the staircase is an excellent whole length, by Rei- 
nao-le, of the late John Nicholson, a Bookseller of 
Cambridge, commonly known by the name of 
Maps.
The Senate House is a magnificent buildin"- of the 
Corinthian order, which was designed by .Sir .James 
Burrell, and erected by Mr. Gibbs, at the expcitc-c of 
the University, aided by a subscription.
Thi> struc- 
ture, which is compose I of Portland stone, is orna- 
mented with pilasters, and a neat balustrade.
In 
the middle of the south front is an elegant pediment, 
supported by four fluted columns, with carv jd capi- 
tals ; and, at the east end, whicn is the usual en- 
trance, is a second pediment, sustained oy four co - 
lumns, of similar workmanship to the former.
The 
interior is spacious, and the ceiling is enriched by 
stucco-work, displaying much taste and neatness of 
execution.
The length of the apartment is 10) feet, 
the breadth 42, and the height 32.
The Vice-Chan- 
cellor's chair, with semi-circular seats on each side, 
for the heads of colleges, noblemen, &c.
is at the 
west end ; below, are the places for the Regents, or 
White-hoods : and, still lower, the seats of the Non- 
Regents, or Black-hoods.
The galleries, which are 
of Norway oak, are elegantly carved, and are sup- 
posed to be capable of containing 1100 persons.
Near the fluted columns, which support the gallery 
ai the east end, are two marble statues.
That on 
the north side is an emblematical figure of Glory, 
executed by Borotta, an Italian, and presented to 
the University by Sir Peter Burrell : on the scroll 
are these words : — Cuncti Adsiut Meritaeq.
Exspec- 
tent .
Praemia .
Palmas : — " Let all be present, and 
expect the palm, the reward of merit." The follow- 
ing inscription appears in front of the pedestal ; — 
Gloria; .
iEternae 
Almse .
Matris .
Academis 
Sjctvwi 
Ob 
Doctrina: .
Feliciler .
Excvlte 
Perpetvam Lavdem 
Et 
Excolendie 
Felicem .
Operam 
L. M.
P. 
Petrvs Bvrrell 
In 
Fiefatis .
Svse .
Et .
Fidci 
Pvblicvin .
Argvmentvin 
M.D.CC.XLVIII.
(Translation.) 
This statue, sacred to the everlasting glory of Alma 
Water, the University, was, in consequence of the un- 
interrupted renown of Learning, happily cultivated, 
and the prosperous endeavour for its future improve- 
ment, joyfully erected by Peter Burrell, as a public 
testimony of his love and friendship, in the year 
1748.
The statue on the south side, which is an exceed- 
ingly fine piece of sculpture, represents th« late 
Duke of Somerset in the younger part of his life,, 
dressed in the Vandyck taste, with the ensigns of 
the Order of the Garter.
It was executed by Rys- 
brack.
In capitals, on the front of the pedestal, ap- 
pears the following inscription : — 
Carolo 
DvCl SoMERSETENSI 
Strenvo Jvris Academici Defensori 
Acerrimo Libertatis Pvblica: Vindici 
Statvam 
Lectissimarvm Matronarvm Mvnii 
L. M.
poneudvm decrevit 
Academia Cautabrigiensis 
Qvam Praesidio svo nnnivit 
Avxit Mwiificentia 
Per annos plvs Sexaginta 
Cinicellarivs.
(Translation.) 
To Charles, Duke of Somerset, a strenuous 
defender of the rights of the University, a most ardent 
asserter of public liberty, This Statue, the gift of 
two most excellent matrons, was erected with the ut- 
most pleasure by the University of Cambridge, which 
he, as Chancellor, had protected by his patronage, 
and augmented by his munificence, during more than 
sixty years.
On the reverse are these words i — 
Hanc Statvam 
Svae in Parentem pietatis 
In Academiam stvdii 
Monvmentvm 
Ornatissimae Foeminae 
Francisca, Marchionis de Granby Conjva 
Charlotta, Baronis de Gvernsey 
S. P.
faciendum cvravervnt 
M.D.CC.LVI.
(Translation.) 
The most accomplished ladies, Frances, wife of 
the Marquis of Granby, and Charlotte, Baroness of 
Guernsey, caused this statue to be erected at their 
own exppnee, in the year 1756, as a monument of 
their filial duty to their parent) and their affection to 
the University.
On the opposite sides, near the middle of this- 
apartment, are two other marble statues.
The one 
on the north, representing his Majesty George the 
First, by Rysbrack, bears three inscriptions on the 
pedestal, to the following effect : — 
" By the Senate of Cambridge, it was- decreed, 
that a statue should be erected to his late most excel- 
lent Majesty George I.
King of Great Britain, as a 
perpetual monument of their gratitude for his signal 
benefits to this University." 
" Charles, Lord Viscount Townshend, a principal 
ornament of both the University and the state, agree- 
ably to his singular loyalty towards his Prince, and 
the particular affection with which he had favoured 
the University, engaged to have this statue, which 
was decreed by the Senate at Cambridge, made of 
marble at his own expeuce." 
" Charles, the son of Lord Viscount Townshend, 
heir alike to the virtues and dignities of hii father, 
caused 
i 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE 
239 
daused this statue, which his father, surprised by sud- 
de« death, had left imperfect, to be completed, and 
erected iu this mo9t honourable place of the Univer- 
sity," 
The other statue, by Wilton, represents George 
the Second.
On the base of the pedestal arc the 
following lines ; — 
Georg-io Secundo 
Patrono suo, optime merenti.
Semper Venerando : 
Quod Volenti Populo, 
Ju-tissime humanissime.
in Pace, et iu Bello, 
Feliciter imperavit, 
Quod Academiam Cai'tabrigiensem 
Fovit, auxit, brnavit; 
Hanc Statuain, 
i&efnam, faxit Deus, Monumenttmi 
Grati animi in Regem, 
Pietatis in Patram, 
Amoris in Academiain 
Suis Sumptibus, pom curavit 
Thomas Holies- 
Dux de Newcastle 
Academic C.-mcellarius.
A. D.
17i>6.
(Translation.) 
To George the Second, his most deserving 
and most respected Patron, for having governed a 
•willing People, with the greatest Justice, Humanity, 
and Success, both in Peace and War ; for having che- 
rished, augmented, and adorned the University of 
Cambridge ; this Statue (may it please God to let it 
stand as a perpetual Monument of his Gratitude to 
the King, of his dutiful Affection to the Country, and 
of his Love to the University) was erected at the Ex- 
pence of Thomas Holies, Duke of Newcastle, and 
Chancellor of the University, in the year 1766.
The University Botanic Garden, occupying be- 
tween three and four acres, on the south-east side of 
the town, is conveniently laid out, and plentifully 
watered.
The ground, with a large and ancient 
edifice, which formerly belonged to the Augustine 
Friars, was purchased by Dr. Richard Walker, Vice- 
Provost of Trinity College, for 16001.
Soon after- , 
wards, a handsome Green-house was erected by sub- 
scription.
It is richly stored with curious exotics, 
amongst which are several singular trees and plants 
from New Holland ; some tea, coffee, and bread- 
fruit-trees ; a cotton-tree, &c.
The whole garden 
is arranged agreeably to the Liunasan System, and 
a catalogue of the plants has l»:en published by Mr.
Dorm, the present curator.
The old house having 
been sold to considerable advantage, a new building 
wa9 erected for the use of lecturers in chemistry 
and botany, and furnished with the necessary requi- 
sites for the instruction of students, &c.
Among the ancient religious houses of Cambridge, 
that of the Austin canons, established in 1092, by 
Picot, the sheriff, at the suggestion of his wife Hu- 
golina, for a prior and six canons, claims precedence 
of notice.
At his death, Picot left the foundation 
incomplete ; and, his son having been attainted for 
s rebellion, the new monastery fell into decay, till 
Payne, or Pagan Peverell, standard-bearer to Ro- 
bert, Duke of Normandy, obtained a spot of ground 
from the King, in the suburbs of Cambridge, near a 
spring called Bairnwell, where there had formerly 
been a hermitage and an oratory dedicated to St.
Andrew.
There he founded a monastery on a larger 
scale ; and, having dedicated it to St. Giles and 
St. Andrew, removed thither the canons from their 
small cell, the site of which was near the castle.
At 
the Dissolution, the revenues were estimated at 
2-361.
10s.
1 ljd.
a year.
The estate now belongs to 
Mr. Panton ; and some remains of the conventual 
buildings are at present occupied as a barn.
The Benedictine nunnery of St. Radegund, origi- 
nally dedicated to St. Mary, is said to have existed 
soon after the Norman conquest, but, more probably, 
it was not established till about the year 1130.
Mal- 
colm IV.
King of Scotland, who built the conven- 
tual church about the year 1160, endowed it with 
more ample revenues, and dedicated it to St. Rade- 
gund.
Part of the building, forming the present 
chapel of Jesus College, still remains.
This con- 
vent is-said to have been suppressed by Henry VII.
on.
account of the notorious incontinency of the 
nuns, most of whom were in a state of preg- 
nancy.
The Grey Friars, or Franciscans, supposed to 
have settled in Cambridge soon after the year 1224, 
occupied the Old Synagogue, now the gaol ; but, 
finding the situation inconvenient, they removed to 
the spot where Sidney Sussex College now stands, 
and erected a very spacious and commodious build- 
ing.
Henry VIII.
granted the site of the friary to 
Trinity College, of which it was purchased by Fran- 
ces Sidney, Countess of Sussex, for the site of the 
College founded by that lady.
The Bethlemite Friars, and the Friars de Sacco, 
or De Penitentia Jesu Christi, settled in Trump- 
ington Street, in the years 12-57 and 1258.
The 
latter order was suppressed in 1307, and the 9ite is 
now annexed to Peter House.
The Friars of St. Mary settled in the parish of 
All Saints about the year 1274 ; and, about the same 
time, the priory of the Black Friars was founded.
Emanuel College occupies the site of the latter.
The monastery of the Austin Friars, supposed to 
have settled at Cambridge about the year 1290, was 
founded by Sir Geffrey Pitehford, in, or near, the 
peas market, in the parish of St. Edward.
Ex- 
cepting a small arch, with Gothic tracery, forming 
part of a cold bath in Mr. Mortlock's gardens, 
scarcely a vestige of the conventual buildings re- 
mains ; though, only twenty years ago, the refectory 
was standing, and was used as a lecture room by the 
botanical professor.
The White Friars, or Carmelites, settled at Cam- 
bridge in the year 1316.
The site of their monas- 
tery is occupied by the garden cf the provost of 
King's College.
A small priory ©1 Gilbertincs, founded by Bishop 
7 Fitzwulter, 
210 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Fit z waiter, in 1:2 91, occupied the old chapel of St.
Edmund the King, opposite Peter House.
At the 
Dissolution, their revenues were estimated at 141.
8s.
B|d.
per annum.
In the early part of the reign of Ed-ward 111.
John de Cranden, prior of Ely, purchased a house 
in Cambridge, to enable a few Benedictine Monks 
to pursue their studies at the University ; but the 
establishment lasted only a short time.
The parish churches of Cambridge, as has been 
already mentioned, are fourteen in number, viz.
All Saints ; St. Andrew the Great ; St. Andrew 
the Less, or Barnwell; St. Bene't; St. Botolph ; 
St. Clement.; St. Edward ; St. Giles and St. Peter 
(united) ; St. Mary the Great ; St. Mary the Less ; 
St. Michael ; St. Sepulchre; and Trinity.
These 
do not ail require particular notice.
Formerly, 
there arc also said to have been the churches of St.
John; St. Nicholas ; St. Zachary ; St. Peter, with- 
out Trumpington gate ; All Saints, in the Jewry, 
which belonged to the nuns of St. Radegund ; and 
St. Edmund's chapel.
In Great St. Andrew's Church, which stands at 
the north end of Preacher's, or St. Andrew's Street, 
is a cenotaph in memory of Captain Cook, the cir- 
cumnavigator, who was killed by the natives of Owy- 
hee, iu the year 1779.
The church ef Little St. Andrew, or Barnwell, 
contains several monumental inscriptions relating to 
the Butler family, Avho were owners of the priory.
The most remarkable is that of the late .Jacob But- 
ler, Esq. the last heir male of the family, who died 
in 1765.
Being an eccentric character, he wrote 
his own epitaph, on live large tablets, comprising a 
brief history of his life, losses, quarrels, law -suits, 
&c.
Some of the tablets were put up in his life- 
time.
In this parish, on Midsummer Green, situated be- 
tween Jesus College and the village of Barnwell, 
an annual fair is holdcn, commencing at Midsummer 
Day, and continuing for a fortnight.
This fair is 
said to have originated with the assemblages of chil- 
dren, attended by a considerable concourse of peo- 
ple, to witness- certain sports and ceremonies which 
they annually performed, near a well from which 
the village derives its name, on St. John's eve.
These meetings are said to have attracted the notice 
of some pedlars, who began to frequent this spot, 
for the disposal of their merchandize as early as the 
reign of Henry I.
The articles now brought for 
sale are chiefly earthen ware, whence the festival 
has obtained tiie name of Pot Fair.
It appears to 
have assumed its legal form in the reign of Henry 
III.
by whom it is said to have been chartered and 
granted to the priory of Barnwell.
Sturbridge Fair is also holder in this parish, a 
little to the eastward of the village, in a large field 
or meadow, near the little river Stour, or Sture, 
from which it seems to have derived its name.
The 
origin of this fair, which is very ancient, is involved 
in so much iueertitude, that Dr. Stukeley has de- 
duced it from his hero Carairsius" ; but howsoever it 
originated, it appears evident that King John grant- 
ed it for the use and maintenance of an hospital of 
lepers, who had an ancient chapel here, called the 
Free Chapel of St. Mary Magdalen, at Stcres- 
brygge, by Barnwell, " whose Gustos demanded 
dues for all merchandizes exposed in its yard ;" and 
had (is.
8d.
allowed him by a jury, in the year 1412, 
for every booth set up there.
In the reign of Henry 
the Seventh, John Arundell, then Chaplain to the 
King, au;ain claimed the right of stallage within the 
precincts of the Chapel, which privilege, after a 
hearing in the Exchequer, was adjudged to him upon 
the plea, that the same right had been enjoyed there 
by his predecessors.
By a charter of the 30th of 
Henry the Eighth, it appears that the Magistrates 
and Corporation of Cambridge obtained a fresh 
grant of this fair in their own favour, in considera- 
tion of 1000 marks which they paid to the King.
This charter, confirmed by Elizabeth, specifies the 
different quarters of the fair to be assigned to the 
different traders.
The field in which the fair is 
holdcn is about half a mile square, bounded by the 
river Cam on the north side, and by the Sture on 
the east.
The ground, since the alteration of the 
style, has been marked out on the fourth of Septem- 
ber, by the Mayor and Aldermen, and the dealers 
are then authorized to erect their booths, which are 
built, in regular order, like streets, each row being 
distinguished by a particular name.
The rows were 
formerly numerous, and were denominated from the 
business of the dealers who kept booths ; as Iron- 
mongers' Row, Cooks' Row, Booksellers' Row, 
Garlic Row, &c.
but of these, the last is not now 
unfrequently the only one.
One part of the fair is 
called the Duddery, and consists of the largest 
booths, formed into a square of about 250 feet, 
chiefly occupied by woollen-drapers, mercers, and 
wholesale dealers in cloths.
The fair is proclaimed 
with great solemnity, on the 18th of September ; 
first by the Vice-Chancellor, Proctors, and other 
officers of the University ; and afterwards by the 
Mayor and Aldermen of the town ; all the persons 
who attend the different processions are arrayed in 
their official habits.
The stated time of the conti- 
nuance of the fair is fourteen days ; its principal 
commodities are wool, hops, leather, cheese, and 
iron ; and one day (September the 25th) is appro- 
priated to the sale of horses.
Indigo was exposed 
to sale at this fair, ?.s early as the reign of Henry 
VII [.
; and soon after the Restoration, great quan- 
tities of tea.
It is mentioned, on the authority of 
Carter, who published a short account of Cam- 
bridgeshire in the year 1753, after the trade of the 
fair had begun to 'decline, that 100,0001.
worth of 
woollen goods had been known to be sold in a 
week's time in the Duddery ; that it had not been 
unusual for a wholesale man to carry baek order* 
for 10,0001.
worth of goods ; that there was once a 
booth for Norwich stulVs, in which were goods to 
the value of 20,0001.
; and that the returns for wool, 
at 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
241 
at one fair, had amounted to 50,0001.
or 60,0001.
and 
for hops nearly as much.
From prudential motives, the Governors of the 
University refuse to permit the exhibition of dra- 
matic pieces within nine miles of Cambridge, at any 
other period than the time of the fair, and the week 
immediately ensuing - ; but, during* these three weeks 
the Norwich Company of Players have for some 
years been allowed to perform.
When they first 
came, they had a spacious wooden building, erected 
and fitted up as a theatre ; but that has lately been 
removed, and a more substantial building has been 
raised for their accommodation, at a little distance 
from Sturbridge.
A Court of Piedpoudre, for the prompt adminis- 
tration of justice, is always held during the fair, in 
which the Mayor or his deputy presides as Judge to 
determine controversies, and preserve decorum.
He is attended by eight servants, called Red-coats, 
who are employed in the duty of constables.
Sturbridge fair was formerly the largest in Eng- 
land : but, through the vast changes which have 
been effected, in the modes of transacting business, 
and the introduction of turnpike roads and canals, 
the business of this celebrated mart has been gra- 
dually declining for many years.
In 1605, the fair 
was first attended by hackney coaches from London; 
-and the multitudes of people assembled in some 
years have been so great, that upwards of sixty 
coaches have plyed here at one time ; but latterly 
the number has seldom exceeded eight or ten.
St. Bene't Church, which is situated on the north 
side of Bene't College, a little to the east of Trump- 
ington Street, contains the ashes of Thomas Hobson, 
the celebrated Cambridge carrier.
Hobson render- 
ed himself particularly famous, by furnishing the 
students with horses : and making it an unalterable 
rule, that every horse should have an equal share of 
rest and fatigue, he would never let one out of his 
turn : from whence the proverbial saying, " Hob- 
son's choice : this or none." 
St. Botolph's Church, on the east side of Trump- 
ington Street, contains a memorial of the learned 
Thomas Playfere, Margaret-Professor of Divinity, 
who died in J 609.
St. Edward's Church stands a little to the west- 
ward of Trumpington Street.
In the parish regis- 
ter appears the following remarkable entry : — 
Elinor Gaskiw said 
( fc.un.or (jaskm said 
" 1650 < ^' ie '' vec ^ four-score years 
y And twenty and two year: 
' And ten years a widow, ,ai 
a maid, 
is a married wife, 
,and then she left this life." 
" This was Elinor Bowman, commonly called the 
widow Bowman, who died August 17th, and was 
buried decently in St. Edward's church-yard, Aug.
18 ; her age 112 years." 
St. Mary's Church, situated near the centre of 
* Vide the Archsologia, Vol. VI.
which contains a ground 
phn, elevation, and section, of this church ; with Mr. Essex's 
VOL.
1. NO.
18.
the town, consists of a nave, chancel, and small side 
aisles ; the whole length being about 1'20 feet, the 
breadth 68.
This church was built by contribution, 
and is said to have been 100 years and upwards 
finishing ; for it was begun in 1478 ; built without 
the tower in 1519 ; but was at length completed in 
1608.
The tower is strong and handsome, with 
lofty pinnacles.
In this church, which is one prin- 
cipally deserving of notice, the members of the Uni- 
versity attended the celebration of divine service.
The seats of the Vice-Chancellor, heads of colleges, 
noblemen, and doctors, are in a handsome gallery, 
raised between the nave and chancel ; the masters 
of arts, fellow commoners, ecc.
have seats in the 
lower part of the church ; and the bachelors and 
under graduates are provided with places in the ex- 
tensive galleries over the aisles.
At the west end is 
a spacious organ-loft, which, on the performance of 
oratorios, or the celebration of festivals, is enlarged 
for the accommodation of the vocal and instrumental 
performers.
Formerly, academical exercises were 
performed, and public orations delivered in this 
church ; and Queen Elizabeth, when at Cambridge 
in 1564, attended the disputations here.
St. Michael's Church, the south aisle of which was 
anciently a chapel for Michael House, and the north 
for Gonville Hall, stands on the east side of Trump- 
ington Street, opposite Caius College.
In 1556, 
this church was interdicted as having been the burial 
place of Paul Phagius, then considered as anarch- 
heretic.
His body, and that of Martin Bucer, an- 
other eminent reformist, who had been buried at St.
Mary's, were disinterred and publicly burnt, with 
their writings, at the market cross ; after which, St.
Michael's church was re-consecrated by (he Bishop 
of Chester, who acted as deputy of Cardinal Pole.
The learned Dr. Conyers Middleton, principal Li- 
brarian to the University, was buried here in 
1750.
St. Sepulchre's Church, sometimes called the 
Round Church, but properly " the Church of the 
Holy Sepulchre in the Jewry," stands on the east 
side of Bridge Street.
This building, from its sin- 
gular form, attracts the notice of the antiquary ; but 
its original shape has been much disfigured by sub- 
sequent erections ; and, in its present state, it ap- 
pears to great disadvantage.
Mr. Essex, an archi- 
tect, who has written on the origin and antiquity of 
round churches, with a particular reference to this 
at Cambridge,* says, " it is evidently a story higher 
than its original architect intended it should be.
This alteration was made in the reign of Edward 
the Second, for the reception of bells, when the win- 
dows were also altered, the chancel added, and the 
ornaments about the door defaced, and partly hid 
by a wooden portal." The more ancient part of the 
building is completely circular, with a peristyle in 
the interior of eight clumsy pillars of far greater 
remarks, which are highly interesting to the, antiquarian and 
architectural reader.
3 p hulk 
24-i 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
hulk and solidity than could be necessary to support 
the conical roof with which it appears to have been 
originally furnished.
The arch over the west door 
is embellished with round zigzag mouldings in the 
Saxon style of architecture.
When the church was 
first built, it is probable that this entrance was the 
only one, but the circular area is now open to the 
chancel.
Formerly, the pillars of the upper portico 
were hidden by a projecting gallery, but that was 
removed some time ago, and the inside of the struc- 
ture repaired and cleaned.
From its being called 
** the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in the Jewry," 
arose the erroneous opinion, that this building was 
originally a Jewish synagogue ; but Mr. Essex, af- 
ter an attentive investigation of the object, affirms, 
that it was built by the Knights Templars, or by 
some persons concerned in the Croisades, who took 
the church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem for 
their model.
" There can be no doubt," says he, 
" either of the time when this church was built, or 
that they who built it intended it should resemble 
the church of the Resurrection, or Holy Sepulchre, 
in Jerusalem ; and, as far as can be judged from the 
descriptions given of that church, this is the best 
copy we have of it in England ; but a perfect resem- 
blance must not be expected, where the sinallness of 
one compared to the other, would make an exact 
imitation no better than a large model, which could 
be of no use but to amuse the curious." It will be 
easier, he observes, " to ascertain the age, than the 
founder of it ;." and he afterwards expresses his de- 
cided opinion, deduced from the consideration of the 
original building, that it was erected in the reign of 
Henry I.
or between the first and second croisades.
There are no monuments of consequence in this 
church ; but the parish register records the circum- 
stance of the baptism of four children of Henry Coe, 
a shoe-maker, two male and two female, born at one 
birth, in November, 1766.
The procession to the 
church consisted of sixteen sponsors, the father, 
nurses, &c.
attended by a great concourse of peo- 
ple.
The mother recovered ; one of the children 
died at the age of two months ; another at fifteen 
months ; a third at twenty months ; and the other 
grew up, and is believed to be still living.
The bu- 
rial register contains the following remarkable en- 
try : — " July 10, 1801, buried John, son of John 
and Mary Nourish.
N. B.
It was quite a Lusus 
Naturae, having no arms at all, and the feet, legs, 
and thighs, crushed into the body." This misera- 
ble little creature is said to have lived seven weeks.
Trinity Church, situated at the south end of 
Bridge Street, was entirely destroyed by fire, iu the 
year 1174.
It was then rebuilt ; but no part of the 
present structure appears to be of that age.
Sir 
Robert Tabor, an eminent physician, supposed to 
have been the first who administered bark in inter- 
mittent fevers, was buried here in 1081.
Cambridge Market-Place consists of two separate 
oblong squares, united together, in which stands the 
Shire Hall, a modern handsome structure, divided 
into two courts, and accommodated for holding the 
assizes and quarter sessions.
The length of this 
building is rather more than eighty feet.
The upper 
part is supported on arches, faced with stone, be- 
neath which is the Butcher's Market.
The markets, 
which are under the sole jurisdiction of the Univer- 
sity, are supplied in the most abundant manner, 
with every article of provision.
The chief market 
day is Saturday ; but there is a market every day 
in the week, except Sunday and Monday, for fowls, 
eggs, and butter.
The last mentioned article is al- 
ways made up into rolls, of such a thickness that a 
pound of butter shall be a yard iu length.
This cu- 
rious practice, peculiar to Cambridge, renders the 
butter more easily divided into certain portions called 
sizes for the use of the collegians.
Opposite the Shire Hall, enclosed by an iron pa- 
lisade, is a conduit, which was erected in the year 
1614, at the charge of Thomas Hobson, the carrier.
The water is brought by a small channel, from a 
brook about three miles from the town, and is con- 
veyed beneath the principal street, by an aqueduct 
to the conduit, which is built of stone, and ornament- 
ed with rude carvings.
On the north side is the 
following inscription : — 
" Thomas Hobson, late carrier between London 
and tii is town, in his life-time was at the sole charge 
of erecting this structure, A.
D. 1614.
He departed 
tin's life January 1, 1630, and gave by will the rent of 
seven lays of pasture ground towards the maintenance 
of tliis conduit for ever.
Moreover at his death he 
gave 101.
towards beautifying the same." 
At the back of the Shire Hall, stands the Town 
Hall, which was rebuilt for the use of the corpora- 
tion in the year 1782.
The principal, or court, 
room is seventy feet in length, twenty-eight broad, 
and twenty-three high.
Numerous ancient hospitals, at.
Cambridge, were 
suppressed at the Reformation, as connected with 
the superstitions of the Roman Catholic Church.
The most ancient hospital, or alms-house, now ex- 
isting in Cambridge, is that which is annexed to 
King's College.
It was founded by Margaret, wife 
of Roger Fawkener, about the year 1472, and was 
conveyed to the college in 1504.
This alms-house 
is occupied by four poor women, who receive their 
maintenance from the college table, are allowed fuel, 
and ten shillings a quarter ; and one of them has 
two guineas a year, tor blowing the organ at the 
chapel.
Jakenett's alms-house was founded in 1473, by 
Thomas Jakenett, burgess of Cambridge, for four 
poor persons.
The second, or upper story, accord- 
ing to the will of the founder, was to be let, and the 
rent applied to keeping the house in repair, and ce- 
lebrating the anniversary of the founder and his 
wife.
For several years previous to 1788, this up- 
per story had been occupied by four poor widows, 
put in by the parish ; but, at that time, under the 
operation of the act for paving and lighting the 
town of Cambridge, the house was taken down, and, 
partly 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
2 IS 
partly at the expence of the parish, but chiefly by 
benefactions, it was rebuilt at the end of Wall's 
Laue.
In 1805, Mr. Joseph Merrill, a bookseller, 
of Cambridge, bequeathed the sum of 10671.
bank 
stock, to the trustees of Story's alms-house, for the 
purpose of paying, hy half-yearly payments, the sum 
of 61.
each to the eight poor persons of Jakenett's 
alms-house ; incidental expences to be defrayed by 
the remainder of the interest.
Queen's College alms-house, which was purchas- 
ed of Bene't College about the year 1560, stands in 
Silver Street, in the parish of St. Botolph.
It is 
inhabited by eight poor widows, who are nominated 
by the President of Queen's College.
They each 
receive two shillings a week, a small allowance of 
meat, a chaldron of coals yearly, twenty shillings at 
Sturbridge fan*, and hali'-a-crown on Christmas 
eve.
Matthew Stokys, Esquire bedell of the Univer- 
sity, founded an alms-house for six poor women in 
1585.
It is generally called the Vice-Chancellor's 
alms-house, from his having the appointment of the 
pensioners ; who, till the year 1796, received only 
ten shillings a year ; but, at that time, a grace was 
passed the Senate, for increasing their annual al- 
lowances to 21.
10s.
Stephen Perse, M.
D. senior fellow of Caius Col- 
lege, founded an alms-house at the corner of Free- 
school Lane, in the year 1615, for six poor persons 
not under forty years of age, who receive 41.
a year 
each.
In 1628, Henry Wray founded an alms-house in 
Wall's Lane, for widows and widowers.
It is oc- 
cupied by seven sf the former, and two of the latter, 
who each receive half-a-crown a week.
Hobson, the carrier, who died in 1630, founded 
an alms-house for six poor widows, in the parish of 
St. Bene't, who receive half-a-crown a week each, 
and a gown every other year.
In 1647, Mrs. Elizabeth Knight, of Denny-Abbey, 
founded an alms-house for six old maids, and en- 
dowed it with lands which now produce about 301.
a year.
In 1692, Captain Edward Story founded an alms- 
house, in the parish of St. Giles, for lour clergy- 
men's widows, two other widows, and four old 
maids.
The allowance to the pensioners is 101.
a 
year each, besides gowns, to which, of late years, 
has been added an allowance of coals.
The late Dr.
Goddard left a legacy to augment the stipend of the 
clergymen's widows, with which trustees purchased 
4101.
in the four per cents.
Addenbrooke's Hospital is a large brick building, 
situated near the south entrance of the town, and 
was so named from John Addenbrooke, an eminent 
physician, who, in the year 1719, bequeathed about 
40001.
on the death of his widow, to erect and fur- 
nish an hospital for the gratuitous cure of the indi- 
gent diseased.
Mrs. Addenbrooke died in March, 
1720 ; but the insolvency of one of her executors, 
who had possession of the money, caused a consi- 
derable delay in the institution.
The trustees at 
length obtained a decree of Chancery in their favour, 
and the building was finished; It. it the remaining 
funds being insufficient to complete the chanty, an 
association was proposed to carry it on by subscrip- 
tion ; and an act was procured in July, 1766, to al- 
ter the original design of Dr. Addenbrooke, and to 
make it a general hospital.
The number of persons 
admitted and relieved since that period, is averaged 
at 700 in the year.
Dr. Perse, who has been already mentioned, was 
the founder of a free grammar-school, in Cam- 
bridge.
With the property bequeathed by this gen- 
tleman, who died on the 30th of September, 1615, 
a school-house was built on a spot called Lifhbiim, 
but now Free-school Lane, sufficiently spacious for 
one hundred boys, who were to be natives either of 
Cambridge, Chesterton, Trumpington, or Barn- 
well ; and to be educated by a master and usher, 
whose services Avere to be requited with the re- 
spective salai'ics of 401.
and 201.
yearly.
The ad- 
ministration of this charity is said to be attended by 
some degree of mismanagement.
At each end of 
the school is a house with a garden annexed, origi- 
nally designed for the residence of the master and 
usher.
The master's salary has been augmented 
by a benefaction of 31.
a year, and that of the usher 
by 30s.
left by the will of Mr. Griffith.
The charity-schools at Cambridge, of which there 
are eleven in number, educating about 288 children, 
were first instituted in the year 1703, by the cele- 
brated William Whiston, who Avas then Lucasian 
professor of mathematics in the University.
Hobson, the carrier, left some houses for the 
support of a house of correction, for setting the 
poor to work, and for other charities, at the discre- 
tion of the corporation.
Cambridge is one of the tAventy-four cities and 
towns, to which Sir Thomas White left, in rotation, 
the sum of 1041.
to be lent in sums of 251.
to four 
young freemen, Avithout interest, for ten years, pre- 
ference being given to clothiers ; the remaining four 
pounds to be employed by the respective mayors, 
&c.
for their trouble.
In old records, several manors within the town 
and suburbs of Cambridge, are mentioned.
The ' 
mansion of that which belonged to the priory of St.
Radegund, Avhich passed into the possession of Je- 
sus College, is occupied by John Hagg-erston, Esq.
The manor of Barneville priory is holden by Mr.
Panton.
That of Merton Hall Avas purchased, in 
1270, of the Dunning family, to Avhose ancestors it 
had belonged ever since the conquest, by Walter de 
Merton, and Avas given by him to the college at Ox- 
ford which bears his name.
The old mansion of this 
estate has been long known by the name of Pytha- 
goras's School.
Many conjectures have been form- 
ed as to its origin, but nothing satisfactory has been 
advanced.
It is remarkable, that, though Cambridge has 
had the honour of giving education to so many il- 
lustrious 
244 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE, 
lustrious T-haraciers, very few of its natives have at- 
tained any distinguished literary eminence.
Amongst 
those, however, whose abilities are most conspicu- 
ous, are Sir John Cheke,* a statesman, gramma- 
rian, and divine ; and the celebrated Jeremy Tay- 
lor, t Bishop of Down and Conmor.
Castle Camps.] — Castle Camps is situated in the 
hundred of Chilford, six miles east by south from 
Linton.
The manor, which had belonged to Wulf- 
Avin, one of the thanes of Edward the Confessor, 
was given by the Conqueror to Aubrey de Vere, a 
Norman Karl, whose grandson was created Earl of 
Oxford by Henry, II.
, The latter nobleman built a 
castle here, Which was the residence of his succes- 
sors till the attainder of John de Vere, the 12th 
Earl, for his adherence to the Lancastrian party.
Edward IV.
bestowed the manor on Richard, Duke 
of Gloucester ; but- John, the 13th Earl, having 
greatly promoted the success of the Earl of Rich- 
mond in the battle of Bosworth field, was by that 
Prince reinstated in the possession of all his estates 
and dignities.
In 1580, Edward Earl of Oxford 
sold it to Thomas Skynner, citizen of London, who 
about 25 years afterwards, disposed of it to Thomas 
Sutton, Esq, founder of the Charter-house, to 
which establishment it has ever since belonged.
The 
castle, which stood on a beautiful eminence, com- 
extensive prospect of the county, to- 
manding an 
* Sir John Cheke was born in the year 1514, and educated 
in St. John's College, where he took his degrees in arts, and 
was afterwards successively appointed to the offices of lecturer 
and professor of the Greek language, the pronunciation of 
which through the opposition of Bishop Gardener, the Vice 
Chancellor, he at that time ineffectually endeavoured to cor- 
rect.
In 1544 he was made Latin tutor, jointly with Sir An- 
thony Cooke, to Prince Edward ; on whose accession to the 
Crown, he was rewarded with a pension of 100 marks, obtained 
grants of several considerable estates, was made provost of 
King's College, received the honour of knighthood, and was 
ultimately promoted to the offices of Secretary of State, and 
Privy Counsellor.
His fall however, was more sudden than 
his elevation ; for having concurred in the crowning of the un- 
fortunate Lady Jane Grey, and having acted as her secretary 
during the nine days of her reign, he was committed to the 
Tower, by Queen Mary, and deprived of the greater part of 
his property.
In 1554, having obtained his liberty, he went 
abroad, and, after travelling to various places on the continent, 
was reduced to the necessity of reading Greek lectures at Stras- 
burg for subsistence.
Thus distressed, he set out for Brussels ; 
but was seized before he entered that city by order of Phi- 
lip the Second, and being conducted on ship-board, was, with- 
out a knowledge of his crime, sent to London, and again con- 
signed to his apartments in the Tower.
There, on Ins refusal 
♦ o subscribe to the Catholic religion, he was informed that he 
must either abjure his faith, or suffer death at the stake.
Mar- 
tyrdom was too dreadful lor his fortitude ; he signed his abju- 
ration, was released, and had his property restored ; but his 
peace of mind was lost.
The recollection of his apostacy em- 
bittered every future hour, and he died of grief, and remorse, 
in less than a twelvemonth, in September 1557.
f Jeremy Taylor, the son of a barber, was born about the 
year 1600, and brought up at the free school in Cambridge, till 
the age of thirteen, when he was entered into Caius College, 
and as soon as he was graduate, was chosen fellow.
When a 
master of arts, he removed to London, and became Divinity 
Lecturer in St. Paul's Cathedral, where his preaching attracted 
wards Cambridge, was, for some years, the resi- 
dence of Mr. Sutton.
A brick tower of this build- 
ing remained till the year 1779, when it was blown 
down by a high wind.
A farm house, surrounded 
by a moat, now occupies the site.
The park is said 
to have been four miles in circumference.
Carlton.] — Carlton is situated in the hundred 
of Radfield, five miies and three quarters south 
south-east from Newmarket.
This place, now the 
property of the Hon. Thomas Brand, of the lloo, 
in Hertfordshire, anciently belonged to Algar, Earl 
of Mercia, and was granted by the Conqueror to his 
relation, William de Warren.
Carlton was the re- 
sidence and burial-place of the learned Sir Thomas 
Eliot, who was Sheriff of this county in the 24th of 
Henry the Eighth.
:£ 
Caxton.] — Caxton is a small decayed market- 
town, situated on a Roman way, 11 miles west south 
west from Cambridge, and forty-nine and a quar- 
ter north north-west from London.
The manor, 
anciently the seat of the barony of Hardiwinus do 
Scalariis, or D'Echalens, now belongs to the Rev.
J. C.
Gape.
Matthew Paris, a celebrated historian, one of 
the monks of St. Alban's, who flourished in the 13th 
century, is said to have been a native of this place.
§ 
Chatteris.] — Chatteris is a large and populous 
village, in the hundred of Witchford, nine miles 
the attention of Archbishop Laud, who thinking it for the ad- 
vantage of the Hierarchy, that he should have more time for 
study and improvement than a continued course of preaching 
would allow, procured him a fellowship in All Souls College, 
Oxford, and soon afterwards gave him the rectory of Upping- 
ham, in Rutlandshire.
The interest of Laud was still employ- 
ed in his favour; he became chaplain to Charles the First, and 
engaged with ardor in his service ; but, on the declin* of the 
royal cause, retired into Caermarthenslrire, and supported him- 
self on the slender revenues of a school.
While in this situa- 
tion, he wrote many of the books for which he was afterwards 
famous.
He afterwards accompanied Lord Conway to Ireland; 
but returned to his native country on the restoration, and in 
1662 was appointed Bishop of Down and Connor, made Privy 
j Counsellor, and promoted to the Vice Chancellorship of the 
University of Dublin, which honorable office he retained till 
his death, which happened on the 13th of August, 1(367.
Bishop 
Taylor wrote, The Great Exemplar, or the Life and Death of 
Jesus Christ; an excellent practical book, called Holy Living 
and Dying, and several sermons controversial tracts, &c.
X This gentleman was the author of several esteemed works.
Ili's " Latin and English Dictionary," 1538, afterwards aug- 
mented by Bishop Cooper; his " Governour," 1534, 8vo.
and 
his " Castle of Health," 1541, quarto ; are all celebrated per- 
formances.
§ Matthew Paris, who had the credit of being one of the 
most learned men of his age, was an able mathematician, archi- 
tect, poet, orator, and historian.
Distinguished by his probity 
and talents, he was honoured with several employments, parti- 
cularly with the reformation of the abuses which at that period 
existed in the monasteries.
Bold, as well as faithful, he de- 
claimed alike against the vices of the English court, and the en- 
croachments which were making by the Papal See. His His- 
toria Major, in which he traces the history of the world, from 
the creation to \'259, the year of his death, is divided into two 
parts, tie also wrote a History of English affairs, from the 
Conquest to the 43rd of Henry III.
and 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
245 
and a quarter west from Ely. A Benedictine nun- 
nery was founded here in the year 980, by Alwen, 
wife to Ethelstan Earl of the East Angles, and nurse 
to King Edgar, which continued in a flourishing 
state until the general dissolution of monasteries.
Its revenues were then estimated at 971.
3s.
4d.
per 
annum.
The site was granted to Lord Clinton.
An ancient dwelling-house, supposed to be part of 
the conventual buildings, is still existing.
The ma- 
nor-house stands in the centre of the village, with- 
in the walls of the nunnery.
The manor belongs to 
the Seymour family.
A river, called the old west water, which has be- 
come dry since canals have been made in other di- 
rections for draining the fens, formerly divided this 
parish.
It ran from Somersham to the ferry -turn- 
pike ; and a house, near where the ferry was, still 
retains the appellation of the ferry-house.
At a place called Hunny farm, in this parish, are 
some subterraneous remains of ancient buildings, 
supposed to be those of a chapel which contained 
the bones of St. Huna, chaplain to St. Etheldreda, 
the foundress of the monastery at Ely. According 
to tradition, St. Huna retired to a hermitage, at a 
place which was afterwards called by his name, 
where he died, and was buried, and where wonder- 
ful cures were performed at his tomb, before his re- 
mains were translated to Thorney.
In the year 1757 a tumulus was opened near So- 
mersham Ferry, about two miles from Chatteris, 
in which were discovered several human skeletons, 
with an iron sword, spear, and umbo of a shield, 
an earthen urn, and a glass vase.
The latter were 
considered, by Dr. Stukeley, to have belonged to some 
British king, whom he supposed to have been buried 
here.
Chesterton.] — Chesterton is a large village, 
giving name to the hundred in which it stands, dis- 
tant three quarters of a mile north from Cambridge.
The manor, now the property of John Rant Ben- 
son, Esq. was given by king John to the priory of 
Barnwell.
Chesterton church is an ancient and spacious 
structure, with a nave, chancel, and side aisles.
At a short distance from this village, are the ves- 
tiges of an ancient camp, of a square form, called 
Arbury or Harborough.
Three parts of the vallum 
still remain, and inclose nearly six acres of ground, 
on which Roman coins are frequently found.
Cheveley.]— Cheveley is situated in the hundred 
of that name, on the borders of Suffolk, two miles 
and a half east by south from Newmarket.
The 
manor, now the property of the Duke of Rutland, 
Was given by EdellJeda, the wife of Brithnod, a 
.noble Saxon, to the monks of Ely.
Here is a free grammar school, founded by Mr.
John Ray, in the year 1558.
In 1748, Mr. John 
Warren left 3001.
N. S.
S. annuities, as a salary for 
a school-mistress, to instruct poor girls in reading 
and sewing.
Chjlderley.] — Childerley is a reduced village, 
vol.
i. — no.
18.
I 
situated in the hundred of Chesterton, six mile?!
and a quarter west from Cambridge.
It was the 
seat of the Cutts family, from an early period to the 
time of the brave John, Lord Cutts, who was Lieu- 
tenant-General of the British forces m Holland in 
the reign of Queen Anne.
Sir John Cutts, one of 
the ancestors of this Nobleman, is* mentioned by 
Lord Herbert, iu his Life of Henry the Eighth, as 
being so eminent for his hospitality, that the Spanish 
Ambassador Avas consigned to the Knight's house, 
in this county, by Queen Elizabeth, during a sick- 
ness which raged in London.
The Spaniard, how- 
ever, who, like most of his countrymen, had a great 
partiality for long names, conceived his consequence 
impaired, when he understood the name of his host 
to be simply John Cutts ; but he afterwards found 
that what the Knight lacked in length of name, he 
made up in the largeness of his entertainment.
Chippenham.] — Chippenham, formerly a market 
town, with a fair at Michaelmas, is situated in the 
hundred of Staplehoe, five miles north by east, from 
Newmarket.
The manor, which in the reign of Ed- 
ward the Confessor, belonged to Orgar, the sheriff, 
was given by the Conqueror, to Geffrey de Mande- 
viile.
Iu 1184, William de Mandevitle, Earl of 
Essex, gave it to the Society of Knights Hospital- 
lers, who made $ a Preceptory to their principal 
establishment in London.
On the Dissolution, it 
was granted to Edward, first Lord North, but af- 
terwards became the property of Sir Thomas Revet,, 
who died, and was buried here, in the year 1582.
About the middle of the seventeenth century it was 
possessed by Sir Francis Russel, Bart, whose 
daughter married Henry Cromwell, the fourth son 
of the Protector.
Admiral Sir Edward Russel 
(created Earl of Orford from the memorable battle of 
La Hogue) resided here from the year 1680 to 1726, 
and had a magnificent house erected by Inigo Jones.
lie is said to have fitted up the hall, to entertain 
King William, at an expence of 20001.
This noble- 
man had a park and grounds laid out according to 
the then prevailing Dutch taste, and is reported to 
have expended 60,0001.
on the buildings and neces- 
sary appendages.
On his death, in 1727, it de- 
scended to Lord Sandys, Avho had married the 
Earl's great niece, and has since been possessed by 
several persons, one of whom, Drummond Smith,.
Esq. had a small hunting box erected in the place of 
the noble mansion, which was taken down, and the 
materials sold.
John Tharp, Esq. grandfather of 
the present proprietor, who is a minor, purchased 
the demesne in 1791, and so considerably increased 
it, that it now contains nearly 7000 acres.
He ex- 
pended large sums in draining, planting, and in- 
closing, lie modernized the park, and extended it 
to 350 acres.
A beautiful sheet of water, nearly 
three quarters of a mile in length, was also laid out 
under the direction of Mr. Eames, and more re- 
cently of Mr. Samuel Lapedge.
The Lodges, at 
the entrance of the park, display much elegance 
They were erected by Mr. Sandys^ and their situa- 
3 Q tiou.
246 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
tion is commanding and pleasant.
The pleasure 
grounds and gardens range along the sides of the 
canal, and contain several pleasant walks, with 
twenty-five acres of wood land.
The Hot-house, 
the principal produce of which is grapes, with a 
few valuable exotics, has a glass front of 440 feet 
in length.
The plantations, consisting chiefly of 
oak, beech, elm, Spanish chesnut, spruce, and 
Scotch firs, are very considerable ; upwards of 
2,090,000 of trees having been planted by the late 
Mr. Tharp.
The house, or rather hunting-box, already men- 
tioned, is built with brick, and stuccoed.
It con- 
tains a few original paintings, by the old masters.
A new edifice, of great elegance, was some time 
ago in contemplation.
Chippenham parish has a neat school-house, op- 
posite the tower of the church.
It was built in the 
year 1714, by the Earl of Orford, who settled 201.
a year on a school-master, as, a compensation for 
educating all the poor children of the village.
Se- 
veral small bequests have been made, in favour of 
the poor of Chippenham.
Comberton.] — Comberton is situated in the hun- 
dred of Wetherley, four miles and a quarter west 
south-west from Cambridge.
The manor, now the 
property of Hale Wortham, Esq. was anoiently 
holden of the Sovereign by Philip de Hastings, by 
the service of keeping the King's falcon ; and, in 
the reign of Edward I.
half abide was holden here, 
by the grand serjeantry of being the King's baker.
Gough, in his additions to Camden, mentions, 
that, " in the windows of the church are two de- 
vices ; one a ladder, probably of the family of Des- 
chalers, who had great property in these parts ; the 
other a tun pierced by a tree, probably the rebus of 
some distinguished inhabitant, a benefactor.
Cottenham.] — Cottenham, formerly a market- 
town, is situated in the hundred of Chesterton, 
seven miles north by west from Cambridge.
It was to this place, that Geffrey, abbot of Crow- 
land, sent the monks who are believed to have first 
established a regular course of academical educa- 
tion at Cambridge.
There are said to be never fewer then ] 200 milch 
* This prelate, who was bom on (he 29th of September, 
7 630, was first educated at the Free School at Norwich, whence 
be was removed to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where 
lie took up his degrees, and entered into holy orders.
After 
passing through some inferior church preferments, he was, in 
1680, presented by King Charles 11.
to the vicarage of St.
Martin's in the Fields, London.
Here he discharged his duty 
with great dilgence, and, on quitting the cure, left behind him 
several monuments of his charity ; besides a great number of 
o'her benefactions, he founded the school which still subsists in 
the neighbourhood of the Mews, for the education of poor chil- 
dren.
In 1685 he attended the Duke of Monmouth at the time 
<of his execution ; and during the struggle between the Protes- 
tant and Catholic faith, he approved himself in writing, as well 
as conversation, a steady friend to the former.
His merit was 
now become so conspicuous, that he was first promoted to the 
archdeaconry of London, then to the see of Lincoln, and in 
i(i94 to the archbishopric of Canterbury.
Ju consequence of 
cows kept in this parish, besides a considerable 
number of young cattle.
The dairies produce a 
celebrated cheese, which receives its name from the 
village.
Cottenham, which is the birth-place of Thomas 
Tennisou, Archbishop of Canterbury,* was almost 
entirely destroyed by fire, in the year 1676.
Coveney.]; — Coveney is situated in the hundred 
of Witchford, four miles west from Ely. The 
manor, which anciently belonged to the monks of 
Ely, is now the property of the Right Honourable 
Morris Robinson, Lord Rokeby.
Manea, a hamlet 
of this parish, is five miles distant from the village, 
across the fens, but ten by the horse-road.
Manea 
has a chapel of ease, with a separate register of 
christenings, marriages, funerals, &ct 
Devil's Ditch.] — The Devil's Ditch, which is 
one of those remarkable ditches by which the eastern 
part of the county is intersected, and which appear 
to have been formed as boundaries against invasion, 
is situated near the thirteenth mile-stone from Cam- 
bridge, on the right of the road.
Dr. Mason, in a manuscript, quoted by Gough, 
observes, — " that the Devil's Ditch and like works 
were made by those who inhabited between them 
and the sea, is manifest by its bein^ on the side 
from the sea, as it is in all those of Wilts, as noted 
by Dr. Stukely, who assigned the same origin, that 
they were made some centuries before Caesar by the 
first inhabitants that settled eastward, to secure 
themselves from the attack of the inland Aborigines.
The situation of this is so well chosen that, being 
only seven miles long, it could secure Norfolk and 
Suffolk from midland invasions, the fen securing all 
between that and Lyme ; and if there was a con- 
tinuation of wood from Ditton to the Thames, as 
we have some accounts of its having been in latter 
ages, it would cover Essex also.
Its greatness 
proves it the work only of a whole province, espe- 
cially as there was for greater security a second pa- 
rallel to it called Fleamdike, at seven miles distant, 
not so big, but longer, beginning at Fen Ditton and 
ending at Balsam, about 12 miles.
One argument 
of its great antiquity is, that, many ways have been 
cut through it, and the ditch filled up, yet such is 
his station, lie had the honour of crowning Queen Anne, and was 
one of the first commissioners appointed to treat of an union 
between England and Scotland.
On the death of Queen 
Anne, lie was one of the Lord Justices who governed the na.
tion till the arrival of George I.
whom he crowned in West 
minster Abbey, on the 20th of October, 17i4.
He was greatly 
respected by the king, whose favours he enjoyed but a short 
time ; as he died on the 14th of December 17 \i>, and was bu- 
ried ,n the parish church of Lambeth.
In addition to the do- 
nations already mentioned, he left several legacies, and founded 
two Charity Schools, one at Lambeth, and the other at Croy- 
don in Surrey.
f The celebrated Dr. Conyers Middleton for a short time 
held the livings of Coveney ami Manea.
He married the 
widow of Mr. Drake, the Recorder of Cambridge, whose 
daughter became the wife of Matthew Robinson, Esq. and was 
mother to the late Lord Rokeby, and the celebrated Mrs.
Montague.
the 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
217 
the nature of the Soil, being chalk almost to the 
surface, that it drinks in all the rain that falls, and 
no water is ever seen in it, nor upon any part of the 
heath ; yet near Strechworth, where the chalk is 
deeper below the surface, violent rains will occasion 
some Avater to run and remain in hollows.
Not far 
from thence was a gap cut in a low place, to which 
the water floating the surface tended, which has by 
length of time brought so much soil with it, as to 
fill up the ditch for about a furlong each way, so 
that it is now ploughed.
" Another ditch, (continues Dr. Mason) about 
one mile south of Bourn-bridge, between Abingdon 
and Pampesford, points to Cambridge, on declin- 
ing ground.
Towards the middle it has been filled 
no for the Ikeneld way to pass over it, and there- 
fore is older than the road.
It is very large and 
deep, but what is remarkable is that it has no bank 
on either side.
What became of the soil taken out, 
being chiefly chalk and rubble, and not fit for ma- 
nure, is doubtful.
This ditch is also conveniently 
situated for preventing the march of an army, the 
upper end being closed with woods, the lower with flat 
so It land.
" Brant Ditch, another such ditch from Haydon, 
pointing near to Barrington, on the decline of the 
hill, is large, but on the lower land changes into a 
small bank between two ditches, and two lesser 
banks, continuing over part of Foulmire field, till 
it ends in a piece of boggy ground ; this part is just 
like that a mile north-east of Newmarket.
A bank 
of chalk, visible in the fens, with deep moors on 
each side, continued for about a mile, setting off 
from north-east of Swaffham and pointing to 
Denny.
" Another is said to be continued above half a mile 
parallel to the river on Wicken uplands.
Lesser 
banks are, one in the field between Whittlesford, 
and Foxton ; another between Triplow and Foxton 
running up to Foulmire hedge." 
The most rational etymology of the Devil's Ditch 
is found in the name of Davilier, who held the ma- 
nor of Broome in Suffolk, by the service of being 
conductor of the footmen, or infantry, of that coun- 
ty and Norfolk, who were bound to serve the King 
in his Welsh wars, and had their rendezvous always 
at that ditch, which Camden observes, was the 
boundary both of the kingdom, and bishopric, of 
the East Angles.
Doddington.] — Doddington, the most extensive 
parish in the county, and one of the most extensive 
in England, containing 38,000 acres of rich land,* 
is situated in the hundred" of Witchford, about 
eleven miles north west of Ely. The manor, which 
formerly belonged to the church of Ely, but was 
alienated to the crown, by Bishop Keton, in the year 
1600, has been nearly ever since in the possession of 
the Peytons.
Sir Henry Peyton, Bart, is the pre- 
sent Lord.
The remains of the mansion have been 
fitted up as a farm house.
Jn the year 1719, Lionel Walden, Esq. left 5001.
for the erection of a free school at Doddington, the 
place of his birth, and for the maintenance and edu- 
cation of as many poor children as his trustees 
should think fit.
This benefaction, however, re- 
mained so many years unapplied, that it had accu- 
mulated to the sum of 18001.
3 per cent, and 5001.
4 per cent.
A school has since been established, 
with a house for the master, and a yearly salary of 
401.
In 1722, a piece of land, valued at 21.
a year, was 
left by Mi;.
Thomas Waddington, for the instruction 
of poor children of this parish.
Doddington has three hamlets : Benwick, March, 
and Wimhlington.
Benwick, which lies four miles 
west of Doddington, at the conflux of the Nen, and 
the west water of the Ouse, has a chapel of ease.
March, which is a considerable town, of which 
we shall treat separately, has also a chapel of 
ease.
At Wimblington, is a school, founded by Mr* 
Thomas Eaton, in the year 1714, for the education 
of 40 children, in reading, writing, and arithmetic.
It was endowed with laud of considerable value ; 
but, in consequence of a chancery suit, the will of 
the founder has not yet been carried into complete 
effect.
The estate at present produces upwards of 
501.
a year ; and, when the funds shall be found suf- 
ficient, further proceedings are to be adapted.
Downham.] — Downhain is situated in the hun-<- 
dred of Ely, four miles west north-'-vest from that 
town.
The manor, which belongs to the see of Ely, 
i9 at present occupied by George Grant, Esq. of 
Piccadilly, lessee.
The Bishop's palace, of which 
there are considerable remains, appears to have been 
rebuilt by Bishop Alcock, the founder of Jesua 
College, Cambridge, whose device, with the arms 
of the see, are on a rich door -way of brick and 
stone, ornamented with crockets, &c.
The office 
have been fitted up as a farm house.
In the reign 
of Henry III.
Downham Park contained 250 
acres.
Dulmngiiam.] — Dullingham is situated in the 
hundred of Radfield, three miles and three quarter?
south-Avest by south from Newmarket.
The manor, 
which anciently belonged to Algar, Earl of Mercia, 
has been in the possession of several noble families, 
and in 1650, it was purchased by ColonelJohn Jeaf- 
freson, ancestor of John Jeaffreson, Esq. the present 
proprietor, who resides in the manor house.
Earl 
Grosvernor, who is the lessee of a piece of ground, 
called the Hare Park, under Mr. Jeaffreson, has lately 
erected a handsome house, in which he occasionally 
resides at the time of the Newmarket meetings.
* The tithes are said to have been recently let at the sum of 
/5Q0O guineas a year.
M* 
248 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Mr. Borodale Milicent, who died in the year 1678, 
endowed a charity school in this parish with 51.
a 
year.
Duxford.] — Duxford St. John, and Duxford St.
Peter, are two small parishes adjoining', in the hun- 
dred of Whittlesford.
The village is situated six 
miles and a quarter west south-west from Linton.
At Whittlesford bridge, in the parish of Duxford 
St. John, are the remains of an ancient hospital, 
supposed to have been founded by Sir William Col- 
ville.
The estate is now the property of Mrs. Crop, 
and the chapel is used as a barn.
Eltisley.] — Eltisley is situated in the hundred of 
Stow, a mile and three quarters west north-west 
from Caxton.
Joseph Leeds, Esq. of Croxtou, is 
the Lord of the manor.
Eltisley church, which, excepting the mutilated 
effigy of a knight in armour, and his lady, contains 
nothing remarkable, is dedicated to St. Pandionia.
This holy virgin was the daughter of a Scottish 
king.
In her flight from some person or persons, 
who attempted her chastity, she is said to have taken 
refuge in a nunnery at Eltisley, the prioress of 
which was her relation.
It is added, that she died 
there, and was buried near a well, called St. Pan- 
dionia's well, whence her body was removed into 
Eltisley church in the year 1344, a sermon for her 
translation having been composed by Sir Richard, 
the parish priest.
The nunnery here mentioned, is 
said to have been near the site of the vicarage house, 
and to have been destroyed Jibout the time of the 
Conquest.
Eltisley is also said to have been the bu- 
rial place of St. Wendrcth.
Ely.] — The Isle of Ely, comprehending the nor- 
thern part of Cambridgeshire, is a considerable por- 
tion of that extensive tract of fen or low country, 
which stretches from the east of Huntingdonshire 
to the west of Norfolk, and northwards through the 
south-eastern division of Lincolnshire.
The Cam- 
bridgeshire fens, strictly speaking, are not confined 
to the Isle of Ely, but spread with the beds of the 
Ouse and Cam to a small distance from Cambridge.
The Isle, however, is emphatically the fenny part, 
and is chiefly separated from the rest of the county 
by the old channel of the Ouse, which river flows 
from the Huntingdonshire to the Norfolk border, 
and washes the city of Ely in its course.
" The Isle of Ely," observes Mr. Bentham,* 
" strictly speaking, is that large tract of high-land, 
encompassed with fens that were formerly over- 
flowed with water, of which Ely is the principal 
place, and gives name to the whole, in which are in- 
cluded also the villages of Stretham and Thetford, 
Wilburton, Iladenham, Sutton, Mepal Wenham, 
* This gentleman (ihe Rev. James Bentham) author of a 
valuable work on Ihe history and antiquities of Ely, was a na- 
tive of this city.
He was born in tiie year 1708 anil took the 
degree of master of arts at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 
1733.
Being a man possessed of liberal talents, he devoted 
much attention to plans of general utility; such as the inclosure 
•of waslo lands, repairing road,, and chaining fens.
He pub- 
Wen tford, Whichford, Downham, and Chetishana, 
making collectively but one island.
Littleport, Co- 
veney, and Stretney, though sometimes reckoned 
part of it, were, in their original state, disjoined by 
small intervals of fenny ground, and therefore were 
distinct islands of themselves.
This tract is about 
seven miles in length, and four in breath.
But the 
whole district now called the Isle of Ely, extends 
from the bridge at Tyd on the north to Upwere on 
the south, 28 miles in length ; and from Abbot's or 
Bishop's Delf on the east, to the river Nene, near 
Peterborough, on the west, 25 miles in breadth.
This district, besides the places above-mentioned, 
includes several considerable towns and villages, as 
Wisbeach, Whittlesey, Doddington, March, Lever - 
ington, Newton, Chatteris, &c." 
" The face of the country," observes a contem- 
porary writer, " is one vast plain, stretching be- 
yond the reach of sight ; interrupted on the south- 
ern side by one or two ridges of comparatively high 
land, but in all its northern portion presenting only 
some small elevations, which just lift the villages 
seated upon them, above the general level.
This 
whole tract is naturally a marsh, subject to be laid 
under water in rainy seasons by the rivers which 
creep through it to the sea, and rendered habitable 
and cultivable only by means of immense labour ex- 
pended in cutting drains across it in various direc- 
tions.
Into these the water is raised by means of 
windmills, which pump it up from the ditches that 
every where intersect the low grounds, and it is kept 
in by high banks which confine it on a level higher 
than that of the adjacent country.
The most con- 
siderable of these works consist of the Old and 
New Bedford Rivers, so called from the noble fami- 
ly of Bedford, who have also given the name of the , 
Bedford Level to the whole tract which they were 
so instrumental in improving.
These rivers, which 
completely cut across the Isle of Ely, make a com- 
munication from the Ouse at Earith, within the Hun- 
tingdonshire border, to the same river at Denver- 
sluice, near Downham, in Norfolk., They run al- 
most perfectly straight and parallel in the direction 
of N.
N. E.
for about twenty-one miles, leaving be- 
tween them a space from two to six furlongs in 
breadth, called the Wash, which is always under 
water in winter, but in summer is used as meadow 
and pasture.
The Old Bedford river is now 
scarcely employed ; for the New, or hundred- 
foot drain, is the main channel for vessels passing 
from the upper to the lower parts of the Ouse, and 
has superseded the passage along the natural river, 
which makes a large bend to the eastward of it.
This 
artificial river receives the spring-tides as far as its 
lished the work above mentioned in the year 1771.
It obtain- 
ed him so much credit, conjointly with his known skill in archi- 
tecture, that when the dean and chapter resolved on a general 
repair of the cathedral, he was appointed clerk of the works, 
which office he held till the completion of his designs, a few 
years before his death.
He died at the advanced age of eighty- 
six.
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
248 
origin at Earith, whence maybe estimated the small 
elevation of the inland country above the surface of 
the sea.
The Nen, which crosses the north- western 
part of the Isle, is in like manner led through an 
embanked channel.
It communicates by a naviga- 
ble branch with the Bedford river, and thus a sys- 
tem of navigation is formed equally complete with 
that of drainage.
" The fen banks afford a good horse track, and a 
view is presented from them which, though at 
length tiresome from its uniformity, is not without 
its attractions.
The water lies in a long reach he- 
fore you, stretching beyond the sight, bordered at 
intervals with ozier beds (here called holts) and 
crowned with scattered houses and pumping mills.
Gangs of lighters tracked by horses, and sometimes 
aided by sails, enliven the stream.
The elevation 
of the banks gives the traveller a very extensive 
prospect over the country, in which the drier spots 
are marked by village steeples and groupes of trees, 
whilst in many parts the eye wanders over a range 
of level green, varied only by herds of cattle, hay- 
stacks, and some detached farm buildings.
Pollard 
willows sometimes border the ditches that form the 
separation of lands, and relieve the general naked- 
ness.
The surface has all the varieties of rushy 
moor, grass meadow, and cultivated field.
The 
corn in the lower tracts, consists almost entirely of 
oats ; while in the elevated parts all the species of 
grain are successfully grown.
A common crop is 
cole seed, which is raised both for the winter-feeding 
of sheep ; and for the seed, whence oil is extracted.
Mustard, flax, and hemp, are also among the ar- 
ticles of culture.
In general, the drainage of the 
Ely fens is so complete, that it enables the land to 
produce whatever is most suitable to its soil ; and 
much of it is exuberantly rich.
" Among the objects presented by nature, the bo- 
tanist will find a large variety of aquatic plants in 
great luxuriance ; and the ornithologist will be en- 
tertained with a number of birds, not indeed equal 
to that of some of the unreclaimed fens of Lincoln- 
shire, but sufficient to excite his attention.
The 
heron is frequent by the sides of the drains, or in 
the watery plashes, and by his tall stature, and wide 
spread of wings, makes a principal figure among 
the feathered tribe.
These places are also the re- 
sort of various kinds of gulls, with the tern, or sea- 
swallow.
The pewit, or lapwing, fills the moors 
with its clamour.
Stares, or starlings, abound 
throughout the fens, and often collect in such flocks 
as to form black clouds hovering over the ground, 
and amusing the spectator by their continual change 
of form and appearance.
The common birds of 
prey are kites and buzzards.
In winter a great va- 
riety of the duck kind, and other water-fowl, come 
up in the washes, and offer a valuable capture to 
the fowler.
Of the fish, pikes and eels are the most 
abundant ; and in the spring season smelts run up 
the Bedford river in great shoals.
" It has been remarked, that where the energies 
vol.
j. — no.
18.
of man are excited by circumstances of hardship 
and necessity, they generally proceed so far as to 
render his situation more abundant in eonvenieneics 
than where indolence is favoured by the bounty of 
nature.
This is the case with Holland, compared 
to the rest of Europe ; and it appears to be that of 
the fens of Ely, compared to some of the more de- 
sirable counties of England.
The villages in this 
tract are for the most part well built, and have an 
air of comfort not usual in the common agricultural 
districts.
That of Earith is even provided with a 
flagged foot-pavement for its whole length, a valu- 
able accommodation in a low site which cannot fail 
of being very wet and miry in the winter.
The pale 
brick and tile manufactured in these parts give a 
very neat appearance to the houses, and the reed 
thatches of the barns and cottages is extraordinarily 
warm and durable.
Many of the churches are 
handsome, and have tall steeples visible at a great 
distance — the landmarks of this naked tract.
The 
cathedral of Ely, one of the largest and most re- 
markable edifices of the kind, is a conspicuous ob- 
ject to a wide circumjacent country.
" The inhabitants of the fens are chiefly engaged 
in farming, and many of the farmers are opulent.
They feed numbers of cattle, and the sheep of the 
upland districts are frequently sent hither in the 
winter to fatten on the coleseed.
The brewing- 
trade is considerable in several of the towns and 
villages ; for the people are a thirsty tribe, and 
avail themselves of the excuse of a moist air and 
bad water, to counteract the former and correct the 
latter, by potations of as much strong beer as they 
can procure.
In particular, those labourers who are 
employed in the important task of keeping the banks 
in repair (provincially termed bankers) are as 
mighty to drink as to work.
The natives in gene- 
ral are a stout broad set race, many of them with 
black hair and dark complexions.
The population 
is scanty in proportion to the space of ground, and 
much of the harvest-work is done by Irish labour- 
ers.
Few gentlemen of large estates reside in the 
fens, as the country is unfit for sporting, and cer- 
tainly does not abound in rural beauty.
The ma- 
gistrates are principally the clergy, several of whom 
enjoy ample livings.
" Although trees are now scarce in the fens, and 
almost confined to willows and other aquatics, yet 
the bodies of oaks of large dimensions, still fre- 
quently dug up in the lowest and wettest tracts, 
prove that the country at some remote period, was 
well wooded, and probably in great part a forest.
As it is certain that before the drainage, a century 
and a half ago, it was much more a morass than at 
present, conjecture is puzzled to determine at what 
remote era the soil could be capable of bearing tim- 
ber-trees, where even now no one would think of 
planting them.
Some of the trunks dug up arc 
still serviceable wood.
In the same parts very 
black turf or peat is cut, which is the common fuel.
The oziers are an article of profit to the planters 
3 a from 
2«0 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
from their sale to the basket makers.
The peeling 
of them, after steeping in pits, is one of the occu- 
pations of the poor.
" Such are the most prominent features of a por- 
tion of this island, which, from its strongly-marked 
diameter and peculiar circumstances, is well worthy 
of being visited by all who travel for knowledge or 
amusement, though a long residence, or a repe- 
tition of visits, is more than can be claimed for it, 
except from those who are particularly interested in 
the objects it presents.
To the sentimental survey- 
or it will afford a pleasure of a higher class than 
that which is merely taken in by the eye — the grati- 
fying reflection, that the powers bestowed upon man 
are adequate to procure him a comfortable existence 
even where nature appears to have multiplied her 
difficulties and discouragements." 
The city of Ely, denominated Sulk Gurcva by 
the Saxons, is situated en a considerable erRinence, 
fifteen miles and a half north by east from Cam- 
bridge, and sixty-six miles aud a half north by east 
from London.
The etymology of its present name 
has been variously explained.
Those who derive it 
from Helig, signifying willows, .in the British lan- 
guage, or from the Saxon iEl, an eel, are amongst 
the most plausible.
The venerable Bede, who lived 
in the eighth century, adopts the latter derivation ; 
and it appears by the Norman Survey, that the 
number of eels to which the several lords of ma- 
nors in the island were annually entitled, amounted 
to upwards of 100,000.
Wisbech alone paid 28,000, 
and Stuntney 27,250.
The first settlement in this island appears to have 
been about a mile from .the present city, and was 
called Cratendune, now Cratendon field.
Soon af- 
ter the introduction of Christianity into the king- 
dom of East Anglia, Ethelbert, the principal Sax- 
on king, founded a church there, but the ministers 
whom he had appointed to perform the divine ordi- 
nances being driven away, by Penda King of Mer- 
..cia, the place was reduced to a desert.
A church 
was afterwards established by Etheldreda, daughter 
of Anna, King of East Anglia, and Hereswitha his 
Queen.
The history of this princess, who was born 
about the year 630, is somewhat curious.
At a 
very early period of life, she formed the determina- 
tion of devoting herself tc the service of God, by 
retaining her virginity ; a sacrifice which, in that 
age, was considered as essential to Christian per- 
fection.
She appears to have accomplished her in- 
vention, under many difficulties ; for she was twice 
married ; first by the authority of her parents, and j 
a second time through the influence of her uncle 
Ethel wold, King of East Anglia.
" Tonbert, her 
first husband," says Gough, in his additions to 
Camden, *' was a principal nobleman among the 
East Angles, being one of those Eokiermen, or 
Princes, afterwards cabled Eorles aud Comites, who 
jn the Saxon times held one or more districts here- 
ditarily, and in fee, or by royal grant ; and with the 
JSishops composed the supreme Council of the na- 
tion." Having prevailed on him to refrain from the 
consummation of the marriage rites, they lived to- 
gether three years, when Tonbert died, and Ethel- 
dreda came into full possession of the Isle of Ely, 
which had been settled on her in dower.
The temporal jurisdiction which the Bishop olf Ely 
now possesses, is understood to be partly the same 
as Tonbert was invested with, and which, on his 
death, descended to his virgin widow.
Etheldreda 
intrusted its management to Ovin, "the upper Eol- 
derman of her household," and went into retire- 
ment, intending to pass the remainder of her day* 
in acts of devotion, accompanied by a few selected 
friends.
She bad continued a considerable time i» 
solitude, when her hand was again solicited by 
Prince Egfrid, son of Oswy, King of Northum- 
berland, whom she at length married ; but, accord- 
ing to the narrations of Bede, and other historians, 
lived with him twelve years, without conceding her 
virginity, which she is supposed to have guarded by 
a private agreement made with the Prince before 
marriage.
On the death of Oswy, in 670, Egfrid succeeded 
to the throne; but Etheldreda's idea of religiou* 
duties continuing the same, she requested her hus- 
band's permission to leave the court, and to retire 
to some monastery, where she might have more- 
leisure to attend her pious duties.
At length, 
wearied with her importunity, he consented, and 
she entered and received the sacred veil in the mo- 
nastery of Coldingham ; but Egfrid's esteem for 
her increasing, he resolved, as persuasions were inr 
effectual, to remove her by force.
Etheldreda ob- 
taining a knowledge of this design, left her retire- 
ment, and fled to the Isle of .Ely. The King pur- 
sued, and according to the Monkish .Legends, over- 
took her near a rocky eminence, whither the Queen 
sought refuge, and was suddenly surrounded by 
water, which continued to encompass her for seve- 
ral days.
Egfrid believing this to be an interposi- 
tion of heaven in her favour, retired to York, and 
permitted her to pursue her journey to Ely.
Etheldreda at first designed to repair the old 
Church of Ethelbert's foundation, and erect a mo- 
nastery near it ; but the spot on which the city now 
stands being closer to the river, and more pleasant, 
she altered her determination, and commenced the 
buildings near the site of the present Cathedral, 
about the year 673.
In a little time she assembled 
a numerous congregation of religious persons.
Her 
establishment was not of any particular Order ; but 
the strictness of their manner of life may be esti- 
mated from the conduct of Etheldreda when she 
became Abbess, which Bede thus describes : " From 
her first entrance on her office, she never wore any 
linen, but only woollen garments.
She usually ate 
only twice a day, except on the greater festivals, 
or in times of sickness ; end if her health permitted 
she never returned to bed after matms, which were 
held at midnght, but continued her prayers in the 
church till bfeak of day." The high opinion enter- 
tained 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
251 
tamed of her sanctity, induced several dignified 
persons to become licr converts, and live under her 
direction, particularly her eldest sister, Sexburga, 
Queen of Kent ; Ermenilda, her daughter, Queen 
of Mercia ; and Erminilda's daughter, the Princess 
Werburga; who all successively held the govern- 
ment of the monastery, and with Etheldreda, were 
for many centuries regarded as saints.
The So- 
ciety was maintained by the profits arising from the 
government of the Isle, which had been settled on 
the monastery by the Royal foundress, and confirm- 
ed with all its immunities and privileges by the 
Pope.
On the death of Etheldreda, who died of an epi- 
demic disorder, in tl>e year 678, she was placed in 
a wooden coffin, and, by her express order, buried 
in the common cemetery of the Nuns.
Her body, 
however, was removed seventeen years afterwards 
into the Church, and deposited in an elegant mar- 
ble coffin, which the Monks had found near the wails 
of the ruined city of Grantaceaster.
This removal 
took place on the seventeenth of October 695, a day 
that was afterwards deemed a festival, and still re- 
tains a place in our Calendar.
When the body was 
removed, say the monks, the flesh was sound, and 
free from corruption.
Various miracles were attri- 
buted to her wooden coffin, and the clothes in which 
she had been interred ; and a spring, famous for its 
healing qualities, was asserted to have burst forth 
from the spot where she had first been interred.
The last Abbess whose name has descended to us, 
though the monastery continued under the order 
and discipline established by St. Etheldreda for 197 
years, was Werburga.
Its inmates remained in 
peace and security till about the year 870, when it 
was discovered by the Danes, who invaded the Isle.
They were at first repulsed by the bravery of the 
inhabitants ; but returning in great numbers, they 
overcame every defensive effort, marched imme- 
diately to the monastery, put the religious to the 
sword, set fire to the church and other buildings, 
and departed loaded with the spoil, not only of the 
town and monastery, but also of all the neighbour- 
ing places, whose inhabitants had, for security, de- 
posited their valuables at Ely.
Beorhed, King of Mercia, who had levied an 
army to pursue the Danes, annexed the jurisdiction 
of the Isle, and the revenues of the monastery, to 
the Crown, by which they were retained till the 
reign of Edgar, who intimated an intention of re- 
storing the ancient monastery to Ethelwold, Bishop 
of Winchester.
That Prelate having provided 
monks, and ejected some seculars who had repaired 
the aisles of the church, and recommenced Divine 
worship, agreed with the King for the surrender of 
the whole district of the Isle of Ely. The charter 
which was granted by Edgar, at Wlfamere, in the 
* Mr. Bentham, whom we have already quoted, says : — 
44 The ditch that crosses the road from Stuntney to Soham, 
having a bridge over it, called Delf Bridge, (rfbuiit by the 
year 970, provides for the surrender of the Js]a, 
with all its appurtenances, privileges, power to try 
causes, &c.
in consideration of sixty hides of land, 
and 1091.
in money, and a crucifix of gold, to be 
given to the King, 
The first abbot of the restored monastery was 
Brithnoth, who was appointed by Edgar.
He ex-* 
erted himself to complete the repairs of the Church, 
which, when finished, was dedicated, by the cele- 
brated Archbishop Dunstan, to St. Peter and the 
Virgin Mary.
The abbot was assisted in the busi^ 
ness of his office by Leo, a monk, who greatly con- 
tributed to the security of the possessions of the 
monastery, by procuring a meeting of the principal 
inhabitants of the Isle, and the adjoining counties, 
in which the rights of the society were ascertained, 
and the boundaries of their estates discussed, and 
settled to the satisfaction of the whole assembly.
On this occasion, a deep ditch was made through 
the fens, and called Abbot's or Bishop's Delf,* a* 
a boundary of the respective possessions.
The pro- 
perty of the church was much augmented by seve- 
ral large purchases of land, which were made by 
the abbot, who is said to have been slain by the or- 
ders of Queen Elfrida ; her servants heating sharp- 
pointed irons in the fire, and thrusting them into 
his body beneath his arm-pits.
This murder was 
not discovered, till the contrition of Elfrida for the 
assassination of Edward, her son-in-law, induced 
her to confess it.
Henceforward, till the time of the Conquest, the 
abbey continued to flourish; its possessions being 
increased by the gifts of many benefactors, but par- 
ticularly by those of Leofwin, a Saxon Nobleman, 
who rebuilt and enlarged the south side of the 
church ; and Duke Brithnoth, who was killed by 
the Danes at Maiden, in Essex, and buried in the 
choir at Ely. The privileges of the monastery were 
confirmed by King Canute, and also by Edward 
the Confessor, who received the early part of his 
education here.
The latter monarch granted the 
abbot a new charter, enumerating all the posses- 
sions, rights, and privileges, of the church, which 
was confirmed by Pope Victor the Second.
At the time of the Norman invasion, the abbey 
was deprived of many estates ; and Thurstan, the 
seventh abbot, fearful that its whole possessions 
would be seized by the Conqueror, resolved to sup- 
port the interest of Edgar Etheling, whom he con- 
sidered as the real heir to the Crown, and gave as- 
sistance and shelter to several English Lords, who 
were determined to defend their country from the 
domination of one whom they regarded as an usur- 
per.
The natural strength of the Isle of Ely was 
thought to be capable of resisting the progress of 
William's army ; and, among other noblemen, Ed- 
win, Earl of Chester ;  Mortar, Earl of Northmu- 
Dean and Chapter in 17G3..) is the utmost boundary of the Isle 
of Ely on that side, and is, without doubt, ike sanje that wa6 
called Bishop's Dell." 
berland - ; 
2r>2 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
* An ancient painting on the walls of the great refectory of 
the monastery, called Tabula Eliensis, in which the arms, 
names, and effigies, of the officers are depicted, together with 
the monks, their companions, commemorates this circumstance.
The painting appears to have been first mentioned in the 
" Story of Ely," supposed to have been written in the reign of 
Henry the Seventh.
Several engravings of it, from ancient 
copies, have been published : one by Blomeficld, from an old 
parchment roll ; another by Fuller, from a transcript on the.
7 
berland ; and Hereward, son of Leofric, Lord of 
Brunne, in Lincolnshire, sought refuge in it, while 
insurrections were raising in different quarters of 
the kingdom.
Here ward was elected General, and 
exerted his military talents in the necessary mea- 
sures to defend the Isle from the expected attack of 
the Normans, who invested it in the summer of 
1069.
William commanded the assailants in person, and 
attempted to force a passage on the western side, 
by forming a causeway over the fens, of straw, 
wood, and bags of earth ; but the work was ob- 
structed by Hereward in several successful sallies.
Some disturbances in the north of England broke 
out about the same period, and the King was ob- 
liged to raise the siege, to which, however, he re- 
turned in the spring of the year 1070, and encamp- 
ed on a spot opposite to Aldrey, where a neck of , 
firm land, stretching into the fen, rendered the pas- 
sage into the Isle narrower than in any other part.
From this spot he carried on the Avork ; but the 
water having, by its weight, destroyed a dam which 
he had formed across the river, he retired to Bran- 
don, on the eastern side of the Isle, where, in a 
council of war, it was resolved to renew the attack 
from the same point.
Hereward, who had attended 
the council in disguise, returned in the habit of a 
fisherman, and set fire to the magazines of straw 
and timber which William's troops had collected, 
and taking advantage of the confusion, made a suc- 
cessful sally with his boats, and destroyed the forts 
which his enemies had erected* 
The camp which was occupied by the Conqueror's 
army when he besieged the Isle of Ely, is still visi- 
ble at the south end of Aldrey-Causey, within the 
manor of Wivelingham, and is corruptly called 
Belsars Hills.
— " That this camp received its name 
from Belasius, or Belasis, one of the Conqueror's 
generals in this expedition," says Mr. Bentham, 
" is evident from a manuscript now in the British 
Museum, intituled, ' Story found in the Isle of 
Ely,' in which arc these words : ' We endured the 
violent threats of the Normans seven years together, 
untyll such tyme as Belasyus, generall of the 
Kyng's army in thys service, of whom certain Hylls, 
which at the south end of Aldreth Causey were 
built for the safety of the Armyes, took their names, 
which we now by corrupt speech call Belsars Hilles, 
&e.' " 
Iuflamed with resentment at his repeated disas- 
ters, William proceeded to Cambridge, where he 
alienated all the estates and manors of the monas- 
tery, situated without the Isle, to his Norman fol- 
lowers.
This was the most certain mode of extort- 
ing the submission of the monks ; but as the En- 
glish officers fed at their tables, with their arms in 
constant readiness for use, they dared not offer to 
make terms with the King, till they were in some 
distress for provisions : even then their persuasions 
were ineffectual ; for their guests could not be pre- 
vailed on to agree to their wishes.
Anxious, how- 
ever, to make their own peace with the Sovereign,, 
the abbot, with several of his monks, left Ely pri- 
vately, and went to William, at Warwick, where 
they implored his pardon.
In a secret interview, 
the abbot informed the King of the best measures 
for reducing the Isle, and promised to use his 
greatest exertions to compel its defenders to obe- 
dience.
He then returned with liis followers to 
Ely.
In the following year, the Islanders received re- 
inforcements from their friends in Scotland, and the 
north of England ; but William, resolved to crush 
their rising hopes, marched a large army to recom- 
mence the siege, and gave orders for the comple- 
tion of the causeway, which, after several months* 
severe labour, was accomplished, and strengthened 
by forts and military engines.
The soldiers were 
now ordered to proceed ; but they soon found their 
march impeded by some deep waters, which lay be- 
tween them and the firm land, and were obliged to 
drag a number of boats through the fens, in order 
to make a floating-bridge, to enable them to con- 
tinue their march.
The besieged renewed their ex- 
ertions, and disputed the passage with much firm- 
ness ; but the superior skill of the Norman soldiers 
in the use of their military engines, overpowered 
resistance, and victory declared for William.
Great 
numbers of the English were slain in the battle ; 
and many of those who were made prisoners were 
cruelly mutilated ; some having their eyes put out, 
and others their hands and feet cut off, that they 
might remain as living monuments of the Conquer- 
or's vengeance, and become a terror to such as pre- 
sumed to dispute his sway.
He had no sooner become master of the Isle, than 
he took possession of the monastery ; but, through 
the intercession of Gilbert, Earl of Clare, and the 
promise of payment of 700 marks, which on a slight 
pretence was increased to 1000, he pardoned the 
monks.
Many of the Norman officers * were now 
quartered on the monastery, and the most valuable 
furniture of the church seized by the King ; but, 
through the firmness of Theodwin, the monk of Ju- 
walls of the Dean's dining room; and a third by Bentham> 
from an ancient painting now in the Episcopal Palace at Ely..
Tradition states, tlrat the original painting was depicted on the 
walls of the refectory, to record the mutual satisfaction which 
existed between the monks and their guests; and the time 
when it was done, is said to be soon after the departure of the 
latter for Normandy, whither they were sent by the Con- 
queror, to quell the insurrection excited against him by his son 
Robert.
image 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
2->5 
ftiiage, in Normandy, whom the Conqueror had ap- 
pointed to succeed the Ahbot Thurstan, the gold, 
Silver, and jewels, were afterwards returned.
On 
the death of Theodwin, in 107-5, the administration 
of the affairs of the abbey was bestowed on a monk 
named Godfrey, who retained its entire management 
for several years, and had sufficient influence with 
the King - , to obtain his permission that the rights 
and liberties of the monastery should be inquired 
into, iu a great assembly, convened for the purpose, 
at Keutford, in Suffolk.
The proceedings of this 
meeting being certified to the King by his barons, 
he issued a precept, in conformity with its decision, 
to the sheriffs of the several counties interested, di- 
recting them to put the Church of Ely in possession 
of all the rights, customs, and privileges, it enjoyed 
at King Edward's death.
In the year 1081, God- 
frey was removed to Mahnsbury, and Simeon, bro- 
ther to Walkolin, Bishop of Winchester, was ap- 
pointed to the abbacy of Ely. This prelate, soon 
after his promotion, laid the foundation of the mag- 
nificent conventual church, which has been justly 
characterized as one of the most curious monuments 
of ecclesiastical antiquity in the kingdom.
It • re- 
mained unfinished at the time of his decease, which 
happened in 1093, when he had completed his 100th 
year ; but Richard, his successor, prosecuted the 
building with diligence ; and the eastern side being 
finished in the year 1106, the bodies and shrines of 
the Saints Ethcldreda, Sexburga, Ermenilda, and 
Werburga, Avere removed from the old church, and 
deposited in the new structure before the altar.
About this period, the revenues of the abbey amount- 
ed to 14001.
a year.
Richard, who was the last abbot, solicited Henry 
the First to establish a bishopric here ; but this was 
not effected till alter his death, in 1107.
Hervey, 
Bishop of Bangor, was the first appointed to the 
new see, which was partly taken from the diocese of 
Lincoln, whose bishop had the manor of Spaldwick, 
Huntingdonshire, in exchange.
Hervey procured 
many gifts and privileges for his bishopric ; and also 
the grant of a fair, to commence at Ely on the third 
day preceding the 20th of June, which was the an- 
niversary of the death of Etheldreda, and to continue 
for seven days.
The conduct of this bishop appears 
in some particulars not to have been consistent with 
-justice ; for having obtained the King's mandate to 
make an equal division of the abbey estates, between 
the bishopric and the monks, he contrived to retain 
two -thirds of the possessions himself.
When the 
possessions of the bishopric and monastery were 
thus separated, the management of the latter de- 
volved on the prior, who was at first chosen by the 
bishop, but afterwards elected by the monks.
The 
prior had apartments for himself and family, distinct 
from those of the society, and was usually styled Lord 
ior.
From the year 1413 till the Dissolution, the 
j y was considered as a mitred one.
•eilus, the successor of IlerveY, with a view to 
.. i.-— NO.
18.
assist the Empress Matilda, during her contest with 
King Stephen, erected a castle at Ely, and another 
at Aldroy ; but he was dispossessed of all his estates 
and revenues by the King, who suddenly passed the 
river with his horse, and made himself master of the 
isie.
Nigellus, however, being soon afterwards 
taken prisoner at Lincoln, profited by the opportu- 
nity, and, with the aid of some forces sent him by 
the Empress, recovered the Isle, and was reinstated 
in his bishopric, which, with a short intermission, he 
retained till his death in 1 104.
Henry the Eighth, after the surrender of the mo- 
nastery, by letters patent, dated September the 
10th, 1541, granted a charter to convert the conven- 
tual church into a cathedral, by the title of the Ca- 
thedral Church of the Undivided Trinity ; the esta- 
blishment for the performance of divine service to 
consist of a Dean, a Priest, and eight Prebendaries, 
with other Ministers : the Dean and Prebendaries to 
form a body corporate.
Tho,-nas Gooderich, the 
thirty-second bishop, who at that time held the see, 
was a zealous promoter of the Reformation ; and his 
injunctions to demolish images, shrines, relics, and 
other superstitious emblems, were executed with so 
much punctuality, that no trace of them remains 
Avithin his diocese ; though before that period it con- 
tained many objects of religious attention.
An act was passed, in the first Parliament of Eli- 
zabeth, which empowered her Majesty to retain any 
lands 
belonging 
to whatever see might become va- 
cant, and to give tenths, and impropriate rectories, 
instead of them.
This was a great disadvantage to 
the bishopric of Ely, which, under this act, was de- 
prived of manors whose revenues amounted to up- 
wards of 1)321.
yearly.
The bishop possesses all 
the rights of a county palatine, and is sovereign 
within the isle, where all causes are heard and de- 
termined by a judge of his appointing, who holds 
assizes, gaol delivery, and quarter sessions ; and has- 
proper officers under him to preserve the peace, and 
execute his decisions.
The see of Ely is valued in 
the King's books at 21341.
18s.
5d.
The clergy's 
tenth, amounting to 3841.
14s.
9f d.
The bishopric 
is supposed to be worth 40001.
per annum.
The city of Ely, the only city in England not re- 
presented in Parliament, is not incorporated, nor has 
it any jurisdiction distinct from that of the island.
It contains two parishes — that of the Holy Trinity, 
and St. Mary's — and is divided into three wards, 
each of which has its separate constable.
The 
spring assizes for the isle, and the Easter and Mi- 
chaelmas quarter sessions, are holden here.
Ely has a weekly market, by prescription, which, 
in the year 1801, was altered from Saturday to 
Thursday.
Here are two annual fairs, each of which is kept 
nine days, commencing on Ascension Day, ami the 
29th of October.
The latter was, in ancient ti lies, 
celebrated for the sale of ribbons ol various colours, 
which were held iu much veneration, as having 
3 s toucned 
254 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE, 
touched the shrine of St. Etheldreda.
They were 
called St. Awdrey's ribbons ; hence, say Messrs.
Ly- 
soiis, the origin of the word tan dry.
The city consists principally of one long street, 
well paved, and containing several good houses ; 
many of them are of stone, and some have a very 
ancient appearance.
The inferior streets are irre- 
gular, and are neither paved nor lighted.
Ely is so encompassed with garden ground, that 
it sends great quantities of strawberries, cherries, 
greens, asparagus, &c.
to Cambridge and London.
Excepting some potteries of coarse ware, there 
nre no manufactures either in or near the city.
Of the first Saxon church, which was built here, in 
673, there are very considerable remains, now convert- 
ed into prcbendal houses, and the area of the nave 
left clear between them.
It was 169 feet long, by 
40 broad.
The east end was lengthened in the year 
1102.
The present cathedral is the workmanship of va- 
rious periods, and displays a singular admixture of 
the Saxon, Norman, and Gothic styles of architec- 
ture ; yet, notwithstanding the dissimilarity of its 
parts, when considered as a whole, it must unques- 
tionably be regarded as a very magnificent struc- 
ture.
The north and south transepts, which are the 
oldest parts of the cathedral, were erected in the 
reigns of William Rufus and Henry the First.
The 
arches are circular here, as well as in the nave, 
which was begun about the middle of the reign of 
Henry I.
and completed before the year 1174.
Be- 
tween 1174 and 1189, Bishop Rydel erected the 
great west tower, which was anciently flanked on 
the north side by a building of the same kind as that 
on the south ; but it either fell, or was taken down, 
and another building was begun in its place, but 
never carried higher than twelve or fourteen feet.
The interior view of this tower, which is decorated 
with small columns and arches running round in 
several stories, and lighted by twenty-seven win- 
dows, is extremely beautiful.
The lower part was 
repaired, and new cased with stone, in the middle of 
the fifteenth century ; but the beauty of the tower 
was destroyed in a considerable degree, by the in- 
sertion of a bellrey-floor, and various beams irregu- 
larly disposed to direct the course of the bell-ropes.
This belfrey, with other cumbrous obstructions, was 
removed a few years ago, through the munificence 
and taste of the Right Rev. James Yorke, the Bi- 
shop, who also enabled the Dean and Chapter to re- 
pair the mutilated decorations of the tower, and re- 
store the whole to its original splendour.
The 
handsome vestibule at the entrance, formerly called 
The Gallilee, which was built about the year 1200, 
by Bishop Eustachius, has also been repaired ; and 
the ground in front so much lowered, that, instead 
of a descent of three or four steps at the entrance, as 
formerly, there is now an ascent into it of one 
step.
8 
In the year 1234, Hugh Northwold, the eighth; 
Bishop, laid the foundation of the elegant structure 
which now forms the Choir, but which was origi- 
nally the presbytery.
It was finished in 1250.
The 
three most western arches were destroyed by the fall 
of the lofty stone tower in the night of the twelfth of 
February, 1322.
This tower stood in the centre of 
the building, on four arches, which gave way, and 
precipitated it to tin" ground.
To prevent any simi- 
lar accident, Alan de Walsingham, Sub-Prior of the.
Convent, and Sacrist of the Church, designed and 
erected the present magnificent octagonal tower, 
which is supported on eight pillars, surmounted by 
a dour", and terminated by an elegant lantern.
The 
capitals of the pillars are ornamented with rude his- 
torical carvings, intended to represent the principal 
events in the life of Etheldreda.
The stone-work of.
this octagonal tower, which is probably unequalled by 
any other of the kind, was completed in six years, 
and the wood-work raised, and covered with lead, in 
about fifteen.
The whole was completed in the year 
1342, at the expence of 24061.
4s.
lid.
About the 
same period, the three arches eastward of the octa- 
gon were rebuilt by Bishop Hothana, and are very 
highly embellished.
The vaulting is divided into 
regular compartments by various ribs, which spring 
from the capitals of the pillars, and are ornamented 
at the intersections with flowers and elegant foliage, 
very skilfully executed.
The arches of the second 
arcade, and the windows above them, are decorated 
with graceful and delicate tracery work.
The wood- 
work of the dome and lantern, with part of the roof, 
was repaired between the years 1757 and 1762, by 
Mr. James Essex, of Cambridge ; and the choir, 
which was then under the lantern, was also removed 
to its present situation.
This was an important im- 
provement, contributing greatly to the beauty of the 
cathedral.
The stalls in the new choir were origi- 
nally constructed by Alan de Walsingham.
The 
east window is embellished with a good painting of 
St. Peter.
The altar-piece, which is a fine old 
painting, representing St. Peter delivered from Pri- 
son by the Angel, was purchased in Italy by the late, 
Earl of Grantham, and presented to the Dean and 
Chapter of Ely by Dr. Yorke.
At the east end of 
the north aisle is a sumptuous chapel, erected by 
Bishop Alcock, who died at his castle at Wisbech iu 
the year 1500.
His tomb, with his effigies lying 
thereon, but much defaced, is placed under an arch 
of stone on the north side.
In the south aisle, and 
in some respects corresponding with the former, but 
much superior in its embellishments, is another cha- 
pel, erected by Bishop West about the year 1530, 
and highly enriched with delicate Gothic ornaments 
and carving.
The bones of Wolstan, Archbishop of 
Y r ork ; of Brithnoth, Duke of Northumberland ; and 
of the Bishops Alwin, Elfgar, Athelstan, and Ed- 
noth, are deposited in this chapel, in small cells, si- 
milar to those in which they were immured in the 
walls of the old choir.
These chapels were greatly 
dilapidated 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
255 
dilapidated by the fanatical reformers of the civil 
wars, who seem to have had an invincible antipathy 
to every elegant or tasteful religious edifice.
In the 
aisles are the remains of several ancient monuments, 
which appear to have been of good workmanship, 
but are much damaged, and all the fine interstices of 
the carving are filled up by a thick coat of glaring 
whitewash.
Among the monuments are those of the 
Bishops Northwold, Kilkenny, De Luda, Hotham, 
Barnet, Grey, Redman, Standley, and many mo- 
Idern bishops ; and also a curious tomb to the me- 
mory of the famous John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, 
and his two wives, of the time of Richard the Third.
The font, which is of very elegantly wrought marble, 
adorned with several small statues, was given to the 
church by Dean Spencer.
The outward extent of the Cathedral, from east to 
west, is 535 feet ; but the interior length is only 517.
The length of the transept is 190 feet, the height of 
the lantern over the dome 170, the extreme height 
of the western tower 270, the two towers on the 
south wing of the latter 120, the length of the nave 
203, the height of the roof over it 104, and the 
height of the eastern front to the top of the cross 
112.
On the north side, near the east end of the Ca- 
thedral, is St. Mary's Chapel, now Trinity Church ; 
it having been assigned to the use of the inhabitants 
of that parish soon after the Restoration, by the 
Dean and Chapter.
This elegant structure, which 
was commenced in the reign of Edward the Second, 
is one of the most perfect buildings of the age.
Its 
shape is oblong ; the interior length about 200 feet, 
the breadth 46, and the height of the vaulted roof 
60.
This building has neither pillars nor side aisles, 
but is supported by strong spring buttresses, sur- 
mounted with pinnacles.
Formerly, the spaces over 
the east and west windows were decorated with 
statues, and a variety of other well executed sculpture.
The interior was also embellished with niches highly 
carved, and enriched with statues, ornamental fo- 
liage, and flower-work ; but the fanatical soldiers of 
the Commonwealth defaced the beauty of the sculp- 
ture, and what escaped their hands, has been so 
miserably clogged and obscured by white-wash, that 
none of the finer parts of the carving are distinct.
This edifice was built at the charge of the convent 
by John de Wisbech, one of the monks, and Alan 
de Walsingham.
The first stone was laid by the 
latter on Lady-Day, 1321.
This chapel has under- 
gone a complete repair.
The Bishop's Palace, a very neat brick structure, 
was built by the Bishops Alcock and Gooderich, and 
much improved by the late Bishop Keene, partly at 
his own expence, and partly with the large sums re- 
covered from the executors of his predecessor Bishop 
Mawson, to whose philanthropy and public spirit 
the inhabitants of Ely were greatly indebted.
There are two manors in Ely, called Ely-Barton, 
and Ely-Porta : the former belongs to the Bishop, 
the latter to the Dean and Chapter.
Here is a grammar-school, founded by Henry 
VIII.
appendant to the Cathedral, in which provi- 
sion is made by the statutes for the education of 
twenty-four boys, commonly called King's Scholars ; 
and a charity-school for twenty-four boys, who are 
educated and clothed by the income of an estate 
bequeathed by Mrs. Needham in the year 1740.
In 1675, Bishop Laney left lands, which produce 
upwards of 2501.
a year, for apprenticing poor chil- 
dren of Ely and Soham.
The premiums are limited 
to 101.
each.
Several small estates, amounting altogether to 
upwards of 2701.
a year, are vested in " the gover- 
nors of the lands and possessions of the poor of the 
city or town of Ely," who were incorporated by that 
name, in the reign of Charles I.
These governors 
consist of the Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, and nine 
of the principal inhabitants.
They distribute the 
rent to the poor, in sums not exceeding eight shil- 
lings each ; every poor inhabitant having also the 
privilege of cutting 5000 turves for fuel, from a tract 
of land appropriated to that purpose.
There are 
likewise some valuable commons, on which the poor 
are allowed to depasture their cattle, and about 150 
acres of waste, which, by turns, they are permitted 
to mow.
At Stuntney, a hamlet of the parish of the Holy 
Trinity, about a mile and a quarter from Ely, is a 
chapel of ease.
Chetisham, a hamlet of St. Mary's, a mile and 
three quarters from Ely, has also a chapel of ease.
Fordham.] — Fordham is situated in the hundred 
of Staplehoe, five miles and a half north-west from.
Newmarket.
This place was anciently the seat of a small prio- 
ry, founded in the reign of Henry the Third.
At 
the Dissolution, its possessions, valued at 401.
13s.
4d.
were granted to Philip Paris, Esq. and Margaret 
his wife.
In the reign of Charles the Second this 
manor was the property of William Russel, Ksq.
(a 
younger branch of the Russels of Chippenham) who 
married a grand-daughter of Henry Cromwell, Lord 
Lieutenant of Ireland, and had a numerous family, 
(all now extinct) some of whom he left in great pe- 
cuniary distress.
About the beginning of the last 
century the estate was purchased by Admiral ,S it- 
Charles Wager, who rebuilt the manor-house, which 
he sold soon afterwards to Governor Harrison, 
whose daughter conveyed it by marriage to the late 
Viscount Townsend.
James Metcalfe, Esq. the late 
possessor, sold it to Francis Noble, who pulled it 
down for the materials ; and, at present, resides in 
a brick-built house, which occupies the site of the 
offices.
Fulbourn.] — Fulbourn is situated in the hundred, 
of Fiendish, five miles east by north from Cam- 
bridge.
It contains two parishes, All Saints and 
St. Vigors, united in one township.
The respective 
churches stood in the same church-yard, till 1 
year 1766, when that of All Saints fell down : it has 
not been rebuilt..
The Abbess of Barking had a 
manor 
25(5 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
manor here as early as the reign of Edward I.
but 
its situation is not known.
Mrs. Elizabeth March, who died in 1722, and 
whose monument was in the church of All Saints, 
left a farm in Ockington, now worth about 1001.
a 
year, for the endowment of reading schools in Ful- 
bourn, and four other parishes.
Gamlingay.] — Gamlingay, formerly a market- 
town, is situated in the hundred of Stow, four miles 
and three quarters south-west from Caxtqn.
The 
principal manor, anciently in the Avenells, has, for 
upwards of two centuries, belonged to Merton Col- 
lege, Oxford.
The manor of Woodbury, in this pa- 
rish, which was for many generations in the Ba- 
bington family, was sold by the present Earl of 
Macclesfield, in the year 1803, to the Rev. John 
Wilkinson, who, in lieu of Woodbury Hall, has 
erected a new mansion on another part of the estate.
The manor, or grange of Shackleton anciently be- 
longed to the abbot and convent of Sawtrey, in 
Huntingdonshire.
Soon after the Reformation it 
was granted to Richard Cromwell ; from whom it 
passed successively to the Burgoynes, Jacobs, and 
Downings.
Sir George Downing, having pulled 
down the manor-house on his adjoining estate at 
East Hatley, erected a magnificent mansion on this 
estate.
Sir George Downing, the last baronet, left 
all his estates for the building and endowing a college, 
to be called after his name, at Cambridge ; and, in 
1776, the house here mentioned was pulled down, 
and the materials sold.
Brookend House, the pro- 
perty of the late Admiral Sir C.
Cotton, Bart, is in 
the occupation of Thomas Quintin, Esq.
In the year 1665, Sir John Jacob built an alms- 
house on the Woodbury estate ; and, in 1754, Mrs.
Elizabeth Lane left 20001.
old S.
S. A.
; the interest, 
subject to the repairs of the alms-house, and other 
incidental expences, to be divided amongst eight 
poor widows, its inhabitants.
In 1769, John Mean endowed a small charity- 
school with 40s.
a year.
Gogmagog Hills.] — These hills, the most elevat- 
ed in the county, are situated about four miles to the 
east of Cambridge.
Henry of Huntingdon calls 
them the Pleasant Hills of Balsham ; but how they 
obtained their present fanciful appellation is un- 
known.
Mr. Layer conjectures it to have been from 
the rude and extensive portraiture of a giant, which 
the scholars of Cambridge cut upon the turf, or sur- 
face of the most elevated part of the hill, and proba- 
bly named Gogmagog.
He had seen this figure ; 
but the business of repairing it had been disconti- 
nued some time.
There is a triple entrenchment, with two ditches, 
rudely circular, on the top of these hills.
This is 
supposed by some writers to have been a British, 
* From the death of Lord St. George, an Irish peer, in 
J73.">, till 1703, when it was revived in the person of Usher St.
George, the tiile lay dormant.
The last mentioned nobleman 
tlied in 1775, and the title again became extinct.
One of this 
and by others a Roman, camp ; but It Was probably 
occupied in succession by both parties.
Gervase, of 
Tilbury, in a passage quoted by Camden, appears to 
have described it by the name of Vandlebury, which 
it received from having been the station of the Van- 
dals when they were employed in the massacre of the 
Brn"ons in this part of the country.
Dr. Gale, from 
the Roman coins found here in digging a cellar in 
the year 16S5, and the contiguity of the Roman Way, 
which runs from the brow of the hill towards Cam- 
bridge, supposed it to be Roman.
" Vandlebmv," 
observes Mr. Gough, " is the fourth of the chain of 
forts which begins at the large camp on the hill, 
where the hunting tower stood, opposite to Audley 
Inn ; Littlebury Church stands in another ; the 
walled town at Chesterford is a third.
To Van- 
dlebury succeeded Grantaeeaster ; then Arbury ; 
and last, Belsar's Hills, all within sight of one an- 
other, reaching from the woodland of Essex to the 
fens, and crossed by several parallel ditches quite to 
Devil's Ditch." Within the entrenchment, which 
encloses about thirteen acres and a half, are the 
house anid grounds of Francis Lord Osbourne, ne- 
phew to the late Earl of Goddlphin.
The house is 
an irregular building, originally intended as a hunt- 
ing box, and establishment for rearing and breeding- 
horses.
Haslingfield.] — Haslingfield is situated in the 
hundred of Wetherley, four miles and a quarter 
south-west by south from Cambridge.
On Chapel 
Hill, near the town, formerly stood a chapel, a great 
resort of pilgrims.
At Easter, it is said, the place 
was scarcely large enough to contain the number 
who flocked thither.
In 1658, Simon Ertman, a Dane, left 4001.
for 
the endowment of a school at Haslingfield ; but Sir 
Thomas Wendy, then Lord of the Manor, in whom the 
management had been vested, directed that, in lieu 
of the said 400]., 201.
a year should be charged on 
some of his estates.
To this are added 121.
a year, 
out of lands given to the parish for charitable uses, 
by William Skellman, in 1494.
Hatley St. George.] — Hatley St. George, or 
Hungry Hatley, so called from the nature of its 
soil, is situated in the hundred of Stow, four miles 
south by west from Caxton.
The manor, which, as 
early as the reign of Henry III.
was in the family 
of St. George, who had their chief seat, and a park 
here, who belongs to John Whitley Quiutin, Esq.
who resides at Hatley Hall.
The park is small, but 
well laid out, and in good order.
* 
Hatley Church, winch was built in the year 1352, 
contains some memorials of the family of St. George; 
amongst which is the grave-stone of Sir Baldwin 
St. George, who died in 1425, with his effigies in 
armour, on a brass plate.
family was honoured with the arms of Sweden, in addition to 
nis own by Gustavus, the Swedish King, to whom he had been 
sent with the Order of the Garter.
H IN TON.] 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
2ol 
IIinton.] — Hinton, generally called Cherry Ilin- 
ton, from the abundance of cherries which it for- 
merly produced, is a large village, chiefly inhabited 
by farmers, two miles and three quarters east from 
Cambridge, in the hundred of Fiendish.
It is situ- 
ated in a valley, at the bottom of Gogmagog Hills.
Great quantities of saffron were formerly grown 
here, but the culture has some time been entirely 
disused.
Hinton Church contains some monuments of the 
Beridolds, formerly Lords of the Manor, amongst 
which is that of Captain Walter Serifdd, of the 
navy, who lost his life at the siege of Calvi, under 
Lord Hood, in 1794.
lloitNSEY.j — Hornsey, or- Horningsea, is situated 
in the hundred of Fiendish, five miles north-north- 
east from Cambridge.
It was the seat of a monas- 
tery, of royal foundation, in the early Saxon times : 
the conventual buildings were laid waste by the 
Danes about the year 870.
Horseheath.] — Horseheath, or Horseth, so call- 
ed from the Horseths, formerly Lords of the Manor, 
is situated in the hundred of Chilford, three miles 
and a half east-north-east from Linton.
The Aling- 
tons, subsequent Lords of the Manor, settled at 
Horseheath before the year 1429.
In 1448, William 
Aliugton, Esq. Treasurer of the Exchequer for Ire- 
land^ obtained the King's license to make a part at 
Horseheath.
Sir Giles Alington, Master of the 
Ordnance to Henry VIII.
having been at the siege 
of Boulogne, brought from thence a bell, which, 
within the memory of man, has been used as a din- 
ner-bell at Horseheath Hall.
This Sir Giles, or.
his 
son of the same name, entertained Queen Elizabeth 
at Horseheath, in her progress from Norwich to 
London, in the year 1578.
Another Sir Giles Aling- 
ton did penance at St. Paul's Cross, and in St.
Mary's Church at Cambridge, in the year 1631, for 
marrying his own niece, the daughter of his sister, 
Mrs. Dalton.
The same punishment was inflicted 
on his lady.* Sir Giles was also fined 12,0001.
in 
the Star Chamber ; and the money, if we are to 
believe Sir Edward Peyton, in his " Divine Catas- 
trophe of the House of Stuart," was divided be- 
tween Queen Henrietta Maria and the Earl of Hol- 
land.
William Alington, created an Irish peer, by 
the title of Lord Alington, in 1046, erected a mag- 
nificent mansion at Horseheath, which, though it 
had cost 70,0001.
was sold, about twenty-two years 
after it had been built, together with the estate, for 
only 42,0001.
John Bromley, Esq. the purchaser, 
expended 30,0001.
more in building.
The grandson 
of this gentleman was created Lord Montfort, of 
Horseheath, in the year 1741.
Thomas, the second 
Lord Montfort, being in embarrassed circumstances, 
sold this estate, with several other manors in the 
vicinity, in the year 1766.
The house, on which 
such vast sums had been expended, was stripped of 
its furniture, and several valuable portraits, in 1775 ; 
and, in 1777, it was pulled down and told for tho 
materials.
t The park, containing 8S0 acres, or up- 
wards, has been disparked.
Stanlake Batson, Esq.
the present owner, purchased the estate in the year 
1783.
Ickleton.]— Ickleton, situated in the hundred 
of Whittlesford, four miles and a quarter south from 
Linton, was formerly a market-town, and still has 
an annual fair, granted by Henry III.
on the 22d of 
July.
In ancient times there was a priory of nuns 
at this place, founded, either by Sir William de 
Chantilupe, or by his son-in-law, Aubrey de Vere, 
the first Earl of Oxford.
The revenues of the prio- 
ry, in the reign of Henry VIII.
were estimated at 
711.
9s.
10^d.
In 1538, Henry granted the site of 
the priory, with the church-yard, and all the de- 
mesnes, and several other possessions, to the Bi- 
shop of Ely, and his successors, in exchange for 
Hatfield.
In the year 1600, by the surrender of 
Bishop Heton, these estates reverted to the crown .
they are now the property of the Honourable Charles 
Percy Wyndham, who inherits them from Percy, 
Earl of Thomond.
Impington.] — Impington, which is a small vil- 
lage, situated in the hundred of North-Stow, three 
miles north by west from Cambridge, formerly had 
a weekly market, and an annual fair for eight days j, 
both long since discontinued.
This place has been 
rendered memorable by the singular case of Eliza- 
beth Woodcock, one ot its inhabitants, who, .
on her 
return from Cambridge market, on the 2d of Fe- 
bruary, 1799, was overwhelmed in a snow-drift, 
where she continued nearly eight days and nights, 
but was at last discovered alive, and survived the 
accident several months.
This unfortunate woman 
was not more than half a mile from her own house, 
when her horse started at a sudden light; and, 
through fear of being precipitated into a ditch, to- 
wards which the animal was rapidly retreating, she 
dismounted.
The horse again started, and broke 
from her ; but she pursued him over the fields for 
nearly a quarter of a mile, and, recovering the bri- 
dle, turned homewards.
At length, wearied by ex- 
ertion, and benumbed in her left foot, through the^ 
loss of a shoe, she released the horse, and sat down 
beneath, a thicket, round which the snow rapidly 
accumulated.
By eight o'clock it had completely 
enclosed her ; and, continuing to fall, it increased 
to between three and four feet in thickness over hor 
head.
In this distressing situation, her clothes 
frozen, and her strength exhausted by fatigue, want, 
* This lady, who died of the small pox, in the year 1044, 
was the daughter of Michael Dalton, author of the Country 
Justice; and it is remarkable, that this incestuous marriage was 
celebrated at the parish church' of West- Wratting, where Mr.
VOL.
I. — NO.
19.
Dalton resided ; hut whether he knew of, or sanctioned it, is 
unknown.
T Of this house, of which there is a description in Campbell's 
Vitruvius Ihitannicus, the hall was fifty feet long by fori.) \uu\-, 
:md (Virtv feet hitrli.
and forty feet higk, 
3t 
fcnd 
253 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
and despair, she remained till the morning of the 
tenth of the month, when the snow having been gra- 
dually dissolved by a thaw, a coloured handkerchief, 
which, on the second day of her confinement she had 
contrived to hang on the uppermost branches of the 
thicket was seen by a young farmer, as he happened 
to be crossing the field.
Through an aperture in 
the snow, he perceived the poor woman who had so 
long been missing ; and having procured assistance, 
quickly released her.
During the whole period of 
her seclusion, she had slept very little, and had 
been wholly without nourishment, except what she ob- 
tained from sucking the surrounding snow, to allay 
her thirst.
She was conveyed home, ami put to 
bed, where she experienced much pain in her legs 
and feet : the latter were soon discovered to be mor- 
tified; and ultimately all the integuments and toes 
came aAvay, and the os calcis of each foot was in 
many parts entirely exposed.
She, however, began 
to amend ; but the mutilated state of her frame 
preyed upon her mind ; and, not abstaining from the 
improper use of strong liquors, her health was never 
completely restored, but she died in the month of 
July following.
Isleham.] — Isleham, or Iselham, is situated in 
the hundred of Staplehoe, eight miles north by west 
from Newmarket.
In ancient times, there was a 
priory at this place, which was a cell to the monas- 
tery of St. Jacutus de Insula, in Brittany ; but no- 
thing is now known, either as to the time of its 
foundation, or the length of its continuance.
An 
ancient building, now used as a barn, which stands 
in the village, a little to the westward of the parish 
church, was the conventual chapel, or church.
Mr.
John Moore holds the priory estate on lease under 
Pembroke Hall.
The lady of Sir Robert Peyton, who died in 1518, 
founded an.
hospital at Isleham for five widowers 
and five widows, and endowed it with lands which 
now let for 961.
a year, and a 
121.
payable by the Lord of the Manor.
Kirtling,] — Kirtling, more generally denominat- 
ed Catlidge, is situated in the hundred of Cheveley, 
three miles and three quarters south-east by east 
from Newmarket.
The manor, now the property of 
the Earl of Guildford, anciently belonged to Earl 
Harold.
At the time of the Normau survey it was 
one of the seats of Judith, Countess of Northumber- 
land, relict of the Earl Waltheof.
His daughter, 
Judith, carried it in marriage to the family of Tony, 
and it became the seat of their barony.
An heiress 
of the family of Tony married Guy Beauchamp, 
Earl of Warwick, whose descendants inherited this 
manor for several generations.
In the reign of 
Henry VIII.
it was purchased by Sir Edward 
North, Treasurer, who, in 1551, was created Lord 
North, of Kirtling, by Queen Mary.
His lordship 
erected a stately mansion on the site of the ancient 
castle of the barony of Tony, which was surrounded 
by a moat.
At this mansion, which acquired the 
narue of Catlidge Hall, Roger, the second Lord 
rent charge of 
North, once entertained Queen Elizabeth, who, at* 
cording to tradition, had been imprisoned there dur- 
ing the reign of her sister Mary.
Previously to the 
year 1752, one wing of this building had been pulled 
down ; and, in 1801, the remainder shared the same 
fate ; a brick gateway, with four octangular turrets, 
through which was the approach to thehouse, being 
the oniy vestiges left.
Several valuable portraits of 
the North family were many years ago removed to 
Wroxton, in Oxfordshire, their principal seat.
Kirtling Church contains several monuments of 
this family ; and also the tomb of Edward Myrfin, a 
great traveller, with the following epitaph : — 
*« Here restith the cors of Edward Myrfin, gentle- 
man, born in ye citie of London, educated iii ^ood 
vcrtu and lernyng, traveled throgh all the countreis 
and notable cities, princes courtes, with other fatnose 
places of Europe, and lykewise of ye lies of Greece, 
and soe to the Turkes courte, then being in the citie 
of Haleppo, on the borclers betwene Armenia and 
Siria, and soe returning throgh Jury to Jerusalem, and 
soe to Damasco, and from thence passing by diverse 
countreis, with sondrye adventures, arived at lengeth 
in his owne natyve citie, where shortly after he endid 
his life, in the yere of ourLorde God on M.CCCCC, 
fvftie and three, and in the XXVII yere of his 
age." 
Mrs. Dudleia North, sister of William, Lord 
North, a very learned lady, who fell a victim to in • 
tense study, was buried at Kirtling, in the yeaf 
1712.
Landwade.] — Landwade is situated in the hun- 
dred of Staplehoe, four miles north-west by north 
from Newmarket.
The manor, which was anciently 
in the Hastings family, has been in the Cottons ever 
since the reign of Edward III.
Admiral Sir Charles 
Cotton, Bart, is tne present lord.
The remains of the old mansion, which exhibit the 
architecture of the 16th and 17th centuries, have 
been fitted up as a farm-house.
They occupy a 
very retired spot, within a moated site, surrounded 
with wood.
Landwade, which contains several monuments of 
the Cottons, was built by Walter Cotton, Esq. who 
died in the year 1445.
Linton.] — Linton is a very pleasantly situated 
market-town, in the hundred of Chilford, nine miles 
and a half south-cast by east from Cambridge, and 
forty-eight north by east from London.
. The mar- 
ket, which is principally for corn, is kept on Thurs- 
day.
Formerly there was a lair at Linton, for three 
days, commencing on the festival of St. Lawrence ; 
but that has been long discontinued ; and there are 
now two fairs : one, a great sheep fair, on the 30th 
of July ; the other for the sale of pedlary, and the 
returning of harvest men.
The grounds round the town are more varied than 
in most other places in this part of Cambridge- 
shire.
The town itself is composed of several irregular 
streets and lanes, the chief of which is about half a 
mile in length.
Most pf the houses are low, and co - 
vered 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
259 
vered with thatch ; but some are >,' brick, and very 
neat.
The market-house is a small square b'ikling of a 
mean appearance.
Linton Church is a spacious structure, with two 
aisles, a nave, a chancel, and large tower.
In the 
south aisle is a handsome mural monument of mar- 
ble, erected with a bequest of 10001.
left for the pur- 
pose by Peter Standly, Esq. to perpetuate his affec- 
tion for Elizabeth, his sister and benefactress.
On 
the pedestal is an elegant marble urn, with the 
figure of Hope on one side, sustained by her anchor, 
and looking upwards.
On the other side, a fine 
female figure, with a wreath and olive branch, and a 
dog couching at her feet.
Over the urn, on a black 
marble ground, is a medallion of Mr. Standley.
The church, which is built with flints, intermixed 
with stoue and plaster, is ornamented with embra- 
sures.
There is a sunday-school at Linton, which fur- 
nishes tuition to upwards of 100 children.
It was 
originally established through the exertions of the 
Rev. Mr.
Fisher, the vicar, and a magistrate of the 
county ; and is supported by the contributions of the 
inhabitants and neighbouring gentry.
Here was anciently a small priory, subordinate to 
the Abbey of St. Jacutas de Insula, in Bretague, 
the possessions of which were granted by Henry the 
Sixth, about the year 1450, to the Master and Fel- 
lows of Pembroke College.
At Barham, a hamlet of this parish, was a priory 
of Crouchid Friars, granted by Henry the Eighth 
to Philip Paris, Esq. who sold it to the family of 
Millecent.
Dr. Richardson, Regius Professor at Cambridge 
in the reign of James the First, was born at 
Linton.
Madingley.] — Madingley, in the hundred of 
North -Stow, lies three miles and a quarter west 
from Cambridge.
The manor is the property of the 
county ; and is supposed to have been so long be- 
fore the year 1530.
" The statute 34 and 35 of 
Henry the Eighth, chap.
24," says Cough, in his 
additions to Camden, " recites, that certain persons 
were infeoffed of and in the manor of Burlewas, 
otherwise called Shire-Manor, of the county of Cam- 
bridge, lying and being in the parish of Madingley, 
being of the yearly value of 101.
to let ten the same to 
farm at this day, to the use and intent, that the pro- 
fits thereof should be received and taken for and to   
wards the payment of the fees and wages of the 
Knights of the said county of Cambridge, being 
chosen for the Parliament Avithin the isaid county ; 
and therefore, lor the.
sure and more perfect conti- 
nuance thereof, and at the request of the Gentlemen 
and Inhabitants of the County* it enacts, ' that 
John Hinde, one of the King's Sergeants at Law, 
shall stand seised of the said Manor, to the use of 
liimself, his heirs, and assigns, for ever, on condi- 
tion to pay every Michaelmas, 101.
to the Sheriff 
and two Knights of the Shire, who are thereby in- 
corporated by the name of Wardens of the Fees and 
Wages of the Knights of the Shire of Cambridge, 
for the use of the said Knights of the Shire, towards 
the maintenance of their charges.' " 
Madingley Hall was the seat of the late gallant 
Admiral Sir Charles Cotton, who died at Plymouth, 
Commander-in-Chief of the Channel Fleet, Feb. 23, 
1812.
It came into the possession of his ancestor, 
Sir John Cotton, of Landwade, the first baronet of 
the family, by marriage with the daughter and 
i heiress o; Sergeant' John Hinde, in the reign of 
! H.'iiry VIII.
The park a:id pleasure grounds, 
with which the house is nearly surrounded, >re ex- 
j tensive, and well wooded.
The mansion is an an- 
j cient brick building, of the time of Henry VIII.
bearing a considerable resemblance to Holland 
House, near Kensington.
The rooms contain some 
good historical paintings, anil several portraits - r the 
be- tof which are those of Sir John Hinde Cotton, Bart, 
by Sir Godfrey Kneller, dated 1692 ; James Craggs, 
Junior, Esq. and William Stukley, Esq. by Waiter.
Madingley Church, which stands very near the - 
house, was repaired and ornamented at the expence 
of the late Sir J.
H. Cotton.
It is a small but very 
neat structure, with a beautiful painted window 
over the Communiou Table.
Some monuments of 
the Hinde and Cotton families are in the church.
It appearsj from the following passage, in Car- 
ter's " History of Cambridgeshire," that the zeal of 
the reformers was severely felt at Madingley : — 
" Reformation, 1643.
March 4th.
We destroyed 
3 J superstitious pictures, Christ on the Cross, and 
the two Thieves by him, Christ and the Virgin 
Mary in another window, Christ in the steeple win- 
dows ; and gave orders that 14 cherubims in wood 
should be taken down, and the steps levelled." 
March.] — March, or Merch, is a market-town, 
situated in the hundred of Witchford ; twenty-six 
miles north-north-west from Cambridge, and eighty- 
one and a quarter north from London.
The market 
is kept on Friday ; and a considerable inland trade 
in coal, timber, and corn, is carried on from the 
town upon the river Nene, which passes through it.
It has a fair on the Monday before Whit Sunday, on 
Whit Monday, and on the 27th of October.
March, as has already been observed, is a hamlet 
of the parish of Doddingtou.
It has a chapel, de- 
dicated to St. Mary, a very handsome Gothic struc- 
ture, with a spire, erected about the year 1343 ; at 
which time an indulgence was granted by the Pope 
to all those who should resort to it.
The following charities merit notice :— William 
Neale, Esq. who died in the year 1696, founded a 
school in this town, for the instruction of eight boys 
in English and Latin, and endowed it with 33£ acres 
of land, in White's Fen. Mr.
Henry Wade left a 
house and some lands, to be disposed of in charita- 
ble uses, the rents of which, by a decree of Chan- 
eery, in the year 1713, were appropriated as fol- 
lows : — 201.
a year to a school -master, for teaching 
20 poor children of March ; 201.
a year for appren- 
7 tice 
200 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
tice fees ; 51.
a year fov a decayed housekeeper ; and 
the remainder for the purpose of buying heifers, or 
•young cows, for poor housekeepers, on Easter Mon- 
day.
The master of Mr. Neale's school enjoys also 
the above-mentioned salary from Mr. Wade's be- 
quest, together with the sum of 61.
15s.
paid by the 
church-wardens, from the produce of some land, 
which was devised in the year 1653, by Mr. James 
Sheppard, for the purpose of educating poor chil- 
dren ; and the interest of 801.
leit by Mr. Gabriel 
Sheppard.
There are some alms-houses at March, without 
endowments, inhabited by parish paupers.
In the year 1730, while the road was forming be- 
tween March and Wisbeach, the workmen found 
three urns, full of burnt bones, and a pot, with 100 
Roman denarii.
Many other coins have been found 
in this neighbourhood.
At Elm, an altar, twenty- 
one inches high, was discovered, and atWelney, va- 
rious coins have been found within reach of the 
plough-share.
Mei.dreth.] —  Meldreth, situated in the hundred 
of Armingford, four miles and a half north by west 
from Royston, deserves notice chiefly as having 
been the birth-place of Andrew Marvell, the father 
of Andrew Marvell, the celebrated poet and states- 
man.
This gentleman was minister of Hull, in 
Yorkshire; and his death, which was occasioned in the 
year 1010, in a very remarkable manner, is thus re- 
lated iu the Biographia Britannica : — 
" On that shore of the Humber, opposite to 
Kingston, lived a lady, whose virtue and good sense 
recommended her to the esteem of old Mr. Marvell, 
as his piety and understanding obliged her to take a 
particular notice of him ; from this mutual approba- 
tion arose an intimate acquaintance, which was soon 
improved into a very strict friendship.
This lady 
had an only daughter, whose duty, ingenuity, devo- 
tion, and general exemplary behaviour, had endear- 
ed her to all who knew her, and rendered her the 
darling of her mother ; whose fondness for her was 
such, that she could scarcely bear to let her child 
be ever out of her sight.
Mr. Marvell, desiring to 
increase and perpetuate the amity between the fa- 
milies, asked the lady to let her beloved daughter 
come over to Kingston to stand god-mother for a 
child of his ; which, out of her great regard for him, 
she consented to, though she thereby deprived her- 
self of the pleasure of her daughter's company, for a 
longer space of time (as the young lady must neces- 
sarily lie at Kingston one night) than she could 
have agreed to on any other consideration, but that 
of obliging her friend.
The young lady came over 
to Kingston, and the ceremony was performed.
The 
next day, when she came down to the water side, in 
order to return hoaie, she found the wind very high, 
and the water so extremely rough as to render the 
Sassage so dangerous, that the boatmen earnestly 
issuaded her from crossing.
But she, who knew 
how miserable her mother would be till she saw her 
again, insisted ou going, notwithstanding all that 
could be urged by the watermen or by Mr. Mafvefl, 
who earnestly entreated her to return to his house, 
and waijg lor better weather.
Mr. Marvell finding 
her thus resolutely bent to venture her life, qathe* 
than disoblige a fond parent, told her, that as she 
had brought herself into that dangerous situation on 
his account, he thought himself bound in honour 
and conscience to share it with her ; and accord- 
ingly having, with difficulty persuaded some water- 
men to attempt the passage, they both got into the 
boat.
Just as they put off, Mr. Marvell threw his 
gold-headed cane on shore, to some friends who at- 
tended at the water-side, telling them, that as he 
would not suffer the young lady to go alone, and, 
as he apprehended, the consequence might be fatal, 
if he perished, he desired them to give that cane to 
his son, v and bid him remember his father.
Thus 
he, armed with innocence, and his fair charge with 
filial duty an;l affection, cheerfully set forward, to 
meet their inevitable fate ; for the boat was overset, 
and they were lost.
" The lady whose excessive fondness had plung- 
ed her daughter and friend into this terrible condi- 
tion, went the same afternoon in her garden, and 
seated herself into an arbour, from whence she could 
view the water, and while, with no small anxiety, 
she beheld the tempestuous state it Avas in, she saw 
(or rather thought she saw) a most lovely boy with 
flaxen hair come into the garden ; who making di- 
rectly up to her, said, ' Madam, your daughter is 
safe now.' The lady, greatly surprised, said, ' My 
pretty dear, how did you know any thing of my 
daughter, or that she was in danger ?' Then bid- 
ding him stay there, she arose and went into the 
house, to look for a pretty piece of new money to 
reward him with ; but on her return into the garden, 
the child was gone, and on examining her family 
about him, she found nobody but herself had seen 
him, nor could they recollect any child in the neigh- 
bourhood which answered the description.
This 
gave her some suspicion of her misfortune, which 
was soon after confirmed, with the additional ag- 
gravation, that her friend was involved in the same 
accident, and of course, his family greater sufferers, 
she having only lost her pleasure, they their sup- 
port ; and thinking herself bound by every tie, to 
make all the reparation in her power, she sent for our 
author (young Marvell) charged herself with the ex- 
pence of his future education, and at her death left 
him her whole fortune." 
Mefal.] — Mepal, or Mepole, is situated in the 
hundred of Witchford, seven miles west-south-west 
from Ely. The manor, which is vested in the Dean 
and Chapter, formerly belonged to the monks of 
Ely, who received it as a gift, from Alan Walsing- 
ham, then prior, iu the year 1345.
Mepal Church contains monuments of James 
Fortrey, Esq. of Byall-Fcn, and of his elder bro- 
ther, Samuel Fortrey, Esq. who died in the year 
1088.
The former monument bears the following 
interesting historical inscription : — > 
I " Near 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
261 
" Near this place lie the remains of James Fortrey, 
Esq. descended from an ancient slock in Brabant, 
which took asylum in England from the persecution 
of the Spaniards, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
He 
was third son of Samuel Fortrey, Esq. who, upon un- 
dertaking the drainage of the Bedford Level, erected 
a commodious habitation in Byall-Fen, which, com- 
ing into his son's possession, was by him enlarged with 
several convenient apartments, and with gardens, and 
other improvements, so as to make it (in such a situa- 
tion) the admiration of the time.* lie was bred in 
courts and in camps; was page of honour to Mary of 
Modena, then Duchess of York ; afterwards groom 
of the bed-chamber to her husband, King James II.
; 
major in the horse guards, and at the same time com- 
manded a troop in Lanier's regiment of horse.
He 
would have followed his unhappy master's fortune in 
exile, but was forbidden by his commands, on account 
of his ill state of health : fidelity and gratitude for- 
bade him t(» engage in the service of his successor.
Having lived a favourite of Princes, he rather chose 
obscurity ; and after residing some time as fellow- 
commoner at Queen's College, in Cambridge, passed 
the remainder of his days in retirement, between Por- 
tugal and Byall-Fen; at the last-mentioned place he 
died the 18th of August 1719, in the 63d year of his 
age, loved, lamented, and honoured by all who knew 
him.
He married the Right Honourable Susanna 
Bellasis, Baroness of Osgodley, in her own right, but 
left no issue." 
Mii.ton.] — Milton, the retirement of the late Rev.
William Cole, an eminent antiquary r f is situated in 
the hundred of North Stow, three miles and a quar- 
ter north by east from Cambridge.
Samuel Knight, 
Esq. who has a neat residence in this village, is the 
Lord «f the Manor.
Newmarket.] — Newmarket, long noted for the 
extensive heath in its neighbourhood, is a mar- 
ket-town, situated, partly in the hundred of Che- 
veley, in the county of Cambridge, and partly 
in the hundred of Lackford, in the county of Suf- 
folk, at the distance of thirteen miles north-east 
by east from Cambridge, and sixty-one north- 
north-east from London.
The petty sessions are 
holden here.
The market is on Tuesday.
The 
fairs are on Whit-Tuesday, and the 8th of No- 
vember.
The town, which comprises two parishes (All 
Saints, in Cambridgeshire, and St. Mary's, in Suf- 
folk) consists principally of one long and wide street, 
on a gentle declivity.
It has been twice destroyed 
by fire : first, in the year 1683, during the presence 
of Charles II.
his Queen, and the Duke of York; 
secondly, about the beginning of the last century.
The damages, in the former instance, were estimat- 
ed at 20,0001.; the expences of rebuilding were in 
part defrayed by a subscription.
Most of the houses 
are modern, and well built ; and, in the neighbour- 
hood of the town are several handsome seats of the 
* The place here mentioned is now occupied as a farm- 
house.
f This gentleman, of whose labours, in our account of this 
county, we have occasionally profited, after a life of laborious 
research, died at Milton on the Ltilh of December, 1782, and 
bequeathed his manuscript collections, in 100 volumes, to the 
VOL.
I. — NO.
10.
nobility and private gentlemen.
The town is sup- 
posed to have received its name about the year 
1227, from a market which had then been recently 
established.
The whole of the race-course is in the county of 
Cambridge.
It may not be irrelevant here to no- 
tice, that the extensive heath, which is in the neigh- 
bourhood of this town, has been formed into one of 
the finest race-courses in the kingdom.
The diver- 
sion of horse-racing, though unquestionably prac- 
tised in this country at the time of the Roman inva- 
sion, appears not to have made any considerable 
progress, but rather to have been dormant, till the 
accession of James the First, 
who agan 
introduced 
it from Scotland, where it had been brought into 
vogue from the spirit and swiftness of the Spanish 
horses which had been thrown ashore on the coast 
of Galloway when the vessels of the Spanish armada 
were wrecked.
From the time of James, it became 
more fashionable, and Newmarket had probably a 
sort of racing establishment as early as the reign of 
that monarch, who erected a house there, which was 
destroyed in the civil wars, but rebuilt by that dis- 
tinguished patron of the turf, Charles the Second.
The site of it is now held on lease by the Duke of 
Rutland, who is Lord of the Manor.
The King's 
present house is a moderate sized brick mansion, in 
which a room is shewn, called King William's apart- 
ment, and another called Queen Anne's.
To im- 
prove the breed of horses, is the ostensible induce- 
ment of the legislature to encourage this species of 
gambling, and which even the throne seems to 
sanction ; as in addition to the plates given by 
the nobility, the King himself gives two every 
year.
The races are holden seven times in the year, and 
are distinguished as follows : — the Craven Meeting, 
beginning on the Monday in Easter week ; the First 
Spring Meeting, commencing on the Monday fort- 
night following ; the Second Spring Meeting, com- 
mencing a fortnight after the close of the first ; the 
July Meeting, which takes place early in that 
month ; the First October Meeting, beginning on 
the Monday of that week in which the first Thurs- 
day in October falls ; the Second October Meeting, 
and the Third October, or Houghton Meeting ; 
both of which take place also in the month of 
October.
Two of the coffee-houses in the town are very 
conveniently furnished for the use of the Betters, 
when they meet to ratify their agreements, or to set- 
tle matches.
Billiard and other rooms are also pre- 
pared for the reception of such gentlemen as prefer 
games of skill, or hazard, to the more boisterous di- 
versions of the turf; and excellent accommodations 
British Museum, with directions that they should not be open- 
ed till twenty years after his decease.
They were accordingly 
opened in 1802, and some of the more interesting passages were 
selected, and detailed in the Monthly Magazine, subsequently 
to that period.
3 a 
fes 
2<3f 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
for visitors may at all times be found in the numer- 
ous inns of the town.
The present sovereign has never visited New- 
market ; but the Prince Recent, and most of his 
royal brothers, have frequently honoured the races 
with their -presence.
Here are two charity schools, one for twenty bovs, 
another for twenty girls, supported by an endow- 
ment of fifty pounds per annum.
In All Saints' Church, is a monument of Tregon- 
well Frampton, Esq. a celebrated sportsman, who 
wa& keeper of the running-horses successively to 
King William, Queen Anne, George I.
and 
George II.
Several Roman coins of Trajan, one of Faustina, 
and one of Maximianus Ilerculius, were found on 
the heath about sixty years ago.
Reach.] — Reach, formerly a market-town, is si- 
tuated in the hundred of Staplehoe, five miles and a 
half west by north from Newmarket.
Divided by 
the Devil's Ditch, it stands partly in the parish of 
Burwell, and partly in that of Swaffham Prior.
A 
navigable draining cut comes up to Reach, and an- 
other to Burwell.
The market at Reach has been long wholly dis- 
continued : but it has a great fair for horses, holden 
annually on Rogation Monday, the tolls of which 
belong to the corporation of Cambridge.
Royston.] — Royston, anciently De Cruce Rohe- 
siae, is a market-town, situated partly in the hundred 
of Armingford, in the county of Cambridge, and 
partly in the hundred of Odsey, in the county of 
Hertford, twenty miles north by east from Hertford, 
and thirty-seven and three quarters north from Lon- 
don.
" The town," says Layer, in his collections 
for the History of Cambridgeshire, " is crossed by 
two of those famous Roman, or rather British, 
wayes : Exning Street which passeth from south to 
north, and lkenild Street, so called because it be- 
gan in the Icenis country, and stretcheth from east 
to west." 
Royston has a large corn-market, on Wednes- 
days; with fairs on Ash- Wednesday, Wednesday in 
Easter week, Wednesday in Whitsun week, the first 
Wednesday in July, and the first Wednesday after 
the 10th of October.
The petty sessions for Roy- 
ston division are holden here.
The town of Royston, which is surrounded by an 
extensive tract of downs, consists of four streets.
The church is spacious, but contains nothing re- 
markable.
At the west end of the eastern street, 
* James I.
was at Koyston, with his favourite, (he Ear!
of 
Somerset, when he received intelligence of the murder of Sir 
Thomas Overbury.
The Earl was arrested as a principal, in 
this infamous transaction ; and it is said, that his .Majesty was 
leaning on his shoulder at (lie moment of the arrest.
Ol the 
King's infamous and disgusting dissimulation on this occasion, 
Sir Anthony Weldon- gives a striking picture.
" The Earl," 
says he, ',' when he kissed his hand, the King hung about his 
neck, slabboring his cheeks, saying, —for God's sake, when 
shall 1 see thee again ?
On my soul 1 shall neither eat nor sleep 
near the centre of the town, is the base of the cross 
of " Lady Rohcsia or Roisa, daughter of Aubrey 
de Vere, Chief Justice of England, and Chamber - 
leyn to Henry the First." Eustachius de Marc, 
Lord of Neweelle, having purchased a piece of land 
adjoining this cross, built a monastery for canons 
regular of St. Augustine, dedicated it to Thomas a 
Becket, at that time called St. Thomas the Martyr, 
and endowed it with considerable revenues.
This 
monastery drew traders, and inn-keepers, to erect 
dwelling-houses near it to entertain for the daily 
resort of strangers ; so that by degrees it became a 
town, and changed its name from Royse's-Cross to 
Royse's-Town, which by contraction was soon pro- 
nounced Royston.
In the year 1742, a curious ca- 
vity or recess, dug out of the solid chalk, was dis- 
covered by some workmen employed near the mar- 
ket-house ; it led to several apartments, containing 
many curious images and reliques of antiquity.
It 
appears to have been made for the Lady Rohesia 
here mentioned, as a chapel or oratory.
King James the First built a house at Royston, 
of which there are now very small remains, as an 
occasional residence for enjoying the amusements 
of hawking and hunting.* 
At the commencement of the civil war, Charles I.
removed from Hampton Court to Royston, previ- 
ously to his setting up his standard at Nottingham.
On the 24th of June, 1647, while a prisoner to the 
army, whose head-quarters were then at Royston, 
his Majesty was lodged in his own house there, for 
two nights.
Sawston.] — Sawston is situated in the hundred 
of Whittlesford, five miles and a quarter west by 
north from Linton.
There are four manors in this 
parish, all of which are the property of Ferdinand 
Huddleston, Esq. whose family has been settled 
there several centuries.
The manor-house, which 
was built, in the year 1557, contains several por- 
traits of the Huddlestons.
In the church are several monuments of the same 
family.
Shelford (Great).] — Great Shelford is situated 
in the hundred of Triplow, three miles south by east 
from Cambridge.
The church was built by Bishop 
Fordham, who died in the year 1425.
The steeple, 
which was blown down in the memorable storm of 
1703, sustained a similar accident in 1798, but has 
since been rebuilt by subscription.
The church 
contains several monuments of the families of Gold- 
well, Torrell, and Redman.
Mary Redman, a 
until you come again.
The Earl told him on Monday (this 
being on the Friday.) For God's sake let me, said the King : 
— shall I, shall I ?
then lolled about his neck ; then for God's 
sake give thy lady this kisse for me, in the same manner at the 
stayre's head, at the middle of the stayres, at the stayre's foot.
The Earl was not in his coach when the King used these very 
words, (in the hearing of tour servants, one of whom reported 
it instantly to the author of this history) * i shall never see his 
face more.' " 
I 
V 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
263 
young lady of the last-mentioned family, who died 
in the year 1612, is described, in her epitaph, as 
" a fair floAver whom too-hasty death plucked from 
the face o{ the earth*, to stick in the bosom of hea- 
ven." 
Shelford (Little).] — Little Shelford is also si- 
tuated in tbc hundred of Triplow, four miles south 
by east from Cambridge.
From the following pas- 
sage in Blomefield's Collections, we learn that there 
was formerly a hermitage in this place : — " There 
was an hermitage at the bridge between Great 
and Little Shelford, for in 1398, J.
Fordham, 
Bishop of Ely, granted an indulgence of forty days 
pardon, to all such as would contribute to repair the 
bridge and cause-way between Great and Little 
Shelford, and to support John Lucas, then hermit, 
in the hermitage." 
The manor, now the property of William Finch 
Finch, Esq.
(formerly William Finch Ingle) was for 
more than three centuries in the family of Freville, 
of which it was purchased, soon after the year 1600, 
by J.
Bankcs, Esq.
In the church, on the north side of the chancel, 
under an ogee arch, richly ornamented with crockets, 
is the monument of Sir John de Freville, who died 
in the sixth year of Edward II.
It is an altar tomb, 
with the effigies of a cross-legged knight, carved in 
stone, with a lion at his feet.
The following inscrip- 
tion, in Lombardic capitals, appears on a tablet, at 
the back of the arch : — 
Ici gist sire Johan de Frivile 
Ke fust Seigniour de ceste ville 
Vous ke par ici passet 
Par charite pur lalme priet.* 
Shengay.] — Shengay, which gives a name to a 
deanery, is situated in the hundred of Armingford, 
seven miles north-west of Royston.
At the time 
of the Norman survey, the manor (now the property 
of the Marchioness of Devonshire) belonged to Ro- 
ger de Montgomery, Earl of Arundel and Shrews- 
bury ; whose daughter, Sibylla de Reynes, in the 
year 11-10, founded here a preceptory of Knights 
Hospitallers, to whom she gave the manor.
There 
was formerly a monument at Shengay, for Sir Ro- 
bert Dalyson, preceptor of the Knights Hospitallers, 
who died in the year 1401.
After the Reformation, 
the estate of Shengay passed, by a female heir, from 
Sir Richard Long, into the noble family of Russell ; 
and when the brave Admiral Russell, at that time 
Lord of the Manor, was created an Earl, his second 
title was Viscount Shengay.
The remains of Shen- 
gay House, formerly the preceptory, were pulled 
down about the year 1794.
Shepukth.] — Shepreth, in the hundred of We- 
therley, five miles and three quarters north by west 
Here lies Sir John Freville, 
Who was lord of this manor: 
You, who pass this way, 
In charity, pray for his soul, 
9 
from Royston, is a pleasant little village, nearly 
surrounded by small rivulets.
There are several 
manors in this parish.
The Lord of the Manor of 
Shepreth (at present Hale Wortham, Esq.) pos- 
sesses a right of free-warren, and lias a royal char- 
ter for keeping swans on the stream which runs from 
Ashwell, in Hertfordshire, to Cambridge.
The 
manor of Chatteris, in the time of Henry III.
be- 
longed to the nunnery at that place.
At the Disso- 
lution, it was granted to Sir William Laxton, Knt.
from whom, by marriage, it descended to Thomas 
Wanton, and was inherited successively by his three 
sons, who all died without issue.
Nicholas, the 
youngest, left the estate to his nephew, John Layer, 
who made MS.
collections for the history of several 
of the hundreds in this part of the county.
Some 
of these collections have been deposited in the Bri- 
tish Museum ; and a thin folio volume is in the li- 
brary of Lord Hardwicke, at Wimpole.
Soham.] — Soham, or, as it is sometimes called, 
Monk's Soham, lies in the hundred of Staplehoe, 
five miles and a half south-east by east from Ely, 
and seventy and a half north-north-east from Lon- 
don.
It was formerly a market town, is still popu- 
lous and extensive, and has an annual fair on the 
9th of May.
It is evident from the following passage in Tan- 
ner's Notitia Monasticon, that Soham was a place of 
considerable note, from very early times : — " Here 
S. Felix the Apostle, and first Bishop of the East 
Angles, is said, about the year 630, to have founded 
a monastery, and to have placed the Episcopal see, 
which was afterward removed to Dunwich.
And 
hither that holy man's body was brought some time 
after his death, and buried, though his bones were at 
length translated from thence to Ramsey Abbey, 
when the great church here, built by a noble Saxon 
called Luttingus, was burnt; and the monks, a fa- 
mous convent of whom flourished here under Abbot 
Werefrid, were killed by the Danish army under the 
conduct of Inguar and Ubba, A.D. 870.
"f 
Soham Church has a large and lofty tower, which 
is seen at a great distance.
Richard the First gave 
the rectory to the abbot and convent of Pyne, who, 
in 1285, conveyed it to the abbot and convent of 
Rewlcy, near Oxford.
It now belongs to Pembroke 
Hall, the fellows of which, about the year 1450, 
pure-based it of the monks of Rewley.
In the 
church-yard is the following epitaph, on the head 
stone of a grave : — 
" Anno "Domini 1641, 
^Ktatis sua 125.
Here lies Doctor Ward, whom 
You knew well before: 
He was kind to his neighbour, 
Good to the poor." 
+ In ancient times, there was a lake at Soham, throu ,*.
which there was a dangerous passage, by water, to Ely. One 
of the bishops made a causeway through the feus.
This 
264 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
This remarkable instance of longevity having been 
nearly obliterated from the church register, by age, 
was re-written by the late vicar, and now appears 
as follows ; 
March 26, 1641.
Doc. John "Ward, 
Aged 125.
Thomas "Wilson, Cotitestor, Vicar, 1795.
Sohain abounds in dairies, the cheese from which 
very much resembles that of Stilton.
There are twelve alms-houses at Soham, for poor 
widows ; but, excepting with a small allowance of 
fuel, none of them are endowed.
Soham also has a 
large charity-school.
Several Roman urns have been found in the 
neighbourhood.
Stanton (Long).] — Long Stanton is a small vil- 
lage, distant six miles and a half north-west by west 
from Cambridge, where the Hatton family have 
been seated ever since the end of the sixteenth cen- 
tury.
The ancient manor-house, which was a vene- 
rable building, was erected about the year 1560 ; 
but it has, in a great measure, been taken down, and 
a smaller mansion built, which is now inhabited by 
Thomas Hatton, Esq. younger brother to Sir John 
Hatton.
This village has two churches, Stanton All-Saints, 
and Stanton St. Michael's.
The latter is a thatch- 
ed structure.
Neither of the churches contains any 
thing deserving of notice.
Stetchworth.] — Stetchworth, or Stachworth, 
distant two miles south by west from Newmarket, 
lies in the hundred of Radlow.
Lord Gorges, a 
former Lord of the Manor, sat in the Long Parlia- 
ment, and was surveyor-general of draining the fens, 
for twenty years.
The church contains a handsome 
monument, to the memory of his son Henry, who 
died in 1674, at the age of nineteen.
It is orna- 
mented with a figure, in white marble, of the de- 
ceased ; with figures of his father and mother in 
mourning attitudes.
Lord and Lady Gorges found- 
ed an alms- house at Stetchworth, in 1700, for two 
poor men and two poor women, endowing it with 
bOl. a year.
Each of the paupers receives two shil- 
* Thi?
gentleman was born in the year 16:50.
lie was edu- 
cated by his father, a clergyman, and afterwards removed to 
Gains College, Cambridge, where he took his degree of M.
A. 
in 16/6, at which time he entered into orders.
In 1679, he 
was instituted to the rectory of Ampton, in Suffolk, which he 
afterwards resigned, on being chosen lecturer at Gray's-Inn.
At i he Revolution he refused the oaths, and wrote in vindica- 
tion of the abdicated monarch, for which he was imprisoned in 
Newgate, but was discharged without being brought to trial.
When Sir John Friend and Sir William Perkins were executed 
for what was called the assassination plot, Mr. Collier and two 
other nonjuring clergymen attended them to the place of exe- 
cution, where all three joined in absolving them by the impo- 
sition of hands.
This circumstance made a great noise, and 
two of the ministers were taken up, but Mr. Collier absconded, 
and was declared an outlaw.
When this storm subsided, lie 
published three volumes of excellent Kssays upon Miscellane- 
ous Subjects.
He next directed his attention to the immora- 
lity of the stage, which was very licentious.
This drew him 
into a controversy with several eminent poets; but Dryden 
made an honest confession of his fault.
Mr. Collier came off 
in his laudable contest completely victorious; the town was on 
his side, and the dramatic writers began to write with more 
regard to decency.
His next woj'k was a translation and con- 
tinuation of Morezi's Dictionary, four volumes folio- At the 
accession of Queen Anne he had great offers of preferment, 
which he steadily refused.
In 1714 he published, in two vols.
folio, " The Ecclesiastical History of Great Britain," brought 
down to the death of Charles II.
In 1713, he was consecrat- 
ed a bishop by Dr. George Hickes, who was himself consecrat- 
ed suffragan of Thetford, by the deprived bishops of Norwich, 
Ely, and Peterborough, in 1694.
Mr. Collier suffered severe- 
ly by attacks of the stone, which brought him to the giave in 
1726.
Besides the above '\orks, he published a volume of 
Sermons, a translation of Marcus Antoninus, and numerous 
pamphlets.
thrusting 
lings a week, besides clothes and fuel.
Mr. Eaton 
is the present Lord of the Manor.
Stow (Long).] — Long Stow is situated in the 
hundred of Stow, two miles south by west from Cax- 
ton.
The petty sessions are holden here.
The 
manors of Stow and Hrune were presented to tins 
abbot and convent of Ramsey, by Ethelgiva, second 
wife of Earl Ailwin, who died in 985.
The manor 
of Stow, formerly holden under the abbey, by a fa- 
mily which took its name from the village, is now 
the property of the Rev. Robert Thomson, LL.
D. 
Stow -hall is occupied by a farmer.
Until the time of Edward the First, an estate in 
this parish was holden by the service of providing a 
truss of hay for the King's Cloaca, or, according to 
some records, Camera forinseca, whenever he should 
visit Cambridge.
Formerly there was an hospital at Stow, founded 
for poor sisters, in the reign of King Henry the 
Third.
Stow-Qui.]- — Stow-Qui, or Stow cum Qui, situ- 
ated in the hundred of Stare, five miles north-east 
from Cambridge, is chiefly remarkable as having 
been the birth-place of Jeremy Collier, the celebrat- 
ed nonjuror.
* 
Sutton.] — Sutton is a large village, situated in 
the south part of the hundred of Witchford, six 
miles and a half south-west by west from Ely. It 
formerly had a market on Thursdays, and a fifteen 
days' fair at the festival of St. Lambert, both of 
which have long been discontinued.
Sutton Church was erected by Barnct, Bishop of 
Ely, who died in the year 1373.
On the arched 
roof of the south porch are the bishop's arms, and 
bust, with a mitre on, carved in stone.
This 
" church," says Blomefield, " is one of the most 
beautiful regular buildings in the county.
It stands 
on a hill, and may be seen at a great distance on the 
north.
It hath an elegant lofty square tower, on 
which are two octagon stories, adorned with spire- 
work and earving, and terminated by a small leaden 
spire." 
In the parish of Sutton, in the year 1651, several 
ancient coins, large gold rings, and a thin plate of 
lead, were turned up by the plough ; and a labourer^ 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
265 
thrusting his hand into the earth near the same spot, 
discovered three silver plates ; the two largest of 
which had a round silver wire, running through the 
middle.
Round the edge of one of them was a 
Dano-Saxon inscription, which Dr. Ilickes, who 
had it engraved for his Thesaurus, conjectured to 
possess a mystical meaning, employed as a charm or 
amulet.
The inscription, with the exception of the 
first three words, he thus translated : — 
" O Lord, Lord, him always defend who carrieth 
me about him.
Grant him whatever he desire." 
A gentleman, whom we have just before quoted 
(Mr. Blomefield) reads it thus : — " Eadwen Mee- 
gage she is owner (of me) Lord him curse that me 
from her carries unless she me gives of her own 
will;" and Mr. Blomefield takes it only for a dish 
belonging to Edwin Meegage before the Conquest, 
and laid over these things to preserve them, proba- 
bly during the siege of Ely. Mr.
Gough* gives the 
following translation of the inscription : — 
" Edwin bought me, 
O Lord him curse 
That me from him takes away, 
Unless he sell me 
Of his own accord." 
Swaffham - Bulbeck.] Swaffham - Bulbeck, 
Bolebec, or Great Swaffham, is situated in the hun- 
* Of this gentleman, to whom the topographical and anti- 
quarian reader is so much indebted, we shall here take an op- 
portunity of furnishing a short account.
Richard Gough was 
the son and heir to Harry Gough, Esq. fifth son of Sir Harry 
Gough, of Perry-hall, Staffordshire.
He was born October 21, 
1735, in a large house in Winchester Street, London, on the 
site of the monastery of Austin Friars, founded by Humphrey 
de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, 1253.
He received 
the first rudiments of Latin under the tuition of Barnewitz, a 
Courlander, who taught at the same time, the sons of several 
eminent merchants in the city.
On the death of his tutor, he 
was committed to the instruction of the Rev. Roger Pickering, 
a very learned dissenting minister: on his death, May lGth, 
1775, Mr. Gough finished his Greek studies under Mr. Samuel 
Dyer, the friend of Jdhnson, and contemporary literary charac- 
ters.
On the death of his father, he was admitted, July 1752, 
fellow commoner of Bene't College, Cambridge, where his re- 
lations, Sir Henry Gough and his brother John, had before 
studied under Dr Mawson, afterwards Bishop of Chichester 
and Ely. The college tutor in 1752, was Dr. John Barnardis- 
ton, afterwards master, who married the widow of the celebrat- 
ed Dr. Conyers Midclleton, and died 17S8.
His private tutor 
was the Rev. John Cott, fellow of the house, son to the town 
clerk of Lynn, and afterwards rector of Broxted, Essex, where 
he died in 1781.
Under the private tuition of the three excel- 
lent scholars before mentioned, Mr. Gough early imbibed a 
taste for classical literature and antiquities ; and it "is not to be 
wondered at, that this connection with a college eminent for 
producing a succession of British antiquaries, inspired him with 
a strong propensity to the study of our national antiquities.
Here was first planned the " British Topography," published 
in 1768, in one 4to.
volume ; improved in two of the same size 
1780, and augmented by a third ready for the press.
From 
Cambridge he made his first excursion to Croyland and Peter- 
borough ; and continued these pursuits every year to various 
parts of the kingdom, taking notes, which on "his return, were 
VOL.
I. NO.
19.
dred of Stare, five miles west-south-west from New- 
market.
The manor was anciently possessed by the 
family of Bolebec, or Bulbeck, one of whom found - 
ed a Benedictine nunnery here before the reign of 
King John, some small remains of which still exist ; 
but the site is occupied chiefly by a modern farm- 
house.
At the Dissolution, the revenues of the nuns 
amounted to little more than 461.
which had been 
appropriated to 'the maintenance of nine persons.
The conventual church, of which there are now no 
remains, was rebuilt about the year 1350 ; and de- 
dicated, in 1352, by the Bishop of Ely.
The manor is now the property of William Parker 
Hamond, Esq. by inheritance from the Parkers.
Mrs. Frances Towers founded a charity-school 
here, in 1721, and endowed it with 501.
a year.
Swaffham-Priou.] — Swaffham-Prior, or Little 
Swaffham, is also situated in the hundred of Stare, 
three miles and a quarter west by south from New- 
market.
It formerly had a market on Fridays, and 
a five days' fair at the festival of St. John the Bap- 
tist ; but they have both been long discontinued.
This village contains two parishes — St. Mary, 
and St. Cyric — the churches belonging to which 
stand on a high hill, in one church-yard, and hence 
have obtained the name of Swaffham two Churches.
" These structures," observe the editors of the 
Beauties of England and Wales, " are built in differ- 
ent styles of architecture, and, from their situation, 
which 
digested into form ; these furnished materials for a new edition 
of Camden's Britannia, the result of twenty years excursions.
In 1767 he was elected F.
S. A.
of London; and, by the par- 
tiality of the late worthy president, Dr. Milles, Dean of Exe- 
ter, was on the death of Dr. Gregory Sharpe, Master of the Tem- 
ple, nominated director of the same Society, 177 1 ; which office 
he held till December 12, 1797, when he quitted the Society.
He was chosen F.
R. S.
1775 ; but quitted that Society in 1795.
He drew up the History of the Society of Antiquaries of Lon- 
don, prefixed to the first volume of their Archsologia, 1775 ; 
and in t'le succeeding volumes of that collection, the publica- 
tion of which he superintended, are various articles drawn up, 
or communicated by him.
Accounts of several plates in the 
" Vetusta Monumenta" of the same Society bear his signa- 
ture.
He opened a correspondence with the Gentleman's Maga- 
zine in 1767; and on the death of his fellow collegian, Mr.
Duncombe, in 17S6, he occasionally communicated reviews of 
literary publications to that miscellany.
In 1773, he formed a 
design of a new edition of Camden's Britannia, which he was 
seven years translating and printing, and which was published in 
three volumes folio, 1789- 
Being on a visit at Poole, and hearing of the difficulties un- 
der which Mr. Hutchins laboured respecting his history of Dor- 
set, he set on foot a subscription, and was the means of bringing 
into light a most valuable county history, which lie superintend- 
ed through the press, whence it issued in two volumes folio, 
1774.
Its author did not live to see it completed; but his 
daughter having been able to proceed to Bombay, and form a 
happy connection with a gentleman to whom she had long been 
engaged, General Bellasis, in grateful return to the memory of 
his father-in-law, at his own expence, set on foot a new edition 
of the History of Dorset, and Mr. Gough contributed his assist- 
ance to his second edition, twenty years alter the first.
Except 
Thomas's republication of Dugdale's Warwickshire, and the 
paltry republications of Burton's Leicestershire, and Philpot's 
3 x Kent, 
266 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
which renders them conspicuous at a great distance, 
become very beautiful ornaments to the adjacent 
country.
The tower of S waff ham Prior is a square 
at bottom, with an octagon story above, and double 
that number of sides upwards, terminating in a spire.
The tower of St. Cyric is also square below, and oc- 
tagonal above, but terminates abruptly a little be- 
yond the roof.
It was originally designed for a 
spire, but finished with difficulty in its preseut state.
The chancel was built as early as the year 1344 ; 
but the entire fabric was not completed till 1504 : 
these periods are sufficiently distant from each 
other to refute the traditionary talc of the above 
churches having been erected at the expence of two 
sisters." 
The church of St. Cyric, having for some years 
been in a dilapidated state, has, since the above ac- 
count was written, b.*n pulled 'eloign, and rebuilt; 
but the old tower has been suffered to remain.
St.
Mary's church has also been pulled down, excepting 
the tower.
Here are some cottages allotted for the poor, but 
they are without endowment.
Here is also a cha- 
rity-school for ten poor children.
Swavesey.] — Swavesey is situated in the hundred 
of Papworth, nine miles north-west by west from 
Cambridge.
It formerly had a market on Tues- 
days, and a fair for three days, at Michaelmas, 
granted to the Zouches, Lords of the Manor, in 
Kent, by Wittingliam, of Lynn, and Thornton's Mollingham- 
shire, by Throsley, not much superior, this is the first instance of 
a county history attaining a second edition.
Having purchased the collections of Mr. T.
Martin, he edit- 
ed an improved " History of Thetford, 1799," 4to.
with plates 
taken by Captain Grose, who accompanied him in the snowy 
season, 1778.
Having also purchased the plates of the medals, 
coins, and great seals, executed by the celebrated Simon, and 
first published by Vertue, 1753, he gave a new and enlarged 
edition of them,*) 780.
He assisted Mr. Nichols in his " Col- 
lection of Royal and Noble Wills, 1780;" and wrote the pre- 
face.
He superintended the printing of Dr. Nash's " Collec- 
tions for a History of Worcestershire, '' in two volumes folio, 
1781 ; a short supplement to which has since been published.
In 1786, he published the first volume of the " Sepulchral 
Monuments of Great Britain," iir a splendid folio; in 1796, the 
second; and in 1799, the introduction which completes the 
work.
In 1794, he published an account of the beautiful mis- 
sal presented to Henry VI.
by the Duchess of Bedford, which 
Mr. Edwards, Bookseller ia.
Pall* Mall, purchased at the Du- 
rness of Portland's sale, and still possesses.
In Mr. Nichols's " Bibliotheca Topographica," the design 
of which he both suggested and forwarded, several essays bear 
his name, and he assisted in the copious, well digested, and ac- 
curate " History of Leicestershire." undertaken and conducted 
with a perseverance, which would baffle common county his- 
torians.
Young as Mr. Gough was at his father's death, being only 
sixteen, his first care was to establish a noble library.
To him 
the well-stored shop of Tom Payne, at the Mews Gale, and 
the auction rooms of Baker and Paterson, had beauties tran- 
scending all the alluring scenes of dissipation.
In August 1774, he married Anne, daughter of Thomas Hall, 
Esq. of Golding, Herts, having just before, by the death of his 
mother, come into full possession of the house at Enfield, with 
t.ie large estate bequeathed him by his father.
the year 1243.
They have both, however, been 
discontinued.
Swavesey manor, which had belonged to Editha, 
the consort of Edward the Confessor, was presented 
by William the Conqueror to Alan de Zouch, Earl 
of Britanuy, his son-in-law.
This nobleman gave 
the church of Swavesey to the abbot of St. Sergius 
and St. Bacchus, in Normandy ; in consequence of 
which, as a cell to that abbey, a priory of Black 
Monks was established at Swavesey.
In 1393, the 
priory was conveyed to the Carthusian Monks of 
St. Anne, near Coventry.
The site of the priory, 
of which there are some important remains on the 
north side of the church, was granted, with the 
priory manor, in the reign of Elizabeth, to the Bi- 
shop of Ely and his successors.
The principal manor which continued many gene- 
rations in the Zouches, is now the property of Tho- 
mas Cockayne, Esq. of Ickleford.
In the reign of 
Henry the Third, it had very extensive privileges 
granted to it ; such as, a view of frankpledge, twice 
in the year ; free warren ; the power of life and 
death ; the regulations of weights and measures, 
&c.
The site of a castle, supposed to have been an 
ancient seat of the Zouches, who are known to have 
resided at Swavesey, in the fourteenth century, is 
visible about half a mile to the south-west of the 
church.
Mr. Gough was a pleasant and easy companion, condescend- 
ing to all, and to the poor, a father, friend, and protector.
His 
" Sepulchral Monuments" alone, to pass over his inferior 
works, was sufficient to perpetuate his fame as a writer ; but in 
this he received much assistance from several great men, con- 
noisseurs.
To effect a second edition of the work, and to ob- 
tain an ample store of additional engravings by the first artists, 
he spared neither trouble nor expence.
From a long and severe illness, which was his last, Mr. Gough 
was released.
without an apparent struggle, Feb. 20, 1809, and 
was buried on the 28th, in the church-yard of Wormley, Herts, 
which church he had devoutly frequented several years.
By his last will, Mr. Gough lias given to the University of 
Oxford all his printed books and manuscripts, on Saxon and 
Norman literature,, for the use of the Saxon professor.
What 
relates to British Topography, with fourteen volumes of sepul- 
chral and other monuments in France, are to be placed in the 
Bodleian Library, in a building adjoining the picture gallery, 
called the Antiquarian Closet.
To Mr. Nichols he has left his 
interleaved set of the Gentleman's Magazine, that of the Anec- 
dotes of Mr. Bowyer, with 10001.
in money, and 1o the six 
daughters of that learned printer 1 00!.
each.
His legacies, ex- 
ceeding 30,0001.
were all to be paid without deduction for the 
stamps.
For Mrs. Gough, who survived him, a life interest was 
secured in the whole of his property.
Amongst the annuities he left, one reflects the highest 
credit on his memory.
The late Mr. Barnveldt bequeathed 
1001.
a year in the Short Annuitits among ten poor men and 
women of Enfield, not receiving alms from the parish.
The 
Short Annuities- closed in 1807, and this source of bounty 
ceased ; when Mr. Gough, though wholly unconnected with 
Mr. Barnveldt, otherwise than as a neighbour, voluntarily gave 
the like sum to each of the annuitants, and afterwards made 
provision in his will, that the annuities be paid as long as one 
individual shall survive.
Swavesey 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
2G7 
Swavesey Cliurch contains several monuments of 
the Cutts family, of which there were five knights 
in succession, of the name of John.
The monument 
of Anne, Lady Cutts, who died in the year 1631, 
represents a cabinet of black marble, with open fold- 
ing doors.
Thorney.] — Thorney, anciently denominated 
Ancarig, or Ankeridge, from the anchorites who 
dwelt in the cells of an abbey founded here by Sex- 
ulphus, the first Abbot of Peterborough, in the time 
of St. Etheldreda, is situated in the north part of 
the hundred of Witehford, ten miles north by west 
from March, and five and a half south-east by east 
from Crowland, m the county of Lincoln.
It de- 
rived its present name from the thorns and bushes 
which used to grow in its vicinity.
Thorney has a market on Thursdays, which was 
granted to the Earl of Bedford, by the charter of 
> the Bedford Level, in 1638.
It has also two fairs, 
on the 1st of July, and the 21st of September, which 
are much frequented for the sale of horses and cat- 
tle.
It has likewise a holiday fair on Whit Monday.
The petty sessions are holden at Thorney.
Old Malmsbury described Thorney as a terrestrial 
paradise ; as " the school of divine philosophy, the 
residence of virtue, the abode of chastity ;" and 
though at present, perhaps, it may not excel its 
neighbours in point of female virtue, its situation is 
extremely pleasant, the eminence on which it stands 
being surrounded by low and fertile grounds in a 
complete state of drainage, the expence of which is 
defrayed by an annual tax of about one shilling an 
acre.
The monastery, or cells, in which the hermits or 
anchorites resided at Thorney, was founded about 
the year 662.
Some of the hermits had the honour 
of canonization, as St. Tancred, St. Torthed, and 
St. Tona.
Dugdale informs us, that by the statutes 
of this foundation, it was enjoined, that " no woman 
should come within six miles of it ; and that the 
sight of a woman would be deemed a prodigy ;" 
consequently, we ought not to be much surprised at 
the fame which Thorney acquired for chastity.
The" monastery, having been destroyed by the 
Danes, was re-founded by Ethel wold, Bishop of 
Winchester, in the year 972, for Benedictine monks, 
and became the burial-place of many devout Saxons, 
whose reputation for sanctity procured them the title 
of saints.
None of their monuments, however, re- 
main.
In 1085, the old church was taken down, and 
a new one was commenced by the Abbot Gunter ; 
but it was not completed till the year 1128, when it 
was dedicated to St. Mary and St. Botolph, by Her- 
veeus, Bishop of Ely. This structure possessed 
considerable magnificence, and according to Browne 
Willis, was at least " five times as large as at pre- 
sent, and had, no doubt, a great cross aisle, with a 
tower in the middle, and a choir beyond it." When 
the abbey was dissolved by Henry the Eighth, great 
part of the church was destroyed; but the remain- 
der escaped destruction by being made parochial.
The aisles were removed i« 1636 ; and the nave, 
which is sixty-six feet in length, and twenty-eight 
in breadth, was repaired, and fitted up for divine 
service.
The west front, which is the entrance to 
the church, is the most complete part of the old 
building.
The recess for the door-way, and the 
arch of the west window, are pointed ; and, over the 
latter, is a row of nine statues of saints, in Gothic 
arches, occupying the space between two octagonal 
towers, which rise from each side of the front nearly 
twenty feet.
At the time of the Dissolution, the revenues of 
the abbey were estimated at' the clear annual value 
of 4111, 12s.
lid.
A great part of its possessions, 
together with its site, was given in the year 1549 to 
John, Lord Russell, ancestor of the Duke of Bed- 
ford, who is the Lord of the Manor, and the sole 
proprietor of the parish.
The monastery used to enjoy the privilege of 
sending members to Parliament.
Near its site, se- 
veral urns, and coins of the Emperor Trajan, have 
at times been dug up.
The inhabitants of Thorney are chiefly the de- 
scendants of the Refugee French, or Walloons ; a 
colony of whom settled at Thorney, about the mid- 
dle of the seventeenth century, having been employ- 
ed by the Earl of Bedford in draining the fens.
In 
the church-yard are several of the tombs of the 
refugees.
A school-house was built at Thorney, by an an- 
cestor of the Duke of Bedford, who allows a salary 
of 201.
a year to a master, and supports ten or 
twelve poor families in some alms-houses, which 
were never regularly endowed.
Triplow.] — Triplow, situated in the hundred of 
that name, five miles and a half north-north-east 
from Royston, is the place where, it is said, Crom- 
well influenced the officers of the Parliament's army 
to form the Council of Agitators.
The manor, which 
was given to the monks of Ely, by Duke Brithnoth, 
in 991, is now the property of Ambrose Benning, 
Esq.
Many of the women and children of this village 
are employed in the preparation of woollen-yarn for 
the Norwich and north country markets.
Trumpington.] — Trumpington is a small village, 
situated in the hundred of Triplow, two miles south 
from Cambridge.
F. C.
J. Pemberton, a descend- 
ant of Sir Francis Pemberton, Lord Chief Justice 
of the Common Pleas, is the present Lord of the 
Manor, and has a seat at Trumpington.
There are several manors in this parish.
The 
abbot and convent of Ely had one, given to them by 
Duke Brithnoth, in the year 991 ; and some records 
speak of a manor in Trumpington^ as belonging to 
the nuns of St. Radegund, and afterwards to the 
master.
and fellows of Jesus College.
This college 
has at present an estate of about thirty acres of land 
in Trumpington ; but it does not claim any manorial 
privileges.
. 
Giles de Trumpington, in the year 1314, had a 
grant 
208 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
grant of a fair, to be hold en here for three days, at 
the festival of St. Peter ad vinculo ; and, though the 
fair has long- been discontinued, the parish feast is 
still kept on this festival.
In the year 1679, William Austin gave fourteen 
acres of land, in Bottisham, for the education of four 
poor children of this parish.
Trumpingfon Church contains the monument of 
a crusader, one of the Trumpington family ; and 
some memorials of the Pychers, or Pychards, for- 
merly Lords of the Manor.
In this parish, at a place called Dam-hill, near 
the river, many urns (Vvith human bones) and dif- 
ferent Roman antiquities, have been found.
Lord 
Oxford had several vases and paterae that were dis- 
covered here : and Mr. Gough mentions a drawing 
in his own possession, by Beaupre Bell, of a patera 
" having in the centre a griffin tearing a stag, sur- 
rounded by a border of dogs, boars, hares, &c.
and 
an outer one of flowers." 
The manor of Beaufoes, or Crochemans, in the 
parish of Trumpington, was well known as the re- 
sidence of the late Christopher Anstey, Esq.* It 
is now the property of his eldest son, the Rev.
Christopher Anstey ; as is also the manor of Tin- 
coitts.
Nathaniel Wadd, Esq. is the occupant of 
Beanfoss' manor-house.
Upwell.] — Upwell, distant five miles and a quar- 
ter south-east from Wisbech, is situated partly in 
the hundred of Wisbech, in Cambridgeshire, and 
partly in the hundred of Clackclose, in Norfolk.
In 
the Cambridgeshire part of the parish are the sites 
of two ancient monasteries, one of Avhich, known 
by the names of Welle, and Mirmaud or Marmaud, 
was a small priory of Gilbertines, founded either in 
the reign of Richard I.
or King John, by Ralph de 
Hanville, as a cell to the priory of Sempringham, 
in Lincolnshire.
The estate which belonged to this 
priory, now known by the name of Ormau's farm, 
was granted by Queen Elizabeth, to Perceval 
Bowes, and John Mosyer, and is now the property 
of Mr. Bacon, from the Audleys, of Lynne, in 
whose possession it has been for many years.
No 
remains of the conventual buildings are visible.
Thirling priory existed in the year 1528 ; but 
nothing of its history is known.
Some lands, call- 
ed Thirlings, and an ancient mansion in the village 
of Upwell, which has the appearance of having 
been a religious house, are in the possession of Sir 
L' Estrange.
The manor of Upwell is the 
property of Richard Greaves Townley, Esq.
Wateubeach.] — Waterbeach is situated in the 
* This ingenious poet was born in Wiltshire, and received 
his education at Eton and Cambridge, but was obliged to quit 
the University without a degree, for a satirical speech made by 
him in the public schools.
After this he went into the army ; 
but resided the principal part of his life at Bath, where he pub- 
lished anonymously the Bath Guide, a ludicrous poem, in 
17(i6.
The year following appeared his poem on (he death of 
the Marquis of Tavistock.
Some years afterwards he publish- 
ed, " An Election Ball in poetical letters from Mr. Inkle at 
hundred of North Stow, five miles and a quarter 
north-north-east from Cambridge.
Nearly in the 
middle of this parish, between Cambridge and Ely, 
formerly stood Denny abbey, which was originally 
a cell of Benedictine monks (subordinate to the 
convent at Ely) who had been remoAed from El- 
meney, by Alberius Picot, about the year 1 160, and 
remained here till some time in the next century, 
when their possessions became the property of the 
Knights Templars.
This order being dissolved in 
the year 1312, their estates were granted, by Pope 
Clement the Fifth, to the Knights Hospitallers, who 
re-granted Denny Abbey to Edward the Second.
Edward the Third, about the year 1341, bestowed it 
on Mary St. Paul, Countess of Pembroke (relict of 
Audomer de Valencia) who founded a nunnery here 
for an abbess and nuns minoresses, to the honour of 
the Virgin and St. Clair.
At the Dissolution, their 
revenues amounted to 1721.
8s.
3|d.
per annum.
Their possessions were granted by Henry VIII.
to 
Edward Elrington, and, after passing through va- 
rious hands, an annuity of 1341.
3s.
4d.
issuing from 
the lands at Waterbeach, was purchased by Tobias 
Rustat, soon after the Restoration, and settled on 
Jesus College.
The estate at Denny has for many 
years been possessed by the Heinmington family ; 
and, on the site of the abbey, there' has been erect- 
ed a spacious and convenient dwelling-house.
The 
remains of the church and other parts of the con- 
ventual buildings are appropriated to the use of the 
farm.
The walls inclose an area of about four 
acres, formerly surrounded by a moat, nearly the 
whole of which may yet be traced.
In the year 1628, Mr. John Yaxley, alderman of 
Cambridge, gave directions for building an alms- 
house at Waterbeach, with an endowment of 121.
a year, for six poor widows.
In 1705, Mrs. Jane 
Brigham left a rent-charge of 151.
a year to these 
widows.
In 1687, Mrs. Grace Clark left the inter- 
est of 1001.
for the instruction of six poor children, 
and the overplus to be given to the poor ; and, in 
1688, Mrs. Dorothy Stone gave some land for the 
augmentation of the school ; so that, at present, 
eighteen children are taught, and the master enjoys 
a salary of upwards of 401.
a year, besides a good 
house and garden.
Whittlesea.] — Whittlesea, situated in the north 
part of the hundred of Witchford, ten miles and a 
half Avest south-west from March, contains two pa- 
rishes, St. Mary and St. Andrew ; but their respec- 
tive boundaries cannot be ascertained, and they are 
so far consolidated, that, although in distinct pa- 
Bath, to his wife at Gloucester." Me was likewise the author 
of" A Poetical Paraphrase upon the 13th chapter of the first 
epistle to the Corinthians, 1779 ;" " The Priest Dissected, a 
poem ; A.
D. C.
W. Bampfylde, Epistola poetica familiar is, 
&c." " Speculation, or a Defence of Mankind," 4to.
" Li- 
berality, or Memoirs of a Decayed Macaroni," 4lo.
" The 
Farmer's Daughter, a poetical tale ;" and other works.
Mr.
Anstey died in 1805.
2 tronn go, 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
269 
tronage, they are generally held by the same per- 
son, and one register of births, &c.
serves for 
both.
Exclusively of the town, Whittlesea is divided 
into five districts : Estry, Cotes, Eldernal, Willow- 
hall, and Glassraoor.
At the last-mentioned place, 
about the year 1742, several Roman lamps, of the 
red ware, were found.
Whittlesea formerly had a market on Fridays ; 
and it still has a fair, for horses, on the 13th of June.
The market has now been wholly disused about 
thirty years.
Whittles ea-Mere, in this parish, is in the county 
of Huntingdon.
It is six miles long, and three 
broad, and is frequently agitated in the most violent 
manner by the wind.
It is abundantly stocked with 
fish and water-fowl.
Whittlesea contains some alms-houses, supported 
by the parish ; and a charity-school, for twenty- 
seven children.
Whittlesford.] — Whittlesford is situated in the 
hundred of that name, six miles and a quarter west 
from Linton.
This, also, according to tradition, 
was formerly a market-town ; and Selden, in his 
titles of honour, mentions an alderman's court hav- 
ing been holden here, about the year 990.
An hospital, the remains of which are still visible, 
was founded near Whittlesford-bridge, as early as 
the reign of Edward the I.
by one William Colvill, 
who dedicated it to St. John the Baptist.
The re- 
mains of this hospital are in the parish of Duxford 
St. John.
Mr. Win.
Westley, about the year 17-23, left two 
farms at Hempsted, in Essex, which now let for 501.
a year, for the purpose of founding schools at Whit- 
tlesford, for the instruction of thirty boys and fifteen 
girls.
Wicken.] — Wicken, or Wykes, is situated in the 
hundred of Staplehoe, seven miles north-west by 
west from Newmarket.
It had, in ancient times, a 
market on Mondays, and a three days' fair at the 
festival of St. Laurence.
The manor, anciently in 
the Thorntons, passed, by female heirs, to the fami- 
lies of Bassingbourn, Colville and Gernon ; from 
which, about the reign of Edward the III.
it was 
conveyed by marriage to the Peytons.
Sir Henry 
Peyton, Bart, was Gustos Rotulorum of this county 
in the reign of Charles the First, but having been 
deprived of his office by the Duke of Buckingham, 
he became an inveterate enemy to the Royal cause, 
and wrote a pamphlet to justify the manner of the 
King's death, which he intituled " The Divine Ca- 
tastrophe of the Kingly House of the Stuarts." 
Abdut the year 1800, Wicken manor was sold, by 
the Earl of Besborough, in whose family it had 
been many years, to Mr. John Rayner, who resides 
in the manor-house.
Spinney Priory, in this parish, was founded by 
Sir Hugh de Maleblisse, who had married Beatrice, 
lady of the u, |pr of Wykes, in the reign of Henry 
¥¥ I.
for three Austin canons.
About the year 
vol.
i. — no.
19.
HI 
1802, Lady Bassingbourn augmented the founda- 
tion with lour more canons ; and, in the fifteenth 
of Edward the Second, Mary, widow of Sir Hum- 
phrey Bassingbourn, granted a messuage in the 
village of Wicken, and several pieces of land, to 
the priory, on condition that they should constantly 
maintain seven aged men, by giving each of them a 
farthing loaf, a herring, and a pennyworth of ale, 
daily ; and every year three ells of linen, a woollen 
garment, a pair of shoes, and 200 dry turfs for 
firing.
About the middle of the fifteenth century, Spin- 
ney Priory, having fallen into decay, was united to 
the priory of Ely ; and after the reformation, i):v 
site, together with a manor in Wicken, was grant- 
ed in trust for Sir Edward North.
In 1559, Sir 
George Somerset died seized of the priory estate ; 
and about the middle of the following century, it be- 
came the property of Henry Cromwell, the fourth I 
son of the Protector, some time Lord Lieutenant of 
Ireland, in which station his integrity and talents 
procured him the esteem of every party.
After the 
Restoration, this gentleman retired to Chippenham, 
where he resided with his father and his brother-in- 
law nearly six years.
He then removed to Spinney 
Priory, where he passed the remainder of his days, 
" descending," as Dr. Gibbons observes, " from the 
toilsome grandeur of governing men, to the humble 
and happy occupation of husbandry." He was vi- 
sited in this retirement by Charles the Second, who, 
on returning to Newmarket, after the diversion of 
hare hunting in the vicinity of Spinney priory, in 
September, 1671, expressed a wish for refreshment; 
and being informed by a courtier, that a very honest 
gentleman resided in the neighbourhood, who woidd 
think it an honour to entdrtain his Majesty, desired 
to be conducted to his seat.
On entering the farm- 
yard, which led to the house, one of his Majesty's 
attendants took up a muck-fork, and throwing it 
across his shoulder, walked in a stately manner be- 
fore Mr. Cromwell, who was then in the yard, won- 
dering at the number of his visitors, and still more 
so at this ceremony, which even surprised the laugh- 
ter-loving monarch, who enquired its meaning.
" Sire," said the muck-fork bearer, " the gentle- 
man before whom I now carry this implement of 
husbandry, is Mr. Henry Cromwell, to whom I had 
the honour of being mace-bearer when he was in 
Ireland." The King smiled ; but Mr. Cromwell was 
thrilled with confusion ; which however, was soon 
removed by the ease and gaiety of his Royal guest ; 
and the hungry company having been treated with 
much hospitality by the generous Henry, departed 
from his table with expressions of satisfaction 
and pleasure.
Mr. Cromwell died on the 22d of 
March, 1673-4, of the stone, and was buried within 
the communion rails of Wicken church.
Several 
other individuals of the Cromwell family, also lie in 
Wicken church.
Among them, is Elizabeth, the 
Protector's lady, on whose grarve-stone is this plain 
inscription : 
3 y Elizabetha 
270 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Euzabetha Cromwell, de Ely, 
Obiit xvi.
die Septembris, 
Anno Christi MDCLXXII Annoq.
jEiatisLXXHU.
An inscription, commemorative of Henry Crom- 
well, who lies close to his mother, is engraven on a 
black marble slab, as follows : — 
Henricus Cromwell, de Spinney, obiit xxur.
Die Martii, Anno Chris.ti MDCLXXII.
Annoq.
iEtatis XLVIII.
The grave-stone of Elizabeth, Henry's wife, bears 
the following inscription : — 
Elizabetha Uxor Hcnrici Cromwell, 
Obiit 7 die Aprilis Ano. 1687.
Annoq.
/Ktatis sua bU.
The estate of Spinney descended successively to 
Oliver and Henry, the sons of the above-mentioned 
Henry Cromwell ; and, by the latter, it was mort- 
gaged, in 1687, to Philip Welbore.
It was after- 
wards purchased by Edward Russell, Earl of Or- 
ford ; and is now, by inheritance from Charles, 
Duke of Somerset, the property of the Earl of 
Aylesford.
Wilberton.] — Wilberton, supposed to be so call- 
ed from Wilbertus, a Saxon, who was killed by the 
Danes in the year 870, is situated in the hundred of 
Witchford, five miles and a half south-west by south 
from Ely.
Wilberton Church is a handsome light Gothic 
huilding.
It contains the remains of Archdeacon 
Wetheringsete, who died in 1440 ; and of Archdea- 
con Bole, who died in 1477.
Willingham.] — Willingham, or Wivelingham, is 
situated in the hundred of Papworth, eight miles and 
a half north-west by north from Cambridge.
The 
manor, which is very extensive, was given to the 
abbot and convent of Ely, by Uva, a Saxon.
It is 
now in the Hatton family ; and the manor-house, 
which is in a very ruinous state, is inhabited by a 
cottager.
Ou the north side of the chancel of Willingham 
church, is a chapel, with a stone roof of singular 
construction.
The village of Willingham, however, is chiefly 
remarkable as having been the birth-place of Tho- 
mas Hall, who having attained almost to the height 
and proportions of manhood, died at the age of live 
years and ten months, on the 3d of September, 1747.
An account of this extraordinary boy was published 
in a pamphlet, called " Prodigiura Willinghamense," 
by Mi*.
Dawkes, a surgeon.
Some particulars con- 
cerning him had been communicated, in 1774, to the 
Royal Society, by Mr. Almond, of Willingham, and 
were published in the Philosophical Transactions ; 
his age was then two years and ten months, he had 
attained a height of three feet eight inches and a 
half, and was large, in proportion.
Mr. Almond 
states that he was so strong, as to be able to throw j 
from his band a blacksmith's hammer of seventeen 
pounds weight : his voice was a deep bass ; he had 
the marks of puberty, and whiskers on his upper 
lip ; at this time he was carried about as a show : 
it appears from Mr. Dawkes" s pamphlet, that this 
boy grew at the rate of an inch a month, until the 
end of March, 1745 ; in the next thirteen months he 
grew only five inches : in November, 1746, his height 
was four feet five inches and five-tenths ; the length 
of his foot was eight inches, and the calf of his leg 
ten inches six tenths in circumference ; he then 
weighed eighty-five pounds, or six stone and one 
pound.
He was buried in the church-yard of Wil- 
lingham, where, it was intended that a tombstone 
should have been erected to his memory, but it does 
not appear that it was ever put in execution : an 
epitaph designed for it, written in Latin and 
English by Mr. Dawkes, is printed at the end of his 
pamphlet.
In the year 1593, a charity-school was founded 
by subscription, at Willingham ; and, in 1700, Dr.
Saywell, master of Jesus College, Cambridge, left 
a rent-charge of 101.
a year, as an augmentation to 
the school, which provides instruction for thirty-six 
children.
In 1616, Dr. William Smith, provost of King's 
College, founded an alms-house here, for four poor 
widows, and endoAved it with 121.
a year.
The poor 
of this parish, derive the benefit of 111.
a year, from 
a house which was left for that purpose, by Henry 
Greves, in the year 1505.
About 1200 milch cows are usually kept in the 
parish of Willingham ; and much of the eheese, 
which takes its name from the neighbouring parish 
of Cottenham, is made here.
Wimpole.] — Wimpole, or Wimple, eminently dis- 
tinguished as the seat of the Earl of Hardwicke, is 
situated in the hundred of Wetherley, four miles and 
a half south-east by east from Caxton.
Formerly 
there were several distinct manors in this parish ; 
but, eventually, they all centered in the Chicheleys, 
who settled at Wimpole in the reign of Henry the 
Sixth.
John Chicheley, Esq. of Higham Ferrers, 
was the first of the family who settled here ; and 
from him the Wimpole estate descended to Sir Tho - 
mas Chicheley, master of the ordnance in the reign 
of Charles the Second.
Sir Thomas sold it to Sir 
John Cutler, in the year 16S6 ; and Sir John, in 
1691, gave it, in case of failure of issue from his 
daughter, the Countess of Radnor, to Edmund 
Boulter, who, disposing of his interest to the Coun- 
tess, conveyed it to her in fee.
The Earl of Rad- 
nor, who survived the Countess, sold the estate to 
John, Duke of Newcastle, in 1710 ; in 1739, it Mas 
purchased by Philip, Earl of Hardwicke, Lord High 
Chancellor of Great Britain, of the Earl of Oxford, 
who had received it in marriage with the daughter 
of the Duke of Newcastle ; and it is now the pro- 
perty of his grandson, Philip, Earl of Hardwicke.
Wimpole-House, the residence of his lordship, is 
a spacious brick mansion, with extensive wings.
which 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
271 
which have been added since the erection of the cen- 
tral part of the building, believed to have been rais - 
el by Sir Thomas Chieheley, about the year 1632.
The east wing- is connected with the offices, and the 
west with a large green-house.
The entrance to the 
hall is by a double flight of steps.
The interior of 
the building, which combines neatness with elegance, 
has been greatly improved by the present Earl, who 
has thrown several of the chambers into one, which 
is magnificently fitted up as a State Drawing Room.
The various apartments contain a very fine assem- 
blage of paintings ; many of which are by the first 
masters, and the whole collection is extremely well 
chosen.
In the Gallery are the following- : — 
Ben Jonson ; Cornelius Jansen : a long picture.
The countenance of the Poet, who appears seated at 
a table, with a pen in his hand, and in the act of 
study, is thoughtful and penetrating ; and the whole 
expression is dignified and noble.
Frank Hals, by himself.
In this, which is a very 
curious head, the painter has pourtrayed himself 
witli rough hair and huge whiskers ; and an air of 
eccentricity and wilduess pervades the whole coun- 
tenance.
A Venetian Nobleman, and Ignatius Loyola ; both 
by Titian, and extremely fine.
Spinola, the famous Spanish general : Rubens.
Head of a Monk : supposed to be Martin Lu- 
ther.
A half length of a Lady, looking over the railing 
of a balcony.
The Library is an exceedingly noble apartment, 
and the col ection of books is very select and valua- 
ble.
It contains the best editions of both English 
and foreign authors, in every branch of literature ; 
besides many volumes of curious engravings.
The 
room is ornamented with portraits of the most emi- 
nent writers ; among them are heads of Lord So- 
mers, Warburton, Dr. Clarke, Ben Jonson, Pope, 
Sir Isaac Newton, and Dr. Barrow ; a whole length 
of Bishop Burnet, by Sir Godfrey Kneller ; and a 
half length of Matthew Prior, with one hand placed 
on a book.
This is a very spirited picture : the 
countenance of the poet is thin, and the nose sharp ; 
the expression is superior to the painting of him in 
St. John's College, and the features are also very 
different.
Prior was frequently a visitor at Wim- 
pole when it belonged to Lord Oxford ; this portrait, 
therefore, it may be presumed, is the more accurate 
likeness.
In this apartment is a fine carving, in 
ivory, of Our Saviour on the Cross, brought from 
Italy by Lord Handwicke.
The agony of the coun- 
tenance, and the appearance of the body drawn up 
by extreme pain, are well and forcibly represented.
Besides the books in this library, Lord Hardwicke has 
a large and valuable collection of State Papers, and 
other manuscripts, preserved in an apartment secur- 
* The fate of this promising young nobleman, the eldest son 
of the present Earl of Hardwicke, was peculiarly distressing to 
his noble parents.
He was wrecked in the Agatha, off Lubeck, 
near Memel, oa the 7t.li of April, 1803.
II is lord.
hip and 
ed from all danger of being <ic:-hoyrd by fire.
The 
most select of the remaining paintings, in the differ- 
ent rooms, are as follow : — 
David and Goliath ; Giorgionc : the Angel ap- 
pearing to Hagar : the Inside of the Chun h of St.
John de Lateral!, at Rome : Virgin and Child ; 
Old Palma : Vandyck ; a head, by himself : the 
Laughing and Crying Philosophers ; Rubens: Vir- 
gin and Child, surrounded with Flowers ; Vandyck : 
the Passage of the Israelites : a Battle.
Piece ; Rosa 
di Tivoli: Sir Thomas More; Holbein: Job and 
his Wife.
The body of Job is naked and covered 
with boils.
Near him stands his wife, who, from her 
expression and attitude, it might be supposed, was 
telling him to " curse God and die." A curious 
piece, called " A Philosopher's Study ;" but is more 
like the cabinet of a Virtuoso ; Old Francks.
It re- 
presents the interior of a large room, with various 
groups of figures assembled in different parts.
The 
walls are ornamented with numerous small paint- 
ings, many of them highly finished ; and, though 
very minute, clear and expressive.
Roman Chanty; 
Rubens : Richard, Earl of Warwick, the parliamen- 
tary Admiral ; Vandyck : John de Witt, Grand 
Pensionary of Holland : Moon-light Scene ; sea 
view : Marlow.
This is a very fine performance : 
the waves tinged with the moon-beams, and rippled 
with the breeze, have a charming effect.
On the 
beach is the hull of a vessel wrecked ; and in one 
corner are two figures boiling a pot over a brush- 
wood fire.
The diffusion of the different coloured 
lights over the surrounding objects, is managed 
with great skill.
The burning of the Turkish Meet 
in the Bay of Constantinople : a Companion to the 
above : the Love Sick Maid ; Opie.
This is a very 
capital performance.
The love-sick girl is leaning 
back in a languishing attitude, with her bosom par- 
tially uncovered.
In the back ground is the figure 
of her lover, with one finger archly placed upon his 
lips ; and, on the left of the picture is Cupid, appa- 
rently introduced by the artist to explain the sub- 
ject.
Virgin and Child ; Titian : Landscape ; Sal- 
vator Rosa : Lord Royston, when a child ;* Sir 
Joshua Reynolds : Hermit in his Cell ; Rembrandt.
The scenery is dark, but the whole piece has great 
effect.
Head of St. Peter, with the Keys and a 
Book ; Guido : Inside of a Green-Grocer's Cot- 
tage ; Teniers .
Marriage of the Virgin ; Luca 
Giordano : Edward the Sixth, an ancient painting, 
on board : Venus and Mars ; Luca Giordano : the 
Temptation of St. Anthony ; Rubens, and other ar- 
tists.
The Temptation occupies only a small com- 
partment in the centre of the piece, and-is surround- 
ed with flowers charmingly executed.
The Saint is 
represented at a table, with a book in his hand ; and 
round him are numerous figures, or rather fiends, 
which have assumed the forms of the most strange 
several other passengers of distinction were drowned.
His 
lordship, who was on his return from the Continent, had, within 
a few days, attained the age ot twenty-four.
and 
272 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
and uncouth animals and reptiles, thrown into very 
ludicrous and whimsical attitudes.
Raphael ; a 
very fine portrait, supposed to have been executed 
by Titian.
Lord Vomers, with the Seals : the 
House of Commons, in the time of the Speaker On- 
slow; painted by Sir James Thornhill, assisted, as 
it is supposed, by Hogarth.
The characters most 
conspicuous, are those of the Speaker ; Sir Sydney 
Godolphin, at that time Father of the House ; Co- 
lonel Onslow; and Sir Robert Walpole, apparently 
in the act of rising, and preparing to speak.
At the 
time this picture was executed, Sir James was a 
member of the House, and lie has therefore intro- 
duced his own portrait.
Lord Anson ; a head.
Philip Yorke, the Chancellor, and first Earl Hard- 
wicke ; W.
Hoare, 1763 : Philip Yorke, the second 
Lord Hardwicke ; Sir J.
Reynolds : Miss Cathe- 
rine Freman, first wife of the Honourable Charles 
Yorke, and mother of the present Lord Hardwicke : 
the Lake of Albano ; More.
In the Drawing-Room is a very fine piece of Mo- 
saic Work, representing the Temple of the Sybils.
The principal figures are a man and two cows.
This performance, at a little distance, is not to be 
distinguished from painting.
The portraits of George the First, George the 
Second, George the Third ; Queen Charlotte ; Mar- 
shal Laudohn ; Mr. Pelham ; Thomas Holies, Duke 
of Newcastle; Lord Lyttleton ; Lord Chesterfield ; 
the Great Hampden ; Sir Eardley Wilmot ; Arch- 
"bishop Seeker ; Mrs. Montague ; and numerous 
others, are also preserved in Wimpole House.
The Private Chapel, which is ornamented with 
various figures of Roman Saints and Pontiffs on the 
walls, and a large painting of the Nativity, over the 
altar, all executed by Sir James Thornhill, is an 
apartment in the house.
In the vicinity of the mansion, the grounds are 
rather flat ; but from some parts of the Park, the 
views are extensive and beautiful.
The deer park, 
contains 250 acres.
Opposite the south front of the 
house is an avenue of fine trees, about two miles and 
three quarters in length.
This is crossed by a 
branch of the river Cam, which flows through the 
grounds.
On the north side of the house are three 
pieces of water, which greatly contribute to the 
beauty of the surrounding scenery ; and, on a rising 
ground, stands an artificial ruin, denominated a Go- 
thic Tower.
This, with a heavy and ungraceful 
building, named the Park-House, the weight of 
which has caused the foundation to give way, was 
erected by the late Lord Hardwicke, who made many 
alterations in the park and grounds ; but the prin- 
cipal improvements have been effected since the 
estate came into the possession of the present pos- 
sessor.
Under his lordship's direction the gardens 
and plantations have assumed a new appearance ; 
the enclosures have been considerably extended ; 
and many more acres of land have been brought into 
cultivation.
Lord Hardwicke's farming establish- 
ment is on a very extensive scale ; and, from every 
improved method in agriculture having been judici- 
ously introduced, the produce of his grounds is 
yearly increasing.
The drill husbandry, which from 
various comparative experiments, has been found to 
be the most beneficial mode of culture, is chiefly em- 
ployed at Wimpole.
A new threshing and dressing 
machine was erected there a few years ago ; and 
various other inventions, to facilitate the labours of 
the agriculturalist, have been introduced.
Lord Hardwicke, whose liberality and beneficence 
are universally acknowledged, he has, for the conveni- 
ence of his labourers, built several neat cottages within 
the enclosures, and allotted a small piece of ground 
to each, »f or the peasant to cultivate at his own dis- 
cretion.
Still more to benefit the industrious, his 
lordship bestows prizes on those who raise the 
greatest quantity of produce, and keep their little 
gardens in the best order, 
Wimpole Church, which stands near the east end 
of the mansion-house, was neatly rebuilt, in the year 
1749, by the Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, after a 
design of Flitcroft.
Four of the windows are of 
painted glass, containing the arms of the different 
families to whom the Yorke family are allied by 
marriage ; and a very beautiful figure of David 
playing on the Harp.
The Chichcley Chapel, or 
Monument Room, adjoining the Church, contains 
several handsome monuments of the Hardwicke fa- 
mily ; and also a marble tomb to the memory of Sir 
Thomas Chicheley, Knight, who died on the 19th 
of September, 1616, and lies buried beneath it.
On 
the top is the effigies of the knight, on his back, with 
his hands clasped, and his head on a cushion ; and 
at his feet an ill- executed figure of some animal.
The monument of the Lord Chancellor Hardwicke 
is very superb.
On the upper part are medallions 
of the Earl and the first Countess of Hardwicke ; 
and beneath it a sarcophagus of Sienna marble, hav- 
ing on one side the figure of Wisdom leaning over 
it in a mourning position ; and on the other, the 
figure of Minerva.
It was designed by J.
Stuart, 
and executed by Scheemaker.
On the base is a long 
inscription, recording the character and abilities of 
the Earl, with the following particulars relative to 
his offices.
" Philrp, Earl of Hardwicke, was born at Dover, 
1690; called to the bar 1714; chosen into Parlia- 
ment 1718; made Solicitor-General 1719 20; At- 
^tomey-Gcneral, 1723 4; Chief J > slice nd Baron 
Hardwicke 1733 ; Keeper if he Great Seal l73(i-7.
Four times High Steward, between 17** and 1746; 
Earl 1754; resigned the Seals 1756; died 1764, 
aged 74." 
It also records the memory of his Lady, Marga- 
ret, Countess of Hardwicke, who was the daughter 
of Charles Cocks of Worcester, by Mary, sister and 
co-heir of John; Lord Somers.
The second Lord 
Hardwicke is commemorated by an urn, with a 
mourning figure decking it with flowers.
This no- 
bleman married Lady Gray, daughter of Lady Je- 
mima Campbell, grand-daughter to the Duke of 
Kent, 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
273 
Kent, and mother of the present Baroness Lucas, 
and Lady Grantham.
Another monument, by Sehee- 
naaker, to the memory of the Honourable Charles 
Yorke, second son of the Chancellor, is ornamented 
with a medallion of the person whose memory it re- 
cords, supported by angels : beneath, very neatly 
sculptured, are the seals and the mace.
Mr. Yorke 
was born December the 20th, 1722; received the 
Great Seal January the 17th, 1770 ; and died iu the 
same month.
His first Lady was Catherine Freman ; 
and his second, Agneta Johnson, daughter of Henry 
Johnson, of Berkhamstead.
The monument to the 
memory of his first wife is ten or eleven feet high, very 
handsome, and adorned with a resemblance of the lady 
in alto-relievo.
It was executed- by Scheemaker.
Here is also a monument in remembrance of the Right 
Honourable Joseph Yorke, third son of the Chan- 
cellor, and Baron of the town and port of Dover.
He was born July the 14th, 1724; and died De- 
cember the 2d, 1792, " after 50 years' constant em- 
ploy in his country's service." This monument, 
which is exceedingly well finished, was executed by 
Bacon.
The village of Wimpole, scattered over a large 
surface, is but thinly inhabited.
The houses, which 
do not exceed forty, are mostly inhabited by farmers, 
and labourers.
Upwards of thirty of the poor children of the pa- 
rish are provided with tuition, through the munifi- 
cence of Lady Hardwicke, whose attention to the 
wants of the industrious inhabitants has made her 
the object of their veneration and gratitude.
In the adjoining parish of Whaddon, there is a 
charity-school, also supported by Lady Hard- 
wicke.
Wisbech.] — Wisbech, more properly Ouse-beach, 
which gives name to a hundred and deanery, is a 
large market-town, the most northern in the county, 
and the second in consequence.
It derives its name 
from its situation on the banks of the river Ouse, or 
Wis, which flows through it, and falls into the sea, 
at the distance of about eight miles.
. Wisbech is situated at the distance of thirty-five 
miles north-north-west from Cambridge, and eighty- 
nine and a half north by east from London.
Its 
market, which is kept on Saturdays, is held by pre- 
scription, no charter relating thereto appearing on 
record.
It is a great mart for corn, of which about 
100,000 quarters are annually exported from Wis- 
bech, by the Ouse and canals, which have opened a 
communication to Cambridge, Lynn, and other 
towns.
The market is also abundantly supplied 
with all sorts of provisions.
In addition to corn, 
the other principal exports from Wisbech are rape 
seed, and long wool, great quantities of which are 
sent, into Yorkshire.
Timber, first brought from 
Northamptonshire, is also forwarded from Wisbech, 
for the use of the navy.
Wine, deals, and coals, are 
the chief imports.
In the year 1327, Edward the Third granted the 
Bishop of Ely a fair, at Wisbech, to begin on Tri- 
vol.
i. — no.
20.
nity-eve, and to last twenty-two days.
This fair 
has been discontinued ; but there are now five others, 
as follow : on the Saturday and Monday before 
Palm Sunday ; on the Monday before Whit-Sunday ; 
on the Saturday before Whit-Sunday ; on the 25th 
of July ; and on the 1st and 2d of August.
Wisbech contains two parishes : St. Peter and 
St. Paul, a vicarage ; and St. Mary, a chapelry to 
the vicarage of St. Peter and St. Paul.
The quarter sessions for the Isle of Ely, holden 
alternately at Ely and Wisbech, are holden at the 
latter place in the months of January and July.
At 
these two places are also holden adjourned quarter- 
sessions monthly, and petty sessions, or meetings, 
when necessary.
The collection of waters of the upland country, 
which, for some centuries, have passed to Lynn, by 
a channel cut for the purpose in the reign of Ed- 
ward the First from Littleport to the River Bran- 
don, or Little Ouse, were formerly discharged 
through Wisbech, but were diverted from their an- 
cient course, by certain ineffective attempts which 
were made to improve the drainage.
Early historical information relating to Wisbech 
is very scanty.; but it is known to have been built 
some time before the Conquest.
It was given to the 
Convent of Ely by Oswy and Leoflede, the parents 
of Alwin, afterwards Bishop of Ehnham, on their 
son being admitted into the monastery.
In 1071, 
five years after the Conquest, King William erected 
a stone castle here, the governor of which was dig- 
nified with the title of constable, and the walls and 
moat thereof were ordered to be kept in repair by 
the proprietors of certain lands in West Walton, 
who held their estates by a tenure to that effect.
This fortress was probably dismantled in the reign 
of Henry the Second ; but a new castle of brick was 
built on its site, between the years 1478 and 1483, 
by Morton, Bishop of Ely, who executed the great 
cut from Peterborough to Guyhirn, which, from its 
name, has been denominated Morton's Lcam.
The 
new building became the bishop's palace : several ofj 
his successors also resided there : and during the 
reign of Elizabeth, it was converted into a prison 
for the papists who conspired against her govern- 
ment.
Between the years 1609 and 1619, this struc- 
ture was repaired by Bishop Andrews ; and on the 
abolition of the Hierarchy, after the death of Charles 
the First, it was purchased by John Thurloe, Esq.
secretary to Oliver Cromwell, and his son.
In the 
year 1660 this gentleman rebuilt it in its present 
form, from a design of luigo Jones.
On the Resto- 
ration, the estate was restored to the see of Ely, and 
was the residence of the bishop, when he came to 
Wisbech.
Of late years, it used to be let on lease to 
one or other of the principal families of the town, 
till the year 1793, when an act of Parliament was 
obtained for the sale of the buildings, its site, 
gardens, &c.
which was shortly after carried into 
execution, and the whole was purchased by Jo- 
seph Medworth, Esq. who removed the detached 
3 z buildings, 
274 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
buildings, and erected several rows of elegant houses 
on the spot.
King Richard the First, on the 28th of March, 
1190, granted the tenants of Wisbech- Barton Ma- 
nor, an exemption, or freedom, from toll in all fairs 
or markets throughout England.
In 1214, this 
grant was confirmed by King John.
In the twelfth 
of Henry the Fourth it was renewed, and again con- 
firmed by- writ of privy seal of Henry the Sixth ; 
but the privilege, being afterwards forfeited, was re- 
stored through the exertions of Mr. Nicholas Sand- 
ford, who died in 1608, and was buried in the church.
Inscribed on the brass plate inserted in his monu- 
mental stone, in reference to the above circumstance, 
appears the following homely couplet : — 
A Patterne for Townesmen whom we may enrole, 
For at his own Charge this Towne he freed of Tole.
When Oliver Cromwell had been appointed Go- 
vernor of the Isle of Ely, for his exertions in sway- 
ing it to the interest of the Parliament, he caused 
fortifications to be raised near the Horse-shoe, on 
the north-west side of Wisbech, to secure the passes 
out of Lincolnshire, which continued attached to the 
King;.
The soldiers who were stationed to defend 
them, were commanded by Colonel Sir John Pal- 
grave and Captain W.
Dodson ; and the ammuni- 
tion, and other warlike stores, were supplied from a 
Dutch ship, which the Queen had dispatched from 
Holland for the use of the loyalists.
In 1043, the 
burgesses lent 1501.
to Captain Dodson, who was 
then engaged in the siege of Croyland ; and on the 
26th of March, 1644, they delivered to Major John 
Ireton, four muskets, three bandeliers, and two 
swords, for the service of the Parliament.
They 
also furnished the latter with a loan of 2501.
towards 
raising a troop of horse for the defence of the Isle.
This troop seems to have been supported even after 
the Revolution of 1688 ; as, on the 6th of June, 
1690, four pounds were ordered to be paid towards 
the expence of a horse to serve in " the troop," and 
the town-bailiff was directed to defray a moiety of 
the charge for arrns and accoutrements.
Secretary Thurloe, whom we have mentioned as 
having rebuilt the castle, was a liberal benefactor to 
the town ; in consideration of which, the burgesses, 
in 1657, erected a gallery in the church for his use, 
and on the 6th of January, 1658, chose him as re- 
presentative of this town and borough (as it is called 
for the only time in the Journals) in Richard Crom- 
well's Parliament, which met on the 29th of .the 
same month.
Thurloe, however, was also chosen 
for Huntingdon, and made his election in February, 
to serve for that borough ; and the Parliament 
being dissolved in April, Wisbech never had the 
honour of an exclusive and independent representa- 
tion.
In the interval between the restoration of Charles 
the Second and the year 1672, cities, towns, and 
even individuals, were allowed to coin copper mo- 
•liey for the convenience of trade ; in consequence of 
which, the capital burgesses of Wisbech, in February, 
1670, ordered the town-bailiff to expend 201.
in coin- 
ing half-pence, with the words " A Wisbech Half- 
penny," on one side ; and on the othor, the impres- 
sion of the town seal.
In 1722, the Poor-Housc 
was erected here, at the expence of 20001.
borrowed 
for that purpose by the capital burgesses on their 
corporation seal.
It deserves to be mentioned, as an historical fact, 
that the frequent journies made by George the 
Second to Hanover (whither it was then sup- 
posed he transported a large portion of the national 
treasure), and his attachment to Lady Walmoden, 
afterwards Countess of Yarmouth, excited the dis<- 
pleasure of some of the inhabitants of this town ; 
and the Rev. Thomas Winston, Curate to Dr. Bell, 
preached a sermon full of asperity against his Ma- 
jesty's proceedings.
His text, chosen from the 
seventh chapter of Proverbs, was as follows : — 
" The good man is not at home, he is gone a long 
journey : He hath taken a bag of money with him,, 
and will return at the day appointed.
With her 
much fair speech she soothed him.
With the flat- 
tery of her lips she caused him to yield.
He goeth.
after her like a lamb unto the slaughter, or as a fool 
to the correction of the stocks." 
After the suppression of the Rebellion in 1745, 
and the return of the Pretender into France, Mr.
Whiston very zealously defended the succession of 
the House of Brunswick, taking for his text, " By 
the way that he came, by the same shall he return ; 
and shall not enter into this city, saith the Lord.'* 
(2 Kings xix.
33.) 
The corporation of Wisbech originated in a reli- 
gious fraternity, styled the Guild of the Holy Tr> 
nity, which was instituted in the year 1374, and pos- 
sessed of estates for pious and charitable purposes.
This establishment shared the general fate of ec- 
clesiastical foundations in the reign of Henry the 
Eighth ; but Edward the Sixth, on his accession to 
the throne, having passed an act which provided for 
the security of those institutions that had been ori- 
ginally founded either as Grammar- Schools, for the 
relief of poor persons, or for the maintenance of 
" Piers, jetties, walls, or banks, against the range 
of the sea, &c." the inhabitants of Wisbech availed 
themselves of the statute, and, through the solicita- 
tions of Gooderich, Bishop of Ely, were incorpora- 
ted on the first of June, 1549, and invested with all 
the possessions of Trinity Guild, the revenues of 
which were then estimated at 281.
2s.
3|d.
but were 
unquestionably much larger.
In the charter granted by Edward, the inhabi- 
tants were directed to assemble annually, and elect 
ten men, who were to have the direction of the busi- 
ness of the body-corporate ; but for the first six-and- 
thirty years after the charter was obtained, they are 
said to have done little else, but meet once a month 
in the Town-Hall, and, " out of mutual love and 
amity," immediately adjourn to a tavern, where, 
having dined, they decided petty controversies among 
2 the 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE 
Z7S> 
the inhabitant!!: " But afterwards they proceeded 
further than they were warranted.
by the charter: 
they took cognizance of the accounts of the church- 
wardens, and surveyors of the highways : they di- 
rected the application of money, over which they 
had no right ; assumed the privilege of levying an 
acre-tax ; and finally, during the plague which 
raged here in the years 1587 and 1588, they sum- 
moned delinquents before them, and punished them 
at their own pleasure." 
In the month of January, 1G10-11, the, inhabitants 
of Wisbech obtained a renewal of their charter at the 
great expence of 1931.
19s.
3d.
They were tlien 
constituted a body -corporate, by the style of the 
town of Wisbech ; but the right of election of ten 
men, thenceforward named' " Capital Burgesses," 
was limited to the possessors of freeholds of the 
value of 40s.
per annum.
From this period the 
Capital Burgesses became " objects of veneration 
and confidence, and were intrusted with the care of 
nearly all the donations made for the benefit of the 
poor." Their executive officer is the Town-Bailiff.
This officer is not at liberty, however, to expend 
more than five pounds at one time, without an ex- 
press order of the body-corporate.
The charter of 
incorporation was renewed on the 17th of February, 
1669.
These Capital Burgesses have no connection 
with the jurisprudence of the town, nor have they 
any degree of civil authority : their principal busi- 
ness is to regulate the management of the revenues 
©f the estates bequeathed, partly for charitable, but 
chiefly for public purposes.
The income of which 
they direct the expenditure, amounts to about 8001.
annually.
Part of this sum arises from a grant 
made to the corporation by the Trinity House, in 
1710, of one penny a ton upon all goods exported 
and imported, for the purpose of maintaining buoys 
and beacons, and keeping clear the channel of the 
river ; a precaution highly necessary from the shift- 
ing sands between Wisbech and the sea.
In former times, Wisbech, and the adjacent coun- 
try, frequently suffered from inundations.
In 1236, 
on the day after Martinmas-Day, and the eight fol- 
lowing days, the sea, by the violence of the wind, 
was raised to such a height, that the banks, yielding 
to the force of the water, were broken so, that, " of 
small craft, cattle, and men," great multitudes were 
destroyed.
A similar calamity happened about nine- 
teen years afterwards ; and in 1437, by a breach in 
the bank of Wisbech Fen, 4400 acres of land were 
overflowed.
The greatest devastation, however, 
from an occurence of this nature, was made in 1613 
and 1614, and commemorated till the year 1750, by 
an inscription on the east wall of the church, which, 
after a transcript had been made of it, was at that 
time effaced by the erection of a monument.
Of late years, both the population and commerce 
of Wisbech have greatly increased.
In 1676, the 
number of inhabitants was 1705 ; according to 
the population returns of 1801, it amounted to i 
5001 , and, in 1811, it was 6300.
About the year 1767, the corporation areeted an 
elegant stone bridge, in the room of the old wooden- 
one, over the great river, at the expence of nearly 
23001..
It consists of a single elliptical arch, very 
accurately proportioned ; and was partly designed 
by Sir James Borough.
A new custom-house was also erected by the cor- 
poration, in the year 1804.
Wisbech was formerly noted for the quantity and 
excellence of the butter which it sent to the London 
markets ; but of late years the dairy has given way 
to the employment of grazing ; and the lands are in 
so high a state of cultivation, for the purpose, that 
few places can vie with this in respect to the num- 
bers and goodness of the cattle grazed in the neigh- 
bourhood.
The sheep and oxen grow to a vast 
size, and considerable numbers of them are sent 
twice every week to the London markets.
There- 
are frequent instances of the Wisbech sheep being 
sold in Smithfield market, at four guineas a head,, 
after clip-day, and of the oxen reaching upwards of 
three hundred stone weight.
There are also great 
numbers of valuable horses bred oa the farms-rounds 
Wisbech.
The town of Wisbech is tolerably well paved, and 
lighted with lamps, in dark evenings, nearly the 
whole of the year throughout.
It is supplied with 
water from wells, rain water, cisterns, and the 
river.
Wisbech Theatre is situated nearly in the centre 1 
of the town, and is well adapted for the purpose, .
There are balls and assemblies monthly at the Rose 
and Crown Inn, winch has been a place of public 
reception from the year 1 475, at which period it was- 
known by the sign of the Horn, and on one of the- 
out-buildings, erected in 1601, the figure of a horn, 
is yet to be seen.
A literary society was established in Wisbech,.
ia ; 
the year 1781.
Wisbech Church, which is dedicated to St. Peter, 
and St. Paul, is a spacious and handsome fabric,.
though 
having 
irreff 
ular, 
and of a singular construction r 
two naves and two aisles.
The former are 
lofty, and separated from each other by a row of.
light slender pillars, with pointed arch.es : the aisles - 
are the more ancient, being divided from their re- 
spective naves by low, massy pillars, and semi-cir- 
cular Saxon arches.
On. one of the naves is the 
date 1586.
The tower is eminently beautiful ;.
but, 
though generally supposed to have been erected in.
1111, from the top of the north side bearing the 
mark of four units, is evidently of much later work- 
manship.
Indeed, the futility of its claim to anti- 
quity is demonstrated by records which still exist,,, 
and prove its erection to have been subsequent to 
the 10th of March, 1520.
The date of the oldest 
bell is 1566.
On the west side of the north entrance 
is a small chapel, or chantry, dedicated to St. Mar- 
tin, and originally endowed with lands for the main- 
tenance of a priest to say masses for the soul of the- 
fcunder.
The images, shrines^ altars, &c, in this- 
chantry 
276 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
chantry were demolished, agreeably to Bishop 
Goodcrich's injunction, dated at Ely the 21st of Oc- 
tober, 1541.
In the south aisle of the church is a memorial for 
Thomas de Braunstone, one of the constables of the 
castle erected here by William the Couqueror, with 
his effigies on brass, and the following old French 
inscription on the marble round it : — 
" C'y gist Thomas de Braunstone jadis Conestable 
<lu Chastel de Wisebeche qui mirust le vyngt & sep- 
tieme jour de May, l'an de nosfre Seignour Mil.
CCCC.
primier.
D'L'alme de qui Dieu par Sa Grace 
ait Mercy, Amen." 
(Translation.) 
" Here lies Thomas de Braunstone, formerly Con- 
stable of Wisbech Castle, who died on the 27th of 
May, in the year of our Lord 1401 : to whose soul 
may the grace and mercy of God be granted, 
Amen." 
The following epitaphs, deserving of notice, also 
appear in different parts of the church : — 
Beneath a sleeping Infant lyes, 
To Earth her Body lent, 
Hereafter shall more glorious rise, 
But scarce more innocent.
And when the Arch-Angel's Trump shall sound, 
And Souls to Bodies join, 
Millions shall wish their Lives below 
Had been as short as thine.
The Rev. James Ashley, a native of Wisbech, and 
rector of Fleet, in the county of Lincoln, composed 
the following beautiful lines to the memory of his 
brother : — 
** Has Death enwrapp'd thee in the cloud of night, 
Whilst youth, hope, pleasure, gleam'd their cheerful ray ?
So fades Aurora's ineffectual light, 
When the pale morning blushes into day.
See by his dying form mild Patience stands, 
Composing u^ony \vitli*healing wing, 
Hope, Ease, and Comfort, wait on her command, 
And o'er the mournful bed sweet requiems sing.
Care, Pain, and Death, terrific gloom no more, 
But seem to pave a golden way to heaven ; 
The race to reach the distant goal is o'er, 
The toil is ended, and the prize is given.
And when an yonder star-pav'd plain you rove, 
And pitying view us active forms of clay, 
Accept,this last sad tribute of our love, 
The best the brother and the friend can pay." 
The same gentleman wrote the following lines, to 
the memory of his mother : — 
Freed from the ever-dreary Vale of Life, 
Here lies the Wife, the Mother, and the Friend; 
Sickness and Health forego their wonted Strife, 
Death's ebon Darts their Opposition end.
Light lies the Turf upon the guiltless Breast, 
Whose Mansion pure no earth-born Passion stain'd, 
Where Pride ne'er gloom' d on its continual rest, 
Nor factious Envy with her Breath prophan'd.
Such, when the Pomp of Kingdoms is no moir, 
When future Suns shall light eternal Skies, 
Shall land for ever on the blissful Shore, 
Where flow the Fountains of celestial Joys.
Such shall the meek-ey'd Cherub Friendship claim, 
And with companion Angels swell the Choir 
In sounds of Praise to the Eternal Name, 
Whilst Heaven's own Harmony informs the Lyre.
There are also several handsome monuments erect- 
ed to the memory of different branches of the South- 
well family, who formerly resided at the castle, which 
they rented of tlie bishop.
Wisbech Church has a very fine organ, with twenty 
stops, built by subscription, in the year 1789, by the 
late Mr. Samuel Green, of Isleworth.
The organist 
has a salary of 401.
per 'annum.
Wisbech St. Mary, a chapel of ease to Wisbech 
St. Peter, stands in the fields, about two miles from 
the town.
It is said to have been originally the 
mother church.
Wisbech-Murrow, and Guyhirn, 
are hamlets of this chapelry.
The latter, which lies 
about four miles south of Wisbech, has a chapel of 
ease.
There was formerly also a chapel at Mur- 
row ; another at Pigges Drove, built in 1 347 ; and a 
third at a place called Kilhus, or Kilhushing.
In 
ancient times, there was likewise another church in 
the town, dedicated to St. George, which stood in 
the timber market.
Wisbech does not contain many sectarists ; but 
there are meeting-houses for the two descriptions of 
Baptists, the Methodists, the Independents, and the 
Quakers ; and, at Guyhirn is a meeting-house for 
the Culymites, so called, from their founder, David 
Culy, who lived at that place in the early part of the 
eighteenth century.
The tenets of the Culymites 
are said to be nearly the same as those of the dis- 
ciples of Mr. Whitfield ; consequently they are 
strong Calvinists.
In ancient times, there was an hospital at Wis- 
bech, dedicated to St. John the Baptist ; but its site 
is not at present known.
About the year 1756, several alms-houses, which 
had been built by the bequests of Dr. Hawkins, and 
Mrs. Jacomin Sturmin, were pulled down, for the 
purpose of enlarging the church-yard, and others 
built in lieu of them by the parish.
There is an ancient grammar-school at Wisbech, 
the master of which, unless misplaced for miscon- 
duct, holds his situation for life.
His salary and 
perquisites are estimated at about 1601.
a year.
There are also two charity schools at Wisbech, 
one for fifty boys, the other for thirty girls : both of 
them are supported by the interest of various bene- 
factions, and by voluntary contributions.
There are likewise some other charities in the 
town, for the benefit of decayed tradesmen, &c.
In the vicinity of Wisbech are several respectable 
villages: — Leverington, distant one mile; Parson 
Drove, six miles ; Newton, three miles ; Tid St.
Giles, six miles ; Walsoken, one mile ; West Wal- 
ton, four miles ; and Eline, two miles.
Agriculture.] 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
277 
Agriculture.]— It is necessary, before we parti- 
cularise the different kinds of soil, &c.
which are 
met with iu Cambridgeshire, to mention a few par- 
ticulars connected with the history of the Great Le- 
vel of the Fens, which includes nearly 400,000 acres, 
lying in the several counties of Cambridge, Hunt- 
ingdon, Northampton, Lincoln, Noi'folk, and Suf- 
folk.
The chief part of this tract appears, from the 
various phcenomena noticed by different authors, to 
have been formerly a dry and cultivated land ; but 
either through injudicious embankments, which pre- 
vented the waters from the uplands issuing at their 
proper outfalls, or from sudden and violent convul- 
sion.-!
of nature, it was reduced to the state of a mo 
rass ;#vhere the waters, stagnating and becoming 
putrid, filled the air with noxious exhalations ; and 
not only destroyed the health of the inhabitants, but 
likewise inpeded their endeavours to obtain neces- 
saries ; the country being almost rendered impassa- 
ble even to boats, by the sedge, reeds, and slime, 
with which it was covered.
That this vast level was 
formerly dry land, and not obnoxious to any extra- 
ordinary inundation by the sea, or stagnation of 
fresh waters, though the surface was originally much 
lowor than it is at present, is also evident from the 
number of trees which have been found buried in 
different parts of the fens, and from a variety of other 
circumstances, which our limits will not permit us to 
enlarge upon.
Dugdale, in a quotation from the 
Life of Agricola by Tacitus, says, that, " the Bri- 
tons complained that their hands and bodies were 
worn out, and consumed, by the Romans, in clear- 
ing the woods, and embanking the fens." This sen- 
tence enables us to form an.
idea of the time when 
the woods were destroyed, which appears to have 
been before the Romans had secured the entire pos- 
session of the island.
Some of the trees were burnt, 
and others sawn down, without any regard either to 
profit or utility, as the trunks were left to perish on 
the soil where they grew.
It is probable, therefore, 
that they were felled to deprive the Britons of shel- 
ter, and to enable the Roman soldiers to march 
in greater security, and obtain an easier con- 
quest.
It is said, that the Emperor Severus was the first 
who intersected the fens with causeways.
Dugdale 
has mentioned one supposed to have been made by 
him, the length of which was twenty-four miles, ex- 
tending from Denver, in Norfolk, to Peterborough.
It was composed of gravel about three feet in depth, 
Vul ::ixty feet broad, and is now covered with moor 
from three to five feet in thickness ; another proof 
of the great alterations which the fens have un- 
dergone.
Sir Robert Cotton, when making a pool at the 
edge of Connington Downs, in Huntingdonshire, 
found the skeleton of a large sea-fish, nearly twenty 
feet long, about six feet beneath the superficies of 
the ground, and as much below the general level of 
the tens.
Many of the bones, which from their long 
eontiuuance in the earth, were incrusted with stone, 
*OL.
i. — no.
20, 
were preserved.
In the year 1635, ©n deepening 
the channel of Wisbech River, the workmen, at tight 
feet below what was then the bottom, discovered z 
second bottom, which was stony, with seven boats 
lying in it, covered with silt ; and, at Whittlesea, on 
digging through the moor at eight feet deep, for the 
purpose of making a moat to secure a plantation of 
fruit-trees, a perfect soil was found, with swaths of 
grass lying on it, as they had been at first mowed.
The latter circumstance induces a belief, that the 
inundation which overwhelmed the country had not 
been foreseen by the inhabitants.
When the found- 
ation was dug of Shirbeck Sluice, near Boston, at 
the depth of sixteen feet, a smith's forge was disco- 
vered, embedded in silt, with all the tools belonging 
to it, several horse-shoes, and some other articles ; 
and at setting down a sluice a little below Magdalen 
Fall, a stone, eight feet long, and a cart-wheel, were 
found, at a similar depth below the surface.
Near 
the river Welland, at the depth of about teu feet, 
several old boats were dug up ; and at the same 
depth, on the opposite side of the river, the remains 
of ancient tan vats, or pits, a great quantity of horns, 
and some shoe-soles of a very unusual form, with 
sharp-pointed toes, turned up in the manner they 
appear to have been worn in the time of Richard the 
Second.
A writer who lived in the reign of King Stephen, 
describes this fenny country as " very pleasant and 
agreeable to the eye, watered by many rivers which 
run through it, diversified with many large and small 
lakes, and adorned with many woods and islands ;" 
and William of Malmsbury, whom we have before 
quoted, has painted the state of the land round Thor- 
ney in the most glowing colours.
He represents it 
as " a very paradise ; for that in pleasure and de- 
light, it resembles heaven itself; the very marshes 
abounding in trees, whose length without knots do 
emulate the stars.
The plain there is as level as the 
sea, which, with the flourishing of the grass, allureth 
the eye ; and so smooth, that there is nothing to 
hinder him that runs through it ; neither is there any 
waste place in it ; for in some parts thereof there 
are apple-trees ; in others, vines, which either spread 
upon the grounds, or run along the poles." 
Without giving lull credit to these descriptions, 
it is evident that the level, in former times, must 
have been in a very flourishing and superior condi- 
tion to what it subsequently was, when the fens were 
covered with water, " and the inhabitants of many 
islands in danger of perishing for want of food." 
Whatever occasioned the alteration, it appears, that 
attempts at draining were made as early as the reign 
of Edward the First.
The celebrated John of Gaunt, 
son of Edward the Third, and Margaret, Countess 
of Richmond, were amongst the first adventurers 
who embarked in this undertaking.
— " The reign of 
Elizabeth," s;;ys Mr. Gough, " may be properly 
fixed on as the period when the great level began to 
become immediately a public care." In her twen- 
tieth year a commission was granted to Sir Thomas 
4 a Cecil, 
278 
'CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
Cecil, Sir William Fitz-Williams, and others, to 
drain the fens about Clows Cross ; but the inutility 
ot such a partial design is supposed to have been 
early foreseen; as there is no account of the plan 
ever having been acted on.
In her forty-third year, 
an act of Parliament was passed on a general plan, 
which not only included the draining of the Great 
Level, but likewise all the marshes and drowned 
lands in the kingdom.
This scheme, for which re- 
sources equal to the extent of the undertaking are 
said to have been provided, was frustrated by the 
Queen's death.
In the beginning of the reign of 
♦James the First, Sir John Popham, the Chief Jus- 
tice, procured an act for draining the fens in the Isle 
of Ely, and the lands in the adjacent counties.
The 
work was accordingly commenced with great spirit, 
but was soon retarded by the death of Sir John Pop- 
hani ; and afterwards entirely dropped, through the 
opposition of some land-owners.
The persons who 
next attempted to proceed Avith this important un- 
dertaking, were the Earl of Arundel, Sir William 
Ayloff, Bart, and Anthony Thomas, Esq. but then- 
proposals not being agreeable to those who acted as 
Commissioners on behalf of the proprietors, and 
much time having been lost by the meetings held to 
determine the contested points, the King himself re- 
solved to become adventurer, and actually under- 
took the herculean labour of draining the fens, on 
condition of receiving 120,000 acres as a remunera- 
tion, when the work was completed.
This agree- 
ment was carried into a law, and here the specula- 
tion closed ; for the political embarrassments which 
attended the remainder of the reign, prevented a 
single step being taken to carry it into effect.
In the sixth of Charles the First, Sir Christopher 
Vermuiden, a Hollander, in a contract with the com- 
missioners of sewers, engaged to drain the fens, on 
condition that 90,000 acres of land, when drained, 
should be transferred to him.
This agreement would 
perhaps have been executed ; but when Vermuiden 
had surveyed the Level, and made drawings of the 
works that were necessary, he appears to have 
thought the reward insufficient, and demanded an 
additional allotment of 5000 acres.
This proposal 
was rejected ; more it is supposed from the preju- 
dices that prevailed against him as a foreigner, than 
from any belief that his demands were extravagant ; 
for soon afterwards the commissioners engaged on 
the same terms of 95,000 acres, with Francis, Earl 
of Bedford, who had large possessions in the fens, 
through the grant of his ancestor of Thornoy Abbey 
and his appurtenances.
Previously to the commencement of the work, 
thirteen gentlemen, of high rank and respectability, 
offered to become joint adventurers with the Earl, ; 
and their proposals being accepted, the undertaking 
commenced.
In the year 1634, the King granted 
the adventurers a charter of incorporation ; and in 
three years and a half from that period, the commis- 
sioners adjudged the Level drained, and, accom- 
panied by his Majesty's surveyor, attended to set 
out the Earl's allotment.
The expenditure had then 
amounted to upwards of 100,0001.
Subsequently to this period, the favourable dispo- 
sition of Charles towards the adventurers underwent 
a change ; and early in the ensuing year, 1638, a 
meeting was held at Huntingdon, of persons devot- 
ed to the will of the Sovereign who were empowered 
to examine into the utility of the measures executed 
by the Earl.
The new commissioners declared that 
the works were incomplete ; and accepted his Ma- 
jesty's proposal to drain the fens, for which he was 
now to receive 15*2,000 acres !
Charles's hopes of 
advantage, however, were entirely dissipated by the 
ensuing troubles, which prevented any fur ther pro- 
gress in the work till the year 1649, when v^lliaiu, 
Earl of Bedford, the heir and successor of Francis, 
was restored by the Convention-Parliament to all 
the rights of his father.
The act which was obtain- 
ed at this period, settled the boundaries of the Level, 
and gave fresh vigour to the undertaking ; conse- 
quently, the works which had fallen to decay were 
repaired, and new channels made; and on the 25th 
of March, 1653, the Level was adjudged to be fully 
drained, and the 95,000 acres awarded to the Earl, 
and his colleagues ; the latter of whom were nearly 
ruined by the expence of draining, which amounted 
to upwards of 400,0001.
In the fifteenth of Charles 
the Second the former act was confirmed in its chief 
clauses ; and a Corporation, consisting of a Gover- 
nor, six Bailiffs, twenty Conservators and Com- 
monality, was established under the title of " Con- 
servators of the Great Level of the Fens." These 
commissioners were empowered to levy taxes on the 
95,000 acres, and to defray whatever expences might 
arise in their preservation ; but only 83,000 acres 
were vested in the Corporation, in trust for the Earl 
of Bedford and his associates.
The remaining 
12,000 which were allotted to Charles the First, in 
pursuance of the agreement made by the persons 
who met at Huntingdon, were now assigned to the 
King, with the exception of 2000 acres, which had 
been granted to the Earl of Portland.
About the year 1697, the Bedford Level was di- 
vided into three districts, North, Middle, and South ; 
having one surveyor for each of the former, and two 
for the latter.
This distribution, however, was th« 
source of considerable disputes.
A misconceived 
distinction of interests arose between the different 
proprietors ; in consequence of which,- application 
was made to Parliament in the year 1753, and an 
act obtained to settle the accounts of the Corpora- 
tion, and separate the North Level from the rest, 
except in those instances where their alliance was 
necessary for the service of the country- On this 
occasion, the Duke of Bedford remitted the sum due 
to him from the South and Middle Levels ; and the 
Earl of Lincoln, to whom they were also indebted, 
concurred in the liberal precedent.
Soon alter-, 
wards, a treaty was negotiated between the Bedford 
Level Corporation, and the principal persons inter- 
ested in the trade carried on through the river Nenp,- 
f from 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
279 
from the port of Lynn to the counties of Northamp- 
ton and Huntingdon ; and the parties, after several 
meetings, agreed in the outlines of a plan intended 
to answer the ends both of draining and navigation.
By an act of Parliament which was then passed, 
agreeably to the plan determined on, the Corpora- 
tion of Bedford Level renounced the general power 
possessed over the river and its banks, and united 
with a stated number of land proprietors, chosen 
from the South and Middle districts, in raising a 
fund, to be appropriated to scour out and deepen 
the bed of theNene and its communicating branches.
Jt may be remarked, that though many other acts 
have been passed within the last sixty years, for 
draining separate districts, yet they ail contain a 
clause, reserving the powers of the Corporation as 
established by the fifteenth of Charles the Second.
In 1795, an act was passed, for improving the out- 
fall of the river Ouse, and amending the drainage of 
the South and Middle Levels, by making a cut 
across the marshes from Eau-Brink to Lynn; but, 
notwithstanding the various projects that have been 
executed, and the vast expenee incurred, to com- 
plete the drainage of the Fens, the work is yet im- 
perfect ; and in many places the farmer is still liable 
to have all the produGe of his grounds carried away 
by inundations.* 
It is deserving of notice, that, amongst the great 
variety of expedients which have been employed to 
drain the marshes, where the usual means have fail- 
ed, is the erection of wind-mills, which, from their 
number and situation in the northern parts of the 
county, present a singular and rather whimsical ap- 
pearance.
These wind-mills raise the water to a 
sufficient height to admit of its being conveyed into 
receptacles sufficiently elevated to carry it into its 
proper channel.
We find, by the Agricultural Survey of this Coun- 
ty, by M.
Vancouver, that upwards of 150,000 acres 
are still in the condition of waste and unimproved 
fen, the average value of which is little more than 
4s.
per acre.
The application of the land in this 
part of the county is various.
Where the soil is 
preserved from the floods, or only subject to occa- 
sional overflowings, it has all the fertility of water- 
meadows ; and the crops of oats are particularly 
abundant, producing frequently from fifty to sixty 
bushels per acre.
On the western side of this dis- 
trict many thousand acres are appropriated to pas- 
ture.
* This was disastrously exemplified, in the floods of January 
and February, 1309, and February 18)4.
In the former instance, 
the damage sustained in the Fens amounted to upwards of 
1,000,0001.
The inundation extended upwards of 15 miles, and 
above '250,000 acres of land were completely flooded.
Four large 
breaches were made in the Hundred-feet Bank, three of which 
were very deep; two in the Old Bedford Bank, a very consi- 
derable part of which was cut away by the violence of the 
wind ; one long breach was made in the Counter Wash Bank, 
against Manea District ; and the water in the Hundred-feet 
Washes was higher than ever was known before, being six feet 
six iuches deep, on Mepal Causeway.
Numbers of sheep, and 
Soil.] — Cambridge possesses a great variety of 
soils ; the chalky gravelly loam, and tender clay 
soils, prevail in the southern parts of the county.
Adjoining Huntingdonshire, on the west, and Nor- 
folk, on the east, the soil is chiefly a close heavy 
clay, upon a gault.
A considerable portion of the 
Isle of Ely is moory and overflowed, but capable of 
great improvement ; the other parts consist of a rich 
deep black soil.
The saty marshes in the north- 
western corner of the county are remarkably favour- 
able for the growth of corn ; but it frequently hap- 
pens that their luxuriant produce is destroyed by the 
floods.
The south-eastern division, extending from 
Gogmagog Hills to Newmarket, is bleak and heathy, 
connected with that vast tract of land, which, ex- 
tending southward into Essex, and northward across 
Suffolk and Norfolk, forms one of the largest plains 
in the kingdom.
The land in the south and south- 
western parts of the county, being more elevated, are 
fertile and productive of fine wheat, barley, and oats.
The valley through which the river Cam pursues its 
winding course from Steeple Morden to Walton, is 
called the Dairies, and is entirely appropriated to 
dairy-farms.
The quantities of each description of land, as 
given in the Agricultural Survey of the County, are 
as follow : — 
Enclosed arable 15,000 
Open-field arable 132,000 
Improved pasture 52,000 
Inferior pasture 19,800 
Woodland 1,000 
Improved fen 50,000 
Waste and unimproved fen .
150,000 
Half-yearly meadow land .
. 2,000 
Highland common 7,500 
Fen or moor common ....
8,000 
Heath sheep-walk 6,000 
Total .
443,300 
As to the mode of occupation and management in 
this county, it may be remarked, that the general 
rent of farms is from 50 to 3001.
per annum ; but 
the rentals of some in the neighbourhood of Wisbech 
are as high as 8001.
and one in the parish of Wood 
Ditton, was at the time of the Agricultural Survey, 
occupied at the rent of 600 guineas, and has been 
since at 1000 guineas a year.
The management of the arable land is to take two 
considerable quantities of corn were lost.
About 300 sack--, 
filled with earth and sand, and placed on the banks of the Old 
Bedford River, fortunately preserved that part of the country 
from inundation.
Meetings of the Board of the Corporation 
of the Bedford Level, and also of the Proprietors, &c.
were 
holdea ; subscriptions were opened for the sufferers; and a 
successful application was afterwards made to Parliament for 
their relief.
On the 12th of February, 1814, in consequence of 
a breach of one of the banks of the Ouse, near Denver sluice, 
10,000 acres (of which 1500 had been sown with wheat) were 
inundated, and great damage sustained.
crops 
280 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
crops and a fallow.
In some parishes, the lighter 
lands, after lying two years under rye-grass, trefoil, 
and Dutch clover, are winter fallowed for Tartarian 
oats, or summer tares.
In others, the first year fal- 
low, dung, sheep-folding, and light manures ; for 
the second year, wheat, winter fallow, wheat stubble, 
a light hand dressing in the spring ; for the third 
year, a crop of barley ; barley stubble sown the fourth 
year, with peas, oats, and lentils.
In some parts, hemp and flax are cultivated ; but 
the culture of saffron has long been disused.
Until lately the greater part of the land was open 
field, but many enclosures have taken place, and 
others are proceeding upon, so that ia a short time 
there will be very little unenclosed laud in the coun- 
ty, except from Gagmagog Hills to Newmarket, on 
the east side of the county, and towards Royston, on 
the west.
The Cambridgeshire horses, generally used for 
the purposes of husbandry are of the large black 
cart breed, and a lighter sort of no great value.
Since the time of making the Agricultural Survey, 
the feeding ami working management of horses has 
been much improved.
The different mixtures of cattle found in Cam- 
bridge are not easily enumerated : the Suffolk polled, 
the Craven, the short-horned Yorkshire, the Der- 
by, the Welch, the Leicester, the Fii'eshire, the 
Gloucester brown, and the common Cambridge- 
shire, are the breeds of cow cattle generally pre- 
ferred ; nor is it perhaps possible to mould this va- 
riety into any one uniform sort, until the open field- 
lands are laid into severalty, and the coarse low 
lands drained and improved, so that by subsequent 
cultivation it shall be ascertained what are the spe- 
cies of cattle most proper for the then improved 
grasses and herbage in the several districts of the 
county.
From Isleham to Newmarket, Linton, 
Caxton, and northwardly to the fens, these breeds 
prevail either distinctly or casually compounded, in 
which latter case the animal, generally speaking, is 
badiy formed, small, and, when in full milk, seldom 
affords more than five quarts at a time.
In the 
neighbourhood of Ely, where the herbage is infinite- 
ly superior to that of the higher parts of the coun- 
ty, it is a matter of concern to observe that so little 
attention is paid to tl»e improvement of the common 
breed of cow cattle.
In the neighbourhood of Wis- 
bech, a very sensible alteration in this particular is 
observable.
The preparation of the rennet, for the purpose of 
making cheese, in several parts of the county, par- 
ticularly in the parishes of Cottenham, Waterbeach, 
and Denny Abbey, is brought to great perfection.
To effect this, nothing more is necessary than salt- 
ing down the bags, in which state they remain for 
twelve months.
The superiority of the Cottenham cheese, is not 
to be ascribed to any particular mode in the manage- 
ment of the dairies, but solely to the nature of the 
herbage on the commons, 
From the general average, at the time of the 
agricultural survey, it appears that 1062 sheep are 
the proportion per parish, in the 62 parishes in 
which the number kept was ascertained.
This ratio 
multiplied by 1 44, the number of parishes in which 
sheep are kept in this county, is equal to 152,928 
sheep, for an extent of highland country of about 
243,300 acres, which is not quite one acre and a half 
per sheep.
The general stock may be divided into 
three distinct breeds, though there are many inter- 
mediate shade* amongst them : the Norfolk, the 
west country, and the Cambridgeshire are the prin- 
cipal ones.
The three year- old wethers of the for- 
mer, when fattened, will average about 161b.
per 
quarter, and about 2|lb.
per fleece.
And the west- 
country breed will average about 181b.
per quarter, 
and 41b.
per fleece.
These two sorts are generally 
found between the Cam and Mildenhall rivers, ex- 
tending along the plains of Newmarket Heath, to- 
wards Linton, Foulmire, and Royston, binding up- 
on the counties of Suffolk, Essex, and part of Hert- 
fordshire, and to the head of the valley distinguish- 
ed by the name of the Dairies.
Crossing this valley 
and extending thence eastwardly towards Caxton, 
and northwardly towards the fens, bending east on 
the river Cam, and south and westwardly upon 
Bedford and Huntingdonshire, the common Cam- 
bridgeshire breed prevails ; the three-year-old we- 
thers of which sort, when fattened to the bone, will 
average about 141b.
per quarter, and 2flb.
to a 
fleeoe.
Farther in the isle, a medley of the Norfolk, 
Cambridgeshire, Berkshire, Hertfordshire, South- 
down, West-country, Lincoln, and Leicestershire 
breeds are found, but on approaching the country 
about Wisbech, extending thence northwardly to- 
wards Holland in Lincolnshire, an inferior breed of 
the Lincolnshire sheep generally prevails ; the three- 
year-eld wethers of this description, averaging, 
when fattened, about 241b.
per quarter, and 121b.
per fleece.
In this neighbourhood a cross between 
the Leicester and Lincoln breeds has been tried late- 
ly, and is much improved.
This part of the county 
is very happily exempt from the ravages of the rot, 
a disease which appears, from the enquiries, and 
observations made in the course of the survey, to 
arise from an extremely wet season in summer.
Extremely wet winters do not produce it.
Of husbandry utensils, in the fens, the common 
fen plough, with a running coulter, which with the 
share is constantly tiled, and kept particularly sharp, 
is in constant, use.
By carrying only two furrows 
and a half to the yard, about an acre and a half 
is usually ploughed in seven hours.
To these 
ploughs is frequently an appendage which in the fen- 
country is called a boy, the business of which is to 
lap in the rushes, reeds, and other early produce of 
the fens, on which the plough share lays the earth, 
and thus completely buries them under the soil.
It is usual to work three horses abreast in these 
ploughs, and it is astonishing Avith what dexterity 
and 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
281 
and adroitness the ploughs and horses are managed.
The lialf and three quarters Dutch ploughs, toge- 
ther with the common swing, and foot ploughs, are, 
in the highland parts of the county, in general use.
The dagger, whole and half winged shares, are va- 
riously employed ; hut one general plough, with 
three octagonal different shares, might perhaps be 
introduced with great advantage.
The harrows, 
carts, waggons, and all other implements of hus- 
bandry are of the usual kinds.
The Agricultural Survey of the County mentions 
an uncommon sort of harrows, invented and used by 
Mr. Shepherd, steward to Mr. Tharpe, of Chippen- 
ham.
The single harrow appears to consist of five 
beams with six teeth in each, the beams not laid 
parallel with each other, but fanning and forming 
the tail of the harrow, about six inches wider than 
the head ; the beams are all curved, forming a con- 
vex at the top, and when connected together, a con- 
cave space of about an inch and a half perpendicu- 
lar, under the middle of the harrow, over and above 
what would necessarily obtain, were the beams 
straight and parallel to the surface ; the teeth are 
all curved, feather, or basil edged, and are set spring- 
ing with their sharp edges, and points forward ; and 
their length in the front of the harrow is about six 
inches and a half, which gradually increases till at 
the tail of the harrow they are eight inches long.
Harrows thus constructed have a wonderful effect 
in drawing into the ground, rather than scratching 
upon the surface, and, in dividing the clods, by cut- 
ting through, rather than by rubbing, or grinding 
them against each other; and, by gathering the 
twitch grass, in the increased space formed by the 
concavity of its beams, it is rendered an excellent 
cleansing harrow, and does much credit to the in- 
genuity of the inventor.
Respecting manures, those chiefly used in this 
county are pigeons' dung, soot, common farm -yard 
and stable dung, and oil-cake dust.
In some parishes 
a kind of small fish, caught in great numbers, called 
stickle-backs, and purchased at about eight- pence 
per bushel, is made use of at the rate of 20 bushels 
an acre.
Rabbits' down, and the trimmings of their 
skins, consisting of their legs, ears, scalps, &c.
pur- 
chased of the furriers at five-pence per bushel, and 
fetched from Norwich, are applied at the rate of 30 
bushels an acre.
Where lime can be procured at a 
moderate expence it is also used.
In this county, there is but an inconsiderable 
* It is observed, in the History of Embanking, that in mak- 
ing several channels for draining the Isle of Axholm, great 
numbers of oak, fir, and other trees, were found in the moor.
The fir trees lay at the depth of between four and five feet ; 
but the oaks were but little more than three feet beneath the 
soil.
They were discovered lying near their roots, which 
"still stand as they grew ; that is, in firm earth below the 
moor ; and the bodies, for the m®st part, north-west from the 
roots ; not.
cut down with axes, but burnt asunder, somewhat 
near the ground, as the ends of them, being coaled, do manifest.
The oaks were lying in multitudes, and of an extraordinary 
size, being-five yards in compass, and sixteen yards long; and 
vol..
i. — no.
20.
The following is a general list of the 
quantity of woodland ; all the timber scarcely 
amounting to 1000 acres, and these principally scat- 
tered through the parishes of Stackworth, Wood 
Dkton, Linton, Bartlow, Boxworth, Wimpole, and 
Mndingley.
The soil, however, in many other parts 
of the county is friendly to the culture of oak, ash, 
and elm ; and, on the chalky lands, beech might be 
advantageously cultivated.* 
Manufactures and Trade] — White bricks, and 
coarse earthen -ware are made in considerable quan- 
tities at Ely ; and, at Whittlesford, Sawston, 
Hawkston, Shelford, &c.
are several mills for pre^ 
paring oil from cole and rape-seed.
Cambridge used to be celebrated for its manu- 
facture of baskets, which is still carried on to a con- 
siderable extent.
Some of the earliest paper-mills in this county 
were erected in the neighbourhood of Cambridge I 
and there is still a paper manufactory, of some ex- 
tent, at Sawston.
Corn, and the produce of the dairies, form the 
chief articles of the trade of this county.
Fairs.] 
fairs in this county : 
Cambridge — June 24, horses, wood, and earthen- 
ware.
Carton — October 12, pedlary.
Ely — Ascension-Day, horses.
— October 29, horses, cheese, and hops.
Jckleton, near Chesterford — July 22, horses.
Linton — Holy Thursday ; July 30, horses, and 
lambs.
March, Isle of FJy — Monday before Whit-Sunday, 
horses ; Whit-Monday, household goods ; October 
27, cheese.
Reach — Rogation Monday, horses.
Svham — May 9, cows, and horses.
Stnrbridge Fair — September 18, lasts a fortnight, 
horses, leather, cheese, hops, iron, wool, and all sorts 
of goods from London.
Thomey, Isle of Ely — July 1, Sept.
21, horses.
Whittlesey, Isle of Ely — January 25, St. Pauls, a 
great fair for horses ; June 13, October 25, horses 
and cattle.
Wisbech, Isle of Ely — Saturday and Monday be- 
fore Palm Sunday, hemp, and flax ; July 15, horses ; 
August 1, 2, hemp, and flax.
Canals,] — Most of the canals of Cambridgeshire 
were cut for the purpose of draining ; but the 
greater part of them are applicable also to the pur- 
some smaller of a great length, with a good quantity of acorns 
and small nuts near them." Similar discoveries have been made 
in the Fen near Thomey; in digging the channel to the north 
of Lynn, called Downham Eau ; and in many other places.
" In Marshland," continues the writer just mentioned, "about 
a mile westward of Magdalen Bridge, at setting down a sluice 
very lately, there were discovered, at seventeen feet deep, se- 
veral furze bushes and nut trees, pressed flat down, with nuts 
sound and firm lying by then) : the bushes and trees were 
standing in the solid earth, below the silt, which had been 
brought by the inundation of the sea, and in time raised to that 
great thickness." 
4 b poses 
282 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
poses of navigation.
The Hundred Foot River, as 
it is called, is the main channel for vessels passing 
from the upper to the lower parts of the Ouse.
Since the new Bedford River was cut, the old one 
has scarcely ever been employed for the purposes 
of navigation.
There is a short canal from the 
Ouse, commencing near Bouvay chapel, to Soham ; 
another to Reche ; and a third to Burwell ; and 
there is also a navigable canal from Peterborough, 
by Stanground sluice, Whittlesea, and through 
Whittlesea Dyke, to the old Nene, a little below 
Ben wick, and so on to March.
Vermuyden's canal, or the Forty-foot Drain, com- 
mences at Ramsey ; enters the Isle of Ely, near 
Ramsey Mere, and passes by Puttock Bridge, and 
fcetween Chatteris and Dodington, to Welches Dam, 
where it enters the Old Bedford River, and pro- 
ceeding in the old course of that river, leaves the 
county a little to the west of Welney.
Roads.] — The whole county of Cambridge is in- 
tersected by ancient British and Roman roads ; but, 
excepting the recent researches of the Bishop of 
Cloyne — interesting chieliy to the antiquary — com- 
municated to the public through the medium of Ly- 
sons' Magna Britannia, very little of a satisfactory 
nature is known respecting them.
The modern turnpike-roads throughout the county, 
are tolerably good ; the private roads are very indif- 
ferent ^ the materials for mending them are in many 
places extremely scarce, and lying at a considerable 
distance, are difficult to be obtained.
The great north road to Edinburgh, enters Cam- 
bridgeshire at Royston, goes through Caxton, and 
leaves the county between the 52d and 53d mile- 
stone from London.
The London road, through 
Potton and St. Ives, to Wisbech, passes through 
Gamlingay, &c.
and passes the above-mentioned 
north road at Papworth- Agnes : it crosses the coun- 
ty of Huntingdon, and re-enters Cambridgeshire at 
Chatteris Ferry in the Isle of Ely, and passes, 
through Chatteris, on to Wisbech ; whence a turn- 
pike-road continues, passing near Leverington and 
Newton, and through Tydd St..
Giles towards 
Boston.
The great road from London to Newmarket and 
Norfolk, enters Cambridgeshire at Great Chester - 
ford, passes between Baberton and the Abingtons, 
•crosses the Devil's Ditch at the turnpike-gate, about 
two miles from Newmarket, beyond which place it 
passes between Chippenham and Kennet, and quits 
the county near the five mile-stone from Newmarket, 
(66 miles from London).
A collateral road, which 
branches oflf from it near Bourn Bridge, passes 
through Pampisford, by Whittlesford Bridge, between I 
Duxford and Triplow, to Royston.
The road from Cambridge to Norwich, passes 
through Barnwell, between Fcn-Ditton and Taver- 
sham, and after leaving Bottisham, it falls into the 
Newmarket road at the turnpike-gate, about two 
miles from that town.
The road from Cambridge 
to King's Lynn in Norfolk, passes near Chesterton, 
through Milton, Stretham, and Thetford, to Ely ; 
and thence to Littleport, at a short distance from 
which it enters Norfolk.
There are three turnpike-roads from Cambridge 
to London ; one of these joins the Newmarket road 
near Chesterford : a collateral road branches off 
from it at Shelford, which, passing through Little 
Shelford, &c.
joins it again at Chesterford.
An- 
other road to London passes through Trumpington, 
Fulmere, &c.
and leaves Cambridgeshire near the 
eleven mile-stone, in Essex.
A third road to Lon- 
don quits the last-mentioned road at Hawkston, and 
passing through Melbourn, to Royston, enters.Hert-- 
fordshire.
The road from Cambridge to Huntingdon passes 
by Girton, Long-Stanton, Fen-Drayton, &c.
on the 
right ; and by Madingley, Lolworth, and Conning- 
ton on the left, and enters Huntingdonshire at Fenny 
Stanton.
The road from Cambridge to St. Neot's 
passes between Madingley and Coton, Dry- Drayton 
and Hardwicke, Childerley and Caldecot, KnapwelL 
and Bourne, Papworth- Everard and Caxton, through.
Eltisley, and leaving Croxton on the left, enters the 
county of Huntingdon near White-hall.
The road from Cambridge to Colchester passes 
over Gogmagog Hills, through Linton and Horse- 
heath, and enters the county of Suffolk about the 
sixteen mile-stone from Cambridge..
The road from Ely to Newmarket passes through 
Stuntney to Soham ; from thence between Fordham 
and Landwade, near which it enters the county of 
Suffolk.
A turnpike road froin Ely to Wisbech, 
goes through Witchford, between Wentworth, Wit-- 
cham and Sutton, and through Mepal to Ghatteri?, 
where it joins the road from London; to Wisbech ; 
another has recently been formed from Streathham 
through Wilberton and Haddenham to join the last- 
mentioned road, about five miles and a half from 
Ely.
A turnpike-road enters the Isle of Ely, near 
Ramsey-Mere, and passing through Whittlesea and.
Thorncy, enters the county of Lincoln, near the 
junction of that county and Northamptonshire, at 
the extremity of the Isle of Ely : another road has 
been beguu from Cambridge, to join the north road 
at Arrington, which is to pass through Barton, near 
Harleton and Orwell on the left, and CombertQa, 
Eversden and Wimpcle on the right.
7. 
TABLE 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
283 
! 
w 
PS 
a 
tvi 
5J 
fa!
JC 
o 
Q 
cd 
•— i 
U 
PS 
< 
CQ 
J 
B 
^ 
© 
= 
< 
H 
,P, 
O 
(d 
o 
u 
fa.
an 
O 
-1 
a. 
_2 
01 
i> 
J3 
H 
O 
n 
55 
EC 
M 
i-* 
co 
n 
bl 
o 
o 
U 
2 
a 
w 
<: 
H 
7- 
a 
CO 
Z 
H 
a 
"* 
^ 5 3 
» W Q 
"9 - z 
5 &• <• 
o o , 
" c/> X' 
U « 3 
* 5 a 
W5 
Q 
o 
ps 
C« 
O 
CO 
z 
1*4 
o 
PS 
o 
u 
< 
P-.
a 
g 
,2J 
•z 
«< 
w 
us 
Oh 
OS 
p 
H 
Oh 
PS 
Cm 
w 
a 
H 
a 
o 
U> 
O 
OS 
a 
H 
to 
s 
cs 
D 
O 
*-> 
fat 
O 
u 
CQ 
— >- 
.. -a 
Si 
s S 
o ta 
O fc ai 
tj Z u.
% s - 
3 U 
cr 2 
PS 
fa!- 
.a" 
fa!
CO* 
^— I 
a" 
H 
-a* 
fa!
a 
w 
en 
PS 
o 
a 
o 
.§» 
fa?
O 
Q 
2 
CQ 
en 
fa!
-J 
fa!
s 
fa!
O 
H 
^3 
ft 
a 
fa!
US 
PS 
< 
fa!
-a 
PS 
ex.
a 
o 
n. 
o 
CO .
CM 
« > bo 
££ - 
> S 
K " c 
►7 E « 
e Si 
1> > 
so PS 
= a 
ec en 
oa"l 
EJ 
» -;«> 
w*t 
(O oo 
CM CO 
o 
>* 
> * 
""  
CM 
CM 
M*t 
fo* 
«* O) <* 
~* 
t> 
>* 
fa!
J5 
B. 
U 
< 
fa!
03 
O 
H 
PS 
OS- 
fa!
fa.
PS 
fa!
H 
H 
a 
Q E _^ 
o P.
« ^J 
S E & 
£ 0"33 
oa fa!
2 •,", S M -5 ."J -<2 
S? ?fa!
W 
fa!
w -i 5 
fa- 
fa!
£ « 
9 
c 
U 
T* 
-3 
i- 
a 
kH 
j 
s 
PS 
•— , 
T3 
o 
C 
n 
-J 
jj 
t3 
a 
u 
QS 
1 
/) 
In 
C 
o 
PS S£ 
ill O •>- O "tf 
Q 
cd 
-a 
c 
CD 
^ 
K 
o 
'a 
cr 
H 
fan 
d" 
c 
fa!
PS 
PS 
fa!
o 
fa!
^ 
cr 
c 
£ 
H 
o 
c/5 
Oh 
(C 
CM 
U 
< 
Oh 
fa!
tu 
£ 
T3 
a 
Si 
o 
t; 
E 
Cm 
h 
ai 
O 
H 
<S 
VI 
5? 
*o 
e 
fa!
U 
cr .
7 
o 
PS 
C Crt •> 
1 c 
O 
fa.
PS 
JJ5 
PS 
E 
fa- 
fa!- 
•a 
oj — 
3 CU 
O CU 
c-c 
^5 E J 
K 0S"° 
re ^PS 
.i£ C - 
_ v = 
= « 3 
5-co 
. -co 
O ex) co 
OS -a c 
-a 
>-* £ 60 
«"-< 8 
a ^ - 
= "9 o 
a- 
O ™ 
cU I 
»: JL £ £.
US 
7~ H^» iHjti-l-Hf 
C -1 Ot «* IT) t^ <vj 
fa!
_ 
Q ^ 
PS 
03 
< 
__ fa!
lui Q 
PS 
C3 
-a a 
" > O) ' ") 
— — CN 
-ht-W-I^MW' MM-H*-^ 
c ^ 
*• E -a -3  < 
8 J a jb -a I a 
o 
^5 
Ci 
<S 
u 
U 
o 
Shelford 
Stapletord 
Sawston 
Great Che 
CO 
Trumpingt 
Harlston 
Melbouru 
Royston 
fa!
00 CO 
4J C - # ^ J 
«u x a?
a 
C •_ n) rl "" a 
UK^P- Ph 
fa!
1 
Z 
PS 
c 
o 
Z 
W) 
cr 
fa!
IB 
w 
a 
« 
_^ 
Q 
p 
3 
PS 
03 
C3 
• ^3 
cfl 
CU 
H 
W i 
->l 
«cn 
h 
PS 
s-o 
o 
mS 
ui 
Om 
s a 
A 
fa!
US o 
:>^ 
H 
2 
Samuel 
een Milt 
Abbey.
i b 
-a = 
5* Cd 
*>-l 
tu'7 
^ 1 
J* 
O 
O 
1 
>> 
1 
B 
B 
1 
c 
H 
PSP3 
PS 
s 
~5> 
"H-.* 
"t* 
k) 
CO o 
•-• 
us 
oo O 
— OJ 
-8* 
rH 
r ~ 
f ~* 
"^ 
"* 
C) CN 
CO t^ 
<N 
OJ -i 
o 
-> 
PS- 
cq 
2 
<! 
a 
CO 
CO 
Q 
a 
"C 
CQ 
C CM 
o -c 
cu 
CO 
O 
H) 
<o 
CO 
© 
o 
g 
2 
£ 
a 
* 
a 
o 
— 
to 
03 
o o 
a a* 
1j QJ 
S-.
<hC« 
LO 
fa!
•s o 
3a 
334 
CAMBRIDGESHIRE.
8. CHATTERIS TO PETERBOROUGH, (N.
W.) 
Garters Bridge 
North Bridge 
(Cross the forty feet 
drain) 
-Ponders Bridge 
(CrossBevill'sLeam) 
Horsey Bridge 
(Cross Pig's Water) 
Stangrave 
Peterborough 
2 
2 
5J 
7i 
3| 
10| 
4 
14| 
2 
m 
11 
18i 
A seat of William Pellows, Esq.
Inns— Angel, Talbot, 
TABLE OF DISTANCES.
The Names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square where both meet gives the distance.
Ely.
Caxton 
Linton , 
March 
Newmarket.
Wisbech.
Cambridge .Distance from London Miles 50 
17 
10 
10 
2G 
13 
40 
Ely.
.66 
21 
21 
14 
12 
17 
Caxton 49 
U 
23 
39 
Linton 48 
March 81 
36 
13 
50 
26 
Newmarket 
.60 
34 Wisbech.
.89 
OUES-lHftK.
HI 
Cfcrt 
7T( 
~ 
3 
P 
1 
285 
CHESHIRE.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
THE county of Chester is bounded, on the east, 
by Staffordshire and Derbyshire ; on the west, 
by the Irish sea, Flintshire, and Denbighshire ; on 
the north, by Lancashire ; and, on the south, by 
Shropshire.
In form, it is considered to resemble 
the right wing of an eagle, as she would spread her- 
self from Wirall, and, as it were, with her pinion, 
or first feather, touch Yorkshire.
It may also be 
described as possessing two horns, or projections, 
running east and west from its northern side, one of 
which is made by the hundred of Wirall, lying be- 
tween the estuaries of the Mersey and the Dee ; the 
other, by a part of the Macclesfield hundred, push- 
ing out between Derbyshire and Yorkshire.
A line 
drawn from the extremities of these projections is 
found to measure 58 miles ; but the extent of the 
county from east to west, across its middle, does 
not exceed 40 miles.
Its greatest extent from north 
to south is about 30 miles.
In circumference it is 
about 112 miles.
According to the agricultural sur- 
vey of the county, published by the Board of Agri- 
culture, it contains about 676,000 acres ; but, by 
the Population Returns of 1811, its area is 1017 
square miles, equal to 650,880 acres.
Cheshire, distinguished by the name of the Vale 
Royal of England,* is in general a flat country ; 
but it has some considerable hills, rising near its 
eastern borders, and connected with those of Derby- 
shire and Staffordshire.
These extend about 25 
miles in length, from Congleton to the north-eastern 
corner of the county.
An interrupted ridge of high 
ground also crosses it from north to south, on the 
western side, beginning near Frodsham, where a 
bold promontory overlooks the Mersey.
After cross- 
ing the large tract of heath called Delamere Forest, 
it exalts itself in the lofty rock of Beeston.
In the 
neighbourhood of Macclesfield are a few other hills, 
and some on the Shropshire side.
Another chain 
runs north and south through the peninsula of Wirall.
The rest of the county is nearly level, and the prin- 
cipal part of it consists of arable, meadow, and pas- 
ture land.
This county possesses a variety of soil, 
but clay, sand, black moor, or peat, seem to pre- 
'* Probably from the abbey of Vale Royal, founded by Ed- 
ward I.
in the central part of the county.
VOL.
I. NO.
21.
dominate ; and the under soil is commonly clay, or 
marl.
The red grit rock is the most prevalent 
stone, and of this most of the towns and villages 
are built.
There are few large woods in the county; 
yet, as the generality of farms abound with hedge- 
rows, a considerable quantity of timber is produced, 
and particularly a great number of oak trees, from 
which the tauners derive a considerable supply of 
that invaluable antiseptic, oak bark.
The estates 
of the Earl of Stamford, the Earl of Cholmondeley, 
and Earl Grosvenor, particularly abound in fine 
timber ; some fine old oaks are standing at Dunham 
Massey ; there are some remarkably fine beech trees 
in Alderley Park ; and one hundred thousand oaks, 
elms, and beeches, were planted by the late Earl of 
Warrington.
A few years since, part of Rud 
Heath was planted with Scotch firs.
Amongst the 
plantations in this county, may be mentioned, as the 
most extensive, those of Francis Jodrell, Esq. oc- 
cupying not less than 1,000 acres, those of Nicholas 
Ashton, Esq. on Delamere Forest, planted with 
477,000 trees, chiefly Scotch firs and larches, and ex- 
tending over 133 acres ; and those of Thomas Chol- 
mondeley, Esq. Vale Royal.
In consideration of 
his exertions in planting, the Society for the encou- 
ragement of arts, manufactures, and commerce, 
presented Mr. Ashton with a premium.
The Forests 
of Delamere and Macclesfield, the former of which 
contained 10,000 acres, are now dreary tracts of 
waste land, only a small portion of which has been 
enclosed.
Wirall Forest was disforested by Ed- 
ward III.
in 1376, in consequence of a request 
made by his son the Black Prince, in behalf of the 
inhabitants of Cheshire, who had been subjected to 
considerable damage, law suits, &c.
on account of 
the Forest.
From that period, the Forest is sup- 
posed to have been constantly under cultivation.
In 
that part of the hundred of Macclesfield which bor- 
ders on Derbyshire and Yorkshire, is a considerable 
extent of blackmoor, or peat-moss land ; and, in 
the neighbourhood of Coppenhall and Warmincham, 
are some mosses ot smaller extent.
An ancient gra- 
vel road appears to have passed through Coppenhall 
4 c 
Moss ; 
586 
CHESHIRE.
Moss ; and numerous oak, beech, and fir trees, bro- 
ken off at various heights, and exhibiting marks of 
fire, have been found therein.
This Moss has been 
almost cleared of peat.
Next to these peat-mosses, 
the largest tract of waste land in the county is Rud- 
Heath, in the parishes of Middlewich, Davenham, 
Sandbach, and Great Budworth.
The air and climate of Cheshire are equal to those 
of any in England, for pleasantness and salubrity.
The air is somewhat colder than in the more south- 
ern part of the island ; but the warmth from the Irish 
sea, melts the snow, and dissolves the ice, sooner 
there than in those parts that are more remote.
The scenery of Cheshire is not remarkable.
Pos- 
sessing an almost uniformly flat surface, it has very 
little claim to picturesque beauty.
The principal 
views are from a remarkable insulated hill, in the 
hundred of Macclesfield ; from Mowcop and Shut- 
lingslnvv hills ; from Overton-Scar ; from Carden- 
Clitf; from the western edge of Delamers Forest; 
and from Halton and Beeston castles.
In most of 
the views, for an extent of many miles, Beeston 
castle Is a very prominent feature.
Rivers.] — The rivers chiefly entitled to notice, are 
the Dee, Mersey, Weever, Wheelock, Peover, Tame, 
Dane, and Bollin.
The Dee rises in Merionethshire ; becomes a 
boundary of Cheshire near Shocklach-green ; passes 
by Shocklach and Farndon, on its Cheshire side, 
and enters the county near Aldford.
It then passes 
by Eaton and Eccleston, to Chester ; at Bangor- 
Bridge, it becomes navigable for barges ; at Ches- 
ter-bridge, it meets the tide-water, and is then about 
a hundred yards wide.
From Chester-bridge it 
passes through an artificial channel, along the 
marshes under Haywarden castle for about nine 
miles.
About three miles farther, near Flint castle, 
it becomes an estuary of three miles wide ; but, at 
low water the navigation is much incommoded by 
sand-banks.
The main channel crosses over to the 
Cheshire side below Parkgate, and about three miles 
farther, near HUbree island, where it is about five 
miles wide, it falls into the sea.
This river, which is the largest and longest on this 
side of Britain, between the Severn and the Clyde, 
is remarkable for force of current, and quantity of 
water, upon hasty rains or snows ; as, at such times, 
the Welch mountains pour down amazing floods.
The height of the water is then terrific, and fre- 
quently occasions great damage.
In ancient times, 
vessels were brought up to the walls of Chester ; 
but, prior to the year 1449, the navigation had been 
,so much impeded by sands that the haven was to- 
tally ruined ; and it was not until the middle of the 
following century, that a new quay or haven was 
formed.
In 1677, Andrew Yarranton published a 
* The Eiherow rises near Woodhead, at the junction of 
Yorkshire, Derbyshire, and Cheshire.
From its source it forms 
the boundary, for some distance, between the counties of Ches- 
ter and Derby.
It enters the former between Compstall-bridge 
tract, under the title of " England*s Improvement 
by Sea and Land," in which he proposed that an Act 
of Parliament should be procured, for the improve- 
ment of the Dee navigation.
The object of this 
proposal was, to enable ships to come up to Ches- 
ter, by a new channel to be cut from the Dee, near- 
ly opposite Neston.
This suggestion was never 
carried into effect ; but, in 1693, Evan Jones drew 
up a plan for making the Dee navigable, and bring- 
ing up ships of a hundred tons burthen to the 
Roodee, at his own expense, on the following condi- 
tions : — -that he should have all such lands as should 
be recovered, upon payment of the usual rent of re- 
covered lands to the crown, and one fourth of the 
clear rents or profits to the companies of the city ; 
and that he and his heirs should be entitled to the 
receipt of certain duties on coals, lime, &c.
This 
proposal was rejected, on account of the latter con- 
dition ; but, in 1698, a modification of Mr. Jones's 
plan, by Mr. Jell, was agreed to ; and, in 1700, an 
Act of Parliament was obtained to carry it into ef- 
fect.
The undertakers of the measure were incor- 
porated by the name of the River Dee Company ; 
and in 1 732, they obtained another act, empowering 
them to enclose the White Sands, a large tract on 
the banks of the river, on condition of their making 
a navigable cut from the sea to Chester.
This pro- 
ject was immediately commenced, and in the year 
1754 it was completed.
Between 1763 and 1795, nearly 2,500 acres of land 
were recovered from the sea ; and further embank- 
ments, to a considerable extent, have since been 
made.
It was not until 1775, that any profits were 
derived from the concern.
The company then made 
a dividend of 2 per cent, on their principal stock ; 
the annual interest has since gradually increased, 
and for several years, the proprietors have never re- 
ceived less than 5 per cent.
Ships of 600 tons bur- 
then now navigate the new channel.
The Dee is 
noted for the superior flavour of its salmon.
The Mersey, formed by the junction of the Ethe- 
row* and Goyt, passes near Chadkirk, between Of- 
ferton and Bredbury, to Stockport ; and thence to 
Liverpool, it forms the boundary between Cheshire 
and Lancashire.
Where it meets the tide-water op- 
posite Warrington, in the latter county, it is only 
forty yards wide ; at Runcorn-Gap,' where it com- 
municates with the Treut, and Mersey, or Grand- 
trunk, and the Duke of Bridgewater's canals, its 
width is 300 yards ; and below the gttp, it immedi- 
ately extends itself into a fine broad estuary, receiv- 
ing the Weever in its course.
In its course north- 
ward, it gradually diminishes, and, opposite Liver- 
pool, it is only three quarters of a mile over.
There, 
however, it forms a fine commodious channel, ten 
fathoms deep at low water.
About five miles far- 
and Marple bridge, at its conflux with the Goyt, which rises 
in Macclesfield Forest; and during a course of about nine niiJes, 
forms a boundary between Cheshire and Derbyshire.
At the 
contlux, the united streams take the name of the Mersey.
2 ther, 
CHESHIRE.
287 
ther, measuring by the coast, it falls into the Irish 
sea, by two or three different channels.
Those 
channels are much incommoded by sands ; but, by 
means of various buoys, &c.
and an excellent sys- 
tem of pilotage, their passage is effected with safety.
Salmon, plaice, flounders, &c.
are found in the 
Mersey.
The Weever, which rises on Bulkeley Heath, never 
quits the county till it unites with the Mersey, at 
Weston.
Passing through Ridley, &c.
it joins the 
Dane, at Northwich, and soon afterwards, the 
Peover.
In its natural state, the Weever was navi- 
gable only at high tides, and not more than six miles 
above Frodsham Bridge ; but, in 1720, the Honour- 
able Langkam Booth, Sir G.
Warburton, Bart, and 
several other gentlemen, obtained an Act of Parlia- 
ment to make the Weever navigable from Frodsham 
Bridge to Winsford Bridge, a distance of about 
twenty miles.
The Act provided, that after pay- 
ment of subscription and interest at 5 per cent, and 
1 per cent, annual profit for the risk of capital, the 
entire produce of tonnage, &c.
should be appropri- 
ated to similar purposes as the county-rate.
By the 
year 1778, all the incumbrances of the concern were 
liquidated ; and, since that time, upwards of 105,0001.
have been paid into the county treasury, in aid of the 
rate.
Within the last sixteen or seventeen years, 
the tonnage has greatly increased ; and, at this time, 
the gross revenue is from seventeen to twenty thou- 
sand pounds a year.
A considerable portion of this 
income is expended in the execution of the trust, in 
maintaining and improving the navigation of the 
river, &c.
The som of 40,0001.
or upwards has 
been recently employed in making an additional cut, 
of about four miles in length, from the Weever, near 
Frodsham Bridge, to AVeston Point.
This cut was 
rendered necessary, by the great extension of the 
salt trade, which was subjected to serious delays by 
the shallowness of the river at neap tides.
The 
course of this river is about thirty-three miles.
The Wheelock, the whole course of which is only 
about twelve miles, is composed of three streams, 
which rise near Moreton Hall, Lawton, and Rode.
Meeting near Sandbach, these streams take the 
name of the Wheelock, and, passing thence to 
Wheelock, Elton, and Warmincham, they fall into 
the Dane at Croxten.
The Bollin has several heads in Macclesfield Fo- 
rest ; and, after a course of about twenty miles, it 
falls into the Mersey, at Rixton.
The Peover is formed by the junction of two 
streams, one of which rises near Gawsworth, the 
other near Macclesfield.
Uniting at Chelford, they 
pass to Over -Peover, Holford, &c.
and fall into the 
Weever near Northwich.
The course of the Peover 
is about fifteen miles.
The Tame rises in Yorkshire : during nearly the 
whole of its course, which is about ten miles, it 
forms a boundary between Cheshire and Lancashire.
It falls into the Mersey at Stockport.
The Dane rises in Macclesfield Forest, near the 
Three-Shire-Meres.
Its course is about twenty- 
two miles, in a broad and shallow channel.
After 
forming, for some distance, a boundary between 
Staffordshire and Cheshire, it enters the latter coun- 
ty within two miles of Cougleton.
At Northwich it 
falls into the Weever.
Besides these rivers, Ihere are some smaller 
streams, and several lakes, more generally termed 
meres or pools.
Ridley-pool, formerly one of the 
largest of the latter, has been drained and converted 
into tillage.
Corabermere, close to the site of Com- 
bermere Abbey, is a fine piece of water, upwards of 
half a mile in length.
It forms a delightful orna- 
ment to the grounds of Sir Robert Cotton.
The 
Chapel-mere and Moss-mere, are two beautiful 
pieces of water in front of Cholmondeley Castle ; 
Bar-mere, in the parish of Malpas, is nearly as large 
as Combermere ; and, amongst others, may be men- 
tioned Comberbach-mere, Oakhanger-mere, Pick- 
mere, Rostherne-mere, &c.
Most of these meres 
abound with the common sorts of fish.
Minerals.] — Iron, copper, and lead, are amongst 
the mineral productions of this county.
The first of 
these is found at Alderley- Edg-e, and in the township 
of Dukenfield.
Some years ago Mr. Astley erected 
works for an iron-foundery ; but they were soon 
abandoned, and the building converted into a cotton- 
mill.
Copper and lead are found at Alderley-Edge, 
and at Peckforton-hills.
A mine was opened at 
Alderley, in 1803, from which considerable quantities 
of both copper and lead ore have been obtained.
A 
few years ago, an unsuccessful attempt was made to 
work a copper-mine on Peckforton Hills.
In 1807, 
cobalt ore was discovered, in great plenty, on the 
estate of Sir J.
T. Stanley.
Considerable quantities 
of this ore have been manufactured into smalt, al- 
most equal in colour to that which is imported from 
Germany.
Mineral Springs.] — For many centuries, this 
county has been celebrated for its brine-springs and 
salt-works.
The strongest springs are said to be 
those at Anderton : the pit at Weverham was work- 
ed in the time of William the Conqueror..
The 
springs now in use, are chiefly found in the valley 
through which the Weever and the W T heelock take 
their course.
The brine is found at various depths, 
and is of various degrees of strength.
It contains 
muriat of soda, and earthy salt, in different propor- 
tions : that in the neighbourhood of Northwich is 
somewhat more ferruginous than the others.
There are also some medicinal springs • in this 
county.
About the year 1600, a well was acciden- 
tally found in Delamere Forest, which acquired con- 
siderable celebrity..
It was represented as curing 
almost every disease, and restoring the blind to 
sight.
At one period, the number of persons daily 
resorting to the well, was said to be not less than 
2,000.
From a pamphlet which was published soon 
after the discovery of the well, the water appears to 
have been cathartic, and to have had the taste of 
alum.
At Shore-heath, near Stockport, is a chaly- 
beate 
288 
CHESHIRE.
beate spring of considerable strength ; and, at Bug- 
Lawton, is a spring containing sulphur, Epsom 
salts, and calcareous earths.
The last has been 
found serviceable in scorbutic cases.
Fossils.] — The rock, or fossil, salt, from which 
the brine springs derive their virtue, was first acci- 
dentally discovered near Marbury, in the parish of 
Budworth, in 1670.
It has since been found at 
Witton, Wincham, M arston, and Lawton ; also be- 
tween Middlewich and Winsford, a little below 
Winsford, and at Whitley.
At Witton, after dig- 
ging through several strata of clay and marie, the 
salt is found about 40 or 42 yards below the surface.
The first bed that was discovered is about 25 yards 
in thickness.
In 1781, the proprietor of one of the 
Northwich mines discovered, that, beneath a stratum 
of indurated clay, there was another bed about ten 
yards lower.
This lower bed has been penetrated 
to the depth of 35 or 36 yards ; and to about that 
depth, all the pits are now sunk.
Some of the mines 
are circular, and 300 yards in diameter.
The salt is 
of two kinds, the one white and transparent, the 
•other of a reddish brown : the former being* an almost 
pure muriat of soda, the latter containing a portion 
of earth from which it derives its colour.
Where- 
ever the salt is found, sulphat of lime is generally 
met with, mixed with the earthy strata above.
Coal, of good quality, is found in abundance in 
the n»rth-east parts of the county.
At Worth, and 
Poynton, in particular, are very extensive collieries ; 
and, at Denwall, in the hundred of Wirall, is a col- 
liery, opened about the year 1750, extending a mile 
and three quarters from high-water-mark under the 
fiver Dee. It has two canals under the river, one 
of which is carried to the extremity of the work.
The produce of this colliery is chiefly exported to 
Ireland ; those of Worth and Poynton supply the 
town of Stockport.
Several quarries of excellent free-stone are work- 
.ed in this county.
Those at Runcorn, Manley, and 
Great Bebington, are the principal.
Lime-stone is 
found at Newbold-Astbury ; Mowcop-hill has long 
been celebrated for mill-stone ; and, on the hills at 
Kcrredge, near Macclesfield, is a species of sand- 
stone, particularly suitable for Hags, or for the whet- 
ting of edged tools.
Near Pott-Shrigley, also, there 
is a compact sand-stone of extreme hardness, and 
capable of receiving an excellent polish.
Marie, in 
several varieties, is found in almost every part of the 
county ; and Dr. Woodward mentions a sort of 
asbestos, found in beds of marie about High- 
Legh.
In his Catalogue of British Fossils, Dr. Wood- 
ward enumerates oak, yew, birch, alder ; and the 
cones of fir, and hazle-nuts, as having been found in 
the mosses at Wilmslow, and on Delamere Forest.
From some of those mosses great quantities of oak 
and fir have been raised, and used for fuel, and 
sometimes for inside work in buildings.
In some 
places, the poor slit the fir into slender pieces, and 
use it as a substitute for candles.
These vegetable 
remains are, we believe, all the extraneous fossils 
which have been found in the county of Chester.
Plants.] — It is stated, by Messrs.
Lysons, that 
the Saxifraga Hirculus grows, in great abundance, 
on Knutsford-moor.
In Turner and Dillwyn's Bo- 
tanical Guide, the following plants are mentioned: — 
Lysimachia thyrsisflora, woods, near Stockport ; 
Campanula latijolia, near the rivers Mersey and 
Tame, at Stockport ; Cicala virosa, near Cheadle- 
Bridge ; Arbutus Uva-Ursi, hills on the borders of 
Yorkshire ; Trollius Europaus, in great plenty, in a 
wood between Stayley-Hall, and Seoutmill ; Limo- 
setla aquatica, near Frodsham ; Giiaphalium dioicum, 
hills above Stayley ; Oplm/s cor data, Stayley-moors; 
and Hi/meunphyllum Tunbrigense, on hills between 
Macclesfield and Buxton, upou mossy rocks ; Dian- 
thus deltoidet, in Wirall, near West-Kirkby church.
— The following additional plants, forming, with the 
above, the most satisfactory list that we have seen, 
are from the Magna Britannia of Messrs.
Lysons : — 
Veronica sc.utetlata, near the road from Wrexham to 
Chester ; Utricutaria vulgaris, near Churton-heath ; 
Utricular ia minor, bogs in Delamere Forest ; Menu- 
ant/ies nymphoides, bogs in Delamere Forest ; Gen- 
tiana Pneuinonanthe, ou the commons near Park- 
gate; Gcnliana campestris, near Hyle-Lake and 
Parkgate ; Sison inundatum, Backford-heath ; Sta- 
tice reticulata, II ilbree- island ; Drosera Anglica, 
marsh near Holme-Chapel ; Acorus calamus, near 
Holford-Hall ; Narthecium ossifiagum, Delamere 
Forest ; Alisma ranunculoides, near Tarvin ; Andro- 
meda polifotia, Delamere Forest ; Saxifraga aizoides, 
Beeston-Castle ; Siratiodes aloides, pools four miles 
from Holmes-Chapel ; Thalictrum minus, banks of 
the Dee, below Parkgate ; Lathraca squamaria, by 
the Dane side, below Congleton ; Bartsia viacosa, 
near Hyle-Lake ; Cochlearia Danica, at Parkgate ; 
Scutellaria minor, bogs on Delamere Forest ; J bens 
nudicaulis, Weston-Hill ; Geranium sanguinmm, 
banks of the Dee, near Parkgate ; Fumaria claiicu- 
lata, Broxton and Sandyway-head ; Lathyrus his- 
so/ai, Blacon-point ; Vicia Sulvatica, woods near 
Vale-Royal ; Hypericum Androsamum, woods near 
Rock-Savage; Senecio Saracenieus, Banks of the 
Dee, near Eaton-Boat ; Inula IJelenium, Eccleston; 
Viola lu tea, on the hills near Derbyshire ; Orchis 
conops<ea, Knrttsford-moor ; Serupias pa/ustris, Bla- 
con-Point ; Liltorella tacmtris, Budworth Common, 
near Oulton ; Empetrum nigrum, Congleton-Edge ; 
and Pitlularia gkbifera, on Congleton-Moss.
Etymology.] — In searching for the etymology of 
Cheshire, which is an abbreviation of Chester-shire, 
anciently written Ceastre-Scyre, we must advert to 
that of Chester, its principal town.
Cestria, or 
Ceastre, is understood to have been derived from 
Castrum, a camp, or military station, which it appears 
to have been, previously to Agricola's expedition to 
Scotland.
That commander made Chester the head- 
quarters of the twentieth Roman legion, whence the 
Britons gave it the name of Caer Llion vawr ar ddyfr 
Dwy, or the camp of the great legion on the Dee.
Gfneral 
CHESHIRE.
289 
General Ilisfo&v.] — Cheshire is one of the six 
counties, which, previously to the arrival of the Ro- 
mans, were possessed by the Coinavii, Camubii, or 
Corinnvii.* Whitaker, the celebrated historian and 
antiquary, conjectures, that the Cornavii of Cheshire 
derived their name from the peculiar situation and 
nature of their coast ; Richard of Cirencester ex- 
pressly declaring, that they were originally situated 
in the neighbourhood of the Dee. The Britons of 
Cornwall, and.
those of Caithness, are also called 
Cornabii, by Richard ; and as all of them were 
named from some striking feature of the country 
where they first resided, Mr. Whitaker contends, 
that those of Cheshire obtained their name from the 
peculiar form of the long promontory, already men- 
tioned, between the estuaries of the Dee and the 
Mersey, which is very similar in shape to those of 
Caithness and Cornwall.
f " Within this peninsula 
then," he continues, " and along the contiguous 
parts of the county, the Cornabii originally resided : 
and from them they originally sallied out, and spread 
their dominions over the rest of the county, over the 
whole of Staffordshire, and the neighbouring parts 
of Shropshire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, and 
Flintshire.
While they were confined within the 
precincts of West Cheshire, they seem to have had 
only the towns of Deva and Condate.
And the lat- 
ter appears, from its name, to have been the capital, 
being composed of the words Conda Te, and signi- 
fying the principal city." 
The Cornavii, besides Deva, or Chester, and Con- 
date, or Kinderton, possessed the towns of Urico- 
nium, or Wroxeter ; Banchorium, or Banchor ; and 
Etocetum, or Wall, near Litchfield ; but having been 
deprived of their principal city by the active and 
spirited Brigantes, they soon afterwards expected a 
new capital at Uriconinm, which seems to have been 
their metropolis at the time of the Roman invasion.
Camden asserts, that no traces of their name are re- 
maining ; but Whitaker insists, that a part of War- 
wickshire, lying between Southain and Coventry, is 
denominated the Cornavy at the present period.
— 
Camden, with some other antiquaries, supposes the 
Cangi, or Ceangi, to have dwelt among the Cor- 
navii, and particularly to have been seated in this 
county, as he conjectures from several pieces of 
lead found on the shore adjoining, with this in- 
scription : — 
IMP.
DOM1T.
AUG.
GER.
DE.
CEANG.
IMP.
VESP.
VII.
T. IMP.
V. COSS.
These he supposes to have been memorials of the 
victory obtained over the Ceangi, who lived in these 
parts.
Dr. Leigh endeavours to confirm this opi- 
nion from the names of several towns, which seem 
* The other five were — Staffordshire, Flintshire, Shropshire, 
Warwickshire, and Leicestershire.
f It is contended, however, by Mr. Owen, that the small 
head land between the livers Dee and Mersey is too inconsi- 
derable to have given name to this extensive nation, and he 
prefers the etymon Coruin, circling or winding, and air, 
VOL.
I. NO.
21.
to retain some traces of their ancient inhabitants, as 
Conghill in Broughton, and Congleton in Nantwich 
hundred.
In the triads of the ancient bards, how- 
ever, the Cangi are mentioned merely as a class of 
men selected from the principal tribes, or nations, 
and deputed to keep their flocks, and attend their 
cattle.
Their herds often consisted of 20,000, and 
were sometimes attended by 800 of these keepers, or 
Cangi.
With this opinion Mr. Whitaker coincides ; 
it may therefore be considered, that the Cangi were 
scattered, or distributed over several parts of the 
country.
But the Cornavii were certainly local.
Their name continued until the decline of the Roman 
empire ; for some troops of the Cornavii are known 
to have settled under the latter emperors, as may 
be seen iu the Notitia Provinciarum ; and it is very 
probable they were a martial people, because the 
Romans always kept strong garrisons in their ter- 
ritories to restrain and keep them in subjection.
Lucian, the monk, who lived shortly alter the 
Conquest, thus speaks of the inhabitants of Cheshire 
at that period : — " They are found to differ from the 
rest of the English, partly better, and partly equal.
In feasting they are friendly, at meat cheerful, in 
entertainment liberal, soon angry, and soon pacified ; 
lavish of words, impatient of servitude, merciful to 
the afflicted, compassionate to the poor, kind to 
their kindred, sparing of labour, void of dissimula- 
tion, not greedy in eating, and far from dangerous 
practices." 
This county was included by the Romans in the 
division they named Flavia Ca;sariensis, and on their 
final departure from the island, it reverted again to 
the Britons, who continued its possessors till about 
the year 607, when it was conquered by Ethelfritb, 
the Saxon king of Bernicia, who defeated the army 
of Brochmael Yscithroc, king of Powys, assembled 
to oppose him near Chester.
On this occasion, 
Ethelfrith is said to have slain 1,200 defenceless 
monks, whom Brochmael had called from the neigh* 
bouring monastery of Bangor, and stationed on a 
hill, that they might assist him with their prayers.
Cheshire was afterwards conquered by the Mer- 
cians, and continued a part of their kingdom about 
200 years, when it fell into the hands of the Danes, 
who kept it but a few years ; for King Alfred, A.
D 
877, carrying his arms against those invaders, con- 
quered them, and making Cheshire a province to the 
kingdom of the West Saxons, constituted Etheldred, 
one of the race of the kings of Mercia, Duke or Go.- 
vernor of the county.
After the family of Etheldred 
had possessed this dignity for six generations, they 
were at length deprived of it by Canute the Dane, 
who committed this part of Mercia to the govern- 
ment of the Earls of Chester ; of these only Leofric, 
streams.
Then, says he, " the people would be called Cora- 
nivi, Coreineiviaid, Coreineivion, Coreineivwvr, and Coiei- 
nrivwys, or the inhabitants of the banks of winding rivers ; 
names very applicable with respect to the two great rivers, the 
Severn and the Dee, on which their county chiefly lay." 
4 D 
the 
290 
CHESHIRE.
the son of Leofwid ; Algar, the son of Leofric ; and 
Edwin, the son of Edgar, enjoyed this dignity, pre- 
vious to the Norman conquest ; for, in the time of 
the last Earl, William the Conqueror, and his Nor- 
mans, got possession of the English throne, and thus 
the line of -the Saxon nobility was closed.
It may 
be mentioned, however, that, about the year 920, or 
923, King Edward the Elder built the city of Thel- 
wall, on the Mersey, and placed a garrison there.
In 971, King Edgar received the homage of eight 
petty sovereigns, or governors of provinces, at Ches- 
ter ; and Higden, the monk, states, that he was 
rowed by them from his palace to the church of St.
•John's.
This county was laid waste by pirates in 
the year 981.
The Conqueror, upon his settlement in England, 
rgave this county to Gherbod, a valiant Fleming, 
who had undergone many hardships for him, both 
in acquiring and settling his kingdom.
This Earl, 
after some time, had occasion to return to Flanders, 
where he was made prisoner, and obliged, from a 
long captivity, to resign his newly-acquired honours 
and possessions to another.
William, therefore, in 
his stead, appointed Hugh de Aurenge, better known 
by the name of Hugh Lupus.
To him he delegated 
extraordinary power ; making Cheshire a county 
.palatine, and giving it such a sovereign jurisdiction, 
that the ancient Earls kept their own Parliament, 
rmd had their own courts of law, in which any of- 
fence against the dignity of the sword of Chester 
was as cognizable as the like offence would have 
been at Westminster against the dignity of the royal 
crown ; for William allowed Lupus to hold this 
county " tarn libere ad gladium, sicut ipse Rex te- 
nebat Angliam ad coronam." The sword with 
which he was invested is still to be seen in the 
British Museum, inscribed, " hdgo comes cE.sxRi.a2." 
The office of sword-bearer, at the times of the coro- 
nation, was also held by this weapon.
As soon as 
Jiupus found lumself firmly established, he began to 
».?xert his regal prerogatives.
He formed his Par- 
liament by the creation of eight barons, viz.
Nigel, 
Baron of Halton ; Robert, of Montalt ; William 
Malbedeng, of Nantwich ; Vernon, of Shipbrooke ; 
Fitzhugh, of Malpas ; Hamon de Massie, of Dun- 
ham ; Venables, of Kinderton ; and Nicholas, of 
Stockport.
They wore obliged to pay him attend- 
ance, and to repair to his court, to give it the greater 
dignity.
They were bound, in time of war with 
Wales, to find for every knight's fee, a horse with 
caparison and furniture, or two without furniture, 
* Hugh, the first Earl before-mentioned, says Camden, was 
succeeded by his son Richard, who was shipwrecked with Wil- 
liam, only son of King Henry I.
and other nobles between 
Normandy and England, A.
D. 1120.
Leaving no issue he 
was succeeded by Ranulph de Meschines, third Earl; Karl 
Hugh's sister's son, who left a son named Ranulph de Gernon, 
fourth Earl of Chester, a brave soldier, who took King Stephen 
._-.^..— »••'— -** ^»<"gc of jf-iiicoin.
Hugh, surnamed krrvel'.oc, 
Irn son was ihe fifth Earl, who died A.
D. 11.81, leaving a son 
Ranulph, sixth Earl, surnamed de Rlundevill, who built Chart- 
ley and Becstou Castles, and De la Cresse Abbey, and dying 
in the.
division of Cheshire.
Their knights and free- 
holders were to have corselets and habergeons, and 
were to defend their lands with their own bodies.
Every baron had also four esquires, every esquire 
one gentleman, and every gentleman one valet.
Each of these barons had also his free court for 
all pleas and suits, and all plaints, except what be- 
longed to the Earl's sword.
He had, besides, 
power of life and death ; the last instance of the ex- 
ertion of which was in the person of Hugh Stringer, 
who was tried for murder in the Baron of Kinder- 
ton's court, and executed in 1597.
This species of 
government continued from the Conquest till the 
reign of Henry the Third, a period of about 171 
years, when, in 1237, on the death of John Scot, the 
seventh Earl of the Norman line, without male issue, 
Henry took the earldom into his own hands, and 
gave the daughters of the late Earl other lands in 
lieu ; unwilling, as he said, that so great an inherit- 
ance should be parcelled out among distaffs.* The 
King bestowed the county on his son Edward, who 
did not assume the title, but afterwards conferred it 
on his son Edward, of Caernarvon ; since that time 
the eldest sons of the Kings of England have always 
been Earls of Chester as well as Princes of Wales.
The palatinate was governed by the Earls of Ches- 
ter as fully and independently, for nearly three cen- 
turies after this period, as it had ever been by the 
Norman Earls ; but Henry the Eighth, by authority 
of Parliament, made it subordinate to the crown of 
England.
Notwithstanding this restraint, all pleas 
of lands and tenements, and all contracts within the 
county, are to be heard and determined within it ; 
and all determinations out of it are deemed void 
' et coram non judici,' except in cases of error, fo- 
reign plea, and foreign voucher ; and for no crime 
but treason, can an inhabitant of this county be tried 
out of it." 
Cheshire, during the first two centuries after the 
Conquest, was much annoyed by the inroads of the 
Welch.
In the time of Hugh Lupus, a battle was 
fought at Nantwich ; and, in 1121, the Welch made 
an incursion, and burnt two castles — probably 
Shocklach, and Old-Castle, in Malpas.
About the 
year 1150, the Welch, after laying waste the county, 
were cut.
off on their return to Nantwich.
In 1212, 
the Welch again invaded the borders, took some 
castles, put the garrisons to the sword, burnt seve- 
ral towns, and returned laden with plunder.
King 
John assembled an army, and marched as far as 
Chester against the invaders ; but having there 
without children left his four sisters heirs, Matilda, wife of 
David, Earl of Huntingdon ; Mabil, married lo William de 
Albiney, Earl of Arundel ; Agnes, to William de Ferrars, Earl 
of Derby; and Hawis, to Robert de Quincy.
He was suc- 
ceeded in the earldom by John, surnamed Scot, son of Earl 
David by Matilda the eldest sister; but he dying without issue 
King Henry III.
casting a longing eye on such a fine inherit- 
ance, annexed it to the royal demesne, and assigned other 
revenues lo John's sisters, lh..t (us the King himself expressed 
it) so fine an estate might not be parcelled out among women.
learned, 
CHESHIRE.
291 
learned, that his barons had thrown off their allegi- 
ance, he disbanded his array, and returned to Lon- 
don.
Henry HI.
in 1245, caused the brine pits to 
be destroyed, and the county to be devastated, to 
prevent the Welch from obtaining 1 provisions : a 
dreadful famine was the consequence of this policy.
The county was again invaded, and ravaged by the 
Welch, in the years.
1256 and 1257.
In the latter 
year, Henry marched against them with a large 
army ; and, the harvest being then ripe, he destroy- 
ed all the standing corn.
This proceeding, which 
he intended to operate only against the enemy, was 
one of the chief causes which compelled him to re- 
linquish his expedition, and to make an inglorious 
retreat.
In the following year, the Welch sued for, 
and obtained a peace, by the submission of Llewellyn ; 
but, again commencing hostilities, Henry marched 
against them, and arrived at Chester, about the festi- 
val of St. John the Baptist.
Cutting his way through 
an extensive and thickly -wooded forest, lying between 
that city and Llewellyn's territories, he entered 
Wales in triumph.
A prompt submission on the 
part of Llewellyn ensued.
That Prince commenced 
his depredations again in 1281 ; but, in the same 
year, he was kdled, in a skirmish with Lord Morti- 
mer ; an event which led to the complete subjuga- 
tion of the Welch, and the consequent security of the 
inhabitants of Cheshire.
In the Hotspur rebellion, the battle which proved 
fatal to the Percy cause was particularly disastrous 
to the men of Cheshire : the greater part of the 
knights and esquires of that county, to the number 
of 200, with many of their retainers, were killed ; 
and the Baron of Kinderton, and Sir Richard Ver- 
non, were taken and beheaded.
Sir John Calveley, 
and Sir John Massey, two of the small number of 
Cheshire Knights who adhered to the King, fell in 
the battle.
The King afterwards pardoned the citi- 
zens of Chester, for the part which they had taken 
in the rebellion, on their paying a fine of 300 marks 
into the royal treasury.
The military prowess of the men of Cheshire 
makes a proud figure in the annals of Britain.
The 
heroic exploits of Lord Audley and his four Che- 
shire Esquires — Sir John Delves, Sir Thomas Dutton, 
Siv'Robert Foulshurst, and Sir John Hawkstone — 
at the battle of Poictiers, are well known.
** 
In the wars between the rival roses, the men of 
this county particularly distinguished themselves.
At the battle of Blore Heath, in 1450, they suffered 
dreadfully ; and, what rendered the calamity the 
greater, was, they ranged nearly in equal numbers 
•on the side of each of the contending parties.
Sir 
Hugh V.enables, Sir William Troutbeck, Sir Tho- 
mas Dutton, Sir Richard Molineux, Sir John Done, 
Sir John Egerton, and Sir John Legh, of Boothes, 
were left dead on the field of battle.
Drayton, in 
.his Polyalbion, thus curiously records this memora- 
ble fight :— 
" There Dutton Dutton kills; a Done doth kill a Done; 
A Booth a Booth ; and Leigh by Leigh is overthrown : 
A Venables, against a Venables doth stand,.
And Troutbeck tighteth with a Troutbeck hand" to hand : 
There Molineux doth make a Molineux to die ; 
And Egerton the strength of Egerton doth try.
Oh Cheshire!
wert thou mad of thine own native gore, 
So much until this day thou never shedd'st before !
Above two thousand men upon the earth were thrown, 
Of whom the greatest part were naturally thine own." 
In the battle of Floddon-Field, in 1513, the Che- 
shire men also distinguished themselves : Several of 
the burgesses of Macclesfield, with Sir Edmund Sa- 
vage, their Mayor, were left amongst the slain.-— 
In 1544, when the Earl of Hertford, after a victory" 
obtained over the Scots, knighted about sixty offi- 
cers, his companions in that expedition, nearly one- 
third of them were gentlemen of the first families of 
Cheshire.
This county appears to have taken great interest 
in the affairs of the Charleses ; but, as the events 
relating to those two monarchs occurred chiefly in 
the city of Chester, we shall defer our noticethereof, 
till we come to the account of that place.
Subse- 
quently, there has been no historical occurrence of 
note relating in particular to this county.
Cheshire being solely under the jurisdiction of its 
own Earls, sent no representatives to the national 
Parliament for the city or shire, till the year 1549, 
the 3d of Edward the Sixth, when, upon the petition 
of the inhabitants, two members were summoned 
from each.
Antiquities.] — With the exception of Chester, 
the sites of the Roman stations in this county are 
uncertain.
Chester, the Deva of the Romans, was, 
as already stated, one of their most important mili- 
tary posts in Britain, for upwards of two centuries; 
and, consequently, as might have been expected, 
many remains of altars, tesselated pavements, &c.
have been found in its neighbourhood.
Kinderton 
is, most probably, the Roman Condate.
Roman 
posts are also supposed to have been fixed at Stock- 
port, Stretford, and Warrington.
Abundance of 
the red Samian ware, with other kinds of pottery, 
many coins, and other Roman relicts, have been 
frequently found, in digging for foundations, withiu 
the walls of Chester.
The principal of these will 
be specified in our account of that city ; and the dif- 
ferent church-antiquities will be duly noticed in their 
respective places.
In the township of Bntley, near the high road 
from Stockport to Macclesfield, several cairns were 
discovered in the year 1808, about three feet below 
the surface of the earth.
The Chester Courant, of 
July 25, in that year, states, that around the circum- 
ference of the area occupied by these cairns, were 
placed, at certain intervals, large boundary stones, 
apparently of a hundred-weight and upwards, A« 
urn, containing ashes, was found near the extremity 
of one of the boundaries.
An ancient bugle-horn, eighteen inches and a half 
in length, and nine and a.
half in diameter at the 
larger end, is in the possession of Sir Thomas Stan- 
7 ley, 
292 
CHESHIRE.
ley, Bart, of this county.
The mouth-piece is 
mounted with gold, and ornamented with a wreath.
This is understood to be the horn, by the delivery of 
which the office of bailiff of the forest of Wirrall was 
formerly conferred.
The office of chief forester, or 
bow-bearer of Delamere Forest, was formerly be- 
stowed in a similar manner by the delivery of a black 
bugle-horn.
That horn, which is mounted with gold, 
is now, or was a short time ago, in the possession of 
John Arden, Esq. the chief forester.
The sword of Hugh Lupus, Earl of Chester, who 
died A.
D. 1101, formerly in Sir Hans Sloane's col- 
lection, is now, as already observed, in the British 
Museum.
This weapon, which is supposed to have 
been the sword of dignity by which Lupus held the 
county of Chester, is three feet eleven inches 
and one-eighth in length ; its blade is two inches 
and three-eighths wide at the top, and it tapers 
gradually to a point : the handle is gilt, ornamented 
with scrolls of foliage and flowers, and inlaid with 
mother-of-pearl.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Divisions.] — Che- 
shire, which was anciently divided into twelve hun- 
dreds, comprises now only the following seven : — 
Macclesfield, Bucklow, Northwich, Eddisbury, 
Nantwich, Broxton, and Wirrall.
Each of these 
hundreds has two subdivisions, for each of which 
there are two high constables.
In ancient times, this county Was subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Bishops of Mercia, who some- 
times had their seat at Chester.
It is now comprised within the diocese of the 
same name, which was erected into a bishopric by 
Henry the Eighth, in the year 1541, and belongs to 
the province of York.
It contains two archdeacon- 
ries, those of Chester and Richmond.
Cheshire is 
entirely within the former ; it is subdivided into the.
following deaneries : Chester, Frodsham, Maccles- 
field, Maldenwich, alias Nantwich, Malpas, Bangor, 
Middlewich, and Wirrall, containing together 86 pa- 
rishes ; of which, 46 are rectories, 22 vicarages, and 
18 donations or curacies.* 
The county of Chester returns, altogether, only 
four members to Parliament ; two for the county, 
and two for the city.
The principal interest for the 
former, rests with the Earls Chohnondeley and 
Grosvenor, Viscount Bulkeley, Sir J.
Leicester, and 
Mr. Chohnondeley, as the chief landed proprietors.
The interest for the city rests chiefly with Earl 
Grosvenor : there are about a thousand voters.
Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Seats.] — Beate 
Hall, in Macclesfield, formerly a seat of the Earl of 
Courtown, is now a public-house ; Frodsham Cas- 
tle, a seat of the Earls Rivers, was burnt down in 
the year 1654 ; Rock- Savage, another seat of the 
same family, has been pulled down ; Lord Dysart's 
mansion, at Woodhey, has experienced the same 
fate ; and Peel Hall, in Tarvin, formerly a seat of 
the Earls of Plymouth, is now a farm-house.
The 
only noblemen's seats, now in the county, are the 
following : — Newton Hall, belonging to Lord Vis- 
count Kilmorey ; Dunham-Massey, the seat of the 
Earl of Stamford and Warrington ; Poynton, a seat 
of Lord Bulkeley's ; Chohnondeley Castle ; Earl 
Grosvenor's seat, at Eaton ; and Crewe Hall, the 
seat of Lord Crewe.
The seats of the principal 
gentry will be described in their local order.
Market Towns.] — Cheshire contains, at present, 
the following fourteen market-towns : — 
Altringham 
Chester 
Congleton 
Frodsham 
Knutsford 
Macclesfield 
Malpas 
Midlewicli 
Nantwich 
Neston 
Northwich 
Sandbach 
Stockport 
Tarporley.
* It may be further remarked, that the diocese of Chester 
'and Lancaster, part of Westmoreland, Yorkshire, and Cumber- 
land, two chapclries in Denbighshire, and four churches and 
None of these markets are noticed for the sale of 
any other commodity but corn.
The most consi- 
derable trade between farmers and the millers is 
carried on near Tarporley ; but the principal mar- 
kets are at Chester, Nantwich, and Sandbach.
At 
Nantwich, besides the accustomed weekly market, 
there is a great cattle-market, from the first Sa- 
turday in February, till the latter end of May.
There is also a weekly market for provisions, at 
Winsford Bridge.
Population.] — There is no record of the ancient 
population of this county.
In 1801, it contained 
34,482 inhabited houses, and 1,139 uninhabited ; 
the total number ©f inhabitants amounting to 
191,751 ; of which, 92,759 were males, and 98,992 
females.
Of this aggregate, 38,823 were employ- 
ed in agriculture, and 67,447 in trade, manufac- 
tures, &c.
Since the period here mentioned, the 
population of the county must have considerably 
increased ; as, according to the Population Returns 
of 1811, the total number of persons was 227,031 ; 
of whom 110,841 were males, and 116,190 fe- 
males.
The proportions of these, in the respec- 
tive hundreds, as employed in agriculture, trade, 
&c.
will be seen by the following table.
The ave- 
rage scale of mortality in this county, in ten years, 
is in the proportion of 1 to 50.
one chapel in the county of Flint, making 506 churches, » ha- 
pels, and donatives, of which 101 are impropriate.
Charged 
in the King's books, 4201.
13s.
3d.
Summary 
CHESHIRE.
293 
Summary of the 
Population of the 
County of Chester, 
as published by Authority of Parliament in 1811 
HOUSES.
OCCUPATIONS.
PERSONS.
Hundreds, &c.
D 
13 
M 
J3 
>-3 
1 8 
E o .
5 H u 
is 
'3 
*6 
a 
'Ja 
a 
'S 
13 
£ e .- 
a; ._ l) 
'-£ "3 3 
O 1/ — 
» C" = 
K O 
£ £ °° 
CO 2 ^ 
tin 
*fj c c o 
H— a?
- 
— 2.-C - 
c p ns o 
- £ .
= .£!)"> 
= S  ; d 
* § o-2 
J! S *<-> 
-^ _ -" 00 
Males.
Females.
Total 
of 
Persons.
13651 
32403 
20761 
70623 1 
19568 
26541 
11579 
16140 , 
12299 
3466 
2399 
5929 
3725 
12520 
3480 
5160 
2160 
3296 
2518 
2641 
6306 
4101 
13415 
3912 
5389 
2265 
3745,' 
2728 
15 
42 
13 
84 
2 
33 
23 
15 
23 
45 
105 
78 
479 
85 
171 
66 
161 
49 
1809 
3034 
2524 
2653 
2382 
1885 
1468 
397 
244 
399 
2562 
813 
10057 
1207 
2774 
477 
2296 
2458 
433 
710 
764 
705 
323 
73 
320 
1052 
26 
6632 
15930 
10347 
33775 
9568 
12815 
5672 
7007 
5629 
3466 
7019 
16473 
10414 
36848 
10000 
13726 
5907 
9133 
6670 
Macclesfield 
WirraU 
41187 
44502 
250 
1239 
16396 
23043 
5063 
110S41 116190 
227031 j 
Chief Towns, Parishes, &c.
Acton.] — This village, which is situated in the 
hundred of Nantwich, lies about a mile and three 
quarters N.
W. by W.
from the town of that name.
In the time of the Saxons it was a considerable 
place, being the seat of Morcar, brother of the last 
Earl of Mercia.
In the Confessor's reign, the ma- 
nor of Acton was valued at ten pounds per annum ; 
but at the Conquest, when it became a part of the 
barony of Nantwich, only at six pounds.
Hugh, its 
second Lord, bestowed the advowson of the living, 
with the appertaining lands, on the Abbey of Com- 
bermere.
It afterwards came successively to the 
Lovells, the Ardens, and the Wilbrahams ; and at 
present belongs to Earl Dysart.
A neat new church 
in this parish, contains some respectable monuments 
of the Mainwaring and Wilbraham families.
The 
old church was used as a temporary prison, after the 
battle of Nantwich.
The chief business of the inha- 
bitants is shoe-making.
Many of the houses are 
very old and irregular, but ethers are large and con- 
venient.
This parish, exclusively of the parochial 
fhapelry of Wrenbury, contains the following town- 
ships : — Aston, Austerson, Badington, Brindley, 
Burland, Cholmondeston, Coole-Pilate, Edlaston, 
Faddely, Henhull, Hurleston, Poole, Stoke, Wor- 
leston, and part of Soond.
Milton's third wife, who 
survived him, was of the Minshull family, proprie- 
tors of the manors of Stoke.
Alderley.] — The parish of Alderley, containing 
the three townships of Great Wurford, Nether Al- 
* Raphael Hollingshed, the celebrated author of the Chro- 
nicles of England, was born in the reign of Henry the Eighth ; 
but it is not known in what year, or to what profession he was 
brought up.
It appears that he began to write history soon 
after the accession of Queen Elizabeth ; and that he wa§ assist- 
VOL.
I. — NO.
21.
derley, and Over Alderley, is situated in the hun- 
dred of Macclesfield, two miles south-south-east 
from Wotton-under-Edge.
Alderley-hall, in Ne- 
ther Alderley, is the ancient inheritance of the Stan- 
ley family, to whom the townships of Over and Ne- 
ther Alderley principally belong.
This family traces 
its descent from Sir John Stanley, third son of the 
first Lord Stanley, and brother to the first Earl of 
Derby.
The ancient manor-house was burnt down 
about eight -and-thirty years ago.
The present re- 
sidence is situated at the southern extremity of Al- 
derley Park, and was formerly denominated the 
Park-House : it commands a fine view of a wood 
about three quarters of a mile in length, chiefly con- 
sisting of remarkably large beech trees.
The ground 
rises rapidly from the park to the northward, and 
forms the range of high hills called Alderley Edge, 
the highest point of which is about 360 feet above 
the church, and the view from it extremely grand.
Formerly, there were four other halls in Nether 
Alderley, Heywood-Hall, Soss-Moss-Hall, Fallows- 
Hall, and Monks-Heath-Hall : the two former arc 
now occupied by farmers ; the latter have been 
taken down, and farm-houses built on their sites.
There is a school-house at Alderley, which was 
built by the Rev. Hugh Shaw, curate of the parish, 
A. D.
1628.
Alderley Church contains some memorials of the 
families of Stanley, Ward, and Holinshed ; of the 
last of which, Holinshed, the Chronicler, was a 
member.* 
Aldford.] — This parish, formerly a place of some 
r.d in the execution of it by several others.
Considering the 
time in which he lived, it is written in an agreeable style; and 
it has gone through several editions, one of which was published 
very recently.
The time of his death is unknown, further than 
that it happened between the years J578 and 1582.
'1 e note 
294 
CHESHIRE.
note, lies five miles south by east from Chester.
It 
has a bridge over the river Dee ; and, in the year 
1253, it received a grant of a market to be holden 
on Tuesdays, and a lair for three days at the Exalt- 
ation of the Holy Cross.
These have long been dis- 
continued.
Formerly, also, there was a castle at 
this place ; the chief seat, of the Aldford family.
The foundations of the castle, moated half round, 
my yet be traced, There is nothing remarkable in 
the church.
The townships of Aldford, Buerton, 
Edgerley, and part of Churton, are all in this pa- 
rish.
Altringham.] — Altringham, or Altrincham, is a 
market-town, in the parish of Bowdon, in the east 
division of the hundred of Bucklow, seven miles 
north by cast from Nether Knutsford.
. Its market 
is on Tuesday ; and it has fairs on the 22d of April, 
the 5th of August, and the 22d of November.
" Al- 
trincham," says Leycester, in his History of the 
Antiquities of Chester, " is of the ancient Fee of 
the Barons of Dunham Massy.
In the reign of 
Edw. I., Hammon de Massey, Lord of Dunham 
Massey, instituted Burgesses in this Town, and 
granted them a Gild-Mercatory here, that is, a So- 
ciety for free Traffic and Merchandize, about the 
Year of Christ 1290.
— Although we usually style the 
chief Officer here, Mayor of Altrincham, yet in Truth 
he is no more than a principal Officer, without any 
Magisterial Authority." 
The Duke of Bridgewater's canal runs near this 
town.
Altringham contains no church ; but, in 1799, a 
chapel of ease was built there at the expence of the 
Earl of Stamford and others.
Formerly the town of Altringham received much 
benefit from the worsted trade ; and the spinning of 
combed wool was general throughout the district, 
the wool being delivered out at Manchester, to the 
people who attended the market, and the worsted 
yarn was sold to the small-ware manufacturers.
This business, however, has been almost ruined by 
the' introduction of Irish worsted.
Some stuffs for 
home wear are still made in small quantities from 
the wool spun by the cottagers.
There are also two 
large cotton manufactories, and a manufactory for 
turning bobbins; the laths of which are worked by 
steam.
Many of the inhabitants of the town and its 
vicinity, obtain a livelihood by raising vegetables for 
the Manchester market ; especially early potatoes, 
which, in the early part of the season sometimes bear 
the high price of 3s.
a pound.
Astbury.] — Astbury, or Austbury, is situated in 
the hundred of Northwich, a mile and a half south- 
west from Congleton.
This is an extensive village, 
and contains several gentlemen's seats.
The church 
is a handsome Gothic structure, with a lofty spire 
* Near Newbolcl-Astbury, at the edge of Mole-cop, large 
quantities of liine-stone are dug.
It is burnt on the spot ; the 
toi'l for the purpose being procured from Staffordshire, at the 
distance of about three miles.
This lime-stone is heavier than 
steeple.
In the church-yard are two ancient stone 
monuments, ornamented with the insignia of knight- 
hood ; but the names of the families whose memories 
they were intended to record, are now lost.
The parish of Astbury contains the following 
twelve townships : — Newbold-Astbury,* Bug-Law- 
ton, Congleton, Davenport, Eaton, Hulmewalfiehi, 
Great- Moreton, Odd- Rode, Radnor, Smallwood, 
Somerford-Booth, and Somerford-Radnor.
Each 
of these townships has its overseer and other officers ; 
hut the whole parish is under the government of one 
church- warden, the office of which is served in ro- 
tation by eight persons, vulgarly denominated the 
" Posts of the Parish ;" properly Praeposita, or 
Provosts.
Audlem.] — Audlem is in the hundred of Nant- 
wich, six miles and three quarters south by east 
from the town of that nama.
It formerly had a 
market on Thursday, and a fair on the festival of 
St. James.
A free grammar-school was founded 
here in the year 1655, by Sir W.
Bolton and another 
gentleman ; and, in 1719, Mrs. Tryphena Bolton also 
founded a charity-school here.
Barrow.] — This place, which is in the hundred of 
Eddisbury, five miles east-north-east from Chester, 
is chiefly remarkable, as having been formerly the 
seat of a preceptory of the Knights Hospitallers of 
St. John of Jerusalem, of which there are now no 
remains.
There is a charity-school in the parish.
Barthomley.] — Barthomley, in the hundred of 
Nantwich, six miles south by east from Sandbach, 
contains the townships of Barthomley, Alsager, Bar- 
terley, Crewe, and Haslington.
The nave of the 
church has a richly carved wooden roof of the date 
of 1589.
On the 22d of December, 1643, a troop of 
Lord Byron's, passing through Barthomley, made 
an attack upon the church, into which several of the 
inhabitants had gone for safety ; they soon got pos- 
session of it, and having set fire to the forms, rushes, 
and mats, made such a smoke, that the men who had 1 
retreated into the steeple were obliged to call for 
quarter ; but their assailants, having got them into 
their power, are said to have stripped them all naked, 
and most cruelly murdered twelve of them in cold 
blood, three only being suffered to escape.
A free-school was founded here, A.
D. 1676, by 
the Rev. Mr.
Steele, in which ten children are edu- 
cated.
In the year 1789, Mrs. Mary, Mrs. Margaret, and 
Mrs. Judith Alsager,- Ladies of the Manor, obtained 
an Act of Parliament to enable them to finish a new 
church or chapel, to be called Christ's Church or 
Chapel, in that township.
The same ladies built a 
school-house and founded a school there, for the 
education of boys and girls.
In the township of Haslington is an ancient cha- 
that of Buxton, is of a grey ash colour, and has lately been 
preferred as a manure by the farmers.
It is longer in breaking, 
but swells more, and is supposed (o have a more durable effect.
2 pel, 
CHESHIRE.
295 
pel, built by the Vernon family.
A bill was once 
brought into Parliament to convert this chapel into a 
church, but it was thrown out.
At Winteley in this 
township, is a Dissenters' Meeting-, supposed to 
have been built in or about the time of Elizabeth.
Bebington.] — Bebington parish, in the hundred 
of Wirrall, is about five miles and a quarter north- 
east by north from Great Neston.
In the reign of 
Henry the Third, there was a chapel here dedicated 
to St. Thomas a Becket, probably the chapel of the 
spital, of which William Lancelyn died seised in 
1382.
In the reign of Edward I.
the spital here 
mentioned was an hospital for lepers.
A charity 
school was founded here in the year 1655.
Amongst 
the benefactions to the poor of the parish, have been 
several sums of money for the purchasing of parish 
cows.
There are now ten of those cows, which are 
let out to the poor at 5s.
a year each.
The cows 
are inspected once a year, and the produce of their 
hire forms a fund to keep up the stock.
Bidston.] — Bidston is in the hundred of Wirrall, 
nine miles and a half from Great Neston.
The 
light-house in this parish, erected pursuant to an 
Act of Parliament passed in 1762, is supported by 
a duty paid by all ships sailing to or from the port 
of Liverpool.
Bidston Hall, an ancient mansion, 
now occupied as a farm house, is said to have been 
a favourite residence of William, Earl of Derby, Lord- 
Lieutenant of the county, and Chamberlain of Ches- 
ter in the reign of James I.
A charity school was 
founded here in the year 1636.
Birkenhead.] — Birkenhead, or Birket-Wood, is 
an extra-parochial chapelry, in the hundred of Wir- 
rall, nine miles N.
N. E.
from Great Neston.
Bir- 
kenhead Priory was founded by Hainan Massie, 
third Baron of Dunham, about the latter end of the 
reign of Henry II.
or in that of Richard I.
for six- 
teen monks of the Benedictine order.
At the Dis- 
solution, its revenues were valued, according to 
Dugdale, at 901.
13s.
per annum, and were then 
granted to Ralph Worseley.
The chapel of this 
ancient structure is yet standing, and has been aug- 
mented by Queen Anne's bounty.
Bowdon.] — The parish of Bowdon, in the east di- 
vision of the hundred of Bucklow, about six miles 
north by east from Nether Knutsford, contains 
the followiug townships : — Bowdon, Altringham, 
Ashley, Baguley, Bollington, Carrington, Dunham 
Massey, Hale, Partington, and Timperley ; and 
half of the townships of Hagden, and Ashton.
It 
is divided into four districts, with a church- warden 
to each.
The church, which stands on a hill about 
* This nobleman, who died in 1694, at the age of 42, wa?
thrice committed to the tower, on accusations of high treason, 
and, having been tried by his Peers, he was acquitted on the 
14th of January, 1686, a day which he ever afterwards com- 
memorated.
His trial took place before his professed enemy, 
Lord Chancellor Jefferies, who sat as high Steward, and a se- 
lect number of Peers, such as were supposed to be most de- 
voted to the court ; yet so clear were the proofs of his inno- 
cence, that he was acquitted by the unanimous verdict of his 
l a mile west from Altringham, possesses several 
handsome monuments of the Booth, Delamere, and 
Brereton, families.
In the north aisle is a monu- 
ment, in memory of Henry, Earl of Warrington,* 
and his Countess ; and another, supported by Ionic 
columns, and ornamented with the medallions of the 
deceased, in memory of the Earl's younger sons, 
Langham, and Henry Booth.
Many of the other 
monuments, are also entitled to the notice of the 
curious visitor.
Bowdon has an ancient free grammar-school, and 
two charity-schools.
One of the Legh family, of Baguley in this parish, 
is traditionally stated to have written several his- 
torical poems in the reign of Heury VII.
In the 
reign of Elizabeth, Jane, the daughter and only- 
heir of John Carrington, Esq. brought the town- 
ship of that name, in marriage, to Sir George Booth 
of Dunham Massy.
In the marriage settlement, 
was the remarkable clause; that, if the said Jane 
should after marriage, be detected of incontinency, 
the estate should remain to the family of Booth.
Sir Peter Leycester informs us that Sir George had 
no issue by this lady, yet, he enjoyed Carrington's 
lands, which, after her death, he recovered by a te- 
dious suit.
From Sir George Booth the estate de- 
scended to the present proprietor, the Earl of Stanv* 
ford and Warrington.
The old mansion is now oc- 
cupied by a farmer.
John Rider, Bishop of Kil- 
loe, author of a Latin and English dictionary, who 
died in the year 1632 was a native of Carrington.
There is an ancient dissenters' meeting-house ; and, 
at Ringey, or Ringway, was an old chapel, which, 
after the Restoration, was occupied for many years 
by the nonconformists.
Lord Crewe's grandfather 
rebuilt the latter, in the year 1720 ; gave 2001.
to- 
wards its endowment ; and procured for it Queen 
Anne's bounty.
The township of Partington has a 
Dissenters' Meeting-house, which has been establish- 
ed many years.
Bradley.] — Bradley is a township of Malpas, 
three miles arid a half north-north-west from Whit- 
church in Shropshire.
The manor was purchased 
of the Breretons, by the Drakes, in whom it still re- 
mains, in the reign of Charles II.
This place is remarkable from the dreadful rava- 
ges which it suffered from the plague, in the year 
1625.
The following extracts from the parish re- 
gister for that year, recording the destruction of an 
entire family — one of the members of which ac- 
tually dug his own grave, from the idea that, other- 
judges.
On the first intelligence of the approach of the Prince 
of Orange, he put himself at the head of an armed force, ami 
on the happy accomplishment of an almost bloodless revolu- 
tion, was one of the persons selected to carry the fallen mo- 
narch, who had so lately put his life to hazard, the message 
which enforced his removal from (he palace of Whitehall.
Lord Delamere was created Earl of Warrington by King Wil- 
liam, in 1690.
*visi 3 .
296 
CHESHIRE.
wise, his body must remain unburied — are exceed- 
ingly curious and interesting : — 
" Thomas Jefferie, servant to Thomas Dawson 
of Bradley, buriyed the Xth daye of August, in the 
night, he dyed of the plague ; — before this was bu- 
ryed a daughter of the sayd Thomas Dawson's, but 
not of the sicklies, as it is thought.
" Richarde, the sonne of Thomas Dawson of 
Bradley, (that dyed of the plague,) buryed the 
XIHth daye of August, in the night, 1625, nihil.
" RafFe Dawson, Sonne of the aforesayd Tho- 
mas, came from London about XXVth of July last 
past, and being sicke of the plague, died in his fa- 
ther's howse, and soe infected the sayd bowse and 
was buryed, as it is reported, nearc unto his father's 
' howse.
" Thomas Dawson of Bradley, died of the pla- 
gue, ami was buryed the XVI th daye of August, 
1625, about Illth of clocke, after midnight, nihil.
" Elyzabeth, the daughter of the afforesay'd Tho- 
mas Dawson, died of the plague of pestelence, and 
was buryed the XXth of August 1625, nihil.
" Anne, the wylie of John Dawson, sonne of the 
afforsay'd Thomas Dawson, died of the plague of 
pestelence, and was buryed the XXth of August.
" Richarde Dawson, (brother to the above-named 
Thomas Dawson of Bradley,) being sicke of the 
plague, and prceyveing he must die at yt tyme, 
arose out of his bed, and made his grave, and caus- 
ed his nefew, John Dawson, to cast strawe into the 
grave, wich was not farre from the howse, and went 
and layd him down in the sayd grave, and caused 
clothes to be layd uppon, and soe dep'ted out of 
this world ; this he did, because he was a strong 
man, and heavier than his sayd nefew, and an other 
wench were able to burye ; — he died about the 
XXIIIth of August ; thus much I was credibly 
tould he did, 1625.
" John Dawson, sonne of the above-named Tho- 
mas, came unto his father, when his father sent for 
him, being sicke, and haveitig layd him downe in a 
dich, died in it the XXIXth daye of August, 1625, 
in the night.
" Ros(* .Smyth servant of the above-named Tho: 
Dawson, and the last of yt howsehould, died of 
plague, and was buryed by Win. Cooke, the Vth 
daye of September 1625, near unto the sayd 
liovvse.''' 
Brerkton.] — Brereton is in the hundred of 
Northwich, two miles and three quarters north-east 
by north from Sandbach.
It was formerly part of 
the parish of Astbury ; but the donative chapel of 
Brereton was erected into the parish church, about 
the reign of Henry VIII.
In 1368, this parish received a grant of a market 
on Thursdays, together with a fair at the festival of 
St. Peter ad Vineula.
The manor of Brereton was 
held under the Baron of Kindcrton, nearly as early 
as the time of the Conquest, by the ancient family 
of that name, in whose possession it remained, in 
uninterrupted lineal descent, for many generations.
Brereton Hall, the remaining part of which is now 
occasionally occupied by Mr. Bracebridge, was 
built by Sir William Brereton, Knt. about the mid- 
dle of the sixteenth century.
It was a magnificent 
brick edifice.
The arms of Brereton occur in se- 
veral of the windows, in stained glass ; and, in the 
windows, and round the top of the stair-case, arc 
the arms of many of the principal gentry of Che- 
shire.
Some windows of painted glass, represent- 
ing the Saxon Earls of Chester, Hugh Lupus, made 
Earl of Chester by William the Conqueror, and the 
six succeeding Earls, which were formerly in the 
hall at Brereton, were removed by Sir Lister Holte, 
and are now at Aston-Hall in Warwickshire, the 
seat of Heneage Legge, Esq. Near Brereton Hall 
is the pool called Bag-Mere, in which, according 
to the tradition of the neighbourhood, trunks of 
trees were observed to rise, and float for several 
days, previously to the death of an heir of the 
Breretons.
This circumstance was attested to Cam- 
den by several creditable persons ; and it is appa- 
rently believed by him, and ascribed to unkown but 
preternatural causes.
The church contains some good monuments of 
the Breretons and others.
On the north side of the 
chancel was formerly a window of painted glass, 
representing the murder of Thomas a Becket.
This 
window is supposed to have been destroyed during 
the civil war ; but, in the year 1788, a painted draw- 
ing thereof was exhibited to the Society of Anti- 
quaries, with an inscription, denoting that the draw- 
ing had been made by the order of Sir William 
Brereton in 1608.
Bromborough.] — This parish, containing the 
townships of Bromborough and Brimstage, is in the 
hundred of Wirrall, about five miles north-east from 
Great Neston.
A monastery was founded here, by 
Elfleda, Countess of Mercia, about the year 912.
There is a well in the parish, whose waters are said 
to possess an incrustrating quality ; moss leaves, 
and small twigs, after remaining in it some time, 
are reported to become incrusted hi a very beauti- 
ful manner.
In the sandy lanes and hedges of this 
neighbourhood, a, species of hurtful reptile, called 
long-worms by the inhabitants, is very commonly 
met with : a poor girl once fed one of them, till it 
became so tame as to creep round her arm, and re- 
ceive its food from her hand, without her sustaining 
any injury.
A small branch of the Mersey, called 
Bromborough-pool, runs through the village : there 
is a good bridge over it ; the prospect from which is 
very beautiful.
Budworth, (Great).] — Great Budworth is in the 
west division of the hundred of Bucklow, three miles 
north by east fromNorthwich.
This place, of itself, 
possesses nothing remarkable ; but it has three an- 
nual fairs — Vvh. 13, April 5, and October 2, for 
cows, horses, swine, hats, and pedlary.
In the 
north chapel of the church is the monument of Sir 
Peter Leycester, Bart, the historian of the hundred 
of Bucklow, and several others of the Leycester fa- 
mily.
CHESHIRE.
297 
.rfrily.
The parish contains the following townships : 
— Budworth, Anderton, Appleton-cum-Hull, Aston- 
juxta-Budworth, Barnton, Barterton, or Barting- 
ton, Cogshall, Comberbach, Dutton, Little-Legh, 
Marbury, Marston, Picmere, Stretton, Nether-Tab- 
ley, Over-Witley, Nether- Witley, and Winchan.
Concerning the township of Anderton, it used to 
be a proverbial saying, that it had no ale-house, nor 
was there a gentleman, beggar, charterer (i'ree- 
holder) or cottager, within its limits ; but that it had 
a common without end.
The township, it appears, 
was entirely surrounded by a common.
Marbury-Hall, formerly the seat of the Marburys, 
in the township of that name, was purchased, in the 
year 1708, under a decree of the Court of Chancery, 
by the Earl of Rivers, whose daughter and heir con- 
veyed it in marriage to James, Earl of Barrymore, 
T>y whom it was much enlarged.
It afterwards 
passed to the Earl's second son, the Hon. Richard 
- Barry ; on his decease, without issue, to the eldest 
son of his next brother, the late J.
H. S.
Barry, 
Esq. to whose natural son, John Barry, it descend- 
ed.
A valuable collection of pictures and antique 
marbles, purchased chiefly at Rome, by Mr. J.
H. 
S. Barry, are deposited here as heir-looms.
The 
pictures are chiefly of the Italian school.
The most 
remarkable antiques are — a statue of Antoninus in the 
character of abundance ; a groupe of Paris eques- 
tris, a colossal bust of Lucius Verus, and a fine pu- 
teah surrounded with figures in bas-relief, now con- 
verted into a vase, 
Budworth, or Marbury-mere, a fine piece of wa- 
ter, nearly a mile in length, and extending over a 
hundred acres of land, lies to the north-east of Mar- 
bury Hall.
The chapclry of Lower Peover, in this parish, 
embraces the townships of Great and Little Peover, 
Allostock, and Plumley.
Great Peover is chiefly in 
the hundred of Northwich, and Little Peover in that 
of Bucklow.
The chapel of Nether Peover, four 
* Sir Geffrey Shakerley, who died 1696, was appointed by 
Charles II.
Governor of Chester Castle.
Of this gentleman, 
Mr. Pennant has given an anecdote, in the appendix to the 
first volume of his "Wales," relating to the expedition with 
which he conveyed a message from Sir Marmaduke Langdale 
at Rovvton Heath, t» the King in Chester, to accomplish which 
he ferried himself over the Dee in a wooden tub, with only a 
batting staff for an oar.
It is added that lie engaged to deliver 
such orders as the King might entrust him with, to Sir Marma- 
duke, in a quarter of an hour ; but that such delays were made 
by some about the King, that no orders were sent for several 
hours, to which the disastrous event of the Rovvton Heath fight 
is attributed.
f Sir John Vanbrugh, a celebrated dramatic writer and ar- 
chitect, was descended from an ancient family in Cheshire, 
who came originally from France, though, from the name, he 
appears to have been of Dutch exlracUon. The year of his 
birth is not certainly known ; but it appears to have been some 
tine in the reign of King Charles the Second.
He received 
'his education from a private tutor; and from his natural genius, 
even when very young, he became eminent both as a poet and 
•an.
architect.
The first comedy lie wrote, called " The Re- 
vol.
j. — no.
22.
miles from Budworth church, was originally built in 
the reign of Henry III.
It contains some memo- 
rials of the Cholmondeley family ; and, in the Sha- 
kerley aisle, is the monument of Sir Jeffrey Shaker- 
ley, a celebrated royalist, who was several times im- 
prisoned during the civil war.* In the year 1710, 
the Rev. Mr.
Cumberbach founded a school in Lower 
Peover.
The chapelry of Witton, also in Budworth parish, 
is partly in the hundred of Eddisbury, and partly in 
that of Northwich.
It is divided into four districts 
— Northwich, Witton, Hartford, and Lostock- 
Grallam ; and it comprises the townships of Castle - 
Northwich, Hartford, Wilmington, Witton- cum - 
Twainbrooke, Northwich, Birches, Hulse, Lach- 
Dennis, and Lostoek-Grallam.
In the year 1558, Sir John Deane, prebendary of 
Lincoln, founded and endowed a grammar-school at 
Witton ; directing in his statutes (among other 
things) " that a week before Christmas and Easter 
(according to the old custome) the scholars should 
barre and keepe forth of the schoole the sehoole- 
master, in such sort as other schollers doe in great 
schools : and that as well in the vacations as the 
other days aforesaid, they use their bowes and ar- 
rowes onely, and eschewe all bowleinge, oardkige, 
dyecing, quiteinge, and all other unlawful games." 
Wilmington, in the township of that name, is now 
one of the seats of Sir J.
T. Stanley, Bart.
Budworth (Little).] — Little Budworth, or Bud- 
worth-in-the-Frith, is in the hundred of Eddisbury, 
four miles north-east by east from Tarporley.
About the reign of Charles L there Avere horse-races 
in the neighbourhood— a four mile course — and an 
annual plate of 201.
value.
There is an alms-house, 
here, with a very comfortable provision, for six men 
and six women.
Oulton Hall, in this parish, is a magnificent struc- 
ture, built from a design of Sir J.
Vanbrugh, t 
about the year 1716.
The old mansion on the site 
of 
lapse, or Virtue in Danger," was acted with great applause in 
the year 1697, which encouraged him to write others, to the 
number of eleven, several of which are still held in high estima- 
tion.
The credit he gained by his dramatic performances was 
attended with more beneficial advantages than usually arise 
from the profits of writing for the stage, lie was first appoint- 
ed to the office of Clarencieux King at Arms ; which, after 
holding for some time, he disposed of.
In the month of August, 
1716, lie was appointed surveyor of the works at Greenwich 
Hospital.
He was also made comptroller-general of his Ma- 
jesty's works, and surveyor of the gardens.
It is reasonable, 
howerer, to suppose that these emoluments were conferred on 
him, not for his abilities as a dramatic writer, but for his great 
skill in architecture ; for his ingenuity in that science was so 
conspicuous, that several noble structures were erected under 
his direction, particularly Blenheim House in Oxfordshire, and 
Claremont in Surrey.
He likewise built the Opera House in 
the Haymarket ; to defray the expence of which he raised a 
subscription, from thirty persons of quality, of 1001.
each; in 
consideration whereof each subscriber, for his own life, was to 
be admitted to every representation without further expence.
When the first stone of this structure was i.;id, it was inscribed 
4 F -with 
208 
CHESHIRE.
of which it was erected, was built in the reign of 
Henry VIII.
In a summer-house are some Roman 
altars, which were found at Chester ; and, at a short 
distance from the lodge are the remains of a very 
ancient cross, which formerly stood in the market- 
place at Sandbach.
There is a charity school at 
Otilton for eight children.
Buneury.] — This village is in the hundred of Ed- 
disbury, three miles and a half south by east from 
Tarporley.
Tanner's Notitia states, that, " in the 
parish church here Sir Hugh Calveley, Knt.* about 
A. D.
1388, founded a college for a master and six 
secular chaplains, to the honour of St. Boniface.
Its reputed yearly revenue was said to be 100 marks ; 
but, 26 Henry VIII.
its clear value was fixed at 
481.
2s.
8d.
when the foundation consisted of a 
dean, five vicars, and two choristers.
It was pur- 
chased from the crown, 18 Elizabeth, by Mr. Tho- 
with these words : " The little Whig," as a compliment to a 
lady of extraordinary beauty, the celebrated toast and pride of 
that party, namely, the Countess of Sunderland, second daugh- 
ter of the great Duke of Marlborough.
Sir John, in some part 
of his life (the time when cannot be ascertained) went over to 
France, in order, as is supposed, to improve himself in the study 
of architecture.
During his stay there, he took views of several 
distinguished fortifications, in doing which, being one day 
observed by an engineer, he was, by his information, taken 
into custody, and after an examination before an officer 
of the police, was committed prisoner to the Bastile.
The 
Earl of Stair was at that time the English ambassador at 
Paris, and being informed of Sir John's confinement, he went 
to the Duke of Orleans, the then Regent, and procured his 
liberty; otherwise he might have spent the remainder of his 
days in confinement, or have ended them on a scaffold.
On 
his return to England, he took a genteel house near Whitehall, 
and continued to pursue his beloved studies of poetry and ar- 
chitecture till his death, which happened on the 26th of March, 
1726.
He was the contemporary and friend of Congreve, the 
great comic writer.
One of Sir John's comedies, however, 
when first acted and printed, bordered too near upon profane- 
ness and obscenity, for which he was chastised, with a becom- 
ing severity, by Mr. Collier; and though he answered this 
gentleman rather in a satirical than in a judicious manner, in 
his advanced years, he was convinced of his error; and, about 
a year before his death, when he heard that a great person had 
ordered the " Provoked Wife" to be acted, he substituted 
a new scene, instead of one which had been justly censured.
* This gentleman, was regarded as the " Arthur of Che- 
shire" — the glory of the county.
He was a younger son of 
Kenrick de Calveley, of Calveley in Bunbury, and served under 
King Edward III.
in the French wars; but he does not appear 
to have particularly distinguished himself before the treaty of 
Bretigny in 1360, when, with other disbanded officers, he be- 
came one of the leaders of a formidable independant army of 
veterans, known by the name of " The Companions," who for 
a while committed great ravages in the provinces of France, 
and held themselves in readiness to join in any warlike expedi- 
tion in which their services were wanted.
Being engaged to 
assist John de Montford in his claim to the Duchy of Britanny, 
they fought at the battle of Auray in 1364, under Sir John 
Chandos, and the fortune of the day was turned in favour of 
Montford, by the bravery of Sir Hugh Calveley, who had the 
command of the rear-guard.
During these wars, Sir H ugh and 
his associate in arms, Sir Robert Knolles, were among the thirty 
English officers who are said to have successfully encountered 
in combat the same number of Bretons.
The " Companions" 
after this assisted in expelling Peter the Cruel from the throne 
of Spain ; -but when the Black Prince had been induced to es- 
mas Aldersey of London, Merchant Taylor, who 
bestowed the income in charitable uses." 
The church is a handsome building, embattled, 
and the tower ornamented with pinnacles.
It con- 
tains several ancient monuments ; among which, that 
of the founder, Sir Hugh, is the most remarkable.
On a magnificent tomb is a recumbent figure, the 
effigies in white marble of this distinguished hero.
He is armed according to the fashion of the times in 
which he lived ; and is represented by the sculptor 
as of extraordinary dimensions ; the effigies being 
seven feet and a half in length.
His head rests on 
a helmet, with a calf's head for a crest, in allusion 
to his name ; a circumstance from which arose the 
absurd traditionary story, that he could devour a 
calf at a meal.
The tomb is kept very neat, by a 
benefaction of Dame Mary Calvely, of Lee ; who in 
the year 1705, left the interest of 1001.
to the poor 
pouse the cause of the dethroned monarch, they ranged them- 
selves under the banners of his throne; and the victory which 
the gallant Edward achieved is attributed, by historians 
to the valiant prowess of Sir John Chandos and Sir Hugh 
Calveley.
The first public situation which Sir Hugh Calveley 
held was the government of Calais, to which he was appointed 
by King Edward III.
in 1375.
In 1377, he burnt twenty-six 
ships in the harbour of Boulogne, and destroyed part of the 
town ; about the same time he retook the Castle of Marke, the 
same day in which it had been lost through negligence, and 
plundered the town of Estaples ; the next year he and Sir 
Thomas Percy were made Admirals of England ; in 1379, hav- 
ing convoyed the Duke of Britanny to St. Maloes, he drove 
off the French gallies with much bravery, and succeeded in the 
safely landing of every thing belonging to the Duke and his 
household ; not long afterwards he narrowly escaped shipwreck 
in a violent storm, which proved fatal to Sir John Arundel and 
several other officers, and above one thousand seamen.
In 
1382, Sir Hugh was one of the commissioners empowered to 
treat with the Earl of Flanders.
The next year he and Sir 
Thomas Fogg of Chester accompanied Sir Henry Spencer, the 
warlike Bishop of Norfolk, in his expedition into Flanders : the 
bishop on his return was blamed for his conduct, and some of 
his officers were sent to the tower on suspicion of treachery ; 
but we are told that Sir Hugh Calveley, ".
that auncient cap- 
tain," as Hollingshed calls him, was retained by the Duke of 
Lancaster, who did him all honour " by reason of his old ap- 
proved valiancie." After this we hear nothing further of his 
public services, but that he continued in the government of the 
island of Guernsey, which he had for some years enjoyed, till 
the time of his death, which happened in 1394.
Vide Lysons' 
Magna Britannia, Vol. IT.
Sir Robert Knolles, mentioned above, was also a native of 
Cheshire, but the place of his birth is unknown ; he attained at 
least equal celebrity with his companion Sir Hugh Calveley.
In 135?, he distinguished himself by taking the city of Auxerre 
and the town of Chastelon sur Loire, for the King of Navarre ; 
he had the command of a battalion at the battle of Auray, and 
shared in the glories of victory at Najaia.
In 1369, the Black 
Prince made him commander-in-chief of his forces in Gascony.
The next year, Sir Robert Knolles, having in the meantime paid 
a visit to his native country, was sent with the chief command 
of an army into France, where he burnt several towns and laid 
waste the country to the gates of Paris.
Lombard, in his Per- 
ambulation of Kent, says, that the sharp points and gable ends 
of the buildings which were then laid in ruins, were many years 
afterwards called Knolles's Mitres.
The last public act of Srr 
Robert Knolles's life, was, the service he rendered in the sup- 
pression of Wat Tyler's rebellion in 1381.
1 
•i 
CHESHIRE.
299 
of Bunbury parish, in consideration of their attend- 
ing divine service, and keeping this monument clean.
In the chancel is the effigies of Sir George Beeston, 
who died in 1601, at the age of 102.
This gentle- 
man was one of Queen Elizabeth's Admirals, in the 
defeat of the Armada, in 1588.
His monument was 
placed here by his son, Sir Hugh Beeston, the last 
male heir of this ancient family.
Bunbury Church 
was set fire to, by a party from the King's garrison, 
at Cholmondely House, on the 20th of June, 1643.
The manor of Bunbury, it appears, belonged, in 
very early times, to the ancient family which took its 
name from the town.
The elder branch became ex- 
tinct, about the reign of King John ; and the greater 
part of the estate has since fallen into the possession 
of different families.
Sir Charles Bunbury, how- 
ever, has still a smail estate in the parish.
Sir Hugh 
Calveley purchased a moiety of the advowson of 
Bunbury in the year 1385, and founded the college 
already mentioned.
The parish of Bunbury comprises the following 
townships : — Bunbury, Alpraham, Beeston, Bur- 
wardsley, Calveley, Haughton, Peckforton, Ridley, 
Spurstow, Teverton, Tilston-Fernall, and Wardle.
In the township of Beeston, about two miles south 
of Tarporley, rises an immense insulated rock, call- 
ed Beeston ; it is composed of sand-stone, and is 
nearly perpendicular on one side, but on the other 
it gradually slopes to the general level of the country 
adjacent ; its height, measuring from Beeston Bridge 
to the summit, is 366 feet.
On the summit of the 
rock are the stately ruins of the celebrated Beeston 
Castle, the impregnable strength of which was once 
almost proverbial.
Leland conceived so high an 
opinion of it, that he wrote, or rather repeated, in 
some Latin verses, a kind of prophecy, which, how- 
ever, does not seem very likely to be accomplished.
These verses are thus translated by Bishop Gibson, 
in his edition of Camden : — 
Ranulph, returning from the Syrian land, 
This castle rais'd, his country to defend.
The borderer to fright and to command.
Though ruin'd here the stately fabric lies, 
Ytt with new glories it againshall rise, 
If I a prophet may believe old prophecies.
It was erected, in 1220, by Randle, or Ranulph 
Blundiville, Earl of Chester ; it consisted of an outer 
and inner area.
The outer came about half-way 
down the slope, and was defended by a great gate- 
way and a strong wall, fortified with strong towers, 
which ranged across the slope, from the edge of the 
precipice to the other ; some parts of this wall, and 
about five or six rounders, still remain.
The area 
enclosed is four or five acres.
The castle, on one 
side of this area, was defended by a vast ditch cut 
out of the old rock, on the other by the abrupt pre- 
cipice which overhangs the vale of Cheshire.
The 
entrance is through a noble gateway, guarded on 
each side by a strong round tower, with walls of 
prodigious thickness ; within the walls are to be seen 
the remains of a rectangular building, which was 
formerly the chapel.
The draw-well is said to have 
been of the immense depth of 160 yards, being sunk 
to the level of Beeston Brook, which flows at the 
foot of the rock ; there was another well in the outer 
area.
The perpendicular side of Beeston has a tre- 
mendous appearance ; and it is haunted by a kind of 
hawk which builds in its clefts.
The history of this 
castle is not well authenticated ; it is, how r ever, cer- 
tain, that from the Earls of Chester it devolved to the 
crown, and that after undergoing many vicissitudes, 
it fell into ruins, and in this state it was seen by Le- 
land, in the reign of Henry the Eighth.
It was af- 
terwards repaired, and in the beginning of the civil 
war in the reign of Charles the First, it was seized 
by the Parliament, and garrisoned by a detachment 
of soldiers under the command of Captain Steel.
On the 12th of December, 1643, it was surprised 
and taken by that famous partizan of royalty, Cap- 
tain Sandford.
It appears that the garrison made 
little or no defence, for, as Rushworth says, the go- 
vernor was afterwards tried and executed for a 
coward.
The Parliamentary forces afterwards at- 
tempted to retake it, and it was unsuccessfully be- 
sieged for seventeen weeks, being bravely defended- 
by Captain Falet.
On the approach of Prince Ru- 
pert the enemy abandoned it, on the 18th of March, 
1644.
In the year 1645 it was again attacked, and 
on the 16th of November it surrendered on honour- 
able conditions, after eighteen weeks continual siege, 
in which the garrison were reduced to the necessity 
of eating cats, &c.
The governor, Colonel Ballard, 
in compassion to his soldiers, assembled to beat a 
parley, and thereupon a treaty followed, and, hav- 
ing obtained very honourable terms (even beyond 
expectation in such extremity,) viz.
to march out the 
governor and officers with horses and arms, and their 
own proper goods (which loaded two trains), the 
common soldiers with their arms, colours flying, 
drums beating, matches alight, and a proportion, of 
powder and ball, and a convoy to guard them to 
Flint Castle, he did, on Sunday the 16th of Novem- 
ber, surrender the castle, the garrison being reduced 
to not above sixty men, who were marched away 
according to the conditions.
Many traces of mili- 
tary operations, such as ditches, trenches, &c.
are 
still discernable about the rock.
The site and ruins 
of the castle at present belong to Sir Thomas Mos- 
tyn, of Mostyn in the county of Flint, Bart.
Bees- 
ton-Hall is in the occupation of Sir Thomas Mos- 
tyn's agent.
Leland, speaking of Ridley Hall, in the township 
of that name, anciently written Ridgley, says, 
" Ridle Hawlle was made of a poore place, the 
fairest gentleman's house of al Chestreshire, by Syr 
William Standeley, Helper to King Henry VII." 
In another place he calls it " a right goodly house 
of stone and tymbre, builded by Sir William of 
Standeley, that much favorid King Henry VII.
parte at Bosworth-field." Henry VIII.
gave the 
township 
•300 
CHESHIRE.
-township to his standard-hearer, Sir Ralph Eger- 
ton, of whose descendants it was purchased, in the 
reign of Charles II.
by Sir Orlando Bridgman, 
Bart, from whose family it has descended to that of 
Sir W.
W. Pepys, Bart.
Ridley Hall was garrison- 
ed by the Parliament during the civil war.
It was 
burnt down about the year 1700, and the site is now 
occupied by a farm-house.
Ridley-mere, mentioned 
by Leland as the fairest mere in Cheshire, has been 
drained, and is now in a state of cultivation.
Burton.] — Burton is in the hundred of Wirrall, 
eight miles north-west from Cheshire.
This little 
village, which contains the townships of Burton and 
Puddington, formerly had a market on Thursdays, 
nnd a three days' fair at the festival of St. James.
It is of some note as the birth-place of Thomas 
Wilson, the venerable Bishop of Sodor and Man,* 
who, in the year 1724, built and endowed a school- 
house in the parish.
Puddington Hall, in the .town- 
ship of thai; name, is a modern edifice, the property 
of Sir Thomas Stanley.
Cheadle.] — This parish, comprising, the three 
townships of Cheadle-Bulkeley, Cheadle-SIosley, 
and Handforth-cum-Bosdon, lies three miles west- 
south-west from Stockport, in 'the hundred of Mac- 
clesfield.
Cheadle manor belonged to a family of 
that name as early as the middle of the twelfth cen- 
tury ; and, by intermarriages, it has since been in the 
Savages and the Bulkeleys.
Jt has be^qfor some 
years the property of Mr. Worthington of Ringway.
There is a free-school in the township of Cheadle- 
Mosley, winch was built by a subscription of the in- 
habitants, and endowed by the late Jonathan Ro- 
binson of Stockport, in 1788, with three acres of 
land.
Chester.] — The ancient and respectable city of 
Chester, the metropolis of the county, is situated 
near its southern boundary, on a rocky eminence on 
tike banks of the Dee. It lies ISOf miles north-west 
from London ; 20 miles south -east from the main 
<^ea ; about 20 miles east from Denbigh ; 40 north 
* This respectable prelate was born on the 20th December, 
.1663, as he himself relates, in his manuscript diary, " of honest 
parents, fearing God." His education was strictly attended to, 
and, when his attainments had sufficiently qualified him for the 
University, he was removed to Trinity College, Dublin, whi- 
ther, at that period, most of the youthful gentry of Cheshire 
and Lancashire were sent to pursue their studies.
Here his at- 
tention was first engaged by the science of medicine : he, how- 
ever, relinquished that pursuit, by the advice of Archbishop 
Hewitson, for divinity ; and, having made considerable pro- 
gress in academical learning, he was ordained in June, 1686; 
towards the conclusion of which year he quilted the University, 
and was licensed to be curate of New Church in Lancashire, of 
which his maternal uncle, Dr. Sherlock, was rector.
In the 
year 1692 he became domestic chaplain to the Earl of Derby, 
and preceptor to his son, Lord Strange, with a salary of 301.
per annum ; this, with a similar sum derived from his curacy, 
and 201.
which he received annually, as master of the almshouse 
at Latham, constituted his entire income.
Even this, however, 
exceeded his wishes, any farther tkan as it enabled him to ap- 
propriate a greater sum to the relief of the necessitous.
Soon 
afterwards a valuable rectory in Yorkshire was offered him, but 
he revised it from the conscientious motive of not being able 
from Shrewsbury; 46 north-west from Stafford; 
76 north-west from Derby ; and 75 south from Lan- 
caster.
The lovers of remote antiquity gravely inform us, 
that the ancient name of this city was Ncomagus, so 
called from Magus, son of Samothis, son of Japhet, 
its founder, 240 years after the flood.
This assertion, 
they as gravely add, is fully authenticated ; thus 
Chester is placed on a line of antiquity with any 
other city in the universe.
Its second name, we are 
told, was Caerlleon,socalled from LeonVawr, or Gawr, 
who, as some writers say, was a giant in Albion, and 
one of its restorers.
This conjecture, it is probable, 
may have originated in the circumstance of a human 
skeleton of prodigious size (some say nine feet in 
length) having been dug up in Pepper Street.
Up- 
on the settlement of the Britons here, it was next 
called Caerleil, and afterwards Caerleir, because 
these two British Kings are said to have been en- 
largers and beautifiers of it.
The Romans, however, 
gave it the name of Deva, or Deunaua ; an appella- 
tion which has been relinquished by later historians 
for that of Cestria, or Ceaster, from Castrum, a 
camp or military station, as we have already stated.
f 
The Saxons styled it Legaceaster, and Legecester ; 
but its denomination West- Chester, was obtained 
through its relative situation to other places which 
have the name of Chester with some addition.
By 
Ptolemy it is sometimes called Oxcellum, Uxcellum, 
Plegimundam, and Leogria, or Locrinus land, of 
which the three first denote no more, as Hollingshed 
observes, than a rock, or place of strong defence ; 
and which historians remark was the boundary of 
King Locrinus's kingdom, westward: this was the 
chief city of the Ordivices, before the coming of the 
Romans, as is affirmed by most of our ancient his- 
torians, winch people were the inhabitants of North 
Wales.
According to some writers, the walls of Chester 
were first built by Marius, a British King, grandson 
of Cymbeline, who commenced his reign in the year 
to reside among those fo whom he might have been appointed 
pastor.
In the year 1697 the Earl of Derby would have pro- 
moted him to the bishopric of Sodor and Man, but this dignity 
he declined from principles of humility and lowliness, till, after 
the expiration of several months, when, to use his own words, 
he was forced into it.
In April, 1698, he took possession of his 
see, and by the goodness of his life, and his mild, dignified, 
and apostolic manners, very eminently.
contributed to the 
spreading of Christianity among the inhabitants ; for, previously 
to his arrival in the Isle of Man, the natives, speaking generally, 
were extremelv ignorant; and the duties of religion and mora- 
lity were very little known, and less practised.
The pious la- 
bours of the bishop, however, and his fervent endeavours to en- 
lighten and improve their minds, proved extremely successful ; 
and his memory is respected and revered by every class of the 
Manks inhabitants.
This esteemed and worthy prelate died on 
the 7th of March, 1755, in the 93rd ) ear of his age, having held 
the bishopric no less than 58 years.
f After the Romans had fixed here tke conquering legion, 
Valens, or Valens Victrix, it was then styled Caerlhon, Caer- 
legion, or, as it is otherwise called, Arciourdwy, and Caer, 
by way of excellence, as Camden observes, to distinguish it 
from the othe* Cacrleon, or Caerusi, in South Wales.
73; 
CHESHIRE.
301 
73 ; but there seems to be very little credit due to 
this account.
It is certain, however, that Chester 
was a walled city prior to the year 908 ; and, as 
will hereafter appear, there is every reason to be- 
lieve, that the walls were originally built by the 
Romans.
The Romans, incorporated with the native Bri- 
tons, continued masters of Chester till the year 607, 
when Ethelfrith, the Saxon, defeated the King 1 of 
Powys, and annexed a rich tract of surrounding ter- 
ritory to his own dominions.
After pillaging the 
city, whose inhabitants, according to Malmsbury, 
dreading a siege, rushed furiously on Ethelfrith, and 
were destroyed in his ambushes, he left it to the 
Britons, who appear to have retained the posses- 
sion till it was wrested from their hands by Egbert, 
about the year 828.
Some years after, it underwent 
a heavy calamity from the Danes.
These pirates, 
the scourge of the kingdom, meeting with a severe 
defeat by Alfred the Great, retreated before him ; 
and in their flight collecting vast numbers of their 
count^vmen, committed the care of their wives, their 
ships, and their booty, to the East Angles, and 
marched day and night to secure quarters in the 
west.
They seized on Legaceaster before the King 
could overtake them.
He besieged them about two 
days, destroyed all the cattle he could find about the 
town, partly burnt, and partly caused the standing 
corn to be destroyed by his cavalry, and slew all 
the Danes whom he found without the walls.
These invaders kept possession of the town part 
of the winter, but, compelled by famine, evacuated 
it the beginning of 895.
The city continued in ruins 
till the year 907, or 908, when it was restored by 
Ethelfreda, the noble-minded daughter of the illus- 
trious Alfred, and wife of Ethelred, Earl of Mer- 
cia.* This distinguished Princess repaired the city 
walls, and, according to some historians, extended 
the i so as to include the castle, which before stood 
without the ancient precincts.
But Mr. Pennant 
observes, that, " any additions she could make 
* Ethelfreda, or Ethelfleda, was a woman of superior mind, 
to masculine powers adding Amazonian activity.
The most 
splendid actions of her brother Edward's reign were the effect 
of her councils ; her time, her genius, and her talents, being 
devoted to the service of her country.
On the birth of her 
first child, she separated from her husband, being deterred by 
the pangs and dangers of parturition from hazarding its recur- 
rence ; observing, "that " it was beneath the daughter of a King 
to pursue any pleasure attended with so much inconvenience." 
From the time of this event she devoted herself to deeds of 
arms, and to acts of munificence and piety.
She built and 
founded many cities; erected nine castles fn different parts of 
England ; subdued Brecenanmere, or Brecknock ; made its 
Queen prisoner; and took Derby by storm.
Her valour 
made her so celebrated, that the titles of Lady, and Queen, were 
thought unworthy of her greatness, and she" was dignified with 
those of Lord, and King.
Alfred is understood to have taken 
particular pains with her education.
t The old historian.
Gira lus Cambrensis, mentions it, as a 
tradition, that Harold, having survived his wounds at the battle 
of Hastings, spent the remainder of his days as an anchorite, in 
a cell near St. John's Church in Chester.
The same tradition 
vojl.
i. — no.
22.
would have destroyed the peculiar figure which the 
Romans always preserved in their castramentations, 
wherever the nature of the ground would permit ;" 
and intimates, that as the military architecture is 
still entirely on the Roman plan, it never was wholly 
demolished, but having become ruinous, was restored 
to its ancient form by Ethelfreda.
King Edgar 
made the port of Chester a station for the Saxon 
navy ; and here, in the year 973, formed an alliance 
with six petty Kings, who engaged to assist him in 
his undertakings both by sea and land.
This cir- 
cumstance has given rise to a monkish table, already 
mentioned, which asserts, that Edgar, one day entering 
his barge with eight tributary Kings, assumed the 
helm, and in token of superiority, made them row 
him from his palace, in the field which yet bears his 
name, to the Church of St. John, and thence back 
to his palace.
In the folloAving century this part 
of the country became subject to Canute, the Danish 
King, who, by his treaty with Edmund Ironside, 
retained possession of both the Northumbrian and 
Mercian kingdoms, in the latter of which Chester 
was included.
On the restoration of the Saxon line, 
it reverted to the Earls of Mercia, who continued to 
possess it till the Norman Conquest ;f soon after 
which event, as we have before related, it became 
the property of Hugh Lupus, created, by his sove- 
reign, the first Earl of Chester.J .
The court of this distinguished personage was of- 
a truly princely nature : his Parliament consisted of 
eight barons, who attended his person ; every baron 
had four esquires, every esquire one gentleman, and 
every gentleman one valet.
Such were the links in - 
his chain of dignity.
In the hands of the barons 
was reposed the power of life and death.
Hugh, the first Earl, was succeeded by his son 
Richard, who, after governing 19 years, met with a 
watery grave in his passage from Normandy ; Ri- 
chard's successor was Ranulph, his cousin, who died 
at Chester, in the year 1 129, and was succeeded by 
the heroic Ranulph the Second, who, after a govern- 
is mentioned by John Bromton, who adds, that his tomb was 
shewn in the middle of the area behind the cross at St. John's 
Church: that there were those who asserted that he was yet 
alive when King Henry I.
returned through Chester from 
Wales, and that he had an interview with that monarch.
The 
historian himself inclines to the more generally received opi- 
nion that King Harold died in battle, and was buried at Wal- 
tham.
Henry de Knighton and other historians relate, that 
Queen Algitha, Harold's consort, after the Conqueror's success, 
was for a while removed to Chester as a place of security, by 
her brothers, Earl Edwin and Earl Morcar.
The above-men- 
tioned historian, Giraldus, relates a tradition also, that Henry, 
Emperor of Germany, spent the latter part of his days as a 
hermit in a desert place near Chester, and was buried in that 
city, having confessed his rank at the point of death.
% In the 24th year of the eighteenth century, the remains of 
Hugh Lupus were discovered in the chapter-house of the Ca- 
thedral, incased with stone, where the body had lain, in undis- 
turbed security, upwards of 600 years ; it was wrapped in lea- 
ther, under which was the remnant of a shroud ; at the head of 
the coffin was a stone, in the form oi a Roman T, with the head 
of a wolf, in allusion to his name, cut thereon.
4 g ' ment 
302 
CHESHIRE.
tuent of 25 years, fell a sacrifice to poison, in 1153.
His remains were interred at Chester, and Hugh, 
• his son, took the reins of government after him, 
which he held 28 years.
Alter him the Earldom 
was possessed by his son Ranulph, whose benevo- 
lence acquired nun the title of Ranulph the Good.
The cloud of superstition which dai^keued the hori- 
zon of those times, overshadowed the native good- 
ness of this Earl's heart, and he entered -the field 
with all that fury and fervour, winch fanaticism 
aloi?e can inspire ; hence the holy wars proclaimed 
alike his prowess and his folly.
On the demise of 
the Earl, which happened in the year 1232, John, 
surnamed Scott, mounted the chair of state ; he 
married Helen, daughter of Llewelyn ap Jorwerth, 
Prince of North Wales, from which alliance no issue 
arising, at his death (which is said to have been pre- 
maturely effected by poison) an extinction happened 
in the line of succession, and Henry the Third an- 
nexed the Earldom to the crown, in the year 1237.
From his hands it was transferred, by gift, to his 
son Edward, afterwards King Edward the First.
The chance of war next gave it to Simon de Mont- 
lord, who took both Henry and his son prisoners, at 
the battle of Lewes, in the year 1264.
Their libera- 
.tion was purchased by the resignation of the Earl- 
dom to Montford, whose brow was adorned with 
this laurel of conquest but a very short period, as he 
resigned his honours with his fife, at the battle of 
Evesham, not twelve months after.
It next devolv- 
ed to Edward of Caernarvon, son of Edward the 
First, who enjoyed it 19 years, when his son, Ed- 
ward of Windsor, succeeded.
A period of 1 1 years 
had barely elapsed, when Edward the Black Prince 
took the reius of government.
From him it devolv- 
ed to his son, Richard of Bourdeaux, who, in the 
21st year of his reign, erected Chester into a princi- 
pality ; an honour which was cancelled in the first 
year of Henry the Fourth.
His son, af erwards the 
great Henry the Fifth, next succeeded ; and after 
him Henry the Sixth, whose life was cruelly violated 
and taken, after the battle of Tewkesbury.
In the 
^year 1471, Edward the Fifth, eldest son of Edward 
the Foucth, was created Earl of Chester ; but he, 
with his brother Richard, Duke of York, fell by Ri- 
chard the Third ; whose only offspring, Edward, 
was next created Earl in the year 1483.
The subse- 
quent year, however, putting a period to his life, 
Arthur., son of King Henry the Seventh, was next 
created, who was succeeded by liis brother Henry, 
in the year 1504.
A long period elapsed before the next Earldom 
took place, which was in the person of Henry Fre- 
deric Stuart, son of James the First, in 1610.
He 
dying without issue, Charles, his brother, succeeded 
in 1616, afterwards Charles the First, who, 11 years 
after, transferred Jhe Earldom to his son Charles, 
afterwards Charles the Second.
More than 80 years 
elapsed, before the next Earl was created ; which 
was not till the House of Hanover ascended the 
throne of England ; when, in 1714, George, son of 
George the First, succeeded ; and after him, in 1 728, 
Frederic, George the Second's eldest son j in his 
hands it remained till the year 1750, when his pre- 
sent Majesty succeeded to it ; and in 1762, it was 
translated to George Augustus Frederic, Prince of 
Wales, his eldest son, the present Earl, and now 
Regent of the United Kingdom.
The first circumstance of note, relating to the 
city of Chester, after the Conquest, occurred A.
D. 
1159.
In that year, Chester was the place t>f in- 
terview between Henry II.
and Malcolm IV.
King 
of Scotland, when the latter ceded to Henry the 
three counties of Cumberland, Northumberland, and 
Westmoreland, which had been wrested from the 
English crown.
About thirty years after, Baldwin, 
Archbishop of Canterbury, was a visitant at Chester 
when on his journey to Wales, whither his zeal car- 
ried him to recommend the Croisade to the moun- 
taineers.
He was attended by Giraldus, the histo- 
rian, the substance of whose scanty notices of this 
city is, that "Constance, Countess of Chester, kept 
a herd of milch kine, made cheeses of their milk, 
and presented three to the Archbishop : that he saw 
an animal, a compound of an ox and stag : a woman 
born without arms, that could sew as well with her 
feet as others of her sex did with their fingers : and 
finally, that he heard of a litter of whelps begotten 
by a monkey." 
For two or three centuries from the Conquest, 
Chester was the place of rendezvous for troops em- 
ployed in the Welch expeditions, and frequently suf- 
fered during the continuance of the contest between 
the two nations.
Llewelyn ap Gryffydd, in revenge 
for the barbarous insults which his subjects had re- 
ceived from Geoffrey Langley, who acted as lieute- 
nant to Prince Edward, afterwards Edward the 
First, carried fire and sword to the very gates of 
the city, and destroyed every thing around on both 
sides the river.
These ravages were committed in 
1255 ; and within two years, Henry the Third sum- 
moned his nobility to attend him at Chester with 
their vassals, on a certain day, that he might invade 
Wales, and repay, on the heads of its inhabitants, 
the injuries sustained by his people.
Chester, also, 
was the place appointed in 1275, by Edward the 
First, for receiving homage of Llewelyn ; a degra- 
dation to which that high-spirited Prince refused to 
submit, and was in consequence involved in the fatal 
war, which caused his own destruction, as well as 
that of his country ; his subjects being obliged to 
acknowledge the sovereignty of England, and make 
personal homage and fealty of their lands to Edward 
of Caernarvon^ Prince of Wales, who received their 
homage in this city in the year 1390.
Chester was the favourite city of Richard II.
who 
converted it into a principality ; and having annexed 
to it the Castle of Holt, with several lordships in 
Wales, and on the borders, made an act, that it 
should only be given to the King's eldest son.
This 
act was rescinded by Henry IV.
who, in 1399, seiz- 
ed the city and castle, when oa the way to Flint, 
where 
CHESHIRE.
303 
where the ill-fated Richard, having been betrayed by 
the treachery of those in whom he had confided, was 
then imprisoned.
On Henry's return with his royal 
prisoner through Chester, Richard was for one 
night secured in the fortress, where several of his 
devoted adherents were put to death..
During the 
insurrection of Owen Glendower, this city was made 
a rendezvous for the royal forces ; and, iu the civil 
tumults between the houses of Lancaster and York, 
it was twice visited by the heroic Margaret, who had 
great influence, and many adherents, in the county.
Several of our Kings have also visited, and con- 
ferred favours upon it at different periods ; but it 
docs not appear to have been so honoured by Eliza- 
beth.
In the year 1506 the sweating sickness carried off 
ninety-one householders, in Chester, in three days.
u The remark," says Pennant, " of this destroying 
angel's respect for the fair sex, was here verified ; 
for only four perished." In 1517 it was visited by 
the pestilence, which destroyed numbers of the in- 
habitants ; and so many fled, that the streets were 
deserted, and were overgrown with grass and weeds 
a foot high.
The sweating sickness returned in 
1550, and was accompanied with so great a dearth, 
that wheat was sold at sixteen shillings a bushel.* 
In the year 1554 occurred the martyrdom of 
George Marsh, who, for preaching against the errors 
of Popery, and for his steady adherence to the Pro- 
testant'faith, was first imprisoned by the Bishop of 
Chester, and afterwards burnt.
His execution was 
attended by the very remarkable circumstance of an 
attempt to rescue him, by Cooper, one of the She- 
riffs, who favoured the reformed religion ; but this 
was rendered abortive by Amory, the other Sheriff", 
who overpowered his brother-officer ; and the latter 
was compelled to conceal himself till better times, 
when he returned, and in 1561 discharged the office 
of mayor.
The unshaken fortitude displayed by 
Marsh at the stake, had so much effect on the peo- 
* In the reign of Richard II.
as it appears, by Aldersey's , 
manuscripts, a bushel of wheat sold at Chester for 6d.
a gallon 
•f white wine for the like sum ; a gallon of claret for 4d.
a j 
fat goose for 2d.
and a fat pig for Id- A, Mayor's feast, en- | 
riched with all the dainties of the season, cost no more than ' 
lis.
lOd.
t II is said, that the fatal tragedy which Queen Mary had 
intentled to act in Ireland, was prevented by an occurrence in | 
this city.
Dr. Henry Cole, a native of Godshill, in the Isle of j 
Wight, and Dean of St. Paul's, is reported to have been en- 
li listed with the commission issued by Mary, to empower the 
Lord Deputy of Ireland to institute prosecutions against such I 
of the natives as should refuse to observe the Ceremonies of (he 
Catholic Religion.
The Doctor stopped at Chester, in his i 
way to Ireland, and having put up at the Blue Posts, in Bridge | 
street, was waited -on by the mayor, to whom, in the flow of 
conversation, he communicated the business in which he was 
•hen engaged, and, opening his cloak, took out a leather box, 
observing, " he had that within, that would lash the heretics of 
Ireland." His hoste?.s (named Edmunds) overheard the dis- 
course, and having a brother of the reformed religion at Dub- 
lin, became alarmed for his safety, and, with a quickness of 
ihouglit winch in the ages«f ignorance would have been deem- 
ple, that the bishop thought if necssary to endea- 
vour to stem the current of their opinions by a ser- 
mon, in which his bigotted enmity to the heretics, as 
the Protestants were then denominated, occasioned 
him to assert, that the sufferer was then a firebrand 
burning in hell.t 
That dreadful calamity, the plague, again extend- 
ed its ravages to this city in 1604, in the mayoralty 
of Edward Dutton, who, though his house was in- 
fected, and several of his children and servants de- 
stroyed by the contagion, kept his station during 
the whole time of the pestilence.
While the plague 
continued, the Court of Exchequer was removed to 
Tarvin, and the assizes to Nantwich, and the fairs 
were postponed.
This city was involved in the calamities of a siege, 
through its firm adherence to the cause of Charles 
the First.
The Bishop of Chester, and Orlando 
Bridgman,| his son, were the chief instruments that 
influenced the inhabitants to the King's service ; 
and the importance of this station being evident to 
the royal party, every necessary attention was be- 
stowed on its defence as early as the beginning of 
the year 1642.
The fortifications were completely 
repaired ; and new outworks extended from the al- 
cove on the north part of the walls, to the brink of 
the river near Boughton ; many houses in the sub- 
urbs were also pulled down, to prevent them from 
affording shelter to the enemy.
The first attempt made on the place by the Par- 
liament's army was on the 20th of July, 1643, when 
Sir William Brereton made a violent assault on the 
works, but was repulsed.
In the latter part of the 
same year, he summoned Sir Abraham Shipman, 
the Governor, to surrender ; but that brave com- 
mander answered, that " he was not to be intimi- 
dated by words ; and that Sir William must win it 
to wear it." Several buildings near the out-works 
were soon afterwards burnt down, that the republi- 
cans might be deprived of any opportunity of mak- 
ed inspiration, she took the opportunity of the Doctor's attend- 
ing the visitor to the door, to withdraw the commission from 
the box, and place a pack of cards in its room.
Soon after, the 
Dean sailed for Ireland, where he arrived on the 7th of De- 
cember, 1558, and was introduced to the Lord Deputy Fitz- 
walter, and the Privy Council.
Having explained the nature 
of his embassy in a speech of some length, he presented his 
box, which his Lordship opened, and with considerable sur- 
prise, beheld the cards.
The Doctor was thunderstruck, and, 
in much confusiop, affirmed, that a commission lie certainly 
had, but some artful person must have made the exchange.
" Then," said his Lorddiip, " you have nothing to do but 
return to London, and get it renewed : meanwhile, we'll shuf- 
fle the cards." This sarcastic advice the Doctor, though, at 
such a disagreeable season of the year, was con trained to fol- 
low ; but, before he could reach Ireland a second time, the 
Queen died, and her sanguinary commission became useless.
The woman, whose dexterity and presence of mind had thus 
providentially operated, was rewanled by Elizabeth with an 
annual pension of forty pounds, lor life, 
% This gentleman was afterwards knighted, and made Lord 
Keeper of the Seals, in the reign ol Charier.
t;ie Second.
JUST 
301 
CHESHIRE.
ing lodgements near the w.alls.
In the following- 
month the Castle of Hawarden was reduced by the 
King's forces, assisted by 300 men from the garri- 
son of Chester.
The loyalists in the neighbourhood, having been 
strengthened by reinforcements from Ireland, had 
the advantage in several smart conflicts ; but Lord 
Byron, who commanded them, being at length re- 
pulsed before Nantvvich, and compelled to take re- 
fuge in Chester, the other parts of the county fell 
into the hands of Sir William Brereton, ami from 
that time the city suffered a kind of blockade.
The 
garrison, however, frequently sallied into the quar- 
ters of the enemy, and generally with some success ; 
but, on the morning of the 20th of September, 1643, 
the Parliamentary forces obtained an advantage which 
the besieged could never recover.
On the preceding evening, Colonel Jones and 
Adjutant- General Lothian, who were employed in 
the reduction of Beeston Castle, secretly collected a 
body of troops from before that place, and in the 
night stormed the out-works of the city, and made 
themselves masters of every thing without the walls.
Two days after this misfortune, while the inhabitants 
were dreading the further successes of the republi- 
cans, the King, in person, with a body of horse, en- 
tered Chester, in hopes that his presence would ani- 
mate the garrison to an effectual resistance, till his 
forces, under the command of Sir Marmaduke Long- 
dale, could advance to their relief.
He arrived, 
however, only time enough to witness, from the 
leads of the Phoenix Tower, the fatal battle of Row- 
ton Heath, two miles east of the city.
This was 
fought on the 27th of September, when his forces, 
commanded by the above officer, were completely 
routed, after a well-disputed action, by the Par- 
liament's troops under the orders of General Poyntz.
On the following day the King quitted Chester ; 
but, previously to his departure, he gave directions 
to Lord Byron, the Governor, to surrender, if he 
saw no prospect of relief before the expiration of 
eight days.
The siege was pursued with the utmost 
vigour by Sir William Brereton, who, on the 6th of 
October, attempted to carry the works by storm.
The assault was made in several places with the 
greatest resolution, and repelled with equal promp- 
titude and courage ; but the assailants at length 
succeeded in scaling the walls, whence they were 
immediately beaten, or thrown off, and killed.
The 
victors took several scaling-ladders, and a quantity 
of arms.
" By this time," says Randal Holme, " our wo- 
men are all on fire, striving through a gallant emu- 
lation to out-do our men,, and will make good our 
yielding walls, or lose their lives to shew they dare 
attempt it.
The work goes forwards, and they, like 
so many valiant Amazons, do outlV.ce death and dare 
danger, though it lurke in every basket ; seven are 
shot, and three slain ; yet they scorn to leave their 
matchless undertaking, and thus they continue for 
ten days' space, possessing the beholders that they 
are immortal.
Our ladies, likewise, like so many 
exemplary goddesses, create a matchless forward- 
ness in the meaner sorts by their dirty undertakings, 
that he who saw them would have thought a hun- 
dred suns eclipsed, at least-ways clouded with our 
loyal dust, had he been in that place, which they 
wipe off with sueh a pleasing smile, that they seem 
rather silent solicitors of a new deformity, than will- 
ing parters with that purchased honour." About 
this time the besiegers made a bridge of boats, which 
the citizens made several ineffectual attempts to de- 
stroy ; the Deemills and the water-tower, were se- 
veral times attacked by the besiegers, and the citi- 
zens were kept in pex-petual alarm by renewed as- 
saults, and by the explosion of hand-granadoes, the 
effects of which are minutely described by Randal 
Holme.
It may be remarked, that some of the de- 
scriptions of this writer are given in a very eccentric 
style, by no means harmonizing with the nature of 
the scenes to which they relate.
Speaking of the 
mischief caused by the bursting of some granadoes, 
December 10, he says, " two houses in the Water- 
gate-street skip joint from jeint, and create an 
earthquake, the main-posts jostle each other, while 
the frighted casements fly for fear ; in a word, the 
whole fabrick is a perfect chaos, lively set forth in 
this metamorphosis ; the grandmother, mother, and 
three children, are struck starke dead and buried in 
the ruins of this humble edifice." — " About mid- 
night they shoot seven more, one of these lights in 
an old man's bed-chamber, almost dead with age, 
and sends him some days sooner to his grave, than 
perhaps was given him : — the next day (December 
11) six more breake in upon us, one of which per- 
suades an old woman to bear the old man company 
to heaven, because the times were evil." 
The siege was at length converted into a regular 
blockade, and the garrison reduced to the utmost 
distress by famine.
They were constrained to feed 
on horses, dogs, cats, or whatever else, however 
loathsome, seemed likely to supply a little nutri- 
ment.
Worn out by hunger, they at length surren- 
dered, on very honourable terms, on the 3d of Fe- 
bruary, 1645-6 ; and the city was given up to the 
Parliament, after a gallant defence of twenty weeks.
Many of the buildings were destroyed during the 
siege ; and when the republicans were admitted, 
they demolished the High-Cross, removed the fonts 
from the churches, and committed various other acts 
of violence and dilapidation.
The miseries endured 
in the course of this siege by the citizens, were not 
the only calamities they were doomed to suffer ; for 
within two years a dreadful pestilence visited them, 
which occasioned the death of more than 2000 per- 
sons, and reduced the place to a desert.
In Au- 
gust, 1648, a fruitless attempt was made to rescue 
the city for the King, whose adherents obtained pos- 
session, but were baffled in their endeavours to keep 
it, by the celerity of the forces sent against them by 
the Parliament.
Chester, in the reign of William III.
was chosen 
7 as 
CHESHIRE.
30-5 
as one of the six cities for the residence of an As- 
say-Master, and permitted to issue a coinage of 
silver.
In the year 1772, on the 5th of November, an af- 
fecting calamity occurred in the remaining part of a 
spacious stone building, which had been founded by 
Sir Thomas Egerton, afterwards Lord Chancellor, 
when he was Chamberlain of Chester.
It was then 
occupied by a poor family, with the exception of the 
first-floor, which was engaged by the master of a 
puppet-show ; and at the moment he was exhibiting 
to a full audience, the house was blown up by the 
explosion of 800 lbs.
weight of gun-powder, which 
had been lodged in a warehouse beneath, and had 
taken fire by some unknown accident.
Twenty- 
three people were instantaneously involved in de- 
struction, and eighty-three more were much hurt, 
being either burnt or maimed : the limbs of many 
were broken, and others dislocated ; and the shock 
was so violent, as to be felt several miles round the 
city.
The limits of the ancient city appear to be deter- 
mined by the walls of the present ; and the form in 
which the buildings are disposed, is evidently the 
same as that of the Roman camp.
At this time, Ches- 
ter consists principally of four streets, running from 
a centre towards the cardinal points of the compass, 
and each terminated by a gate.
These streets were 
excavated from a bed of rock, and are sunk several 
feet beneath the surface : a circumstance that has 
been the cause of a remarkable construction in the 
houses.
Level with the streets are low shops, or 
warehouses, and above them a gallery on each side, 
reaching from street to street, open in front, and 
ballustraded.
These galleries, called the rows by 
the inhabitants, are exceedingly curious to strangers, 
who, when walking in them, can scarcely divest 
themselves of the idea of being up one pair of stairs.
Along the rows are ranges of shops, and above them 
the higher stories, which project into the streets, 
and form a line with the warehouses beneath.
The 
whole appears as though the first stories of the fronts 
of ail the houses were laid open, and made to com- 
municate with each other ; pillars only being left for 
the support with the super-structure.
The principal 
streets are intersected by various lesser ones, which 
cross each other at right angles, and divide the in- 
closed spaces into lesser squares.
The kitchens and 
back courts of the houses are on a level with the 
galleries.
These rows, says Pennant, in his Welch Tour, 
appear to me to have been the same with ancient 
vestibules, and to have been a form of building pre- 
served from the time that the city was possessed by 
the Romans.
They were built before the doors, 
midway between the streets and the houses, and 
were the places where dependents waited for the 
coming out of their patrons, and under which they 
might waste away the tedious minutes of expecta- 
tion.
The shops beneath the rows were cryptas and 
apothecaj ; magazines for the various necessaries of 
vol.
i. — no.
22.
the owners of the houses.
The streets were once 
considerably deeper, as is apparent from the shops, 
whose floors lie far below the present pavement ; 
and an old pathway is often discovered at the depth 
of four feet below the modern.
It was not until the year 1768, that the east gate 
of the city was taken down, and the present struc- 
ture erected in its place at the expence of Earl Gros- 
venor.
This gate was of Roman architecture, and 
is described by Pennant as consisting of two arches, 
formed by vast stones ; the pier between them divid- 
ing the street exactly in two.
Between the tops of 
the arches, which were cased with Norman masonry, 
was the whole-length figure of a Roman soldier, in 
red grit, in relief, and tolerably well preserved.
This gate had been a porta principalis, was the 
grand entrance into the town, and was the termina- 
tion of Great Watling-Street road, which crossed the 
Island from Dover, and was the great road from 
that port to this place.
It deserves to be remarked, that the Roman modes 
of fortification arc still evident in the remains of mi- 
litary architecture which surround the city ; and that 
the antiquities which distinguish their residence are 
not confined to any particular quarter.
From each 
side of the gates projects a propugnaculum, or bas- 
tion ; and the walls are in many parts guarded by 
round towers, as was recommended by the Roman 
architects, the better to elude the force of battering 
rams.
They are also so placed as not to be beyond 
bow-shot of each other, that the arrows might reach 
the enemy who should attempt to scale the walls in 
the intervals.
The thickness of the walls answers 
to the directions of Vitruvius, and are only of suf- 
ficient breadth within and under the embrasures, for 
two armed men to pass each other without impedi- 
ment.
Amongst the principal Roman antiquities that 
have been discovered here, are the following.
— 
Under the Plume of Feathers Inn, in Bridge-Street, 
is a Roman bath, said to be still entire, but nearly 
concealed from the sight by modern buildings.
The 
only part that can be inspected is the Hypocaust, 
which is of a rectangular figure, supported by thirty- 
two pillars, two feet ten inches and a half high ; and 
about eighteen inches distant from each other.
Over 
each pillar is a perforated or flue tile, two feet 
square, supporting a floor of coarse mortar mixed 
with small red gravel, about three inches thick ; and 
over it another floor, between four and five inches 
thick, of finer materials.
The pillars stand on a 
mortar-floor spread over the arch.
An ante-chamber, 
about two feet below the level of the Hypocaust, but 
of the same extent, opens into it.
This, says Pen- 
nant, was the room allotted for the slaves who attend- 
ed to heat the place ; the other was the receptacle 
of the fuel designed to heat the room above, the 
concamerata sudatio, or sweating chamber ; where 
people were seated, either in niches, or on benches 
placed one above the other, during the time of the 
operation.
Such was the object of this Hypocaust ; 
4 « but 
306 
CHESHIRE.
but there were others of different forms, for the 
purposes of heating the waters destined for the use 
of the bathers.
The remains of another Hypocaust and Sudatory 
were discovered, in the year 1779, in the field near 
the Water-gate, together with a Roman altar, in- 
scribed to iEsculapius, and part of a tesselated 
pavement.
The Hypocaust was similar to that un- 
der the Feathers Inn. The Sudatory was supported 
by twenty-four pillars, composed with tiles nine 
inches square, and two inches thick.
On the top of 
each pillar was a tile two feet square, which had ap- 
parently supported a double floor of coarse cement.
Round the sides of the room there appeared to have 
been a row of tunnel bricks, fixed with their upper 
ends on a level with the surface of the floor, and 
perforated at the sides.
The pavement was of cir- 
cular Mosaic- work ; the tesserae composing it were 
cubes, not more than half an inch in size, and of 
three colours ; a dusky blue, a brick-colour red, 
and a yellowish white.
Among the ruins were se- 
veral Roman bricks, inscribed LEG.
XX.
VV.
some 
horns of the small red deer, several coins of the 
Emperors Adrian and Trajan, and a few other 
things.
These antiquities, we believe, are in the 
possession of John Egerton, Esq. of Oulton.
To the right of the Bridge-gate is a small flight 
of steps, leading to a large round arch, seemingly of 
Roman workmanship, but now filled with more mo- 
dern masonry, with a passage left through a small 
arch of an irregular form.
This postern is called 
the Ship-Gate, or Hole in the Wall, and seems to 
have been designed for the common passage over 
the Dee into the country of the Ordovices.
The 
rock on the opposite, orHanhridge side, is cut down, 
as though for the conveniency of travellers ; and im- 
mediately beyond, in Edgar's Field, or the Close, 
are the vestiges of a road pointing up the hill, and 
continuing towards Bonovium.
On the front of a red grit rock in this field, facing 
the remains of the road, is a badly-formed figure of 
the Pallas Armata, cut in relief.
On her left 
shoulder is a rude resemblance of her favourite bird, 
and at her right hand an altar, but without inscrip- 
tion.
A few years ago, this figure, by some modern 
antiquary, was daubed over with paint.
Beyond 
the Pallas, on a spot called by tradition the site of 
Kdgar's Palace, were formerly some very ancient 
ruins, which Dr. Stukeley supposed to have belong- 
ed to a Roman edifice ; but Brauu, in his Civitates 
Orbis, styles them Ruinosa Domus Comitis Cestri- 
ensis.
It seems probable that some public building 
stood on this spot, which had belonged to each na- 
tion successively.
In digging a cellar, near the East-Gate, in 1693, 
a beautiful altar was discovered on the ancient pave- 
ment, which consisted of large stones, surrounded 
with remains of sacrifice, such as heads, horns, and 
* TARANO is the true reading.of this word ; but the let- 
ters R and N are transposed in the inscription.
GVNA, 
Guntia, or Guenetia, if written properly, would be Guenet; 
t 
bones, of the ox, roebuck, and other animals.
The 
earth round it was of several colours, and mixed 
with ashes.
From the inscription, it appears to have 
been erected by Flavins Longtis, tribune, of the twen- 
tieth victorious legion, and his son Longinus, both 
of Samosata, in Syria, in honour of the Emperors 
Dioclesian and Maximian.
On the back of the altar 
was a curtain, and other drapery ; on one of the 
sides, a genius with a cornucopia ; and on the other, 
a flower-pot, with a plant of the acanthus, elegantly 
leaved.
Over the inscription, on the front, was a 
globe, surmounted with palm leaves ; and on the 
summit, a head in a circular garland.
Among the 
bones were two coins ; one of Vespasian, in brass, 
with his head, inscribed IMP.
CMS.
VESPASIAN.
AUG.
COS.
III.
and on the reverse, VICTORIA.
AUGUSTI.
S. C.
and a winged Victory standing.
The other was of copper, displaying the head of 
Constantius, and round it FL.
VAL.
CONSTAN- 
TIUS.
NOB.
C. on the reverse, a Genius, with a 
sacrificing bowl in one hand, and in the other a cor- 
nucopia, with the inscription GENIO.
POPULI.
ROMANI.
In the possession of the late Rev. Mr.
Prescot, 
was a statue supposed to represent Mithras, or the 
sun, a deity which the Romans had borrowed from 
the Persians, and much honoured in the second and 
third centuries.
The figure was standing with a de- 
clining torch, and arrayed in a Phrygian bonnet, a 
mantle, and a short jacket.
A remarkable altar was discovered in 1653, and 
is now preserved with the Arundelian marbles at 
Oxford.
The inscription is entirely scaled off; but, 
from the Marmora Oxoniensia, 1764, it appears, to 
have been as follows : 
I. O.
M TANARO:* 
T. ELVPIVS GALER 
PHRjESENS GVNTIA 
PRl. LEG.
XX.
VV 
COM MODI) ET 
LATERAL O COS 
V. S.
L. M.
Hence it appears to have been inscribed to Jupi- 
ter ; with the British epithet Tanaro, or the Thun- 
derer, adopted instead of Tonans ; probably in com- 
pliment to tAe Britons, over whom the learned Pri- 
deaux and Gale suppose Elupius to have presided.
Guntia is apparently derived from Gwynedd, one of 
the British names for North Wales.
The letters 
V V in the fourth line signify Valeria Victrix, or 
Valens Victrix, the name given to the twentieth le- 
gion.
Chester Castle, which possesses considerable his- 
torical celebrity, stands within the walls, and ap- 
pears to have been rebuilt on the Norman model, 
by the Conqueror, and to have been enlarged by him 
considerably beyond the space which it occupied in 
the time of the Saxons.
It consists of an upper and 
for so it appears in the ancient Welch manuscripts.
Venedotia 
is the common Latinized name of Gwynedd.
lower 
CHESHIRE.
307 
lower ward ; to each of which, the extraxice is de- 
fended by a gate and round tower.
Within the 
precincts of the upper ballium * are some square 
towers of Norman architecture, with square projec- 
tions at the corners, slightly salient.
The upper 
room of one of the towers, called Julius Caesar's, 
has a vaulted roof, with elegant and slender couples 
running- down the wall, and resting on round pil- 
lars, which, from their style and beauty, are sup- 
posed to have been executed by the same architect 
who built the chapter-house, which will be hereafter 
noticed.
The remaining part of this court is occu- 
pied by the arsenal, batteries, &c.
Hugh Lupus's hall stood on the east side of the 
lower ward.
The roof of this noble apartment was 
supported by wood-work carved in a bold style, and 
resting on strong brackets.
The length of the room 
was nearly 99 feet ; its breadth 45 ; and its height 
proportionable.
These dimensions seem to have been well suited 
to the character of the first Norman Earl, and to the 
extensiveness ot his hospitality.
" He was not only 
liberal," observes Ordericus, " but profuse.
He 
did not carry a family with him, but an army.
He 
kept no account of receipts or disbursements, but 
was perpetually wasting his estates ; and was much 
fonder of falconers and huntsmen, than of cultivators 
of the land, and holy men." — Contiguous to this 
building was a smaller one, where the chancery 
court of the county palatine was held, and where the 
petty Sovereigns of the Palatinate assembled in 
council with their eight Barons.
Not many years 
ago, these buildings were taken down, to make room 
for the new county gaol.
This magnificent struc- 
ture, which is scarcely exceeded by any in the king- 
dom, is built with white free-stone, and contains 
five yards, with a working-room and two day-rooms 
in each ; having separate apartments for ihe women 
and debtors.
The number of solitary cells for con- 
demned criminals is fourteen.
The principal charge 
incurred in building this fabric, was defrayed by the 
income arising from the navigation of the Weever.
Ches er Castle is garrisoned by two compares 
of invalids ; and it has a Governor, Lieutenant-Go- 
vernor, and Constable.
The lat(er holds his place 
for life, and, strictly speaking, is the keeper of the 
prison, but he appoints a deputy.
In Peck's Desiderata Curiosa, this castle stands 
in the list of Queen Elizabeth's garrisons, with the 
following officers and salaries : — 
* The appellation of ballium, says Grose, was given, in 
towns, to a work fenced with paJisatioes, and sometimes ma- 
sonry, covering the suburbs; but in castles, was the space im- 
mediately within the outer walls.
f The statute for the purpose was made by Edward the Se- 
cond, in whose fourth year, one Adam, son of John, of the 
Woodhouses, was charged with burning his own houses, and 
carrying away the goods.
He stood mute ; and a Jury, as 
usual, was ijnpannelled, who decided, that he could speak if he 
thought proper, and he was therefore imprisoned ad dixtam.
This was an ironical term, exprnssiie of the sad sustenance the 
L. 3- d.
Constable of the castle; fea 6 1.3 4 
Porter; fee 4 11 3 
Keeper of the gardens ; fee 6 1 8 
Surveyor of the works within Cheshire 
and Flint ; fee 6 1 8 
Master mason ; fee 812 4 
Master carpenter ; fee 9 2 6 
The punishment of pressing to death, or the peine 
forte et dure, for standing mute when arraigned, is 
said, by Pennant, to have originated within the walls 
of the old gaol.f 
There is a singularity in the manner of treatment 
of the prisoners who are relieved by capital punish- 
ment out of their dreadful cells, which merits notice.
They are delivered by the constable, or his deputy, 
at a stone called Glover's .Stone, about ninety yards 
distant from the outward gate, into the hands of the 
sheriffs of the city, who receive them at that stone, 
which is the extreme limit of the castle precincts, and 
from thence convey them to the place of execution, 
of which they also have a charge.
This custom has 
been variously explained.
One account ascribes it 
to the lawless conduct of the citizens, who formerly 
rescued a felen in his way to the gallows, and are 
s'aid to have had the disagreeble duty of executing 
all criminals, whether of the county or the shire, in- 
flicted on them as a punishment.
Another, and per- 
haps the more rational account, is, that when the 
city was separated from the castle by the charter of 
Henry the Seventh, and left as an appurtenance to 
the shire, the citizens were so exceedingly tenacious 
of their independent rights, that they undertook the 
execution of criminals, rather than suffer the county 
officers to exercise authority of any kind within their 
precincts.
The small outlet, or street, leading to 
Glover's Stone, appertains to the castle, and being 
thus exempted from the jurisdiction of the city, is 
chiefly inhabited by non-freemen.
The city Avails are one mile and three quarters, 
and jne hundred and one yards, in circuit.
They 
are tne only entire specimens of ancient fortification, 
those of Carlisle excepted, in Great Britain ; but 
they are now only preserved for the purposes of re- 
creation.
The continued walk on the top affords a 
gr.Mt variety of prospect.
The Welch mountains, 
tiie Cheshire hills of Broxton, and the insulated rock 
of Beesfon, crowned with its castle, the rich flat in- 
terposed, and the perpetually-changing views of the 
river, are the most prominent and striking objects 
sufferer was allowed, which on the first day, was three morsels 
of the worst bread ; on (he second, three draughts of water out 
of the next puddle; and this was to be alternately his daily 
diet till he was bereft of life.
John de Morgan, constable of 
the castle, afterwards testified, that the aforesaid Adam was 
dead ad diaetam ; and the statute for pressing to death was then 
made, as being a mode of punishment less horrible than starv- 
ing.
The superior wisdom and humanity of modern times 
have again occasioned the law to be altered, and the prisoner 
who refuses to plead, is now adjudged to suffer the same pu- 
nishment that is attached to conviction.
in 
308 
CHESHIRE.
in this favourite tour.
The expence of the repairs 
is defrayed by certain imposts called murage duties, 
collected at the Custom-House, on all merchandize 
brought from beyond the sea into the port of Ches- 
ter.
The whole annual revenue is about 2001.
great 
part of which arises from the duty on Irish linens ; 
though the sum levied is only two-pence for one 
hundred yards.* 
There are four principal gates in the wall of 
Chester, besides posterns ; the north-gate, east- 
gate, bridge-gate, and water-gate ; all of which, ex- 
cept the north-gate, of which the citizens had charge, 
were kept by persons who held that office by serjeanty 
under the Earls of Chester, and were entitled to certain 
tolls, as specified in an inquisition taken A.
D. L321.
The custody of the respective gates, with the tolls 
payable at each, have at several times been pur- 
chased by the corporation.
The custody of the 
bridge-gate with other privileges, belonged to the 
Raby family in the reign of Edward III.
The old 
bridge-gate had two round towers, on the western- 
most of which was an octagonal tower, which had 
been built for the water-works.
The gate and 
towers were taken down in the years 1780 and 1781 ; 
and in 178-2, the gate was rebuilt.
The serjeanty of 
the east-gate was given by Edward I.
to Henry 
Bradford, in exchange for the manor of Bradford in 
Delamere.
The keeper was bound to find a cran- 
nock and a bushel for measuring the salt that might 
be brought in ; and the weights and measures of the 
city are still inspected by the serjeant of the east 
gate.
The site of this gate is occupied by an arch, 
which was Uuilt at the expence of Earl Grosvenor, 
about 45 years ago.
For several generations, the 
custody of the water-gate belonged to the Earls of 
Derby, of whom it was purchased by the corpora- 
tion in the year 1778.
In 1788, a handsome arch 
was erected on the site of this g'ate.
A new north 
gate Avas erected in the year 1809.
One of the 
eight columns which adorned it was raised in the 
presence of the Earl of Grosvenor, the Mayor, Re- 
corder, and a large concourse of people.
In a ca- 
vity in the centre of the plinth of the column, there 
was placed by his Lordship an urn, containing dif- 
ferent coins of the present reign, upon which was 
laid a plate of brass, with the following inscription 
deeply engraven upon it : — 
* According to Pennant, the linen trade at Chester began in 
the year 1736, in which year 449,654 yards were imported; 
he says, that the importation regularly increased till the last 
year of the then late war, from which time till the date of his 
'lour in Wales (the preface of which is dated 1778) it continued 
at par.
lie states the annual importation at 1300 boxes and 
packs, including 300 boxes and packs imported into Liverpool, 
and sent across the Mersey to Chester ; and he calculates the 
annual importation by the yard at 2,000,000 of yards, or 
1,000,000 at each fair.
This latter part of the calculation ap- 
pears to be much under-rated, but the exact quantity cannot be 
ascertained, as the number of packs and that of boxes are not 
distinguished.
In 1786, when the trade appears to have been 
at its greatest height, there were 1684 packs and 788 boxes 
brought into the port of Chester, exclusively of such linens as 
" This column was erected in the presence of the 
Right Hon. Robert, Earl Grosvenor, August 24, 1809, 
at whose expence this gate was built, in the 49th 
George III.
William Newell, Esq. Mayor.
Tho- 
mas Harrison, architect." 
The principal postern gates were Cale Yard gate, 
obtained by the abbot and convent, in the reign of 
Edward I.
as a passage to their kitchen garden; 
New-gate, formerly called Woolfield, or Wolf-gate, 
which was repaired and enlarged A.
D. 1608 ; and 
Ship-gate, which leads to the passage over the Dee, 
and is still used as a foot- way.
New-gate, which 
leads to Pepper- Street, has sometimes been called 
Pepper-gate ; and the people of Chester have a 
proverb — " When the daughter is stolen, shut Pep- 
per-gate" — said to have originated from the cir- 
cumstance of the daughter of a Mayor of Chester 
having made her escape with her lover through this 
gate.
The arch of Ship-gate is considered to be of 
Roman architecture.
The Dee Bridge is an ancient structure, with se- 
ven arches of dissimilar workmanship ; but probably 
no part of it is older than the Conquest, as it ap- 
pears, from the Doomsday-Book, that the Provost 
had orders to summon one man from each hide of 
land in the county, in order to rebuild it ; and in 
case of the non-appearance of the person summoned, 
his Lord was to forfeit forty shillings to the King 
and Earl.
A MS.
account of Cheshire, mentioned by Grose, 
contained the following passage, referring to the old 
bridge : — " After the death of Elfleda, her brother 
Edward succeeded to the throne, who, fightingagainst 
the Danes, would have been taken prisoner, but for 
the unparalleled courage and activity of his son 
Atheistan.
In the year after this engagement, he 
visited his territories in Cheshire, and greatly secur- 
ed them by erecting fortresses atThelwell and Man- 
chester.
He likewise finished the bridge over the 
river Dee at Chester, which was begun by his -sister 
Elfleda, before which time there was a ferry for 
passengers under St. Mary's Hill, at the Ship- 
gate." 
At the north end of the bridge, stand the city 
mills, which are supplied with water by a current 
formed by a great dam or causeway, that crosses the 
river obliquely, and causes a fall of thirteen feet.
had been imported to Liverpool, making about 5,500,000 of 
yards.
Since this time, the linen trade at Chester has been on 
the decline; in 1796 only 582 packs and 808 boxes were im- 
ported into Chester, and in 1806 only 327 picks and 936 boxes.
The quantity of bye-goods, which are linens imported at Li- 
verpool, or such as have been previously purchased at Chester, 
and conveyed back again for sale, from Manchester and other 
places, have considerably increased bince the date of Mr. Pen- 
nant's Tour, and may be averaged at about 60 packs and 74a 
boxes each year, which will make t lie whole quantity of linen 
now brought into Chester annually lor sale about 3,500,000 of 
yards.
It is probable, that the return of peace will contribute 
materially to the revival of the linen-trade, and of other 
branches of commerce, in this city.
These 
CHESHIRE.
o09 
These!
mills, with the causeway, were founded hy 
Hugh Lupus, and retained by his successors, and 
afterwards hy the Earls of Chester of the royal line.
They were granted by Edward the Black Prince to 
Sir Howel y Fwyall, in reward for his bravery at 
the battle of Poictiers, where he took the French 
King prisoner.
The revenues were then very con- 
siderable, as no inhabitant of the city, with the ex- 
ception of the tenants of the abbey, was allowed to 
grind his corn at any other place.
The present ex - 
•tensive premises, which are regarded as extremely 
complete in their construction, were erected a few 
years ago, the old mill having been burnt down.
The. city is chieiiy supplied with water from the 
.adjoining works, which raise it from the river in- 
to a reservoir, whence it flows through pipes into the 
houses.
The Norman Earls* invested the city of Chester 
with great privileges, all of which were confirmed by 
Henry the Third, in whose reign its government 
assumed the form of a regular corporation.
f Ed- 
ward the First extended the liberties, and bestowed 
the city, with its appurtenances, &c.
on its citizens 
and their heirs, to be holden of him and his heirs for 
ever, on the annual payment of 1001.
Edward the 
Third confirmed all the former grants, and gave the 
city all the vacant lands within its liberties, with 
power to erect buildings on them.
Edward the 
Black Prince prescribed the boundaries of the city, 
extending in circumference about eight miles.
Ri- 
chard the Second granted many new privileges ; 
and, on his deposition, Henry, the young Prince of 
Wales, confirmed all the former charters of the city, 
and afterwards invested it with the profits of mu- 
-rage, and bridge-tower, or gate, where tolls were 
collected.
The confirmation of the prior immunities, 
given to Chester by Henry the Sixth, records a me- 
lancholy decrease of its commerce through the choak- 
.ing of the creek with sands, which had destroyed 
the goodness of its port, and prevented the influx of 
foreign merchants.
These circumstances induced 
the King to remit 101.
of the ancient fee-farm rent.
The continued distresses of the city, for many years 
after this period, occasioned Henry the Seventh, in 
* In tins age, some peculiar customs were observed at Chcs- 
tfit, and some singular las\s were in force.
Whenever the King 
veiled the city, he claimed from every plough-land 200 hes- 
thas, or capons; one curia, or vat of ale; and one rusca of 
butter; and if any person made bad ale, he was either to pay 
four shillings, or sit in a tumbril, or dung-cart.
With these re- 
markable laws may be enumerated the variations of the fines 
for bloodied and murder.
" The fine for bloodshed," says 
Gough, in his additions to Camden, from the morning of the 
'first holiday to noon ot Sunday, was 10s.
from the noon of Sun- 
day to the morning of the second holiday, 20s.
and the like 
sum in the twelve clays of Christmas, on the Purification of the 
Virgin Mary, the first day of Easter and Whitsuntide, Ascen- 
sion-day, the Assumption, or Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, 
and the feast of All-Saints.
The fine for killing a man on either 
of these days was 41.
but on any other day only 40s.
The pe- 
nalty for robbery, or offering violence to a woman in a house, 
.as 40s.
For a widow dishonouring herself, 20s.
but no more 
than 10s.
if a maiden committed the like crime.
If a lire hap- 
vol.
i. — no.
22.
1506, to make a second remission of its annual rent, 
which had then decreased in the sum of 801.
lis 
also bestowed a new charter on its inhabitants ; se- 
parated the city from the county, and granted it se- 
veral of the most valuable privileges which it now 
enjoys.
This charter was confirmed by Queen Eli- 
zabeth ; but afterwards surrendered by the corpora- 
tion, and again renewed by James the First.
The 
last was granted by Charles the Second, in the year 
1676.
The government of the town is vested in a corpo- 
ration, consisting of a Mayor, Recorder, two She- 
riffs, twenty-four Aldermen, and forty Common 
Councilmen ; two of whom are leave-lookers, whose 
office it is, to inform of all persons exercising trades 
within the city without being freemen.
The two 
senior officers are murengers, or receivers of the 
murage-duties, for repairing the walls ; and two 
are treasurers, who are usually next in succession 
to the Mayor.
There is also a sword-bearer, a 
mace-bearer, and various other officers, of inferior 
note.
Originally, the corporation, or guild of Chester, 
consisted of twenty-four companies of merchants and 
artificers : over each of these companies presided an 
alderman, who was elected annually.
These, with 
Sheriffs, who were appointed by the Earls, the per- 
sons who collected the murage-duties, and two offi- 
cers, called the keepers of the guild, -were all who 
were connected with the government of the city, till 
the twenty-sixth of Henry the Third, when Sir 
Walter Lynett was chosen Mayer, and the office has 
been ever since continued.
At that period the right 
of electing the principal officers of the corporation 
was possessed by the citizen-freemen, and this pri- 
vilege was confirmed by the charter granted by 
Henry the Seventh, in the year 1506 ; but it was- 
afterwards frequently violated through the injudici- 
ous, though grateful, conduct of the citizens, who 
permitted those aldermen who had served them 
faithfully, to retain their respective offices beyond 
the time any constitution allowed.
Many abuses 
naturally followed this infringement of the privilege 
of annual election ; and the right itself being sup- 
pened in the city, the person in whose house it broke out was 
to forfeit four one denar, and pay 2s.
to his next neighbour.
Either man or woman making a false abode in the city, was to 
forfeit 4s." One-third of these forfeitures belonged to the Earl, 
and the King claimed the remainder.
f At this period, and for some years previous, the state of 
Chester may be collected from the Domesday Book.
It ap- 
pears, from that record, that, in the reign of Edward the Con- 
fessor, the city contained 451 houses that were taxable, besides 
fifty-six that belonged to the Bishop.
It had a Guild Merca- 
tory, analogous to a modern corporation ; so that no person who 
was not of that society, could exercise any trade, or carVy on any 
commerce, within its precincts.
Two overseers, selected from 
the most respectable citizens, were appointed to maintain the 
rights of the guild, and receive, for the use of the city, all the 
custom paid by strangers, except during the fairs.
Here was 
also a supreme officer, called the Proesitas Regis, or Provost, 
who had the care boll) of the civil and commercial interests.
4t 
posed 
310 
CHESHIRE.
posed to be abrogated by the new charter granted 
by Charles the Second, the corporation assumed the 
exclusive power of electing into their own body.
This proceeding generated a most violent animo- 
sity between the citizens and the corporation ; and 
many attempts were made by the former to recover 
their lost privileges, but without success, till after 
James the Second's abdication of the throne.
The 
charter of restitution granted by his successor, Wil- 
liam III.
restored the ancient franchises of the city, 
and among them, that of the annual election of its 
principal officers by the citizens at large ; but this 
was again violated, and at length lost in the year 
1698, when the citizens were convened, and, after 
choosing the whole body of the corporation, were 
persuaded to vote that they should continue in their 
offices according to ancient custom ; this was con- 
strued into a complete surrender of the right of 
choice, and the corporation re-assumed the privi- 
lege of self-election, which they have ever since 
possessed.
Several ineffectual struggles have been made by 
the citizens for the recovery of their former power.
About thirty, or five-and-thirty, years ago a suit was 
instituted in the Court of King's Bench, by Mr.
John Eddowes, supported by other citizen-freemen, 
against an aldermau and common councilman who 
had been chosen by the corporation.
The action 
was defended, and a decision given in favour of the 
corporation ; but Mr. Eddowes having removed the 
cause by appeal to the House of Lords, the verdict 
was reversed after a long and solemn hearing, and a 
decree made that the old charter of Henry the Se- 
venth was the only legal one.
Both parties were ad- 
judged to pay their costs.
But, so far are the citi- 
zens from having recovered their rights, that the 
corporation continue to elect as before.
The duty of leave-lookers is generally performed 
by the yeomen of the Pentice, an ancient building, 
which was situated near the junction of the four 
principal streets, in the centre of the city,* and sup- 
posed to occupy some portion of the site of the Ro- 
man Praetorium.
Within this structure all the busi- 
ness under the cognizance of a justice of the peace 
used to be transacted.
There also the sheriffs and 
recorder determined civil causes ; but the assizes 
were, and still are, holden at the castle ; and the 
courts of session, crown-mote, and port-mote, are 
holden in a spacious and convenient room over the 
Exchange.
The Pentice was built about the end of 
the fifteenth century.
Its north side was taken 
down about the year 1731, for the purpose of widen- 
ing the end of North-gate Street ; and the remain- 
der of the building was removed in 1805, to effect 
a similar improvement in East-gate Street.
The Mayor, assisted by the Recorder, is judge 
both in the crown-mote and port-mote court, and 
possesses the jurisdiction over all criminal causes, 
* At this spot formerly stood a cross, called the high-cross, 
which was t.iken down in the year 1646, after the city had fal- 
but treason.
The Common Hall, or room where 
the courts are held, is embellished with several por- 
traits of Recorders, and other persons who have 
been popular in the city.
Among them are those of 
Sir Thomas Grosvenor, Sir Robert Grosvenor, Sir 
Richard Grosvenor, ancestors to the present Lord 
Grosvenor ; Roger Camebratch, Esq. John Eger- 
ton, Esq. Thomas Cholmondeley, Esq. and Robert 
Townshend, Esq. The elections of the city Magis- 
trates ami Members of Parliament take place in this 
building.
The body-corporate also assemble there 
to make bye-laws for governing the city, manag- 
ing the public buildings, directing the charities, 
&c.
In former times, it appears, the authority of the 
corporation extended not only to the manners and 
morals of the inhabitants in general, but to the re- 
gulation of the dresses of women, and other minor 
points.
The following extracts will amuse the cu- 
rious reader : — 
"12 May, 32 Hen. VIII.
(1540) Henry Gee, 
mayor.
— Whereas all the taverns and alehouses of 
this city be used to be kept by young women other- 
wise than is used in any other place of this realme, 
whereat all strangers greatly marvel and think it 
inconvenient, whereby great slander and dishonest 
report of this city hath and doth run abroad : in 
avoiding thereof, as also to eschew such great occa- 
sions of wantonness, brawls, frays, and other incon- 
veniencies as thereby doth and may arise among- 
youth and light-disposed persons, as also damages 
to their masters, owners of the taverns and ale- 
houses, ordered, that after the 9th of June next, 
there shall be no tavern or alehouse kept in the said 
city by any woman between fourteen and forty years 
of age, under pain of 401.
forfeiture for him or her 
that keepeth any such servant." 
" In 1581 (23 Eliz.
Oct. 20.) there was an order 
that no wife, widow, or maid, should keep any ta- 
vern, ale or beer-cellar in Chester." 
" May 12, 32 Henry VIII.
Henry Gee, mayor.
— Whereas great expense and superfluous charge 
hath been and doth grow by reason of costly dish- 
meals and drinks, brought unto women lying in 
childbed, and by them likewise to the other recom- 
penced at their churchings, whereby such as are of 
mean substance strain themselves to more charge 
than they can well sustain ; order'd, that henceforth 
no such dish-meals nor wines be brought to women 
in childbed, or at the churchings ; and that no wo- 
men (except the midwife, mother, sisters, and sis- 
ters-in-law of the woman churched) shall go into 
the house of her that is churched, but bring her to 
the door and so depart, on pain of 6s.
8d.
upon the 
owner of the house, and 3s.
4d.
upon every person 
offending toties 'quotient 
" Hen. VIII.
Henry Gee, mayor.
— To distinguish 
the head-dresses of married women from umnar- 
len into the hands of the Parliamentary army.
It was a clumsy 
erection, of the reign of James I.
1 ricd ; 
CHESHIRE.
311 
rted; no unmarried woman to wear white or other 
coloured caps ; and no woman to wear any hat un- 
less when she rides or goes abroad into the coun- 
try, (except sick or aged persons) on pain of 
3s.
4d." 
Near the Exchange is the Engine-House, a neat 
fabric, with fluted columns, and a rich Corinthian 
cornice.
The fire-engines are kept in order, at the 
expence of the corporation.
In the square opposite the Exchange, the market 
for fish and vegetables is kept.
Salmon was for- 
merly sold here in such profusion, that masters were 
frequently restricted, by a clause in the indentures, 
from giving it to their apprentices more than twice 
a week.
At a little distance are the three flesh 
shambles, which occupy a considerable portion of 
the street.
Here the country butchers are permitted 
to sell meat on the market days.
On the top of one 
of the shambles is a spacious Cistern, or reservoir, 
which is supplied with water from the works at the 
bridge, for the use of the inhabitants of the higher 
parts of the city.
On the 5th of July, 1809, the New Union -Hall, in 
Foregate- Street, was opened for the first time for 
the sale of woollen and linen drapery goods, the dis- 
play of which, for variety, beauty, fashion, and ele- 
gance, was never equalled in tlrat city.
This hall was 
erected through the spirited exertions of the indivi- 
duals, who occupy it generally, and is built upon 
such a plan as at once accommodates both the buyer 
and the seller.
Amongst the charitable institutions of Chester, the 
principal is the Bluecoat Hospital, or school, which 
is situated near the north gate, and was founded, in 
1706, by Bishop Stratford, and endowed for the 
maintenance and education of 30 hoys, who were ad- 
mitted at 9 years of age, and kept in the house for 
four years.
This provision had proved to be ex- 
tremely inadequate to its object ; the greater num- 
ber of the poor of that city being left entirely desti- 
tute of instruction.
In 1783, the trustees adopted 
a beneficial extension of the charity ; and in the 
course of that and the ensuing year, they opened 
a day school in the wing of the hospital, for the in- 
struction of 120 boys in reading, writing, and ac- 
counts.
This they called the green-school, from the 
circumstance of each of the boys wearing a green 
bonnet.
Two masters were engaged, one at 351.
the other at 301.
a year ; and they have proved quite 
equal to the care of 120 boys.
The whole expence 
of teaching these boys, including their bonnets, &c.
is not more than 80 guineas, or 14s.
a year, each.
— 
In order to provide for this expence, the trustees 
diminished the number of boys in the blue-coat school 
from 30 to 25 ; and at the same time extended the 
benefit of the school to a greater increase of objects, 
by reducing the right of continuance to two years, 
and by selecting the best behaved and most deserv- 
ing boys of the green -school for all the vacancies in 
the blue-coat school ; so that 12 or I i of the best 
boys of the former school are annually placed upon 
the foundation : the consequence of which is, that 
there is hardly a poor boy in the city, but may ob- 
tain a place in the blue-coat school, if he perseveres 
in a course of industry and good behaviour.
This 
is of the greatest importance ; as it extends the bene- 
fit, not only of instruction, but of (what is much 
more efficacious) emulation and example, to almost 
every lad in Cheshire.
The boys are now admitted 
at 9 years of age into the green-school, upon the 
nomination of the subscribers, who appoint scholars 
in rotation, accordinq,- to the amount of their contri- 
butions to the charity.
At the end of two years, 
these boys are publicly examined for the b!ue-c;r.;t 
school : after which, if their merit does not entitle 
them to one of the vacancies on the foundation, they 
remain in the green-school two years more ; and are 
then dismissed at an age proper to be placed out in 
service.
But, if their progress has been such as to 
entitle them to a vacancy in the blue-coat school, 
they are clothed and maintained there for two years, 
and, at the expiration of that period, if they have 
made a competent progress in reading, writing, and 
accounts, and (in case the sea is their object) in na- 
vigation, they are placed out, with an apprentice-fee 
of three pounds each, in husbandry, the sea service, 
or in some useful trade or occupation.
Upon the 
former plan the funds of this charity provided, in 
ten years, an education for 75 children : in the pre- 
sent mode,* besides the increased motives for good 
behaviour and attention, 562 poor children of Ches 
ter receive an education during the same period.
This has been attended with no additional expence : 
the degree of benefit, however, far exceeds any thing 
that could have been attained upon the former sys- 
tem ; for the terms of succeeding to the blue-coat 
school, offered equally to all, supply that stimulat- 
ing incentive to human exertion, without which the 
best-framed establishments lose their vital principle 
and degenerate into visionary and noxious theory.
— 
Similar attention has been paid to the female chil- 
dren in that town.
It had been ascertained by Doc- 
tor Haygarth, and some others, who were in the 
habit of visiting the habitations of the poor of Ches- 
ter, that the girls there, as in many other towns, 
were extremely destitute of useful employment ; and 
that of those from 9 to 18 years of age, in one pa- 
rish, three-fourths could not sew at ail, and not one 
orfthem so well as to make a single article of dress.
They were equally ignorant of knitting and spin- 
* Dr. Havgarth, who was the proposer of the green-school, 
suggested, in 1797, a further improvement in it: that in addi- 
tion to their other learning, the greater part of the boys should 
alternately be instructed and employed m the needle manufac- 
ture, in a large unoccupied room, which is over the school, 
i here is a want of occupation for boys.
at Chester, though there 
is already an established neetJte manufactory there, which might 
iurnish employment and finish the work.
As to the -blue-coat- 
boys, it was proposed that part of their profits should be laid up 
for their use and advancement in life, and those of the boys of 
the gre^flHsCfloolj paid over to their patents.
nine* : 
312 
CHESHIRE.
ning : and so unskilful in the common occupations 
of life, as to be disqualified for domestic servants, 
and for most other offices in society, and to have 
•very few means of earning an honest livelihood.
It 
Mas calculated that four schools, of 40 girls each, to 
he taught for four years, from the age of 9 to 13 
years, in addition to a school already raising for 
maintaining and educating 8 girls, would nearly 
provide for all the poor girls in Chester, who were 
unemployed, of a proper age for instruction, anil in 
want of charitable aid for their education.
It was 
therefore proposed, that the girls should change their 
school every year, and (besides their being taught t\i 
read in all the schools, and attending the parish 
church twice on Sunday) that they should learn in 
the first year to knit, in the second to spin, in the 
third to sew, in the fourth to wash and get up lineu ; 
the four schools being placed near the centre of the 
city, so that the scholars might without inconveni- 
ence, go each year to a different school.
In this 
manner it was calculated that, in the whole, the edu- 
cation of 42 girls would be annually completed.
— 
The knitting, spinning, and sewing schools had from 
^he time of their establishment, in 1787, been regu- 
larly attended ; and no difficulty had occurred in 
supplying work for the knitters and spinners, though 
there had been some at first as to the sewing-school.
In procuriug employment for the school for washing 
and getting up linen, there has been very great dif- 
ficulty : and in consequence, this part of the plan 
has been long given up.
The schools are now re- 
duced to two, one for knitting, and the other for 
sewing ; these are very well supplied with work, 
and the children continue there for two years.
— On 
their first appearance at school, the children come 
in but ill clothed, and not well behaved ; but, in a 
-short time, by their industry, and hy the co-operat- 
ing benevolence of the ladies who visit the school, 
they are not only improved in behaviour, but are 
supplied with uniform gowns and petticoats, as well 
as with several other articles ©f dress-; all their 
clothes, except shoes and stockings, being made at 
the sewing- school.
— The subscriptions were at first 
limited to -5s.
each ; though, among the more opu- 
lent, several persons of the same family were ad- 
mitted as subscribers.
They are at present not 
subject to limitation ; and liberal donations have 
been made for supplying books, wheels, forms, and 
other expenees.
A considerable benefit has accrued 
from connecting these girl-schools in some degree 
with the Sunday-schools of Chester : — for, as an 
encouragement to good behaviour, the most deserv- 
ing girls in the Sunday-schools are regularly elect- 
ed into the working- schooL This has a powerful 
and extensive effect in improving the morals and 
behaviour of all the girls in the Sunday-schools, and 
* From the opening of the institution, in 1761, to the year 
A&08, the total number of patients who hud been admitted was 
.80,973.
In the course of the last-mentioned year alone, there 
had been 779 in, aid 1343 out-patients.
In 1S0S, the funded 
with them of almost all the'female children in 
Chester.
There is a grammar-school at Chester, which was 
founded by Henry VIII.
A. D.
1544, for 24 boys, 
who are appointed by the Dean and Chapter.
They 
are not admitted till they are nine years of age, and 
they remain only four years, unless the Dean please 
to allow them a year of grace.
Amongst the numerous alms-houses which are 
dispersed through the city, the chief is for forty de- 
cayed freemen, of sixty years of age and upwards, 
who are allowed 41.
annually, and a gown every 
third year.
Mr. Owen Jones, one of the donors to 
this charity, bequeathed the profits of an estate in 
Denbighshire to the poor of the several city-compa- 
nies, who were to receive it in rotation annually.
The yearly value of this bequest was originally only 
a few pounds ; but the discovery and working of a 
rich lead-mine on the estate, have so improved the 
receipts, that the amiual income is now 4001.
or up- 
wards.
The Infirmary, a handsome structure, is plea- 
santly situated in an airy spot, on the west side of 
the city.
It originated from a bequest of 3001.
left 
by Dr. Stratford, Commissary of the Archdeaconry 
of Richmond, and has been increased by voluntary 
contributions.
Before the present building could 
be got ready for the reception of patients, a tempo- 
rary infirmary was established in Northgate- Street, 
in the year 1759.
The new Infirmary, opened on 
the 17th of March, 1761, has been supported by 
such liberal subscriptions, that the managers have 
been enabled to administer relief to many thousand 
persons.
The utility of this institution was increas- 
ed a few years since, at the suggestion of Dr. Hay- 
garth, by the admission of fever-patients, for whom 
two distinct wards were appropriated, one for men, 
and the other for women, and due precautionary 
means employed to prevent any infectious miasmata 
from communicating with the other parts of the 
house.
The whole establishment is conducted in a 
manner that reflects the utmost possible credit on 
the managers.* 
An institution, of a nature before unknown in 
England, was begun in this city in the year 1778 ; 
for the purpose of preventing the natural small-pox 
from becoming dangerous at Chester, by promoting 
a general inoculation at stated periods ; and, by the 
observance of certain rules drawn up for the occa- 
sion, to keep it from spreading wherever it should 
break out.
Subscriptions were liberally bestowed ; 
but the supineness of the people, and their supersti- 
tious rejection of the offer of free-inoculation, ren- 
dered the scheme abortive.
The projected plans 
for its revival have been happily superseded by the 
more benignant process of vaccination.
property of the institution amounted to 15,5001.
three per 
cent.
; and the subscriptions of that year were 1 1541.
9s.
6d.
The funds of the Iniirmany continue to' increase, and its benelits 
to be extended, 
Chester, 
CHESHIRE.
313 
Chester, as already stated, is the seat of the Bi- 
shop of that name.* The Mercian kingdom was 
divided into the five bishoprics of Lichfield, Wor- 
cester, Lydneaster, Dorchester, and Chester ; and 
about A.
U. 785, that of Chester became incorporat- 
ed with Lichfield, though its annual payments to the 
Pope amounted to 5000 florins, while the see of 
Lichfield only advanced 3000.
This, and other evi- 
dences to its prosperity, attracted the attention of 
Peter, Bishop of Lichfield, who removed his episco- 
pal scat to Chester in the year 1075, and, during 
the remainder of his life, made use of the Church of 
St. John for his Cathedral.
This translation was 
but of short continuance ; for his successor esta- 
blished himself in the former diocese, and Chester 
remained without a bishop till after the suppression 
of the monasteries, when it was restored to its an- 
cient honour by Henry the Eighth, who, A.
D. 1541, 
made it one of the six new sees that were then 
formed.
At this period, the Church of the dissolv- 
ed Abbey of St. Werburgh was converted into the 
Cathedral.
John Bird, the first of the new bishops, effected a 
▼ery important alteration in the concerns of his dio- 
cese.
He was a person who had recommended 
himself to the favour of Henry, by his violent preach- 
ing against the supremacy of the Pope.
His dis- 
Sosition seems to have been suited to the spirit of 
le times ; and he was probably translated from the 
see of Bangor, for the evident pliancy of his will to 
courtly recommendations.
In 1546, he granted the 
manors and demesnes of the bishopric to the King, 
and accepted impropriations and rectories in ex- 
change.
The see was thus deprived of all its pos- 
sessions ; and, witli the exception of the single acre, 
on which the palace stands, and the court before it ; 
another house adjacent ; a little orchard, called the 
Woodyard ; two houses near St. John's Church ; a 
few small tenements in the City of York ; and some 
lands in Boughton and Childer Thornton, bequeath- 
ed in the year 1703; it is completely divested of 
temporalities ; and, though the greatest in extent, is 
of the smallest value of any in England.
Of St. Werburgh's Abbey, from whose possession 
this see was formed, the origin is enveloped in the 
obscurity of tradition.
Great is its antiquity, and 
unquestionable ; but the precise era of its foundation 
cannot be determined, from any of the loose reports 
that have extended to our times.
The general opi- 
nion is, that it was originally a nunnery, founded in 
the year 660, by Wulpherus, King of the Mercians, 
in accordance with the wishes of his daughter, St.
Werburg'h, whose disinclination to connubial enjoy- 
ments, had occasioned her to live three years with 
her husband Ceolredus without impeaching her pre- 
* The following have been the Bishops of Chester, during 
the present reign : — Dr. Edmund Keene, promoted to the see 
of Ely, December 1770, was succeeded by Dr. William Mark- 
ham, translated in 1776, to the Archbishopric of York: he was 
-succeeded by Dr. Beilby Porteus, who was replaced by Dr.
voju i.
— no.
23.
tensions to virginity.
Bishop Tanner regards this 
tale as a fiction of the later writers.
How long this 
community lasted is enveloped in the same incerti- 
tude as its origin ; but it seems probable that it was 
ruined by the Danes, when they seized and defended 
Chester against Alfred, in the year 895.
In the reign of Athelstan, a society of Canons re- 
gular was established in the place of the nuns, by 
Alfred's noble daughter Ethelfieda.
This Princess 
also restored the buildings, which were afterwards 
repaired by Earl Leofric, husband to the celebrated 
Lady Godiva, and more amply endowed by the mu- 
nificence of the Kings Edmund and Edgar, and nu- 
merous other benefactors.
On the accession of 
Hugh Lupus to the Earldom of Chester, he sup- 
pressed the Canon* secular, and, in their room, esta* 
blished a colony of Benedictines from Bee, in Nor- 
mandy.
Sickness, and a troubled conscience, are 
said to have been the causes which led to the action ; 
and possibly, says Pennant, he did not care to trust 
his salvation to the prayers of the Saxon religious.
Lupus, and his successors, made frequent and libe- 
ral grants to the Abbey, which continued to flou- 
rish till the general Dissolution of the Monasteries, 
when it was surrendered by Thomas Clerk.
Ita 
revenues were then valued at 10731.
17s.
7d.
per an- 
num.
Extensive remains of the abbey buildings are yet 
standing.
The old gates consist of two pointed 
arches, included within a round one of great diame- 
ter, apparently of much earlier date.
The abbey 
court is a neat square, with a grass plat, and an obe- 
lisk in the centre.
Two of its sides are ornamented 
with rows of handsome houses ; and, on another, is 
the Bishop's Palace, an elegant stone structure, 
erected in 1753, by Bishop Keene, on the ancient 
residence of the abbots.
The Deanery, in the same 
court, was built on the Avails of a chapel dedicated 
to St. Thomas.
The cloisters, consisting only of 
three walks, are on the north of the Cathedral.
In 
the wall of the south walk, which has long been 
taken down, were immured the remains of the first, 
second, third, and sixth Abbots, whose respective 
names were Richard, William, Ralph, and Robert 
de Hastings.
The vast room in which the gram- 
mar-school already mentioned is held, was originally 
the refectory of the Abbey.
Chester Cathedral is a spacious, irregular, and 
heavy pile, become ragged through the decay of th« 
mouldering stone with which it is built.
The lower 
part of the wall has a row of arches, now filled up, 
and, with a portion of the north transept, appears 
to be the oldest part of the present building ; though 
not any of it can boast of a remote date.
" All the 
labours of the Saxons," says a contemporary writer.
William Cleaver, upon his Lordship's translation lo the Bi- 
shopric of London ; in 17S7, Dr. Cleaver was removed to Ban- 
gor, and Dr. Majendie consecrated in the year 1800 ; in 1S09, 
Dr. Majendie was translated to Bangor, and Dr. Sparke pro- 
moted from the Deanery of Bristol.
4 K « «ud 
314 
CHESHIRE.
" and almost all of its re-founder, Hugh Lupus, are 
now lost.
The Abbot, Simon Ripley, who was elect- 
ed in 1485, finished the middle aisle and the tower ; 
and the initials of his name are interlaid by cyphers 
on the capitals of some of the pillars.
The body is 
supported by six pointed arches.
The columns are 
thick, surrounded by pilasters, with small rounded 
arches.
Above is a gallery, with a neat stone bal- 
lustrade in the parts where it.
is entire, and a row of 
large and broad pointed Avindows, which is the gene- 
raf style." 
Excepting these slight fragments, most of the 
present structure, observes Pennant, seems to have 
been built in the reigns of Henry the Sixth, Seventh, 
and Eighth, but principally in those of the two last.
The beautiful west end was begnn in 1508, and the 
first stone laid with much ceremony.
The window 
over the door is filled with elegant tracery ; and the 
door-case enriched with figures, and other sculpture.
The descent into the Church is down a multitude of 
steps, a circumstance which gives reason to suspect 
that the present was greeted on the foundation of the 
ancient Church, originally on a level with the old 
streets.
The tower, which stands upon four massy 
pillars in the middle, was originally designed, as 
they have a tradition here, to support a lofty spire.
The centre beneath is greatly injured by a modern 
bell-loft, which conceals a crown-work of stone, 
that would have a good effect, were the loft de- 
stroyed.
From the springs of the arches that appear in the 
walls of the nave and its aisles, it seems as if the 
architect had intended to have vaulted them in the 
manner in which St. Mary's Chapel (between the 
choir and the east window) and the choiral aisles are 
done.
The choir is very neat ; and the Gothic ta- 
bernacle-work over the stalls carved in a light and 
elegant manner.
The arches in the galleries are 
divided by pretty slender pillars, and perhaps were 
of a date prior to the body of the Church ; probably 
the work of the Abbot Oldham, who lived in the fif- 
teenth century, and was a benefactor to, and had a 
concern in, the building.
In the chancel are four stone-stalls for the offering 
priests, with carved Gothic work above, and a re- 
cess or two for preserving either the religious or the 
sacred utensils.
About the walls are dispersed mo- 
numents of several Bishops and Churchmen, but 
none of any magnificence.
The Bishop's throne 
stands oil a stone base, as remarkable for its sculp- 
ture, as for its original use.
Its form is an oblong 
square, and each side most richly ornamented with 
Gothic carving, arches, and pinnacles.
Around the 
upper part is a range of little images, designed to 
represent the Kings and Saints of the Mercian king- 
dom.
Each held in one hand a scroll, with the 
name inscribed.
Fanatic ignorance mutilated many 
of the labels us well as the figures : the latter were 
* In the year 1749, the fate Dr. W.
Cooper, published a 
little tract, containing a description of these figures, and a liis- 
restored about 1748 : but the workman, by an un- 
lucky mistake, has placed female heads on male 
shoulders, and given manly faces to the bodies of 
the fair sex.
There were originally thirty-four of 
these figures ; but four have been lost.* Pennant, 
dissenting from the popular opinion, imagines this 
to have been only the pedestal on which the shrine 
of St. Werburgh was placed, and not, as it is gene- 
rally considered, the shrine itself.
In tlje choir are several elegant monuments, par- 
ticularly one to the memory of Sir William Main- 
waring, a young officer, who fell in the defence of 
the city during the siege.
The broad aisle has, 
within a few years, been much enriched by the erec- 
tion of some monuments" ; among which is one to 
the memory of the late Dean Smith ; another to the 
memory of Mr. Ogden, surgeon ; a, third to the me- 
mory of Mr. Philips, an American loyalist; and a 
fourth, to the memory of the late Chancellor Peploe.
In the year 1787, the remains of Thomas Birchel- 
seg, otherwise Lythellis, chaplain to King Edward 
the First, and abbot of this cathedral in 1291, were 
taken up in a lead coffin, near the altar in the choir, 
after having been in the earth 485 years !
The ap- 
pearance of the body evinced, that some endeavours 
had been used to preserve it from putrefaction, 
which partially succeeded ; the legs, arms, head, and 
even the features of the face, appearing in an asto- 
nishing state of preservation.
Behind the choir is St. Mary's Chapel, and on 
each side an aisle.
In the north aisle is a tomb, of 
an altar form, inscribed to Henry the Fourth, Em- 
peror of Germany, who is said to have escaped from 
his troubles, ami to have resided in Godshall-Lane 
in this city ; to have died there ; and to have been, 
interred in the abbey.
It is very uncertain, how- 
ever, whether this great Prince were ever in our 
kingdom ; but it is quite certain that he finished his 
days at Liege, in 1106, and was magnificently in- 
terred in the Cathedral of that city.
The transepts are very dissimilar in form, and 
unequal in extent.
The north one is very large, 
dedicated to St. Oswald, and is the parish church of 
that name.
This is reported to stand on the site of 
the first Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, which 
was afterwards changed to that of the Holy Trinity, 
and finally, to the name it now bears.
On rebuild- 
ing the church, this aisle was designedly enlarged, 
and allotted by the monks to the neighbouring in- 
habitants, who were for the most part their servants 
or tenants.
At first the religious wished to have 
the whole to themselves, and on that account built, 
at a distance, a chapel, called St. Nicholas's, and 
endowed it with a vicarage for the use of the laity ; 
but afterwards, at the request of the inhabitants, 
and by composition between the Mayor and Abbot, 
about the year 1488, they were restored to the use 
of the Church of St. Oswald, which they still retain.
tory of the persons they represented, the profits of which he 
cave to the blue-coat school.
b 2 The 
CHESHIRE.
315 
The chapel, falling into disuse, was purchased by 
the citizens, and converted into their Common Hall 
for dispatch of husiness.
In later times, since the 
building of the Exchange, it has been changed into 
a magazine for wool ; into a carrier's warehouse ; 
and part into a theatre, the performances in which 
are under Parliamentary license.
That beautiful edifice, the Chapter-House, stands 
in the east walk of the cloister.
The vestibule is 
arched, and supported by four columns, each sur- 
rounded with eight slender pilasters (without capi- 
tals) which converge near the.
top of the column, 
and spread over the roof.
The dimensions of this 
room are 33 feet 4 inches, by 27 feet 4 ; the height 
is 12 feet 9.
The Chapter-House is 50 feet long, 
26 broad, and 35 high.
At the upper end is a win- 
dow consisting of five lancet-shaped divisions, and 
on each side is another of three.
A narrow gallery 
jrans along three parts of the room, divided from the 
windows by a triplet of most elegant, lofty, and slen- 
der pdlars.
The roof is of stone ; and the springs of 
the arches, which secure it, are supported by neat 
pilasters, with palmy capitals.
The entrances, both 
from the cloisters, and between the vestibule and 
the Chapter-House, are Gothic, but apparently of a 
later species of architecture than either of those 
rooms.
This Chapter-House appears to have been erect- 
ed in the time of Randle the First, Earl of Chester, 
whose first care, after it was completed, was to re- 
move the body of his uncle, the great Hugh Lupus, 
from the church-yard of the abbey, where it had 
been interred, into this building.
Here, as we have 
already stated, his remains continued unmolested 
till the year 1/24, when, in digging within the 
Chapter-House, they were found in a stone coffin, 
wrapped in leather, with a cross on the breast.
The 
following epitaph on the Earl, quoted from an old 
manuscript, is in Willis's Cathedrals : — 
Although my Corps it lies in Grave 
And that my Flesh consumed be 
My picture here now that you have 
An Earl sometyme of this'Cittye; 
Hugh Lupe by Name 
Sonne to the Duke of Brittayne 
Of Chivalrie then being Flower 
And Sister's Sonne to William Conquerour.
To the Honour of God I did edine 
The Foundation of this Monastery.
The ninth year of this my Foundation 
God changed my Life to his heavenly Mansion 
In the Year of our Lord being gone 
A Thousand one hundred and one 
I changed this Life verily 
The XVII DaieofJuly.
Besides Hugh Lupus, the Earls of Chester, who 
were, interred in the Chapter-House, Avere Randle 
the First, or DeMeschina, who died in 1128 : Ran- 
dle the Second, or De Gernouns, who was poisoned, 
in 1155, by William Peverell : Hugh Cyvelioc, who 
* Vide Dugdale's Baronage.
died at Leek, 1181 : Randle the Third, or DeBlun- 
deville, who died, in 1232, at Walliugford, where his 
bowels were buried ; his heart was placed in the 
Abbey of Dieulacres, Staffordshire, and his body 
transported to Chester : and, finally, John Scot, 
who, in 1237, underwent the fate of Randle the Se- 
cond.
So that every Earl of the Norman line was 
deposited here, excepting Richard, who perished by 
shipwreck in 1120.* 
It does not appear, that the privilege of pro- 
tecting criminals from punishment ever belonged 
to this Abbey in that full manner in which it was 
I possessed by many other religious houses.
It pro- 
| bably afforded only a temporary sanctuary, and that 
but for the short period of the celebration of the 
- feast in honour of St. Werburgh.
Hugh Lupus or- 
1 dered that no thief, or malefactor, should be attach- 
j ed, or punished, during the time of the fair held on 
this occasion, unless he committed some new offence.
! The vast assemblage of loose people, attracted 
i through this indemnity, proved of a singular advan- 
. tage to the third Earl Randle, who being surround-- 
| ed in the Castle of Rhudland by a Welch army, and 
in great danger, dispatched a messenger to Roger 
de Lacy, his general, or constable, for assistance.
This officer, when he received the message, was at- 
tending the fair, and, being assisted by Ralph Dnt- 
ton, his son-in-law, immediately collected a numer- 
ous body of minstrels, musicians, and various idle 
persons, wlro had met together in consequence of 
the privilege.
With this motley assemblage he 
marched in battle array towards the Castle ; and the 
Welch, who had discovered him at a distance, and 
deemed themselves too few to support an attack 
from the multitude that accompanied him, raised the 
siege, and retired with precipitation.
On his return to Chester, the Earl rewarded the 
service of Lacy, by giving him full power over all 
the instruments of his preservation, " magisterium 
omnium lecatorum et meretrieum totius Cestre- 
shire ;" and, by the terms of his grant, he was em- 
powered to require and enforce the attendance of 
all the musicians and minstrels of the county on 
every anniversary of the Earl's release, which was 
also the festival of St. John the Baptist.
The mu- 
sicians, &c.
were to play before him and his heirs 
for ever, in a procession to the Church of St. John ; 
and, after divine service, to the place where he kept 
his court.
The minstrels were then to be examined 
concerning their lives and conversation ; and whe- 
ther any of them played without annual license from 
their Lord, or whether they had heard any words, 
among their fellows tending to his dishonour.
This solemnity was annually celebrated till about 
the middle of the last century ; and many people yet 
living remember the regular procession of the min- 
strels.
The courts Avere held by the steward of the 
Dutton family, which had derived the above privi- 
leges from Hugh de Dutton, on Avhom they had de- 
volved 
310 
CHESHIRE.
•volved from John de Lacy, son of the person who 
originally possessed them.
Four bottles of wine, and 
a lancej were usually claimed by the Dut.tons from 
the minstrels at the times of the feast, together with a 
fee of fourpence-halfpenny ; and for every meretrix 
in Cheshire, and in the city of Chester, " officium 
suum exercente," fourpence.
The minstrel jurisdic- 
tion of the Duttons of Cheshire has been acknow- 
ledged as lawful by our Parliaments, even so late 
as the seventeenth of George the Second ; and in 
many of the.
vagrant acts, the clause " saving of their 
rights,'" has been inserted.
it is probable, that the privileges which resulted 
to the minstrels through the above occurrence, were 
a primary cause of the estimation in which the fa- 
mous dramatic interludes called Mysteries were for- 
merly held by the inhabitants of Chester.
They 
were originally composed by Randel Higgenet, a 
monk of Chester, in the years 1327 and 1328, in 
Latin ; and the author, by great exertion, at length 
procured permission to exhibit them in English, 
from his Holiness the Pope, whom he three times 
visited at Rome for the purpose.
Other Mysteries 
were in " ould tyme devised and made, not only for 
the augmentation and increes of the holy and catho- 
lic faith, and to exhort the minds of the common 
people to good devotion and holsome doctrine, but 
also for the commonwelth of the citty, by Sir Henry 
Frances, soometyme monke there, who gat of Cle- 
ment, then Bushop of Rome, 1000 dayes of pardon, 
and of the Bushop of Chester at that tyme, forty 
dayes of pardon, to every person resorting in peace- 
able manner to heare the sayd playes ; which were 
instituted to the honor of God, by John Arnway, 
then Mayor of Chester, his brethren, and whole co- 
minalty thereof, to be brought forth, declared, and 
played, at the cost and charges of the craftsmen and 
occupations of the sayd citty," &c* 
The Mysteries here alluijed to were in number 
twenty-five.
They began with the Creation, and 
the fall of Lucifer, and ended with the general Judg- 
ment of the World ; but they have not descended to 
our days, in the words of the original deviser.
The 
language and the poetry being grown obsolete, they 
were altered to that of the time for the performance 
©f the year 1600, and were acted by the craftsmen 
of the twenty-five companies, all dressed in suitable 
habits.
" On this occasion," says Pennant, " the 
* Vide Proclamation of the Clerk of the Pentice in the 
reign of Henry the Eighth.
Harl.
MSS.
2013.
+ The subjoined extract, from " The Mystery of King Ba- 
1ark and Balaam," with the Prslogue, will give the reader some 
idea of these entertainments.
" Cappers and lynnendrapers, see that you forth bring 
In well decked order, that worthy storee 
Of Balaam and his asse and Balacke the kinge ; 
Make the asse to speake and set yt out livelve." 
Asina.
" Master thou doest evill sikerly, 
Soe good an asse as me to nye ; 
Novve thou hast beaten me here thrye; 
That bare thee thus aboute." 
drapiers enacted the Creation of the World.
Adam 
and Eve appeared literally naked, and were not 
ashamed, till after the fall, when they proposed, ac- 
cording to the stage direction, to make themselves 
" subligacula a folds, quibus tegamus pudenda," 
and make their appearance with an apron of fig- 
leaves." The church seems to have been the seen* 
of action of these pious absurdities, t 
Exclusively of the Cathedral and St. Oswald's, 
Chester contains eight parish churches ; of which 
St. John's claims priority of notice.
This structure 
stands without the walls, on the east side of the city, 
and is reported to have been founded by King Ethel - 
red, A.
D. 689, on being admonished in a vision to 
erect it on a spot where he should find a white hind.
This building, when entire, was a spacious and 
magnificent pile, in the form of a cross ; but both 
the north and south transepts have been destroyed ; 
and great part of the east end was demolished by 
the fall of the centre tower, in the year 1574.
The 
ruins of the ancient chapels, and the fine arches near 
the east end of the present chancel, have a beauti- 
fully picturesque effect.
The nave is supported by 
massy columns, and Saxon arches.
On one side of 
the tower, at the west end, the legend respecting the 
founding of this structure is represented by the 
figures of a man and a hind.
This church was col- 
legiate ; and, at the Dissolution, was possessed by 
a dean, seven canons, seven vicars, two clerks, four 
choristers, and various servants.
Its annual reve- 
nues were 881.
16s.
4d.
Some part of the build- 
ings, and the site of the college, were granted to 
John Fortescue, by Queen Elizabeth.
The other 
churches are : — St. Peter's, Trinity, St. Bridget's 
or St. Bride's, St. Michael's, St. Mary's, St. Olave's, 
and St. Martin's.
St. Oswald's Church, which was rebuilt in the 
reign of Henry VII.
contains some monuments of 
the Booths and others.
It is somewhat remarkable 
that, at the extremity of the peninsula of Wirrall, 
not far from the coast, is a small island, called Hil- 
bury, about ten acres in extent, which, though 
twenty miles from Chester, is in this parish.
This 
connection is attributed to the circumstance of the 
island having belonged to the abbot and convent of 
St. Werburgh, who established there a small cell 
of monks, dedicated to the Virgin Mary : " thither," 
says Holinshed, " went a sort of superstitious fools 
Balaam.
Bumell, why begylest thou me 
When I have most nede of thee." 
Asina.
That sighte that before me I see, 
Maketh me downe to lowte: 
Am not I master, thyne own asse 
To beare thee whither thou wilte paste, 
And many wiuters ready was, 
To sniyte me it is shame.
Thou wottest well, master, pardye 
Thou hadest never non lyke to me, 
Ney never yet soe served I thee, 
Nowe am 1 not to blame." 
in 
CHESHIRE.
31' 
in pilgrimage to our lady of Hilbuvy, by whose offer- 
ings the monks were cherished and maintained." 
Henry Bradshaw, in his life of St. Werburgh, re- 
lates a legendary story of the sands at Hilbury he- 
coming miraculously dry by the interposition of that 
saint, tor the purpose of affording a passage to the 
army of William Fitz Nigel, Constable of Chester, 
then on his march to the rescue of Earl Richard, 
who had been way-laid by the Welch at Basingwerk, 
on his return from a pilgrimage to St. Winifred ; 
the tale concludes thus : — 
«• And where the host passed over betwixt bondes, 
To this day ben called the Constable Sondes." 
In the burial -register of St. 3Iary's parish, ocours 
the following entry : — " 1656.
— Three witches hang- 
ed at Michaelmas assizes, buried in the corner by 
the Castle-ditch, in the church-yard, October 8." 
St. Peter's Church, which adjoins the Pentice at 
the corner of Northgate and Watergate Streets, is 
said to have been founded by Ethellieda.
It is re- 
corded, in the annals of Chester, that, when the 
Steeple of the church was pointed, A.
D. 1479, the 
parson and some of the inhabitants ate a goose at the 
top of the spire, and threw the bones into the four 
streets ; that a child was killed by the fall of a stone 
from this steeple, A.
D. 1480 ; and that eighteen 
yards of the spire were rebuilt A.
D. 1580.
The 
spire having been injured by lightning, a great part 
of it was taken down about the year 1780, and has 
never been rebuilt.
A few years ago, a handsome 
building of the Ionic order, containing a commer- 
cial coffee-room, a library, &c.
with shops under- 
neath was erected in this parish.
The cross, which formerly stood in this parish, 
was noted as the annual scene of the exhibition of bull- 
baiting.
It is only a few years ago, since the mayor 
and corporation used to attend in their official habi- 
liments, at the Pentice, not only to countenance the 
diversions of the ring, but to participate in a sight of 
its enjoyments.
A proclamation was also made by 
the crier of the court, the composition of which ran 
thus : " Oyez !
oyez !
oyez !
If any man stand 
within twenty yards of the bull-ring, let him take — 
wbat comes." After which followed the usual pub- 
lic ejaculation, for " the safety of the King and the 
Mayor of the City ;" when the scene commenced.
The late Dr. Cowpor, when Mayor, put a stop to 
the attendance of the corporate body on those days ; 
and Mr. Alderman Brodhurst, in his mayoralty, 
made a laudable but ineffectual effort to suppress 
ibis relic of barbarism.
It was, however, suppress- 
ed by Act of Parliament, in the year 1803.
In Trinity Church lie the remains of Parnell, the 
poet; and those of Matthew Henry, the celebrated 
divine,* who many years presided over a congrega- 
tion of Presbyterian Dissenters in this town.
In 
this parish, between the walls of the city, on its 
western side, and the river, is an extended meadow, 
called the Rood-eye, or Island of the Cross, which 
was formerly the Campus Martins of the Chester 
youth, who here performed the various exercises of 
archery, running, leaping, and wrestling.
On this 
spot also, they exhibited gallant and romantic tri- 
umphs, and occasionally exerted their activity and 
strength in mock-fights, and other military specta- 
cles.
The prize of emulation in the sports here ce- 
lebrated w r as a standard ; but in the year 1609, the 
amusements assumed another form, and the mimic 
war was succeeded by horse-racing, which has con- 
tinued to be the occasional diversion of the citizens 
to the present period.
Alter the suppression of the 
pageant, the first prizes given appear to have been 
a bell and a bowl, to be run for on St. George's 
Day. These were provided by the sheriffs of the 
city, and were brought down to the Rood-eye with 
much ceremony.
No situation can be more admir- 
ably adapted for a race-course than this : the whole 
meadow lying, like an amphitheatre, immediately be- 
neath the walls ; and being also commanded by the 
high banks on the opposite side of the river.
The 
annual meeting is held at the beginning of May, and 
generally continues for four or five days.
Several 
subscription-purses, of fifty guineas each, are given 
as prizes ; and a silver punch-bowl, of the same va- 
lue, is bestowed by r the Corporation as the city- 
plate, and is annually run for on St. George's Day, 
old style.
This pasture, which comprises eighty-two 
acres, is considered as the finest pasture-land in the 
county.
It is let as common pasture, at a stipulat- 
ed rent.
The Rood-eye appears to have derived its name 
from the following incident.
It was the place of in- 
terment of an image of the Virgin Mary, with a very 
large cross, in the year 916.
The place of the resi- 
dence of this pious lady was in a Christian temple 
at Harwardeu, in Flintshire, where, in those days of 
superstition, they used to offer up their orisons to 
this idol.
To her they applied for relief in all their 
afflictions.
At last it happened, whilst they were on 
their knees before her, that she fell upon the head of 
the Governor of the Castle's wife, Lady Trawst, and 
killed her.
For this offence tor Lady of the Rood 
was banished the place, and thrown on the sands of 
the river ; whence she was carried away by the tide, 
and next day found near the place now called 
Rood-eye ; upon which the idol was interred, with all 
due pomp, by the inhabitants of Chester, and a large 
stone erected over the grave, a memento of the igno- 
rance of the times.
The City work-house, or house of industry, a spa- 
cious and useful building, erected in the year 1757, 
* Matthew Henry, son of Philip Henry (both non-conform- 
ist divines) was born at Broad Oak, in Flintshire, in 1662.
He 
received His education under His lather, and having made a 
considerable progress in learning, entered at Gray's Inn : but 
he renounced the study ot the law, and became a dissenting 
VOL.
i. — no.
23.
minister at Chester, where he resided many years, and then re- 
moved to Hackney.
He died at Nantwich, in 1714.
His 
chief work is an exposition of the Bible, in 5 vols, folio ; besides 
which he wrote A Method of prgj er : A Discom^e on the Lord's 
Supper; and other esteemed books of practical divinity.
4 j.
stands 
318 
CHESHIRE.
stands on the west side of the Rood-eye.
The ex- 
pence of erecting this house was defrayed with mo- 
ney raised hy the City on life annuities.
Its divi- 
sions and internal arrangements are very commodi- 
ous ; and the inmates contribute towards their own 
support by the manufacture of coarse linen, and 
other articles.
It receives the poor of some of the 
neighbouring districts, in pursuance of an agreement 
between the governor and the overseers of the re- 
spective parishes, to that effect.
Chester, from the circumstances of being the me- 
tropolis of a little sovereignty, did not send repre- 
sentatives to Parliament till some time after the pri- 
vileges of the county-palatine had been curtailed.
Since the year 1541, the City has sent two members 
to Parliament.
At the contested election in the 
year 1690, the number of voters who polled was 
rather more than 900 : they are now generally esti- 
mated at from 1000 to 1300.
Party spirit has fre- 
quently been carried to a great and alarming height 
in Chester.
At the election in 167*2, the Recorder, 
Mr. William Williams, and Colonel Warden, who 
had been gentlemen of the bed-chamber to the Duke 
of York, afterwards James the Second, being op- 
ponent candidates, eight men were killed in the 
erowd, at the foot of the stairs of the common-hall ; 
and the poll was in consequence adjoined to the 
Rood-eye.
At times, the opposite parties, being nearly equal 
in strength and affluence, have agreed to divide the 
representation.
A general election, however, ap- 
proaching in 1734, both parties began to muster 
their forces.
This proved to be one of the severest 
contests which the city had ever experienced.
Their 
passions already inflamed, and conscious of the 
enormous weight of influence against' them, the 
Whigs were driven into excesses, which would have 
been inexcusable on any other occasion.
It was apprehended that the Corporation, having 
the power of making freemen in their own hands, 
might procure as many votes as they wanted.
Some 
of the aldermen having assembled together in the 
Pentice, at a late hour, on the Tuesday night pre- 
ceding the election, suspicion arose that the whole 
night was to be employed in admitting to the free- 
dom of the City as many of their party as they could 
conveniently introduce.
A mob presently assem- 
bled about the Pentice, where they broke open the 
door, assaulted and drove out the aldermen, and 
damaged considerably the windows and furniture.
Their adversaries, feeling their inferiority in this 
sort of contest, resolved to call in foreign assistance : 
the following day, therefore, a large body of col- 
liers, and other countrymen, were brought from the 
neighbourhood of Wrexham, by the direction and 
under the influence of Mr. W.
W. Wynne.
The 
citizens hearing of their approach, retired into the 
castle, and there armed themselves with old swords, 
helmets, and breast-pieces ; and, thus formidably 
accoutred, sallied forth to meet their foes.
A 
bloody encounter ensued in Bridge Street ; and the 
Welchmen, after several of them were dangerously 
wounded, were soon routed and put to flight.
It 
was now agreed that hostilities should cease, and 
some plan be settled for conducting the election hi 
a peaceable and regular manner.
The poll conti- 
nued from Friday to Monday ; and both parties so 
exerted themselves as to bring votes from the most 
distant parts of the kingdom, and even from Ire- 
land, in direct contradiction to the charter, which 
limits these elections to be made by commorant citi- 
zens.
The majority, as might be expected, was in 
favour of the Corporation member ; but no sooner 
were the books closed, and the mayor and his at- 
tendants retired from the hustings, than they were 
obliged to retreat into the Exchange Coffee-House.
They were, however, not here secure, for the mob 
broke in, seized the sword and mace, and, chairing 
their, favourite candidate, bore him to his house in.
triumph.
As the Corporation still exercised their overbear- 
ing influence, recourse was had to the only remedy 
against exorbitant power, which is that of recurring 
to its original and constitutional source, the people.
Informations were accordingly laid against the 
mayor, ten aldermen, and eighteen common-council, 
for usurping the privilege of electing aldermen, ex- 
clusively of the commonalty.
After a considerable 
contest, the Tories prevailed; and the Whigs, from dis- 
appointment and exhausted finances, seemed to have 
been for that time entirely dispirited and disunited.
In the year 1747, an attempt was made to bully 
them, under auspices which seemed to insure suc- 
cess.
It appeared that at the election of 1734, 
the right of non-resident freemen to vote had been 
questioned ; and it was now resolved to try the 
issue.
The minister, to whom the Grosvenor family 
was inimical, encouraged Baron Mainwaring to op- 
pose administration.
They were probably induced 
to this from the hope, that, if the question concern- 
ing non-residents should be agitated, his support 
would not be wanting.
The election was carried 
on with all the heat and violence of former times ; 
and the Tory party, counting the non-residents, had 
the majority.
A petition was presented, and the inquiry com- 
menced, which clearly tended to establish the right 
of election in resident freemen only.
Sir Robert 
Grosvenor now found himself in a very disagreeable 
dilemma : he considered that his interest in West- 
minster must be devoted to the minister, or he 
should be obliged to resign one representation for 
his hereditary borough, to which he could by no 
means consent.
A compromise, however, Avas made 
the evening before the final issue of the petition ; 
and, notwithstanding the resolutions of the preced- 
ing day, the counsel for the petitioners were instruct- 
ed to say, " that they would give the House no fur- 
ther trouble." Thus was the baron made the vic- 
tim of ministerial duplicity.
We may therefore re- 
joice at the day that Mr. Grenville's act placed the 
issue of contested elections iu more impartial hands 
9 than 
CHESHIRE.
319 
than those of an influenced majority of the House of 
Commons.
From the above and other succeeding' circum- 
stances respecting* the conduct of the Corporation 
and their opponents, it is evident that the former 
have always endeavoured to preserve their power, 
by abridging and extinguishing the liberties of the 
people as much as they possibly could, while the 
latter have always endeavoured to found their pride 
and distinction on the defence of the rights and pri- 
vileges of their fellow citizens.
— At the general 
election in 1807, Colonel Hanmer offered himself as 
representative of the City with General Grosvenor ; 
and Mr. Egerton, of Oulton, offered himself in op- 
position to Colonel Hanmer, and was elected.
The 
citizens considered the return of Mr. Egerton as the 
triumph of freedom and independence ; and, in their 
fervour, some of them produced a song-, called the 
Glorious Sixth of May (the day on which Mr. Eger- 
ton was returned to Parliament) which was set to 
music.
This song appears to have become a great 
favourite of the citizens of Chester.
Miss Holiwell, 
having engaged the Theatre for a Benefit Concert, 
on the 3d of January 1810, announced in her bills, 
that it would constitute a part of the performance.
In the evening, a party of the opponents of the song- 
placed themselves in the pit, and very strenuously 
exerted themselves to convert the harmony of the 
performance into discord.
The concert was again 
* According to the statement of Mr. Benyon, the counsel 
for the prosecution, between four and five o'clock in the after- 
noon of the day on which the riot took place, a mob entered 
Ilandbridge, consisting nearly of 100 persons, and composed 
principally of countrymen, labourers, who were soon joined by 
a number of ship-carpenters.
Taylor, the clerk of Lord Gros- 
•venor's chief steward, appeared to be commander in chief of 
this mob, and M'Gregor, overlooker of his Lordship's works 
at Eaton, ranked second in command.
They had marched 
these forces from Eccleston, and were themselves at the head 
of them on horseback.
In Handbridge the mob halted, and 
were treated with liquor at a public-house there.
It was evi- 
dent, that this assemblage was not promiscuously collected to- 
gether.
They had a certain object to accomplish, and for this 
purpose, there was a regular systematic plan, with correspond- 
ing arrangements: this was an organized force of horse and 
foot, armed with sticks and bludgeons, and provided with clap- 
pers, and other instruments of annoyance ; tickets for the con- 
cert were purchased for them, and distributed amongst them.
The learned counsel proceeded to state, that on leaving the 
public-house in Handbridge, they proceeded towards the city 
in a tumultuous and riotous procession, shouting and brandish- 
ing their clubs, preceded by their champions above named on 
horseback.
On their progress up Bridge Street, they were met 
by the chief magistrate, near the Feathers Inn, who accosted 
Taylor, remonstrated with him, and requested him to desist.
— 
His Lordship said, "Do you know me?" Taylor replied, 
" Yes, you are the mayor." He did not care a damn.
He 
said he came to head the mob, and he would lead them on.
Taylor and M'Gregor having put up their horses at the Fea- 
thers Inn, proceeded with the mob up Northgate Street, passed 
the Theatre, shouting, hallooing, huzzaing, and vociferating, 
Grosvenor for ever !
They had a dry subject in hand, a dry 
cause (for certainly the cause of anti-independence is a dry 
cause); and they were taken to the Bull and Stirrup public- 
house in Further Northgate Street, where plentiful libations 
were again administered, to keep up their courage, and render 
them equal to the task they had in view.
It was here that 
advertised for the 12th of January, and the song 
was again announced.
On the evening of that day, 
a very serious riot took place, for which a criminal 
information was afterwards filed against six persons 
(George Taylor, Alexander M'Gregor, John Evans, 
William Gill, John Gough, and James Arnett) who 
were all tried, and found guilty, at Chester, on the 
22d of September following.* 
The City of Chester, founded on a dry rock, en- 
joys a salubrious climate, and a numerous and in- 
creasing population.
The average annual number 
of the deaths of its inhabitants is only as one to 
forty.
f In the year 1774, its population was 
14,713; in 1781, it was found to be 14,860; in 
1801, it was 14,977 ; and, according to the Popula- 
tion Returns, in 1811 it was 16,140 ; of which, 
7007 were males, and 9133 females.
At the last- 
mentioned period, it contained 3296 inhabited, and 
161 uninhabited houses ; exclusively of 15 which 
were building.
The poorer classes of the inhabitants are chiefly 
occupied in the trades common to a large town in- 
habited by opulent families.
The only manufacture 
of consequence is that of gloves, which are made in 
vast numbers, principally by women.
Here is also 
a small manufactory of tobacco-pipes, an iron- 
foundry, snuff-mills, and some establishments for 
ship-building, which furnish additional employment.
This last business is carried on to great advantage> 
these veterans were again marshalled by their intrepid leaders, 
and arranged in marching array, by two and two, right and 
left.
On their arrival in this order at the front of the Theatre, 
Taylor harangued the mob, which had now increased to a vast 
multitude ; and, said the learned gentleman, the sentiment 
which he uttered, on such an occasion, excited in him, and 
must in all who heard it, a nausea and disgust — a sentiment 
which had been expressed by the immortal Nelson, when he 
led his countrymen to battle and victory, to conquest and glo- 
ry.
That sentiment was well known, " England expects every 
man to do his duty." That sentiment, worthy of a better cause, 
had been borrowed for the worst of purposes, and in Taylor's 
mouth ran thus ; Eaton expects every man to do his duty.— 
Such, indeed, was the deep-rooted determination in the rioters 
to carry their purpose, that in the course of the evening, ex- 
pressions had been used at which he shuddered and was appall- 
ed.
It had been publicly declared, by one of them, that, 
sooner than suffer the Sixth of May to be sung, they would have 
blood for their supper !!
! — A violent rush took place at the- 
doors of the Theatre, which was soon filled.
Some of the mob.
were in the pit, some in the boxes, and others on the stage, 
hallooing out, Grosvenor for ever !
It is scarcely necessar)' to 
add, that" the obnoxious song was not suffered to be sung.
Fortunately no lives were lost in the affray ; but many blows 
were struck, and the whole town was thrown into a slate of con- 
fusion and alarm.
f The following comparative statement of the number of 
inhabitants, who die annually, in great towns, both at home and 
abroad, affords a decisive and indisputable proof of the health- 
fulness of Chester : 
one in 
Vienna 19^ 
London 20| 
Edinburgh 20 
Leeds 21 
Dublin 22 
Rome 23 
Amsterdam ..,24 
om in 
Breslau 25 
Berlin 26f 
Shrewsbury 26i 
Northampton 26* 
Liverpool .....,2'i 
Manchester 23 
Chester 40 
many 
320 
CHESHIRE.
many vessels, from 100 to 500 tons, being built 
yearly.
There are said to be more ships built at 
Chester, now, than at Liverpool ; and, in point of 
strength and beauty, they are considered to be equal, 
if not superior, to any in the kingdom .
The mate- 
rials are chiefly British oak.
We are not aware, 
however, that more than one ship of Avar has ever 
been built at this port ; and that was the Swan 
sloop, launched about the year 1740.
In 1801, a 
shot manufactory was established here.
Chester has long enjoyed the advantages of an 
extensive trade.
Lucian, the monk, who lived near 
the time of the Conquest, speaks of its commerce as 
very considerable.
The beautiful river on the south 
side, says he, " serves as a harbour for ships from 
Gascoigne, Spain, Ireland, and Germany, who, by 
the guidance of Christ, and the industry and pru- 
dence of the merchants, supply and refresh the heart 
of the City with abundance of goods ; so that, 
through the various consolations of divine favour, 
we have wine in profusion from the plentiful vint- 
ages of those countries." The principal articles of 
exportation appear to have been horses and slaves.
The Saxons were very much addicted to the latter 
inhuman traffic ; and the situation of Chester, and 
the frequent wars carried on with the Welch, caused 
it greatly to flourish in the City.
The chief of the 
other commodities conveyed from Chester to distant 
countries, were lead, copper, hides, horns, and 
cheese, which the people of Cheshire had been ce- 
lebrated for making, even from the time of the Ro- 
mans.
The imports were spices, and other luxuries, from 
the east ; wine from France and Spain ; cloth from 
Flanders ; linen from Germany ; and reliques and 
ecclesiastical finery from Italy, the emporium of su- 
perstition.
Rich armour was another considerable 
article of Avar ; and religion created in these ages 
the most considerable commerce of the state.
The 
Avarriors and the sainted images Avere the beaux of 
the times ; the crimes of the former Avere supposed 
to be expiated by prostration to the latter ; and ac- 
ceptance Avas announced by the priest in proportion 
to the value of the offering.
Irish linen and skins Avere amongst the principal 
articles of importation at Chester, as far back as the 
year 1130 ; as appears by the following abstract: — 
" Irish wool, and linen cloth, faldinge, 
And marterns good be her mercliandie, 
Hertes hides and other of vein-He, 
Skins of otter, squirrel, and Irish hare, 
Of sheep, lambe, and foxe is her chaff'are, 
Felles of kiddes and conies great plentie." 
The maritime business of Chester still chiefly con- 
sists of the Irish and coasting trades, with a small 
portion of foreign trade.
The quantities of lineu- 
cloth imported from Ireland being very great, a neAv 
Hall for the better accommodation of the merchants, 
was erected in the year 1778 : it is a handsome 
square brick building, enclosing a spacious area, and 
containing 111 shop?.
Besides linen, the commo- 
dities imported, are, avooI, hides, talloAv, feathers, 
butter, provisions, and other articles, from Ireland ; 
groceries from London ; timber, hemp, flax, iron, aud 
tallow, from the Baltic ; kid and lamb skins from Leg- 
horn ; fruit, oil, barilla, and cork, from Spain and Portu- 
gal : and, from the latter, a large quantity of Avine, 
Avhich is the chief article of foreign import.
The ex- 
ports are, coal, lead, lead-ore, calamine, copper-plates, 
cast iron, and vast quantities of cheese.
From the large 
cheese warehouse on the river, vessels are laden at 
stated periods Avith cargoes for London.
The limits of 
the port extend, on the Cheshire side of the Dee, as 
far as the end of Wirrall ; and, on the Flintslurc side, 
to the mouth of the river Chvyd ; yet, notAvithstand- 
ing the number of commercial objects, the number of 
ships belonging to it is but small.
The Port of Chester, as already remarked, was 
improved during the last century.
Across the ca- 
nal, or neAv river, are two ferries, Avhich preserve 
the communication Avith the opposite counties of 
Wales.
From time immemorial, tAvo Aveekly markets have 
been holden at Chester, on Wednesday and Satur- 
day.
These markets — Avhich are considered as 
amongst the prescriptive privileges of the city — 
are abundantly supplied witli butchers' meat, fish, 
&c.
Formerly, they Avere considerable markets for 
corn ; but that trade has greatly fallen off.
In the year 
1655, a horse-market was appointed to be holden in 
Northgate Street every Wednesday.
The fairs of Chester are three in number ; holden, 
annually, on the last Thursday in February, at 
Midsummer, and at Michaelmas.
The first of these, 
Avhich is chiefly for the sale of horses and horned 
cattle, Avas granted by Charles II.
the others Avere 
recognised as established fairs in the time of Hugh 
Lupus, the first Earl of Chester.
Lupus granted 
to the Abbot and Convent of St. Werburgh the ex- 
traordinary privilege, that no criminals should be 
arrested at any of the fairs of Chester, for any crime 
whatsoever, unless it had been committed during 
their stay in that City.
Fourteen days before the 
commencement of each fair, and until its conclusion, 
embracing the period of tAventy-nine days, a glove 
is hung out at St. Peter's Church ; and, during that 
time, non-freemen are permitted to trade within the 
City.
It has been conjectured, that the glove al- 
luded, originally, to what Avas regarded as the sta- 
ple commodity of the City : formerly, at the Mid- 
summer shoAv, the mayor received a glove from the 
Avet-glovers as a part of their homage ; and, to the 
present time, the glovers frequently present the 
mayor Avith a pair of gloves on his election.
These 
fairs are Avell supplied Avith Irish linens, muslins, 
Yorkshire clothes, Welch flannel, hardware, and 
various other goods.
At each of the fairs, the she- 
riffs hold courts of pied-poudre, for the summary 
award of justice.
Chester has had the honour of giving birth to 
s cvcral eminent characters : amougst Avhom may be 
ineutioued.
CHESHIRE.
321 
mentioned, Roger of Chester, and Ralph Higden,* 
two ancient historians ; Henry Bradshaw,t author 
of the Life of St. Werburgh ; David Middleton, who 
settled the English trade at Bantam ; Sir Henry 
Middleton, his brother, who made a voyage to the 
Red Sea, and discovered Middleton Streights ; Wil- 
liam'Cowper, a physician, who made some collec- 
tions towards a History of Chester, and published a 
few tracts on the subject ;| the Rev. John Down- 
ham, author of the Christian Warfare ; § Edward 
Brerewood", the mathematician, and first professor 
of Gresham College ; || Dr. Wittingham, dean of 
Durham, translator of the Geneva Bible, and versi- 
fier of those Psalms in the old version, which have 
the signature of W.
W. ;^[ Samuel Molyneux, an 
eminent astronomer, son of William Molyneux, 
the natural philosopher, author of a Treatise on 
Dioptrics.** 
Overleigh Hall, now, or lately, the seat of Mrs.
Cowper, relict of Thomas Cowper, Esq.ff Recor- 
der of Chester, is situated in the liberties of the 
City, about * mile distant, on the road to Flint.
* Ralph Higden wrote a work intituled, Polychronicon, 
first printed by Caxton, and again in 1642.
Higden died in 
1363.
f Bradshaw was a Benedictine monk of the 4th century : his 
life of St. Werburgh was written in verse.
% Dr. Cowper died in the year 1767.
§ The Rev. J.
Downham, son of the Bishop of Chester, died 
about the year 1644.
|| Edward Brerewood was the son of a respectable glover, 
who was thrice Mayor of Chester.
He was born in the year 
1565 ; and, having received the rudiments of his education at 
the free grammar-school in Chester, he was sent to Brazen-nose 
College, Oxford, where he took his degrees in art 1- , and after- 
wards removed to St. Mary's Hall.
It was his indefatigable 
attention to the abstruse sciences, which procured him the ho- 
nour of being appointed the first Gresham Professor of Astro- 
nomy.
This promotion caused his removal to London, where 
he pursued his studies with unabated perseverance.; but, though 
possessed of a very extensive knowledge, he never favoured the 
world with any of his own performances.
He died of a fever 
at the age of forty-eight.
Several of his manuscripts were after- 
wards published by his nephew, Robert Brerewood.
PI is prin- 
cipal works are, " De Ponderibus, et Pretiis Veterum num- 
morum," &c.
and " Enquiries touching the Diversities of Lan- 
guage and Religion." 
f Dr. Wittingham was educated at Brazen-nose College, Ox- 
ford.
Afterwards he became fellow of All Souls, and senior 
student of Christ Church.
At the death of Edward VI.
he 
went abroad ; and returned in that of Elizabeth, strongly pre- 
judiced against the liturgy and church ceremonies.
However, 
he did not scruple to accept the deanery of Durham, where he 
committed great depredations in removing the stone coffins and 
other ancient remains from the cathedral.
He died in 1579.
** Samuel Molyneux was born iu the year 1689.
His fa- 
ther, the celebrated William Molyneux, was the companion 
and friend of Sir William Petty, of Flamstead, and of Locke.
The plan of education recommended bv Locke was pursued in 
the tuition of Samuel Molyneux, and" attended with success.
His early attainments were marked by manly intelligence, and 
proportionate w isdom accompanied the increase of his years.
When arrived at manhood, he enjoyed the credit of being one 
of the most accomplished characters of his age.
He was cho- 
sen secretary to his late Majesty, when Prince of Wales, and 
had a residence at Kew, where, his place being only a sinecure, 
VOL.
I. — NO.
23.
Overleigh Hall, A.
D. 1230, formed part of the pos- 
sessions of the Barons De Monto Alto.
In 1460 it 
was leased to Ellis ap Did ap Griffith, whose de- 
scendant, Matthew Ellis, then lessee, and gentle- 
man of the body-guard to Henry VIII.
purchased 
the estate from the crown, in the year 1545.
It con- 
tinued in this family for nearly a century, when 
it was conveyed by the marriage of Isabella, daugh- 
ter of Matthew Ellis, Esq. to Thomas Cowper, 
Esq. of Chester.
The ancient manor-house, which 
was of timber, and very spacious, was demolished 
during the siege of Chester.
The present mansion 
was not erected till after the Restoration ; and it has 
since received considerable additions.
It contains 
a good Library, and a great number of old portraits, 
particularly some valuable ones of the Cromwell fa- 
mily ; of which the principal are the following, as 
mentioned in an inventory in the Library : — Sir 
Oliver Cromwell,]: J uncle and godfather to the Pro- 
tector, set.
84, 1646; Lady Elizabeth Cromwell, 
first wife of Sir Oliver, and daughter of Sir Henry 
Bromley, Lord Chancellor ; Colonel Henry.
Crom- 
well, 
he, in concert with Mr. Bradley, had an opportunity of prose- 
cuting his favourite study, astronomy, and the improvement of 
the glasses of telescopes.
He also invented an accurate instru- 
ment, for determining the annual parallax of the fixed stars.
Soon afterwards he was appointed a commissioner of the Ad- 
miralty, and was constrained, by the pressure of national busi- 
ness, to relinquish his accustomed pursuits.
He applied himself 
with unwearied diligence to the duties of his office, and became 
distinguished for his great abilities, especially in affairs relating 
to the navy ; but the change of his studies neither suited his in- 
clinations nor his genius ; and his death, which happened on the 
3rd of January, 1730, shortly followed his promotion.
His pa- 
pers were published by Dr. Smith, in his " Treatise of Op- 
tics." 
|t The Cowpers, of Chester, descended from Thomas, a 
younger son of the Cowpers, of Strode, in Sussex, who was one 
of the bed-chamber, in August, 1498.
Before the end of the 
year, he married Isabella, daughter and heiress of Richard 
Goodman, Esq. then Mayor of the City.
Their descendants 
have ever since continued in Chester, and have repeatedly re- 
presented the City in Parliament, served in all the offices of the 
Corporation, &c.
The last male heir of thi3 family died in 
July, 1788 ; and, on the death of his widow, the house and 
estate descended to a branch of the Cholmondeleys, who are re- 
lated to the Cowpers by marriage.
Xt Sir Oliver was particularly distinguished in the Civil 
Wars, by his loyalty and opposition to the usurpation of his 
nephew.
Fuller ranks him amongst his Worthies of Hunting- 
don, and says, he was remarkable on a four-fold account.
First, for his hospitality, and the prodigious entertainment which 
he provided for King James and his retinue.
" Secondly, lor 
his upright dealings in bargain and sale with all chapmen ; so 
that no man, whosoever purchased land of him, was put to the 
charge of three-pence to make good his title ; yet he sold ex- 
cellent pennyworths, insomuch that Sir John Leeinan (ones 
Lord Mayor of London) who bought the fair Manor of War- 
boise, in this county, of him, affirmed, that it was the cheapest 
land that ever he bought, and yet the dearest that ever Sir 
Oliver Cromwell sold.
Thirdly, for his loyalty, always be- 
holding the usurpation and tyranny of his nephew, godson, and 
namesake, with hatred and contempt.
Lastly, for his viva- 
city." Sir Oliver's principal seat was at Hinchinbrooke House, 
iu the county of Huntingdon, where he was favoured with se- 
veral roval visits.
Queen Elizabeth, who knighted him in 
4 iw 1598, 
322 
CHESHIRE.
wellj xt.
60, 1616;* Colonel John Cromwell,f se- 
cond son of Sir Oliver ; William Cromwell, J fourth 
son of Sir Oliver ; Major John Hettley, painted in 
a large wig ; Sir Thomas and Lady Hettley ; Dr.
Sparks, M.
D. ; and Mr. Manley.
Hooic Heath, which lies about two miles north- 
west from Chester, has, for centuries, been celebrat- 
ed, as having been one of the asylums, § or places of 
reception, for strangers, which Hugh Lupus esta- 
blished soon after his promotion to the Earldom, for 
the purpose of peopling- his newly-acquired domain.
This spot was particularly appropriated to the fugi- 
tives of Wales, who flocked hither in great numbers.
Many of their discontented chiefs made alliances 
with the invaders ; and, in the language of a late 
tourist, " sublimed the race into that degree of va- 
lour, that, in after-times, gave to Cheshire the dis- 
tinguishing title of Chief of Men, and made its land 
the very Seed-Plot of Gentility." 
Combermere Abbey.] —   — Combermerc Abbey, 
founded by Hugh de Malbanke, A.
D. 1133, and de- 
dicated to the Virgin Mary and St. Michael, was 
situated about five miles to the south-west of Nant- 
wich, near the banks of the deep Avater called Com- 
bermere, in the township of Dodcot-cum-Wilksley, 
in the parish of Acton.
He endowed it with lands 
and possessions of considerable value ; and, among 
other things, with a fourth part of the town of 
Nantwich, and the tythes of the salt and the boilc- 
ries there.
These grants were confirmed by Ralph, 
Earl of Chester, the chief lord, who also added se- 
veral other privileges and immunities.
At the Dis- 
solution it was valued at 2251.
9s.
7d.
per annum, 
and the site was granted by Henry VIII.
to George 
Cotton, Esq. whose descendants still possess the 
estate.
The present mansion was built with the 
remains of the ancient abbey, and is now the resi- 
dence of Sir Robert Salusbury Cotton, Bart.
Fish, 
of various kinds, abound in the adjacent lake.
Congleton.] — Congleton, which, as already stat- 
ed, is one of the townships of Astbury, lies thirty- 
1593, became his guest on her return from Cambridge; and 
afterwards lie had the honour to entertain James the First, in a 
most magnificent and sumptuous manner, on his accession to 
the English throne.
His Majesty was so highly pleased with 
his entertainment, that he created Sir Oliver a Knight of the 
Bath.
* Henry was a name which was given to many of the eldest 
sons of the Cromwell family, in honour of their great patron, 
Henry VIII.
This Henry Cromwell was the eldest son, and 
heir to, Sir Oliver, and was distinguished by a spirited and vi- 
gorous conduct, in behalf of the Royal party.
This occasioned 
his estates to be sequestrated ; but on petitioning Parliament in 
1649, the House decreed, that the fine imposed on him should 
be remitted.
The Protector afterwards courted his friendship, 
and appointed him one of the assessors for the county of Hunt- 
ingdon.
•(• Most of this officer's time was spent in Holland, whence 
he was commissioned (o England, by the Prince of Wales and 
Prince of Orange, to procrastinate the execution, or save the 
life, of the dethroned King.
1 The life and conduct, character and death, of William 
Cromwell, were all remarkable, lie had frequently proved 
his attachment to the unhappy Charles the First, >e*t he was 
three miles east by south "from Chester.
It is a 
small corporate town, governed by a mayor and six 
aldermen : has a market on Saturdays ; and four 
annual fairs — the Thursday before Shrovetide ; May 
12 : July 13 ; and December 3.
Formerly it was 
celebrated for the manufacture of tagged leather 
laces, called Congleton points, and for the weaving 
of ribbons, both of which have been discontinued ; 
and the chief employment of the poor is now derived 
from a silk-mill, which was erected on the banks of 
the river, about 1752.
There are also five cotton- 
mills in and near the town, and one paper-mill.
Congleton had formerly two chapels, or churches!
as they were sometimes called, dependant on Ast- 
bury as the mother church.
The lower chapel, ad- 
joining the bridge, was desecrated nearly two cen- 
turies ago, and has been occupied many years as * 
workhouse.
The higher chapel was rebuilt, and pro - 
bably enlarged, about the year 1740 ; but the tower 
was not rebuilt till 1786.
- 
The Corporation is in possession of one of the 
ancient instruments for a scold, or " curst queane," 
called a bridle ; and, to the present day, it is said to 
be occasionally used.
Congleton has a grammar-school, at least as old 
as the time of Queen Elizabeth, which is free only 
to the sons of burgesses.
Congleton is memorable in the history of the 
county, as the scene of an atrocious and perhaps 
unprecedented murder, which was perpetrated by 
Samuel Thorley, a butcher's assistant in the town-.
The name of the unfortunate victim was Anne 
Smith, a ballad-singer, aged 22.
It appeared, that 
she was met on a foot-way near Congleton by the 
prisoner, who prevailed on her to accompany him 
to a hollow place at some distance from the road, 
where he severed her head from her body, cut off her 
arms, legs, thighs, and breasts, took out her bowels 
and tongue, and having cut off the calves of her 
legs, and other fleshy parts, threw what remained of 
the carcass into a brook.
Having thus, as he ima- 
employed by the Protector in a secret expedition to Denmark.
The vessel in which he emba;ked was cast away; and as he 
endeavoured to escape by leaping into a boat he broke his 
arm, and very much bruised his head.
His servant 
was drowned ; his money and clothes were all lost ; and, to 
aggravate his calamity, a fever attacked him, and, from being 
obliged to conceal his name, he was for some time unable to 
procure assistance.
He afterwards returned to England, and 
engaged in a plot to assassinate the Protector ; but the plot 
miscarried, and Oliver acquitted him.
His death was occa- 
sioned by the purchase of a new coat, the cloth of which 
had been brought horn London, and was infected with the 
plague, which he caught, and died of it in the month of February, 
A. D.
1665.
The taylor, with all his family, and about 400 
people at Ramsey, in Huntingdonshire, where he resided, fell 
sacrifices to the pestilential milady generated by this fatal 
cloth.
§ The names of the other asylums are Over-Marsh, near 
Farndon ; and Rud-Ileath, near Middle wich.
By inquisitions 
returned in the reigns of the Second and Third Edwards, it 
appears that the persons seeking refuge in these extensive but 
Wast* places, dwelt in bouths or tents, and not i*i any perma- 
nent building.
gined, 
CHESHIRE.
323 
gined, secured himself from the possibility of detec- 
tion, lie placed those parts in his apron, and carry- 
ing them to the house of an old woman, told her, 
that he had received from a butcher, who had been 
driving pigs on the road, the flesh of one that had 
died, which he desired her to put up for him.
Calling again the next morning, he requested per- 
mission to boil, what he then termed, his pork, which 
being granted, he ate a part of it for breakfast ; but 
finding it to disagree with him, he desired the wo- 
man to throw the remainder away.
Soon after- 
wards some men, who had occasion to pass the 
brook, observed a petticoat in the water j and their 
suspicions being awakened, they searched attentive- 
ly, and found several dismembered parts of a human 
body.
The bead and face being seen by an p.ged 
woman in the neighbourhood, she instantly exclaim- 
ed, " It is poor Anne Smith, the ballad-singer.'" — 
The maimer in which the deceased had been cut to 
pieces, occasioned a shrewd countryman to observe, 
that the act was probably perpetrated by a butcher ; 
mid the ferocious disposition of Thorley excited a 
suspicion that he was the person, though he had 
assisted in the search for the remains of the body, 
and expressed a strong detestation at the conduct of 
the unknown murderer.
His general character was 
bad ; and his frequent practice of eating raw meat 
induced the countryman to imagine that Thorley 
might have concealed the flesh in some barn for food.
Under the influence of this idea, ho searched the 
cottage of the old woman in whose custody the flesh 
had been left, and who was perhaps known as an 
acquaintance of the murderer ; and was theH, as far 
as she was concerned, informed of the foregoing 
particulars.
The scattered pieces of the body were 
produced ; and the man perceiving that they were 
not bristly, as a scraped pig would have been, con- 
veyed them to a surgeon, who immediately pro- 
nounced them to have belonged to some human 
body.
Thorley was soon afterwards apprehended.
He acknowledged the perpetration ; and being ques- 
tioned as to the motive which influenced him to com- 
mit such a horrible crime, he answered, that, " hav- 
ing frequently heard that human flesh resembled 
young pig in taste, curiosity prompted him to try if 
it was true." During his imprisonment and trial, 
he behaved with the utmost indifference.
At the 
gallows he only inquired if the executioner intended 
to strip him ; when receiving an answer in the ne- 
gative, he displayed a slight degree of satisfaction.
His body was hung in chains on a heath near Con- 
gleton.
The witnesses on his trial averred that he 
had never shown any marks of insanity, and enter- 
tained the opinion that extreme avarice was the 
principal inducement to the commission of this sin- 
gularly savage act of diabolical cruelty.
He was 
executed on the 10th of April, 1777.
Ciiuisti.f.ton.] — Christleton is situated in the 
hundred of Broxton, three miles east by south from 
Chester.
It is an ancient village, which, previ- 
ously to the Conquest, was held by Earl Goodwin ; 
but was afterwards granted to Earl Lupus, who be- 
stowed it on Robert Fitz-Hugh.
This chieftain 
gave its chapel to the Abbey of Chester, together 
with the land belonging to it, and the land of a cer- 
tain peasant, with the peasant himself.
Isabel, his 
great-great-granddaughter, united with her hus- 
band, Sir Philip Burnet, in suing the abbey for this 
and other contiguous manors.
The monks, who are 
thought to have obtained this gift from her ancestor 
by practices somewhat removed from heavenly, 
jjndged it most prudent to compromise the claim, by 
paying her '200!.
which the-y did in the year 1280, 
and at the same time received a full confirmation of 
the grant.
In the year 1278, William de Birming- 
ham had free warren given him of all his demesne 
lands in this village.
In the Saxon times, it may 
be proper to observe, every man was allowed to kill 
game on his own estate ; but on the Conquest, the 
King vested the property of all the game in himself, 
so that no one could sport, even on his own land, 
under most cruel penalties, without permission from 
the King, by grant of chase or free warren.
By 
this, the grantee had an exclusive power of killing 
game on his own estate, but it was on condition that 
he prevented every one else ; so that, as Blackstone 
observes, this seeming favour was intended for the 
preservation of the beasts and fowls of warren ;• 
which were roes, bares, and rabbits ; partridges, 
rails, and quails ; woodcocks and pheasants ; mal- 
lards and herons ; for the sport of our savage Mo- 
narchy : this liberty, which they allowed to a few 
individuals, being designed merely to prevent a ge- 
neral destrnction.
It is apprehended, however, that 
William de Birmingham was only an inferior lord 
to the paramount privileges of the Abbey of Ches- 
ter.
In the reign of Richard II.
Christleton passed 
from the Birminghams to Sir Hugh Brower, who 
lost it through his attachment to the house of York ; 
and Henry IV.
in the fourth year of his reign, be- 
stowed it on John Manwaring, of Over Peover, an 
attendant on his son, afterwards Henry V.
Man- 
waring having no lawful issue, granted the estate to 
Sir Thomas lo (irosvenor, Lord of Hulme ; but it 
passed immediately from him to John de Maccles- 
field, in the 10th of Henry V.
One of his descend- 
ants alienated it, about 141-2, to Humphrey, after- 
wards Duke of Buckingham.
Henry, Lord Staf- 
ford, son to Edward, Duke of Buckingham, sold it 
to Sir William Sneyde, of Keel ; and Sir Ralph 
Sneyde, to Sir John Harpur, of Leverstone, in Der- 
byshire : his descendants sold it to Thomas Brock, 
Esq. whose uncle, John Brock Wood, Esq. is the 
present owner.
Christleton Hall, which belonged for several ge- 
nerations to the Bavauds, is now in the possession 
of William Richards, Esq.
About fifteen years ago a school-house was built 
at Christleton, for the education of poor children of 
that township, and of Littleton.
Thirteen boys are now 
taught reading, writing, and arithmetic ; and eleven 
girls are instructed^ reading, sewing, knitting, &e.
7 Ciikwe 
32-1 
CHESHIRE.
Crewe Hall.] — Crewe Hall, situated in the pa- 
rish of Barrow, about four miles to the south-west 
of Sandbach, is the seat of John Crewe, Esq. It 
was erectej in the reign of James the First, by Sir 
Handle Crewe, who is said to have introduced the 
first model of good building into this county.
The 
mansion is a very fine structure, and was erected 
from a design given by Inigo Jones ; but it was re- 
paired after the Civil Wars, during which it sustain- 
ed two assaults, having been occupied both by the 
troops of the Parliament and those of the King.
The 
gardens, which are judiciously laid out, are enriched 
with plantations.
A free-school was founded in the 
township of Crewe, about the year 1717, by Mr.
Leadbeter.
The master is nominated by Lord 
Crewe.
Davenham.] — This parish, which takes its name 
from the River Daven, or Dane, is in the hundred of 
Northwich, rather more than two miles south from 
that town.
It contains the following townships : 
Davenham, Bostock, Eaton, Leftwich, Moulton, 
Newhall, Shipbrooke, Shurlach, Stanthorne, Whar- 
ton, Whatcroft, and the lordship of Rudheath.
Its 
church, which stands within the township of Left- 
wich, was built in the year 1680, and has a very 
handsome spire.
George Savage, once Rector of 
Davenham, was an illegitimate son of Sir John Sa- 
vage, who was killed at Boulogne.
He is recorded 
to have had seven illegitimate children by three dif- 
ferent women ; one of whom, by Elizabeth Frod- 
sham, was the celebrated Edmund Bonner, Bishop 
of London.
Bostock Hall, an ancient timber building, sur- 
rounded by a moat, was pulled down about twelve 
years ago.
The new hall, built about the year 
1775, is the seat of Mr. France.
The ceutre of the 
county is said to be marked by a venerable oak which 
stands on Bostock-Green.
On Rudheath, an action took place, on the 22d of 
February, 1643, between King Charles's army and 
that of the Parliament under the command of Sir 
William Brereton.
Dodleston.] — Dodleston is in the hundred of 
Broxton, four miles and a quarter south-west from 
* The bravery of Lord Audley, and his companions in arms, 
greatly contributed to the obtaining of the splendid victory of 
Poictiers.
Dutton, of Dutton ; Foulshur.->t, of Crewe ; and 
Mackworth, of Mackworth in Derbyshire,  With Delves, acted 
as Squires to Lord Audley, whom attachment had induced 
them to follow to the continent, at that time the theatre of mili- 
tary glory ; and they accompanied him through all the dangers 
of the memorable exploit which has immortalized, and render- 
ed their names honourable.
Previously to the engagement, 
Audley requested the Prince (Edward, son of Edward III.) to 
permit him to commence the action, as lie had vowed to be 
foremost in the first battle that should be fought ; and having 
obtained his suit, began the fight, and, with the " ayde of his 
foure scuyers, dyd marvels in arms, and foughte always in the 
cheyfe of the batayle : yt daye he never loke prisoner, but 
always foughte, and wente on his enemycs." He was at 
length wounded in several parts of the body, and carried from 
the field by his four faithful adherents; who removed his ar- 
Chester.
At an early period, the manor belonged 
to the Boydells, who had a castle here of which no- 
traces arc now visible.
The old hall was purchased 
by Lord Grosvenor, of Sir Robert Lawley, about the 
year 1807 ; and a farm-house has since been erect- 
ed on its site.
Sir Thomas Egerton, Queen Eliza- 
beth's Solicitor-General, purchased an estate in this 
village about the year 1582.
Sir Thomas Egerton, 
who afterwards became Lord Keeper of the Great 
Seal, Lord Ellesmere, and Viscount Brackley, died 
in London, A.
D. 1617, and was buried at Dodles- 
ton.
On a flat stone, in the church, is the following 
epitaph : — 
" Anchora animae, fides et spes in Christo— Ori- 
mur— Morimur — Secjuentur qui non praicesserint." 
(Translation.) 
Our soul's anchor, our faith and hope are in Christ 
—We are born— We die.— They shall foilow, who - 
have not preceded us.
The hall upon the Dodleston estate, was built 
chiefly of timber.
It was pulled down in the year 
1788 ; and its site is now occupied by a farm- 
house.
Doddington Hall, in the township of that name, 
is distant about five miles and a half south-east by 
east from Nantwich.
The manor was anciently in 
a family to which it gave name.
John Delves, Esq.
purchased it about the year 1344.
This gentleman, 
descended from the Delveses of Staffordshire, dis- 
tinguished himself at the battle of Poictiers, as one 
of the four Esquires of the brave Lord Audley, who 
were rewarded for their services with handsome an- 
nuities, and honourable augmentations to their armo- 
rial bearings.* This John Delves was knighted in 
the year 1362 ; in 1364, he was made one of the 
Justices ©f the Court of King's Bench ; and, in the 
same year, he received the Royal License to build a 
castellated mansion, of which we shall presently 
speak, at Doddington.
Sir John Delves died, in 
1369, without issue.
Sir John, grandson of his 
brother Henry, was a strenuous partisan of the 
house of Lancaster ; in 1460, Queen Margaret en- 
mour, and procured him every assistance which the confusion 
of the contest would permit.
When the battle ceased, the 
Prince caused his lordship to be brought into his presence on a 
litter, and having praised him for his bravery, rewarded him 
with a grant of 500 marks annually for ever.
This valuable 
gift Lord Audley immediately transferred to his four Esquires, 
in recompence for the toil which they had undergone ; and, as 
a further proof of esteem, enjoined them to bear his own pro- 
per achievement, gules, a fret d'or, in some part of their coats of 
arms ; and this distinction the families have ever since retained.
When the Prince heard of the generous action of the gallant 
warrior, he was at first somewhat offended ; but, on the latter 
replying to some question concerning the gift, that " those 
men had deserved it as well as he had himself, and had more 
need of it," the youthful Edward beheld the action in its true 
light, and being resolved that so much worth should not pass 
unrewarded, presented the hero with another grant of the same 
value.
trusted 
CHESHIRE.
a-25 
trusted him with the care of the noble prisoners who 
were then in Chester Castle; in 1471, he was killed 
at the battle of Tewksbury ; and, immediately after 
that fatal battle, his son, who had accompanied him, 
was beheaded.
Henry, Sir John's younger brother, 
continued the line ; and, in 1621, his immediate de- 
scendant, Sir Thomas, was created a Baronet.
By 
the death of Sir Thomas Delves, the fourth Baronet, 
A. D.
17'27, the title and the male line of this family 
became extinct.* The Doddington, and other 
estates, then passed, under Sir Thomas's will, to his 
grandson, Sir Bryan Broughton, Bart, whose bro- 
ther, the Rev. Sir Thomas Broughton, Bart, is now 
the representative of the family.
Dugdale, the celebrated author of the Monasti- 
con, in a MS.
history of the Delves family, describes 
Doddington Hall as " a large pile of brick build- 
ing built in a square, with a court in the middle, 
and a stone castle adjoining thereto ; all encompass- 
ed in a moat of water." A square embattled tower, 
evidently the castle of which Dugdale speaks, and 
part of the castellated mansion built by Sir John 
Delves, in 1361, yet remain.
This castle, or tower, 
was one of the Parliamentary garrisons during the 
Civil War. On the 4th of January, 1641, although 
garrisoned by 160 men, it was taken by Lord By- 
ron without any resistance ; but, on the 7th of the 
ensuing month, it again fell into the hands of the 
Parliament.
A part of the more modern mansion-house — a 
quadrangular brick building, apparently of the time 
of Elizabeth, with transom windows — is also yet in 
existence.
The ballustrade, belonging to a flight of 
steps, is ornamented with the stone lace-work which 
was so much in fashion at the close of the sixteenth 
and commencement of the seventeenth century.
Here are preserved the statues of Lord Audley and 
his four Esquires.
That of his Lordship is thought 
to be an original ; but those of the Esquires are 
supposed to have been made when the late mansion 
was erected, in the reign of Elizabeth.
Duckenfield.] — Duekenfield, or Dockenfield, is 
situated six miles and a half north -cast by north from 
Stockport, of which it is one of the townships.
— 
Here are extensive collieries, and also some cotton 
factories.
^ The Barony of Duckenfield, called by the Anglo- 
Saxons Dockenveldt, formed part of the inheritance 
of the family of that name, who resided here from 
the time of the Conquest until the whole estate be- 
came the property of JMr. Astley, by his marriage 
with Lady Duckenfield.
This gentleman, who was 
professionally a painter, made considerable improve- 
ments in the neighbourhood : he repaired the roads, 
Imilt two stone bridges over the Tame for the ac- 
commodation of the village, and a handsome circus 
of brick houses, divided into semi-circles by the 
* This gentleman gave the sum of 1535!.
to be laid out in 
the purchase of lands, for the purpose of clothing and educat- 
ing twenty boys and ten girls of die parish of YVybuubury, in 
•»OL.J.
— .NO, 54.
road.
He also erected an iron fo tindery upon the 
estate, which, from the many workmen employed, 
greatly increased the population ; but, after expend- 
ing considerable time in its establishment, it was 
at length relinquished, and a cotton factory con- 
structed in its place, as has been before observed.
Duckenfield Lodge is a modern building, beauti- 
fully situated on an eminence above the river Tame, 
surrounded with woods, and commanding a fine 
prospect.
The apartments are small but elegant, 
and contain many good paintings, executed by John 
Astley, Esq. the late owner.
Francis Duckenfield 
Astley, Esq. his son, is now the proprietor.
On an eminence above the lodge, is an ancient 
dissenter's chapel, built with stone, and surrounded 
by a burial-ground planted with fir?.
In the bu- 
rial-ground are some monuments of the Duckenfield 
family.
Between the chapel and the lodge is a neat Mora- 
vian chapel, adjoining to an extensive range of 
buildings, formerly inhabited by the Moravians, who 
here exercised a variety of trades and manufactures.
" These buildings," says Dr. Aikin, " were erected 
at a great expence, by the community, under the 
promise of a renewal of the leases when they should 
drop, which, in consequence of the estate going out 
of the Duckenfield family, became null.
Many ne- 
goeiations were carried on with Mr. Astley, for the 
purpose of accommodating the business upon equit- 
able terms ; but, after waiting some years without 
effect, the society determined upon a removal, and 
accordingly erected their present fine building at 
Fairfield, in Lancashire.
Their former settlement 
at Duckenfield now looks like a deserted village.
The chapel is still their property, held by the life of 
one old man, and service is performed in it by a re- 
sident, maintained in the place." 
Since Dr. Aikin wrote, however, the Moravians 
(about nine or ten years ago) have renewed their 
leases of some of the buildings, but without resuming 
their mode of living in community under the same 
roof.
Dernhall.] — Dernhall is a township of the pa- 
rish of Whitegate, in the hundred of Eddisbury, five 
miles and three quarters west- south- w est from Mid- 
dlewich.
At this place, Prince Edward, eldest son 
to Henry III.
during his father's reign began to 
build an Abbey for 100 Cistercian Monks, but, when, 
he ascended the throne, he altered his intention, and, 
in the year 1277, founded a stately monastery in the 
Vale Royal, about five miles to the north ; and, 
about the year 1281, the monks of Dernhall were re- 
moved thither, together with some others, from the 
Abbey of Dore, in Herefordshire, to make up the 
number 100, he having, in a voyage to the Holy 
Land, vowed to endow an Abbey, containing that 
number of monks, with a sufficient maintenance.
which parish Doddington Mall stands.
In the year 1786, the; 
lands, so purchased, produced 941.
4s.
yearly.
The schools 
are now at Doddington and Westou.
4n Upon.
320 
CHESHIRE.
Upon tins monastery he expended 32,0001, besides 
what was given by his Queen Eleanor ; yet the 
building- was not finished till the year 1330, in the 
reign of Edward III.
the monks behig in the mean- 
time much incommoded for want of room'.
The 
church was consecrated by the patriarch of Jerusa- 
lem, Bishop of Durham, and dedicated to Christ, 
the Virgin Mary, St. Nicholas, and St. Niehasius.
At the Dissolution, its revenue Mas valued at 
5181.
7s.
6d.
After the Dissolution, it became the 
property of Sir Reginald Corbet, by one of whose 
descendants, in the reign of James I.
it was sold to 
Richard Lee, Esq. ancestor of the American Gene- 
ral of that name, one of the candidates for the honour 
of having written Junius's letters.
Thomas Corbet, 
Esq. who died about the year 1*0S, and whose son 
is now the possessor, purchased the property of 
General Lee's father.
John Scot, Earl of Chester, 
died at Dernhall, A.
D. 1244, having been poisoned 
by his wife.
Dunham Massey.] — This is a township of the 
parish of Boven, situated about six miles and a half 
north from Nether Knutsford.
Dunham Massey is 
the seat of Earl Stamford, whose father obtained it 
by his marriage with the heiress of the Earl of War- 
rington about 60 or 70 years ago.
It is one of the 
most beautiful residences in Cheshire.
The man- 
sion is spacious, composed with brick, and of a qua- 
drangular form, with a court in the centre.
It con- 
tains many family pictures, several of which are of 
great beauty and value.
The park in the midst of 
which the house is seated, is very extensive, and 
full of timber.
Some of the oaks are of extraordi- 
nary magnitude ; and on their tops is an extensive 
heronry.
Round the house are various masses and 
clumps of trees, whose dark imagery, observes a 
contemporary writer, being reflected in the water, 
by which they are partially environed, gives a beau- 
ty and interest to the landscape, that is peculiarly 
agreeable to the admirer of Nature's scenery.
The 
views are many of them picturesque, and some 
grand.
The grounds near the house are disposed 
into shrubberies, flower-beds, and various other 
specimens of ornamental gardening.
In the park 
are some barrow* ; and urns, and other aHtique re- 
mains, have been found here.
Dutton.] — Dutton is a township of the parish of 
Great Budworth, four miles and three quarters east 
from Frodsham.
This place has long been noted 
' * The Grosvenor family came into England with the Con- 
queror.
Their name is derived from the office of Chief Hunts- 
man, which they held in the Norman Court.
The family re- 
sidence was transferred from Hulme, where it had been fixed, in 
the year 1234, through the marriage of Ralph Grosvenor, in 
the reign of Henry VI.
with Joan, daughter of John Eaton, then 
owner of this estate.
" When chivalry was the passion of the 
times," says Pennant, " few families shone in so distinguished 
a manner : none shewed equal spirit in vindicating their rights 
to their honours.
Witness the famous cause between Robert le 
Grosvenour and Sir Richard le Scrope, about a coat of arms, 
azure, onebeud, or ; tried before the High Constable and High 
for having been the estate of a family of the snme 
name, who derived their descent from the Earls of 
Chester, and who, as mentioned in our description 
of the county -town, enjoyed a peculiar authority 
over all the wandering mi-nstrels, &c.
of Cheshire.
The remains of the old hall, once a splendid man- 
sion, were some time ago converted into a farm- 
house.
Over the principal door are the arms of 
Dutton quartering those of Hatton : also the follow- 
ing inscription : — 
" Syr Peyrs Dutton Knight Lorde of Dutton, and 
my Lady Dame Julian his wile, made this hall and 
bu ylding.in the yere of our LordGod MCCCCCXI II 
who tbanketh God of all." 
Eaton.] — Eaton, Eaton on the Dee, or Eaton- 
Boat, is in the parish of Eccleston, four miles south 
from Chester.
Eaton, said to be the most general 
name of any in England, signifies the Hamlet on the 
Water.
At the time of the Survey, the fishery here 
employed six fishermen, and yielded one thousand 
salmon annually ; one-twentieth of which was claim- 
ed by the minister of Eccleston ; but his revenue 
has long since ceased, the fishery having been aban- 
doned.
Eaton Hall, the seat of Earl Grosvenor,* is in this 
township.
"This recently-erected and exquisitely- 
beautiful mansion," observes a writer in the Monthly 
Magazine, " is situated about three miles to the 
south of Chester, on the edge of an extensive park, 
abounding with large and venerable timber.
The 
level of the park is considerably above the banks of 
the river Dee, which flows through a great extent of 
fertile meadows, about two hundred yards to the 
east, but only visible in casual glimpses at a great 
distance, where the windings are nearly perpendi- 
cular to the eye.
The house is of the Gothic style 
of architecture, built by the present Earl on the site 
of the old mansion, a square brick fabric, erected by 
Sir Thomas Grosvenor, in the reign of King Wil- 
liam.
The fine vaulted basement story of the old 
hall was preserved, and also the external founda- 
tions, and some subdivisions ; but the superstruc- 
ture was lately altered, and entirely refitted, and 
additional apartments erected on the north and 
south sides, so as to make the area of the new house 
twice the dimensions of the former.
" The style of architecture is Gothic ; but it is 
proper to observe that the cathedral Gothic of the 
Marshal of England, in the reign of Richard the Second, and 
lasted three years.
Kings, Princes of the blood, and most of 
the nobility, bore witness in this important affair.
The sentence 
was conciliating: that both parties should bear the same arms; 
but the Grosvenours avec une bortlure d'argent.
Sir Robert 
resents it, and appeals to the King.
The judgment is confirm- 
ed ; but the choice is left to the defendant, either to use the 
bordure, or bear the arms of their relations, the ancient Earls 
of Chester, azure a gerb d'or.
He rejected the mortifying 
distinction, and chose a gerb : which is the family coat to this 
clay." 
age 
CHESHIRE.
327 
nf e of Edward III.
w exhibited in York-Minster, 
the church oi' Newark-upon-Trent, and other cele-; 
brated structures in Emjl.tnd, is chiefly imitated, 
especially on the outside ; though Mr. Porden, the 
architect, has not scrupled to avail himself of the 
low Tudor arch, and the forms of any other age, 
that suited his purpose, which was, to adapt the rich 
variety of our ancient ecclesiastical architecture to 
modern domestic convenience.
The same style pre- 
vails through the whole of the interior, but more or 
less embellished to suit tiie uses of the apartments 
respectively.
Round the turrets, and in various 
parts of the ballustrades, are Gothic shields, charg- 
ed in relievo with the armorial bearings of the Gros- 
venor family, and of other ancient families, that, by 
intermarriages, the Grosvenors are entitled to quar- 
ter with their own.
The windows, which are rich 
in tracery, are of iron, cast from models in wood by 
the iron founders of Chester, and are perhaps the 
first that have been made of that material, moulded 
on both sides, and grooved to receive the glass.
The walls, ballustrades, battlements, and pinnacles, 
are of stone, brought by land-carriage about sixteen 
miles, from quarries near Frodsham.
It is of a light 
and beautiful colour, which harmonises with the hues 
of nature in the landscape.
" The park is flat, but the distant country is ele- 
vated and various.
To the west, the mountains of 
Wales, with Moell tab.
Mah, their mother (as the 
name implies) rise directly in front ; and to the 
south aud east, the hills of Shropshire and Cheshire, 
with that remarkable knowl on which Beeston Cas- 
tle is situated, The City of Chester lies on the 
north.
The principal approach to the house is from 
the west, through a triple avenue formed by four 
rows of majestic limes, which has lately been conti- 
nued to the road, leading from Chester to Wrexham 
(a length of nearly two miles) and terminated by a 
noble lodge in the same style as the house called 
Belgrave Lodge, from a large district in the domain 
of Eaton, that gives the second title of Viscount to 
the Grosvenor family.
The approach from Chester, 
which was made and planted by the present Earl, 
commences at Eccleston Hill, where a lodge, simi- 
lar to Belgrave Lodge, but of smaller dimensions, 
gives admission to the pa>rk.
This road, after 
winding through the park, and catching many in- 
teresting views of the surrounding country, unites 
with the avenue already mentioned, about 300 yards 
from the house, a circumstance to be regretted, as it 
gives to both approaches the same formal geometric 
view of a fabric that possesses much picturesque 
variety, only to be duly appreciated when it is ap- 
proached in an oblique direction.
An ancient 
avenue is justly valued as a monument of ancient 
grandeur ; but, like other monuments, it causes no 
cheerful sensations, and its monotoaous magnifi- 
cence scarcely compensates for the want of that de- 
lightful emotion and variety produced by the ap- 
pearance of objects when seen from a winding and 
undulating road.
The taste of the noble owner of 
Eaton is incessantly active in giving perfection t» 
the place, and he has it in contemplation, as we iiro 
told, to make the Chester approach terminate more 
like the Eccleston road, from which the towers 
and pinnacle's of Eaton Hall are seen to most ad- 
vantage.
" The entrance to the house is in the middle of 
the west front, under a vaulted portico, which ad- 
mits a carriage to the steps that lead to the hall, a 
spacious and lofty room, occupying the height of 
two stories, with a vaulted ceiling, embellished Avith 
the Grosvenor arms, and other devices in the knotg 
that cover the junction of the ribs.
The pavement 
is of variegated marbles in Gothic compartments.
On each of the sides is an ornamented marble chim- 
ney-piece, and four niches with pedestals and cano- 
pies.
The niches, it is probable, will hereafter be 
filled with statues, and the walls covered witli his- 
torical paintings, for which no family can furnish 
more ample materials, as the heads of it were en- 
gaged in most of the military transactions of the 
English in the chivalrous ages.
At the end of the 
hall, a screen of five arches supports a gallery that 
connects the bed-chambers on the north side of the 
house, with those on the south, Avhich are separated 
by the elevation of the hall.
Under this gallery, 
two open arches to the right and left conduct to the 
grand stair-case, the state bed-room, and the second 
stair-case ; and opposite to the door of the hall is 
the entrance to the saloon.
The grand stair-case 
is highly ornamented with niches and canopies; and 
with tracery under the landings, and in the principal 
ceiling, which is crowned with a double skylight of 
various coloured glass.
The steps of the second 
stair-case, with its tracery and ballustrade, are all 
of cast-iron.
The state bed-room is lighted by two 
painted windows, with tracery and armorial bear- 
ings, and contains a magnificent bed.
On entering 
the saloon, the eye is struck by the splendour oi" 
three lofty painted windows, which contain, in six 
divisions, the portrait of the Conqueror's nephew, 
Gilbert le Grosvenor, the founder of the Grosvenor 
family, and his lady ; of William the Conqueror, 
with whom Gilbert came into England ; the Bishop 
of Bayeux, uncle to the Conqueror ; the heiress of 
the house of Eaton, and Sir Robert lc Grosvenor, 
who distinguished himself in the wars of Edward 
the Third, and more particularly by his legal eon- 
test with Sir Richard le Scroope, for the family 
arms — Azure, one bend, or ; a cause which was 
tried before the high-constable and the high-mar- 
shal of England, in the reign of Richard 11.
and 
lasted three years.
Kings, Princes of the Blood, 
most of the nobility, and, among the gentry, Chau- 
cer the poet, gave evidence on this trial.
These 
windows were executed in London, from cartoons 
by Mr. Treshara and other artists.
" The saloon is a square of thirty feet, formed 
into an octagon by arches across the angles, which 
give to the vaultings a beautiful form.
The chim- 
ney-piece is of statuary marble, and opposite to it 
9 is 
C28 
CHESHIRE.
is an organ, Loth, richly decorated.
On the left of 
the saloon is an anti-room, that leads to the dining- 
room, and on the right another, that leads to the 
drawing-room, both decorated, but in a subordinate 
degree to the state-rooms with which they commu- 
nicate.
The windows of these rooms are glazed, 
with a light Mosaic tracery, and exhibit the por- 
traits of the six Earls of Chester, who, after Hugh 
Lupus, governed Cheshire as a county palatine, till 
Henry 111.
bestowed the title on his son Edward ; 
since which time, the eldest sons of the Kings of 
England have always been Earls of Chester.
" The dining-room, situated at the northern ex- 
tremity of the cast front, is about fifty feet long and 
thirty feet wide, exclusively of a bow, containing five 
arched windows, the opening of which is thirty feet.
In the middle window is the portrait of Hugh Lu- 
pus : this portrait, with the six Earls of Chester, in 
the anti-room windows, is the, work of Messrs.
Davenport, of Longport, in Staffordshire, from car- 
toons by Mr. Singleton.
The ceiling is of bold and 
rich tracery, with coats of arms in proper colours, 
and a large ornamented pendant for a chandelier.
At the end, opposite to the entrance, is an arched 
recess containing the side-board, and on each side 
of it is a large niche, with its pedestal and canopy.
The opposite end of the room has a similar recess, 
within which is the door from the anti-room, and 
similar niches on each side of it.
Other niches and 
canopies, of smaller size, ornament the jambs of the 
arched recess and the bow.
The drawing-room, 
which is at the southern extremity of the east front, 
is of the same form and dimensions as the dining- 
room, with the addition of a large window that looks 
to the south, and commands a view of the groves 
and fertile meadows of Eaton, with the village and 
spire of Oidford above them.
All the windows of 
this room are adorned with heads and figures of the 
ancestors of the family, among which are the portraits 
of the present Earl and Countess, in a beautiful brown 
chiar-oscuro, executed by Messrs.
Baehcler and 
Silk, of Newman Street.
The niches, canopies, 
and other ornaments, are the same in situation as 
those cf the dining-room, but of lighter and richer 
design.
The ceiling is a piece of embroidery of the 
nicest materials and workmanship, where all the 
coats, borne by the Grosvencr family, are blazoned 
m their proper colours, and also the arms of Eger- 
ton, Earl of Wilton, the father of the present Coun- 
tess Grosveuor.
The arms of Egerton appear in 
various parts of the house, and will mark the date 
of this fabric to future antiquaries, if all other me- 
morials should be forgotten or destroyed.
The co- 
lour of the saloon is blue, the anti-diaing-room light 
blue, the dining-room of a bright scarlet, the anti- 
drawing-room is hung with light blue satin, the 
drawing-room with crimson velvet, the curtains and 
draperies are crimson and gold satin, with gold 
ta sels and fringes, disposed in a striking and pic- 
turesque manner by Messrs.
Gillow, under the di- 
rection of Thomas Kay, Esq. architect to the post- 
office.
All the other furniture of these apartments is the 
work of the same artificers, and appropriate to the 
style of the house.
The vistas from the dining- 
room, through the two anti-rooms, and the saloon 
to the south window of the drawing-room, and in 
the opposite direction from the drawing-room to the 
dining-room, terminating with the splendidly-fur- 
nished sideboard of plate, perhaps cannot be ex- 
ceeded in novelty and variety, by any thing of the- 
kind in England.
" The library is in the centre of the south front.
The ceiling and the large bow-window, with their 
ornaments, are in the same style as the rooms al- 
ready described, but less rich.
The book-cases are 
of English oak, with arches of tracery, butlresses, 
pinnacles, and battlements.
The sitting-room of 
the Countess is the only room on this floor, with 
square-headed windows and a flat ceiling, and is an.
apartment of singular beauty.
" The middle window of the saloon opens to a 
vaulted cloister, occupying the space between the 
dining and drawing-room, in the east front, which 
affords a sheltered walk in all weathers.
A flight 
of steps leads from the cloister to a spacious terrace 
350 or 360 feet long, laid in gravel walks and beds 
of flowers, from whence other steps at each end, 
and in the middle, descend to the gardens and plea- 
sure grounds, which are disposed with much taste, 
though, some may think, too much of the square 
formality of the ancient garden is retained.
In this 
respect, however, the pleasure-grounds accord bet- 
ter with the terrace (one of the finest features of the 
place) than the gay variety of modern gardening.
The view from the terrace is rich and various.
— in 
the fore-ground, the groves, the gardens, and the 
green-house ; immediately beyond them, the meads 
and the noble inlet of the Dee (made by the present 
Earl to supply the want of the natural river) with 
its pleasure-yachts, forming at times a lively mov- 
ing picture ; and over all the hills of Shropshire 
and Cheshire, with Beeston Castle, before mention- 
ed.
From the walks and rides in these grounds 
and meadows, the house is seeu in various points to 
great advantage, and affords many combinations, 
with the surrounding scenery worthy of the 
pencil.
" The offices and stables are deserving of notice.
The latter surround a court of 160 feet by 100, and 
are decorated with battlements and turrets, and a 
clock tower supported by flying buttresses, in a 
plainer style of Gothic architecture than the style of 
the house." 
Eastham.] — Eastham is in the hundred of "Wir- 
rall, five miles east-north-east from Great Neston.
It contains the following townships : — Eastham- 
cum-Plimyard, Carlett, Hooton-cum- Roveacre, 
[ Over-Poole, Nether -Poole, Great-Sutton, Little- 
Sutton, and Chillier- Thornton, 
Eastham Church, which contains some monu- 
ments of the Stanley family, consists of a nave, 
channel, and side aisles, with a spire towey at the 
west 
CHESHIRE.
32Q 
west end.
Inigo Jones is understood to have been 
the architect ; but the spire, having become 
ruinous, was rebuilt in the year 1752.
It de- 
serves to be mentioned, as a local peculiarity, 
that the Vicar of Eastham is entitled to all the 
fish which is caught in the Mersey on Sundays and 
Fridays.
Randall de Gernon, Earl of Chester, gave the 
manor of Eastham to the Abbot and Convent of St.
Werburgh, " as a compensation," say Messrs.
Ly- 
sons, " lor the ills he had done that house ; and by 
his charter he commanded all his subjects upon their 
allegiance, that this his donation, given for his health 
and absolution, should be as it ought, free and ab- 
solute ; adding this imprecation, that if any of them 
or their heirs should diminish it in any thing, that 
God would lessen him ; so lessened destroy him ; 
and so destroyed, condemn him with the Devil." 
The manor has been in the Stanley family between 
two and three centuries.
Eccleston.] — Eccleston, or Eccleston on the 
Dee, is in the hundred of Broxton, two miles and 
three quarters south from Chester.
It is pleasantly 
situated on the Dee, and commands a good view of 
the county-town.
Previously to the Conquest, it 
was held by Edwin, a freeman ; but at the period of 
the Doomsday Survey, by Gilbert de Venables, of 
Hugh Lupus : it is now the property of the Gros- 
venor family.
From the brow of Eccleston Hill, is 
a very beautiful and extensive prospect over part of 
Shropshire, and the vast environs of Wales and 
Cheshire.
The traces of a Roman road, in the tract 
between this village and Chester, are apparent ; gra- 
vel, and the remains of pavements, being frequently 
dug up.
It passes through Eaton Park, and crosses 
the Dee at Oldford.
During the siege of Chester, 
A. D.
1645, this village was occupied by Sir Wil- 
liam Brereton's army.
The old church of Eccleston contains some monu- 
ments of the Grosvenor family ; and also a memo- 
rial for Elizabeth, the relict of Archdeacon Rogers, 
who made some collections for the history of the 
county.
The present church was rebuilt about se- 
ven years ago, solely at the expenee of Lord Gros- 
venor.
Eddisbury.] — A place called the Chamber of the 
Forest, on which there formerly stood a handsome 
house, occupied by the chief loresters, is supposed 
to mark the site of a town called Eadesburgh, 
Eddisbury, or the Happy Town, built by the Lady 
Ethelfleda, in Delamere Forest.
It appears to have 
given name to the hundred.
Of the town no traces 
* John Speed was born in the year 1555.
The early part 
of his life was passed in the humble capacity of a tailor; but 
the strength of his talents having introduced him to the notice 
of Sir Fulke Greville, that gentleman generously enabled him 
to pursue those studies to which his genius and inclination were 
most adapted.
His principal publication was the History of 
Great Britain.
In collecting information for this work, he was 
assisted by the greatest literary characters of his age ; and the 
estimation in which it continues to be regarded, is the best tes- 
vol.
i. — wo.
24.
remain ; and, of the forest, there arc only a few 
stunted trees.
Camden speaks of the ruins of another town, 
called Finhorough, also built by the Lady Ethel- 
fleda, about two miles distant from Eddisbury.
Farncoim.] — Farndon, in the Doomsday Book 
called Farendon, is a little village on the Dee, over 
which an ancient, bridge of ten arches connects it 
with Holt, in Denbighshire.
It is distant nine miles 
south from Chester.
Farndon Church was built soon after the conclu- 
sion of the Civil War, the former having been burnt 
by the Parliamentary forces during the siege of Holt 
Castle, in the year 1645.
It has some beautiful painted glass on one of its 
windows, representing a commander in his tent, 
with a truncheon in his hand, and surrounded with 
military instruments.
Around the instruments are 
sixteen figures of different ranks of soldiery, with 
coats of arms over the heads of the officers, who are 
apparently intended to represent the several Che- 
shire gentlemen who defended the cause of Charles 
the First during the siege of the City.
Among the 
arms are those of Sir Francis Gamul, Bart.
Mayor 
of Chester at the time of the Civil War ; Roger 
Grosvenor ; William Barnardiston, of Chirton, Esq.
and Sir William Mainwaring.
Farndon was the birth-place of Speed, the histo- 
rian and antiquary.
* A school-house was built 
here about the year 1629.
Over-Marsh, an extra- 
parochial tract of land, now the township of King's- 
Marsh, adjoining to Farndon, was formerly one of 
the spots set apart for the reception of fugitives.
Frodsham.] — Frodsham, which is a small mar- 
ket-town, pleasantly situated on an eminence be- 
neath the hills which form the northern extremity of 
Delamere Forest, is about eleven miles north-east 
by north from Chester.
Its market is on Wednes- 
day ; but, in consequence of its vicinity to Chester, 
it is of little note.
It has two annual fairs, on the 
15th of May, and 21st of August.
This parish contains the following townships : — 
Frodsham, Alvanley, Bradley, llelsby, Kingsley, 
Manley, Netherton, Newton, Norton, Overton, and 
Woodhouses.
Formerly there was a castle at Frodsham, which, 
together with the town, was granted by Edward 
the First to David, who was at that time at variance 
with his brother Llewellyn, the last sovereign Prince 
of Wales.
David afterwards broke his alliance with 
Edward, and having surprised the castle of Har- 
warden, put the garrison to the sword, and made 
timony of the care and attention wrTich were bestowed on the 
selection of its materials.
His "Theatre of the Empire of 
Great Britain,?' is a collection of maps, remarkable for being 
the lirst set that was ever published, with all the hundreds dis- 
tinguished from each other.
Speed also wrote a Scripture 
Genealogy, which is now out of repute.
He died in 16'29, at 
the age of seventy-four, a few months after his wife, with whom 
he hail lived fifty-seven years.
4o 
Roger 
330 
CHESHIRE.
Roger de Clifford, justiciary of Chester, prisoner.
For this conduct he was punished most severely, 
being - the first person who was executed as a traitor, 
according to the mode now in use.
He was con- 
demned to be drawn by a horse to the place of exe- 
cution, and hanged for the murder of the Knights 
whom he had massacred in Harwarden Castle ; his 
bowels were then to be taken out and burnt, and 
his body quartered and exposed in different parts of 
the kingdom.
The castle stood at the west end of 
the town.
From the Frodsham family, the manor passed to 
that of Savage, Earl Rivers, and is now the pro- 
perty of the Earl of Cholmondeley.
A mansion, occupying the site of the ancient cas- 
tle, Avas destroyed by fire, A.
D. 1654, on the day 
that the first Earl Rivers died there.
That edifice 
has been replaced by a handsome modern house.
Frodsham has a harbour for small vessels, and a 
stone bridge over the Weevcr.
At some distance 
on the banks of the river are works for the refining of 
rock-salt.
At the west end of the town is an excel- 
lent cold bath, which discharges 1700 gallons of 
water in a minute.
The town is well supplied with 
many excellent springs of good water ; " one in par- 
ticular called Pearl of Wigan, which distils from the 
face of a rock drops from every vein, resembling the 
purest gems." 
On the church, which stands on a vast height 
above the town, in the township of Overton, in an- 
cient times there used to be a beacon.
Frodsham is remarkable for the instances of lon- 
gevity which its parish register affords.
In the year 
1592-3, one person was interred, of the age of 104, 
and another of the age of 141 ; in 1695, one of 107 ; 
and, in 1791, one of 102.
There is a tablet in one 
of the aisles of the church, for Peter Banner, a car- 
penter, who died in 1749, at the age of 50, having, 
in less than three years, been tapped fifty -eight times 
for the dropsy, by which he had had taken from him 
1032 quarts of water.
Near the church is a free-school, which was 
founded, by subscription, about the middle of the 
17th century.
There is a good house for the mas- 
ter, and a cupola on its summit for an observatory.
On the hill behind the school was formerly a beacon.
The brow of this eminence has been cut into a very 
pleasant walk, commanding a fine view of the estu- 
ary of the Dee, and of the more distant parts of 
Lancashire.
At the foot of the hill are butts for the 
practice of archery, a science which is now only ex- 
ercised for diversion.
Great quantities of potatoes are cultivated in this 
parish.
For some years past, the amount is said to 
have been not less than 100,000 bushels, of nearly 
one hundred- weight each, annually.
Gawswortii.] — Gawsworth is three miles and a 
half south-west by west from Macclesfield, in the 
hundred of that name.
In the church are some monuments of the Fittons, 
a family in which the manor vva^; long vested.
The 
7 
monument of Sir Edward Fitton, who died A.
D. 
1619, has some miserable verses, the last of which 
eulogises the deceased and his family, as " Fitt-ons 
to weare a heavenly diadem." The church is a 
handsome structure.
Halton.] — Halton is a chapelry in the parish of 
Runcorn, in the hundred of Bucklow, three miles 
north-north-east from Frodsham.
Its name signi- 
fies a town upon a hill.
Halton was part of the barony of Nigel, to whom 
it was given by Hugh Lupus, his relation and com- 
mander, to be held by the service of leading the 
Cheshire army into Wales, whenever it should be 
necessary.
Nigel was also made the Earl's Mar- 
shal, and Constable of Cheshire.
From the pos- 
terity of Nigel it came to the crown, and it now 
constitutes a considerable part of the duchy of Lan- 
caster, having round it a large jurisdiction, called 
the honour of Halton.
In this manor was a custom, 
that if, in driving cattle over the common, the driver 
suffered them to graze or take a thistle, he should 
pay a halfpenny per head to the lord of the fee, which 
was called thistletake.
Halton manor had considerable privileges bestow- 
ed upon it, and the town was constituted a borough 
and market-town ; the castle was a favourite hunt- 
ing seat of John of Gaunt.
The castle was entirely demolished during the 
Civil Wars in the reign of Charles the First, and 
has ever since remained in ruins.
There is, how- 
ever, a more modern building, used as an inn, con- 
taining a court house, and called a prison, though 
now never used as such.
The Earl of Cholmonde- 
ley is the proprietor, under the crown.
The prospects from Halton Castle arc highly in- 
teresting.
Northwards, the river Mersey, winding 
through a fertile plain, may be distinctly traced 
from the neighbourhood of Warrington, where its 
breadth is little more than one hundred yards, to its 
expansion into a wide channel, contracting at Run- 
corn Gap and again dilating into the estuary which 
extends to the sea.
Beyond this river the county 
of Lancashire appears like a vast forest, from the 
numerous hedge-rows of its enclosures.
To the 
west the view comprehends a large circuit of Che- 
shire, bounded by the Welch mountains, and broken 
at intermediate distances by scattered hamlets and 
cultivated grounds.
Halton had a market on Saturdays, and an an- 
nual fair on old Lady-Day ; but they have been long 
discontinued.
Here is a charity-school of long - 
standing, and an alms-house for six poor old ser- 
vants.
Norton, and Stockham, are townships in 
the chapelry of Halton.
Harden Hall.] — Harden Hall, situated in the 
manor and township of Bredbury, in the parish of 
Stockport, was formerly the residence of the Ardeu 
family ; but at present it is occupied as a farm- 
house.
This edifice, which is surrounded with a 
moat, consists of a centre and two wings, built in the 
form of the letter H ; it is situated on the brow of 
a steep 
CHESHIRE.
331 
a steep hill, and is reported to have been once oc- 
cupied by the famous John of Gaunt, though the 
date 1558, which appears on the building, invalidates 
this report.
This house contains a great number 
of paintings, many of which were brought hither from 
Utkington Hall, near Delamere Forest ; their ge- 
neral merit is below mediocrity.
The following, 
however, are entitled to some notice :— Democritus 
and Heraclitus, the Wise Men's Offering, Queen 
Eleanor and Fair Rosamond, the Grecian Daughter, 
Pluto and Cerberus, and the burning of Troy ; 
amongst the portraits are Lord Chancellor Egerton, 
Sir Thomas More, Sir Kenelm Digby, Sir John 
and Lady Done, the Lord Keeper Coventry, copied 
from Johnson, by Lupo ; Judge Clynch, in his 
robes, by Ravenscroft ; Duke Hamilton, the Earl 
of Warwick, Oliver Cromwell, James II.
Charles II.
and Mrs. Lane, with the motto, " Sic, sic juvat ire 
sub umbra." This lady, after the battle of Wor- 
cester, by the address with which she managed the 
escape of Charles II.
through the midland counties 
to the sea, may be considered as the principal means 
of the escape of that monarch ; and it appears to 
have made a considerable impression on his grati- 
tude, as the following letter written by him, the ori- 
ginal of which is in the possession of a gentleman at 
Manchester, strongly testifies : — 
" Mrs. Lane, I have hitherto deferred writing to 
you, in hope to be able to send you somewhat els 
besides a letter; and I believe it troubles me more 
that I cannot yett doe it, than it does you ; though 
I doe not take you to be in a good condition longe 
to expect it.
The truth is, my necessityes are 
greater than can be imagined ; but I am promised 
they will be shortlye supplyed : if they are, you 
shall be sure to receave a share ; for it is impossible 
I can ever forgett the great debte I owe you, which 
I hops I shall live to pay, in a degree that is wor- 
thy of me.
In the mean time, I am sure all who 
love me will be kind to you, els I shall never think 
them so to your affectionate friend, 
" Charles Rex." 
"Paris, Nov. 23, 1652." 
Holmes Chapel.] — Holmes Chapel, or Church 
Holme, is seated on the banks of the Dane, over 
which it has a stone bridge, which was built about 
twenty-five years ago by John Needham, Esq.
This village is between four and five miles east by 
north from Middlewich.
It has a charity-school for 
ten boys and ten girls.
Hooton Hall.] — Hooton is a township of Eas- 
ham, nine miles north by west from Chester.
The 
* Whitaker, having sought the road from Mancunium, or 
Manchester, towards Condate, discovered its elevated and 
" well gravelled" surface in many places.
" Its whole length," 
says he, " from Newbridge to Buckley-Hill is denominated 
street ; which Horsley and Percival have written Kind Street ; 
but it is invariably spoken King Street by the people, and leads 
directly to Kiaderlon, leaving" Northwich about half a mile lo 
hall is the seat of the oldest branch of the Stanley 
family.
It is a very fine mansion, erected only a 
few years ago.
Its situation is singularly beautiful, 
being near the eastern extremity of the AVirrall 
hundred, on the banks of the Mersey, and command- 
ing a fine view of that river, and all the contiguous 
country, to Liverpool.
The ancient hall was a tim- 
ber and plaster building, with a stone tower rising 
from the centre, equal in height to many churches.
Here are some old whole length paintings of the 
Earls of Chester, &c.
Hyde.] — Hyde, or Hyde Chapel, sometimes 
called Gee-Cross, is one of the townships of Stock- 
port, four miles north-east by east from that town.
As a village, it is of modern date ; the only build- 
ings in the place, till within forty or fifty years> 
having been a chapel for dissenters, and one soli- 
tary house.
It now resembles a small town ; the 
houses ranging along each side of the road for nearly 
a mile.
Near it is another modern village, called 
Red-Pump- Street.
Hyde Hall, the ancient seat of the Hydes, is now 
the property of William Hulton, Esq. and is occu- 
pied as a farm-house.
Hyde Mill, in this village, is the seat of George 
Hyde Clark, Esq. a branch of the Clarendon family.
It is situated in a romantic spot, on the banks of a 
small river, and surrounded with bold swelling 
eminences, gradually sloping to the water's edge.
The house is an old brick building, with a plain 
modern front.
It contains an original whole length 
of the great Earl Clarendon, and several other good 
paintings.
At a little distance from the house is a 
neat bridge of one arch, built a few years since, for 
the accommodation of those who frequent the coal 
mines which are worked on this estate, which ex- 
tends to both sides of the river Tame.
A Weir on 
the Lancashire side, formed to supply a water-en- 
gine, causes the river above it to assume the ap- 
pearance of a large lake, which, with the cascade 
produced by the falling of the water in a broad 
sheet to a considerable depth, adds great interest to 
the surrounding scenery.
The grounds are tolera- 
bly well wooded ; and the general character of the 
seat is elegantly picturesque.
Ince.] — In this chapelry, which is five miles west 
by south from Frodsham, is a farm-house, fitted up 
from the ruins of an ancient Gothic building, which, 
according to tradition, was a grange belonging to 
the monks of Chester.
Kinderton.] — The village of Kinderton, sup- 
posed by Whitaker, and some others, to have been 
the Condate of the Romans,- is in the parish of 
Middlewich, 
the right.
Here, therefore the termination of the road, and the 
length of the distance, invite us strongly to search for a station.
The name of Condate is loudly echoed in that of Kinderton.
And what is much more weighty, this is the first place conve- 
nient for a camp about the requisite distance from Manchester.
The Kind Street, pointing down the bank of the river to the 
bridge of Ravenscroft, foiued the channel two or three yards to 
the 
332 
CHESHIRE.
Middlewich, about one mile and a half eastward from 
that town.
Kinderton was the ancient seat of the barony 
which was given by the first Earl of Chester to 
Gilbert de Venables, one of his relations.
The Ve- 
nables family have been greatly distinguished by 
their military prowess.
The manor and barony 
continued in the family, till the death of Peter Ve- 
nables, the last Baron of Kinderton, A.
D. 1679, 
when the estate passed, hi marriage with his daugh- 
ter, to the Earl of Abingdon.
His lordship dying 
without issue, it devolved to Henry Vernon, Esq.
whose mother was the sister of the last Baron of 
liinderton.
George Venables, Lord Vernon, whose 
father was, A.
D. 1762, created Baron Vernon of 
Kinderton, is the present possessor.
The Barons of Kinderton are said to have exer- 
cised their privilege of life and death, which was 
enjoyed by the eight Cheshire Barons, down to the 
execution of Hugh stringer, for murder, in the year 
1597.
The old hall of Kinderton was pulled down up- 
wards of half a century ago.
Samuel Hill, Esq. is 
the occupant of the lodge.
The township of Moston, which lies about two 
miles and a half west by north from Sandbach, was 
parcel of the barony of Kinderton, with which it de- 
scended in the year 1801, when Lord Vernon said 
it to the Rev. John Armitstead, of Middlewich.
Knutsford.] — The town of Knutsi'ord is in the 
hundred of Bucklow, twenty-seven miles north-east 
by east from Chester.
It has a market on Satur- 
days ; and three annual fairs, on Whit-Tuesday, 
July 10, and November 8.
Knutsford is said to derive its name from the 
circumstance of the Danish King Canute passing 
a ford after a victory gained by his army in the ad- 
jacent fields.
The author of Vale Royal says — 
" Knutsford, as I think, should be called in Latine, 
Vaclum Canuti, L e.
The ford of Canutus.
That 
where the market is kept is called Nether Kuuts- 
ford ; and the other part of the town scituate higher, 
which is separated by a brook, which they call the 
Bickin, called the Higher Town ; and somewhat 
remote from thence the parochial chappel, which is 
within Rosthern parish.
And the Nether Town 
the right of the bridge, and entered the iield beyond it ; and 
Itere it lias been actually discovered.- This is denominated the 
Harbours Field ; and was plainly the site of the Roman station.
The particular position of the ground between the rivers Croco 
and Dane is a strong argument of itself.
The appellation of the 
close is an additional evidence ; the Harbours Field signifying 
the area of the military station : the site and name, the remains 
about it, and the tradition concerning it, are decisive proofs.
The ground is nearly a parallelogram, about ten statute acres in 
extent, bounded by a natural bank, lofty and steep on one 
side, with the river Croco curling at the foot of it ; and by an- 
other bank, less lofty, but more steep, on a second side ; with 
the Dane running directly under it: the former river falls into 
the latter at the angle of the field.
On the third side, but se- 
veral yards within the bridge, are considerable remains of a 
ditch rising up the ascent, and exhibiting marks of having been 
having also a chappel in it for divine service, and a 
Town House, where the justices and magistrates of 
the county keep their sessions, and other meetings 
of that nature.
The seignory hereof belongeth to 
the said Right Honourable Earl (of Bridgwater) 
last above-mentioned." After the Conquest, Knuts- 
i'ord became part of the barony of Halton ; but, in 
the reign of Edward I.
it was in the possession of 
William de Tableigh.
In the year 1711, Knutsford was made a distinct 
parish, and the ancient chapel mentioned above by 
King, was taken down, and a parish church built in 
the Tentrycroft.
The church is handsome, and has 
a very fine organ.
The town of Knutsford is pleasantly situated, and 
contains several good houses.
The expenditure of 
the numerous families of gentry that reside in its 
immediate vicinity considerably contributes to its 
prosperity, and the support of its trade.
On the mar- 
riage of any of its inhabitants, the friends and ac- 
quaintance of the parties practise the singular cus- 
tom of strewing their doorways with brown sand ; 
and on this they figure various fanciful and emble- 
matical devices, with diamond squares, scallops, &c.
in white sand ; and over the whole are occasionally 
strewed the flowers of the season.
The principal employment of the lower classes of 
the inhabitants is in the cotton factories, and in mak- 
ing thread.
The flax used in the manufacture of 
the latter article is chiefly brought from Russia, 
Ireland, and Hamburgh, though a small portion of 
it is grown in Yorkshire.
Some years ago it was 
usually spun at Knutsford, from the raw material ; 
but it is now principally spun abroad, and brought 
to this place in the state of yarn, the flax spinners 
having engaged in the more lucrative and increas- 
ing business of cotton weaving.
There is also a 
silk-mill, built in imitation of those at Stockport, 
in this county.
Shag velvets are also manufactured 
at Knutsford.
Booth's, or Booth's Hall, about a mile south-east 
from Knutford is the seat of Willoughby Legh, Esq.
It is a plain structure, situated in an extensive park, 
ornamented with some fine pieces of water.
The 
lake in front of the house is particularly beautiful ; 
and the prospects surrounding it are very fiue, the 
once continued along the hollow of the adjoining lane.
On 
the fourth the ancient ditch retains its original appearance, be- 
ing a steep foss, about ten yards in depth, and eight in breadth 
at the top : this was formerly converted, like part of the other, 
into the course of a road, but has lately been made the channel 
of a current.
Such was the station of Contlate." A road also 
has been discovered issuing from Kinderton, commonly called 
the Roman road, which appears, from its direction, to have led 
to Mepiolanum, in Shropshire.
Another vsent up Holm-street- 
hall to Chester; and a third extended by Street-Forge and 
Red-street to Chesterton, near Newcastle, The most accurate 
account of the distance between Manchester and Kinderton, 
states it to be about twenty-two English miles, which are very 
nearly equal to twenty-three and three quarters Roman ; a dis- 
tance which corresponds with the number in the tenth Iter of 
Richard.
country 
CHESHIRE.
333 ' 
country being open to a great extent, and agreeably 
diversified.
In this mansion is a large painting of 
the Death of Dido, by Guerehino.
The expression 
of several of the figures is extremely graceful ; but 
they are somewhat too crowded ; and the por- 
trait of the painter has been injudiciously intro- 
duced.
Lymm.] — Lymm is a pleasant village, seven miles 
and a half north-west by north from Nether-Knuts- 
ford.
At this place the Duke of Bridge water's Ca- 
nal is carried to a groat height over a stream, form- 
ing a mill-dam, and turning a mill which was for- 
merly employed for slitting iron, and flattening it 
into boons for the cooper's use.
The village con- 
tains several good houses.
The situation of the 
parsonage is particularly admired ; it stands on an 
eminence, which commands a fine prospect of a 
deep and romantic valley.
Lymm has an ancient 
cross, ornamented with niches and tracery.
A free 
grammar-school was founded here in the year 1797.
Lyme.] — Lyme, or Lyme-Handley, is a township 
in the parish of Prestbury, seven miles north-east by 
north from Macclesfield.
The manor of Lyme was given by Richard II.
to 
Margaret, wife of Piers Legb, daughter of Sir Tho- 
mas Daniers, of Bradley, a brave knight, who had 
taken the Chamberlain Tankerville prisoner, at the 
battle of Cressy, and relieved the banner of the 
Black Prince.
Lyme Hall is the seat of the principal family of 
the Leghs.
It is built in an elevated situation, and the 
park is very extensive ; but the surrounding country 
is bleak, moorish, and unfruitful.
The plan of the 
building is quadrangular, but composed of very in- 
congruous parts, the north and east angles being 
of the age of Elizabeth, or James the First : the 
south and west sides are more modern, and erect- 
ed from the designs of Leoni, in the regular Ionic 
order.
Three sides of the enclosed court are sur- 
rounded with a piazza, which gives an air of gran- 
deur to the whole edifice.
In this mansion are several family pictures ; and, 
amongst them, a portrait of Dr. John Hewitt, who 
was beheaded in the year 1658.
" In the great 
hall, over the fire-place, is the portrait of a venera- 
ble old man, who was seventy years keeper of the 
park ; in the year 1705, being then in his hundred 
and second year, he is said to have hunted a buck 
during a chace of nearly six hours."* 
* The following extraordinary circumstance is recorded hi a 
patent of augmentation of the arms and crest of Thomas Vena- 
bles, of Goulborne in the County of Chester, Gent, who was 
lineally descended from Sir Gilbert Venables, Knight, cousin- 
german to King William the Conqueror.
His crest was a 
Demie Dragon, gules, issuing out of a Welson, or YVyer to 
take fisli, argent.
" A terrible dragon made bis abode in the 
lordship of Moston, in the county of Chester, where he de- 
voured all such persons as he laid" hould on, which the said 
Thomas Venables hearing tell of, considering the pitiful and 
dayly destruction of the people without recovery, who, in fol- 
lowing the example of the valliant Romans, and other worthy 
VOL.
I. — NO.
24.
The Park, which contains above 1000 acres, is 
well stocked with deer, and the venison is of a su- 
perior flavour.
In the park there is also a herd of 
upwards of twenty wild cattle, similar to those in 
Lord Tankerville's park at Chillingham, in North- 
umberland, principally white, with red ears.
" They 
have been in the park," as we learn from Messrs.
Lysons, " beyond the memory of any one living - ; 
and as there is no account of when they were origi- 
nally placed there, the tradition is that they are in- 
digenous.
In hot weather these cattle usually herd 
on the hills and high grounds, in winter in the 
woody parts of the park ; in severe weather they are 
fed with hay, for which, before the hollies, with which 
the bark abounded, were cut down, holly-branches 
were substituted.
Two of the cows are generally 
for beef.
A very remarkable custom of driving the 
red deer, which has not been practised in any other 
park, either in England or abroad, was established 
about a century ago at Lyme-park, by the old park- 
keeper above-mentioned ; it was his custom in the 
months of May and June, when their horns are ten- 
der, to go on horseback with a rod in his hand, 
round the hills of his extensive park, and having 
collected the deer, to drive them before him like a 
common herd of horned cattle, sometimes everu 
opening a gate for them to pass through.
When 
they came to a place before the hall, called the deer- 
clod, they would stand in a collected body as long 
as the spectators thought fit ; the young ones fol- 
lowing their dams, and the old stags rising one 
against another and combating with their fore-feet, 
not daring at that season of the year to make use of 
their horns.
At the command of the keeper they 
would then move forwards to a large piece of water, 
called the horse-pool, and swim through the whole 
length of it, after which they were allowed to dis- 
perse.
There is a print of this custom of driving 
the deer in Lyme-park by Vivares, from a painting 
by Smith (1745).
The driving of the deer is now 
seldom practised ; when it is, it takes place in the 
month of July or August." 
Macclesfield.] — Macclesfield, anciently Max- 
field, is a thriving corporate town, situated in the 
hundred to which it gives name, in the parish of 
Prestbury, thirty-eight miles east by north from 
Chester.
The Corporation consists of a mayor, 
twenty-four aldermen, a town -clerk, and other offi- 
cers.
It has a weekly market on Mondays ; at 
men, not regarding his own life, in comparison of the commo- 
dity and safeguard of his countrymen, did in his own person 
valliantly and courageously set on the said Dragon, when first 
he shot him through with an arrow, and afterwards with other 
weapons manfully slew h'un, at which instant the said Dragon 
was devouring of a child ; for the which his worth v and valliant 
act, was given unto him the lordship of Moston, by the ances- 
tors of 4he Earls of Oxford, the lords of the fee there.
And 
also ever since the said Thomas and his heirs, in remembrance 
thereof, have used to bear as well in arms as in the crest, a 
Dragon." The Patent of Augmentation is dated the 30lh of 
October, in the vear 1560.
4 p 
which 
iid4 
CHESHIRE, 
which considerable quantities of corn used, formerly, 
to be sold ; but the corn trade has since declined.
Here are five annual fairs — May 6, June 22, July 11, 
October 4, and November 11.
They are chiefly for 
pedlar's wares, toys, cutlery, and cloth.
Macclesfield, as a chapelry, contains the following 
townships : Macclesfield, Macclesfield Forest, 
Hurdsfield, Kettleshulme, Pott-Shrigley, Rainow, 
Sutton, Wildboar-Clough, and Wincle.
The town is seated on the declivity of a steep hill, 
near the borders of the bleak and dreary district still 
icnown by the name of Macclesfield Forest.
A 
branch of the little river Jordan, or Bollin, runs 
through the lower part of the town, and is gene- 
rally called the Waters.
The inhabitants are also 
supplied with water from the fountain upon the 
common to the east of the town, for which 
every housekeeper pays a small yearly sum to the 
mayor.
Macclesfield was first incorporated by charter, 
granted in the year 1261, by Prince Edward, son of 
Henry the Third, then Earl of Chester.
By this 
charter, it obtained the privileges of a merchant's 
guild, free from toll throughout the county, and the 
burgesses were obliged to grind and bake at the 
King's mill and oven, as was usual, and to pay one 
shilling for each burgage.
This charter was con- 
firmed by various succeeding monarchs, and the 
corporation invested with additional privileges.
The 
town-clerk is always coroner for the borough ; and 
the mayor is always lord of the manor, the revenues 
of which amount to 2001.
per annum, arising from 
the tolls and water-money.
He also possesses the 
right of appointing the minister of one of the churches 
ov chapels.
In the town-chest is said to be pre- 
served a copy or counterpart of a petition which 
was sent to King Henry the Eighth, soon after the 
battle of Floddon Field, setting forth that having 
lost so many of the principal inhabitants of the town 
in that battle, they were unable to fill up the num- 
ber of aldermen, as required by the charter, on 
which account they petitioned the King, that their 
charter might not be broken or lost, as their inhabi- 
tants had lost their lives in his Majesty's service.
It has been stated, however, upon good authority, 
that no such paper is now in existence.
Macclesfield being in the parish of Prestbury, its 
two churches are to be considered only as chapels of 
ease to that parish.
The old church, dedicated to 
St. Michael, is a large Gothic structure, founded by 
Edward the First and Eleanor his Queen, in the 
year 1279.
Since that time it has undergone vari- 
ous alterations ; and, in 1740, it was nearly rebuilt, 
and enlarged, at the expence of a thousand pounds.
It lias an oratory and a chapel annexed ; the former 
of which was built by Thomas Savage, Archbishop 
of York, whose heart was interred here, A.
U. 1508.
It Was then made the burial-place of his family, for 
whom it contain;; several marble monuments ; but it 
now belongs to Earl Cholmondeley.
Amongst the 
mouumeuts of the Savago or Rivers family is an 
elegant effigy of Earl Rivers, leaning upon his pil- 
low, supporting his head with his right hand, full 
dressed, and the curtains undrawn, neatly cut in 
marble.
On the wall of this chapel is a brass plate, 
representing a pardon, granted by the Pope of 
Rome, to a woman and her seven children ; it is 
inscribed : — 
" The pardon for saying V paternosters, and V 
aves, and a crede, is XXVI thousand years, and 
XXVI days of pardon." 
Here is also a small chapel, belonging to the fa- 
mily of Legh, the Lords of Lyme, which has a brass- 
plate on the wall, thus inscribed : — 
" Here lyeth the body of Perkin a Legh, 
That for King Richard the death did dye, 
Betray'd for Righteousness : 
And the bones of Sir Peers his sonne, 
That for King Henrv the Vth did wonne, 
At fans.
That Perkin served King Edward the Third, and 
the Black Prince, his son, in all their wars in France, 
and was at the battle of Cressie, and had Lyme given 
him for that service: and after tlieir deaths, served 
King Richard the Second, and left him not in his 
troubles, but was taken with him, and beheaded at 
Chester by King Henry the Fourth.
And the said 
Sir Peers, his son, served King Henry the Fifth, and 
was slain at the battle of Agineourt.
In their me- 
mory Sir Peter Legh, of Lyme, Knt. descended 
from them, finding the said old verses, written up- 
on a stone in this chapel, did re-edify this place, 
A. D.
1626." 
The heroic action here erroneously ascribed to 
Piers Legh was, in fact, that of Sir Thomas Da- 
niers, his father-in-law, as already stated in our ac- 
count of Lyme.
The tower of this church, or parochial chapel, 
contains eight bells, and is 72 feet high.
The building of the new church, or chapel, was 
commenced on the 22d of March, 1775 ; and it was 
opened on the 19th of October following.
This 
structure was raised, by the late Charles Roe, Esq.
Avhose bust, beautifully executed by Bacon, is plac- 
ed above the altar, with the figure of Genius weep- 
ing over him, and a cog-wheel in her hand.
There 
is also an inscription to his memory, describing him 
as particularly conversant with the mineral strata of 
the county ; and adding, that he discovered the va- 
luable mines in Anglesea, and first established the 
silk and copper manufactures at Macclesfield.
At 
his first entrance into business, Mr. Roe was the 
conductor of the button and twist manufactures, 
which had long been the staple commodities of the 
town.
This church is a very regular and elegant pile of 
building, 33 yards long, 22 wide, and ten and a half 
high, besides the tower and chancel ; the tower is 
42 yards high, six yards square within, and has ten 
bells.
It has a handsome organ, and a mahogany 
pulpot.
In the church-yavd, which is open and spa- 
2 cious.
CHESHIRE.
335 
cious, over the family vault of Rowe, is a handsome 
monument, in the form of a pyramid.
The chief trade of Macclesfield, as already ob- 
served, is that of wrought buttons, in silk, mohair, 
und twist ; it is now 200 years since this article was 
first used.
They were at one time curiously wrought 
with the needle, and used in the decoration of full- 
trimmed suits.
Macclesfield was always considered 
as the centre of this trade; and, for many years, mills 
have been erected, both at this place and at Stock- 
port, for winding- silk, and making twist and trim- 
ming suitable to the buttons.
The following curious particulars relative to this 
trade, and to the manners of some of the inhabitants 
of this neighbourhood, are recorded in Dr. Aikiu's 
description of the country round Manchester.
— " In 
the wild country between Broxton, Leek, and Mac- 
clesfield, called the Flash, from a chapel of that 
name, lived a set of pedestrian chapmen, who hawk- 
ed about these buttons, together with ribbons and 
ferretting, made at Leek : and handkerchiefs, with 
small wares, from Manchester.
These pedlars were 
known on the roads they travelled by the appella- 
tion of Flashmen, and frequented farm-houses and 
fairs, using a sort of slang or cant dialect.
At first 
they paid ready money for their goods till they ac- 
quired credit, which they were sure to extend till 
there was no more to be had, when they dropped 
their connections without paying, and formed new 
©nes.
They long went on thus, enclosing the com- 
mon where they dwelt, for a trifling payment, and 
building cottages, till they began to have farms, 
which they improved from the gains of their credit, 
without troubling themselves about payment, since 
no bailiff for a long time attempted to send a writ 
there.
At length a resolute officer, a native of the 
district, ventured to arrest several of them ; whence, 
their credit being destroyed, they changed the wan- 
dering life of pedlars for the settled care of their 
farms ; but as these were held by no leases, they 
were left at the mercy of the lords of the soil, the 
Harpur family-, who made them pay for their impo- 
sition on others.
Another set of pedestrians were 
called Broken-Cross Gang, from a place of that 
name between Macclesfield and Congleton.
These 
associated with the Flashmen at fairs, playing with 
thimbles and buttons, like jugglers with cups and 
balls, and enticing people to lose their money by 
gambling : they at length took to the kindred trades 
of robbing and picking pockets, till at last the gang 
was broken up by the hands of justice.
The cha- 
racter of Autolicus, in Shakespear's Winter's Tale, 
seems to have been a correct model of this worthy 
brotherhood." 
To favour the twist button trade, an act of Par- 
liament was passed, nearly a century ago, inflicting 
a penalty on the wearing of moulds covered with 
the same stuff as the garment; and this, after hav- 
ing fallen into disuse, was again attempted to be 
enforced in the year 1778, by the offensive project 
of huiug informers.
The result was unfavourable, 
as it tended to promote the use of metal and horn 
buttons, instead of tiie particular kind, which occa- 
sioned the attempt to revive the penalty.
The trade 
is still considerable ; and the penal act, we believe, 
has never been repealed.
The cotton trade, however, is rapidly gaiuing 
ground upon the older manufactures.
In addition 
to many cotton factories, Macclesfield has a consi- 
derable manufactory for fustians, linen cloth, &c.
thirty mills for the throwing of silk for weavers, and 
making sewing silk ; and very extensive works for 
smelting and working copper, and making brass.
These are situated on a large common, cast of the 
town, and consist of a spacious building, called the 
Smelting-Houses ; a large windmill, for grinding 
the ore ; a range of low building, called Calamy 
Houses, where the calamine is repeatedly washed in 
running water ; and the Brass-Houses, where the 
copper is made into sheets for sheathing ; and pan 
bottoms, brass wire, and brass nails, manufactured.
In the Smelting-Houses the ore is melted and refin- 
ed ; the metal cast into shot ; and large furnace 
bricks and melting-pots made.
In front of the 
works are three spacious reservoirs for the supply of 
water, and a row of dwelling-houses for the numer- 
ous workmen.
On the same common is a large 
colliery, with four seams of coal rising one above 
another ; whence the town and the copper-works 
are furnished with fuel.
In the neighbourhood of 
the works is an extensive brewery, which is supplied 
with water from a hill much higher than its roof.
The river runs in front, and turns a corn-mill, and 
many of the silk-mills.
On MacclesfieldCommon are about 40 brick-kilns, 
and the mountains, which are seen on the left hand, 
produce all sorts of stone for the supply of the town, 
such as slate, flag, and grave stones ; some of which 
have been found *21 feet long.
In Macclesfield, the increase of population has 
been astonishingly rapid ; the number of inhabitants 
having been considerably more than doubled within 
the last forty years ; the buildings have also been 
proportionality augmented, and the length of the 
town is now nearly a mile and a half.
This enlarge- 
ment has arisen from the numerous manufactories 
which have been established here, originating in a 
certain degree from the quantities of coal and other 
minerals that may be read.ly procured in its neigh- 
bourhood.
The Dissenters from the established religion are 
numerous : the Presbyterians, Quakers, and Inde- 
pendants, each have a meeting-house ; and the Me- 
thodists have two.
Sir John Percival, Lord Mayor of London, of 
which town he was a native, founded a grammar- 
school at Macclesfield, about the commencement of 
the 16th century, for all children, without exceptiou, 
that should be sent thither.
This school was fur- 
ther endowed with considerable lands, houses, &c.
by Edward VI.
The original endowment of tin* 
seminary was of the annual value of twenty-one 
pounds.
336 
CHESHIRE.
pounds, five shillings ; hut the present yearly income 
is upwards of 3001.
and en the falling in of some 
leases granted on certain lives, will be augmented 
to nearly 7001.
The annual salary of the principal 
master is 1001.
that of the second master 601.
A 
few years ago, the governors of this institution esta- 
blished a writing-school for girls, for the accommo- 
dation of this town and its neighbourhood.
There is a roomy dwelling-house for the head 
master, and a field lor the exercise and recreation of 
the scholars.
The town of Macclesfield has three alms-houses, 
which were erected and endowed, in the year 1703, 
by Mrs. Elizabeth Stanley, relict of Mr. James Stan- 
ley, of the family of Alderley, daughter and heiress 
of John Byram, alderman of the borough, for the 
maintenance of three poor widows, who have their 
settlement in the town, with a penny a day to each 
for ever.
Malpas.] — Malpas is a market-town, in the hun- 
dred of Broxton, sixteen miles south-south -east from 
Chester.
It has three annual fairs — April 5, July 
2-5, and December 8.
Wednesday is market-day.
— The Romans called this town Malo Passus ; and 
its ancient British name, as mentioned in the 
Doomsday Book, was Depenbach, both allusive to 
the badness of the neighbouring roads ; and, it is 
deserving of remark that, to the present day, there 
is no turnpike-road, in any direction, which leads to 
Malpas.
That, however, which leads from Chester 
to Whitchurch, passes through the parish ; and it is 
said to have been in contemplation to make a turn- 
pike-road fromTarporley, through Malpas, to Wrex- 
ham.
The town now consists of three paved streets.
— 
It was one of the eight baronies of Hugh Lupus, 
who bestowed it on Robert Fitz-Hugh.
In the 
reign of Henry II.
it was held by William Fitz- 
Patric, one of whose female descendants married 
Hugh de Sutton, who by that means obtained some 
portion of the barony.
Another part became the 
property of David de Malpas, from whom it seems 
to have passed to Urian de St. Pierre, frequently 
called Sampler: Robert, a lineal descendant of 
Hugh, first Baron Malpas, took the name of Chol- 
mondeley from that lordship, which was given to 
him by his father.
His grandson Robert, marrying 
into the family of St. Pierre, acquired their moiety 
of this barony, and from him it descended to the 
present Earl Chohnondeley, whose second title is 
Viscount Malpas.* 
There was formerly a castle in Malpas, of which 
there are now no remains ; and, in the reign of 
Edward 111.
there was also a small monastery, 
a cell to the alien priory of Montacute in Somer- 
setshire.
* The Earl is descended from Sir Robert Cholmondeley, 
who was created a Baronet in 16 1 I, and Viscount Chohr.oude- 
l»-y of Kellis, Earl o( Leinster in Ireland, and Iiaron Cholnion- 
The church is situated on the highest part of the 
town.
It is a very handsome structure, and endow- 
ed with" an ample revenue, which maintains two 
rectors and two curates.
In this church is the fa- 
mily vault belonging to Earl Cholmondeley, in 
which many of his illustrious ancestors lie en- 
tombed.
In a chapel at the east end of the south aisle, is 
the tomb of one of the Breretons (supposed to be 
Sir Randal Breretou, whose younger son, Sir Wil- 
liam, was beheaded, A.
D. 1535, for supposed fami- 
liarity with the unfortunate Anne Boleyn) and his 
lady, with their effigies in alabaster, and a mutilat- 
ed inscription of the date of 15-22.
The parish re- 
gister records the interment, in 1797, of Catherine 
Richardson, widow, aged 107.
Towards the close of the 17th century, a gram- 
mar-school was founded at Malpas by subscription.
Hugh, the first Lord Cholmondeley, gave 2001.
on 
condition that he and his heirs should nominate the 
master.
The blue-school in this town was founded 
about the year 1680 by Richard Alport, Esq. for 
twelve boys.
Here is also an alms-house for six 
poor women, which was rebuilt by Lord Cholmon- 
deley in 1721.
The parish of Malpas contains the following 
townships: — Iscoyd (in Flintshire), Malpas, Ag- 
den, Bickerton, Bickley, Bradley, Broxton, Bulke- 
ley, Chidlough, Cholmondeley, Chorlton, Cud- 
dington, Duckington, Edge, Egerton, Hampton, 
Larkton or Larton, Macefen, Newton, Oldcastle, 
Overton, Stockton, Tushington-cum-Grindley, Wi- 
cough or Wichalgh, and Wigland.
The township of Broxton gives name to one of 
the hundreds.
There is a very fine prospect from 
the terrace of Broxton Hall.
The manor, or reput- 
ed manor, of Bolesworth, a hamlet of this township, 
belonged to the Duttons, in the reigns of Elizabeth, 
James, and Charles I.
About the middle of the 
18th century, part of the estate was purchased by 
James Tilson, Esq. He raised a structure iu the 
Gothic style, called Bolesworth Castle.
Situated 
on an eminence, it commanded a very delightful 
prospect.
It is now the property and residence of 
Thomas Tarlton, Esq.
— Barn-hill, an eminence 
commanding a rich and extensive prospect, and 
which is the half-way stage between Chester and 
Whitchurch, is in this township.
Cholmondeley Hall, the seat of Earl Cholmonde- 
ley, about four miles north-east from Malpas, was a 
fine venerable structure, with gardens, moated 
round.
From its low and damp situation, however, 
it was a disagreeable residence; and, in 1801, with 
the exceptiou of one wing, which was fitted up for 
the residence of the steward, it was pulled down.
In the same year, Cholmondeley Castle, the preseut 
deley in England, by Charles I.
The titles of Baron Malpas, 
and 'Earl Chohnondeley, were first conferred on Bugk, Sir 
Robert's great nephew, by Queen Anne, in the year 1706.
seat 
CHESHIRE.
8o7 
seat of the Earl was begun, from a design of his 
lordship.
It was finished in 1804.
It stands about 
half a mile from the old hall, on a more elevated and 
pleasant site.
During a great part of the Civil War, Cholmon- 
deley House was a garrison, and it appears repeat- 
edly to have changed masters.
It was in the hands 
of the Royalists on the 30th of June 1644, when we 
are told that " the Earl of Denbigh went before 
break of day with three or four pieces of ordnance 
and four cases of drakes, summoned the garrison, 
and shot through the house several times ; the be- 
siegers at last beat the garrison out of the house 
into their works, where they defended themselves 
some time, but at length, about one in the afternoon, 
called for quarter, which was allowed ; when the 
* This Henry Bradshaw was the brother of the celebrated 
John Bradshaw, who presided in the high Court of Justice on 
the trial of Charles I.
He was a descendant from the family 
.of Bradshaw, in Derbyshire, but born at Wybeislegh, in the 
township of Marple, and parish of Stockport.
In the register 
of Stockport, his name is thus entered : •' John the sonne of 
Henrie Bradshaw, of Marple, was baptized 10th Dec. 1602." 
Opposite to this, the word "Traitor" is written in another hand.
The Judge relates in his will, that he had his school-education 
at Bunbury, in Cheshire, and Middleton, in Lancashire ; and 
tradition adds, that lie was also for some time at Macclesfield ; 
with the strange circumstance annexed to the tale, that he 
wrote the following sentence on a stone in the church-yard 
there : — 
My brother Henry must heir the land, 
My brother Frank must be at his command ; 
Whilst I, poor Jack, will do that 
That all the worl ; shall wonder at.
Bradshaw served his clerkship with an attorney at Congleton, 
to which place he returned, after residing some time in Gray's 
Inn, and practised 's counsellor at law.
He was first employed 
in the affairs of Government, in the year 1644.
In 1(346, he 
was appointed one of the three Commissioners of the Great Seal 
for six onths.
In February 1647, both Houses voted him the 
olnce l- Chief Justice of Chester; and he was also made one 
of tn." j ;:lees for Wales.
On the third of January, 1648-9, 
when the Lor<!s had adjourned their House, and it was found on 
their journal, that they had rejected the ordinance for the trial 
of the Km', the Commons voted the business to be performed 
by themselves alone, and chose Bradshaw, then Serjeant, and 
others, for assistants.
On the 10th, the commissioners appointed 
for the trial met, and elected Bradshaw, who was absent, as their 
.president : but allowed him to appoint a deputy to supply his 
place at Guildhall, where he sat as Judge, His conduct in the 
nigh Court, which condemned the dethroned Monarch to a 
violent death, has been so frequently related, that we shall here 
only observe, that the strong attachment to republican princi- 
ples, which appears to have actuated him on that occasion, ani-.
mated him to the latest period of his existence ; for when, on 
his death-bed, he was advised to examine himself about the 
matter of the King's death, he affirmed, that if it was to do 
again, he would be the first man that should do it.
On Fe- 
bruary the 14th, 1643, lie was one of the thirty-eight persons 
whom the House had voted to compose a Council of State, and 
invested with extraordinary powers.
In the month of March 
following, he was appointed Chief Justice of Wales; and in 
June, 1649.
he had 10001.
voted to him by Parliament.
On the 
b*cape of Duke Hamilton, and some other state prisoners, an 
Act wo* pissed constituting a new Court of Justice, and Bradshaw 
vol.
j. — no.
24.
draw-bridge was let down, and the Earl of Denbigh: 
and his forces entered and took the commander, and 
about sixty-six prisoners, with ail their arms and 
provisions." 
Marple.] — Marple, or Merpool, is a township of 
Stockport, from which it is distant nearly live miles 
east-south-east.
The manor was anciently in the 
Stockports ; afterwards in the Vernons ; subse- 
quently in the Stanleys, &c.
Here is a chapel of ease ; and a free-school, which 
was founded by the President Bradshaw.
Marple Hall, formerly the property of Henry 
Bradshaw,* in right of his wife, is now the seat of 
John Sherwood, Esq. who is a descendant from the 
Bradshaws by the female line.
Middlewich.] — Middlewich is a market-town in 
the 
was made President.
This caused a very unexpected change 
in hts affairs.
On the same clay that Cromwell dissolved the 
Long Parliament, and by that means destroyed the Common- 
wealth, it occasioned him to lose the Protector's confidence ; 
for, equally the opposer of unlimited power, whether exercbed 
by a king or an usurper, the Judge disdained to submit in silence 
to illegal authority.
After expelling the Mfhitbers of the House, 
Cromwell went to break up the Council of Stale, and prefaced 
his design with these words: " If yon, gentlemen, are met here 
as private persons, you shall nut be disturbed ; but if as a Coun- 
cil of State, this is no place for you, since you cannot hut know 
what was done in the House in the morning: so take notice 
that the Parliament is dissolved." To this Bradshaw boldly 
replied, " Sir, we have heard what you did at the House in the 
morning, and before many hours all England will hear it.
But, 
Sir, you are mistaken, to think that Parliament is dissolved ; 
for no power under heaven can dissolve them but themselves ; 
therefore take you notice of that." This speech completely 
alienated the Protector's affections, though at the same time it 
appears to have impressed him with respect ; for, in a confe- 
rence with Desborough, he observed, that his work, after dis- 
solving the Parliament, was not completed, till he had also dis- 
solved the Council of State, which " I did in spite of the ob- 
jection of honest Bradshaw, the President." Before this, the 
sum of 20001.
per annum had been settled on him by the Par- 
liament.
In the year 1654, BFadshaw was returned as repre- 
sentative for the county of Chester ; and his behaviour was so 
inimical to Cromwell's designs, that the latter exerted his 
authority to prevent his being a second time returned.
He 
also required him to resign kis commission as Chief Justice of 
Chester; but this he steadily refused, alledging, that he held 
that place by a grant from the Parliament of England, to con* 
tinue " quain diu se bene gesserit :" and whether he had car- 
ried himself with that integrity which his commission exacted 
from him, he was ready to submit to a trial by twelve English- 
men, to be chosen even by Cromwell himself.
The firm ad- 
herence of Bradshaw to what he supposed were the principles 
of liberty, and which Cromwell was unquestionably violating, 
prevented his being any more employed in state-affairs during 
the Protectorship ; yet;,fterthe death of Oliver, he was again re- 
turned for Cheshire to the Parliament that met in January 1658-9; 
and soon after appointed one of the commissioners to hold the 
b/oad sea!
for five months, but was dispossessed of his high 
office by the army, who dissolved this Parliament, or Assem- 
bly as it was called, by force.
After the Restoration, twenty- 
three persons, who had sat as judges on the King, were attaint- 
ed, though in their graves.
Bradshaw, who died in 1659, being 
among the number, his body was taken up, and, on the 30- h of 
January, 1660 1, the day appointed for this act of retributive 
justice, was drawn on a sledge te Tyburn, where he, Cromwell, 
and Ireton, were hanged on the several angles of the gallows, 
4 Q under 
338 
CHESHIRE, 
the hundred of Northwich, twenty-two miles north- 
east from Chester.
It has a market ou Tuesdays, 
for butchers' meat, &c, and another on Fridays.
It 
has two fairs, July 25, and Holy Thursday.
The 
government of the town is vested in a bailiff and 
some of the principal inhabitants.
It contains the 
following townships: — Middlewich, Byley-cum- 
Yatehouse, Clive, Croxtou, Kinderton-cum-Hulme, 
Minshul-Vernon, Moresbarrow-cum-Parme, New- 
ton, Occleston, Ravenscroft, Sproston, Stublach, 
Sutton, Weever, and Wimboldsley - cum -Lea- 
Hall.
The town of Middlewich is seated near the con- 
fluence of the Dane and the Croke.
Its name was 
evidently derived from its centrical situation between 
the Wiches, or Salt Towns ; and its origin is sup- 
posed to have been at least as remote as the time of 
the Romans.
The road to it from Northwich is 
mentioned by Camden, as raised with gravel to such 
a height, as to be readily known for a Avork of that 
people.
Its privileges are similar to those of the 
other Salt Towns.
The salt manufactured here, is 
made from brine springs, well saturated ; but the 
quantity is at present inconsiderable ; though, were 
the demand greater, it might readily be increased.
Some additional employ to that furnished by the salt 
works, arises from a cotton manufactory which was 
established here* a few years ago.
under which their mutilated trunks were afterwards buried ; 
their heads having been first cut oft', and fixed on Westminster 
Hall.
By the Judge's will, dated the 22d March, 1653, it ap- 
pears that he was possessed of various manors, &c.
in Kent, 
Middlesex, Berks, Southampton, Wilts, and Somerset; and 
that he made many charitable bequests; among which, as 
already mentioned, was the sum of 7001.
to purchase an annuity 
for maintaining a free-school at Marple.
The probate copy of 
this will is yet at Marple Hall ; but the observance of its pro- 
visions w;;s completely interrupted by the changes made in the 
destination of his property at the Rest oration.
The general 
opinion, that he possessed lands in Cheshire, is probably erro- 
neous ^s they are not mentioned in the above record.
* The Rev. Theophilus Lindsey, A.
M. was a native of 
Middlewich.
Me was born on the 20lh of June, 1723, O.
S. 
He was a descendant of a family which espoused what are ge- 
nerally called high church principles ; but he often declared 
that, even from his youth, 'he had entertained a great respect for 
the dissenters, as a body of Christians, amongst whom he saw a 
distinguished sobriety of manners, and a spirit of piety.
He 
was destined when very young, for the ministry ; and, after he 
had spent the usual time at Cambridge, he entered into that 
state, with a full persuasion that it was the best way in which 
he could serve God, and be useful to society.
Soon after his 
ordination, he was presented by Sir George Wheeler, with the 
chapel in Spital Square, London.
His settlement, as a resident 
clergyman, was on the valuable living of Kirby- Wisk, in York- 
shire, presented to him by the Duke of Northumberland, whose 
grandson he had accompanied to the continent as tutor and 
guardian.
From this he removed, at the request of the Hunt- 
ingdon family, to Piddle-Town, in Dorsetshire, a valuable liv- 
ing in the gilt of that family, which he afterwards exchanged, 
from motives of friendship and relative attachment, for that of 
Catterick, in Yorkshire.
Here he taught the truth which 
Christ had taught, as far as he was able to learn from an impar- 
tial and diligent search of the Scriptures: often warning his 
Jicarers not to rely ou any thing because spoken by him ; but 
The church is spacious, and contains two chapels, 
which belonged to the Barons of Rinderton.
Here 
are several memorials of that family ; and also a 
monument for the Rev. John Hulse, of Elworth 
Hall, in Sandbach, founder of the Hulsean prize, 
and of the office of Christian advocate, in the Uni- 
versity of Cambridge.
An old register of the pa- 
rish, supposed to have been destroyed, contained 
the following entry : — " Thomas Wood, of Middle- 
wich parish, had a child born on St. Martin's Day 
in the morninge, and christened about noone, called 
Anne, which had on either hande one thumbe and 
five fingers, and upon the right foote five toe9 and 
on the left foot six toes ; and it had a greate eye and 
a small, and lived eight hours after it was christen- 
ed, and buried at Middlewich the same day, 7° Ed- 
ward VI.
1553." 
There is a free grammar-school at Middlewich, 
for eleven boys of the parish.
In the Civil War, a battle was fought, at Middle- 
wich, between some of the King's forces, under Sir 
Thomas Haston, and a detached party of the Par- 
liamentary army, under Sir William Brereton, in 
which the Royalists were defeated.
Sir Thomas 
Haston's troops had previously been guilty of con- 
siderable plunder in the town.* 
Minshull.] — Church-Minshull is six miles north 
by east from Nantwich.
It has a school, which was 
founded 
to compare it with the Holy Scriptures, our only rule and 
guide; and continually demonstrating that religion consists not 
in outward forms and ceremonies, but in an entire devotedness 
of the heart to God, as influencing to sobriety, chastity, bro- 
therly-love, kindness, integrity, in all our conversation.
His 
discourses, for some years previous to his leavingCalterick, were 
altogether expositions of large portions of the New Testament, 
with such inferences as naturally flowed from them, that people 
might see that it was the word of God which was endeavoured 
to be spoke.n.
In this situation Mr. Lindsey continued, living on the best 
terms with his parishioners, and expecting to end his days 
amongst them, till the year 1773, when, upon the most serious 
deliberation, he felt himself obliged, on the principles of inte- 
grity, and from a regard to the pure worship of one God and 
lather of all, to give up his benefice, whatever he might suffer 
by it.
On the resignation of his living, Mr. Lindsey went to 
London, where a temporary place of worship was provided, in 
which he held forth the worship " of the only true God, the 
omnipotent Parent, and Creator of the Universe, to the exclu- 
sion of all other persous and objects of worship." In the latter 
end of the year 1777, a purchase being made of the premises 
called Essex House, the present chapel was erected, which was 
opened for public worship, March 28, 1778.
In this connec- 
tion Mr. L.
continued, respected and admired, for the space of 
twenty years; then, in his 70th year, anticipating the infir- 
mities of age, he withdrew to the retirement of a private 
station.
His life did not close at so early a period as he seems to have 
calculated upon, but was protracted through a dignified retire- 
ment of fifteen years: the greater part of which was enjoyed 
with comparative vigour and health ; and, to the last, he was 
capable of being enlivened by the company and conversation 
of friends, who came to visit him from all parts of the kingdom.
He never lost sight of the benevolence of divine government ; 
which delightful subject had been the last on which he had em- 
ployed his pen ; and his sentiments of which were emphatically 
expressed 
CHESHIRE.
039 
founded by the Rev. Christopher Minshull about a 
century ago, The register of this parish records 
the following instance of longevity : — " Thomas 
Damme of Leigbton, buried the 20th of Februarie, 
K>49, being of the- age of seven score and four- 
teene." 
Minshull- Vernon, a township of the parish of 
Middlewich, is about three miles and a quarter south- 
south-west from that town.
Mollington.] — Great Mollington, or Molling- 
ton-Banester, is a township in the parish of Back- 
ford, two miles and a half north-west by north from 
Chester.
Mollington House, a spacious brick edifice, was 
for many years the property and residence of the 
ancient and respectable family of the Hunts ; but, 
about the year 1797, it was purchased by JohnFeildon, 
Esq. of Blackburn, Lancashire, who has much im- 
proved the estate.
The grounds are pleasant, and 
well wooded.
Little Mollington, or Mollington-Torrant, is about 
a quarter of a mile nearer to Chester.
Mottram.] — The lordship of Mottram, which lies 
in the parish of that name, about seven miles north- 
east by east from Stockport, is thus described in 
King's Va}e Royal : — " Along by Merzey Water, 
lies the stately Lordship of Mottram in Longden 
Dale, and on the top of the hill the town, and the 
goodly fair parish church, to which all these afore- 
said towns, and the rest yet behind in this tract do 
belong, and neer the church an ancient parsonage, 
being an impropriation to the Lord Bishop of Ches- 
ter.
The chief Seignory and Lordship Paramount 
of the whole parish, belonging to the crown ; and 
by grant to Sir Richard Wilbraham, Knight and 
Baronet, and his heirs males in fee-farm for ever." 
Mottram contains the following townships : — 
Mottram, Godley, Hattersley, Hollin worth, or Hol- 
lingworth, Longden, or Tingetwissel, Matley, New- 
ton, and Staley.
Mottram is a very thriving town, with a rapidly- 
extending population.
Within the Inst sixty or se- 
venty years, the houses have been greatly increased 
in number, and they are principally disposed into 
one long street, well paved, both in the town, and 
to some distance on the roads.
Most of the houses 
are built of a thick flag-stone, and covered with a 
heavy slate of nearly the same quality, no other co- 
expressed in the closing scene of existence, when, utterance 
failing, and his breath nearly departing, his words were, "God's 
will is best." He died universally regretted, November 13, 
J808.
His modesty, humility, and sweetness of temper, endeared 
him to the noble families in which, as a friend and chaplain, 
he spent some of his early years.
His works were, An Apology 
on resigning tlte Vicarage of Catterick.
A Sequel to the Apo- 
logy.
Two Dissertations: first, on the Preface to St. John's 
Gospel ; secondly, on Praying to Christ.
The Catechist, or 
an Inquiry concerning the Only True God and Object of Wor- 
ship.
An Historical View of the State of the Unitarian Doc- 
trine and Worship.
Vindiciae Priestlianae An Address to the 
vering being strong enough to endure the impetuous 
gusts of wind which occasionally occur.
Many of 
them are inhabited by shop- keepers of various de- 
scriptions, the town forming a perpetual market, as 
it were, to the numerous manufacturers in the neigh- 
bourhood ; there being twelve large cotton machines 
worked by water, and many lesser ones turned by 
horses, within a small part of the surrounding dis- 
trict.
The cotton trade forms the principal source 
of the employment of the labouring inhabitants.
The church is a large and stately building, about 
the date of 1487.
It stands on the hill above the 
town, from which is a steep and difficult ascent by 
a flight of about ninety stone steps.
Both the tower 
and body of the church are embattled, and support- 
ed by buttresses.
The whole structure is of a coarse 
grey stone, full of small pebbles or flints, of a dura- 
ble quality, every stone still being perfect as wheu 
originally laid.
The stone is supposed to have 
been obtained from a rock in the neighbourhood, 
called Tinsell-Norr, which is of a similar quality ; 
and though it can be easily cut in the quarry, it be- 
comes nearly as hard as flint when exposed to the.
air.
In the church is a rude and very ancient mo- 
nument, called Old Roe and his Wife, of whom many 
fabulous tales have been transmitted by tradition to 
the present race of inhabitants.
The monument has 
neither date nor inscription ; but on the top are two 
recumbent figures, with their hands elevated as in 
prayer.
Their dress is that of the fifteenth century, 
and each has a shapeless animal at the feet.
Th« 
male figure is in armour, with a pointed helmet, a 
collar of S.
S. about his neck, and a sword by his 
side.
The most probable conjecture seems to be, 
that they are the effigies of Ralph Stealy and his 
wife.
Here is also a monument to the memory of 
Serjeant Reginald Bretland, with a whole-length 
statue of white marble.
He died in the year 1703, 
aged 62.
An antique cross stands in the church-yard, ad- 
joining to which is an ancient free-school, with a 
small house for the master.
The endowments were 
bestowed in the years 1610 and 1618, by Robert 
Garsett, Alderman of Norwich, and Sir Richard 
Wilbraham, Lord of the Manor of Mottram ; each 
of whom contributed 1001.
with which sums twenty- 
three Cheshire acres of land were purchased at 
Haughton, near Nantwich, and the rent settled on 
Students of Oxford and Cambridge: a second Address to the 
same.
An Examination of Mr. Robinson's Plea for the Divi- 
nity of Christ.
A List of False Readings and Mis-translations 
ot the Scriptures.
Considerations on the expediency of revis- 
ing the Liturgy, by a Consistent Protestant.
Conversations 
on Christian Idolatry.
Conversations on the Divine Gov em- 
inent, showing that every thing is from God and foi God to all.
To these may be added, A Farewell Address to the Parishion- 
ers of Catterick.
The Book of Common Prayer Reformed, 
for the Use of the Chapel in Essex Street, with Hymns.
Se- 
veral single Sermons, and some papers of Critical Essavs, 
in the " Theological Repository" — in Commentaries and 
Essays.
t the 
310 
CHESHIRE.
the school .
The present Income (including some 
other benefactions) is about 451.
a year.
The scenery in the neighbourhood of Mottram is 
very grand.
The rugged and steep rocks, occa- 
sionally relieved by bold and swelling eminences, 
and those declining into vallies clothed with ver- 
dure, constitute some very picturesque and romantic 
prospects.
" The Car Tor is a very singular preci- 
pice ; its perpendicular height is eighty feet.
The 
summit and sides have oak trees growing on them ; 
and from the former vast rocks are pendent, which 
seem to frown destruction on every thing beneath.
The face of this precipice exhibits various strata of 
rock, coal, or slaty matter, and free-stone ; all as 
regularly disposed as if they had been placed by the 
art of a mason.
Between the Car Tor and the op- 
posite and well -wooded hills of Derbyshire, the 
Mersey hurries along its craggy bed, and greatly 
contributes to the grandeur of the contiguous sce- 
nery."* 
The inhabitants of the town are supplied with 
water from the springs : on the very top of th;> hill 
is a fine well, and two others are on its opposite 
sides.
Most of the hills in this vicinity have springs 
either issuing from their sides, or summits, all which 
are of soft water.
This town was the birth-place of Mr. Lee, for- 
merly an eminent stock-broker, under the Royal 
Exchange, in London ; and Lawrence Earnshaw, a 
very eminent self-taught mechanic, f 
Nantwich.] — Nantwich, or Wych Malbanc, is a 
market-town, in the hundred to which it gives name, 
twenty-one miles south by east from Chester.
" The 
Saxon word Vic," observe Messrs.
Lysons, " which 
we write Wich, is usually translated Vicus, and is 
common to numerous places in England as well as 
to Nantwich, Northwich, and Middlewich ; we can- 
not learn that the word Wich has ever been defined 
as having any meaning connected with the circum- 
stance of brine being found at these places, and at 
others with the same termination, yet on account, it 
should seem, of the termination being common to 
several places where the brine is found, they are 
sometimes called, in an abbreviated way, the Wiches, 
and the term has been sometimes applied to the salt- 
pits.
Nant is the British word for a brook, but the 
most usual distinction of this town in history and 
* Vide Beauties of England and Wales.
f We understand that the cottage where this extraordinary 
man was born stands in the high road to Wednescough Green, 
and is regarded by the neighbouring inhabitants with nearly as 
much veneration as the admirers of Sir Isaac Newton express 
for the place of his nativity.
Young Earnshaw was apprenticed 
to a taylor, and afterwards to a clothier; but neither of these 
employments suiting Ids genius, after serving both for eleven 
iears, he placed himself for a short time with a clock-maker at 
nockport.
By the force of native abilities, with the very little 
instruction which such an education could give him, he became 
an almost universal mechanic and artist.
IJe could have taken 
wool from the sheeps' backs, manufactured it into cloth, made 
that cloth into clothes, and made every instrument necessary 
1 
record, for some centuries after the Conquest, was 
Wich-Malbank, from the ancient family of Mid- 
bank, whose ancestor was one of Hugh Lupus's 
barons." 
Nantwich, formerly considered as the second town 
in the county, is seated near the borders of Stafford- 
shire and Shropshire, in a luxuriant vale on the 
banks of the river Weever, which divides it into un- 
equal parts.
This vale is composed of sotrfe of tile 
finest dairy land in the county, and produces a con- 
siderable quantity of that tine rich cheese, for which 
Cheshire is justly celebrated.
These cheeses, it 
may be remarked, are generally made very large, 
and weigh from 60 to 140 pounds.
Mr. Thomas 
Heath, however, farmer, of this town, made a cheese 
in May, 1792, which weighed 192 pounds, and mea- 
sured two feet four inches in diameter, and twelve 
inches in thickness.
It was intended as a present to 
the King.
In the times immediately preceding the Conquest, 
the revenues of this town were divided between the 
King and Earl Edwin ; but when Hugh Lupus ob- 
tained the Earldom, he bestowed it on William de 
Maldebeng, or, de Malbanc, a Norman chieftain, in 
whose favour Hugh created it a barony.
The ba- 
rony became divided into several parts by subse- 
quent marriages, and in consequence of the division, 
was never incorporated.
The Earl Cholmondeley 
is the principal owner, and takes tolls of all cattle, 
x'oots, and fruits, that are sold here at fairs, &c.
The tolls of corn and fish are claimed by Mr. Crewe, 
the patron of the church.
The market, which is 
holden on Saturdays, is well supplied.
The mar- 
ket house is a neat modern structure, occupying the 
site of the ancient fabric, which suddenly tell to the 
ground in the year 1737, 
Here are three annual fairs — March 15, Septem- 
ber 4, and December 16, 
The salt business was once very considerable at 
this place ; but the advantages arising from the lo- 
cal situation of some other towns in the county has 
deprived it of a great portion of its former trade.
Pennant conjectures that this was the first place 
where the native Britons saw white salt ; and that 
they in consequence, gave it the name of Heldd 
Wen, or the white Brine Pits.
In the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, there were 216 salt-works.
It is 
probable 
for clipping, carding, spinning, reeling, weaving, fulling, and 
dressing, and making it up for wear, with his own hands.
He 
was an engraver, painter, and gilder ; he could stain glass and 
foil mirrors ; was a blacksmith, whitesmith, coppersmith, gun- 
smith, bell founder, and coffin maker ; made and erected sun- 
dials, mended fiddles, repaired, tuned, played upon, and 
taught, the harpsichord and virginal ; made and repaired organs, 
and optical instruments; read and understood fitielid, ana, in 
short, had a taste for all sorts of mechanics, and mast of the 
tine arts.
Clock-making and repairing was a very favourite 
employment with him ; and he carried to far his theory and 
practice of clock-work, as to be the inventor of a very curious.
astronomical and geographical machine, containing ft ttteatial 
and terrestrial globe, to which different movements wer^ 
representing 
CHESHIRE.
341 
probable that tlte Romans had received an impost or 
tax from them.
The Saxons in their time appear to 
have, procured salt from the brine-pits here, and va- 
rious laws and customs have prevailed from old 
times respecting the working of them.
Partridge, in his History of Nantwich, written 
about forty years ago, says — " Enriched by the pro- 
fits, and gratefully sensible of the benefits accruing 
from the saline springs, which so copiously flow 
around Nantwich, every Ascension Day our pious 
ancestors sang a hymn of thanksgiving for the 
* blessing of the brine.' That ancient salt-pit, 
called the Old Biatt (ever held in great veneration 
by the towns -people) was on that day bedecked and 
adorned with green boughs, flowers, and ribbands, 
mid the young people had music and danced round 
it ; which custom of dancing, and adorning the pit, 
continued till a very few years ago." Henry II.
it 
should be observed, to distress the Welch, who car- 
ried on a great traffic with this town, in the article 
of salt, ordered the brine-pits to be filled up.
On 
the return of peace, however, they were re-opened, 
and, for many years, continued to be a source of 
wealth to the inhabitants.
According to Leland, 
there were 300 salt-works in the town, in the reign 
of Henry VIII.
and, as already stated, there were 
216 in the time of Elizabeth.
At present, there are 
only two salt-Avorks, of five large pans.
It was ex- 
pected that the Chester canal, which terminates in 
a broad bason near this town, would have renovated 
the salt trade, but it does not appear to have derived 
any material benefit from the increase in the facility 
and cheapness of conveyance.
In the reigns of Elizabeth and James, Nantwich 
was celebrated for the tanning business, which was 
then carried on to a considerable extent ; but now 
the principal business of the place is confined to the 
manufacturing of salt, and making of shoes : great 
quantifies of the latter are sent to the metropolis.
Here is also a cotton manufactory ; and many peo- 
ple find employment in making gloves.
represented the diurnal and annual motions of the earth ; the 
•position of the moon and stars ; the sun's place in the ecliptic, 
&c.
all with the greatest correctness.
One of these machines, 
curiously ornamented, was sold to the Earl of Bute, for 1501.
All the complicated calculations, as well as the execution, of this 
great work, were performed by himself.
He also, about the 
year 1753, invented a machine to spin and reel cotton, at one 
operation, which he shewed to his neighbours, and then de- 
stroyed, through the generous but mistaken apprehension that 
it might deprive the poor of a livelihood.
This was previously 
to all the late inventions of machinery, by which the cotton 
manufactory has been so much promoted.
He also improved 
a simple and ingenious piece of mechanism for raising water 
from a coal-mine.
He was acquainted with that equally self- 
taught genius, the celebrated Brindley, and when they occa- 
sionally met, they did not part soon.
Eamshaw was possessed 
of an extraordinary degree of sobriety, never drinking a gill of 
ale for years after he was grown to manhood.
His mien and 
countenance were tar, at first view, from indicating quick 
parts; but rather announced stupidity ; but when animated by 
conversation, they at once brightened up.
lie had a good 
flow of word?, and clearly explained his subject in the provin- 
roh.
i. — no.
25.
In the reign of William the Conqueror, a battle 
was fought in the vicinity of this town between Un- 
English and Welch ; the Welch laid the town waste 
in the year 1133 ; but, in 1146, having committed 
great devastations in other parts of the county, 
they were cut off, at Nantwich, on their return.
During the Civil Wars, Nantwich was the only 
town in the county that uniformly adhered to the 
Parliament.
In 1643 it underwent the horrors of a 
siege ; and though only surrounded by mud walls 
and ditches, which had been formed in a hasty man- 
ner by the inhabitants, and such of the neighbouring 
peasantry as were incensed at the cruel and impo- 
litic conduct of the Royalists, it was defended with 
great courage, and the attacks of the assailants were 
repelled with considerable slaughter.
The besieg- 
ing forces were commanded by Lord Byron, who at 
length experienced a signal defeat by the army of 
Sir Thomas Fairfax.
The decisive battle was 
fought on the 18th of January, when the celebrated 
Captain Sandford* was slain, and many persons of 
distinction made prisoners.
Among the latter was 
Colonel George Monk, who was afterwards the chief 
instrument of the restoration of Charles II.
The shat- 
tered regiments of the besieged retreated to Chester.
Colonel Harrison, one of the regicides, and an offi- 
cer of considerable note in the Parliament's army, 
was the son of a butcher in the town of Nant- 
wich.
This town has twice suffered by fire : first, in the 
year 1438, and, secondly, in 1583.
The latter cala- 
mity is thus noticed, by Allen Wrighte, in the pa- 
rish register : " On the 10th of December chaunced 
a most terrible and vehement fyre, beginninge at the 
water-lode, about six of the clock at nighte in a 
kitchen by brevvinge.
The wyude beinge very 
boysterouse, encreased the said fyre, whiche verie 
vehcmentlie burned and consumed in the space of 
fifteen houres six hundred bayes of buyldinges, and 
coulde not be stayed neither by Liboure nor pollice, 
which I thoughte good to comende unto the poste- 
cial phrase and dialect of his country.
He had a sick wife and 
expensive familv, ?o that, notwithstanding all his trades and 
ingenuity; he lived and died poor.
He died about the year 
1764.
Ja-'nes Brndley, the mechanic above mentioned, was a na- 
tive of Derbyshire ; in our account of which county we shall 
introduce some particulars respecting him.
He was employed 
by the Duke of Bridgewater on his famous canal.
* This officer came fcpin Ireland with Sir Michael Earnley, 
and distinguished himselt by the singular letters which he sent 
to the Governor of Hawarden Castle in Flintshire, and to the 
inhabitants of Nantwich, wherein he asserts, "that he neither 
gives nor takes quarter ; that his firelocks never neglect oppor- 
tunities to collect rebels." " Our intentions," he continues, 
" are, not to save you, but to batter, and storm, and then hang 
you all.
Mv bat'ery is fixed, from whence fire shall eternally 
visit you, to the terror of the old and females, and consump- 
tion of your thatched houses.
1 am no bread and cheese 
rogue, but was ever a loyalist, and will be while 1 can write 
or name, 
" Thomas Sandford, Captain of Firelocks." 
4 E 
ritie 
342 
CHESHIRE.
ritie as a favourable punishment of the Almightie in 
destroyinge the buyldinges and goodes onelie, but 
sparinge the lyves of manye people, which, consi- 
deringc the tynie, space, and perill, were in great 
jopardie, yet by Glod's mercie but onelie two per- 
soncs that perished by fyre." The damage occa- 
sioned by this tire was estimated at 30,0001.
equal, 
in all probability, to 100,0091.
in the present day.
A commission was subsequently granted for making 
a collection throughout the kingdom, for rebuilding 
the town, &c.
For this purpose, John Maisterson, 
Gent.
Sir Hugh Cholmondeley, and two other com- 
missioners, were appointed.
By the following ex- 
tract from the epitaph on Mr. Maisterson, who died 
in December 1386, the success of the collection, and 
the speedy rebuilding of the town, appear to have 
been attributed almost entirely to the exertions of 
that gentleman': — 
" This dismal day canicular one this teentli of December, 
Ycur towne was bunide, jour frende did die, that was your 
chiefest menibre.
Your extreame losse he did repaire, he wyp't your teares 
away, 
But now your glorie and your gaine shall be no more your 
stay, 
When this poore towne to ashes felle, devour' d with fine 
flame, 
By pitlie mov'd, he found the way howeto repaire the same, 
Whoe by the grace of our good Queene, and nobles of the 
land, 
This poore towne was builte up againe in state as it dothe 
stande ; 
The timber had els growing in woods, which nowe, sweet 
dwellings are, 
Soe had the seatts and plottsof ground, remained to this day 
bare : 
Had he not bin, this towne had bin, no towne, as now it is, 
That which he had he did procure, the travaille all was his : 
The livinge and the unborn tow, and all that shall sticceede, 
The roofs, and walls, shall blase his fame, for this his wor- 
th\ derde : 
His endlesse labour in this case deserves an endlesse crowne.
With gouklen garlands of greate thankes, and wreaths of 
high renown." 
Several of the renovated buildings exist to the 
present day.
The timber, which is intermixed with 
lath and plaster, in a variety of patterns, is painted 
black ; consequently, the town has rather a singular 
and gloomy appearance.
The government of the town is vested in consta- 
bles and other officers ; such as leave-lookers, ale- 
tasters, fire-lookers, and channel-lookers.
The in- 
habitants possess an exemption from serving on 
juries out of the town, or associated with strangers.
This privilege, which is very ancient, was confirmed 
in the reign of Elizabeth.
Formerly the quarter 
sessions for the county, were holden once a year in 
this town.
A town-hall was built in the year 1720, 
with a sessions-room over it.
George II.
then 
Prince of Wales, had contributed 6001.
towards the 
expence of this edifice.
It was, however, so badly 
constructed, that, on a market-day, sixteen or seven- 
teen years afterwards, a great part of it fell down, 
and killed nine or ten people, and wounded many 
others.
Subsequently to that accident, whilst the 
justices were holding their sessions, a sudden craslv 
excited great alarm in the court ; and, as the mo- 
mentary dissolution of the building was expected^ 
many persons were much hurt in their endeavours 
to escape.
These circumstances are said to have 
occasioned the removal of the sessions to Knutsford,.
about fifty years ago.
Amongst the charitable institutions in this town, 
is a free-school, which was founded by John aud 
Thomas Thrush, natives of Nantwich, who acquired 
a fortune, in the trade of woolpackers, in London.
There is another school, founded chiefly by the fa- 
mily of Wilbraham, aided by the liberality of the 
Crewe family : at this school forty boys, called the 
blue-caps, are clothed and taught English.
Here also are seven alms-houses, endowed by 
John Crewe, Esq. of Crewe ; in pursuance of the 
wills of Sir Thomas Crewe, and Sir John Crewe, 
Knights.
They are lor men and women, who are 
allowed six pounds a year.
In addition to these, 
are six alms-houses, endowed by Sir Edward 
Wright, for men and women, who are allowed four 
pounds per annum each, and one shirt, OHe pair of 
stockings, and one pair of shoes ; and six, endowed 
by Mrs. Wilbraham, for men and women, who ave 
allowed 10s.
each, per quarter, a new gown every 
two years, value 11.
4s.
In 1780, a large and commo- 
dious workhouse was erected in that part of the 
township called Beam Heath, in consequence of a 
grant for that purpose from Earl Cholmondeley.
Fire is not the only calamity by which the town 
of Nantwich has been visited.
In the year 1587, a* 
appears by the parish register, it was afflicted 
" with a kynde of frenzie, or madde ague, of which 
disease there dyed the year aforesaide about seaven 
score and odde persones ;" in 1596, a great morta- 
lity was " introduced by George Fallowed';' late 
come from Cales in Spain, with the Earl of Essex ; 
he was the first who died in the tow^i ;" and, in 
1604, the plague carried off between four and five 
hundred of the inhabitants.
The church is a large, and handsome, Gothic 
structure, in the form of a cross, with an octangular 
tower in the middle.
The east aud west windows 
are of considerable size, and filled with elegant tra- 
cery.
The chancel has a carved stone roof, and se- 
veral neat stalls, which were brought from the ab- 
bey of Vale Royal, after the dissolution of that mo- 
nastery, in the reign of Henry the Eighth.
It con 
tains also part of a tessellated pavement.
Nantwich is a considerable thoroughfare to Park- 
gate and Ireland.
It is deserving of remark, that the widow of Mil 
ton resided during the latter part of her life in this 
town, where she died, at a very advanced age, in 
March, 1726.
The biographers of our great poet 
have represented her as a lady of a most violent 
spirit, and one who oppressed his cliildren in his 
fife-time, and cheated them at his deatii ; yet, ob - 
serres Pennant, she maintained a great respect for 
1 his 
CHESHIRE.
343 
his memory ; and could not bear to hear the least 
imputation of plagiarism ascribed to him.
She was 
the daughter of Mr. Minshull, of Stoke, in the neigh- 
bourhood of Nantwich.
It the year 1808, the Arminian Methodists built 
a large chapel in this town.
The Quakers and Pres- 
byterians also have meeting-houses here.
The parish of Nantwich contains the following 
townships : — Nantwich, Alvaston, Leighton, Willas- 
ton, and Wolstanwood..
Neston.] — Great Neston is a populous market- 
town, ten miles and three quarters north-west from 
Chester.
It contains the following- townships : — 
Great Neston, Little Neston, Ledsham, Leighton, 
Nesse, Thornton Hough, and Willaston.
The town of Great Neston contains some plteasant 
views of the Dee, and of the opposite coast of Wales.
The inhabitants derive considerable advantage from 
the contiguity of Parkgate, which has, of late years, 
become a convenient and fashionable bathing-place.
It is also celebrated as the station for some of the 
packets for Ireland, which generally sail to that 
country four times a week.
The houses of Park- 
gate are chiefly disposed in one long range on the 
Dee banks, and are mostly neat modern buildings of 
brick.
The inhabitants, who are rather numerous, 
derive their principal support from the expenditure 
of the visitants who reside here in the bathing sea- 
son.
Many of the houses are good modern build- 
ings.
The church is a large and handsome struc- 
ture.
In the church-yard is the tomb of John 
Handcock, a farmer, who died on the 4th of Decem- 
ber 1775, at the age of 112.
* Sir John was ihe son of Randal Birkenhead, a sadler, and 
was born about the year 1615.
He became a servitor of Oriel 
College, under the tuition of Humphry Lloyd, afterwards.
Bi- 
shop of Bangor.
He t ontinued in the college till he was made 
bachelor of arts, and (hen became amanuensis to Dr. Laud, 
afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, who admired him so 
touch for his ingenuity, that, in the year 1639, by his diploma, 
he made him master of arts, and by his letters commendatory 
thereupon, he was elected probationer fellow of All Soul's Col- 
lege, in the following year.
After the rebellion broke out, and 
the King set up his court at Oxford, he was appointed to write 
Ihe Mercurius Aulicus, which being much approved by the royal 
party, his Majesty recommended him to the electors that they 
would choose him moral philosophy reader, which being ac- 
cordingly done, he continued in that oflice, with little profit 
from it, till the year 1643, at which time he was not only turn- 
ed out, but likewise from his fellowship, by the Presbyterian 
visitors.
Afterwards, in this destitute situation, Wood observes, 
that he retired to London, and made shift to live upon his wits ; 
having some reputation in poetry, he was often applied to by 
young people in love, to write epistles for them, and songs and 
sonnets on their mistresses : he was also employed in translating 
and writing other little things, so as to procure a tolerable live- 
lihood.
Having in this manner supported the gloomy period 
of confusion, he was at his Majesty's Restoration, by virtue of 
his letters, sent to the University, created doctor of the civil 
law, and in the year 1661, he was elected a burgess of Wilton, 
to serve in that Parliament which began at Westminster, on the 
8th of May In the same year.
On the 1 4th of November, 
1662, he received the honour of knighthood, and, in January, 
J 663, he was constituted one of the Masters of Request, in the 
Little Neston is distant about a mile south-east 
from Great Neston.
Northwich.] — The town of Northwich is situated 
partly in the hundred of Eddisbury, and partly in 
that of Northwich, nineteen miles and a half east- 
north-east from Chester.
It is a large and ancient 
market-town, near the conflux of the Dane and the 
Weever.
The streets are irregular, aud badly pav- 
ed ; and many of the houses are of considerable an- 
tiquity.
It has two annual fairs (August 2, and 
December 6,) which of late years have been much 
frequented, and thus have been the source ol great, 
emolument to the inhabitants ; the lower classes of 
whom are chiefly employed in the salt trade, and in 
a cotton factory established but a few years since.
The market-day is Friday.
Prom its central situa- 
tion, and the circumstance of its being surrounded 
with gentlemen's seats, this town has become a place 
of considerable resort for the transaction of public 
and other business.
The church is spacious, and is remarkable for the 
peculiarity of its choir, which is semicircular.
The 
roof of the nave is adorned with numerous figures of 
wicker baskets, of a similar shape to those which are 
used in the process of salt-making.
Here is a well-endowed free grammar-school, 
founded by John Dayns, of St. Bartholomew's, 
London.
Northwich was the birth-place of Sir John 
Birkenhead, author of the Mercurius Aulicus, or 
Court Journal, which was published at Oxford dur- 
ing the Civil War.* 
In the reign of Charles I.
there were 165 salt- 
works 
room of Sir Richard Fanshaw, when he went ambassador into 
Spain ; he being then also master of the faculties, and a mem- 
ber of the Royal Society.
His Mercurius Aulicus comniuni- 
cated the intelligence and affairs of the court of Oxford to the 
rest of the kingdom.
The iirst of these papers was'published 
on the 1st of June, 1642, and they were carried on till about 
the end of 1645; alter which they were published occasionally.
They were printed weekly in one sheet, and sometimes in more, 
in 4'o.
and contained (says Wood) a great deal of wit and buf- 
foonery ;— His News from Pembroke and Montgomery-, or 
Oxford Manchestered, &c.
was printed in 1648," in one sheet, 
4to.
It is a feigned speech, as spoken by Philip, Earl of Pem- 
broke, in the Convocation-House at Oxford, April 12, 1648, 
when he came to visit and undo the University, as Edward, 
Earl of Manchester, had done that of Cambridge, wh.Ie he 
was Chancellor thereof.
It is exceedingly waggish, and 
much imitating his lordship's way of speaking.
His Paul's 
Church- yard ; Libit theologix, politici, historici, (una 
cum templo) prostant vacates, &c.
were printed in three 
sheets, 4to.
1649.
These pamphlets contain feigned titles of 
books, and acts of Parliament, and several questions all reflect- 
ing on the reformers, and men in those times.
He also wrote 
The four-legged Quaker, a ballad, to the tune of The Dog 
and Elder's Maid, London, 1659 ; Anew Ballad of a famous 
German Prince, without date ; and The Assembly Man, writ- 
ten 1647.
The copy of the last was taken from the author by 
those that said they could not rob, because all was theirs ; at 
length, after it had slept several years, the author published it 
to avoid the false copies.
It is also printed in a book intituled, 
Wit ami Loyalty Revived, in a collection of some smart Sa- 
tires in verse and prose, on the late limes, London, 1682, said 
to 
344 
CHESHIRE.
works in Northwich ; and the chief part of the salt- 
trade is still concentrated in the neighbourhood of 
this town.
Here the salt is made from brine-springs, 
and also from the natural rock.
The latter peculia- 
rity, and the advantageous situation of the town, on 
the banks oi the Weever, on the great road from 
Chester to Manchester, and its contiguity to the 
Grand Trunk Canal, which has opened a source of 
cheap communication with so many parts of Eng- 
land, have all concurred to increase the prosperity 
of its salt trade.
Norton.] — Norton is a township of the parish of 
Runcorn, in the hundred of Bucklow, four miles 
north-east from Frodsham.
The manor of Norton was given, about the year 
1135, by William Fitz-Nigel, constable of Chester, 
to the canons of Runcorn, who were then removed 
to the priory of Norton, just founded.
In 1515, the 
priory and manor were purchased of the King by 
Richard Brooke, one of the ancestors of Sir Richard 
Brooke, Bart, the present possessor.
An old man- 
sion appears to have been built here soon after the 
Dissolution.
Norton priory, the seat of the present baronet, is 
a modern edifice ; but part of the sub-structure of 
the original monastic building, in which is a door- 
way of Saxon architecture, still remains, and has 
been fitted up as n cellar.
In the early part of the year 1643, as we learn 
from an old pamphlet, intituled Cheshire's Successe, 
Norton priory was besieged by the King's party.
" They brought canon," says the pamphlet alluded 
to, " with many horse and foot and fell to batter it on 
a sabbath-day ; Mr. Brooke had SO men in the house; 
we were careful he should lack no powder ; with all 
other things Master Brooke furnished them fully.
A man upon the tower with a flag in his hand cryde 
them ayme, while they discharged their canon, say- 
ing ' wide my lord on the right hand ; now wide 
two yards on the left ; two yards over my lord,' &c.
He made them swell for anger when they could not 
endamage the house, for they only wounded one 
man, having lost forty-six of their own, and their 
canoneer."- 
Over.] — Of this town, which is in the hundred of 
Eddisbury, five miles west from Middlewieh, we 
find the following statement, in King's Vale 
Royal : " Ouver standeth on the east end of Dela- 
mere Forrest, not far from the River of Weever, and 
is but a small thing ; yet I put it in here, because of 
the great prerogative that it hath.
For it hath a 
maior : and the church (which is a qarter of a wile 
south from the town,) is lawlesse.
Which privi- 
ledges (because it standeth in Edsbury hundred,) 
to have been written by Cowley, Birkenhead, and the famous 
Butler.
He has also scattered copies of verses and translations 
extant, to which are vocal compositions, set by He^ry Lawes, 
such as Anacreon's ode, called The Lot' , an Anniversary on 
the Nup ials ot John, Euv\ of Biidgewater.
He likewise wrote 
a poem on his stay ing in London after the act of banishment for 
• cavaliers, and another called The Jolt, made upon Cromwell's 
I think it had since the destruction of the City of 
Edsbury, which stood sometimes in the Forrest of 
Delamere, in the same place, where the Chamber in 
the Forrest, now standeth." Of the peculiar privi- 
leges of the church, here alluded to, nothing is now 
known.
Over formerly had a market on Wednesdays, 
which has long been discontinued ; but it still has 
two fairs, on the 15th of May, and 25th of Sep- 
tember.
In the church is a monument to the memory of 
Hugh Starkey, Gentleman Usher to Henry VIII.
by whom it was rebuilt, A.
D. 1543.
The parish contains the townships of Oulton- 
Lowe, Swanlow, Weeten-hall, and part of Over.
Winstbrd Bridge, over the Weever, connects the 
parishes of Over and Daveuham ; and, owing to the 
extension of the salt trade, several houses have been 
built on each side of the bridge, but principally in 
Over parish.
There are brine pits in this neigh- 
bourhood, on both sides of the river.
On the Da- 
veuham side, there is a fair on the 8th of May, and 
a provision -market on Saturdays.
Over-Church, or Church-Over, seven miles north 
from Weston, contains nothing remarkable.
Over-Peover.] — Over-Peover is a chapelry of 
the parish of Rostherne, comprising the townships 
of Over-Peover, Marthall, and S nelson.
Tbe manor is remarkable as having been the re- 
sidence of the Mainwarings for thirty generations ; 
and, it is also remarkable, as we learn from a manu- 
script volume, drawn up by Sir William Dugdale, 
now in the possession of Sir H.
Mainwariug, and 
noticed by Messrs.
Lysons, that, in ancient records, 
and in modern writings, the name of Mainwaring 
has been spelt no fewer than 131 different ways !
The first of the family (which became extinct in the 
year 1797 by the death of Sir II.
Mainwaring) was 
Richard de Mesnilwaren, who granted certain tythes 
to Chester Abbey, A.
D. 1093.
In the reign of 
Elizabeth, Sir Ralph Mainwaring rebuilt Peover- 
Hall.
Sir Thomas Mainwaring, who received the 
honour of baronetage A.
D. 1660, had a long literary 
controversy with Sir Peter Leycester respecting the 
legitimacy of Amicia, daughter of Hugh Kcvelioc, 
Earl of Chester, which had been impeached by Sir 
Peter in his Historical Antiquities.
The contro- 
versy was terminated by the death of Sir Peter.
— 
On the death of Sir H.
Mainwaring in 1797, his half 
brother, Thomas Wetenhal, Esq. of Nantwich, took 
the name ; and the son of that gentleman, (now Sir 
Henry Mainwaring Mainwaring) who succeeded to 
the estate, was created a baronet in the year 
1804.
being thrown off the coach-box of his own coach, which he 
would drive through Hyde Park, drawn by six German horses, 
sent him as a present by the court of Oldenburgh, while his 
secretary, John Thurloe, sat in the coach, July, 1654.
He 
died near Whitehall, in the year 1679, and was buried in the 
church-yard of St. Martin's in the Fields.
Near 
CHESHIRE.
313 
Near the family seat is a parochial chapel, which 
was supposed by Sir Peter Leyeester to have been 
originally erected about the reign of Edward III.
Ainongst the numerous monuments of the Maimvar- 
ing family, in this chapel, is that of Sir John Main- 
waring, who died A.
L).
1515, with figures engraved 
on stone of himself, his lady, and fifteen children.
This " Sir John bequeathed to one of his daughters 
300 marks, and to the other '200 marks, for their 
marriage, if they should continue of holiest conver- 
sation and disposition, and marry with consent of 
their mother and brother." 
On a wooden tablet, in this chapel, underneath 
the representation of I>eath standing on a corpse, 
wrapped in a shroud, is the following uncommon in- 
scription : — 
Stand and heare a dead man speakc, let not life too much 
enamour ; 
I myself have found her weake, thou shalt have like cause of 
clamour : 
Great breadth of land with rich built cages, 
Goulden earth which men do swallow, 
Youth befooling of the wise, 
Beauty in her daintiest formes, 
Age will teach thee to despyse ; 
Death shall make a meal for wormes.
If vamtie doe thinke this strange, 
Take me an instance of the change.
" This is the emblem and epitaph of Mr. William 
Littleboys, who lived and died religiously, whereof 
he hath made a large manifestation by his charitable 
bounty to remain for ever to the poor of Wickham 
in Buckinghamshire, the place of his birth, and Over 
Peover in Cheshire, where now his body lies inter- 
red till his joyful resurrection, obiit 1624." 
Parkgate.] — See Great Nuston.
Poui.xon.] — In this little village, which lies about 
five miles and a half south by west from Chester, an 
abbey was founded and endowed for Cistertian 
monks, in the year 1153, by Robert, brother to Ra- 
nulph, second Earl of Chester ; but being subject to 
the incursions of the Welch, it was afterwards re- 
moved to Dieulacres, in Staffordshire.
Poynton.] — Poynton is one of the townships of 
Prestbury, four miles and a half south-south-east 
from Stockport, from which it successively passed, 
by female heirs, to the Etons and Warrens ; and it 
now belongs to.
Lord Bulkeley, who married the 
daughter and heiress of the late Sir George War- 
ren, K.
B. The old hall was built by Sir Edward 
Warren in the reign of Edward VI.
It was pulled 
down by the late Sir George Warren, who erected 
the present elegant building on its site.
It is of the 
Ionic order of architecture.
The pleasure grounds 
are beautiful ; they are decorated with a handsome 
sheet of water; and the park is extensive, and judi- 
ciously disposed.
One part of it commands a de- 
lightful prospect, including Stockport, Manchester, 
and the more remote divisions of Lancashire.
It 
contains various plantations, and considerable quan- 
tities of timber; but its subterr<4uean riches, con- 
vol.
i. — no.
25.
sisting of thick veins of cool, are infinitely more va- 
luable.
Their discovery is somewhat recenti An 
old tenant of one of the farms, who was obliged to 
procure his water from some distance, is said to 
have frequently petitioned the late Sir George War- 
ren to have a well sunk ; but seeing no probability 
of the attainment of his suit, though he had been re- 
peatedly assured it should be complied with, he 
gave notice that he would quit the premises, unless 
the well were immediately executed.
Unwilling to 
lose a good tenant, Sir George determined to con- 
form to his wishes, and the work was begun.
The 
spring lay at a considerable depth ; and before they 
came to the water, the workmen were surprised by 
the appearance of one of the finest veins of coal in 
that country.
This discovery has greatly enhanced 
the value of the estate.
A colliery was immediately 
established, and has ever since been worked with 
considerable success.
A school-house was built here, by subscription, 
upwards of a century ago ; but it has never been 
endowed.
Poynton has had a chapel of ease ever 
since the year 1312, the minister of which is ap- 
pointed by the Lord of the Manor : it has no en- 
dowment.
Prestbury.] — Prestbury is a large parish in the 
hundred of Macclesfield, containing the following 
townships : — Adlington, Birtles, Bollington, Bosley, 
Butley, Capesthorne, Chelford, Fahbroom, Hen- 
bury, Lyme-Handley, Marton, Mottram-Andrew, 
Newton, Poynton, Prestbury, North Rode, Sidding- 
ton, Tytherington, Upton, Old Withington, Wood- 
ford, and Worth.
The township of Prestbury is two miles and three 
quarters north -north -west from Macclesfield.
— 
Prestbury manor, holden by the Leghs, of Adling- 
ton, as far back as the reign of Elizabeth, now be- 
longs to Richard Cross Legh, Esq. Thomas Hope, 
Esq. is the present occupant of Prestbury Hall.
There is a school-house at Prestbury which was 
built in the year 1720.
The church contains various monuments of the 
Warrens, Booths, Leghs, &c.
An ancient chapel 
of Saxon architecture is yet standing in the church- 
yard, at some distance from the church.
It was re- 
paired by Sir William Meredith, about 1747.
From 
Dngdale's Visitation of Cheshire, we learn that the 
following inscription formerly appeared upon a 
grave- stone in the church-yard : — 
" Those goods I had whilst I did live, 
Unto four monkes I freely give 
To eate, and drinke, and make good cheere, 
And keep my obite once a yeare." 
Rainow.]— "ainow is a chapelry in the parish of 
Prestbury, three miles north-east by east from Mac- 
clesfield.
It has two chapels of ease, and a school for 
nine children.
" In a letter from the Rev. Francis 
Brokesby to Mr. Thomas Hearne (say Messrs.
Ly- 
sons) printed at the end of the 6th volume of Lcland's 
Itinerary, and dated 1711, is an account communicat- 
4 s ed 
8 16 
CHESHIRE, 
ed to him by a frieadj from the relation of a gentleman 
who was a native of that place, of Margaret Broad- 
hurst of Hedgerow in the township of Raioow, who 
Is said to have lived to the great age of 14Q years ; 
this narrative states that she was horn at Over in 
Delamere-ibrest ; that she was some years a servant 
at Shrigley Hall in the family of Downes ; that she 
afterwards married Humphrey Broadhurst, a la- 
bourer in husbandry ; that they brought up nine 
children ; that she always lived on the most simple 
food ; that in her old age she was much visited by 
all ranks of paople from curiosity, and that some 
years before her death she was sent for to Dunham - 
Massey by Sir George Booth, who offered to take 
care of her as long as she lived, but that after a 
month's stay, she told Sir George that she must re- 
turn to her old fare or die shortly.
She is said to { 
have been buried at Prestbury about the year 1650, 
but the entry of her burial is not to he found in the 
register ; it was in vain to expect any satisfactory 
evidence as to her birth from that of Over, as her 
maiden name was not known.
One passage in the 
letter of Mr. Brokesby's correspondent borders a 
little on the marvellous, speaking of the age of this 
old woman, who went by the name of ' the cricket 
of the hedge,' he says, ' that the computation is very 
moderate,' is evident from the testimony of one 
Mrs. Brideoak, sent me by Mr. L.
; she out of curi- 
osity visited the old cricket, and demanding her age, 
she answered, ' I was fourscore years old whon I 
bare that snicket (meaning her daughter, then pre- 
sent) and she is now threescore years old :' he 
could not be informed how long she survived that 
visit," 
Rock Savage.] — Rock Savage is in the town- 
ship of Clifton, in the parish of Runcorn.
To this 
magnificent pile of ruins, embosomed in wood, and 
seated on a rising ground above the river Weever, 
the following lines of the poet Dyer have been very 
forcibly applied ;— 
'* 'Tis now the raven's bleak abode : 
'Tis now the apartment of the load ; 
And there the fox securely feeds ; 
And there the poisonous adder breeds, 
Conceal' d in ruins, moss, and weeds; 
While ever and anon there falls 
Huge heaps of hoary moulder' d walls," 
In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, this mansion 
was the seat of Sir John Savage, by whom it was 
erected ; but by tho marriage of Elizabeth, daugh- 
ter and heiress of Richard Savage, Earl Rivers, 
with James, Earl of Barrymore, it was conveyed, 
together with the estate, into that family.
It is now 
the property of Earl Cholmondeley, who inherited 
it from his uncle, General Cholmondeley, who ob- 
tained it in marriage wjth Lady Penelope Barry, 
daughter of the above Earl James.
After this mar- 
riage it was neglected, and fell so rapidly into de- 
cay, that a gentleman, who Avas born in the house, 
is recorded to have followed a pack of hounds 
through it it) pursuit of game !
Some portion of its 
stately front, consisting of a fine gateway, with lofty 
turrets on each i»ide, is still standing, as well as 
part of one of its sides.
The residue of tho 
ruins consists only of foundation walls, broken 
vaults, and heaps of rubbish, overgrown with 
weeds ; the whole surrounded with enclosures of 
dilapidated walls.
Robtherne,] — Rostherne, or Rostborne, is in the 
hundred of Bucklow, three miles north by west from 
Nether-Knutsford, The parish contains the fol- 
lowing townships : — Iligh-Legh, Mere, Millington, 
Rostherne, Over-Tabley-cum-Sudlbwc, and Tat- 
too ; part of the townships of Agdcn and Boiling- 
ton, and the ohapelry of Over-Peover.
In Rosthorne Church is an ancient tomb of one of 
the Venables family, and a magnificent monument 
by Bacon, to the memory of the late Samuel Eger- 
ton, Esq, who died in 1780, haying been one of th» 
representatives of the county 00 years.
There is a 
small school in.
tho parish.
Runnr.ATH.] — Rudheath is in the parish of Da- 
venham, four miles north-east from Middlewich.
It 
was formerly an asylum for criminals, where they 
were permitted to remain in safety a year and a 
day ; but this privilege, on account of it;, having 
been abused, was taken away long prior to the Re- 
formation.
Runcorn.] — Runcorn, formerly Roraicofan, or 
Runcovan, was anciently divided into Runcorn Su- 
perior, and Runcorn Inferior, or Over Runcorn, 
and Nether Runcorn, It lies in the hundred of 
Bucklow, four miles north by west from Frodsham.
It is situated on the banks of the Mersey, which is.
here suddenly contracted from a considerable 
breadth to a narrow channel, by a projecting point 
of land from the Lancashire side, It is in con- 
templation to throw a magnificent bridge over the 
Mersey, at this place, which will unite Lancashire 
and Cheshire, and facilitate the communication be- 
tween Liverpool and London, — Runcorn is supposed 
to have been originally built, about the year 915, by 
Ethelfleda who also erected a castle opposite the 
gap, as the above strait is denominated, to defend 
this extremity of her extensive domain.
Not a vestige 
of this building can be seen ; but its site is marked 
by the name of the Castle, given to a triangular 
piece of land surrounded with a mound of earth, 
jutting into the river, guarded on the water side 
by ledges of rocks, and broken precipices, and 
cut off from the land by a ditch six yards in 
width.
The Church stands above the castle rock : its 
foundation, probably coeval with the castle, was 
certainly prior to the Conquest ; for Nigel, Baron 
of Halton, bestowed it on his brother Wolfrith, a 
priest, in the time of the Conqueror, In the suc- 
ceeding reigns, the town decayed, and it sank to an 
obscure village; from which situation it has only 
emerged since the complete n of the Duke of Bridge- 
water's navigation, which here communicates with 
9 the 
CHESHIRE.
zn 
(lio Mersey, descending precipitously through a 
grand series of all the locks on his canal.
These 
are supplied with water hy vast hasons, or reser- 
voirs ; and, from the attendance which they require, 
Occasion a great conflux of workmen, ami the 
consequent increase of dwelling-houses, inns, shops, 
£cc, A large warehouse iias also been erected on a 
new plan, and various wharfs built for the accom- 
modation of traders, 
Runcorn has lately become a plaoe of resort for 
salt-water bathing ; the fine air, and the pleasant- 
ness of the neighbourhood, constituting useful aux- 
iliaries to the effects of the bath, In the quarries 
here, which lie contiguous to the canal, large quan- 
tities of free-stone are procured, of a very excellent 
quality, The shore from this village to Weston 
Point, is protected by a low ridge of rock, rising al- 
most perpendicular from the beach, 
Sandbach.] — Sandbach is a market-town, very 
pleasantly situated on an eminence near the little 
river Wheclock, twenty-seven miles east by south 
from Chester, 
It was made a market-town in the seventeenth 
century, by its lord, Sir John Radcliff, of Ordsall, 
Lancashire, whose ancestors had long possessed the 
manor.
The market is on Thursdays and Satur- 
days ; the former for corn, the latter for butchers' 
meat, &.c. In the market-place are two square 
crosses, ornamented with various imagos, and a 
earved representation of the Crucifixion.
Sandbach was formerly famous for the goodness 
of its malt liquor ; and worsted-yarn, and stuffs for 
country wear, were manufactured in large quantities 
by its inhabitants ; but latterly its trade has consi- 
derably decreased.
It has two fairs — on Easter 
Tuesday, and the first Thursday after the 10th of 
September.
At the September fair, in 1651, a large party of 
the King's horse, on their retreat from the battle of 
Worcester, were attacked by the country -people, 
and many of them taken prisoners, 
The manor is now the property of Lord Crewe, 
The church contains memorials of the families uf 
Moulson, Leigh, Powis, and Jackson of Bcohton, 
A free-school was foundod here about a century 
ago ; at which twenty hoys are tattght reading, 
writing, and arithmetic, and three are fitted for the 
University, 
Besides the townships which are in the chapejries 
of Holmes-Chapel and Gqostrey, the following are 
in this parish : — ArclifFe, Bechton, Bradwell, Has* 
=>ull, Sandbach, and Whcelock, 
The manor of Elworth, in the township of Sand- 
bach,.
was for many generations the seat of the an~ 
cient family of Raven.
In the 17th century, the 
heiress of that family brought it to the Hulses of 
Olive, It was bequeathed by the Rev. John IJulso 
* Ly sons' Magna Britannia, Vol, II.
p. 760, 
to Thomas PVmt and his wife for fii^ ; and, in their 
possession, it still remains.
" The Rev, John 
llulse, who died in 1790, bequeathed his Che- 
shire estates, after a certain period mentioned 
in his will, and the fulfilment of certain spe^ 
cific trusts, to the University of Cambridge for 
ever, In (he mean time he directed thai.
Die sum of 
701.
per annum should be given by his trustees out 
of the profits of his estates, to a master of avis in 
4 the University, to be elected by the vice-chancellor 
and the masters of Trinity and St. John's Colleges ; 
to be called the Christian Advocate, to hold that 
office for six years, and to write and publish yearly 
answers against notorious infidels, whether Atheists 
or Deists, particularly noticing such new and popu- 
lar cavils and objections as shall have been recently 
written against the Christian or Revealed Religion, 
the sum of 601.
per annum to be given to a master 
of arts to be chosen yearly, by the same persons, as 
a lecturer, who should preach twenty sermons at 
Great St, Mary's Church in Cambridge, on the evi- 
dences of Revealed Religion, and on the Truth and 
Excellence of Christianity, which sermons should be 
printed ; the sum of 501.
to the writer (being of the 
University of Cambridge, and under the degree of 
M, A.) of the best dissertation on the Evidences of 
the Christian Religion, to be determined by the 
persons before mentioned ; and 301.
per annum, to 
three scholars (to be called Hulse's scholars) at St.
John's College, to be chosen by the masters and 
seniors of that College ; preference to he given to 
natives of Cheshire, and particularly to sons of the - 
curate of Sandbach, the vicar or curate of Middle- 
wich, the curate of Witton, or to the sons of clergy- 
men born in Sandbach, Middlewich, or Witton,— 
The Bishop of Ely is visitor of this trust."* 
Sacghall.] — -Great Saughall is in the parish of 
Shotwick, four miles north-west by west from Ches- 
ter, Mary Davis, of whom there is an account and 
portrait in Leigh's Natural History of Cheshire, 
was born here about the year 1598.
At the age of 
twenty-eight, a wen-like excrescence appeared 
above the ear on the right side of her head, which, 
after thirty-two yeara' continuance, grew into two 
horns, which remained for five years, and were then 
shed, These were succeeded hy two new ones, 
which, about four years from their first appearance, 
were alao cast, and their places occupied by two 
others, Several portraits were made of her when 
she was upwards of seventy years of age, one of 
which is nqw in the British, and another in the Ash- 
molean M useum ; in the latter, one of her horns also 
is preserved, In 1079, when more than eighty yeara 
old, she was exhibited in Loudon, Some similar 
instances are on record.
In the year 1790, a woman 
of the name of Allen was exhibited in London, with 
a horn growing on her head, In the University 
Libra r 
348 
CHESHIRE.
Library at Edinburgh is preserved a horn, which 
was cut from the head ol" Elizabeth Love, in the oUth 
year ol' her age.* 
Little Saughall is the adjoining" township.
Shocklach.] — Shocklach, thirteen miles and a 
half south by east from Chester, anciently had a 
castle, which, together with the manor, was held, 
after the Conquest, of Hugh Lupus, by Robert 
Fitz-Hugh.
Its place is occupied by a handsome, 
mansion, formerly the residence of the Egcrtons of 
Ridley.
The moat which surrounded the fortress 
still remains ; and on the opposite side of the road 
is a vast mount, which Pennant supposed to have 
been exploratory, and more ancient than the castle.
Mr. Gough, however, conjectures it to have been 
only the keep, which, at some distant, period was se- 
parated fiom the road by the works.
This parish contains the townships of Church- 
Shocklach, Shocklach Oviat, and Caldecote.
Shotwick.] — Shotwick is a little village, situated 
on the River Dee, six miles and a quarter north- 
west from Chester.
Anciently the manor belonged 
to the convent of St. Werburgh, under which it was 
held by the Shotwieks.
It is now the property of 
Mr. Rennet.
Here was formerly a castle, sur- 
rounded with a park, belonging to the crown.
Some of the ruins were remaining in 1622.
Tradi- 
tion states Henry the Second to have lodged in 
this castle, on his way to and from Ireland ; and 
Edward the First was there in the year 1278.
The 
park has long been disparked, and converted into 
farms.
The following townships are in this parish : — 
Capenhurst, Great Saughall, Littie-Saughall, Shot- 
wick, and Woodbank.
Stockport.] — Stockport, or Stopford, a market- 
town in the hundred of Macclesfield, forty-three 
miles north-east by east from Chester, is thus de- 
scribed in King's Vale Royal : — " The skirt of the 
hill is beautified with many fair buildings : and half 
about the skirt of it runs Mersey, with great force 
or rather fury, under a great stone bridge, which 
divides them from Lancashire ; it is a great market, 
and much frequented by dwellers far remote, their 
government by a maior and aldermen ; but the seig- 
nory there, chiefly belonging to the owners of the 
ancient barony." 
Stockport is generally considered to have been 
one of the eight baronies under the ancient Earls of 
Chester; but it is uncertain when this honour was con- 
ferred ; and the opinions of antiquaries are various 
on the subject.
The late Rev. John Watson has 
observed, in his Memoirs of the Earls of Warren 
and Surrey, that if the general reason can be disco- 
vered why the Earls e;f Chester created barons at 
all, or rather if it can be found out why Stockport in 
particular was made a barony, then possibly it may 
* See a particular account of Mary Davis in *' Pha-nix 
be known whether it ought to bo recorded among 
the ancienj baronies or not.
" Alter William the Conqueror," says Mr. Wat- 
son, " thought himself firmly established on his 
throne, he bestowed many provinces and counties of 
this realm on the barons who assisted him.
These 
strengthened the counties respectively allotted to 
them, iu the mode that seemed best adapted to se- 
cure their possessions from the incursions of their 
neighbours.
The Counties Palatine (as they have 
since been called) were judged to be iu greater dan- 
ger than the others, and greater attention was there- 
fore paid to their defence.
Thus, in the adjoining 
county palatine of Lancaster, Roger Pictavonsis, 
the Earl, caused his whole jurisdiction to be sur- 
rounded with a chain of forts ; some of which I shall 
mention, as their situations are immediately connect- 
ed with the illustration of my subject.
" One of these forts was at Widnes, where a baron 
was stationed to protect that part of Lancashire from 
the incursions of the Cheshire people ; and as the 
jealousy was mutual, opposite to this, on the Che- 
shire side, was Haulton Castle : and Nigel, or rather 
William, son of Nigel, was fixed there with the same 
title, and stationed in such a manner, as to guard 
the country from any surprise, either from W'ar- 
rington, another Lancashire barony, or Runcorn 
Ferry.
The next barony on the Lancashire side, 
above Warrington, was Newton, erected as well to 
strengthen the former, as to oppose any passage out 
of Cheshire over the river Mersey at Halligreen 
Ferry ; lest from this station, and over this ferry, 
damage should be done to the inhabitants of Che- 
shire, the Earl of Chester made Hamo de Masci 
another of his Barons, and placed him opposite to 
the above, at Dunham.
Another barouy of the Lan- 
cashire palatinate was Manchester, erected as a 
guard on one side against any incursion from Stret- 
ford, and on the other, against the military station 
which appears to have beeD in very early times at 
Stockport.
Now as all the above Lancashire Ba- 
rons were made in the reign of the Conqueror by 
Roger Pictavensis, it seems to follow, that the baro- 
ny of Stockport is as old as the rest within the coun- 
ty of Chester ; for why should every other Lanca- 
shire barony be guarded against, which lay opposite 
to Chester, and not that at Manchester ?
If such an 
opening into the county was permitted to remain 
unguarded, the other establishments must have been 
useless.
„ 
" When the Castle at Stockport was first erected 
is uncertain ; but the site on which it stood has the 
name of Castle-Yard to this day.
That there are 
no records to determine its origin, is a proof of its 
antiquity.
If the hints given by Mr. Whitaker are 
well founded, it is antique indeed.
' Tlie town of 
Stockport,' says this gentleman, ' appears evi- 
Britannicns," 4to.
p. 248 ; and of Elizabeth Love, in Sir Ro- 
bert Sibbald's " Scotia illustrate," pan i.
p. (30.
dently 
CHESHIRE.
349 
dently the one common centre to three or four very 
variously directed roads of the Romans.
The 
High-Street advances to it from Manchester ; and 
the Pepper- Street hastens to it from Hanford ; and 
in the parish of Asheton, and near the foot of Sta- 
ley Bridge, is a third road, commonly denominated 
Staley-Street, for a mile together, the main line of 
which lies pointing clearly from Castle-Shaw to 
Stockport.
These are sure signatures of a Roman 
station.
This must have been fixed upon as the site 
of the castle, and was the area of the Castle Hill at 
Stockport.
That is exactly such a site as the Ro- 
mans must have instantly selected for such a sta- 
tion ; that is, a small area, detached from the level 
ground of the Market-place, and connected with it 
only hy an isthmus.
The area must have been the 
actual site of the castle in the earliest period of the 
Saxon residence among us ; as the castle must have 
originally communicated its name to the town, and 
as both were denominated Stockport, because the 
former was a port or castle in a wood.
The 
area is about half a statute acre in extent ; the site 
is still incomparably strong in itself, and the posi- 
tion is happily fitted for the ford.
The station must 
have had a steep of 100 or 120 yards upon three 
sides of it ; and must have been guarded by a fosse 
across the isthmus.
The Roman road from East 
Cheshire mu9t have been effectually commanded by 
it ; being obliged, by the circling current of the 
Mersey, to approach very near to the castle ; and 
being evinced, by the remaining steepness of the 
neighbouring banks, to have actually ascended the 
brow in a hollow immediately below the eastern side 
of it." 
" More might be urged in proof of there being a 
castrum in Stockport in the time of the Romans, if 
the point was not already sufficiently established : 
and that a fortress was maintained here in the 
Saxon times, the very name of the place demon- 
strates : and, besides its signification, as given by 
Mr. Whitaker, Soc, or Stoke-port, may likeAvise 
signify a wooden castle ; Stoke Castle in Norfolk 
being interpreted, in Spelman's Icenia, by Capella 
Lignea : or Stoke may also mean a place or settle- 
ment in general ; as, Stoke-Curey, where the Cur- 
ries lived ; Wood-stock, the Woody-place ; so also 
Stoke-port, the Place of the Castle.
But which- 
ever of these derivations is correct, it plainly has a 
reference to the Saxon times, and is confirmed by 
the very current tradition, that the Danes were re- 
pulsed here, and great numbers of them slain.
This 
Nichols has thus expressed in his book " De litteris 
inventis ;" 
Fama refert, Danos lib: nunc Stopporta locaUir, 
Affectos olim clatle fuisse gravi : 
Inde urbi nomen, prxdonum incnisibus obex 
Quod datus, hie Anglis sit quocjue parta salus.* 
VOL 
* In ages past, the place where Stopport stands 
Murk'd the repulse of hostile Danish bands ; 
. I.— no.
25.
" This etymology is wrong, because the name was 
not, very anciently, written Stopport ; but the tradi- 
tion is probably right ; for the field below the cas- 
tle, called the Park, is fuller of human bones, to a 
larger extent, than would be necessary for the bu- 
rial-ground of the garrison.
Stopport was proba- 
bly a corruption from Stoke-port, as some centuries 
ago it was almost uniformly written.
In the year 
1173, the castle was possessed by Geoffrey de Con- 
stantine ; but whether he held it in his own right, or 
of the Baron of Stockport, or even against him, by 
order of the Earl of Chester, is unknown.
" In a manuscript written by the late Dr. Wil- 
liamson, the barony of Stockport is supposed to 
have belonged originally to Ranulph the Dapifer, 
whose name is conjectured to have been Spencer, 
(anciently Le Despencer) and whose family, grow- 
ing into great wealth and favour with the Kings of 
England, sold it to Robert de Stockport about the 
reign of Henry the Third, before whose time there 
is little or no mention of this family.
Now, if our 
author's suppositions are right, this barony is as an- 
cient as the rest, for Ranulph was Dapifer, in the 
time of Hugh Lupus ; and if it was true that the 
barony was purchased of him, by Robert de Stock- 
port, it must have been very near this period ; 
though the particular time of this family's obtain- 
ing the honour, is not to be determined.
Sir Ro- 
bert de Stockport, Knt. bestowed a charter upon 
this town, constituting a free borough ; this charter 
was certainly not granted till the reign of Henry 
the Third ; a deed, printed in the Monasticon, ren- 
ders it, however, evident that Robert de Stockport 
was in power in the latter end of the reign of Rich- 
ard the First." 
Besides many other privileges which were grant- 
ed to the burgesses, by the charter, a perch and an 
acre of land were bestowed on each of them, subject 
only to the annual payment of one shilling.
The 
barony became the property of the Warren family, 
by the marriage of Sir Edward de Warren, Knt.
with Cicely, filth in descent from the first Robert 
de Stockport of whom we have any record; and it 
has descended in uninterrupted succession through 
the Warrens to the present time.
No part of the 
ancient castle is remaining : its site is occupied by 
a circular building, with battlements and embrasures 
which were erected by the late Sir George Warren, 
and intended for butchers' shambles.
This plan not 
succeeding ; after remaining unoccupied for many 
years, it was employed as a cotton factory ; and it 
was afterwards converted into a number of shops 
for the sale of muslin goods manufactured in the 
town and neighbourhood.
The Muslin Hall was 
the name which it then acquired ; but it has not 
been thus occupied lor some years.
During the Civil War, Stockport, which was 
considered as an important post, was garrisoned for 
And thence, according to the voice of Fame, 
The Angles, 'Safety gain'd ; the town, its nau;e.
4 t ther 
CHESHIRE.
the Parliament.
Prince Rupert appeared before it 
with his army, in May 1644, and, after some resist- 
ance, took the town.
In 1745, Stockport bridge 
was blown up, to prevent the retreat of the rebels, 
alter their advance to Derby.
Stockport cheese-market, holden on Fridays, is 
considered to be the first in the county.
The mar- 
ket is also well supplied with corn and oatmeal.
— 
Here are four annual fairs — March 4, March 25, 
May 1 (lor cuttle) and October 23.
The progress of the trade of this town is thus 
described by Dr. Aikin : — " In Stockport were 
erected some of the first mills for winding and 
throwing silk, on a plan procured from Italy.
The 
persons concerned in the silk factories were reckon- 
ed the principal people in the place; but, on the 
decline of this trade, the machinery was applied to 
cotton-spinning, and the different branches of the 
cotton manufacture are now the chief staple of the 
town.
The people of Stockport first engaged in the 
spinning of reeled weft, then in weaving checks, and 
lastly fustians ; and tbey were so ingenious as to 
attempt muslins, which were introduced at the time 
of the invention of the machines called the mills, 
whereby the thread was drawn fine, and spun softer 
than that of the weft.
The manufactories have, 
with this advantage, produced a species of flowered 
muslin, with borders for aprons and handkerchiefs, 
by casting a coarse shoot for the figures, and neatly 
trimming the float, before bleaching, with scissars ; 
so that the figure was a good imitation of needle- 
work.
The cotton trade of Stockport is now so 
considerable that, besides a large number of cotton- 
spinning shops, here are twenty-three spacious cot- 
ton factories, some of them worked by steam- 
engines.
The making of hats is likewise a consider- 
able branch of employment.
Weaving fustians has 
extended from hence over Cheshire, to Galey, and 
Northeudon, where a few checks or furniture had 
been woven before." 
At this time, we believe, there is only one silk- 
mill in the town ; but, in addition to the cotton and 
muslin factories, the manufacture of hats is carried 
on to a considerable extent.
The removal of arti- 
cles of traffic has been much facilitated by a new 
navigable canal from this town to Manchester, which, 
uniting with the Duke of Bridgewater's Canal at 
the latter place, communicates with the Mersey, 
Dee, Ouse,Derwent, Trent, Severn, Dumber, Avon, 
Thames, and many other rivers.
The town of Stockport stauds on very irregular 
ground.
The parish church, and market-place, 
being on the summit of a hill, afford a level of con- 
siderable extent.
Part of the northern side of this 
hill is perpendicular for a height equal to that of the 
houses which encircle its base, and conceal the hill 
from the view of the passengers.
Some of these 
houses have apartments hollowed out of the rock of 
*ioft free-stone which forms the substratum of the 
hill, and the appearance of the whole is very remark- 
able.
The market-place is also encircled by an 
upper row of houses, ranging completely round it.
From this central part of the town, the streets 
stretch away in various directions, and to a consi- 
derable extent.
This town contains two churches : St. Mary's, 
which is the more ancient, and considered as the pa- 
rish church ; and St. Peter's.
St. Mary's is a spa- 
cious structure, consisting of a nave, chancel, and 
side aisles.
Neither the date of this building, nor 
the name of the founder, is known ; but, from the 
style of the architecture of some part of the body of 
the church, it was apparently erected about the 
fourteenth century.
It was built with a soft red 
free-stone, which, by exposure to the atmosphere, 
is so worn, that it has been found necessary to carry 
up an additional row of stone to support the steeple, 
which was rebuilt between the years 1612 and 1616, 
at the expence of the parishioners.
The whole 
length of the church is about 160 feet.
On the north 
side of the chapel, or oratory, is a family vault belong- 
ing to theLeghs of Lyme ; and on the opposite side an- 
other, which belongs jointly to the Ardens of Stock- 
port (who formerly resided at Harden Hall) and 
the Davenports of Bramhall.
In a small building, 
called Marple Chapel, adjoining to the south side of 
the chancel, is an ancient tomb, placed over Rich- 
ard de Vernon, supposed to have been rector of 
Stockport in the reign of Edward the Second ; the 
following inscription on which was remaining in 
1779 :— 
On the north wall of the chancel is a monument, 
by Westmacott, erected within these few years, to 
the memory of the late Sir George Warren.
The 
monument exhibits a female figure, mourning over 
an urn, in white marble, said to be a portrait of the 
Lady Viscountess Bulkeley, the daughter and 
heiress of Sir George Warren, by whom the memo- 
rial was erected.
The following inscription appears 
below : — 
" To the memory of Sir George Warren, late of 
Poynton in this county, Knight of the most honour- 
able Order of the Bath, lineally descended from the 
noble and ancient race of the Earls of Warren and 
Surrey, many years representative in Parliament for 
the town of Lancaster, Lord of the barony and manor 
of Stockport, &c.
whose remains lie interred in a fa- 
mily vault near this place ; in whom the tender affec- 
tions of the parent, the polished manners of the gen- 
tleman, the amiable qualities of the friend, and social 
endearing attractions of the neighbour, were conspicu- 
ously united.
Ob. Aug.
31, 1801, set.
67." 
St. Mary's church has jurisdiction over four cha- 
pels of ease ; and the value of the living has been 
so greatly increased by the improvements made in 
the town and its vicinity, that it is estimated to be 
worth at least 15001.
per annum.
The parsonage- 
house is a handsome and spacious edifice, situated 
on 
CHESHIRE.
Sol 
on an eminence near the church, and overlooking an 
extensive part of the country.
St. Peter's church was erected in the year 1768, 
at the charge of William Wright, Esq. The annual 
value of the endowment, including the rent of the 
pews, is 3001.
per annum.
Both churches are fur- 
nished with organs.
The Presbyterians, Quakers, and Methodists, 
have several meeting-houses in this town.
Near 
the town, also, is a Catholic chapel.
The six alms-houses which stand on the east side 
of the church-yard, were erected about the year 
1685, by an ancestor of the late Sir George Warren, 
for six poor men, inhabitants of Stockport, who re- 
ceive annually twenty shillings, and three horse-loads 
of coal, each person.
Humphrey Warren, who died 
about the middle of the 18th century, increased the 
yearly allowance to each man by an additional five 
shillings.
In the year 1487, a free-school was founded in 
this town, in pursuance of the will of Edmund Shaw, 
citizen and alderman of London, who endowed it 
with 101.
per annum, for a master's salary, which 
has been since increased to 851.
The following 
clause of the will, in which this institution originated, 
is singular : — " And I woll that the other honest 
preest, (the first mentioned was to officiate at Wood- 
head Chapel ;) be a discrete man, connying in gra- 
mer, and be able of connying to teche gramer ; and I 
woll that he sing his masse, and say his other divyne 
service in the parisshe of Stopforde in the saide 
countye of Chester, at souch an aulter ther, as can 
be thought convenient for hym, and to pray specially 
for my soule, and the soules, &c.
And I woll that 
the same connying preest kepe a gramer-school 
contynually in the said town of Stopforde, as long 
as he shall contynewe ther in the said service.
And 
that he frely, without any wages or salarye, asking 
or taking of any person, except only my salarye 
hereunder speeifyed, shall teche all meaner persones 
children, and other that woll come to hym to lorne, 
as well of the said towne of Stopforde, as of other 
townes there about, the science of gramer as ferre as 
lieth in him for to do, unto the time that they be 
convenably instruct in gramer by hym, after their 
capaciteys that God woll give them.
And I woll 
that the same connying preest, with all his scholers 
with hym that he shall have for the time, shall, two 
dayes in every weke, -as long as he shall ahyde in 
that service ther, that is to wite, Wedynysday and 
Fryday, come into the said church of Stopforde, 
unto the grave ther, where the bodies of my fader, 
and my moder lyen buryed, and ther say togiders 
the Psalm of De profundis, with the versieles and 
collects therto accustomyd, after Salisbury use ; and 
pray specially for my soule, and the soules of my 
fader and my moder, and for all Christen soules.
And I woll that the same preeste teching gramer 
shall have for his salarye yerely, as long as he 
abide in that service ther, 101.
of the said 141.
6s.
8d.
residue of the said annuel and quyterent of 
171.
And for to corage my said feliship of the said 
craft of goldsmythes, or else that other feliship, the 
which woll agree to her the charge of the said an- 
uuell and quyterent of 171.
to be the better willen to 
the supportacion of the same charge for evermore : 
I woll that the same feliship shall have for evermore, 
the presentement, nominacion, and admission of the 
said two preestes of the said two services, and the 
removing and puttying out of them, and admyttyng 
of other into the same services, for causes resonable, 
as often as the case so shall require."— In another 
clause of his will he directs his executors " to buy 
as mooch Walshe fryse, half white and half black, 
as may and thereof do mak at my coste 200 party - 
gownes for the poor of Stopforde, Chedle, Mot- 
tram," and some neighbouring parishes in Lan- 
cashire, there specified.
To Stopforde church he 
gives " as good a sute of vestments of blue velvet 
as may be bought with the summe of 40 markes." 
He directs "16 rings of fyne gold, to be graven 
with the well of pitie, the well of mercie, and the 
well of everlasting life," and to be given to his 
friends.
The benefactions for the relief of the poor have 
chiefly consisted of sums from 201.
to 6001.
be- 
queathed to be placed out at interest, and the pro- 
duce annually applied ; part of it was appropriated 
by tfye donors to the apprenticing of poor boys.
In 
the year 1797, a dispensary, for the benefit of the 
sick poor, was built by public subscription, and, in 
1803, nine fever wards were added.
The police of Stockport is conducted by two resi- 
dent magistrates ; two constables ; four church- 
wardens, who, by virtue of certain privileges granted 
by the Barons of Stockport, are always the owners 
of Lyme Hall, Harden Hall, Bramhall Hall, and 
Portwood Hall, estates ; and three overseers of the 
poor.
The streets of Stockport are irregular, and some 
of them so very steep, that loaded carts are obliged 
to he checked, in going down, by three or four horses.
The more ancient part of the town is supplied with 
water from open springs, rising in Barn -Fields, 
which are much higher than the Market-place.
The 
water is collected into a reservoir behind St. Peter's 
Church, and thence conveyed by pipes to different 
parts of the town.
A spring of mineral water, ap- 
pearing to flow from a coal-mine or bed of iron- 
stone, was some years since discovered in the neigh- 
bourhood.
For a time, it was frequented by great 
numbers of people, who used it as a cure for weak 
eyes, and other disorders; but an ill-founded 
prejudice having been conceived against it, as 
occasioning the jaundice, it was quickly desert- 
ed.
Some, years ago, a monument was erected in the 
town, at the expence of the Stockport volunteer 
corps, to perpetuate the remembrance of a remark- 
able accident, which befel one of the privates of that 
corps, named Enoch Hill, who was killed on the 
exercise-ground, by the bursting of his rear-rank 
man's 
852 
CHESHIRE.
man's musket, a splinter of which penetrated his 
heart 
monument : —   
The following lines are inscribed on this 
" Beneath are interred the rtinains of Enoch Hill, 
a private in the Stockport Volunteers ; who, on the 
2lstof February, 1799, and in the 36th year of his 
age, was killed in the ranks, by the bursting of a 
Hiiusket.
" If crown' cl with glory, on the hostile plain.
Sinks the brave hero, for his country slain, 
On this plain grave let honouring tears be shed, 
For know, its tenant for his country bled ; 
Yet not in lands remote, nor with the foe 
Contending, felt he Death's resistless blow ; 
But, from the hope of victory far apart, 
At home a shatter* cl musket pierc'd his heart." 
There are several bridges in the town and neigh- 
bourhood of Stockport : the most ancient, called 
the Lancashire bridge, crosses the Mersey on the 
Manchester road, and stands very high above the 
water, having each end built upon a rock.
The 
Mersey, in the upper parts of its course, is particu- 
larly subject to sudden and violent swells ; by one 
of which, on the 28th of August, 1798, the noble 
structure called the New Bridge, was carried away.
It consisted of a single arch, 210 feet, in width, and 
about 32 feet in height.
Between Stockport and 
the foundation of the new bridge, a very exteifcive 
cotton factory has been erected, the water for which, 
by means of a subterraneous tunnel, is conveyed 
from the Mersey.
Six Sunday-schools were instituted in this town, 
about the year 1784.
Most of them soon declined ; 
but one, under the patronage of the Methodists, has 
continued to flourish in an extraordinary manner.
Ten years after its establishment, it had 695 scho- 
lars ; and, at present, it has between three and four 
thousand, who are educated by upwards of 200 
gratuitous teachers.
The school-house, which was 
erected in 1805, is four stories high, 132 feet long, 
and 57 wide.
The following townships are comprised in this 
parish : — Bramhall, or Bromhall, Bredbury, Brin- 
nington, Disley, Dukenfield, Etchells, or Stockport- 
Etchells, Hyde, Marple, Norbury, Offerton, Romi- 
ley, Stockport, Torkington, and Wernith.
In the township of Bramhall, three miles south by 
west from Stockport, is the ancient seat of the fa- 
mily of Davenport, now the property of William 
Davenport, Esq. It is situated on a rising ground, 
commanding an extensive prospect, and rendered 
pleasant by the contiguity of a small brook, which 
winds through the vale below.
The Bramhales, 
who several centuries ago possessed the estate, 
were related to the Davenports ; and the lion, used 
* This gentleman, born in the year 1612, bequeathed to 
posterity a vast collection of materials for the illustration of the 
history of his native county.
He was the twelfth in lineal de- 
scent from Sir Nicholas Leycester, the first of the family who 
possessed this estate ; he was created u baronet in 1660, and 
on their coats of armour, is yet to be seen on &e 
building, rudely cut in wood.
It must, therefore, 
be at least more than 400 years old ; as Geoffry de 
Bramhale, the last of the name, lived in the reign of 
Edward the Third.
Additions were at various 
times made to this edifice, and a square court was 
at length included within the building.
One side of 
the court, however, was taken down some years 
since, by which the mansion was rendered healthful 
and pleasant.
In the more ancient part of the house 
is a chapel, the windows of which are in a very an- 
tique form, and have been ornamented with repre- 
sentations in stained glass ; but they are now so 
broken and corroded, that nothing like a design can 
be traced.
The east window contains several coats 
of arms of the Davenports and Bramhales : various 
armorial distinctions are also depicted in different 
parts of the house, In the possession of Mr. Da- 
venport is a Manuscript Bible, in English, supposed 
to have been written before the invention »• printing.
The translation varies from our present copies.
In 
this mansion, amongst several family and other pic- 
tures, are those of Sir William Davenport, and his 
lady, Dorothy ; the former aged 65, the latter 66, 
in 1627 ; Sir William (son of the above) and his 
wife Margaret, both aged 44, in 1628 : William 
Davenport, and his wife, Elizabeth Gregory, with 
five of their children.
John Warren, Esq. aged 40, 
1580: Sir Edward, his son, aged 32, 1594; and 
Sir Urian Legh, of Adlington, in the neighbouring 
parish of Prestbury, in a Spanish dress, with a 
truncheon in his right hand.
This gentleman had 
a command under the Earl of Essex, at the taking 
of Cadiz, in 1596, when he was knighted, with many 
others who had been concerned in that event.
A 
tradition in the family at Adlington, states that this 
Sir Urian was the person alluded to in that beauti- 
ful old ballad recording a fine example of connu- 
bial love, which is printed in Percy's Reliques of 
Ancient Poetry.
It begins as follows : — 
Will you hear a Spanish lady, 
How she woo'd an Englishman ?
Garments gay, as rich as may be, 
Deck'd with jewels, had she on.
— 
Tablet.] — Nether-Tabley is a township of the 
parish of Great Budworth, one mile and a half west- 
south-west from Nether- Knutsford.
This place 
is particularly distinguished in the history of Che- 
shire, as the ancient seat of the Leycester family, 
who obtained the manor, by a marriage with the 
daughter of Geffrey de Dutton, about the year 1276.
It was 'the birth-place and residence of Sir Peter 
Leycester, the celebrated antiquary ;* has remained 
in the family to the present day ; and is now the 
died in 1678 : the male line of this ancient family became ex.
tinct by the death of his grandson, Sir Francis, : n 1743, when 
the Tabley estate passed to Sir John Byrne, a baronet of Ire- 
land, the son of his only daughter, who 'assumed by act of Par- 
liament the name and arms of Leycester.
f property 
CHESHIRE.
353 
property of Sir John Fleming Leycester, Bart.
Part of the ancient family resilience still remains ; 
and, from its peculiar situation, picturesque appear- 
ance, and venerable character, is highly interesting'.
It is seated in a low sequestered spot, on a small 
island, and surrounded with a fine lake.
Near to 
the house is a small chapel, where divine service is 
weekly performed.
The family burying-place is at 
Great Bud worth, where is an inscription, comme- 
morative, of Sir Peter Leycester.
The father of the 
present possessor employed Mr. Carr, the architect, 
of York, to build the mansion now standing, which 
is a Urge handsome edifice, of the Doric order, com- 
posed of brick and stone.
The columns which sus- 
tain the portico are of very large proportions, each 
consisting only of a single block.
The interior of 
the house contains some good pictures by ancient 
and modern masters, particularly the portraits of 
Lord and Lady Byron, by Vandyck.
The stables 
are very neat and convenient, and are disposed in a 
quadrangular form, having a spacious riding-house 
in the centre, and suitable offices.
The grounds are 
ornamented by an extensive sheet of water.
Ovcr-Tabley is a township of the parish of Ros- 
therne, two miles west by north from Nether- Knuts- 
ford.
" In this township," says Sir Peter Leyces- 
ter, " there is an ancient Chappel, called Over- 
Tabley Chappel, or more generally known by the 
name of ' The Chapel in the Street ;' for it is situ- 
ate in the High- Street : an old pitiful structure, ill 
seated, and now in decay." Of this chapel there are 
now, we believe, no remains.
Part of the estate is 
the property of the owner of Nether-Tabley.
Tarpori.ey.] — Tarporleyis a small pleasant mar- 
ket-town, in the hundred of Eddisbury, eleven miles 
east-south-east from Chester, It appears to have 
been formerly incorporated, under the government 
of a mayor, &c.
The market, originally on Tues- 
days, now on Thursdays, was granted, A.
D. 1281, 
to Hugh de Tarporley, then Lord of the Manor, to- 
gether with a fair lor three days, at the festival of 
Holy-Rood.
Somewhat more than a century ago, 
Sir John Crewe, who built the market-house, ob- 
tained a grant of three annual fairs, which are now 
holdeu on the 1st of -May, the Monday after the 
festival of St. Bartholomew, and the 11th of De- 
cember.
Tarporley is now chiefly remarkable from being the 
place where many of the principal gentlemen of the 
county assemble at an annual hunt, the first week in 
November, which is equally consecrated to the plea- 
sures of conviviality, and those of the chase ; the 
neighbouring heaths of Delamere Forest affording 
very favourable ground for the latter diversion.
At 
this season there are also horse-races on Delamere 
Forest.
There was a pitched battle at Tarporley, between 
the Royalists and the Republicans, in which the 
latter were worsted, in February 161-2-3.
Formerly, the Lords of the Manor of Tarporley 
claimed the right of punishing scolds by the duck- 
voi..
i. — no.
26.
ing stool; maltsters, offending against the law, by 
the tumbrell ; and bakers, by the pillory.
Tarporley Church contains several monuments of 
the Crewe, Done, and Wagstaff, families.
On an old house in the town, are the two follow- 
ing distichs, -with the crest and initials of Ralph- 
Done, &c.
: — 
" Ralphs Done Esquyre, the Lorde of thys place 
. Was an eade to thys bultlyng in every cace." 
J lion Winter 1586.
*' Fenys quoth Jhon Newson hath kept hyspromesjust, 
In bultlyng of tins house in Awgust." 
Anno 1585.
The Doncs and Crewes appear to have been con- 
siderable benefactors to this town.
In the year 
1704, Sir John Crewe built and endowed alms- 
houses for four poor women.
In 1662, Mrs. Jane 
Done gave 201.
a year to the school, and the interest 
of 2001.
to bind the children apprentice.
This esta- 
blishment has been since considerably augmented by 
various donations.
The parish of Tarporley contains the following 
townships : — Eaton, Rushton, Tarporley^ and Ut- 
kinton.
Tarvin.] — Tarvin, anciently Tarfyn, signifying a 
boundary, which it is to the Forest of Delamere, lies 
six miles east by north from Chester.
It had a 
market obtained for it by Sir John Savage, to whom 
it was alienated from the bishopric of Litchfield, in 
the reign of Queen Elizabeth ; but the market has 
long been discontinued, as has the annual fair, 
which used formerly to be holden on the 9th of De- 
cember.
During the Civil War, this place was, for a con- 
siderable time, one of the parliamentary garrisons ; 
and, with the exception of Nantwich, it appears to 
have been the only garrison in Cheshire, which was 
not abandoned on the reported approach of the 
King, in May 1645.
A grammar-school was founded at Tarvin, in the 
year 1600, in which twenty children are educated.
On the outside of the church, is a monument to the 
memory of Mr. Thomasen,.one of the masters of the 
grammar-school, and much celebrated for his skill 
in the art of penmanship.
His merits are recorded 
in the following epitaph : — 
"John Thomasen,.
thirty-six years master of the 
grammar school, highly excelling in all the varieties 
of writing, and wonderfully so in the Greek character.
Specimens of his ingenuity are treasured up in the 
cabinets of the curious, and in the public libraries 
throughout the kingdom: he had the honour to tran- 
scribe the Icon Basilikeof her royal grandfather, lor 
Queen Anne ; invaluable copies also of Pindar, Ana- 
creon, Eprctelus, Hippocrateb's Aphorisms, and that 
finished piece, the shield of Arhillcs (as described by' 
Homer), are among the productions of hrs valuable 
pen.
Ob. Jan.
25, 1740.
aet.
54." 
There is a portrait of this gentleman, at Vale 
Royal.
Two crossed pens are delineated on his 
tomb.
4 v Ralph 
£*4 
CHESHIRE.
Ralph Nield, who had had six wires, was buried 
at Tarvin, A.
1).
1760, aged 107, 
This parish contains the following 1 townships '— 
AshtoU, Burton, Clotton, Dnddon, Hockenhull, 
Ilorton-cmn-Peele, Kelsall, Grcat-Moiildsworth, 
Bruen-Stapleford, Fulke- Staple ford, and Tarvin- 
cum-Oscroi*t.
Tatten-Hsix.] — Tatten-Hafl is in the hundred 
of Broxton, five miles and a half south-west by west 
from Tarporley.
The manor, formerly in the Aud- 
rey family, was forfeited to the crown, by attainder.
About the year 1600, the Egertons purchased it of 
the Cottons.
They afterwards sold it to the < ?rewes ; 
and it now belongs to Thomas Tarlton, Esq.
The old hall, which was purchased, by the 
Bradshaws, of the Bostocks, is now a farm-house, 
and belongs to the manor.
The modern house of W.
Egerton, Esq. called 
Tatten-Hall Hall, is situated in the midst of a park, 
containing nearly 2500 acres of arable and pasture 
Jt stands on an eleVated spot of grottnd, from 
land.
the front of which a lawn gradually declines to the 
level of Tattenmcre, a fine piece of Water, about half 
a mile from the house.
The view beyond the mere, 
embracing a variety of intermediate objects, is ter- 
minated by Alderley-edge, and the distant hills 
which divide Cheshire from the neighbouring coun- 
ties.
The designs for the house were given by M*.
"Wyatt, and are conceived in a style of- elegant sim- 
plicity.
The gardens are extensive ; and the pinery 
is remarkably spacious, and Well constructed.
There is a school at Tatten-Hall, for the educa- 
ti6n of children of the parish.
The church was 
given, by William de Mfdbank, to the Abbot and 
Convent of St. Werburgh.
It contains some me- 
morials of the Bird family, of Broxton.
Tatten-Hall contains the townships of Golboum- 
Bellew, Newton, and Tatten-Hall.
Taxaix.] — Taxall is rather more than eight miles 
north-east by east from Macclesfield.
There is a 
tradition, that the manor was anciently holden by 
the service of blowing a horn on Midsummer-day, 
at theWgh rock near Taxall, called Wind-gather; 
and that the Lord was to hold the King's stirrup, 
! and rouse the stag, when he should come to hunt 
"in Macclesfield Forest.
Whaley Is a township of 
this parish.
Thfxwaix.] — A township of the chapelry of 
Daresbury, in the parish of Runcorn, was anciently 
a considerable town, founded by Edward the Elder, 
in the year 920.
Its name was derived from the 
Saxon word Thell, indicative of the stumps and 
trunks of trees with which it was originally envi- 
roned ; and wall, a term still made use of to 'signify 
a fenCe, without particular reference to the materials 
that compose it.
It is now an obscure little village, 
about nine miles and a half north-west by north from 
Nether- Knutsford.
Utkinton.] — UtkintOn, a township of the parish 
of Tarporley, upwards of a mile north-West by west 
from that t >wn, was formerly celebrated for con- 
taining a medicinal spring of almost miraculous 
virtue.
This spring, which we have mentioned In 
our introductory particulars, relating to this county, 
was accidentally discovered more than 200 years- 
ago, at a place called the Hollius ; and, for upwards 
of a century, it Went by the name of the New-found- 
Well.
As soon, however, as it was enclosed, and a 
small payment demanded for the use of ife efficacious 
waters, it fell into disrepute.
Utkinton Hall was the ancient seat of the D0nes> 
artd afterwards of the Crewes.
Sir John Crewe 
had a valuable library there.
The remains of the 
hall have been converted into a farm-house ; and 
the chapel belonging to if, which Was eonsecrated 
in the year 1605, has heen appropriated to the use 
of the farm.
WatxjvzEy.] — Wallazey, or Kirkby in Walsey, is- 
in the hundred of Win-all, ten mile* and a half 
north by east from Greut-Neston.
The hall, an an- 
cient stOnc building, lias been converted into a farm 
house.
New-Hall, usually called Mock-Beggar- 
Hall,from the circumstance of its huving been many 
years uninhabited, formerly belonged to the Eger 
tons, of Oulton ; bHt, a few years ago, it was pur- 
chased of them by Mr. Harrison.
Horse-races used formerly to take place every 
year on Wallazey Sands ; but they were disconti- 
nued about the year 1750.
Webb, in his Itinerary, 
written above 200 years ago, speaks- of " these fair 
sands, or plains upon the shore of the sea at Wal- 
sey, which for the fitnesse of such a purpose allure 
the gentlemen and others oft to appoint great 
matches, and venture no small sums in trying 'the 
swiftnesse of their horses." 
Formerly, there Were two churches at Wallazey ; 
one of whieh, occupying the site of the present 
church, was called Walsey's Kirk ; the other Lee's 
Kirk, near a spot which still bears the liame of 
Kirk way.
A grammar-school was erected here about the 
middle of the seventeenth century ; but the site was 
removed about the year 1799.
Between one and two miles from WaHazey, a very 
commodious hotel was erected, about five-and- 
twenty years ago, by Sir John Thomas Stanley, 
Bart, for the accommodation of persons visiting the 
sea side.
This is much frequented, in the summer 
season, by the resident families of Cheshire and its 
neighbourhood, Who visit the spot for the purpose 
of bathing in Ilyle Lake, which is bounded by the 
projecting land of the Wirrall peninsula, and the 
coast Of the small Isle of Hilbree, or Hillebyrj.
The isle is about one mile in circuit ; and though 
the soil is scarcely any thing but sand, it had for- 
merly a cell of Benedictine monks, belonging to the 
abbey at Chester.
" At Hyle Lake," says Mr.
Gough, " Duke Schomberg encamped when he was 
going to reduce Ireland after the Revolution, and 
here his forces embarked." 
Wallazey parish contains the townships of Lis- 
kard, Poolton-eum-Seacome, and WaHazey.
WutTEGATR.
CHESHIRE.
3.35 
Whiteg ate ] — Whitegate,or New- Church, which 
lies three miles and a quarter south-west by south 
from Northwich, was taken out of the parish of 
Over, and made a distinct parish, in the 33d of 
Henry VIII.
In this parish, situated nearly in tlte centre of the 
county, stands Vale Royal Abbey, the seat of Tho- 
mas Cholmondeley, Esq.
The origin of this abbey was as follows :— Ed- 
ward the First, when Prince of Wales and Earl of 
Chester, having been in danger of shipwreck on his 
retunl from the Holy Land, made a vow to found a 
monastery of Cistercian monks.
Some time after- 
wards, having been taken prisoner during the Ba- 
rous' wars, and confined at Hereford, the monks of 
the neighbouring monastery of Dore visited and 
consoled him in his captivity j and, out of gratitude, 
he determined to fulfil his vow and take them under 
his protection.
About the year 1-273, or 1274, lie 
Iremoved them from Don; to Dernhall in this coun- 
ty, where they staid only a few years.
Edward, af- 
ter he became King, determined to build a new ab- 
bey for them on a neighbouring spot, then called 
Quete'nne-Hall.
The first stone of this stately 
building, to which the King gave the name of Vale 
Royal, Was laid on the 6th of the Ides of August, 
A. D.
1277, by his Majesty, in the presence of 
Queen Eleanor and several of the nobles.
The ab- 
bfey was not completed till the year 1330, when the 
charges of building were found to have amounted to 
what in that age must have been considered as an 
immense sum, being not less than 32,0001.
At the 
period of the Dissolution, its revenues were valued 
at 5181.
19s.
8d.
and it was then granted to Sir 
Thomas Holcroft, of Holcroft, in the county of Lan- 
caster, whose grandson, Sir Thomas, sold the whole 
demesne to Dame Mary, daughter of Christopher 
Holford, of Holford, in this county, and widow of 
Sir Hugh Cholmondeley, Knt. who was Member of 
Parliament for Cheshire in the yeaT 1585.
Dame 
Mary was styled « The Bold Ladie of Cheshire," 
by James the First, who visited her at Vale Royal 
in 1617.
She died on the 15th of August, 1625, 
and was buried with her husband at Malpas Church, 
where their memories are recorded by a magnificent 
monument.
From Hugh, their third son, descends 
the present Earl Cholmondeley.
Thomas, their 
fourth son, inherited from his mother the estate of 
Vale Royal, and married Frances, only daughter 
ftnd heiress of John Minshull, of Minshull : Tho- 
mas, his great grandson, is the present proprie- 
tor.
Duriiig the Civil Wars, the Cholmondeley family 
were very active in support of the Royal cause, and 
consequently were very great sufferers.
A detach- 
ment from General Lambert's army, which was then 
engaged in besieging Beeston Castle, plundered 
* The Watch which was given by this unfortunate Monarch 
fc> Bishop Juvon upon the scaffold/is in the possessiou of Mr.
Vale Royal; and, after stripping it of every valua- 
ble article of decoration, or furniture, burnt one of 
the wings, which, from the marks on the bare walls, 
which were standing till within these few years, ap- 
peared to have been the refectory of the abbey.
With this event, tradition has connected the singu- 
lar tale of the family having been for some time 
solely supported by the milk of a White Cow, which 
had found means to escape, from the soldiers who 
had seized, and were conveying her to their camp 
with the other cattle.
Whatever might be the truth, 
it is certain that her posterity has been preserved 
from feelings of gratitude ; as White Cows* with 
red ears, of the very same breed, are still kept at 
Vale Royal.
No part of the ancient abbey now remains ; 
though places are to bo found, with the names High 
Altar,'' Nuns' Grave, and other appellations connect- 
ed with monastic discipline.
The hall of the present mansion, which was erect- 
ed about 200 years ago, is a very fine room, nearly 
seventy feet in length.
The wings were rebuilt, 
about eighteen or twenty years since.
The apart- 
ments are embellished with a great number of family 
and other portraits ; amongst which -are, a half- 
length of Queen Elizabeth, on board ; Charles the 
First, and James the Second, by Sir Peter Lei y ; 
the Great Duke of Somerset, by Rubens ; the Earl 
©f Londonderry ; and his- sister Mrs. Cholmondeley ; 
Governor Pitt, Sir Lionel and Lady Toilemache ; 
Lady Salisbury, his mother ; and the last Sir Hugh 
Cholmondeley : this is a full-length, in green 
armour, painted on board, and placed at the end of 
the gallery called Sir Hugh's.
Here is also a very 
curious painting, on wood, of Charles the First,* 
putting on his cap, previously to his decollation : 
this was executed by Deniers, A.
D. 1649.
Another 
painting represents Mr. John Thomasen, the cele- 
brated writing-master of Tarvin, mentioned in our 
account of that place.
The library is very large aud 
valuable.
Amongst the most choice rarities of th« library, are 
the writings called the Prophecies of Nixon, the fa- 
mous Cheshire Prophet.
They are preserved with 
the greatest care, no stranger being permitted to s»e 
them.
In a pamphlet published at Chester, pur- 
porting to contain the original predictions of Nixon, 
it is said that he was born at a farm called Bridge 
House, in the parish of Over, near New-Church, 
and not far from Vale Royal, in the year 1467 ; but 
in the account of his life, written by John Oldmixon, 
Esq. he is affirmed to have lived in the reign of 
James the First.
The latter assertion is most con- 
sonant to the general history with which tradition 
has accompanied the narration of his prophecies ; 
but, if true, it destroys the validity of various pro- 
phetical speeches which have been attributed to him.
Cholmondeley, who obtained it through the Cowpers, who 
were related to the Juxon family.
and, 
35C 
CHESHIRE.
and, consequently, throws a shade of doubt over the 
whole.
But, whatever opinion may be entertained 
by many, it is certain that numbers of the inhabi- 
tants of Cheshire have given the most unlimited 
credit to the predictions of their oracular coun- 
tryman.
The infancy and boyhood of Nixon are reported 
to have been only remarkable for indicating a heavy 
and sluggish apprehension, which bordered on stu- 
pidity.
80 feeble, indeed, was his intellect, that 
even the most common employments of husbandry 
could not be taught him without considerable fa- 
tigue.
As his years increased, he became^ distin- 
guished for stubbornness of disposition, and sullen 
taciturnity, llis manners were rude and clownish, 
his appetite voracious, his figure unpleasing, and his 
voice harsh ; though this last defect was not often 
perceived, the Cacoethes Loquendi seldom iniluenc- 
ing his conversation to a greater extent than the 
words yes and no.
Trained to the lowest occupa- 
tions of rustic labour, he never soared to a higher 
situation than that of a ploughman.
In that his ac- 
quirements centred ; and with any other subject, 
excepting at the times when inspiration is said to 
have guided him, he was as little acquainted as the 
clod which he was employed to cultivate.
On those 
occasions, tradition affirms that he spake with more 
than customary intelligence ; but as soon as the un- 
known power that propelled him to discourse had 
ceased to operate, he relapsed into mental imbe- 
cility, and drivelling idiotism.
Previously to the 
utterance of his prophecies, he generally fell into 
a trance ; and whatever means were employed to 
awaken his dormant energies, he remained fixed 
and insensible, till the bodily paroxysm had abated ; 
of the nature, or even of the presence, of which, he 
appears to have had no consciousness.
Some mystical expressions, which he uttered on 
recovering from one of these fits, and of which the 
whole neighbourhood rang with the fulfilment, oc- 
casioned him to be noticed by Thomas Cholmonde- 
ley, Esq. the owner of Vale Royal.
This gentle- 
man had him taken into his house, and intended to 
have had him educated ; but his ignorance proved 
too powerful for the arts of tuition to remove, and 
he was suffered to pursue the occupation of guiding 
oxen wjien yoked to the plough, to which his capa- 
city seemed only adapted.
Whilst in this family, 
he is said to have predicted many things which were 
soon afterwards actually fulfilled ; and others that 
were not to be accomplished till after the expiration of 
many years : among the latter events were the Civil 
Wars, the death of Charles the First, the Restora- 
tion, and the Revolution.
Mr. Oldmixon says, that I 
when Nixon prophesied, the Cholmondeloy family 
was near being extinct, the heir, Thomas Cholmon- 
deley, Esq. having married Sir Walter St. John's 
daughter, a lady not esteemed very young ; that 
Nix"on prophesied, that " when an eagle should sit 
on the top of the house, then an heir should be born 
to the Cholmondeloy family ;" and the prophesy 
was fulfilled, by the birth of a son and heir by this 
lady.
In a letter addressed to Mr. Oldmixon, by 
William Ewers of Nantwich, we are told that t h is 
birth of a son and heir to the Cholmondeley family, 
by the daughter of Sir Walter St. John, happened 
about the year 1689, more than threescore years af- 
ter Nixon is supposed (even by those who place him 
in the seventeenth century) to have lived ; and Old- 
mixon says, on the authority of a sister of Mrs.
Cholmondeley, that the son then born, was the heir, 
who, in his time, possessed the Vale Royal estates.
The fame attendant on Nixon's supposed pres- 
cience, was the cause of his being sent for to the 
court of James the First, who wished to converse 
with the man that possessed such extraordinary 
powers.
Nixon was unwilling to attend, declaring 
that his reason for reluctance was, the certain y of 
being starved, should he be obliged to comply with 
the Monarch's command.
The plea seemed found- 
ed on an event too improbable to be credited, and 
he was forced to visit the palace, where the King 
assigned him a station in the kitchen, that he might 
no longer be in fear of perishing with hunger.
This, 
however, is said to have happened ; for, the King 
having departed suddenly for Hampton Court, at a 
time when Nixon, for some mischievous prank, had 
been locked up in a closet, he was entirely forgotten 
for three days, at the expiration of which he was 
found lifeless, having been literally starved to 
death.
The old parish-church of Whitegate stood at the 
abbey- gate of the monastery.
The parish contains 
the townships of Dernhall, Marton, and part of 
Over.
Wheelock.] — Wheelock, a township of the pa- 
rish of Sandbach, is about a mile and a quarter 
south-south-west from that town.
It gave i.ame to 
an ancient family, who held the manor in the reign 
of Henry II.
Of late years, in consequence of the extension of 
the salt-trade, and the establishment of wharfs and 
warehouses on the banks of the Trent and Mersey 
canal, which passes througli the village, Wheelock 
has become very populous.
The brine-springs in 
this neighbourhood — the brine of which is rich, 
but varying in strength — are at the depth of 180 
feet.
In addition to the salt-works, here are a 
brewery, and a large cotton-factory.
Weston.] — This is a retired but beautiful little 
village, nearly opposite the junction of the Weever 
and the Mersey.
" Its vicinity," observe the edi- 
tors of the Beauties of England and Wales, " is 
enriched by some of the most luxuriant natural sce- 
nery in Cheshire ; though its secluded situation, at 
a distance from the course of the roads, has hitherto 
been the means of concealing its beauties from the 
public view.
The brow overhanging the point of 
land where the rivers meet, commands a magnificent 
water prospect, which at full tide exhibits the 
broadest part of the estuary of the Mersey, stretch- 
ing many miles before the eye, till it is completely 
7 " - land 
CHESHIRE.
357 
land-locked by a turn in the channel, and has the 
appearance of an extensive lake, bordered on the 
Cheshire and Lancashire side by a variety of 
ground; partly open, and partly covered with fine 
woods." 
Wilmslow.] — Wilmslow, or Wiinboldshey, is a 
village in the hundred of Macclesfield, distant seven 
miles north-west by north from that town.
Jt en- 
joys an extensive trade in the manufactories of cot- 
ton, having no fewer than eight large factories.
The church contains some memorials of the 
Boothes, Davenports, Fittons, &c.
Mr. Wright, 
the rector, who was dispossessed of the living, dur- 
ing the Civil War, sustained a formal siege at the 
rectory-house, in the course of which, one or two of 
his maid-servants were killed.
He was at that time 
eighty years of age ; notwithstanding which, he lived 
till the Restoration, and was reinstated iu his 
living.
There is a school at Wilmslow, with a small en- 
dowment, for ten children.
A workhouse was built 
there, about 35 years ago.
This parish contains the following townships : — 
Chorley, Dean-Row, Fulshaw, Hough, Morley, 
and Styall.
Woodchurch.] — Woodchurch, in the hundred of 
Wirrall, six miles and a half north by west from 
Great-Neston, contains the following townships : — 
Arrow, Barnston, Laudecan, Noctorum, Pensby, 
Prenton, Oxton, Thingwall, and Woodchurch.— 
" James Goodacre, or Goodier of Barnston, who 
died in 1525, gave twenty marks, lor the purpose of 
buying twenty yoke of bullocks for the poor ; these, 
by order of the commissioners for charitable uses, 
were afterwards exchanged for cows, and it was 
settled that every parishioner who should have one 
of the cows, should pay 2s.
8d.
yearly, for the purpose 
of increasing the parish stock, and augmenting the 
number, which in the year 1741 was ninety-two ; 
there are now about fifty only.
The donor of this 
charity entrusted the management of it to the Lord 
* Richard Sherlock was educated first at Magdalen Hall, 
Oxford, and afterwards at Trinity College, Dublin, where he 
took his degree uf M.
A. and entered 'into orders.
On the.
breaking out of the rebellion, he came to England, and became 
chaplain in the King's army, and frequently preached before 
the court at Oxford, where he was created B.
D. After the 
Restoration, he was presented to the rectory of Winwich, in 
Lancashire, and received his doctor's degree from Dublin.
His principal works are-The Practical Christian ; Confession*, 
Meditations, and Prayers for the Sacrament ; On the Four 
Last Things; and Pieces against the Quakers.
Of the same family is supposed to have been Dr. William 
Sherlock, who was born in 1641, and educated at Eton, whence 
he removed to Peter-House, Cambridge, where lie took his 
degrees in arts, and entered into orders.
He subsec-iuentlv ob- 
tained a living in London, and the mastership of the Temple.
He displayed great zeal and abilities asamst popery, in the reign 
of James II.
but, for some time, he hesitated to take the oa'hs 
to King Wdliam He at last complied, and published an apo- 
logy for his conduct, which was severely animadverted on by 
the nonjurors.
He was preferred to the deanery of St. Paul's, 
and had a long controversy with Dr. South, oa the doctrine of 
VOL.
I. — NO.
26.
of the Manor of Prenton, (then Mr. Gleave,) the 
rector of Woodchurch, and others : in the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, John Hockenhull, Fisq.
the Lord 
of the Manor of Prenton, claimed the sole manage- 
ment ; but it was determined, on appeal to the Bi- 
snop, that in future it should be managed by the 
Lord of Prenton, the rector of Woodchurch, and 
one person out of every township, to be chosen by 
the inhabitants.
Dr. Richard .Sherlock, rector of 
Winwick, author of several theological and devo- 
tional works, who died in 16S9,* gave, in his life- 
time, (A° 1670,) the sum of 501.
to purchase a stock of 
fifteen cows for the poor of the township of Oxton, 
of which he was a native ; the stock to be kept up 
iu like manner as those given by Goodier : in 1718 
there were nineteen or twenty cows belonging to 
this charity, but now about eight or ten only."f 
There is a free-school at Woodchurch, founded 
and endowed by William Gleave, Esq. about the 
year 1665.
It has a respectable library, presented 
by Mr. Adam.
Wybunbury.] — Wybunbury, or Wibbunbury, is 
in the hundred of Nantwich, three miles and three 
quarters east-south-east from the town of that name.
According to Tanner's Notitia, here was an hos- 
pital of a master and brethren, dedicated to the 
Holy Cross and St. George, before the year 1464; 
and, by a lease, in Woodnoth's Collections, of the 
date 1424, we find that there was a hermitage in 
the parish ; two gardens having been demised to 
Nicholas Baker, the hermit, for 99 years, on condi- 
tion that they should be held by fit priests, or honest 
hermits.
This village is supposed to have derived its name 
from Wibba, second King of the Mercians, who 
died A.
D. 615.
In ancient times, the manor was possessed by the 
family of the Praers, who transferred their right to 
the Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry in the reign 
of Edward 1.; but it was alienated in the second 
year of Elizabeth.
the Trinity.
He died in 1707.
He published several ser- 
mons, and" two excellent practical books on death and the last 
judgment.
Thomas Sherlock, son of the above, was born in 1678.
He 
was educated at Catherine Hall, Cambridge, of which he was 
chosen fellow, and afterwards became master.
He took his 
degree of doctor in divinity, and succeeded his father in tne 
mastership of the Temple.
In the controversy excited by Bi- 
shop Hoadley o:» the constitution of the church, Dr. Sherlock 
bore a conspicuous pjrt, and attacked the bishop in an able 
pamphlet in vindication of the corporation and test acts.
He 
also answered Collins in six excellent discourses «n the use and 
intent of prophecy, and wrote, with equal strength, a de- 
fence of the miracle of Christ's Resurrection, against Woolston, 
in a work intituled, The Trial of Witnesses.
He to succes- 
sively Dean of Chichester, Bishop of Bangor, Salisbury, and 
London.
On the death of Archbishop Potter he was offered 
the see of Canterbury, which he declined.
He died in 1761.
II is Sermons, in four volumes 8vo rank among the first in the 
English language.
f Lysoii;,' Magna Britannia, Vol, II.
p. 833.
4 x 
Wybunbury 
358 
CHESHIRE.
Wybunbury Church is a handsome building, em- 
battled and pinnacled, with a lofty tower.
It still 
contains several ancient monuments of tbe Smith, 
Wilbraham, and Delves, families ; though, when 
the church was repaired, A.
D. 1595, and again in 
1790, many of them were destroyed.
Tlie most re- 
markable is an altar-tomb of alabaster, with the 
figures of Sir John Delves, his lady, and John his 
son, engraven on the stone : at the feet of each is a 
dog, and beneath a dolphin ; and on the front of the 
tomb are several figures of the progeny of the above 
personages.
Sir John Delves, as has been already- 
stated, was a particular favourite of Henry the 
Sixth, and repaid the Monarch's attachment with 
the most faithful adherence.
He raised forces in his 
support, and, with his son, was slain when fighting 
bravely in his cause, at the fatal battle of Tewkes- 
bury.
According to another account, his son, with 
various persons of distinction, sought refuge in the 
abbey of Tewkesbury, whither they were pursued 
by the furious Edward, who, with his drawn sword, 
endeavoured to force his Avay into the church ; but 
was opposed admittance by a resolute priest, till he 
had promised to pardon those who had fled to the 
sanctuary.
Depending on the King's word, they 
neglected the means of escaping ; and, two days af- 
terwards, were drawn out, and beheaded by the 
commands of the relentless Monarch.
The bodies 
of both father and son were first buried at Tewkes- 
bury ; but afterwards removed to this church.
An- 
other magnificent tomb, of rather a singular kind, 
records the memory of Sir Thomas Smith, of the 
Hough, in this parish, and his lady.
Their figures 
lie beneath a canopy, supported by four pillars of 
the Ionic order, of white marble, gilt and painted.
Sir Thomas died on the 21st of December, 1614, 
and is represented recumbent, and armed, With his 
gauntlets lying at his feet.
His lady, who was the 
daughter of Sir William Brereton, has a high fore- 
top, a great ruff, and extended hood.
There is a school for boys in this parish, which 
was founded about 200 years ago.
Wybunbury parish contains the following town- 
ships : — Bartherton, Basford, Blackenhall, Bridge- 
mere, Checkley-cum-Wrinehill, Chorltcn, Dod- 
dington, Hatherton, Hough, Hunsterson, Lea, or 
Lee, Rope, Shavington-cum-Gresty, Stapeley, 
Walgherton, Weston, Wigstanston, or Willaston, 
and Wybunbury.
Amongst the numerous seats which formerly sur- 
rounded the village of Wybunbury, was Lee, the 
ancient residence of the family of that name, a son 
of whom settled at Quarendon, in Buckinghamshire, 
about the reign of Edward the Fourth, and was an- 
cestor to the Lees, Earls of Lichfield.
Agriculture.] — In this county, there is a great 
diversity of soil : clay, sand, black-moor, or peat, 
marl, and gravel, in various intermixed proportions, 
abound in different parts.
The three first however 
are the prevailing soils, and of these the largest 
proportion is a cold stiff clay.
The under soil is 
generally clay, marl, sand, gravel, or red rock ; but, 
most commonly, it is of the two former.
The nu- 
merous mosses, marshes, meadows', and peat-bogs, 
seem to prove that either clay, marl, or some other 
earth of the same kind, is generally at no great 
depth from the surface ; a large proportion of the 
county being not more than from 1 to 200 feet above 
the level of the sea.
By the general view of the agriculture of the 
county, as drawn up by Mr. Wedge, the proportions 
of the cultivated parts, and those which lie either 
waste or in a state of little profit, appear to be near- 
ly as follows : — 
Acres.
Arable, meadow, pasture, &c.
about .
. 615,000 
Waste lands, heaths, commons, greens, 
but few woods of any extent 30,000" 
Peat bogs and mosses 20,000 
Common fields probably not so much as 1,000 
Sea sands within the estuary of the Dee, 
exclusive of what may lie on the shores 
of the River Mersey 10,000 
676,000 
There are few counties of equal extent with Che- 
shire, in which the number of wealthy land-owners 
seems so considerable.
Whether the revenue de- 
rived from the list is, in itself, greater, or that men 
of fortune reside more on their estates in this county 
than in others, may be a question ; but from various 
accounts received, it appears that not less than fifty 
noblemen and gentlemen are now resident in Che- 
shire, in possession of property within it to the 
amount of from 3 to 10,0001.
a year, and that there 
are at least as many others with properties of from 
1 to 3,0001.
a year ; at the same time the number of 
smaller land-owners is not apparently less than in 
other counties.
The description of this latter class 
has, however, been very much altered of late years, 
from the advantages which have been derived from 
trade ; and from the effects of the increased taxes, 
which have prevented a man living with the same 
degree of comfort on the same portion of land he 
could formerly ; many of the old owners have been 
induced to sell their estates, and new proprietors 
have spread themselves over the county, very differ- 
ent in their habits and prejudices.
There does not 
appear to be any peculiarity in the management of 
the estates in Cheshire.
Some gentlemen of for- 
tune, who are fond of agricultural pursuits, not 
only farm to a considerable extent themselves, but 
take an interest and pleasure in the management of 
their estates, and in every object conducive to their 
improved cultivation.
Other gentlemen employ as 
their stewards their attomies, or respectable yeo- 
men who are conversant in the value and manage- 
ment of laud.
The tenure in this county is almost universally 
freehold.
There are some few copyholds, or what 
may be called customary freeholds, paying fines, and 
I rents, 
CHESHIRE.
360 
r«mts"; and rents certain, in Macclesfield, Halton, 
and one or two other manors.
The practice of leasing for lives, which was for- 
merly very general in Cheshire, is now by no means 
so frequent.
Most of the old leases of this descrip- 
tion have now run out, and only a few of the land 
proprietors in the county, retain the custom on their 
estates.
Neither are leases of twenty-one or four- 
teen years, by any means so frequent as formerly ; 
few terms are given exceeding eleven years, and the 
generality not rising above seven ; a circumstance 
which may be attributed to the operation of several 
causes, but principally perhaps to the decrease in 
the value of the circulating medium.
When leases 
are given of twenty-one years, it is generally under a 
condition, that the tenant should incur some extraordi- 
nary expenses at the commencement oi his time ; or 
where the land is so rough that it cannot be brought 
into a state of profitable cultivation.
An exception 
must be made for the church and college lands, 
which are all held either for the term of twenty-one 
years, renewable at the end of every seven years ; 
or on leases for lives.
The usual time of entry upon a farm, is at Can- 
dlemas, the offgoing tenant being allowed the use 
of the buildings and of a pasture field near the house, 
as an outlet for his cattle, until the 1st of May, old 
style.
It has been observed, by Geo. Wilbraham, of De- 
lamere Lodge, Esq. that the cottagers in Cheshire 
are in the habit of renting small portions of land 
from the farmers, for growing potatoes for one sea- 
son only, a practice materially useful to both parties,.
but which is subject to abuse in this manner — a per- 
son wishing to gain a settlement in the parish where 
he resides, but to which he does not belong, endea- 
vours, and often succeeds in, renting small lots of 
potatoe ground, privately, and in different parishes, 
in order to make the aggregate rent of his cottage, 
and of such lands, amount to the sum required for 
obtaining a settlement ; and this frequently hap- 
pens, although he may not luivo credit for a rent of 
five pounds in any place where he is known ; so 
that this surreptitious proceeding procures an ad- 
vantage, which the law only meant for a fair and 
open transaction ; and this oidy eventually founded 
on the supposition that a person having a credit for 
a rent of 101.
per annum, had little probability of 
becoming burthensome to a parish ; but by the de- 
preciated value of money, the nominal sum bears a 
very small proportion to the real estimation of it at 
the time it was fixed, constituting it a sufficient evi- 
dence of credit to admit a stranger into a parish, 
and this was by acts of Parliament of the 13th and 
14th Charles II.
This clandestine method of tak- 
ing advantage of the law, crises a variety of dis- 
putes and frequent litigations ; but the mischief does 
not end here, for land-owners are extremely cau- 
tious of letting land to cottagers, unless to such as 
belong to the place of their residence, for the rea- 
sons above stated ;.
so that the law, at present, seems 
to counteract the good principles which probably 
caused its, passing, the facilitating to persons of a 
certain credit the liberty of changing their abode.
^ 
The following statement of the size of farms in 
four townships, situated in different parts of the 
county, will perhaps give a clearer view of the sub- 
ject than could be by detached remarks.
It has 
been drawn up from actual admeasurements of the 
farms in question.
The occupiers of 20 acres and under, 
are wholly or in put, employed 
by the holders of larger farms, as 
labourers 
Funns containing between 20 and 50 
Do 50 and 100 
Do 100 and 150 
Do 150 and 200 
Do. above 200 each 
Averoge quan- 
N'o.
of 
tity of lands in 
Hold- 
each class of 
ings .
holdings.
75 
253 A.
'J R.
19 
715 
30 
2,270 
11 
1,425 
3 
4S5 
2 
540 
140 
in lieu of tithes on 
some parishes it is 
The quantity of land, exempt from the collection 
of tithes, is very inconsiderable in this county ; on 
the college lands, which are extensive, they are all 
held by lay proprietors ; chiefly on leases of twenty- 
one years, renewable at the end of every seven years.
These proprietors usually collect a portion of their 
tithes in kind, and let out the remainder ; or, as is 
the case in many instances, make an annual compo- 
sition with the farmer, sending a person to value the 
produce of the land, and allowing the farmer the op- 
tion of taking or refusing the titheable proportion at 
the valuation that is made.
A similar plan is al- 
most invariably pursued when the tithes ate in the 
immediate possession of the clergy.
In many places 
the hay is valued in the same manner, but in gene 
ral a trifling modus is paid 
this article of produce.
In 
tithed in kind.
A variation occurs in almost every parish, with 
respect to the articles tithed, and the mode of tithing 
them.
In some parishes a tenth part of the produce 
is collected ; in others only an eleventh.
In the 
former case there is seldom any tithe in hay ; which 
contributes in some measure to restore the equality.
Turnips and potatoes are not often tithed, except 
when grown in large quantities for the markets.
Vetches and buck-wheat are likewise exempt when 
got in an unripe state for fodder, or ploughed under 
for the improvement of the soil.
The wages of servants and labourers have been 
very considerably advanced, within the last twenty 
years, in a proportion perhaps more than equal to 
the decreasing value of money.
This is particularly 
the case in the neighbourhood of Macclesfield, 
Stockport, and the manufacturing parts of the 
county.
Such high wages are occasionally obtain- 
ed by children in these districts, that few are now 
brought up to husbandry ; and it is there as difficult 
to get a boy to drive the plough, as a man to hold 
it.
The average wages of servants residing in the 
house 
360 
CHESHIRE.
house are probably nearly according to the follow- 
ing statement : — 
per annum.
L. L.
Man to follow the team, from 10 to 12 
Young man for the same employment 
from fifteen to twenty 8 to 10 
Cow-boy, or man, according to the 
stock 8 to ]2 
Servant for homework, threshing, &c.
10 to 12 
Head dairy-woman, according to the 
size of the farm 10 to 14 
Other women-servants 4 to 6 
Girls 2 to 4 
The wages of labourers are (in winter) from 8s.
to 10s.
per week, in spring and summer 9s.
to 15s.
Where work is done by the job, reaping wheat is 
from 8s.
to 9s.
per acre, mowing barley and oats 
2s.
6d.
to 3s.
6d.
digging ground for potatoes 9cl.
to Is. 6d per rood of 81 yards.
It may not be without its attendant use if we sub- 
join an account of wages of labour, as fixed by the 
magistrates and justices of the peace for the county 
of Chester, met at Chester in April, 1597, taken 
from Sir F.
Eden's State of the Poor.
It will fur- 
nish an interesting subject of comparison with the 
present period, when the wages of the labourer have 
become equal to the income of a clergyman, and 
when a child of ten years old earns as much in three 
months as a bailiff did in twelve.
In the original MS.
(Had. Brit.
Mus. No.
2091) 
the column that contains the wages by the day, 
without victuals, is torn oft".
In the preamble we 
are informed that the meeting was held, and these 
prices of labour settled, on account " of the dearth 
and scarcitie of things at this present tyme." — The 
prices in Windsor market then were : wheat 
31.
9s.
6d.
the quarter, and malt 21.
6s.
4d.
the 
quarter, according to the audit books of Eton Col- 
lege.
Beef sold at Is. 6d.
the stone of 81bs.
; 
Dutch cheese at 3|d.
per lb.; Suffolk.
cheese at 2}d.
per lb.; barley for poultry at lOd. per peck; a 
bushel of oatmeal at 5s.
8d.; best beer in October, 
5s.
4d.
per barrel; small beer at 2s.
per barrel ; and 
in December, best at 6s.
small at 4s.
4d, 
A smith 
A wheel-wright 
A plough-wright 
A master carpenter..
A s«rvant carpenter.
A joiner 
A rough mason 
A plasterer 
A sawyer 
A lime-maker 
A bricklayer 
A brickman 
A tyler 
A slater 
A mill-wright 
A tile-maker 
A linen-weaver 
A turner 
A woollen weaver..., 
A miller 
A'fuller 
A walker 
A thatcher 
A shingler 
\ shearman 
A dyer 
Wages by 
the year 
with meat 
and drink.
s. d.
11 8 
10 
13 4 
10 
6 8 
8 
3 
6 
5 
6 
3 4 
10 
If) 
8 
10 
3 
4 
10 
6 
8 
Wages by 
the year 
without 
meat and 
drink.
L. s.
d, 
5 
5 10 
5 
5 13 4 
3 10 
4 
5 
5 
4 10 
4 6 8 
4 
4 10 
3 13 % 
4 
5 10 
4 
4 
3 
3 12 8 
4 
3 13 4 
4 
4 
4 
3 
3 13 
3 4 
Wages by 
the day 
with meat 
and drink.
2£ 
3 
4 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2i 
3 
2 
1 
1 
I 
2 
li 
»i 
i 
2 
H 
An hosier 
A shoemaker 
A tanner 
A pewterer 
A baker 
A brewer 
Glovers , 
Cutlers 
Sadlers 
Spurriers ...- 
Capps 
Hat-makers 
Bowyers 
Fletchers 
Arrow- head- makers .
Butchers 
Cooks 
Bailiffs of husbandry.
Mowers of grass 
Taskers 
Reapers 
Mowers of coin 
Best servants 
Second sort 
Third sort 
Wages by 
the year 
with meat 
and drink.
10 
6 
16 
6 8 
7 
5 
5 
10 
8 
15 
6 8 
10 
8 
Wages by 
the year 
without 
meat and 
drink.
L. s 
d. 
3 10 
4 
4 
3 13 
4 
3 10 
3 10 
3 16 
4 10 
4 
4 
3 10 
4 10 
4 
3 10 
3 10 
3 10 
3 5 
4 
o - 
3 10 
2 10 
1 16 
AVages by 
the day 
with meat 
and drink.
d. 
1 
2 
1 
Qi 
1 
H 
i 
if 
o li 
2 
Produce."] — " This county," says Fuller, in his 
Worthies, " doth afford the best cheese for quantity 
and quality, and yet their cows are not (as in other 
shires) housed in the winter ; so that it may seem 
strange that the hardiest kine should make tiie ten- 
derest cheese.
Some essayed in vain to make the 
like in other places, though from thence they fetched 
both their kine and dairy-maids: it seems they should 
have fetched their ground too (wherein is surely some 
occult excellency in thiskind),orelsesogoodcheesewill 
not be made.
1 hear not the like commendation of 
the butter in this county, and perchance these two 
commodities 
CHESHIRE.
301 
commodities are like stars of a 4 different horizon, so 
that the elevation of tiie one to eminence is the de- 
pression of the other." It deserves remark, that the 
Cheshire cows are now housed in the winter ; 
though, in many other counties, and in some dis- 
tricts much celebrated for the excellence of their 
cheese, they are not.
The opinion entertained by 
Dr. Leigh, Dr. Campbell, and others, that prime 
cheese is produced exclusively from the pastures 
under which soft springs are found, has been long 
exploded.
It is even said, that the richest and 
finest cheese is produced from land of an inferior 
nature.
The richer the land, however, the greater 
the produce.
Amongst the places and districts which are most 
celebrated for their cheese, are, the neighbourhood 
of Nantwich, for five miles round, several farms 
near Congleton and Middlewich ; the greater part 
of the banks of the Weever ; and the parish of Over.
Webb, in his Itinerary of Cheshire, says, " notwith- 
standing all the trials that our ladies and gentle- 
women make in their dairies, in other parts of the 
county, and in other counties of the kingdom ; yet 
can they never fully match the perfect relish of the 
right Nantwich cheese; nor can, I think, that 
cheese be equalled by any other made in Europe, 
for pleasantness of taste and wholesomeness of di- 
gestion, even in the daintiest stomachs of them that 
love it." 
It may be observed, that a dairy farm of a hun- 
dred acres is generally divided into the following 
proportions : from ten to fourteen acres of oats, 
from six to eight acres of fallow wheat, and the like 
quantity of summer fallow ; the remainder consists 
of meadow and pasture, the former occupying about 
twelve acres.
The good dairy farmer attends more 
to the size, form, and produce of the udder of his 
cow, than to any fancied beauty of shape.
This 
consideration induces him to be particular in the 
breeding and rearing of his calves, and in the ma- 
nagement of his cows during the winter and summer 
seasons.
The annual quantity of cheese made from 
each cow varies from 50 to 5001bs.
and upwards, 
the produce depending on the goodness of the land, 
the quality of the pasture, the seasons, and the 
manner in which the stock are wintered.
On the 
whole, the average produce may be estimated at 
3001b.
from each animal.
The quantity of milk 
yielded daily by each cow, according to this esti- 
mate, will he about eight quarts, whfch it is calcu- 
lated will produce one pound of cheese.
The Che- 
shire cheese is generally made with two meals' milk, 
and that in dairies where two cheeses are made in a 
day ; towards the latter end of the season, which 
continues nearly 22 weeks, they take four, five, or 
six meals ; for, as the cheeses are usually made very 
large, it is necessary to have a sufficient quantity of 
milk to make one at a time.
The most common 
size is 60 pounds.
They commonly preserve the 
evening's milk till the next morning, when it is 
skimmed and made warm ; it is then incorporated 
vol.
i. — no.
20.
with the new milk.
After being mixed in a large 
tub together with the greater part of the cream, the 
dairy woman puts in a proper quantity of rennet and 
colouring, and then leaves it for about one hour and 
a half to coagulate and curdle.
The colouring 
should be Spanish arnotta.
After the cheese is 
come, or when the milk is properly coagulated, the 
dairy-maid breaks the curd into very small particles, 
which are then left to subside, and the whey is pour- 
ed off.
This process is repeated until the whole of 
the whey is nearly expelled, when the curd is put 
into a vat, and occasionally sprinkled with salt.
The 
vat is filled as full as possible, and the whey repeat- 
edly squeezed out before it is placed in the press.
The cheese is usually taken twice or thrice out of 
the vat, to place fresh clothes, pare off the edges, and 
trim it, and sometimes it is immersed in hot whey, 
for the hardening of the coat.
After remaining in the 
press two or three days, it is next conveyed to the 
salting-house, where it is placed in a salting tunnel 
or tub, in which it continues about three days more, 
and is next placed on benches for about eight days, 
being well salted all over, and turned every day.
After this process it is turned twice daily for six or 
seven days, and then washed in warm water, and 
wiped dry with a cloth ; Avhen dry it is smeared over 
with whey -butter, and placed in the warmest part of 
the cheese-room, there to remain until it has attain- 
ed its proper age and consistence.
On the dairy 
farms one woman-servant is generally kept to every 
ten cows, who is employed in winter in spinning, and 
other household business, in common with the other 
servants of the farm.
The cheese is chiefly sold in 
London, being exported from Chester, Frodsham- 
bridge, and Warrington.
A large quantity goes to 
Liverpool and Bristol, some more is disposed of 
to the Yorkshire dealers, and some goes into Scot- 
land.
Holland, in his survey of the county of Cheshire, 
estimates the number of cows kept for the dairy, at 
32,000 ; and that the quantity of cheese, which is an- 
nually made from them, is about 11,500 tons.
It is 
thought, however, that this calculation over-rates 
both number and quantity.
The proper season for calving is considered to be 
from the beginning of March to the beginning of 
May ; and during these months there is more veal 
fed in Cheshire than in any other county in the 
kingdom, though generally killed to spare the 
milk.
Though Cheshire has for many ages been famed 
for its cheese, it is a remarkable fact, that it was 
formerly as celebrated for its wheat.
Strabo and 
Pliny have affirmed, that cheese-making- was intro- 
duced into this county by the Romans ; but this is 
improbable, from various circumstances ; and we are 
certain that the Roman armies on the continent re- 
ceived a great supply of cheese from this county sooiv 
after they had secured its possession.
Potatoes are cultivated to a great extent, for ex- 
portation, in this county.
It is calculated, that, in 
4 y the 
3(12 
CHESHIRE.
the parish of Frodsham alone, not Jess than 120,000 
bushels of 901b.
weight each, have annually tor some 
years past been grown.
In the hundred of Wirrall, 
great quantities are raised by a process, which was 
1ir*t practised by a person o> the name of Evans, of 
Wallazey.
" The secret," says Wedge, in his Ge- 
neral View of the Agriculture of the County of Ches- 
ter, from which we have already quoted, " consists 
in nothing- more than in transplanting the sets, 
(which should be of the earliest kind) during win- 
ter ; carefully guarded from the frost, in a warm 
place, where they may sprout at least three inches 
by the beginning of March.
As soon after that time, 
as the weather happens to be favourable, they are, 
with the sprout on, to be carefully planted in a dry 
soil, iu drills, with a small rib of earth between each 
drill, and the end of the sprout just under the sur- 
face of the ground.
The plants should be kept co- 
vered with straw, or rushes, every night as long as 
the frost continues, and uncovered every favourable 
day." The potatoes so raised are taken to market 
early in May, Their first price is sometimes three 
shillings a pound, and frequently half-a-crown ; from 
which they gradually fall to one penny.
The. horses which are employed in this county for 
the purpose of agriculture, are generally of the 
strong black kind, the best of which are pur- 
chased in Derbyshire.
Those bred in the county 
are not remarkable, but they have, of late years, 
been much improved by mixtures with the Leices- 
tershire kinds.
No species of cattle is peculiar to this county.
The long- horned Lancashire, the Yorkshire short- 
horned or Jlolderness.
the Derbyshire, the Shrop- 
shire, the Staffordshire, the Welch, Irish, Scotch, 
and the true Leicestershire cattle, have at different 
times been introduced into different parts of the 
county, and the present stock of dairy cows is a 
mixture of all these breeds.
It is impossible to say 
which of the intermixed breeds are the most ap- 
proved of as milkers, milk being the general ob- 
ject : some persons prefer half-bred cattle from the 
Lancashire and present Cheshire ; others, a breed 
between the Cheshire and the Welch ; why**, a cross 
between the Lancashire and Holderness, and one 
between the Lancashire and Welch, have also their 
advocates.
On the more valuable pastures, a breed 
partaking of the short-horned Holdern ;ss, or the 
long-horned Lancashire, seems to be pre - , alcut.
There arc very few sheep kept in the farms in this 
county ; what are kept the farmers are supplied with 
chieliy from the Welch and Scotch markets, and 
from the neighbouring counties of Salop, Derby, &c.
In general no more sheep are kept on the farms 
than can be supported by running in the stubbles 
and picking the fallows.
The commons and wastes 
maintain a few ; and on Delamere forest great num- 
bers are kept of a small and fine-woolled kind.
This 
breedjias been improved by crosses with the Hert- 
fordshire.
The common breed of hogs kept in this county is 
a mixture between the long and short-eared, 
CrsTOMs,] — For the following particulars, relat- 
ing to the customs and ceremonies which are preva- 
lent in this county, we are indebted, in substance, to 
the work of Messrs; Lysons, who professed to have 
received the greater part of their information from 
Sir J.
T. Stanley, Bart, 
The most prevalent custom, though not peculiar 
to this county, is the shouting of the marlers, when 
any money has been given tlunn.
When a marie- 
pit is to be dug, the set of labourers, or marlers as 
they are called, who undertake it, chuse one of their 
number to be lord of the pit.
When' at work, they 
never ask for money, but if any is given them, they 
are summoned together, by their lord.
One of them 
steps aside and cries " Oyez !" three times ; another 
says with great solemnity, "Mr. A.
B. dwelling at tho 
township of C.
has been here to-day, and has given 
to my lord and all his men, part of a thousand 
pounds : I hope another will come by-and-bv, and 
give us as much more, and we will return him 
thanks therefor, and shout larjo." The last word is 
evidently a corruption of largess.
Having joined 
their arms, they form a ring, and make four bows, 
towards the centre of it, shouting every time : the 
fourth time, they give a lengthened and much louder 
shout, letting the sound die away gradually ; this 
ceremony is repeated several times, in proportion to 
the sum given : they shout four times tor silver, 
though only sixpence ; six times for a .shilling ; for 
half-a-crown, the shouts are continued as long a> 
their breath will hold out.
My lord keeps the mo- 
ney till the next Saturday evening, when it is spent 
at the next ale-house, and the shouts are there re- 
newed, as the healths of the givers are repeated in 
succession.
When the marlers have finished their 
work, they dress up a pole, with flowers and rib- 
bands, and hanging their silver watches, spoons, 
and other glittering articles on it, carry it about 
to collect money ; this is called carrying the gar- 
land, 
The custom of rush-bearing, or carrying rushes 
to the churches, and there strewing them, was a cus- 
tom which formerly prevailed in this county ; but it 
has been disused for many years, since close pews 
have been erected in most of the churches.
It took 
place on the day of the wake, and was attended 
with a procession of young men and women, dress- 
ed in ribbands, and carrying garlands, &o, which 
wen; hung up in the church.
In several of the 
churches, some, of these garlands yet remain.
We have already mentioned a custom which pre- 
vails at Knutsford, of strewing the streets with brown 
sand, over which various devices are figured with 
white sand, before the doors of the inhabitants, on 
occasion of weddings, and other joyful events, and 
for persons in all ranks of life.
There is still a custom amongst the young men, 
of placing, on the first of May, large birchen-boughs 
over 
CHESHIRE.
863 
over the (!oov« of the house*, where the young wo- 
men reside to whom they pay their addresses ; and 
rtn alder-bough is often found placed over the door 
of a scold.
Mr. Owen, in his Welch Dictionary, un- 
der the word bedvr, birch, says that it !' was an 
emblem of readiness, or complacency, in doing a 
kind act.
If a young woman accepted of the ad- 
dresses of a lover, she gave him the birchen-branch, 
mostlv formed into a crown ; but if he was rejected, 
the gave him a collen, or hazel." 
Another singular custom which prevails in this 
county, is that of lifting, at Easter.
On Easter 
Monday, the young men deck out a chair with 
flowers and ribbands, and carry it about, compelling 
every young woman they meet to get into it, and 
sutler herself to be lifted," as high as they can reach, 
into the air, or to be kissed, or pay a forfeit.
On 
Easter Tuesday, the young women deck out their 
abair, and lift' the men, or make them pay a fine.
This custom, which alyo prevails in some of the 
neighbouring counties, or something very like it, 
seems to have been admitted among the highest 
ranks in the thirteenth century : for it appears, from 
a wardrobe account preserved among the records in 
the tower, that King Edward the First, in the eigh- 
teenth year of his reign, paid a large sum of money, 
more than equivalent to 4001, at this time, to the 
Queen's several ladies of the bed-chamber and maids 
of honour, on a similar occasion,* 
Manufactures and Tkade.] — Of the salt-trade, 
aud of the silk and cotton manufactures of this coun- 
ty, we have already treated so copiously, that we 
have, in this place, but very little further to remark.
f 
Muslin and calico are manufactured at Macclesfield 
and Stockport, and in their respective neighbour- 
hoods ; silk handkerchiefs, silk ferret, and twist 
buttons, are also made at Macclesfield ; thread is 
made at Knutsford ; for exportation, hats are made 
at Stockport, shoes at Sandbach and Nantwioh, and 
gloves at Chester and Nantwich ; gunpowder is 
manufactured at Thehvall ; shot, and white and red 
* Lysons' Magna Britannia, Vol. II.
p. 403.
f It may not, however, be amiss to state, that, in the year 
1810, Messrs.
Marshall and Nay lor, of Northwich, obtained 
a patent tor a new and improved method of manufacturing 
sail.
By the old method, the brine is placed in pans or boilers, 
to the whole of which the lire has access, and aii the parts of it 
are equally heated.
No means are employed for the special 
purpose of causing the brine to sustain, in different parts, 
various degrees of heat, by the greater or less proximity of 
such parts respectively to the fire.
The new method consists 
m varying, at short and successive intervals, the degrees of 
heat which the brine receives from the fire ; and it is done by 
adding to the common brine pan, or boiler, a condenser or 
cooler, having a comuiunication with the boiler, by which 
means the heated brine may freely flow from the boiler into^ 
and circulate about, the cooler or condenser, and from thence 
back again, which it will do by means of the impulse and motion 
communicated by tho fire; and by the consequent expansion 
of the brine, the healed parts following upon the top, and so 
going on towards the extreme part of the condenser, and after* 
wards, when become more cool and dense, returning in and 
kinder and backward current towards the fire, which progress 
lead, at Chester; woollen cloths are ma-do nt Mot- 
tram ; tobacco -pipes are manufactured, though now 
on a comparatively small scale, at Chester ; and, ill 
the parish of Astbury, are mills for rolling cop- 
per sheets and bolts, "and for milking brass wire.
Fairs.]— /M/?Hg/uiiH— April 22, August 5, No- 
vember -2-2, cattle and drapery.
Buduiurih— February 13, April 5, October 2, cows, 
horses, swine, hats, and pedlary.
Coitglelon-*- Thursday before Shrovetide, May 12, 
July 13., December 3, cattle and pedlars' ware.
Chester — Last Thursday in February, cattle; 
July 5, October 10, cattle, Irish linens, cloths, hard- 
ware, hops, drapery, and Manchester wares.
FroJshaiu—yiny'lo, August 21, cattle aud ped- 
lary.
) J niton— Old Lady-Pay, April 5.
Knulsford— Whit Tuesday, July 10, November w, 
cattle and drapery.
Maccles/ie/d-^-May 6, June 22, July 11, October 
1, November 11, cattle, wool, and cloth.
Ma/pas- April 5, July 25, St. James's, Decem- 
ber 8, cattle, linen, woollen cloths, hardware, and 
pedlary.
Middlewch— St. James, July 25, Holy Thursday, 
cattle.
Nanhvich — March 15, September 4, December 16, 
cattle, horses, cloths, fiauncls, hardware, pewter, 
and bedding.
. 
Northwich.
— August 2, December 6, cattle, dra- 
pery-goods, and bedding.
Over — May. 15, September 25, horses, cattle, 
sheep, pigs, onions, aud pedlary ware, 
Sandbach — Easter Tuesday, first Thursday aftep 
September 10, cattle and horses.
Sioekport— rMarbh 4, March 25, May 1, October 
25, cattle and pedlars' ware, 
Tarporley — May 1, Monday after St, Bartholo- 
mew, August 24," December 10, cattle and pedlars' 
ware.
Ilinsford — May 8, November 25, horses, cattle, 
forward and backward is continued, and thus the sajt is formed 
into crystals, chiefly in the condenser, and not in the heated 
pan or boiler, in which the suit is wholly formed by the old 
method.
For dispatch, two of more condensers might be ap- 
plied to one boiler, two or more boileri may be applied to one 
or more condensers.
The cooler or condenser might be an- 
other pan not healed, bat, for saving expence, the patentees 
recommend clay lined with brick-flags, or any other cheap and 
convenient materials, lor forming a shallow pond or reservoir, 
communicating with the boiler, and acting as such cooler or 
condenser.
Any other way of causing an alternate variation of 
the degrees of heat in the brine, during the process, would 
produce a similar effect; « but no method," say they, " can 
be more simple and easy for this purpose, than that which wo 
have described ; and this in its principle, comprehends ail 
other methods of graduating and regulating the heat of th'.j- 
brine, by alternate increase and diminution ; and therefore we 
f protest against the evasive employment of any mode different 
in form and appearance, whereby the same or like effect may 
be produced, either entirely or parti ally, inasmuch as all such 
different modes would be in substance «ad principle, the same 
as that which we have described." 
9 
sheep, 
3G4 
CHESHIRE.
sheep, pigs ; hats, cloth, and other merchan- 
dize.
Canals.] — This county, in addition to the Wee- 
ver navigation, noticed in our introductory remarks, 
is intersected by [tortious of canals, which allow a 
very constant and cheap intercourse of traffic be- 
tween the towns of Chester, Liverpool, Manchester, 
the north of England, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and 
other counties.
The Chester and Nantvvich canal was begun in 
April, 1772, and completed in a very short time.
The course had been surveyed in the years 1707, 
1789, and 1770 ; and though an application was 
made to Parliament in 1709, for an act to complete 
the canal, yet the petitioners were then unsuccess- 
ful: but in 1772, the Corporation and gentlemen of 
Chester, obtained an act, with this singular restric- 
tion, " that the intended canal should not unite, or 
communicate with, the Staffordshire Canal at Mid- 
dlewich." It commences at the River Dee, on the 
north side of Chester, and passing Christleton, Wa- 
verton, Margrave, and the north of Beeston Castle, 
proceeds to Nantwich.
The intended branch of this 
canal, from Wardle Heath to Middlewich, has not 
been yet completed.
Of the Duke of Bridgewater's canal, a branch 
runs through about twenty miles of this county, en- 
tering it to the east of Ashton, and leaving it at 
Runcorn Gap, where it flows into the Mersey.
This 
important cut was planned and executed by his 
Grace, and that extraordinary engineer Mr. Brind- 
ley, previously to the completion of his first canal, 
from Worsley to Manchester.
An act was obtained 
in 1701, and the whole was completed, to the extent 
of twenty-nine miles, in five years.
It is carried 
across the Mersey, near Ashton, by an aqueduct 
bridge ; and farther to the west it crosses the Bol- 
lin.
As this river runs in a tract of low meadows, 
and as the maxim of the ingenious engineer was to 
preserve a level, it was found necessary to raise a 
mound of earth over this valley, to a height, length, 
and breadth, which make it a truly stupendous spec- 
tacle.
By these means the water is kept on a level 
f .ill it nearly reaches the Mersey at Runcorn, where 
it is precipitately lowered ninety-five feet, by a scries 
of locks, of admirable construction.
Before this 
canal was executed, the river navigation from Man- 
chester to Liverpool was 12s.
per ton, and land-car- 
riage 40s.
but by the canal conveyance it is only 0s.
per ton.
Independent of the variety of commercial 
jirticles conveyed by barges on this canal, a new spe- 
cies of boats, on the model of the Dutch treck- 
schuyls, was constructed for passengers, and a very 
cheap and pleasant intercourse was opened between 
Liverpool and Manchester, and the places inter- 
vening.
Tiie first act for making the Trent and Mersey, 
or, as it is called, the Grand Trunk Canal, which 
branches off from the Duke of Bridge water's, at 
Preston-Brook, was passed in the year 1766.
Passing Northwich and Middlewich, it leaves the 
county, on the south side, at Church Law ton.
At 
Preston on the Hill, it passes through a tunnel 1241 
yards in length ; seventeen feet, four inches in 
height ; and thirteen feet, six inches in width.
This 
canal passes through three other tunnels, in its pro- 
gress : one, at Heritage 130 yards long ; another, 
at Saltersfield, in Great-Budworth, 550 yards long ; 
and the third, at Barnton, in the same parish, 572 
yards long.
The Ellesmere canal crosses the western corner 
of this county, entering it at Pulford, and, altar 
uniting with the Dee at Chester, crosses the hundred 
of Win-all for about nine miles, and then joins the 
Mersey ; thereby opening a short and easy passage 
between Chester and Liverpool.
Another branch 
of this canal, which was completed in the year 1800, 
extends through the county a line of eleven miles.
Commencing at Whitchurch, it enters Cheshire at 
Grindley Brook, in Wirswall, and forms a junc- 
tion with the Chester and Nantwich canal, at Hur- 
leston.
The Peak Forest Canal, from Lancashire, crosseg 
the River Tame, at Dukenfield, in this county ; and, 
passing through Hyde, Romiley, Marple, &c.
quits 
Cheshire near Whaley Bridge.
An aqueduct of 
three arches of sixty feet span, and seventy-eight 
feet in height, carries this canal across the Mersey, 
near Marple.
Roads.] — The roads from London to Manchester, 
all pass through this county : — one of them enters 
it near Church-Lawton, 155 miles from London, 
and passing through Knutsford, leaves it, a little 
beyond Cross Street, in Ashton, 183 miles from 
London, and 5 from Manchester : another enters.
Cheshire near Bosley Hills, 102 miles from London, 
and leaves it, at Stockport, 179 miles from London, 
and 7 from Manchester : a third road to Manches- 
ter enters the county at Whaley Bridge, 170 miles 
from London, and likewise leaver it at Stockport.
The principal road from London to Liverpool, 
enters the county at Church Lawton ; and, passing 
through Monk's Heath and Knutsford, quits it a 
little before it reaches Warrington, 188 miles 
from London, and 18 from Liverpool.
Another 
road to Liverpool leads to Monk's Heath, as before, 
and there branches off to Cheadle, 179 miles from 
London, where it leaves the county, 43 miles from 
Liverpool, to which it leads, by Manchester.
One of the great roads from London to Holyhead 
enters the county in the township of Bridgemtre, 
102 miles from London ; and, passing through Tar- 
porley and Chester, enters Flintshire, at Bretton, 
194 miles from London, and 84 from HolyheiStl.
For a fuller account of the roads, we refer the reader 
to the map of the county, and to the journeys, which 
follow the subjoined Table.
TABLE 
CHESHIRE.
306 
^a^H^aoa* 
> c ^* =;* ^ ^7 as "n i-.
C 
§ 2 ft 
re 5 
— • — £i 1 S 
ft p V^ rt — 
sj a 
a a 
3-m 
ww^u) 
D3 o 
* a 
o 3- 
o re 
* 8.
9 
s 
3 
™ C £ n 
o c a 
£-5.
o 
~3 3 
a 
o 
o 
re 
o 
—t 
n 
re 
3 
aa h 
w 10 
!a 
t? 1 a a a 
° S £ =" 
3 c^ 
aoo*** -a ST 
O 3" ' — ^ 3 ^ -^ ^ C 
^r m ^ cv — i pn ^ — r+ , 
s 9 
2'S 
o 
o 
S3 
»o — w *- 
I 5 J ^ -~ 
c So 
to — t»J •— >— 
— (O  <!
<J 
Co to 
CO gg 
a 
H 
W 
a 
a 
a 
o 
o 
a. 
o 
CO 
ft 
a 
pi 
I 
o 
•n : 
O • 
3 
> 
5 
a 
CO 
o 
re 
en 
"I i T § "J 
3 S- <&~ 
B m 2 a 
~ W - re 
pus a< 
5. a^ 
. a 
£° 
re p 
•EL— 
? p 
3 
h« " a a coo gv-r 
ooco 
o o 
in u' 
• 3 
2 ° 
ST 09 
• PI 
2 
O 
a 
a 
2 o 
Z? 
CO 
H 
>3 
O 
cm ffl 
o 
re p 
a 
*" vT~ 
"-3 
o 
<=>*!
&S 
a 
•v 3 
H 
£T 2.
^ re re 
a a a 
a. 
a. 
Pi 
*=e^t 
o 
-r, 
0= 
al a 
re 
_. -< p 
Fh — 
C" i—- 
5 ELcc 
p: 
\. " — , 
j 
WC!- 
►d 
- p 
[H 
' o 
>  = a 
u^ ?
't 
re re i .
CO 
p* 
a 
•a 
So 
n 
> 
ORHO 
-> o a ^ --; c« w i 
' S re £• = S „/ o 5 n> : 
^w 
3: 
n 
CO l— i l-H-N 
3 t; o V 
.a 2- =3 
5 
1 < 
a 
V » 
a. 
05 
^O F 
•r 1 =>" ^v 
^^ O 
^» 
H 
> 5 
r S 
« !?
o 
z 
re n 
O O o 5 3 
3 3 c- O 
a 
pi 
a 
Ore o P5 - " 
a-a o 
S. ff5 *< - 3" 
re « re -= 
3 2.
PI 
Z 
G 
CO 
O 
a 
o —2.
21 5* 
o 
PI 
3 
S 
O** 
it 
a »>i 
zi 
C 3 
•— •— Win 
wh ^>,k*-^j 
CJ K!
to M tO 
oi rf> w w o 
to — .- a 
o , „ , „ 
to to to 
»T2 
re ^ — - 
c ~a.
— .
3 n 
W(K 3 
re <— 
s.a?
a m 
re z: 
E-hd 
•* re 
PJ 
a 
i 
3 
o 
3 
O 
P 
re 
P3 
> 
P123 
^5 P 
n 
> 
w 
a 
<~- 
o 
-n 
re 
O 
3 
a 
Cl 
n 
h— 
o 
O 
f 
re 
o 
-P- 
3 
►n 
a 
w 
I 
»> 
n 
3 
ry 
a 
v> 
•-: 
1 
n 
n 
c 
t 
* 
re 
a 
re 
ara 
"l I 'l 
2.-2 
w rt sr 
3 i_( re 
re © 
S-" a 
K-IJ"" 3 
Pio 
So a.
c-=*o 
H a 
3 re_ 
PI?
"S pi 
a 
&> 
a 
P5 
o 
H 
pi 
P< o 
«J 3 
m ra © 
H a -J >-3 
re o — .
>-'-' 
e; 
> 
tO tO f-i 
an 
.-2 ~ 
Xr 
as: 
a s ^.
^ s 2, 
p- 
P3 
5 
5 
re* 
a 
pi 
«< 
z 
0? 
_re 
I 
PJ 
a. 2 
• a 
(X re 
sr n 
z. 
a2 
re C 
Zla 
a" 
PI 
P'tCtra B ^ 
rt p re £ > 
- -g s; a 
? r«I g 
re i_i a tJ 
J i re 5?
2 a.
p:.
f-'a | ?
^> 
K 
g o 
n 
cQ 
Si 
a 
, 
3 
CO 
-5 
n 
a 
re 
a 
re 
K 
a 
pi 
a 
as 
H 
* 
S3 
re 03 
re a 
-2 
o -• a 
s s- «- 
H -!
o 
>  re r* 
z  ?
s 
p> s z 
w 2 a 
ja _ ►< 
o o CO 
2 o.
H 
h s a 
^ 2 a 
^ a 
re O- 
B C 
£" O 
2 pi 
r a 
8 a 
I 5 
» o 
5 > 
* a 
n C 
9! « 
> 
a 
o 
a 
o 
CO 
I a 
fa 
a m 
t> o 
re 2 
1 
r 
> 
Sf- 
M 
* 
VI 
" SJ 
w« 
> 
^. 
o pi a 
' «" a 
I g o 
S ** «3 
s a 
3 Tl 
- r o 
S a 
p> t*j 
-• co 
" H 
re 2 
~ a 
vol.
i. — no.
26.
4 z 
7. CHESTER 
366 
CHESHIRE.
55 
PS 
w 
u 
I— 4 
s 
© 
fa 
3 
wB 
— Je 
I 
B 
a 
•73 
5" 
fa 
<U J5 
He* 
s*i 
&  a, 
e o 
5B 
u EC 3 
OS o 
s o< 
Sb I — 
"" 3 
23 
w fa 
< >; 
i ~ 
fa > -3 | _* 
B^ 
H1--H 
05 O 
— CM 
H;* rrfrnlfA 
CJ 5-* !£2 
S.aj g 
to 
O c ° -3 .3 <^"S.-._ 
C-- S -3 > 
a 
<o bO 
Ci — to 
C-faU 
w 
V ' 
PS 
a 
a 
H 
PS 
fa 
H 
fa 
« 
.c- 
cr .
V- c, 
O  =!
;s o 
Oh ^ 
= o 
B | 
CJ jj 
'.21 
11 
"a 
3 
a 
« 
pa 
I 
PS 
W 
i>.2 
2f<u 
CJ O 
'. S 
ps-2 
-nflOls O — ' CO 
— — — CM 
„ CO — —  CM-.
CM «<N«W 
CD 
o -g 
&« 
*-> t- 3 U 
6/5.3 43 -g 
O'- O S 
paaoa 
f- •& », 
3 ~ *~> 3 
oacaB 55oaO?
3 O 
ft 
C3 
1 
o 
-2 
cn 
PS 
w 
5 S5 
a 
a 
H 
csS 
O 
55 
I 
J 
6r 
V! 
w 
eg 
y 
i-4 
-o 
c 
c« 
-a 
«S 
E 
« 
CO 
— 
o 
r_!
<U  > 
° is 
PhH 3 
5 « I 
la 
£ .
C/3 o 
o C 
-CO 
> i> 
to 
a S.S 
o n — 
2= c o 
33Q 
•- CS i .3 3Q3 
I I <U .
CO I ' 
QS PS w 
^ J\= 
— * *0 CD t> co 
Hl-t Ht H* 
— co  «* co »> 
— co — — .
— 
<^t -I* mi* 
CO 0> CN 
ft 
2 > > 
c CJ 
USS 
60 
a 
03 
—   c cj 
o-" C 
Sf||||| 
-a 
v. 
< 55 
a g, 
55 
« 
US 
PS 
CQ 
PS 
M 
H 
en 
w 
a 
o 
w 
PS 
PS 
o 
o 
I 
4 
PS 
Pm 
55 .s 
PS 
ea 
c 2 
oa 
"M H* WNfW H*"<* 
OjCOCOt^t^COOCM-^fO 
f>» CO — i — i CN CM « 
bO 
bfl 
o O^uweaOhco 
55 
o 
55 
PS 
a 
w 
1-1 
Q 
Q 
G 
* 
W 
fa 
o 
** s 
— til o 
«« I 
oah'hH 
CQ 
-Kh* h*M'M<* 
d co CO —i CM 
1-1 
T3 
CJ 
PS 
a 
•be 
C/3 
o 
o 
1 
a 
s 
MJO 
,«.
CJ 
co 
V O 
*pa 
-3 ^> 
^ S3 *o 
£ u c 
cj y £- O a-> 
Cj o 
O ,t!
? pa t- 
°^ 
pa' 
S =' 
.9 o 
C-r- c4J=i'-3'0 o g 
— • s^ 3 
i 5 " 
a" 
55 a 
• t 
55 
55 
a 
o 
1— I 
a 
H 
PS 
o 
55 
w 
(3 
3- 
X 
>1 
oa 
o 
u 
3 
o 
2 
r/; 
f-l 
a 
'— 
-i 
pCi 
c rt l." 
pa £° 
CJ L-4 bO 
55^ 
1) « nS 
£>SJ 
6 =PS 
5 
C/3 
1 
PS 
o 
L>- CO 
.w 
O 5J 
as-; 
SB 
U 
HO-O 
iS iJ 
— — CO 
KW"WH|«l-(C»H|flH« 
«* CO o — co *o 
t> 00 
CM 
m|*M)N 
M|f* HM 
— CM CO — CM CM 
-*««|o 
HI* 
a; 
CS 3 
.^i ca 
^??
^ 
° * o ?
G ° « S 
3 41 
cj-c 
01 
p 
0) 
ri 
o 
-3 
^_^ 
T3 FD 
-J 
hi 
o 
§ 
rporley 
lie's En 
ghway 
-3 
-p 
*_ 
u 
oH*-ia 
i£ — *> ri 
« e j; > 
tc°c 
a<;^ 
CHESHIRE.
367 
TABLE OP DISTANCES.
Tfie Names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square where both meet gives the distance.
Chester , 
Congleton 
Frodsham 
Halton , 
Knutsford.
Macclesfield 
Mai pas.
Middlewicli 
Nantwich.
Northwich , 
Sandbach.
Stockport.
Altringham 
32 
'20 
19 
15 
33 
20 
30 
12 
24 
.Distance from London Miles 179 
Chester 182 
37 
10 
14 
2d 
47 
If.
21 
20 
19 
26 
39 
Congleton 175 
27 Frodsham 192 
31 
IS 
1') 
31 
I I 
15 
25 
17 
28 
23 
15 
20 
12 
23 
25 
Halton 19i 
19 
30 
20 
17 
IS 
26 
22 
Knutsford 173 
14 
13 
14 
Ma, 
sfield , 
.207 
40 
15 
24 
21 
19 
1 I 
Malpas 
.165 
18 
11 
20 
22 
30 
Middlewicli 167 
10 
26 
Nantwich 164 
15 
10 
33 
Northwich , 174 
12 
21 
Sandbch 162 
25 
Stockport 176 
CORNWALL; 
368 
CORNWALL.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
CORNWALL is the most western county in 
Great Britain.
It is entirely bounded by the 
sea, excepting on its eastern side, which is separat- 
ed from Devonshire by the Tamar, and an artificial 
boundary of a few miles in length at its northern ex- 
tremity ; so that it almost forms an island.
From 
this boundary to the westward, the land continually 
decreases in breadth, and assumes a figure nearly 
resembling a horn.
The north side is skirted by the 
Bristol Channel, and the south by the British Chan- 
nel ; both seas seeming to meet near the point called 
the Land's End, at the extremity of the promontory 
on the west.
The widest part from Morvinstow, on 
the north, to Rame-Head, on the south, is about 43 
miles in breadth ; but this extent rapidly contracts, 
and 20 miles may be regarded as the medium, till 
we approach Mount's Bay, between which place and 
St. Ives, it is not more than five miles and a half.
The length of the north-east side, from Morvinstow 
to the Land's End, is about 90 miles.
The circumference is estimated at 200 miles.
The Rev. Mr.
Polwhele justly considers, that the 
advantages which this county derives from its mari- 
time situation, in a commercial light, are incalcula- 
ble.
" The sea coast," says he, " spreads itself 
along the south and north parts of Cornwall to such 
a degree, that if we estimate the curvatures of the 
south and north coast, and make also a just allow- 
ance for the much fewer curvatures of the boundaries 
towards Devonshire, we shall find that four parts in 
five of the outline of Cornwall are exposed to the 
sea.
- It is this which fills our bays and harbours, 
makes a number of fishing creeks, brings our native 
products, sands, sea-weed, and fish (as well as fo- 
regn merchandize) home to our doors in a multitude 
of places, exports tin and fish with great con- 
venience ; from vapours generates and feeds our 
brooks and softens the air ; from cliffs, so near on 
either hand, facilitates the drains of mines ; opens 
the treasures of metals, useful earths, and minerals 
to the inquisitive eye, and in short procures plenty, 
and promotes trade and employment in a variety of 
shapes unknown to more inland counties." Mr.
Polwhele, however, admits, that these advantages 
are not altogether without their opposites.
" Our 
coast," he observes, " is not only extended greatly 
in proportion to the area of the land, but it has 
many promontories jutting put on each side which 
necessarily make deep bays, and unhappily aug- 
ment the distresses of sailors in stormy weather.
Another inconvenience of our sea situation is, that 
the land shoots out sharp, like a Avedge, into the 
Atlantic Ocean.
Ships oftentimes mistake one 
channel for another, or are drawn aside from their 
true course by the inequality of the tides.
And the 
tides, irregular from the prominence of the head- 
lands, are rendered more so at the extremity of 
Cornwall by the Sylleh (Scilly) Islands, which nar- 
row the channel whether the tide sets to the north or 
the south, and consequently, increasing the velocity 
of the current, occasion a more than ordinary in- 
draught into both channels.
The tide of flood at 
the Land's End rises on the top of a common spring 
eighteen feet, and from that to twenty-four, accord- 
ing to the wind and weather ; insomuch, that in 
stormy weather, from the south-west, it has risen to 
the height of thirty feet ; but at the common neap 
tides only thirteen feet usually ; and at a very dead 
neap it has not risen above ten feet.
During the 
flood the tide at the Land's End sets inward from 
the south near nine hours.
Its run is eight hours in 
most places between Sylleh and the Land's End : 
but the ebb continues only between three and four 
hours This is a very dangerous singularity if not 
known and properly regarded.
But the greatest 
difficulty of our maritime situation is, that an accu- 
rate survey of our shores, and a precise determina- 
tion of our latitude and longitude, have never yet 
been taken, not so much as of the Lizard, the first 
land usually made by ships homeward bound, and 
the southernmost point of England from which 
most ships outward bound to the southward 
begin their reckoning.
Here a false step is 
made at first setting out, and, unless rectified* by 
repeated observations, it may be of fatal consequence.
To have the longitude and latitude ascertained at 
the extremity of the island, where ships begin and 
end their reckonings, is certainly a matter of the 
greatest moment to commerce, and should be per- 
formed, by a variety of the best instruments, at sub- 
sequent times, and by more than one skilful hand." 
— " Another circumstance," observes Mr. Polwhele, 
1 " claim* 
* • 
ft 
ft 
♦ 
CORNWALL.
369 
* claims the attention of our countrymen.
Our 
harbours are generally at the mouths of rivers, and 
not very distant from the hills where they rise, and 
•of course not so long or deep as where the rivers 
and creeks run farther up into the land : they are, 
therefore, more apt to he choaked with sands and 
rubbish than in other situations.
Too much care, 
then, cannot be taken that ships discharge not their 
ballast in improper places, so as to obstruct the na- 
vigable channel, a grievance of which many intelli- 
gent traders are apprehensive." 
According to Marty n's admeasurement, the coun- 
ty of •Cornwall contains 758,484 square statute 
acres ; but the Population Returns of 1811 make it 
comprise 640 square miles, or 1,500,480 acres.
In 
Worgan's Agricultural Survey, it is estimated, that, 
" from 150,000 to 200,000 acres, consist of unen- 
closed waste lands, which are appropriated to no 
other use than a scanty pasturage for a miserable 
breed of sheep and goats throughout the year ; and 
about 10,000 acres, to the summer pasture of cattle 
and sheep.
The principal and most profitable tract 
of these waste lands extends from south to north, 
between the towns of Liskeard, Bodmin, and Ca- 
melford, and thence to within a few miles of Laun- 
ceston ; particularly those called Roughtor, Tem- 
ple, and Alterton moors." 
Tradition reports, that a considerable tract of 
land, named the Lyoness, was formerly connected 
with this county, and, extending towards the Isles of 
Scilly, was, in the remote ages of antiquity, swal- 
lowed up by the ocean.
From its soil, appearance, and climate, Cornwall 
its apparently one of the least inviting of the English 
counties.
A ridge of bare and rugged hills, inter- 
mixed with bleak moors, runs through the midst of 
its whole length, and exhibits the appearance of a 
dreary waste.
The roads being chiefly carried oyer 
the higher land, or the extensive commons they in- 
tersect, convey a much greater idea of sterility to 
the traveller, than the produce of the county will 
warrant him to entertain ; for the sea shores and 
♦be vallies display marks of abundant fertility, the 
natural richness of the soil being greatly increased 
by the use of sea sand, and weeds, collected on the 
beach.
" This," says Shaw, in his Western Tour, 
" has been the custom in these parts ever sinee the 
time of Henry the Third, at least ; though in the 
early ages of the world, common salt was so far 
from being held in any estimation as a manure, that 
it was regarded as a symbol of extreme sterility ; 
and Dr. Watson, in his Chemical Essays, has 
quoted several passages from Scripture, which af- 
firm it.
Virgil and Pliny represent the same as 
barren, and unfit for vegetation ; but, notwithstand- 
ing these and otiier testimonies of the ancients, the 
above sand, in which sea-salt is copiously mixed, 
when fresh, is used with great success; yet if left 
too long exposed to the air, it proves less useful and 
enriching, which is by some attributed to its having 
been deprived of a portion of its salt by the dews 
VOL.
I. — NO.
27.
and rains.
The sand is produced by the fluctuation 
of the sea, and consists of the broken shells of mus- 
cles, cockles, oysters, scollops, and other fish, vary- 
ing somewhat in colour and grain, according to the 
substances from which it is formed, and the degree 
of agitation to which it has been exposed : it is 
found to fertilize all kinds of soils." 
There is much beautiful scenery near the southern 
coast of Cornwall ; especially on the banks of the 
Lynher, near Trematon Castle, and Nottar Bridge ; 
at East and West Looe, Polperro, and Fowey.
There is also some fine scenery on the banks of the 
Tamar, in the neighbourhood of Pentilly, Calstock, 
Cothele, &c.
Mount's Bay, and the Bay of Fal- 
mouth, are not surpassed in beauty, in the island.
— 
Perhaps, however, the most remarkable and inter- 
esting scenery in the county, is that which presents 
itself along a line of bold and abrupt coast, bound- 
ed by the Atlantic Ocean, and the British Chan- 
nel.
Many of the vallies of Cornwall are well wooded.
The sea air, however, is considered to be injurious 
to vegetation ; and the salt particles with which it 
loads the atmosphere, conjointly with the violence 
of the winds, will hardly suffer any trees to grow 
upon the coasts ; and it is only in the sheltered 
vales that any remains of the ancient natural woods 
are to be found.
In situations exposed to the south- 
west and northerly winds, the attempt to rear plan- 
tations, till within these few years, was scarcely ever 
successful ; but, latterly, the endeavour has been 
attended by more promising indications ; the pine- 
aster fir being first planted, as a slielter to the more 
tender trees.
At present, the best wooded parts of 
the county are in its south-east division, and in the 
neighbourhood of Bodmin, and Lostwithiel.
There 
are also extensive plantations at Clowance, Tre- 
gothnan, Port Eliot, Carclew, Tehidy, &c.
Lord 
tie Dunstanville, Sir William Lemon, Sir John St.
Aubyn, Lord Grenville, Messrs.
Thomas, Rashleigh, 
Vyvyan, &c.
are among its principal planters.
Most 
of the land proprietors are now directing their at- 
tention to this useful branch of economy.
The surrounding body of water renders the air of 
Cornwall exceedingly moist ; and the clouds being 
intercepted in their passage by the high lands in the 
centre of the county occasions frequent and severe 
showers.
These, however, seldom continue long, 
and may be considered as highly conducive to the 
health of the inhabitants, by clearing the air of per- 
nicious vapours arising from the operations of re- 
fining the ores, and leaving in their room the vivi- 
fying qualities waited by the genial breezes of the 
ocean.
The seasons arc more equal than in most 
other parts of England ; the heat of the summer 
seldom being intense, nor the cold of the winter 
piercing.
Frosts are but of short duration, and 
snow seldom lies upon the ground above two or 
three days.
The variety of sea-sands round Cornwall is pro- 
bably greater than in any other county in Great 
5 a Britain ; 
370 
CORNWALL.
Britain ; the sand of almost every cove being dif- 
ferent.
The sand of the same shore, cove, or bay, 
has generally the same colour ; and a microscope 
shows it to be of the same substance as the adjacent 
cliffs, and also the strata under the sea, upon and 
against which the waves are perpetually acting, and 
driving to the shore what they wash or fret off from 
them.
Hence the sands near Chandour Creek, near 
Penzance, and thence to Marazion, are of a pale 
bine colour, like the rocks at Chandour, and the 
shingle on the strand.
On the Scilly Isles > the 
sands are of a bright and shining colour, composed, 
for the most part, of the mica and crystals of the 
granite, commonly called moor-stone, which edges 
all these islands : the same may be said of most 
other parts of Cornwall, the sands being reddish, 
yellow, bright, or blue,, according as stones of each 
particular hue prevail in the places adjoining.
The 
sand of Trereeu Cove, Whitesand Bay, and also of 
the vast tracts on the north coast, is composed of 
broken shells, and is constantly used fur manure ; 
the more generally, perhaps, from the want of lime, 
which is always found in this county combined with 
fluoric acid, and only in small quantities, as schiefer 
spar.
The bright, sparkling appearance of the ocean, 
which is so frequently observed by navigators, on 
the coast of Cornwall, and termed briony, is attri- 
buted by Borlase to a kind of water-insect which 
he calls the aquatic glow-worm, and supposes that 
it ascends from the bottom of the sea.
Mr. Carew, 
alluding to this phenomenon, says, " If the sea- 
water be slashed with a stick or oar in the darkest 
night, it will cast forth a bright shining colour, and 
the drops resemble sparkles of fire, as if the waves 
were turned into flame." This singular appearance 
generally accompanies a fresh breeze ; and is- sup- 
posed by Cornish sailors to be the presage of a 
storm, though, in reality, it is only occasioned by 
these insects, rendered visible by the breaking of the 
waves.
Rivers.] — The chief rivers of Cornwall are, the 
Alan, or Camel, the Fal, the Fawey, the Hel, the 
Ileyl, the Loe, the Looe, the Lynher, the Seaton, and 
the Tartar.
The Alan, or Camel, the largest river on the 
north side of the county, rises near the rocky hills of 
Rough-Tor, and passes Camelford in a southern 
direction ; thence,, inclining to the west, it flows in 
a very circuitous channel to the north of Bodmin, 
below which it turns northwards, and becomes na- 
vigable for barges near Egloshel.
Its stream is af- 
terwards increased by several smaller rivers, and, 
(lowing onward, pours its congregated waters into 
the harbour of Padstow, which, about two miles be- 
low the town, opens into the Bristol Channel.
The 
present name of this river is a corruption of the 
Cornish term Cambm-alan, indicative of its crooked 
course.
In Leland's time it was called Dunmere, 
that is, the Water of the Hills.
The banks of this 
river are famous for two c6nsiderable battles, in one 
of which King Arthur received a mortal wound.
The other was fought between the Cornish and the 
West-Saxons, in Devonshire, in the year 824, in 
which many thousands fell on each side, and the vic- 
tory remained doubtful.
A mile below Egloshel, 
this river comes to Wade- Bridge, which is the 
largest in the county, for it has seventeen handsome 
uniform arches, and reaches quite across the valley.
The erection of this bridge was undertaken by the 
vicar of Egloshel, in the year 1460, whose name 
was Lovebon, as a work of general utility.
This 
public spirited clergyman, after great fortitude and 
perseverance in encountering a number of difficul- 
ties, as well from the situation as his circumstances, 
lived to see his bridge finished, partly by the assist- 
ance of others, to the great emolument of the county, 
and honour of his name.
In the central part of the county, the Fal is th«> 
most considerable river.
It rises at a place called 
' Fenton-val, about two miles west of Roche Rocks, 
and flowing southerly, is expanded by various tri- 
butary rills into a plentiful stream near Grampound.
Thence, running more to the west, it swells into a 
large bason near Truro, to which place one of its 
curving branches extends^ In this neighbourhood 
its waters are increased by several streams, and its 
receding and deeply indented banks form several 
small creeks and bays.
Flowing afterwards to the 
south, all its branches unite in the capacious reser- 
voir called Carreg Rode, and extending onward to 
the sea, form the spacious harbour of Falmouth.
At the foot of the harbour, the Fal opens into the 
ocean, between St. Maw's and Anthony-Point on 
the eastern bank, and Pendennis-Castle on the west, 
its channel being nearly a mile across.
Near the 
middle is a large rock, winch is concealed at high 
water.
On the highest part of that rock, to preven* 
the dangers which it might occasion to shipping, 
the Killigrew family, formerly Lords of Arwennock, 
are obliged to keep a tall pole erected.
We find 
it mentioned in Leland, that, in the reign of Henry 
the Eighth, a naval fight took place in the Fal, be- 
tween a fleet of eighteen Spanish merchantmen and 
a ship of war belonging to Dieppe.
The French- 
man, it appears, had been driven thither by the 
Spaniards.
The Fawey rises in Fawey-Moor, at a place called 
Fawey-Well, not far from Brown Willy, one of the 
highest mountains in Cornwall.
It passes under 
four bridges, takes in several rivulets, and comes at 
last to Resprin-bridge ; three miles beyond which, it 
reaches the borough of Lostwithiel, where it passes 
under a handsome stone bridge of nine arches.
— 
Three miles farther, the Fawey receives the waters 
of Lerwyn river and creek from the east, and then 
becomes a deep, wide haven ; in two miles farther, it 
reaches the town of Fowey, which is seated on its 
western bank; and, a little below, joining the Pol- 
ruan creek, it opens into the sea, between two old 
towers 
CORNWALL.
372 
towers built in the reign of Edward IV.
The scen- 
ery on the banks of this river is eminently pictur- 
esque and beautiful.
The head of the river Hel is upon the hills of 
Wendron parish, whence it runs about three miles to 
a village called Gweek, whither, by the help of the 
tide, vessels come up.
About a mile below, this 
river is joined by Maugan creek on the south, and 
three miles farther by Kestel creek, where there is a 
ferry; and, at its mouth,, three miles farther, it is 
joined by Gillam creek.
These, with two or three 
more, form a harbour, which, within a mile of its 
mouth, is secure enough for ships of -200 tons : its 
passage into the sea is about a mile wide, and is 
called Helford passage.
The river Ileyl is formed by four brooks, which, 
uniting at Rebubbus, run a western course ; then 
turn to the north, and, in three miles, reach St. Erth, 
or St. Ercy-bridge, which has three stone arches, 
and a raised causeway, well walled on each side, ex- 
tending across the valley.
Only small ships can go 
up to the village of Lelant, on account of the sands, 
which have formed a bar, choaked up the harbour, 
and caused it to be only a half-tide haven.
Of "late, 
however, the harbour has been much improved.
The Loe, Lo, or Low, has its origin among the 
hills of Wendron parish, and, flowing towards Hel- 
ston, descends southward to Mount's Bay. The 
estuary of this river is very extensive.
The Looe is composed of two branches (east and 
West) the first of which descends from the high lands 
of St. Cleer, and, taking a southerly course, flows 
about a mile west of Liskeard : the western branch 
Tises in the parish of St. Pinnoc, and is sometimes 
called the Trelawney River.
They unite at some 
distance below Trenant Park, and, flowing between 
the towns of West and East Looe, empty themselves 
into the British Channel.
The Lynher, which derives its source from the 
hills in Alternon parish, flows to the south-east, 
passes within one mile of Callington, and thence, 
winding through a varied country, continues its 
course between the parishes of Shevioc and St. Ste- 
pixen's.
Soon afterwards it receives the waters of 
the Tidi, and between Trematon Castle and An- 
thony, spreads into the form of a lake, named Lynher 
Creek, which empties itself into the Tamar, about a 
mile below Saltash, after a course of about twenty- 
four miles.
The Seaton rises in St. Cleer, four miles to the 
north-east of Liskeard, and passing within a mile of 
that borough, to Lanseaton, runs through Miidienut 
parish ; falling into the sea at Seaton, after a course 
of about twelve miles.
The Tamar, which is one of the most considerable 
rivers in the west of England, rises in the parish of 
Morvinstow, which is more to the north than any 
other, and about three miles from the sea-coast.
— 
The spring first appears on the top of a moor, from 
whence the ground declining to the north, allows the 
liver to run that way, and it forms the head of the 
river Turridge, in Devonshire.
The ground also 
shelves away on the other side to the south, and drain- 
ing the bogs of the same moor on that side, forms 
the beginning of the Tamar, which, at the distance 
of ten miles, becomes so considerable as to give 
name to the village of Tamerton, where, continuing 
its course to the south, it enters the parish of St.
Stephen's, at the corner of which it receives the river 
Werrington.
About half a mile farther, it receives 
the Attery, which runs by Launceston, and sooiv 
after, at Polstun-bridge, the stream becomes consi- 
derably wide and rapid.
From whence, running 
nearly south, it passes through Graistum- bridge, 
and, a mile below, it receives the river Cowley : the 
limy falls into it soon after.
Five miles farther 
down, the Tamar receives the Inny on the east, and, 
having made a creek into the parishes of Botsfleming 
and Landulph on the west, becomes a spacious har- 
bour.
Then it passes the borough of Saltash, and, 
within half a mile, is joined by the Lynher; pursu- 
ing its course, it next forms the noble harbour of 
Hamoaze, a Saxon term, signifying a wet, oozy habi- 
tation.
Here it makes two large creeks, one of 
which is called St. John's, and the other Milbrook.
After this it enters the sea, having Mouut-Edge- 
cumbe for its western, and Stonehouse for its eastern 
boundary.
The island of St. Nicholas, and the 
banks of this river are richly diversified with rocks, 
woods, and meadows ; and the scenery in various 
parts of its course is extremely interesting and beau- 
tiful.
The views about the Cater-marther Rocks, 
Tavistock-Newbridge r the Morwell Rocks, Cotehele, 
and Pentilly, are peculiarly picturesque and inter- 
esting, combining a fine variety of woods and rocks.
In addition to these rivers, may be mentioned the 
Tide, or Tidi, which rises on the south-side of Car- 
raton Hill, near Liskeard, and becomes navigable at- 
Tidiford.
After passing St. German's, it is called 
St. German's Creek.
It is then joined by Lynher 
Creek, and subsequently forms a junction with the 
Tamar.
The Conner rises to the N.
E. of Crow an, 
is joined by a stream from the neighbourhood ot" 
Tehidy, and falls into the sea a little beyond Gwythian, 
Gaiied Creek is formed by a stream which rises m 
the parish of Newlin, near Trevise ; it falls into the 
north sea near Crantock.
In the rivers of this county, besides the fish of 
small consideration, there are shotes, which are a 
kind of small trout ; but in ponds they grow to the 
length of 12 or 14 inches, and are thought by some 
to be peculiar to this and the neighbouring county of 
Devon.
The flesh is white, but not so firm as that 
of the common trout; it is to be found in all brooks 
not infected with the muudic waters of the mines;.
for these are fatal to all fish, sooner or later.
There 
are no jacks, perches, carps, cray-fish, or many 
others that are to be found in the more inland parts 
of the kingdom ; but then, to make amends, there is 
a great variety of sea-fish, and several sorts of 
trout, which are in great plenty in their proper 
season.
In the rivers Alan and Laine, near Pen- 
] 
davy, 
372 
CORNWALL.
davy, they have a grey trout, the flesh of which, -in 
summer, is red and delicate.
In the river Fawey, 
near Lostwithiel, there is a black trout, taken in the 
months of May and June, sometimes three feet long-.
In July, the salmon-peel comes up the same river; 
but it is commonly caught at the mouths of rivers.
— 
About the latter end of August, another kind of trout 
appears, which, from the time it is seen, is called the 
Bartholomew-trout.
It is generally about 18 inches 
long, but the belly is deeper than that of the black 
trout, and the flesh is red, and in higher esteem.
— 
The salmon is properly a sea-fish, but it comes oc- 
casionally into the rivers to cast its spawn.
It is 
caught in the river Fawey, at two wears, from the 
latter end of the spring till autumn : it is also taken 
in great plenty in Lord Edgecumbe's wear at Cuthel, 
on the river Tamar.
In addition to the rivers of this county, there are 
some lakes which deserve notice.
The most consi- 
derable of these is named Low Pool, which lies 
between the parish of Sithney on the west, and those 
of Helston and Mawgan on the east.
It is about 
two miles long, and a furlong wide, and is formed by 
a bar of pebbles, sand, and shingles, forced up 
against the mouth of this creek by the south-west 
wind.
This bar dams up the water, which proceeds 
chiefly from the Loe river, till it comes to a stone 
bridge, called St. John's bridge.
About a mile be- 
low it the lake begins to overspread the whole valley, 
and in half a mile more the depth increases from 
three to ten feet, making a little creek into Penross.
From hence the pool deepens, and at length comes 
to the depth of 26 feet ; and then it shallows again.
However, during the winter, the whole valley is 
often covered with water, from the town of Helston 
to the edge of the sea.
At that season the town 
mills are commonly stopped up by the swelling of 
the lake, at which time the Mayor of Helston applies 
to the Lord of Penross, presenting him a few half- 
pence in a leathern purse; upon which he has aright 
to cut through the bar, in order to let out the re- 
dundant water, and the mills are set going again.
— 
Hence it appears, that if this bar was always kept 
open, there would be a good haven up to Helston.
The cliffs round this lake are moderately high, and 
between them there is a very distinct echo, which, 
though agreeable in a calm, is terrible in a tempest.
This pool has a kind of trout winch deserves a par- 
ticular description.
It is nearly 16 inches long, with 
a large eye, and the back of a deep purple colour ; 
but the scales are of a silver hue.
The belly, from 
the strait line which passes from the gills to the 
middle of the tail, is of a bright pearl colour, spotted 
for the most part with scarlet ; but the spots on the 
back are purplish.
Though the salmon-peel above 
mentioned, in some measure resembles this trout, it is a 
different fish, having a more circular back, and the 
lower mandible rather longer than the upper, besides 
other distinctions.
Between the parish of Budock and that of Fal- 
mouth, is a small creek, not above half a mile in 
length, and a quarter wide, separated from the sea 
by a bar of sand and shingles.
This is now called 
Swan Pool, from the swans which were formerly 
kept here.
The eels of this water are large, and 
accounted extremely good.
Four miles north of St. Neot's jchurch, and about 
14 miles from Looe, the waters ofrthe adjacent hills 
are collected into a basin, and form a small lake, of 
about a mile in circumference, called Dogmery Pool.
It is about nine feet deep, and contains no fish but 
eels.
Fish and Fisheries.] — Besides the finny produce 
of the rivers already noticed, the coast of Cornwall 
abounds with a great variety offish.
The pilchard, 
in particular, is taken in sufficient numbers to con- 
stitute a considerable and productive branch of com- 
merce.
These fish appear in immense shoals, called 
scooles, during the summer and autumn : the first 
swarm generally arrives at the Land's End in the 
middle of July.
They are supposed to be guided 
by instinct, from the North Seas, which they are 
thought to quit from certain indications of the ap- 
proach of the stormy season.
The pilchard fisheries 
are principally on the southern coast of the county; 
in Mount's Bay, and thence eastward, at St. Maw's, 
Mevagizzy, Charles-Town, Polkerris, East and 
West Looe, and Polperro.
On the northern side, 
the principal fishery is at St. Ives.
The pilchards 
are caught in large nets, of a peculiar make, called 
seans, each of which is managed by three boats, con- 
taining about 18 men.
The seans are 220 fathoms 
long, 16 fathoms deep in the middle, and 14 at each 
end.
We may estimate the great importance of the 
pilchard-trade from the immense quantities of fish 
which are annually exported from the Cornish coasts, 
and from the revenue they produce to the govern- 
ment, and the proprietors of the fisheries.
This re- 
venue is supposed to amount, on an average, to 
50,0001.
annually : this sum includes the bounty 
allowed on exportation, which is 8s.
6d.
per hogshead, 
and the receipts for oil obtained from each.
The 
fish, when brought on shore, are carried to the store- 
houses, or cellars, where the small and the broken 
fish, and such as have been bitten by the dog-fish, 
are picked out by women, and carried away for 
dressing.
The remainder are disposed ii< layers on 
the pavement of the storehouse, and a certain portion 
of salt strewed between every layer.
In this state 
they remain about six weeks, after which they are 
taken up, washed, and placed in the hogsheads, 
where with great weights they are pressed together 
as closely as possible, so that the whole, when turned 
out, appears in a compact state.
The floor or pave- 
ment on which they are laid, is on a gentle declivity, 
that the melted fat and salt may drain off and be 
preserved.
Great numbers of men, women, and 
children, are employed in the various processes of 
washing, salting, and pressing ; and in the making 
of nets, ropes, casks, and other necessary articles.
— 
The following statement, relative to the pilchard 
fishery 
CORNWALL.
573 
fishery in St. A'ustel Bay, for one year, drawn up 
about iii'rt""H years ago, will furnish the reader with 
a general idea of its extent and nature : — 
" Seventeen .
scans are employed; and, on the 
average of seven years, about 400 hogsheads are 
taken by each scan.
" The price of fish per hogshead is ]/.
10s.
The 
bounty on ditto is 8"..
GJ.
Total value of each hog- 
shead of fish 1/.
18.?.
(V/.
" The number of pilchards in each hogshead is 
3000.
" The quantity of salt used yearly, at 34lbs.
to 
the bushel, is 40,800 bushels, viz.
about 20,400 
bushels in curing the fish ; 10,200 bushels condemn- 
ed, and sold for the use of the land: and 10,200 
bushels left in stock to be used a second time.
" Price of new salt, 2s.
per bushel.
Price of con- 
demned salt, 10;/.
per bushel.
Price of broken fish, 
li/.
per gallon.
Price of oil, 20/.
per ton.
Garbage 
sold to the soapboilers at 6<7.
per gallon.
Dregs 
sold to the curriers at 10^.
per gallon.
Ten women 
employed in sailing fish at 20<7.
per hogshead.
Each 
cask for the fish costs about 3s.
Cellar rent for a 
scan, 20/.
per annum.
Seventeen men employed on 
each sean at &s, each per week.
Tithe to each sean 
1/.
13s.
id.
yearly.
l( The tithe paid to the fishermen is one twelfth 
part of their share of the fish-money.
The fisher- 
men's share is one quarter of the whole produce.
— 
The fresh fish given to the poor of the neighbour- 
hood from the boat's side, would amount, if sold, to 
about 5/.
a sean yearly." 
lu size and form, the pilchard differs but little 
from the common herring ; but, on close inspection, 
it will be found rather smaller, and less compressed.
The dorsal fin of the pilchard, observes Dr. Maton, 
is placed exactly in the centre of gravity; so that 
the ordinary mode of distinguishing it from the her- 
ring, is to try whether, when taken up by this fin, it 
preserves an equilibrium.
The body of the herring 
dips towards the head, and the scales are also ob- 
served to drop oft'; whereas those of the pilchard 
adhere very closely.
'Besides the quantity exported, 
great numbers of these fish are consumed by the 
* At day-break, on the 3d of January, 1809, an enormous 
fish was descried at half cable's length from Penryn quay, mak- 
ing towards the town ; and three boats, under the direction of 
Captain Dunn, were manned to attack him.
The first he in- 
closed, as it were in a pond, formed by a circular curve from 
head to tail, without doing any injury.
A man then courage- 
ously cut a hole in the dorsal tin, through which he drove a 
hooked rope.
Upon feeling this, the fish attempted to put to 
sea, but being diverted by some hard blows on the snout, he 
sheered towards the Falmouth road.
A three inch rope doubled 
was then parbuckled round him, which he instantly snapped.
A hawser from the (may was next applied to him ; when, after 
•bagging a sloop's anchor, tearing up a moor-stor.e post on the 
quay, and staving a boat, he was brought into shoal water, and, 
it bciag ebb tide, subdued.
He was afterwards towed round 
by three boats, and, with a tackle of a sand barge, 'and the exer- 
tions of 20 men and 3 horse.,, he was drawn upon tee slip of 
VOL.
I. NO.
27.
miners and poor of Cornwall.
The refuse of the 
fish and salt is purchased for manure.
The sea may be regarded as the great store- house 
of Cornwall, which offers not its treasures by piece- 
meal, nor all at once, but in succession; all in plenty 
in their several seasons, and in such variety, as 
though nature were solicitous to prevent any excess 
or superfluity of the same kind.
The largest fish which visits these seas is the 
blower, or fin-fish (the Physeter of the ancients) so 
named from the quantity of water which it blows 
into the air through a pipe or hole in its head.* The 
next in size is the grampus, which is usually about 
eighteen feet long, and sometimes large enough to 
weigh lOOOlbs.
Its voracity is so remarkable, that 
it is observed to prey upon the porpoise, or sea-hog, 
which is also seen on this coast.
During the pilchard 
season, the shores are much infested with the blue 
shark, which has no gills, but breathes through holes, 
or pipes, situated between the mouth and the pectoral 
fins.
The sea-fox is here called the thresher, from 
the motion of its long fox-like tail, with which it 
strikes its less agile enemy the grampus, whenever 
the surface of the water presents him to notice.
Amongst the flat fish is a very uncommon one, 
named the monk, or angel-fish, which seems to par- 
take of the nature of botii the dog-fish and the ray..
The back is colored like a seal, without streaks; the 
belly is white.
The turbot frequents the coast in 
the summer and autumn, and in such plenty, that in 
Mount's Bay thirty of them have been taken in an 
evening with a hook and line.
The sea-adder is a 
kind of nettle-fish, about sixteen inches long, and.
has a back and tail- fin, with scales shaped like those 
of the land-adder.
In the belly of one that was open- 
ed, some hundreds of young fish were found, re- 
sembling small eels, which, on being placed in water, 
soon moved.
That remarkable fish called the sun- 
fish is sometimes caught in these seas.
One was 
taken near Penzance in 31ay, 1743, which was three 
inches thick at the back, but at the belly only three 
quarters of an inch.
The tail was grisly and trans- 
parent; and the colour dappled, with darker spots on 
the back: the belly was of a silver pearl colour, with 
Col. Heame's quay, where he remained a few days for the 
amusement of the curious.
He measured 31 feet long, 19 feet 
round, 9| feet high, and 7^ feet mouth ; and his weight was 
supposed to exceed 5 tons.
This fish was undoubtedly a male 
of the Squalus Maximus, or basking shark, which abounds in 
the Irish channel, and on the west coast of Scotland.
It hag 
been observed to derive great pleasure from basking on the 
surface of the ocean during the heat of the day, whence its En- 
glish denomination.
The liver of this kind yields, on an aver- 
age, eight barrels of oil, which is not only pure, sweet, and fit 
for lamps, but is also much used externally for bruises, burns, 
and rheumatic pains.
It is generally seen in pairs.
Accord- 
ingly the mate of this animal was observed in St. Keverne Bay, 
on the succeeding day, by the Walsingham packet.
In the 
year 1812, two or three of these fish were caught on the Bright 
ton coast, and afterwards exhibited in London.
5 B- 
streaks 
374 
CORNWALL.
streaks half an inch wide, consisting of two lists of 
dark, between which was one in the middle like 
pearl, spotted with black.
This fish was small; but 
one taken at Plymouth, in the year 1734, weighed 
more than 5001bs.
This species is called sun-fish, 
from its circular form, and from its emitting a lucid 
phosphoric splendour in the dark.
The mackarel is 
caught in great plenty on the southern coast of tins 
county.
The beauty of the fish, when alive, is of 
the first order.
Its colors are strong and brilliant; 
the streaks on the back, of a full, dark, blue green; 
the general ground of a bright yellow green; but as 
the fish grows fainter, and dies, the streaks fade, 
and the blue entirely disappears.
Those delicious 
fish, the red mullet and the John Dory, though 
taken on the coast in great numbers, are rarely 
found eastward of Plymouth.
Near the shores 
conger eels of an immense size, weighing from 60 
to 1201bs.
and upwards, are also caught.
The soldier-crab, or hermit-shrimp, is remarkable 
amongst the shell fish, for taking possession of some 
empty shell, and there fixing its habitation as se- 
curely as though it were its own native dwelling.
— 
Oysters are extremely plentiful; but the best are 
found in the creeks of Constantine parish, on the 
river Hel. This fish has the power of closing the 
two parts of its shell, with prodigious force, by 
means of a strong muscle at the hinge; and Carew 
tells us of one whose shell being opened as usual at 
the time of flood, three mice eagerly attempted to 
seize it; but the oyster clasping fast its shell, killed 
them all.
Borlase was also informed, by a clergy- 
man, that a fisherman had observed a lobster at- 
tempt to get at an oyster several times ; but as soon 
as the former approached, the oyster shut his shell : 
at length the lobster, having waited with great at- 
tention till the oyster opened again, made shift to 
throw a stone between the gaping shells, then sprang 
upon his prey, and devoured it.
Sea-nettles abound on almost every rock on the 
coast.
They derive their name from the touch of 
some of them affecting the hand similarly to a land- 
nettle.
Sailors, however, call them blubbers.
They 
vary in colour, from the finest scarlet to the deepest 
purple, and are beautifully powdered with yellow 
specks.
They fix themselves to the rocks by clasp - 
ers of great strength, and continually wave their 
arms, or feelers, in search of food.
There are many 
varieties of these extraordinary creatures, and all of 
them are extremely beautiful.
They swim in an 
oblique position, but very slowly, and promote their 
rest or motion by the action of their feelers.
— The 
bone of the cuttle, or ink-fish, is often found on the 
shores of Mount's Bay; and the fish itself is very 
frequently taken, in nets, on every part of the coast.
The body is flatfish, from about 5 to 8 inches long, 
and \{ thick, spreading at the sides into a thin, tri- 
angular, fleshy substance, which perforins the office 
of fins.
The tail is obtuse; the head globular; and 
its mouth like the beak of a parrot.
The term cuttle 
was probably derived from th« Latin scutum, a shield, 
applied to the bone which grows in the middle of the 
back of this fish, and which, among other uses, is 
employed by artificers in polishing silver.
The ap- 
pellation of ink-fish arose from its having the power 
to emit a black liquid like ink, when endeavouring to 
escape from any imminent danger.
The seal, or sea-calf, frequently found in the caves 
on these shores, is so denominated from its head 
bearing some resemblance to that of a calf.
Its 
pectoral fins are somewhat similar to the fore feet of 
quadrupeds, and have five toes connected with a 
membrane, with which it is said to hurl stones at its 
pursuers : the tail is fixed horizontally.
The general 
length of the body is from 5 to 7 feet.
The flesh is 
sometimes eaten by the poorer inhabitants.
Birds.] — In the heraldic work of Upton, written 
as far back as the year 1440, the Cornish chough — 
known by naturalists as that species of the graatfu* 
which is distinguished by its red feet and bill — is 
noticed as abounding in this county ; but it is now 
somewhat scarce.
Many of the Cornish gentry for- 
merly adopted this bird as an armorial bearing.
— 
This bird, however, is not peculiar to Cornwall: it 
is found amongst the Alps, in the Island of Candia, 
in the Cyclades, on the coast of Cork, in Wales, 
and in some few other places.
It generally weighs 
about 12 or 13 ounces, and is in length, from the tip 
of the bill to the end of the tail, seventeen inches, 
but to the end of the claws sixteen inches; and its 
breadth, when the wings are expanded, is thirty - 
three inches .and a half.
Its cry is like that of a 
jack daw, but more hoarse, and the bird itself is of 
the same shape, though almost as large as a crow.
Its bill, legs, and feet, are red ; but the feathers all 
over the body are black.
It is remarkable for the 
unusual softness of its voice when it applies for 
meat, to those who commonly feed and fondle it ; 
and, on the contrary, it has a frightful shriek at the 
approach, of any thing strange.
It is kept tame 
about the houses, and will steal and hide money, or 
any shining showy things that fall in its way ; though 
it is not quite so unlucky as a jackdaw.
It builds 
its nest upon inaccessible cliffs, and in the middle 
of the steepest rocks.
Some people call it the 
slander of the country; but the ancient inhabitants 
were of a different opinion, for, as has been already 
stated, they bore these birds in their heraldic coats.
Of sea and water fowls, here are coots, sanderlings, 
sea-larks, sea pies, and puffins, in abundance.
The 
last are exceedingly fat; and, from their fishy taste, 
they are sometimes salted and eaten as fish.
All 
sorts of gulls, mews, tarrocks, gannets, murres, 
herons, bitterns, lapwings, curlews, barnacles, and 
shaggs, which, in the north, are called cranes and 
didapers, are in great plenty.
In the winter of 
1810, an eagle was shot on Tredake, in Lanteglos, 
near Fowey, whilst feeding on the carcass of a 
sheep.
It was three feet long, from the extremity of 
its bill to the tail.
The expansion of its wings was 
six feet ten inches.
Its body, neck, and head, were 
brown, their plumage elegantly varied with shades 
of 
CORNWALL.
375 
of darker brown.
When separately examined, the 
feathers on its head and neck were narrow and sharp- 
pointed, and white, except their points, which were 
very brown.
The feathers on its body were white, 
diversified with pale brown ; their extremities were 
very dark brown.
The feathers in the pinions of its 
wings were black ; those next to them were brown, 
and the rest white, here and there shaded with pale 
brown; their extremities dark brown.
The feathers 
in its tail were fourteen inches long 1 , almost all white, 
spotted partially with light brown; their extremities 
very dark brown.
Its thighs were covered with 
reildish brown feathers, and its legs partly with 
feathers of the same colours.
Its feet were yellow, 
its toes armed with long, curved, black talons.
Its 
bill was curved and black; and from the appearance 
of its bill, talons, and feathers, the bird was young.
When this mighty aerial adventurer descended on 
the sheep's carcass, the magpies and crows, which 
were feeding thereon, forsook tbeir prey, in haste, 
with shrill chatter, and dreadful cries, and sought 
shelter in the nearest trees and thickets.
The golden-crested wren is the least bird seen 
in this county.
It is greatly admired for its beauti- 
ful saffron colour, and scarlet crest, as well as for 
the smallness of its body.
The green Avood-pecker 
is also a beautiful bird, remarkable for a vermilion 
crown on the top of its head, and for the various 
shades of green in the body and wiiigs.
The pitte- 
ril of Catesby, or the little paterel of Edwards, is 
sometimes met with in Cornwall.
This bird is also 
called the storm-finch : Catesby in describing 
it, says, it is about, the size of a chaffinch, 
and that the whole bird, except the rump, which is 
white, is of a dusky brown colour, the hack being 
somewhat darker than the belly.
The bill is half 
an inch long, slender, dark brown, and crooked at 
the end ; upon opening the head, the nostrils were 
found to consist of two parallel tubes, running half 
way up the mandible of the bill, and forming a pro- 
tuberance thereon.
The wings extended an inch 
beyond the tail, and the legs were slender, with 
webbed feet, and a small claw or nail on each heel, 
without a toe.
They rove all over the Atlantic 
Ocean, and are seen on the coasts of America, as 
well as on those of Europe, many hundred leagues 
JVom the shore.
Their appearance, as the sailors 
believe, forebodes a storm ; and in reality they are 
never seen except the sea is in agitation.
They use 
their wings and feet with surprising swiftness (the 
former being long, and similar to those of swallows) 
ami they fly in a direct line.
They are generally 
seen skimming on the surface of the waves when 
they are most in agitation.
Mr. Edwards thinks it 
strange that this bird should subsist at such a dis- 
tance from land, where it cannot rest but on the 
water ; for it never appears near the shore, or ships, 
but in tempestuous weather.
These birds flutter so 
near the surface of the water, that they seem to walk 
upon it ; and some think they are called peterels 
from St. Peter's walking on the sea.
The singing 
birds in this county are, thrushes, blackbirds, 
throstles, and the much larger and better colour- 
ed missel-bird, or shrite, which in this county is 
called the holm-thrush.
The Cornish call the 
holly-tree, holm ; and this bird derives its name 
from its feeding on holly berries in the winter- 
Here are also green and brown linnets, goldfinches, 
ruddocks, bulfinches, and larks ; but what is very 
remarkable, no nightingales have been found in 
this county.
Swallows are the principal birds of passage ; but, 
sometimes, the merops apiaster, or bee-eater, is 
found here ; a bird which is rarely seen in England.
In the year 1807, two of these birds were shot, in 
the parish of Madron.
At Stratton,in the summer of 
1813, a white bird, rather larger than a thrush, and 
resembling a cuckoo, was taken up in a very ex- 
hausted state.
The Rev. John King, who took it 
up, preserved it, and afterwards presented it to the 
president of the Royal Society ; and it has since 
been deposited in Bullock's Museum.
Its feet were 
adapted for climbing, with the long feathers of the 
thigh reaching to the toes.
It was probably a de- 
generate variety of the common cuckoo.
Insects, &c] — In Cornwall there are more of 
those insects which require moderate warmth, than 
in any other part of England ; of which the smaller 
are food to the larger, and these serve to nourish 
birds and reptiles.
The number of insects belong- 
ing to the water, is probably greater than of those 
on the land.
The polypes of Cornwall are found in 
great numbers enclosed in alcyoniums, coralines, 
corals, marbles, and other stones ; as also in some, 
branchy fucuses ; for when these are fixed on the 
rock on which they grow, they have a most beauti- 
ful bluish purple at the extremity of the branches ; 
but, taken out of the water, they appear of the brown 
common sea-Avreck colour, which may probably 
proceed from the polypes, or at least some other 
animalcules, contracting themselves into their cells 
as soon as taken out of their element.
In fact there 
is scarcely any plant or soft stone in the sea Avithout 
some polype or other in it.
The alcyonium is of a 
mediate nature, between the herbaceous and horny 
submarine.
It has a fleshy appearance, and is some- 
times as hard as gristle.
It is not always of the 
same shape, though for the most part tubular, and 
generally inhabited by animalcules.
Of the reptiles in this county, the adder is 
amongst the most remarkable : its bite is attended 
Avith instant SAvelling ; and, if a remedy be not im- 
mediately applied, it is very dangerous.
Snakes 
have been killed here, upAvards of four feet long.
The country people have observed tAvo sorts ; one 
of Which has a Avhite garland round its neck, and a 
sharp tail, like the point of a rush ; and the other 
has a yelloAV garland, with a shorter and blunter 
tail.
There is another species of serpents, which 
the people here call the long-cripple ; it is thought 
to be the sloAV-Avorm or deaf-adder of some authors ; 
its bite is poisonous, though not so bad as that of 
1 the 
376 
CORNWALL.
the viper.
Some years ago, there was found among 
a parcel of sea plants, a sea-slug, as smooth and 
slimy as the land slua;, pointing forth its eyes on its 
feelers ; it moved like the dew snail, or land slug ; 
but it had the peculiarity of emitting a most beauti- 
ful purple colour.
A long worm has been met with 
near Careg-killas, in Mount's Bay, somewhat re- 
sembling the eel species, and as slender as a wheat 
straw : it measured five feet in length, and was so 
tender that It could not well be moved without 
breaking ; however, in the water it could contract 
itself to half its length.
Shrubs and Plants.] — An opinion was formerly 
entertained, that no sweet-briar was to be found in 
Cornwall ; a vulgar error, which was removed by 
Borlase.
The ancient inhabitants held the elder- 
tree in such high esteem, that several of the villages 
of the county have derived their names from it.
Fig-trees have been mentioned as growing in a wild 
state in the parish of St. Gorran ; but it is more 
probable that they had formerly belonged to a garden.
Atthistime the tig-tree appears to be naturalized in a 
higher degree, iu the parish of Gwythian, than, per- 
haps, in any other part of the island.
In the 
church-yard there is a considerable groupe, and 
many are found in the neighbouring hedge-rows.
The u/ex nanus, a furze of humble growth, called the 
dwarf, or Cornish, furze, though not peculiar to this 
county, is abundant, on the downs.
It flowers with 
profusion and beauty, at the same time as the com- 
mon heath, with which it is generally intermixed.
On the sea-coasts we find the stone-crop tree, or 
shrubby glasswort, called by Ray, bUtum J'rut icosum 
Kiaritimum, vermiculaiis fruticosum dictum : this is 
propagated in the nurseries for sale, chiefly because 
the leaves remain all the year, for the flowers are 
•mail, and not beautiful ; it is propagated by suck- 
ers, will thrive almost any where, and may be trans- 
planted either in spring or autumn.
Tamarisks, as 
large as good-sized willow-trees, are.
found in 
a hedge-row which surrounds an enclosure near 
Landeweduack.
Bishop Grindall is said to have 
imported the tamarisk into England, in the time of 
Queen Elizabeth.
The common sea-rush (arundo 
arenaria) abounds on the sea-coast, where it is 
planted as the only mean6 of preventing, by its ex- 
tensively-spreading fibrous roots, the produce of the 
moving sand-heaps.
This rush was formerly known 
by the name of starre, or bent ; and, as far back as 
the year it>95, an act of Parliament was passed in 
Scotland, to prevent persons who were in the habit 
•£ collecting it, for the purpose of making baskets 
* In addition to the plants above noticed, we transcribe the 
following, from Camden : — 
Agaricus amncosus, (varietas) (Withering).
A variety of 
broad- gi I led Agaric ; at Pendarves.
caseus.
(Withering).
Cream Cheese Agaric; at 
Pendarves.
1 rimosii-i.
(Withering).
Broad-gilled Agaric 
irees at Pendaives.
and mats, from plucking it up, and thereby loosen- 
ing the sands, to the injury and loss of the land- 
owners.
In 174-2, also, a clause was introduced 
into an act of Parliament, extending generally to the 
north-west coast of England, with the same preven- 
tive view.
On the sea-coast of Cumberland, how- 
ever, some persons, churning a prescriptive right of 
cutting bent, are exempted from the operation of 
this clause.
The sun-dew, or ros solis, is frequently 
found in this county.
It receives its name from a 
speck of water that remains in the middle of the 
leaf, on the driest day.
It is very fatal to sheep, 
for when they feed upon it, they pine and die ; for 
which reason the farmers, in other places, name it 
the red-drop, But this is not owing to the nature 
of the herb itself, but to an insect, or worm, which 
feeds upon the plant.
It grows in shallow, marshy 
grounds, and on some of the moors.
A kind of 
mercury, with leaves like spinach, called by Ray, 
Merciuialis annuaglabra vulgaris, met with in this 
county, has been found effectual in curing sore 
breasts ; and arsmart (Persicaria) when distilled, 
has been found excellent in gravelly .complaints.
Marsh asparagus grows on the cliffs at the Lizard 
Point, though Miller seems to have entertained the 
opinion that it was not to be found in a wild state iit 
England : and indeed it may not, perhaps, be found 
in the eastern or northern parts of the island, where 
the temperature of the air is much colder than at 
the Lizard.
The black whortle-herry grows in the 
spongy parts of heathy grounds in this county : they 
are by some called bilberries, and black-worts ; 
and are eaten with cream, or milk, and made into 
tarts, in the north of England, where they abound.
It is said, a pleasant wholesome wine may he made 
of the expressed juice of the fruit, with a small ad- 
mixture of sugar.
Common fennel grows sponta- 
neously, in the extreme parts of Cornwall, n«ar the 
sea.
Eringo, or sea-holly, grows plentifully on the 
loose dry sand, above high-water mark, between 
Penzance and Marazion, as well as in other places.
The candied root has been ascertained to be a great 
restorative, and is of course in high esteem.
In some 
little islands, or slightly-covered rocks, on this 
coast, a very remarkable circumstance is to be ob- 
served : for one year nothing can be seen growiug 
on them but the tree sea- mallow, and the next year 
only sea-beets, and in this manner they grow alter- 
nately ; for which regular succession, it is difficult 
to assign a cause.* 
It deserves to be noticed, that several of the rarer 
plants which are found in Cornwall, are, correctly 
speaking, 
; under 
Agaricus xerampeliuus.
Purple Agaric ; in firwoods at Clow- 
ance.
Alisma ranunculoides.
Lesser water Piamtain ; in the marcb 
at Marazion.
Althaea officinalis.
March Mallow ; on the shore near Marazion.
and Penzance.
Ancluisa sempervirtns.
Evergreen Alkanet; by the side of the 
walk from Fowey to the ca^tU'.
Anethumr 
CORNWALL.
377 
speaking, natives of the south-eastern parts of Eu- 
rope.
Ligusticum cornubiense is found on Mount 
Athos ; sibthorpia Europaea, in Crete anil Thessaly ; 
Anethum Fceniculum, Fennel ; on sea-banks and cliffs between 
Lalanl and St. Ives, near Marazion and at the 
Land's End.
Anthemis maritima.
Sea Chamomile ; on the shore opposite 
Fowey.
Antirrhinum minus.
Least Toad-flax ; in sandy fields, in a 
bottom in Sancred.
' repens.
Creeping Toad-flax ; in hedges near 
Penryn.
Apium grave-olens.
Smallage ; in a bog near Marazion.
Aquilegia vulgaris.
Columbines; near Goldsithney.
Arenaria marina.
Sea Spurry ; at Portreath.
— veraa.
Mountain Chickweed ; on a wet bank, three 
miles and a half from the Land's End.
Asplenium lanceolatum.
Spear Spleenwort ; on old walls 
and rocks about St. Ives, on a stony bank at 
St. Stephen's, and elsewhere.
marinum.
Sea Spleenwort ; on rocks near the sea.
Trichomanes.
Common black Maidenhair, on Bo- 
connoc church, and elsewhere.
Avena nuda.
Naked Oats, or Pilcorn ; in fields near the 
Land's End.
Bartsia viscosa.
Marsh Eye-bright or Cow-wheat; on moist 
ground near Boconnoc, Plengwary, Cosgarne, 
the Land's End, &c.
Beta maritima.
Sea Beet ; on Mullion Gull Rocks in Mount's 
Bay, and Godrwy Island in St. Ives Bay.
Brassica oleracea.
Sea Cabbage ; on the shore near Fowey, 
Penzance, and elsewhere.
Briza minor.
Small Quake-grass ; near Penzance, plentifully.
Bryum polyphyllum.
Many-leaved Bryum ; on a rock in 
Rook wood-grove, Boconnoc.
tortuosum.
Frizzled Bryum; near Boconnoc.
Calendula arvensis.
Field Marigold; on the shores of the 
harbour at Falmouth.
(Withering).
Campanula hederacea.
Tender Ivy-leaved Bell-flower ; on 
moist places about Boconnoc and elsewhere.
Cardamine hirsuta.
Hairy Ladies'-smock ; common.
Cheiranthus sinuatus.
Sea Stock or July flower; on the coast.
Chelidonitim Glaucium.
Yellow-horned Poppy ; on the shore 
between Penzance and Marazion.
Cb\rori\a pulcketla.
Small Chironia ; on the north coast on the 
downs, at Port Owen, near the sea, (Withering.) 
Chrysosplenitim oppositifolium.
Opposite-leaved Golden 
Saxifrage ; in moist places common.
Clavaria muscoidts.
Pointed Clavaria : at Pendarves.
Cochlearia officinalis.
Common Scurvy-grass ; on the sea 
shore and mountainous parts.
Conferva albida.
Whitish Conferva ; in a rivulet on the west 
of Marazion.
clongata.
Pointed Conferva ; on submarine rocks 
and stones.
— equisetifolia.
Horse-hair Conferva ; at Penzance, 
jitniculacca.
Fennel Conferva ; on rocks and stones 
in the sea.
fulva.
Tawny Conferva ; on Fuci and Subularia, in 
Mount's Bay.
•   interttxta, (Withering.) Interwoven Conferva ; on 
the coast.
• nigrescens.
Blackish Conferva ; on rocks and stones 
in the sea near St. Ives, and at Polkerris.
nodutosa, (varietas.) A variety of knotted Conferva ; 
at Menabilly.
parasitica.
Feathered Conferva; on Fuci on the 
shore everywhere.
pellucidu.
Pellucid Conferva ; on rocks and stones 
in the sea.
VOL, I.
— NO.
27.
corrigiola littoralis, on the Bosphorus ; and panicum 
dactylon, in Greece.
In this county, herbs and plants for the kitchen- 
garden, 
Erica vagans 
Conferva polymoi-pha.
Palmated Conferva ; on Fuci, at Pen- 
zance, and in the Fawey river.
spongiosa.
Sponge Conferva; on rocks and stones 
in the sea.
verticillata.
Verticillate Conferva; at Polkerris.
villosa.
Hairy Conferva ; on rocks and stones in the 
sea.
Convolvulus Soldanella.
Sea Bindweed; near the sea coast.
Cotyledon Umbilicus.
Common Navel-wort, or Wall Penny- 
wort ; about Boconnoc and elsewhere plenti- 
fully.
Crainbe maritima.
Sea Cole-wort, or Cliff Kale ; near Meva- 
gissy.
Crithmum maritimum.
Sea Samphire ; on the shore at Piran 
Uthno, on the cliffs at St. Just's, and on Scilly 
Island.
Cuscuta Epithynntm.
. Lesser Dodder; on Gorze, between 
Penzance and the Land's End.
Daucus maritimus, (Withering).
Sea Daucus, on the western 
coast.
Drosera longifolia.
Long-leaved Sun-dew ; in Torr valley on 
Bradoc-downs.
rotundifolia.
Round-leaved Sun-dew ; in Torr valley, 
on Bradoc-downs, in bogs at Ludgvanlez, and 
at Senan on Torvorian common.
Fir-leaved Heath; on Goonhilly downs, be- 
tween Helsdon and the Lizard point, at the 
Land's End, and near Pendarves, on the road 
from Cambourn to Hayle, in the low ground 
between Trcgothnan and Connor downs.
Eryngium maritimum.
Sea Holly or Eringo; on loose sand 
near the bri*ge at Gwylhien, and between 
Penzance and Marazion.
Euphorbia paralias.
Sea spurge ; on the coast.
peplis.
Small purple sea spurge, on the seashore 
between Penzance and Marazion.
Portlandica.
Portland spurge ; on the shore.
Exacum filiforme.
Marsh Centory ; orj_a rotten ground be- 
tween St. Ives and.
Penzance, at the Land's 
End, and elsewhere.
Fucus aruleatus.
Prickly Fucus ; ?
,, .
it -.ir i J c c on the coast.
alutiis.
Winged I' ucus ; i 
albidus.
White Fucus ; on submarine rocks and stones.
angustifolius, (Stackhouse.) Narrow-leaved Fucus ; at 
Portreath, near St. Ives.
bulbosus.
Bulbosus Fucus; on the shore everywhere.
CQiialiculatus.
Furrowed Fucus ; in the Fawty river.
capillaris.
Capillary Fucus ; on submarine stones near 
the shore.
~ '    cartilagineus.
Cape weed or Fucus ; \ 
ciliatus.
Ciliated Fucus; ( 
concatenatus.
Chain Fucus; 
coccineus.
Scarlet Fucus ; ) 
confervoides, (Stackhouse).
Rough Fucus; at Mena- 
billy and Fowey.
• corneus.
Horny Fucus ; ~i 
crispatus.
Crisped Fucus ; \- on submarine rocks.
diff'usvs.
Diffuse Fucus; } 
digi tutus.
Sea Girdles or Hangers ; on the coast.
edulis, (Withering).
Eatable Fucus ; common.
esculentus.
Esculent Fucus ; 
fibrosus.
Fibrous Fucus ; 
filum.
Thread Fucus; 
gigantinus, (Withering.) Gigantic Fucus; \~\ 
Itolosetaceus.
Prickly Fucus ; 
lanceolatus, (Stackhouse).
Lanceolate Fucus; 
ligulatus.
Ligulated Fucus ; .
' J 
5 c Fucus 
on the coast.
on the 
coast.
378 
CORNWALL.
garden, are ready for use early in the spring, and 
with a little care, subsist all the winter, even when 
pot herbs of all kinds are destroyed by the frost in 
coast.
Fucus linearis.
Narrow-leaved Fucus ; on rocks and stones 
in the sea at Falmouth haven, and on the Geer, 
a rock near Penzance.
loreus.
Sea Thongs ; at Crimble passage, near Mount 
Edgcumbe, and at Mount's Bay.
nutans.
Flote Fucus or Gulfweed ; on the shore near 
Falmouth.
iiodicaulis.
Knoted-stalked Fucus; on the coast at 
Penzance, and at Acton castle.
— — — nodosus.
Knotted Fucus; in the Fawey river.
pinnutijidus.
Pinnalifid Fucus; on the shore near 
Mt. Edgcumbe.
pinnatus.
Pinnated Fucus ; on submarine rocks and 
stones everywhere.
- pirmtcus.
Pygmy Fucus ; > h 
rubens.
Ked r ucus ; 5 
saccharinus .
Ssveet Laver or Sea Belts ; on submarine 
rocks and stones.
sanguineus.
Dock-leaved Fucus ; 
siliculosus; (Stackhouse).
Lesser podded • 
Fucus; ' 
siliquosus.
Podded Fucus ; 
spiralis.
Spiral Fucus ; 
tamuriscifolius.
Tamarisk-leaved Fucus ; on subma- 
rine rocks and stones, near Marazion, and else- 
where.
thrix, (Stackhouse).
Hair-like Fucus ; at Penzance, 
and at Acton Castle.
tomentosus.
Woolly Fucus ; on the coasts, on the 
long rock between Marazion and Penzance, 
and at Menabilly.
• — tuberculatus, (Hudson).
Round Fucus; on subma- 
rine rocks and stones near St. Ives, and at Ac- 
ton Castle.
variabilis, (Withering).
Variable Fucus ; on rocks 
and stones in the sea.
Gentiana campestris.
Vernal Dwarf Gentian ; in mountain- 
ous pastures about Piran round.
Geranium maritimum.
Sea Crane's-bill ; on sandy and gra- 
velly places near the sea at Penzance.
sanguineiwi.
Bloody Crane's-bill ; on rocks near 
the sea.
Gnaphalium dinicum.
Mountain Cudweed, or Cat's-foot ; in 
dry mountainous pastures.
Helvella cJavata." Club Helvella; under) 
beech-tro?s ; > at Pendarves.
fuliginosa.
Sooty Helvella ; ) 
Hern'mia glabra.
Smooth Rupture-wort ; on gravelly ground 
at the Lizard Point.
Hesperis inodora.
Scentless Dame-wort ; about Falmouth.
Hypericum Amlrosaemum.
Tutsan or Park-leaves ; near Pen- 
gwerrv.
elodts.
Marsh St. Peter' s-wort ; on boggy grounds 
and watery places near the Land's End, and on 
Bradoc Downs.
Hydnum auriscalpium.
Ear-picker Hydnum ; under fir- 
trees, at Pendarves.
Hypnum lucens.
Shining Hypnum; in Torr valley on Bra- 
doc Downs.
Illecebium verticitlatum.
Verticillate Knot-grass ; in watery 
places near springs, between St. Columb and 
St. Michael's, about Penzance, and on the rocks 
at Castle Treryn.
Elecampane ; in meadows and wet pastures 
near St. Ives.
Sea hard rush ; on the sandy hills at Gwylhien, 
and on the hills at Philac.
Inula heknium 
J uncus aculus.
the eastern counties.
Esculent roots are not hurt 
neither by the canker or frost, till the plants of the 
spring render them unnecessary.
flowers will 
thrive 
Lepidium didymum.
Procumbent Pepper-wort ; on rubbish 
about Truro and Penryn.
rudcrale.
Narrow leaved wild Cress or Dittander ; 
on the sea shore, and on rubbish about Truro.
Ligusticum Cornubicnse.
Cornwall Saxifrage ; about Bodmin.
Lichen atro-albus.
Mixed Lichen ; on some Druidical stones 
at Duloe.
atro-rirens.
Greenish Lichen ; on rocks about the 
Wringcheese, and elsewhere.
calcareus.
Calcareous Lichen 
centrifugus.
Spreading Lichen ; 
Juscus.
Brown Lichen 
wuei 
"4 
on rocks on Tem- 
ple-moor.
— fuliginosus.
Rust-spangled Lichen; in Rookwood- 
grove.
globiferus.
Globe Lichen; on small rocks and stones 
near Arthur's Bed, and the Wringcheese.
jubatus /3 chalybeiformis.
A variety of Wiry Lichen ; 
on rocks on Temple-moor.
late virens.
Green Lichen ; on trees in Boconnoc 
Park.
Lanatus.
Woolly Lichen ; on rocks and stones.
niger.
Black Lichen ; at St. Ives, and elsewhere.
oederi.
Oeder's Lichen; on rocks ") rp.
, 
omphalodes.
Purple Lichen ; on rocks [  on ' em P le " 
paschalis.
Incrusted Lichen ; on stones ) m oor.
plumbeus.
Bluish Lichen ; on trees at Boconnoc.
polyphyllus.
Smooth Lichen ; on a rock near the 
Wringcheese.
resupinatus.
Reversed Lichen ; near Boconnoc.
siliquosus.
Podded Lichen ; on a rock on the shore 
opposite Fowey.
sylvaticus.
Wood Lichen ; in Rookwood Grove, Bo- 
connoc.
' vulpinus.
Fox Lichen ; on trees.
Linum angustifolium.
Narrow-leaved wild Flax ; in pastures 
by the sea side at St. Ives, and at Truro.
Littorella lacustris.
Small Littorella ; in a watery place near 
Penzance.
Lycoperdon aurantiacum, (Withering).
Orange Lycoperdon ; 
under trees at Pendarves.
Melittis Melissophyllum.
Common bastard Balm ; by the 
road side between Liskeard and Callington.
Mentha rutundifolia.
Round-leaved Mint; by the road side 
between Trengoff and Panter's Bridge, War- 
leggon.
Menyanthes trifoliata.
Buckbean ; in a moist place uear 
Colwood, near Boconnoc.
Mercurialis annua.
French Mercury ; in barren places.
Myrica Gale.
Gale, Sweet Willow, or Dutch Myrtle; on 
Bradoc Downs.
(Enanthe crocata.
Hemlock Dropwort; in damp places at 
Boconnoc.
Osmunda regalis.
Flowering Fern, or Osmund Royal ; about 
Boconnoc, Bradoc, Cosgarne, and Mara/ion.
Panicum dactylon.
Creeping panic grass ; on a sandy bank 
between Penzance and Marazion.
Pedicularis pulustris.
Marsh Lousewort ; by a brook near 
Colwood.
Phallus caninus.
Red-headed Morell ; in a wood near Bo- 
connoc.
impudicus.
Stinking Morell, or Stinkhorns ; in woods.
Phascum piliferum.
Hairy Phascum ; on granite rocks.
repens.
Creeping Phascum ; on apple trees.
Pinguicula lusitanica.
Cornwall Butterwort ; in the marshet 
at Kilkhampton and elsewhere.
Pisum maritimum.
Sea Pea; on the shore near Penzance, 
where the Santolina Maritima grows.
Polygonum 
CORNWALL.
379 
thrive and flourish hero, as well as in any part of 
the island, few of the roots miscarrying through the 
frost ; and in the spring 1 the flowers are so luxuriant, 
that upon the stem of a single polyanthus there 
have been found three hundred and fifty blossoms.
Green-house shrubs also, may be preserved in Corn- 
wall, with less care than in any other part of Eng- 
land, and without artificial heat.
Myrtles are kept 
out in the open air the winter, as well as geraniums 
and foreign jessamine, unless when the cold is ex- 
treme.
It yet remains to be mentioned, that the subma- 
rine plants on the Cornish coast are exceedingly 
beautiful ; and though their number and variety may 
not be equal to those which arc nourished by the 
earth, their firmness of texture, and brilliancy of 
colouring, are probably superior.
They are divided 
into various classes.
In that named Fucus, the grass, 
and sea-wracks, otherwise ore-weed, are enumerat- 
ed.
Two of these, the Fucoides purpureum ele- 
gante plumosum, and the Fucoides rubens varie 
dissectum, of Ray, have their capillary ramifica- 
tions wonderfully distinct, and of a most beautiful 
lake colour.
But the largest and noblest plant of this 
kind, is the Lapathum Marinum Sanguineum, or 
bloody sea-dock, which, when in full season, is 
of a rich blood -colour, and so extremely thin and 
adhesive, that it may be spread on a sheet of pa- 
per, and rolled or folded up with it, without se- 
parating or wrinkling.
One species of this genus 
has been named the sensitive Fucus, from the 
circumstance of its shrinking from the touch of 
the finger, after its edges have been warped by 
exposing it to a small fire ; and when placed on 
a warm hand, it continues waving to and fro like 
an animal struggling for life.
Sponges are often 
found on the sea-shore, fixed to the rocks, shells, 
Polygonum aviculare « maritimum.
Sea Knot-grass, on sandy 
shores, near Penzance.
Polypodium Oreopteris.
Heath Polypody ; about Boconnoc 
and elsewhere plentifully.
Polylrichum abides.
Aloe leaved Polytrichum ; in Reokwood 
Grove.
% 
Rhodiola rosea.
Kosewort ; at the Land's End.
Rosa Eglanteria- Sweet Briar, or Eglantine ; on rocks at the 
Land's End, and at Mount's Bay.
spinosissima.
Burnet Rose ; on Perran Downs.
Ruppia maritima.
Tassel Pondweed, or Sea Tassel grass ; in 
this county.
Salsola/rMr/c<w«.
Shrubby Glasswort ; on the shore.
Saxifraga stcllaris.
Harry Kidneywort ; near Castle Treryn.
Scilla autumnalis .
Lesser Autumnal Star Hyacinth; at'the 
Lizard Point.
— — verna.
Vernal Star Hyacinth, about St. Ive's, and near 
Redruth anil Penzance.
Schoenus albus.
White flowered Rush grass; on Bradoc 
Downs.
mariscus.
Long-rooted Bastard Cyperus ; on bogs 
between Penzance and Marazion.
' — nigricans.
Black Bog-rush ; in Torr valley.
Scrophularia scorodonia.
Batm-leaved Figwort ; near the sea 
shore at St. Ives.
Scutellaria minor.
Lesser Scullcap, or Hooded Willow-herb ; 
in a bog on Bradoc Downs.
or sand : many of these have their parts shooting 
into the shape of curled leaves ; some are branch- 
ed ; others are solid oblong balls, enclosing a 
fishy embrio ; and a fourth species is full of large 
round holes at the top of its tubercles ; the co- 
lour of this kind inclines to purple When taken 
out of the water, but it soon changes to that of the 
common spunge.
v 
Corralines, in great variety, are met with on the 
coast.
They are generally attached to rocks, on 
the sides of which they appear like fringe-work, 
glowing with the strong colouring of the most 
beautiful carpet.
Three sorts of solid white coral 
have also been found on these shores.
One of 
them fixes itself upon stones, and involves them 
with incrustations, resembling the foliaceous turns 
of the liver-wort; another consists of small knotty 
branches, which grow out of each other, like those 
of herbs ; a third kind is found in globular lumps, 
the short sprigs that coat the inside diverging 
from the centre, and terminating at the circum- 
ference in solid protuberances.
Corals of the as- 
troite kind have also been found here, pierced 
with holes resembling stars, from the bottom to the 
top ; these are supposed to have been perforated 
by insects.
Mines and Minerals.] — The minerals of this 
county are its most important produce.
In a nar- 
row slip of barren country, observes the author of 
the General View of Cornwall, where the purposes 
of agriculture would not employ above a few thou- 
sand people, the mines alone support a population 
estimated at nearly 00,000, exclusive of the arti- 
zans, tradesmen, and merchants, in the towns of 
St. Austel, Truro, Penryn, Falmouth, Redruth, 
Penzance, and some others.
The number of men, 
women, and children, deriving their whole subsist- 
Silme amccna.
Sea Catch-fly ; on a rock near Polruan Creek 
near Fowey, and at Portreath.
Sipthorpia curppaa.
Bastard Moneywort ; in a moist place in 
Boconnoc parsonage garden, and elsewhere, 
common.
Sison inundutum.
Least water Parsnip ; in Marazion Marsh.
Spergula subuiata, (Withering).
Ciliated Spurrey ; iti meadows 
and sandy heaths.
Statice Armcria.
Thrift ; on the rocky coasts.
Slellaria uliginosa.
Bog Stitchwort ; in marshes.
Tamarix gatlica.
Tamarisk; on St. Michael's Mount, and 
about the Lizard.
Tragopogon porrifolium.
Purple Goal's beard ; found in this 
county.
Trifolium ornithopoides.
Bird's foot Trefoil ; about Marazion 
and Penzance.
Ulva articulala.
Jointed Laver ; on submarine rocks and 
stones.
coccinea.
Scarlet Laver ; on rocks and stones in the sea 
near Plymouth and Falmouth.
dichotoma.
Forked Laver ; on rocks and stones.
pavonia.
Striated Laver; on the coast.
Urtica pilulifera.
Roman Nettle; in a shady ditch at 
Velinvran.
Valeriana rubra.
Red Valerian ; on walls and rubbish.
Zostera marina fi.
A variety of Grass Wrack ; on the coast.
euce 
380 
CORNWALL.
ence from the mines, by raising the ore, washing, 
stamping, and carrying it, lias been estimated at 
14,000.
In the year 1810, the quantity of copper 
ore raised and sold in this county was 76,281 tons ; 
estimated to produce 6856 tons 15 ewt.
and 27 lbs.
of staudard copper ; which, at an average of 
10/.
2s.
Qd. per ton of ore, was equal to 769,903/.
17s.
6d.
Before we proceed, it is necessary to state the 
geological fact, that the whole of this county is com- 
posed of strata which exhibit marks of the most an- 
cient formation ; no organic remains of consequence, 
or extraneous substances, in a petrified state, having 
ever been found therein.
It may fairly be considered, that the mineralogi- 
cal substances of Cornwall are more abundant than 
those of any other country of the same extent in the 
world ; and their variety and beauty open a pro- 
portionately extensive field to the researches of the 
scientific inquirer.
In geological description, gra- 
nite, which is a compound of felspar, quartz, and 
mica, claims precedence of notice.
This substance, 
generally known by the name of moor-stone, in 
Cornwall, forms the chain of mountains, which, 
commencing at Dartmoor, runs through this county 
to the sea at the Land's End, and to the northward and 
southward goes into primitive schistus.
The varie- 
ties found here are almost infinite, both in respect to 
the size and colour of their component parts.
But 
the most decided characteristic of the Cornwall gra- 
nite over that of other places, is the largeness and 
perfect form of its crystals of felspar.
Occasionally 
it is interspersed with granitines and granitell, and 
is here incumbent upon primitive schistus, that sub- 
stance being found on each side of it.
When first 
raised, it is soft, and may be worked without 
much difficulty ; but afterwards it becomes ex- 
tremely hard.
Many of the aggregated stones of Cornwall are 
intermixed with shorle, which is here called cockle.
The elvan (probably so called from Hel-vaen, i.
e. 
stone common to brooks) is a close gritty kind of 
stone, common to this county, resembling a coarse 
free-stone, but extremely hard.
This is generally 
of a bluish grey colour, and yields great quantities 
of water.
It seldom exists in strata, but is mostly 
found in detached angular masses ; which, when of 
convenient size, make excellent stones for grinding 
colours.
Another very common stone is the killas, 
of which there arc several varieties ; some more 
friable, and some more laminated, than the rest.
The strata, or " country," as the miners say, of 
the Gwennap mines, are mostly granite, with killas 
above on the surface.
There is a decomposing va- 
riety of the latter substance, which is called ftukan.
It is of a white colour, very soft, and crumbles al- 
most to powder between the fingers.
Here also a 
substance called gossan abounds, which is always 
regarded by the miners as indicating a rich lode of 
ore at no great distance.
This is of a reddish or 
yellowish- brown colour, amorphous, and composed 
chiefly of oxyde of iron, mixed with argillaceous and 
other particles.
Most of the lodes in Gwennap are 
accompanied with gossan.
In the country between Liskeard and the Tamar, 
on the south-west, are some quarries of slate, which 
supply the inhabitants of Plymouth with covering 
for their houses, and for the purpose of exportation.
Several quarries have also been opened at other 
places ; but the best covering slate in Cornwall, or, 
perhaps, in England, is procured at Denyball, nearly 
two miles south of Tintagel, in the north part of the 
county.
The quarry is about three hundred yards 
long, one hundred broad, and almost forty fathoms 
in depth.
The slate rock is disposed in strata, dip- 
ping to the south-west, and preserving that inclina- 
tion from top to bottom.
It is first met with at about 
three feet below the surface of the ground, in a loose, 
shattered state, with short and frequent fissures ; 
the laminas of unequal thickness, but not horizontal.
Thus it continues to the depth of ten or twelve fa- 
thoms, when a more firm and useful stone is pro- 
cured, the largest pieces of which are used for flat 
pavements.
This is called the top-stone, and con- 
tinues for ten fathoms, after which the quality im- 
proves with the increasing depth, till, at the twenty- 
fourth fathom from the surface, the workmen arrive 
at the best kind, called bottom-stone.
The colour 
is grey-blue ; and its texture is so close, that it will 
sound like a piece of metal.
The masses are sepa- 
rated from the rock by wedges, driven by sledges of 
iron, and contain from five to fourteen superficial 
square feet of stone.
As soon as this mass is freed 
by one man, another stone-cutter, with a strong 
wide chissel and mallet, is ready to cleave it to its 
thinness, which is usually about one-eighth of an 
inch : the pieces are generally from a foot square, 
to two feet long, by one wide ; but the flakes 
are sometimes large enough for tables and tomb- 
stones.
Free-stone is found in this county of two sorts ; 
one consisting of sand and argil, the otlver composed 
of sand and quartz.
The purest free-stone, in its 
quality, approximating to the Portland and Bath 
stone, is found in the parishes of Carantoc and the 
Lower St. Columb.
At New Kaye, in the latter 
parish, it may be procured in great quantities, and 
almost of any size.
It lies in a stratum, about 
twelve feet thick, and nearly level with the surface 
of the ground.
Its grit is a small yellowish sand, 
agglutinated.
It is soluble in aquafortis, and imbibes 
water plentifully, but becomes very hard on expo- 
sure to the air.
There are other stones that seem 
of the same texture, but in an immature state, dis- 
persed among the Piran and Gwythian sands, and 
appear to be formed by the accidental mixture of 
sand with a cementing fluid, but not of sufficient 
strength to concrete the stone into a compact 
mass.
The polrudon, or pentowan stone, also of the 
sandy kind, lies in a shelving lode, about fifteen feet 
wide, in irregular masses, of three different colours.
* 2 The 
CORNWALL.
381 
The first and finest has a milk-white ground, thinly 
studded with small purple specks : the second has 
an ash-coloured ground, with large, hut fainter, 
specks of purple : and the third has a yellow ochre- 
ous ground, speckled with purple, but the spots not 
so distinct, with some micaceous talc thinly inter- 
spersed.
Of a still closer grit is the free-stone which 
is raised on Illogau Downs : it is nearly of the same 
texture and colour as the Portland stone ; hut the 
masses are seldom large enough to be formed into 
blocks of more than fifteen or eighteen inches 
square.
In a copper-mine near Redruth, a curious pro- 
duction, called the Swimming-stone, has been dis- 
covered.
It is of a yellowish colour, and consists of 
quartz in right-lined lamina?
as thin as paper, inter- 
secting each other in all directions, but leaving un- 
equal cavities between them.
This cellular struc- 
ture renders the stone so light that it will swim on 
Avater.
Transparent quartz, of grGat beauty, is found in 
this county, crystallized in six-sided pyramids, with 
an hexagonal prism, whose sides correspond with 
those of the pyramids.
In some specimens the prism 
is terminated by pyramids at each end ; in others 
they are joined base to base, without any intervening 
prisms.
The most pellucid are termed Cornish dia- 
monds, and are generally supposed to be the finest 
found in England.
Their specific gravity is from 2.64 
to 2.67.
This is the purest state in which siliceous 
earth is found.
Those which are colourless, are com- 
posed entirely of silex ; but some are stained by me- 
tallic oxydes.
The texture of these.
crystals is vari- 
ous : many are of one uniform consistence through- 
out.
One remarkable kind has hexagonal sheaths, 
described one within the other, a structure which, in 
its origin, has exercised the sagacity of the most in- 
genious geologists.
Crystals of this kind are fre- 
quently found in clusters, with one end fixed in a 
hed of coarser crystal than the shoots, and that bed 
separated from a larger mass of coarser materials, of 
a crystalline nature.
That part of Cornwall which forms the Lizard 
Point is composed of Serpentine and Hornblende of 
the most beautiful colours, including every shade of 
green, from pea-green to almost black, enlivened by 
tints of purple, red, and scarlet.
The serpentine is 
occasionally intersected with veins of the steatites, 
so called from the Greek word for tallow, to which 
it bears some resemblance.
The greatest quantity, 
however, of this curious substance, is found in the 
celebrated soap-rock situated between the Lizard 
and Mullion.
This rock is described, by De Costa, in the fol- 
lowing terms : — " The new soap-rock is at Gew 
Grez, or Cres Cove, in the tenement of Kynanee, in 
Mullion parish ; it is about three miles from Mullion 
* Asbestus is known lo have (he property of resisting fire ; 
and the more downy kinds were by the ancients manufactured 
VOL.
I. NO.
28.
town, and about a mile from the old soap-rock or 
cove, which lies farther southward.
The entrance into 
the creek or cove is very steep, craggy, and horrid ; at 
the right hand (on descending into the creek) the 
hills are crested with naked rocks, or caverns, as the 
Cornish people call them ; the sides have also many, 
but they are small.
About half way down the cove 
a small current of water traverses it in a serpentine 
manner, and discharges itself near the lode or prin- 
cipal vein of the steatites.
On the right hand as 
you descend the cove it grows more craggy and 
much narrower, and a few yards lower, on the same 
side, lies the main vein or lode of steatites ; the va- 
rious sorts are all blended together in spots, some- 
times in greater quantities in one place than in an- 
other." 
The colour of the steatites is whitish, or straw- 
yellow, with streaks or veins of green, red, and pur- 
ple.
When embedded in its matrix, which is the 
serpentine, it may be compressed with the hand, and 
feels wet ; but on exposure to the air, it soon be- 
comes indurated, and feels soapy.
It is found of 
three degrees of purity.
The first, emphatically 
termed the best-best, is most beautifully white.
It 
possesses an absorbent property, and will imbibe 
spots of grease or oil from silk without injuring the 
colours.
This sort is particularly used in the ma- 
nufacturing of porcelain ; its proportions of argil- 
laceous and magnesian earths being similar to the 
artificial mixture employed in making that esteemed 
furniture of our tea-tables.
The whole soap-rock is 
rented by the proprietors of the porcelain manufac- 
tory at Worcester.
It is remarkable, that letters 
written with soap-stone, or French chalk, upon 
glass, though insensibly fixed, are not to he moved 
by washing, but always appear on being moistened 
by the breath.
To a person unacquainted with this 
circumstance, the experiment, performed on a look- 
ing-glass, produces, as it were, a magical effect.
Solid Asbestus is frequently found adhering to the 
pure specimens of the steatites just mentioned ; and 
it is also spread like a thin film of enamel on the surface 
of some rocks exposed to the sea.
Sometimes it is 
found in small masses ; and in that state it will bear 
a high polish, and may be wrought into vases, and 
other ornaments.
This substance resembles the 
ophites, or serpentine marble of the ancients.
Se- 
veral specimens of the fibrous asbestus have been 
discovered in the parish of St. Clear, adhering to 
stones of the killas Jkind, and sometimes running 
through them in a wavy line.
In some samples the 
asbestus is very downy, the filaments from an inch 
to an inch and a half long, and the colour a whitish 
brown : in others the fibres are three inches in length, 
but more round, stony, compact, and heavier, ;>nd 
scarcely at all plumous : a third kind appears like 
the decayed wood of the willow.
In a specimen* 
found 
into a cloth, bearing a distant resemblance to iincn.
This was 
employed to enshroud the dead bodies of princes, that theTr 
5 D » *s'*i» 
382 
CORNWALL.
found in a stone in the church-yard of Landawenack, 
the filaments were Hat and pointed, the colour a bright 
purple, and the gloss silvery.
The filaments were 
extremely small and flexible, and when seen through 
a microscope, seemed to be edged with a soft 
down.
The China-stone, which is obtained in the parish 
of St. Stephen, near St. Austel, forms a principal 
ingredient in all the Staffordshire pottery.
It is a 
decomposed granite, the felspar of which has lost its 
property of fusibility.
Its qualities were acciden- 
tally discovered about half a century ago, and it has 
since been made an article of considerable traffic, 
many ship-loads being sent from Charles-Town 
every year.
At Truro it has been manufactured into 
retorts and crucibles of an excellent nature for re- 
sisting fire.
Many other Cornish stones might be 
employed with success in the manufacturing of por- 
celain.* 
Tin, copper, and some lead, are the principal 
produce of the Cornish mines.
The strata in which 
these metals are found, extend from the Land's End, 
In a direction from west to east, entirely through the 
county into Devonshire, where formerly, and in the 
eastern parts of Cornwall, immense quantities of tin 
were raised ; but the chief seat of mining now lies 
in the neighbourhood, and to the westward, of St.
Austel.
From this place to the Land's End, the 
principal mines are to be found, extending along the 
northern coast, and keeping a breadth of about seven 
miles.
In the parishes of St. Agnes and Peranza- 
boloe, there is a great number of mines, the joint 
produce of which is very great.
Kenwin, Kea, and 
Gwennap, afford considerable quantities of tin.
In 
Gwennap is the mine called Poldice, very ancient 
and deep.
It has yielded sometimes 1000 blocks 
yearly.
It may now be denominated with more 
propriety a copper mine.
In this, and many other 
tin mines, when they get to a great depth, the fin 
wears out and leaves a lode or vein of copper.
Huel Virgin is another instance of this kind.
In 
Redruth, from Huel Pever, a portion of North 
Downs, and some other parts of the parish, tin is 
produced.
In the same parish the ancient mine of 
Treleighwood, though long neglected, will probably 
be worked again.
In Wendron, north-east of Hel- 
stone, the tin mines are numerous and productive.
Between Helstone and Marazion are the tin parishes 
of Sithney, Breage, Germoe, &c.
Immediately be- 
yond Penzance there was formerly a tin mine work- 
ashes might be preserved from mixing with those of the fune- 
ral pile.
Pliny relates that he had seen napkins made with this 
substance, which, after being used, were thrown into the fire, 
and thereby better cleansed than if they had been washed with 
water.
Nets, and reticulated caps for the head, were made of 
this stone : it was also used as wicks for lamps; and it proved 
so retentive of fire, that a golden lamp, dedicated to Minerva 
by Callimac.hus, at Athens, continued burning for a whole year, 
without being extinguished, through its wick paving been made 
of the lint of this stone.
* Clays are found in considerable variety in this county, 
ed under the sea.
The shaft, through which the 
miners went down to work, was situated nearly one 
hundred yards below low-water-mark.
This was the- 
celebrated Wherry Mine, which was given up in the 
year 1798.
" The opening of this mine," observes 
Dr. Maton, " was an astonishingly-adventurous 
undertaking.
Imagine the descent into a mine 
through the sea, the miners working at the depth of 
seventeeu fathoms below the waves ; the rod of a 
steam-engine, extending from the shore to the shaft, 
a distance of nearly 120 fathoms ; and a great num- 
ber of men momentarily menaced with an inunda- 
tion of the sea, which continually drains, in no small 
quantity, through the roof of the mine, and roars loud 
enough to be distinctly heard in it." 
It deserves to be noticed, that most of the metals 
in this county are found in veins or fissures, called 
lodes.
The direction of these fissures is generally 
east and west ; but their breadth, depth, and length, 
are all different.
The sides or walls of the fissures 
do not always consist of the same kind of matter, 
nor are they equally hard ; for though one side of 
the fissure may be a dense stone, the other is some- 
times a soft clay : the walls, however, are, in gene- 
ral, harder than the lode they enclose.
The fissures 
are sometimes nearly perpendicular, but more fre- 
quently dip to the right or left as they descend.
Their course, to whatever point they may be direct- 
ed, is seldom in a straight line, but wavy ; and the 
curves which they form are commonly larger in 
crossing a valley.
Many lesser veins branch from 
the great lodes like the boughs of a tree ; and, as 
they extend in distance, become less, till they ter- 
minate in threads.
The indications of a lode, or 
vein of metal, in a particular spot, are various.
The 
most general are either a barren patch, or a partial 
deficiency of vegetation (but this can only happen 
when a lode is near the surface of the ground) or 
scattered fragments of ore, denominated shodes 
when they lie contiguous to a substance of primor- 
dial formation, such as granite, or primitive schis- 
tus ; or, thirdly, a metallic harsh taste in the neigh- 
bouring springs and rills.
Many rich lodes have 
been discovered by working drifts, f as they are 
called, across the country, from north to south, and 
vice versa, as by either of these directions the lode 
will be cut at right angles.
Tin is the most valuable metal produced in Corn- 
wall.
It is sometimes found collected and fixed, 
and at others loose, and dilated.
In the former 
and many of them are extremely serviceable for different pur- 
poses of art and manufacture.
The yellow clay, in the parish 
of St. Kevern, is considered by artizans as almost equal to any 
other for casting in silver, brass, or lead.
The yellow clay 
procured near Lannant is in much request for building furnaces, 
the bricks that are made with it being supposed to withstand 
the most intense heat longer than any other.
•f In the language of miners, a drift is a trench, or fo^se, cut 
in the ground to a certain depth, resembling a level dug to 
convey water to a mill-wheel.
state 
CORNWALL.
383 
state it is either in the lode or floor, which is an ho- 
rizontal layer of the ore ; or interspersed in grains 
and small masses in the natural rock.
The floors 
are frequently deep, and very rich ; but the expence 
of working them is generally considerable, from the 
quantities of large timber necessary to support the 
several passages of the mine.
The same lode which 
has continued perpendicular for severai fathoms, is 
sometimes found to extend suddenly into a floor.
Tin, in its dispersed form, is either met with in a 
pulverized sandy state, in separate stones, called 
shodes, or in a continued course of stones, which 
are sometimes found together in such numbers, that 
they reach a considerable length, and are found from 
one to ten feet deep.
This course is called a stream ; 
;uid when it produces a large quantity of the metal, 
it is denominated Beuheyl, which is a Cornish word, 
signifying a living stream ; and, in the same figura- 
tive language, when the stone is but lightly impreg- 
nated with tin, it is said to be, just alive : when it 
contains no metal, it is called dead ; and the heaps of 
rubbish are emphatically called deads.
The streams 
are of different breadths, seldom less than a fathom, 
and often scattered, though in different quantities, 
over the whole breadth of the moor, bottom, or val- 
ley, in which they are found : when several streams 
meet, they frequently make a very rich floor of tin.
Huel-Jewell, near the Gwennap mines, is famous 
for producing tin crystals, in the substance called 
by the miners, growan, which is nothing more than 
a decomposed granite, consisting of transparent 
quartz, a small portion of decomposing felspar, and 
silvery mica, partly in a decayed state.
The cry- 
stals are rosin-coloured, and are scattered through- 
out the whole mass in the shape of tetrahedral pyra- 
mids, and their modifications, with, and without, the 
intermediate prism.
Though, in itself, the lightest of metals, tin is, in 
its ore, the heaviest.
It melts with a gentle heat, 
and is sufficiently ductile to spread under the ham- 
mer into leaf, yet it cannot be drawn into wire.
Its 
uses are many and valuable : it is sometimes given 
in medicine, and preparations from thence are em- 
ployed as cosmetics : it is used in varnishing earth- 
enware, in dying scarlet, and, in conjunction with 
quicksilver, it makes the foil which is spread on 
the backs of lookiug-glasses.
It is also employed 
in tinning, or covering the surface of, copper and 
other vessels, by which they are rendered neater in 
appearance, and safer in use : it enters into the 
composition of bell-metal, printers' types, and pew- 
ter ; and is likewise of much service in a variety of 
other manufactures.
The three material points to be considered, in 
digging a mine, are, the removal of the barren rock, 
or rubbish ; the discharge of water (which abounds 
more or less in every mine ;) and the raising of the ore.
Difficulties of course increase with the depth ; and 
the utmost aid of all the mechanical powers is some- 
times ineffectual, when the shafts are deep and nu- 
merous.
Mountains 
t 
Mountains and hills are dug with the most 
convenience, because adits, or drains, may be cut to 
convey the water at once into the neighbouring val- 
lies.
These adits are sometimes continued to the 
distance of one or two miles ; and, though the ex- 
pence is very considerable, they are found to be a 
cheaper mode of getting rid of the water than by 
raising it to the top, especially when there is a great 
flow, and the shafts are very deep.
As it seldom 
happens, however, that a level can be found near 
enough for an adit to be made to it from the bottom 
of a mine, recourse must be had to a steam-engine, 
by which the water is brought up to the adit, be the 
quantity what it may.
As soon as a shaft is sunk to 
some depth, a machine^ called a whim, is erected, to 
bring up either rubbish or ore, which is previously 
broken into convenient fragments, by pick-axes, and 
other instruments.
The whim is composed of a 
perpendicular axis, on which turns a large hollow 
cylinder of timber, called the cage, and around this 
a rope winds horizontally, being directed down the 
shaft by a pulley fixed perpendicularly over the 
mouth of it.
In the axis a transverse beam is fixed, 
at the end of which two horses or oxen are fastened, 
and go their rounds, hauling up a bucket or kibbul 
full of ore, or rubbish, whilst an empty one is de- 
scending.
In some mines the whim is worked by a 
steam-engine.
The ore is blown out of the rock by means of 
gunpowder ; and when raised from the mine, it is 
divided into as many shares (or doles) as there are 
lords and adventurers, and these are measured out 
by barrows, an account of which is kept by a person 
who notches a stick.
Every mine possesses the 
privilege of having the ore distributed on the adja- 
cent fields.
It is generally pounded or stamped on 
the spot, in the stamping-mill.
If full of slime, it is 
thrown into a pit called the bundle, to render the 
stamping more free without choking the grates, 
which are thin plates of iron, about one foot square, 
full of small holes, nearly the size of a moderate pin, 
but sometimes larger, as the different sizes of the 
tin-granules require.
If free from slime, the ore is 
shovelled into a kind of sloping canal of timber, 
called the pass, whence it slides, by its own weight, 
mid the assistance of a small stream of water, into 
the box where the lifters work.
The lifters are 
raised by a water wheel, and are cased at the bottom 
with large masses of iron, nearly one hundred and a 
half in weight, which pound or stamp the ore small 
enough for its passage through the holes of an iron 
grate fixed in one end of the box.
To assist its at- 
trition, a rill of water keeps it constantly wet ; and 
it is carried by a small gutter into the fore-pit, where 
it makes its first settlement, the lighter particles 
running forwards with the water into the middle- 
pit, and thence into the third, where what is called 
the slime settles.
From these pits, the ore is car- 
ried to a large vat, named the keeve, where it is 
washed from all its filth, and rendered sufficiently 
clear for the smelting-house.
The foreman, or prin- 
cipal servant, employed by a company of adven- 
turers, 
38-1 
CORNWALL.
turers, and called (he Captain, keeps the accounts, 
pays and regulates the miners, and manages a va- 
riety of concerns.
The Under-ground Captains, as 
they are styled, have the immediate inspection of the 
works below, or in the mine, survey the ladders and 
ropes, and generally overlook all the different ob- 
jects connected with the working of the mine.
Polgooth, situated about two miles to the south- 
west of St. Austel, is one of the principal tin mines.
The famous wood-tin, as it was called, from the ap- 
pearance of wood which some of the pebbles exhi- 
bited, was formerly found in the Poth steam-works 
in abundance ; but all these works have been wash- 
ed away by violent storms.
It was nearly the co- 
lour of haematites, with fine streaks, or stria?, con- 
verging to the different centres like the radiated 
zeolite.
From the experiments of Klaproth, it was 
found to yield sixty-three parts in a hundred of tin.
The most common state in which tin is found in this 
county, is the calciform, the greater quantity of ore 
being indurated, or glass-like ; and its most preva- 
lent matrix is either an argillaceous or a silicious 
substance, or stone composed of both, and called 
by the miners, caple : none of the calcareous genus 
ever appear contiguous to the ore, except the fluors.
The oxides with which the tin is most frequently 
blended, are.
those of iron and arsenic.
It is known that the tin of Cornwall, of the adja- 
cent Isles of Scilly, and of Devon, constituted a 
branch of commerce between the natives of this 
Island and the Phoenicians and Grecians, several 
centuries prior to the commencement of the present 
era.
The Phoenicians were the first who dealt in this 
article of traffic ; and they are reported by Strabo 
to have been so strenuous in their endeavours to 
conceal from other nations the places whence they 
obtained it, that the master of a Phoenician vessel, 
who supposed a Roman was pursuing him for the 
purpose of discovery, chose to run upon a shoal, and 
suffer shipwreck, rather than permit the tract, to be 
made known, which might enable the inhabitants of 
ether countries to participate in the trade.
How 
long the Phoenicians enjoyed this commerce exclu- 
sively, it would not be easy to determine ; but in the 
days of Herodotus, the Greeks appear to have been 
acquainted with the tin-countries by name only.
— 
They knew that the tin with which they were sup- 
plied by the Phoenician merchants came originally 
from the Cassiterides (the term by which the Phoe- 
nicians comprehended the Scilly Isles, and the 
western coasts of Cornwall) but they were ignor- 
ant of the real situation of those places.
In proc-ss 
of time, however, the Greeks of Marseilles obtained 
a considerable portion of the British trade, and tin 
was among the commodities which they exported 
from Britain.
The Romans, also, notwithstanding 
the precautions of the Phoenicians, at length disco- 
vered the situation of the tin countries; and Publius 
Crassus, some time posterior to the first Punic war, 
was sent to make observations on the tin mines, and 
on the general disposition of the people of this coun- 
try.
When the Romans obtained possession of the 
Island, it is probable that some of the mines were 
worked under the x direction of that enterprising 
people.
During the Saxon dominion, the working of the 
mines was entirely neglected; the frequent intestine 
commotions, and the subsequent wars Avith the 
Danes, allowing no time to attend to peaceful em- 
ployments.
The Normans are said to have derived 
great emolument from working them ; but this seems 
doubtful, as, in the reign of King John, their product 
was so inconsiderable, that the tin-farm amounted 
to no more than 100 marks ; of which sum 6/.
13s.
id.
was paid to the Bishop of Exeter in lieu of his 
claim of one tenth of the produce; and the same sum 
is still paid to that See by the Duke of Cornwall.
— 
In the twelfth century, the Jews were the sole ma- 
nagers of the mines, and memorials of them are still 
to be found in the names of different places in the 
county.
The right of working the mines was then 
wholly possessed by the King, who, being sensible of 
the languishing state of the manufacture, bestowed 
some valuable privileges on the county, by relieving 
it from the operations of the arbitrary forest laws, 
and granting a charter to the tinners.
In the time of Richard, King of the Romans, and 
Earl of Cornwall, the produce of the tin mines was 
immense; and the Jews being farmed out to this 
Prince by his brother, Henry the Third, the interest 
which they possessed was at his disposal.
The tin- 
mines of Spain being also prevented working by the 
Moors, and none discovered in Germany, Malabar, 
or the East Indies, the Earl had nearly the entire 
profit of the trade with all Europe.
The Jews hav- 
ing been banished the kingdom in the 18th of Ed- 
ward the First, the mines were again neglected, till 
the gentlemen of Blackmoor (lords of the seven 
tithings best stored with tin) obtained a charter from 
Edmund, Earl of Cornwall, son of Richard, King of 
the Romans, with more explicit grants of the privi- 
leges of keeping a court of judicature, holding pleas 
of actions, managing and deciding all stannary 
causes, holding parliaments at their discretion, ana 
of receiving as their own due and property, the 
toll-tin; that is, the one fifteenth of all tin raised.
— 
At this period, also, the right of bounding or divid- 
ing tin- grounds into separate portions, for the en- 
couragement of searching for it, seems to have been 
first appointed, or at least adjusted, and more per- 
manently regulated.
By these laws the labouring 
tinner, who might discover tin in waste or uninclos- 
cd grounds, acquired a property in the land, pro- 
vided he gave proper notice in the stannary court to 
the lord of the soil, and registered the intended 
boundaries without opposition.
The bounds limited 
the particular portions of ground to which the claim 
was made, and were formed by digging a small pit 
at each angle, so that a line drawn from each mark- 
ed the extent of the claim.
This custom is yet in 
force, and the bounder is obliged to renew the pits 
every year, by cutting away the turf, and removing 
tlit* 
CORNWALL.
385 
the dirt or rubbish which might otherwise obliterate 
his land marks.
In consideration of these privi- 
leges, the landholders or adventurers obliged them- 
selves to pay to Edmund, and his successors, Earls 
of Cornwall, the sum of four shillings for every hun- 
dred weight of whrte tin; and that the payment of 
the tax might be better secured, it was agreed that 
all tin should be brought to places purposely ap- 
pointed by the Prince, and there weighed, coined, 
and kept, till the duties were paid.
" To this char- 
ter," says Carew, in his survey of this county, 
" there was a seal, with a pick-axe and shovel in 
saltire." The charter was confirmed in the thirty- 
third of Edward the first, and the tinners of Corn- 
wall were then made a distinct body from those of 
Devonshire; though before they had been accustom- 
ed to assemble on Hengston Hill every seventh er 
eighth year, in order to concert the necessary mea- 
sures for securing their respective interests.
The 
additional privilege of having a coinage both at Mid- 
summer and Michaelmas, was also granted at this 
time; and liberty given to the tinners to dispose of 
their tin without a particular license, unless the King 
determined to purchase it himself.
The privileges 
and laws of Cornwall were further explained in the 
15th of Edward the Third, and its liberties confirm- 
ed and enlarged by Acts of Parliament made in the 
reigns of Richard the Second and Edward the Fourth.
By these acts the society of tinners was divided into 
four parts, but left under the superintendance of one 
Warden, and reserving an appeal from his decisions, 
in suits of law and equity, to the Duke of Cornwall 
in council; or, should the title be held in abeyance, 
to the Crown.
The Lord Wai'den appoints a Vice 
Warden to determine all stannary disputes every 
month: he also constitutes four Stewards (one for 
each of the precincts governed by the different divi- 
sions of the society) who hold their courts (called 
Stannary Courts from the Latin word stmimwi, sig- 
nifying tin) every three weeks, and decide by juries 
of six persons, with a progressive appeal to the Vice 
Warden, Lord Warden, and the Lords of the Prince's 
Council.
In the reign of Henry the Seventh, Prince Arthur, 
then Duke of Cornwall, made various regulations 
relating to the stannaries, which the tinners refused 
to observe.
For this and some other irregularities 
of which they had been guilty, their immunities were 
declared forfeited by the King on his son's death; 
but Henry, not finding the mines so profitable as he 
had expected, was afterwards prevailed on, for the 
sum of 1000/.
to grant a charter of pardon, and also 
some additional privileges; the principal of which 
declared that no new law should be made without 
the consent of twenty-four gentlemen tinners, six of 
whom should be chosen by the mayor and council in 
each of the stannary divisions.
This charter was 
confirmed in the 20th of Elizabeth; but as the meet- 
ing of the twenty-four stannators hid been found in- 
convenient, it was declared that the consent of six- 
teen only should be sufficient to enact any iaw for 
vol, i.
— no.
28.
the government of the mines, and of persons con- 
nected with them.
In complex and difficult cases, 
the Lord Warden, by commission, issues his precept 
to the four principal towns of the stannary districts, 
when six members are chosen from each, and the 
twenty-four stannators so chosen constitute the par- 
liament of tinners.
The deliberations of this body, 
since the reign of Charles the Second, have been ge- 
nerally carried on by an assistant named by each 
member.
These assistants form a standing council, 
and may be said to be the link which connects the 
landholders with the adventurers and laboring tinners.
Whatever laws are enacted by the assembly are 
signed by each stannator, by the Lord Warden, or 
his deputy, and by the Duke, or King, and thence- 
forward, with respect to tin affairs, have all the au- 
thority of an act of the whole legislature.
The original stannary towns of Cornwall were 
Launceston, Lostwythiel, Truro, and Helstone.
To 
these places the tinners were obliged to convey their 
tin every quarter of a year; but in the reign of 
Charles the Second, Penzance was added, for the 
convenience of the western tinners.
All tin ores are 
wrought into metal in the county ; and when in that 
state, are cast into blocks, weighing from two hun- 
dred and three quarters to three huudred and three 
quarters each.
These blocks are not saleable till 
they have been assayed by the proper officers, and 
stamped by a hammer with the Duchy seal, which 
bears the arms of Richard, Earl of Cornwall, viz.
— 
a lion rampant, gu.
crowned, Or, within a bordure S.
{ arnished with bezants: this is denominated coining 
the tin.
Since the reign of Henry the Eighth, the 
coinages have been held regularly four times annu- 
ally, at Lady -day, Midsummer, Michaelnfas, and 
Christmas.
The annual produce of the tin-mines is 
about 25,000 blocks, which, exclusively of duties, may 
be estimated to afford an income of 260,000/.
the 
value of each block, on the average, amounting 
nearly to 10/.
10s.
The income of the Duchy of 
Cornwall, from this source, produces about 10,000/.
annually.
The trade has been in a very flourishing 
state, from the great exportations to China and the 
East* Indies ; but the great depth of some mines, 
and the advanced price of materials used, tend to 
depress the spirit of adventure, and are said to have 
injured the business considerably for some years 
past.
Cornwall contains copper ores in great abundance 
and variety.
Native copper is sometimes found, on 
the sides of the fissures, in thin films, deposited by 
the impregnated water which proceeds from the 
lodes.
Veins of copper are frequently discovered in 
cliffs that are laid bare by the sea ; but the most en- 
couraging symptom of a rich ore, is an earthy ochre- 
ous stone, already noticed, called gossan, which is of 
a ruddy colour, and crumbles like the rust of iron.
— 
Another promising invitation i.s, when the ground is 
inclinable to an easy, free- working, blue kilias, inter- 
mixed with white clay.
A white crystalline stone is 
also regarded as very retentive of yellow copper.
— • 
5 e The 
086 
CORNWALL.
The ore does not He at any particular depth ; but it 
is a general rule, that, when copper is discovered in 
any fissure, the lode should be sunk upon, as it com- 
monly proves best at some distance from the surface.
Copper lodes lie deeper than those of tin, and its 
ores are mostly of the pyritous and sulphurated 
kinds, with more or less arsenic.
The lodes, both 
of tin and copper, appear most frequently to have 
granite for their " country," and to make an angle 
of from 60° to 76° with the horizon.
The matrices of 
copper ore are very numerous.
Amongst the blue 
ores one is of an extremely fine blue earth.
The 
grey ore is frequently spotted with yellow and 
purple; but is esteemed richest, when of a uniform 
lead colour throughout.
One of the Gvvennap mines, 
named Caharrack, produces octahedral crystals of 
l'ed vitreous copper ore, but in small quantities ; and 
likewise some varieties of the olivenertz, or arseniate 
of copper.
The manner of cleansing and dressing the ore is 
in a great measure similar to that employed for tin ; 
but being generally raised in large masses it requires 
less washing.
In the smelting houses at Hayle, the 
furnaces are all reverberators; and those which are 
used for the process of roasting, contain about three 
tons and a half of ore (reduced to small pieces) at a 
time.
After the ore has been roasted twelve hours 
it is removed into a smaller furnace, where it is 
melted by the aid of a certain portion of slaked 
lime, in a crude state, and occasionally a quantity of 
powdered coal.
The scoria is removed once in three 
or four hours, and the same quantity of the mixture 
added.
In the course of twelve hours it is let out 
by a trough, from a hole towards the bottom of the 
furnace, into a tub of wood, sunk into a pit full of 
water, by which it is reduced into small grains.
— 
This granulated matter is then roasted in a third 
furnace, and afterwards removed to a fourth, in 
which it is again roasted, and at length run into 
quadrangular moulds.
It is not yet, however, re- 
fined, but must pass through further roasting and 
melting, until the refiner has ascertained whether it 
is in a proper state for being laded off.
He first 
takes out about half a pound of the liquid metal, 
which he immerses in water, and afterwards ham- 
mers and cuts it, to examine the grain.
When it has 
arrived at the proper degree of refinement, the scoria 
is carefully removed, and, by the help of ladles, coated 
over with clay, the metal is poured into oblong iron 
moulds, similarly coated, each containing about 
150lbs.
weight.
These occupations employ nearly a 
fortnight.
Most copper ores contain some iron ; 
those with variegated colours, and generally such as 
are mineralized by sulphur, contain the most ; whilst 
the blue and green are often free from any ferrugin- 
ous mixture.
As the specific gravity of iron is less 
considerable than that of copper, the former metal, 
during the operation of smelting, rises to the surface 
of the mass, and is therefore easily separated.
Ten 
or fiitreu years ago, the annual produce of the cop- 
per mines amounted to 40,000 tons of ore, which 
yields nearly 4700 tons of copper, and, at a medium 
valuation produced, about 350,000/.
In 1810, as we 
have already stated, the produce was of more than 
double the value then stated ; and there is reason to 
believe, that the annual amount has since rather in- 
creased than diminished.
The principal copper 
mines are the Consolidated Mines, United Mines, 
Poldice, Huel Unity, Huel Jewell, and Tresavan, in 
Gwennap ; Cook's Kitchen, and Tincroft, in the 
parish of Illogan ; Straypark, Huel Gons, Dolcooth.
Cam home Vane, in Camborne; and Herlaud, Prince 
George, and Huel Carpenter, in Gwinear.
In the 
year 1809, one of the richest lodes of copper that 
, had been seen for many years, was discovered in the 
neighbourhood of Padstow.
It is of fine grey ore, 
three feet thick, and worth from 80/.
to 100/.
a 
fathom ; and it is only 15 feet below the surface, 
while the levels are such as to admit, with ease, of 
an adit at 40 fathoms.
Blocks of grey ore are to be 
seen on the spot, of two hundred weight each, and 
worth 40/.
per ton.
The Lead Mines are not numerous ; but the ore 
has been discovered in many parts of the county, 
and it is generally said to be incorporated with silver.
The ores are extremely dissimilar ; but the kind 
most frequently found is galena, or pure sulphuret 
of lead, which is met with both crystallized and in 
masses.
Its colour is generally bluish grey, and its 
texture foliated.
The primitive form of its crystals 
is the cube.
The most common varieties are the 
cube, truncated at its angles and corners ; and the 
octahedron, composed of two four-sided pyramids, 
applied base to base.
The summits of the pyramids 
are frequently cuneiform, and sometimes their solid 
angles are wanting.
The veins are very irregular, 
being sometimes only a few inches, and sometimes 
several feet, in extent.
The principal mines are 
Huel Pool, and Huel Rose, near Helstone.
At different times gold has been discovered in this 
county, but never in sufficient quantity to warrant 
the engaging in any expensive works to obtain it.
— 
In most instances, the granules are extremely small, 
and intermixed with those of the tin-ore collected in 
the stream-works.
Sometimes, but very rarely, it 
has been met with in pieces, one of the largest of 
which is mentioned by Borlase, to have weighed 15 
pennyweights and sixteen grains.
Minute particles 
of gold arc frequently seen among the stream-tin, 
and some specimens have been found, in streaks, 
incorporated with tin crystals.
In the reigns of Edward the First and Edward 
the Third, silver is reported to have been raised here 
in such quantity, as to have enabled those monarchs 
to defray many of the expences attendant on the wars 
in which they -respectively engaged.
Afterwards 
the produce was so inconsiderable, that the mines 
were entirely neglected, till some time in the six- 
teenth century, when the works, to a certain degree, 
were resumed, but with so little success, that they 
were again abandoned, and the search for silver dis- 
continued.
About thirty-five years ago, however, a 
1 lode 
CORNWALL.
387 
lode was discovered near the sea, between St. Agnes 
and St. Michael ; and it has been worked with some 
advantage.
The course of the lode is almost per- 
pendicular, in a direction from north to south ; and 
the depth of the mine, which is called Hucl Mexico, 
between twenty and thirty fathoms.
The prevailing 
substance is killas intermixed with modules of quartz; 
but the matrix of the ore is an ochraceous iron ore ; 
and the yellow oxyde covers the whole of the mine.
Huel Mexico was at first the only mine in Convwall 
known toproduce silver ; but the Herland copper mine, 
in the parish of Gwinear, has since been found to be 
impregnated with that valuable metal.
The singular 
circumstances connected with the discovery were 
communicated by the Rev. Malachy Hitchins, and 
published in the transactions of the Royal Society 
for 1801.
" The numerous veins of lead in Corn- 
wall," observes this gentleman, " are richly impreg- 
nated with silver, and occasionally yield small quan- 
tities of silver-ore, and even some specimens of na- 
tive silver ; yet, hitherto, no instance had been known 
of their yielding this precious metal in abundance ; 
nor had any circumstance, in the natural history of 
the mineral veins in this country, borne any analogy 
to those which accompany the present discovery."— 
It further appears, from the account of Mr. Hitchins, 
that the Herland mine is of considerable extent.
" It commences," says he, " in a valley on the west, 
and passes through a hill, which is first of steep, and 
then of moderate ascent, for upwards of half a mile 
eastward ; when the principal copper-lodes which 
follow this direction, meet with a large cross lode, 
by which, and by other cross courses, and flookans 
which intersect them in their further progress, they 
are repeatedly heaved, and so disordered by these 
heaves, in their form and position, and so changed 
by them in respect to their composition, as hardly to 
be recognized." It was worked about thirty-four 
years ago, when it was sunk to the depth of 100 
fathoms from the surface, without any appearance of 
silver ores.
About twenty-two years since it was 
again set to work ; and during this period the silver 
ore was discovered in considerable quantities, but 
only in a particular part of the mine, in the neigh- 
bourhood of one of the intersected copper lodes.
— 
The lode in which it occurred was one of those 
cross courses which intersect and derange the cop- 
per-lodes, and consequently are of a more recent 
formation.
No silver ores were observable in this 
lode until at the depth of 110 fathoms from the sur- 
face, and at the further depth of 32 fathoms they 
disappeared.
The richest mass was found but two 
fathoms above this depth.
At the point of contact 
or intersection, the contents of the silver lode were 
so poor as to be scarcely worth saving; and those 
of the copper lode much less productive of copper 
than at a little distance from this point.
In the 
vicinity of the intersection, both lodes, at a corres- 
pondent level, appeared, with respect to the im- 
provement and declension of their ores, to have been 
influenced by a similar cause.
The breadth of the copper lode is about two feet 
on the average, and its direction is nearly east and 
west.
The cross lode intersects it at right angles; 
and its medium breadth is about two feet and a half.
The extent of the latter from the copper lode is no 
where above twelve feet on the north, nor more than 
thirty-two on the south.
The copper lode is filled 
with layers of ore, and the stony matter here called 
caple ; hut the ore is usually found contiguous to 
the walls of the lode.
The contents of the cross 
lode are more various, and more singular in respect 
to their local position.
Only the eastern side of it 
produces silver ore, the breadth of which is, ia 
general, about six or eight inches; although in some 
places it is greater.
The other part of the lode is 
chiefly composed of quartz, intermixed with iron, 
manganese, and wolfram, together with a small 
portion of cobalt and antimony.
The silver ore, 
strictly speaking, is a mixture of galena, native 
bismuth, grey cobalt ore, vitreous silver ore, and 
native silver.
The native silver, of which specimens 
of the greatest beauty have been reserved for the 
cabinets of the curious, was found chiefly in a capil- 
lary form, in the natural cavities of the lode.
The 
depth of the mine is nearly 160 fathoms; but the 
expenses of working have so much exceeded the re- 
ceipts, that the mine has been some time abandoned.
Iron ores exist in abundance in many parts of 
Cornwall ; but coal being distant, the expence of 
working the lodes is superior to the value of the 
iron procured.
Many tons of the ore have of late 
years been shipped for Wales.
Pyrites, or sulphuret 
of iron, called mundic by the Cornish miners, from 
the resplendent appearance of its surface, and struc- 
ture, exists in great abundance in this county, and 
in almost every variety of form and combination.
— 
The outside of this mineral partakes of the various 
colours of blue, green, purple, gold, silver, and cop- 
per.
It is sometimes found solid, in large masses; 
sometimes in grains, and detached lumps; and 
sometimes in micaceous granules, cither fixed in in- 
crustations, or loose, like sand.
Its crystallizations 
are cubical.
Most copper lodes are intermixed with 
this mineral, which, however, from the close consist- 
ence of the copper ore, is easily separated with ham- 
mers, by washing, or by evaporation in the furnace.
With tin ore it unites more intimately, especially 
when the former is found in a loose sandy stratum ; 
and by impoverishing the tin, it renders the produce 
so brittle, that its value is considerably decreased.
To destroy this connection, the tin ore is pulverized 
in a mill, and then placed in a furnace purposely 
erected for roasting it, called a burning-house.
A 
moderate fire is then made, and kept up according 
to the quantity and nature of the mixture, which is 
well raked, and stirred every quarter of an hour.
— 
By this process the mundic is evaporated.
The 
time requisite to clear five hundred weight of the 
ore most strongly impregnated, is twelve hours ; 
but, from the moderately infected ore, the mundic is 
thrown oft* in about eight.
Great caution is neces- 
sary 
388 
CORNWALL.
aary in the management ef the burning-houses ; for 
when the mundic has been a little burnt, its fumes 
are poisonous and destructive.
This arises from the 
mundic being decomposed by the heat, and giving 
out the arsenic which enters into its composition.
— 
" So dreadfully deleterious," observes Vtv. Maton, 
M are the fumes of arsenic constantly impregnating 
the air of these places, and so profuse is the perspir- 
ation occasioned by the heat of the furnaces, that 
those who have been employed at them but a few 
months, become most emaciated figures, and in the 
course of a few years are generally laid iu their 
graves." 
Bismuth, zinc, antimony, cobalt, arsenic, wolfram, 
menachanite, and molybdena, or sulphuret of molyb- 
denum, are the principal semi-metals of Cornwall.
Bismuth, in the state of ore, is usually of a bright 
silvery white, and its structure irregularly foliaceous.
Sometimes it appears granulated; but when found 
crystalized, it is mostly in a cubical form.
Next to 
tin, bismuth is the most fusible of all the metallic 
bodies.
It is sometimes called tin-glass; and when 
exposed to the air, it tarnishes, and acquires a pow- 
dery surface.
A small portion of bismuth increases 
the brightness, hardness, and sonorousness of tin ; 
and when mixed with it anddead in due proportion, 
forms pewter.
It is also used in the composition for 
printers' types, foils for mirrors, for imitating silver 
on wood, for purifying gold and silver by cupella- 
tion, for anatomical injections, for soldering some 
metals, and for rendering others fitter for being cast 
in moulds ; their fusibility being greatly increased by 
the addition of bismuth.
Calamine, or lapis calami- 
naris, is an ore of zinc, produced in great abuudance 
in Cornwall ; and its quality is superior to that found 
in most other countries.
It is a spongy cavernous 
body, of a pale brownish grey colour when it comes 
from the mine, and is sometimes mixed with a small 
portion of lead.
When cemented with copper (for 
calamine never melts) it makes the finest brass; and 
the proof of the richness of the calamine arises from 
the quantity taken up by the copper.
To extract 
the zinc, the calamine is finely pulverized, mixed 
with about one-eighth part of charcoal dust, and 
placed in a close retort on a violent fire, sufficient to 
melt copper.
Alter some time, the zinc rises, and 
appears in the form of metallic drops in the neck of 
the retort.
" This mineral," says Campbell, in his 
Political Survey of Great Britain, " has been long 
known to our miners by the name of spelter; but 
they knew not that spelter was zinc, or that it could 
be extracted from lapis calaminaris : much less had 
they any conception that this spelter, which they 
despised as an incumbrance, was, in reality, the 
same thing as that boasted metal from China, so 
highly esteemed under the sounding appellation of 
tutenag." This discovery was made by Dr. Isaac 
l»awson, soon after the commencement of the 18th 
* Dr. James's fevet powders are an oxyde of antimony, com- 
bined with calcareous uhosphat.
century.
Zinc, combined with copper, is employed 
in Prince's or Bath metal.
In several mines in the parish of Endeliana, anti- 
mony is found.
It runs in veins, mixed with a small 
quantity of copper, and some lead.
In its mineral 
ore, it is generally full of long, shining, needle-like 
streaks ; though sometimes of an exceedingly small 
close-grained texture, hard, brittle, and very heavy.
It is easily separated from its ore, and is then called 
crude antimony, which seems to be composed of 
sulphureous and reguline substances.
The latter 
has a bright shining metallic appearance, is ex- 
tremely fusible, and runs the thinnest of any sub- 
stance of this kind ; but never becomes malleable.
— 
This mineral forms the basis of many efficacious me- 
dicines.* The chemists use it to facilitate the fusion 
of other metals; the refiners employ it to reduce 
gold to its utmost purity ; it is used by the opticians 
to grind their glasses ; the letter-founders find it of 
great utility in casting types ; it is of service to the 
pewterers in giving hardness to their metal ; and 
the bell-founders employ it for the same purpose, 
and to render their composition more sonorous ; 
and it is highly serviceable for the mirrors of tele- 
scopes.
Cobalt, a grey, inclining to a pink-coloured metal, 
is met with in different mines, in various parts of 
the county, but it is not known to exist in any large 
quantity.
This metal is used in producing the fine 
blue tints iu enamelling, painting on glass, porcelain, 
and iu various other arts.
When melted with pow- 
dered flints in a furnace purposely contrived, and 
then sprinkled with water, it forms zaffer ; mixed 
with pot-sash and sand in due proportions, it makes 
smalt ; and this being beaten small, becomes pow- 
der-blue.
Smalts are used in the preparation of 
cloths, laces, muslins, threads, and various other 
articles.
The best cobalt in England has been dug 
at Pengreep.
Other cobalt mines are Huel-Trugo, 
near St. Columb; Dudnan's iu Illogan parish ; and 
near Ponsnooth.
Cobalt yields fine colours to the 
painter, and for sympathetic inks.
Arsenic, formerly ranked in the class of sulphurs, 
is generally found combined with the ore of other 
metals, from which it is disengaged by roasting.
— 
In close vessels it sublimes without alteration, and ' 
crystalizes in tetrahedral pyramids, or octahedrons, 
of a brilliancy resembling that of steel, to which 
metal it also bears resemblance in colour, when dis- 
covered in its native state; but on exposure to the 
air, it soon changes to a greyish black.
Its oxyde, 
Avhich is the substance most commonly termed 
arsenic, is of a glittering whiteness, and sometimes 
of a vitreous appearance : by a strong heat it is con- 
vertible into a metallic glass.
It is sometimes em- 
ployed to fuse metals, and to facilitate the fusion of 
glass, or to render it opake, in order to form enamel.
Its preparations have been introduced into medicine, 
and 
CORNWALL.
389 
and are also of service in painting and dying.
But- 
ter, and cow's milk, taken in large quantities, are 
good antidotes against the poison of arsenic.
Wolfram is found in the mine named Poldice, and 
in several other places.
A specimen which was 
analyzed by Klaproth, contained only tungstenic 
calx, and slightly oxygenated calx of iron, with 
some traces of arsenic.
Its colour is generally 
brown, or brownish, or greyish black ; but some- 
times it is indistinctly variegated, being nearly 
black.
When thrown on red-hot nitre, it effervesces 
with a slight blue flame.
Molybdena, which is the only species of Molyb- 
denum yet discovered, is commonly found in masses; 
but sometimes, though very rarely, it is met with 
crystallized in hexahedral tables.
Its colour is a 
light lead-grey, occasionally streaked with red.
It 
feels greasy, and stains the fingers; effervesces in 
warm nitric acid, but is insoluble in muriatic and 
sulphuric acids.
When rubbed on a piece of rosin, 
the latter becomes positively electric.
If ever found 
in abundance, it will probably be much used in paint- 
ing and dying; but the quantities yet discovered 
have been too small to answer any useful purpose.
Mineral Springs, &c] — The most remarkable 
mineral spring in Cornwall, is that which rises in 
the tenement of Colwien, in the parish of Ludgvan.
The bed through which this water flows is loose, 
abounding with pebbles, mixed with a gravelly clay, 
strongly impregnated with an ochrous iron mineral, 
from which the taste and smell of the water pro- 
ceed.
With galls it turns to a deep reddish purple ; 
with green tea to a higher purple; and with oak 
leaves to a bluish black, but with a purple cast.
— 
This water has many virtues, and Borlase assures 
us, that two persons, by drinking it, and washing 
the parts affected, were cured of the king's evil ; he 
heard also of many others who were cured in the 
same manner.
It promotes perspiration very 
strongly, removes obstructions and swellings of the 
abdomen, restores a decayed appetite, and, applied 
externally, cures sore eyes and scrophulous erup- 
tions.
There are many other wells of this kind, but 
this is sufficient to show their virtues.
Near Redruth there is a well of a different nature, 
called Caruker water, which is impregnated with tin 
as well as iron ; and there are several chalybeate 
springs.
Of the latter, the most remarkable is one 
at Treleven,.
in Mevagissey, called, from the colour 
of its scum, the brass well.
The strongest is that 
of Colurian, in the parish of Ludgvan.
It is much 
esteemed as an eye-water, and is said to be service- 
able in many complaints, both internal and external.
There is a chalybeate spring at Trewoof, in Burian, 
and there are two springs at St. Minver, which are 
resorted to for disorders of tlie eyes.
St. Maddern's well, near Penzance, was formerly 
much frequented for the curing of pains, aches, and 
stiffness of the limbs, by bathing.
" Its fame in 
former ages," says Norden, " was greater for the 
supposed vertue of healinge, which St. Madetne had 
vol.
i. — no.
28.
thereinto infused ; and manie votaries made annale 
pilgrimages unto it as they doe even- at this daye, 
unto the well of St. Winifrede beyonde Chester, in 
Denbighshire, whereunto thowsands doe yearelye 
make resorte; but of late St. Maderne hath denied 
bis or hers (I know not whether) pristine ayde; and 
as he is coye of his cures, so now are men coye of 
coming to his conjured well; yet soome a daye re- 
sorte." Some years subsequently, accident appears 
to have restored St. Maddern's well to its pristine 
celebrity.
The learned Bishop Hall, whilst on his 
visitation in this county, saw a man, who was said 
to have been restored to the use of his limbs by the 
water of this spring.
What there might be miracul- 
ous in the cure we know not ; but the Bishop, after 
conversing with the man, was so thoroughly con- 
vinced of its reality, that he recorded it in his publi- 
cation intituled the Mystery of Godliness.
The 
spring is not considered to have any mineral im- 
pregnation ; but it is very cold ; and thus, perhaps, 
the man's cure may be accounted for without calling 
in the aid of miraculous interference.
Borlase, after 
noticing the supposed healing virtues of this spring, 
observes as follows : — " Hither, upon much less 
justifiable errands, come the uneasy, impatient, and 
superstitious, and by dropping pins and pebbles into 
the water, and by shaking the ground round the 
spring, so as to raise bubbles from the bottom ; at a 
certain time of the year, moon, and day, endeavour 
to settle such doubts and inquiries as will not let the 
idle and anxious rest.
Here, therefore, they come, 
and instead of allaying, deservedly feed their uneasi- 
ness, the supposed responses serving equally to in- 
crease the gloom of the melancholy, the suspicions 
of the jealous, and the passion of the enamoured." —   
In the time of Cromwell, Major Ceely, of St. Ives, 
destroyed a chapel which belonged to this well.
Holywell is another spring of the simple kind.
— 
It is situated about a mile and a half to the north- 
west of St. Cuthbert's church, in Pider Hundred, 
in a small sandy bay, where there are several caves 
made in the cliff by the northern sea.
In one of 
these caves, at the north eastern point of the bay, and 
at the foot of a high cliff", this well is seated.
The 
entrance is low, but, by the help of steps cut into 
the rock, there is an ascent about 15 feet perpendi- 
cular, where the water distilling from every part of 
the roof, is collected into a little basin, whence pro- 
ceeds a small rill.
As the water passes through the 
chasms of the clay and stone, it brings down the 
finest parts of both, which are formed into seams 
and ridges correspondent to the clefts from which 
they proceed.
There are short mamilary protuber- 
ances hanging from the roof, which are a sort of 
stalactites, and the floor of the rock is incrusted with 
the same substance.
The water is much commended 
for fluxes and disorders of the bowels.
St. Uny's well, in the parish of Sancreed, was 
formerly much celebrated ; and its water is still in 
credit for drying up humours, as well as healing 
wounds and sores, though it does not appear to 
5 f have 
390 
CORNWALL.
have any mineral impregnation : hence it is probable 
th.it the cures are owing to the coldness of tiie water, 
which braces up the iibres, strengthens the glands, 
and promotes the secretion and circulation of the 
fluids.
Adjoining the well formerly stood a chapel, 
which was erected on 'account of , the reiharkal.de 
Cures done by the water : it is now in ruins, yet the 
carved stones that remain convince us that it was 
once of great note.
Our Lady of Nants well, in the parish of St. Colan, 
was formerly an object of superstitious resort.
It 
was visited by men, women, and children, to " fore- 
know of the Ladyc of the well, (by givinge an off ring, 
and castinge apalme crosseinto the water on Palme- 
Sunday,) what fortune should befall them thatyeare; 
so blind were people to followe and beleve such de- 
ceyvinge oracles." It is not undeserving of remark, 
that, in Wales, similar superstitions and customs, 
respecting wells, still prevail.
In the parish of Gulvall, near Maddern, is a spring 
called Gulfwell, that is, the Hebrew brook.
This 
also, was the seat of a superstition ; the appearance 
of its water being supposed to indicate the state of 
health of absent friends.
It is related, by Hals, that 
" an old woman attended to shew the well; before 
whom, on their approach, the question was to be 
asked aloud.
If the person inquired after were in 
health, the water was instantly to bubble; if sick, to 
be suddenly discoloured ; and, if dead, to remain in 
its natural state." Borlase, who wrote in 1749, 
seems to speak of this woman as though she had not 
long been dead.
" She was supposed," says he, 
" to be so conversant with the mysteries of the well, 
that she was daily resorted to by numbers of per- 
sons, who wished to consult its oracular waters, 
and have their curiosity satisiied, particularly as to 
goods or cattle lost or stolen." 
Fossils.] — Although forest-trees are not now 
found in a wild state in this county, it is certain that 
it formerly contained woods.
Fossil trees are some- 
times found in lakes, bogs, and harbours, in whole 
groves together ; which perhaps may be owing to 
the subsidence of the ground, occasioned by earth- 
quakes.
On the strand of Mount's Bay, between 
the piers of St. Michael's Mount and Penzance, the 
remains of a wood were discovered in 1757 ; which, 
according to tradition, once covered a large tract of 
ground on the edge of Mount's Bay. The lands 
had been forced off" the shore by a violent sea, and 
had left several places bare, 20 yards in length, and 
ten in breadth ; which gave an opportunity of mak- 
ing the discovery.
The earth about the trees is 
black, cold, and marshy, and covered over with a 
* Dr. William Borlase, the ingenious antiquary and historian, 
to whose researches relating to this county we are so much in- 
debted, was born at St. Just, in Cornwall, in 1G96, and edu- 
cated at Exeter College, Oxford.
In 1720, he entered into 
orders, and in 1722, obtained the rectory of Ludgvan, and after- 
wards that of St. Just.
He was elected a fellow of the ltoyal 
Society ; and having presented a variety of fossils, and various 
pieces ot antiquity, to the university of Oxford, he received the 
thin layer of sand.
The place where Borlase found 
the trees, he observes, is cove red with water 12 feet 
high when the tide is in; whence, he concludes, 
they must have stood twelve feet higher than at pre- 
sent.
In the year 1740, when a marshy piece of 
ground was drained on the banks of the river Hey], 
in Penvvith, several pieces of oak were found buried 
four feet deep in a fast clay.
One large trunk of a 
tree was met with about ten feet long ; but it had no 
branches, and its colour was very black, yet the tim- 
ber was hard and firm, and had suffered little or no 
decay.
In 1750, John Roberts, of the parish of 
Senan, whilst digging for tin near Velendritli, found, 
at the depth of thirty feet, an entire skeleton, about 
the size of that of a large deer ; but the bones were 
quite different.
It lay on its side ; and near it, on a 
parallel line, was a tree 20 feet long, and about as 
thick as a man's wrist ; great numbers of leaves 
were on the branches, and their impression was plain 
on the earth : it was of the oak kind, and so soft in 
some parts that the shovel stuck to it ; but it was 
extremely hard at the knots and spurs.
Not far 
from the skeleton was a deer's horn, two feet and a 
half long, and thicker than a man's wrist, with 
branched antlers.
One of the knobs was as large 
as a man's fist, and it crumbled to dust as soon as 
touched.
Dr. Borlase had a tooth taken from the 
skeleton.
Several other pieces of deers' or elks' 
horns were found in the same place, in the year 
1753, twenty feet under ground.
Etymology.] — It appears that the original name 
of Cornwall, in the British language, was Cernyw ; 
a term implying a slope, or projecting ridge, and 
also a horn or promontory, in which sense it became 
the name of the county.
The inhabitants were call- 
ed Carnabii, or Cernyw ; and Gwyr Cernyw, or ihe 
Men of the Promontory.
They possessed the whole 
of what is now called Cornwall, with the exception 
of a small part lying on the north side of the Tamar, 
and peopled by the Danmonii, who, some time be- 
fore the Roman invasion, subdued the Carnabii, and 
usurped their dominions, which thenceforward were' 
included in the district named Danmonium.
An- 
other etymology- of the name of this county has been, 
sought in the British word Cam, signifying a rock, 
which peculiarly applies to the nature of the place, 
and to the protection which the Britons received, 
from its rocks and mountains, several of which re- 
tain the name of Cam ; as Caminnic, Carnchy r 
Carnbre, Carnmarth, Camulac, and many others.
Dr. Borlase* considers, that the Latin name Cor- 
nubia was " retained till the Saxons imposed the- 
name of Wales on the Britons driven by them west 
thanks of that learned body, and the degree of LL.D. He 
also communicated many curious ores and fossils to Mr. Pope 
for his grotto.
He died in 1772.
He wrote an Essay on 
Cornish Crystals, in the Philosophical Transactions ; Antiqui- 
ties of the County of Cornwall, folio, two editions ; Observa- 
tions on the Scilly Islands, 4to.
; The Natural History of Corn- 
wall, folio y all of them valuable.
of 
CORNWALL.
SOI 
of the river Severn and Dee, calling 1 their country, 
in the Latin tongue, Wallia ; after which, finding 
the Britons had retreated not only into Wales, hut 
into the more western extremities of the island, the 
Latinists changed Cornuhia into Cornwallia ; a 
name not only expressive of the many natural pro- 
montories of the county, hut also that the inhabitants 
were Britons of the same nation and descent as those 
of Wales; and from this Cornwallia is derived the 
present name of Cornwall." 
Language.] — " The Cornish tongue," observes 
Dr. Borlase, " is a dialect of that language, which 
till the Saxons came in, was common to all Britain, 
and more anciently to Ireland and Gaul ; but the 
inhabitants of this island being dispersed, and driven 
into Wales and Cornwall, and thence into Bretagne 
and France, the same language, for want of more 
frequent intercourse, became variously pronounced, 
spoken, and written, and was in different degrees, 
mixed with different languages.
Hence came the 
Welch, Cornish, and the Armoric, dialect, whose 
radicals are so much alike, that they are known and 
admitted by the inhabitants of either country ; but 
the grammar is so varied that they cannot con- 
verse." 
The Cornish dialect is regarded as the most plea- 
sing of the three, having the character of being more 
harmonious and expressive.
As a specimen, the 
following proverbs are inserted : — 
Nob na gare y gy, an gwra deveeder.
He that heeds not gain, must expect loss.
Gura da, rag ta honan te yn gura.
Do good, for thyself thou dost it.
" The ancient language," again observes Bor- 
lace, " was so generally spoken in Cornwal, down 
to the latter end of the reign of Henry VIII.
that 
Dr. John Moreman, vicar of Menhynnet, is said to 
have been the first who taught his parishioners the 
Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments, in 
English." At the Reformation, the natives of this 
county desired that divine service might be per- 
formed in English ; and by this means, and their 
contiguity to Devon, with whose inhabitants they 
began gradually to associate, their own peculiar 
dialect was at length forgotten ; yet in some parishes 
it was retained so long that even iu the year 1640, 
the sacrament was obliged to be administered to the 
elder peopb?
in the Cornish language, from- their in- 
ability to understand English.
Old Dolly Pen- 
treath is generally considered, though erroneously, 
to have been the last person who spoke the Cornish 
language, in the village of Mousehole, in 1773.
She 
was 87 years of age, and was maintained partly by the 
parish, and partly by fortune-telling and gabbling 
Cornish.
In the former period of her life she sup- 
ported herself by selling fish, and was well known 
in the market of Penzance, where, at twelve years 
of age, she sold her wares in the Cornish language.
It appears from her epitaph in Paul's church-yard 
near Mousehole, that she lived to the great age of 
102.
Her epitaph is in both Cornish and English ; 
the hitter of which is as follows : — 
Old Doll Pentreath, one hundred age and two, 
Both born and in Paul parish buried too ; 
Not in the church 'rnongst people great and high, 
B"t in the church yard, doth old Dolly lie.
Mr. Whitaker, in his Tour to the Land's End, in 
the year 1799, beard of two persons who even then 
spoke the Cornish language ; but he had no oppor- 
tunity of ascertaining the fact ; and it is generally 
believed, that although many words are retained, 
there is no person capable of conversing in the lan- 
guage.
" A few MSS." observe Messrs.
Lysons, 
u are extant in the Cornish language, the most re- 
markable of which are some interludes, partly writ- 
ten in the fifteenth century, and a poem called 
Mount Calvary ; all of which were translated by 
J. Keigwin.
Mr. Edward Lloyd, who made a 
journey into Cornwall to collect materials for that 
purpose, in 1700, published a Cornish grammar, in 
1707.
Dr. Borlase gives some Cornish proverbs in 
his Natural History ; and at the end of his Anti- 
quities of Cornwall, has printed a Cornish vocabu- 
lary.
Dr. Pryce, of Redruth, in 1790, published 
Archreologia Cornu-Britannica, or an attempt to 
preserve the ancient Cornish names of places with 
their etymology, the Lord's Prayer, Creed, and 
Commandments in Cornish, Colloquies, a Cornish 
Song, &c.
&c." 
General History.] — That Cornwall formed a* 
part of Britannia Prima, in the time of the Romans* 
seems to be unquestioned ; but many disputes have 
arisen amongst antiquaries, as to the extent of do- 
minion which those conquerors enjoyed there.
Dr.
Borlase was firmly of opinion, that they made an 
actual conquest of Cornwall ; and he imagined them 
to have taken possession at the same period that the 
southern part of the island was subdued by Claudius 
Caesar.
This opinion Dr. Borlase proceeds to 
strengthen by descriptions of many coins, pavements, 
urns, and sepulchres, which have been found in dif- 
ferent parts of the county, chiefly within the eigh- 
teenth century.
He also adduces the form of various 
forts, encampments, and road- ways, and contends 
that the mass of evidence which he has collected, is 
so decisive of the Romans being in possession of 
Cornwall, that it cannot be any longer a.
matter of 
doubt.
The length of time, however, that the natives re- 
tained their original language, and the numerous 
vestiges of the ancient religion and manners of the 
Britons, which overspread, as it were, the entire 
district, indicate that the sway of the Romans in 
Cornwall was rather nominal than real;.
The same 
policy Avlnch induced that people to destroy the mo- 
numents of Druidism in the Isle of Mona, to con- 
sume its groves with fire, level its altars, and mas- 
sacre its priests and.
trembling votaries, would also 
7 have • 
0i>2 
CORNWALL.
have inclined them to press the observance of its or- 
dinances, and level its superstitious memorials with 
the dust of Cornwall, if it had ever been equally 
subordinate to their power.
Oa the retreat of the Romans the British chiefs 
associated in defence of their independence, and 
chose Gortheyrn, or Vortigern, then Earl of Corn- 
wall, as their supreme governor.
The events which 
followed, proved the choice to have been unwise ; 
for Gortheyrn, instead of calling the natural bravery 
of his people into action, and teaching them to de- 
fend their country against the mvirderous incursions 
.<u the Scots and Picts, had recourse to Saxon auxi- 
liaries.
These were, indeed, pregnant with evil, more 
destructive in its consequences.
Seeing- the fruit- 
fulness of the land, and knowing the weakness of 
the inhabitants, the Saxons resolved to undertake 
Ihe conquest of what they had been invited to de- 
fend ; and being continually strengthened by fresh 
arrivals of their countrymen, each band of whom was 
more ferocious than the former, succeeded in their 
intended usurpation.
The most horrible deaths 
awaited the unfortunate Britons ; and the miserable 
fugitives which escaped the sword in the provinces 
subdued by the Saxons, were either made slaves, or 
forced to take refuge in the wilds of Cornwall, or 
the mountaiuous recesses of Wales.
About this period, numerous bodies of fugitives, 
ami of the inhabitants of this county, and other 
western parts of the kingdom, are supposed to have 
sailed to Gaul, where, settling on the coasts oppo- 
site Cornwall, in the province of Armorica, they 
formed a new nation ; and the name of Armorica 
was changed to that of Bretagne, which it retained 
till modern times.
The same language which was 
so long spoken in Cornwall, continued for centuries 
to be the language of Bretagne; and the frequent 
intercourses of friendship and trade which were car- 
ried on between the natives of each county, has been 
considered as ample testimony of their having been 
originally one people.
Vortimcr, the son of Gortheyrn, bravely, but in- 
effectually, endeavoured, with other British chiefs, 
to defend his territory from Saxon tyranny.
The 
united efforts of the Britons of Cornwall and Wales 
were long exerted in the arduous conflict ; but the 
superiority of Saxon discipline, and the continued 
accessions of strength which the Saxons received 
from the nations on the continent, rendered every 
attempt to repel usurpations unavailing.
Tradition regards Cornwall as the birth-place of 
the renowned Arthur, whose history is so enveloped 
in monkish fable, that no endeavours could succeed 
in distinguishing his real from his pretended ex- 
ploits.
This celebrated prince and warrior is, how- 
ever, admitted by all writers to have been the off- 
spring of adulterous Intercourse.
His father, Uther 
Pendragoa, loved the wife of the Duke of Cornwall.
The Duke'* household, or his Lady, was incorrupti- 
ble, and Merlin had to enchant the adulterous Uther 
into the external figure of the husband, before his 
illicit passion could be gratified.
Arthur is sup- 
posed to have succeeded his father Uther about the 
year 516 ; and he was immediately engaged in war- 
fare against the Saxons, with whom he is said to 
have fought twelve successful battles.
Twenty-two 
years are calculated to have intervened between the 
battle of Bath, in which he checked the stream of the 
Saxon conquest, and that fatal period in which he 
was torn from his lamenting friends by domestic 
treachery and civil rebellion.
This catastrophe was 
produced by the infidelity of his Queen Gwenhyfar, 
and the hostility of Medrawd his nephew.
As Me- 
drawd was able to defy the vengeance of the potent 
Arthur, and even to meet him in battle, we may 
suspect that chieftains jealous of Arthur's authority, 
supported the rebellion.
Some authors intimate, 
that, to obtain the aid or neutrality of the West 
Saxons, Medrawd gave them several provinces in 
their vicinity.
As usurped power always seeks to 
maintain itself by crime, and absurdly hopes to ob- 
tain from new transgressions that impunity which it 
can never find, Medrawd may have sacrificed his 
country to his revenge; but all who love truth in 
history will tread lightly and cautiously over these 
events, and not bring any incident too strongly into 
notice.
Camelford, on the banks of the Camel, as 
already stated, was the scene of that disastrous con- 
flict, in which Medrawd dared to meet his injured 
uncle with the sword of revolt, and to consummate 
the crime of incest by murder.
The battle lasted 
two days.
The poem of Myrzin adds, that seven 
only escaped from the slaughter.
We may inter- 
pret this of chiefs or officers.
The traitor fell, but 
Arthur also received a mortal wound.
From the 
coast of Cornwall he was conveyed into Somerset- 
shire.
Sailing along the shore they reached the 
Uzella, which they ascended, and the King was 
committed to the care of his friends in Glastonbury, 
but their skill could not avert the fatal hour.
In the reign of Ivor, King of Wales, which com- 
menced A.
D. 680, the Cornish Britons defeated the 
Saxons in three engagements, one of which occur- 
red at Heyle.
These destructive war* between the 
Britons and the Saxons continued nearly two hun- 
dred and forty years, under the general direction, on 
the part of the Britons, of the reigning sovereign, 
who was sometimes chosen from the natives of this 
county, and sometimes from those of Wales.
Cad- 
wallar, their last sole Monarch, died about A.
D. 
689 ; and from this time the affairs of the Britons 
were conducted by various petty chieftains ; and 
Cornwall having no longer a governor in common 
with the Welch- Britons, became a distinct prin- 
cipality.
These divisions favoured the efforts of the 
Saxons, Avho appear to have penetrated with suc- 
cess into this county.
Their progress, however, 
was for a time interrupted by a strong party of Ar- 
morican-Britons, who had been solicited, by their 
Cornish brethren, to engage in their assistance.
With their aid, the places possessed by the enemy 
were 
CORNWALL.
393 
%vere re-conquered ; and even a portion of the east- 
ern side of Devonshire reduced ; but victory proved 
only the prelude to defeat ; for Ina, King of the 
West Saxons, repulsed them in several engage- 
ments about the year 710, and obtained much re- 
nown from the general triumph of his arms.
From 
that period to the year 766, several battles were fought 
between the Cornish-Britons and Saxons, but the 
former were almost invariably unsuccessful.
In 787, the piratical Danes, who now first began 
to infest the English seas, visited the coasts of Wes- 
sex, under which name the Saxons had comprehend- 
ed the whole of the ancient Danmonia, and within 
twenty years afterwards were engaged in alliance 
with the Cornish-Britons, who had required their 
assistance, that they might be enabled to make a 
more effectual stand against the progress of the 
Saxon arms.
This union drew upon them the con- 
centrated power of Egbert, the reputed founder of 
the English Monarchy.
The military talents of this 
prince were superior to all the resistance they could 
offer ; and in the year 813, Cornwall was entirely 
over-run by his forces.
Its natives, however, were 
again assembled in opposition to his government in 
823, when they fought a furious battle with the De- 
vonian Saxons at Camelford, in this county, which 
terminated with the slaughter of many thousands on 
each side.
This indecisive contest seems to have animated 
the Britons to act offensively ; and in the year 835, 
having been strengthened by a body of Danes, whose 
services on this occasion had been particurly solicit- 
ed, they attempted to expel the Saxons from Devon- 
shire, and marched eastward for that purpose.
At 
first, the combined forces were successful ; but be- 
ing opposed by Egbert at Hengston-Hill, they were 
totally overthrown.
After this victory, Egbert en- 
acted the severe law, that no Briton should pass the 
limits of his country, and set foot on English ground, 
on pain of death.
Notwithstanding this prohibition, 
the struggles for superiority continued till the year 
938, when in the reign of Athelstan, all Cornwall 
was subjugated by the Saxons, and the beautiful 
country lying between the Ex and the Tamar taken 
into the exclusive possession of the conqueror, who 
made the latter river the bouudary of his dominions.
Thus ended the contest which the Cornish-Britons, 
with unabated perseverance, had maintained against 
the Saxons for the full space of 500 years.
According to Dr. Borlase, many vestiges of the 
Danes exist in different parts of the county ; but 
they are so intermixed or combined with British re- 
mains, that in some places it becomes difficult to 
ascertain to which nation they belonged.
Their se- 
veral landing-places, he observes, " they secured 
with a ditch and vallum ; and as they advanced, 
fortified the hills with such propriety and judgment, 
tkat no less than eight castles, or rather strong in- 
trenchments, are to be seen within five miles round 
the town of Penzance.
These are all of a circular 
form, and so placed on the hills, that they are in 
vol.
i. — no.
28.
sight of each other, about two milOT asunder, and 
consequently able to cominw.ieate by proper sig- 
nals ; the most distant are not more than eight miles 
apart.
Some of them are enclosed with a very thick 
wall or walls of masonry, wide ditches, and such 
other works, as plainly bespeak leisure, security, 
and the peaceable permission of the natives.
These 
things sufficiently demonstrate their power in the 
western parts of Britain, and at the same time dis- 
play their willingness to perpetuate it, and retain 
their possessions.
Plunder and empire were the 
sole and darling objects of the Danes, and by de- 
grees they came to use the Cornish as bad as the 
rest of the kingdom.
To establish the one, that 
they might glut themselves with the other, they 
practised every kind of severity unprovoked ; and 
even on common occasions, fire, sword, and deso- 
lation, attended them wherever they marched ; so 
that at last Cornwall is supposed to have been ut- 
terly ruined by them, and to have continued as a 
forest, uncultivated, and thinly peopled, for several 
ages." It is, however, proper to remark that this 
opinion of the establishment of the Danes in Corn- 
wall, is contested by some learned antiquaries of the 
county, who ascribe the above-mentioned fortifica- 
tions to the Cornish-Britons.
In the year 1068, Cornwall was plundered by 
Goodwin and Edmund, the sons of Harold, as they 
returned to Ireland, after they had defeated the Con- 
queror's forces in the county of Somerset.
For three centuries from this period, Cornwall is 
scarcely noticed in military history ; a circum- 
stance which may be attributed to the remoteness of 
its situation.
In the reign of Stephen, however, the 
inhabitants rose, in favour of the Empress Maud.
" The story of Henry de la Pomeray, in the rebellion 
against Richard the First," says Polwhele, " stands 
alone (during a certain period) as a detailed account 
of warlike enterprize in Cornwall." Pomeray, or 
Pomeroy, had large possessions in this county ; and, 
during the captivity of Richard on the Continent, 
he seized on St. Michael's Mount in favour of John, 
Earl of Cornwall, who was then in rebellion against 
the King his brother ; but it appears that he sur- 
rendered it in 1194, on hearing of the King's re- 
lease, and that without the least defence, to Hubert 
Walter, then Archbishop of Canterbury ; and it is 
even said that, on hearing the King had returned, 
he died with fear.
Queen Margaret landed at Wey- 
mouth in 1471, and the whole of Cornwall and De- 
von having risen in her behalf, through (he influence 
of Sir John Arundell of Lanherne and Sir Hugh 
Courtney of Boconnoc, she was joined by them at 
Exeter, and accompanied to Tewkesbury.
In Sep- 
tember the same year, John Vere, Earl of Oxford, 
got possession of St. Michael's Mount, and kept it 
till the 3d of February the next year, when he was 
compelled to surrender it to John Fortescue.
In 
the year 1497, the Commons of Cornwall, headed 
by Lord Audley, marched as far as Blackhcath in 
Kent, where they met and were defeated by Lord 
5 c Daubeny 
394 
CORNWALL.
Daubeny, and nto ring-leaders, being taken prison- 
ers, were executed.
In September the same year, the celebrated Per- 
kin Warbeck landed at Whitsand Bay, near the 
Land's End, where in a short time he gathered to- 
gether a body of 3000 men, with which force he 
marched to besiege Exeter.
His wife, Lady Ca- 
therine Gordon, having been left at St. Michael's 
Mount, was, after the flight of her husband, taken 
from thence by a party of horse, and brought to the 
court of Henry the Seventh.
In 1548, at the insti- 
gation of Hugh Arundell and others, another rebel- 
lion broke out iu Cornwall.
The rebels proceeded, 
as Warbeck had done before, and besieged Exeter ; 
but they were afterwards obliged to raise the siege, 
through the perseverance of its inhabitants ; and 
being defeated, Arundell, with some others of their 
chiefs, was taken and executed.
The Town of 
Marazion was burnt during this rebellion ; and 
Tonkin and Hals make mention that it again un- 
derwent the same calamity in 1513 or 1514, when a 
fleet of French ships, then cruising in the Channel, 
landed a body of soldiers, who obtained possession 
of the town, but thought proper to retreat to their 
ships as soon as the sheriff with the posse comitatus 
approached.
On the 20th of July 1595, a party of 
Spaniards having landed near Mousehole, burnt that 
town as well as Newlin and Penzance.
The county of Cornwall, before the commence- 
ment of the civil war in the reign of King Charles, 
presented a petition to the House of Commons for 
redress of grievances : a part of this petition ran — 
that the havens of Fowey and Helford might be 
fortified and put into the possession of trusty per- 
sons, as being very good harbours ; and that St.
Maw's and Pendennis Castles, both much decayed 
in their fortifications, should be repaired and put 
into trusty hands.
In the early part of the Civil War, Sir Alexander 
Carew of Anthony, and Sir Richard Builer ofMor- 
val, the latter one of the members of Parliament for 
Cornwall, took possession of the eastern part of the 
county, and placed garrisons in Saltash and Laun- 
ceston.
The Parliament now thought they might 
easily possess the whole county, with the exception 
of Pendennis Castle, of which, Sir Nicholas Stan- 
ming a staunch royalist, was the governor : but Sir 
Ralph Hopton and Sir John Berkeley, both firmly 
attached to the royal cause, retiring into Cornwall, 
were soon joined by Sir Bevill Grenville, who ac- 
companied them to Truro.
Sir Ralph Hopton and 
his adherents were presented by the committee, at 
the ensuing quarter sessions, as persons who were 
come armed into the county against the peace ; but 
when Sir Ralph Hopton produced his commission 
from the King, by which he had been appointed 
Lieutenant- General of Horse in the west, they both 
acquitted him and his party of any disturbance of 
the peace, and preferred a cross indictment against 
Sir Andrew Carew and Sir Richard Builer, who 
had assembled their forces to cut off Sir Ralph's 
retreat.
The bill being found by the grand jury, 
against Sir Andrew Carew and Sir Richard Builer, 
an order of sessions was made for the calling out 
of the posse comitatus, which produced a body of 
3000 men well armed for the King's service.
Sir 
Ralph now marched to Launceston with his forces 
thus increased, and Sir Robert Builer, who occu- 
pied the town, quitted it without risking a battle, 
and it was taken possession of by the assailants.
Their next attack was made on Saltash, which also, 
surrendered without resistance.
Cornwall being now wholly occupied by the 
royal party, the trained bands were dismissed, vo- 
lunteer regiments raised, and Lord Mohun, who 
possessed a large estate in Cornwall, and had not 
before declared for either party, joined Sir Ralph 
Hopton and the rest of the King's party.
Forces being ordered by the Parliament, out of 
Dorsetshire and Somersetshire, to join with those of 
Devonshire in repelling the King's troops, General 
Ruthen, who commanded them, entered the county 
at a bridge six miles above Saltash, and advanced 
to Liskeard.
The King's army now retired to 
Bodmin, being much inferior in numbers.
The 
trained bands being again summoned, they met 
Ruthen's army, the 19th of January, on Bradock 
Down, and obtained a complete victory.
They took 
Liskeard the same day, and Ruthen retreated to 
Saltash, which town he fortified as soon as possible ; 
but it bting soon after taken by assault, Ruthen 
escaped by water to Plymouth.
Soon after, a pro- 
posal was made by some of the Cornish gentlemen 
attached to the Parliament, that a treaty might be 
entered into, whereby the peace of Cornwall and 
Devonshire might be settled.
The treaty took ef- 
fect, and was ratified by oaths ; but it nevertheless 
proved inefficient ; for the Parliament annulled it, 
and both counties became the repeated scene of 
bloodshed.
Some time afterwards, the King's forces being at 
Launceston, the Earl of Stamford marched into the 
north of Cornwall with a considerable force, and 
encamped on the top of a hill near Stratton, from 
whence he sent Sir George Chudleigh with a body 
of horse to surprise Bodmin, and prevent the high 
sheriff from joining the army at Launceston with the 
trained bands.
The King's troops, however, re- 
solved to give them battle : and on the 15th of 
May they took their station within a mile of the 
Parliament's army ; the following day, having di- 
vided into four detachments, they gained the sum- 
mit of the above-mentioned hill, and obtained a de- 
cisive victory.
The Earl of* Stamford fled to Exe- 
ter, and Major-General Chudleigh was made pri- 
soner.
This has been accounted by historians as 
one of the most brilliant victories gained by the 
royal party during the whole of the Civil War.
The King, as a reward for his services and bravery 
on this occasion, created Sir John Hopton, Lord 
Hopton of Stratton : Sir Ralph Berkeley, after the 
death of the former, had the same honour conferred 
on 
CORNWALL.
395 
on him.
Cornwall being now in a state of security, 
the King's generals left garrisons in Saltash and 
Milbrook to check any incursions from Plymouth 
garrison ; and left the county with their troops to 
assist Prince Maurice, and the Marquis of Hert- 
ford, in Somersetshire ; and the Cornish army 
greatly distinguished themselves at the battle of 
Lansdowne, and at the siege of Bristol : in the for- 
mer fell the brave Sir Bevill Grenville ; in the latter 
Sir Nicholas Slanning, governor of Pendennis Cas- 
tle, and Colonel John Trevanion, men of distin- 
guished valour ; they had all, from the first, assist- 
ed Sir Ralph Hopton, by raising the regiments of 
volunteers, which themselves commanded.
The fol- 
lowing letter, which plainly sets forth the high opi- 
nion entertained by the King, of the bravery of the 
Cornish men, and of their zeal in his cause, is still 
preserved in many churches in the county : — 
" C.
R. 
" To the inhabitants of the county of Cornwall.
" We are so highly sensible of the merit of our 
county of Cornwall, of their zeal for the defence of 
our person, and the just rights of our crown, in a time 
when we could contribute so little to our own defence, 
or to their assistance; in a time when not only no re- 
ward appeared, but great and probable dangers were 
threatened to obedience and loyalty ; of their great 
and eminent courage and patience in the indefatigable 
prosecution of their great work against so potent an 
enemy, backed with so strong, rich, and populous 
cities, and so plentifully furnished and supplied with 
men, arms, money, ammunition, and provision of all 
kinds; and of the wonderful success with which it 
pleased Almighty God (though with the loss of some 
most eminent persons, who shall never be forgotten 
by us) to reward their loyalty and patience by many 
strange victories over their and our enemies in de- 
Spight of all human probability, and all imaginable 
disadvantages; that as we cannot be forgetful of so 
great desert, so we cannot but desire to publish it to 
all the world, and perpetuate to all time, the memory 
ot their merits, and of our acceptance of the same; 
and to that end, we do hereby render our royal thanks 
to that our county in the most public and lasting 
manner we can devise, commanding copies hereof to 
be printed and published, and one of them to be read 
in every church and chapel therein, and to be kept 
for ever as a record in the same ; that as long as the 
history of these times and of this nation shall continue, 
the memory of how much that county hath merited 
from us and our crown, may be derived with it to 
posterity.
-Given at our camp at Sudeley Castle, the 
10th of September, 1643." 
About the middle of July, 1644, the Queen re- 
treated to Pendennis Castle, at which place she 
embarked for France.
On the 30th of the same 
month, the Earl of Essex, being pressed as it is 
said by Lord Roberts and some Cornish gentlemen, 
who had great hopes that their presence and in- 
terest would do much for the Parliamentary cause, 
after a sharp conflict with Sir Richard Grenville 
and a body of the King's forces, entered the 
county at Newbridge, and took possession of Laun- 
ceston and Saltash.
Sir Richard Grenville's house 
was taken by storm.
After this, Essex fixed his 
head- quarters at Fowey, and summoned the county 
to come to his assistance.
Sir Richard Grenville, 
after sustaining some loss in a skirmish with the 
brigade commanded by Lord Roberts, retreated to 
Truro.
At this juncture the King entered Corn- 
wall, August the 1st, at Polston Bridge, and slept 
that night at Trecarrel, Mr. Manaton's, in Lezant, 
in the midst of his army which was quartered 
around the place.
August the 2d, he drew up his forces on Carra- 
ton Down, whence, after being joined by Prince 
Maurice's troops, he proceeded to Liskeard.
He 
next fixed his head-quarters at Boconnoc-House.
About this time the King wrote to the Earl of Es- 
sex, inviting him to a pacific accommodation ; but 
without effect.
On the 13th the King's army ob- 
tained possession of Hall-house, opposite Fowey 
Haven and Pernon Fort at tiie mouth of it, and by 
this means acquired the command of Fowey Har- 
bour.
On the 21st Restormel Castle was taken by 
General Goring and Sir Thomas Basset.
Soon af- 
ter, the Earl of Essex thought proper to quit Lost- 
withiel, and the soldiers, it is said, after having de- 
secrated the church, blew it up.
Essex soon after 
embarked for Plymouth ; and General Skippon 
being left in command of the Parliament's forces, 
surrendered, and the whole of the ammunition, &c.
was delivered up the next day.
On the 2d of 
March, 1645-6, Charles II, then Prince of Wales, 
after having spent great part of the preceding 
autumn and winter in Cornwall, embarked at Pen- 
dennis Castle for the Scilly Isles.
Whilst he re- 
mained there lie found himself much distressed 
for provisions, and was invited by the Parliament 
to place himself under their protection.
Soon 
afterwards, a fleet of about twenty-seven sail sur- 
rounded the island where he was, with the inten- 
tion, as was supposed, of taking possession of his 
person ; but a storm arising, it was dispersed.
The 
Prince quitted the island on the 16th, and landing 
the next day in Jersey, sailed from thence to 
France.
Not long afterwards, the Scilly Islands 
were surrendered to Parliament.
In the autumn 
of 1649, John Berkeley and Colonel Slingsby, 
having been sent into Cornwall to incite their 
friends to rise in favour of King Charles II.
were 
both taken at Colonel Trevanion's house, and sent 
prisoners to Truro.
In the year 1650 the Scilly Isles were held 
against the Parliament by a large body of Eng- 
lish and Irish forces, and it appears that Mr. Go- 
dolphin commanded them under Sir John Gren- 
ville.
In April, 1651, Van Tromp, the Dutch- 
Admiral, lay off Scilly, and offered to assist in the 
reduction of these islands.
In the month of May 
they were all taken, except St. Mary's, by Sir 
George Ascough, who commanded the Parliament's 
forces.
St. Mary's was surrendered the month 
following.
In 1667 the Dutch attempted to land 
near Cawsand, but were beaten off* by the in- 
fantry.
The Dutch Admiral De Ruyter was also 
repulsed 
396 
CORNWALL.
repubed in making an attempt on the harbour of 
Fowey.
Antiquities.] — The antiquities of this county 
greatly resemble those of Ireland and Wales.
Many of them consist of single stones, not only 
uninscribed, but unhewn ; others composed of two, 
three, or more stones, arranged sometimes in a 
straight line, and sometimes in a circular one.
— 
Stones are also found in heaps, and now and then 
three or four flags and thin stones standing upright, 
covered -with a much larger stone, under the several 
denominations of castles, circles, karns, or cromlechs.
It has been usual to consider all these as Druidical 
remains ; but, as the Druids and ancient Britons are 
known to have confined their religious rites to groves 
of oak, it seems necessary to refer them to a more 
remote, or more recent origin.
Pinkerton, and 
some others, incline to the latter opinion ; attribut- 
ing them to the Danes.
Borlase has described most 
of these monuments at length : the more striking 
shall be noticed in their respective places.
Abundance of Roman coins have been found in 
the western parts of the county ; and, in the old 
mines and stream-works, swords, spear-heads, and 
other weapons of that warlike people.
They are 
neatly executed, in mixed metal.
Roman roads, or fragments of roads, are found in 
all parts of this county.
It is entered by two, if 
not by three, from Devonshire.
The first appears 
to have been the continuation of the great western 
road from Dorchester and Exeter, and it has been 
traced over Hall-Down towards Newton, and marks 
are still said to remain near Brent, and at St. Bu- 
deaux; also, on ascending the downs to the west of 
Liskeard traces of it are to be seen in its old lines, 
pointing to a ford a little below the bridge of Lost- 
withiel ; from which place it is thought to have pro- 
ceeded by St. Austell and Grampound ; near the 
latter of which it passes through a farm called Caer- 
vosa to Truro.
Traces of another road are also 
visible, which appears to come from Torrington and 
the north of Devonshire towards Stratton : as it 
descends the hill of Stratton parish it is 10 feet wide, 
strait, but overgrown with briars : from Stratton, it 
is probable it led towards Bude-haven, which, from 
its situation, must, in ancient times, have been a har- 
bour of great resort.
Between Stratton and Laun- 
ceston there is a ridge of about a mile in length, 
having the appearance of a Roman way ; which has 
given rise to the opinion that a third road once ex- 
isted in this county, but it has, however, little else to 
corroborate it.
Roman stations are still less evident about this 
county than the roads.
There is every appearance 
of one, however, at Bossens, in the parish of St.
Earth ; for the square form of the intreuchment, the 
traces of the road, and the coins and other antiqui- 
ties of that nation, discovered there, leave but little 
room for us to doubt on that subject.
Another is 
said to have existed at Condora, which is situated 
on a neck of land in Helford harbour, where many 
gallons of small Roman coins have been found, wifk 
which the Romans used to pay their troops ; and the 
place has also been fortified with a wall drawn from 
sea to sea.
The situation of Carnbre, in the centre 
of the mining country ; of Launceston for an im- 
portant pass over the Tamar, and of Mount's Bay 
tor conducting the tin trade, has led most writers to 
conclude that they were also occupied by the Ro- 
mans.
Tregony has by some been fixed on as the 
ancient Ceneum, chiefly from the resemblance of 
name : but Condora, from its situation and the fore- 
mentioned discoveries, seems to be the more likely 
place of the two.
Voluba, which appears to have 
been situated on the Vol or Fal, may answer to 
either Tregony or Grampound.
Halangium may 
have been Carnbre, and Musidunum was most likely 
at or near Stratton.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Divisions.] — For- 
merly this county was divided into the following 
seven hundreds : Conarton, Fawiton, Pawton, 
Rialton, Stratton, Tibesta or Tibesterna, and Win- 
neton or Winnenton ; but at present it is divided 
into nine, the names of which will appear in the 
Population Table for this county.
— Cornwall was 
anciently under the jurisdiction of Bishops of its 
own ; whose see, it was supposed, was originally at 
Bodmin : but it appears, from Whitaker's Cathedral 
of Cornwall, that it was first established at St. Ger- 
man's, where it continued till the reign of Canute, 
when, the union of the sees of St. German's and 
Crediton having taken place, the jurisdiction of both 
Cornwall and Devonshire was in one Bishop, whose 
see was at Exeter, where it still remains.
The 
limits of the Archdeaconry of Cornwall are nearly 
the same as those of the county : it is divided into 
the following eight Deaneries : East, Kirrier, Pen- 
with, Powder, Pyder, Trigg-Major, Trigg-Minor, 
and West.
The Archdeacon's visitations are held 
annually, about a month after Easter, at Bodmin, 
Helston, Launceston, Liskeard, Penzance, and 
Truro.
Deans-Rural are appointed annually in 
this county, who make regular visitations to every 
church within their Deaneries, and at the Archdeacon's 
visitations report the state of the churches.
The 
spiritual court for the Archdeaconry is held at Bod- 
min, every other Friday, except during the Easter 
and Christmas holidays.
There are 203 parishes in 
this county, of which 100 are vicarages, 85 rectories, 
and 18 curacies ; the great tithes of the first and last 
of these are mostly in lay-impropriations.
Parliamentary Representation.] — This county 
possesses more parliamentary boroughs than any other 
in the kingdom.
The number of its representatives is 
also greater ; the members returned to the House of 
Commons being forty -four, many of them from 
places inconsiderable, with respect to trade, wealth, 
or inhabitants.
This pre-eminence in representation 
appears to have arisen from the large hereditary re- 
venue yielded by the Duchy to the Crown, or to its 
immediate heir, the Prince of Wales.
In the reign 
of Edward the First, only the county, and the five 
boroughs 
CORN WALK 
;W7 
boroughs of Launceston, LUkeard, Truro, Bodmin, 
and flelston, had the right of returning rnembers.~ 
Iu that of Edward the Second, Lostwhhiel was an- 
nexed to the number, which continued the same, 
frith one exception, till the latter end of the reign of 
Edward the Sixth, when a similar privilege was 
granted to the boroughs of Saltash, Camelford, 
West-Looe, Grampound, Bossitiey, St. Michael, and 
Newport.
In the first of Mary, Penryn was admit- 
ted into the list; and about three years afterwards, 
St. Ives, Soon after the accession of Elizabeth, 
Tregony became a partaker in the same honours; 
in her fifth year, St. Cernmn's and St. Maw's; in 
the thirteenth, East-JLooe and Fowey; and in the 
twenty-seventh, Colungton; so that t'ao whole num- 
ber of boroughs was increased to twenty-one.
Eight 
of these; namely, Saltash, Camelford, West-Looe, 
Grampound, Bossitsey, Tregony, St, "Maw's, and 
ivAst-Looe, had either m immediate or remote con- 
nection with the demesne lands of the Duchy ; and 
four others devolved to the crown on the dissolution 
of the monasteries by Henry the Eighth.
These 
were Newport, which rose with Launceston Priory; 
Penryn, which chiefly depended on the rich Abbey of 
Glasteney; St. German's, which, next to Bodniin, 
was the principal Priory in Cornwall; and Fowey, 
belonging to Trewardreth, St, Michael's was 
poss&ssed by the Arundels of Lanherne; and the 
noble family of Paulet held those of St. Ives ami 
Coilingtom 
Noblemen's and Gentlemen's Skats,] — It has 
been remarked, that Cornwall, as well as possessing 
more parliamentary boroughs than any other county 
in the kingdom, possesses more noblemen's and 
gentlemen's seats, " Yet," says Dr. Borlase, " it is 
a melancholy reflection, to look back ou so many 
great families as have, formerly adorned the county 
of Cornwall, and are now no more ; the Grenvilles, 
the Arundelis, Carminows, Charapernons, Bodru- 
gans, Mohuns, Killegrews, Bevilles, Trevanions, 
which had great sway and possessions in those parts.
The most lasting families have only their seasons, 
more or teas, of a certain constitutional strength.
— 
They have their spring, and summer-sunshine glare, 
their wane, decline, and death ; they flourish and 
shine perhaps for ages; at last they sicken; their 
light grows pale, and, at a crisis when the off-sets 
are withered/and the old stock is blasted, the whole 
tribe disappear, and leave tho world, as they have 
done Cornwall.
There are limits ordained to every 
_ * Richard Carew, Esq, the learned author of the Survey of 
Cornwall, was born in the year 1555, at Anthony House, an 
estate which he inherited from his father, and which is situated 
on a branch of the Lynher Creek, nearly opposite Trematou 
Castle, in this county.
He was educated at Christ-Church, 
Oxford ; and at the age of fourteen was chosen, from the un- 
common vigour ol his understanding, and brilliancy of his 
genius, to dispute extempore with Sir Philip Sydney, whom 
the writers of his age have -denominated "incomparable." — 
The persons before whom the disputants were engaged to dis.
play their powers, were the Earls of Leicester and Warwick, 
and some other noblemen.
He afterwards studied at the Middle 
VOL.
!. NO.
29.
thing under tho sun: Man nil} not abide in.
honour.
Of all human vanities, family pride is one of the 
weakest.
Header, go thy way; secure thy name in 
the book of life, where the page fades not, nor the 
title alters nor expires ; leave the rest to Heralds 
and the Parish Register." The principal seats will 
be described in local order.
Pontes.] — Carew,* who wrote in the year 1602, 
observes that " Cornwall was stored, not long since, 
with many parkes of fallow deere, but King Henri* 
the Eight being persuaded (it is said by Sir Richard 
Pollard) that those belonging to the Duke could 
steed him with little pleasure in so remote a part> 
and would yield him good profit if they were leased 
out on au improved rent ; did condisceud to their 
disparting; so foure of them tooke a fall together, 
to wit, CarryhuUock, Liskerd, Restornell, and Lan*- 
teglos.
Hovvbeit this good husbandry came short of 
tlie devisers promise una the King's expectations, 
wherethrough the one was shent for the attempt, the 
other discontented with the effect.
Notwithstand- 
ing, as Princes' examples are ever taken for war- 
rantable precedents to the subject, so most of the 
Cornish gentlemen, preferring gain to delight, 
shortly after followed the like practice, and made 
their deere leap over the pale to give the bullocks 
place.
Parkes yet remaining are, iu East Hundred, 
Boconnock, Sir Reginald Mohun's.
In Powder 
Hundred, Carhayes, Mr. Trevaniou's.
In Stratton, 
Launoels, Mr. diamond's.
In Kirrier Hundred, 
Mr. Vivian's; and Merther, Mr. Reskymer's."— 
There were anciently plenty of deer in this county, 
but now red deer are seldom seen ; some, however, 
make their appearance from the downs about Bod- 
min, and there are said to be many in the north-east 
part of the county, between Launceston and Stratton-.
in East hundred are Wevington and Mount Edge r 
cumbe parks; in the hundred of West Boconnoc; 
in Powder, Tregotlman, Carhayes, Peurice, and a 
paddock at Trewithan ; in Pyder, a small park of 
Mr. Prideaux Brune's; in Kirrier, Godolphin, Car.- 
clew, and a paddock at Penrose.
Market Towns.] — Formerly there were only 
eighteen Market Towns in this County; but, at 
present, there are the thirty following : — .
Towns, AfaHyet Days..
St. Agnes Thursday.
St, Austell, Friday.
Bodmin, Saturday.
Bosca&tle,....
Thursday.
Calliogton, Wednesday.
*\ 
Temple, and attained great proficiency in many branches oE 
knowledge.
In 1589 he was elected member of the Original 
Society of Antiquaries; and on that occasion made an ingenious 
oration in praise of the study of antiquity.
In the year 1G02 he 
published his Survey of Cornwall, which is one of the best earlj 
County Histories ever printed, ft displays a vigorous under- 
standing, improved by comprehensive study, and a very lively 
fancy, vhose flights are generally agreeable, from being exer- 
cised under the restraints of judgment.
This woik has been 
twice reprinted, and is justly held in high estimation.
He died 
in the year U3'20.
5a 
Toun».
308 
CORNWALL.
Towns.
Market Days.
Camborne, Saturday.
Came] ford, , Friday.
( Thursday, and 
St. Columb, 1 (in Summer) 
(. Saturday.
St. Day, Saturday.
East-Looe, Saturday.
( Tuesday, 
Jalmouth, ^ Thursday, 
( Saturday.
Fowey Saturday.
•Gramponnd, ...
t '.
Saturday.
Helston, Saturday.
St. Ives, 5 Wednesday, 
( Saturday.
Launceston, {Thursday.
( Saturday.
Liskeard .Saturday.
Lostwitri.el, Friday.
Ma tzion, Saturday.
St. Mawes, Friday.
Mev gissey, Saturday.
Padstow Saturday.
Penryn, , Saturday, 
Towns.
Market Days, 
Penzance, j Thursday, 
• I Saturday.
Polpero, Friday.
Redruth, CTW'-vy, 
I Friday.
Saltash, Saturday.
Stratton, Tuesday.
Tregony, Saturday.
Truro, 5 Wednesday.
" (Saturday.
Population.] — In the year 1377, the population 
of Cornwall, exclusive of mendicants, and children 
under fourteen years of age, amounted to 34,960.
— 
According to the Parliamentary returns of 1801, the 
entire population was 188,269; and, in 1811, as ap- 
pears by the following table, it amounted to 216,667; 
of which 103,310 were males, and 113,357 were 
females : 17,465 families were employed in agricul- 
ture; 10,954 in trade and manufactures; and 15,770 
in miscellaneous pursuits : — 
Summary of the 
Population of the County of 
Cornwall 
as published by Authority of Parliament in 1811.
HOUSES.
OCCUPATIONS.
PERSONS.
Hundreds, &c.
a 
a 
1— < 
2>=J 
a w 
2 cj 
E o_.
£ v <v 
J3f* 
t5 
'3 
13 
u.S cj 
.— — 
ib 8j> a 
CU O (j 
s si?
ca ti << 
fa 
Families chiefly 
employed in 
Trade, Manu- 
factures, &c.
All other Fami- 
lies nol com prised 
in the two pre- 
ceding Classes.
Males.
Females.
Total 
of 
Persons.
East 
4386 
6238 
.1191 
9352 
7298 
3377 
1212 
1588 
2602 
262 
465 
5399 
7426 
1301 
10263 
8420 
3876 
1355 
1906 
2873 
353 
1017 
71 
52 
18 
107 
88 
33 
20 
21 
17 
9 
5 
171 
229 
86 
212 
2S6 
138 
51 
74 
133 
7 
13 
2545 
2511 
90G 
2366 
3087 
1898 
1068 
1298 
1635 
141 
10 
1098 
1992 
277 
2774 
2001 
857 
265 
442 
651 
170 
427 
1756 I 13200 
2923 16042 
118 3038 
5123 | 23S01 
3332 18986 
13708 
19455 
3428 
26522 
21459 
9755 
3468 
4810 
7318 
954 
2480 
26908 
35497 
6466 
50323 
40445 
18949 
6857 
9414 
14284 
1758 
3933 
1833 
iPenwith 
Pyder 
1121 
22 
166 
587 
42 
580 
9194 
33S9 
4604 
6966 
804 
1453 
1833 
West 
Borough of Launceston....
37971 
44189 
441 
1400 
17465 
10954 
15770 
103310 
113357 
216667 
Longevity.] — From the salubrity of its climate, 
this county is remarkable for the longevity of its in- 
habitants.
The Rev. Thomas Cole, minister of 
Landewednaek, who was buried there in 1683, is 
said, in the register, to have been 120 years of age.
Dr. Borlase mentions his having walked to Penryn 
nnd back, not long before his death, on the authority 
of Mr. Erisey, who met him on the road.
Michael 
George, sexton of the same parish, was buried 
March 20, 1683, aged, as is said in the register, up- 
wards of 100 years.
Borlase also mentions, on the 
authority of Mr. Scawen of Molineek, a woman who 
died at Gwythian, in 1676, aged 134.
By the tradi- 
tion of the place it appears, that her name was 
Cheston Marchant, that she had a new set of teeth, 
and new hair, in her old age, ami that travellers, who 
came to see her, frequently took with them a lock of 
her hair : it is said also, that she spoke only the 
Cornish language, and that she was many years 
bedridden.
The Rev. John Trist, vicar of Veryan, 
having kept his registers with gre*t accuracy during 
an incumbency of 30 years, and very judiciously 
noted the ag'es of all persons buried, has ascertained 
that the proportion of persons interred during that 
period, who had exceeded 80 years of age, was one 
in eight, including infants ; those who had exceeded 
90, one in fifty-three and a half.
Carew has men- 
tioned the following instances of long vity : — " One 
Polzew, lately living, reached unto 130 ; a kinsman 
of his to 112 ; one Beauchamp to 106 ; Jean Brawne, 
7 the 
CORNWALL.
399 
the beggar, a Cornishman by wandering (for I can- 
uot say by inhabitance) though Irish by birth, out- 
scoret'» a hundred winters by I vr.ote not how many 
revolutions." Peter Joll, or Jowle, an under clerk 
of the parish of Alternon, is said to have lived to 
upwards of 150 years of age, and to have had a new 
$et of teeth in his hundredth year.
Tradition also 
states, that his hair recovered its natural black colour.
The family of Joll, which still exists in the village, 
has been remarkable for its longevity ; but the name 
of the individual here mentioned is not met with in 
the register of the parish.
Chief Towns, Parishes, &c.
Agnes, St.] — The little town of St. Agnes is si- 
tuated on the north coast, in the hundred of Pyder, 
9 miles N.W. by W.
from Truro.
Several unsuc- 
cessful attempts had been made, at great expense, 
to form a harbour here ; but, about the year 1794, 
a company of gentlemen erected a jetty pier of moor- 
stone, at the cost of 10,000/.
and, since that period, 
si considerable trade has been carried on with Wales 
and Ireland, in slate, coals, lime, &c.
A pilchard 
fishery was also established here about the year 
1802.
The town of St. Agnes is surrounded by tin and 
copper mines.
The immense rocks which guard the 
shore have an uncommonly bold and majestic appear- 
ance ; and, on one side is a stupendous mountain, 
called St. Agnes' beacon, which towers, in a pyra- 
midal form, to the height of 664 feet above the level 
of the sea.
When an invasion from France was ap- 
prehended a few years ago, the beacon, attended by 
two soldiers, was kept ready for use.
A summer- 
house has been built near the beacou, commanding 
an extensive marine prospect, with a beautiful view 
of St. Ives.
The stratification of the rock is remarkable.
— 
Borlase observes, that " the strata, upon digging, 
appear in the following order ; the vegetable soil 
and common rubble under it, jfoe feet deep; a fine 
sort of white and yellow clay, six Jed : beneath this 
* John Opie, whose persevering genius advanced him to the 
highest rank in his profession, was born in Harmony Cot, /in the 
month of May, 176l.
It is not recorded of him as of Homer 
and of Virgil, that supernatural events attended his birth, and 
pointed out his future excellence.
On the contrary, the open- 
ing years of his existence indicated, thai he must plod through 
life in the dull occupation of a village carpenter, the occupation 
of his lather and his grandfather.
John Opie's mother was a 
descendant of the ancient and respectable family of Tonkin, of 
Trevauiu'.nce ; and one of his .jiat rnal ancestors was the author 
of a valu ible history of Cornwall, w hit ii is said to be at present in 
the possession of Loid de Dunslanyille 
At a very early period Opie is reported to have distinguished 
himself, by an originality and strength of mind.
At the village 
school he soon o'ertopped his fellows ; and, I the time he was 
.ten ars old, he could solve some ot the most difficult pro- 
Lie o Euclid.
His mathematical skill obtain  >!
for him 'he 
familiar appellation of the little Sir Isaac ; an , at twelve years 
of .^e, he set up an evening school in St. Agnes, teaching 
arithmetic and writing; and reckoning am< »gst his scholars 
some who had nearlv doubled his number ot years.
a layer of smooth rounded pebbles, like those on the 
beach; under this, four feet of a white stony rubble 
and earth ; and then the firm rock (killas) in which 
the tin lodes shape their course." 
In this parish is a large intrenchment, which 
evinces great skill and labour, and was probably in- 
tended as a defence of the beacon, and of the mines 
in the neighbourhood.
Within this intrenchment, 
some years ago, was ploughed up a gold Valen- 
tinian, which had the following legend : — DN.
VAENINIANVS P.P. AVG.
and on the reverse 
Restitutor Reipublice Ant. A.
This, added to 
the greatness of the undertaking, the judgment and 
conduct of the design, the straightness of the lines, 
and the uniformity of the work in all its parts, seems 
to prove the whole to be of Roman origin.
Add to 
this, that on the top of the enclosed hill, to the west 
of the beacon, there are still to be seen the remains 
of a small square fortification, adjacent to which are 
three sepulchral barrows.
This great work is called 
in Cornish, the Kledh, which signifies the trench or 
foss, and is said by the vulgar to be the work of a 
giant called Bolster.
It is observed by Hals, that 
on the very summit of the mountain, " there are 
three sparstone tumulusses, consisting of a vast 
number of those stones, great and small, piled up 
together, in memory of some once notable human 
creatures before the sixth century interred there." 
The tin lodes in this town may be distinctly traced 
towards the sea, in very small thread-like fissures.
The parish church is generally understood to have 
been built about the year 1484 ; but there are deeds 
in existence, which prove that St. Agnes was consi- 
dered a distinct parish, and had a parochial chapel, 
as early as 1396.
Some monuments of the family of 
Tonkin of Trevaunance are preserved in the church.
The parish of St. Agnes was tlie birth-place of 
the celebrated modern painter, Opie, many of whose 
early productions are preserved, and held in liigh 
estimation, by the inhabitants of this county.* 
Anthony, St.] — The parish of St. Anthony, in 
the 
His passion for drawing is said to have been first excited in 
his tenth year, by seeing one ot his companions draw a butteirly.
In eager silence he marked the process; and, being asked wh;:t 
he was thinking of, he replied that, lie zvas thinking he could 
draw a butterfly, if he were to try, as zvcll as Mark Gates.
— 
He attempted, succeeded, and exulted in his success!
Mis 
first humble attempts at portrait painting were, with, a smutty 
slick, against the white-washed wall.
of his paternal cottage; 
where <he exhibited, in dark colours, very striking likenesses 
of the whole family.
His next step was, to draw with ochre, 
on cartridge paper.
It being the wish of his father that he should follow the trade 
of a carpenter, he bound him apprentice to himself; and re 
garding drawing as a waste of time, it has been said that he 
sometimes used to throw a hammer at the head of our young 
arti t, when he found him so employed.
We know not upon what account, but it is understood.
that 
young Opie, instead of serving his time out with his father, was 
turned over, as an apprentice to a sawyer, of the name of 
Wheeler; and it was literally in the bottom of ~a saw-pit that 
Doctor Walcott, better known by the appellation of Peter 
Pindjij 
400 
CORNWALL.
the south division of the hundred of East, is three 
miles and a half S.W. from rSaltash.
Exclusively of 
the church-town, Torpoint, Wilcove, and Tregantle, 
are the chief villages in the parish.
Pindar, first behekl (his untutored child of genius.
Doctor 
Walcolt, at that time, resided about eight miles from the village 
of St. Agnes, but was sometimes led thither by his professional 
. pursuits.
In the course of his rides he had seen and admired 
some rude drawings of Opie's, chiefly likenesses, in common 
chalk; and at the house of one of his patients he learned the 
history of the artist.
Pointing to a very popular print of a 
farm yard, such as is still daily exhibited in a certain large win- 
dow in the neighbourhood of St. Paul's, the lady of the mansion 
observed that the sawyer's lad, whom she had already men- 
tioned, had copied it very exactly.
Struck with so extraordi- 
nary a circumstance, the Doctor immediately proceeded to the 
saw-pit, where he found the youth covered with dust, and not 
in the least expecting the good fortune which was about to pre- 
sent itself.
On being called up and questioned concerning his 
performances, he answered, in the true Cornish dialect, the 
accent of which never wholly forsook his tongue, that he paint- 
ed blazing stqrs !
Duke William !
King and Queen!
and Mrs.
Kanlcivell's cat!
The doctor naturally expressed a wish to 
behold some of these phenomena of the art, when the lad, quick 
as thought, tucked his leather apron round his loins, sprang 
across an adjoining hedge, and instantly returned, not only with 
Mrs. Nankivell'jS cat, but with two most ferocious looking 
monsters, and a portrait of the Devil, agreeably to vulgar tra- 
dition, furnished with a tremendous pair of horns, saucer eyes, 
a long forked tail, &c.
These were the wild efforts of untutored 
genius, which indicated " the god within." Peter Pindar — for 
he was no mean artist himself — immediately saw their value, and 
resolved to cultivate the soil from which they sprang.
By invitation from the doctor, young Opie dined with him 
on the following Sunday, and received a present of brushes, 
colours, &c.
' These favours were soon followed by others of a 
more solid nature.
The doctor received him into his house, 
accommodated him with the use of productions of a superior 
class of artists, for the purpose of imitation, gave him practical 
instructions in his art, and impressed him, for the first time, 
with some faint idea of light and shadow !
Pindar's conduct was 
here strongly marked by benevolence.
His assistance was not 
confined to the points just specified.
In the intervals of his 
pursuits, he taught him the French language, and endeavoured, 
though without much success, to inspire him with a taste for the 
classics.
Opie, however, in his Jatter years, taught himself 
Latin.
The German flute also formed part of the instructions 
of Dr. YValcott, and he was at much pains in endeavouring to 
divest him of his rough and clownish manner.
This was the 
most laborious and least successful task of any.
We have heard it stated, thaPat one time the doctor was at a 
loss, as to what branch of the art he should chiefly direct his 
pupil's attention ; and he is known to have expressed an opinion, 
that, had Opie devoted his talents to landscape, he would have 
been still more eminent than he was.
In summer, Dr. Wal- 
cott used to call him up at three in the morning, that he might 
commence his labours.
Sometimes he used to take him into 
the fields, to give him an idea of landscape, and of the aeiial 
perspective.
One evening, when (hey were at Falmouth, they 
walked into the country, near Pendennis Castle: it was a calm 
summer's evening ; the sea at a distance added to the beauty 
and majesty of the scene : the youthful artist contemplated it in 
silence; he listened to the instructions of his friend ; and, the 
next day, he drew the whole from memory.
This piece is 
said to have been finely coloured, and equal to any of our first 
masters in composition.
Opie was then seventeen.
Previously to this, however, the pecuniary advantages of por- 
trait painting had determined the doctor in favour of that branch 
ef the art.
Under his tuition, young Opie was soon capable of 
The two manors of East and West Anthony, for- 
merly in the family of Dawney, are now in the 
Carews.
East Anthony House, the seat of the 
Right Hon. Reginald Pole Carew, 31.
P. is seated 
on 
pencilling out a decern head for five shillings ; and, at the end 
of a twelve-month, he undertook small half-lengths.
When he had thus depicted half the town of Truro, he used 
to trudge with his apparatus to the neighbouring villages a:;d 
seats.
One of his most profitable excursions was to Padstow 
whither he had repaired, dressed in a peasant's siiort jacket.— 
There he painted not only the heads, but the menial servants, 
together with the dogs, cats, and horses, of the ancient family 
of Prideaux.
Conceiving that he could now afford to sacrifice 
at the shrine of the Graces, he purchased a fashionable coat, 
laced ruffles, silk stockings, and a cocked hat !
After his pur- 
chase, he had about twenty guineas left ; and, entering his pa- 
tron's room with exultation, on his return, he exclaimed, I shall 
xvalloiv in gold !
and actually threw the guineas on the floor, 
and rolled amongst them like a p>g !
To his honour, however, 
it should be recorded, that, with true filial piety, he presented 
this product of his labours to his mother, who had been ex- 
tremely uneasy at his long absence.
Opie was indeed an affec- 
tionate son and brother.
The doctor constantly pointed out 
two objects for his ambition : the first, to reach the head of his 
profession ; the second, to assist his parents, and take his sister 
from servitude.
He nobly attained them both.
His sister lived 
as servant with the celebrated Mr. Townsend, author of " A 
Journey through Spain," " The Physician's Vade Mecum," 
and '•' The Elements of Therapeutics.'* On visiting her, he ex- 
pressed a wish to draw her master : she laughed at him ; but he 
took some common colours from a house- painter, who happen- 
ed to be employed upon the premises, and drew a picture, now 
in the Linnseau Gallery, of Dr. Thornton, the execution of 
which is remarkably fine.
Opie is said to have paid great deference to Dr. Walcott's- 
instructions.
Whilst that gentleman was painting, he would 
sometimes lean over him, and exclaim, " Ah !
if I could ever 
paint like you !" Pindar, however, who knew the real powers 
of iiis pupil, always replied,— " If I thought thou wouldst not 
exceed me, John, I would not take such pains with thee." — 
For nearly two years he never painted a single picture without 
submitting it to the correction of his friend.
Before he was sixteen, young Opie was employed by the 
late Lord Bateman, one of his earliest patrons, upon old men, 
beggars, &c.
and in 1777, he painted his own portrait for that 
nobleman.
By this time, agreeably to the instructions of the 
doctor, he had progressively advanced the price of his heads to 
seven shillings, ten and sixpence, fifteen shillings, and a guinea; 
though not without many exclamations, that he should ruin the 
country !
Some pictures which he had painted for Mr. Price, 
of Penzance, particularly an old man, have been esteemed by 
connoisseurs as equal to any of his subsequent productions.
Perhaps, however, there must be some allowance made for this 
unqualified praise.
Determined on removing his pupil to Exeter, which is 
usually regarded as the London of the West of England, Dr.
Walcotl's efforts were renewed, to remove the barbarisms 
which yet adhered to him ; to give him a genteel deportment, 
to clear his tongue from its provincial harshness, and to fit hiiu 
as far as possible for acting a respectable part on the great stage 
of life.
On this occasion, lie persuaded him to change his sur- 
name from Iloppy, which it originally was, and which was 
thought to have something vulgar appertaining to it, to that of 
Opie, the appellation of a respectable family in the duchy of 
Cornwall, Opie's success at Exeter was commensurate with 
his abilities : and it was soon determined that they should be' 
brought to act in a still wider sphere.
Accordingly, in 17S0, Dr. Walcott and his pupil, resolving 
to emerge from provincial practice, repaired together, to Lon- 
don; 
CORNWALL.
401 
on a branch of the Lynher Creek, nearly opposite 
Trematon Castle.
It is a large square building of 
Pentuan stone, finished by Gibbs, the architect, about 
don; and as they were unmarried, their joint expences were 
supplied from a common purse.
This mode of life — certainly 
a very injudicious one— did not continue long ; and Mr. Opie, 
it is said, being the first to perceive its inconveniences, com- 
municated his opinion by letter to his friend, who was absent 
in the country.
Subsequently to this period they were never 
cordially united : they indeed met and visited, but all their 
former attachment was wanting ; nor, during the remainder of 
their joint lives, did a sincere reconciliation take place.
We 
are not competent to say who might be in fault in this affair.
Opie certainly owed his professional existence to Peter Pindar ; 
and consequently he might have been expected to yield much 
to his patron.
Yet we are not willing to believe him deficient 
in gratitude.
Respecting the opinion entertained by Opie, of 
the services which he had received from the doctor, the fol- 
lowing curious note of hand is said to be still in the possession 
of the latter : — 
" I promise to paint, for Dr. Walcott, any picture or pic- 
tures he may demand, as long as I live ; otherwise I desire the 
world will consider me as a d— d ungrateful son of a b — h.
" John Opie." 
We are not aware that Opie ever deviated from this volun- 
tary obligation ; but it is a matter of pleasant remark, that he 
always made his friend pay eighteenpence for the canvas !
Opie was as fortunate in London, as he had been at Exeter 
and at Truro.
To Pindar, however, was he indebted for his 
introduction into public notice.
Through him, his pictures 
were shown to Mrs. Boscawen, by whom Opie was introduced 
to the late Mrs. Delaney, who procured foi him the notice of 
his Majesty.
An opportunity was contrived, for the Royal 
Family to see his Old Beggar Man ; soon after which, Opie 
was honoured with a command to repair to Buckingham-House.
The artist's account of this interview was given, in the follow- 
ing characteristical manner, to Walcott, who has often been 
heard to relate it with great humour.
— " There was Mr.
West," said Opie, " in the room, and another gentleman.
First, her Majesty came in ; and I made a sad mistake in re- 
spect to her, till I saw her face, and discovered by her features 
that she was the Queen.
In aTew minutes afterwards, his 
Majesty came hopping in ; I suppose," said Opie, " be.cause 
he die!
not wish to frighten me.
He looked at the pictures, 
and liked them ; but he whispered to Mr. West — " tell the 
young man I can only pay a gentleman's price for them.'" — 
The picture which liis Majesty bought was that of A Man 
struck blind by Lightning.
The price given was ten pounds ; 
with which Opie returned to the doctor full of spirits.
His 
friend, when he heard the story, said — " Why, John, thou hast 
only got eight pounds for thy picture." " Indeed but I have 
though," cried Opie, " for I have got the ten pounds safe in 
my pocket." On this he showed him the money.
" Aye," 
rejoined the doctor, " but dost thou know that his Majesty has 
got the frame for nothing, and that is worth two pounds." 
" Damn it, so he has," cried Opie, " I'll go back and knock 
at the door, and ask for the frame ; damn it I will." He was 
actually about to put his resolve into execution, till dissuaded 
by the doctor.
Popularity naturally followed the auspicious notice of roy- 
alty.
His door was daily thronged with carriages; for the no- 
bility were eager to have their lineaments traced by the hand 
of the self-taught boy, from the tin mines in Cornwall.
As is 
usual in such cases, with his change of fortune Opie changed 
his place of residence.
Haying originally resided in a little 
court in the neighbourhood of Leicester Square, he removed 
first to a house in Great Queen Street, and then to Berners 
Street.
VOL.
I. NO.
29.
the year 1721.
Amongst the old portraits, of which 
this mansion contains a respectable collection, is one 
of Richard Carew, the historian, with the device of 
a diamond 
The ladies, however, soon deserted him ; for his likenesses 
were not flattering.
Where nature had been niggardly, Opie 
refused to be liberal In this respect he erred at a very early 
period.
While in Cornwall, a Mrs. Daniel, a lady of Truro, 
sat for her portrait ; but she complained that he had made her 
too yellow.
Opie, who had painted her as she was, bluntly 
exclaimed, " Will you have yourself?
If not, I'll go down to 
Sir Francis Bassett, and draw one of the Graces from Rubens." 
Latterly, our painter became better acquainted with the art of 
pleasing the ladies; a circumstance which has been attributed 
to Mrs. Opie, who used to stand over him and endeavour to 
make him sensible of the true grace of the female form.
It was in the year 1786, that Mr. Opie became known as an 
exhibitor at Somerset House ; soon alter which he aspired to 
academical honours, and ultimately attained the rank of Royal 
Academician.
For a short time he enjoyed the profit and re- 
putation of a fashionable portrait painter ; and where strength, 
breadth, and character were demanded, in respect to the male 
figure, his pencil was deservedly celebrated.
But the tide of 
popular favour, which had set in so strongly at first, turned its 
current; and we believe that, for several years, Mr. Opie 
scarcely earned more by his profession, than procured him a 
liberal maintenance.
Yet, amongst real judges, his merit was 
eminent!
v conspicuous.
For interesting beggars, ruffian rob- 
bers, and midnight assassins, he was thought to have no equal 
amongst his contemporaries.
Even at a much earlier period 
than this, he received a distinguishing compliment from Sir 
Joshua Reynolds, who then enjoyed unrivalled pre-eminence in 
the art.
One morning, whilst Dr. Walcott was breakfasting 
with that gentleman, he showed him one of Opie's pieces : Sir 
Joshua's observation was remarkable : — " Why, this boy begins 
where other people leave off!" 
Opie was one of those artists, who were employed to embody 
the conceptions of our great dramatic bard, in the Shakespeare 
Gallery; and, in the latter part of his life, he enjoyed his full 
portion of profit and of fame.
As a literary character, Mr. Opie is entitled to some notice.
He first distinguished himself in this respect, by his " Life of 
Reynolds" (published in Dr. Walcott's edition of Pilk'nglon's 
Dictionary of Painters) in which he displayed a profound 
knowledge of the subject, a quick and powerful perception of 
distinctive character, and a mastery of language little to be ex- 
pected from a person who was supposed to be destitute of 
learning.
He next published a letter in the Morning Chroni- 
cle (since republished in Hoare's Inquiry into the requisite 
Cultivation of the Art of Design in England) in which he pro- 
posed a distinct plan for tin; formation of a National Gallery, 
lending at once to exalt the arts in this country, and to immor- 
talize its glories.
To this he affixed his name.
On the formation of the Royal Institution, Mr. Opie was 
induced to accept of an appointment, to deliver lectures there 
upon the subject of painting.
But, in that institution, where 
science, 
" with clipp'd wing, familiar flirts away, 
In Fashion's cage, the parrot of the day," 
Mr. Opie was not formed to shine.
His exertions there 
pleased neither himself nor his auditory.
Destitute of the 
graces of dehverv, he possessed no other qualification of a pub- 
lic orator, than that of instructing those to whom he addressed 
himself.
He shortly discontinued his lectures.
At a former period, when the professorship of painting had 
become vacani in the Royal Academy, Mr. Opie started as a 
candidate for the prize, but resigned his pretentions in favour 
of Fuseli.
However, when that artist was appointed keeper 
of the Academy, Mr. Opie renewed his claims, and succeeded 
5 I - him 
402 
CORNWALL.
a diamond on an anvil, with a hammer suspended 
over it.
At a short distance from the house, is a 
ferry over the Lynher to Saltash, Trematon, &e.
belonging to the Lord of the Manor.
In the church are several monuments entitled to 
attention.
Besides numerous memorials of the Ca- 
rew family, there is, in the chancel, the figure of a 
lady, on a brass plate, beneath an elegant Gothic 
canopy, in memory of Margery Arundell, who died, 
Lady of the Manor, in the early part of the fifteenth 
century.
The following inscription, to the memory 
of Richard Carew, the historian, of whom we have 
already given some biographical particulars in a 
note, appears on a tablet of black marble, in the 
north aisle : — 
" Ric. Careiv Arm. A"<tf.
1555; pads presul 1581 ; 
Cornub.
Vicecomes 1586; in re milit.
regias ticcs 
fund.
1386; in colleg.
antiquariorum elect.
1398; 
ob.
1620.* 
" The verses following were written by Richard 
Carew, of Anthony, Esq. immediately before his 
death (which happened the sixth of November 
1620), as he was at his private prayers in his 
study (his daily practice), at four in the afternoon, 
and being found in his pocket, were preserved 
by his grandson, Sir Alexander Carew, accord- 
ing to whose desire they are here set up in me- 
mory of him : — - 
Mm in the professorship.
In his lectures, delivered at Somer- 
set House, he is allowed to have been far more successful, than 
in those at Albemarle Street.
Mr. Opie was in the daily acquisition of wealth and fame, 
and rapidly advancing to the very zenith of popularity, when 
his mortal career was suddenly closed by death, on Thursday, 
tiie 9th of April, 1807, in the forty-sixth year of his age.
In 
his illness, which originated in a cold, caught in returning from 
a visit to his friend Tresham, he was attended by Dr. Ash, Dr.
Y;:ug!ian, and Mr. Carlisle; and, subsequently, by Dr. P t- 
sairn, and Dr. Baillie ; but the disease baffled all their skill.
J'rom its extraordinary symptoms, dissection followed ; when 
the lower portion ot the spinal marrow, and its investing mem- 
brane, were found to be slightly inflamed, and the brain sur- 
charged with blood.
These appearances were regarded as 
constituting a rare occurrence in die records of medicine.
Mr. Opie had been twice married.
At what period his first 
hymeneal union occurred, we are not informed ; but it was in- 
auspicious.
His lady, regardless of her vow, forgot the sacred 
duties of a wife; and a separation, law-suit, &c.
followed.
In 
iiis second marriage; which took place on the 8th of May, 
1798, he was more fortunate ; and in the society of the present 
Mrs. Opie, the amiable author of many beautiful and interest- 
ing literary compositions, he enjoyed a delightful relief from 
the toilsome duties of his profession.
We conceive the following to be a correct account of Mr.
Opie's style of painting.
It was written in his life-time, by the 
ectebrated Mr. Dayes: — 
" His manner approximates to that of Rembrandt ; his style 
is bold and vigorous, and, like that master, he has seldom more 
than one light in his pictures.
The subjects in which he suc- 
i e< Is best, are where the rough, unpolished parts of nature ap- 
pear ; with these his dark and forcible manner suits admira- 
bly; but where he attempts at characters that require eleva- 
tion, he is generally deficient.
Ilia chiar-oscura is broad and 
powerful, but destitute of clearness of colour; a fault that also 
" Full thirteen five of yeares I toiling have o'erpast, 
And in the fourteenth, weary, enter'd am at last ; 
While rocks, sands, storms, and leaks, to take mv back 
away, 
By grief, troubles, sorrows, sickness, did essay : 
And yet arriv'd I am not at the port of death, 
The port of everlasting life that openeth.
My time, uncertain, Lord, long certain cannot be, 
What's best to me's unknown, and only known to thee.
O by repentance, and amendment, grant, that I 
May still live in thy fear, and in thy favour dye." 
Amongst the memorials of the Carews, is one- 
of Jane, relict of Sir Alexander Carew, Bart, who 
having taken part with the Parliament, in the time 
of the Civil War, fell into the hands of the roy- 
alists, and suffered death, as a traitor, on Tower 
In the south aisle of the church, is a monu- 
ment of white marble, to the memory of Thomas 
Graves, Esq. of Thanks, grandfather of the pre- 
set Lord Graves, who, in the year 1740, as a 
naval captain, distinguished himself in the attacks 
on the forts of St. Philip and St. Jago.
This 
gentleman's second wife, Elizabeth, who died in 
1738j was sister to Eustace Budgell, and first 
cousin of Addison, the contemporary and friend 
of Pope.
St. Anthony, in the east division of the hundred 
of Kerrier, is five miles and a half south by west 
from Falmouth.
At this place, as early as the time 
attaches to-ligh's, which are often heavy and cold ; his touch is 
firm, broad, and spirited.
Where he feels his subject, no one 
can enter more into its spirit than himself; as in the assassina- 
tion of James of Scotland, Rizzio, &c.
which justly class him 
among the first masters.
Of feminine beautv he appears not to 
have the' least feeling: his forte is undoubtedly the terrible; 
and for this his manner is best calculated: some of his heads' 
are full of spirit, and finely executed.
Those scenes of assassi- 
nation, from which he derived his reputation, associate perfectly 
well with the severe, dark style, which he pursues ; and that 
from a principle of nature, as the abrupt, forcible, and dark, 
will ever accompany acts of horror.
As a portrait painter he' 
has great claims to praise : particularly in his men, which are 
firm, bold, and freely handled, and occasionally well coloured.
His women are heavy, inelegant, and chiefly accompanied 
with a hardness that destroys all beauty." — For additional par- 
ticulars relating to the life, and professional character of Mr.
Opie, vide Modern Plutarch, Vol. IV.
* Translation— Richard Carew, Gent, was born in 1353 ; 
served the office of Justice of the Peace in 1581; was Hi«h 
Sheriff of Cornwall in 1586; performed service in the army In 
the same year; was admitted of the College of Antiquaries in 
1598; and died in 1-620.
f Sir A.
Carew was a gentleman of large fortune, and one 
of the representatives of the county.
At the commencement 
of the Civil War, he was averse to the measures of the court, 
and being entrusted by Parliament with the command of St.
Michael's Island and Fort, he attempted to deliver them into 
his Majesty's possession; but his design being discovered to 
the Parliament, he was suddenly seized and carried prisoner to 
Plymouth, and there the women were so enraged against him, 
that it was with difficulty they rescued him from their venge- 
ance.
From hence he was sent by sea to London, where °he 
was expelled by the Commons, and, being tried by a court- 
martial, was found guilty, and beheaded on Tower "Hill, De- 
cember 23, 1644.
of 
CORNWALL.
403 
of Richard I.
there was a priory of hlack monks 
of Anglers, subordinate to the abbey of Trewar- 
dreth.
St. Anthony in Roseland, is a post-town, eleven 
miles south-west by west from Tregony.
Here 
was a small priory of two Austin canons, subor- 
dinate to that of Plympton in Devonshire.
The 
present Admiral Spry is the lay impropriator, and 
Lord of the Manor.
Austell, St.] — St. Austell is a considerable 
market-town, at which the petty sessions of the east 
division of the hundred of Powder are bolden.
Con- 
siderable quantities of corn and other articles are 
brought to the market.
It lies thirty-lour miles 
south-west from Launceston : it has two fairs : on 
the Thursday in Whitsun week, and the other on the 
30th of November.
The town is seated on the eastern side of the hill, 
which slopes gradually to a rivulet that runs along 
a narrow valley.
This stream, and the inequality 
of the ground, have been rendered eminently useful 
to the manufactories of the neighbourhood.
The 
water, which has been conducted round the side of 
the hills, in its course impels the machinery of seve- 
ral stamping-mills,, which have been erected on dif- 
ferent levels.
It is also employed to cleanse and 
separate the tin from the pounded matrix.
Through 
its vicinity to the great tin-mine of Polgooth, and 
some others, St. Austell has, within the last sixty 
or seventy years, considerably increased in the 
number of its houses and inhabitants.
The holding 
of the Blackmore Court here, which is the most 
considerable of the stannary courts, has also con- 
tributed to augment its prosperity.
The old town, 
or rather village, was at some little distance to the 
east ; and its site is still marked by a few cottages.
The present town had the turnpike road carried 
through it about fifty years ago, and has since been 
the regular thoroughfare for travellers from Ply- 
mouth to the Land's End. The streets are very 
narrow, and not having any pavement tor foot-pas- 
sengers, are somewhat unsafe.
The only blowing-houses in the county are at the 
east end of this town.
They are three in number, 
and very spacious.
The old smelting Louses are 
supplied with coals, and are reverbtratory ; but in 
these blowing-houses the fire is of charcoal, and 
ignited by air impelled through tubes by the cylin- 
ders, instead of bellows.
This mode of fluxing the 
ore is considered by the workmen as far preferable 
to the other.
The charter whereby the inhabitants hold the 
weekly market, was granted by Queen Elizabeth, 
which is said to have been confirmed by Oliver 
Cromwell.
The inhabitants of the town are chiefly 
employed in the pilchard fishery, mining, and in a 
small manufactory of serges.
St. Austell's has an aims-house, which was erect- 
ed, in 1809, for six poor persons.
Here also are 
meeting-houses for the Arminian Methodists, the 
Independents, and the Quakers.
The parish church, in this town, is a fine old 
fabric, consisting of three aisles.
" The tower, and 
some other parts of the structure, are fancifully or- 
namented ; various carvings, monstrous heads, an- 
gels, and other figures, appear on the cornices.
Round the second story of the tower are eighteen 
statues in richly-ornamented niches ; six on the west 
side, and four on each of the others.
Those on the 
west are imagined to represent God the Father, 
with the crucified Saviour resting on his knees : be- 
low them are Joseph, Mary, and other figures.
The 
remaining twelve are supposed to be designed for 
the Apostles.
Over the south porch is an inscrip- 
tion in relief on a stone, one foot nine inches long, 
by one loot two inches.
The first line appears to 
be the Cornish words Ry T)u, and to signify, God 
is a King ; the second Contains the initial letters of 
Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judeorum.
Various other 
explications are, however, given of this inscription ; 
and the best-informed antiquaries seem undetermin- 
ed as to its true meaning.
Various shields of orna> 
ments are carved on the outside of this fabric, and 
also on several of the seats.
From the repetition v 
of the shovel, pick, hammers, and other tools, it 
seems probable that the miners were the princi- 
pal contributors towards the expences of the build- 
ing."* 
This church contains some monuments of the an- 
cient family of Sawle.
Several of the May family, 
who once had considerable possessions in the neigh- 
bourhood, are also buried in this fabric, as appears 
by a fiat stone in the south aisle.
Their crest was 
the pelican ; and from the figure of that bird being 
carved in stone at the south-east corner of Truro 
Church, it seems probable, that some of them con- 
tributed towards the charges of that building.
On 
the font are some rudely-sculptured figures, in relief, 
of the crocodile, and some other animal.
" In the year 177-1," says the author of the Addi- 
tions to Camden, " as some tinners were searching 
for tin in a stream-work near St. Austell, about se- 
venteen feet under the surface of the ground, they 
discovered a silver cup, which is now used for wine 
at the Communion Table, in which were several an- 
cient pieces of gold and silver ornaments, such as 
bracelets, rings, and buckles, for a person of high 
rank, with many of the most curious Saxon coins 
ever discovered at one time.
All these articles fell 
out in moving the ground, and some were probably 
lost in shovelling about the rubbish.
Those which 
were picked up were in a few hours disperst about 
the country, and many of them broken.
The great- 
est part were afterwards collected, and are at Me- 
nabilly, in the hands of Philip Rasleigh, Esq. The 
cup was placed in a heap of loose stones, the refuse 
of an old tin work, and covered with a common slate, 
where it was probably bid in troblcsome times, either 
Beauties of England and Wales, Vol. I1L 
by 
404 
CORNWALL.
by the owner, or by some person who stole it.
The 
quantity of earth and stone which had accumulated 
over the cup since it was deposited in the stream- 
work, shews that it had remained there for a great 
number of years.
The cup was thin and brittle, 
and fell into so many pieces as to prevent its being 
united."* 
The following are the principal villages in this 
parish :— Carvath, Carbean, Pen te wan or Pentuan, 
Porthpean, Xtescorla, Tregouissy, Tregorick, Tre- 
narren, Trethergy, and Charlestown.
Porthmean 
was the former name of Charlestown.
This place 
was too inconsiderable to be mentioned in Martyn's 
Map ; in 1790, it contained only nine inhabitants ; 
but, in consequence of the harbour, docks, and pil- 
chard fishery, established by Mr.Rashleigh, it is now 
an extensive village, boasting a population of nearly 
three hundred.
The celebrated Pentuan stone-quarry, from which 
the materials of many of the churches and family 
seats in the county have been taken, is in this 
parish.
Polgooth mine, which, in Hals's time, was con- 
sidered as the richest that had ever been worked in 
England, is partly in the parish of St. Austell, about 
two miles south-west of the town.
The surround- 
ing country appears for many miles bleak, desolate, 
and barren ; but its bowels contain vast treasures ; 
though, as a contemporary writer has observed, 
" like the shabby mien of a miser, its aspect does 
not correspond with its hoards." The shafts by 
which the miners descend, and through which the 
ore is raised to the surface, are scattered over a 
considerable extent of sterile ground, whose dreary 
appearance, and the sallow countenances of the mi- 
ners, concur to excite ideas of gloom, apprehension 
and melaucholy.
The number of shafts is not less 
than fifty, from twenty to thirty of which are con- 
stantly in use.
When a stranger is induced to de- 
scend, he is previously accoutred in a flannel shirt 
and trowsers, a close cap, an old hat to shelter his 
face from droppings, and a thick pair of shoes.
A 
lighted candle is put into one hand, and a spare one 
suspended to a button of his jacket.
Every part of 
the ordinary dress is laid aside, and the flannel 
dress worn close to the skin, in order to absorb the 
profuse perspiration which the closeness of the mine, 
or the labour of mounting the ladders, may occa- 
sion.
The ladders are placed almost perpendicu- 
larly ; at the foot of each is a narrow break, or 
landing-place ; and, at certain intervals, are open- 
ings into different beds of ore.
" The main vein of 
ore," says Maton, " which is about six feet thick, 
runs from east to west, and dips to the north at the 
rate of about six feet in a fathom.
Towards the 
east, it divides into two branches ; and there is an- 
other that cuts the former nearly at right angles, 
and consequently runs north and south, dipping at 
the east." The depth of the engine-shaft is oue 
hundred and twenty-four fathoms ; and the machine 
draws up a column of water at each stroke, fifty-six 
feet deep, and fifteen inches in diameter.
The ore 
is disseminated in general through a matrix of caple, 
accompanied with a yellow cupreous pyrites, and 
sometimes a ferruginous ochre.
It is of a vitreous 
kind, but rarely found in crystals ; the colour, for 
the most part, is greyish brown.
The country of the 
ore is chiefly a greyish killas.f At about fifty or 
sixty feet below the surface of this mine, the water 
which passes through the different strata begins to 
form small streams, which would soon increase, and 
overflow the lower part of the mine, if not constantly 
conveyed away.
This process is performed by a 
stupendous steam-engine, which raises the water to 
the adit-level like the fountain of a river.
The 
quantity of coals requisite to fill the fire-place be- 
neath the boilers of this immense machine is sixty 
bushels ; and the consumption every twenty-four 
hours is about three weighs and a half, or 144 
bushels.
The expences of erecting the engine are 
said to have been nearly 20,000/.
Borlase mentions 
that in his time the produce of this mine was so 
great, that the proprietors gained 20,000/.
annually 
for several years.
The revenue now obtained from 
it is very great, but it has not always been so pro- 
ductive.
About the year 1754, it stopped working, 
the receipts having exceeded the charges by only 
ten pounds in the preceding ten years !
though the 
expenditure during that time had been 100,000/.
A little way to the north of the town of St. Aus- 
tell is a place called Menacuddle, the property of 
Charles Rashleigh, Esq. who has succeeded in making 
a large plantation on a coarse hill.
Before his at- 
tempts were successful, he had tried almost every 
size and species of tree, and great part of the ground 
was sown with acorns, beech-mast, and the seeds of 
ash and sycamore ; but the grass proved too strong 
for the seedling plants, and the expence of constant 
weeding was too considerable to be pursued.
The 
bleak north winds, to which the plantation is much 
exposed, were also considerable agents in retarding 
its growth ; and it might possibly have never reach- 
ed maturity, but for the pine-aster fir, which has 
been found sufficiently hardy to resist the more cut- 
ting blasts.
By planting this fir in the highest and 
most exposed places, the more tender trees were 
* The clisprepancy, between the commencement and the 
close of this passage, is so striking, that we can account for it 
only on the supposition, that the fragments of the original cup 
were melted down, and formed into that which is now 
in use.
f " The miners are directed solely by the externa fades of 
a metal, and even about the name applicable to that scarcely 
two can agree.
Caph- is one oi their vague terms, sometimes 
given to the crust or coating of the.
ore, sometimes to an argil- 
laceous substance, and sometimes to a quartzose one.
They 
have pretty generally determined, however, that caple must be 
black : and at Polgooth they mean a heavy kind of quartz, 
which is perfectly opake, and contains a large portion of ar- 
gill." Maton's Observations on the Western Counties.
protected 
CORNWALL.
405 
protected till they had obtained strength to counter- 
act the disadvantage of situation.
The pine-aster 
grows faster than any other fir ; yet, from the expe- 
riments here made, it seems necessary that it should 
be once or twice transplanted when very young;, 
previously to its being placed out for standing.
This 
fir was intermixed with forest trees all over the hill ; 
and, from the strong blasts to which the plantation 
is exposed, was placed very thick.
In thinning the 
Wood, when too close, great caution was observed, 
the boughs only of the trees intended to be removed, 
being taken off" the first season ; it having been 
found much more beneficial to leave the boles stand- 
ing for two, or even three years longer.
In the 
middle of this plantation is a hermitage, built with 
unwrought elms : near it are two ponds, replenished 
with gold and silver fish ; and in a sequestered spot, 
on the skirts of the wood, is a small building en- 
closing a holy well, which formerly served as a bap- 
tistery to a free chapel of the priory at this place.
The priory of St. Austell belonged to the priory and 
convent of Tywardreth.
Bake.] — Between Looe and St. Germain's, plea- 
santly situated about three miles from the sea, 
stands Bake, the seat of Joseph Copley, Bart.
For 
upwards of three centuries, this has been the resi- 
dence of the ancient family of the Moyles, who were 
originally settled in Kent, but obtained possessions 
in this county by marriage.
Thomas Moyle, Esq.
wras Speaker of the House of Commons, in the year 
1542.
The name is now extinct ; but the male line 
subsists in the present possessor of the family estate, 
whose grandfather, Sir Joseph, changed the name 
of Moyle for that of Copley, on his accession to a 
large estate in the county of York.
Amongst the 
family portraits in this mansion is one of the learned 
Walter Moyle, who was born here in the year 
1672.* 
Blazf.y, St.] — St. Blaze, or Blazey, is a chapelry 
to the vicarage of St. Austell, four miles east-north- 
east from that town.
This little village is celebrat- 
ed for having been the landing-p'laee of the renown- 
ed Bishop Blaize, from whom it derives its name ; 
and his effigies is preserved in the church, which was 
dedicated to his memory.
An annual festival is held 
in the parish, at the same period which is observed 
for his commemoration by all the wool-combers in 
England.
Near the turnpike is a slender inscribed 
stone, seven feet six inches high, and one foot and a 
half wide, which is absurdly affirmed by some to 
have been the boundary of the Saxon inroads into 
I his gentleman, after receiving his academical education 
at Oxford, was entered at the Temple ; but, possessing a taste 
too refined to submit to the drudgery of what he termed law- 
lucrative, he applied himself to the study of general jurispru- 
dence, and then probably laid the foundation of those political 
principles, which he afterwards displayed in Parliament.
In 
the I Otb of William III.
he was made representative forSaltash.
His works has obtained from Gibbon, and other eminent 
. VOL.
i.— no.
2.9.
this country.
The characters are much defaced by 
time, but were legible when Borlase made his col- 
lections for the antiquities of Cornwall, and are sup- 
posed by him to have formed the words, Alsoron, 
or Alsoson, Vilici filius ; of whom he regards the 
stone to have been a monument.
In a little mea- 
dow adjoining to the place where this stone now 
stands, many human bones have been found ; it was 
therefore probably a place of public sepulture, and 
from thence this cross might possibly have been re- 
moved.
Blisland.] — Blisland, about four miles and a 
quarter north-north-east from Bodmin, has a cattle 
fair on the Monday after the 22d of September and 
another on the last Monday in November.
The 
church contains some memorials of the Kemps and 
others.
The Rev. Charles Morton was ejected from 
this parish by the Act of Uniformity.
This gentle- 
man was the author of several tracts, amongst which 
were the following : — A Letter to Prove Money not 
so Necessary as Imagined ; Considerations on the 
New River ; A Discourse on Improving the County 
of Cornwall, &c.
Boconnoc] — Boconnoc lies three miles and a 
quarter east-north-east from Lostwithiel.
The ma- 
nor, at the time of the Conquest, was held by Ro- 
bert, Earl of Moreton (or rather of Mortaigne in 
Normandy, Moreton being a modern corruption of 
the name) but was seized on the attainder of Wil- 
liam, his son and successor, who had aided the re- 
bellion of Robert, Duke of Normandy, against 
Henry I.
Afterwards it appears to have been an- 
nexed to the possessions of the Earls of Cornwall ; 
subsequently it was in the ancient family of Cant, 
or de Cancia ; and, early in the fourteenth century, 
it became the property of the Carminowes, who re- 
sided here, and were the first family that possessed^ 
it independant of the earldom.
From the Carmi- 
nowes it passed, by marriage of Margaret, daughter 
and coheiress of Thomas Carminowe, to Sir Hugh 
Courtenay, who was killed at the battle of Tewkes- 
bury.
Sir Edward, his heir and successor, was 
created Earl of Devon, by Henry VII.
in 1485.
His son, Sir William, who married Catherine, 
daughter of Edward the Fourth, should have suc- 
ceeded to the earldom, but being attainted in his 
father's life-time, the title was bestowed on Henry, 
his son, who was created Earl of Devon and Mar- 
quis of Exeter.
This nobleman was beheaded in 
1538-9, and his possessions and honours, reverting 
to the crown, were not restored till the liberation of 
scholars, that tribute of praise to which the profound erudi- 
tion, the acutf and liberal spirit of criticism, and the correct 
and solid judgment by which tiiey are distinguished, so justly 
entitle them, rlis letters, printed with his works, bear testi- 
mony to the wit and vivacity of expression which rendered his 
company interesting to the men of letters who a>sen>bled at 
Will's Colfee-House, to Dryden, Congreve, Wycherly, Flel- - 
cher of Salton, and others.
5k.
his 
40(5 
CORNWALL.
his only surviving son, the accomplished but unfor- 
tunate Edward, in the year 1553.
It is believed 
that the manor, upon becoming vested in the crown, 
by the attainder of Sir William Courtney, was 
granted to John, Lord Russell ; as, in 1579, it was 
sold by the Earl of Bedford to William Mohan, af- 
terwards Sir William Mohun, who died seized of it, 
about 1587.
This family, whose ancestor, William 
de Mohun, came to England with the Conqueror, 
was originally settled at Dunster, in Somersetshire ; 
but they appear to have had property in Cornwall 
in the reign of King John, and afterwards resided 
at Boconnoc.
In the year 1713, Charles, Lord 
fttohun, the last of the name, was killed in a duel 
with the Duke of Hamilton, and his possessions 
were soon afterwards conveyed by his dowager to a> 
Mordaunt whom she had married, of a baronet's fa- 
mily in Warwickshire.
This Mordaunt sold Bocon- 
noc, and all Lord Mohun's other manors in this 
county, to Thomas Pitt, Esq. who had been Go- 
vernor of Madras, and has since been so much cele- 
brated for having brought to Europe the famous 
Pitt-diamond.
This extraordinary stone weighs 127 
carats.
It was purchased in its rough state for 
20,000/.
and was sold for 135,000/.
The Regent of 
France was the purchaser ; and it is sajd to have 
adorned the hilt of Napoleon Buonaparte's sword.
On his late overthrow, Buonaparte was most anxi- 
ous to preserve this precious jewel.
He confided a 
large sum of money to a person, for the purpose of 
bringing it off; but his confident deceived him ; and 
he lost his money, without obtaining his favourite 
diamond, of Which he complained most bitterly.
It 
is believed to be now amongst the regalia of Louis 
XVIII.
Thomas Pitt, Esq. grandson of the go- 
vernor, was Lord Warden of the Stannaries in the 
year 1750.
His great-grandson, Thomas, was 
created Lord Camelford, Baron of Boconnoc, in the 
year 1784.
His son, the second Lord Camelford, 
was killed in a duel with Captain Best, in the year 
1804.* His lordship dying without issue, the Bo- 
connoc estate passed, in marriage with his sister and 
* On the evening of Tuesday, March 6, his Lordship, 
meeting with Captain Best, with whom he had been in habits 
of intimacy, at the Prince of Wales Coffee-house, addressed 
him in very strong terms, and charged him with ungentlemanly 
conduct.
In consequence of this, Captain Best retired, and 
immediately sent a challenge to Lord Camelford.
All the 
points respecting the meeting being arranged, the parties, at- 
tended by their seconds, met the following morning, at the 
back of Holland House, on the Uxbriclge road.
Lord C.
hied the hist shot, which missed his antagonist, who instantly 
returned the fire, anil lodged the contents of his piece in his 
Lordship's both.
His Lordship instantly fell.
On Captain 
Best going up to him, Lord C.
seized him by the hand, and 
exclaimed — " Our quarrel is decided, Best !
and I am a dead 
man, but I freely forgive you !" — The report of the pistols 
brought the gardener to the spot, in whose care his Lordship 
was left, and was shortly after removed to the house of Mr.
Ottey, a gentleman of the Navy Pay Office, adjoining Holland 
House Park.
Lord C.
lingered, without hopes of recovery, 
•till the evening of .Saturday the 10th, when he expired, at half- 
sole heir, to the Right Hon. Lord Grenville, who is 
the present proprietor.
In the reign of Edward IV.
William of Worcester 
described Boconnoc-house as a turretted old man- 
sion.
The present seat is a convenient but not 
magnificent structure, situated on a lawn of nearly 100 
acres adjoining the park.
No traces of the ancient 
mansion can now be seen, though a portion of the 
walls remains in the present building, which was 
new modelled from the old fabric by Governor Pitt, 
and an additional wing made.
The first Lord Ca- 
melford added a second wing, containing a hand- 
some gallery, 110 feet in length, opening into a 
drawing-room, and a library.
The gallery, and 
several apartments, are ornamented with portraits ; 
of which the following are the best entitled to 
observation : — 
Sir Reginald Mohun, half length, thought to be 
by Cornelius Jansen.
An old Lady of the Mohun 
family, supposed to be Sir Reginald's grandmother.
Both these are dated 1636.
Governor Pitt : Knel- 
ler : full length, very fine.
Sir Richard Lyttleton, 
brother to the first Lord Lyttleton, and to Christian, 
mother of the first Lord Camelford : Pompeio Bat- 
toni.
Duchess of Cleveland : Sir Peter Lely.
This 
fine painting was presented by the Duchess to her 
relation, Harriet Villiers, who married Robert Pitt, 
eldest son of the Governor.
The, expression and 
character are wonderfully great.
Mrs. Stewart and 
Mrs. Villiers, sisters to the above Harriet.
Charles 
Lyttleton, Bishop of Carlisle : Cotes.
George 
Grenville, Esq. father of the Marquis of Bucking- 
ham : Sir Joshua Reynolds.
In his robes as Chan- 
cellor of the Exchequer.
Lord Lyttleton: Caltz.
The preceding five are Kit-Cats.
Richard, late 
Earl Temple : three-quarter length : Sir Joshua 
Reynolds.
Frederick, late Prince of Wales : full 
length : the head and breast by Vanloo, but indif- 
ferently finished by one of his scholars.
This was 
presented by his Royal Highness to Thomas, 
grandson of Governor Pitt, when the latter was 
Lord Warden of the Stannaries.
General Earl 
past eight o'clock, in a state of mind perfectly collected and 
resigned.
On the day preceding his demise he settled all his 
affairs, and left behind him a paper in his own hand-writing, fully 
acquitting his antagonist of any blame in the unfortunate trans- 
action which led to his untimely death.
His Lordship's re- 
mains were deposited in a vault of St. Anne's church, Soho, 
there to remain till arrangements should be formed for their 
conveyance to Switzerland.
Lord Camelford had minutely 
described the spot, between three trees in the canton of Berne, 
where it was his wish to be buried.
His Lordship left 1000/.
for the purchase of the ground.
His Lordship's wishes, we 
believe, were carried into effect, shortly after the present 
peace had taken place.
This eccentric, but high-spirited anci 
benevolent young nobleman, fell in the 29th or 30th year of 
his age.
His Lordship went round the world, as a midship- 
man, with Captain Vancouver ; and on his return was pro- 
moted to a lieutenantcy, and soon after to the rank of master 
and commander, which in a short time he resigned, and quitted 
the naval profession.
Stanhope 
CORNWALL.
407 
Stanhope, related to the Pitts by marriage : Knel- 
lcr.
The Billiard-Room contains a bust of the first 
Lord Camelford, executed by an artist at Rome in 
1790 ; and another of the Great Earl of Chatham, 
by Wilton.
Beneath the bust of Lord Chatham 
are the following panegyrical lines, written by 
Frederick Montague, Esq. and engraved on a cop- 
per-plate : — 
Her trophies faded, and revers'd her spear, 
See England's Genius bend o'er Chatham's bier ; 
Her sails no more, in ev'ry clime unfurl' d, 
Proclaim her dictates to th' admiring world : 
No more shall accents nervous, bold and strong, 
Flow in full periods from his patriot tongue ; 
Yet shall th' historic and poetic page 
Thy name, Great Shade, devolve from age to age ; 
Thine and thy country's fate congenial tell — 
By thee she triumph'd, and with thee she fell.
Amongst the rare and choice furniture preserved 
in Boconnoc House, is a rich antique cabinet of 
tortoise-shell, inlaid with silver, representing all the 
principal subjects in Ovid's Metamorphoses ; a small 
table, and a pair of carved chairs of ebony, made 
out of the cradle belonging to the children of James 
the First ; and a very elegant and tastefully disposed 
collection of old china.
Some vestiges of ancient lead mines are found in 
the park, one of which was worked in the reign of 
Charles the First, and again about the year 1750 ; 
but it was not rich enough to defray the expence of 
working.
The neighbouring grounds are varied 
and broken, and possess considerable beauty, from 
being adorned with woody scenery, and retired 
vales, each watered by a babbling but pellucid 
brook, forming by their confluence the little river 
Lerryn.
Through these woods and vales the first 
Lord Camelford had a pleasant ride carried, of about 
six miles in circuit, and so judiciously disposed, 
that easy access was given to the simple but pleas- 
ing scenery of nature, whilst the intrusions of art 
were concealed ; the shrubbery, the green-house, 
and the parterre, which are of necessity trim and 
formal, being hidden from the sight, and almost 
from the imagination.
The 
tree most congenial to 
the soil is the beech : some oaks have here attained 
considerable size, but they do not possess that ma- 
jesty, and stateliness of form, which distinguish them 
in some other parts of the island.
On an eminence at some distance from the house 
is an obelisk, elegantly proportioned, and rising to 
the height of 123 feet.
On the pedestal appears the 
following inscription: — 
In Gratitude and Affection 
To the Memory of 
Sir Richard Lyttleton, 
And to perpetuate the Remembrance 
Of that peculiar Character of Benevolence 
Which rendered him 
The Delight of his own Age, 
And worthy the Veneration of 
Posterity.
1771.
This column stands in the centre of a square in- 
trenchment, which is supposed to have been raised 
during the civil wars in the time of Charles.
On a 
neighbouring hill is another intrenchmeiit, much re- 
sembling the former, called St. Nighton's Beacon.
From the Historical Discourses of Sir Edward 
Walker, it appears to have been made by the King's 
forces in 1644.
In this year, on the 4th of August, 
Sir Bernard Gascoigne surprised and took possession 
of Boconnoc House, which was then garrisoned by 
some of the Parliament's forces under the command 
of the Earl of Essex, several of whose officers being 
carousing there, were made prisoners.
Five days 
afterwards, the King* took his quarters at Boconnoc; 
and on the day succeeding his arrival, the second 
ineffectual attempt was made to corrupt the fidelity 
of Essex.
On the fourth of September Charles 
quitted Boconnoc, and marched to Liskeard, and 
the day following left Cornwall.
Near the gate of 
the Rookwood-Grove, leading to the Parsonage, 
still remains the stump of an aged oak, in which, 
according- to tradition, the King's standard was 
fixed.
The upper part of this tree was broken off 
by the wind in March 1783, about nine feet above 
the ground.
Within the memory of the oldest inha- 
bitants of this county, it had produced scarcely any 
other than variegated leaves, which tradition further 
reports, originally changed colour from an attempt 
havincr been made to assassinate the King while re- 
ceiving the sacrament under its branches : The ball 
is said to have passed through the tree ; and a hole, 
made by woodpeckers, was shown to confirm the 
tale, which probably arose from the King having 
been actually shot at, when in the Hall- Walk, and 
a fisherman killed who was gazing at him.
The 
retirement and repose which now distinguish Bocon- 
noc, render it difficult for the visitant to conceive it 
as having been the residence of a court, and sur- 
rounded witlv contending armies.
Boconnoc church is apparently of the age of 
Henry the Sixth, in whose reign many of the Cornish 
churches appear to have been built.
It consists of a 
small aisle of two arches only, and two larger aisles 
of equal dimensions, separated by clustered columns, 
and six pointed arches.
This fabric once abounded 
with ancient monuments ; but almost allof them, on 
repairing and new paving the church, some years 
ago, were torn down, and confusedly deposited in a 
vault, which was at the same time filled up, as though 
it had been decreed that every memorial of the Car- 
minowes and Mohuns was to be extinguished with 
their families.
A memorial, however, of one of the 
daughters of Sir Reginald Mohun, who died in 
1G37, yet remains.
When the church was repaired, 
the muilions and tracery-work were also taken from 
the windows, and the screen or rood-loft removed.
In the lunette, between the first and second arches, 
on the- north side of the wall which divides the aisles, 
within a small arch, is some ancient sculpture, re- 
presenting a gigantic figure standing beside a cradle, 
in which is an infant sleeping.
Near the foot of the 
7 cradle 
408 
CORNWALL.
cradle is Death ; and at the head, an hour glass in 
the act of falling: in the hands of a large figure is a 
rude scythe.
This is supposed to be a votive tablet, 
offered for the recovery of a sick infant, the gigantic 
personage representing St. Chvistopher.
The font 
is handsome : the bason is supported by a piscina 
and four columns.
The belfry is singular, it being 
only eight feet high from the ground to the spring- 
ing of the roof.
The bells, three in number, hang 
within two feet of the ground, and are rung by the 
foot.
Boconnoc parish is small : its length is only about 
two miles and a half, and its breadth one mile and 
three quarters.
The manor is not bounded by the 
parish, but extends into the parishes of Bradoc, .St.
Winnowe, St. Veep, and Ladock : it also claims 
right of seignory over the manors of Tregrilla and 
Menheniot.
Bodmin.] — Bodmin, anciently Bosmanna, and 
Bodman, is a market and borough town, governed 
by a mayor, 12 aldermen, 24 common councilmen, 
and a town clerk.
It sends two members to Parlia- 
ment ; has a weekly market on Saturdays ; and four 
annual fairs — January 25 ; Saturday se'ennight be- 
fore Easter ; Tuesday and Wednesday before Whit- 
sunday ; and December 6.
Bodmin has been the scene of action of two prin- 
cipal rebellions : the first was that of Perkin War- 
beck, who remained here, collecting his forces, till 
he thought himself sufficiently strong to attack 
Exeter ; the other was in the reigu of Edward the 
Sixth, when the Cornish and Devonshire men rising, 
one Boyer, mayor of Bodmin, was very active in 
assisting them, for which he perhaps deservedly 
suffered death ; but the unparalleled and wanton 
cruelty of Sir Anthony Kingston will ever cover 
his memory with infamy.
This wretch, who was 
provost-marshal of the King's army, on his coming 
to Bodmin, sent orders to the mayor, to cause a 
gibbet to be erected in the street, opposite his own 
house, by the noon of the next day ; and intimated 
that he would then dine with him, in order to be 
present at the execution of some rebels.
The un- 
suspecting mayor obeyed this command, and at the 
appointed time regaled his visitor, who, after the 
* Sir William Lower, a zealous royalist in the reign of 
Charles I.
was born at Tremere, near Bodmin.
On the de- 
cline of the royal cause he retired to Holland, but returned at 
the Restoration, fie wrote and translated the following dra- 
matic pieces: — 1.
The Phoenix in Flames, a tragedy : 2.
Poly- 
e uctes, or the Martyrs, a tragedy : 3.
Horatius, a tragedy, from 
the French of Corneille : 4.
The Noble Ingratitude, a pastoral 
tragi-comedy,-from M.
Quinault: 5.
The Inthanted Lovers, 
a dramatic pastoral: 0.
The Amorous Phantasm, a Iragi-come- 
dy.
All these, except the first, were written during the Inter- 
regnum.
He translated from the French the first and third 
volumes of The Innocent Lady, or Illustrious Innocence.
The 
most considerable of the books published by him, are those 
two which relate to Charles the Second's reception and enter- 
tainment at the Hague.
One of them was printed several years 
before the Restoration, the other at that sera.
It is intituled, 
" A Relation of Charles the Second's Voyage to, and Resi- 
dence at, the Hague, from the 25th of May to June l l, 1660, 
mayor's spirits were exhilirated with wine, desired 
to know if the gibbet was ready, and being told that 
it was, he, with a diabolical sneer, ordered the mayor 
to be hanged upon it.
Among other unhappy per- 
sons, whose mistaken zeal had drawn them into this 
rebellion, was a miller, whose servant had such an 
affection for him, that hearing his master was to die, 
he generously came to Kingston, and offered to 
suffer death in his stead, alledging that he could 
never do his master better service.
On which the 
Knight, instead of being struck with this wonderful 
instance of heroism, fidelity, and friendship, coolly 
told him, that if he liked hanging so well, he should 
not be disappointed^ and instantly ordered him to be 
executed.
During the civil wars of Charles, Bod- 
min was occasionally occupied by both parties ; 
and, in 1646, a few days before the capitulation 
with Sir Ralph Hopton, near Truro, it was finally 
taken possession of, for the Parliament, by General 
Fairfax.
This appears to have been the last inci- 
dent of a military nature, relating to the town.* 
Bodmin is considered to have been one of the 
coinage towns, which was authorised to stamp tin ; 
a privilege, however, which it lost, prior to the year 
1347, and never was able to regain.
Bodmin appears to have been much larger, and 
more populous, some centuries ago, than it is now.
In 1351, 1500 persons died there, of a pestilence : 
in 1811, the entire population was only 2050.
Still, 
however, it is a large town.
It occupies the north- 
ern aspect of a hill, and consists principally of one 
long street, running east and west ; some part of 
which is unevenly paved, and its eastern end is dan- 
gerously narrow.
It is now the seat of the county 
prison ; a commodious and well arranged structure, 
from a design by the late Sir John Call, on the 
Howard system, having been finished in 1780- A 
short time ago it was determined to raise a lunatic 
asylum, near this prison.
The county gaol was for- 
merly at Launceston.
Excepting for the years be- 
tween 1727 and 1738, the summer county assizes 
have been holden here ever since 1716.
The Michael- 
mas Quarter Sessions are also holden here.
It is 
worthy of remark, that barristers do not attend W\% 
Cornish sessions.
The annual horse races, which 
&c." Hag. Com.
1660.
This is a translation of the French.
Sir William Lower died in 1662.
Dr. Richard Lower, mentioned above, was the son of Sir 
William.
He was educated, first at Westminster School, and 
then at Christ Church, Oxford, under Dr. Thomas Willis, of 
whom he learned to be an excellent anatomist ; ami that great 
physician is said to have learnt several things from him.
Upon 
the death of Dr. Willis, he succeeded to a great part of his- 
practice, arid was'in as high repute as any physician in London.
He was the first discoverer of Astrop Wells, which were for- 
merly much frequented.
He was author of several medical 
pieces, of which Mr. Wood has given us a catalogue.
But his 
capital work is his book *' De Corde," which has been often 
printed.
In this book, he lays claim to the invention of trans- 
fusing the blood, to which Francis Potter, a native of Mere, in 
Wiltshire, had cerlainlv a prior right.
Dr. Lower died in 
1691.
had 
CORNWALL.
409 
had been dropped upwards of twenty years, were 
revived in 1807.
Respecting- the ecclesiastical history of Bodmin, a 
strange error formerly prevailed.
The late learned 
Mr. Whitaker,* in his history of the Cathedral of 
* The County of Cornwall is so much indebted to this truly 
erudite and elegant scholar, and we feel ourselves under so 
many obligations to him, in compiling its history, that, although 
another county had the honour of giving him birth, we conceive 
that we cannot gratify our readers more, than by now introduc- 
ing to them some particulars of his life.
The subjoined memoir 
is from the pen of one ot the conductors of the British Critic; 
a work to which he was long a valuable contributor.
John Whitaker was born at Manchester, probably in the year 
1735.
For, in the register of baptisms, at the collegiate parish 
church of Christ, in that place, we find he was baptized on the 
11th of May in that year.
Before he was ten years of age, he 
was entered as scholar of the Free-Grammar-Sohool in Man- 
chester.
In 1752, he was " made exhibitioner to Oxford, at ten 
pounds per annum." He was elected a scholar of Corpus 
Christi College, 2d of March, 1753 ; and fellow, 21st of Janu- 
ary, 1763.
In 1759, February 27, he was admitted M.
A.; and in 1767, 
July 1, he proceeded B.
D. 
It appears that he was a young man " of great peculiarities." 
He associated with very few ; it was supposed from the narrow- 
ness of his circumstances.
He regularly kept the fast of Lent, 
and that of every Friday throughout the year, till supper time; 
when he used to draw attention from all who were at table with 
him, by eating double or treble commons.
He was, from the 
beginning to the end of his time in college, a very hard student.
But these peculiarities were manifest proofs of an independent 
mind, of a conscious superiority over others.
The character, 
however, of his mind was soon decided in literary composition.
In 1771, Mr. Whitaker published the first volume of his 
" History of Manchester," in quarto ; a work which, for acute- 
ness of research, bold imagination, original sentiment, and cor- 
rect information, has scarcely its parallel in the literature of any 
country.
Nor does its composition less merit our applause ; 
whether we have respect to the arrangement of the materials, 
the style, or the language.
In some passages there is much 
elegance, in others a magnificence of thought, a force of ex- 
pression, a glow of diction, truly astonishing.
The introduc- 
tion of Christianity into this island, in particular, is described 
(we had almost said) as with the pen of inspiration.
With re- 
gard to the general subject of the Manchester, Mr W.
was the 
first writer who could so light up the region of antiquarian re- 
search as to dissipate its obscurity, even to the eyes of ordinary 
spectators : and his Manchester is perhaps the only book in 
which the truth of our island history has been elucidated by the 
hand of a master.
It is rather singular that this work was, in 
the order of merit as well as time, the first of Mr. Whitaker's 
publications.
In proportion as he advanced in life, his imagination seems, 
by a strange inversion of what is characteristic of our nature, to 
have gained an ascendancy over bis judgment ; and we shall 
perceive more of fancy and passion, of conjecture and hypo- 
thesis, in some of his subsequent productions, than of just opi- 
nion or deliberate investigation.
Mr. Whitaker's " Genuine 
History of the Britons asserted," an octavo volume, published 
in 1772, may be accepted as a sequel to the " Manchester." — 
It contains a complete refutation of " the unhappy Macpher- 
son," whose " Introduction to the History of Great Britain 
and Ireland," is full of palpable mistakes and misrepresenta- 
tions.
In 1773, we find Mr. W.
the morning preacher of Berkeley 
chapel, London; to which office he had been appointed in 
November by Mr. Hughes ; but in less than two months he 
was removed from that situation.
This gave occasion to " The 
vol.
i. — no.
30.
Cornwall, has, with much ability, proved the fallacy 
of the grounds upon which it was supposed to have 
been a bishop's see ; an error into which Dr. Bor- 
lase, Browne Willis, and other eminent antiquaries, 
had fallen ; and has shewn very satisfactorily, that 
it 
Case between Mr. W.
and Mr. Hughes, relative to the morn- 
ing Preachership of Berkeley Chapel;" in which Mr. W.
de- 
clares himself " unalterably determined to carry the matter 
into Westminster-Hall." But the fervour of his resentment 
threw him off his guard ; and he expressed himself so indis- 
creetly, that his case was considered as a libel by the Court of 
King's Bench.
During his residence in London, he had an 
opportunity of conversing with several of our most celebrated 
writers; among whom were the author of the Rambler, and the 
historian of the Roman Empire.
It does not appear, indeed, that Johnson was much attached 
to Mr. Whitaker.
Both strong in understanding, equally tena- 
cious of opinion, and equally impassioned in conversation, it ts 
not probable that they should amicably coalesce on all occa- 
sions.
In the Ossianicconlroversy they were decidedly hostile.
With Gibbon Mr. W.
was well acquainted; and the MS.
of 
a volume of " The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" 
was submitted to Mr. Whitaker's inspection.
But what was his 
surprise, when, as he read the same volume in print, that chap- 
ter which has been so obnoxious to the Christian world, was 
then first introduced to his notice !
That chapter Gibbon had 
suppressed in the MS.
over-awed by Mr. Whitaker's high 
character, and afraid of his censure.
And, in fact, that the 
Deist should have shrunk from his indignant eye, may well be 
conceived, when we see his Christian principle, and his manly 
spirit, uniting in the rejection of a living of considerable value, 
which was at this time offered him by a Unitarian patron !
He 
spurned at the temptation, and pitied the seducer !
Of his in- 
tegrity, however, some recompence was now at hand ; and in 
the year 1777, he succeeded as fellow of Corpus Christi Col- 
lege, to the rectory of Ruan-Lanyhorne, one of the most valu- 
able livings in the gift of that college ; and into Cornwall he 
went to reside upon his rectory.
There, it might have been expected that retirement and 
leisure would greatly favour the pursuits of literature.
But 
Ruan-Lanyhorne was, for seveial years, no tranquil seat of the 
Muses.
That pleasant seclusion was now the scene of contest., 
This was a contest, however, absolutely unavoidable.
Mr. W.
had proposed a tythe composition, by no means unreasonable; 
which his parishioners refused to pay.
But Mr. W.
was steady 
to his purpose.
A rupture between the parties ensued ; the 
tythes were demandeo in kind ; disputes arose upon disputes ; 
animosities were kindled ; and litigations took place.
That 
Mr. W.
was finally victorious, afforded pleasure to the friends 
of the rector, and to the friends of justice and truth ; yet it was 
long before harmony was restored to Ruan-Lanyhorne.
That his literary schemes had been so early interrupted, was 
the subject of general regret.
But the conscientious pastor 
looked with a deeper concern to the spiritual welfare of his pa- 
rishioners.
He saw, with sorrow, their aversion from his preach- 
ing, their indifference to his instruction, their repugnance to 
his authority : and ' he laboured more abundantly;' till, after 
a few years, he had the satisfaction to perceive a visible altera- 
tion in the behaviour of the principal parishioners ; and a mu- 
tual good understanding was established between the pastor and 
his flock.
His cordial, his familiar manner, indeed, was always 
pleasing to those whom, prejudice had not armed against him: 
and, in proportion as they became acquainted with his kind 
disposition, the transitoriness of his resentments, and, after in- 
juries, his promptness to forgive, and anxious wish to be for- 
given, they endeavoured more and more to cultivate his friend- 
ship; and at length loved and revered him as their father.— 
Nothing can more fully display the warmth of bis affections, 
his zeal as a minister of Christ, or his impassioned style of elo- 
quence, than those ' Sermons' which he published in 1 783, 
5 l s ( '-«" 
410 
CORNWALL.
it was not the monastery at Bodmin, but another 
religious house dedicated to St. Petroc, near the 
sea-side, at Padstow, that was burnt by the Danes.
The priory of Bodmin is said to have owed its origin 
after having preached them to his parishioners, we donht not, 
with a voice and manner calculated to penetrate the conscience, 
and strike conviction into the soul ; to awaken the tears of pe- 
nitence, and to elevate the hopes of the Christian to the abodes 
of immortality.
That he should have published so little in the 
line of his profession, is perhaps to be regretted.
His ' Origin 
of Arianism,' however, is a large vol.
: it is a controversial tract, 
full of erudition and ingenious argumentation.
We have read 
no other work of Mr. W.
in divinity, except 'The Real Origin 
of Government,' (expanded into a considerable treatise, from 
a sermon which he had preached before Bishop Buller, at his 
Lordship's primary visitation), and 'The Introduction to Flin- 
dell's Bible.' This has been much admired as a masterly piece 
of eloquence.
In the mean time the antiquary was not at rest.
His ' Mary, 
Queen of Scots,' published in I7S7, in three octavo volumes; 
Itis * Course of Hannibal over the Alps ;' his   Ancient Cathe- 
dral of Cornwall ;' and his ' Supplement to Polwhele's Anti- 
quities of Cornwall;' furnish good evidence of an imagination 
continually occupied in pursuits, which kindled up its brightest 
flame ; though not always of that judgment, discretion, and 
candour, which (if human cha cters had been ever perfect) we 
should have expected from a Whitaker.
But not even here 
were his antiquarian stores exhausted.
« The Life of St. Neot,' 
' The History of Oxford,' and ' The History of London,' were 
works all at once projected, and no sooner projected than 
executed in imagination, and more than half executed in 
reality.
In criticism (where, writing anonymously, he would proba- 
bly have written with the less restraint) we find him, for the 
most part, candid and good-natured: not sparing of censure, 
yet lavish of applause ; and affording us, in numerous instances, 
the most agreeable proofs of genuine benevolence.
Even in 
the instance of Gibbon, where he has been thought severe be- 
yond ail former example, we have a large mixture of sweet 
with the bitter.
It was his critique on Gibbon which contribut- 
ed principally to the reputation of the English Review ; in 
which Mr. W.
was the author of many valuable articles.
To 
his pen also, The British Critic, and The Antijacobin Review, 
were indebted for various pieces of criticism.
But the strength of his principles is no where more apparent, 
than in those articles where he comes forward armed with the 
panoply of truth, in defence of our civil and ecclesiastical con- 
stitution.
It was there he struck his adversaries with coDster- 
' nation ; and we behold the host of Jacobins shrinking away 
from before his face, and creeping into their caverns of dark- 
ness.
But we are here betrayed into expressions perhaps too 
violent for plain prose.
This reminds us of another part of our 
friend's literary character; we mean his poetical genius.
That 
he contributed some fine pieces of poetry to   The Cornwall 
and Devon Pucis,' is well known.
These were published in 
two small octavo volumes ; and the editor is said to possess a 
sufficient quantity of good verse, by Mr. Whitaker, to fill 
forty or fitty pages of the third volume, once in contempla- 
tion.
We have thus, with rapid glances, viewed the productions of 
our old and valued friend ; and hailed him in the several de- 
partments of the historian, the theologist, the critic, the politi- 
cian, the antiquary, and the poet.
Versatility like Whitaker's, 
is, io truth, of rare occurrence.
But still more rare is the splen- 
dour of original genius, exhibited in walks so various.
Not that 
Mr. W.
was equally happy in them all.
His characteristic 
il'ijlities as a writer, were, acute discernment, a velocity of ideas 
which acquired new force in composition, with a power of 
combining images in a manner peculiarly striking, and of 
throwing on every topic of discussion the strongest illustration, 
to the circumstance of St. Petroc, its founder, hav- 
ing taken up his abode in a valley, now occupied by 
the town of Bodmin, then the residence of St.
(Suroa, 
a solitary recluse, who having resigned his hennit- 
With little scruple, therefore, we hazard an opinion, that, though 
his chief excellence was recognized in antiquarian research, he 
would have risen to some distinction as a poet, had he cultivat- 
ed in early youth the favour of the Muses.
Be this as it may, 
there are none who will deem us extravagant in pronouncing, 
that Mr. W.
was a great literary character.
That he was good 
as well as great, would sufficiently appear in the recollection 
of, any period of his life ; whether we saw him abandoning pre- 
ferment from principle, and heard him ' reasoning of righteous- 
ness and judgment to come,' until a Gibbon trembled ; or, 
whether among his parishioners, we witnessed his unaffected 
earnestness of preaching, his humility in conversing with the 
poorest cottagers, his sincerity in assisting them with advice, 
his tenderness in offering them consolation, and his charity in 
relieving their distresses.
It is true, to the same warmth of 
temper, together with a sense of good intentions, we must at- 
tribute an irritability at times destructive of social comfort ; 
and an impetuousness that brooked not opposition, and bore 
down all before it.
This precipitation was, in part, also to be 
traced to his ignorance of the world ; to his simplicity in be- 
lieving others like himself — precisely what they seemed to be ; 
and, on the detection of his error, his anger at dissimulation 
and hypocrisy.
But his general good humour, his hos- 
pitality, and his convivial pleasantry, were surely enough 
to atone for those sudden bursts of passion, those flashes, 
which betrayed his human frailty, but still argued ge- 
nius.
And they who knew how ' fearfully and wonder- 
fully he was made,' could bear from a Whitaker, what, 
they would certainly have resented in another.
We should 
add, that, in his family, Mr. W.
was uniformly regular ; nor 
did he suffer, at any time, his literary cares to entrench on his 
domestic duties.
Such was the historian of Manchester, and the rector of 
Ruan Lanyhorne ; of whose public and private life, we have 
endeavoured to draw a faithful sketch : and we should now 
close up all in marking the approaches to ' the inevitable hour,' 
at which this life was terminated, but for the literary schemes 
still formed in that mind of high intelligence, and still prepared 
for its execution.
Not many months before his death, the writer of this article 
heard him speak of ' Notes on Shakespeare,' and * Illustrations 
of the Bible.' But he wished to finish his ' Oxford,' his 
' London,' and his ' St. Neot,' (already mentioned as pro- 
jected publications) before he resumed his * Shakespeare,' on 
which he had occasionally written notes ; and to lay aside his 
Shakespeare, before he took up his ' Bible.' To the Bible, he 
meant at last to withdraw himself from all other studies: it was 
' the Holy of Holies,' into which he longed to enter.
All this he intended to do: and all this, if a few years had 
been added to his life, he would probably have done.
With a view to the last three antiquarian works, but chiefly 
to the ' London,' he determined to travel to the metropolis : 
and thither he travelled, with all the ardour of youthful spirits.
But even for his athletic frame, he had a mind of too resiless 
an activity.
Amidst his indefatigable researches into the anti- 
quities of the city, his friends detected the first symptoms qf 
bodily decay.
His journey to London, his vast exertions there 
in procuring information, his energetic and various conversa- 
tion with literary characters, brought on a debility which he 
little regarded, till it alarmed him in a stroke of paralysis.
From this stroke, not long after his return into Cornwall, he 
recovered so far as to be able to pursue (though not many hours 
in a day) his accustomed studies: and it was the Life of St..
Neot that chiefly occupied his attention.
On the actual pub- 
lication of this, which was in the press at the time of his death, 
a very good account may be seen in a preface prefixed to 
2 th« 
CORNWALL.
411 
age to St. Petroe, it was by him enlarged for the j 
residence of himself and three other devout men, ] 
who accompanied him with the intention of leading 
a monastic life, according- to the rules of St. Bene- 
dict.
Here St. Petroe died before the middle of the 
sixth century.
His shrine was preserved in a small 
chapel attached to the east end of Bodmin church, 
as we learn from Leland and William of Worcester.
The hermitage, which he had founded, continued to 
be inhabited by monks of the order of St. Benedict, 
till the reign of King Athelstan, who, in 926, found- 
ed, on or near the same spot, a priory of Bene- 
dictines ; this convent, having been dissolved at an 
early period, and their possessions fallen into the 
hands of secular canons, Robert, Earl of Moreton 
and Cornwall, seized them to his own use, and after 
the death of his son, William, Earl of Moreton and 
Cornwall, they became vested in the crown.
Algar, 
to whom it is probable they had been granted, with 
the King's licence, and that of William Warlewast, 
Bishop of Exeter, re-founded the monastery, and 
replenished it with Austin canons, who continued 
till the general dissolution of religious houses, when 
its revenues were valued at 270/.
0s.
\ld.
per annum, 
clear income.
The prior had, among other privi- 
leges, a market and fair, gallows, pillory, &c.
as 
proved in a quo icarranto, in the reign of King Ed- 
ward I.
The site, with the demesne, was granted 
to Thomas Sternhold, one of the translators of the 
Psalms.
In 1567, it was the property of Nicolas 
Pescod and Judith his wife, and William Pydderly 
and Philippa his wife, by whom it was sold, that 
year, to John Rashleigh, of Fowey, merchant.
— 
The immediate site was purchased of the Rashleigh 
family by the late William Pennington, Esq. and is 
now the seat of Walter Raleigh Gilbert, Esq. who 
married his niece, Miss Hosken.
The site of the 
Grey Friars' Convent was granted to William Ab- 
bot, in the year 1516 ; and he, in the succeeding 
year, transferred it to William Vyvyan, and others.
About twenty years after it was conveyed to the cor- 
poration of Bodmin, in which it still rests.
In the 
reign of Elizabeth, Tanner states that it was used as 
the county house of correction.
The refectory, the 
only part which now remains, was fitted up as an 
assize hall in the early part of the eighteenth cen- 
tury.
According to Hals, it was the fairest and 
best room in England after Westminster Hall : it 
was sixty feet in height, and one hundred and fifty 
in length : it was used also as a market house ; se- 
veral fairs for various sorts of merchandize, were 
holden there ; and a fair for cattle was kept in the 
adjoining church-yard.
Of late years the two ends 
of this room have been occupied by the courts of 
justice ; the business of the corn market is transact- 
ed in the space between ; above is the grand jury 
room, with a large ball-room, which is open at the 
time of the races.
Bodmin church is the most considerable building 
of the fifteenth century in this county.
It consists 
of three aisles, measuring about 123 feet long from 
east to Avest, and 60 feet wide from north to south.
— The aisles are divided by nine pointed arches, 
springing from clustered columns.
On the outside, 
attached to the middle of the north aisle, is a square 
tower.
The eastern end of the church appears the 
oldest ; and in that part are the King's arms, in 
stone, with C.
R., several old oak seats, ornamented 
with rude carvings, symbolical of the crucifixion, 
&c.
These carvings are very frequent on the seats 
and other parts of the Cornish churches.
Amongst 
those of Bodmin church a remarkable one sometimes 
occurs ; being St. Peter's sword, with the high 
priest's servant's ear attached.
On the floor are 
many fragments of ancient monumental flat stones.
Near the eastern wall is a large and curiously sculp- 
tured monument, with a Latin inscription to the fol- 
lowing purport : — " Here lies the venerable father 
Thomas Vyvyan, Bishop of Megara, Prior of this 
House, who died the 3d of June, A.
D. 1533: to 
whose soul God be propitious." The portraiture of 
the old Bishop is represented on the tomb, arrayed 
in his episcopal robes, with a mitre and crosier ; his 
hands clasped on his breast, and two angels guard- 
ing his head : these also sustain shields, charged : 
with the Vyvyan and Priory arms.
On the sides of 
the tomb are six niches, filled with statues of saints; 
and at the head are the arms of England.
There 
I was formerly a spire on the tower, which was des- 
troyed by lightning in the last year of the 17th cen- 
tury.
It was considered to be the loftiest and the 
finest in the west of England.
When the church 
was built, workmen's wages were as follow : — La- 
bourers, id.
per day ; masons hewing of stones, bd.
; .
masons, for forming the pillars, &c.
6d.
; plasterers, 
6|r/.
The lead for roofing the church cost 16/.
2s.
. 
3\d.
; and, exclusively of presents of timber, the.
total expense of the building was only 194/.
3s.
6|r?.
As a contrast to this it may be mentioned, that an 
expense of 227/.
95.
\\d.
was incurred for repairs, 
the volume,, by Mr. Stockdale, ami containing two letters of 
Mr. Whitaker's, in the last of which he still writes with 
confidence as to his further plans.
Alas, never to be com- 
pleted !
During the last year, his decline was gradual ; nor, melan^ 
choly as it was, could a Christian contemplate it without- a 
lively mixture of pleasure ; since, when he became sensible of 
his approaching dissolution, he was uniformly supported by the 
cheerfulness of resignation, and the strength of faith.
His were 
iu truth the resignation and the cheerfulness which became a 
primitive disciple of that Jesus in whose mercies he reposed, .
and to whose mediation alone he looked with confidence.
His 
end, we are assured, was such as could not but give comfort to 
those who.
viewed it ; particularly when (on October 30, 180S) 
in the awful hour which gave, him a nearer assurance of ap- 
proaching happiness — at peace with himself, his fellow-crea- 
tures, and his God — he sank, as into Cjwiet slumber, without a 
struggle or a pang ; .and, with a smile upon, his countenance, 
expired.
rit&m 
412 
CORNWALL.
when the spire, as already stated, was destroyed by 
lightning.* Lord de Dunstanville is patron of the 
vicarage.
In ancient times, according to Hals, 
there were, in Bodmin, besides the priory, thirteen 
churches, or rather free chapels ; of whicli the foun- 
dations and sites of the following still remain, or are 
remembered by some of the inhabitants.
St. Peter's 
Church; St. Paul's, on the north of the town, a 
solitary square tower of which remains ; St. Nicholas, 
or the Friary, of which, as already observed, the 
Town -Hall and Sessions-House occupy the refectory 
part ; St. Anthony's Chapel, near Chapel-Lane ; 
and St. Leonard's Church, near the western turn- 
pike.
Within the last ten or twelve years, meeting houses 
have been erected in Bodmin for the Arminian me- 
thodists, and the Independents.
In the church-yard 
is a grammar-school, which was founded by Queen 
Elizabeth, and endowed with 5/.
a year.
To this 
endowment, the corporation subsequently added 15/.
a year out of the market tolls, which has been en- 
creased to 30/.
In the middle of July, says the old Magna Bri- 
tania, a kind of carnival was kept at Bodmin, to 
which thousands of people came to see the sports 
and pastimes.
King Charles II.
honoured it with 
his company, in his journey to Scilly, and became a 
brother of the society, which it seems derives its 
origin from the times before the conquest.
It was, 
in fact, on Halgavar Moor, a little distance from the 
town, where this rude festival was holden.
The 
season of the year in which Charles proceeded to 
Scilly is not in accordance with the tradition of his 
having attended its celebration.
On these occasions 
there used to be elected a mock mayor, who held a 
court, before which the people presented any person 
" charged with wearing one spurre, or going un~ 
trussed, or wanting a girdle, or some such like 
felony ; and after he hath been arrayned and tryed 
with all requisite circumstances, judgment is given 
in formal termes, and executed in some one ungraci- 
ous pranke or other, more to the skorne than hurt 
of the party coudemned.
Hence is sprung the pro- 
verb, when we see one slovenly aparalled, ' He 
shall be presented in Halgavar Court.' " This cus- 
tom is supposed to have been connected with the 
riding-gild, one of the numerous religious fraterni- 
ties which formerly existed in this town.
The lower 
orders of the people have still some remembrances of 
<his brotherhood, making processions on horseback, 
carrying garlands, &c.
; and, no longer than twenty 
or thirty years ago, on the Monday nearest to the 
feast of St. Thomas a Becket, even the principal 
inhabitants used to walk in procession, with the em- 
blems of their trade, preceded by music, and two 
men, one with a garland, the other with a pole, 
which they had previously deposited at the priory, 
and received again from the master of the house, as 
representing the prior.
There is a considerable intrenehment to the east- 
ward of the town, called Canyke, or Castle-Kynock.
It is thus mentioned in William de Worcester's 
Itinerary of this county : — " Castellum de Keynock, 
dirutum, cum tribis wardis." 
Boscastle.] — Boscastle, or Botereaux Castle, is 
a little market town, seated on the Bristol channel, 
partly in the parish of Forrabury, and partly in the 
parish of Minster.
It lies three miles north east by 
north from Bossiney.
It has fairs on the 5th of 
August aud 22d of November.
There is a pier at Boscastle, whither small vessels 
come with coals, &c.
; and, a few years ago, the 
pilchard fishery was commenced here, but with less 
success than was expected.
This place took its name from the Botereaux, or 
Botterell, family, who were settled here as early as 
the reign of Henry II.
The castle is supposed to have 
been taken down before the time of Leland.
William 
Botereaux and his younger brother, Reginald, were 
amongst the rebel barons in arms against Henry III.
William Lord Botereaux, the last of the family, was 
killed at the battle of St. Albans, in the early part of 
the reign of Edward IV.
He left an only daughter, 
who married Sir Robert Hungerford.
It is remark- 
able, that, with the exception of Reginald, mentioned 
above, who succeeded his elder brother in the pos- 
session of the honour, manor, and borough of Bote- 
reaux Castle, the ten successive owners each bore 
the name of William.
From the Hungerford family 
the estate passed into that of Hastings ; and, in the 
reign of Elizabeth, Henry Hastings, Earl of Hun- 
tingdon, sold it to John Hender, Esq. from whom' it 
descended, by marriage, to the family of the Cottons.
Sir John Cotton, grandson of Dr. William Cotton, 
Bishop of Exeter in the year 1598 presented it to 
his sister's son, Mr. Amy, whose daughter brought 
a moiety thereof to Sir Jonathan Phillipps.
After 
the death of Sir Jonathan and Lady Phillipps, it 
passed to Sir Thomas Winslow, who took the name 
of Phillipps.
That moiety is now the property of 
his son ; and the other is vested in trustees of Miss 
Amy, sister of the late Lady Phillipps, a lunatic.
The manor-house is now in a state of dilapida- 
tion.
The remains of an old church or chapel, dedi- 
cated to St. James, are seen near the market- 
place.
Bossiney.] — Bossiney is in the parish of Tintagell, 
in the hundred of Lesnewth, eighteen miles west by 
north from Launceston.
This borough, which in- 
cludes the town of Trevina, sends two members to 
Parliament.
All who have free land in the borough, 
* One of the vicars of Bodmin Church, Jasper Wood, who 
died in the year 1716, after 37 years enjoyment of the living, 
fancied himself bewitched, and that he had been delivered 
from the witch's power by his guardian angel.
Of this per- 
son, who is very naturally supposed to have been deranged 
in his intellects, a printed account was formerly extant ; and 
various traditions respecting him are still current.
and 
CORNWALL.
41* 
and live in the parish, are deemed free men, and 
have votes at the elections of members and magis- 
trates.
It is governed by a titular mayor, and bur- 
gesses.
There are about twenty houses within the 
borough ; but it frequently happens that the num- 
ber of votes does not exceed five or six.
Bossiney may be described as a group of miser- 
able shabby cottages.
The surrounding country is 
bleak atid rugged, and the whole forms such a dis- 
mal picture of desolation, that the visitor may almost 
imagine himself removed, as it were by enchantment, 
out of the region of civilization.
Breage.] — St. Breage is in the west division of 
the hundred of Kerrier, three miles west by north 
from Helstone.
St. Breage is the mother church of 
Gunwallowe, Cury, and Germoe.
There are several 
villages and manors in the parish ; of which Godol- 
phiu, and Penderswick Castle particularly require 
description.
One of the highest hills in this part of the county 
is named Godolphin, anciently spelt Godalchan, sig- 
nifying a white eagle.
The manor is an ancient 
possession of the Godolphin family, which is said to 
have resided here at the time of the Conquest.
It 
is situated in a part of the county which appears to 
have been once a busy scene with the mining adven- 
turers ; and Sir Francis Godolphin, who lived in 
the reign of Elizabeth, was a very considerable 
and fortunate speculator in this business.
It is 
stated that he employed daily three hundred men 
at the mines, and paid 1000/.
a year customs to the 
queen : as a proof of his perseverance and success 
in the working of mines, it is also asserted, that 
during his time the customs were increased above 
10,000/.
a year.
Some of this family have received 
considerable honours.
Charles II.
created Sir Wil- 
liam Godolphin a Baronet in 1663 ; and his son 
Sydney, in 1639, was invested with the title of Ba- 
ron Godolphin of Rialton.
This nobleman being 
chosen burgess for Helstone, evinced distinguished 
abilities in the House of Commons, and obtained 
such favour at court, that he was employed on seve- 
ral embassies, appointed Commissioner of the Trea- 
sury, and filled some other offices, in the reigns of 
Charles, James II.
and William III.
In the reign 
of Queen Anne he was made Lord High Treasurer, 
and afterwards Knight Companion of the Order of 
the Garter.
He died in the year 1712, and was 
sjtcceeded by Ids son Francis, whose youngest 
daughter married, in 1744, the Duke of Leeds, by 
which means the Godolphin estates are now become 
the property of the Osborne family.
The mansion 
house of Godolphin is a quadrangular building, si- 
tuated in a large park, and embosomed in wood.
Part of it was modernized a few years since ; but 
the chief portion is in ruins, and tenanted by farmers.
Hals informs us, in his Parochial History of Corn- 
wall, that the manor and barton of Godolphin were 
" sold, temp.
Henry VI., by Edmund Arundell, 
Knt, to one Stephens, upon condition of a kind of 
domineering, lording, or insulting tenure and reser- 
VOL.
1. — no.
30.
vation of rent, to his manor of Lambourne, in Peran- 
sand, viz.
; ' That once a year for ever, the Reeve 
of the said Manor should come to Godolphin, and 
there boldly enter the hall, jump upon the table, or 
table-board, and there stamp or bounce with his 
feet, or club, to alarm and give notice to the people 
of his approach, and then and there make proclama- 
tion aloud three times ; O, yes !
O, yes I O, yes !
I 
am the Reeve of the Manor of Lamburne, in Peran- 
sand, come here to demand the old rent, duties, and 
customs due to the Jjords of the said Manor from the 
lands of Godolphin.'' Upon which notice there is 
forthwith to be brought him 2s.
Sd. rent, a large 
quart of strong beer, a loaf of wheaten bread worth 
sixpence, and a cheese of the like value ; which the 
Reeve having received, he shall drink of the beer, taste 
the bread and cheese in the place, and then depart, 
carrying with him the said rent, and the remainder 
of those viands, to the Lords of the Manor afore- 
said." The manor, we believe, is still holden of Sir 
John St. Aubin, as of his manor or Lambourne, by 
the payment of a gammon of bacon.
The manor of Pen gers wick, or Pengerswick Caa^- 
tle, is seated on the border of a small creek, in a 
bottom, at the village of the same name, which sig- 
nifies the head-ward, or fenced, or fortified place.
According to Hals, " this barton and manor were 
purchased, in the latter end of the reign of King 
Henry the Eighth, by a Mr. Milliton, who, having 
slain a man privately, made that purchase in the 
name of his son, and immured himself in a secret 
chamber of the tower, seeing none but his trusty 
friends ; so that he died without being called iu 
question for the offence." The son here mentioned 
was Job Milliton, who was governor of St. Michael's 
Mount in the time of Edward the Sixth.
From 
some of the six daughters and co-heiresses of this 
gentleman, Sir Nicholas Hals purchased their 
shares of this manor, which was afterwards disposed 
of to the Godolphin and other families.
The Duke of Leeds now holds a third, and a sixth 
of the manor, comprising the castle.
The remains 
of that edifice, however, consist only of a square 
tower of three stories, a small one annexed, and 
some fragments of walls ; the whole is faced with 
squared stone.
In the smaller tower is a flight of 
winding stone steps, leading to the summit of the 
building, which commands a pleasing but not ex- 
tensive view.
The walls of the ground floor are 
pierced with loop-holes ; the door on the north side 
is macliicolated ; many of the apartments are fallen 
in ; those which remain are used as granaries and 
haylofts by one of the neighbouring farmers.
The 
wainscot of the first floor is of oak, curiously carved 
and painted.
On the pannels several quaint pieces 
of poetry are inscribed ; but the delineations to 
which they referred are entirely obliterated.
The 
best of these inscriptions was under a representation 
of water dropping from a rock, and thus en- 
titled 
o M 
TERSEVEKAycr- 
414 
CORNWALL.
PERSEVERANCE.
" What tiling is harder than a rock'?
What softer is than water clear ?
Ytt will the same with often drop 
The hard roi.k pierce, as doth appear: 
Even so there's nothing so hard to attayne, 
But may he had with labour and payne." 
The road leading to the castle, on the decli- 
vity of the hill, is paved to a considerable ex- 
tent.
Breward.] — St. Brcward, or Simon's ward, in 
the hundred of Trigg - , is about six miles south by 
west from Bodmin.
Brown Willey, the highest 
land in Cornwall, is in this county.
According to 
tradition, the church was built by William Brewer, 
Bisbop of Exeter, in tbe year 1224; from whom 
also the parish is said to take its name.
The bishop 
here mentioned distinguished himself as a soldier as 
well as a divine, and fought against the Saracens in 
Palestine at the head of 100,000 men.
We have 
seen no account, however, of his canonization, and 
the circumstance seems to have been too recent to 
have given name to the place.
Budock.] — St. Budock is in the east division of 
the hundred of Kerrier, two miles west fc from Fal- 
mouth, between that town and Penryn.
It is a vi- 
carage, which, in Wolsey's Inquisition, taken in the 
year 1521, is valued in conjunction with St. Glu- 
vioas.
Before that time both churches appear to 
have been consolidated by the Bishop of Exeter.
In Budock Church, against the south wall, are 
several monuments of the celebrated family of Kille- 
grew ;* the barton, or manor, of Arwenack, their 
chief seat in former ages, being within this parish, 
till Falmouth, was taken out of it in the year 1663.
Greenbank, or Dunstanvilletown, a populous suburb 
of Falmouth is in this parish.
There is a school in 
Budock parish, for the support of which, Mr. Ro- 
bins, by his will, dated in 1768, left the interest of 
stock, amounting to nearly 11.
per annum.
Burian.] — St. Burian, or Burien, is in the west- 
ern division of the hundred of Penwith, four miles 
and three quarters south-west by west from Pen- 
zance.
" King Ethelstan," observes Tanner, " is 
said to have built and endowed a collegiate church 
almost at the Land's End, and to have granted the 
benefit of sanctuary!
and other privileges to the 
* John Killegrew, Esq. vho died in 1567, was made, by 
Henry the Eighth, the first Governor of Peudennis Castle ; Sir 
John Killegrew, his son, succeeded him in that command, and 
died in 15S4.
The monument of Sir John, in Budock church, 
was put up by his grandson in 16 17: it has kneeling figures of 
himself and his lady, Elizabeth, daughter of Philip Wolver- 
slone, Esq. of Wolverstone Hall, Suffolk.
Thomas Killegrew 
was page of honour to Charles I.
and gentleman of the bed- 
chamber to Charles If. who, in 1651, appointed him his resi- 
dent at Venice.
He was a man of wit and humour, and fre- 
quently entertained the King with his drollery.
As Charles 
was wholly engrossed by his pleasures, and was frequently in 
his mistress's apartment when he should have been at the 
Council Board, Killegrew used the following expedient to ad- 
monish him of his extreme negligence in regard to the affairs 
same, in honour of St. Buriena, or Beriana, a holy 
woman from Ireland, who had an oratory, and was 
buried here.
At the Conquest Irere were Secular 
Canons, as there were a dean and three prebendaries 
at the time of making the Lincoln taxation, 20° 
Edw. I.
: and also down to 26° lien.
VIII., though 
this deanery was seized into the King's hands temp.
Edw. III., by reason that Mr. John de Manute then 
incumbent, was a Frenchman ; and as alien, was 
given 24° Henry VI., to King College in Cam- 
bridge, and afterwards by King Edw. IV.
(an.
reg.
7°) to Windsor College ; yet neither of those socie- 
ties long enjoyed, or had any beneiit from it ; for it 
was all along, and still continues, an independant 
deanry, in the gift of the crown, or of the Duke of 
Cornwall, of exempt jurisdiction as a Royal Free 
Chapel." 
Leland, Camden, and Borlase, concur in ascrib- 
ing the name of the place to St. Burian the Irish 
saint ; but Hals opposes this account, and observes, 
that no such saint is to be found in the Roman le- 
gend, or calendar; nor yet in Capgrave's Cata- 
logue.
When Athelstan had subdued all Devon, 
and Cornwall, he visited the Scilly Isles ; and to 
the vows which he offered to the Deity, to fulfil on 
the successful accomplishment of this expedition, it 
appears the religious establishment of this place 
owes its origin : for Athelstan, on his return from 
the Islands, here founded and endowed a collegiate 
church about the year 930, to which he gave land9- 
and tythes to a considerable value for ever.
It is 
now in the patronage of the crown* The deanery 
includes the parishes of Burian, Sennan, and St. Le- 
van.
At the Norman Conquest there were Secular- 
Canons here ; and in the 20th of Edward I.
a dean 
and three prebends.
The deanery house is said to 
have been partly demolished by Shrubsall, the go- 
vernor of Pendennis Castle.
Some of the fragments 
still remain about half a mile east of the church, 
which is a large and apparently modern building.
At least here are no specimens of that style of ar- 
chitecture which prevailed about Athelstan's reign, 
as may be affirmed on comparing with Malmsbury 
Abbey Church, in Wiltshire.
The church is built 
on the highest spot of ground in this part of the 
county, and its tower forms a conspicuous object 
from the Land's End, Scilly Islands, and the north 
of the kingdom.
He dressed himself in a pilgrim's habit, went 
into the King's chambers, and told him that he hated himself 
and the world, and that he was resolved immediately to leave 
it, and was then entering into a pilgrimage to Hell.
The King 
asked him what he proposed to do there.
He said, "to speak 
to the devil to send Oliver Cromwell to take care of the Eng- 
lish government, as he had observed, villi regret, that his suc- 
cessor was always employed on other business." 
f An ancient building, on an estate called Bossivcn, of 
which the walls are now remaining, about twelve feet high, 
overgrown with ivy, is said, by what is most probably a ground- 
less tradition, to have been the sanctuary, and is held in much 
veneration.
It stands about a mile east from the church, 
and about two miles from the sea.
Lysons, Vol. III.
p. 49.
and 
CORNWALL.
415 
and south channels.
It is 467 feet above the level 
of the sea.
The church consists wholly of granite, 
and is divided into three aisles, which are again 
divided from the east end by a handsome rood-loft, 
reaching entirely across the church.
This is made 
of oak, and is ornamented with a profusion of gild- 
ing and rude carvings, representing huntsmen, 
hounds, fox, deer, birds, &c.
in some respect re- 
sembling the cornice of the Chevy Chase Room at 
St. Michael's Mount.
Many of the seats are also 
formed of oak, and sculptured with a variety of de- 
vices ; among which the initials I.
II.
S. frequently 
appear.
There are also spread eagles, human 
figures, and coats of arms, all in relievo, and 
charged on shields ; but many of these curious re- 
lics have heen sacrificed to the lofty pews, which 
have been either erected in their places, or have 
hidden them from sight.
The south porch is orna- 
mented with embrasures and pinnacles ; and over 
the western door are the letters I.
H. S.
cut in stone 
on a shield.
Near the south entrance is a small cross, elevated 
on four steps.
It consists of one piece of granite, 
with a circular head, perforated by four holes ; on 
one side is represented the crucified Saviour.
Without the church-yard is another cross of simi- 
lar character.
* 
In the church is an old coffin-shaped monument, 
having an inscription round the border : and on the 
middle of the stone is represented a cross fleury 
standing' on four steps.
The inscription is in very 
rude characters, and now partly obliterated ; but 
Hals says it is Norman French ; and Mr. Gough 
gives the following reading to it.
" Clarice la 
iemme ChefFrei de Bolleit git ici, deu de lalme eit 
merce : que pur le alme punt (Prierunt) di ior de 
pardun averunt ;" which is thus translated by an- 
other writer : " Clarice, the wife of Geffrie de Bol- 
leit, lies here : God of her soul have mercy.
They 
who shall pray for her soul shall have ten days of 
pardon." Bolleit is the name of a village a little to 
the south of this church, to which the inscription 
probably refers.
Here is also another ancient mo- 
nument to Arthur LeneliSj of Trewoof, who died 
in 1671 ; and the inscription states, that " the fa- 
mily flourished here 600 years since William's Con- 
quest." 
It has been justly remarked, that the country 
round St. Burian, though divested of the busy 
mercantile town, and the fashionable mansion, is re- 
plete with objects of curiosity, and will furnish am- 
ple gratification to the lover of British antiquities, 
* It has already been remarked, that Cornwall abounds with 
these stone crosses.
Almost every village contains one, or 
more ; and in many parts of the county they are standing by 
the road side, at a considerable distance from any church.
They consist mostly of a single shaft of granite, with- a round 
head, and the figure of a cross in relief.
Some are ornamented 
with zigzag carving down the shaft, with a representation of the 
crucifixion, or with perforated holes at the corners of the cross; 
and to him who can feel delight in contemplating 
the primeval face of nature, unadorned by art, and 
uncontaininated by false taste.
The greater portion 
of this district is wild, open, and unsheltered ; 
though a few labouring farmers cultivate some 
small parts of it ; whilst other parts are ransacked 
by miners, who employ themselves in searching for 
ore, The habitations of these people are either 
scattered over the heath-clad downs, and exposed 
to every passing storm, or congregated round the 
village church ; and most of the enclosures are 
made with stones, either erected on one end, or 
piled into rude walls ; these, as well as the turf- 
banks, are all provincially denominated hedges.
The summits and sides of the eminences, and the 
bottoms of the vallies, are mostly covered with 
large masses of granite, either collected together o.i 
the tops of the hills, or scattered singly over th> 
lower grounds ; and among these are to be found 
many of the Druidical remains which Dr. Borlase 
has described, and descanted on, in his Antiquities.
Amongst them in this parish may he mentioned a 
small circle of nineteen upright stones, called Dance 
Maine, or the Merry Maidens, from the tradition 
that nineteen young maidens, were thus transformed 
for dancing on the Sabbath Day. The stones are 
about four feet above the ground, and five feet dis- 
tant from each other : the diameter of the circle is^ 
about twenty-five feet : and at some distance, 
north-west from it, are two taller upright stonos, 
called the Pipers.
Another of these Druidical cir- 
cles, on Boscawen Downs-, in this parish, is named 
Boscawen-Un.t This also consists of nineteen up- 
right stones, and is about twenty-five feet in dia- 
meter, having a single leaning stone in the centre.
Camden supposes it to have been erected as a tro- 
phy by the Romans ; or by Athelstan in commemo- 
ration of his conquest of the Danmonit; but this is- 
highly improbable.
A school, for the instruction of seven poor boys, 
has recently been founded here.
There are several manors and seats in this parish.
On an estate called Vellanserga are the ruins of an 
old chapel ; and on the Treviedron manor — which 
appears to have been in the Champeruownes, in the 
time of Edward III.
but is now in the Vyvyans — 
are the ruins of another old chapel, called St. Lioy's, 
or St. Dillower's, by the sea- side.
Peudrea was a 
seat of the family of that name, whose co-heiresses 
married Donnithorne and Noy. William Noy, the 
Attorney-General of Charles I.
was born here.
| 
The estate is now in theTonkiu family.
Burnuhall, 
another , 
and one of these, on the moors between Bodmin and Launces- 
ton, has obtained the name ot Four Hole Cross.
-f- In making his inquiries in Cornwall, the visitor will do 
well to recollect, that the Un is pronounced like con, as also 
in CMn.
% He was educated at Exeter College, Oxford, whence he 
removed to Lincoln's Inn. At the beginning of the reign of 
Charles II.
he sat in Parliament and opposed the court ; but 
being 
41(5 
CORNWALL.
another seat of the Noys, is now in the Boscawens.
Pendrea and Burnuhall are now both farm-houses ; 
as also is Leigh, formerly a seat of the Grosses, and 
the Usticks, now the property, by marriage, of J.
Schobell, Esq. Boskennan, formerly in the Car- 
thews, is now in the Paynters, who settled there in 
the time of Charles II.
Boseawen-Rose, the origi- 
nal seat of the Boscawens, as early as the reign of 
King John, is still the property of their descendant, 
Lord Falmouth.
The house is now occupied by a 
farmer ; the Boscawens having removed to Tregoth- 
nan, in consequence of a marriage with that family, 
in the reign of Edward III.
Rosmoddris, which 
has been in severalties from the time of Elizabeth, is 
partly the property of Lord Falmouth, and partly 
of Buller, Esq. M.
P. by descent from Mr.
Grosse.
On the barton of Trewoof, or Trou, which 
is beautifully situated on the side of a woody hill, 
overlooking a romantic valley, terminated by La- 
morna-cove, is a triple intrenchment, with a sub- 
terraneous passage ; and it is said that, during the 
Civil Wars, a party of royalists were there conceal- 
ed from the observation of Sir Thomas Fairfax's 
army.
There is also a chalybeate spring on the 
estate.
According to tradition, which is thought 
to be erroneous, the family of Levelis were settled 
here before the Conquest.
This family became ex- 
tinct in 1671, and the estate passed, by marriage, to 
that of Vospers, since also extinct : it is iioav in seve- 
ralties, and the house is tenanted by a farmer.
Tresi- 
dor, formerly in the Whalesborowes, is now the pro- 
perty of Messrs.
Weymouth and Permewan.
Callington.] — Callington, formerly Kellington, 
is a borough and market-town in the middle division 
of the hundred of East, twelve miles and a half south 
by east from Launceston.
It has four fairs, the first 
of which has been recently established : — the first 
Tuesday in March ; May 4 : September 19 ; No- 
vember 12.
The market was granted by Henry III.
with a fair at the festival of the nativity of the Vir- 
gin Mary : the latter has been discontinued ; but the 
former is still kept, for corn and provisions.
The 
petty sessions are holden in this town.
Frogwell is 
the only village in the parish.
The earliest mention 
of this town occurs in the reign of Henry III.
who, 
as already observed, granted the privilege of a mar- 
ket to Reginald de Ferrars, then Lord of the Ma- 
nor.
From this family it passed by marriage to Sir 
Alexander Cliampcrnowne, Knight, whose grand- 
daughter married Sir Robert Willoughby, Lord 
Broke, installed Knight of the Garter by Henry VII.
This nobleman died about the year 150:2, at Newton 
Ferrars, but was buried in a small chapel, on the 
north side of the chancel in Callington Church, 
where his figure, arranged in the habit of the Gar- 
ter, was placed on the tomb erected to bis memory.
The daughter of Robert, his successor, married 
Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, from whose family, 
in the reign of James I.
this manor descended by 
marriage to the Rolles.
The town was constituted a 
borough in the twenty-seventh year of Elizabeth, 
when it obtained the privilege of sending two mem-* 
bers to Parliament, which right has continued to the 
present time.
It is governed by a Portreeve, choseu 
at the Court-leet of the Lord of the Manor ; but it 
does not possess any charter of incorporation.
The 
elective franchises of the inhabitants are not clearly 
ascertained ; but the custom limits the right of 
election to the burgage- tenures, paying scot and 
lot.
The situation of Callington is low and unplea- 
sant ; and its buildings, with the exception of the 
church, are mostly mean and insignificant.
It is, 
however, of considerably more importance than 
many of the Cornish boroughs, for its manufactory 
of cloth furnishes employment to many poor peo- 
ple.
Its market and fairs are also respectably 
attended.
Callington being only a chapelry, or a 
member of the parish of South-hill, has a chapel of 
ease within the precincts of the town, but the parish 
church is at the latter place.
It is a spacious and 
towering fabric, and was almost entirely rebuilt, 
about the middle of the fifteenth century, by Nicho- 
las de Isheton, serjeant at law, who lies buried un- 
der an ancient marble tomb in the chancel.
In the 
church-yard is a shaft of an ancient cross, having 
a representation of the crucifixion carved on the 
top.
The houses are chiefly disposed in one broad 
street.
Near Callington, on the liighest part of Henges- 
ton Downs, stands St. Kit's Hill, which is compos- 
ed entirely of granite, and partakes of the moun- 
tainous character, from the massive craggs which 
project from its sides.
A shaft on the top, has been 
sunk for digging tin : the quartz which seems to 
adjoin the lode is impregnated with wolfram.
The 
prospect from the summit of this hill embraces a 
vast extent of country, comprehending both banks 
of the Tamar, the Hamoaze, Mount Edgecumbe, 
&c.
Calstock.] — This parish is in the middle divi- 
sion of the hundred of East, five miles east from 
Callington.
The manor was presented by Roger 
Valletort to Richard, Earl of Cornwall ; and it con- 
tinued to be vested in the Earls and Dukes of Corn- 
wall, till the year 1798, when it was purchased by 
Mr. Foote, who, in 1806, transferred it to Mr. Wil- 
liams, of Scorrier House, near Redruth, in whose 
possession it has since remained.
The fishery which 
is in this parish, was formerly leased by the Carew 
family ; but it is now rented by the Earl of Mount 
Edgcumbe, under the duchy of Cornwall.
Amongst the villages in this parish, are Albes- 
ton, Chilsworthy, Metherell, Latchley, and llarro- 
bear.
The parish church, which is built of granite, 
bp'ma made Attorney-General in 1631, he aided the most un- ' was of his proposing.
He died in 1634.
He wrote a Treatise 
popular measures, particularly that of sb'ip^nionev, which ' of the Grounds and Maxims of the Laws of Env-land.
1 7 stands 
CORNWALL.
41?
stands on the top of a very steep -woody hill, which 
forms one of the banks of the Tamar.
The most 
rocky and romantic part of the river about Tavis- 
tock-Newbridge, and the Weir-head, is seen from 
the church-yard.
The church is a neat Gothic 
building, consisting 1 of a nave and two aisles.
Its 
tower is high, and handsomely ornamented with 
lofty pinnacles.
At the east end of the north aisle 
is a small enclosed chapel, or burying vault, of the 
Edgecumbe family ; in which, amongst others, are 
the tombs of Richard Edgecumbe, by whom it was 
built, in the year 1588 ; of Pearsey Edgcumbe, who 
died on the 5th of Jan. 1666 ; and of Jemima, Countess 
of Sandwich (widow of the gallant Admiral Earl Sand- 
wich, who lost his life in the memorable action with 
De Ruyter in 1672) who died on the 10th of No- 
vember 1674.
The parsonage-house was built about 
the year 1720, by Launcelot Blackburn, then rector 
of the parish, and Bishop of Exeter, who was after- 
wards Archbishop of York.
In an orchard close to 
this structure is a small well, which, like many 
others in this county, is denominated holy.
It is en- 
closed within four granite walls, which support a 
low roof.
At the distance of a mile stands Harewood House, 
the seat of William Roberts, Esq. a handsome mo- 
dern building.
From the grounds, which form the 
most eastern extremity of the county, the Tamar is 
seen sweeping with uncommon beauty through va- 
ried scenes of wood, rock, and cultivated land.
Cotehele or Cuttayle House, is an ancient man- 
sion in this parish which formerly gave the name of 
Cotehele to a family, whose last heiress married an 
Edgecumbe upwards of three centuries ago.
With 
the other possessions of the Coteheles, it devolved 
to their descendant, the present Earl of Mount 
Edgecumbe.
It is from the winding vale of the 
Tamar, of which his Lordship's seat at this place 
and at Mount Edgecumbe are regarded as two of 
the principal ornaments, that his Lordship's title of 
Viscount Valletort is derived.
Cotehele is situated 
on a bold knoll on the western bank of the river ; 
but it is so surrounded with wood that the water 
can only he seen from some of the higher apart- 
ments.
It is an irregular stone building, enclosing 
a small quadrangle, the entrance to which is through 
a square gateway tower on the south.
Beyond the 
buildings which form the north side of the quadran- 
gle, there is a large square tower, in which are the 
more spacious apartments.
The windows towards 
the east and south are narrow, arched at the top, 
and darkened with iron gratings ; those towards the 
quadrangle, and those in the north tower, are wide 
and square.
The buildings probably underwent 
some alterations about the year 1627, as that date 
appears carved in stone over the gateway.
This mansion is an object of much curiosity, from 
the antiquity of the furniture, which is considered to 
be of the days of Heiary the Eighth and Queen Eli- 
zabeth, and to have remained in the house ever 
since.
The hall contains a large collection of an- 
vol.
i. — no.
30.
cicnt armour, arquebusses, pikes, aud other imple- 
ments of war, ranged against the walls in various 
forms.
The horns of a large stag, some elephants' 
tusks, and the heads of two antelopes, are also pre- 
served here.
At one end of the hall is the com- 
plete figure of a man, armed cap-a-pee ; and in the 
windows are painted some coats of arms.
The 
chairs are most curiously carved and ornamented.
The stair-case from the hall leads through a stone 
door-way into a chamber where Charles the Second 
slept some nights.
In a second bed-chamber are 
some ancient books ; amongst which is a manu- 
script music-book, with the date 1556.
In another 
apartment, more splendidly furnished, is a rich ca- 
binet ; an ancient sopha, covered with embroidery ; 
a pair of ornamental brass dogs, upwards of four 
feet in height ; and several antique ebony chairs, 
rudely carved.
From inscriptions on brass plates 
on the backs of two of them, it appears that their 
present Majesties, with the Princess Royal, and the 
Princesses Augusta and Elizabeth, on the 25th of 
August, 1788, " honoured this old mansion with 
their presence, and condescended to take a breakfast 
with the Earl and Countess of Mount Edgecumbe." 
Several of the rooms are hung with tapestry ; and 
in one of them, ornamented with the figures of 
Romulus and Remus, is a singular antique cabinet, 
with innumerable figures carved in wood.
In ano- 
ther are numbers of ancient drinking vessels, in 
glass and earthenware, of the most grotesque forms.
The chapel is small, and was originally ornamented 
with painted glass windows ; but they have been 
greatly damaged.
The altar furniture is extremely 
rich.
On one set is embroidered, in gold, the figure 
of the prophet Jeremiah ; and several coats of arms 
in gold and purple.
Another set is of royal purple 
velvet, embroidered with gold, and powdered with 
fleur-de-lis in silver, and still further ornamented 
with the figures of the twelve Apostles in stalls.
— 
Over the west end of the chapel is a small turret, 
surmounted with battlements and pinnacles, and 
containing two open compartments for bells.
Over 
the east end is a small cross.
The grounds are very beautiful ; and the woods, 
especially those between the house and the river, are 
embellished with some very noble trees.
The Spa- 
nish chesnuts have here attained immense size ; 
spreading out their huge massy limbs, they are 
scarcely inferior in grandeur to the proudest oaks, 
and form, amidst the beautiful scenery of rock and 
wood which overhangs the river, such foregrounds 
as recall to recollection the romantic works of 
Salvator Rosa.
At the bottom of one of the grand 
sweeping hills, whose luxuriant covering embellishes 
this domain, stands a small Gothic Chapel, situated, 
with picturesque beauty, upon a little rocky emi- 
nence, rising very steeply from the river, and disco- 
vering its east end from among the trees, which 
screen the other parts of the building.
On the inte- 
rior of one or the Avails is painted the following ac- 
count of its foundation, extracted from Carew's 
5 n Survey 
418 
CORNWALL 
Survey of Cornwall : — " Sir Ric. Edgcumbe was 
driven to hide himself in those his thicke woods, 
which overlook the river ; what time being suspect- 
ed of favouring the Earl of Richmond's party against 
King Richard the Third, hee was hotely pursued, 
and norrowiy searched for, which extremity taught 
him a sudden policy to put a stone in his cap, and 
tumble the same into the water, while these rangers 
were fast at his heels, who looking down after the 
noyse, and seeing his cap swimming thereon, sup- 
posed that he had desperately drowned himself, 
gave over their further hunting ; and left him liberty 
to shift away, and ship over into Brittaine ; for a 
grateful remembrance of which deelivery, hee after- 
wards budded in the place of his lurking a chappel." 
In the year 1769, this was repaired by George Lord 
Edgecombe, his lineal descendant.
In the east win- 
dow is some painted glass, representing the figure 
of a female saint ; St. George and the Dragon ; the 
Crucifixion; and the arms of Edgecumbe.
On the 
altar stands a neat gilt crucifix of wood, and a small 
image of a bishop in pontificalibus, in wood, intend- 
ed for Thomas a Beckct.
On each side of the altar 
is an ancient painting ; one represents a female 
figure, with a book in her hand ; the other an angel, 
holding in his hands a sceptre, on the top of which 
is a bird.
A painted tablet, affixed to one of the 
side walls, appears to represent a monument of Sir 
Richard Edgecumbe, the founder of the chapel, and 
comptroller of the household to King Henry the 
Seventh, who having been sent to France on a pub- 
lic embassy, appears, by the inscription, to have died 
on his return to Morlaix, in Bretagne, on the eighth 
day of September, 1489 ; and to have been buried 
before the high altar of some church in that place.
— 
He is here painted as a knight in armour, kneeling 
on one knee before a desk ; his helmet and gauntlets 
lie by his side : before him stands a bishop, similar 
in design to the wooden figure which is placed on 
the altar.
Camborne.] — Camborne, a market and post town, 
is in the east division of the hundred of Penwith, 4 
miles W.S.W. from Redruth.
Its market, which 
was established only in the year 1802, is well sup- 
plied with butchers' meat, and other provisions.
— 
JLord de Dunstanville (whose manors of Nancekuke 
and Tehidy, in Illogan, extend over great part of this 
parish) was at the expense of building the market- 
* Sir Charles Scarborough, first rJaysiciian to Charles II.
James II.
and William III.
was by his learning, and extensive 
practice, eminently qualified for that honourable station.
He 
was one of the greatest mathematicians of his time.
Mr. Ough- 
tred informs us, that his memory was tenacious to an incredible 
degree ; that he could recite in order all the propositions of 
Euclid, Archimedes, and other ancient mathematicians, and 
apply them on every occasion.
He assisted the famous Dr.
William Harvey in his book " De Generatione Animalum," 
and succeeded him as lecturer of anatomy and suigery.
The 
lecture, which was founded by Dr. Richard Caldval, was read 
by him in Surgeons' Hall, and continued for sixteen or seven- 
teen years with great applause.
He, in his course, explained 
Hie nature of the muscles, aad was the fust that attempted to 
house.
Here are four cattle fairs : — March 7 ; 
Whit-Tuesday ; June 29 ; and the second Tuesday 
in November.
Here also are holden the Petty Ses- 
sions for the hundred.
Camborne parish, comprising the villages of 
Berippa, Penpons, Trewithan, Tucking-miil, &c.
is.
almost entirely inhabited by miners.
Camborne church contains several memorials of 
the Pendarves family, Lords of the manors of Pen- 
darves and Tresbothan.
The monument of Sir 
Win. Pendarves presents his bust in armour, decor- 
ated with a flowing peruke.
The pulpit is highly 
enriched with carved ornaments, amongst which are 
the royal arms, symbols of the crucifixion, &c.
ap- 
parently executed in the early part of the sixteenth 
century.
The altar-piece, erected about 60 years 
ago, by Samuel Percival, Esq. is of Sienna marble.
There is a school for teaching twelve boys and 
eight girls reading, writing, and arithmetic.
It was 
founded by Mrs. Percival, wife of Samuel Percival, 
Esq. and sister of Sir William Pendarves, the last 
male heir of his family.
According to Borlase, there were formerly several 
chapels in this place : he mentions St. Margaret's, 
St. Anne's, St. Derwe's, St. Ye's, and St. James's.
He also mentions the walls of a chapel on the tene- 
ment of Trewn : it stood a few paces from a well, 
called Fentoner, which was celebrated for its medi- 
cinal virtues.
Camelford.] — This town is in the parish of Lan- 
teglos-juxta-Camelford, in the hundred of Ler- 
newth, fifteen milts west by south from Lauuceston.
It is a borough and market town, sending two mem- 
bers to parliament.
It was incorporated by Charles 
I. and is governed by a Mayor and eight Aldermen, 
.or Burgesses, who, with ten freemen, elect the two 
representatives.
The seal of the corporation repre- 
sents a camel passing through a ford of water.
— 
The petty sessions for the hundred are holden at 
Camelford.
Here also are four annual fairs : March 
10, May 26, July 17, and September 5.
This town appears to have been made a free 
boroHgh by Richard, King of the Romans, who also 
granted the market.
It has sent members to Par- 
liament ever since the reign of Edward VI.
In the 
reign of James II.
Sir Charles Scarborough, the 
celebrated Physician, was one of its representatives.
* 
The situation of Camelford is as gloomy and as 
account for muscular strength and motion upon geometrical 
principles, and he very judiciously and happily applied mathe- 
matics to medicine in other instances.
His " Syllabus Muscu- 
lorum" is printed with " The Anatomical Administration of all 
the Muscles, &c.
by William Molins, Master in Chirurgery." 
He was also author of several Mathematical Treatises, a Com- 
pendium of Lilye's Grammar, and an elegy on his friend Mr.
Cowley.
He was a man of amiable manners, and of great 
pleasantry of conversation.
Seeing the Duchess of Portsmouth 
eat to excess, he said to her, with his usual frankness, " Madam 
I will deal with you as a Physician should do; you must eat 
less, use more exercise, take physic, or be sick." He died 
c„i ~_..
ofi i«ns 
February 26, 1695 
dismal, 
CORNWALL.
419 
dismal as can well be imagined ; but, of late years, 
the town bas been somewhat improved in its appear- 
ance.
In the summer of 1806, the first stone of a 
new town-hall was laid, and the building has since 
been oompleted, at the expense of the Duke of Bed- 
ford.
Towards the close of the seventeenth century, 
Sir James Smyth bequeathed the tenement of Tre- 
garth, valued at 40/.
per annum, for the erection and 
maintenance of "a school.
The corporation, it is 
said, are about to erect a new school-house.
Camelford is supposed to have been the Gafulford, 
or Gavelford, of the Saxon Chronicle.
According 
to the statements of many historians, its neighbour- 
hood, as we have before observed, has been the 
theatre of two desperate battles ; one, between tiie 
celebrated Prince Arthur, and his nephew Modred, 
or Medrawd, who, after an adulterous intercourse 
with Arthur's Queen, Gucnora, rebelled against his 
uncle, and sought to deprive him of his kingdom.
— 
The war lasted several years, and various battles 
were fought in that time ; but the decisive conflict 
at length occurred at (probably Cabin alan, the 
Crooked River) where, after two days engagement, 
with uncommon slaughter, Modred was killed, and 
Arthur himself mortally wounded.
The other battle 
was between King Egbert and the Britons, in 823.
Cardinham.] — Cardinham is in the hundred of 
West, three miles and three quarters east-north-east 
from Bodmin.
Old Cardinham, Mill- pool, and 
Kings-wood, are villages in this parish.
The manor 
of Cardinham, or Cardinan, in the reign of Richard 
1. belonged to Robert de Cardinan, who acquired 
the whole of the immense possessions of Robert 
Fitz William, by marrying his heiress.
According 
to Leland, Fitz William held the largest landed 
property in the county.
The manor of Cardinham 
alone was of very extensive jurisdiction, embracing 
several manors both in Cornwall and Devonshire.
One of his female representatives, in 1259, conveyed 
the manor of Cardinham, with that of Bodardle, in 
Lanlivery, to Oliver de Dinan, whose ancestor is 
said to have come into England with William the 
Conqueror.
The estate remained iu the family of 
the Dinans, or Dinhams,* for some centuries ; till, 
the male branches becoming extinct, the greater part 
thereof passed into the Arundell family ; and, about 
15 years ago, it was purchased by Mr. Glynn, the 
present proprietor.
The manor of Glynn, in this 
parish, belonged also to that gentleman, who is the 
elder son of John Glynn, Esq. some time Recorder 
of London, and one of the representatives of the 
eounty of Middlesex, whose family has for several 
generations, held possessions in Cornwall.
* Sir John Dinham, one of the members of this family, was 
a distinguished character during the wars between the houses of* 
York and Lancaster; he was instrumental in carrying the Duke 
of York's friends, tiie EarK of March, Salisbury, and Warwick, 
from Exmouth to Guernsey, and thence to Calais, from the 
pursuit of King Henry VI.
: after this, he attacked, in Sand- 
wich harbour, a fleet which was destined to reduce Calais, took 
Lord Rivers, the high admiral, prisoner, and sailing with the 
Of Cardinham Castle, the seat of the Dinhams, 
there are no remains ; but the site is still called the 
castle.
Anciently, the custom of free-bench, similar 
to that of Chaddleworth and Enborne, in Berkshire, 
prevailed in this manor.
t Hals, when writing about 
the year 1736, observes, that there had been instances 
of widows recovering their lands by riding ©n black 
sheep, within the memory of persons then alive.
The manor of Cabilla, or Carballa, now the pro- 
perty of the honourable Mrs. Agar, was formerly 
holden by the service of attending the Duke of Corn- 
wall, whenever he might come into the county, at his 
expence, and carrying for his use, during the time 
of his stay, a grey cloak, which cloak was to be de- 
livered to the Lord of Carballa, at Foulston bridge, 
by the owner of Pengelly in St. Neot's, on the Duke's 
entrance into the county.
There are some other seats and manors in the 
parish which it is unnecessary to specify.
Cardinham church contains some memorials of 
the Glynn family, and a grave-stone, with a small 
brass plate, on which is engraven the effigies of 
Thomas Aw marie, rector of the parish.
He is re- 
presented in a gown, with a dagger suspended at his 
left side.
At Holywell are some ruins (probably those of an 
oratory) over an arched spring of very fine water.
— 
At St. Bellarmins-Torr, are some remains of a 
little ancient chapel ; and, according to tradition, 
there was another chapel at a place called Vale.
Carn-Bre Hill and Castle.] — In the parish of 
Ulogan, about two miles north-west of Redruth, 
stands Carn-Bre, a steep hill, 607 feet above the 
level of the sea.
Since the time of Borlase, it has 
generally been considered as the grand centre of 
Druidical worship in this county ; an opinion, which 
does not appear entitled to that unlimited credit 
which it has received.
The Druidical remains on 
this spot have been denominated bold, stupendous, 
and multifarious ; have been said to consist of nearly 
every species of Druid monuments ; and Borlase 
himself observes, that in this hill we find rock-basons,, 
circles, stones-erect, remains of cromlechs, karns, 
a grove of oaks, a cave, a religious inclosure, and a 
gorseddau, or place of elevation whence the Druids 
pronounced their decrees.
A slight inspection of 
the hill, however, is sufficient to convince any un- 
prejudiced observer, that nature had the chief hand 
in arranging the materials which fancy has so erro- 
neously appropriated.
Reck-basons and karns 
there are undoubtedly, but they are certainly na- 
tural : the Druidical circles, the cromlechs, the 
grove of oaks, and the gorseddau, must all have 
fleet to Calais, placed it at the disposal of the Earl of March, who 
immediately embarked, and directed his course to Ireland.
On 
the accession of Henry VII.
Sir John Dinham, who had been 
summoned to parliament by writ in 1466, as Lord Dinham of 
Cardinham, was, in 1485, created Lord Dinham, and made 
Lord Treasurer, 
t See Enborne, in Berkshire, page 72, of this volume.
b«cn 
420 
CORNWALL.
been conjured into shape from the rude heaps of 
stones and craggs which occupy the surface of the 
hill, and to which no specific form can rationally be 
assigned.
Indeed, these rocks, as Dr. Maton has 
observed, exhibit awful vestiges of convulsion ; and 
the immense detached masses of granite, which ap- 
pear about, to roll down their declivities, awaken 
sublime ideas in the mind of a spectator ; but any 
appearance of systematical design in the arrange- 
ment of the rugged substances which cover them, 
is wholly imaginary.
Considerable part of the argu- 
ments of Dr. Borlase rests on the assertion, of the 
excavations which he denominated rock-basons be- 
ing artificial ; and if the simple stones figured by 
the Doctor, in his antiquities, were considered with- 
out reference to any others, the deduction would 
probably be in his favour ; but, in opposition to his 
opinion, the gradation of the excavations is quite re- 
gular, from the largest rock-basons, to five or six 
feet in diameter, to the most minute indentations.
— 
They also exist in such numbers in all situations, as 
utterly to exclude the hand of man from the great 
mass ; and therefore, to make some natural though 
unknown process, most probable in all.
Druidical 
relics may, perhaps, be found on this spot ; and it 
might once have been the scene of some Druidical 
rites ; but it does not exhibit a complete system of 
Druid worship, as some contemporary authors have 
asserted.
The vicinity of Redruth, or Dre-druith, 
the Druid's town, as appears to have been its former 
name, may, in a certain degree, be admitted to sub- 
stantiate the opinion of the Druids having a settle- 
ment contiguous to this spot; and the finding of 
various celts, and gold coins, perhaps British, on 
different parts of this hill, may be adduced to 
•strengthen its supposed validity ; but the general 
question will still remain unaltered, as these anti- 
quities would not be sufficient proofs of a Druid 
Temple on Carn-bre Hill, systematically appropri- 
ated to legislative observances, or religious rites.* 
Carn-bre Castle stands at the east end of Carn- 
bre Hill, on a ledge of vast rocks, which not being 
all contiguous, are connected by arches turned over 
the cavities.
One part of this fortress is very anci- 
ent, and pierced with loop-holes ; but the other is 
of more modern construction, and seems to have 
been raised to embellish the prospect from Tehidy, 
of which it is full in shrht.
It commands a vast 
* In the summer of 1749, were dug up, at this place, a con- 
siderable number of gold coins, some of which were worn very 
smooth, not by lying in the earth, but by use, no alloy having 
been used to harden them.
No letters were perceptible on 
any of them: some were flat, and others convex on one side, 
and concave on the other: the largest weighed only 4 penny- 
weights 14 grains.
From the reverse of these coins having 
generally the impression of a horse, some have imagined that 
they were Phoenician, some colonies of that people having 
chosen a horse for their symbol.
This opinion was strengthen- 
ed by the place where they are found, the Phoenicians having 
for many years, from their superior skill in navigation, engross- 
ed the tin of Cornwall to themselves; but others alledge that 
these coins are too rude, and the designs too mean to have been 
horizon ; and the views, from the nature of the 
country, have a peculiar character.
This building 
appears to have consisted originally of three stories, 
only the lowermost of which is now in repair.
On 
the north-west were formerly some outworks.
— 
About 300 yards to the west of this fortress, and 
near the summit of the hill, is a circular fortification, 
called the Old Castle, which appears to have been 
included within a strong stone wall.
The situation, 
however, was its greatest security.
William de 
Worcester, who wrote in the time of Edward IV.
speaks of Carn-Bre; Castle as the property of Sir 
John Basset, Knt.
Castle An-Dinas, and Castle Chun.] — The 
former of these Castles is in the parish of St. Co- 
lumb-Major, in the hundred of Pyder ; the latter, in 
the oarish of Morvah, in the Avestern division of the 
hundred of Penwith.
It was contended by Dr. Bor- 
lase, that all the castles west of Penzance were con- 
structed by the Danes ; but this opinion is confuted 
Mr. King in the first volume of his Monumenta An- 
tiqua, where he states, that many fortresses of a 
similar construction remain in Wales, in Scotland, 
and in parts where the Danes never had access ; and 
if the situation and character of those above named 
are examined, there can be no hesitation in attribut- 
ing them to British origin.
The remains of Chun 
Castle occupy the whole area of a hill, commanding 
an extensive tract of country to the east, some low 
grounds to the north and south, and the ocean to the 
west.
They consist of two walls, or rather huge heaps 
of stones, one within the other, having a vallum, or 
kind of terrace, between them.
This terrace is di- 
vided by four walls ; and towards the west-south- 
west is the only entrance to the Castle, called the 
Iron Gateway.
Tliis turns to the left, and is flank- 
ed with a wall on each side, to secure the ingress 
and egress of its inhabitants.
The outer wall mea- 
sures about five feet in thickness ; but on the left of 
the entrance it is twelve feet ; whilst the inner wall 
may be estimated at about ten feet ; but from the 
ruinous confusion of the stones, it is impossible to 
ascertain this decidedly.
The area inclosed within 
the latter measures about 125 feet in diameter, and 
contains a choaked-up well, and the ruined founda- 
tions of several circular (erroneously described by 
Borlase as square) tenements, or habitations.
These 
are connected with the inner wall, and run parallel 
Phoenician, or Roman; and that they are originally British, 
some of these coins having been found stamped with the figure 
of a horse, and inscribed with British names.
That the Britons 
coined money in their own mint is plain, from an edict of the 
Roman Emperors, forbidding the use of any money in Britain, 
but what was stamped with their image.
However, many 
Roman coins have from time to time been found in the same 
hill, some of which were in the possession of Dr. Borlase ; 
amongst these is an Antoninus ef a large :-iee, of the ancient 
lead, with a triumphant arch on the reverse : coins of this metal 
are very rare: there was also a Sevei us Alexander.
In 1749, 
at the foot of Carn-bre Hill, were found a pint of copper 
Roman coins, about three feet under the surface, with the head 
of an animal in brass, a hinge, and a pierced cover.
all 
CORNWALL.
421 
all round it, leaving an open space in the centre.
— 
The present state of these ruins demonstrates that 
this castle was constructed before any rules of archi- 
tecture were adopted in military buildings ; for there 
are no remains of mortar, nor door-posts, nor fire 
places with chimnies ; and had any of these ever 
been used in this singular and rude fortress, it is ex- 
ceedingly improbable but that some traces thereof 
might be now discovered.
On the north side of the 
castle appears a passage, or road, partly excavated 
out of the soil, and guarded by high stones on each 
side.
This communicates with the fortified retreat, 
and the ruined buildings of a village or town, which 
occupy the north face of a hill, and consist of numer- 
ous foundations of circular huts.
These are from 
ten to twenty feet in diameter, with a narrow en- 
trance between two upright stones, without any 
chimney ; and the walls, composed of various sized 
stones, rudely piled together without any mortar.* 
Castle An-Dinas greatly resembles Castle Chun, 
but is on a larger scale.
About 500 yards to the 
south-west of Chun Castle stands a cromlech, the 
covering stone of which is 12 feet 6 inches long, and 
11 wide, and is supported by three stones pitched 
ou their edges, which, with a fourth, form a pretty 
regular kistvaen, or stone chest, f 
Cleere.] — St. Cleere is in the hundred of West, 
three miles and a half north by east from Liskeard.
Crowsnest, Tremarr, Tredennick, and Tremellick, 
are the principal villages in this parish.
On St.
Cleere common are some alms-houses for poor wi- 
dows, which were erected at the expense of the late 
Mrs. Connock ; and, at Cradoc, in this parish, was 
formerly a chapel dedicated to St. Wiuwalloc.
The village of St. Cleere is particularly deserving 
of notice, on account of its handsome church, its 
consecrated well, and various druidical and other 
antiquities.
The church, which is very spacious, 
consists of a nave and two aisles ; each aisle is 
separated from the nave by four uncommonly large 
pointed arches, supported by elegant columns, with 
rich and ornamented capitals ; and from the chancel 
by a pointed arch of less extent, and lower than the 
others.
In the north wall is a small round Saxon 
door-way, ornamented with a zig-zag moulding on 
the outside ; but the top withinside is formed by two 
straight sides of a triangle, which give it rather the 
appearance of a roof than of au arch.
It is orna- 
mented with a sort of quarter, foil.
The tower is 
* The knowledge of lime, as a cement, is understood to have 
been first introduced into this county by the Romans.
+ Cromlech, observe the Editors of the Beauties of England 
and Wales, is a popular name among the Welsh for any in- 
cumbent flag or flag stone.
The English antiquaries have 
adopted the term from the supposition of its having been anci- 
ently supplied by the Britons to denote an altar, and such the 
cromlech has anciently been regarded.
But the inference is 
wrong, and the fanciful hypothesis it is intended to support 
without foundation.
We have no hesitation in declaring that 
all these kind of works, consisting of upright stones supporting 
incumbent one*, were sepulchral monuments, and mostly raised 
by the Britons ; though Mr. Gough has advanced many argu- 
VOL.
I. HO.
30.
ninety-seven feet high, surmounted with four Itirg© 
and lofty pinnacles ; and the buttresses which sup- 
port it are ornamented with purfled fineals, at three 
stages respectively.
About a quarter of a mile from the church is St.
Cleere's well.
It appears to have been formerly 
covered, and enclosed within four walls, having two 
windows or openings, one on each side, and in front 
an entrance under two very low round arches.
The 
front, which is now covered with bushes and ivy, is 
all that remains of the building.
The water which 
flows from the holy spring forms a large pool before, 
and seems to haye been also surrounded with a low 
wall.
It was probably used for what Carew calls a 
" Bowsening Pool;" a practice which is described 
by that author in words to the following purport : — 
" The water which ran from the well fell into a 
square and close walled plot, that might be filled to 
any depth thought necessary.
The insane person 
was made stand on the wall, with his back towards 
the pool, into which, by a blow on the breast, he was 
suddenly plunged headlong.
While here, a stronge 
fellowe, provided for the purpoce, tooke him, and 
tossed him up and down, alongst and athwart the 
water, until the patient, by forgoing his strength, 
had somewhat forgot his fury.
Then was he con- 
veyed to the church, and certain masses sung over 
him ; upon which handling, if his right wits return- 
ed, the patroness of the well had the thanks ; but if 
their appeared small amendment, he was bowssened 
againe and againe, while there remayned in him any 
hope of life for recovery." In former times it was 
probably considered as a bath of sovereign virtue.
Near the well stands a stone cross, ornamented with 
rude sculpture at the top.
Several objects which have often excited the at- 
tention of antiquaries, and the curiosity of travellers, 
are in the vicinity of this village.
These are the 
Hurlers, the Cheese- Wring, and the Other Half 
Stone, &c.
The Hurlers are attributed to Druidical 
origin, and when perfect, consisted of three contigu- 
ous circles of upright stones, from three to five feet 
in height.
Several of the stones have been removed; 
but those which remain prove the centre of the circles 
to have been on a line with each other.
Their dia- 
meters are not the same, the middlemost circle be- 
ing larger than the end ones, which appear of simi- 
lar size.
Their name was obtained from the general 
persuasion existing amongst the common people, 
ments to make them appear of Danish workmanship.
We 
assert this generally, on the broad grounds of such works not 
being common in Denmark when compared with the numbers 
in Britain : and even if these kind of monuments were more 
frequently found in the former country, that would still be in- 
sufficient to establish the opinion of those in the latter being of 
Danish erection, a?
many cromlechs exist in the most hidden 
recesses of Welch mountains : and some of the most ancient 
records in the language of that nation, name several British 
chieftains who were interred under stones so raised ; some of 
which have beeu dug up, and indisputable remains discovered 
beneath.
5o 
that 
422 
CORNWALL.
that the stones were once men, who were thus trans- 
formed as a punishment for pursuing the diversion 
of hurling* on Sundays.
The next object of curiosity is Cheese- Wring, a 
natural pile or combination of rude rocks, rising to 
the height of thirty-two feet, and standing near the 
top of a hill.
The stones are placed one above ano- 
ther ; and from the shape of some of them resembl- 
ing a large cheese, the groupe obtained its name.
— 
It consists of eight stones : the uppermost, as Bor- 
lase was informed, was formerly a logan, or rocking- 
stone; but part of it having been broken off, the 
equipoise was destroyed, and it is now immoveable^ 
on the top were two hollows, or basons, one of which 
remains.
The great weight of the upper part, and 
the slender bearing between the third and fourth 
stones, have excited astonishment how such an ill- 
grounded pile could resist the storms of such an ex- 
posed situation for so many ages.
On the same hill 
are several other similar groupes of granite stones, 
one of which is of the enormous measurement of 
eleven yards in length, and nine in breadth ; the 
thickness, on a medium, little more than two feet.
— 
The hill is of a conical shape ; and the diameter of 
the summit about 100 yards.
Round the top is an 
immense number of small stones, seemingly ranged 
by art, and forming a rampart, or wall.
Within the 
circle are many large masses of rock, with excavations 
on the tops of some them, called rock-basons : these 
are mostly regular and uniform, and generally two 
together, with a spout or channel between them.
About two hundred paces eastward of Redgate, 
in this parish, stands the Other-Half- Stone, which 
appears to have been the shaft of a cross.
It origin- 
ally stood upright, but has been thrown down, from 
an idle curiosity to ascertain whether any concealed 
treasures were beneath its base.
On one of its sides 
are some ornamental asterisks, but no letters of any 
kind.
Its present length is almost eight feet; but it 
seems to have been longer, as the upper part is 
broken, and displays part of a mortice.
Near it is 
t'nother stone, nearly square, which appears to have 
been the plinth of a monumental cross, havin»- the 
words Doniert rogavit pro anima, inscribed on it, in 
* We learn from Carew that hurling was formerly one of the 
most favourite diversions of the natives of this county ; but this 
diversion has much declined during the last forty or fifty years, 
probably through the many accidents occasioned by the vio- 
lence of the exercise, and the severe blows given in the course 
of the play.
The game consisted in throwing, or hurling, a ball 
of wood, about three inches in diameter, and covered with 
plated silver, sometimes gilt.
On the ball was frequently a 
Cornish motto, allusive to the game, and signifying that fair 
play was best.
Success depended on catching the ball dexter- 
ously when dealt, and conveying it away, through all the oppo- 
sition made by the adverse party ; or if that were impossible, 
to throw it into the hands of a partner, who, in his turn, was to 
exert his utmost efforts to convey it to fiis own goal, which was.
often three or four miles distant from that of his adversaries.
— 
The number of players was indeterminate, but generally each 
had from fifty to sixty* 
similar characters to those used about the ninth 
century.
Doniert is supposed to mean Dungerth, 
a pious Klug of Cornwall, who was accidentally 
drowned about the year 872.
Borlase imagines, 
that Dungerth, in his life-time, desired that a cross 
might be erected over his grave, to remind people 
to pray for his soul.
In addition to these venerable monuments, may 
be mentioned a Cromlech, Avhich is more curious, 
and of greater magnitude, than that of Mona, or any 
other we are acquainted with, in our island.
It 
stands about a mile and a half north-east of St.
Cleere, on an eminence commanding an extensive 
tract of country, particularly to the east, south, and 
south-west, and is provincially denominated Tre- 
vithey Stone, or the place of graves.
J On the north 
the high ground of the moors exalts its swelling 
outline above it.
It is composed of granite, and 
consists of six upright stones, and one large slab, 
covering them in an inclined position, with another 
reclining under it.
The impost measures sixteen feet 
in length, and ten in breadth, and is generally about 
fourteen inches thick.
It rests on five of the up- 
rights only, and its upper end is perforated with a 
small circular hole.
No tradition exists as to the 
time of its erection ; but its name at once designates 
its being a work of the Britons, and sepulchral.
Clement's.] — St. Clement's is in the hundred of 
Powder, half a mile south-east from Truro ; the 
church, however, is nearly two miles from that town.
Edward IV.
gave the church as parcel of the pos- 
sessions of St. Michael's Mount ; and Elizabeth 
granted it, in reversion, to Robert, Earl of Salis- 
bury.
Mr. Vyvyan, of Penkalenick, now holds the 
great tithes of about half the parish.
In the vicar- 
age ground, observes the author of the Additions to 
Camden, is a stone now used as a gate-post, in- 
scribed Isnioc Vital fili Torrici, which Dr. Borlase 
supposes the most ancient Christian sepulchral mo- 
nument in the county, and reads Isniocus Vitalis 
filius Torrici.
Some antiquaries consider this mo- 
nument to be of Roman origin.
In the manor of Moresk, now the property of Mr.
Andrew, formerly stood Moresk Castle, the resi- 
T A similar circumstance occurred in Scotland, about the 
commencement of the present year (1815) but, it is supposed, 
from a different cause.
The immense rocking stone on the 
hill of Clindrie became immovable: the craggy base upon 
which it was so astonishingly balanced, is thought to have sunk, 
and thus rendered it firm.
% In the midst of Canaton-Down is a single upright stone, 
about 10 feet high, having a disk with the figure of a cross in 
relief cut on the west front.
Many rude obelisks of this kind 
are remaining in different parts of the country, but tliey are not 
all figured with the cross.
Borlase considers them as the sym- 
bols of Phoenician deities, raised long before the introduction of 
Christianity, though afterwards inscribed with the cross, and as- 
sociated in some mode with religion : more probably, however, 
they were erected only as guides and mementos to the pilgrims 
passing the mountains.
dence 
CORNWALL.
425 
dence of Edmund, Earl of Cornwall ; but it was in 
ruins prior to the reign of Edward IV.
and no re- 
mains thereof are now visible.
The Rev. R.
Polwhele, the learned author of the 
Histories of Cornwall and Devonshire, and many 
other works, is the proprietor and occupier of Pol- 
whele manor.
The Polwheles are supposed to have 
been settled here before the Conquest : Polwhele 
Castle was in ruins in the reign of Edward IV.
Drugo De Polwhele held the office of chamberlain 
to the Empress Maud.
Admiral Reynolds, who was lost in the Baltic in 
the winter of 1811, held the estate of Penair, by 
lease ; and it is now occupied by Captain Reynolds, 
his son.
Admiral Lake occupies the estate of Tre- 
golls, which was left by the late Samuel Thomas, 
Esq. to his sistar, the wife of Admiral Spry.
There 
is a monument, in the church, by Bacon, to the me- 
mory of Mr. Thomas here mentioned, and a tablet 
for the wife of Mr. John Thomas, who died in 1777, 
aged 93.
There are various other seats and manors 
in the parish.
Colan.] — The parish of St. Colan is in the hun- 
dred of Pyder, three miles west-south-west from 
St. Columb-Major.
St. Colan's well in this parish, 
formerly much celebrated for its medicinal virtues, is 
mentioned in a preceding page.
The manor, now 
the property of the Reverend Robert Hoblyn, be- 
longed to the ancient family of Colan, the male line 
of which became extinct about the close of the 15th 
or commencement of the 16th century.
Two of the 
female descendants then married into the Blewett 
family, greatly distinguished for its loyalty in the 
reign of Charles I.
Major Colan Blewett and four 
of his brothers fought under the royal standard.
John Casworth, Lord of the Manor, or Barton 
of Casworth in this parish, received the honour of 
knighthood from Henry VIII.
for pulling down the 
Pope's bull which had been placed up against Henry 
at Antwerp ; that act having been performed with 
great courage and at much hazard.
John Cas- 
worth, Esq. who died in the year 1575, was re- 
ceiver general for the county of Cornwall : there 
is a monument to his memory in the church.
The 
estate descended, by marriage, into the Minors fa- 
mily, and from that to the Vyvyans, the present 
owners.
Columb Major.] — St. Columb Major is a mar- 
ket-town in the hundred of Pyder, thirty-two miles 
south-west by west from Launceston.
It has fairs 
on the first Thursday after Nobember 13 ; and on 
the Thursday in Mid-Lent ; and the petty sessions 
for the hundred are holden here.
In addition to the usual market, on Thursdays, 
there is during the summer, one also on Saturday.
The original market was granted to Sir John 
Arundell, by Edward III.
A. U.
1333, with a fair 
at the festival of St. Columba the virgin, to whom 
the church is dedicated, and from whom the town 
takes its name.
" St Columb," says Borlase, " is a big parish and 
mean market-town, subjoining to the lordship and 
patronage of the Lonhearn Arrundels, who for many 
descents, lye here interred, as the inscriptions on 
their grave-stones do testify.
Their house of Lan- 
hearn stands in the adjoining parish of St. Maw- 
gan, with a large scope of land, but no wood 
about it." This description does but in part ap- 
ply at present ; for the town, which is very plea- 
santly situated on an eminence, surrounded by some 
fine grass -land, is now considerable, and the houses 
in general are well built.
It consists chiefly of one 
respectable paved street.
Near this town are the ruins of Castle An-Dinas, 
one of the great circular earthworks already de- 
scribed.
The manor of St. Columb, which anciently be- 
longed to Bodmin Priory, and afterwards to the 
Arundels, is now the property of Mr. Rawlings, 
who purchased it of Lord Arundel about eight or 
nine years ago.
The church of St. Columb, which is handsome, 
was formerly of great note, having three chantries ; 
and the rectory, valued in the Kihg's Books at 
53/.
6s.
8d.
is still one of the most considerable 
in the county.
The parsonage-house is a respect- 
able edifice, pleasantly situated below the town on 
the east, side : it is said to have been built by 
Bishop Arundel.
The church contains several 
monuments and grave stones of the families of 
Hoblyn, Vyvyan, Bealinge, Pendarvis, Arundel, 
&c.
The Arundel chapel is considered to have 
been built by Renfrey Arundel, who died A.
D. 131 Q.
There was a monument to the memory of this gen- 
tleman ; but it was destroyed in 1676, when, by the 
carelessness of some schoolboys, a barrel of gun- 
powder which was kept in the rood-loft, was ex- 
ploded, and the church greatly injured.
Three of 
the boys were killed, and the painted glass win- 
dows of the church were totally demolished.
In the reign of .
Henry VI.
Sir John Arundel 
founded a chantry of five priests in the Arundel 
chapel.
They are supposed to have formed the 
college of Black Monks, which Hals mentions as 
having their residence near the church yard.
The 
college was accidentally destroyed by fire, in the 
year 1701 ; and there are now no remains of build- 
ing's on its site.
According to Hals, there were 
anciently four free chapels in the parish of St.
Columb ; but there were no remains of them in his 
time ; and their places of sepulture were occupied as 
gardens and orchards.
The manors in this parish, in addition to that of 
St. Columb, are numerous.
Talskedy is an ancient 
duchy manor, in which, as well as at Cardinham, 
the custom of free bench prevails.
Higher Treky- 
hinge, the property of Mr. Rawe, is supposed by 
Whitaker to have been a royal residence.
Mr.
Paynter is the owner and occupant of Lower Tre- 
kyninge.
In the reign of Edward IV.
there was 
a castle, and a turreted mansion, at Carloygass, 
which had belonged to the Tregoos family.
Nans- 
2 whydeu.
424 
CORNWALL.
whyden manor was purchased towards the close of 
the 16th century, of the representatives of the fa- 
mily of that name, by the Hoblyns, whose chief 
residence, till within these few years, it has ever 
since been.
The present mansion, which is a large 
and handsome stone building, was erected by Ro- 
bert Hoblyn, Esq. at the expence of 30,000/.
from 
a design by Potter.
Mr. Hoblyn formed a valua- 
ble library at this seat, a catalogue of which was 
printed, with the owner's portrait prefixed, under 
the title of Bibliotheca Hoblyniana.* The sale of 
this library, which was removed to London for the 
purpose, in the spring of 1778, occupied twenty- 
five days.
Baker and Leigh were the Auctioneers.
On the 1st of December, 1803, Nanswhyden House, 
by some unfortunate accident was set on fire, and 
its whole interior, with the greater part of the?
furniture ; the walls are nearly entire ; but the 
building has not yet been repaired.
The Rev.
Robert Hoblyn of Bath, is the present proprietor.
Columb Minor.] — St. Columb Minor, is five 
miles and a quarter west by south from St. Co- 
lumb Major.
There is a fair at Rialton, in this pa- 
rish, holden on Monday's Green, on the 9th of June.
Rialton manor- house is occupied by a farmer : 
great part of it was burnt down a few years be- 
fore Borlase wrote.
The manor, which formerly 
belonged to Bodmin Priory, is now the property of 
the Duke of Leeds.
There is a small school in this parish, which 
was founded by Mr. Martyn about five-and-thirty 
years ago.
Formerly there were three chapels ; 
but no remains of them are now visible.
Porth, a sea-port, chiefly for the importation of 
coals from South Wales, is in this parish ; and also 
Towan, or the New Quay, where the pilchard fishery 
is carried on to some extent.
Condora.] — By an arm of the sea, called Helford 
Haven, to the south-west of Falmouth, is Condora, 
which is situated on a Hill, washed on epeh side by 
the sea ; and is supposed to be a Roman fortifica- 
tion.
Near it is an old vallum, also thought to be 
the remains of a Roman work, and stretching almost 
from sea to sea.
Near Condora there were dug up 
iu the year 1735, twenty-four gallons of Roman 
brass money, all of them of Constantine and his fa- 
mily, and had either the heads of that Emperor, 
or were of the cities of Rome and Constantinople.
This money was probably designed for paying the 
common soldiers.
On the other side of this haven, 
forty Roman coins were found, four of which were 
of the largest size; the first, which was of Domitian, 
had a bold impression, and was of copper ; the se- 
cond was of Trajan, and was of bright brass; and the 
third was of the younger Faustina.
* Mr. Hoblyn, who died 1756, represented the city of 
Bristol in three Parliaments ; he was a man of considerable 
literary attainment, and actively engaged in public business, 
particularly in what related to the important concerns of the 
tin mines, having been speaker in two convocations of Staii- 
Constantine.] — The parish of St. Constantine is 
in the east division of the hundred of Kirrier, five 
miles and a half south-west by west from Falmouth.
The church is understood to have been collegiate at 
the time of the Domesday Survey.
It contains 
monuments of the families of Gerveys and Pendar- 
vis.
At Benallack and Budockrean are sites of de- 
cayed chapels ; and in the old hall at Benallack, the 
seat of an ancient family of that name, now a farm- 
house, is some painted glass, with some other ves- 
tiges of respectable antiquity.
Merthen manor, the 
property of Carew Vyvyan, formerly had a fine 
well wooded park : the old mansion is now occupied 
as a farm-house.
Carwithenack, formerly in the 
Stapletons and Chapmans, is now the seat of Peter 
Hill, Esq. Hals records a remarkable escape of 
one of the Chapman family, who was taken alive 
out of a mine into which he had fallen twenty fa- 
thoms deep.
Amongst the villages in St. Constantine are 
Gweek, Dergon, and Calmanjak.
This parish contains several of those massive rock* 
which some of our antiquaries have erroneously ap- 
propriated to Druidical adoration ; and Dr. Borlase 
observing two of them peculiar in shape, and of vast 
size, has even ventured to designate their uses.
One he calls the Tolmen (from the Cornish words, 
Toll, a hale, and maen, a stone) the other he says 
is of uncommon shape, like the Greek letter Ome- 
ga, somewhat resembling a cap.
These, he asserts, 
are evidently shaped by art, and were designed for 
stone deities.
Some other writers have implicitly 
adopted this opinion ; but from an inspection of 
these rocks, it is evident that human art was never 
employed in their erection, or formation.
They are 
somewhat singular in size and shape ; but nature, 
in her infinite modifications of matter, often pro- 
duces greater curiosities.
The rock, called by Dr.
Borlase, the Tolmen, and by the country people, the 
Maen, or Men Rock, consists of several large 
masses of granite, the uppermost of which rests on 
two others, leaving an aperture between them and 
the impost, or top stone.
The impost is shaped 
nearly like an egg, and measures about thirty-three 
feet long, eighteen and a half broad, fourteen feet 
and a half deep, and is supposed to weigh 750 tons.
On the top of this stone are several of the excava- 
tions called rock-basons.
The other stone stands 
close by a cottage, and measures about thirty feet 
in circumference at the bottom, and eleven feet 
high.
It is nearly circular, and has been thought 
to resemble in shape, a lady's narroAV brimmed 
bonnet.
Cranstock.] — Cranstock, Crantock, or St. Ka- 
rentoc, in the hundred of Pyder, seven miles north- 
nators, and having published an edition of the Stannary Laws, 
as appears by the inscription on a handsome monument in 
St. Columb's church which is ornamented with his bust.
— 
Lysons.
west 
CORNWALL.
4'2± 
west by west from St. Michaels, is a chapelry of 
Padstow.
In the reign of Edward the Coufessor, 
there was at this place a collegiate church dedicated 
to St. Karentoc, who is said to have been a disciple 
to St. Patric.
Speed mentions its annual value at 
the Dissolution, to have been 89/ 15s.
Sd. The in- 
habitants have a tradition, that this was once a large 
town ; which is not improbable, as there belonged 
to the church a dean and nine prebendaries.
The 
college estate is the property of Mr. Johns.
The 
little harbour called theGonell is in this parish.
Creed.]— The parish of St. Creed is in the west 
division of the hundred of Powder, one mile south 
of the borough of Grampound, part of which it com- 
prises.
The church contains some monuments of 
the Quarme family.
It is in the patronage of Sir 
Christopher Hawkins, who is one of the chief landed 
proprietors of the parish.
Crowan.] — Crowan is in the east division of the 
hundred of Penwith, five miles and a quarter north 
by west from Helstone.
Trethannas, Trevoole, 
Drym, Cargenwen, and Prage-an-boble are villages 
in this parish.
Clowance, the seat of Sir John St.
Aubyn, formerly belonged to the ancient family 
of Helligan.
By the late and present baronet, it has 
been greatly improved by extensive plantations.
Sir John St. Aubyn has various other possessions 
in this parish.
The church was presented, by Wil- 
liam, Earl of Gloucester, to St. James's Priory in 
Bristol.
Formerly there was a chapel of ease at 
Binnerton.
There is a charity-school in this parish, 
which was handsomely endowed by the St. Aubyns, 
nearly a century ago.
Dominick.] — St. Dominick's is in the middle di- 
vision of the hundred of East, two miles and three 
quarters south-east from Callington.
Subsequently 
to the loth century the manor of Halton, which for- 
merly belonged to a family of that name, was purchased 
by John Rous, uncle to Sir Anthony Rous, a branch 
of the ancient family of Rous, of Little Madbury.
Francis the son of Sir Anthony Rous, was born herein 
the year 1579.
This gentleman was a vehement de- 
claimer in Parliament against the innovations and 
abuses in Church and State ; and particularly 
against Arminianism, which he represented as po- 
pery in disguise.
lie was one of the few Laymen 
appointed by the Commons to sit in the assembly of 
divines at Westminster.
His religious and political 
principles were perfectly accommodated to the party 
which he espoused, and seemed to have ever varied 
with his interest, which appears to have had a much 
stronger hold upon him than his enthusiasm.
He 
was a member of Barebones' parliament ; and made 
a wild proposal to form the English commonwealth 
after the model of the Jewish.
But as a theocracy 
was rejected, he thought fit to invest the regal power 
in Cromwell, whom he affected to look upon as a 
compound of the characters of Moses and Joshua, 
lie was one of those who were called by the Pro- 
tector to the Upper House ; and it was said, " that 
he could not well do less than make that gentleman 
vol.
i. — no.
31.
a Lord who had made him a Prince," by the resig- 
nation of the instrument of government into his 
hands.
He was called " the illiterate Jew of 
Eton ;" but it does not at all appear, from his writ- 
ings, that he deserved that appellation.
He died in 
the month of January 1659, at his house at Acton, 
Middlesex, and was interred at Eton, with great 
pomp.
The old mansion on this estate is now oc- 
cupied as a farm-house.
The manor itself is the 
property of Mrs. Blewitt, the patroness of the rec- 
tory.
Charles Fitz- Geoffrey, rector of this parish 
in the early part of the 17th century, published a 
Life of Sir Francis Drake, " written in lofty verse, 
when he was Bachelor of Arts," Latin poems, a col- 
lection of poems out of his own and the works of 
others, made in the early part of the reign of James 
1. under the name of " Choice Flowers and De- 
scriptions," a book which appears to have been ex- 
tremely scarce, even in Anthony Wood's time ; and 
several sermons, amongst which were those preach- 
ed at the funerals of Sir Anthony Rous, of Halton 
(1622), and Philippa his lady (1620), and "The 
Curse of Corn-harders ; with a Blessing of Season- 
able Selling," in three discourses.
Mr. F"itz-Geof- 
frey died, and was buried at St. Dominick, in the 
year 1637.
The manor of Westcote, in this pa- 
rish, is the property and residence of William 
Pode, Esq.
Formerly in this parish, were chapels dedicated 
to St. lldract and St. Ethelred ; of one of them, a 
place called Chapel, near the Tainar, is supposed to 
have been the site.
Duloe.] — The parish of Duloe is in the hundred 
of West, three miles and a half north-north-west 
from West Looe.
It is divided into three districts, 
north, south, and west ; and almost the whole of the 
western district is holden under the Honourable 
Mrs. Agar, the present representative of the Ro- 
barts family.
There is a yearly court for this estate 
at Pendrescot.
The manor of Treworgye belongs 
to Mr. Eliot, of Bartholemew Close, London ; those 
of Tremoderet and West-North to Thomas Bewes, 
Esq. of Tothill, near Plymouth ; that of Great 
Trenant to Admiral Sir Edward Buller ; and that 
of Bodbrane to R.
II.
Clarke, Esq. of Bridewell, 
Devon.
In the church, which is a plain Gothic structure, 
is a handsome stone monument, sustaining a recum- 
bent plaister figure of a knight in armour, with an 
inscription to the memory of Sir John Colshull of 
Tremodoret, who died on the 17th of March, 1483.
Near it are several monuments of the Arundels and 
Killiows, sculptured in slate.
Monuments of this 
description, it is proper to remark, are found iu 
many churches of Cornwall and Devon : they ap- 
pear to have been much in fashion there during the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
They consist 
of slate slabs, of various sizes ; and are sometimes 
formed into tables or altar tombs : at others they 
are fixed as tablets against the walls.
The large 
slabs are from five to seven feet long, and frequently 
a p ornamented.
426 
CORNWALL.
ornamented with a figure carved in high relief, and 
as large as life, or perhaps with smaller figures, re- 
presenting a man, his wife, and their children.
The 
figures are in some instances raised full three inches 
out of the stone.
They have seldom much beauty ; 
but the ease with which the work was executed upon 
the fine close-grained blue slate of Cornwall, has 
frequently induced the sculptor to mark many more 
minutiae of dress, than are seen in most other monu- 
ments of the same age.
On a tablet of the latter 
kind of substance in Duloe Church, is the under- 
written inscription, in which the name of a female 
whose remembrance it records, forms the anagram, 
Man a dry Laurel.
Maria Arundell.
Man a dry Laurell.
Man to the marigold compar'd may bee, 
Man may be likened to the Laurell" tree ; 
Both feede the eye, both please the optic sense, 
Both soone decay, and suddenly fleet hence.
What then interre you from her name, but this, 
Man fades away, man a dry laurell is.
The Anstis vault in this church contains the re- 
mains of several of the Anstis family, who possessed 
considerable property in the parish.* 
Duloe Church is dedicated to St. Cuby.f St.
Cuby's, or, as it is vulgarly called, Kibby's Well, is 
situated upward of a mile from Duloe Church, on 
the left side of the road which leads to Sandplace, 
and which probably derives its name of Kippiscombe 
(St. Cuby's Combe) Lane from this little consecrated 
spring.
The water flows into a circular bason, or 
reservoir, of granite, two feet four inches at its ex- 
treme diameter at top, and about two feet high.
It 
appears to have been neatly carved, and ornamented 
in the lower part with the figure of the griffin, and 
round the edge with dolphins, now much defaced.
The water was formerly caried off" by a drain, like 
those usually seen in fonts and piscinas.
Within a 
furlong north-east of the church, is a small Druidi- 
cal Circle, consisting of seven or eight stones, one 
of which is about nine feet in height : four are up- 
right ; the others are either broken, or concealed by 
a hedge, which divides the circle ; part being in an 
orchard, and part in an adjoining field.
Its diame- 
ter is, apparently* about twenty or twenty-five 
feet.
A chapel, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, formerly 
stood at Hille, in this parish.
Esloshaile.] — Egloshaile is in the hundred of 
Trigg, three quarters of a mile south-east from 
Wadebridge, part of which stands in the parish.
* John Anstis, whose " Register of the most noble Order of 
the Garter," in two volumes folio, and other works, are well 
known to all lovers of heraldry, was born at St. Neots, in this 
county, in September 1669.
He was made Garter King at 
Arms, in 1714; died the 4th of March, 1744; and was in- 
terred in the vault at Duloe.
Besides the books which he pub- 
lished, he left in manuscript a History of Launceston, a Trea- 
tise on the Antiquities of Cornwall, and many other works and 
collections now dispersed in various hands.
His son John, who, 
in 1723, was joined to his father in the office of Gaiter King at 
Burlawn, Trevilder, Treworder, Sladosbridga, and 
Bodive, are also villages in this parish.
Wadebridge 
which we shall notice hereafter connects Egloshaile 
and St. Breock.
Sir A.
O. Molesworth is Lord of 
the Manor of Pendavy, which is said to have had 
extensive privileges, with the royalties of the river, 
and the bushelage of coals brought to Wadebridge.
Kestell, formerly a seat of a family of that name, 
Pencarrow, and Park are also the property of Sir A.
Molesworth.
The Park manor, antiently the seat 
of the Peverells, descended by marriage to the fami- 
lies of Basset and Boterreaux.
"My Lorde of 
Huntingdune," says Leland, " hath a place caulled 
the Parke, wher Bottreaux had a faire manor eas- 
telle, a VI miles by south from Bottreaux.
The 
late Lord Hungerford had half the Lordship." 
There is an ancient intrenchment in this pa- 
rish, known by the name of Castle Killibury : it 
has a treble ditch enclosing about six acres.
The church contains memorials of the Kestell and 
Molesworth families.
Here are two charity schools, one for boys the 
other for girls, supported by voluntary contribu- 
tion, and combining the plans of Dr. Bell and Mr.
Lancaster.
Endellion.] — Endellion, so called from St. En- 
delienta, is in the hundred of Trigg, four miles and 
three quarters north from Wadebridge.
At Port 
Isaac, the principal village in the parish, a consider- 
able pilchard fishery is carried on, and there is a 
small Friday's market for butchers' meat, &c.
Slate, 
from the Delabole quarries, is exported ; and coals 
are imported from Wales.
Port Isaac appears to 
have risen from the ruins of the havens in the 
neighbourhood.
A charity-school, supported by vo- 
luntary contributions, was established here about ten 
years ago.
The tower of Endellion church, which stands on 
high ground, is seen as a land-mark at a great dis- 
tance.
In the north-aisle is the burial place of the 
Roscarrocks, formerly Lords of the Manor of that 
name.
In the chancel is an old uninscribed tomb, 
supposed to have belonged to the ancient family of 
Chenduit, corruptly called Cheyney.
Roscarrock 
manor is now the property of Mr. Guy; that of 
Bodannan belongs to the Rev. Dr.
P. Lyne.
In 
lieu of tithes, Roscarrock pays a yearly modus of 
9/.
According to an ancient custom, this used to be 
paid in the church -porch, before sun-rise, on Mi- 
chaelmas Day. Some ruins of a chapel are to be 
seen at Roscarrock : there are also some ruins of 
St. I Hick's chapel.
Arms, and had likewise the additional offices of Genealogist 
and Register of Bath, died 5th of December, 1754; and was 
also buried in the family vault.
The heraldic regalia, both of 
the father and son, are still preserved at Wesl-norlh, in this pa- 
rish, where they resided.
f Dr. Jeremiah Milles, Dean of Exeter, and formerly Pre- 
sident of the Society of Antiquaries, was born at the parsonage 
house of Duloe, ot which his father, who died the 3 1st of Ja- 
nuary, 1745-6, was vicar forty- two years.
Enoder.] 
CORNWALL.
427 
Kvoder.]-- Euoder, supposed to derive its name 
from St. Athenodorus, is in the hundred of Pyder, 
ten miles east from Truro.
The borough of Mi- 
ehell, or St. Michael's, is partly in this parish.
At 
Summer-Court, one of the principal villages of St.
Enoder, are three large cattle fairs ; July 28, Holy- 
rood-day, and September 25.
Penhale and Frad- 
don are also villages in this parish.
At Arrallas 
appear the ruins of a chapel.
The church, which*, 
had fallen down, was rebuilt in the time of 
Charles II.
Erme.] — St. Ernie's parish is in the west division 
of the hundred of Powder, three miles north by east 
from Truro.
Trevispan, or Trispan, Stairfoot, and 
that part of Tresilian which lies west of the bridge, 
connecting it with Merther, are villages in this pa- 
rish.
Two annual cattle fairs, the second Monday 
in February, and the Monday before Whitsuntide, 
are holden at this bridge ; which is memorable also 
for being the spot on which was concluded the 
treaty between Sir Ralph Hopton and Sir Thomas 
Fairfax, by which, in March 1646, this county was 
surrendered to the Parliament.
In the parish church is a monument to the me- 
mory of John Jagoe, Esq. of Truthan, who died in 
1652, with the following epitaph : — 
He was more than he seem'd, yet seemed to be 
More than a thousand more ; his pedigree 
Is drawn in Heaven, where, if ere you come, 
You'll see more of him than in verse or tombe.
Here is also a monument to the memory of Joan, 
wife of John Coke, Esq. of Tregasow, 1630 ; and 
another of Robert Trencreek, Esq. of Trencreek, in 
Creed, who died in 1594.
Having married the co- 
heiress of the families of Vyvyan and Kingdon, he 
left four daughters, who married into the families of 
Carminowe, Penwarne, Polwhele, and Mohun.
There being no endowed school in this parish, 
Dr. Cornelius Cardew, the rector, Benevolently 
teaches the children of the poor to read at his own 
cxpence.
Eeth.] — The parish of St. Erth, seated on the 
Heyle, is in the east division of the hundred of Pen- 
with, four miles north-east from Marazion.
Leland 
states, that St. Erth's Bridge was built 200 years 
before his time — which would carry it back to the 
middle of the 14th century — and " that good tall 
ships came up to that place before the haven was 
barred up with sands." 
The ancient name of this parish was Lankudnow; 
and Mr. Bodd, the lessee of the great tithes under 
the church of Exeter, now holds a tenement of that 
name.
A little above the vicarage house is a circu- 
lar double intrenchment, called Carhangives, said 
to have belonged to the Dinham family, At Porth- 
t'.uUumb, in this parish, are the remains of an ancient 
chapel.
St. Erth's has a charity school, with a small 
endowment, 
In a field called the Rounds, at Bossans, near 
Godolphin, in this parish, is an intrenchment of a 
.square shape, but rounded off at the angles, measur- 
ing 152 feet by 136, within the banks.
Within it, 
in the year 1756, a well, or small perpendicular pit, 
of two feet and a half diameter, was accidentally 
discovered by a farmer, and, either from curiosity, 
or hopes of treasure, perhaps from both, its contents 
were afterwards explored, and various relics of anti- 
quity found ; some of which were deposited in the 
Ashmolean Museum.
Digging to the depth of 
eighteen feet, says Dr. Borlase, there was found a 
Roman paterae ; and about six feet deeper, a tin jug, 
a stone weight, and a small mill-stone, about eigh- 
teen inches in diameter.
Beneath these another 
paterae, with two handles, was discovered ; and also 
fragments of horns intermixed with bones of several 
sizes, half burnt sticks, many pieces of leather, and 
shreds of worn-out shoes.
At the depth of 36 feet 
the labourers came to the bottom of the pit, which 
was of a concave form : at the sides appeared small 
holes, seemingly for steps to descend and aseend.
— 
Both paterae were made of tin : the first discovered 
was without handles ; but contained an inscription, 
engraved on the inner surface of the bottom.
The 
characters, according to Borlase, were for the most 
part proper to the Greek alphabet, though several 
Roman letters were found among them ; and the 
language of the inscription was Latin, which, conti- 
nues the Doctor, I read thus : — " Livius Modestvs 
Drivli (or Dsivli) Filivs Deo Marti." Thus con- 
taining the names of the donor and his father, as 
well as the name of the deity to whom it was dedi- 
cated.
The width of the brim of this paterae was 
four inches and a half.
The jug is the praefericulum 
of antiquaries, i.
e. a vessel used to carry the holy 
water, or other sacred liquor to the altar.
Evall.] — St. Evall's parish is in the hundred of 
Pyder, five miles and a half north-west by north, 
from St. Columb Major Downhill, and Trebur- 
thick, are its chief villages.
About the commencement of the 18th century the 
tower of St. Evall's church fell down ; in conse- 
quence of which it was rebuilt from the foundation, 
at the expence of nearly 400/.
It was completed 
in the year 1727, the charge having been defrayed 
by collections in the county, assisted by contributions 
from the Bristol merchants.
From its loftiness, this 
tower is a conspicuous sea mark ; and, to vessels 
navigating the north sea, it is eminently serviceable.
Trethewell manor, anciently in theNanfans, is now 
the property of Mrs. Crosse.
The barton of the 
same name is the property of Lovell Todd, Esq. in 
i the King's packet service.
Ewe.] — The parish of St. Ewe is in the east divi- 
sion of the hundred of Powder, four miles east 
north-east from Tregony.
Crowswin and Polma- 
siek are the chief villages.
The manor of St. Ewe, 
which was in the family of Hiwis, in the early part 
of the reign of Edward III.
now belongs to Sir 
Christopher Hawkins.
The manor of Lanhadron, 
anciently 
42& 
CORNWALL.
anciently in the Arundell family, now belongs to the 
Reverend Hawkins Tremayne.
Norden* speaks of 
Lunhadron, as " an anntient howse of the Arondells, 
where was the most stateliest parke within the shire, 
now utterly decayede, and the woodes rooted up, 
and the land sowed with corne.
There is an oke 
within the circuit of this decayed park, called Aron- 
dells oke, which is sayde to beare leaves as whyte as 
whyte paper.
Some such leaves are ordinarye on 
niaiue others, but to be sogenerall is more strange." 
Among the numerous manors and bartons of this 
parish are those of K< stell- Wartha and Kestell- 
Wollas, possessions of the Tremayne family.
One 
of these was the residence of Colonel Lewis Tre- 
mayne during the civil war in the reign of Charles 
the First, and was plundered by the Earl of Essex's 
troops.
Trelean,in this parish, according to some writers, 
was the birth place of the notorious Hugh Peters.
t 
St. Ewes church contains various monuments, 
none of which is strikingly remarkable.
Carew 
speaks of Dr. Hugh Atwell, Rector of this parish, 
as singular in his practice of physic.
" Marry," 
says he, " his practice is somewhat strange and 
varying from all others ; for though now and then 
he use blood-letting, and do ordinarily minister 
Maims Christi, and such like cordials of his own 
compounding, (a poynt fitting well with my humour, 
as enabling nature, who best knoweth how to Avorke,) 
yet mostly, for all diseases, he prescribeth milk, and 
very often milk and apples, a course deeply subject 
to the exception of the best esteemed practitioners ; 
and such notwithstanding as whereby either the vir- 
tue of the medicine or the fortune of the phisician, 
or the credulitie of the patient, hath recovered sun- 
dry out of desperate and forborne extremities." — 
Bisdon tells us that he lived to be 100 years of age, 
and that the maid servant who attended him was 
120 ; but, according to Prince, he died at the age 
of 91 years, on the 4th of May, 1617 : he adds, that 
it was a received tradition in the parish of St. Ewe, 
that he was buried naked, and that the shroud in 
which he had been wrapped, containing 30 ells of 
linen, was given, by his own directions, to the poor 
at his grave.
Falmouth.] — The town of Falmouth lies in the 
east division of the hundred of Kirrier, 60 miles 
south-west from Launceston, and 270 miles west 
* This gentleman must not be confounded with John Nor- 
den, of the I6th century, who produced Surveys of Middlesex 
and Hertfordshire, and various other works.
Norden's "Topo- 
raphical and Historical Description of Cornwall" may be 
considered as contemporary with Carew's Survey; the" Pe- 
rambulation of Cornwall," as he cahs it, for the purpose of col- 
lecting his materials, appears to have been made in 1584: it 
v. as not written till after the publication of Carew's volume, 
from which he has evidently taken his general sketch of the 
count v ; and, from other circumstances it appears, that he had, 
i in many instances, brought clown his account to the 
tune if his writing.
This survey, in which we have some no- 
t>.
e- of seats of the Cornish gentry of his time, not mentioned 
elsewhere, was not printed till 1728.
south-west from London.
It is situated on the 
point AVhere the river Fal falls into the English 
channel.
It is a corporate town, governed by a 
Mayor and Alderman ; it has fairs on the 27th July 
and the 10th October; with an established market 
on Thursdays.
Scarcely more than two centuries ago Falmouth 
contained only two or three houses, but it is now the 
richest and best trading tow r n of the whole county of 
Cornwall ; a circumstance in part owing to its being 
the station of the packets to Spain, Portugal, and 
America ; which not only bring great quantities of 
gold in specie, and in bars, on account of the mer- 
chants in London, but the Falmouth merchants also 
trade with the Portuguese in ships of their own, and 
have also a great share in the profitable pilchard 
trade.
Falmouth is supposed to have first become 
a station for packets about the year 1688 ; and it is 
known that, in 1696, packets were employed between 
that town and the Groyne.
In 1705, five packets 
were employed about Falmouth and the West India 
islands ; the vessels were of 150 tons burthen, and 
manned with 30 men ; two years afterwards the 
same number of packets were employed about Fal- 
mouth and Lisbon.
In 1755 two packets Avere em- 
ployed between Falmouth and New-York.
The 
next year a packet went from Falmouth to Corunna, 
and another to Gibraltar.
In 1763 the packets to 
New-York were increased to four.
In 1764 packets 
were established to Pensacola, St. Augustin, Sa- 
vannah, and Charles-Town.
In 1766 an additional 
packet was employed on the West India station ; 
and in 1 768 four additional boats between Falmouth 
and Charles-Town.
In 1766 the whole number of 
packets on the Falmouth station were nine ; in 1782 
there were four to Lisbon, and eighteen, including 
office boats, to the West Indies and America.
In 
1799 a fifth packet was employed on the West India 
station.
In 1806 four packets were employed be- 
tween Falmouth, Gibraltar, and Malta ; in 1808 
five between Falmouth and the Brazils, and three 
between Falmouth and Corunna; in 1810 three be- 
tween Falmouth and Surinam.
The present esta- 
blishment consists of seven packets on the Lisbon 
station, and twenty established, and fourteen tempo- 
rary packets for general purposes.
Falmouth harbour is unquestionably the finest in 
the kingdom.
It is defended by two castles : that 
f According to others, this fanatic was born at Fowey,' in the 
year 1599.
He was educated at St. John's College, Cambridge, 
from whence he was expelled.
He afterwards went on the 
stage, where he acquired that buffoonery which subsequently 
distinguished him in the pulpit.
He was ordained by Bishop 
Mountaine, and was for some time lecturer of St. Sepulchre's, 
London ; but having an intrigue with another man's wife, he 
fled to Rotterdam, "where he joined the independents.
He 
went from thence to New England, and at the beginning of the 
rebellion returned to London, where he became a zealous 
preacher in the cause of the parliament.
For his activity in the 
rebellion, especially at the murder of the king, he was hanged 
and quartered in l6b0.
\) 
towards 
CORNWALL.
429 
towards the east is called St. Mawes, and stands on 
a poiut of land three miles across the harbour; that 
to the west, distant from St. Mawes about a mile 
and a half, is called Pendennis.
During' the late 
war the harbour was surveyed by Commissioner 
Bowen, for the purpose of ascertaining 1 its capability 
of accommodating* part of the Channel fleet during 
the winter months, and buoys were in consequence 
laid down for the reception of sixteen sail of the line 
at one time.
A communication may thus be con- 
stantly kept up with the remainder of the fleet off 
Ushant, by which means our ships, in time of war, 
are enabled to pursue the enemy escaping from 
Brest, without loss of time.
A dtpot of naval stores 
has also been formed at Falmouth : and a store- 
keeper, a master ship-wright, and a master attend- 
ant, with proper officers under their directions have 
been appointed.
This regulation is intended to ob- 
viate the necessity of ships going to Plymouth to 
refit.
The harbour, called by Ptolemy Cenionis 
Ostium, is capable of bringing up vessels of the 
largest burthen even with the quay ; and it has so 
many commodious creeks that the whole of the 
Royal Navy might be sheltered during a wind.
— 
Near the middle of the entrance is a large rock, 
called the Black Rock, supposed to have been once 
an island where the Phoenicians used to hold a 
traffic with the natives for tin ; the water at that 
time being so shallow from hence to Pendennis, that 
the tin was conveyed across at low water by wheel 
carriages, but it is now eight or ten fathoms deep.
Leland, who visited Cornwall in the reign of Henry 
VIII.
mentions Falmouth as " a havyn very notable 
and famose, and in a manner the most principale of 
a! Britayne." 
The origin of Falmouth, as a town, though so 
recent, is somewhat involved in obscurity ; and in- 
stead of indubitable historical fact, we are, in a great 
measure, compelled to receive traditional fable and 
anecdote.
The town is not mentioned by Camden, 
even in his edition of 1607 ; though he particularly 
notices the harbour, and actually names Penwryn, 
St. Maw's Castle, Pendennis Castle, and even Ar- 
wennack, now at the end of the town.
" A certain 
person building a little house, a female servant of 
one Mr. Pendaris, or Pendarvis, of Pcndarvis, 
about ten or eleven miles from Falmouth, came and 
dwelt in it ; upon which that gentleman bid her 
brew a little ale, and on such a day he promised to 
come with some gentlemen, and help her to some 
money by drinking it up." This must have been 
prior to the 5th-6th of Edward VI.
as in the Parlia- 
ment held between the months of January and Apid, 
155-2, a law was made for the first time, requiring 
ale houses and tipling houses to be licensed.
The 
servant observed her master's orders.
But in the 
mean time, a Dutch --essel came into the harbour.* 
The crew calling at the house kept by Mr. Pendar- 
vis's servant, drank out the.
ale.
Mr. Pendarvis 
came with his friends at the day appointed ; and 
calling for some drink, his servant told him she had 
none.
Her master expostulating with her, she told 
him what had passed ; and said, " truly Master, the 
Penny come so quick, I could not deny them." The 
country people round about used to call Falmouth 
Penny Come Quick, and to tell this story of the oc- 
casion.
This story is still told popularly at Fal- 
mouth, and is considered still as the narrative of the 
town's origin.
Even the house itself, which was the 
scene of this transaction, and is marked by it for the 
earliest house in the town, is to this day shown at 
the northern end, under the appellation of Penny 
Come Quick.
It still remains upon what was once 
the land of Pendarvis, now that of Lord de Dun- 
stanville.
It has a small walled court before it, fac- 
ing the sea ; is still thatched in one half of its roof ; 
is still an alehouse, and still retains a fading remem- 
brance of the name, which within memory it bore 
familiarly on its head, that of Penny Come Quick.
It stands near the New Quay, opposite to Flushing, 
and a little on the right of the long flight of stone 
steps, by which persons ascend from the passage 
boat that plies between Flushing and Falmouth ; 
having the mark of an ancient door, as well as of an 
ancient window, in the wall by which it turns its 
back upon the land.
A story, bearing some resemblance to the above 
is related in a MS.
history of the Killigrews : the 
writer says, that there was only a single house at 
Falmouth, besides Arwennack, (the seat of the Killi- 
grews) when Sir Walter Raleigh, being homeward- 
bound from the coast of Guinea, put in there ; that 
he was entertained at Arwennack and his men 
poorly accommodated at the solitary house, which, 
it is probable, had been originally built for the en- 
tertainment of sea-faring persons ; that this cele- 
brated navigator, being struck with the great utility 
of providing more extensive accommodations at the 
mouth of Falmouth harbour, for the officers and 
crews of homeward-bound ships, laid before the 
council a project for erecting four houses for that 
purpose.
It is probable, that the single house here 
spoken of, was single as a house of entertainment, 
and that there were also a few fishers' cottages, 
though too inconsiderable to have been described by 
Norden, even as a village.
However, there is yet another story told of the 
origin of Falmouth.
The house, known by the name 
of Penny Come Quick, lies at some little distance 
from the extreme parts of the town, and to the north 
* We believe this to be the earliest intimation which occurs 
fjfany Dutchmen resorting to this harbour.
The Dutch, how- 
ever, appear to have had a large connection with it ; as there is 
the town of Flushing upon one side, and some houses called 
Amsterdam on another.
Hals tells us, that " Jane Killogrew, 
widow of Sir John Killegrew, Knight, in the Spanish \\ ars in 
VOL.
I. — NO.
31.
the latter end oi the reign of Elizabeth, went from the house of 
the Killegrews at Arwennack, aboard two Dutch ships of the 
Hanse Towns, driven into Falmouth Harbour by cross winds, 
laden with merchandizes on account (as was said) of Spaniards, 
and with a numerous party of ruffians," slew the Spanish fac- 
tors, and took away their treasure.
5a 
430 
CORNWALL.
of all.
But another house lies in the heart of the 
town, that was much more the nucleus of the whole.
Notwithstanding its present grandeur, says Hals, 
" neither the town nor its modern name is of any great 
antiquity, neither being extant a hundred years 
past." This is an error, even on the face of his own 
account hereafter; Hals writing about the year 
1715 ; " for," as he adds, " long since that time it 
was known by no other appellation than that of 
Smithike ; from a smith who lived at the creek or 
cove now in the centre thereof.
And verily I have 
been told by some aged persons lately living, that 
they remembered not above five houses standing in 
the place." In this manner is one error confirmed 
by another ; and the memory of his aged informers 
appears, from Hals himself, to have been strangely 
misrepresented by him.
Otherwise, this information 
is sufficiently consistent with the tradition recited, 
and the remains before described.
When properly 
dated, it forms a new link, in the chain of history.
— 
The little alehouse at the north end of the town was 
the first house on the site of the town ; and the se- 
cond was the smith's house, near the centre of the 
site.
The creek or cove on which this house stood, 
is now a broad opening into the plain of what is 
called the Market-Strand ; and formerly went across 
the whole plain, across the ground of the houses be- 
yond, and up that narrow valley behind the market- 
house, which is denominated the Moor.
On build- 
ing a brewhouse in the moor just behind the market- 
house, about twenty years ago, was found a bed of 
beach sand under the surface of the ground.
The 
market-house itself was built originally upon piles, 
because of the unfaithfulness of the artificial earth 
below : it was some time since directed to be en- 
larged, and being thus carried beyond the range of 
the piles, began to crack in its frame from the sub- 
sidence of its foundations, and was actually obliged 
to be re-erected in 1702.
It has been said, that the 
whole plain of the market-strand, with the whole 
site of the houses upon the western side of it, from 
the looseness of the earth beneath, sensibly shakes 
and trembles, on the passage of a carriage over the 
street.
On this creek then was the smith's house, 
which gave the appellation of Smithike to the village.
Accordingly, on the little knoll which runs up from 
the market strand to the south, and on the left hand 
side of the street, that begins at it, the second house 
appears to have been prior to the street, from its face 
turning towards the sea, and its back abutting upon 
the street.
This, amidst the many alterations which 
the formation of a street behind it has necessarily 
occasioned, still appears to have been originally the 
second germ of Falmouth.
It was built with its 
* Some account of this writer, whom we have repeatedly 
quoted, will probably be acceptable.
About the year 1685, 
Mr. William Hals, a gentleman of an ancient Devonshire fami- 
ly, which had been some time settled at Fentongollan, in St.
Michael- Penkeville, began to make collections for a parochial 
History ol Cornwall, which he continued for at least half a 
back to the hill, the street there being only a Iedg- 
ing of the hill cut down to a level, and the entrance 
from the street into that house being by a flight of 
steps.
The wall of the hack has been opened for 
windows since the street was formed behind it.
The 
windows of the front, therefore, have been all block- 
ed up, but still shew they were once there.
The 
Standard-Inn, (now the Hotel) has been built direct- 
ly before it; and what was once the shelving beach 
in front of the house is now the back-yard and water- 
stairs of the inn.
It is a low house, remembered to 
have been once all covered with thatch, and is, or 
was recently, still covered in part with thatch 
very thick.
This part projects beyond the rest, and 
was formerly, in all probability, the Smithy itself.
— 
The real name, there is no doubt, was Smithwik, 
and it was vitiated into Smithike only by an abbre- 
viated pronunciation.
As early as the year 1613, 
John Killegrew formed a grand plan of building a 
whole town here at once.
Truro, having possession 
of all the sovereignty of that fine expanse of waters 
now denominated Falmouth harbour ; the town of 
Penryn, which had arisen since Traro, and had 
come to share its harbour with it ; and even Heiston, 
a town at a considerable distance, actually cut off by- 
nature from any immediate use of the harbour ; all 
united to oppose the execution.
Truro was naturally 
jealous of a town that would have many advantages 
over it ; and might in time, perhaps, wrest from it 
the trident of its inclosed sea.
Truro had, perhaps, 
beheld the rise of Penryn, formerly, with the same 
eye of jealousy.
But only towns that rise all at 
once, can be opposed as Falmouth was ; and Truro 
probably drew in Penryn, with Heiston, to unite 
with her in preventing the rise of Falmouth.
They 
all petitioned King James the First against it.
In 
this petition they urged gravely, " That the erect- 
ing of a town at Smithike," where the town was de- 
signed to be erected, because " of the creek or cove 
now in the centre thereof," and not where the ale- 
house was, at the end of the town, " would tend to 
the ruin and impoverishing of the ancient coinage- 
towns and market-towns aforesaid, not far distant 
from thence ; and therefore humbly prayed the 
King's Majesty, that the buildings and undertakings 
of Mr. Killegrew might be inhibited for tiie future." 
It must be inferred, from the language in the close 
of this petition, that Mr. Killegrew had already 
begun the execution of his plan, and had actually 
entered upon the erection of his buildings.
This 
gives us the origin of Falmouth as a town, in the 
year 1613 ; more than a hundred years before 
Hals* wrote.
On the receipt of this petition the 
King ordered his privy counsellors to require infor- 
mation 
century: it was brought down by him to about the year 1736.
Mr. Hals died in 1739 ; his parochial history being at that time 
nearly compleaied.
About the year 1750, the publication of 
this work was undertaken by Mr. Andrew Brice, then a printer 
at Truro, who afterwards removed to Exeter, where he pub- 
lished an useful geographical dictionary, and other books.
The 
account 
CORNWALL.
431 
mation upon the point from the governor of Pen- 
deunis Castle.
The council wrote, and the gover- 
nor replied, " That he well approved of Mr. lville- 
grew's project for building a town and custom-house 
at Smithike, as being near the mouth of the Fal har- 
bour, for the quick and necessary supply of such 
ships, whose occasions, or contrary winds, brought 
them in there, without being obliged (as then they 
were) to go two miles up the river to Penryn, or 
nine miles to Truro, in order thereto ; or to take in 
and out their cargoes, or ladings, and make entries 
at the custom-house, at such a distance, &c.
The 
King, on a full hearing of all parties at the council- 
board, determined, " That the erecting of a town at 
Smithike, by Mr. Killegrew, could by no means be 
prejudicial to the coinage and incorporate towns 
aforesaid, they standing at such considerable dis- 
tance from it ; but especially for that every man 
might lawfully do what he would, for the utility and 
advantage of his own proper goods and lands, with- 
out the license or approbation even of the King, or 
any contiguous neighbour, who had no public or 
private nuisance thereby done him ; how much more 
reasonable was it, therefore, when the owners of 
such lands converted them to such uses as tended 
not only to his own, but the public good, and advan- 
tage of the king and country together." Thus en- 
couraged, Mr. Killegrew went on with his erections ; 
and Falmouth suddenly stood forth as a town of 
consequence.
It was, however, only a double line 
of houses, probably as being all at Smithike, facing 
equally to the sea, and to the land, running from the 
smith's house, the custom-house, and the market- 
house, along the verge of the harbour, pushing out 
into the tideway itself, yet looking like the smith's 
house end the market-house only across the harbour.
All this low range of ground at the foot and side of 
the steep hill, was apparently considered then as the 
beach of the sea, the market-strand still lying at one 
end, and the fish-strand at the other.
A little on 
the northern side of the fish-strand, in sinking a well 
a few years ago, was found, about fifteen feet from 
the surface of the street, a layer of pebbles ; the 
layer, about two feet in thickness, and the pebbles 
evidently rounded by the dashing of the waves.
— 
Just under this appeared a fine spring of fresh 
water; while the other springs on this side of the 
street are all brackish.
The sinker of the well 
stopped short, on coming to the spring, by the ad- 
vice of an old well-maker ; who assured him, if he 
went any deeper, he would come, like his neigh- 
bours, to brackish water, go curiously has nature 
disposed her stores of fresh water here, between the 
salt below, and the beach above !
This original 
account of seventy-two parishes, arranged alphabetically, from 
Advent to Helston inclusive, was printed in folio in ten num- 
bers, which are extremely scarce : the publication is said to 
have been suspended for want of purchasers; occasioned by 
the scurrilous anecdotes it contained, and reflections thrown on 
tome of the principal families.
It is probable, however, that 
beach had been covered with its depth of earth from 
the soil of the bank washing down upon it.
But, as 
the houses extended afterwards in a lane along the 
beach from Smithike and the market-strand, towards 
the fish-strand, they naturally kept to the eastern 
side of the lane, because of the hill on the other side.
This hill is still called by a Cornish name, while the 
smith's house, and the little alehouse, assumed an 
English one ; having been noticed for ages before 
Smithike had any existence, as long as the harbour 
had been used, or there had been a particular port 
within it ; being therefore denominated Porkan Hill, 
the Hill of the Port of the Raven ; as Porth-karn- 
haun, in Endellion Parish, is the Port of the Rocky 
Haven, and as the Falmouth side of the haven here 
is peculiarly denominated the harbour or port at 
present.
Just to the north of a way up this hill, 
that is called Porkan Lane, and nearly opposite to 
the original Smithike, the ground appears, from a 
recited lease of 1659, to be then unbuilt upon, and 
to be then, for the first time, leased out upon build- 
ing terms.
And the houses there built are all (as it 
were) let into the body of the hill.
The town of Falmouth was long known under the 
double appellations of Smithike and Penny Come 
Quick !
The village continued its name to the town.
But in 1660 a proclamation was issued by Charles 
the Second, that " Smithike, alias Penny Come 
Quick, should from and for ever after the 20th of 
August, 1660, be called by the name of Falmouth." 
On October the 5th, 1601, the 13th of Charles the 
Second, a charter of incorporation was granted to 
this new-named town.
" Whereas our village of 
Smithwike, is an antient and populous village," (an- 
cient only, as its English name shows, from having 
existed, like Penny Come Quick, about a hundred 
years) " situate upon the sea-coast, and near ad- 
joining to our port of Falmouth, which is a most 
safe and capacious harbour for ships, insomuch that 
merchants and mariners, as well natives as foreigners, 
have used to assemble, and do now assemble, from 
divers parts to the village and port aforesaid, with their 
ships, goods, and merchandize, for the purpose of 
buying and selling the same freely from day to day,.
&c." Such was the trade of the town in so short "a.
time.
The King therefore, " in consideration of the 
good, faithful, and acceptable services, as well to us 
as to our most dear father the Lord Charles late 
King of England, of glorious memory, already per- 
formed," by Sir Peter Killegrew, Knight, orders 
and grants, as he had granted and ordered before, 
" that now and for ever hereafter, our village afore- 
said, with the port aforesaid, is and shall be one free 
village; and that from henceforth it shall not be 
the inaccuracies with which it abounds, and the tedious legend?
of saints to whom the churches are dedicated, which occupy at 
least half the work, would have operated more to the ill success 
of its sale than the scandalous anecdotes which occasionally 
occur, many of which had been omitted by the editor.— 
Lysons, 
1 called.
432 
CORNWALL.
called, named, or known by the name of the village 
of Smithwicke, but in all times hereafter shall be 
called, named, or known, by the name of our town 
of Falmouth." The charter then describes the 
bounds of the town to extend " in, through, and 
upon, such place, or places, as the same (the village) 
from time to time, and from time whereof the me- 
mory of man is not to the contrary, hath been accus- 
tomed and ought to extend." And it finally incor- 
porates the whole, " by the name of the Mayor, 
Aldermen, and Burgesses of our said town of Fal- 
mouth," with power to hold a court, &c.
and with a 
confirmation " of one market in every week," and 
" of two fairs in the year," that had been heretofore 
held ; and " of the feriage, or passage over the water 
in boats, from our said town of Falmouth unto the 
village of Flushing," and back to Falmouth again.
Falmouth, in the year 1664, was separated by 
Act of Parliament from the chapelry of Budock and 
the parish of Gluvias.
" Whereas," says the Act, 
" heretofore there were not above ten houses therein, 
there are already two hundred ;" which caused the 
" King to incorporate," &c.
" whereby many others 
will be drawn to settle themselves there, if they were 
not discouraged by the distance of the said town of 
Falmouth from the said parish-church of Gluvias, 
being three long miles, so as the said mayor and 
townsmen cannot repair thereunto with conveniency 
or security to the said town of Falmouth, lying open 
to the sea :" and " whereas towards the prevention 
of these ineonveniencies, by the bounty of his Sa- 
cred Majesty and his Highness the Duke of York, 
and the liberal contributions of several honourable 
and worthy persons, there is a church lately built 
and erected in the said town of Falmouth," in which 
the service of God " is religiously celebrated" by 
" the license of the Ordinary and the Metropolitan ;" 
whereas also Seth, Lord Bishop of Exeter, and Pa- 
tron of Gluvias, consents that Falmouth may be 
made a distinct parish ; and whereas, " the mayor 
and townsmen of Falmouth are willing to pay yearly 
unto the present incumbent of the stud parish church 
of Gluvias, and his successors, a gross sum as much 
as ever was received out of the bounds or precincts 
whereof the said parish shall consist ;" for these 
reasons it was made a parish.
Since that period 
the mayor and corporation pay yearly 3/.
to the vi- 
ear of Gluvias.
Thus, it appears that Falmouth, as a town, began 
in 1613, and at Smithwicke.
It began in houses 
immediately on the south of the creek, close to the 
old house on the east side of the street.
It soon, 
however, spread itself up within the creek, and on 
the northern side of it beginning in a market-house 
within the creek, and so forming an area for houses, 
with a plain for a market.
Thus the road into the 
town from the north, which, as tradition says, had 
gone at high-water round the head of the creek, 
near the upper end of the moor, was now made to 
go perpetually and directly across the market- 
strand.
The two parts of the town were united, 
and the buildings shot out to the north as well as 
the south.
Before the year 1661, the town had ac- 
quired a right to one market and two fairs in the 
year, with the privilege of a ferry-boat to and from 
Flushing.
" But these," says the King in his char- 
ter, " we have lately given and granted unto the 
said Peter Killegrew." Yet previously to all, it 
had obtained a right to certain payments " in re- 
spect of the moorage of ships or boats, in English 
commonly called the groundage of ships or boats, at 
or near the town of Falmouth ; which had been by 
the said Peter Killegrew formerly usually had and 
taken." In 1664 the houses amounted to two hun- 
dred ; those at the south, ending assuredly at the 
church ; and those to the north, at one Drown's 
House, a site not precisely understood at present, 
but a considerable way up the ascent towards Penny 
Come Quick.
The church was dedicated to Charles, 
King and Martyr.
In 1664, the number of houses 
at Falmouth was 200 ; before the commencement of 
the next century, they had increased to nearly 350 ; 
about 1750, there were between five and six hun- 
dred ; and, according to the Population Returns of 
1801, and 1811, the number of inhabited houses in 
the town was 465 ; exclusive of 182 in that part of 
the suburbs which is in FaJ* i ?uth parish, and 72 at 
Green-Bank or Dunstanville town, in Budock, 
making a total of 719.
In the year 1801, the popu- 
lation of the town amounted to 1963 males, and 
2886 females ; exclusively of about 500 sailors and 
soldiers usually resident there.
In 1811, as stated 
in our population table, there were 1453 males, and 
2483 females ; making a total of 3933.
The town of Falmouth is situated at the bottom 
of an eminence which commands the harbour.
The 
houses are principally disposed in one street, nearly 
a mile in length, running by the side of the beach.
— 
Some years ago, the following inscription appeared 
on a window, at one of the inns : — 
" I have seen the specious vain Frenchman ; the 
trucking scrub Dutchman ; the tame low Dane; the 
sturdy self righting Swede ; the barbarous ltuss ; the 
turbulent Pole ; the honest dull German ; the pay- 
lighting Swiss; the subtile splendid Italian; the sala- 
cious Turk ; the ever lounging, warring Maltese; the 
practical Moor ; the proud cruel Spaniard ; the bigot- 
ed base Portuguese; with their countries: and hail 
again Old England, my Native Land!
" Reader!
If Englishman, Scotchman, Irishman, 
Rejoice in the Jrccdom that is the felicity of thy 
own country; and maintain it sacred to poste- 
7'ity." 
The custom-house, and salt-office, for most of the 
Cornish towns, are established at Falmouth.
The 
principal imports are timber, hemp, tallow, grain, 
iron, &c.
from the north ; fruits, wines, and spirits, 
from Portugal, Spain, and Holland ; rum and su- 
gar, from the West 1 ndies ; provisions, grain, &c.
from Ireland.
Tin, tin-plates, copper, oil, pilchards, 
woollens, &c.
are its chief exports.
An extensive 
coasting trade is carried on between Falmouth and 
London, 
CORNWALL.
433 
Loudon, Plymouth, Bristol, &c.
; and Manchester 
cottons, &e.
are sent in large quantities from this 
port to Malta and different ports of the Mediter- 
ranean.
About the year 1750, the Merchants' Hospital was 
established, for the relief and support of maimed 
seamen, and the widows and children of such as 
should be killed or drowned in the merchant service.
This institution, it should be observed, was founded 
under the authority of an act of Parliament, passed 
in the late reign, for the relief and support of maim- 
ed and disabled seamen belonging to the port of 
London.
This act gives a power to any out-port 
that may be desirous of enjoying the benefit thereof, 
by establishing an hospital for seamen belonging to 
such port, to appoint fifteen trustees for its manage- 
ment, who are annually elected by the owners and 
commanders of vessels belonging to the port, and 
confirmed by the corporation in London^ At this 
time there are twenty-four regular pensioners be- 
longing to the Falmoutn institution ; and a consi- 
derable number of widows and children of diseased 
seamen are annually relieved thereby.
Its income is 
about 300/.
a year.
Falmouth has no endowed schools ; a deficiency 
which is supplied by several extensive charities, the 
result of voluntary contributions, for educating the 
children of the poor.
The Quakers have recently 
established two schools on the Lancasterian plan ; 
one, to receive from 200 to 250 boys ; the other, for 
60 girls.
In a Sunday school, connected with the 
church establishment, about 300 children are edu- 
cated, and in the year 1801, a school was establish- 
ed, under the patronage of the resident clergyman, 
for 30 boys and 30 girls, who are cloathed and in- 
structed in reading, writing, and arithmetic.
The 
girls are also taught needle-work.
About nine years ago, a dispensary was establish- 
ed in the town ; and, soon afterwards, a Miserecor- 
dia, or Benevolent Society, for the relief of the poor, 
especially strangers, under the management of a 
visiting committee.
About the year 1800, a lying-in 
charity was established; and, in 1812, a Humane 
Society, and an institution for supplying the poor 
with blankets.
In the year 1810, Lord Wodehouse and Samuel 
Tregelles, Esq. at their joint expence, erected an 
alms-house, containing ten small rooms for the re- 
sidence of poor widows.
This town gives title to an earldom.
The title of 
Karl of Falmouth was given, by King Charles II.
in 1664, to Charles Berkeley, Lord Botetourt, and 
Viscount Fitz-Harding, who died the following 
year, without issue.
In 1679, John, Lord Robartes, 
was created Earl of Falmouth, which title he re- 
tained only six days, by reason, as Tonkin* says, 
of a jest ; Lord Mohun having complimented his 
lady on her acquisition of the title of Countess of 
Penny-come-quick.
It is more probable that it was 
because the title of Viscount Falmouth was then en- 
joyed by George Fitz-Roy, natural son of the King 
by the Duchess of Cleveland, to whom it had been 
given with the Earldom of Northumberland in 1674.
These titles became extinct in 1716 ; and in 1720, 
Hugh Boscawen, ancestor of the present noble- 
man of that title, was created Viscount Fal- 
mouth.
At the eastern extremity of the town stands Ar- 
weunack House, the ancient mansion of the Kille- 
grew family, by one of whom, it was built in the 
year 1567, and it was then esteemed the finest and 
most costly house in the county.
It was much en- 
larged by Sir John Killegrew in 1571.
Tradition 
states, that it was set on fire during the Civil War, 
by its owner, who was a zealous royalist, to prevent 
it from falling into the hands of the Parliamentary 
army ; but, according to a manuscript history of the 
Killegrews, it was set on fire, under that pretext, 
by the malicious and envious Governor of Pendennis 
Castle.
It was never wholly rebuilt after the resto- 
ration, but was partially fitted up for the occasional 
residence of the family ; and, what now remains of 
it, has been divided into two dwelling houses.
Much of its ancient and venerable character has 
been lost by injudicious alterations and whitewash- 
ing.
In the adjoining grove is a lofty but tasteless 
pyramid, fourteen feet wide at the base, and forty- 
four in height.
It was erected by Martin Kille- 
grew, Esq. about the year 1738, at the expence of 
455/.
155.
Qd.
Pendennis Castle, though adjoining to Falmouth, 
is in the parish of Budock.
It occupies the brow of 
a hill, which forms a peninsula between the British 
Channel and Falmouth Harbour, and appears to 
rise from the bay like an island.
The fortress is 
proudly exalted on a rock upwards of 300 feet above 
the sea, and, from its elevated situation, has a com- 
plete command over the entrance to the harbour.
The fortifications are of an irregular shape, includ- 
ing an area of rather more than three acres.
On the 
north, or land front, the hill is defended by four ca- 
valiers, mounted with seventy pieces of cannon in 
excellent order ; and at a short distance are some 
traces of a horn and crown-work, which was con- 
structed in the time of Oliver Cromwell.
The banks 
and ditch of the citadel still remain, the situation of 
which was admirably calculated to protect the castle 
from the approach of the enemy over the isthmus.
* Thomas Tonkin, Esq. of Trevaunance, was contemporary 
with Hah, as a collector of materials, for a parochial history of 
Cornwall.
He was sometime member for Helstone.
He was 
a gentleman of an ancient family, had made great progress in 
prepariug his history for the press, and had completed several 
parishes.
Mr.Tonkin began to write his parochial history inl70'J, 
VQL.
I. NO.
31.
at which time he had the use of Hals' collections.
Or. Borlase 
seems to have supposed that Hals' collections were brought 
doww from 1702 to 1736 by Tonkin; the truth is, that they 
both brought down their collections to that period, without any 
communication with each other, which seems to have ceased 
soon after the period above-mentioned.
5 a On 
401 
CORNWALL.
On the east face is a half-moon battery ; and to the 
water's edge another battery of five guns, called the 
Crab-Quay.
On the south the hill slopes to the sea, 
and forms a kind of glacis.
Within the works are 
barracks for troops, and various store-houses and 
magazines ; and in the south part of the garrison 
stands the old castle, which was built in the reign of 
Henry the Eighth.
It consists wholly of granite, 
and over the door-way are the arms of the monarch.
The works were afterwards strengthened and en- 
larged by Queen Elizabeth, but have undergone 
many alterations and repairs of late years.
The in- 
side of Henry's Castle has also been modernized, 
and is now a very convenient residence, where the 
lieutenant-governor resides.
This castle, during (he 
Civil Wars, was garrisoned for the King, and brave- 
ly defended against the Parliament's forces, in the 
year 1646, by John Arundel of Trerice, who was 
then nearly eighty years of age.
The garrison re- 
fused to treat till their provisions were almost ex- 
hausted, and then conducted the negociations with 
such seeming indifference, that the enemy, ignorant 
of their real situation, granted them as good condi- 
tions as had been given to any fortress in the king- 
dom.
In the winter of 1717 this castle was greatly 
injured by a thunder storm.
The lightning struck 
its walls, which are eight or nine feet thick, removing 
stones of five or six hundred weight each ; and so far 
damaged the fort as to render it for a time inde- 
fensible.
Pendennis Castle, and that of St. Mawes, are each 
strongly fortified, and garrisoned by invalids, with 
a handsome establishment for a governor and a de- 
puty governor.
General Buckely is the present 
governor of Pendennis Castle.
St. Mawes Castle, which we shall have again oc- 
casion to mention, in our account of the borough of 
that name, is on the east side of Falmouth Harbour, 
opposite to Pendennis, to which it is very inferior 
both in size and situation, though erected nearly at 
the same time, and by the same monarch.
The works 
are completely commanded by a hill, which rises im- 
mediately behind them.
Feoke.] — In this parish, which lies in the west 
division of the hundred of Powder, six miles south 
from Truro, the Cornish language is said to have 
been retained longer than in any other part of the 
county.
Admiral Spry has a seat at Feoke.
Ad- 
miral Penrose, a distinguished officer in the time of 
Cromwell, had an estate here, the mansion of which 
is now a farm-house.
Forrabury.] — Part of Boscastle is in this parish.
Norden speaks of Forrabury, which is in the hundred 
of Lesnewth, three miles and a quarter north-east 
from Bossiney, as " a Mayor Towne, the meaneste 
and pooreste that can beare the name of a towne, 
muche lesse of an incorporation, for it consisteth but 
of two or three houses : it hath bene of more import- 
ance, as appeareth by Ruynes : but the fall of Tin- 
tagill and Bottreaux hath bene the overthrow of this 
and many others upon the coaste." Its population 
at this time is under 200.
Fowey.] — Fowey is a borough and market-town 
in the west division of the hundred of Powder, 
twenty-eight miles south-west by south from Laun- 
ccston.
The corporation consists of a mayor, eight 
aldermen, &c.
It has sent two members to Parlia- 
ment ever since the 13th of Elizabeth..
The Port- 
reeve, who is chosen by a jury of the Prince's tenants, 
is the returning officer.
The market is on Satur- 
day ; and it has fairs on Shrove Tuesday, May 1, 
and September 10.
Fowey Harbour is spacious and commodious : it 
had formerly a strong fort on each side of the en- 
trance, built by Edward IV.
The remains of the 
forts are still visible.
At present the harbour is de- 
fended by two small batteries of modern construc- 
tion, and by St. Catherine's Fort, built by the town 
in the time of Henry VIII.
upon the summit of a 
magnificent hill of rocks bounding one of the creeks 
of the river.
The scenery of the harbour, and in the immediate 
neighbourhood, is particularly grand ; on the Pol- 
ruan side of the river, to which there is a ferry for 
foot passengers, the cliffs and projecting fragments 
of the broken rocks are of the boldest character.
Upon the summit of one of the highest are the ruins 
of St. Saviour's chapel, which may be seen at a great 
distance : on the Fowey side the landscape is equally 
pleasing.
The town is seated on the western banks of the 
River Fawy, from which it takes its name, and 
whose waters form the harbour.
The houses extend 
along the bank of the river for somewhat more than 
a mile ; but the streets are so irregular, narrow, and 
full of angles, that a carriage can scarcely pass 
through any of them.
Most of the buildings are of 
stone.
" When Cardinham," says Leland, " gave 
Fawey to Tywartrarth Priorie, it was but a small 
fischar town.
The glorie of Fawey rose by the 
warres in King Edward I.
and III.
and Henry the 
Vth's day, partly by piracy, and so waxing rich fell 
al to merchandize, so that the town was haunted 
with shippes of diverse nations, and their shippes 
went to all nations.
The shippes of Fawey sailing 
by Rhy and Whinchelsey, about Edward the Hid.
tyme, would vale no bonet, being required, where- 
upon Rhy and Winchelsey men and they fought, 
when Fawey men had victorie, and thereupon bare 
their arms mixt with the arms of Rhy and Winchel- 
sey, and then rose the name of the gallants of Fawey.
When warre in Edward the lVth's days seased by- 
tvvene the French men and Englisch, the men of 
Fawey, usid to pray (prey), kept their shippes, and 
nssaled the French men in the sea, agaynst King 
Edwardes commandment ; whereupon the captaines 
of the shippes of Fawey were taken and sent to 
London, and Dartmouth men commanded to fetche 
their shippes away ; at whyche tyme Dartmouth 
men toke away, as is sayde, the great chaine that 
2 was 
CORNWALL.
435 
was made fo be drawn over the haven from the towr 
to towr." 
Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall, agrees with 
Leland, in substance, and adds, that the inhabitants 
prospered so much by war, and " the more civil 
trade of merchandize, that it is reported sixty tall 
ships did at one time belong to the harbour ; and 
that they assisted at the siege of Calais with thirty- 
seven sail." The indignation of Edward the Fourth, 
as we have seen, bereaved the town of this force, 
and its trade afterwards decayed greatly ; but was 
once more revived, through " the commendable de- 
serts of Master Rashleigh the Elder (descended 
from a younger brother of an ancient house in 
Devon) whose industrious judgment and adventur- 
ing", continues Carew, " in trade of merchandize, 
first opened a light and way to the townesmens newe 
thriving, and left his sonne large wealth and posses- 
sions." This family have ever since continued to 
be great supporters of the commerce of the town, 
and have large estates in the neighbourhood.
Fowey has been aptly denominated a colony of 
fishermen ; as, though it contains many respectable 
inhabitants, most of them are concerned either imme- 
diately, or remotely, with some branch of the pil- 
chard fishery, which employs many vessels belong- 
ing to this town.
Upwards of 28,000 hogsheads of 
fish are generally brought into this port every sea- 
son.
The refuse of the salt and broken fish are 
commonly sold at about half-a-guinea a cart load.
When the pilchards are expected, people, called 
Heuers, are frequently stationed on the rocks, to 
watch the course of the shoals, and give notice to 
the fishermen.
Sail-boats are likewise employed for 
the same purpose.
The Market-house is spacious : over it is the 
Town-Hall, erected a few years ago, by Philip 
Rashleigh, Esq. and Lord Viscount Valletort, who 
then represented the borough in Parliament.
The 
charitable establishments are two good Free-schools, 
an Alms-house for eight decayed widows, and a 
Poor-house.
The manor of Fowey, in the time of the Conquer- 
or, was the property of Robert, Earl of Mortaigne ; 
but in the reign of Richard the First, was possessed 
by Robert Cardinham, who bestowed it on the Priory 
of Trewardreth, who claimed manerial rights in 
Fowey, under this grant, in the reign of Edward I.
On the subject of this claim the following curious 
letter, which is preserved in the British Museum, 
was written by Lord Cromwell, to the Prior : — 
" To the Priour of Trewardreth in Comewall be this 
youen.
" Mr. Priour, as vnnacquanted I haue me comend- 
ed vnto you, that where as it is comeu vnto the Kinges 
* With respect to the true definition of a barton, a term in 
general use in the two western counties of Cornwall and Devon, 
the best informed persons differ in their opinion ; some suppose 
it to be strictly confined to the demesne lands and mansion- 
house of a manor ; others, that it is the principal farm or grange 
of a manor with a house, but not the .
manor house ; whilst 
highnes knowledge that the Towne of Fowey is sore 
decayed, and thoccasion thereof p'tlie is that in the 
said Towne is no order o!
Justice, bicause the liberties 
concerninge the same graunted by the Kings highnes 
and his noble progenitours to your predecessouis, and 
by theme vnto the inhabitaunts of the saide Towne, 
remaine in yo r handes and kepinge, so that betwene 
you no maner good order, equitie, nor justice is exe- 
cuted and vsed w 1 in the saide Towne : Wherfore 1 re- 
quire you to condiscende and agree w< the inhabitaunts 
of thesaide Towne so that you hauyngeyor reasonable 
approued Duties, they may haue theire liberties to be 
vsed and extended amongeste theime w< in the saide 
Towne to thiucrease of good order w' in the same ; 
and as you shal agre iherin to certifye me in writinge 
by Thomas Treffry berer herof: For his Highnes 
thinkethe that the saide Porte of Fowey oweth to be 
his, and to be helde of hime so that his Grace extend- 
ed from hensforth to have it as well prouided for w« 
good gouernnce and of defence for vtter enemyes as 
other his townes and portes be w'in these parties.
VV hereunto ye fo r yor partie before this tyme haue 
had little or no regarde neyther to the good order, 
rule, and defence thereof, ne yet to the good rule and 
gouernance of yourself, yo r monasterie, and religion, 
as ye be bounde ; wherefore his Highness thinketh 
that ye be veray vnworthey to haue rule of any towne 
that cannot well rule yor self.
And that I may haue 
aunswer as is afforesaide by this berer what ye intend 
to do I require you to.th'intente I miye certifie his 
Highnes thereof.
And thus fare ye well.
At Loh- 
don the xxi.th daie of Maie, 
" Your Freend Thorns 
Crumwell." 
In the reign of Edward II.
the priory obtained 
for the town a grant of a weekly market, and two 
annual fairs.
On the suppression of religious houses, 
Henry the Eighth annexed the whole manorj with 
other estates, to the Duchy of Cornwall, in lieu of 
the honour of Wallingford, which he had separated 
from the latter.
Philip Rashleigh, Esq. purchased 
it in the year 1798, under the powers of the Land 
Tax Redemption Act ; and his nephew, William 
Rashleigh, Esq. M.P. is its present -owner.
That 
gentleman is also the proprietor of tiie manor and 
barton* of Trenant.
The original patron saint of FoAvey church was 
St. Barre, supposed to have been St. Barrus, or 
Trimbarrus, the first Bishop of Cork, who, accord- 
ing to William of Worcester, was buried here.
Jo 
the year 1336, the church was rebuilt, and dedicated 
to St. Nicholas.
About 1466, it was again rebuilt, 
or considerably altered.
At that time its present 
handsome tower was erected.
Altogether, this 
church is a spacious and lofty fabric, having one 
large and two smaller aisles.
The tower is decor- 
ated with many carved ornaments, and strengthened 
by buttresses terminating in pu riled pinnacles.
This 
edifice, from its style of architecture, and the rose 
observable on the key- stones oi* several arches, 
others again give it a greater latitude, and suppose it to extend 
to all large farms, with houses and homesteads ; all smaller 
farms being called tenements.
According to the first sense, 
every real barton, if not now esteemed a manor, must formerly 
have been possessed of manerial rightS.-*-Zys0/w.
seems 
436 
CORNWALL.
seems, as just mentioned, to have been raised about 
the reign of Edward the Fourth.
In the inside are 
various monuments of the Treffry, Rashleigh, and 
Graham families ; some of them are of sculptured 
marble, but the workmanship is in general very in- 
different.
On a marble tablet, appears the following 
epitaph, shewn for one of the Treffry family, and 
said to have been written by himself, and put up 
whilst he was living : — 
Our nature, by order of Providence divine, 
Will have its period to which it doth incline ; 
From birth to fatal death summons us to the grave, 
Where equally doth lye the simple, fool!, and brave.
Ecclesiastes, chap.
ii.
ver.
16.
Here, in this chancell do I ly, 
Known by the name of John Treffry, 
Being made and born for to dye, 
So must thou, friend, as well as I ; 
Therefore good works be sure to try» 
Hut chiefly love and charity ; 
And still on them with faith rely.
So be happy eternally.
Soli Deo Gloria.
The roof of the church is embellished with carv- 
ings in wood, of angels sustaining armorial shields, 
and other devices ; several of the beams and pews 
are similarly ornamented.
There was formerly a chapel in this town, dedi- 
cated to St. Catherine, which gave name to St.
Catherine's Hill and Bay.
Northward of the church, and close to the burial 
ground, on an eminence connected with the latter 
by three flights of steps, is an ancient mansion, cal- 
led Place, or Treffry-House, which originally be- 
longed to the Treffry family, and was their residence 
for many generations.
Leland mentions it in the 
following terms : — " The Frenchmen divers times 
assailed this town, and last most notably, about 
Henry the VI.
tyme, when the wife of Thomas 
Treury (Treffry) the II.
with her men, repelled the 
French out of her house in her husband's absence ; 
whereupon Thomas Treury budded a right faire and 
strongly embattled tower in his house, and embattl- 
ing all the walls of the house, in the manner of a 
castelle, and unto this day it is the glorie of the town 
building in Fowey." Several parts of this house 
have since been rebuilt ; but its castellated aspect 
still remains, though the whole is now falling a vic- 
tim to time and neglect.
The Hall has a flat oaken 
ceiling, richly carved ; and other parts of the ancient 
building are particularly curious from the style of 
architecture, and sculptured ornaments.
The chief 
entrance is from the church-yard, through a ruined 
gate, with a strong wicket, flanked by a lodge pierc- 
ed with loop-holes.
Near it, on the eminence, is a 
public walk, overlooking the town and harbour.
Fowey and its neighbourhood were, during the 
wars between Charles I.
and his Parliament, at dif- 
ferent times occupied by the soldiers of both parties.
In 1644, Fowey, Lostwithiel, and the intermediate 
places, became the quarters of the troops command- 
ed by the Earl of Essex, who, by unskilful manage- 
ment, was at length surrounded by the King's forces, 
and driven to the disgraceful expedient of abandon- 
ing his army to its fate.
The Earl, accompanied 
by Lord Robartes, and some other officers, embarked 
in a small vessel at Fowey, and escaped thence to 
Plymouth.
His infantry were compelled to surren- 
der, almost at discretion ; but his cavalry effected a 
safe retreat.
Gennis.] — The parish of St. Gennis is in the 
hundred of Lesnewth, nine miles and a half north by 
east from Camelford.
The manor of Treworgye, in 
this parish, which anciently belonged to the prior 
and convent of Launceston, is now in the occupation 
of Mr. Spry.
It was at one time holden on lease by 
the Braddon family ; one of whom, Captain William 
Braddon, was a distinguished officer, m the parlia- 
mentary army, during the civil wars of Charles.
He 
died in the year 1694, and was buried within the 
rails of the communion table, in the church of St.
Gennis.
His epitaph commences as follows : — 
In war and peace I bore command, 
Both gown and sword 1 wore.
From these lines, in all probability, arose the tra- 
dition, that he was vicar of the parish.
The facts 
appear to be, that in the year 1658, he was member 
of parliament, and that, in Cromwell's time, as ma- 
gistrate, he celebrated marriages.
Thus his wear- 
ing both gown and sword appear to be accounted 
for.
Germans.] — The parish of St. Germans, situated 
in the north division of the hundred of East, is the 
largest in the whole county ; being twenty miles in 
circumference, containing seventeen villages, and a 
greater number of gentlemen's seats and lordships 
than any other parish in the kingdom.
The town is 
an inconsiderable borough, pleasantly situated near 
a branch of the Lynher Creek, on the ascent of a 
hill, which rises to a considerable height on the 
south side.
It lies 23 miles south by east from 
Launceston, and 227 miles west south west from 
London.
It has a market on Friday ; and fairs on 
the 28th of May and 1st of August.
The houses, 
about sixty or seventy in number, are disposed in 
one street, which, from the nature of the ground, 
runs nearly parallel Avith the roof of the church.
— 
The inhabitants derive their principal support from 
fishing.
The householders, who have resided a year 
within the town, are nominally invested with the 
privilege of returning two members to Parliament ; 
but the actual right is possessed by the proprietors 
of what are denominated the burgage-tenements.
— 
The present number of voters is about twenty.
The 
only officer of this town is the Portreeve, avIio is an- 
nually elected at the court-leet held by the lord of 
the manor ; he is also bailiff of the borough, and is 
empowered to make any house in it the prison of the 
person whom he arrests.
The petty sessions for the 
hundred are holden in this town.
What chiefly renders this town of importance, are 
the 
CORNWALL.
437 
the remains of its ancient Cathedral Church, and the 
seat of Lord Eliot, which is in the immediate vicinity 
of the former structure, and was originally the site 
of the priory.
The Church is the more particularly 
interesting to the antiquary, as there is probably no 
county in England where fewer remains of Saxon 
architecture are to be met with than Cornwall.
— 
This church was originally conventual, and was in- 
cluded within the body of a priory supposed to have 
been founded by King Athelstan, and dedicated to 
St. Germaine, or Germauus, bishop of Auxere in 
France, a famous preacher, and strenuous opposer 
of the Pelagian heresy ; for which purpose he came 
over into Britain, with Lupus, Bishop of Troy, in 
the year 4*29.
Whitaker supposes a Bishop's See 
to have been established here as early as the year 
614.
Here were at first secular canons ; and King 
Athelstan is said to have appointed one Conan to 
the Bishoprick in 936.
King Canute more amply 
endowed this church: and about 1050, Leofric, 
Bishop of Crediton, then the only see for the coun- 
ties of Cornwall and Devon, having united both 
bishoprics in the church of St. Peter at Exeter, 
changed the Seculars into regular Canons.
The 
yearly revenues of this priory were valued in the 
26th of Henry VIII.
at 243/.
8s.
Its site was 
granted by that monarch to Catharine Champer- 
noune, John Ridgway, and others.
Robert Seymour, 
the last prior, surrendered his convent on the 2d of 
March, 1538.
Part of their church had previously 
been used for divine service by the inhabitants ; but 
after this event the whole structure was made pa- 
rochial.
All the tythes belong to the Dean and 
Chapter of Windsor, who allow the officiating cler- 
gyman a small salary.
Carew, in describing the 
town of St. Germans, and the priory, relates, in the 
following words, the manner in which the site was 
obtained by Champernoune: — 
" The Church Town mustereth many inhabitants 
and sundry ruins, but little wealth; occasioned 
either through abandoning their fishing trade, as 
some conceive, or by their being abandoned by the 
religious people, as the greater sort imagined : for 
in former times the Bishop of Cornwall's see was 
from St. Petrock's, in Bodmyn, removed hither, as 
from hence when the Cornish diocese united with 
Devon it passed to Crediton.
But this first loss re- 
ceived relief through a succeeding priory ; which, at 
the general suppression changing his note with his 
coat, is now named Port Eliot ; and, by the owner's 
charity, distributed) pro viri/i the alms accustomably 
expected and expended at such places.
Neither will 
it I think much displease you to hear how this gen- 
tleman's ancestor, of whom Master Eliot bought it, 
came by the same.
" John Champernoune, sonne and heire apparent 
to Sir Philip, of Devon, in Henry the Eighth's time, 
followed the court, and through his pleasant con- 
ceits, of which much might be spoken, won some 
good grace with the King.
Now when the golden 
shower of the dissolved abbey-lands rayned well 
vol, i.
— no.
32.
near into every gaper's mouth, some two or throe 
gentlemen, the King's servants, and Master Chain- 
pernoune's acquaintance, waited at a doore, when 
the King was to pass forth, with purpose to beg 
such a matter at his hands.
One gentleman became 
inquisitive to know their suit ; they made strange to 
impart.
This while out comes the King : they kneel 
down, so doth Mr. Champernoune ; they prefer their 
petition, the King graunts ; they render humble 
thanks ; and so doth Champernoune.
Afterwards 
he requireth his share ; they deny it : he appeales to 
the King : the King avoweth his equal meaning in 
the largesse ; whereon the overtaken companions 
were fayne to allot him this priory for his partage." 
St. German's church was originally more exten- 
sive than it is at present ; but the necessary repairs 
having been neglected, the ancient chancel fell sud- 
denly to the ground in the year 1592, only a short 
time after the celebration of divine service.
It now 
consists of two aisles, and a nave ; the latter, and 
the south aisle, are of nearly equal proportions ; but 
the north aisle is lower, and more narrow.
The 
west front has two towers, both of which appear to 
have been octagonal.
The upper part of the south 
tower is now square, and surmounted with embra- 
zures ; but the lower part exactly corresponds with 
that on the north, which is nearly covered with ivy.
Between the towers is the ancient entrance door- 
way, which is a very fine circular receding arch, in 
shape and ornament somewhat similar to that of the 
great door at Dunstable priory, described at page 
22 of this volume.
Its whole width is twenty feet ; 
of this space six feet are allotted to the door, and the 
remainder to the pillars and sides of the arch.
The 
pillars are four on each side, having plain square 
bases and capitals, and are contained in semi-circular 
niches.
The arch contains seven mouldings : the 
two innermost are plain and round ; the third and 
fourth have a zig-zag ornament ; the next is round ; 
the sixth and seventh are zig-zag.
A sculptured 
ornament of leafage surrounds the whole, and is ter- 
minated at each end with some rude ornament rest- 
ing on the capital of the outer pillars.
Between the 
pillars is a zig-zag ornament, in alternate succes- 
sion.
The height of the pillars is seven feet, six 
inches ; that of the door, ten feet.
The whole 
height of the arch is about sixteen feet.
Over the 
arch is a pediment, with a cross at the top, resem- 
bling an heraldic cross patee within a circle ; on each 
side is a small painted window ; and above these are 
three small, narrow, round-headed windows.
The 
north aisle is divided from the nave by five short, 
thick, round columns, each connected with a half 
pillar opposite to it in the north wall, by a low sur- 
bascd arch.
All the capitals of the colums are 
square, and curiously ornamented with Saxon sculp- 
ture.
The third from the west end is embellished 
with grotesque figures, having bodies resembling 
dogs, opposed to each other, with their fore parts 
meeting at the angle of the capital in one head ; the 
upper part human, but the lower like a scollop-shell, 
5 s Above.
438 
CORNWALL.
Above these range six plain arches, some of them 
apparently of the same age and style with those in 
the nave of St. Alban's Abbey Church, in Hertford- 
shire.
In several windows of this aisle are coats 
of arms painted on ^la.ss.
The architecture of the 
south aisle is very different from that in the north.
It presents ornamented niches, and pointed-arch 
windows.
The six arches which divide it from the 
nave arc pointed : the two western arches arc quite 
plain, and very sharp : the pillars which support 
them are round, massive, and clumsy : the two east- 
ern pillars are higher, and less pointed, having- round 
capitals, ornamented with mouldings ; the pillars 
sustaining- them arc more slender.
The windows of 
this aisle are large and handsome : they are divided 
into compartments by stone mullions ; but all are 
dissimilar in their tracery.
In the south wall, near 
the middle of the aisle, is a niche ornamented with 
sculpture, supposed to have belonged to some an- 
cient monument of an abbot, but no particulars re- 
lative to it are now extant.
The table of the recess 
in the wall is covered with a stone seven feet six 
inches long*, which appears to have had some figure 
let into it, but the form of the outline cannot be dis- 
tinguished.
The church, within the walls, is 104 
feet 6 inches, in length ; and 67 feet 6 inches, in 
breadth.
In the part which is now employed as the chancel, 
is a rude ancient seat, generally called the Bishop's 
Chair ; but, more probably, it was nothing more 
than a stall-seat of one of the monks ; several of the 
same kind being yet preserved in the church at Bod- 
min.
Its height is about three feet.
Beneath the 
seat is carved a figure of a hunter, with game on his 
shoulder, accompanied by dogs.
The chair is now 
placed on part of a tesselated pavement, found about 
fifty yards from the present east window.
This 
pavement was about ten feet square.
Nearly ten 
feet east of it was the foundation of a wall, which, 
from its thickness, and materials, seems to have been 
the original extent of the building.
" Besyde the 
hie altare," says Leland, " on the ryght hand ys a 
tumbe yn the walle, with an image of a bishop ; and 
over the tumbe a xi bishops painted with their names 
and verses, as a token of so many bishops buried 
ther, or that ther had beene so many bishops of 
Cornwall that had theyr seete ther." No vestiges 
of these paintings are now to be seen ; but on the 
wall, behind the gallery, is the underwritten inscrip- 
tion, which probably, is not entitled to much cre- 
dit :— 
" In tliis church presided over the diocese of Corn- 
wall these following bishops, styled Bishops of St. Ger- 
man's, who continued here till thirty years after Wil- 
liam the Conquerer's time, when the see was removed 
to Exeter, and both dioceses of Devonshire and Corn- 
wall united.
St. Patroc Alhelstan 
Athelstan Wolfi 
Conanus Woronus 
Iluidocus Wolociw 
Udridus 
Bi'itiyinus 
Burwoldus." 
Stidio 
Aldrediu 
St. German's church contains several monuments 
to the memories of the Eliots, Scawens, and Glan- 
vills, all of whom had considerable property in this 
neighbourhood, which is still possessed by their sur- 
viving representatives.
The most considerable is a 
magnificent tomb to the memory of William Eliot, 
executed by the celebrated Rysbrack, who copied 
part of the design from the monument of John Shef- 
field, Duke of Buckingham, in Westminster Abbey.
The figure of the deceased is represented in a Roman 
habit, reclining upon a couch ; the right-hand placed 
on his breast, the left grasping a sword.
Near him 
is his wife, seated in a contemplative posture, with 
a book in her hand.
In a back-ground are two che- 
rubs, holding a medallion of a lady, and the figure 
of an hour-glass.
Near the monument hang two 
hamlets, two banners with the family arms, and a 
gauntlet.
On a monument belonging to one of the 
Glanvills' is a Latin inscription in eight lines, so 
contrived, that the initial letters of the words at the 
commencement and in the middle of the lines, form 
the words Johannes Glanvill, and the terminating 
letters the word Minister.
A white marble tablet, 
in memory of Elizabeth, wife of John Glanvill, Esq.
is inscribed with the following expressive lines : — 
While faithful earth doth thy cold relics keep, 
And soft as was thy nature is thy sleep, 
Let here the pious humble place above 
Witness an Husband's grief, an Husband's love ; 
Grief, that no rolling years can e'er efface ; 
And love, that only with himself must cease ; 
And let it bear for thee this hearfelt boast— 
'Twas he that knew thee best, that lov'd thee most!
The church now possesses a neat modern font of 
white marble, which was presented by Lord Eliot.
The old Saxon font, which appears to be as old as 
the church, has been thrown by in a dark corner, 
under one of the towers.
The pulpit is curiously 
veneered and inlaid.
The altar-piece is of oak, and, 
very fine.
It was given by one of the Eliots.
The 
burial-ground was formerly attached to the church ; 
but about the year 1780, Mr. afterward Lord Eliot, 
procured a faculty from the bishop for levelling the 
church-yard, and making a new cemetery at a little 
distance west of the church.
Since that time the 
ancient burial-ground forms a lawn between the 
mansion-house and the church, which is not more 
than fifty yards from the former, and is included in 
Lord Eliot's gardens.
Before the removal of the 
church-yard, the curious ornaments and columns of 
the western entrance were obscured by earth and 
rubbish, which had been suffered to accumulate to 
the height of several feet round the door-way.
This 
is now protected by iron pallisadaes, erected at the 
expence of his lordship.
The entrance-door for tin* 
parishioners is on the south side of the structure.
St. Germans is indebted to William Eliot, 
Ksq.
CORNWALL.
439 
Esq. the gentleman whose monument is described 
above, for a parochial library, which he founded, 
and endowed with a yearly income for the purchase 
of books.
Here is a school, which was founded and endowed 
by Nicholas Henry, Esq. about the middle of the 
17th century.
St. Germans parish, as already observed, is the 
largest in Cornwall.
Besides the borough town it 
contains the hamMs, or divisions of Bake, Catch- 
french, Caldrinueek, Cuddenbeak, Cutcrew, Hendra, 
Molineck, Pole-Martin, Tiddeford, and Treskelly ; 
but, excepting Hessingford, which contains about 
twenty houses, there is no village of any size or note.
The entire population of the parish, according to the 
last returns, was only "2 129.
St. Germans parish 
consists principally of arable lands ; and the farmers, 
it is said, particularly excel in the cultivation of tur- 
nips.
A few years ago, hoeing the young crops was 
never employed, but its great utility has been lat- 
terly admitted, and it is now very generally and 
successfully practised.
The chief manure used in 
this district is lime and sea-sand : the former is very 
cheap, being procured in abundance from the lime- 
stone rocks near Plymouth, and the banks of the 
Tamar.
The Eliot family are the principal proprietors.
They were settled in the adjoining county of Devon ; 
and, in the year 1565, they exchanged their manor 
of Coteland, in that county, with the Champer- 
nownes, for the priory and its demesne.
Thus Ri- 
chard Eliot, Esq. was its first proprietor of that fa-" 
mily.
Sir John Eliot, son of Richard, was a dis- 
tinguished patriot in the reign of James I.
an active 
opposer of the court, and the Duke of Buckingham, 
especially in their measures of raising taxes without 
the consent of Parliament.
For some of his bold 
speeches on this subject, he was sent to the Tower, 
where he died A.
D. 1632.
His grandson Daniel, 
left an only daughter, married to Browne Willis, the 
antiquary ; but to keep up the family name, he be- 
queathed his estate to Edward Eliot, grandson of 
Nicholas, the fourth son of Sir John, who died in the 
Tower.
In the year 1784, the grandson of this Ed- 
ward Eliot was created Baron Eliot, of St. Germans ; 
and, in 1789, he obtained the royal permission to as- 
sume the name and arms of Craggs, his father hav- 
ing married a natural daughter of Secretary Craggs, 
in 1726.
The grandson and successor of this gen- 
tleman, Edward Eliot Craggs, now Lord Eliot, is 
the present proprietor of the priory estate and 
manor of St. Germans.
Porte Eliot, formerly called Porth- Prior, his lord- 
ship's seat, occupies the site of the ancient priory, 
the refectory of which included the space now used 
as the dining-room.
This mansion is «*xterually 
very irregular, but many of the apartments are 
convenient and spacious.
In its exterior, magnifi- 
cence has been avoided ; and perhaps its simpli- 
city, says a late tourist, is more correspondent to 
the scenery by wliich it is surrounded, and which 
is rather to be culled pleasing; than either pictu- 
resque or grand.
Most of the apartments are de- 
corated with paintings, by ancient and modern 
masters.
In the dining-room is the following chro- 
nological series of the Eliot family : — 
John Eliot, Esq. 1574 ; three quarter length ; the 
head very fine.
— Richard Eliot, Esq.
— Sir John 
Eliot, Knt. 1628, who died in the Tower, in 1632, 
as already mentioned.
While in prison, he was 
treated with great rigour and barbarity.
— John 
Eliot, Esq. son and heir of the above, 1664.
— 
Daniel Eliot, Esq. 1687, bequeathed this estate to 
Edward Eliot, great-grandson of Sir John Eliot.
— Edward Eliot, Esq. 1719.
— James Eliot, Esq 
1734.
— Richard Eliot, Esq. uncle and heir of James, 
1742.
— Edward Eliot Craggs, Lord Eliot, Receiver 
General of the Duchy Court of Cornwall, 1783.
This is a three quarter length, painted by Sir Jo- 
shua Reynolds.
The colouring is clear and fine ; 
the back-ground is a rich landscape.
Besides the 
above, here are several more portraits by this ad- 
mirable artist, who was particularly encouraged 
by Lord Eliot previously to his excursion to Lon- 
don.
Amongst the other pieces in this collection, 
whose merit or curiosity render them deserving 
of attention, are the following : — John Locke, Esq.
1697.
The same as was engraved for the last 
edition of his works ; half-length.
— John Hampden, 
1643, half-length, said to be the only original por- 
trait extant of this distinguished character.
— Cardi- 
nal Bentivoglio, in his robes, full-length.
The head 
bald, and very fine.
— Major-General Richards, the 
brave governor and defender of Alicant.
— View of 
Alicant at the time of the siege.
— Mrs. Hester Booth,, 
a beautiful portrait, delineated with peculiar sweet- 
ness of countenance.
— A family picture by Sir Jo- 
shua Reynolds, with eleven figures, representing the 
portraits of Richard Eliot, Esq. Harriot his wife, 
and their children ; with Mrs. Goldswortby, and the 
Honourable Captain Hamilton.
This was executed 
in 1746, and is said to have been the first family 
group Sir Joshua ever painted.
— The Right Ho- 
nourable James Craggs, Secretary of State, 171H.
— 
Captain Hamilton, father of the Marquis of Aber- 
corn, painted for the Kit-cat Club.
— Rubens, half 
length, and very fine.
— Nine ancient pictures, sup- 
posed to have belonged to the Priory, representing 
various events in the life of our Saviour.
The 
colouring and the draperies are well executed, but 
the drawing is inaccurate.
— View in Holland, by 
Moonlight ; very fine : the sky is painted with con- 
siderable judgment.
— View on the Rhine, with many- 
figures, by R.
Griffoir.
— Two Landscapes, with Cat- 
tle, well painted.
— A small and beautiful cabinet 
picture, by Rembrandt, from the apochryphal story 
of Bel and the Dragon ; representing Cyrus show- 
ing Daniel how the victuals were eaten by Bel.
" Then said* the king unto him, thickest thou not 
that Bel is a living God ?
Seest thou not how 
much he.
eateth and drinketh every day V — An ex- 
ceedingly fine portrait of an Old Man, which is 
curious 
440 
CORNWALL.
curious for being the production of two artists of dis- 
tinguished talents.
Sir Joshua Reynolds, declared 
tiiat the head which had been cut out of another pic- 
ture, and fastened to the canvas, was painted by 
Quintin Matsys ; and the drapery and back-ground 
by Rembrandt.
The style, colouring-, and pencilling 
of the different parts seem perfectly to justify this 
opinion.
Port Eliot has been much increased and improved 
since it came to the possession of the Eliots.
The 
late and present noble proprietor in particular have 
effected many alterations and improvements.
Among 
the peculiar objects which characterize the contiguous 
scenery, may be noticed a branch of the River Tidi, 
which spreads its waters into a lake-like expanse to 
the north front of the house, and, with the outline of 
hills, and the tower of Landrake Church, compose a 
fine view from the windows.
On the banks of this 
river is a place called the Craggs, which has been 
appropriated to pleasure grounds.
The peculiarity 
and contrast of the neighbouring rocks and woods 
render its appearauce singularly romantic and in- 
teresting.
Gerrance.] — St. Gerrance, or St. Gurons, is in 
the east division of the hundred of Powder, eight 
miles and a quarter south-west by south from Tre- 
gony.
At Cargurrell, in this parish, is an ancient 
fortification, called Dingerein, supposed, by Whita- 
ker, to have been the residence of a King Gerennius.
Rosteage, which, in the time of Elizabeth, was the 
seat of Reginald Mohun, the younger brother of Sir 
William Mohun, a captain under Sir Walter Ra- 
leigh, is now the property of Henry Harris, Esq.
Gluvias.] — The little village of St. Gluvias is in 
the east division of the hundred of Kirrier, half a 
mile east from the borough of Penryn, which is 
within the parish.
It lies near the upper end of a 
branch of Falmouth harbour.
Though now of little 
importance, it appears to have an endowed church or 
chapel before the Conquest, and is rated in the 
Domesday Book.
The church is a spacious and 
handsome buildings rendered interesting from its 
woody accompaniment, and the beauty of the grounds 
and scenery.
Among the monuments in the church 
are some belonging to the Pendarvis family, and 
some inscriptions commemorative of charitable do- 
nations.
About half a mile north of the church is a barn, 
which occupies the site of a mansion on an estate 
•called Railland, wherein tradition affirms, was acted 
the horrible tragedy which furnished JLillo with a 
plot for one of his plays.
This was denominated the 
Penryn Tragedy ; but the title has since been 
changed by Colman to that of Fatal Curiosity.
The particulars of this dreadful event are recorded 
in a pamphlet intituled ' ; News from Perin in Corn- 
wall ; of a most bloody and unexampled murther 
very lately committed by a father on his owne sonne 
(who was lately retvrned from the Indyes) at the in- 
stigation of a merciless stepmother.
Together with 
tii.ir severell most wretched endes ; being ail per- 
formed in the month of September last, A.
D. 1618.** 
It consists of eight leaves, printed in black letter, 
with several wood-cuts.
The names of the actors 
were suppressed, in favour to their kindred and 
neighbours.
Burnthouse, Tresluswell, and Pondsnooth, ara 
the chief villages in this parish.
Enys, now the seat 
of Francis Enys, Esq. in the Old 31agna Britannia, 
is said to have been celebrated for its fine gardens ; 
and, in the old Cornish play of the Creation of the 
Universe, it is mentioned among the lands which are 
given as a reward to the builders of the universe.
Enys has belonged to the family of that name ever 
since the reign of Edward I.
Goran.] — St. Goran's parish is in the west divi- 
sion of the hundred of Powder, five miles and three 
quarters east- south-east from Tregony.
At Goran 
haven, or Port-East, one of the principal villages 
in the parish, coals are imported, and great quan- 
tities of pilchards are taken and cured.
This little 
port, however, is supposed to have been anciently of 
more consequence : its pier, which is very old, i» 
said to have been constructed by some of the Bo- 
drugan family, possessors of the manor of that name, 
under the Champernownes.
The elder branch of 
that family became extinct in the male line about 
the year 1330.
The manor, however, in the reign 
of Richard III.
was the property and seat of Sir 
Henry Bodrugan, whose original name is said to 
have been Trenowth.
Having been attainted on the 
accession of Henry VII.
he fled into Ireland, and 
his large possessions were seized by the crown.
Ac- 
cording to tradition, this gentleman was in arms in 
Cornwall, against the Earl of Richmond ; he sus- 
tained a defeat, on a moor near his owu castle ; and 
he made his escape by a desperate leap from the 
cliff into the sea, where a boat was ready to receive 
him.
Most of his estates, including the manor of 
Bodrugan, were granted to Sir Richard Edgecumbe, 
by whom he had been defeated, and are now the 
property of Lord Mount Edgecumbe.
Bodrugan 
Castle is said to have been very extensive, and su- 
perior to any in Cornwall for magnificence.
The 
remains of the buildings, which are supposed, by 
Borlase, to have been about the date of Edward 1.
were pulled down thirty years ago.
There is still, 
however, a large barn, capable, it is said, of contain- 
ing 1000 bushels of wheat in the straw.
The rectorial estate of this parish bears the name 
of Palgarron.
For some time it was a seat of the 
Wills family.
Mr. Anthony Wills, who rebuilt the 
house, and his six sons, joined the Prince of Orange 
on his landing at Torbay.
One of the sons became 
a general officer of great distinction, and in the 
reign of George I.
he commanded the army against 
the Scotch rebels in Lancashire.
In the year 1786 there were some remains of an- 
cient chapels at Goran Haven, Bodrugan, and Ga- 
loures in this parish.
Graoe.] — This parish is in the west division of 
the hundred of Kirrier, ten miles and a half south- 
SQllth- 
CORNWALL.
441 
south-east from Helstone.
The manor of Erisey, 
now the property of Lord Falmouth, was the ancient 
seat of the Eriseys, several monuments of whom are 
in the church.
On the outside of the north aisle of 
the chancel appears the following inscription, in me- 
mory of Hugh Mason, Gent, who died in the year 
1671 :— 
" Why here ?
Why not?
it's all one ground, 
And here none will my dust confound : 
My Saviour lay where no one did ; 
Why not a member, as his head?
No quire to sing, no bells to ring ?
Why, Sirs, thus buried was my King !
I grudge the fashion of this day, 
To fat the church and starve the lay ; 
Though nothing now of me be seene, 
I hope my name and bed is greene." 
Grampound.] — Grampound is a decayed borough 
and market-town, situated in the parish of St. Creed, 
in the west division of the hundred of Powder, 
thirty-seven miles south-west from Launceston.
Its 
market is on Saturday ; and it has fairs on the 13th 
of January, the 25th of March, and the 11th of 
June.
Part of the borough stands in the parish of 
Probus, in which the spring fair is held.
The privi- 
lege of holding a market was granted to this town 
by John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, and brother 
to Edward III.
who, after the death of John, con- 
firmed the first charter, and made the town a bo- 
rough ; but no representatives were returned to 
Parliament till the reign of Edward VI.
The cor- 
poration consists of a mayor, eight aldermen, a re- 
corder, and town-clerk.
The members are elected 
by the magistrates, and all the inhabitants paying 
scot and lot : the whole number of voters is about 
sixty or seventy ; that of the inhabitants, six hun- 
dred.
The manor is held of the Duchy of Corn- 
wall, by the corporation, at a small fee-farm rent.
Dr. Borlase imagines Grampound to have been 
the Voliba of Ptolemy ; but he supports his conjec- 
ture only by a reference to the custom of the ancients 
in building their cities at some distance from the 
mouths of navigable rivers, and by supposing that 
the Greek historian commenced his list of Daumo- 
nium cities with the one farthest to the west.
No 
conclusion can be founded on this evidence ; but it 
seems highly improbable that Grampound should 
have been the site of the antient station, as neither 
coins nor antiquities have ever been discovered here.
Its origin, if it could be traced, would perhaps be 
found posterior to that of the parish in which it 
stands.
By some the name of this town is supposed 
to be a corruption of Grand Pont (Great Bridge ;) 
but this is unlikely if applied to the present struc- 
ture ; and even in Carevv's time, was observed to be 
nomen sine re.
The principal street is situated on 
the declivity of a hill, at whose base the river Fal 
winds through a narrow but fertile valley.
St.
Creed's church stands about half a mile from the 
town : but the inhabitants have a small chapel of 
ease, dedicated to St. Naunter, near the middle of 
vol.
i. — no.
32.
the borough, at which service is performed on Sun- 
day afternoons.
Formerly there was a charity-school in this bo- 
rough ; but, as its funds were derived from the long 
annuities, it ceased on their expiration.
Trewithan, the seat of Sir Christopher Hawkins, 
is situated between Grampound and Probus.
The 
mansion is spacious, and stands on a high spot of 
ground, which commands some very extensive views 
to the north and east.
Gulval.] — Gulval, or Lanisley, is in the west 
division of the hundred of Penwith, a mile and a half 
north-east from Penzance.
Gulfwell, or the He- 
brew brook, a spring to which the superstitious have 
been accustomed to resort, in this parish, has been 
already noticed.
From the terrace of Kennegie, the 
seat of Rose Price, Esq. is a very fine view of 
Mount's Bay. The manor of Lanisley is the joint 
property of Dr. Onslow, Dean of Worcester, and 
his brother Admiral Sir Richard Onslow.
In the 
church are several monuments of the Harris family ; 
one of which is to the memory of Arthur Harris, 
Esq. Governor of St. Michael's Mount, who died in 
1628.
Trevarrock, Chyerdower, and Tresela are 
the principal villages in this parish ; one-tenth of 
the poor rates of which is paid by the proprietors of 
the mines.
Gwennap.] — This parish, which derives its name 
from the female saint, Wenap, or Wenepe, is in the 
east division of the hundred of Kirrier, three miles 
and a half east by south from Redruth.
The great 
Poldice tin-mine, already noticed, is in this pa- 
rish.
It is said to have afforded employment for 
from 800 to 1000 men, during a period of forty 
years.
At St. Daye, in this parish, the manor of which is 
now in severalties, there used to be a chapel, the 
tower of which was taken down not long before the 
year 1780 ; but no remains thereof are now visible.
According to Norden, this chapel was dedicated to 
the Trinity.
" In times past," says he, " men and 
women from far came to it in pilgrimage : the resort 
was so great that it grew to a kind of market, and 
continueth a market to this day without further 
charter." A Saturday's market for butchers' meat 
and other provisions was established here, a few 
years ago, by Mr. Williams, for the accommodation 
of the minors.
Gwithion.] — Gwithion is situated on the Bristol 
Channel, in the east division of the hundred of Pen- 
with, seven miles and a half west from Redruth.
" A considerable portion of the parishes of Gwythian 
and Phillack," observe Messrs.
Lysons, " is covered 
with sand-hills, supposed to have been originally 
brought from the sea-side by hurricanes, probably at 
a remote period ; and we are informed, that among 
the Arundell papers there is mention of such an 
event having happened in the twelfth century.
The 
disproportionate high valuation of the rectory of 
Gwithian, in the Old Valors, when compared with 
that of other parishes, which were then rated much 
5 t lower.
442 
CORNWALL.
lower, though now of very superior value, affords a 
very probable conjecture that much land has been 
lost by the influx of the sand.
It is known by oral 
tradition, that whole farms have been overwhelmed 
at a period not very remote.
Wc have, been inform- 
ed by Mr. Hockin, the rector, who has obligingly 
favoured us with a communication on this subject, 
that the barton of Upton, one of the principal farms 
in Gwithian, was thus overwhelmed ; that his great 
grandfather remembered the occupier residing in the 
farm-house, which was nearly buried in one night, 
the family being obliged to make their escape from 
the chamber windows.
It is very remarkable that 
the ruins of this house, which had never been seen 
by the oldest man living, were again exposed to view 
by the shifting of the sands in the winter of 1808-9.
The present rector remembers two fields lost at 
Gwithian, having been buried with sand ten or 
twelve feet deep.
The church-town would have 
shared the same fate, had it not been prevented by 
the timely exertions of the church-wardens, who 
with all possible expedition, caused large plantations 
to be made of a species of rush, which grows abun- 
dantly in that neighbourhood, and by the rapid pro- 
gress of its long fibrous roots, affords the only known 
method of checking the progress of the sands.
In 
this parish is an extensive earth-work, called Tre- 
varnon Rounds ; it has a moat and rampart, with 
au advanced work, which seems to have been occu- 
pied in times not very remote, a cannon shot having 
been dug up within its site, by some labourers em- 
ployed by the late rector." The site of Conarton 
manor, which anciently gave name to the parish, 
was formerly occupied, according to tradition, by an 
extensive town, which had two parish churches.
This town is supposed to have been what Leland 
calls Nikenor ; which he thus mentions: — " Nike- 
nor a 2 miles from Rivyer, sumtyme a great towne, 
now gone ; 2 parock chirches yet scene, a good deale 
several on from the other, sometyme in the towne, 
but it is now commonly taken to be in St. Guivians 
paroch." Prior to the Conquest, the manor of Co- 
narton belonged, as parcel of the honour of Glouces- 
ter, to Brictric, a Saxon.
King William gave it to 
Alan, Earl of Britany ; but it was subsequently re- 
sumed by the crown, and settled on Queen Maud.
It passed through several possessors into the Arun- 
del!
family ; and, a short time ago, it was purchased 
of Lord Arundell by Sir Christopher Hawkins.
The 
manor of Godreny, formerly in the Arundells, now 
belongs to Lord De Dunstanville.
Helland.] — Holland is in the hundred of Trigg, 
two miles and a half north-east from Bodmin.
It 
appears to have taken its name from St. Helena to 
whom the church is dedicated.
The manor of Hel- 
land appears to have lost its manerial rights : the 
barton is the property of John Wallis, Esq. of Bod- 
min.
According to Hals, whoever is possessed in 
fee of the barton of Helland is legal patron of the 
rectory, paying 40s.
a year to the incumbent in sa- 
tisfaction for all tithes.
The barton of Broads s vvas 
the seat of a younger branch of the Glynn family.
Dr. Robert Glynn, its last possessor of that name, 
was a physician, of King's College, Cambridge, 
where he took his degree, in the year 1752.
Dr.
Glynn wrote an excellent poem on the.
Day of Judg- 
ment, which obtained the Seatonian prize in 1757.
It should be mentioned, to his honour, that he al- 
ways refused to take a fee of a Cornish man.
He- 
died in the year 1800, aged 82 ; having resided in 
his college, universally respected for his wit and 
learning, sixty-three years.
Previously to his death, 
he had taken the additional name of Cloberry, that 
of his mother before her marriage.
He bequeathed 
Broads to the Rev. J.
H. Jacob, of whom it was 
purchased by Mr. Hawken, the present owner, 
in the year 1801.
Helstone.] — Ilelstone, or Hellestone, is a large 
and populous borough and market-town situated on 
the side of a hill, which slopes gradually to the little 
river Cobar.
It is in the west division of the hun- 
dred of Kirrier, sixty-four miles south-west from 
Launceston, and two hundred and seventy-six miles 
and a half west-south-west from London.
It is thus 
mentioned by Leland : " Heylstonn, alias Hellas, 
standeth on a hill, a good market-town, having a 
mayor and privileges, within the which there is a 
court for the coynage of tynne, kept twys yn the 
year.
Yn the town is both a chapel and a paroch 
(church) the vestegia castelli, and a ryver runnyng 
under the same vestegia of the castel, issueth to- 
wards the south sea, stopped ther, yn the west part, 
with S.
E. wyndes, casting up sandes, maketh ~a 
poole, cawled Loo, of a narrow shot in breadt, and 
two myles yn cumpas yn the somer.
In the wynter, 
by reason of fiuddes, men be constrayned to cut the 
sandy banke between the mouth of the poole and the 
sea, by the whyoh gut the sea floweth and ebbeth 
ynto the poole.
Lo Poole is a two mile in length, 
and betwixt it and the mayn sea is but a barre of 
sand, and ons yn three or four yeer, what by the rise 
of the fresch watier and range of the sea, it bubketh 
out, and then the fresch and salt water meeting, 
maketh a wonderful noise.
If this barre be al- 
ways kept open it would be a good haven up to 
Hailston." 
Helstone market is on Saturday.
Its fairs are on the 
Saturday before Midlent Sunday, Saturday before 
Palm Sunday, Whit-Monday, July 20, September 
9, November 8, and the second Saturday before 
Christmas Day. The market is for corn and all 
sorts of provisions ; and there, and also at the fairs, 
great quantities of shoes, chiefly the manufacture of 
the town are exposed for sale.
The fairs are also 
great marts for cattle.
The town of Helstone has, at different times, re- 
ceived the uncommon number of fourteen charters.
The first was bestowed by King John, who made it 
a free borough, and granted it a guild mercatory.
The privilege of holding a market and four fairs 
was granted by Edward III.
who also confirmed 
the former charters.
The borough was originally 
2 incorporated 
CORNWALL.
443 
incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, and its govern- 
ment vested in a mayor, four aldermen, and twenty- 
four freemen or assistants ; but this number being- 
reduced to one alderman, and eight freemen, a new 
charter was granted in the year 1774, which deter- 
mined the corporation to consist of a mayor, five 
aldermen, a recorder, and an indefinite number of 
freemen.
This charter occasioned some very sin- 
gular law proceedings ; for six of the old and sur- 
viving corporators refused to accede to it, and on 
their own authority returned the two burgesses to 
Parliament at the ensuing general election.
The 
cause was then referred to a Committee of the House 
of Commons, who decided in favour of the members 
thus chosen ; and the new charter, in this respect at 
least, was considered as null and void.
Some years 
afterwards the corporators under the ancient char- 
ter, being reduced to one person only, the two mem- 
bers were returned by him ; but on a second refer- 
ence to a Committee of the House, these were de- 
clared to be not duly returned ; and the burgesses 
returned under the new charter were then deter- 
mined to be the legal members.
The charter of 
1774 has since been considered the only one in force.
At the time, however, of preparing this account for 
the press (1815) the rights of this borough are again 
under discussion in Parliament, and a bill is pend- 
ing, the object of which is to alter the right of elec- 
tion, and to extend it to the freeholders of the hun- 
dreds of Kirrier, and Penwith.
The population of 
the borough and parish together was, according to 
the last returns, 2-297.
The number of voters is said 
to be 36.
Helstone was one of the decayed towns, for the 
repair of which, an Act of Parliament was passed in 
the reign of Henry VIII.
but it is now one of the 
most respectable towns in Cornwall.
The houses 
are chiefly disposed in four streets ; and near the 
middle of the principal street are the market-house 
and town-hall.
The surrounding country is pictu- 
resque and fertile ; the neighbourhood genteel ; and 
the town is the residence of several opulent fa- 
milies.
On au eminence to the north stands the church, 
which is dedicated to St. Michael.
This edifice, 
built of white moor stone, was erected in the year 
1763, at the expence of Lord Godolphin.
From its 
elevated situation, and lofty pinnacled tower, it forms 
a very fine object from many parts of the valley, 
which lies between it and the sea.
Although Helstone is one of the original stannary 
towns, very little tin is now coined here.
The old 
coinage hall used to be inhabited by an officer of the 
duchy, to which the manor originally belonged ; but, 
within these few years, a new coinage hall, and a 
house for the Duke of Cornwall's officers, have been 
built at the north end of the site of the ancient castle 
mentioned by Leland.
Of the castle there are no 
remains : its site, which commands a view down the 
valley of the Looe-Pool, is now a bowling-green.
There is a grammar-school in the town, the house 
of which has been lately rebuilt.
It is endowed out 
of the corporation tolls.
There was formerly a chapel, and an hospital of 
St. Mary Magdalen in the town ; and, at the village 
of St. John's, at the west-south-west end, there was 
a priory, founded by one of the Killcgrew family, 
and dedicated to St. John the Baptist.
The remains 
of the latter building were destroyed some years ago, 
and a Methodist meeting erected on their site.
The 
manor of Helstone was purchased by John Rogers, 
Esq. of Penrose, its present proprietor, in the year 
1798, under the Land Tax Redemption Act.
Tradition states, that the first symptoms of the 
Cornish rebellion, A.
D. 1549, appeared at Helstone ; 
where a person of the name of Hody was killed, whilst 
sitting in commission on affairs of religion.
There is a rural festival celebrated annually at 
Helstone, which is entitled to notice.
It is called 
the Furry ; a word, supposed by Mr. Polwhele, to 
be derived from the old Cornish word fer, a fair or 
jubilee.
On the 8th of May, the morning is ushered 
in by the music of drums and kettles, and other ac- 
companiments of au old song.
The observance of 
this day as a general holiday, is so strict, tliat should 
any person be found at work, he is instantly seized, 
set astride on a pole, and hurried on mens' shoulders 
to the river, where he is sentenced to leap over the wide 
place, which if he fail in attempting, he of course 
falls into the water.
A small contribution towards 
the good cheer of the day easily compounds for the 
leap.
About nine o'clock the revellers appear before 
the grammar-school, and demand a holiday for the 
school-boys ; after which they collect contributions 
from house to house.
They then fade into the coun- 
try (fade is an old English word for go), and, about 
the middle of the day, return with flowers and oak- 
branches in their hats and caps.
From this time 
they dance, hand in hand, through the streets, to 
the sound of the fiddle, playing a particular tune, 
running into every house they pass, without opposi- 
tion.
In the afternoon, a select party of the ladies 
ami gentlemen make a progress through the street, 
and very late in the evening.
they repair to the ball- 
room.
The whole is a scene of obstreperous jollity 
and mirth, worthy of the feasts of the ancients.
It 
is indeed highly probable, that it derives its origiu 
from the festival of Flora, which used to be holden 
about the same season of the year.
As in some measure connected with the town of 
Helstone, we shall here notice Penrose, the seat of 
John Rogers, Esq. the proprietor of Helstone and 
other manors.
It is situated in the midst of a finely 
wooded scene, about two miles from the town.
This 
estate formerly belonged to the Penrose family, from 
whom it descended to the present proprietor, who 
has made considerable additions to the old family 
mansion, and planted and improved the grounds.
Here are some fine hanging woods ; but what more 
peculiarly characterizes the place, is a large and fine 
piece of water called The Looe-Pool.
This forms 
one of the most considerable lakes in the county, and 
it 
444 
CORNWALL.
is constituted such by a singular operation of nature.
It was measured in the year 1771, and found to 
contain 163 statute acres, but it varies according - to 
the season of the year.
It abounds in water fowl, 
and a peculiar species of trout, called the Looe 
trout.
The Treville family formerly held lands near 
Helstone, by the service of providing 1 a boat and nets 
lor the King's use in Looe Pool, during the whole 
time of his stay, whenever he should visit that town.
The continual rolling of the waves of the British 
Channel towards the shore, on this part of the coast, 
forces in a vast quautity of sand' and pebbles, which, 
by constant accumulation, form a very thick and 
high bank or dam, extending across the valley from 
hill to hill, and, by closing the mouth of the channel, 
occasion the river to spread its waters over a space 
of ground nearly seven miles in circumference.
— 
When the waters extend so far as to obstruct the 
working of the mills at Helstone and Carminowe, 
the millers, as we have before mentioned, apply to 
the Lord of the Manor, and presenting him with 
two leathern purses, each containing three halfpence, 
solicit his permission to open the bar.
This being 
granted, workmen are employed by the Mayor of 
Helstone to cut a passage through the pebbles ; and 
the opening is no sooner made, than the whole body 
of water rushes through the aperture with wonderful 
force and impetuosity.
Indeed, the conflict between 
the waves and the river, at these times, constitutes 
an extraordinary spectacle, and the effect is often 
visible for six or eight miles from the shore ; yet 
such is the peculiar situation of the place, and force 
of the rolling surge, that the bar of pebbles is again 
formed in a few days.
The scenery round this Pool 
is peculiarly fine and picturesque ; it combines al- 
most every characteristic excellence to form a good 
picture, and affords many interesting studies .to the 
landscape painter.
The whole starts abruptly from 
the margin of the lake ; and a fine hanging wood 
cloaths the sides of tiie neighbouring hills.
On the 
south the prospect is only terminated by a faint 
streak, which seems to unite the sea with the firma- 
ment.
On the north, -hill retiring behind hill in 
aerial perspective, catching the fleeting, but beauti- 
ful effects of light and shade, and continually pre- 
senting a new appearance, cannot fail to please 
every admirer of nature, and must be peculiarly in- 
teresting to the eye and fancy of the painter.
— 
.Sometimes the remote hill, obscured by a transpa- 
rent cloud, or raising its summit above the denser 
vapours, assumes alternately the dark purple, the 
light grey, and the pale blue, whilst the middle dis- 
tance is equally variable, being illuminated by a 
bright light, or shadowed by a passing cloud.
— 
What renders this scene more particularly fine is the 
number of distances, the wavy outline of the hills, 
the situation of Helstone church tower, and the 
broad expanse of water which combines with (he 
contiguous scenery.
The whole is eminently beau- 
tiful; 
Hillary.] — The village of St. Hillary is in the 
east division of the hundred of Penwith, two miles 
and a half east-north-east from the town of Mara- 
zion, which is in St. Hillary's parish.
Relubbas, 
Higher and Lower Downs, Resudgian, Tregurtha, 
and Trevennor, are the chief villages.
The Rev.
John Pennock, who died in the early part of the last 
century, left the interest of 400/.
to be applied to the 
relief of the poor of this parish, or to the education 
of their children.
The Rev. Malachy Hitchins, who 
died in 1809, vicar of St. Hillary's, was the author 
of several ingenious papers in the Archajologia and 
Philosophical Transactions, and of some collections 
relating to this parish.
Palmer's Nonconformist's 
Memorial furnishes a somewhat curious account of 
Mr. Joseph Sherwood, who was ejected from this 
vicarage, by the Bartholomew Act, in the year 1002.
— Mr. Sherwood having been cited to appear before 
the Justices for his preaching concerning that act ; 
prophesied that Mr. Robinson, one of the magis- 
trates, who had ordered him to be committed to 
Launceston gaol, should die a violent death.
This 
is said to have happened a few days afterwards, in 
consequence of his having been gored by his own 
bull, which was never before known to be viciously 
disposed.
Jacobstow.] — Jacobstow, in the hundred of 
Stratton, eight miles south-south- westfrom that town, 
was the birth place of Degory Where, the historian, 
in the year 1573.
He was educated at Exeter Col- 
lege, Oxford ; where he was afterwards appointed 
by Camden, his first reader in history.
He wrote a 
Latin treatise on the reading of history, a Life of 
Camden, and some other works.
He died in 1647.
Illogan.] — This parish is in the east division of 
the hundred of Penwith, three miles north-west 
from Redruth.
Pool, and Portreath, or Basset's- 
cove, are villages in this parish.
At the latter place 
there is a small haven for the importation of coal 
and lime, and the exportation of copper ore, to the 
copper works in Wales.
It has a pier, which was 
commenced about the year 1760, by a company, un- 
der a lease from the late Francis Basset, Esq. who 
had himself a large share in the undertaking : the 
expenses of making the bason, building the pier, 
jettee, warehouses, &c.
amounted to 12,000/.
Be- 
tween the years 1778 and 1781, all the out shares 
were purchased by Lord de Dnnstanville, who ex- 
pended about 3000/.
in extending and repairing the 
pier, and subsequently granted a lease to Messrs.
Fox, merchants, of Falmouth.
These gentlemen 
are said to have expended 10,009/.
in making an inte- 
rior bason, erecting interior buildings, and forming 
more commodious roads from the Gwennap mines 
to the pier.
On the western side of the bay, where 
Portreath is situated, is a battery, raised by Lord de 
Dnnstanville about the year 1782, lor four twelve 
pounders ; and on the opposite hill, immediately 
over the jettee, are two six-pounders.
These, if 
well manned, would effectually defend the cove from 
any attack made by a privateer.
There is a school for poor children at Pool, which 
is 
CORNWALL.
4 45 
is supported by Lord de Dunstanville ; and an 
alms-house for lour poor women, founded by the 
honourable INliss Bassett, about the year 1806.
— 
Carn-Bre, which we have already described, is in 
the parish of lllogan; as is also the manor of Tehidy, 
which possesses extensive jurisdiction, enjoys great 
privileges, and is rich in mineral produce.
Tehidy 
Park, the seat of Francis Basset (created a Baronet 
in 1779, and raised to the Peerage in 1796) Lord 
de Dunstanville, is situated about four miles north- 
west from Redruth, and when seen from Carn-Bre- 
hill, appears like a well cultivated garden in the 
midst ot a sterile desert.
Its spreading woods are 
contemplated with additional delight, from the con- 
trasted scenery of the surrounding country, where 
the face of nature has been robbed of all ornament, 
and the interior of the earth, if we may be allowed 
the expression, been scattered over its surface in the 
pursuit of ere.
The earliest mention of Tehidy occurs in the year 
1100, when Alan de Dunstanville, then Lord of the 
manor, granted a lease of Minwinion, now situated 
in the park, to Paul Guyer.
William Basset, who 
married Cecilia, only daughter to Alan de Dunstan- 
ville, renewed the grant to Richard, son of Paul 
Guyer, about the year 1140.
The marriage by 
which the Dunstanville estates were conveyed to the 
Bassets, must therefore have been solemnized some 
time between those dates ; but there is no evidence 
as to the exact period.
Both the grants are in the 
stewards, office at Tehidy.
In the year 1330, Wil- 
liam Basset had the king's license to fortify his 
mansion of Tehidy.
The present manor-house was 
erected by John Pendarves Basset, Esq. uncle to 
the present proprietor, from designs by Edwards.
The buildings are chiefly of Cornish free-stone, and 
consist of a spacious square dwelling house in the 
centre, and four detached pavilions at the angles.
— 
The pavilions contain the domestic offices, and a 
private chapel.
On the summit of the house is a 
statue of the Farnese Flora, executed in Coade's 
artificial stone.
This mansion is ornamented with 
some good paintings.
Among the portraits, the 
following are entitled to notice : — General Massey ; 
Vandyck ; whole length : in a Bath jerkin, with a 
breastplate: back-ground, a landscape.
Sir Francis 
Basset, vice-admiral of Cornwall ; Vandyck; whole 
length.
In black, with the sea, and shipping in the 
back-ground.
— Chief Justice Keybridge and his 
wife, sister to Sir Francis Basset ; Sir Peter Lely ; 
half length.
The Peer is in his robes, the Lady in 
the dress of the times.
Lady Masters, aged 74, 
also sister to Sir Francis.
Sir Godfrey Kneller; 
half length ; in a large vest, and high peaked stays.
The late Francis Basset, Esq. and the late Sir John 
St. Aubyn ; Hudson ; three quarter lengths.
— Lord 
de Dunstanville and his Lady ; Gainsborough ; half 
lengths, with landscapes in the back grounds.
— 
Lord de Dunstanville when about eighteen ; Sir 
Joshua Reynolds ; three quarter length ; in a Van- 
dyke dress.
— Sir John St. Aubyn ; Sir Joshua Rey- 
vol.
i. — no.
32.
nolds ; three quarter length.
Both these pieces have 
preserved their colours perfect.— -John Prideaux 
Basset, cousin to Lord de Dunstanville ; Ramsey ; 
whole length; in a Vandyke dress, playing with an 
Italian Greyhound.
This has been engraved.
The 
chief of the other paintings are, King John signing 
Magna Charta; Miller ; in the style of the Venetian 
school : two very fine and large Pieces by More ; 
one, the Cascade of Terni ; and the other, the Cas- 
catellis of Tivoli, with Mecaenas's Villa : the Lake 
of Nimi ; Dulancy : the death of Lucretia, and a 
Venus and Cupid ; Gavin Hamilton: Portrait of a 
Venetian Senator; Pordenone ; very fine: Rubens' 
Second Wife, by one of his best scholars : the three 
Graces, with a Landscape in the back ground ; 
Rubens : a Philosopher with a skull in his hand ; 
Rembrandt : a Nativity ; and a Flight into Egypt ; 
Giacomo Bassan : Herodias with the Head of John 
the Baptist; Bononi de Farrari ; supposed to be the 
only picture of this artist in England : a beautiful 
sketch by Lanfranc, of our Saviour appearing to St.
Bruno : a small picture of a Nun ; Carlo Dolci : 
a Battle Piece ; Borgognone : and a Woodcock, 
most beautifully painted ; artist unknown.
This 
piece has been many years in the possession of the 
Bassets.
The park and grounds, in their entire extent, are 
about 700 acres ; of which 150 are appropriated to 
a lawn and sheep-walk, and 130 are in woodland ; 
ninety of which have been planted by Lord de Dun- 
stanville, by whom the estate has been greatly im- 
proved, and many judicious alterations effected.
— 
The number of trees planted annually for the last 
thirty or five and thirty years has been immense.
— 
The pine-asters are constantly planted as screens 
for the other trees, which are not set in the ground 
till the former have attained two years' g-rowth.
Silver firs, laurels, (both common and Portugal,) 
holly, and cypresses, answer extremely well.
Of 
deciduous trees, the oak, Spanish chesnut, beech, 
and sycamore, flourish best ; but, unless in very 
sheltered spots, the larch will not succeed.
Nancecuke, another manor in this parish, is also 
the property of Lord de Dunstanville.
In the year 1591, the plague was remarkably 
fatal at Illogan.
There are some meeting houses, belonging to the 
Arminian methodists, in this parish ; and a new 
chapel of ease, built by Lord de Dunstanville, at 
Trevenson, near Pool, was opened in the year 1809.
The church and church-yard contain several mo- 
numents of the Basset family.
Formerly there were 
chapels in this parish, dedicated to St. Constantine, 
St. John the Evangelist, and St. John the Baptist.
Issev.] — The parish of St. Isseyis in the hundred, 
of Pyder, three miles south south-east from Pad- 
stow.
Trevance, Trenance, and Tredenneck, are 
villages in this parish.
Halwyn, now called Old 
Town, was anciently a manor, on which stood a 
magnificent seat of the Champernownes, which they 
acquired by a marriage with an heiress of Hamely.
5 v The 
446 
CORNWALL.
The ruins of the manor house, and also of a chapel, 
in which some of the Champernownes were interred, 
are yet visible.
The barton, and also the manor of 
Tregeuna, are now the joint property of three 
gentlemen of the names of Rawlings, Beauchamp, 
and Stackhouse.
Formerly there were four chapels in this parish.
The church was anciently called Eglos-Crock.
Ive.] — The parish of Ive is in the middle division 
of the hundred of East, four miles and a quarter 
west south-west from Callington.
According to the 
will of Mr. Wm.
Morshead, of Pcnharget, dated in 
the year 1739, that gentleman left all his lands called 
Keason, in this parish, for the education of poor 
children ; but, from some cause with which we are 
unacquainted, no benefit has ever been derived from 
this charitable bequest.
Dinnerdake and Cadson 
are the principal villages in this parish.
The Knights Hospitallers formerly had a precep- 
tory here, of which there are now no vestiges.
— 
Reginald Marsh and Henry de Pomeroy were great 
benefactors to this preceptory ; which, after its first 
dissolution, was restored by Queen Mary, in the 
year 1557.
The manor of Trebigh, anciently Tre- 
bicen, purchased by Abbot Suetricius, for the abbey 
of Tavistock, was taken from that monastery by 
Robert, Earl of Moreton and Cornwall ; and, either 
by King Stephen, or Henry II.
it was presented to 
the preceptory just mentioned.
The manor has 
been in the Wrey family ever since the 16th century.
There are several other manors in this parish, none 
of which has any thing remarkable in its history.
Ives.] — St. Ives is a populous sea-port, borough, 
and market town, in the east division of the hundred 
of Penwith, 69 miles west south-west from Laun- 
ceston, and 277f west by south from London.
— It is situated near the north-east angle of a very 
fine bay ; bounded by bold rocks of black killas.
— 
The road to St. Ives, observes Dr. Maton, when 
returning from the western part of the country, 
passes near numerous pits and deserted shafts of 
mines, which render a journey over this part of the 
country in the night extremely dangerous.
The 
moor-stone (granite) lies dispersed in detached 
blocks, many of them huge enough for another 
Stone-henge ; scarcely a shrub appears to diversify 
the prospect, and the only living beings that inhabit 
the mountainous parts are the goats, which browse 
the scanty herbage.
The antiquity of this town is great.
In ancient 
records it is called Porth-Ia, and is said to have 
derived its name from St. Hya, or la, an Irish Saint, 
who came over into Cornwall in company with St.
Breaca and others, and died and was buried here.
— 
In the reign of Queen Mary, the town was governed 
by a Portreve and Burgesses ; but was not incor- 
porated till the sixteenth of Charles the First, who, 
on the application of Sir Francis Basset, of Tehidy, 
at that time member of Parliament for St. Ives, con- 
firmed some former privileges, vested the future 
government of the town in a Mayor, Recorder, 
twelve capital and twenty-four inferior Burgesses, 
and granted the inhabitants four annual fairs, two 
weekly markets, and a grammar-school.
The right 
of election is possessed by the corporation, and all 
the inhabitants paying scot and lot.
The voters are 
about 189.
The grammar school has not been kept 
up for many years past ; and, of late there has been 
only one fair, which is on the Saturday before Ad- 
vent, for shoes, sweetmeats, &c.
The market was 
originally granted by Edward I.
A. D.
1295, to be 
holden on Thursday.
The markets granted by 
Charles I.
were for Wednesdays and Saturdays ; 
but the Wednesday's market is now almost confined 
to the sale of vegetables.
The port of St. Ives lies about five leagues to the 
eastward of Cape Cornwall.
It is a bar harbour, 
and it dries at low water ; but, without its entrance, 
there is a sandy bay, with good anchorage.
Coals, 
salt, timber, iron, groceries, &c.
are imported here.
The chief articles of export are slates, copper ore, 
and pilchards.
The latter are in most seasons taken 
in the bay in abundance ; and at the time of large 
draughts, it is usual for all the inhabitants to con- 
tribute their assistance : shops are deserted : and if 
it should be Sunday, even the church is abandoned.
This port, as well as most others on the north coast, 
is greatly incommoded by the sand driven in by the 
north-west winds : and the town, as appears from 
Leland, has also suffered from the same cause.
— 
" The place," says he, " that the chief of the toun 
hath, and partely dooth stand yn, is a very penin- 
sula, and is extendid into the se of Severn as a cape.
Moste parte of the houses in the peninsula be sore 
oppressid or over-coverid with sandes that the 
stormy windes and rages castith up there.
This 
calamite hath continued ther litle above 20 yeres." 
The obscure specification contained in the last sen- 
tence, of a time when the town w as not incommoded 
by sand, seems to imply, that some considerable 
change had taken place in the situation of the lands 
round this part of the coast.
If no change had oc- 
curred, the town, from its situation, and vicinity to 
the sea, must have been always subjected to the in- 
convenience of being partially overwhelmed by sand, 
and there could have been no reason for observing, 
that the calamity " hath continuid ther litle above 
20 yeres." It may be remarked, however, from St.
Ives, with some few interruptions, there extends all 
along the coast, almost to Padstow, a range of sand- 
banks, in many places a mile wide, and elevated to 
fifty or sixty yards above the level of the sea.
This 
rang'e is now generally covered with a thin turf, and 
affords pasturage to sheep ; but it is evidently of a 
recent formation, and consists in its whole mass of 
minute particles of shells.
After digging tp a cer- 
tain depth, a vegetable mould is discovered, with 
regular inclosures, and the remains of houses.
— 
Traditiou represents this overwhelming of sand to 
have happened some time in the sixteenth century ; 
and the tale receives confirmation from the circum- 
stance of one of the livings on this shore being esti- 
mated 
CORNWALL.
447 
mated far above its proportion to adjoining parishes 
in the Liber Valotum of Henry the Eighth.
These 
arguments appear sufficiently valid to substantiate 
the opinion of the occurrence of some great change 
in the situation of the lands round this coast.
In 
Holiushed's Chronicle mention is made of a light 
house, and block house, near St. Ives.
On " a 
little byland cape or peninsula, called Pendina, the 
compas not above a mile, standeth a Pharos, or light 
for ships that sail by those coasts in the night.
— 
There is also a block-house and a peer on the east 
side thereof; but the peer is sore choked with sand, 
as is the whole coast from St. Ives to St. Caran- 
tokes." There is still a battery on the eastern side, 
and the old pharos, which still exists, is used for de- 
positing government stores.
A new and commodi- 
ous pier was constructed, under the direction of Mr.
Smeaton, between the years 1706 and 1770.
The principal trade of St. Ives, however, is now 
carried on at Hale, or Heyl, which is considered 
within this port.
It is situated on the eastern side 
of the river Heyl, and is comparatively of modern 
origin.
It possesses a j^reat trade in iron, lime- 
stone, Bristol wares, and Welch coal for the steam- 
engines and smelting-houses.
— This portion of the 
county, it should be observed, is exceedingly rocky 
and mountainous ; the coal is therefore conveyed to 
its places of destination on the backs of horses, a 
prodigious number of which travel together.
The 
smelting-houses, &c.
in this place and its vicinity, 
are arrived at as great perfection as in almost any 
other part of the kingdom.
The works were first 
erected between forty and fifty years ago, but have 
since been greatly extended at various periods.
— 
Nothing, 
says Dr. Maton, can be more shocking 
than the appearance which the workmen in the 
smelting houses exhibit.
Some of the poor wretches, 
who are lading the liquid metal from the furnaces to 
the moulds, look more l.ke walking corpses than 
human beings.
The effect of the disengaged arsenic 
in the immediate vicinity of the copper house, is also 
very uncommon ; and even the horses employed 
there are irremediably injured by it, as, after three 
or four years they lose their hoofs.
No remedy 
against this malady has yet been discovered.
On 
the western side of Hale harbour, Mr. Praed, who 
introduced the Pineaster fir into Cornwall, has a 
house in a very beautiful situation : his grounds are 
also extremely pleasant and flourishing ; but gene- 
rally speaking, the country round Hale is entirely 
covered with sand, which is blown about by every 
blast, and renders its appearance truly dismal.
— 
Between Hale and Redruth there is a regular line of 
copper mines, situated along the bottom of the north 
side of a ridge of granite hills, which terminate 
abruptly at a small distance from the latter town.
— 
These are generally termed the Camborne Mines, 
from being chiefly seated in that parish.
The ore 
of Huel Gons and Stray Park is of the yellow kind, 
and very rich : the lodes in some places are twelve 
feet wide : in others only as many inches.
Dol- 
cooth lies eastward of Iluel Gons, and is nearly 170 
fathoms deep.
It produces from four to five hun- 
dred tons of copper ore every month, and also some 
oi cobalt.
The matrix of the ore is quartz, accom- 
panied by chlorite and kill as.
Cook's Kitchen is 
one of the most productive mines in Cornwall, and 
has been known to yield a profit of upwards of 
100,000/.
on ten years working ; but, of late years 
the proporlionable produce has not been so great.
— 
Its depth is nearly (80 fathoms.
Its most produc- 
tive ore is the solid grey kind, some of which is 
worth 301.
per ton ; and it often affords ninety parts 
of copper for every hundred of ore : the remainder 
is sulphur, with a little iron and arsenic.
It has nu- 
merous lodes in constant work : one of them, called 
the great north lode, is ft-om six to fifty feet in 
width.
This mine furnishes employ to between 300 
and 400 persons.
Part of its apparatus are three 
immense overshot water wheels ; the respective dia- 
meters of which are 42, 48, and 54 feet : the largest 
wheel is under ground.
Tin-croft is about 130 fa- 
thoms deep, and produces from 200 to 300 tons of 
copper ore every month, exclusive of a small quan- 
tity of tin.
The profits on this mine are said to 
equal any in the county.
The mines of Dolcooth, 
Cook's Kitchen, and Tin-croft, are all on the same 
lodes ; and it has been remarked that these run 
parallel to the course of the granite-ridge above- 
mentioned, but do not all dip in the same direction.
In the Camborne Mines, a hard blue elvan, called 
iron-stone, prevails ; this is exceedingly hard, and 
cannot be broken without great difficulty.
It con- 
sists principally of quartz and schoerl, and appears 
in some quantity on the surface : but the upper 
stratum of the country is chiefly killas ; granite lying 
below both.
St. Ives church is a low but spacious building, 
having a nave and two aisles : from its situation 
near the shore, it is frequently covered at high tides 
and tempests with the spray of the sea.
It was built 
as a chapel to Lalant, by virtue of a bull from Pope 
Alexander I.
bearing date A.
D, 1410; and it was 
consecrated by the bishop of Exeter on the 3d of 
February, A.
1).
1434.
Formerly here were several 
chapels ; but the only one of which there are now 
any remains is that of St. Nicholas, which is men- 
tioned in Holingshed's Chronicle.
According to 
that author, it stood oh the very point of a peninsula 
called Pendinas, which had belonged to Lord 
Brooke, and then to Lord Mountjoy.
The church- 
warden's accounts contain the following remarkable 
entries : — 
1730 Paid for horses to carry the L.
Prince of Mount- Lebanon 
and his retinue 1 
1734 To the Greek Bishop, by order 
of the Mayor 1 
s. d.
10 
11 
In the year 1649, a lady of the name of Hext, 
founded an almshouse here for six poor persons ; 
but of this building there is now no trace.
The 
1 same 
448 
CORNWALL.
same lady gave the sum of 50/.
out of the interest 
of which 205.
a year was to be appropriated to the 
priest of the parish, and the remainder to the poor.
There is a tradition in the town, that a person of 
the name of Payne, who held the office of Port 
Reeve, in the reign of Edward VI.
was executed by 
order of Sir Anthony Kingston, whose barbarous 
disposition we have already mentioned, for being 
concerned in Arundel's rebellion.
Sir Francis Basset, to whom the town was in- 
debted for its charter of incorporation, in the reign 
of Charles I.
presented the corporation with a drink- 
ing cup, inscribed as follows : — 
If any discord 'twixt my friends arise, 
Within the borough of beloved St. Ives, 
It is desyred that this my cupp of love, 
To everie one a peace-maker may prove; 
Then am I blest, to have given a legacie 
So like my Karte unto posteritie.
Francis Basset, A.
1740.
Corva, Carrackdues, Bovallan, Aire, Batavellan, 
Trowan, Trenwith, Treloyhan, Penbeagle, Helles- 
veor, and Hellesvean, ar# the chief villages in this 
parish.
There are several manors in the parish of St. Ives.
The manor and barton of Trenwith, which was an- 
ciently the name of a district, including the whole 
parish of Lelant, belonged to the Abbot Setricious, 
in the reign of Edward the Confessor ; at the time 
of the conquest, it belonged to the Earl of Cornwall ; 
subsequently, John de Beaufort, son of John of 
Gaunt, obtained a grant thereof; and it continued 
in the Beaufort family till the attainder of Edmund 
Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, A.
D. 1471.
The 
manerial rights have long been lost.
Mr. Lander is 
the present owner of the barton.
The manor of St.
Ives, with some others, was many years in the 
Praed family, of whom it was purchased by Sir 
Christopher Hawkins about eight or nine years ago.
The manor of Porth-Ia Prior anciently belonged to 
the priory of Tywardreth.
It was situated partly in 
this parish and partly in others ; and was amongst 
the manors Avhich were annexed to the Duchy of 
Cornwall in lieu of the honour of Wallingford.
— 
Another manor of Porth-Ia is now the property of 
Samuel Stephens, Esq. whose grandfather purchas- 
ed it, with those of Dynas-Ia, and Lelant and Tre- 
vellow, of Vere Hunt, Esq. the representative of 
the Robartes family.
On the manor of Lelant and 
Trevellow stands Tregenna castle, the seat of Mr.
Stephens.
It was erected by his father on an ele- 
vated site, commanding a very fine sea view.
On 
the summit of a lofty hill, observe Messrs.
Lysons, 
about a mile from this house, is a pyramid, erected 
by the late John Knill, Esq. a bencher of Gray's 
Inn, sometime collector of the port of St. Ives, and 
afterwards secretary to Lord Hobart, when Lord 
Lieutenant of Ireland.
On one side of the pyramid, 
which he intended for the place of his burial, is in- 
scribed " Johannes Knill," on another, " Resur- 
gam;" on a third, " I know that my Redeemer 
liveth." Mr. Kuill, who died in 1811, directed that 
at the end of every five years, an old woman, and 
ten girls under fourteen years of age, dressed m 
white, should walk in procession, with music, from 
the market-house at St. Ives to the Pyramid, round 
which they should dance, singing the hundredth 
psalm ; and for the purpose of keeping up this 
custom, he gave some freehold lands, which are 
vested in the officiating minister, the mayor of St.
Ives, and the collector of that port for the time 
being, who are allowed ten pounds for a dinner.
— 
The manor of Ludgvan-Lees has an extensive juris- 
diction in this parish.
In the year 1647, between Easter and the middle 
of October, between five and six hundred persons 
fell victims to the plague in the town of St. Ives.
The Reverend Jonathan Toup, the learned anno- 
tator on Suidas, and editor of Longinus, was born 
in this town, where his father was lecturer, about the 
year 1714.
He was educated at Exeter College, 
Oxford, but completed his degrees in Arts at Cam- 
bridge.
After entering into orders, he obtained a 
prebend in Exeter Cathedral, and the living of St.
Martin's, near Looe, in this county.
He died in the 
year 1785.
Just.] — The parish of St. Just is in the west di- 
vision of the hundred of Penwith, seven miles and a 
half west by north from Penzance.
There are many 
reliques of antiquity in this parish.
On the top of 
Bartine hill, is the site of a fortification, composed 
of a circular mound of earth.
Within the enclosure 
was a well, now filled up with stones, and in the 
centre were three small circles, formed with upright 
stones.
Near the church is an ancient British 
theatre, in which the natives attended to witness 
martial exercises and public sports and games.
There are the remains of several of these in Corn- 
wall, where they are called Plan-an-guare, or the 
plain for sport and pastime.
The benches are gene- 
rally of turf; but those of St. Just, which is the 
most remarkable monument of the kind, are of stone.
It was an exact circle 126 feet in diameter, and the 
perpendicular height of the bank, was at least seven 
or eight feet 
and the height from the bottom of the 
ditch outside was ten or twelve feet.
The seats 
consisted of eight steps, fourteen inches wide, and 
one foot high ; that on the top, where was the ram- 
part, being about seven feet wide.
The latest ex- 
hibitions in these theatres, are supposed to have 
been plays or mysteries in the Cornish language.
In the early part of the last century, Ralph Wil- 
liams, a fanner, in removing a barrow in this parish, 
discovered a great number of urns : near the centre 
of the harrow was a square chest or cell, paved at 
the bottom, in which an urn was also found finely 
carved and full of human bones.
There were forty 
or fifty urns round the stone chest ; but only the 
one within was preserved, on account of its elegance ; 
and the rest were broken and thrown away as of no 
value.
In the tenement of Leswyn, which is also in 
this parish, were discovered, some, years ago, two 
paterae, 
CORNWALL.
449 
paterae, and an urn : the paterae were both of moor 
stone, turned and ornamented ; one of them being 
evidently of that kind from which the priest poured 
libations of wine, either upon the altar or between 
the horns of the victim.
The remains of an ancient chapel, called Parken 
chapel, are visible on the plain above Cape Corn- 
wall, in this parish.
Here also are the ruins of 
Chapel Carn-Bre.
Pendeen, one of the villages in this parish, was a 
seat of the Borlase family, and the seat of Dr. Bor- 
lase the historian.
The mansion is now a farm- 
house, the property of John Borlase, Esq. Pen- 
deen -Vau is the most entire and most curious of the 
artificial caves for which Cornwall is so remarkable.
This cave consists of three parts, or galleries ; the 
entrance, as described by Dr. Borlase, is four feet 
six inches high, and the same width, being walled 
on each side with large stones, and having a rude 
arch on the top.
From the entrance is a descent of 
six steps : advancing to the north-north-east, the 
floor dips or declines all the way.
The sides, built 
of stone, draw nearer together as they rise, the bet- 
ter to receive the flat stones which form the covering, 
full six feet from the floor.
This first cave or gal- 
lery is twenty-eight feet long.
The second gallery 
turns off to the left, at right angles, and is formed in 
the same manner as the former.
In the middle of 
this second cave, Dr. Borlase, observing a low place, 
caused the floor to be dug, and found a round pit, 
three feet in diameter, and two feet deep, but it con-, 
tained nothing remarkable.
At the end of this gal- 
lery is a hole in the roof, through which a man may 
climb into the field.
Fronting the entrance is a hole 
two feet wide, and two feet six inches high, forming 
an opening into a third cave or gallery, six feet wide, 
and the same in height.
This is dug out of the na- 
tural ground, the sides being regular and straight, 
and the roof a semi-circle ; but neither one nor the 
other is lined with stone.
Its length is twenty-six 
feet six inches, and it ends in a semi-circle.
The 
country people relate many idle stories relative to 
these caves, taking no notice of the structure of them, 
which is really commodious and well executed.
This, and the other caves of the like kind in Corn- 
wall, were probably formed as places of security in 
times of imminent danger, in which they concealed 
their women, children, and most valuable effects ; 
their coasts being continually infested by the Saxon 
and Danish pirates.
Since the time of Dr. Borlase, 
a more extensive retreat of this kind has been dis- 
covered near Trelowarren : it consists of several 
galleries, one of them sixty feet long, four feet wide, 
and five feet six inches high ; but, as much of it is 
filled up with rubbish, its exact form and extent have 
not been ascertained.
Like that of Pendeen-Vau, 
however, it is formed of rough stones, narrowing to- 
wards the top, which is covered with large blocks of 
stone, and its entrance passages are formed by up- 
right stones with others laid across.
Mr. Polwhele 
describes another of these caves at Bos-au,-a», called 
vol.
i. — j*o.
32.
Piskey Hall, in the parish of Constantine, thirty feet 
long, and five feet wide, with rough stone walls, six 
feet four inches high, covered with rude stones.
In 
the tenement of Bodinar, in the parish of Sancred, 
is one called the Giant's Hold ; and, in the tenement 
of Boleit, in the parish of St. Burian, is one about se- 
ven feet high, and thirty-six feet long, with another 
branching out from one of its sides.
Bosvargus, anciently the seat of a family of that 
name, was an inheritance of the Reverend Jonathan 
Toup, whom we have mentioned in our account of 
St. Ives.
It is now a farm-house, the property of 
Mr. Nichols, who married one of Mr. Toup's 
neices.
St. Just.] — This parish of St. Just, called St.
Just in Roseland, to distinguish it from the former, 
is situated in the west division of the hundred of 
Powder, eight miles south-west from Tregony.
The 
borough and castle of St.Mawes stand in this parish.
Sir William Lemon is the present owner of the bar- 
tan of Rosecassa, formerly the seat of a family of 
that name.
The mansion is now a farm-house.
The remains of a chapel belonging to this barton are 
yet visible ; and it is said, that there was formerly a 
chapel of ease at a village in tiiis parish called 
Lane.
Kea.] — St. Kea's parish is in the west division of 
the hundred of Powder, three miles and a half south- 
south-east from Truro.
The first copper mines 
which were successfully wrought in Cornwall, are 
said to have been those on the manor of Blanchland 
in this parish.
The parishes of Kea and Kenwin 
form an united benefice.
St. Kea's church, a mo- 
dern structure, stands alone, about two miles from 
Truro.
The old church stood by the side of the 
river.
Its tower, which is yet standing, is a fine ob- 
ject from the grounds at Tregothnan.
There is an 
alms-house in St. Kea, for eight poor persons, 
which was founded by Mr. Lanyon about the year 
1724.
It is endowed with an estate at Gwennap, 
worth about 50/.
a year.
Kean.] — The parish of St. Kean, or Keyne, is in 
the hundred of West, three miles south from Lis- 
keard.
It is chiefly remarkable as the seat of St.
Keyne's Well, which is classed by Carew amongst 
the Cornish natural wonders ; and perhaps, from the 
peculiar properties which have been attributed by 
tradition to its waters, it is more distinguished by 
conversation than most other springs, though more 
renowned for their healing virtues.
" He who caused 
this spring to be pictured," says Carew, " added 
this rhime for an exposition." 
In name, in shape, in quality, 
This Well is very quaint ; 
The name to lot of Keyne befell, .
No over holy Saint.
The shape four trees of divers kinde.
Withy, Oak, Elme, and Ash, 
Make with their roots an arched roof, 
Whosfe floore this spring doth wash.
5k 
Th« 
4C)() 
CORNWALL.
The quality, that man or wife, 
Whose chance or choice attained, 
First of this aacred stream to chinke, 
Thereby the mast'ry gains.
The trees here mentioned have been long dead ; 
but others of similar kinds were planted, about se- 
venty or seventy-five years ago, by Mr. Rashlcigh, 
lather of Philip Rashleig'h, Esq. of Menabilly, and 
continue to flourish over the wonder-working stream.
Southey's pleasing tale, named the Well of St.
Keyne, published in the first volume of the Antho- 
logy, was founded on this poetical fiction.
Kenwyn.] — Kenwyn, which, as before stated, is 
an united benefice with St. Kea, is in the west divi- 
sion of the hundred of Powder, half a mile north- 
west from Truro, part of the suburbs of which town 
is in this parish.
The village of Chacewater, stands 
partly in this parish and partly in that of St. Kea.
In Kenwyn is tlte site of a Dominican convent, said 
to have been founded by the Reskymer family, and 
granted by Edward VI.
to William Aglionby.
There 
were formerly some copper works at a place called 
Twelveheads in this parish.
The manor of Tre- 
gavethan, in Kenwyn, is deemed extra-parochial, 
having its own officers, and maintaining its own 
poor ; it belongs to the Marquis of Buckingham.
The Barton House, anciently the seat of the Trego- 
dicks and Laughernes has been pulled down.
Cap- 
tain Digory Laugherne commanded a troop of horse 
for King Charles I.
In the succeeding reign, hav- 
ing been ruined by the Civil War, he sold the Bar- 
ton to the Vincents.
John Laugherne, his brother, 
who was a lieutenant of horse in Charles's army, is 
said to have been upwards of seven feet six inches 
high, and of proportionate strength.
Near the 
manor-house formerly stood a chapel dedicated to 
St. Mary.
Anciently also, there was a chapel in this 
parish dedicated to St. George.
Keverne.] — St. Keverne, or Lan-a-Kebran, is in 
the east division of the hundred of Kirrier, nine 
miles south by west from Falmouth.
It has a shew 
fair for cattle on the Tuesday alter twelfth-day.
— 
According to Tanner, " here was a society of secular 
canons, at, or about the time of the conquest, dedi- 
cated to St. Achebran : and afterwards here was a 
cell of Cistertian monks, subordinate to Beaulieu 
Abbey in Hampshire, and the manor here as parcel 
of the possession of Beaulieu, was granted 2d Eliza- 
beth, to Francis Earl of Bedford." There is an 
endowed charity school in this parish, for reading, 
writing, and cyphering ; and six reading sel ools.
— 
The endowment of these schools consists of three 
small parcels of land, and the interest of 150'.
stock, 
producing together 26/.
10s.
a year.
Part of the 
land was given hy Sampson Sandys, Fsq. in the 
year 1638, and the remainder was purchased with a 
moiety of 200/.
which was given to the schools by 
John Hosken, Esq. of Tregowris, about 45 years 
Ago. The Barton of Tregovr.s, some time a seat of 
the Hosken family, is now a larin, the property of 
Mr. Gilbert, who married tiie sister and heiress of 
the Rev. John Hosken.
Lanbarth, the seat of Lieu- 
tenant Colonel Sandys, has been in that gentleman's 
family upwards of a century.
Hals has preserved 
an account of what may be termed the miraculous 
preservation of one of the Sandys, and seven other 
persons, of this parish, who were driven to sea in an 
open boat, in the year 1702.
After beating about 
for four days and three nights, they reached the 
coast of Normandy, where they landed and were 
made prisoners ; but, on the circumstance being 
made known to the French King, Louis XIV.
they 
were generously released ; and, after an absence of 
two mouths, safely landed at Portsmouth, whence 
they returned to St. Keverne, where they had long 
been given over as lost.
There are several villages 
in this parish, the principal of which are the three 
following fishing coves : — Coverach, which has a 
good pier for small vessels ; Porthonstock ; and 
Porthalla.
St. Kevern's church contains some monu- 
ments of the family of Squier, Bogan, and Sandys; 
and a marble slab to the memory of Mr. Edward 
Pearce, brother of the present Dean of Ely.
Kew.] — The parish of St. Kew is in the hundred 
of Trigg, three miles and a half north-north-east 
from Wadebridge.
" In the windows of the church 
of St. Kew," observe Messrs.
Lysons, " which ap- 
pears to have been rebuilt in the fifteenth century, 
are considerable remains of painted glass, evidently 
coeval with the building, containing various histori- 
cal subjects from the New Testament, portraits of 
benefactors' arms, roses, &c.
The east window of 
the south aisle, consisting of five lights, is nearly 
filled with rich painted glass of an earlier date, re- 
presenting the favourite subject of the root of Jesse, 
at the bottom of the middle light, with several 
branches, containing figures of the Virgin and Child, 
Solomon, Manasses, Josophat, &c.
From the style 
of the crown and sceptre in their hands, this appears 
to have been a work of the fourteenth century, and was 
formerly part of the church, from which it was re- 
moved, when that edifice was rebuilt ; having been 
sold to the parish of St. Kew for the sum of 26s.
and 
Id. as appears by the accounts of the rebuilding 
Bodmin Church, from 1469, to 1471, among the 
corporation records.
Another window was sold to 
the parish of Holland for 26s." In the parish regis- 
ter is an entry of the burial of Elizabeth Fradd, aged 
103, March 3, 1803.
— There were formerly chapels 
in this parish, dedicated to St. Wenn and St. Ad- 
helm.
The church, with the manor of Lanow, was 
given, by King Edgar, to the priory of Plympton, 
for the support of two canons, the entertainment of 
pilgrims, and the keeping up of almsgiving.
The 
manor of Lanow, at the Dissolution, was granted to 
the Rev. John Wollacombe, and Roger Prideaux, 
Gent It now belongs to Lord Grenville, in right of 
his wife, as sister and heir of the late Lord Camel- 
ford.
His Lordship is also the proprietor of some 
other manors and bartons in this parish.
The ma- 
nor of St. Kew is an ancient possession of the Moles- 
worth family, j 
KlLKHAMPTON.
CORNWALL.
4>r 
Kilkhampton.] — This neat and agreeable village, 
which formerly had a market by prescription, is in 
the hundred of Stratton, lour miles and a quarter 
from that town.
At this time it has two considera- 
ble cattle-fairs — by prescription, we believe — on 
Holy Thursday, and the 28th of August, and another 
fair on the third Thursday after Holy Thursday.
The church, which is a light and handsome edifice, 
was built by an ancient baron of the Grenville line.
With the objects of antiquity appertaining to this 
place of worship, must be enumerated a capacious 
font, and a curiously carved pulpit.
At the southern 
entrance of the church, is a semi-circular arch, round 
which is a curious zig-zag Anglo-Norman cornice, 
which seems of higher antiquity than the building 
itself.
The inside is elegant, consisting of three 
aisles, divided by splendid pillars, supporting obtuse 
pointed arches.
Many elaborate monuments and 
sculptured notices of the Grenvilles occur in differ- 
ent parts of the church ; among which is one to the 
memory of the celebrated Sir Beville Grenville, who 
was killed in the memorable battle of Lansdowne, 
near Bath.
It is surrounded by military trophies, 
and bears the following inscription : — 
" Here lies all that was mortal of the most noble 
and truly valiant Sir Beville Grenville, of Siowe, in 
the county of Cornwall, Earl of Corbill, and Lord of 
Thorigny and Granville, in France and Normandy, 
descended in a direct line from Robert, second son of 
the warlike Rollo, first Duke of Normandy, who, af- 
ter having obtained cliveis signal victories over the re- 
bels in the West, was at length slain, with many 
wounds, at the battle of Lansdowne, July 5th, 1643.
He married the most virtuous Lady, Grace, daughter 
of Sir George Smith, of the county of Devon, by 
whom he had many sons, eminent for their loyalty 
and firm adherence to the crown and church ; and se- 
veral daughters, remarkable examples of true piety.
He was indeed an excellent person, whose activity, 
interest, and reputation, was the foundation of what 
had been done in Cornwall ; and his temper and affec- 
tion so public, that no accident which happened could 
make any impressions on him, and his example kept 
others from taking any thing ill, or at least seeming to 
do so ; in a word, a brighter courage, and a gentler 
disposition, were ne\er married together, to make the 
most cheerful and innocent conversation." Vide Lord 
Clarendon's History of the Rebellion.
' To the immortal memory of his renowned grand- 
father, this monument was erected by the Right Ho- 
nourable George Lord Lansdowne, Treasurer of the 
Household to Queen Anne, and one of her Majesty's 
most honourable Privy Council, &c, in the year 
1714." J 
" Thus slain thy valiant ancestor did lye, 
When his one bark a navy did defy, 
When now encompass'd round the victor stood, 
And bathed his pinnace in his conquering blood, 
* Martin Llewellyn was a poet and physiciai, some time 
principal of St. Mary Hall, in Oxford.
In the latter part of 
his life, he resided at Higa Wycomb ; died there in the year 
1682 ; and was buried in the north aisle of the chancel.
The 
collection of verses, from which the above lines are taken, was 
published by the University of Oxford, on the death of Sir 
Till all his purple current dryed and spent, 
He fell, and made the waves his monument : 
Where shall the?
next famed Grenville's ashes stand, 
Thy Grandsire fills the seas, and thou the land." 
Martin Llewellin.* 
Vide Oxford University Verses printed 1643.
Kilkhampton manor appears to have been among 
the possessions of the Grenvilles almost ever since 
the Conquest.
Of this celebrated family, and of their 
connections Avith the manor and parish of Kilkhamp- 
ton, we find the following valuable account, in Ly- 
sons' Cornwall: — "Richard de Grenville, who came 
over with William the Conqueror, is said, in the 
pedigrees of the family, to have been a younger bro- 
ther of Robert Fitzhaman, Earl of Corbill, Lord of 
Thorigny and Granville, in France and Normandy ; 
and to have been lineally descended from Rollo, 
Duke of Normandy.
It is on record, that Richard 
de Grenville held certain knight's fees at Bideford 
in Devonshire, in the reign of Henry II.
We have 
not found any record of the Grenvilles' possessions 
at Kilkhampton, of an earlier date than the quo 
warranto roll of the year 1301 ; but it appears that 
it had at that time been long in the family.
They 
continued to reside at Stowe, in this parish, for many 
generations, and frequently served the office of she- 
riff for the county.
William Grenville or Grenfield, 
(as the name was at that early period generally writ- 
ten) son of Sir Theobald, became Archbishop of 
York, and distinguished himself as an able states- 
man ; he died in 1315.
Sir Richard Grenville, son 
of Roger, (who was himself a captain in the navy, 
and lost his life, as Carew tells us, in the unfortu- 
nate Mary Rose,) was a celebrated military and na- 
val commander in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
He 
first distinguished himself in the Avars under the 
Emperor Maximilian against the Turks, for which 
his name is recorded by several foreign writers.
In 
the year 1591, being then Vice- Admiral of England, 
he was set in the Revenge, with a squadron of seven 
ships, to intercept the Spanish galleons ; when fall- 
ing in with the enemy's fleet, consisting of fifty-two 
sail, near the Tercera islands ; he repulsed them fif- 
teen times in a continued fight, till his powder was 
all spent : his ship, which sunk before it arrived in 
port, was reduced to a hulk, and himself covered 
with wounds, of which he died two days afterwards 
on board the vessel of the Spanish commander.
Sir 
Richard's grandson, was the brave and loyal Sir Be- 
ville Grenville.
This distinguished officer was one 
of King Charles's generals in the west, and shared 
the glories of the successful campaign in Cornwall 
in the autumn of 1642 ; in the summer of the follow- 
ing year he lost his life at the battle of Lansdowne, 
near Bath.
Sir Richard Grenville, who had been 
Beville Grenville, in the year 1643, and reprinted in 1684.
Annexed were King Charles's Letters to Sir Beville Grenville, .
and to the county of Cornwall ; and a patent of Charles 1.
granting to the county of Cornwall a trade to Denmark, Mus- 
covy, and the Levant.
created 
452 
CORNWALL.
created a baronet in 1631, was, after his brother's 
death, made general of all the King's forces in the 
west.
He was an active and zealous officer, and so 
particularly obnoxious to the parliamentary party, 
that he was perpetually the subject of abuse to 
their journalists, who seldom spoke of him but by 
the appellation of Skellum Grenville.
During the 
dissentions between the civil power and the mili- 
tary in 1645, Sir Richard Grenville was super- 
seded, by the advice of Sir Edward Hyde, after- 
wards Earl of Clarendon.
That noble author gives 
a very unamiable character of Sir Richard, who is 
represented as having been in the highest degree 
oppressive, tyrannical, and unprincipled ; but other 
writers attribute much of this to the enmity that sub- 
sisted between them.
Sir Richard Grenville died, 
in reduced circumstances at Ghent, in the year 1658; 
leaving no male issue, the title became extinct.
Sir 
John Grenville, son of the brave Sir Beville, suc- 
ceeded to the Kilkhampton estates : at a very early 
age he had a command in his father's regiment, and 
was left for dead in the field at Tewkesbury.
He 
was appointed governor of the Scilly Islands when 
they revolted from the Parliament, and was one of 
the chief instruments in effecting the restoration of 
King Charles 1J .
He gave the living of Kilkhamp- 
ton to Nicholas Monk, and employed him, to influ- 
ence his brother (the general) in favour of the exiled 
monarch ; having succeeded in his negociations, he 
had the satisfaction of being the bearer of the King's 
letters to General Monk, and to the Parliament.
In 
April 1661, Sir John Grenville was created Lord 
Grenville of Kilkhampton and Bideford, Viscount 
Lansdowne and Earl of Bath.
On the death of his 
grandson, under age, in 1711, these titles became 
extinct, and the Kilkhampton estate passed to his 
aunt and coheiress Grace Grenville, who married 
George, Lord Carteret, and was afterwards (being 
then a widow) created by King George I.
Coun- 
tess of Granville, with remainder to her son John, 
who inherited that title and the Kilkhampton estate.
On the death of Robert, the second Earl of Gran- 
ville, in 1776, that title became extinct, and the 
•Kilkhampton estate passed, under his will, to his 
Jiephew Henry Frederic Thynne, second son of Lord 
Viscount Weymouth, who had married his sister 
Louisa.
Mr. Thynne was created Lord Carteret in 
1784, and is the present possessor of Kilkhampton, 
the remainder of which, as well as the title of Carte- 
ret, is vested in Lord George Thynne, second son of 
the Marquis of Bath.
Lord Grenville, Earl of Bath, 
in the reign of Charles II.
built a magnificent man- 
sion at Stowe, in this parish, of which scarcely a ves- 
tige remains.
It stood on an eminence, overlooking 
a well wooded valley, but not a tree near it, says 
Dr. Borlase, to shelter it from the north-west.
That 
writer speaks of it as by far the noblest house in the 
west of England, and says that the kitchen offices 
fitted up for a dwelling-house made no contemptible 
figure.
It is a singular circumstance, that the cedar 
wainscot, which had been bought out of a Spanish 
prize, and used by the Earl of Bath for fitting up 
the chapel in this mansion, was purchased by Lord 
Cobham at the time of its demolition (the house be- 
ing then sold piecemeal) and applied to the same 
purpose at Stowe, the magnificent seat of the noble 
family of Grenville in Buckinghamshire, where it 
still remains.
Defoe, in his Tour through Great 
Britain, speaking of Stowe in Cornwall, says, that 
the carving of the chapel was the work of Michael 
Chuke, and not inferior to Gibbon's.
Ilcombe, now 
a farm-house, is described by Norden as the resi- 
dence of a younger branch of the Grenvilles." 
There was formerly a chapel at Brightley, in 
Kilkhampton, dedicated to St. Catherine.
In addi- 
tion to the memorials of the Grenville family, in the 
church, are monuments of the Waddons, of the Or- 
chards, and of the Westlakes.
The last of the 
Westlakes died, about forty years ago, in very de- 
plorable circumstances, having been reduced to the 
situation of a parish pauper.
It is remarkable, that, 
after he was an inhabitant of the poor-house, he was 
twice pricked for sheriff of the county.
Elmswor- 
thy, formerly a seat of the Westlakes, is now a 
farm-house.
Lalant.] — The parish of St. Uny Lalant, is seat- 
ed on the Hayle, in the east division of the hundred 
of Pen with, three miles south-east from St. Ives.
It has a cattle fair on the 15th of August.
Norden 
observes that Lalant had been " somtyme a haven 
towne, but then of late decayed, by reason of the 
sande which had choaked the harbour and buried 
much of the lands and howses : many devises they 
use to prevent the obsorpation of the churche." A 
tradition still prevails, that there was a considerable 
town not far from the church, and that the trade of 
the River Hayle was on the Lalant side till the sands 
drove the inhabitants further to the south.
The 
chief population of the parish is now higher up the 
river.
No longer ago than the year 1730, the sand 
was nearly as high as the church- yard wall, and its 
boundaries were scarcely to be traced.
By the 
planting of rushes, however, the sands have been 
rendered stationary, and the wall is now apparent.
The glebe consists of fifty acres, but, excepting 
about eight, which are under cultivation, the whole 
is covered with sand.
St. Uny, the patron saint, 
brother of St. Herygh, is said to have been buried 
here.
This, which is the mother church of St. Ives 
and Tawednack, was granted or confirmed to the 
monastery of Tywardreth, in the reign of Richard I.
but, subsequently, it was attached to the college of 
Crediton, in Devonshire.
Landewednack.] — Landewednack is in the west 
division of the hundred of Kirrier, eleven miles and 
a quarter south-south-east from Helstone.
In this 
parish are, the Soap Rock, already described ; the 
Lizard Point ; and Kynanee Cove.
The Lizard Point constitutes the extremity of a 
bold projection into the British Channel, on which 
are two light-houses, raised as beacons to warn the 
mariner from steering too close to the shore.
2 Wrecks, 
CORNWALL.
453 
Wrecks, however, frequently occur, but chiefly of 1 
foreign vessels, which, unacquainted with the dan- 
gers of the coast, seldom keep at a sufficient distance 
to avoid its perils.
The wretched sufferers often 
perish in the sight of numerous spectators, not more 
than a stone's throw distant, as the cape is so steep, 
and fenced with rocks, that no assistance can be 
rendered.
Near the Point is a cluster of houses 
dignified with the appellation of the Lizard Town.
About a mile north-west of the Point is Kynance 
Cove, which may be regarded as one of the most 
extraordinary spots on the coast.
The descent to it 
is extremely steep, and overhung by large craggs.
The cove is formed by huge rocks of an immense 
height, partly projecting into the sea ; and in one 
place so singularly disposed, as to open a fine na- 
tural arch into a sort of grotto.
The rocks are 
composed entirely of serpentine, varying in colour 
internally, but on the outside of a very dark green, 
having veins of lighter green, white, and scarlet.
There is a greasiness in the touch of the surface, 
which, with its other properties, seems to charac- 
terize it as the link between talc and the coarser hard 
species of the magnesian class : the scales are rather 
flexible, and somewhat transparent.
" These rocks," 
observes Dr. Maton, " are extremely interesting to 
the mineralogist, from the opportunities they afford 
him of observing the gradations and transitions of 
various substances into each other ; for, besides those 
already mentioned, asbestus appears in small por- 
tions ; and veins of steatites may be traced in nu- 
merous directions.
Native copper, in a thread- 
like form, is found also in the fissures of the ser- 
pentine." 
The parish of Landewednack has been remarkable 
for the longevity of its inhabitants.
In the church 
is a curious old font, apparently of the date of Ed- 
ward I.
Landrake.] — This parish is in the south division 
of the hundred of East, four miles west-north-west 
from Saltash.
It has two cattle fairs, on the 19th of 
July and 24th of August.
The manor, which now 
belongs to Lord Mount Edgecumbe, is spoken of by 
Tonkin as the very best in the county.
At Wotton- 
Cross, in this parish, an extensive tirade in lime- 
burning is carried on.
Wotton was the seat of an 
ancient, family of that name ; but, of the old mansion 
there are now no remains.
Landulph.] — Landulph, or Landilpe, is in the 
south division of the hundred of East, three miles 
north from Saltash.
Clifton, in this parish, formerly 
a possession of the Arundells, was purchased of 
1 1 homas, brother of Constantine Paleologus, of whom 
Mahomet II.
Emperor of the Turks gave this character,— 
" that m the great country of Peloponnesus, he had found 
many slaves, but never a man btit him," alter defending the 
castle of Salmonica a whole year against the Turks, mad.' his 
escape from that fortress, when all hope of relief had been 
abandoned, and fled into Italy, where Pope Pius II.
allowed 
him a pension till his death.
It is probable that Theodore, the 
descendant of Prince Thomas, who lies buried at Landulph, 
VOL.
J. — no.
83.
Lady Grenville, about seven years ago, by the Rev.
Francis Vyvyan Jago, rector of the parish, who is 
its present proprietor.
The old mansion, which wits 
built by Thomas Arundell about the year 1500, is 
now occupied as a farm-house, though in a vtijy di- 
lapidated state.
On a small brass tablet, in the church, is the fol- 
lowing inscription : — 
" Here lyeth the body of Theodore Paleologus, of 
Pesaro, in Italy, descended from the imperial line of 
the last Christian Emperors of Greece, being the son 
of Camillo, the son of Prosper, the son of Theodore, 
the son of John, the son of Thomas, second brother 
of Constantine Paleologus, the eighth of that name, and 
last of the line that reigned in Constantinople, till sub- 
dued by the Turks, who married with Mary, the 
daughter of William Balls of Uadlye in Suffolk, 
Gent., and had issue five children, Theodoro, John, 
Ferdinando, Moria, and Dorothy.
He departed this 
life at Clyfton, the 21st of January 1636."* 
Land's End.] — The point named the Land's 
End, which is the most westerly promontory in 
England, was called by Ptolemy, Bolerium ; by the 
British bards, Penringhuaed, or the Promontory of 
Blood ; and by their historians, Penwith, or the 
Promontory to the Left.
Near this craggy cliff are 
three caverns, in which the agitated waters occa- 
sionally roar with tremendous fury ; and several 
masses of rocks are seen above the surface of the sea 
more than two miles west of the Land's End.
— 
These are called the Long Ships ; and, from the 
dangerous situation of this coast, a light-house was 
erected on the largest of these rocks in the year 
1797, by a Mr. Smith, who obtained a grant from 
the Trinity House for that purpose, and is rewarded 
by a certain rate on all ships that pass the Land's 
End. The Long Ships light-house received a seri- 
ous injury in the winter of 1814-15, but the damage 
was very promptly repaired.
Davy, the Cornish poet, has thus characterized 
this interesting spot : — 
"   _— - On the sea 
The sun-beams tremble ; and the purple light 
Illumes the dark Bolerium; seat of storms.
High are his graniie rocks; his frowning brow 
Hangs o'er the smiling ocean.
In his caves 
The Atlantic breezes murmur ; in his caves, 
Where sleep the haggard spirits of the storm.
Wild, dreary, are the schistine rocks around 
Encircled by the wave, where to the breeze 
The haggard cormorant shrieks ; and far beyond, 
Where the great ocean mingles with the sky, 
Are seen the cloud-like islands, grey in mists." 
The scenery of this part of the coast, as its vaxi- 
sought an asylum in England, in consequence of the hostility 
shewn towards the Greeks by Pope Paul V., and his successor 
Gregory XV.
We have not been able to learn what became 
of the sons of this descendant of the imperial line: his daughter 
Dorothy was married at Llandulph, to William Arundell, in 
16j6, and died in 1681 ; and his (laughter Mary, who died 
unmarried; was buried there in 1674, as appears by the parish 
register.
— Lysons.
O Y 
ous 
454 
CORNWALL.
ous objects respectively present themselves, on com- 
ing up the channel, is als,o happily described in the 
following' lines from a recently published poem, en- 
titled PMfcsures of the Naval Life :— 
•* As eastward now the rapid vessel flies, 
Bold from the wave we see the Lizard rise ; 
Whose dark grey points, Cornubia's western bound, 
OVrlook the flood, with chalky watch-towers crowned: 
These far retreating next we lose ; and clear 
Upon our bow, the Dodman's cliffs appear; 
Then frown the rocky Ram : beyond i» seen 
The lofty Bolt, the Eddystone between.
— 
Hither, when from th' Antilles furious sweeps 
The tempest dire, incensing all the deeps, 
Unable to resist th' etherial pow'r, 
Before his boisterous breath the waters roar : 
Wave whelmed on wave, in long succession hurled, 
The liquid squadrons of the western woild !
Here mounting, charged with long increasing force, 
Meet the vast pile obtruded in their course.
t ixed on her adamantine base, the rock, 
Abrupt, unmoved, receives th' enormous shock; 
Fierce, o'er her fiery cupola the main 
Breaks to the skies !
Her fires unqucrtched remain; 
And gild the horrors round !
— Compared with these, 
Mild are the furies of Tinacria's seas ; 
Her monsters tame, or, plunged in caverns dark, 
Their howlings scarce alarm the feeble bark." 
This promontory, as a contemporary writer has 
justly observed, when considered with all its ad- 
juncts, cannot fail of awakening the united sensa- 
tions of awe, terror, and admiration, even in the 
most placid bosom.
The huge and ragged rocks, 
forming a barrier to the tumultuous sea ; the im- 
mense expanse of waters ; the ceaseless roar of the 
waves : the constantly changeful effects of light and 
shade playing on the surface of the deep ; the glid- 
ing vessels sailing in all directions ; the various 
aquatic birds wildly screaming at the sight of man, 
or pursuing their instinctive propensities on the 
surface of the howling billows ; all combine on this 
spot to rivet the attention, and fill the mind with 
emotions of astonishment at the sublimity of the 
prospect.
Lanhydrock.] — The parish of Lanhydrock is in 
the hundred of Pyder, three miles and a quarter 
south by east from Bodmin.
The manor, which ex- 
tends into the borough of Bodmin, and into the pa- 
rish of Cardinham, belonged at an early period to 
the Glynns, and afterwards, by marriage, to the 
Lyttletons.
The heiress of Lyttlcton married T re- 
nance ; and, in 1620, it was sold to Sir Richard 
Robartes, whose son, Lord John Rohartes, was one 
of the parliament's generals in the reign of Charles 
I. Lanhydrock house was taken by Sir Richard 
Grenville, sometime before the surrender of Lord 
Essex's army, in the year 1044.
Lord Robartes's 
estates were confiscated by the king, and bestowed 
on Sir Richard Grenville.
On the decline of the 
* Letitia Isabella, another daughter of Lord Radnor's, was 
first married to Charles, Earl of Drogheda, and afterwards to 
Wycherly, the dramatic poet.
The Countess went into a 
bookseller's shop at Tunbridge, where Mr. Wycherly happen- 
king's fortunes, Lanhydrock house reverted to its 
former owner, who made great improvements in the 
estate.
The great avenue of the park was planted 
in the year 1648 ; but a remarkable gateway, which 
bad been begun before the civil war, was not com- 
pleted till several years after.
During the Pro- 
tectorate of Cromwell, Lord Robartes led a retired 
life at this seat ; and, having cordially concurred in 
the restoration, was received into the favour of 
Charles II.
; became successively Lord Privy Seal, 
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and President of the 
Council ; and in 1079 was created Viscount Bodmin, 
and Earl oi Radnor.
Granger has observed of this 
nobleman, that he had much learning, but it was 
mixed with the pedantry of the age ; and some vir- 
tues, but they were soured and debased by a morose 
and splenetic temper.
He was appointed Lord 
Lieutenant of Ireland, in a time of confusion, when 
the various claims to the estates in that kingdom 
were to be adjusted.
His parts were by no means 
equal to this government at so critical a juncture ; 
as he had a genius rather for starting than solving 
difficulties.
He treated the Irish nobility with 
haughtiness and contempt, and was himself treated 
with much less ceremony than he expected.
The 
King found it necessary to remove him from this 
employment ; and, soon after his return to England, 
appointed him President of the Council, and created 
him Earl of Radnor.
He was observed to puzzle 
business, and retard the dispatch of it, more than 
any man that had ever been in the great offices 
which he enjoyed.
His Lordship died in the year 
1685, and was buried at Lanhydrock.
Lady Essex 
Speccot, a daughter of the Earl of Radnor, who 
died* in the year 1689, has also a monument in 
Lanhydrock Church.
Amongst other memorials in 
tbe church, is a state tablet for George and Jane 
Carminow, on which are inscribed some verses both 
in English and Latin : the former begin with the 
following play on the family name : — 
" The care of mine I owe to Carminow." 
Thomas Hunt, Esq. of Mollington in Cheshire, 
obtained Landydrock and other possessions by mar- 
riage with the Radnors ; and his grand- daughter, 
the relict of the Honourable Charles Bagenal Agar, 
is the present owner.
Lanhydrock house is an old 
quadrangular building, furnished in the style of tlie 
early part of the 17th century.
The gallery, which 
is 116 feet in length, is ornamented with various 
scripture subjects on the ceiling and cornices.
— 
Amongst the family pictures which it contains, is a 
portrait of the first Earl of Radnor.
The manor of 
TrefFrey, anciently a possession of the family of that 
name, is now also the property of Mrs. Agar.
At a place called Ford Farm in this parish, for- 
ed to be, and asked for the " Plain Dealer," upon which a 
gentleman, pointing to him, said, " Madam, there is the Plain 
Dealer for you." This interview produced an acquaintance 
which ended in marriage.
7 merly 
CORNWALL.
455 
merly stood the remains of an ancient chapel.
The 
village of Trebbyan, on the road from Bodmin to 
Lostwithiel, and part of Reprin, which has a bridge 
over the Fowey, on the road from Bodmin to Liske- 
ard and Plymouth, are in this parish.
Lanivet.] — Lanivet is a small village in the hun- 
dred ol Pyder, two miles and a half north-west from 
Bodmin.
A short distance from the church are the 
remains of a religious house, called St. Bennets, 
which is said to have been a nunnery to some foreign 
monastery.
These remains are situated in a narrow 
valley, on the banks of a rivulet, and are consider- 
ably mutilated ; but a square tower, part of the 
chapel, and some stained glass in the windows, still 
serve to characterize the spot, and induce us to de- 
plore the loss of some ornamented cloisters, which 
were removed about thirty years ago.
The remains 
of this building are at this time inhabited by some 
of Mr. Grose's labourers, who is the proprietor of 
the estate.
There are certain lands in this parish, 
Padstow, and others, which anciently belonged to 
the monastery.
They now produce about 110/.
a 
year, and are vested in twelve feoffees, called the 
twelve men of the parish, for the use of the poor.
— 
An old alms-house, and a charity school under the 
same roof, are supported from these funds.
Credys, 
in Padstow, was a cell to St. Bennets, and is now 
amongst the lands which are vested in the twelve 
men of the parish of Lanivet.
In the church yard are two high stone crosses.
The church contains monuments of the Courteneys 
of Tremere.
On that of Richard Courteney and his 
wife are inscribed the following lines : — 
" They liv'd and dyed both in.
Tremere, 
God hath their souls, their bones lie here.
Richard with Thomson his lov'd wife 
Liv'd 61 years, then ended life." 
Formerly there was a chapel in this place dedi- 
cated to St. Budock.
At St. Cougar, also in this 
parish, were a chapel and well dedicated to that 
saint.
A hermit is said to have resided there.
Lanlivery.]— Lanlivery is in the east division of 
the hundred of Powder, a mile and a quarter west 
by south from Lostwithiel.
The manors of Restor- 
mell (containing the remains of Restormeil Castle, 
of which hereafter) Penkneth, Penlyne, Penknight, 
and Pentneth, all belonging to the Duchy of Corn- 
wall, are in this parish.
The manor of Bodardle, 
and part of that of Polchoath, are also in this parish, 
and belong to Mrs. Agar.
Steekstinton is the pro- 
perty of Lord Grenvilie.
The church contains some 
memorials of the Kendall family.
There was for- 
merly a chapel at Poldew, dedicated to St. Peter ; 
and another at Bodardle, dedicated to St. Nicholas.
Lanreth.] — This parish is in the hundred of 
West, five miles and three quarters west-north-west 
from West Looe.
Here are cattle fairs three weeks 
after Shrove Tuesday, on Whit-Tuesday, and on 
the 18th of November.
In the church is a hand- 
some monument to the memory of Charles Grylls, 
Esq. an ancestor of the Rev. R.
G. Grylls, of Hel- 
stone, who died in 1011.
Formerly there was a 
chapel at Trei'rawl, in this parish, of which there 
an?
yet some remains.
A school was founded here 
for poor children, by J.
Butler j Esq. about a century 
ago, 
Lantegloss.] Lantegloss-juxta-Camelford, iir 
which stands the borough of Camelford, already 
described, is in the hundred of Lesnewth.
There is another Lantegloss, in the hundred cf 
West, a mile and three quarters east from Fowey.
Polman, a village in this parish, is mentioned by 
Leland, as " a good fischar towne, where is a tower 
of force matching again the tower on Fowey side.
— 
There was ons, as is said, a chaine to go over the 
haven from tower to tower." This village furnished 
a ship and sixty seamen to the English fleet before 
Calais, in the reign, of Edward III.
It formerly 
had a market on Tuesdays, and a fair at the festival 
of the Holy Trinity.
Panbruan belonged to the 
Daubeny family at least as early as the year 1291, 
at which time the fair was granted.
It remained in 
the Daubeny's till the year 1420 ; was afterwards in 
the Hungeifords ; and it is now in the possession of 
the Rashleigh family.
Formerly there were chapels 
here dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and to St. Savi- 
our.
The ruins of the former are still visible on St.
Saviour's Hill.
Bodinneck, another village in this parish, is called 
by Leland " a poore fischar village, where was the 
passage or trajectus to Fowey." The manor of 
Bodinneck, formerly in the Mohuns, is now the pro- 
perty of Lord Grenvilie.
Here was a chapel dedi- 
cated to St. John the Baptist.
The barton of Hall is also the property of Lord 
Grenvilie.
The mansion sustained much injury in 
the civil wars of Charles.
It was taken by Sir 
Richard Grenvilie, and converted into a garrison 
for the King, its remains are now occupied as a 
farm house.
There are several other manors in this 
parish.
There were formerly chapels at Hall, and 
at Lanlawren.
According to William of Worcester, St. Willow, 
the hermit and martyr, was beheaded at Lantegloss, 
near the spot where Walter Hart, bishop of Nor- 
wich, who was the son of a miller of this parish, was 
born.
The church was given by Robert de Boyton, 
to the hospital of St. James at Bridgewater, in the 
reign of James I.
It contains a monument for Cap- 
tain Benjamin Young, of the Royal Navy, who died 
in the year 1649; and also some memorials of the 
Mohun family ; particularly of Thomas Mohun, who 
died in the year 1400 ; and of John Mohun, Esq.
and Anne his wife, who died within 24 hours of 
each other, of the sweating sickness, in the year 
1508.
Launcells.] Launcells is in the hundred of 
Stratton, one mile south-south-west from that town.
Here was formerly a cell of Austin Canons, belong- 
ing to the Abbey of Hartland, in Devonshire.
At 
the dissolution it was leased by the crown to Sir 
John 
456 
CORNWALL.
John diamond, and became the seat of that family.
Launcells church contains the monument of John 
diamond, the last of the family, who died, A.
I).
1624.
Sir John diamond the elder, as we learn 
from Catrevv, had been knighted at the sepulchre.
— 
Sir John diamond the younger lived to a great 
age ; served in the office of Justice of the Peace al- 
most (30 years ; knew above fifty several Judges of 
the Western Circuit ; and was uncle and great 
uncle to at least 300 persons.
The barton of Laun- 
c-ells is now the seat of Joseph Hawkey, Esq.
— 
There is an almshouse at Launcells for four poor 
people, said to have been founded by one of the 
diamonds, and endowed with the rent charge of 
two guineas a year.
There are several seats, ma- 
nors, and bartons, in this parish.
Grimscott, Can- 
Orchard, and Hesham, are the principal villages.
— 
At East Leigh, and at Morton, are sites of ancient 
chapels.
Launceston.] — Launceston, formerly called Dun- 
hevid, is an ancient borough and market town, in 
the north division of the hundred of East, eighty- 
four miles from the Land's End, and two hundred 
and thirteen and a half west-south-west from Lon- 
don.
It is a populous town, pleasantly situated on 
an eminence and steep declivity.
Its ancient name 
was Dunheved, the Swelling Hill : it was also called 
Lanstephadon, or Stephen-Church-Town ; but its 
present appellation is thought to be derived from 
Lan cester ton, or Church-castle town.
The ruins now remaining of the ancient castle 
surround and cover a considerable extent of ground, 
and prove it to have been a very strong and import- 
ant fortress.
The building of this castle has gene- 
rally been attributed to William, Earl of Moreton 
and Cornwall, the son and heir of Robert, Earl of 
Moreton, to whom 288 manors in this county were 
given by William the Conqueror.
But this opinion 
is not likely to be correct, the style of workmanship 
exhibited in several parts of the remains, being ap- 
parently of a much earlier date.
The walls of the 
keep, in particular, have every appearance of being 
considerably more ancient ; and, considering the 
events which have happened in this county, the con- 
jecture appears to be fully warranted, that its foun- 
dation is as remote as the time of the Britons, who 
would undoubtedly endeavour to defend their terri- 
tory both from Roman and Saxon usurpation, by 
fortifying the more advanced and important situa- 
tions.
The most, therefore, that can with certainty 
be attributed to the Earl of Moreton, is the repair- 
ing and extending- the fortifications.
Carew, in his 
Survey, which was published in the year 1602, 
mentions the finding, about sixty years before, " of 
certain leather coins in the castle walls, whose fair 
stamp and strong substance till then resisted the 
assaults of time." These singular coins, if they had 
either been preserved, or their impressions had been 
copied, might have thrown some light on the age of 
the building; as it is known that money of similar 
substance was employed by Edward the First in 
erecting Caernarvon Castle in Wales, " to spare 
better bullion." Some Roman coins have also been 
found in this neighbourhood ; so that it is highly 
probable that the Romans had possession of this 
fortress, which, from its situation near the ford of 
the river Tamar, was a post of great importance.
— 
The earliest historical documents that are known 
concerning the castle, mention the displacing of 
Othomarus de Knivet, its hereditary constable, for 
being in arms against the Conqueror.
It was then, 
as before mentioned, given to Robert, Earl of 
Moreton, whose son William kept his court here.
— 
From him it reverted to the Crown, but continued 
attached to the earldom of Cornwall till the eleventh 
of Edward the Third, when it was constituted, and 
still continues, part of the inheritance of the Duchy.
Messrs.
Lysons, who appear to have particularly 
examined the present state of this ancient building, 
furnish us with the following particulars : — 
" Launceston Castle, formerly the chief seat of 
the Earls of Cornwall, and supposed, with great 
probability, to occupy the site of a Roman station, 
Avas much dilapidated when it came into the posses- 
sion of the Black Prince, in the reign of Edward 
III., as appears by a survey taken at that time.
" Little now remains of the base court, except the 
gate-house, a small tower, and part of the outer 
walls, all much decayed.
The keep, which is one 
of the most remarkable buildings of the kind in this 
kingdom, consists of a round tower, 36 feet in dia- 
meter, and about 38 feet high, standing on a steep, 
conical, rocky mount, and surrounded by a wall 12 
feet thick and 20 feet high, the inner part of which 
is much decayed on the east side ; in the thickness 
of this wall at the entrance, on the south side of the 
keep, is a staircase, leading to the top of the rampart.
The form of the outer wall approaches to an oval ; 
its external dimensions are 78 feet by 70.
The 
space between this wall and the inner tower varies 
in width, from six feet to ten feet three inches.
Dr.
Borlase says, that there was a third wall not quite 
three feet thick, at the distance of six feet from the 
wall last described, supposed to have been a kind of 
breast- work, very little of which remained in his 
time ; and Norden represents such a wall in the 
figure of this castle, given in his survey of Cornwall; 
yet, from the present appearance of the mount, 
which is very steep, quite from the foundation of the 
second tower, it is difficult to imagine how a third 
wall could be so constructed, as to have included a 
much less space in width than six feet.
There was 
a very steep flight of steps leading up the south side 
of the mount, to the entrance into the tower on the 
top, between two walls, having originally a roof 
covered with lead.
Dr. Borlase, in whose time 
much of this gallery remained, says, that the passage 
was seven feet wide, and the walls were pierced 
Avith narrow windows.
The record oi 2d Edward III.
above alluded to, mentions two covered ways as 
connected with the tower of the keep.
"In the inner tower, the walls of which are ten 
feet 
CORNWALL.
4-y?
f.>ot thick, were two rooms, eighteen feet six inches 
in diameter, divided by a floor of timber ; the lower 
one being a dungeon without any light : IB the upper 
room was a fire-place on the north side: the space 
between the two towers was covered with a Hat root, 
level with the floor of the upper chamber of the inner 
tower a late learned writer has controverted Dr.
Borlase's assertion on this subject, and attempted 
to prove that there could not be such a root ; not 
aware of the clear indications of it which exist, lor 
the holes in which the beams of that roof were in- 
serted still remain all round the tower.
Some ot 
the door-ways in the keep have round arches, others 
are rudely pointed.
From the print in Norden s 
survey, there appears to have been a wall round the 
base "of the mount in his time (in the reign ot 
Jac. I.) , ...
,. .
" Of the date of this curious edifice, nothing is 
known ; it was certainly in existence at the time of 
the Norman conquest, and probably long before ; 
and as it exhibits no trace of Saxon ornament, there 
seems good reason for Dr. Borlase's opinion, that it 
was a British work, and the chief residence of the 
Cornu-British Princes.
One convincing prool ot 
its "Teat age, is the state of decay in which it ap- 
pears to have been, notwithstanding its massy struc- 
ture, at the earlv part of the 14th century.
What 
has been said by several writers of Launceston 
Castle having been built by William Moreton, Earl 
of Cornwall, must apply to the buildings of the base 
court, the gate-house of which still remaining in 
ruins, has a pointed arch : there was a covered way 
120 feet in length across the ditch, leading to the 
gate ; much of which appears to have been standing 
when the view in Buck's Antiquities, and Dr. Bor- 
lase's work were taken." 
In the reign of Richard I.
Walter Raynell was 
castellan of Launceston ; and Hubert de Burgh, 
who had large possessions in that county, was made 
sheriff, and governor of the castle, by King John — 
In the retgn of Edward II.
William dc Botereaux 
was governor.
During the civil wars of Charles, 
this fortress was garrisoned by the King ; and, from 
its situation and strength, it was a very important 
post It had been previously in the hands of the.
Parliament; but Sir Richard Buller, who com- 
manded it, fled upon the approach of Sir Ralph 
Hopton with the King's forces.
In 1043, it was 
attacked by Major-GeneralChudleigh, without suc- 
cess •, in 1844, it surrendered to the Earl of Essex, 
but fell into the King's hands again after the capitu- 
lation of the Earl's' troops ; in 1645, it was some- 
time occupied by the Prince of Wales, afterwards 
by King Charles II.
; and, in the winter of the same 
year, it was fortified by Sir Richard Grenville, who, 
being at.
variance with Lord Goring, another of the 
royalist Generals, caused proclamation to be made 
in'all the churches of Cornwall, that if any of Lord 
Goring's forces should come into the county, the 
bells should ring, and the people rise to expel them.
Soon afterwards, Sir Richard having refused to 
VOL.
I. NO.
33.
take the chief command of the infantry under Lord 
Hopton, as Generalissimo, was committed to the 
prison at Launceston, Colonel Basset being at that 
time the governor.
In March 1(540, Colonel Basset 
surrendered the garrison to Sir Thomas Fairfax.^ 
During the Interegnum, the castle and park, des- 
cribed as comprising a league in circuit, and capable 
of containing forty deer, was put up to sale, and 
purchased by Robert Bennet, Esq. Alter the 
restoration, Sir Hugh Pyper, for his services in the 
royal cause, obtained a grant of the castle, as lessee, 
and was made constable and keeper of the jail.— - 
It continued in the Pyper family, till the death ot 
Hu«*h Pyper, grandson of Sir Hugh, m the year 
1754.
Edward Coode, Esq. is now lessee ot the 
park, and the Duke of Northumberland ot the 
pi st I o 
The town of Launceston appears to have beea 
founded, or at least to have assumed a regular form, 
about the year 900.
Its foundation is ascribed to 
Eadulphus, brother to Alpsius, Duke of Devonshire 
and Cornwall.
No remains of its antiquity are 
however extant ; with the exception of a Saxoa 
arch, or door case, which now forms the entrance to 
the White Hart Inn. This relique of the times that 
are passed, which displays some neat ornamental 
carving, was removed from the priory.
We learn from Tanner, that " there was a college 
of secular canons before the conquest, in the church 
of St. Stephen, about half a mile from this town, 
which being given to the bishop and church ot 
Exeter by King Henry I.
it was suppressed, A.
D. 
1126 by William Warlewast, Bishop ot Exeter, 
who,' in lieu of it, founded in the west, under the 
castle hill, a priory of canons, of the order of St.
Austin, which was also dedicated to St. Stephen, to 
which he gave the best part of the college lands.— 
The yearly revenues of this monastery were rated, 
26th Henry VIII.
at 354/.
0s.
lid, q.
Dugdale— 392/.
I Is. 2d q.
Speed.
Here were an hospital for lepers, 
and a priory." 
As this town was a principal residence ot the Earls- 
of Cornwall for many years after its foundation, its 
consequence continually increased, and many liber- 
ties and privileges were bestowed on its inhabitants.
Soon after the Conquest, the market, which, from 
the time of Edward the Confessor, had been held at 
Lanstuphadon, or the town of St. Stephen's Church.
about a mile distant, was transferred to Launceston 
and in the reign of King John, the townsmen paid 
five marks for the privilege of removing the market- 
day from Sunday to Thursday, but it has since been 
changed to Saturday ; and, for some time, there ha« 
also be^n a market on Thursdays : the Thursday s 
market, which is the principal, is well supplied with 
corn and provisions, of all sorts : that ot Saturday- 
is only for butchers' meat.
In the reign of Edward 
III.
the town was made a free borough by Richard, 
Earl of Poitiers and Cornwall, and brother to the 
i Kin"-.
He also granted the inhabitants some addi- 
1 tional immunities, which were confirmed by subse- 
5 z <T U,H 
4oS 
CORNWALL.
quent charters : and in the reign of Richard II.
the 
assizes, on petition of the burgesses, were ordered 
to he held at Launeeston, and, " no where else." 
This regulation was observed, till the first year of 
George I.
when an act was passed, which empower- 
ed the Lord Chancellor to appoint any other place 
in the county to hold them at, which he thought 
proper.
For the last fifty years, they have been 
holden alternately at Launeeston and Bodmin.
Here are cattle and other fairs on the first Thurs- 
day in March, the third Tuesday in April, Whit- 
Monday, Old Midsummer Day, 5th of July, St.
Leonard's fair, 17th of November, St. Catherine's 
fair, and 6th of December.
In the charter of Philip and Mary, (granted in 
1555,) the several prior charters of Edward Prince 
of Wales, Richard Earl of Cornwall, Richard the 
Second, Henries the Fourth, Fifth, and Eighth, and 
Edward the Sixth, are mentioned and confirmed.
— 
This charter vests the government in a Mayor, Re- 
corder, and eight Aldermen, who, with the free 
Burgesses, have the right of electing the Parlia- 
mentary representatives.
The whole number of 
voters is about twenty-three.
This borough made 
its first return in the twenty-third of Edward the 
First ; and had a Mayor as early as the time of Ed- 
ward the Fourth.
In the 32d year of Henry VIII.
's reign, an act of 
parliament was passed to encourage the rebuilding 
of certain decayed towns, of which Launeeston was 
one.
In the same year an act was passed for 
abolishing the privilege of sanctuary except in 
churches and church-yards.
At that time Laun- 
eeston was one of eight towns which were made 
sanctuaries for life, for all criminals excepting such 
as had been guilty of murder, rape, highway rob- 
bery, burglary, sacrilege, or house burning.
This 
act continued in force till the reign of James I.
when 
the privilege of sanctuary was wholly abolished.
— 
There is no record, however, of its having been ever 
claimed in Launeeston.
In the year 1801 the population of this town was 
1483 ; in 1811 it had encreased to 1758, exclusively 
of the population of the parishes of St. Thomas and 
St. Stephen.
A considerable number of persons are 
employed in an extensive manufactury of serges 
which is carried on in this town.
There is a grammar school here, which was 
founded by Queen Elizabeth, and endowed with 16/.
a year, payable out of the Duchy of Cornwall.
In 
the year 1685 it received an additional endowment 
of 10/.
a year from George Baron, Esq." whose re- 
presentatives have the privilege of appointing ten 
boys to be gratuitously educated.
An income of 
about 25/.
a year, arising from certain fields which 
formerly belonged to St. Leonard's hospital, is now 
vested in the corporation for charitable purposes.
The town of Launeeston was formerly command- 
ed by a wall ; of which only the north and south 
gates now remain.
The town jail is over the latter.
The streets are uarrow ; but many of the houses are 
well built.
Launeeston manor and honour had anciently a 
very extensive jurisdiction.
In a manuscript ex- 
tent of the Duchy of Cornwall (dated 17th Jac. I.) 
in the possession of Sir John St. Aubyn, Bart, is an 
account of the numerous manors and lands in Corn- 
wall and Devonshire, held under Launeeston castle, 
chiefly by the service of performing garrison dutj in 
it in time of Avar.
Blount, in his " Ancient Tenures," 
has printed from the Pleas of the Crown some of 
these services.
One estate was held by the service 
of personal attendance in the castle of Launeeston, 
for forty days in time of war with an iron scull-cap, 
and a Danish hatchet, or pole axe.
It appears by a 
survey of the Duchy of Cornwall, 11th Edward III.
(in the Treasurer's Remembrancer's Office) that the 
great landholders, who held several fees of the 
honour of Launeeston, were bound in time of war 
to defend as many kernels of the castle, each with 
one man, as they held fees.
The honour and manor 
belonged, from time immemorial, to the Earls of 
Cornwall, who had their chief seat at the castle; 
they now form, as has been already stated, part of 
the possessions of the Duchy.
Launeeston church, which stands near the centre 
of the town, and is dedicated to St. Mary Magda- 
len, is considered to be the most remarkable struc- 
ture in the county, in the style of the later Gothic.
— 
It is a handsome fabric, built with square blocks of 
granite, every one of which is enriched with carved 
ornaments, chiefly pomegranates, executed in a very 
singular manner.
At the west end is a lofty tower; 
and a figure of the Magdalen, in a recumbent pos- 
ture, is placed in a niche at the east end of the build- 
ing.
This church was originally only a chantry 
chapel ; but, in the reign of Henry the Fourth, was 
re-edified, considerably enlarged, and embellished 
with elegant sculpture.
On the south side is a large 
porch, with a room over it : on the front are figures 
of St. George, and St. Martin, carved in bas-relief;, 
and round the base of the building, commencing 
from the small door on the south side, is a range of 
shields, each of which contains a letter ; the whole 
forming a tedious Latin inscription, beginning 
" Ave Maria gracie plena," &c.
Amongst the mo- 
numents in the church, is one to the memory of Sir 
Hugh Pyper, Knight, described, in his epitaph, as 
" Lieutenant-Governor of the royal citadel and 
island of Plymouth, Captain of the castle of Laun- 
eeston, alderman and representative in parliament 
for the borough of Duuhevid, &c.
&c.
He served 
in the civil wars as an ensign, lieutenant, and cap- 
tain, under Sir Richard and Sir Beville Grenville, 
at the siege of Plymouth, the battles of Stratton 
and Lansdowne, where he was wounded in the 
neck and thigh, and shot through the shoulder .
his 
estates were sequestered by the rump parliament for 
his loyalty to his master and injured sovereign King 
Charles I.
He died July 14., 1687, aetat.
76." In 
the 
CORNWALL.
459 
the church are memorials also for the Lawrence and 
Vvvyan families.
The church-yard was consecrated 
iu the time of Bishop Voisey, who was made a bishop, 
A D 15-20.
Anciently there appear to have been 
many chapels in this town and neighbourhood - 
That of St. Mary Magdalen, as already remarked, 
is now the parish church of Launceston 1 he re- 
gisters of the see of Exeter record an indulgence 
for contributing to the support of a company ot 
minstrels of St. Mary Magdalen, in Launces ton - 
St. Catherine's chapel, which stood a little without 
the town, in a west north-west direction was dese- 
crated prior to the time of Leland and has long 
since been pulled down.
The chapel ot Laneast has 
become a parish church.
St. Thomas's chapel stood 
within the castle.
There Were several others ot 
which there are now no remains.
. ,.
• • 
Lavvhitton.]— Lawhitton is in the north division 
of the hundred of East, two miles and a quarter 
south-east by east from Launccston.
It formerly 
had a fair at Michaelmas and a market on Wednes- 
days By the custom of the manor ol Lawhitton, 
leases are granted with widowhood ; but there is a 
manor in the parish, called Sheers-Barton, accord- 
in«- to the custom of which, lands are granted for 
thr'ee lives without widowhood.
The Bennet family 
had a seat in this parish, called Hexworthy, with a 
considerable freehold estate.
Edmund Prideaux, » 
relation of the Bennets by marriage, is the present 
proprietor.
The church contains a memorial for 
Richard Bennet, a barrister, who died, A.
D. Ibiy ; 
and a monHinent of artificial stone in remembrance 
of Richard Coffin, the last heir male of the Bennet 
family, who died, A.
D. 1786: his mother whose 
maiden name he had taken, was heiress ol the Cot- 
fins of Portlege.
. .
Lev an.]— The parish of St. Levan is in the west 
division of the hundred of Penwith, eight miles 
south-west from Penzance.
In this parish is the 
promontory, called Castle-Treryn, which consists of 
three distinct piles of rocks.
On the west side of 
the middle pile, near the top, lies a logan, or moving 
stone, of a prodigious size, so evenly poised that a 
child may rock it, and vet the extremities of its base 
are at such a distance from each other, and so well 
secured, that it seems impossible for any human 
force, assisted by all the mechanical powers, to re- 
move it from its present situation.
St. Levan's well, with an oratory, is also in this 
parish ; as are the sites of two old chapels, called 
Chapel-Carnow, and Port-Chapel.
Lezant.]— Lezant is in the north division ot the 
hundred of East, four miles south by east from 
launceston.
It is separated from Devonshire by 
the Tamar, the banks of which, skirted by the Cater- 
Mather rocks, clothed with coppice, are here highly 
picturesque.
The south side of the parish is bound- 
ed by the little river Innis, which falls into the 
Tamar, at a place called Inny's foot.
The manor of 
Lawhitton extends over great part of this parish.— 
Charles I.
upon his entrance into this county, on 
6 
the 1st of August, 1614, slept in &™^*Z% 
sion of Trecarrell, in this parish then the ^eatot 
Mr. Manaton.
The remains ot this seat, oi WtMCft 
the old hall and chapel constitute part, are now the 
property of Mr. Ceake.
The chapel was dedicated 
to St. Mary Magdalen.
St. Bridget, and St. Law- 
rence also had chapels in this parish.
L.NKiNuoRNE-1-The parish ol Lnikmhorne is in 
the north division of the hundred of East, four miles 
and a half north-west from Callington.
On Carna- 
don, or Carraton, Downs, in this parish is some ot 
the highest ground in Cornwall.
Charles I.
drew 
up his forces on them, the day after he had entered 
the county, in 1644, and there also he was joined by 
his royal relative Prince Maurice.
'I he manor oi 
Carnadon Prior, which belonged to the priory at 
Launceston, was one of the manors annexed to the 
duchy of Cornwall by Henry VIII.
in lieu ofthe 
honour of Wallingford.
The manor ol the Ireffrys 
was formerly of great importance, extending over 
several estates in- this and the adjoining parishes.— 
There is a manuscript history of Linkmhorne, men- 
tioned by Messrs.
Lysons, as having been written in 
the year' 17-28 ; in which the writer speaks ot 1 re- 
frys," as having been the seat of the great Lord 
Trefrey ; and says, that there were the remains ol 
the hall, with great windows ; that there was a chapel 
about a quarter of a mile from the barton, near a well, 
called Lower-Halwell, in the Chapel-park, the nuns, 
of which were then to be seen ; that Sir Henry lre- 
carrell, the possessor of Trefrize, was a great build- 
er ; but that in consequence of the loss of his only 
son, he left his great buildings at Trecarrel m 
Lezant unfinished, and dedicated his fortune to 
pious uses, building the church of St. Mary Magda- 
len at Launceston, and the tower and north side ot 
the church at Linkinbome.
According to tradition, 
it is said, that Sir Henry TrccarreU's child, men - 
tioned above, was drowned in its infancy in a basin 
of water, while the nursemaid went to fetch a towel ; 
that Sir Henry Trecarrel.
by his skill in astrology, 
before the birth of the child foretold its untimely 
death, if it should be born at that hour ; and that he 
heartily begged of the woman who was with his wife, 
to delay the birth ; but it could not be.
Thefe are 
now no remains of the Trefry mansion ; but Sir, 
Garland is the proprietor of its site..
A free school was founded in this parish about a 
century ago, and endowed with the interest of 705/.
lis.
Id. by a Mr. Robarts : two thirds of the pro- 
duce constitute the salary of the master, and the re- 
maining third that of the mistress.
Linkinhorne church, which is dedicated to St, 
Meliora, was presented to the priory of Launceston.
by Reginald, the son of Henry I.
A chapel dedi- 
cated to St. John the Baptist, formerly stood at 
Carnadon-Prior.
Liskeard.] — Liskeard, or Leskeard, a borough 
and market town in the hundred of West, 21 miles 
south-south-west from Launceston, and 222f west- 
south-west from London, is situated partly in a 
bottom, 
4W 
CORNWALL.
bottom and partly on rocky lulls ; ami, through this 
anTcf V ^p omi Y« ^-eets hav'e the ajpearl 
ance ot bemg disposed with studied irregularity 
The basement ,torios of the houses are as 2i 
Jvcrstfed us the streets, the foundations of some 
hud.hugs bang- on a level nith the chimneys of 
Liskeard market, according to Leland, was "the 
s savs^?
Wa • T yUg u Bodm y»" Browne Wil- 
li !
V » at , ,n 1US hme ' the raark ^ was superior to 
thatoi Bodmm ft is holden on Saturdays an I 
abundant y supplied with all sorts of provisions a 
gmt portion ot which is purchased for the supply 
<> the market at Plymouth Dock.
This town' 1* as 
vKn X.
T^ f f rS ' °" the ^^Ption of the 
Virgin, Holy I hursday, and October the 2d.
Here 
SJhV b 5 0,1 ; Shl ' ove ™™<hy, Pahn Monday, 
and the Monday after S\, Nicholas y 
At the Conquest, Eiskeard was amongst the pos- 
sesions of Robert, Earl of Moreton and*Cor«waH ; 
and it became a free borough by a charter jrranted 
by Richard, brother to Henry II f.
dated 5une 5 
1240.
The rents, tolls,- and perquisites, of the bo- 
rougn were granted to the townsmen or corporation 
by Edward Earl of Cornwall, son and successor of 
Kicnard, at the reserved annual rent, of 18/ The 
townsmen were again incorporated in the year 1580 
by Queen Elizabeth, and the government of the 
town vested in a mayor, recorder, eight capital bur- 
gesses, anil fifteen assistants, who, with the other I 
freemen ot the borough, were empowered to elect 
the members of Parliament.
I 
Under some circumstances, which do not appear 
to have been recorded, the corporation, in the reign 
ot Charles the Second, was served with a Quo War- 
ranto ; upon which Elizabeth's charter was surren- 
dered by the mayor, recorder, capital and inferior 
burgesses, under their town seal, and with the con- 
sent and approbation of the inhabitants.
From 
thence, and till after the accession of James the 
Second, it appears that this town remained unchar- 
tered; yet the surrender of Elizabeth's charter was 
The following curious paragraph appeared in some of the 
London newspapers of December 15, 1814:-" On Tuesday 
morning last, one of (he principal members of the Liskeard 
corporation went mto the town-nail, and perceiving that the 
door of a closet, m which the town-chest, containing the char- 
ter, &c.
was deposited, was open, he was induced to examine 
into the cause or this unusual circumstance ; when to his great 
mortification and surprise, he found that the said chest had been 
broken open, and rifled of its contents.
An iron crow the 
instrument by which this extraordinary robbery was effected 
was found on the floor.
This alarming intelligence was imme- 
diately circulated and spread an universal panic amongst The 
i esulent members of the corporate body.
Arthur Puckey, Eso 
immediately took horse, and rode full speed to Port Eliott in 
order to communicate the disastrous intelligence to the no'b'e 
patron, mayor and recorder of the borough, all of which 
si yations are filled by Lord Eliot.
His Lordship and h 
fr ends are totally a.
a loss to conceive the object of the parties 
who have taken away the charter, &c.
; but/ unless they can 
conic Jen c«" •* "^ ""* ^ ***** *** S ^ ioUS 
not enrolled during the residue of Kin* Charles's 
reign, nor till after James's accession, who graced 
another charter, and named in it the Earl of Oath 
EhzaSf's , BU ; S °° n f Part y arose iQ ^onr o f 
Elizabeth s charter, and proceeded even to elect a 
mayor under it.
On the same day another mayor 
Avas chosen under James's charter; and both pX 
prosecuted their several claims at the general ESS 
held at Launceston, when the verdict was given in 
favour of James's charter, and Elizabeth's declared 
null and void, it having been so fully surrendered; 
•' id that surrender actually enrolled.
At this time 
however, it ,s generally understood, that the may"?
uX Eh-rrir an( \ inferior bur ^ « ssa 
under Elizabeth's charter, (ludicrously termed the 
EZrTtrt ^ r6 T Certai " -tso'f judieatir" 
undei it but the greater acts of the corporation 
•uch as their holding two sessions of the pWa£ 
nuady, are said to be performed under that granted 
by King James, Elizabeth's charter investing them 
wa ' Z^f P ° Wer -*; Vhe L ° rd Chief J-ticeCoke 
was once a representative of this borou-h.
The 
.umber of voters is variously st:ited, at f^om 45 to 
i„h i •♦ ?
m the Po P ulatl °n Returns, the number of 
inhabitants appears to be nearly 2000 
file town-hall was erected about the year 1707   
but the upper part has been rebuilt.
It is a hand!
some structure, supported on granite columns, in the 
space between which the market is held 
Here is an alms-house, for poor widows ; and a 
grammar-schoo .vhich is supported by the corpora- 
tion.
Dean Pr.deaux,t and Mr. Walter Movie, re- 
ceived the first part of their education at this school.
Here ,s also a charity-school, in which ten poor girls 
are now educated.
^ s 
.iulT T^?
Si : lG ° f the ascenl to the town, 
stand* the church, which is dedicated to St. Martin 
it is kept in good repair, and particularly clean!
It consists of three spacious aisles, which!
a few 
years ago, were new paved : the pews are also new 
The tower attached to the west end is built moSy 
of granite, and the date is 1627 cut in relief over the 
in L var P lo3 ^ f^ b0 ?
*X Pa ' ,stow > in this «*«7.
arts* r„ ?«% , At Cl jnst Church, Oxford, he took his degrees 
volume fo i' T, e P ,Shed the Mar » 1o raOxoniensia, in°o„e 
volume folio.
This is an account of the Arundell marble 
Suta 3 tir m i?
t r them ' "rt^Br - th < SffSJS 
reputation.
It also procured him the patronage of the Chan- 
cel or Fmch who gave him a living in Oxford?
n ,681 he 
vas promoted to a prebend of Norwich, of which cathedral he 
bHder C b e v an an n e ,7 ° 2 - , '" 17 '°' * f CUt for thVSStaS 
11 e care J ™ M ° Pem °J ° f London ' but bein S Ie * * 
tTht in.
f I?
T S sl,r ?.
eon ' he w as so ill treated as ever after 
ed himsel ?
?J atte "* n 8 P« blic ^ty.
After this he devot- 
l d Nw t 7 " g " a,Ki 15r ° tlucetl his Connection of the Old 
octavo t?-?
5 "T'.'' tW ° VoUlmes foIi0 ' a,Kl four voll ""es 
octavo.
J his work has been translated into several languages " 
and has passed through many editions.
Dean Prideaux died 
at Norwich ,„ 1704.
Besides the above works, he was 2 
author of Directions to Churchwardens, 12mo.
; The L e of 
Mahomet, s vo .; some pamphlets., and a single sermon.
western 
CORNWALL.
4(31 
western door.
The south side of the church is or- 
namented with pinnacles and battlements, and over 
the porch are three Gothic niches, The battlements 
are all ef granite ; but the greater partoi the church 
is composed of slate-stone, which also constitutes 
the foundation of the town.
In the church are two 
inscriptions, recording - benefactions bequeathed for 
charitable purposes ; and a memorial for Joseph 
Wadham, who died A.
D. 1707 ; " being the last of 
that family, whose ancestors were the founders of 
Wadham College, in Oxford." 
The Independents, Quakers, and Methodists, have 
meeting-houses in Liskeard.
That of the Indepen- 
dents was originally built for the Presbyi roans, by 
the Johnson family.
Defoe, in his Tour through 
Great Britain, written in the early partoi the last 
century, mentions it as a large new-built meeting- 
house ; and observes, that there were only three 
more in the county.
The Rev. Henry Moore, some 
time minister of this meeting, left a volume of 
poems, which were published by Dr. Aikin, after 
his death.
On the 19th of January, 1643, a battle was fought 
near the town, between Sir Ralph Hopton and the 
Parliamentary forces, when the latter were defeated, 
and Sir Ralph marched into the town.
On the 2d 
of August, in the following year, the King, on his 
entrance into Cornwall, halted here and remained till 
the 7th of that month.
Liskeard manor, as already observed, was part of 
the ancient possessions of the Earls of Cornwall ; 
and it was amongst those which were annexed to the 
duchy, by act of Parliament, in the reign of Ed- 
ward HI.
It is supposed, that the manor-house, or 
castle, was built by Richard, King of the Romans, 
who made it occasionally his residence.
On an emi- 
nence north of the town is the site of this castle ; 
but every trace of its shape and architecture is nearly 
obliterated.
Contiguous is a large field, still called 
Castle Park ; but no fragments appear of the Chapel 
of our Lady, mentioned by Browne Willis to have 
stood therein, and to have been " famous for the 
frequent pilgrimage made to it." In a survey, of the 
date of 1337, the park, which contains 200 deer, 
was spoken of as a new park.
It was disparked by 
Henry VIII.
Lord Eliot is the present lessee of the 
estate.
There arc some other manors and seats in 
this parish, none of which seems to be entitled to 
particular notice.
In addition to the Chapel of our Lady, i:i Lis- 
keard Park, there was a chapel at Laiueliia, in this 
parish ; and, at Lean-hill, about three miles south- 
cast of the town, is the site of a decayed chapel.
There is, also, a house yet standing near the bottom 
of the town, which, from its windows, gateway, and 
sculptured ornaments, appears to have been con- 
nected with some religious establishment.
This 
was probably a nunnery of poor Clares, which 
was founded and endowed by Richard, Earl of 
Cornwall and King of the Romans.
Near this 
building is a spring sailed the Pipe Well ; which 
vol.
i. — no.
33.
supplies the town with water, and which, by some 
of the credulous inhabitants, is mistakenly sup* 
posed to possess extraordinary qualities.
It divides 
into four streams ; one of which, by a still further 
stretch of credulity, is imagined to have more po- 
tent virtues than others.
" Here was anciently a 
house for Lepers," says Tanner, " for there is an 
indulgence granted by Edna.
Stafford, Bishop of 
Exeter, to all those who should contribute to the 
hospital of St. Mary Magdalen at Liskeard, about 
A.D. 1400." 
Liskeard is one of the four towns which were 
appointed for the coinage of tin ; but no coinage 
has taken place there, for many years.
Before the 
late war, the clothing business flourished here ; but 
the chief business now carried on is tanning, and 
that to no great extent.
The parish is in live 
divisions : the north side ; west side ; south side ; 
constitution lands ; and borough.
There are four 
villages in the parish — Treweedland, Trevelmond, 
Dabwalls, and Lamellin — all at a considerable dis- 
tance from the town.
Looe (East and West).] — These towns are si- 
tuated at the mouth of the river which bears the 
same name, and are connected by an irregular 
bridge, of fifteen arches ; 141 yards in length, and 
only six feet two inches wide.
" We were much 
struck," observes Dr. Maton, " by a view of the 
river as we descended into East Looe, which com- 
municates with West Looe by a bridge of fifteen 
arches, built after a very ancient fashion.
There 
was something more bold, and of a grander effect, 
with respect to the main objects, than in any 
scene that had yet occurred.
'I he river washes 
the basis of the mountainous swells- of ground on 
both sides, and West Looe is flanked by a pro- 
digious eminence, that at a distance appears inac- 
cessible, and, in fact, is one of the steepest spots 
in the county." On the bridge was formerly a 
chapel, or oratory, dedicated to St. Anne.
These towns are both in the hundred of West, 
twenty-six miles south by west from Lauuceston, 
and rather more than 233 miles west-south-w r est 
from London.
East Looe, which is in the parish of St. Mar- 
tin, is a labyrinth of short, narrow, dirty alleys, 
above which rises the low r embattled tower of a 
little chapel : it is mostly built on a small flat 
piece of ground, having the river on the west, and 
the sea on the south.
The port is protected by a 
small battery and breast-work.
West Looe is in the parish of Talland.
It lies 
in a bay on the opposite bank of the river, which, 
rising immediately from the water, presents a long 
street of mean irregular houses, creeping up the 
side of a hill, with a small town-hall, anciently a 
chapel, and a few other buildings on the brink of 
the river.
The appearance of both towns, encir- 
cled with very steep, high hills, the sides of which 
are covered with gardens, hanging one over an- 
other, and trees through which are seen other 
6 a straggling: 
402 
CORNWALL.
straggling cottage is remarkably picturesque.
The inhabitants are chiefly supported by the pil- 
chard fishery, and the trade connected with the 
port, which appears to have been formerly the only 
sea-port in Cornwall, of any importance, except 
Fowey ; having furnished towards the equipment of 
the English fleet, in the reign of Edward III.
20 
ships and 315 seamen.
The imports are lime- 
stone, salt, &c.
There is a fort and ten guns on 
the beach.
East Looe, in the reign of Edward the First, as 
appears by the claim of Henry de Bodrugan, then 
Lord of tiie Manor, possessed a market and fair, a 
ducking-stool and a pillory.
In the reign of Ed- 
ward the Third, in conjunction with Fowcy, it de- 
puted a merchant to a council of trade held at West- 
minster, but was not admitted to a full share of the 
legislature till the 13th of Elizabeth.
This Princess 
granted the borough its first charter of incorpora- 
tion in the year 1587.
It vests the government in 
nine burgesses, one of whom is annually chosen 
mayor ; aud they have jointly the power of electing 
a recorder.
The number of voters is about fifty.
The corporation hold the manor of the duchy of 
Lancaster, by a fee- farm rent of twenty shillings 
per annum.
The houses, about 128 in number, are 
chiefly built with slate.
Within the memory of man, 
there were four animal fairs in this town ; but they 
have all been discontinued.
There is now a small 
weekly market on Saturdays for butchers' meat.
One of Mr. Buller's charity-schools, the endow- 
ment of which expired with the Long Annuities, was 
in this town.
Here is a mathematical school, which 
was founded in the year 1716, by the trustees of the 
will of John Speccot, Esq. That gentleman, in 1793, 
bequeathed the sum of 1000/.
to charitable uses ; and 
his trustees, Bishop Trelawney, and his brother, the 
ranera}, considered such an establishment to be most 
consot:a:it to the wishes of the deceased and of most 
public benefit.
East Looe has a chapel of ease, supposed to have 
been originally dedicated to St. Mary.
The date 
of its first erection is unknown : it was repaired 
m the year 1700, and lias since been rebuilt.
East Looe, or Port Looe manor, which contains 
only about 100 acres, belongs to the duchy.
Within the borough of East Looe, is a little vil- 
lage called Shutta, or Shouta, which is said to have 
been anciently a place of great note.
The parish church of St. Martin contains, amongst 
other monuments, a tablet to the memory of the 
Rev. Jonathan Toup, the learned annotator on 
^ * The Trelawny family are supposed to he descended from 
Flamelin, who held Treloen, and several other manors under 
the Earl of Moreton, when the Survey of the Domesday was 
taken.
They derived their name from the manor of Trelawny, 
in Alternon, the ancient residence of the family, which is sup- 
posed to have pa«se1 into other hands, when The male line of 
lite elder branch became extinct, on the death of Richard Tre- 
lawny, in the reign of Henry VI.
This Richard .vas the son of 
Snidas and Theocritus, who was thirty-four years 
rector of the parish.
Here is also a memorial for 
Philip Majolue, an opulent merchant of East Looe : 
and one for Walter Langdon the last of the loyal, an- 
cient, and honourable family of that name, and llhoda, 
his wife.
That lady was the daughter of William 
Martin,, Esq. of Lindridge, in Devonshire, and 
grand-daughter of William Martin, Esq. the author 
of a work intituled, " The History and Lives of the 
Kings of England, from William the Conqueror to 
the end of the reign of Henry VIII." 
West Looe, originally named Portpigham, was 
first incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, and the go 
verntnent vested in a mayor and twelve capital bur- 
gesses, who at the yearly rent of twenty-four pounds, 
hold the manor of the duchy of Cornwall, to which 
it was annexed by Henry the Eighth, on the attain- 
der of Henry Courtney, Marquis of Exeter, to whom 
it then belonged.
The voters are about 53, the num- 
ber of houses between 90 and 100.
The Earl of 
Ranelagh, Sidney Godolphin, Sir Charles Hedges, 
and Admiral Sir Charles Wager, a celebrated 
officer, who is said to have been a native of the 
town, have been amongst the representatives of the 
borough.
There is an annual cattle fair in this town, for 
three days, commencing on the 6th of May. For- 
merly there was a market on Wednesdays, but it has 
been discontinued.
At West Looe there is a meeting-house of the 
Calvinistic Methodists.
— An ancient chapel dedi- 
cated to St. Nicholas, has been converted into a 
guild-hall.
Polvellan, the seat of Colonel Lemon, stands at a 
small distance from West Looe, on the north ; and 
when the tide is in, commands a beautiful view over 
the confluence of the Looe and Trelawny rivers, both 
of which are seen from the house, retiring in per- 
spective for several miles amidst steep broken banks, 
principally covered with wood.
Trelawny House, the seat of the Trelawny family, 
is a venerable mansion, apparently of the age of 
Elizabeth, situated in the neighbourhood of some 
very beautiful scenes, about three miles from the 
River Looe.
The valley, in which is Trelawny Mill, 
is one of the most delightful in the west of England.
Iu the drawing-room is a fine portrait, by Sir God- 
frey Kneller, of Sir John Trelawny, Bishop of Win- 
chester, who was born here.* 
Opposite the mouth of the Looe River is Looe 
Island, a small tract belonging to Sir Harry Tre- 
lawny, the chief inhabitants of which are various 
kinds 
Sir John Trelawny who signalized himself in the wars with 
Fiance under Henry V.
and had a grant of 20/.
|»er annum, 
besides an honourable augmentation to his arms.
Jonathan 
Trelawny, the Bishop of Winchester, mentioned above, was a 
descendant from this gentleman.
IJe was a younger son of Sir 
Jonathan Trelawny ; but, his elder brother dying in lfi80, he 
inherited the title 6>f Baronet, lie was a man of polite manners, 
competent learning, and uncommon knowledge of the world.
lie 
CORNWALL.
<f63 
kinds of sen-fowl, which rosorf.
to the rocks in the 
spring, for the purpose of incubntion.
" At this pe- 
riod/' says Carew, " you shall see your head shadow- 
ed with a cloud of old ones, through their diversified 
cries, witnessing their dislike of your disturbance of 
their young." On this island was formerly a chapel 
dedicated to St. George, of which nothing remains 
but the foundations.
Lostwithiel.] — Lostwithiel, or Lestwithiel, is an 
ancient market-town, in the east division of the 
hundred of Powder, twenty-five miles south-west 
from Launceston, and 234| west-south-west from 
London.
Camden, Borlase, and others, consider 
the Uzclla of Ptolemy to have been on the site, or 
in the vicinity of this townj but neither Roman re- 
mains, nor the discovery of antiquities, have been 
adduced by either to support their arguments.
Camden supposes the ancient town to have stood 
on the high hill now occupied by the strong fortress 
of Restormel, and the voice of tradition is corres- 
pondent ; yet no remnant of walls, nor foundations 
of buildings, can be found to confirm the conjecture; 
and whether Lostwithiel were a Roman station, or 
were originally seated at a distance from the place 
now bearing its name, is equally uncertain.
In Le- 
land's Itinerary, we find, " Lostwithiel having a 
market, is the shire-town of Cornwall ; for there the 
shire is kept by the shrive once in the month : also 
at this town ys quynag (coinage) of tynne twyce a 
year, and by the shire-hawl appere auncyent buyld- 
ings." The present town is situated in a narrow 
valley, on the western banks of the river Fa wey, which 
receives the tide, and is navigable at some distance 
below the town.
The houses are principally dis- 
posed in two streets, running parallel from the river 
to the bottom of a steep hill, which rises to a great 
height on the west.
All the buildings are of stone, 
and mostly covered with slate, which is obtained in 
great abundance, and large slabs, in the neighbour- 
hood.
The number of houses is about 140 ; the 
streets are narrow, and roughly paved.
TheFowey 
is navigable up to this town, for barges.
Whitaker supposes Lostwithiel to have been the 
residence of Withiel, the first Earl of Cornwall ; 
and that he had his palace at Penkneth, now part of 
the borough, but in the parish of Lanlivery, on the 
opposite side of the brook ; but doubts have been 
expressed by Messrs.
Lysons, whether there ever 
were a palace of the Earls of Cornwall at this place.
They consider the building, regarded as the palace, 
to have been the same that was erected by Edmund, 
Earl of Cornwall, for his Court of Exchequer, with 
a hall, &c.
In this hall, which is yet standing, 
were held the stannary parliaments : here is also the 
stannary court, with a prison adjoining, the only one 
in the county belonging to the stannaries, used oc- 
casionally during the sessions.
The entire fabric, 
whatever were its origin, was once very extensive ; 
but great part of its site is occupied by timber-yards.
The walls are extremely thick, and, like those of 
many ancient castles, seem to have been constructed 
with small stones, fixed by a liquid cement, now be- 
come harder than the stone itself.
The principal 
building is supported on a wide stone arch ; and the 
whole is strengthened by large butresscs.
The re- 
mains are at a little distance southward from the 
church.
The town of Lostwithiel has been incorporated 
many centuries : numerous privileges wore conferred 
on it by Richard, King of the Romans, who, by 
charter, made Lostwithiel, and Penkneth, one free 
burgh, and granted its burgesses the liberty of a 
guild mercatory.
A new charter was granted by 
James 1.
in 1623 ; which was renewed by George II.
in 1732.
Amongst its other privileges, the corpora- 
tion possesses the anchorage dues of Fawey Har- 
bour, and various duties on coals, salt, corn, malt, 
and other commodities brought into that port.
The 
corporation consists of a mayor, six capital bur- 
gesses, and seventeen assistants, or common coun- 
cilmen, who are chosen annually by the mayor and 
burgesses.
The right of electing the two represen- 
tatives of the borough is vested in these twenty-four 
persons.
Addison, the poet, was some time one of 
the members for Lostwithiel.
Friday is the market day in this town : a short, 
time ago, a corn-market, free of toll, was established 
here.
On the 29th of June, 24th of August, and 
13th of November, are fairs for the sale of horses, 
bullocks, sheep, &c.
The town hall is situated in the Fore Street.
It 
was built by the Lord Mount Edgecumbe, in the 
year 1740 : the county elections take place in this 
building ; which at other times is occupied by the 
writing-school ; besides the writing-school there is a 
grammar-school in this town, which was established 
by the corporation about forty-five years ago.
Here 
is also a school for the education of poor children, 
under the direction of Mr. St.
John Elliot's trustees.
In the summer of the year 1044, the head-quarters 
of the Earl of Essex's army were in this town ; in 
the vicinity of which, a battle had previously been 
fought between the royalists under Sir Richard 
Grenville and Lord Robartes's brigade : the latter 
were victorious.
The church, which is small, is dedicated to St.
Bartholomew, and consists of one large and two 
small aisles, with a tower at the west end, terminat- 
ing in a singular open spire.
Here is a very curi- 
ous octangular font, composed of one large block of 
free-stone, supported on five clustered columns, and 
covered with rude and ill-executed sculpture, in 
the different compartments are represented a hunts- 
man accoutred in a short jacket, with a sword by his 
lie was a tru<' son and friend of the church ; and exerted him- 
self with courage and alacrity, with magnanimity and address 
in defence of her just rights and privileges..
lie was friendly 
and open, generous and charitable ; vas a good companion, .an J 
a good man.
side, 
464 
CORNWALL.
side, a horn in his month, and a hawk on his finger ; 
two lions ; an ape's head, with a snake twirled 
round it ; a dog seizing a rabbit; a bishop's head ; 
and tiro crucifixion, with a figure standing on each 
side.
This was probably executed by some provin- 
eial mason ; and though the badness oi drafting, 
proportion, and drapery, render it contemptible as 
si work of art, it deserves notice from its singularity.
In the south aisle is an ancient monument of the 
time of Elizabeth, with eight small figures, in basso 
relievo, kneeling, erected in memory oi Temperance', 
wife of William Kendall, Esq. who died in the year 
3579.
Here is also a memorial for Tristram Cur- 
tys, Esq. who died A.
D. 1423, having been mem- 
ber for this borough in the 9th year of Henry V.
This ancient family, which has been long extinct, 
occasionally represented Lostwithiel from the reign 
of Edward I.
to that of Henry V.
In the Civil War, Lostwithiel Church was pro- 
faned by the soldiers of the Parliament, and injured 
by an explosion of gunpowder.
* 
This town was the birth-place of Samuel Austin, 
who was born about the year 1606.
He was the 
author of a work called Urania, or the Heavenly 
Muse.
Several pieces both in prose and verse, were 
also published by his son of the same name.
Ludgvan.] — This parish is in the west division of 
the hundred of Penwith, three miles and three quar- 
ters north-east from Penzance.
Ludgvan holds a 
distinguished place in the literary annals of Corn- 
wall, for having been the residence of the learned 
Dr. Borlase, who was rector of the parish 52 years.
Dr. Oliver, who wrote a treatise on the virtues of the 
Bath Waters, and also on tar water, was a 
native of this place.* Dr. William Borlase, of whom 
we have already given some biographical particulars 
in a note, besides being rector of this parish, was 40 
years vicar of his native parish of St. Just.
The 
doctor and his wife were both buried in Ludgvan 
Church, where their memory is recorded on two flat 
monumental stones.
In Ludgvan Church there is 
also a tomb to the memory of the Reverend John 
South, M.
A. who died rector of this parish, on the 
6th of October, A.
D. 1636.
It bears the following 
quaint epitaph : — 
Let Nature's coarser children have 
A tongueless tomb, or but a grave ; 
South, the meridian point of wit, 
Can never set, but shine in it.
Hipe Artist, and Divine inspir'd, 
Thou liv'dst; thou died'st, belov'd, admir'd.
Hyperbolize I do not:— true, 
All's here: dear, dearest friend, adieu.
In this parish there formerly Avere chapels at Trc- 
well, Ludgvan-Lces, and Collurian.
Of the last, 
* Dr. William Oliver was a descendant of the Olivers of 
T rencere : he resided many years at Bath : he was a professed 
unb.
never till a short time before his death, when he became 
a sincere penitent: he died in the year 1764.
f Church Town is an appellation given to all places in Corn- 
which was dedicated to St. Thomas, and acquired 
the corrupted name pf Tubmas chapel, (here are yet 
some sli gnt remains.
The manor of Ludgvan-Lecs, which was granted 
by Richard, Earl of Cornwall, to the Ferrers fa- 
mily, is now the property of the co-heirs of the 
Duke of Bolton.
John Rodgers, Esq. of Pen- 
rose, is the present owner of the barton of Tre- 
menherc.
Tornewidden, in Ludgvan-Lecs, Crawiiss, Ca- 
vassen-Downes, and Cowegyhere, are the principal 
villages in this parish.
Some years ago, in an old hedge, in Ludgvan.
was found a vase of fine moor stone, turned and po- 
lished.
It was undoubtedly a Roman sacrificial 
patera, such as was used to receive the blood of the 
victim, and conveyed it to the altar.
The propor- 
tions of this vessel were very well preserved ; and 
the elegance and the harmony of measurement to be 
observed in it leave no doubt of its being Roman.
— 
In the tenement of Bodivar, in the same parish, is a 
singular monument called the Crellas.
This con- 
sists of two low walls, the outermost of which forms 
two circle?
; one of these is only eighteen feet in 
diameter ; hut the other is fifty-live by fifty ; and 
encloses within it another circular wall, forty-one 
feet from north to south, and thirty-six from east to 
west.
Between each wall of the great enclosure is 
a ditch four feet wide ; the larger circle has two en- 
trances ; but the lesser has but one, they have all 
lofty stones on each side.
In crossing the road to 
Marazion, about half a mile below Ludgvan, or the 
church-town, f as it is called, by way of eminence — 
is a vallum, which was thrown up by the Parlia- 
mentary forces, when they besieged St. Michael's 
Mount, in the Civil Wars of Charles.
Makyn.] — St. Mabyn's parish is in the hundred 
of Trigg, three miles east from Wadebridge.
The 
church has a lofty tower, with solid pinnacles.
It 
contains memorials for Grace, Lady Carnsew, of 
Bokelly, who died A.
D. 1656 ; for the family of the 
Hamleys, &c.
The Reverend Charles Peters, rector 
of this parish, was the author of a dissertation on the 
Book of Job, in which Bishop Warburton's opinions 
were controverted.
AVilliam Parker, Esq. left a le- 
gacy of 100/.
for the erection of an alms-house in 
St. Mabyn's.
Having been thrown into Chancery, 
it accumulated to 200/.
when it was recovered, anil 
the intention of the donor complied with.
At a place 
called Hclgrave in this parish, formerly stood a cha- 
pel dedicated to St. Mary, the site of which is not at 
present known.
Madekn.] — The village of St. Madern, Madron, 
or Maddron, is in the west division of the hundred 
of Penwith, two miles and three quarters from the 
town of Penzance, which is one of the chapclries of 
wall where the parish church is situated.
Many of the market- 
town^ in Cornwall are unprovided with churches, and are theie- 
fore not dignified with the title of Church-Town ; but if there 
are only half a dozen cottages attached to the church, those in- 
variably receive this distinction.
8 this 
CORNWALL.
4G-: 
this parish.
In the parish of St. Madern is a cele- 
brated well, which has been already described.
There was anciently a castle in this parish, said 
to have been built by the noble family of Tyes.
Castle Horneck, now in possession of the Borlase 
family, but the residence of Mr. Boase, is thought to 
occupy the site of this castle.
Some, however, con- 
sider this baronial castle to have been on the north 
of the town of Penzance, where there are consider- 
able earth-works, with a treble intrenchment, 
called Lescaddock : yet these seem to be the remains 
of something more ancient.
A school was founded in this parish, upwards of 
a century ago, by Mr. George Daniel, for the in- 
struction of the poor children of St. Madern, Mor- 
vah, and Penzance, in reading, writing, and cypher- 
ing.
It was endowed with a house and garden for 
the master, and certain lands, &c.
which now let at 
1-22/.
a year.
There are several manors, bartons, and estates, 
which do not require particular notice.
At Lanyon, the principal village in this parish, 
are three upright stones, on a triangular spot of 
ground: one of them is thin, flat, and fixed in the 
ground on its edge; it has a hole in the middle 
above two fiet in diameter, whence it is called Men- 
antol, that is the holed stone.
On each side is a 
rude pillar about four feet high ; one of them has a 
long stone lying on its outside, like a cushion or pil- 
low to kneel upon.
This monument was certainly 
designed for some religious use ; but the ignorant 
people in its neighbourhood, even at this day, creep 
through the holed stone, as a cure for pains in the 
back and limbs ; they also draw their young children 
through it, as a cure for the rickets ; and it likewise 
serves as an oracle to inform them in affairs of lovo 
and fortune.
In this village there in a cromlech 
standing north and south.
The area described by the 
supporters of the covering stone, or quoit, is seven 
feet.
It has no kistvaen, chest, or area marked out 
by side stones.
The quoit is upwards of seven feet 
in girth, and nineteen feet long ; its thickness in the 
middle on the eastern edge is sixteen inches ; at 
each end not so much ; but at the western edge it is 
two feet thick.
The two chief supporters do not 
stand at right angles with the front line, as in most 
other cromlechs, but obliquely ; having probably been 
forced from their original position by the weight of 
the quoit, which is so high that a man on horseback 
can stand under it.
This cromlech is placed on a 
low bank of earth, not two feet higher than the ad- 
jacent soil.
It is about twenty feet wide, and seventy 
long, running north and south ; at the south end are 
many rough stones, some pitched on end in no order, 
yet evidently put there by design ; at the distance 
of about eighty yards west-north-west there is also 
a high stone.
On digging under this quoit, a pit in 
the shape of a grave six feet deep was discovered, 
and it is not improbable, that the whole bank was a 
burying-place for more than one person.
In a croft, 
about half a mile to the north-west of Lanyon, is a 
vol.
I. — no.
34.
stone, called by the natives men scryfa ; that is, the 
inscribed stone.
It is nine feet ten inches long, one 
foot eight inches broad, and one foot seven inches 
thick.
It stood upright, and the inscription begins 
at the top, as most ancient Cornish inscriptions do ; 
and is to be read downwards.
The inscription is 
Rialobran Cunoval Fil. signifying, that Rialobran, 
the son of Cunoval, was interred there.
As to its 
age, nothing certain can be said ; but it is probably 
one of the oldest monuments in Cornwall.
It is 
disputed by antiquaries, whether this Rialobran, was 
a Christian or a Heathen ; there being neither a 
cross on it nor the letters, 31.
D. for Diis Manibus.
Another monument of this sort is to be met with in 
the tenement of Trewren, in Madern, where the dis 
tance from stone to stone was ten feet, and the line 
they formed pointed east- north-east.
Upon search 
ing the ground, between the two stones, in the year 
1752, a pit six feet six inches long was presently 
found ; this pit was two feet nine inches wide, and 
four feet six inches deep ; near the bottom it was 
full of black greasy earth, but no bones were to be 
found.
The grave came close to the westernmost 
and largest stone, where probably lay the head of the 
person interred.
Maker.] — The parish of Maker, which is five 
miles and a half south-east from Saltash, is partly in 
the south division of the hundred of East, in this 
county, and partly in the hundred of Roborough iu 
the county of Devon.
The royalties of that part 
which is in Devonshire, are in the right of the Earl of 
Mount Edgecumbe.
The proprietors of lands, as 
well as leases, in the Cornish part of the parish, pay 
an acknowledgement, and perform suit at the Court- 
Baron, and Court-Leet, holden annually, about 
Michaelmas, by Lord Clinton, for the borough of 
Millbrook, and manor of Inswork ; at which a jury 
is appointed and sworn, who present a Portreeve, 
Clerk of the Market, (which shews that there was 
formerly a market at Millbrook, and, we are told, 
sent members to Parliament) Constables, &c.
with 
sufficient powers for regulating the police of the 
place, but, in general, the power is not much exer- 
cised.
Leland calls Millbrook a rich fisher town ; 
and Hals informs us, that it lost the privilege of 
sending members to Parliament in the reign of 
Henry VII.
because it could not afford to pay them 
their wages of four shillings a day during their at- 
tendance.
There is a cattle fair at Millbrook on 
Michaelmas Day, and another has been recently es- 
tablished on May Day. Some years ago, a woman 
was delivered of two female children, at Millbrook, 
at ten weeks distance from each other, and, what is 
still more remarkable, they both lived.
There is a 
weekly market at Inswork on Tuesdays.
The 
Champernovvnes, Lords of the Manor of Inswork, 
had a mansion there, which was standing in the 
time of Carew.
There was also a chapel at Ins- 
work.
Mount Edgecumbe, thf beautiful seat of the Earl 
of Mount Edgecumbe, is in the Devonshire part of 
6 b this 
ICG 
CORNWALL.
this parish, and will be described in the history of 
that county.
Marazion.] — Marazion, or Market Jew, is a 
market-town in the parish of St. Hillary, on the 
coast of Mount's Bay, about three miles and a half 
from Penzance.
This town derived its principal 
support, if not its origin, from the resort of pilgrims, 
and other religious devotees, to the neighbouring- 
sacred edifice on St. Michael's Mount ; but that at- 
traction being counteracted by the changes of opi- 
nion which commenced at the Reformation, and the 
new town of Penzance drawing within its vortex 
many merchants and tradesmen, with their immedi- 
ate connections and dependants, the consequence of 
Marazion declined.
By some authors, the name of 
Market Jew is derived from die Jovis, in Cornish 
Jeu, from its Thursday's market ; but others derive 
1 it from the Jews, who are reported to have traded 
here several centuries ago, and to have holden an 
annual market for the sale of various commodities, 
and for purchasing tin, and other merchandize in 
return.
Tradition states the market to have been 
held on a spot of ground about five hundred yards 
west of the Chapel Rock ; but if it were ever calcu- 
lated for the site of a market, it must have been ma- 
terially altered by the sea, as it is now only a mass 
of rugged rocks, jutting out into the bay ; occasion- 
ally environed with water, and always submerged at 
spring and neap tides.
They still bear the name of 
August Rocks, from the month in which the Jews 
are said to have resorted to this coast, and held their 
yearly market.
Richard, King of the Romans, granted two fairs 
to this town for the benefit of the priory at St. Mi- 
chael's Mount ; but his charter was superceded by 
another, granted in the 37th year of the reign of i 
Queen Elizabeth, which invested the government of I 
the town in a mayor, eight aldermen, and twelve I 
capital burgesses, with power to hold one weekly 
market, and two annual fairs.
It is certain that j 
Robert, Earl of Moreton, in the year 1085, granted j 
to the monks of St. Michael a market on Thursday, 
and five fairs ; but it is not expressed where they ; 
should be held.
The charter of Richard, King of 
the Romans, granted to the prior and convent of 
St. Michaels, that the three fairs and three markets, 
which they held under the charter of the Kings of j 
England, at Marghas-bigan, on land not their own, ' 
they should in future hold at Marchailyon on their : 
own land near their grange.
The fairs are said to ; 
have been holden two days each, at Mid-Lent, at 
Michaelmas, and at the festival of the Apparition of 
St. Michael in the Mount.* The market days are | 
not stated ; Jnit the circumstance of there being j 
three indicates that the town was of great conse- 
quence.
However, from time immemorial, there has 
been only one weekly market ; and that, which is 
* We are informed by some of the British monkish histo- 
rians tint St. Michael, the archangel appeared about the year 
495, on St. Michael's Mount in Cornwall ', the Italians say, 
abundantly supplied with butchers' meat, fish, poul- 
try, and vegetables, is kept on Saturday.
Shoes 
also in great quantities are taken there for sale.
Two of the more ancient fairs — those at Mid-Lent 
and Michaelmas, for cattle, cloaths, &c.
— are still 
kept in the adjoining village of Trevennor, near the 
old priory barn and farm, or, as it used to be called, 
the grange.
There are two other inconsiderable 
fairs, holden under Queen Elizabeth's charter, on 
the festivals of St. Barnabas and St. Andrew.
Leland speaks of this place, which he calls 
Marhesiu, as along town, burnt by the French, in the 
j third or fourth year of Henry VHI.
At that time, 
! according to Tonkin and Hals, a party of French 
I soldiers landed from a fleet, which was then cruiz- 
j ing in the channel, and took possession of the place.
I On the approach of the sheriff of the county, with 
the posse commitatus, they retreated to their ships, 
but not before they had set fire to the town.
Either 
I this account is incorrect, or the town suffered a 
1 subsequent and similar calamity, from a different 
cause, in the reign of Edward VI.
when it wa$ burnt 
! by the rebels.
This is intimated in the preamble to 
Queen Elizabeth's charter, wherein it is stated, that 
Marghasiewe (Marazion) was a trading borough 
town of great antiquity, and that it suffered consi- 
derable dilapidation in the time of Edward the Sixth, 
when a number of rebellious people entered, and 
took possession of the town, and laid many of the 
buildings in ruins.
From this place being denomi- 
nated an ancient borough in the above charter, and 
from some original letters which passed between 
the then sheriff of Cornwall and the mayor of Mara- 
zion on the subject of returning members to Parlia- 
ment during Cromwell's Protectorate, it seems pro- 
bable that this town was anciently represented in the 
House of Commons.
Two members were actually 
elected, and returned, in the year 1648 ; but they do 
not appear to have taken their seals.
The trade of Marazion consists principally in im- 
porting timber, coals, and iron, for the use of the 
inhabitants and neighbouring mines.
The parish church (that of St. Hillary) is about 
two miles distant ; but the town has a chapel of 
ease, in which service is regularly performed by a 
lecturer, whose salary is defrayed by private sub- 
scription.
Leland speaks of a chapel here, and of 
another in the saud, near the mount.
The present 
chapel in the town is supposed to be the same which 
Leland described : the other probably was the same 
which Dr. Borlase mentioned by the name of St.
Katharine's Chapel, on the Chapel Rock : of this 
there are no remains.
There are two meeting- 
houses in the town.
Marazion is built on the side and at the bottom of 
a hill, which rises towards the north, and shelters 
the town from the cold winds.
Peculiarity of situa- 
that it was on Mount Garganus in Italy ; and the French wri- 
ters that it was on Mount St. Michael in Normandy.
tion, 
CORNWALL.
467 
tion, and the mildness of the western climate, ren- 
der its vicinity singularly inviting, and often bene- 
ficial to valetudinarians ; and were it not for the 
frequent rains which occur in this part of the coun- 
ty, the invalid would have little occasion to travel to 
It;dy, or the south of France, for a mild and salu- 
brious atmosphere.
Between Marazion and St. Michael's Mount is the 
place called Chapel Rock, whereon the pilgrims, 
who came to visit the priory of St. Michael, are said 
to have performed certain devotionary and super- 
stitious ceremonies, in a kind of initiatory chapel, 
previous to their admission to the more sacred 
mount.
From Marazion, at low water, there is a 
causeway not more than a furlong in length, to St.
Michael's Mount, which we shall notice hereafter.
At high tides, the mount, is completely insulated by 
the sea ; but at low -water it may be approached, 
over the causeway, which is formed ol sand and 
rocks, connecting the mount with the shore.
Marham.] — Marham, or Church Marham, is in 
the hundred of Stratford, two miles south-south- 
west from Stratton.
The manor of Whalesborough, 
now the property of Sir F.
Y. Buller, Baronet, gave 
name to an ancient family who resided thereon for 
several generations.
The old mansion is now a 
farm-house.
Langford Hill, formerly the seat of the 
ancient family of Langford, has recently passed into 
the possession of Thomas Hale, Esq. of Roborough, 
in Devonshire.
Hilton manor is the property of the 
Reverend John lvingdon, who is also patron of the 
Rectory.
Wood-Knawle, an ancient seat of the 
Rolles, of whom there are some memorials in the 
church, is the property and residence of the Rev.
Henry Badcock ; Bere belongs to Sir A.
Moles- 
worth ; and the farm of Wood-Knowle, which is 
distinct from the manor of that name, is the pro- 
perty of Sir William Call.
Formerly there were 
chapels at Halesborough and Hilton.
Martin.] — There arc two parishes of this name : 
one, in the hundred of West, in which stands the 
little market-town of East Looe, already described : 
the other (that of St, Martin in Meneage) is in the 
west division of the hundred of Kirrier, five miles 
and three quarters east-south-east from Helstone.
It is remarkable that there is no manor in this pa- 
rish ; the lands principally lying within the manors 
of Traboc, in St. Kcverne, Trelawarren, or Mawgan.
Mudgian, whirl) formerly had manorial rights, was 
the seat of a family of that name, but now belongs 
to John Hext, Esq. of Restormel : the old mansion 
is now a farm-house.
Tremayne, the original seat 
of the Tremaynes, who took their name from the 
barton, was, for some time, the residence of Captain 
* Captain Samuel Wallis, of whom little is known beyond 
his professional services, died on the 21st of February, 1705.
From bis public character, he seems to have been a diligent 
unostentatious man, duly performing the duties imposed on 
him, and answering the purposes for which he was employ- 
ed ; his services were more useful than splendid, more solid 
Wallis,* the circumnavigator, the original discoverer 
of Otaheite.
It is now a farm-house, and belongs to 
Mr. George Richards, of Truro.
According to Hals, there used to'be a nunnery in 
this parish, called Hellnoweth, or the New Hall, en- 
dowed by the Bishop of Exeter and the Prior of St.
Michael's Mount, as a cell to the monastery of St.
Martin, in Truro.
The estate, which belongs to 
Francis Gregor, Esq. of Trewaithenick, is parcel 
of the manor of Trebock, which belonged to the 
priory of St. Michael's Mount ; but the deeds fur- 
nish no particulars of its having been the site of a 
religious establishment.
Mawes.] — The borough town of St. Mawes is in 
the parish of St. Just, in the west division of the 
hundred of Powder, 261 miles south-west by west 
from London.
Antiquaries do not appear to be agreed respecting 
the patron saint of this town : Leland supposes it to 
have been Mauduit, or Machutus, a Welchman ; and 
Maw has been variously considered as a corruption 
of Mary and Matthew.
In several ancient records, 
the town is called St. Mawes, alias St. Mary's ; per- 
haps, from having belonged to the priory of St. Mary 
at Plympton.
This town formerly had an annual fair on the Fri- 
day after the Festival of St. Luke ; but it has been 
discontinued.
Its market, kept on Fridays, is at- 
tended only by a few butchers.
The borough of St. Mawes has sent members to 
Parliament ever since the year 1562 : the right of 
election is in the Portreeve, (who is the chief magis- 
trate, and dignified with the title of mayor) and the 
resident burgesses, altogether thirty -one in num- 
ber.
The late Marquis of Buckingham was at the ex*- 
pence of erecting a chapel in this town, which was 
finished in the summer of 1812.
There formerly 
was a well in St. Mawes, dedicated to the patron 
saint ; and, adjoining it, a chapel, at which the in- 
habitants of St. Just had a license from the see of 
Exeter to attend.
The manor and its rights were, not long since, the 
subject of litigation ; and we learn, from Messrs.
Lysons, that " it was determined in a suit at law 
with Admiral Spry, at the summer assizes in the 
year 1808, that the manor of St. Mawes extended over 
the whole creek and harbour, and that the lord had a 
right to certain duties for anchorage, bushelage, &c.
and was entitled to wrecks, &c.
It was proved at 
the same time, that the fishery claimed by Admiral 
Spry, in right of his manor of Bohurra, was an open 
fishery ; but that the Admiral had acquired by usage 
the right of fishery at St. Anthony Mill-leet.'*' The 
than shining ; but if merit is to be estimated by the perma- 
nency of benefits conferred, the discovery of Otaheite, and 
the consequent acquisition of its valuable bread-fruit tree, 
will render the memory of Captain Wallis deservedly respect- 
ed by his.
country.
manor 
468 
CORNWALL.
manor of St. Mawes is the properly of the Marquis of 
Buckingham, in right of his mother the late Mar- 
chioness, who was the heiress of Earl Nugent.
St. Mawes Castle, which we have briefly men- 
tioned in our account of Falmouth, as a sister for- 
tification with Pendennis castle, was built by Henry 
VIII.
during the war with France, A.
D. 1542.
— 
Leland thus mentions these two castles : — 
Pedinas tenet asperi cacumina 
Celsum montis, & intonat frequenter.
Mauditi quoque sulisidet roluiulum 
Castrtim, & impetu fulminat fureuli, 
Portus ostia qua patent Falensis.
(Translation.) 
" High on a craggy rock I'endennis Stands, 
And with its thunder all the port commands ; 
While round St. Maudit's answers it below, 
Where Falmouth's sands the spacious harbour show." 
Mr. TrefFry, of Fowey, had the superintendance of 
the building of St. Mawes Castle ; and, at his re- 
quest, Leland wrote some inscriptions, which are not 
now to be seen.
General Nugent is the present 
governor.
The Marquis of Buckingham, and James 
1 Ju Her, Esq. M.
P. possess the castle estate in inoities 
between them.
Mawgan.] — There are two parishes of this name: 
Mawgan in Meneage, in the west division of the 
hundred of Kirier, three miles and a half east-south- 
east from Helstone ; and Mawgan, in the hundred 
of Pyder, four miles north-west by west from St.
Columb Major.
In the church of St. Mawgan in Meneage, are 
some memorials of the Vyvyan family ; and in Car- 
minovv's isle is the tomb of a crusader and his lady.
The latter, according to Hals, was originally placed 
in a chapel attached to the old mansion at Carmi- 
now ; and, when the chapel fell to ruin, it was re- 
moved into Mawgan church out of respect to that 
ancient family.
The manor of Treverry, in this 
parish, belongs to Samuel Pelew, Esq. whose bro- 
ther, the Admiral, now Lord Exinouth, when created 
a Baronet, was described as of Treverry.
There 
are several manors in this parish ; and, formerly, 
there were chapels dedicated to St. Margaret and 
St. Magdalen.
In the church of Mawgan, in the hundred of 
Pyder, are several brass plates, memorials of the 
Arundels, about the reign of Elizabeth.
Here 
also is the screen of a rood loft, which extends along 
the nave and south aisle ; it is very richly orna- 
mented with Carved scrolls of vine branches, gothic 
tracery, and animals of various kinds.
It bears the 
Arundel arms, as the gift of one of that family.
In 
the church-yard is a gothic cross, " on the east side 
of which is a niche, containing the crucifixion sculp- 
tured in pretty high relief.
In the niche on the west 
side is carved a subject, taken, no doubt, from some 
legend, consisting of the figures of a king and queen.
She is in the dress of the fourteenth century, kneel- 
ing, on one aide, before a desk ; on the other side is 
a large bolt, with a serpent coiled round it, which 
seems to be biting the face of the king, whilst an 
angel holds its tail." This appears to be one of the 
most curious old crosses in the county.
Formerly there were chapels at Denzell, and Car- 
nan ton, in this parish.
William of Worcester speaks of an ancient ruin- 
ated castle, called Castle- Fust, on the manor of 
Carnanton.
This is supposed to have belonged to the 
Earls of Warwick ; Thomas, Earl of Warwick, hav- 
ing forfeited the manor, by attainder, A.
D. 1397.
— 
Within this manor is a field called Castle Field, in 
which are the remains of a circular intrenchment.
James Willyams, Esq. is the lessee of Carnanton 
under the crown.
Mellion.] — St. Mellion, anciently St. Mellyn, is 
in the middle division of the hundred of East, three 
miles and three quarters south-south-east from Cal- 
lingtou.
The Coryton family has been seated in 
this parish for many generations.
William Coryton^ 
Esq. who died in the year 1651, was member for 
Launceston in the reign of Charles I.
He was impri- 
soned, with Hampden, Elliot, and others, for refus- 
ing to subscribe to forced loans ; he afterwards fur- 
ther distinguished himself by his activity in procur- 
ing the petition of rights, and was one of those 
members who were prosecuted in the Star-chamber 
for detaining the speaker, Finch, in his chair.
— 
Newton Park, which is now the seat of Weston 
Helyar, Esq. by inheritance from Dame Rachael 
Coryton, was the ancient seat of the Coryton family.
Carew calls it " Master Corington's house of New- 
ton, old to him by succession, yet new in respect of 
his own antiquity." At the east end of the north 
aisle of the church is a monument to the memory of 
William Coryton, Esq. whom we have already men- 
tioned as having died in the middle of the 17th cen- 
tury.
The effigies of the deceased is presented in a 
kneeling posture, beneath a canopy which is sup- 
ported by pillars of the Corinthian order.
The fol- 
lowing lines are inscribed upon the monument : — 
" This marble pile is placed on 
The thrice renowned Coryton : 
(But his own name a trophie shall 
Outlast this his memorial!.) 
Grave, wise and pious, Heaven him lent 
To be his age's president.
Both good and great ; and yet belov'd ; 
In judgment just, in truth approv'd.
Honour'd by the offices he bore 
In publique ; but by's meekness more.
Loyal I in warre, in peace he stood 
The pillar of the common's good.
Wordes may not set his prayses forth.
Nor prayses comprehend his worth ; 
His worth doth speake him thus, in briefe 
Cornwall's late glory, now its grief." 
John Coryton was created a Baronet, A.
D. 1661, 
but the title and male line of his family became ex- 
tinct in 1739; and Peter Goodall, Esq. took the 
name of Coryton in consequence of inheriting seve- 
ral estates under Sir William Coryton.
The manor 
of 
CORNWALL.
469 
of West-Newton-Ferrers, which became the pro- 
perty of the Corytons by marriage, takes its name 
from the family of Ferrers, its ancient possessors.
— 
John Tillie Coryton, Esq. the patron of the rectory, 
grandson of Mr. Goodall who took the name oi 
Coryton, is the present proprietor.
The manor of 
Crocadon, the ancient seat of the Trevisa family, 
also belongs to this gentleman.
This is said to be 
the birth place of John Trevisa, who translated the 
Bible, Ralph Higden's Polichronicon, and Bartlio- 
lomeus " De Proprietabus Rernm." 
Here was formerly a chapel dedicated to St.
Elidius.
Menabilly.] — Menabilly, the seat of William 
Rashleigh, Esq. M.
P. is in the parish of Tywar- 
dreth, about three miles west of Fowey, on an emi- 
nence at a small distance from the sea.
The mansion, 
which is of stone, commands an extensive prospect 
over the British Channel.
Philip Rashleigh, Esq.
its late possessor, formed here the most rich and 
magnificent collection of minerals of any in this 
county, or perhaps in the kingdom.
The most rare 
and curious specimens are here preserved, and their 
number and variety are thought to be unequalled in 
any cabinet existing.
The varieties of copper alone 
amount to nearly one thousaud.
Mr. Rashleigh was 
accustomed, in the most liberal manner, to display 
the treasures of his collection to every person of 
literature and science.
He also favoured the minera- 
logical world with a valuable publication, intituled 
" Specimens of British Minerals," containing a spe- 
cific description, with very beautiful engravings, of a 
considerable number of the most rare kinds found in 
Cornwall.
The drawings of the minerals, which 
are minutely correct, and executed with great fidelity 
and taste, were made by Messrs.
Underwood and 
Bone.
The Rashleigh cabinet exhibits other curiosities, 
equally interesting to the antiquary, as to the mi- 
neralogist.
Amongst its stores are several British 
instruments, which were found at Bennalack ; on 
opening the barrows on St. Austel Down ; and in 
the different stream works of this neighbourhood.
— 
Some models in glass are also preserved here of the 
remarkable hail-stones which fell in the neighbour- 
hood on the 20th of October, 1791, and of which an 
account was given by Mr. King, in his Essay on 
Stones fallen from the Clouds.
Among the most 
remarkable Cornish mineralogical specimens in this 
cabinet, " are green carbonate of lead and apatite, 
with quartz, from near Helston ; blende, in twenty- 
sided crystals, and green fluor in crystals of twenty- 
four sides, from St. Agnes ; crystallised antimony, 
with red blende, on quartz, from Huel Boys, near 
Port Isaac ; yellow copper ore, with opal, from 
Roskeir; and arseniate of copper, in cubes ©f a 
bright green colour, from Huel Carpenter." 
Philip Rashleigh, Esq. to whom the county is in- 
debted for this highly valuable collection, also built 
a most beautiful Grotto near the shore, in the little 
cove of Polredmouth, at the end of a narrow valley, 
vol.
i. — no.
34.
the western side of which is decorated with a fin:; 
hanging wood, and terminated by a creek, where 
the surge is in constant agitation, and continually 
dashing against the beetling cliffs.
The form of the 
grotto is octagonal.
The materials employed in its 
construction and decoration are, chieily crystals, 
pebbles, and shells.
Internally, two of the sides are 
appropriated to the door and the window, which 
front each other.
The remaining six are disposed 
in niches : four of them contain collections of ores 
found in the county, of tin, lead, iron, and copper, 
each kind being classed separately.
The two others 
are filled by organic fossils, polished agates, jaspers, 
&c.
The intermediate spaces are covered with 
shells, coraloides, specimens of quartz, fiuors, and 
various other substances.
Here also are preserved 
the two links of the chain found in Fowy harbour, 
which we have mentioned before.
They are of a 
triangular form, incrusted with shells, corals, &c.
— 
The diameter of each link is about sixteen inches ; 
the iron is nearly decomposed.
The size and beauty 
of one of the specimens of chalcedony contaiued in 
this singular building excites the admiration and 
wonder of every one.
In the middle of the grotto is 
a table, with polished specimens of thirty-two species 
of granite, all found in this county.
Menheniot.] — Menheniot is in the middle divi- 
sion of the hundred of East, three miles east by 
south from Liskeard.
It has three cattle fairs : — 
April 23, June 11, and July 28.
The manor is one 
of the nine franchises which were enumerated by 
Carew.
The scenery of this parish is extremely 
beautiful, its numerous vallics being delightfully di- 
versified with rock and wood.
Dr. Moreman, vicar 
of Menheniot, in the time of Henry VIII.
is said to 
have been the first clergyman in Cornwall, who 
taught and catechised his parishioners in the Eng- 
lish language.
There is a charity school very 
respectably endowed.
At Cartuther, in this parish, 
was formerly a chapel dedicated to St. Nicholas.
— 
The old mansion of Cartuther, which was some time 
the residence of the Morsheads, is now a farm house.
For several generations the Trelawneys had a seat 
at Menheniot, called Pool, whence tliey removed, in 
the reign of James I.
to Trelawney, in Pelynt.
— 
The old mansion is now occupied as the parish 
poor-house.
Carew mentioned it as far beneath the 
worth and calling of its possessor, even in his time.
Merryn.] — St. Merryn, or Merran, is in the hun- 
dred of Pyder, two miles and a quarter west-south- 
west from Padstow.
About 20 years ago, Mr.
Peter, of Harlyn, constructed a small pier, or quay, 
under Catacleuse Cliffs, in this parish, for the ac- 
commodation of coasting vessels, and of the seam- 
boats belonging to the pilchard fishery, which is 
carried on in Portlease bay.
Thomas de Tregerve, 
owner of the barton of Harlyn, in the early part of 
the 16th century, was a considerable benefactor to 
the parish ; and he left a spot of ground, near the 
church-yard, for the celebration of Cornish sports.
" Adjoining to St. Merran, or Harlyn warren," ob- 
6 c serve 
470 
CORNWALL.
serve Messrs.
Lysons, " was in ancient times, a 
village with a chapel, or, as it is said, a parish church, 
dedicated to St. Constantine ; some ruins of this 
building still remain, consisting of part of the east 
end ; some broken arches and pillars, and a consi- 
derable portion of the tower ; a richly ornamented 
aisle, said to have been standing till about the year 
1780.
The festival of St. Constantine, March 9th, 
was, till very lately, kept at St. Merran, by an 
annual hurling match, on which occasion the owner 
of Harlyn had, from time immemorial, supplycd the 
silver ball.
We are informed from good authority 
that a shepherd's family, of the name of Edwards, 
held one of the cottages in Constantine for many 
generations under the owner of Harlyn, by the an- 
nual render of a Cornish pie, made of limpets, 
raisins, and sweet herbs, at the feast of St. Con- 
stantine." 
Mevagissey.] — Mevagissey, in the east division 
of the hundred of Powder, six miles east by north 
from Tregony, is a large populous village on the 
western shores of St. Austel Bay, whose inhabitants 
are almost wholly supported by the pilchard fishery.
Some years ago they experienced a considerable 
scarcity, through the fish neglecting to visit tine coast 
for several seasons ; and the miseries of hunger were 
augmented by a putrid fever, which proved fatal to 
many persons.
In this distress the fishermen em- 
ployed themselves in procuring limpets, on which 
they entirely subsisted, though previously this kind 
of food had been regarded with contempt.
When 
the pilchards re-visited the bay, a great quantity 
was taken ; and the opening of the vaults, or salt- 
cellars, immediately checked the fever, so that in a 
few days the inhabitants were completely recovered.
This village has a Saturday's market, by prescrip- 
tion, for provisions.
Tonkin informs us that Meva- 
gissey, which had been lately a poor fishing village, 
contained in his time 200 houses ; that a pier had 
been constructed at the expense of the Trewalla 
family ; that it was then the most convenient place 
on the coast for the pilchard fishery ; that, on an 
average, 12,000 hogsheads were taken and cured 
annually ; and in 1724, 16,505 hogsheads.
The 
fishery is not now so extensive as it then was : the 
season of 1812 was esteemed a successful one, yet 
not more than 10,000 hogsheads had been caught on 
the 1st of October.
The tithe of fish taken at Me- 
Tagissey in the year 1796, amounted to 485/.
Is. 8d.
— Ships of 100 tons burthen may ride safely in the 
bason or pool at Mevagissey.
This parish contains, at present, upwards of 370 
houses.
The eastern part of the town, which, in old 
deeds, is called Porthilly, belongs to the Reverend 
Robert Hoblyn : it is to this part that the quay or 
pier is attached ; the middle part belongs to the 
Marquis of Buckingham, as parcel of the manor of 
Trelevan : the western part is parcel of Mr. Tre- 
mayne's manor of Peuwarne.
Trelevan manor is the property of the Marquis of 
Buckingham ; the barton house is occupied by the 
Reverend Dr. Lyne, vicar of the parish, as lessee 
for life under the Marquis.
Tonkin mentions a 
strong chalybeate spring on this estate, denominated, 
from its sulphureous scum, the brass well.
He 
states, that it resembled the Tonbridge waters, and 
that it hail performed numerous cures.
It has been 
destroyed ; but, for many years, it had not been 
medicinally employed.
Mevagissey church contains memorials of Richard 
Carew, of Peuwarne, who died in 1640 ; of Lewis 
Dart, of Pentuan, who died in 1632 ; and a monu- 
ment for Otwell Hill, Esq. of Penwarne.
This 
monument presents figures of Mr. Hill and his wife, 
and is inscribed with the following lines : — 
" Stock Lancashire, birth London, Cornwall gave 
To Otwell Hill inheritance and grave: 
Frank, frugal, pleasant, sober, stout and kind, 
Of woorcle true, just in deed men did him find.
Two rayns he served a justice of the peace, 
Belov'd he lived, and godly did decease; 
Mary his wife, to overlive him lothe, 
This monument hath raised to them both.
Otwell Hill, Esq. the subject of this epitaph, was 
lord of the manor of Penwarne, which had been 
brought into his family by marriage.
It is remarked 
by Tonkin, that although his widow was so loth to 
overlive, she was more loth to refuse a good offer ; 
as, within two months after the decease of her hus- 
band, who lost his life by a fall from his horse, she 
married Lord Chichester of Ireland.
John Carew, 
the second son of Carew the historian, and nephew 
of Mr. Hill, was the next possessor of Penwarne.
— 
This gentleman distinguished himself at the siege of 
Ostend, in the year 1601, where he lost his right 
hand by a cannon ball.
The old mansion is now 
occupied as a farm-house.
St. Michael's Mount.] — This stupendous mass 
of rocks adjdins the parish of St. Hilary, opposite to 
Marazion ; and, as we have stated, in our account of 
that town, it is connected therewith by a narrow 
causeway of pebbles, which is dry at low water.
It has been justly observed, that St. Michael's 
Mount is one of those rare and commanding objects 
which arrest and fix the attention the moment they 
are seen.
Its peculiar situation, and the sublime 
character which it assumes, from appearing to rise 
immediately from the waves, singularly interest the 
imagination of the observer ; though, when viewed 
from the land, its real magnitude is apparently 
diminished, from the vast extent of the horizon, and 
the expanded tract of water which surrounds \U 
base.
At high tides it appears a completely insu- 
lated congregation of rocks, rising to a considerable 
height, gradually decreasing in size, till, assisted by 
the tower of the chapel on the summit, 231 feet 
above the level of the sea, it assumes the form of a 
complete pyramid.
Some of the masses of rock in 
the space between it and the shore, are immensely 
large, and are all composed of granite of a close 
texture, with its felspar of a pinkish colour.
The 
Mount itself consists of a hard granite, in which 
2 transparent 
CORNWALL.
471 
transparent quartz is the preponderating substance.
From various stations its appearance is different ; 
being in some places nearly perpendicular, and at 
others presenting' a gentle declivity ; and though the 
rocks are for the most part craggy and barren, the 
soil affords sufficient herbage to pasture twenty or 
thirty sheep for the whole year.
It has also some 
small plantations of fir scattered over its surface.
— 
The distant view of the Mount excites ideas of im- 
pressive grandeur; but the effect is considerably in- 
creased, when traversing its base, ascending its 
craggy sides, or slowly Avinding beneath its immense 
masses of pendant rocks.
The Mount altogether 
comprises about seven acres of land ; at its foot is a 
level piece of ground, with a wharf; and, near it, is 
a village of considerable extent.
Tradition states, that the Mount was formerly 
surrounded by a wood, which was part of the main- 
land, and its Cornish name, Carak-ludgh or luz, 
signifying the grey or hoary rock in the wood, gives 
this tradition some degree of credibility.
Leland 
remarks that " In the baye betwixt the Mount and 
Pensans, he found neere the low water marke rootes 
of trees yn dyvers places." Borlase also relates, in 
a paper published in the 15th volume of the Philo- 
sophical Transactions, the discovery of roots and 
trunks of trees, some of them embedded in the 
natural soil, covered with sand, and twelve feet 
below the water.
To this tradition, Sir Humphry 
Davy,* in his elegant poem of " Mount's Bay, 
alludes in the following lines : — 
" Majestic Michael rises; he whose brow 
Is crowned with castles, and whose rocky sides 
Are clad with dusky ivy ; he whose base, 
By the storms of ages, stands unmoved 
Amidst the wreck of things — the change of time.
That base, encircled by the azure waves, 
Was once with verdure clad : the towering oaks, 
Here wav'd their branches green : the sacred oaks, 
Whose awful shades amongst the Druids stray'd, 
To cut the hallow'd Misletoe, and hold 
High converse with their Gods." 
William of Worcester, too, says that the Mount 
was called " Le Hore-rok in the Wood ;" and adds 
the marvellous story of 140 parish churches having 
been swallowed up by the sea, between that place 
and the Scilly Islands.
These traditions, however, 
appear to be entirely groundless ; for Dr. Berger 
has very satisfactorily shewn, from the position of 
the strata, that St. Michael's Mount could not have 
been separated from the land, but by some great 
convulsion of nature, far beyond the reach of tradi- 
tion or historical record.
* This gentleman, to whom the world of science is so emi- 
nently indebted, is a native of Penzance, in this county.
By 
his vigorous intellect, profound research, indefatigable industry, 
and happy mode of illustration, he has acquired, for himself 
and for his country, unrivalled eminence in Chemical science.
— He has for several years hail the honour of being Chemical 
Lecturer to the Royal Institution.
| We have alluded to this apparition in a former note.
— 
Several writers have supposed St. Michael's 
Mount to be the island called Ictis, mentioned by 
Diodorus Siculus, whither the tin, whea refined and 
cast into cubic ingots by the Britons, who dwelt 
near the promontory of Bolerius, was carried in 
carts over an isthmus, which was dry only at low 
water.
This description certainly applies to St.
Michael's Mount, in the circumstance of its con- 
nection with the land at low water ; and the conjec- 
ture is strengthened by its situation with respect to 
the mining district.
This opinion is thus alluded 
to by the Rev. W.
L. Bowles, one of our contempo- 
rary poets, whose works ought to be in the library 
of every reader of taste : — 
" Mountain, the curious muse might love to gaze 
On the dim record of thy early days ; 
Oft fancying that she heard, like the low blast, 
The sounds of mighty generations past.
Here the Phcenecian, as remote he sail'd 
Along the unknown coast, exulting hail'd ; 
And when he saw thy rocky point aspire, 
Thought on his native shores of Arauus or Tyre, 
Thou only, aged mountain, dost remain !
Stern monument amidst the dtlug'd plain : 
And fruitless the big waves thy bulwarks beat ; 
The big waves slow retire, and murmur at thy feet.'' 
St. Michael's Mount is the Ocrinum of Ptole- 
my ; but, soon after the sixth century, it seems to 
have received its present name, from the apparition 
of St. Michael, whose appearance, according to the 
monkish legends, to some hermits on this mount, 
occasioned the foundation of the monastery.
f The 
place where the vision sat was a craggy spot, in a 
dangerous situation, near the upper part of the rock, 
which, in the time of Carew, still bore the name of 
St. Michael's chair : but that appellation has since 
been transferred to a more accessible but equally 
dangerous spot, on the summit of one of the angles 
of the chapel tower.
" On the top of the tower," 
says Grose, " in one of the angles, are the remains 
of a moor-stone lantern, kept in all likelihood by 
the monks, who had a tithe of the fishery, to give 
direction to the fishermen in dark and tempestuous 
weather.
This is vulgarly called St. Michael's 
chair, and will only admit one person to sit down in 
it.
The ascent to it is dangerous ; but it is some- 
times ascended, out of a foolish conceit, that whoso- 
ever sits therein, whether man or woman, will 
henceforth have the mastery in domestic affairs." 
However little the credit that can be attached to 
the wild story of the apparition, it is certain that the 
mount became hallowed at a very early period ; that 
Another version of the story states, that " the first apparition of 
St. Michael in Mount Gorgon, in the kingdom of Apulia, was 
in the year of Christ 391.
The second apparition was about 
the year of Lord 710, in Tnmba in Cornwall, near the sea.
— 
The third apparition was at Rome; it is written that happened 
in the time of Pope Gregory, during the time of a great pesti- 
lence, &c.
The fourth apparition was in the hierarchy of cur 
Angels." 
it.
Alt 
CORNWALL.
it was renowned for its sanctity ; that it was for a 
time an object of frequent pilgrimage.
The super- 
stitious veuemtion paid to it by the mistakenly de- 
vout is alluded to by Spencer, in his Shepherd's 
Calendar, and in terms sufficiently explicit to mark 
its celebrity : — 
'" Fn evil hour thou len>t in hond 
Thus holy hills to blame, 
For sacretl unto saints they stond, 
And of them have their name : 
St. Michael's Mount who does not know, 
That wards the western coast ?" 
At what period St. Michael's was first consecrat- 
ed to religious purposes is unknown ; but the earliest 
time it appears on record as a place of devotion, is 
the fifth century ; though it seems probable that it 
was then highly celebrated ; as St. Keyna, a holy 
"virgin of the British blood royal, and daughter of 
Braganus, Prince of Brecknockshire, is stated to 
have come hither on pilgrimage about the year 490.
Here she was joined by her nephew Cadoc, who is 
reputed to have caused a fountain to spring up in a 
dry place, on which a church was erected to his 
honor.
Upwards of 500 years afterwards, Edward 
the Confessor founded on this spot a priory of Be- 
nedictine monks, afterwards changed to Gilbertines, 
on whom he bestowed the property of the Mount, 
together with several other places.
The peculiar 
respect in which this church was held, may in some 
degree be estimated from the following particulars, 
copied from an instrument recorded by William of 
Worcester, and asserted to have been found among 
the ancient registers of the priory.
" To all Members of Holy Mother Church, who 
shall read or hear these Letters, Peace and Salva- 
tion.
Be it known unto you all, that our Most Holy 
Lord Pope Gregory, in the Year of Christ's Incar- 
nation 1070, out of his great zeal and devotion to 
the Church of Mount St. Michael in Tumba, in the 
County of Cornwall, hath piously granted to the 
aforesaid Church, which is entrusted to the angelical 
Ministry, and with full approbation consecrated and 
sanctified, to remit to all the Faithful, who shall en- 
rich, endow, or visit, the said Church, a Third Part 
of their Penance, and that this Grant may remain 
for ever unshaken and inviolable, by the Authority 
of God the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost, he forbids all his Successors from attempting 
to make any Alteration against this Decree." 
The same author informs us, that these words 
were placed publicly on the gates of the church, and 
enjoined to be read in other churches, that the de- 
vout might be induced to visit the Mount " more 
frequently, and in greater numbers." 
At the time of the Conquest, Robert, Earl of 
Mortaigne, became the patron of this foundation, 
and gaVe the monks some additional lands ; but, 
from a partiality to his native country, he made this 
monastery a cell to the Abbey of St. Michael de 
Periculo-Mario, which was situated on a mount, 
very similar to this, on the coast- of Normandy.-— 
When the alien priories were seized in the reign of 
Edward the Third, this was included with the 
others ; but was afterwards restored, on condition 
oi paying the same sum to the King that was before 
remitted to the superior convent.
About this period 
its revenues were valued at 200 marks ; and the 
monks were only six, which it is probable was the 
greatest number ever maintained on the foundation 
at one time, as the number of stalls in the choir was 
the same.
Henry the Sixth granted this priory to 
King's College, Cambridge ; but it was afterwards 
granted by Edward the Fourth to the nunnery of 
Sion, Middlesex.
At the dissolution its revenues 
were valued at 110/.
12s.
per annum ; and they were 
bestowed, together with the government of the 
Mount, then a military post, on Humphry Arundel, 
Esq. a branch of the family of the Arundels of Lan- 
herne, from whom the present Lord Arundel is 
descended.
On his death it was leased to John 
Milliton, Esq. for twenty-one years, under the des- 
cription of the Farm-House of the Mount and 
Island, with the appurtenances, at the annual rent 
of forty marks.
In the first year of Elizabeth it 
was granted by patent to Thomas Bellet and John 
Bridden, who afterwards conveyed it to Robert, 
Earl of Salisbury, from whose family it passed to 
Francis Basset, Esq. but, previous to the last cen- 
tury, it was sold to John St. Aubyn, Esq. whose 
descendant, Sir John St. Aubyn, Bart, is its present 
owner.
The earliest transactions of a military nature re- 
corded to have happened at this Mount, were in the 
reign of Richard the First, during whose wars in 
the Holy Land, or subsequent imprisonment in Ger- 
many, it was seized, according to Uovedon, by 
Henry de la Pomeroy, who expelled the monks, and 
fortified the place, probably to support the cause of 
John, Richard's brother, who was Earl of Cornwall, 
and at that time endeavouring to usurp the throne.
On the release of Richard, it is stated that Pomeroy, 
fearing the King's vengeance, committed suicide ; 
and that, after his death, the Mount was surren- 
dered to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
The cir- 
cumstances of this proceeding are related by Carew, 
somewhat differently, On the authority of some of 
De la Pomeroy's descendants.
" They affirme," 
says this author, " that a Serjeant at arms of the 
King's came to their ancestor at his castle of Berry 
Pomeroy, in Devon, received kind entertaynment 
for certaine days together, and at his departure was 
gratified with a liberal reward ; in eounterchange 
whereof, he then, and no sooner, revealing his long- 
concealed errand, flatly arrested his hoaste, to make 
his immediate appearance before the King, for an- 
swering a capital crime ; which unexpected and ill- 
carryed message, the Gent, tooke in such despite, as 
with his dagger he stabbed the messenger to the 
heart : and then well knowing in so superlative an 
offence, all hope of pardon foreclosed, he abandons 
his home, gets to a sister of his abiding in this Mount, 
bequeathed 
CORNWALL.
47$ 
bequeathed a large portion of his land to the religi- 
ous people there, for redeeming his sinne ; and last- 
ly, causeth himself to be let bloud unto death, for 
leaving the remainder to his heire.
From this time 
forward," Carew proceeds, " this place continued 
rather a schoole of Mars than a temple of Peace ; 
for shortly after the discomfiture of Henry the 
Sixth's party, by Edward the Fourth at Barnet 
Field, John Earle of Oxford, who had made one, 
and one of the principall, on the weaker side, arrived 
heere by shipping, disguised himselfe, with some of 
followers, in pilgrims habits, there-through got en- 
trance, mastred the garrison, and seysed the place, 
which thus politikly wonne, hee as valiently kept, 
and kept a long time defended against the King's 
power, untill reasonable conditions swayed him to a 
surrender." 
It appears that the Earl, after demanding a parley, 
agreed to surrender, on condition of a pardon to 
himself and his adherents.
The King chose, to con- 
sider this pardon as extending only to life ; and he 
was imprisoned in the castle of Hamms, in Pieardy, 
till the year 1485, when he came over with the Earl 
of Richmond, and was in the battle of Bosworth 
field.
In the reign of Henry VII.
Perkin Warbeck, who 
represented himself to be Richard, the younger son 
of King Edward IV.
supposed to have been mur- 
dered in the tower, having landed with a party of 
his friends from Ireland, in Whitsand-bay, in the 
month of September, 1498, was admitted into the 
castle by the monks, who were favourable to the 
house of York ; he immediately put the fortifications 
in a state of defence ; and soon afterwards marching 
with forces to Bodmin, he left his wife, the Lady 
Katharine Gordon, at the Mount, as a place of se- 
curity.
She remained there till after the unsuccess- 
ful termination of his enterprise, when King Henry 
sent the Lord Uaubiney to bring her thence to the 
royal presence.
During the Cornish insurrection, in the reign of 
Edward the Sixth, many of the superior families fled 
to the Mount for security, and were besieged by the 
rebels, who took the plain at the bottom of the rock 
by assault, at the time of low-water, " and then the 
even ground on the top, by carrying great trusses 
of hay before them, to blench the defendants sight, 
and dead their shot.
After which, they could make 
but slender resistance ; for no sooner should any one 
within peepe out his head over those inflanked walls, 
but he became an open marke to a whole showre of 
arrows." This disadvantage of situation, together 
with the fears of the women, and the want of food, 
obliged the besieged to surrender.
The civil contentions in the reign of Charles the 
First were the cause of the fortifications of the 
Mount being increased, til!, in a chronicle of the 
* Lelantl also states, that the S.
S. E.
" part of the Mount 
is pasturable, and breedeth conys." These animals are yet 
found here in great numbers; and their preservation is so 
voi.
j. — no.
84.
proceedings of the time, the works were styled, 
" impregnable, and almost inaccessible." They 
were, however, reduced, after being vigorously de- 
fended by the King's adherents, in the month of 
April 1646, by Colonel Hammond, who obtained 
much celebrity from having accomplished this ser- 
vice, which the historians of that period represent as 
full of difficulty and danger.
This was the last transaction of a military des- 
cription that occurred on this romantic spot, whose 
inhabitants the alarms of war appear to have driven 
away ; for though Leland mentions " certaine houses 
with shoppes for fishermen,"* as existing here in his 
time, yet at the commencement of the last century 
there was but oue dwelling-house, besides the for- 
tress itself, in the place.
About the time of the Restoration, the Mount 
came into the possession of the St. Aubyn family ;.
and many of the improvements which have since 
been effected thereon, and the increase of the build- 
ings, are to be attributed to Sir John St. Aubyn, 
grandfather to the present Baronet, who, in the 
years 1726 and 17:27, rebuilt and enlarged the pier 
on the north side of the Mount, and rendered it suf- 
ficiently capacious to contain upwards of fifty sail 
of small vessels.
The security which this gave to 
the fishing-boats, induced several of the inhabitants 
of Marazion to erect houses and cellars at the bot- 
tom of the rock, and the number of residences have 
since, been augmented to upwards of fifty.
The in- 
habitants are about 120 ; but in the pilchard season 
that number is greatly augmented.
The House, which is the occasional residence of 
Sir John St. Aubyn, is on the summit of the rock ; 
the ascent to which is by a steep and craggy passage 
fronting the north, defended about midway by a 
small battery, and near the summit by the north flank 
of the principal battery, which also protects the en- 
trance of the bay.
The entire summit is occupied 
by the remains of the ancient monastic buildings, 
which were considerably altered by the late proprie- 
tor, and have been much improved and beautified by 
fhe present possessor, under whose directions the 
chapel has been newly fitted up.
This is spacious, 
and of what is termed the Gothic order : a stair-case 
extremely narrow leads from one of the angles of 
the tower to the summit, whence the prospect com- 
prehends the entire view of the bay, the several towns 
and villages which skirt the coast, and an immense 
extent of sea, which, as Dr. Maton observes, " raises 
the most sublime emotions, as the waves of the Bri- 
tish, Irish, and Atlantic Seas, all roll within the com- 
pass of the sight." A spacious apartment near the 
chapel, now called the Chevy Chase Room, but for- 
merly the refectory of the monastery, is ornamented 
with a very singular frieze, representing, in stucco, 
the modes of hunting the wild boar, bull, stag, 
strictly enjoined, that the inhabitants of the Mount are prohi- 
bited from keeping any cats.
fin 
ostridge.
474 
CORNWALL.
ostridge, fox, hare, and rabbit.
At the upper end 
of this room is the royal arms, with the date 1644 ; 
apd at the opposite end, the arms of the St. Aubyn 
family.
The various improvements which have been 
effected on this spot, and the singularity of the situa- 
tion, have rendered it a very convenient and inter- 
esting summer residence.
It partakes of the nature 
of both a fortress and a monastery, being castellated 
and embattled.
Formerly, a scarcity of water was 
sometimes experienced, as there was no other for 
use than rain-water, collected by drains ; about half 
a century ago, a well was sunk through a very hard 
rock, and a fine spring found at the depth of about 
thirty-seven feet, in the immediate vicinity of a tin- 
lode.
Specimens of tin -ore are said to be very plentiful 
all over the Mount.
Human bones and sculls are frequently dug up in 
every place where the soil was of sufficient depth for 
interment.
The church of St. Michael on the Mount is sup- 
posed to have been the mother church of St. Hilary; 
and the ancient cemetry for the town of Marazion 
was at the Mount.
It was in the year 1313, that 
they were first permitted to bury at St. Hilary, be- 
cause of the danger of the flux of the sea near the 
Mount.
In a part of Mount's Bay, which is dry at low 
water, though covered by every returning tide to 
the height of several feet, are some remains of the 
Wherry Mine ; the peculiar situation of which ren- 
dered it hii object of considerable curiosity, and at- 
tracted the attention of all persons who visited this 
part of the county.
Now, however, it can be con- 
templated only in description ; for the shaft has been 
filled up, and the framework nearly annihilated.
— 
" The opening of this mine," observes Dr. Maton, 
a was an astonishingly adventurous undertaking.
— 
Imagine the descent into a mine through the sea, the 
miners working at the depth of seventeen fathoms 
below the waves ; the rod of a steam engine extend- 
ing from the shore to the shaft ; a distance of nearly 
120 fathoms ; and a great number of men moment- 
arily menaced with an inundation of the sea, which 
continually drains in no small quantity through the 
roof of the mine, and roars loud enough to be dis- 
tinctly heard in it." A company of adventurers 
were induced to sink a shaft in this place, through 
the representations of an old miner, who foretold 
the acquisition of great treasures from the richness 
of this lode : nor were they wholly deceived by his 
information ; for " she turned up," as the miners 
say, a great quantity of rich tin stuff, and also some 
cobalt.
The latter was chielly mixed with pyrites 
* The Trevaiiions were of considerable note in (his county.
Kichard Trevanion was one of the members for the county in 
the reign of Henry V.
Sir Hugh Trevanion is said to have 
been kniehted in Bosworth-field.
Sir Charles Trevanion was 
a great sufferer for his loyalty in the civil war; his son John 
was slain, with Sir Nicholas Slanning, at the siege of Bristol.
— 
Lord Clarendon, speaking of the death of these brave officers, 
and nickel ; and when properly purified produced a 
beautiful blue colour, equal to that in the finest 
porcelain.
The dangerous situation of the shaft, * 
the injurious efVects arising from storms and tides, 
and the partial failure of the lode, induced the ad- 
venturers to discontinue their workings in the yenr 
1798.
The relation of the following distressing 
circumstance, which occurred to the miner above 
alluded to, will serve to display the peculiar danger 
which attended the working of this mine.
At a time 
when the tide was rolling its swelling waves into the 
bay, and many of the breakers were dashing over 
the mouth of the shaft, the old man was eagerly em- 
ployed in loading the kibble with a large mass of 
ore ; and, although the other workmen had left the 
mine, yet he persisted in sending up this load before 
he deserted his station.
The mass, being rather 
larger than usual, became entangled in the mouth 
of the shaft, and was therefore suspended for none 
time ; whilst the sea continued to rise higher, and 
every successive wave left some of its waters in the 
mine.
To escape seemed utterly impossible, and 
the next wave threatened instant death ; but a fellow 
labourer descended by the rope, broke off parts of 
the ore, and the kibble being set at liberty, was soon 
brought to the top.
Another was then let down, 
and the poor old miner getting into it, was happily 
rescued from a watery grave.
Michael-Carhayes.] — The parish of St. Michael 
Carhayes is in the east division of the hundred of 
Powder, three miles and three quarters south-east 
by east from Tregony.
The manor and barton 
passed by marriage from the Arundells to the Tre- 
vanions.
The latter family had its original seat at 
Trevanion, in this parish, where there is still a 
park, but no remains of the mansion.
The manor 
of Carhayes now belongs to J.
T. P.
B. Trevanion, 
Esq. This gentleman is the son of the late John 
Bettesworth, Esq. by a sister of the late Reverend 
Nicholas Trevanion, in whom the male line of this 
family became extinct about 50 years ago.* The 
old mansion has recently been taken down, and a 
castellated building erected on its site.
Formerly 
there was a chapel at Carhayes, the ruins of which 
are yet visible.
Michael Penkevie.' — The parish o£ St. Michael 
Penkevil is in the west division of the hundred of 
Powder, five miles west-south-west from Tregony.
The manor and bartonof.
Penkevil, anciently in the 
family of that name, now belong to Lord Falmouth, 
grandson of the celebrated Admiral Boscawen.
The 
manor of Fentongollan, which extends into the parish 
of Merther,.
is another of the possessions of Lord 
Falmouth.
At an early period this manor belonged 
says, " they were the life and soul of the Cornish regiment ; 
both young, neither of them above eight-and twenty ; of entire 
friendship to each other, and to Sir Beville Grenville, whose 
body was not yet buried." Richard Trevanion was a distin- 
guished naval officer; he died in France, whither he had fol- 
lowed the fortunes of his master, King James II.
after his abdi- 
cation.
to 
CORNWALL.
475 
to a family of the name which it bears, from which 
it passed, through female heirs, to the families of 
Trejago and Trenoweth.
John Trenoweth, who 
died A.
D. 1497, left four daughters, co-hciresses : 
Phillippa, the eldest, brought Fentongollan to John 
Carminow, of Resprin, a younger hranch of the 
Carminows of Carminow, who, according to Hals, 
became, in consequence of this marriage, "more fa- 
mous for his wealth than any other of his name or 
house, or than any other family then in Cornwall." 
Thomas, the offspring of the marriage, was gentle- 
man of the privy chamber to Henry VIII.
John 
Carminow, the grandson, was greatly distinguished 
by his hospitality.
" He kept open house'," says 
Hals, " for all comers and goers, drinkers, min- 
strells, dancers, and what not, during the Christmas 
time, and that his usual allowance of provision for 
those twelve days, were 12 fat bullocks, 20 Cornish 
bushels of wheat (/.
c. 60 Winchesters) 36 sheep, 
with hogs, lambs, and fowls of all sort, and drink 
made of wheat and oat malt proportionable ; for at 
that time barley-malt was little known or used in.
those parts." This manor came into the possession 
of the Boscawens, by purchase, about the year 1676, 
when the grand old mansion of the Carminows, to- 
gether with a fine chapel, dedicated to the Virgin 
Mary, was taken down.
The site of the mansion is 
occupied by a farm-house.
Lord Falmouth is the 
proprietor, also, of the manor of Tregonian, or Tre- 
gonyan.
Tregothnan, a manor and 9eat of Lord Fal- 
mouth's, is in this parish.
The site of Tregothnan 
house, which is rebuilding, under the direction of 
Wilkins, the architect, is on a rising ground near 
the Fal, over which river, and the adjacent harbour 
of Falmouth it commands several fine views ; the 
prospects on the land side are extensive.
The lawn, 
the plantations, and the pleasure grounds, are mo- 
dern.
Through the timber and coppice woods in 
the park, a pleasant ride of several miles, has been 
formed on the banks of the river.
This estate came 
into the possession of the Boscawens, in the four- 
teenth century, by marriage with the heiress of Tre- 
gothnan.
_ * This distinguished officer was tiie second son of Hugh, 
Viscount Falmouth, and bom at the family seat in Cornwall.
Having entered into Ihe navy, he was, in 1740, made captain 
of the Shortham.
He particularly distinguished himself at the 
taking of Porto Bello, and the siege of Carthagena.
At the 
latter place he took, with a party of seamen, a Spanish battery, 
though exposed to a tremendous fire.
On his return to Eng- 
land, he married the daughter of William Glanville, Esq. arid 
was chosen member of Parliament for Truro.
In 1744, he was 
made Captain of the Dreadnought, of 60 guns, and soon after 
took the Media, commanded by M.
Hoquart, the first French 
ship of war captured (hat year.
In 1747, he signalized himself 
under Anson, and was in an engagement with the French fleet 
off Cape Finfsterre, on which occasion M.
Hoquart again be- 
came his prisoner.
The same year he was made- Rear-Admiral 
of the Blue, and commander of the land and sea forces em- 
ployed in -an expedition to the East Indies.
On his arrival he 
laid siege to Pondicherry, but was obliged to quit it on account 
6 
There is a free-school in this parish, which is pa- 
tronized and supported, by Lord Falmouth.
The church of St. Michael Penkevil, contains 
several memorials which are entitled to notice.
On 
a brass plate, in the south aisle, is the figure of a 
man in armour, in memory of John TrenowetK Esq.
who died A.
D. 1497.
On a brass plate, in the 
chancel, is the figure of a priest, inscribed as fol- 
lows : —   
" Pray for the soule of Maister John Trembras, 
Maister of Artes, and late parson of this churche, 
which decessyd the 13 day of September, in the year 
of our Lord God 1515, on whose soule Jliu ha^e 
mercy." 
The most interesting monument, however, in the 
church, is that which was executed by Rysbrack, 
from a design by Adams, in memory of Admiral 
Boscawen.* It is ornamented with the bust of the 
deceased, surrounded by naval trophies, and bear- 
ing the following inscription, which is • said to have 
been written by his widow, the Honourable Mrs.
Boscawen : — 
Here lies the Right Honourable 
Edward Boscawen, 
Admiral of the Blue, General of Marines, 
Lord of the Admiralty, and one of his 
Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council.
His birth, though noble, 
His titles, though illustrious, 
Were but incidental additions to his greatness.
History 
In more expressible, and more indelible 
Characters, 
Will inform late posterity, 
With what ardent zeal, 
With what successful valour, 
He served his Country, 
And taught her enemies 
To dread her naval power.
In command 
He was equal to every emergency, 
Superior to every difficulty.
In his high departments, masterly and upright.
His example formed, while 
His patronage rtwarded, 
Merit.
With the highest exertions of military greatness, 
of the monsoon.
However he took Madias, and peace being 
concluded, he returned to England, where he was appointed 
one of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty.
In 1753, 
he sailed to intercept a French squadron, bound to North 
America, of which he took two ships, and Hoquart became his 
prisoner a third time.
In 1738, he took Cape Breton and 
Louisburg .in conjunction with General Amherst.
The year 
following he commanded in the Mediterranean, and while lying 
at Gibraltar, hearing that M.
dela Clue had passed the streights, 
he refitted his ships, and came up with the French fleet, of 
which he burnt three and took two in Lagos Bay. In J 760, he 
was appointed General of the Marines, with a salary of 3000/.
a year.
The Honourable Mrs. Boscawen, widow of the Ad- 
miral, died on the 26th of February, 1805, and was buried 
near her husband in the .
church of St. Michael Penkevil.
Edward Hugh, their eldest son, died at Spa, in the year 1744; 
William Glanville, their second son, a lieutenant in the navy, 
was drowned, whilst swimming, in 1769.
H* 
476 
CORNWALL.
He united the gentlest offices of humanity.
His concern for the interest, and unwearied 
Attention to the health, of all under 
His command, 
Softened the necessary exactions of duty, 
And the rigours of discipline, 
• By the care of a guardian, and the tenderness 
Of a father.
Thus beloved and revered, 
Amiable in private life, as illustrious in public, 
This gallant and profitable servant of his 
Country, 
When he was begining to reap the harvest 
Of his toils and dangers, 
In the full meridian of years and glory, 
After having been providentially preserved 
Through every peril incident to his profession, 
Died of a fever, 
On the 10th of January, in the year 1761, 
The 50th of his age, 
At Halchland's Park in Surry, 
A seat lie had just finished (at the expence 
Of the enemies of his country) ; 
And amidst the.
groans and tears 
Of his beloved Cornishmen, was 
Here deposited.
His once happy wife inscribes this marble, 
An unequal testimony of his worth, 
And of her affection.
There are several other memorials of the Bos- 
cawen family,* in the church of St. Michael Pen- 
kevil.
Michael's.] — St. Michael's, or Michell, anciently 
Modishole, is a mean, inconsiderable borough, partly 
in the parish of Newlyn, partly in that of Enoder, in 
the hundred of Pyder, thirty-six miles south-west 
by west from Launceston, and 250| west-south-west 
from London.
This town sends two members to 
Parliament.
Its constitution is that of a Superior 
or High Lord, and five Mesne or Deputy Lords, 
who hold of him.
The Portreeve, who presides in the 
borough, is one of the Deputy Lords, annually cho- 
sen to that office at the Court-Leet of the High 
Lord.
It is not known ever to have been incorpo- 
rated.
Browne Willis observes, that " the mem- 
bers to serve in Parliament, have been elected seve- 
ral ways ; sometimes by a jury of the principal in- 
habitants ; and at others, by the inhabitants in gene- 
ral ; but on the 20th of March, 1700, the right of 
election was settled by a vote of the House of Com- 
mons to be in the Lords of the said Borough, capable 
of being Portreeves, and in the inhabitants paying 
scot and lot, who were then not above sixteen, but 
are now twenty-six." 
* The Boscawens were originally of Buscawen-Rose, in the 
parish of Burian, where they are traced to about the year 1200.
They removed to Tregothnan, in St. Michael Penkevil, in 
consequence of the marriage of John Boscawen with the heiress 
of Tregothnan, about the year 1300.
The descendants of this 
John have ever since continued at Tregothnan, having married 
the heiresses of Albalanda, Brett, and Trevanion, and co- 
heiresses of Halap, Garminow, Treturfe, Clinton, and Godfrey.
The elder branch of the Boscawens became extinct in 1701, by 
the death of Hugh Boscawen, who married one of the co- 
heiresses ot Theopliilus, Earl of Lincoln.
Bridget, a daughter, 
ajyl eventually sole heiress of Hugh Boscawen, married Hugh 
The houses, or rather cottages, in the time of 
Browne Willis, amounted to twenty-six ', but since" 
the borough came into the hands of Sir Christopher 
Hawkins, the present owner, the cottag'es have been 
pulled down as fast as they became empty, till 
the whole was reduced to the present number of 
four.
There was formerly a chapel in this village, dedi- 
cated to St. Francis ; the site of which is now oc- 
cupied by a dwelling-house ; but the adjoining field 
still retains the appellation of the Chapel Field.
A 
market and fair were granted here, to Walter de 
Ralegh, about, or prior to, the reign of Edward 1.
The market has been many years discontinued ; 
an annual fair is still holden here on the 15th of 
October.
It is chiefly for sheep, of which there 
are generally offered for sale from three to four 
thousand.
Michaelstow.] — The parish of Michaelstow is in 
the hundred of Lesnewtb, four miles and a half 
south-west by south from Camelford.
In this pa- 
rish is Helsbury Park, which Iras been long dispark- 
ed, and was, till lately, a rabbit warren.
At a place 
called the Beacon, from which there is a very ex- 
tensive view, just without the park, is a castle 
mount, with considerable earth-works, supposed to 
be the site of the castle mentioned by William of 
Worcester.
The park is held under the duchy 
of Cornwall, by the Duke of Bedford.
The duchy 
manor of Helstone extends over a great part of this 
parish.
Milor.] — The parish of Milor, or Mylor, is in the 
east division of the hundred of Kirrier, three miles 
and a quarter east from Pcnryn.
It may be consi- 
dered, indeed, to form the south-south-east side of 
Falmouth Harbour.
The manor, formerly in the 
Killegrews, now belongs to Lord Wodehouse, who 
holds the Killegrew estates in right of his lady.
Part of Perran Cove, or Perran Wharf, including 
a large iron foundery, belonging to Messrs.
Fox, is 
in this parish.
The church contains a monument 
to the memory of Captain Yescombe, of the King 
George Lisbon Packet, who was killed in defending 
his ship against the enemy in the year 1803.
Here 
are also some memorials of the Donythorn family ; 
and a monument for Francis Trefusis, Esq. who 
died in the year 1680.
Restronguet Passage, within the manor of Res- 
tronguet, in this parish, is the nearest road from 
Falmouth to Truro.
The manor of Restronguet, 
Fortescue, Esq. of Filleigh in Devonshire, on whom the title 
of Lord Clinton and Say was conferred by George 1.
The 
male line of the Boscawens was continued by Edward, a 
•vounger son of Hugh Boscawen, who died in 1641.
Hugh 
Boscawen, Esq. of Tregothnan, son and heir of Edward, was in 
1720 created Baron Boscawen-Rose, and Viscount Falmouth.
Hugh Boscawen paid a fine of four marks, for not attending the 
coronation of Philip and Mary, to receive the honour of knight- 
hood: his descendant, Richard Boscawen, paid a fine of 5/.
on 
a similar occasion, to be released from the Order of the Bath at 
the creation of Prince Hrnrv.
anciently 
CORNWALL.
477 
anciently in the Cardinhams, belongs to Sir William 
Lemon, Bart.
M. P.
for the county, whose seat is at 
Carclew, in this parish.
In the reign of Henry II.
Carclew belonged to an 
ancient family of the name of Daungers.
The house 
is pleasantly seated on a gentle eminence, rising 
from the valley through which the Carnon stream 
works are conducted.
It is a neat modern struc- 
ture, of the Ionic order, faced with white moor stone, 
having a regular portico.
It was built by Samuel 
Kempe, Esq. from the designs of Edwards.
The 
centre is connected with the wings by two uniform 
colonades, added by the present owner.
Sir Wil- 
liam Lemon inherits this estate from his grandfather, 
by whom it was purchased in the year 1749 ; and he 
has made very considerable improvements in the 
grounds, by various plantations, which become pe- 
culiarly beautiful and interesting, from the con- 
trasted scenery of the wide and open moors in this 
part of the county.
This mansion contains a few 
good pictures, and is fitted up with much conveni- 
ence and taste.
The Carnon stream works, mentioned above, are 
situated near Restronguet Creek, an arm of Fal- 
mouth Harbour, into which flows a number of rivu- 
lets from the hills of Redruth.
They occupy a por- 
tion of ground nearly a mile in length, and 300 
yards wide, and are by far the richest, and most ex- 
tensive of any stream works in the county.
The 
pebbles from which the metal' is extracted, are em- 
bedded in a marl, with sand and marine shells ; in- 
deed the whole space occupied by the stream-works, 
appears to have been gained by the sea ; the mud 
and other matter washed down by the streams, hav- 
ing raised a sort of embankment, which, by its con- 
tinual extension, and some assistance from art, has 
gradually contracted the boundaries of the tide.
The bed of tin pebbles is about thirty-six feet below 
the surface of the ground ; its thickness is from four 
to six feet.
Immediately on the bed of tin several 
stag's- horns have been found, one of which mea- 
sured three feet from the root to the point.
Skulls 
and other bones have also been discovered here ; 
and what renders it apparent that these works were 
known at a very early period, a wooden shovel, and 
various picks made of deers' horn, have also been 
found on the spot.
The present works were com- 
menced in 1785, and are said to have been attended 
with great profit.
Minute particles of gold are fre- 
quently observed among the tin grains.
A little 
above Carnon stream, an adit commences, which 
has been driven to the western part of North Downs, 
a distance of nearly ten miles.
This, by its various 
branches, draius the mines named Chace Water, 
North.
Downs, Huel Unity, Huel Garland, Huel 
Pink, Huel Jewel, Huel Hope, Huel Daniel, Pol- 
dice, Huel Virgin, the United Mines, &c.
The 
water which issues from the adit drives the wheel in 
Carnon- Works, and is also directed to other useful 
purposes, of various kinds.
On a branch of Fal^ 
mouth Harbour, near Mepal Passag, in the year 
vol.
i. — no.
34.
1747, such vast numbers of Roman brass coins were 
discovered, that their weight amounted to twenty 
pounds.
About 3000 of them were examined by 
Dr. Borlase, who found them to be " all from Ga- 
lienus, who began his reign in the year 253, to Ca- 
rinus, who, with Cams andNumerian, reigned about 
two years ; i.
e. from 282 to 284." 
The manors of Trefusis and Tregew have been 
from time immemorial in the Trefusis family, and 
are now the property of their representative, the 
Right Honourable Lord Clinton, who had the ho- 
nour of being Aid de Camp to Lord Wellington at 
the battle of Salamanca, and of bringing home the 
news of that important victory.
The Trefusis fa- 
mily is to be traced, as resident on the manor of 
Trefusis, in this parish, four generations before the 
year 1292.
Lord Clinton not residing at Trefusis, 
the mansion is occupied by G.
C. Fox, Esq. Nan- 
kerry, formerly a seat of the Littletons, but now a 
farm-house, belongs to Lord Clinton.
Milor- Bridge, and Flushing, are the principal 
villages in the parish of Milor.
Flushing, as al- 
ready intimated in our account of Falmouth, received 
its name from the Dutch.
In consequence of the 
improvements which were made by Samuel Tre- 
fusis, Esq. in the early part of the preceding cen- 
tury, its population and consequence were greatly 
increased.
At a great expence, that gentleman le- 
velled the ground, constructed wharfs, and erected 
numerous buildings : he also endeavoured to esta- 
blish the packets there but failed in the attempt.
By water, Flushing is only half a mile from Fal- 
mouth, to which there is a ferry-boat in constant 
employment.
On account of the mildness of its 
climate, Flushing has of late years, been greatly the 
resort of invalids.
Minster.] — The parish of Minster, or Talcarn, is 
in the hundred of Lesnewth, three miles and a half 
east north-east from Bossiney.
Here are some re- 
mains of the ruins of a priory of Black Monks, which 
was subject to the Abbey of St. Sergius and Bachus, 
at Angiers.
The manor, honour, and borough of 
Boscastle, or Bottreux Castle, already described, are 
in this parish.
Minver.] — There appear to be two parishes of 
this name, in the hundred of Trigg, St. Minver High 
Land, and St. Minver Low Land ; they are about 
three miles east-north-east from Padstow, from which 
they are separated by a ferry.
St. Minver High 
Land is the church town.
.John Randall, Esq. who 
died in the last century, left 10.?.
a year, for a fune- 
ral sermon, to be preached on the 27th of December, .
for 1000 years ; and 20?.
a year, to be given to poor 
widows and orphans.
The church contains a hand- 
some painted glass Avindow, which was put up by' 
Mr. Sandes four or five years ago.
In the parish of St. Minver Low Land, which is 
divided into north and south, are two chapels, dedi- 
cated to St. Enodoc, or Gwinuodock, and St. Mi- 
chael.
St. Enodoc, or the north chapel, is almost 
sunk in sands.
St. Michael's chapel, better known 
6 e by 
478 
CORNWALL.
by the name of Porthilly church, is seated on the 
banks of the Padstow River.
The village of Port- 
hilly was depopulated, many years ago, by the drift- 
ing of the sands.
At Trenelver, in this parish, was 
a free chapel, of which some ruins still remain.
There were chapels also, say Messrs.
Lysons, at 
Roserrow and Trewornan, and another, with a spa- 
cious burying-ground, on the manor of Penraean.
In consequence of the shifting sands in 1778, many 
coffins made of slate were exposed to view, and a 
great quantity of human bones were found, with 
rings and other ornaments of dress, and coins of va- 
rious reigns from Henry I.
to Queen Elizabeth, now 
in the possession of the Rev. William Sandys.
— 
There is a meeting-house in this parish, with a ce- 
metery belonging to the Quakers, who were formerly 
numerous here ; it has been some time disused.
There are now no Quakers or other Dissenters in 
the parish.
Trewornan Bridge, in this parish, was 
built about the year 1791, in the place of a danger- 
ous ford, impassable at high tides, in the road lead- 
ing from St. Minver to Egloshayle, by the exertions 
of Mr. Sandys, and has been made a county bridge : 
it is over, a rivulet which separates the parish of St.
Minver and Egloshayle ; and which, by the flux of 
the tides, is rendered navigable for barges as high 
as Amble-Bridge, in the parish of St. Kew.
Tre- 
vanger, Tredruic, Trebetherick, and Penmean, are 
villages in these parishes.
Morva.] — Morva, in the west division of the 
hundred of Penwith, six miles north-west from Pen- 
zance, is at once a separate parish, and a chapelry 
to Madron.
At Tregominian, the principal village 
in this parish, are the ruins of an ancient chapel, and 
a well called the Chapel Well.
Morval.] — The parish of Morval is in the hun- 
dred of West, three miles north from East Looe.
For many generations, the manor of Morval was the 
property and residence of the Glynn family ; to one 
of whom, the following remarkable circumstance 
occurred, as related by Messrs.
Lysons : — " In the 
year 1471, John Glynn, Esq. was barbarously mur- 
dered at Iligher-Wringworthy, in this parish, by 
several ruffians, employed by Thomas Clemens, 
whom he had superceded in the office of under stew- 
ard of the duchy : in the preceding year, he had 
been assaulted and grievously wounded in the face 
by the retaiuers of Ciemens, as he was holding the 
* This gentleman, after receiving his education at Winches- 
ter school, entered at the Temple, and in 17fi3 was called to 
the bar, about which time also he became a member of Parlia- 
ment.
In his profession he was chiefly distinguished as a spe; 
cial pleader, but his practice at the bar was also considerable.
fn 1772 he published a work, which is held in considerable 
repute, called " An Introduction to the Law of Nisi Prius." 
Being related by marriage to Earl Bathurst he soon attained the 
honours of his profession, wa< made a Welch Judge, and at 
length a Justice of the King's Bench, where he acquired by his 
great legal knowledge the particular friendship of Lord Mans- 
field.
When that nobleman was about to retire, he earnestly 
wished that Su- Francis should be his successor, but superior 
interest prevailed in favour of Lord Kenyon, ou which he re- 
King's Court at Liskeard, and thrown into Liskeard 
prison, where he signed a compulsory obligation not 
to prosecute ; some months preceding the murder, 
the retainers of Clemens went to Morval, and plun- 
dered the house and premises of goods and chattels 
to the value of 200/.
and upwards, as then estimat- 
ed : all this appears from the petition of Jane Glynn, 
the widow, to Parliament, which sets forth that she 
could have no redress for their horrible outrages in 
the county of Cornwall, by reason of the general 
dread of the malice of Clemens and his lawless 
gang : she therefore prayed, that her appeal might 
be tried in London by a Cornish jury ; and that, in 
default of Clemens appearing to take his trial, he 
might be dealt with as convicted and attainted : her 
petition was granted." The words of Jane Glynn's 
petition, as recorded in the rolls of Parliament, are 
contained in the following words : — " The said Tho- 
mas Fleet, &c.
&c.
then and there, at four of the 
clok in the mornyng, hyra felonsly and horribly slewe 
and murdred and clove his head in four parties, and 
gave hym ten dede woondes in his body ; and when 
he was dede, they cut off oone of his legges, and 
oone of his arraes, and his head from his body to 
make hym sure ; and over that, then and there his 
purs and 22/.
of money numbered a signet of golde, 
a grete signet of sylver in the same purs contayned, 
a double cloke of Master Deviles, a sworde, and a 
dagger to the value of 6 markes of the goodes and 
catels of the said John Glynn, felonsly from hym 
they robbed, toke and bare awey." In the reign of 
Henry VIII.
Morval manor passed, with one of the 
co-heiresses of Glynn, to the Coodes, and with the 
heiress of Coode to a younger branch of the Buller 
family, in which it has ever since remained.
The 
late Sir Francis Buller, some time one of the Jus- 
tices of the Common Pleas, was of this family, and 
was born here.* The situation of the old mansion, 
now occupied by John Buller, Esq. is pleasant, and 
the neighbouring views are picturesque and beauti- 
ful.
The manor of Wringworthy, in this parish, is 
now the property of Sir J.
Copley, Bart.
; and that 
of Bray, anciently in the Vyvyans, is now the pro- 
perty and occasional residence of P.
W. Mayow, 
Esq. in whose family it has been for some genera- 
tions, f Polgarn, and Lydcott, are now farm-houses, 
belonging to Mr. Mayow and Mr. Braddon.
The 
church contains some memorials of the Kendall, 
moved to the Court of Common Pleas.
He was a man well 
skilled in his profession, of pleasant and amiable manners, and 
strictly impartial.
He died suddenly in the year 1800.
f Of this family was Dr. John Mayow, an eminent physician 
in the reign of Charles II.
He was born in 1645.
He was 
fellow of All Soul's College, Oxford, and took his degrees in 
civil law, but practised physic.
He died in London in 1679.
Dr. Mayow, though little known in his own age, was one of 
the greatest chemUts this country has produced ; and Dr.
Beddoes has proved, that most of the modern discoveries in 
chemistry were known to him.
His works were published 
at Oxford in 8vo, 1674.
Mayow, 
CORNWALL.
'179 
Mayow, and Coode families.
In the early part of 
the last century, John Buller, Esq. left 8/.
a year, 
chargeable on the rectory, to endow a school for 200 
years ; and 6/.
a year, to be laid out in wool for the 
poor of the parish.
Some years subsequently, an- 
other member of the Buller family, out of the pro- 
fits of certain estates in Kent, devised by Sir John 
Hayward for charitable purposes, purchased a house 
in this parish, which is now occupied by poor 
people ; and two closes, at this time letting for 
51.
a year, for decayed housekeepers at Morval.
Morwinstow.] — -The parish of MorwinstoW, con- 
tracted from Moorwinstow, is situated on the Bristol 
Channel, in the hundred of Stratton, seven miles 
north-north-west from the town of that name.
The 
river Tamar rises in this parish ; and the principal 
villages are Woodford, Woolley, Hollabeer, Goose- 
ham, Cross-town, Eastcot, and Coumbe.
The 
south door-way of the church has a semicircular 
arch, which is ornamented with zigzag mouldings 
and grotesque heads : the greater part of the church 
is also in the Saxon style.
Formerly, there was a 
chapel at Milton in this parish, dedicated to the Vir- 
gin Mary.
Neot.] — The little village of St. Neot's is situat- 
ed in the hundred of West, four miles and a half 
north-west by west from Liskeard.
It was origi- 
nally denominated Neotestov, from Neotus, the re- 
puted brother of Alfred the Great.
Its church, ac- 
cording to Camden, (who quotes Asser as his autho- 
rity,) was anciently called St. Guerrier's, or the 
healing saint's ; so entitled, he adds, through the re- 
covery of Alfred from a dangerous sickness, by here 
offering up his prayers.
Neotus, who obtained the 
appellation of saint from his holy life, and the mira- 
cles wrought through his peculiar sanctity, was bu- 
ried in this fabric, which from that time was called 
St. Neot's ; though history records two removals 
of his body ; first to Arnulphbury (now St. Neot's) 
in Huntingdonshire, and subsequently to Croy- 
land.
It appears, from the Doomsday Survey, that there 
was a monastery at this place in the time of Edward 
the Confessor ; but whether founded by Neotus, by 
Alfred, or by Edward himself, is uncertain.
Its in- 
mates, there named the Clerks of St. Neot, held 
Neotestov, " formerly consisting of two hides of 
land," all which, says the Survey, " except one 
acre, which the priests still have, the Earl has taken 
away." Thus dispossessed of its lands, the monas- 
tery decayed, and only its name lias descended to 
the present age.
All remains of its ancient church, 
which belonged to Montaeute Priory, in Somerset- 
shire, have also been destroyed.
The present struc- 
ture, however, contains some curious memorials of 
its patron saint, and displays some singular speci- 
mens of the credulity of our forefathers.
It is a 
handsome fabric, consisting of a nave and two aisles, 
with a tower at the west end, and apparently not 
older than the reign of Henry the Sixth.
The roof 
is of timber, ornamented with lozenges, in which are 
initial letters, knots, and other embellishments.
This 
seems more modern than the rest of the building, 
the date in the western lozenge of the nave being 
1593.
The nave is separated from the aisles by 
pointed arches.
" The windows of St. Neot's 
church," say Messrs.
Lysons, " are nearly filled 
with painted glass, which, from several fragments 
of inscriptions remaining in them, appears to have 
been placed there in the early part of the 16th cen- 
tury.
In the six windows on the south side of the 
south aisle, are many portraits of benefactors, some 
of them in groups, with labels on their heads in- 
scribed, " See Neote ora pro nobis.
See Leonarde, 
ora pro nobis ;" &c.
the figures of which saints are 
represented over them.
In one of these windows, are 
twelve compartments, containing different subjects 
from the history of St. George, very coarsely exe- 
cuted with inscriptions under them in text hand.
From the fragment of an inscription in one of these 
windows, it appears to have been executed at the 
expence of Catherine Borlase, and others of the 
Borlase family.
In the windows of the east end of 
the south aisle, there are fifteen small compartments, 
containing subjects from the Old Testament, begin- 
ning with the Creation, and ending with the death 
of Noah, Avith an inscription under each explaining 
its subject.
The windows of the north aisle also 
contain many portraits of benefactors, and figures of 
saints with inscribed labels : under one of these 
windows is the fragment of an inscription in text 
hand, by which it appears to have been executed 
" sumptibus uxorum parochiae." One of them con- 
tains, in 12 small compartments, various subjects 
from, the legend of St. Neot, with inscriptions un- 
der them." 
About thirty years ago, the Rev. Benjamin Fos- 
ter, rector of Boconnoc, published a quarto pamph- 
let, intituled, " Some Account of the Church and 
Window's of St. Neot's, Cornwall," to which we are 
considerably indebted for the following particulars.
The window in which the principal events of the 
legendary life of St. Neot are delineated, is situated 
in the north aisle, and under each compartment is a 
Latin sentence, explanatory of the subjects, which 
are twelve in number.
They appear, with the ex- 
ception of the first, wherein the saint is represented 
as resigning his crown to a younger brother, to have 
been taken from Capsgrave's Nova legenda Anglia, 
published in the year 1510.
The story of St. Neot, 
represents him as " endowed with every Christian 
virtue, eminent for his learning, eloquent in his 
spcach, intelligent in giving councel, and of coun- 
tenance truly angelic ;." but so dwarfish in his sta- 
ture, that when he performed mass he was obliged 
to be exalted on an iron stool.
His fame while he 
resided at Glastonbury, where he first became a 
monk, was so extensive, that he was visited by im- 
mense numbers of people, who sought his prayers, 
either for the relief of bodily infirmity, or for the in- 
flux of spiritual comfort.
The saint, however, be- 
came wearied with the concourse of multitudes, and 
witk 
480 
CORNWALL.
with one adherent, named Barius, retired to an her- 
mitage on this spot ; and having spent seven years 
here, in great sanctity, Avent to Rome, received the 
Pope's Messing, and obtained permission to build a 
monastery near his place of residence.
Accordingly, 
continues the legend, " on his return, he erected a 
suitable edifice, and filled it with monks, and was 
thought worthy of frequent consolation from angelic 
visitors.
Near the spot on which his monastery 
stood, there was a spring of clear water, which in 
the driest seasons never failed.
In it this man of 
God perceived there were three fishes ; but not pre- 
suming to touch them till it was revealed to him for 
what purpose they were placed there, an angel ap- 
peared to acquaint him, that every day, or as often 
as he should find occasion, he might take one, and 
one only, of these fishes for his use; leaving the 
other two untouched.
This condition being ob- 
served, he was assured, that, on his next return to 
the well, he should always find three fishes, as at the 
first.
" It happened soon after this, that our saint was 
afflicted with a grievous disorder, and unable for 
some days to take any sustenance.
Barius, his 
faithful and affectionate servant, being alarmed at his 
long abstinence, went to the well, and caught two 
fish, which he cooked in different ways, boiling one, 
and broiling the other, and brought them to his 
master in a dish.
The good saint immediately took 
alarm, and inquired with much earnestness whence 
these two fish came.
Barius, with honest simplicity, 
told him he had taken them from the well, and had 
dressed them in different ways, hoping that if one 
did not suit his sickiy palate, the other might.
Then 
said the saint, " Why hast thou done this ?
How, 
in opposition to an express command, hast thou pre- 
sumptuously ventured to take from the well more 
than one fish at a time ?" He then commanded his 
trembling servant instantly to carry back the two 
fishes to the well ; and throwing himself prostrate 
upon the floor, he continued in prayer, till Barius 
returning, acquainted him, that the two fishes, after 
having been drest, were now in the well, alive and 
active, and disporting in the water as usual.
Neotus 
then commissioned him to go again, and catch one 
fish only, and to dress that for his use ; which order 
being complied with, no sooner had he tasted of the 
fish, than he was restored to perfect health.
" Afterwards it befell, that the oxen belonging to 
the monastery were stolen, and for want of them, the 
servants of the holy monks could not plough their 
grounds." In this difficulty, "many stags from the 
adjoining woodlands, forgetting their savage nature, 
came, and offered their necks to the yoke, and con- 
tinued obediently to perform all the labours neces- 
s.iry for the support of the monastery, until the rob- 
bers who had carried off the oxen, hearing of this 
miracle, brought them back to Neotus, and express- 
ing their repentance, framed their future lives by his 
council.
It is said, that, from that day to the pre- 
sent, these deer, and all that are descended from 
them, are marked with white wherever they were 
touched by the yoke, or by the harness.
It happen- 
ed also, that this same servant of heaven standing in 
the Avell, in which he was daily wont to repeat the 
whole psalter throughout, a hind, whom the dogs 
were pursuing, broke from the wood adjoining, and 
running toward him, fell at his feet ; nor could it by 
any means be brought to rise, till he had assured it 
of protection and security.
The dogs presently af- 
terwards advancing towards it in full cry, were 
checked and reproved by Neotus, on which they 
immediately turned tail, aud fled nastily away from 
their prey.
The huntsman, beholding this wonder, 
fell prostrate before the saint, and took upon him the 
habit of a monk, in the priory of St. Petroc, in which 
priory his horn is preserved as a memorial of this 
adventure." 
The legend records several other miracles of this 
saint ; but as they are not noticed in the paintings, 
we shall forbear to relate them, and only observe, 
that whatever fables are attached to the history of 
St. Neot, he was undoubtedly a man of learning and 
ability.
Leland remarks, that, " he was nearly 
allied in blood to the great Alfred ; and is also be- 
lieved to have induced him to rebuild the English 
School at Rome, founded by King Ina, and aug- 
mented in its revenues by Offa ; and from the same 
pious zeal for learning and religion, to have pre- 
vailed on him to found the New School at the ford 
of the Isis." 
Near the east end of St. Neot's Church is a stone 
casket, eighteen inches by fourteen, said to con- 
tain such remains of St. Neot as were not carried 
into Huntingshire.
Over this is a wooden tablet, 
inscribed to his honour and memory, with the follow- 
ing antique verses : — 
Consuming Time Neotus' flesh 
A sacred tomb this dust inclos'd, 
Tlio' flesh, and bones, and dust, and torn 
Ye( Neot's fame lemains with us.
Whose father was a Saxon King , 
In famous Oxford lie was eke 
That then in schools, by quaintest terms.
Which schools by his advice the good 
Eui in those days the furious Danes 
And Neot forced was to leave 
Willi hostile spoils: then Anisbury 
Within the shire of Huntingdon, 
That for his sake the place from him 
The vulgar call it now St. Need's, 
There Alfric built a monastry, 
And Roscy, Wife to the ei le of Clare, 
For maintenance in after tunes: 
liui thence, enfore'd by furious Danes, 
To GuerticrsStoke for his repose ; 
Bui now best known by Neot's name, 
For why, a college here of darks 
When as his corpse was clad in day, 
Some say his bones were carried home ; 
Which claims the grace of St. Neot's mm 
Neotus lluruil ano 
and hones to dust translated ; 
which now is ruinated.
b, thro' tract of time be rotten, 
which nere shall be forgotten; 
St. Dunstan was his teachei ; 
the first professed preacher, 
the sacred theine expouded, 
King Alfred well had founded; 
the Saxons' peace molested, 
that place so much inle^ied 
his place tit re:uge wa-, 
wheie since it came to pass, 
doth take its eomon name ; 
their market town of fame, 
to Neot 'was behestcd; 
with means the same invested, 
where long he did not stay, 
he forward look his way 
this place so call'd of yore, 
more famous than before, 
he had, whose fame encreased 
and he from hence diceased, 
St. Need's will have u so, 
b; but h"ieto we say No.
Doin 896.
On Easter Monday, and the 5th of November, 
there are holiday fairs at St. Neot's.
The manor of 
St. Neot, the ancient possessors of which are un- 
known, is the property of Lady Morshead, whose 
late husband, Sir John M.
purchased it of Elias 
Lang, Esq. There are several other manors in this 
parish.
John Anstis, Esq. Garter King of Arms, author 
of " The Black Book of the Order of the Garter," 
2 and 
CORNWALL.
481 
and an industrious topographical collector, whom 
we have already noticed, was a.
native of St. Neot's.
In this parish, on the borders of Alternon, a mile 
north-east of Dosmery Pool, are the remains of a 
chapel, which was dedicated to St. Luke, the an- 
cient font of which is yet preserved.
It is remark- 
able, that the estate on which this chapel stood, call- 
ed Pinnock's and Luke's Hills, comprising about 
three hundred acres, has been many years without 
an owner.
Newlyn.] — The village of Newlyn is in the hun- 
dred of Pyder, two miles and a quarter west-north- 
west from the borough of St. Michael, part of which 
is in this parish.
" Newlyn," says Leland, " ys a 
poore fischar towne, and hath al only a key for 
shyppes and bottes, with a lytle soeur of land water; 
wythyn a arrow shot of the sayd key or peere lyeth 
directly a lytle low island with a chapel yn yt ; and 
thys lytle islet bereth gresse." The manor of Car- 
gol, in this parish, formerly had a market on Thurs- 
days, and a fair on the festival of St. Matthew : it 
has now two fairs ; one, on the first Tuesday in 
October ; the other, on the 8th of November.
The 
old park, on the manor of Treluddero, has been long 
disparked.
Newlyn Church contains a marble monument to 
the memory of Margaret, the lady of John, Lord 
Arundell, of Trerice, who died A.
D. 1691.
A 
school has recently been erected in the parish, by 
Mr. Oxnam, who has expressed his intention of en- 
dowing it with 5/.
a year.
It is to be supported, in 
part, by voluntary contributions, and to be conduct- 
ed on Dr. Bell's plan.
Newport.] — This is a borough town, situated in 
the hundred of East, 214 miles west-south-west 
from London.
It forms a suburb to Launceston, in 
the parish of St. Stephen.
It was formerly included 
with Launceston under the name of Dunheven, or 
Dunhevid ; but upon the removal of the priory 
church, at the Dissolution, another church was 
erected and dedicated to St. Thomas, round which 
houses being built to the number of 80, the whole 
was included in the borough of Newport.
This 
place was never incorporated, but at the Dissolu- 
tion, the manor of this hamlet having belonged to 
the priors of St. Stephen, whereas Launceston be- 
longed to the Earls and Dukes of Cornwall, it 
claimed distinct privileges as being separated in ju- 
risdiction, and the manor devolved to the crown.
It 
challenged a right of sending members to Parlia- 
ment, in the sixth of Edward VI.
and their bur- 
gesses being admitted, they have exercised the same 
right ever since* Two persons called Vianders, are 
annually chosen at the Lord's Court, these are offi- 
cers who regulate the elections, and make the return 
of the representatives, who are chosen by all the in- 
habitants of the place, paying scot and lot, or having 
burgage tenure in this district amounting in all to 
about 62 in number.
At a short distance from Newport, lower down, 
near the banks of the Tamar, stands Hengstoa or 
vol.
i. — no.
35.
Henston Hill.
This place was anciently so rich in 
veins of tin, that the country people have still a pro- 
verb in chime : — 
Ilenshon-tlown well y wrought.
Is worili London clear y bought.
The mines arc now worn out ; but there are, how- 
ever, plenty of Cornish diamonds found here, yet 
not of consequence enough to verify the proverb.
The inhabitants of the neighbourhood say, that a 
cloud sitting on this hill forebodes rain.
Northill.] — The parish of Northill is in the north 
division of the hundred of East, seven miles south- 
west by west from Launceston.
llland, or Yelland, 
Treveniel, and Trebartha, arc villages in this parish.
At Trebartha, and also on the manor of Landreyne, 
there formerly were chapels.
On a rocky tor, in 
this parish, about five miles south-west of Launces- 
ton, near the road which leads to Lostwithiel, are 
many basons, which the country people call Arthur's 
troughs, in which, they have a tradition that prince 
used to feed his dogs.
Near these basons is Ar- 
thur's Hall ; for whatever is great, and the use 
thereof unknown, they ascribe to King Arthur.
Padstow.] — Padstow, a name apparently abbre- 
viated from Petrocstow, lies in the hundred of Py- 
der, thirty miles west by south from Launceston.
It is a sea-port and market-town, seated on the west 
side of Padstow Haven, near the mouth of the Ca- 
mel.
It is a place of considerable antiquity, and is 
stated to have been the spot where the first religious 
house in Cornwall was founded by St. Petroc, in 
the year 432 ; and the altar on which the saint, ac- 
cording to his legend, swam over from Ireland, was 
long preserved in the ancient church.
The original 
name of the town, in the Cornish language, was Lo- 
denick ; from some old writings, mentioned by Le- 
land, it is said to have been also called Adetstow, 
from King Athelstan, whom the traditions of the in- 
habitants represent to have vested the town with 
many privileges.
From all the research that has 
been made, however, it does not appear that Athel- 
stan ever had any connection with Padstow.
Whita- 
ker supposes, that the monastery of Petrocstow, 
which was destroyed by the Danes in 981, and 
afterwards established at Bodmin, occupied the 
ground on which Mr. Prideaux Brune's house now 
stands.
The houses in Padstow and its vicinity are cover- 
ed with fine blue slate, which is obtained from the 
Denny-Ball slate quarries.
The market, for but- 
chers' meat and other provisions, is on Saturday ; 
and the fairs, which, forty or fifty years ago, were 
well supplied with cattle, cloth, hats, &c.
are on the 
18th of April and 21st of September.
There are 
several schools and other benevolent institutions in 
the parish ; amongst which are two Sunday schools, 
and several day schools ; and an establishment, con- 
ducted by a society of young ladies, for relieving the 
poor, and encouraging the industrious.
One of the 
schools founded by the trustees of the Reverend 
6f St.
482 
CORNWALL.
St. John Elliott's charitable donations, A.
D. 1760, 
with a yearly endowment of 51, was established in 
this town.
Padstow church contains various monuments of 
the Pridcaux family.
That of Sir Nicholas Pri- 
deaux, Knt. who was Carew's contemporary, and 
died in 1627, commemorates also Sir William 
Morice, who married a daughter of Humphrey Pri- 
deaux ; " he was knighted," says his epitaph, " by 
King Charles II.
on his landing at Dover, and made 
secretary of state and a privy counsellor, in conse- 
quence of his great services in bringing about the 
Restoration, by his influence with General Monk.
— 
He died at Werrington, in 1676, aged 75." The 
learned Dr. Humphrey Prideaux, of whom we have 
given some account in a preceding note, was a 
grandson of Sir Nicholas mentioned above.
In this 
church is also a memorial for Lawrence Merther, 
vicar of the parish, who died in the early part of the 
loth century.
Formerly there were several chapels in this 
parish : at Trethyllic, near Place Grounds, was a 
chapel with a burying ground; St. Sampson's 
chapel stood at the top of the town, near Place 
House ; St. Saviour's chapel, of which the east wall 
is standing, occupied the brink of the precipice 
which overlooks the town ; about a mile and a half 
from the town, stood St. Cadock's chapel, which 
had a tower, the pinnacles of which were used in 
rebuilding the tower of Little Petherick church ; 
and, between Stepper Point and St. Saviour's was 
another chapel, the name of which is lost.
Hals 
speaks of a nunnery, at Credis, in this parish, the 
supposed site of which belongs to the poor of 
Lanivet.
Padstow haven is navigable to Wadebridge, 
whither vessels of about 40 or 50 tons go up with 
lime, coals, salt, &c.
Iron and coals are imported 
from Wales ; grocery and other goods from Bristol ; 
and timber from Norway : the exports are corn, 
malt, and block tin.
On the south of the town, Mr.
Rawlings has recently erected a handsome house, 
which commands a fine view of the harbour.
Padstow enjoys a small portion of the pilchard 
fishery.
The harbour, according to Heather's Pilot, 
" lies about seventeen leagues, E.
N. E.
one half E.
from Cape Cornwall ; it has a narrow shoal entrance, 
and it is frequented only by small vessels.
The en- 
trance of this harbour is very narrow ; the deepest 
water is nearest to the westernmost shore.
About 
one mile within the entrance there is a cove, where 
.small vessels lie aground at low water.
The har- 
bour lies about a mile above this cove, and dries at 
low water.
The tides rise here twenty-four feet.
It 
has frequently happened in the winter season, in 
gales of wind at N.
W. and N.
N. W.
that ships 
have been lost on this coast entirely for want of a 
proper knowledge of the harbour of Padstow, which 
is a good and safe place for ships of any burden, 
having never less than three fathoms at low water in 
the channel, which in the narrowest part is 70 
fathoms wide, and is bounded on the west by the 
Steep Cliff, which is bold to, and on the east by the 
Dunbar Sand, which ought to be carefully avoided.
This harbour is a most excellent outlet for ships 
bound to the northward and eastward." To this it 
may be added, that the want of a light-house at 
Trevose-head, near Padstow harbour, is greatly felt 
by mariners, as it would save many vessels from 
being wrecked.
Great damage was sustained, by 
the shipping, on this part of the coast, in the winter 
of 1814-15.
Paul.] — The parish of St. Paul lies on theAvestcrn 
point of Mount's Bay, in the west division of the 
hundred of Penwith, three miles and a quarter south 
from Penzance.
Mousehole (celebrated as the resi- 
dence of old Dolly Pentreath, the last person known 
to speak the Cornish language) and Newlin, are 
villages in this parish.
At these places, which are 
numerously inhabited by fishermen, the mackerel 
and pilchard fisheries are carried on to a great ex- 
tent ; and, in the early part of the mackerel season, 
the London market is chiefly supplied from thence, 
by the way of Portsmouth.
Penzance and most of 
the Cornish towns are also supplied in abundance 
with all the different sorts of fish which frequent tins 
part of the coast.
On the 23d of July, 1595, a party of Spaniards, 
who, as Camden observes, were the only Spaniards 
that ever landed in this country as enemies, landed 
near Mousehole, and committed great devastation ; 
burning Newlin, Mousehole, &c.
Jenkin Keigwin, 
who was killed by the Spaniards on this occasion, 
was the first person whose burial occurs in the pre- 
sent parish register ; the earlier registers having 
been destroyed, when the invaders set fire to the 
church.
There was formerly a weekly market at Mouse- 
hole, with a fair for seven clays at the festival of St.
Bartholomew ; but they are understood to have been 
discontinued ever since the destruction of the place 
by the Spaniards.
It is certain that Mousehole was 
anciently a place of considerable trade : about the 
year 1392, a new quay was constructed there.
— 
Mousehole is sometimes known by the name of 
Port-Enys.
Mousehole chapel, which had been a 
sea-mark, was destroyed by the encroachments of 
the sea prior to the year 1414, when Bishop Stafford 
wrote a circular letter, exhorting the inhabitants of 
his diocese to contribute towards its rebuilding.
It 
probably was then rebuilt, and again destroyed in 
the descent of the Spaniards.
On a little island 
opposite the village was a chapel dedicated to St.
Clement ; the island still retaining his name.
— 
There are said to have been two other chapels in or 
near the village.
Formerly, also, there was a chapel at Newlin.
In the parish church, supposed to have been dedi- 
cated to St. Paulinus, Bishop of Rochester, is the 
following curious record of the burning of the church 
by the Spaniards : — 
" The Spungier burnt this church in the 1 595." 
The 
CORNWALL.
483 
The burning of the church is also r corded, by an 
inscription en the parish register, as follows : — 
" Register of St. Pawle, in the county of Cornwall, 
from the 23 daye Julie, the yeare of our gracious 
J-onl God J595,on the which daie, soon after the sun 
was risen, the church, tower, bells, and all other 
things pertaining to the same, together with the houses 
and goods was burned and spoiled by the Spaniards, 
intta saide parish, being Wensdaic the dave afore- 
said, in the 37th yeare of the raigne of our Soveraine 
Lache Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, 
traunce, and Ireland, Queene, Defender Jt the 
A'aithe, &c.
" Per me Johnem Tremearne, Vicarium." 
It is said that the force of the fire consumed 
nearly the whole of the church ; but there is a tradi- 
tion, that the south porch escaped the flames ; and 
in confirmation of that tradition, it deserves to be 
mentioned, that when that porch was repaired, about 
eignt years ago, one of the wooden supporters, at 
the end nearest the body of the church, was found 
to have been partially burnt.
The church contains 
a monument to the memory of William Godolphin, 
Esq of Trewarveneth, the last of that branch of the 
family.
There is a respectable alms-house in this parish, 
lor twelve poor men and women.
It was built 
agreeably to the bequest of Capt.
Stephen Hitchens!
of the Royal Navy, who had acquired a handsome 
Jortune by cruizing on the Jamaica station.
He 
?iS i skn , d in the y ear 1709 > a "" left the 
sum of 600/.
for the purpose of building this alms- 
house, f he management of the charity is vested in 
14 trustees.
All the expenses of erection, &c.
hav- 
ing been defrayed, the lands which were purchased 
with Captain Hitchens's bequest, now produces 
nearly /0/.
a year.
Pelynt.— Pelynt, or Plynt, is in the hundred of 
West, four miles west-north-west from West Looe 
At the time of the Domesday survey, the manor was 
held by Halgar, under the Earl of Cornwall • in the 
year K>43, it was given, together with the advowson 
V ^ a tH rch ' y , the exec,,to ™ °f Giles de Cancellis, 
co the Abbot and Convent of Newenham, in Devon- 
shire, who ml 356, obtained a grant of a fair for three 
days at the festival of John the Baptist ; and there 
is still a cattle fair on Mid-summer day.
The Buller 
family have been Lords of the manor upwards of a 
JZ- m l{ i 1 1G m ?
nor of 1Ia11 ' also in th e Bullers, 
anciently belonged to the convent of Newenham.- 
The manor of Mucklarnie is the property of the 
Rev. ten- H.
Trelawney, Baronet ; as is Trenake, 
anti^l n -" S6at ° f A?
ymS ' n0W a fa ™ hoase 
and al,o tne manor of Trelawney, which has been 
the chief seat of the family ever since the year 1628 
croVrT 1 ^ rrehwile y the » Purchased it of the 
croyvi .
Trelawney manor belonged, at an early 
period to the Bodrugans ; and w& subsequently 1 
the Champernowns and Bonvilles.
The Bonvilles 
were an ancient Devonshire family ; respec in " 
which, rt „ B remarkable circumstance/that the de- 
vastation of cml war destroyed three generations 
within the brief period of two months.
At the battle 
of Wakefield, on the last day of December, A.
D. 
1460, Lord Bonville witnessed the death of his son, 
Sir William Bonville, and of his grandson, William 
Lord Harrington, who enjoyed that title by having 
married the heiress of Lord Harrington; in the 
month of February following, the bereaved old man 
was taken prisoner at the second battle of St. Al- 
ban's ; and, although his life had been promised, he 
was beheaded by order of the Queen, who cherished 
a spirit of resentment against him, on account of his 
having been one of those who had the custody of 
King Henry's person after the battle of Northamp- 
ton.
On the accession of Edward IV.
Elizabeth 
Lady Harrington, had a large dower assigned her 
out of Lord Bonvill's estates in this county ; and 
the manor of Trelawny, with other estates, passed, 
by marriage, to Thomas Grey, Marquis of Dorset 
on the attainder of whose grandson, Henry Duke of 
Suffolk, it was seized by the crown.
The north aisle of Pelynt church was anciently 
appropriated to the manor of Trelawny ; and, for- 
merly, it contained a monumental effigy, which ac- 
cording to tradition, was that of Otes, or Otho de 
Bodwyan, some time lord of the manor.
In the 
church which is said to have been the burial place 
of St. Juncus, are several monuments of the Butlers 
Achyms, and Trelawnys.
On the monument of one 
of the last mentioned family appears the following 
inscription : — * 
June 7, 1836 
Edward Trelawnye 
Ana : We wander, alter, dy.
U what a bubble, vapour, puff of breath, 
A nest of wormes, a lump of pallid earth, 
Is mud wald man ; before we mount on hi<*h 
We cope with change, we wander, alter, dy.
Causidkum claudit tumulus, miraris, honestum 
Oentibus hoc cunctis dixeiis esse novum.
Here lyes an honest lawyer, wot ye what > 
A thing for all the world to wonder at.
Pendarves.]— Pendarves, situated about threrr 
miles north east of Clowance, is a seat of the Stack- 
house family.
It derived its name from Sir William 
J^endarvis, who resided here in the reign of Queen 
Anne.
The house is a large, handsome, modern 
building, and two of its fronts consist of squared 
granite.
It is erected on an eminence, and com- 
mands some extensive views over the western part 
of the county.
The southern front overlooks a laWe 
piece of artificial water; and in a contiguous fieldls 
a cromlech, consisting of three upright stones, and 
another covering them.
r^ TI ^- C ^ TLE -~ PentiI3 y Castle > tlie Property 
of John Tihe Coryton, Esq. is beautifully situated 
on the swelling banks of the Tamar, in the parish of 
Pillaton, about three miles below Cotehele The 
declivities towards the river are most luxuriantly 
wooded, and fine tall elms and limes, picturesque 
from age, stretch their broad branches over the ap- 
proach 
484 
CORNWALL.
proach to the mansion, which obtained the appella- 
tion of castle from its embattled form.
Mr. Gilpin, 
in his observations on the western parts of England, 
records the following particulars respecting a former 
proprietor of this mansion : — 
" Mr. Tilly, [Sir James Tillie] once the owner of 
Pentilly-House, was a celebrated atheist of the last 
age.
He was a man of wit, and had by rote all the 
ribaldry and common-place jests against religion 
and scripture, which are well suited to display pert- 
ness and folly, and to unsettle a giddy mind ; but 
are offensive to men of sense, whatever their opinions 
may be ; and are neither intended nor adapted to 
investigate truth.
The brilliancy of Mr. Tilly's wit, 
however, carried him a degree further than we often 
meet with in the annals of profaneness.
In general, 
the witty atheist is satisfied with entertaining his 
contemporaries ; but Mr. Tilly wished to have his 
sprightliness known to posterity.
With this view, 
in ridicule of the resurrection, he obliged his exe- 
cutors to place his dead body, in his usual garb, and 
in his elbow chair, upon the top of a hill, and to 
arrange on a table before him, bottles, glasses, 
pipes, and tobacco.
In this situation he ordered 
himself to be immured in a tower of such dimensions 
as he prescribed, where he proposed, he said, pa- 
tiently to wait the event.
All this was done ; and 
the tower, still inclosing its tenant, remains as a 
monument of his impiety and prophaneness.
The 
country people shudder as they go near it.
•" Religio pavklos tenebat agrestes 
Dira loci : — sylvam saxumque tremebant." 
" The fear-struck hind, with supertitious gaze, 
Tnsmbling aiul pale, th' unhallowM tomb surveys, 
Ant!
half expects, while horror chills his breast, 
To see the spectre of its impious guest." 
The tower, mentioned above, was placed on a 
lofty bank, which its owner denominated Mount 
Ararat.
It appears, however, that the directions of 
his will were not punctually complied with ; for, on 
opening the lower apartment, or vault, not long 
since, Sir James Tillie's remains were found to 
have been deposited in a coffin in the usual manner.
His effigies in white marble, which was placed in 
the upper apartment, still remains.
The estate of Pentilly was left by Sir James to 
his sister's son, James Woolley, who took the name 
of Tilly.
It came, by marriage, to the father of the 
present proprietor, who has recently pulled down 
the greater part of the old embattled building, and 
erected a gothie structure on the site.
Penryn.] — This is a large borough and market 
town, pleasantly seated on the declivity of a hill on 
the opposite side of the water to St. Gluvias, in 
which parish it stands.
It is in the hundred of 
Kirrier, 50 miles south-west from Launceston, and 
266| west-south-west from London.
Some of our 
antiq jnnes have contended that Penryn occupies 
the site of a wood, which is mentioned in a Cornish 
MS.
play of the Creation, where the following 
passage alludes particularly to this place and neigh- 
bourhood : — " Blessing of the Father on you ; you 
shall have your reward ; your wages is prepared 
together with all the fields of Bokelland, and the 
wood of Penryn entirely, the Island, and Arwenick, 
Tregemher, and Kegyllack." Mr. Tonkin, pos- 
sessed with this idea, states, that many " ancient 
trees were growing in the streets" in his time.
But 
it seems more probable, that the wood mentioned in 
the MS.
was contiguous to the town, instead of in 
it.
The manuscript is preserved in the Bodleian 
Library at Oxford.
According to Tanner, " Walter Bronescomb, the 
good bishop of Exeter, about the year 1270, built a 
collegiate church upon a moor called Glasenish, at 
the bottom of his park at Penryn, to the honour of 
the blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Thomas of Can- 
terbury.
It consisted of a Provost, a Sacrist, eleven 
Prebendaries, seven Vicars and six Choristers ; and 
was certified 26th Henry Vlll.
to be worth 210/.
13^.
2d.
per arm.
in toto; 205/.
10s.
6a.
clave.' 1 '' 
Some of the ruins of the college, which, according 
to Leland, was castellated, and had three strong- 
towers, were to be seen a few years ago, but are 
now hidden by modern buildings.
The manor be- 
longed to the See of Exeter, and was probably made 
a borough by one of the bishops in the thirtieth of 
Edward the First.
Thomas Button, who was se- 
cond successor to Walter in the bishopric, chal- 
lenged the right of holding a market and a fair at 
Penryn, in as full a manner as had been enjoyed by 
his predecessors.
A Monday's market, and a lair 
at the festival of St. Thomas, the martyr, were 
granted to the Bishop of Exeter in 1258, and a fair 
at the festival of St. Vitalis in 1312.
The charter 
of King James I.
grants two markets to be held on 
Wednesday and Saturday, and three fairs, May 1, 
July 7, and December 21.
The fairs arc still kept 
up, and there is now a fourth on the 8th of Octo- 
ber : they are all considerable cattle-fairs.
There 
is now only one market, on Saturday, well sup- 
plied with butchers' meat, fish, poultry, and vege- 
tables.
The Market-House and Town-Hall stand near 
the middle of the principal street, from which some 
others diverge at right angles.
Several small 
streams issue from the eminences west of the town, 
and supply its inhabitants with water ; one of them, 
flowing "with rapidity over some large masses of 
stone, forms a singular cascade, and, with its ac- 
companiments of mill-wheels and cottages, presents 
a scene exceedingly picturesque.
The town was 
first incorporated in the eighteenth of James the 
first, and its government vested in a Mayor, eight 
Aldermen, twelve Coinmon-Councilmen, a Re- 
corder, and inferior officers.
The right of election 
is in the Mayor, Aldermen, and all the inhabitants 
paying scot and lot.
The number of voters at the 
last election (1812) was nearly 300.
The popula- 
tion of this town, as returned under the last act, is 
2,713 ; the number of houses 352.
The boundaries 
of 
CORNWALL.
485 
of the borough extend about half a mile north of the 
town.
The corporation is possessed of a silver cup and 
cover, presented by Jane Lady Killegrew, bearing 
the following inscription : — 
" From Maior to Maior to the towne of Permarin 
when they received me that was in great misery, 
J. K.
1633." 
According to Hals, this lady had gone on board 
two Dutch ships, with a party of ruffians, and hav- 
ing slain two Spanish merchants, their owners, 
robbed them of two barrels of Spanish pieces of 
eight.
The lady, he adds, was by means of great 
interest pardoned ; but her accomplices were all 
executed.
The more probable story is, that, as 
Lady Killegrew had been divorced from her hus- 
band, site was protected by the inhabitants of Pen- 
ryn, who were disaffected to Sir John Killegrew, 
and his rising town of Smith wick.
It is related by Heywood, in his Apology for 
Actors, published some time in the reign of .lames 
I. that,.
about twelve years, or less, before that time, 
a company of strollers, playing late in the night at 
Perin (Penryn) in Cornwall, happening to be repre- 
senting a battle on the stage, and suddenly struck 
up a loud alarm, with their drums and trumpets, 
just as a party of Spaniards, who had privately 
landed the same night, were inarching to make a 
real attack on the town, but hearing the alarm, they, 
apprehending a discovery, retired with precipitation 
to.
their boats, only firing a few shots by way of 
bravado; thus were the towns -men delivered from 
an impending danger by the accidental representa- 
tion of a play.
Penryn was a royal garrison during 
the civil Avars of Charles : in the month of March, 
ld46, it was surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax, 
for the parliament.
A grammar school was founded at Penryn, and 
endowed with 6/.
13$.
4r/.
a year, out of the Duchy 
of Cornwall, by Queen Elizabeth.
There was for- 
merly a chapel of ease in this town ; and there are 
now meeting houses for the Independents and Ar- 
minian Methodists.
The manor has belonged, from time immemorial, 
to the Bishops of Exeter, who formerly had a coun- 
try house in or near the borough.
Penzance.] — This is a market town, seated on 
the north-west side of Mount's Bay, in the parish of 
Madron, in the hundred of Pen with, 73 miles south- 
west by west from Launceston, and 289± west- 
south-west from London.
" Pensantes," says Leland, " about a myle from 
Mousehoole, standing fast in the shore of Mount 
Bay, ys the westest market towne of all Cornwall, 
and no socur for botes or shyppes, but a forced pare 
or key.
Ther ys but a chapel yn the sayd towne, 
as ys yn Newlyn.
For theyr paroche chyrches be 
more than a myle off." 
It is deserving of notice, that the road from 
Marazion to Penzance is conducted over a bank of 
vol.
i. — no.
35.
sand, which separates Mount's Bay from a large 
tract of marsh land.
The greater part of the latter 
is a steril unprofitable bog : but the laudable exer- 
tions of an individual has rescued and preserved 
thirty-six acres from the inundations of the tide ; 
and, by skilful management, has succeeded in ob- 
taining corn and potatoes from the renovated land.
The whole of this district was occasionally covered 
with water, and always immersed by the sea at 
spring tides.
To carry off the superfluity, and se- 
cure the land from future inundations, were the ob- 
jects of consideration.
This was effected by intro- 
ducing an aqueduct, or wooden pipe, of nine inches- 
in diameter, through 171 yards of sand, and thereby 
opening a communication between the sea and a 
reservoir at the lower part of the marsh.
The pipe 
is in some places 24 feet beneath the surface of the 
bank, and is fixed (on that part of the sand called 
Half Ebb) to a large rock, to preserve it from re- 
moval by the turbulent waves.
Its mouth towards 
the sea is secured by a valve, to prevent the intru- 
sion of salt-water, and is always closed by the 
pressure of the swelling tide.
At the opposite end, 
of the pipe is another valve, opening into the reser- 
voir, which is eighteen feet square by eight feet deep,, 
and properly situated to receive the drainage water 
from ali parts of the inclosed marsh.
Several open 
canals, or trenches, cut at right angles, convey the 
water from all parts of the inclosure to the reservoir ; 
and on the retiring of the tide, the collected water 
rushes through the aqueduct with great velocity.
— 
The land, having been so long saturated with sea- 
water, was unproductive for the first four years ; 
but it has since rewarded the adventurer for his ex- 
pense and perseverance.
The labourers, when 
cutting the open drains, discovered an earthen pot, 
containing nearly one thousand Roman copper coins.
. 
They were very much corroded by the salt-water ; 
but many of the impressions were sufficiently legible 
to identify the emperors, who lived between the years 
260 and 350.
Etymologists differ with respect to the derivation .
of the name of this town.
By some it is supposed 
to signify the " Saints Head;" an opinion which is * 
supported by the circumstance of " the Baptist's 
head in a charger" being the corporation arms : : 
others conceive it to have originated from its situa- 
tion, and that it was thence called Pensavas, or, the 
Head of the Channel.
The petty sessions for the west division of the 
hundred of Pen with are holden in this town.
The • 
market is on Thursday ; and, of late years, there 
has also been a market on Saturday, abundantly 
supplied with provisions.
The fairs are on the 
Thursday before Advent, the Thursday after Trinity : 
Sunday, and Corpus Christi day.
About the time of the restoration, Penzance was =.
added, as a fifth, to the coinage-towns ; and all the, : 
tki is now coined here, and at Truro.
Penzance is particularly distinguished for its 
cheap fish-market, the -mildness of the.
seasons, and 
6 o th« - 
48<J 
CORNWALL.
the fertility of the neighbouring lands, which in 
some instances have been let at the annual rent of 
twelve and thirteen pounds an acre ;* and even the 
average rental per acre of the land in the vicinity of 
the town may be fairly estimated at seven or eight 
pounds.
This is a convincing proof that the soil is 
either of a superior native quality, or derives some 
considerable advantage from situation ; and these 
circumstances, connected with other local peculiari- 
ties, have occasioned a considerable increase of 
population, by the influx of inhabitants from the 
neighbouring villages.
In 1801, the number of 
houses was' 694; of people, 3,382: in 1811, 784 
houses, and 4,022 inhabitants.
In Carew's Survey, Penzance is represented as 
" not so regardable for his substance, as memorable 
for the late accident of the Spaniards firing," when 
a few of them invaded Cornwall in the year 1595.
They did not, however, acquire many laurels ; 
though for a few days their incursions spread consi- 
derable alarm through this part of the county.
— 
Spain, at that period, was mistress of Bretagne, 
whence four gallies were dispatched to invade the 
English coast.
On the 23d of July, as already 
mentioned, they landed near Mousehole, and com- 
menced their depredations by burning several houses, 
the church of Paul, and afterwards Mousehole itself.
Meeting with little resistance, they proceeded to 
Newlyn, and afterwards to Penzance, where Sir 
Francis Godolphin had ordered the inhabitants to 
assemble at the market-place : but when he himself 
arrived, he found, says Carew,  " only two resolute 
shot which stood at his commaund, and some ten or 
twelve others that followed him, most of them his 
owne servants : the rest, surprised with feare, fled, 
whom neither with his perswasions, nor threatening 
with his rapier drawn, hee could recall." Thus 
situated, Sir Francis was obliged to desert the town 
to the enemy, who entered at three different places, 
and set it on fire ; and having also burnt Newlyn, 
returned to their gallies.
The next day they seemed 
to meditate a fresh landing ; but the numbers of the 
Cornish being augmented, and their courage in- 
creased proportionably, the Spaniards desisted ; and 
finding themselves annoyed by the bullets and ar- 
rowes from the shore, removed to a greater distance, 
and on the day following sought security in flight, 
as means were preparing to interrupt them.
This 
enterprize of the Spaniards appears, from Carew, 
to have been favoured by a prophecy, (believed by 
the vulgar,) in the Cornish language, which inti- 
mated, that those should land on the rock of Merlin, 
who would burn Paul's Church, Penzance, and 
Newlyn ; and, indeed, continues our author, " so is 
the rocke called where the enemy first stept on 
shore." 
* It is not perhaps generally known, that the Cornish acre, 
by which the land is usually estimated in this county, is some- 
what larger than the statute at re, being in nearly the proportion 
of five to six.
The measures are also: different from -the stand- 
ard Winchester measure.
A Cornish bushel contains fcwenty- 
From this time Penzance seems to have increased 
both in size and population ; hence the inhabitants 
were induced to erect a chapel of ease nearer home, 
as the mother, or parish church, is situated at Ma- 
dron, nearly two miles westward.
This chapel, 
built before 1612, but not consecrated till 1680, is 
dedicated to St. Mary, and furnished with a small 
whitewashed spire.
The government of Penzance is vested in a Mayor, 
Recorder, twelve Aldermen, and twenty-four Com- 
mon-Councilmen.
The streets are paved.
Many 
of the houses are large and respectable habitations : 
and about fifty years ago, a new pier was erected at 
the expence of the Corporation, unaided by any 
Parliamentary grant.
In the vicinity of the town 
are several pleasant walks, through shady dingles, 
and over swelling hills.
A charity school was endowed here in 1711, by 
John Buller, Esq. of Morval, who conferred a simi- 
lar benefaction on each of the boroughs of Gram- 
pound, East Looe, Liskeard, and Saltash.
Among the various religious sects residing here, 
may be^ specified Methodists, Quakers, Presbyteri- 
ans, and Jews ; each having a separate place of 
worship.
Penzance is said to have been plundered, in the 
year 1646, by the troops of Sir Thomas Fairfax, as 
a punishment for the kindness which the inhabitants 
had shown to Lord Goring's and Lord Hopton'p 
forces.
From this town a considerable export trade in tin 
and pilchards is carried on ; and, besides a number 
of fishing vessels always lying in the commodious 
bay, frigates and excise cutters are often stationed 
here to watch the smugglers, who, in defiance of the 
laws, and regardless of its agents, prosecute their 
illicit traffic on this coast with extraordinary audacity 
and success ; the various stratagems which they 
employ in.
landing and secreting their liquors, fur- 
nishing singular instances of sagacity and cunning.
The exertions of magistrates, excise officers, and 
soldiers, are equally ineffectual to suppress this 
clandestine trade ; and tliongh severe penalties are 
inflicted on those who are detected, in almost every 
session, their successful proceedings furnish a con- 
stant theme of conversation in most parts of the 
county.
In the month of October, 1754, the following 
curious phenoiif^nou was seen in the heavens, by 
two persons of St. Just, six miles westward of Pen- 
zance, as recorded in the Gentleman's Magazine : — 
" About ten o'clock at night they saw in the sky a 
huge fleet of ships, aiuf soon after a cloud came 
before it, the scene was changed into an army, or 
armies, seeming to be smartly engaged in battle.
— 
It lasted fifteen minutes, and was seen by divers 
four gallons, or three bushels Winchester; and a pound in 
weight, js commonly eighteen or twenty ounces.
The farmers 
in this district make a practice of letting their milch cows for a 
term of forty weeks, at a sum varying from 5l.
10s.
to ll.
other 
i 
CORNWALL; 
487 
other persons.'" This, it rosy be presumed, was 
one of the phenomena of the aurora-borealis.
The Royal Geological Society of Cornwall hold 
their sittings in Penzance.
Their respective apart- 
ments are fitted up in a very handsome and appro- 
priate manner.
The museum, as it is termed, is a 
long spacious room, containing extensive cabinets, 
divided, like the Leskean Collection, into the geolo- 
gical, systematic, and economical departments, well 
furnished with splendid and instructive specimens.
The society, however, are understood to have it in 
contemplation to erect a new and more elegant mu- 
seum.
* 
Perran.] — There arc three parishes of this name 
in the county, all deriving their name from St. Piran, of 
whom we shall presently speak : Perran in Zabuloe, 
or St. Perran in the Sands, in the hundred of Pyder, 
seven miles west-north-west from St. Michael's ; 
Perran Uthnoe, in the east division of the hundred 
of Penwith, one mile and a half south-east from 
Marazion ; and Perran Arvvothal, in the east divi- 
sion of the hundred of Kirrier, four miles north from 
Penryn.
Perran Zabuloe is thus described by 
Messrs.
Lysons : — " This parish is said to have been 
the residence and burial place of St. Piran, the 
patron of the tinners, of whom the legend, as given 
by Hals, is, that ' he swam over from Ireland on a 
mill-stone, and lived 200 years after his emigration:' 
but this differs from Capgrave's account, who says 
nothing of the mill-stone ; his story is, that ' after 
having lived to the age of- 200 years and upwards, 
and 
end 
finding his health declining, he determined to 
his 
days in Cornwall.' The two preceding 
parishes take their name from the same saint.
— 
' This parish,' as Carew observes, ' but too well 
brooketh his surname in SaOu/s, for the light sand 
carried up by the north wind from the sea shore, 
unify continueth his covering and marrying the land 
adjoinant, so as the distresse of this deluge drove 
the inhabitants to remove their church : howbeit 
when it meeteth with any crossing brooke, the same 
{by a secret antipathy) restraineth and barreth his 
* At (lie last quarterly meeting of the Society, holder) in the 
year 1SI4, E.
W. Stackhouse, Esq. Vice- President, took the 
Chair, and announced the resignation of Lord de Dmistanvilie, 
as Patron ; on which a letter was read from the Lord Warden 
of the Stannaries, communicating the gracious intention of his 
Itoyal Highness the Prince Regent to become a patron of the 
Society, with a donation of a hundred guineas.
It was then resolved, that the Earl of Yarmouth and Lord de 
Dunstanville, be requested to accept the office of Vice- Patrons.
An address of thanks to the Prince, for the distinguished honour 
which his Royal Highness had been pleased to confer on the 
Society was then ordered.
Letters were afterwards read from 
Dr. Kidd and Dr. Edward Daniel Clarke, Professors of Mine- 
ralogy in the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
A letter 
was also read Iron) Sir Ralph Milbanke, President of the So- 
ciety for preventing Explosion in Coal Mines; requesting the 
co-operation of the Society ; on which Mr. Rose Price observ- 
ed, that although (he firedamp did not exist in the Cornish 
mines, yet, that an evil of equal importance and of daily oc- 
currence did demand the interference of that Society — he al- 
luded to the fatal effects produced by Uie explosion of gtm- 
farder incroaching that, way/ It was probably in 
consequence of tins notion that the inhabitants, 
thinking such situation secure, removed their church 
only about 300 yards, it being on the opposite side 
of a brook.
In the old church was the shrine of St.
Piran, in which his relics were carefully preserved : 
there was a great resort of pilgrims to make obla- 
tions at his shrine, as appears by a deed in the 
registry of the see of Exeter, bearing date 1485.
— 
The brook above mentioned, having been dried up 
by the adits made from time to time for the purpose 
of working the mines, the new church lost all the 
protection it could have derived from it ; and Bor- 
lase, in a MS.
account of an excursion in 1755, 
speaks of it ' as being then in no little danger, the 
sands being spread all around it :' it stood among 
the sand hills with only a solitary cottage near it, 
half buried in sand, and the porch frequently so 
blocked up, that it was difficult to obtain entrance; 
it was determined, therefore, about ten years ago, to 
build a new church near the village of Lambourne, 
and the centre of the parish : thither the pillars and 
the font, which appear to have belonged to the ori- 
ginal church, were removed, and the new church 
was consecrated by Dr. Fisher, then bishop of Exe- 
ter, in 1803.
When we visited Perran-Zabuloe in 
that year, the former church, which had been un- 
roofed, was nearly filled with sand.
The great 
tithes of this parish are held on lease by Francis 
Enys, Esq. under the Dean and Chapter of Exeter, 
who are patrons of the vicarage.
Near Tywarn- 
haile-house is a small island, on which was an an- 
cient chapel, called Chapel-Engarder ; the ruins of 
it remained in 1733.
There were chapels also at 
Castelstock-Uual ; near Bethawhall ; atLambourn, 
dedicated to St. Edmund ; near Perran Porth ; and 
Chapel- Widdan, near St. Piran's Well : the tradi- 
tion is, that most of these were oratories, in which 
St. Piran celebrated divine service.
St. Piran's 
Weil is on a tenement called Caer or Carn-kief, 
near Lambourn, which belonged to the Dean and 
Chapter of Exeter ; it has been lately purchased by 
powder, owing to the use of iron rammers, and he exhibited -a 
bar, composed of a metallic alloy, incapable of producing sparks 
by collision with silicious fragments.
The Treasurer announc- 
ed the following donations towards a fund for building a Mu- 
seum, and for defraying expences in forming a geological map 
for the mining districts of Cornwall, for which thanks were 
voted: — His Royal Highness the Prince Regent 105/.
Lord 
de Dunstanville 50/.
Sir John St. Aubin 30/.
Sir William 
Lemon 10/.
10*.
J. H.
Tremayne, Esq. M.
P. 10/.
10s.
Sir 
Vyel Vyvyan 10/.
10s.
W. T.'Praed, Esq. 5/.
5s.
Doicoath 
Adventures 25/.
Cook's Kitchen Adventurers 15/.
Huel 
Fanny Adventurers 10/.
&c.
The Secretary next proceeded 
to read a communication from Sir Christopher Hawkins, con- 
taining an extremely interesting account of the gold found 
in the stream works of Ludock, accompanied with fine speci- 
mens of the same.
This gentleman also presented some rich 
varieties of lead ore, with their analysis ; a paper was likewise 
read from Mr. Majendie, intituled " A Sketch of the Geology 
of the Lizard District," containing the result of an investiga- 
tion hito the boundaries and positions of the serpentine forma- 
tion.
1 John 
488 
CORNWALL, 
John Thomas, Esq. under the powers of.
the land 
tax redemption act : this well, which is enclosed by.
an ancient stone building, was formerly much re- 
sorted to as a cure for the rickets.
About one mile- 
and a half from Lambourn, on the downs, is St.
Piran's Round, one of the ancient amphitheatres 
already spoken of.
There are also several ancient 
earth-works in this parish." The manor, or honour 
of St. Piran, long since destroyed by the sands, an- 
ciently belonged to a college of Canons, by whom, 
in the reign of Edward the Confessor, it was held 
free of all taxes.
At a later period, the manor is 
said to have been the property and seat of the family 
of St. Piran, from which it successively passed to 
the Kendals and Vincents.
The Lords claimed 
Freewarren, and had tin-works, which lost their 
value, by the fluctuation of the sands.
A farm, with 
a large tract of land, chiefly covered with sand, now 
belonging to the Dean and Chapter of Exeter, is 
supposed to have been the site of the manor There 
are many other manors in the parish, the history of 
which presents nothing remarkable.
Rose, Pen- 
wartha, Lambourn, Callestocke, Lundrawna, and 
Millingy, are villages in the parish of Perran Za- 
buloe.
At Millingy a fair is occasionally holden, 
and another at a place called 
Tuesday.
Millingy 
Penhallow on Easter 
A considerable stream runs through 
and falls into the sea at Perran-Porth, 
where there is a fine sandy beach, much frequented 
as a bathing place, by the neighbouring gentry.
At Gold-Sithney, in the parish of Perran Uthnoe, 
a large fair is holden on the 5th of August for cattle, 
coarse cloths, hardware, and various other articles.
Tradition states, that this fair was originally kept at 
Sithney, near Helstone, and that some persons ran 
off with the glove, by the suspension of which to a 
pole the fair was by its charter held, and brought it 
to this village, where, it is added, the glove was 
hung out for many years at the time of the fair.
It 
has been mentioned, in confirmation of this tradition, 
that the lord of the manor, as proprietor of the fair, 
was accustomed to present a shilling a year to the 
church-wardens of Sithney.
A chapel dedicated to 
St. James formerly stood at Gold-Sithney.
The 
manor of Gold-Sithney, near the property of Sir 
John Trevellian, formerly belonged to the priory at 
St. Michael's Mount.
Acton Castle, by the sea- 
side, now the property and residence of Buckley 
Praed, Esq. was built by John Stackhouse, Esq.
Perran-Arwothal, is a daughter church to Sti- 
thians.
The manor, which includes two-thirds of 
the parish, belongs to Lord de Dunstanville.
In this 
parish is a manufacture for arsenic.
Petherwin.] — At South Petherwin, in the north 
division of the hundred of East, three miles south- 
west from Launeeston, are two holiday fairs ; on 
the second Tuesday in May, and the second Tues- 
day in October.
William Eliot, Esq. M.
P. has 
erected a new mansion, for his own residence, on the 
manor of Treburesy.
PmiXACK.] — At Phillack, in the east division of 
the hundred of Penwith, nine miles west-south-west 
from Redruth, are the Hayle Copper Works.
There 
is a daily bye-post from Marazion to Hayle.
Pillaton-.-] — In this parish, which lies in the 
middle division of the hundred of East, three miles 
and a half south from Callington, stands Pentilly 
Castle, the seat of Mr. Coryton, of which we have 
already given an account.
There is a fair in the 
parish on Whit-Tuesday.
Penter's Cross is the 
only village in Pillaton.
Polperro.] — The little fishing town of Polperro 
is situated in the parish of Lansalloes, and partly in 
that of Talland, in the hundred of West.
It has a 
small market on Fridays, and a holiday fair on the 
10th of J uly ; when a mock mayor is elected by a 
mock council of aldermen, and much mirth and re- 
velry ensue.
The situation of the town is highly 
romantic ; the houses, being seated on the sides of 
two steep rocky hills, which form a very narrow, 
valley, through which runs a little river.
The pilchard fishery, and an extensive hook-and- 
liue fishery, which supplies Plymouth, Bath, and 
many other places, with turbot, plaice, whitings, 
dories, pipers, &c.
are carried on here.
Polperro has a harbour for vessels of about 150 
tons burthen : coals, and lime-stone are the chief 
imports : grain is occasionally exported.
Here is a 
boy's charity-school, endowed with the interest 
of 200/.
given by Captain Kendall ; and a girl's 
school, endowed by Mrs. Kendall, with the interest 
of 100/.
Formerly there was a chapel at Polperro, 
dedicated to St. Peter : on the brow of the western 
hill, above the town, some of its remains, called the 
Chapel House, are yet visible.
Poughill.] — This parish is in the hundred of 
Stratton, one mile and a quarter north-west by west 
from the town which gives name to the hundred.
It 
was in this parish that the memorable battle of 
Stratton was fought, when victory crowned the 
efforts of the ill-fated Charles.
The battle was 
fought on a hill, now called Stamford's Hill, from, 
its hiaving been the position of the Earl of Stamford,.
the Parliamentary General.
The Earl had thirteen, 
pieces of cannon, and 5,400 men.
A little after day- 
break, on the 16th of May, 1642, he was attacked 
with a very inferior force by the Royalists, who as-- 
cended four sides of the hill at once, and, after at 
j desperate struggle, met together on the summit 
J about three in the afternoon, having entirely cleared 
' the hill of the enemy, and taken their camp, bag- 
I gage, ammunition, and cannon.
The following cu- 
j rious and interesting account of the site of this bat- 
j tie, is transcribed from a letter, written by the Rev.
! Walter Hart, to Bishop Lyttleton, and preserved in 
! the Marquis of Buckingham's manuscript library, 
at Stowe.
" Port Eliot, August 13, 1743.
" With pleasure, attention, and Clarendon's His- 
tory in my great coat pocket, I surveyed the ground 
whereon the battle of Stratton was fought.
'Tis an 
oblong hill, with two batteries raised on its eminence, 
capable 
CORNWALL.
489 
capable of containing near 4000 men, the number of 
the Parliamentary army drawn up in close battel- 
lions.
I thought Lord Clarendon the exactest of 
writers, till I reviewed the idea he had of this battle, 
and the place 'twas fought on, but ex pede Her- 
culean.
" The front of this oblong- hill lay due west ; de- 
fended with a straight line, but 400 paces long, 
which served for a breast-work.
The south and 
north parts were two sharp angles ; but iront and 
angles were all ascended to by a moderately gradual 
ascent.
As it happened, so the attack fell, judici- 
ously and naturally in four places, as I think the 
historian tells us ; twice, perhaps, in the front, and 
at each angle, north and south.
(I learnt from tra- 
dition that two small parties inarched in a semi- 
circle, and made an attack unexpectedly at the an- 
gles.) You would think by Clarendon, an attack 
was made on the east side ; but that was impracti- 
cable, being exceedingly steep ; skirted with wood, 
a rivulet, and morass at bottom.
" The error in the Parliament General was, lying 
open at too many places, not having ground enough 
to rectify any mistake, and the impracticability of 
retreating ; for the troops must tumble over one an- 
other, and no art could re-collect them." 
In the year 1773, a monument was erected on 
Stamford's Hill, inscribed as follows : — 
" In this place the army of the Rebels, under the 
command of the Earl of Stamford, received a signal 
overthrow by the valour of Sir Beville Granville and 
the Cornish army, on Tuesday the 6(h of May, 1643, 
by George Lord Lansdowne, Comptroller of the 
Household, and one of the principal Secretaries of 
State." 
This monument, we understand, was removed, on 
what account we know not, a few years after it was 
erected.
The tablet, containing the inscription, was re- 
moved to Stratton, and fixed in the front of the 
market-house.
When some alterations were made 
in that building, it was transferred to the front of 
the Tree Inn, where it is yet to be seen.
The manor of Poughiil, consisting only of a 
Royalty, without either lands or rent, belongs to 
Thomas Trood, Esq. who bought it of the late 
J. C.
Saunders, Esq. the celebrated occulist, of 
London.
Poundstock.] — This parish is in the hundred of 
Lesnewth,five miles and a half south-south-west from 
Stratton.
It has a fair on the Monday before Ascen- 
sion Day. Lord Carteret, and Lord de Dunstan- 
ville, have possessions in this parish.
Probus.] — St. Probus, formerly a market-town, 
is in the west division of the hundred of Powder, 
two miles and a half west by south from Grampound.
There was a collegiate church here, dedicated to 
St. Probus, before the Conquest ; it was held by 
Edward the Confessor himself, and must either have 
vol.
i. — no.
33, 
been granted to the canons by him, or soon after.
There wore five prebends, and Henry of Balish was 
made dean, by the Bishop of Exeter, in 1258.
The 
perpetual patronage of the prebends seems to have 
been "ranted to the dean ten years after by the Bishop 
of Exeter and his successors.
No more deans are 
mentioned ; but soon after the greatest part of the 
revenues, with the advowson, patronage of prebends, 
&c.
were given to the treasurer of the church of 
Exeter, for the time being.
There were five pre- 
bendaries at the general surrender who had each 
a salary, amounting in the whole to 16/.
9s.
4c/.
The tower of St. Probus Church is extremely ele- 
gant, and is generally esteemed the first architectu- 
ral ornament of the county ; whether its form and 
proportions are contemplated at a distance, or its 
individual members inspected more closely.
The 
character and architecture of the church, however, 
do not correspond with the tower, which rises to a 
great height, and appears elegant and beautiful from 
being contrasted with the thatched and mud- walled 
cottages which surround it, and the insipid and un- 
ornamented hills and vales succeeding each other 
with a monotonous sameness in its vicinity.
The 
church stands on the brow of a hill, the tower rising 
from its west end.
The tower is entirely built of 
granite, and covered with lichens, which from the 
nature of the stone, or from the exposed situation, 
appear to thrive in an extraordinary manner.
The 
height of the tower to its battlements is 108 feet.
Each angle is sustained by a double buttress, dimi- 
nishing in size in the ascent, and ornamented at 
each stage by a foliated pinnacle.
The top of the 
tower is embellished with embrasures, and no fewer 
than forty pinnacles, disposed in eight clusters.
The 
plinth, cornices, and upper story are ornamented 
with a variety of sculptures, consisting of small fi- 
gures, foliage, fleurs de lis, animals, &c.
On the 
north and south sides are three tabernacle niches.
In the south wall, towards the east end of the chan- 
cel, are several stones ornamented with different 
figures, and implements which were probably de- 
signed as emblematical allusions to the trades of the 
persons concerned in erecting the tower ; which Ca- 
rew says, " within compasse of our remembrance, 
was builded by the well-disposed inhabitants." The 
church, which is neat and commodious, consists of 
two long aisles, and a short one.
Here is a large 
marble monument to the memory of Thomas Haw- 
kins, Esq. of Trewithan.
It represents a female 
figure recliniug on an urn of variegated marble, and 
holding a medallion in her left hand.
There are four large horse and cattle fairs at St.
Probus, as follows : — April 5, April '23, July 5, and 
September 17.
The seat of Sir Christopher Hawkins, Bart, is at 
Trewithan, in this parish.
Carew mentions a wealthy and charitable farmer, 
of the name of Williams, as " grandfather to sixtie 
persons now living, aud able lately to ride twelve 
myles in a morning, for being witness to the chris- 
6 a 
temng 
436 
CORNWALL.
toning of a child, to whom he was great-great- 
grandfather." This gentleman was ancestor of the 
several families of the name, now in the parish ; and 
is supposed to have hecn a former occupant, as 
lessee, of Treworgy House.
Of the manor of Tre- 
worgy, and one of its ancient possessors, the history 
is highly interesting.
" The manor of Trewithgy, 
or Treworgy," observe Messrs.
Lysons, " was part 
of the possessions of the ancient family of Walvedon, 
or Wulvedon of Wulvedon, alias Galden, in tins pa- 
rish ; the last' male heir of which died in the year 
1512, as appears by his epitaph in Probus Church : 
their large estates passed by a female heir to the 
Tregians or Tregyans, who built a magnificent man- 
sion at Golden : this mansion, of which the ruins 
still remain, was unfinished when Leland visited this 
county, in the reign of Henry VIII.
: that author 
speaks of it as " richly begon, and amply, but not 
ended." Francis Tregian, of Golden, being then 
twenty-eight years of age, having been accused, in 
the year 1577, of recusancy, and harbouring Cuth- 
bert Mayne, a Romish priest, was found guilty ; ad- 
judged to have incurred a prcmunire, his goods and 
estates seized, and himself imprisoned during the 
Queen's pleasure ; after having lain some time, and 
been subjected to great hardships in Launceston 
gaol, his lady procured his removal to the King's 
Bench ; he was afterwards removed to the Fleet ; 
where, in 1593, he had been confined thirteen years, 
his lady having lived with him during the whole 
time of his imprisonment ; she then had eighteen 
children, eleven of whom had been born in the Fleet, 
and most of them then living.
Norden, whose sur- 
vey must have been written about the year 1602, as 
he had evidently seen Carew's work then printed, 
says, ' for his and his wife's recusance, and for some 
former reserved offence committed, the laud of Tre- 
gyan was suspended, and himself near twenty years 
imprisoned ; but he is now at libertie, and liveth 
with sufficient glorie nere Loudon ; havinge no use 
of his lande, which was in the handes of the late 
Lorde Hunsdon, Lorde Chamberlaine to her late 
Majestye.
This gentleman's reliefe is thought to 
grow by the bounty of suche as afYecte his parte.' 
In July 1600, we are told that Mr. Francis Tregian, 
then an ancient gentleman, arrived at Douay on his 
way to Spain.
Tregian's estates, consisting of se- 
veral manors and other lands, then estimated at 
nearly 500/.
per annum, were given by Queen Eli- 
zabeth to Sir George Cary, afterwards Lord Huns- 
don ; whose widow, in the year 1607, sold the whole 
(except a small part of which had previously been 
disposed of by her husband) to Francis Tregian the 
younger.
Most of these estates, including the ma- 
nor of Treworgy, and the barton of Golden, were 
alienated, either by this Francis, or by his younger 
brother Charles, (who survived, and was in posses- 
sion of some of the estates in 1620) to John Vincent.
Charles Tregian was in Cardinal Allen's family, and 
published a work, intituled, ' Plarictus de Morte 
Cardinalis Alani.' Ezekiel Grasse, who became 
possessed of most of the Tregian property, purchas- 
ed the barton of Golden Vincent, and made it his 
residence ; his only daughter and heir married the 
ancestor of J.
F. Buller, Esq. the present proprietor 
of these estates.
Golden has long Wen used as a 
farm-house : the dilapidated part consists principally 
of a gateway and chapel, opposite to which is what 
is called the chaplain's apartment ; and within is a 
small room, with stone seats : they show a dungeon 
under an old tower, in which Cuthbert Mayne is said 
to have been confined." 
' In the year 1688, Mr. Williams, of Tieworgy, 
founded a grammar-school at Probus, and endowed 
it with 10/.
a year.
Formerly, it was one ol the 
principal seminaries in the county ; b it, from the 
scantiness of the endowment, it now on'y affords in- 
struction in reading, writing, and arithmetic.
There 
is another reading school in the parish, which was 
endowed by Mrs. Hawkins with the interest os' 1 00/.
The site of the college is apposed to have been near 
the church-yard, between the parish-road and the 
school-house.
The school-house is supposed to 
have been a chapel ; and there was formerly a little 
chapel, or oratory, dedicated to the Holy Trinity 
and St. Mary, in Trenowth Wood.
There were 
chapels also at Golden, Treworgy, Trelowthas, and 
Hellan.
Rame.] — The parish of Rame is in thesouth divi- 
sion of the hundred of East, seven miles south from 
Saltash.
Rame Head, generally called Ram Head, 
is the appellation of that singular promontory which 
juts into the British Channel, and is the most south- 
eastern point of the county.
On the summit are the 
ruins of a small vaulted chapel, forming a good 
land-mark to seamen navigating the Channel, it being 
visible at many miles distant.
It was dedicated to 
St. Michael.
Redruth.] — This is a considerable market-town, 
in the east division of the hundred of Penwith, fifty- 
five miles south-west by west from Launceston, and 
20-H west-south-west from London.
It consists 
chiefly of one long paved street, situated on the side 
of an eminence, in the very bosom of the mining dis- 
trict, and of course occupying a bleak and exposed 
spot.
Dr. Pryce supposes its antiquity to be prior 
to that of any other town in the county, and ob- 
serves, that its name (Drc-druith) is so very ancient, 
as to have been given to the situation of this town 
before the kingdom Was I n id -d into parishes ; as 
old writings express, thus : " In the parish of Uny 
juxta Dredruith." But however remote the origin 
of this place, it does not appear to hive listen to im- 
portance till the discovery and working of the cop- 
per mines, which have been the mc<;ns of augment- 
ing its population in at least a six-told proportion 
during the course of the last century.
Tins is ap- 
parent from the number oi baj isms, which in the 
year 1700 amounted to only 31, but in 1800 was in- 
creased to 196, and for several preceuing years had 
been somewhat higher.
In the returns made under 
the Population Act of 1801, the inhamtaiirs were 
8 enumerated 
CORNWALL.
491 
enumerated at 4024; and, in 1811, they bad in- 
creased to 5903.
In 133-2, this town obtained a grant of two weekly 
markets, and two annual fairs ; and, in 1552, it re- 
ceived a grant for a weekly market, and three an- 
nual fairs.
The markets having been long- discon- 
tinued, Mr. Buller, of Morval, in the time of Oliver 
Cromwell, procured a charter for a market on Fri- 
days, and also for two annual fairs.
The Friday's 
market is how a great corn market ; and there is 
another market on Wednesdays, and four fairs ; 
May 2, July 9, September 5, and October 12.
The 
first, Avith the markets, belong to James Buller, Esq.
M. P.
; and the last, which is kept in Fair Me.ulew, 
and called Roast Goose Fair, is the property of Lord 
de Dunstanville.
Many of the mining transactions are carried on 
in this town, which, indeed, derives its whole im- 
portance from its central situation with respect to 
the mines.
Amongst the numerous mines in Red- 
ruth, and the contiguous parishes of Gwennap, Ken- 
wyn, and St. Agnes, those denominated the Gwen- 
nap Mines are considered as the principal.
These 
lie on the south-east side of Redruth, in a part of 
the county where the tin and copper lodes are very 
rich, and in some places intersect each other.
The 
point at which the four parishes mentioned above 
meet, is also the point where the four western hun- 
dreds of ConvWal) unite.
It is a barren heathy spot, 
denominated Kyvur an Kou ; the Place of Death ; 
and has from time immemorial, been the place where 
all self-murderers belonging to the adjacent parishes 
have been deposited.
Redruth Church, which is dedicated to St. Uny, 
is a neat modern edifice, about half a mile from the 
town.
It consists of a nave only, with a flat ceiling 
supported by pillars.
There are the remains of a 
chapel, dedicated to St. Rumon, in the town.
The 
Quakers and Anabaptists have each a meeting-house 
in the parish ; and the Methodists have three.
Here 
is a Sunday-school for 150 children.
About twelve 
years ago, a large school house was built here, by 
subscription, for teaching Latin, arithmetic, &c.
; 
but, the subscription having been discontinued, the 
master kept the school open upon his own ac- 
count.
Redruth Highway, and Plaingwary are the prin- 
cipal villages in this parish : the latter, as its name 
imports, was the playing-place,on one of those ancient 
theatres in which mysteries, and other theatrical per- 
formances were exhibited.
Res'iop.mcl Casti.e.] — On the summit of a lofty 
hill, ia the parish of Lanlivery, about a mile north of 
Lothwithiel, are the mouldering remains of Restor- 
mel Castle.
This fortress, magnificent in ruin, and 
proudly rearing its ivy-clad walls above the conti- 
guous narrow-winding vallies, was the ancient seat 
of the baronal family of Cardinan.
Towards the 
close of the thirteenth century, it became one of the 
principal residences of the Earls of Cornwall : Ri- 
chard, King of the Romans, kept his court here ; 
his son Edmund was also an inhabitant of this cas- 
tle ; and though it is new te'minfeed only by the owl, 
the bat, and the daw, the gra.ideur of its ruins, and 
the importance which they communicate to the sur- 
rounding scenery, render it peculiarly interesting.
Tile hill on the north side is remarkably steep, hav- 
i ig its base swept by the rapid waters of the Fawy 
R-iVc r.
This side, and, indeed, the greater part of 
the hill, is covered with a thick mass of wood, of 
different chavpcter, and variegated foliage.
Norden 
thus laments over the rains of this stately pile :— - 
" ihe whole castle begineth to mourne, and to 
wringe out harde stones for teares, that she that was 
imbraced, visited and delighted with greatc princes 
is now desolate, forsaken and forelorne : the cannon 
needes not batter, nor the pioneer to undermine, nor 
powder to blow up this so famous a pyle, for time 
and tirranie hath wrought her desolation : her water 
pypas of lead, manie and of greate use, are cutt up, 
the coveringe lead gone, the pianchings rotten, the.
walls fall downe, the fayreand large cliimnye peeces, 
and all that would yeld monie or serve for use, are 
converted to private men's purposes ; and these re- 
mayneth a forelorne showe of honor, not contentinge 
anie compassionate eye to behold her iingrynge de- 
cayes.
Men greve to see the dying delayes of anie 
brute creature, so may we mourne to see so stately 
a pyle so longe a fallinge ; if it be of noe use, the 
carcase would make some profit ; therefore, if it 
deserve, let her fall be no longer delayede, els will 
it dropp peece-mealc downe, and her now pro- 
fitable reliques will then serve to little or no 
use." 
The only part of Restormel Castle now remain- 
ing, is the keep, a circular building, of large dimen- 
sions, surrounded with a wide and deep ditch on the 
outside, which commands many views, singularly 
beautiful from the combination of wood, water, lawn, 
and meadow, the contour of the hills, and the variety 
of the receding distances.
The entrance is beneath 
the ruins of a square tower, and an arched gateway.
It leads into an open area, between which and the 
embattled wall of the ramparts are a number of dif- 
ferent apartments, extending round the whole inside.
These were subdivided into lesser chambers, dispos- 
ed into two stories, and originally covered with a 
circular roof, which, however, did not extend over 
the inner area, the diameter of which, from east to 
west, is sixty-eight feet ; and from north to south, 
sixty-five.
The various apartments occupied two 
stories : the uppermost seems to have contained the 
state rooms, and to have had small openings, or 
windows, in the outer wall, but the spaces are now 
filled up : most of the apartments were lighted from 
the inclosed court.
Just within the entrance to the 
area are two stair-cases, leading between the rooms, 
and the embattled outside walls, to the parapet, 
which is seven feet higher than the top of the ram- 
part, and two feet and a half in thickness.
The 
rooms of the upper story were entered by a third 
and descending .stair-case, which led through the 
wall 
402 
CORNWALL.
wall from the former.
This floor communicated 
with a small chapel, (twenty-five feet six inches, by 
seventeen feet six,) which projected from the outer 
circular wall, nearly as far as the centre of the ditch, 
and seems, with the windows and the gateway, to 
have been more modern than the other parts of the 
building : in the southern wall are two small niches, 
where holy water was kept.
The thickness of the 
rampart of the outer wall is nine feet ; and its height, 
from the bank to the parapet, about twenty-seven.
The depth of the ditch from the outer bank is nearly 
nine yards.
Notwithstanding the ruinous state of this castle, 
its commanding situation was such, that, in the civil 
wars of Charles, it was deemed expedient so far to 
repair it, as to render it a place of defence ; and, in 
tiie first instance it was garrisoned by the Parlia- 
ment ; but on the 21st of August, 1644, previously 
to the capitulation of Essex's army, it was taken for 
the King by Sir Richard Grenville.
The mansion 
formerly connected with the estate, and named Tri • 
nity House, is now the property of Lord Mount 
Edgecumbe, of whom it is rented by John Hext, 
Esq. and called Restormel.
Restormel Park was 
disparked by Henry VIII.
Roche.] — This parish, which appears to have 
taken its name from the family of de Rupe, or de la 
Roche, is in the east division of the hundred of Pow- 
der, five miles east-south-east from St. Columb 
Major.
This village is interesting to the admirer of 
nature, from a singular mass of rocks, and the re- 
mains of a hermitage, or chapel, which occupy the 
highest part of them.
These rocks consist of three 
immense piles of craggy ponderous stones, which 
seem to start out of a flat heathy plain ; and on the 
brow of the centre mass stand the ruins of a small 
building, which is partly formed by the natural rocks, 
and partly by stone walls, which inclosed two rooms, 
one above the other.
The side and end walls still 
remain ; but the floor and roof are destroyed.
It 
appears, however, from the representation given by 
Norden of these rocks, to have been roofed in his 
time.
" In this ragged pile," says he, " may be 
observed five several workes : the firste of nature, 
whoe as a mother begat this stonye substance ; next 
of force, whereby the water at the generall floude 
depryved it of her earth-covering shelter, leaving 
it naked ; the therde of arte, which raysed a build- 
ing vpon so cragged a foundation ; fourth of indus- 
trye in working concavetye in so obdurate a sub- 
jecte ; lastlye of devotion, wherein men, in their then 
well-weeninge zeale, woulde abandon, as it were, 
the societye of humane creatures, and vndergoe the 
tedious daylie ascent, and continuance of so colde 
and so abandoned a place.
To this may be added 
a sixth worke, even of Time, who, as she is the mo- 
ther, and begetteth, so is she the destroyer of her 
begotten children ; and nothinge that she bringeth 
forth is permanent." These rocks, Dr. Maton ob- 
serves, " consist of a white sparry quartz, mixed 
with schocri, which appears in innumerable needle- 
like crystals.
Two or three varieties of this sub- 
stance are observable ; in one the schoerl being more 
sparingly interspersed, and in another more abun- 
dantly.
A pile of rocks, starting abruptly out of a 
wide green surface, and covering some space with 
enormous fragments, on which there are only a few 
vestiges of incipient vegetation, form a singular 
scene, exhibiting a kind of wild sublimity, peculiar 
to itself." The walls ol the building were plastered 
on the inside ; the lower room measured about nine 
feet by twelve.
The whole height of the rock and 
building may be estimated at about one hundred and 
twenty feet from the level ground.
This rock is 
considered to form as conspicuous and as striking 
an object to the surrounding country, as St. Mi- 
chael's Mount, near Penzance, which we have 
already described.
Hensborough, or Hainsborough, 
which Carew terms the archbeacon of Cornwall, is 
partly in this parish, and commands a most exten- 
sive prospect.
The church, instead of having been dedicated to 
St. Roche, according to the vulgar opinion, was de- 
dicated to St. Gomonda ; and the town wa9 called 
Roche, long before the only saint in the calendar of 
that name was born.
The family of de la Roche, Lords of the Manor of 
Tregarriek, became extinct, A.
D. 1357 ; that manor 
now belongs to Lord Falmouth ; and the manor of 
Tremoderet, also an ancient possession of the Roches, 
belongs to Lord Mount Edgecumbe.
At Holywell, 
near Tremoderet, formerly stood a chapel, with a 
burying ground.
Ruan Lanyhorne.] — The village of Ruan Lany- 
horne, sealed on the banks of the Fal, in the west 
division of the hundred of Powder, two miles and a 
half south-west from Tregony, is supposed, by 
Whitake'r, to have been a market-town.
There was 
formerly a castle here, which Leland describes as 
" a castelle of an eight towers, then decaying for 
lak of coverture." Tonkin mentions a large tower, 
which was taken down in the year 1718 : he ob- 
serves that, within thirty years of the time of his 
writing, six out of eight towers of the castle had 
been standing : the site is now occupied by some 
cottages.
The castle was the property and resi- 
dence of the Arcedekne family, who also appear to 
have had another seat in this parish, called Shepes- 
tall.
The manor of Lanyhorne and Ellerkey, now 
belonging to Francis Gregor, Esq. were formerly 
holden under the honour of Launceston, by the an- 
nual presentation of a brace of greyhounds.
The 
Rev. and learned John Whitaker, ol whom we have 
given some biographical particulars, in a preceding 
note, was about thirty years the resident rector 
of Lanyhorne, where he died in the year 1808, 
and was buried within the rails oi the communion 
table.
Ruan Major.] — This parish, in the centre of which 
are the remains of an ancient chapel, is in the west 
division ot the hundred of Kirrier, eight miles and 
three quarters south-south-cast from Helstone.
Rl'AN 
CORNWALL.
493 
Rvan Minor.] — This parish is in the same hun- 
dred as the preceding, ten miles south-east by south 
from Helstone.
By ancient usage and prescription, 
the rector claims a right, which is never disputed, 
of sending" a horse into a certain field, in the parish 
of -Landeweduack, whenever it is cropped with corn, 
and taking away as many sheaves as the horse can 
carry on his back.
Cadgwith, a populous fishing 
cove, is in this parish.
Saltasii.] — Saltash, anciently known by the 
names of Esse, Assheburgh, and Salt-esse, from its 
vicinity to the sea, is a borough and market-town ; 
a chapelry, in the parish of St.
.Stephen, in the south 
division of the hundred of East, 21$ miles south- 
south-east from Launceston, and 220 west-south- 
west from London.
It is one of the principal en- 
trances into Cornwall, and is approached from the 
Devonshire side by a ferry over the Tamar, which 
forms part of the revenues of the corporation, pro- 
ducing an annual rent of between 300/.
and 400/.
The corporation also lets the oyster fishery for a si- 
milar sum, and the market for about 15/.
" Asche" is described, by Leland, as " a praty 
quik market-town.
The townesmen," he observes, 
use boothe marchandise and fishery." Norden 
says : — " the towne increaseth day lie in mercliann- 
dise and wealth : there belong unto the towne some 
8 ships besydes small boates.
The haven is capable 
of anie burden.
The great carrack that Sir Fraun- 
c-is Drake browghte home so rich, arrived here, 
and was here disburdened, and after fatally fyred." 
This town was originally constituted a borough 
by the immediate ancestors of Reginald de Valletort, 
who was lord of the honour of Trematon, within 
which this town is situated, in the reigns of King 
John and Henry the Third.
The last branch of this 
family sold the castle of Trematon, and its appurte- 
nances, to Richard, Earl of Cornwall, Henry the 
Third's brother ; and these estates being afterwards 
vested in the crown, were by Edward the Third 
made part of the duchy of Cornwall, of which inhe- 
ritance Saltash still forms a portion.
The charter by which the town was first incorpo- 
rated, was bestowed by Charles the Second, who 
granted the inhabitants the privilege of being go- 
verned by a mayor, who is water coroner, six alder- 
men, and thirty-three burgesses ; but the number of 
the latter is at present indefinite.
A new charter 
was granted on the 7th of June, 1774, through the 
petition of the members of the corporation, whose 
numbers at that time were less than twenty.
This 
charter was similar in principle to that bestowed by 
Charles the Second, which reserved a power to the 
crown of displacing any of the corporation at plea- 
sure.
The right of electing members is possessed 
by the burgage-holders, whose number is about 120.
The first return was made in the reign of Edward 
the Sixth.
The town is situated on the side of a steep hill, 
near the banks of the Tamar : it consists of three 
principal streets, which, says Carew, " every show- 
vol.
i. — sjo.
30.
er washes clean." The foundation of the town is a 
solid rock, and the buildings are composed of the 
native stones.
The houses rise one above another, 
in a quick ascent, to the summit of the hill, on which 
stands the Chapel and the Mayoralty-Hall.
The 
latter was erected about five-and-forty years ago, 
and is supported on several pillars : the market is 
held in the space beneath.
On the brow of the hill 
is an old conduit, or covered spring.
'The streets 
are narrow, and the houses but indifferently built.
The inhabitants are chiefly fishermen.
In Carew's 
time, the number of houses, in Saltash, was between 
80 and 100 ; in 1801, the number of houses was 160, 
that of the inhabitants 1,150; in 1811, the former 
had increased to 190, and the latter to 1,478.
The market day, at Saltash, is Saturday ; and 
the fairs are on the 2d of February, and the 25th of 
July.
In the year 1393, the assizes for the county were 
holden in this town.
In the time of Oliver Crom- 
well, the justing-place, and other lands in Saltash, 
were sold to Charles Boscawen, and William Brad- 
don.
The chapel, at Saltash, to which the mayor nomi- 
nates the minister, is dedicated to St. Nicholas.
Formerly there were chapels in the town, dedicated 
to St. John the Baptist, and St. Faith.
The Armi- 
nian Methodists, and the Baptists, have meeting- 
houses in the town.
Here is a free grammar-school, which is said to 
have been founded by Queen Elizabeth, and endow- 
ed with 11.
a year, payable out of the revenues of the 
duchy.
During the civil wars of Charles, Saltash, being 
a very important station, as one of the passes into 
the county, was frequently the subject of contention.
It was first garrisoned by the Parliament, but sur- 
rendered, without resistance, to Sir Ralph Hopton, 
in the autumn of 1642.
In January, 1643, General 
Ruthen, finding it open after his defeat on Bradock 
Down, occupied, and hastily fortified it ; but Sir 
Ralph Hopton and Lord Mohun soon afterwards 
took it by assault.
In the month of May following, 
it was left garrisoned ; but, in the latter end of July, 
1644, on the approach of the Earl of Essex, it was 
given up.
After the capitulation of that commander, 
the town was again taken possession of by Sir Ri- 
chard Grenville; in the month of October following, 
it was taken by a detachment from the garrison at 
Plymouth ; Sir Richard Grenville afterwards reco- 
vered it by assault ; but, in February, 1646, it was 
finally abandoned by the royal troops.
We must not close our account of Saltash, with- 
out mentioning a singular story which Carew re- 
lates, and to whieh he appears to attach implicit 
credit, of the sagacious actions of a dog belonging 
to an inhabitant of the town.
" This animal," says 
he, " as I have learned from the faithful report of 
Master Thomas Parkins, used daily to fetch meate 
at his house there, and to carry the same unto a 
blinde mastiffe, that lay in a brake without the 
6 i towi.e 
494 
CORNWALL.
towne : yea, hee would upon Sundayes conduct 
him thither to dynner, and the meale ended, guide 
him back, to his couch and covert againe." 
Sancreed.] — Sancreed, Sancred, or Sandcreet, is 
in the west division of the hundred of Penwith, four 
miles west by south from Penzance.
Some Roman 
antiquities have been found in this parish.
In tbe 
tenement of Dryft, is, what is supposed to be, an 
ancient sepulchral monument, consisting of two 
stones, one of them standing nine feet high out of 
the ground, and the other somewhat more than se- 
ven feet : the distance from one to the other is eigh- 
teen feet, and a line which they form, points north- 
west.
The long stone, which stands on a barrow or 
heap of stones, in this parish, is considered, by the 
author of the additions to Camden, to have been a 
memorial of civil contracts.
At Caerbran, in this parish, is a circular fortifica- 
tion, on the top of a high hill.
It consists of a deep 
ditch, fifteen feet wide, edged with stone, through 
which you must pass to the outward vallum of earth, 
fifteen feet high.
Within this vallum is a large 
ditch, fifteen yards wide, and beyond it a stone 
wall, which runs quite round the top of the hill, 
and seems to have been of considerable strength.
There are, in this parish, the remains of three an- 
cient chapels : one, on Chapel Downs ; another, in 
the village of Bosence ; and the third, called Chapel 
Uny, in the village of Brahan.
Scilly.] — The Scilly Islands, from their vicinity 
to, and connection Avith the county of Cornwall, 
cannot be noticed with more propriety than in the 
present place.
To these islands, the principal mode 
of conveyance is in vessels which sail from the port 
of Penzance ; and, as the distance is little more 
than fourteen leagues, the passage, unless in bad 
weather, is generally performed in four or five 
hours.
The situation of this group or cluster of islands is 
about nine leagues westward of the Land's End ; 
and, though comparatively inconsiderable in their 
present state, they were earlier and better known to 
the ancients, thau most other parts of Britain.
Their original denomination appears to have been 
the Cassiterides, or Tin Isles ; a name by which 
they are mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, 
and Solinus.
Pinkerton, we believe, is the only 
author who dissents from this opinion ; and his soli- 
tary scepticism seems entitled to but little respect.
He considers, that these islands, or rocks, were too 
minute to have attracted the notice of the ancients.
Their original appearance, there is no doubt, has 
been greatly altered by the violence of the sea, and, 
probably, also, by some great convulsion of nature.
In every attempt, therefore, to reconcile the present 
state of the Scilly Isles with the descriptions which 
* Men-ar-warth, Men-ar-wklen, Penbros, Gwynliill, Gwyn- 
hillvi or, Enys-an-geon, Envs-withek, Carrey-stein, Cri-bawe- 
tl'.ea, Cri-banek, Itosvean, Rosveor, Men'-caer-la'w, &c.
$ TrenowitlJ, Salakee, Trewailethen, Ilablingy, Tohnen.&c.
occur in the old writers, it should be remembered, 
that they do not appear to have accurate ideas of 
either the situation or form of them, but seem to 
have included all the western coasts of Cornwall in 
their respective descriptions.
" The Cassiterides," 
says Strabo, " are ten islands near each other.
One 
of them is desert, and unpeopled j the rest are inha- 
bited by men who wear black garments, and long 
coats reaching down to their heels, girt about their 
breasts, and walking with long staves, resembling 
the furies of tragedians.
They have mines of tin 
and lead, which, together with hides, they exchange 
with merchants, for earthen-ware, salt, and brass- 
work." " Scarcely a vestige of this ancient state 
of things," says Borlase, " is remaining.
The sea, 
by submerging in the low lands, has multiplied the 
islands ; and the present number is upwards of 140, 
twenty-seven of which are the principal — besides in- 
numerable craggs, and bare and desolate rocks.
The twenty-seven islands comprise together, about 
4486 acres ; of Avhich half, at least, are considered 
to be tillable, and capable of improvement.
ThA 
inhabitants are all new comers ; not one old habi- 
tation, nor any remains of Phoenician, or Grecian 
art, in the Ports, Castles, Towns, Temples, or Se- 
pulchres.
All the antiquities here to be seen are of 
the rudest Druid times ; and if borrowed in any 
measure from the oriental traders, were borrowed 
from their most ancient and simple rights." " We 
are not to think, however," continues Borlase, " but 
that Scilly was really inhabited; jind as frequently 
resorted to anciently, as the old historians relate.
All the islands, by the remains of hedges, walls, 
houses contiguous to each other, and a number of 
sepulchral barrows, show that they have been fully 
cultivated and inhabited :" and that they " were 
inhabited by Britons is past all doubt, not only from 
their neighbourhood to Britain, but from the Druid 
monuments ; the several rude pillars, circles of 
stones-erect, kistvaens without number, rock-basons, 
and tolraens ; all monuments common in Cornwall 
and Wales, equal evidences of the antiquity, reli- 
gion, and original of the old inhabitants.
They have 
also many British names at present for their little 
islands,* tenements,f karns,J and' creeks ;§ and 
more doubtless have been jostled out by modern 
ones.
How came these ancient inhabitants then, it 
may be asked, to vanish so, as that, the present have 
no pretensions to any affinity, nor connection of any 
kind, either in blood, language, or customs ?
How 
came they to disappear, anil leave so few traces of 
trade, plenty, and arts, and no posterity, that we 
can hear of, behind them ?
Two causes of the ex- 
tinction of the old inhabitants, their habitations, and 
works of peace, war, and religion, occur to roe ; 
these are the gradual advances of the sea, and a 
J Karn-:.iorval, Karn-gwavel, Karn-leh, Pen-enys, Mount 
Todii, &c.
§ Portbrnellyh, Porthloe, Porthcrasson, Porlhelik, &c.
sudden 
CORNWALL.
495 
sudden submersion of the land.
The sea is perpe- 
tually preying upon these little islands, and leaves 
nothing where it can reach hut the skeleton, the bare 
rock.
The many hedges now under water, (disco- 
verable at low tides,) and flats which stretch from 
one island to another, are plain evidences of a for- 
mer union subsisting between these now distinct 
islands.
The continual advances which the sea 
makes upon the land at present, are evident to all 
people of observation, and within these last thirty 
years have been very considerable.
What we see 
happen every day, may assure us of what has hap- 
pened in former times ; and from the banks of sand, 
and the low lands giving way to the sea, and the 
breaches becoming still more open and irremediable, 
it appears that there has been a gradual declinsion 
4nd diminution of the solids, and as gradually a pro - 
gressive ascendency of the fluids, for many ages.
But further, ruins and hedges are frequently seen 
upon the shifting of the sands, in the friths between 
the islands ; and the low lands, which were formerly 
cultivated, particularly those stretching from Samp- 
son to Treseaw, have now ten feet water above the 
foundations of their hedges ; although at a reason- 
able medium, we cannot suppose these foundations 
formerly to have been less than six feet above high- 
water level, when the lands were dry arable, or pas- 
ture grounds.
Several phenomena of the same na- 
ture are to be seen on these shores, and particularly 
a straight-lined ridge, like a causeway, running 
across the Old Town Creek in St. Mary's, which is 
now never seen above water." Again, he observes, 
" tin mines they certainly had in these islands 200 
years before Christ.
What is become of these 
mines ?
for the mines at present to be seen shew no 
marks of their being ancient.
To account for these 
alterations, the gradual advances, and slow depre- 
dations, of the sea will not suffice ; Ave must either 
allow that these lands, since they were (originally) 
cultivated and built upon, have sunk so much lower 
than they were before ; or else we must allow, that 
since these lands were fenced and cultivated, and 
the houses and other works under water, the whole 
ocean has been raised, as to its surface, sixteen feet 
or more perpendicular ; which latter supposition 
will appear to the learned, without doubt, much the 
harder of the two.
1 conclude, therefore, that -these 
islands have undergone some great catastrophe ; 
and, besides their apparent diminution by sea and 
tempest, must have suffered greatly by a subsidence 
of the land, attended by a sudden inundation of those 
parts where the above-mentioned ruins, fences, 
mines, and other things, of which we have no ves- 
tiges new remaining, formerly stood.
This inunda- 
tion probably destroyed many of the ancient inhabi- 
tants ; and so terrified those that survived, and had 
* " Chuyvyan," observes Price, in his Cornish Dictionary, 
signifies " to escape or flee.
. Fruir\ hence the family Vyvyan 
is supposed to take its name ; tor fleeing on a white horse from 
Lioness, when it was overflown ; that person being at that time 
wherewithal to support themselves elsewhere, that 
they forsook these islands, by winch means the peo- 
ple, who were the Aborigines, and corresponded so 
long with the Phoenicians, Greeks, and Romans, 
were reduced to the lust gasp ; and the few poor 
remains of the desolation might soon lose sight of 
their ancient prosperity and eminence, by their ne- 
cessary attention to food and raiment ; no easy ac- 
quisitions when their low lands, ports, and towns, 
were overwhelmed by the sea." 
The tradition* winch has existed for many ages 
among the inhabitants of Cornwall, and the pheno- 
mena observed on the Cornish coasts, may be offer- 
ed as additional evidence to support the opinion of 
an extensive subsidence of land round these shores 
through some sudden and violent convulsion of the 
earth.
The principal islands of this cluster having differ- 
ent, and chiefly modern appellations, it appears 
somewhat singular that their general name should 
have been derived from so small and inconsiderable 
a spot as the Isle of Scilly, " whose cliffs hardly 
any thing but birds can mount, and whose barren- 
ness would never suffer any thing but sea-birds to 
inhabit there." The author already quoted, in solu- 
tion of the difficulty, imagines this rock (which is 
now only a furlong in extent, and situated nearly 
half a mile from the Isles of Guel and Brehar) to 
have been connected by Ioav necks of land with Tres- 
eaw, St. Martin's, Brehar, Sampson, St. Mary's, 
and other rocks and islets adjoining, so that all of 
them formerly made but one island, having several 
head-lands, of which Scilly was the " highest, 
outermost, and consequently most conspicuous." 
He further supposes, that this island might have re- 
ceived the name of Sylle, or Sulleh ; and having 
some smaller islands scattered round it, imparted its 
name to them ; whence what were called by the 
Greeks Cassiteridcs, were named, by the Latin au- 
thors, Sigdeles, Sillina?, Silures ; and by the Eng- 
lish, Sylley, Sulley, and Scilly : though the appel- 
lation is not spelt with the c in any ancient record.
The term Sulleh is British, signifying flat Rocks de- 
dicated to the Sun, " who," as Mr. Gough ob- 
serves upon this passage, " was certainly a northern 
deity." 
It is uncertain at what period the Scilly Islands 
were first possessed by the Romans ; but, during 
their dominion in Britain, they appear to have been 
known only as the place of banishment for disgraced 
nobles.
King Athelstan bestowed them on some 
monks, who most probably bad independent posses- 
sion, till the reigii of Henry the First, who granted 
" to Osbert, Abbot of Tavistock, all the churches of 
Sully, with their appurtenances, and the land as the 
monks or hermits held it in the time of Edward th« 
governor thereof.
In memory of the circumstance, this family 
gives a lion for its arms, and a white horse ready caparisoned 
for the crest." 
Confessor 
496 
CORNWALL.
Confessor, and Bnrgald, Bishop of Cornwall." In 
the year 1 103, Pope Celfestin confirmed to the Ab- 
hey of Tavistock the blinds of St. Nicholas, St.
Sampson, St. Elid, St. Tcon, and Nullo, with all 
their churches and oratories, and certain lands in 
other islands.
Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, granted 
to the monks all wrecks, except whole ships and 
whales, in Kentemen and Nurcho (ancient names of 
islands) and the isles of St. Lid, St. Sampson, and 
St. Tcon.
Before the reign of Edward the First, 
they appear to have reverted to the crown, as they 
were then held by Raimlph de Blanckminster, 
" paying yearly, at Michaelmas, 300 puffins, or six 
shillings and eight pence." In the reign of Edward 
VI.
Thomas, Lord Sejmour, the Lord Admiral, be- 
came proprietor of the Scilly Islands, as appears by 
one of the articles of his accusation, which charges 
him with having gotten into his hands those strong 
and dangerous isles, bought of divers men (viz.
the 
heirs of Dauvers and Whittington, as representatives 
of that branch of the Arundells which inherited the 
estates of the Coleshills and Blanckminsters.) Lord 
Seymour was beheaded and attainted, A.
D. 1540, 
trhen the temporal property of the Scilly Islands fell 
to the duchy, already by the dissolution of religious 
houses, possessed of what had belonged to the Abbey 
of Tavistock.
By James the First, they were 
granted on lease to Sir Francis Godolphin ; and are 
now held of the crown by the Duke of Leeds, at a 
yearly rent of 40/.
for thirty-one years, from the 
year 1800.
During the civil wars of Charles, these islands 
were of considerable importance.
In 1645, they af- 
forded refuge to Prince Charles and his friends Lord 
Capcl and Lord Hopton ; and, in 1649, Sir John 
Grenville fortified and held them for Charles II.
The Parliament, finding their trade much annoyed 
by his frigates, fitted out an expedition for the re- 
duction of the Scilly Islands, by Admiral Blake and 
Sir George Ayscue.
They took possession of Bre- 
har and Trescaw, and threw up fortifications, with 
the view of attacking Sir John Grenville at St.
Mary's ; and, resistance being found unavailable, the 
garrison, consisting of about 800 soldiers, surrender- 
ed, in the beginning of June.
The principal of the Scilly Islands, are St. Mary's, 
St. Agnes, St. Martin's, Trescaw or Tresco, Brehar, 
and Sampson.
In a clear day they may be seen 
from the Land's End, appearing like a cluster of 
cliffs, or fragments of ruined castles, round which 
the Atlantic rolls in a vast curve.
In the passage 
from Penzance, about midway between that town 
and these islands, is a dangerous ledge of rocks, 
(whereon many vessels have been lost,) called the 
Gulf, or Wolf, from the continued howling which 
the waves make in breaking round it.
Other rocks, 
named the Bucks, the Rennet, and the Seven Stones, 
also impede the navigation, and render this passage 
dangerous to all who have not a perfect acquaintance 
with the coast.
St. f.Iary's is the largest, most important, and best 
6 
cultivated, of these islands.
The tamarisk and La- 
vatera Arborea, grow here in abundance.
It pos- 
sesses three towns, a pier, a garrison, custom-house, 
and other public buildings.
The entrance into the 
Sound is skirted by numerous small isles, covered 
with verdure to the water's edge, or occasionally 
surrounded by bold assemblages of bare rocks, which 
in some places have a very sublime, and in others an 
extremely grotesque, appearance.
The views from 
hence of the adjacent islands are exceedingly diver- 
sified and interesting ; and, generally speaking, this 
is also the case with the whole group ; almost every 
prospect being animated by the various vessels which 
are warily navigating the contiguous channels, or 
more boldly spreading their swelling sails over the 
wide bosom of the distant ocean.
The number of 
inhabitants, on all the islands, was, in the year 1750, 
about 1,400; in 1799, about 1,900; and, at present, 
2,358.
St. Mary's Island had a population, in 1750, 
of from 600 to 700 ; in 1799, of nearly 1000 ; at 
present, of 1271.
The length of this island is about 
two miles and a half: its circumference is between 
nine and ten miles.
The hills are mcky, rising in 
some places to a considerable height, and are said to 
abound with metallic veins.
, 
New Town, or Heugh Town, so named from the 
neighbouring peninsula, on which, during the pil- 
chard fishery, a man is stationed to watch the com- 
ing of the fish, and give notice of their approach, by 
heughing to the boats below, is the chief settlement 
on St. Mary's Island.
On the summit of the penin- 
sula is a small fort, built in the year 1593 by Sir 
Francis Godolphin, and called Star-Castle, from 
having eight points projecting like the rays of a 
star.
It was in this castle that Dr. John Bastwick was 
imprisoned, by order of the Court of Star Chamber, 
in the year 1637, after having been deprived of his 
ears, in the pillory, for writing against the Church 
and State.
His sentence was imprisonment for life ; 
but he was liberated, by order of the Parliament, in 
1040.
The historical reader will recollect the great 
odium which the severity of this sentence excited 
against the government.
Dr. Bastwick, and his fel- 
low sufferers, Burton and Prynne, who had been 
sent to other remote prisons, were conducted 
into London, on their return, with great triumph and 
rejoicing.
In the centre of the castle is the gover- 
nor's house, having a loss between it and the outer 
rampart ; where, at the salient angles, are four small 
apartments, designed for as many captains of the- 
garrison.
The lines are at some distance below the 
fort, nearly two miles in extent, and flanked with 
several strong batteries, supposed to have been con- 
structed in the civil war.
Below the lines, on a 
round hillock, are the remains of an ancient fort, 
which seems to have had a circular keep, like the 
Castles of Trematon, Launceston, and Restormer".
About a quarter of a mile to the eastward is a bay 
called Porthmellin, or Pomellin, producing abun- 
dance of white sand, composed of talc and crystals, 
UK 
CORNWALL.
491 
in much request as a writing sand, and for various 
other purposes.
On the western side of the peninsula, is theHeugh 
Town, which skirts the border of a sandy bay, with 
a good anchorage, and sufficiently spacious to con- 
tain a hundred sail of shipping, of 150 tons burthen.
The town suffered much, by an inundation, during a 
great storm, in the year 17-11.
The houses are 
chiefly low buildings, but were much improved un- 
der the late Lord Godolphin, at whose expeuce a 
pier was erected here about the year 17-50.
The 
other towns are named Old Town, and Church 
Town ; but they consist only of a few houses, and 
present nothing entitled to particular attention.
On a promontory in tins island, near Salakee 
Downs, are the remains of an ancient fortress, call- 
ed the Giant's Castle, defended towards the sea by 
an immense crag of rocks, but strengthened on the 
land side, where the precipice is less abrupt, by a 
double ditch and vallum, and near the summit by a 
very high and thick stone wall.
On a karri adjoin- 
ing this castle, Borlase mentions the remains of a 
Druid Temple, standing on the plane of a rock, ap- 
parently cleared by art of all unevenness, of an or- 
bicular figure, and measuring 172 feet from north to 
south, and 138 from east to west.
On the edges of 
the area were nine vast stones, with smaller ones in- 
tervening, and all of them " planted in a circular 
line," but.
at very unequal distances, even when the 
circle was perfect, as appeared from " that part of 
the circumference from which no stone had been 
taken away.
One stone on the edge of this temple 
was seven feet ten inches high from the ground ; the 
front of it inwards, towards the centre, was twenty 
feet long; it was forty-three feet in girt; and had 
thirteen distinct and curious basons sunk into the 
top of it." Many of the stones have been removed 
at various times, and broken for the purposes of 
building.
Numerous smaller circles of erect stones 
are to be found on different parts of this island ; as 
well as many rock-basons, and two tolmen, one of 
which is similar, both in shape and position, to that 
in Constantine Parish.
Of the ancient places of se- 
pulture, the barrows in this island are very numer- 
ous.
" They are all," observes Borlase, " con- 
structed in one manner.
The outer ring is compos- 
ed of large stones pitched on end ; and the heap 
within consists of smaller stones, clay and earth, 
mixed together : they have generally a cavity of 
stone- work in the middle, covered with flat stones : 
but the barrows are of various dimensions ; and the 
cavities, which, being low, and covered with rubble, 
are scarcely apparent in some, consist of such large 
materials in others, that they make the principal figure 
in the whole monument." Several of these were 
opened by Dr. Borlase, but nothing decisive was 
discovered.
In one, different coloured earths were 
found ; and in another, some earths of a strong* 
unctious quality, emitting a cadaverous odour.
It was at Porthelik Cove, on this island, that the 
body of the brave Sir Cloudesly Shovel was washed 
vol.
i. — iso.
36.
on shore : not being recognized, it was buried in a 
bed of sand ; but afterwards taken up, and removed 
to Westminster Abbey.
The place where his re- 
mains were first deposited, is still shown by the 
islanders, who superstitiously remark, that " the 
grave never fills with sand, though close to the sea- 
surge." The admiral was not drowned ; but, alter 
having reached the shore in safety, was, according to 
the confession of an ancient woman, by her treacher- 
ously and inhumanly murdered.
This atrocious act 
she, many years afterwards, when on her death-bed, 
revealed to the clergyman who attended her, de- 
claring she could not die in peace till she had made 
this confession.
She acknowledged having been led 
to commit this horrid deed, for the sake of plunder ; 
and that she then had in her possession, amongst 
other tilings, an emerald ring, which she had been 
afraid to sell, lest it should lead to a discovery.
This 
ring, which was then delivered to the minister, was 
by him given to James, Earl of Berkeley, (in pos- 
session of whose family it now remains) at his parti- 
cular request, Sir Cloudesly Shovel and himself 
having lived on terms of the most intimate friend- 
ship.
When the fatal accident occurred, Sir Clou- 
desly, in the Association, was returning with his 
squadron from Toulon ; and on the night of the 22d 
of October, 1707, in an extreme fog, struck on the 
Gilstone-Rock, and sunk instantly : every soul on 
board perished ; and among them several persons of 
distinction, who had accompanied the admiral.
The 
Eagle, Captain Hancock, underwent a similar fate ; 
and the Romney and the Fire-brand were also lost; 
but their captains and twenty-five men were saved.
The greatness of this calamity made a considerable 
impression on the nation, and the consequent mourn- 
ing was almost universal.
Sir John Narborough, 
Bart, son of the celebrated admiral of that name ; 
Henry Trelawny, sou of the Bishop of Winchester ; 
and Captain Edmund Loades, of the Association 
man of war, were all lost with that ship, and were 
buried in the chancel of St. Mary's church ; but there 
is no monument to their memory.
This may not be an improper place to remark, 
that the Scilly Islands have always been deemed to 
be under the spiritual jurisdiction of the Bishops of 
Cornwall, or Exeter, and to have constituted part of 
the Archdeaconry of Cornwall ; but, observe Messrs.
Lysons, " there is no memory of any ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction having been exercised, except in the 
particular of approving wills.
In early times, the 
Abbot of Tavistock held the tithes of the Scilly 
Islands, and certain lands, by the service of finding 
two monks to reside in them, and to provide for the 
spiritual wants of the inhabitants.
In the reign of 
Edward III.
he was allowed to provide two secular 
chaplains for this service instead of monks, during 
the war, with France.
Since the Reformation, the 
tithes have been vested in the Lord Proprietor, who 
is patron of the donative and pays the minister or 
chaplain an optional salary, now sixty guineas per 
annum.
The minister receives neither institution 
6 k nor 
4#& 
CORNWALL.
nor is be licensed by tbe bishop ; and neither he nor 
the church-wardens are cited to visitations : the lat- 
ter are sworn in at the Lord's Council Court, where 
cognizance is taken of all offences usually brought 
before spiritual courts.
It was formerly customary 
to punish such offenders by ducking in salt water at 
tbe quarry head.
Till of late years, divine service 
was performed regularly only* by the minister of 
St.Mary's, where a register of baptisms and marriages 
was kept for all the islands ; at Trescaw only on "the 
Sunday after Easter ; and at St. Martin's on Tri- 
nity Sunday.
The chapels of the other islands are 
served by laymen, or, as they are called Island CI.
rkr, 
generally fishermen.
The Society for promoting 
Christian Knowledge now employ two missionaries, 
who officiate at what are called the Off-Islands." 
In St. Mary's church and church-yard are monu- 
mental inscriptions for some of the Rallenbury family, 
commissaries in the early part of the 18th century ; 
Captain James Bostock, of a Kentish family, who 
met his death by the accidental discharge of a gun, 
whilst taking the diversion of shooting, in the year 
1756 ; and Mary, wife to Joseph Hunkins, Esq.
Governor of the Scilly Islands in 1659.
About a mile south-west of St. Mary's is St.
Agnes ; though more frequently called Light-House 
Island, from a very high and strong light-house, 
erected here to warn the mariner from the rocks, 
which are more numerous about this than any other 
of the Scilly Islands.
This building is upwards of 
sixty feet high, and stands on the most elevated 
ground.
The light is produced by twenty-one pa- 
rabolic reflectors of copper, plated with silver, and 
having each an Argand's lamp in its focus.
The 
reflectors are disposed in three clusters, of seven in 
each cluster ; and the frame in which they are fixed 
stands perpendicularly to the horizon, on a shaft 
united to a machine below, which makes the whole 
revolve every two minutes.
By this motion the 
light progressively sweeps the whole horizon ; and 
by its gradual intermission and increase, it is readily 
distinguished from any other.
Its brilliancy is also 
extraordinary ; and by these combined effects, its 
benefits are greatly increased, as the seaman is at 
once rendered completely sensible of his situation.
This light was designed by the ingenious Mr. Adam 
Walker, (lecturer in natural and experimental phi- 
losophy,) under whose inspection it was constructed.
The Light-House itself is of stone, and was erected, 
as appears from an inscription over the door, by the 
Captains, Hugh Till, and Symon Bayley, in the 
year 1680.
The charges attending the light are de- 
frayed by the Trinity House.
The approach to England, after a voyage to In- 
dia ; the appearance of St. Agnes' light ; and the 
present improved, and improving state of the Scilly 
Isles, are thus happily introduced, in Downey's 
Poem (from which we have before quoted) intituled 
" Pleasures of the Naval Life : — 
" Long is die watery track, and home afar, 
Yet southward roils, at length, the fiery car; 
No ionger downward dart the scorching ravs, ' 
Rut the tool ambient air iei Freshing plays ; 
Mis masts projecting, as the moments roll, 
A lengthening shade towards the northern pole : 
While each mild evening, to his gladdened view, 
Successive stars their well-known beams renew, 
And up the Heavens he sees Bootes' team 
Wheel, in wide arching track, o'er ocean's stream : — 
Then, as he sounds, and, by the adhesive sand, 
Precisely notes his distance from the land, 
Low in th' horizon, through the gloom of night, 
Beams on his eye a solitary light; 
As sudden lost ; then far along the main, 
The orb, revolving, shoots its blaze again, 
Till dawn discloses Scilly, rising steep, 
In craggy groupes, above the circling deep.— 
" The land is made ; the sailor's care subsides ; 
Awhile complacent by the shore he glides, 
Of the lone isle, permitted long, by fate, 
To pine, neglected by her parent state ; 
To rear, unknown, her barren summits vast, - 
In sullen grandeur to th' Atlantic blast ; 
To stretch her rocks amid the stormy wave, 
Scaring the trembling ik-ets her bays would save.
Now, 'mid the dangerous mazes ol that isle, 
Cheer'd by her guardian Prince's fostering smile.
Grateful, he views the solid mole ascend, 
The friendly port its arms capacious bend ; 
And thronging masts and sails, and naval bands.
And crowds industrious, spreading o'er her strands ; 
And cultured fields, and herds, and flocks around ; 
And safety reign, where erst destruction frowned." 
St. Agnes' Isle, says Leland, " was desolated by 
this chance in hominuin memoria.
The whole num- 
ber almost of five households, that were in this isle, 
came to a marriage or feast into St. Mary's Isle, and 
going home, were all drowned." The present num- 
ber of inhabitants is about 244.
They have a cha- 
pel, in which religious service is performed by one 
of the ministers, appointed and paid by the Society 
for promoting Christian Knowledge.
This island is 
extremely pleasant, fertile, and well cultivated.
Trescaw, or Tresco, anciently called Iniscaw, and 
St. Nicholas, lies nearly two miles south-west of St.
Mary's, and is only about half the size of that island; 
though Leland, from inaccurate information, has de- 
scribed it as the largest of the groupe.
Here, in a 
very beautiful situation, near the borders of a small 
fresh-water lake, separated from the sea by an ever- 
green bank, named the Abbey Pond, stood an an- 
cient monastery, which is mentioned in Borlase's 
historical account of these Islands : only some re- 
mains of the outside walls of the church, dedicated 
to 8t.
Nicholas, are now visible.
Several batteries, 
and remnants of ancient fortifications, are on this 
isiand.
That called the Old Castle is an extensive 
pile of ruins, situated on an eminence.
It was ori- 
ginally intended to command the harbour, but has 
been neglected since the art of defence became bet- 
ter understood.
Some other fortifications are named 
Oliver's Castle, Battery, &c.
in honour of Cromwell.
That called Oliver's Castle, however, seems to have 
been originally fortified many years prior to the civil 
wars.
In the Dolphin Town, in Trescaw, is a cha- 
pel, and the only range of houses on the island: 
these 
CORNWALL.
4D» 
these are scarcely more than twenty in number, but 
contain about 465 inhabitants.
The soil is very pro- 
ductive, and, according to Campbell, it is " parti- 
cularly noted for producing 1 plenty of the finest sam- 
phire." Borlase mentions a row of shallow tin-pits 
near Dolphin Downs, none appearing to be more 
than four fathoms deep, but most of them not more 
than six or eight feet perpendicular ; these are stat- 
ed to be the only certain remains of tin- works now to 
be seen on any of the islands.
About seventy years 
ago, the Earl of Godolphin established a school here, 
for the instruction of twelve boys in reading, writ- 
ing, and cyphering.
Some years after, the Rev. R.
C. Hart9horne, rector of Brosely, in Shropshire, pre- 
sented the sum of '250/.
towards the support of either 
a clergyman or school-master in this island, under 
the direction of the Society for promoting Christian 
Knowledge.
Charles Etty, Esq. has since present- 
ed 500/.
towards the religious instruction of the 
island.
The Society already mentioned contributed 
400/.
towards the erection of a house for the mis- 
sionary, at Trescaw ; and, out of its general funds, 
it expends about 300/.
a year on the missions and 
schools in the Scilly Isles.
Tbc Island of St. Martin is somewhat smaller 
than Trescaw, whence it is situated about a mile east- 
ward.
From the remains of inclosures which inter- 
sect it in various directions, it seems to have been, 
in former times, exceedingly well cultivated ; but it 
was entirely deserted till within little more than a 
century ago, when Mr. Thomas Ekiues, a merchant 
of these islands, encouraged some people to make it 
their abode.
He also caused a hollow tower, twenty 
feet high, and a spire, of the same height, to be erect- 
ed, as a day-mark to seamen navigating the Chan- 
nel, or steering for Scilly.
A Druidical circle of 
rude upright stones, about twenty feet in diameter, 
and several barrows, are on this island.
The inha- 
bitants, who are almost all related to each other, and 
extremely attached to their native land, are about 
235 in number.
The Society for promoting of 
Christian Knowledge has appointed a minister for 
this island, conjointly with Trescaw aud Brehar.
The chapel is pleasantly seated, but extremely small.
Here is a school for twenty-five children, which was 
built by twelve of the inhabitants, at the slight ex- 
pence of about sixteen pounds.
The master's sa- 
lary is partly defrayed by subscription, and partly 
by the Trinity- House.
Much kelp is burnt in this 
island.
Brehar, or Bryer, lies to the west of Trescaw, and 
is very mountainous, whence it obtained its present 
appellation, which in the Cornu-British language 
signifies a high mountain.
Many small barrows are 
scattered over different parts of the downs ; and on 
the highest ground of one of the eminences is a very 
large circular cairn, or barrow, seventy-seven feet 
in diameter.
" Within it," says Borlase, " are 
many kistvaeus, as the Britons call stone-cells ; and 
many of the flat stones which covered them lie here 
and there, some keeping their first station, and some 
being removed, to make stands for shooting rabbits, 
with which this part of the hill abounds." The 
sands between this island and Trescaw may be 
crossed at low water on foot.
The number of inha- 
bitants in Brehar is about 111.
Here is a chape], 
which was built by some of the Godolphin family, 
about the year 1746.
St. Sampson's Island is composed of two circular 
hills, connected by a low rocky ledge, and at a dis- 
tance has a pleasing effect, being apparently covered 
with a luxuriant mantle of verdure, but which, on a 
nearer approach, is discovered to be little else than 
fern.
On the summit of one of the hills are eleven 
cairns ; and on the other, various ruins of houses, 
some rock-basons, a kistvaen, &c.
The inhabitants, 
which, in Heath's time, consisted of but one family, 
are now about 32 in number : they support them- 
selves by the various occupations of husbandry, fish- 
ing, and making kelp ; a process which was intro- 
duced by a Mr. Nance, in the year 1684.
These, we believe, are all the Scilly Islands now 
inhabited ; though, from various remaining vestiges, 
it may be affirmed, that several others have once 
been peopled.
St. Helen's, supposed to have been 
the same as St. Lyde's, presents the ruins of houses, 
and of an ancient chapel, probably that of St. Lyde ; 
" where," says Leland, " in times past, at her se- 
pulchre, was gret superstition." 
The air of these islands is mild and healthy ; the 
winters are never severe ; and the heat of the sum- 
mers is rendered moderate by the sea-breezes.
The soil is productive ; but wheat is at present 
grown in much less quantity than formerly : the 
grain most abundant is barley.
Potatoes are pro- 
duced, in great quantities, at St. Mary's.
The 
horses and cattle are but small ; sheep and rabbits 
are plentiful ; and wdd and domestic fowl are bred 
here in great numbers.
The civil government of these islands is chiefly 
managed by twelve of the principal inhabitants, who 
meet monthly at Heugh Town, St. Mary's, and ge- 
nerally settle differences by compromise, as their 
authority rests more on custom than positive insti- 
tutions, and is therefore insufficient to enforce the 
observance of their decisions.
All criminal causes 
are referred to the military power.
The inhabitants 
are chiefly employed in husbandry, fishing, and mak- 
ing kelp.
The principal months for burning the 
ore- weed of which the kelp is made, are June and 
July ; as, after the latter month, the manufacturers 
consider it for their advantage not to gather any 
more weed, but let it grow till the following year.
There are several sorts of this ore-weed, or alga 
marina, of which the kelp is made, and each island 
has its proper limits assigned for gathering it.
As 
the rocks near the sea shore cannot furnish a suffici- 
ent quantity, the people employed go off in fair 
weather to distant ledges, where they place their 
boats.
And when the water ebbs, and the boats 
touch the ground, they get out of them, and cut the 
ore-weed from the rocks with hooks and load their 
8 bouts.
500 
CORNWALL.
boats.
When the title rises they return home, and 
spread their cargo on the beach to dry ; alter being* 
oilen turned, they then cock it in the manner of hay, 
but in much less heaps, and let it remain.
Having 
thus prepared the ore,and made a circular shelving pit 
ill the sand, seven feet in diameter, and three feet 
deep, they line the side of the pit with stones, to 
prevent the sand or earth from mixing with the kelp.
They then put a small bush of lighted furze into the 
bottom of the pit, lightly placing some pi the driest 
ore- weed on the fire.
Thus by.
degrees it gains 
great strength, when they feed it with fresh ore.
At 
this time the smoke rises, which spreads, itself like a 
thick heavy mist, with a most disagreeable smell ; 
and if it is calm weather, it hangs in the air for some 
time after the burning is over.
' When the fire is 
very strong, it has the appearance of bright burning 
embers, and then they mix and stir it with iron rakes, 
from one side of the pit to the other, till it begins to 
run and turn to a kind of imperfect glass.
When 
the whole mass is melted, they let it settle, and it be- 
comes a lump at the bottom of the' pit, and is fit for 
exportation when cold.
Senan.] — The parish of St. Senan, or St. Senuen, 
the most westerly in England, is in the west division 
of the hundred of Pen with, nine miles and a half 
Tvest-south-west from Penzance.
On one of the 
rocks, off this coast, called the Long-ships, is a light- 
house, which has been already described.
Cape 
Cornwall is in this parish ; and, a little to the north 
of the Land's End, which we have also noticed, is 
Whitsaud Bay ; near which are the remains of an 
ancient chapel, and the site of a castle, called Castle- 
Mean.
It was at Whitsand Bay that King Stephen 
landed, on his first arrival in England.
King John 
also landed there, on his return from the conquest 
of Ireland, and Perkin Warbeck in the reign of 
Henry VII.
Mean, the last village towards the Land's End, is 
in the parish of St. Senan : on the western side 
of the sign-board of a house of entertainment for 
travellers, is inscribed — " The last inn in England ;" 
and, on the eastern side — " The first inn in England." 
In this village stands Table-Mean, a large stone 
mentioned by Borlass.
Tradition states, that three 
Kings once dined together at this stone, on a jour- 
ney to the Land's End. About a century ago, a 
farmer, on removing a flat stone in this village, se- 
ven feet long, and six wide, discovered beneath it a 
cavity, formed by stones, four feet long and two 
wide ; in the middle of which was an urn full of 
black earth, and around it some very large bones ir- 
regularly dispersed.
Sheviock.] — The parish of Sheviock is in the 
south division of the hundred of East, two miles 
south by east from St. Germans.
The manor, an- 
ciently in the Dawney family, and subsequently in 
the Courtenays, escheated to the crown, on the at- 
tainder of the Marquis of Exeter, in the year 1538 ; 
in 1554, it was granted, by Edward VI.
to Sir Wal- 
ter Mildmay ; who, in 1558, sold it to Thomas Ca- 
rew, Esq.
; and it now belongs to Sir Reginald 
Pole Carew, Esq. M.
P. the representative of the 
Carew family.
Sheviock Church appears to have been built, in 
part at least, in the 14th century.
Sir Edward 
Courtenay, whose monument is under the south 
window of the south transept, is supposed to have 
been its founder.
The windows are in the elegant 
style of the 14th century.
Here are some ancient 
monuments of the Dawney family.
Craf thole, anciently called Croftil-borowe, is the 
principal village in this parish ; and, from the cir- 
cumstance of its having had one, if not two weekly 
markets, with a three days' fair at the festival of St.
James, it must have been, anciently, of some note.
The market has been long discontinued ; but there 
is a cattle fair, of recent origin, at Lady-Day, and 
a holiday fair, of older date, on Easter Tuesday.
Carew, in mentioning Crafthole, terms it " a poore 
village, but a much frequented thorow-fare, some- 
what infamous, not upon any present deserts, but 
through an inveterate byword ; viz.
that it is peo- 
pled with 12 dwellings, and 13 cuckolds : for as the 
dwellings are more than doubled, so I hope the 
cuckolds are less than singled : bowsoever, many 
wayfarers make themselves glee, by putting the in- 
habitants in mind of this privilege ; who againe, es- 
pecially the women (like the Campellians in the 
north and the London bargers) forflow not to baigne 
them (unless they plead their heels the faster) with 
a worse perfume than Jugurth found fault with in the 
dungeon, where the Romanes buried him alive, to 
attend his languishing and miserable death." In 
the year 1798, Mr. Pole Carew purchased, under 
the Land Tax Redemption Act, the manor of Craft- 
hole, which, after the attainder of the Marquis of Exe- 
ter, had been annexed to the duchy of Cornwall.
The pilchard fishery is carried on, to a consider- 
able extent, at Wrinkle-Cove, where there is an an- 
cient pier, in this parish.
Sithney.] — This parish, situated in the west di- 
vision of the hundred of Kirrier, two miles and a half 
north-west from Helstone, is remarkable chiefly for 
a pile of rude stones, the uppermost of which has the 
name of Men-amber, and was formerly a Logan, or 
rocking-stone.
The superstitious veneration, how- 
ever, in which it was held by the common people, 
who were accustomed to resort to this place at par- 
ticular seasons of the year, occasioned Shrubsall, 
Governor of Pendennis Castle in the time of Crom- 
well, to have the under part cleaved off, and by that 
means the stone was thrown from its balance.
Bor- 
lase imagines the term Men-amber to be a corrup- 
tion from Men-an-bar, which in the Cornish lan- 
guage signifies the top-stone, as this was called in 
token of pre-eminence.
It measures eleven feet in 
length, six in width, and four in thickness.
Near it 
is a pile or wall of smaller stones, which seems to 
have been raised to enable persons to reach the 
logan-stone more conveniently.
Carew mentions 
this rocking-stone as a great rocke, " advanced 
upon 
CORNWALL.
50J 
upon some others of a meaner size, with so equall a 
counterpoyze, that the push of a finger will move it 
to and fro : but farther to remove it, the united forces 
of many shoulders are over weak." Wherefore, 
continues he, " the Cornish wonder-gatherer thus 
descrybeth the same :" — 
Be thou thy mother Nature's work, 
Or proofe of giants might ; 
Worthless?
and ragged though thou show, 
Yet art thou worth the sij<ht.
This hugy rock, one finger's force 
Apparently will move ; 
But to remove it many strengths 
Shall all like feeble prove.
At the village of St. John's, almost adjoining the 
town of Helstoue, formerly stood the hospital or 
priory of St. John the Baptist, or St. Mary Magda- 
len, which is said to have been founded by the Kille- 
grew family.
When Bishop Stafford was at Hel- 
stone, in the year 1411, he granted an indulgence 
to all the benefactors to the poor of this hospital.
The revenues of this hospital, which is said to have 
been dependent on the priory of St. Michael's Mount, 
were valued, at the Dissolution, at 12/.
6s.
4d.
The mauor of Thuthall, in this parish, said, by 
Hals, to have belonged to the Knights Hospitallers, 
but more probably to the priory of St. John above 
mentioned, was purchased of the Arundells by the 
late Judge Buller, in whose family it is still vested.
It had formerly a free chapel, the ruins of which re- 
mained in the time of Tonkin.
Sithney Church contains memorials for some of 
the Arundell family,* &c.
Stephen.] — St. Stephen's in Brannell is in the 
east division of the hundred of Powder, four miles 
and a half west-north-west from St. Austell.
Hugh 
Wolridge, a physician, who died A.
D. 1652, in the 
30th year of his age, was buried in St. Stephen's 
Church ; aud on his tomb is the following inscrip- 
tion : — 
*' Borne at Penkevell, and in Cambridge bred 
A scholler, in Breda I studied 
Phisicke, till, forced by her unkindly aire 
Back to my country to make my repaire ; 
Sicke I retum'd, though furnished with skill 
To cure, ami did cure others that were ill: 
But my grief seeming to give ground to art, 
Left me" not till 'lad made my soule depart ; 
She gla.l to doo't, in CreecVe I chane'd to dye, 
But in St. Stephen's chose enlomb'd to lye." 
There arc some clay -pits in this parish.
King John granted the manor of Brannell to Ri- 
chard, Earl oi Cornwall and King of the Romans, 
by whom it was given to Richard de Cornubia, or 
* The Arundells are sometimes called, in Latin, De Hirun- 
tline ; and, says Camden, " in my opinion not improperly, as 
that word answers to the French Arondell (a swallow,) and the 
family bear six swallows Argent in a field Sable.
It is an an- 
cient and renowned family, and much extended by descents 
and alliances ; to who?e name and arms William Breton alludes 
vol.
i. — no.
36.
Cornwall, his natural son by Joan de Valletort, wi- 
dow of Sir Alexander Oakeston.
It now belongs 
to Lord Grenville.
Brannell Manor-House, called 
Court, has been taken down.
Godfrey de Corn- 
wall, a Carmelite friar, the author of several learned 
works, about the year 1300, was of the family of 
Cornubia, mentioned above, and is said to have 
been born at Brannell Manor-House.
The Gren- 
ville and Trevanion families have estates in this 
parish.
St. Stephen's, in the south division of the hundred 
of East, is a little village, about a mile west of the 
town of Saltash, which is within the parish.
The 
church is a spacious fabric, built of stone in thin 
layers, and handsomely covered with slate.
It has 
three aisles, and a high tower at the west end.
Here 
all the parochial duty of Saltash is performed.
About 
300 years ago, it is said, that a leaden coffin was 
dug up in the chancel containing the body of a very 
large man* who, from some writing engraved on the 
lead, appeared to have been one of the ancient Dukes 
of Cornwall.
The grounds of this supposition, however, are 
very weak.
There is a curious stone in the porch, 
at the entrance of the church-yard, called a Leach 
Stone, where they rest the bodies brought for inter- 
ment.
It is nearly in the shape of a coffin : the 
same kind of stone-bearer is found in other Cornish 
church-yards.
In this parish, the mauor of Ashe-torre, or Esses- 
torre, observe Messrs.
Lysons, the site of which is a 
rock at the bottom of Saltash Town, abutting on the 
water, has an extensive jurisdiction, although it Avas 
itself held as seven fees under the honour of Trema- 
ton.
Carew speaks of this rock as " invested with 
the jurisdiction of a manor, and that it claimed the 
suites of many gentlemen as his freeholders in 
knights' service." This manor, which extends its 
jurisdiction into several parishes in Cornwall and 
Devonshire, belonged to the ancient family of Flem- 
ing of Devonshire, Barons of Slane in Ireland : it 
was sold in the 16th century, by Nicholas and Ro- 
bert Dillon, sons and heirs of Anne, one of the sis- 
ters and co-heiresses of Christopher Fleming, Baron 
of Slane, to Thomas Wyvell, Esq. from whose fa- 
mily it passed, by a female heir, to the ancestor of 
Francis Wills, Esq. of Saltash, the present proprie- 
tor.
The site of this manor is thus described in old 
papers: — " All that messuage, dwelling-house, pa- 
lace, &c.
and waste ground in and nigh Ashe-torre 
Rock with the remains of houses, on which premises 
manor-courts were held, all unconnected with auy 
person's land, and forming a peninsula, situated at 
the bottom of Fore-street or road, in the borough of 
in his description of a warrior of this house assaulting a French- 
man about A.
D. 1 170.
" Swift as the swallow, whence his shield's device 
Ami his own name are ta'en, enraged he flies, 
Ami his own name are ta en, enraged lie fries, 
Piercing thro' troops that overspread the field, 
And strike his mighty lance in.
William's "litterii 
6l 
jups iiim oveispieau me neiii, 
ighty lance in William's "littering shield." 
Saltash, 
50* 
CORNWALL.
Saltash, on a rock, part of which abutteth into the 
sea." — " A record of the year 1620," says Thomas 
Wyvell, Esq.
" clahneth Wadsworthy as parcel of 
the demesne of the manor of Ashe-torre." 
There are several other manors in this parish, one 
of which, called the Sanctuary Manor, is held on 
lease under the Church of Windsor, together with 
the great tithes, by Mr. Thomas Edwards, who lately 
purchased it of the Buller family.
The church itself 
was -given to Windsor College, by Edward the 
Black Prince, The manor of Shillingham belongs 
to James Buller^ Esq. M.
P. Of the old mansion, 
'which was sometime the chief seat of the.
Bullers, 
kittle remains except the ruins of an elegant Gothic 
chapel, now covered with ivy.
Weard House, which 
was built by Admiral Harrison, who distinguished 
himself in the Monmouth in the year 1747, and died 
in 1759, is now the property of Captain Harrison of 
the artillery.
It commands a fine view of Plymouth, 
the River Tamar, &c.
Stoketon House, which 
w r as built about the year 1770, now belongs to the 
Hon. Vice- Admiral de Courcy, by whom it has been 
improved for his own residence.
In the year 1635, Sir John Hay ward, of Roches- 
ter, having give* his manor of Minster, in the Isle 
of Shepey, to be sold, and the money to be applied 
to the relief of the poor, agreeably to the directions 
of his trustees ; and the trust having devolved to J.
F. Buller, Esq. of Shillingham, that gentleman laid 
out the sum of one hundred and twenty pounds in 
lands at Shillingham, which now produce 14/.
per 
annum for the benefit of the poor of St. Stephen's.
In 1771, Mrs. Mabbot gave certain lands now pro- 
ducing 70/.
a year, the rent of which is appropriated 
to poor widows, at the discretion of the proprietor, 
for the time being, of the mansion of Earth and the 
minister of the parish.
There is no regularly en- 
dowed alms-house in St. Stephen's.
Stoke Climsland.] — This parish is in the north 
division of the hundred of East, four miles north 
from Callington.
During the feudal times, the te- 
nants of Stoke Climsland Manor, in common with 
those of many other manors, could not send their 
sons to school, or marry their daughters, without the 
permission of the Lord.
The Manor of Climsland- 
Prior, which is partly in this parish and partly in 
that of Lvnkinhorne, anciently belonged to the priory 
of Launceston, and was one of those which were an- 
nexed to the duchy of Cornwall, in lieu of the ho- 
nour of Wallingford.
The greater part of Hengis- 
ton-Down is in this parish.
There are also several 
villages, manors, and old seats in Stoke Clims- 
land.
Stratton.] — Stratton is a little market-town, in 
the hundred to which it gives name, seventeen miles 
and a half north-north-west from Launceston, and 
2*21 £ west by south from London.
The petty ses- 
sions for the hundred arc holdeui in this town.
The 
markets are on Tuesdays and Saturdays for corn and 
provisions: the fairs for cattle are on the 19th ol 
May, the 8th of November, and tho 11th of Decem- 
ber.
The town of Stratton, inconsiderable as it is at 
present, is of great antiquity ; and that it was built 
by the Romans, there is sufficient testimony ; not 
only by the names of many other towns, which are 
undoubtedly Roman, for the Roman roads were by 
the Saxons called streets, and some of the towns 
which stood on them they named Street-towns or 
Strettens.
Besides the great southern road leading 
into Cornwall, it is highly probable the Romans had 
another more to the north, and this second road 
might probably run along the coast of the south sea 
with forts and towns at proper distances, as well as 
cross roads reaching from one principal road to an- 
other.
The remains of a Roman road are still ex- 
tant among the hills in the neighbourhood of Strat- 
ton.
Borlase made this discovery from the church 
tower, from the battlements of which he saw a 
straight road passing east and west pointing directly 
for the town, which has nearly the same direction.
The next morning he easily found the ridgeway 
about ten fett wide, bearing up the hill, but over- 
grown with briars — he traced it to West Leigh on 
the top of the hill, nearly two miles east of Stratton, 
on the way to Torrington.
There is a way called 
Smalh'idge-lane, which runs nearly parallel to this, 
between the lane leading to Lanceli's Church and 
the way above-mentioned ; from its name it would 
appear to have been a second or collateral way, hav- 
ing reference to some broad ridgeway or principal 
road in its neighbourhood.
To the west of Stratton, at the town's end, thera 
is a raised way called the Causeway, paved with 
stones, which passes slanting up the hill, and then 
runs about a mile and a half as straight as the hilly 
surface will permit, passing away at the head of 
Budehaven towards Camelford.
About half a mile 
from the town, and a furlong to the right of the 
Causeway, is a square intrenchment of about an acre 
of ground, where the house of Blanchmiuster for- 
merly stood.
It was moated round — but whether it 
were a small fortress belonging to the road, or con- 
structed by the owners, remains uncertain.
How- 
ever, near the latter spot several brass medals and 
silver coins have been found.
Hence it should ap- 
pear that the Romans had a road in the north of 
Cornwall ; but whether it came from Exeter or ran 
into the north of Devonshire from Somersetshire is 
undetermined.
Dr. Borlase favours the latter opi- 
nion.
There are two square i'orts near Stratton : at 
the one at Binnomy several Roman brass coins 
have been found.
The other is at Walsborow, 
and on the highest part of its tenement is a large 
barrow.
As this place lies but a little way from the 
road, called the Canseway, leading from Stratton to 
Camelford, and is raised above the common level like 
a wall, it is suspected that it was either called the 
Barrow, on or near the wall, or named from the wall- 
ed fort yet visible above the house ; Gaul signifying, 
in 
1 
CORNWALL.
508 
in Saxon, a fort.
As both these Square forts lie so 
near Stratton, and near a road thought to be Ro- 
man, it seems very probable that they were erected 
by that nation.
The road into Cornwall, by the way of Stratton, 
was much frequented before the making of the Ca- 
melford turnpike, about 60 years ago.
According- to Camden, the parish of Stratton was 
famous for gardens and garlick ; but there are now 
no gardens in the neighbourhood, but such as belong 
to private families ; nor is it remarkable for the cul- 
ture of garlick, although that root is sometimes 
brought to the market, and purchased by the cattle 
doctors.
In some parts of the hundred of Stratton 
there are numbers of orchards.
This town, as has been seen at large, in an ac- 
count of the adjoining parish of Poughill, has ac- 
quired considerable note in history, from the battle 
of Stratton, in which the King's forces, in the early 
part of the civil war, obtained an important victory 
over the Parliamentarians.
At an early period, the manors of Stratton and 
Binnomy were in the possession of an old family, 
Which in ancient records is entitled, de Albo Mo- 
nasterio, Blanchminster, and Whitminster.
Towards 
the termination of the fourteenth century, Sir John 
de Blanchminster dying without issue, the family 
estate in consequence devolved to Emmeline, only 
daughter and heir of Sir Richard Glivis, who had 
•spoused Alice, daughter of Sir Ralph de Blanch- 
minster, and aunt to Sir John of that name : this 
Emmeline was first married to Sir Robert Tresillian, 
chief justice of the King's Bench, and upon his de- 
cease to Sir John Coleshill.
Guy de Blanchminster, 
rector of Lansallos, relinquished in 1393 all claim to 
the manors of Stratton, Binnomy, &c.
to Sir John 
Coleshill.
His son, of the same name, fell at the 
celebrated battle of Agincourt, A.
D. 1415.
The 
infant son and heir of the latter likewise died, and 
upon his death the property passed through a female 
heir into a junior branch of the Arundell family.
— 
This likewise was soon extinct, and the estates 
afterwards devolved in severalties to its numerous 
representatives.
The manors of Binnomy and Strat- 
ton were afterwards bought by the Grenvilles, and, 
together with Kilkhampton estate, became the pro- 
pel ty of the present Lord Carteret.
William of 
Worcester mentions the Coleshills as occupying the 
castle of Binnomy.
It should seem that this was 
built by Sir Ralph de Blanchminster, about the 
year 1335.
According to Borlase, the seat of the 
Blanchminster family was about half a mile distant 
from Stratton, and about a furlong from an old 
causeway belonging to the same family.
On the 
Binnomy estate, now so called, there is a moated 
orchard, a little to the westward of the farm house.
This garden is distinguished by Camden by the 
wame of Binnoway, and is described as a square 
fort.
In ancient times, the manor of Eflford, alias 
Ebbingford, belonged to the family of Waumford, 
«r Waunforde : through a co-heiress it devolved to j 
* .
♦ 
the Durante: the heiress of the latter married an 
Arundell of Trerice : it has since passed with the 
Trerice estate, and now belongs to Sir Thomas 
Dyke Ackland, Bart.
Part of the old mansion is 
occupied occasionally by Wrey J'Ans, Esq. and 
the rest as a farm-house.
Sir John diamond, who 
had married the mother of John Arundell, then of 
Trerice, widow to Sir John Arundell, distinguished 
by his naval services, resided at Efford, according 
to Leland, who visited these parts, during the reign 
of Henry VIII.
The following remarkable instance of longevity 
is recorded in the parish register of Stratton : —   
" Elizabeth Cornish, widow, buried March 10th, 
1691.
This Elizabeth Cornish was baptized in 
October, 1758.
Her father's name was John 
Veale : she was when she died in the 111th yi ar, 
having lived at least 113 years, 4 months and 15 
days." In this small town, during the year 1547, 
no less than 153 persons fell victims to the plague.
To that scarcely less formidable malady, the small 
pox, 42 deaths out of 49 which occurred in 1729, 
were attributed.
In the church we find the following epitaph, in 
memory of Mr. John Avery, a schoolmaster, who 
died in the year 1691, being one of the " eight men," 
as they are termed, of the town.
He appears to 
have discovered some abuses, relating to certain 
charities, and to have recovered some benefactions*, 
which had been either lost, or applied to improper 
purposes : — 
" Here by this place interred does lye, 
One of the eight whose memory 
Will last and fragrant be to all posterity.
He did revive the stock and store ; 
He built the almshouse for the poor ; 
Manag'd so well was the revenue neer before.
The Church he lov'd and beautified, 
His highest glory and his pride ; 
The sacred altar shows his private zeal beside.
A book he left for all to view, 
The accounts which are both just and true ; 
His own discharge and a good precedent for you 
Be silent then of him who's gone ; 
Touch not, I mean, an imperfection, 
For he a pardon lias from the Almighty Throne.
Look to your ways, each to his trust ; 
That when yon thus are laid in dust 
Your actions may appear as righteous and as just." 
Lands of considerable value were given to the 
church and poor of Stratton by one of the Blanch- 
minster family ; who gave also forty-eight shillings 
a year, payable out of the tythes of Egloskerry to 
the vicar of Stratton for preaching four sermons on 
two Sundays in Egloskerry Church.
The land* 
given to the church of Stratton, situated in the 
parishes of Stratton, Week Si. Mary, and Tresmere, 
now produce yearly 53/.
5s.
Those bequeathed to 
the poor are all in Stratton parish, and let for 113/.
13s.
id.
per annum.
A small parcel of land was 
likewise left to the poor of Egloskerry, which now 
lets for 7/.
per annum.
The direction of the pro- 
perty.
£04 
CORNWALL.
perty, bequeathed to Stratton parish, is vested in 
the hands of certain individuals, distinguished by 
the name of " feoffees, or eight men." The rents 
payable to the poor are by them distributed to such 
as are not actually upon the parish.
The Arminian 
methodists have a chapel in Stratton.
On a little hill, at the mouth of Bude Harbour, for- 
merly stood a chapel, dedicated to the Holy Trinity 
and St. Michael ; there was also a chapel at Efford, 
dedicated to St. Leonard.
Bude, a small sea-port, 
is the principal village in the parish of Stratton.
It 
contains a few cottages, in which the families which 
frequent the coast for the benefit of the sea air and 
sea bathing reside.
Within a few years the com- 
merce of this place has considerably augmented.
— 
Bark, timber, and oats, now form the principal ar- 
ticles for exportation.
The chief imports are of 
©oal and limestone from Wales, and of groceries and 
similar goods from Bristol.
Vessels from 50 to 60 
tons burthen are most appropriate to the harbour, 
from its sands, although vessels of 80 and 90 tons 
enter it ; a ship of upwards of 90 tons was indeed 
built at Bude, in the year 1813, specially for the 
trade of this port.
The neighbouring parishes, to 
the distance of twenty miles, draw large quantities 
of sea sand from Bude, for the purpose of manure.
Talland.] — This parish is situated on the English 
Channel, in the hundred of West, about two miles 
and a quarter south-west by west from West Looe, 
which, as well as the fishing town of Polperro, is in 
Talland.
The manor of Talland, which now belongs 
to John Morth Woolcombe, Esq. of Ashbury, in 
Devonshire, by inheritance from the Morths, was a 
possession of that family for many ages.
The re- 
mains of the old mansion are now occupied as a 
farm house.
The following anecdote relating to the 
Morth family is recorded by Carew : — " Oue of 
their auncestors, with the memorie of a next neigh- 
bour called Prake (burdened with 110 yeers age) 
entertained a British miller, as that people, for such 
idle occupations prove more handie than our owne.
But this fellowes service befell commodious in the 
worst sense : for when, not long after his accept- 
ance, warres grew betweene us and France, he 
stealeth over into his own countrey, returneth privily 
backe againe with a French crew, surpriseth sud- 
denly his master and his ghests at a Christmas sup- 
per, carrieth them speedily into Lantreghey, and 
ibrceth the gent, to redeeme his enlargement, with 
the sale of a great part of his revenewes." Several 
remarkable particulars are related by the same 
writer, respecting a servant of Sir William Beville, 
lord of the manor of Killigarth.
Carew compares 
this man to Polypheme, and to the great Egyptian 
eater named Polyphagus, who was a great favourite 
with Nero.
Sir William found him under a hedge 
in the midst of winter, perishing with hunger and 
cold : — " bee was of a stature meane, of constitution 
leane, of face, freckled, of composition well propor- 
tioned, of diet naturally spare and cleanely inough ; 
yet, at his master's bidding, Ire would devoure 
nettles, thistles, the pith of artichokes, raw and liv- 
ing birds, and fishes, with all their scales and fea- 
thers, burning coles and candles, and whatsoever 
else, however unsavourie, if it might be swallowed : 
neither this a little, but in such quantitie, as it often 
bred a second wonder, how his belly should contain 
so much : yet could no man, at any time, discover 
him doing of that which nature requireth.
More- 
over he would take a hot iron out of the fire with 
his bare hand ; never changing his apparell but by 
constraint ; and used to lie in straw, with his head 
downe, and his heeles upwards.
To Sir William ho 
bare such faithfuhiesse, that he would followe his 
horse like a spanyell, without regard of way or 
wearinesse, waite at his chamber door the night 
time, suffering none to come neare him, and per- 
forme whatsoever he commanded were it never so 
unlawfull or dangerous." 
A small cloister of Benedictine Monks, subject to 
Glastonbury Abbey, formerly stood on the barton of 
Portlooe, in Talland parish.
The ground it was 
built upon appears to have been a donation of the 
Solenny family : it was situated just opposite Loos- 
island, and called Laramana ; some vestiges of the 
Chapel are still extant.
In the appendix to Adam 
de Domerham, by Hearne, we meet with a grant, 
confirming to the monks of Glastonbury the posses- 
sion of the Island of St. Michael de Lainmana, 
which is most probably that of St. George, opposite 
Looe ; another grant also of Roger Fitzwilliam, by 
which he relinquishes all claim to the lands of Lam- 
mana, which were held by him for fife, under the 
church of Glastonbury, with the exception of the 
house occupied by his sister Mabil ; and another 
also of Richard Earl of Cornwall, licencing the 
monks to farm out the church and island of Lam- 
mana.
There is reason to suppose that Michael the 
Abbot leased it to the sacristary of the convent about 
the year 1250.
Temple.] — Temple is a depopulated parish, con- 
taining only three cottages, with some remains of a 
dilapidated church.
It is situated in the hundred 
of Trigg, six miles north-east by east from Bodmin.
The manor and church were an ancient possession 
of the Knights Hospitallers, and having passed with 
their preceptory of Trebigh, they now belong to Sir.
Bourchier Wrey.
Some old persons yet living, re- 
collect Divine Service to have been performed in 
the church : at present, tiie baptisms and burials, 
are entered in the registers of Blisland parish.
— 
Carew observes, that Temple is exempt from the 
jurisdiction of the bishop, as a place " appertaining 
to the Templars, but not so from disorder ; for it* 
common report communicate with truth, many a bad 
marriage bargaine is there yerely slubbered up." — 
Tonkin adds, " grass widows go thither, sent to lye 
in and be nursed." Hals says, " that by antient 
right or prescription, the vicar or curate, or parish 
clerk of Temple, for the time be'mo;.
legally married 
ail persons applying to them, a cor .dug to the 
canons of the Church of England, without bann and 
6 licence,.
CORNWALL.
r>o* 
fieence, and registered their names as married 
couples, which was good and valid iu law to all 
intents and purposes whatsoever." The extensive 
fooors, which lie between Bodmin and Launceston, 
ake their name from this parish, in which they are 
partly situated- 
Tintagell.]— The parish of Tintagell, in which 
stands the little borough town of Bossiney, already 
described, with several villages, is situated in the 
hundred of Lesnewth, five miles north-west from 
Camclford.
Tintagell manor was parcel of the an- 
cient demesnes of the Earls and Dukes of Cornwall.
Tradition regards its castle as the birth-place of the 
renowned Arthur.
It was a strong fortress, now in 
ruins, standing partly on the main land, and partly 
•on a bold slaty promontory, almost separated from 
the shore by an immense chasm in the cliff, over 
which there was formerly a drawbridge.
What re- 
mains on the peninsula part, is a circular garrotted 
wall, inclosing some traces of buildings : here was 
probably the keep.
Underneath is a cavern, or 
subterraneous passage, through which boats could 
once sail from one side of the rocks to the other, at 
full tide.
The walls on the other side of the chasm 
inclose two narrow courts.
The whole is construct- 
ed with slate, which is pierced with loop-holes, for 
discharging arrows.
The extent of the ruins proves 
this fortress to have been formerly very Spacious, — ' 
The precipice towards the sea is craggy and terrific; 
and the whole situation of the castle has a wildly 
sublime and commanding aspect.
The rocks on this 
part of the coast are very majestic and bold, and 
soar to an immense height.
In speaking of Tintagell, Leland observes as fol- 
lows : — " This Castelle hath bene a marvellous 
stronge and notable fortrese, and almost situ loci 
inerpugH.ibile, especially the dungeon that is on a 
great high terrible cragge, environned by the se, 
but having a drawbridge from the residew of the 
Castelle unto it.
There is yet a chapell standing 
withyn this dungeon of S.
Ulette alias Ulianne.
— 
Shepe now fede within the dungeon.
The residewe 
of the buildinges of the castelle be sore wctherbeten 
and yn ruinc, but it hath been a large thinge.
& 
farther on, The castel had be lykhod three wardes, 
wherof two be woren away with gulfying yn of the 
se : withowte the isle renneth alonly a gate howsc, 
a walle, and a fals braye dyged or walled.
In the 
isle remayne old walles, and yn the est parte of the 
same, the grownd beyng lower, remayneth a wall 
embatteled, and men alyve saw ther yn a postern, a 
dore of iron.
There is in the isle a prety chapel 
with a tumbe on the left side." 
Norden and Carew give accounts of this castle 
very similar to the above : we might even suppose 
they were copied from it.
Carew says: — " Half 
the buildings were raised on the Continent, and the 
other half on an Island, continued together, (within 
men's remembrance) by a drawbridge, but now 
divorced by the downe fallen steep cliffes, on the 
farther side, which, though it shut out the sea from 
vol.
i. — no.
36.
its wonted recourse, hatli yet more strengthened the 
island ; for in passing thither you must first descend 
with a dangerous declyning, then make a worse 
ascent by a path, by his sticklenesse occasioning, 
and through his steepnesse threatening the ruin of 
your life, with the falling of your foote.
At the top, 
two or three terrifying steps give you entrance to 
the hill which supplyeth pasture for sheepe and 
conies : upon the same I saw a decayed chapell.
—   
Under the iland runs a cave, throw which you may 
rowe at ful sea, but not without a kind of horrour, 
at the uncouthnesse of the place." Norden gives 
more particulars : the ascent to the island, he says, 
is " by a very narrow rockye and wyndiuge wave 
up the steepe sea-clyffe, under which the sea-waves 
wallow, and so assayle the foundation of the ile as 
may astonish an unstable brayne to consider the 
perill, for the least slippe of the foote sendes the 
whole bodye into the devouringe sea ; and the 
worste of all is higheste of all, near the gate of en- 
trance into the hill, where the offensive stones so 
exposed hang over the head as while a man respect- 
eth his footinge, he indaungers the head, and look- 
inge to save the head, indaungers the footinge, ac- 
cordinge to the old proverbe, Iiuidit in Scyllam qui 
vult vitare Ckarybdim.
He must have his eyes that 
will scale Tyntagell.
Most of the iland building* 
are ruined." 
The castle and manor, which were annexed to the 
Duchy in the reign of Edward III.
are now leased 
by the Hon. Stewart Wortley.
The church was 
anciently appropriated to the convent of Fontevrault 
in Normandy : it was presented by Edward IV.
to 
the collegiate church of Windsor.
There is a charity 
school in the parish, supported by the corporation.
Formerly there were chapels dedicated to St. Dennia 
and St. Piran.
At Trevenna, one of the villages in 
this parish, there is an annual cattle fair on the 
Monday after the 19th of October.
Tregony.] — Tregony is a borough and market 
town, situated in the parish of Cuby, in the west 
division of the hundred of Powder, 16 miles south- 
west from Launceston, and 250| south-west by west 
from London.
It is seated on the banks of the Fal, 
and was probably the first settlement on this branch 
of the harbour.
Its situation and name correspond 
with the Itinerary of Richard ; and there seems rea- 
son to believe that it was the Roman Ceuio, as the 
harbour was named Cenius.
Some slight traces of 
Roman workmansliip are yet visible, but the more 
prominent characteristics of a military station have 
been long obliterated, '."'he old town was seated on 
the low ground at the bottom of the hill on which 
the present one was built ; but even this exhibits 
strong symptoms of depopulation, as many of the 
houses are in ruins.
The name of Tregony occars in the Domesday 
Book, amongst the lands held by the Earl of Mor- 
taigwe ; but, very early, it came into the possession 
of the ancient family of the Poraeroys, who appear 
to have obtained many manors in this county by the 
6 M marriage 
606 
CORNWALL.
marriage of Jotl de Pomeroy with au illegitimate 
daughter of Henry the First.
In this family it ap- 
pears to have continued till about the reign of 
Charles the First, when, either by descent or pur- 
chase, the chief part became the property of the 
Bcscawens, one of whom, the present Viscount 
Falmouth, transferred his right about thirty years 
ago to Sir Francis Basset, now Lord de Duns tan - 
ville, who in return withdrew his opposition to Lord 
Falmouth's interest at Truro, and afterwards dis- 
posed of the whole property at Tregony to Richard 
Barwell, Esq. of Staustcd Park, in Sussex.
Sir 
Christopher Hawkins also possesses considerable 
property in this borough.
Tregony was formerly a place o!
some conse- 
quence ; but it fell to decay when Truro began to 
flourish, and attract its trade and population.
— 
When the market was established is unknown ; but 
its Lord, Henry de Pomeroy, so early as the reign 
of Edward the First, certified his right to a market, 
fair, and other privileges.
The market, which is 
now on Saturday, for butchers' meat and other pro- 
visions, has been many years in a declining state.
— 
The fairs, which are also much inferior to what they 
were formerly, are five in number, as follow : — 
Shrove Tuesday, May 3, July 25, September 1, 
and November 6.
They were anciently noted for 
the sale of woollen cloth, of which there used to be 
an extensive manufactory in the town.
Whitaker has been at great pains to prove that 
Tregony was in ancient times a sea-port, and a 
place of much consequence.
He states also, that 
in the reign of Charles II.
Charles Trevanion, 
Esq. obtained an act of parliament to convey the 
tide as high as Crowbill, in the parish of St.
Stephen, but failed in his attempt to execute the 
plan.
By a charter granted to the town in the 19th of 
James I.
it appears to have been governed by a 
mayor, seven capital burgesses, a recorder; and a 
town clerk.
Tregony sends two members to Par- 
liament ; the right of election being nominally vested 
in all the householders who boil a pot.
The number 
of voters has some time been decreasing, and in the 
election of 1812 there were only 183.
This town 
enjoyed the privilege of sending members to Par- 
liament in the reign of Edward I.
; a privilege 
which, after long disuse, was recovered in the year 
1550.
The houses in this town are chiefly disposed 
in one long street.
Of Tregony Castle, mentioned by Leland, there 
are now no remains.
Its site was at the lower end 
of the town, a little below the hospital.
It is said 
to have been built by Henry de Pomeroy, on behalf 
of John, Earl of Cornwall, when King Richard I.
was in the holy land.
In the old town was a church dedicated to St.
James, the walls of which were standing about the 
year 1736, and part of the tower much more re- 
ticntjy.
There was also a chapel dedicated to St.
Aune.
According to Whitaker, the site of the 
priory of Tregony was opposite the old mount of 
the castle.
On the opposite side of the river is Trewarthenick, 
the seat of Francis Gregor, Esq. who was sometime 
one of the representatives of the county.
The house 
is charmingly seated on an elevated piece of ground, 
which abounds with fine groves, and commands 
several rich prospects, interesting from their variety 
of outline, and picturesque from the diversity of 
woods.
Trematon Castle.] — This old fortress occupies 
the summit of a high hill, a little westward of the 
village of St. Stephen's, near Saltash.
The remains 
of this once formidable structure are very consider- 
able, and from the east they present au aspect of 
great boldness and grandeur.
From some points, 
the tufted scenery by which it is surrounded, and 
the encircling ivy which envelopes its battlements, 
afford a picturesque and beautiful prospect.
The 
area enclosed by the outer walls, which are about 
six feet thick, is nearly circular, and comprises 
rather more than an acre of ground.
The walls are 
embattled, and are in many places still perfect, 
though several massive fragments have fallen into 
the deep ditch, which surrounds the whole fortress, 
excepting at the gateway.
This is in good pre- 
servation.
The entrance is under a square tower, 
supported by three strong arches, between which 
are the grooves for portcullisses.
This leads into 
the area, at the north-west corner of which stands 
the keep, consisting of a conical mount, considerably 
elevated, with a circular wall on its summit ten feet 
in thickness, and rather more than three times that 
height.
The space inclosed is of a cylindrical form, 
about twenty-four yards by seventeen in extent.
— 
This is now a kitchen garden, but it was originally 
divided into apartments, which must have been 
lighted entirely from the top, as the wall of the keep 
does not contain any windows.
The entrance was 
by a round arched door-way, opening towards the 
west.
On the north was a sally-port, and probably 
some buildings, the' surface of the ground being in 
this part very uneven.
The ramparts command a 
fine prospect of the Hamoaze, Dock, Mount Edge- 
cumbe, and Maker Heights.
A branch of the 
Lynher Creek flows near the foot of the hill.
Trematon castle was erected befora the conquest, 
and was the head of a barony belonging to the an- 
cient Dukes of Cornwall.
The Conqueror bestow- 
ed it on his half brother, Robert, Earl of Moreton 
and Cornwall, on the attainder of whose son Wil- 
liam, his successor, it reverted to the Crown, and 
was afterwards, according to some authors, restored 
to Cadoc, a British Prince, who was re-instated in" 
the earldom.
His daughter aud heiress conveyed it 
by marriage to Reginald Fitz-Henry, natural son 
of Henry the First, and their daughter to Walter 
de Dunstanville, whose male issue failing, it went 
by marriage to Reginald de Valletort, and was 
afterwards made part of the Duchy of Cornwall.
— 
It now consequently belongs to the Prince Regent, 
who 
CORNWALL.
007 
who has a court hoi den here twice every year, for 
receiving' rents and other purposes.
Benjamin 
Tucker, Esq. the surveyor-general of the Duchy oi^ 
Cornwall, has recently erected a handsome house, 
within the base-court of the castle.
Treryn Casti.k.] — The place called Treryn Cas- 
tle, near tlie Laud's End, in the parishof Levau, which 
we have already had occasion briefly to mention, is 
a large piece of rocky ground, projecting into the 
sea, and inclosed by two formidable ramparts and 
ditches, one within the other, stretching in a semi- 
circular form from the sides of the cliff's.
The per- 
pendicular rocks form three sides of this fortifica- 
tion ; and the land side is guarded by these high 
and thick embankments.
The most considerable and curious of the Logan- 
stones in this county is that at Treryn Castle.
This 
extraordinary stone is poised on the top of an im- 
mense pile of rocks, which projects into the sea ; 
and, from its awful situation, the massive grandeur 
of its supporters, and the continual roaring and 
dashing of the waves below, it seems peculiarly cal- 
culated to inspire the mind with the blended emo- 
tions of admiration and terror.
This logan-stone 
is an immense block of granite, supposed to weigh 
nearly ninety tons ; yet this enormous mass, from 
its peculiarity of position, may be easily rocked, or 
logged to and fro.
Mason, who poetically alludes 
to the property of discovering guilt, vulgarly attri- 
buted to these stones, thus describes one of them : 
" Behold yon huge 
And unhewn sphere of living adamant, 
Which, pois'd by magic, rests its central weight 
On yonder point :-d rock: firm as it seems, 
Such is its strange and virtuous property, 
It moves obsequious to t he gentlest touch 
Of him whose heart is pure; but to a traitor, 
Tho' e'en a giant's prowess nerv'd his arm, 
It stands as fix'd as Snowdon." 
About a mile and a half west of Treryn Castle, 
the cape called Tolpedn-penwith is divided from 
the main land by a stone wall.
The castles Karni- 
jeck and Boseagell, in the parish of St. Just, are 
also of the same kind, as well as many others on the 
sea-coast of this county- 
Truro.] — The market and borough town of 
Truro is in the west division of the hundred of 
Powder, 46 miles south-west by west from Laun- 
oeston, and 257| west south-west from London.
It 
is situated in a vale, at the conflux of the two small 
rivers Kenwyn and St. Allen, which direct their 
streams on each side of the town, and at the bottom 
unite with a branch of Falmouth harbour : at every 
spring tide they form a fine lake, or body of water, 
two miles in length, and of sufficient depth to be 
navigable for vessels of one hundred tons.
This 
town, though of no very remote antiquity, may now 
be denominated the metropolis of Cornwall.
Its 
central situation, with respect to the commerce and 
chief products of the county, its improved and im- 
proving state, the regularity and handsome appear- 
ance of its buildings, its advanced population, and 
the similarity of its local regulations to those of our 
principal cities, equally contribute to justify its title 
to pre-eminence.
The advantage oi its situation 
has doubtless been a principal cause of its rapid pro- 
gress ; and it may not be uninteresting to review a 
few of the particulars connected with the different 
stages of its improvement.
" Ther is a castille," 
says Leland, " a quarter of a mile by west out of 
Truro longing to the Erles of Cornwalle, now clenc 
down.
The site thereof is now used for a shoting 
and playing place, out of the town of Truro." This 
castle is not mentioned in the Domesday Book, and, 
therefore, it is presumed to have been erected after 
the conquest, and most probably by some of the 
Norman Earls of Cornwall, as a kind of rural palace, 
smaller and subordinate to their grand residences at 
Launceston, Trematon, and Restormel.
From this 
castle the town appears to have derived its origin ; 
for wherever an ancient Earl's house was situated, 
and however small its extent, or occasional its use, 
it naturally attracted the traders of the county, and 
became for a season the little centre to which the 
venders of merchandize directed their attention, and 
near which they would chuse their residence.
The 
castle stood on an eminence on the more westerly 
side of the two currents ; but its only remains are 
the name, a waste area, and the artificial mount or 
keep, the earth of which is daily decreasing by being 
applied to other purposes.
On this it is probable 
the main tower was situated ; but its smaller wards 
must have occupied the natural ground.
From the 
increase of buildings since the tune of Leland, its 
site is now included within the town, and united 
with St. Pancras Street.
It commands the whole 
place, with some pleasant views of the adjacent 
country, and particularly of the arm or branch of 
the harbour.
Thus it would appear, that the ori- 
ginal and primitive parts of the town were its west- 
erly sides, as nearest to the castle ; and we accord- 
ingly find that the most ancient building of which 
there is any account, the White Friar's House, 
stood on the west.
" The creke of Truro," says 
Leland, " afore the very town, is devided into two 
parts, and eche oi' them has a brook cumming down, 
and a bridge, and this town of Truro bytwixt them 
both.
The White freres house was on the west area 
in Kenwyn Streat." From this current it extended, 
as it enlarged, easterly ; and the peninsulated ground 
between the currents was formed into a parish of 
itself, including a district taken out of Kenwyn 
parish, on which side a church was erected.
It is 
probable that the town, at first, consisted only of 
the street running from the loot of the hill, on a part 
of which the castle stood, and extended backwards, 
with its yards and gardens, to the western current.
This part of course adopted the previous appellation 
of the Castle, and was called with it, Tre-ve-reu ; 
Tre- urea, or Treru ; Tre-uro, or Truro ; the House 
or Castle upon the Uro, or Uru ; the same denomi- 
nation of a river with that of the Vere in Heitford- 
1 shire.
508 
CORNWALL.
shire, the Veru-lamium of the Itineraries, the Uro- 
lanium of Ptolemy, and with that of the Eure in 
Yorkshire, the Ebur-acum and the Is-ur-ium of the 
Geography and Itineraries.
The town, though it emanated from the castle, 
was so nearly coeval with it, that it is noticed as 
existing 1 within a century after the conquest.
— 
" Truro, Truru, or Trivereu," says Dr. Brady, 
" was some time in the possession of Riciiard de 
Lucy, a person of great note in the reigns of Ste- 
phen, and Henry the Second." This Richard actu- 
ally resided at the castle, as he is styled iu an 
instrument of Henry the Second's, " Richarde de 
Lucy de Trivereu ;" and he encouraged the grow- 
ing town, by granting it a charter of incorporation ; 
and even proceeded to allow it that highest privilege 
of a borough, an exemption from toll : nor, says a 
contemporary writer, " was this confined to the 
borough itself, it extended beyond it ; it was com- 
mensurate with the whole county ; and Richard 
must therefore have acted with a power not merely 
of the Lord of the borough, but of the Earl of the 
couuty, as no one possessing less power could have 
granted such an ample clause of exemption.
The 
proof of all this was in the original charter of this 
town, which, though not now in existence, is so 
particularly referred to in a succeeding charter, that 
no doubt of the facts can be entertained." This 
town was in all probability incorporated between 
1130 and 1140 ; as in the latter, Lucy resigned the 
possessions of the earldom to Reginald de Fitzroy, 
the illegitimate son of Henry the First, who eon- 
firmed Lucy's charter, as Henry the Second con- 
firmed Reginald's ; and all were re-confirmed by 
Edward the First, in the thirteenth of his reign.
— 
But in all these charters there is no intimation of 
that grand privilege which Truro certainly possess- 
ed, and which is thus referred to in the last visita- 
tion of the county, preserved in the Heralds' Office : 
" We find that the Mayor of Truro hath always 
been, and still is, Mayor of Falmouth, as by an an- 
cient grant now in the custody of the Mayor and 
Burgesses doth appear." The superiority of Truro 
over all the harbour of Falmouth, is here attested by 
a record of lt>*22, and an ancient grant now " in the 
custody," &c.
appealed to by the record.
This 
distinguished privilege had been ceded to Truro by 
a grant of a particular nature ; but, from the man- 
ner the visitation refers to it, the grant must have 
been so early as to have been without a date, and 
was probably, therefore, about the same age as Re- 
ginald's and Lucy's charters ; but the privilege had 
most likely been transferred from another town, and 
possibly from Tregony, as that was the first town 
on the arm of the harbour.
The charter granted by 
Elizabeth, states, that the Mayor " is, and has long 
been reputed to be, Mayor of Falmouth ;" but this 
is not now the fact.
The rights of Truro being 
contested by the inhabitants of Falmouth, and its 
privileges violated, the Mayor and Corporation, on 
the 1st of June, 1709, proceeded to establish their 
claim, by perambulating the borough, and including 
within its bounds all the country as far as the Black 
Rock in the mouth of Falmouth harbour.
The 
cause was afterwards tried, and decided in favour 
of the inhabitants of Falmouth, who now enjoy the 
advantages connected with the jurisdiction of their 
own port, which formerly belonged to Truro.
This town makes no remarkable figure in history.
Sir Ralph Hopton, soon after his arrival in Corn- 
wall with the royal army, took up his head-quarters 
in this town, and also occupied it previously to his 
surrender to Sir Thomas Fairfax in 1046.
It was 
the head-quarters of Sir Thomas previously to the 
conclusion of the treaty.
King Charles II.
whilst 
yet Prince, visited Truro in the winter of 1045, and 
iu February 1047.
The manor of Truro, which, as we have seen, was 
in the Lucy family at a very early period, has been 
divided into severalties, and is now possessed as 
follows: One moiety belongs to Lord Mount 
Edgecumbe, by right of inheritance ; one-eighth to 
Sir John St. Aubyu, by inheritance from the Arun- 
dells, through the Whittingtons ; a fourth to the 
Hon. Mrs.
Agar, by inheritance from the Robartee 
family, who possessed it in 1 020 ; and one-eighth to 
the Marquis of Buckingham, which was purchased 
from some of the representatives of Coleshill, by the 
Vincent family, and thus passed, together with their 
other Cornish estates, to the Nugent family.
The 
Robartes family had a fine mansion in this town, 
which is still standing at the north-west corner of 
Boscawen, or Powder Street: its front, however, 
has been changed.
There was formerly a nunnery of " poor Clares" 
at Truro ; but, further than its existence, nothing is 
known.
It stood upon the ground lately occupied 
by the King's Head Inn, pulled down when Lemon 
Street was built, and occupied the present entrance 
of that street from Boscawen Street.
There was a 
monastery of friars of the Dominican Order, in Ken- 
wyn Street, the site of which is now occupied by 
tan-pits.
The church, now dedicated to St. Mary, but sup- 
posed to have been originally dedicated to St. Pan- 
eras, is a spacious fabric, of that elegant architec- 
ture which flourished in England about the reign of 
Henry the Seventh.
It consists of two aisles of 
equal size, and a smaller one ; has a very modern 
steeple, of very inharmonious proportions, and by no 
means correspondent with the body of the church, 
the south aisle of which is very similar in its archi- 
tecture to that at Launceston.
It is said to be a 
general remark with the inhabitants of Truro, that 
their church and Probus tower ought to be united, 
as they would better assimilate than the new steeple 
of Truro does with the old church ; the latter being 
elegantly light in all its parts, while the former is 
formal, and wholiy devoid both of symmetry and 
beauty.
In the windows are several fragments of 
painted glass ; and in one of them, on the south 
side, is the date 1513, the year when the church 
was 
CORNWALL, 
509 
was erected.
On the north side of the chancel is a 
monument, inscribed as follows : — 
" To the pious and well deserved memory of Owe" 
Fit?
Pen 3 ' 4 Phippe" who travelled over many parts 
of the world, and on the 24th of March, 1620, was 
taken by the Turks, and made a captive in Argier.
— 
He projected sundry plots for his liberty, and on the 
17th of June, 1627, with 10 other Christian captives, 
Dutcli and French, (^persuaded by his counsel and 
courage,) he began a cruel right with 65 Turks in 
their own ship, which lasted 3 hours, in which 5 of his 
companions were slain, yet God made him conquer, 
and so he brought the ship into Cartagena, being of 
400 tons and 22 ord".
The King sent for him to 
. Madrid to see him ; he was offered a Captain's place, 
and the King's favour, if he would turn papist, which 
he refused.
He sold all for 6000/.
returned into 
England, and died at Lanoran, 17th March, 1636.
" Melcombe in Dorset was his place of birth, 
Age 54, and here lies Earth in Earth.
" George Fitz Pen Jls Phippen — Ipsius frater et lmjus 
Ecclesiae Rector." 
This structure contains another very large monu- 
ment, to the memory of John Robartes, Esq. of 
Truro, who died March, 1614, aged 70, " or there- 
abouts." It is decorated with several figures, and 
was repaired a few years ago by the orders of Miss 
Hunt, a descendant from the Robartes', afterwards 
created Lords Radnor, a family now extinct.
On 
this occasion the following singular Bill was deli- 
vered by the mason : — " To putting one new foot 
to Mr. John Robartes, mending the other, putting 
seven new buttons to his coat, and a new string to 
his breeches knees.
To two new feet to his wife 
Phillipa, mending her eyes, and putting a nosegay 
in her hand.
To two new hands and a new nose to 
the captain.
To two new hands and mending the 
nose of his wife, repairing her eyes, and putting a 
new cuff to her gown.
To making and fixing two 
new wings on Time's shoulders, and making a new 
great toe, mending the handle of his scythe, and 
putting a new blade to it." 
Truro is one of the original coinage towns ; and 
here only, and at Penzance, with the exception of a 
few times at Helstone, for the convenience of the 
merchants, have the coinages of late years taken 
place.
Most of the tin is coined here, and more is 
exported hence than from any other port in the 
county.
The blocks lie in heaps about the streGts, 
and are left entirely unguarded, as their great i 
weight renders it difficult to remove them without 
immediate detection.
Here is a Coinage Hall ; and 
Hals, in his Parochial History, mentions the town 
as possessing one so early as the reign of King 
John.
There is also a manufactory for converting 
block-tin into bars and ingots : the weight of the 
former is from half a pound to one pound ; that of 
the latter, from sixty to seventy pounds each.
The 
bars are exported to the Mediterranean and Baltic ; 
the ingots are sent to the East Indies.
Consider- 
able quantities of copper ore are exported from this 
town to Wales.
In addition to the different branches 
vol.
i. — no.
37.
of trade connected with the mines, a new source of 
business was established here, about twenty years 
ago, by some tradesmen of the town.
This is a 
manufactory for carpets, which is now carried on 
with considerable success.
Over the Town-Hall and Market-Place is the 
following inscription : — 
"T: B: Jekiyn Daniel, Maior.
Who seeks to find eternal treasure, 
Must use no guile in weight or measure.
— 1615." 
Of late years, the improvements made in Truro 
have been very considerable, particularly since the 
lighting and paving act was passed in 1794.
The 
principal street was formerly very narrow, and dis- 
figured by a row of houses stretching along the 
middle from the Coinage Hall to the Market Place.
These having been removed, and a spacious opening 
formed, a new street has been built, diverging from 
the other at right angles ; through this proceeds the 
road to Falmouth.
The charges of' paving, &c.
are 
defrayed by a small assessment on each house.
Amongst other objects which diversify the town, 
and reflect credit on its inhabitants, and the gentle- 
men of Cornwall, is a Literary Society and County 
Library, established in the year 1792.
This was 
originally instituted, and is still patronized and 
supported by the Cornish nobility and gentry.
A 
Theatre and Assembly-Room have also been erected 
in that part of the town called the High Cross \ on 
the 12th of August, 1799, a County Infirmary was 
opened in Kenwyn Street, under the patronage of 
the Prince of Wales.
The expenses are defrayed 
by subscription ; and the regulations for the ma- 
nagement of the sick, and for an active superin- 
tendauce over the persons employed to attend them, 
have been conceived and are executed with much 
judgment.
The Infirmary is a new and spacious 
stone building.
There are seven meeting houses in this town, for 
the Baptists, Methodists, Independents, &c.
Mr.
Williams, draper, who died in 1(331, founded an 
hospital here for ten poor housekeepers of the parish.
It was built the following year, and cost 225/.
19s.
Id. The founder endowed it with lauds now produc- 
ing about 120/.
per annum.
The corporation make 
widows the exclusive objects of this chanty, and 
allow them pensions of 4s.
a week each, and clothes.
It is uncertain to whom the foundation of Truro 
grammar school is to be attributed, or in what 
its endowment consists.
Formerly the salary was 
15/.
per annum, together with a house, which hav- 
ing been given up by the master about tho end qf 
the last century, the corporation increased the 
salary to 25/.
per annum.
The same sum is also 
allowed to an usher.
There are two exhibitions of 
30/.
per annum at Exeter College for scholars of 
Truro school, founded by the trustees of the charit- 
able bequests of the Rev. St.
John Eliott, who died 
in 1760.
One of the charity schools, with an en-» 
6 n downient 
£10 
CORNWALL.
dowment of 5/.
per annum, established out of the 
same funds, was fixed at Truro.
A central school, 
on Dr. Bell's plan, for boys and girls, in separate 
rooms, was established at Truro in the year 1312.
This school now contains 130 boys and about 70 girls.
The government of the town is vested in a Mayor, 
four Aldermen, a Recorder, and twenty capital 
Burgesses.
The right of returning members is in 
these twenty-six persons only.
The interest of the 
borough, since the exchange of Tregony with Lord 
de Dunstanville, has been wholly possessed by Lord 
Falmouth.
On the election of a Mayor, the town 
mace, by the custom of the borough, must be deli- 
vered to the Lord of the Manor, who retains it till 
he is paid sixpence for every house as an acknow- 
ledgment.
The inhabitants of this town presented, in the 
year 1410, a petition to Parliament, praying that 
the rent payable to the Crown, which had been 
lowered from 12/.
1?.
lOd. to 2/.
10s.
might be thus 
reduced in perpetuity.
The measure had been 
adopted by Richard II.
in consideration of the losses 
they had sustained from invasion and pestilence.
— 
They therein stated, that Truro should be looked 
upon as the chief defence of the country from inva- 
sion, but that the inhabitauts, so far from being en- 
couraged to rebuild their houses, were thinking to 
leave the town and seek a home elsewhere.
Truro 
was one of the decayed market towns, to encourage 
the repairs of which an act of Parliament was passed 
in the year 1540.
In 1801, there were 369 houses, 
and 2358 inhabitants in the town : according to the 
population returns of the year 1811, the houses had 
then been increased to the number of 400, and the 
inhabitants to 2482.
The suburbs, however, which 
apparently form part of the town, are more populous 
than the town itself; comprising a great part of the 
population of the two parishes of Kenwyn and St.
Clement, which together contain nearly 8000 per- 
sons.
Truro is inhabited by many of the gentry of 
the county.
* Samuel Foote was born on the 21st of January, in the 
year 1721.
His lather was a justice of peace for the county, 
and his mother sister to Sir John Diuely Goodere of Hereford- 
shire.
Foote was educated at Worcester College, Oxford, 
from whence he removed to the Temple, hut he quitted the 
study of the law, and took to the stage.
His first performance 
was in the character of Othello.
In 1747 he opened the little 
Theatre in the Haymarket, with a dramatic piece of his own, 
called " the Diversions of the Morning," which succeeded 
very well.
The exhibition next sea/on was called " An Auction 
of Pictures," in which he took off some of the most noted cha- 
racters of the day.
He still continued to play at one or other 
of the Theatres, and frequently produced new pieces.
In 
1760 he brought out " The Minor" at his own house in the 
Haymarket.
In 1766 he had tin* misfortune to break his leg, 
which was obliged to be amputated.
The Duke of York, out 
of compassion, procured for him a patent for life for the Theatre 
injthe Haymarket.
In 1776 he attacked the Duchess of King- 
ston, in a piece which was suppressed by authority.
Soon after 
this, a man servant whom he had dismissed charged him with 
an unnatural offence ; and, though he was honourably acquitted, 
2 
The market days at Truro are Wednesday and 
Saturday.
The market is well supplied with but- 
chers' meat and other provisions ; and on Wednes- 
day with corn.
Here are four cattle fairs in the 
year : Wednesday in Mid-lent, Wednesday u: Whit- 
sun-week, the 19th of November, and the 8th of 
December.
The November fair belongs to the pro- 
prietors of the manor, as high lords of the town.
— 
At this fair, as at Chester, a glove is always hung 
out.
The lords claim a tax, called smoke money, 
from most of the houses in the borough ; and there 
vvas anciently a tax, now obsolete, called coveridge 
money.
Amongst the persons of note to whom this town 
has given birth, were Sir John Arundell, vice-ad- 
miral of Cornwall, who took Duncan Campbell, the 
Scotch pirate ; and Samuel Foote, the celebrated 
dramatic author, who was born at a house, now the 
Red Lion Inn, which was the town residence of the 
Footes of Lambesso.* 
About one mile from Truro, on the road to Fal- 
mouth, is a large smelting-house for tin, called 
Calinnick.
It consists of ten reverberatory fur- 
naces, six feet in height, and about twelve feet in 
length, each.
" Culm-coal is used as the flux, in 
the proportion of about one eighth to the ore, of 
which nearly 600 cwt.
is smelted within six hours, 
and yields about 350 cwt.
of tin." 
Ttjdy.] — The parish of St. Tudy is in the hun- 
dred of Trigg, five miles and three-quarters north 
by west from Bodmin.
Here are two fairs for sheep 
and cattle, on the 20th of May and 14th of Septem- 
ber.
Tamsquite, Penhale, Polshea, and Killygreen, 
are villages in this parish.
Tremeer, now the pro- 
perty and residence of Mrs. Reed, was a seat of the 
Lower family, some of the members of which we 
have had occasion to mention.
Henger, another 
possession of the Lowers, belonged to Mathew 
Michell, Esq. M.
P. for Westbury, who, as captain 
of the unfortunate Gloucester, accompanied Lord 
Anson in his voyage round the world,t and after- 
wards 
the circumstances made so deep an impression on his spirits 
that he never recovered it.
He died at Dover, on his way to 
Fiance, for his health, in October, 1777.
His remains were 
inteired in Westminster Abbey.
Foote had an infinite fund of 
comic humour, both in writing and conversation ; but he took 
unwarrantable liberties in taking off persons merely on account 
of natural failings and peculiarities ot manner.
His farces pro- 
cured him the title of the English Aristophanes.
, 
f Matthew Michell was appointed, in June 1740, to com- 
mand the Pearl, of forty guns, then under order for the south, 
seas.
Captain Norris of the Gloucester having, on his arrival 
at Madeira, requested permission to return to England, Cap- 
tain Michell was appointed to command in his room.
Ibis 
ship was remarkably unfortunate upon the expedition : — after 
having narrowly escaped destruction by fire, and having en- 
countered a series of inconceivable difficulties, in the passage 
round Cape Horn, at last came in view of the island Juan 
Fernandez, on the 21st of June.
Commodore Anson had for- 
tunately reached the island some days before, aud prudently 
dispatched his long boat, laden with water and vegetables, to 
meet them.
This was a most providential relief to tbe crew, 
who, 
CORNWALL.
6i r.
wards distinguished himself as captain of the Wor- 
cester, on the coast of Flanders, in 1746.
The 
church of St. Tudy contains monuments of the 
Michell family, and one to the memory of Samuel 
Michell, Esq. who died in 1786.
Formerly there 
were chapels, of which some remains are yet visihle, 
at Kellygreen and at Tinten.
Tywardueth.] — This parish is in the east divi- 
sion of the hundred of Powder, three miles and 
three quarters west-north-west from Fowey, on the 
borders of Tywardreth bay.
The name signifies a 
house or dwelling - on the sands.
At this place, says 
Tanner, there was " an alien priory of Benedictine 
Monks, belonging - to the Abbey of St. Sergius and 
Bachus in Angiers, founded before A.
D. 1169, by 
Champernulphus or Champernon of Bere, lord of 
the manor of Tywardreth, or by the ancestors of 
Robert de Cardinan, perhaps Robert Fitz-William.
It was seized by the Crown during the wars with 
Fiance, and its farm then fixed at 50 marks per 
annum, but beiug afterwards made denison, it con- 
tinued till the general suppression, about which 
time herein were seven monks, whose revenues were 
rated at 123/.
9s.
Sd. per anu.
Dugd.— 151/.
16?.
]</.
Speed.
It was dedicated to St. Andrew, and 
granted 31th Henry VIII.
to Edward Earl of 
Hertford." 
In this parish numerous Roman coins have been 
found, of the Emperors Valerian, Gallienus, Victori- 
ous, Tetricus, Claudius, Aurelian, and others : — 
many of them are preserved in the cabinet at Mena- 
billy.
Tywardreth church contains some very ancient 
oak seats, curiously carved ; a handsome monument, 
erected by the late Philip Rashleigh, Esq. to the 
who, without this succour, must have absolutely perished from 
thirst and disease.
They had, been restricted for some time to 
a pint of water per day, per man, and (hat small supply was 
upon the point of being exhausted.
After being driven about 
for nearly a month, within sight of the island, under constant 
apprehensions of destruction from the disabled state of their 
vessel, and the tempestuous weather; at last, on the 23d of 
July, they succeeded in getting round to the north-west point 
of the bay, and bringing their vessel to anchor.
The unfortu- 
nate crew were reduced to eighty-two persons, but happily 
the mortality ceased almost on the instant of their landing.
— 
This circumstance was attributed to the supply of vegetables, 
&c.
sent them by the Commodore on his first discovering the 
vessel.
The Anna pink, victualler, being condemned as 
unfit for service, her crew, consisting of eleven persons, in- 
cluding the master, were turned over to reinforce the Glou- 
cester, together with twenty-three sailors and six passengers, 
from on board a Spanish vessel captured by the Centurion.
— 
Mr. Anson sailed on the 19th September, directing Captain 
Michell to join him when the state of his vessel would allow 
him, off the Paita islands, where the Commodore meant, en 
attendant, to cruize.
The Gloucester meanwhile captured two 
Spanish vessels, with inconsiderable cargoes, but having on 
board specie nearly to the amount of 20,000 pounds.
Mr.
Anson joined Captain Michell on the 18th November.
In the 
month of August following, (1742) the Gloucester, after various 
other mishaps, was unlucky enough to lose her fore and main- 
top masts in a gale of wind, and was so leaky that she had seven 
feet of water in her hold.
It blew almost a hurricane at that 
time, and the Commodore's vessel even sprang a leak.
Al- 
memory of his wife, who died on, the ninth of Sep- 
tember, 1795 ; a slab, with a cross fiory, in memory!
of Tliomas Colyns, prior of Tywardreth, who died 
in 1732 ; a monument of Robert Harries, Esq- 
major-general of his Majesty's forces before Ply- 
mouth, who died in the year 1635, &c.
On a tenement called Tregraminion, about a mile 
from Menabilly House, which has been already 
described, a chapel has recently been built by Wil- 
liam Rashleigh, Esq. who is the patron of the 
living.
At Polkerris, a village in this parish, is a fishery, 
which supplies Bodmin and other markets.
It is 
also frequented as a bathing place.
An alms-house for four poor widows was founded 
at Tywardreth by one of the Rashleighs : they had 
no fixed pension, but were relieved from time to 
time by the family, till the late Mr. Rashleigh paid 
so much stock in trust for the benefit of the pen- 
sioners, as will pay the nett sum of 20s.
per ann.
to 
each of them.
Doctor Maton, in his " Observations on the 
Western Counties," classes the Poth Stream-works 
with the most considerable of the kind in Cornwall.
They were situated near the shore of Tywardreth, 
and were all washed away by the sea in the year 
1801.
The ore was of the purest kind, and con- 
tained rather more than two-thirds of metal.
The 
pebbles from which the metal was extracted, were 
in size from sand-like grains to that of a small egg ; 
they were included in a bluish marl mixed with sand, 
and containing various marine exuvia?.
The depth 
of the principal bed was nearly twenty feet, and its 
breadth about six or seven.
This appears to have 
been worked at a very remote period, probably be- 
though the communication of relief was nearly impossible, Mr.
Anson sent his boat on board the Gloucester, by which the 
Captain returned an in4rument, signed by himself and officers, 
in which he stated at length, the untenable state of his vessel, 
and the reduced and sickly condition of his crew, which, in 
despite of reinforcements, was reduced to one hundred and 
fifteen souls, of whom no more thtm sixteen men and eleven 
boys were able to do duty, and even many of these in a very 
infirm state.
This being confirmed by a regular survey, Cap- 
tain M.
and his people, after occupying two days in removing 
those goods which could be got at, provisions and the prize- 
money, quitted the ship, and removed on board the Centurion.
Three of the Gloucester's sick, who were about seventy in 
number, died in the act of removal, although treated with the 
utmost tenderness.
The ship, in which several valuable prize 
goods had been left from necessity, was set fire to and turned 
adrift.
Captain Michell quitted the Centurion on her arrival at 
China, and returned to Europe by a Swedish vessel.' He ar- 
rived in England, June 1743, was received with great attention 
by administration, and was soon afterwards appointed Captain 
of the Worcester.
He exerted himself very effectually, in 
1746, as commodore of a small squadron stationed off the coast 
of Flanders, for the purpose of preventing the passage of sup- 
plies to the Pretender's army in Scotland.
In 1747 he waj 
chosen to represent the borough of Westbury in Parliament, 
but died shortly after, in the prime of life, April 2°, 1752.
On 
the 4th of March, 1749, he married Frances, daughter of —— 
Ashforby, Esq. of Norfolk Street, London, with whom he is 
reported to have received « fortune of ?0 000/.
fere 
512 
CORNWALL, 
fore iron tools were employed, as large pick-axes, 
made of oak, holm, and box, have been found on it.
The soil in this vicinity is supposed by Dr. Maton 
to have been partly formed by deposit from the sea, 
and partly by mould and fragments washed from the 
surrounding mountains and rocks.
Veep.] — The parish of St. Veep is In the hundred 
of West, eight miles west by north from West Looe.
Here arc some remains of the chapel belonging to 
the little priory of St. Cyric and St. Juliet, which 
stood on the north side of St. Cyric Creek.
This 
was founded by William, Earl of Moreton and Corn- 
wall, as a cell to the priory of Montacute in Somer- 
setshire.
William of Worcester assures us that St.
Cyric the Priest lies interred in the church of this 
cell.
It is said that Walter de Exon, who wrote in 
the 14th century a history of Guy, Earl of Warwick, 
was a monk of this establishment.
Mrs. Ann Wy- 
mond, widow of Richard Wymond, Esq. resides 
upon the site of the priory, now called St. Cadix, 
which is in her possession.
In the year 1644, just before the capitulation of 
the Earl of Essex, King Charles's cavalry was 
quartered in this parish.
Here is a cattle fair, on the first Wednesday after 
the 16th of June.
Vf.ryan.] — This parish is in the west division of 
the hundred of Powder, three miles and three quar- 
ters south by west from Tregony.
Behan Park, the 
seat of the Rev. Jeremiah 'Frist, and Crugsillack, 
the scat of John Kempe, Esq. are in this parish.
Here is a charity-school, supported partly by sub- 
scription and partly by a benefaction of about ten 
pounds a year from the Society for promoting Chris- 
tian Knowledge.
Portloe, a fishing cove, is the principal village in 
the parish.
Wadebridge.] — Wadebridge is a little market- 
town, situated partly in the parish of St. Brcock, 
and partly in that of Egloshayle, in the hundred of 
Trigg, twenty-five miles west-south-west from 
Launceston.
The market, now inconsiderable, is 
held on Saturdays for butchers* meat and other pro- 
visions ; and there are three fairs, on the 1st of May, 
22d of June, and Michaelmas Day. The bridge, 
which consists of seventeen arches, and is nearly 320 
feet in length, unites the two parishes.
This bridge 
is said to have been built by the gentlemen of the 
couuty in the reign of Edward the Fourth, to pre- 
vent the dangers which horsemen were exposed to 
at the ferry.
Tradition informs us that some of the 
piers were built upon woolpacks, where the founda- 
tion was a quicksand.
The subscription for carry- 
ing on this structure, was greatly promoted by Ni- 
cholas Lovibond, vicar of Egloshayle, as hath been 
before observed in treating of the rivers of this 
county.
Warbstow.] — In this parish, which is situated in 
the hundred of Lesnewth, eight miles and a half 
north-east from Camelford, is a remarkable ancient 
fortification, called Warbstow Burrow.
It has a 
double vallum and two entrances : — the inner area 
is twelve hundred feet by 1075, and in the centre is 
an oblong tumulus, called the Giant's Grave.
The 
mouth of the tumulus is four feet six inches wide, 
thirteen feet eight inches long, and it is three feet 
eight in height.
It is covered with large flat stones, 
which serve as a shelter for sheep.
Week.]— The parish of Week St. Mary, or St.
Mary Week, is in the hundred of Stratton, six miles 
south from the town of that name.
There was for- 
merly a castle in this parish, of which a field adjoin- 
ing the church-yard, called Castle Hill, exhibiting 
the traces of extensive buildings, is supposed to 
have been the site.
In ancient records, the church- 
town is called the borough of Week St. Mary ; the 
occupiers of certain lands are still called burgage 
holders ; and the custom of electing a mayor is still 
retained, though his office is only nominal and with- 
out authority.
Here are cattle fairs on the 6th of 
September and 10th of December.
Lord de Dunstanville is Lord of the Manor of 
Swannacot, including that of Week St. Mary, by 
inheritance from the Hales.
The manor of East- 
Orchard-Marsies is the property of Sir W.
P. Call, 
Bart.
At Goscose, in this parish, formerly stood a chapel 
dedicated to St. Lawrence.
Dame Thomasine Percival, a native of this parish, 
founded in the reign of Henry VIII.
a grammar- 
school and chantry at Week St. Mary — " with fair 
lodgings for the school-master, schollers, and offi- 
cers, and twenty pounds of yeerely revennue for 
supporting the incident charges." Thus Carew, 
who moreover informs us, that he is ignorant of her 
birth, but that her maiden name was Bonaventer ; 
that " whiles in her girlish age she kept sheepe on 
St. Mary Wike Moore, it chanced that a London 
Marchant" — whose name was Thomas Burnsby — 
" passing by, saw her, heeded her, liked her, begged 
her of her poore parents, and carried her to his 
home.
In processe of time, her mistres was sum- 
moned by death to appeare in the other world ; and 
her good thewes, no lesse than her seemely person- 
age, so much contented her master, that he advanced 
her from a servant to a wife, and left her a wealthy 
widow.
Her second marriage with one Henry Gall ; 
her third and last, with Sir John Percival, Lord 
Maior of London, whom she also overlived.
And to 
shew that vertue as well bare a part in her prefer- 
ment, she employed the whole residue of her life and 
last widowhood, to works no lesse bount full than 
charitable — namely repayring of highwayes, building 
of bridges, endowing of maydens, relieving of pri- 
soners, feeding and apparelling the poor," &e.
Some parts of Dame Thomasine's history are in a 
measure elucidated by her will, which is dated 1512.
It proves her family name to have been Bonaventer ; 
for she leaves 20/.
to her brother John Bonaventer.
John Dinham, who married her sister's daughter, 
and 
CORNWALL.
513 
and is called hor cousin, is named residuary legatee ; 
the grammar-school and chantry founded in her 
life-time, is committed to his discretion ; she leaves 
a little gilt goblet to the vicar of Liskeard, that he 
may pray for her soul, and twenty marks towards 
building the tower at St. Stephen's, Launceston.
Several sons of the best families of Devon and 
Cornwall, had been educated, according to Carew, 
at this grammar-sehool, where they were " vertu- 
ously trained up in both kinds of divine and humane 
learning, under one Cholweil, an honest and religious 
teacher, which caused the neighbours so much the 
rather and the more to rewe, that a petty smacke 
onely of popery opened a gap to the oppression of 
the whole, by the the statute made in Edward the 6.
raigne, touching the suppression of chaunteries." 
Thus would many others of our foundation-schools 
have been put down, had not well-wishers to them, 
demonstrated the facility with which the supersti- 
tious customs, originally connected with them, 
might be corrected : those who coveted their re- 
venues would fain have overlooked all this !
Wendron.] — The parish of St. Wendron is in the 
west division of the hundred of Kirrier, three miles 
north-east by north of Helstone.
Helstone, though 
in most respects enjoying separate jurisdiction, is a 
chapelry to this parish.
The barton of Trenear, 
now the property of Richard Johns, Esq. is said, 
though probably without any foundation, to have 
been the hunting seat of the Earls of Cornwall.
Merther-Uny, to which anciently a deer park was 
annexed, is now a farm, retaining no vestiges of its 
original grandeur.
A chapel, dedicated to St. Uny, 
the tower of which was standing within the memory 
of man, was in Merther Park.
There was also a 
chapel at Tresulla, dedicated to St. Wendron ; and 
another at Bodilly, dedicated to St. Henry.
On a high hill, in the wilds of this parish, a few 
miles to the north-west of Penryn, is an ancient mo- 
nument, composed of four thin llat stones laid one 
upon the other, the upper stone of which is irregular 
and nineteen feet in diameter ; at the bottom is a cir- 
cular trench, the diameter of which is thirty-five feet 
and a half.
In the year 1700, some tinners, in open- 
ing a barrow of stone called Golvadnek Barrow, in 
the same neighbourhood, met with a vault rudely 
constructed with large stones, in which they found 
an urn full of ashes and a fine chequered brick pave- 
ment, which together with the urn were broken to 
pieces by the ignorant countrymen.
Several Roman 
brass coins, and a small instrument of brass set in 
ivory, supposed to be used by the Roman ladies 
about their hair were also found.
The coins were de- 
faced : the words, however, Diva Fustina, were very 
legible on one of them, and another had the head of 
Lucilla, wife of the Emperor Verus ; but the inscrip- 
tion was quite defaced and the head much spoiled.
There are two barrows of the same kind on a hill 
called Karn-meneley : the countrymen say that se- 
veral coins of Julius Cassar were found there, 
vol.
i. — no.
37.
doubtlessly mistaking some of the other Caesars for 
Julius.
Wenn.] — The parish of St. Wenn is in the hun- 
dred of Pyder, four miles and a half north-east by 
east from St. Columb Major.
The punishment of 
the cucking stool was formerly resorted to in this 
parish ; and, when Hals wrote, the stool had been in 
existence within the memory of man.
Great Ske- 
wish, in this parish, gave name to a family, of whom 
John Skewish, in the reign of Henry VI.
compiled 
an Abridgement of the Chronicles ami Wars of Troy.
Thomas Rawlings, Esq. is the present proprietor of 
the estate.
A chapel, called Carenza-Wortha, de- 
dicated to St. Mary Magdalen, formerly stood on 
the North Downs ; but it was destroyed during the 
civil war.
At Tregonetha, one of the villag-es of this parish, 
are two cattle fairs — on the 25th of April, and the 
1st of August.
W'hitstone.] — Whitstone is in the hundred of 
Stratton, five miles and three quarters south-south- 
east from the town of that name.
Its vallies, as we 
learn from Lysons, abound with woodcocks, in a re- 
markable degree : nearly forty nets, or roads as they 
are called, being exempted from license by the last 
Game Act, are employed in taking them, and yield 
considerable profit to the cottagers.
There is said to 
have been formerly a chapel at Froxton, in this 
parish.
Winnow.] — The parish of St. Winnow is in the 
hundred of West, three miles south-east from Lost- 
withiel.
On the Beacon Hill, in this parish, not far 
from the town just mentioned, King Charles's army 
constructed a square battery not long before the ca- 
pitulation of the Earl of Essex in the year 1644.
At St. Nighton, considered by some as a distinct 
parish, is a chapel of ease ; and, formerly, there were 
chapels at Resprin, and Bodvalgan, both dedicated 
to St. Martin.
Withiel.] — The parish of Withiel, situated in the 
hundred of Pyder, five miles west-south-west from 
Bodmin, deserves to be mentioned, as the birth-place 
of the brave Sir Beville Grenville, of whom we have 
already related some interesting particulars.
The 
manor of Withiel-Goose, which anciently belonged 
to the priory of Bodmin, is now the property of the 
Rev. Sir Carew Vyvyan, Bart, the patron of the 
rectory.
Zen nor.] — -This parish is in the west division of 
the hundred of Pen with, six miles and a quarter 
west-south-west from St. Ives.
It is remarkable, 
that the greatest part of this parish is a mass of 
moor-stone ; that the only cultivated land is a slip 
about half a mile in breadth near the sea ; and that 
the arable land is much celebrated for its luxuriant 
crops of barley.
About half a mile to the east of the 
Church Town, on a hill, stands Zennor Cromlech, 
surrounded by a stone barrow.
Formerly there 
were chapels at Treen and at the Chapelfield, of 
which there are yet some remains.
Trewey, 
6 o Treen, 
514 
CORNWALL.
Treen, and Boswednack, are villages in this pa- 
rish.
* 
aoiL.] — The vegetable soils of Cornwall are ex- 
ceedingly various, but their general distinctive cha- 
racters may be ranged under the heads black growan, 
or gritty, and the shelly, or slaty soil.
The former 
abounds in the high lands, the upper stratum mostly 
consisting of a light black earth intermixed with 
small gravel, the detritus of granite or growan, 
and hence the soil is denominated.
This stratum on 
the tops and sides of the mountains is very shallow ; 
and even on the more level and extensive wastes, its 
depth is not considerable ; its natural produce is a 
thin short heath, and the dwarf or Cornish furze.
Beneath it is generally a stratum of a cubic quality, 
of various sizes, and from four to eight inches in 
thickness, and below this a yellowish or whitish 
loamy clay.
By digging up and removing the 
quartz, and afterwards intermixing the under stra- 
tum of clayey loam, with the growan earth on 'the 
* Amongst the natives of Cornwall, whose history may be 
regarded as somewhat remarkable, Jeffery, the seaman, whose 
case excited so much interest a tew years ago, is entitled to no- 
tice.
His own statement of the circumstance of being turned 
on shore on the desert island of Sombrero, is contained in the 
following affidavit, sworn before William Stevenson, Esq, one 
of the magistrates for the county of Suffolk, in the United 
States of America :— * 
" At Wenham, County of Essex, State of Massachusetts, 
in the United States of America, the 17th of June, 1310, per- 
sonally appeared Robert Jeffery, Blacksmith, who, being inter- 
rogated and examined declares as follows, viz.
— That he is 
21 years of age, was born at Polperro in the county of Corn- 
wall, Great Britain.
That in the summer of 1S07, he shipped 
himself at Polperro aforesaid, on board the privateer schooner 
Lord Nelson, of Plymouth.
That the schooner, about eight 
days afterwards, put into Falmouth, where he was impressed by 
an officer belonging to and carried on board his Britannic Ma- 
jesty's brig Recruit, of 18 guns, commanded by Lake, 
and appointed armourer's mate, and soon sailed in the Recruit 
for the West Indies, where she cruized about three months.
The brig's water running short, the crew were allowanced ; and 
this declarant being very thirsty, and unable to obtain a suffi- 
ciency to quench his thirst, one Saturday evening went to the 
beer ca-.k and drew off about two quarts of beer into a bucket, 
drank about three-fourths of it, and left the remainder in the 
bucket One of the crew was present when this took place, 
and informed Captain Lake of it, who next day asked the de- 
clarant if it was lie who tapped the beer, to which he replied in 
the affirmative, and Captain Lake ordered the Serjeant of Ma- 
rines to put him on the black list.
That he continued to do his 
tl;ity as usua', nnd nothing else particularly occurred until the 
Sunday following; Captain Lake called him aft, and said to 
him— Sombrero island being then in sight — Jeffery, do you see 
that island ; do you know that I am going to land you on it ?
To which be replied in the negative.
Shortly afterwards Cap- 
tain Lake ordered the boat to be lowered down ; the second 
lieutenant, a midshipman, and four men, to land him on Som- 
brero island.
That this declarant wished to take his clothes 
with him, but Caplaiu Lake denied him them, or any thing 
else except what he had then upon him; and when the boat 
landed him, the rocks cut his feet, upon which the lieutenant 
begged one of the men then on board to spare him his shoes, 
which he did, and gave him a knife.
The lieutenant and mid- 
shipman each gave hiin a handkerchief, and left him on the 
island ol Sombrero aforesaid, the lieutenant having previously 
surface, a prolific soil is produced fit for any kind of 
grain.
The gentlemen of the county encourage the 
miners to pursue this mode- of cultivation by allow- 
ing them a large portion of the wastes they wish to 
cultivate for an inconsiderable quit rent.
The shelly 
or slaty soil is found in more abundance in the gen- 
tle declivities and level grounds, and may be termed 
the detritus of the schistus.
In many parts of the 
west and south-west districts, and particularly near 
the sea, this soil is found in regular strata : more in- 
land it lies only in patches.
With sand and the 
more viscous earths, it makes an excellent compost, 
and produces exuberant crops of wheat and barley.
In some of the parishes near the Lizard's Point, the 
latter kind of grain has been frequently sown, reap- 
ed, and threshed in less than nine weeks, and some- 
times sooner ; but this is principally owing to the 
mildness and warmth of the situation, the Lizard 
being the most southern part of our island.
Agriculture.] — Agriculture, three hundred years 
recommended him to keep a look out for vessels passing.
That 
Sombrero is a desolate island without any inhabitants fhc-reon, 
or sustenance of any kind to support life, and he remained on 
it nine days without any food, save about a dozen limpets that 
he picked off the rocks after a fall of rain.
That he saw the 
several vessels pass, and attempted to hail them, without any 
effect, for they were too distant to hear or see him, until the 
schooner Adams, of Marble Head, John Dennis, Master, came 
to his assistance, took him off, and landed him at Marble Head, 
in the county of Essex aforesaid." 
Captain Lake was tried for the offence, and dismissed his 
Majesty's service.
When Jeffery arrived in England, the 
Lords of the Admiralty gave him his free discharge; and the 
friends of Captain Lake made him a compensation tor the 
hardships which he had sustained.
The gentleman who was 
employed on this occasion by the Lake family — Captain Lake 
himself having been abroad some time — after having adjusted 
every thing entirely to the satisfaction of Jeffery, properly con- 
ceived that one so inexperienced could not be trusted with so 
large a sum of money by himself, and anxious that he should 
be safely restored to his family, sent his clerk to accompany 
him to the spot.
On the road from Plymouth to Polperro thev 
met the father-in-law of Jeffery, who recognized him immedi- 
ately, and went forward to apprize his mother of his arrival.
By the time that they reached the village all the inhabitants 
were prepared to receive him, and it is hardly possible to ear- 
press the cordial greeting and exulting transport that attended 
his arrival.
After the tumult of joy had a little subsided, they 
began to look on the clerk with apparent suspicion and some 
degree of hostility, but Jeffery immediately assured them that 
he was one of his friends, and had taken the trouble of so long 
a journey for the purpose of protecting him.
Their sentiments 
were changed, and the clerk was received with respect and 
kindness.
The meeting between Jeffery and his mother was 
particularly interesting.
At first she gazed on him with a kind 
of bewildered anxiety, as if doubtful whether she could trust 
what she saw : in a few moments she recovered herself, and they 
rushed into each other's arms — Oh !
my son !
and Oli !
my 
mother !
interrupted by sobs on both sides, was all they could 
utter for some time.
— At length the agitation of their feelings 
subsided, and a scene of calm endearment succeeded.
No- 
thing but the arrival of Jeffery engrossed the attention of the 
villagers, and the whole place was a scene of generous tumult 
till a late hour in the night.
Jeffery repeatedly declared that 
he entirely forgave Captain Lake, and could take him by the 
hand with sincere good will, if he were upon the spot.
CORNWALL, 
515 
-*go, appears to have been but little practised in this 
county.
" Their grounds," says Mr. Carew, " lay 
all in common, or only divided by stiche mearle, and 
their bread-corn very little : their labour horses were 
only shod before ; and the people, devoting them- 
selves entirely to tin, their neighbours in Devonshire 
and Somersetshire, hired their pastures at a rent, 
and stored them with cattle they brought from their 
own homes, and made their profit of the Cornish, by 
cattle fed at their own doors.
The same persons 
also supplied them at their markets with many hun- 
dred quarters of corn and horse-loads of bread." 
Dr. Borlase, in his observations on this passage, re- 
marks, that, " the people increasing, and the mines 
something failing, the Cornish felt the necessity of 
applying themselves to husbandry ; and their im- 
provements answered their expectations ; for, in the 
latter end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, they 
found themselves not only in a capacity to support 
themselves, but also to export a great quantity of 
corn to Spain, and other foreign parts." Notwith- 
standing this success, the agriculture of Cornwall 
may be considered as having again relaxed into a 
secondary pursuit ; and though in the eastern dis- 
tricts, bordering on Padstow and St. Germans, and 
in the lands adjacent to the Alan and Fawy, there is 
a greater quantity of grain raised than is sufficient 
for the use of the inhabitants, the produce in the less 
fertile parts is very inadequate to the demand.
In 
the neighbourhood of Penzance, two crops of pota- 
toes are commonly produced yearly.
The applica- 
tion of the land is to arable and pasture alternately.
The former is sown with wheat, barley, and oats, as 
long as it will bear any, and then converted into 
pasture, until its strength is recovered, and it is 
again capable of producing corn.
The farmers of 
this county have a practice, which seems to have 
originated in uncertain weather, of making up the 
sheaves of corn into a regular and solid cone, about 
twelve feet high ; the ears being all turned inwards, 
and the butt-ends only exposed to the atmosphere : 
the whole is finished by an inverted sheaf, which is 
fastened to the upper rows.
In this county, water meadows are but few, and 
those principally connected with the estates of gen- 
tlemen.
The chief dependance for manure is on the 
sea-sand, and on weeds which are collected on the 
coast, and carried on the backs of horses, or mules, 
to the place where the manure is wanted ; very few 
carts being used.
Another excellent dressing for 
land is formed by the mixture of lime and earth- 
sand, with bruised and damaged pilchards, and the 
refuse salt used in curing them.
" After a dressing 
of this kind for barley," says Fraser, in his General 
View of tiie County of Cornwall, " on some lands 
near the Lizard, I have been assured, that ninety 
bushels, Winchester measure, have been produced 
on one acre statute measure ; and it is not uncom- 
mon to have from seventy to eighty bushels ; seven- 
ty -five they consider as a middling crop.
There are 
not many districts equal to this, but some other ex- 
tensive tracts are extremely fertile.
In the division 
extending from Cubert to Padstow, and from thence 
to Lanteglos by Camelford, the land is so wonder- 
fully fertile, that, with the common dressing of sea- 
sand, earth, and dung, they first sow wheat, and 
then barley, without any fallow, or intermediate 
crop.
Grass seeds are sown with the barley, and 
the produce cut for hay the following year.
The 
land is then left one year to rest, and the same rou- 
tine repeated ; yet even with this management the 
crops of wheat are from twenty-four to thirty and 
thirty-five bushels an acre, and of barley from thirty 
to forty-live." As a preparation for turnips, a 
compost of sea-sand, pilchard salt, dung, and de- 
composed schistus, is sometimes used.
Waste Lands, &c] — The waste lands of Corn- 
wall have been estimated at nearly one -fifth of the 
whole county, and though a considerable part con- 
sists of marshy grounds, intermixed with rocks and 
mountains, there are some very extensive level 
tracts, which, under proper culture, might be made 
to yield an abundant produce.
The woodlands are 
not numerous, but the face of the country in this re- 
spect is greatly improving, as many of the resident 
gentlemen have within these few years beguu to 
embellish their estates with plantations.
The duchy 
lands are mostly held on leases for lives, renewable 
for a fine certain, or calculated upon their improved 
value.
The other farms are held for terms of years, 
or leases for lives.
They are in general very small ; 
and half a century ago, even in the eastern and more 
fertile parts, the rents were seldom more than thirty 
or forty pounds per annum ; the greater part were 
not above ten or fifteen, though some few were as 
high as 100/.
and from that to 200/.
yearly.
Lat- 
terly their size has been increased, by the system of 
throwing several farms into one.
The landed pro- 
perty of Cornwall is very much divided ; and few 
estates, excepting those annexed to the duchy, pro- 
duce an annual rental of more than 3000/.
exclusive 
of the underground revenues, which defy estimate, 
by their continual fluctuations.
The duchy lands 
are far more extensive than those belonging to any 
proprietor in the county.
The income derived from 
them, and from the duty on the coinage of tin, are 
the only parts unalienated of the immense hereditary 
revenues which formerly constituted an independent 
provision for the Heir-Apparent to the Crown.
This provision was originally bestowed by Edward 
the Third, in the eleventh year of his reign, on his 
eldest son, Edward the Black Prince, whom he 
created Earl of Cornwall, by the " investiture of a 
wreath, a ring, and a silver rod " By the special 
act then passed, the title and duchy were limited to 
the first begotten son of the Prince, and of his heirs, 
being Kings of England, for ever ; and from that 
period the eldest "*on oi the Sovereign is presumed 
to be of full age on tiie very day of his birth, and 
immediately has entire livery of all the possessions 
eonuccted 
516 
CORNWALL.
connected with the duchy.* Some portion of the re- 
venues have, at different times, heen distributed in a 
manner unauthorized by the original grant ; and 
though the latter expressly provides against the alie- 
nation of any estates ; several have been disposed of 
under an act made in the present reign.
During the 
minority of the present Heir-Apparent, upwards of 
300,000/.
arising from the products of the duchy, 
were appropriated to the augmentation of the Civil 
List, and other public services.
Cattle.] — It has been remarked, that the cattle 
grazed in this county are principally of the North 
Devonshire breed, and the siz-e of the stock is very 
much proportioned to the quality of the soil upon 
which it is reared.
Yearlings are universally kept 
upon straw.' Working oxen, of which great num- 
bers are employed for every purpose of agriculture, 
aud cows, are led with hay.
In summer they run in 
pastures, moors, &c.
In the present state of the 
grazing land of the county, there is but little oppor- 
tunity for improving this part of the live stock.
The 
oxen are generally turned off to feed at six years 
old, and sometimes get up to eight, ten, and upon 
very good grass, twelve hundred weight.
They have 
a small sort of cattle on the commons, and in many 
other parts, which they call the Cornish breed, which 
when fat do not exceed five or six hundred weight.
They are too large boned for their size, and coarse 
shouldered.
The Scotch Highland breeds, it is 
thought, would answer much better.
It is, however, 
In the mining 
district Mr. Marshall saw inanv goats.
difficult to get them of the best sort.
At every 
cottage door were two or three of these useful ani- 
mals, with a hind and a fore leg tied together, to 
prevent their escaping to the mountains, or wander- 
ing from home.
A much greater number of these 
animals is to be seen in Cornwall than in any part 
of South Wales.
There are but few cows kept in 
* Fraser, in his General View of the County, gives the fol- 
lowing list of duchy lands, granted by charter 11th of Ed- 
ward III.
1. The Castle, Manor, and Park and Borough of Launces- 
tun, with its appurtenances.
2. The Castle and Manor of Trematon, and the Borough of 
Saltash, and the- Park there, with the appurtenances.
3. The Castle, Borough, and Manor of Tyntagell, supposed 
to be the place of birth and seat of King Arthur.
4. The Castle and Manor of Restormel, and the Park 
there, 
5. The Manor of Clymesland and Park of Kerry Bollock.
6. The Manor of Tibesta, with the Bailiwick of Powder- 
shire.
7. The Manor of Tevwynton, with the appurtenances.
8. The Manor and Borough of Helstone in Kirrier, with the 
appurtenances.
9. The Manor of Moresk, with the appurtenances'.
10.
The Manor of Penkneth, with the appurtenances.
1 1.
The Manor of Penryn, with the Park there.
12.
The Manor of Rela"ton also Rillaton, with the Beadlery 
of Eastwyvelshire.
13.
The Manor of IleMone in Trigshire with the appurte- 
nances, and the Park of Hellesbury.
J4.
The Manor and Borough of Liskeard, and the Park 
there.
the northern districts of the county : in the southern 
districts they are perhaps more numerous, but 
they are principally kept for the purpose of rearing 
young stock, the dairy being but little attended to.
Some farmers in the neighbourhood of Penzance let 
their milch cows for a term of forty weeks, at a 
sum varying from five guineas to seven guineas per 
head.
A breed of small sheep, horned and having rather 
coarse wool, is fed on lands or downs in the vicinity 
of the sea, provincially called Towans, where the 
pasture is old, the grass very short, and perhaps 
salt.
" On these towans," observes Polwhele, 
" distinguished as they are from very ancient times, 
the Cornish probably were feeding their sheep before 
the Romans explored their country.
Such were the 
Towans of Prian-sand, of Gunwallo, of Gwythian, 
of Philac, and of Senan Green near the Land's End." 
" The mutton of our little sheep fed on these towans 
is certainly sweetest ; but that the flavour of this 
mutton is owing to snails coming forth from the 
sands, and spreading themselves over the verdure in 
the morning views, I can hardly conceive, though I 
have heard it often asserted as a fact." The new 
Leicestershire breed of sheep, and the South Down, 
have been introduced into the county, and much 
cultivated.
A mixture of these breeds would, pro- 
bably, succeed better than any other for the inclosed 
lands.
Of the Cornish sheep there is a small species 
with very small tails, of a good form, and small- 
boned.
At Boconnoc, there was at the time of 
Mr. Eraser's Survey, a thousand head of the Dor- 
set breed.
In this county, the horses are in general small, 
but hardy and well adapted to a mountainous dis- 
trict.
Immense numbers of mules are also bred in 
Cornwall, and employed in the mining countries, 
conveying away the produce and carrying supplies 
15.
The Manor of Kallestock, with the Fishery there, and 
its other appurtenances.
16.
The Manor of Talskydo, with the appurtenances in the 
said county of Cornwall.
17.
The Borough or Town of Lostwithiel, together with the 
Mills.
Henry VIII.
at his Parliament holden at Westminster the 
thirty-first year of his reign, and prorogued on divers occasions 
until the twenty-fourth day of July, in the thirty-second year 
of his reign, in lieu of other lands severed from the duchy, did 
annex, to the said dukedom the manors of Westanton, Port 
Looe, Northill, Port Pigham, Laudren, Treloweia, Tregoroe, 
Trelagar., Crofthole, Trevithern, Courtney, Landulph, Leigh 
Durant, and Tinton, and all other his land in the said places, 
which came to the said King by the attainder of treason of 
Henry Courtney, Marquis of Exeter ; also the manor?
of 
Austel, Fentregan, Tremeynalls, Tremagwon, Fovvey, Cud- 
grave, and Port Neaprior, in the county of Cornwall, which 
came to the King's hands by the dissolution of the Priory of 
Trewerdreth, in that county ; also all the manors of Breadford, 
Caverton, Clymesland, Pryor, Tievvorgy, Stratton, Eastway, 
Bowyton, Bradrissey, Bucklaurue, and Bonyalvey, which came 
into the King's hands by the surrender and suppression of the 
priory of Launceston.
8 tO 
CORNWALL.
517 
to the urines.
Troops of fifty at a time of these 
sure-footed animals are frequently to be met on the 
roads, laden with copper or tin ore, particularly be- 
tween Redruth and the Heyl copper- works.
These 
animals sell at a very high price ; sixteen, eighteen, 
and twenty guineas a piece are sometimes given.
Tithes.] — Greatly to the credit of the clergy in 
this county, Mr. Fraser assures us that they are in 
general contented with very moderate composition 
for their tithes.
Were an accurate account taken of 
the Avhole of the diocese, it would be found, ha ob- 
serves, that the number of parishes where there was 
any litigation or dispute respecting their tithes, are 
very few indeed in comparison to those where the 
people live in harmony with their pastors.
Customs.] — The superstitious visitations of wells, 
the May sports at Helstone, the Bodmin riding, &c.
have been already noticed ; in addition to which, it 
may be mentioned, that the church-ale was formerly 
kept up with great spirit in this county, and upon 
these occasions wrestling — still a favourite recreation 
with the Cornish — and other athletic exercises, 
doubtless formed the chief amusements.
Bonfires, 
according to Borlase, are kindled in Cornwall on 
the eve of St. John the Baptist, and of St. Peter's 
Day. Golvan signifies in the Cornish tongue, Mid- 
summer, as well as light and rejoicing.
Upon these 
occasions, says this author, the Cornish are present 
with lighted torches, covered at one end with tar 
and pitch, and afterwards proceed through the neigh- 
bouring villages, with their torches.
Bushes on the 
top of long poles are placed, says Mr. Brand, to 
mark the boundaries of the different mines : these 
are ornamented with flowers on St. John's Day.
From Polwhele we learn, that " the custom of sa- 
luting the apple trees at Christmas, with a view to 
another year, is still preserved both in Cornwall and 
Devonshire.
In some places the parishioners walk 
i2 -procession, visiting the principal orchards in the 
i&trish ; in each orchard single out the principal 
tree ; salute it with a certain form of words ; and 
iprinkle it with cyder, or dash a bowl of cyder 
against it.
In other places, the farmer and his 
workmen only, dip immense cakes in cyder and place 
them on the branches of an apple-tree with due so- 
lemnity ; sprinkle the tree as they repeat a formal 
ifjcantation, and dance round it." " At Lostwithiel," 
pays Carew, formerly, " upon little Easter Sunday, 
the freeholders of the towne and mannour, by them- 
selves or their deputies, did there assemble : amongst 
whom, one — as fell to Iris lot by turne — bravely ap- 
parelled, gallantly mounted, with a crown on his 
head, a scepter in his hand, a sword borne before 
him, and dutifully attended by all the rest, also on 
horseback, rode thorow the prineipall streete to the 
church : there the curate in his best boseenc, so- 
lemnly received him at the churchyard stile, and 
conducted him to heare divine service : after which 
he repaired with the same pompe, to a house fore- 
provided for that purpose, made a feast to his at- 
tendants, kept the tables ende himself?, and was 
vol.
i. — no.
37.
served with kneeling, assay, and all other rites due 
to the estate of a prince : with which dinner the 
ceremony ended and every man returned home 
again." Another singular custom still prevails in 
this county — the corn being cut, the last handful of 
wheat or any other corn, is held up by one of the 
reapers, who criee aloud three times — " I have it" — 
upon which another inquires thrice, " What have 
you ?" to which the former replies, " a neck, a neck, 
a neck." — The corn is then decorated with flowers, 
amidst the shouts of the by-standers, and paraded 
about with great merriment.
It should appear 
from the account given by Dr. Borlase, that as 
lately as the middle of the last century, the ancient 
British superstition respecting the anguinum, or 
Serpent's Egg, which Pliny mentions, still prevail- 
ed amongst the people of Cornwall.
They were 
formerly greatly given to sports and athletic exer- 
cises : of these the principal were the guare-nriracle 
or miracle-play, hurling and wrestling.
Carew men- 
tions the first as being " a kind of entrelude, com- 
piled in Cornish out of some Scripture History, 
with that grossenes which accompanied the Romanes 
vetus Comedia.
For representing it they raise an 
earthen amphitheatre, in some open field having the 
diameter of his enclosed playne some 40 or 50 foot.
The country people flock from all sides, many miles 
off to heare and see it ; for they have therein devils 
and devices, to delight the eye as well the eare." — 
That this pastime has long been disufeed, seems to 
appear from these plays having been composed in 
the Cornish language.
The Cornish excel in wrest- 
ling, which is in greater repute in this county, than 
perhaps any where else in Great Britain.
Hurling, 
a game requiring considerable exertion of strength 
and display of swiftness, was anciently much in vogue 
here.
Carew gives a particular account of this game 
in the Survey.
It was played with a wooden ball 
covered with silver, twenty or thirty on each side, 
the object being to convey it to the destined goal, by 
art or force, as soon as possible.
Manufactures, Trade, &c] — At the time of the 
Doomsday Survey, there were some salt-works at 
Stratton ; and, in the time of Dr. Borlase, traces of 
salt-works were to be seen, near the Land's End.
At present the Only manufactories entitled to notice 
in this county are the following : — Au iron founder) 
and a carpet manufactory at Truro ; works for mak- 
ing copper spikes and nails for ship-building, at 
Hayle copper-house ; a manufacture of crucibles, at 
Callinick, near Truro, of about fifty years standing ; 
a manufactory of poldavies, at Penryn, ike.
At 
Penzance, tin is manufactured into bars for the Me- 
diterranean trade, and into ingots for the East In- 
dies.
The mass of the population, as the reader must 
have remarked, is employed in the mining concerns, 
and in the fisheries.
Tin, copper, and fish arc the' principal exports of 
tii' 1 county ; and timber, iron, hemp, coals, <kc.
are 
its chief imports.
Fairs.]— The .reader must have observed, that die 
ti p number 
518 
CORNWALL.
number of fairs in tliis county is unusually great.
Carcw enumerates about thirty ; but since his time, 
there has been a great numerical increase.
The 
principal cattle fairs are those of Bodmin, at Whit- 
suntide ; Grampound, on the 11th of June ; Probus, 
on the 5th of July ; Menheniot, uu the 1 Ith of June ; 
and Launceston, on the 17th of November.
For 
the following table, which we believe to be the 
most copious and the most correct that has ap- 
peared, we are indebted to the work of Messrs 
Lysons : — 
I OWNS, &c.
IN WHAT PARISHES 
SITUATED.
St. Austell.
St. Blazey 
Blisland, see Poundscawze.
BoUmin.
Boscastle ..
Boston 
Callinaton.
Camborne 
Camelford 
St. Columb..
St. Columb (Lower).
Crofthole 
St. Day 
St. Ewe 
Falmouth 
Five Lanes 
Fowey 
St. Germans 
Gold-ithney.
Grampound 
Helstonc 
Hessenford.
St. Issey....
St. Ive 
St. Ives 
St. Keverne.
Kilkhampton.
Landrake 
Lanreatlv 
Launceston .
S'.
Lawrence.
Lelant 
Linkinhorne.
Liskeard.
Minster.
Shevioek ., 
Gwennap.
Alternon.
Perran Uthnoe.
St. Germans.
ON WHAT DAY HELD.
DESCRIPTION.
Thursday before Easter, Thursday in 
Whitsun Week, the Friday after July 
22, October 16, and November 30.
February 2 
Monday after September 22 
January 25, Sunday after Midlent Sun- 
day, Saturday before Palm Sunday, 
Wednesday before Whitsuntide, De- 
cember 6 
August 5 
November 22 
Monday fortnight after August 1 
First Tuesday in March, May 4, Sep- 
tember 19, November 12 
March 7, June 29, November 11 .
Friday after March 10, May 20, July 
17 and 18 ...
Thursday after Midlent Sunday, No- 
vember 13 
July 9 
Lady Day 
Easter Tuesday 
Easter Monday 
Thursday after April 7, Thursday after 
November 4 
August 7, October 11 
Monday week after June 24, and First 
Tuesday in November 
Shrove Tuesday, May 1, September 10.
May 28, August I 
August 5 
January 13, March 25, June 11 
Saturday before Midlent Sunday, Whit- 
Monday, July 20, September 9, No- 
vember 8, and December 12 
Whit Tuesday 
First Monday in October 
Thursday after April, Thursday after No- 
vember 4 ' 
> For Cattle and Horses.
Holiday Fair.
Cuttle.
• Cattle and Horses.
Lambs and Cattle.
Ewes and Cattle.
Cattle.
> Sheep and Cattle.
( For Cattle, besides a Holiday 
\ Fair in the Whitsun week.
Cattle.
Lust Saturday in November 
Tuesday after Epiphany....* 
Holy Thursday, that day three weeks, 
and August 20 
July 19, August 4 
i Three weeks after Shrove Tuesday lately 
...-?[ established, Whit Tuesday, and No- | 
(I vember 18 
t [First Thursday in March, and third Tue-s- 
1\ day in April, Whit Monday, July 5, 
( Novembers, December 11 
Bodmin August 21, October 29 and 30 
j August 1 j 
Tast Thursday in April, and last Thursday 
™ j in October 
4 Shrove Monday, Monday before Palm 
? I Sunday, Holy Thursday, August 13, 
(I October 2, Monday after December G.
6 
Sheep and horned Cattle, the 
latter principally for Sheep.
Cattle.
Cattle.
Holiday Fair.
Holiday Fair.
\ Cattle.
Cattle.
\ Cattle of all sorts.
Holiday Fairs.
Horned Cattle and Sheep.
< Large Fair for Cattle, Coarse 
I Cloths, Hardware, ice.
Cattle.
I Cattle.
Holiday Fair.
Cattle.
\ Cattle.
S Shoes, Sweetmeats, &c.
chiefly 
a Holiday Fair.
Cattle.
{ Considerable Cattle Fairs, ex- 
] cept the second, which is 
(. more of a Holiday Fair.
Cattle.
Cattle.
I 
f^ For Cattle free of toll.
I Bullocks.
For Horses, &c.
Cattle.
I Cattle.
Large Cattle fairs.
TOWNS, &C.
CORNWALL.
il6 
TOWNS, &C.
Lostwithiel .
St. Mabyn.
Marazion.
Marharn Church 
St. Martin in Meneage.
Menheniot 
Micheil 
Milbrook 
Wellinsrv or Penhallow...
St. Neot.
Newly a .
Northill .
Padstow..
Pelynt ....
Penrose...
Penryn....
Penzance.
South Petherwin.
Pillaton 
Polperro 
Port Isaac 
Poundscawze 
Poundstock 
Probus 
Rianton 
Redruth 
Sallash 
St. Stephens, near Laun- 
ceston 
Stoke Cliinsland 
Stratton 
Summerccurt .
St. Teath 
Treganatha 
Tregony 
Tresilian Bridge.
Trevena, or Tintagel .
Trerule-soot 
Trew 
Trewen 
Trewithiaa 
Truro .
St. Tudy 
Tywardreth 
St. Veep 
Wadebiidge , 
Wainhouse-Corner.
Week St. Mary 
West Loo ,, 
IN WHAT PARISHES 
SITUATED.
Milbrook.., 
Perran Zabuloe, 
e ' ) 
(sometimes held at (_ 
one, and sometimes C 
at the other ) 
St. Evans.
Gluvias....
Madron ...
Lansalloes.
Endelyon .
Blisland....
St. Stephens.
St. Enodera.
St. Wenn 
Merther .
St. Germans.
Breage 
Gerrans.
St. Briva....
St. Gennys.
ON WHAT PAY HELD.
July 10, September 4, November 13 
February 13 
Midlent Monday and September 29, (St.
Andrew and St. Barnabas) 
March 25, August 12th , 
February 13 
April 13, June II, July 28 
October 15 
May 1, September 29 
Easter Tuesday.
May 5, Easter Monday, and November 5 
First Tuesday in October, and Novem- 
ber 8 , 
September 8, (if on Friday or Saturday 
the Monday after) and the first Thurs- 
day in November 
April 18, September 21 
June 24 
Tuesday before Ascension-day 
May 1, July 7, October 8, December 21, 
May 28, Thursday after Trinity Sunday, 
and Thursday before Advent 
Second Tuesday in May, and 2d Tuesday 
in October 
Whit-Tuesday 
July 10 
Holy Thursday 
Last Monday in November 
Monday before Ascension-day 
April 5 and 23, July 5, and September 17 
June 9 
May 2, August 3, and October 12 
Tuesday before each quarter-day, Feb. 2, 
July 25 
May 12, July 31, and September 25 ...
DESCRIPTION.
May 29 
May 19, November 8, and December 11, 
Holy Thursday, July 28, and Sept.
25...
Last Tuesday in February and first Tues 
day in July 
April 25, August 1 
Shrove Tuesday, May 3, July 25, Sept 
1, and No\ ember 6 
Second Monday in February, and Mon 
day before Whitsunday 
October 19, if Monday, otherwise the first 
Monday after 
Shrove Tuesday 
Holy Thursday, and July 25 
May 1, October 10 
Tuesday before Holy Thursday 
Wednesday after Midlent Sunday, Wed- 
nesday in Whitsunvveek, November 19, 
and December 8 
May 30, September 14 „ 
Juiy 19 
First Wednesday after June 1G 
May 12, June 22, and October 10 
June 24, September 29 
September 8, December 10 
May 6 ..................
, 
Horses, Sheep, Bullocks, &c.
Cattle.
(Cattle, Cloathes, &c.
(very 
( small fairs.
Cattle.
Cattle.
Horned Cattle and Sheep.
Cattle.
C Cattle, chiefly the fonner, esta- 
\ blished about 1795.
Chiefly a holiday fair.
Holiday fairs.
[ Sheep and Cattle.
> Horned Cattle and Sheep.
Little more than holiday fairs.
Cattle.
A large Cattle fair.
Considerable Cattle fairs.
I Cattle.
i Mere holiday fairs.
Cattle.
Holiday fair.
Holiday fair.
Cattle.
5 Chiefly a holiday fair, very fev* 
I Sheep and Cattle.
Large fairs for Cattle & Horses.
CattU, & Osier Manufactures.
) Horned Cattle and Sheep, and 
I the two last mentioned.
t Horned Cattle and Sheep.
Horned Cattle and Sheep.
Cattle.
i Very large fairs for Horses, 
-j Cattle.
The July fair of late 
f establishment.
j Cattle.
Cattle.
) For Cattle, but are declining 
J fairs.
| Cattle, &c.
I Horned Cattle.
Cattle.
Cattle.
Colts, Sheep and Lambs.
\ Cattle.
Sheep and Cattle.
Cattle.
Horned Cattle and Sheep.
Sheep, Bullocks, &c.
Cattle.
Cattle.
Cattle, &c.
Canals.} 
&60 
CORNWALL, 
C ANAts.
] — A Bill for makingnavigableall the rivers 
in Cornwall being brought into the House of Com- 
mons, in the reign of Charles the First, was passed.
The bill, however, it being then very near the close 
of the Sessions, did not go through all its stages, 
although the House of Lords highly approved of 
the design, looking upon it as setting an excellent 
example to the rest of England, and as meriting 
encouragement.
The civil war, unfortunately soon 
supervened, and this noble measure thus passed into 
oblivion, it is recommended by Borlase, in his 
Natural History, that the River Tamar be rendered 
navigable os far as Launceston, and so unite the.
Fawy and the Alan from the bridge of Duntneer to 
that of Resprin.
He maintains that such an union 
would be attended with advantages, which, to use 
his own words — " are too obvious to be particular- 
ized, and the dillicuitias too few to discourage the 
undertaking, whenever a public spirit for making 
rivers navigable shall arise in this nation.
It is in- 
deed to be wished, that as the eyes of all begin to 
see the advantage of good roads for trade and tra- 
vellersj.so they may in time awake and perceive the 
greater, at least equal, advantage of improving the 
water carriage of this nation." 
In the year 1796, an act was passed for making a 
navigable canal— to be exiled the Polbrook canal— 
from Guineaport, near Wadebridge, to the bridge of 
* Whilst this sheet was preparing tor the press, we have 
learned i from one of the Corni-h papers, that in the month of 
April, IS 1 5, there died, at Trenaw, aged 60, in consequence of 
aji apoplectic fit, a person commonly known by the appellation 
ot Giant CUiilcott.
fie was six feet four inches high ; measured 
round the bfeast six feet nine inches, and weighed about 46u 
Dunmeer, in Bodmin parish ; likewise a collateral 
cut to or near Rathern-bridge in the same parish : a 
communication to Lostwithiel was intended, but the 
very great cxpence with which it seemed likely to be 
attended, on account of the construction of a tunnel 
which it was thought would prove necessary, pre- 
vented its accomplishment.
Roads.] — From London, to Falmouth, Penzance, 
&c.
The great turnpike-road enters Cornwall at 
Poulston Bridge, about a mile and three quarters 
from Launceston ; thence it proceeds to Bodmin ; 
from Bodmin to Truro and onward to Penryn, and 
Falmouth.
At the village of Perranwell, between 
Truro and Penryn, the road branches off to Pen- 
zance ; and from Penzance, a public but not turn- 
pike-road, proceeds to the Land's End, eleven miles 
distant.
The great road from London to the Land's 
End, by the way of Plymouth Dock, enters Corn- 
wall at Tor Point : twelve miles beyond Liskeard it 
reaches Lostwithiel ; and, at Truro it joins the other 
great road.
For the other principal roads in the 
county, and for the journeys which it is usual ior 
travellers to take, Ave must refer the reader to the 
map, and to the Table of Journeys at the close.
It 
may be remarked, however, that the mail-coach 
roads in Cornwall are very good : — the cross roads, 
not being much used, are of course inferior.* 
lbs.
He was almost constantly smoking; the stem of the pipe 
he used was two inches long, and he consumed three pound* 
of tobacco weekly.
One of his stockings held six gallons of 
wheat.
The curiosity of strangers who came to visit him gave 
him great pleasure ; and his usual address on such occasions 
was-—" Come under my arm, little fellow." 
=35= 
TABLE 
CORNWALL.
621 
e £ 
a 
o 
5' 
Junct 
to 
Craft 
'! 
re 
13 
►* 
ion ol 
Sal (as 
hole 
-4 
(A 
W> 
w 
JO, 
CD 
3 
n re »,i ~- 1 ~-v 
to ►- >- KD — 
©i to — oo Oi u* to 
hj — — 
to to 
I 
TIPS' 
"SJ 
C en £T 
i» »: ?r 
•«> 3 ?
3 r 
I T 
2. 3 
— re 
ft 
J3 
C3 
h» " 
"O •— 
3" 3 
3' re 
*" re 
*.~ 
CO 
c? 
* i 
re C 
C 50 
• re 
u 
UQ 
I 
o 
o 
a. 
© 
» ** re tn 
£ r J 'I 
& re 
ft 
o 
s 
c- 
g-'S ?w 
3* 
t-pdiasat" p 
s re 
05 =J 
a 
o 
3 5' 
g to * 
O 
Gj 
H 
H 
s 
2. ^ 
&. re 
OQ 3 
© = 
p* I?
O- re ^ 
^ S re 
3 
ffl 
PI 
.3 
C" CO 
3 
C 
3' 
w 
3 5 
s..
w 
en 
r 1 
re 
3 
OQ K o 
3' 2_- 
» i"w 
3" C 
pi 2.S 
re re E?
E o 
o o 
3 = 
r 3 ^ 
c re 
fti 3^ 
= 5 
3 
J3 
M 
t- 1 
H 
O 
ft 
a, _ 
^ 3" 
— 
s n 
§ 2 
> 3 
2 o 
C o 
3: r* 
*0L.
I. — NO.
38.
Cq 
5. ST.
511 
CORNWALL.
- ' p £L ^5.
C I2_ " re 
2 w g rt 
• X ~ 3 
»-< o ^ ~ 
a 
o 
3 
OJ 
1*> 
— *- — 
tJi" 
— O 
CO VJ KO 
5W.
p 
"t 
?1 
w 
5 r 
£3 53 
2 o 
w 
c 
23 
o 
w 
C/3 
H 
O 
55 
6 
o 
rr-a 
Notta 
(over 
Callin 
Stock 
O c/3'~^ *d 
ale's 
ezan 
aunc 
engr 
t. Iv 
adsc 
o ~ 
O © S 53 
3 <T> * 3 
-t X 
3 pa, 
1 fs 
C 2 
tM 4*.
— 
be 
*>lw 
to to 
10 
iC   — — 
c*> o 
00 
4-I-N1M 
to 
3 
^3 
»» 
3 
W| 3 
£| | 
1 
< 5: l 
•P ^K 
23 
H^3 ; 05 
*» 
OS, 
• O^ c/T 
^§ 
U- 
re a.
5 
ead, 
Ho 
tclil 
°3 
3 
•  ?
21 
a j ?
3" 
CfiS 
ft sd 
3 g.
ni 
ro 
— 
O ?
w 
3" 
3 
s rt 
09 
1-1(3 
S* 
5" 
r* 
>..
so 
p*l 
> 
53 
O 
© 
Op 
O 
O 
S3 
t- 1 
> 
a 
2! 
O 
w 
c/3 
H 
O 
25 
fT • C» 1-1 2 ~ "^ "^ 3* 
V 
O a c 
>S?TJS2;S:; 
S * »( x 
r= 3 3 
c x era 3.
-s rr 
c =-  — o "• & S- 
n 
2. 
era' 
3 
re 
< 
SO 
3 
3 
n 
re 
o 
S3 
ET 
3 
a 
ro 
era 
o 
n 
W 
cfl 
F 3 ^ 
H ^o I 
B G 
V? 3 
= n> 
<:^ 
p o 
p ?
W 
I 3 ^ 
= M?
ITT." ^" 
5' 2 
r •" 
. o 
o 
a-cr 
0.3 
W 
C/3 
c« 
»• 
H 
SO 
C 
pa 
O 
s. 
H 
po 
Pi 
O 
O 
2! 
-< 
► 
CI 
in 
H 
W 
r 1 
c- 
TABLE OF DISTANCES.
TAe Names of the respective Tonus are on the top and side, and the square where both meet 
gives the distance.
3 re 2.
it » s 
5 S 
, re w 
~ o n — ,- 
0"J9 3 W 
-j T re —.- 
C 3 — 
=c 
cr 
St 
Auslel .
n; 
stance trnm f.nndnn.
Miles 242| 
13 
Bodmin 
234i 
29 
23 
Callington 
2144 
2(3 
13 
10 
IN 
19 
33 
17 
Cameltoid 
228 
12 
20 
25 
St. Colum 
b 
249f 
17- 
28 
2o 
31 
54 
23 
46 
26 
42 
Falmouth.
270 
8 
14 
27 
20 
9 
33 
.31 
39 
36 
60 
67 
52 
56 
32 
36 
is 
69 
12 
20 
39 
46 
2761 
38 
14 
33 
20 
20 
14 
6 
12 
9 
21 
38 
16 
17 
19 
19 
3d 
24 
14 
23 
8 
14 
53 
45 
29 
14 
59 
51 
64 
Launcestoi 
58 
15 
Lostwitliiel...
8 
33 
8 
39 
46 
26 
12 
Lostwitliiel 
234| 
19 
15 
7 
33 
33 
29 
39 
43 
00 
29 
21 
243 
1Z 
31 
47 
29 
52 
70 
52 
4 4 
59 
41 
24 
39 
21 
38 
40 
p 
4(1 
14 
2 
31 
10 
12 
10 
18 
51 
43 
31 
31 
43 
23 
26 49 
10 31 
56 ° 3 
10 
15 
67 
49 
52 
43 
49 
31 
46 
28 
24 
8 
289J 
Redruth 
IS 
263i 
34 
28 
9 
28 
54 ,; ' 
21 
14 
26 
45 
54 
66 
46 
Salta 
ih, 
220 
42 
7 
31(28 
20 1 36 
is 
3 i 
3s 
14 
39 
24 
64 
19 
45 
15 
70 
25 
77 
}2 
24 
16 
40 
42 
31 
27 
34 
26 
15 
22 
37 
62 
so 
62 
37 
2214.
21 
22 
17 
"9 
34 
24 
17 
41 
49 
Tregony 
250^ 
ll 
22l43 
35 
15 
31 
H 
22 
17 
9 57 
53 
8|Truro 
2574 
p 
r»r _ 
S _rjq 
-1 CO 
X >1 
^ B.
O 
o 
3 
— 
h>|i- h^ 
£^ 
OJ 
to to NO to w — 
o> *.
U Ifl O f 
OJ 
*% 
Sd 
SO 
3 
L   
3 
| 
1 
3 
3 
00.
X 
JQ 
3' J=3 
^0 
3- 
so 
'1 
so 
o 
3- 
3 
o 
? 1 
u 
re 3 
© 
— u 
t-H- 
> 
C SO 
sx 
3 -• 
. 
m 
3" 
c 
^ 
< 
u 
Sd 
»< 
B9 
Z 
hrl 
523 
CUMBERLAND.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTY.
CUMBERLAND, one of the most northern 
counties of England, is hounded on the north 
by Scotland, and part of Northumberland ; on the 
west by the Irish sea ; on the south by Lancashire ; 
and on the east by Westmoreland, Durham, and 
Northumberland.
Its greatest extent is about 80 
miles, but its mean length not more than 60 ; its 
general breadth is nearly 35 ; and its circumference 
224.
It contains 970,000 (the population returns say 
958,080) acres; of which, 342,000 are comprised in the 
mountainous districts; 470,000ai-einclose*iandchiefly 
under cultivation; 150,000 are in low commons, capa- 
ble of improvement ; and 8000 in lakes and waters.
Of this county, the surface is extremely irregular 
and broken ; the south-west districts exhibiting a 
gigantic combination of rugged mountains, promis- 
cuously thrown together, but inclosing many beau- 
tiful vallies, as well as fine lakes, rivers, and some 
few though extensive woodlands ; on the eastern 
confines, another range of hills stretches along to 
Scotland, but possesses much less picturesque beauty 
than the former.
In the front of this last assemblage, 
a considerable broad tract of land extends the whole 
length, unobstructed by any high mounts, partly 
cultivated, and partly heathy common, and watered 
by the Eden, and innumerable brooks and rivulets.
This tract becomes very extensive before it reaches 
Carlisle, stretching across the county to Wigton, 
and thence towards Workington, including all the 
northern part of the county.
Along the western 
shore there is a strip of cultivated land, from two to 
four or five miles in width ; but from the extensive 
moors, which so frequently present themselves, the 
general appearance of the county is cold and naked 
to the eye of the traveller.
The air of Cumberland is sharp and bleak, but 
not unhealthful.
Rivers.] — Amongst the rivers of this county, the 
following are chiefly entitled to notice : — 
The Caldew rises on the south-east side of Skid- 
daw, and after being joined by several smaller 
streams, from the neighbouring fells, pursues a 
northerly direction by Ilesket New-Market to Car- 
lisle, at which place it joins the Eden, after a course 
of about 24 miles.
Its banks are remarkably woody, 
and the vales through which it flows are very beau- 
tiful, though generally narrow.
In its course to 
Carlisle, it turns a number of corn and cotton mills ; 
and its water is much used for bleaching, for which 
it is considered excellent.
The Cocker takes its rise in a mountain near the 
black-lead mines, and after flowing through the 
lakes of Buttermere and Crummock, continues its 
progress northward; dividing the vale of Lorton, 
and after leaving the mountains, and flowing through 
a more open country, falls into the Derwent at 
Cockermouth.
By the variety and romantic nature 
of the grounds through which it passes, the course 
of this river is rendered peculiarly beautiful.
The Derwent, which is regarded as the principal 
river in the county, rises amongst the monstrous 
crags at the head of Borrowdale, and pouring its 
foaming stream over various precipices, unites with 
several sister streams at the bottom of that romantic 
chasm, through which, and being dashed from rock 
to rock, it flows into Derwent lake.
At the loot of 
this fine expanse of water, it joins the Greata^ and 
runs through an extensive tract of meadow land, to 
Bassenthwaite-water.
Through this it pursues its 
course, and at length emerges at Ousebridge.
— 
Then assuming a westerly direction, it rapidly flows 
through a narrow vale to Cockermouth, there unites 
with the river Cocker, and then pursuing its course 
through a more open country falls at length into the 
sea at Worthington.
The little river Duddon rises near the borders of 
Westmoreland and Lancashire, and flowing south- 
wardly, forms a boundary between Cumberland and 
the last-mentioned county from its source to its 
confluence with the sea, which flows near nine miles 
up its channel.
The Duddon receives the waters of 
several brooks, which flow from the mountains 
Hard-knot and Wrynose ; and its whole course, till 
it reaches the tide mark, is through a narrow dell, 
skirted by mountains and elevated grounds.
Sal- 
mon, trout, cod, flounder's, and other fish, are taken 
here in abundance.
The Eamont rises amongst some of the highest 
and most romantic mountains in Eugland.
The 
remotest branch takes rise upon the height of Kirk- 
stone in Westmoreland ; and flows along the road- 
side, in a continued rumbling cataract, to the foot of 
8 that 
524 
CUMBERLAND.
that mountain.
From thence, it gently flows through 
Patterdale to Ullswater, quitting this lake in the 
vicinity of Pools-bridge, shapes its course to the 
south-east, and running through an agreeable woody 
vale, joins its waters to those of the Eden.
The Eden, one of the largest rivers in the north 
of England, issues from the side of a hill in West- 
moreland, near the borders of Yorkshire, and, after 
receiving the waters of various smaller streams, 
enters Cumberland at its confluence with the Eamont.
In its progress through the county it takes rather a 
north-westerly direction, and having passed Kirkos- 
wald and Carlisle, flows into the Solway Frith near 
Rock-cliffe marsh, where it forms a fine estuary.
— 
In its course it is inclosed on each side with high 
grounds, which sometimes approach to the water's 
edge ; but generally there is a flat vale, or level 
tract of land, between its borders, and the high land.
These vales are from sixty feet to half a mile in 
breadth ; but their most common size is from one to 
two or 300 yards.
Provincially, they are termed Holm- 
lands, and appear to have been formed by the river 
varying its tracts for many past ages.
The banks of 
the Eden are in many parts beautifully clothed with 
wood; and its channel is, in general, either paved 
with rock, or covered with smooth pebbles.
It pro- 
duces fine trout, and various other fish, especially 
salmon, which are very fine, and of excellent quality.
There are several fisheries on the Eden, the pro- 
prietorship of which is vested in different persons.* 
The Eden rises amongst the mountains which 
surround Borrowdale ; and having formed the lake 
called Ennerdale-water, proceeds in a semicircular 
direction through the pleasant dales of.Ennerdale 
and Kinniside to Egremont, and then flows south- 
ward through a flat country to the ocean.
The little river Ellen rises on Caldbeck fells, and 
after receiving several tributary streams, which issue 
from the range of hills forming the western boun- 
dary of the Derwent, passes Udale and Ireby, and 
flowing in a westerly direction through an open vale, 
falls into the sea at Maryport.
The Esk is a large river, which rises in Scotland, 
and enters Cumberland at a place called the Mote.
Flowing through a beautiful vale, it passes Long- 
town, and, continuing its course in a westerly direc- 
tion, it falls into Solway Frith.
Great quantities of 
salmon are taken in the Esk.
The Gelt rises on Croglin Fell ; and having pass- 
ed through Geltsdale forest, it issues from the fells 
below Castle-carrock; and, having its current swell- 
ed byCastle-carrock-beck, and the brook which flows 
from Talkintarn, it continues its rapid progress, till 
* In the night between the 2Slh and 29th of December, 
1763, the river Eden suddenly fell at Ai mathwaite, at least 
two feet perpendicular.
This decrease was so sudden, that 
several Irouts, and upwards of 200 young lampreys, were left 
on the sand and frozen to death.
The miller ot Armathwaite 
mill left off grinding at twelve o'clock at night, there being then 
sufficient water to work the mill.
He returned the next morn- 
ing at six, when there was not sufficient water to turn the wheel.
it falls into the Irving near Edmund castle.
The 
channel of the Gelt is a deep narrow glen, bounded 
with rocks, over the fragments of which the water 
pursues its course with headlong fury.
The Greata is formed by the junction of the two 
little rivers Glendera-maken and Bure.
The former 
derives its origin from Threlkeld-tarn, on Saddle- 
back, and winding round Souter-fell, flows through 
the narrow vale ofGrisdale and Threlkeld, and hav- 
ing received supplies from the various streams which.
issue from the surrounding mountains, unites with 
the Bure below Threlkeld.
The Bure rises near Dunmail Raise, and after 
formingthe lake of Thiilmere at the base of Helveilyn, 
pursues a rapid course through the vale of St. John, 
and soon contributes its waters to form the Greata, 
which rushes along a narrow glen, passes Keswick, 
and falls into the Derwent.
The Irthing, which rises in the bleak hills divid- 
ing this county from Northumberland, proceeds in a 
southerly direction, and forms a boundary between 
the two counties for several miles ; afterwards wind- 
ing round Spade Adam Waste, whence it derives an 
increase from several streams ; and from that barren 
district it proceeds westerly towards the Eden, into 
which it falls near Newby.
The banks of tins river 
are embellished with very fine scenery.
The Leven, or Line, springs from several foun- 
tains amongst the gloomy hills of Nichol forest and 
Bewcastle, and waters with great regularity nearly 
every part of these extensive districts.
The two 
chief branches derive their source near Christonbury- 
craggs.
Black Line is the name of the northerly; 
the other to the south is called White Line.
These 
brandies, swollen in their course, by the addition of 
many lesser streams, unite at length near Stapletou 
Church.
The Line is augmented by several brooks, 
and meandering in a curious manner through vales 
both agreeable and fertile, joins at length the Esk, a 
few miles above Solway Frith.
The Lidilal, which rises in Scotland, enters Cum- 
berland at Kirshope-foot, where it receives the waters 
of Kirshope rivulet, which springs from the sides of 
the craggy hills of Nichol Forest and Roxburgh.
— 
It then traverses a wild country, along a rocky 
channel, in a deep and contracted valley, in one part 
of which, near Penton-Hills, the rocks rise perpen- 
dicularly to a great height, and are fringed with 
trees and bushes, which grow out of their crevices.
Its waters afterwards flow into the Esk, near its 
entrance into this county.
The Peteril has several streams or branches, the 
chief of which issue from the neighbourhood of 
The water continued in that state till about eleven m the fore- 
noon, and then gradually increased, no rain or snow falling, till 
about one, by which time it had risen a foot perpendicular.
— 
There had been an intense frost all night, and a strong wind 
varying from the north-cast to the south-east.
At Armath- 
waite the Eden flows nearly from the south-west to the north- 
east.
/ 
Graystock 
^jRWite^ 
I 
.!/,///.,;„.
-*^Z  ' ''""" •' itiu < 
'"" ''I //;„/,  '-^ 
,iW«">!< 
I. 2 
i ' U.l.atr.,;.
y7>,„iitr„w'\ 
M,i,..
Stymy* 
yw*»w_ ..._,/,.,„„,., •- 
5 ^» r/i'Bv/n.' 
\¥ 
i Oilh'iin Brians 
\RTtr 
tiyt{itttmtttt   , 
It.-rhiim 
• t'lititbt' 
C7mjirt ' _ , 
mourti 
WhtUiywtr 
'// /  ,WV'- ,/ "*' "TV//"-!' .
;,J 
\hrelkflij , (in 
j.t'lthtttitti^i 
0'i"!ff 
I> 
'tilfr/t 
M,nM:„.
.i 
Wllitr M,h t\ 
/Vw. tutors *$in i' 
JM/,,;;*/,--^.
*  
mt.l^<r!
K» x /— <"' jt^kimrrsiliile l>"l <Cs b,i/r<.i.itlti (Ml 
*%.
* 
4? 
* 
v; 
^ 
tliftifta 
v;1al'.M 
tl, mule PI$MS>f i ~* 
W. 
"Ulpka 
&3Mjm^cLj^m, 
irl'iu 
'  i;uh Xfih- " 
ir,-  >>«"« v \* 6§ 
British Miles.
Hr„,l 
tl„.
fff/ \f)titttlrlt 
tSwrir 
CUMBERLAND.
52j 
Crraystbck Park, Skelton, and Hutton ; and, after 
forming' a junction, descend northward towards 
Carlisle, near which this river flows into the 
Eden.
The Wampool and the Waver rise amongst the 
fells in the neighbourhood of Brocklehank.
The 
latter wanders for a few miles through a low tract 
of country, and then falls into the sandy estuary of 
the Wampool, which flows more eastward, and at 
length conveys its waters into Solway Frith.
Be- 
tween 3000 and 4000 acres of ground have been 
converted into a mere bed of sand, by the tide flow- 
ing up the channels of the Wampool and Waver.
Lakes.] — Cumberland has long been celebrated 
for its lakes and mountains ; and as they constitute 
the chief objects of attraction in the county, and are 
visited by every traveller, we shall at once present 
the reader with a general and comprehensive view 
of such as are most interesting.
The names of 
the lakes are as follow: — Bassenthwaite-water ; 
Burnmoor-tarn ; Butter-mere-water ; Crummock- 
water ; Derwent- water ; Devock-water ; Enner- 
dale- water: Lowes-water; Over- water ; Thirl- 
mere ; Ulls-water ; Wast-water ; and three smaller 
pieces, called Talkin-tarn ; Tarn-wadling ; and 
Tindale-tarn.* 
Bassenthwaite-water, or Broad-water, is thus 
described by a popular modern writer : — " Broad- 
water is nearly three miles north of Keswick Lake, 
having in the east the beautiful and extensive vale 
of Bassenthwaite, with the mighty Skiddaw rearing 
its lofty head beyond it ; and on the west, a range 
of humble mountains, which fall abruptly to the 
water's edge, and only admit cultivation to prevail 
in small patches.
These declivities are called Wi- 
thopbrows, and are partly rocky, and partly covered 
with thick woods.
The contiguous scenery affords 
some very fine views ; and the prospect from Ouse 
Bridge, at the northern end of the lake, is exceed- 
ingly beautiful.
From this point, Skiddaw, with all 
the mountains round Borrowdale, appear in a mag- 
nificent amphitheatrical perspective ; and the vallies 
both of this and Keswick Lake are seen at one view, 
which is only terminated by the sublime but dark 
fells of Borrowdale.
Three noble bays spread their 
pellucid bosoms in different parts of the lake, and 
greatly increase the beauty of the neighbouring 
prospects." 
Burn-moor-tarn, the waters of which do not cover 
more than 250 acres, is seated amongst the wildest 
mountains, at the head of Mitre-dale, to which there 
* Housman, in his " Descriptive Tour of the Lakes," re- 
commends (without reference to t his county in particular) that 
the lakes be visited in the following order: — Haws, Ulls, Der- 
went, Bassenthwaite, Buttermere, Crummock, Lowes, Enner- 
dale, Wast; and, returning to Keswick, from thence to Leathes, 
Grassmere, Kydal, Winandermere, Esthwaite, and Conisten.— 
" Tourists from Scotland," he observes, " will find it most 
convenient to proceed from Carlisle to O use-bridge, at the 
lower end of Bassenthwaite-water.
After visiting that lake, 
they may either go directly to Kendal, or first visit Buttermere, 
VOL.
I. NO.
38.
is scarcely a sheep-track, to direct the steps of a 
traveller.
Butterincre-water, which is rather more than a 
mile and a half in length, and about half a mile in 
I).- \dth, lies about a mile south of Crunnnock water, 
from which it is separated by a luxuriant vale, as 
fine and as level as a Bowling-green.
" Its western 
shores," says the writer just quoted, " are hemmed 
by a range of rugged mountains which rise abruptly 
from the margin of the.
water, with dark and gloomy 
aspects, and arc knovui to the shepherds, who are 
almost the only persons that pace their craggy 
steeps, by the names of Hay-cock, High-crag, 
High-stile, and Red-pike.
The eastern shores rise 
more gently, are partially wooded, and admit of cul- 
tivation at a little distance from the lake ; the north 
end is skirted by the verdant vale of Buttermere ; 
and the southern extremity bounded by Honister- 
crag, which abruptly terminates a chain of mountains 
that extend southward.
From this steep numerous 
torrents are continually pouring clown their foaming 
waters into the lake ; one of these roaring cataracts 
fall between four and 500 yards." ' 
On contemplating the gloom, the grandeur, and 
the solitude, of the environs of Buttermere, it might 
be supposed, that Beattie's Edwin had them in his 
eye in the following passage: — 
" Hail !
aweful scenes, that calm the troubled breast, 
And woo the weary to profound repose, 
Can passion's wildest uproar lay to rest, 
And whisper comfort to the man of woes !
Here Innocence may wander safe from foes, 
And Contemplation soar on Seraph's wings.
O Solitude !
the man who thee ioregoes, 
When lucre lures him, or ambition stings, 
Shall never know the source whence real grandeur springs." 
The river from which Buttermere derives its 
chief supply of water, flows through Gatesgarth- 
dale, situated to the east of the lake, and opening on 
the side of Honister Crag, having a road leadinf 
through it to Borrowdale.
Gilpin, who pursued its 
course for about three miles, thus describes its ro- 
mantic path : — " Gates-garth-dale is indeed a very 
tremendous scene.
Like all the vallies we had yet 
found, it had a peculiar character : its features were 
its own; it was not a vista, like the valley of Waten- 
lath, nor had it any of the sudden turns of the valley 
of Borrowdale ; but it wound slowly and solemnly 
in one segment, being at least half a epiarter of a 
mile from side to side, which distance is pretty uni- 
formly observed ; the rock mountains which environ 
and the adjacent lakes.
From Keswick proceed to Ambleside; 
and having viewed the beauties of Windermere, cross the ferry 
to Conisten, by way of Hawkhead.
From thence, the traveller 
might ride to Kendal by way of Newby-bridge, or pursue his 
route still further to Ulverston and Furness, and after visiting 
the antiquities there enjoy the pleasure of a new scene, irf-a 
journey from Ulverston to Lancaster over the sands.
Return 
from Lancaster, by Kendal, Haws-water, Ulls-water, and Pen- 
rith to Carlisle." 
6 R 
it 
526 
CUMBERLAND.
it keeping their line with great exactness, at least 
never breaking 1 out into any violent projections.
" The area of this valley is a general concave, the 
sides almost perpendicular, composed of a kind of 
broken craggy rock, ruins of which every where 
strew the valley, and give it still more the idea of 
desolation.
The river also which runs through it is 
as wild as the valley itself.
It has no banks but the 
fragments of rocks ; no bed but a channel compos- 
ed of rocky strata ; among which the water forces 
its course.
Its channel, as well as its bank, is com- 
posed of loose stones and fragments, which break 
and divide the stream into a succession of wild im- 
petuous eddies.
" A stream, which is the natural source of plenty, 
is perhaps, when unaccompanied with verdure, the 
strongest emblem of desolation ; it shews the spot 
to be so barren that even the greatest source of 
abundance can produce nothing.
The whole valley, 
indeed, joined in impressing the same ideas.
Faith- 
ful nature making in every part of her ample range, 
unremitting" efforts to vegetate, could not here pro- 
duce a single germ in.
" As we proceeded, the grandeur of the valley in- 
creased.
We had been prepared indeed to see the 
highest precipices which the country produced ; 
such a preface is generally productive of disappoint- 
ment, but on this occasion it did no injury ; the 
fancy had still its scope.
We found the mountains 
so overhung with clouds, that we could form little 
judgment of their height ; our guide told us they 
were twice as high as we could see ; which, how- 
ever, we did not believe, from the observation we 
were able to make, as the clouds at intervals floated 
past, and discovered here and there the shadowy 
forms of the rocky summits.
A great height, how- 
ever, they certainly were ; and the darkness in which 
they were wrapped gave us a new illustration of the 
grandeur of those ideas, which arise from obscurity.
Tlie middle of the valley is adorned, as these vallies 
in some part often are, by a craggy hill ; on the top 
of which stands the fragment of a rock, that looks, 
in Ossian's language, like the stone of Power, the 
rude deity of desolation, to which the scene is 
sacred." 
When at Buttermere, the tourist should not neg- 
lect a remarkable water-fall, railed Scale-Force, 
which lies about a mile and a half to the west.
The 
path which leads to it, however, is so iutricate and 
rocky, that it is necessary to have the assistance of a 
guide.
Of this water-fall, Mousman, in his " Topo- 
graphical Description of Cumberland," gives the 
following descriptive account : — 
" Having obliquely crossed the pasture, we come 
to a wall close under Blea-cragg, which shews 
nothing but a most rug*ged face of rock, rising in 
successive tiers, like so many huge walls of old 
castles.
Here our ears are stunned with a hoarse 
dashing noise at a little distance, without any ap- 
pearance of its cause.
Climbing over the wall, we 
descend a few paces turning to the left, towards the 
place from whence the sound proceeds, when the 
sense of sight is still more confounded than that of 
hearing.
The rocks yawn and open into a frightful 
chasm, nearly 100 yards in the mountain, the horrid 
aspect of which at first almost staggers our resolu- 
tion of making further progress.
We cautiously 
proceed over fragments of rocks up this awful cavity; 
and soon after our entrance, a water-fall of four or 
five yards in height meets the eye.
We ascend with 
difficulty over the rocks on one side of this cascade, 
when we enter a long passage, covered with rocky 
fragments, and a brook tumbling at the bottom.
— 
The rooiless walls on each side are perpendicular, 
covered with dark coloured moss, fern, and shrubs ; 
and near the top large trees grow from the crevices, 
darkening the chasm with their impending boughs.
These natural walls increase in heig-ht from about 
30 to 180 feet, and are there abruptly terminated, 
by another perpendicular wall of equal elevation, 
running across, over which a large body of water 
rushes forward, and falls 60 yards in one unbroken 
sheet, with a noise that seems to shake the mountain, 
and alarms the most intrepid.
The spray occasioned 
by the falling water rises in the form of a thick mist, 
and fills that part of the cavity, otherwise we might 
travel, with caution, along one side of the brook, 
quite to the fall.
This chasm is uniformly about 
four or five yards wide, the bottom almost horizontal, 
and between the falls, about the space of 80 yards in 
length, nearly in a direct line.
The regularity of 
the walls forming the side and front screens of this 
natural curiosity is very remarkable ; nor is it easily 
conceived what process of nature could effect the 
singular excavation.
After heavy rains this cascade 
becomes terrible, and no one can approach even to 
the first fall ; but in very dry seasons the quantity 
of water is inconsiderable." 
Crummock-water is situated near the skirts of the 
barren Mellbreak, and other lofty mountains, whose 
vast steeps descend generally to the water's edge, 
leaving but feAV tracts for cultivation.
These steeps 
form the boundaries of its western banks ; but its 
opposite shores are much indented, and " varied 
with low bays, curious promontories, little coppices, 
and trees scattered among small farms ; the whole 
terminating in a rich scene of woodland, impending 
in a beautiful manner from the superior eminences.
Three small islands ornament the lake, one of which 
is barren, the others covered with wood.
The 
ragged and pointed summits of the chain of moun- 
tains on each side, are truly picturesque : some 
naked, others wooded to their bases ; some verdant, 
some rocky and heathy, and some covered with red 
shiver, which streams down their furrowed sides, 
exhibiting a singular appearance." The length of 
Crummock-water is nearly four miles, its breadth 
about half a mile : its waters, which are very deep 
and clear, abound with char, generally weighing 
from six to eight ounces each.
Derwent water, or Keswick-lake, as it is fre- 
quently termed, from its vicinity to the elegant little 
8 town 
CUMBERLAND.
527 
♦own of Keswick, is of an irregular figure, some- 
what approaching to an ellipsis, about three miles in 
length, and a mile and a half in breadth.
It is thus 
interestingly described, by Mr. Hutchinson, in his 
" Excursion to the Lakes :" — 
" From a short description of the beauties of 
Keswiek, which was written by the ingenious Dr.
Brown, and which we had then in our hands, we 
were impatient to enter upon the lake ; and thought 
every delay irksome which kept us from the inchant- 
ing scene.
We hastened thither, and from Cockshoot- 
hill took a general survey of the lake ; which, though 
inferior in size to Ulswater, is yet different in its 
beauties, and afforded many delightful scenes.
The 
water, which still bears the name of Derwent- water, 
though embodied in so great a lake, said to be ten 
miles in circumference, was transparent as crystal, 
and shining as a mirror ; over whose surface five 
fine islands were dispersed : the nearest in view was 
covered with yellow corn, the rest clothed in wood ; 
the hills are lofty, arising on every side from the 
margin of the lake.
Here the mountains were in 
some parts covered with grass, in others Avith heath; 
there the rocks were grown with shrubs and brush- 
wood, which hung in their apertures and creeks.
— 
Little vallies of cultivated land presented themselves 
in the openings and windings of the mountains ; and 
small enclosures and groves of oak stretched up the 
precipitate ascents of the several hills from the brink 
of the water ; at the head of the bason the mountains 
were more rugged and romantic.
We hurried to 
the boat, that we might enjoy the pleasures of this 
place in their greatest perfection.
The general view 
was magnificent and beautiful; but we wanted to 
take each pleasing scene apart.
" We ordered the boat to coast round the nearest 
island, called the Vicar's Island, containing about 
six acres of corn-land ; on the eastern side of which 
a few sycamores formed a little grove, covering a 
hovel, which varied the hue with a rich green, and 
gave the whole a picturesque appearance.
Here we 
found a sweet shade, whilst we lay on our oars to 
listen to the sound of waterfalls, which struck the 
ear from every side with an agreeable solemnity.
— 
On my second visit I lamented to see that this grove 
was hewn down, this beauty effaced : what will not 
avarice perpetrate !
Now we had the valley to the 
right opening upon our view, and extending a rich 
plain towards the north-west, three or four miles in 
breadth ; the strips of corn, and little groves, scat- 
tered here and there, gave the most pleasing variety, 
when contrasted with the verdure of the mown 
meads, struck by the rays of the morning sun, and 
happily opposed to the adjoining mountains.
In 
this vale, the church, with some neat houses, shewed 
their white fronts, over which, the mountains arising 
to the right were stupendous and gloomy, as they 
stood covered with clouds.
There Skiddaw raised 
his head, and, with a peaked brow, overlooked 
Saddleback and Cawsey-pike, together with a chain 
of mountains stretching away towards the north- 
west ; whilst, on the other hand, the little rocks 
which stand upon Bassenthwaite-water, form the 
other wing of a lofty avenue of mountains, which 
extend into the distant plains.
" We coasted the right hand side of the lake, 
where the hills, gradually retiring from its margin, 
rise to their summits covered with herbage.
Here 
we had a view of the little valley of Newlaiul, which 
winds about the feet of the mountains, and, with the 
finest verdure from the small enclosures of grass- 
ground, refreshes the eye, which had laboured with 
upstretched looks over the vast heights that shut it 
on every side ; there cattle and sheep were seen 
depasturing, little cottages were dispersed amongst 
the hedge-row ashes, whilst the shadows of the hills 
suffered the sun-shine to fall on strips over the 
vale.
" We landed at St. Herbert's Island, which con- 
tains about five acres of land, now covered with 
young trees, famous for being the residence of St.
Herbert, a priest and confessor : who, to avoid the 
intercourse of man, and that nothing might withdraw 
his attention from unceasing mortification and pray- 
er, chose this island for his abode.
The scene around 
him was adapted to his gloomy ideas of religion ; he 
was surrounded by the lake, which afforded him fish 
for his diet ; on every hand the voice of water-falls 
excited the solemnest strains of meditation ; rocks 
and mountains were his daily prospect, where bar- 
renness and solitude seemed to take up their eternal 
abode ; from the situation of this place, nature hath 
given three parts of the year to impetuous hurricanes 
and storms, the fourth alone provides for the rest.
— 
Here this recluse erected an hermitage, the remains 
of which are visible to this day, being a building of 
stone, formed into two apartments ; the outward one 
about twenty feet long and fifteen broad, the other 
of narrower dimensions.
He was cotemporary with 
St. Cuthbert, and, as the legends of that time say, 
by the prayers of that saint, obtained a joint or 
equotemporary death with him, in the year of our 
Lord 608.
There is no history of his life and actions 
to be met with, or any tradition of his works of piety 
or miracles preserved by the inhabitants of the coun- 
try.
The passion for solitude and a recluse life, 
which reigned in the days of this saint, and was 
cherished by the monastic school, although at first 
sight they might appear to us uncouth and enthusi- 
astic, yet, when we examine into those times, our 
astonishment will cease ; whilst we consider the 
state of those men, who, under all the prejudices of 
education, were living in an age of ignorance, vas- 
salage, and rapine ; and we shall rather applaud 
than condemn a devotee, who, disgusted with the 
world and the sins of men, consigns his life to the 
service of the Deity in retirement.
" We now pursued our voyage by a noble woody 
scene, where Brandelow Park, arising from the edge 
of the lake, with stately young oaks, extends its 
groves over two round hoes, or eminences, and be- 
hind them (after covering a little intervening valley) 
rises 
528 
CUMBERLAND.
rises on the side of a mountain to a considerable 
height, and forms a woody amphitheatre, fringed 
with some small strips of corn, which grow under 
its skirts ; whilst all above are stupendous hills and 
rocks.
The strait boles of the trees, together with 
the verdure of the ground under their shadow, which 
was perceived at a great depth from the grove, by 
reason of the distance at which the trees stood from 
each other, formed an uncommon and solemn scene, 
which, being again reflected by the water, seemed 
like enchanted haunts where the dryads met their 
naiad-nymphs in the happy regions of the genius of 
the lake.
" We arrived at the borders of Manisty Meadow, 
a flat of a few acres at the foot of the mountains, 
where our boat anchored, that we might enjoy the 
pleasures of the situation : to the left, the nearest 
object was a wooded island, edged with rocks, be- 
hind which Brandelow Park, and oaken groves, 
dressed in the deepest green, covered the hills which 
arose immediately from the margin of the lake, and 
from thence stretched up the foot of Cathell's moun- 
tain, which laid so near us, that it required the eye 
which reviewed its summit to be turned directly up- 
wards.
On our right, at the distance of about one 
hundred yards, lay another small island, on whose 
rocky margin brush-wood and willow hung fantasti- 
cally ; above whose thickets the distant shores were 
seen, where the mighty cliffs of Falcon and Wallow 
Crags, projecting, shew their grotesque and tremen- 
dous brows, in a lofty line of rocks ; beneath the feet 
of which, a strip of cultivated lands and woods shot 
forth a verdant promontory, which sunk gradually 
into the lake.
In the centre of this view (after 
stretching the eye to the distance of three miles over 
a bason of the clearest and smoothest water, spread- 
ing its bosom to the noon-tide sun) is a large mount, 
called Castlehead Rocks, rising in a cone, and co- 
vered with oak wood ; behind which a lofty mountain 
raised its brown brow, drest in heath and sun-burnt 
herbage, exceeded only by Skiddaw, covered with 
blue vapour, and capped with clouds, which termi- 
nated the prospect.
" After passing Bank Park, a rocky and barren 
promontory, on which a few scattered trees looked 
deplorably aged and torn, we entered a fine bay, 
where the mountains rise immediately out of the 
lake ; here standing perpendicular, there falling 
back in ruinous and rude confusion, as being piled 
heap on heap from the convulsions of chaos ; and in 
other parts shelving and hanging over the lake, as if 
they threatened an immediate fall ; the whole form- 
ing a stupendous circus.
To describe this view is 
difficult, as no expression can convey an idea of the 
subject, where the wild variety consists only of vari- 
ous features of the same objects ; rocks and moun- 
tains forming and constituting the parts of this 
massive theatre.
In the front oi this romantic 
scene, a small mount presents itself, covered with 
herbage ; small from the mighty stature and gigantic 
members of the other parts of the prospect.
Over- 
eosii 
looking this mount stands a round rock, pushing his 
mountainous brow into the clouds, once crowned 
with a castle.
On the summit of the mount, sweetly 
contrasted by the grey rocks behind, there grows, 
with peculiar picturesque beauties, a single ancient 
oak.
The lake beneath was a perfect mirror.
On 
each hand the cliff's and mountains are strewed 
with bushes and shrubs, down whose sides small 
streams of water trill, like so many threads of silver, 
giving a delicate mixture to the greyness of the 
rocks over which they pass, in many places perpen- 
dicular, and rent into a thousand rude columns, as 
if they had been torn by thunderbolts ; in other 
places they are of a tamer aspect, and, compacted in 
one solid mass, stand firm as the pillars of the ante- 
diluvian world.
Where the hills are separated, 
little vales filled with wood, or narrow winding dells 
of grass-ground, twist around their feet, and give a 
happy variegation to the view.
In some places, 
clefts in the rocks afford a prospect into a valley be- 
hind ; in others, the over-hanging cliffs form rude 
arches and apertures, through which distant moun- 
tains are discovered.
Behind all are mountains 
piled on mountains, where the clouds rolled in heavy 
volumes, giving a gloominess to those regions of 
confusion and barrenness, which rendered the lustre 
of the shining lake, and the streams of light which 
fell upon the rocks, waterfalls, and shrubs, brighter 
and more pleasing.
In the cliffs in this part of the 
lake, eagles build their nests, far removed from gun- 
shot, and seldom disturbed by men ; for it is no easy 
matter to assail their lofty habitation.
In the sight 
of the cottage, hither they bring the spoils of the 
fold or the field, to feed their young, superior to the 
wrath of the injured.
' I was fortunate enough,' 
says Mr. Topham, ' to see the storming of an eagle's 
nest, which was built in the cleft of a rock, that has 
been constantly employed for that purpose for many 
ages, notwithstanding it is destroyed every year.
— 
The man who took it was let down in a basket by a 
rope from the summit of the rock, and combated 
with a sword the parent eagle, who fought valiantly 
in defence of her progeny.' 
" On these shores a salt spring of very salubrious 
quality is found, but it is neglected.
" We next visited a very extraordinary phenome- 
non, an island about 40 yards in length, and 30 in 
breadth, grown over with rushes, reeds, grass, and 
some willows.
We would have landed upon it, but, 
as the water was said to be 40 fathom deep in that 
place, and the attempt rather hazardous, we desisted, 
and had not the means of enquiring particularly into 
its nature.
This island arose about four perpendi- 
cular feet above the surface of the water, on which 
we were told it floated ; from its magnitude we were 
not able, with one boat, to try whether it would move 
from the perpendicular line of its then station, or 
whether it was bound to, and connected with, the 
bottom of the lake by the roots o: any aquatic plants 
which appeared upon its surface.
" On my second visit, the lake was greatly in- 
creased 
CUMBERLAND, 
529 
•reased in magnitude, insomuch, that the Lord's 
Island, as it is called, which before was a mere pe- 
ninsula, was now so perfectly insulated, that we 
sailed between it and the main land iu several feet 
water, the arm of the lake which formed this division 
not being less than 300 yards in width ; the floating 
island was no more to be seen ; and I am induced to 
assert, that it never descends below the surface but 
when the lake is full of water, and the sedges and 
willows, which cover the point of some rock, are 
flooded and disappear.
" We now pushed up the river which feeds the 
lake ; the water-lily spreads its broad leaves over 
the surface, and here and there shewed its meek 
white bells, beiug at this season in full perfection.
-— 
We anchored near a little but pleasant habitation, 
called Lochdoor or Lodore ; a place perfectly 
adapted for the abode of a recluse, and much pre- 
ferable to St. Herbert's Island, lying open to the 
southern sun, sheltered from the north by mighty 
mountains, which almost overhang it ; and, fronting 
to the widest part of the bason, it commands a view 
of the several islands, Manisty meadows, and Bran- 
delow parks, with their oaken groves hanging from 
the ascent of the mountains shade above shade ; 
Cathell's and the adjoining crags surmounting the 
whole scene.
" We were landed on a plain of meadow-ground, 
which descended to the edge of the water, over 
which we passed to an adjoining wood at the foot of 
the rocks, behind Lodore-house.
After winding 
through several passes in these groves and thickets, 
we gained a situation where we were delighted with 
the noble objects which presented themselves to our 
view.
" Around us was spread a grove, formed of tall 
young oaks, ash, and birch trees, which gave an 
agreeable coolness and shade ; above the trees, with 
uplifted looks, to the right, we viewed a mountain of 
rock, called Shepherd's Crag, forming a rude circu- 
lar mass, shelving from the foot towards its crown 
in a spiral form ; on every plane of which, and every 
step that hung upon its sides, herbage and shrubs 
grew fantastically, whilst the very summit wore a 
verdant cap of grass.
To the left there arose a per- 
pendicular grey cliff", said to be a thousand feet in 
height from the lake, rent into innumerable fissures, 
and standing, like massive columns, in rude arrange- 
ment, to support the seeming ruins of a shattered 
tower, grown white with storms, and overlooking 
Shepherd's Crag some hundred feet.
In the open- 
ing between these stupendous rocks, the river pours 
its whole stream, forming a grand cascade, near '200 
perpendicular feet high ; as the channel is rugged, 
the water makes a sheet of foam, and roars among 
the caverns and cliffs, so that you are deprived of 
hearing any thing but its tumult.
Reaching the 
wood, where the descent is less precipitate, it winds 
among the trees, sometimes shewing itself, and at 
others totally concealed, whilst it serpentines towards 
the lake.
The spray, which is dashed around the 
vol.
i. — no.
38.
rocks, and carried upon the breete, wherever it 
meets the rays of the sun, through the openings of 
the cliffs, takes the colours of the rainbow.
On 
turning from this grand spectacle, the greatest 
beauties of the lake are thrown into one prospect.
The ground whereon we stood was * rugged and 
rocky, shadowed with trees, looking over a rich 
bosom of wood ; below us lay the Lodore meadows, 
where groups of cattle were dispersed, and by the 
shore some carpenters were repairing their boats, a 
circumstance which enlivened the scene : the shining 
lake lay in one smooth plain, reflecting the azure 
sky chequered with clouds ; over which the Vicar's 
Island, yellow with corn, and the woody islands, 
were arranged ; the mountains, whose feet were 
trimmed with wood, lay in long perspective to the 
left.
Castle-head, with its embowered cone, and 
Lord's Island arising from the opposite shore, 
intervening between us and the vale of Keswick ; 
over which the awful Skiddaw, with his inferior race 
of mountains, frowned in azure majesty, and closed 
the scene.
" Claude in his happiest hour never struck out a 
finer landscape ; it has every requisite which the 
pencil can demand, and is perhaps the only view in 
England which can vie with the sublime scenes from 
which that painter formed his taste.
" We now returned to our boat, and, sailing 
within some little distance of the shore, had a view 
of the water-fall, where the beauties of the lake to 
the south-east lay in pleasing perspective !
We 
looked over a small part of the bason, from whence, 
to the left, a stupendous mountain of rock arose, on 
whose skirts, and in the rents and clefts of its sides, 
trees and shrubs climbed to the very summit.
Be- 
fore us lay the wood from which we had lately pass- 
ed, under whose shade Lodore-house and enclosures 
were seen inclining towards the lake ; above which, 
the lofty precipice, the water-fall, and Shepherd's 
Crag, were seen in their variety of beauties ; whilst 
all beyond the mountains formed a crescent, en- 
clasping a sheet of water of two miles circuit.
— 
Mountain behind mountain, and rock behind rock, 
fell here in fine perspective, and brought to our 
minds those astonishing scenes which characterize 
the pencil of Salvator.
We passed from hence, in 
our return to Keswick, by the coast, where we were 
shewn a cliff that projected over the lake, called 
Eve's Crag, from its bearing some similitude to a 
female Colossian statue.
We next passed Wallow 
Crag, in which a large opening is formed by the 
parting of the rocks, bearing the name of Lady's 
Lake, from the escape Lady Derwentwater made, 
there, by climbing the horrid and stupendous heights 
with such jewels and valuables as she could secure, 
when her unfortunate lord was apprehended.
We 
now reached Lord's Island, containing some acres 
covered with wood, where are the remains of a 
mansion of the Derwentwater family.
Formerly 
this was only a peninsula ; but, when the place was 
made the residence of the Rudcliffs and Derwent- 
6 s waters,* 
sso 
CUMBERLAND.
waters,* it was severed from the main land by a 
ditch, over which was thrown a draw-bridge.
— 
Travellers cannot behold the ruins of this place 
without yielding a sigh for the follies of the world, 
and bewailing the dire effects which attend ambition 
and the crimes of princes.
" The fish of this lake are trouts, pike, eels, and 
perch.
The romantic scenes upon the lake induced 
us to take a boat at night, under favour of the moon, 
which was near the full.
We began our voyage 
soon after the moon was risen, and had illuminated 
the top of Skiddaw, but, from the intercepting 
mountains had not (within the ascent of an hour) 
reached the lake.
We were surrounded with a so- 
lemn gloom ; the stillness of the evening rendered 
the voice of the water-falls tremendous, as they, in 
all their variety of sounds, were re-echoed from 
every cavern ; the summits of the rocks began to 
receive the rising rays, and appeared as if crowned 
with turrets of silver, from which the stars departed 
for their nightly round.
As the night advanced, 
objects arose to view as if emerging on the first 
morning from chaos ; the water was a plain of sable, 
sprinkled over with gems, reflecting from the starry 
firmament ; the groves which hung upon the feet of 
the mountains were hid in darkness, and all was one 
grave and majestic circle of shadow : 
' till the moon, 
Rising in clouded majesty, at length, 
Apparent queen, unveil'd her peerless light, 
And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw.' 
" When the long-protracted shade the mountains 
cast on the bosom of the lake, shewed the vastness 
of those masses from whence they proceeded ; and 
still as the moon arose higher in the horizon, the 
distant objects began to be more illumined, and the 
whole presented us with a noble moon-light piece, 
delicately touched by the hand of nature, and far 
surpassing those humble scenes which we had often 
viewed in the works of the Flemish painters.
Mists 
began to arise on the lake, and by reason of the air 
which bore them aloft being confined and eddying 
within this deep circle, they were whirled round, and 
carried upwards like a column, which, so soon as it 
approached the rays of the moon, had a most won- 
derful appearance, and resembled a pillar of light.— 
The moon's mild beams now glistened on the waters, 
and touched the groves, the cliffs, and the islands, 
with a meekness of colouring which added to the 
solemnity of the night.
Every bay and promontory 
assumed an appearance different from what it had 
by day-light ; the little dells which wind round the 
feet of the mountains, as they were shadowed by 
interposing objects, or silvered by the moon, afforded 
* The Derwent-water family took their name from this place, 
where they were seated from the reign of Edward I.
Sir Ni- 
cholas Radcliffe, of Dilston, in Northumberland, married the 
heiress of the family in the reign of Edward VI.
and his de- 
scendant, Francis, was created by James II.
baron of Diiston, 
Viscount Langley and Radcliffe, and Earl of Derwent-water ; 
most enchanting scenes ; where we might have wan- 
dered, with delight, till morn.
" Where the lake narrows, and runs up in a creek 
towards Borrowdale, the rocks looked tremendous, 
almost shutting us from the face of heaven ; the 
cliffs were struck with scanty gleams of light, Avhich 
gained their passage through the interstices of the 
hills, or chasms in the rocks, and served only to 
discover their horrible over-hanging fronts ; their 
mighty caverns, where the water struck by our oars 
made a hollow sound ; their deformed and frowning 
brows, the hanging shrubs with which they were 
bearded, their sparkling water-falls that trilled from 
shelf to shelf, the whole half seen and half concealed, 
leaving imagination at large to magnify the images 
of their grandeur and horrible magnificence." 
The floating Island of Keswick, mentioned in 
Mr. Hutchinson's account, is described in Clarke's 
" Survey of the Lakes" as about twenty yards in 
diameter, nearly circular, and sloping gradually 
from the centre to the circumference, whence, " as 
far as the eye can distinguish, the sloping is more 
sudden.
The island is never visible unless the water 
in the lake be high, and then it scarcely appears 
more than a foot above the surface." The existence 
of this island has frequently been contested, but its 
appearance so recently as the year 1808, leaves the 
point no longer in dispute.
" It has emerged from 
the bottom of the lake," says an attentive observer 
of the phenomenon, at the time mentioned, " three 
times in the course of about thirty years, or, accord- 
ing to other accounts, it has been in the habit of re- 
peating its visits after an interruption of seven or 
nine years.
It began to emerge on the 20th of July, 
1808, and in a very short time appeared above the 
surface.
It is situated at the head of Keswick-lake^ 
about a stone's cast from the shore.
It contains 
about an acre of ground, and is quite stationary ; at 
first it was of a dark brown colour, but soon became 
covered with verdure.
By thrusting a pole in seve- 
ral places to the depth of three yards, the water 
rushed up ; consequently it is of that thickness, and 
unconnected with the bottom.
That it is also un- 
connected with the shore is evident, as boats sailed 
entirely round it, and sounding with large poles, 
without finding the bottom.
It is of an oblong 
shape, and in the middle of it is a large hole, about 
eight yards long and two broad, evidently made by 
the confined rarefied air.
The depth of soil com- 
posing it is in some places two feet, and in others 
more ; and in forcing a stick through it in different 
places, air arose in large bubbles ; and as this con- 
fined air escapes, the island, it appears, lessens, and 
at length sinks, by its own weight, to the bottom of 
the lake.
Its sides adhere to the neighbouring soil 
all which titles were forfeited, with his estate and life, by his son 
James, beheaded on Tower Hill in the year l?l6, for engaging 
in the rebellion.
The estate, amounting to 20,000/.
a year, in- 
cluding mines, was vested in trustees for the support of Green- 
wich Hospital, but restored on the reversal of the attainder 
some years after.
8 with 
CUMBERLAND.
531 
with a steep descent, except at one corner about six 
yards in length, which appears like a bank.
This 
bank has actually been the remains of the sides oi a 
hole of a former island, for these temporary islands 
are found to change their positions at every appear- 
ance ; and the present one is somewhat nearer the 
shore than the former ones have been.
The plants 
which form the vegetation are, Lobelia Dortmannia, 
the Isoetes Lacustris, the Lettorella Lacustris, the 
Arundo fragmites, and the Scirpus Lacustris.
A 
secondary island made its appearance about the 
same time, at some distance from the principal one, 
and nearer the shore, of a circular form, about eight 
yards in diameter, and divided completely in two, 
by a rent of about one yard wide and three yards 
deep, reaching to a considerable distance on each 
side of this island, and evidently being one of those 
numerous cracks which may always be discovered 
in the bottom of this part of the lake, which we pre- 
sume is a communication of the waters beneath, 
with those above.
The island gradually sunk dur- 
ing some weeks till the night of Friday the 7th of 
October, when, in consequence of rain the lake rose 
about five feet, and the island was covered with wa- 
ter.
The lake rose above a foot higher on the 7th 
of August than on the 1st of October, and yet the 
island was larger in extent and higher above the 
water than on the former day." 
Mr. Clarke endeavours to account for the occa- 
sional appearance of this island, by supposing, that 
the torrent which in wet seasons pours down a fis- 
sure called Cat-gill from the adjacent heights, and 
seems totally lost, forces its way between the loose 
stones, and endeavours to mingle with the waters of 
the lake ; but finding its course impeded by the su- 
perincumbent turf, and strongly matted roots of the 
grass which covers it, raises the turf into a convex 
form, and during the continuance of the torrent gives 
it the appearance of an island.
This hypothesis he 
endeavours to strengthen by observing that he has 
stood upon the island and caught fish ; and once 
pierced the surface with his fishing-rod, which the 
grass roots embraced so closely, that no water could 
escape ; " but upon drawing it, the water spouted 
out to the height of two feet." 
It has been remarked, that the waters of this lake 
are sometimes agitated in an extraordinary manner, 
though without any apparent cause ; and in a per- 
fectly calm day, are seen to swell into high waves, 
which have a progressive motion from east to west.
This phenomenon has received the name of Bot- 
tomwind, but no rational theory has hitherto been 
devised to account for it.
The swell sometimes 
continues for an hour or two, yet at others will last 
almost a whole day, though scarcely a breath of air 
is felt in the vicinity of the lake.
* The island here alluded to is Poclington's, so called from 
its having been the property of a gentleman of that name, who 
disposed of it a few years ago to a person from the south of 
England.
By its former owner it was disfigured with several 
We cannot close our account of this delightful 
lake, without a quotation from the magic pen of 
Mrs. Radcliffe.
" Derwent water," says this lady, 
" has peculiar charms, both from beauty and wild- 
ness.
It seems to be nearly of a round form ; and 
the whole is seen at one glance, expanding within an 
amphitheatre of mountains, rocky, but not vast; 
broken into many fantastic shapes, peaked, splinter- 
ed, impending, and sometimes pyramidal, opening 
by narrow vallies to the view of rocks, that rise im- 
mediately beyond, and are again overlooked by 
others.
The precipices seldom overhang the water, 
but are arranged at some distance ; and the shores 
swell with woody eminences, or sink into green pas- 
toral v .rgins.
Masses of wood also frequently ap- 
pear among the cliffs, feathering them to their sum- 
mits ; and a white cottage sometimes peeps from 
out their skirts, seated on the smooth knoll of a pas- 
ture projecting to the lake, and looking so exqui- 
sitely picturesque, as to seem placed there purposely 
to adorn it.
The lake, in return, faithfully reflects 
the whole picture ; and so even and brilliantly pel- 
lucid is its surface, that it rather heightens than ob- 
scures the colouring.
Its mild bosom is spotted by 
four or five small islands, of which those called 
Lord's, and St. Herbert's, are well wooded, and 
adorn the view ; but another is deformed by build- 
ings, stuck over it like figures upon a twelfth-cake.* 
Beyond the head of the lake, and at a direct distance 
of three or four miles from Crow Park, the Pass of 
Borrowdale opens, guarded by two piles of rock, 
the boldest in the scene, overlooked by many rocky 
points, and beyond all by rude mountain tops, which 
come partially and in glimpses to the view.
Among 
the most striking features of the eastern shore are 
the woody cliffs of Lodore ; then nearer to the eye, 
Wallow-craggs, of dark brown rock loosely impend- 
ing ; nearer still, Castle Hill, pyramidal, and richly 
wooded to its point, the most luxuriant feature of 
the landscape.
Cawsey Pike, one of the most re- 
markable rocks of the western shore, has its ridge 
scolloped into points, as if with a row of corbells.
The cultivated vale of Newland slopes upwards 
from the lake between these and Thornthwaite Fells.
Northward, beyond Crow Park, rises Skiddaw ; at 
its base commences that beautiful level, that spreads 
to Bassenthwaite-water, where the rocks on the west 
side of the perspective soon begin to soften, and the 
vale becomes open and cheerful." — " Derwent-wa- 
ter affords abundant matter for admiration, though 
not of so hi»-h a character as that which attends 
Ullswater.
The soft undulations of its shores, the 
mingled wood and pasture that paint them, the bril- 
liant purity of the water, that gives back every land- 
scape on its bank, and frequently with heightened 
colouring, the fantastic wildness of the rocks, and 
incongruous modern buildings ; and, to render them still more 
discordant with the contiguous scenery, the glare of white-wash 
was added.
the 
532 
CUMBERLAND.
the magnificence of the amphitheatre they form, are 
circumstances, the view of which excites emotions of 
sweet and tranquil pleasure, softening- the mind to 
tenderness, rither than elevating- it to sublimity.
The wildness, seclusion, and magical beauty of this 
vale, seem, indeed, to render it the very abode for 
Milton's Comus, " deep skill'd in all his mother's 
witcheries ;" and while we survey its fantastic fea- 
tures, we are almost tempted to suppose that he 
has hurled his 
" Dazzling spells into the air, 
Of power to cheat the eye, with blear illusion, 
And give it false presentments." 
Connected with this lake, is the celebrated water- 
fall of Lodore, through which the waters of Wa- 
tenlath are forced, on its southern side.
The moun- 
tain here makes a rude curve, inclining towards the 
road; its sides are rugged beyond description, dis- 
playing rocks, tree's, and shrubs of the most fantastic 
shapes ; its summit is rugged and broken.
The fall 
consists of a series of cascades, tumbling over an 
enormous pile of protruding crags, which oppose its 
descent, and are partially concealed by the project- 
ing arms of trees on each side.
In a dry season, the 
fall is inconsiderable, and its grandeur is entirely 
lost ; but, as Warner has elegantly observed, in his 
" Tour through the Northern Counties," — " When 
charged with the thousand streams which a storm 
pours occasionally from the mountains, one stupen- 
dous whole is formed by the mighty mass of rushing 
element, which presents a most magnificent scene to 
the eye ; and an uproar is raised, that shakes the 
surrounding mountains to their foundations." The 
height of the fall is nearly 200 feet.
Devockwater is situated amongst the hills, nearly 
five miles south-east of Ravenglass.
It is about 
300 acres in extent, and is said to contain the finest 
trout in the north of England.
Ennerdale-water spreads itself amongst the moun- 
tains nearest to Whitehaven, and on every side, ex- 
cept the west, it is guarded with wild and craggy 
heights, which are almost impassable.
Its eastern 
shore is spangled with small farms, which in some 
degree alleviate the gloom of the situation ; but, on 
* On the 1st of August, 1807, died, at Mire Sike, in Lowes- 
water, which is a chapelry of St. Bee's parish, Mr. John Mire- 
house, in his 102d year.
On the 19th of October, 1805, which 
was the anniversary of his birth, and the completion of his cen- 
tury, this person received a very numerous party of his neigh- 
bours (" all his juniors") seated in a new oak chair, and cloth- 
ed in a new coat, which, he pleasantly observed, might, with 
care taken, serve his life-time.
He possessed in an eminent 
degree all his faculties, sight excepted.
His memory seemed 
perfect to the last, for he occasionally spoke with the same ac- 
curacy of recent transactions, — a singular circunvtance — as he 
had been accustomed to do, in relating occurrences of former 
times, which he had either witnessed himself, or heard detailed 
by contemporaries at a period so remote as that of at least 
ninety years.
The deceased was married in the 21st year of 
his lite, and was the father of five sons, and a daughter.
He 
was of a remarkably cheerful disposition ; and during the whole 
the whole, the scenery is melancholy ; and the mind 
is apt to be depressed, rather than enlivened, and 
touched with pleasure, at the view of human habita- 
tions sequestered and shut out for many months from 
the comfortable rays of the sun.
The length of this 
lake is about a mile and a half; and about three 
quarters of a mile broad, in its widest part.
Lowes-water, unlike the other lakes in this dis- 
trict, has its course from north to south.
It is beau- 
tifully situated near the north- western extremity of 
the mountains, above Mellbreak.
Its borders are 
ornamented with a mixture of woodland and culti- 
vated fields, receiving animation from small farms, 
seated in very pleasing points of view, which, with 
their waving enclosures, greatly increase the beauty 
of the scenery.
The southern shore is partly bound- 
ed by lofty eminences, which, in some parts, descend 
precipitously to the water ; the northern screen is 
more humble, and soon softens into an open country.
The lake is about a mile long, and a quarter of a 
mile broad.* 
Over-Avater,whichliesbetweenBinseyandCaldbeck 
fells, possesses no superior claims to attraction : its 
situation is naked, and the country is neither suffi- 
ciently wild nor sublime to engage the attention 
which has been exercised on the more mountainous 
districts.
It is about half a mile in length, and rather 
more than a quarter of a mile broad.
Talkin-tarn, seated on the bleak moors a few miles 
south-east of Brampton, occupies an extent of forty 
or fifty acres, but presents nothing remarkable to the 
eye of the traveller.
Tarn-wadling, is seated in a naked and barren 
common, about a mile westward of the river Eden, 
at Armathwaite, above which its waters rise six 
hundred feet perpendicular.
This lake, which co- 
vers about a hundred acres, is much frequented by 
wild fowl, and produces carp of a particularly fine 
quality.
Thirhnere, or Leathes- water, observes a modern 
writer, is a narrow irregular sheet of water, about 
three miles in length, skirting the immense base of 
llelvellyn, and receiving a variety of torrents from 
the sides of that huge mountain.
This lake is situ- 
ated in the interior of a very sequestered district, 
bordering on Westmoreland.
Its shores are gene- 
course of so long a life, it is not known that he ever had the 
least disagreement with his neighbours or acquaintance.
His 
funeral was attended by an immense concourse of people, all 
emulous of shewing their respect to the memory of one, whom 
they had individually esteemed while living, and whose death, 
though in " full time," deprived their vicinity of so venerable 
an ornament; and also for the example of one who had " kept 
innocency, and taken heed unto the thing that is right ; such 
as alone shall bring a man peace at the last." His family 
furnishes such an instance of longevity as is hardly to be met 
with.
His father and mother were born within a month of 
each other.
The former died at the age of 95, leaving a widow 
of the same age, who attained her hundredth year.
He had 
three sisters, each of whom died in her 82d year ; and a fourth 
sister, Mrs. Margaret Longmere, widow, of Trushbank, in 
Loweswaler, died on Tuesday, July 24, in the 93d year.
raHy 
CUMBERLAND.
aas 
rally naked and rocky, and display a scene of deso- 
lation which is much heightened by the appearance 
of the immense craggy masses, that seem to hang 
on the side of Helvellyn, from whose steeps they 
have apparently been severed, but arrested in their 
tremendous progress down the mountains by the im- 
pulse of gravitation : others have reached the bottom, 
and are at rest in the silent lake.
Near the middle, 
the lake is so contracted by its craggy boundaries 
that a bridge of three arches has been thrown over 
it for the convenience of the neighbouring inhabi- 
tants.
Further on the noise of water-falls assails 
the ear on every side, which are seen tumbling 
from considerable heights in silvery threads; the 
north end is terminated by a pyramidal 'and tower- 
ing rock.
al- 
Tiudale-tarn, is situated near Talkin-tam, 
ready mentioned, and is about the same size.
Ullswater, which is generally considered to be the 
finest and the most eminently beautiful of all the 
lakes, is situated partly in Cumberland, and partly 
in Westmoreland.
In shape it somewhat resembles 
the letter S, or rather an Z, with obtuse angles : its 
entire length is about nine miles ; but its greatest 
width, is little more than one ; and in its second 
reach, an immense rock projects, so as to reduce it 
to less than a quarter of a mile.
" These," ob- 
serves Mrs. Radclift'e, to whose elegant pen we are 
already indebted, " are its reputed admeasurements; 
but the eye loses its power of judging even of the 
breadth, confounded by the boldness of the shores, 
and the grandeur of the fells that rise beyond : the 
proportions, however, are grand ; for the water re- 
tains its dignity, notwithstanding the vastness of the 
accompaniments.
" The approach to this sublime lake," continues 
Mrs. Radcliffe, " along the heights of Eamont, is 
exquisitely interesting ; for the road, being shroud- 
ed by woods, allows only partial glimpses of the gi- 
gantic shapes that are assembled in the distance, and 
awakening high expectation, leaves the imagination 
thus elevated, to paint " the forms of things un- 
seen." Thus it was when we caught a view of the 
dark broken tops of the fells that rise round Ulls- 
water, of size and shape most huge, bald, and aw- 
ful ; overspread with a blue mysterious tint, that 
seemed almost supernatural, though according in 
gloom and sublimity were the severe features it 
involved.
" Further on the mountains began to unfold them- 
selves : their outlines, broken, abrupt, and intersect- 
ing each other in innumerable directions, seemed 
now and then to tall back like a multitude at some 
supreme command, and permitted an oblique glimpse 
into the deep vales.
Soon after the first reach ex- 
panded before us, with all its mountains tumbled 
round it ; rocky, ruinous, and vast ; impending, yet 
rising in wild confusion, and multiplied points, be- 
hind each other.
" This view of the first reach from the foot of 
Dunmallet, a pointed woody hill near Pooley-bridge, 
VOL.
i.— no.
38.
is one of the finest on the lake, which here spreads 
in a noble sheet, nearly three miles long, to the.
base 
of Thwaithill-nab, winding round which it disap- 
pears, and the whole is then believed to be seen.
The character of this view is nearly that of simple 
grandeur ; the mountains that impend over the shore 
in front, are peculiarly awful in their forms and atti- 
tudes : on the left, the fells soften ; woodlands and 
pastures colour their lower declivities ; and the wa- 
ter is margined with the tenderest verdure, opposed 
to the dark woods and craggs above.
" Winding the foot of Dunmallet, the almost py- 
ramidal hill, that shuts up this end of Ulls-water, 
and separates it from the vale of Eamont, we eross- 
ed Barton-bridge, whence this little river, clear as 
crystal, issues from the lake, and through a close 
pass hurries over a rocky channel to the vale.
If* 
woody steeps, the tufted island that interrupts its 
stream, and the valley beyond, form altogether a 
picture in fine contrast with the majesty of Ulls- 
water, expanding on the other side the bridge.
" The characteristics of the left shore of the se- 
cond reach are grandeur and immensity ; its cliffs 
are vast and broken, rise immediately from the 
stream, and often shoot their masses over it : the 
right exhibits romantic wildness in the rough ground * 
of Dacre-common, and the craggy heights above ; 
and further on, the sweetest forms of reposing beau- 
ty, in the grassy hillocks and undulating copses of 
Gowbarrovv Park, fringing the water, sometimes 
over little rocky eminences, that project into the 
stream, and at others, in shelving bays, where 
the lake, transparent as crystal, breaks upon the 
pebbly bank, and leaves the road that winds there.
" Among the boldest fells that breast the lake on 
the left shore, are Holling-fell, and Swarth-fell, now 
no longer boasting any part of the foro«t of Martin- 
dale, but showing huge walls of naked rock, ami 
scars which many torrents have inflicted.
One 
channel only in this dry season retained its shining 
stream ; the chasm was dreadful, parting the moun- 
tain from the summit to the base.
The perspective, 
as ^he road descends into Gowbarrow Park, is, per- 
haps, the very finest in the lake< The scenery of the 
first reach is almost tame when compared with this, 
and it is difficult to say where it can be equalled for 
alpine sublimity.
The lake, after expanding to a 
great breadth, once more loses itself beyond the 
enormous pile of rock called Place-fell, opposite to 
which the shore, seaming to close upon all further 
progress, is bounded by two promontories covered 
with woods, that shoot their luxuriant foliage to the 
water's edge.
The shattered mass of grey rock y 
called Yew-crag, rises immediately over these ; and 
beyond, a glen opens to a chaos of mountains, more 
solemn in their aspect, and singular in their shape, 
than any which have appeared, point crowding over 
point in lofty succession.
'Among these is Stone- 
cross-pike, and huge Helvellyn, scowling over all, 
but losing its dignity in the mass of alps around and 
below it.
6 T " From 
534 
CUMBERLAND.
" From Lyulph's Tower, in Gowbarrow Park, the 
lake is seen to make one of its boldest expanses, as 
it sweeps round Place-fell, and flows into the last 
bend of this wonderful vale.
The view up this 
reach to the south, and to the east, traces all the 
fells and curving banks of Gowbarrow that bound 
the second reach ; while to the west, a dark glen 
admits a glimpse of the solemn alps round Hel- 
vellyn.
" Passing fine sweeps of the shore, and over bold 
headlands, we came opposite to the vast promontory 
named Place-fell, that pushes its craggy foot into 
the lake like a lion's claw, round which the waters 
make a sudden turn, and enter Patterdale, their 
third and final expanse.
In this part, the lake, 
which in the second reach had assumed the form of 
a river, regains its original appearauce, being clos- 
ed, at three miles distance, by the ruinous rocks that 
guard the gorge of Patterdale, backed by a multitude 
of fells.
On one side it is bounded by the precipices 
of Place-fell, Martindale-fell, and several others 
equally rude and awful, that rise from its edge, and 
retire in rocky bays, or project in vast promontories 
athwart it : on the other, the shore is less severe, 
ami more romantic ; the rocks are lower, and richly 
wooded ; and often receding from the water, leave 
room for a tract of pasture, meadow, and arable 
lam I, to contrast their ruggedness.
At the upper 
en.i the village of Patterdale, and one or two white 
farms, peep out from among trees, beneath the 
scowling mountains that close the scene ; seated in 
a rocky nook, with corn and meadow land sloping 
gently in front to the lake, and here and there a scat- 
tered grove.
" Entering Gleneoyn woods, and sweeping the 
boldest bay of the lake, while the water dashed with 
a strong surge upon the shore, we at length mount- 
ed a road frightful from its steepness and craggs, 
and gained a wooded summit, which we had long 
admired.
From hence the view of Ulls-water is the 
most various and extensive that its shores exhibit, 
comprehending its two principal reaches ; and 
though not the most picturesque, it is certainly the 
most grand.
To the east extends the middle sweep 
in long and equal perspective, walWl with barren 
fells on the right, and skirted on the left with the 
pastoral recesses and bowery projections of Gow- 
barrow Park.
The rude mountains above almost 
seem to have fallen back from the shore to admit 
this landscape within their hollow bosom, and then 
bending abruptly, like Milton's Adam viewing the 
sleeping Eve, to hang over it enamoured.
" Place- fell, which divides the two last bends, and 
was immediately opposite the point we were on, is 
of the boldest form.
It projects into the water, an 
enormous mass of grey crag, scarred with dark 
hues ; then retiring a little, it again bends forward 
in huge cliffs, and finally starts up a vast perpendi- 
cular face of reek.
As a single object, it is wonder- 
fully grand ; and connected with the scene, its effect 
8 
is sublime.
The lower rocks are called Silver-rays, 
and not unaptly ; for when the sun slimes upon 
them, their variegated sides somewhat resemble in 
brightness, the rays streaming beneath a cloud.
" The last reach of Ulls-water, which is on the 
right of this point, expands into an oval, and its 
majestic surfaoe is spotted with little rocky islets, 
that would adorn a less sacred scene, but are here 
prettioesses that can scarcely be liberated by the 
grandeur of its character.
The tremendous moun- 
tains which scowl over the gorge of Patterdale ; the 
cliffs, massy, broken, and overlooked by a multitude 
of dark summits, with the grey walls of Swarth and 
Martindale fells, that upreave themselves on the 
eastern shore, form one of the most grand and aw- 
ful pictures on the lake ; yet, admirable and impres- 
sive as it is, as to solemnity and astonishment, its 
effect is not equal to that of the more alpine sketch 
caught in distant perspective from the descent into 
Gowbarrow Park." 
Every traveller, and almost every reader, are 
aware, that the rocks of Ulls-water and its vicinity 
are celebrated for reverberating sounds ; and the 
echoes produced are described by several writers as 
exceedingly grand and impressive.
a , The sound of 
a cannon," says Mr. Gilpin, fired on the lake, " is 
distinctly reverberated six or seven times.
It first 
rolls over the head in one vast peal ; then subsiding 
a few seconds, it rises again in a grand uninterrupt- 
ed burst, perhaps on the right.
Another solemn 
pause ensues ; then the sound rises again on the 
left.
Thus thrown from rock to rock in a sort of 
aerial perspective, it is caught again perhaps by 
some nearer promontory; and returning full on the 
ear, surprises with as great a peal as the first.
But 
the grandest effect of this kind is produced by a suc- 
cessive discharge of cannon, at the interval of a few 
seconds between each discharge.
The effect of the 
first is not over, when the echoes of the second, the 
t' *rd, or perhaps the fourth, begin.
Such a variety 
of awful sounds, mixing, and commixing, and at the 
same moment heard from all sides, have a wonderful 
effect on the mind ; it seems as if the very founda- 
tions of every rock on the lake were giving way, and 
the whole scene, from some strange convulsion, fall- 
ing into general ruin.
" The cannon's roar 
Bursts from the bosom of the hollow shore ; 
The dire explo^i'm the whole concave fills, 
And shakes the firm foundations of the hills ; 
Now pausing deep, now bellowing from afar, 
Now rages near the elemental war ; 
Affrighted Echo opens all her cells, 
With gathered strength the posting clamour swells, 
Check'd or impell'd, and varying its course, 
It slumbers, then awakes with double force ; 
Searching the strait, and climbing bill or dale, 
Sinks in the breeze, or rises with the gale.
Chorus of earth and sky !
the mountains sing, 
And Heav'n's own thunders through the rallies ring." 
Killarney ; a Poem.
" There 
CUMBERLAND.
5?5 
" There is another species of echoes which are 
well adapted to the lake in all its stillness and tran- 
quillity, as the others are to its wildness and confu- 
sion, and which recommend themselves chiefly to 
those feelings that depend on the gentler movements 
of the mind.
Instead of cannon, let a few French- 
horiit and clarionets be introduced : softer music 
than such loud wind instruments would scarcely 
have power to vibrate.
The effect is now wonder- 
fully changed : the sound of a camion is heard in 
bursts ; it is the music only of thunder.
But the 
continuation of musical sounds forms a continuation 
of musical echoes, which, reverberating around the 
lake, are exquisitely melodious in their several gra- 
dations, and form a thousand symphonies, playing 
together from every part.
The variety of notes is 
inconceivable : the ear is not equal to their innume- 
rable combinations.
It listens to a symphony dying 
away at a distance, while other melodious sounds 
arise close at hand : these have scarcely attracted 
the attention, when a different mode of harmony 
arises from another quarter.
In short, every rock 
is vocal ; and the whole lake is transformed into a 
kind of magical scene, in which every promontory 
seems peopled by aerial beings, answering each other 
in celestial music." 
Hutchinson, the author of the Excursion to the 
Lakes, &c.
in his visit to Ulls-water, landed on the 
shores of a bay opposite Water-millock.
While 
here, he observes, " The barge put off to a station 
where the finest echoes were to be obtained from the 
surrounding mountains.
The vessel was provided 
with six brass cannon, mounted on swivels : on dis- 
charging one of these pieces, the report was echoed 
from the opposite rocks, where, by reverberation, it 
seemed to roll from cliff to cliff, and return through 
every cave and valley, till the decreasing tumult 
gradually died away upon the ear.
— The instant it 
had ceased, the sound of every distant water-fall was 
heard ; but for an instant only ; for the momentary 
stillness was interrupted by the returning echo on 
the hills behind, where the report was repeated like 
a peal of thunder bursting over our heads, continu- 
ing for several seconds, flying from haunt to haunt, 
till once more the sound gradually declined : again 
the voice of water-falls possessed the interval, till on 
the right the more distant thunder arose upon some 
other mountain, and seemed to take its way up every 
winding dell and creek, sometimes behind, on this 
side, or on that, in wonderful speed running its 
dreadful course.
When the echo reached the moun- 
tains within the line and channel of the breeze, it was 
heard at once on the right and left at the extremities 
of the lake.
In this manner was the report of every 
discharge re-echoed seven times distinctly.
— At in- 
tervals we were relieved from this entertainment, 
which consisted of a wondrous tumult and grandeur 
of confusion, by the music of two French-horns, 
whose harmony was repeated from every recess 
which echo haunted on the borders of the lake : here 
the breathings of the orgau were imitated ; there, the 
bassoons with clarionets ; in this place, from the 
harsher sounding cliffs, the cornets ; in that, from 
the wooded creek, amongst the eaverns and trilling 
water-falls, we heard the soft-toned inte, accompa- 
nied with the languishing strains of enamoured 
nymphs ; whilst in the cops*' and grove was still re- 
tained the music of the horns.
Ail this vast theatre 
seemed possessed by innumerable aerial beings, who 
breathed celestial harmony." 
This lake abounds with fish of various kinds, but 
particularly with trout, perch, and eels.
Trout of a 
particular species are sometimes caught, of the weight 
of thirty pounds and upwards ; the eels are also of 
a large size, and of the finest quality.
Char and 
gwinniard are also caught here, the latter in consi- 
derable quantities.
From June to November, they 
swim in shoals, and may be observed at a great dis- 
tance, from the rippling which they make on the sur- 
face, of the water.
When taken, those not immedi- 
ately consumed, are either salted or smoke-dried, 
and preserved as winter provision for the poor.
Wild ducks are met with here in great plenty.
They 
breed by the sides of the lake, and many thousands 
have been seen, with their new broods, resting on its 
bosom in the month of October, as though in prepa- 
ration for their flight to the more southern parts of 
the kingdom.
On the summit of Dunmallet, the 
hill which has been mentioned in the former part of 
this account of Ulls-water, are the vestiges of an an- 
cient fort, which some writers have denominated 
Roman, and others have supposed to be the remains 
of a monastery of Benedictines.
" An area," says 
Mr. West, " of 110 paces by 37, surrounded with a 
fosse, is yet visible ; and stones ot the rampart still 
peep through the grass." 
Wast Water, situated in the bosom of Wast Dale, 
amongst the western mountains, is so difficult of 
access, except on the side of Egremont, that it is 
visited by very few travellers.
" Some of the 
mountains," it has been remarked, " lean their rocky 
heads towards each other, from the opposite sides of 
the vale, as if wishing to embrace ; while others rise 
perpendicularly, having their ascents covered with 
loose stones, which shiver down in long streamers of 
different colours, somewhat resembling, in appear- 
ance, the aurora borealis.
The vale, from the heights 
that lead to it, appears a most delightful recess, but 
seems sunk much below- the common level of the 
earth.
Here every thing is rural, and seen in the 
true stile of pastoral beauty and simplicity.
The 
road runs along the north side of the lake, which is 
about three miles in length, and three quarters of a 
mile broad in the widest part.
The Screes, a very 
high ridge of mountains, run along the southern 
shore, and the loose rocks on its sides are in an 
almost constant motion, shivering down into the 
water.
On the north a small tract of cultivated 
country intervenes between the dale and the moun- 
tains, divided into small farms.
Towards i;ie north 
end of this valley the mountains begin to lower, and 
afterwards diminish by degrees till they terminate in 
an.
£3G 
CUMBERLAND.
an open country ; towards Ravenglass and the coast 
of the Irish Sea." 
Mountains.] — The mountains of this county are 
remarkable for their immense elevation, and for the 
singularity of their structure.
They enter, as it has 
been observed, into the composition of almost every 
View ; and either by their sublime heights, their ro- 
mantic forms, the dignified grandeur of their aspects, 
the immensity of the rocky masses which compose 
them, or the wild, awful, and imposing majesty of 
their appearance, are well calculated to give birth 
to interesting emotions.
On entering Cumberland 
at the south-west corner, Black-comb immediately 
presents itself; a very high, black-looking, conical - 
topt hill : its sides are rather smooth ; and cultiva- 
tion is spreading fields up its large base, where also 
many beautiful farm-houses appear in pleasant situa- 
tions.
This mountain steps boldly forward, drag- 
ging behind it a legion of lower hills, ranged in the 
utmost disorder.
The prospect from the summit is 
extensive.
Skirting the southern borders of the county, the 
next mountains of note which present themselves, 
are Hard-knot and Wry-nose, situated near each 
other at the head of Eskdale, in the centre of a 
mountainous country.
Further to the north is Scaw- 
fcll, a secluded hill, of an oblong form, and mea- 
suring 938 yards in perpendicular height above the 
level of Der went -water.
In this neighbourhood are 
two remarkable craggy precipices, called Doe-crag 
and Earn-crag, the fronts of which seem polished 
like marble.
The cliffs called Screes, which border 
the south side of Wast- water, are about two miles 
in length, and rise to an immense height.
The ma- 
terials of this bulky mass, as before observed, are 
continually shivering and tumbling into the lake ; 
and when a more than ordinary break happens, it 
causes a prodigious noise, and even fire and smoke, 
which present the appearance of lightning to the inha- 
bitants on the opposite shore.
Northward from 
hence is a vast collection of mountains, many of 
which are nameless to all but a few shepherds, and 
never trodden upon but by themselves and their 
flocks.
The most remarkable of these are Honister- 
crag, Robinson-fell r High-stile, Red-pike, Hay- 
cock, Pillar, and Steeple.
This enormous range of 
mountains terminates at Dent, a beautiful green hill 
just above Egremont.
Looking north-eastward, 
Grassmere immediately strikes the eye, and in part 
hide*; those numerous hills which rise behind it as 
far as Cockermouth : it is a long-topt mountain, 
and said to be nearly as high as Skiddaw.
Gris- 
dale-pike, a high conical hill, is also seen in the 
same cpiarter.
This grand assemblage of Nature's monstrous 
productions lies on the west side of the Derwent : 
" Alluding to these proverbial lines, 
When Skiddaw wears a cap, 
Scruffel wots full well of that.
their aspects vary considerably r some are smooth, 
and covered with a dry green turf ; others are wet 
and mossy on the top, producing heath, rushes, &c.
while others again present little beside the naked 
and rugged rocks, shaped in the rudest and most 
fantastic forms.
Several woods and coppices are 
interspersed among these hills, either spreading along 
their bases, or beautifully creeping up their sides ; 
and sometimes their very summits are brushed with 
a few shrubs an<t evergreens.
Eastward of Grisdale-pike is the majestic Skid- 
daw, whose sweeping declivities nearly reach the 
margin of Bassenthwaite Lake, above the level of 
which its summit rises upwards of 3500 feet in per- 
pendicular height.
This august mountain is thus noticed by Maurice, 
the harmonious eulogist of Netherby : — 
" There tow'ring Skiddaw, wrapt in awful shade, 
Monarch of mountains, rears lm mighty head ; 
Dark'ning with frowns fair Keswick's beauteous vale, 
He views beneath the gathering tempests sail ; 
Secure, nor heeds the rolling thunders rage, 
Though Scruffel,* trembling, marks the dire presage." 
Travellers generally commence their ascent to its 
summit, from Keswick, the distance from which, to 
Skiddaw, is about five miles : this space is some- 
times passed on horseback ; but the safer and moro 
practicable method of ascending, is on foot.
Mrs.
Radcliffe, who visited the summit of this mountain 
in the year 1 795, observes as follows : — • 
" We began to ascend this tremendous mountain 
from Keswick.
Passing through bowery lanes, lux- 
uriant with mountain-ash, holly, and a variety of 
beautiful shrubs, to a broad open common, a road 
led us to the foot of Latrigg, or, as it is called by 
the country people, Skiddaw's Cub, a large round 
hill, covered with heath and turf.
A narrow path 
now wound along steep green precipices, the beauty 
of which prevented what danger there was from be- 
ing perceived : Berwent-water was concealed by 
others ; but soon after we rose above the steeps, and 
it appeared with all its enamelled banks, sunk deep 
amidst a chaos of mountains, and surrounded by 
ranges of fells, not visible from below.
On the other 
hand, the mor?
cheerful lake of Bassenthwaite ex- 
panded at its entire length.
Soon after we reached 
the brink of a chasm, on the opposite side of which 
wound our future track ; for the ascent is here in an 
acutely zigzag direction.
" At length, as we ascended, Derwent-water 
dwindled on the eye to the smallness of a pond, while 
the grandeur of its amphitheatre was increased by 
new ranges of dark mountains, no longer individually 
great, but sublime from accumulation ; a scenery to 
give ideas of the breaking up of a world.
Other 
Scruffel is a mountain in Annadale, in Scotland, the inhabitants 
of which prognosticate good or bad weather from the mists that 
fall or rise on the brow of Skiddaw." 
precipice* 
CUMBERLAND, 
537 
precipices soon liid it again ; hut Bassenthwaite 
continued to spread immediately below us, till we 
turned into the heart of Skiddaw, and were inclosed 
by its steeps.
We had now lost all trace even of 
the flocks that were scattered over the tremendous 
wilds ; and the guide conducted us by many < urv- 
ings among the heathy hills and hollows of the 
mountains.
An opening to the south, at length, 
showed the whole plan of the narrow vales of St.
John and of Nadale, separated by the dark ridge of 
rock, called St. John's Rigs, with each its small line 
of verdure at the bottom.
i( Leaving this view, the mountain soon again shut 
out all prospect, but of its own vallies and preci- 
pices, covered with various shades of turf and moss, 
and with heath, of which a dark purple was the pre- 
vailing hue.
Not a tree nor bush appeared on Skid- 
daw ; nor even a stone-wall any where broke the 
simple greatness of its lines.
Sometimes we looked 
into tremendous chasms, where the torrent, heard 
roaring long before it was seen, had worked itself a 
deep channel, and fell from ledge to ledge, foaming 
and shining amidst the dark rock.
These streams 
are sublime from the length and precipitancy of their 
course, which, hurrying the sight with them into the 
abyss, act, as it were, in sympathy with the nerves ; 
and to save ourselves from following, we recoil from 
the view with involuntary horror.
" The air now became very thin, and the steeps 
still more difficult of ascent.
About a mile from the 
summit, the way was, indeed, dreadfully sublime, 
lying, for nearly half a mile, along the edge of a 
precipice, that passed with a swift descent, for pro- 
bably almost a mile, into a glen within the heart of 
Skiddaw ; and neither a hill nor bush interrupted its 
vast length ; nor, by offering a midway check in the 
descent, diminished the fear it inspired.
The ridgy 
steeps of Saddleback formed the opposite boundary 
of the glen ; and though really at a considerable dis 
tance, had, from the height of the two mountains, 
such an appearance of vicinity, that it almost seem- 
ed as if we could spring to its side.
The hills in 
this part rose so closely above the precipice, as 
scarcely to allow a ledge wide enough for a single 
horse.
After this, the ascent appeared easy and se- 
cure ; and we were bold enough to wonder that the 
steeps near the beginning of the mountain had excit- 
ed any anxiety.
" Passing the skirts of the two points of the Skid- 
daw, which are nearest to Derwent-water, we ap- 
proached the third and loftiest, and then perceived 
that their steep sides, together with the ridges which 
connect them, were entirely covered near the sum- 
mits with a whitish shivered slate, which threatens 
to slide down them with every gust of wind : the 
broken state of this slate makes the present summits 
seem like the ruins of others.
Tiie ridge on which 
we passed from the second summit to the third, was 
narrow, and the eye reached, on each side, down the 
whole extent of the mountain, following, on the left, 
the rocky precipices of Bassenthwaite, and looking, 
VOJL.
I. NO.
39.
on the right, into the glens of Saddleback, far, far 
below.
But the prospects that burst upon us from 
every part of the vast horizon, when we had gained 
the summit, were such as we had scarcely dared to 
hope for, and must now rather venture to enumerate 
than to describe.
" We stood on a pinnacle, commanding the whole 
dome of the sky.
The prospects below, each of 
which had been before considered separately as a 
great scene, were now miniature parts of the im- 
mense landscape.
To the north lay, like a map, the 
vast tract of low country which extends between 
Bassenthwaite and the Irish Channel, marked witit 
the silver circles of the River Derwent, in its pro 
gross from the lake.
Whitehaven and its while 
coast were distinctly seen ; and Cockermouth seem- 
ed almost under his eye : a long blackish line more 
to the west, was said, by the guide, to be the Isle of 
Man. Bounding the low country to the north, the 
Solway Frith, with its indented shores, looked like 
a grey horizon ; and the double range of Scottish 
mountains, seen distinctly through the mist beyond, 
seemed like lines of dark clouds above it.
The Sol- 
way appeared surprisingly near us, though at fifty 
miles distance ; and the guide said, that, on a bright 
day, its shipping could plainly be discerned.
Nearly 
in the north, the heights seemed to soften into 
plains ; for no object was there visible through tho 
obscurity that had begun to draw over the furthest, 
distance ; but towards the east, they began to swell 
again ; and what we were told were the Cheviot 
Hills, dawned feebly beyond Northumberland.
We 
now spanned the narrowest part of England, look- 
ing from the Irish Channel, on oae side, to the 
German Ocean, on the other ; the latter was, how-; 
ever, so far off", as to be discoiuible only like $ 
mist.
" Nearer than the county of Durham, stretch;*!
the ridge of Cross-fell, and an indistinct multitude 
of the Westmoreland and Yorkshire highlands, whose 
lines disappeared beyond Saddleback, now evidently 
pre-eminent over Skiddaw.
Passing tin's mountain;, 
in our course to the south, we saw immediately be- 
low the fells round Derwent-water ; the lake itself 
remaining still concealed in their deep rocky bosom.
Southward and westward, the whole prospect was a 
turbulent chaos of dark mountain*.
All individual 
dignity was now lost in the immensity of the whole, 
and every variety of character was overpowered by 
that of astonishing and gloomy grandeur.
" Over the foils of Borrowdale, and far to the 
south, the northern end of Windormere appeared 
like a wrealh of grey smoke, and spread along the 
mountain's side, More southward still, and beyond 
all the fells of the lakes, Lancaster sands extended 
to the faintly seen waters of the sea.
To the west, 
Duddon sands gleamed in a long line among the 
fells of High Furness.
Immediately under the eyo 
lay Bassenthwaite, surrounded by many ranges of 
mountains, invisible from below.
We saw green 
cultivated vales over the tops of lofty rocks, and 
6 w other 
538 
CUMBERLAND.
other mountains over these vales in many ridges, 
whilst innumerable narrow glens were traced in all 
their windings, and seen uniting behind the hills 
Avith others that also sloped upward from the lake.
" The air on this summit was boisterous, intensely 
cold, and difficult to be respired, though the day was 
below warm and serene.
It was dreadful to look 
down from nearly the brink of the point on which 
we stood upon the lake of Bassenthwaite, and over 
a sharp and separated ridge of rocks, that, from 
below, appeared of a tremendous height, but now 
seemed not to reach half way up Skiddaw ; it was 
almost as if 
" The precipitation might clown stretch 
Below the beam of sight." 
" In the descent, it was interesting to observe 
each mountain below gradually re-assuming its dig- 
nity, the two lakes expanding into spacious surfaces, 
the many little vallies that sloped upwards from 
their margins recovering their variegated tints of 
cultivation, the cattle again appearing in the mea- 
dows, and the woody promontories changing from 
smooth patches of shade into richly tufted summits.
At abouta mile from the top, a great difference was 
perceptible in the climate, which became compara- 
tively warm, and the summer hum of bees was again 
heard among the purple heath." 
There is a continuation of several hills of less im- 
portance, of uninteresting forms, to the north and 
east of Skiddaw, which are principally covered with 
heath, and terminate in the open cultivated part of 
the county.
The most remarkable are Caldbeck- 
fells, Carrock-fells, Bouscale-fell, and Souter-fell.
On Bouscale-fell is a spacious sheet of water, so in- 
closed by an amphitheatrical ridge of craggy rocks, 
that, in the winter season, the rays of the sun never 
reach its surface for four months.
It is proper for the tourist to remark, that, 
amongst these mountains, an extremely hot day is a 
signal for very heavy rain, and tremendous water- 
spouts.
The lofty mountains and great flats below 
seem to put the clouds into eddies, and cause them 
to clash, when the water-spouts are formed ; and if 
they land upon the side of a mountain, which is 
almost always the case, the scene is awful indeed !
The late intelligent proprietor of the Keswick 
JMuseum*, in a statement winch he published in the 
summer of 1807, observed, that he remembered the 
fall of a* least a dozen " first-rate" water-spouts, 
within the preceding sixty years.
" On the night 
of the 13th of August, 1795," says he, " five large 
water-spouts fell within a few miles of Keswick, and 
all of them upon the sides of mountains, viz.
— two 
in Borrowdale, one in Newlands, and two upon 
* This gentleman, at the date of his publication, mentioned 
above, had, for twenty-six years, endeavoured to render his 
Museum useful, as well as entertaining; amongst other things, 
he had gathered together, within the circumference of twenty- 
Sve miles round Keswick, a stone of every kind of strata he 
Skiddaw.
One of the two which fell upon Skiddaw 
seemed to be the largest of the five ; it took the 
ground on the south-west side of this far-famed 
mountain, 440 yards perpendicular above the level 
of the Derwent Lake, and at the distance of only 
two miles and a half from Keswick, and to this day 
is well worth the tourist's observation.
It has made 
a scar in the side of old Skiddaw, which a thousand 
years will not efface.
At its first arrival upon the 
earth it began to tear it up, and in less than ten mi- 
nutes made a cavity sixty yards long, twenty broad, 
and five feet deep upon an average, whilst this 
mighty torrent was also ploughing great furrows 
below in its steep descent of 400 yards to Millbeck 
Gill, and forced its way 27 yards up the opposite 
shore or side of the Gill, a steep brow which rises 
with an angle of 26 degrees, where gravity turned 
this mighty stream into the said Gill at seven fur- 
longs above the village of Millbeck.
This great 
convulsion happened between nine and ten o'clock 
at night, and carried off not less than 100,000 cart- 
loads of the side of this lofty mountain into the vale 
below, and by the appearance of earth and sand left 
upon the two sides of the Gill, this water-spout 
flood had been higher than 400 times the average 
water of the Gill would have risen.
When the torrent 
(mixed with thousands of large stones, and millions 
of lesser) approached the village, it made such a 
dreadful noise as entirely drowned the voice of the 
then loud thunder ; and caused a great consternation 
amongst the people.
However, a jolly dame, more 
bold than the rest, bounced out of bed from the side 
of her husband, and ran out to see what was the 
matter; and it was well the lightning shewed her 
the danger she was in, or perhaps she might have 
been carried from her earthly home, and arrived at 
her long home, in a few minutes, drowned with 
water, and ground to pieces by the rolling of large 
stones !
A wall of considerable length was swept 
away, at a good distance above the village, and so 
clean, that scarcely one foundation stone was left, 
and the Gill, where it passed through the village, 
was about twelve yards wide and six deep, when the 
first water of the spout arrived, and in less than 
fifteen minutes it was filled with stones to the brim, 
and all was almost hush again except the thunder.
The lesser stones, the sand, and the mould, spread 
to a great, distance, and damaged the roads and 
some fields not a little, but improved some meadow 
grounds at the extremity of the overflow." 
Souter-fell is nearly 900 yards high, barricadoed 
on the north and west sides with precipitous rocks, 
but somewhat more open on the east, and easier of 
access.
On this mountain occurred the extraordi- 
nary phenomena, which towards the middle of the 
could meet with, and shewed perhaps ten times the variety of 
stones which can be met with in the same area of plain country, 
where the strata that have not been disuibed generally lie hori- 
zontal, or nearly so.
* 
last 
CUMBERLAND.
o3t> 
last century, excited so much conversation and 
alarm.
We mean the visionary appearances of 
armed men, and other figures ; the causes of which 
have never yet received a satisfactory solution.
The 
particulars are related somewhat differently ; but as 
Mr. Clarke procured the attestations of two of the 
persons to whom the phenomena were first visible, 
for the account inserted in his Survey of the Lakes, 
we shall relate the circumstances from that au- 
thority.
The first time any of these visionary phenomena 
'Were observed, was on a summer's evening in the 
yenr 1743.
As Daniel Stricket, then servant to 
John Wren, of Wiiton-hall, the next house to Blake- 
hills, (about half a mile from Souter-fell) was sitting 
at the door with his master, they saw the figure of a 
man with a dog, pwrsumg some horses along Souter- 
fell side, a place so steep that a horse can scarcely 
travel on it.
They appeareu 10 run at an amazing 
pace, till they got out of sight at the lower end of 
the fell.
The next morning Stricket and his master 
ascended the steep side of the mountain, in full ex- 
pectation that they should find the man lying dead ; 
as they were persuaded that the swiftness with which 
he ran must have killed him ; and imagined also, 
that they should pick up some of the shoes, which 
they thought the horses must have lost in galloping 
at such a furious rate.
They, however, were disap- 
pointed ; for their appeared not the least vestiges of 
either man or horses ; not so much as the mark of a 
horse's hoof upon the turf.
Astonishment, and a 
degree of fear, perhaps, for some time, induced them 
to conceal the circumstances ; but they at length 
disclosed them, and, as might be expected, were 
only laughed at for their credulity.
The following 
year, 1744, on the 23d of June, as the same Daniel 
Stricket, who at that time lived with Mr. William 
Lancaster's father, of Blakehills, was walking a little 
* These phenomena have by some been considered as a mere 
deceptio visus; but it seems improbable that so many specta- 
tors should experience the same kind of illusion, and at exactly 
the same period.
We should rather attribute the appearances 
to particular states of the atmosphere, and suppose them to be 
the shadows of realities ; the airy resemblances of scenes actu- 
ally passing in a distant pari of the country, and by some singu- 
lar operation of natural causes, thus expressively imaged on the 
acclivity of the mountains.
We shall illustrate our opinion bv 
some particulars relating to the Spectre of the Broken, an aerial 
figure which is sometimes seen among the Hartz mountains in 
Hanover; previously remarking, however, that the time when 
these appearances were observed, was the eve of the rebellion, 
when some troops of horsemen might be privatelv exercising.
" Having ascended the Broken," observes Nl. Haue, from 
whose diary this account is transcribed, in the Gottingischts 
Journal dtr Naturwisscnschujten, Vol. I.
Part.
III.
" for the 
thirtieth time, I was at length so fortunate as to have the plea- 
sure of seeing this phenomenon.
The sun rose about four 
o'clock, and the atmosphere being quite serene towards the east, 
his rays could pass without any obstruction over the Heinrich- 
shbhe : in the south-west, however, towards Achtermaunshbhe, 
a brisk west wind carried before it thin transparent vapors.
— 
About a quarter past four I looked round, to see whether the 
atmosphere would permit me to have a free prospect to the 
above the house, about half-past seven in the eveu- 
ing, he saw a troop of horsemen riding on Souter- 
fell side, in pretty close ranks, and at a brisk pace.
Mindful of the ridicule which had been excited 
against him the preceding year, he continued to ob- 
serve them in silence for some time ; but being at 
last convinced that the appearance was real, he went 
into the house and informed Mr. Lancaster, that he 
had something curious to show him.
They went 
out together ; hut before Stricket had either spoken 
or pointed to the place, his master's son had himself 
discovered the aerial troopers ; and when conscious 
that the same appearances were visible to both, they 
informed the family, and the phenomena were alike 
seen by all.
" These visionary horsemen seemed to 
come from the lowest part of Souter-fell, and be- 
came visible at a place called Knott ; they then 
moved in regular troops along the side of the fell, 
till they came opposite to Blakehills, when they 
went over the mountain : thus they described a kind 
of curvilineal path ; and both their first and last ap- 
pearances were bounded by the top of the mountain." 
The pace at which these shadowy forms proceeded, 
was a regular swift walk ; and the whole time of the 
continuance of their appearance was upwards of two 
hours : but further observation was then precluded 
by the approach of night.
Many troops were seen 
in succession ; and frequently the last, or last but 
one, in a troop, would quit his position, gallop to 
the front, and then observe the same pace with the 
others.
The same changes were visible to all the 
spectators ; and the view of the phenomena was not 
confined to Blakehills only, but was seen by every 
person at every cottage within the distance of a 
mile.
The persons who witnessed the march of 
these aerial travellers, seem, from the attestation, 
signed by Lancaster and Stricket, and dated the 21st 
of July, 1735, to have been twenty-six in number.* 
Our 
south-west, when I observed, at a very great distance, towards 
Achtermannshohe, a human figure of a monstrous size !
A vio- 
lent gust of wind having almost carried away my hat, I clapped 
my hand to it, by moving my arm towards my head, and the 
colossal figure did the same.
The pleasure which I felt at this 
discovery can hardly be described ; for I had already walked 
many a weary step in the hopes of seeing this shadowy image, 
without being able to gratify my curiosity.
I immediately 
made another movement, by bending my body, and the colossal 
figure before me repeated it.
I was desirous of doing the same 
thing once more, but my colossus had vanished.
1 remained 
in the same position, waiting to see whether it would return, 
and in a few minutes it again made its appearance on the Ach- 
termanshbhe.
1 paid my icspects to it a second time, audit 
did the same to me.
I then called the landlord of the Broken, 
(the neighbouring inn,) and having both taken the same posi- 
tion which I had taken alone, we looked towards the Achter- 
nviniishbhe, but saw nothing.
We had not, however, stood 
long, when two such colossal figures were formed over the above 
eminence, which repeated their compliments by bending their 
bodies as we did, after which they vanished.
We retained our 
position, kept our eyes fixed on the same spot, and in a little 
time the two figures again stood before us, and were joined by 
a third.
Every movement that we made these figures imitated ; 
but with this difference, that the phenomenon was sometimes 
weak 
M(3 
CUMBERLAND.
Our next object of attention is Snddle-baek, rear- 
ing its vast hoad on the western side of Souter-fell, 
which is indeed only an appendage to this more stu- 
pendous mountain.
It obtained its name from the 
resemblance which its shape bears to that of a saddle, 
when seen from several different points of view.
Its 
base, observes a contemporary writer, is broken into 
a little world of mountains, green with cultivation : 
its north-western skirts unite with the declivities of 
$kiddaw ; but its southern face is furrowed by 
several hideous chasms ; and its summit is in many 
parts frightful and desolate.
It appears to have 
been in a volcanic state ; and a lake on the upper 
part of the mountain, called Threlkeld-tarn, whose 
bed is apparently the solid rock, is supposed, from 
the lava and burnt stones found in its neighbour- 
hood, to have been the crater.
This cavity is of 
several acres in extent, and is said to be so deeply 
situated in the bosom of the rocks, that the sun never 
shines upon it : its waters appear black, but smooth 
as glass.
The views from the summit are exceed- 
ingly extensive ; but those immediately under the 
eye, on the mountain itself, so tremendous and ap- 
palling, that few persons have sufficient resolution 
to experience the emotions which those awful scenes 
inspire, and they are therefore but seldom visited.
One of the points of the summit juts out between 
two horrid gulphs, which seem to be more than 800 
feet deep, having their sides craggy and barren, and 
their bottoms paved with broken rocks, of various 
hideous forms and dimensions.
The height of this 
mountain, as taken by Mr. Donald, is 3324 feet : 
that of Skiddaw, as ascertained by the same gentle- 
man, 3270.
At a short distance from the southern declivity of 
this vast eminence is the Vale of Wanthwaite, which 
most tourists have mistaken for the Vale of St. John, 
and described it by that name.
It is a narrow cul- 
tivated spot, seated in the bosom of tremendous 
rocks, which impend over it in masses of grey crag.
These rocks are overlooked by still more awful 
mountains, falling in abrupt lines, and closing up 
the vista, except where they also are commanded by 
the vast top of Helvellyn.
On every side are images 
of desolation and stupendous greatness.
In the 
widest part of the dale is a singular piece of scenery, 
described by Hutchinson, in his Excursion to the 
Lakes, as follows : — 
" An ancient ruined castle seems to stand upon 
the summit of a.
little mount, the mountains around 
forming an amphitheatre.
Ti.is massive bulwark 
shows a front of various towers, and makes an awful, 
rude, and Gothic appearance, with its lofty turrets, 
and ragged battlements : we traced the galleries, 
the bending arches, the buttresses.
The greatest 
weak and faint, sometimes strong and well defined." This 
curious detail concerning the imitative powers ot th.e Spectre of 
the Broken, demonstrates that the actions of human beings are 
sometimes pictured on the clouds ; and when all the circum- 
stances of the phenomena on Souter-fell are considered, it seems 
probaWe tlwt some thin vapors must have been hovering round 
antiquity stands characterized in its architecture ; 
the inhabitants near it assert that it is an antedilu- 
vian structure.
" The traveller's curiosity is roused, and he pre- 
pares to make a nearer approach, when that curiosity 
is put upon the rack, by his being assured, that if he 
advances, certain Genii, who govern the place, by 
virtue of their supernatural arts, and necromancy, 
will strip it of all its beauties, and by enchantment 
transform the magic walls.
The vale seems adapt- 
ed for the habitation of such beings; its gloomy re- 
cesses and retirements look like the haunts of evil 
spirits.
There was no delusion in the report ; we 
were soon convinced of its truth ; for this piece of 
antiquity, so venerable and noble in its aspect, as 
we drew near, changed its figure, and proved no 
other than a shaken massive pile of rocks, which 
stand in the midst of this little vale, disunited from 
the adjoining mountains, and have so much the real 
form and resemblance of a castle, that they bear the 
name of The Castle Rocks of St. John." 
Connected with these castellated rocks, the pro- 
prietor of the Keswick Museum has furnished some 
very curious particulars, which are thus introduced: 
— "' On the night of tiie 22d of August, 1749, four 
water-spouts fell upon the sides of the mountains, 
in the south-east quarter, at the distance of four and 
five miles from Keswick.
The day had been the 
hottest of any in the above year.
A very large and 
black cloud came floating from the south in the 
evening, and was joined by other clouds.
About 
nine, thunder, very large hailstones, and much heavy 
rain followed ; as did also the prodigious large wa- 
ter-spouts.
An old man had his mill swept away, 
which joined one end of his dwelling, and a hog-stye, 
which joined the other ; and his house left standing 
like a rock in the sea.
The aged sire now called 
out for help for himself and family, but no assistance 
could be given, until the water subsided.
He lost 
one of his large red mill-stones in the wreck, which 
lias never yet been found, and a new gill was that 
night formed, assisted by the large stones it bore 
down with it close by the miller's house, and upou 
the very spot where thriving hawthorn trees stood 
the day before ; and this gill was capable of con- 
cealing the hull of a sloop of 100 tons burthen from 
a side view.
The miller's nex< neighbour's houso, 
called the Green, was broken into by the flood, and 
caused to tremble; a very numerous family met 
together in the upper story, in dreadful expectation 
of destruction every moment.
Providentially they 
all escaped unhurt.
Alter the uproar had ceased, 
poor puss was discovered sailing about in a milk 
bowl, in a lower room, in about four or five feet of 
water.
It was also very soon discovered, that the 
its summit at the time when the appearances were observed.
It is also probable Unit these vapours nwist have been impressed 
with the shadowy forms that seemed to " imitate humanity," by 
a particular operation of the sun's rays, united with some singu- 
lar, but unknown refractive combinations, that were then taking 
place in Hie atmosphere, 
impetuous 
CUMBERLAND.
5-41 
impetuous flood had brought down with it from 
aloft, a very large stone, and that it was laid at rest 
only a few paces above his house!
" This same house is yet standing, a little below 
the Green Crag, which projects out of the side of a 
very large mountain, called by old Father West, in 
his Guide to the Lakes, " the Castle-like Rock of 
St. John's." It is indeed a very great curiosity, 
and in some respects exceeds all other rocks amongst 
the Lakes.
It seems to have taken its present name 
of Green Crag from the house below, called Green; 
and this house its name from the verdant fields still 
a little lower.
However, this rock was very grey 
*ixty years ago, and, by its present appearance, 
perhaps sixty times sixty years before that time ; 
and yet this spot does not appear to be the very 
place where it was formed.
" Mr. Timothy Walker, a manufacturer of cloth, 
and father of a great family, who with him had a 
narrow escape from the waters (accompanied by 
many thousands of great stones from the rending 
spout) measured the perpendicular height aud re- 
clination of this aged rock, with his packing cords, 
and made its perpendicular height 120 yards, and 
its reclination to the westward 10 yards.
That is, 
its summit is more westerly than the base by 10 
yards.
" A convenient spot, for viewing this natural and 
stupendous castle and the green house, is beside a 
white gate, which stands on the left side of the turn- 
pike road, that leads from Windermere to Keswick.
This white gate is 80 yards to the east of Mr. Gas- 
karth's white house, which house is nearly four miles 
and a half from Keswick, and situate at the north 
end of a very large and conspicuous wooded hill, 
called the Great How, on the left of the turnpike 
road also.
Turn your back on the white gate and 
white house, and you may from this station view the 
towering grey rock, old Father Walker's house, the 
old miller's house, and hawthorn gill (made in 1749) 
a little beyond the houses.
The rock bears E.N.E.
from the station, distant about half a mile, and the 
two houses N.
E. distant rather less.
" Rocks and water-falls are not near so striking 
at this distance as when near.
The footpath, from 
the station to the base of the rock, is very good ; 
but if the tourist is coming from Windermere, he 
may, with his carriage, turn up a lane to the right, 
600 yards short of the station (which lane is oppo- 
site to the Stanah House, situate on the brow of the 
hill) and drive down to the Green, situate 200 yards 
below the rock ; but this is not near enough.
The 
author recommends his walking forward until he 
can touch the base, where he may observe the strata 
of this old rock, instead of lying horizontal, standing 
almost perpendicular.
He can now step aside sixty 
yards, and take, a profile view of this hanging tower, 
and if his feelings are congenial with the author's, 
he will think his time not ill spent.
They are in- 
telligent people that inhabit the Green House, and 
if he wishes it, they will no doubt shew him the old 
vol.
l. — no.
39.
I 
manufacturer's habitation, Hawthorn Gill, the mil- 
ler's old house, the scite of his torn-down mill, and 
the scite of the ancient gill, where the waters used 
to pass in times of old, and which worked the old 
mill; and they will also tell him if his nearest way 
to the turnpike road is passable for a carriage.
" Now this giant rock, and also the mountains 
themselves, amongst the lakes, seem to have been 
thrown, or thrust up by internal convulsions of the 
earth, the author having observed the greatest rocks 
on the mountain sides, when on lis Survey of the 
Lakes, exhibiting their shattered strata, resting in 
almost all manner of directions ; and a sight of the 
many naked rocks, in Borrowdale, have convinced 
many a judicious tourist, that these mountains have, 
indeed, been thrown or thrust up by a very powerful 
agent from below.
"Of all the rocks the author has examined, Gate 
Crag, in Borrowdale, as seen from Bowderstone, 
exhibits, at something more than half a mile to the 
westward, the greatest jumble and confusion ; the 
different strata of the above rock being standing, 
leaning, and lying, in almost every direction.
" Hollow Stone Crag, also in Borrowdale, and 
close by the road side, a very little to the southward 
of Lowdore water-fall, is likewise standing with its 
strata almost upright.
Even smooth Skiddaw bears, 
on its lofty summit, dark blue slate with its strata 
standing vertical ; in other places of this great 
mountain, this slate's strata are in a sloping direc- 
tion.
And another part of the mountain exhibits an 
original stone, called Gniess, and by the neighbour- 
ing people, Whintin.
The strata of this stone are 
nearly vertical in one place, and almost horizontal 
in another.
" Pardshaw Crag, of very hard limestone, is seat- 
ed upon a high eminence a little to the north-west 
of the mountains amongst the lakes, and contains 
marine sait, petrified sea shells, of different sorts ; 
corals, fishes' teeth, and other nameless bodies.
He 
has also observed several crater-like places, and 
picked up volcanic matter, but has not met with any 
lava, it being liable to return to dust again by length 
of time.
Rounded stones lie in vast quantities all 
over the vale of Keswick and the neighbouring val- 
lies, and also in the vallies of Derbyshire, where 
there is volcanic matter also ; amongst the many, 
are here and there found the red and grey granites, 
from half a pound to 200 pounds, and they are also 
above and below the surface of the earth, but very 
scarce ; and they are met with many miles distant 
from any visible rock of their kind ; whereas the 
stones on the mountain sides are not rounded.
It is 
therefore conjectured, as appears in the late ingeni- 
ous Mr. Whitehurst's Book on the Original State 
and Formation of the Earth, that this aarth has un- 
dergone one or more dreadful convulsions, and that 
these rounded stones have been broken from off the 
different strata of rock, some of them perhaps many 
hundred miles beneath our feet, and by the attrition 
of one piece against another, and against the broken 
6 x strata 
,M2 
CUMBERLAND.
strata of roefe on their passage (into the light of day) 
have been brought into their present form.
*' Much more might be said of the ravages of the 
water spouts, but suffice it to say, the pretty little 
vale of Legburthwaite (a hamlet of St. John's) in 
which the great rock stands, suffered most.
A few 
furlongs to the southward of this rock came down 
the waters of another very great spout, which had 
taken the ground high upon the mountain side, and 
brought down with it vast quantities of earth and 
stone, and also took with it several large pieces of 
stone wall, and left them piled one, two, and three 
feet high, in some fertile fields below.
A yeoman 
had his house broken, and the turbid water rose and 
marked his clock face at the hour of X, which made 
the water above five feet deep.
It also broke into his 
orchard, and made great havock amongst his fruit 
trees.
A third fell about two miles to the north-east 
of the Green Crag, made its way down a gill, and 
carried with it much earth, a vast quantity of stdnes, 
from fifteen tons weight and downwards.
It laid 
above twenty of the largest kind in a bed of earth, 
side by side, where they rest to this day, and will 
remain a lasting monument of the awful effects of 
water spouts.
And yet for all this " War of Ele- 
ments," the author has not heard of one life being 
lost, of either man or beast." 
We now proceed to Watenlath, a tract of moun- 
tainous country (itself surrounded by mountains still 
higher,) which, connecting with Borrowdale-fells, 
advances south-west from Saddleback, and breaks 
abruptly oh the vale of Keswick.
In its bosom is a 
valley so contracteJ, that it affords room for little 
more than a path at the bottom, and the little river 
which, falling into Derwent-water, forms the cataract 
of Lowdore.
For- nearly the space of three miles, 
the vale of Watenlath appears only like a chasm of 
rifted rocks, the mountains on each side being so 
perpendicular, that their summits are scarcely more 
asunder than their bases.
The valley terminates 
in a rocky amphitheatre, of considerable grandeur, 
above the lake of Derwentwater.
To the west, beyond Watenlath, is the rocky 
chasm of Borrowdale, a tremendous pass, which 
opens from the centre of the amphitheatre that binds 
the head of Keswick lake.
Dark caverns yawn at 
its entrance, terrific as the wildness of a maniac ; 
and disclose a narrow strait, running up between 
mountains of granite, which are shaken into almost 
every possible form of horror, and resemble the ac- 
cumulations of an earthquake, splintered, shivered, 
piled, amassed.
Through this region of desolation, 
which furnishes a succession of such romantic and 
picturesque scenes, that they can hardly be paralleled 
by any in Britain, the river Derwent pursues its 
rapid course, leaping from rock to rock, and giving 
animation to its rude, horrid, or fantastic boundaries.
Near the entrance of the gorge is a detached moun- 
tain, called Castle-crag, which obtained its name 
from a fortress that once frowned on its summit, and 
guarded this important pass.
At its foot is the ro- 
variegated 
mantic village or hamlet of Grange, situated among 
the woods and meadows which skirt the borders of 
the Derwent.
The views from the top of Castle- 
crag are extensive and peculiar.
On one side is the 
lake and vale of Keswick, with their accompaniments 
of rocks, islands, villages, seats, farm-houses, and 
cottages ; with the majestic Skiddaw overlooking 
his more savage neighbours in the back-ground; on 
the other, the straits of Borrowdale, where immense 
rocky mountains are huddled together in the most 
singular arrangement, as though " emerging from, 
or returning to, the wildest chaos : rock riots over 
rock, and mountain triumphs over mountain." 
Amongst the most gigantic of the fells which form 
the great outline of this astonishing prospect are 
Eagle-crag, Glamarara, Bull-crag, and Serjeant- 
crag.
The first is a tremendous rock at the head of 
Borrowdale to the east, where the eagles have com- 
monly made their habitation, and their nests.
The 
young eagles are occasionally caught by the adven- 
turous inhabitants of the vale, who, when standing 
beneath, observe the place where the nest is seated, 
and afterwards, from the summit of some cliff, let 
down by ropes one of the most hardy of their com- 
panions, to secure the nest while the old eagles are 
abroad.
Glamarara is a perpendicular rock, of im- 
mense height.
Bull-crag, and Serjeant-crag, are 
less considerable eminences, but have their rugged 
sides covered with hanging wood, and 
shrubs.
Almost opposite to Castle- crag, in one of the re- 
cesses of this romantic chasm, is that gigantic mass 
of rock called the Bowder-stone.
Its veins are ex- 
actly similar to those of the adjoining precipice, 
from which it seems to have been detached by some 
violent convulsion of nature ; but its immense size, 
and singular position, render it nearly impossible to 
account for the mode by which it reached the place 
that it now occupies.
Resting on some fragments 
of rock, it lies almost hollow; and the road winds 
round its eastern side, which projects about twelve 
feet over its base.
In shape it bears some resem- 
blance to a large ship inclined upon its keel ; it is 
about thirty-one yards in length, and its weight has 
been computed at nearly 1800 tons.
On the top is 
a small portion of earth, from which one or two little 
trees derive their nourishment.
The stupendous mountain of Helvellyn lies to the 
south-eastward of the chasm of Borrowdale, partly 
in the county of Westmoreland.
With Helvellyn, 
Cross-fell, Grassmere, and Skiddaw, are the only 
mountains in this region which dispute the point of 
altitude.
Its height, as computed by Donald, is 
3324 feet ; and the snow remains longer on its sum- 
mit than on Skiddaw.
This, however, may be oc- 
casioned by its being situated in the more interior 
parts of the district than Skiddaw, which is more 
exposed to the sea breezes, and the winds which 
blow over a low cultivated country : its front is rude, 
and magnificently awful, stretching nearly a league 
and a half in one vast concave ridge.
Huge and 
innumerablw 
CUMBERLAND.
643 
innumerable fragments of rocks hang pendant from 
its sides, and appear ready to fall and overwhelm 
the curious traveller who dares to ascend its wild 
and fantastic heights.
* Cross-fell, and Ingleborough 
in Yorkshire, are distinctly visible from its summit, 
which commands a remarkably fine and extensive 
prospect.
The impressive grandeur of the echoes which may 
be called forth in the vicinity of U lis water, have 
been already noticed ; but this effect is almost 
paralleled by the reverberations of any loud sound 
that may be suddenly emitted in the wilds of these 
romantic eminences.
" It is utterly impossible," 
observes one of our popular tourists, " for a lively 
imagination, unused to the delusion, to experience 
it, without a momentary belief that he is surrounded 
by the unseen spirits of the mountains, reproving 
his intrusion into their sacred recesses in vocal thun- 
der." The universal uproar which a sudden burst 
of laughter produces in the bosom of these precipices, 
is thus beautifully noticed in the Lyrical Ballads of 
Wordsworth : — 
" 'Twas that delightful season, when the broom, 
Full flower'd, and visible on every steep, 
Along the copses runs in veins of gold : 
Our pathway led us on to Rotha's banks; 
And when we came in front of that tall rock 
Which looks towards the east, 1 there stop'd short, 
And trac'd the lofty barrier with my eye 
From base to summit: such delight I found 
To note in shrub and tree, in stone and flower, 
That intermixture of delicious hues 
Along so vast a surface, all at once, 
In one impression, by connecting force 
Of their own beauty, imag'd in the heart.
— When I had gaz'd, perhaps, two minutes space, 
Joanna, looking in my eyes, beheld 
That ravishment of mine, and laugh'd aloud.
The rock, like something starting from a sleep, 
Took up the lady's voice, and laugh'd again ; 
That ancient woman,* seated on Helm-crag, 
Was ready with her cavern ; Hammar-scar, 
And the tall steep of Silver-how, sent forth 
A noise of laughter; southern Loughrigg heard, 
And Fairfied answer' d with a mountain tone: 
Helvellyn far into the clear blue sky 
Carried the lady's voice ; old Skiddaw blew 
His speaking-trumpet ; back out of the clouds 
Of Glamarara southward came the voice; 
And Kirkstone toss'd it from his misty head.
Now whether (said I to our cordial friend, 
Who, in the hey-day of astonishment, 
Smil'd in my face) this were, in simple truth, 
A work accomplish'd by the brotherhood 
Of ancient mountains, or my ear was touch'd 
With dreams and visionary impulses, 
Is not for me to tell ; but sure I am, 
That there was a loud uproar in the hills ; 
And while we both were listening, to my side 
The fair Joanna drew, as if she wish'd 
To shelter from some object of her fear." 
The eastern side of Cumberland is occupied by a 
portion of that immense ridge of mountains termed 
* That impressive single mountain, Helm-crag, at the head 
•( the vale of Grassmere, is a rock which, from most points of 
the British Apennines, which, commencing in Derby- 
shire, extend in a continued chain of different eleva- 
tions to the river Tweed.
On entering the county 
from the north, the bleak, naked, and wet district 
round Nichol Forest and Bewcastle presents itself; 
and the eminences, in general, are heathy and 
barren.
The hills named Dove-crags and Christen- 
bury-crags, are lofty, and exceedingly rugged near 
the summits, particularly the latter, which affords a 
very extensive prospect.
The view from Preston - 
Hill, a few miles to the east of Bewcastle, also 
comprehends a considerable tract of country.
— 
Spade- Adam, a dreary and extensive waste, ren- 
dered more dismal by the contiguity of black and 
cheerless looking moors, which vary in elevation, 
and become disagreeable objects from their lumpish 
and uncouth forms, is the next eminence of magni- 
tude.
South-west of Spade-Adam, at the distance of 
some miles, is Castle-carrock-fell.
It possesses a 
more agreeable aspect, especially towards the west, 
where it rises rather abruptly from a verdant base, 
and becomes somewhat precipitous near the summit.
This range of mountains continues, with but few 
breaks, and little variations in altitude, to Cross-fell, 
which rears its lofty head near the confines of the 
county, and, from being encompassed with other 
desolate and barren heights, retains the snow upon 
its summit nearly nine months of the year.
Differ- 
ent portions of the intermediate range between 
Castle-carrock-fell, and Cross-fell, are distinguish- 
ed by the names of the fells of Cumrew, Croglin, 
Thackmoor, and Hartside ; and are partly covered 
with bent-grass, rushes, and heath, and partly with 
fragments of lime-stone rock.
The ascent to Cross- 
fell is in some places very steep, and in others it 
passes over wastes, which, in wet seasons, are so 
many actual morasses.
At different elevations there 
are two extensive plains ; and a third, on the sum- 
mit of the mountain, contains several hundred acres, 
and chiefly consists of a loose whitish free-stone, 
covered Avith moss, and other productions of the 
vegetable kingdom.
The prospect from this height 
is supposed to comprise a diameter of more than a 
hundred miles, and to embrace great part of six 
counties.
Donald computed the extreme altitude of 
the mountain to be 3390 feet.
A few yards below 
the summit is a spring called the Gentleman's Well, 
the temperature of which, during the whole year, 
seldom varies more than ten degrees.
It deserves to be mentioned, that this range of 
mountains, of which Cross-fell is the highest part, 
frequently gives birth to the Helm-wind.
This 
singular phenomenon rushes from an enormous 
cloud which gathers round the summit of Cross-fell, 
and covers it like a helmet.
The Rev. Mr.
Rich- 
ardson has thus described its appearance, and the 
manner in which it affects the air : — " In the vicinity- 
view, bears a striking resemblance to an old woman in the act 
of stooping.
of 
iu 
CUMBERLAND.
of these mountains the air is generally very clear 
and healthy, owing, perhaps, to the violent Helm- 
winds in the months of December, January, Fe- 
bruary, March, and April: but the inhabitants of 
the countries immediately influenced by that wind, 
are more subject, to rheumatic complaints than those 
at a greater distance.
The- summit of Cross-fell, 
and the regions a little lower, are sometimes clear 
when the vale is covered with a fog.
I have been 
upon the mountain when that has happened, and the 
spectacle is curious, as the clouds appear firm, 
though uneven, like a boisterous disturbed ocean.
— 
All distant sounds are at that time heard distinctly, 
and strike the ear in a very singular manner, as they 
seem to issue under your feet.
The name of Helm 
seems to be derived from the Saxon, and implies, in 
our language, a covering.
Its appearances, accord- 
ing to my remarks, have been that of a white cloud 
resting on the summits of the hills, extending even 
from Brough to Brampton : it wears a bold, broad 
front, like a vast float of ice, standing on edge.
On 
its first appearance, there issues from it a prodigious 
noise, which, in grandeur and awfulness, exceeds 
the roaring of the ocean.
Sometimes there is a 
Helm-bar, which consists of a white cloud arranged 
opposite to the helm, and holding a station various 
in its distances, being sometimes not more than half 
a mile from the mountain j at others three or four 
miles : its breadth also varies from a quarter of a 
mile to a mile at least : this cloud prevents the wind 
blowing farther westward.
The sky is generally 
visible between the helm and the bar, and frequently 
loose bodies of vapour, or small specks of clouds, 
are separated from the helm and the bar, and flying 
across in contrary directions, both east and west, 
are seen to sweep along the sky with amazing velo- 
city.
From the bar-cloud the wind blows eastward ; 
but underneath it is a dead calm, or gusts of wind 
from all quarters : and the violence of the wind is 
generally greatest when the helm is highest above 
the mouutains.
The cold air rushes down the hill 
with amazing strength : it mostly comes in gusts ; 
though it sometimes blows with unabated fury for 
twenty-four hours, and continues blowing at inter- 
vals for three, four, five, and even six weeks.
I 
have at different times walked into the cloud, and 
found the wind increase in violence, till I reached 
the mist floating on the side of the hill : when once 
entered into that mist, I experienced a dead calm.
If the helm is stationed above the mountain, and 
does not rest upon it, it blows with considerable 
violence immediately under the helm.
Shepherds 
have frequently observed, that the wind rushes down 
on each side, so that at a distance from the base of 
the mountain, it blows from different quarters.
The 
helm does not always observe a regular form ; 
neither is there always a helm-bar, for that phe- 
nomenon only appears when the wind at a little dis- 
tance blows from the west." 
It has been remarked, that this phenomenon is 
almost always terminated by rain, which restores 
the general warmth of the atmosphere.
Minerals.] — The metallic, and other mineralogi- 
cal substances of this county, are rich, variegated, 
and abundant.
The principal mines are those of 
iron, copper, and lead.
" Oeiireous iron ores, re- 
sembling those called by Mr. Kirwan, highland ar- 
gillaceous ores, are very commonly met with, either 
on or near the surface, in most parts of the county, 
especially in moory soils, and where the under 
stratum is a coarse martial clay.
They appear to 
have been deposited by water, as they are generally 
found connected with small stones, roots, and other 
substances.
At a place named Crowgarth, in the 
parish of Egremont, is the most singular mine of 
iron ore supposed to be in Great Britain.
It lies in 
the earth, at the depth of twelve fathoms ; and the 
thickness of the band of ore, which is hard solid 
metal, is between twenty-four and twenty-five feet.
It was never known to be much wrought till the 
years 1784 and 1785, when it was more generally 
opened ; and so great has been the demand for it, at 
Carron foundery, in Scotland, and others, that in 
1791 and 1793, the annual exportation was 20,000 
tons and upwards." 
The copper ores are generally combined with 
sulphur, and contain for the most part arsenic and 
iron.
The chief copper mines are situate near Cald- 
beck, at Hesket-New-Market, in Borrowdale, and 
at Newlands, near Keswick.
At the latter place is 
the famed mine of Goldscarp, from whence, accord- 
ing to the old workings and written documents, im- 
mense quantities of this metal were anciently ob- 
tained.
Specimens of copper ores have been found 
at different places, particularly in the mountains 
Hardknot and Wrynose.
The lead mines are chiefly in Aldston Moor, oh 
the south-east borders of the county, where about 
1100 men are employed, and have been accustomed 
to clear to the owners upwards of 16,000/.
per ann.
In working some of these mines, the miners fre- 
quently meet with large breaks in the rock, like 
grottoes, wholly incrusted with the most beautiful 
spar, which, on entering, has the richest appearance 
imaginable.
The whole cavern, by the light of a 
candle, reflected from a thousand points, appears as 
if bespangled with gold, silver, and diamonds.
— 
These internal openings are generally closed up as 
soon as found, the spar which they contain presenting 
a great temptation for the men to neglect the service 
of their employers, as they could acquire more by the 
gathering and selling of spar, than by the regular 
pursuit of their own occupation.
In the neighbour- 
hood of Caldbeck, Keswick, and Aldston, the mines 
produce galena in all its varieties, and frequently 
with a considerable portion of silver.
In the mines 
of Aldston Moor, the lead ores are found lying in 
cracks or fissures.
" These fissures, though com- 
monly nearly perpendicular, are never wholly so, 
and iu whatever direction they are found, they 
always 
CUMBERLAND.
545 
always incline downwards from that side where the 
strata are highest : thus in a vein from north to 
south, if the strata should be raised higher on the 
south side the fissure than on the north side, its in- 
clination will then be from the south downwards to 
the north." 
At the head of Borrowdale, in a place extremely 
difficult of access, are the famous Black-lead or 
Wadd Mines, which, for the richness and quality of 
their substance, are unequalled.
They lie to the 
east of a very steep mountaiu, which forms the west 
side of the vale of Stomathwaite.
There are two 
workings ; the lower one is about 340 yards above 
the level of the sea, and its perpendicular depth is 
about 105 yards ; the upper one is nearly 390 yards 
above the sea, and its depth about 30.
The strata 
of the mountain are very irregular and broken, and 
the black-lead appears to have been formed in the 
fissures ; not existing in regular strata, but in irre- 
gular masses.
It is found lying in the mine, in form 
resembling a tree, having the body, or root, and 
veins, or branches, spreading from it in different di- 
rections : the root or body, is the finest black-lead ; 
and the branches, the worst ; decreasing in quality, 
as they become distant from the parent stem.
The 
veins, or branches, sometimes shoot out to the sur- 
face of the ground ; these indications, however, are 
very rare.
The black-lead is generally embedded 
in a blue rock, which is frequently stained as black 
as the mineral itself, to the depth of two or three 
feet : sometimes there is a wet sludge between the 
rock and the black-lead : at others it is found in 
sops, or lumps, in a body without branches.
In the 
deepest mine the black-lead lies in two transverse 
veins ; the main body, the richest in quality, being 
at the point of intersection : these veins fall perpen- 
dicularly to the depth of forty fathoms.
The blue 
stone, where the black-lead is commonly found, has 
often a stratum of hard granite above it.
In the 
workings, quartz crystals are frequently disco- 
vered.
The late Mr. George Smith, to whom the public 
is greatly indebted, for many particulars relating to 
Cumberland, describes the country in the immediate 
vicinity of the Wadd Mines, as full of cataracts and 
rivers, which are precipitated from the craggs with 
an alarming noise ; and the summit of the mountain 
itself, in whose bowels this valuable mineral is pro- 
duced, has been depicted by the same gentleman as 
truly terrifying.
" Not an herb," says he, " was 
to be seen, but wild savine, growing in the interstices 
of the naked rocks ; while the horrid projection of 
vast promontories, the vicinity of the clouds, the 
thunder of the explosions in the slate quarries, the 
distance of the plain below, and the mountains heap- 
ed on mountains that were piled around us, desolate 
and waste, like the ruins of a world which we had 
survived, excited such ideas of horror as ara not to 
be expressed." 
The value of the Wadd, and the curious fraud of 
an owner of a contiguous part of the mountain, who 
VOL..
i,— no.
39.
I secretly sunk a shaft, and opened a passage diago- 
nally to the mine, occasioned an Act of Parliament 
to be made in the reign of George the Second, to 
prevent its being stolen, by subjecting the criminal 
to the same punishment as for felony.
There is a 
recital, in this Act, that black-lead hath been disco- 
vered in one mountaiu or ridge of hills only in this 
kingdom ; and that " it hath been found, by expe- 
rience, to be necessary in the casting of bomb-shells, 
round-shot, and cannon-balls." The chief use to 
which it is now applied, is drawing ; and the lead of 
some pencils made at Keswick is of so very fine a 
texture, that it bears a point nearly as sharp as that 
of a needle.
According to the traditions of the county, the dis- 
covery of this valuable substance was occasioned by 
a storm, which blew down a large oak, whose roots 
tearing up several fragments of the rock where it 
had grown, laid bare the Wadd.
For some time, 
it was only employed to mark sheep ; but its value 
has been better estimated, and its price greatly in- 
creased.
In the year 177'2, when Mr. Pennant visit- 
ed this county, the best kind might be obtained for 
twelve shillings a pound, but the same quantity is 
now sold for upwards of 3/.
The mines are defend- 
ed against pilferers by a temporary mason-work and 
wall within, with a house over each entrance, occu- 
pied by the stewards and workmen.
They are only 
opened at intervals for a certain period, and are then 
closed up again.
While the miners are at work, 
they are watched as narrowly as though they were 
gathering pearls.
That this substance is almost pe- 
culiar to £ngland, is evident from the foreign name 
of black-lead pencils, which bear the general appel- 
lation of Crayons d' Angleterre.
Of semi-metals, Blende.
Pseudo-galena, or Black 
Jack is found in the greatest plenty.
It differs 
greatly in its colours and forms ; some being bluish, 
like galena ; black, or greenish black, like pitch ; of 
a glassy shining surface, frequently crystallized in 
irregular pyramids, and other irregular figures : oc- 
casionally containing silverj arsenic, and other sub- 
stances.
At Ousely and Borrowdale, oxide of zinc 
has likewise been found.
A mine of cobalt was dis- 
covered about five-and-twenty years ago, in the 
parish of Crossthwaite, near Cowdale, about four 
miles from Keswick, but has hitherto, we believe, 
been little regarded.
Antimony has also been met 
with at Bassenthwaite ; and in the stratum under 
the coal at Tindale Fell, oxide of manganese, tinged 
and intermixed with pyrites and mica : it has been 
likewise found at Caldbcck.
Wolfram, but of a dis- 
tinct species from that met with in the county of 
Cornwall, has been found in a manor south-Avest of 
Borro wdale-head .
At a place called Languor, between Whitehaven 
and Egremont, many varieties of the haematites are 
found, and sometimes, from their colour and shape, 
arc called kidney ore.
Laminated iron ore, with 
quartz and red ochre, has been found in a perpendi- 
cular fissure, in a granite rock at Eskdalc, near Ra- 
y ven glass, 
546 
CUMBERLAND.
venglass.
In the peat-moss of this county, native 
Prussian blue is occasionally fouud, and in clay, 
more especially that of Etterby-sea, near Carlisle : 
its qualities, however, are different from those of 
the artificial.
Of the stones in this county, in the calcareous ge- 
nus is limestone, differing in colour, texture, and 
hardness.
Impressions of many kinds of shells, to- 
gether with ammoniac, entrochi, and esteriac are 
found in the quarries at Overend.
A great variety 
of marine exuviae are found in the limestone on the 
moors near Gisland Spa. Marble, with shells in it, 
of a brownish colour, is met with at Dacre, and 
Little Stainton ; dusky green, veined with white, at 
Cross-fell ; yellowish, grey, lead-colour, and brown, 
with,' and without shells, on the hanks of thePeteril ; 
and bluish black, clouded wit Is lead grey, veined 
and spotted with white, hard, free from cracks, and 
admitting of a fine polish, near Kirkoswald.
Beau- 
tiful specimens of spar of various colours, amor- 
phous, and crystallized in different forms, are found 
in the lead mines of Aldston Moor ; and since the 
study of mineralogy has become almost general, have 
been s^lil for considerable sums.
In the mines be- 
tween Kesvvick and Aldston, it has been met with, 
crystallized in hexagonal prisms, terminated at one 
end by a pyramid.
Gypsum is found in many parts 
of the county.
Its colour is mostly white, veined, 
clouded, and spotted with red ; sometimes brown 
and grey ; of compact, even fracture.
Frequently, 
however, it exhibits a considerable variety of appear- 
ance, even in the same quarry ; and at Newbiggen 
it is met with not only compact, but splintery, 
fibrous, foliated, and crystallized : in the latter state, 
the crystals are pure and colourless, arrow-headed, 
and irregularly disposed, forming the resemblance 
of a cock's-comb.
It lies embedded in red argilla- 
cious marl, between two large strata of sandstone; 
the upper, solid, hard, and fine grained ; the under, 
loose, friable, and coarse : the stratum varies consi- 
derably in thickness ; and in some places immedi- 
ately below it, there is a thin bed of a soft umber- 
like substance, which, on examination, appears to be 
decayed wood.
The lead-mines of Aldston Moor, 
contain a great variety of fluor, compact, foliated, 
amorphous, and crystallized.
The colours are very 
numerous, being red, green, blue, yellow, purple, 
violet, and of all gradations, from very pale to al- 
most black.
Sometimes they arc found studded 
with brilliant quartz crystals, crystallized geleiia, 
&c.
Mica, in the magnesian genus, is found here of 
many different colours, interspersed and incorporat- 
ed with several sorts of stones, especially in most of 
the sandstone rocks.
Spangles of silvery mica are 
met with in a red, slaty, friable store, near the river 
Caldew, in the quarries oil the Peteril, and in vari- 
ous other places.
The streatitt * semi-indurated, 
white, streaked with pale green, has been found at 
Hill-Top, and St. John's ; and some of the solid 
white kind, in Languor Iron-Mine, at Borrowdale, 
and one or two other places.
Some small rounded 
masses of Serpentine, are met with in many parts on 
the sea shore, and sometimes, but rarely, in plough-, 
grounds.
Asbestus has been discovered in the lead- 
mine at Northern!, and in some of the mountains, 
where it presents a great variety of appear- 
ance.
Quartz crystals, of the siliceous genus, are found 
in the mines of Aldston -Moor, beautifully transpa- 
rent, and of various forms and colours ; some of the 
yellow kind are but little inferior in brilliancy to the 
Brazilian topaz.
Garnets are not unfrequently found 
in micaceous stones ; and some beautiful small ones 
have been met with in the neighbourhood of Kes- 
wick.
Cornelians of various tints, but principally 
of different shades of red, are frequently discovered 
on the sea shore, and near the surface of the earth 
in many other places.
Jaspers of different colours, 
often veined, clouded, and spotted, are generally 
met with in beds of rivers, and on or near the sur- 
face of the earth.
Of the argillaceous genus, many substances are 
found in different parts of the county.
Trap, Whin- 
stone, and Toadstone, exist almost every where : 
the two latter generally in detached pieces on the 
surface.
Schistus, of several varieties of colour, is 
found in immense strata in many parts ; and schis- 
tose clay, frequently of a tabulated structure, re- 
sembling the leaves of a.
book, is met with in most 
coal mines, at Gisland, Keswick, and various other 
places.
Terra- Porcellanea, or porcelain clay, the 
kaolin of the Chinese, is found at Barrock, near 
Nebsteps : it is of a white and cream colour, mostly 
friable, and dusty : it contains minute particles of 
shining silvery mica.
On the banks of Ulls-water, 
tripoli is frequently discovered in rounded lumps, of 
a greenish colour, in coarse martial clays, and, some- 
times, in gravel beds.
What may be termed the aggregated stones of 
Cumberland, are exceedingly numerous ; and they 
are found graduating into almost every imaginable 
variety.
Hitherto, many of them have not been ar- 
ranged under any class, but are here known by the 
appellation of Cobbles.
These are generally found 
enveloped in a thin whitish or grey crust, and ap- 
pear to have been fragments of masses, having had 
their angles rounded off, apparently by attrition.
Granite abounds in the fells above Shap, in the rocks 
near Ulls-water, and in detached masses at many 
Other places.
Granatines and Granatell also abound.
Pudding stone is met with at Water-fort- scat, Ulls- 
wateT ; in a thin bed, in a stratum of sandstone, near 
Low-house, &c.
Sandstone of various kinds, ar- 
gillaceous, siliceous, calcareous, ferruginous, red, 
white, yellowish, grey', and "of different sorts of grit, 
is found in great pienty.
It lies in considerable 
strata, and affords quarries of very durable stone for 
building in almost every part of the county.
Ar- 
gillaceous and siliceous porphyry, and many other 
varieties, are frequently found in loose stones, in se- 
veral parts of the county.
8 Mineral 
CUMBERLAND.
o!7 
Mineral Springs.] — This county does not ap- 
pear to be remarkable for its mineral or medicinal 
springs.
Near the Eden, however, a little below 
Rockcliffe, is a curious spring, on the water of which 
a scum rises, which, when collected on paper, ap- 
pears of a beautiful gold-colour: if suffered to dry, 
and then rubbed off, the paper has the appearance of 
being - covered with gold dust.
At Borrowdale, 
near Keswick, a tolerably strong spring" rises in a 
plain, near a moss, sixteen gallons of the waters of 
which yield one gallon of pure salt.
This is the 
more remarkable, when it is considered that the same 
quantity of salt cannot be obtained by boiling less 
than twenty-two gallons of the water of the German 
Ocean.
At Stangar, two miles south of Cocker- 
mouth, and three west of Keswick, there is a spring 
of clear, saltish water, with a ferruginous smell and 
taste : it turns white with spirit of hartshorn, and 
lets fall a considerable sediment, on the addition of 
oil of tartar; — a gallon of the water affords 1170 
grains of deposit, of which 1080 are sea salt, and 
the remainaer limestone.
It is white, hot to the 
taste, and rapidly imbibes atmospheric moisture.
It contains a small portion of the nitre, but the sea 
salt predominates, in combination with a considerable 
portion ot iron.
Four or five pints produce copious 
evacuations upwards and downwards.
It may from 
its composition be esteemed useful in various com- 
plaints.
Fossils.] — Pit coal, which is found in various 
* Akhemilla Alpina.
Cinqueloil, Ladies' mantle ; on 
rocks, near the lake called UUswater, not far 
from Penrith.
Allium vineale.
Crow garlick ; in meadows and pastures.
Ursinum.
Ramsons ; in woods and hedges.
Althaea officinalis.
Marsh mallow ; in sea marshes.
Andromeda poli/folia.
Marsh cistus, or wild rosemary; in 
turfy bogs.
Anthi(llis vulneraria.
Kidney vetch, or Ladies' finger ; in 
meadows and pastures, in a chalky or limestone 
soil.
Artemisia mariiima.
Sea wormwood ; on sea shores.
A r undo arenaria.
Sea reed-grass ; on sandy sea shores.
Aspleniurn adiantum nigrum.
Black maidenhair ; in shady 
places and on old walls.
marinum.
Sea maidenhair, or fern ; on sea rocks.
Rata muraria.
White maidenhair, or wall rue ; in 
damp chinks of rocks and on old walls.
Trichomanes.
Common maidenhair ; on old 
walls.
Aster tripolium.
Sea starwort ; on the sea shore in a clay 
soil.
Athamanta'meum.
Common spignell; in mountainous mea- 
dows.
Atropa Belladonna.
Deadly nightshade, or dwale ; in hedges 
.nd amongst rubbish.
Sea beet ; on sea shores.
Brassica monc nsis.
Procumbent cabbage, or rocket; on 
sanely sea shores.
Butomus umbeliatus.
Flowering rush, or water gladiole ; on 
the banks of rivers and ponds.
Carduus heknoides.
Melancholy thistle ; in mountainous pas- 
tures.
——— marianus.
Milk thistle; in ditch banks and on 
rubbish.
Beta vulgaris.
parts of Cumberland, and of different qualities, ap- 
pears to be the principal fossil, which this county 
produces.
It is found in numerous places, along 
the eastern mountains, but is easiest of access, and 
in the greatest abundance on Tindale and Talkin 
Fells, whence Brampton, Carlisle, and Penrith, de- 
rive their chief supplies.
It is found in great abun- 
dance near Caldbeck, and from thence along the 
western bank of the river Caldew, to IViaryport, 
Whitehaven, and Workington : several mines in this 
district, especially at Whitehaven, are perpetually 
at work.
At Tindale Fells, near Brampton, and at 
Workington, several large pits have been opened.
In the rocks on the Irthing, thin layers of jet are 
occasionally found, also in small detached pieces in 
the bed of this river, on the sea shore, and a little 
below the surface of the earth in many places.
This 
substance has been looked upon as Asphaltum; indu- 
rated and condensed by the lapse of time, by Wal- 
lerius and other eminent chemists.
As it bears a 
fine polisli, it is frequently worked into toys, buttons, 
bracelets, boxes, and other articles.
Plants.] — The plants of Cumberland are nearly 
the same as are to be met with in the other northern 
counties of England.
Those enumerated by Cam- 
den are given in a note below ;* and it may be re- 
marked, that there is scarcely a plant in England, 
which may not be found in the fields, near Salkeld, 
in this county.
Etymology.] — Authors are divided in their opi- 
nions 
Campanula latifolia.
Giant throatwort ; amongst bushes and 
hedges.
Tracheiium.
Great throatwort, or Canterbury 
bells ; in woods and hedges.
— glomerata.
Lesser throatwort, or Canterbury 
bells; in hilly or chalky pastures.
Chelidonium Glaucium.
Yellow-horned poppy ; on sandy 
sea shores.
Chrithmum mari'timum.
Samphire ; on sea shores.
Chrysosplenium ojijiositifolium.
Common golden saxifrage ; 
in damp shady places.
Circae lutetiana.
Enchanter's nightshade ; in damp shady 
p'aces and hedges.
Cunosurus caeruleus.
Blue doytatl grass; in hiilv meadows.
Crambe maritima.
Sea colewort ; on sandy sea shores.
Conferva Jiuviatilis.
Horsetail conferva; in rivers.
Drosera anglicd.
Great sundew ; in boggy p'taces, 
Empelrum nigrum.
Blackberried heath, crow or crakeberries ; 
on mountainous heaths, 
Erica multiflora.
Fir-leaved heath ; on heaths.
Eriophoron polystachion.
Cotton grass; in damp meadows 
and bogs.
vaginatum.
Hair's-tail rush ; in turfy bogs on 
mountains.
Eryngiu?n maritimum.
Sea holly, or eryngo ; on sea shores.
Fucus escutcntus .
Esculent fuctis; on submarine rocks and 
stones.
linearis.
Nai row-leaved fucus, orseathongs; on sub- 
marine rocks ancl stones.
vesiculesus.
Common fucus, or sea- oak ; on sea rocks 
and stone-*.
Galanthus nivalis Snow-urop ; in meadows or hedges.
Geranium cicutarium.
Hemlock- leaved cranesbill ; on rub- 
bish and walls.
moschatum.
Musked cranesbill ; in dry meadows.
Geranium 
548 
CUMBERLAND.
nions respecting the origin of the name of this 
county ; some think it may be derived from the Bri- 
tish word Comb, signifying a valley between hills, 
as the use of this old name was in several places 
adopted by the Saxons ; thus in Cambridgeshire 
there is a village situated under a hill, which is called 
Cumberton, and near Royston is a valley called 
Kelsey-comb.
Salmon conjectures the original 
Geranium nodosum.
Knotty cranesbill ; in mountainous places.
Stibcaticum.
Mountain cranesbill; in mountainous 
pastures and bushy places.
Galeobdolon luteum.
Yellow nettlehemp ; in hedges and 
shady places.
Gentiana centaureum.
Lesser Centaury ; in dry and barren 
pastures.
Geum rivale.
Water avens ; in moist hilly pastures.
Glaux maritima.
Sea milkwort, or black saltwort ; in sea 
marshes.
Isatis tinctoria.
Woad ; in corn fields.
Jungermannia ciliaris.
Fern jungermania ; in woods, on damp 
heaths, and by rivers.
Leonwrus cardiaca.
Motherwort ; on rubbish and in hedges.
Lichen furfuraceus.
Branny liverwort; on trunks of trees.
geographicus.
Map liverwort ; on rocks.
Lycopodium alpinum.
Mountain clubmoss; on hilly heaths.
— clavatum.
Common clubmoss; on mountains and 
heaths.
.. inundatum.
Marsh clubmoss; on damp heaths.
Selago.
Fir clubmoss ; on hilly heaths.
Lysimachia nemorum.
Yellow pimpernel of the woods ; in 
shady and damp woods.
Lobelia dortmanna.
Water gladiole ; in the lake Ullswater.
Malva alcea.
Vervain mallow ; in hedges, and at the sides of 
fields.
^farrubium vulgar e.
White horehound ; on rubbish, and by 
waysides.
Melampyrum sylvaticum.
Yellow cow-wheat ; in woods and 
woody places.
Menuanthes trifoliata.
Marsh trefoil, or buckbean ; in marshy 
and watery places.
Jfarthecium ossifragum.
Lancashire asphodel ; in turfy bogs.
Nepeta cataria.
Mep, or Catmint; in meadows and hedges 
in a limestone soil.
Nympkuea lutea.
Yellow water lily ; in rivers, ponds, and 
ditches.
alba.
White water lily ; in rivers and ponds.
Ophioglossum vulgatum.
Adders-tongue ; in damp meadows 
and pastures.
Origanum vulgare.
Wild marjoram ; in bushy places and 
hedges in a limestone soil.
Orobus sulraticus.
English Wood yetch ; at Gamlesby.
Osmunda regalis.
Osmund royal, or flowering fern ; in marshy 
and watery places.
Parietariu officinalis.
Pellitory of the wall ; amongst rubbish 
and on walls.
Parnassiapalusiris.
Grass of Parnassus ; in damp meadows.
Phalaris arenaria.
Sea canary grass ; in sandy places by the 
sea.
arundinacia.
Reed canary grass ; on the banks of 
rivers and lakes.
Pinguicula vulgaris.
Butterwort, or Yorkshire sanicle ; in 
boggy places.
Plantago coronopus.
Buekshorn plaintain ; in sandy places.
maritima.
Narrow-leaved plaintain; on sea shores.
media.
Hoary plantain ; in meadows and pastures 
in a limestone soil.
Polygonum Bistorta.
The greater bistort, or snakeweed ; in 
dampish meadows.
Poa pratensis $ alpinum.
Alpine meadow grass ; on the moun- 
tains.
name might be Comb-more-land, to distinguish it 
from West-moreland ; this, however, is not proba- 
ble, as no ancient records call it by that name ; a 
part of Staffordshire is also called the More-lands.
It is much more likely, that it was named after the 
ancient inhabitants, who were called Cumbri, or 
Cambri, and were included in the Brigantes, a po- 
tent British nation, which inhabited Cumberland, 
Polypodiumfragrans.
In damp chinks of stones.
Prenanthes muralis.
Ivy-leaved wild lettuce ; on walls, and 
in shady woods.
Primula far inosa.
Birds-eye ; in bogs on mountains.
Pulmonaria maritima.
Sea Bu gloss ; on the sea shore near 
Whithaven, plentifully.
Prunus Padus.
Wild cluster-cherry, or bird-cherry ; in woodi 
and hedges.
Rhodiola Rosea.
Rosewoit ; on the mountains.
Ribes nigrum.
Black currants, or squinancy berries; in 
damp woods, and on the banks of rivers.
Rubus chamcEmorus.
Cloud berries, or knot berries ; in turfy- 
bogs on the mountains.
• saxatilis.
Stone bramble ; amongst the stones at the 
sides of the mountains.
Rumex digynus.
Round leaved mountain sorrel ; on the 
mountains.
Salicornia Europea.
Marsh sampire ; on sea shores.
Salix hermaphroditica.
Sinning willow; in damp hedges about 
Ashton.
Sambucus ebulus.
Dwarf elder or Dane wort ; in hedges and 
by road sides.
Sanicula Europaza.
Sanicle; in woods and woody places.
Sedum Tetephium.
Orpine or Live-long; on walls, also ia 
hedges.
Silena Amoena.
Sea campion ; on sandy sea shores.
Solidago virgaurea.
Golden- Rod ; in woods and hedges, also 
on heaths.
Statice armeria.
Thrift, or sea-gilly flower ; in meadows and 
on rocks near the sea.
Stratiotis abides.
Water aloe, fresh water soldier ; in marsh- 
ditches.
Taxus baccata.
Eu<?h tree ; on mountains.
. 
Thlaspi alpestre.
Perfoliate bastard cress ; in tbe moist places 
in a limestone soil.
Thalictrum ftavum.
Meadow rue ; in damp meadows and 
pastures, and on the banks of rivers.
Tragopogon porrifolium.
Purple goats beard ; in the fields 
about Carlisle and Rose Castle.
Tremella uiriculaia.
Bladder-tremella, in rivulets on the 
mountains.
Trientalis europasa.
Winter green; in woods, and on turfy 
heaths.
Triglochin palustre.
Arrowheaded grass; in wet meadows 
and pastures.
maritimum.
Sea-piked grass ; in sea meadows.
Triticum junceum.
Sea wheat grass ; on sea shores.
Trollius Europaus.
The globe flower, or locker gowlons, on 
the sides ot mountains, and in hilly meadows.
Turritis hirsuta.
Hairy tower mustard ; on rocks, walls, and 
in stony places.
Faccinium Myrtillus.
Black whorts, whortle berries, or bill 
berries ; in woods and on heaths.
oxycoccus.
Cranberries or moss berries ; in turfy 
marshes.
uliginosum.
The greater bill-berry bush; on 
mountains between Hexam and Penrith.
Viola hirta.
Hairy violet ; in woody places, and in hedges in 
limestone soil.
Utricularia minor.
Lesser hooded milfoil ; in turfy bogs and 
ditches, 
Yorkshire, 
CUMBERLAND.
M9 
Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, and Westmore- 
land.
It is natural enough to imagine, that the 
Saxons, finding 1 the Cumbri possessed of this part 
of the island, gave it the name of Cumhreland, as 
much as to say, the country of the Cumbri.
Camden, and many other writers, have bewildered 
themselves in their researches after the origin, or 
meaning, of the term Brigantes ; but, from the 
" Cambrian Register," we learn, that the word 
Brigant, is from Brig, implying in the British, a 
summit, or upper situation ; and in its derivatives 
forms Brigantwys, the people of the summits, or of 
the upper regions.
General History.] — When the Romans divided 
Britain into provinces, Cumberland was included in 
that, entitled Maxima Caesariensis ; and, according 
to Whitaker, who differs from Camden and most 
other writers, it was then inhabited by the Volantii, 
or Voluntii, the people of the forests, whose name is 
said to have been derived from the British term, 
Gwyllaint, signifying a region abounding with wilds, 
or coverts.
In sketching the early history of Cumberland, 
however, we shall adhere to the more general opi- 
nion of its having originally been inhabited by the 
Brigantes.
Of these people, very little is accurately 
known ; but, from an obscure passage in Tacitus, 
we find, that they had early formed an alliance with 
the Romans, and preserved every engagement in- 
violable, till the conjugal infidelity of Cartismaudua, 
their queen, involved the nation in a civil war.
The 
Brigantes were divided ; one party supported the 
cause of Venutius, the injured husband ; the other 
attached themselves to the queen, who, adding 
cruelty to libertinism, destroyed the brother and re- 
lations of Venutius by treachery.
This base act so 
exasperated the people, that they revolted from her 
service, and, joining the forces of Venutius, would 
quickly have overpowered her, but for the conduct 
of the Romans, who, thinking the opportunity fa- 
vourable for a further assumption of power, sent 
some cohorts to her assistance, and, by their aid, 
after a fierce and sanguinary conflict, the army of 
Venutius was driven from the field.
Venutius appears to have been the ablest com- 
mander the Britons at this time had ; and his bra- 
very must have been equal to his skill : his exertions 
were increased by defeat ; and his succeeding at- 
tacks were executed wrth such rapidity and judg- 
ment, that his perfidious queen was driven from the 
* Ridpath, in his Border History, observes, that " the an- 
cient historians describe the Caledonians and Mceatae as entirely 
resembling each other in their manners and customs, both in 
•war and peace.
Their arms were the same as those used by 
their ancestors in the time of Agricola.
For offence they were 
provided with a short spear, a broad-sword, a dirk, and javelins ; 
for defence they had nothing but a small target.
They lived 
in huts, having no houses, towns, or villages ; hence their food 
was chiefly the milk and flesh of their cattle, and the game they 
took in hunting, together with the roots and fruits that the soil 
naturally yielded.
They are said to have had some sort of 
food, or rather medicine, a quantity of which, no bigger than a 
VOL.
I. — NO.
40.
throne, and himself reinstated.
The Romans them- 
selves were obliged to content themselves with a 
partial extension of their line of forts ; and it was 
not till the reign of Vespasian, nearly twenty years 
afterwards, that the Brigantes were subdued by that 
people.
Their country was then over-run by Peti- 
lius Cerealis, who defeated them in several severe 
battles, and spread desolation and terror through 
those parts which he could not entirely conquer.
The unsubdued Brigantes retired northwards, and 
being assisted by the Caledonian Britons, descended 
from the northern mountains like ferocious wolves, 
and, by their frequent and destructive incursions, so 
(Jesolated the Roman provinces, that Adrian found 
it necessary to repel their attacks, by erecting a Fras- 
tentura, or rampart, of earth, which extended across 
the present counties of Cumberland and Northum- 
berland, from the mouth of the Tyne on the east, to 
Solway Frith on the west ; thus reaching from sea 
to sea.
From this era all the territory of the Bri- 
gantes south of the rampart may be considered as 
completely^subjugated.
The Brigantes who settled 
north of Adrian's Wall, appear to have assumed the 
name of Moeata 4 ,* and to have held the sway of the 
Romans in such abhorrence, that they continually 
endeavoured to involve their possessions in destruc- 
tion.
In the reign of Antoninus Pius, they fought 
several severe battles with the Romans under Lol- 
lius Urbicus, who at length conquered the Avhole 
country as far as the isthmus which separates the 
Friths of Forth and Clyde.
Across this isthmus, in 
imitation of Adrian, and by the Emperor's order, he 
raised a second rampart, exactly upon the tract 
where Agricola had before erected a chain of forts.
This, however, was soon broken through by the 
fierce enemy, who made many irruptions into the 
Roman districts, and generally with such success, 
that the Emperor Severus, about the year 207, de- 
termined to take the field against them in person.
He accordingly proceeded to the north, entered 
Caledonia at the head of a numerous army, and, not- 
withstanding the innumerable obstacles which im- 
peded his march, he continued his progress with 
such a firm and undeviating step, that the terrified 
inhabitants were glad to obtain peace by the surren- 
der of a considerable portion of territory.
When 
the agreement was ratified, Severus returned into 
Britain, and having inspected the Wall of Adrian, 
considered it far too weak to prevent the entrance of 
the northern enemy ; he therefore caused another to 
bean, prevented all sense of hunger and thirst ; and this they 
made use of in their long marches.
They abstained totally 
from fish, though their seas and rivers contained it in great 
plenty.
Instead of dress, they painted their bodies, which 
were mostly naked.
Property was very little regarded by 
them.
They were swift, and sure of foot; patient ot toil, hun- 
ger, thirst, and other hardships.
They had horses, small, but 
fleet, and retained their ancient custom of fighting in chariots.
In almost all these particulars, as also in their language, they 
resembled the Briganles, with whom they appear to have been 
originally the same people." 
6 z 
be 
550 
CUMBERLAND.
be built with stone, strengthened by an outward 
ditch, and guarded by a chain of forts or military 
stations.
Many vestiges of this stupendous work 
are yet to be seen ; it was conducted nearly parallel 
with the rampart of Adrian, and like that extended 
from Tynemouth, in Northumberland, to Solway 
Frith, on the western side of Cumberland.
On the 
completion of this laborious undertaking', Severus 
retired to York, where his age and increasing infir- 
mities confined him to his chamber.
His indisposi- 
tion inspired the Mceatae and Caledonians with new 
hopes ; they again commenced hostilities ; and, by 
this breach of faith, so highly exasperated the Em- 
peror, that he resolved on their extirpation.
How- 
ever, being too much afflicted with disease to exe- 
cute his vengeance in person, he bestowed the com- 
mand of his forces on his son Caracalla, who led the 
army to the north.
On the death of Severus, which 
soon afterwards ensued, Caracalla hastily concluded 
a peace, and returned to the southern parts of Bri- 
tain, the more effectually to prosecute his claims to 
the Roman empire.
From this period the notices 
of historians are so vague and unsatisfactory, that 
nothing respecting the northern Brigant.es can be 
asserted with precision : their names and customs 
seem to have been lost in appellations still more 
uncouth, and in manners still more brutal.
By 
these ravages, whom historians have generally 
distinguished under the appellations of Scots, 
Picts, and Attacotes, the wall was frequently broken 
through, and the contiguous districts depopulated in 
the most savage and unrelenting manner.
The si- 
tuation of Cumberland occasioned it to be frequently 
the theatre of the most destructive conflicts, and the 
most atrocious deeds.
The incursions of the northern nations became so 
frequent and successful, when the Romans had en- 
tirely withdrawn from Britain, that the natives had 
recourse to Saxon auxiliaries, by whose assistance 
the invading bands were repelled.
The Saxons 
usurping the territory they had been employed to 
defend, the Cimbri united with the Scots and Picts, 
and with them assailed the settlements of the new 
comers, who began to establish themselves in North- 
umberland about the middle of the filth century.
Their hasty irruptions were marked with blood and 
rapine, and their retreats were conducted with equal 
celerity and destruction, while the impenetrable 
fastnesses in their mountains and forests, screen- 
ed them from the veng-eance of th ir Saxon pur- 
suers.
During the reign of Ethelfrith, King of Northum- 
berland, winch commenced in the year 593, Cumbria 
appears to have submitted to the Saxons.
Proba- 
bly, however, it was considered only as a tributary 
province ; lor it seems to have been governed by its 
own potentates till the tenth century, when King 
* It is stated by Camden, that, in testimony of this grant 
and as a memorial ot the division ot the two kingdoms, the 
Scottli Historians observe, that the Reay -cross, or Kay-cross, 
Edmund, " with the assistance of Leoline, King of 
Wales, spoiled Cumberland of all its riches ; and 
having put out the eyes of Duninaile, King of that 
country, granted his kingdom to Malcolm, King of 
Scots, to hold of him to protect the northern part of 
England, by sea and land, against the incursions of 
enemies : upon which the eldest sons of the Kings 
of Scotland, as well under the Saxons as Danes, 
were styled Governors of Cumberland."* In after 
ages, this proved a source of bitter contention be- 
tween the rival kingdoms, and the events attending 
it were extremely dreadful to this country.
" The 
inhabitants were continually harassed with warfare ; 
the herds and flocks were swept away ; women and 
children carried into bondage ; multitudes of men 
put to the sword ; towns, monasteries, and churches, 
sacked, pillaged, and laid in ashes." 
In the early part of the eleventh century, Uchtred, 
Earl of Northumberland, su pported by the Daues, 
began to commit depredations in Cumberland; but 
was soon opposed by Malcolm, King of Scotland.
The armies met, and engaged near Burgh-ou-Sands; 
and, alter a long- and well-contested battle, the ho- 
nours of the field were awarded to Malcolm, whose 
son Duncan possessed the principality, agree ably to 
Edmund's compact, but had retused to pay homage 
by the advice of ins father, the latter considering 
Canute only as an usurper.
Canute soon afterwards 
levied a great army, and advanced into Cumberland 
to avenge the insult.
The Saxon Chronicle asserts 
the defeat of Malcolm ; but tlie testimony of other 
writings is in favour of an amicable adjustment of 
the claims of the respective monarchs, who are said 
to have been influenced by the great men of both 
nations, to make a circumstantial investigation into 
the right of the Scottish Crown, when Cumberland 
was confirmed to Duncan, and the required homage 
performed.
At the period of the Conquest, William's autho- 
rity was strongly opposed by many of the northern 
inhabitants of the kingdom : at length an insurrection 
began at York, and was accompanied by an invasion 
of the Scots, who were supported by a body of Danes 
and Northumbrians.
William was at that time em- 
ployed at the siege of the Isle of Ely, which he im- 
mediately raised, and, with a powerful army, march- 
ed to the borders of Scotland, destroying the whole 
country northwards from York, with extreme and 
merciless severity.
On his return to the southern 
provinces, Malcolm again entered Cumberland, and 
retaliated the cruelties committed by the unfeeling 
Norman, by carrying his ravages even to the gates 
of Durham.
In 1072, William returned to the north, 
and having penetrated Scotland, was met by Mal- 
colm, at Aberncthy, where the Scottish monarch 
consenting to pay the accustomed homage, a peace 
was concluded.
The grant oi Cumberland, however, 
was placed oi.
Staimnore, on the confines ot Westmorel.
nd and 
Yorkshire, and had the arms of England and Scotland sculp- 
tured ow its opposite sides.
6 was 
CUMBERLAND.
551 
was resumed by William, anil soon afterwards be- 
stowed on Ranulph de Meschfries.
It will be recollected by the historical reader, that 
the disputes between the two Crowns, and the vio- 
lence with which their respective claims were con- 
tested, occasioned the institution of the Border Ser- 
vice ; the rise of which was cotempora.ry Avith the 
division of Cumberland under Rannlph, but its re- 
gulations were wholly distinct, and unconnected 
with other military service.
Its purposes were to 
prevent, or remedy, the dreadful effects which arose 
irom the incursions of men inured to bloodshed, and 
only happy when employed in the business of mas- 
sacre and plunder.
" The predatory life of the old 
borderers," observes Stoddart, in his Remarks on 
Local Scenery and Manners in Scotland, " forms an 
interesting subject or contemplation.
From the lo- 
cal traditions of the people, we find that the very 
term freebooter was not considered as a word of re- 
proach by the borderers, who, during the open wars 
between the two countries, combined with their per- 
sona] views of plunder something like a spirit of pa- 
triotism.
At other times they became dangerous to 
both parties, though generally professing hostility 
only to the inhabitants of the opposite territory.
Finally, when the two governments agreed to mea- 
sures of mutual advantage, for the suppression of 
the border depredations, an irregular system of con- 
ventional jnstice arose, which itself was not unfre- 
qnently the source of fresh dispute and bloodshed." 
In the.
infancy of this institution, the tenants of the 
several manors were obliged, on the firing of bea- 
cons,* or other warning, to attend their Lord in the 
service of the borders at their own expence ; and, if 
requisite, their attendance might be prolonged to 
forty days.
According to the value of their respec- 
tive tenures, some were obliged to serve on horse- 
back, and others on foot, with their proper accou- 
trements.
Hence there were nag tenements, and 
foot tenements, the owners of which, on pain of for- 
feiture of their estates, were obliged to furnish their 
stipulated number.
Very few of the purposes for which the border ser- 
vice was devised, were effected till the reign of Ed- 
ward the First ; and, in the intermediate time, many 
atrocious acts were committed.
The accession of 
William Rufus to the throne of England gave offence 
to Malcolm, King of Scotland, who entered the hor- 
ders with a considerable army, and having ravaged 
the country, returned to his kingdom laden with 
* 1 he following places were appointed for beacons in Cum- 
berland: Bl'ackcombe, Mulcaster Fell, St. Bees Head, Woik- 
ing or.
Hil , Moot hay, Skiddaw, Sandale Top, Carlisle Castle, 
Lingy Close Head, Beacon Hill, Penrith, Dale Raughton, 
Brampton Mote, and Spade-Adam lop 'I he Border Beacons 
of Scotland, from their number and position, formed a sort of 
telegraphic communication with Edinburgh.
The Act of Par- 
liament 145.'), .-.
48, directs that one bale or faggot shall be 
warning of the approach of the English in any manner; two 
bales, thai they are coming indeed ; lour bales, blazing beside 
each other, thai the enemy are in great force.
" The same 
plunder.
Rufus, in revenge, determined to attack 
Scotland with a vast armament, both naval and mi- 
litary ; but having advanced in an inclement season, 
his forces were so distressed by the severity of the 
weather, that he consented to make peace with Mal- 
colm on the same terms that had been granted to 
him by William the Norman.
This excursion of 
Rufus to Cumberland was attended with consider- 
able beneficial effects, for he ordered the city of Car- 
lisle to be rebuilt, and a fortress erected for its se- 
curity, to be garrisoned with soldiers acquainted with 
agriculture, by whose, means tillage was once more 
introduced.
" From the time," observes a modern 
writer, " that the Romans departed, the plough- 
share had not divided the soil ;" and the inhabitants, 
we are told, had become as totally ignorant of the 
cultivation of their lands, as though corn had never 
grown in the district.
The produce of their flocks and 
herds, and themilchgoats,formedtheirchiefsustenance.
About the year 1135, Cumberland was again in- 
vaded by the Scots, under the command of King 
David, who reduced and placed a garrison in the 
city of Carlisle, and compelled many of the natives 
of the country to swear allegiance to his niece the 
Empress Maud, who was then contending with Ste- 
phen for the Crown of England.
Stephen, to avert 
the interposition of the Scots, consigned to them not 
only this, but also the adjoining counties of North- 
umberland and Westmoreland, to hold of him and 
his successors, Kings of England.
This imprudent 
grant was contested by his successor, Henry the 
Second, who, in the year 1151, demanded full resti- 
tution of these northern provinces from Malcolm the 
Fourth, of Scotland.
The young Monarch acquies- 
ced in the demand, and in return received confirma- 
tion of Huntingdonshire, to which he had an ancient 
claim.
On the rebellion of Prince Henry, son of 
Henry the Second, Cumberland was involved in new 
disturbances ; the city of Carlisle was twice besieg- 
ed, and the second time obliged to surrender.
In the year 1189, on the accession of Richard the 
First, William the Lion, King of Scotland, claimed 
restitution of the ancient honours of the Crown, 
among which the principality of Cumberland was 
enumerated ; but the death of Richard prevented 
any award being made.
In the reign of King 
John, the Scottish Monarch renewed the claim ; 
but the decision was evaded.
The coalesced 
barons of the north applied for aid to Alexan- 
der the Second, of Scotland, and having paid 
taikenings to be watched and made at Eggerhope ^Eggerstane) 
Castell, and nidk taikening in like manner: And then may all 
Loutluane he warned, and in special the Castell of Edinburgh; 
ami their our tires to be made in the like maner, that thev in 
Fife, and ira Slnveling east, and the east part of Louthian'e to 
Dunbar, all may se them, and come to the defense of the 
realme." These beacons (at least in latter times) were "a 
long and strong tree set up with a long iron pole across the 
head ot it, and an iron brander fixed on a stalk in the middle 
of it, 'or holding a tar-barrel." Stevenson's History, Vol. II.
page 701.
him 
552 
CUMBERLAND.
him homage at Felton, obtained a promise of assist- 
ance.
This incensed the English King so highly, 
that he marched his army of mercenaries towards 
Scotland, and marked his progress northward, by 
burning and laying waste the whole country.
The 
Scots were sufficiently irritated to pursue the savage 
example ; and in a subsequent excursion they pene- 
trated as far as Richmond, in Yorkshire, and spread 
desolation through all the intermediate territory.
The county of Cumberland was miserably ravaged, 
in the course of this expedition.
In 1235, Alexan- 
der peremptorily demanded from Henry the Third, 
the restitution of this county, with the other pro- 
vinces which had belonged to Scotland.
This oc- 
casioned a conference to be held at York, at which 
Otho, the Pope's legate, presided ; " when in full 
satisfaction of all the claims of the King of Scots, 
Henry agreed to assign lands of the yearly value of 
200/.
within the counties of Northumberland and 
Cumberland ; if lands of that value could be found 
therein, without the limits of those towns where 
castles were erected." Nine years afterwards, Ni- 
cholas de Farneham, Bishop of Durham, received 
the Royal Commission to assign the lands, when 
Penrith and Sowerby were allotted to the Scottish 
Prince.
Notwithstanding the disputes relative to the 
northern district were thus adjusted, there was a 
certain tract between the two kingdoms, which not 
being immediately subject to either government, be- 
* " The authority of Lord Warden," observes Hutchinson, 
in his History of Cumberland, " was of a mixed nature, mili- 
tary and civil.
In his military capacity, he was generalissimo, 
to preside and give command ; to place and appoint watchmen, 
to fire beacons, and give alarm, on the approach of an enemy.
And for the safety and defence of the city of Carlisle, as often 
as any danger of a siege appeared, to muster all sensible men, 
between the ages of sixteen and sixty, within the marches, and 
all men at arms, billmen, and archers, according to their de- 
gree, who were to resort to him properly armed, to be marshal- 
led in thousands, hundreds, and twenties; and so arrayed to 
defend and keep the same.
He had authority to agree to ces- 
sations of arms, and conclude treaties of peace, to appoint 
deputies and warden Serjeants, and other officers.
In his civil 
capacity, he was to take cognizance of all breaches of the 
border laws, imprisonments, robberies, and spoils; to hold 
wardens courts, and sessions; therein to hear all matters in 
dispute between the people of both kingdoms ; and by the laws 
established, to redress all grievances.
To arrest and imprison 
all persons discovered to be in league with the enemies of 
England.
— The Lord Warden was to have a council, chosen of 
discreet borderers, who were to enquire into murder, maiming, 
burning of houses, corn, &c.
rapine and theft, deadly feud, 
threatening of life in revenge, cutting down trees, sowing corn, 
depasturing cattle, hunting beyond the established limits, &c.
A thief might be pursued into the opposite realm within six 
days, and the chase carried on, as the term is, in hot-trod, with 
bounds and horn, with hue and cry ; in which pursuits, re- 
ceivers and rescuers of the fugitive were equally punishable 
with the principal." 
The term Hot-trod, mentioned above, was the pursuit of 
offenders, called moss-troopers, with blood-hounds, or slough 
dogs, as they were named, from exploring the sloughs, mosses, 
and bogs, which were not passable, but by those who were ac- 
quainted with the various and intricate bye-paths and turnings.
These dogs were in use so lately as the reign of James the First, 
came the abode of a lawless banditti, who, acknow- 
ledging no ties, either of convention or humanity, 
pursued their own gratification, even to the absolute 
destruction of all opposers.
This debateable ground, 
as it was called, proved an inexhaustible source of 
contention ; and though it scarcely at any time ex- 
ceeded eight miles in length, by four in breadth, the 
wretches by whom it was peopled, conjointly with 
other dissolute inhabitants of the marches, frequently 
occasioned the most deplorable commotions between 
the Scotch and English nations.
" A lark's nest, a 
fair, and a merry-making, became the equally insig- 
nificant of objects of quarrel ; and the contention* 
continued till thousands of human victims have been 
sacrificed on the altar of discord and wild up- 
roar." 
As Ave have already intimated, the regulation of 
the borders by distinct and effective laws, seems to 
have commenced in the reign of Edward the First, 
about the time when he aspired to the Sovereignty 
of Scotland.
Robert de Clifford, Lord ami Heredi- 
tary Sheriff of Westmoreland, was the fust Lord 
Warden of the Marches ; a situation to which he 
was appointed in the year 1296.* The regulations 
which were now made to protect outraged humanity, 
were inadequate to the complete removal of the feuds 
which the cherished animosities of the borderers 
were continually calling forth.
Ever willing to dis- 
pute, and always ready to decide their quarrels by 
force of arms, it required the lapse of centuries to 
as, from a warrant then issued, it appears that nine of them 
were ordered to be provided and kept at the charge of tiie 
inhabitants respectively.
The Kings and Heroes of Scotland, 
as well as the border-siders, were sometimes obliged to study 
how to evade the pursuit of blood hounds.
Barbour informs 
us, that Robert Bruce was repeatedly tracked by sh uth-dogs.
On one occasion, he escaped by wading a bowshot down a, 
brook, and ascending into a tree by a branch which overhung 
the water : thus leaving no trace on land of his footsteps, he 
baffled the scent.
A sure way of stopping the dog was to spill 
blood upon the track, which destroyed the discriminating fine- 
ness of his scent.
A captive was sometimes sacrificed upon 
such occasions.
Henry the Minstrel tells a romantic story of 
Wallace, founded on this circumstance : — The hero's little 
band had been joined by an Irishman, named Fawdon, or 
Fadzean, a dark, savage, and superstitious character.
After a 
sharp skirmish at Black- Erne Side, Wallace was forced to re- 
treat with about sixteen followers.
The English pursued with 
a border sleuth bratch, or bloodhound.
In the retreat, Faw- 
don tired, or affecting to be so, would go no farther.
Wallace, 
having in vain argued with him, in hasty anger, struck off his 
head and continued the retreat.
When the English came up, the 
hound stayed upon the dead body.
The story concludes with 
a fine Gothic scene of terror.
Wallace took refuge in the 
solitary tower of Gask.
Here he was disturbed at midnight by 
the blast of a horn : he sent out his attendants by two and two, 
but no one returned with tidings.
At length, when he was left 
alone, the sound was heard still louder.
The champion de- 
scended, sword in hand ; and at the gate of the tower was 
encountered by the headless spectre of Fawdon, whom he had 
slain so rashly.
Wallace, in great terror, tied up into the 
tower, tore open the boards of a window, leaped down fifteen 
feet in height, and continued his flight up the river.
Looking 
back to Gask, he discovered the tower on fire, and the form of 
Fawdon upon the battlements, dilated to an immense size, and 
holding in his hand a blazing rafter.
sway 
CUMBERLAND.
553 
•way their unyielding 1 tempers to submit to the re- 
straints necessary to ensure peace, or eveu induce 
that amenity of disposition requisite to exist before 
the social feelings can be invigorated.
80 accus- 
tomed were they to rapine, that they went armed 
even to their feasts ; nor was robbery, even by wo- 
men, regarded as disgraceful.
Tradition informs us, 
that a woman had two sons : as long as her provi- 
sions lasted, she set them regularly on the table ; 
but as soon as they were finished, she brought forth 
two swords, and placed them upon the table, say- 
ing, " Sons, I have no meat for you ; go seek your 
dinner." 
As the border chiefs lived in small fortified castles, 
they bade defiance to the power of the sheriffs, and 
could only be attacked with success by regular 
troops.* During the open wars between the king- 
doms, the borderers assisted each, as was most con- 
genial to their interests.
On these occasions Cum- 
berland was so immediately in the road of the con- 
tending powers, that it hardly ever escaped without 
having some of its towns and villages ravaged and 
burnt.
The neighbouring provinces of Scotland 
were subjected to similar treatment, and the in- 
stances of deliberate barbarity were so numerous 
and diabolical, that humanity shudders at the recol- 
lection.
Inroads, or forrays, as they were termed, were 
•numerous in tlte reign of Henry the Sixth, and 
were attended with increased destruction : the pro- 
duce of the land, oorn, flocks, and herds, were all 
swept away ; women and children were made cap- 
tives, and carried into severe abject slavery ; and so 
greatly were the calamities of war extended, that 
nearly the whole of Cumberland was rendered deso- 
late.
The evils inflicted by the Scotch were amply 
repaid by the English.
Amongst Haynes's State 
Papers is the history of one of these campaigns, in 
the reign of Henry the Eighth, under the title of 
* " We met with many of these little fortresses," remarks 
Gilpin, " in different parts of the borders.
They are commonly 
built in the form of square towers.
The walls are thick, the 
apertures for light, small.
They are divided generally into 
three or four stories, each containing only one apartment.
The 
lowest was the receptacle for cattle, which was driven into it in 
time of alarm." 
f The outer ward of a castle, containing the barns, stables, 
&c.
X Supposed to be monasteries or hospitals.
§ Fuller includes, amongst the wonders of Cumberland, 
" the Moss-troopers ; so strange is the condition of their liv- 
ing, if considered in their Original, Increase, Height, Decay, 
and Ruine.
" 1.
Original.
I conceive them the same called Borderers 
in Mr. Cambden ; and characterized by him to be a wild and 
warlike people.
They are called Moss-troopers, because dwell- 
ing in the mosses and riding in troops together.
They dwell 
in the bounds, or meeting, of the two kingdoms, but obey the 
laws of neither.
They come to church as seldom as the 29th 
of February comes into the Calendar.
" 2.
Increase.
When England and Scotland were united 
in Great Britain, they that formerly lived by hostile incursions, 
vot.
1. — no.
-40.
" Exploits done upon the Scots in the year loll." 
The first exploit was on the second of July, and the 
last on the seventeenth of November ; and between 
these dates, no fewer than 97 inroads were made 
into the borders of Scotland, and 192 towns, towers, 
steds (houses) barnekyns,t parish churches, and 
bastel-houses,J were cast down and burned; vast 
quantities of sheep, horned cattle, horses, corn, and 
other articles, were at the same time taken.
The 
following passages are extracted from this curious 
document :— 
" August 7, Sir Ralph Evers, with the garrison 
of the middle marshes of Tinedale, and Ridsdale, to 
the number of 1400 men, rode, and burnt Jedworth, 
and Ancram spittle, with two other towns, called 
East Nesbit and West Nesbit ; and won divers 
strong castle-houses, and slew all the Scottish men 
in the same to the number of 80, aud brought away 
220 head of nolt (black cattle) and 400 sheep, with 
much inside goods." 
" August 16, William Buncton and John Ordre, 
and certain of the garrison of Berwick, burnt and 
spoiled the town of Dunglass very sore ; and seized 
320 nolt, 800 sheep, and much spoilage.
In their 
return they fought with the Scotts, and put them to 
flight ; and slew Alexander Home, and forty other 
good men, and took the Laird of Anderwicke, and 
his son Hamilton, and sixty more, prisoners.
" August 27, Sir Bryan Layton, &c.
ranged the 
woods of Wodden, where they got many nags, 
sheep, and nolt, and slew in the said woods, 30 
Scotts.
From thence they went to a tower of Lord 
Buccleugh's, called the Moss-House, and smoked 
it very sore, and took 30 prisoners, and have brought 
away 80 nags, 200 nolt, and 400 sheep ; and they 
burnt the town of Wodden, and many shielings and 
houses in the said wood, and other steds aud mills 
in their way."§ 
During the reign of Edward the Sixth, the ap- 
propriation 
now betook themselves to the robbing of their neighbours.
— 
Their sons are free of the trade by their father's copy.
They 
are like to Job, not in piety and patience, but in sudden plenty 
and poverty ; sometimes having flocks and herds in the morn- 
ing, none at night, and perchance many again next day.
They 
may give for their motoe, " -civitur ex rapto," stealing from 
their honest neighbours what they sometimes require.
They 
area nest of hornets: strike one, and stir all ot them about 
your ears.
Indeed, if they promise safely to conduct a travel- 
ler, they will perform it with the fidelity of a Turkish Janizary; 
otherwise, woe be to him that fallelh into their quarters !
" 3.
Height.
Amounting, forty years since, to some thou- 
sands.
These compelled the vicinage to purchase their securi- 
ty, by paying a constant rent to them.
When it!
their greatest 
height, they had two great enemies-- .the Laws of the Land, 
and the Lord William Howard of Naworth.
He sent many of 
them to Carlisle, to that place where the officer doth always" his 
work by day-light.
Yet these Moss-troopers, if possibly ibey 
could procure a pardon for a condemned person of their com- 
pany, would advance great sums out of their common vtock, 
who m sucn a case, cast in lots among themselves and have all 
one purse.
"4.
Decay.
Caused by the wisdom, valour, and diligence, 
7 a.
rf 
554 
CUMBERLAND.
proprlation of the clebateable land was, for the first 
time, seriously considered, and it was proposed that 
it should be divided into two equal parts, that the 
two kingdoms might introduce order into their res- 
pective divisions.
How it was determined does not 
appear ; but, from the succeeding events, it is ap- 
parent that the regulations were not effective, as the 
reign of Elizabeth teems with instances of the con- 
tinuance of the border depredations.
lt The acces- 
sion of James the First to the Crown of England," 
says Ridpath, " when both kingdoms devolved on 
one Sovereign, was an event fruitful of blessing to 
each nation.
The borders, which for many ages 
had been almost a constant scene of rapine and de- 
solation, enjoyed a quiet and order which they had 
never before known.
The King, in pursuance of 
his favorite purpose of extinguishing all memory of 
past hostilities between his kingdoms, and, if possi- 
ble, of places that had been the principal scenes of 
those hostilities, prohibited the name of Borders any 
longer to be used, substituting in its stead, that of 
Middle Marches.
He ordered all the places of 
strength in these parts to be demolished, except the 
habitations of nobles and barons, and broke the gar- 
risons of Berwick and Carlisle.
Natural prejudices, 
and a mutual resentment, owing to the series of 
wars carried on for centuries between the two king- 
doms, still, however, subsisted.
From the same 
source arose frequent disputes and feuds upon the 
Marches, which, by the attention of the sovereign, 
were soon and easily composed ; but it required 
almost one hundred years, though England and 
Scotland were all the time governed by a succession 
of the same line of Princes, to wear off the jealousies 
and prepossessions of the formerly hostile nations, 
and to work such a change in their tempers and 
views, as to admit of an incorporating- and effectual 
union.
1 ' This was at length completed in the fifth 
of Queen Anne.
" From that period all border 
hostilities have by degrees subsided ; and, as the 
then generation, which had been brought up in 
rapine and misrule, died away, their posterity, on 
both sides, have become humanized.
The arts of 
peace and civil policy have been cultivated, and 
every man lives safe in his own possessions: felonies, 
and other criminal offences, are as seldom committed 
of the Right Honourable Charles Lord Howard, Earl of Car- 
lisle, who routed these English tories with his regiment.
His 
Vt'verity unto them will not only be excused, but commended, 
by the judicious, who consider how our great Lawyer doth 
describe such persons, who are solemnly outlawed.
Bracton.
Lib. 8.
Trac.
2. Cap. 11.
'Thenceforward, (after that they 
are outlawed) they wear a wolf's-head, so that they lawfully 
may be destroyed, without any judicial inquisition, as who 
carry their own condemnation about them, and deservedly die 
without law, because they refused to live according to law.' 
" 5.
Rttine.
Such was the success of this worthy Lord's 
severity, that he made a thorough reformation amongst them ; 
and the Ringleaders being destroyed, the rest are reduced to 
legal obedience, and so, I trust, will continue." 
Walter Scott's portrait of Sir William Dcloraine, in his 
" Lay of the Last Minstrel," appears to be a striking repre- 
sentation of these people ; — 
in these parts as in most other places of the united 
kingdoms ; and the country, from having been the 
outskirt and litigated boundary of both nations," 
may now be considered as the centre of Britain, and 
as fruitful of good-will and social enjoyment as most 
other parts of the Island.
Antiquities.] — The antiquities of this county, in 
which there are many Roman remains, will be best 
described, respectively as they occur.
Near Car- 
lisle began the Picts' wall, built by the Emperor 
Adrian in 121, which crossed the whole island from 
sea to sea, about 100 miles.
It was 8 feet broad 
and 12 high, with 25 strong castles, the founda- 
tions of many of them are yet visible.
Besides 
which, there are Roman, Saxon, or Danish encamp- 
ments to be seen at Moresby, Thirlwall, Bankhead, 
Little Chesters, House-studs, between Seavenshale 
and Little Chesters, at Carrow- Borough, Seavens- 
hale, Portgate near Hexham, Ellenborough,Wigton, 
Burgh, Penrith, Netherby, Brampton, Lanecroft, at 
Aldston Moor, called Whitley Castle, near Rose 
Castle, at Bewcastle, at Deerham, near Denton, 
and at Liddle Strength.
The Roman military road, 
upon which the second journey of Antoninus is 
made, commences at and leads through this county, 
from Carlisle to Old Penrith ; and another vicinal 
way we have from Old Penrith to the wall.
The 
Roman road leading hither from York, may be 
traced to Rippon, and from thence to Merton, at 
the confluence of the Tees and Greta.
There 
are five stations from Merton to Walwick ; but to 
Carlisle there are but three : — Brough, in West- 
moreland, (Lavatris) is the first, Old Penrith 
(Veteris) the second, and Carlisle (Brovoniacis) the 
third.
A road goes also by the wall to Caer Vorren 
and Luguvallain near Walwick, and thence to Old 
Penrith.
The last station in this county is (Alone) 
Bewcastle, the station of the third cohort of the Ner- 
vians.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Divisions.] — This 
county is divided into five wards, synonimous with 
the hundreds of other counties, but so called here, 
the inhabitants of each division being obliged to 
keep watch or Avard against the northern irruptions.
It contains one city, one borough, 12 or more market 
towns, and 103 parishes.
The ward of Allerdale, 
" A stark mos« trooping Scott was he, 
As e'er couched border lance by knee: 
Through Solway sands, through Tarras moss, 
Blindfold, he knew the paths to cross ; 
By wily turns, by desperate bounds, 
Had bafled Percy's best blood-hounds ; 
In Esk or Liddel", fords were none, 
But he would ride th«.-m ; one by one ; 
Alike to him was lime or tide, 
December's snow, or July's pride ; 
Alike to him was tide, or lime, 
Moonless midnight, or matin prime: 
Steady of heart, and stout ot hand, 
As e'er drove prey from Cumberland, 
Five times outlawed had he been, 
By England's King and Scotland's Queen." 
above 
CUMBERLAND.
ooo 
above Derwent, is in the diocese of Chester ; all 
the other part of the county in that of Carlisle.* 
Parliamentary Representation.] — The total 
number of Representatives, returned to Parliament 
by Cumberland, is six : — two for the county, two 
for Carlisle, and two for Cockermouth.
Market Towns.] — At present, the following 1 are 
the principal established market towns in this 
county : — 
Aldston-Moor, 
Brampton, 
Carlisle, 
Cockermouth, 
Egremont, 
Ireby, 
Keswick, 
Kirkoswald, 
Penrith, Whitehaven, 
Ravenglass, Wigton- 
Population.] — With any early state of the popu- 
lation of this county we are unacquainted : by the 
population returns of the year 1801, the aggregate 
number of its inhabitants was 121,100: and, by the 
returns of 1811, the number was 133,744.
At the 
last mentioned period, as will be seen by the fol- 
lowing table, the number of males was 66,433, 
that of females 70,311; composing 2373 families; 
of which 10,868 individuals were employed in 
agriculture; 11,448 in trade; and 6,074 in other 
pursuits.
Summary of the Population of the County of Cumberland, as published by Authority of Parliament in 1811.
HOUSES.
OCCUPATIONS.
PERSONS.
Wards, &c.
V 
15 
By how many 
Families occu- 
pied.
ST.
T3 
U 
2 
'5 
Families chiefly 
employed in 
Agriculture.
Families chiefly 
employed in 
Trade, Manu- 
factures, &c.
AH other Fami- 
lies not comprised 
in the two pre- 
ceding Classes.
Males.
Females.
Total 
of 
Persons.
Allerdale Ward, above 
Allerdale Ward, below 
1 
i 
6461 
3934 
3037 
3366 
3606 
1658 
1940 
7222 
4423 
3286 
3852 
4405 
2829 
2373 
39 
34 
14 
13 
7 
7 
16 
140 
71 
121 
65 
68 
51 
34 
2595 
1934 
1530 
2386 
2277 
134 
12 
3015 
1254 
1156 
1013 
1132 
2301 
1577 
1612 
1235 
600 
453 
996 
394 
784 
15141 
10029 
7171 
9305 
10129 
5628 
4285 
1745 
18059 
11060 
7924 
10074 
10470 
6903 
5821 
33200 
21089 
15095 
19379 
20599 
12531 
10106 
1745 
Eskdale Ward 
Leath Ward 
24002 
28390 
130 
550 
10868' 
11448 
6074 
63433 
70311 
133744 
Chief Towns, Parishes, &c.
Abbey Holm.] — Abbey Holm, Holm Abbey, or 
Holm Cultram, is a small town, in the ward of 
Allerdale, six miles west-north-west from Wigton, 
not far from the estuary of the river Waver.
The 
original consequence of this little town was derived 
from an abbey of Cistercian monks, founded here 
about the middle of the twelfth century ; but it is 
quite uncertain, whether (as Camden informs us) 
by David, King of Scotland, or, as the Melros 
Chronicle relates, by Prince Henry his son ; or, at 
a still more remote period, by Henry the First of 
England, as the crown rolls imply : circumstances, 
however, indicate the last opinion as the least objec- 
tionable.
Its benefactors were many in number ; 
and by the munificent grants and privileges with 
which it was endowed, it acquired so much import- 
ance, that during the reigns of the first and second 
* The following have been the Bishops during the present 
reign: — Upon the translation of Or. Oslnddeston to the See of 
London, in 1762, Dr. Littleton was consecrated Bishop of 
Carlisle, and dying in 1769, was succeeded by Dr. Law, who 
died, 1787.
In the same year Dr. Douglas was elected Bishop, 
Edward, its abbots, though not mitred, were fre- 
quently summoned to sit in Parliament.
The abbey was pillaged and burnt during the in- 
cursion of Robert Bruce, but afterwards rebuilt 
with greater magnificence ; few vestiges, however, 
of its monastic buildings now remain.
From the 
ruins the parochial chapel was formed ; and there 
yet stands a part of the church, in its original form.
During the reign of Henry VIII.
the abbey was 
chiefly dilapidated ; the church continued in good 
condition till the year 1600, when the steeple, 114 
feet high, suddenly fell down, and by its fall des- 
troyed great part of the chancel.
Its total ruin was 
nearly accomplished by an accidental fire four years 
afterwards.
The following account of this occur- 
rence is found in the parish register : — " It so hap- 
pened, that upon Wednesday, the eighteenth of 
April, 1604, one Christopher Hardon, carrying a 
upon whose translation to the See of Salisbury, in 1791, the 
Hon. Dr.
Vernon succeeded, who being promoted to the 
Archbishopric of York, was replaced by Dr. Goodenough, 
in the year 1808.
live 
5.36 
CUMBERLAND.
live coal and a candle into the roof of the church, to 
.search for an iron chisel which his brother had left 
there, and the wind being exceedingly strong and 
boisterous, it chanced that the coal blew out of his 
hand into a daw's next which was within the roof 
of the church, and forthwith kindled the same, which, 
set the roof on fire, and within less than three hours, 
it consumed aud burned both the body of the chancel 
and the whole church, except the south side of the 
low church, which was saved by means of a stone 
vault." The name of the incumbent was Edward 
Mandevil : Hardon was his servant ; and a bill was 
brought into the Exchequer against both, for burn- 
ing the church wilfully and maliciously ; but proof 
failing, the charge was dismissed, and Mandevil 
afterwards rebuilt the chancel at his own expence.
The body of the church was repaired by the parish- 
ioners, at the command of the bishop.
The abbey, 
at the dissolution, was valued, according to Speed, 
at 537/.
Qs. Id.
Nearly the whole parish, which 
contains about 1500 inhabitants, and lb,500 acres 
of land, is comprehended in one lordship, belonging 
to the Stephenson family, one of whom, the late 
Ectwafrd Stephenson, Esq. purchased it of William 
Burton, of South Luffington, Suffolk.
* The story ot Michael Scot forms a beautiful episode in 
Scott's " Lay of the Last Minstrel ;" the notes to which Furnish 
some curious information respecting that extraordinary person- 
age.
Sir Michael Scot of Balwearie, we are told, flourished 
during the 13th century, and was one of the ambassadors sent 
to bring the Maid of Norway to Scotland, upon the death of 
Alexander III.
His memory survives in many a legend ; and 
in the south ot Scotland, any work of threat labour and antiquity- 
is ascribed either to the agency of Autd Michael, of Sir Wil- 
liam Wallace, or of the devil.
Tradition varies concerning the 
place of his burial : some contend for Melrose Abbev ; others 
for Holm Cultram in Cumberland.
But ::li agree that his 
books of magic were interred in his grave, or preserved in the 
convent where he died.
Satchells, wishing to give some au- 
thority for his account of the name of Scott, pretends, that, in 
]629, he happened to be at Burgh, under Bowness, in Cum- 
berland, where a person, named Lancelot Scott, shewed him 
an extract from Michael Scot's works, containing that story : — 
" He said the book which he gave me 
Was of Sir Michael Scot's historic ; 
Which histoly was never yet read through, 
!Nor never will, for no man dare it do.
Young scholars have picked out something 
From the contents, that dare not read within.
He carried me along the castle then, 
And shew'd his written book hanging on an iron pin.
His writing pen did seem to be 
Of hardened metal, like steel, or accumie ; 
The volume of it did seem so large to me, 
As the book of Martyrs and Turks historic.
Then in the church he let me see 
A stone where Mr. Michael Scot did lie ; 
I asked at him how that could appear, 
Mr. Michael had been dead above live hundred year?
He shew'd me none durst bury under that stone, 
More than he had been dead a few years agone; 
For Mr. Michael's name does terrifie each one." 
History of the Right Honourable name of Scot.
The following are amongst the current traditions concerning 
Michael Scot:— He was chosen, it is said, to go upon an em- 
Almost due west from Abbey Holm, in a strong 
situation, near the sea coast, are some remains of 
Wul-Lcy-Castle, a fortress which was erected by the 
abbots to secure their treasures, books, and charters, 
from the sudden depredations of the Scots.
" In this 
castie," observes Camden, " tradition reports, that 
the mai>ic works of Michael Scot (or Scotus) were 
preserved, till they were mouldering into dust.
He 
professed a religious life here about the year 1290 ; 
and became so deeply versed in mathematics, and 
other abstruse sciences, that he obtained the charac- 
ter of a magician, and was believed in that credulous 
age to have performed many miracles." Gough re- 
marks, that " Michael Scot was a Durham man, 
who applied himself to the abstruse Aristotelian 
philosophy, which he pretended to translate from 
Avicenna, and dedicated to Frederic the Second, 
Emperor of Germany, whose astrologer he was.
— 
Some of his philosophical and astrological works 
have been printed ; and Dempster says, some re- 
mained in ids time in Scotland, which his country- 
men would not dare to open, for fear of the devilish 
pranks that might be played by them." A broad 
and deep moat surrounds the site of the castles- 
Abbey Holm either has, or had, a small unim- 
portant 
bassv, to obtain from the King of France satisfaction for certain 
piracies committed by his subjects upon those of Scotland.— 
Instead of preparing a new equipage and splendid retinue, the 
ambassador retreated to his study, opened his book, and evoked 
a fiend, in the shape of a huge black horse, mounted upon his 
back, and forced him to fly through the a.ir towards France.
— 
As they crossed the sea the devil insidiously asked his rider, 
what it' was that the old women of Scotland muttered at bed- 
time?
A less experienced wizard might have answered, that 
it was the Paternoster, which would have licensed the devil to 
precipitate him from his back.
But Michael sternly replied, 
" What is that to thee?
Mount, Diabolus, and fly !" When he 
arrived at Paris, he tied his horse to the gate of the palace, en- 
tered, and boldly delivered his message.
An ambassador with 
so little of the pomp and circumstances of diplomacy, was not 
received with much respect, and the King was about to return 
a contemptuous refusal of his demand, when Michael besought 
him to suspend his resolution till he had seeu his horse stamp 
three times: The first stamp shook every steeple in Paris, and 
caused all the bells to ring ; the second threw down three of the 
towers of the palace ; and the infernal steed had lifted up his 
hoof to give the third stamp, when the King rather chose to dis- 
miss Michael, with the most ample concessions, than to stand to 
the probable consequences.
Another time, it is said, that when 
residing at the tower of Oakwood, upon the Ettnck, about three 
miles above Selkirk, he heard of the fame of a sorceress, called 
the Witch of Falsehope, who lived on the opposite side of the 
river.
Michael went one morning to put her skill to the test, 
but was disappointed, by her dewying positively any knowledge 
of the necromantic art.
In his discourse with her, he laid his 
wand inadvertently upon the table, which the hag observing, 
suddenly snatched it up and struck him with it.
Feeling the 
force of the charm, he rushed out of the house ; but, as it had 
conferred on him the external appearance of a hare, his servant, 
who waited without, hallooed upon the discomfited wizard his 
own greyhounds, and pursued him so close, that, in order to 
obtain a "moment's breathing to reverse the charm, Michael, 
after a very fatiguing course, was fain so take refuge in his own 
jawhole (anglice, common sewer).
In order to revenge himself 
of the Witch of Falsehope, Michael, one morning in the ensu- 
ing harvest, weat to the hill above the house with his dogs, and 
$ teat' 
CUMBERLAND 
557 
portant market, on Saturdays, and an annual cattle 
fair on the 29th of October.
It deserves remark, that the coast on this part of 
Cumberland appears, from various historical re- 
cords, to have undergone great changes by irrup- 
tions of the sea, which destroyed Skinburness, a 
considerable market town near the edge of the bay, 
where Edward the First kept his chief magazines 
for his Scotch expeditions.
The monarch had 
granted a charter to this place in the 23d of his 
reign, declaring it a " free borough, and the men 
inhabiting there free burgesses, with all liberties 
and free customs for ever ; so that the said borough 
be kept by some faithful man, chosen by the Abbot 
and his brethren." Soon afterwards, the misfor- 
tunes which happened to the borough, occasioned 
an application of the abbot to the crown, to have a 
market and fair at Kirby-Joan ; the former charter 
is rehearsed, and the following statement made in 
the grant for that purpose : — " That the abbot had 
reported, that a considerable part of the road lead- 
ing to the borough, and much of the borough itself, 
by divers invasions and storms were wasted ; and 
that the inlets of the sea were become so deep, that 
people could not resort there to inhabit the place as 
before ; on which account the abbot had petitioned, 
that the village of Kirby-Joan should be created a 
borough, with the like liberties and privileges as 
Skinburness had before held ; and the same was 
then granted accordingly, with a Thursday market, 
and a yearly fair." The small place now called 
Skinburness is chiefly inhabited by fishermen.
Addingham.] — The parish of Addingham, or Al- 
dingham, is hi Leath Ward, seven miles and a half 
north-east by north from Penrith.
Long Meg and 
her Daughters, in this parish, as we learn from the 
u Additions to Camden," is a Druidical circle, 300 
feet in diameter, and originally composed of 100 
stones, of which 67 are now standing.
On the 
South side, 15 paces south-west, at the distance of 
40 yards, is an upright squarish stone, nearly 15 
feet in girth, and 12 high, and nearly two yards 
square at the bottom : it is hollow at the top like a 
Roman altar ; one of its angles is turned to the 
circle ; and each angle answers to a Cardinal Point.
sent down his servant to ask a bit of bread from the good-wife 
for his greyhounds, with instructions what to do if he met with 
a denial.
Accordingly, when the witch had refused the boon 
with contumely, the servant, as his master had directed, laid 
above the door a paper which he had given him, containing, 
amongst many other cabalistical words, the well known rhyme, 
" Maister Michael Scot's man 
Sought meat, and gat nane." 
Immediately the good old woman, instead of pursuing her do- 
mestic occupation, which was baking of bread for the reapers, 
began to dance round the fire, repeating the rhyme, and conti- 
nued this exercise till her husband sent the reapers to the house, 
one after another, to see what had delayed their provision; but 
the charm caught each as they entered, and, losing all idea of 
returning, they joined in the dance and chorus.
At length the 
old man himself went to the house ; but as his wife's frolic with 
Mr. Michael, whom he had seen on the hill, made him a little 
cautious, he contented himself with looking in at the window, 
VOL.
I. NO.
40.
Near it, next the circle, are three or four large 
stones, forming an altar, or Facellum, and two 
towards the east, west, and north.
In the middle 
of the circle are two round plots of ground, of a 
different colour from the rest, and more stony and 
barren.
Aldingham, according to Dr. Todd, is de- 
rived from ald-hing-ham, signifying a habitation 
nigh the hanging stones ; but, in the opinion of 
Bullet, it implies nothing more than a place on the 
summit of a hill.
The area within the circle just 
described is now cultivated, and intersected by the 
boundaries of two enclosures.
Not the least mark 
of a tool appears on any of the stones ; the sub- 
stances of which are different, some freestone, some 
flint, some granite, and others of a blue and white 
lyas.
Aldstonmoor.] — This town, which is the most 
eastward of any in the county, is situated in Leath 
Ward, twenty -five miles east-south-east from Car- 
lisle, and 303 north-north-west from London.
It 
has a market on Saturdays, and fairs on the last 
Thursday in May, and the first Thursday in Sep- 
tember.
The parish of Aldstonmoor is very extensive ; the 
houses amounting to nearly 900.
The inhabitants 
are upwards of 5000.
The country affords but a 
naked aspect, and is barren of wood ; the trees 
being but thinly strewed, even in the neighbourhood 
of farms, and the fields and meadows almost every 
where enclosed by low stone walls.
The grounds 
under cultivation are principally appropriated to 
hay, and pasturing cows, as there is hardly a dozen, 
acres of arable land in the whole parish.
There is 
a cavity of considerable extent, called Tutman-hole, 
on Gilderdale fells ; some adventurous persons have 
gone nearly a mile into it, without finding its ter- 
mination.
A pool of stagnant water has likewise 
been remarked upon this fell ; its top is covered, to 
the thickness of several inches, with an opake crust 
or slime, which produces colours similar to Spanish 
brown and yellow ochre, and is often made use of 
by the country people instead of paint.
The town of Aldstonmoor consists principally of 
small stone houses, covered with slate, irregularly 
built on the declivity of a steep hill near the river 
and saw the reapers at their involuntary exercise, dragging his 
wife, now completely exhausted, sometimes round, and some- 
times through the fire, which was, as usual, in the midst of the 
house.
Instead of entering, he saddled a horse, and rode up 
the hill, to humblf himself before Michael, and beg a cessation 
of tho spell, which the good natured warlock immediately 
granted, directing him to enter the house backwards, and, with 
his left hand, to take the spell from above the door; which ac- 
cordingly ended the supernatural dance.
Notwithstanding his 
victory over the witch of Fabehope, Michael Scot, like his pre- 
decessor, Merlin, fell at last a victim to female art.
His wife, 
or concubine, elicited from him the secret, that his art could 
ward off any danger except the poisonous qualities of broth, 
made of Ihe flesh of a bremc sow.
Such a mess she accordingly 
administered to the wizard, who died in consequence of eating 
it ; surviving, however, long enough to put to death his trea- 
cherous confidante.
7 B 
Tyne, 
558 
CUMBERLAND.
Tyne, over which (here is an ancient anil narrow 
bridge, of one arch.
The surrounding country is 
bleak and desolate ; the seasons are generally incle- 
ment ; and the vegetable produce of the soil is not 
sufficient for the Supply of the inhabitants, whose 
provisions arc therefore obtained from the southern 
parts of Northumberland, and across the mountains, 
from the south-eastern borders of this county.
— 
These disadvantages are compensated by the rich- 
ness of the interior of the earth, which, in this se- 
cluded district, is impregnated with lead ore, and 
furnishes employment to many hundreds of miners : 
the mines are numerous ; and the country, for several 
miles round, is almost wholly inhabited by persons 
connected with the business.
The profit derived 
from the different mines is computed at from 16,000/.
to SO^OO'.
annually.
In the mountains of Aldston- 
moor, is found a species of coal, named CraW-coal : 
it is without bitumen ; but sulphureous.
The Ger- 
mans call it sulphur-coal.
It is not fit for the forge, 
but excellent for burning lime, and for apartments, 
as it maintains its heat a long time, and gives no 
smoke.
There is no bed of this coal sufficiently 
thick to be worth working regularly : but many 
persons extract it out of three different beds for pri- 
vate use, and for burning lime.
None of these beds 
are more than a foot thick.
In the reign of Edward the second, the manor of 
Aldstonmoor belonged to the family of Vipont : in 
Henry the Fifth's time it was the property of John 
de Clifford ; and in the next reign it was owned by 
Thomas Whitlow, who granted it to William Staple- 
ton and his wife.
Mary, daughter and co-heiress of 
the Stapletons, espoused Sir William Hilton, and 
the estate devolved to their issue, being, however, 
first conveyed to a son of Sir Richard Musgrave, of 
Hartley Castle.
In the reign of James the First, 
Henry Hilton, Esq. disposed of it to Francis Rat- 
cliffe, Baron of Dilston, in Northumberland, by 
whose descendants it was held until the attainder of 
James, Earl of Derwent water, in the year 1715, 
when it was annexed to the crown lands.
In 1735, 
Aldstonmoor, together with the other confiscated 
estates of that nobleman, was vested in the governors 
of Greenwich Hospital, for the support of that ad- 
mirable institution ; and the mines are let out on 
working leases for its benefit.
Allonby.] — Allonby, or Alaliby, situated on the 
Irish sea, nine miles north-north-west from Cocker - 
mouth, is in the ward of Allerdalc.
This is a neat 
and well built town, much frequented in the summer 
season for the purpose of bathing.
Tradition attri- 
bu^s its origin to Alan, the second son of Lord 
Allerdale, who, being of a melancholy disposition, 
was well pleased with its lonely situation, and chose 
it for his dwelling.
He afterwards gave, or left it, 
to some of his relations, who thence obtained the 
name of de Alanby.
The manor has subsequently 
been in the Flimbys and Blennerhassets, and is now 
in the Thomlinsons.
The town is a ehapelry in the 
parish of Broomfield.
It has a small chapel of ease, 
built in the year 1744 ; and adjoining it fs a neat 
schoolhouse, which was founded chiefly by subscrip- 
tion.
The erection of the chapel was at first opposed 
by the quakers, who have a meeting-house in th* 
town, and were formerly the most numerous of its 
inhabitants.
The population of Allonby is, at times, chiefly 
supported by the herring fishery ; respecting which, 
Hutchinson, in his " History of Cumberland," pre- 
sents the following curious statement : — " After re- 
maining in this channel ten years, the wonderful 
shoals of this fish (herrings) are said to leave it, to 
stay away ten years, and then return and stay tea 
years longer.
These revolutions are described to be 
as regular as those of any of the planets, the flowing 
of the tides, or the vicissitudes of the seasons.
Un- 
accountable as this circumstance confessedly is, it is 
confidently affirmed, and by very credible authority, 
to be a fact, and to have been observed of the her- 
ring for three successive periods yet within me- 
mory." 
Armathwaite.] — The village of Armathwaite is 
situated in the parish of Hesket-in-the-Forest, in 
Leath ward, ten miles south-east by east from Car- 
lisle.
There is also an Armathwaite, in the ward of 
Allerdale, five miles and half east-north-east from 
Cockermouth, in which there is only one house, the 
residence of Sir Frederic Fletcher Vane, Bart.
Armathwaite Castle, in the former place, is situ- 
ated near the banks of the river Eden, in a deep 
vale, and appears rather to have been intended for 
seclusion than security.
The front, which is modern, 
is built of hewn stone.
An additional building for 
offices was erected a few years ago.
The antiquity 
of this castle has not been ascertained ; the first 
family, however, that appears to have resided here 
is the Skeltons, in the reign of Henry VIII.
who 
continued possessors till the year 1712 ; when 
Richard Skelton sold the estate to William Sander- 
sen, Esq. from whom it descended to the present 
owner.
The contiguous scenery is highly romantic 
and picturesque.
The river, which here spreads 
itself into a broad and tranquil expanse, has the ap- 
pearance of a lake, being hemmed in at the southern 
extremity by Barren Wood, " a magnificent hill, of 
the most solemn shade ; and broken in upon to the 
right by a projecting crag, bold and grotesque, called 
Cat Glent, the rendezvous of many wild inhabitants 
of the feline tribe.
Other grand masses of rock, 
groaning beneath the weight of heavy woods, pre- 
sent themselves in front, while behind is the mill, 
and some little sequestered tenements.
Beyond this 
peaceful feature another reach of the Eden displays 
a very different character ; here, rushing down a 
cataract, it pours in sonorous violence over a bed of 
the opposing rock, whose immovable crags whirl the 
stream into eddies as it passes them in its fury."— 
On this side, the prospect terminates with a little 
stone bridge, which is in perfect keeping with the 
rest of the landscape.
On the estate of Armathwaite, at Nuns Close, 
2 William 
CUMBERLAND.
6oV 
William Rufus is said to have established a Bene- 
dictine nunnery.
This, however, appears to be 
erroneous-; for the religious house which that 
monarch founded was at Nunnery, and Nuns Close 
was only part of the endowment.
Nunnery, the enchanting residence of Richard 
Bamber, Esq. was so named from the religious house 
just mentioned, established here by William Rufus, 
who, like other profligates, " trembled amidst his 
impiety, and was willing enough to secure a chance 
of heaven, provided it could be obtained by any 
other means than virtuous practice." At the period 
of the Dissolution, its only inmates were a prioress 
and three nuns, whose entire revenues were not 
more than 18 guineas, notwithstanding their tene- 
ments included nearly 300 acres of land, and various 
other possessions.
The smullness oi this income 
must be attributed to the prevailing border conten- 
tions, and the frequent hostilities between the English 
and Scottish kingdoms.
It was granted to William 
Graham, in the time of Henry Graham, a branch of 
the Grahams of Netherby.
It was purchased in the 
year 1600, for the sum of 1436/.
by Sir John Lowther, 
Bart, from one of the descendants of the above, and 
exchanged by him for the manor and castle of 
Drumburgh, with John Aglonby, Esq. long time re- 
corder of Carlisle.
His successor, Henry Agionby, 
Esq. erected the present mansion on the site of the 
nunnery ; it is a plain, neat structure, fronted with 
red stone.
Various alterations have likewise been 
made in the grounds ; but the late Christopher 
Aglonby, the last male heir, and his sister Eliza- 
beth, (Mrs. Bamber) who succeeded to this estate as 
co-heiress, in 1785, have effected the principal im- 
provements.
The situation of the house is rather 
confined ; but the grounds are very beautiful, and 
much taste and judgment are displayed in the manner 
of laying them out.
*' The walks commence," ob- 
serves Warner, in his Tour through the Northern 
Counties, " with a turf-path of some length, carried 
along the margin of the Eden, whose waters, con- 
cealed by trees, are only heard in their furious pas- 
sage through their rugged channel, and terminating 
upon a point which opens upon a grand face of rock, 
scarred with natural caverns, the largest of which is 
called Samson's Cave." Returning from hence, the 
walks ascend to a higher level, and soon introduce 
the traveller to the confluence of the Croglin and 
Eden.
Farther on, the walk ascends to the deep 
rocky ravine, through which flows the river Croglin.
The banks rise at once " into lofty precipices, beetl- 
ing over the road, but finely softened down with 
shrubs and plants ; the torrent in the mean time 
follows a rapid descent, and keeps up an uninter- 
rupted roar.
Further on, the mural rock rises on 
each side, the glen becomes narrower and more 
gloomy, and the sound of many waters increasing 
upon the ear, intimates the neighbourhood of a cata- 
ract : nor is the expectation disappointed, for two 
successive falls immediately appear.
Of these the 
second is wonderfully impressive ; the deep caldron 
which receives the troubled water, after its desperate 
leap, being nearly involved in midnight darkness by 
the mass of wood which overhangs its abyss.
Ap- 
proaching now more closely to each other, the rocks 
excite the struggling stream to tenfold fury, who 
with difficulty pushes his waters through a horrible 
fissure, and forms a cascade" nearly 36 feet deep, 
which is precipitated in an unbroken sheet into a 
circular basin about six yards deep, in the rock 
below.
" The overarching cliffs and solemn shades 
reverberate the roar in a manner truly tremendous.
In these beautiful recesses little has been done to 
assist Nature, and that little performed with great 
skill : an increasing interest is kept up by the scenes 
which succeed each other, gradually rising in gran- 
deur and sublimity, from the quiet of Poussin's pas- 
toral pictures, where Nature shews herself in silence 
and repose, to the dashing and gloomy landscapes of 
Salvator, where she dwells in awful magnificence 
amidst rocks and cataracts, amidst images of de- 
struction and scenes of uncontroulable fury." 
At a little distance from the mansion, on a rising 
ground, in a field called Cross Close, is an upright 
pillar, having a large oval stone on one side, inscrib- 
ed with t he word Sanctuarium, in Saxon and Roman 
characters.
The letters form a semicircle, within 
which is cut the figure of a cross, and beneath, the 
date 1088.
The shape of th^se numerals, however, 
is modern ; and they are said to have been inserted 
about the beginning of the eighteenth century, by a 
person who wished to record the time of the founda- 
tion of the nunnery.
In the year 17 55, a wood-cut 
of this monument was published in the Gentleman's 
Magazine ; which was soon followed by an ingenious 
dissertation, from the pen of the learned Mr. Pegge, 
wherein he expressed his opinion, that " Nunnery 
had the privilege of a sanctuary, and that this cross 
or pillar formed the boundary of the privileged land 
towards that point of the compass in which it 
stands." 
At a short distance from Armathwaite Bridge, is 
a small but neat seat belonging now or recently to 
John Richardson, Esq. of Penrith ; where a beau j 
tiful walk has been formed along the summit of the 
cliffs overhanging the river.
" The views from 
hence," observes a contemporary writer, " are very 
pleasing, the brown and heathy mountains in the 
back ground affording an agreeable contrast to *he 
softer tints of the intermediate scenery.
To the 
south the prospect comprehends a long stretch of the 
Eden, to a point where a wear, or dam, formed to 
embay the salmon, interrupt its course, and causes 
it to descend nearly twenty feet in broken streams 
The wear is chiefly formed by natural rocks; but, 
to render the salmon fishery more complete, a frame 
of tiniber has been extended across the channel, over 
which the whole stream rushes in a distracted man- 
ner, and then hurries along its rocky bed in troubled 
volumes.
On the east the prospect is abruptly closed 
by lofty hanging woods." 
About a mile and a half from Armathwaite, near 
Tarn 
660 
CUMBERLAND.
Tarn Wadling Lake, are the remains of a very strong 
fortress, called, by the neighbouring inhabitants, 
Castle-Hewin.
Leland appears to be almost the 
©nly author who has mentioned it ; he 'terms it Cas- 
tel-Lewin, but says nothing relating to its history 
or owners.
Tradition affirms that it was a fortress 
belonging to King Ewaine, who was sovereign of 
Cumberland in the time of Athelstan, and is reported 
to have been interred in the Giaut's Grave at Pen- 
rith.
Its ruins are still considerable: the legend of 
a poet who wrote about the time of Chaucer, and 
whose verses are preserved in Dr. Percy's Collec- 
tion of Ancient Ballads, makes it appear to have 
been of eminence in the days of King Arthur.
•" A boone, a boone, O Kinge Arlhure, 
I beg a boone of thee ; 
Avenge ine of a carlish knighte, 
Who hathshent my love and me.
"" In Tcarne Wadlinge his castle stands, 
All on a hill so bye ; 
And proudlye rise the battlements, 
And gaye the streemers flye.
" Noe gentle knighte, nor ladye faire, 
May pass the castle wall ; 
But from the four, discurteous knighte, 
Mishappe will then befalle." 
Castle-Hewin is situated on the summit of a lofty 
^eminence, north-east of the lake.
It has consisted 
'of various apartments, strengthened with out-works 
and long-extended trenches.
The ruins cover a 
considerable tract of ground ; in some places the 
foundations are eight feet in thickness, and faced 
with rough stones of ashler work.
The extent of 
the principal building is upwards of 230 feet by 
nearly 150 : a smaller structure at one corner ap- 
pears to have been fifty feet square : the outer fence 
is of stone, and seems to have been circular : beneath 
dt are a ditch and breast-work, which are carried 
down the side of the hill for three or four hundred 
yards.
The whole situation is very commanding : 
towards the south it overlooks a spacious tract of 
country, having Penrith Beacon in front, and termi- 
nated eastward by the heights of Cross-fell, Button, 
and Stainmore : south-west the view embraces the 
whole district from Ullswater to Graystock, and is 
•only bounded by the Mell -fells, the towering Hel- 
vellyn, and other mountains ; the western prospect 
comprehends the more cultivated tract inclining to 
the river Peteril : and on the north it commands the 
city of Carlisle, the Solway Frith, and Brampton, 
with the high lands of Nichol Forest, and the Scotch 
mountains in the distance.
* The well known name of Daere is derived from the ex- 
ploits of one of their ancestors at the siege of Acre, or Ptole- 
mais, under Richard Cceur de Lion.
There were two power- 
ful branches of that name.
The first family, called Lord 
Dacres of the South, held the castle of the same name, and are 
ancestors to the present Lord Daore.
Tie other family, de- 
scended from the same stock, were called Lord Dacres of the 
North, and were Barons of Gilsland and Gravstock.
A chief- 
Arthuret.] — The village of Arthuret is situated 
in the parish of the same name, on a point of land, 
which is said to have anciently borne the name of 
Arthur's head.
It is in Eskdale Ward, one mile 
and a quarter south from Longtown.
In this vil- 
lage was born and buried Archibald Armstrong, 
jester to James I.
and Charles I.
By an accident 
suitable to his profession, the day of his funeral was 
the 1st of April.
He was banished from court for 
speaking too freely of Archbishop Laud's measure 
of introducing the liturgy into Scotland, which had 
produced a considerable tumult.
On the arrival of 
the news in England, Archy facetiously asked his 
grace, " Who's i'ool now ?" — This joke was resent- 
ed by the prelate, who procured au order of council, 
" That the King's fool be banished the court, for 
speaking disrespectful words of the Archbishop of 
Canterbury." 
The parish, which is very extensive, and include* 
the English part of the debateable lands, is bounded 
partly by Solway Frith.
Originally it was much 
larger ; but the parish of Kirkandrews was separated 
from it by letters patent in the reign of Charles the 
First.
It forms part of the barony of Lyddal, which, 
soon after the Conquest, was granted by Ranulph 
de Meschines to one of his dependents, named 
Brundey, which grant was confirmed by Henry I.
It was afterwards given to the Abbey of Jedburgh, 
in Scotland; but in the reign of Edward III.
it was 
seized by that king, on the principle that the Abbot 
of Jedburgh was then in rebellion.
The church stands on an eminence, and overlooks 
the western ocean.
It was erected in the year 1609, 
and consists of a nave, chancel, side aisles, and square 
tower : its length is considerable, and the whole 
structure is embattled.
In the ehurch-yard is a rude 
cross, which Mr. Pennant observes is " the exact 
figure of the cross of the Knights of Malta, and was 
probably erected by one of that order." 
Solway Moss, of which we shall hereafter have 
occasion to speak, is in this parish.
Askerton.] — The little village of Askerton is 
situated in Eskdale Ward, thirteen miles and a half 
north-east from Carlisle.
Here is a castle, which 
was built by the Barons Dacre.* It used to be gar- 
risoned by the Serjeant of Gillesland, who, whenever 
there was occasion, commanded and led the inhabi- 
tants against the Scots.
Aspatria.] — Aspatria, or Aspatrick, is a long 
straggling village on the side of a hill, in the Ward 
of Allerdale, eight miles north from Cockermouth.
It now forms part of the estate of the Earl of Egre- 
mont, but is supposed to have derived its name from 
tain of the latter branch was warden of the West Marches dur- 
ing the reign of Edward VI.
He was a man of a hot and ob- 
stinate character, as appears from some particulars of Lord 
Surrey's letter to Henry VIII.
giving an account of his beha- 
viour at the siege and storm of Jedburgh.
It is printed in the 
Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, Appendix to the Intro- 
duction.
Gospatrick, 
CUMBERLAND.
56 1 
Gospatrick, Earl of Dunbar.
On removing the 
earth of a barrow which stood at Be icon Hill, an 
eminence about 200 yards to the north of the village, 
in the year 1790, a human skeleton was found in a 
kind of rude chest or kistvaen formed by two large 
cobblestones at each end, and the same on each side.
The feet were decayed and rotted off, but from the 
head to the ancle bone the skeleton measured seven 
feet.
Ou exposure to the atmospheric air the other 
hones soon mouldered away.
Near the shoulder on 
the left side was a broadsword five feet long-, tne 
guard of which was elegantly inlaid with silver 
flowers : a dirk or dagger lay on the right side ; it 
was one foot and a half lom>-, and the handle seemed 
to have been studded with silver.
There were likewise found, part of a golden fibula, 
or buckle ; a broken battle axe ; an ornament for 
the end of a belt, a part of which yet remained ; part 
of a spur, and a bit resembling a modern snaffle.
Various figures, rudely sculptured, remained on the 
stones which enclosed the left side of the chest ; they 
chiefly represented circles, each having within a 
cross in relief.
Hayman Rooke, Esq. the learned 
antiquary from whose account we take the above 
particulars, was led, by these emblematic delineations, 
to conceive, that the personage whose remains were 
found was buried soon after the first dawning of 
Christianity; and also to infer, from the rich orna- 
ments found in the tomb, that he was a chieftain of 
high rauk.
Not far distant from the village, stands Arkleby- 
Hall, which was erected about the year 1740, on the 
site of an ancient manor-house.
In one of its walls 
are three stones, rudely sculptured with animal 
figures.
This mansion was rebuilt by Gustavus 
Thompson, Esq. from whom it passed to the Satter- 
thwaite family.
Bees.] — The ancient village of St. Bees is situat- 
ed in the Ward of Allerdale, three miles and a quar- 
ter west by north from Egremont.
It is understood 
to have derived its name and origin from a religious 
house, which was founded here, about the year 650, 
by St. Bega, an Irish nun of great sanctity.
On the 
death of Bega, a church was erected in honour of her 
virtues ; but both thesa establishments having been 
destroyed by the Danes, William, son of Ranulph 
de Meschines, replaced them by a new foundation of 
Benedictine monks, and made it a cell to the Abbey 
of St. Mary at York : temp.
Henry the First.
The 
manor was granted after the Dissolution to Sir Tho- 
mas Chaloner, by Edward VI.
in the last year of his 
reign.
It next became the property of a family 
* This prelate was born at the neighbouring village of Hel- 
singham, in the year 1519.
He was educated at Cambridge, 
where he obtained a fellowship at Pembroke Hall.
Being 
attached to the principles of the Reformation, Bishop Ridley 
made him his chaplain, and precentor of St. Paul's.
He was 
also appointed chaplain to the Kins;, and prebendary of West- 
minster ; but on the accession of Mary he retired to Germany, 
and settled at Strasburgh.
When 'Elizabeth ascended the 
throne he returned home, and was employed in revising the 
'vol.
1. — NO.
40.
named Wyberg, from whom, under a fore-closed 
mortgage, it passed to an ancestor of the Earl of 
Lonsdale about the year 1663.
It remains in tho 
Lonsdale family.
St. Bees Church, which was erected about the 
time of Henry the First, had the form of a cross, 
and great part oi it is yet standing.
The east end 
is unroofed, and in ruins : tite nave, however, is fitted 
up as the pansh church ; and the cross aisle is used 
as a place ol sepulture.
The ancient chancel has 
narrow lancet windows, ornamented with double 
mouldings, and pilasters, with rich capitals.
At the 
east end, are niches, of a singular form, with pointed 
arches, supported on well proportioned pillars, hav- 
ing capitals adorned with rich carvings.
The whole 
edifice is of red freestone.
A free grammar-school was founded in the village 
of St. Bees by Archbishop Grindal,* under a char- 
ter from Queen Elizabeth, towards the close of the 
sixteenth century.
James the First afterwards in- 
creased \he endowments, which have been since 
augmented by divers benefactors.
Several scholars 
of great eminence have received the rudiments of 
education in this seminary.
It is remarkable, how- 
ever, that, till five or six years ago, the school had 
not undergone any material change since its founda- 
tion.
Occasional repairs were indeed found ahso- 
lntely necessary for the support of the buildings, 
but no improvement seems ever to have been at- 
tempted.
Through the munificence of the Earl of 
Lonsdale, this long respected seminary has been put 
into complete order, and made more suitable to the 
purpose intended by the pious founder than it had 
been at any time since its erection.
Exclusive of 
what has been done at the spacious school-room, 
the Library is rendered more commodious.
The 
master's house (which adjoins the school) has been 
eidarged, some parts of it rebuilt, a good garden 
walled round, and the whole made a very comfort- 
able and eligible residence.
Barnscar.] — About a mile and a half to the east 
of Muncaster House, near Ravenglass, on the oppo- 
site bank of the Esk, are some considerable ruins 
called the City of Barnscar.
No historical docu- 
ments appear to exist relative to this place ; but 
tradition ascribes it to the Danes, who are said to 
have peopled it from the villages of Drig and Becker - 
mont ; in confirmation of which they give the popu- 
lar saying of, " Let us go together like lads of Drig 
and lasses of Bcckermont." Hutchinson,, in de- 
scribing this place, says it.
" is about 300 yards long, 
from east to west, and 100 broad, from north to 
Litany.
In 1559 he was chosen master of Pembroke Hall, and 
the same year preferred to the see of London, from whence in 
1570 he was translated to Yoik, and in 1575 to Canterbury.
Two yeaps afterwards lie was suspended from, his archupiscopal 
functions, tor refusing to obey the Queen's order to suppress 
prophecyings, or the associations of the clergy to expound tha 
Scriptures.
His sequestration was taken oft, though he never 
completely recovered the royal favour.
He died at Croydon,, 
1583.
He contributed to Fox's Acts and Monuments.
1 C south : 
562 
CUMBERLAND.
south : it is walled round, save at the east end, near 
three feet in height.
There appears to have been a 
long- street, with several cross ortes : the remains of 
house-steads, within the walls, are not very numer- 
ous ; but on the outside they are innumerable, espe- 
cially at the south side and west end.
The circum- 
ference of the city and suburbs is nearly three com- 
puted miles ; the figure is an oblong square.
There 
is an ancient road through the city leading from Ul- 
pha to Ravenglass.
About the year 1730, a consi- 
derable quantity of silver coin was discovered in the 
ruins of one of the houses, concealed in a cavity 
formed in a beam." 
Bewcastle.] — Bewcastle, supposed to have been 
a Roman station, and garrisoned by part of the Le- 
gio Secunda Augusta, as a security to the workmen 
who were employed in erecting the famous wall, is 
situated in the midst of a wild and unfrequented 
district, in the Ward of Eskdale, nineteen miles 
north-east from Carlisle.
Some vestiges of ancient 
buildings still remain, and numerous Roman coins 
and inscriptions have been discovered here.
The 
present name of the village is reported to have been 
derived from Bueth, who was Lord of the Manor at 
the time of the Conquest, and who is said to have 
repaired a Roman castle here, and called it after his 
own name.
The castle was of a square form, each 
-front about twenty-nine yards in length : it is now in 
ruins : the south side, of* which there are most re- 
mains, is nearly fourteen yards high.
This structure 
was destroyed by the Parliament's forces in the year 
1641 .
It seems to have been a dark, gloomy fortress.
Gils Bueth, the son of Bueth, mentioned above, 
was treacherously killed by Robert de Vallibus, at a 
meeting which had been appointed for friendly pur- 
poses.
His possessions then fell to the crown, and 
were bestowed by Henry the Second on the last 
Hubert de Vallibus, whose daughter conveyed them 
to the family of the Multons by marriage.
The estates 
afterwards passed through several hands.
Bewcas- 
tle, in the fifth of Charles the First, was granted to 
Sir Robert Graham, in whose family it remains.
— 
Upon one occasion, the captain of Bewcastle is said 
to have made au incursion into Scotland, in which 
he was defeated and forced to fly.
Watt Tinlinn, a 
celebrated retainer of the Buccleuch family, who 
held for his border service a small tower on the 
frontiers of Liddisdale, pursued him.
Watt Tin- 
linn was, by profession, a cobler, but by inclination 
and practice an archer and warrior.
He closely 
followed the fugitive through a dangerous morass : 
the captain, however, gained the firm ground ; and 
seeing Tinlinn dismounted, and floundering in the 
bog, used these words of insult : '*' Sutor Watt, ye 
cannot sew your boots : the heels risp, and the seams 
rive."* — " If I cannot sew," retorted Tinlinn, dis- 
charging a shaft, which nailed the captain's thigh 
to his saddle, — " If I cannot sew, I ran yerk."i 
* Bisp, creek.
— Rive, tear.
Bewcastle Church is a small edifice, standing on 
a rising ground near the castle, a fosse surrounding 
them both.
In the church-yard is a celebrated obe- 
lisk, which has for many years attracted the atten- 
tion of.
the curious.
Its height is fourteen feet, two 
inches : its breadth, on the bottom of the broadest 
side, is one foot ten : on the top was originally a 
cross, which is supposed to have been abolished in 
some ebullition of popular enthusiasm.
Various 
sculptured ornaments appear on its different sides, 
executed with much fancy, together with an illegible 
Roman inscription, and some human figures.
On the wastes of Bewcastle parish, several thou- 
sands of sheep and black cattle are annually fed.
The inhabitants of the parish live chiefly in single 
and scattered houses.
Their religious opinions are 
mostly conformable to the doctrines of the church of 
England ; but about twenty years ago a meeting 
house was built for a small congregation of Presby- 
terians.
In tins parish, a fine is paid of four years ancient 
rent, on change of the Lord of the Manor by death ; 
or of the tenants either by death or alienation : be- 
sides various customary works and carriages ; and 
for a heriot, the best beast of which the teuant may 
die possessed, except the riding-horse kept for the 
lord's service.
Bewcastle parish has two schools, supported by 
subscription, the masters of which have a salary of 
about ten pounds a year, and the privilege of a whit- 
tle-gate.
The custom of whittle -gate was formerly 
much observed in this and the neighbouring coun- 
ties : it consists in the master going to all the abodes 
of his scholars in rotation, and being supplied with 
victuals by their parents or friends.
Blencowe Hall] — This ancient manor-house, 
situated about a mile north-east from the little vd- 
lage of Graystock, has been the seat of the Blen- 
cowe family ever since the reign of Edward the 
Third.
Adam de Blencowe was standard bearer at 
the battles of Cressy and Poictiers, to William, Ba- 
ron of Graystock, who in reward for his good con- 
duct, made kim a grant of his own arms, as Baron 
of Graystock, to be thenceforth borne on a band, 
conjoined with his paternal coat.
There is a free 
grammar- school on the manor of Great Blencowe, 
which was founded by Thomas Burbank, a native of 
the place, who had been a school-master, in the 
reign of Elizabeth.
Bootle.] — Bootle is a small but pleasant market- 
town, situated amongst fertile meadows and culti- 
vated lands, in the ward of Allerdale, live miles and 
a half south by east from Ravenglass.
The market 
is on Wednesday ; and it has fairs on the 5th of 
April, and 24th of September.
Bootle Church, though an ancient structure, con- 
tains nothing remarkable, except an octagonal font, 
of black marble, having on each face two shields, 
f Ycrk, to twitch, as shoe-makers do, in securing the stitches 
of their work.
raised 
CUMBERLAND.
56c 
raised from the plane, and inscribed with a Latin 
sentence, in Old English and Saxon characters.
The 
inscription contains the words of baptism — " In the 
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost." 
There is a small school in this town.
Westward of Bootle, on a common, called Esk- 
Meals, adjoining a small inlet of the sea, are some 
remains of an encampment, where Roman coins and 
altars have frequently been found.
Lord Muncaster 
is said to possess several of the former.
Black-Comb.] — About a mile from Bootle, com- 
mences the ascent of the mountain Black-Comb, 
which has already been briefly noticed.
It stands 
near the 6ea ; and, having the level counties of Lan- 
cashire and Cheshire on its south-east side, it may, 
in a clear day, be plainly distinguished from Talk- 
on-the-Hill, inStaffordshire/nearly 100 miles distant.
Several mountains of North Wales, the Isle of Man, 
and fourteen counties of England and Scotland, can 
be seen from the summit of this mountain ; which in 
one part displays a capacious cavity, denoting to 
have been the crater of a volcano : a small rivulet 
now springs from the centre of the cavity.
The 
fragments on the margin are of vitrified matter, with 
some few crystallizations.
In the country immedi- 
ately surrounding this rock, extending between the 
Sea and Duddon river, are several Druid ical circles, 
and other remains of antiquity.
At Annaside, near 
the sea, is a circular arrangement of twelve stones, 
about twenty yards in diameter.
Near Gutterby, in 
a field belonging to Mr. Pearson, is the monument 
called Kirk stones.
This is more extensive than the 
former, and consists of thirty stones, forming part of 
two circles, one within the other : two sides of the 
interior range are perfect.
At the distance of about 200 yards, is a cairn 
nearly 15 yards in diameter, with large stones sur- 
rounding the base.
The standing stones, about three 
miles further south, consisted of eight massive co- 
lumns, forming a circle of twenty-five yards in dia- 
meter ; but some have been broken and taken away.
In the grounds of the adjacent parish of Milium are 
the remains of another imperfect circle of rude 
stones.
About a mile east from Black-Comb, in the 
level part of a wet meadow, surrounded by moun- 
tains of dreary aspect, is the Druidical temple called 
Sunken-Kirk.
This is a circle of very large stones, 
and has been thus described in Gough's Additions to 
Camden : " At the entrance are four large stones, 
two placed on each side, at the distance of six feet ; 
the largest, on the left hand side, is five feet six 
inches in circumference.
Through this you enter 
into a circular area, twenty-nine yards by thirty.
The entrance is nearly south-east : on the north or 
right hand side, is a huge stone of a corneal form, its 
height near nine feet.
Opposite the entrance is an- 
other large stone, which has once been erect, but is 
now fallen within the area : its length is eight i'ect.
To the left hand, to the south-west, is one in height 
seven feet ; in circumference, eleven feet nine inches.
The altar probably stood in the middle, as there are 
some stones still to be seen, though sunk deep in the 
earth.
The circle is nearly complete, except on the 
western side, where some stones are wanting ; the 
larges stones are about thiriy-one or thirty two in 
number.
The outward part of the circle, upon the 
sloping ground, is surrounded with a buttress, or 
rude pavement of smaller stones, raised about half a 
yard from the surface of the earth.
The situation 
and aspect of the Druidical temple, near Keswick, 
is in every respect similar to this, except the rectan- 
gular recess formed by ten large stones, which is pe- 
culiar to that of Keswick ; but upon the whole, I 
think the preference will be given to this, as the 
stones in general appear much larger, and the circle 
more entire." — About a mile from Sunken-Kirk 
stands another smaller circle of stones, twenty-two 
in number, commanding a view of Duddon Sands* 
The rising ground, on which the stones have been 
placed, appears to have been levelled for the pur- 
pose.
Bowness.] — Bowness, or Bulness, is situated in 
Cumberland ward, thirteen miles and a half west- 
north-west from Carlisle.
It was anciently a Ro- 
man station, but is now only a small village, in which 
the traces of old streets, and pieces of walls, plainly 
appear ; Roman coins and inscriptions have been 
found ; and several years ago a small brazen figure 
was dug up, which was thought to represent either 
a Mercury or Victory.
This small village was an- 
ciently the principal town of a large manor, contain- 
ing several hamlets, and the mother church is still 
here.
It has been observed, that the wall of Seve- 
rus, commonly called the Picts' wall, begins at this 
place, and its foundations plainly appear in the sea 
at low water ; for a large portion of the shore seems 
to have been washed away ; the roots of trees being 
visible when the tide is out.
Foot passengers and carriages pass over Solway 
Frith, at low water, with perfect facility, it being 
fordable here at that time ; but when the tide is 
flowing, the expanse of sea is great, and is navigated 
by vessels of considerable burthen.
We find men- 
tion, in Camden, of a tradition that was current in 
this part of Cumberland, respecting a battle in the 
Frith, in which the contending parties, — the Scots 
and English — are said to have first engaged their 
fleets, and on the ebbing of the tide, renewed the 
conflict with their cavalry.
Bramfton.] — Brampton is a market-town, situ- 
ated in Eskdale ward, ten miles north-cast by east 
from Carlisle.
This town, which Camden suppose* 
to have been the Roman Brcmeturaeum, lies in a 
d.eep narrow vale, round which the country swells 
into considerable eminences.
It appears to have 
been formerly of much greater consequence than at 
present.
It consists chiefly of one spacious sheet, 
irregularly built ; but, within these few years, some 
modern houses, and a good inn, have been erected, 
and the town seems altogether in a state of improve- 
ment.
There is no manufacture of extent in Bramp- 
ton, but a railed waggon-way, which the Earl of 
6 Carlisle 
564 
CUMBERLAND.
Carlisle has made from his collieries at Tindale-fell, 
has greatly augmented its trade.
The market, 
holden on Tuesdays, is large ; and there are fairs on 
the second Wednesday after Whitsunday, and the 
last Wednesday in August.
Here also are holden 
annually Courts Leet, &c.
for the whole Barony of 
Gilsland, viz.
for the several manors of Brampton, 
Irthington, Leverston, Newby, Askerton, Walton- 
wood, Tredermaine, Hayton, Cnmwhitton, Car- 
latton, Castle Carrock, Cumrew, Farlam, Denton, 
Nether Denton, and Talkin.
There is a chapel in the town, which was conse- 
crated in the year 1789, having been built with the 
materials of the church, which stood about a mile 
distant, on a bold eminence near the banks of the 
river lrthing.
The chancel yet remains, and the 
burial service is generally read there, most of the 
inhabitants preferring to be interred in the ground 
that had emtombed their ancestors.
At the east extremity of the town is a large coni- 
cal mount, called the Moat, or Castlehill ; its height 
is about 360 feet perpendicular, and its acclivity 
very steep.
There are a trench and* rampart near 
the summit, which completely surround the hill, the 
crown of which now forms a plain, about forty paces 
in diameter, and defended by a breast-work.
From 
this spot a very extensive view of the surrounding 
country presents itself : on the southern side, how- 
ever, the view is confined to about six miles, by lofty 
eminences : towards the west the eye commands all 
the levels, from Carlisle to Solway Frith ; the bar- 
ren tract surrounding Bewcastle, and the remote 
mountains of Scotland, meet the view, and the east- 
ern prospect extends to the Cheviot Hills, and lofty 
mountains in the vicinity of the Northumbrian river, 
Reed.
On the face of a rock, overhanging the river Gelt, 
about two miles from Brampton, is a celebrated Ro- 
man inscription, noticed by Camden, and almost 
every antiquary since his time.
The rock on which 
it is cut is of an angular form : from its exposed 
situation, the letters have been partially obliterated 
by the weather, but still less so than could have been 
expected, as it may be ascertained, by the inscrip- 
tion itself, that it has endured the storms of more 
than fifteen centures.
It seems to have been writ- 
ten by a lieutenant of the second legion Augusta, 
under Agricola the Propraetor.
A little higher up, 
on the banks of the river, at a place called Ilelbeck, 
was fought a bloody battle between the forces of 
Queen Elizabeth, and those of Leonard Dacres, her 
rebellious subject, wherein the royal army gained 
the victory.
Brayton-Hall.] — Brayton-Hall, the principal 
seat of the Lawson family, is near the village of As- 
patria, about six miles from Wigton.
The house, 
* Thomas Tickell, a poetical and miscellaneous writer, was 
born in lf>S6, and educated at Queen's College, Oxford, lie 
translated tlie first book of the Iliad, which Addison preferred 
to that of Pope.
He also wrote some papers in the Spectator, 
which is an elegant and commodious dwelling, has 
been much improved of late years, and the apart- 
ments are enriched with several good paintings.
The ancient seat of the Lawsons, which is Isel- 
Hall, stands in a low but pleasant vale, near the 
banks of the river Derwent.
The surrounding emi- 
nences are clothed with wood, and many of the views 
along the borders of the river possess considerable 
beauty.
In the house, amongst other family por- 
traits, is one of Sir Wilfrid Lawson, a person of 
much note in the civil wars of Charles.
Biudekirk.] — This is an irregularly constructed 
village, situated in the ward of Allerdale, two miles 
north-north-west from Cockermouth.
Bridekirk, 
as a contemporary writer observes, has become 
celebrated among antiquaries, from the curious and 
ancient font contained in its humble church.
The 
height of this singular relic is two feet and an inch : 
it is of a square form, having its sides ornamented 
by different sculptures.
The front, or south side, 
according to its relative position, is divided into 
compartments by horizontal fillets, on the lowermost 
of which is an inscription, in Runic and Saxon cha- 
ractors, thus decyphered by Bishop Nicholson : — 
"Er Erkard ban men egrocten, & to dis men red wer 
Tanar men brogten." 
That is, continues the learned prelate, ' Here 
Erkard was converted ; and to this man's example 
were the Danes brought.' Who Erkard really was 
is uncertain ; but the bishop, with much probability, 
supposes him to have been a Danish officer.
On the 
east side, in the upper division, is a monster with 
two heads, one bent down over its body to the 
ground ; the other erect, with a triple flower on one 
stem proceeding from its mouth : the compartment 
beneath represents St. John the Baptist immersing 
in a font the Saviour, rounl whose head is a nim- 
bus, or 2florv ; and above, the defaced resemblance 
lory 
of a dove.
On the north front is a rude figure of a 
Centaur, defending itself from the attacks of a bird, 
and some animal : beneath is the expulsion of our 
first parents from Paradise ; Adam seems appealing 
to the clemency of the ministering angel, while 
Eve is clinging to the tree of Life.
The west side 
displays the cross with ornamental leafage : below 
it is a kind of shield, supported by two birds, proba- 
bly ravens.
Tickell, the friend and companion of 
Addison, was a native of this village.* 
Broadfield Common.] — On this common, great 
part of which is waste and uncultivated, are numer- 
ous vestiges of antiquity, apparently connected with 
the sepulchral customs of the Aboriginal Britons.
There are also some other ancient remains, which 
cannot, with certainty, be referred to any particular 
people, but are generally supposed to be of Roman 
and became private secretary to Addison, when he was Secre- 
tary of State.
He wrote a beautiful poem on the death of that 
great man, and published a collection of his works.
He died 
in 1740.
origin.
CUMBERLAND.
origin.
On a portion of ttie common, which was 
enclosed about a century ago, adjoining the High- 
head Castle Estate, stands a round barrow, called 
Souden, or Solden-hill, about 14 yards in diameter, 
having a circle of granite-stones on the top.
This barrow, which was opened in the year 1780, 
was found to contain several stone chests, about 
three feet in length, and two feet broad, in which 
were a great variety of human bones, skulls, jaws, &c.
in complete preservation.
These remains, however, 
were not the only indications of sepulture, here dis- 
covered.
In the ninth volume of the Arehaeologia, 
is the following account of the opening of a barrow 
in this vicinity, communicated to the Society of An- 
tiquaries, by Hayman Rooke, Esq.
" Towards the middle of a field, near High-head 
Castle, at the south-west end of Broadfield, the 
aarth has been thrown up in a circular form, with a 
sloping bank of twelve feet.
The diameter of the 
top, which has a flat and level surface, is sixty-three 
feet.
Here there appeared to have been a circle of 
great stones ; the holes from whence they have been 
taken are very distinguishable ; and several people 
in the neighbourhood assured me that many large 
stones have, from time to time, been blasted, and 
carried away from this place.
Towards the centre, 
and a little out of the circular line, were six large 
stones, placed two and two : one of these was four 
feet in height, and five broad ; two others were three 
feet high, and respectively four feet, and four feet 
and a half, in breadth.
They evidently appeared to 
have been much higher ; and the present tenant told 
me, that he remembered having seen large pieces 
broken from the tops.
" Being of opinion that this celebrated circle had 
been a Druid temple, I could not help thinking that 
those stones, placed two and two, were put there for 
some mysterious purpose ; either as rock idols, or 
sepulchral monuments of the Druids.
— With this 
idea, I ordered two men to clear away the ground 
under two of the contiguous stones.
Here 1 per- 
eeived that great pains had been taken to fix these 
firm in the ground, by placing large stones close 
round their bases, to the depth of three feet and 
a half.
This I think, favours the supposition of 
(heir having been a considerable height above the 
ground, which would naturally require their being 
firmly secured in the earth ; the smallest of them 
at present cannot be less than five or six tons 
weight.
" In removing the earth and stones, I observed, 
that, as the workmen advanced towards the centre 
of the circle, the soil varied to a lighter kind of 
earth, and was free from stones.
At length I dis- 
covered a small stone ehest, the stones of which had 
been shaped and dressed, and fitted close at the 
sides without cement.
This was filled with a light 
sandy earth ; and at the bottom were pieces of a 
skull, and small bits of bones, which mouldered 
away on being touched; under the skull was 
found a lump almost as big as a man's fist, of con- 
voi.
i. — no.
41.
creted metallic particles resembling gold ; but whe- 
ther it is a composition of art, or nature, seems to 
me doubtful.
The stone of which this chest was 
made is a kind of free-stone, common in that part of 
Cumberland.
" In digging under a second couple of these 
stones, they appear to have been as firmly fixed in 
the ground as those above-mentioned.
At about six 
feet from these, towards the centre, I discovered an- 
other chest, a little bigger than the former, the ends 
equally diverging.
In the bottom was part of a 
skull, with the upper jaw, the teeth remarkably even : 
they were much decayed, and mouldered away on 
being pressed ; near the head was found a piece of 
a skull, and under the head a metallic lump of the 
same composition as the above-mentioned, but larger.
This chest was covered with a flat stone, and two 
larger cobble stones were placed on the top, for the 
purpose, I should suppose, of keeping it close down.
The sides of this chest were a dark coloured kind of 
slate, shaped and dressed.
It is remarkable that 
some of this sort is to be found near Grisdale Fell, 
between 18 and 19 miles distant.
" Proceeding in a like manner, from the other two 
contiguous stones, I found a third chest, filled with 
light earth, the sides of which were of the common 
free-stone and dressed : pieces of a skull, a few teeth, 
and some bones, which were very brittle, lay at the 
bottom : there were likewise some small bits of the 
above-mentioned composition.
— This chest was also 
covered with a flat stone, and two large cobble stones 
were upon it.
" The placing of these small chests, under ground, 
and in the middle of a Druid temple, is very singu- 
lar.
It is evident, that the bodies could not be in- 
terred within so small a space, and therefore probable 
that they were first burnt and the bones afterwards 
deposited in the chests.
As neither arms, nor any 
kind of ornaments were found in these little chests, 
I think it is not improbable, but that they were the 
sepulchres of the principal Druids of that district, 
who alone would be indulged in having their bones 
deposited within the sacred circle.
Amulets, as 
preservatives against diseases, witchcraft, and other 
unforeseen accidents, were highly esteemed by the 
ancient Britons ; and after death were deposited in 
their sepulchres, or placed upon their ashes in the 
urns, as guardians of the manes : one thus placed 
I found in a barrow, among the druidical remains, 
at Stanton Moor : hence 1 think we may venture 
to conclude, that the above-described lumps of 
metallic particles were deposited in the chests as 
amulets." 
Mr. Rooke mentions the following curious par- 
ticulars of a Rocking-stone, in the vicinity of the 
circle, in the same paper.
" At about 165 
yards south from the Druid Temple, is a large 
stone, 23 feet, nine inches in circumference, and sup- 
posed to be nearly ten tons weight.
On examining 
the bottom, I perceived it had been sloped to a point, 
from which I imagined it had formerly been a rock- 
7 d ing- 
506 
CUMBERLAND.
nor was I deceived in my conjecture, 
tor, on clearing away only part of the stones and 
rubbish from under it, one man set it in motion with 
the iron crow he was working with, and it easily 
moved on its centre.
This appeared more extraor- 
dinary, as I had been informed by the tenant, that 
he had, not many years ago, blasted off a great 
piece from the top, which it was natural to suppose 
might have destroyed the equilibrium.
It is proba- 
ble that there has been an avenue of erect stones 
leading to this sacred rock ; parts of four now re- 
main on its different sides ; and 1 was told that 
others have been taken up for the conveniency of 
ploughing." 
" Upwards of a mile north of these remains, but 
still within the limits of Broadfield Common, are 
three ancient works about half a mile distant from 
each other forming a triangle.
These are denomi- 
nated Castlesteeds, Whitestones, and Stoneraise.
The former is the largest, commanding an extensive 
view towards the west, and consists of a double ditch 
and vallum to each.
Its form is an oblong, 188 
yards by 160.
The inward ditch and vallum are 
on the west side, nearly fifty yards from the outer- 
most ; but on the east more than thirty-five yards.
In the centre part are several foundations of walls, 
formed of rude stones, without cement.
The en- 
trance begins at some distance from the outward 
vallum, and continues to the centre of the camp hav- 
ing on each side a small bank of earth.
Whitestones 
had only a single ditch and vallum, but part of the 
south side has been destroyed.
Stone-raise is a 
square plot of ground on the top of a hill, and has 
been enclosed with a small rampart of earth.
Two 
of the sides remain perfect, the length of each is 
sixty-seven yards : within this is a small inclosure, 
thirty-four yards by twenty -two, composed of loose 
stones without mortar, from which several hundred 
loads have been taken for the repairs of walls, and 
other structure*-!
Mr. Rooke examined this place 
"with great attention, and conceives the whole euclo- 
sure to have been set apart for the purpose of se- 
pulture.
" The bank of loose stones," says In; — 
" are the remains of four cairns ; their circular 
shapes are visible, but almost destroyed by the la- 
bourers, having scattered about the small stones, in 
search of the larger ones.
Near to these are two 
more defaced cairns ; and several more, three of 
them very distinct, appear in other places.
In one 
part is a circular hole, which had no appearance of 
having been a cairn ; nor was there any thing dis- 
tinguishable, except part of a flat stone, that appear- 
ed above the surface.
Being willing to examine the 
shape of this stone, I employed three men to clear 
away the earth, when I found that its length on the 
top was five feet ten inches, its width two feet four : 
near its narrow end was another stone standing erect, 
near which lay part of a hand mill.
The great stone 
was placed on a pavement, and required the efforts 
of three men to turn it over : when removed, a thin 
coat of baked earth entirely covered the space on 
which it lay : on this was found a tooth, small bits 
of burnt stones, and ashes.
The floor was laid on a 
body of clay three inches thick.
The ground beneath 
it was examined to the depth of a foot and a half, 
but not any thing appeared but indications of the 
natural rock." 
Burdoswald.] — Burdoswald, the Amboglana of 
the Romans, is situated in the parish of Llanercost, 
in Eskdale ward.
It was a very large and remark- 
able fort, in the vicinity of which more inscriptions 
have been found, than at any other Roman station.
It is the first station of any consequence on the wall 
in Cumberland ; and, in the space between that and 
the station Magna, a distance of nearly three miles, 
three castella are visible, at equal distances of six 
furlongs and a half.
The site of Burdoswald is lofty 
and commanding : the plain on which it stands termi- 
nates with a very steep descent, towards the river 
1 1 thing, which flows near the south side of the walls, 
for several miles in length.
This castrum forms a 
parallelogram of nearly 120 yards north and south, 
by 80 yards east and west ; its area including about 
two acres.
All its sides have been fortified with 
walls, of which Severus's forms the northern one ; 
the others were simple layers of stone, uncemented 
with mortar.
The foundations of gateways, and the 
ruins of buildings, are still visible all over the sta- 
tion, as well as the site of the Praetorium, though 
almost covered with a modern building.
By the 
Roman inscriptions discovered in the neighbourhood, 
it appears to have been garrisoned by the Cohors 
prima iElia Dacorum.
From Burdoswald, the wall 
of Severus may be traced upwards of a mile ; and in 
some places two, three, and four ranges of the facing 
stones may be observed.
Adrian's wall may also be 
seen at a little distance ; and advancing still west- 
ward, all the works are discovered very distinctly.
Near Wallbours, the military way which accompa- 
nied the wall is extremely perfect, and the wall itself 
of a considerable height.
Burgh.]— Burgh, or Burgh upon the Sands, is 
situated in Cumberland ward, six miles west by 
north from Carlisle.
" Burgh yn the Sand," says Leland, " is a village 
by the which remain the ruins of a great place, now 
clene desolated, wher King Edward the First died." 
All the vestiges of ruin which remain at present are 
those of a square column, having a cross at the top, 
which was erected by Henry, Duke of Norfolk, in 
the year 1685, about a mile from the village.
Its 
height was twenty-eight feet six inches ; and, on the 
south side, was a brief Latin inscription to the me- 
mory of King Edward.
This village derives its name of Burgh-on-the^ 
Sands, from its situation near the low meadows bor- 
dering on Burgh Marsh.
There appears to have 
been a Roman station near the church, said to be the 
Axelodunum of the Notitia, and the 16th station ad 
lineam Valli, where Horsely imagines the Cohors 
prima Hispaniorum lay in garrison, after its removal 
Severus's wall seems to have 
formed 
from Ellenborough 
CUMBERLAND, 
6(J7 
formed the northern rampart of this station, as seve- 
ral Roman antiquities have been dug 1 up here.
The village, -which contains a linen manufactory, 
and another of tobacco, is about three quarters of a 
mile in extent from east to west, and is tolerably 
populous.
Subsequently to the Conquest, the barony of 
Burgh was bestowed by Ranulph de Meschines on 
his brother-in-law, Robert de Estrivers, whose 
daughter married Ranulph Engaine.
From his fa- 
mily it passed to Sir Hugh de Morville, who be- 
stowed the rectory on the Abbey of Holm-Cultram, 
as a penitential atonement for the murder of Arch- 
bishop Becket.
It afterwards became the property 
of the Multons, and from them was transferred to 
the Lords Dacre of Gilsland, whose coheiresses con- 
veyed it by marriage to the Howard family.
Henry 
Howard, Duke of Norfolk, disposed of it, in 1685, to 
Sir John Lowther, whose descendant, the present 
Earl of Lonsdale, is now the owner.
Buttermere.] — The Lake of Buttermere has been 
already described : the village is in Allerdale ward, 
eight miles and a half south-west by west from Kes- 
wick.
In many a reader, the name of Buttermere 
will elicit recollections, which cannot fail to excite 
the tenderest sentiments of pity and commiseration.
Mary of Buttermere, or, as she was more frequently 
denominated, the Beauty of Buttermere, was the 
daughter of the landlord of its rustic inn.
She is 
said to have been as amiable in her character and 
manners, as she was lovely and fascinating in her 
person.
Admired by all, she was singled out, and 
devoted to destruction, by a notorious swindler and 
impostor, who shortly afterwards expiated his crimes 
at the gallows.
Mary, whose virtue seems to have 
been proof against every common art of the seducer, 
was deluded by a fatal marriage, and her prospects 
of happiness blasted for ever.
Caldbeck.] — Caldbeck is in the ward of Aller- 
dale, eight miles south east from Wigton.
Long 
after the Conquest, this parish was either forest, or 
waste land, the high road to the western coasts pass- 
ing through it from Westmoreland and the eastern 
part of the county.
Villainy was favoured by the 
recesses of the forest, and the unfortunate traveller 
was frequently way laid, maltreated, and plundered.
Ranulph, chief forester of Inglewood, although un- 
able to prevent these depredations, wished to relieve 
the persons who might suffer by them ; and ac- 
cordingly obtained a license, to build an hospital for 
the relief of the ill-fated travellers, who might either 
* George Fox, the founder of the Quakers, was born at 
Drayton in Leicestershire, 1624.
He was at first placed with 
a shepherd, and afterwards bound apprentice to a shoe-maker.
In 1643 he became a religious itinerant, and about 1647 com- 
menced public preacher, inveighing, not only against the pre- 
vailing vices, but the stated ministers and religious services, 
affirming that the light within, or Christ in the heart, is alone 
the means of salvation, and the true qualification for the minis- 
try.
He suffered frequent imprisonment and other rough 
treatment, which he seems in general to have brought upon 
be ill used by the banditti, or detained by bad wea- 
ther, on the road.
Thus originated Caldbeck : the 
hospital was first built, and soon after, anno 1112, 
as appears from a date connected with a half effaced 
inscription above the window at the east end of the 
sacred pile, the church was erected ; some portion 
of the present structure seems, however, more mo- 
dern.
These buildings being completed, the place 
became peopled : the part nearest the church, situ- 
ated on elevated ground, was called Caldbeck-upper- 
Town ; and that contiguous to the mountains re- 
ceived the appellation of Caldbeck-under-Fell, to 
which ancient divisions, another, termed the East- 
End, has been since superadded.
" Two-thirds of 
the parish of Caldbeck," observes the author of the 
History of Cumberland, "is supposed to consist of 
mountains and moors ; these being estimated at not 
less than 13,000 acres.
Even the bleakest and most 
bare of these wastes, however, is not wholly useless ; 
they afford a good summer pasture to between seven 
and eight thousand sheep, whose yearly produce of 
lambs is estimated at upwards of two thousand.
In 
several of the estates, the flock of sheep is consider- 
ed as a sort of heir loom, being sold and bought 
along with the land ; aud also leased out with it, 
when the land is let ; the tenant being bound to de- 
liver, on the termination of his lease, as many sheep 
as he receives, and of the same kind, age, and 
quality." 
The population of Caldbeck appears to be consi- 
derably on the increase : the present number of houses 
is upwaids of 300, that of the inhabitants upwards 
of 1400.
There is a free-school in the parish; and 
the Quakers, who have been settled at Caldbeck a - 
most as early as in any part of the kingdom, have 
three meeting-houses.
George Fox, their founder, 
resided here, at Woodhall, when actively employed 
in the establishment of the sect.* 
Caldbeck manor formerly belonged to the Lords 
of Allerdale, who continued to enjoy it through the 
descents of the Lucys, till an heiress of that family 
conveyed it, by marriage, to the Percys.
By Henry 
Percy, sixth Earl of Northumberland, it was trans- 
ferred to Henry the Eighth, who soon afterwards 
sold Caldbeck- Upperton to Thomas Dalston, Esq.
and Caldbeck- under-fell to Thomas, Lord Wharton, 
created a baron for the victory which he obtained 
over the Scots at Solway-moss.
The influence pos- 
sessed by this nobleman as Warden of the West 
Marches, induced Mr. Dalston to dispose of his por- 
tion of Caldbeck to his lordship, in whose family the 
himself, by his indiscretions in opposing the clergy, and vilifying 
them in their public ministry.
The name of " Quakers" was 
given to him and his followers first at Derby, on account of the 
strange contortions and trembling which accompanied their 
preaching.
In 1669 he married the widow of a Welch Judge, 
but still continued his course of itinerant preaching, and visit- 
ed Holland, Germany, and America.
Fox died in London in 
1690.
His Journal was printed at London in 1694, his Epistles 
in 1698, and his Tracts in 1706 ; all in folio.
8 
whole 
5G8 
CUMBERLAND.
whole remained till the time of the profligate Duke 
Philip, who was obliged to alienate this and his other 
estates for the payment of his dehts.
Charles, Duke 
or Somerset, became the purchaser ; and, in his re- 
presentatives, the Earls of Egremont, it still re- 
mains.
It has been remarked, by a modern writer, that, 
" IB the bed of the river Caldew, somewhat more 
than a quarter of a mile west of Caldbeck, is a sin- 
gular natural curiosity, called the " Howk," a word 
seldom used as a substantive, but frequently as a 
verb ; it being the common northern term for scoop- 
ing out, or making a hole.
This is a waterfall in a 
narrow glen, in which the stream rushes through the 
narrow arches of a bridge of limestone rock, with 
vast impetuosity, and dashing over irregular masses 
of other rocks, empties itself into a large bason, 
where it boils up in foaming eddies.
A few feet 
from this bason is a curious excavation, called the 
" Fairy Kettle," about six yards in diameter, and 
scooped out in nearly the shape of a huge cauldron, 
with an inside as smooth as if polished by a statuary.
Several smaller excavations are near it.
Not far 
distant is a cascade formed between two perperdicu- 
lar rocks, about eighteen or twenty yards in height ; 
and a little to the right of this, is a cavern called the 
" Fairy Kirk," where the roaring of the cataract, 
heard without being visible, has a pleasing effect." 
C alder.] — Calder, or Calder-in-Copeland, is si- 
tuated in the parish of St. Bridget, in Allerdale 
ward, five miles south-east by south from Egremont.
In the manor of Calder, on the northern banks of 
the river, stand the romantic ruins of Calder Abbey.
Theineituation is eminently beautiful : the sides of the 
vale are covered with hanging woods, and its area 
spread into level meads, watered by the river.
The 
square tower of the church constitutes the chief re- 
mains.
It is supported by pointed arches, sustained 
on four finely clustered columns, of admirable work- 
manship, having capitals ornamented with a roll, 
from whence spring the arches.
The church was 
small, the chancel being twenty-five feet wide, and 
the width of the transept did not exceed twenty-two 
feet.
The roof was supported on semicircular 
arches, with clustered pillars, and a facia, yet visi- 
ble above the remaining arches.
The capitals of the 
columns are variously ornamented in the Saxon 
style.
Fragments of various sepulchral figures are 
against the walls, which appear, from the remains of 
sculpture and devices on shields, to have belonged 
to the tombs of eminent persons.
Calder Abbey was a foundation for Cistercian 
monks, begun by Ranulph de Meschines, second 
Earl of Chester and Cumberland, in the year 1134, 
but not completed till the time of Thomas de Mul- 
ton, who increased the lands and augmented the 
number of monks.
According to Speed tiie revenue i 
amouuted at the Dissolution, to 61/.
3v.
Qd. In the 
13th of Henry VIII.
the abbey lands were granted 
by letters patent, to Thomas Leigh, LL.
D. and his 
heirs, to hold in capitc.
Sir Ferdinand Leigh, 
grandson to the doctor, disposed of the abbey to Sir 
Richard Fletcher, who gave it as a marriage portion 
with his daughter, to John Patrickson, Esq. of 
whose son it was bought by Mr. John Tiffin, of 
Cockermouth, and by him given to his grandson, 
John Senhouse, Esq.
The remains of the abbey adjoin the church, and 
some broken arches, and other vestiges of the clois- 
ters, are yet visible.
Near these ruins stands the 
elegant mansion of the Senhouse family.
Carlton.] — There are two villages of this name 
in Cumberland ; one, two miles and a half south- 
east from Carlisle, and within the liberties of that 
city ; the other, in Allerdale ward, two miles and a 
half north-north-west from Ravenglass.
At the 
latter, Carlton Hall, with its demesnes, was the 
original inheritance of the Carlton family, who set- 
tled here soon after the Conquest.
It remained in 
this family and contiuued to be their chief abode, 
until 1707, when issue male failing, it was bought by 
John Pattinson Esq. The only son of this gentle- 
man died unmarried, and the estates consequently 
devolved to his three sisters.
Carlton Hall became, 
on a partition, the property of the eldest, who mar- 
ried Thomas Simpson, Esq. by whom she had a son 
and a daughter.
The latter espoused the late James 
Wallace, Esq. his Majesty's attorney-general, and 
on the death of her brother, the estate came into her 
possession.
The house is a plain modern structure, 
situate upon a knoll, in a fertile and agreeable vale, 
surrounded with hills covered with wood, and inter- 
sected by the streams of the Eamont and the Low- 
ther.
A lawn, bounded by eminences, expands it- 
self in the front : the elevations on the eastern and 
western sides gradually increase in height, and are 
decorated with hanging woods.
Walks, in different 
directions, have been formed through these, which 
afford prospects of various beauty and character, 
over the adjacent country.
The valley of Eamont, 
opening to a great distance, on the west, presents to 
view the meandering course of the river, the woods 
of Lowther, and the rugged and lofty barriers of 
Ullswater.
The romantic ruins of Brougham Cas- 
tle, the Park of Whintield, and a great extent of 
country, are seen on the range of mountains which 
end in Cross-fell : a plantation of aged trees, and a 
wood-covered hill, continue the northern prospect.
The present improved disposition of the grounds was 
made under the direction of Mrs. Wallace, whose 
alterations conform, as nearly as possible, to the na- 
tive character of the spot.
Carlisle.] — The city of Carlisle, the Luguval- 
lium of the Romans, is pleasantly situated in what 
was formerly a forest, near the confluence of the 
rivers Caldew and Eden, at the distance of 304* 
miles north-north-west from London.
Its origin, 
and the etymology of its name, seem equally involved 
in obscurity.
Its foundation is, by some, attributed to Luel, a 
British potentate ; and the time of its erection is 
supposed to have been prior to the Roman invasion : 
by 
CUMBERLAND.
069 
by others, however, it is thought to be of the same 
antiquity as Severus's Wall, and to have first ap- 
peared as a fortress on that celebrated rampart.
That it was a place of consequence in the time of 
the Romans, observes Camden, " appears plainly 
from the various evidences oi antiquity occasionally 
dug up, and from the frequent mention of it in the 
writers of those days : and even after the ravages of 
the Picts and Scots, it retained something of its an- 
cient splendour, and was accounted a city." In the 
Itinerary of Antoninus, it is called Lugu-vallio ; a 
name which Dr. Burn supposes to have been formed 
from the British Liu gyda gwal, signifying the Army 
by the Wall.
This appellation was, by the Saxons, 
contracted into Lu-ell, and Lu-all ; to which the 
British Caer, a city, being afterwards prefixed, it 
became Caer-luell ; a term which, by an easy tran- 
sition, has, in more modern times, been changed into 
Carlisle ; though the peasantry of Cumberland still 
pronounce it according to the former mode of spell- 
ing.
Its ancient celebrity has been noticed in some 
old Latin lines, of which the following is a transla- 
tion : — 
Of yore the Roman army's safe retreat, 
Bound of their conquests and their chieftain's toils, 
She views the extensive country from her height, 
Alarms, defends, and seizes on the spoils.
Her active sons inured to martial feat, 
And skill'd to hurl the javelin at the foe, 
She once the Scottish happy monarch's seat, 
Now to her former sov'reigns back must go.
In vain the Roman boasts that erst he found 
Earth's limit here.
See other worlds arise, 
To mock his distant view.
Ambition's bound 
By Scottish valour fixt unalter'd lies.
When the Romans quitted the island, Carlisle 
was entirely abandoned to the northern invaders, 
and by them completely ruined and laid waste.
In 
this state of desolation it remained till the reign of 
Egfrid, King of Northumberland, who ordered it to 
be rebuilt, and encompassed with a wall.
He after- 
wards bestowed it on the celebrated St. Cuthbert, 
who visited his new acquisition in the year 686, and, 
according to Bede, " was carried by the towns - 
* St. Cuthbert, observes Walter Scott, in his Notes to Mar- 
mion, was in the choice of his sepulchre, one of the most muta- 
ble and unreasonable saints in the Calendar.
He ded A.
D. 
680, in a hermitage upon the Fame Islands, having resigned 
the Bishipric of Lmdislarne, or Holy Island, about two years 
before.
His body was brought to Lindisfarne, where it re- 
mained until a descent of the Danes about 763, when the mo- 
nastery was nearly destroyed.
The monks fled to Scotland, 
with what they deemed their chief treasure, the relics of St.
Cuthbert.
The saint was however a most capricious fellow- 
traveller ; which was the more intolerable, as, like Sinbad's 
Old Man of the Sea, he journeyed upon the shoulders of his 
companions.
They paraded him through Scotland for several 
years, and catne as far west as Wiiithern, in Galloway, whence 
they attempted to sail for Ireland, but were driven back by 
tempests.
He at length made a halt at Norham ; from thence 
he went to Melrose, where he remained stationary for a short 
time, and then caused himself to be launched upon the "Tweed 
in a stone coffin, which landed him at Tillmoutl), in Northum- 
V0L.
I. — NO.
41.
people to see their walls, and a fountain, or wall, of 
admirable workmanship, constructed therein by the 
Romans." St. Cuthbert* was Bishop of Lindis- 
farne ; and by Egfrid's grant, Carlisle became an 
appendage to that see, and so continued till the year 
1 133, when it was constituted a separate bishopric, 
by Henry the First.
In the eighth and ninth centuries, during the in- 
cursions of the Dauo3, Cumberland was exposed to 
frequent ravages, and this city sustained its toll share 
of calamity, for it was entirely consumed by fire ; 
its inhabitants were massacred ; and its walls were 
overthrown.
" Its very foundations," remarks Dr.
Todd, " were so buried in the earth, that it is said, 
large oaks grew upon them : and this is not only 
attested by our historians, but also evinced by some 
discoveries that have been lately made by large un- 
hewn oak trees buried ten or twelve feet below 
ground." In this desolate state the city remained 
nearly 200 years, when Walter, a priest, and fol- 
lower of William the Couqueror, repaired a few of 
the ruined habitations, and attempted to re- establish 
a religious institution, which had either been founded 
by St. Cuthbert, or about his time : on this occasion 
the Conqueror issued a mandate, that the inhabitants 
of Cumberland, but particularly those of Carlisle, 
should be subject to the episcopal jurisdiction of 
Durham ; from the predecessors of whose diocesan 
they had received our holy religion.
At the time William Rufus returned from his in- 
tended attack on Malcolm, King of Scotland, about 
the year 1094, he made a visit to this city, and per- 
ceiving its importance, as a frontier station, gave 
orders that it should be completely restored.
He 
entrusted the execution of his plan to Walter, the 
priest, under whose direction several public edifices 
were built, a strong fortress erected, and the whole 
defended by a wall of circuinvallation.
These build- 
ings are believed to have been raised by Flemish 
artificers, a colony of whom was settled here by 
Rufus, but afterwards removed to North Wales, and 
the Isle of Anglesey.
Their place w as occupied by 
a body of South Britons, who were directed to cul- 
tivate the neighbouring lauds, and to teach the na- 
berland.
This boat is finely shaped, ten feet long, three feet 
and a half in diameter, and only four inches thick ; so that with 
very little assistance it might certainly have swum.
It still lies, 
or at least did so a few years ago, in two pieces, beside the 
ruined chapel of Tillmouth.
From Tilmouth, Cuthbert wan- 
dered into Yorkshire ; and at h-ngth made a long stay at Ches^ 
ter le Street, to which the Bishop's see was transferred.
At 
length the Danes continuing to infest the country, the monks 
removed to Rippon for a season ; and it was in return from 
thence to Chester le Street, that passing through a forest called 
Dunholme, the saint and his carriage became immoveahje at a 
place called Wardlaw, or Wardilaw.
Here the saint chost his 
place of residence ; and all who have seen Durham must admit, 
that if difficult in his choice, he evinced taste in at length fixing 
it.
It is said that the Northumbrian Catholics still keep secret 
the precise spot of the saint's sepulture, which is only entrus ed 
to three persons at a time.
When one dies, the s.uivivois asso- 
ciate to them, in his room, a person judged fit to be the depo- 
sitory of so valuable a secret.
7 e tives 
570 
CUMBERLAND.
tives the art of rendering the fertility of the soil con- 
ducive to their subsistence.
Carlisle may, from this period, be regarded as a 
military station as well as a city ; and for several 
centuries its vicinity to Scotland occasioned it to 
experience many vicissitudes.
Having been ceded 
by Stephen to the Scotch King, David, about the 
year 1136, it was made a place of retreat by the 
latter, after his defeat in the dreadful battle of the 
Standard, in 1338 ; and here also he received the 
Pope's legate, Alberic, by whose influence all the 
female captives that were brought into Carlisle were 
set at liberty.
He also obtained from the Scotch 
leaders a solemn promise, that in future incursions, 
they would spare the church, and with-hold their 
swords from the aged, from Avomen, and infants : an 
injunction which humanity dictated, but which the 
savage customs of the contending nations had not 
before allowed to operate.
In the year 1173, William, the successor of Mal- 
colm to the throne of Scotland, made a fruitless at- 
tack on Carlisle, which was then in the possession of 
the English.
The next year he returned, and com- 
menced a regular siege with an array of 80,000 
men.
The garrison, under the command of Robert 
de Vaux, was reduced to great distress, and would 
probably have surrendered, had the operations con- 
tinued ; but William, having been made prisoner at 
Alnwick, and the Scots' affairs rendered desperate 
by other disastrous events, the war terminated.
— 
During the reign of Henry the Second, Carlisle was 
invested with some valuable privileges ; but the 
royal grant, with the other records, and great part 
of the city, were soon afterwards destroyed by fire.
In the reign of King John, Carlisle, with the ex- 
ception of its castle, was taken by Alexander, King 
of Scotland, but soon afterwards repossessed by the 
English.
In the year 1298 it was again attacked 
by the Scots, who burnt the suburbs, and attempted 
to storm the city, but were frustrated in their enter- 
prise by the bravery of the inhabitants.
Even the 
fair sex, on this occasion, exerted an uncommon 
degree of spirit ; pouring boiling water from the 
walls on the heads of the assailants, and otherwise 
distinguishing themselves by fearless and intrepid 
conduct.
About four years prior to this event, great 
part of the city was burnt again ; and in the thirty- 
second of Edward the First, a yet larger proportion 
became a prey to the devouring element.
In the thirty-fifth of the same sovereign (A.
D. 
1307) the Parliament met here on the 20th of Janu- 
ary, and continued sitting till the Palm Sunday fol- 
lowing; in the course of which period several im- 
portant acts were passed, and laws made to promote 
the expedition which Edward was then meditating 
against the Scots.
The King remained at Carlisle 
till the 28th of June, when he proceeded towards 
Scotland, but being seized with a flux, expired at 
Burgh-on-Sands, on the 17th of the following 
month.
(See the account of Burgh, in a preceding 
page.) 
In the ninth of Edward the Second, Carlisle was 
besieged by Robert Bruce, King of Scotland, who 
continued the assaults for ten days, and erected se- 
veral warlike engines ; but, finding his whole force 
insufficient to take the city, he was at length obliged 
to make a precipitate retreat.
About the year 1322, Andrew de Harcla was in- 
vested with the title of Earl of Carlisle, for his 
bravery and good conduct ; but he soon afterwards 
deserted the King's party, and embraced the cause 
of Robert, of Scotland, with whom he made a treaty, 
or convention, which most of the principal inhabit- 
ants of Cumberland, whom he had summoned to 
Carlisle for the purpose, swore to defend.
Their 
consent, however, appears to have been given more 
from fear than inclination ; for the Earl being pro- 
claimed a traitor, was seized by Anthony, Lord 
Lucy, and put to death, witli but very little opposi- 
tion on the part of his adherents.
The associates in 
this enterprise were Lord Lucy, Sir Hugh de Lou- 
ther, Sir Richard de Denton, and Sir Hugh de Mo- 
riceby, with their four 'squires in arms, and a small 
party of attendants.
They entered the castle as 
though on general business ; and, without any appa- 
rent intention, a few men were left near each gate, 
whilst the four chiefs proceeded to the innermost 
parts of the fortress, and reached the Earl's apart- 
ment unmolested.
They found the Earl seated, and 
wholly unsuspicious of attack, till Lord Lucy in- 
formed him that he must either surrender, or instantly 
defend himself.
He chose the former.
A cry of 
" Treason!" however, being echoed by some of his 
adherents, the keeper of the inner gate attempted to 
shut it on the knights who had entered, but was 
slain at the same moment by Sir Richard ; and the 
watch-word being given, all the avenues of the castle 
were seized by the scattered forces of Lord Lucy, 
without any more bloodshed.
Six days afterwards 
the Earl was tried by the chief justiciary, Jeffrey de 
Scroop ; and sentenced to be degraded, and execut- 
ed as a traitor.
In the year 1338, this city was again besieged by 
the Scots, and the suburbs burnt ; as was frequently 
the case during the contentions between the rival 
houses of York and Lancaster.
Its wealth was so 
much reduced by these repeated outrages, that Ed- 
ward the Fourth remitted to the inhabitants one half 
of the ancient annual rent of eighty pounds paid to 
the crown, and also granted them the Lordship of 
the royal fisheries at Carlisle.
In the reign of Henry the Eighth, during Aske's 
rebellion, Carlisle was besieged by 8000 of the in- 
surgents, under the command of Musgrave and 
Tilby ; but they were repulsed by the garrison, and 
had their retreat more fatally intercepted by the 
Duke of Norfolk, who ordered all the leaders, with 
about seventy other persons, to immediate execu- 
tion : their bodies were afterwards hung on Carlisle 
walls.
In the fortieth and forty-first of Elizabeth, Cum- 
berland was greatly afflicted by a plague, and 1196 
2 of 
CUMBERLAND.
571 
of the inhabitants of Carlisle fell victims to its ra- 
vages : this number is supposed to have included 
nearly one-third of all the persons residing within 
the walls of the city.
The civil war of Charles the First again subjected 
this city to the horrors of a siege, and the general 
distress was increased by the calamities of famine.
The blockade commenced on the 9th of October, 
1644, and continued till the ensuing June, when the 
place surrendered to General Lesley, for the Parlia- 
ment, on honourable terras.
The wants of the gar- 
rison and inhabitants had been so great, that not 
only horses, but even cats, dogs, and rats, were 
eaten ; and hemp-seed was substituted for bread, 
till that also was consumed : the city was then given 
up on honourable terms.
During the siege, a coin- 
age of silver three shilling pieces was made in the 
castle, with the plate of the inhabitants, which had 
been presented for the purpose.
The latest occurrences of this nature, of which 
Carlisle was the scene, were in the rebellion of 1745, 
when it surrendered, after a short siege, to the forces 
of the Pretender.
This surrender drew great odium 
on the inhabitants, who were supposed, though with- 
out reason, to be disaffected to the government.
— 
The real cause of its having been so soon given up, 
appears to have arisen from the fears of the militia, 
who composed part of the garrison, and who, being 
unaccustomed to war, were terrified by the multi- 
tudes which appeared before the walls of the city.
Its ill-timed surrender is partly illustrated by the 
following anecdote, related by Mr. Gilpin, but un- 
known till many years after the event : — " When 
the insurgents came before it, it was garrisoned only 
by two companies of invalids, and two raw undis- 
ciplined regiments of militia.
General Wade lay at 
Newcastle with a considerable force; and the gover- 
nor of Carlisle informing him how unprovided he 
was, begged a reinforcement.
The single hope of 
this relief enabled the gentlemen of the county, who 
commanded the militia, to keep their men under 
arms.
In the mean time the rebels were known to 
be as ill-prepared for an attack as the town was for 
a defence.
They had now lain a week before it ; 
and found it was impracticable, for want of artillery, 
to make any attempt.
They feared also an interrup- 
tion from General Wade ; and, besides, were unwill- 
ing to delay any longer their march towards London.
Under these difficulties, they had come to a resolu- 
tion to abandon their design.
At this critical time 
the governor of Carlisle received a letter from Ge- 
neral Wade, informing him he was so circumstanced, 
that he could not possibly send the reinforcement 
that had been desired.
This mortifying intelligence, 
though not publicly known, was, however, communi- 
cated to the principal officers ; and to some others, 
among whom was a busy attorney, who was then 
addressing a young lady, the daughter of a gentle- 
man of the county ; and to assist his cause, and give 
himself consequence with his intended father-in-law, 
he whispered to him, among his other political 
secrets, the disappointment from General Wade.
— 
The whisper did not rest here.
The father fre- 
quented a club in the neighbourhood, where, observ- 
ing (in the jollity of a cheerful evening) that only 
friends were present, he gave the company the in- 
formation he had just received from the attorney.
— 
In that company there was a gentleman of some for- 
tune, who, though a known papist, was at that time 
thought to be of very entire affection to the govern- 
ment.
This man, possessed of such a secret, and 
wishing for an opportunity to serve a cause which he 
favored in his heart, took horse that very night, after 
he left the club room, and rode directly to the rebel 
camp, which he found under orders to break up the 
next morning.
He was carried immediately to the 
Duke of Perth, and others of the rebel leaders, to 
whom he communicated the intelligence, and assured 
them, that they might expect a mutiny in the town, 
if they continued before it one day longer.
Counter- 
orders were immediately issued ; and the next day 
the Cumberland and Westmoreland militia, being 
under no discipline, began to mutiny and disperse; 
and the town, defended now only by two companies 
of invalids, was thought no longer tenable." It was 
then surrendered by the Mayor and Corporation, 
who made the best terms they were able ; but the 
inhabitants were obliged to raise 2000/.
to preserve 
their houses from being plundered.
This capitula- 
tion was made on the 14th of November.
In the fol- 
lowing month the city was attacked by the Duke of 
Cumberland, who planned and directed the opera- 
tions himself, and on the 27th opened a six-gun bat- 
tery of eighteen pounders against the castle.
Two 
days afterwards, the rebels displayed a flag of truce, 
and on the 13th surrendered, on the laconic terms 
offered to their acceptance by the Duke, and con- 
ceived in these words : — " All the terms his Royal 
Highness will, or can, grant to the rebel garrison of 
Carlisle, are, that they shall not be put to the sword,, 
but be reserved for the King's pleasure." 
In the year 1810, a very curious medal, which 
must have been struck in commemoration of the 
victory gained by the Duke of Cumberland over the 
rebels in 1745, was found at the bottom of a well in 
the castle of Carlisle, at the depth of eighty-four 
feet.
It appears to be a composition of copper and 
tin, or such like metals.
On one side is a head of 
the Duke of Cumberland, crowned with laurel ; and 
on the reverse, a number of naked and armed men 
in flight, and the inscription — " The Pretender's and 
Rebels' race for Life." 
The situation of Carlisle, as we have already re- 
marked, is extremely fine : it stands on a gentle ris- 
ing ground, in the midst of extensive and fex'tile 
meadows, terminated by the distant mountains, and 
watered by the Eden, the Caidew, and the Peteril.
Of these rivers, the two first flow on different sides 
of the city, and form its ground-plot into a sort of 
peninsula ; their banks and contiguous meadows 
affording numerous ami pleasant walks to the inha- 
bitants.
In high floods in the winter season, the 
low 
572 
CUMBERLAND.
low lands lire sometimes inundated, and the city at 
"those periods appears like a promontory, or -island, 
rising from the midst of a vast lake.
Since the union with Scotland, numerous im- 
provements have been effected at Carlisle.
It was 
then more celebrated for the strength of its walls, 
and fortress, than for the neatness of its buildings, 
or the respectability of its inhabitants; but as the 
prospect of future commotions vanished, manufac- 
tures were introduced, and a taste for improvement 
accompanied the increase of wealth.
This being 
attended with an augmented population, alterations 
were so rapidly made, and so much for the better, 
that Carlisle is now exceeded by few towns of simi- 
lar size in Great Britain.
At the commencement of 
the seventeenth century, the dwellings of the inha- 
bitants were mostly formed of wood, clay, and laths, 
-exhibiting singular specimens of poverty and vitiated 
-taste.
The gable ends fronted the streets ; and the 
diminutive windows, projecting porches, and clumsy 
oaken doors, fastened together with large wooden 
pins, corresponded in form with the gables.
The 
-streets were badly paved ; and the gutters, or rather 
trenches, on each side, were so wide and deep, that 
small bridges were in many parts placed over them 
for the convenience of passengers.
These obstruc- 
tions have in a great measure been removed, many 
of the houses have been rebuilt with propriety and 
taste, and many new ones erected in the modern 
style of architectural elegance.
The space includ- 
ed within the walls is somewhat in the form of an 
irregular triangle: the buildings, however, which 
extend considerably beyond these limits, are chiefly 
spread in the vicinity of the city gates : these are 
three in number, respectively denominated — the 
Caldew, or Irish gate, on the south ; the Bother, or 
English gate, on the west ; and the Rickard, or 
Scotch gate, on the north.
The English gate is 
^connected with the building called the citadel, which 
is of an oblong shape, having a round tower at each 
end, with slender openings for the discharge of ar- 
rows.
Of these opeuings the apertures diverge out- 
ward, gradually decreasing to the inner side.
The 
towers are low, but apparently of great strength ; 
and, together with the gateway, were built by Henry 
the Eighth.
The city walls are chiefly formed of 
squared stone, and on the south and east sides are 
supported by numerous buttresses.
Various flights of 
steps lead to the top, whence many of the prospects 
are extensive and interesting in an eminent degree.
The public buildings which chiefly engage the 
curiosity of the stranger, are the castle, and the 
cathedral.
These edifices, or at least certain parts 
of them, are of considerable antiquity, but have sus- 
tained many vicissitudes and alterations.
The castle, which stands at the north-west angle 
of the city, consists of an outward and inward ward.
The walls of the outer-ward are nine fed in thick- 
ness, and about eighteen in height ; the thickness of 
those of the inner-ward are about twelve feet.
— 
Within this ward is the great tower, dungeon, or 
citadel, of the castle.
This is of a square Form, and 
very lofty, with walls of immense thickness, and con- 
structed according to the modes of defence employed 
before the invention of cannon.
It has since been 
strengthened according to the modern system, and 
defended by a half-moon battery, and a very large 
platform, mounted with cannon under cover of the 
outward wall.
The upper part is embrasured, and 
commands a very beautiful prospect.
Within this 
tower is a well of great depth, which tradition affirms 
to have been made by the Romans.
The outer ward 
contains the Governor's house ; and in one of the 
gates of the castle the old portcullis is still remain- 
ing.
This fortress was made the prison of the un- 
fortunate Queen Mary, for some time after her land- 
ing at Workington, and the apartments wherein she 
was lodged are still shown to visitors.
The Cathedral, having been erected at various 
periods, displays specimens of different styles of 
architecture.
Some part of it is apparently as old 
as the Saxon times, but the greatest portion is of 
more modern date.
Several parts of the building 
are highly beautiful; but on the whole it appears to 
much disadvantage, having* suffered in the civil wars, 
when about thirty yards of the nave, or western 
limb of the cross was pulled down, to erect guard- 
houses and batteries.
The opening was afterwards 
closed with a wall, and the space between the wall 
and the transept fitted up as the parochial church of 
St. Mary, as the entire west end had formerly been ; 
and in which divine service is regularly performed.
The arches in this part of the cathedral, and in the 
transept, are circular, and the shafts extremely mas- 
sive ; the height of each being only fourteen feet two 
inches, while the circumference is seventeen feet six 
inches.
The east end of the cathedral, from the 
transept, is in the Gothic style of architecture ; the 
choir, which is the most magnificent part of the 
building was begun by Bishop Welton in the reign 
of Edward the Third, and finished by the succeed- 
ing Bishops, Appleby, and Strickland.
The ex- 
pences were chiefly defrayed by subscription ; and 
indulgences and remissions of penance were also 
granted to such of the laity as should by money, 
materials, or labour, contribute to the pious work.
The arms and devices of several contributors and 
patrons to the work were delineated on the inner 
side of the roof, which was vaulted with wood ; but 
these were defaced or removed about the year 1764, 
when the choir was repaired, and the ceiling stucco- 
ed in form of a groined vault.
A manuscript of the 
arms is preserved in the Heralds' College : among 
them are those of Warren, Musgrave, Mortimer, and 
Percy.
The arches of the choir are supported by 
clustered pillars, and have a very elegant appear- 
ance : the inner mouldings of the capitals are orna- 
mented with figures and flowers, in carved open 
work.
The stalls are embellished with tabernacle 
work ; and the bishop's throne is elegant and stately.
The east window is partially decorated with painted 
glass, of which the colours are principally green, red, 
and 
CUMBERLAND.
573 
and yellow .
The height of this window is forty-eight 
feet, its breadth thirty.
The choir is wainscotted 
with oak, from a design of Lord Camelford, presented 
to Bishop Lyttleton, who held this see when the re- 
pairs were made.
In the aisles on each side are some 
singular legendary paintings from the histories of 
St. Anthony, St. Cuthbert, and St. Augustine, with 
a distich over every subject in uncouth rhyme.
In the cathedral are several ancient monuments, 
supposed to be for the Bishops Welton, Appleby, 
and two or three others ; and on the north side of 
the choir, near the altar, is a curious monumental 
brass plate, erected to the memory of Bishop Henry 
Robinson, who was born in this city about the year 
1556, and became celebrated for his piety and learn- 
ing.
He was educated at Queen's College, Oxford, 
where he was at first only a " poor serving child," 
but afterwards became Provost, and, by his judicious 
regulations and good-conduct, considerably advanc- 
ed the iuterests of that foundation, to which also, in 
other respects, he was a great benefactor.
The 
brass plate to his memory is finely engraved.
It is 
thus described by the editors of the Beauties of Eng- 
land and Wales : — " On it the bishop is represented 
in ponii/ica/ibus, kneeling, with one hand supporting 
a crosier ; the other sustaining a lighted candle, and 
holding a cord, to which three dogs are attached, 
who appear guarding an equal number of sheep- 
folds from the attack of wolves.
Below the candle 
is a group of figures, bearing implements of agri- 
culture and peaceful industry ; near their feet is a 
wolf playing with a lamb, and various warlike in- 
struments scattered and broken.
Each part is illus- 
trated with appropriate Latin and Greek sentences, 
chiefly selected from the Scriptures.
Behind the 
Bishop is a quadrangular building, inclosing an 
open court, and apparently intended to represent the 
college which he had so much benefitted.
On it are 
the words, " Invenit destructum : reliquit extructum 
et instructum." i.
e. He found it destroyed ; he left 
it built, and furnished.
Above this building is the.
delineation of a cathedral ; over the entrance is in- 
scribed, " Intravit per ostium;" He entered by the 
door : on a label across the entrance is, " Permansit 
fidelis ;" He passed through faithful; and, below, 
on the steps, under a group of figures, one of whom 
is kneeling', and receiving a benediction, are the 
words, " Recessit beatus;" He departed blessed.
Near the top of the plate is the angel of the Lord, 
hearing a label inscribed in Greek characters, — 
" Unto the Bishops :" above, are the words, " Erant 
pastores in eadem regione excubantes et agentes 
vigilias noctis super gregum suum;" There were in 
the same country shepherds abiding in the field, and 
keeping watch over their flocks by night.
At the 
bottom is a Latin inscription to this effect : — " To 
* The spirit of these lines would be lost by a literal transla- 
tion : they may, in substance, be rendered thus:— To. him, 
whose light shone forth, not for his own benefit, but for his 
country's good — whose abilities were not exerted in vain — 
VOL.
I. — NO.
41.
Henry Robinson of Carlisle, D.
D. a most careful 
Provost of Queen's College, Oxon, and afterwards 
a most watchful Bishop of this church for eighteen 
years, who, on the 13th Calend of July, in the year 
from the delivery of the Virgin 1616, aud his age 64, 
devoutly resigned his spirit to the Lord.
Bernard 
Robinson, his brother and heir, set up this Memorial 
as a testimony of his Love." Beneath are the fol- 
lowing lines : — 
Non sibi, sed Patriae, prsluxit Lampadis instat, 
Deperdens oleum, non operam lllesuam, 
In minimis tide Servo, majoribus apto, 
Maxima nunc Domini guadia adire datur.* 
In the south aisle, adjoining the transept, is a 
small chapel, dedicated to St. Catherine, which was 
founded and endowed by John de Capella, a citizen 
of Carlisle.
Some of the revenues of this chapel 
having been unjustly detained, about the year 1366, 
Bishop Appleby ordered public notice to be given, 
that he should excommunicate the parties by bell, 
book, and candle, unless restitution were made before 
the expiration of ten days.
The length of the choir is 137 feet ; its height 75; 
and its breadth, together with the aisles, 71.
The 
breadth of the transept is 28 feet, and its length 124: 
from its centre rises a square embattled tower, with 
a small turret at the north-east angle.
The height, 
from the area of the cathedral to the summit of the 
tower, is about 130 feet : it was originally terminat- 
ed with a leaden spire, thirteen or fourteen feet high; 
but this being greatly decayed, was removed soon 
after the Restoration.
The upper parts of the but- 
tresses which support the east end, were originally 
ornamented with statues : but these are either muti- 
lated, or entirely destroyed.
The entire structure, 
and, indeed, most of the buildings in this city, are 
composed of a coarse, but durahic, kind of red free- 
stone.
Bishop Tanner remarks, that " this is the 
only Episcopal Chapter in England of the order of 
St. Austin." 
Prior to the dissolution of the monasteries, several 
religious houses were established in this city, some 
few remains of which are yet visible.
" The priory," 
says Denton, in his MSS.
" wanted not for relics of 
saints; for Waldeive, the son of Gospatrick, Earl of 
Dunbar, brought from Jerusalem aud Constantinople, 
a bone of St. Paul ; aud another of St. John Bap- 
tist ; two stones of Christ's Sepulchre, and a part 
of the Holy Cross ; which he gave to the priory, 
together with a mansion, near St. Cuthbert's Church, 
where at that time stood an ancient building, called 
Arthur's Chamber, taken to be part of the mansion- 
house of King Arthur, the son of Uther Pendragon, 
of memorable note for his worthiness in the time of 
ancient kings." The cathedral itself seems to have 
who, in the least things, was true to his faith, yet not neglectful 
of the greater— it is now given to enjoy celestial bliss, in the 
bosom of his Lord.
7f 
belonged 
S74 
CUMBERLAND.
belonged to the priory, which was either founded or 
renewed by Henry the First, previously to his erection 
of Carlisle into a bishopric ; but these foundations, 
in most respects, remained independent of each other, 
till they were surrendered to Henry the Eighth.
— 
The revenues of the priory were then valued at 418/.
those of the bishopric at 531/.
After the surrender, 
Henry made a new foundation, for a Dean, four 
Prebendaries, eight minor Canons, a Sub-Dean, four 
Singing-men, a Grammar-master, six Choristers 
and a Master, six Almsmen, &c.
The chapter-house and cloisters stood on the 
south side of the cathedral : they were pulled down 
during the civil wars ; but part of the dormitory is 
yet remaining, and also the fratry, or refectory, which 
is now used as the chapter-house.
The proportions 
of this building are good ; the windows were in the 
Gothic form, but are mostly blocked op : the arches 
exhibit some pleasing specimens of ornamental trac- 
ery.
Gilpin observes, " that the style of architecture 
seems to be that which prevailed rather before the 
two later Henries." The abbey gate is standing, 
and in tolerable repair.
In the month of May, 1809, as some workmen 
were digging a foundation for an intended buttress, 
to be erected against the south side of the cathedral, 
which is supposed to have been weakened by the 
removal of the cloister, they found two stone coffins 
containing human bones.
As this piece of ground is 
supposed to have constituted a part of the church, it 
must have been used as a dormitory by our ancestors, 
for the inhumation of the dead, anterior to the year 
750, from which time the church-yards may date 
their origin in this island.
The practice of conse- 
crating ground adjacent to churches, for the burial 
of departed Christians, was brought over from 
Rome by Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury, 
about the time above stated.
In one of the chambers in the deanery is a curious 
painted ceiling, divided into numerous compart- 
ments, and decorated with roses, birds, scallop- 
shells, angels sustaining shields of arms, &c.
with 
labels inscribed with various supplicatory or devo- 
tional sentences.
On the sides of the cross-beams 
several uncouth couplets are written, and also the 
following lines, which point out the person (made 
prior about the year 1507) by whom the ceiling was 
erected ; his name likewise appears in many of the 
compartments : — 
" Symon Seuus, Prior, sette yis roofe and scallope here 
llo the intent wythin fchys place they shall have prayers every 
ilaye in the year 
Lofe Gcc'l and thy prynce and you neydis not dreid 
thy enimys." 
In this city, the only church, besides that of St.
Mary's in the cathedral, is St. Cuthbert's : this is a 
plain modern building, erected in the year 1778, on 
the site of the ancient structure, which appears to 
have been originally built before the destruction of 
the city by tiie Danes.
When the foundations were 
making for the present edifice, the workmen dag 
below the foundation of the old church, and disco- 
vered the remains of a still more ancient building.
They also found some pieces of broken sculpture, 
and, among others, the figure of a nun with a veil, or 
hood, in good preservation.
Some years ago, this 
was in the possession of George Mounsey, Esq. of 
Carlisle, but is now lost.
The steeple of the old 
church of St. Cuthbert was rebuilt in the reign of 
Elizabeth ; and at that time was found a large parcel 
of small silver coins, to the quantity of nearly a 
Winchester bushel, called St. Cuthbert's pence, and 
supposed to have been an oblation at the first build- 
ing.
The other structures for religious worship itt 
this city, are meeting-houses for Protestant Dissen- 
ters, Quakers, and Methodists, and a Catholic 
chapel.
Three of the principal streets of Carlisle range 
nearly in the shape of the Roman Y, and meet at 
the market-place, where the town-hall, moot-hall, 
and council-chamber, are situated ; the last of these 
is ornamented with a cupola.
Here the assize 
courts, on the summer circuit, and quarter sessions, 
are held, and most of the public business is transact- 
ed.
The corporation records are also kept here ; 
and the representatives for the city elected.
The 
principal streets are altogether five in number : — 
English Street, Scotch Street, Fisher Street, Castle 
Street, and Abbey Street.
The Guildhall is rather 
a mean edifice, but appears ancient.
In the quarter 
near the English gate stood the county-goal, art old 
and ruinous building, constructed on a confined and 
injudicious plan.
Near the goal are some buildings called charity 
houses, where decayed freemen, and widows of 
freemen, are permitted by the corporation to live 
rent-free.
The poor are maintained in a workhouse 
erected by subscription about half a century ago ; 
prior to that time, they were either farmed out, or 
had a weekly allowance at their own houses.
On the first of July, 1782, a dispensary was in- 
stituted for the relief of the indigent sick, by which 
many thousands of persons have been relieved.
There is a free school in this city, handsomely en- 
dowed, for the children of freemen ; and one or 
more Sunday schools.
Carlisle has received many royal grants, and been 
invested with great privileges by different monarchs, 
but nearly all the original charters have been con- 
sumed by the fires which have so frequently deso- 
lated the city.
The corporation consists of a mayor, 
recorder, sheriff, twelve aldermen, two bailiffs, two 
coroners, twenty-four common council-men, and 
various subordinate officers ; but the time of its 
establishment is uncertain.
Charters of confirma- 
tion were granted by Edward the Third, Henries 
the Seventh and Eighth, and every succeeding 
monarch, to the reign of Charles the First, who or- 
dered some alteration to be made as to the manner 
of electing the different officers.
The city was first 
represented in Parliament iu the twenty-third of 
2 Edward 
CUMBERLAND.
575 
Edward the First : it returns two members, who are 
chosen by the free burgesses, about 750 in number.
Amongst the privileges granted to the corporation 
by Henry the II.
were the following : — A weekly 
market on Saturdays, which is considerable for corn, 
wool, and several other commodities ; a fair on the 
26th of August, for horned cattle and linen ; another 
on the 19th of September, for horses and horned 
cattle; and a third, on the first and second Satur- 
days after October 10, for Scotch horned cattle.
— 
The cattle market is held on a little island called the 
Sands, on the north side of the city; where, also, 
criminals have of late years been executed.
The 
island here mentioned is formed by the river Eden, 
which divides into two branches ; over which are 
two narrow stone bridges, one of nine arches, and 
the other of four.
This is the great passage towards 
Scotland.
To the westward is a fine view of the 
Frith, to its mouth, with a vast tract of Scotch land, 
surmounted by Scroffell, and a chain of hills extend- 
ing westward as far as the eye can reach.
To the 
east a rich plain of cultivated land, bounded by the 
heights of Northumberland.
To the south, the plains 
towards Penrith, with Cross Fell and Skiddaw; and 
to the north an extensive Scotch territory.
The population and buildings of Carlisle and its 
suburbs, very rapidly increased during the last cen- 
tury ; but the augmentation principally arose within 
the last fifty years.
In 1763 the inhabitants were 
enumerated with much care under the direction of 
Bishop Lyttleton ; and their number was found to 
be 4158.
In 1780 another survey was made under 
the direction of Dr. Heysham, and the number re- 
turned was 6299 inhabitants, and 891 houses.
A 
third enumeration was made in 1796, superintended 
by the editors of the History of Cumberland, and 
the result was 8516 inhabitants, and 1293 houses.
— 
Under the population aet of the year 1801, the inha- 
bitants were found to have increased to 10,221 ; viz.
4679 males, and 5542 females ; the number of houses 
was 1338.
In 1811, the inhabitants had further in- 
creased to 12,531 ; of which 5628 were males, and 
6903 females : the number of houses A tT as 1716.
This astonishing increase may be attributed to at 
least three causes : the progress of vaccination ; the 
salubrity of the air and situation, evinced by the 
number of deaths not exceeding one out of thirty 
persons annually ; and the introduction and increase 
of the various branches of the cotton manufacture.
A short time after the rebellion of 1745, a com- 
pany of Hamburgh merchants fixed upon Carlisle 
as a convenient place for an extensive woollen manu- 
factory, and two gentlemen, brothers, were sent over 
to superintend the work.
In this establishment, all 
the different branches, from the sheep-shearing to 
the finishing the pieces of broad and plain cloths, 
were performed.
For some time every loom that 
could be got was engaged, and the undertaking 
flourished greatly ; but the elder brother, who had 
been the chief conductor of the business, died, and, 
by the imprudent conduct of the survivor, the com- 
pany was declared insolvent; no person could be 
found willing to risk a second failure; the establish- 
ment was therefore givcu up, and all the effects sold 
by auction.
At this period, the roads in the vicinity 
of Carlisle were impassable to carriages for several 
months of the year, and the intercourse with distant 
towns was by this means greatly impeded : goods 
were chiefly brought to the city upon pack-horses.
The neighbouring farmers were also so slothful, or 
ignorant, that the corporation were obliged to pay 
an annual salary, and supply an occasional new cart, 
to have the manure removed from the streets.
A 
few whips and fish-hooks, and a small quantity of 
linen, were the only articles then manufactured in 
the town.
About the year 1750 a small manufactory of coarse 
linen cloth, called Osnabarghs, was established; and 
also a new woollen manufactory ; but the latter was 
of short duration, and scarcely any person has since 
attempted to revive this business.
The roads were 
now repaired, or new ones made ; and the lands 
contiguous to the city were better cultivated.
The 
manure began to be in request ; and its value has so 
progressively increased, that it is now annually sold 
by the corporation for fifty pounds or upwards.
Between the years 1750 and 1755 several manu- 
factories for spinning and weaving cotton and linen 
were established ; and the population began to aug- 
ment by the settlement of many weavers from Scot- 
land and Ireland.
In 1756 a brewery was commenced 
in the suburbs, but was for some time in an unpro- 
mising state.
A year or two afterwards the streets 
were paved, and various nuisances removed ; and in 
1759 a post-chaise was for the first time lent from 
an inn of this city.
The increasing opulence of the 
inhabitants was also marked by the erection of a neat 
assembly-room.
In 1761 various new works were established : a 
company from Newcastle commenced the calico- 
printing business, which has since progressively in- 
creased, and now furnishes employment to many 
hundreds of men, women, and children.
Land be- 
gan to rise in value ; wages became higher, and 
provisions dearer.
Before this time eight-pence 
or ten-pence per day was as much as a labourer 
could earn ; and a woman must have been exceed- 
ingly industrious with her wheel, to have obtained 
more than one shilling a week ; the wages of chil- 
dren were proportionable.
On the establishment of 
the calico manufactory, the exertions of individuals 
were better remunerated ; the women were engaged 
to pencil the colours into the different pieces ; at 
each table three or four female children were em- 
ployed, and the youngest could earn eighteen -pence 
or two shillings weekly.
This encouragement in- 
duced a number of families, from distant parts of 
the country, to settle in the city ; and so great was 
the alteration, that a common labourer, who, with 
his wife's assistance, could scarcely have obtained 
eight shillings weekly, was now able to earn between 
twenty and thirty.
Cotton looms were now set up ; 
I and 
576 
CUMBERLAND.
and machinery for carding, roving, and spinning of 
cotton, was erected in various parts of the neigh- 
bourhood of the city.
Four print fields, employing 
about 1000 persons, have paid upwards of 20,000/.
to the revenue annually.
Besides these, there are 
eight or ten other manufactories ; some of them exe- 
cuting every branch, from preparing of the raw 
materials, to the completion of checks, calicoes, mus- 
lins, and all kinds of fancy-work.
Hats, shamois, 
tanned leather, lindsays, nails, hardware, dressed 
flax, ropes, &c.
are also now manufactured at Car- 
lisle.
The brewery has become established, and 
some others have been erected : a soap manufactory 
has also been built : and so greatly has the trade of 
the city increased, that the duty paid on licenses and 
exciseable articles amounts to more than 110,000/.
yearly.
The growing importance of Carlisle is 
evinced by the establishment of banks, two or more 
of which have been opened within a few years.
That this city will continue to increase in wealth 
and prosperity there is every reason to suppose.
— 
The great scarcity of coals which Avas experienced 
in the winter of 1806, suggested the idea of a canal 
to 3Ir. Cur wen, and he brought the plan forward in 
so liberal and candid a manner, as at once to obtain 
the support of the principal land proprietors.
In 
the summer following, a meeting was holden at the 
Moot-hall, and it was resolved to make a survey, 
with a view of considering the best line of a canal to 
the sea ; which might not only bring down coals 
from the west of the county, but might also be the 
means of conveying ship timber or any other article 
of bulk.
It was estimated that not less than 30,000 
tons would annually pass along the canal to Carlisle, 
occasioning a saving in the carriage of goods of 
8000/.
per aim.
to the city and its immediate neigh- 
bourhood, independent of the county at large ; and 
a clear yearly revenue of 4000/.
About 300/.
was 
subscribed to defray the expences of a survey made 
by Mr. Chapman, of Newcastle, who, after a careful 
examination of the banks of the river Eden, and of 
the channel of Solway-Frith, suggested two differ- 
ent lines of canal ; one, from Carlisle to Maryport, 
the expence of which he estimated at about 95,000/.
sufficient for vessels of fifty tons burthen ; and ano- 
ther, from Carlisle to a place called the Binnacle, or 
Knock-cross, which, for vessels of ninety tons, he 
supposed might cost about 55,000/.
but for vessels 
of forty-five tons, only about 40,000/.
By the com- 
pletion of such a communication with the west sea, 
Cumberland, and the south-west parts of Scotland, 
must reap immense advantages, in the improvement 
of agriculture, and the increase of trade, manufac- 
tures, and commerce.
Among the remarkable occurrences which have 
happened in this city, may be enumerated the shock 
of an earthquake, felt in the year 1786 ; the pheno- 
menon, perhaps unparalleled, of a female child, 
born, in 1788, without the least appearance of a 
brain, and yet lived nearly six days ; and a most 
destructive inundation, which occurred in the autumn 
of the year 1809.
The two former events ate re- 
corded in Dr. Heysham's observations on the bills 
of mortality in Carlisle.
The account oi the first is 
related as follows : — 
" About two o'clock on Friday morning, August; 
the llth, a slight shock of an earthquake was very 
sensibly felt by many persons in Carlisle and the 
neighbourhood.
Those who were perfectly awake, 
or who happened to be out of doors, report, that the 
concussion continued about four or five seconds, aud 
that it was immediately preceded by a hollow tremu- 
lous sound.
Many were awakened out of their sleep 
by the shaking of their houses, beds, doors, and 
window-shutters.
Birds in cages were likewise 
sensible of its influence, and fluttered as if greatly 
agitated and alarmed.
Very providentially, how- 
ever, little or no damage was sustained : a few 
chimneys and old walls were here and there thrown 
down, and three people in Whitehaven were thrown 
off their feet ; but in other respects, a momentary 
fright and alarm were the only inconveniences that 
were suffered from it.
The concussion seemed to 
take its direction from the east to the west, and ex- 
tended quite across the island, being felt both at 
Newcastle and Whitehaven ; from the north, south- 
wards, it extended from Glasgow to the northern 
parts of Lancashire.
The Wednesday and Thursday 
preceding were moist, gloomy and sultry." 
The child was born on the '26th of May, in Car- 
lisle Dispensary : she was the daughter of Mary 
Clark, who was twenty-six years of age, and the 
mother of six children.
The child's head had a very 
unusual appearance, and it seemed evident that the 
bones of the upper part of the skull were wanting, 
and that the brain was only covered by its proper 
membranes, the pia and dura mater, and resembled 
a large excrescence, which projected a little over the 
common integument.
" The colour of this sub- 
stance," observes Dr. Heysham, " was a dark red- 
dish brown ; and upon examining it particularly, I 
thought I could perceive the division of the two 
hemispheres of the brain, and likewise the division 
of the cerebrum from the cerebellum.
The child 
was full grown, and seemed in perfect health ; her 
limbs were plump, fine, and well proportioned, and 
she moved them with apparent agility : the external 
organs of sense were also perfect.
She took a suf- 
ficient quantity of nourishment for several days; but 
sometimes during the action of swallowing started a 
little.
She lived till five o'clock on Sunday morn- 
ing, June the first, when she expired ; but some time 
before her death was affected with slight convul- 
sions.
During the three or four days preceding her 
death, there was a constant discharge of thin watery 
fluid, somewhat tinged with blood, from the excres- 
cence, which greatly diminished its bulk ; for at her 
death it was only about half the siae of what it had 
been when she was born, and the surface was in 
some places beginning to put on the appearance of 
mortification." A few hours after her death, Dr.
Heysham, and two other professional gentlemen, 
dissected 
CUMBERLAND.
577 
dissected the head, and removed the whole of the 
substance from the bones ; the greatest part of the 
frontal, the temporal, the occipital, and the whole of 
the parietal bones were wanting'.
The substance 
removed was then examined, and, to the utmost 
astonishment of the operators, found to consist of 
membranes, blood-vessels, and principally of small 
hags of different sizes, but all hlled with a brownish 
coloured fluid.
The spinal marrow had a natural 
appearance, yet did not seem to have been connected 
with the above parts : but there was not the least 
indication of either " cerebrum, cerebellum, or any 
medullary substance whatever!" Amongst the in- 
ferences deduced by Dr. lleysham from tbis extra- 
ordinary conformation, is, " That the living prin- 
ciple, the nerves of the trunk, and extremities, sen- 
sation, and motion, may exist independent of a 
brain !
and that the natural, vital, and animal func- 
tions may be performed without one." 
The inundation to which we have alluded, took 
place in tbe month of September, 1809.
Owing to 
severe and incessant rain, on the Monday, the cir- 
cumjacent rivers overflowed their banks on the fol- 
lowing morning, and presented a vast and magnifi- 
cent sheet of water, beautifully spotted with little 
islands and clumps of trees.
The Eden and Peteril 
were not deficient in mischief; but the greatest pro- 
portion of damage was effected by the Caldevv ; 
whose mountain torrent, hurrying along a continued 
declivity, scarcely gave warning of its approach.
— 
By those persons in and near Caldew-gate, who 
saw the flood descending in its fury (which was be- 
tween the hours of five and six in the morning) it is 
represented as resembling some mighty tide, rolling 
forward with amazing rapidity.
In Shaddowgate, 
Caldewgate, and by the Deanside, the houses were 
inundated to the depth of three, four, and even six 
feet.
Furniture of every description was carried 
away ; and a house on the margin of the river, in- 
habited by two families, was washed down scarcely 
a minute after they had made a precipitate retreat.
Part of their property was afterwards recovered, it 
having been cast upon the shore about, three miles 
below.
It was lamentable to view the immense 
quantities of grain which were driven down by the 
current; at one time the river presented the singu- 
lar appearance of an immense moving field of corn.
A small part was recovered by means of drags, but 
some hundred thousands of sheaves were entirely 
lost.
Timber, trees, hedges, &c.
were all carried 
away in one promiscuous ruin : stone walls were 
levelled, and the ground stripped of its soil.
A re- 
markable instance of the latter occurred at Seberg- 
ham ; in a field of potatoes, containing about one 
acre, not only the roots, but every particle of soil 
was swept away !
so that what was formerly fertile 
land, became a barren field of gravel.
At the same 
place, the woollen manufactory of Mr. Saul, with 
the machinery, &c.
was entirely swept away.
Se- 
bergham bridge shared the same fate..
The bridges 
at Hawkesdale, Hesket, Whelpa, and over the river 
vol.
i. — no.
42.
Eden, near Maryport, were likewise destroyed.
At 
the time the arches of the last mentioned bridge 
gave way, a boy was passing on horseback ; he un- 
fortunately perished, but the horse escaped unhurt.
The river Waver being greatly swollen, the house 
of an old woman, of the name of Mary Calvert, at 
Field-end, nearWoodrow, was surrounded by water : 
the helpless state of the poor creature exciting the 
fears of the neighbours, as soon as it was practicable 
her situation was attended to, when she was disco- 
vered in her bed a lifeless corpse.
On the Monday 
night, near the same place, the driver of a post- 
chaise belonging to an innkeeper at Wigton, missing 
his road, from the darkness of the night and severity 
of the weather, the horses plunged into the foaming 
deep, where they were drowned, and the chaise 
dashed to pieces, which fortunately contained no 
passengers.
Miraculously, the driver regained the 
shore.
Amongst the antiquities which have been found 
here in different ages, Malmsbury mentions a Tric- 
linium, or Roman saloon, arched over, and in good 
preservation, which was discovered in the time of 
William Rui'us, having on its front the words Marii 
Victoria.
Not any vestige of this work is now re- 
maining; and even its site is totally forgotten.
— 
Camden mentions two inscriptions which he saw in 
this city : the first, in the house of Thomas Aglionby, 
near the citadel ; but, according to Horsley, it wa9 
afterwards removed, and built up in the wall of a 
house of the same family at Drawdikes.
DIS MANIIW 
S MARCI TROJANI 
AVGVSTINHI TVM FA 
CIENDUM CVKAVl 
T AEL AMM1L LUSIMA 
CONJVX KAKISS 
Horsley explains this inscription as follows : — 
" Dis Manibus Marci Trojani Augustinii tumulum 
faciendum curavit Mlia Ammilla Lusima conjux 
karissima ;" importing that, " By the favor of the 
Gods, this Monument to Marcius Trojanus Augus- 
tinius, was erected by his dear wife /Elia Ammilla 
Lusima." Over the inscription, in a triangular com- 
partment, is a human head, probably intended to re- 
present the person deceased ; aud at the upper cor- 
uers of the stone, two lions rudely sculptured, with 
a head near each, which they appear to guard.
The second inscription, according to Camden, was 
as follows : — 
LEG.
VI.
VIC.
PF.
G. P.
RF.
Horsley says, this is, " Legio se*ta victrix pia 
fidelis genio populi Romani fecit ; and he remarks 
that, " the person to whom the compliment was 
paid, of being the genius of his people, might be 
the emperor himself;" this mode of adu'.at on being 
frequently met with on the Roman coins after the 
death of Gullienus.
In the year 1743, when digging 
7 g a pit, 
578 
CUMBERLAND.
a pit, a Roman Fibula, and a medal of the Emperor 
Trajan, were discovered ; and some years ago, in 
making the Grapes' Inn cellar, an altar was found, 
with two human figures sculptured on its sides.
Ano- 
ther altar has since been met with ; and some pieces 
of broken stones, with remains of carved figures.* 
Carlisle, Old.] — Old Carlisle, the ruins of an 
ancient city, to which the neighbouring inhabitants 
have given this name, is about a mile south of Wig- 
ton, about eight miles south-west of Carlisle, and 
twelve or fourteen west of Old Penrith.
Both Cam- 
den and Stukely conjectured, that the Romans had 
their garrison here, called by Antoninus, Castra 
Exploratorum ; but Horsley, with greater probabi- 
lity, supposes it to be Olenacum, and observes, that 
the ruins of the old Roman town and station are here 
very grand and conspicuous.
It stands upon a mi- 
litary way very large and visible, leading directly to 
Carlisle and the Roman wall.
The ramparts of the 
station lie two of them directly east and west, and 
the others north and south.
There seems to have 
been a double ag'ger quite round it.
The river Wiza 
runs on the south and west sides of the station, about 
half a mile from it, and the descent to the river is 
steep, yet the out buildings have been on all sides 
here as well as at Old Penrith.
From this station 
there is a very extensive prospect, especially on the 
west towards the sea.
It appears from inscriptions, 
that a body of horse, called Ala Augusta, was long 
quartered here ; and according to the Notitia Olena- 
cum, was garrisoned by the Ala Herculea ; Horsley 
conjectures, however, that the Ala Augusta, in the 
year 242, under the Emperor Gordian, took the name 
Gordiaua ; and that about forty years afterwards the 
* Captain Thomas Morris, brother of the celebrated song- 
writer, was a native of Carlisle.
He was born in the year 1732, 
and received the rudiments of his education at the chief school 
in that city.
His family, for three generations, had been bred 
to arms, but being intended tor a learned profession, he was en- 
tered, when nine years old, at Winchester College, where he 
continued nine years.
His father's views, however, being 
changed, he was taken to London, and soon acquired, under 
able masters, a knowledge of the French 1 menage, of mathe- 
matics, dancing, and fencing, thus uniting scholastic learning 
with elegant accomplishments.
Having purchased an ensigncy 
in the 17th regiment of foot, he joined it in Ireland, in 174S.
He 
made a trip to Paris in 1753 ; and embarked with his battalion 
for America in 1757.
Afterwards his regiment was drafted for 
the West Indies, and he was present at the siege of the Havan- 
nah, and the descent on Martinique.
He about this time ob- 
tained a company, and returned to America, where he became 
commander at Niagara.
During his residence there, he made 
frequent excursions into that interesting country.
At the fall 
of Niagara, in particular, by an intrepid and bold attempt, he 
performed what had scarcely been achieved before or since.
He boldly descended the huge rocks which separated the pre- 
cipitated 'stream from the spectator, and, by scrambling over 
disjointed projections, contrived, during a favourable oppor- 
tunity, to place himself, at the imminent danger of Ins life, un- 
der a branch of the immense arch of waters.
After the surren- 
der of Canada, Captain Morris was fixed upon by General 
Bradstreet, to be sent to the Illinois country, to take possession 
of that region in the name of his Britannic Majesty.
A French 
prisoner,.
.named Go'defrol, under sentence of death for treason, 
received his life ami libtrtv, under the condition of acting as a 
same Ala assumed (he appellation Herculea, from 
the Emperor Maximianus Herculeus ; and if we ad- 
mit this conjecture, it seems clearly demonstrated 
that Old Carlisle is the Olenacum of the Notitia.
From a survey of this spot in the year 1755, by 
George Smith, Esq. whom we have before had occa- 
sion to mention — it appears, that the aggers, praeto- 
rium, ditches and roads belonging to this station, are 
still to be traced by (heir remains on the uncultivat- 
ed common; and Smith thought, from many scat- 
tered remains, that the Ala 1 Auxiliariae appeared to 
have encamped a considerable way to the eastward.
He also remarks, in a letter addressed to the Editors 
of the Gentleman's Magazine, that though Camden 
calls it a famous city, it is most likely that he never 
saw it, there being no remains of buildings besides 
the fort, the wall of which is still to be seen, and 
some wretched huts, which seem to have been cob- 
bled up by private soldiers, merely to shelter them 
from the weather ; for their remains are of very bad 
stone, though there is a good cjuarry at a little dis- 
tance,^ which resort would certainly have been had, if 
any regular edifices had been raised for more dura- 
ble purposes.
Within the vallum, a well was dis- 
covered' a few years ago, about three feet in diameter, 
and regularly walied with stones.
Sacrificing instruments, coins, altars, small images, 
equestrian statues, urns, and many other vestiges of 
antiquity, have been found at this station.
Certain 
it is, says Camden, that the ala (wing) which, for its 
valour, was called Augusta, and Augusta Gordiana, 
was here in the time of Gordianus, as appears from 
the following and other inscriptions, which 1 saw in 
the neighbourhood : — 
guide to the Captain, who encountered many clangers amongst 
the savages.
He was once made prisoner, and condemned to 
perish by fire, and when already tied to the stake, was rescued 
from death by an Indian Sachem, whose life he had formerly 
been the mean of saving.
Captain Morris, after witnessing an 
astonishing reverse in the affairs of America, returned to Eng- 
land in 1767.
He married Miss Chubb, daughter of a respec- 
table merchant at Bridgewater, in Somersetshire, by whom he 
had six children.
On this occasion he quitted his regiment at 
Cork ; and thus retired, alter an active life of twenty-one years, 
without having attained even a majority in the usual gradation 
of service.
When at Winchester, he imbibed a taste for let- 
ters, which added greatly to the enjoyment of his latter days.
The French language he became intimately acquainted with, 
having been warmly encouraged in thestud\, by the influence 
of paternal partiality for this tongue.
His literary labours 
would fill many volumes, but a part only of his works have 
seen the light.
His remarks on Racine's" Phtfdt a still remain 
in manuscript.
Like many other men of sensibility, he hailed 
the expected halcyon days' so confidently promised by the Na- 
tional Assembly of France.
The same feeling which urged 
him to take part with that nation, caused him, nearly at the 
same time, to declare against the slave trade, and he published, 
in 1796, with this view, a Tale, intituled, " Quashy ; or, the 
Coal-black Maid." He suggested emendations in the works of 
Pope.
Homer was with him a very favourite author, and he 
read both the Odyssey and Iliad annually.
For some years 
past he lived sequestered, hermit-like, in the neighbourhood of 
Hampstead ; but at the period of his death (January 8, 1808) 
he occupied apartments in the metropolis.
I. O.
M. 
CUMBERLAND.
570 
I. O.
M. 
PRO SALVTE IMPERATORIS 
M. ANTONI.
GORDIANI.
P. F.
INVICTI AVG ET SADINIAE FR 
IAE TRANQVILE CONIVG1 FIVS TO 
TAQVE DOMV DIVIN EORVM A 
LA AVG GORDIA OB VIRTVTEM 
APELLATA POSVIT CVI PRIEST 
AFMILIVS C1USPINVS PRAEF 
EQQ.
NATVS IN PRO AFRICA DE 
TVSDRO SVL5 CVR NON^II PHI 
L1PPI LEG AVG PROPRETO ....
ATT1CO ET PRAETEXTATO 
COSS.* 
About the year 1791, an urn of red clay, appa- 
rently unbaked, and containing human bones, was 
found in the neighbourhood, and also a square ston:», 
rudely sculptured with a human head.
A gentleman 
of Wigton, we believe, is still in possession of these 
antiquities.
Cardew.] — This is a small village, or manor, in 
the parish of Dalston, in Cumberland ward, six.
miles south-south-west from Carlisle.
Sometime 
before the Conquest it was amongst the possessions 
of the Cardew family.
In the reign of Henry V.
it 
became the property of the Dentons, in whose pos- 
session it remained until 1686, when George Den- 
ton, Esq. disposed of it to an ancestor of the Earl 
of Lonsdale, to which nobleman it now belongs.
— 
John Denton, Esq. who held the manor, and resided 
at Cardew Hall, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, 
collected many valuable manuscripts towards a his- 
tory of this county.
He remarks, that John Den- 
ton, the first owner of Cardew of that name, was 
steward of all Allerdale, under the Lord Humphrey 
de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, to whom 
Baliol, the Scottish king, granted the seigniory of 
Allerdale, and that on the triumph of the Bruce fac- 
tion, and the banishment of the Baliols, he " still 
kept the principal house, till it was fired under him, 
heated, and undermined till it was ready to fall." 
In commemoration of this event, he chose for his 
arms a castle or tower, sable ; with flames issuing 
from the top ; and a demi-lion rampant, with a 
sword in his right paw, issuing from the flames.
Carrock-fell.] This stupendous mountain 
stands in the ward of Leath, about three miles south- 
west from Castle Sowerby.
It is 803 yards above 
the level of the sea, and 520 yards above the sur- 
rounding meadows.
— The whole of Carrock-fell is a 
ridge of horrid precipices, abounding with chasms, 
not to be fathomed by the eye.
Close under it, for 
nearly two miles, is a winding path, just wide enough 
for a horse to pass singly, and every where inter- 
cepted by enormous stones, which have fallen from 
the summit ot the mountain.
In the year 1740 a 
cavern was discovered at the end of it, which has 
* This votive altar was erected for the happy health 
of the Emperor Gordian the Third, am his wife Furia 
Sabina Tranquilla, and their whole Family, by the 
troops of Horsemen surnumed Augusta Gorciiar.a, 
never been explored ; near this is a remarkable pool 
of water, called Black Hole, 150 yards in circumfer- 
ence, and in some plac.
s 05, and in others 45 fathoms 
deep.
The eastern end of the mountain, for upwards 
of a mile in length, is almost covered with masses of 
granite of various sizes, some of them not less than 
300 tons in weight ; and on the summit is a singular 
monument of antiquity, of which the History of Cum- 
berland contain* the following description : — 
" The summit of this huge fell is of an oval form ; 
round its circumference is a range or inclosure of 
stones, which seems to be incontestibly the work of 
men's hands.
The stones at the sides of the enclos- 
ed area are about eight yards, perpendicular below 
the ridge of the mountain, but at the ends not more 
than four.
The stones are piled one upon another, 
in a rude irregular manner : the mean breadth at the 
base of the range is about eight yards, and its mean 
height about four.
In some places, however, the 
height is six feet, in others three only, or even less ; 
this var ation is probably owing to a practice conti- 
nued from age to age of rolling some of the stones 
down the sides of the mountain for amusement, or 
rather from a desire of witnessing the effect of their 
increasing velocity.
The stones are in general from 
one to two or three, and even 400 weight : but many 
of them are considerably smaller.
From the few 
stones that may be found within the area, it would 
seem that the whole range has been formed by the 
stones obtained in the enclosed space, which is nearly 
destitute of vegetation.
" The direction of the ridge on the top of the fell, 
in its transverse diameter, is nearly east by west ; 
and in this direction, within the surrounding pile of 
stones, it measures- 252 yards ; the conjugate diame- 
ter is 122 yards ; and the contents of the space en- 
closed is about three acres and a half.
The entrances 
are four, one oj posit e each point of the compass; 
those on the west and south sides are four yards in 
width, that to the east appears to have been origi- 
nally of the same dimensions, but is now about six 
yards wide ; the width of the northern entrance is 
eight yards.
Besides these, on the north-west 
quarter there is a large aperture or passage 12 
yards in width ; which if the nature of the ground 
is attended to, and the apparent want of stones in 
this part considered, seems never to have been com- 
pleted.
" At the distance of 66 yards from the east end of 
this range, on the summit of the hill, stands an in- 
sulated pile of stones, appearing at a little distance 
like the frustrum of a cone.
Its base is about eleven 
yards in diameter, and its perpendicular height se- 
ven yards.
On clambering to the top, the interior 
is iound to be funnel-shaped ; the upper part or top 
ol the funnel, being of five yards diameter; but as 
when JEmilius Crispinus, a native of Africa, governed 
the same under Nonnius Philippus, Lieutennnt-Gene- 
nl in Britain,, in the year of Christ 243, as appears 
by the Consuls therein specified.
the 
580 
CUMBERLAND.
the hollow gradually slopes downward, the width 
at the bottom is little more than two feet : the largest 
stoaes appear to weigh about one hundred and a 
half.
" The crowned head of old Carrock is by no 
means perfectly uniform, the end to the westward 
being about 13 yards higher than the middle of the 
oval.
On the highest point is a fragment of rock, 
projecting about three yards above the surface of the 
ground, having stones heaped up against two of its 
sides, and at a distance assuming an appearance si- 
milar to the one just described, though of twice its 
magnitude.
Both these piles seem to be coeval 
with the surrounding range; but there are other 
smaller heaps that are evidently of modern contri- 
vance, and appear to have been erected, speaking 
locally, as ornaments to the mountain.
The name 
given to this monument by the country people is the 
Sunken Kirks." 
Castlecarrock.] — The village of Castlecarrock, 
a name derived from Castle-Careg, signifying the 
castle on the rock, is seated in Eskdale ward, eleven 
miles east from Carlisle, at the foot of the extensive 
ridge of mountains already noticed, which extends 
northward from Cross-fell.
Near the village are 
the remains of two ancient fortifications ; one, of an 
oblong shape, situated in a low meadow field, sur- 
rounded by a fosse of some depth, and about 120 
feet from the eastern extremity of the church.
The 
area it encloses, which measures about 100 yards by 
48, has been long in a state of cultivation ; it is 
higher than the adjacent lands, the soil black and 
gravelly.
According fo tradition, a castle once 
stood here, and with its materials was built (he 
church : an idea which derives an appearance of pro- 
bability, from various carved pieces of stone being 
included in the walls.
There is a small pool of wa- 
ter in the moat, whose waters possess similar pro- 
perties to those of Gilsiand Spa. The other is round, 
about afurlongtowards the south, andbetween800 and 
900 yards in circumference.
There is likewise another 
situated in a low meadow, from whose level it rises 
nearly twenty feet, almost perpendicular on every 
side, except eastward, where the ground is most 
elevated.
The soil differs totally from that of the 
surrounding district, being strong and clayey ; some 
stones are occasionally met with by the ploughman.
Vast numbers of sheep are annually bred on the fells 
in this neighbourhood.
Cleahall.] — Cleahall, about a mile south from 
Old Carlisle, is one of the seats of Sir Henry Flet- 
* The late Sir Henry Fletcher, who died at Ashley Park, 
Surrey, in the spring of 1807, was born in the year 1727.
He 
was b.
ought up in the service of the East India Company, and 
successively commanded two of their ships, the Storm on t and 
Middlesex.
On quitting the sen, lie was chosen a Director of 
the Company, an office which he filled for eighteen years, ex- 
cepting when he went out by rotation.
He «as elected M.
P. 
for the county of Cumberland, in 1768 ; and the same year 
married Miss Lintot, of Southwater, in Sussex, by whom he 
had an only son, (the present Sir Henry) and one daughter.
cher, Bart, whose family obtained it by an intermar- 
riage with the female heir of a branch of the Mus- 
graves.* It stands on a well-cultivated spot, in the 
midst of an elevated and dreary moor.
The northern 
prospect is extensive; the low parts of Cumberland, 
the Solway Frith; and the borders of Scotland, being 
all comprehended in the view.
On Roslcy-Hill, a 
few miles to the east, a large fair is held every fort- 
night, between Whitsuntide and Martinmas; at which 
many thousands of black cattle and horses are an- 
nually sold.
Cockermouth.] — The market and borough town 
of Cockermouth is situated in Allerdale ward, 
twenty-six miles south-west from Carlisle, and 302 
north-west by north from London.
It was formerly 
a hamlet, belonging to the parish of Brigham ; but, 
according to some writers, it was constituted a dis- 
tinct parish in the reign of Edward III.
The petty 
sessions of Allerdale ward, above Oerwent, are holden 
here, and also at Whitehaven, and Workiugton.
The 
market is on Monday ; and the fairs, are on the first 
Monday in May, and on the 10th of October.
This town derives its name from its situation at 
the mouth of the river Cocker, which separates it 
into two parts, and then falls into the Derwent near 
the western extremity of the town.
The streets are 
spacious, but irregularly built ; yet many of the 
houses are neat, particularly those on the acclivity 
leading to the castle.
The Moot-hall, Market-house, 
and Shambles, have an ancient, gloomy appearance, 
and like most of these kind of buildings in the north- 
ern towns, prove a considerable obstruction to pas- 
sengers, from being situated in the midst of one of 
the principal streets.
Of the inhabitants, computed 
at 2,901, many are employed in manufacturing hats, 
coarse woollen cloths, shalloons, checks, and coarse 
linens.
The church, which was first built in the 
reign of Edward 111.
was rebuilt of free-stone iu the 
year 1711, with the exception of the ancient tower.
The parts of the town on the opposite sides of the 
river, are connected by a bridge of one arch : on the 
north side is an artificial eminence, called Toot-hill, 
resembling the large barrows, which are found in 
many parts of England.
The hills on the opposite 
side of the Derwent, in this neighbourhood, are cal- 
careous, and almost wholly composed of shells of the 
Anomine genus.
Cockermouth first returned members to Parlia- 
ment, in the twenty-third of Edward I.
but discon- 
tinued the exercise of this privilege for nearly a cen- 
tury and a half, not sending deputies again till 1640, 
In Parliament he supported the opposition, for which, on their 
accession to power, he was rewarded by a baronetage, in 1782.
When Mr. Fox's India Bill was thrown out, he was one of the 
seven commissioners for the affairs of Asia.
In 1796, he voted 
with Mr. Fox for a direct censure on ministers, tor having ad- 
vanced money to the Emperor, and to the Prince oi Conde, 
without the knowledge or consent oi Parliament; and, in 1797, 
he supported Mr. Grey, on the subject of Parliamentary Re- 
form.
He. continue: I to represent the county of Cumberland 
till the general eiection of 1806.
since 
CUMBERLAND.
58 L 
since which time the returns have been regular.
The 
right of electing is limited to the inhabitants having 
burgage tenure, who are about 300 in number.
The 
government of the town is vested in a bailiff' annually 
chosen, at the lord's court, by the sixteen burghers 
who form the jury of the leet, which assists in the 
execution of the duties of this office.
A dispensary for the relief of the indigent poor 
was established here in the year 1793, since which 
period, many thousands of persons have been ad- 
mitted to the benefits of the charity.
Here is a free- 
school ; and several other institutions, for the instruc- 
tion of youth, have been established by the bequests 
and subscriptions of the benevolent.
Cockermouth Castle was the baronial mansion of 
the Lords of Allerdale ; and is generally supposed 
to have been erected by Waldeof, the first Earl of 
this house, a few years after the Norman Conquest.
It is said, that his original seat was at Papcastle, 
two miles below Cockermouth, on the opposite side 
of the Derwent, and that he demolished that edifice, 
and used the materials in constructing this fortress.
It was afterwards possessed, in succession, by the 
families whose arms are seen on the tower at the 
entrance ; but now belongs to the Earl of Egremont.
In the civil wars of Charles, it was garrisoned by 
the King's forces : when reduced by the Parliament- 
ary troops, it was dismantled, and with the excep- 
tion of the outer gateway, part of the buildings at 
the east angle, and two other apartments, has ever 
since continued in ruins.
In the part still entire at 
the eastern angle, the Earl's Audit Courts are 
holden.
These venerable remains occupy the summit of an 
artificial mount, raised on a precipice above the 
Derwent, near its confluence with the Cocker.
The 
castle appears to have been a strong and extensive 
fortress, of a square form, and guarded with square 
towers, the compass of the wall measuring almost 
six hundred yards.
The entrance has been strength- 
ened by a draw-bridge, deep ditch, and tower gate- 
way ; the last of which still remains, and is defended 
by massive gates, and a portcullis.
On the tower, 
the prospect from which is extensive, are the arms 
of the Lucies, Multons, Umphrevilles, Percies, and 
Nevilles.
Within the entrance is an open area, 
about thirty-five yards square, which communicates 
with an interior court, round which the principal 
buildings were situated.
To the north-west are the 
remains of a square tower, apparently the most an- 
cient part of the fortress.
Beneath it is a cell or 
chamber, thirty feet square, which is entered from 
the inner area by a descent of twelve steps, and 
lighted by one small grated window.
The vault is 
formed of groined arches intersecting each other, 
and supported by an octagonal pillar in the centre, 
which is perforated, to contain a leaden pipe, for the 
conveyance of Avater into the cell.
On each side of 
the gateway, between the outward and inner courts, 
is a deep dungeon, sufficiently capacious to contain 
forty or fifty persons : both are vaulted at top, and 
vchl.
I. — -no.
42.
have only a small opening, for the purpose of lower- 
ing down the unhappy wretches whose fate it was to 
be confined in these prisons : on the outside of each 
is a narrow slit, or aperture, having a descending 
slope, through which the wretched inhabitants re- 
ceived their provisions.
Corby.] — The villages of Great and Little Corby 
are both in Eskdale ward, (the former in the parish 
of Wetherall, the latter in that of Warwick ;) be- 
tween five and six miles to the eastward of Carlisle.
The manor of Corby Castle was granted by Henry 
11.
to Hubert de Vallibus, who consigned it to Wil- 
liam de Odard, Lord of Corby.
In the sixteenth of 
Edward the Second, it was held by Rolaud de Rich- 
mund, and the same year conveyed to Sir Andrew 
de Harcla, the unfortunate Earl of Carlisle ; on the 
attainder of that nobleman it was granted to Sir 
Richard de Salkeld, in the possession of whose de- 
scendants it remained until the reign of Henry VII.
when Sir Richard Salkeld dying, without issue male, 
the estate devolved to his five daughters, co-heiresses, 
among whom it was accordingly divided.
From the following epitaph, we are induced to 
suppose, that this Sir Richard, with his lady, were 
interred in Wetherall Church, between the north aisle 
and the chancel : — 
Here lies Sir Richard Salkeld, that knight.
Who in his land was mickle ef niighl ; 
The Captain and Keeper of Carlisle was he, 
And also the Lord of Corkebye ; 
And now he lies under this stane, 
He and his lady Dame Jane.
The eighteenth day of Februere 
This gentle knight was buried here.
I pray you all that this do see, 1 
Pray for their souls for charitee ; >• 
For as they are now — so must we all be.
) 
This inscription is in the Old English character ; 
and above are seen the effigies of a man and woman 
in alabaster.
The two eldest daughters, Catherine 
and Margaret, had Corby in partition ; Lord William 
Howard purchased it from their descendants, and 
settled it upon his second son ; from whom it was 
derived by the present proprietor, Henry HoAvard, 
Esq.
The elegant mansion of Corby Castle is boldly 
situated upon a lofty cliff overhanging the Eden ; 
the rocky banks and finely wooded shores of this 
river affording a prospect highly picturesque.
The 
edifice is irregular, and displays very few marks of 
antiquity, although, as is believed, it has been occu- 
pied by the owners of the manor for centuries past, 
having undergone alterations so various and exten- 
sive, that its name is almost the only circumstance 
that conveys the idea of a fortress.
It is now a con- 
venient, and elegantly furnished domestic habita- 
tion ; but the chief features of the place areata cele- 
brated and beautiful grounds, which, after noticing 
a few paintings in the dining-room, Ave shall briefly 
describe.
Of the paintings, those most entitled to notice are, 
7 h a Philosopher 
>82 
CUMBERLAND.
a Philosopher reading by torchlight ; a full-length 
portrait of the severe Lord William Howard, the 
owner of Naworth Castle, and collateral ancestor of 
the present owner of Corby Castle, clothed in ar- 
mour ; and a curious piece hy Titian, representing 
Charles the First and his Empress, seated at a table 
with an hour-glass before them.
The head of 
Charles is in a fine style of composition and colour- 
ing, very far superior to the lady's ; she is delineated 
with a countenance expressive of grief at the pur- 
pose of her husband, who is imparting to her his in- 
tention of renouncing the world, and spending his 
future days in monastic severities and seclusion.
In 
this apartment is also a remarkable vestige of antiqui- 
ty ; a square stone, dug out of the ruins of Hyde 
Abbey, near Winchester, and inscribed with the 
words Alfredus Rex, dccclxxxi.
in Saxon letters.
That monastery was founded by Alfred.
The beautiful grounds of Corby, to which we have 
alluded, were chiefly laid out by the father of the 
present possessor, who commenced his improvements 
about the year 1706.
He is said to have been one of 
the first persons who had the good sense to break 
through the trammels of the Dutch taste, which had 
been introduced into English gardening in compli- 
ment to King William.
" The exchange of style," 
remarks Mr. Warner, " was so far for the better, 
that the latter mode had classical ideas for it* found- 
ation ; but the climate and scenery of this country 
never harmonized well with decorations taken from 
ancient mythology : and, after a reign of half a cen- 
tury, in which Good sense, led astray by pleasing as- 
sociations, lost itself amidst temples, statues, and in- 
scriptions, Taste at length took her by the hand, and 
presented Nature to her for a prototype ; bidding 
her, in future, borrow all her ideas from that inex- 
haustible source of enchanting variety and picturesque 
beauty.
" Some of these classically-disposed parts at Corby 
Castle are still preserved for the sake of the hand 
that laid them out ; but they only serve as a foil to 
the more modern improvements of Mr. Howard.
To 
these beautiful scenes we were introduced by a de- 
scending path, arched over head by the finely spread- 
ing branches of some fine lime-trees, which admit 
occasional peeps at the reaches of the Eden, both up 
and down the river ; the former showing him in his 
rude, impetuous course, thundering over a rugged 
bed of rock, maddened by the close confinement of 
his banks ; the latter throwing him before the eye 
into a still, lake-like scene, silently rolling on his 
floods through flower-enamelled meads, and gentle 
velvet banks.
" Proceeding onwards for a few hundred yards, a 
point of view is caught, at once curious and pictu- 
resque : the opposite bank of the river now rises 
in front, and a deep face of perpendicular rock, 
* The country people have a tradition, that the excavation 
was made by the younger son of a king of Scotland, named 
Ccnstatitine, as a hermitage ; where he himself lived and died.
whose beetling head is crowned with wood.
Half 
way down this precipice are seen traces of masonry, 
in four small windows, and some regular arrange- 
ments of stone, which prove that human art has ex- 
ercised itself in this singular spot.
They form the 
facing of an excavation called St.Constantine's Cell,* 
consisting of three rooms and a gallery ; either the 
seat of solitary sanctity in superstitious times, or of 
retreat and safety in violent ones ; or, perhaps, de- 
signed for both purposes, as occasion might require.
The inhabitants, at all events, might be sure of rest- 
ing unmolested in this retreat, since it can only be 
reached by a path, steep, narrow, and perilous, and 
which, before the wood was cleared away, must also 
have been invisible.
With this object, the rocky 
bank on our right, the river before us, and a castel- 
lated summer-house crowning the distant eminence, 
we paced along the margin of the stream for half a 
mile, when the rock to the right suddenly rears itself 
to a tremendous height, its perpendicular face em- 
bossed in the most singular manner with the knarled 
roots of some vast and ancient oaks, whose giant 
arms, aloft in air, stretch themselves over the walk 
beneath.
This grand scene is opposed on the other 
side by a bank of gentle declivity, and pastoral ap- 
pearance ; and between them is caught another long 
reach of the river, terminated by a promontory, one 
dark mass of fir-tree shade from top to bottom- Re- 
tracing our footsteps we took the walk that exhibits 
the old decorations of the place ; and keeping aside 
the river, opens in succession, the cascade, the tem- 
ple, the excavated apartment, and a stair-case hewn 
out of the rock, affording a descent from its summit 
to its foot." 
Amongst the interesting objects in these grounds, 
is a Roman altar, preserved within a recess, formed 
by an overhanging rock.
Crofton Place.] — -Crofton Place, the seat of Sir 
WastallBrisco,Bart.
is situated in Cumberland ward, 
in the parish of Thursby, three miles and a quarter 
north-east by east from Wigton.
The mansion is a 
commodious building, erected in an open and pea- 
sant situation, within a small park.
At a little dis- 
tance is an artificial mount of a conical form, con- 
structed probably as the tumulus of some ancient 
chieftain, and now planted with trees.
The deer 
park contains about 150 acres ; the woodlands in- 
cluding new plantations, about 100.
Several old 
coins were found on this estate, not many years ago: 
on one of them were the arms of England and France 
on a shield, with the inscription E.
D. G.
Rosa sine 
Spina ; the reverse, civitas London : another was 
inscribed Edwardus Rex Dns Hyb ; the reverse, 
civitas Lincoln.
The late Sir J.
Brisco's general at- 
tention to agriculture, and plantations, greatly im- 
proved the appearance of this part of the county ; 
many acres having been cultivated within the last 
The three cells are from twenty to twtnty-two feet in depth; 
the gallery is about seven feet broad.
This is also called We- 
theral Safeguard.
8 thirty 
CUMBERLAND.
383 
thirty or forty years, 'which were only morass or bar- 
ren heath.
Croglin.] — Great Croglin, or Kirk Croglin, and 
Little Croglin, are both in Leath ward ; the former 
thirteen miles, the latter eleven miles north-north- 
east from Penrith.
These manors, or villages, de- 
rived their appellation from the neighbouring river, 
whose name, compounded from the British word 
Careg, a rock, and Lyn, water, has been corrupted 
into Croglin.
This possession was granted to a fol- 
lower of Richard the First's, named Hastings, for 
his services at the siege of Jerusalem during the 
Crusade ; and it has been affirmed, that the deed of 
conveyance was signed beneath the walls of that 
city.
In the reign of Edward the First it came into 
the possession of the Whartons, one of whom mar- 
ried the heiress of the Hastings family, and assumed 
their arms ; Sable, a Manche Argent : from him it 
descended to the late Duke of Wharton, by whose 
trustees it was sold to the Duke of Somerset, whose 
descendant, the Earl of Egremont, is the present 
owner.* 
Crosthwaite.] — Great Crosthwaite and Little 
Crosthwaite are both in Allerdale ward ; the former, 
one mile north-west from Keswick ; the latter, four 
miles north-west by north from the same town.
In 
the church is a monumental brass, to the memory of 
Sir John Radcliff and his lady, of the date of 1327.
Sir John Bankes, Bart.
Attorney General, and 
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the reign of 
Charles I.
gave a considerable sum, for erecting a 
manufacturing house here, and for maintaining the 
poor of Keswick, his native place.
t 
Cumrew.] — Curarew is a little village, situated at 
the bottom of the fells of the same name, in Eskdale 
ward, twelve miles east- south-east from Carlisle.
On the summit of the fells, is a prodigious cairn, 
called Cardunneth ; and another about 300 yards 
from the church ; near which there are also some 
considerable ruins, supposed to be those of Dunwal- 
loght, formerly the property of William, Lord Dacre 
of the North, who obtained a license from Edward 
.the First to fortify and convert his mansion into a 
castle.
The ruins are so confused, that the form of 
the structure cannot be determined.
In the common 
fields, west of Cumrew, a human skeleton was dis- 
* Dr. John Locke, a celebrated physician, was horn in the 
neighbouring parish of Ainstable, of which his father was cu- 
rate.
He was taught the rudiments of education at Croglin, 
whence he was removed to the grammar school at Bishop Auk- 
land, where lie distinguished himself by his rapid advances in 
the classes of that ancient seminary.
He afterwards went to 
London, intending to engage in the profession of arms; but he 
soon relinquished his design, and attached himself to the study 
of medicine.
His success became equal to his application, and 
he made great progress both in business and in knowledge.
About the year 1765, he drew up the plan for the institution of 
the Westminster Lying-in-Hospital, and purchased the piece 
of ground on which that structure stands on a building lease, 
which he afterwards assigned, without compensation, to the 
Governors of the Hospital.
He died on the eighth of August, 
1792, of a pulmonary affection, which appears to have been in- 
covered some years ago, enclosed in a sort of coffin 
of rough stones : the sepulchre itself was covered 
with a heap of stones.
A stone enclosure, or cairn, 
was also opened on the estate of John Gill, Esq. and 
an urn of pottery ware, curiously carved on the out- 
side, found within, containing some black mould ; 
the urn was enclosed with broad flag-stones, and se- 
cured by one placed over the top.
There are two 
little manors in this parish, called Brackenthwaite, 
and New- Biggin.
Cumwhitton.] — Cumwhitton is in Eskdale ward, 
nine miles and a quarter east-south-east from Car- 
lisle.
Within this parish lies all, or great part of the 
large waste called King Harry ; upon which the pa- 
rishes of Cumwhitton and Ainstable depasture their 
cattle ; the Earl of Carlisle being the Lord, and hav- 
ing the soil.
In the middle of this desolate waste, 
where the ground is every where rent with torrents, 
and the deep-worn channels filled with rugged stones, 
is an extensive Druidical circle, called, from its ap- 
pearance, and contrast to the black, mossy earth by 
which it is surrounded, the Grey Yauds, or horses ; 
yauds being a Cumberland name for horses.
The 
number of stones which compose this monument is 
eighty-eight ; the diameter of the circle is about fifty- 
two yards ; the stones are but small, the largest not 
exceeding four feet in height ; that of the greatest 
magnitude stands about four yards from the circle, 
on the north-west point.
The barrenness of the 
country in the vicinity of this vestige of former cus- 
toms is remarkable, almost the only symptoms of ve- 
getation being a thin covering of heath and moss.
For several centuries, the estates in this parish have 
regularly descended from father to son ; and the re- 
spective families having had but little intercourse with 
the more open parts of the country, a great simila- 
rity of character and disposition is found amongst 
the inhabitants.
" Honest, credulous, and supersti- 
tious," observes a contemporary writer, " they are 
tenacious of conforming to ancient customs, and have 
a bluntness of demeanour which assimilates, in a cer- 
tain degree, with primaeval manners.
Their tene- 
ments are but little better than hovels, covered with 
straw ; and the number of houses throughout the 
whole parish, though congregated into seven villages, 
scarcely amounts to 100." 
duced by too intense an application to study.
Amongst his 
few singularities, was an extraordinary, and even troublesome, 
solicitude respecting fresh air.
All his windows were made to 
admit it, both at top and bottom ; "and neither in his professional 
visits, nor those of friendship, could he be induced to remain in 
anv room in which fresh air was not instantly and copiously 
admitted." 
p Sir John Bankes was educated at Queen's College, Ox- 
ford, from whence he removed to Gray's Inn, and in due course 
was called to the bar.
In 1G30 he was made attors.ey-genernl 
to the Prince of Wales, and in 1G40 chief justice of the Common 
Pleas.
He displayed his loyalty and courage at the beginning 
of the Rebellion ; and his lady defended Corff Castle, the family 
seat, against the Parliament forces, till it was relieved bj the 
Earl of Caernarvon.
Sir John continued with the King at Ox- 
ford, and died there in 1044.
Dacre.] 
oS-i 
CUMBERLAND.
Dacrt:.] — Dacre, or Dacor, is situated in Leath 
ward, live miles south-west by west from Penrith.
Rede, in his Ecclesiastical History, mentions a mo- 
nastery, which, " being built near the river Dacore, 
took its name from it, over which, the religious man 
Suidebart presided." The, church is a neat struc- 
ture.
s;ud to have been built of the ruins of the mo- 
nastery, of which no other traces are now extant.
Near the altar is the figure of a knight, cut in red 
stone.
He is in a recumbent position, with his legs 
crossed, his hands being lifted up, and his sword 
sheathed by his side : this is presumed to be in me- 
mory of the first Lords Dacre.
In the church-yard 
are tour curious monuments ; they represent bears, 
sitting on their haunches, and clasping a rude pillar, 
or ragged staff", on which two of them rest their heads.
On the back of each of the others is a lynx.
These 
figures are about five feet in height, and Bishop Ni- 
cholson conceives, that they relate to some achieve- 
ment of the Dacre family.
Dacre Castle, in this parish, is famous, for being 
the place where Constantine, King of the Scots, and 
Eugenius, King of Cumberland, put themselves and 
their kingdoms under the protection of the English 
King Athelstan.
This is supposed to have been the 
original mansion of the illustrious family of Dacre ; 
and it certainly was their place of residence for many 
generations.
Some years ago, it was converted into 
a commodious farm-house : the moat is filled up, 
and the outworks are destroyed : four square towers, 
composed of durable stone, and connected by a cen- 
tral building, are the principal parts now standing.
The windows are narrow and grated ; and the gloom 
which overspreads the interior, is deeply expressive 
of the dark ages of feudal tyranny, in which it is 
supposed to have been built.
In a note, at a pre- 
ceding page, the Dacres are said to have obtained 
their name from Acre, in the holy land, where one of 
their ancestors distinguished himself under Richard 
Cceur-de-Lion.* Some, however, are of opinion, 
that the family derived their name from their posses- 
sions, on this spot.
This opinion seems to be 
strengthened by what Bede has mentioned, respect- 
ing the river Dacor.
In the reign of Henry VII.
Johan, heiress of the Dacre family, espoused Sir 
Richard Fynes, Knight, who was declared Lord 
Dacre of the South, in his wife's right.
Their de- 
scendants remained in possession of the castle and 
estates until the year 1716, when Sir Christopher 
Musgrave bought them ; and they have been since 
resold to Edward Hassel, Esq. of Dalemain.
The last-mentioned estate and mansion adjoining, 
were purchased by Sir Edward Hassel, in the reig-n 
of Charles II.
of the Laytons, who had possessed it 
* Walter Scott, in his Lay of the Last Minstrel, thus alludes 
to this circumstance: — 
" To back and guard the archer band, 
Lord Dacre's bill-men were at hand ; 
from the time of Henry III.
The house is a spaci- 
ous modern building of red stone, situated near the 
foot of a rocky eminence, and surrounded at 
some distance with elevated grounds covered with 
trees.
Dalston.] — Dalston is a respectable village, seat- 
ed on the banks of the Caldew, in Cumberland ward, 
four miles and a half south-south-west from Car- 
lisle.
The importance of this place, which was be- 
stowed on the see of Carlisle, by Henry HI.
has of 
late years been much increased by the introduction 
j of various branches of the cotton manufacture, esta- 
blished here about thirty years ago, by the late Mr.
Hodson of Manchester.
At the east end of the vil- 
lage is a cross, raised on several steps ; the shaft of 
which is sculptured with various coats of arms : on 
one shield is a triple combination of crosses, proba- 
bly symbolical of the Trinity ; on another, three kites" 
heads, which were the arms of Bishop Kyte, who 
held the see of Carlisle in the reign of Henry VIII.
The church is a good stone building without aisles, 
yet sufficiently capacious for five hundred peo- 
ple.
Near Dalston Church is a field, called the Chapel 
Flat, supposed to have been the site of a hermitage, 
occupied in the year 1343 by a recluse, named Hugh 
de Lilford.
The situation is strikingly romantic, in 
a deep vale surrounded by rocks and hanging woods, 
and watered by the winding current of the Caldew.
" Here," observe Nicholson and Burn, in their His- 
tory of Cumberland, " was anciently a British tem- 
ple, or something of that sort ; for, a good many 
years ago, a circle of rude stones, each about three 
feet in diameter, was discovered; the whole circle 
being about thirty yards in circumference.
Within 
the circle, towards the east point, were found four 
stones, much of the same form as the rest, lying one 
upon another, supposed to be something of the kist- 
vaen kind.
Not far from thence was a very regular 
tumulus, or barrow, about eight yards in diameter at 
the bottom, and two at the top, and about three 
yards in height.
When opened, two stones were 
found near the top, about three feet long, and one 
broad ; each having a kind of circle rudely cut on 
the upper part.
Nothing particular was discovered 
underneath, though the ground was opened more 
than four feet below the level." 
There is an endowed school in the village.
Dalston Hall, the ancient seat of the family of 
Dalston, but now, or lately, the property of John 
Sowerby, Esq. who purchased the estate in the year 
1795, for upwards of 15,000/.
is a venerable man- 
sion, apparently, of the time of Richard the Third, 
or Henry the Seventh.
Over a window of the up- 
A hardy race, on Irthing bred, 
With Kirtles white and crosses red, 
Array'd beneath the banner tall, 
That stream' d o'er Acre's conquer'd wall ; 
And minstrels, as they marched in order, 
Played ; ' Noble Lord Dacre, he lives on the border.' " 
per 
CUMBERLAND.
585 
per story, is this inscription, in Old English charac- 
ters, reversed : — 
3Iofjn Daljston, dSlgnbtt foiprje, mm t& bnlngnj.
Amongst the fillets of the stones are four shields, 
with the Dalston arms, and the figures of a rat, and 
a cat.
In several of the apartments, the vestiges of 
former grandeur yet remain.
In a field fronting the 
house are the traces of an ancient camp ; and near it 
a barrow, planted with fir-trees.
Drumbursh.] — Drumburgh, the Gabrosentum of 
the Notitia, and seventeenth station ad lineam Valli, 
is at the distance of ten miles west by north from 
Carlisle, and somewhat more than four miles from 
Burgh, measuring by the course of the Roman wall, 
which appears to have run by Bousted-hill and Eas- 
ton, near the borders of the marsh.
To trace its 
course is, however, difficult, if not impossible ; the 
operations of building, and of the plough, having 
occasioned its track to be nearly obliterated.
At the extremity of the marsh, on a rising ground, 
the site of the ancient fort, stands Drumburgh Cas- 
tle, a large building, erected by the Dacres about 
three centuries ago, with the materials of the old 
castle, and the wall.
The station was about 110 
yards square ; the ditch very deep.
The ramparts 
are yet visible ; but the area which they enclose has 
been converted into a garden and orchard ; and the 
castle itself is a farm-house.
It was here, in the 
opinion of florsley, that the cohors secunda Thra- 
cum were stationed in the time of the lower empire.
At a small distance from Drumburgh, on the west, 
both Severus's Wall and Ditch again become con- 
spicuous, and may be traced the greater part of the 
way to Bowness.
Drumburgh was formerly a chapelry to Bowness ; 
but the chapel is now in ruins.
Edenhall.] — The little village of Edenhall is si- 
tuated on the western bank of the river Eden, in 
Leath ward, four miles east-north-east from Penrith.
The houses are chiefly built of red free-stone, and 
covered with thin slabs of the same colour.
The 
vicinal scenery is remarkably picturesque, especially 
on the river banks, which are decorated with various 
hanging groves ; the Eden pouring its waters 
through a meandering and rocky channel.
Various 
monuments of the Musgrave family are seen in the 
church : their ancestor came over with the Norman 
William, and possibly obtained his name from hav- 
ing been keeper of the hawks under that monarch.
In the reign of Henry VI.
Thomas Musgrave es- 
poused Jane, daughter and co-heiress of Sir Wil- 
liam de Stapleton, Knight ; whose progenitors had 
possessed Edenhall from the first year of Edward 
the First.
By this marriage the Musgraves became 
proprietors of the estates ; and the manor-house was 
made their principal residence, up to the middle of 
* The south part of this county, observes Camden, is called 
Copeland, and Coupland, because it rises in pointed mountains, 
vol.
I. — no.
4'2, 
last century ; when Sir Philip Musgrave removed to 
Kempton Park, in the county of Middlesex.
Sir 
John Chardin Musgrave repaired the mansion, a 
few years ago, intending to make it his occasional 
residence.
An old drinking-glass, enamelled with 
colours, and called " the Luck of Edenhall," is here 
preserved with the utmost care.
On the top are the 
letters I.
II.
S., which evidently indicate the sacred 
use to which it was originally appropriated : tradi- 
tion, however, affirms it to have been seized from a 
company of faries, whilst sporting near a spring in 
the garden, called St. Cuthbert's Well ; who, after a 
fruitless attempt to recover it, " vanished into thin 
air," saying, 
" If that glass either break or fall, 
Farewell the luck of Edenhall." 
Edsiond Castle.]— The situation of this seat, 
near the junction of the rivers Gelt and lrthin°-, is 
eminently beautiful ; and, within these few years, 
the grounds have been greatly improved, by new 
plantations, walks through the woods, &c.
Thomas 
Graham, Esq. the gentleman to whom the estate is 
indebted for these and many other tasteful and judi- 
cious alterations, is, we believe, still the pro- 
prietor.
On a rising ground, about a quarter of a mile 
from Edmond Castle, near the village of Hayton, is 
a mound of earth, called Castle Hill.
It is raised 
about four yards, is hollow on the top, and more than 
ninety feet in diameter.
Egremont.]^— The town of E^remont is situated 
in Allerdale ward, forty-five miles south-west by 
south from Carlisle, and 302 miles north-west by 
north from London.
It lies about two miles from 
the sea, on the northern side of the vale that is wa- 
tered by the Eden.
The origin of this town appears connected with 
that of the castle, which was erected here, about the 
commencement of the twelfth century, by William, 
brother of Ranulph de Meschines, who bestowed on 
the former the whale barony of Copeland,* which 
included all the country between the sea, and the 
rivers Duddon and Derwent.
William de Mes- 
chines caused the name of the barony to be changed 
from Copeland to Egreinont.
The houses are chiefly disposed in one long and 
spacious street ; many of them have a piazza in 
front, and wear the appearance of considerable an- 
tiquity.
The castle seems to have been of great 
strength, but not very extensive ; its ruins occupy 
the summit of an eminence on the west side of the 
town.
The approach and principal entrance were 
from the south, where a drawbridge secured the pas- 
sage over a deep moat, which surrounded the for- 
tress, and was originally walled on both sides, hav- 
ing a rampart of earth on the exterior.
The gate- 
way is vaulted with semicircular arches, and de- 
which the Britons call Kopa, or as others think Copeland for 
Copperland, from its rich veins of copper.
7 i fended 
586 
CUMBERLAND.
fended by a strong tower, which appears to be the 
most ancient part of the fabric.
The outward wall 
enclosed an area of a square form, but it is now 
wholly decayed, and has only a postern on the east 
side remaining-.
Westward from the area, is an 
ascent to three narrow gates, standing in a line, and 
close together ; these appear to have communicated 
with the outworks, and have each been defended by 
a portcullis.
Beyond the gates is a lofty artificial 
mount, whereon stood an ancient circular tower, the 
western side of which was levelled not many years 
ago : the height of the mount is seventy -eight feet 
perpendicular above the moat.
The construction of 
some of the walls is singular ; they are built with 
large thin stones, placed in inclining positions ; the 
courses lie different ways, and the whole has been 
run together with lime, pebbles, &c.
In ancient times, Egremont was a borough, and 
possessed the privilege of returning Members to 
Parliament : it was disfranchised on petition of the 
burghers, who thought the expeuce of representa- 
tion exceeded its benefits.
The inhabitants were in- 
vested with many privileges, under charters granted 
by the immediate successors of William de Mes- 
chines, and were also enjoined the performance of 
many of the servile duties which distinguish- 
ed the ages of feudal tyranny.
The charter 
granted by Richard Lucy, who possessed the ba- 
rony about the reign of King John, is still extant, 
and displays singular vestiges of the abject state of 
vassalage in which the people then lived.
The bur- 
gesses were obliged to find armed men for the de- 
fence of the castle forty days at their own charge ; 
they were bound to aids for the redemption of the 
Lord and his heir from captivity ; for the knight- 
hood of one of his sons ; and the marriage of one of 
his daughters.
They were to find him twelve men 
for his military array ; to hold watch and ward ; and 
were restrained from entering the forest of Enner- 
dale with bow and arrow.
Every burgess who kept 
a plough- was compelled to till the Lord's ground 
one day in the year, and also to find a man to mow 
and reap in autumn.
If a woman belonging to the 
borough were seduced, the fine to be paid to the 
Lord by the male offender, was three shillings : but 
if a burgess seduced the daughter of a rustic, who 
was not a burgess, he was excused the penalty, un- 
less it could be proved that he had promised her 
marriage.
The wife of a burgess, guilty of using 
contumelious language to a neighbour, forfeited 
four-pence.
Egremont has a Saturday's weekly market, and 
a fair on the 19th of September.
The government of the town is vested in a jury, 
and a chief magistrate, called a Sergeant, who is 
elected annually.
The whole manor is the property 
of the Earl of Egremont.
The number of houses is 
336 : that of the inhabitants 1556 ; of these 730 are 
males, and 826 females.
On a common adjoining Egremont are several 
tumuli, particularly a remarkable one of loose stones', 
forty yards in circumference.
At a little distance is 
a circle of ten large stones, enclosing an area of about 
sixty feet in diameter.
Ellenborough.] — The village of Ellenborough, 
or Elneburgh, is situated in Allerdale ward, on the 
south side of the Ellen, six miles north-west by 
west, from Cockermouth.
It is, we believe, from 
this place, that the present Lord Chief Justice of 
the Court of King's Bench derives his title.
At some distance from the village, on an emi- 
nence, on the opposite side of the river, are the re- 
mains of a considerable Roman station, generally 
called Ellenborough ; which, in the opinion of 
Ilorsley and Warburton, was the Virosidum of the 
Notitia.
Camden supposed it to be Volantium ; and 
other writers have styled it Olenacum.
The fort is 
on a high bank, overhanging the sea, and command- 
ing an extensive prospect of the Scotch coast, to 
overlook and prevent irruptions from which this 
station appears to have been chosen.
Its area is a 
square of about 100 yards, with four entrances, and 
defended by a double ditch and rampart.
It is considered, that the numerous vestiges of 
antiquity, and variety of inscriptions, which have 
been found at this station, are not to be equalled 
by those discovered in any other in Britain.
They 
are chiefly preserved, however, at Nether-Hall, the 
seat of the Senhouse family, to whom the manor has 
belonged for several centuries.
It stands in a plea- 
sant situation, near Maryport, up the river Ellen ; it 
was formerly called Elneburgh-Hall, and Ellenbo- 
rough-Hall.
The principal of the antique remains, alluded to 
above, is a Roman altar, about five feet high, the 
finest and most curious ever met with in Britain.
— 
It is of reddish coloured stone, ornamented with 
sculptures.
On the front is a military inscription ; 
over which, on the capital, are two full faces, sup- 
posed to have been intended as representations of 
the sun : between them appears to be a bunch of 
wheat.
On the back of this altar, and upon the 
upper edge, are the words " Volanti Vivas," from 
which Camden conjectures, that the altar was votive 
for the life of G.
Cornelius Peregrinus, who lived at 
Volantium, and was erected by the inhabitants as an 
acknowledgment of his kindness and protection.
— 
Under the inscription are the figures of several in- 
struments, used in sacrifices.
On the left side are a 
mallet and a jug ; and on the right a goblet, a dish, 
and a pear.
This altar is at Lord Lonsdale's seat 
at Whitehaven.
Amongst other remains discovered at this station 
was an altar dedicated to Belatucader, since lost ; 
a stone neatly carved, with a corona supported by 
two Victories, and the words — 
VICTORLE 
AUGG 
D D 
NN 
Victoria: 
CUMBERLAND.
-587 
Victoria Augustorum Dominorwn Nostrorum; erect- 
ed, as Horsley conjectures, in honour of the Emper- 
ors Dioclesian and Maximian, to whom the title 
Domini Nostri is more frequently given than to any 
others ; and a second altar, with a figure on the 
right side, supposed to he that of Hercules, having 
in one hand a club, and in the other what Horsley 
and Pennant suppose to be the Hesperian Apples; 
on the left side Mars, with his spear and shield : 
and on his front this inscription — 
DIS DEABVSQ 
P. POSTVM1VS 
AGTLLANVS 
PRiEF 
COH I DELM 
In addition to the CoJiors prima Dalmaturum, 
mentioned on this altar, both the cokors prima Uis- 
pamoruntf and the colwrs prima Bcctasiorum, appear 
to have been quartered at this station.
Another 
altar met with in this vicinity since the time of Cam- 
den, had been erected to the local goddess Setlocenia, 
by ' arias Ahareus, a Centurion.
This is preserved 
at Nether-Hall, together with a sculpture of a female 
with long flowing hair, and a vessel, or urn, in her 
hand, supposed by Pennant to represent the goddess 
Setlocenia.
In the year 1779, a stone was found 
within the area of the station, with this inscription, 
being the only one discovered here that mentions 
the legions : 
VEXIE LEG II AgV 
ET XX.
VV 
FECERVNT 
Vexillatio Legionis secundcc Augusta et vicissimce 
Valentin Pictricisjecerunt.
A vault within the fort, twelve feet in length, and 
ten and a half in breadth, was opened, in the year 
1766, and at the bottom a thin piece of beaten gold 
was found, together with a brass ring, not unlike a 
curtain ring, and the root of a stag's horn, with a 
small portion of the skull ; the beam, and below the 
antler, which had been sawn off.
On a stone that 
was also discovered here, were three disproportioned 
female figures, rudely sculptured in niches, supposed 
to have been intended for the Dea?
Matres ; a cir- 
cumstance from which Mr. Gough was led to ob- 
serve, " that it is highly probable that this vault was 
the temple of the Deae Matres, who were here re- 
presented as they have been found in other parts of 
Britain." 
In the year 1795, within the fort, near the prreto- 
rium, was found a square stone, the upper part sin- 
gularly cut, which Hayman Rooke, Esq. who trans- 
mitted a drawing of it to the Society of Antiquaries, 
supposed to have been the base of a small ohelisk, 
used as a gnomon to a horizontal ground-dial.
— 
On one of the sides is carved a woman on horseback, 
without a bridle.
Eastward of the fort, about sixty 
yards, is a small tumulus, or mound of earth, which 
was opened in the year 1712, and found to consist 
of layers of different substances.
On the top was 
the sod, or common turf; then a layer of crumbly 
earth, which was at first brittle, but on being expos- 
ed to the air, it acquired great hardness, and a ferru- 
ginous appearance : next was a bed of strong blue 
clay, mixed with fern roots, placed on two or three 
layers of turf, with their grassy sides together ; and 
beneath these were the bones of a heifer and of a 
colt, with some wood ashes-near thein.
Pennant, who visited Ellenborough about the 
year 1772, gives the following account of some dis- 
coveries that were made here, on the removal of the 
earth that covered the relics of the station.
" The 
streets and footways have been traced, paved with 
stones from the shore, or free-stone from the quar- 
ries ; the last much worn by use.
Many founda- 
tions of houses, the cement still very strong, and the 
plaster, on several remains of walls, of a pink colour.
Several vaults have been discovered ; one with free- 
stone steps, much used ; fire hearths open before, 
inclosed with a circular wall behind : from the re- 
mains of fuel, it is evident, that the Romans used 
both wood and pit coal.
Bones and teeth of various 
animals, and pieces of the horns of stags, many of 
the latter sawed, were found here ; also shells of 
oysters, muscles, and snails.
Broken earthen-ware, 
fragments of glass vessels and mirrors, and two 
pieces of a painted glass cup, which evince the an- 
tiquity of that art." 
In the year 1787, the remains of the Roman gate- 
way at the north entrance of this station were disco- 
vered.
The stones were so exactly fitted as to stand 
close to each other, without cement.
Soon after- 
wards the arch which had covered the gate was 
found entire, but was quickly destroyed, through 
the thoughtlessness of the labourers, who carried 
away the stones to repair walls.
In the following 
year the remains of an elegant Roman bath were 
discovered ; and several pieces of broken sculpture, 
inscribed stones, &c.
Fluskew Common.] — We notice this inclosure, 
in the vicinity of Graystock, for the sake of mention- 
ing, that, in the year 1773, several stone coffins, 
arms, and other sepulchral remains, were found 
here ; and that, in 1781, a curious piece of antiquity 
was discovered, thought to have been used as an in- 
strument to close the curtain of a state tent.
It was 
wholly of silver, and consisted of a rim, or frame, of 
an oval form, and somewhat more than seven inches 
and a half in its longest diameter, with a tongue of 
the length of twenty-two inches.
There were three 
hollow balls on the rim, one of which had a sliding 
socket ; the others being fixed near the different 
sides of an aperture in the lowest part of the rim, 
through which the tongue fell.
The under side 
of each ball had a rude, figure of a mullet; the upper 
sides were crossed or chequered.
The workmanship 
was extremely coarse, and it appeared to have beeu 
executed with the hammer only.
The whole weight 
was about twenty-five ounces.
Geltsdale Forest.] — Geltsdale Forest, holdeu 
8 under 
588 
CUMBERLAND.
under a lease from the crown, by the Earl of Car- 
lisle, takes its name from the river Gelt, which runs 
partly through it.
It is a considerable tract of moun- 
tainous land, chiefly heathy pasture ; but in the lower 
parts are some extensive birch and alder woods.
— 
This, and the adjoining forest of Brierthwaite, now 
Tindale, anciently belonged to the Priory of Hex- 
ham ; and, at the dissolution of that house, were 
granted to the Lords of Gilsland.
Gilsland Spa.] — Gilsland Spa, a place much 
frequented during the season, by persons of fashion 
from both sides of the Tweed, is situated on the 
confines of the county, about two miles south from 
the village of Temmon, in Northumberland, and 
eight miles south-east of Bewcastle.
It has only 
two houses, and some smaller dwellings for the ac- 
commodation of the company ; but the former are 
large, and commodious, and on the plan of those at 
Harrowgate.
One of these buildings is called the 
Spaws, and the other the Orchard-house : the for- 
mer is delightfully situated on a steep bank of the 
river Irthing ; the latter is about a mile distant, also 
by the side of a river, on both sides of which are 
beautiful walks, with benches at convenient dis- 
tances.
" The spring," observes Warner, in his 
Tour through the Northern Counties, " which at- 
tracts the company to this sequestered and desolate 
spot is near the upper house ; it is strongly impreg- 
nated with sulphur, but extremely agreeable to the 
palate : its effects in cutaneous disorders are power- 
fully good.
At a small distance, on the moor, is a 
chalybeate spring ; and another four miles distant, 
highly charged with alum and vitriol.
The agree- 
able mixture and diversified combination of those 
constituents of landscape, rock and wood, water 
and dingle, render Gilsland Spa a spot of great in- 
terest to the painter ; but it is still more attractive 
to the geologist, as the banks of the river, being in 
many places utterly bare of vegetation, present a 
beautiful and complete specimen of the stratification 
of this part of the country.
Their height is about 
forty yards, wherein the following strata are thus 
disposed : mould, about six inches ; common ferru- 
ginous or coarse martial clay, five yards ; loose ar- 
gillaceous shiver, growing gradually more compact 
as it descends; two yards ; coarse freestone, eight 
yards ; limestone, one yard ; black shiver, approach- 
ing to coal, one yard ; a stratum of hard coarse 
schistus, sandstone, with ironstone and limestone 
intermixed, singularly composed and blended toge- 
ther, six yards ; another stratum of black shiver, 
out of which the sulphurated water issues ; below 
this the indurated argil, called chinch.
The black 
shiver for the most part is strongly impregnated 
with alum ; and some of it so strongly with alum 
and green vitriol, as to hold out a fair encourage- 
ment for the establishment of works for those articles 
in this neighbourhood." 
The barony of Gilsland, or Gillesland, which, be- 
fore the Conquest, belonged to Bucth, was granted 
by Ranulphus de Meschines, in the time of the Con- 
queror, to one Hubert, a Norman, who took his 
name from it.
Gill, in this county dialect, signifies 
a dale, or valley, and hence he was styled Hubert 
de Vaux, or Vallibus.
The wall of Severus enters Cumberland about a 
mile west from Gilsland Spa.
Gowbarrow Park.] — This extensive demesne, 
seated on the north bank of Uls-water, belongs to 
the Duke of Norfolk ; who generally resides here a 
short time in the summer season.
The park con- 
tains nearly 1800 acres : it was formerly ornamented 
with a great number of ancient oaks : they have 
been nearly all cut down ; but many of their im- 
mense roots point out the majestic size which they 
had attained.
Gowbarrow Park was one of the 
tracts proclaimed a forest by William Rufus, and it 
still abounds with deer.
On a rising ground, at a 
short distance from the lake, is a castellated edifice, 
built by the Duke about thirty years ago, and called 
Lyulph's Tower, from a tradition that a chieftain, 
named Lyulph, was the owner of these possessions 
about the time of the Conquest.
At some distance from the Park is a celebrated 
cascade, called Airey Force ; the pathway to which 
is carried through a rocky glen, from whose depths 
the sun is excluded by the solemn branches which 
wave above.
The water falls from the summit of a 
cliff clothed with wood, and descends almost eighty 
feet perpendicularly.
The violence of the fall dashes 
the stream into vapour ; and the refraction of the 
sun's rays is frequently rendered visible by the pris- 
matic colours of the spray, beaming with concentric 
rainbows.
The bason into which the cataract pours 
itself is very deep ; and seems to have been worn into 
its present form, by the force of the water impetu- 
ously dashing from the precipice through a suc- 
cession of ages.
The stream above the fall is abun- 
dantly stocked with fish of various sorts.
Graystock.] — This barony is understood to have 
been granted by Ranulph de Meschines, to one 
Lyolfe or Lyulphe, and confirmed to his son Pharne, 
who assumed the name of Graystock, by Henry the 
First.
In this family it continued till the reign of 
Henry the Seventh, when Elizabeth, daughter and 
heiress to Ralph, the last Lord Graystock, married 
Thomas Lord Dacre of Gilsland, whose descend- 
ants retained it till the time of Queen Elizabeth, 
when Anne, eldest daughter and co-heiress of 
George Lord Dacre, conveyed it to the Howards by 
her marriage with Philip, Earl of Arundel, eldest 
son to the Duke of Norfolk.
The little village of Graystock, or Graystoke, is 
situated near the east side of Gravstock Park, in 
Leath ward, five miles west from Penrith.
It for- 
merly was collegiate ; and Ncvill, the Pope's legate, 
and archbishop of York, appointed, in the year 1382, 
a master and six canons.
Some of the stalls are yet 
extant, but of six charities that were founded here 
previously to the erection of the college, there are 
no remains.
The interior greatly needs repair : 
several windows are filled with painted glass, but 
cither 
CUMBERLAND.
i89 
either so misplaced, or so mutilated, that the design 
can no longer be traced.
There is a grand alabaster 
tomb, erected for some of the Barons of Graystock, 
near the altar.
On it are the effigies of two knights; 
the one of a gigantic size, clad in armour, and girt 
with a sword ; the other likewise dressed in armour, 
but of a different description, is represented resting 
his feet upon a lion.
The upper part of the se- 
pulchre is embellished with figures of angels, be- 
neath ornamental canopies, sustaining shields, on 
which armorial bearings appear to have been paint- 
ed.* 
Graystock Castle, the seat and birth-place of the 
present Duke of Norfolk, is seated on an eminence, 
towards the south-east side of the Park.
It has a 
gradual ascent from the north, but declines more 
precipitously to the south and east.
The ancient 
structure was fortified ; and some of its broken 
towers, and ether remains, are still preserved 
in the present building, which was erected prin- 
cipally by the Hon. Charles Howard, the Duke's 
great-grandfather, about the middle of the 17th 
century.
Considerable additions, however, have 
been made by the present noble owner.
A rivulet, 
which falls into the river Peteril, flows by the castle 
walls with some rapidity, and has been made to con- 
tribute to the beauty of the scenery, by being col- 
lected into reservoirs, and caused to descend in ar- 
tificial cascades.
The upper sheet of water, which 
* The Right Rev. John Law, D.
D. Bishop of Elphin (who 
died in Dublin, on the 19th of March, 1810, at the age of 65) 
was a native of this village, of which his father, the late Bishop 
of Carlisle, was rector.
He was brother to Lord Ellenborough.
He received his education at the Charter-house, and became a 
member of Christ's college, Cambridge ; in which university 
he was eminently distinguished, both as a mathematician and a 
classical scholar.
He succeeded to a fellowship, and became 
one of the tutors in his college ; his co-acljutors being Dr. Shep- 
herd and Dr. Paley.
Such a triumvirate have rarely, if ever, 
appeared in such an office, in any one college, at one time.
His father, in 1773, gave him the vicarage of Wark worth, in 
Northumberland, and a prebend at Carlisle.
He then left the 
university, after eleven years residence, and married a sister of 
the late Mr. Wallace, formerly attorney-general .
In 1777, he 
was made Archdeacon of Carlisle ; and in 1782 he was conse- 
crated bishop of Clonfert, in the kingdom of Ireland ; and was 
successively bishop of Killala and Elphin.
We must here men- 
tion an instance of genuine liberality of principle and Catholicism 
of spirit.
When he was installed bishop of Killala, he found 
that the great mass of the people in his diocese were members 
of the church of Rome; upon which his Lordship observed, 
that, " as it was a hopeless task to make them protestants, it 
would answer every desirable purpose to make them good 
catholics;" to this end, he printed, at his own expense, a new 
edition of the Rev. John Gother's works, which breathe the 
piety, and in plain and intelligible language, inculcate the 
morality of the Bible.
This book he distributed gratis through- 
out his diocese.
In this " labour that proceeded of love," he 
set a glorious example to all prelates, whether of the Roman or 
the Protestant church.
Dr. Law left behind him considerable 
wealth.
He bequeathed 500/.
to the Rev. James Whilelaw, 
vicar of St. Catherine's, Dublin, who was only known to him 
by his virtues and his literary acquirements.
He left a like 
sum to the Rev. Dr.
Magee, senior fellow of Trinity College, 
Dublin ; an offering made to literature, for he had no particu- 
VOL.
I. — NO.
42.
is of considerable extent, has been rendered pictur- 
esque by small islands, and the contiguity of a 
hanging wood, which covers the summit and decli- 
vities of a lofty eminence, that greatly increases the 
importance of the views in this portion of the 
grounds.
The plantations are extensive ; and near 
the castle are several ornamental buildings, which 
have been erected as terminations to the prospects 
from the road which conducts to the principal en- 
trance.
The park contains nearly 1000 head of 
deer.
The castle has been elegantly fitted up, and the 
apartments rendered as convenient as the disposi- 
tion of the buildings will admit.
On the stair-case, 
in niches, are busts of Thomas, Earl of Arundel, and 
the Lady Alathea Talbot, his wife.
The rooms on 
the first floor are decorated with some fine paintings; 
of which the following are amongst the most re- 
markable : — Charles Howard, the present Duke of 
Norfolk ; and Marian, his first lady, daughter to 
Coppinger, Esq. of Cork ; whole lengths.
— 
Mary, Queen of Scots, in the dress she wore at the 
time of her execution.
f — Henry, Earl of Arundel, 
when a boy, with a gold chain thrown over the left 
shoulder ; Vandyck.
— Elizabeth Stuart, Henry's 
Countess, dated 1649.
— John, Duke of Norfolk, the 
faithful adherent of Richard the Third, and partner 
in his fate at the battle of Bosworth Field.J — Tho- 
mas, Duke of Norfolk, Lord High Treasurer, in the 
reign 
lar acquaintance with him.
To Dr. Brinkley, professor of 
astronomy in the university of Dublin, he left 5000/.
and his 
books, worth at least 3000/.
The rest of his fortune he chiefly 
(with the exception of a few legacies) bequeathed in certain 
proportions to his widow and his relations.
We have seen a 
statement, however, which asserts, that, by a codicil, the be- 
quest to Professor Brinkley has been increased to 15,000/.
with the Bishop's astronomical apparatus, in addition to his 
library.
f A manuscript in the British Museum describes this habit as 
follows: " The said 8th of Febreuary beinge come, and the 
tyme and place appointed for the execution as atoresaid ; the 
said Queue of Scotts, being of stature tall, of bodye corpulent, 
round shouldered, her face fatt and brod, double chenned, and 
hasle eyed, hir borrowed heare borne: — hir attyre on hir head, 
was on this manner ; she had a dressing of lawne, edged with a 
bone lace, a pomander chaine, with an Agnus Dei about hir 
neck, a crucifix in hir hand, apayer of beads at hir girdle, with 
a goulden crosse at th' end of it ; a vaile of lawne fastened to 
hir cawle, with a bowed out wyre, and edged round about with 
a bone lace ; hir gowne of black satten prynted, with a trayne, 
and long sieves to the ground, set with a range of buttons of 
jett, trimed with pearle, and short sieves of black satten, cut 
with a payer of sieves of purple velvett, hole under them ; hir 
kirtle hole of figured satten, black ; her petycote uper bodie, 
unlaced, of crymson satten ; hir petycote scrites, of cr\mson 
velvett ; hir shooes of Spanish lether, with the rough side out" 
ward; apayer of greene silke garters; hir nether stockings 
worsted coloured, water set, clocked with silver, and next hir 
legg, a payer of Jersey hose, whit." 
X This nobleman was a person of distinguished braverv ; he 
was employed in many important offices by Edward the Fourth; 
and on his concluding a beneficial treaty with France, was re- 
warded by that Prince with grants of several manors in Suffolk 
and Cambridgeshire.
On the coronation of Richard theTnird, 
he was for that day only constituted High Steward of England, 
7 K and 
590 
CUMBERLAND.
reign of Henry the Eighth.
In his right hand is 
his staff as Earl Marshal ; in his left, a white wand: 
his robe is heavily trimmed with fur.
— Edward, 
Duke of Norfolk; Vanderhank ; and Mary, his 
Duchess : both in their robes of state.
The portrait 
of the Duchess is very fine.
— Philip Howard, brother 
to the above Edward.
— Lady Dacre, in mourning ; 
with a ruff; a cap much peaked in front, and put on 
side-ways : a hood over it.
— Erasmus, inscribed 
with the following words : — 
Ilannes Holbenne me fecit, 
Joliannie novie me dedit, 
Ed ward us Surrey me possidet.
Sir Thomas More, marked with the letters T M, 
and -dated 1573.
— Warham, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury ; Hans Holbein.
— A picture of our Saviour, 
inscribed with this legend: " This present figure is 
the similitude of our Lord I.
H. S.
our Saviour, im- 
printed in Amarald by the Predecessors of the Great 
Turk, and sent to the Pope, Innocente the Eighth, 
at.
the cost of the Great Turk, for a token for this 
cause, to redeem his brother that was taken prison- 
er."— The Virgin Mary with the infant Jesus.
— A 
small picture, embroidered in silk, representing the 
Crucifixion.
This, as appears by an inscription on 
the back, in the hand-writing of Henry Charles 
Howard, was exeLMited by Mary, Queen of Scots, 
and given by her mother, the Duchess of Guise, to 
a Countess of Arundel.
Here are some other por- 
traits of the Howard family ; but the characters 
they represent are not accurately known.
Hale Hall.] — This seat and manor have been in 
the Ponsonby family for many generations.
The 
mansion occupies a lofty and exposed situation, near 
the extensive moor-lands which skirt the assemblage 
of mountains involving the Cumberland lakes.
It 
stands well, however, for a sporting seat, and is al- 
together a commodious residence.
In the neighbourhood of Hale Hall, on the manor 
of Beckennont, is a romantic hill, called Wotobank, 
the traditionary etymology of which furnished the 
late Mrs. Cowley with the subject of her poem of 
Edvvina.
" A Lord of Beckennont, (we are told) 
with his lady and servants, were one time hunting 
the wolf: during the chace, the lady was missing; 
and, after a long and painful search, her body was 
found lying on this hill, or bank, slain by a wolf, 
who was in the very act of ravenously tearing it to 
pieces.
The sorrow of the husband, in the first 
transports of his grief, was expressed by the words 
" Woe to this Bank!" 
" Woe to Thee, Bank !
th' attendants echoed round, 
And pityinu, shepherds caught the grief-fraught sound : 
and carr'ud the crown ; while his son, the Earl of Surrey, bore 
the sword of state The following month he obtained a grant 
of numerous manors and lordships in different counties, and the 
same day was invested with the office of Lord- Admiral of Eng- 
land, Ireland, and Aquitaine.
These honors excited his grati- 
tude, and his fidelity to the Monarch who bestowed them was 
correspondent, vet his character appears to have continued per- 
Thus to this hour, through ev'ry changing age, 
Through ev'ry year's still ever-varying stage, 
The name remains, and Woe-to-bank is seen 
From ev'ry mountain bleak, and valley green.
Dim Skiddaw views it from its monstrous height, 
And eagles mark it in their dizzy flight.
" Not rocks, and cataracts, and alps, alone, 
1'oint out the spot, and make its sorrows known ; 
For faithful lads ne'er pass, nor tender maid, 
Hut the soft rite of tears is duly paid : 
Kach can the story to the trav'ller tell, 
And on the sad disaster, pitying, dwell." 
Hard-knot Castle.] — About 120 or 130 vards 
to the left of the road leading towards Kendal, in 
the adjoining county, on the western side of the 
mountain, called Hard-knot, we meet with the re- 
mains of an ancient fortification, which is mentioned 
by Camden, as having been, in his time, recently 
discovered.
It was constructed, there can be no 
doubt, for the purpose of defending the pass over 
the mountains : it is called by the country people 
Hard-knot Castle.
Its form approaches as nearly 
to a square as was permitted by the irregularity of 
the ground; the sides being 323, 347, 348, and 352 
feet in extent.
There are four entrances, and the 
gateways belonging to them appear to have been 
arched with freestone ; this, however, when found, 
has been removed by the inhabitants of the neigh- 
bourhood, and appropriated to their own uses.
The 
foundations of various buildings have been discover- 
ed within the area, with many fragments of brick.
— 
They are apparently of Roman origin.
Adjoining, 
and communicating with the eastern entrance, is a 
piece of ground, about two acres in extent, which 
has been cleared of the stones with which it was en- 
cumbered.
There is every reason to presume that it 
was used as a military parade.
To the northward 
of this spot is an artificial bank of stones, now thinly 
grown with grass, regularly sloping from its sum- 
mit, near which, on the highest ground, are the 
ruins of a round tower ; whence the road is conti- 
nued along the edge of the hill to the pass, and there 
joins, in its most elevated part, the road to Kendal.
Harrington.] — Harrington is a populous and 
improving village, situated in Allerdale ward,, on 
the Irish sea, two miles and a half south from Work- 
ington.
Mr. Curwen is the chief landed proprietor.
A few small farms, straggling up the dell, consti- 
tute the ancient part of the village.
The more mo- 
dern part is situated close to the shore, at the mouth 
of a small brook, which contributes to form a very 
convenient port, possessing a considerable trade ; 
nearly 60 vessels of 100 tons burthen being employ- 
ed in the exportation of coal, lime, iron-stone, and 
fectly fair and blameless.
Had it been otherwise, the virulence 
with which the measures of that short reign has been censured 
by historians, would never have permitted the Dike's conduct 
to have continued un-arraigned.
He was so hrnly leathered 
on King Richard's wing, says a late author, that he cho^e rather 
to abandon his life with his friend, than to save it by falsifying 
his promise.
8 fire 
CUMBERLAND.
591 
fire clay, the whole of which are obtained in the 
neighbourhood.
Hesket.] — Hesket, or Hesket in the Forest, is 
situated in Leath ward, within the precincts of 
Inglcwood Forest, nine miles north by west from 
Penrith.
This parish is noted for the singular cir- 
cumstance of the annual court of Inglewood Forest 
being holdeu in it, on St. Barnabas' day, in the open 
air.
The suitors assemble by the highway side, at 
a spot marked by an ancient thorn, where the dues 
to the lord of the forest, compositions for improve- 
ments, &e.
arc paid; and a jury for the whole juris- 
diction is chosen from among the inhabitants of "20 
mesne manors who attend on this spot.
Several 
quarries of gypsum have been opened in this neigh- 
bourhood.
Here is a small endowed school.
The village of Nether Hesket is in this parish.
Hesket-new-market.] — This little town, which 
has had a Friday's weekly market established within 
the last century, is situated in Allerdale ward, four- 
teen miles north-west, by west, from Penrith.
It is 
a hamlet of the parish of Caldbeck, chiefly held by 
Sir Wilfred Lawson, of Brayton, Bart, under the 
Earl of Egremont.
The situation is extremely 
pleasant, on the banks of the river Caldew ; and, as 
it possesses great facilities for a manufacturing 
town, it will most probably rise in importance.
Highheao Castle.] — This relic of antiquity is 
seated on the banks of a small rivulet, called Ive, or 
Ive-beck, in the neighbourhood of Broadfield Com- 
mon, on the road to Penrith.
The name of this 
castle, called, in Inquisitions taken in the reign of 
Edward the Third, Pela de Highhead, was appa- 
rently derived from its situation, on the brink of a 
rocky precipice ; the pavement of the court-yard 
being merely the surface of the rock levelled.
The 
shattered walls of a tower above the rivulet, the 
curtain wall, and a gateway-tower, with a small 
turret at one corner, are its only remains.
In the 
reign of Edward the Second, Highhead Castle was 
possessed by John de Harcla, on whose death it be- 
came the property of his brother, Andrew de Harcla; 
but, after his attainder, it was granted to the Dacres.
How it passed from this family is uncertain ; but it 
appears to have changed owners very early ; as, in 
the eighteenth of Edward the Third, it was held by 
William L'Englise, by the tenure of delivering a 
redrose annually, on the feast of St. John Baptist, 
* Of this family, and, we believe, a native of this village, 
was the celebrated Catholic father, John Huddleston, who be- 
came conspicuous from his unshaken loyalty to Charles the 
Second, and the share he had in his preservation after the battle 
of Worcester.
Nor did his services end here ; for he accom- 
panied the monarch to the continent, and attended him in dis- 
guise through all his difficulties.
On the Restoration, he was 
appointed first chaplain and confessor to the Queen; and, in 
gratitude for his fidelity, was exempted by the Parliament from 
every act made for the suppression of popery.
Previously to 
the death of King Charles, he administered to him the sacra- 
ments, according to the Romish communion; and on his pro- 
nouncing the absolution, the Ki;ig expressed himself in these 
remarkable terms: "You have saved me twice; my body 
into the King's Exchequer at Carlisle.
Henry (he 
Eighth sold the castle and manor to John Rich- 
mond, Esq. by whose descendants they are still 
claimed.
Several of the apartments were sumptu- 
ously ornamented between the years 1744 and 17 47, 
by a Mr.
(Brougham, who procured artificers from 
various parts of the continent for that purpose ; but 
the whole fabric has since been suffered to fall to 
decay ; and its only tenants are the swallow and the 
jackdaw, ami the " ill-omened birds of night." 
Hutton Hall.] — Hutton Hall, the seat of Sir 
F. F.
Vane, Bart, lies a few miles to the north-east 
of Craystock.
It is seated on a fine eminence, in a 
pleasant park, near a branch of the river Peteri!.
— 
It was greatly improved during the last century.
The manor was anciently held in capite, by the ser- 
vice of maintaining the paling or fences of the royal 
forest of Plumpton, and holding the king's stirrup 
whilst he mounted his horse in Carlisle Casde.
— 
The Huttons, to whom it originally belonged, sold 
it to the Fletcher family in the year 1605.
On Hutton Common are the vestiges of a square 
fortification, called Collinson Castle, each side about 
one hundred yards in length ; but of its erection, or 
demolition, there is no tradition extant.
Hutton-John.] — This village, consisting of only 
two estates, is situated in Leath Ward, six miles 
west-south-west from Penrith.
The manor, or 
township, was held in the reign of Edward the 
Third, by homage, the payment of twenty shillings 
coinage, and other services.
It was then possessed 
by a branch of the Hutton family ; but, in the reign 
of Elizabeth, was conveyed to the Iluddlestons, by 
the marriage of Mary, sister of the last male heir, 
with Andrew Huddleston, Esq. of Farringdon in 
Lancashire, by whose descendants it is still en- 
joyed.* 
Ireby.] — High Ireby, a township of Loav Ireby, 
is situated in Allerdale ward, six miles and a half 
south by west from Wigton, is a very ancient but 
inconsiderable market town, situated near the source 
of the river Ellen : the general aspect of the sur- 
rounding country is naked, but not unpleasant ; the 
soil is fertile.
This place Camden supposed to be.
the " Arbeia of the Romans, where the Barcarii 
Tigrienses were stationed;" but Horsley dissents 
from his evidence, observing, that no Roman anti- 
quities were ever found here; and that the affiinity 
after the battle of Worcester, and now my soul." He after- 
wards published some papers, written by Charles in defence of 
the Catholic religion ; and* was made sliperintendant of the 
chapel of Somerset House, by James the Second, who also 
allowed him a pension, which he received through all the 
changes of government to his deatli, in the year 1704, at the 
great age of ninety-six.
Pennant mentions a fine portrait of 
this eminent priest, which he saw at Mrs. Cust's, in Carlisle: 
he was pourtrayed in black, with a larae band, long grey hrir, 
and an uplifted crucifix in his hand : " probably," continues 
our author, " the attitude in which he lulled the soul ot the 
departing protligate Charles the Second." Andrew Huddle- 
ston, the elder brother of the confessor, was one of the first per- 
sons in Cumberland, who declared for the Revolution.
Of 
592 
CUMBERLAND.
of names has less force in this instance, as there is 
another Ireby in Lancashire, on the borders of 
Westmoreland and Yorkshire.
Horsley and Ward 
both place the Arbeia at Moresby, where remains 
have been dug" up, and the site of a station is evident.
Ireby has a small free-school: the market is on 
Thursday; and there are two fairs for horses and 
horned cattle, on the 24th of February, and 21st of 
September.
Irton.] — The village of Irton, or Irtondale, is in 
Allerdale ward, four miles and three quarters north 
by east from Ravenglass.
Irtonhall, the mansion of the ancient family of 
Irton, by whom it has been occupied for several 
Centuries, is situated on an eminence, near the banks 
of the river Irt, which rises above the mountains 
round Wastdale, and falls into the sea, a little above 
Ravenglass.
Camden observes, that pearls are 
produced by the shell-fish of this river, after their 
having been impregnated with the dew, of which, 
says he, they are exceedingly fond.
Certainly 
pearls were obtained by the inhabitants of the neigh- 
bourhood, from a species of muscles, which they 
gathered at low water, and afterwards dispos- 
ed of them to jewellers.
A patent was granted to 
some gentlemen for pearl-fishing in this river ; but 
with what success their undertaking was attended 
we have been unable to learn.
It should appear 
that the pearl muscles were never found in great 
plenty, though, from Nicholson and Burn it appears, 
that one Thomas Parkinson, of Howe, in this coun- 
ty, bought as many, from several poor people, as he 
afterwards disposed of in London for the sum of 
eight hundred pounds.
None, however, have been 
found of late years.
Keswick.] — The attractive little town of Keswick 
is situated in Allerdale ward, twenty -eight miles 
south-south-west from Carlisle, and two hundred 
and ninety and a quarter north-west, by west, from 
London.
It is near the lower end of Derwent- water, 
on the eastern side of the extensive and beautiful 
vale of Keswick.
The buildings are of stone, and, 
as appears by the returns made under the popula- 
tion act of 1811, the houses, with very few excep- 
tions, are each inhabited by only one family : the 
number of families being 356, and of tenanted houses 
352 : the entire population is 788 males, and 895 
females.
The market, which is kept on Saturdays, 
is celebrated for delicious mutton, and a variety of 
fresh-water fish, from the neighbouring lakes.
An 
annual fair, chiefly for leather, and woollen yarn, is 
held on tbe 2d of August.
The petty sessions for Allerdale ward, below 
Derwent, are holden at Keswick.
Here is an en- 
dowed school.
Some years ago, a cotton factory was established 
here.
In the town and its vicinity coarse woollen 
goods, carpets, blankets, kerseys, and 9ome linens, 
are also manufactured.
From its central situation, Keswick is much fre- 
quented by strangers making the tour of the lakes ; 
their number, in one season, sometimes amounting 
to fifteen or sixteen hundred.
Two museums, col- 
lected by private individuals, are open for the in- 
spection of visitors : they contain specimens of al- 
most every variety of the mineralogical substances 
of the county, many kinds of fossils, plants, antiques, 
&c.
To the south of the town, distant upwards of a 
mile, on the summit of an eminence called Castle- 
Rigg, is a remarkable Druidical arrangement of 
rude stones, some of which stand upright, others 
have fallen down, and others lean obliquely.
Most 
of the stones are granite ; the whole number is fifty : 
forty of these are disposed in an oval form, thirty 
paces by thirty-two in diameter ; the remaining ten 
compose a recess, or oblong square, within the area 
on the east side, in conjunction with the stones of 
the oval : this is seven paces in length, and three in 
width.
One of the stones is more than seven feet in 
height; others five feet and a half; but the greater 
number are much smaller.
" Whether our judg- 
ment," observes Mrs. RadclifFe, " was influenced by 
the authority of a Druid's choice, or that the place 
itself commanded the opinion, we thought this situa- 
tion the most severely grand of any hitherto passed.
There is, perhaps, not a single object in the scene 
that interrupts the solemn tone of feeling impressed 
by its general character of profound solitude, great- 
ness, and awful wildness.
Castle Rigg is the cen- 
tral point of three vallies, that dart immediately un- 
der it from the eye, and whose mountains form part 
of an amphitheatre, which is completed by those of 
Derwent Water, on the west, and by the precipices 
of Skiddaw and Saddleback, close on the north.
— 
The hue which pervades all these mountains is that 
of dark heath, or rock ; they are thrown into every 
form and direction that fancy would suggest, and 
are at that distance which" allows all their grandeur 
to prevail.
Such seclusion and sublimity were, in- 
deed, well suited to the deep and wild mysteries of 
the Druids.
Here at midnight, every Druid, sum- 
moned by that terrible horn never awakened but 
upon high occasions, descending from his mountain 
or secret cave, might assemble, without intrusion 
from one sacrilegious footstep, and celebrate a mid- 
night festival," 
* George Graham, the r< leorait-ci mechanic, was horn at 
Horsgills, in this paiish, in the year 1675.
He was apprentic- 
by rites of such strange potency, 
As done in open day would dim the sun, 
Tho' thron'd in nood tide brightness.
Caractacu*, 
Kirk-Linton.] — Kirk-Linton, or Kirk-Leving- 
ton, is situated in Eskdale ward, four miles and three 
quarters east by south from Longtown.* 
K irk- 
ed in London, an 1 after some time, was taken into the house of 
Tompion, the eminent clock and watch-maker, where he ac- 
quired 
CUMBERLAND.
503 
Kirk-Linton Hall, in this parish, is a delightful 
seat of the Dacre family ; the materials for the erec- 
tion of which were partly brought from an ancient 
mansion, or castle, of the Dacres, which was for- 
merly Clough Hall, and stood at the distance of a 
lew hundred yards.
It is supposed that the re- 
nowned archers "Clym o' the Clough," and " Wyl- 
Jyam of Cloudesle," who figure so considerably in 
the " Garland of Adam Bel," derived their names 
from this place.
Three neighbouring villages still 
retain the names of Clough Side, Long Clough Side, 
and Clough Head.
The prospect of Kirk-Linton 
Hall extends over a fine vale, which reaches to Sol- 
way Frith.
Kirk-Oswald.] — The ancient market-town of 
Kirk-Oswald is situated in the pleasant and fertile 
vale of Eden, in the ward of Leath.
It lies at the 
distance of eight miles north north-east from Pen- 
rith, and 292 north-north-west from London.
The 
houses are irregularly scattered on the declivity of a 
gentle eminence, which descends towards the mar- 
gin of the river, whose stream enlivens so many 
beautiful scenes in this part of the country.
The 
name of the town is derived from Oswald, the cele- 
brated King and Martyr of Northumberland,* to 
whom the church is dedicated, and who, in the Ro- 
mish Calendar, is enumerated in the list of saints.
The population, during the last century, varied very 
little, but has since appeared to increase.
The in- 
habitants are now between six and seven hundred ; 
and including the township of Staffield, or Staffol, 
the parish of Kirk-Oswald contains nearly 1000 per- 
sons : their chief employment consists in agricultural 
pursuits.
Kirk-Oswald Church is an irregular building, and 
appears to have been enlarged at different periods, 
at the expence, it is supposed, of the Dacre family, 
whose arms are seen here, in several places.
Here 
is an elegant monument, erected to the memory of 
Sir Timothy Featherstonehaugh, a firm adherent of 
Charles the First, Avhom he supported both by per- 
sonal services, and liberal contributions.
His zeal 
in the monarchical cause was fatal to him ; his two 
sons fell at the battle of Worcester, and himself was 
beheaded ; while the depredations, committed on his 
property by the soldiery, were estimated, in a peti- 
tion, written by his lady, at upwards of 10,000/.
This document has been preserved by his descend- 
ants, and it is now in the possession of Timothy 
Featherstonehaugh, Esq. the proprietor of a small, 
yet neat, mansion in the vicinity of Kirk-Oswald, 
who also inherits some portion of the manor.
f A 
copious spring of excellent water issues from be- 
neath the west end of the church : which is not un- 
common, several similar instances being observed in 
this county.
It is probable, that spots thus gifted 
were sought for by the respective founders, from an 
idea of their possessing peculiar qualities, favouring 
devotion.
A short time previously to the Dissolu- 
tion, a college for twelve secular priests was esta- 
blished here ; which afterwards passed into lay 
hands.
The belfry stands at some distance from the 
church.
There is a dissenting meeting-house in the town ; 
and, at Highbank, in Kirk-Oswald parish, is a school, 
endowed with the sum of 124/.
The market is oa 
Thursday ; and there are two fairs for horned cat- 
tle, on Thursday before Whitsunday, and the 8th of 
August.
Eastward from the town, about a quarter of a 
mile, on an eminence, are the ruins of a castle, de- 
scribed by Sandford as " the fairest fabric that ever 
eye looked upon :" its grandeur is, however, fled ; 
and a small tower, and some dreary vaults, are the 
only remains which it exhibits of its ancient splen- 
dour.
It appears to have occupied an extensive 
area, of a square form, bounded on three sides by a 
fosse, and skirted on the other by a brook.
Its-ori- 
ginal founder is said to have been Ranulph Eugaiue, 
Lord of Kirk-Oswald, Burgh, and some other 
places ; but this, perhaps, alludes only to the build- 
ing of the manor-house ; as we are informed by Pen- 
nant, that Hugh de Morville, who obtained these 
possessions by marriage, procured a license, in the 
second of King John, " to inclose his woods at 
Kirk-Oswald, to fortify his manor-house, and to have 
there an annual fair and weekly market." J From 
the Morvilles the castle passed to a younger branch 
of 
quired very great knowledge of mechanics.
He invented seve- 
ral astronomical instruments; and improved and constructed 
others, the principles of which were already known, with a pre- 
cision that had never been before attained.
Under his inspec- 
tion was made the great mural arch in the observatory at 
Greenwich: he divided it himself ; and the sector by which Dr.
Bradley discovered two motions of the fixed stars, that had nut 
been observed before, was invented by him.
He died at the 
advanced age of seventy six, and was interred in the same 
grave with his friend Tompioti, in Westminster Abbey.
* Oswald, or Si. Oswald, King of Northumberland, was 
obliged, after the death of Ethelfrid his lather, to take refuge in 
Ireland; his uncle, Edwin, having taken possession of the 
throne.
He became a Christian, in his retreat ; ami returning 
to his own country, defeated Cerdowalla, King of the Britons, 
who lost his life.
Oswald reunited the two kingdoms of 
Northumberland; but was slain in a battle with Penda, King 
VOL.
I. — NO.
13.
of Mercia, A.
D. 643.
The Monkish historians relate many' 
miracles performed by his relics, for which he was canonized.
•|- The Featherstonehaughs were a Northumberland family, 
whose ancient seat was at a place of that name.
Their house, 
it is said, was formerly on a lull, (where are two stones, called 
Featherstones) and was moated about for defence against the 
Scots; but, upon the ruin of this, the house was afterwards 
built in the Holme, or valley under the lull, which they there 
call " Haugh," and the family write their names, de Feather- 
stone, and sometimes, de Featherstonehaugh.
They first came 
to Kirk-Oswald in the beginning of the sixteenth century.
| Hugh de Morville was one of the murderers of Archbishop 
Becket; and the weapon with which that ambitious prelate was 
slain at the altar was long deposited in this fori less.
The 
legends of superstition teem with the peculiar judgments which 
befel his assassins; yet no sudden deaths awaited them; nor 
were they marked, as the monks have feigned, with tails issuing 
7 L from 
594 
CUMBERLAND.
of the Multon family, whose widow married John de 
Castro ; from him it was con\eyed by marriage to 
Thomas, Lord Dacre, whose lineal descendants, the 
daughters and co-heiresses of the Earl of Sussex, 
sold the estate to Sir Christopher Musgrave, Bart, 
in whose family it remains.
Lanercost Priory.] — The parish of Lanercost is 
in Eskdalc ward, thirteen miles north-east by east 
from Carlisle.
The vale which descends from Na- 
worth Castle to the ruins of the Abbey or Priory of 
Lanercost is about half a mile broad, and in length, 
between two and three miles ; it is the most beau- 
tiful, and most romantic in the county.
The sides, 
which are gentle declivities, are thickly covered with 
wood ; the Irthing flows beneath, at a short distance 
from whose banks, are seen the remains of Lanercost 
Priory, an Augustine monastery, founded by Robert 
dc Vallibus, in the year 1169.
According - to Speed, 
it was valued on the Dissolution, at 79/.
19s.
and 
was granted to Sir Thomas Dacre, by Edward VI.
Few vestiges now remain, though the cloister was 
originally of such an extent, as to have been the re- 
sidence of Edward the First, during one of his Scot- 
tish expeditions.
Part of the structure is converted 
into a farm-house ; and a portion of the cemetery 
now forms several gardens.
The gate of the burial- 
ground is a fine semicircular arch.
The church is 
in the conventual form, with a low tower embrasur- 
ed.
Numerous mouldings, supported by pilasters, 
with plain capitals and bases, form the western por- 
tal : over which is sculptured a figure of Mary Mag- 
dalen, of good workmanship, in a recess surmount- 
ed with a Gothic canopy ; seemingly of more modern 
origin than the rest of the building : to the right is 
a diminutive figure of a monk, in a kneeling posture.
This part of the edifice now forms the parish church; 
but the other remains of the structure are open, and 
exposed to the weather.
A colonnade runs entirely 
round the upper part of the building ; it is support- 
ed by single pillars, which present a light and airy 
appearance : the windows are generally high and 
narrow.
There are several tombs in the cross aisle, 
belonging to the families of Dacre and Howard, 
whose inscriptions, and other ornaments, however, 
the hand of time has nearly obliterated.
" Their 
blazoned arms and Gothic tombs," says a modern 
writer, " many of which are sumptuous, are so 
matted with briars and thistles, that even the foot of 
curiosity is kept at a distance." Indeed, so little 
attention has been bestowed upon this monument of 
departed greatness, that not many years since, the 
body of Lord William Dacre was dug up, and the 
leaden coffin, in which he had been interred, stolen.
There formerly was the following inscription in the 
church : — 
" Sir Rowland Vaux, that sometime was the Lord of Triermaine, 
Is dead, his body clad in lead, and ligs law under thisstane; 
Evin as we, evin so was he, on earth a levan man ; 
Evin as he, evin so maun we, for all the craft we can." 
It is supposed that the principal materials for this 
building were obtained from the Roman wall, which 
was at a short distance from this spot.
From Pen- 
nant we learn, that there are some remains, near the 
place, " about four feet high, on the brow of a hill ; 
but in an adjoining vale they rise to eight or ten, 
with very perfect facing stones on each side ; the 
middle part is composed of small stones, and mor- 
tar, flung in (probably hot) without any order : the 
facing stones are from ten to eighteen inches long, 
and four inches thick." One or two Roman in- 
scriptions have been found on stones built up in the 
walls of the priory.
The manuscript chronicle of 
Lanercost, deposited in the British Museum, speaks 
of the election of a prior about the middle of the 
fourteenth century.
This man's name was Thomas 
de Hextoldesham ; and so notorious was his worldly 
conduct, that, besides taking the oath of canonical 
obedience, he was required by the bishop, solemnly 
to promise, that he would not frequent public hunt- 
ings, nor keep so large a pack of hounds, as he had 
formerly done.
Liddal's Strength.] — Liddal's Strength, or the 
Moat, is a strong entrenchment, situated about two 
miles from Netherby, on a lofty and steep cliff, and 
commanding a vast extent of country.
Its form is 
circular, having a high mount at one end, and in the 
middle is the foundation of a square building : on one 
side it is strongly intrenched, having a sort of half 
moon before it, with a vast fosse.
" This," says 
Leland, " was the moted place of a gentilman cawl- 
ed Syr Walter Seleby, the which was kylled there, 
and the place destroyed yn King Edward the Thyrde' 
time, when the Scottes went to Dyrham." David 
II.
took this place by storm ; and having caused the 
two sons of Sir Walter Seleby to be strangled before 
their father's face, ordered the parent's head to be 
struck off.
Linstock.] — Linstock, a little village, two miles 
and a half north-east from Carlisle, is in Eskdale 
ward.
It was granted, with Carleton, by Henry the 
First, to Walter, his chaplain, who took upon him a 
religions habit in St. Mary's Priory, Carlisle, and, 
with the King's consent, gave both manors to that 
in Frank Almoyne for ever, and became prior there.
For some time, the bishop, and convent, held all 
their lands in common ; but when the first partition 
was made by Gualo, the Pope's Legate, this barony 
fell to the bishop, and this castle was his seat, so late 
as 1293.
Longtown.] — This is a modern market-town, nine 
miles north by west from Carlisle, in the ward of 
Eskdale.
It is very pleasantly seated on the banks 
of the Esk, in the midst of the estate of Sir James 
Graham of Netherby, whose predecessor, Dr. Robert 
from behind.
" William de Tracy," says Pennant, " lived 
almost lo the reign of King John, and Hugh de Morville till 
about the sixth of that monarch ; nor did his remorse seem to 
have been very deep, if it is true that he preserved the sword 
with which he"did the murder." 
Graham, 
CUMBERLAND.
.59-5 
Graham, may he considered as having heen the prin- 
cipal cause of the flourishing state of this part of the 
county.
Under his patronage Longtown became 
populous ; and, hy constructing the little harbour at 
Sarkfoot, he furnished the people with an easy means 
of exporting their superfluous produce, and supply- 
ing themselves with necessaries.
At the north end 
of the town is a good stone bridge.
The houses are 
neat, and the streets are regular and spacious : many 
of the inhabitants are employed in weaving checks 
for the Carlisle manufactories ; their number is near- 
ly 1600.
There is a charity-school in this town, for 
sixty children.
The market is on Thursday; and 
there are two fairs, on Thursday after Whit-sunday, 
and the Thursday after Martinmas.
Loweswater.] — Loweswater, ten miles west by 
south from Keswick, is a chapelry of the parish of 
St. Bees, in the ward of Allerdale.
Its celebrated 
lake has been already described.
Maryport.] — The market-town of Maryport, an- 
ciently named Ellen, or Elene-foot, from its situa- 
tion on the banks of the Ellen, is in the parish of 
Cross-Canonby, in the ward of Allerdale, six miles 
north-north-east from Workington.
It was first 
called Maryport, in compliment to the lady of the 
late Humphrey Senhouse, Esq. in whose family the 
manor had long been vested.
Its situation is ex- 
ceedingly pleasant ; the streets are wide, and the 
houses are neatly built.
" On an eminence, called 
the Moat-hill, at the south end of the town, stands 
an artificial mount, whose base is 160 yards in cir- 
cumference, protected by a deep ditch almost sur- 
rounding it, ceasing only where the steepness of the 
hill rendered such a defence unnecessary." 
Maryport, like most of the towns on the western 
coast of the county, derives its origin and consequence 
from the coal-trade.
Seventy years ago, the beach 
was occupied only by one house, called Valencia, 
and about ten or twelve miserable huts, which serv- 
ed to shelter a few fishermen.
Now the houses 
amount to five or six hundred, and the number of 
inhabitants, including seamen, are upwards of 4000; 
though both the increase of population, and of build- 
ings, was suspended some years ago, by a temporary 
failure in the adjoining collieries : new seams, how- 
ever, have been opened, and the business has again 
returned to its accustomed channels.
Wooden piers, 
with quays, have been erected on each side the river, 
for the conveniency of the shipping, which rapidly 
increases.
Upwards of one hundred vessels now be- 
long to the port, some of which are of 250 tons bur- 
then.
They are chiefly employed in the exportation 
of coals to Ireland ; and in the importing of timber, 
flax, and iron, from the Baltic.
Many of the inha- 
bitants derive subsistence from an extensive cotton 
manufactory, that was established here not many 
years ago, and furnishes employment for some 
hundreds of people.
The market is held on 
Friday.
In the year 1 760, a chapel was erected here, and 
consecrated by Bishop Lyttleton, in 1763, by the 
name of St. Mary's Chapel.
Millum.] — Milium, Millom, or Mil-Holme, in 
Allerdale ward, lies twelve miles south-south-east 
from Ravenglass.
The privilege of a market, which 
it former!
v enjoyed, has been lost for many years.
This parish comprehends the whole southern part of 
the peninsula formed by the sea, and the channel of 
the river Duddcn.
The low lands are exposed to a 
considerable torrent of air, which rushes up the 
gulph from the Irish Channel, and in dry weather 
covers the ground with driving sands, which greatly 
impede the process of vegetation.
The country is 
in general naked and barren of wood ; though, ac- 
cording to the Denton manuscripts, it was formerly 
verdant with huge oaks, and other timber.
In this 
sequestered district, many popular superstitions are 
current, and many singular customs are observed.
The bees are said to sing, on the midnight preced- 
ing the day of the Nativity, and the labouring ox to 
kneel at the same hour.
The inhabitants are friend- 
ly and hospitable, but, from the little intercourse 
which they have with society, their manners are un- 
couth, and their language, made up of antiquated 
words and phrases, is a mere " thing of shreds and 
patches." 
The extensive manor of Mellum was bestowed, by 
William de Meschines, on de Boyvill, in the 
reign of Henry I.
According to tradition, the Boy- 
vills were nearly related to the Lords of Egremont ; 
and the circumstances through which Milium was 
transferred to them, are thus stated in the Denton 
manuscripts : — " The Barons of Egremont being- 
taken prisoner beyond the seas by the infidels, could 
not be redeemed without a great ransom ; and being 
for England, entered his brother or kinsman for his 
surety, promising, with all possible speed, to send 
him money to set him free ; but, upon his return to 
Egremont, he changed his mind, and most unnatu- 
rally and unthankfully suffered his brother to lie in 
prison, in great distress and extremity, until his hair 
was grown to an unusual length, like a woman's 
hair.
The Pagans being out of hopes of the ransom, 
in great rage most cruelly hanged up their pledge, 
binding the long hair of his head to a beam in the 
prison ; and tied his hands so behind him, that he 
could not reach the top where the knot was fastened, 
to loose himself.
During his imprisonment the 
Paynim's daughter became enamoured of him, and 
sought all good means for his deliverance, but could 
not enlarge him : she, understanding of this last 
cruelty, entered his prison, and taking her knife to 
cut the hair, being hastened, she cut the skin of his 
head, so that with the weight of his body, he rent 
away the rest, and fell down to the earth half dead ; 
but she presently took him up, causing surgeons to 
attend him secretly, till he recovered his former 
health, beauty, and strength, and so entreated her 
lather for him, that he set him at liberty.
Then,, 
desirous to revenge his brother's ingratitude, he got 
leave 
f>9fi 
CUMBERLAND.
leave to depart to his country, and took home with 
him the Hatterell of his hair, rent off as aforesaid, 
and a bugle-horn, which he commonly used to carry 
ahout him.
When he was in England, where he 
shortly arrived, coming toward Egremont Castle, 
about noontide of the day, when his brother was at 
dinner, he blew his bugle-horn, which, says the tra- 
dition, the Baron presently acknowledged, and 
thereby conjectured his brother's return : then send- 
ing his friends and servants to learn his brother's 
mind to him, and how he had escaped, they brought 
back the report of all the miserable torment which 
he had endured ; which so astonished the baron, 
half dead before with the shameful remembrance of 
his disloyalty and breach of promise, that he aban- 
doned all company, and would not look on his bro- 
ther, till his just wrath was pacified by diligent en- 
treaty of the friends.
And to be sure of his brother's 
future kindness, he gave the Lordship of Milium to 
him and his heirs for ever ; Avhereupon the first 
lords of Milium, gave for their arms the horn and the 
Hatterell." From the Boyvills, the manor was 
conveyed by a female heir to the Huddlestons, 
through the last of whom, a female also, it went to 
her husband, Sir Hedworth Williamson, who sold it 
about forty years ago, to the late Earl of Lonsdale, 
for upwards of 20,000/.
Milium Castle, the ancient mansion of the Lords 
of Milium, has been long in ruins : its remains are 
tenanted by a farmer, who rents the surrounding 
lands.
It stands about half a mile from the banks of 
the river Duddon, and was formerly connected with 
a spacious park, well stocked with deer and timber.
The principal works were a large square tower with 
embrasures, and turrets at the angles : round the 
whole was a curtain wall and deep moat.
The 
estate called Ulpha Park, which extends from the 
Duddon river towards Devock lake, was originally 
enclosed by the Huddlestons, as a place of security 
for deer.
Moresby.] — The pleasant little village of Mores- 
by is situated in Allerdale ward, two miles north 
from Whitehaven.
According to Horseley, and 
others, this is the Arbeia of the Notitia ; several in- 
scriptions having been found here, which prove the 
station to have been Roman ; and its remains, winch 
occupy the summit of an eminence, commanding a 
fine view of the sea, are still very conspicuous.
The 
fort was a square of 110 yards, with obtuse angles, 
the west rampart is very conspicuous and lofty ; the 
southern one is on the edge of a high ridge, and dis- 
tinct, the stones and mortar in many parts breaking 
through the turf.
The east rampart is low, but very 
observable ; and the ditch is also discernible ; the 
northern rampart is much defaced.
The church 
stands within the limits of the station, the area of 
which is cultivated.
Lord Lonsdale is the proprie- 
tor of the manor.
Muncaster.] — Muncaster is a small village, seat- 
ed on the northern bank of the Esk, in Allerdale 
ward, one mile east by north from Ravenglass.
It 
formerly belonged to the Lordship of Milium ; and 
was subsequently in the Pennington family, from 
whom the present proprietor, Lord Muncaster, is a 
lineal descendant.
There is a small school in the 
village.
The children of the inhabitants observe an 
ancient custom of going from house to house, sing- 
ing a ditty, which craves the bounty " they were 
wont to have in old King Edward's day's." Whence 
the custom arose is not known ; but the donation is 
two -pence, or a pye, at each house.
Many parts of 
the annual salutation are conceived in unchaste lan- 
guage, more fit for the orgies of heathenism, than 
the utterance of youth.
Its origin is probably 
pagan.
Muncaster House is the chief residence of Lord 
Muncaster ; a nobleman to whom the agriculture 
of Cumberland is highly indebted.
By his exertions, 
the bleak hills in this neighbourhood have been co- 
vered with forest trees, various breeds of cattle have 
been introduced, and many improving alterations 
have been made in the management of the adjacent 
farms.
Irrigation has also been practised on his 
Lordship's estates with much advantage.
In the 
park belonging to the Muncaster estate arc about 100 
head of deer.
Naworth Castle.] — This ancient baronial man- 
sion of the Lords of Gilsland is situated in Eskdale 
ward, in the parish of Brampton, thirteen miles 
north-east by east from Carlisle.
It stands on a 
pleasant eminence, at the head of the vale of Laner- 
cost, or St. Mary's Holme.
It consists chiefly of 
two large square towers, united by other buildings, 
enclosing a quadrangular court.
The earliest men- 
tion of it on record, occurs in the reign of Edward 
the Third, when Ranulphus Dacre, who had mar- 
ried the heiress of the Multons, obtained a license 
to fortify, and convert his mansion here into a castle.
The arms over the entrance, are the Howards' and 
Dacres' quartered, supported by griffins, and crest- 
ed with a bull collared ; and their motto, " Fort in 
Loialtie." 
This castle is now the property of the Earl of 
Carlisle, a descendant of Lord William Howard, 
third son of the Uuke of Norfolk, who married the 
heiress of the Dacres', its former lords.
George, 
Lord Dacre, the last heir male of that family, was, 
according to Stowe, on the 17th of May, 1559, " by 
a great mischaunce, slayne at Thetford, in the house 
of Sir Richard Fulraerstone, Knight, by meane of a 
vaunting horse of woode standing within the same 
house ; upon which horse, as he meant to have 
vaunted, and the pins of the feet being not made 
sure, the horse fell upon him.
and bruised the brains 
out of his head." 
Pennant observes, that " the wfcole house is a 
true specimen of ancient inconvenience, of magnifi- 
cence and littleness ; the rooms numerous, accessi- 
ble by sixteen stair-cases, with frequent sudden as- 
cents and descents into the bargain ; besides a long 
narrow gallery." In fact, the idea of a comfort ible 
dwelling has been entirely excluded ; the whole of 
8 the 
CUMBERLAND.
o97 
llie interior seeming calculated only to keep an ene- 
my out, or to elude his vigilance, should he happen 
to get in : its hiding-holes are numerous ; hut it 
seems prohable, that many of its close recesses are 
now unknown, even to its occupants.
Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, was succeeded in the 
ownership of Naworth Castle by Lord William Ho- 
ward ; and during his time it exhibited the appear- 
ance of a mansion belonging to some giant of ro- 
mance, rather than the dwelling of an English no- 
bleman.
" Being made Warden of the Borders by 
Elizabeth," says Warner, in his Northern Tour, 
*' and appointed to controul and chastise the moss- 
troopers, whose devastations were such as to awaken 
the notice of government, he prepared himself for the 
unthankful office, by strengthening his castle, and 
securing his own apartments in every possible man- 
ner, to prevent attack from without, and filling it 
with 140 soldiers, to enable him to carry on his of- 
fensive operations.
A winding staircase, dark and 
narrow, admitting only one person to ascend at a 
time, guarded by a succession of strong doors plated 
with ironi which, on their massive hinges turning, 
grated harsh thunder, and when shut, defied all hu- 
man strength to open, led to the rooms which ho 
occupied ; a library, a chapel, and a bed-chamber.
The first apartment is like all the other rooms, small, 
dark, and inconvenient ; the situation sufficiently 
secluded, and secure, at the top of the tower, which 
contained his own suite of apartments.
The roof is 
rudely carved, and the windows far above the head.
Here we have a proof of this nobleman's attachment 
to letters, in a vast number of books, chiefly of con- 
troversial divinity, legendary history, and early 
translations of the classics; many of them inscribed 
in the first page with the hand of Lord William, in 
very good writing.
Some manuscripts of no great 
antiquity are among the volumes ; particularly a 
great wooden case, above a yard in height, contain- 
ing three leaves, in each of which are two pages of 
vellum fairly written with the legend of Joseph of 
Ariinathea.
In this cell Lord William is said to 
have consumed a great part of his time, nourishing 
his natural severity by silent solitude.
To interrupt 
these hours of seclusion, was an offence cautiously 
avoided by the domestics, particularly as one intru- 
sion had been attended with fatal effects.
His 
Lordship was one day deeply engaged among his 
schoolmen or fathers, when a soldier, who had cap- 
tured an unfortunate moss-trooper, burst into tho 
apartment, to acquaint his master with the circum- 
stance, and inquire what should be done with the 
captive.
" Hang the fellow !" said Lord William, 
peevishly : an expression intended to convey no 
other meaning than displeasure at this intrusion upon 
his privacy.
The servant, however, accustomed to 
the most implicit obedience, immediately construed 
this passionate expression into a command ; and a 
few hours afterwards, when Lord William directed 
the fellow to be brought before him for examination, 
vol.
i. — no.
43.
he was told, that, in compliance with his orders, the 
man had been hanged." 
Lord William's government produced a wonder- 
ful change in the lawless manners of the surround- 
ing district, and introduced a degree of security, 
where every thing before had been violence and li- 
centiousness.
The means employed were, however, 
of the harshest kind, as the modes of imprisonment 
and punishment fully evince.
" Prompt execution 
(observes Warner) on a lofty gallows, followed the 
hearing of his dread tribunal ; and till his leisure 
allowed investigation, the prisoners were confined in 
tho dungeons ; four horrible apartments, that still 
exhibit the rings to which criminals were chained to 
secure them during the dreadful interval that passed 
between capture and death." 
By a poetical anachronism, Walter Scott has in- 
troduced this nobleman as one of his personages in 
the Lay of the Last Minstrel.
He was known, it 
appears, by the appellation of " Belted Will Ho- 
ward :" Wat Tinlinn, a border retainer of the Buc- 
clough family, thus mentions him, in reporting " the 
tidings of the English foe" to his lady : — 
" Belted Will Howard is marching here, 
And hot Lord Dacre, with many a spear.
And all the German hag-but men 
Who long have lain at Askeiten : 
They crossed the Liddle at curfew hour.
And burned my little lonely tower ; 
The fiend receive their souls therefor '.
It had not been burned this year and more.
Barn-yard and dwelling, blazing bright.
Served to guide me on my flight ; 
But I was chased the live-long night.
Black John of Akeshaw, and Feigns Graeme 
Fast upon my traces came, 
Untill I turned at Ptiesthaugh Scrogg, 
And shot their horses in the bog, 
Slew Fergus with my lance outright — 
I had him long at high despite: 
He drove my cows last Fastern's night." 
Near the room which was occupied as Sir Wil- 
liam's library, is the ancient oratory, the walls and 
ceilings of which are richly ornamented with coats of 
arms and carvings in wood, painted and gilt.
On 
one side is an excellent painting on wood, in the 
style of Lucas Van Leyden ; representing tho 
Scourging of our Saviour, his Crucifixion, and Re- 
surrection.
In this room arc also several pieces of 
sculpture in white marble ; among which are Judas 
saluting Christ ; an abbess with a sword in her 
hand, waiting on a king who is stabbiug himself; 
and a monk with a crowned head in his hand.
These 
pieces of sculpture are supposed to have been brought 
from Lanercost Abbey.
The chapel, which is in the lower part of the cas- 
tle, h fitted up in the antique style.
The ceiling, 
and altar-end, are composed of large wood-panncls, 
ornamented with delineations of the patriarchs, se- 
veral of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and other 
personages of sacred writ.
Opposite the pulpit are 
blazoned the arms of all the Howards, from Fulcho, 
7 m to 
598 
CUMBERLAND.
to whom they trace their descent, to the year 1625 ; 
together with those of the families with whom they 
had made alliance : below the shields arc the names 
of the persons they belonged to.
This pedigree, it 
should be remarked, is very different from those of 
the Howards contained in the books of peerage.
On 
the window, in glass, are represented kneeling, Tho- 
mas, Lord Dacre, who died in the year 1525, and 
his Lady, Elizabeth, the rich heiress of the barony 
of Greystoke.
The great hall is a noble old apartment, seventy- 
eight feet in length, and proportionably high and 
wide.
Tbe ceiling is divided into a variety of wood 
pannelled compartmentSj similar to those in the cha- 
pel, containing the portraits of the Saxon, Norman, 
and other sovereigns of England, and their royal 
branches, to the union of the houses of York and 
Lancaster: these were said to have been brought 
from the castle of Kirk-Oswald.
The intersections 
of the frame-work are embossed with the shields and 
achievements of the ancient owners of the castle.
At one end of this apartment is an extensive gallery, 
adorned with four large crests, carved in wood, re- 
presenting a griffin, a dolphin, a unicorn, and an ox, 
with a coronet round his neck : on the front is the 
figure of a knight in armour, in wood ; and also two 
other figures, in short jackets and caps, apparently 
vassals.
The chimney here is nearly seventeen feet 
wide.
An inner apartment, hung with ancient ta- 
pestry, contains a head of Anne of Cleves, and seve- 
ral family portraits.
This structure, and its whole interior arrange- 
ment, forcibly recal ideas of feudal oppression and 
manners.
The old windows are narrow and grated; 
the doors are entirely cased with iron, moving" on 
ponderous hinges, and guarded with massive bolts.
The chambers dark, and hung with gloomy furni- 
ture ; and the approaches are intricate, and without 
regularity.
The mantle-pieces are sculptured with 
coat armour ; many of the ceilings figured, and 
the mouldings of several apartments gilt and 
painted.
The Roman inscriptions that were formerly plac- 
ed in the garden, atNaworth, have been many years 
removed to Rokeby, in Yorkshire.
In the vicinity of Naworth Castle are the remains 
of Cambeck Fort, otherwise Castlesteads, which is 
generally considered to have been the thirteenth sta- 
tion ad lineam Valli, though nearly 400 yards south 
of the Praetenturae.
Horsley and Warburton sup- 
pose it the Petriani of the Romans ; and its distance 
from the stations, and the inscriptions which have 
been found here, render the opinion extremely pro- 
bable.
The lands round the fort are now in a fine 
state of cultivation, and most probably the whole 
station would long ago have been defaced by the 
operations of husbandry, but for a forest of oaks, 
with which some former proprietor permitted it to 
be overrun.
The estate was some years ago pur- 
chased of +he Dacre family by the late John John- 
som, Esq. who erected a new residence between the 
fort and an ancient manor-house, and made a garden 
on the site of the station, at which time its dimen- 
sions were exactly ascertained.
Its form was that 
of an oblong square ; the width 100 yards ; and the 
length, in the directions east-south-east and west- 
south-west, 130 yards.
The outward walls were 
faced on each side with large stones ; and filled with 
stones thrown in irregularly to the height of one 
foot ; then a strong cement of lime and sand, four 
inches in thickness ; and thus alternately, with stones 
and cement to the top : the width of the foundations 
was eight feet.
Without the walls, on the south 
side, was a large platform of stone, five feet below 
the surface, and measuring eleven yards by eight.
The upper soil of the area within the station Was 
turned over to the depth of three feet, when various 
fragments, altars, and other memorials of antiquity, 
were found.
The under stratum was a stiff clay, 
with a thick layer of pebbles and gravel above it, 
which covered the whole area : the ground was ve"ry 
irregular, and several ruins of walls were seen, but 
too much confused to admit the forms of the build- 
ing's to be determined.
The south-east and west 
sides had been moated ; the north side was secured 
by an abrupt descent, at the bottom of which flows 
the river Cambeck.
Amongst the numerous antique remains discover- 
ed at this station, the most remarkable are fho&e re- 
lating to the worship of the sun, which, if not a local 
deity in Britain, appears, from the inscriptions, to 
have, at least, had votaries in the Roman army.
On 
one altar, with other characters which could not be 
clearly trace'!, were tue wor'.s — " deo soli mitr ; 
which Horsiey translates, To the Deity of the Sun ; 
observing, that Mkhras was the name given by the 
Persians both to the sun :*nU fire.
The remains of 
a Roman hypocaust ^ere also discovered near this 
station ; and some pieces of a glass bowl, on which 
the story of Actt±on is thought to have been engraven, 
from his name appearing on the fragments in Greek 
characters.
Walton House, the seat of the Johnson fa- 
mily, on the Cambec estate, is a very handsome 
building, enjoying a delightful situation, and com- 
manding an extensive prospect over the fertile 
vale of the Irthing.
The grounds are parti- 
cularly pleasant ; and the distant views bounded 
by the long range of mountains which divides 
this county from Durham and Northumberland, 
are, from their diversity, eminently interest- 
ing.
Netherby.] — The township, or village of Nether- 
by is situated in the parish of Arthuret, in the ward 
of Eskdale, two miles and a half north- north-east 
from Longtown.
" Netherby, the seat of Sir James 
Graham," obseryes a modern writer, " is much ce- 
lebrated in the topographical annals of this county, 
from the vast improvements that were made here 
during the latter part of the last century ; nor is it 
less interesting to the antiquary, from the assem- 
blage of Roman remains that are here preserved; 
from 
CUMBERLAND.
509 
from its having' itself been a Roman station ; and 
from its contiguity to /Esica, which it is imagined 
stood not far distant, especially as the river Esk, 
from which the name is derived, runs through these 
grounds.
" 
This estate forms part of the barony of Lyddal.
In the reign of King John it became the property of 
the Stotevilles, whose issue male failing in the time 
of Henry the Tiiir.l, their possessions were conveyed 
to Hugh de Wake, by his marriage with Joan, 
heiress of Nicholas de Stoteville.
Margaret, a de- 
scendant from the Wakes, married Edward Planta- 
genet, Earl of Kent, third son of Edward I.
; and 
had issue one daughter, Joan, who became the wife 
of Etward the Black Prince.
Through this match, 
the barony is by some writers thought to have be- 
come vested in the Crown ; but others affirm that it 
Was purchased ol the Earl of Kent by Edward the 
Third ; by whom, or by Richard the Second, it was 
annexed to the duchy of Lancaster.
James the 
First, soon alter his accession, granted this, among 
other manors, to George Clifford, Earl of Cumber- 
land, whose successor, Francis, sold them to Sir 
Richard Graham, ancestor to the present owner.
The Grahams are descended from Malise, Earl of 
Monteith in Scotland, whose second son, from whom 
they trace their genealogy, was surnaraed John, with 
the bright Sword.
From some disgust, he withdrew 
himself from his court, and, with many of his retain- 
ers, settled in the English borders during the reign 
of Hear) the Fourth.
Horsley observes, that " the remarkable station 
at Neiherby is certainly Castra Exploratorum ; the 
remains and monuments of it are so very great.
The Roman Way, from Middlehy to Netherby, and 
from thence to Carlisle, is very certain ; and the 
distances, according to the numbers in the Itinerary, 
I believe to be very exact." Sir J.
Clerk, however, 
in a letter to Mr. Gale, expresses his belief, that the 
true Castra Exploratorum was at Middleby and 
Burns wark Hill, in Scotland, about ten miles from 
Netherby.
At all events, it is evident, from the si- 
tuation of the place, and the numerous antiquities 
here discovered, that this was a Roman station of 
importance.
" Ther hath bene marvelus buyldings," 
says old Leland, " as appere by.
ruinus walles ; 
and men alyve have sene rynges and staples yu 
the walles, as yt had bene stayes or holders for 
shyppes." 
In a letter from Mr. R.
Goodman of Carlisle, to 
Mr. Gale, it is observed, that " from the principal 
and oblong fort on the north-west angle towards the 
Esk, there is a gradual descent, in which several 
streets are very visible.
In one running north and 
south, on the west side towards the river, by dig- 
ging among the ruins for stones, were discovered 
two rooms parallel to the street.
The southernmost 
is plainly a cold bath, from the cement, and large 
thin flags laid at the bottom, and an earthen pipe at 
the north-west corner, descending from a small wa- 
ter course, that runs under the other room, and a 
partition wall, and so below the door into the street.
The outward room has an entrance from the street : 
the door cheeks are two large flags of about seven 
feet high, and twenty inches broad, with holes for 
fastening the door, which opened into the street." 
In this room, in the year 1732, a plain altar was 
found, inscribed as follows : — 
DE/E SANCT 
M FOKl VN/K 
CONSliKVATRICI 
MARCVS AYR EL 
SALVIVS TRIIiVN 
VS COH I &L HI 
SPANORVM 
CO EQ.
V. S.
L. M.
Heads of different animals, and particularly sheep 
and oxen, were scattered over the floor ; and also 
fragments of fine earthen pots, adorned with figures : 
the cement which covered the pavement was about 
an inch and a half in thickness.
Adjoining this 
apartment, in the year 1745, a fine Roman hypo- 
caust was discovered, with a double sudatory.
The mansion of the Grahams stands on an emi- 
nence near the river Esk, commanding an extensive 
view.
It was built by the late Dr. Robert Graham, 
soon after he became possessed of the estate in the 
year 1757, but has since been much improved, and 
elegantly fitted up.
It contains a valuable collec- 
tion of ancient and modern medals ; and the library 
is furnished with a select collection of classic and 
other valuable authors.
The gardens and pleasure- 
grounds are disposed with great taste and judg- 
ment.
The chief improvements on this estate, derived their 
origin from Dr. Graham ; and, in the words of Pen^ 
nant, may be called a " creation of his own." " The 
lands, when he became possessed ef them," says 
Pennant, " were in a state of nature ; the people 
idle and bad, still retaining a smack of the feudal 
manners : scarce a hedge to be seen, and a total ig- 
norance prevailed of even coal and lime.
His im- 
proving spirit soon wrought a great change in these 
parts ; his example instilled into the inhabitants an 
inclination to industry, and they soon found the dis- 
tinction between sloth and its concomitants, dirt and 
beggary, and the plenty that a right application of 
the arts of husbandry brought among them.
They 
lay in the midst of a rich country, yet starved in it ; 
but in a small space they found that, instead of a 
produce that hardly supported themselves, they were 
enabled to raise even supplies for their neighbours : 
that much of their land was so kindly as to bear 
corn for many years successively without the help 
of manure ; and for the more ungrateful soils, that 
there were limestones to be had, and coal to burn 
them.
The wild tract soon appeared in form of 
verdant meadows, and fruitful corn-fields : from the 
first they were soon able to send to distant places 
cattle and butter ; and their arable lauds enabled 
them to maintain a commerce as far as Lancashire 
in- 
600 
CUMBERLAND.
in corn." One mode by which Dr. Graham im- 
proved his estates, was by erecting hamlets of eight 
or ten houses, with a number of acres to each, and 
then permitting his industrious married tenants to 
live in tliem rent-free, till the produce of the soil 
would gradually enable them to pay a certain rent.
lie also established schools on different parts of his 
estate ; and as the peasants were enjoined to send 
their children with regularity, in a few years he had 
the satisfaction of seeing upwards of 500 young per- 
sons availing themselves of the instruction thus af- 
forded.
By these and other judicious regulations, 
his rent-roll increased in more than a quadruple 
proportion.
The number of inhabitants was also 
greatly augmented, and their situation improved, 
and themselves rendered proportionally wealthy ; 
' : but their value as citizens," observes a contempo- 
rary writer, " was augmented in a ratio which is 
incalculable ; they were changed from being idle to 
be industrious ; from wretehed cottagers, grovelling 
in dirt and poverty, into contented husbandmen, and 
opulent farmers.
Still more, they were changed 
from loose and ignorant barbarians, ever quarrel- 
some and disorderly, into a peasantry, peaceful and 
regular ; a peasantry, perhaps, more intelligent, 
and better educated, than most others in the 
island." 
Amongst the numerous antiquities and Roman re- 
mains preserved at Netherby, is a plain stone two 
feet eight inches in height, by two feet eleven wide, 
with an inscription, which preserves the memory of 
the Cohort, Lieutenant, and Propraetor, who found- 
ed the Basilica Equestris equitata excercitatoria at 
this place.
This was a sort of riding-school for ex- 
ercising the cavalry with the infantry who were to 
serve mixed with them." 
IMP C.ES M AVRELIO 
SEVERO ALEXANDRO FIO FEL AVG 
PONT MAXIMO TRIB POT COS PP COH I JEL 
I1ISPANORVM 00 EQ DEVOTA NVMINI 
MAIESTATIQVE EIVS BASELICAM 
EQVESTREM EXCERCITATORIAM 
IAMPRIDEM A SOLO COEPTAM 
JEDIFICAV1T CONSUMMAVITQVE 
SVB CVRA MARI VALERIAN I LEG 
AVG PRPR 1NSTANTE M AVRELIO 
SALVIO TRIB COH IMP D N 
SEVERO ALEXANDRO PIO FEL 
AVG COS.
Dr. Taylor, in his observations on this inscrip- 
tion, printed in the first volume of the Philosophical 
Transactions, observes, that the dedication of this 
edifice to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Severus 
Alexander, by the words Devota Numini majesta- 
tique ejus, renders the opinion of the Emperor's in- 
clination to Christianity, and aversion to idolatrous 
compliments, somewhat suspicious ; notwithstanding 
the affirmation of Lampridius, Dorahmm se appef- 
lari vetuit, that, He forbade himself to be called 
Lord !
— On a stone, seven feet four inches in height, 
is a sculpture of an erect figure, holding in one hand 
a patera over an altar, in the other a cornucopia?
: 
on its head a mural crown.
This is supposed, both 
by Horsley aud Gordon, to be intended for the Em- 
peror Adrian, thus represented as the Genius of the 
Roman people.
Another stone is carved with the 
figure of a woman sitting in a chair, with apples or 
fruit in her lap, and her garments much plaited and 
folded.
Pennant supposed this to represent Neha- 
lennia, a Zealand Goddess, who is delineated in 
Montfaugon in the same attitude, with her lap thus 
filled.
On a third stone is a group of very singular 
figures, rudely sculptured; each with a pointed 
hood, a kind of breast-plate hanging loosely, and 
the legs and feet clothed.
They are all in similar 
erect attitudes, and have each only one arm.
The hand 
of one has been broken off: the others appears to hold 
a stone.
They were imagined, by Pennant, to have 
been a description of rude soldiery, who fought with 
stones ; but, in the History of Cumberland, they are 
mentioned as the Fates, or Destinies ; and what 
appears in their hands, as the lots which deter- 
mine human affairs.
In addition to the above, we must mention a small 
but beautiful female figure in brass, the drapery of 
which folds with much elegance.
By the rudder in 
her hand, Pennant conjectured it to have been a 
Fortune.
Some years ago, part of the grounds belonging 
to the Graham estate were overwhelmed by a tor- 
rent of mud, which burst from the marshy ground 
called Solway-Moss, and occasioned considerable 
damage.
The nature of the place, and the parti- 
culars of the eruption, have been thus described by 
Mr. Gilpin :— 
" Solway-Moss is a flat area, about seven miles 
in circumference.
The substance of it is a gross 
fluid, composed of mud, and the putrid fibres of 
heath, diluted by internal springs, which arise in 
every part.
The surface is a dry crust, covered 
with moss and rushes ; offering a fair appearance 
over an unsound bottom, shaking with the least 
pressure.
Cattle, by instinct, know and avoid it.
Where rushes grow, the bottom is soundest : the 
adventrous passenger, therefore, who sometimes, in 
dry seasons, traverses this perilous waste, to save a 
few miles, picks his cautious way over the rushy 
tussocks, as they appear before him.
If his foot 
slips, or if he ventures to desert his mark of se- 
curity, it is possible he may never more be heard of.
" On the south, Solway-Moss is bounded by a 
cultivated plain, which declines gently through the 
space of a mile to the river Esk. This plain is ra- 
ttier lower than the moss itself, being separated from 
it by a breast-work formed by digging peat, which 
makes an irregular, though perpendicular line, of 
low, black boundary.
It was the bursting of the 
moss through this peat breast-work, over the plain 
between it and the Esk, that occasioned the dread- 
ful inundation which destroyed so large a district.
8 The 
CUMBERLAND.
tiOl 
The more remarkable circumstances relating to this 
calamitous event were these.
" On the 13th of November, 1771, in a dark tem- 
pestuous night, the i v habitants of the plain were 
alarmed with a dreadful crash, which they could no 
way account for : many of them Avere then abroad 
in the fields watching their cattle, lest the Esk, which 
was then rising violently in the storm, should carry 
them off.
None of those miserable people could 
conceive the noise they had heard to proceed from 
any cause, but the overflowing of the river in some 
shape, though to them unaccountable.
Such, in- 
deed, as lived near the source of the eruption, were 
sensible that the noise came in a different direction ; 
hut were equally at a loss for the cause.
" In the meantime, the enormous mass of fluid 
substance which had burst from 1 the moss, moved 
slowly on, spreading itself more and more, as it got 
possession of the plain.
Some of the inhabitants, 
through the terror of the night, could plainly disco- 
ver it advancing like a moving hill.
This was in 
fact the case ; for the gush of mud carried before it 
through the first two or three hundred yards of its 
course, a part of the breast-work ; which, though 
low, was yet several feet in perpendicular height ; 
but it soon deposited this solid mass, and became a 
heavy fluid.
One house after another, it spread 
round, filled, and crushed into ruin ; just giving 
time to the terrified inhabitants to escape.
Scarcely 
any thing was saved except their lives ; nothing of 
their furniture, few of their cattle.
Some people 
were even surprised in their beds, and had the ad- 
ditional distress of flying naked from the ruin.
" The morning light explained the cause of this 
amazing scene of terror, and showed the calamity in 
its full extent : and yet, among all the conjectures 
of that dreadful night, the mischief which really 
happened had never been supposed.
Who could 
have imagined, that a breast- work, which had stood 
for ages, should at length give way ?
or that those 
subterranean floods, which had been bedded in dark- 
ness since the memory of man, should ever burst 
inom their black abode ?
" This dreadful inundation, though the first shock 
of it was most tremendous, continued still spreading 
for many weeks, till it covered the whole plain, an 
area of 500 acres ; and, like molten lead poured 
into a mould, filled all the hollows of it, lying in 
some parts thirty or forty feet deep, reducing the 
whole to one level surface.
The overplus found its 
way into the Esk, where its quantity was such as to 
annoy the fish ; no salmon during that season ven- 
turing into the river.
As we descended from the 
higher ground, to take a nearer view of this scene of 
horror, it exhibited a very grand appearance.
The 
whole plain was covered by a thick smoke, occa- 
sioned by a smothering fire set to it in various parts, 
with intent to consume it ; and brought before us 
that simple and sublime idea of the smoke of a couu- 
try going up like the smoke of a furnace.
vol.
i. — no.
43.
" When we got to the gulph, from whence all this 
mischief had issued, the spectacle was hideous.
The 
surface of the moss itself had suffered little change ; 
near the chasm it appeared indented, through a 
space of several yards, but not in any degree as 
might have been expected from so vast a discharge.
The mouth of the chasm was heaped round with 
monstrous piles of ruin, formed by the broken breast- 
work and shell of the moss, on the first great burst; 
and a black mossy tincture continued still to issue 
from it.
" As we stood on the higher ground, we obtained 
a clear idea of the plain, and of the course of the ir- 
ruption over it.
Many fragments of a very large 
size, which had been carried away in the first full 
stream of the discharge, appeared thrown to a con- 
siderable distance.
Fragments of a smaller size, 
and yet many of these considerable, appeared scat- 
tered over the plain, as the heavy torrent was able 
to carry them.
Here and there, the broken rafters 
of a house, on the top of some blasted tree, were 
seen ; and made an odd appearance, rising as it were 
out of the ground.
But through the whole waste 
there was not the -least sign left of any culture, 
though this plain had once been the pride of the 
country.
Lands which in the eveniug would have 
let for twenty shillings an acre, by the morning light, 
were not worth six -pence.
On this well-cultivated 
plain twenty-eight families had their dwellings, and 
little farms ; every one of which, except perhaps a 
few, who lived near the skirts of it, had the world 
totally to begin again." 
Pennant, in his account of this extraordinary oc- 
currence, observes, that " the shell, or crust, which 
kept this liquid within bounds nearest to the valley, 
was at first of sufficient strength to contain it ; but, 
by the imprudence of the peat- diggers, who were 
continually working on that side, at length became 
so weakened, as no longer to be able to resist the 
weight pressing on it.
To this may be added, that 
the fluidity of the moss was greatly increased by 
three days' rain of unusual violence, which preceded 
the eruption, and extended itself in a line as far as 
Newcastle; took in part of Durham, and a small 
portion of Yorkshire, running in a parallel line of 
about equal breadth.
After the black deluge had 
burst its confines, many cattle were suffocated : but 
the case of a cow, that escaped, deserves mention, 
from its singularity.
She was the only one out of 
eight, in the same cow-house, that was saved, after 
having stood sixty hours up to the neck in mud and 
water : when she was relieved, she did not refuse to 
eat, but would not taste water ; nor could even look 
at it without showing manifest signs of horror.
The 
surface of the moss received a considerable change : 
what was before a plain, now sunk in the form of a 
vast bason ; and the loss of the contents so lowered 
the surface, as to give to Netherby a new view of 
land and trees unknown before.
The eruption burst 
from the place of its discharge like a cataract of 
7 n thick 
602 
CUMBERLAND.
thick ink, and continued in a stream of the same ap- 
pearance, intermixed with great fragments of peat, 
with their heathy surface : then flowed like a tide, 
charged with pieces of wreck, filling the whole val- 
ley, running up every little opening, and, on its re- 
treat, leaving upon the shore tremendous heaps of 
turf, memorials of the height this dark torrent ar- 
rived at." 
The plain which was covered hy this Stygian tor- 
rent, has since been reclaimed and cultivated.
The 
expence was considerable, but by no means so great 
as might have been expected.
The object was 
chiefly accomplished by the exertions of an illiterate 
Yorkshireman, named Wilson, whose self-taught 
genius at once conceived the plan, and directed its 
execution.
Near the side of the front of the house 
at Netherby, then occupied by Dr. Graham, says 
Gilpin, " stood a knoll, which made a disagreeable 
appearance from the windows : being desirous, 
therefore, of removing it, he sent to Newcastle for a 
person accustomed to works of this kind.
The un- 
dertaker came, surveyed the ground, and estimated 
the expence at 1300/.
While the affair was in agi- 
tation, Dr. Graham heard that Wilson had affirmed, 
the earth might be removed at a much easier rate.
lie was examined on the subject, and his answers 
appeared so rational, that he was set to work.
He 
had already surveyed the higher grounds, where he 
first collected all the springs he found into two large 
reservoirs ; from which he cut a precipitate channel, 
pointed at an abrupt corner of the knoll.
He cut also 
a channel of communication between his two reser- 
voirs.
These being both filled, he opened his sluices, 
and let out such a continued torrent of water, the 
upper pool feeding the lower, that he very soon car- 
vied away the corner of the knoll, against which he 
had pointed his artillery : he then charged again, 
and levelled against another part with equal success.
By a few efforts of this kind, he carried away the 
whole hill ; and told Mr. Graham, with an air of 
triumph, that if he pleased, he would carry away his 
house next.
The work was completed in a few 
days ; and Mr. Graham himself informed us, the 
whole expence did not amount to twenty pounds." 
The whole of the ground overflowed by Solway- 
Moss, Wilson cleared by a plan formed on the same 
principles.
" From the reservoir made by a little 
stream on the highest part of the overflowed ground, 
he cut channels in various directions to the Esk ; 
and when the water was let off, he placed numbers 
of men by the side of the stream, who rolled into it, 
large masses of the mossy earth which was hardened 
by the sun." Thus all the extraneous matter was 
carried away, and the whole plain restored to its 
accuston ed utility.
The neighbourhood of Solway-Moss is celebrated 
in history, from the defeat of the Scotch army, under 
the command of Oliver Sinclair, in the reign of 
Henry the Eighth.
Sinclair was the minion and 
favourite of James the Fifth, and being proclaimed 
general on the field, the appointment gave so much 
offence to the Scottish nobility, that they preferred 
an immediate surrender to a handful of enemies, ra- 
ther than fight in the cause of a monarch who had 
treated them with such contempt.
The whole Scotch 
army was either taken or dispersed ; and a few fu- 
gitives are said to have perished in this very moss, 
into which they had plunged to escape the sword.
James, the Scottish sovereign, was so grieved for 
the loss of his army, consisting of 15,000 men, that 
he died soon after.
Orton.] — Great Orton, or Overton, is in Cum- 
berland ward, five miles west-south-west from Car-, 
lisle.
The church is nearly in the centre of the pa- 
rish, and also of the village j and its situation is so 
remarkably fine, that from Parson's Thorn, a small in- 
closure a little to the west, fifteen churches may be 
seen in Cumberland, and several in Scotland.
Tins 
view embraces a very extensive tract of country ; 
" the wide estuary of the Solway Frith, the beauti- 
ful village of Gretna, the distant Scotch mountains, 
the elevated ridge of Crossfell, Patterdale, and the 
neighbouring eminences of Westmoreland, the 
heights of Skiddaw and Carrock, the city of Car- 
lisle, and most of the towns and seats in the northern 
part of the county, are all comprehended in the sur- 
rounding prospects." 
The entrances to the village of Great Orton, were 
formerly defended by gates fastened with an iron 
chain, and a double ditch ; that to the north is very 
distinct.
Several other villages in this part of Cum- 
berland exhibit traces of similar defences, which the 
predatory excursions of the moss-troopers rendered 
highly necessary, if not indispensible.
It has been remarked, that the customs and phra- 
seology of the inhabitants of this village, and its 
vicinity, are in several respects exceedingly pecu- 
liar, but were still more so, before the introduction 
of what are here termed South Country Fashions, 
or, in other words, the manners of the metropolis, 
which, latterly, have made a rapid progress north- 
ward.
The buildings are chiefly of clay, and are 
commonly erected in two or three days ; for as all 
the inhabitants live on very friendly terms with each 
other, and in general consider themselves as branches 
of the same family, the person who wishes to erect 
a house, or barn, has only to acquaint his neigh- 
bours, who assemble at a time appointed ; and whilst 
some tread and moisten the clay, others prepare the 
straw, and a third party proceeds with the building, 
which, by these means, is very expeditiously com- 
pleted.
Great Orton parish comprises about six square 
miles, rising, on all sides, with a gradual ascent.
— 
In the reign of Henry III.
the manor was held by a 
family of the name of Orton ; but, after passing 
through several hands, it was purchased, in the 
reign of Queen Elizabeth, by the Briscoes, whose 
lineal descendants, the Briscoes, of Crofton, are the 
present owners.
William 
CUMBERLAND.
603 
William Nicholson, the learned antiquary and di- 
vine, was a native of thjs -village.* 
PaPcastle.] — This is an exceedingly pleasant vil- 
lage, in Allerdale ward, two miles and a half north- 
west hy north from Cockermouth.
Seated on the 
banks of the Derwent, it is supposed to have been 
the site of the Notitia station Derventione.
The fort 
was on the southern declivity of a hill, and suffici- 
ently visible in the time of Dr. Stnkeley to be traced 
round its whole circumference.
Its western side is 
bounded by a narrow lane, supposed to have been 
the via Militaris, which communicated at its extre- 
mities with Ellenborough and Ambleside.
Many 
remains of antiquity have been discovered here ; 
particularly broken walls, pavements ; coins of the 
Emperors Claudius, Trajan, and Adrian ; and a 
patera of fine red clay, having vestiges of a defaced 
inscription at the bottom.
Gough supposes the 
term Papcastle to have been contracted from Pipard, 
the name of an owner of the manor who married a 
descendant of Waldeof's.
By some, its ancient 
British name is considered to have been Palme- 
castle, 
Penrith.] — The market-town of Penrith is in 
Leath ward, 18 miles south-east by south from Car- 
lisle, and 283i north-north-west from London.
It 
is seated at the foot of an eminence, in a delightful 
vale, within the district of Inglewood Forest, which 
extends from hence to Carlisle ; and which is said 
to have been so well stocked with game, that Ed- 
ward the First killed 200 bucks in its woods in one 
day.
Inglewood Forest, however, was disforested 
by Henry the Eighth, and is now a wide dreary 
moor, bounded by lofty hills, and spotted with a 
few stone farm-houses and cottages by the side of 
the road.
The town which we are now about to describe 
appears to have derived its origin from Old Penrith, 
which Camden considers as the Ala Petriana of the 
Romans.
It is thus noticed, however, in Nicolson's 
History of Cumberland : — " Old Penrith (says Mr.
Horsley) which I take to be Bremeturacum, stands 
upon the grand military way, that leads directly to 
Carlisle, or to the Wall, and is visible almost all the 
way to it.
The remains of the out-buildings here 
continue very considerable, as well as those of the 
station itself.
The place near the station is called 
Plumpton Wall, being a long and scattered village.
The fort is called Castlesteeds, and the house that 
stands near it the Lough, from a small lake, as it 
* He was born about the year 1655.
At the age of fifteen 
he was admitted into Queen's College, Oxford, of which 
foundation he was chosen fellow in 1079; and, after various 
intermediate preferments, he was made Bishop of Carlisle in the 
year 1702.
Previously to this, he published several ingenious 
works; of which the English Historical Library has been re- 
garded as the most useful.
His literary acquirements procured 
him the esteem and friendship of some of the first circles in the 
kingdom ; but an unfortunate controversy in which he engaged 
respecting the Bishop's right of visitation under the statute of 
Henry the Eighth, occasioned him considerable enmity, till the 
light was confirmed by a new law in the sixth of Queen Anne.
seemeth, just before it.
The said Plumpton Wall 
takes in the whole row of houses, of which the 
Lough is one.
The station lies about 200 yards 
from the River Peterell, which runs on the west side 
of it.
The distance to New Penrith, is about 5 
miles, and to Carlisle 13." 
The present town, however, is a place of consi- 
derable antiquity : its name is evidently British ; 
and, as it implies a Red Summit, it was probably 
derived from the adjacent eminence, which is of a 
red colour, and conspicuous at a great distance.
Of the early history of New Penrith, little Is 
known ; but, since the Conquest, it has experienced 
a variety of changes, and has been successively h> 
the power both of the English and Scottish sove- 
reigns.
On the Norman invasion it appears to have 
been held by the Scots, who were driven out by the 
Conqueror, and did not regain possession till the 
reign of Henry the Third, when the assignment was 
made under the celebrated treaty concluded at York.
Margaret, Henry's daughter, A.
D. 1251, married 
Alexander the Third, of Scotland, who received 
confirmation of Penrith and some other lands : these 
possessions were henceforth called the Queen's 
haims, or demesnes, and remained attached to the 
Scottish Crown till the defection of Baliol, in the 
reign of Edward the First, who seized, and granted 
them to Anthony Beck, Bishop of Durham, in re- 
ward for his services at the battle of Falkirk.
f Ri- 
chard the Second gave Penrith to John, Duke of 
Bretagne, and Earl of Richmond ; hut shortly af- 
terwards re-granted it, with other places, to Ralph 
de Neville, Earl of Westmoreland, whose heir, Ri- 
chard Neville, the great Earl of Warwick, was slain 
at Barnet in the eleventh of Edward the Fourth.
His possessions are ; by some authors, supposed to 
have reverted to the Crown ; but Pennant is of opi- 
nion, that the seigniory of Penrith constituted part 
of the great estate which Richard the Third, when 
Duke of Gloucester, became possessed of by his 
marriage with Anne, the Earl of Warwick's daugh- 
ter.
Penrith continued to be a royal demesne, till 
it was granted by William the Third, with its ap- 
purtenances, to Bentinck, Duke of Portland, whose 
grandson sold all his Cumberland possessions to the 
Duke of Devonshire in the year 1783.
At different times, Penrith has greatly suffered by 
the incursions of the Scots ; a body of whom, 
amounting to nearly 30,000, under the command of 
Sir William Douglas, entered Cumberland in the 
On the 9th of February, 1726, he was translated to the Arch- 
bishopric of Cashel, in Ireland; but he died suddenly, on the 
14th of the same month, at Londonderry.
His manuscript 
collections towards a history of the diocese of Carlisle, in three 
volumes folio, he bequeathed to the dean and chapter.
•f The actions of this prelate were so contrary to the genuine 
principles of religion, that he obtained the name of the Fighting 
Bishop.
His haughtiness kept pace with his success, till, as we 
are informed by Camden, he became " so insolent through ex- 
cessive wealth," that be was deprived of Penrith by Parliamen- 
tary interposition, having been previously summoned to support 
his claim at Carlisle, in the year 1307.
8 year 
604 
CUMBERLAND.
year 1345, and ravaged the country with the most 
merciless severity.
Penrith, with several villages, 
was pillaged and burnt ; numbers of the inhabitants 
were carried into Scotland, and made slaves ; and 
many others were treated with the greatest barba- 
rity.
Eleven years afterwards, the town's people, 
in a petition to the Crown, stated, that their " land 
and tenements, which they held under a heavy rent, 
were wasted by the Scots, and their corn often de- 
stroyed by the beasts of the forest," This state- 
ment occasioned the King (Edward III.) to grant 
them some valuable privileges, which were confirm- 
ed to the town by Richard the Second, soon after it 
had again been plundered by the Scots.
The booty 
obtained by the invaders was of immense value, 
Penrith having been surprised at the tune of a fair.
The expedition, however, proved very fatal to Scot- 
land ; for the plague, which then raged in this town, 
was contracted by the troops, and carried into Scot- 
land, where it swept away nearly one-third of the 
inhabitants.
In the years 1597 and 1598, a second 
visitation of this dreadful disorder occurred at Pen- 
rith, by which it was nearly depopulated ; not fewer 
than 2260 persons falling victims to its ravages in 
little more than fifteen months.
The fear of infec- 
tion prevented the continuance of .the regular mar- 
kets ; a »d places without the town (now called 
Pileal-cross, Cross-green, &c.) were appointed for 
purchasing the provisions brought by the country 
people, for sale.
Penrith is a very irregular town, but many of the 
houses are well-built and convenient : the buildings 
are of red stone, and in general covered with blue 
slate.
The population of the parish (comprising the 
townships of Burro \v gate, Dockray, Middlegate, and 
Sandgate, Netherend Bridge and Carleton, and 
Town and Plumpton Head) amounts to 4528.
The 
inhabitants are chiefly employed in agripulture, in 
the tanning of leather, and in weaving checks and 
fancy waistcoats.
The market day is Tuesday : the stations for the 
sale of different commodities are unusually disposed; 
the wheat-market is in one part of the town ; rye 
and potatoes are sold in another ; barley in a third ; 
and cattle, horses, and hogs, have each their distinct 
places of sale.
The measures used in the markets 
are also different : the bushel by which barley and 
oats are sold, containing eighty-three quarts ; that 
by which wheat, rye, peas, fruit, and potatoes, are 
disposed of, only sixty-four.
The latter is called 
the Penrith bushel : three of these, or 192 quarts, 
constitute a load.
The principal market-place was 
disfigured by an ancient town-house of wood, which 
appeared to have been erected by one of the Earls 
of Warwick, as their device, the bear and ragged 
staff, was carved in different parts : but this build- 
ing was consumed by fire some years ago, while oc- 
cupied by a company of itinerant actors.
Here are 
four annual fairs : April 6, and 25 ; Whit-Tuesday, 
and November 11; the two latter are chiefly for 
horses aud horned cattle.
Penrith Church is a neat, but plain, structure ; 
the body was rebuilt of red stone, in the year 1722, 
at an expence of 2253/.
16s.
10d.
and connected 
with the ancient tower.
The interior is remarkably 
neat and commodious : the side aisles are covered 
by galleries, which meet at the west end, and are 
supported by rows of Ionic columns, each column 
formed of a single stone ten feet four inches in height, 
and about f'->ur feet in circumference : these are of a 
red colour, finely veined ; and, being well polished, 
have the appearance of mahogany.
The altar is 
enclosed in a semicircular recess, well illuminated, 
and embellished with paintings.
The centre aisle is 
ornamented with two large gilt chandeliers, purchased 
at the expence of the first Duke of Portland, to re- 
ward the spirited exertions of his tenants, the inha- 
bitants of the Honour of Penrith, during the rebel- 
lion in the year 1745.
The pews are of English 
oak.
The windows are spacious ; and, it deserves 
to be remarked, that, in a series of prints published 
to illustrate Granger's Biographical History, are 
portraits of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, 
and Cicely Neville, his Duchess, (the parents of 
Edward the Fourth, and Richard the Third,) said to 
have been copied from the south window of this 
church, from paintings on glass, supposed to be the 
only originals of these personages extant.
In the 
old church were several inscriptions to the memory 
of the Huttons ; and also one to the celebrated bor- 
der hero, Richard Coldall, better known by his ac- 
quired name, Dick o' the Cow ; some of his achieve- 
ments being recorded in the popular ballad so 
called.
In the church-yard is that extraordinary monu- 
ment of antiquity, the Giant's Grave, the origin of 
which has exercised the sagacity of the most emi- 
nent antiquaries.
It is composed of " two stone 
pillars, standing at the opposite ends of the grave, 
about fifteen feet asunder, eleven feet six inches 
high, and nearly five feet in circumference at the 
bottom, where they are mortised into round stones 
embedded in the earth.
The space between them is 
two feet in breadth, and is enclosed by four thin semi- 
circular stones, two on each side, of equal lengths, 
but little more .than, twenty inches in height.
Three 
of these stones have an ornament of foliage, rudely 
sculptured, remaining round their upper edg-es ; the 
fourth is plain, of a different kind, and seems to have 
been placed in the room of one decayed.
The pil- 
lars taper upwards ; their lower parts are rounded 
to the height of about seven feet, where they assume 
a square form, and appear to have terminated in a 
point; but the tops are broken.
On the square 
parts are some traces of an ornamental fret-work ; 
and the interior side of one pillar has a rude delinea- 
tion of some animal, like a wolf, or dog.
Near the 
summit of each pillar are vestiges of a raised cross, 
now almost obliterated." Bishop Lyttleton, in his 
remarks on this monument, published in the Archac- 
ologia, inclines to the opinion of its being the sepul- 
chre of some British Prince, interred here subse- 
quently 
CUMBERLAND.
005 
quently to the introduction of Christianity ; and tra- 
dition, which not unfrequently furnishes a clue to 
detect truth, ascribes it to the British King Ewain, 
or Owain Ca?sarius, a warrior of gigantic size, who 
reigned in this county in the time of Athelstan.
" Recurring to the early Welsh writers," observe 
the Editors of the Beauties of England and Wales, 
" we find that the latter part of this traditionary tale 
is false : Ewain was not sovereign in Cumberland 
during the time of Athelstan, hut in that of Ida, 
whom the Britons assert he slew in battle.
That 
this Ewain was the chieftain actually buried at Pen- 
rith, appears in the highest degree probable, from 
the Verses of the Graves of the British Warriors, 
written about the close of the sixth century, which 
notice his sepulchre in these words : — 
' Bez Ewain ab Urien yn mhedryal bit!
Dan weryd llan Morvael.' 
That is, c The grave of Ewain, son of Urien, is in 
the space inclosed by four-curved ridges, beneath 
the soil of the church of Morvael.' This is the more 
remarkable, because it is almost the only sentence in 
the Verses of the Graves that notices any particulars 
as to boundaries round the place of interment of 
either of the warriors." The principal ground on 
which this statement can be contested, is the diffi- 
culty of identifying the church of Morvael with that 
of Penrith ; but as Ave know Morvael was a British 
Saint, it seems probable that Penrith church, when 
originally built, was dedicated to St. Morvael ; 
though, on the advancement of Christianity, it found 
a new patron in St. Andrew.
The above hypothesis 
derives additional support from an elegy on Ewain, 
in the Welsh language, which mentions him as the 
chief of the splendid Elewins ; words that can only 
be referred to Castle-Llewin, mentioned in a pre- 
ceding page, and constantly asserted by tradition to 
have been possessed by King Ewain.
At a little distance from the Giant's Grave, with 
which, however, it docs not appear to have any con- 
nection, is a single stone, five feet eight inches high, 
called the Giant's Thumb.
The lower part is about 
fourteen inches broad, but upwards, it contracts to 
ten inches : the head appears to have been circular, 
and is somewhat damaged ; it expands to the dia- 
meter of about eighteen inches.
This is supposed to 
be an ancient cross, the base of which has sunk into 
the earth.
Similar relics of antiquity are observable 
in various church-yards, in villages, and on the tops 
of many of the hills in different parts of Cumber- 
land.
Previously to the year 1400, the inhabitants of 
Penrith were frequently in considerable distress for 
fresh water ; but between that period and 1420, their 
wants in this respect were relieved by the generosity 
of Strickland, Bishop of Carlisle, who purchased of 
the owners of certain mills, as much of the water of 
the river Peteril as would flow through the eye of a 
mill-stone.
" This," observes Clarke, in his Sur- 
rey of the Lakes, " he conveyed to Penrith at his 
VOL.
i.— mo.
44.
own expence ; and the water still continues to How 
in the same quantity, and no more." 
A chantry was founded in Penrith by Bishop 
Strickland, and endowed with Six pounds annually, 
for the support of a priest, who was to teach church- 
music, and grammar.
The revenues of this esta- 
blishment were afterwards given by Elizabeth to a 
very ancient school, which she re-founded, by the 
title of " the Free-grammar school of Queen Eliza- 
beth in Penrith." It appears to have been origi- 
nally instituted as early as the fourteenth of Edward 
III.
when John Eskeheved was licensed to teach the 
Art of Grammar therein.
Many benefactions have 
been given to support this establishment ; and, be- 
sides two Sunday schools, two charity schools, one 
for boys, the other for girls, have since been found- 
ed, by a Mr. Robinson, a citizen of London, who left 
a sum of money to the parish.
In the reign of Edward II.
or earlier, a house of 
grey friars was founded here, the revenue of which 
is unknown : it was granted by Henry VIII.
to Ro- 
bert Tyrwhit, Esq. Penrith contains several meet- 
ing-houses for Presbyterians and Quakers.
On an eminence of inconsiderable elevation west 
of the town, are the ruins of a castle, which appears 
to have been built in the form of a parallelogram, 
and to have been fortified with a very deep outward 
fosse, and a walled rampart.
The only entrance was 
on the side next Penrith, where an opening through 
the works still appears, the communication across 
the ditch having been secured by a draw-bridge.
This fortress was dismantled in the time of the Com- 
monwealth : the principal remains, are the outside 
walls, and several arched vaults, which were proba- 
bly intended for the confinement of prisoners.
The 
time it was originally built is unknown ; but scarcely 
any part indicates a more remote period than the 
reign of Edward the Fourth.
Richard the Third, 
who resided here while Duke of Gloucester, for the 
purpose of awing the Lancastrian party, repaired 
and strengthened the whole fortress, by constructing 
several additional towers.
An arched subterranean 
passage is reported to lead from the castle to the 
lower apartment of a house in the town, called Dock- 
wray-hall ; a distance of nearly 1000 feet.
To the north of Penrith, on a lofty eminence, is a 
square stone building called the Beacon.
The as- 
cent to it is difficult ; but the prospects from the 
summit of the hill are so extensive and beautiful, 
that all remembrance of fatigue is lost in the variety 
of delightful views which present themselves to the 
eye.
" Cumberland," observes a contemporary- 
writer, " is spread before the view like au immense 
map ; so that a spectator, even but little acquainted 
with the country, can readily poiut out the situation 
of the more considerable places..
Towards the east 
is seen the majestic Crossfell \ and stretching to the 
north, the extensive range of mountains which ter- 
minate near Brampton, In the vale, the city of 
Carlisle is distinguished by some faint traces of the> 
[ cathedral ; and far beyond, a dark shade on the 
' 1 o skirt*.
SOtj 
CUMBERLAND.
skirts of the horizon, intimates the situation of the 
distant hills of Scotland.
On the south of Brougham 
Castle, the spreading woods of Lowtlier, and the 
intermediate track of country hounded by the moun- 
tains from Itigleborough in Yorkshire, to Stainmore 
in Westmoreland.
South-west are the mighty steeps 
ofHelvellyn; and, at the feet, the pellucid Ulls- 
water, extended like an azure mirror.
To the west 
is Graystock Castle, spreading its long shattered 
ridge towards Keswick ; and the majestic Skiddavv, 
rising supreme over his neighbouring alps." 
At a short distance from Penrith, on the north 
bank of the Eamont, are two caves, or grottos, dug 
out of the solid rock, and sufficiently capacious to 
contain 100 men.
The passage to them is narrow 
and dangerous ; and, from some iron gates having 
been formerly taken from hence, it is supposed they 
were intended as a place of safety during the incur- 
sions of the Scots : they are called Isis Parlis, or 
Giants 1 Caves ; and "the vulgar," says Dr. Gibson, 
" tell strange stories of one Tser, a giant, who lived 
here in former times, and like Caous of old, seized 
men and cattle, and drew them into his den to de- 
vour them." 
Ponsonby.] — The principal part of this parish, 
which is situated, in Allerdale ward, four miles and 
three quarters south-east by south from Egremont, 
is the property of Mr. Stanley, through whose agri- 
cultural skill, and the liberal encouragement which 
he has given to his tenants, many hundred acres of 
land have been brought into cultivation, that were 
formerly covered with furze and broom.
The soil 
has the appearance of being well adapted to the 
growth of wood ; and many plantations of forest 
trees have been made within the last thirty years.
— 
The vestiges of an ancient encampment are visible 
•n Ponsonby fell.
Ponsonby Hall, the seat of the chief landed pro- 
prietor, was erected about live-and-thirty years ago, 
near the banks of the Calder.
Delightfully seated 
on an eminence, it commands some extensive and 
beautiful prospects, particularly over the sea ; and 
the Isle of Man, and the mountains of Wales, are 
distinctly perceptible in fine weather.
The apart- 
ments are elegantly fitted up, and contain some ex- 
cellent portraits, both of the ancient and modern 
masters ; and amongst other remnants of antiquity 
here preserved, is a curious carved bedstead, which 
is supposed to have been made in the year 1345.
It 
was brought from the ancient residence of the Stan- 
leys, at Dalegarth-hall.
On the head, and round 
the cornices, are the arms of the Stanley family, 
* In the year 1794, this poor woman was in her 84th year ; 
lmt the period of her death we have not been able to learn.
I J Lit-, hinsoflfin hisCuniberland,affornB us the following particulars 
of her manner of living, at that time: " Siie has been twenty- 
three years a widow : her husband left her a cow, which she 
told for live pounds, but lost two pounds eighteen shillings of it 
by a bad debt ; the remaining two guineas she has locked up in 
ber box, with a firm determination to save it to defray her fu- 
quartered with those of the Awsthwaites of this 
county, whose heiress, Constance, married Nicholas 
Sianleigh, Esq. about the time just mentioned.
It 
is supposed to be one of the greatest curiosities of 
the kind in this country.
Portenscales.] — This village is situated in Al- 
lerdale ward, two miles west by north from Kes- 
wick.
It has been noticed, in the history of the 
county, as the spot whence, some years ago, a re- 
markable natural phenomenon was observed.
The 
account, drawn up by an anonymous writer, but 
warranted to be authentic, is thus given in the se- 
cond volume of Hutchinson's Cumberland : — " In 
some part of the interval between the years 1745 and 
1750, was seen by some boys, &c.
in their return 
from school, about five or six o'clock in the evening, 
at Portenscales, near Keswick, the extraordinary 
phenomenon of several parhelia, or mock suns.
There must have been six at least in their count with 
the real sun ; but there might have been seven, in- 
cluding the sun in that number ; for less than six 
could not have been made to answer the circular 
form or figure, they assumed, which is well remem- 
bered : the sun in the middle as supposed, for the 
parhelia could not easily be distinguished from the 
sun itself, in point of brightness, or otherwise than 
by the time of the day.
The parhelia were not ac- 
companied by any coronae, or luminous circles, so 
far as I can at present well recollect ; neither, cer- 
tainly, had they any luminous cones at all, in 
any direction whatsoever.
The several parhelia 
were all clearly and distinctly seen, at the same 
time, above the horizon, at a considerable, and 
apparently equal, distance from the sun in the 
centre, and equidistant from each other to all ap- 
pearance.
We stood gazing at this display of the 
mimic sport of nature for some time ; it might be for 
several minutes, to speak within compass ; till the 
parhelia began to fade, and presently after vanished, 
leaving the real sun without a competitor, the unri- 
valled monarch of the skies.
Some packs of clouds, 
and black as those we usually call thunder clouds, 
were towards the north.
The edge of these must 
have been nearly over onr heads, as the scenery was 
accompanied by the gentlest fall of a few glistening 
drops of rain ; but these were quickly over, the air 
being warm, still, and calm." 
More recently, the village of Portenscales at- 
tracted considerable notice, as the residence of Mary 
Wilson, who was justly regarded as a remarkable 
instance of sobriety, industry, and economy.* ' 
Ravenglass.] — This little market-town is situat- 
ed 
neral expences.
Her house rent is fifteen shillings a year, and 
coals cost her five shillings more.
Her whole earnings is two and 
sixpence a month, which she receives for carding and spinning 
eight pounds of wool.
She goes to Keswick regularly every 
four weeks, with eight pounds of yarn on her back, and returns 
with eight-pounds of wool : this she has done for mauy years 
past.
Her time is thus employed, or in gathering luel ; viz, 
fern, whins, &c.
She has nothing to support nature but this 
scanty 
CUMBERLAND.
(M>?
ed at the junction of the rivers Esk, Irt, and Mite, 
where they form a harbour near the Irish sea.
It 
lies in AUerdale ward, in the parish of Muucaster, 
57 miles south-south-west from Carlisle, and 287| 
north-west by north from London.
Dr. Burn de- 
rives its name from renigh, fern, and glass, green ; 
but others say, that it was anciently called Aven- 
giass, or the blue river ; and a King Eveling is said 
to have had a palace here.
Notwithstanding the advantageous situation of 
Ravenglass, it enjoys but little trade, the neighbour- 
ing country furnishing but few articles for exporta- 
tion.
The oysters on the coast are remarkably fine, 
and the inhabitants are chiefly employed in attend- 
ing to their beds.
Burn informs us, that woodcocks 
are so plentiful here, in winter, that the tenants are 
bound to sell them to the Lord of the Manor at a 
penny a piece.
Ravenglass manor was originally part of the ba- 
rony of Egremont, but was granted by Richard 
Lucy, (who obtained the privilege of a market and 
fair, from King John,) to the Penningtous, from 
whom Lord Muucaster, the present owner, is a lineal 
descendant.
The market is on Saturday.
The 
fair is still held by the Earl of Egremont, or his re- 
presentative for this purpose, on the eve, day, and 
morrow of St. James ; and the ceremonies attending 
its proclamation and continuance are somewhat sin- .
guiar.
On the first day, the Earl, or his proxy, at- ' 
tends, accompanied by the sergeant of the borough !
of Egremont, with the insignia, called the Bow of 
Egremont, by the foresters, with their bows and ar- 
rows, and by all the tenants of the forest of Cope- 
land, who hold their estates by the special service of 
attending the Earl or his representative during Ra- 
venglass fair.
On the third day at noon the Earl's 
officers, and tenants of the forest, depart after pro- 
clamation ; and Lord Muncaster and his tenants 
take formal repossession of the place, when the day 
is concluded by horse-raoing, and various rustic 
diversions.
This fair, as well as another, which is 
kept on the 8th of June, is chiefly for horses, horned 
cattle, and yarn.
Rockcliff.] — The little village of Rockcliff, or 
Castle RockclifF, is in Cumberland ward, about six 
miles north-west from Carlisle.
It is situated partly 
on a high bank, above the Eden, and partly at the 
bottom, within flood-mark.
Margaret, daughter of 
Thomas Daniel, who had married one of the Rad- 
elifTes, conveyed it to that family in the reign of 
Edward the Third.
Her posterity sold it to Lord 
Dacre, who built a small castle upon the cliff; 
•canty earning.
Her dress is not expensive ; her market-going 
hat lias served her thirty years, and her petticoat sixty-five: her 
pewter dishes are bright as when new ; her house neatand clean.
She hears, sees, and walks as well as most persons of filly ; is 
always cheerful, and never was heard to utter a complaint.
She lias frequently been advised to live comfortably on the 
little she had, and then to apply to parish officers for relief.
Jier answer has always been " Nay, nay, I'll not be trouble- 
I which was afterwards bought by Charles Usher, of 
Henry Howard, Duke of Norfolk, together with the 
I demesnes, for 15,000/.
The grand- daughter of the 
j former devised it to the late William Strong, Esq.
of Peterborough ; and, on his decease, it fell into 
the hands of the Rev. Thomas Strong, of HargYavc, 
| in the county of Huntingdon.
The castle is in a 
| ruined state ; a road has been carried through part 
I of the works.
The- church, which has only a body, 
, is very small.
On a tombstone, there is an inscrip - 
1 tion, " to the memory of the Rev. William Robin- 
, sou," which thus begins : — 
" I living, planted trees; of one is made 
The chest wherein my body now is laid." 
Rose Castle.] — Rose Castle, said to have been 
so denominated, from the pleasantness of its situa- 
tion, is the seat of the Bishops of Carlisle.
It oc- 
cupies a gentle acclivity, about two miles from Dal- 
ston : it is overlooked by many superior eminences 
to the west and north, but is more open to the east 
and south.
The Caldew winds round it, semicircu- 
larly, at about half a mile distant ; and the grounds 
between the river and the castle consist of beautiful 
meadows.
Beyond the stream, the lofty bank is 
well planted, and forms a sweep of hanging wood.
The mansion retains little of the castellated form, 
except the gateway, and the two northern towers.
Over the gate is sculptured a large rose, thought, 
by some, to be the device of John de Rosse, Bishop 
of Carlisle in the early part of the fourteenth cen- 
tury.
The building appears to have possessed con- 
siderable magnificence, and consisted of a complete 
quadrangle, with a fountain in the middle, five 
towers, and other lesser turrets ; it was encompass- 
ed with a mantle wall, which had several turrets.
About the year 1299, it became the residence of Ed- 
ward the First, while he was employed on his expe- 
dition against Scotland ; and his writs for assem- 
bling a Parliament at Lincoln were dated from this 
fortress, by the distinction of Apud le Rose.
In th« 
succeeding reign, the castle was burnt by Robert 
Bruce ; but, in 1330, it was ag'ain fortified, and cas- 
tellated.
Bishop Strickland, about the year 1400, 
rebuilt one of the principal towers ; and other addi- 
tions were made by succeeding bishops, till the pe- 
riod of the civil wars, when the castle was com- 
pletely dismantled, and, with the adjoining woods, 
offered for sale at the sum of 1500/.
The parts 
which escaped ruin, were, on the Restoration, re- 
paired, and made habitable, by Dr. Sterne, then Bi- 
shop of Carlisle ;* and ail his successors have con- .
tribntedj 
some so long as I can work." She has never till last yeaj 
received any charity ; when some humane people left her 
about four shillings.
How littie is absolutely necessary to sup- 
port nature!" 
* Richard Sterne, who was educated at Cambridge, was, in 
the reign of Charles I, Master of Jesus College in that univer- 
sity, and Chaplain to Archbishop Laud.
Upon the commence- 
ment of the civil war, when the King's necessities were very 
urgent, 
G08 
CUMBERLAND.
tributed, more or less, to restore it to its former con- 
sequence.
Strickland's Tower is supposed to have 
been the ancient keep of the castle ; it contains three 
ruinous chambers, and a dreary vault, where pri- 
soners are thought to have been'confined.
A small 
library, for the use of the bishops, occupies one of 
the rooms.
Several of the chambers are elegant 
and commodious, in a superior degree.
At a little distance from Rose Castle is a small 
brook, called Shawk-beck, on the borders of which 
are several quarries, which appear to have furnished 
the stone for the cathedral, castle, and walls of Car- 
lisle ; and, from an inscription, cut on the face of a 
rock of very difficult access, probably for some of the 
public works of the Romans also.
Salkeld.] — Great Salkeld, or Salkeld Regis, as 
it is occasionally denominated, from having been part 
of the possessions which were ceded to the King of 
Scotland, is situated near the western banks of the 
Eden, in Leath ward, five miles and a half north- 
north-east from Penrith.
A free- school was esta- 
blished here, about the year 1515 ; but a long con- 
tested law-suit has greatly deteriorated the revenues 
of the institution.
Great Salkeld church, dedicated to St. Cuthbert, 
has a tower, the form and construction of which are 
remarkable.
It appears to have been intended for a 
place of defence, and it probably served as a retreat 
for the more wealthy parishioners, during the pre- 
valence of hostilities between the rival crowns.
The 
entrance is from the church ; and the door is plated 
with iron : the lower chamber is vaulted ; and se- 
veral funnels are carried up through the walls, as 
for the conveyance of smoke.
On a large table, in 
this tower, stands an ancient iron helmet, and the 
remains of coats of mail, of which various supersti- 
tious tales are related by the awe-struck inhabi- 
tants.
The scenery in the neighbourhood of Great Sal- 
keld is extremely beautiful.
At a spot called Force- 
mill, at some distance from the bridge, is a romantic 
cascade, bounded on the western side by lofty rocks, 
and falling in broken streams over a ruined wear.
In the stream is a singular column of masonry work, 
appearing like the pier of some ancient bridge.
Other remains were visible within the memory of 
man ; and also the ruins of a church, on a bank 
about one mile below ; but the river has long since 
washed them away.
At a place called the Dyke, near the north of the 
parish, are some vestiges of an encampment, about 
twelve feet high, and 1200 feet in length, with a cir- 
urgent, he, and several others of the heads ot houses, were very 
instrumental in sending the Cambridge plate to his Majesty, to 
be coined tor his use.
This gave great offence to Cromwell, 
who seized Dr. Sterne, Dr. Beale, Master of St. John's Col- 
lege, and Dr. Martin, Master of Queen's, and carried them lo 
London, where they were imprisoned for a year, and afterwards 
sent on board a ship at Wapping, put under hatches, and treat- 
ed with great inhumanity.
A little before the execution of his 
good friend ar.d patron, the Archbishop, he was permitted to 
cular pool of water, from 150 to 200 feet in diame- 
ter, and 12 or 15 deep, in its vicinity.
From this 
cavity the earth for the vallum is thought to have 
been obtained, as the ground round the encampment 
is entirely level.
About a quarter of a mile further 
are considerable remains of a fortified station, en- 
closed by a rampart of pebbles and rough stones, 
now overgrown with brush-wood and oak-trees.
This has the name of Aikton Castle : in some parts 
are small square enclosures, formed in the same 
manner as the rampart.
At a little distance is a tu- 
mulus of stones, called a Raise ; and in the adjoin- 
ing parish of Lazonby is another Raise, or tumulus, 
but not so large as that in Great Salkeld.
Little Salkeld, which anciently had a chapel, is 
situated in the parish of Aldingham, six miles north- 
east from Penrith.
Scaleby.] — East Scaleby, and West Scaleby, are 
both in Eskdale ward ; the former, six miles, the 
latter, five miles and a half north-east by north from 
Carlisle.
The manor of Scaleby Castle Avas presented, by 
Henry I.
to Richard the Ryder, surnamed Tiliolf, 
whose issue male failing in the reign of Edward the 
Fourth, his possessions were divided between his 
two heiresses, Isabel and Margaret.
After a few 
intermarriages, and partly by purchase, they came 
into the possession of Sir Edward Mosgrave, Knt.
a descendant of Isabel.
The grandson ot Sir Ed- 
ward having suffered through his attachment to the 
cause of Charles the First, was obliged to sell part 
of his estates ; and Scaleby Castle was bought by 
Mr. R.
Gilpin, whose grandson, Richard Gilpin, 
Recorder of Carlisle, sold it to Governor Stephen- 
son, in whose family it remains.
The mansion of Scaleby Castle, supposed to have 
been built by Tiliolf, above-mentioned, stands in a 
flat situation ; and though its site is ill-adapted to 
defence, it appears to have been a place of consider- 
able strength.
It was surrounded by two circular 
moats, the circumference of the outward circle being 
about half a mile.
These were broad and deep ; the 
earth which was thrown out of them has the appear- 
ance of having been heaped up at the centre; where 
there is a considerable elevation on which the castle 
was erected : it was entered by two draw-bridges, 
defended by a lofty wall, and tower.
Gilpin, the 
celebrated author of Observations relative to Pictu- 
resque Beauty, published in the year 1786, thus de- 
scribes this castle, in which he was born, and passed 
the first years of his life : — 
" At present (1780) one of the moats only rc- 
attend him, and perfoi rted the last offices for him on 1 lie scaf- 
ioid.
He lived in great obscurity tiil the Restoration, when he 
returned to his Mastership of Jesus College, which he h dd till 
he was made Bishop of Carlisle.
He was afterwards translated 
to York.
He was a man of worth, and of good abilities, as an 
author.
He compiled a System of Logic, and wrote a Com- 
ment upon the 103d Psalm.
He gave 1850/.
toward the budd- 
ing of St. Paul's Church.
He died on the 8th of June, 1683, 
at the auvanced age of 87.
6 mains ; 
CUMBERLAND.
609 
mains ; the other is filled up, but may still be traced.
The castle is more complete than such buildings 
generally are : it preserved its perfect form till the 
civil wars of tbe sixteenth century, when, in too much 
confidence of its strength, its gates were shut against 
Cromwell, who made it a monument of bis venge- 
ance.
He has rent tbe tower, and demolished two 
of its sides ; tbe edges of tbe other two, he has shat- 
tered into broken lines.
The chasm discovers tbe 
whole plan of the internal structure ; the vestiges of 
the several stories, the insertion of tbe arches which 
supported them, the windows for speculation, and 
the breastwork for assault.
" The walls of this castle are uncommonly mag- 
nificent : they are not only of great height, but of 
great thickness, and defended by a large bastion : 
tbe greatest of them is chambered within, and 
wrought into several recesses.
A massive port- 
cullis gate leads to the ruins of what was once the 
habitable part of the castle, in which a large vaulted 
hall is the most remarkable apartment ; and under 
it, are dark and capacious dungeons.
The area 
within the moat, which consists of several acres, was 
originally intended to support the cattle which 
should be driven thither in times of alarm.
When 
the house was inhabited, this area was the garden ; 
and all around, on the outside the moat, stood noble 
trees, irregularly planted, the growth of a century.
Beneath the trees ran a walk round the moat, which 
on one hand commanded the castle in every point of 
view ; and on the other overlooked a country con- 
sisting of extensive meadows, bounded by lofty 
mountains.
" This venerable pile has now undergone a second 
ruin ; the old oaks and elms, the ancient natives of 
the scene, are felled.
Weeds, the spiry grass, have 
taken possession of the courts, and obliterated the 
Tery plan of a garden, while the house itself is a 
scene of desolation.
The chambers unwindowed, 
and almost unroofed, fluttering with rags of ancient 
tapestry, are the haunts of daws and pigeons, which 
burst out in clouds of dust when tbe doors are open- 
ed ; while the floors, yielding to the tread, make 
curiosity dangerous.
A few pictures, heir-looms of 
the wall, are the only appendages of this dissolving 
* The parentage of this gentleman was humble, but not 
mean.
His father, on a small paternal inheritance, which could 
not exceed, if it even amounted to, thirty pounds a year, 
brought up a family of three sons and a daughter ; one of whom 
he destined for a learned profession.
Josiah, the subject of tiiis 
notice, was educated under the northern Busby, the learned 
and venerable Mr. Yates, of Appleby.
This truly eminent 
schoolmaster, like his prototype of Westminster, and his co- 
temporary, Mr. Jackson, of St. Bees, spent more than half a 
century, in the arduous office of instructing youth; and few 
men have had the reputation of sending out into the world so 
many good scholars.
At fifteen, young Relph went to the 
university of Glasgow; where he is said to have given home 
distinguishing proofs of genius.
It appears, however, that he 
did not remain long at this seat of the Muses, for we find him 
early engaged, in a small grammar-school, at his native village.
VOL.
I. NO.
44.
pile, which have triumphed over the injuries of time.
Swallows and martins are every where about the 
ruins ; either twittering on broken quoins, threading 
some fractured arch, or pursuing each other in 
I screaming circles round the walls of the castle." 
Seaton.] — There are two villages of this name, 
in Allerdale ward.
The first, which bears also the 
name of Lekeley, is situated four miles south- west 
by south from Ravenglass.
It formerly was the 
seat of a Benedictine nunnery dedicated to St. Leo- 
nard, and is said to have been founded by Henry 
Kirkly, just before the dissolution, when it was valued, 
according to Speed, at twelve guineas a year.
Henry VlII.
granted it to Hugh Ascue.
The other village, of this name, lies at the dis- 
tance of two miles and three quarters north-east by 
north from Workington.
Some extensive iron-works 
were erected here about the year l7o-3, under the 
inspection of the ingenious Thomas Spedding, Esq.
of Whitehaven : they consist of two blast furnaces 
for tbe melting of iron-ore ; a mill for the slitting 
and rolling- of bar -iron, and a double forge for re- 
fining and drawing it ; a foundery for casting can- 
non, and iron-work of all kinds ; a mill for boring 
cannon cylinders, &c.
Sebergham.] — The delightful village of Seberg- 
ham is situated in Cumberland ward, nine miles 
east-south-east from Wigton.
It originated, ac- 
cording to the Denton manuscripts, about the end 
of the reign of Henry the Second, when it was par- 
tially enclosed by a hermit, named William Wastell, 
or De le Wast-dale, who settled here in the time of 
Henry the First, and lived to extreme old age.
King John granted him the eminence on which the 
village stands, and the recluse bequeathed it to the 
Prior of Carlisle, who appears to have erected a 
church on the site of the hermit's cell, and to have 
let the lands to farmers, and other tenants.
The 
Duke of Devonshire is Lord of the Manor.
The 
church is a small, but remarkably neat structure.
The neighbourhood of this village is ornamented 
with several neat, and even elegant mansions.
The Rev. Josiah Relph, emphatically termed the 
Poet of the North, was born at Sebergham, on the 
3d of December, 1712.* 
Skirwith.] 
In due time, he succeeded to the minister's pluce, which is a 
perpetual curacy, and was then hardly worth thirty pounds a 
year.
We find no reason for supposing, that his income ever 
exceeded fifty pounds per annum.
From one of his memorandum books, seme particulars of his 
private life have been collected, which all equilly concur to 
establish the goodness and amiability of his character.
The ill- 
usage of a stepmother, with whom, as is unfortunately too often 
the case, his father sided against linn, he bore with pious resig- 
nation ; although, from his excellent conduct towards his parent, 
he never merited unkindness.
Willi equal fortitude, he bore 
the unpleasantnesses to which he was occasionally subjected, by 
his pupils, and their parents.
His reflections upon this subject, 
as recorded in his " Memoranda," present his mind in a very 
amiable point of view.
He had recourse to frequent prayer ; 
alter which, he generally committed his meditations to paper.
7 P Oa 
G10 
CUMBERLAND.
Skirwith.] — The village of Skirwith is in Leath 
ward, in the parish of Kirkland, seven miles and a 
half east-north-east froth Penrith.
It was formerly 
the seat of a religious house, supposed to have be- 
longed to the Knights Templars.
What is now 
called Skirwith Abbey is a modern-built mansion, 
near its site.
The grounds are disposed with much 
taste ; and many improvements have been made on 
the adjacent lands by Mr. Yate, the proprietor, 
whose attention to agriculture, and the planting of 
forest trees, has much increased the beauty and pro- 
ductiveness of this part of the county.
Several bro- 
ken urns were found in a bank near the old abbey, 
when the workmen were laying out the gardens.
A 
curious genealogical painting is preserved here, 
which traces the descent of the Warwick family, 
On affairs and emergencies, which he deemed more momen- 
tous, he deserted the grot, which he had chosen for retirement, 
and visited the church.
During the solemn stillness of mid- 
night, under the beautiful walk of lime-trees, in the church- 
yard of Welwyn, Youkg walked, contemplated, and composed 
his Night Thoughts.
Uelph, less favoured by climate, walked 
in the aisles within his church ; and there, in that awful soli- 
tude, poured out his soul, in prayer, and praise, to his maker.
Poetry has always been the solace of men of genius, under 
the pressure of trouble, need, sickness, or any other adver- 
sity.
Relph was an early, as well as constant votary of the 
Muses.
His father's estate, though small, was not without that 
sort of scenery, which is peculiarly pleasing to the eye of a poet.
It had flowery meadows, silver streams, hanging groves, and 
many commanding views of the adjacent country.
His favour- 
ite walk was to a fountain, which poured, in soft meanders, 
down a gentle declivity, till it gained the Caldew, whose 
waters, here, leave the borders of a beautiful valley.
Here, he 
had a fishpond, a chair, and table, formed from the natural 
rock; where, when at leisure from the duties of his profession, 
and, in the hours not devoted to abstraction and prayer, he was 
accustomed to entertain a select party of cheerful friends, 
in that primitive simplicity, which characterizes the pastoral 
ages.
To his solitary contemplations and night thoughts, in the 
church-yard, without any light, or with a light only sufficient 
to " render darkness visible," his audiences were indebted for 
those sermons which the editor of his poems refers to, as testi- 
monies of his piety and industry.
The awe, excited by the 
footsteps of Relph, at this unusual hour, is not yet effaced, fiom 
the memory of the aged villager.
In his school, from which he sent out many good scholars, 
he was a rigid disciplinarian : he was himself, without doubt, a 
man of very considerable literary attainments : those of his 
translations from the classics which have appeared before the 
public, bear testimony to the accuracy of this assertion.
As a poet, though his muse was of the humbler kind, his me- 
rit is, and has long been, generally acknowledged.
His fables 
vie with Gay's for smoothness of diction, and are superior in 
other points of view.
His pretensions, however, to poetical fame, are principally 
founded upon his Pastorals, written in the dialect of Cumber- 
land.
It is an opinion entertained by many, that a dialect is, 
if not essential, at least highly advantageous, to pastoral poetry ; 
and, that the rich, strong, Doric dialect of this county is, of all 
others, the most appropriate.
On this ground, Relph's Pasto- 
rals have transcendent merit.
With but a little more sentiment, 
or perhaps tenderness, they would very nearly equal the Gen- 
tle Shepherd of Allan Ramsay.
In short, these Cumberland 
eclogues are, in English, what we suppose those of Theocri- 
tus to have been in the Greek.
The ideas, as well as the lan- 
guage, are perfectly rural ; yet, neither the one, nor the other, 
#re either \ulgar or coarse.
Relph drew his portraits from 
from the famous Guy, Earl of Warwick, in the time 
of Athclstan, to the reign of Henry the Third.
Sowerby.] — The parish of Sowerby, or Castle- 
Sowerby, lies wholly within the forest of lnglewood.
It is in Leath ward, twelve miles west-north-west 
from Penrith.
The manor, which takes its name 
from the remains of an old fortress on a lofty emi- 
nence, called Castle hill, belongs to the Duke of 
Devonshire, who purchased it from the Duke of 
Portland.
The customs are singular : the copyhold 
lands do not descend to the heir male, but are inhe- 
rited by females as coparceners ; and the wife of a 
copyholder cannot be divested of her contingent 
right of dower without her consent.
On change of 
tenant, by descent, the Lord of the Manor is enti- 
tled to what is called a God's penny fine (silver 
real life, and, so faithful were his transcripts, that there was 
hardly a person in the village, who could not point out those, 
who had sitten for his Curstv, and his Peggy.
The Amorous 
Maiden was well-known, and, a few years ago, was still living.
The character of Relph's muse, was a natural and elegant ease, 
and simplicity.
He, indeed, loved to survey, though at a dis- 
tance, the sublimities of Carrock, Skiddaw, and Saddleback ; 
but was contented to cull a few wild flowers, which bloomed 
spontaneously on the banks of the Caldew.
In delineating the 
passions and customs operative on low life, he is inimitable; 
and that reader must be insensible to the beauties of nature, 
and propriety of character, who does not accompany the Poet 
with pleasure, whilst, with a picturesque accuracy, he discri- 
minates the peculiarities, and describes the undistinguished, 
and innocent loves, of the Damons and Chloes of the vale of 
Sebergham.
Relph's assiduity in the discharge of his ministerial duties, 
appears in the effects it produced.
The inhabitants of this pa- 
rish had, till thin, been rude and unpolished ; ignorant and illi- 
beral; abjectly superstitious, in the belief of exploded stories 
of witches, ghosts, and apparitions ; with but little morality, 
and less religion.
They considered the Sabbath, as grateful, 
only for the relaxation it afforded from their labours — as a day 
of recreation, rather than a day devoted to religious exercises ; 
of course, it was generally spent in tumultuous meetings, at 
alehouses, or, in the rude diversions of foot-ball.
Kinneir, or 
Kinnear, a Scotchman, and episcopalian, who, in the fury of 
Presbyterian Reformation, had been driven from his rectory 
at Annan, and received at Sebergham, was Relph's predecessor 
in the church, and, being really a re'igious man, he, with great 
earnestness, set about reforming them.
But, his success bore 
no proportion to his zeal ; he was an austere man, and his reli- 
gion, gloomy and unsocial ; his conversation distant and re- 
served ; and his manners, ungracious.
Attacking and roundly 
condemning, all amusements, even the most innocent, he lost, 
by his moroseness, what he might else have gained, by the 
blameless tenour of his life.
His parishioners pitied, despised, 
and neglected their pastor, whilst he gave them up, as despe- 
rately abandoned, profligate, and irreclaimable.
The happiness of effecting a reformation, was reserved for 
Relph.
To him, in a great measure, must be attributed that 
elegance of conversation, esteem for learning, and reverence for 
religion, which travellers, even of the present day, observe, in 
a people, whose ancestors were tutored by Relph.
In his stature, Relph was tall, and of a thin habit; his consti- 
tution very weak, and tending to consumption.
His ascetic 
manner of living has been supposed, perhaps erroneously, to 
have accelerated his end.
He died, unmarried, in his 32d 
year.
A hectic complaint was the cause of his early decease, 
which took place, on the 26th of June, 1743, at Seberghum ; 
and he was buried, in the.
family burying-ground, in the church- 
yard of that village.
penny ;) 
^h< 
CUMBERLAND.
611 
penny ;) but on change by alienation, to a year's 
rent additional.
This, we understand, is the custom 
of the whole Forest of Inglewood.
The ten princi- 
pal estates in Castle Sowerby were formerly called 
Red-spears ; from titles of their owners, obtained 
from the curious tenure of riding through the town 
of Penrith every Whit-Tuesday, brandishing their 
spears.
These Red-spear Knights seem to have 
been regarded as sureties to the Sheriff for the 
peaceable behaviour of the inhabitants.
How-hill is an eminence, on which is a circular 
enclosure, about sixty feet in diameter, the rampart 
of which is composed of stones and earth.
Formerly 
the Castle-hill was fortified with a strong pallisado, 
or out- work of wood : in one part is a cavity formed 
in the rock, between fifty and sixty feet in extent, 
with a narrow entrance, which appears to have been 
guarded with much ease.
Stanwick.] — The irregular village of Stanwick, 
or Stanwix, is situated in Eskdale ward, three quar- 
ters of a mile north from Carlisle, on the opposite 
side of the river Eden ; the view of which, from the 
Stanwick bank, is very pleasing.
The curve which 
it.
describes, the beautiful meadows which it winds 
through, and the mountains which close the pros- 
pect, form altogether a very amusing combination 
of objects.
The name of the village is derived, by 
Bishop Gibson, from Stane Wegges, signifying a 
Place upon a Stony-way.
By Horsley, and others, 
Stanwick is determined to have been the Congavata 
of the Notitia, where it is mentioned as the fifteenth 
station ad lineam Valli, or, upon the Wall, the re- 
mains of which may be distinctly traced in this vici- 
nity.
" Here," observes Horsley, " is the plain 
area of a station," according to the rules observed 
by the Romans in selecting them.
" There is a 
gentle descent to the south ; and the rising for the 
out-buildings, which the number of stones dug up 
prove to have stood here ; and by all accounts it is 
upon this descent, and chiefly to the south-east, that 
the Roman buildings have stood.
Severus's Wall 
formed the north rampart of this station : some of 
the gardens of the village pass over its course, and 
are fenced with the stones obtained from it.
The 
ditch may be traced distinctly from the west end of 
the village to the river's banks : the ridge which the 
wall has left is pretty eminent in many places, and 
may be accurately traced to the brink of the preci- 
pice above the river Eden, where it apparently ter- 
minates ; but at the bottom of the precipice, near 
Hissopholm Well, some remains are still to be seen." 
" On Hissopholm Bank," remarks Pennant, " are 
the vestiges of some dykes, describing a small square, 
the site of a fort to defend the pass ; for the wall 
reached to the edge of the water, and continued to 
the opposite side.
Possibly this was a station of 
cavalry ; for near Hissop-bank is a stupendous 
number of horses' bones exposed by the falling of a 
cliff." 
Stanwick church stands upon the Roman station, 
and was built with materials from the wall : it ap- 
pears to have been more extensive, in its original 
state, than it is at present.
Stone Carron.] — Stone Carron, or Red Stone 
Camp, is a circle of rude stones, about fifty feet in 
diameter, near a place called Motherby, in Gray- 
stock parish, distant five or six miles west by south 
from Penrith.
A few years ago, within the area of 
the circle, large quantities of bones were found ; 
and, at a short distance, are vestiges of an encamp- 
ment, supposed to have been a summer station of the 
Romans.
The adjacent ground, called Stone-Carr, 
seems to have been connected with a miiitary-way, 
which passed between the eastern aud western Mell- 
Fells, to the head of Gowbarrow Park, but is there 
lost : from its direction, it appears to have been 
continued to Ambleside.
In this track are the re- 
mains of two or three large cairns, many of the stones 
of which have been removed ; but without any thing 
remarkable having been discovered.
Stone-Carr 
has long been appropriated to rustic diversions ; 
and wrestling, leaping, racing, and other village 
sports, for prizes, are frequently exhibited here.
Tiireapland.] — -The village of Threaplund is in 
Allerdale ward, six miles and a quarter north by 
east from Cockermouth.
An accidental circumstance 
attaches some importance to the place.
Here, on 
the 18th of August, 1810, died Mary Jackson, at 
the age of 82 ; having been a widow forty years.
If the country owes a debt of gratitude (as Dr.
Johnson asserts) to that person, who has caused two 
blades of grass to grow r , where only one grew be- 
fore, much praise is due to Mrs. Jackson, the disco- 
verer of the mode of raising what are denominated 
" Potatoe-Oats," now, so generally, and so benefi- 
cially cultivated.
She observed a single stem of 
oats, growing- with peculiar verdure and vigour, 
sown by accident, on a potatoe-ridge.
She pre- 
served its produce, and used it for seed, when the 
proper season came round.
It succeeded, in a de- 
gree equal to her most sanguine hopes.
The straw 
proved of superior quality, and the grain uncom- 
monly weighty.
The method of culture was adopt- 
ed by this sagacious woman, and is now in exten- 
sive use amongst farmers in general.
Thursby.] — Thursby, or Thor's Town, is a small 
village, situated in Cumberland ward, six miles aud 
a half south-west from Carlisle.
Tradition states, 
that it derived its appellation from Thor, to whom 
the Danes are said to have consecrated a temple at 
a place called Woodings, about half a mile north- 
west of Thursby Church, which is reputed to have 
been built by David the First, of Scotland.
Warnel Hall.] — This is a venerable mansion of 
the Earl of Lonsdale's, situated about a mile to the 
west of Sebergham, on a commanding ascent of 
Warnel-Fell.
It was, for several generations ttie 
seat of the Denton family, but it had originally be- 
longed to the Lords Dacre of Gilsland.
At the west 
end of the mansion there was formerly a strong- 
tower, said to have been erected as the condition of 
ransom by a Scottish nobleruan, who was made pri- 
y soui r 
612 
CUMBERLAND.
soner at the battle of Flodden-Field, in the year 
1513, by one of the Dentons, then Lord of the 
Manor.
Warwick.] — This is a small but ancient village, 
four miles and three quarters east by north from 
Carlisle, in Cumberland ward.
Camden erroneous- 
ly supposed it to have been the Roman Virosidium, 
"where the sixth cohort of the Nervii kept garrison.
That it was a military station, however, seems evi- 
dent from its name ; Guart signifying' a guard or 
garrison, and wick, a place of residence.
By the 
Saxons it was called Warring-wick, a name of simi- 
lar import.
Warwick Church is of remote ©rigiu, but the date 
of its foundation is unknown : it was granted in the 
time of the Conqueror, to the Abbey of St. Mary, in 
York, but was then mentioned as a chapel.
It is 
built Avith squared stone : its length is now about 
seventy-two feet ; but from an arch which has been 
filled up at the west end, it appears to have extend- 
ed forty yards further.
The east end is of a semi- 
circular form, with thirteen niches, ten feet eight 
inches high, and seventeen inches broad, reaching 
almost to the ground : the top of each niche is arch- 
ed, and in two of the niches is a small window.
Warwick Hall, now, or recently, the seat of Ro- 
bert Warwick, Esq. is a low and retired mansion, 
situated in a finely cultivated vale on the banks of 
the river Eden.
The adjacent lands have been 
greatly improved, under the judicious management 
of Mr. Warwick ; a common, belonging to himself 
and tenants, having been enclosed and cultivated.
The manor was given by Hubert de Vallibus, and 
Robert his son, to Odard, Lord of Corby, a short 
time subsequent to the Conquest ; and it has been 
transmitted through his descendants, who obtained 
the name of Warwick from these possessions, to the 
present reign.
Francis Warwick, Esq. of War- 
wick Hall, died in July, 1772 ; and, as appears by 
the parochial register, was the nineteenth Lord of 
the Manor.
The original name of the present owner, 
who became possessed of the estates, as heir at law, 
in the year 1784, was Bonner; which, by royal 
license, in 1792, he exchanged for that of War- 
wick only.
The house was a few years ago rebuilt, 
and some additional improvements were made.
Watciicross.] — This place, which lies about two 
miles north-west from Edmond Castle, near the 
junction of the Irthing and the Gelt, is the four- 
teenth station ad lineam Valli, and supposed to have 
been the Aballaba of the Notitia.
Its situation is on 
the summit of an eminence, of an easy ascent ; and 
it commands a very extensive prospect.
Water-Millock.] This beautifully -situated 
mansion, a little to the north of Ullswater, is, we 
believe, the residence of a military officer of rank, 
named Robinson.
" The surrounding prospects 
include as much variety as can be found in almost 
any situation in the county.
The azure waters of 
the lake, the craggy steeps of Helvellyn, and various 
other rugged eminences of inferior elevation, partly 
covered with wood, enter into the composition of 
the landscape on one side ; while on the other, the 
scenery, though iess romantic, is more chaste, and 
comprehends the softer features of cultivation, and 
rustic simplicity." 
Wetheral.] — The little village of Wetheral is 
situated on the top of the western bank of the Eden, 
in Cumberland ward, five miles east-south-east 
from Carlisle.
Here, on an eminence opposite to 
Corby, are the ruins of Wetheral Priory, which was 
founded for monks of the Benedictine order, by the 
Earl Rauulph de Meschines, about the year 1086, 
and afterwards given to the Abbey of St. Mary, at 
Carlisle.
Richard the First granted these monks 
many immunities and privileges, particularly an 
exemption from pleas and plaints for murder, rob- 
bery, danegelds, &c.
The Priory was surrendered 
in the year 1539 ; when the revenues were valued 
at nearly 130'.
The gateway is the only part of the 
building now remaining : it is ornamented with a 
fine eliptic arch.
" Its square, turreted form," re- 
marks Warner, " points out the strength with which 
it was constructed, in order to resist, or repel, the 
attacks of the moss-troopers.
Plain and trifling as 
it is, it yet forms a pleasing feature in the very 
beautiful picture which opens at this spot.
A deep 
glen, with bold and lofty banks of rock and wood, 
bearing in its bosom the river Eden, of crystalline 
transparency, confines the eye to the right by its 
verdant eminences ; and opening to the left, lets 
in a broad, luxuriant valley, bounded by distant 
hills." 
Whitley Castle.] — This was a Roman station, 
on the eastern border of the county, on what was 
anciently called the Mardenway, leading from West- 
moreland.
According to Camden, traces were here 
visible of a very large town, defended on the north 
by four ramparts, and on the west by two.
Several 
stones, with inscriptions, have been found here ; 
particularly one, by which we learn, that the third 
cohort of the Nervii built a temple here to the Em- 
peror Antoninus, son of Severus.
Whitehaven.] — This now populous and opulent 
town is situated on the Irish sea, in the parish of 
St. Bees, in Allerdale ward, 40 miles south-west 
from Carlisle, and 385 north-west from London.
It has a well-supplied market on Tuesdays, and a 
fair on the 12th of August.
Its localities are at 
once interesting and remarkable.
The coast, south- 
ward of St. Bees, is bounded by bold rocks rising 
abruptly from the sea, and making a fine sweep into 
the ocean.
Nearly equidistant from those places is 
the lofty promontory called St. Bees Head, which 
forms a very conspicuous land-mark ; and having a 
light-house near its summit, is of great use to ma- 
riners.
The view from this eminence is scarcely 
equalled, for extent and beauty, by any in the king- 
dom.
The whole shore, with most of its creeks, 
bays, and harbours, the Isle of Man, and a vast 
range of Scotch coast, are distinctly seen.
The 
rocks teem with various kinds of sea-fowl, and sam- 
phire 
CUMBERLAND.
013 
phlfe grows here in abundance.
The town itself 
occupies the northern extremity of a narrow valley, 
which extends about five miles, to the village of St.
Bees, and is thought to have been once covered by 
the sea, both from the appearance of the soil, and 
the circumstance of an anchor having been found, 
about the middle of the vale, considerably below the 
surface.
In ancient deeds, we also find the hilly 
ground between this valley and the sea, called 
" Preston Isle;" the inclination of the ground, too, 
which, though seemingly quite level, has a descent 
on each side, tends to confirm us in the opinion that 
it was an arm of the sea.
This inequality of the 
surface is evinced by the small rivulet Poe, or Poe- 
beck, which on the one side, taking its course north- 
ward, runs in an easy stream, from about the mid- 
dle of the valley, to the sea at Whitehaven ; and, on 
the other, from nearly the same spot, runs south- 
ward, in an equally gentle current, to St. Bees, 
where it falls into the sea.
It seems most probable, 
that this valley has been produced by the tides, 
which have deposited a sediment, where the streams, 
which flowed in on both sides, meet ; and that the 
constant and gradual increase of this sediment filled 
up the inlet, until it assumed its present appear- 
ance.
The whitish-grey colour of one of the promon- 
tories, between which the Poe empties itself into 
the creek that forms the harbour of Whitehaven, has 
been, by some, supposed to give name to the town.
This eminence is called Tom Hurd Rock, the other, 
Jack-a-Dandy Hill.
The derivation of the name, 
from White, a fisherman, who, according to tradition, 
was the first person who frequented the bay, and 
built a cottage here, seems, however, more plausi- 
ble.
This cottage, or its vestiges, are still to be 
seen, in that part now called the Old Town.
In 
confirmation of the latter opinion, it may also be 
worthy of remark, that several old persons in the 
vicinity, call it " Whitton," or White's Town.
As the creek upon which the town is built is very 
low, the neighbouring lands overlook it on all sides.
The northern approach is singular, the heights being 
so considerably elevated above Whitehaven, that the 
slated roofs only are visible, until near the entrance, 
which is here adorned, by a fine portico, constructed 
with red free-stone, over which is an entablature, 
richly ornamented, and sculptured with the arms of 
the Lowther family.
The southern prospect is more 
open, the whole town, the haven, and the elegant 
residence of the Earl of Lonsdale (the Castle) are 
presented to the view on this side.
Whitehaven 
may be perhaps considered superior in beauty to 
any other town in the north of England ; the streets 
are wide and regular, and cross each other at right 
angles.
There are many very neat buildings, and 
the shops evince a degree of elegance, which is sel- 
dom seen in this part of Britain.
It has been justly remarked, that the effects of 
trade, industry, and enterprize, have scarcely ever 
been so strikingly exemplified, as in the rise, pro- 
vol.
i. — no.
44.
gress, and increasing importance of Whitehaven.
From an obscure hamlet to the village of St. Bees, 
it has become, in less than two centuries, of consi- 
derably greater magnitude than many cities ; and, 
both in extent of buildings, and in population, it by 
far exceeds Carlisle, the capital of the county.
Its 
rapid advancement to prosperity will be easily con- 
ceived, when it is stated, that in the year 1566, it 
consisted only of six fishermen's cabins, and a small 
bark ; in 1633 of nine or ten thatched cottages ; in 
1693, its buildings were sufficiently numerous for 
2272 inhabitants ; in twenty-two years afterwards, 
for 4000 ; in the year 1801, its population amounted 
to 8742 ; and, in 1811, to 10,106.
The increase of 
shipping has been equally progressive ; in 1685, the 
whole number of vessels belonging to the port was 
forty-six, exclusive of boats ; in 1772, they amount- 
ed to 197; in 1790, to 216 ; and have since in- 
creased to about 250 : the quantity of tonnage is 
between seventy and eighty thousand tons.
This flourishing town contains three churches, or 
rather chapels, dedicated, respectively, to St. Ni- 
cholas, St. James, and the Holy Trinity.
They 
are all plain and convenient structures ; but, in their 
outward appearance, they have few pretensions to 
beauty.
They were erected by the subscriptions of 
the inhabitants, augmented by the benevolence of 
the Lowther family.
St. Nicholas' Chapel stands 
nearly in the centre of the town : it was finished 
and consecrated in the year 1693 ; the whole charge 
of its building amounted to 1066/.
lQs. 2|r/.
In the 
accounts are several items for ale and tobacco, 
which appear to have been given to the seamen of 
different vessels, who, during their stay in the port, 
occasionally laboured in the building.
The altar- 
piece is a painting of the Last Supper : over it is 
an excellent organ, by Snetzler, erected in 1756.
Trinity Chapel was erected in 1715 ; and St. James's 
in 1752.
The latter is elegantly fitted up ; the roof 
and gallery being supported by ranges of pillars, 
beautifully proportioned.
Here also are three or 
four meeting-houses for Methodists, and two for 
Presbyterians ; and the Anabaptists, Catholics, 
Glassites, and Sandimanians, have, respectively, 
their places of worship.
A large and commodious poor-house was erected 
in Whitehaven, in 1743 ; and about thirty, or five- 
and-thirty years ago, the distresses of the indigent 
were still further alleviated by the establishment of 
a dispensary, which is supported by subscription.
The principal manufactories at Whitehaven arc 
those for cordage and sail-cloths : the latter was 
only established in the year 1786, but though much 
of the business is executed by machinery of great 
variety and powers, it furnishes employment to se- 
veral hundred workmen.
A handsome theatre was erected here by subscrip- 
tion in the year 1769.
The Lowther family is entitled to the credit of 
raising this town to importance.
About the reign 
of Charles I.
Sir John Lowther purchased, for his 
7 q second 
(51 1 
CUMBERLAND.
second son, Christopher, the lands of the dissolved ; 
monastery of St. Bees.
At this period, the use of j 
coals first became general ; and Sir Christopher ap- !
pears to have conceived the idea of making his pos- j 
sessions productive, by opening some collieries.
; 
No considerable progress, however* was made till 
after the Restoration, when Sir John Lowther, who 
had succeeded to the estates, formed a plan for ] 
V. orkiug the mines on a very extensive scale ; and 
that all opposition to his intended series of operations | 
might be prevented, he procured a grant of all the 
ungrauted lands within the district.
This was in 
the year 1000.
In 1668, he obtained a further ac- 
cession of property, by a grant of the whole sea- 
coast for two miles northward, between high and 
low water mark.
Sir John now directed his atten- 
tion to tne port, which was neither large nor conve- 
nient ; and, by his judicious plans, he laid the foun- 
dation of the present haven.
It has since been 
greatly improved ; particularly during the last reign, 
Avhen an act was obtained to perfect, and keep it in 
repair, by a tonnage on shipping.
It is protected by several piers or moles of stone- 
work ; three of which project in parallel lines from 
the land ; and a fourth, bending in the form of a 
crescent, has a watch-house and battery, and at its 
extremity a light-house.
At low water the port is 
dry, and the shipping withhi the moles lie as in dry 
docks.
The coal staith, or magazine, adjoins the 
harbour on the west side of the town : here, on an 
under tloor, sufficiently extensive to receive about 
3000 waggon loads, the coals are deposited when 
there are no ships ready to take them.
The method oi delivering the coals into the vessels 
is as follows : — the greatest part of the road from 
the pits is on a gentle descent, along which rail- 
ways ore laid, which communicate with covered gal- 
leries terminating in large flues, or hurries, placed 
sloping over the quay.
When the waggons are 
loaded, they run by their own weight on the rail- 
Avay, irom the pit to the staith, where the waggon 
bottoms striking out, the coals fall into the hurries, 
whence they are discharged into the holds of the 
ships, rattling down with a noise like thunder.
Each waggon is guided from the pits by one man ; 
and where the tlescent is so steep that the motion 
becomes too rapid, he retards it by pressing down 
one of the wheels with a piece of wood, called the 
convoy, which is fixed to the waggon for that pur- 
pose.
When the waggons are emptied, they are 
carried round by a turn frame, and drawn back to 
the pits by a single horse, along another road.
Eight, ten, or twelve v seels, from a hundred to a 
hundred and tweuiy tons burthen each, may be 
loaded at one tide : the expence of loading is ten 
shillings each.
Most of the coals exported from this 
haven are conveyed to Ireland : the quantity raised 
annually, on the average of twenty years, is about 
90,000 chaldrons.
We have bpen informed, that, when the bands of 
coals near this town were first begun to be worked, 
a level was driven from the bottom of the valley 
which reaches from Whitehaven to St. Bees, till it 
intersected the seam, now called by the workmen, 
the Bannock-band, where it drained a considerable 
bed, or field of coal, which has been drawn out by 
pits from twenty to fifty yards deep.
Another level 
was then driven more towards the south than the 
former ; and by continuing it to the westward, the 
seam called the Main Band was intersected, and a 
large bed of coal effectually drained.
The coals at 
this period were drawn out of the pits by men with 
windlasses, and were carried to the ships in packs, 
each measuring about three Winchester bushels, 
upon the backs of galloways, or small horses.
A 
subsequent attempt to obtain coal was made lower 
down the valley, at a place now called Gins, from 
the machines worked by horses, and employed here 
to raise both coals and water.
Near these gins a 
few houses were erected, which have since been in- 
creased to a considerable village.
This mode of 
raising the water by horses, having been found 
greatly to diminish the profits of the colliery, the 
late Sir James Lowther erected a steam-engine, the 
materials of which he purchased in London, where 
it had been used for raising water for the service of 
the city.
As the number and depth of the pits in- 
creased, the difficulty of freeing them from water 
augmented ; and another and more powerful engine 
was erected.
By these two engines several consi- 
derable bands of coal were drained, from which the 
markets were wholly supplied for some years.
Af- 
terwards a pit was sunk about half a mile from the 
Staith, and called the Parker-pit, and from this the 
first railed waggon-way was laid in this county.
The next working for coals was made at Saltam, 
about a mile south-west of the town ; this was a 
very expensive undertaking : a steam-engine, with 
a forty-inch cylinder, was erected ; and within a 
few years afterwards, a second of the same dimen- 
sions : the united powers of these machines dis- 
charged the water from a number of new pits, and 
the collieries became very flourishing.
" These Coal Mines," observe Nicholson and 
Burn, in their History of Cumberland, " are, per- 
haps, the most extraordinary of any in the known 
world.
The principal entrance for men and 
horses, is by an opening at the bottom of a hill, 
through a long passage hewn in the rock ; which, 
by a steep descent, leads down to the lowest vein of 
coal.
The greatest part of this descent is through 
spacious galleries, which continually intersect each 
other ; all the coal being cut away, except large 
pillars, which, in deep parts of the mine, are three 
yards high, and twelve square at the base.
The 
mines are sunk to the depth of 130 fathoms, and are 
extended under the sea to places were, above them, 
the water is of sufficient depth for ships of large 
burthen.
These are the deepest coal mines that have 
hitherto been wrought ; and perhaps the miners have 
not in any other part of the globe penetrated to so 
great a depth below the surface of the sea; the very 
deep 
CUMBERLAND.
613 
deep mines in Hungary, Peru, and elsewhere, being 
situated in mountainous countries, where the surface 
of the earth is elevated to a great height above the 
level of the ocean.
" There are here three strata of coal, which lie at 
a considerable distance, one above another ; the com- 
munication between each is preserved by pits.
The 
vein of coal is not always regularly continued in the 
same inclined plane, but is sometimes interrupted 
by hard rock ; and in those places, the earth seems 
to have sunk downwards from the surface, while the 
part adjoining hath retained its ancient situation.
These breaks the miners call dykes ; and when they 
meet with one of them, they first observe whether 
the direction of the strata is higher or lower than in 
the part where they have been working.
If, to em- 
ploy their own terms, it is cast down, they sink a 
pit to it with little trouble; but should it, on the 
contrary, be cast up to any considerable height, they 
are frequently obliged to carry a long level through 
the rock, with much expence and difficulty, till they 
again arrive at the vein of coal.
" In these deep and extensive works, the greatest 
care is requisite to keep them continually ventilated 
with perpetual currents of fresh air, to expel the 
damps and other noxious exhalations, and supply 
the miners with a sufficiency of that vital fluid.
In 
the deserted works, large quantities of these damps 
are frequently collected, and often remain for a long 
time without doing any mischief; but when, by some 
accident, they are set on fire, they produce dreadful 
and destructive explosions, and burst out of the pits 
with great impetuosity, like the fiery eruptions from 
burning mountains.
" The coal in tiiese mines hath several times been 
set on fire by the fulminatiug damp, and continued 
burning many montns, until large streams of water 
were conducted into the mines, and suffered to fill 
those parts where the coal was on fire.
Several 
collieries have been entirely destroyed by such fires : 
of this there are instances near Newcastle, and in 
other parts of England, and in the shire of Fife in 
Scotland ; in some of which places the fire has con- 
tinued burning for ages.
" To prevent, as much as possible, the collieries 
from being filled with these pernicious damps, it has 
been found necessary to search for those crevices in 
the coal whence they issue ; and then confine them 
within a narrow space, from which they are after- 
wards conducted through long tubes into the open 
air, where being set on fire, they consume in perpe- 
tual flames, as they continually arise out ot the earth.
The late Mr. Spedding, vvno was the great engineer 
of these works, having oDserved that the fulminating 
damp could only be kindled by flame, and was not 
liable to be set on fire by red hot iron, nor by the 
sparks produced by the collision of flint and steel, 
invented a machine, in winch, while a steel wheel is 
turned round wiih a vt:ry rapid motion, flints are 
applied to it, and by the abundance of fiery sparks 
emitted, the miners are enabled to carry on their 
work in places where the flame of a lamp or candle 
would occasion dreadful explosions.
Without some 
invention of this sort, the working of these mines 
would long ago have been impracticable, so greatly 
arc they annoyed with these inflammable damps.
Fewer mines, however, have been ruined by fire, 
than by inundations ; and here that noble piece of 
mechanism, the steam-engine, displays its beneficial 
effects.
When the four engines belonging to this 
colliery are all at work, they discharge 1228 gallons 
of water every minute, at thirteen strokes ; and after 
the same rate 1,768,320 gallons every twenty-four 
hours." 
Mr. Spedding, mentioned above, lost his life about 
fifty years ago, by the explosion of one of those 
damps, the destructive effects of which he had so 
sedulously laboured to prevent.
The steel wheel 
and flints have been proved not to be effectual 
preservatives ; but, by a system since adopted, the 
miners have, fortunately, been free from any serious 
accidents for several years ; although many new 
spreads, or fields of coals, have been opened out ; 
and this process is always deemed the most danger- 
ous part of the service.
The hydrogen gas, inflam- 
mable air, or dirt, as the workmen call it, is now 
made useful in carrying on the works.
They have 
collected a very large quantity of it, at the bottom 
of one of their upcast shafts (Duke pit) and keep it 
constantly burning.
The heat from it exceeds that 
of the largest coal-fires or lamps, as they are called, 
which are kept at the bottom of the upcast shafts to 
rarify the air in the pit.
The speed of the common 
atmospheric air, by burning the hydrogen gas, is 
greatly accelerated.
It compels it to travel at the 
rate of more than four miles an hour.
It also saves 
the expence of attendance and coals, which is very 
considerable at other upcast shafts.
In these works 
neither expence nor care is wanting, to make the 
situation of the colliers, while at their labour, as se- 
cure as possible.
The two engines at Saltom being nearly worn out, 
were removed about thirty years ago, and one only, 
but of greater power than both the others, erected 
in their stead.
This has two boilers, of fifteen feet 
diameter each, a seventy-inch cylinder, and a work- 
ing barrel eleven inches and a half.
The quantity 
of water raised by it is 581,175 gallons every twenty- 
four hours.
The subterranean passages by which men and 
horses descend to the coal works, are termed Bear- 
mouths : where these have not been made, no horses 
can be employed under ground, and the workmen 
are M down the shaft by a windlass.
In the How- 
gill colliery, south-west of the town, the King-pit is 
160 fathoms deep, and has five valuable seams of 
coal, besides several which are smaller, and of little 
consequence: this colliery abounds with dykes.
In 
those places where the coal is drawn from under the 
sea, which it is, in many parts, to the extent of eight 
or nine hundred yards, the pillars left to support the 
roof are about eighteen yards square.
Those works 
which 
616 
CUMBERLAND.
which are at the greatest depth below the level of 
the sea, produce the largest quantity of fire-damps ; 
in the works above the level, the damps are but tri- 
fling-.
It is observed, that the best coals are inva- 
riably the lightest : the seams are always found at 
equal distances from each other ; and all dip to the 
west about one yard in ten.* 
Wtgton.] — Wigton is a market-town, in Cum- 
berland ward, 12 miles south-west by west from 
Carlisle, and 304| north-north-west from London.
The market-day is Tuesday ; and there is a fair on 
the 25th of March.
Through the introduction of 
manufactures, the town has been some time in an 
improving state.
The first manufactories establish- 
ed here were for different kinds of coarse linens ; but 
since the year 1785, this business has received a 
considerable check by the encouragement given to 
the various branches of the cotton trade.
About five- 
and-twenty years ago, a manufactory was establish- 
ed at Spittle, in the vicinity of the town, for the 
printing of calicoes.
The town occupies an open situation, on a plain, 
having a dry, gravelly, well-cultivated, and gene- 
rally productive soil.
As the surrounding land, 
however, is chiefly spread out in extensive commons, 
there is yet much room for improvement.
The 
streets of Wigton are tolerably spacious ; and many 
of the buildings are handsome and modern.
In the 
year 1723, an hospital was founded here, under the 
will of the Reverend John Thomlinson, A.
M. for 
six indigent widows of Protestant beneficed clergy- 
men, episcopally ordained, and incorporated by the 
name of " The Governess and Sisters of the College 
of Matrons, or Hospital of Christ, at Wigton." The 
endowment having been augmented by some small 
benefactions, the allowance to each widow is about 
8/.
annually.
A free-school was also established 
here about the year 1780 ; chiefly by the contribu- 
tions of the inhabitants, aided by the benevolence of 
Dr. Thomlinson's brother.
In this town, observes 
Gough, was anciently " an hospital, or free chapel, 
dedicated to St. Leonard ; to which Mr. Pegge is of 
opinion, belongs a seal found in Pickering Castle, 
Yorkshire : it is of wood, not unlike a butter pat, 
and has the representation of the Deity, with the 
crucifix, circumscribed segillvm wighton." 
The church now standing in this town was built 
in the year 1788 ; and in point of neatness it is said 
* The lower classes, in the mining counties, have a tradition, 
that mines are frequented by a dwarf species of gnomes, or 
elves, who wander through the drifts and chambers of the works, 
as little old men, dressed like miners, and seem perpetually 
employed in blasting the ore, flinting it into the vessels that 
convey it to the surface, turning the windlass, &c.
yet never do 
any thing.
Mr. Pennant observes, in his description of these 
collieries, that the immense caverns that lie between the pillars, 
exhibited such a gloomy appearance, that he could not help 
inquiring after the imagiuary inhabitant, the creation of the 
labourer's fancy, " The swart Fairy of the mine;" and was 
seriously answered by a black fellow at his elbow, that he really 
had never met with any ; but that his grandfather had found 
the litile implements and tools belonging to this diminutive 
rsce of subterranean spirits !
to form a striking contrast with the ancient fabric, 
which was a dark, gloomy structure, built, accord- 
ing to the Chronicon Cumbriae, by Odaard de Logiz, 
to whom the barony was given by Waldeof, son of 
Earl Gospatrick.
The materials it was constructed 
with, were procured from the Roman station at Old 
Carlisle, as appears from the stones being marked 
in a similar manner to those that may yet be obtain- 
ed there.
In removing the foundations of the old 
steeple, two Roman sepulchral inscriptions were 
discovered.
Workington.] — Workington is a considerable 
sea-port town, seated in Allerdale ward, near the 
southern margin of the Derwent, which discharges 
itself into the sea at about the distance of a mile.
It 
is 34 miles south west by west from Carlisle, and 
310 north-west by north from London.
Leland 
mentions it, as being, in his days, a " lytle prety 
fyssher town ;" and it is noticed by Camden, as fa- 
mous for its salmon fishery, which is still consider- 
ble, both on the coast, and several miles up the 
river, f 
The present importance of Workington appears 
to have originated in the working of the collieries 
since the reign of Queen Elizabeth, at which period the 
entire maritime strength of Cumberland consisted of 
only twelve vessels and 198 sailors and fishermen.
Now, however, the number of ships belonging to 
Workington alone, is from 160 to 200, and many of 
them are from 1 to 300, and upwards, tons burthen.
These are principally engaged in the exportation of 
coals to Ireland, and some few to the Baltic.
Tim- 
ber, bar-iron, and flax, are the chief articles of im- 
portation.
The manufactures and exports are sail- 
cloths and cordage.
The river is navigable to the 
town for ships of 400 tons ; and on each bank, near 
the mouth, are piers, where the ships lie to take in 
their respective ladings, which, if coals, are convey- 
ed into them from frames occasionally dropping from 
the rail-roads.
Workington harbour is one of the 
safest on the coast ; and many improvements in the 
situation and construction of the quays have been 
made within these few years.
The old streets are principally narrow and irre- 
gular ; but those of modern erection are better con- 
structed, and many of the houses are handsomely 
built.
The public edifices are all of recent date.
The church is a neat structure ; the altar-piece in 
f The salmon are sometimes caught on the shallows, or 
sand-banks, near the mouth of the Derwent, by persons on 
horseback, called salmon-hunters.
The huntsman is armed 
with a spear of three points, barbed, having a shaft fifteen feet 
in length, which he holds with both hands ; and whilst the horse 
is going at a swift trot, or moderate gallop, middle deep in wa- 
ter, he strikes the spear into the body of the salmon, and with 
a turn of the hand raises the fish to the surface, and runs it the 
readiest way to land without dismounting.
The passage of the 
salmon is frequently obstructed by nets; but whether thus in- 
tercepted, or left in the shallows by the tide, the fish is gene- 
rally discovered by the effect which his endeavours to escape 
produce on the surface of the water.
August, September, and 
October, and sometimes February, are the months for killing 
salmon at Workington.
8 which 
CUMBERLAND.
017 
which is the Descent from the Cross.
The houses 
are principally disposed into two clusters : in that 
called the Upper Town a new square was erected a 
few y ars ago, in the area of which is the corn mar- 
ket ; at a little distance are the butchers' shambles.
The market-day is Wednesday.
The petty sessions for Allerdale ward, ahove Der- 
went, are holden here ; and also at Whitehaven and 
Cockermouth.
Workington has a neat assembly-room ; and a 
theatre, on a small scale.
The sick and afflicted poor of this town are sup- 
ported chiefly from the funds of the various friendly 
societies which have been instituted under the pa- 
tronage of the Curwen family, who are the chief \ 
proprietors of this manor.* The workmen employ- i 
ed by Mr. Curwen, of whatever description, contri- 
bute three-pence each, every fortnight, towards the 
support of such individuals amongst them, as may be 
deprived of health, through mistortune or sickness ; 
and to every ten pounds thus collected, Mr. Curwen 
generously adds three.
In the vicinity of Workington, there are about 
sixteen coal-pits ; the depth of which is from 240 to 
540 feet.
Tne coal lies in bands, or seams, divided 
from each other by intermediate strata.
The thick- 
ness of the uppermost seam is generally three teet ; 
of the second, tour feet ; of the third, or lowest that 
has yet been worked, from ten to twelve teet.
The 
extraneous matter which separates the former, va- 
ries ; but the covering of the main coal is of the 
finest white free-stone, generally about sixty feet 
thick.
The quantity or coals shipped per day is 
about 300 tons ; the raising of whicli employs seve- 
ral steam engines, and about six hundred workmen.
The coals consumed by tiie inhabitants are purchas- 
ed at the rate of two shillings for tour customary 
bushels.
A new and very rich seam was discovered 
in the year 1794, at the place called the Chapel- 
bank, on the estate of Mr. Curwen, who celebrated 
the opening of the works by a splendid festival.
Workington Hall.] — This fine old mansion, the 
principal residence of John Christian Curwen, Esq.
stands on a delightful eminence near the east end of 
the town, on the banks of the Derwent.
It is a spa- 
cious quadrangular building ; and though it has 
undergone various alterations within the last fifty or 
sixty years, it still retains marks of considerable an- 
tiquity.
Gough observes, that the walls are so re- 
markably tnick, that, in making some improvements 
not many years ago, a passage was excavated 
through one of them, lengthways ; sufficient thick- 
ness being left on each side to answer every purpose 
of strength.
In this mansion the Queen of Scots 
was hospitably entertained on her landing at Work- 
ington, by Sir Henry Curwen, till required by Eli- 
zabeth to resign his royal guest, who was removed 
first to Cockermouth Castle, and afterwards to that 
at Carlisle.
The apartment in which she slept, 
whilst here, is yet called the Queen's chamber.
The park and pleasure grounds are beautiful and 
extensive.
Soil.] — The soils of Cumberland, though remark- 
ably various, are generally classed under the divi- 
sions of fertile clays, or strong rich loams, which 
occupy but a small part of the county ; upon these 
wheat is chiefly cultivated — dry loams, which in- 
clude different degrees, from the light sandy soil, to 
the rich brown loam, and occupy the greatest part 
of the land— -wet loam, mostly upon a bottom of clay, 
and suited for grazing — and black peat-earth, which 
is frequently met with in the mountainous parts, 
most commonly in those which lie near Durham and 
Northumberland.
Farm-yard dung, lime, slake, or 
mud deposited by the tide, and sea-weed ; mussels, 
found on the sands adjoining the coast, are employ- 
ed in the vicinity of Ravenglass for the same pur- 
pose — five or six cart loads are the usual quantity 
strewn over an acre of ground.
A compost of lime 
and earth is very generally employed as a top 
dressing ; in the proportion of one part of lime to 
four or five of earth.
Some small beds of marl have 
been discovered of late years in Cumberland ; but, 
as far as we have been able to learn, it has not yet 
been employed as manure.
There is an excellent 
practice observed in many parishes here : persons 
are engaged, with a regular annual salary, for a 
term of years, to keep the enclosed grounds free 
from moles ; the requisite sum is levied in the same 
manner as the regular parochial taxes, and scarcely 
exceeds a halfpenny per acre.
Agriculture.] — Until within these few years, the 
agriculture of this county was deplorably behind 
that of the more southern districts of the kingdom.
The Workington Agricultural Society, however, 
founded under the auspices of J.
C. Curwen, Esq.
has, in a very short space of time, effected the most 
astonishing improvements in every branch of hus- 
bandry.
The establishment of this Society com- 
menced during the late war, at a period highly pro- 
pitious to the interests of agriculture.
The altera- 
tions, then recently made in the laws, respecting the 
imports and exports of grain, had given a spring 
to the exertions and industry of the farmer ; and an 
advance in the price of wheat was the infallible 
consequence of the change.
Much land was brought 
into cultivation for wheat, which, previously to that 
period, had either remained in pasture, or been em- 
* TheCurwens have possessed considerable property, and 
great influence, in the county, for several centuries.
Camden, who 
was a descendant <>t the Curwens, maternally, states, hat they 
derive their descent from Gospatric, Earl of Northumberland, 
and took their surname, by agreement, from Curwen, a family 
of Galloway, whose heir they married.
Another account, how 
ever, traces their descent to John de Tailbois, brother to Fulke, 
VOL.
I. — NO.
44.
EarlofAnjou, and husband to Elgiva, the daughter of King 
Ethelred.
On the death of Henry Curwen, Esq. the last male 
heir, his possessions descended to Isabella, his on»y surviving 
daughter, who married John Christian, Esq. in 1782.
This 
gentleman assumed the surname and arms of Curwen in the year 
1790, by virtue of the King's sign manual.
7 B 
ployed 
CIS 
CUMBERLAND.
ployed solely for raising of »ats ; the return being 1 
such as would not repay the farmer for growing 
wheat.
At the same moment, advanee of rents, 
with great increase in the taxes, pressed so heavily, 
as not only to compel greater exertions, but to point 
out the necessity of having recourse to a superior 
system of cultivation, to support those additional 
burdens.
It is gratifying to observe the exertions of such 
men as Mr. Curwen duly appreciated.
At the an- 
niversary meeting of the Workington Agricultural 
Society, in the year 1810, William Browne, Esq.
one of the stewards, presented him (as President) 
with a superb piece of plate, which had been voted 
to him by the Society.
We shall take the liberty of 
here inserting a sketch of Mr. Browne's speech on 
the occasion, and of Mr. Curwen' s reply, as they are 
both eminently calculated to shew the improving 
state of this county.
Mr. Browue commenced as 
follows : — 
" Mr. Curwen — In the name of the Workington 
Agricultural Society, I have the honour of present- 
ing you this salver, as a mark of the sense entertain- 
ed by them of your exertions in promoting the Agri- 
culture of this County ; and, with your permission 
and theirs, I shall read the inscription, which will best 
explain their sentiments — 
" The Workington Agricultural Society, as a testi- 
mony of their regard, and in honour of his distinguish- 
ed zeal, exertion, and ability, directed not less suc- 
cessfully to the advancement of universal agriculture 
than to the internal improvement and local prosperity 
of the county of Cumberland, present this to J.
C. 
Curwen, Esq. their founder and president, Sept.
28, 
1810." 
" No person can regret more sincerely than I do, 
that it should have fallen to the lot of one so little 
qualified, to express on this occasion the sentiments 
.of the Society ; not only as I feel myself unable to 
express their feelings sufficiently, but more so as I 
am unable to do justice to your merits.
When the 
zeal and ability, with which you direct and promote 
the agricultural interests of this county, attract the 
notice of all ranks of your fellow subjects ; not to 
have been observed by those around you who are 
daily witnesses and partakers of the benefits of which 
you are the source, and not to have noticed them, 
would have been ungrateful.
I shall not trespass 
upon your valuable time by entering into any detail 
of your merits, which are written in legible characters 
throughout the neighbourhood : every one who has 
known the coast of Cumberland the last ten years, 
must have seen the rapid change that had taken 
place ; and, although I have no doubt there have 
been many men, before you, who have wished well 
to their country, it has been your proud felicity to 
have effected what they could only contemplate, and 
to have raised a zeal and spirit in the county, which, 
J trust, will lead to agricultural perfection.
You 
have the inward self-satisfaction (the best consola- 
tion of a good mind, the only wish of a wise one) 
that you have done your duty in that situation where 
Providence has placed you.
In the name of the Agri- 
cultural Society, I have the honour of presenting 
you this, and with it, I am sure, the most heartfelt 
wishes of all who hear me, and all friends to agri- 
culture ; and when the time shall come, as come it 
must, when those who give, and he who receives it, 
shall be no more, I trust it will prove a lasting re- 
membrance to our posterity, of how much they were 
indebted to your exertion and ability, and a memento 
to your's, of what the genius and exertion of one 
man and one mind (when properly directed) are ca- 
pable of achieving, and that it will be a stimulus to 
them, to follow the example of one, who has shined 
so eminently conspicuous.
If an individual may be 
allowed to express his sentiments on such an occa- 
sion, my second wish is, that you may long con- 
tinue to enjoy the honours which your countrymen 
bestow upon you ; my first is, that you may always 
as well continue to deserve them." 
To which the President replied : — 
" This is one of the proudest and most flattering 
moments of my life.
The approbation of the So- 
ciety, thus publicly expressed, is a.
rich reward, 
amply compensating the most important service, but 
far exceeding any that it has been in my power to 
render.
In accepting your valuable and elegant 
present, I am sensible I am increasing an obligation 
not to be discharged.
Proudly I bequeath it to my 
successors, and entail upon them the pleasing task 
of discharging what I owe you for this distinguished 
favour you have conferred upon me.
The rapid 
and extensive improvements which have taken place, 
and the widely extended and extending sentiment in 
favour of agriculture, which has sprung from this 
Society, are the happy fruits of your combined ef- 
forts.
If it was my good fortune to propose the 
plan — it was your able assistance which has prose- 
cuted it.
Much am I indebted to my worthy friend 
for the flattering manner in which he has carried the 
resolution of the Society into execution ; but I must 
protest against any greater share of merit being 
assigned to me, than what is due to himself, and many 
others.
Bound to you by the most powerful of sen- 
timents, gratitude, I need not profess that my exer- 
tions shall be redoubled to justify your kindness, and 
to promote those objects, for which we are com- 
bined." 
Formerly, no particular rotation of crops was ob- 
served ; but the most general custom was, to sow 
from two to five or six crops of corn, in succession ; 
and in some instances, in remote districts, the land 
had been ploughed, and sown with corn from time 
immemorial.
Better practices, however, have been 
introduced.
Every sort of grain is cut with the 
sickle, and not utifrequently by females, who are as 
active and expert at the businesses the labouring men 
of the more southern counties, They also assist in 
carting, harrowing, and weeding ; and many, with 
as fine forms and complexions as nature ever be- 
stowed, ore continually employed iu some one or 
other 
CUMBERLAND.
619 
other of these humble occupations.
Corn used to 
be all threshed with the flail, but threshing-ma- 
chines have some time been introduced, with great 
success.
The general mode of ploughing is with horses, 
yoked in pairs abreast to a plough ; a pair of horses 
ploughing an acre a day.
Since the establishment 
of the Workington Society, however, oxen-plough- 
ing has been adopted on many farms.
Of late years, there has been an increased atten- 
tion to the cultivation of that most useful vegetable, 
the potatoe.* In the Wigton district, in particular, 
potatoes have been cultivated extensively, and with 
great success.
In the district about Aldstonmoor, round the 
northern skirts of the western mountains, and in the 
north-east parts of the county, the dairy system is 
chiefly prevalent.
The dairies, however, are but I 
small, and are mostly employed in the making of but- 
ter, the quality of which is excellent.
The average j 
quantity of butter from one cow, in a season, is 
about two firkins of fifty-six pounds each.
The 
amount of the butter sent to distant markets, is from 
35,000/.
to 45,000/.
annually.
When the cream is 
taken off", the old milk is either consumed in the fa- 
mily, sold for two-pence a gallon, or made into what 
is called blue-milk cheese, which is in common use 
among the peasantry.
Cattle.] — The Cumberland cattle are a small 
* Tn the year 1809, Mr. Curwen circulated the following 
letter, on this subject:— 
" Workington Hall, April 9, 1809.
" Sir,— The improvement of our agriculture appears to me to 
be the most certain means of advancing the prosperity and hap- 
piness of the United Empire, and preserving to us the blessings 
we enjoy.
I may be deemed visionary, but I cannot disguise 
my opinion, that Great Britain, under a system of good agricul- 
ture, would be capable of supporting thirty millions of inhabi- 
tants.
Nothing can contribute more to this desirable object 
than the general culture and use of potatoes.
"The population of Workington is estimated at eight thousand 
— the weekly sale of potatoes during ten months of the year 
exceeds four thousand stone per week : to supply this con- 
sumption requires nearly 100 acres.
I am inclined to believe five 
times the number of acres would not, by any other mode of 
cropping, produce an equal quantity of food.
In corroboration 
of this opinion, let us suppose five hundred acres of wheat, 
yielding twenty-four Winchesters per acre of sixty pounds, or 
six hundred thousand pounds of bread, equal to supplying four 
thousand persons with half a pound of bread for three hundred 
days.
The consumption then would be half a pound of bread 
to four pounds of potatoes.
The comfort derived from the use 
of potatoes by the working classes affords a most powerful argu- 
ment in favour of their general introduction— -no food is more 
nutritious, none so universally palatable.
The philanthropist 
and politician will equally promote their views by extending 
the use and culture ot the potatoe.
" For eight years past I have fed all my working horses upon 
steamed potatoes, mixed with cut straw ; and latterly I have with 
equal success given them to oxi n.
They would answer for 
milch cows, and fattening rattle, if they could be raised at less 
expence.
My consumption for eight months in the year is a 
ton and n half per day, or about three hundred and sixty tons 
annually ; the saving 'in land, in feeding with potatoes as a sub- 
stitute lor hay, is between a sixth and a seventh— fifty acres of 
breed, with long horns, with a few exceptions of the 
Galloway breed intermixed, particularly along the 
coast from Whitehaven to Carlisle.!
Much pains, 
however, are now taking, in the improvement of 
cattle, and to unite early maturity with a propensity 
to fatten.
Mr. Curwen has paid much attention to 
the stall-feeding of cattle, for which the London So- 
ciety of Arts, &c.
not long since presented him with 
a gold medal.
Great advantage has resulted from the attention 
which, of late years, has been given to the breed of 
swine ; animals in which there is a vast difference : 
whilst one stock is highly profitable, another con- 
sumes in fattening, as much or more than it is 
worth.
Sheep.] — Formerly, sheep-farming, which is pre- 
valent in the mountainous tracts, and on the borders 
of large commons, was less understood here than in 
other parts of the kingdom.
" At Penruddock," 
say the persons who drew up the Agricultural Re- 
port — " Ave observed some singularly rough-legged, 
ill-formed sheep ; and on asking an old farmer, 
whence the breed was obtained, he replied, ' Lord, 
Sir !
they are sik as God set upon the land ; we 
never change any.' " These sheep-breeders were 
generally so attached to their own kind, that they 
seldom cared to make those experiments which the 
perfection of the science renders necessary.
I But, 
by the exertions of the Workington Society, these 
prejudices, 
potatoes will furnish above the quantity required, whilst three 
hundred and fifty acres of hay would most frequently fall short 
of supporting the same number of working horses and oxen— 
the advantage of this system extends beyond the individual, 
and is felt both immediately and remotely by the mass of the 
community.
In the first place, the ground, heretofore indis- 
pensibly requisite for the growth of hay for horses is, now ap- 
plied to the purposes of a dairy, and in the last year 507,024 
quarts of milk were sold ; whereas, in 1S04, only 222,755.
In 
years of scarcity, the food of horses can be applied to the use 
oTman." J.
C. CURWEN." 
f Horse and cattle-dealing is chiefly in the hands of the 
borderers, provincially termed Bworder Cowppers, a numer- 
ous, unpolished race.
Their manners, to employ their own 
phrase, are more "ramshackle" than those of other Cumbrians.
They are the life and soul, as well as the plague and disturb- 
ance, of every company they join with ; being continual talkers, 
hard drinkers, and quarrelsome companions.
One of these 
horse-dealers attempted to recommend himself to a travelling 
Scotchman, by claiming kindred ; affirming, that he was a 
Border Scot.
" Gude faith, I dinna doubt it," quoth the 
shrewd Caledonian, " the coarsest part o' the claith's ay at the 
selvidse." 
\ Warner, in his Northern Tour, has furnished the follow- 
ing characteristic sketch of the Estatesmen, or sheep-breeders, 
of the mountainous parts of Cumberland: — " In the midst of 
these secluded scenes, formed by the involutions of the moun- 
tains, uncorrupted by the society of the world, lives one of the 
most independent, most moral, and most respectable characters 
existing; the Estatesman, as he is called in the language of the 
country.
His property usually amounts from SO/, to 200i.
a 
year; his mansion forms the centred point of his possessions, 
where he passes an undisturbed inoffensive life, surrounded by 
his own paternal meads and native hills.
Occupied in cultivat- 
ing the former, and browzing the latter with his large flocks of 
3000 or 4000 sheep, he has no temptation to emigrate from 
home j 
020 
CUMBERLAND.
prejudices, as well as many others, arc rapidly 
wearing away ; and considerable care is now taken, 
to combine excellence of meat with superiority of 
fleece.
It is said, that the recent improvements of 
the staple have been such as not only to equal, but 
to surpass the wool imported from Spain.
Leases, Tenures, &c] — There are probably few 
counties where property in land is divided into such 
such small parcels as in Cumberland, and those 
small properties so universally occupied by the 
owners.
The annual value of these tenements varies 
from 5/.
to 50/.
a year ; but the generality are from 
15/.
to 30/.
and some extend to 100/.
or a little 
more.
The rental of the largest estate in the coun- 
ty amounts to about 13,000'.
per annum.
By far 
the greatest part of this county is held under Lords 
of the Manors, by that species of vassalage called 
" customary tenures," subject to the payment of 
fines and heriots on alienation, death of the Lord, or 
death of the tenant, and the payment of certain an- 
nual rents, and performance of various services, 
called " boon days," such as getting and loading 
the Lord's peats, ploughing and harrowing his 
land, &c.
whenever summoned by the Lord.
It is 
supposed that two-thirds of the land are held by this 
kind of tenure ; the remaining part is mostly free- 
hold ; leasehold and copyhold are rarely met with.
The few lands, however, which are let on lease, if 
that term be not applied improperly to what are 
chiefly verbal contracts for five, seven, or nine years, 
are also held by tenures nearly equal, in their inju- 
rious effects, to customary ; these are, a year and a 
half improved value to the proprietor of the manor 
every seven years, and also a claim to the wood 
planted on the estate by the tenant.
To the high 
credit Oi the Earl of Lousdale, and to the great ad- 
vantage of the county, that nobleman has recently 
adopted the liberal policy of emancipating the arbi- 
trary and customary tenures on his estates ; and it 
is probable that, in the course of a few years, the 
leasehold property, in this county, will assimilate, in 
nature and value, with that of the more southern 
parts of the kingdom.
It deserves to be remarked, that most of the old 
farm-houses, cottages, &c.
are thatched, and the 
stones of the walls are laid with clay instead of 
mortar ; but the more modern buildings are gene- 
rally covered with slate, and walled with lime : in 
those districts, however, where clay or mud walls 
prevail, the advances of modern improvements are 
admitted with some reluctance, the j.eople consider- 
ing thein as an expensive and um.ocessarv luxury.
Many of the houses are covered wit.) a line blue 
slate, the best of which is procured in Borrowdale.
Contrary to the country custom, of building with 
stone, the houses, in the market-towns, &.c. are cliiefly 
of brick.
Inclosures, Tithes, &c] — Amongst the various 
causes, which are at this time coni.ibuting so materi- 
ally to the improvement of this county, it would he 
inexcusable not to notice, or omit piymg the tribute 
of praise, so justly due, to the general disposition 
evinced by tne principal landed proprietors, in fa- 
vour of inclosures of wastes, and commutation of 
tithes.
Numerous acres in Inglewood Forest, at 
Dalston, and in various other parts of the county, 
which hitherto furnished only a scanty pittance to 
a few miserable sheep, now produce grain sufficient 
for the support of thousands of the human species.
The improved system, too, in the management 
oi old inclosures, is entitled to particular admira- 
tion.* 
Manufactures, &c] — This county is not re- 
markable tor the number, or extent, of its manufac- 
tures.
The principal are the spinning and weaving 
ol cotton into calicoes, corduroys, and other articles, 
and the printing of cotton.
The lormer, which has 
not been many years introduced, was first corameuc- 
home ; and knowing but few of those artificial want<: which 
spring from luxury, he h.is no inclination to lessen ( r aiienate 
his property in idle expenditur ; Out trans nits to his descend- 
ants, without diminution or increase, the demesne, which hail 
been left to himself by his own frugal nd contented forefathers.
Hence it happens that more frequent instances occur in the 
deep vales of Cumberland, of property being enjoyed ior a 
long series of generations by the same family, than in any other 
part of England.
Their •-het p running wild upon the moun- 
tains, and nevi-r taken into ihe farm-yard, are exposed to per- 
petual accidents and loss, arising from the inclemency of the 
weather, and the horrors of snowstorms; and in si.me instances, 
12 er 13 head have bet n destroyed in a year.
This circum- 
stance prevents ihefn from getting 1 ri< h ; but on the other hand, 
the Hocks are kept without the l< ast expence to the proprietors, 
their losses never induce poverty upon them; so that happily 
oscillating between their loss and gain, they are preserved in 
the independent state, that golden mean, which the wiseAgur, 
so earnestly and rationally petitioned of his God that he might 
enjoy.
Removed by their situation and circumstances from 
the ever shifting scene of fashionable life, their manners con- 
tinue primitive, unabraded t>\ the collision of general inter- 
course; the r hospitality is unb Uuded an< !
sincere, their senti- 
ments simple, and their language scriptural.
" Go," said an 
6 
estatesman to a friend of mine, whom he had enterta : ned for 
some days in his house, " go to the vale on the other side of 
yon mountain to the house of such an estatesman, and tell him 
you came from me.
I know him not ; but he will receive you 
kindly, for our sheep mingle upon the mountains !" 
* " To Mr. Hodgson, of Blennerhasset," observes the Pre- 
sident of the Workington Society, "great merit is due, and 
in no situation m Great Britain did it require a more determined 
spirit to commenct improvement.
The obnoxious weeds that 
overran this village and its environs, infinitely out number 
what I ever observed.
Were the seeds of Ihe docks converted 
into half crowns, they would, I verily believe, afford a sum 
sufficient to discharge the national debt!!!
Without having 
seen them, no adequate idea can be formed of their quantity.
In such a situation, I should recommend to my worthy friend, 
after having completely eradicated Ins own weeds, to adopt the 
plan of a most amiable, and highly respected nobleman (Lord 
Crewe) who had complained of the injury both in i*xamp!e and 
effect, of a very negligent tenant that tolerated eveiy weed — 
remonstrance producing no effect, an indictment was presented 
at ihe Court Baron ; the complaint was substantiated, and the 
culprit fined some gallons of ale.
The fine was paid ; and the 
reform, which friendly admonition failed of producing, was 
most completely accomplished by ridicule." 
ed 
CUMBERLAND.
(321 
cd at Dais ton, whence it soon extended to Carlisle, 
Warwick-Bridge, Corby, Comersdale, &c.
The 
seat of cotton printing- is at Carlisle, lu some of 
the market-towns are small manufactories of checks 
and coarse linens ; at Egremont numerous looms 
are employed in the manufacture of sail-cloth ; and 
at Whitehaven, where it was only introduced about 
thirty years ago, several hundred hands are employ- 
ed in the different branches of the same manufacture.
Some paper-mills are worked in different parts of 
the county ; a manufactory of course earthenware 
has been bug carried on near Dearham ; and near 
Workington, as already mentioned, are the Seaton 
Iron-Works, which employ several hundred work- 
men.
It is usual for private families to knit and 
spin their own stockings ; and every village manu- 
factures its own cloth, for general purposes.
Customs and Manners.] — The inhabitants of 
Cumberland may be divided into four classes : the 
first are the descendants of the borderers, who yet 
retain much of their native fierceness and savage, 
courage.
The second class is composed of those 
who occupy the open cultivated parts of the county, 
and whose manners assimilate with those of the more 
southern parts of the island.
Those who inhabit the 
peaceful dales shut up amongst the mountains con- 
stitute the third class.
With them, labour and 
health go hand in hand ; luxury and discord having 
had little opportunity of extending their baneful in- 
fluence amongst them.
It has been often remarked, 
that the behaviour of this class is modest, unaffected, 
and humble; and that their civility to the traveller, 
who visits their delightful retreats, is the pure ema- 
nation of nature and honesty, being neither accom- 
panied by the expectation of profit, nor attended by 
that prying species of curiosity, which renders prof- 
fered services unacceptable.
Their chief occupation 
is tending their flocks upon the hills ; and such is 
the confidence reposed in individual integrity, that 
in some vales of the southern district, the exchange 
of strayed sheep is regularly made only once a year.
This is on St. Martin's day, when every farmer, who 
has any in his possession, attends at the place ap- 
pointed, ami delivers them to the respective owners, 
without expence.
The meeting concludes with a 
feast on roast geese and ale.
Among these villagers, 
iionesty is the only qualification requisite to entitle 
its possessor to the best company : and so accus- 
tomed arc they to consider mankind as equal, that 
the " Lword" of a Manor will cordially associate 
with even the meanest workman who has preserved 
his character.
Indeed, the honorary titles, as they 
may be termed, which arise from the different de- 
grees of allowed consequence or property in Cum- 
berland, appear singular when compared with their 
usual acceptations in society.
The mistress of the 
house is a " Dame j" every owner of a little landed 
property is a " 'Statesman ;" his eldest son is the 
" Laird ;" and where there is no son, the eldest 
daughter is born to the title of " Leady." Thus 
we may see a "'Statesman" driving the plough, a 
vofc.
i. — no.
4-5.
" Lord" attending the market with vegetables, and 
a " Lady" labouring at the churn !
— The miners of 
Aldstonmoor, &c.
who labour hard about four days 
in the week, and drink and make holiday during the 
other three, form the fourth class.
Seeing only bleak 
mountains above ground, and not any thing except 
rocks and ores in the bowels of the earth, these men 
obtain but few ideas, and are generally rude and 
churlish in their manners.
The " hirings" for farmers' servants, half yearly, 
at Whitsuntide and Martinmas, though not altoge- 
ther peculiar to this county, are entitled to notice.
Those who come to be hired stand in a body in the 
market-place ; and to distinguish themselves, hold 
a bit of straw, or a green sprig in their mouths.
When the market is over, the girls begin to file off, 
and gently pace the streets, with a view of gaining 
admirers ; whilst the young men, with similar de- 
signs, follow them ; and having " eyed the lasses," 
each picks up a sweetheart, conducts her to a danc- 
ing-room, and treats her with punch and cake.
Here they spend their afternoon, and part of their 
half year's wages, in drinking- and dancing ; unless, 
as it frequently happens, a girl becomes the subject 
of contention, when the harmony of the meeting is 
interrupted, and the candidates for her affection set- 
tle the dispute by blows.
When the diversions of 
the day are concluded, the servants generally return 
to their homes, for a few holidays, before they enter 
on their new servitude.
At fairs, as well as hirings, 
it is customary for all the young people in the neigh- 
bourhood to assemble and dance at the inns and 
alehouses.
In their dances, which are jigs and reels, 
exertion and agility are more regarded than ease 
and grace.
But little order is observed in these 
rustic assemblies : disputes frequently arise, and are 
generally terminated by blows.
During these com- 
bats, the weaker portion of the company, with the 
minstrels, get upon the benches, or cluster in cor- 
ners, whilst the rest support the combatants : even 
the lasses will often assist in the battle, in support 
of their relations or lovers.
When the affray is 
over, the bruised pugilists retire to wash, and the 
tattered nymphs to re-adjust their garments.
Fresh 
company arrives, the fiddles strike up, the dancing 
proceeds as before, and the skirmish, which com- 
mences without previous malice, is rarely again re- 
membered.
In these dancing parties tho attach- 
ments of the country people are generally form- 
ed.
The method by which courtship is pursued in this 
county is somewhat singular.
After the youth has 
obtained permission of his mistress to visit her, he 
appropriates his Saturday evenings to that purpose.
When the family are retired to rest, the fire darken- 
ed, and the candle extinguished, he cautiously enters 
the house, and is received by his expectant lass with 
affectionate cordiality.
In this obscurity the lovers 
pass several hours, conversing on the common topics 
of the village, or the more animating subject of mu- 
tual affection, tUl the increasing cold of a winter's 
7 3 night, 
022 
CUMBERLAND.
night, or the light of a summer's morning, annouuees 
the painful moment of parting.
The parents, or 
masters of the lovers, generally connive at these 
proceedings, having little idea of depriving others 
of an indulgence, which themselves and their fore- 
fathers enjoyed with impunity.
This " dark" me- 
thod of courtship is sometimes attended with the 
effects which might naturally be expected.
The 
frail fair one is then indebted to a premature mar- 
riage for the concealment of her shame : or should 
her perjured paramour refuse the acceptance of her 
hand, the ruin of the poor girl is completed by the 
destruction of her character.
Illicit ameurs, how- 
ever, are not always, nor even generally, the conse- 
quence of Cumbrian courtship.
When the affec- 
tions of the parties are sufficiently engaged to lead 
them to marriage, and it is understood that the 
girl's parents have no objection to the match, the 
young man shows himself to the family ; and the 
"wedding day being fixed, the friends and neighbours 
of both the bride and bridegroom are.
invited to the 
ceremony.
If the church be at a distance, the 
*< weddingers" mostly ride ; and the bridegroom 
and his party commence the amusements of the day, 
by approaching the bride's residence in a full gallop.
Having alighted, the whole company breakfast to- 
gether, and afterwards mount their horses ; when 
men and women gallop over hill and dale to the 
church, eagerly contending who shall arrive there 
first.
The neighbouring alehouse to the kirk re- 
ceives the joyful guests, who refresh their spirits 
with a hearty glass before the performance of the 
eeremony.
The indissoluble knot having been tied, 
they again adjourn to the inn, inviting the parson to 
partake of their cheer ; and having spent an hour in 
drinking punch without intermission, they once.
more 
mount their nags, and half mad with liquor, furi- 
ously scamper headlong towards the bride's house ; 
whilst all the villagers, who have been upon the 
watch, are collected on the neighbouring hills to 
witness the race.
If the entire company reach their 
place of destination without accident, it is regarded 
as a fortunate omen : but it frequently happens that 
some of the party get a tumble, and that a desperate 
female alights upon her head and shoulders.
The 
good performances of their horses, and of courage 
and dexterity displayed by the riders, furnish suffi- 
cient matter for conversation during dinner ; which 
being finished, the music strikes up, and dancing 
beguiles the hours, till the time arrives of perform- 
ing the ceremony of putting the wedded couple to 
bed : this is accompanied with appropriate songs, in 
which, it is to be lamented, the " decencies" of 
speech do not always experience due attention.
About thirty or forty years ago, the Bidden- 
wedding, as it is provincially termed, was very 
common ; but is now, in a great measure, obsolete.
When this custom is observed, the bridegroom, with 
a few of his friends, rides about the villages for seve- 
ral miles round, bidding, or inviting, the neighbours 
to the wedding, on the appointed day ; which is also 
advertised in the county newspapers, with a general 
invitation for visitants.
In the advertisement va- 
rious rural sports are enumerated to be exhibited on 
the occasion, for suitable prizes.
These iuvitations 
bring together a concourse of people, who, after en- 
joying the amusements of the day, make a contri- 
bution for the new-married couple, which not mi- 
frequently amounts to a considerable sum.
The Cumbrian funerals, not less than the wed- 
dings, arc entitled to notice.
Respect for the dead 
is carried to a degree bordering on superstition, and 
the comforts of the living are often sacrificed by the 
expences of a funeral.
When a person is at the 
point of death, the neighbours are called in during 
the expiring moments, and they remain to assist the 
family in laying out the body, which is placed on a 
bed, hung round and covered with the best linen the 
house affords.
In the interim of death and inter- 
ment, the neighbours watch the corpse alternately ; 
the old people during the day, and till bed-time, 
and the young people afterwards till morning ; 
bread and cheese, and ale, and pipes and tobacco, 
being provided for those who attend.
The friends 
of the deceased, as well as the neighbours for seve- 
ral miles round, are generally invited to the funeral ; 
and the festive cheer just mentioned, with the addi- 
tion of drams, is partaken of by the visitants.
A 
select number of the company sup together, after the 
burial.
Feasting, and rural amusements, take place at 
various seasons, but particularly at Christmas, when 
the utmost hospitality prevails among the villagers, 
and every family is provided with goose, minced 
pies, ale, &c.
This festival is ushered in with eat- 
ing and dancing, which continue to be the chief oc- 
cupations till after the twelfth day ; and were for- 
merly pursued with such unabated zeal, that even 
the servants were excused working during the 
greatest portion of the intermediate time.
On 
" Fasting's-Even," or Shrove Tuesday, the habit 
of indulging the appetite is gratified to its utmost 
extent, the traditions of the country being, on this 
occasion, in full accordance with the natural desire 
of feeding heartily on good cheer.
It should here 
be observed, that, amongst the local spirits of this 
county, whose existence is believed by the vulgar, is 
one named JJob Thross, whom the old gossips re- 
port to have frequently seen in the shape of a 
" Body aw over rough," lying by the fire-side at 
midnight ; though, like Milton's Lubber Fiend — 
" ere glimpse of morn," he would execute more 
work than could be done by a man in ten days.
The Cumberland traditions affirm, that, those per- 
sons, who, on " Fasting's-Evcn," do not eat hearti- 
ly, are crammed with barley chaff by Hob Thross, 
during the ensuing night : and so careful arc the 
villagers to set the goblin at defiance, that scarcely 
a single hind retires to rest without previously par- 
taking of a hot supper.
The sports of the young men are chiefly of the 
athletic kind ; but the savage amusement of cock- 
6 fighting 
CUMBERLAND.
623 
fighting once a year occasions an assemblage of rude 
gamblers at every village alehouse.
The boys, 
among other amusements, divert themselves with 
sports which exhibit traces of the warlike feats of 
their forefathers.
The game called " Beggarly Scot," 
in particular, bears a striking resemblance to the ma- 
rauding practices of the ancient border inhabitants.
In this amusement, the boys form two parties, which 
respectively represent the Scots and the English ; 
they theu fix upon two holds, at the distance of 
sixty or a hundred yards ; and having marked a 
boundary line between them, each party deposit 
their coats, waistcoats, and hats, at the proper hold.
The sport now begins, the object on both sides 
being to plunder the enemy in the most dexterous 
manner, without becoming prisoners ; because, if 
they are caught on their adversaries' ground, they 
are carried to a supposed place of confinement, 
where they can no longer assist their party in mak- 
ing prizes of the clothes.
Sometimes, the prisoners 
are mutually permitted to pillage for the con- 
querors.
Dancing, and a game at cards, are the favourite 
amusement of both sexes.
An " Upshot" is a mer- 
ry-meeting, where the visitors assemble for these 
purposes ; and the expences attending it are de- 
frayed by a collection from the female part of the 
company, as well as from the males.
The " Up- 
shop" is generally projected by a few of the most 
lively young felloAvs of some particular neighbour- 
hood, who having provided a sufficient stock of 
bread and cheese, and ale, and fixed on a commo- 
dious place for the reception of their expected 
guests, make the time of meeting known to the in- 
habitants of the adjacent villages from a Throughh, 
or flat tomb-stone, in the Kurk-Garth, or church- 
yard, Avliich, in a north-country village, is the High- 
Change of the parish, and the place where general 
information is circulated.
In a popular local 
poem, the Worton Lads are represented as having 
chosen their assembly-room, and going to church to 
make their intentions public : — 
" They went to Kurk off hawn' ye see, 
To lwose nea teyme about it; 
An' ther Wull Brough stutle on a Throughh, 
An' 'midst o' tli' Kurk-Fwoke shoutit!" 
The place of dancing is generally the Up-staire, 
or loft of a farm-house, whose owner readily lends 
it for the occasion free of expence, together with 
every corner, above and below, for the accommoda- 
tion of the Drinkers and Carders.
The Up-stairs, 
Loft, or First-floor, of a Cumberland farm-house, 
is at the same time the Attic Story, with only the 
bare rafters and thatch for a covering, and divided 
from the kitchen below by the simple joists covered 
with oak boards.
These are seldom so nicely fitted, 
as either to obstruct the sight or hearing, and often- 
times so thin, that a night's dancing will effect a 
complete intercourse with the card party below.
The loft generally includes the whole length of Ihc 
house, from one gable to the other.
The Down- 
stairs is divided into Kitchen, and Bower, or bed- 
chamber.
The tunes, by which the feet of the dan- 
cers measure time, *re mostly peculiar to the coun- 
try, and named after particular places or local ob- 
jects.
In one ceremony the worst dancers are 
generally said to be the most dextrous ; that is kiss- 
ing their partners at the end of the tune : to omit 
this would be infallibly regarded as an insult to the 
women so neglected, who would immediately consi- 
der the defaulter as a " Snotteran, Snoftlan, feckless 
Fellow, nit worth Stan din' up tea." While the 
light-heeled portion of the company are pursuing 
their diversion in the loft, the card parties are busily 
employed below stairs at Noddy, Popps an' Pairs, 
Whupp's Yeace, Shwoart Trump, and other rustic 
games, whose names are as little known in the 
southern part of the kingdom, as those of more 
fashionable society are in the northern.
The parties 
are usually thus grouped : the old folks play Whisk, 
or Catch-Honours, by the fire-side ; the young 
fellows, at the long kitchen-table, make up sets at 
Bragg, or Three Caird Lant ; and the mixt parties 
of men and women carders, occupy the Bower in a 
round game at Oald Yen-an-Tharty, Shwoart 
Trump, &c.
As the Upshot is commonly held in 
the long evenings when the weather is cold, the 
players, both male and female, frequently seat them- 
selves in the Bed to be comfortable ; for the Bower 
being at the further end of the house, with a damp 
earth floor, and no fire at hand, they cannot be so 
agreeably situated, with respect to warmth, in any 
place.
The circumstance has been thus described, 
in the Cumbrian dialect : — 
" But Veddet fwoke rare laughin' hedd 
I' th' bow'r, wa' yen anither, 
For five or six gat into th' Bed, 
And sat ham samm togither ; 
They mixt their legs a'nonder 'claiths, 
As vveel as they war yeable, 
An' at Popps an' Pairs laik't lang and sair, 
Wi' th' Ass-beurd for a teable." 
The meeting generally ends in drinking all the 
yell, (ale) and carrying away the spiddick (spigget) 
as a trophy.
The lads and lasses who assemble on 
these occasions, frequently have to walk ten or a 
dozen miles ; but the spirit with which they pursue 
the diversion counterbalances the fatigue.
The Up- 
shot, however, is much less frequent, of late years, 
than formerly.
Fairs.] — Abbey Holm, or Holm Cultram — Octo- 
ber 29, horses and horned cattle.
didst on Moor — Last Thursday in May, first 
Thursday in September, horned cattle, horses, linen, 
and woollen cloth.
Brampton — Second Wednesday after Witsuntide, 
last Wednesday in August, for horses and honied.
cattle.
Booth — April 5, September 24, for cloth and 
corn.
Carlisle 
G24 
CUMBERLAND.
Carlisle — August 29, for horned cattle and linen ; 
September 19, horses and horned cattle ; first and 
9econd Saturday after October 10, Scotch horned 
cattle.
Cockermouth — First Monday in May, horned cat- 
tle ; October 10, horses and horned cattle.
Egremont — September 19, ditto.
Iioselt/ Hill — "Whit-Monday, and every fortnight* 
after, till September 29, horses, horned cattle, and 
linen cloth.
Leby — February 4, September 21, horses and 
horned cattle, ditto.
Keswick — August 2, leather and woollen yarn.
Kirhowald — Thursday before Whit-Sunday, Au- 
gust 5, homed cattle.
Longto'vn — Thursday after Whit-Sunday, for 
horses and linen yarn ; Thursday after Martinmas, 
November 22, horses, horned cattle, and iinen 
cloth.
Penrith — April 25 and 20, Whit-Tuesday, Sep- 
tember 27, cattle ; November 11, for horses, homed 
cattle, and yarn.
Raveng/asi — June 8, August 5, horses, horned 
eattle, and yarn.
Ulpha — Monday before Easter, July 5, cloth and 
yarn.
Wigton — March 25, for merchandize and toys.
Whitehaven — August 1, ditto.
Workington — Wednesday before Holy Thursday, 
October 18, for ditto.
Roads.] — The great turnpike-road from London 
enters this county about two miles below Penrith, 
and proceeds, in nearly a northerly direction, by 
High Ilesket, to Carlisle ; and thence, past Long- 
town, Kirkandrews, and Canonby, into Scotland.
A turnpike-road enters Cumberland at Aldston 
Moor, from Northumberland, and proceeds west- 
wardly to Penrith ; from which town various roads 
diverge, to different parts of the county.
. The road 
from Penrith to Keswick and Cockermouth, and 
thence to Workington, takes nearly a north-west 
course.
Another turnpike-road enters this county, 
from Kendal, in Westmoreland, at a place called 
Dumerlaise Stones, whence it proceeds direct to 
Keswick.
Carlisle Addenda.] — In addition to the account 
which we have already given of the ancient city of 
Carlisle, the following particulars, respecting its re- 
cently improved, and still improving state, will, no 
deubt, be acceptable to the reader.
This place has 
lost almost every appearance of a frontier town : its 
walls and its gates have been demolished ; and the 
castle, which is still a garrison, is the only vestige 
remaining, to mark it as the scene of ancient border 
warfare.
* Meetings of this nature take place at many other towns 
and villages of Cumberland : they are much frequented by 
The cathedral, which we have already mentioned, 
as having been long admired by the lovers of Gothic 
architecture, and as having received at different 
eras many additional interior embellishments, was 
newly beautified in the year 1814.
The nave of the 
chinch, which had long been used as the parochial 
church of St. Mary's, was fitted up in an antique 
style.
New and commodious Courts of Justice have 
been erected upon the site of the old citadel : these 
buildings, which were begun in the year 1808, and 
opened in August 1812, are finished in a splendid 
Gothic style, with painted groined cedings, &c.
The court-rooms are circular, and excellently 
adapted for the purpose for which they were erect- 
ed.
Each tower contains six lancet windows, di- 
vided by a muliion of wood, surmounted by an em- 
battled parapet, above a row of double corbels.
There is a spacious gallery for the accommodation 
of auditors in each court.
Statues of Justice, Mer- 
cy, &c.
are situated upon pedestals on each side of 
the Judges' seats, and a large colossal bust of his 
Majesty has lately been executed for the interior of 
this building, by Charles Rossi, R.
A. of London.
Attached to the Halls of Justice are rooms for the 
grand juries, witnesses, offices for the clerk of the 
peace, &c.
These magnificent buildings were be- 
gan under the superintendance of Mr. Telford, who 
deputed Mr. Chisolm to overlook the building, 
which he did till his death, in November 1808.
To 
him succeeded Mr. Peter Nicholson, who continued 
till 1811 ; when Mr. R.
Sinirke, Jun. R.
A. suc- 
ceeded, and has finished the work in a very superior 
manner.
At this time, a new bridge is building over the 
river Eden at Carlisle, to which government sub- 
scribes the sum of 10,000/.
It was begun in 1812, 
has proceeded gradually since that time, and will in 
all probability be completed in 1818.
The span of 
the arches j which are elliptical, is fifty -seven ieet, 
the breadth thirty-six feet.
The stone is of a beau- 
tiful white colour, and was procured from Cove 
quarry, near Gretna, in Scotland.
This elegant 
structure is under the superiutendance of Mr. R.
Smirke, R.
A. an architect of deserved celebrity.
Literature is by no means neglected in this city.
The public library has been, under the judicious 
management of the present committee, increased so 
as to be an institution of the greatest utility.
It 
contains an extensive collection of books, in all the 
different branches of science and polite literature.
There are two weekly papers published in this city ; 
the Carlisle Journal, which was established in the 
autumn of the year 1798, and the Patriot, which was 
commenced on the 3d oi June, 1815.
cattle breeders and dealers ; and are generally termed " Fort- 
night Fairs." 
Table 
CUMBERLAND.
02.
j? 5 
•n ho 
" as 
e  * * 
42 p 
2^* 
S Si 
a-s 
1 moon-'OOtO'flN-© 
1 
CO 
< 
2 
.2 
o 
1 oorO' ?
i , »^'«^''^tcO'^»Oio 
J N 4 cu- o io n c © Ol 
CMCMcMcMCNCNPOcop'icM 
- f) -• n o n mo -i •* 
Da 
a 
a 
CO 
m 
H 
o 
JO 
PS 
E 
tl 
tv, 
Wf5 in t-.
o 'O c i^ o; t~- 
— 
-PIWH^-MONOI 
<tinxt^oisoco-ai 
— .— ,___„CM_CM — 
< 
< 
> 
3 
j 
4 
oooooosoo— 
CAOCCJOCOOOOOCOCOOOCO 
* This summary of the county of Cumberland is collected 
from the Registers of one hundred and thirty-three Parish 
Churches and Chapels, and one Register of Dissenters; and it 
is believed that no return whatever remains due.
Several of 
the Returns mention unentered Baptisms, Burials, and Mar- 
riages, to the following amount ; viz.
Annual average number of unentered Baptisms 145.
Burials 
60.
Marriages 3.
On the subject of these Tables, it is deserving of remark, 
that the canons of the Church of England, which are now in 
force, date their authority from the beginning of the reign of 
James I.
(Anno 1603).
One of them prescribes very minutely 
in what manner entries are to be made in the Parish Registers ; 
herein reciting the injunction of 1538, and ordering an attested 
copy of the register of each successive year to be annuallv 
transmitted to the bishop of the diocese or his chancellor, anil 
to be preserved in the said bishop's registry.
This canon also contains a retrospective clause, appointing 
that the ancient registers so far as they could be procured, but 
especially since the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth, should 
be copied into a parchment book, to be provided by every 
parish.
This wise regulation appears to have been carried into 
full extent at the time; so that the ancient parish registers now 
extant, usually commence with that Queen's reign, and some 
of them earlier, quite as far back as the date of the original in- 
junction.
That part of the canon which directs the register to 
be kept in a coffer in the church, is not enforced, as it was 
found by experience that the book was liable to be damaged 
by the moisture prevalent in uninhabited buildings, and also to 
be purloined with the other contents of the church coffer.
The 
register book is at present usually kept in custody of the officiat- 
ing minister, at his own house, if resident on the benefice, other- 
wise in that of the parish clerk.
Many inconveniencies having arisen from the undue solem- 
nization and registry of marriages, an Act was passed 20" of 
Geo. IT.
" for the better preventing of clandestine marriages," 
which directs a certain formula for the registry of marriages, to 
VOL.
I. — NO.
45.
<8 
s 
a 
as 
a 
K) 
G 
Mar- 
V 
.2 
n — co o  .-> •* as ;:> o, «i- 
haoaasiaoao 
1 - 
CO 
1 o 
1 '-o 
Ol 
co' 
< 
2 
n 
"c5 
o 
H 
03i--0"io«Kioa 
IN tTi IN.
i.T o *f t> CO CO .n 
— — co— .
-. n n 'O i^ t 
CM CM O* CM C) Cl CM CM CI C» 
L 
1 CO 
1 •«* 
"J 
u 
"a 
Ex 
a co » o o <f o o a o 
CO -* co -o -"t — > CM >r\ CI (O 
O • C O tl Cl ji  * o 
1 «n 
|3 
cu 
«-) CO — o CO — OCOOIO} 
©~— .o>copo«npooo> 
— CCNOO— • — .
PO PO — .
1 >P) 
CO 
*£> 
CO 
t- 1 
c- 
<tj 
cq 
c_ 
•*MOOP)N---CD 
Kicaiocoa 3; co 
O <f '/I •••) O In SS |\ JO CJj 
cociPjcocon-'Oncd 
\* 
CO 
PO 
E 1 
£ 1 
co anma-.ta«to — 
— .
CO O •** Z> '-"> -"* rn CM o 
P. O l^ 1^ CC In CO p.
CO C 
CM 
o 
CO 
l- 
i\ 
SB 
2 I 
— PO CM *C "*t PO CM cn CO 'O 
l> D O T -O • *) -1 CO »~ CO 
u-, In CO CO CO C7) C) C7> CJ) Oct 
Is 
CO 
CO 
— PMPO-*'OCOlN(}t>350 
coocooocro — 
CO CO CO OQ CO X CO X CO CO 
"5 
be attested and signed by the minister officiating, the persons 
married, and two or more witnesses ; and declares any erasure 
or mutilation of the parish register, or false entry therein, to be 
felony without benefit of clergy, which implies a capital offence : 
nor can a marriage be legally solemnized in any chapel conse- 
crated since this law was made.
A retrospective relaxation of 
the act in this particular case took place in 1781, tinder an act 
by which marriages already solemnized in such chapels were 
declared to be valid ; but the registers of such marriages were 
ordered to be forthwith removed to the parish church.
The solicitude of the female and her family, aided by 
the precision and severity of the marriage act, leaves 
no occasion to suspect any deficiency in the marriage registry 
from negligence ; and the deficiency from other causes cannot 
be very important.
Some few persons are known to wade the provisions of the 
marriage act by a marriage in Scotland ; but the registry of 
marriages in England is not much affected thereby, because 
the family of the female who has been thus irregularly married, 
usually cause such marriages to be afterwards solemnized ac- 
cording to the law of England.
The marriages of Dissenters of every denomination take 
place in the established church ; excepting those among the 
Quakers, who are permitted to intermarry in their own congre- 
gation.
To these may be added the Jews, who marry accord- 
ing to their own peculiar ceremonial.
But neither these reli- 
gious sects are numerous : and with these exceptions the mar- 
riage registry of England and Wales may be deemed complete, 
and unexceptionable.
A great variation in the annual number of man iages is caused 
by the circumstances of the limes, and especially by the price 
of provisions ; and in ten years from 1801 to 181 1, the differ- 
ence arising from this cause is perceptible ; so that no safe in- 
ference concerning the increase or diminution of population 
can be drawn from the comparison of any single years with each 
other: but the average amount of the marriages for five years 
together, or for a longer period, is the best evidence on the 
7 T subject, 
t326 
CUMBERLAND.
subject, because the register of marriages may be deemed per- 
fectly correct.
The medium average of marriages in 1760 and the four years 
preceding it (as collected in 1801, and corrected in 1811) may 
be taken at 52,666 ; the registered baptisms were at that time as 
366 to 100 marriages.
In this manner the following Table of 
Proportions has been formed ;— 
1760 ....
Baptisms.
366 
1770 ....
361 
17S0 ....
356 
1785 ....
366 
1790 ....
359 
1795 ...
353* 
1800 ...
340 
1805 ...
350 
to 
to 
to 
t» 
to 
to 
to 
to 
to 
Marriages.
.. 100 
.. 100 
.. 100 
.. 100 
.. 100 
.. 100 
.. 100 
.. 100 
.. 100 
It appears hence that the proportion of registered baptisms to 
marriages has continued much the same; the extremes of the 
fluctuation differing only a fourteenth part.
In the year 1709 and 1710, England was afflicted by a dearth, 
which must have lowered the proportion of births in 1710 as 
happened in 1795 and IS00; the scarcity which prevailed in 
1710, causing the average price of wheat to rise to 62 shillings 
per quarter.
The scarcity of 1800 caused the average price of 
wheat to rise to 110 shillings per quarter; whereas the average 
price of the ten preceding years was no more than 54 shillings 
per quarter.
Therefore the severity of the dearths of 1710, and 
of 1800, may be assumed to have been equal, and the effect of 
both in diminishing the births and baptisms to have been also 
equal.
In the year 1800, the baptisms were 255,000, though 
the five years average is 264,000.
The registry of burials may be supposed to be deficient on 
the following considerations : — 
1. Many congregations of Dissenters, inhabiting towns, have 
their own peculiar burying grounds: as have the Jews, and the 
Homan Catholics, who reside in London.
2. Some persons from motives of poverty or inconvenience 
inter their dead without any religious ceremony.
But in esti- 
mating the deficiency from this cause, it should be considered 
that a place must be very populous before the establishment of 
cheap burial grounds can become a profitable speculation.
Such 
there are in the metropolis, in Bristol, and in Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne.
But the interments within the London Bills of Mortality 
unay be nearly ascertained ; and of the interments at the Ballast 
Hills, near Newcastle-upon-Tyne, a register account is kept, of 
which a return was received and entered.
3. Children who die before baptism are interred without any 
religious ceremony, and consequently are not registered.
4. Negligence may be supposed to cause some omissions in 
the registers, especially in those small benefices, where the offi- 
ciating minister is not resident.
5. Many persons employed in the army, and navy, die 
abroad ; and consequently their burials remain unregistered.
The annual number of Burials, as collected in pursuance of 
the Population Acts of 1801 and 1811, authorises a satisfactory 
inference of diminishing mortality in England since the year 
1780 : the average number of registered burials (though consi- 
derably fluctuating from year to year) having remained sta- 
tionary during twenty-one years, from 1780 to 1800 ; the first 
five years of which period, as well as the last five years, and all 
the twenty-one years together, equally averaged at about 
192,000 burials per annum.
From 1800 to 1805, the burials 
average at 194,000 per annum ; from that time to 1810, at 
196,000.
It follows from hence, that about the year 1780 one 
person in 40 died annually ; in 1790, one in 45 ; in 1800, one 
in 47 ; and in 1810, one in 49 or 50 : — and this improving ratio 
appears to be indisputable ; for although the registry of burials 
is certainly deficient, no cause can be assigned for believing 
that the deficiency has been increasing in the last thirty years.
Indeed the progressive increase of population in these years 
has caused an augmented proportion of young persons ; which 
circumstance may have contributed (but in a very small de- 
gree) to lessen the proportion of mortality to the population.
The registry of baptisms is deficient from the same causes as 
that of burials, and from most of those causes is a greater de- 
gree.
1. Many Dissenters of every denomination (those especially 
who reside at the distance from any other burial place) from 
motives of decency or convenience bury their dead in the 
cemetries of the established church, though they baptize after 
their own manner or not at all.
2. Some irreligious persons, especially in large towns, neglect 
the rite of baptism altogether.
3. Some children die directly after birth, unbaplized ; these 
however not being registered among the burials, the comparison 
is not affected from this cause.
But the great defect in bap- 
tismal registers arises from private baptism, which is carried to 
an extent not at all in the contemplation of the founders of the 
church of England ; for the canon ordaining registers applies to 
christenings, without further explanation ; and this word is un- 
derstood to mean public baptism only.
The practice of the 
clergy is not uniform on this point ; and it appears from the re- 
marks subjoined to many of the parish register returns, that the 
register of private baptisms is denied in many places, from a 
conscientious desire thereby to induce persons to cause their 
children to be publicly received into the congregation.
On the 
other hand, it appears that " the great cause and necessity" 
mentioned in the Rubrick as necessary to justify private bap- 
tism, is so little regarded by parents in some places, that such 
baptism (or half baptism as it is popularly called) is become 
nearly general, and this whether it is intended afterwards to 
carry the childred to church or not.
Public baptism is some- 
times prevented by the difficulty of procuring god-fathers and 
god-mothers, many persons being deterred trom taking this 
office by scruples of conscience ; and sometimes it is prevented 
by an unwillingness or inability in the parents to incur the ex- 
pence which in some places is customary on the occasion.
4. Negligence may be supposed to cause the same propor- 
tion of omissions in the registry of baptisms as in that of 
burials.
The whole number of baptisms collected for the purpose of 
the Population Acts of 1801 and 1811, appears to be 9,315,016: 
of these 4,753,856 males ; 4,561,15) females : so that the bap- 
tism of males are 10,423 to 10,000 females.
The whole num- 
ber of burials appear to be 7, 116,033 : of these 3,557,401 males, 
3,558,632 females ; a remarkable equality in so large a num- 
ber; and from hence it may be inferred, that the larger pro- 
portion of males born, which may be taken at 4-J per cent, very 
exactly balances the number of those who die abroad in the 
employments of war and commerce.
TABLE 
CUMBERLAND.
627 
ft a 
S-a.
3 Cf» 
* ft 
era 2.
W3 
a 
4-- tO 
V t» 
C" 
to IO 
-4 Co 
•itk 
to ~ 
— o> 
W 
Hi- 
*d 
W 
Z 
pa 
H 
=ro t -1 pd K 
, 1— 'd 3- QJ P M 
F o 
I f 
ft O ?T jj ?r f» 
s & o 2 n> g 
°L* = §-3 o 
S r ^ o 3.
to aitswai 
a <"} — p 2 
u> -i -I 3 3 
£ o t.
rt P 
?r, 
fV to 5T - w* ; 
ft i-u jj.
o 
► d CO Jr t"" 1 
ft £L —.
O p 
3 TT'JO.
? TO.
j- - 2.
•" ft ££" 
H ffls 2 — 
">< ft — .
^ i — > 
>o r- - 
> 
CO 
CD 
W 
m-!CO) 
pd f 
'I 'I 
§ 2.
EC % 
ao •.
ft "i 
3- LP* H 
2 11 "> 2 ^ 
? =•» o <i 
2 Err" 
H .K 
3 — 
Si 
ffl 
H 
W 
<; 
w 
z 
pd 
> 
<! 
W 
Z 
C 
P 
> 
CO 
co 
V* 
(J t*) O) 
fc.
41- ~ C" to 
co to to 
.— M ** 
Hi- 
CO Cil 00 v) K) 
3 3 
^£5 2 
£> 
ft 
a. 
Pd 
O 
P 
Pd 
p 
3 
Pd 
o 
s 
p 
'I 
O 
u 
*-4 
III 
OQ.
| =  
o (-.2 
S I r> 
' B-f 
I? 
3 I 
^^ 
cr c 
i^ 3 
Otl 
5-rT 
OPd 
cd 
« ° 
- era 
>-° 
3^ 
SO 
«!  
Si 
Pd 
r 
r 
JOS' 
ft- 
^ 
tn 
g 
O 
O f 03^ T pel i-5 "T3C/J 
00302^3" 2w a C 
r^7i_.^'3.^-i D — • 3*i 
^ r o5-S<T*5- 22.
S. « 
ft> «^ S 7T2.
0- = 
ft-' »" Hi P- o 
re « — " 
&J^ 3 
3 ^ 
*v_ 
41 
4^ -* 
to to 
4-t-Nl>- 
ib- 4^> CO 
co a-- 'w 
UUb> 
^3 O) tc 
to to 
ao 
44u 
«»o ffl 
4>h* hH« 
> 
a 
d 
O 
a 
o 
o 
pa 
s 
es-^I* p 
= E O " 1 
ja 2 — r> — 
" U> = ~ 3--S P D P 
K-o ft p 2 "2 ^ 
0-v 
I' 
i 
2 S co 
3 g- r 
g "a 
''3 
o 2.™ a 
o "2.
o 
— — to to 
•O — ~~i (O — *=• 
to Co <jj 
4-- CO to 
NHt>J-<Nf-» 
Co to.
— <o 
to — — 
— M U.
COOl 
It 
• o 
a* 
a> 
c« 
c 
3 
'I 
'I 
o 
o 
fib 
3 
per 
|. >— 1 
t-Pd 
^^ 
—   
a i 
O t« 
| | 
-<-o 
3 
T 
c 
o 
2, rr p r 
p s 
c- ~ 
f 
o 
c 
re 
n 
13 2.32.
P o — 
v_ o 
B 3 
•3 
ft 
3 
IA 
!«r r- ^ 
lo " 
p a" 
^R- 
r> 
a 
o K 
3 O 
HH 
0>!
p 
p F 
r'o 
( m 
£L 
era 
o 
3 
> ?
l 
1 
W 
a 
M 
? 1 
P 
p 
Fr 
5 O 
1 
3 
O 
p 
o 
•5 3 
-'I 
O 
o 
n 
> 
a 
?  > 
Mi 
P^!
o 
&. — 
M 
R 
fS 
pa 
c 
O 3 
*• 
9T 
'I 
^•"2.
3 re 
O 
c 
'l 
a. 
a 
5* Pdt-Krr 1 f 
P 
r 
§> 
i m 1 1 * 
> B 
n 
o 
p 
B- 
O 
I -" 
>CO 
— c 
C 3 
p -<  
G- O 
~ O 
O C- 
. P 
3 
> 
3 
3 
J2 > P "^ J-r< 
p ^- 3 P o 
3- -' re" rt 2 
*"2.
o = 
d 2 
f-ip_ p p.
1^1 ^ 
s fs a 2 
fce~ --" • — i 
r k tcpo 
"* H.
o 
pi c> 
3 
O 
Pd 
O 
i 
3 
Q 
H 
^ O 
8 s a 
IS 
O 
rr 
03 
n> 
P 
# 
PI 
rs 
p 
O 
ft 
*n 
-t 
<— i 
Ul 
o 
►J 
G 
> 
O 
J2 
C 
fD 
Pd 
GA 
n 
CO 
O 
o 
H 
i: 
o 
cr 
S3 
H 
ft) 
Pd 
< 
O 
ft 
G? 
o 
r» 
o 
s 
P 
K 
2 
M 
f* 
H 
7. 
ff 
a 
n 
tn 
ii 
to 
TJ 
m 
as 
O 
o 
K 
n 
3 
i — " 
H 
s 
wi 
•-o 
> 
w 
O 
p 
^^ 
t/3 
hJ 
c 
C 
C 
- 
(t 
Pd 
-< 
>TJ 
P) 
?=5 
5 
r 
jft 
o 
d 
-• 
PS 
s 
r* 
a 
H 
n 
CO 
&s 
o 
&d 
•• 
O 
O 
a, 
> 
d 
H 
3" 
CO 
V. 
a 
Z 
O 
X 
Z 
> 
Z 
&3 
^r- 
n 
M 
o 
p-.
*" 
to 
n 
*—* 
15 
93 
O" 
D- 
O 
c 
£ 
a 
z 
rc 
T) 
H 
tT 
r 
►< 
n 
c 
o 
rn 
O 
— 
n 
d 
►t) 
a 
n 
>  
a 
w 
^. 
Pd 
r 
>• 
»- 
z 
** 
c 
o 
628 
CUMBERLAND.
Birkby 
Crosby 
Aspatria 
Waverton 
Wiglon 
Thursby 
Carlisle 
6. MARYPORT to CARLISLE, (E.
by S.) 
L. — Between Crosby and Aspatria, Hayton Castle, 
Joliffe, Esq.
R. — Between Aspatria and Waverton, — Brayttm 
Hall.
Inn-^Queen's Head.
Inns— Blue Bell, Bush Coffee House.
7. CARLISLE, by Ireby, to KESWICK, (S.
W. by S.) 
i 
5 
n 
n 
6 
13| 
2* 
16| 
5i 
21| 
27J 
Thursby 
Red Dial 
Cockbridgc 
Ireby 
Uldale 
High-Side 
Little Crossthwaite 
Crossthwaite 
Keswick 
6 
6 
5 
11 
5 
16 
3 
19 
n 
20£ 
4| 
25 
2 
27 
2 
29 
1 
30 
R. — Mirehouse, T.
Storey, Esq.
Inns — Queen's Head, Royal Oak.
TABLE OF DISTANCES.
The Names of the respective Towns are on the top and side, and the square where both meet gives the distance.
_____ — — — — __i — — -— _- 
Carlisle.
..Distance from London..
Miles 301 
25 
Cockermouth 
303 
8 
33 
Bramptoi 
314 
37 
15 
48 
15 
9 
24 
24 
22 
12 
31 
18 
10 1 Keswick 
' 15 
27 
14 
QCi 
8 
30 
11 
29 
22 
7 
L0B"t'»«' 
, 311 
o 
18 
26 
20 
34 
18 
15 
26 
Ten- 
si 
li 
37 
13 
45 
20 
18 
38 
39 
14 
SO 
1 
END OF VOLUME I.
£> 
BINDING SECT.
OCT 19 1971 
DA Dugdale, James 
625 The new British traveller 
D85 
v.l 
PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 