MEMOIR 
AND 
CORRESPONDENCE 
OF 
THE LATE 
SIR JAMES EDWARD SMITH, M.D.
FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON J 
MEMBER OF THE ACADEMIES OF 
STOCKHOLM, UPSAL, TURIN, LISBON, PHILADELPHIA, NEW YORK, ETC.
ETC.
THE IMPERIAL ACAD.
NATURAE CURIOSORUM, 
AND 
THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES AT PARIS; 
HONORARY MEMBER OF THE HORTICULTURAL SOCIETY OF LONDON J 
AND 
PRESIDENT OF THE LINN-EAN SOCIETY.
EDITED 
By lady smith.
" How delightful and how consolatory it is, among the disappointments and 
anxieties of life, to observe Science, like Virtue, retaining its relish to the last!" 
Sketch of a Tour on the Continent, vol.
ii.
p. 60.
IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL.
L 
LONDON: VU.lJ>-<^<' i;K\ti* ft 
PRINTED FOR 
LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMAN, 
PATERNOSTER ROW.
1832.
DUPLICATA DE LA BIBLIOTIIEQUE ' 
DU CONSERVATOIRE BOTANIQUE DE GEJSEVE 
V£NDU £N 1822 
Ad 
v.\ 
RICHARD TAYLOR, 
PHINTKR TO THE VNU'ERSITY OF LONDOJf, 
RER T.ION COURT, FLEET STREET.
LIBRA!<V 
SEW YORK 
BOTANICAL 
OARDEN 
PREFACE.
In the following pages, which contain the 
principal events in the life of Sir James 
Edward Smith, the writer has been tempted 
to insert various domestic and familiar letters, 
even from an early period, as it appeared to 
her that they mark the progress of his cha- 
racter, his predilection for botanical science, 
and other facts, more faithfully than a nar- 
rative composed of different materials would 
be likely to do.
From the vast accumulation of letters, 
preserved during a period of more than fifty 
years, the limits of this work would admit 
only of a selection ; and many therefore are 
omitted, equally worthy of publication.
a 2 
IV PREFACE.
The letters of the Bishop of Carlisle, fol- 
lowing the chapter upon Sir Jameses works, 
being chiefly critical, and relating to those 
publications, are kept together, that the sub- 
ject may not be interrupted.
The correspondence of Mr. Davall and 
Sir James is kept separate from the general 
current of letters, as it relates principally to 
the botany of Switzerland, and their peculiar 
regard for each other.
That of the Marchio- 
ness of Rockingham, their mutual friend, is, 
for similar reasons, mingled with theirs.
The letters of Mr. Caldwell, of Dr. Wade, 
&c.
are inserted together, being descriptive 
of Ireland chiefly.
Those of the Abbe Corr^a De Serra and 
a few other friends have a reference to some 
political occurrences in Portugal which af- 
fected the Abbe's safety ; and among them 
are a few concerning a magnificent plant, 
the Cyamus Nelumbo, whose history has been 
a subject of interest and speculation with 
classical botanists.
The correspondence of Mr. lloscoe and 
PREFACE.
V 
Sir James is given apart from others, for the 
same reason as Mr. Davali's.
To her friend Dr. Boott, of Gower Street, 
the editor is under great obligation for his 
repeated acts of kindness in the course of the 
work, which she is happy thus to acknow- 
ledge : and for assistance in the selection 
of foreign correspondence she is indebted to 
Mr. Dawson Turner's friendship.
For every 
thing else the compiler alone is answerable ; 
— conscious as she is of the imperfections of 
the work, and unconscious probably of many 
that may have escaped her observation, it 
might seem unjust not to make this avowal.
Should it be inquired why no portrait of 
an earlier age is given, in preference to that 
which is prefixed to the work, the answer is 
contained in the fact, that of several deline- 
ations by different artists at various periods,' 
none have been esteemed as likenesses, and 
that the bust of Sir James, by the hand of 
Chantrey, in the library of the Linnaean 
Society, conveys the only representation of 
him which retains the expression of his mind, 
VI PREFACE.
through the features; and if the copy of it at 
the opening of this volume is less perfect 
than could be wished, it must be ascribed to 
the difficulty of fixing in a copy the expres- 
sion which was often found impossible to 
catch from the original.
Sir James Edward 
Smith's mental lineaments are less difficult 
to trace ; they will be seen in various lights, 
sketched by a variety of hands, in the suc- 
ceeding pages.
Pleasance Smith.
Norwich, 1832.
8 that 
e than 
overn- 
notes 
leficial 
; equal 
ble to 
'lieves 
u this 
course 
en by 
e li,^ 
untfy 
Death of Lady Smith, the Centenakian.— Tl* 
East Anglian Daily Times announces tlie deatii at Lowes- 
toft on Saturday afternoon, of Lady Siuith, widow of Sk 
James B.
Smith, E.L.S., and President of tlie Linnean 
Society.
The deceased was born on the 11th of May, 1773^ 
and was consequently in her lOith year.
Upon the occa., 
sion of attaining the centenary anniversary of her uirti 
she gave a dinner to all the aged poor in the neighoourhoOsi, 
and on the same occasion received from the Queen a copy 
of " Our Life in the Highlands," with the following iii- 
scription in Her Majesty's own wi-iting :— "From Vici/oriar 
E. to her friend Lady Smith on her birthday." 
"Pocket Almanac Gsatis."— To be had free, at th« 
uuui J Agents for Horaiman's Celebrated Pure Tea, or send adfli-.-g* 
CONTENTS.
VOL.
I. 
CHAPTER I.
Page 
Introductory notice.- — Birth of Sir J.
E, Smith.
— Pedigree of the 
Kinderley family.
— Mr. Smith, the father of Sir James.
— Early 
education.
— Ilis domestic amusements.
— Fondness for history.
— Began the study of systematic botany the day Linnseus died.
— Trained by his father for merchandise.
— Acquaintance with 
James Crowe, Esq., Mr. Pitchford, Mr. Rose, Rev. H.
Bryant, 
T. J.
Woodward, Esq.
— Goes to Edinburgh.
— Dr. John Hope.
— Lord Monboddo.
— Mr. Engelhart a young student from 
Sweden.
— Mr. Batty.
— Mr. Broussonet.
— Forms a Society for 
the study of natural history at Edinburgh.
— Tour in the High- 
lands.
— Makes a collection of the native plants of Scotland.
— Presented with a gold medal by Dr. Hope.
— Made first 
President of the Natural History Society.
— Letter of the Earl 
of Buchan upon that occasion.
— Letter of Mr. Kindersley from 
Tinnevelly 1 
CHAPTER II.
Sir J.
E. Smith leaves Edinburgh.
— Lodges in Great Windmill- 
street, London.— Dr. John Hunter.
— Sir J.
Banks informs him 
that the library and collections of Linnaeus are upon sale.— 
Writes to Dr. Acrel.
— Correspondence with his Father.
— Let- 
ters of Dr. Acrel, and catalogues of the collection.
— Agrees to 
become the purchaser.
— Letters from Mr. Pitchford, Dr. Wi- 
thering, Dr. Stokes, Professor J.
Sibthorp.
— Rev. H.
Bryant.
— Chosen Fellow of the Royal Society.
— Letter from Dr. J.
Hope.
— Preparation for going abroad 89 
CHAPTER III.
Sir J.
E. Siuilh begins his travels.
— His correspondence with va- 
rious friends.— Publication of his " Sketch of a Tour on the 
Vlll CONTENTS.
Page 
Continent." — His taste for the Fine Arts.
— Introduced by \'is- 
countess Cremorne to the late Queen Charlotte.
— Instructs 
Her Majesty and the Princesses in Natural History.
— Loses 
the Queen's favour by some expressions in his Tour.
— Rous- 
seau.
— Approbation of his Tour by Dr. Pulteney and Mr.
Pennant.
— Origin of his acquaintance with Colonel Johnes.
— 
Visit to Ilafod.
— Miss Johnes.
— Letters of Mr. Johnes.
— 
Letter from Mrs. Watt, the only daughter of Ellis ; and other 
friends.
— Introductory Lecture at the Royal Institution in 
1803.
— List of Foreign Professors 148 
CHAPTER IV.
Foundation of the Linnsean Society.
— Sir J.
E. Smith elected 
President.
— List of the Fellows in 17 90.
— Letters of Mr. Smith.
— Letters from various Foreign Professors.
— Charter.
— Presi- 
dent's Address on the Twentieth Anniversary 841 
CHAPTER V.
Enumeration of the Works of Sir J.
E. Smith.
1. Reflexions on 
the Study of Nature.
— 2.
Dissertation on the Sexes of Plants.
— 3.
Thesis de Generatione.
— 4.
Reliquiae Rudbeckianfe.
— 
.5.
Plantarum Icones.
— 6.
Icones Pictae.
— 7.
English Botany.
— 
8. Spicilegium Botanicum.
— 9.
Flora Lapponica.
— 10.
Botany 
of New Holland.
— 11.
Tour on the Continent.
— 12.
Syllabus.
— 13.
Insects of Georgia.
— 14.
Tracts.
— 15.
Flora Britannica.
— 16.
Compendium Flora Britannicae.
— 17.
Flora Grasca.
— 
18.
Prodromus Floras Grascae.
— 19.
Exotic Botany.
— 20.
In- 
troduction to Botany.
— 21.
Articles in Rees's Cyclopedia.
— 
22.
Tour to Hafod.
— 23.
Lachesis Lapponica.
— 24.
Articles in 
Trans, of Linu.
Soc.
— 25.
Review of the Modern State of Bo- 
tany.
— 26.
Grammar of Botany.
— 27.
Linnsean Correspond- 
ence.
— 28.
English Flora 425 
CHAPTER VI.
The Bishop of Carlisle endeavours to persuade Sir James not to 
remove from London.
— Motives which induced him to return 
into Norfolk.
— Letter of Mr. Crowe.
— Lectures at the Royal 
Institution.
— Flora Graca.
— Letters from Sir Joseph Banks, 
Sir J.
E. Smith, John Hawkins, and Thomas Piatt, Esqrs.
— Bishop of Carlisle's Correspondence 525 
MEMOIR 
AND 
CORRESPONDENCE 
OF 
SIR JAMES EDWARD SMITH.
CHAPTER I.
Introductory notice.
— Birth of Sir J.
E. Smith.
— Pedigree of the 
Kinder ley family.
— Mr. Smith, the father of Sir James.
— Early 
education.
— His domestic amusements.
— Fondness for history.
— Began the study of systematic botany the day Linnceus died.
— Trained by his father, for merchandise.
— Acquaintance with 
James Crowe, Esq., Mr. Pitchford, Mr. Rose, Rev. H.
Bryant, 
T. J.
Woodward, Esq.
— Goes to Edinburgh.
— Dr. John Hope.
— Lord Monboddo.
— Mr. Engelhart a young student from 
Sweden.
— Mr. Batty.
— Mr. Broussonet.
— Forms a Society for 
the study of natural history at Edinburgh.
— Tour in the 
Highlands.
— Makes a collection of the native plants of Scot- 
land.
— Presented with a gold medal by Dr. Hojie.
— Made first 
President of the Natural History Society.
— Letter of the Earl 
of Buchan upon that occasion.
— Letter of Mr. Kindersley from 
Tinnenelly.
X HE Correspondence of the late President of the 
Linnaean Society falling under the care of her who 
is the natural guardian of all the confidential as well 
as scientific communications it contains, it appeared 
VOL.
I. o B 
to her improper and scarcely possible that any other 
person should overlook, or could have leisure to 
select from several thousand letters, those most fit 
for the public eye.
This consideration had suf- 
ficient weight with her to attempt what otherwise 
she would have left in abler hands ; but, as the letters 
form the principal and most engaging portion of 
the following Memoir, she has given her attention 
to put them in their proper places, and to burthen 
the reader with few that are trifling, although many 
will be interesting chiefly to persons who love to 
trace the doubts and progress of those learned men, 
who by degrees and with much mental labour, but 
more mental enjoyment, have raised the botanical 
department of natural science to its present high 
station and importance ; and why may she not 
add another if not a stronger inducement to the 
work?
— the delight of renewing some shadow of 
that choice society in which she has lived over 
again while preparing these Letters for the press.
— 
Would that the ability to appreciate the virtues and 
talents of the lamented subject of this Memorial 
imparted equal ability to record them !
Sir James Edward Smith has been so long known 
as the possessor of the Linnaean Library and Her- 
barium, and as the original founder of the Society 
which bears the name of the illustrious Swedish 
naturalist, that some account may be expected here 
of his early years, and of the circumstances that led 
him to the choice of a profession offering few 
lucrative rewards to an aspiring and not indepen- 
dent man.
" The last infirmity of noble minds" 
can hardly be said to have spurred him to the effort; 
for an effort it surely is, to choose a path through 
which we see but darkly where it leads.
Though enthusiasm and a love of fame had per- 
haps some influence, a love of science and of truth 
had greater still.
He said to others, " The fairest 
flower in the garden of creation is a young mind, 
offering and unfolding itself to the influence of divine 
wisdom, as the heliotrope turns its sweet blossoms 
to the sun ;" and may it not be said of him that taste 
and virtue fixed his choice ?
He was born at Norwich the second of December 
1759, was the eldest child of his parents, and for 
almost five years continued the only one.
From 
infancy a delicacy of constitution marked his 
bodily frame ; and an extreme susceptibility was no 
less obvious in his mental temperament.
He was 
consequently more under the immediate care and 
direction of his mother than most children require 
to be, and it was from her, that at a very early period 
he imbibed a taste for flowers, which she had plea- 
sure in cultivating.
He seldom in after-life saw the 
delicate blue flowers of the wild succory, without 
recalling to mind, that, when, in infancy, their beauty 
caught his eye and attracted his admiration above 
most others, he tried in vain to pluck them from 
the stalk.
Probably the charm of this quiet amusement was 
greatly enhanced by a natural timidity, a diffidence 
amounting to a degree often painfully embarrassing, 
and which was never so obliterated from his re- 
membrance, but that at times he would recur to 
B 2 
events in his childhood, when for a word or almost 
a thought he feared was wrong, he experienced 
the pangs of a broken and a contrite spirit, and in 
his later years has felt that pity for his former suf- 
ferines, which he would have done for those of a 
different individual.
It was impossible for a mother not to be tenderly 
attached to such a disposition in her child; and ac- 
cordingly a more than common affection subsisted 
between them, and he at all times spoke of her as 
his guardian and his friend.
The family of Kinderley, from whom Sir James 
is descended on the maternal side, is an old and 
opulent one in the north of England.
His great- 
great-grandfather, Geoffery Kinderlee of Spalding 
in Lincolnshire, w^as the intimate friend of Daniel 
de Foe, the well-known author of Robinson Crusoe ; 
who in one of the persecutions which he suffered, 
was sheltered from its effects in the house of 
Geoffery Kinderlee.
He died in 1714, and is buried 
in Spalding churchyard under a stone bearing this 
character of him : 
" He was a very charitable and merciful man." 
" The pleasure which from virtuous deeds we have, 
Affords the sweetest slumber in the grave." * ' 
Nathaniel Kinderley, Sir James's great-grand- 
father, lived at Saltmarsh, between Stockton and 
* Of this ancestor many anecdotes are preserved.
He was noto- 
rious for having had six wives, and it was whispered that he souglit 
them in healthier counties, and that the change to the fens of 
Lincolnshire soon gave him an opportunity of trying his fortune 
again.
He drove four horses in his coach, and had an appropriate 
Durham, and inherited a considerable fortune from 
his father Geoffery before mentioned.
He married 
Mary, grandaughter of the honourable Francis 
Pierpoint, uncle to Evelyn Earl of Kingston, by whom 
he had issue John, Nathaniel, Audrey, and Mary.
He endowed a school for poor boys at Dundee, and 
attempted to civilize the inhabitants of the northern 
part of England near which he resided.
Being induced to speculate in a project for the 
improvement of the navigation of the river Dee, 
Mr. Kinderley lost a great portion of his property 
in that adventure: he also engaged in the Eaubrink 
drainage, and was the original projector of the mea- 
sure which has within a few years been carried into 
eflFect and completed near Lynn in Norfolk.
A canal 
in that district is still known by the name of the Kin- 
derley Cut. But these schemes proved unsuccessful 
at the time, and ruinous to Mr. Kinderley's fortune.
He left an estate at Setch within four miles of 
Lynn, which thirty years ago was valued at about 
1 2,000/., and was the residue of the property saved 
from the wreck of his unfortunate speculations.
airing for every morning in the week, in which his grandson John 
was his frequent companion.
In these excursions he heard many 
anecdotes, which he transmitted, probably with some embeUish- 
ments, to his successors.
His sixth wife survived him, and is supposed to have avenged 
her predecessors by her excessive care ; for she made a flannel 
cap to his gold-headed cane, lest the coldness of the metal should 
affect his health, and this treatment he did not long survive.
— 
But these have the air rather of jocular tales than of serious 
accusations, and we may believe ** he was a very charitable and 
merciful man." 
6 
His eldest son John, the grandfather of Sir James, 
being obliged to turn his attention to some means 
of living, beyondthe remnant of his paternal fortune, 
chose the clerical profession, and was sent to St.
Andrew's, where he graduated.
The corporation of 
Norwich presented him with the perpetual curacy 
of St. Helen's church in that city, and the vicarage 
of South Walsham in Norfolk ; and the Countess of 
Leicester appointed him her domestic chaplain at 
Holkham.
The generosity of his nature was a check upon 
his enriching himself or his family, although he 
preserved his independence ; but he seldom could 
take his dues from a necessitous parishioner, and 
it was his invariable custom, at the wedding of a 
poor couple, to receive the fee from the husband 
and slip it into the bride's hand.
He was remark- 
able for the sweetness of his temper and for several 
little eccentricities of character ; was a great pede- 
strian, and not unfrequently walked from Norwich 
to Holkham before breakfast, a distance of at least 
forty miles, always beginning his journey at one or 
two in the morning.
His daughter on one occasion 
received the severest reproof he ever gave her for 
altering the clock to retard his hour of setting off.
He married Sarah, daughter of Mr. John Raining *, 
* Mr. Raining gave the service of communion-plate still in use 
at the Octagon Chapel in Norwich ; 500/.
for charitable uses to his 
native town of Dumfries ; 1 200/.
to found a school in North Britain ; 
1000/.
among several schools and congregations about Norwich, 
or, if times of persecution should arise, to their ministers; be- 
sides other charitable legacies.
Mr. Raining was the intimate fi'iend of the Rev. Robert Fie- 
7' 
a wealthy Dutch merchant, a woman of graceful and 
refined manners, and considerably more accom- 
plished than ladies of her day usually were : she 
survived her husband many years.
The Rev. John 
Kinderley died the 10th of April 1775, aged 69 : 
his widow lived to the great age of 91, and died in 
1799.
They had two children : Frances, the mo- 
ther of Sir James Smith, whose exemplary conduct 
through lilfe requires no eulogium here, for her 
memory is still cherished by a numerous circle of 
friends and relatives ; her life was protracted to the 
great extent of 88 years, when, without bodily in- 
ming, V.D.M., who had been minister of the English church at 
Leyden, and was patronized by the Prince of Orange.
He pub- 
lished a poetical essay on the death of King William ; but Mr.
Fleming is more remarkable as the author of a prophecy de- 
duced from the obscure and highly poetic visions of the Apo- 
calypse, contained in a " Discourse concerning the Rise and Fall of 
the Papacy," printed in 1701.
The following passage was noticed 
soon after the commencement of the French Revolution by the 
editors of some London newspapers ; and being received with 
suspicion by many readers, Sir James having in his possession a 
copy of Mr. Fleming's work, which descended from his prede- 
cessor Mr. Raining, he took it with him to London, for the pur- 
pose of showing it to his incredulous friends.
" There is ground to hope that about the beginning of another 
such century, things may alter again for the better ; for I cannot 
but hope that some new mortification of the chief supporters of 
antichrist will then happen ; and perhaps the French monarchy 
may begin to be considerably humbled about that time : that 
whereas the present French King takes the sun for his emblem 
and this for his motto, Nee pluribus impar, he may at length, or 
rather his successors, and the monarchy itself (at least before the 
year 1794), be forced to acknowledge that (in respect to neigh- 
bouring potentates) he is ever singulis impar." 
s 
firmity or any mental failing, she expired in February 
1820 ; — and Nathaniel, lieutenant-colonel of the 
honourable East India Company's artillery service, 
whose only son was the friend through life of his 
cousin, the subject of this memoir.
Mr. Smith, the father of Sir James, was a man 
of strong understanding and of a cultivated mind.
Having in his early youth occasion to reside some 
time at Clifton hot-wells for the recovery of his 
health, he was induced by the kindness of a lady 
there, who conceived a partiality for him as a clever 
and superior boy, to employ his leisure hours in 
learning French, and with the language he acquired 
a taste for reading the best authors of a country 
whose history more especially engaged his attention, 
and perhaps few men in his own or any station read 
more, or enjoyed in a greater degree the charm of 
good composition.
He left remarks upon the style 
and character of most of the works belonging to 
the book-club of which he was a member ; and they 
are indicative of the acute and sound judgement he 
possessed*.
* The following is a specimen, though a very short one, of 
Mr. Smith's notice of the books he read : 
•' Some Thoughts concerning Education, 1693.
*' This little useful treatise was written by the celebrated Mr.
Locke, and is truly valuable, although the luxury and effeminacy 
of the present times will not, cannot conform to the rules he de- 
livers.
He recommends a private education, because he says the 
first, the greatest object of education is virtue and goodness.
In 
reading his observations, 'tis impossible not to reflect how very 
different is the mode of education in the great schools from that 
he thinks proper." — Common-jyJace Book.
A habit of thinking for himself strengthened his 
understanding ; and his son has often expressed 
himself deeply indebted to his father's, and it ought 
also to be added his mother's, encouragement not 
to follow any received opinion blindly and impli- 
citly, but dare to think for himself and stand alone.
For the free action this gave his mind, he to the 
last year of his existence expressed his obligation 
to both parents.
The education which Sir James received was en- 
tirely domestic : he never was at a boarding-school, 
and had even as a child, a dread of being sent to 
one.
The best masters, however, which the city of 
Norwich afforded, attended him at home, and he 
acquired the knowledge of grammar only through 
the Latin tongue : an English grammar, he has fre- 
quently observed, he never had ; nor did his pro- 
ficiency in Latin extend beyond the rudiments of 
the language, till he had passed the usual period of 
a school-boy's age.
The French and Italian languages he acquired 
correctly, and made some progress in mathematics ; 
and in the society of well-informed, sensible parents, 
those hours which in a public school are frequently 
grievous, or unavoidably wasted, those domestic 
evenings which expand the heart with the under- 
standing, and "leave us leisure to be good," were 
devoted to reading, or lessons rendered pleasing by 
the associations connected with them.
His timidity has just been mentioned ; but it was 
the timidity of a tender infant mind, fearful of doing 
wrong.
As he grew older, mental courage was per- 
10 
haps the most prominent feature of his character, 
and its supporting effect was felt in his presence, and 
diffused confidence.
" He feared God, and knew no 
other fear." 
It seems natural to suppose that his father's love 
of historical works led his son to take an interest 
in similar researches ; for at the early period of 
eleven or twelve he composed an imaginary history 
of Scotland, very fairly and correctly written and 
expressed, in which two races of kings are accu- 
rately described.
The writer of these pages has in 
her possession the drawing-room or saloon of these 
illustrious personages, and their place of interment 
under the chapel floor.
If invention be the proof of genius, it must be 
accorded to him even in this youthful occupation ; 
for nothing is borrowed : though the dresses, lan- 
guage, and furniture strictly resembled realities he 
had seen, yet the materials he used and the manner 
of applying them to his minute population, show 
very uncommon originality of design.
The writer is not ashamed to acknowledge, that 
reading the history of this ideal court, its ladies, 
servants, and dependents, and the satirical verses and 
pasquinades upon some members belonging to it, 
has occasionally beguiled a winter's evening very 
agreeably, when the company of some young friend 
has been the occasion of introducing the ^^ Paper 
People^'' as they were called, upon the tea-table : 
and at the same time his own playful recurrence 
to the scenes of his youthful happiness produced 
an enjoyment which will never return.
" Man was 
11 
made for relaxation as truly as for labour ; and by 
a law of his nature, he finds perhaps no relaxation 
so restorative as that in which he reverts to his 
childhood ; seems to forget his wisdom ; leaves the 
imagination to exhilarate itself by sportive inven- 
tions ; talks of amusing incongruities in conduct 
and events ; smiles at the innocent eccentricities 
and odd mistakes of those whom he most esteems ; 
allows himself in arch allusions or kind-hearted 
satire, and transports himself into a world of ludi- 
crous combinations.
It may be said that on these 
occasions the mind seems to put off its wisdom ; 
but the truth is, that in a pure mind wisdom re- 
treats, if we may so say, to its centre, and there 
unseen keeps guard over this transient folly, draws 
delicate lines, which are never to be passed in the 
freest moments, and, like a judicious parent watch- 
ing the sports of childhood, preserves a stainless in- 
nocence of soul in the very exuberance of gaiety." 
Whoever recollects his love of fun and drollery 
may perceive that it was an original part of his 
disposition ; but at all times joined to such a sweet- 
ness of temper and true humanity as left no sting 
behind : a quick perception of the ridiculous, and 
especially the grave affectation of wisdom, was 
always irresistible.
Enough, and perhaps it may be said more than 
enough, has been bestowed upon this juvenile game ; 
yet it may be considered as the embryo appearance 
of a taste, or rather passion, for historical records, 
which was at all times the relaxation most salutary 
to his spirits, and to which he daily looked forward 
12 
in the pages either of a real or fictitious representa- 
tion of human life, with a zest that almost identified 
himself with the characters he read of.
Whether 
he saw a delineation of human passions and events 
in the pages of Robertson, Froissart, Brantome, or 
Roscoe, or met with them in those of Lady Morgan, 
Mrs. RatclifFe, Richardson, Fielding, or Sir Walter 
Scott, his sympathies were called forth, and he 
would weep or rejoice as the master pen of the writer 
touched his heart and charmed his imagination.
It was his knowledge of history that made his 
company so delightful in travelling ; for never did 
he pass a spot, marked by an event in our national 
history, without reminding his companion, and thus 
furnishing topics of discourse from place to place, 
and peopling a desert with forms long since at rest, 
and ideas that were as amusing as the prospect be- 
fore them ; while, to enrich the scene, and fill each 
step with interest, the habitats of plants were always 
noticed, and their sure recurrence gave a delight 
well known to those of similar pursuits.
The writer can never forget some occurrences of 
this kind, and will mention one, because it happened 
in a road generally thought dull and wearisome, 
except to men of the turf, and that is Newmarket 
heath, a tract he always passed with particular plea- 
sure, from the exhilarating effect of the pure air.
Here it was, one " incense-breathing morn," he 
pointed out to her notice the Carduus acaulis, whose 
close and stunted growth his companion had attri- 
buted to the barren soil and frequent treading upon.
Soon after a wide field covered with the rich bios- 
13 
soms of the red poppy and the viper's bugloss, which 
attracted their mutual admiration, reminded him 
that when Mr. Kindersley's East Indian servant first 
travelled into Norfolk and passed over this heath, 
he exclaimed in rapture, "Yonder are flowers worthy 
to adorn the gardens of the gods, and here they grow 
wild!'''' 
Nor was this a solitary instance of the pleasure 
afforded to the admirer of nature in an unpromising 
tract of country.
Sir James's friend the late An- 
drew Caldwell, Esq. of Dublin, describing his re- 
turn out of Norfolk, observes, " It was dark before 
we reached Newmarket, and the night misty ; I 
could only perceive this part of the road led over 
vast extended heaths.
The favourite Verbascu7n, I 
could not help observing, gradually took its leave, 
and disappeared entirely some time before day de- 
clined.
The Centaurea Cyanus, Cichorium Intybus, 
and Echium in profusion on the road sides — whose 
beautiful blue colours attracted even the notice of my 
servant.
The sun rose in the utmost splendour just 
before we came to what I believe was Epping forest.
The landscape was wild and enchanting enough 
for the warmest fancy of the poet and painter, yet 
this pleasure was lost to every one but" me.
Not 
a door or window in any house but was closed, and 
the inhabitants asleep.
How continually we give 
up the most delightful hours !
Yet, sensible of this 
as I am, I shall persevere in error, following the 
example that is always surrounding one.
An op- 
portunity was soon afforded of perfect contrast.
The sky became clouded before eleven, and heavy 
14 
showers were repeated the whole day afterwards.
What a change from the hrilliant light and the 
beautiful objects of the forest, to the gloom and 
confinement of streets and houses !
" The travelling observer of nature," Sir James 
remarks, "has, as it w^ere, the enjoyment of a new 
sense in addition to those common to the rest of 
mankind.
He can find amusement and instruction, 
where they bemoan themselves as in a wilderness ; 
he can relieve his attention and refresh his spirits 
when wearied by common objects of observation, or 
troubled with disagreeable ones, and is stimulated 
with ardour to undertakings, prolific of pleasure 
in various ways, which the incurious, half-occupied 
mind would not think worth the pains of attempting.
A still higher advantage is attached to the pursuit 
of natural history in a journey through an en- 
lightened country, as well as in the journey of life 
itself.
It is an unerring clue to an intercourse with 
the best minds.
It brings those together who are 
connected by a most commendable, disinterested 
and delightful tie ; it brings forth the best parts of 
every character." 
Happy as he was in an excellent mother, he was 
no less so in another matetmal character, to whom 
the writer owes an infinite debt of gratitude and 
love.
Sir James has often reminded the person who 
records the circumstance, of the pleasure it gave 
him, w^hen, in early life, and then almost a stranger, 
he first paid a visit to that inestimable parent, and 
found the apartment destined for himself, decorated 
by her hand with wreaths of the Calluna and Erica 
15 
Tetralix.
The appearance of these beautiful flowers 
served to open an immediate communication of 
minds and taste, led to harmony of ideas on other 
subjects, and proved the beginning of a friendship 
which was never impaired by time or a nearer affi- 
nity with each other.
These are the graces which 
compose the poetry of life ; which require neither 
equipages nor liveries; which, instead of waste, create 
abundance; and best of all, unlock the treasures of a 
well-stored mind, 
" Rich in the pure and precious pearls of splendid thought!
" 
Those only who have witnessed the effect which 
the tranquillity of the country, the sight of gardens, 
the unpacking even of dried specimens, had upon 
him, can form an idea of the serenity and charm 
such situations and objects produced ; — a flow of 
happy spirits, never overbearing, a ready wit, an en- 
joyment which communicated its happiness to all 
about him, not a solitary pleasure, exclusive of so- 
ciety, but which made society itself more welcome.
In his " Biographical Memoirs of Norwich Bo- 
tanists," published in the seventh volume of the 
Linnsean Society's Transactions, in 1804, Sir James 
has recorded an event worthy of remembrance.
" I became," he says, "at the age of eighteen, de- 
sirous to study botany as a science.
The only book I 
could then procure was Berkenhout, Hudson's Flora 
having become extremely scarce.
I received Berken- 
hout on the 9th of January 1778, and on the 1 1th be- 
gan, with infinite delight, to examine the Ulex euro- 
pceus (common furze), the only plant then in flower.
IG 
" I then first coinpreheiided the nature of syste- 
matic arrangement, and the Linnaean principles ; httle 
aware, that, at that instant, the world was losing the 
great genius who was to be my future guide ; for Lin- 
naeus died on the night of January the 1 1th, 1778." 
In an age of astrologic faith, such a coincidence 
would have excited superstitious reflections, and the 
polar star of the great northern philosopher might 
have been supposed to shed its dying influence on 
his young disciple.
It was his father's intention to train his son to 
merchandise, with a design of his engaging in the 
importation of raw silk ; but the thoughts of trade 
never satisfied him, and he passed some years in 
doubts and wishes that kept him from repose and 
enjoyment.
As an inclination for science unfolded itself, he 
formed connections more congenial to him ; and a 
few of these, who knew his wishes, strongly urged 
his father to offer him a more suitable object.
Among the friends whom a love of botany pro- 
cured him, must be mentioned the late James Crowe, 
Esq. of Lakenham, to whose constant attachment 
and friendship Sir James was indebted for much of 
the choicest social happiness he enjoyed in his sub- 
sequent residence in his native town.
Mr. Crowe 
died in 1807, and on that occasion his friend drew 
up a short memoir of him, of which the following is 
a part.
"He had," says his biographer, "for nearly 
thirty years past studied the botany of Britain with 
indefatigable zeal, and with peculiar success.
A 
penetrating eye, and no less sagacious and discrimi- 
17 
nating mind, fitted him in an eminent degree for 
the study of nature.
No man ever loved that sci- 
ence more, nor derived more satisfaction from the 
goodness and wisdom of the Creator as displayed 
in his works, to which he was constantly recurring.
To the more difficult parts of British botany he had 
given peculiar attention, especially to the Mosses 
and Fungi, but above all to the Willows, a tribe of 
plants, which, however important in an ceconomical 
point of view, may be said, before his time, to have 
been almost entirely unknown to botanists, so con- 
fused were their ideas concerning them.
" In public life Mr. Crowe was a warm and stre- 
nuous assertor of the genuine old English Whig 
principles; to which he was attached by early edu- 
cation, extensive reading and experience, but espe- 
cially by his uncommon acuteness of judgement and 
manliness of sentiment^ for 
* Never Briton more disdain'd a slave.'" 
Mr. John Pitchford, another of his early associates, 
" was one of a school of botanists in Norwich among 
whom the writings and merits of Linnaeus were per- 
haps more early, or at least more philosophically, 
studied and appreciated, than in any part of Britain." 
Of this school was Mr. Hugh Rose, "who to 
much classical learning added a systematic and phy- 
siological turn of mind." In 1780 2^ gutta sereria 
deprived him of sight.
This affliction he bore with 
exemplary patience ; for though with the loss of his 
external visual organs he lost his darling amusement, 
"no one," observes Sir James, "could ever derive 
more consolation from looking within." 
VOL.
I. c 
18 
To these must be added the Rev. Henry Bryant, 
" a man of singular acuteness, well skilled in the ma- 
thematics, and sufficiently master of his time to de- 
vote a considerable portion of it to natural history." 
And, Thomas Jenkinson Woodward, Esq., of Bun- 
gay in Suffolk, whom he terms "his intimate and 
much-loved friend, the most candid, liberal and ho- 
nourable of men." The Fungi and Sea-weeds were 
the vegetable tribes he more particularly studied.
To the late Dr. Manning, a physician of eminence, 
and to Robert Alderson, Esq., the present Recorder 
of Norwich, he considered himself more especially 
indebted for the accomplishment of his views towards 
going to Edinburgh to complete his education, and 
acquire what was necessary for the practice of physic, 
that being the profession towards which he at this 
time directed his attention.
On the 14th of October, 
1781, he began his journey to Edinburgh.
This 
was his first separation from an affectionate family 
and home, and it was not therefore with unmixed 
feelings of delight that he attained the object of his 
sanguine wishes.
He has sometimes recurred with 
emotion to his distressing sensations, when he turned 
from his father and a beloved brother, who accom- 
panied him part of the way, to pursue the remainder 
of his journey alone.
As a man of inflexible integrity in all his mer- 
cantile transactions, and of moderation blended with 
generosity in his domestic regulations, Mr. Smith 
had been distinguished among his townsmen; but 
in the correspondence which follows, the reader may 
view his character nearer still, and will sympathize 
19 
in the tenderest parental feelings and the deep sense 
of piety and virtue which influenced and pervaded 
his mind.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
My dear Son, Norwich, Oct. 27, 1781.
We received your letter with all the joy that our 
concern and anxiety for your welfare had prepared 
for us in the gratification of our wishes; and I can- 
not refrain from giving you the pleasure of receiving 
a letter from me before you may expect it.
I am 
afraid you had an unpleasant journey to Sheffield, 
though you make the best you can of it; but 'tis over 
safe, and the remembrance of it will be pleasant 
hereafter.
I can never regret the journey I took 
with you, as it has left some of the tenderest ideas 
my mind is possessed of, and although anxious and 
serious were the minutes, they were precious indeed.
What would I not give for such another morning 
as we passed at Wansford !
It is true the separa- 
tion and the rest of that day was cutting, and as 
much as I could well bear; but every reflection on 
the prospect that attends you is a balm to heal the 
wounds that absence gives the mind.
It is obvious, 
that in proportion to the difficulties we encounter 
in the pursuit of laudable acquirements, whether of 
riches, honours, or knowledge, in adequate propor- 
tion is the pleasure of overcoming them, and the 
enjoyment of the rewards we have obtained.
Our return home would have been very pleasant 
indeed, if our separation had not been so recent.
We 
c 2 
20 
had delightful weather, fine roads, and very capital 
towns to pass.
We lodged on Tuesday at Alconbury 
Hill, a most excellent house, the neatest I ever saw; 
on Wednesday we breakfasted at Fen Stanton, and 
dined at Cambridge, where I showed John, King's 
College chapel only, the walks, and fronts of the 
colleges, and the streets : we had time for no more ; 
and came to Newmarket to sleep.
It was one of the 
meetings, so next day we went upon the course, 
heard a deal of betting, and saw three matches run.
There was very little company, but some great men; 
the Duke of Grafton, Marquis of Rockingham, Earl 
of Egremont, and, above, all Mr. Charles Fox. It 
was amusing and agreeable enough to see this pic- 
ture of human life.
God be with you, and bless all 
your undertakings !
Your ever affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
Writing home to his father on the second of No- 
vember 1781, he acquaints him with the success of 
his introductory letters, and informs him that the 
person from whom he expects to derive most comfort 
and advantage is Dr. Hope *.
" He has the highest 
character for abilities and real goodness of heart, 
and is a man of the first consequence in this place: 
his behaviour was at first (as it generally is) a little 
reserved; but botanical subjects opening the way, he 
became perfectly affable, and treats me with almost 
paternal tenderness.
Having found that I was quite a 
novice in the study of medicine, he talked the whole 
* Dr. John Hope, professor of botany.
21 
over with me, and recommends me^ above all things, 
first to make myself master of Latin, for which pur- 
pose he has recommended me a master, who taught 
all his children, who is to come for an hour every 
day: the usual terms are a guinea a month, but I 
am to give after the rate of eight guineas a year, 
and expect six or eight months will do.
I hope you 
will not disapprove of this expense, as it is quite 
necessary, and you may depend on my frugality in 
every case where I can save money without missing 
anything of real importance.
Dr. Hope thinks 
that, with the utmost oeconomy, I cannot spend 
less than 120/.
a year; but I don't see how it can 
amount to near that.
" I am quite pleased with my lodgings and compa- 
nions.
My only fellow-lodger, besides Mr. Lubbock, 
is Mr.Engelhart, a most accomplished and agreeable 
young gentleman, whose father is physician to the 
King of Sweden.
"At Dr. Hope's I have seen Lord Monboddo*: he 
is a plain-dressing elderly man ; he had on an ordi- 
* The following notes concerning this nobleman's works are 
extracted from Mr. Smith's common-place book.
" Ancient Metaphysics, or the Science of Universals.
J. Balfour, 
Edinburgh, 1783 : 2 vols, 4to.
— Lord Monboddo is the author of 
this very extraordinary work, and some other whimsical ones.
It 
is amusing to see what great lengths the imaginations of some con- 
templative men will carry them in fanciful hypotheses, which the 
Abbe BufRer aptly calls philosophical romances.
Indeed meta- 
physicians are a sort of knights errant in literature, who sally 
out in search of adventures in fancy's region ; and their wildness 
and absurdity, like that of the knights historians, are more or less 
shocking to reason and probability, as they are more or less inge- 
nious and penetrating ; but they are always absurd in something, 
22 
nary gray coat, leather breeches, and coarse worsted 
stockings ; he conversed with me with great affability 
about various matters, spoke of the great decline of 
classical learning at Edinburgh, and mentioned the 
Norfolk husbandry, which he said he had adopted.
" I often think of you, and imagine what is pass- 
ing in the scenes which my friends render so dear 
to me.
Pray give my most affectionate duty to my 
dear mother." 
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
My dear Son, Norwich, Nov. 12, 1781.
We received your letter with a pleasure equal to 
transport, for the satisfaction it gave us to hear how 
well you go on so far, which although I did never 
doubt, yet the confirmation of the hopes I had enter- 
when they affect to discover what is out of the reach of the facul- 
ties of man to know, or even to comprehend." 
" Ancient Metaphysics, containing the History and Philosophy 
of Man, ^c.
378 pp.
— This is the 3rd volume, and it appears in 
it that his lordship.
Lord Monboddo, the author, proposed to 
continue the work by an inquiry into the state and condition of 
man to be expected after death, where I suppose his lordship will 
get to his furthest.
"I read only a part of the 1st and 2nd volumes; — this was so 
amusing I read it through.
The wildness of the author's imagina- 
tion and his credulity go beyond all bounds.
There are some acute 
and sensible passages ; but when his lordship tells you he believes 
there have been a race of men born with tails, another with only 
one leg, others twenty or thirty feet high ; that the orang outang 
is really a man, and the true stmidard of our species in a natural 
state, and a great deal more such extravagant stuff, the sober 
reader must conclude his lordship's ' learning hath made him 
mad.' " 
tained is their fruition, to which I am sensible in 
proportion to that fond and eager desire for your 
welfare and prosperity, from which they owe their 
existence.
It cannot be doubted but you will recom- 
mend yourself wherever you are by those amiable 
qualities that gained and fixed you so many friends 
in your native place ; and I trust to your discretion 
and knowledge of the world to distinguish and 
choose such among those that present themselves to 
your acquaintance, that you will be able to reap 
most advantage from in point of knowledge, true po- 
liteness, and sincere friendship.
As for morals, you 
are too well grounded in virtue, and sound, unaffected 
piety, to make it at all necessary for me to mention 
them, as I am sure you will shun the immoral and 
profane^, both from taste and principle.
We are happy to hear you are so satisfied with 
your lodgings, and the company you find in them, 
especially the young Swede, whose acquaintance 
must be both entertaining and useful, and his friend- 
ship may be of service when and where you don't 
expect it*; so it may be right to cultivate it, w^hen 
you have sounded the heart ; you know if that be 
not good, no reliance is to be had upon even warm 
professions.
It is a great comfort to us that you are 
received so kindly by Dr. Hope, and that you have 
fallen into such hands as may supply in a great 
measure the place of a father to you ; and I have no 
* There appears something prophetic in this observation.
It 
was Dr. Engelhart who recommended Sir James to Dr. Acrel, 
and was mainly instrumental in the acquisition of the Linnoean 
collections, as will be noticed hereafter.
24 
doubt, my dear James, you will meet with many such 
friends during your stay in Edinburgh.
My dear, I cannot disapprove of any expense that 
is useful to your pursuit, therefore have no objection 
to a Latin master.
Latin and Greek are necessary 
to your profession in more respects than being keys 
to the doors of science, into any of which you may 
enter if you have those keys ; and I would wish you 
should have as good ones in your possession as any 
body else has ; they should have no advantage over 
me in that respect, and I believe, between ourselves, 
there is a great deal in the parade of it, besides the 
use.
The men of learning have agreed to stamp a 
high value upon classical learning: it sets them out 
of the reach of the vulgar, and of those who are 
their superiors in every other worldly advantage; 
yet I do not think it is all sterling worth, but a great 
deal of it imposition.
I would not be without any 
of it that will be really useful to you, nor without 
enough of it to be creditable, but I would not sacri- 
fice anything substantial to attain more ; the know- 
ledge of things is your proper study, and an acquisi- 
tion of that knowledge will be the solid and profit- 
able advantage of your attention* ; that will be your 
grand aim ; and as the study you have so delighted 
in, not only requires a mind formed for nice observa- 
* The opinions on the subject of education in the above pas- 
sage very much coincide with those of Milton.
" Though a linguist should pride himself to have all the 
tongues that Babel cleft the world into, yet if he have not studied 
.the solid things in them, as well as the words and lexicons, he were 
nothing so much to be esteemed a learned man, as any yeoman 
or tradesman competently wise in his mother tongue only.
Hence 
25 
tion, as the foundation of a genius successful in that 
branch, but also a patient discriminating judgement, 
joined to constant industry and close observation 
to seize the varieties of nature in her productions, 
I persuade myself that genius and taste, joined to 
those qualities which you possess in an eminent 
degree, will enable you to discern wherein the essen- 
tial of medicine lies, and to discover not only as far 
into the nature of diseases, and what relates to them, 
as human knowledge has yet gone, but I go further, 
and flatter myself you will be distinguished for a 
judgement and penetration that surpasses most 
others, and such as will procure you the esteem and 
veneration of the world, as I am without doubt 
your conduct and behaviour in your practice will 
secure you the love of it.
— You say I may depend 
upon your frugality in every case.
I know I may, 
my dear; but I would not have you cramp yourself, 
nor deny yourself either any advantage or enjoyment 
upon that account.
I am perfectly easy ; satisfied 
that you would not wish for what I ought to refuse.
appear the many mistakes which have made learning generally so 
unpleasing and so unsuccessful : first, we do amiss to spend seven 
or eight years merely in scraping together so much miserable 
Latin and Greek as might be learned otherwise easily and de- 
lightfidly in one year.
** I shall detain you now no longer in the demonstration of what 
we should not do, but strait conduct you to a hill-side, where I will 
point you out the right path of a virtuous and noble education : 
laborious indeed at the first ascent, but else so smooth, so green, 
so full of goodly prospect and melodious sounds on every side, 
that the harp of Orpheus was not more charming." — Milton : 
Letter to Master Samuel Hartlib.
26 
Mr. D.
showed us the Maccaroni rooms at New- 
market, where the ordinary for dinner is 28.?.
besides 
wine, and for supper 1 4s., where every luxury is 
procured, and every vice, I am afraid, indulged.
How 
much happier are the innocent, who know nothing 
of these excesses of the great and affluent !
I hope you have seen Dr. Hutton.
Your meeting 
with Lord Monboddo, and at Dr. Hope's, pleases me 
much.
A superficial view of singular and great cha- 
racters is entertaining, and an acquaintance with 
them is honourable and useful.
I would not have you make a burthen of writing 
letters to any of your friends, because you will have 
enough of sedentary application without that.
Perhaps I may be your physician as long as I live, 
if you prove as great as Boerhaave or any other: 
but you will make allowance for a father's tender- 
ness, for indeed, James, I love you as much as any 
father ever did a son, and I have the joy of suppo- 
sing you will allow me to show it to the last.
I will 
take care it shall not be ridiculous fondness, if I can ; 
but fondness I must be indulged in.
Your affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
The following is from Mr. James Dickson, author 
of " Four Fasciculi of Cryptogamic Plants." 
To Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, October 22, 1781.
I received yours.
I am very glad to hear from you, 
and return my best thanks for the Bryum rigidum.
27 
As such a rare plant has been found with you, I 
have no doubt but more will be found if looked 
after.
You must not depend upon my judgement on 
Fungi, it being but a new study to me as yet.
I 
find no author that is to be depended upon, and 
none worse than Mr. H.
; and Mr. Lightfoot has so 
very few.
SchaeiFer's figures, some good and some 
very bad ; I know about an half of what is in Hudson 
to be sure of.
I mean Agarici, and many he has not 
got.
If you go to the Highlands .of Scotland, I have 
not any doubt but you will find some new plants.
I 
have received some from thence since Mr. Lightfoot's 
publication.
I am now on the top study of Fungi; 
should be glad of all you can send me, and I will 
return you what I make of them.
I received some 
from Mr. Crowe : I am not able to make them all 
out as yet.
You are wrong in your doubts about the 
Elymus arenarius — I have seen the Elymus philadel- 
phicus at Sir Joseph Banks's.
I have a specimen 
of Elat'ine Alsinastrum, but did not find it myself.
I shall ask Sir Joseph Banks about it : he is the 
only man that can inform me of it.
The Arbutus 
Andrachne that sold at Dr. Fothergill's for fifty-one 
guineas was not half so large as that at Chelsea.
I 
found a few days ago the Boletus perennisy which 
I had never seen before.
Have you ever seen the 
Lycoperdon pedu7iculatum ?
I want it much.
I am.
Sir, your very humble servant, 
James Dickson.
28 
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
My dear Son, Norwich, Dec. 1781.
The manner in which you speak of your situation, 
the pleasure you take in the objects of your studies, 
the satisfaction the prospect gives you, the company 
you have got acquainted with, and, above all, the 
friendly manner in which Dr. Hope treats you, quite 
transports us ; and as we have so much confidence 
in your prudence and virtue as to be quite satisfied 
that neither the examples of will draw you 
into vice, nor the blandishments of beauty mixed 
with coquetry will steal you from yourself and us, 
we have no uneasy reflections on those considera- 
tions : but as it will give you more enlarged know- 
ledge of the world, I doubt not you will be more 
confirmed in your principles of the excellence of 
virtue, and will receive a polish and ease of deport- 
ment from the other, which, if it does not enhance 
the intrinsic value of your mind, will set off your 
more valuable qualities, and altogether will recom- 
mend you to the esteem of the penetrating and the 
superficial, to people truly valuable and the world 
in general.
The one is obtained by true merit ; the 
other by external show of it : and there is nothing 
either vicious or base in courting the approbation 
of both by the talents they are adapted to admire, and 
both will be found useful if properly estimated.
As 
for , you draw an amiable picture of him, and 
you may do him much good if he does you no harm ; 
you also may gather knowledge, curious at least, 
from him ; but beware of strict friendships.
I don't 
29 
mean, avoid them, but be cautious how you engage ; 
they very frequently influence a man's prosperity, 
and oftener his happiness through Hfe. But honey 
is to be gathered from the flowers of poisonous 
plants, with submission to you botanists; — I repeat 
submission, in every sense ; for I delight to think 
you will soon be above the reach of my feeble pen 
in every branch of knowledge, ethics, and moral phi- 
losophy, as well as physic and the belles lettres, and 
I shall be proud of taking fronij instead of giving 
lessons to you ; so you will not be troubled with so 
much sermonizing; yet probably I may not leave it 
off at once, and ever throw in an observation which 
appears to me may be useful.
'Tis an elFect of the 
imbecillity of age to hobble in their advice, as in 
their gait ; and they fancy people think them wise, 
when they undertake to instruct others ; but nothing 
is more fallacious, and nothing so common, as to 
see an old prating fool, a Polonius, think himself 
an overmatch for Hamlet.
I have declined the cottage ; and as your absence 
makes a greater impression there than any other 
place, and nobody has the taste to take care of it, 
it gives your mother and me too much pain to see 
the spot so neglected as it is, and will be ; and those 
plants you used to nurse and view with delight in 
their progress and perfection, those plots you used 
to ornament, vacant, and no hand able to cherish 
them.
We cast a mournful eye upon them, and a 
sigh ; frequently a pang is excited : thus a gloom 
hangs about us, instead of the former cheerful dis- 
position when we looked with joy on what had 
30 
been the effects of your beloved hands^ and had given 
you health and amusement.
So we are almost in 
the mind to let it.
There is a talk of some removes in the ministry, 
and change of measures ; and indeed things wear a 
very serious appearance.
It is time to think how to 
find means to save the nation, which is crumbling 
fast to pieces, and must soon be ruined if our affairs 
be no better conducted than they have been ever 
since Lord North has been at the helm ; though I 
presume people where you are entertain different 
sentiments : but you are not at Edinburgh to learn 
politics.
I esteem the Scotch much for their zeal 
for the protestant religion, yet I think two sermons 
at a time rather too much.
I hope their kirks are 
warmer than our churches.
I am, and ever shall be.
Your most affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Edinburgh, Dec. 31, 1781.
I was much entertained on Friday se'nnight at a 
rnourning concert in honour of the Earl of Kelly, 
a member of the musical society here ; this compli- 
ment is always paid to every member's memory soon 
after his death : the music is all of the sacred kind, 
and as fine as can possibly be, and the company and 
performers are all in mourning.
It is very dif- 
ficult to get admittance to these concerts ; ladies 
31 
have the preferencCj of course, and gentlemen are 
balloted for by the members.
I was so fortunate as 
to be proposed, together with Mr. Engelhart, by his 
friend Sir William Forbes, and we were both ad- 
mitted; but great numbers were rejected; and above 
a hundred people who had got tickets could not get 
in.
The room is most elegant, of an oval form.
I am very happy in the Miss Riddels acquaintance.
I have dined there twice with some great people, 
and their brother Sir James ; he behaved very po- 
litely to me: his lady is my aunt Kindersley's friend, 
a literary lady.
Sir James knows much of Norwich ; 
is acquainted with Counsellor Chambers, Aldermen 
Harvey, Thurlow, Ives, the Morse family, and Dr.
Manning, of whom he spoke much.
We have had twelve days vacation ; on Wednesday 
next the college meets again.
I have been very 
much taken up with invitations, as this is a time of 
feasting ; though not so much so as in England.
I 
was much surprised to see all the shops open on 
Christmas-day, which is not observed here at all, 
except by the church-of-England members, who 
have a most beautiful chapel here, where they per- 
form cathedral service.
I do not perceive that the better sort of people 
are less neat here than elsewhere.
I am sure in 
many places I visit, the most exquisite neatness is 
apparent.
My friend Engelhart introduced me one night as 
a visiter to the Medical Society, of which he is 
president.
My warmest prayers are offered up for a continu- 
32 
ation of your health and happiness in the approach- 
ing new year, and many more after it.
I am quite 
well and continue very happy.
I am, honoured Sir, 
Your ever dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear James, Norwich, Jan. 17, 1782.
We are all much pleased that you pass your time 
so agreeably.
You must begin to experience the ad- 
vantage of travelling, of which I doubt not you will 
also reap the benefit by forming your own manners 
and carriage upon the best models that fall in your 
way: I mean, you will choose the best from each 
individual, for few are altogether perfect ; and 
that after weighing well in your reflections what 
strikes you in the manners and behaviour or con- 
versation of any person as polite, amiable and sen- 
sible, you would endeavour to trace the principle 
upon which such a manner was in general approved, 
and if it had its foundation in reason.
If it was 
alloyed with any affectation, it will not stand that 
test; but if it had intrinsic beauty, and will bear ex- 
amination, such a scrutiny will fix it so in your mind, 
that you will have it operate upon yourself without 
being too sensible of it ; for when a man feels himself 
really acting after a pattern, he must be stiff and 
unnatural at best ; 'tis very likely he may appear 
affected, which is equally disgusting and despicable 
33 
to people of judgement and taste.
I am satisfied, 
my dear, your own good sense makes this and many 
other things I write, and have written, unnecessary ; 
but I am satisfied too, when it happens so, I have 
too great a share in your affection and esteem to 
apprehend any disdain.
You were much obliged to Mr. Engelhart for the 
concert.
I like much you should gain an acquaint- 
ance with valuable foreigners ; 'tis impossible to say 
how useful they may happen to be in every walk in 
life.
Yours ever, 
James Smith.
The Rev. Henry Bryant to Mr.James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Heydon, Jan. 18, 1782.
I rejoice to hear that you are seated so much to 
your satisfaction, and trust you will find your ac- 
count at last in the walk of Hfe you have chosen, 
and which nature herself seems to have chosen for 
you.
I am in no fear but you will eagerly catch 
hold of every favourable advantage you can meet 
with for improvement, and which in your present 
situation I know must be very many.
I rejoice 
also to hear that you have already begun to make 
some accession to the Flora Scotica ; which I am 
sure must be very imperfect.
Lightfoot's situation 
in life, whatever advantages he might boast of, 
could never qualify him for giving a botanical ac- 
count of all the plants of North Britain.
To do 
this, he ought to have been stationary in it for some 
VOL.
I. D 
34 
years, and to have had free communication with the 
chief botanists in that country.
This has been the mildest winter in Norfolk I 
ever remember, and consequently a fine season for 
cryptogamic botany.
Crowe and I have made good 
use of our time, and have found a multitude of new 
things ; many of which are not described, and I 
want you much to dehneate some of them for me.
I have found a new species of Jungermannia.
I 
have found one good specimen of Phallus caninus 
SchaefF., which agrees exactly with his figure, t.
330.
I have found many specimens of Hudson's Helvella 
plants, which as it is a creature of his own, and con- 
sequently there can be no figure of it in any author, 
I will beg the favour of you to delineate one for me : 
and as it must be new to Dr. Hope, pray give him 
two specimens, with my compliments.
Pray remember your sincere Friend, 
H. Bryant.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Edinburgh, Feb. 12, 1782.
I now sit down to give you the information you 
desire concerning my studies.
In the first place, 
my progress in Latin satisfies myself, and my master 
too, as Dr. Hope tells me : indeed I find it very 
easy.
I am at present reading Dr. Home's Princi- 
pia MedicincB, (an excellent book), after which shall 
begin Celsus.
I think one quarter more with my 
tutor will be sufficient ; and in the summer shall 
continue my application to it regularly by myself.
35 
so that next winter I hope to be able to attempt a 
little Greek (a very little will do ; but I would 
not be entirely ignorant of it.) Few physicians go 
further than the works of Hippocrates^ which are 
very easy I am told.
Indeed I am far from being sin- 
gular in my deficiency in the knowledge of Latin ; 
but I assure you no application shall be wanting to 
complete me in it as much as possible.
I am really 
very fond of the language, and have got over 
the worst part : I am before most students in the 
knowledge of French and Italian, the former of 
which is of the greatest use ; and both have assisted 
me wonderfully in acquiring Latin.
I have learned to pronounce Latin like Italian ; 
as it is pronounced so here, as well as by all foreign- 
ers ; I mean the vowels *.
I know no entertainment equal to Dr. Monro's 
physiological lectures ; his remarks are so inge- 
nious, satisfactory, and curious, that we could never 
be tired with hearing them.
He cannot forbear 
throwing out remarks now and then, when he 
finds either of his great rivals Haller or Hunter in a 
mistake.
Your affectionate Son, 
James Edward Smith.
* *' Their speech is to be fashioned to a distinct and clear pro- 
nunciation, as near as may be to the Itahan, especially in the 
vowels.
For we Englishmen, being far northerly, do not open 
our mouths in the cold air wide enough to grace a southern 
tongue ; but are observed by all other nations to speak exceed- 
ingly close and inward ; so that to smatter Latin with an English 
mouth, is as ill hearing as law French." — Milton on Education; 
in a Letter to Master Samuel Hartlih.
D 2 
36 
Mft Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
My dear Son, Norwich, Feb. 25, 1782.
We are all much pleased that you spend your 
time so agreeably, and hope nothing I have said will 
convey the idea that I think you too profuse in 
your amusements : on the contrary, as you rightly 
say, it is a part of your education de vous appri- 
voisera la grandefoule; besides, I look upon diver- 
sions as useful, nay necessary, to relieve your mind 
and renew its vigour, to exhilarate the spirits and 
give a zest to life, for which end the beneficent Au- 
thor of our nature has given us the capacity of an 
almost innumerable variety of enjoyments, which 
are all lawful when they are expedient, when they 
promote our happiness and that of our friends and 
connections.
I look upon the promotion or pro- 
duction of genuine true happiness to be the surest 
mark of virtue, if it is not virtue itself.
Some phi- 
losophers call a mediocrity in all things, virtue : 
however that be, medio tutissimus ibis is an excel- 
lent maxim, and I am in no fear you should trans- 
gress ; on the contrary, I would rather urge you 
forward to take pleasure than restrain you, for I 
am not in the least afraid you should go beyond 
what will do you real good.
So, my dear, go to as 
many diversions as you like, see everything you 
can, and push forward your acquaintance with gen- 
teel, valuable people ; and be not under any con- 
cern whether you spend a few pounds more or less 
in the year.
I would not have you neglect any ad- 
vantages, nor deny yourself any proper gratification 
37 
for fear of swelling your expenses.
Solomon says, 
*' There is a time to scatter, and a time to gather:" 
do you scatter wisely, and I will endeavour to gather 
carefully, and hope I shall so far succeed as to leave 
a comfortable subsistence to every one that depends 
upon me for support.
I think you had better not 
fix a time to leave off your tutor: 'tis impossible to 
tell where you may be situated, or how ; and scholar- 
ship will recommend in all parts of the world.
And 
as you have the elegancies of French and Italian, the 
useful Latin, with a little Greek, will be desirable.
God be with you and bless you, my ever dear child!
Your affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
M7\ James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Edinburgh, March 11, 1782.
I want words to answer as it deserves that part 
of your letter concerning my expenses : can only 
say, your kind indulgence will have a most power- 
ful influence in making me as ceconomical as real 
prudence will allow of.
With respect to diversions 
interrupting my application, I dare say you have no 
apprehension of that : as you know my inclination 
for the pursuit of science, you will easily believe that 
to be the highest pleasure I can enjoy, as I am at pre- 
sent circumstanced with every advantage for that 
pursuit, and at full liberty to explore the vast stores of 
knowledge that are presented to me on every side.
The diversions here will be over in a few days; as 
38 
the session (the courts of justice) rises then.
I 
have not been to Archer s-hall again, nor to the 
concert, but have been to three assemWies in the 
new town, in a room opened only this season, 
where there is a subscription-ball every Friday, I 
have a very useful friend in Lady Gordon, with 
whom I became acquainted at the Queen's assembly, 
and who always finds me a partner when I am at a 
loss for one.
It is a common complaint among the 
students, that the Edinburgh people are very proud, 
and that students are despised by them : I have not 
experienced any neglect on account of my profes- 
sion, nor do I believe that any one who behaves de- 
cently will experience it.
The Miss Riddels are excellent acquaintances for 
me ; they have very good connections, and are per- 
fectly conversant with genteel life : they are my 
privy counsellors in all matters of etiquette, and are 
quite unreserved and familiar with me.
Mr. Martineau advises me to get into the Medi- 
cal Society ; but there is a law made, that no more 
can be admitted this year.
The Earl of Buchan was 
made an honorary member last Saturday ; but that 
is an extraordinary thing.
I always find means to get 
in as a visitor : I was there last Saturday fortnight, 
and spoke twice, from which I hope you will think 
I have got rid of some of my mauvaise honte.
The 
members were disputing on the analogy of the dis- 
eases of brutes with those of men, and how far the 
method of cure, which succeeds in theirs, might be 
applied to ours.
I ventured to represent the dan- 
ger which might happen from trusting too much to 
39 
this analogy, considering that many plants are poi- 
sonous to some animals and wholesome to others, 
of which I gave several instances.
The president 
very politely thanked me for my observations.
I 
find they are wonderfully ignorant of natural hi- 
story : and even my little knowledge of the subject 
gives me an importance which I hope will be of 
great advantage, and may perhaps in some measure 
atone for my deficiency in classical learning.
James Edward Smith.
To his mother, on the following day, he expresses 
himself thus : — " My happiness, honoured madam, 
in my present situation is completed by your ex- 
pressing so much happiness in my prospects, as 
well as my father.
I cannot help considering it, as 
you say, peculiarly directed by the Almighty, and 
therefore I recur immediately to him when any 
gloomy ideas present themselves; as I hope I have 
the most perfect confidence in him, and trust he 
will preserve us all to be a blessing to each other.
But if he thinks fit to separate us, I hope we could 
acquiesce; and we know that not a single kind 
thought can ever be lost, or lose its reward.
I have 
met with a number of young play-fellows, as you 
said I should.
The children of Dr. Duncan are very 
pretty, and remarkably sensible ; and here are a sweet 
little boy and girl, the children of Dr. Adam, whom 
I often play with.
Mrs. Adam is a very beautiful 
polite woman^ and the children in perfect order ; 
the little lass told her mamma I was ' a bonny man.' 
' Ay,' says her brother, ' and a good man too !
' " 
40 
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Ediuard Smith.
Dear Son, Norwich, March 1782.
When a man really takes delight in his business, 
be it what it will, it is hardly ever seen that he is 
unsuccessful.
You cannot conceive the joy it gave 
your affectionate mother and me to hear you have 
spoken twice at the Medical Society : you have 
broke the ice, and have good ground to expect you 
will be distinguished from the common herd.
I 
would have you proceed with firmness and due con- 
fidence : one of the most certain prognostics of vic- 
tory in every conflict, is a dependence upon one's 
self, so that a man does not quite miscalculate his 
powers ; but that includes the idea of so much vanity 
or ignorance, neither of which I am sure will dupe 
you, that I don't take them into the account when I 
consider your attempts.
I have seen your brother since I wrote before.
' What gave me much pleasure was, to see that he read 
the dedication to Dryden's Virgil, and tasted the 
beauties of it besides ; for you know his dedications 
are looked upon as the best in our language, and 
masterly performances ; — and how few boys read 
dedications and prefaces !
I am, dear James, with the strongest affection, 
Your loving Father, 
James Smith.
N.B.
' Loving' is an out-of- fashion term, and has 
not been in use since our grand- or great-grand- 
41 
fathers ; but they were as honest, sincere, and virtuous 
as the present age ; and as I am not ashamed to be 
reUited to them, though many are, I do not blush 
to use their phrase.
To say true, I could find no 
better ; and I know, my dear boy, you will not de- 
spise it.
Mr. J.
Pitchford to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Norwich, April 1782.
It is now high time to answer your obliging 
letter.
I am very sure you have but little time to 
botanize ; and am far from being jealous, as an ad- 
mirer of Flora, that you should neglect her for the 
more useful parts of science, which I make no 
doubt at this time have taken possession of your 
heart.
This is as it should be ; nor can I see that 
the competent knowledge of botany, which you 
say is considered at Edinburgh as an essential part 
of medical education, can really be so very necessary; 
unless no more is meant than a knowledge of the 
species employed in medicine.
This is so very 
necessary, that Linnaeus, you know, makes one of 
the obstacles to the improvement of physic to arise 
from an ignorance of the species intended.
Botany, 
to be sure, ought to be pursued as an amusement 
ojily (except by those who write upon it) ; and as 
such this pr€sent letter, and I'm afraid my future 
ones, will contain scarce anything else, unless you 
will improve me by informing me what new disco- 
veries are making in physic, and what are the prin- 
cipal studies in which you are at present engaged.
42 
Let usj however, take a little ride together upon our 
favourite north and south British steeds, and com- 
municate our discoveries to each other.
In the 
first place let me thank you for your discovery of 
Lichen mhuatus, in which you are perfectly right; 
the plant brought last summer by Messrs.
Crowe 
and Woodward being no other, notwithstanding 
Mr. Browne is confident that Sir Joseph Banks 
and Dr. Solander named it deustus.
Many disco- 
veries have been made in Norfolk indeed, owing to 
Mr. Crowe's industry, and Mr. Dickson's having been 
down here for ten days : he left Norwich last Friday 
night.
They found little less than thirty new 
species in the Cryptogamia ; among which, two very 
pretty Pezizas, a for eigUt/uno-ermannia, now named 
hypnoides ; and by Mr. Bryant, a plant figured in 
Dillenius under the name of Sphccrocephalus ter- 
resti'is mirdmus 8fc.
What think you of the finding 
Hydnwn imbr'icatuin and Ly coper don coliforrne, or 
Fungus piilvertdentus coli instar perforatus cwn 
volva stellata, R.
Syn. 28.
12 ?
It is twice as large 
as the common stellatum, and the vesica at least six 
times.
It is an elegant Fungus, and much deserves 
a place in the Flora ; I counted fifteen rays, and 
about ten perforations about the size of small peas ; 
not with their oribus aciiminatis, but laceratis, as in 
the Bovista.
As I know you are an admirer of Ray, 
I thought this information would give you plea- 
sure, as it is probable the plant may not have been 
found (at least known by botanists) since his time.
Hydnuni wibricatwn was scarce less valuable to 
Mr. Dickson ; he said the sight of it alone was worth 
43 
five guineas : but the other is in my opinion the 
greater diseovery, and Mr. Dickson was not a little 
rich in carrying them home.
They were both found 
by Mr. Stone* of Bungay.
For my own part.
I 
dreamt of Lycoperdon the night I saw it, and 
thought I had found four or five ; but, alas !
it 
was only a dream.
Lichen pullus I have not yet seen : 
horizontalis is one of Mr. Crowe's, — at least so 
marked.
Fucus palmatus I have not seen except in 
Gmelin.
Lichen parellus grows very common here ; 
I did not know the plant 'till lately, but took it for 
pertusus, which I now have.
The London botanists 
know very little (di Agariciis quercinus and betulinus, 
nor do I believe writers are clear about them.
We 
are certain of your quercinus from Batarra's figure, 
which I'm afraid does not accord with Scheefte.r's : the 
betulinus we are in the dark about.
Young Linnseus 
is at London, and turns out better than they expect- 
ed, showing no want of genius ; but he has put a stop 
to his publication, since Sir Joseph Banks's disco- 
veries, which Mr. Crowe was told amount with the 
Spe. PI.
to the number of 40,000.
I will not say a 
word more upon botany, except that I beg my re- 
spects to Dr. Hope ; and whatever is in my power 
to procure for you and your friends you may com- 
mand.
And I know you will take pity on a poor 
botanist, who must depend upon his friends for any 
thing he gets new.
My wife desires her best respects to you.
As I have 
* Robert Stone, Esq., late of Bedingham Hall, Norfolk, died 
5th January, 1829.
44 
filled this letter, she is determined to fill the next 
herself.
I remain your affectionate humble Servant, 
J. PiTCHFORD.
P.S. This afternoon I saw a letter of yours to 
your sister Fanny : I respect you for such a mark 
of your affection to her.
Messrs.
Rose and Hum- 
phrey desire their compliments.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Edinburgh, 15th April, 1782.
-, myself, and four or five friends, who have a 
turn for natural history, have lately formed a society 
for the prosecution of that study.
Dr. Walker the 
new professor, who is a most amiable, worthy and 
ingenious man, no sooner heard of it than he offered 
us his museum to meet in, with the use of his books 
and specimens ; and he begged to be admitted an or- 
dinary member, which he accordingly was, and about 
seven young men besides.
Dr. Hope was made 
an honorary member, as he cannot often attend 
us ; but Dr. Walker, who has no business to follow 
but natural history, foresees the consequence this 
society may be of to him, and is resolved to support 
it as much as possible.
Several men of genius and 
rank have petitioned to be admitted as ordinary 
members, among whom are the Earls of Glasgow 
and Ancram, and Lord Dacre, son to the Earl of 
Selkirk, — three young noblemen of fine parts and 
great fortunes We have had two public meetings : 
45 
at the first Dr. Walker was president, and at the 
last I had that honour ; and the other members are 
to take it in turn : four visitors are admitted every 
night.
We meet every Friday evening, from six to 
nine o'clock ; and two papers are to be produced 
and discussed at every meeting, the members taking 
it in turn to write them.
I did not accept the 
office of president without great anxiety ; but I 
went through it with credit, as I knew the power I 
held, which is absolute for the time in all societies.
I have great hopes that this will be a most respect- 
able and useful institution, and am very proud of 
having been one of its first founders.
As I told 
Dr. Walker at his first coming I could not attend 
him this year, but should the next, if his hour suited 
me ; he was so generous as to give me a ticket for 
his present course, saying I might perhaps find 
some opportunities of attending him.
He also told 
me I had studied more of natural history than 
anybody he had before met with in this country ; 
but in this I doubt he was a little premature in his 
decision, as I doubt not but he will find many more 
learned than myself, upon examining.
It is accidental 
my not having mentioned Dr. Hutton ; he is one of 
my best and most agreeable acquaintances, a man 
of the most astonishing penetration and remark- 
able clearness of intellects, with the greatest good 
humour and frankness ; in short, I cannot discover 
in what his oddity (of which I heard so much) con- 
sists.
He is a bachelor, and lives with three maiden 
sisters ; so you may be sure the house and every 
thing about it is in the nicest order.
I step in when 
4G 
I like, and drink tea with them ; and the Doctor 
and I sometimes walk together.
He is an excellent 
mineralogist, and is very communicative, very clear, 
and of a candid though quick temper; in short, I am 
quite charmed wath him.
He has a noble collection 
of fossils, which he likes to show : — by the way, I do 
not mean to prosecute this study any further than 
is necessary and proper for me to be acquainted 
w4th ; it requires infinite attention and labour, and 
there are few certain conclusions to be found.
I 
shall endeavour to get a general knowledge of every 
branch of literature as it falls in my w^ay ; but believe 
I shall find enough to employ me in the strict line 
of my profession, w^ith the two first kingdoms of na- 
ture by way of relaxation; for I am fully persuaded 
that an intimate acquaintance with these is not only 
peculiarly ornamental, but highly necessary, to form 
an accomplished physician, as literature now stands : 
and am sure the benefit I have derived, wherever 
I have been, and am continually deriving, from the 
little knowledge of this kind w^hich I am possessed 
of, is greater than could have been imagined, — I 
mean wath respect to introducing me to the lite- 
rary world ; for if I had been without such an in- 
troduction, I might have drudged here perhaps a 
couple of years before I could have done anything 
to have signalized myself, or have been taken half 
the notice of which I now am.
I promised to give you some account of my 
young acquaintances.
The name of the one I have 
contracted most intimacy with is Batty ; he comes 
from Kirby Lonsdale in Westmoreland ; is about 
47 
twenty, and has had an excellent education*.
He is 
a good Greek scholar ; but what principally endears 
him to me are his refined feelings and great sensi- 
bility, joined with a strong judgement, and a mind 
whose native simplicity and purity have been pre- 
served by an education in a sequestered and virtuous 
part of the world, where luxury and vice have made 
very little progress indeed, compared with ours.
Mr. Batty has a fine ear for music, plays on the 
German flute, and sings well; and there is some- 
thing in his appearance that pleased me at first 
sight.
There are a few others about taking their 
final leave of Edinburgh : this I consider as a very 
great alloy to the happiness which a scientific man 
enjoys in a seat of learning like this.
I have a 
numerous acquaintance, with whom I visit or walk 
with occasionally.
I have written- Mr. Rose an ac- 
count of our new society ; as I thought it would 
please him.
Your ever dutiful and afi'ectionate Son, 
James Edward Smith.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Mother.
Honoured Madam, Edinburgh, May 16, 1782.
I have a plan in agitation to take a little tour 
* Robert Batty, M.D. received his classical education under 
the Rev. Mr.
Wilson, a very celebrated schoolmaster of Kirby 
Lonsdale.
He was early patronized by the late Sir Richard Jebb, 
who sent him into Italy with one of his patients.
He is a mem- 
ber of the Royal College of Physicians, F.L.S., and senior j^hy- 
sician of the Brownlow-street Hospital.
48 
to the Highlands on foot, at the instigation of 
Dr. Hope, who is desirous his son (a fine youth of 
about sixteen), and a few others, should be of the 
party.
Dr. Hope thinks we might be out a month 
for about three pounds each ; but I should be for 
taking some kind of horse to carry baggage, which 
would make the expense more.
Perhaps my father 
will allow me to lay out five or six pounds in a 
scheme of this kind, as I may not have another 
opportunity of seeing the country ; however, there 
is time enough to think of it, as we would not go 
till August.
The winter classes all finished the end of last 
month.
I was quite melancholy at the conclusion ; 
for besides being really sorry that the lectures were 
over, it made me vapourish to see so many students 
going away, and all the places which used to be so 
cheerful and busy quite vacant and gloomy.
Our Na- 
tural History Society goes on gloriously.
Dr. Black, 
professor of chemistry, is become an honorary 
member, and spoke there last Friday.
Dr. Walker 
is there constantly, and generally speaks.
Dr. Hope means to give a medal this year for 
the best collection of the native plants of Scotland 
and plants of the materia medica, and will extend 
the benefits of it not only to his pupils, but to all 
the members of our Society.
I think it will be worth 
my trying for, and have but little doubt of getting it, 
if I try.
Such an honour is surely worth taking some 
pains for, and ought not to be neglected by a young 
man, as such things are generally thought more of 
at a distance than on the spot.
I beheve I have 
49 
never given you an account of my friend Lady Reay, 
to whom I was introduced by the Miss Riddels, and 
who honours me with her particular attention : — she 
is the widow of Lord Reay, and has two daughters, 
the elder of whom only I have yet seen, who is a 
very pleasing unaffected young lady, about sixteen.
Lady Reay never goes to public places : she has read 
a good deal, and is highly polished in her manners.
I have a general invitation to go when I please to 
see her.
A few weeks ago I read a paper before the Na- 
tural History Society on collecting and preserving 
plants, which was debated on for three hours, and 
procured me much commendation from Dr. Walker 
and Dr. Hope.
When I was at Sheffield, my cousin T.
Smith in- 
troduced me to an intimate friend of his, a son of 
Dr. Younge*, a physician there, who is to come and 
study here next winter.
I have engaged him a room 
in Mrs. Beveridge's house.
I am, my dear Madam, 
Your dutiful, affectionate Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
My dear James, Norwich, May 2, 1782.
O my dear son !
how much gratitude we think is 
due to your great Creator, from us, who are so inex- 
pressibly concerned for your temporal and eternal 
* Afterwards his companion in a tour on the continent.
VOL.
I. E 
50 
happiness, that your mind is so naturally formed for 
virtue, that our minds are entirely at ease on that 
account, which is the most important of our con- 
cerns about you nevertheless, and that they are only 
the subordinate cares for your health and prosperity 
that give us much anxiety.
Thanks to you for the 
account you give us of your intimates !
it delights us 
that you find such congenial to your own mind.
The 
establishment of your new society for natural hi- 
story, in which you appear so conspicuously, fills us 
with pleasure which need not be described ; we flatter 
ourselves it is a presage that you will arrive at emi- 
nence in your profession, and reap a good harvest 
of honour and profit.
How happy will that make 
both your most aff'ectionate parents in the decline of 
life I What joy is it to us to contemplate, that as 
you must now be the fabricator of your own fortune, 
you begin your career so happily !
You are certain 
you have our daily prayers for the continuance of 
the protection and favour of our universal Parent 
and Benefactor, whose blessing I have no doubt 
you omit not to solicit yourself, with a piety which 
I trust never will forsake you.
'I would by no means oppose your journey to the 
Highlands, if it would answer any good purpose, of 
which you are to be the judge; and Dr. Hope's 
sending his son along with you is a pledge of its 
safety : but by no means go without one baggage 
horse at least ; I think you had best have a galloway 
to ride, and if not each one, at least one amongst 
you in case of weariness or "any accident, and take 
guides as often as there is a chance of wanting 
51 
them.
I shall grudge nothing for your heahh and 
safety.
You are much obliged to your aunt for introdu- 
cing you to so many respectable friends and acquaint- 
ances, in particular Lady Reay, who seems a very de- 
sirable one ; but as you are in the midst of so many 
agreeable young ladies, take care of your heart ; 
be least with and think least of those you like best.
Excuse me if I repeat cautions on this subject un- 
necessarily till you have a prospect of settling.
Adieu, my dear Son !
James Smith.
In the beginning of June the student made an 
excursion to Kirby Lonsdale in Westmoreland, to 
visit his friend Mr. Batty, and into Yorkshire to 
meet his father.
"I have many inducements," he 
tells him, " to take this journey; and first, the com- 
pany of an agreeable and ingenious Frenchman, Dr.
Broussonet, who has been in Edinburgh a week to 
see the place, and with whom I have been very happy.
He is an eminent naturalist, and intimate with Sir 
Joseph Banks." 
The following letter from Mr. Smith is written 
after they had met, and his son had returned to 
Edinburgh.
Mr. Smith to Mr, James Edward S7nith.
My dear James, Norwich, August 5, 1782.
Your letter from Kirby Lonsdale, and that lately 
from Carlisle, afforded us great pleasure, to hear you 
E 2 
52 
were well and so far on your return to Edinburgh.
I should be very happy indeed to visit Cumberland 
and Westmoreland with you, and nobody knows but 
it may fall out so at some time or another : it is 
easy to conceive the want of a companion must 
abate a great deal of the pleasure in viewing the 
beautiful and romantic scenes ; there is even a degree 
of horror in the grand and majestic prospects of 
nature, in solitude.
I will not say what flattering hopes I form, but 
I am much mistaken if kind Providence has not put 
your fortune in your own power, and that you have 
little to do besides pursuing the track you are travel- 
ling with so much success, but to shun the most 
obvious dangers and mistakes in life.
The pleasure 
and comfort your meeting gave me is inexpressible.
On our return home we came to Lutterworth : here 
we ascended the pulpit in which the first English 
reformer, Wickliffe, used to preach, and sat in the 
chair, still preserved, in which that eminent man 
died*.
I am, your affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
* " The Lives of John Wickliffe, and of the most eminent of his 
Disciples, Lord Cohham, John Huss, Jerome of Prague, and 
Zisca.
' After the way which they call heresy, so worship we 
the God of our fathers :' Acts, chap.
xxiv.
ver.
14.
By William 
Gilpin, M.A, 1766, 8vo.
372 pp.
— The writer of this very enter- 
taining work has shown himself a man of abilities, a gentleman, a 
scholar, and a friend to truth and religious liberty ; and the very 
great men he hath chosen for the subjects of his pen are worthy 
to be well considered in all ages, and afford very many useful 
lessons to all succeeding times, of the amazing force of truth.
53 
Mr. James Edivard Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Edinburgh, August G, 1782.
I left Carlisle on Tuesday night at eight o'clock, 
and arrived at Moffat next morning by five.
This is 
a neat pleasant town, v^rhere there is a sulphureous 
spring much resorted to: the town is at present full 
of genteel company, and they have dancing almost 
every night.
Here I found Dr.Walker, as I expected : 
he has a good house and noble garden here, which 
he will leave in November, as he will then remove 
to a place three miles only from Edinburgh, where 
he has got a living in exchange for Moffat.
I spent 
that day and the next very happily with the Doctor : 
he is a very agreeable man, the life and soul of 
WicklifFe seems to have been in religion, what Lord Bacon was in 
philosopliy ; that is, the first hght, and of the most amazing bright- 
ness.
Huss was a man of uncommon virtue and great parts; 
Jerome,of more refined abihties and greater learning; and Zisca,a 
most extraordinary military reformer, and of talents and capacity 
to war, equal to any man that we read of in history.
So is his 
history one of the most uncommon, and the fullest of great events 
to be met with.
He was the founder of the city of Tabor in 
Bohemia on the river Maldaw, wliich was his strong retreat, and 
from wliich his sect was called Taborites.
" It would be wrong to omit the mention of Lord Cobham, who 
is a shining example of a military man in a very high station and 
of eminent abilities, converted from the irregularities of such a 
life and the errors of popery, by the force of the truths delivered 
by Wickliffe, and most heroically maintaining his virtue and his 
truth at the expense of his life.
His magnanimous and pathetic 
behaviour at his examination and tryal before the convocation, 
afford a most interesting, noble, and moving scene." — From 
Mr. Smith's common-place book.
54 
Moffat ; his loss will be equally felt by the gay, the 
industrious, and the unhappy.
I reached Edinburgh 
on Friday evening, and have had great congratula- 
tions on my return.
Dr. Hope paid me the very 
high compliment of saying he had wanted me to 
keep him from falling into many mistakes : I supped 
there on Sunday, and talked with him about the 
medal, among other things ; he said he had not pub- 
lished it in his class, as he saw nobody there who 
was likely to try for it, except those who were 
members of our Natural History Society, where it 
had already been published.
I think this was wrong ; 
he ought to have made it as public as possible : he 
concluded by saying he thought I had it all in my 
own hands.
I am, -honoured Sir, 
Your obedient and affectionate Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Mr, James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, August 29, 1782.
My late tour was shorter than had been proposed, 
owing to bad weather, but was very agreeable and 
successful.
We set off on Tuesday the 20th instant, 
and got to Glasgow that night.
Mr. Hope intro- 
duced us to some of the professors, who were very 
polite ; and I called on Mr. Grant, who was very glad 
to see me.
Glasgow is, I think, one of the finest 
towns I ever saw : the buildings in the two principal 
streets (which cross each other) are very noble, in 
55 
the style of Queen Elizabeth's time ; these streets are 
very broad, and crowded with people, like Cornhill : 
in other parts of the town are a great number of su- 
perb modern houses.
The Green, which is between 
the town and the Clyde, is very delightful ; it is about 
two miles long and half a mile broad, and planted 
with very large trees : here the women wash their 
linen in the open air, having fires in small iron 
stoves.
On Wednesday evening we went in the 
diligence to Dumbarton, where is a castle built on 
a very singular rock, from which is a view down the 
river worthy of Italy; yet this is called "a barren 
land without a tree" !
From hence we took a chaise 
to Lussj fourteen miles, through a sweet country 
on the shore of Loch Lomond ; rode by the pillar 
in memory of Smollet.
Loch Lomond is full of 
beautiful islands ; but though its borders be clothed 
with wood and ornamented with tow^ns and gentle- 
men's seats, yet there is not that picturesque variety 
about it which the lakes of Cumberland afford.
Mr. Stew^art, minister of Luss, was the companion 
of Mr. Pennant in one of his tours.
1 became ac- 
quainted with him at Edinburgh, where he was 
made an honorary member of our society on my 
nomination: he is a first-rate naturalist, and remark- 
able for his modesty and simplicity of manners.
On 
Friday he accompanied us to Ben Lomond : we took 
a boat, and sailed across the lake, five miles ; the 
weather was fine, and it was a most delightful voyage; 
a fine eagle was soaring above our heads.
After 
landing we began to ascend the mountain, whose 
top is full five miles from the shore of the lake, and 
56 
whose perpendicular height is 3240 feet.
Two men 
went out with us, who carried provisions and rum, 
of which I drank, during the whole of our expedi- 
tion, three luine-glasses with great advantage, for at 
the top of the hill it was extremely cold, and rain 
came on, so that we were, nearly all the time we were 
at the top, wrapt in clouds : we ascended the highest 
point, on which we stood as on an island in a sea 
of clouds; from time to time, however, we had trans- 
ient views of the country below us, as if by enchant- 
ment ; on one side Loch Lomond chequered with 
islands ; on the other, a sweet valley with the Forth 
winding through it in the most fantastic manner ; 
on the north-east side, the mountain is absolutely 
perpendicular, and we looked straight down on the 
river at its foot.
We found a great number of very 
rare plants, which amply rewarded us for our journey, 
and about six o'clock began to descend again, and 
got back to Luss before nine.
On our return home we saw Carron iron-works, 
which are really stupendous, and the ancient town 
and castle of Linlithgow : the country most of the 
way is barren and dreary, consisting of fields of 
starved barley, and turfy moors.
I have had a very obliging letter from Dr. Brous- 
sonet : he says he has sent me a copy of a book he 
has lately published on fishes.
He is now at Paris.
Your affectionate, 
J. E.
Smith.
57 
Mr. James Edivard Smith to T.
J. JVoodward, Esq.
Dear Sir, Edinburgh, Sept.
28, 1782.
Although I have at present much upon my hands, 
I would not neglect answering your kind letter, as 
you wish to have an account of my journey.
We 
were out but a week, and went no further than 
Loch Lomond ; we ascended Ben Lomond in com- 
pany with Mr. Stewart, so often mentioned in Light- 
foot's book.
The weather was cloudy, and we could 
see nothing of the country, but have great reason 
to be satisfied with our botanical success.
The best 
things we found were Sibbaldia procumbens ; Azalea 
procumbens ; Alchemilla alpina; Polygonum vivipa- 
rum ; Saxifraga stellaris, nivalis^ oppositifolia, hyp- 
noides and autumnalis ; Juncus sp'icatus and triglu- 
mis; Rubus Cliammmorus ^ in fruit ; Silene acaulis in 
seed, except one specimen which had a flower, and 
by which we saw it was truly a Silene; Giiaphalium 
alpinum of Lightfoot, i.
e. supinum of Linnaeus ; 
Salicc herbacea ; Lichen crinitus, torref actus, poly- 
phylluSy ventosuSy ericetorum, ccBVuleo-nigricans, and 
many other plants, which would have transported me 
a few months ago, but I made great acquisitions in 
Westmoreland.
From Mr. Stewart's garden I got 
•/uncus biglumisj Anthericum calyculatum, Salix 
lapponum, and some others ; Vaccinium Vitis-ldcBa in 
^fruit; Cor7ius herbacea, roots; Astragalus uralensis, 
seeds, &c.
From this gentleman I hope to receive 
some more specimens soon, so that I shall have 
nearly all the rare Scotch plants.
I have lately added 
58 
to the Flora Scotica, Polygonum pensylvamcum, 
Senecio saracenicus, Lichen pyxidatns, (o of Huds.
; 
JByssus rubra ?
Huds.; Agaricus deiiciosus and vi- 
7'idis, and Ly coper don epiphyllum of Linnaeus, not 
of Lightfoot or Hudson.
I have done very poorly in Fuci, &c., having re- 
peatedly gone down to the sea-shore, when the wind 
has nearly blown me off my feet, without finding 
scarcely a morsel of vegetable matter.
This is a very 
bad coast for sea plants, not comparable to ours.
I 
got no fossils in my tour: the Asbestos is very rare, 
and perhaps, were you to see it, would disappoint 
you as it did me.
The Arundo in Earsham wood 
is certainly the epigejos.
I have the true calama- 
groslis.
I am extremely obliged to you for your 
excellent drawing of Lycoperdon coliforme, and for 
your valuable remarks on that genus.
The L.pedun- 
culatmn I have seen at Dr. Hope's ; it was found in 
Scotland : I have formerly observed the circum- 
stance you mention in the L.fraxmum.
I found the L.
stellatwn in a young state ; it is 
now in the form of a white ball, the volva being en- 
tire, about the thickness of a leather glove, and co- 
vering the head ; the perforation in the head is as 
distinct as when the fungus is ripe.
I have a species 
which I take to be new, and have sent Mr. Dickson 
a specimen : it is very small, and grows in clusters 
on moss ; I call it Lycoperdon fragile^ and define it, 
L. parasiticum pyriforme, fragile^ nitidiwi, badium, 
farina fused : 'tis not a SphcEria.
Dr. Walker has found a number of plants in 
Scotland which arc not in Lightfoot : among them 
59 
are Rubiis arcticus, Lysimachia thyrsiflora^ and the 
indubitable Elymus arenarius, wiiich I have seen 
and examined, and of which I have a specimen 
brought from the Gottingen garden, and is the same 
with tlie Doctor's ; that, therefore, brought from 
London by Mr. Crowe is a new English plant, if 
really found in England.
I am, dear Sir, yours, &c.
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edivard Smith.
My dear James, Norwich, Nov. 3, 1782.
Mr. Woodward called here last week on his way 
to Narford, where he is gone to spend a few days.
Mrs. is vastly pleased with your letter, and 
we are pleased with it too; you have a better knack 
at la badinage than I imagined.
She is a lady very 
proper to correspond with, to introduce a young 
man into that kind of style which has its agrdmens 
as well as utility.
I suppose you know it is the 
way in France for every young gentleman to have 
such a female friend as will introduce him into the 
world in every sense of the word, and I need not tell 
you how far they carry it.
She is not only his corre- 
spondent to form him to an easy, familiar, polite 
and gay style in letter-writing, to teach him the 
graces in company and conversation, but she is his 
tutor in gallantry and the knowledge of the character, 
the tastes, the foibles of the fair-sex ; — and it is a 
scandalous corruption, for she is too often their 
betrayer, at least by giving him lessons to employ 
60 
to their injury.
The famous Ninon de TEnclos' 
correspondence with the Marquis de Sevigne is a 
very curious and well-known instance of it.
He 
was initiated by her into all the mysteries of intrigue 
and gallantry ; whilst his mother, who was a woman 
of uncommon fine understanding and virtue, was 
endeavouring by her letters and instructions to form 
him to good morals, virtue, and piety.
I believe he 
did not make the choice of Hercules, but chose 
Pleasure for his deity, and consequently made no 
figure in the woydd, and if I am not mistaken was 
unhappy, though born with every quality and a good 
fortune to make him otherwise.
You cannot think I mean to carry the comparison 
any further than that Mrs. will make you a 
cheerful, sensible, pleasing correspondent, and give 
scope to the style enjouee in your epistolary corre- 
spondence.
I trust you will acquit yourself well, and 
want no advice from me to urge you to perseverance 
in the difficult roads of knowledge and honour, nor, 
when attained, what conduct is necessary to procure 
and preserve the esteem and love of mankind, which 
are among the most solid advantages of life.
I can- 
not describe the pleasure it gives me to reflect that 
you have only to avoid stepping aside from your na- 
tural divsposition, and not to torture your character, 
and you are formed to be respected, and, what is of 
more value, to be loved by mankind as well as by 
your most partial friends.
"What you relate concerning does high credit 
to you, and some to him : 'tis happy indeed when the 
imprudences of young men serve so good a purpose 
61 
as to bring them to the love of virtue and of truth 
(and he seems in earnest, pray Heaven he may!).
It 
was not much to be expected that his education and 
company and way of hfe in this age should permit 
him to escape the follies he speaks of; but if they 
serve to show them selves to him in their true colours, 
and he loves virtue the more for it, I could almost 
say they will do him honour.
'Tis noble to reform, 
though not so great, so estimable as to be innocent, 
nor can ever be so happy.
James Smith.
The Rev. Henry Bryant to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Heydon, Nov. 11, 1782.
I congratulate you on your safe return from your 
little northern tour, and am sorry the weather 
proved so unfavourable as to spoil much of the 
pleasure of it.
I have sent you a specimen of my 
Lichenparellus.
I think it differs from yours, though 
perhaps yours may be right and mine wrong.
We have had a very wet, uncomfortable, sickly 
summer, and I suffered much from the epidemic 
influenza, consequently have done but little in the 
botanical way : the chief things I have found are 
these, viz.
Scirpus paucijiorus, Lightfoot ; Galium 
er^c^MW, Hudson ; ScuteUar-ia minor; Peucedanum 
Silaus ; Leonurus Cardiaca ; Riccia fluitans, and, I 
believe, Targionia.
Our turnips in Norfolk this season have suffered 
greatly from a species of black caterpillar ; thou- 
sands of acres have been destroyed by them, and no 
62 .
method could be found so efFcctually to stop their 
ravages as the employing women and children to 
pick them off, either by the day, or at three halfpence 
the pint.
I have taken great pains to find out the 
fly which produceth them, but to little purpose.
Albin has figured the caterpillar well, and says, 
" These black caterpillars, of the Ichneumon kind, 
were found feeding on the turnip-leaves in the be- 
ginning of September 1719, they being so numerous 
at that time about London, that they destroyed 
whole fields of them : about the latter end of Sep- 
tember they went into the earth, and spun them- 
selves up in a transparent case, and changed into a 
chrysalis, and in May following came forth a small 
Ichneumon fly, as in the figure annexed*." 
Now the figure of this fly is not of the Ichneumon 
kind ; it has only two wings, and belongs to the 
genus Musca ; but none of that genus spring from 
caterpillars, but from maggots.
I have offered and 
given premiums to many persons to pick up and 
bring me all the different sorts of flies which they 
find upon the turnips, but can gain no satisfactory 
knowledge about them ; they have all, or most of 
them, brought me a species of fly with four wings, 
with black and yellow intermixed upon their bodies 
and legs, which have been prodigiously numerous ; 
but I know not what it is, unless it be the Ten- 
thredo Rosce.
I have inclosed you two specimens, 
and beg you would get me the best information 
you can about it, and at the same time to find out, 
* Albin's History of English Insects, tab.
C2.
63 
if you can, what fly Albin's black caterpillar really 
produces.
Henry Bryant.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Edinburgh, Dec. 31, 1782.
Our Natural History Society goes on increasing.
I believe we shall have four annual presidents 
chosen ; if so, I hope to be one of them.
I have 
just given in a paper on the Pha^nomena of Vege- 
table Odours, which was well received.
I have 
spoken often in the Medical Society.
I am to 
have Dr. Hope's medal, but 'tis not yet come from 
London.
There were no other collections given in 
besides mine ; it has been examined, and thought 
worthy ; indeed Dr. Hope paid me very high com- 
pliments upon it.
January 3, 1783.
I have just been at the funeral of an acquaint- 
ance, whose death gives me great concern : he was 
the son of Dr. Reid of Glasgow, author of a cele- 
brated work on the human mind ; he was a young 
man of the first abilities and accomplishments, but 
of the greatest modesty and diffidence.
I had flat- 
tered myself with the hopes of being intimate with 
him ; this was his first winter here, and we have 
been much together.
He is the last of a numerous 
family, who have all died about the same age, just 
entering into life.
His father bears it like a phi- 
losopher.
I cannot help comparing him to a vene- 
64 
rable oak that has been bowed before many a blast, 
and stripped by degrees of its leafy honours, but 
that has now nothing to lose, and braves the fury 
of the storm inflexible.
The mother is not so tran- 
quil.
They are both in Edinburgh.
Many young men have had fevers, but have all 
recovered except Mr. Reid ; he died of a very pe- 
culiar disorder, which came on at the crisis of the 
fever ; it is called tympanites, and is a collection of 
air on the outside of the intestines in the cavity of 
the abdomen ; none of the Professors ever saw it 
before ; the hole in the intestine through which it 
passed was so small as to be found with dithculty 
on dissection.
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Smith to his Son.
Dear James, Norwich, Jan. 14, 1783.
I cannot help congratulating you on your ob- 
taining the botanic medal, and at the same time 
lamenting the loss of your friend Reid, and we 
daily return God thanks you are well : 7iot to fear 
infectious disorders Mr. Martineau says is the best 
preservative.
We are every where and every mo- 
ment surrounded by dangers ; and you and we are 
taught to trust in a good Providence for our pro- 
tection, always meaning that whatever we would 
obtain, whatever avoid, our own endeavours and 
prudence must be exerted for the purpose ; those 
very powers we have capable of contributing thereto 
65 
are part of the means, we may rationally suppose, 
that our Creator and Preserver designs and uses 
for those ends, the ends of his government in the 
world ; and not a sparrow falls to the ground without 
his permission.
Yours, 
James Smith.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
My dear Son, Norwich, Feb. 28, 1783.
We have had the pleasure of hearing you are 
well, and arc perfectly happy on the score of your 
health.
I need not add that we are so also upon 
the further addition to your academical honours, in 
being chosen first President of your Natural History 
Society in so distinguished a manner as will leave 
an undoubted testimony of your being its founder 
and supporter.
I cannot account for your having 
such a preference.
These distinctions I flatter 
myself are prognostics of the eminent rank you 
will by and by stand in, and the use you will be of 
to yourself, your friends, and to mankind, — pleasing 
reflections indeed to parents who have your hap- 
piness so much at heart.
We begin to think how near the month of May 
is ; and although we cannot expect you have formed 
your plan for leaving Edinburgh and coming to 
Norwich, I cannot help mentioning it, and that 
when you have thought ever so little upon it, you 
will give us the hint.
VOL.
I. F 
GG 
Our compliments wait on your friends, and our 
tender love on you.
I am, dear James, 
Your affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, March 6, 1783.
I cannot help expressing to you the dissatis- 
faction which I have experienced in my inquiries 
into the theory and practice of physic.
I really 
believe medicine, if it deserves the name of science 
at all in its present state, is in the most barbarous 
condition of any science, and only now emerging 
from the greatest darkness and absurdity.
It is 
commonly declared by all practitioners, that theory 
is nonsense, and that experience, that is empiricism, 
is everything.
Cullen's theory is visibly going into 
the same state of contempt as Boerhaave's has 
been reduced to, and his lectures are by no means 
consistent with it, though admirable as mere prac- 
tical lectures.
These considerations and some other 
have induced me to attend Browne this winter; and 
I am happy in having done it, for his system and 
view of the human ceconomy are certainly the most 
philosophic of any, and are gaining ground in a 
wonderful manner: perhaps, however, he may have 
only his day.
He has many of the most respectable 
pupils, and behaves very well to us.
I am happy to 
have procured the admission of my friend Dr. Brous- 
67 
sonet of Montpellier as an honorary member of the 
Medical Society : he was admitted unanimously on 
my recommendation J of which I am not a little vain.
The very day of his admission I received a letter 
from him expressing his desire of that honour, and 
offering to procure in return my admission into 
some of the French academies, of which I gladly 
accepted.
I also procured him an honorary seat in 
the Natural History Society ; and I believe he will 
be admitted to the Philosophical Society, which 
Is composed of the first literati in Scotland.
Lord 
Kaimes (of whose death I suppose you have heard) 
was president.
I cannot help sending you a copy of a letter 
which I received, as president of the Natural Hi- 
story Society, from Lord Buchan, on his admission 
to it.
Your affectionate and dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
To J.
E. Smith, Esq., President of the Society for 
the investigation of Natural History.
Sir, 
The notification you have done me the honour 
to transmit to me of my election as an honorary 
member of your literary association for the inves- 
tigation of natural history demands an early and 
respectful acknowledgement.
I give it with alacrity 
and gratitude.
From my earliest infancy all my thoughts have 
F 2 
68 
been set on public good, and I have thought no 
sacrifice too great for its promotion.
I consider your 
association as connected with the darling occupa- 
tion of my life, and your society will find in me a 
sincere and active friend.
I know the merits of 
your professor; he has been an object of my esteem 
and literary regard for eighteen years past ; and I am 
persuaded that you will find in him an assiduous and 
successful commentator on the subjects which your 
youthful ardour may engage you to explore.
I entreat of you, Sir, to convey to your brethren 
the thanks of a member of the great republic of 
letters, who, at no advanced age, begins to grow old 
in the service of that community which seems to 
have adopted him more heartily than any other*.
I am, Sir, with regard, 
Your obliged and obedient humble servant, 
(Signed) Buchan.
Edinburgh, 1783.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith, 
Mr. BickerstethbS, Kir by Lonsdale, 
My dear Son, May 18, 1783.
I am very certain you are able to form some judge- 
ment of what we felt when we heard you had been 
so very ill ; indeed, my dear James, a very, very great 
* This alludes to his lordship's disappointment in not being 
elected one of the sixteen peers, on the death of Lord Breadal- 
bane.
69 
share of the happiness that may remain to us to be 
enjoyed in the rest of the years we have to continue 
in this world depends upon your life, and the health 
and happiness you will enjoy in it.
No child cer- 
tainly was ever dearer to parents than you are to 
us, for every reason that can affect the human soul: 
you are seldom absent from our thoughts ; you are 
the dear object of our fondest wishes, the never- 
forgotten subject of our prayers to Heaven.
'Tts 
not for our own happiness in the expected enjoy- 
ment of your much valued company, 'tis for your 
own sake, we so earnestly pray for your life and 
health : we forebode there is a noble and pleasing 
career for you to run, in which your happiness and 
your honour will be great ; and we flatter ourselves 
you will be useful to your fellow-creatures.
With 
these hopes, these prospects, and these tender sen- 
timents, we must be, we are, inexpressibly sensible 
to everything that relates to your health and safety, 
and must urge with all the force in our power that 
you will run no sort of risk of either on your 
journey home, nor suffer any temptation to bo- 
tanize, to see the lakes, mountains, or any other 
natural curiosity, lead you into the least possibility 
of taking cold; but come home as soon as you can 
safely, and bless your dear affectionate mother and 
me with a sight of you.
Mr. Windham is appointed secretary to Lord 
Northington, lord lieutenant of Ireland ; and he 
has appointed Mr. Repton, your friend, his secre- 
tary, which you will be glad to hear.
Adieu, my 
dear!
May it please the gracious God to confirm 
70 
your health, and bring you safe and well to the em- 
braces of your most affectionate parents, and the 
bosom of your family !
I am, your ever affectionate 
James Smith.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Kirby Lonsdale, May 23, 1783.
Your most valuable letter reached me yesterday.
I cannot sufficiently express my gratitude for the 
sentiments it contains, nor the feelings I experienced 
on reading it.
How much soever I may fall short 
of the flattering height of honour and happiness 
which your paternal partiality has set before me, I 
hope, if I can trust my own heart, I shall never be 
deficient in a return of affection and duty to those 
parents in whom I am so peculiarly happy, and to 
whom I am indebted for the foundation of every 
good inclination which it has pleased God to help 
me to cherish.
You will by this time have received 
letters from me, and will see I continued to mend 
as fast as possible.
Nothing can exceed the at- 
tention and genuine hospitality which I experience 
here.
I shall make no visits on my return, for by 
that time every mile will seem ten till I see you 
at Norwich.
I am, your dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
71 
The whole foregoing narrative, in familiar letters 
to his parents, discovers the humility and tender- 
ness of a child towards them ; while by the sole in- 
fluence of personal character and conduct he at 
once made his way into the best society, and 
planted himself in a niche in the temple of science, 
when others, with more apparent advantages, were 
consuming their time in " chinking useless keys, and 
aiming feeble pushes against the inexorable doors." 
He spent about two years in that accomplished 
community, in a well regulated course of useful dis- 
cipline and studies, and in the agreeable and im- 
proving commerce of gentlemen and scholars ; in a 
society, where emulation without envy, ambition 
without jealousy, contention without animosity, in- 
cited industry and awakened genius ; where a liberal 
pursuit of knowledge, and a genuine freedom of 
thought, was raised, encouraged and pushed forward 
by example, by commendation, and by authority.
Of the warmth and goodness of his heart, his 
early letters bear unequivocal testimony, as well as 
of that peculiar tendency in his nature to form at- 
tachments, which he carried with him through life : 
and wherever these were placed, nothing on his part 
ever changed their force, he thought no sacrifices 
too great, and no expressions too strong, to attest 
his regard.
In these partialities he was influenced by his love 
of genuine nature, and the appearance of confidence 
and dependence upon him.
" My heart," he says 
in a letter written in 1783, "is formed for social 
enjoyments ; but how often have its warmest affec- 
72 
tions been torn asunder when just most fully deve- 
loped !
I shall hardly ever dare to fix, for fear of a 
disappomtment." 
This is the language, and such are the feelings of 
ingenuous youth : but such a heart, whatever re- 
solves the head might make, must seek its happiness 
in new affections, and his were not long condemned 
to solitude, or withered by despair.
The following letter, written the next year to his 
earliest friend and near relation, (of whose connec- 
tion with him he was always justly proud, and whose 
friendship lasted unimpaired through all the vicis- 
situdes of absence, habits, and a different clime,) 
may give a lively idea of that ardent temperament 
which has just been described.
Mr. J.
E. Smith to N.
E. Kindersley, Esq* 
Tinnevelley, 1784.
Why, dearest friend, do you think I am changed ?
How can you blaspheme the name of reason, so as 
* Author of the following woi'k : 
" Specimens of Hindoo Literature, consisting of Translations 
from the Tamoul Language of some Hindoo Works of Morality 
and Imagination ; with explanatory Notes, to which arc 2^refxed 
introductory Remarks on the Mythology, Literature, ^c.
of the 
Hindoos.
By N.
E. Kindersley, Esq., of the Hon. East India 
Company's civil service on the Madras establishment: 1794.
8vo.
S35 pages, — This work, by a most worthy and esteemed 
relation, is very curious, and appears to be extremely well exe- 
cuted.
It will gratify the inquirers into the Hindoo religion, 
and the manners, ideas and literature of that ancient extraordi- 
nary people.
It is a beautiful edition, and has five curious 
plates, which are not mentioned in the title-page." — Mr. Smith's 
common-j)lace book.
73 
to suppose she can have taken away my honesty 
and openness of heart ?
Thank God, this is not the 
case.
— How often do I think of the days of our 
childhood, when we have so often by sympathy 
retired from the social scene, to relieve ourselves 
from that gentle restraint which the presence of our 
partners or friends (though the most indulgent in 
the world) laid us under, to pour out all our 
thoughts on each other's bosom, to communicate 
our little discontents or our joys, our childish ob- 
servations, and our innocent merriment ; but chiefly 
to indulge that sympathy of soul which appeared 
so early, and which may Heaven still cherish !
How often have we been forced to have recourse 
to the mute expression of looks or embraces, when 
our young bosoms swelled with feelings which our 
artless tongues could not utter !
My heart exults 
with conscious dignity at the idea.
I recollect with 
no less pleasure the few but most happy days we 
have passed together in the course of our riper 
youth.
A thousand Norwich and Yarmouth scenes arise 
to my mind ; — our evening walk by the sea- shore ; 
our more cheerful excursion in the Yarmouth cart ; 
our dancing parties, and the conversations which 
passed after we had left them ; our last sad parting ; 
— can we forget these ?
If we do not forget them, 
can we ever think otherwise of each other than we 
do ?
Let us then not suspect each other, or if we 
do, let us communicate our suspicions.
— Friend- 
ship is an intellectual marriage, and the same turn 
of mind and character which makes us lastingly 
74 
happy in the latter condition, can alone make us so 
in the former.
I lately received yours of May the 29th, and most 
heartily congratulate you on your advancement.
May you ever be happy, and escape the snares which 
surround you !
I do not fear it.
Surely I knew 
your heart once ; and surely such a heart cannot be 
corrupted while there is a Providence watching over 
the well-disposed; and that there is, I would not give 
up to attain the literary reputation of all the inge- 
nious perverters of reason that ever lived.
Still you 
express a fear of my becoming a literary coxcomb 
or a fastidious man of the world !
Read the first 
part of this sheet; it w^as written many months ago: 
I have looked it over in many different moods : I 
now deliberately send it you.
You may perhaps 
smile at it, think it boyish, too warm to be sincere : 
but I will not suppose such things ; if it gives you 
half the pleasure in reading it that it did me in wri- 
ting, I shall be happy indeed.
I am your, 
J. E.
S. 
In another letter he tells his cousin, "What a 
pleasing picture does your letter give me of your 
mind !
I am fully sensible of the value of a true 
friend, and will always be quite open with you.
I 
have been happier in my friendships than most peo- 
ple : but with you, and in one instance besides, I've 
enjoyed that true union of hearts and mind which 
is the essence of friendship ; I mean in an intimacy 
I have formed with a young man of my own profes- 
75 
sion.
We became acquainted at Edinburgh.
Wc 
must soon be separated, and I shall be afraid to 
form another so close connexion." 
The subjoined letter is addressed to the friend 
here spoken of.
Dear Batty, 
You are, perhaps, like me, too apt to regret past 
pleasures, and neglect present ones.
This disposi- 
tion should not be too much indulged ; for when 
the object of our regret is really important, our di- 
stress might be increased to an intolerable degree.
You, my dear friend, have in your own power an 
inestimable source of happiness, in the amiable sen- 
sibility which you possess in so eminent a degree ; 
yet this choice gift of Heaven may occasion its pos- 
sessor as much misery without the direction of rea- 
son, as it would happiness with it.
It is a most discouraging thing to a young man 
entering into life, — his heart, without reserve or 
suspicion, overflowing with the "milk of human 
kindness," — to be told by those who have gone 
before him, that his ideas of friendship, love, ho- 
nour, are merely romantic, and not to be realized 
in a commerce with the world ; that there, self-in- 
terest, ambition, avarice, and lust, reign with abso- 
lute sway ; that those feelings which (if he be not 
a villain) have chiefly contributed to his happiness 
hitherto, must now be restrained by prudence, and 
be perfectly obedient to the dictates of interest and 
worldly advantage.
They tell him, that now 
" The wild romance of life is done ; 
Its real history is begun." 
76 
I would fain hope this is exaggerated : not tliat I 
would by any means reject the use of due caution 
and prudence \t\ forming friendships.
I am perfectly 
convinced that on this depends the existence of 
those very feelings ; and perhaps the persons who 
compose most of the worthlessness of the world, 
are those who for want of this proper care have 
had their dearest hopes and expectations deceive 
them.
Let us therefore, when we hear these com- 
plaints, carefully consider from whom they come ; 
whether from such an one as I have just mentioned, 
or from a person, who, having sacrificed his own 
feelings to interest, wishes to reduce all mankind to 
the same level ; or from one of a fretful, peevish tem- 
per, who expects too much from others, far more 
than he will grant them in his turn ; or, lastly, from 
one who has naturally no feeling at all.
I trust there is more virtue in the world than we 
are generally told of.
Those lovely dispositions that 
glow in the youthful heart, may perhaps be gene- 
rally in some degree concealed by various means 
amid the busy pursuits of active life, and sometimes 
may be clouded by a degree of ambition or self-in- 
terest.
But in the decline of life we see the social 
feelings revive : then old friendships are renewed ; 
children are doated on ; a thousand little offices of 
love are mutually performed; and I confess I do 
not know an object of more respect and admiration, 
instead of contempt and ridicule, than an old per- 
son taking pleasure in recollecting and relating the 
scenes of his past pleasures, and cherishing every 
idea of his former friends.
I have indulged myself 
in a little prolixity on this subject ; but I hope you 
77 
will excuse it, as I trust it is an interesting one to 
both of us.
Nor am I afraid you should be severe 
in your criticisms on what I have said.
I attend the infirmary with much pleasure, there 
is so much room for observation and reasoning, and 
I have got over the disgust.
Dr. Hope honours me with his notice, attention, 
and assistance.
The more I see of that excellent 
man, the more I adore him.
I admire his botanical 
lectures ; his delivery is agreeable, with as many "be- 
hoves" as Dr. Walker ; his politeness and condescen- 
sion unparalleled.
How happy should I be to call 
you out of bed in a morning to go to him !
Tho' 
I cannot do this, something unavoidably takes me 
down Robinson's Close; and I cannot help looking 
at that gloomy dwelling which I have so often vi- 
sited with a most cheerful step when it contained 
my friend.
Your fine ears would be dreadfully 
shocked by the instrument used by Dr. Hope to call 
us together.
I am your faithful and aft'ectionate Friend, 
J. E.
Smith.
To the same.
God bless you, my dear Batty, for writing me so 
early so kind a letter !
You've amply repaid me for 
my trouble as you call it.
You must come the very 
first of October and be examined a little.
But why, 
my delicate, scrupulous friend, do you say so much 
about trouble and obligation to me, who am far 
more obliged to you ?
78 
Nothing would, I think, be too much to serve the 
friend I really loved : yet I would avoid the extreme 
which some very good-natured people run into, 
who ^XQ f etchers and carriers to all the world.
Your 
partial opinion of me shows your own good heart.
Indeed, Batty, I must confess I am capable of very 
strong attachments, and sometimes perhaps of too 
strong dislikes ; one often takes prejudices which 
time either confirms or removes.
When I first was 
with you, I was prejudiced in your favour : I soon 
thought I saw you had feeling (the foundation of 
all that 's good) ; and soon, that I saw real merit 
through that amiable modesty and diffidence which 
are so great an ornament to the brightest abilities.
I determined to be more acquainted with you.
I 
saw your friendship was better worth my cultivating 
than that of the more forward or splendid ; and as 
I have known you better, I have bound you to my 
heart as an inestimable jewel.
Think not this is all 
pure disinterestedness : the first prejudices we form 
concerning persons and things border on weakness ; 
we are therefore peculiarly happy to have them 
confirmed ; for the human mind is confessedly more 
tenacious of its weaknesses than of anything else 
that belongs to it.
I offer you, my Batty, a warm, an 
honest heart : if I had more ability to be of use to 
you, I should be more happy.
I shall trouble you 
as often as you can be of use to me next winter.
Come then, my friend, let friendship give a relish 
to our studies and heighten the pleasure of our re- 
lations : let us assist each other in avoiding the 
snares of the profligate, and the still more dange- 
79 
rous solicitations of the good-natured and inconsi- 
derate ; both of whom, though for opposite reasons, 
wish to make all mankind like themselves.
One 
method of obtaining this end is to represent all 
mankind as being already so, to question the ex- 
istence of any virtue, and to talk of the appearance 
of it as grimace.
This is done, more or less openly 
or artfully, by all who leave its paths.
I have seen 
many such characters ; particularly one, since I 
came here, whose machinations I have carefully 
observed.
The Italians say Volto sciolto e pensieri 
stretti : one may be as free and compliable as pos- 
sible in unimportartt matters, and yet inflexible in 
things of consequence, without incurring the charge 
of formality ; whereas hypocrites are always pecu- 
liarly nice about the smallest matters.
But where am I going ?
How do I pester you with 
my scrawling!
I WTOte the above, in the fullness of 
my heart, immediately on the receipt of your letter, 
which I have read over and over with the greatest 
pleasure.
Believe me yours, 
J. E.
Smith.
These are specimens of his pure affections and 
high moral worth, at a period of life when they 
may be expected to show a vigorous growth ; but 
that unsuspicious simplicity and depth of feeling 
which marked his early years was never obliterated; 
and if it was a failina:, undoubtedlv it was one 
" which lean'd to virtue's side." Inclined by nature 
or a happy mental temperament to duty and inte- 
80 
grity, It must be acknowledged, nevertheless, that 
Sir James was indebted greatly to an education 
among those who placed the standard of virtue upon 
higher ground than usual ; who considered errors 
which too frequently, through false indulgence, 
through indolence, through extreme folly, are over- 
looked as pardonable or inevitable because they 
are common, as evils to be carefully avoided, be- 
cause they surely lead to misery.
The high principle of rectitude which appears in 
the next letter, from his relative of the same age, is 
worthy of record imd imitation, and confers honour 
on both parties.
TV.
E. Kindersley, Esq. to Mr. J.
E. Smith.
My dearest Friend, Tinnevelley, 19th June.
I had the pleasure to write to you a few days ago, 
but now resume my pen to attempt to express the 
uncommon satisfaction I received two days ago in 
reading a letter from you.
It gave me a more than usual pleasure, not only 
to see the very great confidence you repose in me, 
but more especially as I am now assured you are 
not one of those innumerable multitudes of young 
men who are insensible to religion and virtue ; so 
much greater in number (beyond all comparison) 
than the good, that you will not, I hope, condemn 
me as uncharitable, when I thought it highly pro- 
bable even you were one of them.
I congratulate 
you on your happiness with the greatest pleasure, 
and thank Providence that the person who had the 
81 
greatest share in my friendship of any man in the 
world, is at the same time of my way of thinking 
in matters of rehgion.
In my last I informed you of my present situa- 
tion, and that I was much pleased with it.
I am 
assistant to Mr. Eyles Irwin, whose Travels over- 
land, and his Eastern Eclogues, you may have read*.
The Nabob's countries being assigned over to the 
Company in the year l/Bl, for five years, has 
given them the absolute sovereignty of it for that 
time.
This district is the most southern of the 
Nabob's country, and is one of the largest and 
finest.
Mr. Irwin is intrusted with the entire go- 
vernment of the revenue, and has with that all the 
judicial authority in his hands of a country 
miles in circumference.
He is exceedingly worthy 
of his trust, and is perhaps the brightest example of 
integrity and zeal in office that ever graced India.
He might with the utmost ease, and secrecy too, 
make one or two hundred thousand pounds, but he 
will not make a sixpence beyond his pay ; — a mar- 
ried man too, with a family.
Flis whole time is taken 
up in making the country produce such a revenue, 
and establishing such a government, as may do credit 
to the Company's management.
You see there are 
some honest men even on the corrupt shores of 
Hindostan ; — would to God there were enough to 
make me charge you with uncharitableness in your 
opinion of our general depravity !
Under such a 
*Also author of Adventures in a Voyage up the Red Sea, and 
in a Journey through the Desarts of Thebais.
— See Atimuil 7?f- 
gisterfor 1780, p.
40-54.
VOL.
I. G 
82 
man you will not think I have much reason to ar- 
rogate merit to myself, if I am micorrupt.
Indeed, 
James, I never doated on money ; and were I not 
influenced by any motive of conscience, I believe 
the principle of honour would prevent my being 
very rapacious ; though perhaps it would not of 
itself make me so rigid as I now feel myself obliged 
to be.
I have caught the honourable infection from my 
superior, and enter into the interests of the Com- 
pany in this quarter, and into the prosperity of the 
provinces, with a force very uncommon.
I have a 
great deal to do, but I do it with pleasure, as it is 
business of consequence ; and as I find that with 
ordinary abilities, a degree of activity and diligence, 
with good dispositions^ and great power to perform 
your wishes, a country like this may be made happy 
in itself, and productive to its owners.
It has been the want of strict integrity that has 
hurt the English name more than any one thing.
The black people, though corrupt to a man, have the 
highest opinion of integrity.
They consider Irwin 
here as a wonder ; and did they not know his abili- 
ties and labours in this country, they would believe 
he was crazy for not accepting the presents brought 
him.
The rents are now as regularly collected as 
in Europe ; a thing before unknown.
It was always 
the custom for the Nabob to let his country at a 
high rent ; but what with the constant elopement 
of renters, and the many hands the revenue passed 
through, the Nabob was happy with one half, and 
often I believe a quarter, of the nominal rent.
You 
83 
will easily apprehend that I am now in a way of 
making a great deal of money ; for Mr. Irwin has 
an entire confidence in me, and leaves much of the 
collection of the rents, as well as decision respect- 
ing disputed lands, &c.
in my hands : but I hope 
you will as easily believe that I cannot descend to 
such dirty ignoble means of enriching myself.
I 
do assure you, upon my honour, that I never yet 
received a bribe in a7iy shape whatever ; though 
in the six months I have been here, I.
may safely 
say I could have made at least 1000/.
sterling, were 
I bent upon it.
With integrity and diligence we 
are almost sure of succeeding.
I can lay my hand 
upon my heart, and solemnly assert that what I 
have, has been acquired as honestly and humanely 
as that of your worthy father.
The people here are 
surprised, that have made me offers; however, I 
find the good effects of it.
Mr. Irwin knows that 
the great powers he has intrusted me with are ex- 
erted for the public good : the people respect those 
orders, and admire those decisions, which they know 
are not dictated for private views.
And the poorest 
(a thing very uncommon in India) have the confi- 
dence to complain of injuries from the rich, because 
they know they must have justice, and need not 
apprehend a wrong decision from any thing but 
inability.
Your mind is too noble not to conceive with 
ease, that being looked upon in this hght is much 
more satisfactory to my pride (if you please) than 
the possession of money, bought at the expense of 
a breach of my solemn engagements with my em- 
G 2 
84 
ployers, and the reward of neglect in doing justice, 
if not of absolute injustice.
My pay is very hand- 
some for a young man ; I keep a palanquin, and I 
indulge myself with a handsome horse to ride, — an 
exercise I have found of great benefit.
The Tinnevelly country is a very delightful one ; 
the heat for some time, till the rains set in, is great 
beyond imagination.
I live at a beautiful garden 
on the banks of the river, which adds to a most 
charming prospect.
At forty miles distance are 
inaccessible hills, but very apparent.
The rain first 
falls on these hills, which are hid under clouds for 
some days, which is a sign that the river will soon 
be full ; for the water runs down with such astonish- 
ing rapidity, that I can assure you, from my own 
frequent knowledge, that the river which in the 
morning was not a foot deep, will before noon be 
impassable by men, and so rapid that bullocks, &c., 
which in crossing, at first were only half below 
water, have before they got over been carried away 
and often drowned in the stream.
This river is called 
the Tummer bunny.
The water is very sacred among 
the Bramins, and is the great source of the fertility 
of this province.
You can hardly think how inter- 
ested I am in the cultivation and prosperity of this 
country.
I take the greatest pleasure in seeing 
the river fill and spread itself into tanks, ponds, 8ic.
which it does in two or three hours.
Before the rains fall on these immense moun- 
tains, the weather is so hot, and the earth so dry, 
as to afford a wonderful phaenomenon that I have 
often been witness to.
In this season I have seen 
85 
immense fires on the inaccessible mountains, which 
are occasioned by the friction of the bambo trees 
against one another, which always happens in high 
winds ; — so dry is this country before the rain.
The knowledge I have of the people makes one 
often smile at the ideas of Europeans concerning In- 
dians.
I assure you that the "innocent Indians" are 
the most depraved people in the world that I know of; 
and there are not more impudent^, debauched, arch- 
villains than the " holy harmless sons of Brama :" 
they are insolent and tyrannical to a degree.
I 
had a little adventure with them the other day.
While we have the Nabob's country, we pay all the 
church expenses, which the superstition of these 
people has made very great.
A great feast is now 
coming on, for which they got leave to cut a certain 
kind of wood.
A single tree of this was in the 
garden of a gentleman, which I would not suffer 
them to cut.
They then all shut themselves up in 
the pagoda, and from the top of it held out a flag 
of defiance and mutiny.
They charged the people 
to rebel, and all the shops to be shut up.
They 
were obeyed in the last instance.
Mr. Irwin was 
up the country about fifty miles distant.
I rode 
over to a place called the Cutchery (the court of 
business and justice), of which I am, in Mr. Irwin's 
absence, sole president and governor.
In my way I 
was saluted with more exclamations of mutiny.
I 
sent for the Bramins, who said they would come 
down and submit if I would give them this tree.
I 
would make no composition ; but told them to go 
back, and I would follow them in fiv«" minutes : 
86 
when if the flag of mutiny was not taken down, 
and the pagoda door opened, I would put on the 
Company's seal and starve them.
They saw I was 
resolved, and instantly obeyed.
Under one of their 
own princes they would have succeeded.
An extraordinary event requires my presence at 
the fort of a polygar, where the commander-in- 
chief of the army to the southward is arrived.
I 
am to endeavour to prevent the matter coming to 
any extremities, the man being under the Company's 
protection.
This may be the subject of another 
letter.
Till then believe me, w^ith increased fervency.
My dear Cousin, yours most affectionately, 
Nathaniel Edward Kinderley*.
* The Kinderley family having been mentioned in a former 
page, it may not be uninteresting in this place to relate the fol- 
lowing anecdote, which an old servant who had lived fifty- two 
years with Mrs. Kinderley and her daughter Mrs. Smith, fre- 
quently repeated as a fact with which she was well acquainted, 
and in part a witness of.
-The Rev. John Kinderley 's con- 
nexion with Scotland had procured him the acquaintance of 
several families in the North, among whom Lord D was 
one of his most intimate friends.
This nobleman had met with a 
lady at Bath, both young and attractive, and who passed for the 
widow of an officer.
His lordship becoming attached to tliis 
lady, he married her, and they soon after left England to reside 
on the Continent.
Here, after a few years, she was seized with 
an alarming illness, and earnestly desired her lord, in case of her 
death, that she might be conveyed to England and interred in a 
particular church, which she named.
Upon this event taking place, 
Lord D • accompanied the body in the same ship, and, upon 
landing at Harwich, the chest in which the remains of his lady 
were inclosed excited the suspicions of the Custom-house officers, 
who insisted upon ascertaining its contents.
Being a good deal 
shocked with such a threat.
Lord D proposed that it 
87 
should be removed to the church, and oj3ened in the presence of 
the clergyman of the parish, who could vouch for its containing 
what he assured them was within : — accordingly the proposal was 
yielded to, and the body conveyed to the appointed place, when, 
upon opening the chest, the attending minister recognised, in the 
features of the deceased, his own wife.' and comnnunicated the un- 
welcome discovery to his lordship on the spot.
It ajipeared, 
upon further conversation, that Lady D had been married 
against her inclination to this person, and, determining to separate 
entirely from him, had gone he knew not whither, and under an 
assumed name and character had become the wife of Lord D , 
The two husbands followed her remains to the grave the next 
day ; and on the same evening Lord D in great distress 
of mind, attended by one servant, came to his friend's house in 
Norwich for consolation.
It was winter, and about six o'clock 
when he arrived.
Mr. Kinderley was called out to speak to a 
stranger, and returning to his wife, desired her to leave them 
together, pretending that a stranger from Scotland was arrived 
on particular business.
Lord D sat up with Mr. Kin- 
derley the whole night, to unbosom his affliction and extraordi- 
nary fate to his friend, and at day-break, in order to avoid any 
interview with his host's family, for which his spirits were un- 
equal, he departed.
The following affecting letter, given to Mr. Kinderley by the 
Rev. Thomas Pyle of Lynn, although it contains nothing relative 
to the family, yet being written by so celebrated a man as Dean 
Swift, may be found not void of interest, and has not befoi'e ap- 
peared in print.
The Rev. Dr.
Jonathan Swift to the Rev. Thomas Pyle, Lynn, 
Norfolk.
" Sir, London, Dec. 26, 1711.
" That you may not be surprised with a letter from a person 
utterly unknown to you, I will immediately tell you the occasion 
of it.
The lady who lived near two years in your neighbour- 
hood, and whom you were so kind sometimes to visit, under the 
name of Mrs. Smyth, was Mrs. Ann Long, sister to Sir James 
Long, and niece of Colonel Strangways.
She was of as good a 
private family as most in England, and had every valuable qua- 
88 
lity of body and mind, that could make a lady loved and es- 
teemed.
Accordingly she was always valued here above most 
of her sex, and by the most distinguish'd persons.
But by the 
unkindness of her friends, and the generosity of her own nature, 
and depending upon the death of a very old grandmother, 
which did not happen till it was too late, she contracted some 
debts that made her uneasy here, and in order to clear them, 
was content to retire unknown to your tovvn, where I fear her 
death has been hastened by melancholy, and perhaps the want 
of such assistance as she might have found here.
I have thought 
fit to signifie this to you, partly to let you know how valuable a 
person you have lost, but chiefly to desire, that you will please 
to bury her in some part of your church, near a wall, where 
a plain marble stone may be fixed, as a poor monument for one 
who deserved so well ; and which, if God sends me life, I hope 
one day to place there, if no other of her friends will think fit 
to do it.
I had the honor of an intimate acquaintance with her ; 
and was never so sensibly touched with any one's death as her's.
Neither did I ever know a person of either sex, with more 
virtues or fewer infirmities : the only one she had, which was 
the neglect of her own affairs, arising wholly from the goodness 
of her temper.
I write not this to you at all as a secret, but am 
content your town should know what an excellent person they 
have had among them.
If you visited her any short time before 
her death, or knew any particulars about it, or of the state of 
her mind, or the nature of her disease ; I beg you will be so 
obliging to inform me.
For the letter we have seen from her 
poor maid is so imperfect, by her grief for the death of so good 
lady, that it only tells me the time of her death : and your 
letter may, if you please, be directed to Dr. Swift, and put under 
a cover, which cover may be directed to Erasmus Lewis, Esq.
at the Earl of Dartmouth's Office at Whitehall.
" I hope you will forgive this trouble for the occasion of it, 
and give some allowances to so great a loss, not only to me, 
but to all who have any regard for every perfection that human 
nature can possess ; and if in any way I can serve or oblige you, 
I shall be glad of the opportunity of obeying your commands.
" I am, Sir, Your most humble servant, 
" J.
SwiVT." 
-^ 
X..^ t^-^v^.^<^.
^^-^•--?-t c3e 
-j;r 
//^^T' 
89 
CHAPTER II.
Sir J.
E. Smith leaves Edinburgh.
— Lodges in Great WindmiU- 
street, London, — Dr. John Hunter.
— Sir J.
Banks informs him 
that the library and collections of Linnceus are upon sale.
— - 
Writes to Dr. Acrel.
— Correspondence with his Father.
— Letters 
of Dr. Acrelt and catalogues of the collection.
— Agrees to bc' 
come the purchaser.
— Letters f-om Mr. Pitchford, Dr. Wither- 
ing, Dr. Stokes, Professor J.
Sibthorp.
— Rev. H.
Bryant.
— 
Chosen Fellorv of the Royal Society.
— Letter from Dr. J.
Hope.
— Preparation for going abroad.
Upon leaving Edinburgh, Sir James's next object 
was to fix himself in London for the purpose of 
attending the great school of anatomy of which Dr.
John Hunter was the head, and to avail himself of 
the medical instruction of Dr. Pitcairn ; and on the 
25th September, 1 783, he took lodgings with his 
fellow-student, Mr. Batty, in Great Windmill -street, 
at the top of the Haymarket.
" Mr. Baillie," he 
tells his father, " Dr. Hunter's nephew, is very civil 
to us ; but we are charmed with John Hunter, he 
alone is worth coming to hve in London for.
I 
shall devote myself," he continues, " chiefly to dis- 
section as long as I find it necessary, and afterwards, 
I believe, St. Bartholomew's hospital will be worth 
my notice.
I will confess that at my first seeing 
the dissecting-room, which is abominable and horrid 
beyond conception, I found it very easy to persuade 
90 
myself that I could do without being any thing 
more than a spectator there*." Nevertheless, he 
appears to have settled with great comfort to him- 
self, and to the satisfaction of his friends.
Of his conduct while he resided here, no better 
testimony can be given than that which immediately 
follows from a man of strong sense and principle, 
still more anxious about the reputation of his son 
than for his worldly advancement.
* These were the sensations which revolted him at first, although 
they abated as his curiosity was awakened to the study ; and thus 
has he not unfrequently contrasted them, in the vivid language 
of the Seventh Promenade of Rousseau : — 
" Quel appareil affrevix qu'un amphitheatre anatomique, des 
cadavres puants, de baveuses et livides chairs, du sang, des in- 
testines degoutans, des squelettes affreux, des vapeurs pestilen- 
tielles !
Ce n'est pas la, sur ma parole, que j'ira chercher mes 
amusemens.
" Brillantes fleurs, email des pres, ombrages frais, ruisseaux, 
bosquets, verdure, venez purifier mon imagination salie par 
tous ces hideux objets." 
In a letter written at this time to his father, he tells him, " We 
have dined with Dr. Osborn, the colleague of Dr. Denman ; he 
is a man of rank in the literary world.
At his house we met the 
famous, or rather infamous Dr. Shebbeare, a most entertaining 
and lively companion ; the best teller of a story I ever heard, 
beyond all comparison ; but a most malicious violent-tempered 
man : being an Irishman, his most predominant hatred is against 
the Scotch.
He can counterfeit any dialect whatever ; his Scotch 
is the most accurate I ever heard out of that country.
It is cu- 
rious to observe (as I remarked to my companion at the time) 
in these gross strong-featured minds, as in a microscope, the 
workings of those passions and dispositions, which in common 
characters are so faintly and confusedly marked, that we can 
seldom trace them to their sources, or observe their various con- 
nections and dependencies upon one another." 
91 
My dear Son, ^^ .
, ^^ 
•' Norwich, Nov. 24, 1783, 
In regard to your mode of living, it is as mode- 
rate as can be, and you seem to be very good ma- 
nagers ; you may be allowed more of course for 
diversions and amusements, which I persuade my- 
self will not go beyond the bounds of prudence and 
moderation, still less of virtue.
Nothing can be a 
greater cause of joy to me than that a son, in whom 
I have from his infancy had so much pleasure and 
comfort, and on whom my firmest hopes of happi- 
ness in my declining years are founded, gives me 
no anxiety and uneasiness, though without control, 
at a critical time of Hfe ; situated in the midst 
of all the fascinating pleasures, and the most al- 
luring temptations, that the most sumptuous, most 
luxurious, and most vicious and corrupt capital 
in Europe, or perhaps in the whole world, can pro- 
duce.
May the Almighty God protect him in every 
danger, and deliver him from the evil of every 
temptation !
I am, your affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
Dr. Pitcairn entertained a warm friendship for 
his pupil, and considered him remarkably acute in 
the detection and nature of internal diseases ; and 
there seems little doubt that the practice of physic 
would have become the pursuit of his after life, but 
for the unexpected events which put him in posses- 
sion of the collections of Linnaeus.
His passion for natural history continuing para- 
92 
mount in his mind, the house of Sir Joseph Banks 
was at all times the place of resort most attractive 
to him ; and here he first heard that the museum 
and library of the celebrated Swede were upon sale.
Upon the demise of young Linnseus, Dr. Acrel, 
Professor of Medicine at Upsal, had written to D .
Engelhart, who was then in London, offering the 
whole collection of books, manuscripts, and natural 
history, to Sir Joseph Banks, for the sum of 1000 
guineas.
" It happened," adds Sir James, "that I 
breakfasted with Sir Joseph upon the day the letter 
arrived, which was the 23rd of December, 1783; 
and he told me of the offer he had, saying he should 
decline it ; and, handing me the letter to read, ad- 
vised me strongly to make the purchase, as a thing 
suitable to my taste, and which would do me ho- 
nour." Being thus encouraged by Sir Joseph, he 
went immediately to Dr. Engelhart, with whom he 
had been intimately acquainted at Edinburgh, and 
made his desire known to him; and they both 
wrote the same day to Professor Acrel, Dr. Engel- 
hart to recommend his friend, and the other desiring 
a catalogue of the whole collection, and telling him 
if it answered his expectations he would be the 
purchaser at the price fixed.
On the following day the young student of physic 
made these occurrences known to his father, and 
thus entreated his assistance : — 
Honoured Sir, Dec. 24, 1783.
You may have heard that the young Linnaeus is 
lately dead : his father's collections and library and 
93 
his own are now to be sold ; the whole consists of 
an immense hortus siccus, with duplicates, insects, 
shells, corals, materia medica, fossils, a very fine 
library, all the unpublished manuscripts ; in short, 
of every thing they were possessed of relating to 
natural history and physic : the whole has just 
been offered to Sir Joseph Banks for 1000 guineas, 
and he has declined buying it.
The offer was made 
to him by my friend Dr. Engelhart, at the desire of 
a Dr. Acrel of Upsal, who has the charge of the 
collection.
— Now, I am so ambitious as to wish to 
possess this treasure, with a view to settle as a phy- 
sician in London, and read lectures on natural hi- 
story.
Sir Joseph Banks and all my friends to 
whom I have entrusted my intention approve of it 
highly.
I have written to Dr. Acrel, to whom Dr.
Engelhart has recommended me, for particulars and 
the refusal^ telling him if it w^as what I expected, I 
would give him a very good price for it.
I hope, 
my dear sir, you and my good mother will look on 
this scheme in as favourable a light as my friends 
here do.
There is no time to be lost, for the affair 
is now talked of in all companies, and a number of 
people wish to be purchasers.
The Empress of 
Russia is said to have thoughts of it.
The manuscripts, letters, &c., must be invaluable ; 
and there is, no doubt, a complete collection of all 
the inaugural dissertations which have been pub- 
lished at Upsal, a small part of which has been re- 
published under the title oi Am(£nitates AcademiccB ; 
a very celebrated and scarce work.
All these dis- 
sertations were written by Linnaeus, and must be of 
94 
prodigious value.
In short, the more I think of 
this affair, the more sanguine I am, and earnestly 
hope for your concurrence.
I wish I could have 
one half hour's conversation with you ; but that is 
impossible." 
To this appeal there came an admirable reply, 
regarding the expediency of the purchase, in every 
point of view ; but so much approaching to a re- 
fusal as to produce great uneasiness and alarm : and 
another letter, reiterating the persuasions in thetirst, 
had but little more effect.
Repeated efforts, how- 
ever, produced some change of opinion ; and in a 
subsequent letter, Sir James tells his father, " I 
have learnt from Mr. Dryander what the collection 
consists of; he has often seen it : it was kept in a 
room built on purpose by itself, for fear of fire.
One side of this room was quite occupied by the 
cabinets of fossils, which are very fine ; in another 
part was a large cabinet of corals, and some ani- 
mals, as he thinks : there was also a very large 
collection of insects and shells.
The dried plants 
of the elder Linnaeus were about 8000 ; and his son's 
collection in his travels, from Sir Joseph, and in 
France, about as many more.
There were many 
cabinets round the room, and also a few books for 
common use ; but his principal library was kept in 
another place, and this Dryander never saw : he tells 
me it was considered to be a good one." 
95 
Mr. Smith to his Son.
My dear Son, Norwich, 12th January, 1784.
The dutiful and affectionate light in which you 
now see what has passed between us upon the sub- 
ject under consideration, you may be assured makes 
a very deep and feeling impression upon my heart.
I am almost sorry for what my affection and duty to 
you and my family seemed to me to force me to 
write, as I knew it would give you pain ; but now 
that I perceive a cooler expostulation would have 
wrought the same effect, I make some reproaches 
to myself for having given you more uneasiness 
than was necessary ; and that must and does hurt 
a father who loves you to excess, who wishes and 
strives and prays most fervently that all your days 
may be tranquil, and all your undertakings success- 
ful.
My soul is full of parental tenderness at this 
moment, and would fain expand itself upon this 
subject; but I have not time.
Suffice it now to say, 
that we both think and feel as we ought to do upon 
the occasion, and that you have satisfied every sen- 
sation of my mind that regarded the relation you 
stand in to me : it shall be my care to strengthen 
your confidence in my solicitude and unalterable 
regard for your welfare.
But the thing that strikes 
me very forcibly in your last, seems to confirm an 
opinion I took up at first ; that is, the bulk of the 
collection.
Here is a room (no doubt of large di- 
mensions) built on purpose to contain a great many 
cabinets, and a few books ; the principal library was 
in another place, — no doubt a very large one too : 
96 
we both know a large library takes up a deal of 
room.
All this, and a great deal more that must be 
supposed, convinces me that it will require no small 
nor inelegant house to place so capital a collection 
and library in a commodious manner, such as will 
answer your design in the possession.
Indeed I 
perceive that, however probable the possession of 
this and your plan is to prove advantageous, I am 
afraid it is out of the reach of our abilities to attain.
Had I but you, I had not hesitated one moment; 
every shilling of mine should be at your devotion 
to serve any good purpose ; and your dear mother 
would be as contented as I should be, to retire upon 
the moderate income of our real estate, till Provi- 
dence, withdrawing us from the world, should leave 
you in possession of that also.
That you have con- 
sulted Dr. Pitcairn and other judicious friends, I 
much approve ; they and your own prudence will 
advise you about the intrinsic merit and value of 
the collection, how to have it examined, and every 
thing relating to that part of the business: but none 
of them can know how far the purchase would be 
expedient in our circumstances and situation ; — our 
own wisdom must guide us there.
I cannot but suppose that the library of such a 
man as Linnaeus, and which is called a fine library 
too, must be worth a great deal, perhaps all the 
money advanced ; but upon the subject of its great 
supposed value, the character and esteem of its col- 
lector in his native country, who must be proud of 
him and everything tha belongs to him, — I can 
hardly conceive they will suffer it to depart from 
97 
Sweden for so paltry a sum, considered in a national 
light, and from an university whose reputation he 
has contributed so much to raise.
The kingdom of Denmark, and all Germany, and 
Holland, France, and Switzerland, from taste and 
learning ; as well as Russia, from ostentation or 
improvement, — will be competitors for it, as well as 
England.
And we cannot but suppose, if it is to be 
peremptorily sold, the object being the money it 
will fetch, they will make use of their whole endea- 
vours to get as much for it as it is worth, if they 
are so honest as not to desire more.
Without calling Dr. Acrel's or any other person's 
honour, known or unknown, in question, ask your- 
self how seldom it is the case, without great igno- 
rance about the true value of the thing disposed of, 
where there are many desirous of purchasing, that 
it does not fetch at least its full value.
So that I 
am inclined to think, that after all your anxiety 
about it you may not be able to obtain it ; and I 
hope you will not fix your mind so strongly upon 
it as to create you uneasiness if you miss it, from 
any cause whatever.
But wait calmly the answer to 
your letter to Dr. Acrel, till you see and examine 
the catalogue with care, and then determine as cir- 
cumstances require ; and I hope it will please Heaven 
to direct you for the best in a matter of so very 
great importance.
I would caution you against the enthusiasm of a 
lover, or the heat of an ambitious man.
I need not surely now tell you how dear you are 
to me, how much I esteem you, nor what I hope 
VOL.
1. H 
98 
from you.
If you are a stranger to these things, 
Nature does not write a legible hand, or you have 
not learned to read her writing ; but I know you 
have, and that you do my great love of you justice.
Adieu, my dear son !
May Heaven direct all your 
steps, and shower its choicest blessings on your 
head!
For ever your affectionate Father, 
James Smith.
Dr. Acrel to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Vir nobilissime, Upsaliae, d.
9 Februar.
1784.
Humanissimas tuas litteras, Londini d.
23 De- 
cemb.
a. p.
datas, accepi ; et licet petitioni tuae, in 
mittendo catalogo rerum natur.
p. def.
Linnaei, ob 
temporis angustiam hodie satisfacere non possim, 
responsionem tamen differre non debui : me vero 
quam proxime missurum polliceor.
Permittas etiam 
ut in scribendo me lingua Latina inserviam, dum 
linguam tuam maternam, quam amo et intelligo, 
tantummodo ad legendos libros calleam.
Biblio- 
thecam Linnseanam perlustravi, titulosque libro- 
rum adnotavi : superet voluminum numerus 1500: 
exceptis manuscriptis et litteris, quas non adhuc 
in ordinem redegi.
Permulti eorum sunt ligatura 
Gallica; reliqui plurimi et quidem majoris momenti 
libri bene custoditi.
Defecti, uti vocant, fere nuUi.
Omnes vero ad completam bibliothecam botanicam, 
ab antiquissimis ac nunc rarissimis operibus, usque 
ad recentissima eadem, pertinent : figuris nitidissimis 
99 
ornati.
Libri medici fere nuUi. Cetera catalogus 
monstrabit.
In eo jam occupatus sum, ut quantum fieri po- 
test, numerum ineam herbarum, in ditissimis her- 
bariis Linnaeanis, scilic.
patris et filii, occurren- 
tium.
Superant vero fere numerum.
Observandum, 
hae collectiones dividi deberent, 1.
in herbarium 
Linnaei patris, et, 2.
filii : quarum — 
1. Collectio patris consistere ex circiter 14000 
plantis, in tribus thecis sub numeris A, B.
& C.
— Ut vero vir illustrissimus, dum vixit, nihil ad 
ostentationem habuit, omnia vero sua in usum ac- 
commodata ; ita etiam in hoc herbario, quod per xl.
annos sedulo coUegit, frustra quaesiveris papyri in- 
signia ornamenta, margines inauratas, et cet.
quae 
ostentationis gratia in omnibus fere herbariis nunc 
vulgaria sunt.
Et dum aliorum herbaria, recenter 
collecta, similitudinem habent libri cujusdam novi 
e manu bibliopegae illico assumti, sic herbarium 
Principis Botanicorum usu magis tritum, annota- 
tionibus ubicunque refertum ; minime vero blattis 
tineisque corrosum, vel alio quodam modo inutile 
factum.
2. Herbarium Linne filii, splendidum magis ac 
nitidum prout recentius collectum.
Numerus spe- 
cierum adhuc incertus.
Insignis etiam earum nu- 
merus, quas in Anglia, sub itinere suo, nee non in 
Gallia, e collectionibus Smeathmanni, Massoni, 
Aubleti, SonneratijDombeyi, aliorum que, depromp- 
sit ; plura etiam de hac coUectione catalogus mon- 
strabit.
Eminet inter cetera collectio ilia pulcherrima, 
H 2 
100 
ditissima Conchyliorum, adhuc patre vivente, inter 
pretiosissimas numerata, postea a Linne filio insig- 
niter aucta et ditata.
Insectorum collectio, si separatim divenderetur, 
licitator quidam Suecus 170 ducatos aureos impen- 
dere non haesitabit.
Corallia et cetera producta marium insignia 
sunt.
Aves, circiter 50, in thecis vitro clausis servantur.
Pisces, tam in sp.
vin.
quamsiccati supra chartam 
glutine affixi, permulti sunt.
Cetera, ut fructus, nidus avium et insectorum, 
vestimenta Indorum et incolarum Maris Pacifici, ut 
taceam : Materia Medica nulla.
Litterae clarorum 
virorum ad Linnaeos scriptae superant numerum 
3000, quae, una cum manuscriptis, et, inter ea.
Nova 
Zoologi(B Fundamenta LinnS.
Filii, materiam da- 
bunt operum posthum.
Linnaeorum uberrimam, et 
a bibliopolis et typographis avide expectantur.
Ea tamen est haeredum in defunctos Linnaeos 
pia memoria, ut manuscripta et litterae non nisi 
ad doctum quendam et honestum virum venumda- 
rentur ; ne typis mandaretur quidquam, quod pub- 
lico scire non interest.
Eam etjam fiduciam in te 
habent, vir nobilissime, si collectionum emptor 
fueris.
Collectio ilia sub titulo Epistola alar or.
Virorum ad Hallerum pecuniam certissime auctori 
convexit, parum vero honoris.
In ceterum tibi sanctissime polliceor, ex omnibus 
coUectionibus, in quocunque genere, ne minima 
quidem particula, me sciente vel volente, distrahi 
vel abalienari ; et quantum in me erit, omnia sarta 
101 
tectaque ad te venire curabo.
Catalogum quam 
proxime exspectas.
Vale interea, atque fave 
Nominis tui nobilissimi 
Cultorem fidelem 
JOH.
GUSTAV.
ACREL.
Dominum D'".
Engelhardt, amicum meum sin- 
cerrimum, permultas dicas salutes.
Mr. Smith to Air. James Edward Smith.
My dear Son, Norwich, March 1, 1784.
The frost broke up, the snow gone, and waters 
run off", I mean to set out for London next week 
with your brother John : we shall come on horse- 
back, or I shall put the horses in a chaise, I don't 
fully resolve which.
It will be proper to know 
whether you can meet with a lodging for us, the 
town is now so full of people attending parliament.
Again I shall want a livery stable for two horses.
I have daily expected to hear you have had an 
answer from Upsal: if all be right, 'tis as well it stays 
till we can travel more comfortably.
I am glad to 
hear you are prepared to meet whatever may be the 
event of the Linnaean collection.
Things are so 
uncertain in this life, we cannot tell what will be the 
best; but a due exertion to improve the circum- 
stances we find around us will most generally be 
attended with success, and I entertain very flattering 
hopes of yours.
P.S. I am told the post has come constantly from 
Sweden notwithstanding the frost.
Yours, 
James Smith.
102 
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, London, April 10, 1784.
I was a little impatient to hear how you got home.
On Tuesday I received the wished-for catalogue 
from Sweden : it is very full and exact, much better 
than I expected.
There are many valuable books : 
such as the King of Denmark's book of shells, like 
that at Cambridge ; Sloane's Jamaica, worth ten or 
twelve guineas ; and many others worth from five to 
ten pounds ; besides a complete collection of the 
most useful books in natural history, and many 
medical books.
The greater part are Latin, many 
French, English, Italian, some Swedish, &c.
There 
are also a few books which from their extreme 
scarcity sell for an exorbitant price ; one little book 
on insects, coloured, for a copy of which Sir Joseph 
Banks gave books to the value of thirty pounds, 
and which has long been sought for in vain for the 
Royal library.
The whole number of works is about 
1600, of volumes above 2000.
The manuscripts 
also are very valuable, full as much as could be 
imagined.
Plants 19,000: insects, shells, &c.
are 
said to be very valuable and numerous, but of these 
I am soon to have a further account.
There is a collection of plants called the small 
herbarium of young Linnaeus, which was collected 
before his father's death, and contains nothing but 
what is in the great herbarium : this he desired be- 
fore his death might go to Baron Alstromer to sa- 
tisfy a debt of 200 rix dollars (fifty-five pounds) 
103 
which he owed him.
The executors, unwilling to 
separate anything from the collection, offered the 
whole to Baron Alstromer for 1 000 guineas ; they 
have not had his answer, nor do they expect he will 
buy it, as he is quite paralytic, and can neither read 
nor write at present : they therefore do not doubt 
his taking the small herbarium only, and in that 
case they offer me all the rest for 900 guineas, as 
the very lowest price : they have had offers of an 
unlimited sum from a Russian nobleman, but have 
declined treating with him till they had my final 
answer.
I wrote last night, remonstrating against their 
having made such an offer to Baron Alstromer, as 
nothing was said of it in Dr. Acrel's first letter to 
me, and I agreed to take the whole without the 
small herbarium for 900 guineas, or with that, and 
pay Baron Alstromer's debt.
I hope this will re- 
ceive your approbation.
The executors demand 500 guineas to be paid 
as soon as the bargain is concluded, the rest six 
months after.
j^^^^ Edward Smith.
Dr. Acrel to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Vir nobihssime, Upsali^, d.
6 Martii, 1784.
Catalogum bibliothecae Linnaeanae jam tibi 
sisto, vir nobilissime, eum in finem, ut judices quid 
in re herbaria valeat selecta haec librorum col- 
lectio : continet enim libros permultos quos ob 
raritatem alibi frustra quaesiveris.
104 
Herbarium illud niagnuiii Liiinaei patris, in 
thecis V.
asservatum, consistit plantis circa 19,000 ; 
nam his numeranda sunt etiam ea specimina per- 
multa, quae sub itinere suo in Anglia et Gallia, e her- 
bariis Commersoni, Dombeyi, Sonnerati, aliorum- 
que, collegit illustr.
Von Linn^ filius, et quse chartis 
glutine adfigere viri illustris cita nimis mors pro- 
hibuit.
Alia quaedam plantarum collectio, sub nomine 
herbarii parvi Linnd Jiln, adest, continens tam in- 
digenas quam exoticas, quas in juventute collegit 
Linne filius, ideoque nihil aliud est quam tirocinium 
suum, sub auspiciis patris.
Ita autem disposuit 
Linne junior, ante obitum, ut haec collectio, quae mi- 
noris est momenti, nee alias plantas habens quam 
quae in magno herbario praesto sunt, traderetur 
viro nobilissimo Baroni Alstromer, ob contractum 
aes alienum, inque ejus solutionem.
Dispositionem 
banc pie defuncti abnuere non voluerunt haeredes, 
nee facile concedere, ut, quidquid sit, etiam mini- 
mi momenti, e collectionibus distraheretur, ratum 
duxerunt, omnes historiae naturalis collectiones 
cum bibliotheca et manuscriptis Baroni Alstromer 
ad ernendum ofFerre, eodem scilicet pretio, 1000 gui- 
nearum.
Nescimus adhuc, si pecuniam solveret, 
nee ne : ego vero valde dubito Baronem Alstromer, 
ob graven!
morbum articulorum, qui eum nee scri- 
bere vel legere, multo minus naturalia tractare, con- 
cedit, emtorem fieri.
Nobilis Moscovita, nuper 
etiam ad solvendam non determinatam, pecuniae 
summam sese obtulit, si possessor fieret collectio- 
105 
niim ; abnui ego, antequam ultimam tuani respon- 
sionem acceperim.
Catalogum insectorunij conchyliorum, et reliqu.
tibi quam proxime mittam ; etiamsi persuasas sis, 
has collectiones et optimas et numerosissimas esse.
Si herbarium parvum Baroni Alstromer traditur, 
ad solvendum debitum 200 thaleror.
imperialium 
monetae nostrae, reliqua quotquot sunt, a maximis 
ad minima, non infra 900 guineas divenderentur : 
sed emtori id certum sit, ut, ita me Deus !
nihil 
eorum ab aliquo distraheretur.
Si igitur LinrKBana Opera et Collectiones de- 
sideres, vir nobilissime, mihi id notum facies 
proximo tabellarum die, et simul, legato Magnae 
Brittaniae, illustrissimo D".
Wrougthon, Stock- 
holmiae, vel secretario missionis, litteras mittas, 
ut si forsan quis scrupulus te urgeat, (qui inter 
honestos viros non facile contigit,) rem tuam apud 
nos peragent, bonaque tua observent.
Emtionem festinat, praeter alias rationes, etiam 
ea, quod domus, ubi magnae hae collectiones 
asservantur, professori successori traderetur, et 
vereor, ne ex demigratione e domo in aliam, e col- 
lectione subtilioribus speciminibus damnum infer- 
reretur.
Si nos inter convenietur, pecuniae dimidiam 
summam solvere grave tibi non duxeris spero, et 
alteram dein post vi.
menses.
Manuscripta adhuc perplurima deterrui, quam 
quae in catalogo adnotata sunt ; ita etiam disser- 
tationes, aliaque scripta, magno numero.
106 
Vale, vir nobilissime, et amicorum amico D°.
D®.
Engelhardt salutes.
Nobilissimi tui nominis 
Cultor observantissimus, 
J. G.
ACREL.
N.B. Ab Upsalia usque ad pontem navalem Lon- 
dinensem, coUectiones per mare transferri possunt, 
adeo ut facilis et quassationi expers sit earum 
transportatio.
Mr. James Edivard Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, London, April 23, 1784.
Yours of the 1 2th made me very happy.
I hope 
we shall have no reason to alter our sentiments 
about the step I have set.
As it is now pretty gene- 
rally known, I hear more of the opinion of people 
on the subject than I did before, and am very much 
encouraged by them.
I thought it a piece of respect 
due to my old botanical friends to inform them of 
my purchase before they heard of it by any other 
means; I therefore wrote lately to Messrs.
Wood- 
ward, Bryant, and Pitchford, to tell them, and de- 
sired the latter to inform Mr. Crowe and Rose.
I 
mentioned particularly that my medical studies were 
to go on as before.
The collection comes every inch of the way from 
Upsal by water.
Your dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
107 
Mr, Pitchford to Mr. James Edivard Smith.
Dear Sir, Norwich, May 2, 1784.
I am favoured with your letter, for which I think 
myself much obliged to you, as I began to fear I 
was struck out of the list of your correspondents ; 
but this letter is a letter indeed !
and makes ample 
amends for past deficiencies.
I sincerely give you 
joy of your purchase as a matter which will afford 
you a fund of instruction and amusement in natural 
history, and I should imagine will be a means of 
making you much known.
Mr. Woodward was 
here this week, and acquainted me with some es- 
sential particulars not mentioned in your letter.
You may imagine the surprise we were all in.
We 
dined at Mr. Crowe's, who I imagine will talk with 
you a great deal about it.
He was for desiring me 
to write to you immediately, to beg you would by 
no means make any agreements as to the disposal 
of your purchase ; but as he sets off for London on 
Monday, May the 3rd, he can better make you ac- 
quainted with his intentions himself.
Poor Mr. Rose 
(who has lost Mrs. Rose) commissioned me in par- 
ticular to return you his thanks for your remem- 
brance of him.
You certainly make a very proper remark in 
saying that this purchase is not to interfere with 
your medical pursuits, as the cultivation of natural 
history cannot be pursued with vigour but by per- 
sons of independent fortunes ; for others it must 
only be as an amusement, or relaxation from other 
studies.
108 
I shall now look up to you as to a second Lin- 
naeus, and without any compliment I think you 
highly deserving of being the possessor of such re- 
mains : at the same time I am afraid your other 
more serious pursuits will not suffer you to make 
the use of them your abilities would otherwise en- 
title you to.
The English botanist will now have 
an opportunity of knowing what natives of his own 
country are in the Sp. PI.
In hopes of hearing from you a little oftener, 
I remain, dear Sir, 
Yours sincerely, 
J. PiTCHFORD.
Dr. W^ithering to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Birmingham, May 27, 1784..
I thank you most sincerely for the very judicious 
and liberal criticisms you have made upon the sheet*, 
and am happy to inform you that the work in its 
new form meets with the approbation of all who 
have seen it.
Your remarks upon the difficulties of 
making the references are unfortunately too true ; 
but as nothing is taken upon authority, I hope the 
actual examination made upon this occasion will do 
away more error than it will introduce.
Our friend Dr. Stokes has undertaken this part 
of the business, and I think his accuracy and in- 
dustry, as well as his experience, will not be readily 
* Of the 2nd edition of Dr. W.'s Botanical Arrangement, the 
1st edition of which was published in 1776 in two volumes.
109 
outdone.
The names, both trivial and generic, are 
accented through the body of the work, as most 
people seemed to concur with your opinion.
The 
times of flowering are marked as accurately as I 
knew how to mark them ; those of ripening the 
seeds would certainly be useful, but I know not 
any source from whence they could be derived.
The 
same difficulty occurs too as to the opening and 
shutting of the flowers.
The budding of the leaves 
differs so much in the southern, the midland, and 
the northern parts of this island, and all these differ 
again so widely in particular years, that the task of 
marking them would be endless.
I have seen the 
gooseberry trees in Scotland naked, and in six days' 
ride to the south found them in full leaf.
Trees 
which in this place were in full leaf on the 18th of 
April last year had not a bud unfolded on the 10th 
of the present May.
I apprehend that many of our plants supposed to 
be Linnsean may be in the same predicament with the 
Solidago J^irgaurea, but certainly can no otherways 
be ascertained than by an actual comparison of our 
dubious plants with his, and this we were in hopes 
of doing had young Linn^ lived ; but we hear the 
whole collection is coming to England, though 
ignorant into whose hands it has fallen.
You can 
probably inform me, and likewise of the probability 
of procuring aid from that quarter.
I remain.
Sir, with great respect, 
Your obliged 
W. Withering.
no 
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, London, June 18th, 1784.
This day I received the long wished-for letter 
from Sweden.
It contains an accurate inventory of 
the insects and shells, with the number of species 
in every genus, by which it appears that these col- 
lections are truly noble, even beyond what I could 
expect.
The species of insects are in all 3198 ; of 
shells 1564, and 200 more not arranged: there is 
also a fine collection of minerals ; of these there are 
2424 specimens ; among them are 108 silver, and 
31 gold ones, &c.
&c.
There are 45 birds in glass 
cases.
The bargain is concluded with me on these terms, 
— Baron Alstromer is to have the small herbarium, 
and I am to give 900 guineas for the rest.
J. E.
Smith.
Dr. Aerel to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Vir nobilissime, Upsalia, Maij 1784.
Binas tuas accepi litteras, die 9 Aprilis et 20 
ejusdem mensis datas : debui jam antea responsio- 
nem dare, etiam dedi, nisi intensissimum frigus va- 
riaque alia negotia me retardarunt catalogum rerr.
naturall.
Linnseorum perducere ad finem.
Fateor 
ingenue, me nondum omnia in ordinem et numerum 
reduxisse, negotiis praecipue academicis ut et aliis 
obrutus : quae vero hac vice tibi ob oculos pono, suf- 
ficere ad judicandum pretium puto.
En igitur ea.
Ill 
quae post bibliothecam et herbaria sequuntur, de 
quibus antea scrips!
: — 
INSECTA 
in duobus tliecis conservata, pulchra et omnino 
splendida : ex his continet sequentia : 
Coleoptera.
Genera.
Numerus Specierum.
Scarabaeus 139 
Lucanus 7 
Dermestes 44 
Hister 7 
Byrrhus 11 
Ptinus 14 
Bruchus 9 
Cassida 24 
Silpha 47 
Coccinella 58 
Chrysomela 148 
Hispa 4 
Gyrinus 3 
Atelabus 15 
Curculio 138 
Cerambyx 91 
Leptura 43 
Necydalis 10 
Lampyris 6 
Cantharis SQ 
Elater 38 
Buprestis 37 
Cicindela 19 
Carabus 51 
Dytiscus 31 
Tenebrio &3 
Meloe 26 
Mordella 8 
Staphylinus 24 
Forficula 2 
1153 
CI.
II.
Hemiplera.
Genus.
Species.
Blatta 7 
Mantis 16 
Gryllus 55 
Fulgora 7 
Cicada 48 
Nepa 7 
Notonecta 4 
Cimex 164 
Coccus 7 
315 
CI.
III.
Neuroptera.
Genu*.
Species.
Libellula 17 
Hemerobius 9 
Myrmeleon 7 
Ephemera 8 
Phryganea 19 
Raphidea 3 
Panorpa 3 
66 
112 
CI.
IV.
Lepidoptera.
Genus.
Species.
Papilio 239 
Sphinx 59 
Phalsena 625 
923 
CI.
V. 
Hymenoptera.
Gen.
' Spec.
Tenthredo 78 
Sirex 7 
Ichneumon 87 
Sphex 50 
Chrysis 11 
Cynips 5 
Vespa 51 
Apis 53 
Mutila 12 
Formica 8 
362 
CI.
VI.
Dipt era.
Gen. Spec.
Asilus 19 
Bombylus 5 
Conops 14 
Hippobosca 3 
OEstrus 6 
Empis 6 
Tabanus 17 
Musca 156 
Tipula 36 
Culex 4 
266 
CI.
VII.
Aptera.
Gen. Spec.
Aranea 18 
Phalangium 6 
Scorpio 4 
Oniscus 20 
Scolopendra 15 
lulus 6 
Monoculus 4 
Acarus 4 
Pediculus 6 
Cancer 30 
113 
Summa Specierum, 3198 
CONCHYLIA 
consistunt sequentibus Gencr.
et Speciebus cum 
variationibus : 
Gen.
Chiton 
Lepas 
Pholas , 
Mya .
Spec.
Gen. Spec 
3 Cardium 44 
6 Donax 13 
14 Venus 89 
13 Spondylus 6 
Solen 15 Chama 14 
Tellina 54 Area 24 
113 
Ostrea 77 
Anomia 32 
Mytilus 26 
Pinna 8 
Argonauta 2 
Nautilus 20 
Conus 74 
Cyprea 85 
Bulla 20 
Voluta , 49 
Buccinum 154 
Do 89 
Stronibus , 62 
Murex 145 
Trochus 88 
Turbo 57 
Helix 84 
Nerita 61 
Patella 94 
Haliotis 14 
Dentalium 10 
Serpula 20 
Summa Testaceorum, 1564 
N.B. Praeter haec Testacea in theca conservata, 
etiam alia eaque numerosa collectio Conchyliorum 
adest ; cujus tamen numerus mihi incertus : quan- 
tum vero ex sola inspectione judicare licet, earn 
numer.
200 circiter diversarum specierum continere, 
facile credo.
MINERALIA, 
in 2 thecis conservata ; quae collectio sequentia 
habet 
Genera, et Num. Specierum.
Schistus 76 
Marmor 150 
Gypsum 26 
Stirium 16 
Spatum 25 
Talcum 59 
Amianthus 45 
Mica 35 
Cos 50 
Quartzum 28 
Silex 39 
Saxum 139 
VOL, I.
Genera.
Species.
Nitrum 103 
Crystallorum figurae ....
8 
Natrum 44 
Borax 22 
Muria 8 
Alumen 9 
Vitriolum 10 
Succinum 8 
Bitumen 40 
Pyrites 125 
Arsenicum 28 
Hydrargyrum   , 9 
114 
Molybdenum 8 Entomolithus 23 
Stibium 23 Helmintolithus 162 
Zincum S5 Phytolithus 27 
Vismuthum 6 Graptolithus 21 
Cobaltum 14 Calculus 10 
Stannum 20 Tartarus 2 
Granatum 10 Actites 30 
Plumbum 232 Pumex.
. .
, 11 
Ferrum 184 Stalactites 35 
Cuprum 206 Tophus 76 
Nickelum 4 Ochra 61 
Argentum 108 Arena 4 
Aurum 31 Argilla 86 
Platinum 1 Calx 20 
Zoolithus 2 
Amphibolithus Specier.
mineral, summa, 2424 
Ichthyolithus 10 
ANIMALIA.
Aves in thecis operculis vitreis No. 45 
Rostra avium.
Pisces, siccati et chartis glutinati No. 158 
Quaedam in spir.
vin.
CORALLIA, 
magno numero, ^ed non adnotata.
Quae restant, tarn naturalia, qiiam eorum pro- 
ducta, ut flores, spadices Palmarum, radices, fruc- 
tus, necnon curiosa varia vestimenta et utensilia 
incolarum Maris Pacifici, et Indorum etc., addu- 
cere et nominare tempus non permittit.
MAMMALIA nulla.
Quae ad materiam medicam spectant, scilicet, 
gummata, resinae, radices, etc., nulla adsunt, nee 
adfuerunt.
Plantae vero, unde haec omnia desu- 
muntur, inmaximo hoc herbario sine dubio adsunt.
115 
Post ilium quern antea dedi calculum, insignem 
herbarum siccatarum copiam inveni : sed numerum 
adnolare vetuit temporis angustia.
Has collectiones, omnes et singulas, una cum reli- 
quis omnibus, a niaximis ad minima, quae in musaeo 
Linnaeano post mortem inventa sunt, tibi jam, no- 
mine haeredum oflero emenda, sequenti sub condi- 
tione, quod, 
P. Concedas Baroni Alstromer herbarium par- 
vum, plantas continens quas in juventute et sub 
auspiciis patris collexit Linne filius ; non tam ad 
solvendum debitum illud 200 thai, imper., quam 
ob pretium illud amicitiae et adfectionis, quae L.
Bar. Alstromer et Linnaeum a teneris inde interfuit.
^".
Quod summae (900 guineas) dimidiam par- 
tem, sine mora, mihi mittas sub forma tesserae 
nummariae (bill of exchange), a mercatore quodam 
Stockholmiense, more eorum, solvendam.
3°.
Reliquam summae partem, (450 guineas,) post 
tres menses ad minimum mihi eodem modo mittas ; 
et interea chirographum tuum debitum ostenden- 
tem, una cum litteris tuis responsoriis nobis relin- 
quas.
Si inter te et me res ageretur, ejus modi 
testimonia, ubi honor et fides suprema lex est, om- 
nino supervacanea essent ; jam vero, cum jus tertii 
in negotio versetur, et haec conditio ab haercdibus, 
matre scilicet defuncti et sororibus, postulata, non 
possum non, quin votis corum respondeam, et earn 
tibi proponam.
Ad me quod attinet, fidem summam tibi servabo, 
ne hilum quidem ab eorum omnium abalicnetur 
I 2 
116 
vel furtivis manibus arripietur.
Si tibi placeant 
postulata haeredum, litteris quam primum mihi 
certiorem facies seqiientia.
1".
Si in Anglia tantum vectigalis solvatur pro 
libris filo ligatis (sewed books) quam pro iisdem 
in corio ligatis (bound ones) ?
Si ita est, promiscue 
in thecis consarcinari possint : si pro corio ligatis 
plus solvendum, separentur, et in suis tliecis diver- 
sis servari necesse est.
2°.
Ab Upsalia usque ad Stockholmiam, mari- 
timo itinere, transportentur collectiones, impensis 
hseredum.
In the warehouse at Stockholm you 
must pay the duty, but I don't know how much : 
crcdidero tamen, quod ejusmodi mercedes non 
magni ibidem aestimantur.
Interest ne quid a pub- 
licanis difFrangeretur, quod ut prohibeatur curabo.
3°.
Notus mihi est nauta mercatorius, nom.
Captain Browel, natione Anglus, civis et Londi- 
nensis et Stockholmensis, vir probae fidei : hie 
quotannis seniel vel bis inter Londinum et Stock- 
holmiam iter facit propria navi ; fideliori viro res 
tuas committere vix habeo, quamvis etiam multi 
nautae mcrcatoriae quotannis a portu Stockh.
Londinum petunt.
Will you take insurance for the 
sea transport ?
4''.
Opuscula Bergmanni tibi mittam : quaeri- 
tur vero, si mihi liceat ex bibliotheca Linnaei se- 
quentes libros a te emere ?
In quarto : No. 5, 
Banks's Voyage ; No. 7, Kussel's Natural History of 
Aleppo ; No. 7, Pennant's Voyage to the Hebrides ; 
No. 126, Cursory Remarks on Scurvy; No. 223, Dal- 
rymple's Memoirs of the Coast of China.
In octavo : 
117 
No. 10, Miller's Illustmtion of the Sexual System ; 
No. 123, Letsom's Medical Memoirs; No. 303, 
Letsom's Traveller's Companion.
Quieritur etiam 
quanti a te aestimantur ?
Vix proposueram, nisi 
perpassiis, tc aut eos habere in bibliotbcca tua, 
aut facile obtinere.
Mihi vero perquam difficiles 
comparatu.
Dolendum sane, quod nos inter tanta 
diflicultas est comparandi libros ; nam libri An- 
glici in Suecia perrari, sicut Suecici in Anglia.
5".
Bibliopola quidam Upsaliensis, nom.
Suede- 
rus, Angliam petere se dixit ; et officium suum mihi 
obtulit in custodiendis omnibus, modo illi a pos- 
sessore, a te scilicet, promittitur itineris impcnsa : 
est vir bonae fidei, et tibi sub itinere ncccssarius, 
providendo, ne quid detrimenti capiant res natu- 
rales : affirmare vel negare non potui : die (|uid de 
ejus proposito tibi videtur.
Haec sunt, qua?
jam scribenda habeo.
Tu quam- 
primum litteras mittas.
Omittendum non est, me 
a Domino Sibthorp binas accepisse litteras : in pri- 
mis tantum herbaria emere voluit, in ultimis vero 
se emtorem omnium fieri scripsit, modo si illi tan- 
tum concedatur temporis spatium, ut Upsaliam per- 
veniet.
Ita ejus verba : — " If I am not too late to 
become a purchaser, I will immediately on the 
receipt of your answer set off for Upsal.
If you have 
absolutely disposed of it, I must attribute it to the 
miscarriage of my former, which I think at least 
you would have done me the honour of attending to." 
Vereor ne iter suum incepit, nam duplices litteras 
responsorias postulavit, Oxfordiae et Bruxella?.
Si 
vero collectiones emeris, te rogo et obtestor, ut 
118 
illico cum, D'" Sibthorpium, id notum facies per 
litteras, ne honestus vir friistra et quasi dolo cir- 
cumducetur.
Scripsi ei, quod negotium mihi est 
cum alio viro, et si non placuerint proposita mea, 
Sibthorp ei erit proximus in negotiatione.
Insecta sarta tectaque per itineris cursum servare 
difficillima res est.
Oportuit thecarum fundos 
cera oblinire, ne acus decidui fient : sed huic operi 
requiritur multum temporis^ necnon impensorum, 
nam cerai necessaria quantitas non est exigua, nee 
vilioris est pretii.
Die mihi, si sufficere tibi videa- 
tur, insectum quodcumque probe inspicere et ejus 
acus fortiter in assere ligneo impingere ?
Quantum 
in me est, curabo ne blattis tineisque corrodentur.
Consarcinatio (the packing) fiet impensis haeredum : 
sed si tibi curse est tuarum rerum, suadeo, ne ali- 
quot schill.
parces viro in hoc negotio occupato 
solvendos : plus enim diligentiae et curae adhibeat; 
sed hsec sunt minima.
I am, Sir, 
with the most faithful esteem and respect, 
Your most humble obedient servant, 
J. G.
ACREL.
Di'.
Jonathan Stokes to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Stourbridge, June 21, 1784.
Give me leave to congratulate you on being be- 
come the possessor of the cabinet and MSS.
of the 
great Linnaeus, and of his excellent and amiable son.
119 
whose loss I shall ever most sincerely regret as a 
friend, as well as a lover of natural history.
I con- 
gratulate you on this acquisition, not merely as per- 
suaded that those excellent men will find in you an 
able as well as faithful editor and commentator, but 
as an Englishman, who feels a degree of honour 
given to himself, in finding that one of his country- 
men, animated by a love of science, has had the 
spirit to make the purchase, and to import into his 
own country so valuable a collection.
But the same 
information adds that very great offers have been 
made to you from France.
L'Heritier and Brous- 
sonet I much esteem, and I remember with pleasure 
the civilities I received from several other naturalists 
of that nation ; but I must here confess myself so 
far national, as to wish that the valuable treasure 
which you are become the possessor of should not 
go out of this kingdom.
If Parliament should not 
think proper to add it, with your permission, to our 
national museum, I flatter myself private individuals 
will be found to form a subscription, which may 
enable you to resist the influence which any liberal 
oifers from France may have upon you.
I remain, with much esteem, 
Your old fellow-student, &c.
Jonathan Stokes.
P.S. If you meet with a letter of mine to young 
Linne may I ask you to return it.
If your private fortune should not permit you to 
keep the whole, and you should be induced to dis- 
120 
pose of any of it, I should be happy to become a 
purchaser of what duplicates you may find of British 
plants, at what should be considered as a fair price, 
I should be equally happy to become a purchaser in 
like manner of the duplicates of European plants.
Mr. James Edward Smith to Dr. Stokes.
Dear Sir, London, Sept.
23.
I ought long ago to have thanked you for your 
letter, and friendly congratulations on my late ac- 
quisition ; you may be assured they were extremely 
acceptable to me ; and the principal reason for my 
not replying sooner to your favour was, that I ex- 
pected every day to receive my treasures from Swe- 
den, and I wished, not only to send you some more 
information, but to answer that part of your letter 
in which you speak of purchasing some of the du- 
plicates.
As yet they are not arrived ; I would not, 
however, be any longer silent, lest you should ac- 
cuse me of inattention to your friendship.
At pre- 
sent I have no intention to dispose of any part of 
the collection.
I have had several overtures from 
different quarters on this head, but have declined 
entering into any treaty, as I did not purchase the 
collection with that view.
On my return from Edin- 
burgh next year, I shall have leisure to examine the 
whole, and hopjc then to be able to make it of use 
to the scientific world, by removing as much as 
possible some of the doubts and diflficulties which 
have always attended inquiries in natural history, 
and which I need not particularize to so experi- 
121 
enced a naturalist as yourself.
I find by the cata- 
logue, there is a large number of letters from va- 
rious learned men to the two Linnaei, and you say 
I shall find some of yours among them, which you 
wish to have returned ; but as I shall be very soli- 
citous not to mutilate any part of the collection, I 
hope you'll permit me to keep them ; especially as 
returning them might expose me to endless solici- 
tations of the same kind.
I hope you will rest as- 
sured that no improper use shall be made of any 
thing of that kind which may fall into my hands.
Permit me in my turn to congratulate you on 
yotir late accpiisition, I mean of an agreeable and 
accomplished partner for life.
It will always give 
me real pleasure to hear of your happiness, or by 
any means in my power, to express the esteem and 
respect with which I am 
Your most obedient, 
J. E.
Smith.
Dr. Stokes to Mr. James Ediuard Smith.
Dear Smith, Stourbridge, October 1, 1784.
It was with the truest pleasure I learnt from your 
own hand, that you have no intention to dispose of 
any part of the collection.
My application had onlv 
for its object the possibility of the contrary, and 
the fear lest so invaluable a treasure should pass 
into some foreign country, where the memories of 
LinnaRus and his truly excellent son would find a 
less enlightened or less faithful guardian than your- 
122 
self.
Happy that this invaluable collection is in the 
possession of one who has candour, knowledge, and 
enthusiasm, 
I remain, with much esteem, 
Yours, &c.
Jonathan Stokes.
Dr. Act el to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Vir nobihssime, Upsalise, d.
13 Julij, 1784.
Humanissimae tuae litterae, d.
25 Junij scriptae ho- 
die mihi ad manus pervenerunt.
Ex iisdem percepi, 
te pecuniae dimidiam summam apud mercatorem 
Wilkieson et Co. jam deposuisse, ideoque primum 
postulatum non procul a nobis distare, sed forsan 
proximo tabellarum die haeredibus pervenire.
In eo jam occupatus sum, ut omnia sarta tectaque 
ad te perveniant ; ideoque herbaria in thecis lig- 
neis includere ; insecta, acubus fortiter ad thecarum 
fundos adfixa, in aliis ejusmodi thecis ligneis con- 
servare curavi ; nee in reliquis, quantum fieri potest, 
defuturus sum.
Ob libros mihi dono datos millenas accipies gra- 
tias.
Pretium eorum lubenter persolvere et volui et 
debui, sed nunc in tui memoriam servabo.
Ut ali- 
quantulum par pari referam, ut pignus amicitiae 
recipies rogo, Opusculorum Bergmanni 2 Exem- 
plaria, et Dissertationum Chemico-Physicarum 
Wallerii voll.
2. Si in aliis libris tibi comparandis 
Usui esse possum, habebis me obstrictissimum.
A Sibthorpio iterum litteras accepi, in quibus se 
123 
nunc emtorem omnium fieri optat, et pecuniai 
summam solvere velle, scripsit.
Me vero imprimis 
mo vet, quod, dum in priori ejus epistola nos inter 
sermo erat tanturamodo de herbariis, quae sepa- 
ratim vendere abnui, nunc se in iisdem litteris pre- 
tium 1000 guineas obtulisse contendit.
Certus 
sum te jam litteras illi dedisse ; responsi ego, me 
omnia vendidisse.
Fidem et honestatem incolumem 
servare studui erga omnes ; nee mihi conscientia 
imputat, quod alio quam Sibthorpio collectiones 
venum dare volui.
Interea tu valeas, amicorum optime, et me ama.
J. G.
ACREL.
Triste tibi nuntium mittam, celeberrimum Berg- 
mannum d.
16 hujus mensis diem obiisse supre- 
mum, ad fontes soterias Medevicenses, ubi salutis 
ergo aliquantisper moratus fuit.
Apoplexia ab 
haemorrhoidibus interceptis occubuit.
Mr, James Edward Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, August, 31, 1784.
I have now the pleasure to inform you, that it is 
unnecessary for us to trouble our friends any furth- 
er about the custom-house business, for I went 
there yesterday, and was told that an order had 
come from the treasury, that every thing except 
the books should be admitted and delivered to me 
without duty, or any charges whatever.
I was at 
the same time assured that every attention possible 
124 
should be shown me, and the greatest care taken 
that nothing should be injured.
I am principally 
obliged to Sir John Jervis* for this indulgence, 
and I understand it is almost a singular instance.
I shall write to thank him, as he is out of town.
J. E.
Smith.
Di\ Acrel to Mr.
*James Edward Smith.
Vir nobilissime, Upsaliee, d.
13 Augusti, 1784.
Quae ad historiam naturalem spectant, omnia, 
non minus quam manuscripta, plantae siccse et 
nondum chartis adfixae, libri, etc.
etc.
in thecis 
ligneis (great wooden binns) probe consarcinata, 
et, ubi opus fuerit, scobibus ligneis (saw-dust) in- 
terspersa sunt : insuper sigillo telonii regii munita, 
ne ea in telonio R.
Stockholmensi aperiri necesse 
sit.
Numerus thecarum est 26 : et jam ante 9 dies 
abhinc ad Stockholmiam itinere navali feliciter 
transportatae, ibi secure et placide in domo publica 
(warehouse) navem Londinum pandentem expecta- 
turae.
Cum mercatore quodam Stockholmensi 
ita peregi, ut primam et securam transmittendi oc- 
casionem arripiet ; sive id fiat cum navi Anglico vel 
Suecico.
Inter rariora jure numerantur 97 figurae ligno 
* Afterwards Earl St. Vincent, and at this period one of the 
representatives of the borough of Great Yarmouth.
This favour Sir James never ceased to recollect with grateful 
feelings towards the distinguished nobleman, who confened it on 
a perfect stranger.
125 
incisae, quae olim ad opus botanicum Olavi Rud- 
beckii patris, Campi Elys'ii dictum, pertinent ; et 
quidem ad tomum T" cujus non nisi duo exem- 
plaria in rerum natura cxistit, ideoque inter raris- 
simos libros habetur.
Magnum illud incendium 
Upsaliense A° 1702 totam editionem consumsit, 
et solummodo hse figurae supersunt.
Magni heic 
aestimantur ob raritatem.
Plura scribere prohibet teniporis ratio.
Cura ut 
valeas, niihique fave.
Nobil.
nominis tui 
Cultor humiilimus, 
J. G.
ACREL.
Mr. Jmnes Edward Smith to his Father, 
Honoured Sir, Sept.
9, 1784.
On Monday I had a most excellent letter from 
Dr. Acrel, dated August 13.
He says that having 
now received half the sum, the heirs had consented 
to forward the collection, and it was sent to Stock- 
holm August the 4th under the care of a trusty 
mercantile friend, to be put on board the first good 
ship for England.
Captain Browell would not wait 
for it.
Dr. Acrel says, there is among the books a copy 
of that very rare book the 1st volume of Rudbeck's 
Campi Elysii, of which there are only two or three 
copies in the world, almost the w^hole edition hav- 
ing been consumed, with the whole town of Upsal, 
in 1702.
I have heard Mr. Dryander say, Sir J.
12G 
Banks would gladly give 100/, for it; he has the 
2nd volume, and so shall I.
I shall not remove to 
Chelsea till about Monday.
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. James Edward Smith to his Father.
October 2, 1784.
Upon inquiring this day about the probable time 
of the arrival of the ship from Sweden, I find it 
may be here in a day or two.
Its name The Ap- 
pearance, Captain Accel Daniel Sweder.
The cases 
are marked J.
E. S.
No. 1 to 26, and must be very 
large, as the books, which are near three thousand, 
take up six of them only, the plants five, minerals 
four, insects two, shells, fish, and corals occupy 
three.
The freight 80/., and hi.
for the captain's 
fee.
I was at the custom-house to-day, and saw the 
letter from the treasury, which is very handsome 
and full.
All the expenses that Dr. Acrel has been 
at on my account amount to 4/.
10^.
which he de- 
sires I'll repay him in medical books.
J. E.
Smith.
The ship which was conveying this valuable cargo 
had just sailed, when the king of Sweden, Gustavus 
III., who had been absent in France, returned home, 
and sent a vessel to the Sound, to intercept its voy- 
age ; but happily it was too late.
At the end of 
October, 1784, the packages were safely landed at 
the custom-house.
127 
The whole cost of the collection, including the 
freight, was 1088/.
5.9.
So nice does Dr. Acrel's conduct appear in the 
negotiation between himself and the purchaser, re- 
jecting all offers till the first was concluded, that a 
report of his being bribed with a hundred pounds 
was circulated in various quarters.
In a letter to 
him, Sir James says, " Dryander immediately contra- 
dicted this malicious falsehood ; but it gives me much 
concern that your conduct, which has been so ho- 
nourable, should have made you enemies.
I should be 
very unhappy if you suffer on my account, and shall 
always be ready to bear witness to the rectitude of 
your behaviour, and can at any time produce all the 
letters that have passed between us, as a proof.
" Between ourselves^ it is certainly a disgrace to 
the university that they suffered such a treasure to 
leave them : but if those who ought most to have 
loved and protected the immortal name of Linne 
failed in their duty, he shall not want a friend or an 
asylum while I live or have any power, though ever 
so small, to do him honour." 
Sir James's first idea was to deposit his purchase 
in some spare rooms in the British Museum ; but 
he found some objections to the scheme^ and pre- 
ferred taking a house, that it might be safer, and 
more accessible to himself and his friends.
He 
therefore hired apartments in Paradise-row, Chel- 
sea, whither it was immediately conveyed ; and often 
has he recurred with great pleasure to the first win- 
ter after its arrival, when, with Sir J.
Banks and Mr.
Dryander, they examined the herbarium minutely, 
128 
and carefully unpacked and arranged the whole 
collection.
With no premeditated design of relinquishing 
physic as a profession, yet from this hour he de- 
voted his time and all the powers of his mind to 
the ohject for which he had hazarded so much; nor 
was there ever a period, in his subsequent life, of 
misgiving or regret that he had made a wrong 
choice : neither was his love of botany pursued to 
the exclusion of other literature or lighter plea- 
sures ; but it was the charm of his existence, al- 
ways at hand ready to take up, always leading the 
mind forward, and filling his hours with satisfac- 
tion.
How well he estimated his own powers, and 
came up to the expectations formed of him, may be 
learnt from the opinions of his fellow-labourers in 
the fields of science.
Mr. Pitcliford to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Norwich, Nov. 26, 1784.
Since I wrote my last short letter, I have had 
some conversation with Mr. Smith your father 
about your collection.
As he seemed desirous 
that your friends should communicate to you every 
thing they thought about the matter, I esteem it 
an honour he does me, in supposing mine worth 
your perusal ; and as I should be very happy in ren- 
dering you any real service, so you must accept the 
following as written with that intention, to be re- 
jected or embraced as your own good sense and 
129 
prudence will point out, and offered merely as 
hints which may or may not be well grounded, as 
I cannot but have an imperfect knowledge of some 
parts of the matter.
First then, as the human mind is limited, and 
your first business is that of the study of physic, 
give me leave to say, that as your thoughts must 
unavoidably be much engrossed by the variety and 
pleasingness of the many objects about you, I would 
not suffer them to get too much possession of my 
mind ; but after I had arranged everything to my 
satisfaction, and taken a complete catalogue, I 
would let the collection remain as it was, after I 
had digested the following considerations : viz.
whether I should dispose of any part of it at all ?
and if I did, whether it would be right to do it di- 
rectly while the public curiosity was awake, or wait ?
— If you mean to give lectures, the minerals cannot 
be disposed of, no more than the insects or plants.
I conclude therefore that you will not dispose of 
these at present, as you cannot tell whether you 
may lecture or not.
— Secondly, as to the matter of 
publishing, I am to suppose (without knowing it 
to be a fact) that you have complete manuscripts 
of S?/sL N^at., Gen. and Sp. PL, Fl.
/5e/ec2c.,andthe 
eighth volume of Amoen, Acad., for an improved 
edition of each.
But first let me ask you, whether 
your hortus siccus is named by this manuscript edi- 
tion ?
— If it is not, it certainly must, as many alter- 
ations may have taken place.
If it is, it remains 
whether you mean to publish these, or not ?
At 
present certainly not, as you have not time ; but 
VOL.
I. K 
130 
Mr. Rose thinks you should by all means offer them 
to the booksellers at once, who he thinks would give 
a very handsome sum (he guesses 500/.) ; whereas 
you nmst run a hazard, with the certainty of a great 
loss of time in the publication, revisal, &c., if you 
are the publisher.
If you cannot sell them to your 
mind, they can but remain till some future occasion 
brings them forth.
— Thirdly, there is one work 
which I am sure you have in your power to pub- 
lish yourself, and you only, provided you could 
have possession of Ray's plants, viz., a Flora Bri- 
tannica, the most correct that can appear in the Lin- 
n(Ban dress ; and such English plants as are not in 
the Linnaean collection must have new names, which, 
if you cannot get Ray's plants, must have that au- 
thor's synonyms as far as it appears certain they 
are his.
Such a work as this I think you might 
safely publish ; but I have no idea that you will have 
it in your power to do it at present, as your 
thoughts must be employed on other matters.
Upon the last matter on which I would venture 
to write my thoughts I own I am entirely at a loss ; 
for, after all the conversation I had with Mr. Smith 
on the subject, we both, I believe, remained in the 
same uncertainty, viz., how far you can with pro- 
priety show your hortus siccus ?
I am afraid you 
must have difficulty in it, as your natural good- 
nature would be put to a trial to refuse any one a 
sight they are so desirous of enjoying ; and yet with 
regard to the English plants, if you mean to pub- 
lish yourself, you would not choose to be anticipated.
I hope you do not think me invidious in saying 
131 
this : I mean it only for your sake, and if you do 
not publish yourself, there is nothing in it, except 
the time it would cost you in the exhibition, which 
I suppose you would regulate so as to make it as 
little burthensome as possible.
I own, for my own 
particular, that I should be severely mortified if I 
was in London and could not take a peep.
I have thus offered you a few crude thoughts on 
subjects which I own I am not sufficient judge 
of; and, as I said in the beginning, you will accept 
them for the intention with which they are written, 
and as induced by Mr. Smith your father ; and if 
you can spare leisure to send me a few lines, I shall 
receive them with pleasure.
I need not 'say Mr. Rose and the rest of your 
botanical friends here desire their best compliments.
Dear Sir, 
Your ever obliged and affectionate humble servant, 
J. PiTCHFORD.
I have lately seen specimens of Athamanta Oreo- 
sel.
of Hudson, gathered by Mr. Relhan within a 
mile and half of Cambridge, and named by him 
Atham.
Libanotis, in which we think him right.
Mr. Hudson has found plenty of Corrigiola lit- 
toralis on the Devonshire coast.
Professor tl.
Sibthorpto Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Gottingen, Jan. 1, 1785.
Give me leave to congratulate you upon your 
K 2 
132 
late acquisition of the Linnaean cabinet.
The dis- 
appointment I feel in not possessing it myself is in 
great measure alleviated by the kind opportunity 
vou offer me of consulting it upon my return to 
England.
We were competitors from a laudable 
ambition, and I trust are not worse friends for 
our competition.
You have left me only one wish, 
that in case you should ever be disposed to part 
with it, you will give me the first refusal.
You 
very fortunately closed with Acrel a short time be- 
fore he received a letter from me offering him a 
thousand guineas ; and, as I was told by your banker 
Wilkieson at Amsterdam, you got it for nine hun- 
dred.
The Swedes I hear are very angry at Acrel's 
disposing of it ; and indeed Sweden must have very 
little money, and very little respect for the memory 
of Linnaeus, to suffer his collection to be so soon 
expatriated.
If I can render you any service in the course of 
my travels, I beg you will command me, I am now 
in Gottingen, a German university of much learned 
labour and sober science, with a library the richest 
in modern books of any in Europe.
The facility of 
procuring these books, the opportunity of learning 
the German language, with the civility and lite- 
rary society of the professors, give me the utmost 
satisfaction.
Should you think of spending some 
time on the continent, I know of no situation more 
eligible, or that I should recommend to you more 
strongly than Gottingen.
Pray have you a printed 
catalogue of Linnaeus's books ?
If you have, will 
you do me the pleasure to send it me r or could you 
133 
get your manuscript transcribed for me ?
as I ima- 
gine it is not very bulky.
Do tell Dryander that 
my very respectable friend Sir Joseph may procure 
many of his desiderata at Professor Spielman's 
auction, which will be in Strasbro' in April next.
I 
dare say you will often see my worthy friend Mr.
Lightfoot.
I beg you will make him my best com- 
pliments, and tell him I have got specimens (almost 
a complete collection) of the land and fresh-water 
shells of Switzerland, which I only wait for an op- 
portunity to send to the Duchess of Portland.
Has 
our friend Dickson published his lyncean disco- 
veries r Broussonet tells me of strange wonders (a 
Rosa unifolia from Ispahan) in the Paris garden ; 
and I imagine L'Heritier is almost ready with his 
first Decas of Plant.
Rarior.
Thunberg has lately 
attempted to throw some light upon the Bohun 
Upas, or Poison-tree, which he imagines to be a 
species of Sideroxylon, Ferber will probably suc- 
ceed to the chair of Bergman.
Schreber is writing 
a monography on the genus Aster, and a little dis- 
sertation on the Boletus suaveolens.
A Flora and Fauna of Lombardy is expected 
from Scopoli, and Professor Lachenal and Saussure 
are collecting the materials for the complete natu- 
ral history of Switzerland.
I am here as a prac- 
titioner, making experiments upon the Caryophyl- 
lata, to chase away intermittents ; and as our hos- 
pital physician is a pupil of the school of Vienna, 
the Cicut a, Arnica^ and Pulsatilla,^.Ye in constant use 
— Valeant quantujiivalere I look on, but with 
impartial eyes.
It is here somewhat colder than in 
134 
England; the principal amusement going in sledges, 
everybody wrapped up in furs.
— I shall be very 
happy to hear from you.
I am, dear Sir, with much respect, 
Your sincere Friend, 
J. SiBTHORP.
The most devoted friend to natural science, and 
one most personally attached to Sir James, w^as the 
late Bishop of Carlisle.
The following is a passage 
from the very first letter he appears to have written 
to him, and is dated January, 1785.
" Natural history is to me an object of perpe- 
tual pleasure ; and whatsoever, therefore, you will 
be pleased to lay by for me will not be thrown 
away upon one who is insensible of the trouble 
(I have propria persona collected and dried full 
3000 specimens) or value of collecting specimens 
of plants.
Other branches also of natural history 
have been my study.
" Your noble purchase of the Linncean cabinet 
most decidedly sets Britain above all other nations 
in the Botanical Empire ; and it w^ere much to be 
wished that the studies of individuals with respect 
to the science at large would become so animated 
and so successful, that she might be induced to fix 
her seat amongst us." 
On the 21st of February 1785, Sir James informs 
his father, " I take the chair this evening in the 
135 
Natural History Society for the tirst time.
We 
meet in a room in Leicester Square.
My certi- 
ficate was given in to the Royal Society last Thurs- 
day, signed by Drs. Garden * and Combe-j-, Sir John 
Cullum:^:, and Mr. Hudson §.
Sir Joseph Banks (the 
President) thinks I have no fear of being rejected ; 
at least, he says, I shall have him on my side." 
Rev. Mr.
Lightfoot to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Uxbridge, May 5, 1785.
Your magnificent coUection afforded the highest 
gratification to the Duchess of Portland ||, and the 
little presents you made her obliged her extremely.
* Dr. Alexander Garden, a memoir of whom is given in the 
Linnsean Correspondence, vol.
i. 282.
f Dr. Charles Combe, author of a Catalogue of the coins in 
Dr. William Hunter's collection, and other works.
;{; Sir John Cullum, author of the History and Antiquities of 
Hawsted and Hardwick in the county of Suffolk, and elder bro- 
ther of Sir Thomas Geary Cullum, Bart.
— This accomplished 
writer of one of the best topographical works extant, died in 
October 1785, aged 51.
§ Mr. William Hudson, one of the earliest Linnaean botanists 
in England, and author of the Flora Anglica, published in 1762, 
in one volume octavo.
II Margaret Cavendish Harley, heiress of the Harley and 
Holies ftunilies, married in 1734 to the second Duke of Portland, 
and long celebrated as the nnunificent and intelligent patroness of 
natural history, especially conchology.
— Her Grace died the 7th 
of July 1785, and her fine collection was afterwards sold by 
public auction in April 1786, and occupied thirty'seven days.
The number of lots was no fewer than 4156, and the produce 
amounted to 11,5217.
4*.
— Linncean Correspondence, and Cata- 
logue.
136 
This introduction will I hope make you better ac- 
quainted with her, and be productive of a visit to her 
noble seat of Bulstrode, when I shall hope to have 
a share of your company there and at Uxbridge.
As your election to become F.R.S. approaches, 
if you think there will be the least occasion for my 
presence, be pleased to write me a line, and I will 
be ready to tender you my services at a day's no- 
tice ; and will at the same period beg another day 
or two to go through with the doubtful plants, if 
you will indulge me so far.
I am.
Sir, with great regard and affection.
Your most obliged humble servant, 
John Lightfoot.
Please to try if you can make out the Murex am- 
biguus and despectus of Linnaeus, as also his M.
cor- 
7ieus^ against I see you.
On the 28th of May, Sir James acquaints his 
father that " he was admitted a Fellow of the Royal 
Society on Thursday, without a single black ball ;''^ 
and adds, "I paid my money, 32/.
116"., and took 
my seat the same evening : my success was indeed 
very flattering, and I believe gave my good friend 
the President great pleasure.
" I received a letter lately from Monsieur L'Heri- 
tier, a counsellor at Paris, on a botanical subject; in 
which he says, he will at any time give me my pur- 
chase-money and any other expense that I may have 
been at for my collection ; but not expecting I 
137 
should listen to this offer, he earnestly desires to 
buy the duplieates of plants, if any, at whatever 
price shall be judged reasonable.
" I have lately employed a few hours in trans- 
lating into English a little treatise of Linnseus's 
recommending the study of nature : it begins by 
showing that this study leads to a proper know- 
ledge of the Deity, then takes a comprehensive 
view of the oeconomy of nature, and ends with a 
number of curious and striking facts in the history 
of a number of animals.
— It is the Introduction to 
a large work of his, which few people here have 
seen ; I think this preface would be very accepta- 
table to the public*.
" I inclose you a preface to it of my own, and 
wish it may meet your approbation.
I do not mean 
to put my name to it; all my friends will know it is 
mine; it is not of consequence enough to make me 
known, nor is my name of importance enough to 
make it sell." 
Rev. Henry Bryant to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Sir, Heydon, May 28, 1785.
Yours of the 19th came safe to hand, the con- 
tents of which gave me infinite satisfaction, as they 
informed me of your good state of health, and your 
laudable endeavours to acquire knowledge and lite- 
rary fame ; and whatever may be in my power to 
forward such pursuits, you may at all times com- 
* Published in June 1785, under the title of " Reflections on 
the Study of Nature." 
138 
mand.
You are now in possession of the greatest 
part of the natural wealth of almost the habitable 
world; and therefore the public must look up to you 
for information, which I trust you will be ready to 
give, as they will at all times be thankful to receive 
from you.
I make no doubt but we have been in numberless 
errors, both in the Cryptogamian and other classes; 
which does not show that words are inadequate to 
convey our ideas to one another, but only that the 
first attempts of the Linnsean method of doing it in 
a certain number of words, is not always sufficient 
for the purpose ; and therefore, where more are 
necessary, more should be employed.
— I know no- 
thing of the preface of the MuscBum Regis Adolphi 
Frederici, and shall be very glad to see it when it 
comes forth.
My essay on Branded Wheat was 
partly intended for the same purpose you mention.
I have lately found the Bryum aureum and 
fleonwsum, and a new one for which I want a name.
Likewise the Riccia iiatans, which I suspect is not 
in your collection ; and many other good things, 
any of which shall be at your service.
Henry Bryant.
Mr. Smith to Mr. tJames Edward Smith.
Dear Son, Norwich, June 2, 1785.
I received yours of the 19th and 23rd of May, by 
Mrs. Kindersley, and on Sunday that of the 28th 
with the very agreeable news of your being ad- 
mitted F.R.S., of which I give you joy most cor- 
139 
dially, and especially on the unanimity with which 
you came in, which is a great addition to the honour, 
and must be to your satisfaction.
I believe 'tis 
looked upon here as a very extraordinary thing, 
and does you great honour in the opinion of the 
world.
As for your care of, and the use to make of your 
collection, 'tis at your own discretion ; I would only 
wish to guard you against either the flatteries or 
circumventions of pretended friends, and men who 
may be interested in misleading your conduct with 
respect to it.
I know the purity of your own heart, 
which being incapable of any mean or base designs, 
will hardly permit you to suppose others can : ex- 
perience will certainly convince you of the contrary, 
and there can be no harm in beginning to be on 
your guard in good time in matters of importance.
I thought Mr. Pitchford's the letter of a true 
friend ; and I thought your answer considerate and 
manly.
I will not conjecture myself into uneasi- 
ness ; but as you well know the interest I take 
in your prosperity and happiness, which is much 
dearer to me than my own, I cannot avoid com- 
municating to you my most secret thoughts, and to 
the best of my abilities (I wish to God they were 
greater) be your watchman against any evil that 
may approach you.
I had rather say twenty useless 
things than omit one piece of advice that may be of 
the least service to you ; and I have that opinion of 
your affection for me, that you will not put that 
down to the score of impertinence, which proceeds 
from the purest sources of parental love and esteem.
140 
I have read Le Mtdec'in de Soi-mhne once with 
great pleasure, and am reading it again with more : 
there are some most excellent things in it I am 
certain ; and tho' 'tis a severe satire upon interested 
and dishonest practitioners, I think such upright 
ones as yourself will applaud the good sense and 
honest advice of the author : besides, I am mista- 
ken if the wisest may not gather some more wis- 
dom from it.
It seems to me Linnaeus had read it, 
and thought it worth while to mark some passages 
w^ith his pen.
I will return it as soon as Francis 
and I have read it, and I beg you will never part 
with it.
I am reading Milton with great reverence and 
pleasure : 'tis immensely sensible and often very 
entertaining, tho' the language is uncouth.
'Tis 
curious to observe him when he is upon a subject 
that is not to be explained or supported, how he 
labours and struggles, you may see without satisfy- 
ing even himself ; hov/ then can he his readers ?
But when he is supporting truth and liberty, he car- 
ries it with a high hand indeed.
I never met so ner- 
vous and triumphant an opposer of temporal and 
spiritual tyranny, as far as I have yet gone in the 
books.
They are curious and valuable for the sake 
of the publisher, and his having marked with his 
pen the passages that most forcibly struck him.
— 
This work is an invaluable gem in your library*.
* The annexed observations upon this fine edition of Mihon, 
are from Mr. Smith's common-place book.
" The Works of John Milton.
Historical, Political, and Mis- 
cellaneous.
Non' more correctly printed from the Originals than 
141 
As for the people of EngUmd, what with factions, 
plundering and being plundered, and luxury, they 
seem to be dead to their true interests, nay to their 
safety, — and, I fear I may add, to their existence as a 
in any former edition, and many jMssages restored, tvliich have 
been hitherto omitted.
To whicli is prejixed an Account of his Life 
and Writings.
In 11 volumes, quarto, 1753.
— This very fine 
and beautiful edition of Milton's prose works was published by 
that very eminent friend of liberty and the rights of mankind, 
Mr. Hollis, who bestowed the most part of the income of a 
very large estate in promoting them to the utmost of his power.
For this end, to perpetuate the writings, and disperse the doc- 
trines of the authors who have been the most conspicuous friends 
to civil and religious liberty, he reprinted several of their 
works in very good editions, and presented fine sets of them to 
almost every university, learned society, and eminent man, in 
Europe, perhaps the world.
Among the rest, Milton, holding 
the first rank upon many considerations, did not escape this ho- 
nour, as well as Toland's Life of Milton.
" The books I read were presented by Mr. Hollis to the late 
celebrated Linnaeus, and came with his library and collection 
into the possession of my son, James Edward Smith.
They are 
addressed to Linnaeus, in the first leaf, in Mr. HoUis's own hand, 
though not signed with his name, and there are many notes 
and marks in manuscript by the same hand throughout both 
volumes, 
" Milton's prose style is very faulty ; 'tis intricate, stiff, and the 
periods immensely long, formed in the manner of the Latin, 
some tracts more so than others ; but the strong sense and forci- 
ble expressions that abound in them, make full amends for the 
pain of reading much that is uncouth and awkward.
The most 
liberal and free notions and principles both in church and state, 
are maintained without reserve, and they will be a perpetual 
monument of the vigour of the minds of our ancestors in the age 
of Milton." 
It is remarkable that Mr. Smith uses the epithet uncouth in 
142 
people.
I know you and my good friend Mr. Clay 
will smile at my grave politics ; and you in the 
midst of your library and kingdom of nature look 
down on the miserable mortals who are busy in 
speaking of Milton's periods ; yet Milton employs the same 
word while speaking of himself, in the finest elegiac poem that 
was ever written, for " the force of language can no further go." 
"Thus sang the uncouth swain to th' okes and rills, 
While the still morn went out with sandals gray ; 
He touch'd the tender stops of various quills, 
With eager thought warbling his Doric lay." 
How would the excellent father of Sir James Smith have de- 
lighted in the interchange of thoughts and ideas with Dr. Chan- 
ning, upon Milton alone !
Speaking of the intellectual qualities 
of our great poet, in his " Remarks on the Character and Writ- 
ings of Milton," Dr. C.
has observed, *' that the very splendour 
of his poetic fame has tended to obscure and conceal the extent 
of his mind and the variety of its energies and attainments.
— Of 
all God's gifts of intellect, Milton esteemed poetical genius the 
most transcendent.
He esteemed it in himself as a kind of in- 
spiration, and wrote his great works with something of the 
conscious dignity of a prophet.
It seems to us the divinest of 
all arts ; for it is the breathing or expression of that principle or 
sentiment which is deepest and sublimest in human nature, — we 
mean of that thirst or aspiration to which no mind is wholly a 
stranger, for something purer and lovelier, something more 
powerful, lofty, and thrilling, than ordinary and real life affords.
" But we rejoice," continues Dr. Channing, " that the dust 
is beginning to be wiped from Milton's prose writings, and that 
the public are now learning, what the initiated have long known, 
that these contain passages hardly inferior to his best poetry, 
and that they are throughout marked with the same vigorous 
mind which gave us Paradise Lost.
We recommend them to 
all who can enjoy great beauties in the neighbourhood of faults, 
and who would learn the compass, energy, and richness of our 
143 
working out their own misfortune in corruption 
and injustice.
I hope, my dear James, your useful, 
pleasing pursuits will never be interrupted by any 
thing that may happen to kingdoms and states : 
language ; and still more do we recommend them to those who 
desire to nourish in their breasts magnanimity of sentiment and 
an unquenchable love of freedoin.
They bear the impress of 
that seal, by which genius distinguishes its productions from 
works of learning and taste.
The great and decisive test of 
genius is, that it calls forth power in the souls of others.
It not 
merely gives knowledge, but breathes energy.
There are au- 
thors, and among these Milton holds the highest rank, in ap- 
proaching whom we are conscious of an access of intellectual 
strength.
A ' virtue goes out ' from them.
We discern more 
clearly, not merely because a new light is thrown over objects, 
but because our own vision is strengthened.
Sometimes a sin- 
gle word, spoken by the voice of genius, goes far into the heart.
A hint, a suggestion, an undefined delicacy of expression, teaches 
more than we gather from volumes of less gifted men.
" His moral character was as strongly marked as his intellec- 
tual, and it may be expressed in one word, magnanimity.
It 
was in harmony with his poetry.
He had a passionate love of 
the higher, more commanding, and majestic virtues, and fed 
his youthful mind with meditations on the perfection of a human 
being.
We have this vivid picture of his aspirations after vir- 
tue : — ' What God may have determined for me I know not ; 
but this I know, that if he ever instilled an intense love of moral 
beauty into the breast of any man, he has instilled it into mine.
Ceres in the fable pursued not her daughter with a greater keen- 
ness of inquiry, than I, day and night, the idea of perfection.
Hence whenever I find a man despising the false estimates of the 
vulgar, and daring to aspire in sentiment, language and conduct, 
to what the highest wisdom, through every age, has taught us as 
most excellent, to him I unite myself by a sort of necessary at- 
tachment.' 
" He reverenced moral purity and elevation, not only for its 
own sake, but as the inspirer of intellect, and especially of tlie 
144 
and I trust Providence will ever protect such as are 
studying to do good to mankind with such upright 
intentions, and so good a heart, as it is one of the 
chief causes of the happiness I do enjoy to know 
you possess.
We join in the tenderest love.
I remain.
Dear James, ever yours, 
James Smith.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
My dear Son, Norwich, Nov. 28, 1785.
I wrote to you on Wednesday last, to propose to 
your consideration the delaying your journey to 
Leyden till the spring, that you might have milder 
weather, more favourable to your health as well as 
pleasure and comfort, which are all so dear to your 
parents and family ; and I advanced as an argument, 
the safety of your museum and library in the long 
winter nights.
To all which I shall be glad to hear 
your opinion ; to which we shall I hope concede 
with firmness, as we are satisfied your prudence 
and good judgement will fix your resolves upon what 
higher efforts of poetry.
— ' I was confirmed,' he says, in his 
usual noble style, 'I was confirmed in this opinion, that he who 
would not be frustrate of his hope to write well hereafter in laud- 
able things, ow^Ai himself to be a true poem; thatis, a composition 
and pattern of the best and honourablest things : not presuming 
to sing of high praises of heroic men, or fanaous cities, unless he 
have in himself the experience and the practice of all that which 
is praiseworthy.' " 
145 
is best for you to do ; as you know all circum- 
stances better than ourselves : and we trust that kind 
over-ruling Providence that has so distinguishedly 
conducted and protected you so far on the journey 
of hfe, will continue your friend and guide.
To 
God Almighty then we commend you in our daily 
prayers ; and we rely on your virtue and piety that 
you will not lose his favour and regard.
Mr. Martineau thinks the spring, when the waters 
are set at liberty in the marshes of the Low Coun- 
tries, is more unfavourable to intermittents than 
the depth of winter ; but I am more afraid of the 
severe cold for your constitution than the fogs and 
exhalations, which I think you may more easily 
avoid.
Indeed, my dear James, I believe my own 
health and happiness depend in a very great mea- 
sure upon yours.
There is no doubt but you will make the best use 
of your stay at Chelsea, and I trust that your publi- 
cations will bring you both honour and profit : whilst 
you are thus employed, I dare say you will not neg- 
lect the study of medicine, which, if not the entire 
foundation, I must look to as the superstructure 
of your fortune, and I forebode of your fame too.
I have finished Milton.
There is so strong a 
beam of good sense and profound judgement, that 
I was highly pleased with his prose works, and could 
read them again if I had leisure.
Pray have you read Sonnerat's account of the 
Medicine, and especially the Mythology, of the 
East Indians ?
Perhaps you have not, though you 
may the Natural History.
I have got to the end of 
VOL.
I. L 
146 
the Mythology, to which there are some curious 
notes indeed, which I shall not make my observa- 
tions upon till you have read that part of the work : 
it entertains and informs me very much, and is writ- 
ten, in my opinion, in the best manner I ever met 
with any account of countries.
I judge the author 
to be very liberal, and a sound deep philosopher.
Your ever affectionate, 
James Smith.
Dr. Hope to Mr. James Edward Smith, F.R.S.
Dear Sir, Edinburgh, April 24, 1 786.
A few days ago I had the pleasure of receiving 
your kind letter and acceptable present.
I thank 
you for a copy in English dress of a Dissertation I 
long wished to see.
I thank you for the honour you 
do me in dedicating it to me *; and I thank you very 
much for the many kind expressions in your letter.
The more I thought of publishing'on a large scale 
the entire plant o^ Assa fcetida, the more difficul- 
ties I perceived in the execution of such a design ; 
till finally I saw clearly I had been mistaken, and 
that Sir J.
Banks had done the thing in the best way 
for me, and for which 1 am much indebted to him.
I hear with great pleasure of your intention, upon 
your return to Britain, to publish a new edition of 
the Species Plantarum.
I most heartily wish you 
success.
You have so happy a genius for botany, 
and so much unremitting zeal for the improvement 
of the science, that I heartily wish His Majesty, by 
* Dissertation on the Sexes of Plants.
147 
a good pension, would induce you to give up physic.
My son attends with great vigour every branch of 
physic ; — had he leisure for it, he should make a bo- 
tanical tour through Scotland this summer.
Believe me, my dear Sir, with much sincere 
regard, 
Your most obedient humble Servant, 
John Hope.
The concluding letter from his father was written 
immediately before Sir James set out upon his conti- 
nental tour, as will appear by the following chapter.
Mr. Smith to Mr. James Edward Smith.
Dear Son, Norwich, June 4, 1786.
Every thing has gone on as it should do in my 
absence, and except the prospect of parting with 
you for a time, we are as happy as we can expect 
to be in this world : and as hope is the most com- 
fortable food the mind can partake of, we look for- 
ward with pleasing anxiety to your happy return.
In the mean time we recommend you to the Divine 
protection, which can carry you safe where thickest 
dangers run, to restore you to us again in the full- 
ness of time.
I am dull and weary : you must excuse my adding 
more, than sincere good wishes for you on your 
journey.
I am, my dear James, ever affectionately yours, 
James Smith.
L 2 
148 
CHAPTER III.
Sir J.
E. Smith begins his travels.— His correspondence with va- 
rious friends.
— Publication of his " Sketch of a Tour on the 
Continent."— ' His taste for the Fine Arts.
— Introduced by Vis- 
countess Cremorne to the late Queen Charlotte.
— Instructs Her 
Majesty and the Princesses in Natural History.
— Loses the 
Queen's favour by some expressions in his Tour.
— Rousseau.
— 
Approbation of his Tour by Dr. Pulteney and Mr. Pennant.
— 
Origin of his acquaintance with Colonel Johnes.
— Visit to Ha- 
fod.
— Miss Johnes.
— Letters of Mr. Johnes.
— Letter from Mrs.
Watt, the only daughter of Ellis ; and other friends.
— Introduc- 
tory Lecture at the Royal Institution in 1808.
— List of Foreign 
Professors.
In somewhat less than two years after Sir James 
became possessed of the collections of Linnaeus, he 
began a tour through Holland, France, Italy and 
Switzerland, on the 16th of June, 1786.
The im- 
mediate object was to obtain a medical degree at 
Leyden.
The name of Linnaeus, he tells us, opened every 
door and cabinet to him, though he disclaims the 
weakness of assuming to himself the honours which 
were paid to that name.
The following letters to and from the traveller 
will throw some light upon what was passing in 
natural history in England during his absence, as 
149 
well as describe the objects and pleasures of this 
delightful tour.
How frequently soever these coun- 
tries have been visited, descriptions of them seem 
never unwelcome to the reader.
A traveller, who 
preceded Sir James, observed of Italy, that it is " a 
fine well-known academy figure, from which all sit 
down to make drawings, according as the light falls, 
and their own seat affords opportunity." So, like 
the pencil or the chisel, the pen also portrays, not 
merely the scene, but the character of the mind 
which directs it, making either a beautiful, a grand, 
or a mean representation.
The friendly letter of introduction to Professor 
Allamand, which the traveller carried with him, 
from Sir J.
Banks, may, without seeming too arro- 
gant, precede the other correspondence; and is 
given as a proof of the high esteem in which, at so 
early a period.
Sir James was held by that eminent 
man.
Letter of Introduction from Sir Joseph Banks to 
Professor Allamand, Ley den.
Sir, London, June 16, 1786.
Give me leave to recommend to your notice the 
bearer of this, Mr. Smith : he is an enthusiast in 
natural history, and I really hope will one day be- 
come one of the chief supports of that science.
He has purchased at a very liberal price the her- 
barium, library and other collections of our great 
master Linnaeus, and has for some time had them 
in his possession.
You will find him well informed 
150 
in every branch of natural history, but particularly 
so in botany : he intends to take his degrees in 
Leyden, in the physical faculty ; and I trust you 
will find him able to stand a good examination in 
that also.
Allow me, good Sir, to request that you 
will introduce him to Professor Van Royen, and 
claim in my name the Professor's civilities to him : 
he brings a parcel of American ferns as a present 
from me to Dr. Van Royen's collection.
I am 
called upon suddenly for this letter, and pressed by 
business have not time to make it more particular ; 
but you shall hear from me again, and I shall have 
the pleasure also of answering Mr. Van Royen's 
obliging letter at my first leisure.
Believe me.
Sir, 
Your most obedient humble Servant, 
Joseph Banks.
«/.
E. Smith to his Mother.
Honoured Madam, Leyden, June 26, 1786.
I wrote to my father from Rotterdam, and hope 
he received my letter.
I had a very pleasant voy- 
age thence along a canal to this place.
On Friday 
morning I called on Professor Sandiforte, to whom 
I had letters, and that afternoon was fixed for my 
examination ; it lasted about forty minutes in Latin, 
and gave me, and I hope the Professor, much satis- 
faction.
Next day I was examined by the College, 
and had two aphorisms of Hippocrates given me to 
write on, which I gave in this day, and am now en- 
161 
titled to my degree when I please : I only wait for 
the printing of my thesis.
I doubt not you will 
rejoice with me at my having got through the trial, 
about which I felt no small anxiety; although I 
think scarcely so much as I did before my election to 
the Royal Society.
I thought the examination very 
proper and sensible ; nothing but what was useful 
was asked, although some questions were very mi- 
nute.
Mr. Vaughan, one of my companions, passed 
his examination at the same time as myself.
The 
students here are treated like gentlemen by every- 
body ; indeed the people are extremely polite, ra- 
ther troublesomely so.
When one goes along the 
street every well-dressed person pulls off his hat 
in so slow and formal a manner, that one had 
need have nothing else to do but to return their 
compliments ; andallthe students bow to each other 
in the same way.
Yesterday I was at a party at Professor AUa- 
mand's, the oldest professor in the university, to 
whom I was particularly recommended by Sir Jo- 
seph Banks : there was a large party, and very po- 
lite one ; their manners quite French, and nothing 
but French was talked : there were four or five 
card-tables, although it was Sunday ; and before I 
was aware of it, a whist party was made on my 
account, being an Englishman ; so I could not avoid 
playing, although it was a desperate undertaking 
for me, who do not pretend to be a whist player, 
nor ever played at cards in French before : how- 
ever, I was successful, and was at least as good a 
player as the rest ; for 'tis not a game any people 
152 
shine in but the Enghsh.
Nothing could exceed 
the politeness of the company, and of Monsieur 
and Madame Allamand : today he carried me to 
the Botanical Professor, who walked with me two 
hours in the garden this evening.
I found my 
friend Van Meurs at Leyden ; he is gone to Am- 
sterdam, where I am to meet him on Thursday nex 
to see that town.
My two companions are very 
good kind of young men, and a great comfort to 
me ; we have taken lodgings together ; — one very 
large and good dining-room, and two chambers, for 
about two guineas per month, which divided be- 
tween three makes it come cheap to us.
All the 
people here speak French ; every thing is contrived 
in the best manner to provide for the convenience 
of students, as they are the chief support of the 
town.
The principal street in which we live is 
truly noble, full of very handsome houses and fine 
public buildings ; the houses have platforms of grey 
marble before them, which are washed clean every 
day ; the middles of the streets are paved with 
stones like the London pavement (not flag stones), 
and the sides with bricks ; no gutters in the streets ; 
and the whole is so clean that you might safely sit 
down in any part.
The insides of the houses are 
neat in proportion, and superbly ornamented with 
marble ; the rooms very lofty and large ; every 
part so wonderfully cleaned and polished that you 
would be charmed with it : 'tis the same with our 
beds, and every thing we have to use.
The houses 
on the outside resemble some good old houses in 
Yarmouth more than any others that I have seen ; 
153 
but every house in the town looks as if it had been 
cleaned and painted within this fortnight.
Adieu, my dear Madam ; 
I am your dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Rev. Dr.
Goodenough to J, E.
Smith, Ley den.
My dear Sir, Ealing, July 3, 1786.
I give you much joy upon your succeeding with 
such eclat at Leyden, and am much obliged to you 
for your kind remembrance of me ; you cannot re- 
peat it too often : there are very few people with 
whom I correspond for pleasure, because I can find 
nobody, scarcely, who loves to live with his eyes 
open, and has philosophy enough to talk of any 
thing but common occurrences.
I pity your sea- 
sickness, which horrid consideration curbs my roving 
spirit, and bids me think that I am very well off in 
staying at home.
How delightful must your hours 
pass with Allamand and Van Royen !
Your account 
of the Chamco^ops humilis*, planted by Clusius, is 
truly wonderful.
Is it likely still to live ; or does it 
bear marks of weakness and decay ?
The age of 
vegetables is a curious and useful subject; — you talk 
of getting specimens from Van Royen — .(Just at 
this moment, which is ten o'clock at night, I have 
caught the Cimex personatus, which settled on my 
paper.
— N.B. This is the second of this species 
which I have taken this year, both of them at night, 
* See Tour, i.
p. 11.
154 
whilst I was writing.) — I say, you talk of getting 
specimens : Pray think of my poor list if you have 
it with you, or if not, pack up for me any thing cu- 
rious (particularly English) which may offer.
I never saw so many of the Musca hovihylans, 
7nystacea ?m^pelluce7is, as this year.
I observe that 
some years particular insects are excessively com- 
mon ; and in others are very rarely to be met with.
I remember about eight years ago the PhaltEna 
Geometra samhucaria passed over my garden night 
after night, like flakes of snow almost : perhaps I 
speak a little too hyperbolically, but I am confident 
I have taken fifty on a night ; but since that time I 
have never seen twenty, that I know of.
If you 
pass by any places where the S'lum or Phella7idriuin 
is in plenty, do look for the Curculio paraplecticus^ 
and take as many of them as you can.
I am told 
it is not uncommon abroad.
The Ptinus elytris 
striatis is probably the Ptinus mollis of Linne.
Is 
it reddish brown ?
I am glad to hear that you had your talk out 
with Sir Joseph.
I wrote to Marsham last night, 
and told him what you said.
See how our minds 
move !
Marsham was at that instant writing to 
me upon the same subject.
He says he has had a 
conversation with Forsythe, and that we may have 
him if we please.
But Forsythe thinks that we 
might form a party in this Society, which he says 
wants lueeding very much.
But Marsham adds, 
" he told me many things which serve to convince 
me that that is impossible." I think of going to 
the next meeting of our Society, July 11th, and 
155 
then shall see Marsham, and you shall hear what is 
likely to be done.
I shall long for your return, as 
by that time I reckon that I shall have ten thou- 
sand questions to ask you.
You will therefore be 
apprized of some little troublesomeness on my part.
In the mean time, believe that you have the very 
best wishes of your very sincere friend, 
Samuel Goodenough.
J. E.
Smith to T.
J. Woodward, Esq.
Dear Sir, Leyden, July 14, 1786.
I heard of your having received my last with 
the Portland Catalogue ; and now write to let 
you know whereabouts I am, in hopes of being 
favoured with a line at your leisure.
I have gone through my examinations, and shall 
take my degree tomorrow.
I am very well pleased 
with this place, and with the Professors.
Van 
Royen and Allamand are as friendly and communi- 
cative as possible.
The garden is by far inferior 
to many in England ; but there are some things in 
it which we have not ; some of which I am pro- 
mised.
The garden at Amsterdam is rather neater, and 
has perhaps more plants in it, than the Leyden one; 
but Burman shelters his ignorance under his pro- 
fessional dignity, and is very difficult of access.
I 
could not get a sight of his herbarium ; nor did he 
seem to be acquainted with some very well known 
botanical facts.
How different is Van Royen I I 
156 
spend almost every morning with him in looking 
over original herbariums of Herman !
Boccone, 
and Rauwolf, as well as his own and his uncle's col- 
lections.
Conium Royeni proves to be nothing else than 
Caucalis daucuides.
This gentleman has just resigned the botanical 
chair, having reserved to himself the use of the gar- 
den : and a young man, of small skill, is appointed, 
against the approbation of Van Royen, who wished 
to have had Thunberg to succeed him ; but this is 
not publicly known.
I have seen no wild plant 
worth gathering except Eryng'iuni campestre, which 
was not in flower, and Menyanthes nymph(Eoides, 
which was out of my reach.
The former is very 
plentiful on the sides of the road from Helvoet to 
Rotterdam and elsewhere.
My inaugural dissertation is printed ; 'tis very 
trifling, but all my own or nearly so.
You shall 
have it as soon as I can send it ; but you must con- 
sider it merely as an exercise and a sketch.
Amsterdam is a fine town, and so is Leyden ; the 
former is all bustle, the latter stately and silent.
The streets wonderfully neat, and the houses very 
elegant.
The Dutch exceed us much in expense in 
fitting up their houses.
Every hall and kitchen al- 
most is paved with blue and white Italian marble.
I cannot meet with a single copy of Leers's Flora.
I have many commissions for it.
Charity begins 
at home, but you are next in my list.
Yours &c.
J. E.
Smith.
15- 
«/.
E. Smith to Mrs. Hoivorth.
Dear Madain, Ley den, July 15, 178G.
I hope I need not make any apology for not 
having sooner availed myself of the permission you 
gave me at parting ; for you will do me the justice 
to believe that I should not easily neglect an op- 
portunity of enjoying your conversation, or even 
the shadow of it : in fact, I have of late been very 
busy indeed, nor have I had a moment at my com- 
mand, till this day, for some time past.
This morn- 
ing finished my academical business, to my great 
joy.
Well has Miss Lane imagined that the great 
wigs must have a formidable appearance ; there 
were near twenty of them assembled ; some to bait 
me, and others to watch my behaviour.
However, 
thank God !
I came safe out of their hands, and 
have now nothing to receive from them but congra- 
tulations.
I go hence on Monday for the Hague, 
and thence to Antwerp, Brussels, &c.
nor will I 
forget to pay my devotions at the tomb of the good 
Archbishop of Cambray, as I have already done at 
that of Boerhaave.
I feel some reluctance at leaving Holland, and 
particularly Leyden.
I like the people better and 
better, and have made some agreeable acquaintances 
here.
There is something very delightful in the re- 
collection of being in a country of universal tolera- 
tion and unbounded liberty ; — the first country that 
afforded an asylum for the Protestant reformers 
who were driven from their native soil, and long 
158 
without a resting-place, till Amsterdam wisely re- 
ceived and protected them.
You may perhaps have 
read of the memorable siege of Leyden, which hap- 
pened at the time when this country was about to 
shake off the Spanish yoke.
The people were re- 
duced to eat the leaves of trees, as well as horses, 
dogs, every morsel of leather, and other animal 
substances in the town ; which at length were all 
exhausted.
A pestilence came on which carried off 
more than half the inhabitants ; and in this dreadful 
exigency the besiegers demanding the townsmen to 
surrender, the latter appeared on the walls, and 
vowed that they would first each cut off his left arm 
for food, and fight with his right.
The governor 
wrote to the Prince of Orange, that without help 
from him, or from Heaven, they could not resist 
two days longer.
At this crisis, providentially surely, the wind 
changed, and blew in such a manner that the Spa- 
nish army, fearing a flood, made a precipitate re- 
treat.
They were no sooner gone, than the wind 
returned to the same point as before, the waters 
retired, and there was an easy access to the town 
for the people with provisions, who flocked in on 
every side.
The churches were crowded with the 
famished wretches, who, just saved from the jaws of 
death, one moment greedily devoured the welcome 
food, and another, with sobs and inarticulate excla- 
mations, returned Heaven thanks for their deliver- 
ance ; insomuch that no regular or methodical 
service could be performed (surely never was said 
a more sincere or a more acceptable grace I).
And 
159 
here a new distress occurred ; the poor creatures, 
who were too eager and incautious in gratifying 
their craving appetites, many of them fell down dead 
on the spot, from having fasted so long ; so that the 
magistrates were obliged to regulate the quantity 
of provision for each person.
The day after this 
signal deliverance, the Prince of Orange went to 
Leyden to express his admiration of the inhabitants' 
behaviour, and gave them their choice, whether to 
be for a time exempt from certain taxes, or to have 
an University founded in their town : they wisely 
chose the latter, and have derived much profit from 
it.
— May not one be proud to belong to such an 
University ?
I look with reverence at the houses, 
which are of an earlier date than the period I have 
described ; and I contemplate with pleasure the 
portraits of the great founder of the College, and 
his no less illustrious son, Prince Maurice, which 
are in the Public Library.
I could tell you some 
very interesting anecdotes of persons who have 
lived in this to\Mi ; but at present must omit them.
I assure you, I am, &c.
J. E.
Smith.
J. E, Smith to his Mother.
Honoured Madam, Rotterdam, July 20, 1786.
This day I came through Delft and saw the mag- 
nificent monument of William I., the great Prince 
of Orange, not without great veneration.
I put my 
fingers into two holes in the wall of the house 
where he was murdered, which were made by the 
pistol balls after they had passed through his body.
160 
He had just dined and was coming down stairs, 
when near the bottom the assassin pretending to 
have some business with him, shot him ahnost in- 
stantly dead.
There is an inscription on the wall to 
commemorate it.
What a great man was Maurice Prince of Sax- 
ony ; to whom Germany owed its liberty, and whose 
daughter married the great Prince of Orange, by 
whom she had Prince Maurice !
What a constel- 
lation !
I am sure you would be charmed with the Dutch 
neatness, as I am.
Their beds here are made in the 
form of those in the pictures to our History of the 
Bible.
I should have liked very well, if I had had 
nothing else to do, to have stayed longer at Leyden, 
for I began to form some very agreeable acquain- 
tances there.
It is the custom in this country for 
strangers coming to a place to make the first visit : 
if I had known that at first, I should have made 
acquaintances sooner.
I was very often at Professor 
Allamand's, and learnt many little particulars of 
etiquette, which it is not amiss to know.
There are 
many very delightful walks about Leyden, but all 
flat.
The Hague is the pleasantest place I have 
seen : on one side of it is a delightful wood, which 
extends three miles, in which is the Prince of 
Orange's summer palace ; on the other side is a 
fine avenue two miles long, which leads to the sea, 
and at the end is a village : here are even some 
little elevations of ground, with woods and thickets 
of birch.
Your affectionate and obedient Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
161 
Mr. TVoodivard to J.
E.^ Smith, Pa7'is.
Dear Sir, Bungay, August 13, 1786.
I was very much flattered by your early attention 
to my request of letting me hear from you.
It 
seems very strange that our Caucalis daucoides 
should be inserted a second time under the name 
of Conium Royeni: Linnaeus certainly did not see 
the specimen, and named it after the description, or 
possibly merely on the authority of Van Royen, 
without any description.
Did not Burman put you 
in mind of Hudson ?
I do not mean any reflexion 
on the latter, whose abilities, when unclouded by 
arrogance and self-sufficiency, I admire : but that 
difficulty of access to his herbarium and professo- 
rial dignity which you complain of, seem strongly 
to mark a similitude of character between the Am- 
sterdam professor and our author.
I must con- 
gratulate you on finishing the business of the degree, 
and the being now completely Dr. Smith ; though 
I do not apprehend the business had anything very 
ti^rrific in it.
I shall be much flattered with the sight 
of your inaugural dissertation : you speak of it in 
very modest terms ; nevertheless I am sure I shall 
find something to admire in the style and manner 
of the composition.
This and the other primiticp* 
of your pen will be laid by as choice memorials of 
our early friendship ; and should it please God to 
*  These were, Reflexions on the Study of Nature ; and A Dis- 
sertation on the Sexes of Plants ; published in 1785 and 1786.
They will be enumerated among Sir James's works in a subse- 
quent chapter.
VOL.
I. M 
IG2 
give us a length of years, how dehghtful will it be to 
read them over together some years hence, when 
the business and hurry of your profession, and works 
of fi^reater consequence, in both the lines of physic 
and natural history, may have almost made you 
forget your juvenile performances !
There is how- 
ever a freedom of style and spiritedness of compo- 
sition which appears in both the translations, that 
I would wish you to cultivate : they have been much 
admired by everybody who has seen the transla- 
tions, and they give to them an appearance of ori- 
ginality which makes me very desirous that you 
should cultivate the same style in original compo- 
sitions.
Believe me, dear Sir, 
Yours most affectionately and sincerely, 
Thos.
Woodward.
J. E.
Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Paris, August 21st, 1786.
On Sunday, August 6th, I went with my friend 
Broussonet to Versailles, which I need not describe 
to you at present : I shall only say it is more su- 
perb than I had an idea of; but it is tiresome, and 
not pleasing (I mean the garden).
Saw the King 
and most of the family, but the Queen was in bed.
The daubing of the ladies' cheeks is beyond concep- 
tion ; nature is quite out of the question : old hags, 
ugly beyond what you can conceive, (for we have 
very inadequate ideas of what an ugly woman is in 
England,) are dressed like girls, in the most tawdry 
colours, and have on each cheek a broad dab of the 
163 
highest pink crayon, or something hke it.
The 
King is a pretty good person, rather fat, his coun- 
tenance agreeable : he had some prodigiously fine 
diamonds.
In the evening, after making two or 
three visits, seeing the menagerie, &c., we went to 
St. Germain-en-laye, and slept at the country-house 
of the Marechal de Nouailles, a fine old gentleman 
who was a great favourite of the late King, as he is 
of the present ; he contributed chiefly to give the 
late King a taste for gardening and botany, and was 
a correspondent of Linnaeus ; he received us very 
politely, but had a large party of his family with 
him, so we had little conversation.
With him lives 
Mr. Le Breton, a young man of genius whom he 
patronizes, and who was in England with Brous- 
sonet this spring.
It is he who is translating my 
two pamphlets into French.
When the preface 
to the last one was read to the marechal, it drew 
tears from his eyes, and he expressed the highest 
approbation of it.
You have heard of the Chateau 
de St. Germain, built by Francis I.
: its situation is 
very fine, but Louis XIV.
did not like it, because 
from it the spires of St. Denis (where he was to be 
buried) appear in view ; so he built Versailles, in a 
situation by no means comparable to it.
After an early dinner, hearing that the King was 
coming to St. Germain to shoot, the marechal sent 
Broussonet and myself in his chariot, and himself 
and Le Breton rode on horseback to the place.
The game had been all driven together into some 
fields and thickets, around which the people were 
kept at a distance by soldiers.
The King came 
M 2 
164 
about three o'clock, alighted from his coach, stripped 
off his coat, ribbands, &c., and appeared in a linen 
jacket and breeches, with leather spatterdashes.
He 
was attended by eight pages in almost the same 
kind of dress, each of whom carried a gun, and one 
of these guns was always ready charged for the 
King ; as soon as that was discharged, another, and 
so on: next to these were ten or twelve Swiss guards, 
all (as well as the King) on foot ; about were some 
of his Majesty's principal officers, whose business 
it was to attend, with a physician, surgeon, &c.
on 
horseback, and a few persons of distinction, as the 
Marechal de Nouailles, and their friends, of which 
number were Broussonet and I, for it was a great 
favour to be allowed to follow the King.
His Ma- 
jesty went several times up and down the fields, 
killing almost every thing he aimed at.
Hearing 
there were some Englishmen in his train, (there 
were one or two beside me,) he desired the Mare- 
chal de Nouailles to ask us if we had heard any 
thing of the attempt on our King's life, and bade 
him tell us that he himself had had a full account 
of the affair, and that the King was safe.
This was 
a very polite piece of condescension.
Since that I 
have seen the whole story, for all the English papers 
are at Paris.
In the evening Broussonet and I 
returned to Paris.
You will easily imagine here are 
things innumerable to be seen, and I must postpone 
particulars to future conversations.
Some are fine, 
and some paltry.
Traces of Henry IV.
and Louis 
XIV.
appear everywhere.
Here are many fine 
buildings, but mostly left unfinished, or now in the 
165 
act of finishing.
In a little shabby apartment in 
the Benedictins Anglois, lies poor James II., muler 
a rusty black pall and tattered escutcheons, waiting 
to be carried back to England !
So very deplorable 
a spectacle softened my contempt into pity.
I am 
quite well, and in constant entertainment.
Your ever dutiful son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Dryander* to J.
E. Smith, Paris.
Dear Sir, London, Sept.
5, 1786.
I am very much obliged to you for both your 
letters.
All the parcels which came with the letter 
from Leyden were sent as directed.
Far be it from us to encumber the library with 
* " Mr. Jonas Dryander, a Swedish naturalist of eminent talents, 
and a distinguished pupil of the great Linnaeus, was born in 1748.
He was domesticated under the roof of Sir Joseph Banks as his 
librarian in 1782, and continued in that situation as long as he 
lived.
Mr. Dryander also held the offices of librarian to the 
Royal and Linneean Societies.
He was one of the first founders 
of the latter in 1788, and took a principal interest in all its con- 
cerns, especially in drawing up its laws and regulations, when 
this Society was incorporated by charter in 1802.
He moreover 
fulfilled the duties of a very active vice-president till the time 
of his decease in October 1810, in the 63rd year of his age.
'* The study in which this most acute and correct man found 
ample scope for the exercise of his talents, was bibliography.
His Catalogus Bibliothecce Historico-Naturalls Josejj/ii Banks is 
a model for all future writers in this line ; but a model rather 
calculated to check than to excite imitation.
A work so inge- 
nious in design and so perfect in execution can scarcely be pro- 
duced in any science." J.
E. S.
— Supplement to the Encycloj3£edia 
Britannica.
166 
such an enormous quantity of nonsense as the col- 
lection of the works of Albertus Magnus, which you 
mention.
Of all dull books, the most dull are those 
of scholastic writers ; and only the desire of having 
all books on natural history, good, bad, and indif- 
ferent, could induce me to take up Albertus Mag- 
nus's book on animals, among the wants.
If the 
edition of Rome 1478, or Mantua 1479, should ever 
occur for a couple of guineas, I suppose we must buy 
it, though it is throwing away money on trash.
We have at last received Hedwig's answer to the 
prize question at Petersburg, with 37 coloured plates, 
and also the two first fasciculi of his Stirpes Crypto- 
gamiccE.
I have had his account of the fructification 
of Filices and Algcs^ and have no objection to his 
account of them, except as far as relates to Equi- 
setum, which does not seem convincing to me.
Lycopodium he acknowledges not to have been able 
to find the male parts of.
I have not yet had time 
to read what he says about Fungi.
I am, dear Sir, 
Your very faithful friend and servant, 
J. Dryander.
«/.
E. Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Paris, Sept.
13, 1786.
Paris is wonderfully like Edinburgh in many re- 
spects ; nor should I at all like to live here.
Some 
places here are very fine and beautiful, as the Tuil- 
leries, to which we have nothing comparable.
The 
167 
statues, which are in such profusion in all the gar- 
dens and squares hereabouts, are extremely noble ; 
and such is the management of the Government that 
nothing is injured by the populace : there are marble 
statues in the gardens of Versailles and the Tuille- 
ries exposed to all kinds of people, and yet unhurt, 
which deserve to be kept in glass cases.
I have seen 
no really beautiful and perfectly pleasing morsel of 
architecture except the portico of St. Genevieve now 
building, and the celebrated colonnade du Louvre.
The paintings are all removed from the gallery of 
the Louvre, and packed up ; but I hope to see the 
Luxembourg gallery soon.
I have visited with great 
veneration the bedchamber of Henry IV.
which is 
now one of the apartments of the Academic des 
Sciences, who meet in the Louvre : it is a small 
ill-lighted room, wonderfully richly carved and gilt ; 
his bust stands in the place of the bed.
Here I sup- 
pose he was brought bleeding, and left for the peo- 
ple to look at.
The monument of the Valois family, and those 
of Francis I.
and Louis XIL, all at St. Denis, are 
exquisite indeed ; but the design of them is odd, 
for the kings and queens are represented almost 
naked, in the agonies of death, or just dead; their 
limbs, features, and hair, in ghastly disorder; and the 
bodies as if having been opened and sewn up again, 
for the stitches are as curiously done as any part.
All the church and every monument are kept most 
scrupulously neat, which is a great advantage.
The Duke of Orleans has a fine collection of 
pictures, which I have seen: among them is one ex- 
168 
actly like your picture of nymphs and satyrs, which 
hangs on the stairs, if I mistake not; but 'tis lighter 
and in better preservation than yours : the master's 
name on the frame is C.
Polembergh, — 'tis not a 
good picture.
I hope you are not displeased with the criticism 
of my work in the Critical Review for June.
I am 
much flattered by it.
Should be more proud of the 
critic's praise if he would but allow poor Linnaeus 
any judgement.
Your dutiful son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Smith to his S071, Paris.
My dear Son, Norwich, Sept.
20, 1786.
I received your most pleasing acceptable letters 
dated August 2 1st and September 13th.
The news 
of your health and safety give us all great joy ; but 
the pleasure is much increased by the entertaining 
account of what you see and do.
You are laying 
up a treasure of knowledge that will serve for a 
high entertainment through your whole life.
I 
would not have you be discouraged by my last let- 
ter from pursuing your travels from an idea that it 
will be disagreeable to me, or that I may repine at 
the expense.
I am too well acquainted with your 
prudence and your virtue to entertain any appre- 
hensions that you will waste your time, your health, 
or your money, in such pursuits as are pernicious 
or reprehensible, because you are beyond the reach 
of the observations of your friends and neighbours 
169 
whom you respect, and whose opinion you esteem, 
as is too often the case with young people at a di- 
stance from home.
I know your objects and incli- 
nations are of the most noble kind, that as your 
mind is possessed with the purest principles of truth 
and virtue, so your genius and understanding, ex- 
cellent as they are from nature, are, the one aiming 
at, and the other acquiring, the most valuable trea- 
sures of human knowledge, upon which to establish 
a character and reputation that will be of advantage 
to yourself and all your connexions, as well as an 
honour to your family and country.
I would not, 
then, check you in your progress.
I hope it will 
please God to enable me to provide for your ex- 
penses without injuring the rest of you.
For the 
risk of life and health I trust in Providence and your 
prudence for your preservation, to which I hope my 
unworthy prayers may contribute something.
I cannot object to your visit to the Marquis 
Durazzo anything but so long a journey in short 
days, in which the passage of the Alps, if you go 
that way, may be disagreeable, if not dangerous.
But I should think there may be a way along the 
coast from Provence to avoid the Alps.
If you go 
to Turin, you will call on my correspondents^ who 
no doubt will show you every civility.
As for the election, we never had one upon which 
there is so much to say : it is so difficult to do it 
justice, that I would not have you expect it from 
me, who am neither practised in descriptive writing, 
nor have abilities for it.
The canvass for the Ho- 
nourable Henry Hobart began two months ago, and 
170 
the day of election was last Friday, the 10th instant.
The intermediate time was filled up with carousings 
of each party three times a week in various quarters 
of the town, when there was drunkenness and noise 
more than enough.
The committees met very fre- 
quently; Hobart's at the King's Head and Johnson's 
Coffee-house ; Beevor's at Tuck's and the Angel.
As the dispute was not upon the ground of politi- 
cal principles, for both candidates professed the 
same, that is Whiggism and an attachment to the 
present ministry, I wondered to see them so eager; 
but as it was for power and interest, and which of 
the two factions should rule, I ought to have known 
that the corruption of the present age would be as 
zealous as the principles of the last.
Those who 
could use a pen and tag verses* were set to work : 
* From the herd of mere verse-taggers one exception must 
be made, — the author of the following eclogue, an intimate and 
highly esteemed friend both of Mr, Smith and his son.
Who- 
ever recollects the late Mr. John Taylor of Norwich will recog- 
nize in these lines the good temper, the pleasantry, and wit, which 
at all times enlivened his conversation, and were the emanations 
of a good heart as alive to mirth and enjoyment as it was void 
of malice and detraction.
The Mr. Hampp who figures in the 
eclogue was a cordial friend of the author, a German by birth, 
and whose broken English is happily imitated.
CITY ECLOGUES.
Eclogue the First.
Scene — A Club.
Time — Evening.
The clock struck seven, — the cheerful sun retires, 
And only gilds our castle and our sjiires.
The market walk now fills from every street ; 
There jarring parties, various interests meet ; 
171 
the press teemed daily with poems, songs, epigrams, 
on both sides, viHfying the characters and ridiculing 
the persons of each party who were at all conspi- 
cuous.
The day that was to terminate the dispute 
proved good weather, and every room in the market 
Each candidate resumes his wonted ground, 
And all his friends and followers throng around.
Now hope inspires, now gloomy fears succeed, 
And show what thorny paths to honour lead : 
Now still and silent is the vacant loom, 
And hot and noisy is the ale-house room ; 
For hither, thirsting after news and nog**, 
And loving, if not Hobart's cause, his prog, 
Freemen and freemen's wives and friends repair, 
And pay due reverence to the leathern chair ; 
For there presides, with face of Belgic stamp, 
That son of Liberty — Bavarian Harapp.
He, at the sheriff's vmcontroul'd command.
Amongst the friends of Hobart takes his stand : 
He knows each wise contrivance to a hair, 
Which brought his master Thurlow to the chair ; 
And boasts to know, however you may doubt, 
The gibes and jolts o' th' day which threw him out ; 
And therefore, as a manager right able, 
He claims attention at the council table.
Now, rising from his chair, his cane he waves, 
As who should say, " Be silent, English knaves !
" 
Silence ensues ; our hero strives to speak, 
And tortures English ears with German Greek : 
Tired with his eloquence, the clamorous rabble 
Drown his oration with their deafening gabble ; 
Till hearing something said about the Diet, 
They thought the supper coming, and were quiet : — 
" Te Diet, sers, I mean te Parlament 
To vich dis Mr. Hobart sail be sent ; 
A kind of ale.
172 
was filled with well-dressed ladies, fluttering their 
white handkerchiefs out of the windows with a fa- 
vour at the corner, of the colours of the candidate 
whose interest they espoused, — Hobart's deep blue 
and orange, Beevor's pale blue and white ; they made 
a pretty show.
The area of the square was crowded 
with stavesmen and spectators : the candidates rode 
as usual.* The contest was very strong, but all was 
carried on with very little violence ; so little that 
the Countess of Buckinghamshire with her two 
Dere must he take te care of all te laws, 
And make more to dem if he find te cause ; 
And if te king of money sail fall short, 
Why, he must to hem come, and ask hem for 't ; 
For he vill have te string of all your purses.
And must look sharp to vat te king disburses.
Veil, sers, all dis can Mr. Hobart do, 
For he can read and write as well as you ; 
He knows quite veil de Engelsch constitution, 
And is so great as me at elocution : 
I know myselve te interest of dis city.
And Hobart is te man, I know, to fit ye.
As for dat Beevor, which some people talk of, 
Let me alone, Vll make dat fellow walk off: 
Who dares to speak fon wort of Beevor here, 
Te schondrel sail be scalp'd from ear to ear ; 
Forth from dese club my friends sail kick him out.
And I will eat his share of beef and krout.
Are fagabons to say who sail be chos'd, 
And gentlemen of blood to be oppos'd ?
Donder and hlixem !
'tis a thought so vile, 
As makes te hairs upon myn head recoil ; 
Sooner den have te lot on Beevor fall.
Got !
ye sail have no Parlament at all." 
* "At the elections for the county of Norfolk, for Norwich, 
Yarmouth, &c., this custom is invariably observed.
In the city 
ust named, the candidate, standing erect on a platform, is car- 
173 
(laughters and three other ladies, who were in Mr.
Schuldham's small room when Mr. Hobart in one 
of his chairings was coming his third round, issued 
out to meet him, near the Hall, and then proceeded 
with him to the King's Head, his quarters.
Perhaps you don't know what a fine person Lady 
B. is, — tall, handsome, and extremely elegant: most 
of the ladies besides were handsome, and all young.
To see such in the centre of a throng of stavesmen, 
rending the air with their shouts, was a novel sight, 
and struck everybody with surprise and pleasure, 
except some who might envy what they had no op- 
portunity of rivalling.
It pleased the people so 
much, that they requested her ladyship to gratify 
them once more with the pleasing honour, to which 
she condescended, and the ladies took a tour round 
Mr. Hobart's ground.
I beg your pardon for the suspicion I entertained 
too hastily ; 'tis the foible natural to age.
I am very 
glad to hear I am mistaken, and rejoice at every in- 
stance of the integrity of human nature.
I remain, dear James, ever yours, 
James Smith.
ried on men's shoulders three times round the place of election, 
and is frequently tost by them into the air.
Those who have 
seen this ceremony will not fail to be struck with the words, 
already referred to, of a Roman historian, (Tacit.
Hist.
iv.
15.) 
' impositus scuto et sustinentium humeris vibratus ; ' the exact 
agreement of which with the yet remaining practice will scarcely 
allow us to doubt that the elevation of kings, here, as well as in 
the other countries above mentioned, was the original mode of 
their inauguration." — Taylor's Glory of Regality, p.
29.
174 
Mr. W.Jones* to J.
E. Smith, Paris.
Dear Sir, London, Sept.
20, 1 786.
I have not felt my mind for a long time under 
such pleasing sensations as this day, from your at- 
tentive favour.
I therefore take pen , immediately 
in hand, lest every day deferred I might grow more 
indifferent to thank you for it, and to assure you 
that you possess a place in my memory and esteem 
as frequent and favourable as I can have in yours ; 
and to tell you si tantus amor casus cognoscere nos- 
tros.
I read your letter with great patience until I 
came to the Prince of Orange's cabinet of insects, 
when I found anunaccountablcfidgetting about me, 
very restless in my seat, until I had taken two or 
three turns across the room to compose myself; 
and just as I was recovered, the double Tuberoses 
occasioned a relapse, that 'twas some time before I 
was able to proceed.
'Tis a flower I have a great 
partiality for, but their culture in England is diffi- 
cult without a hot-house, — quo fata ferant uhi sis- 
tere detur.
May health attend you, and every plea- 
sure your journey can give !
I am sensible that 
cannot be little, when you have access to every 
thing that is rare and beautiful, and more especially 
in those things particularly adapted to your taste.
* An excellent entomologist, well known in the scientific 
world, though, like other men of superior genius, modest and 
retiring from the observation he so well deserved.
175 
Mr. M , as you say, I find very anxious about 
the success of the new society.
I am persuaded from that open, honest simphcity 
that prevails in every part of your conduct, that 
you have no views but what are disinterested ; but 
that may not be the case with every one that joins 
you.
I have been united in societies of various 
kinds, and have been heartily vexed and dissatisfied.
Omit it a few years : at the end of the first weigh 
every objection, and demur a little, and I think 
that afterwards the spirit of procrastination will in- 
crease ; yet I would not have the thought wholly 
laid aside.
We may enjoy every satisfaction from 
each other's information and company, as we might 
have done in society, and this by a breakfast to our 
select friends, once a quarter, either by you, or al- 
ternately as agreed.
By this will be discoverable 
the probable success of such a society ; and if it 
ever matures, let it come forth.
Even the idea of 
associating should be foreign to our first purposes, 
and only meet as select friends.
Under this view 
we raise no envious spirit against us from the pre- 
sent existing society ; and prevent in future that 
acrimony which, I am sorry to say, exists too much 
amongst ingenious people.
In short, I am horri- 
bly afraid of a wasp's nest.
St. Paul's advice to Ti- 
mothy was a good one, even in common life : " Lay 
hands suddenly on no man." 
If, amidst the various avocations that surround 
you, one hour can be spared, employ it by scrib- 
bling a few lines to, dear Sir, 
Your very sincere friend, 
W. Jones.
176 
*J.
E. Smith to Mrs. Howorth.
My dear Madam, Paris, Sept.
24, 1786.
I abhor the thought of staying any part of the 
winter at Paris : the streets are so dirty, and the 
houses so cold, with nothing but brick floors and 
marble tables, that the idea chills one.
I have lately had a most agreeable jaunt, in which 
I wished for nothing more than your company, to 
visit the tomb of Rousseau.
My companion was 
an Englishman of great taste and sensibility, who 
enjoyed the expedition no less than I did.
We 
went first to Chantilly, about twenty miles from 
Paris, where the Prince of Conde has a noble seat, 
with very fine gardens, perpetual fountains, and 
every decoration that art can furnish, but all in the 
old style ; 'tis however worth seeing, as being one 
of the finest things in its way, and we have nothing 
like it in England.
Here w^e slept, and next day 
had a very romantic ride of eight miles through the 
forest to Ermenonville ; we arrived about dusk, and 
put up at a little inn, where the present Emperor, 
and the King of Sweden had been accommodated 
before us.
The landlord knew Rousseau, and spoke 
of him with the greatest esteem.
The day of his 
death this man saw him about seven o'clock bo- 
tanizing ; he complained of having had a sleepless 
night, from the headach.
Before ten he was dead.
Water was found collected in his head.
Our land- 
lord preserves his snuff-box, and the shoes in which 
177 
he died ; they have wooden soles and straw tops.
One of his admirers has written something on the 
box ; and another has written on the shoes, that 
he was proud to inscribe his name '^ sui' la simple 
chaussure (Tun homme qui ne marchoit jamais que 
dans le seritier de la vertu^ 
The next morning being very fine we rose at six, 
and had a most enchanting ramble through the 
gardens of Monsieur le Marquis de Girardin, which 
form a striking contrast with those of Chantilly, 
being laid out in the most romantic style, what the 
French call a VAngloise.
They consist of about 
eight hundred acres, a great part of which are wild 
woods, and rocky hills and dales as wild as the 
highlands of Scotland.
We first passed a beautiful 
cascade, and went along a winding path through a 
wood by the side of the lake, from time to time 
meeting with inscriptions disposed with great judge- 
ment.
We took a boat to go to the Island of Pop- 
lars, honoured with the ashes of Rousseau.
His 
tomb is elegantly simple, of white stone ; on one 
side is a piece of sculpture representing a mother 
of a family reading Emilius, with other emblems ; 
on the other is inscribed, " U homme de la Nature 
et de la Verite.r He desired to be buried in the 
garden, and the Marquis chose this spot.
I shall 
not attempt to describe to you what I felt on seeing 
and touching this tomb.
I brought away some 
moss from its top for you.
In another island near it is a lesser monument, 
over a German who taught the Marquis's children 
drawing ; and being a Protestant could not be buried 
VOL.
I. N 
178 
in consecrated ground.
Hence we passed by some 
inscriptions in honour of Virgil, Thomson, Shen- 
stone, and some others, to the Temple of Modern 
Philosophy, an unfinished building ; on each of the 
pillars already erected is inscribed the name of 
some great man, with a word expressive of what 
he excelled in : thus to Voltaire is given, ridicule ; 
to ^OMSse?i\x,nature ; to Priestley, air; to Franklin, 
thunder, &c., &c.
On an unfinished column is written 
in Latin, " Who will complete this ?
" This temple 
overlooks the lake ; near it is an hermitage embo- 
somed in a wood.
From this spot we went to some 
simple w^ooden buildings, where every Sunday the 
Marquis and his lady amuse themselves with hav- 
ing the neighbouring peasants dance, &c., on the 
plan described in the Nouvelle Heloise.
The woods 
around them are very fine ; and after passing 
through them we came to a solitary elm-tree, on 
which the Marquis has written, " Le void cet orme 
heureux ou ma Louise a re^u mafoir From hence 
is an immense prospect, finely varied with fields, 
woods, and water.
Descending the hill among 
heath and juniper, we came to two charming Italian 
inscriptions by the Marquis, which lead to a rock 
on which Rousseau has engraven with his own 
knife, " Julier I have some moss for you from 
this very rock.
Ascending another hill we came to 
the House of Rousseau, a little hut so called, in 
which he wrote several verses ; for he often used to 
visit it during the short time of his residing here, 
which was only six weeks before his death, although 
he often used to come to Ermenonville with the 
179 
Marquis's fiunily before.
Of his dwelling-house I 
shall speak hereafter.
Within this hut is written, 
" •lean Jacques est immortel." From it is another 
fine view ; it stands among craggy rocks.
Descending into another valley, we went by the 
water side through groves and across a meadow to 
the tower of la belle Gabrielle (T Estrees^ who was 
mistress to Henry IV.
Tradition says this garden 
was their first place of rendezvous, which occa- 
sioned the Marquis to build this tower ; it is in 
the Gothic style, and ornamented with trophies and 
verses.
Among the rest is the very armour which 
belonged to a faithful follower of Henry IV., whose 
name I forget, and who passing through the street 
where that prince was murdered, a few days after 
that event, fell down in an agony of grief, and died 
the next day.
Passing by a pretty grotto by the side of a bub- 
bling fountain of the finest water I ever saw, we at 
length arrived at Rousseau's garden, one of the 
sweetest spots I ever beheld, quite sequestered, and 
planted in the most romantic style ; it chiefly con- 
sists of an irregular lawn surrounded with a variety 
of trees and shrubs, and ornamented with flowers, 
but apparently all in a state of nature ; nor is the 
hand of art to be traced at all, except in the beauti- 
ful velvet of the turf.
On a tree is an inscription, 
signifying that there Jean Jacques used often to re- 
tire, to admire the works of nature, to feed his 
favourite birds, and play with the Marquis's children.
Near this spot is a house intended for his dwelling, 
but he died before it was finished ; 'tis a comforta- 
N 2 
180 
ble cottage, with a little garden of flowers before it, 
and is embosomed in apple-trees, vines, &c.
In a 
small arched building near it, the Marquis at first 
intended to have buried Rousseau, but changed his 
mind.
From this place we soon reached the front 
of the house opposite to that whence we set out, 
and our delightful tour was at an end.
I think you will not be displeased at my giving 
you so particular an account of it, so I make no 
apology for the length of my letter ; but I have 
more to tell you.
Hearing that the widow of Rousseau was living 
at a place not far out of our road to Paris, and 
that many strangers visited her, we felt a strong de- 
sire to do the same ; but had some fears lest we 
should discover something in her which might ex- 
cite disagreeable sensations, and even perhaps lessen 
our veneration for her husband; for we heard that 
she had been his servant, and after having lived 
with him in that capacity ten years, he said to her, 
" Ma bonne a7nie, I am satisfied with your fidelity, 
and wish I could make you an adequate return.
I 
have nothing to give you but my hand.
If you think 
that worth having, it is yours." They were mar- 
ried ; and lived together sixteen years afterwards 
very comfortably.
She was several years younger 
than her husband.
— At last curiosity prevailed, and 
we went to see her.
She received us with the 
greatest politeness, and appeared much pleased with 
our visit ; spoke in the most becoming manner of 
her husband, and readily answered every c|uestion 
1 put to her.
What I principally learned from her 
181 
was as follows : — The character of Julia was drawn 
from Madame Bois de la Tour of Lyons, a lady still 
livingj with whom Mr. and Mrs. Rousseau often 
sf)ent a great deal of time : she has a large family, 
and is the admiration of all who know her.
The 
story of Julia has not however any connection with 
hers.
How far that is founded in truth, Mrs. Rous- 
seau said was only known to its author.
The idea 
that Ermenonville was the scene of it, or that the 
real father of Julia lived there, is without founda- 
tion.
She assured me that the Confessions of 
Rousseau were really all of his own writing.
She 
confided the manuscript to the Marquis de Girardin, 
who expunged several names and anecdotes rela- 
ting to people still living, but against her consent ; 
for she thought the whole ought to have been pub- 
lished as the author left it.
I think more ought to 
have been expunged, at least the name of Madame 
de Warens ought to have been kept secret.
We asked her which was the best portrait of 
Rousseau.
She showed us a plaster bust, which 
was cast from his face a few hours after death, and 
which she said resembled him exactly.
The expres- 
sion of the face, as well as its form, is vastly supe- 
rior to that of any likeness of him I ever saw.
There 
is great serenity in the countenance, and much sen- 
sibility.
The mouth is uncommonly beautiful.
I saw at Chantilly a wax bust, which was cast 
from the face of Henry TV.
four hours after his 
death ; it has the same features which appear in 
the portraits of him ; but such a melancholy gloom 
is diffused over the countenance, that it is quite a 
182 
pitiable object.
I account for this difference from 
the death of Rousseau being less violent, and his 
inind more serene at the time, than the King's could 
have been, considering all circumstances, besides 
the mechanical cause of the great loss of blood in 
the latter.
We returned to Paris extremely well pleased with 
OLir jaunt, and particularly so with having seen 
Madame Rousseau.
I learned at Ermenonville that 
the King of England allows her fifty pounds a year, 
which I never knew before, but which ought to be 
known.
Le grand Monarque allows her nothing.
I am acquainted with a gentleman at Paris, who 
knew Rousseau intimately, and often used to bota- 
nize with him (you see how I dehght to put you in 
mind that he was a botanist).
He describes him 
as the most unaffected and unassuming of men, 
free from all airs or petulancy in conversation, and 
even very sociable latterly, at least since he knew 
him, which was many years before his death.
He 
was always warmly attached to those who loved 
natural history, especially to the pupils of the Lin- 
naean school, and he adored Linnaeus.
What would 
I have given to have seen him !
Adieu, my dear Madam.
Believe me faithfully yours, 
J. E.
Smith.
183 
Rev. D)\ Goodeuough to J.
E. Smith, Paris.
Dear Sir, Ealing, Sept.
25, 1786.
Your letter dated Paris, Sept.
Sth, has just reached 
ine, and given me prodigious pleasure, not only 
from the very favourable expressions towards me 
with which it abounds, but from my having such 
an actual proof that you are alive and well.
To 
speak in modern political terms, with respect to 
the regard which you are pleased to testify towards 
me, " the reciprocity is not all on one sideT 
I had a very pleasant excursion with Curtis to 
Maldon, then along the Essex coast to Mersey 
Island, and thence to Harwich.
At this last place 
I was laid up with a terrible boil, which threw me 
quite into a fever for a week, and imbittered the 
latter part of my time.
However, before this un- 
fortunate circumstance; we worked well from seven 
in the morning till eleven at night, with only the 
interruptions of.
breakfast and dinner, and those, 
short repasts.
I had no conception we should have 
found so many insects.
But we happened to find 
a pond overrun with Typha major and Festuca 
Jluitans.
It was incredible what a number of curious 
things we found ; Sphex Jissipes, and your little 
Cantharis 7niniata.
But as if fortune designed us 
to be niggardly, she would not let us take more 
than tivo of each ; so there was one for each of us, 
and not one for a friend.
I looked over every stalk 
and blade for two days together, five or six hours at 
a time, to find more, but in vain !
A great variety 
184 
of Coccinellas, of Musccb also, particularly of the 
spotted-wing sort, Cm^dui and Cerasi, &c.
Ich- 
neumons a great many, particularly /.
sarcitorius.
Bees, several new ones, one very specious indeed, 
with a red thorax and blue abdomen, fasciated with 
white.
Sphecces not a few.
A new Chrysis or two.
Some new Carabi, besides some of the Linnaean 
beauties.
All the new ones which we took I de- 
scribed, or rather as many as time would permit, — 
between fifty and a hundred.
Some were drawn 
on the spot by Curtis's draughtsman.
Of plants, we found in many places Lepidiiim ru- 
derale, and particularly all along the Essex coast, 
on the sea marshes, Hudson's Dactylis cynosuroi- 
des.
Hudson's Poa loliacea, his Lolium bro?noides, 
Salsolafruticosa, Brassica campestris, Atriplex la- 
ciniata and serrata., CharafiexUis, Ruppia niaritima, 
j^gilopsincurva, Bunias Cakile ; — cum midtis aliis.
I have not been able to see Sir Joseph Banks yet, 
although I have called several times.
I think of 
our New Society with pleasure, and long for your 
return on that account, as well as others ; but, as 
you say, the longer you stay the more you will be 
worth at your return.
A thousand thanks for your 
Agrostis rninima.
I shall be much obliged to you 
to get me any of my desiderata.
Gnaphalium luteo- 
alhum is inter 7nea desiderat'isshna.
Pray look sharp 
after the Origanums^ and if you can see either 
O. (Bgyptiacum or syriacum, do be so good as to 
have very correct drawings made of both or either 
of them for me.
I am preparing a complete list of the Linna?an 
185 
nomenclature, through all the classes from Mam- 
malia to Lapides, which will be ready for the press 
by your return.
I should have liked to have given it 
to the public " By a Fellow of the Linnaean Society." 
Whatever you do, take care of your health, and use 
your time with courage and activity.
Above all, 
believe me ever your most sincere friend, 
Samuel Goodenough.
I depend upon hearing of your motions to the 
southward, and your successes.
When you come 
towards the Mediterranean, perhaps you may find 
it worth your while to think of conchology.
At 
Leghorn there may be an ^Egyptian correspon- 
dence carried on ; a step towards getting Origa/mm 
(Egyptlacum.
Rev. Dr, Goodenough to */.
E. Smith, at the Mar- 
quis Hippolito DurazzoSy Genoa.
My dear Sir, Ealing, Nov. 3, 1786.
I am so far glad at finding that the prodigious 
loss which we have lately sustained has made its 
way to you, as it saves me from the pain of men- 
tioning it to you.
A better child, I verily believe, 
never lived : my very heart doated upon her, not from 
any weak or irrational motive, but from her good- 
ness, her love of improvement, her duty to us, and 
her actual attainments in every thing which we 
wished her to apply to.
Our grief was highly en- 
riched by observing the whole neighbourhood in 
186 
tears for her.
It was hard parting with her at her 
time of life.
I thank you most sincerely for your very enter- 
taining letter of the 21st of October.
Your account 
of the morals of Paris is just what every one who 
lives with his eyes open and will see, has given me ; 
so that that does not tempt me to cross the water.
But I could give one of my eyes almost to be 
with you, and join you in turning over Tournefort's 
rich herbarium.
I am sorry to find that you leave 
any behind to examine at your return : I am always 
fearful of something or other happening or inter- 
vening which will draw off the attention from pur- 
suing a labour, once deserted, to the end ; and here 
I would say, that I hope you will find time to go 
regularly through Vaillant's herbarium.
What if 
it should detain you a week or two longer; it will 
be better to seize the opportunity which now offers, 
and perhaps will never return, than after you have 
returned to England, to sit down all your life re- 
gretting that you had not completed your view.
On this account also I hope you will describe every 
thing in Tournefort's herbarium that appears new ; 
it can be easily thrown away if you should find 
yourself in a mistake : and for this purpose I 
should again wish you not to be impatient of any 
loss of time ; or rather I should say of a longer 
employment of time.
In Italy, if you can make it 
convenient, you would certainly be repaid in ex- 
amining Allioni's collections.
Do you mean to come 
through Switzerland r If you do, try for a view of 
Haller's cabinet.
187 
The Earl of Northampton and his son Lord Conip- 
ton (a pupil of mine formerly) reside somewhere 
near Lausanne in the Canton de Berne.
Show 
Lord Compton my handwriting, and I am sure he 
would do any thing for you that you could wish.
He is a collector, as is his sister.
Before I call you 
back to England, where we wish you, once more 
let me say, do not mind the trespassing upon a 
'little time or money, in securing any intellectual 
attainment.
You can easily make up every thing 
afterwards.
And now for matters at home.
Your 
letter of the 21st instant did not reach me till after 
the anniversary meeting of our Society.
It appears 
from the business of the day, that you might have 
saved yourself your shudderlngs.
I could not at- 
tend ; but from Marsham's account, every thing 
was settled by the party before the business was 
proceeded upon.
A most curious committee (in- 
stead of that farrago of committees of last year) was 
chosen.
J. Hunter, Home, Curtis, Swainson, Lee, 
Marsham, Mitchel, and Drury.
What can they do 
in the publishing way, or indeed in any thing great ?
It is a joke to think of it.
You may easily then 
conceive how much I wish for your return.
A due 
share of activity and firmness in a few intelligent 
working people will do more than our present un- 
wieldy body, with all their members, and all their 
luealth (for they have voted the purchase of 1 00/.
stock in the 3 per cent, consols.) This might seem 
to cut a dash, could knowledge and credit be bought.
Your translation of the Linnaean treatise on the 
Sexes of Plants is very well spoken of in the 
188 
Monthly Review^ — the only Review which I see.
Pray write to me as often as you have leisure.
Do 
not for this one grand excursion (as you must ever 
look upon it) grudge either time or money to sa- 
tisfy your mind in all scientific matters.
Commit 
every thing of science to writing, et'iam tritissima 
as says Linne.
It is scarcely worth while to bur- 
then the mind with remembrances of houses and 
churches ; all books are full of them, and will call 
every thing to your remembrance.
When Howard 
set out upon his prison-visitation, he refused seeing 
one of these lesser spectacula^ alleging that one 
pursuit was sufficient at a time.
I pray God to 
bless you ; and am ever yours, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
Pray take one thing into consideration.
Meni' 
hers 2ivA wealth 2^x0, so far real necessaries to a so- 
ciety, as it enables them to carry matters into effect ; 
— to purchase, reward, publish.
A society at Brux- 
elles is stopped at present for want of money to 
enable a pubhcation going forward.
I say this only 
to remind you, that along with diligence, the pri- 
mum mobile, we may think of increasing the num- 
ber of the society as far as may be safe.
This oc- 
curs to me at the moment upon thinking of the 
society at Bruxelles.
— Adieu.
t/.
E. Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Montpellier, Nov. 18, 178C.
At Lyons, a letter from Broussonet to his cousin 
Monsieur Lajard procured us the greatest civility 
189 
from him, as well as from Dr. Brun, Dr. Frossard 
the Protestant minister, and several others.
We 
were charmed with the hospitality we experienced 
here, and with the manners of the people : I could 
have spent a month with them gladly.
The ladies 
too hegin to improve on us in every respect, as we 
go south.
After seeing the hospital (which is more 
praised than it deserves), the public library, &c., &c., 
which took us four days, on the 10th we took a 
voiture to carry us to Montpellier.
We are now in 
a fine temperate climate ; like a fine English Sep- 
tember.
The most striking objects we saw in our 
way were the Pont St. Esprit, an old stone bridge of 
twenty-two arches, over the stately Rhone ; the 
Pont du Gard near Nismes, a most noble Roman 
aqueduct ; and the Amphitheatre at Nismes ; the 
country for the last three days covered with laven- 
der, thyme, box, evergreen oaks, and many fine 
plants still in flower ; olive-trees laden with fruit in 
greater abundance than has been known these hun- 
dred years ; fig-, and white mulberry-trees.
Ripe 
olives are purple like a damson, but of the most 
abominable bitter taste.
At Montpellier we have 
met with the kindest reception from Professor 
Broussonet, father of my Paris friend ; we dined 
with him today : he has introduced us to several 
interesting acquaintances.
We could gladly stay 
here a month or two had we not greater objects 
in view.
This town is situated on a hill very pleasantly: 
its streets are narrow, crooked, and paved like those 
of Norwich ; so is Lyons.
But of all that I have 
190 
yet seen, the Place de Perou is the finest thing by 
far ; it is a vast platform, out of one of the gates of 
the town, surrounded with a stone bakistrade.
From 
it you have the command of a most beautiful coun- 
try, covered with olives, studded with villas, and 
bounded by blue mountains ; the Mediterranean 
Sea to the south, and beyond it in fine weather 
may be seen the Pyrenees, and on the other side 
the x\lps ; no finer situation can be conceived.
The Place is disposed in grass plats ; in the cen- 
tre is a fine equestrian statue of Louis XIV., in 
bronze, and at the side opposite the entrance an 
open temple (over a basin of water), which with the 
flights of steps leading to it are in so fine a taste, 
and so striking, that it is like a design in an opera, 
a fairy palace, or a dream of some great genius 
rarely seen on paper, and scarcely ever in reality.
To this temple water is brought by a vast aqueduct, 
worthy of the Romans ; and hence it is distributed 
into various fine marble fountains in the town.
This Place I had often heard of, but had no con- 
cejJtion of it till I saw it.
We shall stay here about a week longer ; then 
go to Avignon, Marseilles, &c., to Genoa.
I am extremely obliged to you for your liberal 
provision of money.
Believe me, honoured Sir, 
Your ever affectionate and obedient Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
191 
J. E.
Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Marseilles, Dec. 5, 1786.
My last was from Montpellier, Nov. 18th.
We 
were so well pleased with that place and its inhabit- 
ants, that we stayed there till the 27th, and then 
left it with regret, and went in a coach with an in- 
telligent and liberal-minded superior of Cordeliers, 
to Nismes : next day a violent rain prevented our 
seeing much of the celebrated antiquities of this 
place.
We saw, however, the Maisori Carree,^.
fine 
Roman temple, very entire (see Thicknesse's Tra- 
vels).
The Amphitheatre we had seen in our way 
to Montpellier.
Mr. Granier, a friend of Brous- 
sonet, showed us the library and collection of the 
Academy,left them by Mr.Seguier, a celebrated na- 
turalist and antiquary.
After dinner we pursued 
our journey, and next day reached Avignon, where 
the most striking objects are the vast walls of the 
city, and the great old palace of the Popes.
The 
town is lifeless and unpleasant.
Next day we went 
in a chaise to the fountain of Vaucluse, so cele- 
brated in the history of Petrarch ; but in my opi- 
nion far more interesting in itself than for all that 
has been said or sung about it.
It is a river at 
least as large as ours at Norwich, and ten times as 
rapid, which rises at once from an unfathomable 
rocky basin at the foot of a rock many hundred 
yards high, which hangs over it.
The water, which 
is as clear as crystal is supposed to be, but looks 
sea-green as it runs, falls from the edge of the basin 
192 
over fragments of rock, forming cascades, com- 
pared with which all the paltry squirts of Versailles 
are mere baubles ; and then winds along a most ro- 
mantic valley, overhung with rocks of every varied 
form, which are here and there clothed with fine 
evergreen shrubs, and sometimes stuck with cot- 
tages, which seem equally in danger from the small- 
ness of their foundations, and the vast crags above 
them.
Every Frenchman that comes here thinks it in- 
cumbent on him to set his brains a-jingling, and 
scribble something about love and Petrarch and 
Laura.
We were tired to death with a man who 
travelled with us to Montpellier, who repeated to 
us some verses of his own and others of his friends, 
all about Vaucluse : they excited my indignation 
so much, that I thought it almost profanation of 
nature and feeling to indulge any similar ideas at 
so prostituted a spot ; and indeed even the passion 
of Petrarch for Laura has always seemed to me too 
artificial and affected to be touching.
Notwith- 
standing all this, I could spend a solitary month at 
this charming spot, in the most delightful medita- 
tions ; but I should rarely think of Petrarch.
We 
slept at a comfortable inn, at a town not far distant, 
and returned next day to Avignon.
The following 
morning set out for Marseilles, where we arrived in 
two days.
Passed through Aix, a pleasant town, in 
a most delightful country, covered with olive-trees 
with vines between them, and here and there a 
towering cypress.
Aix is the only place I have 
seen (except Marseilles perhaps) to which I should 
193 
ever think of sending a consumptive patient, consi- 
dering situation, climate, country, &c., and more es- 
pecially as there is a fine walk which passes through 
the middle of the town^ in which are three noble 
fountains constantly running, — the middle one of 
warm water, like that at Bristol.
This is the coun- 
try for fine water : every village in the South of 
France has its perpetual fountains.
The approach to Marseilles the night before last 
struck us with great admiration.
From a high hill 
in the way we had a complete view of the town, its 
harbour, and a very rich extensive valley studded 
with villas, and clothed with olives.
This is by 
far the finest town I have seen in France, Paris 
in general not excepted.
The streets are broad, 
straight, and finely built, the pavement good and 
clean, and the people more so than in any other 
place we have been at.
It is as busy a place as 
London or Amsterdam, crowded with people of all 
nations, and with every kind of merchandise.
The 
markets loaded with vast variety of fish unknown 
to us, and with pomegranates, melons, dates, flowers 
of every season, and the finest grapes at one penny 
per pound.
Here we seem at length to have over- 
taken summer.
The sky yesterday was as bright 
as possible ; today we have had rain, but the air is 
so warm that a fire is only necessary in the even- 
ings.
We meet with great civilities here, as we have 
done everywhere.
I think the inhabitants of the 
South of France the most engaging people I ever 
saw ; there is little grimace, and much real urbanity 
and hospitality.
The women are pretty, and very 
VOL.
I. o 
194 
interesting ; they do not in general use paint : at 
Montpellier that custom is as infamous as with us.
The lower kind of people are much more civil here 
than in England; but they speak ^«/026', the ancient 
language of the Troubadours, which we find it dif- 
ficult to understand, except by the help of Italian, 
which it much resembles.
The Abbe Raynal resides here, but we have not 
yet been fortunate enough to see him : he is safe 
here, as this place is endowed with many privi- 
leges.
Believe me, dear Sir, 
Your dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
«7.
E. Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Genoa, Dec. 30, 1786.
November 7th, we left Marseilles in an excellent 
voiture, which we hired by the day to convey us to 
Nice ; travelled through a most romantic country 
(like Switzerland, as I conceive), and in two days 
reached Toulon.
Foreigners are not permitted to 
see the arsenal ; but we saw a very decent hospital 
and little botanic garden.
November 9th, got to Hyeres to dinner.
Here 
we first saw gardens or rather woods of orange- 
trees, loaded with fruit ; myrtle and aloes in the 
fields, and had much botanical entertainment.
Hy- 
eres is a shabby little town, but in one of the finest 
situations possible : the Isles d'Hyeres are much 
195 
celebrated for their beauty, but we could not visit 
them.
Next day a very bad road led us to Bri- 
gan9ienes, most beautifully situated in a valley ; 
and after dinner we rode through one of the most 
picturesque countries I ever saw : woods of pines, 
thickets of myrtle, aloes, cistus, rosemary, noble 
cascades of every varied form, all combined to de- 
light and surprise us.
The following day dined at 
Brignolle, famous for the Prunes de Brignolle, 
which we have corrupted into Prunellas ; and the 
same night arrived at Cottignac, where we went on 
purpose to see Monsieur Gerard, one of the most 
famous European botanists of the Linnaean school, 
author of the Flora GaUo-Provincialis.
He re- 
ceived us in the most polite manner, and devoted 
the next day entirely to us ; gave me copies of two 
letters of Linnaeus to him, with leave to publish 
them, as well as his to Linnaeus.
I learnt a great 
many things from him, and w^e settled a plan of 
future correspondence.
November 13th, slept at 
Draguinan, and next day at Frejus, where are re- 
mains of a Roman amphitheatre, and of a very no- 
ble aqueduct.
15th, our road lay over a very high 
mountain, from the top of which we had the finest 
and most extensive prospect I ever beheld.
Frejus, 
at our feet, was almost imperceptible ; on one side 
was the beautiful Mediterranean quite calm ; on the 
other, hills rising o'er hills, clothed with myrtle, 
juniper, and pines, (not nasty black Scotch pines) ; 
and beyond all, the Alps of Piedmont covered with 
snow, and glittering in the sun.
Towards evening 
o 2 
196 
we descended to Cannes, a little sea-port close to 
the water's edge.
16th.
A fine bright and rather frosty morning.
Our road lay by the sea-side, through the most 
beautiful shrubberies of myrtle, with its blue berries 
and some flowers ; fine heaths, which with us are 
kept in greenhouses ; most stupendous clusters of 
the great aloes (improperly called American), and 
other fine plants.
We passed by Antibes, had a 
fine view of Nice and its bay, and after fording the 
Var (a very unpleasant business), with the Duchess 
dowager of Leinster and her train, we arrived at 
Nice.
This town is finely built, and well secured 
from the cold winds.
It is full of our country peo- 
ple, and indeed exactly in the style of an English 
watering-place.
The natives fawn upon, laugh at, 
and cheat the strangers, who come here from all 
parts of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to get rid 
of their consumptions and their money.
Here I 
first learned with great concern the death of Dr.
Hope.
I rejoice, however, in having paid him the 
compliment I did, and particularly in having writ- 
ten a letter, which I sent with the dedication copy 
of my book, and which seemed to give him parti- 
cular pleasure.
The road from Nice to Genoa is bad beyond de- 
scription, being for the most part along a path on 
the brink of precipices hanging over the sea, and 
so rocky and steep that every comparison of flights 
of broken steps, Norwich pavement, &c., &c., is very 
insuflicient to give an idea of it : but the mules 
197 
never make a false step, though they have often all 
their four feet together on a loose slippery stone, 
and sometimes climb up places so steep that 'tis 
difficult to keep from sliding off their rumps.
The 
weather was cold and windy ; for though we rode 
through myrtle thickets, and among trees which 
even at Montpellier are kept in greenhouses, and 
had groves of orange-, lemon-, and palm-trees about 
us, yet there was ice an inch thick in the road, and 
snow on the hills at no great distance.
The weather 
is, however, now very fine, rather cold but bright.
On my arrival at Genoa, I called on my friend 
the Marquis Durazzo, and was a little struck at the 
magnificence of the house (notwithstanding what 
I had heard of the Genoese nobility), the ranks of 
servants, &c.; so that I began to dread some for- 
mality and reserve.
I was, however, most agreeably 
relieved from all such ideas the moment I saw him; 
and I found him the same cheerful, easy, unassu- 
ming man as when I knew him in London.
He 
made me most heartily welcome ; insists upon all 
ceremony being laid aside ; that he will make us 
acquainted with all his friends, and procure us ac- 
cess to every thing worthy our notice.
Last night 
he introduced me to a family party ; everybody 
received me in the same agreeable manner, and 
talked English or French (both equally well), out 
of politeness to me ; while I blundered out some 
Italian.
His family are persons of the first conse- 
quence here ; their palaces far beyond what we 
have, except perhaps Chatsworth ; and their collec- 
tions of pictures celebrated in books of travels.
A 
198 
marble staircase in the Marquis's house is just 
finished, at the expense of about 5000/.
sterling.
We shall not stop at Rome for more than a day 
or two in our way to Naples.
We have letters to 
Mr. Walsby, secretary to the Duke of Gloucester, 
now at Rome.
Your aft'ectionate Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Smith to J.
E. Smith, Genua.
My dear Son, Norwich, Jan. 4, 1787.
Pray make no apology for writing a small cha- 
racter that your letters may contain more; they are 
so entertaining, independent of the interest we take 
in every thing you do, and in all that takes your 
attention, that we are never tired, but read them 
over and over again.
— I have looked into Thick- 
nesse for the Maison Carree, into Le Voyage de 
France for Aix, Nismes, the Po7it du Gard, Mar- 
seilles, &c.
; and much the more enjoyed your and 
their descriptions.
For the climate, the fruits, the 
good cheer, the frugality, and though last, not 
least, the fountains of Aix, I amuse myself with the 
delights of living there.
Could we but find civil and 
religious liberty, besides the above blessings, I could 
wish myself and my family resident there.
I was not sorry you were not bit with poetic 
phrensy at your visit to Vaucluse.
'Tis by no means 
a vein to be wished.
No muse rewards her votaries 
so ill : to say how njany she has ruined would be 
199 
endless.
Whether Garth, Akenside, and others in 
your line reaped any advantages in glory or fortune 
from courting her, I know not.
I would lay they 
did not come near a Sloane, a Lee, a Heberden, a 
Jebb, in one or the other ; but dare say if we looked 
about, we might find many such ingenious men 
as Goldsmith, who would have lived happier and 
obtained more renown, as well as riches, in being 
more ardently fond of their own sciences than of a 
rhyming muse.
Your judgement of Petrarch and Laura is just 
what I formed when I read Petrarch's life ; yet I 
confess there was a sort of fascinating pleasure at- 
tended the perusal.
One might style it a sentimental 
romance, as Buffier would.
Too many delusions 
are pleasing.
I am sorry to tell you , so lately married 
in an extraordinary manner, very soon fell into 
bad health, and this week she died, — a very serious 
lesson to those who set a step of the utmost im- 
portance against prudence and against duty.
'Tis 
most likely she is a sacrifice to disappointment and 
repentance.
Alas !
too amiable, too valuable a 
victim !
We join in wishing you the continuance of health, 
pleasure and safety ; which, whilst you take care of 
yourselves, we trust you will be blessed with by 
Heaven.
I am, dear James, ever yours, 
James Smith.
200 
J. E.
Smith to his Mother.
Honoured Madam, Pisa, Jan. 22, 1787.
We staid at Genoa till the 1 8th instant, being 
very highly entertained with the fine buildings, pic- 
tures, &c.
of that superb city, and extremely pleased 
with the perfect ease and familiarity with which we 
were received by the Durazzo family, who all seemed 
to strive to amuse and make us welcome.
We found 
their attention of great use to us in procuring us 
that of everybody else ; for the Genoese are rather 
stately : but this family having undertaken to in- 
troduce science into the country, and particularly 
natural history, found some amusement themselves 
in our company.
I must postpone my descriptions 
of Genoa to our future conversations, which I often 
think of.
I rejoice that I have been there on many 
accounts, independent of the pleasure I received at 
the time.
The road towards Pisa being very mountainous, 
my companion preferred the sea ; so he had a very 
pleasant voyage to Sestri, thirty miles, where he 
landed to sleep the first night, and where I met him 
the same evening after a rather perilous ride on 
horseback ; however, I dared not ride down the hills, 
but got off to walk whenever I saw danger.
The 
road beyond Sestri being so extremely mountainous 
and bad, that everybody told me I could not go 
without great danger, I was induced (notwithstand- 
ing my promise, which I hope you and my father 
will pardon) to go by sea.
We could not leave 
201 
Sestri next morning, as it rained ; but the day after 
being very fine, not a breath of wind, and the sea 
smooth as possible without a wave^ we were rowed 
thirty miles to Lerici, all the way within a few yards 
of the shore, which is most sublimely beautiful ; 
nothing could be finer than this voyage, nor was it 
worth sixpence to be insured.
From Lerici we came 
yesterday post to Pisa.
This day we have been 
highly entertained with the fine old cathedral, the 
hanging tower, &c.
of this place ; the town is very 
pleasant, streets wide, clean and airy, the river very 
fine, but the inhabitants too few for so large a place.
We have determined to go straight to Florence to- 
morrow.
Your ever dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
We are abundantly furnished w^ith letters to every 
place we go to, from the Durazzos, Dr. Batt, Brous- 
sonet, &c.
; so that we shall see the principal literary 
people in Italy.
The Marquis Durazzo (who knows Spallanzani 
well) assures me that he is now in prison at Vienna, 
under a charge of embezzling some things intrusted 
to his care by the Emperor.
His friends hope he is 
innocent ; so do I, for the honour of philosophers, 
«/.
E, Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Rome, Feb. VZ, 1787.
My last was addressed to my dear mother, from 
Pisa, Jan. 22nd; and I now sit down to continue my 
202 
narrative of our journey thus far.
We met with a 
very good voiture with two mules, which conveyed 
us to Florence, and the same afterwards brought us 
to Rome, and had a very safe and pleasant journey ; 
excejDt that the country inns were very bad, and 
some of the country little better than the borders 
of Scotland.
We had a very sharp wind all the way 
to Florence, so that we had but little enjoyment of 
the famous vale of the Arno, through" which we 
passed.
It is highly cultivated ; the fields bordered 
with elms or mulberry-trees, each of which supports 
one or more fine vines, which hang in festoons from 
one tree to the other ; but at present they are quite 
without leaves, except here and there in a warm 
corner, where the old leaves remain.
We were quite 
in raptures with Florence, where we spent eight 
days, the greatest part of which was passed in the 
gallery.
Nothing can be more handsomely con- 
trived than this place is for the convenience of 
strangers.
The Grand Duke (a worthy brother of 
the Emperor) gives the most positive orders that 
no money should be taken on any pretence for 
showing the gallery, the library, museum or any 
thing, except only one of his palaces.
The civility 
and extreme attention of the guides deserves no 
less praise than their sovereign's liberality.
The 
gallery is open every day, except Sundays, from 9 
till 1, and from 4 till 5.
Here we contemplated at 
leisure the Venus de Medicis (of which I had a very 
inadequate idea before), the Venus of Titian, the 
Wrestlers, the Slave whetting his Knife, the Apollo 
Venator, with many other master-pieces of sculp- 
203 
ture and painting, all in one room ; among' the rest 
St. John in the Wilderness, by Raphael, I could never 
cease to admire.
We studied the countenances of 
the Roman Emperors, and various great men of an- 
tiquity, in their original busts.
I would give one of 
my ears for the bust of Marcus Aurelius, The por- 
traits of the painters interested me much.
I was 
sorry to see Sir Joshua Reynolds cut so very poor 
a figure among them as he does.
His picture is 
one of the worst of his works I ever saw, — a bad 
likeness, and faded all away ; it hangs too in so low 
a situation that it appears a mere mass of daubing.
Some of the best portraits in this collection are by 
painters of whom we know little or nothing.
The 
inlaid tables are above all praise.
You have read so 
many descriptions of this justly celebrated collection, 
that I need not attempt to describe it at present.
I 
shall only say that it more than answered my ex- 
pectations.
The collection of the portraits of illustrious men 
I think unworthy of the rest ; most of them are 
only bad copies, not originals.
The chapel built for the sepulchre of the Medici 
family, but never finished, is very large, and entirely 
lined with the most precious jaspers, agates, lapis- 
lazuli and various gems, in the finest taste possible : 
stones of which we generally see only small bits in 
snuff-boxes or rings, are here used for panels or cor- 
nices.
There are innumerable fine statues and pic- 
tures to be seen about the town, to mention which 
would take several sheets.
Our afternoons were gene- 
rally spent with the celebrated Abbe Fontana, whose 
204 
civility to us was very particular, and we learned 
much from him.
Our inn was the most comfortable 
and elegant one I ever was at, so that on the whole 
we had no alloy to our happiness at Florence.
We 
stopped a day at Sienna (a fine old town in a very 
fine high situation) on purpose to see Dr. Mascagni, 
a very ingenious anatomist, whose discoveries in the 
lymphatic system have gone far beyond those of 
Monro or Himter, and who is going to publish a 
fine work on the subject.
He is one of the most 
modest and unaffected of men.
We arrived at Rome 
full of expectation and admiration at every step 
when we came within its walls, and were much 
struck with the entrance, which you have, figured 
in one of Piranesi's plates, and which gives a very 
just idea of it, notwithstanding what we have been 
told to the contrary.
We got here Wednesday 
the 7th instant, and are lodged extremely well in 
part of a house hired by the Duke of Gloucester 
(who is now at Naples).
A Portuguese abbe*, 
whom I knew at Paris, is extremely useful to us ; and 
as we have several letters, we shall I hope see every 
thing worth seeing, as well as several distinguished 
persons.
Thursday was almost entirely spent in 
St. Peter's, which, although with respect to archi- 
tecture perhaps scarcely superior to St. Paul's, and 
even in some parts inferior, is so infinitely beyond 
it in internal decorations, as well as in cleanliness 
both within and without, that a comparison excites 
one's pity.
We have seen several antiquities like- 
wise ; Trajan's and Anthony's pillars, the Coliseum, 
* M.
Correa de Serra.
205 
the arches of Titus, Severus, and Constantine, the 
castle of St. Angelo, as well as many churches.
Tomorrow we go to the Vatican.
Saturday carni- 
val began, and I need not say we were highly di- 
verted.
After it is over (in about ten days) we go 
to Naples, stay there two or three weeks, and then 
return here for three more ; thus we shall be here 
in the holy-week, the best time possible.
I have now learned all the particulars about Spal- 
lanzani.
Scopoli *, who is a man of the first cha- 
* In a letter toliis father in 1791, Sir James tells him, in speak- 
ing of his publications: *' I hope you have seen the Critical Re- 
view for January, in which the second fasciculus of my Icones 
(uncoloured) is so very handsomely reviewed.
I believe I never 
translated to you what I have said of poor Scopoli, which the re- 
viewer quotes with approbation.
It is nearly as follows: — 'T.
A. 
Scopoli, universally celebrated for his Flora and Entomulog'ia Car- 
niolica, after various labours in metallurgy, zoology, and botany, 
at length, by favour of the Emperor, became the public botanical 
and chymical professor at Pavia.
This indefatigable man devoted 
his leisure hours to the collecting all such new or ill understood 
natural productions as fell in his way; whence arose that splendid 
work, Dellc'ice Florce Faunceriue Insubricce, his last production, 
and brought forth in trouble.
Although devoted to the most 
inoffensive pursuits, although dear to all good men, and esteemed 
by all Europe, how much, alas !
did he suffer from the arts and 
malice of the malevolent!
When he would have exculpated him- 
self from censures unjustly cast upon him, his excellent sovereign, 
seduced by the arts of the same men (for sovereigns are generally 
obliged to judge but superficially), absolutely commanded him to 
be silent.
He submitted to his fate, but his indignant soul sought 
for liberty and justice at a higher and more impartial tribunal, 
May 8, 1788.'" 
In speaking of Professor Scopoli in his Tour on the Continent, 
Sir James adds : " It is needless here to enter into the particulars 
206 
racter, and beloved by everybody, has found out 
how he has been used, and is dispersing the true 
story all over Europe.
My idea of the rivalship 
between these two men proves exactly true ; indeed 
I knew it could not be otherwise.
Spallanzani is 
in but little credit among real philosophers, who 
examine for themselves ; for many of his experi- 
ments are found false, and he is considered as a 
mere random theorist.
I am, dear Sir, yours, 
J. E.
Smith.
of the celebrated jTracas which happened at Pavia not long since, 
relative to some articles missing in the public museum.
Nothing 
is more painful than to find blemishes in a distinguished charac- 
ter ; nor should I mention the matter at all, but for the purpose 
of justifying the innocent.
All the above-mentioned professors 
were unanimous in their account.
The government was also well 
informed of the truth, and the emperor Joseph II.
took care to 
have his sentiments known.
But, unwilling to lose a person 
whose scientific abilities were of importance to the university, the 
accusers were somewhat harshly condemned to silence.
Poor 
Scopoli, one of the most concerned in the business, died of grief 
the following year; and his only justification was a printed circu- 
lar letter, sent to the principal literati of Europe, in which the 
real cause of his death was mentioned, and which authority itself 
did not suppress.
May ray honest though feeble endeavours help 
to revive his blasted laurels, and protect a name which ought to 
be dear to every good man, and doubly so to every naturalist •' 
It is the privilege of an Englishman, thank Heaven !
safely to 
assert the cause of justice whether in his own case or that of 
another ; a privilege which, under even a mild and beneficent 
sovereign, cannot, we find, be always obtained in an unlimited go- 
vernment.
May happy Britain long most jealously watch and 
preserve this inestimable blessing !
May she be cautious, too, of 
207 
aSV^ *Toseph Banks to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Revesly Abbey, Sept.
24, 1786.
Enclosed you will receive two letters for Naples, 
one to Sir W.
Hamilton*, the other to Greater the 
gardener, whom I sent over to the Queen of Naples ; 
you will find him a knowing man, and I expect you 
will receive much real assistance from him.
I shall 
have great pleasure in hearing that your journey is 
pleasant and successful.
I know of no news to send 
you from this country.
Dryander writes me word 
that Swartz, the Danish botanist, who has been all 
about the West Indies, arrived in London a few days 
ago, and stays till spring.
Believe me, most faithfully and truly.
Your humble Servant, 
Joseph Banks.
hazarding it in pursuit of other advantages, however flattering, 
remembering how much she has to lose, and how little to gain.
" — 
Vol. iii.
p. 72.
* Sir Joseph Banks to Sir William Hamilton.
My dear Sir William, Revesly Abbey, Sept.
24, 1786.
As the bearer of this, Dr. Smith, is one of my most intimate 
friends, I take the liberty to request as particular an indulgence 
in his favour as your occupations will allow.
As his wishes are 
merely on the subject of science, he will repay, I am sure, any 
civilities you are pleased to show him.
Botany is his chief pursuit, and in that he has made very 
great progress.
Believe me, 
Most faithfully and affectionately yours, 
Joseph Banks.
208 
*J.
E. Smith to his lather.
Honoured Sir, Naples, March 5, 1787.
I was much disappointed at not finding a letter 
from you at any of the post-offices (for there are 
several) at Rome, nor any here.
We staid at Rome till Feb. 25th, and spent our 
time very happily indeed.
We saw all the Carnival, 
a description of which (as you have seen so many 
descriptions of it) I must defer to those future op- 
portunities so often referred to, and thought of by 
me with great pleasure.
We saw the Pretender every day : he is a heavy 
sickly-looking man, very much like what Mr. Ba- 
con of Earlham was latterly.
He drinks very hard.
The principal things which we have seen at Rome 
are the Coliseum, the arches of Severus, Titus, and 
Constantine, columns of Trajan and Antoninus, 
the Pantheon, the Museum Clementinum (where 
are the most celebrated statues, as the divine Apollo 
Belvidere, the Antinous, Laocoon, and a thousand 
other inestimable things), the paintings by Raphael 
in theVatican, the Moses of Michael Angelo, which 
is the first modern statue, as the Transfiguration of 
Raphael, is the finest picture, in the world.
We have 
also seen the Palace Farnese, and several other pa- 
laces and villas, with churches innumerable ; yet we 
shall have enough to employ us very closely for the 
three weeks which we have allowed ourselves to 
stay on our return, and shall then leave Rome with 
more regret than ever I left any place.
I think it 
209 
best to see the principal things well, and leave the 
rest slightly seen, or unseen altogether ; but I think 
nothing of the kind will ever interest me after I leave 
Rome.
We were three days and a half in coming 
to Naples in a voiture ; the inns were bad, but the 
road equal to any in England ; the weather very 
fine.
Another voiture with excellent company was 
with us, and we liked our journey very well, espe- 
cially as the country through which we passed was 
so very interesting.
We visited the villa of Cicero, 
where he was killed, and also his tomb.
We arrived 
at Naples February 28th.
Sir W^.
Hamilton is most 
particularly civil, and his acquaintance will be of 
great use to us.
Mr. Walsby, who is here with the 
Duke of Gloucester and family, is also very polite.
On Saturday evening we were presented to the Duke 
and Duchess, who received us very courteously, es- 
pecially the latter, who talked with me for near half 
an hour with the greatest aifability, and so did the 
young prince and princess.
The Duke was engaged 
almost all the evening in playing on the bass-viol 
with the celebrated Giardini, who is in his train ; 
there were only two gentlemen and ourselves be- 
sides the family, so that it was quite like a private 
visit.
Lady Almeria Carpenter is always with them, 
and we had some conversation with her.
She is 
the most angelic creature that I have seen since I 
left England, — I might almost say the only really 
handsome woman.
The Duchess too is a very fine 
woman.
We are now at liberty to go any evening 
we please, as they are generally at home ; we shall 
see them again at Rome.
VOL.
I. p 
210 
This morning, in consequence of an invitation 
from the French ambassador, we went to liear mass 
performed for the Abb^ de Bourbon, natural son of 
the late King of France, who died here of the small- 
pox, aged 24, the day we arrived.
It was the most 
superb thing of the kind I ever saw.
The church 
was hung with black, and an astonishing profusion 
of cloth of gold and ermine, and lighted with about 
four thousand large wax tapers.
In the centre was a 
most magnificent Ionic temple of wood, painted like 
£:ray marble and gilt, in which was a sarcophagus of 
purple velvet embroidered with gold, at each of the 
corners of which stood a skeleton holding a great 
torch.
The body was buried on Saturday.
Mass was 
performed by the Pope's nuncio ; the music was 
quite heavenly ; there were a hundred instrumental 
and fifty vocal performers, and two organs.
The 
company consisted of the first people of both sexes, 
all in mourning.
The abbe is much regretted, par- 
ticularly by the English ; and the French say he 
was an Englishman in his heart.
Naples is a very long and extensive town, ama- 
zingly populous ; the people very dirty, and the most 
barefaced villains that ever I met with.
Here are some rich churches, and many tolerable 
pictures ; but none very fine.
The architecture in 
general, as well as the taste of the ornaments of the 
town are very bad ; some of them like the taste of 
our James the First's time ; others like the flounc- 
ing, fluttering, scrawling style of the Dutch burgo- 
masters, or London and Norwich aldermen.
How 
211 
different from Rome, Florence, and even Genoa!
Mount Vesuvius is in full view of our window^ and 
this evening has thrown out flame several times.
March 6th.
This morning I have seen the Char- 
treux, a very rich monastery, where is a capital Na- 
tivity by Guido, which has been engraved, and some 
other good pictures by Lanfranc, Spagnoletto, &c.
The treasury is amazingly rich.
From a castle 
above this convent is one of the most celebrated 
views in Europe, and the day being very fine we 
saw it to great advantage.
I forgot to tell you, that we got into the Pope's 
chapel on Ash Wednesday, and saw him put ashes 
on the heads of all the clergy.
He is a very hand- 
some man ; and although said to be ashamed of this 
ceretnony, yet he went through it with great dig- 
nity.
We find Italy much dearer than France ; but I 
hope to finish my tour without being immoderately 
extravagant.
Your affectionate and obedient Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Rev. Dr.
Goodenough to J.
E, Smith, Milan.
Dear Sir, March ll, 1787.
Your last letter from Genoa, dated January 13, 
reached me the beginning of last month, but not 
before it had been anxiously wished for.
The ac- 
count you give me of your travels through groves 
of oranges and beds of myrtle, puts me in mind of 
p 2 
212 
the enchanting scenes of the Arahian Nights En- 
tertainments, or Milton's 
Spicy gales 
From Araby the blest.
I do not know what I would not give to be with 
you.
When you return home I think I shall never 
have done asking questions about something or 
other.
As it now seems determined that we shall 
have a commercial treaty with France, and restore 
the golden age, which I foolishly imagined was 
only in Utopia, I hope a few exports and imports 
in natural history may be both allowed and obtained, 
luhile it lasts; for I own myself one qui timeo Da- 
naos et dona ferentes, and cannot bring myself to 
think that there is much sincerity on either side in 
this business.
Perhaps if mutual interest can be 
made to take place, it may exist a while.
Yet be- 
tween two rival nations, I do not see how there can 
be a mutual interest.
If the gain be equal on both 
sides, then they are as they were before relatively 
considered, and there is no bond of union.
If one 
side have the greater gain, the other will appear 
foolish, and in the end try to break the bargain.
In this train of tbinking, I am not at all sanguine 
about this measure, which I fear I ought to call the 
bantling of mercantile interest, favoured in preju- 
dice to the true offspring of Britain, national valour 
and sound policy.
Now I am upon politics, just 
let me tell you the exact state of things at present.
The Houses of Lords and Commons have both 
pledged themselves to adopt the treaty generally; 
213 
that is, reserving a right of modifying particular 
matters of inferior moment.
Mr. Pitt carried it in 
both houses by a majority of two to one.
The 
whole body of traders are full of ideas of present 
profit; and as yet, though a slight grumbling is be- 
ginning in some quarters, not a single petition has 
been presented against it.
Lord Lansdown says 
that the scheme was his, and therefore, though a 
secret enemy to Pitt, is for it.
Four charges have 
been urged against Mr. Hastings (for maladmini- 
stration) in the House of Commons.
He has been 
adjudged liable to an impeachment upon three of 
them, to the no small displeasure of a certain great 
personage.
Some people go so far as to say, that 
Mr. Pitt, who voted for Hastings's impeachment, 
will lose his situation for his behaviour.
Lord 
Mansfield, angry that ministry will appoint Sir 
Lloyd Kenyon to succeed him, refuses to resign.
He wishes Buller to succeed him.
A pamphlet, 
entitled, "A short Review of the Political State of 
Great Britain," affecting a great impartiality and 
knowledge of present affairs, has lately made much 
noise, and run through several editions.
It by no 
means deserves the character which has been given 
it (it has been translated into all foreign languages), 
for it is evidently partial to the court side, and is not 
a true prophet.
Witness the case of Hastings, whom 
this writer trumpets to the skies.
I look upon this 
pamphlet as little more than a jumble of the best 
sort of coffee-house conversation.
Though you 
are not a zealot in politics, nor I myself, yet I 
thought, at your distance from England, you might 
214 
not dislike to hear so much of our affairs.
Portu- 
gal is to be considered as of very inferior moment : 
but ministry are very much perplexed about Irish 
affairs ; for the treaty says, the French are to be 
the most favoured nation; so the blood of St. Patrick 
thinks that very strange.
As to natural history, which I busy myself about 
every day, more or less, I am in the first place 
amusing myself with the idea of our New Society, 
which must take place of our present gross body, 
the instant it starts.
The present society goes on 
in the usual way, of having a fossil or a plant go 
round the table : nothing is or can be said upon it.
It is referred to a committee to consider of it ; the 
committee call it by some name, and send it back to 
the society.
The society desire the committee to 
reconsider it : the committee desire the society to 
reconsider it.
In the mean time nothing is done ; 
indeed it does not appear to me that any of them 
can do any thing.
I have had a short conversation 
with Sir Joseph, who repeated to me what he said 
to you.
Were he not President of the Royal So- 
ciety, I am sure he would join us.
My Systema Accentuatum'x^ ready for the press: 
but I shall not take that step till you return.
I am much obliged to you for your letters, and 
beg that you would continue to write to me, where- 
ver you are.
Your letters are my first-rate amuse- 
ment.
In the mean time believe me.
Your very affectionate friend, 
Samuel Goodenough.
215 
Marsham is here with me, and has just showed 
me your letter to him, which was wonderfully en- 
tertaining, particularly your account of the famous 
gallery, and your laying down your heart at the foot 
of the Venus de Medicis.
I hope you will contrive to see Allioni : I look 
upon him as one of the few who search into nature, 
and see with their own eyes.
Besides, where can 
you see the Alpine plants in such plenty, or such 
perfection as with them ?
Do keep in your mind Ciirculio paraplecticus, 
— my desiderata in general.
I should be glad of a 
little more Agi^ostis minima.
Above all, write to 
me often, again and again.
Ever yours, with best wishes, S.
G* 
Thomas Jenkinson Woodward, Esq. to J.
E. Smith, 
Milan.
Dear Sir, Bungay, March 16, 1787.
I have now before me your two very friendly and 
highly entertaining letters, the first from Paris, 
October 2nd, the other from Rome, February 12th.
It gives me great pleasure to find that in such distant 
journeys, and amongst the literati of all countries, 
and such interesting objects, your old Norwich 
friends claim a share in your recollection and re- 
gard ; and I do assure you the distinction flatters 
me highly.
I am very much obliged to you for 
BuUiard, which, with your Parisian letter, I received 
very safe a1)out Christmas.
I shall certainly thank 
you for the promised copy of Leers, at the eighteen 
216 
livres.
You will also be so kind as to procure for 
me on your return to Paris, such other Fungi as 
Bulliard may have published since you bought them, 
together with the Histoire des Champignons^ and 
such other letter-press as may relate to that subject.
Your thesis I shall hope to receive on your re- 
turn.
Retzius is, I take it, a Swedish professor, who 
has published three fasciculi of observations in bo- 
tany, in 1779, 1781, and 1783.
The second is de- 
dicated to Sir Joseph Banks.
There are a few 
plates, particularly the real Astragalus arenarius, 
and another called Hippuris lanceolata, which I 
apprehend to be the tetraphyUa ; some good ob- 
servations, and I apprehend some error.
I think I 
saw the book in your library.
I thank you for 
Gnaphalium luteo-alhum^ and Agrost'is minhna, both 
of which are treasures.
I need not say how often I have wished myself 
with you, for it has happened every step you record 
of your tour, and every library and herbarium you 
have examined.
The names of the old botanists 
seem to carry one into enchanted ground ; and the 
travelling through the herbaria of Tournefort and 
Vaillant, &c.
is like taking a journey to Jupiter or 
Saturn, to verify the number of their satellites, and 
periods of their revolutions.
Your Senecio acanthifol'ms must be a magnifi- 
cent plant, and the rest I long much to see.
If you 
return through Switzerland as you propose, pos- 
sibly you may have an opportunity of inspecting 
Haller's herbarium, which would, I should think, 
be of great advantage to an accurate Flora Anglicay 
217 
as so very many of the Swiss plants are also natives 
of England.
I have travelled with you in your 
second letter, from Paris to Rome, and enjoyed the 
beautiful and sublime scenery you describe, and the 
sight of so many plants growing wild, which we 
either immure in greenhouses, or look upon as 
valuable ornaments to the shrubbery or flower-gar- 
den.
I hope you drank out of the fountain of 
Vaucluse, to the memory of Petrarch and his beau- 
tiful Laura.
The two days you spent with Gerard must have 
been delightful, and particularly advantageous to 
your proposed reform of the Si/st.
Veget.
Your 
time at Genoa must have passed delightfully with 
your friend the Marquess and his family.
And the 
time spent in examining the gallery at Florence was 
charmingly employed.
The veleris vestigia flaimiKE 
however, always breaking forth, makes me regret 
the impossibility of examining to purpose the col- 
lection of Micheli, as it might have been of conse- 
quence in ascertaining the synonyms of many En- 
glish Cryptogamia.
I was ill-natured enough to 
be highly pleased with your account of Spallan- 
zani's disgrace, and that principally on account of 
the strictures it pleased the reviewers to pass on 
your second tract, because they judged it improper 
to attack so great a personage.
To people any 
way qualified to judge of the subject, there could 
be no doubt of the propriety of your strictures on 
Spallanzani ; but there are so many readers of the 
Reviews, who pin their faith upon them, and though 
entirely ignorant of the subject of natural history.
218 
choosing to retail their opinions on that as well as 
other subjects, that it gave me great pleasure to 
have, what one might call, a practical defence of 
your assertions.
In consequence I have mentioned 
to some friends the anecdote.
You expect an account of some discoveries ; but 
whilst you are daily treading new ground, how am 
I to supply you with any thing new?
I have not 
met with any thing new in the Cryptogamia this 
winter, and in the other classes one has nothing 
to expect.
Dickson's journey to Scotland has how- 
ever produced enough, at least according to Crowe's 
account, to surprise you on your return.
He says 
that he believes he goes not more than half way, 
when he declares that Dickson has discovered one 
hundred and fifty new species of Mosses, Junger- 
manniae, &c., and Lichens, and some of them so 
completely unlike any thing discovered before in 
those genera, as to be wonderful; but whether they 
will excite your wonder as much as ours is rather 
doubtful.
For my own part, not having been at 
London this winter, I have seen none of them ; 
and Crowe's portmanteau, in which were many of 
these treasures, was stolen on its way to the coach, 
by which they, as well as his wardrobe, were irrepa- 
rably lost.
I was at Norwich last Saturday, when I 
saw Mrs. Smith, your father being out of town ; 
and she was so kind as to communicate to me great 
part of a letter from you of the same date as mine ; 
but they were so different, that each of us received 
much pleasure from the exchange of intelligence.
Pitchford and his wife desire their affectionate com- 
2J9 
pliments.
I showed them your letter, with which 
they were charmed.
Norwich has just been in another uproar.
Yes- 
terday se'nnight the committee of the House of 
Commons, after a long sitting on Sir Thomas Bee- 
vor's petition, declared the last election void, from 
bribery proved on both sides ; and on Saturday a 
writ came down.
Yesterday was the election, when, 
after a hard struggle, Hobart succeeded by a majo- 
rity of eighty and upwards, as I have heard ; but a 
scrutiny is talked of.
We have experienced a severe loss in the death 
of my worthy and much respected father-in-law and 
friend Mr. Manning, which happened on January 
15th.
His kindness to me was such that I can never 
cease to regret his loss, and must ever highly re- 
spect his memory.
I am, dear Sir, 
T. Woodward.
«/.
E. Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Rome, March 26, 1787.
Your letter of February the 12th, which I found 
here, March 23rd, on my return from Naples, was 
as grateful to me as " cold water to a thirsty soul ;" 
and I take the first opportunity of thanking you 
for it.
I now proceed with my own history.
— The 9th 
instant we were most delightfully occupied in see- 
ing the antiquities on the west side of Naples ; the 
grotto of Pausilippo, Puzzuola, Baise, the Elysian 
220 
Fields^ temple of Venus, (from which I brought 
some sprigs of myrtle, as I did of bay from Virgil's 
tomb,) baths of Nero, grotto of the Sibyl, lake 
of Avernus ; in short all that you will find in books, 
and which I need not describe.
They are highly 
interesting, and I could have spent a month about 
them instead of a day.
I had them all, however, al- 
ready so well in my mind, that a slight view was 
sufficient to stamp a lasting impression.
Two days after, we visited the palace of Capo di 
Monte, where are some good pictures, but bad ones 
innumerable ; the best thing there is an onyx cup, 
found in Adrian's tomb.
The catacombs are wonderful for their extent, 
and worth seeing.
We afterwards visited the Grotto 
del Cane, Virgil's tomb, and " some other things 
thereabouts.
Next day was devoted to Vesuvius.
We left 
Naples at six in the morning, and in an hour and a 
half got to Portici, w^here we took mules, and as- 
cended as far as we could in that manner, but were 
obliged to walk about a mile over the loose ashes 
to the top, which is very fatiguing ; but by going 
very slow we accomplished it well.
We walked 
round the inside of the old crater, in the centre of 
which is arisen a new mountain within these twelve 
months, to the top of which we ascended and looked 
into the present crater ; but it was less striking 
than I expected, as its inside is not perpendicular, 
and the smoke, although very moderate, prevented 
us from seeing far.
I can give you no idea of the 
grotesque appearance of iron cinders, encrusted 
221 
with salts of the most vivid green, red, and yellow 
colours ; the chasms from which issue smoke and 
heated vapours, with snow at three feet distance 
from them.
All this I had no conception of, much 
less of the lava, of which we saw a fine stream, 
about a yard in breadth, issuing from one side of 
the hill : we dipped our sticks into it, and it imme- 
diately cooled into a cinder around them ; — the 
melted iron running from a furnace gives the best 
idea of it.
We descended much faster than we 
came up, after having gratified our curiosity, and 
enjoyed the view, which is beautiful and extensive 
beyond description.
As to the hazard we ran, I 
believe it to have been none, however formidable 
in the description ; for there was no rumbling in 
the mountain, as there always is before any change, 
and all the top is an iron crust firmer than any 
other rock in the world, and very safe to walk on.
We descended into the theatre of Herculaneum, 
which is all that is left open, the rest having been 
filled again for security, as Portici stands upon it.
Next day went to Pompeii, many of the houses of 
which are quite laid open, with their beautiful stuc- 
cos and mosaics in full view ; the streets, gardens, 
&c.
are quite perfect: nothing can be more interest- 
ing, and they daily discover more.
The museum at 
Portici contains most of the things that have been 
found : vases, bronzes, statues, paintings, imple- 
ments, even dates, figs and bread, with many other 
such things, in their perfect form, although disco- 
loured.
At the porcelain manufactory at Naples 
we saw a superb set of china, intended as a present 
222 
to our king.
I received great civility from the Da- 
nish ambassador, who is a botanist, and who was 
earnest with me to correspond with him.
Saturday 
last, March 17th, we left Naples for Caserta, where 
the court resides.
We spent that day and the next 
with Sir William Hamilton and the queen's gar- 
dener, who was sent over by Sir Joseph Banks ; and 
on Monday a very bad road brought us to Monte 
Cassino, the chief of the Benedictine convents, to 
which we were well recommended, and where we 
were most hospitably and elegantly received : 'tis 
well worth seeing, but I must postpone a descrip- 
tion of it for the present.
We spent Tuesday there; 
and in three days more a very bad road, through a 
most beautiful country, brought us to Rome.
We 
passed through Frescati (Tusculum), and saw the 
ruins of Cicero's Villa, and the Villa Aldobrandini, 
with some other gardens.
Yesterday and today we 
have seen the antiquities of the Capitol, and today 
ascended to the top of Trajan's noble column.
We 
stay here a month.
I am, honoured Sir, your dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Mr. Smith to «/.
E. Smith, Milan.
My dear Son, Norwich, March 29, 1787.
Your letters, my dear James, give us the most 
exquisite pleasure : but although the narrations are 
so pleasing, and the reception you meet with makes 
your parents' hearts exult with joy; though we con- 
template the advantages you may derive from your 
223 
journey in regard to information and connections, 
with a pleasing prospect of future happiness and in- 
terest ; — all these agreeable subjects for reflection 
do not interest us near so much as what concerns 
your health and safety, the confirmation of which in 
every letter carries my soul, loaded with gratitude, 
up to the throne of our gracious God, displaying 
your letter as the testimony of his great goodness in 
preserving and protecting you, who are the joy and 
comfort of those to whom you owe your birth, and 
who are never ceasing to offer up vows for your 
happy return, when you have completed your pur- 
posed tour.
Excuse, my beloved son !
these sallies 
of the passions, — my heart is full.
Your brother Francis is pursuing astronomy now 
with the earnestness he undertakes every thing, and 
he is making astronomers of the girls and me.
We 
are ever popping out to peep at the stars, and are 
intimate with Orion, the Ursse, the Lion, and Bull, 
&c.
Sir J.
Banks told me he had received a letter 
from you.
I shall write to you to Turin, and hope 
you will let us hear from you as soon as you arrive 
at Venice, at Milan and Turin, if you have only 
time to say you are well.
Yours for ever, 
James Smith.
I am told the road from Milan to Turin is in dan- 
ger of banditti.
I beg of you omit no precautions, 
nor spare expense, for your safety.
I write now 
for the caution I give you, which I don't let your 
mother see.
224 
Mr. TVillmm Jones to J.
E. Smith, Milan.
Dear Sir, London, April 9, 1787.
I thank you for your favour from Rome, and 
particularly for your apology for not writing sooner ; 
because it justified my jealousy, when you wrote 
to Mr. Marsham, that you had either forgot me, or 
was offended that I did not embrace your scheme 
with the same ardour yourself and some others pos- 
sessed for it.
I own, not one tittle of the plan ex- 
pressed in your favour can be objected to by such 
as are qualified for it ; but am certain 'tis your par- 
tiality only can rank me in that number, for I feel 
in myself too much ignorance when with the in- 
genious and scientific, to conceive myself entitled 
to it.
This, and an indolence of mind that fre- 
quently accompanies me, seem to throw obstruc- 
tions where otherwise my ambition might tempt 
me.
To cultivate your esteem, I shall be always 
proud of communicating the little I know, and I 
am afraid so little, though all, that I shall hardly 
merit it ; nevertheless, I may venture to assure you 
it shall not be charged to my account, if our friend- 
ship ceases sooner than our lives.
Rome, more than any city upon earth, would 
please me to visit; I conceive it an inexhaustible 
source of delight to a curious mind.
'Twas the 
sentiment of an ingenious traveller, that of all the 
places he had seen or should see, it was by far the 
most delightful ; — that a voyage to Italy might pro- 
perly enough be compared to the common stages 
and journeys of life.
At our first setting out through 
9 '3;-!
France, the pleasures that we find, like those of our 
youth, are of the gay fluttering kind, which grow 
by degrees as we advance towards Italy, more solid, 
manly, and rational, but attain not their full per- 
fection till we reach Rome ; from which point we 
no sooner turn homewards, than they begin again 
gradually to decline ; and though sustained for a 
while in some degree of vigour through the other 
stages and cities of Italy, yet dwindle at last into 
weariness and fatigue, and a desire to be at home, 
where the traveller finishes his course, as the old 
man does his days, with the usual privilege of being- 
tiresome to his friends by a perpetual repetition of 
past adventures.
This last is only to finish the 
climax, and by no means applicable to you.
You 
have a fair opportunity of adding your suffrage to 
the above, or giving your dissent ; and as this re- 
mark was made more than fifty years since, you 
will observe how far manners may have changed 
with time.
I must give you another quotation.
Brydone, in his Travels through Sicily, speaks of 
large aloes making a magnificent appearance, and I 
believe thought them indigenous, and enumerated 
sundry plants, which, when I read him, struck me 
with surprise ; but you assign a very probable rea- 
son why more southern plants should flourish in 
that country.
In the west of England, near the sea, 
'tis no unusual sight to observe myrtles in the open 
air bear the winter well ; and I have noticed some 
springs, when near London the severity of weather 
has destroyed the blossom of the wall-fruits, near 
the sea in Sussex they have not perished.
VOL.
I. a 
226 
Mr. Latham will be mucli obliged to you if you 
can procure a good description, &c.
of a bird called 
Courier, described by several, but only seen by 
Aldrovandus, from whom the others took their 
account.
The description given is too short and 
imperfect to give a just idea of it.
I saw Dr. Goodenough and Mr. Marsham this 
day.
They and theirs are well, and are anxious to 
see you ; but not more than, dear Sir, 
Yours most sincerely, 
W. Jones.
J. E.
Sinith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Rome, April 11, 1787.
Yesterday I received from Genoa yours of Ja- 
nuary 4th, inclosed in one from M.
Durazzo, which 
informed me of the death of his father, a fine old 
man of eighty-five, whom every body loved, and I 
was very much pleased with.
I am not partial to 
the bread of Italy, 'tis all made with leaven, and 
so sour that nothing but custom can reconcile one 
to it, nor can I ever eat it without something to 
conceal the taste.
Since our return from Naples 
we have been very busy in seeing houses, pictures, 
and statues, and with the ceremonies of the Holy 
Week.
The palace Borghese contains I think the 
finest collection of pictures I ever saw ; there are 
above seventeen hundred originals, scarcely any of 
which are not good, and some exquisitely fine.
You will find accounts of them in books.
There is 
227 
a Venus of Titian, one of the two which contends 
with that at Florence for originahty ; several things 
by Leonardo da Vinci, a charming painter, of 
whose works I have seen but few ; many by Ra- 
phael, Julio Romano, Titian, Guido, Paul Vero- 
nese (especially Cupid caressing Adonis), St. Ceci- 
lia by Domenichino, a most divine performance, 
&c., &c.
I have learned one thing, which I hope 
will be agreeable intelligence for you, which is, 
that your Virgin with the Infant Jesus and St. John, 
which now hangs disgracefully on the staircase, is 
by no other hand than Raphael, in his second man- 
ner, — you know he had three very different ones.
The first, in which he imitated his master, was a bad 
and stiff one.
In the second, he improved very 
much in drawing and colouring, and finished very 
highly (as yours is), so that some of his pictures 
in this manner are very highly valued, especially 
as they are rare.
His third manner is quite origi- 
nal, although various in itself, and of various merit ; 
of this are all his most celebrated pieces, and no 
one has yet equalled him in design and drawing, 
although his colouring has been excelled.
I sus- 
pected your picture to be by his hand when I was 
ta Genoa, from one which I saw there ; and since, I 
have made so many observations on the pictures 
painted by him and his scholars as well as others, 
that I am without a doubt on the subject.
What 
settled my opinion was a very much admired picture 
at the palace Borghese, which is extremely like 
yours in the thought and execution.
I have seen some of Andrea del Sarto's, which in 
a 2 
228 
some measure resemble it, but still are sufficiently 
different.
Leonardo da Vinci and his scholars are 
not in the least like it, and I wonder Worlidge 
thought it was one of theirs ; but perhaps he was 
never in Italy, where, only, Raphael's pictures can 
be seen in any number.
What is characteristic in 
your picture is a certain sublime tranquillity in the 
countenances, especially I think in St. John's ; the 
little gold wiry hair of the children ; the Virgin's 
very thin veil ; the colours of her drapery ; the 
colour and design of the back-ground ; and the 
softness of the finishing, with some errors in the 
outline of the faces here and there, but no defect 
in grace or delicacy.
I have so often contemplated 
the picture, that I know it perfectly, and have taken 
no small pains to make observations on the sub- 
ject ; but I'll tell you better when I see it again.
The villa Borghese, which is without the city, is the 
finest about Rome, and as rich in sculptures as the 
palace is in paintings ; besides that the house is 
extremely elegant and neat, abounding with the 
most precious porphyry and marbles.
Of all the 
splendid sights that can be seen, I think the Holy 
Week exceeds them ; indeed no prince who pre- 
tends only to temporal authority can assume the 
dignity that the Pope does, nor can any other have 
such a place as St. Peter's to exhibit in.
The pre- 
sent Pope conducts himself with admirable grace 
and dignity.
Nothing can be finer than his blessing 
the people from the middle window of the great 
front of St. Peter's, the great bell ringing, guns of 
St. Angelo firing, and the soldiers, who are drawn 
229 
up in the area, trumpeting at the same time.
Im- 
mediately after he has pronounced the blessing, 
with his arms extended, all the people kneel to re- 
ceive it.
His washing the pilgrims' feet, and serv- 
ing them at dinner, are sights altogether novel ; but 
the finest thing of all is his saying mass on Easter 
Sunday.
The altar of St. Peter's was set out with 
candlesticks and statues of pure gold, each about 
four feet high.
Behind it, at some distance, was a 
most magnificent throne for the Pope, who came in 
a chair on men's shoulders, blessing the people as 
he advanced.
Behind him were carried two im- 
mense fans of white peacocks' feathers, and before 
him about eight different mitres and tiaras, for the 
most part covered with the finest pearls and gems, 
besides one which he wore on his head.
The cere- 
monies of the preceding days were chiefly in the 
Sixtine chapel ; there we heard such music, all 
vocal, as I never heard elsewhere, especially the 
Miserere, which is so very famous.
I could have 
no idea before of such sounds, yet I can conceive 
that music might be carried further.
We dressed 
in black, full dress, as is the fashion, and were 
easily admitted everywhere, as the Romans make a 
point of showing attention to strangers.
There 
were a great many foreigners of the first distinction; 
the Duke of Gloucester and family (whom we have 
visited here since they came from Naples), the Duke 
and Duchess of Bucclcugh, Lord and Lady Gower, 
&c.
The fireworks at St. Angelo are inferior to 
what I have seen, except the vast fountain of fire, 
which Wright has painted.
Two evenings in the 
230 
week the inside of St. Peter's was lighted only by a 
huge cross of copper, studded on both sides with 
lamps, and hung in the middle of the church, which 
was quite a promenade, like Ranelagh.
We leave 
Rome in twelve days for Loretto, Bologna, Venice, 
and Milan.
Your dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
J. E.
Stnith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Rome, April 24, 1787.
We could not get off this morning, but shall 
leave Rome this afternoon or tomorrow.
I have 
got a letter from Broussonet of Paris, informing 
me that I am chosen a member of their Royal Agri- 
cultural Society.
We have been busily employed 
in seeing all we could, but must still leave some 
things undone.
The church of St. Paul without- 
the-walls pleased me very much, on account of its 
great number of noble antique pillars of marble, 
forty of which came from Adrian's tomb, and are 
most of them of a single block of Parian marble 
near twenty-five feet high.
A few days ago a very 
elegant new monument was opened in the church 
of the Twelve Apostles, for the late Pope Ganganelli ; 
'tis one of the finest I ever saw : 'tis of the usual 
form ; a large base, on which is a sarcophagus, 
at one end of which is a figure of Humility, and at 
the other Temperance, both quite in the antique 
style, and far superior to Bernini's heavy works.
231 
Above is a figure of the Pope giving his benedic- 
tion.
The artist is to be paid about 3000/.
He is 
a Venetian.
There is a perpetual crowd about 
this monument, and nobody talks of anything else.
The people have begun to kiss a part of the dra- 
pery of one of the figures^ which hangs low ; for 
the late Pope is adored by all kinds of people ex- 
cept those who helped to take him off.
The people 
likewise kiss the monument of Innocent XI.
at St.
Peter's.
I have not met with the " Voyage de 
r Abb^ Richard," but with that of " De la Lande," 
which is an excellent one.
I have also just been 
reading Addison's Travels, and a poor book it is.
Smollet's gives a very just account of the manners 
of the people, but he always gives the dark side.
I wish I had Lady Miller's Letters ; from what I 
remember of them they are very just, and have af- 
forded me many useful hints.
Your dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
«/.
E. Smith to his Mother.
Honoured Madam, Bologna, May 7, 1787.
Although I wrote to my father so lately as April 
24th, yet having made a long step since, I think you 
will have no objection to hear we are got thus 
much nearer home.
On the 25th after dinner we 
left Rome, casting many a longing lingering look 
at the line things we passed by.
I have left no 
place with half so much regret.
The last object 
232 
we lost sight of was the dome of St. Peter's, from a 
hill about six miles off.
We engaged with the 
same voiturin who had brought us from Florence 
to Rome, — a man of character^ and with whom we 
were well pleased, — -to carry us to Bologna by Lo- 
retto (366 miles) for 10 sequins (that is about 5/.
each)^ and provisions and every thing included.
We 
arrived here quite safe and well May 5th at noon ; 
and had a very agreeable journey, except that the 
weather was part of the way very cold, and we had 
much rain.
One half day we were obliged to lie by 
on account of a storm of rain and wind in our faces 
as we went by the sea side from Savignano toward 
Rimini.
Friday, April 27th, we visited the famous 
cascade of Terni, said to be one of the finest in the 
world.
It is a very considerable river, which falls 
above 460 feet perpendicular, as it is said, but I can 
scarcely conceive it to be quite so much : it is al- 
most all changed into foam in its fall, and is dashed 
up an amazing height from the rocks below ; it 
fills the neighbouring valleys, which are very ro- 
mantic, with a perpetual mist, and when the sun 
shines there is always a rainbow.
We slept at 
Spoleto, where there is a fine old aqueduct.
Next 
day our road lay through one of the finest and rich- 
est countries I ever saw ; it was along a very ex- 
tensive valley, cultivated in the highest degree with 
corn and vines, and bounded by hills clad with olive- 
trees, and stuck with towns, white convents, villas 
and cottages, to their very tops.
The hedges were 
full of what we call Italian May, in flower, and 
Venus's Looking-glass grew on the banks.
At 
233 
Foligno we saw a very fine statue of massy silver, 
as big as life, representing St. Felix, one of their 
bishops ; it is in a chair of silver, and is carried 
about the town once a year.
After dinner we be- 
gan to ascend the Apennines, and slept at a poor 
little place called Serravalle, in a very deep rocky 
valley, high among the mountains, where every- 
thing wore the appearance of February ; the trees 
just budding, and the spring flowers now in bloom.
This is one of the lowest passes of these mountains ; 
there are others which are now covered with snow.
The road is commodious enough.
Next day we 
descended into a milder climate, and I found seve- 
ral fine plants.
Passed through a rich and beautiful 
country (which continued all the way to Bologna) 
to Macerate, a very fine situation, and next day 
dined at Loretto, where we spent the rest of the day 
in seeing the celebrated curiosities of that holy 
place.
They are very civil to strangers here, and 
delight to show them every thing ; no kneeling or 
any ceremony of that kind is required.
The place 
swarms with poor labouring people, who come on 
pilgrimages here from every part of the world : 
they go round the holy house on their knees, sing- 
ing or saying their prayers.
The holy house is 
converted into a chapel ; the outside is cased with 
marble ; it stands under the dome of a very large 
church: the inside is divided into two parts by an 
altar and grate, all of massy silver ; the part behind 
the altar is lined entirely with silver, and here in a 
niche of gold stands the holy image of the Virgin, 
in a robe covered with above six thousand diamonds, 
234 
some of them of immense value.
About the niche 
hang great numbers of offerings made by the great- 
est princes in the world ; among others, a figure of 
a child in gold, weighing twenty-four pounds, given 
by Louis XIII.
of France, on the birth of his son 
Louis XIV., and many others equally valuable.
Here are kept what they call the Virgin's gown, 
dishes which she used, the cup out of which 
our Saviour took pap, &c., all in massy silver cup- 
boards.
But the most stupendous thing of all is 
the treasury, a large room where most of the of- 
ferings that have been made are disposed in glass 
cases all around ; that is, all the choicest of gold 
and jewels, for silver can scarcely find a place.
There are some most beautiful as well as precious 
things, and many interesting in an historical light ; 
as the fine crown and sceptre of Christina queen of 
Sweden; a gold heart set with diamonds, given by our 
James the Second's queen, and many others equally 
curious.
There are garments forthe priests, covered 
with millions perhaps of pearls and precious stones, 
in embroidery and other forms.
Every thing is 
kept in the most exquisite order, and shown freely 
to the public twice a day.
One thing which struck 
me extremely was a huge mass of emeralds, each as 
big as the handle of a table-knife, sticking in their 
natural bed ; the whole must weigh one hundred 
and fifty pounds ; it was given by Philip IV.
of 
Spain.
Here is a Virgin and Child by Raphael, for 
which they say Lord Spencer offered about 3/00/.
: 
but this church is not in want of money, as you will 
easily believe ; their revenues are in proportion to 
235 
their other riches.
We laid in a stock of rosaries 
and crucifixes of various kinds, which are made at 
Loretto, and which we had touched with the holy 
house and porringer, to make them (as Lady Miller 
says) as efficacious as possible, to present as curi- 
osities to our friends in England.
Their cheapness 
is as remarkable as any thing, and some of them 
are really very pretty things ; as you shall see, I 
hope, one day.
We were obliged to buy a little 
silver Madonna, and some flaring artificial flowers 
to stick in the front of our voiturin's hat ; that was 
indispensably necessary, and if it had been neg- 
lected, nobody knows what ills might have befallen 
us.
Next day we proceeded amid troops of pil- 
grims to Ancona, a pretty sea-port, and thence to 
Sinigaglia.
We saw nothing very remarkable all 
the way to Bologna, but passed through some very 
pretty neat little cities, viz.
Rimini (which last 
week felt another shock of an earthquake), Forli, 
Faenza, Imola, and Cesene.
Most of the towns in 
this country are built like Bologna, of brick ; the 
houses stand on stone pillars, and form a clean 
broad covered way for foot-passengers on each side 
of most of the streets, which is very convenient.
We have been busy since our arrival here, in seeing 
churches and pictures, with which this place abounds ; 
some of the latter prodigiously fine : butnochurches 
will do after seeing Rome.
Tomorrow evening we 
set off in a barge, to go by canals and rivers to 
Venice, where we are to arrive in thirty-six hours, 
and where we expect to meet several of our friends.
We shall probably stay ten days, or at most a fort- 
236 
night, to see the place, and the celebrated cere- 
monies at the Ascension.
Direct to me as before, 
at Genoa: the letters go post free to M.
Durazzo's ; 
and he can send them after me to Paris, where I 
shall likewise get them post free.
I may perhaps 
call again at Genoa, as it is very little out of my 
way, and I am warmly invited.
Your ever dutiful Son, 
J. E.
Smith.
Si?' J.
Banks to J, E.
S?niih, Milan.
Dear Doctor, Soho Square, May 11, 1787.
Many thanks for your letter, and the news it 
contains.
I am very glad to find your travels pro- 
duce so much amusement to you.
I have nearly finished Swartz's herbarium, — a 
most valuable one it is ; he is certainly the best 
botanist I have seen since poor Solander's death, so 
that the addition I have received from him is im- 
mense.
I am in hopes to procure his being sent 
out by the East India Company next year to Ben- 
gal.
The Royal Society flourishes much.
Herschel 
sent an account there the other day of three volca- 
nos* which he saw burning in the unenlightened 
part of the moon, the largest of which appears 
twice as large as Jupiter's third satellite, and he 
* In a letter from Dr. Younge, dated Milan, June 22nd, he 
tells his friend Smith, " Oriani thinks he has found out what 
Herschel calls volcanos ; he is at present in doubt whether 
they be really so." 
237 
conceived to be three miles in diameter.
We ex- 
pect from him a dissertation on the subject, which 
is not new; as Hevehus saw a similar phaenomenon, 
though he was not able to account for it.
Herschel 
had before discovered two new satellites to his 
Georgian planet.
Mr. Walker, apothecary to the Infirmary at Ox- 
ford, has produced a frigorific mixture with salts 
and acids only, by which he has frozen mercury 
last week when the thermometer was at forty-five.
His cheap process, which produces forty-six degrees 
of cold, may be useful to cool your wine, &c.
It is 
oil of vitriol mixed with an equal quantity of water, 
cooled by putting into it Glauber salts finely pow- 
dered.
These I think are our three things, the new- 
est this season, for the Philosophical Transactions.
We begin to look out for your return, which I 
suppose will be in autumn ; and have a long list of 
queries for comparison with your herbarium.
Sib- 
thorp is expected here shortly.
Yours most faithfully, 
Jos. Banks.
Marquis IppoUto Durazio to J.
E, Smith, Milan.
Dear Sir, Genoa, June 8, 1787.
Your letter of the 23rd of May came safe to my 
hands, and afforded me some notices of you, which 
I wanted of.
I thank you for the part you take 
on the loss of my father, which has been very much 
felt by all our family.
It seems, by the history of 
the Capuchin, you were astonished to hear I was 
238 
110 more a bachelor.
I cannot tell you how this 
changement of thinking took place in my mind so 
suddenly.
In few days every thing was proposed 
and concluded.
The box shall remain with the other till you 
come, and I shall pay what is necessary, — I say, till 
you come, as I hope you will do it.
Why, sir, do 
you take the liberty to ask me if your coming to 
Genoa is convenient or not to me, after so many 
petitions and prayers which I made to you for this 
object?
I expect you consequently without any 
doubt, and will prepare some interesting things for 
you.
You must, therefore, write to me some lines, 
that I can know the time of your coming ; and shall 
be very happy to meet you again, and present you 
to my wife before that I can see you again in Eng- 
land.
I wrote to Mr. Broussonet in the month of April, 
and received no answer at all from him, according 
to his custom.
Believe he will be always the same 
for me, and consequently I shall be obliged to look 
for another correspondent in Paris, in the scien- 
tifical line.
Present my compliments to Mr. Younge.
I 
send you those of Mr. Cattaneo and my sister ; and 
am with the greatest regard and consideration.
Your most humble and obedient servant, 
Ippolito Durazzo.
239 
J. E.
Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Milan, June 8, 1787.
Nothing could exceed my joy and satisfaction on 
finding here your very affectionate letter of March 
29th, together with ten others from various friends.
I always feel (thanks to your good instructions) 
so exactly the same sentiments towards Heaven on 
receiving your letters that you express on receiving 
mine, that I need not repeat them even if I could 
express them better ; and whenever I approach the 
place where I expect news from home, I endeavour 
to prepare my mind in such a manner, that if it 
were unfavourable I hope I could bear it, and if fa- 
vourable, as thank God it always has been, such a 
disposition of mind doubles my pleasure.
My last was to my mother, from Bologna, May 
7th.
I believe we shall fly down to Genoa for a 
few days, to congratulate my friend the marquis on 
his marriage, which is now in hand, and to strength- 
en still more my connection with his family, and 
especially with his elder brother, who is now the 
chief of the family, and who was beginning to be 
much attached to me : his son will soon come to 
England.
From Genoa we go by the loiv road to 
Turin, in which there is nothing to fear.
Our jour- 
ney from Bologna here has been very prosperous 
and agreeable, and I now proceed to give you a 
sketch of it.
To Venice we went by the Courier 
by water, pretty much as in Holland, in two days 
and two nights ; the country we passed through 
was execrable, like the worst fens of Holland or 
240 
Lincolnshire.
We dined excellently at Ferrara, a 
vast lifeless town, or to use Ganganelli's words, 
^^ line belle et vaste solitude, presqu aiissi silentieuse 
que le tombeau de rArioste qui y reposed We had 
not time to visit Ariosto's tomb.
I regretted more 
that we did not pass through Cento, where are 
some celebrated paintings of Guercino's, one of my 
favourites.
I have made ample notes on the pic- 
tures of Bologna, which I hope will amuse you at 
my return, so I say nothing about them now.
I 
shall tire even you with what I have to say about 
pictures and statues.
The approach to Venice 
struck me, but the place on the whole disappointed 
me ; it has formerly been one of the finest towns 
in Europe, but others have so far surpassed it, that 
it is now only the most singular one.
We spent 
seventeen days there busily enough ; saw with due 
attention most of the pictures of Paul Veronese, 
Titian, and Tintoret, which abound in Venice ; and 
I think I understand these painters' works tolera- 
bly ; their principal merit you know is in their 
colouring.
I was amazed to find every thing in 
Venice prodigiously dirty.
St. Mark's church, one 
of the richest in the world in oriental marbles, por- 
phyries, jaspers, &c., as well as mosaics, is so blacked 
and dirtied in every possible manner, that one thing 
can hardly be distinguished from another; the taste 
of it is very bad Gothic ; pillars intrinsically worth 
some hundred pounds each, even to cut in pieces, 
are piled on one another in all parts without any 
judgement.
We saw Venice in all its glory, it being 
Ascension time, when everybody resorts there ; and 
341 
we paid for it pretty well, although not so much as 
I expected, for the price of every thing is nearly 
doubled at that time.
The Doge's marriage with 
the Sea is a most noble and singular sight ; we went 
in a gondola among thousands perhaps of other 
vessels accompanying the Bucentaur, which is a 
splendid ugly thing, not much better than our Lord 
Mayor's barge, and heard mass with the Doge, &c.
at an island about two miles from St. Mark's-place, 
called Lido.
We returned in the Bucentaur itself, 
as all genteel foreigners were permitted to do, with 
the Doge, who sat in a throne at the upper end, 
with the Pope's Nuncio (a shrewd-looking fellow) 
at his right hand, and the nobles, in crimson gowns 
and great wigs, about him.
St. Mark's fair began 
on Ascension-day ; it lasts three weeks, and is held 
in an elegant temporary building in the back part 
of the Place of St. Mark (not the part that appears 
from the sea) ; there were all kinds of shops, coffee- 
houses, &c.
under a circular colonnade, and all the 
world walk there, many in dominos and masks, 
especially in the evening and all night till day-break ; 
there is a tedious sameness in the amusement, and I 
never had patience to stay very late.
We picked up 
much curious Materia Medica here ; and, in search- 
ing for the various articles, were amazed at the state 
of superstition, ignorance and folly in which physic 
seems to be at Venice.
Indeed all science is at a 
low ebb there; we found nothing like a man of lite- 
rature, except those apes of them collectors of old 
useless books.
We saw at Venice (what I had long 
VOL.
I, R 
242 
wished for) the making a nun, or the profession as 
it is called, of a young lady of noble family : there 
was a great deal of company, and more diamonds 
on the ladies' heads than ever I saw at one time, 
except at Loretto; the music was very fine: the Ita- 
lians always treat you with good music on every 
occasion.
The young lady seemed in high spirits, 
but I should fear a flatness might follow when all 
the splendour and pomp were over.
At the end of 
a year she is to come out of the monastery for 
three days, and may then, if she pleases, recant • 
but if she persists in taking the veil, as is most pro- 
bable, it is irrevocable.
" Vo'ila (said a Venetian 
near me) encore une victime des prejuges" 
We left Venice May 28th, and went in the barge 
(as in Holland) to Padua, which is like a vast ram- 
bling village more than a city.
The church of St.
Anthony is very rich ; the church of St. Justinian 
by Palladio is very fine, and contains a good pic- 
ture by Paul Veronese.
Here is Mr. Ardouino, a ce- 
lebrated naturalist, with whom I was much pleased.
May 30th got to Vicenza by one o'clock, and saw 
most of the fine buildings of Palladio's, for which 
this town is famous, especially the theatre, built 
after the style of the ancients, and reckoned one of 
the best pieces of modern architecture.
Next day travelled through a most sweet country 
to Verona ; the road was flat, but Mount Baldus, 
with its innumerable snow-capped summits, was al- 
ways on our right hand.
Verona is a large hand- 
some town ; the amphitheatre is one of the most 
243 
entire which remain ; there are many other curious 
pieces of architecture, some antiquities, and a few 
pictures in Verona.
June 2nd we went through Mantua (chiefly re- 
markable for being the birth-place of Virgil) to 
Guastalla, where we slept, and next day (Sunday) 
dined in Parma, which is an extremely handsome 
well-built town and very neat; it abounds in officers 
and abbes.
The Duke, cousin to the King of Spain, 
always resides here : we saw the Duchess, a fine 
stately woman.
Correggio's paintings (which are 
only to be seen here in perfection), although few, 
are well worth going a great way to see ; one or 
two of them, I think, are among the best pictures 
of Italy : he excels in grace and in colouring.
Here 
is a noble public library, established by the Duke ; 
the first librarian is father AfFo, a capuchin, known by 
many biographical and historical works.
We had a 
letter to him from the elder Mr. Durazzo, and he has 
been very civil.
The royal printing-oflSce is one of 
the greatest curiosities in Parma, as that art is here 
carried infinitely beyond what has ever been done 
before, or perhaps ever will again ; for the genius, 
the taste, and the application of the director are 
immense : he gave us some specimens of his work, 
the most exquisitely elegant things I ever saw.
This printing-press is now only beginning to be 
known in England.
The famous theatre, built by 
the Farnese family when sovereigns here, is the 
largest in the world ; the pit used to be filled with 
water to represent sea-fights : it is now disused on 
account of its size and the great expense of light- 
R 2" 
244 
ing it up ; the architecture is the most noble that 
can be.
June 5th we dined at Firenzuola and slept at 
Piacenza, a little fortified town, not badly built, but 
paved like Norwich.
The dome of the cathedral, 
painted by Guercino, was our principal object, and 
nothing can be finer.
Next day ferried over the Po, which is here about 
as broad as the Thames at London, and soon after 
entered the Emperor's dominions ; slept at Lodi, 
and next morning got to Milan.
We have seen 
little yet.
Pray tell Mr. Gunn, with my best com- 
pliments, that I inquired for Baron de Cronthall ; 
he is well, but lives now twenty miles from Milan.
The hospital here is one of the most noble and 
the best regulated I have seen.
The celebrated ca- 
thedral, which is Gothic, but unfinished, is perhaps 
larger than that of York, but not near so beautiful, 
especially the west end ; having five aisles it seems 
crowded, and is too high.
We have letters innu- 
merable for Turin, but shall stay there no longer 
than is necessary ; as we both long to be at home.
My warmest love and duty to my dear mother.
I am yours, &c., 
J. E.
Smith.
J. E.
Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Genoa, July 2, 1787.
I spent four days at Pavia, a pretty little town, 
devoted to the sciences.
We first visited Scopoh, 
who received us with open arms, and whose civility 
245 
to me could not be exceeded : hearing I proposed 
to publish some works of Linnaeus, he voluntarily 
offered all his notes, which will be a great acqui- 
sition.
Mr. Ippolito Durazzo is married since I was here, 
to a very agreeable woman.
His father left him 
and his three brothers above 7000/.
sterling a-year 
each, in clear cash, besides the estates to his eldest 
son.
I have now spent a month at Genoa in cultiva- 
ting the friendship of many worthy people, and 
especially the Durazzos.
Mr. Ippolito wants me to 
spend a whole summer here, and takes delight in 
showing me an apartment in his new house, which 
he calls mine, and tells me how it shall be fitted 
up for me ; but I assure him this cannot be.
He 
means in a year or two to revisit England with his 
wife; but she is to learn English first.
His nephew 
Mr. Marcellino, who will be the chief of the family, 
is also to come to England one day ; he is a most 
charming young man.
I really meant this day to 
have left Genoa, but am now obliged to stay an- 
other week, which I hope you will pardon when you 
hear the reasons.
First, Signor Jacomo, Mr. Ippo- 
lito's eldest brother, is just returned from a long 
journey, and I could not with any propriety leave 
him so soon after.
Next, he has brought home 
great numbers of natural curiosities from France 
and Switzerland, which he wants me to see.
But 
the chief reason of my stay is, that there being a 
vacation of public business next week, he and Mrs.
Theresina his wife, with Mr. Marcellino and Mr.
246 
Ippolito, go for four or live days to Cornegliano, 
their country-seat, a magnificent and delightful pa- 
lace by the sea-side, four miles from Genoa, where 
their museum is ; and they all so earnestly entreated 
me to go there with them to assist in arranging 
and naming the various things, that I could not re- 
fuse it without being rude and ungrateful.
Indeed 
they merit every attention from me ; their friend- 
ship is valuable and sincere ; their acquaintance is 
in the highest degree agreeable to me ; and people 
of more elegant, cultivated minds are nowhere to be 
found.
I remain, dear Sir, &c., 
J. E.
Smith.
Dr. Younge being on many accounts in a hurry 
to get home, we agreed to part at Pavia ; and he 
joined a friend who was going through Switzer- 
land.
Dr. Younge to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Geneva, July 6, 1787.
You will probably be much surprised to learn 
that I have already passed the Alps, and find my- 
self much at my ease on the borders of the Lake of 
Geneva.
On the 25th ult.
I left Milan, without having 
had the pleasure of seeing Locatelli.
The 26th 
was entirely employed upon the Lago Maggiore, 
which I confess did not answer my expectations.
We entered from the great lake into the smaller 
one of Margozza : on the banks of this last I found 
247 
a plant of the class Gynandria, a Lobelia ?
for I 
have no botanical guide as heretofore ; and the 
(O my treacherous memory !) Ros solis, heretofore 
called, growing in a micaceous soil; not that this 
last plant is rare at all, but I was very glad to find 
it in a particular state, which secures to it a rank 
among the irritable, if not the sensible plants.
I 
have got three specimens, all of which have small 
flies inclosed within the leaf as it were, and hurt.
We slept at the inn on the banks of the lake ; 
and the next day^ being informed that there was a 
pass that way, by which the post always went, by 
Milan to Geneva, we set out on horseback to en- 
counter all the difficulties which might present 
themselves.
Our journey during the first day lay 
along the plain betwixt the mountains, under trel- 
lises covered with vines, whose flowers had strongly 
the smell of mignonette : slept at Domo D'ossola 
in the Sardinian dominions.
Leaving this early on 
the second day, we soon began to ascend the hills, 
rising on each side to a very considerable height 
above us, and a rapid stream roaring among the 
fragments of rocks in the valley beneath.
The 
common accidents in mountainous countries was 
our lot ; for a heavy shower coming on about noon 
almost wetted us through.
It cleared up soon, and 
as we proceeded we found the road almost dry.
We entered into the country of the Valais, where 
we heard no language but a sort of German, to me 
utterly unintelligible.
The higher we ascended, 
the more difficult we found the passage, which I 
compared to the passage along the rocks from Nice 
248 
to Genoa, with this difference, that instead of a sea 
below, we had a rapid river.
The scenes of rude 
grandeur, and the beauty of the natural cascades 
tumbling sometimes among woods of pines, and 
then bursting into day, over the rugged and bare 
rocks, were inexpressibly pleasing.
One cascade 
in particular, about a league before we arrived at 
Simpelen, is as fine, I had almost said, as Terni ; 
but the stream is not above half as large, though 
the fall is higher.
We were now at such a height, 
that the Alpine plants began to present themselves.
I found Alchemilla alp'ina in abundance, a Pingui- 
cula (an alpina ?), a Pedicularis, and Geranium, I 
think pyrenaicum.
At Simpelen we supped on 
excellent milk ; and after a breakfast of the same 
we again set out to mount still higher.
Mount 
Simpelen takes its name I believe from the village 
at which we slept.
The ascent is not sudden, but 
long.
Found a Gnaphalium, two Gentians, Prt- 
mula, Pinguicula in abundance, &c., &c.
But what 
I looked for most was the Rhododendron^ which at 
length I found in great profusion ; I think it is the 
ferrugineum, if I may judge from the under surface 
of the leaves.
At the top we found a sort of swampy plain, 
about a mile and a half over ; this being passed, 
we began to descend rapidly among forests of pine, 
and by some of the most dangerous passes which 
we met with, for they were not only narrow, but a 
shower of rain, which continued for two hours, and 
wetted us through, had rendered them very slip- 
pery.
About three o'clock in the afternoon of the 
249 
third day we arrived at Bryg, situated in the valley 
at the foot of the mountains, and near the banks of 
the Rhone.
We were taught to expect that car- 
riages might be had here, but we were again ob- 
liged to set out on horseback.
This day produced 
nothing in addition to my collection, except a few 
insects.
The road lay chiefly along the banks of 
the Rhone, whose waters were considerably swelled 
with the rains ; so that we went a little out of our 
way through the fields, and did not cross the river 
till near eleven o'clock at night, by a wooden bridge 
just by the city of Syon, where we slept, and were 
well accommodated.
Quis tumidum guttur miratur 
in Alpibus?
is an old exclamation; yet notwith- 
standing, I could not but wonder at the immensity 
of the size, and the frequency of the complaint, 
of the goitres in this country : scarcely a woman 
above twenty years of age in the streets who had 
not more or less of this deformity, I would call it, 
though habit may probably have rendered it a beau- 
tiful protuberance.
The men are by no means ex- 
empted from it, though in them it is not so com- 
mon ; but they are subject to what may acknow- 
ledge probably a similar origin, viz.
swellings of 
the parotid and submaxillary glands : those I par- 
ticularly noticed were on the right side.
Solamen 
7?iiseris socios habuisse doloris ; so common is it, 
that no one looks upon the people thus deformed 
with any sort of idle curiosity, nor are they anxious 
to prevent or diminish its growth when once it 
begins to make its appearance.
What is the re- 
mote cause r 
250 
We proceeded from Syon to Martigny, from 
thence to Villeneuve on the banks of the Lake of 
Geneva.
The next morning, 3rd of July, took a barque 
from thence to Vevay, where we breakfasted.
Ve- 
vay is almost directly opposite to Meillerie ; — see 
Rousseau.
We found some difficulty in proceeding 
by water to Lausanne, all the boats being engaged 
by the market-people of Vevay.
To lose no time 
we took a voiture, and after a very warm ride 
among the vineyards, which almost cover the hill 
sides in the Pays de Vaud, we arrived at Lausanne 
about dinner-time.
Here there is nothing to see ex- 
cept the prospects ; and Mr. Tissot, whom I visited 
on the 4th in the morning, introducing myself as a 
stranger and a physician : he returned my visit at 
the inn, the Lion d' Or. I have promised for you, 
who will I think be pleased with him, though he 
seems to be affected with the complaints of seden- 
tary people.
If you are not displeased with me for writing so 
long a letter, write as much in return.
I am, &c., 
W. YOUNGE.
t/.
E. Smith to Mrs. Howorth.
My dear Madam, Genoa, July 7, 1787.
You desire me to write to you, and I am sure I 
neither ought, nor do I wish, to withhold from you 
that satisfaction.
Of poor Mary I never had great 
251 
hopes : her friends should consider her as one more 
treasure laid up for them in heaven ; a beloved ob- 
ject secured from all possibility of trouble, doubt, 
or fear ; possibly a guardian angel, blest with the 
means of directing their steps, and smoothing their 
path to that abode where minds like theirs shall be 
fully gratified with unembittered love and joy.
You do me the honour to consult me about 
mental as well as bodily ailments (in gratitude for 
which I only wish you a better adviser).
I shall ven- 
ture to encourage you about my dear young friend 
Douglas.
Believe me, you have little to fear about 
him ; I say little, because a good mother can never 
be without fear, but I know him perhaps as well as 
you do.
His feeling affectionate heart, and his 
piety to you, so different from a blind fondness, 
are the best things you could wish in him : firm- 
ness and resolution will come in due time.
" Filial 
piety is of more value than all the incense which 
Persia offers to the sun ; " it is intended by Provi- 
dence to prepare the mind for religion, which is 
only the same feeling ripened, and directed to an 
higher object, which a good parent ought carefully 
and very judiciously to point out.
And here I can- 
not but observe, what I beheve you do not want 
to have pointed out, that you are in your children 
one of the happiest people I know : and what 
troubles will not such comforts allev^iate ?
I know not what to say to you about Italian 
poetry : without doubt there is plenty of it, but I 
feel myself unequal to recommend any.
You guess 
rightly, that I have learned to like Italian music, 
252 
which I could not relish till I had heard.
As to 
pictures and statues, I shall tire you to death about 
them ; and with Rome I am quite enchanted.
Would I could live two or three years there !
I am 
sorry to say I must disappoint you about views in 
Switzerland : 'tis too cruel of you to require of me 
what I cannot do, because I wish never to decline 
anything which may give you pleasure ; but I find 
myself quite unequal to sketch views myself, or to 
admire what other people draw, now I have seen so 
much of nature.
Your reflections on Rousseau and Socrates are 
excellent, and perfectly just.
I think, and so thought 
Dr. Johnson (who was certainly a good man, al- 
though he had his foibles), that a partial conceal- 
ment is less hurtful than open profligacy, or an un- 
necessary avowal of weaknesses and transient faults.
We have delicious weather, although rather hot, 
with terrible tempests.
A few days ago a steeple 
was knocked down ; but no people are killed here, 
because they cross themselves at every flash.
I am, dear Madam, &c.
J. E.
Smith.
t/ E, Smith to Mr. Willimn Jones.
Dear Sir, Genoa, July 7, 1787.
Perhaps you may wonder at my not having 
sooner answered your last favour ; perhaps too you 
may have done me the honour to be a little dis- 
pleased, or jealous if you please, — an honour I value 
253 
more than you think.
I am proud to find myself 
capable of exciting your jealousy, and my reason 
for saying so is, that I am no stranger to that feel- 
ing myself ; but there are very few people that I 
honour with it.
Indeed I rather wish never to feel 
it again, for it is in me connected with such a degree 
of esteem and affection as scarcely any human be- 
ing can merit or return ; yet the sufferings it oc- 
casions are those of a martyr, and bring with them 
in a great measure their own reward.
This is far 
different from that jealousy which is founded in 
pride, accompanied (however paradoxical it may 
seem) with a sense of meanness, which is so com- 
mon among foolish people, and so general with 
married persons, who feel themselves unworthy of 
their partners.
I admire above all things your 
comparison of the tour of Italy to a journey through 
life, — 'tis just what I have felt.
I long to know 
whence you took it, as you seem to say 'tis not 
your own.
Leaving Rome we came to Loretto by Bologna, 
which we saw without any diminution of our en- 
joyment.
But Venice disappointed us ; its singu- 
larity will always be striking, but nothing there is 
in a good taste, riches are squandered injudiciously, 
and dirt deforms every thing.
The ceremony of 
the Doge's marriage with the Sea pleased us by its 
novelty rather than by its pomp.
We had scarcely 
any relish for the fair of St. Mark, which is held in 
a temporary building in the square, and lasts three 
weeks ; it is lifeless and uniformly tedious.
There 
is a good library at Venice, and indeed all through 
254 
Italy we have met with very fine ones.
Padua, 
Verona, Parma, and Milan, although we found 
ourselves going down the hill, were not quite desti- 
tute of amusement for us, even with respect to 
works of art.
The theatre of Parma is the finest 
in the world, so large and magnificent is it as to be 
useless ; it costs too much to light it up, and it is 
only studied by architects and admired by travellers.
I have seen no collections of natural history 
worth mentioning, compared to what we have in 
England.
At Bologna are some things, and at 
Pavia more ; but the latter has been so plundered 
by Spallanzani as to be diminished one-third of its 
value.
We spent four days at Pavia with Scopoli, 
whose civility was very great.
We heard Spallan- 
zani lecture ; the composition was admirable, but 
his manner supercilious and affected.
Here my 
friend Younge, in whose company I had been per- 
fectly happy all through my tour, left me ; and I, 
wishing to enjoy all the summer abroad, continued 
my journey alone to Genoa, to spend a little time 
with my friends here, for whom I have a great re- 
gard.
These are pleasures which never cloy : and I 
hope to enjoy them in their full extent at the end 
of this journey, as I rely on them to make old age 
comfortable at the conclusion of the journey of life.
I am always, with sincerest regard.
Dear Sir, most faithfully yours, 
J. E.
Smith.
255 
Dr. Younge to J, E.
Smith, Turin.
My dear Sir, Basle, July 17, 1787.
The truth is, that I have been so long used to a 
participation of the pleasures of travelling with you, 
that even in my present situation I meet with no- 
thing new or pleasing which I do not wish you to 
see as well as myself ; and though you may proba- 
bly get information similar to my own from other 
persons, yet with regard to the particulars of which 
I shall speak, you will find none more authentic.
After travelling during the whole night along a 
road rendered very rough with repeated rains, I 
arrived at Basle on the 15th instant in the morning.
The situation of the city, upon the banks of the 
Rhine, which is about as large and rapid as the 
Rhone at Lyons, is charming.
The inn where I 
now am, the Trois Rois, is built upon the very 
edge of it ; so that the river runs directly under the 
window.
I recommend this inn to you for good 
bed and good dinner ; but bad tea and coiFee. As 
Basle was the residence of the justly celebrated 
Erasmus (whose writings I have always esteemed 
from the days that his innocent jokes alleviated my 
tasks at school), and of Holbein the painter, whom 
he patronized, my first business was to inquire after 
them.
I knew that there existed in the library 
some paintings by Holbein, and some manuscripts 
by Erasmus ; — but how to see the library ?
It was 
necessary either to signify my desire in writing or 
in person to Professor Falkner : I chose the latter, 
256 
and introducing myself as a stranger of curiosity, 
the professor politely appointed the hour at which 
I should come, and met me at the library.
This is 
a very good one, having been founded upwards of 
three hundred years ago ; but I slightly regarded 
every thing except what related to my two favourite 
objects.
There is a room full of paintings and 
sketches, chiefly by Holbein, who here appears in 
a much higher line as a painter than I had be- 
fore placed him (for I never saw his picture of Sir 
Thomas More's family).
The Passion of our Savi- 
our in eight separate histories appears to have been 
painted for the doors of a small organ, but are 
nevertheless in as fine preservation as if they had 
been painted yesterday.
The countenances have 
not that great stiffness observable in most paintings 
of the year 1520, about which time this work was 
executed, and the colouring is fine.
But I most 
admire the Last Supper, in which the figures are 
nearly as large as life, the characters well expressed, 
and the colouring inferior only to Raphael's.
There is a capital miniature of Erasmus by Hol- 
bein, and another picture of him writing, (a profile,) 
which still seems to think and write : I question 
whether as true representations of nature as these 
two last portraits could be outdone.
In another 
room are preserved manuscript letters of Erasmus.
The Elogiuvi StuUiticc, with the drawings made by 
Holbein in the margins.
Erasmus's will in his 
own hand-writing.
Manuscripts of the Council of 
Basle for the suspension of the Pope's authority, &c.
Can you read of these things and not wish to see 
257 
see fhem ?
I forgot a copy of Columna's Phyto- 
basanos, in the same room with the manuscripts of 
Erasmus.
I inquired at the library from Professor 
Falkner about the family of the Bauhins, and the 
herbarium, which he told me had been purchased by 
Doctor de la Chenal, who is director of the bota- 
nical garden here.
I paid my next visit to him, and 
was received by him with great courtesy.
He pur- 
chased for a very trifle Bauhin's herbarium, which 
had lain neglected in the lumber-room of the house, 
and from which some parts had been taken ; and 
he has since incorporated the remains of it with 
his own.
He is extremely fond of botany, and gave 
considerable assistance to Haller in his great bota- 
nical work.
His library is one of the best private 
ones I ever saw : witness Dillenii Hist.
Muscor.
4to; 
Columnae Ecphrasis and Phytobasanos ; Raii Sy- 
nopsis Plant.
1724.
Sloane's Jamaica.
Gerard; 
Jacquin ; Linnseus (Flor.
Lapp., Crit.
Botan.^ &c.) 
Jacquin has called a plant Lachenalla tricolor 
after this gentleman.
He has given me a coloured 
plate of it.
I talked to him about you, and en- 
gaged to inform you of his existence, that you 
might become acquainted with him.
He offered to 
give you all assistance in his power with respect to 
Bauhin's plants, about several of which Linnaeus 
has mistaken him.
I must not forget one thing.
When I talked of 
Columna's Phytobasanos as rare, he said that he 
had a duplicate of it.
I did not urge the matter 
further ; but I think it rather odd that he should have 
two copies, and the successor of Linnaeus not one.
VOL, I.
s 
258 
Could not one be procured by honest means with- 
out seeming to beg it ?
You may see a fine col- 
lection of prints, English, French, German, &c., in 
the house of Mr. Mechel, a very celebrated engraver 
here ; — paintings likewise.
The Dance of Death in 
the churchyard here is much in the style of Hol- 
bein, and will bear examination.
No botanical 
books to be got in the shops here.
One old crusty 
fellow wondered I should come to ask for old books 
at Basil ; they had no such things !
I leave this place tomorrow, and expect to sleep 
at Strasburg.
I shall be impatient until I hear 
from you.
Yours ever, 
W. YOUNGE.
«/.
E. Smith to Dr, Younge, Paris.
My dear Sir, Genoa, July 21, 1787.
I thank you for your long and entertaining letter 
of July 6th ; and to show my apprehension of not 
writing an answfer sufficiently long to satisfy you, 
I begin as near the top of my sheet as possible ; but 
I am not in the way of writing so eventful an epi- 
stle as yours.
I have often wanted to see Drosera 
in the state you describe.
Your Lobelia is probably 
L. Dortmanna, and your Rhododendron certainly 
ferrugineum.
I will not fail to visit Tissot.
Here 
are many people with goitres in the mountainous 
country of Genoa.
I have been with Dr. Pratolon- 
£jo, with whom I am much pleased, to a little coun- 
259 
try-house of his in the iiioimtains, about eight miles 
off.
We staid there two days to botanize ; found 
Hieracium cymosum and Auricula^ Linum viscosum^ 
and many other good things, at your service^ except 
the Linum, of which I have not a duplicate ; Lin- 
naeus had it not.
We travelled in sedan chairs.
Dined in our way with the Senator Durazzo (mas- 
ter of the great house in Strada Balbi^) at his villa 
of Pino ; he is a very courteous, affable old man, 
and his brother the abbe quite charmed me.
I have 
* "The palace of the Durazzo family was erected by the cele- 
brated Fontana ; the length and elevation of its immense front 
astonish the spectator, who perhaps can scarce find in his me- 
mory a similar edifice of equal magnitude.
Besides the rustic 
ground-floor, it has two grand stories, with mezzanmi, and over 
the middle part, consisting of eleven windows, an attic.
The 
portal, of four massive Doric pillars with its entablature, rises 
as high as the balcony of the second story.
The mezzanini win- 
dows, with the continuation of the rustic work up to the cornice, 
break this magnificent front into too many petty parts, and not 
a little diminish the effect of a double line of two-and-twenty 
noble windows.
The portico, which is wide and spacious, con- 
ducts to a staircase, each step of which is formed of a single block 
of Carrara marble.
A large antechamber then leads to ten 
saloons, either opening into one another, or communicating by 
spacious galleries.
These saloons are all on a grand scale in all 
their proportions, adorned vvith pictures and busts, and fitted up 
with prodigious richness, both in decorations and furniture.
One 
of them surpasses in the splendour of its gildings anything of the 
kind I believe in Europe.
These apartments open on a terrace, 
which commands an extensive view of the bay, with its moles 
and light-house, and the rough coast that borders it on one side.
In this palace the Emperor Joseph was lodged during his short 
visit to Genoa, and is reported to have acknowledged that it far 
surpassed any that he was master of.
The merit of this compli- 
ment is, that it is strictly true." — Eustace's Classical Tour, vol.
ji, 
s2 
260 
now completed my allotted mojith, and really con- 
scientiously meant to have gone away this day ; but 
Signor Jacomo returned only on Tuesday last, and 
he has brought so many shells, corals, &c., that I 
cannot go without looking them over a little ; be- 
sides, I did not choose to leave Genoa so soon after 
his arrival.
But this is not all.
Next w^eek there is 
a vacation of five or six days in the public business, 
and these are to be spent by the family at their 
country-house ; they pressed me so much to pass 
this interval with them in studying shells, insects, 
&c.
in the museum, and especially the request of 
Mrs. Theresina had such an effect, that I could not 
resist.
We go to Cornigliano on Monday after- 
noon, to stay till Saturday, after which I shall set 
off for Turin.
Indeed I am more and more charmed 
with this amiable family.
Signor Jacomo is the 
most good-natured cheerful man that can be.
It is 
a constant joke against him that he cannot speak 
my name, but calls me Smit, or Smish; though his 
wife takes great pains to tutor him.
I spent Satur- 
day and Sunday last at Castagna, a country lodging 
of Mr. Caffarena, w^hose wife is an English woman, 
worthy of her country: his sons are very amiable 
young men; I am quite at home with them.
These 
are all my acquaintances.
Mr. Ippolito Durazzo 
wants me to spend a w^hole summer here for bota- 
nical purposes ; to come in February, and stay till 
October.
He takes delight in showing me a room 
in his new house, which he calls mine, and tells me 
how it shall be fitted up to receive me ; but this 
scheme is next to impracticable.
Pratolongo is 
261 
very industrious about botany, and knows a great 
deal of the matter ; we are often together.
Batt 
is coining back to Genoa.
We have made a cata- 
logue of the plants at the villetta, which amount 
to about 500 ; but I hope to increase them much.
Yesterday afternoon I spent there very agreeably 
with only Mr. Cattaneo ; he is a most amiable man.
Mrs. Lomellina, the senator's wife, has a pretty villa 
just out of town, by the Lanthorn ; I was there the 
other evening, and never saw the succulent plants 
so fine, they are really stupendous.
From it is the 
best view of Genoa I know; I mean for a picture of 
the town ; for the view from Mr. Durazzo's villetta 
is on the whole vastly superior.
Count Durazzo has promised me a copy of his 
catalogue of prints, with remarks, lately superbly 
printed by the man at Parma *; I have not yet seen 
it.
Cattaneo promises to reprint his poems, &c., in 
one volume.
Adieu, my dear Friend, 
J. E, Smith.
Mr. TVm. Jones to J.
E. Smith, Paris.
Dear Sir, London, August, 1787.
From some circumstances that attended your fa- 
vour from Genoa, I have been puzzled to determine 
whether you have thereby more gratified my feel- 
ings, or flattered my pride.
I cannot assert that I 
am insensible to the latter, nor will I believe any 
one who affects the reverse : the only misfortune 
* Bodoni.
262 
that can attend that quality in the mind, is a defi- 
ciency in the understanding, to direct it to a proper 
end.
I read more of your heart in your last, to 
engage my esteem, than you ever yet discovered ; 
nevertheless, I had seen sufficient to claim a parti- 
ality before.
There are many that talk well, that 
write w^ell, that fill an amiable character in life, and 
yet destitute of those tender sensations that vibrate 
through kindred souls, awake to every touch.
There 
is a pride, which I account a folly, that prostitutes 
itself, and spreads its sails for every breath of ap- 
plause ; so that it can but catch the gale, it cares 
not from what quarter the breeze springs, favour- 
able or unfavourable, it never examines, and thereby 
misses the point, its intended goal.
I conceive that, 
like myself, you have been searching through life 
for a friend, — 'tis a word much hackney' d, I mean 
in its strictest import, — and sometimes thought 
myself successful ; but soon deceived, wearied and 
tired, I gave over the pursuit, determined to give no 
one more admittance to my heart, but with indiffe- 
rence view the world, and pass along.
I have since 
found myself more at my ease, but still there re- 
mains an aching void that wants a fiUing, yet 
better and easier to be borne than the excruciating 
pangs of ingratitude and disappointment.
I am particularly sensible of your early attention.
Mr. Marsham wonders why you should write to 
me, who did not press you for another letter, and 
omit him and Dr. Goodenough, who solicited it 
n)Ost anxiously.
The extract I gave you relative to the compari- 
263 
son of the tour of Italy to a journey through hfe, 
was from Dr. Conyers Middleton's Letters from 
Rome.
I will lend you the volume ; 'twill merit 
your attention.
I travel with you, though with less 
fatigue, as my elbow-chair is the more easy vehicle; 
yet shall be happy to hear of those things which 
you will be able to give a better account of by 
having seen.
You say you hope to enjoy your 
friends at the end of this journey, and rely on them 
to make old age comfortable at the conclusion of 
the journey of life.
Now as I reckon myself among 
the number of your friends, how am I and some 
others, who may be twenty years older than you, 
to make your old age comfortable ?
— many a one 
would here cry out, a Bull, an Iricism.
They know 
nothing of the matter ; you are perfectly in order ; 
for, having I suppose in Italy picked up, by way of 
novelty, a certain heretical book, you have noticed 
that length of days do not consist of a number of 
years, but that " Wisdom is the gray hair unto 
men, and an unspotted life, old age.'"' But I fear 
I am here encroaching upon Dr. Goodenough's 
province, writing a sermon ; — be it so, 'tis in the sin- 
cerity of my heart.
I am sorry to add.
Dr. Good- 
enough (though I love and honour him) has agreed 
with Mr. Marsham, if I will not unite in their 
Society, to banish me to Coventry, — a species of 
severity I know you would not be guilty of; never- 
theless I hope to get through this affair with a 
little address.
I have been collecting some Lepi- 
doptera this summer, which I design as a free-will 
offering to that gentleman.
Free-will offerings are 
264 
what the clergy are fond of, and by that means 
hope to make my peace with him.
Mr. Marsham 
I will fight in another manner.
He has a book in 
hand*; and I have matter in my head.
At Coventry 
there is no conversation, you know, consequently 
no communication : I shall therefore soon settle 
matters with him.
Fabricius is in London, and much wishes to see 
you, but will certainly leave us before your return ; 
he is goingthrough my drawings, to correct, amend, 
and add to a Mantissa that he has now in hand; yet 
I have more than he will be able to accomplish in 
the time he has limited to stay.
I am sorry you 
are from home for your own sake ; he is a man 
that must please ; — open, free, easy, candid, unaf- 
fected ; in short / like him, and think you must.
Marsham has been at Dunmow in Essex this fort- 
night, consequently I have heard nothing of Younge.
With every tender of affectionate esteem, 
I am most sincerely yours, 
W. Jones.
Dr. Younge to J.
E. Smith, Geneva.
My dear Sir, Paris, August 5, 1787.
Broussonet has been extremely obliging to me 
since my return ; he has introduced me at the Aca- 
demy, and at the Society of Agriculture.
I suspect 
the distribution of medals has ceased in the latter, 
* Entomologia Britanmca, of which the first volume, including 
the Coleoptera, was published in 1802 ; but no more ever ap- 
peared.
265 
for I saw no such thing.
The societies of this 
country are exactly what you describe ; there is a 
president it is true, and members as in our societies 
in England ; but in the French societies the mem- 
bers seem to have no regard to order, and the 
power of the president seems to extend no further 
than to the enforcing a momentary silence by mak- 
ing a more distinct noise than the members by means 
of a little musical instrument.
But the great excel- 
lence of our societies in England consists in the 
exact limits drawn and observed between private and 
public business.
How am I interested as a visitor 
about the votes of Mr. Fourcroy or Mr. Thouin, 
about this or that committee ?
yet half the time of 
sitting is thus spent in demanding opinions and 
appointing committees on private affairs.
There 
was a communication from Gerard of Cottignac 
upon I^athyrus amphicarpos, read by Desfontaines 
at the Academy ; but the noise and confusion was 
so great, that I could not understand whether it 
contained any thing more than the simple relation 
of its extraordinary fructification.
I am glad to hear of your botanical success, and 
of your ardour in the pursuit of natural history, 
which the Durazzo family still support.
I propose to leave this place in two weeks more.
What I regret, after you, is that I nmst bid a last 
adieu to my very good friends, the amiable family 
of Mr. De Lessert at Passy.
With them I am as 
happy as if at home.
You must know them.
I have 
often spoke to them concerning you.
Your own 
name and mine will I trust be sufficient introduc- 
266 
tion to Mr. De Lessert and to Mr. Guyot.
Any- 
body will show you their house at Passy ; and on 
Wednesdays they dine at their town-house, No. 58 
Rue Coqheron a Paris.
Adieu !
All happiness attend you !
W. YOUNGE.
I almost envy you the happiness you will expe- 
rience in this family ; and were I not your friend I 
should be downright envious.
Rev. Dr.
Goodejiough to «/.
E. Smithy Paris.
Dear Sir, August 13, 1787.
Your silence made us very apprehensive that you 
were not well ; the fact it appears was so.
However, 
we were not a little gratified by reading in your 
letter that you had been ill but were recovered.
The we here spoken of, means myself and Mar- 
sham, who is at present my chief communicant.
— 
Well, when do you come home ?
you will find 
yourself much wanted.
Our Natural History So- 
ciety, under the auspices of our illustrious presi- 
dents Fordyce and Pitcairn, drones on in its usual 
course.
I attended one night, and heard Dr. For- 
dyce read an extempore lecture upon a new arrange- 
ment of shells.
Such humming, such hawing, 
mumbling, snuffling, such interruptions in looking 
for his shells to illustrate as he went on, that not a 
soul could tell what he would be at.
After he had 
done, I hinted to him that I did not understand 
267 
what was his aim ; he began a second harangue to 
convince me he was right.
The harangue was worse 
than the lecture, — I was glad of the first opportu- 
nity to turn my back.
I got acquainted that night 
with Mr. Wilson of Snow-hill ; he agreed with me 
the lecture upon shells could have been spared.
Sticks and stones were exhibited as usual.
Old 
Da Costa sat enjoying every thing said against Lin- 
naeus*, having before him some old yellow paper, 
written very close, which I afterwards understood 
was a lecture upon the fossil and live Aster'ia.
He 
would not deliver it in to the society, for he meant 
to publish it himself.
Dr. Fordyce's dilatory 
snorting took up the whole time, an hour (I think 
I could have said twice as much in ten minutes), so 
that Da Costa waited for another day.
I have 
taken a capital rarity this year, Cicada auiita, said 
to be a German insect.
Silpha germanica has also 
been taken.
We have had the luck of taking a 
great variety of nondescripts, and describing many.
We should have done much more, but I have been 
assaulted five times with blind attacks of the gout.
I set out on Saturday for Hastings in Sussex, where 
I hope to meet with some new insects.
With 
Marsham's assistance and my own assiduity, my 
* Da Costa '* appears to have taken great offence at not being 
chosen a member of the Upsal Academy, and conceived an 
antipathy to Linnaeus, which the writer of this has often heard 
him express, but could never before account for.
" That Academy was always very select in its choice of foreign 
members, and subsequent events too amply justified its conduct 
in the present instance." — J.
E. S.
— See Selections of the Corre- 
spondence of Linnceus, ^c., vol.
ii.
495.
268 
cabinet begins to fill.
Jones is at work for me ; 
and before the end of the season hopes, he says, to 
get me two hundred of the Lepidoptera ; so that I 
shall begin to be somebody.
I have lately made a 
purchase of AUioni's Stirpes Pedemontan(B, at a 
venture ; also I have set my writing-master to copy 
the defect in the second volume of De Geer.
(How 
I like that work !) 
Now one has you so near as France, one is apt 
to think that it is no distance at all.
Do pray let 
us know when you mean to be in England ; how- 
ever, eager as I am to see you, study Tournefort's 
herbarium well, and my wish is that you would go 
through the whole a second time.
Second thoughts 
are best.
You need not attempt to smuggle any 
French wine home.
It is a commodity which hangs 
terribly on hand, — so say the wine-merchants ; and 
no one calls for it ; — a true picture of John Bull !
Tell him he must not have any thing : — Blood and 
thunder !
but he will.
Give way to him, — -fastidit et 
odit.
We are all here upon the tiptoe of expecta- 
tion about the issue of affairs in Holland.
Some 
positively assert that there will be war : we have no 
preparations for it.
Mr. Pitt is said now to be for 
it, and a Great Personage against it.
A few months 
ago they were of directly contrary opinions : Tem- 
pora rnutantur nos et mutanmr in illis.
I hope only 
to hear that you are alive and well.
And am, ever yours, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
I approve entirely all that you say on sights and 
269 
saints ; I envy you the former.
Oh for Orchis 
abort'iva and coriophora !
I am glad you leave Pavia 
before your tract on the Sexes of Plants comes out: 
Spallanzani would assassinate you I fear.
Sii' Joseph Banks to «/.
E. Smith, Paris.
Dear Doctor, Soho Square, August 15, 1787.
Botany flourishes here most abundantly.
The 
Queen studies diligently under Aiton, and to much 
purpose.
The ship which we are sending to Ota- 
heite to bring home the bread-fruit to the West 
Indies, will bring many plants from thence.
The 
garden at St. Vincent's flourishes ; a new one is 
established at Bengal, and an intercourse prepared 
between the two, by the medium of England ; and 
probably another will soon be established at Madras.
Swartz is the best botanist I have seen since So- 
lander.
I have hopes of getting him out to supply 
Koenig's place in India.
In short, botany may raise 
its head, and I think it will.
Believe me, dear Sir, 
Most faithfully yours, 
Joseph Banks.
J. E.
Smith to his Father.
Honoured Sir, Geneva, August 27, 1787.
Mr. Malanot was so excessively hospitable as to 
make me uneasy : he would let me pay for nothing.
270 
not even postage of letters, nor, what was more, 
coach-hire.
I was obliged several times to have a 
coach, it being impossible (according to the exe- 
crable etiquette of Turin) to make any visit what- 
ever but in full dress ; indeed I had many great 
people to visit.
Mr. de Sousa the Portuguese 
ambassador invited me to meet all the corps di- 
plomatique, and the French ambassador was very 
civil to me, and invited me to dinner ; but I was 
engaged to see La Superga and La Veneria (a 
hunting-seat of the King's).
I left my servant at Turin ; but I have met with 
a Milanese lad, whom I esteem such a treasure that 
I shall bring him to England.
He has good friends, 
and was recommended to me very particularly*.
Geneva swarms with English people ; but I have 
met with no acquaintances except a Professor 
Zimmerman, who travels with Mr. Harbord, Lord 
* The name of the Milanese lad here mentioned was Fran- 
cesco Borone.
Notwithstanding his humble birth and educa- 
tion, and the situation of domestic servant, which he retained for 
several years, yet his manners and subseqvient acquirements 
elevated him above the menial condition he originally held; and 
he accompanied Dr. Afzelius to Sierra Leone, and also, at his 
master's recommendation, after his return thence, attended Dr.
J. Sibthorp to Greece ; in both instances as botanical assistant 
and companion.
While thus engaged, his existence was unhap- 
pily terminated by an accidental fall at Athens, at the early age 
of twenty-five, in October 1794.
To commemorate this faithful 
and attached dependant, Sir James named a beautiful New Hol- 
land genus of plants after his name ; and the letters of Dr. J.
Sibthorp, which appear in a subsequent chapter, sufficiently at- 
test the estimation in which this young votary of science was 
held by him.
271 
Suffield's son : they are going to Italy, and I shall 
give them some letters.
I cannot see this country as it deserves for want 
of time.
Yours^ &c., 
J. E.
Smith.
P. S.
I have a letter from my Swedish corre- 
spondent Dr. Acrel, which informs me that I was 
very near losing my Linnsean treasures by a plot 
of Baron Alstroemer, who wanted to have them, and 
who procured authority to confiscate the whole 
after it was sold.
How his scheme failed I know 
not.
I had heard some rumour of this in Italy.
The Marquis Ippolito Durazzo to «/.
E. S??iit/i, 
Paris.
Monsieur, Genes, ce 10 7bre, 1787.
J'ai re9u avec le plus grand plaisir la lettre dont 
vous m'avez honore ; j'y trouve des details qui me 
prouvent que vous etes content de votre voyage, et 
je ne doute point qu'il ne vous doive arriver de 
m^me pendant le restc de votre tour de Suisse.
C'est un pays de liberty et de situations roman- 
tiques, ou les beautes de la nature triomphent, et 
vous ne pouvez ne pas I'aimer.
J'envie le plaisir 
que vous avez eu sur le Mont Cenis, et je vous suis 
bien oblige des graines que vous m'avez envoiees.
A^ propos, ne m'oubliez pas a present que vous dtes 
272 
a Paris pour me procurer des graines de M.
Thouin, 
et de quelques autres amateurs, et ne laissez pas 
la commission a M.
Broussonet, mais tachez 
d'avoir le tout pendant votre sejour ici, et de con- 
signer le paquet a M.
le Marquis de Spinola, qui 
me Tenverra : Broussonet sait ou il demeure.
Je 
vois que, malgre vos extases pourlabotanique, vous 
n'oubliez pas ni vos amis, ni la pauvre Villetta qui 
vous a mis au rang de ses plus grands benefacteurs.
Madame Teresina ct ma femme vous remercient 
infiniment de votre souvenir, et me cliargent de 
mille compliments de leur part.
Mr. Cattaneo et le Docteur Caneferi en font de 
meme, et souliaiteroient de vous voir bientot ici de 
retour.
Mais vous vous eloignez au contraire, et 
voila le mal.
Voila sur tout mes regrets quand je 
me rapelle les momens, sur tout que nous avons 
passes ensemble a la Villetta dans une society aima- 
ble, et a la bonte que vous aviez pour moi.
J'es- 
pere que vous voudrez bien me la continuer pendant 
le sejour que vous allez faire en Angleterre.
Vous 
me marquerez, j'esp^re, toutde suite votre addresse a 
fin que je puisse entreprendre une correspondence 
reguliere en bon Anglois.
En attendant je verrai 
Mr. Zimmerman et Mr. Harbord, et je vous re- 
mercie d'avance du livre qu'ils m'apporteront.
Phascolus Caracalla is now flourishing in an 
amazing glorious manner, covering the stair-wall 
at this Villetta.
I shall in a few days pick up a fine 
specimen for you, and conserve it in dry paper till 
the time of sending to you the apples.
Pray send 
•273 
me some commands that I can have my part in 
your commissions from Italy.
I am with the great- 
est respect and consideration, 
Your faithful Friend and obliged Servant, 
Ippolito Durazzo.
Thomas J.
fVoodtuard, Esq. to J.
E. Smith, Paris.
Dear Sir, Bungay, Oct. 11, 1787.
I received your very friendly and highly enter- 
taining letter on my return from a short tour, in the 
course of which I had seen your father at Norwich; 
and from him I heard of your arrival at Paris, and 
some hints of your agreeable tour to Mont Cenis, 
which must have been most delightful.
1 should 
have highly rejoiced at spending that time with 
you, and still more at visiting the glaciers.
I have 
lately viewed Saussure's second tome of his Voy- 
age dans les Alpes, which is extremely interesting ; 
and I can fancy myself following your steps in the 
delightful valley of Chamouny, and up Montanvert 
to the Glacier du Bois, which I suppose was the one 
you visited, as your father said you made no very 
near approach to Mont Blanc, on the summit of 
which it would be my ambition to set my foot if I 
visited that country.
Saussure must be a very enter- 
taining companion in that tour, of which he seems 
to have examined every inch.
He is a botanist, as 
appears from his mentioning the scarce plants in 
several parts of the Alps ; but according to him, a 
part of Mount Jura is the best botanizing ground 
VOL.1.
T 
274 
in the environs of Geneva.
I am highly obliged 
by your promise of some Alpine specimens towards 
completing the English series, and the very friendly 
manner in which you mention me will highly en- 
hance their value.
We seem to think quite in con- 
sonance on this subject ; for I do assure you that 
when I have happened to turn to one of your Scotch 
specimens during this journey you have been en- 
gaged in, the recollection of the donor, and the 
considering the plant as a prisccc pignus amicitice, 
has given me greater pleasure than it would have 
done to have recurred to the gathering it myself.
I pass over Rome and Naples as ground mentioned 
by every traveller, but your sejoiir at Genoa with 
your noble friend must have been delicious ; and I 
will indulge you when we meet in talking of Genoa 
as much as you can desire, provided one of those 
enchanting and accomplished sisters I have heard 
of, has not such a share in it as to divert your 
thoughts from your native country ; for that same 
native country must now employ your thoughts 
and attention, unless you can find time for another 
trip.
When I go to Norwich I shall show Pitchford 
your letter and account of Melampyrum si/lvaticmu 
(which I much doubt if it has ever been found in 
England); but he will not now require your oath, 
either on the Cross or Bible, as he is at length con- 
vinced of the other being thepratense.
The grand 
difficulty was to persuade him that, though Hudson 
had quoted Ray, it did not necessarily follow that 
Hudson and Ray meant the same plant ; for you 
275 
know he looks upon Ray's infallibility as only 
second to that of the Pope ; and you and I, with- 
out thinking Ray so absolutely infallible as he does, 
may set him still higher than His Holiness in that 
point of view.
I have little botanical news to tell you ; but you 
will be glad to hear that Crowe found three speci- 
mens of Ophrys Loesein on St. Faith's Bogs this 
summer : they w^ere far distant from the spot on 
which Pitchford found his, and Crowe left them 
untouched ; they were growing on the very wettest 
part of the bog, and actually in the water.
Mr. Sole 
of Bath has found several on Hinton Moor near 
Cambridge, where Ray mentions their growing.
Roots have been sent to Curtis and to Dickson, 
and are grown in Curtis's and the Museum garden.
I understand the full force of your expression 
' '^really ncw^ in regard to Dickson's Scotch disco- 
veries.
I do not look upon it as very clear that all 
are so ; but as he has the game entirely in his own 
hands, he must play it as he likes.
I understand 
he has said he almost wishes he had never found 
them, as he finds such great difficulty in making 
them out to his satisfaction.
I wish the discoveries 
do not more confuse than elucidate these difficult 
tribes of plants.
I wish much to gain a know^ledge 
of the Fuel, &c.
which are at present very little 
known, and on which few authors have written ; for, 
except Gmelin and Lightfoot, I know none from 
whom much information is to be gotten.
In my 
late tour I stayed a day at Cromer for low water, 
but I found little there.
The Ulva phimosa of 
T 2 
276 
Hudson was growing on the stones, and makes a 
beautiful appearance in the small puddles left by 
the recess of the tide, representing a miniature 
cypress-tree, of about two or three inches high, 
growing in the water.
It is improperly described 
as pinnated, as the pinncB grow all on the stem like 
a tree ; cypressiformis would be a much more pro- 
per name for it.
The Ulva Jistulosa of Hudson, the 
Fuciis verrucosus of Gmelin (which seems to be the 
albidiis of Hudson), and some other common ones 
were growing.
Do you know any authors who 
have written much on these subjects, besides those 
I mentioned ?
I hope if you do not procure Leers 
before you return, that you will contrive a corre- 
spondence with the Paris bookseller, that you may 
receive it when he can procure it.
I shall be ob- 
liged to you for the 4th Fasciculus of Retz.
The 
most useful matter I found in him was the clearing 
w^ Astragalus arenarius ; though I am by no means 
clear that our plant is his danicus, as Withering 
gives it ; it certainly is not arenarius, Linn.
My 
commissions give you a great deal of trouble, but 
I know your friendship will excuse it.
Believe me most sincerely yours, 
T. Woodward.
t/.
I^.
Smith to Dr. Younge.
Dear Doctor, Paris, October 13, 1787.
I left Turin August 12th, with Mr. de Sousa, the 
Portu2:uese minister.
Dr. Bellardi, &c.
for Mont 
277 
Cenis, where I stayed six days, lodged at the hos^ 
pital most comfortably ; — the rest of the party in 
a tent with the Chevalier St. Real, intendant of 
Morienne, who with an officer had been six weeks 
in that place making philosophical observations 
of various kinds.
The hospital stands 996 toises 
above the sea.
One day we ascended little Mont 
Cenis, 558 toises higher, but I did not go to the 
top.
Nothing could be more charming than the 
plain of Mont Cenis ; it was all flowery with the 
choicest alpine plants ; and I rambled about every 
day among the neighbouring hills and thickets, 
loading myself with treasures for myself and my 
friends, among whom you need not fear being prin- 
cipally remembered.
The weather was delightfully 
cool after the suffocating heats of Turin.
The fine 
air, good milk, and trout, pleased me extremely.
The abbe, who governs the hospital like a patriarch 
of old, was as hospitable as possible, and my com- 
panions extremely agreeable.
After our long walks 
we reposed on a turf of Dryas octopetala, and Mr.
de Sousa never failed to keep us in perpetual cheer- 
fulness with his good-humoured sallies.
I stayed 
two days longer than the Turin party ; my Milan- 
ese lad overtook me here, and I left Mont Cenis 
in company with the Chevalier de St. Real and his 
companion.
We passed slowly through Savoy, visit- 
ing many of his acquaintances by the way, and were 
very hospitably received.
At one place we met with 
amagnetizer, at whose whimsies, when not too con- 
temptible, we laughed among ourselves.
At length 
we arrived at St. Jean de Morienne, the little capi- 
278 
tal of the country, where I stayed two days at the 
house of the Chevaher, and then left him with 
regret ; he is a very intelligent friendly man.
The manners of this country reminded me of old 
English hospitality, which we know only by report; 
but cleanliness is not here considered as a first-rate 
virtue.
At Geneva I saw Messrs.
Bonnet, De Saus- 
sure, Senebier, De Luc, &c.
&c.
I scarcely ever met 
with so many scientific people together.
Bonnet is 
a most interesting man, all complaisance and en- 
thusiasm, and very communicative ; but, alas, almost 
deaf and blind !
He is not like the vulgar tra- 
ducers of Linnseus, but allows him all his merit, 
and has his portrait in his own chamber, with a few 
other first-rate naturalists.
De Saussure is a rough 
man, and at sword points with De Luc, Dr. Butini 
senior is one of the most pleasing and apparently 
ingenious physicians I ever saw ; and his son, to 
whom Batt gave me a letter, is a very clever man, 
in whose company I was very happy during the 
week I spent at Geneva.
I visited the glaciers about Mont Blanc, had very 
fine weather, and another rich botanical harvest.
Passed by Martigny, Bex, &c.
over the lake to Lau- 
sanne, which I need not describe, as it is the road 
you took.
Tissot received me very civilly, and gave 
me his little publication on the Vapours.
I was 
much pleased with Berne, and the Bears, to whom 
I hope you paid your compliments.
I visited the 
unmarked grave of Haller, and got acquainted with 
his son ; but nobody at Berne pleased me so much 
as Wyttenbach the clergyman, whose acquaintance 
2/9 
I shall earnestly cultivate.
He is a good naturalist, 
has a very pretty museum, and is a most pleasing 
companion.
He gave me a letter to Mr. la Chenal 
at Basle, with whom I was pleased, no less for his 
knowledge and manners, than for his politeness in 
presenting me with my grand desideratum, the Phy- 
tobasanos, for which I ought indeed to thank you, 
as I suspect he had put it by for me in consequence 
of what you said ; at least he took an early oppor- 
tunity to show me his own copy, and when I said I 
had long sought that book in vain, he immediately 
produced the duplicate.
He promised to help me all 
in his power with the Sysl.
Veget., and will inform 
Schreber and Jacquin that I mean to publish it.
I saw all the venerable relics of Holbein and 
Erasmus which you mentioned to me, and was 
much pleased with the three days I spent at Basle.
At Strasburg I passed two days entirely with Pro- 
fessor Herman, one of the best and most zealous 
naturalists I have met with.
At Nancy I saw Mr. Willement, a good botanist, 
from whom, as well as from most of the other peo- 
ple I have mentioned, I expect assistance for the 
Linnaean Society.
In the greenhouse at Nancy is 
the bust of Stanislaus the banished king of Poland, 
to whom Louis XV.
gave this province for a refuge.
Under it are the two lines which I have heard you 
quote as written for Louis XIV., and I wish to 
know whether they were so, or really original at 
Nancy.
" Inter ------- succosque salubres, 
Quam bene stat populi vita salusqiie sua." 
280 
Pray send me them complete at your leisure, as I 
have no copy of them.
I got to Paris, September 19th, and am employing 
myself at the Cabinet du Roi, where my work is 
nearly finished.
I cannot too highly thank you for 
procuring me the acquaintance of the De Lessert 
family, of which however I have hitherto only seen 
the female part, the gentlemen being all at Lyons 
at present, but they are expected home soon.
Parr, 
who knew the young men at Edinburgh, took me 
one morning in his whiskey to Passy ; Mrs. De Les- 
sert invited us to dinner a few days after, and I never 
spent a more agreeable day.
I looked over the her- 
barium of Rousseau with great pleasure.
I find his 
letters on botany were addressed to Mrs. De Lessert.
I am very much pleased with my servant in every 
respect ; he is a remarkably clever lad, and at pre- 
sent very good.
He is beginning to learn drawing, 
and succeeds in everything he attempts.
Brous- 
sonet is gone into the country this morning on 
some agricultural business.
Here are great reforms going on.
L'Ecole Mi- 
litaire is to be abolished, and the house made an 
hospital.
We have been at Versailles and saw the 
King and Queen, but the waters have ceased play- 
ing for the winter, — a great disappointment.
Adieu, my good friend ; believe me I shall ever 
think with pleasure on the time we have spent to- 
gether.
I could scarcely have hoped that so long 
a connection of the same kind with any one would 
have left me so many pleasing ideas.
J. E.
Smith.
281 
Dr. Yoimge to J.
E. Smith, Chelsea.
My dear Doctor, Liverpool, Nov. 7, 1787.
Your good fortune in meeting with the most 
intelligent men in the different towns of France 
through which you passed, I rejoice at.
I did not 
see any gentleman at Nancy, nor the greenhouse 
which you mention, though I spent nearly a whole 
morning in visiting the different parts of that charm- 
ing town.
I am glad to be particularly informed 
respecting an inscription, which I remember only 
as related by my father, and, as it was always my 
idea, applied by an English gentleman, then on a 
tour in France, to Louis XIV., on an inscription 
being publicly requested for his statue.
This supposed statue I never saw, and therefore 
suspect the inscription might be originally intended 
for the place where you saw it.
It is thus : 
"Inter vitales herbas, succosque salubres, 
Quam bene stat populi vita salusque sui." 
The wit of this couplet consists, it may be truly 
said, in a verbal pun ; but there is a smartness and 
elegance in the conceit, which after ten years ac- 
quaintance with I still continue to admire.
I am 
happy to be able to furnish you with what may be 
a correct copy of this couplet.
Your affectionate friend, 
W. YOUNGE.
282 
In November 17^7, Sir James returned to his na- 
tive country ; and in 1793 he published his " Sketch 
of a Tour on the Continent/' in three volumes, 
octavo*.
His enthusiastic admiration of whatever he saw 
beautiful in nature and excellent in art^ for which 
he appears to have possessed an intuitive discrimi- 
nation, renders his " Sketch of a Tour on the Con- 
tinent " one of the most engaging narratives of the 
kind which has come from the press.
It attracted 
the approbation of every one who took it up ; yet 
by a fatality often attending what is excellent, it 
appears to be less known than it deserves.
There 
is something very romantic in the description of 
his approach to Genoa.
" Traversing," he says, " majestic cliffs among 
groves of olive- and carob-trees, and thickets of 
oleander and myrtle, 
" ' I felt as free as nature first made man, 
When wild in woods the noble savage ran.' " 
His entrance by the gate of St. Thomas, walking 
alone into the Strada Balbi, to the palace of the 
father of his friend the Marquis Ippolito Durazzo, 
— his kind, yet magnificent reception, the state in 
* The author's father left the following observation upon this 
work, in his common-place book.
"A Sketch of a Tour on the Continent in the Years 1786 and 
1787, by James Edward Smith, M.D., F.R.S., Member of the 
Royal Academies of Turin, Upsal, Stockholm, Lisbon, &:c.
&c.
President of the Linnoean Society." In 3 volumes.
*' I must leave the world to judge of the merits of this work 
of my most dearly beloved son ; it is for me to contemplate them 
with a tender father's partiality in silence." 
283 
which they hved, give an impression which reminds 
the reader of some characters in the novels of 
Richardson.
Under the protection of this family Sir James 
had the opportunity of seeing the great council and 
the final election of a Doge, the only occasion 
on which strangers can he admitted at all to that 
august assembly.
While w^andering among the classic scenes of 
Italy, his admiration for the works of art, whether 
of painting or sculpture, was frequently called forth, 
andhere his enthusiasm breaks out in language which 
inspires a similar enthusiasm in the reader.
The 
strength of a first impression will be shown in his 
sensations when in the chapel of the Albergo : " My 
attention," he obser\'es, " was entirely w^ithdrawn 
from a fine piece of sculpture I had been looking 
at, by an accidental glance to the left, where an- 
other sculpture over a small altar riveted my eyes 
and every faculty of my mind, in a transport of 
admiration and tender compassion as fervent as 
ever Mrs. Siddons herself excited.
This w^as no 
other than the bas-relief by Michael Angelo Buo- 
narotti.
The subject consists of two heads, about 
the natural size, of a dead Christ, and his mother 
bending over him.
Words cannot do justice to 
the expression of grief in the Virgin.
It is not 
merely natural in the highest degree, 'tis the grief 
of a character refined and softened above humanity.
The contemplation of it recalls every affecting scene, 
every pathetic incident of one's whole life.
Those 
who have watched all the agonizing turns of coun- 
284 
tenance of the great actress above mentioned, in 
the parts of Isabella and Belvidere, can alone form 
a conception of the wonderful effect of this marble.
In contemplating it, every exquisite variety of that 
expression seems to pass in turn over its breathing 
features.
The reader must pardon my enthusiasm.
This was the first truly fine piece of sculpture I 
ever saw.
I had not before any conception of the 
powers of art.
I shall have few occasions of re- 
lapsing into such rapture." 
The following, though but a translation, yet 
only a mind inspired with the impression could 
have done justice to it.
" Conscious," the writer tells 
us," of my own inability to furnish adequate concep- 
tions upon the subject, I beg leave to offer Winkel- 
man's Hymn, as De la Lande has well denominated 
it, in honour of the famed Apollo.
It is a curiosity 
which has not appeared in English ; and while it 
exemplifies the genius of its author, will afford a 
conclusive proof that the study of antiquities is not 
always a dry one." 
Winkelman's Hymn to the Apollo Belvidere.
" Of all the productions of art which the ravages 
of time have spared us, the statue of Apollo is in- 
disputably the most sublime.
The artist has con- 
ceived this performance from ideal being, and has 
made so much use of matter only as was necessary 
to execute and give a body to his thought.
As far 
as the description of Apollo in Homer surpasses 
those descriptions which other poets have made after 
285 
him, so far does this figure exceed all other figures 
of the same divinity.
His stature is more than 
human, and his attitude expresses majesty.
An 
eternal spring, Hke that of Elysium, diffuses the 
beauty of youth over the manly perfection of his 
frame, and gracefully displays itself in the noble 
configuration of his limbs.
We must endeavour to 
penetrate into the empire of incorporeate beauty ; 
seek to become creators of a celestial nature, in 
order to elevate the soul to the contemplation of 
such supernatural perfection ; for here is nothing 
mortal, nothing subject to the wants of humanity.
This body is neither warmed by veins, nor agitated 
by nerves.
A celestial spirit, diffused like a gentle 
stream, circulates, if I may so express myself, over 
the contour of this figure.
He has pursued Python, 
against whom he has bent, for the first time, his 
tremendous bow ; in his rapid course he has over- 
taken him, and given the mortal stroke.
In the 
fullness of sublime satisfaction, his august aspect, 
penetrating into infinity, extends far beyond his 
present victory.
Disdain is impressed on his lips ; 
the indignation he breathes inflates his nostrils, and 
mounts even to his brow.
But unalterable peace 
is seated on his forehead, and his eye is all sweet- 
ness, as if he were now surrounded by the Muses, 
eager to ofter him their caressing homage.
Among 
all the representations of Jupiter that have reached 
us, there are none in which the father of gods seems 
so nearly to approach that dignity, in which he 
once manifested himself to the intelligence of the 
poet, as in this portrait of his son.
The individual 
286 
beauties of all other deities are assembled in this 
figure, as in the divine Pandora.
This brow is the 
brow of Jupiter pregnant with the goddess of Wis- 
dom, and its movement announces its will.
These 
eyes, in their fine-turned orbits, are the eyes of 
Juno ; and this mouth is the same that inspired the 
beautiful Branchus with voluptuousness.
Like the 
pliant branches of a tender vine, his lovely hair 
waves around his divine head, as if lightly agitated 
by the breath of Zephyr ; his locks seem perfumed 
with ethereal essence, and negligently attached at 
the summit by the Graces themselves.
When I 
behold this prodigy of art, I forget all the universe, 
I assume a more dignified attitude, to be worthy to 
contemplate it.
From admiration I pass into ec- 
stasy.
Penetrated with respect, I feel my bosom 
heave and dilate itself, as in those filled with the 
spirit of prophecy.
I am transported to Delos, 
and the sacred groves of Lycia once honoured by 
the presence of the god ; for the beauty before me 
seems to acquire motion, like that produced of old 
by the chisel of Pygmalion.
How is it possible to 
describe thee, thou inimitable masterpiece, unless I 
had the help of ancient science itself to inspire me, 
and guide my pen !
I lay at thy feet the sketch I 
have rudely attempted ; as those who cannot reach 
the brows of the divinity they adore, offer at its 
footstool the garlands with which they would fain 
have crowned its head." 
The reader who has not before seen this ani- 
mated description will not consider it obtrusive 
287 
here ; and the writer feels she shall be treated with 
indulgence if she speaks with enthusiasm of the 
volumes which first disclosed to her knowledge 
the taste and character of their author : a poetic 
spirit breathes through these, and through all his 
writings, and gives a charm which is felt even in 
the strict language of scientific description.
" Poetry," says a fine modern writer, " has a 
natural alliance with our best affections.
It de- 
lights in the beauty and sublimity of the outward 
creation, and of the soul.
Its great tendency and 
purpose is to carry the mind beyond and above the 
beaten, dusty, weary walks of ordinary life ; to lift 
it into a purer element, and to breathe into it more 
profound and generous emotions.
It reveals to us 
the loveliness of nature, brings back the freshness 
of youthful feelings, revives the relish of simple 
pleasures, keeps unquenched the enthusiasm which 
warmed the spring-time of our being, refines youth- 
ful love, strengthens our interest in human nature 
by vivid delineations of its loftiest feelings, spreads 
our sympathies over all classes of society, knits us 
by new ties to universal being; and through the 
brightness of its prophetic visions, helps faith to 
lay hold on the future life.
It is objected to po- 
etry, that it gives wrong views, and excites false 
expectations of life, peoples the mind with shadows 
and illusions, and builds up imagination on the 
ruins of wisdom.
That there is a wisdom against 
which poetry wars, — the wisdom of the senses, 
which makes physical comfort and gratification the 
supreme good, and wealth the chief interest of life, — 
288 
cannot be denied ; nor is it the least service which 
poetry renders to mankind, that it redeems them 
from the thraldom of this earthborn prudence.
It 
is good to feel that life is not wholly usurped by 
cares for subsistence and physical gratifications, but 
admits, in measures which may be indefinitely en- 
larged, sentiments and delights worthy of a higher 
being." This refinement pervaded his whole cha- 
racter, gave a charm to his domestic habits and 
social pleasures, which stood in place of the lux- 
uries of fortune, and surpassed them.
" There is one subject," Sir James observes in 
the preface to his Tour, " which commonly makes 
a conspicuous figure in all travels to Italy, — the 
absurdities and abuses of the Catholic religion.
On this head many a Protestant writer seems to 
think himself privileged to let loose every species 
of sarcasm, censure, and calumny, without any 
qualification or distinction.
He censures a pre- 
tended infallible church, as if he himself and his 
own mode or fashion of belief alone were really 
infallible : he condemns a persecuting religion, 
w^hile he himself persecutes it more uncharitably 
and unrelentingly with his pen or his tongue, than 
any churchman ever did heretic with fire and fag- 
got ; and he execrates those who keep no faith with 
unbelievers, while he betrays the confidence of 
friendship and hospitahty, and perverts the kind- 
ness of human nature, (which gets the better even 
of religious antipathies,) into a tool of ridicule 
against those who have exercised it in favour of 
himself.
These errors, by far more disgraceful and 
289 
blameable than errors of faith, he has earnestly 
wished to avoid." 
After such a declaration, which is justified by the 
forbearance, or rather disinclination, to make any 
offensive remarks on the rehgion of a country 
among whose members he had met with acknow- 
ledged hospitality and great kindness, he never- 
theless was so unlucky as to incur very serious 
reprehension, from an unknown hand, upon this 
very subject and some others ; all contained in a 
long letter sent him two or three years after the 
publication of his Tour.
This letter, however amusing it occasionally proved 
to the person to whom it was addressed, might be 
considered too long to insert, and as Sir James never 
knew who was the writer of it, it cannot be said 
that he lost a friend ; but he was so unfortunate as 
to wound the feelings, very undesignedly, of our late 
Queen Charlotte, by an expression in speaking of 
the Queen of France, which seems never to have 
been obliterated from Her Majesty's remembrance, 
and occasioned the withdrawing of her favour, al- 
though the offending epithet was expunged in the 
second edition of his Tour.
It happened some time in the year 1791^ that Sir 
James's friend, Dr. Goodenough bishop of Carlisle, 
being about to write a botanical paper on the Bri- 
tish species of Carecc, had occasion to consult the 
herbarium of Mr. Lightfoot.
This had been bought 
by His Majesty George HI.
on the death of its ori- 
ginal possessor, and presented to the Queen.
Dr, 
Goodenough obtained permission to examine it : 
VOL.
I. u 
290 
the Queen, being present when he went to Frog- 
more, conversed with Dr. G.
on the subject of his 
studies.
He found the herbarium very much da- 
maged, and recommended Her Majesty to have it 
looked over by some intelligent person, mentioning 
Mr. Dryander and Sir James Smith, as either of 
them capable of advising some method of preserv- 
ing what remained.
The name of the latter was 
not unknown to the Queen ; he had some time be- 
fore presented her, through the kindness of the 
Hon. Mrs.
Barrington, with a copy of his Colour- 
ed Figures of Rare Plants, which both Their Majes- 
ties were pleased enough with to desire to become 
purchasers of three copies besides ; and in one of 
Her Majesty's familiar visits to the late Viscountess 
Cremorne, the Queen carried her a copy as a pre- 
sent.
Lady Cremorne, perceiving with agreeable sur- 
prise that the author of this new work was a person 
she had honoured with her friendship so far as to 
have fixed on him as an acquaintance and compa- 
nion for an only and beloved son, the consequence 
of the rencontre was, that when Dr. Goodenough 
gave the above-mentioned hint to Her Majesty, 
she instantly fixed upon him, for the purpose not 
merely of arranging Lightfoot's herbarium, but of 
conversing with herself and the Princesses on the 
elements of botany and zoology.
These visits were 
at all times remembered by him with considerable 
pleasure; and he never spoke without veneration of 
the character of the Queen, her care to afford her 
daughters every opportunity of acquiring informa- 
291 
tion, and to furnish them with the means of filling 
their time with worthy objects of pursuit.
Sir James sincerely esteemed his royal patroness, 
and was flattered to find his services acceptable to 
her.
In every conversation the benignity and cul- 
tivated understanding of the principal personages 
removed every sensation of awe, and royalty itself 
lost none of its dignity in the polite and accom- 
plished companions.
With these impressions he took leave of his il- 
lustrious pupils, suspecting no ill, and- designing 
nothing disloyal, nor was it likely that any passages 
in his Tour should have given offence at any other 
time.
But the events of the French revolution had 
filled the minds of many with suspicion and alarm : 
what he had said was representedto him " as injuri- 
ous in these times to crowned heads ;" and a passage 
wherein he is accused of eulogizing Rousseau, was 
regarded as "hostile to religion, virtue, and loyalty." 
There can be no doubt that Her Majesty's mind 
was prejudiced against him by one who had been a 
mutual friend, but whose personal contests with 
Rousseau had warped his judgement.
That Sir James regretted this alienation cannot 
be matter of surprise to those who have felt what 
it is to be misunderstood, and who recollect that 
his sentiments of regard for those who had shown 
him kindness were no less warm than sincere.
He 
had no other reason to regret the circumstance, for 
it was a disinterested connection entirely.
To the friend above alluded to, he replied, " If 
you consider calmly what I have said of Rousseau, 
u 2 
292 
you will find it rather an apology than an eulogium, 
and cannot be understood to palliate any of his 
faults or mistakes.
What I have said of the un- 
happy Queen of France in vol.
iii.
p. 217 and 218, 
is the most favourable apology that can be made 
consistent with truth and the sacred interests of 
virtue.
The other expression* I regret, and will 
correct it." 
Those who have not seen these passages may 
have a curiosity to peruse what at the present day 
would scarcely be considered hostile to religion 
and virtue, likely to produce alarm, or to be con- 
strued into disaffection.
Extract from the Tour, vol.
iii.
/?.
217- 
" Of her political faults during her prosperity, I 
presume not to form an idea ; for who could dive 
into the intricacies of one of the most intriguing of 
all courts ?
Her subsequent conduct, her plots as 
they are called, her treason against her oppressors, 
none that can put themselves into her situation will 
wonder at or blame.
Her private faults I will not 
palliate.
They were but too well known, when she 
was in a situation that might be supposed out of 
the reach of all justice, except the divine ; but they 
will not fail now to be blackened, no doubt, where 
that can be done.
Let it however be remembered, 
that the state prisons revealed no secrets to the 
dishonour of this unfortunate Queen, no victims of 
her jealousy or resentment, though they were often 
filled with those of the worthless mistresses of for- 
* The epithet of Messalina applied to the Queen of France.
293 
mer kings.
The canting Madame Maintenon spared 
no pains to entrap and to confine for life a Dutch 
bookseller, who had exposed her character : but 
Marie Antoinette took not the least vengeance of 
the most abusive things, written and published by 
persons within her own power." 
Vol.
\. p.
110.
"With respect to the character 
of Rousseau, about which the opinion of the world 
is so much divided, I have found it improve on a 
near examination.
Every one who knew him speaks 
of him with the most affectionate esteem, as the 
most friendly, unaffected and modest of men, and 
the most unassuming in conversation.
Enthusias- 
tically fond of the study of Nature, and of Linnaeus 
as the best interpreter of her works, he was always 
warmly attached to those who agreed with him in 
this taste.
The amiable and accomplished lady^ to 
whom his Letters on Botany were addressed, con- 
curs in this account, and holds his memory in the 
highest veneration.
I have ventured to ask her opi- 
nion upon some unaccountable actions in his life, 
and especially about those misanthropic horrors and 
suspicions which embittered his latter days.
She 
seemed to think the last not entirely groundless ; but 
still, for the most part to be attributed to a some- 
thing not quite right in his mind, for which he was 
to be pitied, not censured.
Her charming daughter 
showed me a collection of dried plants, made and 
presented to her by Rousseau, neatly pasted on 
small writing-paper, and accompanied with their 
Linnaean names and other particulars.
* Madame dc Lessert.
294 
" Botany seems to have been his most favourite 
amusement in the latter part of life ; and his feel- 
ings with respect to this pursuit are expressed with 
that energy and grace so peculiarly his own, in 
his letter to Linnseus*, the original of which I 
preserve as an inestimable relic.
I need offer no 
apology to the candid and well-informed reader for 
this minuteness of anecdote concerning so cele- 
brated a character.
Those who have only partial 
notions of Rousseau, may perhaps wonder to hear 
that his memory is cherished by any well-disposed 
minds.
To such I beg leave to observe, that I hold 
in a very subordinate light that beauty of style and 
language, those golden passages, which will immor- 
talize his writings ; and a faint resemblance of which 
is the only merit of some of his enemies.
I respect 
him as a writer eminently favourable on the whole 
to the interests of humanity, reason, and religion.
Wherever he goes counter to any of these, I as 
freely dissent from him ; but do not on that account 
throw all his works into the fire.
As the best and 
most religious persons of my acquaintance are 
among his warmest admirers, I may perhaps be 
biassed in my judgement ; but it is certainly more 
amiable to be misled by the fair parts of a charac- 
ter, than to make its imperfections a pretence for 
not admiring or profiting by its beauties.
Nor can 
any defects or inconsistencies in the private charac- 
ter of Rousseau depreciate the refined moral and 
religious principles with which his works abound.
* Published in the " Selection of the Correspondence of Lin- 
295 
Truth is truth wherever it comes from.
No imper- 
fections of humanity can discredit a noble cause ; 
and it would be madness to reject Christianity, for 
instance, either because Peter denied Christ, or 
Judas betrayed him.
"It will be hard to meet with a more edifying or 
more consolatory lecture on religion than the death- 
bed of Julia.
Her character is evidently intended 
as a model in this respect.
By that then we should 
judge of its author^ and not by fretful doubts and 
petulant expressions, the sad fruits of unjust perse- 
cution, and of good intentions misconstrued.
" Nor would it be difficult to produce, from the 
works of Rousseau^ a vast majority of passages di- 
rectly in support of Christianity itself, compared 
with what are supposed hostile to it.
It is noto- 
rious that he incurred the ridicule of Voltaire, for 
exalting the character and death of Jesus above 
that of Socrates.
' But he was insidious, and he 
disbelieved miracles,' say his opponents.
If he 
believed Christianity without the assistance of mi- 
racles to support his faith, is it a proof of his infi- 
delity ?
If he was insidious, that is his own concern.
I have nothing to do with hidden meanings or 
mystical explanations of any book, certainly not of 
the writings of so ingenuous and perspicuous an 
author as Rousseau.
Unfortunately for him, the 
whole tenour of those writings has been too hostile 
to the prevailing opinions, or at least to the darling 
interests of those in authority among whom he 
lived ; for Scribes and Pharisees are never wanting 
to depress every attempt at improving or instruct- 
296 
ing the world, and the greatest heresy and most 
unpardonable offence is always that of being in the 
right.
For this cause, having had the honour of 
feeling the vengeance of all ranks of tyrants and 
bigots, from a king or bishop of France, to a pal- 
try magistrate of Berne or a Swiss pastor, he was 
obliged to take refuge in England.
Here he was 
received with open arms, being justly considered as 
the martyr of that spirit of investigation and liberty 
which is the basis of our constitution, and on which 
alone our reformed religion depends.
He was ca- 
ressed and entertained by the best and most ac- 
complished people, and experienced in a particular 
manner the bounty of our present amiable sove- 
reign.
" One cannot but lament, that one of the most 
eminent, and 1 believe virtuous, public characters 
of that day, should of late have vainly enough at- 
tempted to compliment the same sovereign, by 
telling him he came to the crown in contempt of 
his people, should have held up a Messalina for 
public veneration, and become the calumniator of 
Rousseau !
" It is, indeed, true that a certain morbid degree 
of sensibility and delicacy, added to the inequalities 
of a temper broken down by persecution and ill 
health, made Rousseau often receive apparently 
well-meant attentions with a very bad grace.
Yet, 
from most of the complaints of this kind, which I 
have heard from the parties immediately concerned, 
I very much suspect he was not unfrequently in the 
right.
But supposing him to have been to blame 
297 
in all these instances, they occurred posterior to 
his most celebrated publications.
Was it not very 
unjust, therefore, for those who had patronized and 
extolled him for those publications, to vent their 
animosity against them for any thing in his conduct 
afterwards ?
" Far be it from me, however, to attempt a full 
justification of his writings.
I only contend for 
the generally good intention of their author.
The 
works themselves must be judged by impartial pos- 
terity.
I merely offer my own sentiments ; but I 
offer them freely, scorning to disguise my opinion, 
either because infidels have pressed Rousseau into 
their service, or because the uncandid and the dis- 
honest have traduced him falsely, not daring to 
declare the real cause of their aversion, — his vir- 
tuous sincerity." 
When compassion for the sufferings of another 
mingles with similitude of feelings, especially on 
some favourite point, it never fails to produce a 
strong partiality.
The same love of Nature, the 
same passion for her works, the same rapture in 
beholding the sublime scenery of the Alps, charac- 
terized both these men ; and in reading, as Sir 
James sometimes did, the 7th Promenade of the 
celebrated author of "«/m//<?," he saw, as it were in 
a mirror, his own sensations reflected.
"Toutes mes courses de botanique, les diverses 
impressions du local, des objets qui m'ont frappe, 
les id^es qu'il m'a fait naitre ; les incidens qui sont 
meles, tout cela m'a laisse des impressions qui se 
298 
renouvellent par I'aspect des plantes herborisees 
dans ces m^mes lieux.
Je ne reverrai plus ces beaux 
paysages, ces forets, ces lacs, ces bosquets, ces ro- 
chers, ces raontagnes dont Taspecta toujours touch^ 
mon cceur ; mais maintenant que je ne peux plus 
courir ces heureuses contrees, je n'ai qu'a ouvrir mon 
herbier, et bientot il m'y transporte.
Les fragmens 
des plantes que jy ai cueillies suffisent pour me rap- 
pellei" tout ce rnagnijique spectacle.
Cet herbier est 
pour moi un journal d'herborizations, qui me les 
fait recommencer avec un nouveau charme, et pro- 
duit I'efFect d'un optique qui les peindroit derechef 
a mes yeux." 
" Clarens !
by heavenly feet thy paths are trod, 
Undying Love's, who here ascends a throne 
To which the steps are mountains ; where the God 
Is a pervading life and light — so shown 
Not on those summits solely, nor alone 
In the still cave and forest : der the Flowers 
His eyes are sparkling^ and his breath hath blown." 
There were, however, others who saw the senti- 
ments put forth in these volumes in their genuine 
light, in the sense intended by their author : Dr.
Pulteney will not be accused of disloyalty, nor of 
any latitude of opinion beyond what has been the 
distinguishing mark of a British subject, true to 
every part of the institutions of his country ; though 
he could not exceed the writer of these travels in 
his patriotic spirit.
299 
Dr. Pulteney to «/.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Blandford, January 30, 1794.
Mr. White sent me down, about a month ago, 
your Tour on the Continent, and I take an oppor- 
tunity, by means of a frank to my friend Dr. Garth- 
shore, to send you these few Hnes, to thank you for 
the entertainment I have received in the perusal of 
it.
This work will, I hope, exalt your fame, and 
contribute to your emolument.
Indeed I cannot 
doubt it, as you have so judiciously proportioned 
your information to such a variety of readers.
You 
will not wonder that / should have wished to have 
seen more of natural history ; but I am well aware 
how proper it was not to introduce too much of 
any particular branch of knowledge, since the ge- 
neral taste was to be consulted, to make a work 
popular.
Your mode, however, of introducing what you 
have done on our favourite subject, is so judiciously 
managed, that I hope it will much tend to recom- 
mend it.
This is not all I wish to applaud.
Be 
assured, my dear Sir, that I am delighted with that 
spirit of freedom, and zeal for the cause of liberty, 
which so eminently appears throughout these vo- 
lumes : your sentiments are so congenial to my 
own, that I honour you for the expression of them, 
and for the spirit you have shown on this occasion, 
as well as for the pr'udent discrimination you have 
made every where betweeen Liberty and Licentious- 
ness, at a time when our neighbours are discredit- 
ing their principles, and injuring the best of causes.
300 
by their savage proceedings.
I ever thought they 
had neither virtue nor religion enough to deserve, 
at present, or to attain, the noble object, they 
aimed at.
I am, dear Sir, with true esteem, 
Your faithful humble Servant, 
R. PULTENEY.
Thomas Pennant Esq. to *J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Downing, March 9, 1791.
Your travels were continued to Holyhead, and 
are but just returned, otherwise I should have sooner 
made my best acknowledgements.
From the part I have read I have little doubt of the 
satisfaction I shall have in the perusal to the last 
page.
I opened accidentally on your account of the 
French, which suits my sentiments most exactly.
I detest the savages ; but think every virtuous man 
must be struck with horror at the abandoned man- 
ners of Louis XV.
and his court.
Could reformers 
tell where the proud waves of correction should 
stop, it would be happy : but the cruel inundation 
has made havoc indiscriminate.
But Providence 
for wise ends often suffers its judgements to pass 
over the just and unjust.
When we weep when we 
hear of the axe falling on the merciful Louis XVI., 
how do we exult when we see under it Brissot and 
a number of the other regicides.
I thank you for the fine drawings.
Adieu.
Yours most faithfully, 
Thomas Pennant.
301 
Among the friends whom the pubHcation of his 
Tour procured him must be mentioned Colonel 
Johnes, of Hafod.
To his secluded residence in 
the Alpine wilds of Cardiganshire, Sir James had 
the happiness of making several visits, and enjoy- 
ing the society of the master of that elegant man- 
sion, whose historical researches, whose residence in 
many of the European courts, whose acquaintance 
with general literature, and whose knowledge of the 
world, made his companionship delightful.
Here 
too Sir James directed the taste and encouraged the 
pursuit of natural history among the other acquire- 
ments of his amiable daughter, a child in years, but 
mature in mind at a very early period.
Miss Johnes's 
genius for music was extraordinary at the age of ten 
years : but admirer as he was of Handel and of Ita- 
lian airs, in both of which she excelled in no com- 
mon degree, the greatest charm was to hear her 
fine voice among those mountain paths, singing the 
native songs of the country, as they botanized to- 
gether on the hills ; and of these the solemn music 
of Morfa Rhyddlan was the favourite of both : 
" Wild on old Havren's banks the modest violet blooms, 
And wide the scented air its fragrant breath perfumes ; 
Bright shines the glorious sun amid the heaven, 
When from its cheering orb the clouds are driven ; 
A form more beauteous still adorn'd the flood, 
Gwendolen's fatal form, Llewellyn's blood!" 
This charming villa, containing within itself all 
that could gratify the taste, — inaccessible to intru- 
sion, yet replenished with sufficient society to dis- 
pel any feelings like solitude or desolation, — Mr.
302 
JohneSj by way of expressing his own satisfaction 
with the spot where all his domestic comfort cen- 
tered, — had called, after the ideal abode of Johnson's 
Rasselas, The Happy Valley.
And surely never was a 
more appropriate name bestowed ; "All Nature and 
all Art" conspired to make it enchanting ; and like a 
scene of enchantment, it has vanished away !
The 
accomplished owner and his only child have long 
been numbered with the dead ; and of those who 
formed the social party, how many are gone since 
the days alluded to !
But his name will live as 
long as the works of Froissart and Monstrelet and 
Joinville and Brocqui^re, which all issued from the 
Hafod press, continue to Occupy the shelves of our 
libraries.
The following letter to Sir James, from Mr. Sym- 
mons, a mutual friend, will give the reader some 
idea of the place and its inhabitants.
Dear Sir, Paddington, Sept.
30, 1794.
On my return home yesterday from a fortnight's 
excursion into Kent and Surrey, I found your very 
obliging letter on my table, for which, as well as 
every other mark of your kind and friendly atten- 
tion, my best acknowledgements are due.
When you 
come finally from Norfolk, and I learn you are 
settled in Marlborough-street, I shall certainly take 
the earliest opportunity of thanking you in person, 
and of further cultivating, so far as your numerous 
avocations will permit without inconvenience to 
you, an acquaintance from which I promise myself 
so much advantage of every kind.
It must be a 
303 
subject of great disappointment to Mr. Johnes, that 
your plans did not admit of a call upon him at Ha- 
fod; where, besides a very handsome place, situated 
amidst wilds of a character the most romantic and 
picturesque imaginable, and some curiosities in the 
botanic line, which might perhaps not have fallen 
within your observation elsewhere, you might have 
assured yourself of a most hearty and hospitable 
reception from people naturally kind, benevolent, 
and generous in their dispositions, and who would 
have felt a very particular satisfaction in contribu- 
ting to yours by every means in their power.
I have 
seen Sir George Staunton, but not so much of him 
as I could have wished, enough however to know 
that he has not visited the capital of China without 
making such observations as cannot but prove 
highly interesting in the detail, and from which I 
flatter myself with the hope of much delight and 
information at some future time, when both of 
us are less occupied than at present.
His little 
boy comes with his tutor to my garden every day, 
and goes over the collection of plants in a regular 
course, with a Linnaeus and a Hortus Kewensis 
in his hand.
His memory is great, and his appre- 
hension quick and lively, so that there can be little 
doubt of his progress in that, or any other study to 
which he applies his mind.
But I have fears for his 
health, which seems but ill established, and cannot, 
in my judgement, be benefited by those continued 
attentions to all that diversity of languages and 
sciences which the baronet is perpetually -pouring 
into him.
The vessel is certainly of fine but of de- 
304 
licate materials, and may be prematurely broken by 
too frequent use.
I have insensibly scribbled to 
the end of my paper, with a bare reservation for 
what may be necessary for assuring you, that I am, 
dear Sir, with much kindly regard.
Your Friend and Servant, 
John Symmons.
Sir James's first visit to Mr. Johnes was made 
in August 1795 ; and in a letter to Mr. Woodward 
he decribes his journey and reception at Hafod in 
these words : 
Dear Sir, 
I left Norwich last Monday se'nnight ; and on the 
following Saturday went to Worcester, — continued 
my journey to Ludlow (32 miles) in the mail, by a 
very hilly and rough road.
Observed hiula Hele- 
nium in moist places by the road side ; the country 
rich, and beautifully varied with woods and fields.
Ludlow is on a hill, very pleasantly situated ; the 
castle, where Comus was first acted, is in ruins.
On Monday morning at five I set out in a day coach 
for Aberystwith (80 miles), too great an undertaking 
by far in such a country for one day.
As we pro- 
ceeded, the country grew more hilly, but not craggy.
'Tis like Westmoreland or the north of Yorkshire, 
but without lakes.
We breakfasted at Bishop's 
Castle, a shabby town, built of stone as in the North 
of England.
A little way past it we ascended a 
hill called the Bishop's moat, from whence is one 
of the most extensive views I ever saw, it only 
305 
wants water.
The hills are lofty and swelling, not 
abrupt ; green to the top, and cultivated half way 
up ; not abundant in wood.
Wc soon after en- 
tered Wales, and had another more beautiful view 
to the right, over an immense extent of hills and 
valleys to Montgomery, and far beyond, command- 
ing a fine reach of the Severn between woody 
rocks like Matlock, looking as if one might take 
them up like a toy.
We dined at Newtown, and 
were to have met the Aberystwith coach, but it was 
overturned (a common case) six miles from New- 
town, and we were delayed in waiting for it all that 
evening, but spent our time pleasantly enough in 
walking about the beautiful country around, which 
much resembles the environs of Matlock, (not the 
valley itself,) and next morning I proceeded towards 
Aberystwith (45 miles), but the road was so very 
hilly we did not get there till six in the evening.
The latter part of the way was very beautiful, com- 
manding the river, and a rich vale through which it 
runs, with openings to the sea.
The town is ugly, 
but abounds with company, and I met Sir George 
and Lady Caley there.
Mr. Johnes's man and 
horses were waiting for me, but I did not set off 
till next morning, when I had a most charming 
ride to Hafod over the hills sixteen miles ; 
" And here I rest, as, after much turmoil, 
A blessed soul doth in Elysium." 
Here is a most sumptuous modern house, in a vale, 
among rocks, woods, and cascades of the wildest 
kind, and on the most magnificent scale.
I know 
nothing like it, except some parts of the north of 
VOL.
I. X 
306 
Yorkshire.
The house looks small on the outside, 
and yet the gallery is 200 feet long.
The drawing- 
room is one of the most elegant anywhere to be 
seen, with Gobelin tapestry made on purpose, and 
chairs of the same.
French glasses throughout 
the house.
Every thing in the highest style of 
decoration.
The library an octagon of 30 feet.
Miss Johnes, though not above ten years of age, 
has taken a wonderful turn for botany and ento- 
mology.
She has made out almost every plant 
within her reach that is in Flora Londinensis, or 
English Botany, and has the latter almost by heart.
She longs to botanize in a chalk country.
She is 
almost equally fond of insects, and her whole de- 
light is to walk with me about the woods, searching 
for mosses and insects, patiently attending to every 
thing I say, and telling me all her observations, 
doubts, queries, &c.
This is the more extraordi- 
nary, as she has had no companion till now.
Her 
mother indeed is fond of a garden and greenhouse, 
and her father encourages her by all the means in 
his povver ; but it is a remarkable instance of early 
ardour.
Miss Johnes is also a capital musician.
I have been rather disappointed hitherto as to 
botany in Wales.
What I have observed are the 
common plants of hilly, not alpine countries, and 
not a great variety of them.
Mosses and Lichens 
are plentiful, but they are chiefly of the tree kind, 
yet no filamentosi.
L. Iccte-virens, glomulifei'us, 
scrobiculatus, sylvaticus, resupmatuSy plumbeus, are 
common.
I have found one specimen oi perlatus 
in fructification.
Hypericum duhmm of Leers, 
307 
lately observed near Worcester, is one of the most 
common things here, and I dare say has been over- 
looked for H.
perforatum^ — pr*iy see to it.
The 
leaves are not punctated, except a line of purple 
dots on the margin.
I have been this morning a walk of five miles in 
the grounds, among rocks, cascades, woods, every 
thing that is romantic, and quite natural.
This 
family are the guardian angels of the country.
Mr.
Johnes has lately imported a ship-load of wheat 
from Bristol, to sell at cent per cent loss.
The harvest here is fine, and so it seemed all the 
way I came.
The hop-grounds of Shropshire are 
beautiful.
I send you a bit of Hypericum dubiurn, and also 
a Gnaphalhwi, which I took at first for the true 
si/lvaticum, but it must surely be only rectum of 
Engl.
Bot.
; pray give me your opinion.
My fair 
pupil has promised me a tune, and I must go down.
August 31.
We are to go tomorrow to the Devil's Bridge, 
where I hope to find some Mosses at least.
I 
must leave this charming spot in seven or eight 
days, and mean to go to Llandillo, where a friend 
of mine, Dr. Parr, lives, and thence to Bath to see 
my aunt Kindersley and her grandchildren.
There is no limestone, chalk, or gravel here, and 
consequently the Flora is poor.
Soiidago v'lrgau- 
rea, Serratula tinctoria, Hypericum duhium are pro- 
digiously abundant ; but scarcely any thing else 
X 2 
308 
that is at all uncommon ; few Ferns ; many Mosses 
and Alga?.
I have also found few insects.
Mr. Caldwell is disappointed of his Guernsey 
expedition, and regrets disappointing you of Fuci.
I wanted him to accompany me to Wales, but he 
could not.
I have just been looking over a book of twenty- 
six drawings of shells, &c., done for M.
Paris, at 
ten louis each.
Mr. Johnes bought it for about 130Z.
His copies and manuscripts of Froissart are ex- 
tremely valuable ; he is at work on an elaborate 
translation of that work, with notes.
Your ever affectionate friend, 
J. E.
Smith.
In the summer of 1796, the writer accompanied 
her husband to this romantic spot.
In addition to 
the native beauty of the scene, a flock of peacocks 
from the neighbouring woods came frequently at 
early dawn, and placing themselves 
^' Right against the eastern gate, 
Where the great sun begins his state," 
displayed their gorgeous plumage between the bat- 
tlcments of the mansion, and with their singular 
cry of Pavo !
Pavo !
enlivened and animated the 
otherwise silent solitude of the " morning spread 
upon the mountains ;" nor can she ever hear the 
note unaccompanied with that peculiar sensation 
" Which out of things faniihar, undesign'd, 
When least we deem of such, calls up to view 
The spectres whom no exorcism can bind ; 
309 
The cold, the changed, — perchance the dead, anew, 
The mourn'd, the loved, the lost — too many !
yet how few !
How agreeable Mr. Johnes was in conversation, 
his letters give some idea of, for they greatly re- 
semble his colloquial manner.
Abounding in infor- 
mation, he was rapid, allusive, and obscure to those 
who had more limited knowledge than he possessed.
The letters which remain of this lively and amia- 
ble correspondent are very numerous, beginning 
in 1794, and ending in February 1816, only two 
months before his death.
The following, written after the loss of the be- 
loved object of his affection, is remarkable for the 
altered style, subdued by grief, yet full of resigna- 
tion to the stroke which severed the last branch 
from the parent tree.
My dear Friend, Hafod, August 17, 181 1.
We are very much obliged by all your attentions, 
and wish you could have sent us better accounts of 
your own health.
We came here this day se'nnight, 
and hope we may be able to endure it, although 
deprived of its brightest charm.
It is here we can 
do most good, and that must now be our only en- 
deavour, to show some gratitude for mercies al- 
ready received, and they have been manifold, and 
to indulge a hope that we may all meet again here- 
after.
By placing our dependence on the sole 
Source of happiness and comfort, we have been 
wonderfully strengthened, not only to bear our loss 
with resignation, but with thankfulness.
My wife is still very low, though calm.
She 
310 
cannot see any company ; but if you could favour 
me with a visit, I think it would do us both good.
I never saw this place in such beauty, and I 
trust that we shall enjoy it as we ought, within a 
short time, for we daily regain strength.
Tomorrow will, I fear, unhinge us again, for we 
must go to church.
Our thoughts now will be attached to all that 
loved her, and to every thing that may remind us 
of her excellencies.
I do not think I shall ever again bear music !
Adieu, my good Friend, I am always yours, 
T. JOHNES.
A very flattering tribute of approbation to Sir 
James's Tour comes from the pen of the amiable 
and accomplished Mrs. Watt, the only child of the 
celebrated Ellis, whose discoveries concerning the 
formation and nature of Corallines give him a high 
rank among those whose genius enriched the science 
of natural history in the eighteenth century.
My dear Sir, Northaw Place, June 23, 1793.
Amidst the various avocations of a large family, 
a mother anxious to discharge her duty, cannot be 
supposed to have much leisure for the pursuit of 
those amusements which, in the earlier period of 
her life, constituted her greatest pleasures ; unless 
from the affluence of her fortune she can transfer 
all the cares, and retain only the enjoyments of it.
This not falling to my lot, I have been necessi- 
tated to postpone thanking you for your most 
311 
obliging present of a " Sketch of a Tour on the 
Continent," which I received some months since.
What little acquaintance I had before the pleasure 
of having with you, I must confess interested me 
very sincerely in your success through life ; as you 
appeared to merit in the highest degree the encou- 
ragement of every one who was anxious to promote 
that noblest of all studies, the study of natural hi- 
story.
But since the perusal of your work, methinks 
I discern in your character some traits which, for 
the sake of my much-loved country, I most fer- 
vently wish were the leading ones in the character 
of every Englishman.
You unite religious and moral 
with natural philosophy ; you permit it to conduct 
you, as it was ever intended it should, to the great 
Origin of all ; and while it enlightens your mind to 
contemplate the most sublime subjects, it heightens 
your enjoyment of that infinite variety of pleasures 
which the society of those of a similar turn for im- 
provement must afford.
While you have contracted 
no mean prejudice against those who may differ from 
you in opinion, your benevolence inclines you to 
think every individual of every persuasion entitled 
to your charity and good-will.
Allow me therefore 
to assure you that, for the benefit of the world in 
general, as well as those particularly of your own 
circle of friends, both Mr. Watt and myself most 
unfeignedly wish you health and long life !
since 
we are both fully persuaded, if by an All-gracious 
Being you are blessed with the one, your ardent 
and indefatigable pursuit after useful knowledge 
will render the other a blessing to mankind.
3J2 
I return you the Linnaean and Philosophical 
Transactions, with my very best acknowledgements; 
and have, I assure you, much pleasure in subscribing 
myself, my dear Sir, 
Your much obliged Friend, 
Martha Watt.
To this lady Sir James was indebted for the 
whole correspondence of her admirable father, with 
various other papers, for the purpose of turning 
them to any public use he might think proper.
He 
thus became possessed of the letters on both sides 
between Ellis and Linnaeus, which were published 
in 1821, in "A Selection of the Correspondence of 
Linnaeus and other Naturalists." 
This excellent woman was the second wife of 
Alexander Watt, Esq., of Northaw, Herts.
In the 
memoir of Ellis, in Rees's Cyclopaedia, Sir James 
tells us, "She inherited her father's taste and cha- 
racter, more especially his piety and sensibility of 
mind, with a considerable likeness to his person.
She died in childbed at Northaw, in the spring of 
1795.
Her will, written entirely in her own hand, 
and a letter to her husband, found after her decease, 
are worthy of the pen of a Richardson, and the 
character of a Clarissa." 
From Mr. Davall, of Orbe, in Switzerland, an 
enthusiastic botanist, whose correspondence will 
appear hereafter.
Sir James received the following 
notice of his travels.
313 
Orbe, Canton de Berne, July 22, 1794.
My dearest Friend, 
I have at last received your inestimable present, 
your Tour, which I have hitherto devoured, not yet 
having been able to read soberly ; it has given me 
such delight as I cannot express.
No doubt from 
my attachment I cannot be perfectly impartial ; yet 
I can solemnly declare, that were I ignorant of its 
author, I should say he is the favoured child of 
Nature, and displays more solid sense than almost 
any other I have ever read.
I have been delighted 
with subjects on which I understand little or no- 
thing, such as painting, from the nature of the 
remarks, ex.
gr.
vol.
iii.
p. 35.
I had, just before I 
read this, seen the very attitude between my boy 
and his nurse.
You know me well enough, my dear 
friend, to be assured that I am incapable of flatter- 
ing any one, from any motive whatever: believe me 
then when I say, that I have no words to express 
the delight your Tour has given, and continues to 
give me ; you give throughout the whole, in my 
opinion, the best proofs of sound and solid sense, 
freedom from prejudice, and all the qualities that 
become a being worthy of the name of man.
You 
desire particularly to have my opinion of what you 
say on Rousseau.
I must frankly tell you the truth; 
I have never yet read any one of his works !
Hav- 
ing rather too early in life had reason to be dis- 
gusted with general society, not having within my 
reach here any one congenial soul, I have long lived 
in a very recluse manner, visiting A^ature !
as well 
314 
as very indifferent health and delicate eyes could 
permit.
"Anim.« causa ad lenienda vitcpfastidia." 
Scopoli Entom.
Carniol.
Pra^f.
I cannot refrain in 
one single instance, my dear friend, lamenting a 
very great error of the press I hope, — viz.
vol.
iii.
p. 1 70, in styling Van Bercherm an ingenious bo- 
tanist!
For botanist let us read, if you will, zoolo- 
gist.
I knew him well, — a good young man ; the 
only solid knowledge he had then in natural history 
was relative to Quadrupeds, not Mammalia.
But as 
for botany !
I should, — as I love you, and as I wish 
you ever from my heart as free from error and in- 
justice as possible, — I should, I say, have hardly 
been less grieved had you spoke of your cordial 
friend Davall as an ingenious astronomer I 
Another testimony must still be added, though 
last, not least welcome to the author of the Tour; 
and it is memorable as being contained in almost 
the first letter he ever received from the historian 
of the Medici.
"I will not trouble you with enumerating the par- 
ticulars which your parcel contained, all of which I 
highly value, but none more than the three volumes 
of your Tour, which display so much of your own 
observations and opinions.
To say that these are 
almost invariably in unison with my own is perhaps 
but a very doubtful kind of commendation ; and I 
will therefore add, that these volumes exhibit that 
well-tempered zeal for rational liberty, that love of 
science and predilection for works of art, which will 
always render them highly interesting to all those 
315 
who can feel for the true dignity and happiness of 
nfankind.
" Your affectionate friend, 
"W.
ROSCOE." 
Mr. Woodward in some observations upon the 
Tour, selects the description of his journey up 
Mount Cenis, as the part he preferred.
"This 
charming chapter," he tells his friend, " I can never 
sufficiently admire.
For a botanist the scene has, as 
you observe, peculiar charms : in reading this the 
second time, I frequently laid down the book for a 
few minutes to prolong the pleasure, dreading to 
get to the end of the chapter.
The journey to 
Chamouny has nearly equal charms, but the sub- 
ject was not so novel as Mount Cenis." 
After this excess of approbation, which the mind 
is not always in tune to accord with, it is a bold 
resolve to give the reader the passage, which his 
partial friend so much approved.
"Aug. 11.
About eleven at night I set out from 
Turin along with Mr. de Sousa, Dr. Bellardi, Dr.
Buonvicino a mineralogist, and the Abb^ Vasco a 
natural philosopher.
' ^ Aug. 12.
Early in the morning we found our- 
selves among the narrow passes about the foot of 
the Alps, with majestic scenery intermixed with 
cultivation, and here and there a not very flourish- 
ing village.
Passed through Suze, the key of Pied- 
mont, which of course is very strongly fortified ; its 
bastions are cut out of the live rock.
The country 
316 
grew more hilly and romantic at every step.
At 
the miserable village of la Novalaise vs^e were obliged 
to quit our carriages for mules ; and after a tedious 
ascent by a zigzag stony road, no way dangerous 
however, we reached the top, that is, the plain of 
Mount Cenis, towards noon.
Within about a mile 
of the summit I found Junciis filiforjiiis in a wet 
place on the left of the road, and Lichen polyrhizos 
on a rock near it.
Not far from hence, on a small 
plain before we arrived at the great one, grew Bart- 
sia alpina, in seed, Trifolmm agrarium of Linn.
(Dickson's Dried Plants, No. 80.), widely different 
from that of English writers, and many other rare 
plants.
On our right a magnificent cascade fell 
close to the road.
All along a great part of the 
way I had observed various alpine species of Ane- 
mone and Pedicularis, mostly in seed, with a novelty 
of appearance in the herbage highly encouraging, 
and a luxuriance at which (having no idea of alpine 
pastures) I was surprised.
I lamented only the ad- 
vanced state of these plants, and feared we were too 
late for the season ; but when I found the plain of 
Mount Cenis all flowery with the rarest alpine pro- 
ductions, such as we delight to see even dragging 
on a miserable existence in our gardens, and the 
greatest part of which, disdainful of our care and 
favour, scorn to breathe any other air than that of 
their native rocks, none but an admirer of nature 
can enter into my feelings.
Even the most com- 
mon grass here was Phleum alpinmn, and the heathy 
plain glowed with Rhododendrum ferrugmeum and 
Arnica montana.
Well might Clusius so beauti- 
317 
fully say — ^ No?i carent alttssimi niontes prcBruptique 
scopuli suis etiam delicm *; nor need one have the 
science of a Clusius to feel pleasure in such scenes.
Scarcely any traveller passes the Alps in summer 
without either lamenting the 'neglect of his bota- 
nical studies,' or more honestly regretting that he 
had never attended to this source of pleasure at all.
I have long ago perhaps tired the reader with my 
admiration of the works of art.
If he had had in- 
dulgence enough for me to get thus far, he must 
now lay in a fresh stock of patience while I expa- 
tiate on the productions of nature; unless he should 
chance to be a botanist, and then all I can say will 
not satisfy his curiosity.
Dr. Bellardi and myself 
were accommodated at the hospital, built for the 
reception of travellers in bad weather, which is now 
under the direction of an abbe, named Tua ; the 
good father Nicholas, so much celebrated by Lady 
Miller, being dead long since.
This is a good rus- 
tic sort of inn ; so far from being intolerable, that 
the English ambassador, Mr. Trevor, and his lady, 
had lately resided some weeks here on a party of 
pleasure.
Mr. de Sousa and the rest of our com- 
pany took refuge in a tent not far distant, belong- 
ing to the chevalier de St. Real, then intendant of 
the province of Maurienne, and now of the valley 
d'Aost, who with an ingenious young officer of 
Chambery, Mr. Martinel, had spent several weeks 
here, and as many in the preceding summer, in 
order to investigate thoroughly the geography and 
* " 'The most lofty mountains and most rugged precipices are 
not without their own peculiar charms.' " (Clus.
Panon.
31 G.) 
318 
natural history of the environs.
In society like 
this, no less pleasant than instructive, and amid 
such scenery, the time passed but too quickly ; 
and I could not but regret the impossibility of my 
spending the three following summers here with 
the worthy intendant, who had allotted five years 
in all for the accomplishment of his undertaking.
His observations must be inestimable ; but it was 
thought the whole would hardly be given to the pub- 
lic, as the Sardinian court very justly objected to 
making their French neighbours too well acquainted 
with all the secrets of their natural bulwark.
" This hospital stands by the high-road side half 
way over the plain, which is at least two miles in 
length ; and about the middle, which is its broadest 
part, it may be a mile across.
It is entered at each 
extremity by a narrow pass, and surrounded on 
both sides with very lofty mountains capped with 
eternal snow.
The plain itself is full of inequalities.
Towards the northern extremity are two or three 
beautiful lakes, with an island in the principal one, 
clothed with shrubs and rich pasturage.
This lake 
empties itself to the south by a small river, whose 
rocky channel often forms considerable cascades of 
great beauty, and is overhung with luxuriant herb- 
age, and shrubberies of Rosa alplna^ Mespilus (or 
rather CratcBgus) ChamcBmespilus, &c.
&c.
This 
part of Mount Cenis is seldom visited by travellers; 
but, being within a moderate walk from the post- 
house or the hospital, richly deserves attention.
On the other side of the rivulet, about the bottom 
of the hills, are some alders, which, being sheltered 
319 
by the craggy rocks, attain a considerable height ; 
otherwise no tree in general, not even the fir, grows 
to any size so high on the Alps.
A little further up 
are most delicious pastures, intersected with alder 
thickets, and bordered with Cacalia alpinay Aqui- 
legia alpina.
Ranunculus acomtifolius.
Sisymbrium 
tanacetifolium, Pyrola minor ^ Juncus spicatus, and 
other rarities.
This beautiful Aquilegia, which far 
exceeds our garden kind, was very sparingly in 
flower, and I am obliged for its detection to my 
faithful attendant Francesco Borone, who here im- 
bibed that taste for botany which afterwards led 
him to Sierra Leone ; and by whose acutencss and 
activity I have often profited.
Some little hillocks 
on the left of the front of the hospital are covered 
with Rhododendru7nferrugineum, among which grew 
Pyrola rotundifolia, and in the clefts of rocks the 
very rare Saponaria lulea.
{Spicileg.
Bot. t.
5.) 
Here I first iowxiA Lichen cucuUatus, Trans, of Linn.
Soc. vol.
i. 84, t.
4, f.
7j which I am astonished any 
body can confound with L.
nivalis: the latter too 
grows here, as does L.
ochroleucus, Dickson Fasc.
Crypt, iii.
19.
Descending towards the river I came 
to a most delightful little valley, like the vale of 
Tcmpe in miniature, with a meandering rivulet, 
scarcely three or four feet broad, running through 
it, and bordered with abrupt precipices not much 
more in height, in which were several fairy caves 
and grottos, their entrances clothed with a tapestry 
of mantling bushes of Salix reticulata and retusa.
These dwarf willows grow close pressed to the 
rocks, whether horizontal or perpendicular, almost 
320 
like ivy, and may be stripped off in large woody 
portions.
By the rivulet, which issued in several 
streams from these caves, was a profusion of ^n- 
thericu7n calyculatum* and Leontodon auremn, with 
many other things equally uncommon, and in full 
bloom.
^^Aug. 14.
We all sallied forth on foot about five 
in the morning to ascend little Mount Cenis, one 
of the most considerable hills that front the hospi- 
tal on the other side of the lake.
Pursuing a wind- 
ing path through the thickets, we came to a few 
cottages, in surely one of the most retired habitable 
spots in Europe, and which probably are seldom 
four months in the year uncovered with snow.
Yet 
at this season who would not have envied their si- 
tuation ?
No lowland scenes can give an idea of 
the rich entangled foliage, the truly enamelled turf 
of the Alps.
Here we were charmed with the pur- 
ple glow of Scutellaria alp'ina ; there the grass was 
studded with the vivid blue of innumerable Gentians, 
mixed with glowing Crowfoots, and the less osten- 
tatious Astrant'ia major and Sax'ifraga rotundifolia^ 
whose blossoms require a microscope to discover 
all their beauties ; while the alpine rose, Hosa al- 
pina, bloomed on the bushes, and, as a choice gra- 
tification for the more curious botanist, under its 
shadow, by the pebbly margin of the lake, Carex 
capillaris presented itself.
The riches of nature, 
both as to colour and form, which expand so lux- 
uriantly in tropical climates, seem here not dimi- 
nished but condensed.
The further we ascended, 
* Tofiedia pallustris FI.
Brit., and Engl.
Bot. vol.
viii.
t. 536, 
321 
the more every production lessened.
By the sandy 
bed of a torrent, which runs from the glaciers above, 
the very elegant Sax'ifraga ccEsia seemed to emu- 
late the glistening of the hoar-frost around it.
"At length, about eleven o'clock, we reached a 
small plain full two-thirds of the way to the top.
Here we divided.
Some of our party were adven- 
turous enough to climb the very summit; but 
being already got to the utmost limits of vegeta- 
tion, and near those of perpetual snow, I had no 
business higher.
Indeed this plain appeared to be 
clothed with a short barren turf that promised 
little ; nor was it till I examined it on my hands 
and knees, that I discovered this turf to be a rich 
assemblage of Cherleria sedoides, Alcliemilla penta- 
phyllea, Chrysanthemum atratum^ Gent'iana nivalis^ 
and other diminutive inhabitants of the highest 
Alps, among which one of the most beautiful is a 
dwarf variety of the common Eye-bright, Euphra- 
sia officinalis^ with large purple flowers.
"This plain was here and there sunk, on the mar- 
gin of the declivity, into little hollows, watered by 
very small trickling rills, and in such parts vegeta- 
tion appeared extremely luxuriant.
Barts'ia alpina 
was here but in flower, along with Satyrium nigrzim; 
the latter smelling like Vanilla.
I observed a pair of 
Papilio Apollos in this exalted region, fluttering 
about and celebrating their innocent nuptials.
After 
enjoying from hence the view of the plain of Mount 
Cenis, with the lake and woods about it, we de- 
scended on the side fronting the hospital, and ar- 
rived there by six o'clock, not a little fatigued, 
VOL.
I. Y 
322 
having been all day on our legs, without any re- 
freshment except what a servant had carried with 
us ; but I believe our satisfaction much exceeded 
our fatigue.
' ^A^ig.
15.
This day Dr. Bellardi and myself as- 
cended the hill called Ronche, immediately behind 
the hospital, where Professor Allioni first disco- 
vered Viola Cenisia and Campanula Cenisia.
Dr.
Bellardi found them this day, though I was not so 
fortunate ; nor did I meet with any thing very de- 
sirable excei^t J^ujicus Jacqumi; and in the boggy 
sides of a little rivulet, in the very highest part of 
the mountain, a little Carex of great rarity, the 
juncifolia of Allioni's Flora Pedemontana.
This is 
surely the same species as Lightfoot's C incurva, 
though on the Alps its stem is seldom curved.
I 
have it also from Iceland.
Juncus triglumis grew 
along with it, and in other parts of the hill Carex 
foetida of Allioni, and C.
atrata, with Antirrhinum 
multicaule.
" Before the post-house are some remarkable 
white limestone rocks, on which grow Dianthus 
virgineus, and the real Festiica spadicea (see Trans, 
of Linn.
Soc. vol.
i. p.
11 1).
Below these rocks, by 
the lake, I gathered the most beautiful Gentiana 
asclepiadea, and in the surrounding pastures Agro- 
stema Flos *Jovis, Senecio Doronicum, Aster alpi- 
nns, Centaurea uniflora, Arnica montana, and the 
Rujnex arifolius of Linnseus's Supplement, which 
last is, I presume, more certainly a native of the 
Alps than of Abyssinia.
Immediately before the 
hospital is great plenty of Riimex alpinvs, and a 
323 
little further on I joyfully waded up to my knees in 
a swamp to gather Swertia pereniiis.
All the plain 
abounds with the beautiful Dianthus alpiniis, the 
leaves of which differ so much in narrowness and 
sharpness from the Austrian one, that I have some- 
times suspected them to be distinct species.
No- 
thing however is more common on Mount Cenis 
than Drijas octopctala, forming thick tufts many 
feet in breadth, covered with its elegant flowers and 
feathery heads of seeds.
On this elastic alpine 
couch we reposed when tired with walking, and the 
delicious temperature of the air made any shelter 
perfectly indifferent.
"Such are a part of the botanical riches of this 
interesting mountain, not to mention numerous 
species of Arenaria, Silene, AchillcEa, Astragalus^ 
tlii7icus, and grasses of various kinds.
Of all these 
treasures I laid in as large a stock as I could well 
bring away, multiplying my own enjoyments in the 
anticipation of the pleasure I should have in supply- 
ing my friends at home.
The selfish dealer in mys- 
teries and secrets, the hoarder of unique specimens, 
knows nothing of the best pleasures of science." 
In an introductorv lecture at the Roval Institu- 
tion Albcmarle-street, in 1808, the author of the 
Tour observes, that " Of all studies, perhaps natu- 
ral history is the most practical.
Its very charm 
consists in the interest it gives to objects always 
before our eyes^ but which it furnishes us with a 
new sense to admire, to enjoy, and to understand.
" From the earliest period of my recollection, 
V 2 
324 
when I can just remember tugging ineffectually 
with all my infant strength at the tough stalks of 
the Wild Succory on the chalky hillocks about 
Norwich, I have found the study of Nature an in- 
creasing source of unalloyed pleasure, and a conso- 
lation and refuge under every pain.
Long destined 
to other pursuits and directed to other studies 
tho Light more advantageous or necessary, I could 
often snatch but a few moments for this favourite 
object.
Unassisted by advice, unacquainted with 
books, I wandered long in the dark ; till some of 
the principal elementary works, the publications of 
Lee, Rose, Stillingfleet, and a few others, came in 
my way, and were devoured over and over again.
This kind of botanical education has the advan- 
tages of the necessary drudgery of a grammar- 
school ; it trains the mind to labour, it fixes princi- 
ples and facts and terms and names, never to be 
forgotten.
At length, however, I found I wanted 
something more, to apply to practice what had 
thus been acquired.
I was then furnished with sy- 
stematic books, and introduced to Mr. Rose, whose 
writings had long been my guide.
I was shown 
the works of Linnaeus ; nor shall I ever forget the 
feelings of wonder excited by finding his whole 
system of animals, vegetables and minerals, com- 
prised in three octavo volumes.
I had seen a fine 
quarto volume of Buffon, on the Horse alone.
I 
expected to find the systematical works of Linnaeus 
constituting a whole library ; but they proved al- 
most capable of being put, like the Iliad, into a 
nutshell.
Hence a new world was opened to me.
325 
I found myself moreover in the centre of a school 
of botanists.
Ever since the Spanish tyranny and 
folly had driven commerce and ingenuity from 
Flanders, to take refuge in Britain, a taste for 
flowers had subsisted in my native county along 
with them.
Our weavers, like those of Spitalfields, 
have from time immemorial been florists, and many 
of them most excellent cultivators ; their neces- 
sary occupations and these amusements were pecu- 
liarly compatible.
And it is well worthy of remark 
that those elegant and virtuous dispositions which 
can relish the beauties of nature, are no less strictly 
in unison with that purity of moral and religious 
taste which drove the founders of our Worsted 
manufactory from foul and debasing tyranny to the 
abode of light and peace and liberty.
" Our circle of naturalists at Norwich, far from 
being confined to florists, had long contained some 
systematic botanists.
They were students of Ge- 
rard, and Parkinson, and even of the learned works 
of Ray. In my young time this circle was pecu- 
liarly enriched by the possession of Mr. Rose, Mr.
Bryant, and Mr. Pitchford, three names well known 
to all who are conversant with the botany of Bri- 
tain.
They were often favoured with the society 
of the learned and amiable Stillingfleet, and the 
correspondence of Hudson ; and they may all to- 
gether be considered as the founders of Linnasan 
Botany in England, to the promulgation of which, 
the publications of Rose, Stillingfleet, and Hudson, 
have contributed more than any others whatever ; 
while the indefatigable practical labours of Mr, 
326 
Bryant and Mr. Pitchford were daily enriching the 
science with new discoveries.
Thus the botany of 
Norfolk has become celebrated, and its Flora has 
proved richer, I believe, than that of any other county, 
because it has been more closely investigated.
. " Eired by these examples, and ambitious of con- 
tributing to the common stock of knowledge, I 
took advantage of a journey to Yorkshire, Derby- 
shire, and Lancashire, to inquire what those coun- 
ties afforded.
I had visited them several times 
before, but now I wondered how any of my former 
journeys had afforded me pleasure.
I felt like a man 
born blind, who first walked abroad to look about 
him.
The wild moors, the mossy rocks, the moun- 
tainous woods, to me were ' opening Paradise'.
" Some time afterwards the country about Edin- 
burgh, and the mountains of Scotland, afforded me 
a fresh harvest ; and at length the classical scenes 
of Italy derived for me a new charm from the oc- 
casional pursuits of botany.
But above all, the 
alpine scenery and treasures of Savoy and Swit- 
zerland have left the most pleasing impression.
In those countries all the riches of Flora burst 
upon us at once, during their short spring and 
hasty summer.
From the first melting of the snow, 
when the Jura and its brother Alps are absolutely 
covered with Crocuses, as with a purple robe, to the 
bright days of autumn, when the Raspberry and 
Bilberry glow on their dewy bushes, such a profu- 
sion of foliage and flowers and fruits, so much 
more abundant and varied than we have any expe- 
rience of, is crowded into a few weeks, that the 
327 
whole face of the country is like a flower-garden, 
as rich and brilliant as the finest collection of Cape 
plants about London.
" I know not how it is that alpine scenery is so 
enchanting to the lovers of nature, under which 
denomination I mean to comprehend the poet, the 
painter, and the naturalist, as well as those who 
alone have minds to taste and appreciate their per- 
formances.
The purity of the air, the grandeur of 
the scenery, the beauty of the face of nature alto- 
gether, affect the spirits and senses in a manner 
that is scarcely experienced elsewhere.
If we quit 
the hot-bed of the metropolis and its neighbour- 
hood, to welcome the rising spring among the 
Derbyshire hills, we taste something of this en- 
chantment ; but infinitely more when we quit the 
scorching plains of Italy for the Alps^ which rise 
above them like an immense purple rampart of 
clouds." 
It may not be unentertaining to give at one view 
a general enumeration of the men of science Sir 
James met with in his travels, and the ideas their 
different characters impressed upon him.
These arc 
extracted from his Tour.
The names of several have 
appeared already, and others will occur hereafter.
Ley den.
Van Royen.
— " I had an introduction to the cele- 
brated Mr. David Van Roy en, whose politeness 
and attention could not be exceeded.
He had 
been professor here thirty-two years, and has 
lately resigned, having still permission to use 
328 
the garden for his amusement.
His fondness 
for botany continues as strong as ever." 
Allamand.
— "The chair of natural philosophy was 
at this time filled by Mr. Allamand, well known 
by his edition of the Natural History of Buf- 
fon.
A fine old man of the most agreeable 
manners, and with that happy mixture of po- 
liteness and cheerfulness almost peculiar to 
Frenchmen in the decline of life." 
Sandifort.
— "Dr. Sandifort's private library is one 
of the finest things in Leyden." 
Pestel.
— "One of the chief ornaments of this uni- 
versity is Mr. Pestelj professor of jurispru- 
dence.
His Fundamenta Jurisprudential Na- 
turalis is a book every inhabitant of a free 
state ought to study.
His pure system of 
elevated piety, his union of Christianity with 
morality, and of manly principles of liberty 
with virtuous order, are not at all in the style 
of philosophers who insinuate atheism, or of 
fools who avow it," 
Lyons.
ViLLARs.
— " A very able entomologist, whose cabi- 
net was said to contain five thousand European 
species of insects.
We found Mr. Villars 
modest, communicative, and unassuming, like 
most people of real knowledge and genuine 
taste for science." 
Versailles.
Le Monnier.
— " First physician to Louis XV., 
329 
after whom Monniera was named.
I found him 
in his garden with Messrs.
Thouin, Dombey, 
and other botanists.
His herbarium is said to 
be uncommonly valuable." 
St. Germam-en-laye.
Marechal de Noailles.
— !-'  From Versailles we 
passed by Marli to St. Germain-en-laye, and 
slept at the house of the venerable Marechal de 
NoailleSj the old friend and correspondent of 
Linnaeus.
Since my being there, the Marechal 
has decorated it with a monument to Linnaeus, 
and has celebrated a jubilee in his honour." 
Paris.
D'AuBENTON.
— "WithMr.D'Aubenton I had often 
an opportunity of conversing, and always with 
pleasure and advantage." 
" De la Cepede, who has published an able work 
on Reptiles, was also very frequently at the 
cabinet during my visits there." 
"Adanson, whose knowledge of botany would 
procure him great reputation, were he less a 
slave to paradox and pedantry.
He generally 
accosted me with some attack on Linnaeus, 
sometimes calling him grossly ignorant and 
illiterate ; and then when I have ventured to 
quote Philosophia Botanica, as a proof of the 
contrary, abusing him as scholastic, I was con- 
tented with smiling, to think how one accu- 
sation destroyed the other." 
A.L. DE Jussieu.
— "M.
Antoine Laurent de Jussieu 
330 
takes the lead among those who with respect 
to system may be called Anti-Linnaeans.
He 
inherits his taste for the science from his 
uncles Bernard and Joseph de Jussieu ; the 
former of whom was Professor at Paris, and 
the latter made a fine collection of plants in 
Peru.
Their books and collections descended 
to their nephew, who has not turned his atten- 
tion to botany till within these few years ; but 
with what very great success he has in that 
time studied natural orders, is manifested in 
his Genera Plantarum, published in 1789, — a 
work which will immortalize its author, and 
• probably go down to posterity with the Genera 
Plantarum of Linnaeus, to which it is an ex- 
cellent companion.
Those who can read and 
judge of this work need not be told that he is 
a true philosopher, profound in science, ardent 
in the pursuit of truth, open to conviction 
himself, and candid in his correction of others; 
nor will they be surprised to hear his manners 
are gentle and pleasing, his conversation easy, 
cheerful, and polite.
Although we differed on 
many points, as on the laws of nomenclature, 
and the merits of the Linnsean system, yet as 
truth was our common object, repeated and 
free discussions increased our esteem for each 
other, and to me at least were productive of 
instruction as well as pleasure." 
" De Lamarck is equally devoted to botany, but 
his character is less pleasing than that of Mr.
de Jussieu.
I freely acknowledge that I 
331 
shrunk from the society of a man who always 
took occasion to attack with violence what he 
knew to be my most favom-ite sentiments." 
L'Heritier.
— "Among ihe Linnsean botanists, Mr.
L'Heritier is eminently distinguished by his 
most superb and scientific publications, the 
plates of which are executed with a degree of 
accuracy rarely to be met with, nor are the 
descriptions less complete," 
" BuLLiARD is well known by his Herb'ier de la 
France ^^ 
" Desfontaines, Professor of Botany at the Royal 
Garden, w^as in 1786 lately returned from Bar- 
bary with a rich harvest of plants and insects, 
all of which he allowed me to examine and 
partake of." 
Thou IN.
— " Mr. Thouin, who has the superinten- 
dence of the Botanic Garden, deserves my 
w^armest acknowledgements for the very liberal 
manner in which he at all times allowed me 
access to that rich collection, as w^ell as to his 
own private herbarium, which I looked over 
entirely with great advantage." 
Broussonet, — " with whose friendship a stranger 
could want nothing in Paris, and whose bene- 
volence I had not now to seek for the first 
time.
Few naturalists equal him for zeal and 
abilities." 
Montpellier.
Dorthes.
— " A very ingenious entomologist." 
GouAN.
— " The old correspondent of Linnaeus, well 
332 
known by his botanical and ichthyological 
works." 
CussoN.
— " Demonstrator of botany.
His death is 
no loss to the science, as he kept entirely from 
the world his father's celebrated manuscripts, 
and a collection of umbelliferous plants.
They 
are now fallen into the hands of Mr. Dorthes, 
who is amply qualified to digest and publish 
them." 
Cotttgnac.
Gerard.
— " We came to this place purely to visit 
Mr. Gerard, author of the Flora Gallo-Provin- 
cialis, one of the best European botanists of 
the golden age of Linnaeus.
Nothing could 
exceed his politeness and hospitality to us.
We had much conversation together about the 
purchase of the Linnsean collection, a never- 
failing topic with all the botanists I met with 
in my journey.
Almost all I had to tell was 
news to him ; and I felt as if paying a visit in 
the Elysian fields, so little did his " tales of 
other times " seem connected with what is now 
going on in the world.
He spoke very highly 
of Linnaeus and Ray ; and permitted me to 
copy two very interesting letters from the 
former to himself." 
Florence.
FoNTANA.
— " We were fortunate enough to enjoy 
much of the society of the Abb^ Fontana, who 
did us the very flattering honour of spending 
333 
at our lodgings most of the evenings we were 
at Florence ; how much to our profit and en- 
tertainment, those who know his physiologi- 
cal enthusiasm and penetration need not be 
told." 
Fabroni.
— " Secretary to the Agricultural Society." 
Targioni-Tozzetti.
— " One great object, in our 
way, was the museum of the celebrated Micheli.
His collection was bought after his death by 
his friend Dr. Targioni, who afterwards took 
the name of Tozzetti for an estate.
His son, 
who now possesses these relics, is a man of 
the most engaging simphcity, modesty, and 
benevolence of manners, and worthy to be the 
heir of the amiable Micheli." 
Rome.
CoRREA.
— "I was so fortunate as to meet with the 
Abbe Corr^a de Serra, Secretary to the Aca- 
demy of Sciences at Lisbon.
With this gen- 
tleman I first became acquainted at Mr. de 
Jussieu's at Paris.
He had resided twelve 
years at Rome formerly, and was attached to 
the place by all the enthusiasm which a man 
of so much fine taste and extensive literature 
must feel in such a residence, though he had 
since lived many years in Portugal, his native 
country." 
Father jAcauiER.
— " One of the most interesting 
of the literati whom it was our fortune to meet 
with, was the illustrious mathematician father 
Jacquier, general of the French minims at the 
334 
Trinita de Monti, the Roman editor of Newton, 
who, if I remember right, was obliged to make 
an apology in his preface for publishing such a 
dreadful heresy as that the earth moved round 
the sun, and to disclaim his belief of it.
What 
more bitter sarcasm could have been offered to 
the very authority which required this apology!
" This good and venerable old man, who is 
since removed to a state where he will find 
truth needs no apology, was confined to his 
bed with a broken limb from a fall.
Never- 
theless he admitted visitors every ev(;ning, 
conversing with his natural cheerfulness and 
urbanity, and discussing scientific subjects 
with as much ardour as if he were just enter- 
ing on his literary career.
How delightful 
and how consolatory it is, among the disap- 
pointments and anxieties of life, to observe 
science, like virtue, retaining its relish to the 
last ; smoothing the bed of age and infirmity, 
preserving the mind young and vigorous, alive 
to all its enjoyments, amid the wreck of its 
frail cottage ; while, in communicating its own 
ardour and its own light to others, it tastes 
the happiness of a good father, who feels him- 
self living over again in his children !
" 
Milan.
Oriani.
— " The Abbe Oriani, Astronomer Royal.
He treated us as if he were paying a debt of 
gratitude, instead of humanity.
I have ever 
since been proud to cultivate his friendship." 
335 
Pavia.
ScoPOLi.
— "This is at present the most celebrated 
university in Italy.
The loss of one bright 
ornament we have now indeed to regret ; the 
accomplished Scopoli, who was at this time 
Professor of Botany here.
We found him a 
man verging towards the decline of life, of a 
plain but animated countenance, not at all re- 
sembling his portrait in the Flora Carniolica, 
and entirely devoid of that stupid gravity so re- 
markable in that print.
Breakfasting with him 
next morning, I took an opportunity of offer- 
ing him any assistance the Linnaean herbarium 
could afford, by which he first understood 
it was in my possession, having but slightly 
read over our French introductory letters.
He 
was quite overjoyed ; gave me a most cordial 
embrace, and from that moment we scarcely 
separated during my abode in Pavia.
"One morning, at 7 o'clock, we attended a 
botanical lecture of Professor Scopoli's, in a 
room at a garden.
It was in Italian, chiefly on 
grasses.
He observed that there arc really no 
limits between Bromus and Festuca; but that, 
nevertheless, Linnaeus's arrangement of the ge- 
nera and species in general was the best, as well 
as the first, ever seen." 
" Gregorio Fontana, brother of the Abbe Fon- 
tana at Florence.
Little could I imagine, when 
I enjoyed the pleasure of his conversation and 
admired the acuteness and vcrsatilitv of his 
336 
genius, that he should ever condescend, as he 
has since done, to become the translator and 
commentator of any production of mine*." 
Scarpa.
— "We were no less happy in the acquain- 
tance of Professor Scarpa, the excellent teacher 
of Anatomy." 
Spallanzani.
— "The Abbe's countenance is austere 
and proud, in form inclining to the African.
"We anxiously wished to hear a lecture from 
this famous Professor of Natural History, not 
choosing to be presented to him ; and it fortu- 
nately fell out that our curiosity was gratified.
His delivery is exceedingly deliberate, drawling 
and monotonous ; it could scarcely be heard 
with a grave face ; but the composition of his 
lecture so admirable as to make us forget the 
rest.
The subject was the different lengths of 
time which butterflies remain in the chrysalis, 
and how far their exit may be hastened by 
heat ; with Reaumur's experiments of putting 
the insects in that state under a hen, and so 
producing the first butterflies perhaps, as the 
professor said, that were ever hatched by a 
bird." 
Turin.
"Allioni, the father of natural history in this place, 
is still ardent in its pursuit." 
Bellardi.
— "A most excellent botanist.
He has 
much enriched the Flora Pedemontana of his 
master Allioni." 
* "Discorso preliminaire.
— 1792." 
337 
Cigna.
— " Professor of Anatomy." 
Penchienati.
— " Professor of Surgery." 
Malacarna.
— " Whose unaffected plainness and 
native genius were very strongly marked in the 
little conversation I had with him." 
Dana.
— "The Cabinet of Natural History promises 
well under the auspices of this very able Pro- 
fessor." 
De Sousa Coutinho.
— "The Maecenas of Botany, 
and indeed of general science, at this period, 
the chevaliere de Sousa Coutinho, Portuguese 
ambassador.
At his table was a weekly as- 
sembly of literary men, in whose conversation 
and pursuits he bore a very intelligent part, 
always making himself completely one of the 
company by his knowledge and enthusiasm, 
no less than by his winning affability." 
Giorna.
— " With respect to literary and accom- 
plished characters, I cannot but esteem myself 
peculiarly fortunate at Turin.
The only ento- 
mologist I met there, besides Professor Allioni, 
was Mr. Giorna, to whose liberal communica- 
tions my collection is much obliged, and who 
has all the candour and modesty of real merit." 
Padua.
Arduino.
— "Formerly Professor of Botany, but 
now of Agriculture.
From him the Arduina 
was named, and he sent Linnaeus those rare Bra- 
zil plants, chiefly described in the Mantissa," 
Geneva.
De Luc.
— "The brother of our amiable natural 
VOL.
I. z 
338 
philosopher at Windsor.
He has a superb 
cabinet of shells and extraneous fossils." 
" Senebier, the historian of Geneva, is distin- 
guished for his experiments relating to the 
physiology of vegetables." 
Bonnet.
— "The most illustrious philosopher of 
Geneva is Mr. Bonnet.
Though almost deprived 
of sight and hearing, he conversed long and 
most instructively on our favourite subjects, 
affording a fresh proof of the truth of what 
1 observed in speaking of Father Jacquier." 
De Saussure.
— "I had an interview only of a few 
minutes with Mr. de Saussure, who had just 
then descended from the summit of Mont 
Blanc." 
Zimmerman.
— " I fortunately met at Geneva Pro- 
fessor Zimmerman, the celebrated zoologist." 
Sasle.
" Lachenal was a great friend ofHaller.
His bo- 
tanical library is one of the best I ever saw." 
SociN.
— "Professor of Natural Philosophy, a very 
ingenious well-informed man." 
Bernouilli.
— "An excellent chymist and minera- 
logist." 
Berne.
Halle R, Jun.
— " He resembled his father in fond- 
ness for botany, versatility and even strength 
of genius; but not altogether in application." 
Wyttenbach.
— "A most estimable character, who 
has cultivated natural history, especially mi- 
neralogy, with great success." 
339 
Strasburg.
Herman.
— " Professor of Botany.
I have seldom 
conversed with a man of a more acute or more 
enlarged mind." 
ScHURER.
— "Nor was I less obliged to Professor 
Schurer, teacher of Philosophy," 
Lawth.
— "Professor of Anatomy, a man of ability." 
JVapies.
N. Pacifico.
— " A zealous botanist and able ma- 
thematician.
His library possesses four vo- 
lumes of the botanical plates of Cupani, an un- 
published work of the most extreme scarcity." 
Dr. Cyrilli.
— "His garden contains some rare 
plants, and his library and old herbarium were 
made by Imperatoy 
"Don Filippo Cavolini is the most ingenious 
and indefatigable naturalist in this part of the 
world; whose observations on corals and other 
marine animals rival those of our illustrious 
Ellis for extent and fidelity." 
Genoa, 
Durazzo.
— "Science is a plant of slow growth, nor 
is it yet a fashionable pursuit among the Ge- 
noese.
The Durazzo family stand almost sin- 
gle as its encouragers.
The Senator Marcellino 
Durazzo, owner of the great palace in Strada 
Balbi, has a romantic country-seat at Pino, 
where he very kindly received us, and gave an 
entertaining narrative of his going to France 
in the year 1747, to solicit the assistance of 
z2 
340 
Louis XV.
against the Germans.
All the Ge- 
noese coast being occupied by the enemy, he 
was obliged to return by sea to Marseilles; and 
that harbour being blocked up by the English 
fleet, he escaped in the disguise of a fisherman, 
with a million of French livres.
For this ser- 
vice, and his good conduct when Doge, he has 
had the almost unprecedented honour of a sta- 
tue in the council chamber, erected in his life- 
time." 
'd^l^/orvC Cf^Cc^TP^'^- 
y^c 
J-^eQoi 70.
Jc'Tt/^^ 
iPL.i^^<-(j\_^ 
^ 
ca^A 
r/^"^ .
a^c 
c^TL .
^ ^^<^-( a^C^o ^J (^ 
/^/^ 
i? / 
O, 
'^ Syrian I 
^'j^-'^^'f^ yycr?,^ 
yp=''o^^'^^20.,^^ jT^ 
341 
CHAPTER IV.
Foundation of the Linncean Society.
— Sir J.
E. Smith elected Pre- 
sident.
— List of the Fellows in 1790.
— Letters of Mr. Smith.
— 
Letters from various Foreign Professors.
— Charter.
— Presi- 
dent's Address on the Twentieth Anniversary.
Foundation of the Linncean Society.
In looking round upon the literary institutions and 
learned academies of Europe, it will be seen that 
they have generally owed their origin and success 
either to large endowments, to royal favour, or to 
the commanding influence of persons ah-eady known 
by their scientific attainments, or their station.
This 
Society is almost a solitary example of an institu- 
tion deriving its origin from an individual, young 
and unknown to fame, without rank, without wealth, 
without support, whose ardour for the pursuit of 
science led him to risk the expectation of a mode- 
rate independence, by bringing into his native coun- 
try, at the expense of his patrimony, those rich 
materials forwhich princes had contended, and upon 
which he was to establish a new Society, and give 
to it its name, its character and direction.
At the 
commencement of a lucrative professional Hfe, Sir 
James cheerfully abandoned the promises it held 
forth, to become the leader of a band of naturalists, 
who should follow in the steps of the immortal Lin 
342 
nseus, and among whom, by the influence of a can- 
did and benevolent mind, he preserved the peace 
and harmony of the community he had framed, and 
the esteem and good-will of its members.
He had said long before, " My heart is formed for 
friendship, and cannot exist without it :" so his soul 
was formed for high intellectual pursuits, and could 
not exist without a fairer field than the opening of a 
young physician's course presented.
In the present 
object both his tastes were gratified ; and he found 
it in England, as he had done on the Continent, a 
passport to the best society.
Early in the month of February 1788, Sir James, 
in a letter to his father, acquaints him that he has 
engaged a house in Great Marlborough-street, be- 
longing to Mr. Bendish, a Cambridgeshire gentle- 
man ; and to this he removed a few weeks after.
His leaving Chelsea was with an expectation of 
beginning his medical career in London ; yet in the 
same letter, wherein he expresses a desire to per- 
form his duty as a physician, he adds, " In that rank 
in science to which I may say / have raised myself, 
with every prospect of taking a lead in the studies 
to which I am peculiarly attached, with so many 
fortunate circumstances about me, and especially 
w^hen I consider that all I enjoy is owing to this 
study, you can hardly expect I should give up that 
and all my hopes.
You may depend upon it Natu- 
ral History will always be the main object of my life ; 
and I doubt not you will be thankful that I have so 
noble a one.
I rely on this to give me real lasting 
honour, and to make me useful to mankind through 
343 
ages when I am no more, as well as while I live to 
afford me relaxation from less pleasant cares.
Do 
not think I mean to oppose it to my medical views ; 
I have always meant them to co-operate." 
Mr. Smith to his Son, 
My dear Son, 
The pursuit of science you say shall co-operate 
with practice — that is the idea I wish to entertain, 
to answer all your views ; and I hope they will unite 
to raise you to a very high degree of eminence, 
I am proud of the light you stand in ; and every 
advance you make to fame lifts my heart with trans- 
port, and I want only to give you an independent 
fortune to make me perfectly happy : but as I can- 
not do that, nor any thing like it, I must repeat, my 
dear James, that a determination to depend upon 
yourself and to be your own master is so consonant 
to my own disposition, that it gives me great plea- 
sure.
I believe it springs from a better principle 
than pride in both of us, the love of dear Liberty, 
which is the birth-right of every individual of man- 
kind, and has my strongest affection.
I wish to sec 
her universally enjoyed, and therefore must most 
earnestly desire it may be the portion of each of 
my dear children.
Would to God I may be able to 
leave every one of them in a condition to possess 
it in a rational, virtuous degree !
J. Smith.
It is probable his father saw more clearly than 
344 
he himself perceived, that physic would be a very 
secondary object: his first undoubtedly was to com- 
plete the design which he and several of his friends 
had long kept in view, the establishment of a new 
Society, and thus to render his possession of the 
cabinets and library of Linnaeus subservient to the 
general use of natural science, and especially of 
botany.
With the assistance of Sir Joseph Banks, Dr.
Goodenough, Mr. Marsham, and a few others, this 
object was carried into effect; and the first meeting 
of its members was held at his own house in Great 
Marlborough-street, on the 8th of April 1788, on 
which occasion Sir James delivered " A Discourse 
on the Rise and Progress of Natural History;^ — an 
animated and most instructive address, auspicious 
of the prosperity of the new-formed Institution, 
and which affords a convincing proof that the study 
of nature is not a tasteless and insipid one.
He 
was at the same time appointed President of the 
community, which was designated by the appro- 
priate name of " The Linnaean Society." 
" I consider myself," he observed, " as a trustee 
of the public, and hold these treasures only for the 
purpose of making them useful to the world and 
Natural History in general, and particularly to this 
Society, of which I glory in having contributed to 
lay the foundation, and to the service of which I 
shall joyfully consecrate my labours, so long as it 
continues to answer the purposes for which it is 
designed." 
This Institution, venerable now by its duration.
345 
approaching to half a century, has enrolled among 
its members from the beginning names illustrious 
as well by high birth, as by high claims to scientific 
distinction, in France, and Holland, and Germany ; 
in Switzerland, in Italy, and Spain, as well as in 
England ; and in its later days the catalogue is 
swelled with names from America and India.
An original list of the 36 Fellows and 16 Associ- 
ates may not be unacceptable here.
A few names 
yet survive, and are enrolled in the present year 
with full 500 additional ones.
The Foreign Mem- 
bers, originally about 50, are still limited to that 
number.
With most of the Fellows and Foreign Members 
here enumerated, a correspondence, founded on the 
President's personal acquaintance on the continent, 
had begun, or continued from the time of the esta- 
blishment of the Linnaean Society, increasing year 
by year, as the boundaries of science extended; and 
their letters bear testimony to the liberality of the 
possessor of the treasures of the great master of 
natural science.
The List of the Linncdan Society, 1790.
Honorary Members.
Sir JOSEPH BANKS, Bart.
President of the Royal Society.
HENRY, Earl of GAINSBOROUGH.
The Marechal Due de NOAILLES.
Fellows.
James Edward Smith, M.D. President, F.R.S. Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Taurin.
Ulissip.
Agron.
Paris.
Botanoph.
Andegav.
Corresp.
Mr. George Adams, Fleet-street.
Robert Barclay, Esq., Clapham.
Mr. John Beckwith, Spitalfields.
346 
James Crowe, Esq. Norwich.
Sir Thomas Gery Cullum, Bart.
F.R.S. Bury.
Mr. William Curtis, St. George's Crescent.
Edmund Davall, Esq. Orbe, in Switzerland.
Mr. James Dickson, Covent Garden.
Jonas Dryander, M.
A. Librarian, Lib. to the Roy. Soc.
Acad.
Reg. S'c.
Stochliolm.
Soc. Dean-street.
Samuel Ewer, Esq. Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.
Mr. John Fairbairn, Chelsea Garden.
John Ford, M.D. Bond-street.
The Rev. Samuel Goodenough, LL.D. Treasurer, F.R.S.
Ealing.
William Hanbury, Esq. Kilmarsh, Northamptonshire.
Mr. Thomas Hoy, Sion House.
Aylmer Bourke Lambert, Esq. Salisbury.
Mr. John Latham, F.R.S. Dartford.
John Latham, M.D. Old Jewry.
The Rev. John Lyon, Dover.
Thomas Marsham, Esq. Secretary, Upper Berkley-street, Port- 
man-square.
The Rev. Thomas Martyn, B.D. F.R.S. Prof.
Bot. Cambridge, 
Westminster.
Mr. Archibald Menzies, Broad-street, Soho.
Richard Pulteney, M.D. F.R.S. Blandford, Dorset.
The Rev. Richard Relhan, M.A. F.R.S. Cambridge.
John Rotheram, M.D.
Richard Anthony Salisbury, Esq. F.R.S. Chapel Allerton, near 
Leeds.
George Shaw, M.D. F.R.S. Frith-street.
John Sibthorp, M.D. F.R.S. Prof.
Bot. Oxford.
Soc. Reg.
Monsp.
et Gotting.
Correspond.
Oxford.
John Sims, M.D. Paternoster-row.
Sir George Leonard Staunton, Bart.
F.R.S. Berner's-street.
Mr. John Timothy Swainson, Dover-place.
Mr. Robert Teesdale, Ranelagh.
William Thomson, M.D. F.R.S. Lect.
in Anat.
Oxford, Oxford.
Thomas Jenkinson Woodward, Esq. Bungay.
William Younge, M.D. Sheffield.
Mr. John Zier, Pimlico.
347 
Foreign Members.
D. Adam Afzelius, M.A. Botan.
Demonstr.
Upsal.
D. Carolus AUioni, M.D. Soc. Reg.
Lond.
Soc. Bot.
Prof.
Emer.
et Acad.
R. Sclent.
Taurin.
Soc.
D. Petrus Arduino, Oecon.
Prof, Patav.
D. Antonius Bannal, Hart.
Reg. Monsp, Ciistos.
D. Ludovicus Bellardi, M.D. Coll.
Med. I'auri7i.
Soc.
D. J.
P. Berthout Van Berchem, Soc. Phys.
Lausann.
Soc.
D. P.
M. Augustus Broussonet, M.D. Soc. Reg.
Lond.
Ac. Reg.
Sc. Paris, et Monsp.
Socius, Soc. Reg.
Oecon.
Par. a Secretis.
D. Caesar Caneferi, M.D. Genuoe.
D. Antonius Josephus Cavanilles, Madriti.
D. Philippus Cavolini, Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Neap.
Soc.
D. Cels, Parisiis.
D. Josephus Correa de Serra, J.U.D. Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Ulyss.
a 
Secretis.
D. Rodrigus de Sousa Coutinho, Legatus Regin.
Lusit.
ad Reg.
Sardin.
D. Dominicus Cyrllli, Prof Therap.
in Lyceo Neap.
D. Johannes Pet. M.
Dana, Hist.
Nat. Prof, et Ac. R.
Sc. Tau- 
rin.
Soc.
D. D'Antic, Parisiis.
D. Renatus Louiche Desfontaines, M.D. Bot. Prof.
Ac. Reg.
Sc.
Paris.
Soc.
D. Jacobus Anselmus Dorthes, M.D. Soc. Reg.
Sc. Monsp.
Soc.
D. Hippolitus Durazzo, Patricius Geiioensis.
D. Fehx Fontana, Director Mtis.
Phys.
Reg. Florent.
D. Ludovicus Gerard, M.D.
D. Esprit Giorna, Taurinae.
D. Antonius Gouan, M.D. Med. Prof.
Soc. Reg.
Sc, Monsp.
Soc.
D. Millin de Grandmaison, Parisiis.
D. Johannes Theoph.
Groschke, M.D. Hist.
Nat. Prof Mitav.
D. Carokis Ludovicus L'Heritier, Dom. de Brutelle, in Aula Ju- 
vam.
Paris.
Reg. Consil.
D. Johannes Herman, M.D. Med. Chem.
et Mat. Med.
Prof.
Argentor.
D. Antonius Ludovicus de Jussieu, Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Paris.
Soc.
D. Josephus Franciscus a Jacquin.
348 
D. Nicolaus Josephus a Jacquin, Soc. Reg.
Lond.
Soc. Bot.
et 
Chem.
Prof, Vindoh.
D. Wernerus de Lachenal, Prof.
Bot. Basil.
D. Lambertus Lucas Van Meurs, Anat.
Prcelect.
Amstelod.
D. Gulielmus Antonius Olivier, M.D. Parisiis.
D. Nicolaus Pacifico, Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Neap.
Soc.
D. Johannes Baptista Pratolongo fil.
M.D. Genuae.
D. De Reynier, Soc. Phys.
Lausann.
Soc.
D. David Van Royen, Soc. Reg.
Lond.
Soc. Bot.
Prof, in Acad.
Lugd.
Bat.
D. Scarpa, Anat.
Prof.
Ticin.
D. J.
G. Schlanbusch, Legatus Regis Dan. ad Reg. utriusq.
Si- 
cilice.
D. Christianus Frid.
Schumacher, Acad.
Reg. Chirurg.
Hafn.
Adjunctus.
D. Andreas Sparrman, M.D. Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Stockholm.
Soc.
D. Olaus Swartz, M.D. Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Stockholm.
Soc.
D. Nicolaus Sam. Swederus, Regi Siiec.
a Sac7-is.
D. Thibaud, M.D. Monsp.
D. Thouin, Acad.
Reg. Sc.
Paris.
Soc.
D. Carolus Petrus Thunberg, M.D. Equ. Ord.
Wasiaci, Soc.
Reg. Lond.
Soc. Med.
et Bot. Prof.
Upsal.
D. Tingry, Chem.
Prcelect.
Genev.
D. Octavian Targioni Tozzetti, M.D. Florent.
D. Ericus Viborg, Artis Veterin.
Lector Hafn.
D. Villars, M.D. Gratianop.
D. Philippus Werner, Chirurg.
Algir.
D. Willemet, Bot. Prof.
Nanc.
D. Jacob.
Samuel Wyttenbach, S.T.P. Bern.
Associates.
Mr. William Boys, F.A.S. Sandwich.
Francis Buchannan, M.D. East-Indies.
William Coyte, M.D. Ipswich.
Edward Whitaker Gray, M.D. F.R.S. British Museum.
John Heysham, M.D. Carlisle.
Thomas Hope, M.D. Professor of Chemistry, Glasgow.
Mr. James Hoy, Gordon Castle, Scotland.
349 
Mr. George Humphrey, Long-Acre.
Mr. Edward Hunter, Caen-Wood.
Mr. Thomas Lamb, Readmg.
WilHam Markwick, Esq. Catsfield, near Battle.
Mr. John Pitchford, Norwich.
Mr. Wilham Sole, Bath.
Mr. James Sowerby, Mead-place, St. George's Fields.
Jonathan Stokes, M.D. Kidderminster.
Mr. Lilly Wigg, Great- Yarmouth.
" I understand," says Mr. Woodward in a letter 
dated the 20th of April, I788, "that the Society has 
met at your house, and that your ^ hitroductory 
Discourse'' met with great approbation.
I do not 
doubt of this happening : but do you remember a 
promise that I should see this same discourse ; and 
do you suppose that my curiosity is quite laid 
asleep?
I want to hear also somewhat about the 
Institution.
Who are the resident members?
What 
papers have you read there ?
If there have been 
more than the first meeting ; and where ?
Do you 
likewise recollect that you promised me some ob- 
servations, which you had collected upon Lycoper- 
do?is?
— the want of which puts me to a stop as to my 
promised paper on that genus.
Upon mature con- 
sideration, however, I have determined to confine 
my observations on the species to those of Great 
Britain, as being more able to speak with precision 
upon them ; and when a person writes on a single 
subject, as little as possible should be left doubtful, 
the very design of a Monograph being to clear up 
all diflSculties on the subject.
Now it is evident 
that in the Cri/ptogamia, the moment you take the 
350 
whole globe into your system, doubts and difficul- 
ties innumerable must arise ; and in this class it is 
quite enough to know and understand the plants 
even of one's own vicinity.
" I hope you received my last, with my thanks for 
your invaluable parcel, which made me rich beyond 
my warmest hopes as a botanist.
'You hope the 
specimens will prove acceptable !' What a modest 
way of speaking of treasures above all price !
I know 
not how sufficiently to thank you for such ; the pos- 
session of which has always been beyond my hopes 
and expectations.
I know however that your libe- 
rality, and, I am proud to add, your friendship, is 
such, that you truly gratify yourself when you confer 
a favour on your friend.
The three Orchideae are 
inestimable, and the rest of the specimens highly 
valuable.
I sent the parcel to Pitchford directly, 
attending to your request of not mentioning what 
I had received myself, that I might not take off his 
surprise at the sight of Ophrys Loeselii.
You have 
doubtless heard from him, with his acknowledge- 
ments.
I got, however, rather found fault with for 
not informing him what I had got ; and had some- 
thing of a lecture for wickedly telling him that I lost 
no time in forwarding the parcel, as Lent was just 
approaching: and I did not know, if I delayed it till 
that period, whether he might not incur a penance 
for indulging in a mental feast at the time that he 
was restricted from corporeal indulgencies.
I could 
not have helped this sally, if I had died for it !
I 
have kept him in the dark yet, but shall send him 
351 
an account directly.
Mrs. Woodward thanks you 
for the holy chaplet*." 
The exertions of the spring, or perhaps nothing 
more than might have happened without any such 
excitement, produced one of those inflammatory 
disorders to which Sir James had always been liable, 
and which in some shape or degree appeared every 
spring during his life.
For these attacks, the cli- 
mate and waters of Matlock always proved a speci- 
fic remedy.
This happy effect, combining with the 
natural beauty of the place, realized a fairy-land, 
where health and pleasure took place of weakness 
and fear : the cure was so agreeable, that instead of 
reflecting with aversion upon these periods of debi- 
lity and alarm, he frequently recurred to such times, 
as parts of his life that were attended with the hap- 
piest sensations, — as a holiday from mental exer- 
tion, and during which his mind was refreshed, as 
well as his bodily strength renovated.
Thither he 
went in the autumn of 1/88.
The following letters from his father are addressed 
to him while at this place.
* In another letter, dated the 15th of November the same me- 
morable year, Mr. Woodward concludes with telling him : " I must 
leave the caves of Neptune and bowers of Flora for a while, to 
inform you I was at Mr. Coke's magnificent fete at Holkham, on 
November the 5 th.
Descriptions of it you have seen in the news- 
papers, without doubt ; it suffices therefore to tell you, that they 
were not at all exaggerated ; the entertainment being magnifi- 
cence itself, and the splendid mansion having quite the air of an 
enchanted castle, when illuminated for the reception of the com- 
pany.
Adieu, most truly and affectionately yours, 
Thomas Woodward." 
352 
Mr. Smith to his Son, Matlock Bath.
Dear Son, Norwich, August 12, 1788.
I rejoice to hear that you bore travelHng so well, 
and had begun to bathe, and found yourself so well 
after it.
To these assistances to your health it is to 
be hoped, relaxation from application, the charms 
and amusements of the place you are in, and the 
company of the most amiable and affectionate of 
mothers, will make you so happy as to contribute 
no small share for you to lay in a good store of 
cheerfulness and joy.
Would to God it may make 
you robust and strong!
It is what I have seen the 
Bristol and Matlock waters do to many people.
You will get more good I doubt not at Matlock ; 
but if you had not gone thither, I think you would 
have been both pleased and benefited at Setch* in 
such a season as this, with plenty of fine fruit, fine 
fish, a nice dairy, and beautiful fields.
Perhaps the 
spa affords a water which would be beneficial ; at 
least I think it would, and would try it if I should 
want any assistance of the kind.
It is said the benefit of the waters is most fre- 
quently found after people leave them ; but I found 
benefit upon the spot, and every spot I trod a long 
time after.
May it please Heaven you may both 
do so Hkewise !
I hope you have or will take a 
walk towards Cromford, and turn to the right when 
you come at the stream ; pursue it some way, it will 
afford you some very picturesque views.
If you 
* A farm of Mr. Smith's, near Lynn in Norfolk.
353 
turn towards the left, towards Cromford, you will 
find a cold room, where the water that runs over it 
to the cotton-mill issues through the wall.
It was 
there I saw the flies that alighted upon the sides 
so congealed with cold they could not get away, 
and afterwards petrified with it.
I think I gave 
you one that I brought away with me.
Sir Richard Arkwright was clearing the ground 
for his house when I was there.
Dr. Johnson wanted very much to see Matlock 
by moonlight ; you must have had that pleasure.
I have been reading his Letters, published by Mrs.
Piozzi.
They are full of beautiful passages^ and 
some of hers cut a very good figure.
I have not read the book you sent, and shall hear 
the opinion of others before I resolve to bestow 
my time upon it, in preference to many, many 
other works which I wish to read, but which I 
certainly shall not have time to read in this world ; 
unless, upon the Pythagorean system of the me- 
tempsychosis, I should reappear in some other 
body ; and then I may be thrown into a different 
country, where there may not be the reading I want, 
or no reading at all.
I admire Jebb's * works, and more the man ; so 
* The following note, from Mr. Smith's common-place book, 
illustrates his sentiments more at length on this subject : — 
'* The Works, theological, viedical, jwUtical, and miscellaneous, 
of John Jebb, M.D. F.R.S.; with Memoirs of the Life of the 
Author, by John Disney, D.D. F.A.S., in three volumes 8vo, 
1787.
The excellent author of these volumes was a pattern of 
integrity, patriotism, and zeal for the civil and religious liberties 
VOL.
I. 2 A 
354 
does your mother ; very little of physic, more of 
politics ; but most of all, the principles upon which 
Protestants cannot consistently subscribe to the 
Thirty-nine Articles, nor enforce them upon others.
Next to Dr. Franklin's, I like Jebb's style ; 'tis 
simple, plain, and persuasive ; and the heart that 
dictated, the reader feels was an honest one.
Your brother Francis has made a most ingenious 
instrument or machine, to show the position of 
the planets, and aspect of the heavens.
It is the 
most simple imaginable, yet the most comprehen- 
sive ; it meets the admiration and approbation of the 
few scientific he has shown it to.
I am ever yours, 
James Smith.
of mankind.
He, like Mr. Lindsey and Dr. Disney, resigned 
preferments in the Established Church, as incompatible to hold 
with the principles they had espoused ; and was one of the most 
active and able amongst the committee at the Feathers Tavern, 
to conduct the petition to Parliament for the abolition of sub- 
scription to the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England ; 
which was unsuccessful.
He was the foremost in promoting the 
attempts to reform the Commons House of Parliament, and to 
shorten its duration to one year, agreeable to the ancient usage 
of the Constitution.
Upon these occasions he made the most 
respectable figure by his speeches and his publications, which 
are now given complete in these volumes.
They contain, in 
regard to religion, the truest and clearest principles of Protest- 
antism, independent of any particular sect or opinions ; and in 
regard to the English Constitution, the most enlightened and 
soundest maxims upon which its liberties depend.
His thoughts 
upon religion and parliaments are admirable ; his style clear and 
nervous in a high degree.
I think it very much resembles the 
great, the excellent Dr. Franklin's ; and like such comprehensive 
and upright minds, their principles were very much the same.
355 
Mr. Smith to his Son.
My dear Son, Norwich, Sept.
20, 178S.
I congratulate you most heartily upon your re- 
turn to London in such good health.
You will 
hear from your other correspondents how much 
Norwich has been amused and pleased with Mrs.
Siddons, performing nine nights to audiences so 
crowded, so heated, that I could get in only once, 
and that was to the upper gallery, to see her in 
Belvidera, in Venice Preserved, I never was so 
charmed with acting, no not by Garrick ; and had 
I not consulted my health, ease, and pocket, should 
have attended at every different part she performed, 
which is saying a great deal for me, who am not, nor 
ever was, fond of the theatre, nor play-reading.
We are to be very full next week at the music 
Dr. Jebb was deserted by many who appeared for some time to 
coincide in his sentiments, and he met with very unkind treat- 
ment ; but he was firm to his integrity to tlie last.
When lie 
left the Church, he studied physic, in which his biographer 
says he acquired much skill and considerable practice.
He 
was born Feb. 16, 1736 ; married Miss Torkington of Little 
Stukeley near Huntingdon, Dec. 29, 1764; and died in Parlia- 
ment-street, Westminster, March 2, 1786, in the fifty-first year 
of his age ; eminently esteemed by the truly great and the 
virtuous in all the British dominions, and the United States of 
America ; and extremely beloved by those who were so happy 
as to be acquainted with him ; for he had the character of being 
a very amiable man.
" The definitions in the third volume, beginning at page 253, 
and ending page 258, of an Atheist, a Deist, a Jew, a Mahome- 
tan, a Christian, a Papist, a Dissenter, and a Church-of-England- 
man, are admirable." 
2 A 2 
356 
meeting, — a very novel scene to Norwich.
A consi- 
derate person must marvel to sec, on the one hand 
such extravagance and dissipation, on the other so 
much distress and complaint, from the decay of trade, 
and the increased load of taxes : but I believe it 
has been observed as the characteristic of a luxu- 
rious sinking empire, and is often that of a sinking 
individual.
Perhaps you will smile when I tell you I read 
Rousseau's works a second time.
In reading his 
Heloise, I became very much interested in his cha- 
racter, and pleased with his genius.
I read the 
volume you lent me with more attention the second 
time ; the first I hurried it over, and found I had 
missed a thousand beautiful passages : now, I stu- 
died him, and found in his Heloise a store of the 
finest thoughts, and most profound observations of 
any book I almost ever read.
I cannot alter my 
opinion of the man.
I think him a heterogeneous 
composition of great vices, and fewer virtues, but 
of a sublime genius, and a penetrating faculty into 
the human heart, that no writer has developed with 
so much perspicuity and ingenuity.
He carries 
you to the bottom of it, and will not leave you till 
he has made you thoroughly persuaded you under- 
stand it yourself.
His descriptions are amazingly 
strong.
Sterne had him certainly in view, but he is 
so minute as to leave nothing to the reader's ima- 
gination, and puts one in mind of the laboured ex- 
actness of the Flemish painters.
Rousseau's pic- 
tures have infinitely more force, by not making 
each trait so very distinct.
Moore says, " All dress 
357 
was meant for fancy's aid." Rousseau's own reli- 
gion is somewhat equivocal.
It is Julia's pleases 
me.
Her character is inimitable, and her last mo- 
ments are the most pious, the most rational, and 
the most touching surely ever drawn by pen.
I do 
not know whether I shall read all Heloise again, 
but I certainly shall the last volume.
I shall study 
it attentively, and I shall like to mark all the beau- 
tiful thoughts in it, and make them very familiar 
to my memory.
There are many sentences infi- 
nitely surpass Rochefoucault's, or any proverbialist 
but the sacred.
It is a pity the work is not quite 
fit for young persons, females especially.
He has 
said so in the preface, and warned them against it ; 
but there are parts I could select, which every per- 
son, young and old, might be much edified by.
I 
was most wonderfully attached to the latter part of 
Heloise, so as I never was to any book before ; and 
in the mood in which I then was, from the solitude 
of my family, it made a deeper impression, I sup- 
pose, than it would at another time.
Adieu!
God bless and prosper you!
James Smith.
From this period.
Sir James gave lectures on 
botany and zoology at his house in Great Marl- 
borough- street, where he was honoured with the 
attendance of the Duchess of Portland, Viscountess 
Cremorne, Lady Amelia Hume, and the Honour- 
able Mrs. Barrington, besides professional men.
He 
also delivered a course of lectures on botany at 
Guy's Hospital, for several successive years.
358 
At this time a flow of letters from foreign mem- 
bers and professors greatly enriched his correspon- 
dence, and ceased not till his death.
The few 
w^hich immediately follow are from men highly 
distinguished for scientific attainments, and as pro- 
ficients in the pursuit which engaged so much of 
the attention of him to whom they are addressed.
A. L.
de t/ussieu to J.
E. Smith, P.L.S.
Monsieur, Paris, ce 19 Mars, 1788.
Jc vous dois des remercimens bien sinc^res pour 
le z^le et la promptitude avec lesquels vous avez 
bien voulu m'obliger en faisant des recherches dans 
votre herbier a mon intention : les notions que vous 
me communiquez sur plusieurs genres me sont 
tr^s utiles ; et je mets beaucoup de prix auxechan- 
tillons que vous m'avez envoy^s, quoique la plus 
part soient tr^s incomplets comme vous I'observez 
vous-meme : ils m'aideront a reconnoitre les memes 
plantes dans mon herbier, si je les ai, ou du moins 
a me faire une id^c plus juste de leur caractere.
Mr. Tournier, auteur de la Collection des Por- 
traits d'Hommes illustres vivans, compte donner Ic 
mois prochain la figure de M.
Sparrmann : il est 
venu me demander un echantillon ou un dessin du 
Sparrma7imac[\i\\ xent'^omAve k la gravure : je n*ai 
pu le satisfaire, n'ayant point cette plante qui n'est 
d'ailleurs figur^e nulle part; mais je lui ai promis 
de vous ecrire pour obtenir cette communication, 
et je suis port^ a croire que vous voudrez bien nous 
obliger tons deux en ce point.
Dans le cas, ou 
359 
vous ne le pourriez pas, je vous prierai d' avoir re- 
cours a Mr. Banks qui se feroit probablement un 
plaisir de foiirnir rencadrement du portrait de M.
Sparrmann : je vous observe qu'on voudrait le pub- 
lier a la fin d'Avril prochain.
Mon travail avance beaucoup, quoique j'ai et^ 
beaucoup d^tourne par diverses occupations : je 
viens de perdre mon beau-pere apres une longue 
maladie pendant laquelle je lui ai donne tons mes 
soins : c'est meme en partie cette circonstance qui 
a retard^ ma reponse a votre lettre.
Vous savez 
que cbez moi les sentimens du coeur ne sont point 
etoufFes par I'ambition de I'esprit : on pretend que 
les sciences dessechent Tame ; je crois que c'est 
selon la mani^re dont elles sont traitees.
Ceux qui 
font de la science un metier, negligent pour elle 
tout le reste : ils la regardent simplement comme 
un moyen de parvenir, et sacrifient souvent d'autres 
interets a celui-ci.
De la vient que tons les savans 
ne sont pas ainiables, que peu sont communicatifs, 
que la rivalite entr'eux se change souvent en inimi- 
ti^.
J'ai cru m'apercevoir que vous ne traitez pas 
ainsi la science par ce que vous dites de I'aimer 
pour elle-meme, pour I'agr^ment qu elle pent vous 
procurer, pour I'occasion qu'elle vous ofFre de vous 
rendre utile a vos concitoyens en leur offrant le tri- 
but de vos connoissances.
Ne vous ecartez jamais 
de ce plan, et vous vous en trouverez bien : je vous 
avoue que c'est le mien : mon temps se partage 
cntre I'etude et d'autres devoirs domestiques que je 
ne regarde pas commc etranger pour moi.
J'aime 
a cultiver I'amitie ; jo consens volontiers a inter- 
360 
rompre mes affaires pour in'occupcr de celles des 
autres lorsqu'il en r^sulte une utility pour eux ; et 
dans cette disposition les occasions se presentent 
souvent ; le travail particulier en souffre ala verite ; 
mais il va toujours, quoique plus lentement.
De- 
puis que je ne vous ai vu, j'ai encore fait a mon 
travail des additions et des changements utiles ; et 
j'en ferois encore plus si j'avais vu votre collection 
et celle de M.
Banks ; mais il m'est impossible 
pour ce moment de m'absenter.
Je crois^ que 
pour satisfaire les eleves du Jardin de Paris, je pub- 
lierai cette annee mon genera^ a le corriger dans 
une seconde Edition, si elle a lieu.
Croyez que 
lorsque je pourrai aller vous voir, je le ferai bien 
volontiers : je serai aussi charme de voir M.
Banks, 
que j'estime dcpuis long-tems a cause de sa ma- 
niere de traiter les sciences.
Rappellez-moi, je vous 
prie, a son souvenir, et recevez les assurances du 
sincere attachement et de la consideration tr^s dis- 
tingu^e avcc lesquels j'ai I'honneur d'etre, 
&c., &c., &c.
A. L.
De JussiEu.
D. Rodrigo de Sousa Coutinho to J.
E. Smith.
Monsieur, Turin, ce 13 Aout, 1788.
J'ai eu I'honneur de recevoir votre aimable et in- 
t(iressante lettre, en date du 21 Juillet ; et, en vous 
t^moignant toute ma sensibilite pour votre souvenir 
et pour vos gracieuses expressions, permettez que 
je vous assure qu'il faut toute la connoissance que 
361 
j'ai de mes faibles talens pour ne point me in^con- 
noitre d'apr^s ce que vous daignez m'ecrire.
Je ne 
sais point trouver des expressions pour vous remer- 
cier de Tamitie avec laquclle vous avez voulu agre- 
ger nion nom a celui des plus grands hommes 
d'Europe, oil il ne pent figurer a aucun autre titre 
qua celui du vrai z^le qui m'anime pour la perfec- 
tion et encouragement des sciences naturelles qui 
seules font le vrai bonheur de I'homme, et qui ont 
meme dans le moral contribue beaucoup a la recon- 
noissance des droits dont I'ignorance et la supersti- 
tion avoient partout depouille les hommes.
Per- 
mettez que j'ajoute ici Toffre ingenu et entier de 
mes faibles services pour votre societe dont vous 
etes si dignement le President, et qui, j'esp^re, por- 
tera la plus grande lumierc dans la science qu'elle 
cultive de preference, et qui surement en a bien 
besoin.
Je prendrai la liberte de vous adresser 
incessamment le genre Arenaria^ tel qu'il est decrit 
dans la Flora d'Allioni, et je vous enverrai deux 
exemplaires de chaque espece : je vous previens 
cependant que ces esp^ces que M.
AUioni a mar- 
quees sont encore sujettes a bien des difficult^s ; sa 
vue et ses infirmit^s ne lui ayant point permis d'y 
porter son exaction connue.
Sur votre lichen que 
j'ai con fie au Dr. Bellardi, je suis parfaitement de 
votre avis ; et je le crois tr^s distinct quoique tr^s 
approche du nivalis.
J'ai communique votre lettre 
au Dr. Bellardi qui a ete tres sensible a vos expres- 
sions sur la reponse au Dr. de Chambery, qui est 
un vrai charlatan, et qui par des phrases couvre ses 
mauvaiscs raisons.
362 
Excusez si je vous prie de faire mes complimens 
a MM.
Harbord et Zimmermann, surtout a ce der- 
nier, dont les connoissances statistiques me le ren- 
dent tr^s estimable.
J'ambitionne le bonheur de lire vos oeuvres que 
vous m'annoncez; mais malheureusement je ne 
connois que la tardive voie de mer pour les recevoir, 
la meme dont je me servirai pour vous adresser 
les plantes ci-dessus mentionn^es, et que je vous 
expedirai ou par la voie de votre consul a Genes ou 
par celle du notre.
Le souvenir que vous gardez 
de ma biblioth^que m'oblige a vous r^peter que je 
dois a vos tuteurs Anglais que j'ai toujours estime 
de preference le peu de lumieres que j'ai dans les 
sciences naturelles, et dans celle de mon metier en 
particulier ; et vous sentez bien avec quelle justice 
et avec quel plaisir je devois vous montrer ceux 
que je consid^re a si juste titre comme mes maitres.
J'oubliois qu'une longue lettre va vous distraire 
de vos savantes occupations, qui vous assurent 
tous les jours d'avantage la haute estime dont vous 
jouissez deja, et qui m'inspire les sentimens du 
respect et attachement avec lesquels j'ai I'honneur 
d'etre, 
Monsieur Smith, 
&c., &c., &c.
D. RODRIGO DE SOUSA CoUTINHO.
363 
Esprit Giorna to J.
E. Smith, P.L.S.
Monsieur, Turin, ce 29 Aout, 17S8.
J'ai recu sur la fin de Juin pass^ votre obligeante 
lettre ; et vous m'aurez deja, h.
Theure qu'il est, 
accus^ avec raison de negligence et d'impolitesse 
de n'y avoir pas encore r^pondu.
Je serais au des- 
espoir.
Monsieur, que vous ni'accusiez de manquer 
aux sentimens d'amitie et de respect que je vous 
dois : quant au reste, j'esp^re que vous trouverez 
bonnes les excuses que je vais vous faire ci-apr^s.
Je vous dois une infinite de remercimens de 
riionneur que vous avez bien voulu me faire en 
m'associant a votre Academic Linneenne, honneur 
que je ne dois certainement pas a mes merites, 
mais tout a votre bonte, car mon amour propre 
n'arrive pas a me flatter jusqu'a ce point.
Les collegues qu'il vous a plu me donner atten- 
dront assurement des grandes clioses de moi apr^s 
les assurances que votre bon cceur leur en aura 
donn^es, et ils se verront trompes : en efFet, com- 
ment repondrai-je a leur attente, moi, que mon etat 
occupe aux mathematiques, et qui n'^tudie I'liistoire 
naturelle que par amusement ?
Dans ce cas, Mon- 
sieur, je ne vois qu'un parti a prendre, c'cst de lais- 
ser a votre bonte meme, qui m'a engag^ dans cet 
embarras, le soin de faire mes excuses.
Je ne pretends pourtant pas avec cela de me refu- 
ser a donner a votre Societe ce que mes faibles ta- 
lens pourront decouvrir de nouveau dans la vaste 
science qui fait son objet : au contraire, Thonneur 
364 
que j'en re^ois me scrvira d'aiguillon qui m'engagera 
a me donner avec plus d'interet a Thistoire naturelle, 
et a faire tout mon possible, si Dii tibi otia dabunt, 
pour contribuer en quelque sorte aux progres de 
cette science: en attendant, pour vous marquer la 
sincerite de mes intentions, je tacherai de faire pein- 
dre d'apr^s nature quelques insectes que j'ai seul, 
et que je crois inconnus jusqu'a present, comme 
aussi quelques oiseaux qu'on a pris en Piemont, 
et qui ont echapp^ aux ornithologistcs ; et, s'il 
m'est possible de les avoir a terns, je vous ferai 
passer ces dessins avec leurs descriptions dans une 
caisse d'oiseaux arranges a ma facon, que je dois 
envoyer a Londres vers la fin d'Octobre prochain.
Dans I'edition que vous vous proposez de faire 
des ouvrages du c^lebre Linnee, je ne sais pas si 
vous contez de donner les figures de tous les in- 
sectes, ou au moins de ceux qui n'existent pas 
encore dans les autres auteurs ; en ce cas, je pour- 
rais vous procurer nombre de ceux inconnus de 
Linnee, et nommes par Fabricius, et par Miiller, 
qui les ont tires du Piemont.
Nous avons ici M.
le Baron Daviso, amateur 
et collecteur de min^ralogie, qui, entendant que je 
devois vous ^crire, m'avoit charge de vous prier s'il 
^tait possible de faire quelques echanges avec vous, 
ou avec quelqu' autre de votre connaissance en mi- 
n^raux.
II oiFre de vous envoyer le premier une 
collection de metaux et mineraux du Piemont, de- 
sirant en obtenir de ceux des isles Brittaniques.
II 
m'avoit promis une liste de tous ceux qu'il possMe, 
et de ceux qu'il desire pour vous lui transmettre.
365 
II est parti pour im voyage dans les Alpcs : je le 
croyais de retour a la fin de Juillet ; je I'ai attendu ; 
et je I'attends encore a present.
Voila, Monsieur, 
la cause du retard a vous repondre, et voila I'excuse 
que j'avais a vous faire.
Faites agreer, Monsieur, mes tres humbles re- 
spects aux membres de votre tr^s louable Societe, 
et particulierement a M.
Marsham, que vous me 
dites occupe a I'Entomologia Brittannica, et qui 
feroit pour plusieurs raisons tr^s bien, (comme 
vous le remarquez) de commencer par donner les 
Coleopteres, et ensuite les autres classes successive- 
ment.
L'auteur ainsi n'est pas surcharge d'ouvrage : 
il ne risque pas d'etre des fois prevenu par un autre.
Le public achate plus facilement un volume que 
deux ou trois ; et, des qu'il a pris le premier, il est 
engage de prendre les autres.
En attendant, disposez de moi, Monsieur, en tout 
ce dont vous me jugerez capable de vous rendre 
services de ces cotes ici ; et vous me trouverez tou- 
jours tel que je me proteste avec les sentimens les 
plus sinceres.
Esprit Giorna.
Professor Scarpa to J.
E. Smith.
Monsieur, Pavie, 12 Septembre, 1788, 
Toujours en attente de vos ouvrages, que vous 
m'avez fait I'honneur de m'envoyer, je n'ai pas en- 
core rien recu : je suis dans la plus grande inquie- 
tude a cause qu'il m'est retarde le plaisir de les lire, 
et parceque je ne puis rien savoir le precis sur ce 
366 
que Fabricius a ^crit au sujet de Touie des insectes ; 
car malheureusement nous n'avons pas encore ici 
les Actes de Copenhagen de Tan 1783, et quand 
meme ils y seroient, il n'y a personne ici qui connoit 
la langue Danoise.
Comment faire done r II faut 
nouvellement avoir recours a votre amiti^ en vous 
priant de me traduire en Anglais le precis du me- 
moire, ou de le traduire tout-a-fait, s'il n'est pas 
bien long, et de me I'envoyer par la poste.
Sur- 
tout, s'il y a quelque planche, comme il y en aura 
certainement, d'en oter les en les placant contre un 
vitre, ce qui se fait aisement, et de me I'envoyer 
aussi.
Cet incident est la cause du retard de mon 
Guvrage^ qui seroit deja sous presse ; et si vous, 
Monsieur, ne daignez pas d'y prendre part, il tar- 
dera peut-etre encore des ann^es.
Je ne vous fais 
pas des excuses sur ma franchise de vous incommo- 
der, parceque, ayant vecu parmi les Anglais, je con- 
nois parfaitement bien leur aimable liberalite.
Je vous fais plutot mes congratulations sur votre 
nouveau etablissement pour les progr^s de I'histoire 
naturelle ; et je suis tr^s sensible a I'honneur que 
vous me faites de vouloir bien m'agreger a cette 
illustre compagnie.
Pour faire connoitre d'avantage les fautes de 
I'ouvrage de Spallanzani sur la Digestion, j'ai trouv^ 
bon de traduire le memoire de M.
Hunter sur le 
meme sujet.
Spallanzani a fait d'abord une r^- 
ponse qui repousse M.
Hunter un pcu vilainement.
Je vois cependant, qu'il seroit necessaire que M.
Hunter donne une plus grande ^tondue a ses id^es 
sur la digestion, qui, dans le memoire, sont trop 
367 
serrees et concises, et qui donnent lieu ik des inter- 
pretations arbitraires.
Il faut demontrer evidente- 
ment que I'ouvrage de Spallanzani n'a en rien fait 
avancer la science sur la digestion, et ce travail ne 
me paroit pas difficil pour un physiologiste, sur 
tout pour M.
Hunter.
Le professeur Fontana me charge de vous saluer 
tr^s distinctement.
&c., &c., &c., 
Scarpa.
P. S.
La chimie et la botanique n'est pas encore 
remplace cbez nous apr^s la mort de Scopoli.
On 
s'est flatte d'avoir ici M.
Murray de Gottinge.
A. L.
de Jussieu to «/.
E, Smith.
Monsieur, Paris, ce 20 Mars, 1789.
Je profite du depart de M.
Olivier, naturaliste 
tr^s recommandable et fort vers^ dans la connois- 
sance des insectes, pour me rappeller a votre sou- 
venir.
Comme il part dans deux heures, je n'ai 
qu'un moment pour m'entretenir avec vous, et pour 
vous remercier de I'envoi que vous m'avez fait du 
Sparmannia I'annee derni^re.
Votre petit ^chan- 
tillon me I'a fait retrouver sur-le-cbamp dans mon 
herbicr, et maintenant je le connois bien : ce genre 
vient dans ma famille des Tilleuls entre le Triuni' 
fetta et le Sloanea.
Je vous avois annonce que 
j'allais imprimer un Genera dispose par families : ce 
travail, commence en Mai dernier est maintenant 
achev^ et imprime presque enti^rement : il ne me 
reste plus que I'introduction elementaire a termi- 
3G8 
ner ; et j'esp^re pouvoir offrir I'ouvrage au public 
et a vous au mois de Mai prochain.
Vous y verrez 
que j'ai profite des connoissances que vous m'avez 
comnumiquees ; et je serai egalement dispose dans 
la suite de faire le meme usage de vos avis.
Mes 
genres passeront le nombre de 1800, parceque j'y 
joins ceux d'Aublet, de Forskal, de Forster, deConi- 
merson, et les nouveaux de mon herbier.
Vous m'aunoncez dans votre derniere, que vous 
avez forme une Societe Linneene, c'est a dire, pure- 
ment botanique, et que vous voulez bien m'y adop- 
ter : je serai surement flatte de tenir a une societe 
qui s'occupe des progres de la science, et je ferai 
mon possible pour meriter son suffrage et son 
estime.
J'esp^re cju'elle voudra bien me pardonner 
si je ne suis pas tout-a-fait Linneen : je m'ecarte 
de ce grand homme dans sa partie systematique, 
qui me paroit eloigner la science de son vrai but ; 
mais je fais grand cas de sa nomenclature, de ses 
genres, de ses esp^ces ; et je crois qu'il a rendu en 
ce point un vrai service a la botanique, quoique 
souvent dans ses genres il omette les caracteres es- 
sentiels tires des insertions.
Si votre herbier de Linne fils est maintenant en 
ordre, je me recoramanderai encore a vous pour 
avoir connoissance de ses genres.
Je suis, comme 
vous savez, peu exigeant : les plus petits ^chantil- 
lons me suffisent: pourvu que je puisse reconnoitre 
les caracteres, je suis content; etj'avoue que j'ai 
grand besoin de cette communication pour mieux 
connoitre les plantes du supplement, dont la de- 
scription n'est pas toujours assez claire.
369 
Je finirai ici ma lettre pour la faire tenir sur le 
champ a M.
Olivier.
Recevez, je vous prie, les assu- 
rances du sincere attachement et de la consideration 
tr^s distinguee, avec lesquels j'ai Thonneur d'etre, 
&c.
&c.
&c.
A. L.
De Jussieu.
The Abb k Cavamlles to J.
E. Smith, P.L.S.
Monsieur, Paris, ce 29 Juillet, 1789.
Agreez, je vous prie, mes remerciments pour la 
complaisance que vous avez montree dans votre 
lettre que je viens de recevoir ; elle porte I'em- 
preinte de la franchise et de I'honnetete qui vous 
caracterisent.
Nous pourrons fort bien penser chac- 
un de sa facon, et travailler cependant a I'ouvrage 
de la science cherie, avec la seule difference que 
mes ouvrages seront toujours inferieurs en merite 
aux votres.
Cette raison, Monsieur, doit vous enga- 
ger a corriger mes fautes, et a donner des planches, 
qui mettront le public en etat de s'assurer de la 
perfection et de la verite.
Mes Tourreas ont ete 
gravees d'apres les echantillons trouves chez M.
de 
Jussieu (Herb.
Comm.), et j'ai cru rapporter a ce 
genre le T.
lanceolata, malgre que ses anth^res 
soient placees un peu plus haut que dans les autres 
especes; vous aurez remarque que je nomme tuyau.v, 
tubus, ce que vous appellez nectaire d'apres notre 
maitre, Linnee.
J'ai rapporte dans mes ouvrages 
les raisons qui m'ont oblige a repeter une expres- 
sion trop vague et par consequent obscure.
J'ai lu avec autant d' attention que de plaisir, ce que 
VOL.
I. 2 b 
370 
vous m'^crivez sur les Passiflores : unnsqidsque suo 
sensu abundet, c'est une loi que le filosofe doit suivre.
Mais puisque vous avez la bonte de parler avec 
franchise, je m'en vais faire autant, et soumettre a 
votre tribunal mes raisons.
Nous trouvons dans les 
ouvrages de Linnee ces principes : \°.
Genus dab'it 
characterem, 7ion character genus.
2°.
Genus est 
characteris causa, non character generis.
3°.
Omnia 
genera sunt naturalia.
Fixons d'abord la veri- 
table notion de ce mot genre; selon la bonne lo- 
gique genre represente une idee commune a plu- 
sieurs esp^ces : il est par consequent I'ouvrage de 
notre ame, quelle a fait d'apres I'examen et la com- 
paraison des caract^res trouves dans les individus: il 
n'existe done dans la nature^ ou tout est individuel; 
et tout son etre est renferme dans notre esprit ; en 
sorte que s'il n'existoit aucun esprit, il n'existeroit 
non plus aucun genre.
D'apres cet expose, je trouve 
que cette proposition, omnia genera sunt naturalia^ 
est absolument fausse.
Si pour la soutenir on dit 
que c'est la nature qui a fait les individus, et par 
consequent les caract^res que notre esprit choisit 
pour former I'idee generale, genre, on pent repondre 
que I'idee generale representee par ce mot genre, 
n'embrassant tons les caracteres des individus, doit 
etre tout-a-fait differente de ce que la nature a fait.
Et en verite pour former un genre qui embrasse 
toutes les Passiflores, nous serous obliges de mettre 
de cote comme inutile et genant : 1°.
le calice {invo- 
lucrum Linnsei) ; 2°.
les folioles ou divisions de 
celuy-ci ; 3°.
les franges ou couronnes tantot sim- 
ples, tantot nuUes, et quelquefois triplees ; 4°.
les 
371 
rangs des semences, variiint de trois a quatrc ; 5°.
V 
envelope partiel de chaquc semence, qui est luil dans 
certaines esp^ces.
Et nous serous en fin obliges 
de nous renfermer dans les etamines, germe, stig- 
mats, et fruit.
C'est a dire, nous serons obliges de 
s^parer par notre imagination ce que la nature a r^- 
uni, et par consequent nous donnerons un ouvrage 
different de celui de la nature.
D'apr^s ce que je viens de dire je ne sais pas 
comment peut on avancer que le genre est la cause 
de caract^res, puisque ce sont les caracteres qui 
forcent notre esprit a former les genres ; puisque ce 
sont les caracteres qui out une existence reclle dans 
la nature, et que les genres n'existent hors de nous 
m^mes.
Vous convenez, Monsieur, que Linnee n'a 
pas observe souvent les lois botaniques qu il etablit 
dans ses ouvrages : vous dites aussi que son traite 
sur les Malvac^es n'est pas la meillcur(; chose (ju'il 
a fait.
Je crois qu'il ne devoit pas avancer comme il 
a fait dans son Genera,'^,'6^%: Nos genera distingin- 
7nus a calice, qui magni momenti est, et iunites abso- 
lutos ponit: mais je crois avoir demontre contre M.
L'Heritier, que si on neglige le calice dans les Mal- 
vacees pour former les genres de cctte famille, on 
ne fera que confondre les plantes que le port et les 
caracteres separent tout a fait.
Si j'osois vous dire que genitalia et fructus sunt 
idem dans une grande quantity des genres reconnus 
differents par tons les botanistes, les Malvacees, les 
Ombellif^res, les Cruciformes, les Az^daracs, les Li- 
serons, &c.; et si de plus j'avois le bonbeur de vous 
le prouver, je crois.
Monsieur, qu alors mon idtc sur 
2 B 2 
372 
les Passiflores ne seroit pas si mauvaise.
J'ai dit 
dans ma reponse a M.
Medicus, que la nature n'a pu 
faire aucun genre, que tons sont I'ouvrage des bota- 
nistes, et que ceux-ci les ont construit pour mettre 
de I'ordre dans ses recliercheSj et pour trouver des 
points d'appuy ; d'ou ils partent pour decouvrir les 
richesses de la nature.
Je vois que notre mani^re 
de penser est difterente, mais je ne puis pas imagi- 
ner que 9a soit un obstacle, qui nous doit aussi 
separer.
Mon respect, Monsieur, pour vous, et 
mon attachenient sera sans bornes, et soyez en sur 
que je n'aurai jamais a me plaindre de vous, ni vous 
de moi.
J'ai deja termine ma 9me dissertation, dont le 
fond principal sont les JBanisteres.
J'ai un doute 
sur la determination du Banisterm fulgens, Linn., 
que vous pouvez dissiper, comme possesseur de son 
herbier.
Je vous prie de me dire si la feuille que 
je vous envoye appartient a cette esp^ce.
Vous souhaitez, Monsieur, posseder la partie bo- 
tanique de I'Encyclopedie.
Rien de plus facile : 
M. Pankouk a ouvert une nouvelle souscription 
pour chaque dictionnaire, au prix de 12 francs le 
volume, si je ne me trompe pas.
M. de Lamarck 
ajoute a la fin de chaque volume un index Latin des 
genres y compris ; par ce moyen vous aurez le plai- 
sir de savoir dans un instant tout ce qu'il contient.
Permettez, Monsieur, de vous renouveller tons 
mes remerciments, et de vous assurer de mon pro- 
fond respect, avec lequel j'ai I'honneur d'etre.
Monsieur, vous tres humble, &c.
D. Antoine Joseph Cavanilles.
373 
Sir C.
P. Thunherg to J.
E. Smith.
Upsalise, d.
21 Dec. 1789.
Permittas velim, Vir illustris, ut hisce gratam tibi 
meam significem menteni, ob honorem et amicitiani 
mihi pra^stitam, ea occasione, qua niembrum Soci- 
etatis vestrge honorificae et utilissimae electus sum.
Hacce quoque utor occasione, ad te mittendi quas- 
dem meas Dissertationes academicas, inque his duo 
ex meis generibus Japonicis, quibus foisan non 
possides in herbario, scilicet, Hontuyniam et Cley- 
eram, quam ultimam nescio sane an sit vere diversa 
a Ternstroejnia.
Nihil mihi magis gratum erit, 
quam si ullo modo tibi et Societati, ad quam non- 
nuUas meas quoque mitto Dissertationes, utilis esse 
possini; cumque crcdibile sit, ex Capensibus et aliis 
Indicis plantis, praesertim novis inque Supplement© 
descriptis meis plantis, multas in tuo herbario Lin- 
naeano desiderari, vellem lubenter tot tibi, Vir amicis- 
sime, suppeditare, quot mihi in duplo esse possunt.
Sique ex tuis duplicatis nonnullas mihi deficientes 
mecum communicare velles, gratissimum hoc mihi 
foret munus.
Rogo itaque ut deficientium catalo- 
gum mihi mittas ; sique hoc non renuis, ego tibi 
meum catalogum deficientium reddam.
Interim 
tuo favori et amicitiae memet commendatum, tibi 
addictissimum, habeas.
The following letter, and the only one from the 
celebrated naturalist, Gerard, author of the Flora 
Gallo-Provincialis, "one of the best European bo- 
tanists of the golden age of Linnaeus," will not be 
374 
considered long or wearisome by those who recol- 
lect Sir James's visit to the good old man at Co- 
tignac, situated in a beautiful part of the South of 
France, where he went on purpose to see him, and 
felt, as he tells us, as if "paying a visit to the Elysian 
Fields; so little did his tales of other times seem 
connected with what is now going on in the world." 
Monsieur, 
A la satisfaction dont vous me procurates lajou- 
issancc pendant le tr^s court sejour que vous fites a 
Cotignac, se joignit bientotle regret caus^ par votre 
depart, qui ne me permit pas de cultiver votre ami- 
ti6 comme je Taurois desir^, ni de vous procurer 
les renseignements que ma position particuli^re 
me permettoit de vous presenter r^lativement aux 
plantes de cctte contr^e, qui ne sont point carac- 
t^ris^es comme elles devroient I'etre dans la derniere 
edition du Systema Vegetabilium.
Mais, a la reception de votre lettre et des ou- 
vrages dont vous avez la bont^ de me faire part, que 
je re^ois avec toute la reconnoissance dont je suis 
susceptible, ce regret a fait place a un souvenir qui 
me sera toujours infiniment precieux par le cas que 
je fais de votre amiti^, et par le desir que j'ai de la 
cimenter autant qu'il dependra de moi.
C'est pour vous en donner une preuve que je 
vous communiquerai les observations critiques dont 
le syst^me de Murray me fournira le sujet, relative- 
ment a plusieurs plantes de Provence, et que des 
nouvcUes observations faites depuis tres peu de 
temps pourront rendre plus importantes.
Occupe 
375 
essentiellement depuis plus d'une annee a perfec- 
tionner I'ouvrage que j'avois public autrefois sur les 
plantes de Provence, j'ai, pour ainsi dire, entrepris 
un nouveau travail plus penible que le premier qui 
fourmille de negligences.
J'ai passe en revue toutes 
les especes : j'y en ai ajoute plus de 300, et com me 
il n'est presque aucune plante sur laquelle je n'aye 
quelque chose a dire,je pense que cet ouvrage sera 
au moins une fois aussi volumineux que celui qui 
fut imprime en 1761.
Je n'ose me flatter pourtant 
qu'il se public, quoiqu'un libraire d'Aix me temoigne 
qu'il en auroit envie ; mais comme mon travail est 
assez avance, je le poursuis avec autant d'empresse- 
ment que si j'etois bien assure qu'il ne se presentera 
aucune difficulte.
Je vous oifrirai done les premices de ce travail, 
relativement a Tedition du Systema Vegetabilium, de 
laquelle vous vous occupez; et ce sera avec d'au- 
tant plus de plaisir qu'il ne sera pas enti^rement 
perdu si mon projet ne s'execute pas.
J'apprends avec plaisir que vous avez fait unlong 
sejour en Italic ; et je ne doute point que vous 
n'ayiez mis a contribution les productions vegetales 
de cette riche contree ; je n'ai pas eu moins de sa- 
tisfaction en sachant que vous vous proposiez de 
faire connoitre par des figures les plantes de I'her- 
bier de Linn^, qui ne I'etoient nuUement.
C'etoit 
presque un engagement que vous aviez contract^ 
en acquerant cette magnifique collection, et un 
liommage que vous seul etes capable de rendre au 
c^l^bre naturaliste qui a en partie dissipe les tenebrcs 
dont la botanique etoit environnee.
Vous aviez en 
376 
mdme temps forme le dessein de publier sa corre- 
spondance litteraire avec quelques retranchements.
Je pense et je souhaite en meme temps que ce pro- 
jet s'ex^cute, et qu'un commerce ^pistolaire qui doit 
avoir ete fort etendu, et dont le sujet doit avoir 
roul^ principalement sur des objets scientifiques,ne 
soit pas perdu pour le public naturaliste, surtout 
dans un temps oul'histoire naturelle prend toujours 
plus de faveur, et ou la reputation du naturaliste 
Suedois s'est singuli^rement accrue depuis surtout 
qu il n'existe plus.
Vous rendez justice a mes intentions bien plus 
qua mes talents en voulant m'agreger a la Societe 
Linneenne, dont vous m'aviez sans doute parl^.
J'ai lieu de croire que le centre de cette institution 
doit etre a Londres.
Je recevrai avec beaucoup de 
plaisir tout ce qui aura trait a cet etablissement, 
parceque je suis curieux d'apprendre quelles sont 
les personnes qui s'adonnent a la botanique dans un 
pays ou les sciences sont cultivees avec tant de 
succ^s.
Je ne distingue point le Daphne que vous m'avez 
envoye du D.
alpina.
Ce petit arbuste que vous 
avez trouv^ a Naples vient aussi en Provence sur 
les plus hautes montagnes, et en Languedoc a sept a 
huitlieux de Montpellier : c'estcertainement le Thy- 
melea saxatilis Ole<E folio Tourn.
: il est assez bien 
represente dans les ouvrages posthumes de Gesner : 
je dois pourtant observer que le notre a ses feuilles 
plus lisses et presque aussi blanchatres en dessus 
qu'en dessous ; au premier abord on le prendroit 
pour une autre espece, mais, vucs a la loupe, les 
377 
feuilles pr^sentent les memes bossettes.
Le tube 
exterieur du calyce dans Tune comme dans I'autre 
espece est velu, mais encore plus dans celle d'ltalie, 
qui a ses feuilles plus roides, plus dures, dont les 
bords sont reflechis, ce que j'attribuerois a un climat 
plus sec et plus chaud.
J'avois adresse, il y a plus d'un an, un manuscrit 
qui contenoit des observations critiques sur une 
traduction de Pline, au medecin du Marcgrave d' 
Anspach, appele Schmidel, qui, comme vous savez, 
a public quelques ouvrages de botanique : d'apres la 
promesse qu'il m'avoit faite qu'il seroit I'editeur de 
cet ouvrage dont il m'avoit accuse la reception, je 
me flattois qu'il me donneroit de ses nouvelles.
J ai attendu inutilement jusqu'aujourd'hui, sans 
avoir pu etre informe s'il est meme encore en vie : 
si vous aviez appris quelque chose sur son compte, 
je vous serois tres oblige de m'en faire part.
Conformement a vos intentions j'ai I'honneur de 
vous adresser quelques remarques au sujet de la 
nouvelle edition du Systema T^egetabilkwi, dont 
vous vous occupez.
J'ai fait ces remarques a la 
hate, afin de vous les faire parvenir plutot.
Par la 
meme raison je ne les ai point achevees ; mais je 
vous promets que je ne perdrai pas de vue les ob- 
jets restants.
II y aura toujours des corrections a 
faire dans un ouvrage de cette nature ; et pour 
quelles soyent faites avec connoissance de cause, il 
faut necessairement etre a portee des plantes de tel 
et tel pays.
Si Linnaeus avoit pu toujours voir par 
lui m^me, et s'il ne s'en etoit pas souvent tenu a 
des relations infidclles, on trouveroit moins a redirc 
378 
dans son Species Plantarum.
II est certains genres, 
tels que ceux des Cislus, des Tit/iymales, qui exigent 
line refonte g^nerale a I'egard meme des especes 
Europeennes : il y auroit encore une reforme bien 
essentielle a faire dans ce systeme sexuel ; qui seroit 
de supprimer la Polygamie (puisque la plupart des 
plantes hermaphrodites qui sont surchargees de 
fleurs sont en partie st^riles et en partie fertiles), et 
de reduire la Moncecie aux genres dont les fleurs 
males sont en chaton et d'une structure difFerente 
des fleurs femelles ; car la ou la disposition des 
fleurs avortantes est la meme que celles des fleurs 
fertiles, je n'admettrois point de difference essen- 
tielle, parcequ'il est naturel que lorsque la nombre 
des fleurs excede la force naturelle de la plante, la 
plupart de ces fleurs doivent couler, soit que le 
gcrme ne none pas, ou qu'il avorte dans son prin- 
cipe.
Je vous prie, Monsieur*^ d'excuser cette longue 
lettre en faveur du plaisir que j'ai eu de m'entre- 
tenir avec vous.
Cette occasion ^toit trop precieuse 
pour ne pas en profiter autant qu'il dependoit de 
moi.
J'esp^re quelle me procurera I'avantage de 
recevoir des nouvelles de votre sante a laquelle je 
ne saurois trop m'intercsser : je me flatte aussi que 
vous voudrez bien employer quelques moments 
libres pour me faire part de tout ce qui a trait chez 
vous a I'histoire naturelle, et particulierement a la 
botanique : quoique vous n'ayiez pas besoin d' exciter 
ma reconnoissance, je vous la manifesterai bien vo- 
lontiers dans toutes les occasions qui pourroient me 
rapprocher de vous ; et je serai toujours tr^s em- 
379 
press^ de vous reiterer les temoignages des senti- 
ments que vous m'avez inspire, et avee lesquels j'ai 
I'honneur d'etre, Monsieur, 
Votre tr^s humble el tr^s obeissant Serviteur, 
Gerard.
M. Desfontaines to J.
E. Smith.
Monsieur, Paris, le 20 Juillet, 1790.
Un grand nombre d'amateurs d'histoire naturelle 
de notre capitale se sont reunis et cotises pour faire 
executer a leurs frais le buste de Linn^ en marbre : 
ce buste sera vraisemblablement place au Jardin des 
Plantes, soit au pied du c^dre de Liban que vous 
connoissez, soit dans I'ecole meme de botanique.
Vous devez bien penser que je n'ai pas et^ un des 
derniers a souscrire.
Ce monument honorera plus 
les naturalistes Fran^ais que Linne ; parceque ses 
ouvrages suffisent a sa gloire ; mais je vois avec 
plaisir, que nous rendons enfin justice au p^re de 
I'histoire naturelle, et a I'un des plus rares et des 
plus beaux genies de notre si^cle : nous esperons 
que cet hommage public fera enfin taire en France 
les ennemis de cet homme si celebre, et qu'ils n'ose- 
ront plus que murmurer sourdement.
La basse 
jalousie qui regne en ce pays contre les hommes 
celebres, est reellement un fleau : je vous crois 
bien plus philosophes que nous a cet egard.
Les 
Anglais savent honorer le merite independamment 
de temps et de lieux : je ne vous dis point cela par 
ilatterie, je le pense aussi ; et vous en donnez sans 
cesse de preuvcs.
Quclqu'uns de nos detracteurs 
380 
de Linne voudroient se mettre de niveau ou meme 
au dessus de lui ; mais ils n'en approcheront cer- 
tainement jamais.
Je voudrois bien, que vous don- 
nassiez une edition complette de ses ouvrages sur 
la botanique, a laquelle vous ajouteriez des notes 
critiques, et des corrections que vous jugeriez conve- 
nables : je suis persuade quelle auroit le plus grand 
succ^s.
Vous seul pouvez remplir dignement cette 
tache ; vous possedez les manuscrits et I'herbier de 
Linn^ : le public en est instruit, ce qui donneroit 
encore un prix infini a cette entreprise : je ne doute 
point qu'elle ne fit tomber absolument toutes les 
autres editions que Ton donne, et que Ton se pro- 
pose de donner.
Ce projet est certainement utile ; 
et je suis persuade qu'il seroit parfaitement rempli.
Vous pourriez aj outer un supplement qui renfer- 
meroit les genres et les esp^ces inconnues a Linne.
Un pareil livre deviendroit le manuel des natura- 
listes : je crois que cela merite attention de votre 
part : vous rendriez un service important a I'histoire 
naturelle ; et vous en retireriez beaucoup de gloire.
Mais, voici, Monsieur, ou je voulois en venir parti- 
culierement : les personnes qui se sont reunies pour 
faire executer le buste de Linne m'ont charge de 
leur fournir une liste exacte, s'il est possible, de 
tons les ouvrages du naturaliste Suedois : je n'en 
connois qu'un petit nombre.
J'ai cru ne pouvoir 
niieux faire que de m'adresser a vous pour vous 
prier de m'aider a remplir cette tache.
Envoyez 
moi done, s'il vous plait, le titre, ainsi que les di- 
verses editions, des oeuvres de Linne que vous con- 
noissez : je vous aurai beaucoup d'obligation.
Je 
381 
sais qu'il en existe en langue Su^doise, qii'il en a 
fait sur des sujets Strangers : je voudrois les con- 
noitre tons : je presume que vous les possedez, ou 
qu'ils se trouvent dans la biblioth^que de M.
Banks : 
j'attends done cette grace de vous, Monsieur ; et je 
vous prie de vouloir me la rendre le plutot que faire 
se pourra.
Je me rappelle aussi que vous avez 
bien voulu me promettre quelques plantes de I'lnde : 
toutes celles que vous m'enverrez seront deposees 
chez moi ; et personne an monde ne les publiera : 
je vous en donne ma parole.
Je desire bien avoir quelque jour le plaisir de 
vous aller voir dans votre patrie, et renouveler la 
connoissance que j'ai eu le bonheur de faire avec 
vous pendant votre sejour a Paris.
Voulez vous bien presenter mes hommages a 
M. Banks, et agreer les sentimens de I'estime et de 
la consideration parfaite avec lesquels j'ai I'honneur 
d'etre.
Monsieur, &c., &c., &c., 
Desfontaines.
P.S. Les sciences languissent beaucoup ici : 
tons les esprits sont tournes vers les affaires pub- 
liques : je desire ardemment qu'elles puissent s'ar- 
ranger convenablement le plutot possible : j'ose 
I'esperer.
II est bien difficile de cultiver les sci- 
ences quand on n'est pas tranquille.
Je vous prie de m'honorer d'une reponse le plu- 
tot que vous pourrez : vous me ferez grand plaisir.
J'ai vu votre dernier ouvrage chez M.
I'Heritier.
Cimex Pantilhis n'est pas tr^s content : vous lui 
382 
donnez rudement sur les oreilles : j'espere que cela 
lui apprendra a vivre : nous en avons ri de bon cceur.
J'ai eu I'honneur de vous ecrire pour vous prier 
de faire mes sinceres remerciniens a la Societe Lin- 
n^ene, et pour lui temoigner combien je me trou- 
vois honore d'etre admis au nombre de ses membres.
Voulez vous bien leur reiterer les assurances de 
mon respect, et de mon attachement inviolable.
Sir George Staunton to «/.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Buxton, Sept.
1, 1790.
Not only have I to thank you for your kind let- 
ter, but also to request you will present my ac- 
knowledgements to your friend for his very obH- 
ging invitation to his house ; and though a variety 
of engagements will prevent me from availing my- 
self of it this year, I shall, if I go to Scotland, as I 
am inclined to do next year, pay my respects then, 
when my little fellow will be perhaps somewhat 
better able than at present to distinguish the value 
of such a botanical collection.
Since you left us he has had the opportunity only 
of seeing Mr. Eyre of Hassop's collection, where 
he saw and ate of the fruit of the Musa, of that 
kind which is called the Fig-Banana in the West 
Indies : this was a great curiosity to him, who, 
though he saw the plant at Kew, never saw the fruit 
before.
We saw atBakewell impressions of several 
plants in argillaceous earth and iron-stone, which 
were found in working the mines of this country.
The Arundo Bambos, one of the exotic Euphor- 
383 
bi(E, were distinguishable enough, and ascertained 
by former visitors to the collection of Mr. White 
Watson, a zealous naturalist ; and my boy thought 
he could distinguish another impression to be that 
of the Dodecatheon Meadia.
There are a great 
many other impressions of plants, not settled, and 
which I wish you would see : many of them appear 
to be of Ferns.
The same gentleman has a very curious collec- 
tion of what are called petrified shells, which appear 
to be formed by water charged with calcareous 
earth, as is the water which forms stalactites, 
entering into the shells, and depositing its earth, 
which takes, as it loses its water and hardens, the 
form of the containing shell, in some instances 
covering the petrifaction.
My little fellow is too 
great a novice in conchology to ascertain the spe- 
cies of the shells.
The neighbourhood of Buxton promises very 
little in any part of Botany ; and your young friend 
is yet too much of a tyro to make much progress 
without a guide.
We all, on every account, wish 
for your presence.
When you return to London 
we may trouble you to settle the names of a few 
specimens for us.
I am, dear Sir, very much yours, 
George Staunton.
Sir C.
P. Thmberg to J, E.
Smith.
Dum non aeque facile scribere scio, ac quidem 
intelligo linguam Anglicam, spero fore, ut tu, vir 
384 
illustrissimc, permittas, ut hac utar lingua antiqua, 
atque tibi significem gratias meas maximas, tain ob 
litteras tuas humanissimas ad me datas, quam ob 
arnica ilia mutui commercii promissa : quantum 
in me est, conabor, ut cum acceperim desiderata 
tua botanica, nonnullae, tam Capenses,quam Indicae 
plantae a me mittantur, quae in vasto et pretioso 
tuo herbario adhuc desiderari possunt.
Hacce oc- 
casioned catalogum meum mitto desideratarum plan- 
tarum ; atque significo, summopere mihi gratas fore 
omnes illas accessiones, quas pro me sensim parare 
tibi, vir sestumatissime, placebit.
Nee dubito, quin 
plures erunt, qui mecum gaudent, quod in tuis 
manibus venerint collectiones Linnseanae, atque 
quod utiles reddantur erudito orbi, ac dudum coe- 
pisti modo adeo lionorifico illas reddere.
Editione 
nova Systematts Vegetabilium infinite tibi omnes 
botanicos devincies, quae ultima adeo vitiosa evasit, 
ut cito emendari mereatur et debeat.
Opto sane, 
ut aliquo modo, tibi, vir illustris, in hisce terris uti- 
lis esse possim, atque vel tantillum tuam in me 
amicitiam atque faventein animum demereri vale- 
am.
Occupatus sum in elaboranda Flora Capensiy 
cujus quatuor priores classes absolvi, paratas pro 
prelo.
Doleo vero, quod adeo pretiose, adeo digne 
hoc opus edere non valeam ac quidem Capensis 
Flora mereri posset, cum Upsaliae occasiones illae 
deficiant, quibus edi alibi posset, nitidissima charta 
et iconibus.
Forsan Berolini tomus primus figuris 
minus bonis impressus erit.
Pro Actis Societatis 
Linnseanae descriplionem generis, Diiie?iicB, cum satis 
nitidis figuris tribus paravi ; sed ad te, vir celeber- 
385 
rime, mittere noliii, antequam sciam si haecce per 
tabellarium mittere possim, sique acceptae sint.
Genus hoc sex constat speciebus, quarum tres om- 
nino ignotas habeo, quarumque figuras conficere 
feci : una exstat in Systemate lAnncci, scilicet Indica, 
quam non vidi, nisi e figura, et duae species depin- 
guntur aRumphio.
Nuperrime accepi Ordines Na- 
turales D"' Jussieu, de quibus adhuc judicium ferre 
nee audeo, nee debeo : videtur tamen mihi genera 
nimis multiplicasse.
Ego semper allaboro, ut ge- 
nera naturalia non separentur : ex.
gr.
Mahernia et 
Hermannia, Diosma et Hartogta, Galium et Va- 
lantia, et caetera.
Upsalise, cl.
3 Sept.
1790.
J. P.
M. Dana to J.
E. Smith.
Monsieur, De Turin, ce 23 9bre, 1790.
Mes amis ne m'ont point manque ce 21 me 9bre 
dans I'assemblee de notre Academic Royale; et apres 
un combat d'unc heure employee en rotations pour 
le choix d'un academicien etranger a la place qui se 
trouvoit vacante, vous avez ^te elu pour associe 
etranger, de preference a M.
Pallas et autres savans 
du premier ordre ; et en cela je dus me servir de 
votre lettre derniere, ou vous aviez ofFert d'envoyer 
un memoire sur les fougeres, qu'on a eu la bonte 
de considerer comme s'il eut ete expedie, puisque 
son retard dependit uniquement de vous avoir ^crit 
que le volume 8me ^tait pour sortir (comme il est 
VOL.
1. 2 c 
386 
a present sorti) de sous presse.
D'tiilleurs vos nit- 
rites et votre celebrite auroient suffi a vous pr^ferer 
(comme elle a fait) a ses anciens correspondents et 
h tant d'autres concurrens, qui, dans un nombre si 
born^ des places d'academiciens, marquerent ^gale- 
ment Tempressement d'etre nommes, si toute Y 
academic fut composee de botanistes ; mais comme 
les academiciens de cette assemblee etoient 19, et 
qu'il n'y avoit que moi et M.
Allioni botaniste, 
de cette academic, pendant qu'il y faut au moins 
les quatrequints des voix pour etre nomm^ vous 
maintenant y avez et^ admis a la pluralite de 17 
contre 2 voix.
Ceci ayant ete fait en bonne forme, 
je vous en donne avis ; et vous en sera expedie le 
diplome par le secretaire en peu de jours.
Je vous prie, Monsieur, a etre assure des senti- 
mens de la veritable estime, et de la sincere amitie, 
avec laquelle je serai toujours avec le plus parfait 
attachement, et je suis, Monsieur, 
&c., &c., &c., 
Medecin Dana.
Isolds Bosc to J.
E, Smith.
Paris, ce 15 Janv.
1791, an 3me de la Liberie.
Broussonet ou autres vous ont sans doute appris 
qu'apr^s avoir ^leve dans le Jardin des Plantes un 
buste h.
la memoirc de Linneeus, les anciens membres 
de la Societe Linneenne s'etoient de nouveau reunis, 
et s'etoient constitues sous le titre de Society cV His- 
toire Naturelle de Paris.
Cette societe a aussitot sa 
387 
naissancedeveloppeiinegrande ardeur pour Tavancc- 
ment de la science qui fait Tobjet de ses travaux ; 
et nous sommes prets k faire imprimer un fascicule 
qui contiendra beaucoup de choses interessantes.
Je ne vous parlerai pas de nos projets ; vous en 
verrez les details dans la preface de notre fascicule : 
mon but aujourd'hui est simplement de vous faire 
passer les diplomes qui interessent votre personne 
et celles de trois de vos amis.
C'est Broussonet 
qui vous a fait inscrire sur la liste dcs associes ; c'est 
lui qui auroit du vous envoyer ces diplomes ; mais 
il est si occupe d'affiiires politiques qua peine pour- 
rons nous le voir.
Nous esp^rons que vous voudrez 
bien concourir a I'amelioration de nos fascicules, 
en nous fournissant des mc^moires, et a notre in- 
struction, en correspondant avec nous d'une maniere 
active.
Je profite de cette occasion pour vous envoyer 
fjuelqucs descriptions d'insectes nouveaux ou mal 
connus, pour la Societe Linneenne.
Je vous prie de 
les corriger avant de les communiquer ; car je suis 
fort peu assure de ma maniere d'ecrire en Latin.
On vous remettra aussi un ouvrage d'entomolo- 
gie nouveau, du debit de quelques exemplaires du- 
quel j'ai ete charg^ par I'auteur.
J'ai pense que vous 
et M.
Banks seroient bien aises d'en avoir chacun 
un exemplaire.
II coute 30 livres chaque.
Si vous 
n'en voulez pas, tachez de le faire vendre k quelque 
personne de votrc connoissance.
Ne doutez pas de mes dispositions a faire tout 
ce qui vous sera agreable dans ce pays.
Je vous salue.
Louis Bosc.
2 c 2 
388 
Professor Zimmerinan to «/.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Brunswick, July 16, 1791.
I feel myself under the greatest obligation for the 
undeserved honour of having been chosen a mem- 
ber of the Linnsean Society.
As I am mainly in- 
debted for it to your favour and friendship, I 
will not miss any opportunity to prove to you my 
acknowledgement and gratitude.
1 take the liberty to direct to you a few copies 
of the beginning of an excellent work of my learned 
friend Mr. Lichtenstein of Hamburgh.
In a few 
days the translation of Smellie's Philosophy of Na- 
tural History, which was undertaken under my care, 
will be finished.
I made many additions to that 
anti-Linnasan work, part of which are refutations.
I shall have the honour of sending a copy to the 
Linnaean Society, as perhaps some among her mem- 
bers understand our language.
I cannot conceive 
how Mr. Smellie could undertake a work without 
being master of more modern languages, for a great 
part of the new discoveries were lost to him.
My son pays his respectful compliments to you, 
and acknowledges his great obligations for the 
kindness and care you bestowed on him last year* 
He is going to Gottingen, where he will study law, 
but properly statistics and technology.
I am, with the greatest regard.
Sir, 
Your humble Servant, 
E. A.
Zimmerman.
389 
/>.
H, Stoever to J.
E. Smith.
Vir doctissime, celeberrime, plurimum colende, 
Inclyta, qua gaudes fama, animusque benevolens 
atque amicus viris qui inesse solet ingenio et doc- 
trina excellentil)us, com movent, ut equidem hisce 
te litteris adeam, subsidia imploraturus, tali viro 
saltem non indigna.
Triennium et quod excurrit jam elapsum est, ex 
quo vitam viri immortalis longeque de studiis et 
doctrina meritissimi, terras Europae septentrionalis 
quern unquam tulerint, Linnaei nimirum patris, ela- 
borare et conscribere operam dedi.
Fama quidem 
omnibus notus, parum erat et mancum quod de 
fatis ipsius memorabilibus, de indole, moribus,meri- 
tisque in universum expositum fuit.
Quare studui, 
memoriam viri pro magnitudine rerum gestarum 
amplius tradere ; in quo labore ita adjutus fui a viris 
Suecice eruditis et a discipulis Linnaei, qui in Ger- 
mania supersunt, ut sperem, operam me non pror- 
sus incassum insumsisse, orbique erudito aliquo 
modo satisfacturum esse.
Ut autem recte atque 
vere, quantum unquam fieri posset, omnia tradan- 
tur, opus adhuc est benevola tua ope, quam te non 
denegaturum esse manibus Linnaei, tam insigni stu- 
dio jam a te condecoratis, a tua Immanitate spero.
Tu enrm, vir inclytissime, felix ille Croesus es, 
cui jure emtionis contigerunt thesauri Linnaeani 
omnes, Quum autem plurima dubia et falsa de ce- 
lebri hac emtione circumferantur, quaeso ut me edo- 
cere velis de sequentibus : 
I. Quonam anno, quove pretio emisti?
— Cum pe- 
390 
regrinatore Germano coUoqimtus, qui eodem tem- 
pore UpsaliiE fuit ac in tua societate versatns est, 
plura de hac re audivi^ quse autem incertiora viden- 
tur qiiam lit memoriae mandare possem.
Etenira 
nomen tuum celeberrimum, cujus ssepius in hac 
vita Linnaei incidit mentio, commemorando, nollem 
me falsi aliquid perscribere.
Ceterum dicunt thesan- 
ros istos pretio \000 pound sterl.
a te coemtos esse.
Num stricte veritati respondet?
Injunctum fuit a 
Sueco quodam divite, Mauhle, qui tunc temporis in 
India orientali morabatur, viro nob.
Andr.
Dahl, ut, 
pondere pecuniae in hunc finem jam erogato, pro se 
coemeret thesauros Linnaei relictos, quod consilium 
autem successu carebat.
Quomodo hoc factum ?
Num tu prior, vel majus pretium obtulisti?
Si vis 
ct potes, mc de hac re certiorcm facias, quaeso.
II.
Quaenam omnia emisti ?
quibusnam ex rebus 
singulis composita est haereditas ilia litteraria ?
Bibliothecae quantus est circiter numerus librorum ?
Herbarii quantus circiter numerus plantarum ?
col- 
lectionibus ejus naturalibus quaenam est praestan- 
tissima ?
Quot et quaenam possides manuscripta ?
lUud de Perlarum vel Margaritarum ortu mihi 
notum.
Ad haec scio, Linnaei exemplar Materia; 
Medicm e regno vegetabili, multis auctum et orna- 
tum esse propriis observationibus, quum dudum 
constituisset earn denuo edere.
Ejusmodi observa- 
tiones et scholia num et in pluribus aliis ipsius libris 
reperiuntur?
Num tu possides Diarium, quod sub 
titulo Nemesis Divinm composuerat ?
Quum de 
hisce parum aut nihil publicc sit notum, gratissi- 
mum facercs mihi orbique littcrato, si certo aliquid 
391 
tradere velles, non intermissurus, operam aniinum- 
que tuum generosum dignis laudibus celebrare.
III.
In versione of the General Vieiv of the JVri- 
i'mgs of LinncBUS, by R.
Pulteney, ante biennium a 
cl.
M. de Grandmaison, gallice edita, relatum est, 
te curare novam editionem Specierma Plantarum et 
Systematis Natures.
Num hoc veruni ?
Maxima 
vellem hoc compertum habere, quippe vitae adjungo 
catalogum scriptorum Linnsei, eorum commenta- 
riorurn, versioniim, &c., locupletissiraum, in quo 
tuum addere possem.
Forsan Systema Regni Ve- 
getabilis inteUigendum erit.
Porro ex te quseram 
num tu praeter egregios illos Fasciculos Plantarum 
(quorum hue usque duo publici juris facti, quosque 
excerptos reperis iiii Maga%infur die Botaiiik, edi- 
tum Turici a cl.
Romer et Usteri) aliaque bota- 
nica, digne celebrata, alia scripta ex collectionibus 
Linnaeanis, vel ad systema ejus facientia, nobis for- 
san ignota, edideris.
Annotationes tuas una cum 
cl.
Broussoneti ad Linnaei Diss, de Sewu Plantarum 
recusas esse in tom x.
Amo^nitat.
Acad, ab 111.
Schrebero Erlangae 1790 editum^te jam non fugiet.
Ceterum doleo, quod cl.
de Grandmaison uti non 
licuerit subsidiis in nostra Germania passim im- 
pressis, quibus versionem suam egregie augere 
potuisset.
IV.
Una cum vita quum a me curatur collectio 
epistolarum ad viros eruditos a Linnaeo datarum 
(congessi enim non adeo paucas) me tibi maxime 
devinctum redderes, si e coUectione tua epistolarum 
ad Linnseum scriptarum unam vel alteram memo- 
rabilem, e.
gr.
Hallcri (quum anno 1739 illi offcrret 
392 
munus Professoris Goettingensis) vel Marchionis 
clementissim£e Baadensis, vel quum vocaretur in 
Hispaniam, mecum communicare velles.
Sed ve- 
reor, nc his quideni precibus tibi molestus sim : 
veniam dabis.
Fortasse autem non dedignaberis 
mihi indicare, quot literae Marchionis Baadensis 
existant.
V. Compertum habeo, Londini in honorem Lin- 
naei institutam esse societatem, quae te praesidem 
veneratur.
Sed quo auctore instituta est (ccrte te) 
et quo anno ?
Queeso, paulo amplius nie de his 
edoceas, quum mentio hujus instituti praechiri in- 
jicienda.
Ceterum addo, ad hoc vestruni exemplar 
praeterito anno et Lipsiae auspiciis cl.
Ludwig ejus- 
modi societatem coalitam esse.
Sed temperanduni calamo, temperandum preci- 
busj ne te fatigem et quasi obruam.
Ignosces ardori 
et studio veritatis, quo trahor.
Per Deos^ per manes 
Linnaei, quos colis, quos per sacrificia adeo splen- 
dida adhuc venerabiliores et honoratiores reddidisti, 
nunc te precor, vir humanissime, ne prorsus deesse 
velis votis meis.
Facias me compotem eorum eo 
modo quo tibi placebit.
Rescribas quanta et (jualia 
tibi ex re videbuntur ; omnia enim gratissima erunt, 
nee me publice ingratum senties.
Sed responsione 
tua, rogo, quam primum tibi per otium licuerit, me 
laetitia affice ; vita enim jam imprimitur, at non 
adeo festinanter, ut non in usum vocare possim 
quae intra binos et quod excurrit menses perscribere 
dignaberis.
Releges tunc verba tua ; jucundum 
enim erit officium, librum tibi transmittere quam 
primum imprcssus fuerit.
In responsione autem 
393 
mihi annotes, quaeso, plateam in qua habites.
Ce- 
terum rescribas vel latine, vel, si placet, anglice.
For although I am not exercised so much as to speak 
or ivrite this noble language^ I understand it pretty 
well.
Secundum litteras, quas mense praeterito ex Up- 
salia habui, vidua Linnaei adhuc in vivis est, vitam 
degens in praedio Hammarby.
Filia natu minor 
nupsit nob.
vir.
Duse, litiuni curatori Upsaliae.
Reliquae duae sorores vitam agunt coelebem.
In 
fronte novi horti academici sumptu regio erigitur 
monumentum Linnaei.
Amicus mens, Professor 
Gieseke, Hamburgensis, ejus quondam discipulus, 
anno proximo ejus Pr(Electiones in Ordines Natu- 
rales Plantarum edet.
Plura ejusmodi nova tibi 
scribere possem, nisi vererer nimis leviora et mi- 
noris momenti esse.
Quod si in Germania uno vel altero modo in- 
servire et operam tibi commodare possem, moneas^ 
jubeas, quaeso.
Enixe ceteram repetens preces 
supra memoratas, humanitati tuae iterum atque ite- 
rum me commendo.
Vale !
meque quam primum 
fie^^^ossit litteris tuis laetitia affice !
Nominis tui inclytissimi cultor observantissimus, 
D. H.
Stoever, Doct.
Dab. Altonse (prope Hamburgum), die Octobr.
viii.
1791.
394 
Rev. JFm. Kirhj* to J.
E. Smith, P.L.S.
Dear Sir, Barham, Dec. 5, 1791.
I received your letter and obliging present^ which 
I shall keep as a precious relic, not only on account 
of their great original possessor, but also for the 
sake of the worthy donor, whose name I prophesy 
will not be forgotten while that of Linnaeus is re- 
membered, and the study of the works of an all- 
wise Creator continues to be a favourite pursuit 
with enlightened Europe.
Pray give my compli- 
ments to Mr. Marsham, and tell him I am prepa- 
ring another box of insects for him.
I was much 
gratified lately by having an opportunity of calling 
upon Mr. Woodward, who very obligingly showed 
me his herbarium and collection of fossils.
I men- 
tioned to him a plan upon which we had some con- 
versation when you were at Ipswich, — I mean the 
establishment of a provincial society for the pro- 
motion of the knowledge of the natural history of 
this county.
He approved much of the design, 
and desired to be a member, in case such an insti- 
tution should take place.
I have a friend in an 
adjoining parish, who is a very ingenious naturalist, 
(Rev. Charles Davy f, of Caius Coll.,) with whom I 
have had some conversation upon the subject; and 
he tells me that he has had the same idea long in 
* Author of a very delightful Introduction to Entomology, in 
union with Mr. Spence.
•f Translator of Bourrit's Letters upon the Glaciers, and son 
of the Rev. C.
Davy, of Onehouse, in Suftblk, the very learned 
author of Letters on Literature, 
395 
his mind, and that such a society, if it could be esta- 
bhshed, and the plan be generally adopted through- 
out the counties, would contribute more to the elu- 
cidation of the natural history of this country, than 
any other plan whatsoever.
I should be particu- 
larly obliged to Dr. Smith for any hints he could 
furnish me with; and the outlines of such an insti- 
tution I should esteem a great favour, if it would 
not engross too much time.
It is the design, if a 
proper situation could be fixed upon, to collect 
specimens in every department, and to impose it as 
a law upon every member, to contribute a certain 
proportion every year, which I should hope would 
keep out of our society all non-effectives.
I am 
much flattered by your obliging invitation : when- 
ever I go to town, one of my principal pleasures 
will be to wait upon you.
Your sincere friend, 
William Kirby.
Professor Scarpa to «/.
E. S?nith.
Monsieur, Pavie, 2 Mars, 1792.
Jc viens de recevoir votre obligeante lettre du 1 8 
Aout de Tannee passee,avec le Discours picliminaire 
et les Articles qui concernent la Soci^te Linn^enne.
Parmi la liste des Associes etrangers ayant trouve 
mon nom, j'en ai ^t^ tr^s flatte ; et comine c'est 
principalement a vous que je dois cet honneur, aussi 
je vous fais millc remercimcnts.
D^s que j'ai commence a lire les premieres lignes 
396 
de votre Discours^ il ne mefutplus possible de quit- 
ter le livre jusqu'a la fin.
L'excellent tableau que 
vous avez entrepris est dessin^ avec une nettet^, 
precision, et verite surprenante : il y a bien long 
temps que je n'ai eu le plaisir de lire un mor9eau 
si bien acheve.
Les epoques principales de I'his- 
toire naturelle et les hommes illustres qui Font 
cultive y sont marques avec une intelligence et une 
critique tr^s fine ; ce qui fait voir que vous avez 
approfondi cette science.
Oil vous parlez des etablissemens, je m'attendois 
que vous auriez parle du General Comte de Mar- 
sigli de Bologne ; mais peut-dtre ce^i n'entroit pas 
dans votre plan.
Cependant ce grand militaire, 
victime de I'intrigue, etoit un assez bon naturaliste 
de son temps, et qui s'est depouille de presque tout 
son bien pour etablir 1' Academic ou Institutde Bo- 
logne, dont le but principal est I'histoire naturelle.
Son ouvrage sur le Danube, et quelques autres sur 
les productions naturelles de la Mediterranee ne 
sont pas absolument sans quelque prix.
Quelque 
trait de votre excellent pinceau sur les circonstances, 
I'etat, et les talens de cet homme singulier, il me 
semble qu'auroit fait un tres bon effet, Donnez 
un coup d'ceuil sur I'eloge qu'en a fait M.
de Fon- 
tainelle.
Je vous remercie des politesses que vous avez bien 
voulu pratiquer a M.
Scassi : je crois qu'il sera bien- 
tot de retour a Londres pour se rendre tout de suite 
ici.
Je I'ai charge de m'apporter tout ce qu'il trou- 
vera chez vous de nouveau, en chirurgie principale- 
ment : je vous prie de Taidcr dans le choix.
397 
Je travaille actuellement a quelques planches de 
necrologie fine ; niais tout chez nous va lentement ; 
raoi encore plus que tout autre etant beaucoup dis- 
trait par un double emploi a I'universite^ et par la 
pratique.
Je desire vivement et sinc^rement de vous ^tre 
utile ici en quelque chose.
Je suis, avec la plus perfecte estime.
Monsieur, 
Votre tr^s humble et tr^s obeissant Serviteur, 
Scarpa.
The subjoined letter from Father Fontana will 
discover to the reader the impression made upon 
him by the person to whom it is addressed.
In the 
third volume of his Tour on the Continent, Sir 
James acquaints his readers, that " Professor Sco- 
poli introduced him to the celebrated Father Gre- 
gorio Fontana, Professor of Mathematics." " Lit- 
tle," he continues, " could I imagine, when I en- 
joyed the pleasure of his conversation, and admired 
the acuteness and versatility of his genius, that he 
should ever condescend, as he has since done, to 
become the translator and commentator of any 
production of mine." 
Father Fontana to J, E.
Smith.
Monsieur, Pavie, 5 Mai, 1792.
Je sais.
Monsieur, que mon collogue et ami Scarpa 
vous a donn^ avis de la traduction Italienne que 
j'ai faite de votre beau Z)iscours Preliminaire aux 
Actes de votre Society Linn^enne, qui dans ce mo- 
398 
ment vient de sortir de lapressc.
Le jeune homme 
qui vous remettra cette Icttre, vous rendra aussi 
un exemplaire de cette version, que je vous prie 
d'agreer comme un hommage que je me fais gloire 
d'offrir a votre Eminent savoir, et plus encore aux 
vertus aimables de votre belle ame.
Ce jeune 
homme est M.
le Dr. Valli de Toscane, qui, par 
son excellent caract^re moral, universellement re- 
connu, par son amabilit^, et par son savoir peu 
commun, m^rite la consideration et I'amitie de tout 
homme vertueux et sensible.
II est auteur de 
quelques petits ouvrages medicals assez estimes, et 
il en a public trois k Pavie dans le peu de sejour 
qu il y a fait ; parmi lesquels il y a deux lettres sur 
r^tonnante decouverte de M.
le Dr. Galvani de 
Bologne relative a I'electricit^ animale, decouverte 
qui ne fait que paroitre.
M. Valli a verifi^ les 
faits principaux, et les experiences fondamentales 
de M.
Galvani, et est meme all^ un peu plus loin ; 
car au talent d'^crire il joint le genie d'exp^rimen- 
ter.
Agreez, Monsieur, les offres de mes services 
pour ce pays que j'habite.
En attendant, je suis, avec le plus entier devoue- 
ment et la plus haute estimc, Monsieur, 
Votre tr^s humble et tr^s obeissant Serviteur, 
Gregoire Fontana.
Professor Scarpa to «/.
E. S?niih.
Monsieur, Pavie, ce so Mai, 1792.
Votre lettre du 8 de ce mois m'est parvenue 
quelques jours apr^s la publication dela traduction 
399 
Italienne de votre excellent Discours : ainsi Ic P^ie 
Fontana n'a plus et^ en etat de faire les additions 
que vous veniez de me marquer dans votre lettre : 
il me charge de vous renouveller ses sentimens 
d'estime et d'amitie.
J'attends de Genes I'occasion 
de vous faire passer une douzaine d'exemplaires de 
la traduction.
Vous ne tarderez pas cependant d' 
en recevoir un, qui vous sera remis par M.
Valli, 
docteur en medecine.
Ce jeune homme, rempli de 
talent, mais tout-a-fait sans fortune, et qui depuis 
quelques annees voyage a la mani^re de nos Capu- 
cins, c'est-a-dire a pied et en mendiant, s'est pro- 
pose de se rendre a Londres, comme en effet il 
est parti il y a un mois.
Comme il marche bien, 
je crois qu'il ne tardera pas beaucoup a paroitre 
devant vous, et s'acquitter de sa commission.
II vous informera d'un nouveau fait de physique 
animale, que le docteur Galvani de Bologne vient 
de decouvrir concernant I'electricit^ animale.
Je 
tacherai de vous en donner quelque idee.
Si on 
prend la moitie d'une grenouille dont on a ote la 
peau, et en prepare les nerfs cruraux de mani^re 
que I'origine de ces nerfs reste adherente a I'^pine, 
et en ote toute autre substance intermediaire entre 
1 epine et les jambes, et que apr^s avoir isol^ ce 
morceau d'animal on place I'extremit^ d'un arc con- 
ducteur sur les nerfs, et I'autre partie de Tare sur la 
jambe, les muscles se contractent vivement h plu- 
sieurs reprises et pendant long terns.
Ce ph^no- 
m^ne est encore plus frappant si on entoure I'ori- 
gine des nerfs et une partie de la jambe avec une 
feuille m^tallique.
Chez nous il y a qui tirent 
400 
plusieurs consequences de ce phenom^ne, jiisqu'a 
croire que par ceci I'existence des esprits animaux 
soit demontree.
Quant a moi, je ne cesse de mMiter 
sur ce fait singulier, et qui pour I'instant donne de 
quoi travailler aux ^lectricistes ; mais je n'y vois 
pas encore claire sur les consequences physiolo- 
giques qu'on se hate de deduire.
M. Scassi me fait savoir qu'il se trouve actu- 
ellement h Paris.
J'espere qu'avant son depart de 
Londres il se sera informe des meilleurs ouvrages 
qui ont paru dernierement chez vous en mMecine 
pour me les procurer, comme je I'avois charg^.
D'heure en avant je compte sur votre amitie pour 
etre au fait de ce qui se passera de plus interessant 
en Angleterre par rapport a la chirurgie et ana- 
tomic, cpii forment ma principale occupation.
Les ames honnetes ont beaucoup appreci^ votre 
passage sur la vie de Scopoli, et se rejouissent de 
voir qu'un juge si savant dans I'histoire naturelle, et 
impartial, comme vous ^tes, ait pris avec franchise 
a devoiler I'intrigue et la malignite d'un petit nom- 
bre d'ignorans, qui ont employe tons leurs efforts 
pour fletrir jusqu'a la memoire de cet homme re- 
spectable.
Je suis, avec respect et attachement sincere.
Monsieur, 
Votre tr^s humble et tres obeissant Serviteur, 
Scarpa.
401 
Dr, Darwin to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Derby, Sept.
12, 1792.
I should sooner have written to thank you for 
the books you were so kind as to send me.
I 
mentioned your Society to Sir Brooke Boothby of 
Ashbourne, and to Dr. Johnson of this town, two 
ingenious men, who wish to become Fellows of 
the Linnaean Society.
Sir Brooke Boothby has a 
great collection of plants, which you probably saw 
when you were in this country.
Sir Brooke is now 
at Ashbourne, so that I can acquaint him if it be 
agreeable to you to admit him to your Society.
I 
received much pleasure from your Thesis De Ge- 
neratione, though our theories will not agree.
With true esteem, I am, yours, 
E. Darwin.
Dn, Pulteney to t/.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Blandford, Oct. 14, 1793.
I am tempted to make a request to you, which I 
confess to be not very reasonable: — Can you do me 
the favour of the loan of your copy of the folio 
Historia Muscorum of Hedvvig ?
I am engaged to 
give Mr. Nichols a compendious catalogue of the 
rare plants of Leicestershire, for his history of that 
county now in the press ; and I wish to make my 
references to Hedwig, in the Miisct frondosi^ taking 
it for granted that his book will become classical 
in that way.
VOL.
I. 2d 
402 
I had lately, in my attendance upon one of the 
family, an opportunity of spending a few hours in 
the botanical library of the late Earl of Bute.
It is 
indeed very rich in books and dried specimens, as 
well as in volumes of paintings of plants ; and it 
appears that the earl preserved his taste to the last, 
as I observed all the latest expensive works.
There 
are (thick and thin) more than 300 folios, strictly 
botanical, and quartos and octavos in proportion ; 
very many of the old authors, and some very scarce 
ones ; a conservatory almost 300 feet long, full of 
fine plants, growing and flourishing in the soil (not 
in pots), like an Indian grove.
To this add a gar- 
den of four acres, walled round, and full of hardy 
plants ; and all this within 150 yards of the sea.
If you honour me with a plant, I must leave the 
choice of it to yourself, amidst the great variety of 
new subjects that are now pouring in upon you*.
I wish to ask whether the Fungus, called in Ray's 
Synopsis Oak leather ^voi the timber of houses, is well 
known in London, and its history investigated, and 
whether a specimen of it would be likely to be ac- 
ceptable to the Linnsean Society ?
I am, &c.
R. PULTENEY.
* In his work entitled Botany of New Holland, Sir James 
has named a plant of that country after Dr. Richard Pulteney, 
F.R. and L.S., well known by his Sketches of the Progress of 
Botany in England, and more especially by his Biography of 
Linnaeus.
403 
Rev. Henri/ Muhlenberg, D.D. to J.
E. Smith.
Lancaster, State of Pennsylvania, 
Dec. 1, 1792.
Honoured and dear Sir, 
Pardon a stranger that intrudes upon your stu- 
dies : an enthusiastical love of botany, and irresis- 
tible desire to know the plants of my native country, 
stimulate me to do it.
Since a number of years I 
have endeavoured to explore the Regnum vegetabUe 
AmericcB Septentrionalis, in particular of Pennsyl- 
vania Media.
Partlyl have been successful, and have 
gathered pretty near all the plants of my neigh- 
bourhood, being upwards of 1200 in less than ten 
square miles.
Of these I sent in 1786 a specimen, 
and in 1790 an Index Florae, JLancastriensis, to our 
Philosophical Society at Philadelphia, which will be 
published in the third volume of their Transactions ; 
and am now making a full description at least of 
the indigenous plants, after Withering, Lightfoot, or 
Thunberg's method.
But I met so many adversa- 
ria, nova genera et novas species, \^\i\c\\.
I am not able 
to class according to the present editions of Lin- 
naeus, that I long ago and earnestly looked for a 
friend, who would kindly assist me to find out 
which plants are already described by Linnaeus, and 
which are nondescripts.
Some of my doubts have 
been cleared up by my worthy friend.
Dr. Schreber, 
the editor of the eighth edition of the Genera Plan- 
tarum ; but very many remain.
Dr. Stokes, in Withering's Arrangements, men- 
tions the gentleman to whom I could address myself 
2 D 2 
404 
with the greatest prospect of success ; "The learned, 
candid and ingenious possessor of the herharium, 
lihrary and manuscripts of the two Linnaei" could be 
my oracle, if his time and the nmltiplicity of his la- 
bours would permit him to assist me.
I would send 
all the plantas adversarias et Jiondescriptas in good 
order, numbered, and beg of him to favour me with 
his judgement, which of the plants are already de- 
scribed, and by what name, and which arc not de- 
scribed.
Perhaps it would not be disagreeable to 
him to have even some of the described plants in his 
noble herbarium: new species certainly would be 
pleasing ; so every doubt would be cleared up, and 
the adversaria Americana be lessened.
This, Sir, is 
the reason of my troubling you ; and may I hope to 
receive a favourable answer?
If my offer is not 
disagreeable to you, pray do me the honour to let 
me know to what place I should send the dried spe- 
cimens and my future letters ; and be pleased to 
inform me whether you want any particular Penn- 
sylvanian plant or seed.
Any commands that way 
will punctually and with pleasure be obeyed.
But, 
should your time and various labours not permit 
you to grant me the desired favour, may I, by your 
recommendation, find any candid and ingenious 
gentleman in England or Scotland to whom I could 
address myself?
Any letter to me can be addressed to my brother, 
Frederick Augustus Muhlenberg, Esq., Member of 
Congress, at Philadelphia, who will forward it safe 
to Lancaster, where I live.
In expectation of an agreeable answer, and re- 
405 
commending myself to your kindness, I have the 
honour to remain, with great esteem.
Honoured Sir, 
Your most obedient humble Servant, 
Henry Muhlenberg, D.D.
Minister of Trinity Churcli at Lancaster ; Fellow of 
the Philos.
Society at Philad., and of Academ.
Imper.
Nat. Cur.
J. E, Smith to the Rev. Henry Muhlenberg^ JD.D., 
Pennsylvania.
Dear Sir, March 6, 1793.
I have seldom received more pleasure from a let- 
ter than yours of Dec. Ist afforded me : never did 
I receive one so gratifying, I will not say to my 
vanity^ but to better feelings.
You cannot be more 
enthusiastically fond of botany than I am ; and your 
letter promises me a fresh instance, in addition to 
many already experienced, that this study, charming 
in itself, is still more valuable as a key to the inter- 
course of the most amiable minds.
To botany I 
owe friendships and connections I else could have 
had no chance of forming ; and your letter, over- 
flowing with the milk of human kindness, and with 
the amiable modesty of real merit, promises me one 
which it will be my most anxious care and ambition 
to deserve.
One part only of your letter gives me 
pain, my dear Sir, — that, where you express a doubt 
(however slight) lest I should not attend to it as it 
deserves.
Allow me to say, I am too covetous of 
your correspondence to turn it over to anybody 
else.
I am extremely concerned that my ignorance 
406 
of the American post-day occasioned me to miss 
the last; yet if you have doubted my politeness and 
sensibility to your worth, (of which I want no other 
proof than your letter,) I hope and trust such unfa- 
vourable impressions will now be effaced.
I flatter myself you will soon execute your inten- 
tion, and make me as useful as you can : — you may 
depend on my utmost care and accuracy, and I'll 
honestly tell you my doubts ; neither hurrying over 
the business, nor by any means pretending to know 
more than I do.
I have all Kalm's original speci- 
mens ; I also know by marks all Linnaeus's origi- 
nally described specimens, so there can be no fallacy.
I have several similar correspondences, and with joy 
add yours to the number.
Send your specimens 
numbered.
How can I send you any little parcel 
of one or two works of my own ?
Rely on my zeal and fidelity.
J. E.
Smith.
Professor Marty n to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Park Prospect, March 15, 1793.
My letter was just gone to the penny-post when 
yours arrived, containing acknowledgements far 
above the merit of the compliment which I was 
happy in paying you*, and which I do most sin- 
cerely assure you came from the heart.
I ought to 
apologize for not having asked your consent, but I 
* The dedication to the President of the Linnaean Society of 
his work on the Language of Botany, being a dictionary of the 
terms made use of in that science.
107 
was fearful that your modesty might have dedined 
receiving that tribute, which, in my opinion at leasts 
you have every right to receive.
I beg the favour 
of you, when you have occasion to look into the 
glossary, to note in the margin any errors or doubts 
that you observe, in order that a second edition 
may be more correct.
If you wish for any copies 
to give away, they are at your service.
You see by 
my letter that I have no scruple in asking your as- 
sistance.
One-ranked does not strike me as a good 
term for secundus: at least I am afraid it is too bold 
to venture on.
I am still for the periphrasis.
I am satisfied with what you say about glaber and 
l(Evis.
But what English term shall we adopt for 
the latter?
Even or level are the only terms I can 
think of; and, if I forget not, you proposed the 
former of these, but they express nothing of free- 
dom from hairiness ; for which reason I put smooth 
for glaber^ and smooth and even for Iccvis.
Certainly most adjectives in osus have an unfa- 
vourable meaning.
Religiosiis, however, has very 
frequently a good meaning in Cicero.
" Homines 
integri, innocentes, religiosi." In Verrcm.
" Huic 
ego testi gratias agam, quod et in reum misericor- 
dem se preebuit, et in testimonio religiosum." In 
CfEcinam.
I do not know that Cicero or his con- 
temporaries use ya?}iosus in a good sense; but Pliny 
and Tacitus certainly do.
Cicero generally uses gloi'iosiis in a good sense : 
as, " Magnificum ctiam illud, Romanisquc liomini- 
bus gloriosum." Dc Divin.
" lUustria et gloriosa 
facta." De Fin.
408 
Milton therefore is sufficiently justified in his use 
oi gloriosissimus, however superlatives may be ap- 
plied ; on which subject I can say nothing.
I do not find aiiimosus ever used in a good sense.
But we want an index of terminations to assist us 
in such inquiries.
I suspect that in the Latin lan- 
guage, as in ours, and I suppose all others, many 
words which had originally a good sense have 
changed gradually into a bad one, — *a good man', 
*an honest fellow', *an innocent girl', *a good sort 
of a woman', ' a good-natured man', are examples.
But a remarkable instance is the word wench, 
which originally signified a young unmarried lady.
In Piers Plowman the Virgin Mary is so called.
I am, dear Sir, with great esteem.
Your very faithful Friend and Servant, 
Tho. Martyn.
Dr. Roxburgh to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Samulcotah, March 20, 1793.
Your polite and acceptable letter reached me on 
the 4th of August.
The diandrous tree you intend 
to give my name to, you will find described and 
drawn amongst those sent to the court of Directors.
I thank you for the honour you intend doing me 
in your next fasciculus.
Mucada is one of our 
most valuable and finest timber trees ; some of the 
wood I sent to Mr. Alexander Dalrymple last year, 
to try if it would answer for scales to mathematical 
409 
instruments; for it is close-grained and less subject 
to crack or warp than any other wood in India.
Weavers' beams are always made of it on this coast.
I have taken the liberty of sending you some of 
my newly discovered Fever Bark : it is from a new 
species of Swieienia, a most beautiful and most va- 
luable tree as any in India.
I have hitherto found 
this bark infallible in the cure of intermitting and 
remitting fevers, even after the Peruvian bark had 
failed.
My Ly thrum orixensis is now in flower in my gar- 
den for the first time.
It is a very beautiful, large, 
ramous shrub, of quick growth : the flowers are on 
small racemes of a bright vivid red, and seem to me 
to partake of the character of Grislea as well as Ly- 
thrum.
I find my former description and drawing 
faulty : your observing to me that it will belong to 
the genus Grislea^ first induced me to compare it 
with the description of that family.
I inclose you a specimen of an IndigoJ'era, the 
leaves of which yield the most beautiful indigo I 
ever saw, and in a very large proportion.
I have 
sent home to the Directors a drawing and descrip- 
tion under the name of Indigofera coerulea.
I am, dear Sir, with much regard, yours, 
W. Roxburgh.
D7\ Roxburgh to «/.
JE.
S7mih.
Dear Sir, Calcutta, August 20, 1794.
Since my return to Bengal I have found several 
plants unknown to me before : amongst them there 
410 
will be, I think, three or four new genera and more 
new species.
Amongst the former is the beautiful 
Aajogam of the Hortus Malabaricus ^ vol.
v. tab.
59, 
which I think will make a very distinct new genus, 
and have called it after the late Sir William Jones, 
whose botanical knowledge well entitles his me- 
mory to this mark of regard* : amongst his MSS.
was found a paper (70 — 80 pages in fol.), entitled 
Botanical Observations on select Indian Plants, 
which will be published in our next volume (the 
4th) of Asiatic Researches.
Amongst them I found 
a description of this lovely small tree : a copy of it 
I send you along with my own description and 
drawing, with the hopes of your giving one of them 
an early place in one of your valuable publications.
I hope it will prove deserving of being so placed.
The drawings are very exact, though not elegant.
And may I further request of you to insert a better 
panegyric on so great a character?
He was a most 
surprising man, and the complete gentleman.
You will have learned that the bark of Corchorus 
olitorius and capsularis is equal to the best flax, a 
fortunate discovery for India, and for our manufac- 
turers at home.
Do you find that it was ever used 
by the ancients, or any other people, as a substitute 
for flax ?
Rumphius just mentions this quality.
From time immemorial the Bengalese have known 
* Of this genus, which was established by Dr. Roxburgh in 
tlie Asiatic Researches, iv.
p. 853, a singularly beautiful species, 
the Jonesia Asoca, lias lately been introduced into our gardens, 
and was figured in a recent Number of the Botanical Magazine, 
plate 3018.
411 
its value; yet they only employ it for cordage, twine, 
and other such uses, holding the bark of Crotala- 
riajuncea in higher repute, it being stronger and 
more durable.
Your humble Servant, 
W. Roxburgh.
Professor TVilldenow to «/.
E. Smith.
Condona, illustrissime vir, audaciam meam, quod 
nomine tuo celeberrimo librum a me sub titulo 
PliytographicB editum inscripserim.
Accipe hie li- 
brum tenuem grato animo ; sed rigoroso baud sub- 
jicias rogo scrutinio : sunt haec vegetabilia descripta 
e collectione mea herbarum, quae non tam dives 
quam tua et aliorum botanicorum Angliae.
Si ita- 
que in descriptionibus nieis hinc inde erraverim, 
indicatio errorum a tua manu facta mihi erit grata.
Flagranti amore florum vegetabilia prosequor ; sed 
Germania nostra paucas, tam in agro, quam in 
hortis, alit plantas : hinc commercium litterarium 
et communicatio siccarum herbarum cum viro tam 
illustri mihi accepta erit.
Vale, itaque, vir cele- 
berrime ; meque favore tuo hand indignum habeas 
oro rogoque.
Dabam Berolini, d.
27 Septembris, 1794.
Dr. Roxburgh to J.
E. Siiiith.
Dear Sir, Calcutta, Dec 27, 1794.
I have this instant got a few seeds of my Ipojiicoa 
grandifiora : it is Munda-valli of the Hart.
Mala- 
412 
bar.
; but certainly not Bona-nox, or Gaertner is 
wrong.
His plant is my /.
Bona-nox.
You will find 
both, drawn and describedj in my sixth hundred ; 
viz.
No. 567.
and 568.
With a good deal of address, and the help of 
friends, I have been so fortunate as to procure living 
plants of Sir William Jones's Jatawansi, the real 
Spikenard, which he concluded to be a Valerian 
from the imperfect description of it he received 
from a friend ; for he never saw the living plant.
I have had them a month : they as yet show only 
a small lanced leaf or two.
The names they were 
sent under by the Deb Rajah of Bootan, are Jata- 
loans'i and Nanipe or Nanpe.
Garcias ab Horto's 
figure of the drug is excellent.
In short, every cir- 
cumstance corroborates Sir W.
Jones's plant to be 
the real Spikenard of the ancients.
You will soon 
see, in the 4th volume of the Asiatic Researches, 
what he further said on this subject, when he saw 
Dr. Blane's account of an Andropogon which Dr.
B. took for it.
I am promised the living plants of 
this Andropogon.
It grows far north, on the skirts 
of the mountains.
It is a medicine of repute 
amongst the people of these countries*.
But let me stop my pen.
W. Roxburgh.
* Subsequently to the very excellent paper upon this plant, 
given by Sir William Jones in the Asiatic Researches, the plant 
here referred to by Dr. Roxburgh flowered ; and, satisfied that 
it was really a Valerian, he published it as such with a descrip- 
tion and figure.
Sir William Jones's own paper, and that of 
Dr. Roxburgh, have both been reprinted in Sir W.
Jones's Works, 
ii.
p. 9.
Further and very curious observations on the Spike- 
413 
Major Velley to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Bath, Jan. 25, 1795.
I received yours, and am highly flattered by the 
very favourable, and I fear partial, opinion which 
you express of the work * ; especially when you 
condescend to say that you have read it with great 
pleasure and advantage.
Whatever difference of 
opinion may subsist upon the meaning of the word 
seeds, and which perhaps should be confined to 
those plants only in which a sexual influence pre- 
vails ; yet the term seems to have been appropri- 
ated to the propagation of plants from the most 
remote antiquity, and long before the discovery of 
any sexual distinction in the vegetable world.
Thus 
in the Scriptural account : — 
" Kat ec,i]veyKev t) -y/j poTavr]v yj^prov, aireipov aTrepf.ia 
Kara yevoc \_Kai KaO' o/noiOTyjra]." Lib. Gen.
cap.
i. 
ver.
12.
(The word aTre7pov, by the by, is hardly 
reducible to grammatical construction.) 
The ancients, who formed their ideas from natu- 
ral objects, probably borrowed the term from the 
mode of propagation observable in plants ; and by 
analogy applied it to sexual generation in animals, 
without knowing at the time, that the same princi- 
ple existed in the former.
Although I had my scruples with respect to the 
application of the term seeds, and for the same rea- 
nard of the ancients, is given in the very learned Hierohotanicon 
of Olaus Celsius, ii.
p. 1., where the plant is, as by Sir G.
Blane, 
referred to the Grasses.
* Coloured Figures of Marine Plants of England, folio.
1795.
414 
sons which you have assigned, yet I found myself 
unavoidably compelled to make use of it ; as both 
Gmelin and Gaertner (but more particularly the 
last) have endeavoured to establish a material diffe- 
rence in the propagation of marine plants.
You 
will readily perceive the force of my remark, from 
the following passage in Gaertner, p.
19 : — " quod 
non alia in Ceramiis, quam -per solas ge7mnas locum 
habeat propagationis ratio : dum contra in omni 
genuino Fuco vera reperiantur semina utero car- 
noso, a matris cortice ac medulla distinctissimo, 
conclusa." 
And yet the same author maintains that these 
very seeds are produced by a simple unassisted 
power : — " quod in Fucis gejiumis ipse 
uterus officia genitalium utriusque sexus, 
^Y?estet solus y — Vide p.
33.
One of the great points which Gaertner endea- 
vours to establish, is, that the less perfect Fuci, 
(i.
e. complanati), as well as the Conferva?, have a 
different and more simple mode of propagation than 
the former ; and that it is effected only hy gennncE.
He makes this distinction between the origin of 
semen and gemma : — " Quod gemmcR medulla sit 
pars identica medullae maternae, dum contra seminis 
medulla a matris suae distinctissima.'* 
I think I have evidently proved that the grains 
in the Confervse are as much entitled to the appella- 
tion of seeds, as those in the perfect Fuci : nay, more 
so, because the medullary substance of the Conferva 
corallinoides is a liquid, while the grains contained 
in clusters at the joints are solid and opaque.
415 
Gaertner seems to have been a very superficial 
observer of the Confervae, taking; upon trust the 
opinion of Adanson.
If I had adopted the term 
geymna, I should have perplexed the subject, and 
at the same time seemed to accede to Ga^rtner's 
theory.
In short, as the expression had been used 
by Linnaeus, and in general by subsequent writers, 
I thought it better to continue the same.
Whenever you may find the same objections 
raised against the term seeds, I hope, for the reasons 
assigned, that you will become my apologist.
I remain, dear Sir, 
with sincere regard, &c., 
T. Velley.
Mr. Stackhouse to J.
K. Smith.
Dear Sir, Pendarves, Sept.
16, 1795.
I was much flattered by a letter from Mr. Wood- 
ward, who informed me you approved of my work*.
As I described every plant from nature, and 
bestowed every attention in my power, I had some 
reason to hope it might be favourably received.
The little amicable controversy between the Majorj' 
and myself has spurred me on to take a further 
peep into the arcana of marine plants ; and it is 
with pleasure I can assure you that my pains have 
already been amply rewarded.
I brought down with me a compound microscope 
* Nereis Britannica, 2 fasc.
folio 1795 — 1797.
t Major Velley.
416 
with six different magnifying powers, and have 
begun a course of observations on the fructification 
of every species which has offered itself in fruit.
Instead of the simple process of Gcertner, I find 
nature more ehiborate in her processes in proportion 
to the minuteness of the operation.
In the larger 
Fuci (the F.
vesiculosus, spiralis, nodosus, &c.) the 
mucus, as I called it, in which the seeds are lodged, 
appeared through high magnifiers to be a collection 
of pellucid tubes, in some places seemingly divided 
by septa.
These tubes are curiously reticulated ; 
and each species seems to have the form of the net- 
work different.
The seeds at first adhere to the 
inside of the fruit in orbicular masses, but after- 
wards are dispersed through the tubes.
Though it 
is asserted by Velley, in F.
vesiculosus and F.
ca- 
naliculalus, that the seeds issue out of holes in the 
tubercles of the fruit, yet I have reason to think 
that is by no means general to all the species.
In 
some there are tubercles permanent on the surface : 
in others the surface is smooth ; and though the 
thinnest slice of the outside has been taken offwith 
a fine instrument, yet no aperture has been discover- 
able.
The air-bladders likewise in F.
vesiculosus 
and F.
nodosus are by no means simple inflated ves- 
sels.
Lightfoot calls them hairy within ; but they 
have a curious process : it consists of pellucid 
strings stretched across, swelling at intervals into 
oval beads ; these strings are ramified, and dis- 
tended in various irregular directions.
All this is 
discoverable by cutting out a slice from each side, 
and looking through the cavity.
Whether this 
417 
process is to prepare any impregnating vapour, or, 
more probably, to rarefy air for the purpose of in- 
flation,.
I have not been able to discover.
In the 
old bladders little traces remain of it, when the 
skin (as is the case in F.
nodosus) acquires the thick- 
ness of sole-leather.
I find likewise the inside of 
the pod of F.
siliquosus to consist of a curious 
branched process, extending in all directions, and 
not simple threads stretched across, as I had de- 
scribed it, p.
9. I have likewise discovered the 
fructification of F.
digit aius and Polyschides to be 
an imbedded oval bladder, and not a superficial one, 
as I had described it, covered with a tender pellicle.
I have not yet seen it in maturity.
A fragment of 
F, palmatus in fructification was thick set with 
conical protuberances, perforated at the summits, 
with the seeds imbedded in the internal substance.
This mode is very similar to that of F.
vesicidosus^ 
&c., excepting that in the latter, nature has set 
apart a fruit.
The powers of my glasses go as far 
as to discover the internal structure of Ulva umbi- 
licalis, the thinnest and most membranaceous of 
sea plants ; and I have discovered small dark per- 
forated granules^ which are undoubtedly the seeds.
I shall take the liberty of inclosing two or three 
new species or varieties of sea plants to add to your 
collection ; and having drawn up a paper on the 
Herniaria glabra, in which you will discover many 
errors of the early writers rectified, and a descrip- 
tion more at large than I have met with, I shall beg 
the favour of you to present it to the Society.
I beg leave to subscribe myself, Yours, &c.
J. Stackhouse.
VOL.
1. 2 E 
418 
Professor Blumenhach to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Goettingen, Dec. 25, 1795.
I return you my best thanks for the interesting 
acquaintance of Dr. Duncan you were so kind to 
procure me by your introductory letter.
He spent 
some months with us, and, as I hope, to his satis- 
faction.
I wish you would be tempted, dear Sir, to 
a second tour on the continent, and particularly to 
a trip to Goettingen, where I should think myself 
very happy to return you, in any way, the civilities 
you showed me during my abode in London.
You will receive here a letter of a friend of mine, 
Mr. Persoon, from the Cape, a very estimable ac- 
curate naturalist ; and I request your acceptance of 
a pamphlet of mine I published lately.
A propos, you were kind enough to present me 
with a curious enigmatical sea-animal of the class 
of Vermes, out of your Linnaean museum, which I 
keep as a relic of a saint, as well as a token of your 
kindness to me ; a figure of it is given in a rather 
indifferent book, Schroder's Einleitung in die Cori" 
chylien-kenntniss^ T.
11.
tab.
6. fig.
21, and de- 
scribed under the name of a magnified Sabella (?), 
under which genus it is likewise put in the new edi- 
tion of the S.
N.T. 1.
p. vi.
p. 3751.
I shall be happy to be of any use to you ; and am, 
with much regard.
Dear Sir, &c.
J. Frederick Blumenbach.
419 
In 1802, His Majesty King George III.
granted 
to the Linnaean Society a Charter of Incorporation ; 
and in 1811 the late King, then Prince Regent, ho- 
noured the Society in becoming its Patron.
It has been the custom from the time of its first 
institution to celebrate the birth-day of Linn8eus by 
an annual dinner, when a large proportion of the 
English members assemble on the 24th of May to 
commemorate the event.
On the twentieth anniversary the President ad- 
dressed the Society at their annual feast, in the 
following words, which are here transcribed from a 
MS.
found among his papers.
They have not be- 
fore appeared in print.
" I cannot take this chair for the twentieth time 
of my being in so unanimous and flattering a man- 
ner chosen to fill it, without saying a few words, 
not merely to express my gratitude and attachment 
to the Society, which I trust would be superfluous, 
but to congratulate all its members, and particularly 
those who with me have watched over its infant 
growth, on the eminence it has now attained.
I 
have another motive for choosing the present oc- 
casion for this purpose.
" This is the hundredth anniversary of the birth 
of Linnseus ; and as we have chosen to commemo- 
rate his birth-day by our general annual meeting, 
the centenary revolution of it should certainly not 
be passed over in silence.
" I cannot but compare the obscurity of his birth, 
and the struggles of his youth, with those of our 
infant Institution ; and the sanction and protection 
2 E 2 
420 
which he received from his countrymen and rulers, 
with what we have obtained from ours.
Happy 
will it be, if the utility of our labours should prove 
to correspond with the benefits which he conferred 
on the scientific world.
" Our beginnings have been propitious ; and I be- 
lieve it will be found on comparison, that no lite- 
rary institution ever produced more solid matter of 
information within the same limits of time ; and 
this entirely by our own pecuniary, as well as scien- 
tific efforts.
" Celebrated academies have generally been as- 
sisted by royal stipends and ample funds; and their 
members have often had collateral views of worldly 
profit and promotion.
We have been prompted by 
a disinterested zeal for science alone.
" It is extremely pleasing to my recollection to 
recall the day when the first idea of this Institution 
presented itself to my mind, — which I immediately 
communicated to my worthy friend, who was then 
my near neighbour at Chelsea.
The result of our 
consultation was a conference with our much valued 
friend, now Dean of Rochester.
We soon laid the 
plan of the rising Institution ; and with the assis- 
tance of Sir Joseph Banks, and Mr, Dryander more 
especially, modelled it in such a manner that scarcely 
any alteration has since been found necessary.
*'In my subsequent tour through Europe, I made 
it my business to associate with us the most learned 
foreigners ; and after my return, in the spring of 
1788, the Linnaean Society was founded.
"The honourable sanction we have received from 
421 
Government five years since, is fresh in your me- 
mory ; and our publications are a better testimony 
of our deserts than any that I could lay before you.
I trust we shall go on with equal zeal and increas- 
ing honour and success.
" In whatever way I can be most useful to you, 
I am at your disposal, as are the treasures of our 
great leader and instructor, which I hold only for 
the use of my fellow-labourers in science.
" I regret my personal absence from you for 
many reasons, but it is unavoidable ; and I am an- 
nually reminded that a permanent residence in town 
would still less agree with my constitution than it 
did formerly.
Nevertheless I enjoy by that means 
more leisure for my favourite pursuits, to wliich my 
whole time is devoted ; and my mind is always with 
you.
Allow me to conclude with my most ardent 
wishes for the prosperity of the Linnaean Society, 
and that we may all long witness and promote it." 
At a period when the illustrious individual, in 
whose honour the Linnaean Society was founded, is 
assailed on all sides, it will be interesting to know, 
that, unmoved by the almost gerieral defection, he, 
who may be considered as his principal representa- 
tive, still continued to advocate the principles of the 
immortal Swedish naturalist ; and this unaltered ad- 
herence Sir James expressed in his last introductory 
lecture at the London Institution in 1825, as well as 
in the concluding pages of his latest printed work, the 
English Flora, where the author alludes to "prin- 
ciples too little studied by the pursuers of super- 
422 
abundant discrimination, instead of philosophical 
combinations." "This," he asserts, " is the bane of 
natural science at the present day.
Hence thejilum 
Ariadneum is lost, or wilfully thrown away, and a 
bandage darkens the sight of the teacher no less 
than that of the student." 
Yet Sir James cannot be said to stand alone and 
unsupported in his opinion.
" The question," he 
remarks, " of the natural or artificial character of 
Jussieu's system has been ably discussed by the 
celebrated Mr. Roscoe in the Transactions of the 
Linnaean Society, vol.
xi.
p. 50 ; who, in showing that 
this method involves several as unnaturalassemblages 
as the professedly artificial system of Linnaeus, 
contends that little is to be gained by its adoption 
with respect to a conformity to nature." And in 
the fifteenth volume of the Society's Transactions, 
Mr. Bicheno, in a paper on Systems and Methods 
in Natural History, observes, " that the two great 
masters of botanical science (Linnaeus andJussieu) 
propose different ends, and ought not to be regarded 
as rivals.
Division and separation are the ends of 
the artificial system ; to establish agreements, is the 
end of the natural." 
Following the same idea, the Rev. E.
B. Ramsay, 
in a biographical notice of his lamented friend, 
printed in the Edinburgh Journal of Science, ob- 
serves, that " there is no point on which young 
botanists are more mistaken than in their ideas of 
natural classification.
They often imagine they have 
only to commence the study of natural arrangements, 
and become at once profound philosophical bota- 
423 
iiists.
This is one of the signs of the times ; a de- 
sire to grasp at general results and conclusions 
without a previous study in detail.
The error in 
this case is putting the natural and artificial me- 
thods in opposition to each other ; whereas it ap- 
pears to be the object of the artificial system to 
collect materials to Jbr?n a natural one.
But it has 
been of late spoken of rather as something quite 
superseded, as something to give way to a new and 
a nobler structure, built upon a foundation entirely 
different." 
Sir James moreover informs us, that " the illus- 
trious Frenchman, Bernard de Jussieu, the early and 
confidential friend of Linnaeus, conceived a philoso- 
phical idea of natural orders of plants, and conferred 
on the subject with the on/^ man whom he found 
capable of appreciating or understanding them." In 
his letters to Linnaeus * he even gives him the ho- 
nour of having Ji7'st formed a scheme of natural 
orders of plants ; but it seems as if the science of 
botany were no sooner destined to emerge from 
obscurity and confusion by a just perception on 
* Bernard de Jussieu writes to Linnaeus, 15th Feb. 1742 : "I 
learn with the sincerest pleasure of your being appointed Pro- 
fessor of Botany at Upsal.
You may now devote yourself entirely 
to the service of Flora, and lay open more completely the path you 
have pointed out, so as at length to bring to perfection a natural 
method of classification, which is what all lovers of botany wish 
and expect." 
" In the face of this testimony," observes Sir James Smith, " we 
trust it will hardly be asserted in future, that Linnaeus owed his 
ideas of natural orders to the excellent writer of the above letter." 
— ^Selection of the Correspondence of Linnceus, vol.
ii.
p. 212.
424 
these various subjects, than it becomes in danger of 
plunging again into darkness by a neglect of them.
The natural principles of arrangement for a scien- 
tific knowledge of plants and a permanent discrimi- 
nation of their families and species, have been no 
sooner distinguished (at the suggestion of Linnaeus) 
from an artificial scheme for their convenient inves- 
tigation, than those different objects are confounded.
" Linnaeus read lectures on the natural orders of 
plants to his most assiduous and accomplished 
pupils only.
To begin to teach botany by these 
orders would be like putting Harris's Hermes into 
the hand of an infant, instead of his horn-book»" 
//>/ 
"z/^^a.
^ 
d'€^2^-^^^~-3 
ICC^"^^^ ^ 
^7Z 
e^- 
'^ i^uXcc^in ef 
a 
}} ^^ Ctfnfy^O'-t^^ 
425 
CHAPTER V.
Enumeration of the Works of Sir J.
E. Smith.
1. Reflexions on 
the Study of Nature.
— 2.
Dissertation on the Sexes of Plants.
— 
3. Thesis de Generatione.
— 4.
Reliquice RudheckiancB.
— 5.
Plan- 
tarum Icones.
— 6.
Icones Pictce.
— 7.
English Botany.
— 8.
Spi- 
cilegium Botanicum.
— 9.
Flora Lajxponica.
— 10.
Botany of 
Nerv Holland.
— 11.
Tour on the Continent.
— 12.
Syllabus.
— 
13.
Insects of Georgia.
— 14.
Tracts.
— 15.
Flora Britannica.
— 
16.
Compendium Florce Britannicce.
— 17.
Flora Grceca.
— 
18.
Prodromus Flcrcs Grcecce.
— 19.
Exotic Botany.
— 20.
In- 
troduction to Botany.
— 21.
Articles in Bees' s Cyclopcedia.
— 
22.
Tour to Hafod.
— 23.
Lachesis Lapponica.
— 24.
Articles in 
Trans, of Linn, Soc.
— 25.
Review of Modern State of Botany.
— 
26.
Grammar of Botany, — 27.
Linncean Correspondence.
— 
28.
English Flora.
1. In the year 1785, previously to his tour on 
the Continent, Sir James Smith made his first ap- 
pearance as an author in publishing Reflexions on 
the Study of Nature, which he translated from the 
Latin.
It is the Preface to the Mus(Eum Regis Adol- 
phi Frederici of Linnaeus ; a work containing de- 
scriptions of the various natural productions of the 
museum of the King of Sweden, printed in 1754 at 
His Majesty's expense.
In speaking of this most superb and expensive 
of all Linnaeus's works, " one fact," he observes, 
"njay be learnt from it, — that the study of nature 
does not necessarily tend to make a man irreligious, 
as some weak people have been led to believe.
A 
426 
number of illustrious examples might be produced 
to the contrary ; none more eminent than the ex- 
cellent author of this work." 
2. In the following year Sir James published 
A Dissertation on the Sexes of Plants, translated 
also from the Latin of Linnaeus ; which he inscribed 
as a token of respect to Dr. John Hope, Professor 
of Botany in the University of Edinburgh.
Of both these works an edition was printed at 
Dubhn in 1786.
3. Dispuiatio Inauguralis qucedam de Genera- 
tione complectens .
— ^The Thesis which entitled him 
to the degree of M.D. at Leyden, 17H6.
It is dedicated to Robert Batty, M.D.
4. ReliquicB Rudbeckiance.
— The President's next 
literary work was the republication of the wooden 
blocks of Rudbeck, in 1789.
In his introductory discourse, Sir James informs 
us, that " at Upsal, under the auspices of the great 
Rudbeck, was laid the foundation of what Mr. Stil- 
lingfleet has justly called an unrivalled school of 
natural history, and which was destined afterwards 
to give laws to the rest of the world.
Rarely has 
such a variety of profound and extensive learning 
been united as in Rudbeck.
In antiquities, espe- 
cially those of the northern nations, and in the 
learned languages, his knowledge was unbounded.
In botany he had erected to himself what might 
reasonably have been thought a ^ monumentum cere 
perenmus\ in one of the greatest undertakings of 
the kind, a collection of fine wooden cuts of alf the 
plants then known.
They were to have been ar- 
427 
ranged and named according to Bauhin's Pinax, in 
twelve large volumes folio.
But two volumes were 
scarcely printed, when in 1702 a dreadful fire re- 
duced almost all Upsal to ashes, and with it the 
work of Rudbeck, and many thousand wooden 
blocks, already cut, besides almost all the materials 
of a history of Lapland composed by his son.'* 
All that remains of this work are a few copies of 
the second volume, and three only of the first, one 
of which is in the Sherardian library at Oxford.
Linnaeus was possessed of about 120 of the wooden 
blocks of this first volume, as well as eight or ten 
unpublished blocks belonging to some intended 
one, all which with his collections came into Sir 
James's hands.
The republication of this fragment of Rudbeck's 
great work was a tribute of respect to his profound 
and varied learning.
It is dedicated to Johannes Gustavus Acrel, Pro- 
fessor of Medicine at Upsal.
5. Plantarum Icones hactenus Ineditce, prcpd- 
pue ex Herbario LmncEano.
— The first fasciculus, 
folio, was published in 1789.
It extended but to 
three numbers.
The first was dedicated to Sir Jo- 
seph Banks, Bart.
The second to M.
P. Auguste 
Broussonet, M.D. The third to the Marquis Ippo- 
lito Durazzo.
6. Icones PictcB Plantarum Rariorum; or Co- 
loured Figures of Pare Plants.
— (This also reached 
but to three numbers,) — 1790.
It was dedicated to 
the Marchioness of Rockingham, which jDroduccd 
the following obliging letter from that lady.
428 
The Marchio7iess of Rockingham to «/.
E. Smith.
August 28, 1790.
I must interrupt your agreeable studies for one 
moment, just to thank you for the letter you wrote 
me before you set out for Yorkshire.
I ought not, 
even in a dream, to have had the faintest apprehen- 
sion of Dr. Smith's ever writing a satire.
His ele- 
gant and concise Dedication has relieved my foolish 
fancies ; but if a certain Ladys name, and the 
word botany., had appeared in the same page, he 
will allow that it would have been a complete one.
I dare not dispute with a Dr. Goodenough, other- 
wise, as it is in the form of the address of a letter, 
I should have supposed that Most Honourable was 
dignified enough ; and that the Noble Duchesses 
might think his decision rather an infringement of 
their rights : if so, I hope my neighbour Duchess * 
will make him stoop, if that \^ possible, to ask pardon.
I ought to be ashamed that I have not before 
acknowledged your being so good as to add to my 
library the engravings of Rudbeck.
Mr. Lee brought me a plant he calls the Red 
Palm, — quite a new thing, and, to my taste, remark- 
ably elegant.
I shall long to hear what beautiful 
plants are flourishing and flowering where you are.
My largest Portlandia is beginning again ; four flow- 
ers in a cluster upon almost every branch, and there 
is also a fine fruit upon it ; at the same time it is 
in such health, that one grieves to unload it of any 
* Duchess of Portland.
429 
of its buds, though soine people reckon that right.
I cannot but hope you will take a look at Went- 
worth as you pass by ; and if so, do observe what 
Amaryllises there are there ; and Henderson will 
tell you about the arrival of the Euphorbia Walle- 
niuj and all about it.
I also wish vastly to know 
whether a prodigious large Palm is there, which 
came from Gordon's, and was called the true Sago 
Palm ; and pray tell Henderson that I should rejoice 
if he could find time to be spared to make me a 
visit.
But I am quite ashamed to be so trouble- 
some to you with all my little nonsenses.
I will only add my compliments ; and conclude, 
Dear Sir, 
Your very sincere 
M. Rockingham.
7. English Botany.
— It was in 1790 that Sir 
James undertook to write a Flora of his native 
country, under the title of English Botany, to which 
his name did not appear as the author, till he pub- 
licly acknowledged it in a Preface to the fourth 
volume, in 1795 ; wherein he observes, " I have to 
answer for every word in this publication, except 
the letter-press to plates 16, 17 &18, which were fur- 
nished by another friend of the editor.
No pains 
were taken to conceal the real author ; nor was I 
aware that the truth, after a little time, was not ge- 
nerally known, till a criticism appeared in the Gen- 
tleman's Magazine for February 1793 ; in answer to 
which, in that for April following, it became neces- 
sary to own the work as entirely mine." 
430 
The public has from its commencement ac- 
knowledged the excellence of the figures which 
illustrate this work, by the pencil of the late Mr.
Sowerby.
The plates amount to 2592.
" And it is but just," 
observes its author, " to the memory of the worthy 
and lamented artist, to say that they are, on the 
whole, the most expressive and accurate of their 
kind.
In the account of each species, besides cor- 
rected characters, synonyms, and descriptions, I 
have frequently introduced whatever might recom- 
mend the study of plants, diffuse a charm over the 
more dry and technical parts of the subject, improve 
our scientific language, or direct the contemplative 
mind to more important and exalted views of its 
Creator's Works." 
The English Botany^ from which the Fungi* 
only are excluded, " has the singular merit of being 
the only national Flora which has given a figure 
and description of every species native to the coun- 
try whose productions it professes to investigate." 
It was brought to a termination in 1814, and 
consists of thirty-six octavo volumes.
For the motto to the first three volumes.
Sir 
James chose the following quotation from Virgil : 
" Quos ipsa volentia rura 
Sponte tulere sua." 
The remainder of the work, with the exception 
of the last volume, has this : 
" Viresque acquirit eundo." 
* These having been published by Mr. Sowerby in a separate 
work, in three vols, folio.
431 
The concluding volume has this line ; 
" Longarum haec meta viarum." 
Throughout the whole progress of this work, its 
author had not merely the ablest, he had the most 
friendly assistance ; and it was one of the happy 
circumstances attached to a labour which was itself 
a pleasure, that it brought him the acquaintance of 
many amiable and accomplished characters whom 
he might otherwise never have known.
The subjoined letters will convey an idea of the 
zeal and delight with which persons of similar pur- 
suits assist each other, and accord together ; and 
as Sir James observes in the Preface to his Tour, 
long before he had much experience of the fact, 
"It brings those together who are connected by a 
most commendable, disinterested, and delightful 
tie," — if indeed that may be termed " disinterested " 
which affords one of the purest, most engaging 
occupations in which a person possessing leisure 
and opportunity can fill up his vacant hours.
The amiable correspondent whose communica- 
tion first appears, bequeathed to Sir James in 1 805 
his whole collection of dried plants.
His executor 
Prof.
Dugald Stewart, in a letter to Sir James, says 
that " Mr. Bruce died in the 80th year of his age, 
respected and beloved by all who knew him.
His 
life was singularly blameless and tranquil.
I avail 
myself," he adds, " with much pleasure, of this op- 
portunity to express my high respect for your cha- 
racter and learning." 
432 
Mr. Arthur Bruce to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Edinburgh, Dec. 2, 1792.
Convallaria verticillata*, I beg leave to men- 
tioiij is a true native from the den Rechip, a deep, 
wooded gully from the hills in the Stormont, Perth- 
shire, about four miles north-east from Dunkeld.
On the 7th of July the flowers were beginning to 
fade.
Except the Co7ivallaria vertic'illata, I cannot 
inform you of any acquisitions entirely new, not- 
withstanding in the course of last summer there 
have been discovered, not far from this city, some of 
our very rare Scots plants, hitherto unnoticed, par- 
ticularly, Astragalus ziralejisis, North-ferry hills ; 
Orobus sylvaticus.
Bread-hill, near Edinburgh ; 
Anagaltis tenella.
Hunter's bog, Arthur's seat ; and 
about two years since, I found TrientaVis europcEU 
only six miles north from the ferry.
All these 
things taken together strongly justify your ex- 
pectation of the LiniKLa horeaLis being hereafter 
found a native also in N.
Britain f.
I am happy to inform you that the Natural Hi- 
story Society still continues to flourish.
At pre- 
sent, and for some time past, chemical pursuits 
* Narrow-leaved Solomon's Seal — Engl.
Bot. fig.
128.
t This beautiful plant was discovered in 1795 by Professor 
James Beattie, jun., of Aberdeen, in an old fir wood, at Englis- 
maldie.
" Linnaeus," Sir James Smith tells us in the seventh vo- 
lume of Engl.
Bot., *' has traced a pretty fanciful analogy between 
his own early fate, and this ' little northern plant, long over- 
looked, depressed, abject, flowering early,' — and we may now 
add, more honoured in its name than any other." 
433 
have very much engrossed the attention of medical 
gentlemen at this University.
I am, with the highest respect, 
Sir, your most obhged, &c.
Arthur Bruce.
The Rev. H.
Davies to «/.
E. Smith.
Aber, near Bangor, N.
Wales, 
Dear Sir, March 4, 1793.
Be pleased to accept my many thanks for your 
kind attention to my letter and packets.
I am truly 
sorry I cannot supply you with a specimen of y4n- 
thericum serotinum : I have not a perfect one myself.
I shall be much gratified to see your genera of 
ferns : there are certainly some British species 
likewise of that family that want ascertaining.
I was observing to a friend very lately, that I 
discovered traits of a very masterly hand in Sow- 
erby's English Botany ; but I confess I did not know 
where to look for the author : I thank you for that 
information.
I wish to know the plan more parti- 
cularly.
Is it to comprehend all English plants, or 
only the rarer ones, or such as are not already well 
figured ?
Is it intended to take in Cryptogamous 
plants ?
I have certainly several new ones of that 
class, and much at your service.
Mr. Sowerby's 
excellence in figuring these genera, among others, 
is conspicuous in Dickson's Fasciculi.
To your query, whether plants could be sent to 
London fresh so as to be drawn, I answer, I suppose 
VOL.
I. 2 F 
434 
they might : when I get among them, the experi- 
ment will not be expensive.
I wish to know what 
species you are most desirous of, besides that one 
already mentioned.
The latter expedient which 
you mention, I should prefer ; I mean, having them 
sketched on the spot, and sent with dried speci- 
mens ; but that, I fear, is impracticable, as Mr. Pen- 
nant's draughtsman lives between fifty and sixty 
miles from the scene of action.
I beg, Sir, you will be assured, that I shall think 
no commission of yours a trouble, but shall be 
happy to promote so elegant and desirable a work 
as the English Botany, or any other that you in- 
terest yourself in.
I lately left Mr. Pennant in good health.
I am 
much affected at your account of Mr. Hudson and 
Mr. Zier.
I am, dear Sir, with great esteem and regard, 
Your much obliged, 
Hugh Davies.
Marquis of Blandford to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, " Bill Hill, Aug. 9, 1798.
I have been spending the last fortnight at Ly- 
mington, and did not lose the opportunity of 
searching for some of the rarer English maritime 
plants, as well as those that prefer a boggy soil.
The principal plants I collected were.
Inula crith- 
7noides, salt marshes near Lymington ; Chironia 
pulchella (vid^ Engl.
Bot.), on a dry sea-beach near 
435 
Milford ; Vhiroma Centaurmm florihus candidissi- 
mis, on a dry pasture near the sea; Anthemis 
maritima, salt marshes, plenty ; Beta mdriiima, 
Santolina marithna, Che'iranthus simiatus, Salsola 
Kali, on Brownsca Island, belonging to Mr. Sturt, 
near Poole ; Pinguicula Lusitanica (villosa), bogs 
in the New Forest.
I likewise found a Schoenus, 
which I take to be longus.
— I have just had notice 
of between 200 and 300 plants having left Jamaica 
from Dr. Dancer; a great many new genera.
I shall 
be very happy to show them to you, as well as all 
my others, when I am settled at "White Knights.
I 
believe the Pulmonaria maritima and Convolvulus 
Soldanella grow on your coast : I should be very 
thankful if you could procure me some strong 
living plants of them, and be so good as to order 
them to be sent to Marlborough House.
I remain, dear Sir, 
Your faithful, humble Servant, 
Blandford.
Rev. Thomas Butt to *J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Upper Areley, Jan. 22, 1 799.
I feel much obliged by the notice you have taken 
of my request concerning the Anchusa officinalis^ 
and the trouble you have given yourself respecting 
it.
In conformity to your wishes I immediately 
rode to the spot where I had found it, that by a 
second examination I might with more certainty 
determine its claim as an indigenous plant.
I am 
2 F 2 
436 
now perfectly satisfied that it is no garden outcast.
It is insulated in the sands of Hartley Links ; nor 
have I found any specimen near the village.
The 
kitchen-garden of Lord Delaval is at no great 
distance.
He is no collector of plants ; and this 
flower is rarely met with (at least by me), except 
in collections : there are no traces of garden rub- 
bish about.
It has been observed to me, that it 
might have been brought in the ballast of ships ; 
as Hartley now and then sends vessels to Copen- 
hagen, though nearly the whole of its trade is in 
coals to London.
I took a person with me who 
was well acquainted with the port ; and, when I 
pointed out the spot, he assured me that ships never 
emptied their ballast there, but always on the artifi- 
cial mound, which has been in this manner raised 
close to the harbour.
I examined this mound in 
the summer with some accuracy, and found several 
plants on it which I had not elsewhere observed in 
Northumberland, — Pastinaca satwa, Aiiethum fbe- 
niculum, &c., but not one plant of Anchusa.
The 
spot where the latter grows lies two hundred yards 
north of this mound.
It is not of great extent ; but 
the plant flourishes there very well.
I have not 
observed it in any other place ; but I have not closely 
examined that part of the coast.
I will not take 
upon me to decide this question ; but I thought it 
proper to state the objection to you.
My opinion 
might perhaps be construed into a wish of acquir- 
ing the honour of discovering an indigenous plant 
not before observed : I will only remark that, as 
Northumberland and Denmark lie under the same 
437 
parallel of latitude, there is nothing extraordinary 
if the same plant proves indigenous in both coun- 
tries.
My Lord Valentia desires me to present his best 
compliments.
He hopes soon to meet you in 
London.
Believe me, my dear Sir, 
Most sincerely yours, 
Thomas Butt.
Rev. Thomas Butt to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Upper Areley, Dec. 17, 1791).
I feel myself highly honoured by the mention 
made of me in a late number of English Botany, 
and am particularly pleased that my name should 
appear in a work, which, without any pretensions to 
inspiration, I may venture to predict will always 
retain its present celebrity.
I am not, however, 
without some uneasiness, unsupported as I am by 
any botanist of established fame, lest I should erro- 
neously have judged Anchusa officinalis indigenous.
With the same diffidence I shall now accurately 
describe to you the situation of another plant, 
which I met with this summer in my wanderin^^s 
through Wyre Forest.
I have little doubt of its 
being Gnaphalium margaritaceum*, of which Wi- 
thering gives no habitat since the time of Ray.
* This conjecture on the part of Mr. Butt proved quite cor- 
rect; and the plant was figured in English Botany ten years after, 
from specimens sent from the spot here described.
438 
In the heart of .the forest is a spot of cleared 
ground, which constitutes a small farm : a cottage 
is erected on it.
About a quarter of a mile (two 
fields breadth) distant from it I met with the plant, 
growing by the side of a running ditch, and cover- 
ing several square yards of ground.
The spot did 
not lie below the cottage ; nor could I find an ap- 
pearance of any habitation having ever existed near 
the course of the little stream, I traced it to its 
source in the bogs of the adjoining forest, and 
downwards to its union with Dowles' Brook, but 
could find no more specimens of the plant.
If you 
agree with me in believing it really wild, it will be 
easy for me to send you fresh plants next summer, 
though I cannot discover that they differ from the 
garden ones.
If ever you have leisure in any fu- 
ture visit to Oxford, I much wish you would visit 
Elsfield Wood, and ascertain what probabilities 
there are for considering Lonicera Caprifolium as 
wild there : I think they rest on as firm founda- 
tion as any other plant with a single habitat.
Dr.
Randolf, the present Bishop of Oxford, showed 
great botanical ignorance, in affirming that it was 
only a variety of the common Honeysuckle, since 
no two plants have their distinct characters more 
strongly marked.
I will, as usual, subjoin a list of what rarer 
plants I have found this year.
Osinunda lunaria, on 
a hill above Cheadle, Staffordshire.
Vacciniuin J^itis 
Idaa, very abundant in Gotten Woods, near Chea- 
dle.
A very small specimen of a fern, in the ca- 
vity of a rock below Renard's Cave in Dovedale, 
439 
which I believe to be Adiantmn CapiUus Veneris, 
I was assured by a botanical gentleman of Cheadle, 
whose name I have forgot, that it did grow there.
Cynoglossum omphalodes grows on a rock planted 
with trees on the left hand of the road from Blore 
to Ham, close to Ham grounds : I suppose it to be 
naturalized.
The gardener, who has lived there 
many years, assured me that in his remembrance 
no flowers had ever been planted there.
This visit 
to Cheadle I made in the month of May. Unfortu- 
nately the weather was bad, and the season back- 
ward ; otherwise I might have been more success- 
ful in botany, as the country appeared promising.
Erodkmi marUimum is by no means unfrequent 
about Areley : the Morfe in particular, at Bridg- 
north, produces it abundantly.
Carex curta grows 
in a pit near the High Trees, a farm-house between 
Areley and Enville.
Atropa Belladonna^ by a road- 
side near Mr. Child's of Kinlet.
Iberisnudicaulis, 
frequent on the Morfe and Hartlebury Common.
Polypodiiim Oreopteris, on Hartlebury Common 
and the N.
W. side of Aberley Hill.
Carex strigosa, 
in Clifton Woods on the river Team.
Inula Hele- 
wmm, about half a mile from Areley, but near a farm- 
house.
Serapias ensifolia, a single plant, under- 
neath the Pyrus domestica.
This famous tree is in 
a very unhealthy state, in part owing to a large oak 
which overshadows it.
I am almost inclined to adopt 
an opinion which I have heard respecting it, — that 
there once was a garden on the spot ; for though 
there are no certain vestiges of it, I am much puz- 
zled by finding Ligustrum vulgare growing there, 
440 
which as yet I have not found in any other part 
of the forest, nor indeed anywhere near Areley.
A 
Pyrola grows in the forest, which differs from 
Pyrola minor in having- a longer bent pistillum.
Qu. P.
rotimdifolia ?
Scirpus flidtans, in a ditch on 
Hartlebury Common near Stourport.
Campanula 
hederacea and Viola palust7is, on Hartlebury Com- 
mon, found by J.
M. Butt.
Gentiana cainpestris, 
in Wyre Forest.
Mr. Moseley of Glasshampton, the gentleman 
who sent you Serapias e7isifolia, is a skilful and 
most assiduous botanist.
He has been fortunate 
in discovering rare plants in his neighbourhood, 
and would, I am sure, feel happy in communicating 
them to you.
He showed me Silene Anglica, Typha 
angustifolia, Stellaria Nemorum^ Campanula lati- 
folia, and a species of Mentha, in a short walk 
which I took with him near his house.
We have 
at Areley a common Galium, which differs from 
Mollugo, in having the serratures of the leaves di- 
rected towards the point, and from erecium in hav- 
ing a smooth and shining stem ; but in a walk to 
Whitley, which lies in a limestone country, I found 
that the same Galium (to all appearance) had a hairy 
stem.
I found also a variety of Galium verum, 
with flowers of a paler yellow and a loftier stem.
When I first saw it growing with G.
verum, its 
habit appeared so distinct, that I set it down for a 
different species ; but, on examination, I could not 
find a specific difference.
You will, I am sure, excuse me for being thus par- 
ticular about trifles, because you know that my sole 
441 
intention is to he useful to you in the great work 
in which you are now engaged*.
If any part of 
this detail answers that end, it will aiFord me the 
highest gratification.
Believe me, dear Sir, 
Most sincerely yours, 
Thomas Butt.
Professor James Beattie\ to J.
E. Smith, 
Dear Sir, Aberdeen, June 12, 1800.
Accept of my warmest acknowledgements for 
your attention to my last communications and con- 
descension in answering my impertinent queries.
I am happy that the packet was found to contain 
some new plants, and that they came so seasonably.
— The Carices, which you have pronounced new, 
were long thorns in my path.
Often did I give 
them up ; but when they again occurred, a new in- 
vestigation was the consequence, and as fruitless as 
the former.
My doubts and difficulties are now 
dispelled ; and the genus Carew, from being the 
most obscure in the system, is now that with which 
I am best acquainted.
I only hesitate a little as to 
the proper character of C.
M'lcheliana.
The cir- 
cumstance of the female spikes being crowned with 
males is a striking one ; but I question its con- 
stancy.
I have many speciniens gathered on the 
same spot, and (as I suppose) of the same species, 
* Flora Britannica.
f Author of The Minstrel and The Hermit.
442 
in which this characteristic is wanting.
When that 
is the case, I am at a loss for a distinction between 
it and C, recurva.
Hence I was led formerly to 
consider them as varieties, which will account for 
their being huddled together in my packet.
I am 
carefully watching the progress of this and the other 
plants of which you wish for specimens, and in a 
very little time shall send them as directed.
I lately 
found Mercurialis perennis with male and female 
flowers (monoecious).
I have this season found 
the Carex incurva in a new situation, in the Links * 
of Aberdeen, in a wet spongy soil, half a mile from 
the sea.
I have traced its progress : — first it puts 
forth a simple spike ; some time after, this spike 
unfolds itself, and the spiculae become distinct.
These terminate always in male flowers.
As the 
capsules swell, the compound spike, from being 
oval, becomes conical, which is a necessary conse- 
quence of the upper florets being barren.
The epi- 
thet incurva is in general very applicable, insomuch 
that the spike is often buried in the grass.
Some 
specimens are more upright ; but the curvature is 
always observable immediately below the spike.
I 
shall send you specimens in all the stages of 
growth.
I may here subjoin the places of growth 
of the other Carices.
C, Micheliafia, low marshy 
ground in Mearns or Kincardineshire, also in wet 
gullies in the Heughs (cliffs of St. Cyrus, ditto).
C. binervis, moorish ground, frequently in Aber- 
deenshire.
C. IcBvigata, frequent in shady wet situ- 
* A common below the town.
443 
ations in Mearns and Aberdeenshire.
C. Davalli- 
ana, on a moor two miles west of Aberdeen, along 
with C.
binervis.
C.Julva, one of the most com- 
mon species of the genus, in upland pastures in 
Mearns and Aberdeenshire.
I do not recollect if I 
took notice in my last of a mistake respecting the 
place of Lmncea borealis (Engl.
Bot.); for "at 
Mearns/' it should have been "old fir woods at 
Englismaldie (seat of Lord Kintore), on the borders 
of Mearns or Kincardineshire." Have you decided 
on the Polypodimn which I had called rhcp.ticum ?
It grows in the Den of FuUerton, Angus or Forfar- 
shire, two miles from Montrose.
I have lately received the very agreeable infor- 
mation, from Colonel Brodie, that part of the Flora 
Britannica is published.
Wishing it success, 
I remain, Sir, 
Your much obliged, &c.
Jas. Beattie.
8. Spicitegkmi BotanicwrtyOr Gleanings of Botany.
2 fasc, folio.
1791.
Dedicated to Lady Amelia 
Hume.
To Dr. W.
Wade of Dublin the author was in- 
debted for the following commendation of these 
early efforts : 
" Sir, — Though I have not the honour and satis- 
faction of being personally acquainted with you,per- 
mit me to introduce myself by correspondence.
"Your different valuable publications I have taken 
in, and peruse with much pleasure and admiration.
444 
particularly your Icones PicttB and SpicUegium.
They are certainly without flattery the most superb 
botanical publications I ever saw.
" Your introductory paper, or rather admirable 
epitome of the history of natural science, in the 
Linnsean Transactions, charms me.
"I am delighted with all your various publications, 
* from the hyssop on the wall to the cedar of Le- 
banon :' i.
e. from your Dissertation on the Seoces 
of Plants to your Icones Pictce" 
9. Caroli L'lnncd Flora Lapponica, Editio altera 
studio et curd t/acobi Edvardi Smith.
Illusti^issiincE, 
Societati RegicE Scientiariim Upsaliensi, olhn SuecicF, 
appellatcE, novam hanc Editionem ohsequio quo par 
est DDD J.
E. Smith.
In a letter addressed to Mr. Woodward in 1791?
Sir James informs him that " Flora Lapponica is at 
last gone to the press;" and adds " Do not think me 
too vain if I say it will be the most correct edition 
that ever appeared of any of Linnaeus's works, his 
own Stockholm ones not excepted.
The list of au- 
thors quoted will be infinitely more complete and cor- 
rect; and as to synonyms, I have examined every one, 
judged of it as well as I was capable, and corrected 
the typographical errors, which are.
innumerable in 
the first edition.
I add fifty-five new species to the 
Flora." 
10.
^ Sj}ecimen of the Botany of New Holland.
Dedicated to Thomas Wilson, Esq., F.L.S. 1793.
This work was published in numbers, of a quarto 
445 
size, corresponding with Dr. Shaw's Zoology of 
New Holland ; the works were intended to accom- 
pany each other : — no more than sixteen plates of 
either ever appeared.
1 1 .
Sketch of a Tour on the Continent in the 
Yea?'S 1786 and 17^7- Dedicated to his fellow-tra- 
veller, William Younge, M.D. F.L.S., 3 vols.
8vo, 
published in 1793.
A second edition appeared in 1807- This Tour 
was translated into the French, Italian, and German 
languages.
From his friends Dr. Goodenough and James Al- 
derson, M.D., of Norwich, the author received the 
following commendations : 
My dear Sir, — By your inquiry after my opinion 
of your Travels, I conclude my letter to you, which 
I got franked from Bulstrode the first week in 
January, has miscarried.
I said a great deal upon 
the subject, to thank you for the great entertain- 
ment I have had in reading them : you show such 
multifarious reading that you quite surprise me.
In one part, I thought I saw a passage, or rather 
a page or two, which I took to be in Dr. Kippis's 
style.
I like to read on both sides of a question.
No good cause is hurt by discussion.
— Believe me 
your most affectionate and sincere friend, 
Samuel Goodenough.
Dear Sir,— I have this moment finished your 
Travels, and am extremely obliged to you for the 
pleasure you have afforded me.
At the same time 
416 
I cannot help saying that the simile of the Pope, 
when alarmed, going to the Castle of St. Angelo, 
equals, in my opinion, any thing to be found in my 
favourite Hudibras.
— J.
A. 
12.
Syllabus of a Course of Lectures on Botany , 
1795.
13.
Natural History of the rarer Lepidopterous 
Insects of Georgia, from the Ohservations of */ohn 
Abbot.
Two vols, folio, published in 1797, and 
dedicated to Miss Johnes of Hafod.
The following letter from Mr. Jones relates to 
this work : 
Mr. TF.
Jones to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Chelsea, 9th Sept.
1797.
Had you ere this pronounced the sentence of in- 
gratitude upon me, the world in general would have 
justified you, appearances are so very greatly against 
me, for not giving you thanks for your magnificent 
present before ; but the truth is I was not in pos- 
session of it till this morning.
I went to the book- 
seller's no less than three times before I could get 
it ; and even today I believe I should have been sent 
oiF without it, if I had not showed myself greatly 
dissatisfied.
I took it under my arm, but soon found 
it suflficiently weighty.
Did you ever see a carica- 
ture of a three-pounder going up Hampstead Hill 
to dinner ?
— a man oppressed with his own weight, 
yet surmounting all difficulties that he might enjoy 
the pleasures of the table.
So I laboured abundantly 
447 
with my load, in expectation of high gratification 
from the contents when I should'^ get home, — and 
truly I was not disappointed ; but I disclaim all 
merit, unless you maintain that such is due to' every 
one that stands sponsor to a child, if such child 
should turn out a worthy member of society.
No, 
Sir, the merit is yours ; the demerit attaches to the 
engraver and colourer, for there are some faults ; 
but upon the whole it has the three great requisites 
to a modern publication, — good letter, good paper, 
and showy plates.
I find myself very much gratified, as well for the 
present, as for the genteel manner you notice me 
therein, and for which I return you my most grate- 
ful acknowledgements.
I am in possession of a pair of Papilio Ijathonia.
Until the last time I examined your cabinet at 
Hammersmith I was unable to distinguish between 
Phalcena, Padella and Euonymella : I there saw evi- 
dently the distinctions, and concluded, from the ex- 
perience I then had, that Euonymella was not Eng- 
lish ; but this year Mr. Haworth has taken it, and 
another person has taken one also.
Ray described 
it.
You are certainly wrong in naming the fly Ar- 
giolus, Tab. 15.
I have both male and female 
among my drawings without a name.
Argiolus is 
certainly different.
Dear Sir, 
Your most obliged, 
William Jones.
14.
— Tracts relating to Natural History.
— In 
448 
1798 Sir James republished Reflexions on the 
Study of Nature, which was then out of print, to- 
gether with the following essays, reviews, and de- 
scriptions, collected together in one octavo volume, 
which he dedicated to his valued friend, James 
Crowe, Esq., of Lakenham, under the above title.
Discourse on the Rise and Progress of Natural 
History.
Observations on the Irritability of Vegetables.
Review of Mr. Curtis's Botanical Magazine.
Review of Berkenhout's Synopsis.
Review of x\n Easy Introduction to Drawing.
Review of a Dutch edition of Systema NaturcB.
An Essay on the Genus of Dorsiferous Ferns.
Description of a new Genus of Plants called 
Sprengelia.
Description of a new Genus of Plants called 
TVestringia.
Description of a new Genus of Plants called 
Boronia.
Mr. Pennant to «/.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Downing, Sept.
6, 1798.
I waited only for a frank, that you might receive 
gratuitously my thanks for your acceptable present 
of Tracts relating to Natural History : they give me 
great pleasure, especially your account of my favour- 
ite Gesner.
Did you know that he died of the plague ?
When he was attacked, he collected his papers or 
works, fell to correcting, and died in the employ.
I — but how dare I put my name in level with so 
449 
great a man !
— am doing the same, with my anasarca 
hanging upon me ; but let me not alarm you.
After 
being much weakened by the rough medicines ne- 
cessary to expel the foe, I am much better, but left 
very weak, — the effects of fox-glove, a medicine not 
to be depreciated, for I may praise its efficacy.
I 
have much reason to be content, at the age of 73.
Why should I repine ?
a painless invalid in posses- 
sion of my mental faculties !
Every good wish at- 
tend you !
May you live long a useful member of 
society, is the sincere wish of.
Dear Sir, 
Your affectionate Friend, 
Thomas Pennant.
Have you any friend who could give you an ac- 
count of the colours used in the Hindostan paint- 
ings, if any are chemical?
15.
Flora Britannica.
— The acquisition of the 
Linnaean Herbarium soon discovered to the bota- 
nists of England, that many of our native plants had 
been mistaken, and that the nomenclature of our 
whole Flora stood in need of revision.
Hence Sir 
James was led in 1/94 to undertake a Latin Flora 
Britannica^ which was completed in three volumes 
m 1804.
This work the author dedicated to Sir 
Joseph Banks, Bart.
It was reprinted word for word by Dr. Romer at 
Zurich.
" It is remarkable," says the writer of Sir 
James's obituary in the Philosophical Magazine, 
"like all his other labours, for accuracy in observing, 
accuracy in recording, and unusual accuracy in print- 
VOL.
I. 2 G 
450 
ing : being written in the Latin language, the infor- 
mation is condensed into a small compass, while it 
has the rare advantage of having had every synonym 
compared with the original author." 
Davies Giddy ^ Esq. to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, June, 18, 1799.
I am extremely happy to learn that you are about 
to finish the work of my late friend Doctor Sib- 
thorp.
One need not hesitate in declaring the 
materials worthy of your attention.
Some ancient 
Greek, unacquainted with the sexual system, has 
long since observed, ra avOri rravra EjOWTOC epya' ra 
(jyvra Tavra tovtov 7roiJ7/itaTa. It gives me little lesS 
satisfaction to find that your Flora Britannica is 
in such forwardness ; since, in addition to the learn- 
ing and research every one expects, I understand 
the descriptions are to be derived from your own 
observations.
I can't help wishing that Cornwall 
had been previously favoured with a visit.
Believe me, dear Sir, 
Your much obliged and very humble Servant, 
Davies Giddy.
Sir Thomas Frankland, Bart.* to %J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Wimpole Street, April 29, 1800.
I write a few lines to say how much I am grati- 
fied by the Flora Britannica, and flattered by your 
* Of Thirkleby, near York ; many years M.P. for Thirsk.
This able botanist died early in the month of January, 1831, in 
the 84th year of his age.
451 
notice of me in it.
Tlic descriptions which you 
have so judiciously added to every plant lessen the 
botanist's labour tenfold, and every little amplifica- 
tion of generic characters {e.g. in the Umbelliferous 
plants) is valuable.
The new specific descriptions, 
also, are most important : e.g.l used to find Geji- 
tiana amarella near Netherby, "corolla 4-fida"; and 
what ground had I to doubt its being campestrisy 
as it had been described in Hudson ?
I could ob- 
serve no other difference, and from not knowing 
the real campestris, disbelieved there being such a 
plant as a distinct species.
Thomas Frankland.
"Hudson, Lightfoot, and Withering," says the 
Rev. E.
B. Ramsay, " wrote /Yor^^" on the system 
of Linnseus ; but there can be no doubt that Sir 
James Edward Smith was the most accomplished 
disciple of this school, and the best expounder of 
its principles.
The Flora Britannica is perhaps the 
most perfect specimen existing ; a work of which 
it has been said by no mean authority, that it is 
worth studying, as well for its logical precision, as 
for its botanical information." 
«/.
E. Smith to the Editor of the Monthly Review.
Sir, Norwich, March 2, 1801.
The very favourable, and perhaps partial account 
of the Flora Britannica^ given in your Review for 
January, is too intelligent in itself, not to deserve 
2 G 2 
452 
assistance from tliose capable of adding to its accu- 
racy ; and too flattering to its author, not to excite 
in him a wish of exculpating himself from any cen- 
sures it may seem to contain against him.
Yet these 
two objects would hardly have occasioned my trou- 
bling you with the present letter, had I not thought 
it justice to the public to avow some mistakes into 
which I have fallen, and at the same time to account 
for a longer delay of the remaining volumes than I 
once intended ; for both which communications I 
have judged your Review the most proper vehicle.
The reason assigned in the Preface, for publish- 
ing the work in an incomplete state, is really and 
truly the only one that operated with me at the 
time : it was suggested by my publisher, and had 
the sanction of my most enlightened friends.
I 
had then continued my manuscript far into the last 
class among the Mosses and Lichens ; and had 
thought of nothing less than postponing that part, 
being determined to finish the work as completely 
as was then in my power.
Since the publication, 
however, of the first two volumes, several new mo- 
tives have presented themselves, which oblige me 
to defer the sequel longer than I intended.
1st, I 
wish to see Mr. Dickson's fourth Fasciculus of 
Cryptogamia, which is on the point of publication : 
2ndly, The Prodromus LichenographicB SueciccB of 
Dr. Acharius takes the lead so much in that de- 
partment, it is absolutely essential to my purpose 
to compare specimens with that author ; and this 
cannot be done either in the winter season, or in 
the present miserable state of Northern politics.
453 
3rdly, A general work by Mr. Persoon, on Fimgi, 
some sheets of which he has sent me, promises to 
be so important, that I wish to see it complete be- 
fore I digest the British Fungi into order.
Whatever 
reasons therefore might occasion the first delay, 
these, which are analogous to what you supposed, 
make me hope the public will in the end have no 
reason to complain of it.
A still further advantage 
will accrue from my having the benefit of two sea- 
sons more (the spring of 1800 and 1801) to inves- 
tigate the diflficult genus Salicc, which I have already 
written twice over, and in which the work will be 
more likely to merit the praise of labour and ori- 
ginality, than perhaps in any other part, though it 
will still contain only an imperfect sketch of the 
subject.
I proceed to notice some of your remarks.
The 
order of Syngenesia Monogynia appears not to be 
founded in nature, nor useful in practice, because 
some GentiancR, VioIce and Lobelice have the an- 
thers perfectly united, others not at all.
I have 
more to say on this subject than can be admitted 
here.
The genus of Potamogeton I am aware is but 
imperfectly treated.
I have more than one new 
British species.
As to changing names, — Radiola millegrana is no 
" arbitrary alteration," or novelty, but the old ge- 
neric name of Ray, retained as a specific one, and 
surely preferable to linoides, which I have proved 
to be false.
My S'llene inflata would certainly have 
been called S.
Behen, had there not been another 
already so called in Linnceus.
In the specific 
454 
names of the genus Glauc'ium, I confess I have been 
tempted to follow Gaertner, in preferring precision, 
elegance, and truth, to barbarism, confusion, and 
error.
The name of the common Wall-flower is not 
changed by me, but it is so called by Linnaeus.
On 
this subject, however, I entirely agree with you in 
principle ; otherwise I might have changed half the 
names in the book.
I differed from M.
de Lamarck in his ideas of 
tluncus acutus and mmntmius^ because analogy led 
me to judge the panicle must be terminal in one if 
in the other ; but perhaps I may be mistaken, and 
have been led to think the two species more akin 
than they are, because of other authors having con- 
founded them.
I am sorry to say I fear I have 
added to the confusion concerning the Dover Cam- 
pion, for Miller's pretendedly authentic specimen 
deceived me.
Original ones in the British Mu- 
seum, gathered at Dover, are a plant I do not 
know, and which is now said not to be found at 
Dover.
We must wait in hopes of its being one 
day recovered, as was the case with Ligusticum 
Cornuhiense.
I should claim no merit, even if I had corrected 
myself by the help of a much less able botanist 
than Mr. Curtis, on the subject of Cerastium te- 
trandrum.
I have already found out my error in 
confounding two species under Trifolium filiforme^ 
and shall correct that, and such further errors as 
may be detected, in an appendix to the last volume.
I am.
Sir, 
Your obliged and very humble Servant, 
J. E.
Smith.
455 
Liberte.
Egalit^.
Mus4wR National (T His toire Naturelle.
Paris, le 12 Fiimaire, an 9 de la Republique, (3 Dec. 1801).
JLes Prqfesseurs administrateurs du Musdum d'His- 
toire Naturelle a Monsieur James Ed^vard Smith, 
a Londres.
Monsieur, 
Nous avons re9U par la voie de Monsieur Delau- 
nay, que vous avez accueilli a Londres, divers ou- 
vrages de votre composition destines par vous a en- 
richir la biblioth^que de notre Museum d'Histoire 
Naturelle ; savoir la Flora Britannica, 2 vol.
8vo ; 
le Compendium Florcp, BritanniccB^ 1 vol.
8vo ; un 
recueil de Memoires sur divers sujets d'histoire na- 
turelle, 8vo.
Ces ouvrages, dignes de la reputation de leur au- 
teur, en contribuant aux progres de la science, lui 
ont deja acquis la reconnaissance de tous les natu- 
ralistes.
Recevez, Monsieur, le temoignage de la 
notre, pour un present dont nous sentonstout leprix, 
et agreez I'assurance de notre sincere attachement.
Salut et estime.
JussiEu. Faujas.
Desfontaines.
Thouin.
Lamarck.
16.
Compendium Florce BritanniccB, dedicated 
to Aylmer Bourke Lambert, Esq. V.P.L.S., has 
gone through four editions, and, to borrow the 
observation of an able friend on the subject, is " be- 
come the general text-book of English botanists, 
456 
and is perhaps the most complete manual furnished 
on any subject." It was published in 1800.
Mr. Woodward, to whom the author presented 
this volume, says : 
" I return you my most sincere thanks for your 
inestimable present ; inestimable, quia pignus ami' 
citicB.
I have been highly pleased with the Preface : 
the language is good, the style appropriate ; but 
what I most admire is that unassuming display of 
knowledge which always informs so much more 
than it promises, and is the true characteristic of 
all my esteemed friend's writings, unlike the gene- 
rality of modern authors, who promise mountains, 
and very often produce not even mole-hills." 
17.
Flora Grccca.
— A sketch of the origin of 
this classic Flora seems necessary in this place, to 
acquaint the reader with the occasion of its falling 
into the hands of the President of the Linna3an So- 
ciety, to arrange into shape and give to the world.
The following is taken, in a very concise form, 
from the biographical memoir of Dr. J.
Sibthorp, 
by Sir J.
E. Smith, in Rees's Cyclopaedia: — 
"Dr. John Sibthorp, an eminent botanist, the 
younger son of Dr. Humphrey Sibthorp, Professor of 
Botany at Oxford, was born there in 17^8, and was 
educated and took his degree at the same University.
"He passed a portion of the year 1784 at Got- 
tingen, where he projected his first tour to Greece, 
and thence he proceeded to Vienna, where he stu- 
died with peculiar care the celebrated manuscript 
of Dioscorides, which has so long been preserved 
457 
in the Imperial library, and procured an excellent 
draughtsman, Mr. Ferdinand Bauer, to be the com- 
panion of his expedition.
The illustration of the 
writings of Dioscorides was Dr. Sibthorp's chief 
object.
The names and reputed virtues of several 
plants recorded by that ancient writer, and still 
traditionally retained by the Athenian shepherds, 
he hoped would serve occasionally to elucidate or 
confirm the synonymy.
" In March 1786 Dr. Sibthorp and Mr. Bauer 
set out together from Vienna, and in May pro- 
ceeded to Crete.
Here, in the month of June, our 
botanical adventurers were welcomed by Flora in 
her gayest attire.
The snowy covering of the 
Sphaciote mountains was withdrawing, and a tribe 
of lovely little blossoms were just peeping through 
the veil.
" The first sketch of the Flora Graica comprises 
about 850 plants.
' This,' says Dr. Sibthorp, 
' may be considered as containing only the plants 
observed by me in the environs of Athens, on the 
snowy heights of the Grecian Alp, Parnassus, on 
the steep precipices of Delphi, the empurpled 
mountain of Hymettus, the Pentele, the lower hills 
about the Pirseus, the olive-grounds about Athens, 
and the fertile plains of Bceotia.' 
"In December 1787, Dr. Sibthorp returned to 
England, and was enrolled among the first members 
of the Linnaean Society in the following spring.
" In March 1794 he set out on a second tour to 
Greece, attended by Francesco Borone " (the Mila- 
nese servant of Sir James before mentioned,) "as 
458 
a botanical assistant.
At Constantinople he was 
joined by his friend Mr. Hawkins.
They made an 
excursion into Bithynia, and climbed to the summit 
of Olympus.
Taygetus, the highest mountain of 
the Morea, and almost rivalling Parnassus, was as- 
cended by these adventurous travellers.
But Dr.
Sibthorp's impaired health made it essential to him 
to return to his native country in the autumn of 
1795.
His few succeeding months were marked 
by the progress of an unconquerable disease ; and 
he died at Bath, February the 8th 1796, in the 
38th year of his age.
" The only work which Professor John Sibthorp 
published in his lifetime is a Flora Oxoniensis, in 
one volume octavo, printed in 1794.
"We have now to record the posthumous benefits 
which Dr. Sibthorp has rendered to his beloved 
science, and which are sufficient to rank him amongst 
its most illustrious patrons.
" By his will, dated January the 12th, 1796, he 
gives a freehold estate in Oxfordshire to the Uni- 
versity of Oxford, for the purpose of first publish- 
ing his Flora GrcEca, in ten folio volumes, with a 
hundred coloured plates in each ; and a Prodromus 
of the same work, in octavo, without plates.
" His executors, the Honourable Thomas Wen- 
man, John Hawkins, and Thomas Piatt, Esquires, 
were to appoint a sufficiently competent Editor of 
these works, to whom the manuscripts, drawings, 
and specimens were to be confided.
They fixed 
upon the writer of the present article.
The plan 
of the Prodromus was drawn out by Dr. Sibthorp ; 
459 
but nothing of the Flora^ except the figures, was 
prepared, nor any botanical characters or descrip- 
tions whatever.
The final determination of the 
species, the distinctions of such as were new, and 
all critical remarks, have fallen to the lot of the 
Editor, who has also revised the references to Dio- 
scorides, and, with Mr. Hawkins's help, corrected 
the modern Greek names." 
Sir James lived to complete six of these volumes, 
and half the seventh, which has been published 
since his death by his distinguished friend Mr. Ro- 
bert Brown.
The Flora GrcRca was a work, in the compilation 
of which Sir James had peculiar pleasure.
Those 
who have seen the thousand beautiful delineations 
of the flowers of that country, by the hand of Mr.
Ferdinand Bauer, may conceive it was no dull em- 
ployment : it was a work of relaxation, to which he 
returned with impatience after any pause in its pro- 
gress.
It was agreeable to him to observe that 
many of the plants of that beautiful and classic land 
were the same as the most admired offspring of 
Flora in our own.
The white lily was at all times 
his admiration ; and he was charmed with disco- 
vering that its native bed and choice habitation 
is in the vale of Tempe.
" The violet and prim- 
rose," Sir James tells us, " enamel the plains of 
Arcadia, and the Narcissus Tazetta, which Dr.
Sibthorp was disposed to think the true poetic 
Narcissus, decorated in profusion the banks of the 
Alpheus.
The barbarian horde under whose escort 
they were obliged to travel, had taste enough to 
collect nosegays of these flowers.
The oaks of the 
460 
Arcadian mountains presented them with the true 
ancient misselto, Loranthus europcEUS, which still 
serves to make birdhme ; whilst our misseltoe, Vis- 
cum album, in Greece grows only on the silver fir.
May not this circumstance," he continues, " account 
for the old preference of such misseltoe as grows 
on the oak, among the ancient Britons, and conse- 
quently help us to trace the origin of their super- 
stition to Greece ?" 
In illustration of the foregoing narrative, the fol- 
lowing letters from Dr. Sibthorp and Mr. Hawkins 
will not be found uninteresting to the reader.
Professor Sibthorp to «/.
E. S??iit/i.
Dear Sir, Pera, Aug. 9th, 1794.
I am glad you have safely received the Flora 
Occoniensis : it was hastily drawn up ; and, pressed 
for time, I had no leisure to give it what I could 
much have wished, for I fear it much wants a cor- 
recter form.
I can only say this, that it contains 
only such plants as I have seen : I could have added 
more from the catalogue of Camden and others ; 
but I was scrupulous, and wished to bear testimony 
only of those things I had seen.
I recollect jocosely 
having proposed to you a botanical conversation, 
in which it should be debated in a council of bota- 
nists, what should be admitted and what rejected.
I think the latter classes of the Linnaean system 
are advantageously melted down amongst the others ; 
but they have gone such lengths lately in Germany, 
in mixing and compounding the Linnaean system, 
as almost to have spoilt its shape and form.
I dis- 
461 
like particularly the mixture by Ginelin of the Icos- 
andria and Polyandria; the attachment of the sta- 
mina to the calyx or the receptacle furnishing a 
striking mark of distinction.
Francesco would 
inform you that I arrived very ill, with a bilious 
fever and colic, at Constantinople :as soon as my 
health permitted me I visited the shores of the 
Bosphorus, the woods of Belgrade, and the sands 
of Domusderi on the Black Sea. I have noticed 
near eight hundred plants about Byzantium, and 
have got seeds of Daphne pontica and Convolvulus 
persiciis, two good plants for our garden.
I know 
not why Epimedium is termed alpinum ; it is one 
of the most common plants in the woods of Bel- 
grade, which are scarcely mountainous, much less 
alpine.
The custom of setting fire to the woods in 
this country, to burn the brush-wood to give the 
grass room to grow, and furnish it with a manure 
from the ashes, is very unfriendly to the researches 
of the Cryptogamist.
Boletus lucidus was almost 
the only Fungus I noticed ; this is Forskal's B.
7nargmalis ; his Salvia, now in full flower, is a most 
ornamental plant.
Bosa centifolia grows wild 
there ; and the flowers of the vine, which mixes with 
the Smilax and twines round the chesnut, have a 
fragrant delicate odour beyond any flower I recol- 
lect.
The shores of the Bosphorus are very poor 
in Fuci, nor are they rich in Testacea.
I have col- 
lected about fifty sorts of fish, with their modern 
Greek names.
The genus Labrus is rich in spe- 
cies, varying with many colours.
Julus [omnium 
formosissimus) is often brought to market ; its fla- 
vour inferior to most of the fish brought to table.
462 
I go often upon the Bosphorus, while dolphins 
play around me.
Gulls here are so tame that they sit 
upon the roofs of houses like pigeons.
The Pro- 
cellaria Puffinus is constantly flying up and down 
the canal : they call them here by the emphatical 
name of " souls of the damned." While I was read- 
ing in the palace garden the other day, a vulture, 
Percnopterus, perched in the tree hanging over my 
head ; and I could not resist, not having the fear of 
the Egyptians before my eyes, to shoot it.
The summer has been very dry and hot.
Fahren- 
heit's thermometer varied in my chamber last week 
from 84 to 86 degrees.
There are few insects at 
present, except scorpions, mosquitoes, bugs, and 
Conops calcitrans, the happy accompaniments of this 
happy climate.
The chase of the entomologist was 
almost over about a month since.
I had fine sport.
I write to you in good health and spirits ; for 
yesterday my friend arrived, and today my baggage, 
having run " per varios casus, et tot discrimina re- 
rum." Tell Shaw, that Hawkins is in "high preser- 
vation," that he differs only in appearance from hav- 
ing the labia barbata — huge mustaches, which he 
is nursing for a Syrian and Egyptian tour.
We are 
going together into Thessaly, Attica and the Pelo- 
ponnesus, and shall winter at Zante.
My health is 
much better.
Remember me kindly to Sir J.
Banks, 
Dryander, Lambert, &c 
Yours sincerely, 
J. SiBTHORP.
Borone is in good health, in action quite a Le 
Fleur.
403 
Professor Sibthorp to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Athens, Nov. 1, 1794.
I should have been happy to have sent you a 
pleasant letter from Athens ; but from Athens I 
must this time write you a very mournful one.
Poor Borone is no more !
He was quite recovered 
from an intermittent fever that had attacked him a 
little before his departure from Constantinople, and 
on the evening of his unhappy fate was unusually 
gay, singing to a tune that Arakiel, Mr. Hawkins's 
servant, played upon the guitar.
A little after mid- 
night, we were waked out of our sleep by the cries 
of Francesco, who had fallen into the street, out of 
the window of the chamber where he slept with 
Arakiel.
On the servants' going down to him, he 
languishingly groaned to Arakiel, who was the first 
that came up to him, '^ Ah !
povero Francesco e 
morto !" James, the other servant of Mr. Hawkins, 
then coming up, he said, " Ah !
James, James !
" and 
expired.
As soon as Mr. Hawkins and myself heard that 
Francesco was hurt by his fall, we immediately got 
up, and went down to him.
On taking him by the 
hand, I found the pulse gone, and no signs of life.
We directly got him into the house, and attempted 
to bleed him, but without effect.
His loins and 
back, on which he appeared to have fallen, were 
very much bruised ; but there was not the least ap- 
pearance of blood, nor could I find that any bones 
were broken.
It had rained very hard on the pre- 
464 
ceding day, so that the street was dirty : the night 
was dark, with frequent flashes of lightning.
The 
opening of the window out of which he fell was 
extremely narrow, and appears not above eighteen 
feet from the ground.
To get out of it, he must 
previously have mounted on a box that stood near 
it, and then squeezed himself through.
We have 
every reason to think all this was done in his sleep.
On the opposite side of the room to this window 
was another, that opened upon a terrace, on which 
he was accustomed to walk.
Perhaps, if awake, 
which I can scarcely conceive, he had forgotten 
which of the two windows led to the terrace.
You may imagine that after this we passed the 
remainder of the night dismally enough.
The next 
day nothing remained but to perform the last offices 
to poor Francesco.
He was buried in the evening 
at the Church of the Madonna, under the shade of 
a mulberry-tree.
The obsequies were performed in 
a very decent manner l)y four Greek priests, who 
chanted over him the burial service.
Mr. Hawkins 
and myself, the British Consul, and some Sclavo- 
nians who were here, with the servants, attended 
the corpse.
The Archbishop, who a few days be- 
fore had expressed the strongest obligations to the 
English nation, pitifully sent a Papas to demand 
fifty piastres (about twelve pounds) for his permis- 
sion to bury him.
The Consul remonstrated with 
him on the impropriety and exorbitancy of the de- 
mand ; when he sent a second message to say he 
would take half that sum.
This produced another 
remonstrance from the Consul, when he repented.
465 
and refused to take anything.
He has since sent a 
hint that he would be glad of a present.
We mean 
to send him a Greek Testament, that a metropo- 
litan who has four suffragans may read a lesson 
of piety.
I regret with you most sincerely the cruel end of 
this unfortunate youth.
He had escaped from the 
thieves of Italy, and from the inhospitable climate 
of Sierra Leone.
He had been with me blocked 
up eight days by pirates at Mount Athos.
Poor 
fellow!
he was then very anxious to hide my money, 
that we might have something, he said, to return 
home with.
I shall set off in two or three days for 
Zante, where I shall winter.
In January I propose 
to visit, with Hawkins, the Morea; and in the spring, 
or early in the summer, to return to England.
I 
have made considerable additions to my collection of 
Greek plants and animals, having visited the Bithy- 
nian Olympus, Troy, Lemnos, Mount Athos, and 
Negropont.
During my stay at Athens, I have 
procured a pretty exact knowledge of the agricul- 
ture and natural history of Attica.
Tell our friends 
in Soho Square, that I have all the labour, if not all 
the sweets, of an Attic bee.
J. SiBTHORP.
Professor Sib thorp to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Oxford, Oct. 8, 179 J.
I regret extremely not being in Oxford when you 
favoured me with a call.
In my way through Town 
VOL.
I. 2 H 
466 
I made my inquiries in Marlborough Street, but 
was informed you were at Norwich.
Since my re- 
turn I have felt myself very much indisposed, and 
in a very infirm state of health, — a nasty low fever, 
with a cough that alarms me, from some affection 
of the lungs.
I have been down to Brighton, but 
bathed only in the tepid bath.
I am now nursing 
myself at Oxford with asses milk, and gentle exer- 
cise on horseback ; — have some thoughts of trying 
what Bristol will do.
I left Hawkins at Zante, from whence I had a 
very long and uncomfortable passage of twenty- 
four days to Otranto, in which I date the origin of 
my complaints, having in an excursion to Nicopolis, 
near Actium, caught a most severe cold, — the air of 
Prevesa is even by the Greeks deemed infamous.
I travelled post from Ancona through the Tyrol, a 
beautiful Alpine country, very inviting to the bo- 
tanist.
At Erlang I paid a visit to Schreber, who 
received me with great politeness.
He has got 
a Monograph ready on the genus Carex, and told 
me he would adopt Dr. Goodenough's names if he 
would favour him with a list of them.
He is also 
ready with a Fasciculus of your Gramina.
I pro- 
mised to send him Carex strigosa^ and, if I could 
get it, Carex i?idica.
I spent an hour with Hoffmann at Gottingen ; 
he has much improved the Gottingen garden ; he 
was compiling a Synopsis of the German Crypto- 
gamia under the form of a Taschen-buch, or what 
we call Pocket-book.
I should like to see it in a 
more dignified form.
467 
Your situation is a very enviable one for a bota- 
nist; out of the smoke of London, and close to one 
of the best gardens in Europe*.
I left all my treasures behind me at Zante ; but 
by a letter from our Consul I hope soon to receive 
them.
I am quite a stranger to what has been 
going on in the botanical world for this twelve- 
month past.
Lambert informs me of great trea- 
sures brought by Masson, White and Menzies, — 
that the botanic world will grow too big for us.
You renew my grief in mentioning poor Borone.
I was so affected that I could do nothing for some 
days after his death, not even continue my journal.
If I recollect right, it was on the 20th of October 
that this melancholy event took place.
He certainly 
had no watch, but as he was fond of wearing one, 
I lent him mine when we were at Constantinople.
It was indeed a cruel fate, and we all lament his 
death.
Hawkins, when I last heard, was gone into 
Thessaly to visit Ali Pashaw, in good health, but 
under alarms from robbers.
Yours most sincerely, 
J. SiBTHORP.
The following letters, it will be perceived, were 
written after Dr. Sibthorp's death, and when the care 
of his posthumous work was confided to Sir James 
Smith.
* Mr. James Lee's at Hammersmith.
2 h2 
408 
«/.
Hawkins, Esq. to «/.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, London, June 25, 1799.
I conceive that you must have had some trouble 
in packing up so large and miscellaneous a collec- 
tion, but I hope you have received every part of it, 
particularly a large collection of seeds made in his 
last tour, and named by him on the spot, as far as 
the plants could be ascertained from whence they 
were taken.
I hope you will be able to decipher Dr. Sibthorp's 
hand-writing, which is not the best.
As to the want of names, I well recollect that he 
never affixed any to the specimens, but seemed to 
have a perfect knowledge of them, and therefore 
thought it perhaps superfluous.
You, of course, will find little difficulty in ascer- 
taining them, after which you may refer to the 
Journals for their respective habitats, and all that 
relates to them.
You will find that Dr. Sibthorp subdivided the 
Flora Grseca in his last tour into a number of pro- 
vincial Floras, which has its use.
There is a Flora 
Zacynthia, which was prepared for him by Consul 
Foresti before his arrival, with the vulgar names 
underwritten.
Likewise a small collection of plants 
from Maina, procured by Consul Foresti from a 
Mainote.
In the collection made during the last tour you 
will find a few sub-alpine plants, collected by me in 
Crete.
469 
I have specimens of three or four rock plants 
from the mountains of the Morea^ and I left about 
two hundred behind me at Patras.
Flaxman is now executing a monument to the 
memory of our late friend ; but the best, by far, will 
be that which you have in hand.
I remain, my dear Sir, 
Most truly yours, 
J. Hawkins.
J. Hawkins, Esq. to J.
E. Srnith.
Dear Sir, Sunbury, Feb. 13, 1800.
I have before me your two letters, and hasten to 
give you that information which lays in my power.
In our first tour a regular journal was kept by Dr.
Sibthorp of our daily peregrinations, and of every 
object of natural history discovered.
Thus for in- 
stance you will find a list of the plants which we 
found in the middle of March on the shores of the 
Hellespont, and a few days after on the coast of 
Caria ; but when we came to Cyprus, the form of 
the journal was so far changed, that only the vulgar 
names and uses, and the remarkable plants or birds 
were noted therein which daily occurred ; and the 
whole Flora and Fauna Cypria were drawn up in 
systematical arrangement at the end.
Every allowance must be made for the hurry and 
precipitation with which this Journal was written.
The season for botanizing is so short in these 
southern latitudes, and such a profusion of new or 
470 
rare plants present themselves at once, that it is 
hardly possible for the most practical botanist (and 
such was Dr. S.) to determine all with sufficient 
accuracy at the moment.
Hence it is that many 
of these supposed new species prove perhaps on 
further investigation to be old, and some of the 
supposed old new, while the old too are mistaken 
one for the other.
Add to this, that the necessity 
of moving quickly from one spot to another, and 
the time consumed on horseback or on shipboard, 
further contributed to limit the time which could 
be employed in the real scientifical examination of 
species of plants.
It is certainly a pity that Dr. Sibthorp did not 
mark all his specimens, or the drawings ; but he 
trusted to his memory, and dreamed not of dying.
In our second tour a daily journal was kept as in 
the former, and the same attention was paid to the 
determination of the vulgar names and uses of 
plants and of animals, and particular species as they 
occurred were noted down ; but now a more par- 
ticular geographical arrangement was adopted, and 
the Flora and Fauna of every province was thrown 
together, as you will find in the journal-book in re- 
spect to the Flora Byzantina, Bithynica, Montis 
Athos, Attica and Boeotica, Zacynthia, Achaica, 
Eliensis,Messeniaca, Arcadia, Argolica,Corinthiaca, 
and Laconia.
The Dacian plants which you mention were col- 
lected on his journey to Constantinople by land, 
and probably include those plants which he observed 
on Mount Heemus.
471 
Those of Olympus were collected in the course 
of our expedition to the summit of that mountain, 
soon after our junction ; and the Cretan plants are 
what I brought with me from Crete, and presented 
to Dr. Sibthorp at Constantinople.
1 should think +hat all the plants collected in our 
last tour are still unmixed with those of the former ; 
for the collection arrived after the final removal of 
Dr. S.
from Oxford, and shortly before his death.
They were consigned to the care of Dr. Werman, 
who found them in good preservation ; but whether 
Dr. W.
arranged them in any systematical order, or 
amalgamated them with the rest, I know not, but 
hope he did not ; in which case you will find, besides 
the abovementioned parcels, a very curious and 
finely preserved collection of the plants of Zante, 
made for him by a Zantiote apothecary ; a small 
collection of the plants of Maina, made by a Mai- 
note ; and those plants which Dr. S.
collected in his 
voyage from Zante to Venice, besides all the insects, 
fishes, birds, shells, quadrupeds and seeds which he 
preserved in the whole course of his tour.
It appears, then, that you either have or ought 
to have two large and distinct collections of Greek 
plants, the result of the two tours.
Next summer, or the following, I will contrive to 
visit Norwich, -and shall be happy to overlook your 
literary labours.
I am impatient to get your Flora Britannica.
I remain, my dear Sir, 
Most sincerely yours, 
J. Hawkins.
472 
18.
Prodromus Flora, Greece.
— Of this work, the 
first volume was published in 1806, a thick octavo ; 
and in 1813 a second volume of the same size.
" I have just received," says Dr. Goodenough, 
" your kind present of the first part of the Prodro- 
mus of Flora Grseca.
What a beautiful book — 
what good paper — what a distinct and elegant type !
How much information, without a letter of osten- 
tation or frippery.
Indeed it is a sterling work." 
19.
Exotic Botany.
— ^This work, published in 
numbers, was terminated in two volumes quarto, and 
also an octavo edition of the same was published 
in 1804.
It is dedicated to William Roscoe, Esq.
For want of public patronage it did not go on, 
notwithstanding it contained figures of many new 
and beautiful plants, communicated from the Indian 
Alps, from Africa, and New Holland.
20.
The Introduction to Physiological and Sy- 
stematic Botany, published in 1807, has passed 
through six editions.
Sir James dedicated this work 
to the Honourable and Right Reverend, Shute Lord 
Bishop of Durham.
The death of Mrs. Harrington 
defeated the author's original design of dedicating 
the work to her.
Dear Sir, Auckland Castle, Sept.
ZQ, 1807.
Every thing which reflects credit on the memory 
of a woman most justly dear to me, is in the high- 
est degree gratifying to my feelings.
In this view 
I beg to offer my earliest thanks for the very hand- 
4/3 
some manner in which you have expressed yourself 
in the Dedication respecting her and me.
Allow 
me to assure you that I shall at all times be happy 
in seeing you when in London^ or here, or at 
Mongewell.
I am, dear Sir, with much regard, 
Your faithful Servant, 
S. DUNELM.
In returning thanks to the author for a copy of 
this work, the Bishop of Carlisle proceeds to tell 
him : " I have read the Preface, Introduction, and 
part of the work.
Really you write with great spi- 
rit and propriety, and let me add with great dignity, 
worthy your superior station in the botanical world.
All natural history should be turned to the mental 
improvement of mankind, to make them think pro- 
perly, and with precision and truth ; arguments from 
this source are literally innumerable.
Have you 
seen a publication of Mr. Vince's, four sermons 
against Atheism, where he makes astronomy speak 
in this high strain.
I shall read your book through 
with great minuteness.
Yours ever, 
S. Carlisle.
Mr. Roscoe, writing to Sir James on the subject 
of the Introduction to Botany, says, "I am impatient 
to tell you how much I like what I have yet seen 
of it, particularly your Preface, with the concluding 
part of which I was not only delighted but really 
much affected." 
"To those," observes the Author, "whose minds 
474 
and understandings are already formed, the study of 
nature may be recommended, independently of all 
other considerations, as a rich source of innocent 
pleasure.
Some people are ever inquiring, What is 
the use of any particular plant ?
by which they 
mean.
What food or physic, or what materials for 
the painter or dyer does it afford ?
They look on a 
beautiful flowery meadow with admiration, only in 
proportion as it affords nauseous drugs or salves.
Others consider a botanist with respect only as he 
may be able to teach them some profitable improve- 
ment in tanning, or dyeing, by which they may 
quickly grow rich, and be then perhaps no longer 
of any use to mankind or themselves.
These views 
are not blameable, but they are not the sole end of 
human existence.
Is it not desirable to call the 
soul from the feverish agitation of worldly pursuits, 
to the contemplation of Divine Wisdom in the 
beautiful economy of Nature ?
Is it not a privilege to 
walk with God in the garden of creation, and hold 
converse with his providence ?
If such elevated 
feelings do not lead to the study of Nature, it can- 
not be far pursued without rewarding the student 
by exciting them.
" Rousseau, a great judge of the human heart and 
observer of human manners, has remarked, that 
' when science is transplanted from the mountains 
and woods into cities and worldly society, it loses 
its genuine charms and becomes a source of envy, 
jealousy, and rivalship.' This is still more true, if 
it be cultivated as a mere source of emolument.
'* But the man who loves botany for its own sake.
475 
knows no such feelings, nor is he dependent for 
happiness on situations or scenes that favour their 
growth.
He would find himself neither solitary nor 
desolate had he no other companion than a ' moun- 
tain daisy,' that ' modest crimson-tipped flower/ so 
sweetly sung by one of Nature's own poets.
The 
humblest weed or moss will ever afford him some- 
thing to examine or to illustrate, and a great deal 
to admire.
Introduce him to the magnificence of a 
tropical forest, the enamelled meadows of the Alps, 
or the wonders of New Holland, and his thoughts 
will not dwell much upon riches or literary honours; 
things that 
' Play round the head, but come not near the heart.' 
" In botany all is elegance and delight.
No pain- 
ful, disgusting, unhealthy experiments or incpiiries 
are to be made.
Its pleasures spring up under our 
feet, and, as we pursue them, reward us with health 
and serene satisfaction.
None but the most foolish 
or depraved could derive anything from it but what 
is beautiful, or pollute its lovely scenery with un- 
amiable or unhallowed images.
Those who do so, 
either from corrupt taste or malicious design, can 
be compared only to the fiend entering into the 
garden of Eden." — Preface to Introduction.
The letter which follows is from the late Professor 
of Natural History at Cambridge in Massachusetts 
(North America), a very amiable man, and who, like 
many of his countrymen, filled with enthusiasm for 
England, came to it with the feelings of those who 
from this island visit the classic realms of Greece 
and Rome.
476 
Very dear Sir, • London, Feb. 8, 1808.
Your favour of the 11th October gave me the 
more pleasure as it was unexpected, for you were so 
much occupied that I did not venture to ask such 
an indulgence.
The letter which contains the kind 
expression of your good-will must be always a 
treasure to me.
On coming home one evening, I found your 
Introduction to Botany.
This too was unexpected.
I thank you very heartily, and may say Voiis 7ne 
comblez without an hyberbole.
The Preface is ex- 
cellent; the reflections are perfectly just, and place 
this delightful science in its proper light.
Some 
paragraphs aft'ected me in a manner which I cannot 
well describe, and which I have frequently expe- 
rienced in reading Linne and Pliny.
The termina- 
ting one, p.
338, is one of these.
Did you ever ob- 
serve in reading anything which affected the mind 
by its energy or sublimity, that the blood flowed 
more copiously to the heart, leaving a chill on the 
surface of the body ?
I cannot explain it, but I 
never read Linne s Introduction to the Systema 
Natures, without this sensation.
I feel all that you say of botany as an introduc- 
tion to amiable characters, for the little I know of it 
has brought me acquainted with some of the best and 
most worthy persons in every country that I have 
visited, and those whom I shall always love.
The 
converse of such persons cherishes the flame of phi- 
lanthropy within me.
The study of Natural History, 
if pursued on right principles, thus serves to keep 
477 
the heart warm, and to preserve in vigour its best 
affections ; while in most other pursuits, the heart is 
hardened by the collision of sordid interest, and its 
affections smothered by emulation.
The study of 
man has often given me pain ; but since I have seen 
more of him, I feel a more glowing love of my 
species, and my heart stretched, as it were, with 
gratitude and affection.
God keep it so !
for a cold 
heart can never be happy.
I went to the Abbey to read the excellent epi- 
taph of Lord A.
Beauclerc, and was very well dis- 
posed to appreciate its beauties and receive its 
impressions, but I was disappointed.
In a state of 
mind perfectly calm, I entered the church, and was 
proceeding to the spot, when I was stopped by one 
of those persons who get their bread by strangers 
and visitors, who demanded a shilling, — which in- 
deed I intended to give him before I left the church ; 
but the demand at that instant was revolting, — 
my tranquillity was thus disturbed, and almost as 
soon as I began to read, the organ was struck, and 
its solemn peals, accompanied with some charming 
voices of singing boys completely frustrated the ob- 
ject of my visit, — which was, to read in silence.
So 
I transcribed the epitaph to read at home ; but the 
first impression was ruined for ever.
The four last 
lines are excellent, but " bid" in the penultimate 
one should be hade.
" Dying he hade Britannia's thunder roar, 
And Spain still felt him when he breathed no more." 
I have since received through the kindness of 
Mr. Lambert a packet of New Holland plants, and 
478 
am truly sensible of your goodness in this particular, 
and very much gratified to find so many among 
them called after botanists, some of whom I know.
These are precious objects, and will always bring 
you to my mind, as the communications of your 
friend Davall bring him present to you.
I often go with you to visit the Salicetum of your 
late friend Mr. Crowe^, see with pleasure the stream 
which flows by it, adorned with NipnphcEa ; visit in 
my way T^erbascum pulverulentum, and collect the 
Scabious in passing through the churchyard.
I 
live over again the happy days I passed at Norwich, 
and enjoy anew the pleasure I felt in witnessing the 
domestic felicity of my friends there.
That it may 
long continue is my anxious and ardent wish.
I pray you to make my respects acceptable to 
your mother and your lady.
I ardently wish the 
continuance of your health ; all other wishes are su- 
perfluous, as they cannot add to your enjoyments : 
yet minds like yours may receive some satisfaction 
that even I rejoice in your prosperity.
I do not 
forget any of my friends in Norwich, where every 
day of my sejour was albo lapide notari dignus.
I salute you with affectionate respect, and am, 
My dear Sir, 
Your truly obliged, 
Wm. D.
Peck.
* James Crowe, Esq. of Lakenham House.
479 
Dr. Swartz to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir^ Stockholm, Oct. 16, 1808.
Two years and a half are elapsed since our cor- 
respondence ceased.
In order to remind you of your 
Scandinavian friend, I write a few lines in company 
with the Sequel of the Memoirs of the Academy of 
Science, until the last published.
Though I have not had any immediate informa- 
tion from you, I have several times inquired about 
your welfare, and from the news I not long since 
obtained, I think my wishes for you not entirely 
frustrated.
If I am so happy as to hear it from 
yourself, so much the better.
We have long been exiled from foreign literature, 
except from that of your country, of which however 
we have had but sparing communications.
Of your 
Exotic Botany I have got two volumes, and seen 
some fasciculi of the wonderfully well executed jFYor^ 
GrcEca, with one part of its Prodromus from your 
hands.
Lately I have also enjoyed a particular sa- 
tisfaction from the sight of the beautiful Historia 
Fucorum of Mr. Turner.
It can hardly be expected that anything remark- 
able should appear from this corner, during a period 
the most cruel that can be imagined ; so much more 
desolating, as in and outward causes seem to pre- 
pare completely the ruin.
Under all this, for my 
part engaged to continue two current works, the 
Swedish Botany and Zoology, two volumes have ap- 
peared by my care during the two years past.
They 
480 
are merely calculated for home consumption, but 
have not escaped to be noticed abroad, as well as 
Westring's Economical History of the Lichens.
The interrupted communication with our neigh- 
bours has made us in a melancholy manner sepa- 
rated from our friends, with whom we are in behalf 
of literature connected.
This has been the case 
with me in regard to the intended Synopsis or 
Historia Muscorum, in connection with my excel- 
lent and ever-lamented friend Mohr, at Kiel, who 
has eclipsed from this sublunary world during the 
gloomy interval, and left me alone !
Much is done 
but more is remaining to do.
Even Acharius has 
proved the adversity of the times on account of his 
work the Lichenographia Universalis, which was to 
be printed at Gottingen, under the inspection of 
Professor Schrader (because the enterprise was too 
great for any home dealer in typography).
The 
manuscript was above two thirds past sent in locum 
last year, and some time after the printing began 
we were shut up, that in the course of nineteen 
months no account could be had.
As for present 
appearances, there are but little or no hopes yet to 
get out of the cage, if not quite perished before — 
Du7n dclirant.
Thunberg and Afzelius are, as before, living at 
Upsala, and, as much as I know, both well.
From 
the latter, some dissertations have appeared con- 
cerning the Swedish species of Rosa, on which he 
bestows rather more pains than some think deser- 
ving.
But it must be something like the Trifolium.
Pity that he has laid all his African treasures aside.
481 
He is a la tite for a kind of institution called the 
Linnaean, but I do not know how far it has pro- 
ceeded.
An excellent Eulogy on Linnaeus has been printed 
by one of his former pupils, Dr. Hedin, first physi- 
cian to the king.
This was a panegyric held in the 
school at Weixio, which Linnseus first visited.
On 
the same day a grand fete was given at the Academy 
of Upsala ; a secular celebration of the birthday of 
the great man; — the only instance to this day, in 
Sweden, of public honours given to an individual of 
subjects.
The museum and auditory were at the 
same time consecrated.
Many thousands assisted 
at the solemnity, and most part of the Linnaean old 
disciples also ; which gave the whole a most vene- 
rable appearance.
Mr. Turner has informed me that a new volume 
was soon to appear of the Linnaean Society's Trans- 
actions.
He mentioned also that you had described 
a new genus of Mosses.
I am most impatiently 
desirous to know what this may be, as well as the 
other contents of this first-rate work, so far above 
common praise.
Do not forget me, who remain with the sincerest 
esteem and affection.
Dear Sir, 
Your faithful Servant, 
Olof Svvartz.
VOL.
I. 2 I 
482 
Sir T.
G, Cullum to Sir* J.
E. Smith.
Bury St. Edmunds, 
My dear Sir James, Sept.
27, 1814.
I returned home from my journey to Wakefield, 
Harrowgate, &c.
on Saturday last ; and I cannot any 
longer delay returning you my thanks for your kind 
present of the Introduction to Physiological and 
Systematic Botany, the perusal of which has many 
years ago given me much pleasure, and will continue 
so to do whenever I take it up either for instruc- 
tion or amusement : but I must forbear (as Dr.
Thornton says) " expressing all the sentiments of 
respect and esteem entertained by me towards one 
so truly estimable." 
I wished you had been with me at the Dropping 
Well (or rather rock) at Knaresborough, I think you 
would have found some Jungermanniee, Lichens or 
Mosses ; but I am so totally ignorant in the Class 
Cryptogamia, that I do not pretend to know and 
distinguish the common Lichen or Moss.
Travel- 
ling along the road a fine plant or two of the Inula 
Heleiiium caught my eye, and the Seduin Telephium 
in a hedge-bank for a quarter of a mile.
The 
churchyard of Aberford near Ferrybridge, and the 
hedges near the town, are full of the Atropa Bella- 
donna, and the Colchicum autumnale in the meadows 
about Knaresborough, &c.
I called upon an old acquaintance of mine near 
Wakefield, the Rev. Dr.
Zouch, a Prebendary of 
Durham, and a Fellow of the Linnsean Society.
He 
printed (but I believe never published) A Memoir 
* It was in July this year, that Sir James had the honour of 
being knighted by His late Majesty George IV.
483 
of the Life of Dr. John Sudbury, who was Dean 
of Durham in 1 66 1 .
Dean Sudbury was born at Bury St. Edmunds, 
and left a considerable estate in Suffolk towards 
putting out boys as apprentices, and the residue to 
the Grammar-school at Bury.
But an anecdote Dr.
Zouch relates of Dean Sudbury's '^recovering many 
books that had been embezzled and taken away by 
Mr. Isaac Gilpin, who also lent Gerard's Herbal, 
which cost 10/., to Colonel Robert Lilburn, who is 
now in the Tower, and still detains that book from 
the church's library," I think is somewhat curious, 
in showing the estimation in which Gerard's Herbal 
was held at that time.
The Doctor should have told 
us (if he knew) whether it was Gerard's own edition, 
or the amended one by Johnson.
But the best part of my letter is to acquaint you 
and Lady Smith the time when Bury Fair will be in 
all its splendour and gaiety : but this I shall leave to 
Lady Cullum ; and shall therefore bid you farewell, 
and am, with great regard, 
T. G.
Cullum.
Baron Humboldt to Sir *J» E.
Smith.
Monsieur le President, Paris, ce 12 Juillet, 1816.
Je prends la liberty de vous adresser ces lignes 
par un de mes intimes amis, M.
Kunth, Professeur 
Royal de Botanique a I'Universite de Berlin.
C'est 
le botaniste qui a publie les Nova Genera et Species 
Plantarum que vous avez re(;u avec tant d'indul- 
gence.
M. Kunth etoit I'el^ve le plus cheri de 
Willdenow ; et je suis sur que vous serez content 
2 I 2 
484 
de son instruction et cle sa niodestie.
Que n'ai-je 
ete assez heureux d'avoir pu le suivre ; mais je suis 
enfonce dans mes Cartes des Cordilleres que je des- 
sine moi-meme.
Vous savez par votre propre ex- 
perience que les graveurs ne sont pas des gens qu'il 
faut perdre de vue.
J'ai lu et meme etudie avec le plus vif plaisir votre 
hitroduct'ion philosophique.
C'est un petit ouvrage 
plein de vues ingenieuses et ecrit avec une rare ele- 
gance de style.
J'ai aussi fait avec bien de I'interet 
la connoissance de I'ainiable M.
Sparshall, que nos 
entomologistes ont trouve tres habile.
Malheu- 
reusement que mon indisposition m'a empeche de 
lui etre aussi utile que j'aurois desire I'etre a une 
personne qui vous est chere.
Je serai tr^s flatte 
d'etre un jour membre de I'illustre Societe Linne- 
enne ; mais je ne voudrois pas que vous poussiez 
la bienveillance jusqu'a changer vos loix constitu- 
tionelles.
Excusez, je vous supplie, le petit mot que j'avais 
lache dans ma derniere lettre sur ces grandes ba- 
tailles qu'on me livre de trois en trois mois dans le 
Quarterly Review.
J'ai ete loue avec trop d'exa- 
geration a Edinbourg, il faut bien qu'on me blame 
aillcurs : c'est le systeme de compensation.
Je pro- 
fite des critiques : je cultive les sciences parceque 
je les aime, et parceque ma position me permet 
une heureuse independance : je n'ai de I'amertume 
contre personne ; mais comme je tiens beaucoup a 
mes projets pour les montagnes de I'lnde, j'aimerois 
assez etre en paix avec les trois Royaumes Brittan- 
niques.
Je n'ai d'ailleurs qua me louer des oiFres 
du Prince Regent, auquel le Roi de Prusse m'a re- 
485 
cominande personellenient, et des precedes de Lord 
Castlereagh et d'autres mcmbres du Gouvernemeiit 
avec lesquels mon frere a eu des rapports si multi- 
plies.
Quand on a passe six ans dans les Colonies 
Espagnoles entre des Inquisiteurs qui restent et des 
Ministres qui tombent, couche par couche, comme 
des feuilles mortes, on ne craint pas, aver un coeur 
droit et un veritable amour des sciences, le sejour 
parmi un peuple noble, eclaire, et juste, comme le 
votre.
Je vous supplie.
Monsieur le Chevalier, d'agreer 
rhommage de mon admiration et de mon respec- 
tueux attachement.
Alex.
Humboldt.
Dr. Boon to Sh' J.
E. Smith.
Derby, March 3,1817.
You have no doubt, my dear Sir, often expe- 
rienced the delightful satisfaction which results 
from having contributed to the knowledge or plea- 
sures of any one to whom you have long owed 
great obligations ; and I need not therefore say with 
what feelings I read your letter of the 27th ult., in 
which you give me to understand that my little 
present of plants was valuable to you.
Authors, of course, seldom look for personal ac- 
knowledgments from those who read their works ; 
but I see no reason why such should not be made, 
when a reader and the author happen accidentally 
to be thrown in each other's way.
Take, therefore, 
my dear Sir, my grateful thanks for the pleasure 
486 
and instruction I have derived from your Intro- 
duction to Botany, the Flora, and Lachesis Lap- 
ponica, &c.
&c.
And when next you think of re- 
paying any favour I can confer, remember that I 
owe my knowledge of botany to you, and that I 
shall always consider it a duty (a pleasant one) to 
return those obligations you first conferred on me.
Let me, wherever fate wills it, if possible do some- 
thing to contribute to your herbarium every year ; 
and the consciousness of having afforded you gra- 
tification will be ample recompense for my exertions.
My sincere thanks are due to you for your sym- 
pathy in my late bereavement.
Had you known 
my father you could better have appretiated the loss 
I have sustained.
Many men pass away, and leave 
behind the reputation of a good name ; but his vir- 
tues were not like those of ordinarv men.
I cannot 
tell you what he was : but when you are next in 
Liverpool, ask Mr. Martin, with whom I have the 
pleasure to be acquainted, — ask of him, of those 
who knew him, and you will find the contemplation 
of such a character will exalt your idea of human 
nature, to find it capable of such purity and bene- 
volence.
Excuse this passing tribute to his worth.
Do you remember Horace's 
" .
. .
. Cui pudor, et justitise soror 
Incorrupta fides, nudaque Veritas, 
Quando villum invenient parem ?
Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit !
" 
It is so applicable !
With great respect, Yours ever, 
F. BOOTT.
48" 
Professor Schultcs to Sir J.
E. Smith.
Dear and noble Sir, Landshut, 1821.
I considered it as a duty to science, as well as to 
mankind in general, and especially to you, to give 
a translation of your Introduction ; because, with all 
my respect for the Philosophia Botanica, I do not 
know better elements of botany than yours.
I am, 
though being a Christian, of the heathen opinion' 
that " Maxima dehetur puero reverential 
Your idea of a grammar of botany is no less 
worthy of the classic solidity you fixed with the 
principles of science ; it might perhaps also be con- 
sidered as a true British sneer on those foreign 
botanists who, being totally ignorant of both the 
grammar of their science and of Greek and Latin?
intrude themselves as authors, or rather as poets in 
botany.
In our old time, grammar was studied 
before poetry, but now we see poets in botany who 
can scarce spell the terms of art ; and thus we 
might say now of the amahilis scientia what Shak- 
speare once said of poetry, — botany " has bubbles 
as water has." What a patchwork did not become 
the glossology of some modern botanists !
Happy 
that they are kind enough to provide a particular 
dictionary to every botanical pamphlet they send to 
the press.
A complete dictionary of all the terms 
now used by different modern botanists would give 
a greater volume almost than any Polyglotten since 
the steeple of Babel, to which we should unavoid- 
488 
ably recur if there is not any Hermes like you, that 
puts an end to that confusion.
I always did, ac- 
cording to your view, defend the necessity of an ar- 
tificial system, and especially that of Linna3us, for 
analytical examination ; a natural one, even that of 
Jussieu, being of no use at all for that purpose.
I explain and contend for Linnaeus's system in 
my Lectures.
The plants in my garden are ranged 
according to Jussieu's.
A. SCHULTES.
21.
CyclopcEdia.
— When Dr. Rees first under- 
took the arrangements of this great work, he re- 
quested Sir James to furnish the botanical articles, 
but other occupations deterred him from the under- 
taking : and upon his declining it, the Rev. William 
Wood of Leeds supplied that department of litera- 
ture, till illness deprived him of the power of pro- 
ceeding ; when Sir James being again solicited on 
the subject, he no longer hesitated : and after the 
death of that excellent man in 1808, he continued 
his assistance till the close of this voluminous 
work.
In a letter dated 180/, Sir James tells Mr. Ros- 
coe, that " he had undertaken to write the physio- 
logy, terminology, and biography of the botanical 
part of Dr. Rees's Cyclopaedia, which he was re- 
quested to do when Mr. Wood of Leeds was ill.
Indeed," he adds, " the whole of the botany fell 
upon me, but now he is well enough to resume the 
descriptive parts.
I have just done Clusius and 
Peter Colhnson." 
489 
In another letter of the same year, he says, " I 
have written much of late in Rees's Cyclopaedia; it 
is a very pleasant employment to me, and has led 
me to launch out into subjects I might otherwise 
not have touched upon, — I mean only in botany and 
botanical biography.
" 
In 1808 Mr. Wood died suddenly, in the midst of 
writing the article Cyperus.
" Dr. Rees," adds Sir 
James, " then threw himself on me.
As five thousand 
copies sell, it is of importance for the progress of 
science, and therefore I would not let it go out of 
my hands.
I now write all the botanical part, and 
biography of botanists.
I put an S.
to the articles 
for which I wish to be responsible." 
Thus beginning towards the conclusion of the 
letter C, Sir James continued his communications 
through the remainder of the alphabet ; and, with 
the exception of a few articles by his friend the 
Rev. W.
F. Drake, the botanical information con- 
tained in this work is exclusively Sir James's from 
the time of Mr. Wood's decease.
The communications he sent, without including 
the biography of botanists, amount to 3348 articles.
The lives of botanists are 57, of which the follow- 
ing is a list : — 
Michael Adanson.
John Ellis.
Charles Clusius.
Louis Feuillee.
Peter Collinson.
Leonard Fuchs.
William Curtis.
Joseph Gaertner.
James Dalechamp.
Alexander Garden.
John James Dillenius.
John Gerarde.
Rembertus Dodoneeus.
Conrad Gesner.
Joseph Dombey.
John Gesner.
490 
Nehemiah Grew.
Philip Miller.
John Frederick Gronovius.
Robert Morison.
Laurence Theodore Gronovius Jose Celestini Muds.
Stephen Hales.
John Parkinson.
M. du Hamel.
Leonard Plukenet.
Frederick Hasselquist.
Charles Plumier.
John Hedwig.
Richard Pulteney.
Laurence Heister.
John Ray.
William Hudson.
A. D.
Rivinus.
Engelbert Kaempfer.
Olof Rudbeck.
George Joseph Kamel.
Olof Rudbeck, jun.
John Lightfoot.
William Sherard.
Charles Linnaeus.
John Sibthorp.
Charles Linnaeus, jun.
Sir Hans Sloane.
Matthias de Lobel.
Joseph Pitten de Tournefort.
Christian Theophilus Ludwig.
John Tradescant.
Peter Magnol.
William Turner.
Marcello Malpighi.
Martin Vahl.
John Martyn.
Sebastian Vaillant.
Francis Masson.
Anthony Vallisneri.
Peter Anthony Micheli.
22.
A Tour to Hafod.
— A large folio, contain- 
ing fifteen coloured engravings of views in that pic- 
turesque domain, was published in 1810, and dedi- 
cated to his friend Colonel Johnes.
23.
Lachesis Lapponica.
— In 1811 Sir James 
published Lachesis Lapponica, or A Tour in Lap- 
land, in two volumes, translated from the original 
manuscript journal of Linnaeus in Swedish.
In dedicating these travels to his valued friend 
Thomas Furly Forster, Esq., he observes, " Happy 
are those who, like you, can equally sympathize 
in his pious and benevolent affections, his disdain 
of hypocrisy and oppression, and his never-ceasing 
491 
desire to turn his scientific acquisitions to practical 
utility." 
" How have I been delighted/' says the Bishop 
of Carlisle, " at reading Lachesis Lapponica.
What 
a genius did Linnaeus inherit as it were from Na- 
ture !
" 
" Aayeaic — Lachesis Lapponica means, I pre- 
sume, the Fate or Lot of Lapland." 
24.
The titles of the ioWo'^m^ fifty -two papers 
from the hand of the President are taken from 
the Transactions of the LinncBan Society.
Vol. I.
1. Introductory Discourse on the Rise 
and Progress of Natural History.
It was immedi- 
ately translated into Italian by Father Fontana, under 
the title " SuW Origine e Progresso della Storia 
NaturaleT — 2.
Descriptions of Ten Species of Li- 
chen, collected in the South of Europe.
— 3.
On the 
Festuca spadicea and Anthoxanthum paniculatum 
of Linnaeus.
— 4.
Remarks on the Genus Veronica.
Vol. II.
5. Remarks on the Abbe Wulfen's 
Descriptions of Lichens, published among his rare 
Plants of Carinthia, in Professor Jacquin's Col- 
lectanea, vol.
ii.
112.
— 6.
Additional Observations 
relating to Festuca spadicea, and Anthoxanthum 
paniculatum.
— 7- Remarks on Centaurea solstitia- 
lis and C.
melitensis.
— 8.
Remarks on the Genus 
Dianthus.
— 9.
Additional Remarks by James Ed- 
ward Smith.
— 10.
Description of Saginacerastoides, 
a new British plant, discovered in Scotland by Mr.
James Dickson, F.L.S.
Vol. III.
1 1 .
The Botanical History of Mentha 
492 
exigua.
It was translated into German in Sclirii- 
der's Journal.
— 12.
Botanical Characters of some 
Plants of the Natural Order of Myrti.
— 13.
Charac- 
ters of a new Genus of Plants named Salisburia.
Vol. IV.
14.
Remarks on some Foreign Spe- 
cies of Orobanche.
— 15.
The Characters of Twenty 
New Genera of Plants.
— 16.
Observations on the 
British Species of Bromus ; with Introductory Re- 
marks on the Composition of a Flora Britannica.
Vol. V.
17' Description of Sowerbaja juncea^ a 
Plant of New South Wales.
— 18.
Observations on 
the British Species of Mentha.
— 19.
Descriptions 
of five new British Species of Carex.
— 20.
x\ddi- 
tional Note to the Observations on the British 
Species of Mentha.
Vol. VI.
21.
Remarks on the Genera of Pse- 
derota, Wulfenia, and Hemimeris.
— 22.
Remarks 
on some British Species of Salix.
— 23.
Botanical 
Characters of four New-Holland Plants of the 
Natural Order of Myrti.
— 24.
Description of the 
Fruit of Cycas revoluta.
Vol. VII.
25.
An Illustration of the Grass 
called by Linnaeus Cornucopiae Alopecuroidcs.
— 
26.
Remarks on the Generic Characters of Mosses, 
and particularly of the Genus Mnium.
— 27- Bio- 
graphical Memoirs of several Norwich Botanists, 
in a Letter to Alexander MacLeay, Esq., Sec. L.S.
Vol. VIII.
28.
Account of the Bromus triflorus 
of Linnaeus, in a Letter to Alexander MacLeay, 
Esq.
— 29.
Characters of Three New Species of 
Boronia.
Vol. IX.
30.
A Botanical Sketch of the Genus 
493 
Conchium, — 31.
An Inquiry into the Genus of the 
Tree called by Pona Abilicea cretica.
— 32.
An In- 
quiry into the real Daucus Gingidium of Linneeus.
— 33.
An Inquiry into the Structure of Seeds, and 
especially into the true Nature of that Part called 
by Gaertner the Vitellus.
— 34.
Observations re- 
specting several British Species of Hieracium.
— 
35.
Specific Characters of the Decandrous Papi- 
lionaceous Plants of New-Holland.
— 36.
Charac- 
ters of Hookeria, a new Genus of Mosses ; with 
Descriptions of Ten Species.
— 37.
Characters of 
Platylobium Bossiaea, and of a new Genus named 
Poiretia.
Vol. X.
38.
Characters of a Liliaceous Genus 
called Brodiaea.
— 39.
Remarks on the Sedum ochro- 
leucum, or AeiZtjjov to fxiKpov of Dioscorides.
— 
40.
On a remarkable Variety of Pedicularis sylva- 
tica.
— 41.
Some Remarks on the Synonyms and 
Native Country of Hypericum calycinum.
— 42.
An 
Account of several Plants recently discovered in 
Scotland by Mr. G.
Don, A.L.S., not mentioned 
in the Flora Britannica nor English Botany.
— 
43.
An Account of a new Genus of New-Holland 
Plants named Brunonia.
— .44, A Description of 
Duchesnea fragiforrais, constituting a new Genus 
of the Natural Order of Senticosae of Linnaeus, 
Rosaceae of Jussieu.
Vol. XL 45.
Some Observations on Iris susi- 
ana of Linnaeus, and on the Natural Order of Aqui- 
laria.
— 46.
Observations on the Genus Teesdalia.
— 
47.
Remarks on the Bryum marginatum and 
Bryum lineare of Dickson.
494 
Vol. XII.
48.
Some Information respecting the 
Lignum Rhodium of Pococke's Travels.
— 49.
A 
Botanical History of the Genus Tofieldia.
— 50.
Cha- 
racters of two Species of Tordylium.
— 5 1 .
An Ac- 
count of Rhizomorpha meduUaris, a new British 
Fungus.
Vol. XIII.
52.
Remarks on Hypnum recogni- 
tum, and on several Species of Roscoea.
25.
A Review of the Modern State of Botany, 
with a fart'icular Reference to the Natural Sy steins 
of LinncRus and Jussieu.
— Printed in the second 
volume of the Supplement to the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica.
After the publication of his Review of the 
Modern State of Botany, its author was gratified 
by the following letters.
Mr. Roscoe to Sir *J.
E, Smith.
My dear Friend, Liverpool, June 9, 1817.
I have read your dissertation on the present 
systems and state of botany with the greatest plea- 
sure, and am quite gratified to find how fully 
I coincide in all your opinions; as it leads me to 
think that however short the progress I have made 
may be, I have at least had the good fortune not to 
wander far astray.
Your account of the botany of different countries, 
and of their different professors, is as novel as it is 
interesting ; and the candid spirit of discrimination 
in which it is written will not only confer honour 
495 
on the writer, but on the work of which it forms a 
part.
You will not however be surprised that I am 
still more interested in the discussion respecting 
natural and artificial systems, which I conceive you 
have completely set at rest ; and that too, without 
giving the advocates for either any just ground of 
complaint.
I only regret that this excellent tract 
does not form a part of the Transactions of the Lin- 
naean Society, where you would have appeared in 
your proper character, as defending the system of 
the great man whose name adorns the institution 
over which you have with such universal approba- 
tion so long presided, and over which I hope you 
will yet preside for many many years to come.
William Roscoe.
Dr. Swartz to Sir */.
E. Smith.
My dear Friend, Stockholm, Nov. 19, 1817.
I return you my most hearty thanks for your 
kind letter of June the 19th, which I had the plea- 
sure to receive not very long ago through the hands 
of a travelling friend of mine just returned home 
from your country, I acknowledge also with equal 
pleasure your very agreeable present of the article 
intended for the Supplement to the Edinburgh En- 
cyclopaedia, which article I have perused with the 
greatest satisfaction ; and of the Compendium Florce 
Britannicce , new edition, which I had already sent 
for and just received.
The copy offered to the 
Academy of Sciences I have delivered in your name.
496 
and am ordered to return you her best thanks.
I 
am also very contented to have seen this very neat 
publication, as I am upon the point of publishing 
something of the same kind, comprehending the 
Scandinavian vegetables ; as we want entirely a 
synopsis of our Flora, the contents of which is 
known but to exceedingly few.
The cryptogamous 
parts having been greatly augmented of late, some 
summary is looked for earnestly.
The botanical part of Rees's Cyclopaedia I long to 
see, and must have it at any price or rate, if it be 
had separately in the manner of the entomological 
part, written I suppose by Leach.
The Cyclopaedia 
itself will not so easily find its way to the North.
The delay you have proved by the continuation 
of your Flora JSritannica cannot but be very disa- 
greeable.
You will, however, probably find means 
to carry your most excellent enterprise to an end 
wished for by all cultivators of our amiable science.
It gives me great pain to hear the valetudinarian 
state of my highly respected fautor Sir Joseph 
Banks.
But it is our lot, poor beings !
to leave the 
stage some way or other.
He does it however not 
without leaving the brightest marks behind.
I hope you have received the last volume of our 
Academy's Handlingar, which I sent both for your 
account and for the Linnaean Society, together with 
those for Sir Joseph, to whom the parcel was ad- 
dressed.
From our mutual friend Mr. Hooker I have re- 
ceived news at times that have interested me ex- 
ceedingly.
I can hardly say what I admire more 
497 
in his works, his pencil or his pen.
His talents 
are inimitable indeed.
Mr. Robert Brown has also 
favoured me some months ago.
It is with great 
impatience that I wait the sequel of his admirable 
Prodromus.
My friend Acharius, whom I had not seen since 
fifteen years past, having just these very days paid 
me a visit in the capital, and hearing that I intend- 
ed to write to you, desired to add a line to thank 
you for your affectionate greetings ; and you will 
receive it on the opposite side.
I remain, respectfully and cordially, 
My dear Sir, 
Your affectionate and very obedient Sers'ant, 
Olof Swartz.
Amicissime, 
Diu, et proh !
nimis diu expectavi, nee a te lit- 
teras ullas accepi.
Jam apud amicum Swartz per 
quasdam dies vitam jucundam degens ab eo audivi, 
quod ante horam ad te litteras mitteret : itaque non 
potui quin etiam verbis quibusdam ego te saluta- 
rem.
Ante aliquot annos cum Dno. Magist.
Ekenstem 
Londinum proficiscente species aliquot Lichenum 
rariores includentem ad te misi.
Exemplar Synop- 
seos meae Lichenum ante annum et quod excurrit, 
tuta ut opinabar via, ad te ablegavi.
Per amicissi- 
mum Swartz, monographiam duorum Lichenum 
{Glyphis et^Chiodecton) cum figuris, Actis Societatis 
Linnaeanae ut inserantur etiam tuae cur£e tradidi.
An 
haec omnia ad te advenerunt, nee ne, adhuc inscius 
VOL.
I. 2 k 
498 
sum.
File itaque ut brevi ccrtior fiam, et de tua 
perennante amicitia, et de harum rerum felici ad- 
ventu.
Plura jam scribere vetat et temporis angustia et 
loci.
Interim abs te exflagito, ut quam primum 
Lichenographia Britannica prodierit, exemplar hu- 
jus libri ad me perveniat.
Philosophiam Licheno- 
logicam cum Terminologia critica edere jam nunc 
meditor ; sed antea opu8 laudabile Turner!
et Borreri 
studere vellem atque inde erudiri.
Vale, 
Die 18 Nov. 1817.
E. ACHARIUS.
Sir Joseph Banks to Sir J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir James, Soho Square, Dec. 25, 1817.
My chief reason for troubling you with this is 
to tell you I have paid obedience to your mandate, 
by reading your article on botany in the Scotch 
Encyclopaedia, which, conceiving it to be an ele- 
mentary performance, I had neglected till now to 
peruse.
I was highly gratified by the distinguished 
situation in which you have placed me, more so I 
fear than I ought to have been.
We are all too 
fond of hearing ourselves well spoken of by persons 
whom we hold in high regard.
But, my dear Sir 
James, do not you think it probable that the reader 
who takes the book in hand for the purpose of 
seeking botanical knowledge, will skip all that is 
said of me, as not at all tending to enlarge his ideas 
on the subject ?
499 
I admire your defence of Linnaeus's Natural 
Classes : it is ingenious and entertaining, and it 
evinces a deep skill in the mysteries of classifica- 
tion, which must, I fear, continue to wear a myste- 
rious shape till a larger portion of the vegetables 
of the whole earth shall have been discovered and 
described.
I fear you will differ from me in opinion when I 
fancy Jussieu's Natural Orders to be superior to 
those of Linnaeus.
I do not however mean to allege 
that he has even an equal degree of merit in having 
compiled them, — he has taken all Linnaeus had 
done as his own ; and having thus possessed him- 
self of an elegant and substantial fabric, has done 
much towards increasing its beauty, but far less 
towards any improvement in its stability.
How immense has been the improvement of 
botany since I attached myself to the study, and 
what immense facilities are now offered to students, 
that had not an existence till lately !
Your de- 
scriptions and So werby's drawings of British Plants, 
would have saved me years of labour, had they 
then existed.
I well remember the publication of 
Hudson, which was the first effort at well-directed 
science, and the eagerness with which I adopted 
its use.
Believe me.
Yours, 
J. Banks.
26.
A Grammar of Botany.
— The Grammar of 
Botany appeared in 1821.
This volume its author 
inscribed, as a memorial of his esteem, to Mrs.
2 K 2 
500 
Corrie of Woodville near Birmingham ; and of this 
work Sir Thomas Frankland tells the writer, " I 
must not omit to notice your Dedication, as equal 
in elegance to any extant." 
Mrs. Corrie to Sir J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir James, Woodville, Jan. 29, 1821.
On our return hither two days ago, we found 
your elegant present waiting our arrival.
The book 
is a treasure in itself, and doubly valuable as a proof 
of your friendly remembrance.
But what can I say 
in acknowledgement of the gratifying and unex- 
pected distinction with which you have honoured 
me ?
I can conceive nothing so flattering to va- 
nity, if vanity were not lost in the far stronger feel- 
ing of affectionate gratitude.
The privilege of an 
introduction to you has been one of my first wishes 
for many years past, and I feel myself fortunate in 
no common degree in its accomplishment.
I am, my dear Sir James, with the greatest re- 
spect, your truly obliged, — may I add.
Your affectionate Friend, 
Susan Corrie.
An American edition of The Grammar of Botany 
(by Henry Muhlenberg, D.D.) was published in 1822 
at New York ; and a translation of it into German 
was made the same year.
501 
The Bishop of Carlisle to Sir J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir James, Bemers Street, Jan. 19, 1821.
I beg to thank you for your remembrance of me 
in sending me your Botanical Grammar.
When I 
first heard of its being announced, I thought it was 
a mere repetition of what had been before published, 
which possibly was now getting out of print.
But 
upon opening it I really perceived it to be a grammar 
of prime excellence.
^^Disce docendus adhuc^"" said 
an ancient philosopher.
So might you have fronted 
your Grammar with those humiliating words ; for 
who is there who will not receive instruction ?
The 
endeavouring to unfold and explain the intricacies 
of Natural Orders requires a masterly hand such 
as yours.
You, Correa, and Brown, are the only 
ones of my knowledge who could touch a subject 
of this kind ; so that I look upon you as facile 
principem, and holding the Chair of the Linnaean 
Society, if I might say so, tuojure.
It is, in my 
judgement, admirably well done.
Yours, 
S. Carlisle.
Professor Martyji to Sir «/.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Pertenhall, March 9, 1821.
I received your book, which gave me great plea- 
sure.
Your Grammar plainly speaks the hand of 
502 
a master ; concise, yet full ; remarkable for clearness 
and neatness.
Small as it is in size, it must have 
cost you some time and attention.
I smile some- 
times when I meet with the miserable, incorrect 
compilations and imitations of your former work 
(Introduction to Physiological and Systematic Bo- 
tany).
When your intended Flora makes its ap- 
pearance, the British botanist will find everything 
that he wants in these three works of yours.
I am not such a bigot as to think lightly of the 
Natural Orders, imperfect as our present knowledge 
of them is.
Had I been younger, that very circum- 
stance would have incited me to pursue so delect- 
able a subject ; and I hope you will continue to do 
it.
I am only sometimes vexed when they would 
fain persuade me that the natural system may su- 
persede the artificial.
My health is still good, but 
I grow sensibly weaker in body, and memory and 
recollection are decaying.
With all this I am thank- 
ful that my eyes are yet efficient, that my spirits are 
good, and that I can still enjoy conversation with 
those who will condescend a little to my deafness.
This is much for almost eighty-six.
With my hearty good wishes for your health and 
happiness, 
I am, dear Sir, yours, 
Thos.
Martyn.
503 
Professor Schultes to Sir J.
E. Smith.
Landshut, July 15, 1821.
My noble and very dear Sir, 
It was no sooner than yesterday evening when I 
was happy to receive your very kind letter, dated 
April 23rd, together with the splendid presents you 
favoured me with.
I shall immediately try to make 
my countrymen acquainted with it by a translation 
made by my son Jules, under my direction and by my 
side.
The young man cannot begin his botanical 
career better than with the study of this work every 
science should be commenced with, — that of gram- 
mar; and I hope you will be content with his per- 
formance.
He seems not to live but for botany ; 
and if Heaven yields him health and strength, as he 
was till now graciously favoured with, he will not 
fail in zeal and ardour for the amabilis scientia,'dnd 
return once from the Himallaya with a new world 
of plants.
He might perhaps in a few years be fa- 
voured by our Government to gather plants on the 
source of the Ganges, as our Martins on the Rio 
Grandes.
The fellow was yet, when scarce ten years old, 
applauded by some of our best herborists for his 
botanical eye, when he climbed with them on our 
Alps, and brought them the rarest and smallest 
Alpine plants he had never seen alive, but only in 
my herbal.
I hope you had received since, my translation of 
your Introduction ; I could not send it sooner than 
504 
I had got a copy of, and I did it in the very moment 
I received it.
I am happy to find myself think as 
you do, and to have never mingled my elbows in the 
rather metaphysical than physical quarrel against 
the sexualists, though I was summoned.
I answered 
almost in your own terms; even if the Linnaean 
theory on this subject were false, the Linnaean sy- 
stem would not be at all the worse.
I shall, according to your direction, look as soon 
as possible to complete our Rees's Cyclopaedia.
How should it be possible, noble Sir, that any 
thing coming out of your hands should cost more 
than it is worth.
The most trifling plant given by 
you becomes a jewel for any herbal in the world ; 
and jewels never cost more than they are worth.
Sieber has collected three interesting herbals — 
Herb.
Palaestinum, Creticum, and yEgyptiacum.
I 
bought them, and am very content with ; he has yet 
doubles enough if you wish.
He did send now a 
young man to the Cape, to gather there for his col- 
lection.
Another was sent by him to Domingo ; and 
he wrote me today that a very ample load of dried 
plants, almost two waggons, arrived safely at Mar- 
seilles from Domingo.
Command with him ; he is 
a clever fellow, 
I rejoice to learn no greater grief but what nature 
imposes on everybody has fallen upon your noble 
heart.
It gives me the purest joy to hear your dear 
mother touched even the 88th ; for we have by it 
the most reasonable hope to see you to us at the 
same term: "Fortes creantur fortibus et bonis; inest 
parentum virtus /" 
505 
Agree the homage of the sincerest and deep-felt 
respect, esteem, and even awe.
I have the honour 
to continue for ever faithfully.
Noble Sir, 
Your most obedient Servant and Friend, 
J. A.
SCHULTES.
Landshut in Bavaria, 1822.
My very dear and noble Sir, 
Your plain English Flora will^become a benefit, 
a blessing to your countrymen and countrywomen, 
and to their children in their furthest generations.
You will become by it the very British botanical So- 
crates,who, as Tully said, "scie?iiia?n e ccelo deduxit^'' 
^c.
; and, as Socrates did in philosophy, thus banish 
the sophisms of botanophili ephebi, &c.
(to use some 
sneer of holy father Linnaeus) out of the realm of 
the amabilis scientia.
Your country, as well as 
Germany and France, needs highly to receive the 
impressions of a new die, cut and hardened by the 
master-hand of a first-rate botanist, if botany should 
not relapse in the old chaos before the times of 
Bauhin, and cease to be of any use to mankind.
All our modern botanists pretend to the possession 
of the key of Nature's mysterious temple ; and what 
they open is nothing else (thus it seems to me) 
but the gloomy dwelling of Minotaurus.
" Multiplicique domo, caecisque includere tectis, 
Ponit opus, turbatque notas et lumina flexum 
Ducit in errorem variarum ambage viarum." 
You'll forward more the wealth of science and of 
506 
your country by your English Flora, by settling 
the due and true relations between terms and ideas, 
than all those who being only jealous of the glitter 
of novelties afford new confusion in the science to 
the old one.
Your Grammar^ noble friend, is now already 
translated by my son, and shall I hope become the 
botanical common prayer-book of our Bavarian 
students.
Pardon me for the expression of common 
prayer-book ; 'twas only to have the honour to show 
you, that I am not of those fools who " have said 
in their heart, there is no God ;" and that I know 
well the use of a common prayer-book.
It was the 
very awe for religion that brought the note, page 8, 
in the translation of your Introduction.
You can- 
not imagine to yourself in what a terrible abyss of 
paganism, polytheism, or rather pantheism (in the 
ill sense of the word, for in the good one Deo 'plena 
sunt omnia) ^ of mysticism and Torquemadism my 
poor High-German countrymen are now fallen in, 
by mixing natural philosophy with theology ; not 
in your manner, and in that of every sound philo- 
sopher, but doing it in their own way.
SCHULTES.
27.
Selection of the Correspondence of Linncms 
and other Naturalists.
— Two volumes 8vo, pub- 
lished in 1821.
These are dedicated to the Linnaean 
Society.
507 
Professor Martyn to Sir J.
E. Sinith.
Dear Sir, Pertenhall, Nov. 16, 1821.
I have been reading your Selection of the Corre- 
spondence of Linnaeus &c., and have been perhaps 
more interested in the work than most others ; for 
though the chief part of the correspondence is an- 
tecedent to my botanical life, yet most of the par- 
ties were familiar to me in my early days, though 
I had personal acquaintance with few of them.
These letters show how dead botany was in Eng- 
land in the middle of the last century, when Col- 
linson and Ellis, two men not professionally scien- 
tific, but engaged in commerce, were Linnaeus's 
principal English correspondents !
His system can 
hardly be said to have been publicly known among 
us till about the year 1762, when Hope taught it 
at Edinburgh, and I at Cambridge, and Hudson 
published his Flora.
Go on and prosper, my dear friend, in your Flora 
Grceca, and your other most useful works, in pro- 
moting the most delightful of all sciences ; and be- 
lieve me, &c.
Thos.
Martyn.
28.
The English Flora.— Oi the English Flora, 
dedicated to perpetuate his regard for one of his 
earliest as well as latest friends, Sir Thomas Geary 
Cullum, Bart., the first and second volumes were 
published in 1824, the third in 1825, and the fourth 
in March 1828.
508 
The partial author of the obituary before men- 
tioned, declares the English Flora to be " the last 
best work of the distinguished President of the Lin- 
neean Society, consisting of four volumes octavo, 
and describing the Phasnogamous plants and Ferns 
of Great Britain, though its title might imply a more 
limited range: ^^ Finis coronat opusT There is no 
Flora of any nation so complete in flowering spe- 
cies, and none of any country in which more accu- 
racy and judgement are displayed.
If any person 
should in future contemplate a work of this kind, 
whatever the originality of his information, what- 
ever the novelty of his subject, let him imitate this 
illustrious author in careful remark, in taking no- 
thing upon trust, in tracing every synonym to its 
source, and lastly in arranging his matter in such 
a manner, by the aid of different types, as shall 
render it easy of reference, and point out at a 
glance the nature of it.
However mechanical some 
of this may appear, it is absolutely essential to 
be attended to in natural history, where the sub- 
jects are infinite in number, and where aid must be 
derived from every mode of generalizing particu- 
lars." 
The part of this work which it may be said the 
author himself considered the most original, and af- 
forded him most satisfaction, was the natural order 
of Umbellatae.
"By a full investigation," he observes, 
" of all the organs of fructification, and by distin- 
guishing the tumid bases of the styles from the 
floral receptacle, things hitherto confounded, I have 
characterized the Umbelliferous plants like the rest 
509 
by the parts oi \\\q, flower and fruit alone.
In doing 
this, I have kept the exotic species in view, of which 
the Linnaean collection and those of many botanists 
of Switzerland, with the Greek herbarium of my 
lamented friend Sibthorp, have furnished me with 
almost all that are known.
The principles I have 
adopted prove amply sufficient, being no other than 
those by which Linnaeus was, on the whole, so suc- 
cessful, though he deserted them in the arrangement 
of the tribe in question.
But what affords me most 
satisfaction is, that I am thus enabled to keep en- 
tire almost all his own genera." 
In a letter addressed to Mr. D.
Turner in January 
1823, Sir James tells him that "the Umbelliferae 
occupy me so that I have hardly time to write a let- 
ter; but I have the satisfaction of thinking I am 
doing some good, and that they will all be found 
capable of being arranged in good natural genera 
by their fructification alone.
In reply to an objec- 
tion of yours, please to observe these plants are 
(without exception perhaps) to be found in flower 
and seed at the same time.
"I have better opportunities of specimens in every 
state than most people who have laboured at this 
subject, having the herbaria of Linnaeus, Davall, 
Reynier, Favrod, with my own.
I have also Cus- 
son's numerous letters explaining his ideas.
"I am happy that you think of our late conversa- 
tion with the pleasure that I do, for indeed I have 
seldom been more pleased with any.
We must have 
more such.
I am often in the way of so many 
whom it is hopeless or worthless to converse with, 
510 
that good sense and just feeling added to religious 
consolation are like grains of gold in the mud of 
a torrent." 
The following flattering notice of this work the 
author received from a young and ardent admirer of 
his favourite pursuit, an acquaintance as unexpected 
as it was pleasing, and which he regretted having 
no opportunity of cultivating more closely.
My dear Sir James, Edinburgh, Sept.
6, 1824.
I have been purposing for some time past to 
write to you, as I should be sorry to let you forget 
me.
The sincere pleasure, I will say delight, I ex- 
perienced in cultivating your acquaintance during 
the short time you were with us at Cowes, I often 
think of, and regret that the distance now between 
us is likely to be a great obstacle to our meeting.
My present excuse for writing to you is to thank 
you most cordially for the present you have lately 
made the British botanist.
It may appear pre- 
sumption in me to praise the two volumes of the 
EngHsh Flora lately pubhshed; but as an ardent 
admirer of the science, more especially as relating 
to these kingdoms, I consider it a great happiness 
and honour to address you, and to express my great 
admiration of the elegance, the neatness, the per- 
spicuity of the language, the exquisite clearness of 
the scientific descriptions, and the consummate skill 
of the generic arrangements.
The Umbellate plants 
are surely now perfect.
I am sure, my dear Sir 
James, you will excuse my thus expressing my feel- 
ings ; but, indeed, although you have many older 
511 
and abler friends, you have none who admires and 
esteems you more for your scientific and also for 
your amiable qualifications.
A very clever man, Mr. P.
Duncan of New Col- 
lege, Oxon (a great admirer of you), said of the 
Flora Briiannica, " that it was a sort of logic, — so 
clear, so perspicuous and so convincing." I thought 
of this in the examination I have made of the Flora.
Hoping soon to see the remainder, and wishing you 
all health and strength to go on with that and your 
other works, and with many years of happiness, 
I am, my dear Sir James, 
Your faithful Friend, 
E. B.
Ramsay.
P.S. As an ardent lover of British botany, permit 
me (though I am a mere novice) to take this oppor- 
tunity of expressing my unfeigned admiration of the 
Flora Britannica.
I offer rather my thanks than 
my approbation ; for approbation insignificant as 
mine is can never increase your reputation.
Le Secretaire perpituel de VAcaddmie a Monsieur 
le Chevalier J.
E. Smithy Corrdspondanty^c.
Institut de France, Acadeniie Royale des Sciences, 
Paris, le 10 Mai, 1824.
L' Academic, Monsieur, a recu I'ouvrage que vous 
avez bien voulu lui addresser, et qui est intitule 
Flore Anglaise, 2 vols.
8vo, 1824.
J'ai Thonneur 
de vous remercier au nom de I'Academie de I'envoi 
de cet ouvrage, et de vous temoigner tout le prix 
512 
quelle attache a cette publication.
II a ^te depose 
honorablemenl dans la Bibliotheque de I'lnstitut, et 
M. Desfontaines a ^t^ charg^ par I'Academie de lui 
en rendre un compte verbal.
Agreez, Monsieur, I'assurance de ma considera- 
tion distinguee.
B. CuviER.
P. S.
Oserais-je vous prier de profiter de quelque 
occasion pour m'addresser le diploma de membre 
de la Societe Linneenne : m'honorant d'appartenir 
depuis long tems a cette association distinguee, je 
desirerais posseder le document qui en est la preuve.
Sir Thomas G.
CuUum to Sir J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir James, Bury, March 19, 1824.
I received your kind present of the two volumes 
of English Flora, and shall wait with some impa- 
tience for the continuation of it; but should almost 
despair of seeing it, if you had not told us in page 
21 that you would proceed immediately with the 
remainder.
It is true, as you say, that I have a love of natu- 
ral science, and it has amused me a great many of 
the years of my long life ; yet I am conscious how 
deficient I am in the real knowledge of natural 
history, as many amateurs, as they are called, are of 
the fine paintings they possess.
I will not however 
conceal the pleasure I feel in your address to me, 
which tells the world far and near, that I have the 
513 
esteem and affection of the author of the English 
Flora.
Our friend Professor Martyn told me that in the 
compilation of Miller's Gardener's Dictionary he 
wrote 20,000 sheets of paper.
I know not how 
many sheets of paper the English Flora has occa- 
sioned you to write, neither can I calculate how 
many volumes of books you must have examined.
Glad as I should be to live to see the remaining vo- 
lumes of the Flora, yet I live in fear that you should 
hurt your health by the confinement and labour 
it must occasion you ; I will allow in some cases 
" Labor ipse voluptas" but I cannot think the con- 
finement and labour of sending forth a finished 
Flora of five volumes is anything less than an ar- 
duous undertaking.
I have been looking into a few leaves of the Rev.
T.M.Harris's, D.D. book on the Natural History of 
the Bible.
He takes notice of the lilies of the field, 
and quotes you for their being the Amaryllis lutea.
Yours most gratefully and affectionately, 
T. G.
CULLUM.
Sir J.
E. Smith to Mrs. Corrie.
My dear Mrs. Corrie, Norwich, March 21, 182]..
I have, for a long time past, had so much employ- 
ment for my pen, that except a few urgent letters of 
mere necessity or business, I have scarcely written 
one.
I am still as busy at the sequel of my Flora, 
of which I hope you have received the first and se- 
VOL.
I. 2 L 
514 
cond volumes, which I ordered to be sent for your 
kind acceptance.
Nevertheless, it seems hard if I 
may not write a letter for mere pleasure, — and I feel 
but too sensibly that I am deep in your debt.
I am 
in full as good health as when I left your hospitable 
and delightful abode, and hope to give a course of 
ten lectures at the London Institution in May and 
part of June.
The Institution has claims upon me 
as an honorary member, and it is extremely well 
attended.
I have many things to say in these lec- 
tures, as well as at the anniversary of the Linnaean 
Society, about the present state, progress, and cor- 
ruptions of botany.
I know not that I can stem 
the barbarous and muddy torrent, but will try.
— 
Have you seen the Systema of my friend DeCan- 
dolle ?
It is a rich store of knowledge, the greatest 
assemblage of botanical information, as to species, 
characters and synonyms, in the world, but the 
nomenclature and its principles most corrupt !
He 
has also published one volume of Prodromus of the 
whole work.
His only rule for names is priority 
of date ; as to bad or good, classical or barbarous, 
he has no taste.
All Linnaean rules are disregarded.
He condescends indeed to retain all Linnaean names ; 
but all the classical names of Solander, Swartz, 
Schreber, &c.
are abolished, to restore the vile bar- 
barous appellations of Aublet and other illiterate 
French travellers.
I know not how the world will 
bear this.
I am no Hercules, to attempt to cleanse 
the stable, but I shall go on in my own way, and 
trust to the good sense of those who may come 
after me.
DeCandolle is a most worthy man, and 
515 
I wish neither to hurt nor quarrel with him.
Bo- 
tanists are more sore on the subject of nomencla- 
ture than any other, especially when they are in 
the wrong.
Linnaeus was aware of this when he 
wrote his Critica Botanica.
I shall be happy to 
hear your opinion, with any advice or corrections, 
on these two volumes of the English Flora.
I 
think there must be five in all, if I have health and 
eyes to finish them.
I am now in Didynamia, and 
hope to get through it before I go to Town.
De- 
Candolle is most injudicious in Tetradynamia,\^ii\i 
an immensity of genera and subdivisions.
We had an agreeable visit at Holkham in Octo- 
ber last, with Mr. and Miss Roscoe, the Duke of 
Sussex, &c.
I introduced there Mr. Hunter, a na- 
tive American, brought up among the Indians, and 
now going back with the noble design of improving 
them on the wisest and best principles.
If you and 
Mr. Corrie have not read his Memoirs of his 
Captivity, pray do.
The Duke of Sussex and Mr.
Coke were delighted with him.
He came to Europe 
with every possible recommendation from people 
whom I know.
I am, dear Madam, 
Your ever obliged, 
J. E.
Smith.
Nathaniel tlohn TVinch, Esq. to Sir J.
E. Smith.
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, April 2C, 1824.
My dear Sir, 
Permit me to return you my best thanks for the 
2 L 2 
516 
notice you have been pleased to take of my North- 
umberland and Durham Catalogue and pamphlet in 
your excellent English Flora, which has afforded 
me infinite information, especially on the difficult 
subject of the synonymy of the older authors, — a 
topic far beyond the reach of ordinary compilers.
Had I been aware that no localities of rare species 
would have been admitted into your work without 
you possessed specimens, I would have sent you the 
last I have of Pyi^ola secunda, from the only well 
authenticated English habitat at present known: — 
I mean Ashness Gill, above Barrow Force, near the 
Derwent-water Lake in Cumberland, where it was 
gathered in 1807 by your friends Turner, Hooker, 
and myself.
As for Pyrola rotundifolia, it is abun- 
dant in the romantic Dene at Castle Eden in Dur- 
ham.
In vol.
ii.
p. 369, Gibside Woods, in the same 
county, is mentioned as a locality of Spiraea salici- 
Jhlia, but it is merely naturalized there, in the same 
way as in the Duke of Athol's woods at Dunkeld, 
and by Roadley Lake on the wild moors of North- 
umberland beyond Cambo (the birth-place of Ca- 
pability Brown); but there, very old and stunted 
lilac-trees pointed out the exotics.
While on the 
subject of naturalized plants, it may not be amiss 
to mention that I once met with a considerable 
quantity of Sawifraga umhrosa in the woods of 
Blair Athol, associated with Pyrola secunda^ Arbu- 
tus XJva-Ursi and Habenaria bifolia, and close to 
Pellidea venosa.
Here I thought the London-Pride 
might be considered truly wild, especially as the 
general habit of the plant was much altered ; but.
517 
to my disappointment, the gardener informed me 
he had introduced the plant in various parts of the 
wood several years before.
In a small lake, high 
on the Wallingford moors, Ahiphar minima is found 
in plenty; and about twelve years ago, Mr. Treve- 
lyan had plants removed to the ponds in his gar- 
dens, where it flourishes with Butomus umbellatus, 
and Menyanthes ni/mphcBoides of the South of En- 
gland, and JVymphcca alba, and Nymphcca liitea of 
the North, but still retains its diminutive size.
— 
This, allow me to remark, is all the difference I can 
find between it and A^.
lutea; for the teeth of the 
stigma (I mean their protrusion) depends upon the 
age of the seed-vessel, and the approximation or 
separation of the lobes of the leaves also, is owing 
to age.
Erythraza littoralis, I think, must be consi- 
dered a good species ; it is scattered over several 
hundred acres in Holy Island ; and though I met 
with many gigantic specimens, still the peculiar 
shape of the leaf and mode of growth were retained, 
while ErytkrcEa Centaurium grows on the sandy sea- 
beach near Tynemouth, without being altered by 
situation.
Here also SUene hijiata may be seen, as 
in inland fields, without being changed into SUene 
maritima: — see Hooker s Flora Scotica.
Thomas, of 
Bex, has sent me German specimens of the Pheasant- 
eye Pink, as D'lanthus plumarius .
Is he correct ?
or 
what is U.
plumarius ?
— D.
arenai'ius I have from 
Swartz.
Should any plant not as yet published in 
English Botany fall in my way, fresh specimens 
shall be sent to Sowerby for the Appendix.
— llosa 
dumetorum ?
and a few mosses he received from me 
518 
in the autumn.
The Scotch botanists have detected 
six new species.
Did Harriman transmit Juncus 
castaneus to you from Teesdale ?
I was not aware 
we possessed this rare plant.
AdieUj &c.
N. J.
Winch.
Robert Brown ^ Esq. to Sir «/.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Dean Street, February 2, 1825.
It is very gratifying to me, to find that you are 
likely to adopt the greater part of the genera I have 
proposed in Cruciferce.
As to M.
DeCandolle's 
labours in this difficult family, I think he has made 
several improvements in his divisions of genera, and 
I remember I thought, — but I confess I have not suf- 
ficiently studied it, — that his Diplotaocis would pro- 
bably be adopted.
I have no hesitation however in 
saying, that he has pushed his divisions from modi- 
fications of form and direction of cotyledons much 
beyond their value, and, in giving nearly equal im- 
portance to all these modifications in every part of 
the order, has proposed subdivisions or tribes which, 
though more natural than Linnaeus' s Siliculosa and 
Siliquosa, are still in some degree artificial ; one 
curious proof of this is, — and several others might 
be mentioned, — that not having thought it necessary 
to examine the most common plant of the family, 
namely Bursa Pastoris, he has placed it where it 
really ought to be, but where it cannot remain ac- 
cording to his own system.
Believe me, my dear Friend, most faithfully yours, 
R. Brown.
519 
A peculiarity in Sir James's literary compositions 
may be mentioned; it is, that he seldom wrote any 
hing more than once, and his manuscript was 
sent to the press as it came from his hand, without 
any material correction or interlineation, in a dis- 
tinct legible character, that appeared more like a 
corrected copy than a rough draught.
This was the 
case not only in scientific description, but with other 
compositions, such as his biographical memoirs of 
botanists printed in Rees's Cyclopaedia.
The person who records this was first struck with 
the circumstance when he wrote the Life of Dom- 
bey=^, which came 
" Warm from the heart, and faithful to its fires," 
with scarcely an erasure of the pen, and perfect in 
the minutest particulars of orthography and punc- 
tuation.
Another peculiarity, as it appears, was this, that 
when pressed for time, he frequently wrote most to 
his own satisfaction.
Such was the case with his 
prefaces and dedications ; always delayed till the 
volume was near its completion, and then hurried 
by his printer, he generally sat down after tea, and 
* " The collections of seeds and botanical collections of this 
unfortunate and injured man, through the mismanagement of the 
Spanish court, have been lost to the gardens of Europe.
— Among 
a few of his botanical discoveries which are preserved, are the 
magnificent Datura arborea, the beautiful Salvia formosa, and the 
fragrant Verbena tr'qjhylla, or, as it ought to have been called, 
citrea ' ; this last will be a monumentum cere 'pcrcnnius with 
those who shall ever know his history." — J- 1^- S.
' V.
iriphylla, now Lippia cHriodoia.
Kiinth 
520 
would fairly write what was wanted, without pre- 
meditation or doubt about its plan, as he would have 
written a letter.
These are proofs of the correct and energetic 
mind he was endued with; — he loved repose, his 
bodily constitution required it ; but his mental vi- 
gour, when occasion called forth exertion, disco- 
vered a power beyond what he appeared to possess.
It may not become the present writer to speak of 
Sir James's style as she is inclined to do, but the 
Prefaces to his works always seemed to her happily 
expressed, and the Dedications appropriate.
That 
to his Exotic Botany is one of the best among 
the latter, and shows the truth of the poet's obser- 
vation, 
" Affection lights a brighter flame 
Than ever blaz'd by art." 
She is even tempted to apply to him the eulogy he 
bestowed on Sir William Jones, "who honoured the 
science of botany with its cultivation, and like every 
thing else he touched, refined, elevated and eluci- 
dated it.
No man was ever more truly sensible of 
the charms of this innocent and elegant pursuit ; 
and whenever he adverted to it, all the luminous 
illustrations of learning, and even the magic graces 
of poetry flowed from his pen." 
The following passage from a letter of Mr. Ros- 
coe's, dated the 6th of January 1 805, by no means 
falls short in expression of those sentiments of esteem 
which are found in the Dedication of this work to 
that accomplished and learned historian, naturalist, 
and poet.
521 
" My dear Sir, — It was not till late last night that 
I had the pleasure of receiving through the hands 
of my booksellers the first number of Exotic 
Botany, and of perusing the affectionate, and to me, 
highly gratifying address which you have done 
me the great honour to prefix to it.
To such 
parts of it as are commendatory, I can only say, 
that although it be an arduous task, I will do the 
best I can to justify you to the world for the 
favourable opinion which you have ventured to ex- 
press ; and in this respect I feel as if I had been 
paid beforehand for a work which I have yet to 
perform : but in your kind and friendly expres- 
sions of attachment and esteem I experience the 
most unalloyed and perfect satisfaction, because I 
know that affection can only be repaid in kind, and 
that I am rich enough to make you a return.
May 
this public seal of our friendship not only confirm 
it whilst we live, but long continue to unite our 
names in future times, as associates in our studies 
and pursuits, in our dispositions and our hearts." 
The Prefaces to the Reflections on the Study of 
Nature, his Tour on the Continent, his Introduction 
to Botany, and to the English Flora, (which last is 
indeed a brief history of the progress of ])otanical 
science in this country,) are well worthy of being 
read for the information and sentiments which they 
contain.
In all Sir James's literary compositions his only 
aim was to express his thoughts with clearness and 
brevity, in the most coni^on words.
" Hard words," 
522 
he observed, " never taught wisdom^ nor does truth 
require them." 
He never sacrificed the accuracy of his meaning 
to a well-sounding sentence, considering it a fre- 
quent cause of obscurity in writers, and one form of 
affectation ; and affectation he defined in the words 
of Lavater, as " the vain and ridiculous attempt of 
poverty to appear rich." 
The facility with which he wrote had its origin 
in a habit of thinking much on the subject previ- 
ously to his committing it to paper.
Long before 
he began his English Flora, he occasionally said, 
" I have it in my mind, and only want time to write 
it down." This must be understood with some 
latitude : — as soon as he did begin, it grew beneath 
his hand, and a thousand ideas, dormant till then, 
crowded for admission, and new arrangements took 
place as occasion required ; but still, the foundation 
had been laid, and to its stability the superstruc- 
ture owed its strength and beauty.
When we consider the variety and number of 
works that came from his hand, the frequent bodily 
indispositions that retarded his progress, together 
with the interruptions occasioned by an extensive 
correspondence, by the delivery of lectures, by oc- 
casional journeys, and the indulgence of social in- 
tercourse, — it is remarkable that he accomplished so 
much ; but he had two hands to his work, which 
experience proves to be effectual in surmounting 
difl&culties ; — an unconquerable inclination, and 
great order and method, without which, however 
dull and technical it may be esteemed, nothing can 
523 
be well done.
They comprise the secret of much 
perfection in human operations, and the best oeco- 
nomy of our most precious and evanescent property, 
time and temper.
In the common occurrences of life, a promptness 
of decision was one of the characteristics of Sir 
James's mind ; it implies, indeed, an experienced 
judgement : but he considered the habit of indeci- 
sion more wearisome and unprofitable than even a 
wrong determination ; and having chosen for the 
best, he would not permit himself in vain regrets if 
he failed in his designs.
Upon more important 
occasions, he usually quoted a rule of his friend the 
Bishop of Carlisle, " Let us do the right thi7ig" 
and then whatever the result may be, we shall want 
no consolation.
This was a principle upon which 
he invariably acted ; and to those who have felt the 
peace of mind which accompanies such a motive, it 
will not require any other recommendation.
The letters of Sir James's inestimable and long- 
tried friend, who has been just alluded to, will best 
illustrate the works above enumerated.
As a classical 
scholar Dr.Goodenough's criticism is full of instruc- 
tion, as a systematic naturalist he was not behind 
any in precision, nor was it his disposition to com- 
pliment at the expense of sincerity ; his remarks 
are therefore valuable, and were continued at pretty 
regular intervals during an unbroken friendship of 
more than forty years.
The Bishop died in the 
autumn of 1827, a few months only before his at- 
tached friend.
His last letter, in the month of May 
that year, was written to express his regret at being 
524 
unable to attend the anniversary dinner of the Lin- 
ngean Society on the 24th.
A similar reason pre- 
vented Sir James himself from being present.
After 
repeated attempts to reach the metropolis, increas- 
ing infirmity put a stop to an annual visit, which 
for many returning seasons had been the period of 
much enjoyment, connected with the celebration of 
the birth of Linnaeus.
^^ vr /^^ r- 
.6^^ 
<p^yT2(U^ C^JU..
^yicK^-^^^^ 
''/ 
y:ycP^^^t^^:£y 
526 
CHAPTER VI.
The Bishop of Carlisle endeavours to jiersuade Sir James not to 
remove from London.
— Motives which induced him to return 
into Norfolk.
— Letter of Mr. Crowe.
— Lectures at the Royal 
Institution.
— Flora Grceca; — Letters from Sir Josej)h Banks; — 
Sir J.
E. Smith; — Thomas Hawkins and Thomas Piatt, Esqrs.
— Bishop of Carlisle's Correspondence.
The following correspondence of the Bishop of 
Carlisle, chiefly critical, and relating to Sir James's 
literary pursuits, comprises a period of thirty years.
With it are mingled a few letters from other learn- 
ed men, and they are thus kept apart for more easy 
reference to the foregoing Chapter.
The Rev. Samuel Goodenough, D.D., to J.E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Ealing, Sept.
16, 1793.
I have the pleasure of telling you that I am ar- 
rived at Ealing from Hastings, where I have been 
for a month, safe and sound.
Our eyes were blest 
with the sight of the India, Jamaica, and Oporto 
fleets, and variety of shipping of all descriptions, 
beyond what I ever saw before.
I was well all the 
time, met with very agreeable company, and in short 
unbent thoroughly.
Having been at Hastings fre- 
quently before, there was not so much remaining 
to be found.
However I improved myself some- 
526 
what in marine plants.
Among other things, the 
fishermen brought one day to shore the Blue Shark, 
Squahis glaucus.
As I observed that Pennant has 
spoken of this species very slightly, having never 
seen one, I have taken a very particular description 
of it, and a young lad of the place has given me a 
very correct outline drawing of it.
I should be glad 
to know if it would be worth while to make up a 
paper upon the subject for the Society.
Has any 
one given in to our Herbarium ^6p/e72zW;z marinum?
because I have a very good specimen to spare.
I 
found two new UIv(E at Hastings, but only single 
specimens of each.
And now give me leave to ask 
how my paper on the Carices goes on : is it all 
printed yet?
I could wish to let Sibthorp see a copy 
of it before he finishes his Flora Oxoniensis.
The Baroness Itzenplitz is brought to bed of a 
son at Kew. The Baron favoured me with a note 
announcing the happy tidings.
Pray favour me with a few words upon the Blue 
Shark, my paper on Carices, and the Asplenium 
marhium.
I am, dear Sir, ever yours, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Ealing, March 21, 1796.
The retirement of my situation and the neglect 
of the newspaper which we read, kept concealed 
from me till the latter end of last week, that you 
had completed your happiness.
You must now be 
527 
doubly valuable to me.
I most sincerely give you 
joy, and sball be glad to know when I may tell you 
so in person.
If there be in this world a state in 
which all is not vanity, it is that where two meet 
and unite on rational ideas, and on the sacred prin- 
ciple of making each other happy.
Pray hold me still among your friends, and re- 
commend me to Mrs. Smith's good opinion.
I remain ever your most sincere Friend and 
Servant, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
I forgot to say how sincerely Mrs. Goodenough 
joins me in all I say, and all the girls too.
From the same.
Dear Sir, August 25, 1796.
The same channel of information which informed 
me of your return from Norfolk, mentioned your 
intention of quitting Middlesex.
I rode over to 
Portland Place the next day, when lo !
(see what it 
is to live out of the world !) I found you had re- 
turned some time, and set out again for Hafod the 
day before.
I found from the ticket at the corner, 
and from your servant likewise, that all was too 
true, and that your house was to be let immediately.
Directly I began grieving for you and for the Lin- 
naean Society.
At the distance of Norwich you will 
be quite buried alive.
I wished to talk over with 
you once more, how necessary it is, that he who 
would reign over many must be perpetually contend- 
528 
ing with many.
How many matters do we ascertain, 
not merely from positive and laborious study, but 
accidental conversations with persons but meanly 
informed upon the subjects discoursed of!
You will 
have nobody to cjuestion your authority at Nor- 
wich ; the consequence of this will be, that if you 
once settle in any error, such is our infirmity, you 
will continue in it.
Then how will you from time 
to time be aware of the new discoveries which may 
be made ?
If you are not here upon the spot, you will in 
this respect be greatly behind others.
But all these 
things will keep you out of sight.
You ought to 
be always in the centre, and the ruling and anima- 
ting power.
I hear you propose being three months 
in town ; that is not sufficient ; — reverse it ; — be 
nine months here, and three at Norwich.
Then 
again the concerns of the Linnsean Society will 
require more attendance than three months.
The 
scheme of vice-presidents is proper enough, but a 
substitute (for such after all is a vice-president) can- 
not give life like the principal.
And yet much do 
we want life; when recourse has been had to several 
persons in the room, and scarcely one has been 
prevailed on to take the chair, many have been 
disgusted and their ardour cooled.
Do think upon all these things before it be too 
late.
The more the Society flourishes, the more credit 
to the President : if the Society dwindles away, the 
President has an empty name.
What credit has the potentate of a barren land.
529 
uninhabited ?
Better therefore to be much in the 
busy world, and Httle out of it ; and therefore, as I 
said before, you had better reverse the matter ; be 
nine months here, and three there.
I want you very much to give me specimens of 
Hypericum dubium and quadrangulum, and indeed 
any other choice specimens which Hafod may afford.
My very particular thanks are due to you for in- 
troducing me to Sir Thomas Frankland; I wish this 
had taken place before we had finished our paper 
on Fuci, I think his correspondence will make it 
necessary to make an addendum to our paper.
I have long since gone through your Flora^ &c.
— I am interrupted.
— Always yours affectionately, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
These affectionate letters want but little explana- 
tion ; and it must have been a powerful impulse 
which made the friend to whom they were addressed 
resist the strong persuasions of so sincere, so warm 
and judicious a counsellor.
Sir James had not long before removed from his 
house in Great Marlborough-street, and taken one 
near Mr. Lee's nursery-garden at Hammersmith, 
which was a primary inducement with him to make 
the change.
Domestic convenience, however, influ- 
enced him to leave London altogether, and he re- 
turned to his native place for a permanent residence 
in the autumn of 1796.
In the city of Norwich he 
found himself among those who knew and esteemed 
him ; and there, as his medical skill was not unfre- 
quently put in requisition among his intimate ac- 
VOL.
I. 2 m 
530 
quaintance, Mr. Crowe of Lakenham, one of his 
earliest and at all times most cordial well-wishers, 
who had great confidence in his judgement, endea- 
voured to persuade him to the practice of his pro- 
fession, and told him he should repeat the advice 
annually, convinced that he would rise to great emi- 
nence in it.
There certainly were moments when Sir James 
took this advice into consideration, and reflected 
with some satisfaction upon the friends and confi- 
dence which his professional pursuits might procure 
him.
His own experience of the value of a medi- 
cal friend made him look with complacency upon 
being useful in a similar way to others : but these 
were transient thoughts, for he knew that his fa- 
vourite occupation must frequently be interrupted 
if he once seriously engaged in practice as a physi- 
cian, and some apprehension as to his health endu- 
ring the requisite fatigue was a bar against a prompt 
decision to try the experiment.
— The writer reflects 
with as much self-satisfaction as upon almost any 
determination in her life, that she never encouraged 
her husband to relinquish his proper pursuit for a 
new object : — not that she made any sacrifice in this ; 
a comparison of the possible advantages attending 
such a change weighed but little against the plea- 
sure of seeing him in a much happier situation ; in 
his peaceful library, amidst the Floras of Greece and 
India, of the Alps and England.
To keep up as much as possible a connection 
with the Linnsean Society and his friends in Lon- 
don, Sir James spent at least two months every 
531 
spring- in town, and for full twenty years he deli- 
vered an annual course of lectures on botany at the 
Royal Institution in Albemarle-street, when his as- 
sociates there were men of the first talent in their 
respective departments of science and taste*".
Sir James also gave at different periods botanical 
lectures at the institutions of Liverpool, Birming- 
ham, Bristol, and London.
* Among these were Sir Humphry Davy, Campbell, Opie, 
Sidney Smith, and other men of eminent attainments.
The following letters from Sir H.Davy relate to arrangements 
for these courses of lectures.
Dear Sir, Royal Institution, 1804.
It is in the contemplation of the Royal Institution to extend 
considerably the subjects of the lectures of the establishment, and 
amongst other courses for the ensuing season, a short one on bo- 
tany is proposed.
I presume to inquire of you, at the request of 
one of the most active and enlightened members of the board, 
whether they may entertain any hopes that you will be disposed 
to undertake such an object.
I trust your goodness will pardon 
the liberty I am taking.
I am sure the committee will be dis- 
posed to concede to any terms that you may propose.
By your 
assistance the Institution would be materially benefited, and a 
new impulse would be given in the metropolis to that science in 
which you have so long taken the lead, and which you have so 
much extended by your labours.
I am, dear Sir, with the greatest respect.
Your obedient humble Servant, 
H. Davy.
Dear Sir, March 22, 1805.
I am requested by the managers of the Royal Institution to 
inquire whether it will be agreeable to you to deliver a third 
course of botany in 1806.
I hope and trust you will reply in the 
affirmative, because I know that your last course gave universal 
pleasure and satisfaction.
I am, dear Sir, yours, 
H. Davy.
2 M 2 
532 
When his heahh was good, the occupation was 
one he enjoyed.
He arranged previously the heads 
of his lecture ; but for words he always trusted to 
the ideas which arose in his mind while he was de- 
livering itj and in general he exceeded the allotted 
time, and had more to say than could be compressed 
into the space of an hour.
A printed abstract of 
the subject he intended to discourse upon was not 
omitted, for the convenience of himself and his 
auditors ; and of these sketches he composed a great 
variety, as the succession of his courses required.
Of one of these Dr. Goodenough, in the year 1795, 
tells him, " I am quite charmed with your Syllabus.
I would advise you, while you are a lecturer (do not 
defer it till you have given up, it will not be half so 
well done), to draw out all that matter at full length, 
and publish it as suits you ; it would be another 
Philosophia Botanica in a fashionable dress." 
Perhaps there is not to be found in the records of 
any scientific association a more gratifying exam- 
ple of the existence and the expression of kindly 
feelings, of the absence of all jealousy, and of the 
most active exertions in the support of science, 
than has been displayed by the members of the 
Linnaean Society, not only with a view to maintain 
the spirit and utility of their institution by indivi- 
dual efforts, unfettered by rivalry or intrigue, but 
by a mutual feeling of friendship and esteem exist- 
ing between themselves and him who was so long 
chosen to preside over them.
The honour which the Society conferred upon its 
533 
President, in electing him to that office year after 
year, was reflected back upon itself by the constant 
attention which he paid to its interests and by the 
unwearied devotion to scientific pursuits, which his 
more retired situation enabled him to exhibit with 
fewer interruptions than could have been expected 
had he continued to reside in London : and that 
his situation at Norwich did not injure him in the 
estimation of learned men, or hide from him the 
progress which science was making, the works he 
composed subsequently to his retreat are acknov?- 
ledged proofs.
The Rev. Dr.
Goodenongh to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, February 21, 1797.
I rejoice to hear of the comfortable arrangement 
of your family, and shall never cease regretting that 
that comfort could not be accomplished in the neigh- 
bourhood of London ; — you must allow your friends 
to regret in silence.
I have not been at the Society 
since you went, except once at a meeting of the 
Fellows.
I have introduced a most respectable 
member, Sir Thomas Frankland.
Salisbury's nomenclature is I think extremely im- 
proper, not to say ridiculous.
I am sorry that he 
has persisted in his errors even to printing them.
I was present at a very warm dispute between him 
and Dryander, who in his blunt rough manner 
finished his argument with '' If this is to be the case 
with every body, what the devil is to become of 
botany"?
I did not interfere then at all, but took 
534 
a private opportunity of persuading him (but I la- 
boured in vain) to invert the order ; and instead of 
giving new names, and quoting the Linnsean ones 
mider them, to retain the old names, and remark 
under each how much better any name he thought 
of would accord.
Mr. Salisbury has a happy firmness, which some 
people will call obstinacy, which makes him rise 
superior to every opponent.
You are quite right about Agrostis littoralis.
Dr.
Withering and I corresponded about the arista of 
the corolla.
He had either prepared that page for 
the press, or actually printed it before this took 
place.
But, as I told him, my specimens which he 
saw could have convinced him, that both calyx and 
corolla occasionally are with an arista.
I do not 
scruple to abominate, without the least qualification, 
the undermining the Linnsean fabric.
But Thunberg 
is answerable for this envious superficial daubing.
It would be worthy of you to set the world right in 
this particular.
Sowerby has failed very much in his figure of 
Fucus kaliformis.
My idea when I saw it, was like 
the story of old churches in briefs, — that it must 
be wholly taken down and rebuilt.
I find we are to 
have a visit from the French.
They will send our 
specimens flying after Gigot d'Orcey's butterflies, 
and purchasers after both.
If they take it into their 
heads to come, it will be too serious a matter to 
joke upon.
Yours most sincerely, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
535 
J. E.
Smith to the Rev. Dr, Goodeiiough.
My dear Sir, Hafod, Nov. 9, 1797.
You have perhaps heard of the reason of my 
coming to Wales, — which is to see my young pa- 
tient Miss Johnes.
I am very glad you like what I have done about 
Orobariches.
I have also sent a paper to our So- 
ciety upon some foreign ones.
The characters I 
use hold good in them.
By looking over Buddie's 
herbarium, and that of Sherard in my way hither, I 
have got much light about Menthce, and Bromi.
I 
have made ample notes, and think I now under- 
stand the former genus.
The genus Bromus is as 
ill done in all our British authors (and perhaps in 
Linnaeus) as any one in the system.
By this time 
you have got English Botany for November, and my 
preface.
I am very glad now Curtis did not accept 
my offer, though I would then have steadily kept to 
it.
I will always do justice to his botanical abili- 
ties on every occasion.
I hope our Society will go 
on very well.
Your ever faithful Friend and Servant, 
J. E.
Smith.
James Crowe^ Esq, to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir Lakenham, Nov. 21, 1797.
lam most exceedingly rejoiced indeed to hear from 
you that Miss Johnes is so much recovered as to be 
536 
pronounced so decidedly out of all danger from the 
most formidable attack that could perhaps be made 
upon her by nature without depriving her of life.
My dear Sir, after your experiencing the pleasure of 
restoring to her friends and the world so amiable 
an object, one so likely to diffuse blessings around 
her, and be in every respect a shining ornament in 
society, as I have often been informed by your ho- 
nest and intelligent mind, — I say, after having expe- 
rienced this pleasure, how can you hesitate to be- 
nefit the world with a more extensive practice than 
the limits of your favoured friends call for !
To 
them I know you can refuse nothing, and I have 
vanity enough to hope I shall always be on that 
list ; so that it is not from a selfish motive I thus 
renew a subject I have taken the liberty so often to 
mention.
I feel in the most sensible manner for 
Mr. Johnes.
What a loss would he have had !
An 
only child, — and such a child !
His only danger now 
will be excess of happiness ; but you say he has a 
great mind, and in truth he has had occasion to put 
it to the test.
I am sorry Mr. Johnes did not receive the white 
poplars ; they were sent according to the direc- 
tions, and also a bundle of the large sort of white 
willow.
These last should be cut into lengths of 
twelve or fourteen inches ; and both of them put 
into nursery beds, placed one foot distant from 
plant to plant.
They will soon become great trees, 
to be removed to such places where they may re- 
main, and add another ornament, I hope, to that 
now astonishingly ornamented country by art and 
537 
nature.
The white poplar increases rapidly by 
layers and also by suckers, which are plentifully 
thrown out by plants a few years old.
The willows 
are propagated by cuttings ; and this plant not only 
will make very large trees, but if used as osiers and 
so cut every year, are as good a kind as any the 
basket-makers employ.
A moist soil, but not too 
wet, is the most proper for both ; but they do not 
like a gravel under any circumstances.
— I cannot 
help returning again to the subject of Miss Johnes.
I hope she will be prevailed on to come to London, 
and so^be within your reach ; for I dread physical 
ignorance, but much more physical knavery.
The 
first is almost a constant resident in the country, 
and the latter in London.
But in London you 
could attend her at any time within a few hours 
notice.
If she travels, you might be during the 
whole journey at her elbow ; and for her benefit the 
enthusiasts in natural history would give up the 
information to be derived from your intended re- 
view of the treasures at Oxford.
Indeed I am in- 
clined to believe you have already been too diligent 
to leave behind much to glean.
MenthcB and Bromi will now be traced through all 
their dark recesses.
From your faithful Friend, 
James Crowe.
The Rev. Dr.
Goodenough to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Windsor, Nov. 18, 1799.
Your packet came here just as I was setting off 
538 
for dear Bulstrotle.
Upon my return last Tuesday, 
I set to it, as Shakespear says, incontinently.
I 
have not been able to run through your synonyms 
of Carices.
Your binervis is a good species.
I believe it 
grows near Hastings in Sussex.
It always struck 
me as different from distans, but I did not think of 
your excellent mark of difference.
C. Micheliana 
is a good species, and entitles you to all praise.
Pray give your vesicai'ia a new name.
The one I 
have so called is so named (confounded with yours) 
in the herbarium.
It has always been received 
abroad as vesicaria.
I have somewhere among 
my papers some very cogent remarks upon the pro- 
priety of so naming it.
Yours is not a vesicarious 
plant ; most probably it is Linnaeus's j3, or rather 
what he thought a variety of it.
Its fructification 
is more allied to our sylvatica, which I take for 
granted was Linnaeus's vesicaiia j3.
Pray do as I 
say ; you will find it will be received as hypercri- 
ticism if you do not.
If the world may be suffered after all its bloody 
struggles, I trust science, and that most natural one, 
botany in particular, will flourish more and more, 
and, under your correct auspices, stride on to per- 
fection.
I have used deficit with an accusative case.
There 
are good and elegant authorities.
I hope you see in all I say and do, a mind truly 
attached to you.
S. GOODENOUGH.
539 
Fi'om the same.
My dear Sir, Windsor, Feb. 13, 1800.
You must know that riding the other day through 
water that I had passed a hundred times, all at once 
my horse plunged into a cavity over head and ears.
I fortunately kept my seat.
The water, however, 
at fair standing came over his back.
All filled with 
water, by good luck we scrambled out.
My ser- 
vant could not help me ; it was over his head.
I 
then found a little unnoticed bridge had been car- 
ried away by the floods just before.
All this hap- 
pened at Old Windsor, in the main road to London.
Who could have expected such a thing ?
I had 
three miles to ride home dripping wet and chilly.
It ended in gout, as I feared.
You are so deep in willows that I cannot come 
near you.
My idea has always been that they 
should be described in two states, — fructification, 
and leaf.
They are full as distinct in the one as the 
other.
I am glad to agree with you both in amyg- 
dalina and tnandra being the same.
I have met 
with it at Bath with an almond leaf as like as 
ovum ovo, and in Battersea fields quite otherwise, 
but bearing the sign corticem ahjiciens most re- 
markably.
The rubra Jissa, Hoffman, I found in a 
holt, close (on the north side) to the town of Ely, 
not on Prick willow Bank, which is six miles from it 
nearly.
I longed to add a habitat of what I always 
thought S.
arenaria, but I am not sure of your 
plant.
The one I mean is that on the sandy downs 
540 
about Walmer Castle and Deal, where, when the 
wind blows fresh, the under side of the leaves turn- 
ing up gives the whole a silvery appearance.
I am 
glad you throw out hermaphroditica.
Again in Polypodmms I cannot follow you.
I 
always thought we found P.
Thelypteris near Bury ; 
but by your list that is Oreopteris : it grew only 
in one marshy place, about six or seven miles from 
the town.
Have you sufficiently attended to acu- 
leatum and lohatmn ?
As they grew in Sole's gar- 
den together, they seemed very diiferent ; lobatuin 
as smooth again as aculeatum : then its pinnae were 
adscendent, &c., &c.
I am heartily glad at seeing that so much pro- 
gress is made.
I am getting better every day ; so 
send when you please.
S. G.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Windsor, Oct. 17, 1801.
I wish to say that I am alive, and am disappointed 
at not hearing from you : I always look up to you 
for consolations in natural history, — a bit of some- 
thing new: then especially those new Carices which 
have been discovered since I wrote.
Any thing 
to a poor wretch who has no field for exploration, 
no companion, but still knows the value and the 
comforts of the charming science, would be accept- 
able.
You all seem to be mistaken, I fear, about my 
541 
Carexfulva.
I left veritable specimens with the 
Linngean Society of all stages of its growth.
I was 
the first who ascertained Lightfoot's C.
tomentosa 
to be the Jilifoniiis of Linna?us, which I suppose 
you did not recollect.
I begged the Queen to let 
me examine her herbarium for this purpose.
I augur from the arrival of peace at last, (Oh 
that it may last !) that natural history in particu- 
lar will raise its head.
We shall meet folks whom 
we have not seen for years, and of course shall have 
much to tell, and so much to ask that we shall 
never have done.
I hope we shall keep the lead in 
science, as we have undoubtedly in naval glory.
I 
dread, however, the introduction of revolutionary 
principles ; as you have often heard me say, " my 
nerves will not shake till the peace comes." 
Send a body a little natural history news.
I have 
little food here, but I love it as much as ever.
Yours ever, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Deanery, Rochester, Nov. 3, 1802.
I was very sorry to hear, when I was appointed 
to the Deanery of Rochester, under what a severe 
affliction you were labouring.
To that I attributed 
my not hearing from you, and to that you must 
attribute my not writing to you a letter which I was 
assured you could not read.
It would gratify me 
very much to have a proof that you have shaken 
off your holy adversary St. Anthony.
542 
I have some time since quitted Windsor, and am 
most comfortably lodged at the Deanery at Roches- 
ter, whither you will in future direct to me.
I have 
a charming house, with a very neat and convenient 
garden, and a little orchard adjoining, and com- 
pletely secluded from the town of Rochester.
All 
this on the fair side.
On the other hand, the neigh- 
bourhood for the most part is naval, military, and 
suited to the various business of a Dock-yard.
Un- 
fortunately I have all my life long been accustomed 
to the conversation of clergymen, men of letters, and 
liberal pursuits.
Our minor canons are very re- 
spectable indeed, — beyond most situations of the 
kind ; but I cannot hear of a person who has the 
least turn for any branch of natural history, so that 
I seem to stand quite alone, a solitary being.
If ever you should come into Kent, I hope you 
will take your quarters at the Deanery in your way.
I will promise you a warm room and warm wel- 
come ; and once for all let me say, that I hope you 
will not think that any elevation of rank in life will 
make me different from what you saw me at Ealing.
I flatter myself I have a mind above such nonsense.
I admire the gradual progress of your English Bo- 
tany.
I am told that I am well situated for bo- 
tany ; that must be ascertained as next year (if I 
live so long) opens.
The whole country around 
me seems chalk, and very thickly clothed with 
wood.
But without a companion one has no heart 
to move, especially as you everywhere hereabouts 
see loose fellows from the navy and Dock-yard, with 
their doxies.
543 
Your Car ex divisa is a good figure ; but had I 
known of your publishing it, I should have desired 
you to have noted that strange variation of the 
culm, from sharp angles in moist rich situations, 
to almost round in stiiOf half-moist clay.
I found 
it in great plenty in all its varieties in the Isle of 
Sheppy.
I have a great notion that Hudson, in 
his first edition, took your L.
chrysophthalmus for 
Juniperinus, Linn.
Yours, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Bulstrode, April 1, 1804.
I waited till I came to this place, that I might 
write under the Duke's cover before I thanked you 
for your very kind attention to me in sending me 
two copies of the third volume of your most excel- 
lent Flora Britannica.
I see every thing you do 
with most partial eyes.
I thought that I had long 
since done growing, but really I fancy myself some 
inches taller from the deference you have paid to 
my humble attempts at the genus Careoc.
I have 
just heard that there is a lady botanist at Roches- 
ter.
I shall endeavour to find her out, and hope 
that she is a proficient.
It is really hard that during 
my whole residence at Windsor, as well as Roches- 
ter, I have not had a naturalist within my reach.
The moment I can find one I shall run over ray 
stores with him, and communicate with pleasure.
544 
But this horrid war turns all men's minds to drums, 
trumpets, and arms.
You may depend upon my noting down any er- 
rors which I may perceive ; but from what I have 
read, I should think there are none, for all seems 
quite correct.
How admirably well you support English Bo- 
tany.
The numbers improve as they go, I think.
I wish to recommend the variety S of Hedypnois 
autumnale to your notice, as I have found it seve- 
ral times just as Petiver's figure represents it.
I 
cannot but think it a distinct species : the outer- 
most lobe of the lower leaves always large.
There is a plant of which I have not a correct 
notion; \\z.
the Picris hieracioides.
I always took 
a dwarfish plant, about one foot high, of a hard 
roughish tendency, to be that ; but the Eton bota- 
nists assured me, that a smooth plant which grew 
just over the ferry lane at Datchet, about three feet 
high, was P.
hieracioides.
I do not find my dwarf 
plant in English Botany.
How will you contrive 
about the Fungi ?
An acquaintance of mine, whom you formerly 
saw at my house, a good entomologist, and a friend 
of Dr. Sibthorp's, Miss Hill, has lately turned 
her very acute mind to the study of marine plants.
I have encouraged her to proceed, and I think she 
will produce some valuable observations.
Time 
will show.
An old friend of yours at Leyden and 
Edinburgh, Dr. Vaughan, is stationed as a physician, 
and he has good practice, at Rochester.
He threat- 
ens that he will take to botany this summer.
I 
545 
know if while you are in town you would take a 
run down to us that he would be very glad to renew 
his acquaintance with you.
I have a good large 
house, and you will always find a bed for you at 
your leisure.
Your faithful 
S. G.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Deanery, Rochester, Nov. 21, 1804.
You cannot think how glad I am to receive any 
letter from you, particularly when it calls me to 
literary investigation.
Having alw^ays been a stu- 
dent in Divinity, as my first duty, that bore a very 
principal part in my pursuits even when at Ealing, 
when interest ought to have kept me entirely to 
Classics.
Notwithstanding, however, that I was so 
wholly engrossed by those two profound studies.
Natural History, as you always saw, was a study 
quite congenial to my feelings, and continually 
sweetened the toils of the other two.
Happily re- 
leased from Classical interest.
Divinity now remains 
the great object of my life.
You may judge then 
how delightfully a little botanical, or rather I should 
say Natural History literature, relieves a long and 
laborious application to that ponderous employ- 
ment.
I need not say more to persuade you to think 
how gladly I always turn aside to your call, — never 
leading me into any thing uninteresting or cold or 
trifling, but into rich and most gratifying concep- 
tions.
— Verhum sat.
VOL.
I. 2 N 
546 
My reason for preferring archetypus in my for- 
mer letter, was because the noun in Greek is tuttoc 
(typus), not rvTTov {typmii).
It is true that Aristotle 
himself uses adjectively apyzrvKov{archetypmii)\ but 
I think he uses it in the abstract sense, to o.py^&- 
TVTTov, a thing that represents the original form, 
meaning something rather conceived than real.
But you apply it to a thing at hand, the original 
itself present.
I did not recollect that you used 
archetypMm in the nominative case in Flora Bri- 
tannica.
If you did use it in the accusative, the 
argument will not apply.
I still think archetypus 
better than archetypum, for ^ specimen,' especially 
where specimen is contrasted with icon^figura ; for 
I think apy^erv-Koc meansybrwitt originalis pr(Esens.
I do not think your generic name Anotion right.
When a vox hiulca occurred, I observe the Greeks 
often inserted a consonant to please the ear, eu- 
phoni(B causa: but in this word they could not, for 
by inserting the v (n), they introduced a new word of 
different meaning.
Anotion, written in Greek will 
stand either avonov or avwnov.
The first word signi- 
fying non humidus, without moisture — if any thing ; 
the second, non dorsalis, without a hack.
Now it 
happens that Athenaeus has an expression, Kepcifiiov 
awTov, vas non aures habens, in which he makes 
atoToc, which is naturally a noun, declined (as I ob- 
served on a|0)(eTU7roc) like an adjective.
This was 
no uncommon thing with the Greeks themselves, 
when they wanted to express a new idea.
We 
have the same in our own language.
We say star- 
light, making star an adjective for starry, &c.
Now 
547 
the original word is atoroc, and when decHned ad- 
jectively has only two terminations (like tristis, 
(7'iste), o Kai h awroc, Kai to aiorov.
But as in botany 
the word /3oTav»?
or ttoo {plantd) is usually under- 
stood, the generic name therefore should be Aotus, 
and all the specific names should be of the femi- 
nine gender : and this observation will account to 
you why Linnaeus was advised to apply feminine 
specific names to so many generic nouns appa- 
rently not feminine : the feminine word Troa or 
jSoTovij was understood.
You are very happy in 
Eriocalia : the name is after the true Greek ety- 
mology, and applies with great exactness.
I have 
some doubts about stylid'mm ; not but that it is 
framed after the Greek analogy : the terminati on 
i^iov (idium) being used by the Greeks to express a 
diminutive.
But it happens that the original word 
CTTvAoc {stylus, columna) has its diminutive already 
formed by the Greeks themselves.
They called it 
arvkiQ {stylis) and arvXioKOQ {styliscus),hoth.
signify- 
ing columella, not cttuXiSiov.
I am of opinion, 
therefore, that you had better use either columella, 
the Latin word, or stylis, which makes stylidis in 
the genitive ; which last remark I mention in case 
you should wish to use the word in any of its ob- 
lique cases.
Linguiforme is undoubtedly after the 
true analogy of Latin words.
When you come to town, you and Mrs. Smith 
both must come and stay with us at the Deanery.
You may work here in my study below ; I have a 
few good books and specimens : and she may work 
above with my females ; and I promise her she 
2 N 2 
548 
shall be taken care of.
Whoever comes here, uses 
the privilege uti possidetis , — there is no restraint.
I remember very well making a hasty sketch of 
the Air-plant.
I remember also my ideas of the 
physiology of the plant, which I gathered from 
Kaempfer, and the directions which I gave to the 
duchess's gardener, under whose management the 
plant flowered for the only time, I believe, in this 
kingdom.
I wish you are not running into too 
many species of Lichens of the Crust acei^^ndi Liprosi 
divisions.
Have they been watched from year to 
year in their changes ?
I am encouraging a beautiful charming young 
student in botany in general, particularly in Fuci, 
&c..
Lady Mary Thynne.
I intend, as soon as I 
have a little leisure, to write to Mr. Turner for the 
favour of a few specimens both for myself and her.
Your faithful and affectionate 
S. GOODENOUGH.
Sir J.
Banks to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Doctor, Soho Square, Feb. 22, 1805.
After maturely considering the question of the 
title-page to Sibthorp's book, submitted to me by 
you at the desire of the trustees, and consulting with 
your friends about it, I am clearly of opinion that 
it is much too long, and that it will be better to di- 
vide the matters intended to be expressed in it into 
two parts : the one, that is the tribute to Sibthorp's 
memory, will be a very proper subject for the title 
549 
of a book of such extreme cost at his expense; the 
other, the justice which ought strictly to be done to 
your talents and judgement by separating your part 
of the work distinctly from Sibthorp's part, is, I 
think, a much fitter subject for an introduction ; 
because everything may there be specially stated 
and the reasons given, which surely ought not to be 
omitted, why Sibthorp neglected to do the things 
which you are now employed in.
Thus will due jus- 
tice be done to both his and your claims in a plain 
and intelligent manner.
I therefore submit to your 
censure the following title, for which we are obliged 
to your friend Dryander, a man whose correct ideas 
of justice, as well in matters of property as of lite- 
rature, I have not yet seen excelled by those of any 
other of my friends.
"Johannis Sibthorp M.D. S.S. Reg. etLinn.
Lond.
Socii Bot. Prof.
Reg. in Academia Oxoniensi 
Flora Graeca Edidit Jacobus Smith" (Here enter 
all your literary titles).
Sibthorp's intentions of making the descriptions 
he had at first omitted in Greece, and his journey 
there the second time for that purpose ; the ill health 
which prevented him from executing his most lau- 
dable intentions ; his death immediately after his 
return home; his will, with an eulogium on the sa- 
crifices he made to science, not only by submitting 
to personal privations, hazards, difficulties, &c., but 
also by his magnificent pecuniary provision for this 
work, — will make excellent themes for your Intro- 
duction.
You may in it do full justice to the me- 
mory of your friend, which a title-page can never 
do, and at the same time be a perfect and complete 
declaration of the share of the work you have had, 
which will come admirably well in that place, under 
the plea of an honourable care that no fault com- 
mitted by you should by any misconception be laid 
to the charge of your friend.
If this plan meets your ideas, the business will 
be settled I think to the perfect satisfaction of the 
trustees, and I have no doubt of yours also.
If you 
see any objections to it, do me the favour of stating 
them, and I will take them into immediate consi- 
deration.
Being, my dear Sir, with real esteem and 
regard, very faithfully yours, 
Joseph Banks.
J. E.
Smith to Sir J.
Banks.
My dear Sir, Norwich, Feb. 26, 1805.
I take the earliest opportunity in my power to 
thank you for the kind attention you have given to 
the subject of my last, and for your excellent letter 
received on Sunday afternoon.
It has always been 
my intention to prefix a preface to the Flora Grcsca 
upon the plan you so ably suggest.
In that every- 
thing will be fully explained.
The exact nature of 
the materials Sibthorp left, the great pains and ex- 
pense he bestowed, and his zeal and knowledge, 
shall have as full justice done them as possible.
His 
manuscripts, when deposited at Oxford, will vouch 
for all this.
I shall also as simply and plainly as 
possible state what part I have had in the work, and 
the assistance I have received from you or other 
551 
friends.
On these heads we are perfectly agreed.
I only thought it necessary, for the honour of the 
work and its original author, to express in the title, 
that it was not strictly confined to Greek plants, lest 
some carping critic, finding a plate of Saccharum 
TeneriffcE from Sicily, a new tulip from Florence, 
and a few other such extraneous matters, should 
object to the plan or to the title.
I also thought 
as we are all agreed that it should somewhere be 
fully explained what part I have in the work, that 
such information ought to appear in the title.
I think, however, yours and Mr. Dryander's sim- 
plification of the title a great improvement, except 
that I am in doubt about the word edidit; for though 
I am aware of its true Latin meaning being nearly 
what I wish, yet an English, or superficial reader 
will, by casting his eye on it, suppose me to be 
little more than the publisher of a book written by 
Dr. Sibthorp.
For this reason I strongly objected 
to saying in the title, that it was " composed from 
his manuscripts." I also doubt the propriety of 
the title standing as it does, without an accusative 
case connected with edidit.
I shall, however, think 
about it; and as the title will not be wanted yet for 
some time, we can finally decide upon it when I go 
to town in April ; and perhaps you or I may hit on 
some other word, which does not now suggest itself.
I would by all means keep on the modest side in my 
part of the title ; and I know I may trust my fame 
implicitly in the hands of you and my friend Dry- 
ander, who will both be ready enough to assert my 
claim, in case I should be underrated.
I know also 
552 
that my advantages would be tenfold, on the score 
of my ambition, by such a procedure ; but about this 
I am really very easy, for I love the science chiefly 
for its own sake : I would only not put an expres- 
sion into the title that should give a false idea, whe- 
ther for or against me.
I am now hard at work on the Prodromus FlorcR 
GrceccE (having got the great work sufficiently for- 
ward), which would be easy enough if Sibthorp had 
referred from his MS.
habitats and catalogues to 
either specimens or drawings; but as he has not, it 
is a series of laborious criticism and investigation.
Believe me, dear Sir, 
Your ever obliged and faithful Servant, 
J. E.
Smith.
The Rev. Dr.
Goodenough to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Deanery, Rochester, May 7, 1805.
I am quite rejoiced to hear that you are in town, 
and that you are disposed to pay me, what in my 
idea you have long long owed me, a visit at Roches- 
ter.
I have a charming retirement here, a good 
house, delightful garden, quite out of the tumult of 
the town, and what I call a very respectable library; 
so that my wants are very few.
I really feel but 
one at present, and that is the want of literary so- 
ciety.
Had I a naturalist within my reach, or a 
good classical scholar, I should feel myself in de- 
lights.
But we cannot have everything.
I have 
lately exchanged my Oxfordshire preferment for a 
' 553 
living in Kent; Boxley, about seven miles from this 
place, which makes a very convenient arrondisse- 
ment of my worldly possessions.
If I live, I shall attend you on the anniversary the 
24th, from which these few last years I have been 
necessarily absent.
Nil milii rescribas, attamen ipse veni.
More of the title when we meet.
Edidit in that 
form of words does not necessarily require an ac- 
cusative after it, the word opus or some such thing 
being always understood.
You certainly are more than an editor ; I would 
not put myself so low as that, though there are some 
would have you considered in no other light.
The sooner you come and the longer you stay 
the happier you will make me and Mrs. G., and 
perhaps ultimately the better it may be for you.
Ever yours most faithfully, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
The Rev. Dr.
Goodenough to *I.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, April 4, 1806.
To speak en masse, I cannot object to one of your 
proposed alterations.
All is right in point of Lati- 
nity, and seems to express what was wanted more 
minutely than what was written before.
I under- 
stood from your copy that modern Greece and igno- 
rance were nearly synonymous terms.
When I added 
"6fc." after Homero, Aristoteli, Theophrasto, I did it 
to save the trouble of enumerating every author of 
554 - 
authority who might be classed with them.
You 
see that Pliny refers to multitudes who wrote before 
him.
Every one will be aware that there are many 
who have touched upon the plants of Greece, though 
they are not commonly mentioned.
Their memory 
is almost defaced, as Horace observes, Quia carent 
vate sacro.
Your title, as you send it now, will stand very 
well : only I would suggest, that perhaps invemt 
would be better than inven^xdX — "which he foundl^ 
not ^'^ had found.'''' Perhaps you wrote inve7iera.t for 
invcTiet^'it*, which possibly may be best of all, as it 
implies something indefinite, ^' which he/bund occa- 
sional?/.'' 
In the title of Prodromus the word " omnium '* 
seems necessary: for the Flora GrcBca contains Sib- 
thorp's thousand plants, which he wished to be en- 
graved, &c.; the Prodromus gives an account of all 
which he found in his course of travel.
— Flora Graca 
Sibthorpiana cannot be improper.
I wish you were settled at or near London again.
Yours ever, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
t/.
E. Smith to the Rev. Dr.
Goodenough.
My dear Sir, Lowestoft, Sept.
2, 1806.
My long stay in London this year made me so 
far behindhand with my periodical publications, 
that I have been occupied with them ever since my 
* Invencrit is the word used in the title-page.
565 
return.
We are now here for a while with my wife's 
family, unbending ; yet I long to be at work again.
I take advantage of my present leisure to chat a 
little with you, my good friend ; as I could not enjoy 
your conversation in person, on account of our se- 
veral engagements.
If you see Exotic Botany, you will observe in the 
Number for August what I have done about Globba 
marantina and other Scitmninem.
I flatter myself 
I have done some good in this Order, and shall do 
more.
Mr. Roscoe, in a most excellent paper to 
the Linnaean Society, first led the way to a true 
knowledge of the genera of these difficult plants, 
founded on the form of the filament.
I have lately had a most bountiful present from 
my old friend Dr. Buchanan, Tong resident in India, 
of his whole herbarium of Nepal and Mysore plants; 
about 1500 species, with all his MS.
descriptions, 
and near 200 fine drawings.
He has given me them 
entirely, for publication in Exotic Botany.
I mean to go home the beginning of next week, 
and, except one or two little excursions, I shall be 
stationary here through all the winter.
My work 
laid out for the season is to finish Flora Britannica; 
to write a popular Introduction to Botany; to finish 
and publish Linnaeus's Lapland Tour, besides going 
on with Flora GrcRca^ and my two periodical works.
I like a variety of employment; and we lead a quiet 
domestic life that allows me to be very much mas- 
ter of my time.
The first fasciculus oi Flora Grceca is printed, but 
waits, I believe, for the coloured frontispiece.
556 
The first, fasciculus of the Prodromus Flor(R 
GrcEC(B is not yet done.
I shall beg your acceptance 
of the only copy I can give away to anybody.
I 
hope it will be ready by the time the Flora is.
It 
will contain the first five Classes.
The UmhellatcE, 
have given me much trouble, but I think I have 
learned to know them tolerably.
The tribe of Si- 
lene, Dianthus, &c.
is also a very numerous and dif- 
ficult one in this work.
How glad I should be if anything could tempt 
you to visit this coast !
My wife begs to join me 
in best respects to all your family; she would be as 
happy as myself in entertaining them here or at 
Norwich.
Do you know our new bishop?
I once 
thought nothing but your coming to the see of Nor- 
wich could console us for the departure of the late 
bishop ; but really the present is a very amiable 
benignant character, and not without taste for bo- 
tany, at least he esteems it much.
Pardon me for 
intruding on you with this long scrawl; and believe 
me, dear Sir, with the warmest afl'ection and respect, 
ever yours, 
J. E.
Smith.
Dr. Goodenough to J.
E, Smith.
Boxley, near Maidstone, Sept.
9, 1806.
My dear Sir, 
Your letter of the 2nd instant followed me to 
this my new charming retirement.
The house it- 
self is the only spot in the parish which can be 
called dull ; add to this, in very wet weather it is 
557 
rather damp.
You now know all the worst : but 
the whole country round is beautiful in the extreme, 
— such hills, such rich valleys, such extensive views, 
such rides, such roads, as are not to be met with 
scarcely anywhere.
An excellent neighbourhood, 
and within a mile and a half of the market town, 
Maidstone, where we get tolerably well supplied 
with everything.
I shall long for you to see it.
But this must, I fear, be a distant pleasure.
I should have been glad to have had a quiet talk 
by ourselves concerning Salisbury's strange conduct.
I never^admired him ; and from a warm conversation 
I once had with him about changing of the nomen- 
clature of the genus E7ica, I thought him too wild 
to take a lead.
In that same conversation Dryan- 
der took part with me, and dressed him in his rough- 
est manner.
When you have to consider that you 
and Sir Joseph Banks divide the empire of the 
botanical world, you have a clue to all the awkward 
oddities to which such a circumstance necessarily 
exposes you.
Well managed, these whimsicalities 
are mere ephemera : in angry hands the posses- 
sion of a butterfly might disturb the universe : 
nothing is so prolific as strife.
I have seen here Hierac'ium wnbellatum, Chrysos- 
plenium oppos'itifollum^ Hedypnois hieracioides, Cre- 
pis biennis, with many others fond of a chalky soil.
I have looked in vain through the neighbourhood 
of Rochester for Viola hirta.
Orchis militai'is j3 
is surely no variety.
S. GOODENOUGH.
558 
Dr. Goodenough to J.
E, Smith.
My dear Sir, Rochester, Dec. 11, 1806.
I have just received your kind present of the first 
part of the Prodromus of Flora Grseca.
I Uke the 
idea of one good figure to every plant.
As this first 
volume reaches only to Pentandr'ia, I should ap- 
prehend that there will be two or three volumes 
more.
How superb must Flora GrcEca itself be !
I see a new work cut out for you : you only can 
execute it.
To some species is added icon nulla.
Then there should be a figure given, and you may 
count upon the number of purchasers beforehand 
by the sale of the Prodromus.
No purchaser of 
the Prodromus will be without the figures of these 
new and rare plants.
Indeed I shall look upon this 
work as one of the prides of my library.
Would 
the times were more tranquil, that the work might 
make its way upon the continent, where it must be 
very interesting ; but Bonaparte's rage against us 
increases hourly with his wonderful success.
He 
seems to say, as Achilles did over the body of Hec- 
tor, " I wish I could eat you raw." I protest now, 
I do not see how peace can take place, for nothing 
can satisfy his ambition.
He has already all the 
land, and now he talks how hard it is that he cannot 
be upon equality with us by sea : — the English of 
which is, that he must have free access to us, i.
e. 
invade us, and then — the whole world is at his feet.
It will be a pleasure to me to meet you in town 
559 
in the spring, and talk over all our pleasurable con- 
versations ; and a greater to see you here.
Yours, 
S. G.
J, E.
Smith to Thomas Piatt, Esq.
Dear Sir, Jan. 1, 1807.
In reply to your favour of Dec. 29, it is impossi- 
ble not to see the justice and candour of what you 
say on the subject of my engagement with you ; and 
I feel and acknowledge that you have shown confi- 
dence in me, and that our dealings together have 
been more like old friends than persons hitherto 
unknown to each other.
But I wish you and all 
the world to know that the protracted pubhcation 
of the work (except what arose from my being al- 
most blind for some months, and therefore unable 
to work at it) has been owing to the confused na- 
ture of the state in which our deceased friend left 
the materials, and which no one could have sus- 
pected beforehand.
For instance, there being no 
names to either specimens or drawings, except a 
few ; which has occasioned me infinite trouble, and 
(if I may say so) required eminent botanical know- 
ledge in order to combine the materials together.
This you will readily perceive would not have been 
the case if the same names which are in Dr. Sib- 
thorp's journals and catalogues, my only guides to 
the places of growth, had been written on either 
specimens or drawings ; because then a person of 
560 
moderate knowledge might have turned at once 
from one to the other.
Now it has cost me many 
weary months, and will cost many more, to sur- 
mount this unexpected and unnecessary difficulty.
For this reason I conceive you must be justified in 
paying me that additional compliment of presenting 
me with the works, even in the eyes of the most 
rigid judges.
But you well know you are amena- 
ble to nobody, and that it is left to your discretion 
how to use the funds in the best manner for the 
publication of the work.
Nevertheless, I would 
have the whole transacted as if the world saw it, 
and so I am sure would you.
I therefore accept 
the books on this ground from you and Mr. Haw- 
kins, as Dr. Sibthorp's executors, but with even 
more satisfaction as a pledge of your favour and 
friendship for me, and of your approbation of my 
labours.
The work is my pleasure, and I always 
long to be at it.
"Wishing you and Mrs. Piatt, and all dear to you, 
many happy years, 
I remain, dear Sir, 
Your faithful and obliged Servant, 
J. E.
Smith.
Dr. Goodenough to «/.
JE.
Sinith.
Boxley, near Maidstone, Sept.
21, 1807.
My dear Sir, 
I am always so glad to see your handwriting, 
ever touching upon matters of usefulness and enter- 
561 
tainnient, that I could wish you to be beset with 
difficulties every day, if those difficulties would 
induce you to apply to me.
My search after truth 
is so strong, that I like the discussion .
of difficul- 
ties ; for I have always found that if I have not 
been able to solve the difficulty itself, I have always 
gained knowledge of matters connected with it 
more than sufficient to repay my labour.
In the 
beginning of my study of botany, I remember being 
employed for three days in the investigation oi Hy- 
pericum procumbens.
(You will say, how stupid I 
was !) But I believe I learned more from ascer- 
taining what it luas ?iot, than from any other dis- 
covery which I ever made.
From all this preface, one would think that you 
had now thrown down some arduous matter in my 
way.
That is not the case ; but it is a pleasure to 
talk with you.
I am of the same opinion now with respect to your 
Syllabus as I ever was, and have still no doubt but 
that in your plain illustration and management it 
would become a very popular Philosophia Botanica.
I am a great advocate for throwing out criticisms 
and hints of improvement upon the Linnaean system, 
as it is the surest mode of strengthening and esta- 
blishing it.
What a great advantage would it have 
been to the world, had Aristotle begun where Lin- 
naeus did !
All the subjects of natural history would 
have been so well known, that we should now have 
been advanced to the philosophical parts of the 
study, — the gradations of nature in structure and 
oeconomy ; and, by having the whole before us to 
VOL.
I. 2 o 
562 
compare together, perhaps been enabled to find out 
the true uses of everything.
As yet, we are not 
got beyond the elements ; but it appears to me that 
we, — that is, you who are the enlightened professors 
of natural history, — build surely as you go, and that 
you have laid a foundation for solid and progressive 
improvement.
How I admire your English Botany !
— the first 
thing of the kind.
You must not talk of a close 
yet, when so many things remain to be figured.
I long for a completion of Flora Br'itannica.
I 
shall look over all English plants again.
Shall you 
be able to maintain all your new Cryptogamics ?
Do 
set somebody upon JJlvm and ConfervcB.
Oh that 
I may see them illustrated before I die !
Ever yours, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
Dr, Goodenough to J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, Rochester, Dec. 20, 1807.
Many thanks for your kind letter ; but I am 
grieved to think by the expressions of it, that a 
letter from me to you the moment I received intel- 
ligence of my advancement, has not reached you.
You know me very well, — what I have been, that I 
hope to continue ; neither will one old friend have 
ever to say that I have forgotten him.
Rose Castle is distant, but it opens out a new 
country.
The labours of my mind will be relieved 
there, as elsewhere, by the delights of natural hi- 
563 
story.
I anticipate the great pleasure I shall have 
in seeing you and Mrs. Smith there.
My friends are too partial to me : I can never 
hope to answer their expectations ; but it is flat- 
tering to find the King taking the lead in bearing 
testimony to me, and all the friends of my intimacy 
joining in the same strain.
Adieu, dear friend ; and always be assured that I 
am, and shall be, as truly yours as ever.
I have not time to go on with your book yet.
When I can frank, you shall hear from me.
Yours ever, 
S. GOODENOUGH.
«/.
E. Smith to the Bishop of Carlisle, 
My dear Lord, Norwich, March 28, 1808.
I have waited, and hoped, and despaired, and 
hoped again (but now I despair), that you would 
perform your very kind promise, ^'^as soon as you 
could frank" of letting me hear from you.
In despair then of the speedy performance of this 
promise, I venture to take up my pen, trusting that 
this will find your Lordship somewhere or somehow, 
and that I may express how ardently I wish to pay 
my congratulations in person.
How happy should 
I be to see Rose Castle and Carlisle, where I have 
been so many years since!
I hope to visit my sister 
Martyn at Liverpool this summer.
I must quote 
a passage in one of her letters : " If the new Bishop 
of Carlisle or any of his family should pass this 
way, I should be happy to spread my cloak in their 
2 o 2 
564 
path, as Sir Walter Raleigh did for Queen Eliza- 
beth." 
My dear Lord, I presume to hope you will make 
my congratulations acceptable to Mrs. Goodenough 
and all your amiable family.
Long may you be ho- 
nours and blessings to each other !
— so sincerely 
prays your ever devoted 
J. E.
Smith.
From the saine.
My dear Lord, Norwich, April 3, 1808.
My friend Dawson Turner has at length informed 
me how I may direct a letter to you.
If I could be 
jealous of so good a friend, I should grudge Turner 
this letter, as I have so long languished and hoped 
for, and been promised one, "a^- soon as I can frank ^ 
But I will not indulge mean passions; so I do most 
heartily rejoice that the above-mentioned excellent 
and amiable friend has found favour in the sight of 
one among the very few whom I have known and 
loved more and longer.
Lambert too writes that 
"our friend the Bishop of Carlisle is to dine with 
him on Monday, and is to be at the meeting of the 
Linnaean Society on Tuesday." This last piece of in- 
telligence, my good Lord, is what makes me trouble 
you now.
You would by law, as the oldest member 
amongst the Vice Presidents, be in the Chair.
If this 
be your intention, and I hope and trust there is no 
objection to it, it would give me peculiar pleasure; 
because a paper of mine on a new genus of mosses 
is to be read, and the Latin characters and descrip- 
565 
tions would certainly not come so well from any 
other mouth.
Another reason is, that I call this 
genus Hookeria, after a friend here, F.L.S.*, who is 
one of the best of our cryptogamic botanists, and a 
very promising young man, — who devotes an inde- 
pendent fortune to literary and other commendable 
objects.
Your Lordship's most faithful 
J. E.
Smith.
The Bishop of Carlisle to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, April 5, 1808.
I have begun my career in the House of Lords.
You cannot think how my time is cut up by it.
Fifty- 
eight hours confinement there (as my predecessor's 
fate was) in one week is rather too much.
We 
have to thank All the Talents, or, as they are hu- 
morously styled, all the papers.
I do not think it 
possible that I can be at the Linnsean Society to- 
morrow, for I was told today that there will be a 
late debate.
We had a very agreeable day at Lambert's.
Sir 
A. Hume was there.
Admiral and Mrs. Essington, 
General and Mrs. Grose, MacLeay and Marsham, 
and Lord Seaforth !
He contrived with all his deaf- 
ness to hold conversations and to play at cards.
Your Piquot^ (I never knew before how to spell 
that word, neither do I know its etymology now) 
pink is a curious plant.
I never saw a yellow one 
* Dr. W.
J. Hooker, now Regius Professor of Botany in the 
University of Glasgow.
566 
before.
Your yellow carnation surely is something 
extraordinary.
I wish you would dispatch one to 
me in a letter ; the sight of the flower will be very 
gratifying.
I long for your coming up.
You will find me 
at No. 14 Berners Street, just as you found me at 
Ealing of old, unchanged in all but in name.
Yours, most truly and faithfully, 
Samuel Carlisle.
«/.
E. Smith to the Bishop of Carlisle.
Norwich, April 7, 1808.
How very unfortunate am I, my dear Lord, about 
your letters !
and those the most interesting to my 
vanity and improvement : as to my heart, I had ra- 
ther read that " you are unchanged to me in all but 
in name", much rather, than even your instructive 
remarks ; yet never did I suspect the contrary.
I 
remember a long and critical letter about my Tour, 
franked by the Duke of Portland, never came to my 
hands ; neither most assuredly did this about my 
Introduction !
But I shall hear your remarks to 
double advantage in conversation, and I shall bring 
my MSS.
and Prodromus with me.
I fear my let- 
ters and MSS.
will prove as great a hore as "all the 
papers"; but I must be allowed to vent my chit-chat 
to my long valued correspondent, about botany or 
the Linnaean Society, or some such old favourite 
subject, now I feel that I can do it without taxing 
him further than for a few moments' patience to 
read (for I will not be so unreasonable as to expect 
567 
him always to answer) what I may chance to scrib- 
ble.
Sir Thomas Frankland, when in parliament, 
used to write to me every now and then the most 
delightful epistolia of the moment ; perhaps four 
or five lines, about some plant found, or some bird 
seen or heard, &c.
&c.
I do not despair of having 
some such produced by the beauties or rarities 
about Rose Castle.
The very name of the spot 
enchants me.
May all its present occupiers ever 
find it (as I am confident I shall when I visit it) 
"rasa sine spinisf" 
I recollect a most charming day spent in the 
woods of Corby Castle near Carlisle, with Yeates 
and Broussonet, where I caught Elater cupreus, and 
a new ScarabcBus, which I gave Marsham.
I won- 
der he has not mentioned me for the former ; he 
is very deficient in habitats for that genus.
The lat- 
ter is his Sc. arvicola, but Corby Castle is not in 
'^ Yorkshire." 
I found Elatef^pectinicornis on Cromford Moor, 
near Matlock.
As I am on the subject of beetles, I beg leave to 
observe, that one of the commentators in Johnson's 
Shakespeare explains the " shard-born beetle"* of 
* Macbeth, Act iii.
sc.
2. [Shakespeare also uses the word in 
the following passages which elucidate his meaning.
They have 
however been overlooked by entoinologists : See Kirby and 
Spence, i.
392.-72.
T. 
....
Often, to our comfort shall we find 
The sharded beetle in a safer hold, 
Than is the full-wing'd eagle, Cymheline, Act iii.
sc.
2. 
They are his shards and he their beetle.
Ant. and Cleop.
Act iii.
sc.
2.] 
568 
the poetjEs born or produced among broken stones 
or pots, shards.
Surely it means borne or flying 
about on shards or shells {testcB)} I stumbled on 
this the other day, and was surprised at it much*.
Yours, 
J. E.
Smith.
«/.
Haivkins, Esq. to J.
E. Smith.
Bignor Park near Petworth, 
Dear Sir, April 16, 1808.
Your letter reached me by a very circuitous route 
and after much delay, or it would have been an- 
swered sooner.
I take for granted that you are now 
in town, so I shall address this to you at Sir Jo- 
seph's, and shall beg you to recollect in future that 
I am settled here, where I shall not only be happy 
to receive your letters, but yourself too, whenever 
business or inclination prompts you to visit this 
part of the kingdom.
My present residence has 
some claims to your notice, having been that of 
Charlotte Smith, whose numerous little poems on 
subjects of natural history must have engaged your 
attention, and from whose sister Mrs. Dorset, who 
is equally eminent in the same line, I purchased it 
three years ago.
I took for granted you would apply to me when- 
ever you found it expedient in the progress of the 
work ; and I am happy to learn that a second part of 
* In reply the Bishop says, " I think that you must be right 
about shard-horn : quandoque bonus dornnitat Homerus.
— We 
have in Scripture horn of four ; i.e. carried by four people ; — so 
it must mean here." 
569 
the Prodromus is nearly ready for publication.
I 
have received the second part of the first volume of 
the Flora GrcBca, and am much pleased with every 
part of it ; as I was with the other^ a few trifling 
errors excepted, which I ventured to point out, and 
from which this latter part seems to be free.
It had 
escaped my memory that I communicated anything 
on the subject of Briza elatior.
Sommavera will be of great use, provided you 
follow him with caution, in explaining the fanciful 
modern Greek names.
Both he and my friend the apothecary of Zante 
have given a number of the ancient names of plants, 
which in reality are not in vulgar use.
In fact, the 
modern Greek names of plants are generally so 
barbarous, that people of any education among the 
natives are ashamed to make use of them, and 
gladly avail themselves of those which they have 
culled from Matthiolus and other popular authors, 
which they do not hesitate often to put ofl^" upon 
travellers as the real vulgar names of the plants.
Many therefore of Sommavera's names of plants 
must be rejected as not strictly neo-grecian, and for 
the same reason many of the Zantiote names.
Mr. Piatt spoke with much satisfaction of his 
tour to Norwich.
I remain, dear Sir, 
Your faithful and obedient Servant, 
J. Hawkins.
kto-^epa Argol.
— M<Z^epac, Zacynth.
— Anagyrisf(B' 
570 
iida.
It will be proper to retain both names, as 
the etymology is uncertain.
KovTtoTTia /LiovKXiciy-^Cercis SiUquastrum ; perfectly 
barbarous and unintelligible, and therefore I 
would recommend its being omitted.
I suspect 
it to be Albanian.
Kou/caVr/Zacynth.— better KouKa/ci; means dwarf bean, 
if anything.
Aypio^acjii'i^a Zacynth.
should be Ay|Oto'?a^«Sa, from 
its resemblance to the currant grape.
Be/ca XovvyKa Zacynth.
Lythr.
hyss.
— A lame at- 
tempt of the apothecary to give a scientifical 
name to a plant.
The right way of spelling 
Beccabunga in modern Greek is fxireKKa/uTrowya.
Meaaa^povXa, Reseda undata, should be fxeaoBpovXa, 
Etymology uncertain.
AyyioT/oa, 'Oyj]rpa, Reseda alba.
— Ayyeiorpa is I be- 
lieve correcter orthography, but its meaning I 
cannot explain.
''Oy^evrpa is ' serpent'.
KovKovXocjiavia Lacon.
— Euphorbia spinosa ; right 
accent.
Etymology inexplicable.
h.yov\vapia Lemnos, — Euphorbia Gerardiana; either 
c o or a seems to be wanting between A and v.
Etymology too difficult.
The Bishop of Carlisle to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Rose CastlerOct. 1, 1808.
First let me say that I have forwarded your letter 
to Mr. Don.
I did not know that Limosella was 
not to be found in Scotland.
It grows on Houns- 
571 
low Heath.
I cultivated it for years in my garden 
at Ealing.
I am vastly disappointed at not finding a single 
Naturalist in this part of the'world.
One clergyman 
formerly gave himself up to the study, but he seems 
to have neglected it totally of late years.
As I ride out I always keep my eyes upon the 
watch.
I have found here upon very elevated moist 
situations, that variety of Plantago maritima which 
Hudson took to be Lce/Hngii : it seems to me dif- 
ferent from P.
maritima in many respects.
It is 
much smaller, and its leaves have not the smallest 
tendency to be toothed.
Next year, if I live, I hope 
to be able to find it in proper state for examination 
in its several stages of growth.
Are you aware of 
its being found so far from the sea, and in such 
situations?
We have in all our moist hedges, Salio' pentan- 
dra.
Having been accustomed to see it in its taine 
state in Kew Garden, I protest I did not know it in 
this large free luxuriance of growth.
Just by Rose Castle I observe Campanula latifo- 
lia.
I have seen it also in several shady lanes.
You mention Fumaria capreolata as a plant of the 
South.
I have found it here in several of the corn- 
fields, particularly among the turnips.
Senecio saracenicus is here, but I fear that it has 
escaped from some garden.
I find a favourite Ox- 
fordshire plant, Sanguisorba officinalis.
I have 
found also Serapias latifolia, Salix repens, and a 
tree which they call here Bird-cherry or Hcckberry.
By the description of the flower (it was out of flower 
572 
before I came into the North, neither can I disco- 
ver any fruit) I should suppose it to be Prunus Pa- 
dus ; Rubus coryltf alius ^ if I discriminate the plant 
rightly, is by no means uncommon.
Many of our 
hills and wastes seem to be in the same wild state 
in which they were left in Noah's time : I have tra- 
versed several of them without finding any thing at 
all uncommon.
Erica vulgaris, tluncus squarrosus, 
Torynentilla reptans, Lichen rangiferinus, and such 
things, cover the whole.
I am glad to hear Dryander is so profitably em- 
ployed, and particularly yourself, who I know are 
never idle.
I have nothing ready to offer upon your 
Introduction ; indeed you are too deep for me to 
presume to inform.
I was quite surprised the other day to find in the 
grass by the road side one single and large specimen 
of Gentiana Amarella; I could not by any research 
discover a second.
I long to see the fourth volume of Flora Britan- 
nica ; and in that, nothing whatever will more move 
my curiosity than what you will give us upon Con- 
ferv(B.
Do figure them away in English Botany, 
that I may have some chance of knowing a little of 
them before I die.
Rose Castle is very prettily situated, and the air 
seems remarkably salubrious and vivifying.
The 
wind being north, we have already cold weather: the 
thermometer in the house, half way between Tempe- 
rate and Freezing point.
As yet we are not got into the way of supplying 
ourselves with necessaries readily, being six miles 
573 
from the market-town, whicli is at best but sorrily 
supplied.
Your philosophical mind would not dislike the 
spot.
We are all of one mind about Sir Hew and Sir 
Harry and the Portugal Convention, — shocking!
Yours ever, 
Samuel Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Oct. 24, 180S.
If Hypericum be not already named, I would beg 
to submit whether ciliatum or crinitum be not the 
proper specific name.
Don seems to me one of your most valuable cor- 
respondents.
What a number of new things has he 
occasionally discovered!
* * * # * should not dis- 
gust him; most particularly he should avoid putting 
such a man to needless expense.
. The old Duchess 
of Portland used to say, talking of her assistants, 
"I do not mind what their bodies suffer, for they do 
not mind it themselves ; but I always take care that 
their ^ocA-6'/^ shall not." 
I am not sorry to see all ranks of people eager 
for an investigation of the Portugal business : Mi- 
nisters arc as desirous as they.
How can they con- 
trol the blunders of officers at such a distance ?
You will find that Ministers could have nothing to 
do with it.
I am all anxiety for the poor patriots of Spain.
What shadow of right has Buonaparte to interfere.
574 
invade, and call them rebels ?
Are they not true to 
their country?
Never was there in the history of 
man a more barefaced invasion of natural right and 
justice.
I shall be glad to hear from you, if it be but the 
chit-chat of a moment.
In what state of forward- 
ness is the fourth volume of Flora Britannica?
How 
I long for it!
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Nov. 12, 1808.
Natural History totters as it were under its own 
weight ; every one publishing, quite to the nausea 
of purchasers, the commonest things.
When Shaw 
published the Cock Sparrow and the Common Snail, 
I thought it high time to discontinue the Natura- 
list's Miscellany.
I thought Don's discoveries very 
valuable ; the Hypericum and Equisetum were quite 
new to me.
How is it that such large plants have 
lain hid from ages?
I fear much that roguish tricks 
have been played by more persons than your hum- 
ble servant, who often attempted to naturalize fo- 
reigners.
Witness the Sisy^nhr'ium polyceratium in 
the streets of Bury, which poor Laurents and I 
sowed there.
I cannot help thinking his Lammm 
to be a distinct species.
If the leaves are constantly 
petiolated, surely it ought to be so named.
The 
corolla appears also to me to be different from 
amplexicaule .
Hugh Davies sent me, while at Rochester, his 
575 
three species of articulated Junciis ; but one of 
them had no leaves to it.
so that I could judge of 
its distinction.
I remember Sempervivum sediforme 
at Kew many years ago : I always contended with 
old Aiton that it was a Sedum; but I think Solan- 
der had laid down the law to him that it was a 
Sempervivum.
I am speaking of a plant so named; 
perhaps it might be that which you now mention.
I am glad to see you write and quote Greek so 
fluently, and talk so big of Dioscorides.
I would 
advise you to get another contemporary of his, 
Theophrastus : they would mutually explain each 
other ; and Bodeeus's notes are very copious and 
very explanatory.
I am sorry to see that envious creature Salisbury 
again barking at you; — I should rather say, hear, for 
I never see anything of his.
I shun all fellows who 
have a twist in their head.
Never mind him ; you 
are confessedly the king of natural history: — I beg 
your pardon, I should rather say, as Buonaparte, 
villain !
does, emperor.
All kings and emperors are 
abused by one party or the other, but it is beneath 
them to notice such nibbling.
The great Philip of Macedon used to say that he 
rejoiced at being abused; "For," said he, "I mend 
myself if this abuse be well-founded, and thus they 
are mortified at doing me good : — as to falsehoods, 
they prevail only for the moment." 
This place, quite calculated for philosophical re- 
tirement, with its pure air, free from all nauseous ef- 
fluvias, the very opposite to the perfume of crowded 
towns, continues to agree with us exceedingly.
I 
576 
shall be truly glad whenever you and Mrs. Smith 
will direct your steps to see us here.
I am glad to find Prodromus Florce, Gr(EC(E is in 
such progress.
How I long to see Flora Britan- 
nica complete !
Your very affectionate 
S. Carlisle.
«/.
F. S??iith to the Bishop of Carlisle.
My dear Lord, Norwich, Nov. 17, 1808.
If you are so kind as to write me often such amu- 
sing and instructive letters, I shall be a troublesome 
correspondent.
I have Theophrastus by Bodseus a Stapel, and 
often consult it; but as Sibthorp's professed object 
was to illustrate Dioscorides, it is not my business 
to go further, at least in the Flora Grceca or Pro- 
dromus.
Now I want your Lordship's kind advice, 
both critical and botanical.
— Mr. Salisbury (whom 
I wish in this case to consider as an indifferent per- 
son) makes Nymph(E,a alba a distinct genus from 
lutea, and I think rightly : I have said so in my 
Introduction, page 385.
He calls it Cast alia, from 
casta (chaste), because the petals "chastely fold over 
and cover the organs of impregnation"; — such is his 
idea.
I should like it better if it could allude to the 
Castalian fountain.
Now I am about to insert these 
plants in my Prodromus FlorcB GrcectB.
If you will 
be so good as to turn to Dioscorides, you will find 
A^.
alba is his true Nu^u^ato, which therefore ought 
to have been retained as Nymphcsa, especially as 
577 
there are many species of it, some of them known 
in our gardens, — as iV.
ccBrulea, rubra, odorata, &c.
I wish therefore to keep this name as it is; and as 
Dioscorides says that the flower of his Nv/u^aja aXXii, 
which is our A^.
lutea, is called (i\e(f>apa, I think 
this will be an excellent generic name, expressive of 
the closed position of the calyx, which shuts up over 
the petals entirely, and partly over the internal or- 
gans.
Blepliara I presume is feminine, is it not ?
The generic characters will be something like these.
Nymph^a.
Cal. 4 — 5-phyllus.
Petala plurima, 
germini inserta.
Stigma radiatum, sessile, medio 
nectariferum.
Bacca supera, multilocularis, poly- 
sperma.
Blephara.
Cal.
.5 — 6-phyllus.
Petala plurima, 
receptaculo inserta, dorso nectarifera.
Stigma ra- 
diato-sulcatum, sessile.
Bacca &c.
The main point on which I wish for your Lord- 
ship's opinion is the generic name, and whether I 
shall follow Salisbury, or not.
The characters are all my own, except what re- 
gard the nectaria (which are his, and excellent), and 
are pointed out in English Botany, t.
159, 160.
It is curious that the A^.
alba is strictly gynandrous, 
according to the more correct character of Gynan- 
dr'ia.
I think I have quoted Dr. Hull oftener than 
I have commended him ; — he is a mere compiler.
I hope I shall never forget Philip of Macedon : 
but I think in the above case he w^ould have pro- 
fited by his enemy ; — if so, I am right.
The Bishop of Norwich is always gratified to 
hear of your Lordship's remembrance, and charges 
VOL.
I. 2 P 
578 
me with his best comphments.
He is quite reco- 
vered ; though he had a fall lately at Holkham, open- 
ing a door by mistake, which led down a flight of 
cellar steps.
He told me " it would have made a 
better story, if he had been a jolly wine-bibbing 
bishop ; " but he drinks scarcely more than I do.
Lady Amelia Hume's yellow Chrysanthemum in- 
dicum is now in flower, 9^ight glorious at my elbow: 
it looks by candle-light of a rose-colour.
I will send a bit of my Sedum ochroleucum in a 
frank.
It will grow.
Your devoted 
J. E.
Smith.
The Bishop of Carlisle to J.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Nov. 23, 1808.
I had the pleasure of receiving yours of the 17th 
instant yesterday.
I am glad now, as 1 have been 
at all times heretofore, to receive communications 
of your literary difficulties.
To begin, then — in 
Greek, for I must talk to you as a Grecian, this 
would be Kai ^jj Xeyw aoi.
Much as I wish for 
peace and forbearance and coiidescension to inen of 
low estate, (and in point of scholarship thus must I 
style Salisbury, — of very low estate,) I must hold 
up both my hands against allowing Salisbury to 
desecrate the name Castalia.
To make the name 
of the nymph of the fountain where Apollo and all 
the Muses drank the purest lymph, serve for the 
denomination of a plant inhabiting foul, stagnating, 
foetid water, and that too in a Flora GrcBca, which 
is to preserve the memorial of all Grecian excel- 
579 
lence in the natural world, will be an offence of the 
grossest sort : Religio vetuit.
A bad name, Linnaeus 
says, had better be retained, than that a change 
should be made.
But really there is reason in 
roasting of eggs.
You cannot be bound down to 
a name that is execrable, and which must excite in 
all minds ideas of execration.
Besides, how con- 
trary is it to all rules of analogy, to make a noun 
Castalia, from Castus -a -wn ?
Is there any other 
word of the form in all Latin ?
Would latus make 
lataliaf or bonus ^ honaVia?
Really if such things, 
so very gross, are to be allowed, natural history 
Latin must soon come to be a language fit for bar- 
barians.
Dryander himself cannot plead for such 
coarse liberties.
Still further, Castalia is a Greek 
word, and has nothing to do with Latin etymology 
or meaning.
In point of priority of language, Cas- 
tus might have been formed (but w^ho can say that 
it was ?) from Castalia, the chaste Greek vi?gi?i (it 
would have been castalus, not castus) ; but it was 
impossible that Castalia could be formed from cas- 
tus : — so much for that absolutely/ inadmissible word.
Philip of Macedon would not have attempted to 
profit from such conceit and folly : he would have 
placed such a correction amongst his contemnenda, 
KaTacjypovtfvea, to speak as a Grecian.
BAe^a/oa is the plural of the neuter noun /3Ae^a- 
pov.
I suppose Dioscorides meant that the petals, 
particularly the outward ones, or our calyx, closed 
curvingly, if I may so say, as the eyelids do : and 
if you observe, he calls ihe flower ^Xec^apa, not the 
plant itself ; so that it would be false unity to make 
2 p 2 
580 
BXe(l)apa a generic name.
If you look into your 
Dioscorides, you will see a marginal reading taken 
from another copy, Nov^«|0, JVuphar.
That would 
come nearer to a true generic name.
If you wish 
to examine more deeply into this name, turn to 
your Theophrastus and read the explanation.
This 
is amply detailed by Bodaeus, p.
11 03, and continues 
to half of the second column on p.
1104.
See 
particularly the bottom of p.
1103, where he tells 
you that vovcpap is a Mauritanic, or modern Greek 
word.
Nou<|)a|0 makes a medicine, vovcjyapov.
So that 
that very circumstance favours the idea of making 
Nuphar a generic name.
But go back to Theo- 
phrastus himself, and you will see that he brings 
forward another name for it, |uaSwvta.
Perhaps such 
a termination of a word may seem suitable to the 
purpose ; see p.
1093 (last hue but two), where he 
says it is a Boeotian name.
As you profess to be 
bound to Dioscorides, I declare I should prefer Nu- 
phar, and should suppose it a feminine noun, and 
make the species ranged under it, lutea, &c., &c.
Mado7iia is formed from yia^tav, calvus, bald, having- 
no hairs upon it.
Observe towards the end of 
p. 1 103, how it is said, ^uaSwv iroa Kai \eiov, a glabritie 
caulium et foliorum, &c.
— Xeioc is Icevis.
Either 
of these names Nuphar or Madonia is highly clas- 
sical.
I scarcely know which is best : perhaps 
Madonia is ; but Nuphar is Dioscorides's.
You 
must, and you do reject Salisbury's Castalia here 
upon irrefragable grounds.
In your Introduction, 
you have pledged yourself, not to the name Casta- 
lia, but merely to the separation from Nymphcea.
581 
In your generic description of Blephara, should 
it not run, " Stigma radiato-sulcatum, sessile, m- 
mune ?" immune opposed to medio Jiectarifemm of 
Nymph(La.
As soon as Christmas is over, we shall begin to 
pack up for London for the winter.
How I dread 
the angry countenances, tedious speeches, and late 
nights of this next session of parliament !
I am always, my dear Sir, 
Most sincerely yours, 
Samuel Carlisle.
Pray always say kind things for me to my good 
Brother of Norwich.
From the same.
Mv dear Sir, December 14, 1808.
Flora GrcEca surely may raise its voice occasion- 
ally on classical grounds.
On this idea I propose 
the three following emendations of your note of 
observation at the end.
a. ex fructu antidotum vov(^apov parabant veteres.
j3.
ascitis insuper nectariis.
-y.
at minus bene Nymphaeam antiquorum veram, 
nomine Castalia, ad novam et plane abnormem 
etymologiam formato, distinxit.
Nomen Castaliae virginis illius prsenobilis Graecae, 
unde Castalius fons ex quo Apollo atque omnes 
Musae lymphas hauriebant purissimas, ad plantam 
in palustribus saepe foetidis nascentem dignandam, 
desecrare, religio vetuit.
As nothing could be more ignorant than Salis- 
582 
bury's derivation and use of the word Castalia^ I 
think you are fully entitled to check him, and give 
a classical reason.
— Would it not be better to say 
Nw/i<^ata aWr], S.
^ov^ap Diosc.
? 
I did not remember estur used in classical wri- 
ting.
But if it have obtained in medicinal Latin 
you are free to use it.
Sedutn ochroleucum thrives bonnily.
If the Spaniards are foolish enough to fancy 
themselves warriors and to fight pitched battles, 
there will be a quick end put to all their hopes.
Yours ever, 
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Aug. 25, 1809.
I wish I could give you any information about 
EthuUa, As Linnaeus was no scholar, he adopted 
names, and formed names which are passing all 
powers of accounting for.
Had he written it ^s- 
thulia, I should, from combining it with Vaillant's 
name Sparganophorus, have supposed it derived 
from e(70)7c, indumentum^ and ouXoq, mollis ; alluding 
to its contributing somehow to soft clothing or 
swaddling.
I do not know the plant.
Can it be 
supposed to be derived from aiOit), iiro, and ovXoq, 
perniciosus ?
Is there anything hot or poisonous 
in it?
I know of no analogy or authority which will 
justify your elegant reference to Thule in Seneca : 
Linnaeus never had such a classical thought in his 
583 
head.
When no one offers an etymology, all I can 
say is, that every one is at liberty to guess at it.
If you choose to refer to Thule, who has a right to 
condemn you, unless he will give you a true origin?
Where have we in compounded words, e for extra 
in the local sense of beyond} 
Euclea was once a name for Diana.
(See Con- 
stantini Lexicon in vocem Ev/cXeia.) Was her name 
derived from her celebrity or her chastity ?
In either 
case it is derived from the idea of celebrity.
For 
/cAetw, to shut up, would never form a derivative 
Kkeia : it is against rule.
If Linnaeus did really form it from /cXetw, claudo, 
he acted, as he often has done, from not knowing 
better.
The manifold coverings evidently justify 
the idea that he did so : but it is contrary to rule ; 
nouns are usually formed from the Aoristus, or 
Perfectum of verbs.
I am quite sorry that you do not come here this 
year, as well as next.
So many things happen inter 
pocidum et lahra, that I always dread delays.
How- 
ever, if you will keep your word, and come next 
year with Mrs. Smith, we will endeavour to put up 
with the disappointment.
— I fear that the death of 
Lady Amelia Hume will take Sir Abraham off" from 
natural history.
If you should find any clue to Euclea and Ethu- 
lia, let me know, and I will hunt again.
I remem- 
ber of old that I could not do anything with 
Ethulia.
S. Carlisle.
584 
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Oct. 30, 1809.
You need not fear burthening me or the Carlisle 
post with your correspondence.
To me, I may 
say, Labor ipse voluptas.
The postboys must 
travel the road whether you or your friends write 
or not ; and as for the poor horses, the only ani- 
mals to be considered compassionately, they love 
the contents of your correspondence so well, they 
would eat them if they could.
Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris ?
I was sorry to see our Carlisle choristers' impu- 
dence blazoned forth in the public papers : it is 
making such chits of wonderful consequence.
But 
this is the age of servants and children.
You once gave me a foreign specimen of Ophrys 
Corallorhiza.
As this is now found so near Edin- 
burgh, I wish you would bring with you next 
spring a good native specimen or two.
How I 
dread the being in London!
Independent of eter- 
nal noise, smoke and dirt, what a fiery session have 
we to expect !
God guard our dear King's life yet 
awhile.
When a change comes, Buonaparte will 
not be inert.
I wish our troops were all well at 
home from Spain and Walcheren.
These expedi- 
tions and the Catholic question will produce such 
a flame within a fortnight after the meeting of 
parliament, that I fear nothing will be able to ex- 
tinguish.
Just so Carthage fell, — the enemy at 
the gates, and the leading citizens immersed in 
585 
party-animosities.
Just so, you say, the French 
revolution began.
The danger of these things may 
perhaps awaken us to a sense of union and mode- 
ration : but I fear that nothing but suiferings will 
correct us.
Yours ever, 
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Nov. 12,^809.
I write you this amidst the hurry of packing for 
town, for which noisy, smoky, foggy place we are 
tomorrow morning to exchange the pure serenity 
of the unparalleled air of Rose Castle.
My com- 
forts also there will be sorely abridged by the death 
of my most steady friend and counsellor and patron 
the Duke of Portland.
His excellence was but 
imperfectly known : never was a sounder under- 
standing.
I am sure that old as he was, and dis- 
tracted by his sufferings, this Administration must 
miss him.
I could write volumes in his praise.
How we are to be extricated from our difficulties 
I know not.
I hope for good, and pray to God to 
grant it.
In great haste, 
Yours ever, 
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Nov. 24, 1809.
I was delighted upon my return to town, with a 
586 
sight of the second volume of the Prodromus of 
Flora Graeca.
I prize that work and its authors 
so much, that I could not refrain from writing ex- 
pressly to assure you, with what sincerity I thank 
you for this choice present.
My friendship for 
you sets me always a nibbling.
Upon opening the 
book, I found repeatedly this expression, (Hab^) 
in DelpK\, Atho et Olympo Bithyno montlbus.
Now the word Delphi is plural only.
The Greeks 
called it Ae\(pot, and from them the Latins called it 
Delphi, and declined it plurally only, Delphi, Del- 
phorum, Delphis, Delphos, &c.
Schoolboys have been often taught, but very 
improperly, to say in English, the Oracle at Del- 
pho^ : it should be the Oracle at Delphe ; and thus 
in your work it should stand in all such descriptions 
as above.
In Delphis, Atho et Olympo Bithyno 
7nontibus, All this is upon the supposition that 
you mean the place where the Oracle at Delphi is 
situated.
Perhaps something else may be designed 
by coupling the above with the expression, In Del- 
phi monte EuboecB, which occurs several times.
Is 
Delphi here a modern name ?
or is it the ancient 
one ?
If so, I should apprehend that still it ought to 
follow the original declination, Delphi -orum &c.
Sir J.
Banks having a slight touch of the gout, 
I had the honour of sitting in the Chair at the coun- 
cil, and at the meeting of the Royal Society in the 
evening.
A paper of Davy's was read, full of acute 
remarks, observations, and experiments upon hy- 
drogen and oxygen gas, and to which unfortunately 
I have had no opportunity of turning my mind.
587 
It is said that Lord Wellesley joins the Ministry.
People seem confident that a great naval victory 
has been gained ; — time will show.
Yours J 
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Dec 2G, isoo.
Fucus discors and ahrotanifoVius are certainly one 
and the same.
Miss Hill and Mrs. Griffiths can 
give you the details of proof more minutely than I 
can.
If you choose to consult them, send their let- 
ters to me, and I will forward them.
Unlike as F.
discors and abrotanifoUus may seem, the difference 
is only in the breadth of the lower leaves, which 
are rather rudiments of new branches : this dif- 
ference is occasioned by the season of the year, 
depth of water, &c.
; as those scientific ladies, who 
have watched them thoroughly, can demonstrate to 
you.
I duly forwarded your letters to Mrs. Grif- 
fiths, a most intelligent investigator.
• I took your Chair at the Linnsean Society at the 
last meeting.
How shocked was I to see Salisbury's 
surreptitious anticipation of Brown's paper on the 
New-Holland plants, under the name and disguise of 
Mr. Hibbert's gardener !
Oh, it is too bad !
I 
think Salisbury is got just where Catiline was when 
Cicero attacked him : viz.
to that point of shame- 
ful doing when no good man could be found to de- 
fend him.
I would not speak to him at the anni- 
588 
versary of the Royal Society ; I often caught his 
eye upon " the Bishop's wig." 
Yours, 
Samuel Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, June 20, 1810.
I had a brother who formerly lived at Hurley, 
close by Sir William East's.
I have been hospi- 
tably received there, as I believe everybody is.
I 
have the pleasure to tell you that the young folks 
after whom you make inquiry (I mean the Carna- 
tions) are alive and merry : I managed them myself, 
keeping them in their original ball of earth wrapped 
up in newspapers, and keeping the whole constantly 
moistened with water.
I remember once keeping 
roots of L'lgust'icum cornubiense in the same man- 
ner for a month before I could get home and plant 
them : they lived for years ; and perhaps they may 
be in existence now at Bulstrode, where I left them 
in the poor Duchess's time, and saw them after- 
wards growing year after year.
How the name of 
Bulstrode agitates my mind !
Monotropa hypopithys certainly used to grow in 
Bisham woods.
The Rev. Sir Henry Parker sent 
it to me from thence many years ago, when I was 
a young botanist.
I was down in Cumberland time 
enough this year to see Primula farinosa in great 
abundance, lining our road-sides, and in our mea- 
dows.
I have brought some roots into my garden.
589 
I shall long to show you Rose Castle.
Whether 
it be a paradise or not, every one's own mind must 
determine ; — Satan could not find a paradise in the 
garden of Eden.
Yours most sincerely, 
S. Carlisie.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Sept.
14, 1810.
I am always glad to have a little botanical nib- 
bling with you.
All I give you is my opinion, 
whether right or wrong, and you always take it in 
good part.
• This encourages me to speak with 
greater freedom.
Your German botanist Tliigge 
is I think quite right about Paspalxis (Gr. Tlaa- 
TraXoc) instead of Paspalnm.
There can be no de- 
pendence in general upon Linnaeus for learned cri- 
ticism.
I believe he took all upon trust, accord- 
ingly as he consulted books or men.
I could easily 
believe that he met with the ss^ovA paspalum as the 
accusative of paspalus, and supposed it to be the 
nominative of the right name ; or he might have 
seen the accusative in Greek, iraaTraXov, and have 
thought it a nominative : or he might have thought 
that, like many words ending in oc, waaTraXoa was 
read also iraaTraXov in the nominative.
Many have 
done it before Linnaeus.
The old Latins observing 
in Greek KaaaiBa the accusative of Kaaaic, ' a helmet', 
taking it for a nominative, made their noun cassis, 
or cassida.
Monstrous !
So also Kpartjo, 'a bowl', 
made Kparripa in the accusative.
The Latins igno- 
590 
rantly adopted them both indiiferently as nomina- 
tives.
The Greeks themselves dealt with Hebrew 
words in the same way, of which the Greek Sep- 
tuagint will give you hundreds of instances.
Pas- 
pains is undoubtedly the true reading.
I once 
before let off a squib upon this very word ; I thought 
it had been to you.
I went upon a botanical expedition the other day 
to our high mountains ; — a great undertaking for 
me, — ten or twelve miles out.
No sooner had I 
reached the spot, than clouds began to gather, and 
tremendous rain ensued.
My girls were of the 
party : they must needs climb the highest pinnacle, 
their brother Samuel being with them, and got back 
without one dry thread : providentially no one 
took cold.
I got back to the carriage without 
being wet through.
I had just time to find three 
species of Lycopodium, — Selago^ clavatum^ and alpi- 
num ; Empetrum nigrum^ Pteris crispa, Aspidium 
thelypleris ; I believe Parnassia palustris^ and a 
few Lichens ; when I was fairly driven off the field 
by wind and rain.
We set out immediately after 
breakfast, and could not get back till six o'clock in 
the evening.
There 's for you !
Should there be 
fine weather I shall be for trying again.
S. Carlisle.
This place gains upon me most exceedingly.
I 
view it with daily delight.
mens expler'i ncquit, ardescitque tuendo.
591 
From the same.
My dear Sir^ Rose Castle, Nov. 9, 1810.
I had a great deal to do in the former edition of 
Hortus Keiuensis, and cannot but think the work 
highly useful and most highly honourable to Great 
Britain.
What a dreadful loss will the death of poor Dry- 
ander be !
I do not think that he is to be replaced, 
in all his bearings.
Possibly he was a dull plod- 
ding genius as to brilliant and classical effusions : 
but that said genius jfitted him for every other si- 
tuation which he filled.
Plodding is the first qua- 
lity of a librarian.
None but he could have worked 
up the Bibliotheca Banksiana.
Who so fit to in- 
vestigate dried plants, and trace out synonyms in 
the musty journals of foreign Academies.
Then he 
was a walking Dictionary, or rather Repertory, for 
all inquiries into natural history.
Then also his 
usefulness as a patient drudge in all matters which 
were proposed to him, was an excellent quality.
His bluntness had its great effect with innovators, 
impertinents, and popinjays.
He had a conscious- 
ness of his real worth also, which made him a very 
independent character.
I really am quite sorry that 
we have lost him.
What will Sir Joseph do ?
As soon as I come to town I shall have a long 
arrears of English Botany to run over, for I take 
in that work in town.
Ever yours, 
Samuel Carlisle.
592 
«/.
E. Smith to the Bishop of Carlisle.
My dear Lord, Norwich, Dec. 3, 1810.
As to poor Dryander's loss, and his character, I 
can only mournfully assent to what you have so well 
expressed !
The immediate object of my present 
writing is to consult with your Lordship about sup- 
plying his place, as far as we can, in our own scien- 
tific circle.
I find it not easy, independent of his 
vast attainments and peculiar usefulness, to find any 
one to put into his place of Vice President.
We are lamenting the state of poor Lady East, 
and soon expect to hear of her death.
She is one of 
the best and most amiable of human beings; a most 
delightful companion, as to taste, sense, cheerful- 
ness, and everything that makes society charming.
I have seen much of our excellent Bishop lately, 
and cannot but profit by his society in many re- 
spects.
He is much pleased by your Lordship's men- 
tion of him.
I find Mr. Brown is in Dryander's place at Soho 
Square ; — his manner will be more suaviter, but not 
less Jbrtiter with coxcombs and blockheads.
I hope Hortus Kewensis will go on.
Your Lordship's ever faithful 
J. E.
Smith.
The Bishop of Carlisle to */.
E. Smith.
My dear Sir, Dec. 5, 1810.
I received your obliging favour of December 3rd, 
593 
and answer it without delay.
Dryander's place in 
the natural history department is not to be filled up.
The man is not to be found in the whole world; — 
Brown will fill admirably well the Botanical line at 
Sir Joseph's ; a Librarian for the Royal Society may 
be found ; — a Vice President for the Linnaean ; — a 
Medallist for Mrs. Banks.
But his biblical know- 
ledge, his local acquaintance with Sir Joseph's pro- 
digious collections, is not to be had elsewhere.
I 
attended at the Linnaean Society last night, and took 
the Chair, when I announced his death and the va- 
cancy of the V.
P., and enlarged upon what I have 
said above.
I gave a little sketch of the origin of the Society; 
how anxious we were to get scientific men, and them 
only, wherever they could be found.
That no man's 
rank in life should exclude, knowledge being the 
only object in electing members.
Immorality alone 
(and ignorance at first) was to be a bar to our choice.
That our Society owed its stability to our never ad- 
mitting Society-hunters, but only practical men who 
would have an interest in its welfare, — "cw7?z miiltis 
aliis hujuscemodi''\ Observing as I spoke that I 
made great impression, I went no further for fear of 
disturbance.
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, London, May 25, 1812.
Everything has gone off today beyond my ut- 
most expectations.
In the morning I first took 
VOL.
I. 2 Gl 
594 
the precaution of consulting every leading man in 
the room respecting the choice of the Bishop of 
Durham for our honorary member, and at length 
proposed him.
He was elected unanimously.
I im- 
mediately wrote him word of it, dating it from the 
Society's rooms.
He returned me an immediate an- 
swer expressive of his thanks for the honour done 
him, but sent it to my house in Berners Street ; — the 
consequence was, that I did not receive it till my 
return home ; so that I could not deliver his thanks.
There were nearly thirty members present.
We sat 
down to dinner about fifty-three : among others 
were present the Bishop of Winchester, Lord Stan- 
ley, Sir Nash Grose, Sir George Staunton, Sir 
Thomas Frankland, Mr. Poulter, Mr. Woodward, 
D.Turner, Davies of Trinity College, &c.
&c.
I was 
sorry to see a falling-off of some of our old mem- 
bers, — Dickson and Fairbairn andFrancillon, — none 
of whom were present in the morning or at dinner.
Hoy was there.
We drank the usual toasts, — yours 
of course; when I took an opportunity of repeating 
what I had before said in the morning respecting 
your utter inability to attend, your great regret at 
this hindrance, which now occurred for ihejirst time 
since the formation of the Society.
TheVice Presidents were drank of course.
— After 
I had returned thanks in a short speech.
Sir Nash 
Grose would give my health individually, as Presi- 
dent for the day.
It was rather hard to return thanks 
twice; however, I somehow contrived it.
I returned 
Sir Nash's compliment by giving, "The Laws of Old 
England, and our very able Ministers of those Laws." 
595 
This induced Sir Nash to make a speech of thanks.
As it happened, all these little things (together with 
Marshams, MacLeay's, and Brown's thanks) enli- 
vened the day not a little, and sent every one home 
expressing what a pleasant day we had had, 
I must say that I never knew a day go off more 
harmoniously.
Marsham and MacLeay will give you all the de- 
tail of the finance matters and other particulars 
more immediately within their provinces.
Dillwyn 
was with us ; Mr. Forster, who has lately, he told 
me, lost his father ; Dr. Maton, Mr. Lambert, Mr.
Symmons, Mr. Rackett.
Dr. Rees was at the rooms 
in the morning.
I pressed him to dine with us, that 
I might have an opportunity of improving my ac- 
quaintance with him.
He excused himself from 
dining with us, pleading that he was not well.
Mr. Hodgson, Mr. Knight, Mr. Davies Giddy, 
were with us in the morning, but were engaged to 
dine at other places.
Sir A.
Hume and Lord Valentia, the Bishop of 
Salisbury and others, had promised to dine with us, 
but did not come.
However, "All's well that ends 
well." We must not expect at any time to have 
everything our own way.
This will relieve Mrs. Smith from no small anxiety, 
and your many other friends.
It will be a great pleasure to me to hear you are 
better.
I am, dear Sir, 
Your very faithful humble Servant, 
S. Carlisle.
2 61 2 
596 
From the same.
My dear Sir, London, Feb. 25, 1813.
You are very good in turning your thoughts to- 
wards us and our distresses.
Indeed we have sus- 
tained a great loss : in one sense, perhaps, I the 
greatest ; for my poor daughter was possessed of a 
mind and understanding all usefulness and resource: 
I had depended upon her to arrange many matters 
in case of my death, having no idea but that she 
would have survived me.
Nothing was too difficult 
for her comprehension ; nothing happened cross 
and untoward but for which the resources of her 
mind could find some remedy or alleviation.
But 
so was the will of God; and we have nothing to do 
but to accept his pleasure, and be thankful that no 
worse thing befell us.
In all distress it is fruitless 
to look back and regret; we should only still press 
forward, and look to the comforts which still re- 
main.
It is both our duty and our happiness so to 
do.
What a gap is made in our little domestic so- 
ciety !
What a permanent loss in every respect !
I am sorry to tell you that Sir J.
Banks is very 
ill.
I called there today, when the servant, with 
most mournful countenance, said he had been better 
yesterday, but was worse today.
Sir Everard Home 
said this morning that he was rather alarmed about 
him.
He is one that cannot be well replaced.
I 
shall still hope that his strong constitution, as of 
iron, will carry him through.
His servant described 
him to me as being in great pain.
If this proceeds 
from gout, it is surely no bad symptom.
Moderate 
597 
quantities of feau medicinale failed in relieving him 
this time : he took an immoderate quantity, which 
produced immoderate effects; hence malady and 
weakness ensued.
' 
Mrs. Goodenough is much affected, but bears all 
with Christian patience.
I am, dear Sir, 
Your most truly affectionate 
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir, Rose Castle, Oct. 25, 1814.
I received your very agreeable letter of the 18th.
Both you and the Bishop of Norwich must have 
had a rich treat in the library at Holkham.
You 
took your lines very appropriately; you the History 
of Italy, and he the MSS.
of the Greek Testament.
If you can remember to answer such a trifle, I 
wish you would in your next tell me if the spirits 
(asper ' and lenis ') were marked in those MSS.
That missal so full of miniatures must be a great 
curiosity.
Do the Roman Catholics attach any re- 
ligious worth to the possession of such costly mis- 
sals?
Is the possession of them deemed doing God 
service, or a proof of piety?
I have heard these 
points argued, but I own never satisfactorily.
I never see the Monthly Review now.
When 
old Griffiths died, the managers of that work took 
such liberties with our church establishment, and 
the doctrines of our church, (not in argument, for 
598 
that would not be unfair, but in invective and sar- 
casm,) that I left off taking it in.
When I return 
to town^ I will endeavour to get a sight of it.
Yours, 
S. Caulisle.
From the same.
My dear Sir James, Rose Castle, July 26, 1816.
I am always happy when I receive a letter from 
you: it is amusing to compare the different accounts 
of things from different persons in different situa- 
tions ; they usually vary very much in those ac- 
counts.
But there is one particular now in which 
all accounts from all quarters agree, viz.
about the 
weather : we have had scarcely a day without rain 
since we came into the North.
I admire some of those agricultural meetings, 
particularly when they are purely agricultural, like 
Mr. Coke's, and not as they have been in this coun- 
ty, mixed up with politics.
I am glad to hear that the House of Buckingham 
has so fair a promise in Lord Nugent.
The world ne- 
ver will move better and in more natural order than 
when the greatest men in it are the wisest and the 
best.
A novus homo has a deal to struggle through 
before he can get into a commanding situation.
A 
man of rank, and of real knowledge at the same 
time, comes into it without an effort, and thus a 
great deal of time and contention is saved.
599 
I do not like this Indian nor this Algerine war.
Wars are prolific monsters, and soon people the 
world with those of their own kind.
Would that 
war was completely banished from mankind !
My son Edmund has been at Malvern.
He was 
puzzled there with that variety of Ervum tetrasper- 
mum which has footstalks with one flower only.
I 
do not recollect ever to have seen your variety of 
/. Xiphium.
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
Dear Sir James, Rose Castle, Sept.
15, 1819.
I will begin answering the last matter which you 
mention, — your new edition of the Flora: I hope 
that you will not abandon that idea.
Had you not 
so very lately given a new edition of your Com- 
pendium complete, I should have advised an edi- 
tion of it, and also have wished that you had an- 
nounced your intentions of pubhshing your edition 
for the ladies, and stating what you had got already 
for the Flora.
As that edition of the Compendium cannot be 
nearly taken off yet, I fear you must risk your edi- 
tion at once.
It must be a most respectable work, 
far beyond what has been produced in any country 
under the sun.
I cannot say anything to the En- 
glish Flora, not knowing your plan.
The old plan 
of your Flora Britannica was, I always thought, 
extremely good, and such as needed no mending.
600 
I have never seen Fonthill, but at a great di- 
stance en passant.
What an amazing inclosure !
fourteen miles of wall !
Yours most sincerely, 
Samuel Carlisle.
From the same.
Dear Sir, Berners Street, Nov. 29, 1819.
The famous American serpent is at length ascer- 
tained to be no fiction.
It seems that there has 
always been a rumour of this animal : Aldrovan- 
dus mentions it among others.
However it has 
never been caught and described.
It has now been 
seen by three hundred people at once, and hopes 
are entertained that ere long this will be taken.
It 
is of immense size and length.
This feverish anxiety cannot last long, as things 
must come to a crisis soon.
And Cobbett's landing 
with Tom Paine's bones will be adding oil to the 
flame.
All this is frightful.
I am, dear Sir James, yours, 
S. Carlisle.
Fi'om the same.
Dear Sir James, Rose Castle, Sept.
28, 1821.
. 
I had been expecting a letter from you according 
to annual custom, I own; but that did not stop me 
from writing to you, but an uncommon variety of 
601 
business, and a greater variety of domestic troubles 
than usually falls to one's lot at one time.
We were hindered coming down hither at first 
by the two servants whom we leave here in our ab- 
sence being seized with typhus fever : they could 
not join us for a considerable time after our arrival.
This confused the regularity of our house, and 
gave us no small trouble, and some expense.
As 
soon as we were all set to rights in this respect, my 
housekeeper's husband, a healthy young active man, 
was suddenly seized with a swelling in his thigh and 
leg, so that his clothes were obliged to be cut away 
to free him from them : this makes her very un- 
easy, and paralyses her services.
My coachman's 
wife, who keeps our house in Berners Street, and 
has been expecting to be confined all this month; a 
person has come down from London and told him 
she is very ill, so that this keeps him upon the fret.
Then the other night, Mrs. Goodenough's maid, a 
nice delicate young woman, fell down suddenly in 
a fit, and has not been thoroughly herself or useful 
since.
One of my labourers has just lost his cow, 
and he has a son in a rapid decline.
To add to all, 
our letter-carrier is taken suddenly ill ; so that I 
have nothing to hear but complaints, and nothing 
to see but moping figures.
A pretty picture this 
of domestic inconveniences !
Lady Melville the other day gave me a very fine 
pot of Gloxinia speciosa.
How like the flower was 
to Digitalis, at first sight.
The cold begins to 
pinch it.
I am very much afraid that when I go 
away, it will go the way of all flesh, i.
e. die.
It is 
G02 
beautiful in flower and health just now, and has a 
great many flowers.
Yours always, 
Samuel Carlisle 
Sir J.
E. Smith to the Bishop of Carlisle.
My dear Lord, Norwich, March 3, 1822.
I am steadily at work at my English Flora, and 
hope to get it into the press when I go to town, 
which I cannot spare time to do before the begin- 
ning of May. I find so much to do in this work 
that it will be quite an original Flora, the whole 
subject being revised after so many years expe- 
rience ; and nothing, or worse than nothing, done 
by most writers since I began.
To try to fix the 
language, revise all generic and specific characters, 
enrich and correct synonyms, add remarks on natu- 
ral aflfinities, clear away the mischief done by com- 
pilers, — all this is an Herculean labour.
The 
object of the book is botanical determination.
I am now finally disposing of the grasses, and 
hope I have done some good, as also in the Tri- 
andria Monogynia.
Brown is very great in these.
My present employment makes me a very bad 
correspondent.
I remain 
Your Lordship's devoted and most faithful 
J. E.
Smith.
603 
The Bishop of Carlisle to Sir J, E.
Smith.
Dear Sir James, Bemers Street, March 8, 1822.
You are entered indeed upon a Herculean task, 
if your English Flora be intended to embrace what 
you propose ; to fix the language, revise generic 
and specific characters, enrich and correct syno- 
nyms, add remarks on natural affinities, and clear 
away the mischief done by compilers, — and to cor- 
rect habitats.
One would think that this is suffi- 
cient for a first edition.
As the object of your 
work is botanical determination, it certainly might 
fairly include the accenting of the generic and spe- 
cific names throughout.
But have you time for 
all this before the beginning of May ?
I shall very 
gladly lend you all the assistance which I can give.
When I turned my thoughts to this subject, I 
adopted two characters to mark the quantity of the 
penultimate and antepenultimate syllables.
Where 
the syllable was pronounced long, as in purus, edu- 
lis, Polypodium, I put one straight stroke ( I ); where 
it was pronounced short, as magnus, palustris, 
Chrysanthemum, I put two straight strokes (ii).
/ 
preferred this to the more learned characters of 
"and ", because we accent a living language according 
to the use, not the nature of the syllable.
Thus 
there are some refined critics who would pro- 
nounce polypodium polypodium, the o in podium 
being an omicron, and thus by nature short.
But 
this in the present state of things would be per- 
plexing, because great tenderness and attention 
604 
should, I think, be paid to practical men, and ladies 
and gardeners, who have been accustomed to pro- 
nounce so.
I give you my opinion and my reasons ; 
and therefore, if you enter upon this part of your 
work, you will judge for yourself.
I do not see that you are called upon to give the 
etymology of the generic and specific names : it 
would open into dispute, and take off the mind 
from your main object, botanical determination.
These things must, I think, be left generally to 
scholars.
Yours, 
Samuel Carlisle.
Sir «/.
E, Smith to the Bishop of Carlisle.
My dear Lord, Norwich, March 13, 1822.
I derive, as usual, great assistance and encou- 
ragement from your Lordship's instructive letter.
I think I may be spared explanations of generic 
names, except such as are new to British readers.
As to accents, your Lordship's plan is excellent: 
I well remember your telling me about it, — but per- 
haps it is more than I want.
Common English 
readers, not wanting to make Latin verses, would 
never understand magnus, and palustris, &c.
It 
will be enough, I apprehend, to put a ' over the 
syllable on which the accent is to be laid.
This I 
can do easilv in most instances ; and when I am 
puzzled, I know whom to consult.
DeCandolle has introduced a new term for the 
605 
single grains or parts of compound fruits, as in 
Uvaria: — carpella (plural?); but should it not be 
carpiola ?
as the original word is Greek.
I do 
not however admit it at all, any more than his 
sepala for segments or leaves of a calyx.
I must 
adopt Schreber's genus Spartina, for Dactylis 
stricta: it is very distinct.
Is not Spartina a good 
name, alludingto the broom-like, or cord-like stems 
and leaves ?
The French have subsequently called 
it Limnetis, — a good name ; but it ought not surely 
to supersede the older one.
Mr. Coke is too good and too prosperous to 
escape envy.
I regret that party should make such 
men as him enemies.
As to the bulk of each party, 
it matters little.
I esteem him one of the best of 
human beings.
I allude not to politics, which I 
often regret should disturb so fine and happy a 
mind as his.
Mr. Roscoe is preparing for our Society a very 
excellent distribution of the species of Canna, now 
very numerous.
I am ever, most respectfully.
Your Lordship's, 
J. E.
Smith.
The Bishop of Carlisle to Sir J.
E. Smith.
Dear Sir, March 14, 1822.
"When I put my two strokes over magnus, &c., 
it was more to show you my plan, than any wish 
that you should mark words, dissyllables or others.
606 
which the common genius of our own language 
would so readily point out.
Whether the single 
stroke will sufficiently teach the pronunciation of 
words of three or more syllables, a little use and 
experience will convince you.
If, for instance, the 
word Ricinus occur, will the same mark ' indicate 
that the i be pronounced short, as if two consonants 
followed it?
I only throw out this for your consi- 
deration.
DeCandolle was quite mistaken about his term 
carpella: it is evidently taken from the Greek word 
KapTToc, and is a diminutive of it, and so far is of clas- 
sical analogy.
But Kapiroc, is a masculine noun, and 
so must its diminutives be ; and therefore the word 
should be carpelh not carpella.
But why is not 
Linnseus's word satisfactory ?
Thus in Rubus, he 
says, "Bacca composita acinis monospermis." Who 
is at a loss ?
I can make neither head nor tail of Sepala.
I 
should think with you that the term is not called 
for.
As Dactylis stricta is so distinct a genus, I cer- 
tainly should prefer the older appellation of Spar- 
t'lna (although it does not quite suit my ear and 
taste) to the more modern one Limnetis.
I call 
Limnetis no name at all ; it is derived from the 
Greek word Xijxvt}, palus — i.
c\.
palustris.
But there 
may be others found perhaps growing in marshes 
also ; — in this case, as in many of the Linnsean ge- 
nera, the term palustris does not assist us.
I am, dear Sir James, yours, 
Samuel Carlisle.
607 
From the same.
My dear Sir James, Rose Castle, Sept.
6, 1822.
I observe one odd thing this year.
Although last 
year we had such a multitude of wasps that they 
ate up all our fruit, this year not one has been seen 
yet.
Another odd thing took place: — the swift 
left us in the beginning of August; and during last 
week, when there were violent rains, storm and 
tempest, there was not a swallow or martin to be 
seen ; but this week they have appeared again.
Was it that the wind and storms destroyed their 
food ?
and now the serenity of the atmosphere has 
brought them all back again, — I cannot say in such 
numbers as before.
Indeed this year they came 
some weeks later, and were by far less numerous 
than usual.
I envy you at the sea side.
Yours, 
Samuel Carlisle.
The Bishop of Carlisle to Sir *J, E, Smith.
My dear Sir James, Bemers Street, Jan. 25, 1823.
I am not at all surprised at Cobbett's manoeuvres ; 
I only wonder that such things have not taken 
place before.
For when parties meet, such a mul- 
titude of inflammatory speeches are made, that the 
passions of the ignorant must be set to work.
The 
principal people concerned, think that the rabble 
are too far off to presume to take a lead ; but that 
distinction is set aside, more or less, at every meet- 
608 
ing, and the consequence is to be dreaded.
Now 
at the York meeting, it was fine talking to say that 
our Constitution is made up of three distinct li- 
mited powers.
But what is to keep them limited ?
Mr. Wortley could not be heard, so that here in 
limine there was one unlimited power that over- 
ruled.
They are three limited powers, I grant you ; 
but the argument is too fine drawn for the lower 
classes to be held by it.
There is nothing new in 
all this ; it is thoroughly well understood, and has 
practically been observed as far as circumstances 
will permit : but occasionally one part or other 
has outrun its limits, and evil has inevitably ensued.
I own I dread seeing things pushed to these nice 
extremities : I say this as a true Whig.
I am glad to see that you have taken the Um- 
bellatcB in hand.
I have been more puzzled in that 
class than in any other.
The Involucra and Invo- 
lucella are by far too unstable to form decisive 
distinctions.
If the fruit will furnish distinctions 
broad enough, you will have done a great work.
Will your system hold good through all the foreign 
genera ?
— I can write no more than to assure you 
and Lady Smith how truly I am 
Yours, 
S. Carlisle.
From the same.
Berners Street, Dec. 11, 1823.
My dear Sir James, 
What a winter summer we have had !
The wea- 
609 
ther at Rose Castle was all the time as cold as at 
Christmas : we had fires in all our rooms from 
morning till night, just as we have in the depth of 
winter.
Your accurate distinction between Geum and 
Dryas is very satisfactory.
How many times I 
have looked at both those genera, without having 
an idea or a suspicion of your nice distinction !
— but 
I have often observed that old men go on in the 
errors which they imbibed inadvertently in their 
early age.
It would be well if they could begin 
again according to the old adage — Disce docendus 
adhcBC^ 
The singular generic character of Icosandria is 
so very striking, that I believe it gives one a care- 
less way of examining its plants.
Hence our er> 
rors and our difficulties so late to be discovered.
The produce of our gardens was sadly damaged 
this year.
We had no apples : our pears did not 
ripen : strawberries and raspberries were in plenty, 
but they had not by any means their usual flavour.
Yet, what was remarkable, we had mulberries, of 
which we have had none but twice since I have been 
at Rose Castle.
Our corn was very late.
When 
I left Cumberland, the 3rd of November, there were 
multitudes of acres not reaped, all of them almost 
as green as grass.
We have one peach-tree from 
which we gathered ripe and well-flavoured fruit the 
last week in October.
Sincerely yours, 
Samuel Car.msle.
VOL.
I. 2 R 
610 
The correspondence between these friends con- 
tinued to the end of 1826 with its original spirit ; 
but from that time the declining health of the 
Bishop became visible in his handwriting, and his 
subsequent letters were chiefly upon the progress 
of infirmity.
Like most admirers of Nature, he 
possessed warm domestic and social affections, and 
great love for the enjoyments of home.
Speaking 
in one of his earlier letters of a family possessing 
the same qualities, who had been bereaved of a 
tender parent, " The description," he says, " of such 
an harmonious family, is as delightful as it is ser- 
viceable.
When one wants nothing from without, 
how sure and constant our comforts are !
and that 
is the case with a family at unity in itself.
Oh, how 
good and joyful a thing is it to dwell together in 
unity !
It is a pleasure even for strangers to look 
upon.
" Parting is a hard task.
I do not wish for stoi- 
cism enough to set me above such fine feelings.
In 
the end they are a happiness for us, ever recalling 
the connexion while it subsisted, teaching us the 
value of everything of the kind, and inviting us to 
look forward to other modes of it." 
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
PRINTED BY RICHARD TAYLOR, 
RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.
aK31.S64A3c.2 V.I gen 
Smith James Edward/Memoir and correspon 
3 5185 00098 7741 
N. MANCHESTER.
INDIANA 