THE FIELD MUSEUM LIBRARY 
3JT 
/ 
SUPPLEMENT 
TO 
BAINES’ FLORA OF YORKSHIRE.
' 
A 
SUPPLEMENT 
TO 
BAINES’ FLORA OF YORKSHIRE, 
WITH A MAP.
pri JM 
THE FLOWERING PLANTS AND FERNS: 
BY 
JOHN GILBERT BAKER, F.B.S.L.
fart ItotA 
THE MOSSES OF THE COUNTY: 
BY 
JOHN NOWELL.
I 
LONDON : 
WILLIAM PAMPLIN, 45, FRITH-STREET, SOHO.
1854 .
“Nature never did betray 
The heart that loved her: ’tis her privilege, 
Through all the years of this our life, to lead 
From joy to joy: for she can so inform 
The mind that is within us, so impress 
With quietness and beauty, and so feed 
With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues, 
Bash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men, 
Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all 
The dreary intercourse of daily life, 
Shall e’er prevail against us, or disturb 
Our cheerful faith that all which we hehold 
Is full of blessings.
Therefore let the moon 
Shine on thee in thy solitary walk, 
And let the misty mountain winds be free 
To blow against thee ; and in after years, 
If solitude, or fear, or pain, or grief, 
Should be thy portion, with what healing thoughts 
Of tender joy wilt thou remember me, 
And these my exhortations!
” 
— Wordsworth.
NOTE, 
BY THE AUTHOR OF THE “ FLORA OF YORKSHIRE.” 
In offering to tire Public this Supplement to the “ Flora of Yorkshire,” 
I can lay but little claim to direct participation in the large addition of 
species and stations which has been made since the publication of the 
work, in 1840.
At that time I took occasion to express my opinion, that many curious 
discoveries would reward the diligent observer, who might venture be- 
yond the beaten track, into the more secluded districts of the county; 
but I must confess, that I never anticipated that the number of species 
added would have been so large as has already proved to be the case.
Had I myself edited the Supplement, it would have been a mere 
list of species and localities ; but Mr. Baker, with the assistance of 
Mr. Nowell, having with great kindness undertaken the management of 
the matter, (a task for which their labors in the special field of research, 
and their acquaintance with the general literature of the subject, have 
rendered them so eminently fitted,) I may with confidence introduce the 
Supplement which they have furnished, to the notice of my Friends and 
the Public, as exhibiting not only a very complete list of the botanical 
treasures of the county, so far as it professes to treat, but also as a 
•work calculated to lead its readers to the study and investigation of 
general principles.
HENRY BAINES.
Museum, York, 
Dec., 1854.
INTRODUCTORY EXPLANATIONS.
The Supplement to the “ Flora of Yorkshire ” contains a complete list 
of the flowering plants, ferns, and mosses, known or reported to grow 
wild within the limits of the county, so far as they hare been ascertained 
by those who have contributed towards it, at the close of the year 1853.
Since the original “ Flora ” was published, fourteen years have elapsed.
During the interval much has been accomplished in collecting facts and 
details relative to the geography of the plants of Britain, and connecting 
together the records of their localities and situations which have been 
gradually accumulated.
By arranging and comparing these, considerable 
progress has been made in tracing the leading features of the distribution 
of the species which compose the (phanerogamic) flora of Britain over 
the surface of the island, and investigating the laws and conditions which 
govern and limit their diffusion.
The era of the “ New Botanist’s Guide” 
has passed away, and is succeeded by that of the “ Cybele Britannica.” 
During the interval, also, Babington’s “ Manual of British Botany” has 
replaced Hooker’s “ British Flora,” as a popular descriptive handbook and 
standard of nomenclature.
The most characteristic feature of this work, 
which has already, passed through three editions, is an endeavour to 
establish uniformity in the nomenclature employed in this country, with 
that of the most trustworthy continental authorities of modern times, 
amongst whom Koch and Fries are pre-eminent.
In order to attain this, 
numerous alterations from the names previously adopted have been 
rendered necessary.
Many species before unknown within the limits of 
Britain have been found, upon closer examination, to extend their range 
to this country.
And others, which were formerly supposed to be single 
species only, are found, upon more accurate investigation, to require sub- 
division.
So that the fourth edition of the “ London Catalogue of British 
Plants ” is very different from what any similar enumeration which might 
have been attempted in 1840 would have been.
6 
In preparing tlie first part of the present work, I have endeavoured, so 
far as I have been enabled by my own observations, and by the assistance 
of various notes and lists liberally furnished to the author of the “ Flora” 
and to myself, to carry out the idea of the original work up to the present 
time, by making the additions which were needful to adapt it to the 
present standard of knowledge.
That is to say, I have wished that the 
“Supplement,” either taken alone or in connection with the “Flora,” 
might furnish a summary of the higher vegetation of the county, so far 
as it has been ascertained: for the use of the botanical and physical 
geographer, either to be viewed by itself, or considered in comparison 
and taken in connection with other similar comital enumerations ; and 
of the resident or travelling collector, to give him information respecting 
the species which he may expect to be enabled to add to his herbarium 
within the limits of the county, and some of the special localities of the 
rarities.
In all scientific enumerations of the plants of a definite area, it is 
needful that a clear line of distinction should be drawn between those 
which are indubitably ascertained to inhabit it, and those, the occurrence 
of which within the limits of the district rests only upon doubtful 
authority or unconfirmed report.
It is also essential, if we wish to esti- 
mate the true relations of the flora, to separate as accurately as possible 
those species which are aboriginal inhabitants of the district, so far as 
can be judged, from those which bear the appearance of having been 
introduced by human agency at some period more or less remote.
Partly 
in order that we might attempt to trace these distinctions in the present 
instance ; partly because, on account of the alterations in nomenclature, 
which, as before explained, have been rendered necessary by advancing 
knowledge, confusion might otherwise have arisen; it has been judged 
desirable to repeat the complete series of names.
For various reasons, upon which it is unnecessary here to dwell, 
especially for the sake of uniformity with the “ Oybele Britannica,” the 
catalogue of British plants published by the Botanical Society of London, 
the fourth edition of which has just made its appearance, has been used 
as an index of nomenclature and arrangement.
A line or more is devoted 
to each species which the county is ascertained or reported to afford ; but 
a single line only to those species, respecting the situations and degree 
7 
of rarity or frequency of which no further information than is contained 
in the “ Flora” appears necessary to be given, or has been obtained.
This 
line contains, on the left hand side, the number and name under which 
the species stands in the Catalogue, with an abbreviation of the name of 
the original authority for the latter.
Next is placed one of the following 
series of terms,* used in the sense explained below, designed to express 
the degree of citizensliijD of the species, so far as can be judged from the 
evidence which has been obtained.
Native.
— Apparently an aboriginal Yorkshire species ; there being little 
or no reason for supposing it to have been introduced by human 
agency.
Examples : Ranunculus acris, Beilis perennis, Calluna 
vulgaris, Coryllus Avellana.
Denizen.
— At present maintaining its habitats as if a native, without the 
aid of man ; yet liable to some suspicion of having been originally 
introduced.
Examples: Viola odorata, Saponaria officinalis, Pyre- 
thrum Parthenium.
Colonist.
— A weed of cultivated land, and about houses ; seldom found, 
except where the ground has been adapted for its production by 
the operations of man.
Examples : Papaver Rhceas, Brassica 
Napus, Lychnis Githago.
Alien.
— Now more or less established, but either presumed or certainly 
known to have been introduced by human agency.
These may be 
arranged under two classes : — 1st.
Species introduced by horticul- 
ture.
Examples : Corydalis lutea, Mimulus luteus.
And 2nd.
Spe- 
cies introduced by agriculture, or with ballast.
Examples : Alyssum 
calycinum, Lolium italicum, Trifolium incarnatum.
Incognit.
— Reported as a Yorkshire plant ; but either certainly erroneous, 
or extinct, or requiring confirmation before it can be received with 
complete confidence.
Of species reported through errors in nomen- 
clature, Hieracium villosum, Centaurea jacea, and Stachys ger- 
manica, are examples.
Others have been placed in Yorkshire lists, 
on faith of localities which are not within the limits of the county ; 
as Vaccinium uliginosum, Woodsia ilvensis.
Amongst those species 
which have formerly occurred, but are now probably extinct, are, 
Vide “ Cybele Britarmica,” vol.
i. page 63.
8 
Silene cornea, Potamogeton zostersefolius, and Carex Gibsoni.
Examples of the class of species which are probably correctly 
reported, may be found in Centaurea calcitrapa, Aceras anthropo- 
phora, and Carex brizoides.
One of the most important generalizations which has been established 
through the onward progress of geographical botany, is, the subdivision 
of the British flora into “ types of distribution,”* according as the species 
are more or less generally diffused over the whole extent of the island, 
or are limited to, or preponderate in, some particular section of its sur- 
face.
In order to afford a means of estimating the relations of the flora 
of Yorkshire to that of other portions of Britain, on the right hand side 
of the line is placed the name of the type to which each species may bo 
considered to belong.
The types of distribution are thus named and 
made up.
1. British Type.
— Species which are more or less generally diffused 
throughout the whole, or nearly the whole, extent of Britain.
Examples : Sagina procumbens, Senecio vulgaris, Thymus serpyl- 
lum, Lastrea dilatata.
2. English Type.
— Species which have their head quarters in England, 
especially in the southern provinces, and become rare and finally 
cease altogether towards the north.
Examples : Rhamnus catharti- 
cus, Pulicaria dysenterica, Convolvulus sepium, Tamus communis.
3. Scottish Type.
— Species which, contrary to those which make up the 
last type, have their head quarters in Scotland or in the northern 
provinces of England, and become rare and finally cease altogether 
southward.
Examples : Trollius europeus', Campanula latifolia, 
Gnaphalium dioicum.
4. Highland Type.
— The boreal flora in a more intense degree.
Species 
which have their head quarters amongst the Scotch Highlands, and 
are only found southward in the vicinity of elevated mountains.
Examples : Draba incana, Rubus chamsemorus, Myosotis alpestris.
5. Germanic Type.
— Species which have their head quarters in the south- 
east of England, and run out northward and westward.
Examples : 
* These were first defined in Watson’s “ Remarks on the Geographical Distribution of British Plants,” 
published in 1835.
They are fully explained in the same author's “ Cybele Britannica,” vol.
i. pp.
43—55, 
and under each species in detail.
Anemone Pulsatilla, Ophrys apifera, Brachy podium pinnatum.
6. Atlantic Type.
— Species which have their head quarters in the south- 
west of England, and run out northward and eastward Examples : 
Hypericum Androssemum, Sedum anglicum, Asplenium marinum.
7. Local oe Uncebtain Type.
— Species too much restricted in their dis- 
tribution to be ranged under any of the preceding pages.
Ex- 
amples : Actaea spicata, Potentilla fruticosa, Gentiana verna.
Or 
doubtful for various reasons 
In those cases in which the species has been discovered within the 
limits of the county, since the “ Flora ” was published : or further infor- 
mation of sufficient importance to be worth recording has been obtained 
respecting it : or correction and explanation were rendered necessary, 
the line which contains the category of citizenship and type of distribu- 
tion to which the species belongs is followed by a paragraph conveying 
the requisite information As may readily be supposed, new localities 
have been ascertained during the interval which has elapsed since the 
“ Flora ” was published, for the greater proportion of the rarer species 
included in it.
But they have only been given in the present work in 
those cases where very few localities were mentioned under a species in 
the “ Flora, ” or further verification and confirmation of its occurrence 
within the limits of the county has appeared desirable.
I may take this 
opportunity of expressing an acknowledgement of my obligations to 
the numerous kind friends and correspondents, whose names will be 
found throughout the pages of the work, who have furnished lists of 
localities, illustrative specimens, and information of various kinds.
It 
will be understood, that in those localities which are not followed by the 
name of any authority, I have personally collected the species under 
which they are given.
A note of admiration implies that I have examined 
an authenticated specimen, either from the station specified or of the 
plant described by an author ; and in most of these cases an example is 
preserved for reference in my herbarium.
In arranging the second part of the work, my colleague has followed 
the same system of nomenclature and the same order of sequence of the' 
genera and species that was adopted in the “ Flora.” We should, however, 
have preferred taking the “ Brvologia Europea” of Bruch and Sehimper 
as a Standard of classification, if the issue had been completed, or Wilson’s 
10 
forthcoming Manual of “ British Bryology,” if it had been published in 
time.
He has given the synonyms of those species which have appeared 
in the former work under different names : and has arranged the mosses 
which the county has been ascertained to produce, on the same plan which 
has been pursued with reference to the Flowering Plants and Ferns.
That is to say, he has given the names only where no further information 
of sufficient importance to be worth recording has been obtained respect- 
ing those species which are included in the original work, but the localities 
also of novelties and rarities.
But the mosses of a considerable propor- 
tion of the cotmty have been only very imperfectly explored, and the long 
list of species which we are enabled to furnish, is the result, rather of the 
persevering efforts of a few talented and diligent bryologists in their re- 
spective districts, than of the combined labours of a great number of 
observers.
On account of the comparative paucity of data which have been collected 
respecting the lower familes of cellular plants, we have not thought it 
desirable in the present work to exceed the scope of the original Flora.
Respecting the Hepaticae of Yorkshire, information may be procured from 
the Botanist’s Guide, Spruce’s list in the Phytologist, (vol.
2, page 158,) 
and Mac Ivor’s Hepaticae Britannicae.
Teesdale, Harriman, Brunton, 
Dalton, Hailstone, and Gibson, have determined numerous lichens in 
different parts of the county, and more recently, my friend W.
Mudd, of 
Ayton, has published in the Phytologist, (vol.
5. page 71, 97,) a list of con- 
siderable extent of the species which he has found in Cleveland.
Various 
botanists have collected maritime Algae, and some few have studied the 
fresh-water and microscopic groups ; but nothing like a complete list of 
the species which may be supposed likely to inhabit the country has been 
obtained.
The Fungi of the country present a wide field for exertion, 
which has as yet hardly been entered upon.
JOHN G.
BAKER.
Thiksk, 7th mo.
1, 1854.
SUPPLEMENT 
TO THE 
FLORA OF YORKSHIRE.
fart first 
THE FLOWERING PLANTS AND FERNS : 
BY 
JOHN GILBERT BAKER.
GENERAL SUMMARY.
In the present work 1155 species of flowering plants and 53 Ferns are 
enumerated.
Out of these, T3 flowering plants and 8 ferns are either 
certainly erroneous, or cannot he received with confidence as Yorkshire 
plants without further confirmation of their occurrence.
Of the remain- 
ing 1082 flowering plants, 31 are naturalized species only, which are not 
included in the fourth edition of the London catalogue, and one (Salix 
acutifolia) has been discovered since it was printed.
So that out of 1445 
flowering plants enumerated in the catalogue, 1051 species, or 72 \ per 
cent, and out of 60 ferns, 45 species, or 75 per cent, have been ascertained 
at the present time to inhabit Yorkshire.
If we deduct the alien species 
of flowering plants the relative proportion of the floras, in the number of 
species which they contain, still remains nearly the same ; for out of 1336 
species enumerated in the catalogue, we may claim 955, or 71 % per cent.
But out of 1336 flowering plants enumerated in the catalogue, 31 species, 
and out of 60 ferns, two species, belong exclusively to Ireland or the 
Channel Islands.
So that the true proportion which the ascertained 
Yorkshire flora bears to the ascertained British flora is 71 % per cent, or 
1001 species to 1339.
The following is a tabular summary of the species enumerated in the 
present work, arranged according to the categories of citizenship under 
which they are placed : — 
Flowering Plants.
Native 893 
Denizen 36 
Colonist 27 
•956 
55 
Ferns (Native) 
1001 
14 
Forward 1001 
Flowering Plants.
Aliens included in the fourth edition of 
the “ London Catalogue ” 95 
Aliens excluded from do 31 
1127 
Incognita.
Flowering Plants 73 
Ferns 8 
1208 
Flowering Plants.
Type of Distribution.
Number of Species.
Per Centage.
British 
542 
57— 
English 
272 
28 + 
Scottish 
51 
5 + 
Highland 
30 
3 + 
Germanic 
29 
3 + 
Atlantic 
7 
1— 
Local or doubtful 
25 
3— 
956 
100 
Ferns.
Type of Distribution.
Number of Species.
Per Centage.
British 
25 
56— 
English 
5 
11 + 
Scottish 
4 
9— 
Highland 
6 
13 + 
Atlantic 
3 
7— 
Local or Doubtful 
2 
4+ 
45 
100 
If we unite the Germanic and Atlantic types with the English, and the 
Highland type with the Scottish ; and thus group together, 1st species 
universal, or almost universal in their distribution throughout Britain ; 
2nd species, which run out northward; 3rd species, which run out south- 
ward ; and 4th species, of limited diffusion in Britain ; we shall find the 
Flora of Yorkshire thus made up : — - 
15 
Type of Distribution.
Number of Species.
Per Centage.
1 Universal 
567 
57— 
2 Austral 
317 
31 + 
3 Boreal 
91 
9 + 
4 Local 
26 
3— 
1001 
100 
Three species, all of which are comparatively recent discoveries in 
Britain, are only known in this country within the limits of Yorkshire, 
viz ; — 
Polygala uliginosa 
Salix acutifolia 
Carex paradoxa.
There are strong reasons for believing a fourth species to be truly 
native in Yorkshire, which is not known, except as a naturalized plant, 
elsewhere in Britain, viz.
; — 
Saxifraga umbrosa.
Three of the local species are not known to grow in any of the eastern 
counties, either to the north or south of Yorkshire, viz.
; — 
Actaea spicata , 
Asarum europoeum 
Lastrea rigida.
Eighty species are not known with certainty to grow in any of the 
eastern counties northward of Yorkshire ; that is to say, they are supposed 
to find their boreal limit in the county, viz ; — 
Clematis Yitalba 
Anemone Pulsatilla 
Meconopsis cambrica 
Hutcbinsia petrsea 
Lepidium latifolium 
Draba muralis 
Cardamine impatiens 
Barbarea stricta 
Brassica oleracea 
Helianthemum canum 
Drosera intermedia 
Arenaria tenuifolia 
Cerastium aquaticum 
Hypericum elodes 
Erodium moschatum 
Medicago maculata 
denticulata 
Trifolium subterraneum 
Hippocrepis comosa 
Yicia bithynica 
Lathyrus palustris 
Bosa micrantha 
Pyrns communis 
Epilobium roseum 
Cotyledon Umbilicus 
Petroselinu m segetum 
Peucedanum palustre 
Torilis infesta 
Viscum album 
Viburnum Lantana 
Asperula Cynanchica 
Fedia carinata 
Dipsacus pilosus 
Tragopogon porrifolius 
16 
Carduus pratensis 
Filago apiculata 
Inula Oonyza 
Campanula patula 
— Kapuncul us 
Wahlenbergia hederacea 
Monotropa Hypopitys 
Gentiana Pneumonanthe 
Chlora perfoliata 
Polemonium cseruleum 
Cuscuta europsea 
Epithymum 
Verbascum Blattaria 
7 nigrum 
Veronica triphyllos 
Antirrhinum Orontium 
Linaria spuria 
Elatine 
repens 
Orobanche minor 
Teucrium Scordium 
Leonurus Cardiaca 
Lamium Galeobdolon 
Salicornia radicaus 
Polygonum mite 
Rumex pratensis 
Hippophae rhamnoides 
Daphne Mezereum 
Euphorbia platyphylla 
Spiranthes autumnalis 
Ophrys aranifera 
Convallaria Polygonatum 
Stratiotes aloides 
Acorus Calamus 
Cyperus fuscus 
Eriophorum gracile 
Carex elongata 
axillaris 
divisa 
divulsa 
strigosa 
digitata 
Apera Spica-venti 
Arundo Calamagrostis 
Brachy podium pinnatum 
Lastrea Spinulosa 
Fifty species are not known to grow in any of the eastern counties 
southward of Yorkshire ; that is to 
austral limit in the county, viz.
; — 
Thalictrum alpinum 
flexuosum 
Dryas octopetala 
Potentilla fruticosa 
alpestris 
Alchemilla alpina 
Epilobium alsinifolium 
Sedum Rhodiola 
villosum 
Saxifraga stellaris 
Hirculus 
aizoides 
oppositifolia 
Cornus suecica 
Meum athamanticum 
Peucedanum Ostruthium 
Galium boreale 
Crepis succissefolia 
Hieracium Lawsoni 
iricum 
pallidum 
gothicum 
prenanthoides 
crocatum 
Arbutus Uva-ursi 
say, they are supposed to find their 
Pyrola secunda 
Gentiana verna 
Bartsia alpina 
Melampyrum sylvaticum 
Orobanche rubra 
Myosotis alpestris 
Primula farinosa 
Trientalis europcea 
Polygonum viviparum 
Rumex aquaticus 
Salex nigricans 
phylicifolia 
herbacea 
Habenaria albida 
Cypripedium Calceolus 
Allium Scorodoprasum 
Tofieldia palustris 
Elyna caricina 
Carex pauciflora 
capillaris 
Sesleria coerulea 
Poa alpina 
Aspidium Lonchitis 
Equisetum umbrosum.
variegatum 
Each of the remaining 863 species is more or less generally diffused 
both to the north and south of Yorkshire.
AN OUTLINE OF THE BEARINGS 
OF THE 
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE COUNTY 
UPON ITS VEGETATION.
Tlie superficial area of the county is stated at 5836 square miles.
That 
of the whole of Britain is about 90300 square miles, and yet we have seen 
that within the limits of Yorkshire, three out of every four vascular species 
which the island produces have been ascertained to occur.
If, however, 
the range of climate and physical character embraced within the area of 
the county was less extensive, the number of species which it furnishes 
would be decreased in proportion.
As the natural result of its varied 
structure and the varied elevation of different parts of its surface, in its 
flora, groups of plants of austral and alpine distribution, with the various 
intermediate gradations, meet and mingle together.
The broad and fertile 
central vale and its ramifications, where the annual temperature is the 
normal effect of latitude, and does not differ materially from that of a 
considerable part of the midland counties of England, afford a flora com- 
paratively luxuriant in species, typically southern, and essentially English 
in its characteristic features.
Amongst the wide extent of the broad 
ranges of barren moorlands, where the climate from the elevation of the 
surface corresponds with that of the lowland provinces of Scotland, a 
vegetation of a more northern stamp finds supplied the suitable condi- 
tions for its existence.
Whilst round the elevated peaks of the great 
central ridge of the island, cluster those more hardy and arctic species 
(supposed to be the vestiges of the flora of the pre-glacial epoch) which 
find in Britain their head quarters amongst the Grampians of Perth ,and 
Forfar, and Aberdeen.
The author of the “ Cybele Britannica” lias considered the surface of 
Britain as subdivided into two climatic regions.* The boundary between 
* Vide “ Cybele Britannica,” vol.
i. pp.
19 — 43.
18 
these is marked by the line of the limit above which grain cannot be 
cultivated : or when this test is not easy of application, by the line of 
cessation of the common brake, (Pteris aquilina,) which is generally dif- 
fused throughout the whole extent of the island ; but only grows where 
cultivation is practicable.
The lower of these divisions possesses a mean 
annual temperature, ranging from 52 to about 42 degrees.
It comprises a 
much larger extent of surface than the upper, but its conditions are con- 
siderably modified by the operations of agriculture and the influence of 
man.
It is therefore designated the region of cultivation or Agrarian 
region.
The upper division possesses a range of mean annual temperature 
from 42 to about 32 degrees, and remains nearly in its natural state.
It 
includes that portion of the surface of the Scotch Highlands which 
rises above 450 or 500 yards in elevation above the level of the sea : and 
of the English and Welsh mountains above about 600 yards.
Its charac- 
teristic flora bears a strong analogy to that of the north of Europe, and it 
is therefore distinguished as the Arctic region.
In order to supply a means of registering the vertical distribution of 
species, the two climatic regions are each subdivided into three zones.
Each of these zones has a range of about three degrees of mean annual 
temperature, but the extent of surface which they severally embrace is 
necessarily very unequal.
Each is characterised by its peculiar flora, and 
as an aid to their recognition in practice we may regard each as bounded 
by the line of limit of some conspicuous species.
The author of the 
“ Cybele” furnishes the following table.
II.— ARCTIC REGION.
Name.
Characteristic Species.
6. Superarctic zone 
5. Midarctic zone 
4. Inferarctic zone 
. Salix herbacea without Calluna 
. Calluna vulgaris without Erica 
. Erica Tetralix without Pteris.
Name.
I.— AGRARIAN REGION.
Characteristic Species.
3. Superagrarian zone .
. .
Pteris aquilina without Rhamnus 
2. Midagrarian zone .
. .
Rhamnus catharticus without Clematis 
1. Inferagrarian zone .
. .
Clematis, Rubia, Cyperus longus.
The area of Yorkshire is embraced within the second, third, and fourth 
19 
of these climatic zones.
The midagrarian, or with reference to the county 
only, the lower zone, comprises all that portion of the surface which does 
not attain an, elevation of about 300 yards.
The inferarctic or upper zone 
includes those mountain summits which exceed about 600 yards ; and the 
superagrarian or middle zone, the intermediate space.
If we wish to make more exact and accurate comparisons of the vertical 
distribution of species than can be supplied by tracing their zonal range, 
it is easy to estimate, with sufficient accuracy for practical purposes, the 
isotherms or lines of mean annual temperature, within which their 
localities are respectively circumscribed.
The influence of latitude in 
causing a variation between the climate of different parts of the county 
is so slight as scarcely to deserve consideration.
The mean annual tem- 
perature of the whole coast line may therefore be stated in round numbers 
at 49 degrees, though in reality, it is rather less.
That of all inland 
situations which are not much above the coast level, including the whole 
of the great central vale, may be taken at 48 degrees For the remainder 
of the surface, we shall not fall far short of accuracy in adopting the rule 
first proposed by Dalton of deducting one degree of mean annual tem- 
perature for every hundred yards of elevation.
The summit of Micklefell, the 
highest mountain in Yorkshire, attains an elevation of 2580 feet.
So that 
according to the rule just stated, its average annual temperature will be 
rather less than 40 degrees ; and consequently the range embraced within 
the limits of the county, about nine degrees.
Although several districts have been only very partially explored, it 
is not probable that the relative proportion which the Yorkshire flora 
bears to that of the whole of Britain will be materially increased as 
knowledge advances : seeing that most of the species have been found 
which might be expected to occur, from their distribution beyond the 
limits of the county.
But although such is the case, we can only estimate 
very imperfectly from the data which have been accumulated, the manner 
in which each species is diffused over the surface, and the proportion 
which each bears to the general mass of the vegetation.
In order to obtain a means of judging respecting the horizontal distri- 
bution over the island, of the species which make up the British flora, and 
reducing to accurate expression through the medium of a numerical for- 
mula the knowledge which has been and maybe obtained respecting each, 
20 
the author of the “ Cybele ” has considered the surface of Britain as sub- 
divided into eighteen botanical provinces,* usually formed by grouping to- 
gether several counties which comprise the basin of a river, or possess some 
other physical peculiarity in common.
Amongst the counties of Britain, 
Yorkshire, alone, is considered sufficiently extensive in area, and natural 
in its boundaries, to form a province of itself ; and is called the tenth or 
Humber province.
For the sake of attaining greater accuracy, more 
recently he has mapped out the island into thirty-eight sub-provinces ; f of 
these, Yorkshire contains two, East Humber and West Humber, which are 
bounded from each other by a line drawn from the southern bend of the 
Tees to the mouth of the Humber along the course of the Wiske, the 
Swale, and the Ouse.
These again he has further sub-divided into vice- 
counties, the total number of which is 112.
The East Humber sub- 
province contains two of these vice-counties, South-east Yorkshire and 
North-east Yorkshire, the boundary between which is the same as that 
between the east and north ridings.
The West Humber sub-province 
contains three vice-counties, South-west Yorkshire, Mid-west Yorkshire, 
and North-west Yorkshire.
The boundary between the two former of 
these extends from the Ouse, along the course of the Aire, to the neigh- 
bourhood of Skipton, and then across to Lancashire: that between the 
two latter is a line drawn along the summit of drainage between the TJre 
and the Swale.
But if our special object be to estimate, not the distribution of the flora 
of the whole island, but of that of the county only : if we wish to trace 
each species throughout the extent of its surface more accurately than 
could be done by ascertaining in how many of the sub-provinces it occurs; 
and to obtain a closer idea of the area of each, and the proportion which 
it bears to the general mass of the vegetation, it will be needful to descend 
a step lower into detail.
With slight exception, not only the county, but 
each of the five sub-provinces is bounded by natural limits.
They may 
therefore be readily subdivided into natural botanical districts, each of 
which will comprise the whole or some definite portion of the basin of a 
river, and can therefore be very easily recognised in practice.
The object 
of the present sketch is to point out how the geological structure and 
physical aspect of the county are mirrored and reflected in its vegetation, 
* Vide “ Cybele Britannica,” vol.
i. pp.
9 — 19.
+ Ibid.
vol.
iii.
pp.
524 — 528.
21 
and to suggest the means to he employed in tracing the links of connec- 
tion and relations between them.
For this purpose it will not be needful 
here to enter into the details of the geography and condition of each of the 
different river basins -which the county includes.
My own attention, from 
residing in the midst of it, has been more especially directed to the north 
riding ; the surface of which embraces almost as wide a range of variation 
as that of the whole county, and has been ascertained to produce all but 
46 species which the county affords.
I have therefore selected it for 
illustration, and will proceed to give a brief and cursory account of the 
prominent features of the respective districts which it comprises.
I 
would refer those who may wish to study the physical geography of the 
county to the various works on the subject by Professor Phillips, especially 
his latest, “ The Rivers, Mountains, and Seacoast of Yorkshire,” from 
which many of the facts here brought under consideration have been 
obtained.
As has been already explained in the Flora, the north riding consists of 
a broad central vale, running north and south, between two groups of 
hills, the eastern range of which has also a smaller depression both on 
the north and south.
Of these, the western series is the most extensive 
and attains the highest elevation.
The general slope of the surface is : 
from west to east, and consequently the general flow of the river is in the 
same direction.
With the exception of a small tract of greenstone at the 
north-western corner of the county, and a few inconsiderable veins and 
dikes of plutonic origin, the mineral masses of the surface are all sedi- 
mentary, and have been deposited during the primary and secondary 
periods.
In order of succession they are thus arranged from west to east; 
each usually sloping more considerably in that direction than the whole 
mass.
Names.
Localities.
I. Primary period.
A. Carboniferous Series.
1. Scar limestone Cronkley Fell, Micklefell.
2. Yoredale limestone .
Hawes, Muker, Reeth.
3. Millstone grit Gretadale, Balderdale, Masham.
B. Permian Series.
4. Magnesian limestone Bedale, Thorp-arch, Eipon.
II.
/Secondary period.
C. Trias Series.
5. New Red Sandstone York, Thirsk, Northallerton.
22 
D. Lias Series.
6. Lias Stokesley, Guisbro’, Easingwold.
E. Oolite Series.
7. Bath Oolite Whitby, Scarbro’, and the summit 
of the eastern moorlands.
8. Oxford Oolite ILelmsley, Malton.
9. Kimmeridge clay Pickering, Kirby Moorside.
These strata have been many times elevated and depressed during the 
period of their deposition : and a considerable portion of them must even 
have been submerged since various members of the flora and fauna of 
the county have occupied the regions which they now inhabit.
The 
prominent physical features which we observe have been gradually de- 
veloped through the long succession of ages by the continual action of 
water upon the surface.
So that the strata formed of softer materials, 
the sandstones and aluminaceous shales have wasted away beneath its 
abrading influence, and now form the central vale and lower levels of the 
county : whilst the oolites and still harder gritstones have better with- 
stood its power, and now tower upwards as ranges of hills and moorlands 
of greater or lesser elevation, margined by “grey cliffs and winding scars.’’ 
As may be seen at a glance by reference to the map, the three vice- 
counties of the “Cybele Britannica” which are wholly or partially included 
in the north riding, may be conveniently subdivided into eight districts, 
founded upon the river drainage.
Of these, North-east Yorkshire will 
comprise five, North-west Yorkshire two, and Mid-west Yorkshire one- 
If we also include the Ainsty, the vice-counties will contain respectively 
five, two, and two districts, as below : — 
Name oe District.
Vice -county No. I.
North-east York.
District 1.
Ouse and Foss 
2. East Swale 
3. Derwent 
4. Esk 
5. East Tees 
Yice-county No. II.
Mid-west York.
6. Nidd and Wharf (Ainsty) 
7. Ure 
Vice-county No. III.
North-west York.
8. West Swale 
9. West Tees 
Area in Square Miles.
133 
165 
514 
235 
147 
1194 
84 
259 
343 
364 
186 
550 
2087 
23 
Before proceeding to characterise these districts, it may be desirable to 
dwell for a short time on the general features of the vegetation of the 
three climatic zones.
As before stated, the lower, or with reference to the whole of Britain, 
the midagrarian zone may be considered to comprise all that portion of 
the surface which does not attain an elevation above the sea of about 300 
yards.
Consequently, it includes the whole of the central vale : on the 
east, the vales of Cleveland and Pickering and the wide extent of the sur- 
face of the oolitic moorlands, with the exception of the summit of Boseberry 
Topping and a few other detached peaks ; and also a broad branched 
serpentine strip which forms the watershed between the rivers Derwent, 
Swale, Leven, and Esk : and on the west, narrow at first, but widening as 
the rivers descend, the valley of the Tees to the neighbourhood of Hol- 
wick and Mickleton, Swaledale to the vicinity of Muker, and Wensleydale 
to the junction of the two forks of the Ure near Hawes.
The great body 
of its vegetation is made up of the species enumerated throughout the 
work as belonging to the British type of distribution : but these mostly 
ascend also into one or both of the upper zones.
But those which make 
up the three austral types (i.
e. English, Germanic, and Atlantic,) seldom 
pass up above the limits of the present zone.
Some of them are com- 
paratively plentiful, and are probably distributed at intervals throughout 
almost the whole extent of its surface.
As examples of this class, I may 
mention Cornus sanguinea, Pulicaria dysenterica, Ranunculus arvensis, 
Bryonia dioica, Rhamnus catharticus, Scrophularia aquatica, Acer cam- 
pestre, Convolvulus sepium, Tamus communis.
But others, such as most 
of the species previously mentioned as finding their boreal limit in the 
county, are much more restricted in their range.
The flora of this zone 
is also characterised by the comparitive rarity within its precincts of 
many of the more or less boreal species, as Trientalis europsea, Primula 
farinosa, Listera cordata, Empetrum nigrum, Habenaria albida, Gnaph- 
alium dioicum.
The middle, or with reference to the whole of Britain, the superagrarian 
zone includes, on the east, the detached peaks before mentioned, and 
the broad branched serpentine strip forming the watershed between 
the rivers Derwent, Swale, Leven, and Esk: and on the other side 
of the great central vale, that considerable portion of the western 
24 
part of the county, and the parallel ranges of hills between Teesdale, 
Swaledale, Wensleydale, and Nidderdale, which lies above an elevation 
of about three hundred yards, and below the limits of possible cultivation.
Its surface consists principally of broad bleak moorlands, sparingly inter- 
spersed with cultivated land, and consequently there is not nearly so 
much variety in situation as in the zone below, and the number of species 
which make up its flora is comparatively small.
The bulk of its vegeta- 
tion is composed of species which would naturally be equally plentiful in 
the lower zone, but which have there been considerably diminished in 
quantity by drainage, and the operations of agriculture : as Calluna vulga- 
ris, Erica Tetralix and cinerea, Nardus stricta, Juncus squarrosus, Scirpus 
csespitosus.
The species which make up the colonist class of citizenship, 
many of which are plentiful in the lower zone, are here comparatively 
rare, whilst the aliens are almost altogether wanting.
Some of the species 
which belong to the two boreal types of distribution (i.
e. the Highland 
and Scottish) appear in the riding to be peculiar to this zone, but they 
are mostly of very limited diffusion.
Of this class Saxifraga Hirculus, 
Hieracium iricum and croeatum, Meum athamanticum, Arbutus Uva ursi, 
Allosorus crispus, Equisetum umbrosum and variegatum, are examples.
Other species, as Draba incana, Rubus Chamsemorus, Saxifraga aizoides 
and stellaris, Bartsia alpina, Gentiana verna, and Carex capillaris, are 
common to this and the upper zone.
The upper or inferarctic zone comprises those mountain summits, about 
twenty in number, near the western boundary of the county, which rise 
above the limits of possible cultivation.
Marked upon the map, the por- 
tions of surface which it embraces appear to consist of two groups : one 
of them a horse-shoe shaped tract encircling the head of Swaledale, 
with several minor circular patches in its vicinity : the other a single 
oblong streak between Lunedale and Teesdale.
The flora of this zone is 
made up of only a very small number of species, and is best characterised 
by the absence of a large class of plants which are common in both the 
zones of the Agrarian region, including all the more conspicuous trees 
and shrubs, and the weeds which attend upon cultivation.
A few, however, 
of the species belonging to the Highland type of distribution, appear (in 
the riding) to be peculiar to it.
Amongst these are Myosotis alpestris, 
(the most thoroughly boreal species which has been found in Yorkshire,) 
Thalictrum alpinum, Helianthemum eanum, Dryas octopetala, Epilobium 
alsinifolium, and Tofieldia palustris.
Reversing the order of the districts we begin with — 
No. IX.— WEST TEES.
Drainage.
— Taking its rise on the slope of Cross fell in Cumberland, 
augmented by the drainage of the dreary moors of Milburn and Har- 
thorpe, after spreading out into a tarn-like expansion, called the Weal, 
and thus forming, for several miles, the boundary between Westmoreland 
and Durham, the Tees introduces itself to Yorkshire, thundering over an 
irregular series of basaltic cliffs, two hundred feet in height, called the 
Caldron Snout ; and forms for the remainder of its course the northern 
limit of the county.
Below the waterfall, it is joined by the Maizebeck, 
and flows towards the east in a broad rocky channel, margined on the 
south by the scars of Cronkley, and on the north by Falcon Clints : and 
after a few miles, it falls over a perpendicular cliff of greenstone 69 feet 
in height, forming the High Force.
Thence descending rapidly in a more 
confined bed, it runs through a rich and well known botanical district, 
under the bridges of Lower Cronkley and Wince, and advances for about 
the next twelve miles in a south-eastern direction.
Till its junction with 
the Lune, opposite Middleton, a range of cliffs, gradually lessening in 
height, runs parallel with it at some distance.
Afterwards, the hills recede 
and decrease in altitude : and the river flows past the villages of Romald- 
kirk, Cotherstone, and Lartington, and is joined at intervals by the parallel 
streams which drain respectively Balderdale, Grizedale, and Deepdale.
Below Barnard Castle it receives the Greta from the forest of Stainmoor ; 
and thence, entering the central vale, it flow's with many sinuosities 
towards the east, the district which it drains being considerably narrowed 
in breadth.
Surface.
— From the summit of Micklefell, 2580 feet in altitude, the forest 
of Lune slopes gradually towards the east to Cronkley Scarrs ; and is 
principally included in the arctic region.
The moors to the south are 
considerably less elevated, and the highest peaks do not exceed 1860 and 
1448 feet.
The surface ascends to the line of watershed between Greta- 
dale and Arkendale, where Hoove and Baxton Nab nearly attain the upper 
26 
limit of the middle zone.
The lower zone includes the whole of the 
eastern portion of the district, the valley of the Tees till above its junc- 
tion with the Lune, and the lower levels of the subordinate dales.
Structure.
— The course of the Tees from the Caldron Snout to the High 
Force runs over a mass of basalt, called the Whin Sill, which ascends 
Maizebeck for about two miles, and attains an elevation of about 1800 feet, 
in the almost inaccessible cliffs of Cronkley.
By contact with the 
plutonic rock, the narrow' ridge of scar limestone which borders it, the 
oldest in our series of deposits, is in a great measure metamorphosed into 
a coarsely granular “ sugar limestone,” wdiich produces several plants not 
found elsewhere in the riding.
Next in succession, over Micklefell and 
along the western margin of the county, extend Yoredale limestones, which 
also cover a small district south of the junction of the Greta with the 
Tees.
Whilst on the east, the broad moors which surround the dales of 
of the Balder and Greta, and extend to the summit of drainage on the 
south, consist of millstone grit.
In the neighbourhood of Croft, are 
traces of Permian deposits, wdth their botanical concomitant in Anemone 
Pulsatilla : and from thence to the boundary of the district stretches the 
new red sandstone of the central vale.
No. VIII.— WEST SWALE.
Drainage.
— The Swale takes its rise by numerous branches amongst 
the lofty series of undulated summits which form the boundary between 
Yorkshire and Westmoreland.
From Hollow Mill-cross the main branch 
flows due east for about five miles, receiving numerous inconsiderable 
feeders both from the north and the south.
Opposite the celebrated Auld 
Gang lead mines it curves towards the south, the valley widening to en- 
circle the curious conical mound of Keasdon, 1639 feet in altitude.
South- 
ward of this, below the small town of Muker, it again advances due east, 
and maintains that direction till Sw r aledale loses itself in the great 
central vale.
Margined by the scars of the gradually descending summits, 
at Reeth it receives the considerable stream which rises near Baxton Nab 
and drains Arkengarthdale.
Below Grinton the dale widens and becomes 
more highly populated and cultivated.
At Marske the river receives an 
addition from the moorlands on the north ; and after flowing past Rich- 
27 
mond it is joined by another branch from Barningham and Dalton.
Below 
Catterick it winds through a more level country, in a south eastern direc- 
tion.
At Deeming it is further augmented by Grim scar Beck, which rises 
amongst the group of summits a few miles south of Beeth, and flows past 
Bellerby and Bedale.
After its junction with the Wiske, near Sandhutton, 
the Swale forms the boundary between the eastern and western sub-pro- 
vinces.
The district which it drains on the west becomes much narrower, 
and does not contain any town of importance.
Opposite the mouth of 
Codbeck is Leckby Carr, the original British station for Scheiwhzeria 
palustris.
At My ton the Swale unites with the Ure.
Surface.
— A considerable portion of the watershed of the Swale is 
included within the arctic region.
Between Arkendale and Swaledale, the 
summits of Rogan’s Seat, Watercrag and Pinseat attain respectively an 
elevation of 2207, 2192, and 2125 feet.
Round the head of Swaledale 
several peaks exceed 2000 feet.
Of these, the loftiest is Hugh Seat (2330 
feet).
Along the summit of drainage between the Swale and the Yore, rise 
the peaks of Shunnor Fell (2351 feet), the second in altitude of the moun- 
tains of north Yorkshire, Lovely Seat (2216 feet), and Bakestone Edge 
(1983 feet), The remaining portion of the more considerable moorlands, 
including the upper part of Arkengarthdale and the valley of the Swale 
above Muker, are comprised in the middle zone.
The whole of the eastern 
part of the district, from Richmond racecourse, on the north side of the 
river, and Downholme moor, on the south, with the lower levels of the 
dales, is included in the lower zone.
Structure.
— The principal summits at the head of Swaledale, and the 
lower levels of the vallies of the Swale and Arkle, are formed from lime- 
stones of the Yoredale series.
The surface of the more elevated portions 
of the moorlands sloping gradually towards the east, consists of millstone 
grit.
New red sandstone strata, overlaid with diluvial clays, fill up the 
eastern part of the district.
At Topclifle the river touches the lias forma- 
tion.
No. VII.— URE.
Drainage.
— Wensleydale is formed by the junction of two branches, 
Widdale and Cotterdale, which unite below the town of Hawes.
The 
river is supplied by numerous small streamlets, which rise amongst the 
28 
lofty moors of Mossdale and Abbotside, some of which, are diversified by 
waterfalls of considerable height.
During the earlier part of its course it 
runs in an eastern direction, almost parallel with the Swale, at a distance 
from it varying from five to seven miles.
Opposite the town of Askrigg it 
receives a considerable stream from Seamer water, which rises amongst 
the summits of Stake Fell and Yokenthwaite moor.
The district which the 
Ure drains on the north is necessarily very limited, and seldom exceeds 
three miles in breadth.
It includes the town of Leyburn, and the ruins of 
the castle of Bolton.
Below Askrigg are three interesting waterfalls, the 
largest of which, Millgill Force, is 69 feet in height.
There is another, 
rather lower down, at Aysgarth, after which the river is considerably 
augmented by the united streams which flow down Bishopdale and 
Waldendale.
Passing beneath the peak of Penhill, (1817 feet) at Middle- 
ham, it is joined by the Cover, which rises near to Little Whernside, not 
far from the head of Nidderdale.
At Witton and Jerveaux Abbey it enters 
the central vale, and flows in a south eastern direction for the remainder 
of its course.
From Masham to its junction with the Swale, it forms the 
boundary between the north and west ridings.
Surface.
— As mentioned under the last district, a portion of the water- 
shed between the Swale and the Yore attains the arctic region.
At the 
point of juncture between the north and west ridings, the peaks of Wild 
Boar Fell, Swarth Fell, Bow Fell, and Sayls, attain or exceed 2200 feet.
Between Widdale and Cotterdale, and towards the head of the former 
dale, and along the summit of drainage between Wensleydale and Kettle- 
welldale, are several fells of considerable altitude, with lateral ridges 
between Bishopdale, Coverdale, and Nidderdale.
The remainder of the 
western portion of the district, including the valley of the Ure above 
Hawes, and the moorlands to Leyburn and Witton, are comprised in the 
middle zone.
The lower zone includes a narrow strip of surface which 
stretches along the north side of the river to its junction with the Swale, 
and the less elevated portions of the various dales.
Structure.
— As before mentioned, the watershed between the Swale 
and the Ure consists of mill-stone grit strata, which also descend to the 
river at Masham, and form the summit of drainage between Bishopdale 
and Coverdale.
The surface of the remainder of the western portion of 
the district consists of a series of limestones of earlier date, which have 
20 
been called “ Yoredale limestones,” from their abundant developement 
here.
A narrow ridge of magnesian limestone borders the millstone grit 
at Tanfield and Shape.
The remainder of the district is included in the 
great central vale.
No. VI.— NIDD AND WHABFE.
Dra.ina.ge.
— The Ainsty is a highly populated and richly cultivated 
district, only 82 miles in superficial area, bounded on three sides by the 
rivers Nidd, Wharfe, and Ouse, and on the west by a line drawn from 
Colthorpe to Thorpe Arch.
The southern portion is drained by a small 
stream, the two branches of which rise near Wighill and Marston.
It 
flows towards the south-east and falls into the Wharfe, near Bolton 
Percy.
On the north, also, a rivulet rises-near Bilton, and falls into the 
Ouse opposite Overton.
Surface.
— The surface is very little undulated or elevated; so that no 
portion of the district rises above the isothermal line of 48 degees.
Near 
Askham are a series of low wooded bogs, which produce in abundance 
the very local Carex paradoxa.
Structure.
— The surface of nearly the whole of the district, like that of 
the remainder of the great central vale, consists of new red sandstone 
strata, overlaid with diluvial deposits.
A narrow terrace of magnesian 
limestone bounds them on the west, and margins with cliffs that portion 
of the rivers.
No. V.— EAST TEES.
Drainage.
— From the southern bend of the Tees below Darlington, it 
flows with many windings in a north-eastern direction, past the towns of 
Yarm and Stockton, and expands into an estuary at Middlesborough.
The ballast hills around its mouth afford an interesting ground for the 
botanist, as they produce several species which have originally been in- 
troduced from the south of England, or the Continent.
The marshes in 
the neighbourhood of Coatham and Bedcar are intersected by numerous 
salt water ditches, (locally called stells,) which supply various maritime 
rarities.
The Leven is formed by the union of two branches, which unite 
near the town of Stokesley.
The northern of these rises near Codhill, 
30 
not far from the source of the Esk, and flows down Kildale, past Stokes- 
ley and Ayton ; the other on the slope of Burton Head, the loftiest of 
East Yorkshire summits.
The united streams wind towards the west, and 
soon receive, on the north, the Tame, which rises on Eston Nab and flows 
past Ormesby and Nunthorpe ; and on the south several inconsiderable 
feeders from the banks of Dromanby and Carlton.
At Budby, the Leven 
is joined by the stream which drains Scugdale, and turns in a northern 
direction.
After flowing past Hilton and Kirklevington, it enters the Tees 
below Yarm.
Surface.
— The summit of the drainage of this district, on the east and 
south, along Boseberry Topping (1022 feet), Burton Head (1485 feet), 
Wainstones (1800 feet), Cranimoor (1428 feet), Dromanby Bank and Carl- 
ton Bank (1325 feet), is included in the middle zone; but the surface 
descends abruptly, and the whole of the remainder of the district, though 
considerably undulated, does not rise above the lower zone.
Structure.
— The southern summits consist of a series of arenaceous 
and argillaceous deposits, corresponding to the Bath oolite of the south 
of England.
Below these, a broad band of the shales and marlstones 
of the lias extends from the coast at Marske, along the upper branch of 
the Leven, to Osmotherley.
The north-western portion of the district is 
included in the great central vale.
No. IV.— ESK.
Drainage.
— The Esk is formed by the junction of two streams which 
unite near Castleton.
The northern of these rises in the neighbourhood 
of Boseberry Topping, not far from the head of the Leven, and flows 
down Sleddale and Commondale.
The southern is supplied by the drain- 
age of Baysdale and the two divisions of Westerdale.
From their point 
of junction, the river flows due east for about fifteen miles, through a 
well-wooded valley, interesting alike to the botanist and the antiquarian.
It is joined by numerous rivulets during its course, each of which takes 
its name from the dale through which it runs.
Between Castleton and 
the town of Egton are Danbydale, Fryopdale, and Glaisedale on the south, 
and Stonegate Gill on the north, each three or four miles in length.
At 
Grosmont Bridge the Esk is joined by a branched and more considerable 
31 
stream from Goathland Dale, upon which is the waterfall called Thomas- 
son’s Force.
Below Sleights the hills decrease in altitude, and the valley 
expands after its junction with Iburndale.
Near Ruswarp the river curves 
slightly towards the north, and is joined by Cockmill Beck, and soon after- 
wards falls into the sea at Whitby.
From Robin Hood’s Bay to Saltburn, 
the coast is margined by a series of elevated cliffs, which rise near Boulby 
to an elevation of 681 feet.
Near Staiths is the mouth of a small stream, 
of which the two principal branches rise on the northern slope of Danby 
Beacon.
Another rivulet rises near Freeburgh Hill, and falls into the sea 
at Skinningrove.
A more considerable beck rises below the recently dis- 
covered station for Gyperus fuscus, at the head of Sleddale, and flows past 
Guisborough and Skelton to Saltburn.
From Saltburn to Marske the 
coast is guarded by a series of bold rocky embankments, gradually des- 
cending northward into a range of loose sand-hills, firmly bound together 
by the interlacing roots of Ammophila arundinacea and Triticum junceum.
Surface.
— North of the Esk, from Roseberry Topping and Guisborough 
Moor, the hills slope gradually eastward, so that only the western ridge 
and a few detached summits attain the middle zone.
The watershed on 
the south of the river declines in the same direction, from Burton Head 
(1485 feet) along Farndale Head (1412 feet), Shunnor Hoe (1404 feet), and 
Lilia Cross (1000).
The remainder of the surface belongs to the lower 
zone.
Structure.
— The moorlands, both north and south of the Esk, consist of 
strata belonging to the Lower Oolite formation.
Beneath these extend the 
shales and ironstones of the lias period, filling up the lower levels of the 
dales, and composing the whole of the cliffs at many parts of the coast.
No. III.— DERWENT.
Drainage.
— South of Robin Hood’s Bay, the cliffs which margin the 
coast attain their highest elevation in High Peak (585 feet), and then 
descend gradually towards Scarborough and Filey.
At Scalby is the 
mouth of a small stream about five miles in length, which runs past 
Cloughton and Burniston.
The Derwent rises only three miles from the 
coast, about midway between Whitby and Scarborough.
At first, it flows 
southward, down Harewooddale, Longdale, and the valley of Hackness, 
32 
during which portion of its course it is joined by numerous inconsider- 
able feeders.
Above Ganton, it receives the Hartford river, which rises 
in the immediate vicinity of Filey.
Afterwards, it turns towards the west, 
and forms, for the greater part of the remainder of its course, the south- 
ern boundary of the riding.
At Newstead, it receives a rivulet from 
Ellerburn and Thornton.
Above Malton, it directs its course towards the 
southwest, and is joined by the Eye — a river which is formed by the 
union of numerous small streams of considerable length, which rise 
amongst the -moorlands on the North; each of which flows down a dale 
for the early part of its course, and then descends into the level country 
of the vale of Pickering.
From east to west in order of succession are, 
the Hole of Horcurn, (in which grows Gornus suecica,) Newtondale, Bose- 
dale, Farndale, Brantsdale, Bilsdale, and Snailesworth, with several others 
of lesser extent.
The vale of Pickering contains the towns of Helmsley, 
Kirby-Moorside, Malton, and Pickering, and the abbeys of Bievaulx and 
Byland.
An eastern branch from Byland and Ampleforth, aud another 
from Hovingham and Slingsbyjoin the Eye near Brawby.
Below Barton, 
the Derwent receives a further augmentation from the Howardian hills, 
which rises near Bransby, not far from the head of the Foss.
At Helms- 
ley, about five miles north-east of York, it directs it course due south, 
and entirely leaves the north riding.
Surface.
— The summit of drainage along the Hambleton Hills on the 
west, and the watershed between the Derwent and the Esk, with lateral 
ridges of surface between several of the dales, are included in the middle 
zone.
The whole of the remainder of this extensive district, sloping 
towards the east and the south-west, belongs to the lower zone.
Structure.
— The level district called the vale of Pickering, extending 
from Filey on the sea-coast to Kirby-Moorside and nearly to Helmsley on 
the west, consists of Kimmeridge clay strata.
Eound these, embracing 
the southern portion of the moorlands, and extending through the level 
country to the Derwent below Malton, occur upper oolitic deposits.
The 
next in succession, occupying the surface of the summit of drainage on 
the north and west, and a district in the level country to the south of that 
last mentioned, are oolites of an earlier era.
Below these is a narrow band 
belonging to the lias period, and south of all a small portion of the great 
central vale.
33 
No. II.— EAST SWALE.
Drainage.
— The Wiske rises near Osmotherley, and curves towards the 
west.
Near Cowton it receives the drainage of several small lakes, and 
directs its course due south; forming, till its junction with the Swale, the 
boundary between the eastern and western sub-provinces.
Below North- 
allerton it receives a small stream, which flows in a south-western direc- 
tion from Hartsey and Brompton.
The Codbeck is formed by the union 
of two principal branches.
The northern of these rises near Osmotherley, 
and flows past Sigston and Crosby ; the other on the slope of Black Ham- 
bleton, flowing past Kepwick and Borrowby.
The united streams wind 
towards the south-east, and receive at Kilvington a rivulet from the vicinity 
of F eliskirk.
Passing Thirsk, below Gristh waite they are joined by a con- 
siderable stream, which flows past Boltby and Sutton-under- Whitstonecliff, 
and fall into the Swale below Topcliffe.
At Cundall, the Swale receives a 
rivulet on the east, which rises on the southern slope of Hood Hill, and 
runs past Coxwold and Sessay.
Sureace.
— The middle zone includes the summit of drainage between 
the Swale and the Derwent, along Black Hambleton (1246 feet), Kepwick 
Bank (1148 feet), Boltby Scar (1106 feet), Whitstonecliffe (1078 feet), and 
Rolston Scar.
The surface sinks into the central vale by a single abrupt 
descent, and the bank is interspersed by several series of irregular cliffs 
and precipices.
Below two of these the lower strata have slipped away, 
and lakes have been formed at Gormire and above Kirby Knowle.
The 
first of these is about a mile in circumference ; the other is more elevated, 
but considerably smaller.
The remainder of the district is all comprised 
in the lower zone.
Structure.
— The surface of the moorlands consist of oolitic strata in 
the form of coralline limestone, calcareous gritstones, and clays.
Below 
these extend a series of liassic deposits of varied mineral character, which 
form a broad belt on the east and south of the oolite, extending from Os- 
motherley to the neighbourhood of Northallerton and Thirsk, and touch- 
ing the Swale at Topcliffe.
The remainder of the district, like the rest of 
the central vale, is filled up with new red sandstone strata, overlaid with 
boulder (post pliocene) diluvium, 
c 
34 
No. I.— OUSE AND FOSS.
Drainage.
— The Swale and Ure unite together at My ton, and wind 
towards the south-east, the united streams taking the name of Ouse.
At 
Newton the river receives a considerable stream from the north-east, the 
northern branch of which rises near Easkelf and Easingwold, and the 
southern in the forest of Galtres.
The Foss takes its rise in the un- 
dulated distript about Gilling and Coxwold, and flows towards the south- 
west past Stillington and Strensall, joining the Ouse at York.
Surface.
— Though considerably undulated at its north-eastern corner, 
none of this district rises above the lower zone.
Structure.
— The greater part of the surface of this district consists of 
the new red sandstone strata of the central vale.
On the east, these are 
margined by a broad band of lias which contains the town of Easingwold.
At present it will not be needful to describe the drainage districts which 
make up the east and west ridings, but they may be easily traced upon a 
good map of the county.
A few words in conclusion, respecting the 
position in which we stand and the path for future exertion, may be not 
unnecessary.
So far as we are enabled to judge from theoretical con- 
siderations, the species of Exogens, Endogens, and even of Acrogens, 
which the county, viewed as a whole, produces, have been ascertained and 
determined with a tolerably close approximation to completeness : although 
no doubt a few others, which have not yet been detected within our limits, 
will be discovered by future research.
But we can only form a general, 
and in consequence, necessarily a vague idea of the proportions in which 
they unite together to form the general body of the vegetation, and the 
manner in which is distributed over the surface.
Leaving the Thallogens 
out of consideration, the determination of the Flora of Yorkshire is, to all 
intents and purposes, accomplished; but the general outline only is traced 
of the Gybele of the county.
The kaleidoscope is formed and the objects 
supplied; but the mirrors require nicer adjustment before we can obtain 
symmetrically combined and accurate reflections.
The most useful 
35 
manner, therefore, in which those who wish to advance our knowledge of 
the geographical botany can employ themselves, is by tracing the range 
of the species, both commoner and rarer, which the county affords ; 
horizontally, by means of the sub-provinces, vice-counties, and subordinate 
districts : vertically, by using the climatic regions and zones, and the lines 
of mean annual temperature, as before explained.
I shall be glad at any 
time to receive lists of species observed within any of the districts of 
superior or inferior grade, especially those which make up the north 
riding, and facts respecting the zones which they inhabit, or the eleva- 
tions which they attain.
It is only by accumulating details in the first 
instance, and afterwards analysing and comparing them, that we can 
ascend to theconsideration in a satisfactory manner, and finally arrive 
at a correct appreciation of general principles and relations.
GENERA AND SPECIES, 
ARRANGED ACCORDING TO THE FOURTH EDITION OF 
® foutott Catitlogue.
ORDER I.
RANUNCULACEiE.
CLEMATIS.
1. C.
Vitalba, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Perhaps indigenous in hedges near Whitby — Rev. A.
Bloxam.
Naturalised on the green, Richmond — James Ward.
“ Really wild,” 
in a hedge at the bottom of a wood on the margin of Guisborough 
moor, below the Warren, three quarters of a mile S.S.E. of Guis- 
borough, and nearly that from any house — William Mudd, 1854.
This species might perhaps be placed in the native category without 
much risk of error, but has not yet been ascertained to occur in the 
chalk district of the south-east of Yorkshire.
THALICTKUM.
2. T.
alpinum, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
3. T.
minus, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
A glaucous and glandular variety of this species (T.
pubescens, 
Schreb.) is plentiful amongst the sand hills about Coatham, Redcar, 
and Marske (Vide Phytologist, vol.
iv.
page 933.) Probably it is the 
ordinary littoral form of the species.
3. * T.
flexuosum, Reich.
Native.
Scottish.
Malham Cove, near Settle!
— J.
Dugdale.
Bolton Woods, Wharf- 
dale !
— O.
Lord.
Mackershaw Woods, near Ripon — T.
Simpson.
Bank of the Tees, below Holwick and Wince Bridge, plentiful.
Banks of the Wharf, at Thorparch.
Probably T.
majus of the Flora 
is wholly, or in greater part, identical with this species.
4. T.
flavum, Linn.
Native.
English.
38 
ANEMONE.
5. A.
Pulsatilla, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
6. A.
nemorosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
7. A.
apennina, Linn.
Alien.
In a wood near Otley, 1843 — Miss Garnett.
(Phyt.
i. 650.) Amongst 
the pleasure grounds at Clifton Castle, near Bedale — W.
Mudd.
8. A.
ranunculoides, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised near a garden at Everingham — James BacJchouse, Jun.
ADONIS.
9. A.
autumnalis, Linn.
Alien.
A casual straggler in cornfields and cultivated land; Crathorne, 
near Yarm, 1852 — W.
Mudd.
MYOSUBUS.
10.
M. minimus, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
Fields S.E. of Welburn — Teesdale.
(Bot. Guide, 682.) Hedgebank 
behind Thirsk church, sparingly, 1848 ; not found since.
RANUNCULUS.
11.
R. aquatilis, Linn.
Native.
British.
Of the three forms defined in the third edition of Babington’s 
Manual, heterophyllus is common in pools and still waters, trichojohyl- 
lus in ditches and slowly running streams, and subjpeltatus less fre- 
quent in similar situations.
A maritime variety which closely 
resembles R.
confusus of Godron, is plentiful in the ditches in 
Coatham marshes ; and a much branched state of the same also 
occurs, with leaves, flowers, and fruit, only about one-third the usual 
size.
( Vide Phyt.
iii.
721 and 933.) 
11.* B.
confusus, Godr.
Incognit.
The series of forms which the Coatham salt marshes afford, were at 
first referred to this species (Phyt iii.
721 and 933) ; but when speci- 
mens were submitted by Mr. H.
C. Watson to Professor Grenier, 
Godron’s coadjutor in the preparation of the “Flore de France,” he 
considered them to belong to R.
aquatilis.
11.* R.
circinatus, Sibth.
Native.
English.
Ponds and ditches, apparently rare ; Applegarth, near Richmond — 
James Ward.
In the ditches of Potteric Carr, near Doncaster — 
O. A.
Moore, Rev. W.
W. Newbould.
(Cyb. Brit.
iii.
521.) 
11.* R.
fluitans, Lam. Native.
English.
Slow streams and running waters, apparently rare.
Skeeby Beck, 
near Richmond — J.
Ward.
Plentiful in the Codbeck, below Dalton, 
near Thirsk, and in the Swale, below Topcliffe and Leckby.
39 
13.
R hederaceus, Linn.
Native.
British.
13.* R.
ccenosus, Guss.
Native.
British.
R. Lenormandi, Schultz.
In similar situations to the preceding, rare.
Ecelesall, near Sheffield — Rev. W.
W. Newbould.
(Cyb. Brit.
iii.
522.) 
Damp places at Ilkley and Salterthwaite, near Settle — J.
Backhouse, 
Jun. Grewelthorpe, near Ripon — T.
Simpson.
14.
R. Ficaria, Linn.
Native.
British.
15.
R. Flammula, Linn.
Native.
British.
16.
R. Lingua, Linn.
Native.
British.
18.
R. auricomus, Linn.
Native.
British.
19.
R. acris, Linn.
Native.
British.
A dwarf, pale, single-flowered form of this species (var.
pumilus, 
Wahl.) grows with Helianthemum canum and ILippocrepis comosa, 
on the sugar limestone, on Cronkley Fell.
20.
R. repens, Linn.
Native.
British.
21.
R. bulbosus, Linn.
Native.
British.
22.
R. hirsutus, Curt.
Native.
British ?
Roadsides and cultivated fields ; probably not unfrequent.
Between 
Coatham and the Tees mouth — S.
Hailstone.
Fields behind Sower- 
by, between Sowerby and Dalton, Dober gardens, and other places 
near Thirsk.
23.
R. sceleratus, Linn.
Native.
British.
Damp places, and about the margin of ponds and ditches ; frequent.
24.
R. parviflorus, Linn.
Native.
English.
Malton fields — Teesdale.
B. G.
692.
Dry bank between Romanby 
and Northallerton!
— W.
Foggitt.
25.
R. arvensis, Linn.
Colonist.
English.
CALTHA.
26.
C. palustris, Linn.
Native.
British.
TROLLIUS.
27.
T. europjEus, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
HELLEBORUS.
29.
H. viridis, Linn.
Native.
English.
I place this as a true native, under shelter of Mr.
Vide Bot. Gaz.
ii.
93.
(Phyt.
v. 44.) 
Borrer’s authority.
30.
H. fcetidus, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Perhaps might be considered a native without much risk of error, 
but rather more open to suspicion than the other species.
40 
AQUILEGIA.
21.
A. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
English.
DELPHINIUM.
32.
D. consolida, Linn.
Alien.
Cornfield near Bipon ; rare — W.
Brunton.
B. G.
696.
Cornfields 
nearKippax; rare — J.
Atkinson.
Balby, near Doncaster !
— H.
Ec- 
royd Smith.
Crathorn and Langbargli Bigg, near Ayton, 1852 !
— 
W. Mudd.
Amongst potatoes on Carlton Moor, near Thirsk, 1851 !
(two specimens only) — Thos.
Wood.
ACONITUM.
33.
A. Napellus, Linn.
Alien.
PiEONIA.
34.
P. corallina, Betz.
Alien.
Naturalised with Lamium maculatum, in Kildale Woods, Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
Probably on the site of an old garden, 
ACTiEA.
35.
A. spicata, Linn.
Native.
Local.
ORDER II.
NYMPHyEACEiE.
NYMPHiEA.
36.
N. alba, Linn.
Native.
British.
NUPHAB.
37.
N. lutea, Sm. Native.
British.
ORDER III.
PAPAVERACE4L 
PAPAVEE.
39.
P, hybridum, Linn.
Colonist.
English.
41 
The localities enumerated for this species in the Flora, rest upon 
the authority of Teesdale and Dr. Wasse.
Modern confirmation 
of its occurence would be desirable.
40.
P. Argemone, Linn.
Colonist.
41.
P. DiJBiuM, Lind.
Colonist.
42.
P. Rhceas, Linn.
Colonist.
Var. strigosum, Bonning, occasionally occurs.
— 0.
A. Moore.
British.
British.
English.
Acomb, near York 
43.
P. somniferum, Linn.
Alien.
Ballast heaps and waste ground ; a casual straggler from cultiva- 
tion.
Near Kiddale, behind Scarborough Castle, and in a field 
between Wilsthorpe and Burlington Quay — S.
Hailstone.
Near 
Richmond — J.
Ward.
And other localities.
MECONOPSIS.
44.
M. cambric a, Vig. Native?
Atlantic.
Papaver , Flora , 8.
Probably a true native in the elevated stations, 
but introduced at Woodend and Londesborough.
CHELID ONIUM.
45.
C. majus, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
GLAUCIUM.
46.
G. luteum, Scop.
Native.
British?
Waste ground near the sea ; apparently rare.
Amongst the ballast 
hills near Middlesborough !
— G.
Dixon , M.
Umplely.
Near the 
mouth of the Esk, at Whitby!
— W.
Mudd.
G. phcenicehm, Grantz.
Alien.
An occasional straggler from cultivation.
During each of the last 
three or four years, I have usually noticed a few plants in waste 
places, in the vicinity of Thirsk, Rievaulx, &c.
ORDER III.* FUMARIACEiE.
CORYDALIS.
48.
C. claviculata, DC.
Native.
British.
Fumaria, Flora, page 9.
49.
C. lutea, DC.
Fumaria, Flora, page 9.
Alien.
42 
49.
C. solida, Sm. Alien.
Waste ground, Duckett Ings; and occasionally a troublesome weed 
in gardens about Tliirsk.
FUMARIA.
50.
F. capreolata, Linn.
Native ?
British.
51.
F. ofeicinalis, Linn.
Native?
British.
53.
F. parviflora, Lam. Incognit.
I have no information respecting the occurrence of this species in 
Yorkshire.
F. micrantha is not unlikely to be found.
ORDER IY.
CRUCIFERS.
CAKILE.
Native.
CRAMBE.
Native.
CORONOPUS.
57.
C. didyma, Sm. Alien.
“The locality of Scarborough, on the authority of Robson, ( vide 
B. G.) will need confirmation before it can be received for a native 
habitat}” — H.
(7.
Watson (Cyb. Brit.
i. 116.) Waste ground, Cargfleet, 
near Middlesborough, 1852 !
— W.
Mudd.
Probably introduced with 
ballast.
58.
C. ruellii, Gaert.
Native.
Senebiera Coronopus, Flora , 11.
THLASPI.
60.
T. arvense, Linn.
Colonist.
61.
T. perfoliatum, Linn.
Incognit.
Mentioned in the Botanist’s Guide, and other works, as a Yorkshire 
plant, in mistake for the following species : 
62.
T. alpestre, Linn.
Native.
’ Highland?
The Settle plant is T.
occitanum, Jord., placed in the London Cata- 
logue, and the third edition of Babington’s Manual, as a variety of 
this species.
English.
British.
British.
English.
55.
C. MARITIMA, Scop .
56.
C. maritima, Linn.
43 
CAPSELLA.
63.
C. Bursa-pastoris, DC.
Native.
British.
Thlaspi, Flora, 10.
HUTCHINSIA.
64.
H. petRjEA, Br. Native.
Local.
Rocks near Hawes, Wensleydale — 0.
A. Moore: and above Souther- 
scales, Ingleton fells — R.
Clapham.
TEESDALIA.
65.
T. nudicaulis, Br. Native.
British.
IBERIS.
66.
I. amara, Linn.
Alien.
An occasional straggler from gardens to railway embankments, 
ballast hills, and similar places.
LEPIDIUM.
67.
L. latifolium, Linn.
Native?
English.
Hedgebank between High Worsall and Yarm !
— T.
J. Foggitt.
Fur- 
ther evidence is required before this can be received with complete 
confidence as a genuine native.
68.
L. Draba, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised in two or three places amongst the Middlesborough 
ballast hills, 1852.
69.
L. Smithii, Hook.
Native.
British.
Dry banks and cultivated fields ; frequent.
70.
L. campestre, Br. Native.
British.
In similar situations ; not unfrequent.
L. campestre of the Flora 
also includes the preceding species.
71.
L. ruderale, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised in considerable abundance amongst the Middlesborough 
ballast hills, 1852.
Modern confirmation of the stations recorded 
in the Flora is desirable, before this can be accepted as a native.
At Coatham marshes I could find only Coronopus Ruellii.
L. sativum, Linn.
Alien.
River banks and waste places ; an occasional straggler from culti- 
vation.
COCHLEARIA.
72.
C. officinalis, Linn.
Native.
British.
44 
72b.
C. alpina, Bab. Native.
Highland.
72d.
C. anglica, Linn.
Incognit.
On the coast, near Scarborough — Dr. Wasse.
On the Castle hill, 
Scarborough — TheaJc stone’ s Guide.
Included, also, in Ibbotson’s list 
of the plants of North Yorkshire.
The Coehlearia of Scarborough 
Castle hill, and the dried specimens which I have seen thus label- 
led, have been ordinary officinalis only; but the true anglica is 
very likely to occur along the coast line.
ARMORACIA.
73.
A. rusticana, Baumg.
Alien.
River banks and waste places; not unfrequent.
On the Willow 
Island at Settle, and on the turnpike road between Settle and 
Ainley House — J.
Tatham.
Fields about York — O.
A. Moore ; and 
Leeds — J.
Backhouse, Jun. Banks of the Calder !
— H.
Bcroyd Smith.
Roadside -between Thirsk and Newsham !
— W.
Foggitt.
Thoroughly 
established on the bank of Codbeck, Dalton, near Thirsk.
77.
D. incana, Linn.
DRAB A.
Native.
Highland.
78.
D. muralis, Linn.
Native.
Local.
79.
D. verna, Linn.
Native.
British.
80.
C. sativa, Grantz.
C. DENTATA, PerS.
CAMELINA.
Alien.
Alien.
In similar situations to the preceding; very rare.
Cultivated fields 
near Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson.
ALYSSUM.
82.
A. calycinum, Linn.
Alien.
In clover fields and on cultivated land ; not unfrequent, but with- 
out permanence in its localities.
Discovered in 1842, at Nether 
Poppleton, by Mr. Wetherhill, of York, growing with Veronica tri- 
phyllos — R.
Spruce.
(Phyt.
i. 842.) On fallows with a sandy loam 
soil at Cantley, near Doncaster — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
(Phyt.
ii.
283.) 
Heslington fields — J.
Backhouse, Jun.; and Acomb, near York — 
O. A.
Moore.
Sessay moor, and fields between Sowerby and Dalton !
— W.
Foggitt.
Near Ayton, Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
Cultivated 
fields near Gristh waite, and on Carlton moor, near Thirsk.
Be- 
tween Woodend and Newsham, and other localities.
The Rev. G.
E. Smith (Phyt.
loc.
cit.) advocates the claim of this species to a place 
in our indigenous flora.
45 
CARD AMINE.
84.
C. amara, Linn.
Native.
British.
85.
C. pratensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
86.
C. hirsuta, Linn.
Native.
British.
86b.
C. sylvatica, Link.
Native.
Woods and shady thickets; frequent.
British.
87.
C. impatiens, Linn.
Native.
Local.
C. bellidifolia, Linn.
Incognit.
Arabis hirsuta, on the walls of Ripon Minster, was mistaken by 
Merrett for this species.
Vide W.
Brunton, B.
G-.
702.
ARABIS.
88.
A. thaliana, Linn.
Native.
British.
89.
A. petrjEA, Grantz.
Incognit.
The locality mentioned under A.
hispida, in the Flora, rests upon 
the authority of the Rev. W.
Hincks and H.
Baines.
In the ab- 
sence of recent confirmation or dried specimens, I hesitate to accept 
it as referring to this species ; seeing that it lies considerably beyond 
its clearly ascertained climatic range in this country.
92.
A. hirsuta, Br. Native.
British.
TURRITIS.
94.
T. glabra, Linn.
Native.
English.
BARB AREA.
95.
B. vjjlgaris, Br. Native.
British.
B. arcuata, Reich., doubtless a variety of this species, and a form 
with adpressed pods, (probably var.
intermedia of Buxton’s Man- 
chester Flora,) occur occasionally.
96.
B. stricta, Fries.
Native.
Local.
In similar situations to the preceding, with which it usually grows 
intermixed ; locally plentiful.
Clifton Ings, Tilmire, and other 
places near York; discovered by Mr. Borrer, in 1842.
Between 
Sheffield and Huddersfield, and Weedon and Blisworth ; plentifully 
— W.
Borrer.
Banks of the Foss near Yearsley bridge, Smeaton, 
Barnby Dun, banks of the Don above and below Doncaster, and 
roadside between Methley and Leeds — O.
A. Moore.
For the name, 
Fries is the original authority.
Vide Summa, i.
146.
97.
B. prjEcox, Br. Alien.
46 
NASTUETIUM.
98 N.
officinale, Br. Native.
British.
In drier situations this becomes N.
microphyllum of Reichenbach ; 
and when more luxuriant than ordinary, N.
siifolium of the same 
author.
99.
N. terrestre, Br.
Native.
British.
100.
N. sylvestre, Br.
Native.
English.
101.
N. AMPHIBIUM, Br.
Native.
English.
SISYMBRIUM.
102.
S. OFFICINALE, Scop.
Native.
British.
104.
S. Sophia, Linn.
Native.
British.
Waste ground near the village of Clapham, 6 miles north of Settle 
— J.
Tatham.
Cantley, near Doncaster — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
Near 
Great Ouseburn and Brompton-on-Swale— J.
Gramond.
By the 
roadside between Flambro’ Head and the lighthouse — O.
A. Moore.
By the side of the old street near Fencote — T.
Simpson.
Waste 
ground near Scarbro !
— W.
Bean.
Carthorpe, near Bedale !
— M.
Hebbletliwaite.
Amongst the Middlesbro’ ballast hills!
— W.
Mudd, 
M. Umplehy.
Waste ground behind Thirsk church.
ERYSIMUM.
106.
E. cheiranthoides, Linn.
Alien.
107.
E. alliaria, Linn.
Native.
British.
CHEIRANTHUS.
109.
C. Cheim, Linn.
Alien.
C. fruticulosus, Flora , 13.
HESPERIS.
112.
H. matronalis, Linn.
Alien.
Bank at Killinghall, and between Millington and Bishops Wilton — 
H. Wetherhill.
Waste ground near Headingley — A .
Shipley.
Banks 
of Rye, above Rievaulx — R.
Spruce , Jno. H.
Phillips.
Gargrave, 
near Skipton — T.
Simpson.
Field between Mickleton and Holwick, 
Teesdale, 1852 — W.
Foggitt.
Beside the stream at Lartington, near 
Barnard Castle, 1851.
BRASSIGA.
113.
B. oleracea, Linn.
Denizen.
English?
1 place this as a denizen, in consequence of information received 
from my friend William Mudd, who collected it to the north of 
47 
Staithes in 1852.
He remarks, in reply to my inquiries respecting 
its condition, that it grows in considerable abundance amongst the 
coast cliffs, principally in inacessible situations, and that it lias 
quite the appearance of being an indigenous inhabitant of the 
locality.
114.
B. campestris, Linn.
114.* B.
Rapa, Linn.
Colonist.
British.
Root slender, produced (B.
campestris) or caulescent fleshy (B.
Rapa).
Cultivated fields and river banks; in company with B.
Napus, or in similar situations.
Probably we should consider B.
Rapa as the cultivated, and B.
campestris as the colonist form of 
this species.
Vide Koch, Synops.
FI.
Germ.
p. 55, and Watson, Cyb.
Brit.
iii.
385.
115.
B. Napus, Linn.
Colonist.
British, 
SINAPIS.
116.
S. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
117.
S. alba, Linn.
Colonist.
British.
Corners of fields and manure heaps near York — J.
Backhouse.
Snape mires, Bedale ; and near Ayton, Cleveland !
— W.
Mudd.
Amongst the Middlesbro’ ballast hills, 1852.
Frequently cultivated.
118.
S. nigra, Linn.
Native.
English.
River banks, road sides, cultivated fields, and waste places ; not 
unfrequent.
120.
S. tenuieolia, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Sand hills and waste ground in the vicinity of the sea-coast ; fre- 
quent : occasionally on walls and in dry places inland.
In a field 
between Newby Wiske and Kirby Wiske — W.
Foggitt.
Near Scar- 
borough !
— W.
Bean.
Plentiful about Middlesborough, and along 
the railway embankment to Redcar.
RAPHANUS.
123.
R. Raphanistrum, Linn.
Colonist.
British.
124.
R. maritimus, Smith.
Incognit.
There can be little doubt that the plant mentioned at page 143 of 
the Flora, as “ frequent in cornfields,” is the preceding species.
'ORDER V.
RESEDACE^E.
RESEDA.
125.
R. luteola, Linn.
Native.
British.
126.
R. lutea, Linn.
127.
R. fruticulosa, Linn.
Native.
Alien 
Germanic.
ORDER YI.
CISTACE.E.
HELIANTHEMUM.
128.
H. vulgare, Ociertn.
Native.
British.
Cistus Helianthemum, Flora, 15.
130.
H. canum, Dun. Native.
Local.
Cistus marifolius, Flora, 15.
ORDER VII.
VIOLACEiE.
132.
V. palustris, Linn.
Native.
133.
V. odorata, Linn.
Denizen, 
134.
V. hirta, Linn.
Native.
British.
English.
English.
135.
Y. canina (Ger.) Sm. Native.
British.
V. sylvatica, Fries.
Woods, -thickets, and hedge hanks; common.
The dwarf form (V.
flavicornis, Forst, not 8m.) is frequent in drier 
situations.
135.* V.
flavicornis, Smith.
Native.
British.
V. canina, Linn.
Hedge banks and heathy places; probably not 
unfrequent.
135.
* V.
stagnina, Kit. Incognit.
I am informed by my friend James Backhouse, that the Thorne 
moor violet (Flora, page 15) may probably belong to this species.
It merits further investigation.
136.
V. tricolor, Linn.
Native.
British.
137.
V. lutea, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
ORDER VIII.
DROSERACEjE.
138.
D. rotundif olia, Linn.
DROSERA.
Native.
British.
49 
139.
D. intermedia, Hayne.
Native.
English.
D. longifolia, Flora, 16.
Not nearly so frequent as the preceding, 
and oniy to he found in low situations.
140.
D. anglica, Huds.
Native.
Scottish.
ORDER IX.
POLYGALACEiE.
POLYGALA.
141.
P. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
P. oxyptera, Reich., a variety of this species, grows on the hanks 
of the Swale, near Bichmond — James Ward ; and in other localities.
P. depressa, Wend., is frequent in dry heathy situations.
Probably 
the latter is identical with the Whitby P.
amara (Flora, page 143).
141.* P.
uliginosa, Reich.
Native.
Local.
Dry heathy ground on Cronkley fell, on the margin of the stream 
which forms the White Force!
Discovered in 1852, by James 
Backhouse and James Backhouse, Jun. The only known British 
locality.
ORDER XII.
CARYOPHYLLACEiE.
DIANTHUS.
146.
D. armeria, Linn.
Native.
English.
Brightside, Sheffield — Rev. W.
W. Newbould fide H.
G .
Watson in 
litt.
1854.
D. barbatus, Linn.
Alien.
On a marl bank in Studley Woods — W.
Brunton, B.
G. 690.
Planted 
with D.
Caryophyllus (plumarius) in Thorp Arch woods — 8.
Hail- 
stone.
This species possesses very little claim to be considered a 
wild Yorkshire (or British) plant.
14T.
D. plumarius, Linn.
Alien.
D. Caryophyllus of the Flora is this species.
148.
D. Caryophyllus, Linn.
Incognit.
150.
D. deltoides, Linn.
Native.
British.
“ D.
glaucus is only a pale-flowered variety of D.
deltoides.
I have 
a specimen communicated to the Bot. Soc.
London, by Mr. W.
D. 
Biden, collected by F.
E. D.
Biden, at Mamwood, near Leeds ”— H 
C. Watson, in litt.
1854.
D 
50 
SAPONAEIA.
151.
S. officinalis, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
S. vaccaria, Linn.
Alien.
A few plants were 
William Bean.
found in a cultivated field 
near Scarborough 
SILENE.
153.
S. inflata, Linn.
Native.
British.
153.* S.
MARITIMA, With.
Native.
British.
This species, in addition to its elevated localities, grows also in the 
vicinity of the sea ; but either sparingly, or else it has only been 
noticed in few places, on account of the Yorkshire coast having 
been explored botanically, as yet, in a very imperfect manner.
Coatham marshes, and rocks between Saltburn and Huntcliffe !
— 
W. Mudd.
144.
S. Otites, Smith.
Incognit.
Apparently now extinct in the only known locality.
Vide Phyt.
i. 577.
155.
S. anglica, Linn.
Colonist.
English.
Cultivated fields and waste places ; rare.
Fields near Terrington — 
R. Spruce.
Cantley, near Doncaster — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
In the 
dried up bed of a wear in Luddenden brook, Halifax, (a single plant 
only,) 1844 — S.
King.
Langwith — G.
G. Bdhington ; and Heslington 
fields, near York !
— H.
Ecroyd Smith.
Carlton moor, near Thirsk.
156.
S. nutans, Linn.
Native?
Local.
Recent confirmation of the locality for this species mentioned in the 
Flora would be desirable.
It rests upon the authority of the Rev.
Archdeacon Peirson, J.
Atkinson, and S.
Hailstone.
157.
S. noctiflora, Linn.
Colonist.
Germanic.
S. armeria, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised plentifully on the embankment of the Northern Coun- 
ties Union Railway, near Bedale — T.
Simpson.
LYCHNIS.
162.
L. Flos-cuculi, Linn.
Native.
British.
163.
L. diurna, Scoth.
Native.
British.
164.
L. vespertina, Sibth.
Native.
British.
165.
L. Githago, Lam. Colonist.
British.
Agrostemma, Flora, 16.
MOENCPIIA.
166.
M. erecta, Smith.
Native.
English.
Dry banks near Rotherham — L.
Langley 
51 
SAGINA.
167.
S. procumbens, Linn.
Native.
British 
168.
S. maritima, Don. Native British.
Dry places on the sea coast; rare?
On the railway embankment at 
Coatham, near Redcar, 1852.
Coatham marshes ; plentiful.
1854.
169.
S. apetala, Hard.
Native; English.
169.
* S.
ciliata, Fries.
Native.
English.
In similar situations to the preceding ; rare.
Selby, and Garforth, 
near Leeds — S.
Gibson, fide G.
C. Babington, Bot. Gaz.
i. 176.
170.
* S.
subulata, Wimm.
Native.
British.
Spergula, Flora , 19.
The locality reported in the Flora rests upon 
the authority of Teesdale, B.
G. 692.
It is desirable that the occur- 
rence of this species in Yorkshire should receive modern confir- 
mation.
171.
S. nodosa, Meyer.
Native.
British.
A glandulose variety (S.
glandulosa, Bess) grows amongst the coast 
sand hills, at Coatham and Redcar.
SPERGULA.
172.
S. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
HONCKENEJA.
173.
H. peploides, Ehrh.
Native.
Arenaria, Flora, 19.
SPERGULARIA 
174.
S. marina, Camb.
Native.
Arenaria , Flora, 20.
A plant intermediate in many of its characters 
between this species and the following, (var.
media of the London 
Catalogue,) occurs on the sea shore in the vicinity of Hull — G.
G. 
Babington; Scarborough!
— W.
Bean ; Middlesborough !
— M.
Um~ 
fileby ; and Coatham.
175.
S. rubra, St. HU.
Native.
British.
Arenaria, Flora, 20 
AREN APIA.
178.
A. se rp yllifoli a , Linn.
Native.
British.
179.
A. tenuifolia, Linn.
Native.
English.
In a stone quarry west of Tadcaster — H.
Wetherhitl.
“ The Rev. W.
W. Newbould suggests that Salt’s station, about Maltby, York- 
shire, is likely to be correct” — H.
G. Watson.
Gyb. Brit.
iii.
395; 
British.
British 
British.
52 
This locality is also mentioned in Mr. Moore’s list of Yorkshire 
plants; he believes on the authority of the Rev. G.
E. Smith.
The 
authorities for the stations quoted in the Flora are respectively, 
Teesdale, Brunton, and Dalton.
180.
A. verna, Linn.
Native.
Scottish, 
181.* A.
ULIGINOSA, Schl.
Incognit.
Mentioned as a Yorkshire plant, Phyt.
ii.
77, 
hut the only known 
locality is on the Durham side of the Tees.
182.
A. trinervis, Linn.
Native.
British.
STELLARIA.
184.
S. nemorum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
185.
S. media, With.
Native.
British.
186.
S. holostea, Linn.
Native.
British.
187.
S. glauca, With.
Native.
English 
188.
S. gr amine a, Linn.
Native.
British.
189.
S. uliginosa, Murr.
Native.
British.
191.
C. aquaticum, Linn.
OERASTIUM.
Native.
English.
192.
C. GLOMERATUM, Thllil.
Native.
British.
G. viscosum, Flora, 20.
193.
C. triviale , Link.
Native.
British.
G. vulgatum, Flora, 20.
194.
C. semidecandrum, Linn.
Native.
British.
194.* C.
TETRANDRUM, Curt.
Native.
British.
With reference to the remark at page 142 of the Flora, I may 
observe, that both this species and the preceding grow in the 
vicinity of Redcar.
195.
C. arvense, Linn.
Native.
Germanic ?
ORDER XIII.
LINACEiE.
LINUM.
199.
L. usitatissimum, Linn.
200.
L. perenne, Linn.
201.
L. ANGUSTIFOLIUM, Huds.
Alien.
Native.
Alien or Incognit.
Germanic.
53 
Not unlikely to grow wild in the county, as it occurs plentifully in 
the vicinity of Yarm !
— T.
J. Foggitt ; but only on the Durham side 
of the Tees.
Yet it is desirable that Mr. Brunton’s locality should 
be verified by modern confirmation.
Stragglers from cultivation 
occur occasionally.
202.
L. catharticum, Linn.
Native.
British.
RADIOLA.
203.
R. millegrana, Smith.
Native.
British.
ORDER XIV.
MALVACEAE, 
204.
M. moschata, Linn.
205.
M. sylvestris, Linn.
206.
M. rotundifolia, Linn.
MALYA.
Native.
Native.
Native.
208.
A. officinalis, Linn.
ALTH2EA.
Incognit.
English.
British.
British.
ORDER XV.
TILIACEiE.
TILIA.
211.
T. parvifolia, Ehrh.
Alien.
Hedgerows and plantations ; rare.
212.
T. intermedia, DC.
Alien.
T. Europcea, Flora , 22.
213.
T. grandifolia, Ehrh.
Alien.
Possibly a true native in some of its stations.
Woods near Ayton, 
Cleveland — W.Mudd; and at Kirkleatham, near Redcar.
ORDER XVI.
HYPERICACEiE .
HYPEBICUM.
214, H.
AndrosjEmum, Linn.
Native.
Atlantic.
54 
215.
H. perforatum, Linn.
Native.
British.
216.
H. dubium, Leers.
Native.
English.
River banks and ditches, not unfrequent.
216.
H. quadrangulum, Linn.
Native.
British.
218.
H. humifusum, Linn.
Native.
British.
220.
H. pulchrum, Linn.
Native.
British.
221.
H. hirsutum, Linn.
Native.
British.
222.
H. montanum, Linn.
Native.
English.
Lane between Tanfield and Stainley; and Mackershaw woods, near 
Ripon— T.
Simpson.
Broadsworth wood, near Doncaster ; spar- 
ingly — O.
A. Moore.
Gilla-ley’s wood, Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson 
(Phyt.
i. 577).
Beckdale, Helmsley; and at the bottom of Flazen- 
dale, near Rievaulx.
223.
H. elodes, Linn.
Native Atlantic.
224 H.
calycinum, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized in Mulgrave woods, near Whitby!
— W.
Mudd.
ORDER XVII.
ACERACEiE.
ACER.
225.
A. campestre, Linn.
Native.
English.
226.
A. Pseudoplatanus, Linn.
Alien.
ORDER XVII.
GERANIACEiE.
ERODIUM.
228.
E. cicutaritjm, Sm. Native.
British.
228.
* E.
moschatum, Sm. Denizen.
English.
I am afraid that some of the localities mentioned in the Flora 
under this species in reality refer to the preceding.
GERANIUM.
G. striatum, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized in Aske woods, near Richmond — James Ward.
O. Maw.
229.
G. PH.EUM, Linn.
Alien.
Water Fulford, near York — J.
BacTthouse , Jun. In a meadow at 
Feizor, near Settle— R.
Clapham.
Aske woods, near Richmond — 
55 
James Ward.
Newton, between Guisbro’ and Ajton — W.
Mudd.
Swinton, near Masham — T.
Simpson.
About the ruin^ of Upsal 
Castle.
Hedgebank, at Feliskirk ; and in a lane leading from Kil- 
vington to the Thirsk and Northallerton road.
G. nodosum, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized in a wood at Londesborough.
— H.
Ibbotson ; and in a 
wood at Kirklington, between Bedale and Ripon !
— M.
Hebblethivaite.
An imperfect specimen of this species, or G.
macrorhizum, labelled 
by the late S.
Gibson 4 ‘ Washerlane, near Halifax,” was communi- 
cated by the late J.
E. Bowman to the author of the Cybele Brit- 
annica.
Vide Phyt.
i. 556, 558.
Cyb. Brit.
iii.
401.
230.
G. sylyaticum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
231.
G. pratense, Linn.
Native.
British.
232.
G. pyrenaicum, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
233.
G. rotundifolium, Linn.
Incognit.
It is desirable that the station mentioned in the Flora, though 
resting upon the authority of Dalton, should be clearly ascertained 
to belong to this species before it can be admitted with confidence 
as a plant of the county, as Yorkshire is considerably northward of 
its supposed boreal limit in Britain.
234.
G. pusillum, Linn.
Hedgebanks and cultivated 
species.
235.
G. molle, Linn.
236.
G. dissectum, Linn.
237.
G. columbinum, Linn.
238.
G. lucidum, Linn.
239.
G. robertianum, Linn.
240.
G. sanguineum, Linn.
Native.
British, 
fields ; nearly as frequent as the next 
Native.
British.
Native.
British.
Native.
English.
Native.
British.
Native.
. 
British.
Native.
British.
ORDER XIX.
BALSAMINACE4C.
IMPATIENS.
242.
I. Noli-me-tangere, Linn.
Alien.
ORDER XX.
OXALIDACEjE.
OXALIS.
243.
0. Acetosella, Linn.
Native.
British.
56 
ORDER XXL CELASTRACEiE.
EUONYMUS.
245.
E. europjeus, Linn.
Native.
English.
Feizor, near Settle — R.
Clapham.
Kitscrew wood, Castle Howard — 
H. Ibbotson.
Newton wood, near Ayton; and hedges between Cra- 
thorn and Hutton Rudby !
— W.
Mudd ; and other localities.
STAPHYLEA.
S. pinnata, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized in hedges, at Newton, between Ayton and Guisboro’ !— 
W. Mudd.
ORDER XXII.
RHAMNACE^.
EHAMNUS.
246.
R. catharticus, Linn.
Native 
247.
R. Frangula, Linn.
Native 
ORDER XXIII.
LEGUMINIFERiE.
SPAETIUM.
248.
S. scoparium, Linn.
Native.
British.
ULEX.
249.
U. EUROP2EUS.
Linn.
Native.
British.
250.
U. NANUS, Forst.
Native.
English.
The plant which grows at Gatherley moor, near Richmond, is the 
true nanus.
— T.
Simpson, J.
Ward.
I have no means of ascertaining 
which of the two supposed species the Doncaster station produces.
One of them grows also on Normond’s Moor, near Newton-le- 
Willows.
— W.
Mudd.
250b.
U. Gaxlii, Planch.
Native.
English.
Moors near Barningham !
— T.
Simpson.
English.
English.
57 
GENISTA.
251.
G. tinctoria, Linn.
Native.
253.
G. anglica, Linn.
Native.
ONONIS.
254.
0. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
255.
0. antiquorum, Linn.
Native.
In similar situations to the preceding, frequent.
ANTHYLLIS.
257.
A. vulneraria, Linn.
Native.
English.
British.
British.
English.
British.
MEDICAGO.
258.
M. sativa, Linn.
Alien.
259.
M. falcata, Linn.
Incognit.
Does the locality reported in the Flora really refer to this species ?
It is needful that it should receive confirmation before it can be 
accepted with confidence.
260.
M. lupulina, Linn.
Native.
British.
261 M.
maculata, Sibtli.
Native.
English.
Dry ground, Langbargh Bigg, near Ayton !
— W.
Mudd.
Amongst 
the Middlesborough ballast hills !
— M.
Umplely.
262.
M. denticulata, Willd.
Native.
Germanic.
Dry, sandy ground, on the castle hill, at Scarborough ; growing in 
considerable abundance in company with the preceding species.
MELILOTUS.
264.
M. officinalis, Willd.
Denizen.
English.
265.
M. vulgaris, Willd.
Alien.
M. leucaniha, Flora, 30.
Cultivated fields and waste places ; an 
occasional visitant.
In a clover field, at Kilvington, near Thirsk, 
1852.
— W.
Foggitt.
About the railway station, at Thirsk, 1849.
Amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 1852.
TBIGONELLA.
266.
T. ornithopodioides, DC.
Alien.
Trifolium, Flora, 31.
Amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 
1852 !
— W.
Mudd.
It is needful that Willisel’s Tadcaster station 
(B.
G. 706, Flora, 31) should receive further confirmation, before 
this species can claim a higher grade of citizenship.
58 
TRIFOLIUM.
266.
T. repens, Linn.
Native.
British.
268.
T. subterraneum, Linn.
Native.
English.
In a dry, sandy field, near Ayton, Cleveland !
— John Ward.
269.
T. ochroleucum, Linn.
Incognit.
A single specimen, in 
G. 706.
a clover field near 
Ripon.
— W.
Brunton, ' 
T. incarnatum, Linn.
Alien.
Amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 
1852 !
— W.
Mudd.
271.
T. PRATEisfsE, Linn.
Native.
British.
272.
T. medium, Linn.
Native.
British.
Woods, hedgebanks, and borders of fields; 
frequent.
275.
T. arvense, Linn.
Native.
British.
276.
T. scabrum, Linn.
Native.
English?
277.
T. striatum, Linn.
Native.
English.
280.
T. eragiferum, Linn.
Native.
English.
This species also grows in sandy ground, in the vicinity of the sea- 
coast.
Near Hull.
— G.
C. Babington.
Plentiful amongst the Coatham 
marshes.
281.
T. procumbens, Linn.
282.
T. minus, Relh.
282.* T.
EiLiEORME, Linn.
Native.
Native.
Native.
British.
British.
British.
Not nearly so frequent as the preceding species.
LOTUS.
283.
L. corniculatus, Linn.
Native.
British.
L. tenuis , WK., a slender much branched variety of this species, 
is frequent in dry places.
284.
L. major, Scop.
Native.
British.
ASTRAGALUS.
286.
A. glycyphyllos, Linn.
Native.
287.
A. hypoglottis, Linn.
Native.
British ?
Germanic.
ORNITHOPUS.
29 L 0.
perpusillus, Linn.
Native.
British.
ARTHROLOBIUM.
292.
A. ebracteatum, DC.
Incognit.
or Alien.
“According to Mr. Elihu Berry, in Phytologist iii.
p. 866, this south- 
ern plant has been found in Yorkshire, on the canal bank by the 
Oakes farm (near Barnsley).
Unless there has been some error as 
to the species, we may presume it an introduced plant there.” — H .
C. Watson.
(Cyb. Brit.
iii.
41 L.) 
HIPPOCREPIS.
293.
H. comosa, Linn.
Native.
ONOBRYCHIS.
294.
0. sativa, Lam. Native.
Hedysarum Onobrychis, Flora, 34.
VI CIA.
295.
V. Orobus, DG.
Incognit.
“ The county of York was published for it in the New Guide, through 
an inadvertence ; Orobus sylvaticus having been marked in a printed 
list, accidentally, instead of O.
tuberosus.
The same locality in 
that county has, however, been since re-stated on a second au- 
thority ; but I do not include the locality of Richmond within the 
area of the species, until it appears that the second announcement 
is something better than a plagiarism of the former error” — H.
G. 
Watson (Cyb. Brit.
i. 315.) 
296.
V. sylvatica, Linn.
Native.
British.
297.
V. Cracca, Linn.
Native.
British.
V..
Pseudo-cracca, Bert.
Alien.
Naturalised amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 1854!
— M.
Umpleby.
It may be distinguished from the preceding species by 
its larger size, spreading hairs, and unequal calyx-teeth.
A native 
of Italy.
298.
V. sativa, Linn.
Native.
British.
Of this species, V.
sativa (Flora, 33,) is the cultivated, and V.
angus- 
tifolia (Flora, 1.
c.) the native state.
299.
V. lathyroides, Linn.
Native.
British.
Mickley Barrows, near Ripon — T.
Simpson.
It is intimated in the 
Cybele Britannica, that the localities mentioned in the Flora under 
this species require modern confirmation.
The true plant still 
grows at the Acomb stations.
300.
V. ltjtea, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 1852!
— W.
Mudd.
English.
Germanic ?
60 
301.
V. SEPiuM, Linn.
Native.
British.
302.
V. bithynica, Linn.
Native.
English.
Modern confirmation of the localities quoted in the Flora under 
this species would be desirable.
Upgang beck, near Whitby, 1852 !
— William Mudd.
303.
Y. HiRSUTA, Koch.
Native.
British.
Ervum, Flora, 32.
Hedgebanks and cultivated fields ; frequent.
304.
V. tetbasperma, Koch.
Native.
English.
Ervum, Flora, 33.
LATHYRUS.
305.
L. Aphaca, Linn.
Alien or Incognit.
Malton fields — Teesdale.
Cornfields at Monckton, near Ripon — W.
Brunton, B.
G. 705.
I am not aware that this species has been in 
Yorkshire more recently.
306.
L. Nissolia, Linn.
Incognit.
Near Sigglesthorne, in Holderness — Mrs. Wharton, B.
G. 705.
307.
L. hirsutus, Linn.
Incognit.
The locality mentioned in the Flora under this species is probably 
erroneous.
308.
L. pratensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
309.
L. palustris, Linn.
Native.
Local.
Near Leeds — Rev. W.
Wood.
Near Hull — P.
W. Watson, B.
G. 705.
Still found in Heslington fields.
310.
L. sylvestris, Linn.
Native.
English.
Banks of the Esk, Ruswarp, near Whitby!
— W.
Mudd.
L. latieolius, Linn.
Alien.
OROBUS.
312.
O. tuberosus, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER XXIY.
ROSACEiE.
PEUNUS.
314.
P. spinosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
P. domestica, Flora, 34.
P. spinosa and institia, Flora, 35.
The three 
Linnean supposed species appear to be connected by gradual inter- 
mediate stages of transition.
61 
315.
P. Padus, Linn.
Native.
British ?
316.
P. avium, Linn.
Denizen.
British ?
P. Cerasus, Flora , 33.
SPIRAEA.
317.
S. Ulmaeia, Linn .
Native.
British.
318.
S. Filipendula, Linn.
Native.
m 
English ?
319.
S. salicifolia, Linn.
Alien.
DRYAS.
320.
D. octopetala, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
GEUM.
321.
G. uebanum, Linn.
Native.
British.
G. intermedium , Fhrh.
appears to be a fertile hybrid between urba- 
num and rivale, analagous to Primula elatior of English authors, 
rather than a distinct species.
( Vide Phyt.
iii.
737.) 
223.
G. eivale, Linn.
Native.
British.
AGRIMONIA.
323.
A. Eupatoeia, Linn.
Native.
British.
POTENTILLA.
325.
P. feuticosa, Linn.
Native.
Local.
It is desirable that 
modern verification.
the locality near Doncaster 
should receive 
327.
P. ANSEEINA, Linn.
Native.
British.
328.
P. aegentea, Linn.
Native.
English.
About a mile from Spofforth, upon a low rock in a 
of the road leading to Harrogate — H.
Wetherhill.
Cantley, near Doncaster — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
field by the side 
Frequent about 
329.
P. veena, Linn 
Native.
British.
About Kipp ax and Ledstone Park, abundantly- 
Rocky woods at Castle Howard and Hovingham- 
Carr End, Wensleydale — Curtis, B.
G., 695.
-Rev. W.
Wood.
-Teesdale.
Near 
330.
P. alpesteis, Hall.
Native.
Highland.
331.
P. eeptans, Linn.
Native.
British.
332.
P. Toementilla, Schk.
Native.
British.
Tormentilla officinalis, Flora, 37.
62 
b. nemoralis, Nestl.
T. rep tans, Flora, 27.
333.
P. Fragariastrum, Ehrb.
Native.
British.
COMARUM.
334.
C. palustre, Linn.
Native.
British.
FEAGABIA.
335.
F. vesca, Linn.
Native.
British.
336.
F. elatior, ETirli.
Alien or Incognit.
I am afraid that the localities mentioned under this species in the 
Flora ( vide Cyb. Brit.
iii.
419) refer in part to casual naturalisations 
of the cultivated strawberry, and in part to the tall sylvestral form 
of the preceding species.
It is the latter that is “ frequent in Tees- 
dale.” 
BUBUS.
337.
R. Chaivuemorus, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
338.
R. saxatilis, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
339.
R, ImEus, Linn.
Native.
British.
340.
R. fruticose s, Linn.* 
Native.
British.
3. R.
suberectus, And.
Boggy wood and heathy situations ; rare.
Potichar bank wood, 
Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson.
Near the high fish-pond, Kildale, 
Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
5. R.
plicatus, W.
and N.
Langwith lane, Askham bogs, and other places near York.
Locker, 
Snailes worth.
7. R.
nitidus, Bell Salt, Bab !
not W.
and N.
R. Lindleianus, Lees !
Hedges, thickets, and -woods ; frequent.
* The peculiar difficulties which attend the study of the fruticose brambles have deterred nearly all 
resident botanists from attempting to determine the forms which have fallen under their notice ; and so 
many alterations in nomenclature have been rendered needful by advancing knowledge within the last 
few years, that it would he unsafe to rely with confidence upon most of the few localities which have 
been reported.
The accompanying list, therefore, is scarcely more than a resume of the specimens pre- 
served in my own herbarium.
The idea of comparitive rarity and frequency is necessarily formed alone 
from the district which has been examined, the limits and extent of which may be gathered with tolera- 
ble accuracy from a consideration of the stations quoted.
In fixing the names, I have been guided less 
by the verbal descriptions of authors than by an extensive collection of dried specimens, mostly authen- 
ticated or furnished by those botanists who have studied the genus most successfully in this country.
63 
8. R.
affinis, W.
and N., Leight.
(Phyt.
iii.
75), Bab. Man.
3 !
Lees , 
(Phyt.
iv.
824) !
In similar situations ; less frequent.
Abundant in hedges about 
Horton and Ravenfield — Rev. A.
Bloxam (Phyt.
iii.
325).
Hedges 
between Thirsk and the railway station.
Leckby, near Topcliffe.
Thickets at Thorpfield, near Thirsk; plentiful.
Banks of Gor- 
mire, and other places on the edge of the moorlands.
"Woods 
about Guisborough Spa. Langwith lane, near York.
9. R.
latifolius, Bab. Man.
3 !
Hedges between Thirsk and Thorpfield, and other localities.
I 
believe this to be a dilated form of R.
corylifolius, (vide Phyt.
iv.
968,) but possibly the Scotch plants may be different.
12.
R. rhamnifolius, W.
and N., Bab !
Hedges and thickets, especially in moory situations ; common.
This includes R.
cordifolius and R.
rhamnifolius of the “ Rubi 
Germanici.” The former is most frequent in Yorkshire.
14.
R. thyrsoideus, Wimm., Bab. Man.
3! R.
macroacanthus, W.
and 
N., Blox!
In the lane behind Sowerby, near Thirsk, and between Thorpfield 
and Topcliffe ; sparingly.
15.
R. discolor, W.
and N.
Hedges and thickets everywhere ; plentiful.
16.
R. leucostachys, 8m., Bab. Man.
3 !
R. leightonianus, Bab. Man 2 !
Woods and hedges; frequent.
17.
R. carpinifolius, W.
and N., Bab!
Lees!
Blox!
In similar situations ; rare ?
Horton cliff, between Rotherham and 
and Doncaster — Rev. A.
Bloxam (Phyt.
iii.
325).
Woods on the 
edge of the Cleveland moorlands, Guisborough !
Airyholme !
and 
Battersby !
— W.
Mudd.
18.
R. villicaulis, W.
and N.
Bab. Man.
3 !
In similar situations ; rare ?
Hedges near the Westhouse, Kildale !
Langbargh Rigg!
and Newton Wood, near Ayton!
— W.
Mudd.
Woods about Guisborough Spa. Thickets on the sea-shore, be- 
tween Redcar and Marske.
Dr. Bell Salter (Bot. Gaz.
ii.
18) unites 
together, under the name of R.
rhamnifolius, species 7, 8, 12, 18, 
of Babington.
19.
R. mucronatus, Blox !
Bab. Man.
3 !
In similar situations ; perhaps not unfrequent.
Horton Cliff, 
near Doncaster (sub nom.
R. sylvaticus) — Rev. A.
Bloxam (Phyt.
iii.
326).
Newton Wood, and Langbargh Rigg, near Ayton!
— W.
Mudd.
Hedges behind Sowerby, near Thirsk.
Woods between 
Sowerby and Dalton.
Hedges at Thorpfield, near Thirsk.
Thickets 
between Laskill and Hawnby, Bilsdale.
21.
R. macrophyllus, W.
and N ?
Bab. R.
amplificatus, Lees !
In similar situations ; rare ?
Horton Cliff, near Doncaster.
— Rev.
A. Bloxam (Phyt.
iii.
326).
Langbargh Rigg; Airyholme Wood, 
64 
near Ayton !
and hedges at Kirkleatham, near Redcar!
— W.
Mudd.
If R.
macrophyllus and amplificatus are different (vide Phyt iv.
823) our plant is the latter.
23.
R. Sprengelii, Weihe.
R. Borreri, Bell Salt.
In similar situations; not unfrequent?
Denaby Wood, near Mex- 
borough — Rev. A.
Bloxam (Phyt.
iii.
25).
Near Hebden Bridge — 
S. Gibson fide E.
Lees (Phyt.
iv.
925).
Airyholme Wood, near 
Ayton !
— W.
Mudd.
Thickets near the Woodend railway bridge, 
and woods between Dalton and Sowerby, near Thirsk.
24.
R. fuscus, Weihe.
Lees !
Bab. Man.
3 !
Hedges and thickets near Laskill bridge, and elsewhere in Bils- 
dale: 
25.
R. Babingtonii, Bell Salt.
- R.
Bloxamh, Lees !
With the preceding, near Laskill bridge, Bilsdale.
Hedges be- 
tween Westow and Mount St. John, near Thirsk.
26.
R. Hystrix, Weihe.
Roche Abbey Wood, nearDoncaster — Rev. A.
Bloxam (Phyt.
iii.
326.) 
27.
R. Radula, Weihe.
Hedges and thickets ; rare.
Horton rectory between Rotherham 
Rev. A.
Bloxam (Phyt.
iii.
326.) In a lane behind Sowerby, near 
Thirsk.
28.
R. rudis, Weihe.
In similar situations ; frequent.
R. Leightonii, Lees !
occurs in 
hedges between Thorpfield and Thirsk ; and var.
denticulatus.
Bab. near Sheffield — Rev. W.
W. Newbould fide Bab. Man.
29.
R. pallldus, Weihe.
Woods and hedges; frequent: var.
infestus, Bab. Man.
3, in 
thickets by the roadside above Boltby, near Thirsk.
30.
R. Kochleri, Weihe.
In similar situations ; common.
R. fuscoater, W.
and N ?
Bab.
Hedges and thickets ; frequent.
R. tenuiarmatus, Lees !
which 
resembles the weak forms of this species and R.
nemorosus, 
grows in hedges near Thirsk.
33.
R. Guntheri, Weihe.
Bab !
Lees !
Woods and thickets; perhaps not unfrequent.
Near Hebden 
bridge — E.
Lees , Phyt.
iv.
930, (fide S.
Gibson?) Amongst rocks 
at the head of Flazendale.
Woods on the edge of the moorlands 
above Gormire, and Hood Hill, near Thirsk.
Woods about 
Guisborough Spa. Hedges between Nunthorpe and Marton, 
Cleveland.
34.
R. humifusus, Weihe.
Bell Salt !
Lees !
R. hirtus var.
foliosus, Bab.
Man. 3 !
With the preceding species, amongst the rocks above Gormire, 
near Thirsk.
65 
25.
R. glandulosus, Bell, Borrer !
Bab !
R. Bellardi, Lejeunii, and 
rosaceus, W.
and N.
Amongst the rushes, on a light, peaty soil, in a plantation on 
Terrington Carr, near Castle Howard !
— R.
Spruce !
H Ibbotson.
Woods in Kildale, Cleveland!
— William Mudd.
Woods between 
Sowerby and Dalton, near Thirsk.
37.
R. corylifolius, Sm. Bab !
R. sublustris, Lees !
Hedges and thickets ; a common and very variable species.
The 
three forms defined in Babington’s Manual all occur.
39.
R. nemorosus, Hayne ., Bab. R.
dumetorum, W.
and N.
Lees !
In similar situations ; frequent.
40.
R. ccesius, Linn.
Woods, hedges, and thickets; frequent.
Var. rugosus, Lees l var.
agrestis, Leiglit!
not unfrequent.
R. arcticus, Linn.
Incognit.
“ Several years ago a specimen of the very plant, beyond all doubt, 
was sent to me as having been gathered on a moor in Yorkshire ; 
but I could neither obtain nor hear of any second specimen, and 
felt no doubt respecting the origin of that one specimen from a 
botanic garden in another county.” — H.
C. Watson (Cyb. Brit.
i. 
350.) 
ROSA.
R. cinnamonea, Linn.
Incognit.
A specimen of this species supposed to have been collected by 
Salisbury, at “ Aketon pasture, near Pontefract,” is preserved in the 
Smithian herbarium.
341.
R. spinosissima, Linn.
Native.
British.
R. spinosissima and rubella, Flora, 38.
R. rubella, Smith.
Incognit.
344.
R. involuta, Smith.
Incognit.
On the Yorkshire side of the Tees, at Wince bridge — S.
King , 
(Phyt.
i. 113.) A dwarf glandular Rose, resembling this species, 
grows upon basaltic rocks at the station specified !
— T.
J. Foggitt ; 
but it seems to be rather a form of R.
Sabini.
345.
R. Sabini, Woods.
Native.
English.
R. Sabini and Doniana, Flora , 38, 39.
On the Yorkshire side of the 
Tees, at Wince bridge — S.
King, (Phyt.
i. 113) !
T. J.
Foggitt.
Oglethorpe ings, Thorp Arch — S.
Hailstone.
Coalsgarth, near 
Richmond — James Ward.
Cliffrig, Ayton, Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
Thickets at Saltburn, about the mouth of Guisborough beck.
346.
R. villosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
347.
R. tomenxosa, Woods.
Native.
British.
66 
348.
R. inodora, Fries.
Native.
English.
Boadside, near Sedbergh — J.
Backhouse, Jun. Sandbeck, near 
Richmond — J.
Ward.
349.
R. micrantha, Smith.
Native.
English.
Newton wood, near Ayton!
— W.
Mudd.
Thickets about Cleves, 
near Thirsk, and in Beckdale, near Helmsley.
350.
R. rubiginosa, Linn.
Native.
British?
Bushy places, near Kirby moorside — W.
Mudd Hedges, between 
Yarm and Worsall!
— W.
Foggitt.
On the Yorkshire side of the 
Tees, above Gainford — T.
Simpson.
Banks of Codbeck, near the 
Dalton railway bridge.
351.
R. canina, Linn.
Native.
British.
JR,, canina, sarmentacea, Forsteri, and dumetorum, Flora , 39, 40.
The 
three first of these are of frequent occurrence.
Does this in- 
clude a single species only, or more than one ?
Of the other Roses 
ranged here in the London Catalogue, R.
surculosa, Woods, occurs 
at Sandbeck, near Richmond, J.
Ward; and R.
bractescens, Woods, 
near Croft — J.
Ward.
352.
R. systyla, Aut. Incognit.
In hedges, near Kirby Misperton — JR.
Spruce.
As this supposed 
species has not been clearly ascertained to grow in Britain, except 
considerably southward of Yorkshire, it will be safest to reject it, 
until confirmed, as an inhabitant of the county.
{Vide Cyb. Brit, 
iii.
422.) 
353.
R. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
English.
SANGUISORBA.
354.
S. officinalis, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
POTERIUM.
355.
P. sanguisorba, Linn.
Native.
English.
ALCHEMILLA.
256.
A. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
357.
A. alpina, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
Reported by Ray as growing on “ mountains in this county ; ” but 
the only special locality which seems to have been ascertained is 
Cautley crags, near Sedberg — Rev. G.
Pinder , (Cyb. Brit.
iii.
423,) 
J. Backhouse, Jun.
358.
A. arvensis, Linn 
Native.
British.
67 
MESPILUS.
359.
M. germanica, Linn.
Alien.
In a wood, near Busby Hall, Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
Doubtless 
planted.
CRATAEGUS.
360.
C. oxyacantha, Linn.
Native British.
C. monogyna, Jacq., is much more frequent in the county than the 
form with glabrous peduncles and calyces.
PYRUS.
362.
P. communis, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
363.
P. Malus, Linn.
Native.
English.
365.
P. Aria, Smith.
Native.
British.
365c.
P. scandica, Fries.
Native.
British.
Cliffs above Holwick, Teesdale — J.
Backhouse , Jun. The Wince 
bridge locality refers also to this supposed species, but is on the 
Durham side of the Tees ; and perhaps some of the other stations 
mentioned under P.
Aria in the Flora.
366.
P. aucuparia, Gcertn.
Native.
British.
ORDER XXV.
ONAGRACEiE.
EPILOBIUM.
367.
E. angustifolium, Linn.
Native.
British.
368.
E. hirsutum, Linn.
Native.
British.
369.
E. parviflorum, Schreb.
Native.
British.
A glabrous form of this species, E.
rivulare, Wald , occurs occasion- 
ally.
370.
E. montanum, Linn.
Native.
British.
371.
E. roseum, Sclireb.
Native.
British ?
Ditches near Bichmond, at Clifton, and beside the Foss at York — 
0. A.
Moore.
Damp ground near Ilkley !
— G.
S. Gibson.
Banks of 
Codbeck, between Dalton and Sowerby.
A plant which I collected 
in 1852, on the south bank of the Swale, near Topcliffe, is probably 
E. purpureum — Fries , FI.
Hall, p.
65; Nov. Mant.
iii.
185; Summa.
1. pp.
41 and 178.
From E.
roseum it differs by its subsessile leaves 
narrowed gradually below, by its bisulcate stem, and by its erect 
buds and dark purple flowers.
It merits further examination in a 
growing state.
68 
272, E.
palustre, Linn.
Native.
British.
A plant which grows in company with this species at Gormire, near 
Thirsk, where it was discovered in 1844, by Mr. Borrer, (vide Phyt.
ii.
425,) is probably E.
virgatum of Frieg.
The same or something 
similar occurs near Barnard Castle, by the side of the road to Greta 
bridge — W.
Borrer ; by the roadside near Sedbergh — J.
Backhouse, 
Jim.
; and on the banks of the Black beck, Baysdale !
— W.
Mudd.
373.
E. tetragonum, Linn.
Native.
British.
374.
E. alpinum, Linn.
Incognit.
375.
E. ALSINIFOLIUM, Fill.
Native.
Highland.
OENOTHERA.
375.
CE.
biennis, Linn.
Alien.
An occasional straggler from garden cultivation.
Waste ground 
near Ayton, 1852 !
— W.
Mudd.
CIRCLEA.
377.
C. lutetiana, Linn.
Native.
British.
Yar. intermedia of English authors occurs on the banks of the 
Bother, near Sedbergh — J.
Backhouse , Jun.
378.
C. alpina, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
ORDER XXVI.
HALORAGACEiE.
HIPPURIS.
379.
H. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
MYRIOPHYLLUM.
380.
M. verticillatum, Linn.
Native.
English.
M. pectinatum, DC., along with the gradations which connect it 
with the ordinary form of the species, grows plentifully in the 
ditches at Newsham Carr and elsewhere.
381.
M. spicatum, Linn.
Native.
British.
382.
M. alterniflorum, DC.
Native.
British.
Lakes, slow streams, and ditches ; frequent.
Probably some of the 
localities mentioned in the Flora, under M.
spicatum, belong to 
this species.
69 
CALLITRICHE.
383.
C. verna, Linn.
Native.
British.
384.
C. platycarpa, Kutz.
Native.
British.
Pools and ditches; frequent.
Plentiful in the ditches at Askham 
bogs, near York, and at other localities.
385.
C. pedunculata, LG.
Native.
British.
Lakes and ponds ; not unfrequent.
Probably the stations mentioned 
in the Flora under C.
autumnalis refer to this species.
386.
C. autumnalis, Linn.
Incognit.
CERATOPHYLLUM.
387.
C. demersum, Linn.
Native.
English?
The localities in the vicinity of the Foss, at York, mentioned under 
C. submersum in the Flora refer to this species.
388.
C. submersum, Linn.
Incognit.
The locality of “ponds at Newburgh” rests upon the authority of 
the Rev. Archdeacon Peirson.
This species so much resembles the 
preceding, that it will be safest to wait till it is confirmed before 
receiving it with confidence.
OEDEE XXVII.
LYTHEACEiE.
LYTI1RUM.
389.
L. hyssopieolium, Linn.
Incognit.
This species was collected long ago in the vicinity of Harrogate, by 
the Rev. Archdeacon Peirson (B.
G. 692), but I am not aware that 
it has since been found within the limits of the county.
390.
L. Salicaria, Linn.
Native.
English.
PEPLIS.
391.
P. Portula, Linn.
Native.
British.
OEDEE XXIX.
CUCUEBITACEiE.
BRYONIA.
393.
B. djoica, Linn.
Native.
English, 
70 
ORDER XXX.
PORTULACE^E.
MONTIA.
394.
M. FONTANA., Linn .
Native.
British.
M. rivularis, Gmelin ., a flaccid elongated form, occurs occasionally 
about springs and rivulets, 
POLYCARPON.
398.
P. tetbaphyllum, Linn.
Incognit.
Near Hull — P.
W. Watson, fide W.
Brunton, B.
G. 673.
A list of the 
species in the Hailstone herbarium makes mention of a specimen 
received from this locality from Mr. Brunton.
SCLERANTHUS.
399.
S. annuus, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER XXXI.
ILLECEBRACEiE.
BERBEKIS.
401.
B. vulgaris, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
EPIMEDIUM.
402.
E. alpinum, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised in Kildale woods, Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
ORDER XXXIII.
GROSSULARIACEiE.
KIBES.
403.
R. nigrum, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
404.
R. rubrum, Linn.
Native.
British.
R. petrseum, Smith , Flora, 41, is now usually considered a variety 
of this species, and also R.
spicatum, Hobson!
which formerly 
occurred in the vicinity of Richmond, but which is now stated to 
have become extinct.
71 
405.
R. alpinum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
406.
R. grossularia, Linn.
Denizen.
British.
Perhaps might be placed in the alien category without much risk 
of error; but bushes may occasionally be seen in wild looking situ- 
ations in woods, and on the edge of the moorlands.
ORDER XXXIV.
CRASSULACE^E.
SEDUM.
408.
S. Rhodiola, DC.
Native.
Highland.
Bhodiola rosea, Flora, 25.
409.
S. Telephium, Linn.
Native.
British.
410.
S. villosum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
411.
S. dasyphyllum, Linn.
Alien.
On a wall near Bedale !
— 
T. Simpson, W.
Boston.
412.
S. anglicum, Linn.
Native.
Atlantic.
On the round hill, Langbarghh rigg, near Ayton !- 
-W.
Mudd.
Near 
the outer gate of Scarborough castle — Theah stone' s Guide.
413.
S. album, Linn .
Alien.
Cottage roofs at Askew, near Bedale !
— M.
Helblethivaite, T.
Simpson.
On walls and roofs at Lofthouse, Easington, and Lythe, Cleveland 
— W.
Mudd.
414.
S. acre, Linn.
Native.
British.
415.
S. sexangulare, Linn.
Alien ?
Ayton, Stokesley, Danby, and Castleton, Cleveland !
— W.
Mndd.
Doubtless naturalised only at these localities, and at Scarborough.
Is it an introduced plant also at the Malham station?
416.
S. reflexum, Linn.
Alien.
417.
* S.
rupestre, Linn.
Incognit.
Supposed (probably in error) to have been found at Guisborough 
(vide Mr. Flintoff, B.
G. 692).
SEMPERYIYUM.
417.
S. tectorum, Linn.
Alien.
418.
C. Umbilicus, Linn.
COTYLEDON.
Native.
Atlantic.
72 
C. lutea, Huds.
Incognit.
Walls and rocks in the west riding — Mr. Tofield.
“ Mr. Fairbairn 
informed me that the stock of the plant now in Chelsea garden 
originated from a Yorkshire root introduced by Mr. Hudson ” — D.
Turner (B.
G. 692).
Not heard of as a plant of the county since 
the days of Tofield and Hudson.
ORDER XXXV.
S AXIFRAGACEiE .
SAXIFRAGA.
419.
S. Geum, Linn.
Alien.
Planted in a rock in Thorp Arch woods — 8 .
Hailstone.
Naturalised 
near Weathercote cave, four or five miles from Ingleton — J.
Back- 
house, Jun.
421.
S. umbrosa, Linn.
Native.
Local.
Truly native at the Heseltine locality, a deep ravine at the foot of 
Pennygent and Fountain’s fell— -fide John Tatham (Phyt.
i. 267, Cyb.
Brit.
i. 467) ; G.
G. Babington (Phyt.
i. 845) ; W.
Borrer (Phyt.
ii.
430) ; 
and J.
Backhouse in litt., 1854: and in Lynn gill, near Horton, in 
Ribblesdale, where it was discovered by the Rev. J.
Howson— -fide 
J. Tatham (Phyt.
i. 267).
Naturalised only in the other localities.
Covering large tracts in the woods at Storthes Hall, near Hudders- 
field — P.
Inchbald (Phyt.
iii.
331).
422.
S. stellaris, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
In the streams which issue from Micklefell, Teesdale !
— J.
Back- 
house, Jun., W.
Foggitt.
On the moor above Cantley Spout, near 
Sedbergh — John Nowell.
424.
S. Hirculus, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
425.
S. AizoLDES, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
426.
S. oppositieolia, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
427.
S. granulata, Linn.
Native.
British.
430.
S. tridactylites, Linn.
Native.
British.
431.
S. hypnoides, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
CHRYSOSPLENIUM.
434.
C oppositieolium, Linn.
Native.
British.
435.
C alternifolium, Linn.
Native.
British.
PARNASSIA.
436.
P. palustris, Linn.
Native.
British.
73 
ORDER XXXYI.
ARALIACEiE.
ADOXA.
437.
A. moschatellina, Linn.
Native.
British.
HEDERA.
438.
H. Helix, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER XXXYII.
CORNACE^E.
CORNUS.
439.
C. sanguinea, Linn.
Native.
English.
440.
C. suecica, Linn.
Native.
Highland, 
ORDER XXXVIII.
UMBELLIFERjE.
HYDRO C OT YLE .
441.
H. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
442.
S. europcea, Linn.
SANICULA.
Native.
British.
ERYNGIUM.
444.
E. maritimum, Linn.
Native.
British?
445.
E. campestre, Linn.
Incognit.
“ Melling, Yorkshire, has also been reported (by Hudson) as a 
locality, though probably by some mistake both of plant and 
county” — H.
C. Watson (Cyb. Brit.
i. 425).
CONIUM.
446.
C. maculatum, Linn.
Native.
British 
74 
SMYRNIUM.
448.
S. Olusatrum, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
CICUTA.
449.
C. virosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
It is intimated in the Cybele Britannica, that modern confirmation 
would be desirable for the stations in Yorkshire recorded for this 
species.
At Newsham Carr, where it was discovered by Sir T.
Frankland, the true plant still occurs, 1853 !
— T.
Simpson.
Pond 
near Langwith, and marshy places between Kexby and Elvington — 
H. IbboUon.
APIUM.
450.
A. graveolens, Linn.
Native.
English.
PETROSELINUM.
451.
P. sativum, Hoffm.
Alien.
An occasional straggler from cultivation.
452.
P. segetum, Koch.
Native.
English.
Sison, Flora , 47.
Between Hull and Hedon, 1853 — G.
C Babington.
Specimens, both of this species and Sison Amomum from the vici- 
nity of Hull, are mentioned in the list of the plants in the Hail- 
stone collection.
HELOSCIADIUM 
454.
H. nodiflorum, Koch.
Native.
English.
Sium, Flora, 47.
Slow streams, ditches, and watery places ; fre- 
quent.
S. repens, Flora, 1.
c., is probably only a variety of this 
species.
455.
H. inundatum, Kocli.
Native.
British.
Sium, Flora, 47.
SISON.
456.
S. Amomum, Linn.
Native.
English.
Adwick, near Doncaster — P.
Inchbald (Phyt.
iii.
446).
Between 
Doncaster and Askern — O.
A. Moore.
The station mentioned in 
the Flora rests upon the authority of the Rev. J.
Dalton.
iEGOPODIUM.
457.
iE.
Podragraria, Linn .
Native.
British.
75 
CAEUM.
458.
C. Carui, Linn.
Alien?
Meadows adjoining the Humber, near Hull; so plentiful that the 
poor people gather the seed to dispose of it to the druggists — 
Teesdale.
Near the Black’s Head, above Grantley — Rev. J.
Dalton, 
(B.
G. 680.) By the roadside on Sawley moor, near Kipon — W.
Brun- 
ton.
Waste ground near Scarborough — W.
Bean.
Amongst the 
Middlesborough ballast hills!
— W.
Mvddl M.
Umpleby.
Perhaps 
this species might be referrred to a higher than the alien category.
461.
B. flexuosum, With.
462.
P. Saxifraga, Linn.
463.
P. magna, Linn.
BUNIUM.
Native.
PIMPINELLA.
Native.
Native.
British.
British.
Germanic.
SIUM.
464.
S. latifolium, Linn.
Native.
English.
Ditch near the old water-works, at Hull — G.
C. Babington.
465.
S. angustifolium, Linn.
Native.
English.
Germanic.
BUPLEUEUM.
469.
B. rotundifolium, Linn.
Colonist.
CENANTHE.
470.
CE.
fistulosa, Linn.
Native.
English?
471.
* (E.
Lachenalii, Gmel.
Native.
English.
In the ditches at Potteric Carr, Doncaster — 0.
A. Moore.
( (E.
pirn- 
jpinelloides, Flora, 145.J Probably also the localities mentioned in 
the Flora, under CE.
peucedanifolia, refer to this species.
472.
CE.
silaifolia, Bieb l Incognit.
473.
(E.
crocata, Linn.
Native.
British.
474.
CE.
Phellandrium, Lam. Native.
English.
475.
M. Cynapium, Linn, 
iETHUSA.
Native.
British.
76 
ECENICULUM.
476.
F. vulgare, Gaertn.
Alien.
Meum Fceniculum , Flora , 46.
Amongst the Middlesborough ballast 
hills, 1852.
SILAUS.
479.
S. pratensis, Bess.
Native.
English.
Gnidium Silaus, Flora, 46.
MEUM.
480.
M. athamanticum, Jaccf.
Native.
Scottish.
On the sides of Howgill Fell, near Sedbergh — Rev. G.
Pinder (Cyb.
Brit.
iii.
444).
ANGLICA.
482.
A. sylvestris, Linn.
Native.
British 
AUCHAN GELICA.
A. officinalis, Linn.
Alien or Incognit.
PEUCEDANUM.
484.
P. palustre, Mcench.
Native.
Germanic.
Selinum, Flora, 45.
485.
P. ostruthium, Koch.
Denizen.
Local.
Imperatoria, Flora, 45.
Waste ground opposite Middleton, and 
other places in Teesdale ; in considerable abundance, but always 
not far from the vicinity of farm houses.
PASTINACA.
486.
P. sativa, Linn.
Native.
British.
Frequent between Maltby and Doncaster — 0.
A. Moore.
Adwick, 
near Doncaster — P.
Inchbald (Phyt.
iii.
446).
'Naturalised amongst 
the Middlesborough ballast hills.
HERACLEUM.
487.
H. sphondylium, Linn.
Native.
British.
DAUCUS.
489.
D. Carota, Linn.
Native British.
77 
CAUCALIS.
491.
C. daucoides, Linn.
Colonist.
Germanic.
With Onobrychis sativa, on the magnesian limestone, at Tanfield — 
M. Hebblethiv elite !
TORILIS.
493.
T. Anthriscus, Oeertn.
494.
T. infesta, Spreng.
495.
T. nodosa, Oeertn.
Native.
Native.
Native.
British.
English.
English.
496.
S. Pecten, Linn.
SCANDIX.
Colonist.
British.
ANTHRISCUS.
497.
A. vulgaris, Pers.
Native.
498.
A. sylvestris, Hoffm.
Native.
499.
A. Cerefolium, Hoffm.
Alien.
Waste ground near Ayton, Cleveland, 1853 — W.
Mudd t 
British.
British.
CHiEROPHYLLUM.
500.
C. temulentum, Linn.
Native.
British.
MYRRHIS.
501.
M. odorata, Scop.
Native.
Scottish.
This species grows so plentifully in wild looking situations in Tees- 
dale, Wensleydale, and amongst the oolite moorlands, that I cannot 
doubt that it is a genuine and aboriginal inhabitant of the county.
(Vide B.
G. 680 J 
OKDER XXXIX.
LORANTHACE2E.
VISCUM.
503.
Y. album, Linn.
Native.
English.
78 
ORDER XL.
CAPRIFOLIACEiE.
SAMBUCUS.
504.
S. nigra, Linn.
Native.
British.
505.
S. Ebulus, Linn.
Denizen, 
British.
VIBURNUM.
506.
V. Opulus; Linn.
Native.
British.
507.
V. Lantana, Linn.
Native.
English.
Woods and thickets ; rare.
Adwick-le-street, near Doncaster — Rev.
W. W.
Newbould (Cyb. Brit.
iii.
449).
Vide also, Flora , 114.
Rain- 
cliffe wood, near Scarborough — J.
Williamson.
Mulgrave woods, 
near Whitby — W.
Mudd !
LONICERA.
508.
L. Periclymenum, Linn.
Native.
British.
509.
L. Caprifolium, Linn.
Alien.
Hedges near Bedale — T.
Simpson ; near Rotherham — L.
Langley; 
and at Newton, between Ayton and Guisborough !
— W.
Mudd.
510.
L. Xylosteum, Linn.
Alien.
In a wood on the Yorkshire side of the Tees, near Yarm !
— W.
Foggitt.
In a plantation near the Woodend railway bridge, near 
Thirsk.
ORDER XLI.
RUBIACEAL 
GALIUM.
513.
G. verum, Linn.
Native.
British.
514.
G. cruciatum, With.
Native.
British.
515.
G. palustre, Linn.
Native.
British.
G. Witheringii, Flora , 30, is a common variety of this species.
516.
G. uliginosum, Linn.
Native.
British.
517.
G. saxatile, Linn.
Native.
British.
518.
G. erectum, Huds.
Native.
English.
In a limestone quarry at Hovingham, near Castle Howard!
— H.
Ibbotson (Bot. Gaz.
ii.
251).
On the Wolds at Ganton, near Scai> 
borough — E.
Beam.
79 
5L9.
G. Mollugo, Linn.
Native.
English.
520.
G. pusillum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
Limestone hills near Ingleton — 0.
A. Moore.
Rocks near the head 
of Lunedale !
— J.
Backhouse , Jun. Applegarth Scarrs, near Rich- 
mond — James Ward.
521.
G. anglicum, Huds.
Incognit.
The locality mentioned in the Flora for this species rests upon the 
authority of Mr. Knowlton (B.
G. 674).
It is needful that it should 
receive modern confirmation.
522.
G. tricorne, With.
Colonist.
Germanic ?
G. saccharatum, Linn.
Incognit.
G. verrucosum, Flora, 50.
It is needful that the locality quoted in 
the Flora for this species should receive modern confirmation be- 
fore it can be accepted with confidence.
523.
G. Aparine, Linn.
Native.
British.
525.
G. boreale, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
SHERARDIA.
526.
S. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
ASPERULA.
527.
A. odorata, Linn.
Native.
British.
A. arvensis, Linn.
Alien.
Between Brighouse and Sowerby bridge, in the vale of Calder — 
8. Gibson.
(Phyt.
i. 773.) 
528.
A. cynanchica, Linn.
Native.
English.
ORDER XLII.
VALERIANACE4C.
CENTRANTHUS.
529.
C. ruber, DC.
Alien.
Valeriana , Flora , 54.
VALERIANA.
531.
V. dioica, Linn.
Native.
British.
532.
V. officinalis, Linn.
Native.
British 
V. sambucifolia, Mikan, considered as a distinct species by Koch 
and Babington, is more frequent than the true officinalis.
80 
FEDIA.
534.
F. olitoria, Valril.
Native.
British.
Hedgebanks and cultivated fields ; frequent.
535.
F. carinata, Stev.
Denizen.
English - 
In abundance on a rocky bank above Askrigg, Wensleydale, about a 
mile on the -road to Richmond — W.
Francis, (Bot. Gaz.
ii.
223.) On 
the embankment of the Leeds Northern railway, near Mawnby !
— 
M. Umpleby.
536.
F. auricula, DC.
Colonist.
English.
Cornfields at Cantley, near Doncaster — Rev. Q.
E. Smith.
537.
F. dentata, Bieb.
Colonist.
English.
Cornfield and cultivated land ; frequent.
Yar. mixta, Vahl, occurs 
occasionally.
ORDER XLIII.
DIPSACEiE.
DIPSACUS.
D. eullonum, Linn.
Alien.
539.
D. sylvestris, Linn.
Native.
English.
540.
D. pilosus, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
SCABIOSA.
541.
S. succisa, Linn.
Native.
British.
542.
S. Columbaria, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
KNAUTIA.
543.
K. arvensis, Coult.
Native.
British.
Scabiosa, Flora, 55.
Cornfields and cultivated land ; common.
A 
form with nearly entire leaves occurs in the Westfields, Thirsk.
ORDER XLIY.
COMPOSITE.
TRAGOPOGON.
544.
T. pratensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
T. pratensis and major, Flora, 55.
There seems to be strong reasons 
for believing that T.
pratensis of Linnaeus and T.
minor of.
Fries, 
81 
are forms of the same species.
( Vide Cyb. Brit.
ii.
33,) The last 
is by far the most frequent of the two.
545.
T. porrifolius, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Borders of fields and ditches, Cliffrig, Ayton !
— W.
Mudd.
Near 
Scarborough !
— W.
Bean.
HELMINTHIA.
546.
H. echioldes, Oaertn.
Native.
English.
Picris, Flora, 63.
PICRIS.
547.
P. hieracioides, Linn.
Native.
English.
Dry banks and roadsides ; not unfrequent.
Knavesmire, near York ; 
about Doncaster; and frequent near Thorp Arch — O.
A. Moore .
In 
a field between the north lane and the park at Headingley — A.
Shipley.
Mowthorpe Dale, near Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson.
Banks near Battersby and Teme bridge, Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
Roadside between Ayton and Scarborough!
— A.
O. Black.
Banks 
between Rievaulx and Cold Kirby.
THRINCIA.
548.
T. hirta, Roth.
Apargia, Flora, 65.
Native.
English.
APARGIA.
549.
A. hispida, Willd.
Native.
550.
A. autumn alis, Willd.
Native.
English.
British.
HYPOCHCERIS.
551.
H. glabra, Linn.
Native.
English.
On the common close to the inn at Banktop, near Barnsley — Mr.
Wood (B.
G. 708).
Near Thorp Arch — S.
Hailstone.
Fields near Gan- 
thorpe — H.
Ibbotson.
The plant mentioned under this name in the 
Flora is erroneous.
- 552.
H. maculata, Linn.
Incognit.
The plant mentioned under this name in the Flora is an Hieracium, 
placed by Fries as a form of his caesium ; but which seems scarcely 
to agree with that species.
553.
H. radicata, Linn.
F 
Native.
British.
82 
LACTUCA.
554.
L. virosa, Linn.
Native.
Germanic 
557.
L. muralis, Lees.
Prenanthes, Flora, 62.
Native.
English.
SONCHUS.
559.
S. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
560.
S. asper, Hoffm.
Native.
8. oleraceus , /3.
Flora, 82.
British.
561.
S. oleraceus, Linn.
Native.
British 
CREPIS.
563.
C. virens, Linn.
C. tectorum, Flora, 62.
Native.
British.
564.
C. biennis, Linn.
Native.
English.
Cultivated fields ; rare.
Near Cleveland Lodge, Ayton !
— W.
Mudd.
Fields near Thorp Arch — 8.
Hailstone.
Is the species mentioned 
in the Flora under this name the true plant ?
566.
C. succisjefolia, Tausch.
Native.
Highland.
Heseltine gill, near Settle — W.
Borrer (Phyt.
ii.
428).
Bank of the 
Tees below Wince bridge, hedgebank between High Startforth and 
Lartington, and other places in Teesdale.
567.
C. PALUDosA, Mcench.
Native.
Scottish.
Hieracium, Flora , 64.
HIEEACIUM* 
568.
H. pilosella, Linn.
Native.
British.
569.
H. aurantiacum, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised near Settle — J.
Backhouse, Jun.
; and in Wilton Woods, 
Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
576.
H. Lawsoni, Smith.
Native.
Highland.
Under this name I have included a plant which grows sparingly at 
* In this genus, I have slightly departed from the classification followed in the London Catalogue.
The species which Britain produces want carefully working out hy watching the range of variation of the 
characters of each in its natural localities and under cultivation.
The “ Symbol se ad Historiam Hieraci- 
orum ” of Fries has given a vivid impulse to the study of these plants, and it is hoped that we may he 
enabled, before long, to have the nomenclature of the British representatives of the genus settled upon 
a substantial and satisfactory basis.
But at present, whilst undergoing the process of renovation, they 
are involved in a considerable amount of confusion.
I have published specimens of most of the York- 
shire forms in the “ Hieracia of North Yorkshire and Teesdale.” 
83 
tlie White Force, Cronkley Fell, which has been referred to cerin- 
thoides by Fries and others {vide Cyb. Brit.
ii.
59, Phyt.
iv.
1050) ; 
another which grows on the Maize-beck scarrs !
— J.
E. Bowman, 
and in several other places in Tees dale, but principally on the 
Durham side of the river (“ IT.
pilosum var.
subnudum Frol.” 
fide Fries, Symb., p.
57.
Vide Phyt.
iv.
1050) ; and a third from 
ITeseltine gill, near Settle, placed under anglicum of Fries, in the 
third edition of Babington’s Manual.
My friend, J.
Backhouse, 
Jun., has ascertained that these plants approach each other very 
closely in cultivation ; so that we may take for granted, that they 
are all one and the same species.
But it would seem doubtful, 
whether the Teesdale cerinthoides is the true plant of Linnseus.
It 
differs considerably from specimens for which I am indebted to 
Mr. H.
C. Watson, of the plant he mentions, Cyb. Brit., ii.
59.
577.
IT.
iricum, Fries.
Native.
ITighland.
Rocky bank of the Tees between Wince bridge and ITolwick ; in 
considerable abundance.
575.
H. pallidum, Bir. Fries !
Native.
Highland.
Cronkley Scarrs and Wince bridge, Teesdale !
— J.
Backhouse, Jun.
More plentiful on the Durham than on the Yorkshire side of the 
Tees.
The Teesdale plant, which was supposed to be identical 
with IT.
saxifragum of Fries, is a form of this species.
TI.
oreades, Fries.
Incognit.
Goredale Scarr, near Malham — Dillenius, fide Fries.
Not found 
recently.
H. villosum, Linn.
Incognit.
The Meer gill plant is perhaps TI.
nigrescens — J.
Backhouse, Jun.
The other two localities mentioned in the Flora under this species, 
probably refer to forms of IT.
vulgatum.
572.
H. murorum, Linn., Fries.
Native.
British.
IT.
nudicaule, Edmonst !
Rocks and walls; not unfrequent.
Rocks 
near Settle !
— J.
Tatham.
ITell Kettles, near Croft !
— T.
J. Foggitt.
Rocks in the wood at ITackfall !
— M.
Llebblethwaite.
On the walls 
of Fountains Abbey On the banks of the Tees below Wince 
bridge.
Rainton heights, rocks above Hawnby, Sutton bank, and 
other places amongst the Hambleton hills.
H. murorum, Flora, 63, 
includes also the following species.
572.* H.
caesium, Fries.
Native.
British.
In similar situations ; not unfrequent.
Castlebar rock and other 
places near Settle !
— J.
Tatham.
Maizebeck — T.
J. Foggitt.
Walls 
at Cotherstone, and other places in Teesdale.
Rocks above Hawnby, 
Whitestonecliff, Boltby Scarr, and in several other localities amongst 
the Hambleton hills.
572.
*b IT.
HYP 0 CH.<ER 0 iDEs, Gibs.
Native.
Local.
Hypochceris maculata, Flora, 64.
Gordale and Giggleswick Scarrs, 
near Settle !
— J.
Backhouse, Jun !
J. Tatham !
S. Thompson.
84 
573.
H. vulgatum, Fries.
H. sylvaticum, Flora, 63.
very variable species, 
sylvaticum of Smith.
582.* H.
gothicum, Fries !
Native.
British.
Walls, rocks, and woods ; a common and 
This includes both H.
maculatum and 
Native.
Scottish.
Banks of the Tees, below Wincebridge and Holwick.
H. gothicum 
of Babington’s Manual!
(third edition) and of the London Cata- 
logue !
(fourth edition) includes H.
gothicum, Fries., and H.
tridenta- 
tum, Fries, in part.
The true plant of Fries, is allied to vulgatum 
rather than to tridentatum ( Vide Phyt.
iv.
1051).
582.
H. tridentatum, Fries.
Native.
British.
Woods and thickets ; probably not unfrequent.
Woods about Guis- 
boroughSpa!
— W.Mudd.
Bank of the Tees, below Wincebridge.
Woodend, near Thirsk; plentiful; and between Dalton and Sowerby.
Roadside between Thirsk and Sutton-under-Whitstonecliff.
Woods 
in Nettledale and Flazendale.
Boltby bank, Hawnby bank, and 
other places amongst .the Hambleton hills.
583.
IT.
rigidum, Fries.
Incognit.
If the Teesdale plant mentioned under corymbosum be truly that 
species, an Hieracium which occurs at Langwith and in other places 
near York!
(J.
Backhouse, Jun.J may possibly be referred to here.
579.
H. prenanthoides, Vill.
Native.
Scottish.
Banks of the river at Stamforth, near Settle!
— J.
Tatham.
Rocks 
in the woods at Hackfall !
— W.
Foggitt, T.
Simpson.
A plant which 
grows on the hillside near Bolton Castle, Wensleydale !
— J.
W. 
Watson.
Intermediate in character between this species and H.
crocatum is probably H.
strictum of Fries ( vide Phyt.
iv.
844).
580.
H crocatem, Fries.
Native.
Scottish.
Near Settle!
— J.
Tatham.
Bank of the Tees about lower Cronkley 
and Wince bridges (vars.
angustatum and dilatatum, Fries).
580.* H.
corymbosum, Fries.
Incognit.
A plant which grows in Teesdale, in company with the preceding, 
has been considered to belong to this species ( vide Bab Man. iii.
&c.) but when specimens were sent to the author of the “ Symboloe ” 
by my friend J.
Backhouse, Jun., he referred them, perhaps by 
some oversight, to his FI.
rigidum.
The same, or something simi- 
lar, occurs at Kirby Hill, near Richmond — J.
Ward.
584.
H. umbellatum, Linn.
Native.
British.
Woods, heaths, and hedgebanks ; frequent.
Yar. minus, of Fries) 
grows in a wood on the top of the moor above Ingleby Greenhow, 
Cleveland !
— W.
Madd.
581.
H. boreale, Fries.
Native.
British.
H. sabaudum, Flora, 64.
Moory places and hedgebanks ; common.
BARKHAUSIA.
587.
B. setosa, DC.
Alien.
85 
Found occasionally in cultivated fields.
Airyliolme, Cleveland !
— 
W. Mudd.
Carlton moor, Sowerby fields, and other places near 
Thirsk.
TABAXACUM.
588.
T. officinale, Wigg.
Native.
British.
Leontodon Taraxacum andpalustre, Flora 68.
A very variable species.
The normal form is universally distributed.
T. lsevigatum and 
erythrospermum, DC., are not unfrequent on dry banks, and T.
palustre, DC., in marshy places, especially in elevated situations.
LAPSANA.
590.
L. communis, Linn.
Native.
British.
CICHOBIUM.
591.
C. Intybus, Linn .
Native.
English.
ABCTIUM.
592.
A. Lappa, Linn.
Native.
British.
This includes two species, according to continental authors.
Of 
these, A.
minus, Schk., (A.
Bardana, Willd.J is the most frequent in 
Yorkshire, especially in the form of A.
intermedium, Lange MSS.,.
Bab. Man.
3. 
SEBBATUTA.
594.
S. tinctoria, Linn.
Native.
An entire leaved variety occurs occasionally.
English.
CABDUUS.
595.
C. nutans, Linn.
Native.
English.
596.
C. acanthoides, Linn.
Native.
British.
This also includes two species, according to Koch and other foreign 
authors, C.
acanthoides and C.
crispus.
597.
C. tenuifloeus, Curt.
Native.
English.
598.
C. Marianus, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
599.
C. lanceolatus, Linn.
Native.
British.
600.
C. eriophorus, Linn.
Native.
English.
Ft seq.
Cnicus, Flora, 60.
601.
C. palustris, Linn.
Native.
British.
602.
C. arvensis, Curt.
Native.
British.
86 
604.
C. pratensis, Huds.
Native.
607.
C. heterophyllus, Linn.
Native.
English.
Scottish.
ONOPORDUM, 
608.
O. Acanthium, Linn.
Native?
English.
CARLINA.
609.
C. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
English.
OENTAUREA.
C. Montana, Linn.
Alien.
“ Many years ago Mr. Jas.
Ward favoured me with specimens from 
the neighbourhood of Richmond” — H.
G. Watson (Cyb. Brit.
ii.
88).
C. Jacea, Linn.
Incognit.
The plant mentioned under this name in the Flora, is not the true 
Jacea of Linnaeus.
Specimens of a radiate Centaurea from East 
moors, Castle Howard !
— M.
B. Slater, and other localities seem to 
coincide with my examples marked “ C.
nigrescens, Willd.” from 
the south of England; but I have not been able to distinguish 
clearly between that alleged species and the radiate form of C.
nigra.
611.
C. nigra, Linn.
Native.
British.
612.
C. Cyanus, Linn.
Colonist.
British.
613.
C. Scabiosa, Linn.
Native.
English?
615.
C. Calcitrapa, Linn.
Incognit.
It is intimated in the Cybele Britannica, that it is desirable that 
the locality mentioned in the Flora for this species should receive 
confirmation.
616.
C. Solstitialis, Linn.
Alien.
Dry pastures near Frystone — A.
AiJdn (B.
G. 710).
Like Barkhau- 
sia setosa, this species also appears occasionally in cultivated 
ground.
Leeming Lane, near Bedale, 1853 !
— T.
Simpson.
GALACTITES.
G. tomentosa, Mcencli.
Alien.
Naturalized amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 1853!— IF.
Mudd.
A native of the coasts of the Mediterranean.
BIDENS.
617.
B. cernua, Linn.
618.
B. tripartita, Linn 
Native.
Native.
British ?
English.
87 
EUPATORIUM.
619.
E. cannabinum, Linn.
Native.
TANACETUM.
622.
T vulgare, Linn .
Native.
ARTEMISIA.
6231.
A. campestris, Linn.
Incognit.
“ Mr. Moore reports it from Ganton, near Scarborough, in Yorkshire, 
on the authority of Mr. Ibbotson.” This habitat “ will require con- 
firmation, though it does not appear improbable in itself.” — H.
G. 
Watson, (Cyb. Brit.
ii.
97).
It is not, though, exactly “ on the York- 
shire coast.” 
624.
A. maritima, Linn.
Native.
625.
A. Absinthium, Linn.
Native.
626.
A. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
GNAPHALIUM.
627.
G. dioicum, Linn.
Native, 
628.
G. margaritaceum, Linn.
Alien.
Scotland mills, Addle, near Leeds — A.
Shipley.
Bank of the river 
near Brompton-on-Swale — T.
Simpson.
Locker, Snailesworth, but 
now extinct — W.
Foggitt.
In considerable abundance on the coast 
cliffs about three miles south of Scarborough!
— A.
O. Black.
630.
G. sylvaticum, Linn.
Native, British.
632.
G. uliginosum, Linn, Native.
British.
FILAGO.
634.
F. minima, Fries.
Native.
British 
Ft seq.
Gnaphalium , Flora , 56.
635.
F. germanica, Linn.
Native.
British.
635b.
F. apiculata, G.
E. Smith.
Native.
English.
Sandy places, Cantley and Rossington, near Doncaster — Rev. G.
E. 
Smith.
It was from specimens collected at these localities that the 
species was originally described.
English.
English.
British.
Scottish.
British.
British.
PETASITES.
636.
P, vulgaris, Desf.
Native.
British.
88 
P. albus, Gcertn.
Alien.
A large patch in a damp stony hollow in an oak wood north of 
Storthes Hall, near Huddersfield — P.
Inchbald (Phyt.
iii.
445).
TUSSILAGO.
637.
T. Farfara, Linn.
Native.
British.
ERIGERON.
639, E.
acris, Linn.
Native.
English 
ASTER.
641.
A. Tripolium, Linn.
Native.
British.
A. brumalis, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized in considerable abundance in a wood on the Yorkshire 
side of the Tees, at High Worsall, near Yarm !
— W.
Foggitt.
SOLIDAGO.
642.
S. virgaurea, Linn.
Native.
British.
SENE CIO.
643, S.
vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
644.
S. sylvaticus, Linn.
Native.
British.
S. sylvaticus and lividus, Flora, 57.
645.
S. viscosus, Linn.
Native ?
British.
The localities near York reported in the Flora under this species 
refer to S.
sylvaticus.
The others rest upon the authority respec- 
tively of the late Dr. Wasse and the Rev. Archdeacon Peirson, and 
perhaps may only produce the same, so that modern confirmation 
of the occurrence of this species would be desirable.
647.
S. erucifolius, Linn.
Native.
English.
S. tenuifolius, Flora, 57.
Hedgebanks and thickets ; frequent.
648.
S. J acoBjE a, Linn.
Native.
British.
648.* S.
aqtjaticus, Huds.
Native.
British.
650.
S. Saracenicus, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
On the Addle side of Weetwood, near Leeds — A.
Shipley.
Frequently 
in the neighbourhood of Sedbergh, by the river, and in uncultivated 
places — j Rev. G.
Finder (Cyb. Brit.
ii.
119).
DORONICUM.
653.
D. Pardalianches, Linn.
Alien.
89 
Near the World’s End, Harrogate — Mr. Manby (B.
G. 710).
Several 
patches occur in the valley of Don, between Doncaster and Conis- 
bro’ Castle, far from any traces of cultivation — P.
Inchbald (Phyt 
iii.
330).
In a wood at the back of Lartington Hall, leading down 
to the Tees — W.
Francis (Bot. Gaz.
ii 223).
Clintswood, near Rich- 
mond — James Ward.
Cliffrig and Newton wood, nearAyton!
— W.
Mudd.
Plentiful in an old shrubbery between Sinderby and Holme, 
near Thirsk.
654.
D. plantagineum, Linn.
Alien.
Woods at Kirklington, between Ripon and Bedale !
— T.
Simpson.
INULA.
655.
I. Helenium, Linn.
Native.
656.
I. Conyza, DC.
Native.
Conyza squarrosa, Flora , 55.
PULICAEIA.
658.
P. dysenterica, Gcertn.
Native.
659.
P. vulgaris, Gcertn.
Incognit.
“ In Yorkshire, according to the outlines ; but I cannot find the 
original authority” — H.
C. Watson (Cyb. Brit.
ii.
124).
English.
English.
English.
BELLIS.
660.
B. perennis, Linn.
Native.
British.
CHRYSANTHEMUM.
661.
C. segetum, Linn.
Colonist.
British.
662.
C. Leucanthemum, Linn.
Native.
British.
PYRETHRUM.
663.
P. Parthenium, Smith.
Denizen.
British.
664.
P. inodorum, Smith.
Native.
British.
Is the plant mentioned in the Flora, page 59, the true M.
maritima, 
Linn., or only the littoral form (var.
salina, Wallr.) of this species?
The original authority for the locality was Teesdale (B.
G. 710).
MATRICARIA.
665.
M. Chamomilla, Linn.
Native.
English.
Cornfields, cultivated land, and road sides ; frequent.
90 
ANTHEMIS.
667.
A. nobilis, Linn.
Native.
English.
668.
A. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
English.
Cultivated fields ; not unfrequent.
669.
A. Cotula, Linn.
Native.
English.
In similar situations to the preceding, but more frequent 
ACHILLiEA.
671.
A. Ptarmica, Linn.
Native.
British.
A. tanacetifolia, All. Alien or Incognit.
On a rough hilly bank near Ringing Low, near Sheffield — J.
Hardy, 
fide G.
G. Babington (A.N.H., Feb. 1847).
Extinct in 1849 — W.
Bor- 
rer (Cyb. Brit.
iii.
464).
I fully believe it to be no modem inter- 
loper ; but it is now rare, or almost eradicated.
I find it has been 
carried into several gardens at Sheffield ” — J.
Hardy, in litt.
1854.
A. serrata, Smith.
Incognit.
“ A specimen of a yellow flowered Achillea, a mere fragment with- 
out leaves, is preserved in my herbarium, along with the following 
label : ‘ Societas Botanica Edinensis, Achillea serrata, Hab. Bur- 
lington, Co. York, Comm.
Mann.
Coll.
1840.’ As far as I can say 
from the top of a flowering stem only, this is the plant intended by 
English botanists under the name of A.
serrata — one cultivated in 
gardens.
And I deem it highly probable that the fragment in ques- 
tion once grew in a garden, although labelled as if a wild Briton ” 
— H.
G. Watson, in litt.
1854.
672.
A. millefolium, Linn.
Native.
British.
A. tomentosa, Linn.
Alien.
A casual garden escape.
Stokesley, Cleveland, 1852!
— W.
Mudd.
ORDER XLV.
CAMPANULACEiE.
CAMPANULA.
675.
C. rotundifolia, Linn.
Native.
British.
676.
C. patula, Linn.
Native.
English.
Near Rotherham — L.
Langley.
Gravelly banks of the Esk, Ruswarp, 
near Whitby!
— W.
Mudd.
Bank of the Tees below Yarm — T.
J. 
Foggitt.
677.
C. rapunculus, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Hedges at Wressle, near ILowden — Rev. Archdeacon Peirson (B.
G. 
676).
Hedgebanks and borders of fields, Cliffrig, Ayton \—W.
Mudd.
91 
678.
C. latifolia, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
679.
0. eapunculoides, Linn.
Native.
Scottish?
Doubtless a true native in the localities reported in the Flora.
Sleningford, near Ripon — T.
Simpson.
Occuring occasionally as an 
escape from garden cultivation, in the vicinity of Thirsk.
680.
C. Teachelium, Linn.
Incognit.
It is desirable that the occurrence of this species in the county 
should receive confirmation.
681.
C. glomeeata, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
682.
C. peesicifolia, Linn.
Alien.
Thorp Arch woods, but certainly not native — S.
Hailstone.
WAHLENBERGIA.
683.
W. hedeeacea, Reich.
Native.
Atlantic.
Campanula, Flora, 54.
SPECULAKIA.
684.
S. hybeida, A.
DC.
Colonist.
English.
Campanula , Flora, 53.
S. speculum, (Linn.) Alien.
A few specimens in a fallow field between Thirsk and the railway 
station, 1854 !
— R.
W. Long and Eliza H.
Smith.
Probably intro- 
duced with foreign seed, as it inhabits cultivated fields upon the 
continent.
PHYTEUMA.
685.
P. oebiculaee, Linn.
Incognit.
“ From the Botanical Society of London I have received a specimen 
localised from Sheffield, on the authority of Mr. J.
G. Lyon.
This 
habitat should be confirmed” — H.
C. Watson (Cyb. Brit.
ii.
143).
JASIONE.
687.
J. Montana, Linn.
Native.
British ?
ORDER XL VI.
ERICACEAE.
ERICA.
690.
E. Tetealix, Linn.
692.
E. cineeea, Linn.
Native.
Native.
British.
British 
92 
CALLUNA.
695.
C. vulgaris, Salisb.
Native.
British.
ANDROMEDA.
699.
A. polifolia, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
ARBUTUS.
701 A.
Uva-ursi, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
VACCINIUM.
703.
V. Myrtillus, Linn.
Native.
British.
704.
V. uliginosum, Linn.
Incognit.
The locality mentioned under this species in the Flora is on the 
Durham side of the Tees, so that we cannot claim it as a Yorkshire 
plant.
705.
Y. Yitis-Id^ea, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
706.
V. Oxycoccos, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
PYROLA.
707.
P. rotundifolia., Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
Near Croft — James Ward.
It would appear (vide Phyt.
iv.
119) that 
specimens of the variety arenaria have been procured from the 
Yorkshire coast, but I do not know the special locality.
708.
P. media, Swartz.
Native.
Scottish.
709.
P. minor, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
710.
P. secunda, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
Cautley crags, near Sedbergh — Rev. G.
Finder (Cyb. iii.
468).
Kocks 
at the White Force, Cronkley Fell, Teesdale — J.
Backhouse, Jun.
MONOTROPA.
712.
M. Hypopitys, Linn.
Native.
English.
ORDER XLVII.
ILICACE^.
ILEX.
713.
I. Aquifolium, Linn.
Native.
British.
93 
ORDER XL VIII.
JASMINACEiE.
LIGUSTRUM.
714.
L. vulgare, Linn.
Native.
English.
ERAXINUS.
715.
F. excelsior, Linn.
Native.
British.
Var. heterophylla, Vahl., is much cultivated near Doncaster — O.
A. 
Moore.
ORDER XLIX.
APOCYNACEiE.
VINCA.
716.
V. minor, Linn.
Alien ?
Possibly this species might be referred to a higher than the alien 
category.
In the woods at Storthes Hall, near Huddersfield, it is 
stated to grow “interspersed with Saxifraga umbrosa in such abun- 
dance as to preclude the possibility of its being an escape from 
garden cultivation” — P.
Inchbald (Phyt.
iii.
332).
But on the pre- 
ceding page it is expressly stated, that the Saxifraga, though 
“covering large tracts,” is “naturalised” only; so that there must 
be a strong probability that the periwinkle which grows intermixed 
with it, has been “naturalised” also.
717.
V. major, Linn.
Alien.
ORDER L.
GENTIANACE2E.
GENTIANA.
718.
G. verna, Linn.
Native.
Local.
Ascends also nearly to the summit of Micklefell — J.
Backhouse , Jun.
719.
G. Pneumonanthe, Linn.
Native.
English ?
721.
G. Amarella, Linn.
Native.
British.
This includes two species of continental authors, G.
Amarella, L., 
and G.
Germanica, Willd.
The former is not uncommon in dry, 
heathy situations ; the latter occurs occasionally.
722.
G. campestris, Linn.
Native.
British.
94 
ERYTHEMA.
724.
E. Centaurium, Pers.
Native.
British.
724c.
E. pulchella, Fries.
Native.
English.
Vide Flora, 142.
Probably specifically distinct from the preceding.
CHLORA.
725.
C. perfoliata, Linn.
Native.
English.
* VILLARSIA.
726.
Y. nymphjeoides, Vent.
Alien.
MENYANTHES.
727.
M. trifoliata, Linn.
Native.
British.
POLEMONIUM.
728.
P. ccertjleum, Linn.
Native.
Local.
Truly native in the Craven localities.
Probably introduced in the 
other station; also in a plantation near the West Fields, Richmond 
— J.
Ward; and in the hedges at Pouter Carr, near Topcliffe, where 
it grows in considerable abundance.
COLLOMIA.
C. grandiflora, Douglas.
Alien.
In the autumn of 1852 my friend W.
Foggitt and I collected several 
specimens of this native of north-western America, in a barley 
field behind Thirsk church (vide Phyt.
iii.
760).
ORDER LI.
CONVOLVULACEiE.
CONVOLVULUS.
729.
C. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
730.
C. sepitjm, Linn.
Native.
English.
CUSCUTA.
732.
C. europjea, Linn.
Native.
English.
In a field near Little Ouseburn — J.
Cramond.
Fields at Bening- 
borough, 1849 — 0.
A. Moore.
05 
734.
C. Epithymum, Smith.
Native.
English.
On furze near Teme bridge, Cleveland, 1852 !
— W.
Mudd.
735.
C. Trifolii, Bab. Colonist ?
English.
On clover and other plants in cultivated fields near Tad caster, 1842 
— II.
Baines.
Heslington fields, near York, 1852 — J.
Backhousse, 
Jun. Long plain, ILawnby, Bilsdale !
— R.
Foxton.
Hutton Rudby, 
near Stokesley, 1853!
— W.
Mudd.
Carthorpe, near Bedale, 1854!
— W.
Boston , 
ORDER LII.
SOLANACEiE.
HYOSCYAMUS.
736.
H. Niger, Linn.
Native.
British.
SOLANUM.
737.
S. nigeum, Linn.
Native.
English.
738.
S. Dulcamara, Linn.
Native.
British.
ATROPA.
739.
A. Belladonna, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
DATURA.
D. Satrmonium, Linn.
Alien.
A casual straggler from garden cultivation to rubbish heaps and 
waste ground.
LYCIUM.
L. baebaeum, Linn.
Alien.
The ordinary material for seaside fences in the vicinity of Redear 
and Marske.
ORDER LIII.
SCROPHULARIACEiE.
VERBASCUM.
740.
V. Thapsus, Linn.
Native.
English.
96 
742.
V. floccosum, W.
and K.
Incognit.
Near Rotherham — L.
Langley.
It is desirable that the occurrence 
of this species in the county should be confirmed.
743.
V. nigrum, Linn.
Native.
English.
In the lane leading to Croft, near Middleton Tyas — J.
Ward.
744.
V. Blattaria, Linn.
Denizen ?
English.
Lane by Highthorne, near Easingwold — Rev. Archdeacon Peirson.
Walls of Tickhill Castle — Dr. Maton( B.
G. 677).
Roadside between 
Wensley and the Middleham suspension bridge, 1849 — T.
Simpson.
The station reported in the Flora rests upon the authority of R.
Cameron.
I have not seen the localities and consequently have 
not a clear idea to which of the categories of citizenship the species 
should be referred.
VERONICA.
747.
V. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
749.
V. triphyllos, Linn.
Native.
Local (Germanic) 
Dry banks and cultivated fields ; locally and periodically plentiful.
First found in the vicinity of Doncaster, by Tofield ; re-discovered 
in sandy ground near Cantley — Rev. G.
E. Smith (Phyt.
ii.
284), 
P. Inchbald (Phyt.
iii.
447).
On a sandy bank near Nether Popple- 
ton ; discovered in 1842 — H.
Wetherill.
Hobmoor, Acomb, and 
other places near York!
— S.
Thompson.
750.
V. serpyllifolia, Linn.
Native.
British.
753 V.
scutellata, Linn.
Native.
British.
The hairy variety (V.
Parmularia of authors) ; occurs occasionally.
754.
V. Anag allis, Linn.
Native.
British.
755.
V. Beccaeunga, Linn.
Native.
British.
756.
V. officinalis, Linn.
Native.
British.
757.
V. Montana, Linn.
Native.
British ?
758.
V. Chamiedrys, Linn.
Native.
British.
759.
V. hederifolia, Linn.
Native.
British.
760.
V. agrestis, Linn.
Native.
British.
761.
V. polita, Linn.
Native.
British.
762.
V. Buxbaumii, Ten.
Alien.
Cultivated fields and 
waste places ; not unfrequent.
Clover field 
near Haxby, 1840 — R.
Spruce.
Heslington fields, and Towthorpe 
moor, near York, 184 L — 0.
A. Moore.
East woods, Castle Howard, 
1844 !
— H.
Ibbotson.
Maltby, near Doncaster, 1846 !
— Rev. G.
E. 
Smith.
Rose Nursery, near Malton, 1847!
— M.
B. Slater.
Carlton 
moor, near Thirsk, 1853 !
— W.
Foggitt.
Lane behind Sowerby, near 
Thirsk.
On the railway embankment near Scarborough mere, 1853.
Fields between Woodend and Newsham.
97 
BARTSIA.
763.
B. alpina, Linn Native.
Highland.
Marshy ground near Malham Tam, Craven !
— W.
Wilson, J.
Tatham.
765.
B. Odontites, Huds.
Native.
British.
EUPHRASIA.
766.
E. officinalis, Linn.
Native.
British.
RHINANTHUS.
767.
R. Crista-galli, Linn.
Native.
British.
767b.
R. major, Linn.
Native.
British.
Probably specifically distinct from R.
Crista-galli, hut forms appa= 
rently intermediate occasionally occur.
Our plant is var.
stenop- 
terus, Fries.
MELAMPYRUM.
768.
M. cristatum, Linn.
Incognit.
In Walton field, near Wakefield, among the corn — Ray (B.
G. 699).
Doubtless an error.
770.
M. pratense, Linn.
Native.
British.
M. montanum, Johnst., probably a variety of the species, occurs in 
Teesdale — J.
Backhouse, Jun.
; and on the training ground near 
Richmond — J.
Ward.
Doubtless some of the stations enumerated 
in the Flora under M.
sylvaticum produce only this species.
771.
M. sylvaticum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
PEDICULARIS.
772.
P. palustris, Linn.
Native.
British.
773.
P. sylvatica, Linn.
Native.
British.
SCROPHULARIA.
774.
S. nodosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
774b.
S. Ehrharti, Stev.
Native.
In similar situations to the preceding; rare, 
and Salterforth, near Settle !
— J.
Backhouse, Jun.
English.
Skipton, Gargrave, 
775.
S. aquatica, Linn.
Native.
English.
777.
S. vernalis, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Near Middleton Tyas — J.
Ward.
The Balby station is just under 
the walls of Tofield’s garden, from which the plant has doubtless 
escaped ; but it grows at Cantley under less suspicious circum- 
stances — John Hardy, 
a 
98 
DIGITALIS.
778.
D. purpurea, Linn.
Native, British.
ANTIRRHINUM.
779.
A. majus, Linn.
Alien.
780.
A. Orontium, Linn.
Native?
English.
Rose nursery near Malton, probably introduced — M.
B. Slater.
It 
is desirable that the category of citizenship to which this species 
must be referred should be clearly ascertained.
LIN ARIA.
781.
L. Cymbalaria, Mill.
Alien.
Ft seq.
Antirrhinum, Flora, 78.
782.
L. spuria, Mill.
Native.
English.
Cornfields about Appleton and Barton, near Malton — Rev., Arch- 
deacon Peirson (B.
G. 700).
With the succeeding species, in fields 
near Scarborough — J.
Williamson.
L. Elatine, Mill.
Native.
English.
Cornfields near Scarborough — J.
Williamson.
Hedgeside at Maltby, 
near Doncaster — 0.
A. Moore.
Near Rotherham — L.
Langley.
784.
L. repens, Ait. Native.
English.
Old walls near the mill at Richmond — J.
Ward.
Bank of the Esk, 
Ruswarp, near Whitby !
— W.
Mudd.
785.
L. vulgaris, Desf.
Native.
English.
A. Linaria, Flora, 78.
787.
L. minor, Desf.
Native.
English.
LIMO SELLA.
788.
L. aquatica, Linn.
Native.
English.
Near Nonnanby bridge, and wet places near Kirby Moorside — Rev.
Archdeacon Peirson (B.
Gr. 700).
The locality mentioned in the 
Flora is not in Wharfdale, as stated at page viii., but near Richmond.
MIMULUS.
789.
M. luteus, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized in boggy places or waste ground in the vicinity of 
gardens.
Near Settle — J.
BacJehouse, Jun. Bogs in Kildale, Cleve- 
land, 1853 !
— W.
Mudd.
In the Skell at Studley, 1850 ; and about 
the ruins at Fountains abbey, 1852.
99 
ORDER LIY.
OROBANCHACEiE.
OROBANCHE.
790.
O. major, Linn ?
Native.
English.
792.
O. elatioe, putt.
Native.
English 
793.
O. minor , Sutt.
Native.
English?
Dunkirk Avood, near Sleningford — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Near Numvick, 
by Ripon — W.
Brunton (B.
G. 700).
Heslington fields, near York — 
J. Backhouse, Jun. Howe-upon-Swale, and Burnistone, near Ripon ; 
plentiful — T.
Simjpson.
West fields and other localities near Thirsk ; 
periodically abundant.
794.
O. eubka, Smith.
Native.
Local.
Leyburn Shawl, Wensleydale; sparingly — Rev. R.
Pulleine, J.
Ward.
LATHILEA.
797.
L. squamaeia, Linn.
Native.
English.
ORDER LV*.
VERBENACEiE.
798.
Y officinalis, Linn.
VERBENA.
Native.
English 
ORDER LV.
LAMACEiE.
SALVIA.
799.
S. veebenaca, Linn.
Native.
English.
800.
S. peatensis, Linn.
Incognit.
Mentioned as a Yorkshire plant in the Botanists’ Guide, on the 
authority of Teesdale The late Dr. Wasse, also, supposed that he 
had found it near the Ure at Hutton Conyers ; but it is probable 
that in both cases S.
verbenaca was mistaken for this species.
801.
L euroPjEus, Linn.
LYCOPUS.
Natrve.
British.
100 
MENTHA.
802.
M. rotundifolia, Linn.
Native.
English.
Studley Woods — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Saltburn, by the sea in a dry 
sandy place — Robson , (B.
Gr. 698.) Adwick, near Doncaster — P.
Inchbald, (Phyt.
iii.
448.) 
803.
M. sylvestris, Linn.
Native.
English.
Mickley barrows, near Papon — T.
Simpson.
804 M.
viridis, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Riverbanks and damp places ; not unfrequent.
Ditches and banks 
of the XJre, near Papon — W.
Brunton.
Banks of the river Swale, 
half a mile from Copgrove towards Newby — Rev. J.
Dalton , (B.
Gr.
678.) Between Spennithorne and Harmby — Rev. R.
Pulleine.
Cot- 
terfoss ; Hazel Bush, and roadside beyond Strensall, near York — 
O. A.
Moore.
In the lane between Sand Hutton and Upper Helmsley 
— H.
Ibbotson.
Between Kirby Wiske and Mawnby — T.
Simpson.
Sowerby lane and other places near Thirsk.
Might probably be 
considered a true native without much risk of error.
805.
M. piperita, Linn.
Native.
English.
In similar situations ; frequent.
806.
M. aquatica, Linn.
Native.
British.
In similar situations ; common.
M. liirsuta, Flora , 82, includes 
both this species and a form of M.
sativa.
M. citrata, Ehrh., now 
usually ranged here as a variety, grows in the vicinity of Ingleton — 
S. Thompson , J.
Backhouse, Jun.
; and has also been reported to 
occur near Malton.
(Vide B.
Gr.) 
807.
M. sativa, Linn.
Native.
English.
M. liirsuta in part, acutifolia, rubra, and gentilis, Flora, 82.
In similar 
situations ; not unfrequent in some of its forms.
M. pratensis, 
“ Sole,” grows at Belcombe brook, near Bradford — Rev. J.
Dalton.
808.
M. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
809.
M. pulegium, Linn.
Native.
English.
In great abundance by the roadside between York and Haxby — A.
Shipley.
On Stockton common, near York — J.
Backhouse, Jun.
THYMUS.
810.
T. Serpyllum, Linn, Fries.
Native.
British.
Amongst the moorlands and in dry, heathy situations ; plentiful.
810b.
T. ChamjEdrys, Fries.
Native.
British.
Tilmire, near York — H.
Ecroyd Smith.
Howe hill, near Malton — 
M. B.
Slater.
Perhaps it may not be uncommon in similar situa- 
tions to the preeeeding in the lower zone, but at present I can only 
quote for it the two localities mentioned above.
Doubtless a truly 
distinct species.
101 
ORIGANUM.
811.
O. vulgare, Linn.
Native.
British.
CALAMINTHA.
812.
C. acinos, Clairv.
Native.
British.
Et seq.
Thymus , Flora, 84.
813.
C. Nepeta, Clairv.
Native.
English.
In the neighbourhood of Malton— Teesdale.
At Cookridge — Rev.
W. Wood, (B.
G. 699.) Tanfield, near Bedale, on the magnesian 
limestone — T.
Simpson.
814.
C. officinalis, Mcench.
Native.
English.
Thymus Calamintha, Flora, 84.
815.
C. clinopodium, Spenn.
Native.
British.
Clinopodium vulgare, Flora, 84.
Hedgebanks and borders of fields > 
frequent.
TEUCRIUM.
818.
T. scorodonia, Linn.
Native.
British.
819.
T. scordium, Linn.
Native.
English.
The locality for this species is near Richmond, and not in Wharf- 
dale, as stated in Flora, page viii.
821.
T. Charledrys, Linn.
Incognit.
A plant is mentioned in the Botanist’s Guide under the name of 
“ Ajuga Chamsedrys,” as having been found by Dr. White, “on walls 
near York.” Probably this species is intended, but it has not been 
seen recently.
AJUGA.
822.
A. reptans, Linn.
Native.
British.
BALLOTA.
825.
B. nigra, Linn.
Native.
English.
LEONURUS.
826.
L. cardiaca, Linn.
,Denizen.
English^ 
LAMIUM.
827.
L. Galeobdolon, Crantz.
Native.
Galeobdolon luteum, Flora, 83.
English.
102 
828.
L. album, Linn.
Native.
British.
829.
L. maculatum, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised in Kildale woods, Cleveland, 1852!
— Wm. Mucld.
830.
L. amplexicaule, Linn.
Native.
British.
831.
L. purpureum, Linn.
Native.
British.
831b.
L. incisum, Wiild.
Native.
British.
GALEOPSIS.
832.
G. Ladanum, Linn.
Native.
English.
833.
G. ochroleuca, Lam. Colonist.
Local.
G. villosa, Flora, 83.
Cornfields at Cantley, near Doncaster; abun- 
dant : varying with white and purple-tipped flowers — Rev. G.
E. 
Smith.
834.
G. Tetrahit, Linn.
Native.
British.
G. bifida, Bonning and Koch, placed under this species in Babing- 
ton’s Manual, occurs in cultivated fields near Thirsk and elsewhere.
Fries ( vide Summa.
Yeg. Scand.
i. 14) regards it as the true Tetrahit 
of Linnaeus, and places the plant usually described under that name 
by modern authors as a species doubtfully distinct from versicolor, 
calling it unicolor.
835.
G. versicolor, Curt.
Native.
British?
A variety with uniform yellow flowers grows occasionally in Hes- 
lington fields, near York — 0.
A. Moore.
STAOHYS.
836.
S. Betonica, Benth.
Native.
Betonica officinalis, Flora, 83.
837.
S. palustris, Linn.
Native.
838.
S. sylvatica, Linn.
Native.
S. sylvatica and germanica, Flora, 82.
839.
S. germanica, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised sparingly in a garden at Calvas Hall, near Thirsk.
The 
plant mentioned in the Flora under this name is S.
sylvatica.
840.
S. arvensis, Linn.
Native^ British.
GLECHOMA.
841.
G. hederacea, Linn.
Native.
British.
NEPETA.
English.
British.
British.
842.
N. Cataria, Linn.
Native.
English 
103 
MARRUBIUM.
843.
M. vulgare, Linn.
Native.
English 
PRUNELLA.
844.
P. vulgaris, Linnr.
Native.
British.
SCUTELLARIA.
845.
S. galericulata, Linn 
Native.
British.
846.
S. minor, Linn.
Native.
Atlantic ?
About Scarborough, mere — Theak stone s Guide.
Near the high fish 
pond, Kildale, Cleveland!
— W/Mudd.
ORDER LVI.
BORAGINACEiE.
MYOSOTIS.
847.
M. palustris, Linn.
Native.
British.
The variety with adpressed hairs (M.
strigulosa, Reich.) is not un- 
common.
It may he easily taken for M.
csespitosa, unless the calyx 
teeth are examined.
848.
M. repens,.
Don. Native.
British.
Woods, and about the margin of streams, especially in hilly dis- 
tricts; frequent.
Whaston springs, near Richmond — James Ward.
Banks of Maizebeck, Teesdale, and near Keighley!
— J.
Backhouse, 
Jun. Woods near Scarborough!
— W.
Bean.
Kildale, Roseberry 
Topping, and other places in Cleveland!
— W.
Mudd.
Banks of 
Tees, below Cronkley Scarrs.
Woods amongst the Hambleton hills; 
plentiful.
Woods at Mount Saint John, and between Kirby Knowle 
and Thirsk, and other localities.
849.
M. cjespitosa, Schultz.
Native.
British.
850.
M. alpestris, Schmid.
Native.
Highland.
High limestone ridges of Micklefell and Little fell, Teesdale !
— J.
Backhouse and J.
Backhouse, Jun. Discovered in 1852.
851.
M. sylvattca, Bhrh.
Native.
852.
M. arvensis, Hoffm.
Native.
M. arvensis and intermedia, Flora, 67.
853.
M. collina, Hoffm.
Native.
Dry hedgebanks ; not unfrequent.
854.
M. versicolor, Lehm.
Native.
Scottish.
British.
British.
British.
104 
LITHOSPERMUM.
855.
L. officinale, Linn.
Native.
British?
856.
L. arvense, Linn.
Native.
British.
857.
L. PURPUROCiERULEUM, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised in a wood near Ayton, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
SYMPHYTUM.
859.
S. officinale, Linn.
Native.
860.
S. tuberosum, Linn.
Native.
BORAGG.
861.
B. officinalis, Linn.
Alien.
LYCOPSIS.
862.
L. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
ANCHUSA.
864.
A. sempervirens, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
Scottish.
British.
British.
CYNOGLOSSUM.
866.
C. officinale, Linn.
Native.
English.
PULMONARIA.
868.* P.
officinalis, Linn.
Alien.
Camp Hill, near Bedale !
— M.
Hebbletiiwaite.
And other localities.
ECHIUM.
867.
E. vulgare, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER LVII.
PINGUICULACEiE.
PINGUICULA.
872.
P. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
105 
UTJEtlC ULARIA.
875.
U. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
877.
U. minor, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER LYIII.
PRIMULACEiE.
PRIMULA.
878.
P. VULGARIS, Huds.
Native.
British.
P. elatior, Flora , 75, is a fertile hybrid between this species and the 
following, not the plant of Jacquin or of later British Authors.
880.
P. veris, Linn.
Native.
British.
881.
P. farinosa, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
A stemless variety grows on Hawkswell moor, near Masham — Rev.
R. Pulleine ; and with Polygala uliginosa on Cronkley fell !
— James 
Backhouse, Jun.
TRIENTALIS.
884.
T. europjE a, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
HOTTONIA.
885.
H. palustris, Linn.
Native.
English.
LYSIMACHIA.
886.
L. vulgaris, Linn.
Native.
British ?
887.
L. thyrsiflora, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
888.
L. nummularia, Linn.
Native.
English.
889.
L. nemorum, Linn.
Native.
British.
ANAGALLIS.
890.
A. arvensis, Linn.
Native.
British ?
The pale-flowered variety (A.
carnea, Schrank ) occurs occasionally 
in cornfields at Bilton, between Broadsworth and Doncaster — 0.
A. 
Moore.
890b.
A. c^erulea, Smith.
Colonist.
English.
Not unfrequent at Adwick, near Doncaster — P.
Inchbald.
(Phyt, 
iii.
447.) 
891.
A. tenella, Linn.
Native.
British.
OENTUNOULUS.
892.
C. minimus, Linn.
Native.
British.
SAMOLUS.
893.
S. Valerandi, Linn.
Native.
British.
GLAUX.
894.
G. maritima, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER LIX.
PLUMBAGINACE^.
ARMERIA.
895.
A. maritima, Willd.
Native.
British.
Statice Armeria, 'Flora, 69.
Judging from the specimens which I 
have been enabled to examine in a dried or recent state, the Armeria 
of the Yorkshire coast line is principally A.
pubigera, Boiss ; and 
the plant of the inland localities, A.
puhescens, Link.
STATICE.
897.
S. Limonium, Linn.
Native.
English.
A plant which grows amongst the salt marshes at Coatham ap- 
proaches S.
Bahusiensis, Fries.
ORDER LX.
PLANTAGINACE4C.
PLANTAGO.
901.
P. major, Linn.
Native.
British.
902.
P. media, Linn.
Native.
English ?
903.
P. lanceolata, Linn.
Native.
British.
904.
P. maritima, Linn.
Native.
British.
905.
P. coronopus, Linn.
Native.
British.
LITTORELLA.
906.
L. lacustris, Linn.
Native.
British.
107 
ORDER LXIL CHENOPODXACEiE.
C1IEN OPODIUM.
908.
C. olidum, Linn.
Native?
English.
“ Marked in a list of plants checked for the Leeds district, by Mr.
Denny of that town” — H.
G. Watson, in litt., 1854.
A. weed in 
garden-ground, Bootham, York — 0.
A. Moore, Jas. Baclchouse.
909.
C. polyspermum, Linn.
Native.
English.
C. acutifolium, Flora, 88 and 145, is erroneous.
( Vide Cyb. Brit.
ii.
315.) Waste ground near Beningbrougli — J.
Backhouse.
910.
C. urbicum, Linn.
Native.
English.
In the streets of Redcar, near the railway station, 1849.
911.
C. rubrtjm, Linn.
Native, English.
Cultivated ground and waste places; not unfrequent.
A small 
prostrate form amongst the salt w r ater ditches in Coatham marshes.
912.
C. murale, Linn.
Native.
English.
In the streets at Bootham and Clifton, York.
914.
C. album, Linn.
Native.
British.
The variety C.
viride, Linn, is common on cultivated land.
915.
C. ficifolium, Linn.
Native.
Germanic 
In similar situations to the proceeding ; rare.
Waste ground near 
Brafferton — Bev. E.
Gray.
Roadside between Woodend and Thirsk, 
and other localities.
916.
C. glaucum, Linn.
Native.
English.
Waste ground near York — J.
Backhouse.
917.
C. Bonus-Henricus, Linn.
Denizen.
British ?
ATRIPLEX.
918.
A. portulacoldes, Linn.
Native.
English.
Waste ground near the sea; rare.
Tees’ mouth — J.
Backhouse, Jan.
Coatham marshes !
— W.
Foggitt.
Near Hull — J.
Kitching.
920.
A. arenaria, Woods.
Native.
British.
A. laciniata, Flora, 68 !
921.
A. Babingtonii, Woods.
Native.
British.
Middlesborough, Coatham, and Redcar, and probably along the 
coast.
922.
A. hastata, Linn.
Native.
British.
A.patula, Flora, 88.
Cultivated and waste land; everywhere plen- 
tiful.
108 
922b.
A. deltoidea, Bal. Native.
British.
In similar situations to the preceeding ; less frequent.
Waste 
ground near Hull — G.
G, Babington.
Near York — J.
Backhouse, Jan.
Norby and other places near Thirsk.
923.
A. angustieolia, Smith.
Native.
British.
In similar situations ; common.
A tall narrow-leaved Atriplex, with 
panicled spikes, which grows amongst the Coatham marshes, is 
probably A.
erecta of authors, which I have also had reported from 
the vicinity of Hull — G.
G. Babington ; and Heslington fields, near 
York — 0.
A. Moore, and J.
Backhouse, Jun.
924.
A. littoralis, Linn.
Native.
English.
Waste ground near Hull — G.
G. Babington.
Plentiful about Middles- 
borough and the Coatham marshes.
A. littoralis and marina, of 
authors, both occur; but seem to be connected by intermediate 
stages of transition.
BETA.
925.
B. maritima, Linn.
Native.
British.
SALSOLA.
926.
S. Kali, Linn.
Native.
British.
SCHOBEBIA.
927.
S. maritima, Meyer.
Native.
British.
Chenopodium, Flora, 88.
SALXCOBNIA.
029.
S. herbacea, Linn.
Native.
British.
S. procumbens, Smith, is plentiful amongst Coatham marshes.
930.
S. radicans, Smith.
Native.
Germanic.
On the banks of some of the salt water ditches in Coatham 
marshes!
— W.
Mudd.
Discovered in 1852.
ORDER LXIII.
ROLYGONACEiE.
POLYGONUM.
931.
P. bistorta, Linn.
932.
P. viviparum, Linn.
933.
P. amphibium, Linn.
Native.
Native.
Native.
British.
Highland.
British.
109 
935.
P. lapathifolium, Linn.
Native.
' British.
Cultivated ground and waste places ; common.
P nodosum, Pen .
; 
a variety of this species sometimes occurs.
934b.
P. laxum, JE.B.S. Native.
English.
Cultivated fields between Hawnby and Laskill, Bilsdale.
Perhaps 
not unfrequent, but doubtfully distinct as a species from the pro- 
ceeding.
935.
P. Persicaria, Linn.
Native.
British.
936.
P. mite, Schrank.
Native.
English.
Banks of the Eoss, near York — W.
Borrer.
Very plentiful about 
the great ditch on Knavesmire, near York!
— 0.
A. Moore , J.
Back- 
house, Jun.
937.
P. Hydropiper, Linn.
Native.
‘ British.
938.
P. minus, Huds.
Native.
English.
939.
P. aviculare, Linn.
Native.
British.
A much branched maritime form, probably P.
littorale, of authors, 
grows amongst the Coatham marshes.
P. Fagopyrum, Linn.
Alen.
941.
P. Convolvulus, Linn.
Native.
British.
A variety with winged perianth segments is not unfrequent.
RUMEX.
943.
R. Hydrolapathum, Linn.
Native.
English.
944.
R. crispus, Linn.
Native.
British.
944.
* R.
aquaticus, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
River banks and road sides, especially in the hilly districts ; locally 
plentiful.
Banks of the Ouse, Acomb and Clifton ings, near York, 
where it was discovered by Mr. Borrer.
Near Settle — J.
Backhouse , 
Jun. Near Hawes, Wensleydale — O.
A. Moore.
Banks of the Swale, 
near Richmond — J.
Ward.
Ditches near Kirby Wiske — T.
Simpson.
Wince bridge, Holwick, and other places in Teesdale.
945.
R. pratensis, M.
et K.
Native.
English.
River banks and waste ground ; rare.
Easby, near Richmond — J.
Ward.
Banks of the Foss near Earsley bridge, Heworth moor, and 
near Hawes, Wensleydale— O.
A. Moore.
Fields near the Foss at 
York — J.
Backhouse, Jun, Banks of Codbeck, Blakey bridge, and 
other places near Thirsk.
947.
R. obtusifoIiIus, Linn.
Native.
British.
948.
R. sanguineus, Linn.
Native.
British.
Roadsides and waste ground ; common.
948.* R.
conglomeratus, Murr.
Native.
British.
R. acutus, Flora, 142.
110 
950.
R. maritimus, Linn.
Native.
English.
Bury hills, near Kirklington !
— M.
Hebblethwaite.
950b.
R. palustris, Smith.
Native.
English.
By the Foss, near Peasholmegreen bridge, York — 0.
A. Moore.
A 
single plant on Knavesmire, near York — J.
Backhouse, Jun. Ditch 
at Pickhill, near Bedale !
— T.
Simpson.
Seacroft, near Leeds— 
A. Shipley.
It is not improbable that under this name two distinct 
species* are confused in Britain, viz.
R. limosus of Thuillier, and 
R. Steinii of Becker.
The only Yorkshire specimen which I have 
seen ( vide supra ) is possibly the former.
R. scutatus, Linn.
Incognit.
The Silverdale locality, on faith of which this species is admitted 
as a naturalised Yorkshire plant in the Cybele Britannica, is in 
Lancashire.
951.
R. Acetosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
952.
R. Acetosella, Linn.
Native.
British.
OXYRIA.
953.
O. renieormis, Hook.
Incognit.
Mountains in the north and west ridings — Teesdale.
“ The only 
locality I ever heard of is the foot of Ingleborough ; but I never srav 
it there, and think it was probably a mistake ” — J.
Backhouse, in litt.
1854.
Admitted as a native of Yorkshire in the Cybele Britannica ; 
but is desirable that some special locality should be ascertained, 
before it can be received with confidence.
ORDER LXIY.
ELEAGNACEiE.
HIPPOPHAE.
954.
H. rhAmnoides, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
Amongst the coast sandhills at Lythe, near Whitby, 1852!
— W.
* I liave subjoined a translation from Koch’s Synopsis, of the diagnostic characters of these two sup- 
posed species.
“ R.
limosus ( Thuill .
par.
182).
Enlarged petals, ovate oblong, with two setaceous teeth on each 
side, but quite entire at the elongate lanceolate apex: each bearing a tubercle: teeth shorter than the 
enlarged petals : whorls somewhat remote leafy : leaves linear lanceolate or elongate lanceolate, nar- 
rowed into the petiole.
E. maritimus, Hoffm not Linn.
R. palustris, Koch.
“ R.
Steinii (Bede.
fl.
v. Frankf.
165).
Enlarged petals, ovate, with two setaceous teeth on each side, 
but quite entire at the elongate apex: each bearing a tubercle : teeth shorter than the enlarged petals: 
whorls remote, lower leafy, upper naked: radical leaves broadly oblong, with a cordate base: stem 
leaves lanceolate from a rounded base, upper lanceolate.
Allied to R.
conglomeratus and sanguineus, 
but differing by the subulate dentate teeth of its perigone ; and from R.
limosus by its perennial root, 
and by its two or three times broader root leaves, with cordate bases.” 
Ill 
Mudd.
Probably this is the same station as tlie one mentioned in 
the Flora ; but it is intimated in the Cybele Britannica, that it is 
desirable that the growth of this species in Yorkshire should receive 
modern verification.
ORDER LXV.
T H YME LAC EiE .
DAPHNE.
955.
D. Laureola, Linn.
Native.
English.
956.
D. Mezereum, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
ORDER LXVII.
ASARACE.ZE.
ASARUM.
958.
A. europium, Linn.
Native?
Local.
It is stated that this plant is now eradicated in both the stations 
mentioned in the Flora.
It is reported to have occurred in the 
woods near Newby Wiske.
ARISTOLOCHIA.
959.
A. Clematitis, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalised near the old castle in Mulgrave woods, near Whitby!
— 
IF.
Mudd.
ORDER LXVIII.
EMPETRACE2E.
EMPETRUM.
960.
E. nigrum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish, 
ORDER LXIX.
EUPHORBIACEiE.
EUPHORBIA.
962.
E. helioscopia, Linn.
Native.
British.
112 
963.
E. platyphylla, Linn.
Colonist.
English.
Cornfields and cultivated land; rare.
Near Terrington — R.
Spruce.
On arable land at Adwick, near Doncaster; no doubt introduced 
with seedcorn — P.
Inchbald (Phyt.
iii.
448).
Fields near Rawcliffe 
— 0.
A. Moore.
Haxby, near York, and in a field between Addle 
and Headingley, Leeds — A.
Shipley.
964.
E. hiberna, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized in Kildale woods, Cleveland !
— W.
Mudd.
968.
E. Cyparissias, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized on the Cliff rigg, Ayton !
— W.
Mudd ; and on Snape 
mires and other places near Bedale !
— T.
Simpson.
971.
E. exigua, Linn.
Native.
English.
972.
E. Peplus, Linn.
Native.
British.
973.
E. Lathyris, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized about Newton, between Ayton and Guisborough !
— W.
Mudd.
About Newton-le-Willows, near Bedale!
— T.
Simpson; and 
amongst the Middlcsborough ballast hills !
— M.
Umpleby.
974.
E. amygdaloides, Linn.
Native.
English 
In a copse between Bilton and Wighill park, near York — 0.
A. 
Moore.
BUXUS.
975.
B. sempervirens, Linn.
Alien.
MERCURTALIS.
976.
M. perennis, Linn.
Native.
British.
977.
M. annua, Linn.
Alien.
Naturalized amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 1852!
— W.
Mudd.
ORDER LXX.
URTICACEvE.
urtica.
978.
U. urens, Linn.
Native.
British.
979.
• U.
diotca, LAnn 
Native..
British.
PARIETARIA.
982.
P. officinalts, Linn.
Native.
British.
All the Yorkshire specimens of Pellitory which I have been enabled 
113 
to examine either in a recent or dried state have belonged to P„ 
diffusa, Koch.
HUMULUS.
983.
H, Lupulus, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
ULMUS.
984.
U. Montana, Smith.
Native.
British.
Woods and hedgerows; much more frequent than the following 
species, especially in more or less elevated situations.
Unquestion- 
ably a true native.
985.
U. suberosa, Fhrh .
Native ?
English.
U. suberosa , Flora , 90, and U.
campestris, Flora, 91.
In similar situ- 
ations in the lower districts of the county.
Probably a true native, 
but open to some slight suspicion.
ORDER LXXI.
AMENTIFERiE.
QUEBCUS.
988a.
Q. pedunculata, Willd.
Native.
British.
988c.
Q. sessiliflora, Salisb.
Native.
British.
Woods and hedgerows, especially in more or less elevated situa- 
tions ; less frequent than the preceeding.
Intermediate forms occur 
occasionally.
FAGUS.
989.
F. sylvatica, Linn .
Denizen?
English.
CASTANEA.
C. vulgaris, Lam. Alien.
CAEPINUS.
990.
C. betulus, Linn.
Alien.
Hedgerows and plantations ; not unfrequent.
991.
C. Avellana, Linn .
H 
COEYLUS.
Native.
British.
114 
ALNUS.
992.
A. glutinosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
BETULA.
993.
B. alba, Linn.
Native.
British.
B. pendula, Roth, B.
glutinosa, Wallr., and B pubescens, Ehrh., 
ranged here as varieties in the London Catalogue, all occcur 
occasionally.
There appears, however, considerable probability 
that we possess two truly distinct species, viz., — 1, B.
verucosa, 
Ehrh., (B.
alba, Koch and Babington,) of which B.
pendula, Roth, is 
a condition or variety : and 2, B.
glutinosa, of Wallroth and Fries, 
of which B.
pubescens, Ehrh, is a condition or variety.
Of these 
two supposed species, the last is the ip.ost plentiful in Yorkshire, 
especially amongst the moorlands.
POPULUS.
995.
P. alba, Linn.
Native.
Riverbanks and hedgerows ; frequent.
997.
P. tremula, Linn.
Native.
Woods and hedgerows ; common.
998.
P. nigra, Linn.
Denizen ?
Riverbanks and hedgerows; frequent; but usually evidently 
planted.
P. monilifera and dilatata are sometimes planted in 
similar situations.
British.
British.
English.
SALIX.
999.
S. pentandra, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
Riverbanks and marshy ground ; frequent, both in the central 
vale and amongst the moorlands.
1001.
S. fragilis, Linn.
Native.
British.
a. S.
decipjens, Hoffm.
Hedge between Thirsk and South Kilvington ; sparingly.
b. S.
fragilis, Linn.
Riverbanks and hedgerows ; common.
c. S.
Russelliana, Aut. Ang.
Easby, near Richmond — James Ward.
(Salictum Britannicum, 
No. 55.*) Dr. Anderssen refers this to S.
fragilis.
He suggests 
that the true Russelliana of Smith is identical with a distinct 
species, S.
viridis of Fries.
* Specimens of many of the Yorkshire Willows were issued in the Rev. J.
E. Leefe’s “Salictum 
Britannicum.”   A series of notes upon these by Dr. Anderssen, the celebrated Swedish Salicetist and 
author of the “ Salices Lapponise,” may he found in the Botanical Gazette, vol.
iii.
p. 57 .
115 
1002.
S. alba, Linn.
- Native.
English ?
In situations similar to the preceding ; equally frequent.
The 
variety S.
cserulea, Smith, occurs occasionally.
1002.
* S.
vitellina, Linn.
Native.
English.
In similar situations ; rare.
In osieries, Teesclale, (B.
G., 718.) 
Banks of the Leven, near Stokesley !
— W.
Mudd.
Vide also 
Flora, 143.
1003.
S. undulata, Ehrh.
Incognit.
S. lanceolata, Flora, 91.
Doubtless erroneous.
1004.
S. triandra, Linn.
Native.
English.
Riverbanks and osier grounds ; frequent.
S. triandra, Curt., (S.
B. 8), from Skeeby, near Richmond, Dr. Anderssen regards as 
exactly the true amygdalina of Linnaeus.
e. S.
amygdalina, Smith.
Hedges and banks of ditches — Teesdale, (B.
G., 718.) Banks of 
the Foss at Huntington, near York — O.
A. Moore.
S. acutifolia, Willd.
Native.
Local.
Bank of the Ure, near Wensley, 1831 — J.
Ward.
Airyholme Wood 
and banks of the Leven, near Ayton (a single bush each in three 
localities) !
— W.
Mudd.
Discovered in 1852.
For an account of 
this species vide Phytol., vol.
v. page 33.
1005.
S. purpurea, Linn.
Native.
English.
S. Lambertiana and purpurea, Flora, 92, About Beverley — Tees- 
dale.
By Nunwick, near Ripon — W.
Brunton, (B.
G., 717.) Banks 
of the Swale, near Richmond — James Ward, (ramulosa, Borr., 
S. B., 11, 12, 13.
Lambertiana, Smith, S.
B., 14.) Near Bromp- 
ton-on-Swale (Woolgariana) — James Ward.
Between Mickley and 
Tanfield — T.
Simpson.
Banks of the Skell, between Studley and 
Ripon.
Banks of Codbeck, between Dalton and Sowerby.
(Lam- 
bertiana.) 
1005.
* S.
Helix, Smith, Linn 1 Native.
English.
Banks of the Tees, near Blackwell bridge!
— W.
Mudd.
Banks 
of Codbeck, between Thirsk and Kilvington, and near its junction 
with the Swale.
Banks of the Skell, between Ripon and Studley.
Osier grounds near Little Carlton (probably planted) Moatwood, 
near Thirsk, and in the wood above Kirby Knowle.
Banks of 
the Swale, above Skipton bridge.
Very doubtfully distinct from 
the preceding as a species.
1006.
S. rubra, Huds.
Native.
English.
Banks of the Swale, below Topcliffe — W.
Foggitt.
Banks of the 
Skell, between Studley and Ripon.
Banks of Codbeck, between 
Thirsk and Kilvington.
Osier grounds near Thirsk and Little 
Carlton (probably planted).
1006.* S.
Forbyana, Sm., Borr.
Native.
English.
Between Tanfield and Mickley — T.
Simpson.
Banks of the Cod- 
116 
beck, Holmes, Thirsk ; sparingly.
Plentiful in a wood between 
Tliirsk and Woodend.
Between Bedale and Snape.
1007.
S. viminalis, Linn.
Native.
British.
Riverbanks, hedgerows, and damp places; common.
1007.
'!' S.
stipularis, Smith.
Native.
British?
Near Ripon — W.
Brunton (B.
G. 718).
It is desirable that the oc- 
currence of this species should receive modern confirmation.
1008.
S. Smithiana, Willd.
Native.
English.
In similar situations to the preceding ; probably not unfrequent.
Near Richmond — James Ward (S.
B. 27, 28, 29, fide Anderssen).
S. rugosa, S.B. 81, 32, Dr. Anderssen refers to the next species.
In a damp wood between Thirsk and Woodend.
Banks of the 
Codbeck, and hedges between Thirsk and Kilvington.
(Smithiana 
and ferruginea ) 
1009.
S. acuminata, Smith.
Native.
English.
Near Richmond — Jas. Ward (S.
B. 31, 32, fide Atiderssen).
S. Seringeana, Gaud.
Incognit.
To this species* Dr. Andersen suggests that S.
B. 39, collected 
near Richmond — Jas. Ward, should be.
referred.
It merits fur- 
ther investigation.
1010.
S. cinerea, Linn.
Native.
British.
S. cinerea and oleifolia, Flora, 92.
S. aquatica, Flora, 143.
River- 
banks and damp places ; common.
1011.
S. aurita, Linn.
Native.
British.
Damp woods and hedgerows ; frequent.
1012.
S. Caprea, Linn.
Native.
British.
Woods, hedgerows, and damp places; common, S.
sphacelata, 
Smith, probably a variety of this species, occurs in the neigh- 
bourhood of Richmond — J.
Ward.
1013.
S. nigricans, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
S. Andersoniana, Flora, 92.
To this species Dr. Anderssen refers 
S. hirta, S.
B. 67, from Ravensworth, near Richmond — James 
Ward.
Near Weathercote, Bilsdale!
— A.
Watson.
Damp places, 
and along the banks of the stream at the bottom of Flazendale, 
near Rievaulx; plentiful (Andersoniana).
1014.
S. laurina, Smith.
Native.
Scottish.
S. bicolor.
Flora, 92.
Near Richmond — Jas. Ward (S.
B. 73).
No. 43, S.
B., is a doubtful form from the same vicinity, referred 
by Dr. Anderssen to this species.
* I subjoin a diagnosis of this species, translated from Koch’s Synopsis: 
“ S.
Seringeana (Gaud.
fl.
helv.
6. p.
251).
Aments sessile arcuate bracteated at the base : capsules 
stalked tomentose, lanceolate from an ovate base: pedicel twice the length of the gland: style elongate: 
stigmas bifid: leaves lanceolate oblong acuminate crenulate, roughly veined and covered with white 
tomentum beneath : stipules ovate acute.
Banks of rivers in sub-alpine vallies,” 
117 
1015.
S. phylicifolia, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
S. Croweana, Flora , 93.
To these species Dr. Anclerssen refers 
the plants issued in the Salictum under the following names and 
numbers, viz — “68, 69, rupestris, Donn.
; 70, 71, rupestris?
72, 
tenuior, Borr .; 74, 76, 77, Weigeliana, E.B.S.; 79, Weigeliana, 
Forbes ; 80, 81, 83, Croweana, Smith ; 82, nitens, And.
; 84, 85, tetra- 
pla, Walk.
; ” all collected in the vicinity of Richmond — J.
Ward : 
and doubtfully, “ 75, propinqua, Borrer ,” collected near Wensley, 
in Wensleydale — Jas. Ward.
Bank of the Tees above Middleton, 
to Cronkley ; plentiful.
(Croweana, Weigeliana, and nitens.) 
1017.
S. fusca, Linn.
Native.
British.
S. repens and prostrata, Flora, 92.
S. argentea and fusca, Flora , 93.
Heaths and riverbanks ; frequent.
S. ROSMABiNiFOLiA, Linn.
Incognit.
The localities mentioned under this species in the Flora are 
doubtless erroneous.
1023.
S. myrsinites, Linn.
Incognit.
On the slope of a high hill between Kilnsey and Arncliffe — Curtis 
(B.
G. 718).
Probably erroneous, or at least requiring confirma- 
tion.
1026.
S. reticulata, Linn.
Incognit.
Reported by Ray as growing upon Whernside and Ingleborough, 
but doubtless he mistook S.
herbacea for the present species.
1027.
S. herbacea, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
Ingleborough, and other high mountains in the north and west 
ridings — Teesdale (B.
G. 718).
On Whernside, near Ingleton — 
R. Clapham.
MYRICA.
1028.
M. Gale, Linn.- Native.
British.
ORDER LXXII.
CONIFERS.
PINUS.
1029.
P. sylvestris, Linn.
Alien.
JUNIPEBUS 
1030.
J. communis, Linn.
Native.
British.
118 
TAXUS.
1031.
T. baccata, Linn.
Native.
British.
Near Fountain’s Abbey there is a yew tree estimated by De 
Candolle to be about 1300 years old.
ORDER LXXIII.
ORCHIDACEiE.
SPIEANTHES.
1033.
S. autumnalis, Rich.
Native.
British, 
Neottia spiralis, Flora , 100.
NEOTTIA.
1036.
N. Nidus-avis, Rich.
Native.
British 
Lister a, Flora, 101.
LISTERA.
1037.
L. cordata, Brown.
Native.
Scottish.
1038.
L. ovata, Brown.
Native.
British.
EPIPACTIS.
1039.
E. latifolia, Swartz.
Native.
British.
Shady woods and thickets ; 
not unfrequent.
1039.* E.
media, Fries.
Native.
English.
“ Mr. C.
C Babington informed me that he had a specimen, picked 
near Sheffield, by the Rev. W.
W. Newbould” — H.
G. Watson in 
litt., 1854.
Friarage woods, on the Yorkshire side of the Tees, 
near Yarm !
— W.
Foggitt.
1039.
* E.
ovalis, Bab. Native.
British.
E. rubra, Flora, 101, is this species, which grows also at Macker- 
shaw woods, near Ripon — O.
A. Moore ; and at Nosterfield lime- 
kilns!
— T.
Simpson, M.
Hebblethwaite.
1040.
E. palustris, Swartz.
Native.
British.
1042.
E. ensifolia, Swartz.
Native.
English.
Woods about Rievaulx abbey — G.
S. Gibson, (Phyt., ii.
374.) 
Hawnby — T.
J. Foggitt ; and Beckdale, near Helmsley — John H.
Phillips.
Forge wood, Scarborough!
— E.Bean.
Guisborough 
Spa wood !
— W.
Mudd.
Rosedale abbey !
— I.
Rartas.
1043, E.
rubra, Swartz.
Incognit.
119 
ORCHIS.
1045.
O. morio, Linn.
Native.
English.
1046.
O. mascula, Linn.
Native.
British.
1048.
O. ustulata, Linn.
Native.
English.
1051.
O. pyramid alis, Linn.
Native.
English.
1052.
O. latieolta, Linn.
Native.
British.
This includes three supposed species, as defined by Koch and 
other continental authors, each of which occurs occasionally.
1053.
O. maculata, Linn.
Native.
British.
GYMNADENIA.
1054.
G. conopsea, Brown.
Native.
British.
HABENARIA.
1055.
H. bieolia, Brown.
Native.
British.
Grassy fields and heathy pastures, especially amongst the moor- 
land districts ; not unfrequent.
1055b.
H. chlorantha, Bab. Native.
British.
In similar situations to the preceeding ; equally frequent.
This 
species is included under H.
bifolia, Flora, 102.
1056.
H. viridis, Brown.
Native.
British.
1057.
H. albida, Brown.
Native.
Scottish.
ACERAS.
1058.
A. anthropophora, Br. Incognit..
“ It is reported to have been discovered by Mrs. Broadrick, in 
Hamphole wood, near Doncaster.
While it would be satisfactory 
to me to obtain a verification of this report, indirectly conveyed 
and probably unpublished, the alleged habitat near Doncaster, 
does not appear so unlikely as to warrant its rejection without 
further inquiry ; although, for the present, I prefer to hold it un- 
certain ” — H.
C. Watson, (Cyb. Brit., ii.
432).
HERMINIUM.
1059.
H. Monorchis, Brown.
Incognit.
“ In the first volume of the New Botanist’s Guide, it is given for 
Yorkshire dubiously; but confirmed in the second volume, p.
657, 
thus : ‘ Mr. Winch intimates that he has a Yorkshire specimen 
received from Mr. Bicheno — H.
G. Watson, in litt., 1854.
120 
OPFIRYS.
1060.
O. apifera, Ruds.
Native.
Germanic.
1061.
O. aranifera, Huds.
Native?
Germanic.
It is desirable that the stations mentioned for this species in the 
Flora, which rest upon old authority only, should receive modem 
verification.
( Vide Cyb. Brit., ii.
435).
1062.
O. muscifera, Huds.
Native.
Germanic.
MALAXIS.
1063.
M. paludosa, Swartz.
Incognit.
Formerly found opposite the High Force — J.
Backhouse.
The 
station mentioned in the Flora is on the Durham side of the 
Tees.
CYPRIPEDIUM.
1065.
C. Calceolus, Linn.
Native.
Local.
Beckdale, near Helmsley, 1844 — O.
S. Gibson.
“I gathered a 
specimen in flower, June 12th, 1849 ; but have only seen leaves 
since ” — John Phillips, Helmsley, 1854.
Kildale woods, Cleveland, 
1852 !
— W.
Mudd.
ORDER LXXIY.
IRIDACE^.
IRIS.
1066.
I. f(etidissima, Linn.
Native.
English.
In ditches at Little Nunwick and Kirklington, near Rip on !
— T.
Simpson, M.
Hebblethwaite.
1067.
I. Pseudacorus, Linn.
Native.
British, 
CROCUS.
1069.
C. vernus, Willd.
Alien.
1070.
C. NxmxFLORUs, Smith.
Alien.
C. aureus, Sibth.
Alien.
An occasional rambler from garden cultivation.
121 
ORDER LXXY.
AMARYLLIDACEiE.
NARCISSUS.
1071.
N. poeticus, Linn.
Alien.
1072.
N. biflorus, Curt.
Alien.
N. incomparabilis, Curt.
Alien.
In a field between Guisborough and the Spa!
— W.
H. Clemesha.
Thoroughly established in a field between North and South Kil- 
vington, near Thirsk.
( Vide Phyt., ii.
600).
1073.
N. Pseudo-narcissus, Linn.
Native.
English.
GALANTHUS.
1074.
G. nivalis, Linn.
Alien ?
ORDER LXXVI.
LILIACE.E.
LILIUM.
1076.
L. Martagon, Linn.
Alien.
In the wood behind Mr. Gossip’s house, at Thorp Arch; but no 
doubt planted — S.
Hailstone, J.
Backhouse.
In the wood on the 
bank of the Swale, below Aisenby, probably the outcast of a 
garden.
TULIPA.
1077.
T. sylve stris, Linn.
Denizen.
English.
This species is marked as a probable alien in the Cybele Britan- 
nica, but would appear to possess strong claims to be considered 
indigenous to the locality mentioned in the Flora.
( Vide also 
Phyt., ii.
330).
FRITILLARIA.
1078.
F. Meleagris, Linn.
Incognit.
ALLIUM.
1081.
A. Scorodoprasum, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
A. arenarium , Flora , 106.
122 
1082.
A. oleraceum, Linn.
Native, English.
A. carinatum, Flora , 106, ( Smith, not Linn.,) is a variety of this 
species.
1083.
A. vineale, Linn.
Native.
British.
1085.
A. Scelenoprasum, Linn.
Alien or Incognit.
This species grows with Sedum reflexum, on garden walls near 
Ricvaulx.
The Kirby Moorside station requires modern verifica- 
tion.
1086.
A. ursinum, Linn.
Native.
GAGEA.
1087.
G. lutea, Ker. Native.
Ornithogalum, Flora, 106.
OENITHOGALUM.
1089.
O. nutans, Linn.
Alien.
1090.
O. umbellatum, Linn.
Alien.
HYACINTHUS.
1093.
H. nonscriptus, Linn.
Native.
S cilia, Flora.
107.
EUSCUS.
1097.
E. aculeatus, Linn.
Native.
Woods at Ormesby, near Middlesborough and near Egton, Esk- 
dale; probably introduced at the latter locality!
— W.
Mudd.
Naturalised in a hedge at Whitcliffe, near Kichmond — Jas. Ward.
CONVALLAEIA.
1099.
C. majalis, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
1101.
C. multiflora, Linn.
Native.
English.
1102.
C. Polygonatum, Linn.
Native.
English.
The Fountain’s Abbey station is probably erroneous.
Scottish.
British.
English.
ORDER LXXVL* TRILLIACEiE.
PAEIS.
1103.
P. quadrifolia, Linn.
Native.
English.
123 
ORDER LXXVII.
TAMACE2E.
1104.
T. communis, Linn.
TAMUS.
Native.
English.
ORDER LXXYIII.
MELANTHACEiE.
COLCHICUM.
1105.
C. autumnale, Linn.
Native.
English.
TOEIELDIA.
1106.
T. palustris, Huds.
Native.
Highland.
ORDER LIX.
HYDROCHARACEiE.
HYDROCHABIS.
1107.
H. Morsus-ranyE, Linn.
Native.
English.
ANACHAKIS.
1107.* A.
Alsinastrum, Bab. Alien.
Planted in a pond below the bridge over the Wiske, at Kirby 
Wiske, near Thirsk.
( Vide Phyt., iv.
867, 751; v.
55, 80).
Un- 
doubtedly identical with Udora canadensis of Nuttall (as it was 
introduced to this locality direct from America) : and therefore 
his specific name should be retained, having been applied many 
years previous to that which has been pretty generally adopted in 
this country.
STRATIOTES.
1108.
S. aloides, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
Common in the fens about Doncaster — P.
Inclibald , (Phyt.
iii.
448).
In a pone]/ near Knaresborough — M.
Hebblethwaite.
Natu- 
ralised in a pond at Deeming lane, near Bedale !
— T.
Simpson.
124 
ORDER LXXX.
ALISMACEiE.
ALISMA.
1109.
A. Plantago, Linn.
Native.
British.
1110.
A. ranunculoides, Linn.
Native.
British.
1111.
A. natans, Linn.
Incognit.
Reported doubtfully by Teesdale, (B.
G., 685), from the lake at 
Hornsea.
SAGITTARIA.
1113.
S. sagittifolia, Linn.
Native.
English.
BUTOMUS.
1114.
B. umbellatus, Linn.
Native.
English.
TRXGLOCHIN.
1115.
T. mamtimum, Linn.
Native.
British.
1116.
T. palustre, Linn.
Native.
British.
SCHEU CHZERIA.
1117.
S. palustris, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
This species still grows at the old station at Leckby Carr ; but 
may easily he overlooked by those unacquainted with the locality.
ORDER LXXXI.
FLUVIALES.
POTAMOGETON.
1118.
P. denses, Linn.
Native.
English.
Ponds and slow streams ; not unfrequent in low situations.
1119.
P. pectinatus, Linn.
Native.
British.
In similar situations ; not unfrequent.
A maritime form grows in 
the saltwater ditches in the Coatham and Middlesborough marshes.
1119c.
P. elabellatus, Bab. Native.
English.
In the fen ditches between Hull and Hedon — Rev. W.
W. New- 
bould,fide C.
G. Babington, (Phyt., iv.
1160).
1120.
P. pustllus, Linn.
Native.
British.
Ponds and slow streams ; frequent.
125 
1120.* P.
compressus, Linn.
Native.
British.
In the Foss, near York- 
-0.
A. Moore.
1121.
P. gramineus, 11 Linn.” 
Native.
English 
1123.
P. ZOSTERiEFOLIUS, Schm .
Incognit.
1124.
P. crispus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1125.
P. perfoliatus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1126.
P, lucens, Linn.
Native.
British.
Plentiful in the Foss, 
near York — S.
Hailstone, 
0. A.
Moor 
Malliam Tarn — J.
Backhouse , Jun .
In the Mere at Scarborough.
1127.
P. prjelongus, Wulf.
Native.
Germanic.
With the preceding species in Malliam Tarn — J.
Backhouse, Jun.
Gormire, near Thirsk.
1129.
P. heterophyllus, Schreb.
Native.
British.
Frequent near Bedale !
— T.
Simpson.
Potteric Carr, near Doncaster 
— 0.
A. Moore.
Plentiful in Gormire, near Thirsk.
1130.
P. lanceolatus, Smith.
Incognit.
“ Inserted on Mr. Ward’s authority in the first volume of the 
New Botanist’s Guide ; but in the second volume, the name is 
corrected to P.
heterophyllus.
In the Companion to the Botanical 
Magazine, vol.
i., p.
292, Mr. Woods says that in Gormire pool he 
. found a Potamogeton, * which I believe to be P.
lanceolatus, but 
without any floating leaves.’ It was also more probably P.
heterophyllus” — H.
G. Watson in litt., 1854.
The species which 
grow in Gormire are natans, heterophyllus and prselongus.
1131.
P. rufescens, Schrad.
Native 1 .
British.
P.fluitans, Flora, 96.
Pond near Scarborough — Jno. S.
Roivntree.
Pond at St. Trinnians, near Richmond — James Ward.
1132.
P. natans, Linn.
Native.
British.
1133.
P. oblongus, Viv. Native.
British.
Pools and ditches, especially in moory places ; frequent.
1134.
P. plantagineus, Ducr.
Native.
British.
In similar situations ; probably not unfrequent.
Heslington 
fields, near York !
— G.
G. Babington.
On the moors between Lune- 
dale and Teesdale — J.
Backhouse, Jun. Bogs near the Black beck, 
Baysdale !
— W.
Mucld.
RUPPIA.
1135.
R. maritima, Linn, Native.
English?
The plant so plentiful amongst the Coatham saltmarshes is the 
true mhritima of Linnaeus.
I am not aware of the occurrence of 
R. rostellata within the limits of the county ; but a considerable 
portion of our coast line has been as yet only very imperfectly 
explored.
126 
ZANNICIIELLIA.
1136.
Z. palusteis, Linn.
Native.
British.
Ditches and slow streams ; frequent.
Z. pedicellata, Reich., 
placed as a variety of this species in Babington’s Manual and the 
London Catalogue, but considered as a distinct species by Fries 
and other continental authors, has been found in salt water 
ditches near Hull — C.
C. Babington; and in the neighbourhood 
of Middlesborough — W.
Mucld.
ZOSTERA.
1137.
Z. maeinA, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER LXXXII.
ARACE2E.
LEMNA.
1138.
L. minoe, Linn.
1139.
L. gibba, Linn.
1140.
L. polyehiza, Linn.
1141.
L. teisulca, Linn.
Native.
Native.
Native.
Native.
Ponds and ditches ; not unfrequent.
British.
English.
English.
British.
1142.
A. maculatum, Linn.
ARUM.
Native.
1143.
A. Calamus, Linn.
ACORUS.
Native.
English.
English.
SPARGANIUM.
1144.
S. minimum, Fries, Native.
British.
Ditch at Pickhill, near Bedale — T.
Simpson.
I have no means of 
ascertaining whether the localities mentioned in the Flora belong 
this species or the true natans.
One of these (probably S.
mini- 
mum) also occurs at Buttercram.be and other places near York — 
O. A.
Moore.
Most likely both will be found in the county even- 
tually.
1145.
S. simplex, Hnds.
1146.
S. EAMOSUM, Huds.
Native.
Native.
British.
British.
127 
TYPHA.
T latifolia, Linn.
Native.
British ?
T. angustifolia, Linn.
Native.
English.
T. minor, Smith.
Incognit.
“In the New Botanist’s Guide a second locality was added, 
through an inadvertence there suggested, viz.
in the mere at 
Scarborough” — H.
G. Watson (Cyb. Brit.
iii.
36).
ORDER LXXXIV.
JUNCACE^.
JUNCUS.
1151.
J. conglomerates,' Linn.
Native.
British.
1151.
* J.
eefusus, Linn.
Native.
British.
Roadsides and boggy pastures ; common.
1152.
J. GLAucus, Sibth.
Native.
English.
In similar situations ; frequent.
1152.* J.
diffusus, Hoppe.
Native.
English.
In similar situations; perhaps not rare.
Near Ilkley !
— Geo. 8.
Gibson.
In the fields near the Woodend railway bridge, near 
Thirsk.
Ditches between Newsham and Woodend.
1154.
J. maritimus, Smith.
Native.
British.
Near Whitby — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
Amongst the Coatham salt- 
marshes, and the sandhills in front of the village.
1156.
J. acutiflorus, Ehrh.
Native.
British.
Damp fields and boggy places ; common.
1157.
J. lamprocarpus, Ehrh.
Native.
British.
A procumbent rush, much resembling this species, but smaller in 
size, with all the segments of the perianth acute, which I col- 
lected in 1853 near the head of Bilsdale, is perhaps J.
nigritellus, 
D. Don. J.
polycephalus, Flora, 109, is a form of J.
supinus.
1158.
J. obtusiflortjs, Ehrh.
Native.
English.
In similar situations to the two preceding species, but rare.
Marsh at Skeeby, near Richmond — Jas. Ward.
Askliam bogs, 
near York — 0.
A. Moore.
By the lake above the landslip at Kirby 
Knowle — Wm. Foggitt.
Ditches between Woodend and Newsham 
near Thirsk, and between Newby Wiske and Kirby Wiske.
1159.
J. supinus, Mceneh.
Native.
British.
J. uliginosus, subverticillatus, and polycephalus, Flora , 109.
Watery 
places ; common.
128 
1160.
J. compressus, Jacq.
_ Native.
British.
J. coenosus, Bich., occurs in the vicinity of Whitby — Rev. O.
E. 
Smith., and is plentiful on the margin of the salt water ditches at 
Middlesborough and Coatham.
Probably it is a variety of this 
species.
1162.
J. bufonius, Linn.
Native.
British.
1163.
J. squarrosus, Linn.
Native.
British 
1168.
J. triglumis, Linn.
Incognit.
Planted upon the sugar limestone on Cronkley fell, by J.
Binks, 
of Middle ton-in-Teesdale — J.
Backhouse.
This species might 
easily be supposed to be a true native, as it grows in great abun- 
dance on the Durham side of the Tees.
LUZULA.
1169.
L. sylvatica, Bich.
Native.
British.
Et seq.
Luciola, Flora, 109, 110.
Woods and riverbanks, especially 
in moorland districts ; frequent.
1170.
L. pilosa, Willd.
Native.
British.
Woods, thickets, and hedgebanks ; common.
1172.
L. campestrts, Brown.
Native.
British.
1172.* L.
multiflora, Lej. Native.
British.
L. congesta, Flora, 110.
Heaths and moory places; frequent.
NABTHECIUM.
1175.
N. ossifragum, Huds.
Native.
British.
ORDER LXXXY.
CYPERACEiE.
CYPERUS.
1177.
C. fuscus, Linn.
Native.
Germanic.
Codhill bog, Guisborough moor, near Roseberry Topping, Cleve- 
land!
— W.Mudd.
Discovered in 1852.
CLADIUM.
1178.
C. Mariscus, “Brown.” Native.
English.
SOHGENUS.
1179.
S. nigricans, Linn.
Native.
British.
Boggy and watery places ; not unfrequent.
129 
RHYNCOSPOEA.
1180.
R. alba., Vahl.
Native.
British.
1 J 81.
R. fusca, Smith.
Ineognit.
Reported doubtfully by Teesdale, as growing with the last species 
at Terrington ; but the plant he found was probably R.
alba, var.
sordida, Bab.
{vide B.
G., 667).
BLYSMUS.
1182.
B. compressus, Panz.
Native.
English.
Conisborough, near Doncaster — 0 .
A. Moore.
Banks of streams 
near Rievaulx, and in the dale below Morton House, near Hawnby.
Boggy fields between Thirsk and Upsal.
Amongst the coast 
sandhills about Coatham, Redcar, and Saltburn.
Aysgarth Force, 
Wensleydale, and other localities.
SOIRPUS.
1184.
S. lacustris, Linn.
Native.
British.
Ponds and streams ; frequent.
1184b.
S. glaucus, Smith.
Native.
English.
In the salt-water ditches behind the mill at West Coatham, m 
Redcar.
Doubtfully distinct as a species from the preceding.
1186.
S. setaceus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1190.
S. maritimus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1191.
S. sylvaticus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1192.
S. paltjstris, Linn.
Native.
British.
Eleocharis, Flora, 111.
1198.
S. multicaulis, Smith.
Native.
British.
Eleocharis, Flora, 111.
1194.
S. pauciflobus, Lightf.
Native.
British.
1196.
S. CJ3SPITOSUS, Linn.
Native.
British.
1197.
S. acicularis, Linn.
Native.
English.
Eleocharis, Flora, 111.
1198.
S. fluitans, Linn.
Native.
British.
ERIOPHORUM.
1199.
E. vaginatum, Linn.
Native.
British.
Moory and boggy places ; frequent.
1200.
E. angustifolium, Roth.
Native.
British.
E. polystachion, Flora, 111.
E. angustifolium, Flora, 112 In 
similar situations ; frequent.
130 
1201.
E. latifolium, Hoppe.
Native.
British.
In the wood near the source of Locker beck, Snailesworth.
Boggy 
fields at the bottom of Flazendale, and about Rievaulx.
1202.
E. gracile, Koch.
Native.
Local.
“ Near Halnaby, in a small strip of boggy ground mostly covered 
with brushwood, on the left hand side of the road from Croft, which 
affords Ranunculus Lingua.” J.
Woods, (Comp.
Bot. Mag., i.
290).
Discovered in 1835.- Authenticated by Borrer, (Phyt., v.
44) ; 1854.
ELYNA.
1203.
E. CARiqiNA, M.
et K.
Native.
Highland.
CAREX.
C. Davalliana, Smith.
Incognit.
1204.
C. dioica, Linn.
Native.
British.
Boggy ground, especially in moory places ; frequent.
1205.
C. pulicaris, Linn.
Native.
British.
In similar situations ; frequent 
1206.
C. paucielora, Lightf.
Native.
Highland.
The localities mentioned under this species in the Flora rest 
upon the authority of Dalton.
With reference to the observations 
in the Cybele Britaniea, I may remark that Lilia cross is precisely 
1000 feet above the level of the sea ; but that the original manu- 
script record runs, “ Banks of Derwent, near Lilia cross, &c.,” so 
that it is probable that the Carex descends considerably lower 
than 1000 feet.
1209.
C. stellulata, Linn.
Native.
British.
Damp meadows and boggy places ; frequent: 
C. brizoides, Linn.
Incognit 
Studley woods — W.
Mac Ivor, fide G.
C. Babington.
The author 
of the Manual mentions that he has received a specimen from 
this locality.
I have, however, followed the Cybele Britannica in 
waiting till the occurrence of the species in Britain is confirmed, 
before accepting it as a clearly established inhabitant.
1211 C.
ovalis, Good.
Native.
British.
Damp meadows and boggy places ; frequent.
1212.
C. cijrta, Good.
Native.
British.
1212b.
C. Persoonti, “ Sieb.” Native.
Highland.
C. vitilis, Fries.
Codhill bog, Guisborough moor!
and Kildale, 
Cleveland !
— W.
Madd.
In a boggy wood near the source of 
Locker beck, Snailesworth.
( Vide Phyt.
iii.
731.) 
1213.
C. elongata, Linn.
Native, English.
Still occurs at the original locality near Rotherham — J.
Hardy.
Boggy woods at Langwith, near York.
131 
1214.
C. remota, Linn.
Native.
British.
1215.
C. axtllaris, Good.
Native.
English.
Carthorpe moor, near Bedale — T.
Simpson.
Amongst the brick- 
ponds on Hob moor, near York.
1217.
C. intermedia, Good.
Native.
English?
Damp meadows and boggy places ; not unfrequent.
1218.
C. arenaria, Linn.
Native.
British.
Plentiful amongst the coast sandhills about Redcar, Marske, 
Coatham, and Saltburn.
1210.
C. divisa, Huds.
Native?
English.
It is desirable that the occurrence of this species on the York- 
shire coast should receive modern confirmation.
A flowering 
specimen from “a spongy bog on the edge of the moor, above the 
village of Ramsgill, in Nithersdale,” collected in 1846!
— -J'.
Simpson, 
is probably C.
schsenoides, Host, (C.
austriaca, Schk:,) now ascer- 
tained to be a variety of this species This merits further in- 
vestigation, and it would also be interesting to ascertain what 
Winch’s station really produces.
1220.
C. muricata, Linn.
Native.
British.
Dry banks ; frequent.
1221.
C. divulsa.
Good.
Native.
English.
Cum Hagg wood, Castle Howard !
— H.
Ibbotson.
1222.
C. vulpina, Linn.
Native.
British.
Ditches and boggy places; 
common.
1223.
C. TERETIUSCULA, Good.
Native.
British.
Sleddale, Cleveland!
— W.
Mudcl.
Askern, near Doncaster — P.
Inclibald, (Phyt., iii.
449).
The Askham bog plant is the next 
species.
C. Elirhartiana, Hoppe , (C.
pseudo-paradoxa, Gibson ,) 
probably a variety of this species occurs plentifully by the side 
of Malharn Tarn, near Settle — S.
Gibson, (Phjd., i.
779) ; and per- 
haps also near Halnaby.
( Vide J.
Woods, Comp.
Bot. Mag., i.
290; 
Phyt., i.
1020.) 
1223.
* C paradoxa, Willd.
Native.
Heslington fields, near York !
— R.
Spruce, S.
Plentiful in Askham bogs, near York.
1224.
C. paniculata, Linn.
Native.
Boggy wmods and meadows ; frequent.
1228.
C. vulgaris, Fries.
Native.
C. ccespitosa, Flora , 115.
Damp places; common.
Local.
Thompson, &c.
British.
British.
C. Gibsoni, Bab. Incognit.
C. ccespitosa, var.
chhroccirpos, Gibs., Flora, 143.
Woodhay, near 
Hebden bridge, said to be now lost by drainage — 8.
Gibson (Bab.
Man., iii.
361).
If a true species, this will most likely be found 
in other places, and deserves looking for.
132 
1229.
C. RiGiDA, Good.
Incognit.
A specimen from Ingleborough is in the herbarium of the Rev.
J. Dalton in York Museum — 0.
A. Moore.
It is desirable that 
the occurrence of this species should receive confirmation.
1231.
C. steicta, Good.
Native.
English.
Heslington fields, near York — R.
Spruce.
Bogs below Cook’s 
monument, Ayton !
— W.
Mudd.
Plentiful about the mere at 
Scarborough.
Amongst the ditches in Askham bogs.
1232.
C. acuta, Linn.
Native.
British.
Ditches, river banks, and boggy places; frequent.
A variety, 
with the perigone bearing anthers, occurs at Bootham [and Clif- 
ton, -near York — R.
Spruce', and I have also collected a form, with 
paniculate spikes, at the same locality.
C. Mcenchiana, Reich.
Incognit.
“ In 1843, I found the Carex Mcenchiana in abundance near Heb- 
den bridge.
The plant I sent to Dr, Boott, and have his au- 
thority for the correctness of the name ” — S.
Gibson in litt.
(April 
23rd, 1847.) The author of the Manual informs us (Phyt.
v. 176) 
that the plant afterwards proved to be only a form of vulgaris.
1234.
C. flava, Linn.
Native.
British.
G.jlava and (Ederi , Flora, 114.
Damp meadows and boggy places ; 
frequent.
1235.
C. Extensa, Good.
Native.
British.
1236.
C. pallescens, Linn.
Native.
British.
Damp meadows ; frequent.
1237.
C. eulva, Good.
Native.
British.
1238.
C. distans, Linn.
Native.
British.
On the banks of the salt water ditches in Coatham marshes.
The 
plant mentioned under this name in the Flora is doubtless C.
bi- 
nervis.
1239.
1240.
1241.
1243.
1244.
1246.
1247.
C. binervis, Smith.
Native.
British.
Moory and heathy places ; frequent.
C. laevigata, Smith.
Native.
English.
Dallow gill, near Rip on — Rev. J.
Dalton (B.
G., 716).
C. panicea, Linn.
Native.
British.
Damp heaths and pastures ; common.
C. capillaris, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
C. limosa, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
C. strtgosa, Muds.
Native.
English.
Studley woods, near Ripon — W.
Brunton (B.
G., 714).
Still occurs 
in the locality mentioned in the Flora (on the authority of the 
Rev. J.
Dalton) — T.
Simpson.
C. sylvatica, Muds.
Native.
British.
Woods, hedgebanks, and damp meadows; frequent.
183 
1248.
C. PENDULA, ILuds.
Native.
British.
1249.
C. Pseudo-cyperus, Linn.
Native.
English.
1250.
C. GLAUCA, Scop.
Native.
British.
C. recurva, Flora , 115.
Banks, damp meadows, 
and roadsides ; 
common.
1251.
C. PEiEcox, Jacq.
Native.
British.
1252.
C. pilulife ra, Linn.
Native.
British.
Damp meadows and moory places ; frequent.
1255.
C. digitata, Linn.
Native.
English.
Levitt Hag wood, near Doncaster!
— J.
Backhouse, Jun., 0.
A. 
Moore.
In the wood af Roche abbey — Rev. G.
E. Smith (Pliyt.
iii.
449), J.
Hardy.
Magdalene banks, Hackfall — T.
Simpson.
Stud- 
ley woods, near Ripon.
Rocky banks above Hawnby, near 
Helmsley.
1256.
C filiformis, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
1257.
C. hirta, Linn.
Native.
British.
1258.
C. AMPULLACEA, Good.
Native.
British.
1259.
C. ve sic aria, Linn.
Native.
British.
1260.
C. PALUDOSA, Good.
Native.
British.
Riverbanks and watery places ; not unfrequent.
The variety with 
cuspidate glumes, (C.
Kochiana, DC., C.
spadicea, Moth.,] occurs in 
Oak wood, Castle Howard !
— M.
B. Slater.
1261.
C. riparia, Curt.
Native.
English.
ORDER LXXXYI.
GRAMINA.
DIGITABIA 
1265.
D. humifusa, Pers.
Alien.
Amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills, 1852 !
— W.
Mudd.
PHALARIS 
1269.
P. aeundinacea, Linn.
Native.
British.
1270.
P. canaeiensis, Linn.
Alien.
A form with variegated leaves sometimes occurs amongst the 
Middlesborough ballast hills.
ANTHOXANTHUM.
1271.
A. odoratum, Linn.
Native.
British, 
134 
PHLEUM.
1273.
P. pratense, Linn.
Native.
British.
Meadows and pastures ; common.
P. nodosum, Linn., is frequent 
in dry places.
1274.
P. arenarium, Linn.
Native.
English.
Amongst the coast sandhills about Bedcar and Coatham, &c.
ALOPECURUS.
1278.
A. pratresis, Linn.
Native.
British.
1279.
A. geniculatus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1280.
A. fulvus, Smith.
Incognit.
It is desirable that the occurrence of this species ( vide Flora, 142) 
should receive confirmation.
1282.
A. agrestis, Linn.
Colonist.
English.
MILIUM.
1287.
M. effusum, Linn.
Native.
British.
APERA.
1288.
A. Spica-venti, Beauv.
Colonist.
‘ Germanic.
Agrostis, Flora, 118.
Abundant in sandy soil about Cantley, near 
Doncaster — Rev. O.
E. Smith (Phyt.
ii.
282).
AGROSTIS.
1289.
A. setacea, Curt.
Incognit.
The locality mentioned in the Flora, on the authority of Brunton 
(B.
G., 699), is probably erroneous.
1290.
A. canina, Linn.
Native.
British.
1291.
A. vulgaris, With.
-Native.
British.
A. pumila, TAghtf., a dwarfed form of this species, is frequent in 
dry elevated inoory situations.
1292.
A. alba, Linn.
Native.
British.
A. stolonifera, Linn., is the maritime form of this species.
AMMOPHILA.
1293.
A. ARUNBXNACEA, Host.
Arundo, Flora, 122 .
Native.
British.
135 
AEUNDO.
1294.
A. Phragmites, Linn.
Native.
1295.
A. Calamagrostis, Linn.
Native.
1296.
A. Epigejos, Linn.
Native.
British.
English.
English.
A. sylvatica, Schrad.
Incognit.
Under Host’s name of Calamagrostis pyramidalis this species is 
mentioned as having been “ twice found near Hebden bridge,” by 
himself, in a letter from the late S.
Gibson.
This is all the in- 
formation I can procure respecting it.
It is allied to A.
stricta, 
but differs by its broader panicle, shorter hairs at the base of the 
glume, and bent awns.
1299.
S. c.erulea, Scop.
SESLERIA.
Native.
Highland.
AIRA.
1300.
A. 
ciESPiTOSA, Linn.
Native.
Ditches, hedgebanks, and meadows ; common.
British.
1302.
A 
flexuosa, Linn.
Native.
British.
1303.
A. 
CARYOPHYLLEA, Linn.
Native.
British.
1304.
A. 
prjEcox, Linn.
Native.
British.
STIPA.
S. pennata, Linn.
Incognit.
AVENA.
1307.
A. FATUA, Linn.
Colonist.
English.
Cornfields and cultivated land ; frequent.
1308.
A. strigosa, Schreb.
Alien.
1309.
A. pratensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
Meadows and pastures; frequent on the oolite and other limestone 
formations.
A. alpina is the same plant, grown in more elevated 
situations.
1310.
A. pubescens, Linn.
Native.
British.
Meadows and pastures ; frequent 
1311.
A. flavescens, Linn.
Native.
English.
136 
ARRHENATHERUM.
1312.
A. avenaceum, Beauv.
Native.
British.
Holcus, Flora, 119.
The form with bulbous roots, A.
bulbosum, 
of Lindley, is frequent in dry situations.
HOLCUS.
1313.
H. lanatus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1314.
H. mollis, Linn.
Native.
British.
TRIODIA.
1315.
T. decumbens, Beauv.
Native.
British.
Moory places and heathy pastures ; diffused universally.
KOELERIA.
1316.
K. cristata, Pers.
Native.
British.
Aira, Flora, 118.
In similar situations to the preceding; frequent.
MELICA.
1317.
M. uniplora, Betz.
Native.
British.
1318.
M. nutans, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
MOLINIA.
1319.
M. ciERULEA, Mcench.
Native.
British.
Melica, Flora, 119.
M. depauperata, Lindl ., a diminished form, 
occurs occasionally.
CATABROSA.
1320.
C. AQUATicA, Presl.
Air a, Flora, 118.
Native.
British.
Ponds and watery places ; frequent.
GLYCERIA.
1321.
G. aquatica, Smith.
Native.
English.
1322.
G. eluitans, Brown.
Native.
British.
1322.* G.
plicata, Fries .
Native.
British.
In similar situations to the preceding ; probably not unfrequent.
Kirby Knowle, along the margin of Bagby beck, and other places 
near Thirsk.
G. liybrida, -Toivns., G.
pedicellata, Towns., Bab.
Man. 3, occurs in similar situations in the vicinity of Thirsk 
and elsewhere.
It stands as a variety of this species in the third 
edition of Babington’s Manual, and the fourth London Catalogue.
137 
1323.
G. maritima, M.
et K.
Native.
British.
1324.
G. distans, Wahl.
Native.
English.
Between Sheffield and Doncaster — 0.
A. Moore.
Banks of the 
salt water ditches in Coatham marshes, and near Middlesborough.
1325.
G. procumbens, Smith.
Native.
English.
With the two preceding species about Coatham and Middles- 
borough, but less plentiful than either of them.
1326.
G. rigida, Smith.
Native.
English.
1327.
G. loltacea, Lond.
Cat. Native.
English.
Triticum , Flora, 117.
Seashores; not uncommon — Teesdale.
On 
the old piers at Scarborough — Rev. Archdeacon Peirson (B.
G. 673).
POA.
1328.
P. annua, Linn.
Native.
British.
1330.
P. alfina, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
Steep rocks on the west side of Ingleborough — S.
Thompson.
1331.
P. pratensis, Linn.
Native.
British.
1332.
P. trivialis, Linn.
Native.
British.
1333.
P. compressa, Linn.
Native.
English.
Dry fields and banks ; frequent.
P. polynoda, Pam., is equally 
frequent with P.
compressa; and P.
subcompressa, Pam., occurs 
in a stone quarry alongside the York and London road at Adwiek, 
near Doncaster — S.
Gibson, 1846.
Probably both are varieties of 
this species.
1334.
P. nemoralts, Linn.
Native.
British.
1334c.
P. Parnellii, Bab.
Native.
Local.
Rocky bank of the Tees, from the Caldron Snout to Greta bridge 
— W.
Borrer.
Probably a variety of the preceding.
1334*c.
P. Balfourii, Pam.
Native.
Highland.
P. glauca , Flora, 120.
BRIZA.
1335.
B. media, Linn.
Native.
British.
CYNOSURUS.
1337.
C. cristatus, Linn.
Native.
British.
1338.
C. echinatus, Linn.
Alien.
This species occurs occasionally in cultivated fields.
Ashgrove, 
valley of Calder (three specimens) — S.
Gibson (Phyt.
i. 172).
In 
a field of Italian rye-grass between Thorparch and Clifford, 1849 !
— S.
Hailstone.
In a cornfield near Ayton, 1852, where it has 
been known for the last fourteen years !
— W.
Mudd.
138 
DACTYLIS.
1339.
D. glomerata, Linn.
Native.
British.
FESTUCA.
1340.
F. uniglumis, Linn.
Incognit.
It is desirable that the locality mentioned at page 142 of the 
Flora should receive modern confirmation, as this species has not 
been clearly ascertained to grow on the east coast northward of 
Suffolk.
1341.
F. beomoides, Linn.
Native.
British.
1341b.
F. pseudo-myurus, Soy Will.
Native.
English.
F. myurus, Flora, 121.
On Ayton moor r near Captain Cook’s 
monument!
— W.
Mudd.
Plentiful amongst the Middlesborough 
ballast hills, 1852.
1342.
F. ovina, Linn.
Native.
British.
F. ovina and vivipara, Flora, 120, 121.
F. tcnuifolia, Sibth., is the 
ordinary moorland form of the species.
1343.
F. DURiuscuLA, Linn.
Native.
British.
1344.
F. rubra, Linn.
Native.
British.
1345.
F. SYLVATICA, Till.
Native.
Scottish.
F. Calamaria, Flora, 121.
1346.
F. ELATIOR, Aut.
Native.
British.
1347.
F. PRATENSIS, Huds.
Native.
British.
1347b.
F. loliacea, Huds.
Native.
British.
BROMUS.
1348.
B. gigantebs, Linn.
Native.
British.
Woods, thickets, 
diminished form, 
and riverbanks ; frequent.
F. triflora, Smith, a 
occurs occasionally.
1349.
B. asper, Linn.
Native.
British.
1350.
B. sterilis, Linn.
Native.
British.
1353.
B. erectus, Huds.
Native.
English.
Maltby, near Doncaster — 0.
A. Moore.
St. Ann’s hill, Castle 
Howard !
— M.
B. Slater.
Bank near Kirklington!
— M.
Hebble- 
thwaite.
Hedgebank between Thorpfield and Topcliffe!
— A.
Wat- 
son.
Amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills !
— W.
Mudd.
1354.
B. secalinus, Linn.
Colonist.
British.
Cornfields and cultivated land; frequent.
There are two well 
marked forms of this species, grossus and vulgaris.
An awnless 
variety also occurs occasionally.
139 
1355.
B. commutatus, Schrcid, Native.
British.
B. arvensis, Flora , 122.
Meadows and cultivated fields ; frequent, 
According to Fries, this is B.
pratensis of Ehrhart.
A variety 
with separate fructiferous florets, which grows plentifully along 
Clifton ings, York, is perhaps B.
Billotii, of Schultz.
( Vide Bot.
Gaz. ii.
3.) 
1356.
B. mollis, Linn.
Native.
British.
A grass which agrees with authenticated specimens of B.
race- 
mosus of the London Catalogue, occurs occasionally in the 
vicinity of Tliirsk.
It is also reported from the neighbourhood 
of Settle !
— John Tatham .
Heslington fields and Clifton ings, 
York — 0.
A. Moore.
Welburn, near Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson ; 
and a cornfield near Whitcliffe wood, near Bichmond — Jas. Ward.
B. abvensis, Linn.
Alien.
In the vale of Calder, between Brighouse and Sowerby bridge — 
S. Gibson (Phyt.
i. 773).
B. pat ulus, M.etK.
Alien.
In Yorkshire, accidentally introduced — Bab. Man.
Near Hebden 
bridge — S.
Gibson.
BBACHYPODIUM.
1357.
B. sylvaticum, Beauv.
Festuca, Flora , 121.
1358.
B. pinnatum, Beauv.
Festuca, Flora.
121.
Native.
British.
Woods, thickets, and hedgebanks ; common.
Native.
Germanic.
1359.
T. caninum, Huds.
TBITICUM.
Native.
British.
1360.
T. repens, Linn.
Native.
British.
T. littorale, Host , the maritime form of this species, is common 
in the vicinity of the seacoast.
1361.
T. laxum, Fries.
Native.
British.
Plentiful amongst the ballast hills at Middlesborough, and along 
the coast to Bedcar and Marske.
The variety macrostachyum, of 
Fries, occurs amongst the marshes at Coatham.
1362.
T. junceum, Linn.
Native.
British.
Auburn quay, near Bridlington — 0.
A. Moore.
Plentiful amongst 
the sandhills between Marske and Saltburn.
LOLIUM.
1363.
L. perenne, Linn.
Native.
British.
1363.* L.
italicum, Braun.
Alien 
Cultivated fields ; frequent.
Doubtfully distinct from the pre- 
ceding.
140 
1364.
L. temtjlentum, Linn.
Native.
British.
L. arvense, Flora , 116, is a variety, of this species.
L. linicola, Bonder.
Alien.
In a field at Catterick bridge, near Richmond — J.
Ward.
ELYMUS.
1365.
E. arenarius, Linn.
Native.
British.
On the railway embankment near Lazenby station, Cleveland.
HORDEUM.
1366.
H. SYLVATICUM, Hllds.
Native.
English.
Flymus europceus, Flora, 117.
1367.
H. pratense, Huds.
Native.
English.
Meadows and pastures ; frequent.
1368.
H. murinum, Linn.
Native.
English.
1369.
H. maritimum, With.
Native.
English.
NARDUS.
1369.
N. stricta, Linn.
Native.
British.
LEPTURUS.
1371.
L. incurvatus, Brown.
Native.
English.
Rottbollia, Flora, 116.
ORDER LXXXVII.
FILICES.
CETEEACH.
1372.
C. oeficinarum, Willd.
Native.
English.
Orammitis Geterach, Flora 125.
Notolepeum Geterach, Newm.* 
WOODSIA.
1373.
W. ilvensis, Brown.
Incognit.
The single Teesdale locality for this species is on the Durham 
side of the river.
That near Richmond is erroneous.
* I have given the synonyms of those species which appear under different names in the new edition 
of “ Newman’s British Ferns,” just published.
141 
POLYPODIUM.
1374.
P. vulgare, Linn.
Native.
British.
Ctenopteris, Newm.
(B.
F. 3.) 
1375.
P. Phegopteris, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
Et seq.
Gymnocarpium, Newm.
1376.
P. Dryopteris, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
1377.
P. calcaeeum, Smith.
Native.
Uncertain.
G. Robertianum, Newm.
With the preceding species on Ingle- 
borough — W.
Brunton, W.
Wilson.
Clapham, near Settle — B.
Clapham.
Plentiful on Anston rocks — J.
Hardy (Phyt.
i. 450).
ALLOSORUS.
1378.
A. cbispus, Bernh.
Native.
Highland.
Eteris , Flora , 126.
CYSTOPTERIS.
1379.
0. feagilis, Bernh.
Native.
British.
Cystea fragilis, dentata, angustata, and regia, Flora , 124.
A very 
variable species, if a single species only.
Nearly all the described 
forms may be found within the limits of the county.
ASPIDIUM.
1382.
A. Lonchitis, Swartz.
Native.
Highland.
Et seq.
Polystichum, Roth.
The Falcon Clints station is on the 
Durham side of the Tees.
Near Malham — W.
Wilson (Phyt.
i. 
451).
On Moughton, near Austwick — R.
Clapham.
1383.
A. ACULEATUM, Swartz.
Native.
British.
Woods, hedgebanks, and rocky places; frequent.
A. lobatum, 
Flora, 124, is a variety of this species.
1384.
A. angulare, Smith.
Native.
English.
In similar situations ; not uncommon.
LASTREA.
1385.
L. Thelypteris, Presl.
Native.
English.
Et seq.
Aspidium, Flora, 123, 124.
Hemestheum, Newm.
1386.
L. Oreopteris, Presl.
Native.
British.
L. montana, Newm.
1387.
L. cristata, Presl.
Incognit.
Lophodium Callipteris, Neivm.
It is needful that the occurrence 
of this species should be confirmed.
142 
1388.
L. Filix-mas, Presl.
Native.
British.
Dryogjteris, Schott.
A very variable species.
The three forms 
defined in the new edition of Newman’s British Ferns, affinis, 
Borreri, and abbreviata, all occur occasionally.
1389.
L. rigida, Presl.
Native.
Local.
Et seq.
Lophodium, Newm.
Seven Forks of Whernside, near 
Ingleton !
— S.
Thompson.
1390.
L. spinulosa, Presl.
Native.
English.
Loph.
spinosum, Newm.
Woods, thickets, and boggy heathy 
places; not unfrequent.
Bingley, near Bradford !
— Dr. Airiley.
Woods about Castle Howard!
— H.
Ibbotson!
M. B.
Slater.
Forge 
valley, near Scarborough!
— W.
Bean.
Kildale, Cleveland!
— W.
Muclcl.
Askham bogs, near York, Leckby Carr, near Thirsk, and 
other localities.
When growing in boggy ground it approaches 
closely L.
uliginosum, Newm!
1391.
L. dilatata, Presl.
Native.
British.
L. multiflorum, Newm.
Woods, thickets, and hedgebanks ; common.
Frequently more or less glandular (vide Phyt., iii.
722} ; but I have 
not seen anything in Yorkshire which coincides exactly with my 
authenticated examples of L.
glandulosum, Newm., (from Ankle- 
bury hill, Forest of Dean, Gloucester!
— W.
H. Purchas.) L.
colli- 
num, Neivm., occasionally occurs.
1392.
L. Fgenisecii, Watson.
Native.
Atlantic ?
In similar situations to the preceding; rare.
Hills about Settle 
— J.
Tatham, E.
Newman (Cyb. Brit., iii.
272).
Plentiful in 
Forge valley, near Scarborough !
— E.
Bean.
Hackfall woods, near 
Bipon — T.
Simpson.
A specimen, labelled as having been col- 
lected at “ Richmond — J.
Ward” was communicated by the 
Edinburgh Botanical Society to the author of the Cybele Britan- 
nica (vide vol.
iii.
page 272) ; but Mr Ward informs me, that he 
believes some mistake has arisen.
ATHYRIUM.
1393.
A. Filix-fcemjna, Roth.
Native.
British.
A. Filix-foemina, Both., A.
rhseticum, Roth., and A.
molle, Schreb., 
are all three tolerably frequent ; the last in shady woods, the 
others in more exposed situations.
Possibly they are distinct 
species.
A. fontanum, Presl.
Incognit.
“ I have a specimen given to meas a Teesdale plant, but probably 
under some mistake”!
— S.
Gibson (Phyt.,-!.
452).
Near Skipton 
castle, 1835 — S.
Oibson.
Wharncliffe wood, 1838 — R.
M. Redhead 
(Phyt , i.
1084).
These three alleged localities are probably all 
erroneous.
1395.
A. viride, Huds.
ASPLENIUM.
Native.
Highland.
143 
1396.
A. Trichomanes, Linn.
Native.
British.
1397.
A. marinum, Linn.
Native.
Atlantic.
1398.
A. lanceolatum, Hads.
Incognit.
Reported by Bolton (B.
G., 733), as occurring “on a wall in the 
village of Wharfe.” 
1399.
A. Adiantum-nigrum, Linn.
Native.
British.
1400.
A. Ruta-muraria, Linn.
Native.
British.
Et seq.
Amesium, Newm.
1401.
A. septentrionale, Hull.
Incognit.
Ingleborough hills— To field.
(B.
G., 723).
“ A specimen, labelled 
Ingleborough, was in the herbarium of my brother, the late Thos.
Backhouse, but I do not think any living botanist has seen it 
there ” — J.
Backhouse , in litt.; 1854.
SCOLOPENDRIUM.
1402.
S. vblgare, Symons.
Native.
British.
Phylittis Scolojoendrium, Newm.
BLECHNUM.
1403.
B. boreale, Swartz.
Native.
British.
B. sqhcant, With.
PTERIS.
1404.
P. AQUiLiNA, Linn.
Native.
British.
Eupteris, Newm.
ADIANTUM.
1405.
A. Capillus veneris, Linn.
Incognit.
TRICHOMANES.
1406.
T. radtcans, Swartz.
Incognit.
Supposed to have been collected formerly by Dr. Richardson and 
others, near a small waterfall in a wood at Bellbank, near Bingley; 
but the station has now been destroyed many years.
( Vide B.G., 
724.) Newm., Hist.
Brit.
Ferns, 3 edit., p.
285.
HYMENOPHYLLUM.
1407.
H. Tunbridgense, Smith.
Native.
Atlantic.
Near Halifax, and at Green field, (near Todmorden) — W.
Wilson 
144 
(Phyt., i.
453).
On rocks by a stream running down to the sea at 
Hayburn wyke, near Wliitby, five miles north of Scarborough — 
Mr. Peterkin, fide R.
Spruce , (Phyt., loc cit.) Reynard crags, near 
Birstwith, in Nidderdale!
— H.
B. Brady!
J. Backhouse, Jun.
1408.
PI.
Wilsoni, Hooker.
Native.
Scottish.
H. unilaterale, Willd.
Greenfield, (near Todmorden) — W.
Wilson, 
(Phyt., i.
453).
Rocks near Lower Harrogate — J.
Backhouse, Jun.
ONOCLEA.
O. sensibilts, Linn.
Alien or Incognit.
In a lane at Moreby, near York, now extinct?
— H.
Baines (vide 
Phyt., i.
492).
OSMUND A.
1409.
0. regalis, Linn.
Native.
British.
DOTPYCHIUM.
1410.
B. Lunaria, Swartz.
Native.
British.
OPHIOGLOSSUM.
1411.
0. vulgatum, Linn.
Native.
British.
ORDER LXXXVIIL PTERIDOIDES.
LYCOPODIUM.
1412.
L. 
clavatum, Linn.
Native.
British.
1414.
L. 
inundatum, Linn.
Native.
British ?
1415.
L. 
alpinum, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
1416.
L. 
Selago, Linn.
Native.
Scottish.
1417.
L. 
selaginoides, Linn.
Native.
Highland.
ISOETES.
1418.
I. lacustris, Linn.
Incognit.
In the large lake at Castle Howard, and in the Foss reservoir at 
Coxwold — H.
Ibbotson (Phyt.
i. 454).
Is the plant which grows 
at these localities the present species, or is it Littorella lacustris?
I should suspect, the latter.
145 
PILULAHIA.
1419.
P. globulifera, Linn.
Native.
British.
Terfington Carr, and other watery places — Teesdale (B.
G. 724).
Scarborough mere — S.
Gibson (Phvt.
i. 454).
Brickpond near 
Leeming lane — T.
Simpson , Pond between Bootham and Gate 
Hehnsley, York — T.
A. Smith.
Plentiful in Gormire, near Thirsk, 
especially at the north-east corner.
EQUISETUM.
1420.
E. Telmateia, Ehrh.
Native.
British.
E. fiuviatile , Flora, 127.
About springs and rivulets, and in boggy 
ground, especially in the more undulated districts ; frequent.
Occasionally in drier situations.
1421.
E. umbrosum, Willd.
Native.
Scottish.
Bank of the Tees, about Lower Cronkley and Wince bridges, and 
below Holwick.
1422.
E. arvense, Linn.
Native.
British.
1423.
E. sylvaticum, Linn.
Native.
British.
Boggy places and damp meadows; frequent.
1424.
E. palustre, Linn.
Native.
British.
F. palustris, Flora, 128.
Varieties nudum and polystachion, of 
authors, both occasionally occur.
1425.
E. limosum, Linn.
Native.
British.
Ponds and watery places; frequent.
This includes both E.
limo- 
sum and fiuviatile, Fries ; which are considered to he distinct spe- 
cies by that illustrious author, and all the other modern botanists 
of Scandinavia.
They appear, however, to he connected, in some 
degree, by intermediate stages of gradation ; but deserve further 
investigation than they have yet received, before this point can 
he confidently decided.
(Vide Phyt.
iv.
1056, 1117.) 
1426.
E. hyemale, Linn.
1428.
E. variegatum, Selil.
Native.
Scottish.
Native.
Scottish.
K 
/ 
fart Sttouii.
THE MOSSES OF THE COUNTY 
ARRANGED ACCORDING TO 
HOOKER’S BRITISH FLORA; 
BY 
JOHN NOWELL.
GENERA AND SPECIES, 
ARRANGED ACCORDING TO 
Jfffokrs §n&{f Jflom 
SECTION I.
ACROCARPI.
SUBSECTION I.
ASTOMI.
I. ANDREA.
1. A.
alpina, Heclw.
Fr. April.
Bocks on Ingleborough— Teesdale, S.
Hailstone.
Brimliam rocks, 
near Eipon — Teesdale.
Cronkley fell, Teesdale — B.
Spruce.
2. A.
rupestris, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
On Brimliam rocks — Teesdale.
Cronkley fell, Teesdale — B.
Spruce.
3. A.
Eothii, Mohr.
Fr. Spring.
Baysdale, Londsdale, and Ingleby bank, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
II.
PHASCUM.
1. P.
serratum, Schreb.
Fr. Oct.
Ephemerum, Hampe.
In a wet pasture called Swinemoor, at Bever- 
ley; and in arable lands amongst stubble — Teesdale.
Field near 
Mackersliaw wood— W.
Brunton.
Eailway bank, Stony-royd, Hare- 
ley wood, Todmorden.* 
2. P.
alte rn ifolium , B.
and S.
(not Brit.
FI.) Fr. Spring.
Pleuridium, Brid.
Frequent near York.
Kirkkam bill and other 
places near Castle Howard, Teesdale — B.
Spruce.
The plant men- 
tioned under this name in the Flora is the young of some other 
moss ; probably of Dicranum varium — B.
Spruce.
*N.B. It will be understood that the stations given without any other name rest upon the personal 
authority of the Editor of this part of the work.
I have carefully revised the whole and added a few 
localities from the Botanist’s Guide, Phytologist, and other sources.
J. G.
B. 
150 
3. P.
crispum, Hedw.
Fr. March.
Astomum, Hampe.
Side of ditches at Figham near Beverley— 
Teesdale.
Fields near Ay ton — W.
Mudd.
4. P.
subulatum, Linn.
Fr. Spring.
Pleuridium, B.
and S.
5. P.
axillare, Dicks.
Fr. Spring.
Pleuridium nitidnm, B.
and S.
6. P.
patens, Hedw.
Fr. August.
Physcomitrella, B.
and S.
Ditches by the Foss, near York, Temple 
Rush, Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
7. P.
Floerkeanum, W.
and M.
Acaidon, C.
Mull.
Frequent in autumn in stubble fields near Castle 
Howard — R.
Spruce.
Yar. badium occurs in a field on the south 
side of Bulmer hagg — R.
Spruce.
8. P.
MTJTicuM, Schreb.
Fr. Oct.
Acaidon, Mull.
On a clay bank at Stony-royd, near Todmorden.
9. P.
cuspiDATUM, Sclireb.
Fr. Spring.
Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson.
Fields and 
gardens at Ripon — W.
Brunton.
Roadsides and fallows in the 
north riding; common — John G.
Baker.
Ackworth, near Pontefract 
I. Brown.
Banks at Pontefract and roadsides near Bolton bridge.
10.
P. bryoides, Dicks.
Fr. April.
In old stone quarries at Welburn, and waste ground at Ganthorpe, 
near Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
11.
P. rectum, With.
Fr. Feb.
On a bank in Mackershaw wood — W.
Brunton.
Banks and fallows 
near Pontefract; frequent — Dr. J.
B. Wood.
Banks and stubble 
fields near Tadcaster.
12.
P. curvicollum, Hedw.
Fr. Feb.
On the Avoids between Beverley and Market Weighton — Teesdale.
Plentiful on banks and Avalltops covered with mud, near Pontefract 
— Dr. J.
B. Wood, and J.
N. On the magnesian limestone, near 
Ackworth — I.
Brown.
III.
ARCHIDIUM.
1. A.
phascoides, Brid.
Pliascum alter nifolium, Brit.
FI.
Stockton forest and Langwith 
moor, near York, Avhere it fruits freely — R.
Spruce.
Hareley wood, 
near Todmorden ; rare.
SUBSECTION II.
GYMNOSTOMI 
IY.
SPHAGNUM.
1. S.
obtusifolium, Ehrh.
Fr. July.
S. cymbifolium, Swartz.
2. S.
compactum, Briclel.
Fr. July.
8. obtusifolium £ minus, Brit.
FI.
Yorks.
FI., 129.
Stockton forest, 
near York — B.
Spruce.
Boggy moory places above Boltby, and 
amongst the Hambleton Hills — J.
G. Baker.
Terrington Carr, near 
Malton — M.
B. Slater.
Stansfield moor, near Todmorden.
3. S.
CONTORTUM, ScJiultZ.
Stockton forest, and Terrington Carr, near Malton — R.
Spruce.
Plentiful at the north-east corner of Gormire, and above Boltby, 
near Thirsk — J.
G. Baker.
Stansfield moor, near Todmorden.
The var.
obesum, Wils.
MSS., occurs with the normal form of the 
species on Stockton forest, near York — R.
Spruce.
4. S.
molruscum, Brid.
Fr. August.
Stockton forest and Barmby moor, near York — R.
Spruce.
Moors 
near Ayton, Cleveland — W.Mudd.
Stansfield moor, near Todmor- 
den.
5. S.
SQUARROSUM, W.
and M.
Fr. June, July.
6. S.
fimbriatum, Wils.
MSS.
Fr. July.
Boggy ground on the edge of Guisborough moor, near Highcliff; 
plentiful — J.
G. Baker.
Stansfield moor, near Todmorden ; rare.
7. S.
acutifolium, EJirh.
Fr. July.
8. S.
cuspidatum, Ehfh.
Fr. July, Aug.
Y. (EDIPODIUM.
1. O.
Griffithianbm, Schwaegr.
Fr. Aug.
YI.
GYMNOSTOMUM.
1. G.
viridissimum, Smith.
Fr. April.
Zygodon , Brid.
Everywhere common on trees, &c.
; but rarely fruit- 
ing.
Wharfdale, trees in Teesdale, and rocks in Balderdale — R.
Spruce.
Baysdale, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Castle Howard woods — 
H. Ibbotson.
On ash trees at Busby stoop, near Thirsk — J.
G. Baker.
On hawthorn between Thirsk and the railway Station — J.
H. Davies.
Trees in Studley park — W.
Brunton.
2. G.
curvirostrum, Hediv.
Fr. Sept.
Bocks in Newtondale barren, and near the streams in Teesdale — 
R. Spruce.
152 
3. G.
rufestre, Schivaegr.
Fr. Sept.
Bolton,- Wharfdale - S.
Gibson.
Rocks above Ingleby Greenhow, 
and Kell gill, Cleveland— W.
Mudd.
4. G.
ovatum, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Pottici cavifolia , Ehrh Near Castle Howard — H.
Ihbotson.
Banks 
and walls, Holmes, Sowerby, and other places near Tkirsk — J.
G. 
Baker.
Wall on the York road, near Malton — M.
B. Slater.
Ack- 
worth, near Pontefract — I.
Brown.
Cliff rigg, Ay ton, Cleveland — 
W. Mudd.
The var.
gracile grows plentifully on the walltops 
covered with mud at Buffit farm and other places near Pontefract 
— Dr. J .
B. Wood.
At Knottingley, near the railway station — J.
G. 
Baker ; and Darrington, near Ferrybridge.
5. G.
TEU'NCA'ruLUM, Hoffm.
Fr. Winter and Spring.
Pottia truncata, B.
and S.
6. G Heimii, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Pottia , B.
and S.
Walls and dry banks — Teesdale.
On the bridge 
crossing the Wharf e at Thorp-Arch, and on the Multangular tower, 
York — R.
Spruce.
Plentiful amongst the Redcar sandhills — W.
Mudd.
7. G.
conicum, Scluvaegr.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
Pottia minutula, B.
and S.
Frequent near York and Castle Howard 
— R.
Spruce.
Fields near Welburn, and Rose nursery, Malton — M.
B. Slater.
Bank between Tkirsk and Ivilvington, and other stations 
in that vicinity — J.
G. Baker.
Common in stubble fields near Tad- 
caster, and on banks and walls near Pontefradt.
8. G.
fasciculare, Hedw (not Brit.
FI.) Fr. Spring 
Physcomilrium, B.
and S.
Stockton forest, near York— A.
Spruce.
Damp banks near Ayton — W.
Mudd.
9. G.
ericetorum, ( De Not.J Fr. Spring.
G. fascicidare, Eng. FI.
Yorks.
El., 130.
Physcomitrium, De Not.
Banks of Boltby beck, above the village — J.
G. Baker.
Moist 
banks in a field at Hartley-royd, near Todmorden.
10.
G. pyriforme, Hediv.
Fr. Spring.
Physcomitrium, B.
and S.
Damp banks ; frequent.
11.
G. tenue, Schrcid.
Fr. June.
Near Wetkerby — Dickson.
Thorp-Arch, and fruiting on "the Sand- 
hill bridge, Castle Howard park — R.
Spruce.
On the ruins of the 
Abbot’s house, Fountain’s Abbey — A.
Hutchinson.
On stones along 
the railway embankment, south of TkorpfielcL bridge, near Tkirsk 
— J.
H. Davies, J.
G. Baker.
12.
G. Donianum, Smith.
Fr. July 
Anodus , B.
and S.
Mowtliorpe dale, and rocks at Crambeck, Castle 
Howard — R.
Spruce.
On wet, shady rocks, overhanging the water- 
course at Highgreen wood, near Heptonstall ; rare.
15.
G. microstomum, Hedw.
Fr. Summer.
Hymenostomum, R.
Brown.
Banks near Hudson Mill, Heptonstall, 
and Hareley wood, near Todmorden.
VII, ANICTANGIUM.
1. A.
ciliatum, llecliv.
Fr. April.
Hedivigia, Hedw.
White Force, Cronldey fell, and other places in 
Teesdale*— R .
Spruce.
Rocks at Lord Grantley’s lakes, on Sawley 
moor, near Ripon — W Brunton.
Holwick scarrs, Teesdale.
— M.
B. 
Slater.
Bolton woods, Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
Rocks in Louns- 
dale, Cleveland — W.
Mucld.
Walls near the bridge at Barden 
tower.
VIII.
SCHISTOSTEGA.
1. S.
pennata, H.
and T.
Fr. April.
S. osmundacea, W.
and M.
Sides of an old coal drift in Greens- 
'clough, near Todmorden, not far from the boundary of the cdunty.
Under shady rocks at Guyscliffe, near Pateley bridge, Nidderdale.
SUBSECTION III.
PERISTOME 
DIY.
I APLOPERISTOHI, 
IX.
DIPHYSCIUM.
1. B.
foliosum, Mohr.
Fr. June.
Near the High Force, Teesdale — Sir W.
Trevelyan.
Rocks in Louns- 
dale, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Heathy banks b How- Slope’s mill, and 
other places near Todmorden ; rare.
X. TETRAPHIS.
1. T.
pellucida, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Trees and rocks; frequent; especially Jn more or less elevated 
situations.
2. T.
Browniana, H.
and T.
Fr. Summer.
Tetradontium, Schwg.
Stones in the rivulet from Lord Grantley’s 
lakes, on Sawley moor — W.
Brunton.
Plumpton rocks, Hackfall, 
and Hallow gill by Copgrove — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Teesdale, Newton- 
dale, Merricks gill, Hackness — R.
Spruce.
Shady rocks above 
Boltby, near Thirsk — J.
G. Baher , J.
J. Packer.
Rocks at Batters- 
by, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
High Cliffe near Guisborough — J.
W. 
Watson, J.
G. Baker.
Shady sandstone rocks in Stopes dough, and 
other rocky dells in the neighbourhood of Todmorden.
154 
XI.
SPLACHNUM.
1. S.
spile ricum, L fil.
Fr. Summer.
2. S.
mnioides, L.jil.
Fr. Spring.
Tetraplodon, B.
and S.
Holwick Scarr, Teesdale — B.
Spruce.
Caut- 
ley crags, near Sedbergh — Rev. G.
Pinder.
3. S.
angustatum, L.jil.
Fr. Autumn.
Tetraplodon, B.
and S.
Bog near Cottingham ; rare — Teesdale, B.
G. 
4. S.
ampullaceum, Linn.
Fr. Summer.
Terrington Carr, near Malton — Teesdale , R.
Spruce, dc.
Dallow gill, 
Nidderdale — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Wet ground near Ripon — S.
Hailstone.
5 S.
yasculosum, Hediv.
Moist mountainous lieatlis — Hudson, B.
G. Probably erroneous, or 
at least requiring confirmation.
XII.
ENCALYPTA.
1. E.
streptocarpa, Hedw.
Fr. April.
Bolton woods, Wbarfdale — S.
Gibson.
Roofs at Boltby, rocks above 
Hawnby (in fruit), Sutton bank, and other places amongst the 
Hambleton hills — J.
G. Baker.
Stogdale and Westerdale, Cleve- 
land — W.
Mudd.
Walls of Castle Howard park — H.
Ibbotson, M.
B. 
Slater.
Frequent on old walls in Craven.
2. E.
vulgaris, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Walls and banks ; frequent.
3. E.
ciliata, ITedw.
Fr. Summer.
Wliernside and Howgill fells — Rev. G Pinder.
Rocks near the 
waterfall at Mossdale head, Wensleydale — W.
Brunton.
At the 
White force, Cronkley fell, and other places in Teesdale — R.
Spruce, 
J. G.
Baker.
Limestone rocks on Malham moor, and near the sum- 
mit of Ingleborough, 
4. E.
rhaptocarpa, Hedw.
Fr. June.
XIII.
WEISSIA.
1. W.
nuda, H.
and T.
Fr. March.
Discelium, Brul.
Bolton, Wharfdale — 8.
Gibson.
2. W.
Starkeana, Hedw.
Fr. Feb.
Encalypta, Nees.
and Horns.
Clifton Scope, near York — R.
Spruce.
3. W.
lanceolata, H.
and T.
Fr. Spring.
Encalypta, Kohl.
Mud walls and hedgebanks — Teesdale.
Near 
Bolton abbey, Wharfdale — 8.
Gibson.
Roofs at Ay ton, Cleveland 
— W.
Mudd.
Walls at I)alby, and near Castle Howard — H.
Ibbot- 
son.
Went Yale, and Ackworth, near Pontefract — J.
Watson.
Banks 
and mud-covered walltops near Pontefract.
Banks near Broughton 
Hall, Craven.
155 
4. W.
fugax, Hedw.
Fr. Summer.
W. striata « minor , Brit.
FI.
Rhabdoweisia, B.
and S.
Between 
Bolton abbey and Barden tower, Wharfdale — R.
Spruce .
5. W.
DENTicuLATA, Schwaegr.
Fr. Summer.
W. striata /3 major , Brit.
FI.
Rhabdoweisia, B.
and S.
Moist sliady 
rocks in Greensclough, near Todmorden, near the border of the 
county.
6. W.
trichodes, H.
and T.
Fr. Autumn.
Brachyoclus, N.
and H.
Abundant on sandstone near Castle Howard 
— R.
Spruce, M.
B. Slater.
Rocks at Guyscliffe, near Pateley bridge.
7. W.
cirrata, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
In tlie North Riding, generally on very old paling — Teesdale.
Kil- 
dale, Sleddale, and Baj-sdale, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Park quarry, 
Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
Walls at Romaldkirk, Teesdale, and 
rocks above Boltby, near Tliirsk — J.
G. Baker.
Ackworth, near 
Pontefract — I.
Brown.
Walls near Darley, in Nidderdale — G.
R. 
Baker.
Common on walls near Pateley bridge.
Walls and rocks 
near Todmorden ; rare.
8. W.
tenuirostris, H.
and T.
Fr. April.
Bidymodon cylindricus, B.
and S.
On stones in Lythe beck, Eskdale 
R. Spruce.
9. W.
curvirostra, H.
and T.
Fr. Autumn.
Rocks, walls, and trees; frequent.
10.
W. controvebsa, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
11.
W. calcarea, Hedw.
Fr. May.
Seligeria, B.
and S.
Chalk stones near Bishop’s Burton; rare — 
Teesdale.
12.
W. recurvata, H.
and T.
Fr. Summer.
Seligeria, B.
and S.
Rocks near Copgrove — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Rocks 
in Eskdale — R Spruce.
Near Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson.
Rocks 
below Wliitstoneciiff, in Flazendale, and other places amongst the 
oolitic moorlands ; plentiful — J.
G. Baker.
Ingleby hank, and other 
localities in Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Shady rocks and walls near 
Todmorden.
13.
W. pusilla, Hedw.
Fr. June.
Seligeria.
B. and S.
Limestone rocks, Mowthorpe dale, and Cram- 
beck, near Castle Howard ; a form approaching W.
calcarea — R.
Spruce.
Howgill and Dent fells — Rev. G.
Pinder.
Moist shady 
rocks, Gordale, and other places near Malham.
14.
W. verticillata, Schwaegr.
Fr. June.
Fucladium, B.
and S.
First waterfall at Hackfall, and at Mossdale 
head, Wensleydale — W.
Brunton.
Goadland beck, Eskdale, Cram- 
beck, near Castle Howard, and Forge valley, near Hackness — R.
Spruce.
Near Knaresborough — T.
B. Powell.
Near Middleton, in 
Teesdale — W.
Robertson.
Damp moory places above Boltby, near 
Thirsk; plentiful—/.
G. Baker.
Hell gill, Guisborough moor — 
156 
W. Mudd.
Gillaleys, Castle Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Went Vale, 
near Pontefract — J.
W. Watson.
Helks wood, near Ingleton.
15.
W. acuta, Hedw.
Fr. May, June.
Blindia, B.
and S.
Plentiful on basaltic rocks by tbe Tees, at Wince 
bridge, and other places in Teesdale — R.
Spruce , M.
B. Slater.
Bolton, Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
Rocks at Ingleby, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
XIY.
GRIMMIA.
1. G.
apocarpa, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Schistidium, B.
and S.
Walls and rocks ; frequent.
The fiuitant 
form (G.
rivularis, Brid.) is not uncommon in mountainous rivulets.
Var. stricta, Turn., occurs on rocks near the Strid, Wharfdale.
2. G.
saxicola, Schwaegr.
Fr. May.
Campylostelium, B.
and S.
Merrick’s gill, Hackness — R.
Spruce.
3. G.
maritima, Turn.
Fr. March.
Schistidium, B.
and S.
On the coast cliffs at Huntcliffe point, near 
Saltburn — W.
Mudd.
4. G.
pulvinata, Smith.
Fr. Spring.
5. G.
trichophylla, Grev.
Fr. March.
Walls between Barnard Castle and Middleton, Teesdale; abundant 
— R.
Spruce.
Walls on the top of the Hambleton hills, above Boltby 
— J.
G. Baker.
Old walls near Barden tower, and rocks in Bolton 
woods.
Frequent on walls near Pateley bridge, in Nidderdale.
6. G.
spiralis, H.
and T.
Fr. Autumn.
High force, Teesdale, on basaltic rocks — R.
Spruce.
Rocks at the 
White force, Cronkley fell — J.
G. Baker.
7. G.
torta, Horns, and JSfees.
Cronkley scarrs, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
8. G.
ovata, Web. and Mohr.
Fr. June.
Rocks above the Rye, near Laskill bridge, Bilsdale — J.
G. Baker.
9. G.
Doniana, Smith.
Fr. Summer.
Old walls near the White force, and other parts of Cronkley fell — 
A. O.
Black, J.
N. 
XY.
DIDYMODON.
1. D.
purpureus, H.
and T.
Fr. Spring and Summer.
Ceratodon, Brid.
2. D.
flexieolius, H.
and T.
Fr. Winter.
Ackworth, near Pontefract— J.
Brown.
Ayton moor, Cleveland — 
W. Mudcl.
Eaves wood, near Pleptonstall.
157 
3. D.
AQCATICUS,* 
(“ Tricli.
aquaticum, Brid.?
fide Wilson" — Spruce, PJiyt.
ii.
155 ).
Near Malham, 1837 — W.
Wilson.
Settle — W.
Borrer.
In an old 
quarry at Welburn — R.
Spruce.
4. D.
Bruntoni, Am. Fr.
May..
Cynodontium, B.
and S.
High force and Cronkley scarrs, Teesdale.
Newtondale — R.
Spruce.
Bocks near the Strid, Bolton Abbey.
5. D.
eigidulus, Hediv, Fr. Autumn and Winter.
Trichostomum, Smith.
Walls and rocks; common.
Weissia crispula, 
Flora, 132, is a form of this species — R.
Spruce.
6. D.
trifaritjs, Swartz.
Fr Autumn and Winter.
T. tophaceum, Brid.
Crambeck, Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
Wet 
rocks at High-green wood, Heptonstall.
7. D.
ckispulus, Eng. FI.
Fr. Summer.
Trichostomum , Bruch.
Cliffs north of Scalby mills, near Scarborough 
— R.
Spruce.
' 8.
D. brachydontius, Wils.
Fr. Summer.
T. mutabile, Bruch.
Scalby mills, near Scarborough — R.
Spruce.
9. D.
capillaceus, Schrad.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
Distichium , B.
and S.
Near Wince bridge, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Saltersgate beck — M.
B. Slater.
Aysgarth Force, Wensleydale — A.
Watson.
Ayton moor, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Bocks at the Strid, 
Wharfdale.
10.
D. flexicaulis, Schwaegr.
Trichostomum, B.
and S.
D. longirostris, Eng. El.
(not W.
and M.) 
Frequent on rocks, walls, and banks, in the limestone districts ; but 
always barren.
11.
D. heteromallus, H.
and T.
Fr. Autumn, 
T. homomallum, B.
and S.
12.
D. pusillus, Hook.
Fr. Spring.
T. tortile, Schrad.
In the park quarry at Castle Howard — R.
Spruce, 
H. Ibbotson.
13.
D. cylindricus, Hook.
Fr. Nov.
Castle Howard park quarry — R.
Spruce.
XVI.
TBICHOSTOMUM.
1. T.
lanuginosum, Hedw 
Racomitrium, Brid.
2. T.
canescens, Hedw.
Racomitrium, Brid.
* Is not this “ Grimmia recurvifolia, Wils., MSS." ?
I have a specimen so named, collected by Spruce 
at the station quoted above.
J.G.B, 
Fr. Spring.
Fr. Spring.
Strensall moor, near York — H.
Ibbotson.
On 
158 
the moor near the Hambleton hotel — J.
G. Baker.
Heaths, hanks, 
and sandy lanes, near Todmorden.
8. T.
heterostichum, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Bacomitrium, Brid.
4. T.
protensum, (Al. Br.) Fr. Feb.
Bacomitrium , Al. Braun.
Rocks above the White force, Cronkley 
fell, Teesdale.
5. T.
aciculare, Beauv.
Fr. Spiring.
Bacomitrium, Brid.
At Harrogate — Teesdale.
Rivulet on Sawley 
moor — W.
Brunton.
Stones by the Esk, and Goadland beck; plen- 
tiful — B- Spruce.
Rocks by the Rye, near Laskill bridge, and in 
Boltby beck — J.
G. Baker.
Baysdale, Cleveland — W.Mudd.
Ravine 
near Roseberry Topping — J.
Watson.
6. T.
fasciculare, Schrad.
Fr. Spring.
Bacomitrium, Brid.
Rocks and walls ; frequent.
7. T.
polyphyllum, Schwaegr, Fr. Summer.
Brimham rocks, near Ripley — Teesdale.
Lord Grantley’s lakes, near 
Ripon — W.
Brunton.
Walls near Darley, in Nidderdale — G.
B. 
Baker.
Stones at Thornton-le- street ; sparingly — John H.
Davies.
Rocks at Newton, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Old walls near Todmor- 
den; rare.
T. ellipticum, Flora, 138, is erroneous.
i 
XVII.
FISSIDENS * 
1. F.
bryoides, Hedw.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
Dicranum bryoides «, British Flora.
D. bryoides, Yorks.
FI., 133, in 
part.
Hedgebanks and fallows ; common.
2. F.
iNCURvus, Schwaegr.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
D. bryoides y, Brit.
FI.
Grassy places near York — B.
Spruce.
Banks about Boltby and other places near Thirsk — J.
G. Baker.
Ayton, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
The variety (?) pusillus, Wils.
M.S.S., 
is frequent on sandstone near Castle Howard — B.
Spruce, M.
B. 
Slater ; and occurs also on wet rocks at Gormire, and below Rolston 
Scarr, near Thirsk — J.
G. Baker', and sparingly on moist rocks near 
Todmorden.
3. F.
crassipes, Wils.
MSS.
Fr. Spring.
On stones in Crambeck, Castle Howard — B Spruce.
On stones in 
Codbeck, at Kilvington, and in the Holmes, Thirsk — J.
G. Baker.
4. F.
exilis, f Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
F. Bloxami, Wils.
Airyholme wood, near Ayton — W.
Mudd.
5. F.
tamarindifolius, Don. and Smith.
Fr. March.
Grassy banks and fields, Stansfield, near Todmorden ; very rare.
* In one or two cases, as in the present instance, we have slightly departed from Hooker’s classifica- 
tion, in conformity with recent usage, J.G.B.
t In the Bryologia Europsea, F.
Bloxami and F.
exilis, stand as two distinct species.
J.G.B.
159 
G. F.
osmundoides, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
D. bryoides /3, Brit.
FI.
Hocks at the White force, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Guisborough moor, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Wet rocks at 
Stopesclough, and on boggy ground at Longfield moor, near Tod- 
morden.
7. F.
adiantoedes, Hedw.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
Et seq.
Dicranum, Flora, 133.
Brit.
FI.
ii.
36.
8. F.
taxifolius, Hedw.
Fr. Winter and Spring.
XVIII.
OAMPYLOPUS.
1. C.
flexuosus, Brid.
Fr. Spring.
Dicranum, Brit.
FI.
Yorks.
FI.
1 33.
Hocks in shady woods ; not 
unfrequent.
The variety (?) C.
pilifer, Brid., is frequent upon 
boggy moors, especially in mountainous situations.
2. C.
tarfaceus, B.
and S.
Fr. Spring.
Moors, and heathy banks in woods ; frequent.
3. C.
fragilis, B.
andS .
Fr, Spring.
Dry banks, Slopesclough, Stansfield, near Todmorden.
XIX.
DICRANUM.
1. D.
glaucum, Hedw.
Onocophorus, B.
and S.
2. D.
cerviculatum, Hedw.
3. D.
STRUM1FERUM, Ehrh.% 
Fr. Spring.
Fr. Summer.
Fr. Autumn.
4. D.
falcatum, Hedw.* Fr. June.
Saltersgate beck — M.
B. Slater.
5. D.
Starkii, “ Web. and Mohr ?
” Spruce, Phyt.
ii.
150.
Holwick scarr, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Fr. July.
6. D.
flavescens, Smith.
Fr. Autumn.
Abundant by the Esk and Lythe beck — R.
Spruce.
Plentiful on wet 
rocks in Flazendale, Scawton Nowle, and other dales amongst the 
Hambleton hills — J.
O. Baker.
Aysgarth force, Wensleydale — A.
Watson.
Goadland beck — M.
B. Slater.
On stones in a small 
stream in Bolton woods ; plentiful.
7. D.
PELLUciDUM, Swartz.
Fr. Autumn.
Large stones by the side of a rivulet north of Harrogate — Teesdale.
Stones near a rivulet at Hip on — W.
Brunton.
Abundant by the Esk 
* These two species both grow in elevated alpine situations, so that it is possible that some misappre- 
hension has arisen with reference to their occurrence in the Yorkshire stations reported ; but I haye not 
seen specimens.
J.G.B.
160 
and Lythe beck — B.
Spruce.
Bolton, WEarfdale — S.
Gibson.
Sab 
tersgate beck — M.
B. Slater.
Kilvington, near Tliirsk, and plenti- 
ful on damp rocks in Flazendale, and otlier places amongst the 
Hambleton bills — J.
G. Balter.
Hell gill, Guisborough — W.
Mudd.
Wet rocks, near Todmorden ; not rare.
8. D.
squarrosum, Sclirad.
Fr. Autumn.
North Bierley, near Bradford — Dr. Richardson.
Boggy ground near 
Holwick, Teesdale — J.
G. Balter.
Near Bolton, Wharfdale^ — S.
Gibson.
Saltersgate beck, fruiting plentifully — M.
B. Slater.
Bogs 
in Baysdale, Cleveland — TV.
Mudd.
Frequent on wet banks and 
scars near Todmorden.
9. D.
spurium, Hedw.
Houghton moor, near Newbold.
Barmby moor, between York and 
Beverley — Teesdale.
Still grows at Bramby moor, and fruits spar- 
ingly.
Stockton forest, and Langwith moor, near York — R.
Spruce.
10.
D. elagellabe, Hedw.
Fr. Autumn.
Rocks, Kildale, Cleveland — W.
Mudd .
11.
D. Scottianum, Turn.
Fr. Autumn.
On rocks at Ingleby Greenhow, and Highcliff, near Guisborough — 
W. Mudd.
12.
D. Schbeberi, Hedw.
Ditch on the west side of the Temple rush, Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
13.
D. UNDULATUM, Ehrli.
Fr. Autumn.
D. palustre, Brid.
Stockton forest, Welburn moor, Terrington carr, 
and other places — R.
Spruce.
Sleddale, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Moors above Boltby, and plentiful on the Hambleton hills — J.
G. 
Balter.
Ackworth, near Pontefract — 1.
Brown.
Boggy ground near 
Wainstones, Cleveland — J.
W. Watson.
Wet pastures near Tod- 
morden.
The plant mentioned in the Flora under this name is 
D. scoparium, (Dillenii).
.14.
D. scoparium, Hedw.
Fr. Summer and Autumn.
D. scoparium vulyaris f Brit.
FI.
D. Dillenii, Tayl.
Walls and 
rocks; common.
-15.
D. majus, Schwaegr.
Fr. Summer and Autumn.
D. scoparium & majus, Brit.
FI.
D. scoparium , Tayl.
In similar situ- 
ations to the preceding; equally frequent.
10.
D. euscescens, Turner.
Fr. Autumn.
D. scoparium y fuscescens, Brit.
FI.
Holwick and Cronkley scarrs, 
and on basaltic rocks below the High force, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Bolton, Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
Rocks above Boltby, near Thirsk — 
J. G.
Balter.
High green wood, near Heptonstall, and woods near 
Bingley and Guyscliffe, Nidderdaie.
17.
D. varium, Hedw Fr. Autumn and Winter.
18.
D. rufescens, Turn.
Fr. Autumn and Winter, 
161 
1).
varium p> rufescens, Brit.
FI.
On the margin of Kildale moor, 
Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
On the Yorkshire side of the Tees, between 
the High force and Wince bridge — A.
O. Black.
Clayey hanks and 
scars near Todmorden.
19.
D. heteromallum, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
20.
I).
subulatum, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
Clayey banks, Hareley Wood, and in an old quarry at Shawbridge, 
near Todmorden.
XX.
TORTULA.
1. T.
enervis, Hook and Grev.
Fr. Winter.
Barlula rigida , Schultz.
Abundant on mud-capped walls at Cram- 
beck, and near Malton, Scalby, near Scarborough, and Jackdaw 
crag, Tadcaster — B.
Spruce.
Abundant, along with the next species, 
on walltops covered with mud, near Pontefract — Dr. J.
B. Wood.
2. T.
AMBiGUA, B.
and S.
Fr. Winter.
Et seq.
Barbula, B.
and S., Bryol.
Europ.
Abundant on walltops 
covered with mud, in the vicinity of Pontefract — Dr. J.
B. Wood.
Plentiful on w r alls at Knottingley — J.
G. Baker.
On a mud-capped 
wall by the roadside leading out of Malton towards York, and in 
similar situations near Welburn — B.
Spruce.
On walltops in the 
village of Barkston Ash, near Church Fenton station.
3. T.
rigida, Turn.
Fr. Winter.
B. cdoides, B.
and S.
Rocks on Ingleborough — Hudson.
Hedge- 
banks near Ripon, and rocks on [the banks of] the Nidd, near Knares- 
borough — W.
Brunton.
Wall on the York road, half a mile from 
Malton — M.
B. Slater.
On a wall at Stackhouses, near Settle — 
A. O.
Black.
Moist rocks and walls, in a deep cutting of the road 
at Wenthill, near Pontefract — Dr. J.
B. Wood, and J.
N. 
4. T.
conyoluta, Swartz.
Fr. Spring.
Gillaleys, Castle Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Baysdale, Cleveland — 
W. Mudd.
Dry banks and fields near Todmorden.
5. T.
revoluta, Brid.
Fr. Spring.
Ifirkham hills, near Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
6. T.
muralis, Hedw.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
7. T.
RURALis, Hedw.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
8. T.
l.evipila, Scliwaegr.
Fr. Summer.
T. ruralis /3 Icevipila, Brit.
FI.
On trees ; common — R.
Spruce.
On 
trees nem’ Thirsk, and other places ; J.
G. Baker.
Welburn, near 
Malton — M.
B. Slater..
On trees near Bolton, Wharfdale.
9. T.
subulata, Hedw.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
10.
T. marginata, B.
and S.
Fr. Spring, 
On walls and rocks of soft sandstone, near Castle Howard; most 
abundant in the park quarry — R.
Spruce.
With Bryum atropurpu- 
reum, at the sandstone quarry on the south side of the Swale, at 
Leckby — J.
G. Baker.
L 
162 
11.
T. PAPTLLOSA, Wils.
MSS.
Castle Howard park, and on old elms at Huntington, near York — • 
It. Spruce.
12.
T. latifolia, B.
and S.
Frequent in situations liable to inundation, as on the banks of the 
Ouse, Derwent, Wliarfe, Foss, &c.
— JR.
Spruce.
Banks of Codbeck 
near Kilvington and Thirsk, of the Swale below Topcliffe, and of 
the Wiske at Kirby Wiske — John G.
Baker.
Banks of the Wharfe, 
near Tadcaster.
13.
T. unguiculata, JHJ.
and T.
Fr. Winter.
14.
T. cuneifolia, Turn.
Earthen walls and dry banks — - Teesdale .
It is desirable that the 
occurrence of this species should receive modem confirmation.
15.
T. tortuosa, JHJedw.
Fr. Summer.
Plentiful on rocks amongst the oolitic moorlands, and other lime- 
stone districts.
16.
T. fallax, Hedw.
Fr. Summer, Autumn.
17.
T. vinealis, Brid.
Fr. May.
Zygotrichia cylindrica, Tayl.
On a wall by the roadside between Bar- 
nard Castle and Lartington— JR.
Spruce.
Rocks by the Wharfe, at 
Bolton Abbey; sparingly.
18.
T. gracilis, j Hook and Grev.
Dillenius reports “ T.
brevifolia,” from “bogs in Yorkshire.” It is 
desirable that this should receive modern confirmation.
XXI.
CXNCLXDOTUS.
1. C.
f'ontinaloides, Beauv.
Fr. Spring.
Mountain rivulets in the north and west ridings — Teesdale.
Near 
Ripon — W.
Brunton.
In the Wharfe, between Bolton Abbey and 
Barden Tower — JR.
Spruce and J.
N. Plentiful in the Swale, below 
Aisenby, and in the Ure, at Aysgarth force — John G.
Baker.
Hell 
gill, Guisborough moor — W.
Mudd.
In the watercourse below Mal- 
ham Cove, Very fine on the Tees above High force — A.
O. Black.
XXII.
POLYTRICHUM.
1. P.
undulatum, JHedw.
Atrichum, P.
Beauv.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
J2.
P. hercynicum, JHedw.
Fr. May.
Oligotrichum, DC.
3. P.
piliferum, Schreb.
Fr. Spring.
4 P.
juniperiStum, Willd.
Fr. Spring.
Heathy and moory places ; frequent.
5. P.
commune, Linn.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
Yar. P.
fastigiatum, Wils.
MSS., occurs on Stansfieldmoor, Todmorden.
* 
163 
6. P.
formosum, Hedw.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
Woods near Castle Howard; more frequent than P.
commune — R.
Spruce.
In a fir plantation on the south side of Terrington carr — 
M. B.
Slater.
Moory ground above Boltby, near Thirsk — J.
G. 
Baker.
Cliff-rig, Ayton, Cleveland — W.
Mudcl.
Sandy hanks and 
old shady walls in woods, High green wood, Heptonstall; plentiful.
7. P.
gracile, Menz.
Fr. Summer.
Ayton moor, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Terrington carr — II.
Ibbotson.
Stansfield moor, near Todmorden; rare.
8. P.
alpinum, Linn.
Fr. Summer.
Et seq.
Pogonatum, Brul.
On the east side of Bay wood, Castle 
Howard, near the octagonal temple — Teesdale.
Mossdale head, 
Wensleydale — W.
Brunton.
Bolton, Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
Cronk- 
ley fell, Teesdale — H.
Ibbotson.
Common in elevated moory places 
in Teesdale — A.
0. Black.
Abundant on the moors above Malham.
On the roadside at Stipenden bank, Stansfield.
9. P.
urnigerum, Linn.
Fr. Autumn, Winter.
Sandy pla6es on moors, and banks by roadsides ; frequent.
10.
P. aloides, Hedw.
Fr. Autumn, Winter.
11.
P. nanum, Hedw.
Fr. Autumn, Winter.
DIVISION II.
DIPLOPERISIOMI.
XXIII.
FUNARIA.
1. F.
hygrometrica, Hedw.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
2. F.
Muhlenbergii, Schwaegr.
Fr. May.
Limestone rock at Copgrove — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Banks and ledges of 
rock near Malham.
XXI Y.
ZYGODON.
1. Z.
Mougeotii, B.
and S , 
Amphidium, N.
et H.
Gym. nimbosum, Tayl.
MSS.
On moist rocks 
in elevated situations throughout the county.
Teesdale and Eskdale 
— R.
Spruce.
Pennyghent — H.
Ibbotson.
Rocks at the White force, 
Cronkley fell — J.
G. Baker.
Rocks at the Strid, Bolton abbey ; and 
High green wood, Heptonstall.
XXY.
ORTHOTRICHUM.* 
1. O.
cupulatum, Hoffm.
Fr. Spring.
Rocks and trees ; frequent.
Var. O.
nudum, Eng. Bot., on the 
banks of the Wharfe at Bolton abbey.
* I have arranged the species of this genus and the next in the order of sequence in which they are 
given in the Bryologia Europea.
J.G.B.
164 
2. O.
anomalum, Hediv.
Fr. Spring.
In similar situations to the preceding ; not unfrequent.
3. O.
pumilum, Schwaegr.
Fr. Summer.
0. affine P> pumilum, Brit.
FI.
Near the root of a sycamore tree at 
Hell wath, by Rip on — W.
Brunton.
On an ash tree on Clifton ings, 
York — R.
Spruce.
4. 0.
TENELLUM, Bruch.
Fr. Summer.
Ash trees on the York road near the Castle Howard gate.
Very 
fine on trees by the Cock near Tadcaster — R.
Spruce .
On trees 
near Guisborough — W.
Mudd.
On trees at Sutton-under- Whitstone- 
cliff, near Thirsk — J.
G. Balter.
5. O.
Sprucii, Mont.
Fr. Summer.
Frequent on trees and shrubs on the hanks of the Ouse, Wharfe, 
and Cock — R.
Spruce.
Discovered in 1842.
Banks of Codbeck at 
Thirsk and Kilvington, of the Swale below Top cliffe, and of the 
Wiske at Kirby Wiske ; generally in company with Tortula latifolia 
— J.
G. Balter.
6. O.
affine, Schrad.
Fr. Summer.
Trunks of trees ; frequent.
7. O.
fastigiatum, Bruch.
Fr. Summer.
By a footpath between Greta bridge and Rokeby, 1810 — JV.
Borrer.
8. O, rupincola, Funclt.
Fr. Summer.
O. rupestre, Schleich.
Fallen rocks below the High force, Teesdale — 
R. Spruce.
9. 0.
speciosum, Nees.
On trees and shrubs near Bolton bridge — S.
Gibson.
10.
O. STRAMINEUM, Homsdl.
Teesdale.
Frequent in the neighbourhood of Castle Howard, grow- 
ing chiefly on beech trees — R.
Spruce.
On an ash tree on the south 
bank of the Swale, near Leckby — J.
G. Balter.
On an ash tree near 
Blakey bridge, Thirsk — J.
H. Davies.
11.
O. pallens, Bruch.
On a willow in Clifton ings, York ; with O.
Sprucii — R.
Spruce.
12.
O. rivulare, Turn.
Fr. Summer.
Trees by the banks of the Skell, near Ripon — W.
Brunton.
Balder- 
dale — R.
Spruce.
Banks of Codbeck and the Swale — J.
G. Balter.
Banks of the Leven, near Ayton — W.
Mudd.
13.
0. diaphanum, Schrad.
Fr. Spring.
Trees, posts, and rocks ; frequent.
14.
O. striatum, Hedw.
Fr. Summer.
O. lejocarpum , B.
and S.
Walls and trees; frequent.
15.
O. Lyellii, H.
and T.
Fr. Summer.
Laskill, Bilsdale, and woods about Mount St. John, near Thirsk— 
J. G.
Balter.
Ayton, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Trees near Rievaulx 
— John H.
Davies.
Forge valley, near Scarborough — A.
0. Blaclt.
Gordale, near Malham.
165 
16.
0. pulchellum, Smith.
Fr. Spring.
Mowthorpe dale, Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
On elders, Cliff-rig, 
Ay ton — W.
Mudd > On trees near Patel ey bridge.
17.
O. Drummondii, Hook.
Fr. Summer.
Lowdale, Hackness, and on junipers near the High force, and other 
places in Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Very fine on the banks of Blea beck 
— A.
O. Black.
On young oaks above Boltby, near Thirsk, and 
below HighclifTe, Guisborough moor — J.
G. Baker.
18.
0. Hutchinsee, H.
ancl T.
Fr. Summer.
On stones in the Greta — W.
Borrer.
On an old wall between Scaw- 
ton and the Hambleton hotel — R.
Spruce.
The plant mentioned in 
the Flora under this name is a variety of anomalum.
19.
0. coarctatum, Pal. Beauv.
O. Bruchii, Brid.
Frequent in the Castle Howard woods — R.
Spruce.
20.
0. crispum, Hedw.
Fr. Summer.
O. Ludwigii, Flora, 136, is a form of this species.
21.
O. phyllanthum, B.
and S.
On a tree on the south side of Heslington fields, near York — R.
Spruce.
XXYI.
BEY CM.
1. B.
androgynum, Hediv.
Fr. May.
Aidacomnion, Schwaegr.
Shady rocks below the High force — R.
Spruce.
Leckby carr, near Topcliffe — J.
G. Baker.
AGkwortli, near 
Pontefract — John W.
Watson.
Aytrfh moor, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Bocks and dry banks near the Strid, Bolton, Wharfdale.
2. B.
palustre, Swartz.
Fr. Summer.
Aidacomnion , Schwaegr.
3. B.
trichodes, Linn.
Fr. August.
Meesia idiginosa, Hediv.
On damp basaltic rocks at Wince bridge ; 
sparingly.
4. B.
dealbatum, Dicks.
Fr. June, 
Amblyodon, P .
Beauv.
Aysgarth force, Wensleydale — A.
Watson.
Bogs on Malham moor, and ground covered with lime on Stansfield 
moor.
5. B.
squarrosum, Hedw.
Paludella, Schwaegr.
Abundant, and very fine, in Terrington north 
carr, near Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson, R.
Spruce , M- B.
Slater.
6. B.
gracile, Wils.
MSS.
Fr. Spring.
Orthodontium, Schwaegr.
On rocks near the Strid, Bolton, Wharf- 
dale — R.
Spruce.
7. B.
cernuum, B.
and S.
Fr. Summer.
Greta bridge, 1810 — W.
Borrer.
Banks and walls in Teesdale; 
frequent.
Castle Howard, &c.
Bather scarce near York — R.
Spruce.
In the sandstone quarry on the south bank of the Swale, near 
Leckby — J.
G. Baker.
Stansfield moor, near Todmorden.
166 
8. B.
inclinatum, B.
and S.
Fr. Summer.
Very frequent, both in the high and low grounds — R.
Spruce.
9. B.
ulig in o sum , B.
and S .
Fr. Summer.
Heslington fields, near York, and on tufa under the new river 
bridge, at Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
Abundant at Whitby, and 
other places on the east coast — R.
S. and H.
Ibbotson.
On stone in 
a pond at Ackworth — J.
W. Watson.
10.
B. Zierii, Dicks.
Fr. Summer.
Rocks near the upper waterfall at Mossdale head, Wensleydale — 
W. Brunton.
Basaltic rocks at the High force, and other places in 
Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Banks of the Rather, below Swarth fell — - 
J. W.
Watson.
Rocks at the White force, Cronldey fell — J.
G. Baker.
Rocks above Howgill fells and Whernside — Rev. G.
Pinder.
Rocks 
above Ingleby Greenhow, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Limestone rocks 
on Malham moor.
11.
B. acuminatum, B.
and S.
Fr. July.
Near the west end of Holwiek scarr, Teesdale ; sparingly — R.
Spruce.
12.
B. elongatum, Dicks.
Fr. Summer.
Near Halifax — Dickson.
Shady rocks at Scatcliffe wood, and one or 
two other places near Todmorden; sparingly.
13.
B. nutans, Schreb.
Fr. Summer.
Walls and moory places ; frequent.
14.
B. crudum, Huds.
Fr. Summer.
Mossdale head, Wensleydale — W.
Brunton.
Abundant amongst 
shady rocks at Wince bridge, and other places in Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Plentiful on the shady rocks above the Strid, Bolton abbey.
15.
B. annotinum, Hediv.
Fr. May.
The gemmiferous state of this moss is very frequent ; the fruit I 
have seen only in Teesdale and on Stockton forest — R.
Spruce.
16.
B. carneum, Linn.
Fr. Spring.
Clifton Scope, near York — R.
Spruce.
Gillaleys, Castle Howard— 
M. B.
Slater.
Banks of Codbeck, and other places near Thirsk — 
J. G.
Baker.
Near Ayton, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
17.
B. Wahlenbergii, Schwaegr.
Fr. Spring.
B. albicans , Brit.
FI.
Frequent on wet rocks in Eskdale — R.
Spruce.
Banks of Goadland beck — M.
B. Slater.
Kildale, Cleveland — W.
Mudcl.
Damp places above Boltby, near Thirsk — J.
G. Baker.
Wet 
clayey banks, Blackclougk, near Todmorden.
18.
B. pyriforme, Swartz.
Fr. Summer.
Rocks at Hornby and Helmsley — Teesdale.
Walls at Heworth, near 
York, and on the bridge across the Wharfe, at Thorp-Arch — R.
Spruce.
Hebden bridge — S.
Gibson.
Walls of the Abbot’s house, 
Fountain’s abbey — J.
G. Baker.
Ackworth, near Pontefract — J.
W. 
Watson.
Walls near Ayton, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
In an old stone 
quarry, by the roadside between Castleford and Ferry-bridge.
19.
B. intermedium, Brid.
Fr. Summer.
167 
Frequent on heaps of rubbish, and on mortar in walls, as well as 
in moist sandy situations — R.
Spruce.
Kirkham hill, near Castle 
Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Wall at Ackworth, near Pontefract — J.
W. 
Watson.
Walls of the Abbot’s house, Fountain’s abbey— J.
G. 
Baker.
Near Scarborough, and in several places in Teesdale — 
A. 0.
Black.
Wet scarr, Blackclough, Langfield, near Todmorden.
20.
B. torquescens, B.
and S.
Fr. Summer.
On a stone on the north side of Gormire — W.
Borrer.
21.
B. pallescens, Sclavaegr.
Fr. Summer.
On rocks and sandy deposits near the Tees, at Wince bridge — R.
Spruce.
Wall at Stackhouses, near Settle — A.
O. Black.
22.
B. cavieolium, Tayl.
MSS.
Maizebeck, and in a stream on Holwick fell, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
23.
B. gracilentum, Tayl.
MSS.
Waste ground at Ganthorpe, near Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
24.
B. BiMUM, Schreb.
Fr. Summer.
B. ventricosum, Brit.
FI.
in part.
Frequent in the low grounds, 
Stockton forest, and other places near York — R.
Spruce.
Amongst 
the dales of the Hambleton hills — J.
G. Baker.
Moors near Ayton, 
Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Wintersett, near Ackworth — J.
W. Watson.
25.
B. pseudo-triquetrum, Schwaegr.
Fr. Summer.
B. ventricosum, Brit.
FI.
in part.
Abundant in the sub-alpine parts 
of the county, scarcely descending to the plains — R.
Spruce.
Boggy 
ground in Flazendale — J.
G. Baker ; and above Boltby, near Thirsk 
— J.
H. Davies.
Marshy ground about Malham; frequent.
26.
B. roseum, Schreb.
Fr. Autumn.
27.
B. obconicum, Hornsch.
Fr. Summer.
Greta bridge — W.
Borrer.
On a wall by the road leading from Bar- 
nard Castle to Lartington.
In the park quarry at Castle Howard — 
R. Spruce.
Sandy hedgebank by the roadside between Thirsk and 
Thornton-le-street ; plentiful — J.
G. Baker.
Rainton heights, Hawn- 
by — J.
II.
Davies.
28.
B. capillar'e, Hedw.
Fr. Summer.
Walls, rocks, and roofs; common.
29.
B. pallens, Swartz.
Fr. Summer.
B. turbinatum, Flora, 136.
30.
B. CjESPItitium, Linn.
Fr. Summer.
31.
B. erythrocarpon, Schwaegr.
Fr. May.
Plentiful, and very fine, in moist sandy stubbles between Barmby 
and Woodhouse moors, near Pocklington.
Stockton forest, near 
York — R.
Spruce.
Ackworth, near Pontefract — I.
Brown.
32.
B atropurpureum, W.
and M.
Fr. Summer.
Very frequent near York and Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
Rocks 
near Wince bridge, Teesdale — M.
B. Slater.
Stones near the rail- 
way bridge over the Codbeck — J.
H. Davies.
Roadside below 
168 
Westow, near Thirsk — J.
G. Balter.
On tlie top of tlie Hambleton 
hills, above Boltby — W.
Robinson.
33.
B. alpinum, Linn.
Fr. Summer.
Frequent on low moist rocks in Teesclale — R.
Spruce.
Damp rocks 
at Hipping’s farm, Stansfield.
34.
B. julaceum, Schrad.
White bridge, Teesdale, with B.
atropurpureum — M.
B. Slater.
Plentiful on the banks of Blea beck, Cronkley fell, but barren — 
A. O.
Blaclt.
Wet rocks on Greensclough, near Todmorden, near 
the border of the county.
35.
B. argenteum, Linn.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
36.
B. mnioedes, Wils.
Fr. Winter.
Mnium subglobosum, B.
and S.
Codhill bog, Slecldale — W.
Mudd.
Fallow gill, Nidderdale — T.
Simpson.
Marshy ground on Stansfield 
and Longfield moors, near Todmorden.
37.
B. punctatum, Schreb.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
Et seq.
Mnium, Hedw.
38.
B. ligulatum, Schreb.
Fr. Spring.
M. undulatum, Hedw.
39.
B. hornum, Schreb.
Fr. Spring.
40.
B. marginatum, Dicks.
Fr. Spring.
M. serratum, Brid.
Hackfall, and Scotton, about a mile westward 
of Knaresborough — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Mossdale head, Wensleydale, 
and Whitcliffe, near Hip on — W.
Brunton.
Near Sedbergh — Rev. G.
Binder.
Teesdale, and Lythe beck, Eskdale — R.
Spruce.
Gillaleys, 
Castle Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Banks of Wharfe, between Bolton 
abbey and Barden tower.
41.
B. rostratum, Schrad.
Fr. Summer.
Bogs in the mountainous part of the county — Dr. Richardson.
Hackfall, near Ripon — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Hedgebanks and woods 
near Thirsk, and other places in the north riding — J.
G. Baker.
Goadland beck — M.
B. Slater.
Ackworth, near Pontefract — I.
Brown.
In several places in Teesdale — A.
O. Black.
Abundant on the 
banks of the Wharfe, near Bolton abbey.
42.
B. cuspidatum, Schreb.
Fr. Spring.
Wall by the roadside between High Startforth and Partington — A.
O. Black.
In fields amongst grass, Ilareleywood, near Todmorden.
43.
B. aeeine, Brid.
Fr. May.
Frequent near York and Castle Howard.
Fruiting sparingly on 
Terrington carr — R.
Spruce.
Frequent in boggy ground near Thirsk, 
and in the dales of the Hambleton hills — J.
G. Baker.
Damp ground 
above Boltby — J.
H. Davies.
44.
B stellare, Hedw.
Gillaley’s w r ood and Mowthorpe dale, near Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
Banks of Goadland beck — M.
B. Slater.
Shady rocks in 
Flazendale — J.
G. Baker.
Plentiful amongst rocks near the Strid, 
and other places on the banks of the Wharfe, near Bolton abbey.
169 
XXVII.
CINCLIDIUM.
1. C.
stygium, Wahl.
Fr. Summer.
In a small "bog by the roadside near a place called Middlehouse, 
between Arncliffe and Malham.
Sides of springs near the summit 
of Ingleborough.
XXVIII.
BARTRAMIA.
1. B.
pomiformis, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
The larger form (B.
crispa, Brid.) occurs on rocks in Teesdale — 
B. Spruce ; and Flazendale — J.
G. Baker.
2. B.
ithyphylla, Brid.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
Plumpton Rocks, near Copgrove — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Mossdale head, 
Wensleydale — W.
Brunton.
Frequent on basaltic rocks on Cronkley 
and.
Holwick scarrs, and below the High force, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Bocks at the White force, Cronkley fell, with B.
gracilis — J.
G. 
Baker.
Mossdale head, Wensleydale — S.
Hailstone.
3. B.
gracilis, Floerke.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
B. (Ederi, Swartz.
Rocks at the White force, Teesdale — R.
Spruce , 
J. G.
Baker.
Mossdale head, Wensleydale — S.
Hailstone.
Banks 
of the Wharfe, near Bolton— R.
Spruce.
Rocks at Battersby, Cleve- 
land — W.
Mudd.
4. B.
fontana, Swartz.
Fr. Summer.
5. B.
calcarea, B.
and S.
Fr. Summer.
Moist springy places, Teesdale, and under the new river bridge at 
Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
Boggy ground near Rievaulx, and 
Heseltine gill, near Settle — W.
Borrer.
Banks of the stream above 
Boltby, near Thirsk, and on the edge of Guisborough moor, near 
Highcliff — J.
G. Baker.
Banks of the Ure, near Aysgarth force — 
A. Watson.
- Littondale, near Arncliffe.
6. B.
Halle rian a, Hedw.
Fr. Summer.
In the clefts of basaltic rocks near the High force, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Dentdale and Howgill fells, near Sedbergh — Rev. G.
Pinder.
Banks of the Rather, below Swarth fell — J.
W. Watson.
Rocks near 
Ingleby Greenhow, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
1. B.
arcuata, Brid.
Fr. Winter.
Boggy part of Houghton moor — Withering.
Mossdale head — W.
Brunton.
Amongst rocks in Teesdale; plentiful — R.
Spruce , &c.
Cantley and Dent, near Sedbergh ; in fruit abundantly, 1846 — Rev.
G. Pinder.
Banks of the Rather, below Swarth fell — J.
W. Watson.
Shady rocks in Flazendale— J.
G. Baker.
Banks of Goadland beck, 
Eskdale — M.
B. Slater.
Helk’s wood, Ingleton; and in fruit, above 
Clapham, Craven, J.850.
XXIX.
BUXBAUMIA.
1. B.
aphylla, Haller.
Fr. Spring.
Heathy ground on Sawley moor, near Ripon — T.
Simpson 
170 
SECTION II.
PLEUROCARPI.
SUBSECTION I.
GYMNOSTOMI.
XXX.
HEDWIGIA.
1. H.
.estiva, Hooker.
Fr. Autumn.
Anictangium comp actum, Sckwaegr.
Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Rocks at 
tlie White force and High force — A.
O. Black.
Rocks at Hell gill, 
Guisborough moor — W.
Mudd.
Moist rocks in Greensclough, Tod- 
morden, near the boundary of the county.
SUBSECTION II.
PEBISTOMI.
DIY.
I. APLOPERISTOMI.
XXXI.
PTEROGONIUM.
1. P.
GRACILE, Swartz.
Teesdale (B.
G. 727) reports this alpine species as occurring on 
“ trunks of trees near Castle Howard, but scarce.” Mr. Spruce has 
found it in Teesdale, but only on the Durham side of the river.
XXXII.
LEUCODON.
1. L.
sciuroides, Schwaegr.
Fr. Summer.
Braunia, B.
and S.
Trunks of trees and bushes ; common.
DIY.
II.
DIPLOPERISTOMI.
XXXIII.
NECKERA.
1. N.
pumila, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
Trunks of trees in Ray wood, Castle Howard ; but very rare — Tees- 
dale.
Gillaleys wood, Castle Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Trees in Hol- 
wick wood, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Studley woods, near Ripon — 
J. G.
Baker.
2. N.
crispa, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
Rocks at Hornby, but seldom in fructification — Teesdale.
Macker- 
shaw wood, near Ripon — W.
Brunton.
Rocks in Teesdale and 
Wharfdale — R.
Spruce.
Rocks on the western edge of the oolitic 
moorlands ; plentiful, but becoming rarer amongst the dales east- 
ward — J.
G. Baker.
Went Yale, near Pontefract — J.
W. Watson.
171 
XXXIY.
ANOMODON.
1. A.
curtipendulum, H.
and T.
Fr. Spring.
Mossdale head, Wensleydale — W.
Brunton.
Walls at Laskill, Bils- 
dale, and other localities — J.
G. Baker.
On the park wall at Castle 
Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Walls and stones in several localities in 
Teesdale — A.
0. Black.
Common on trees and walls in Bolton 
woods, and near Barden tower, Wharfdale.
2. A.
viticulosum, H.
and T.
Fr. Spring.
Leskea, B.
and S.
Rocks and trees ; frequent.
XXXY.
DALTONIA.
1. D.
heteromalla, H.
and T.
Fr. Spring.
Trunks of trees in a wood at Castle Howard, called Mount Zion ; 
but very rare — Teesdale.
In fruit on an apple-tree on Eskdale side, 
1842 — R.
Spruce.
Near Carlton, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
XXXYI.
FONTINALIS.
1. F.
antipyretica, Linn.
Fr. Summer.
2. F.
squamosa, Linn.
Fr. Summer.
In the Tees, above Middleton — Winch FI.
N.D. In the bed of the 
Tees, just above the High force— A.
0. Black.
In the Wharfe, near 
Bolton abbey — S.
Gibson.
In the Rye, near Laskill, Bilsdale — 
J. G.
Baker.
Baysdale, Cleveland — W.
Mudd.
Gorple dough, near 
Heptonstall.
XXXYII.
HOOKERIA.
1. H.
lucens, Smith.
Fr. Spring.
XXXYIII.
ISOTHECIUM.
1. I.
INSIDIOSUM, Mont.
On limestone rocks, Hildenley quarry, near Malton — R.
Spruce , Sc.
XXXIX.
LESKEA.
1. L.
INCURVATA, Hedw.
Hypnum atrovirens, Dicks.
Flora , 140.
Shady woods in the north 
riding — Teesdale.
2. L.
pulvinata, Wahl.
Fr. Summer.
Abundant on trees, in situations liable to inundation from the Ouse, 
near York.
By the river Cock, near Tadcaster — R.
Spruce.
3. L.
polycarpa, Ehrh.
Fr. Summer.
H. medium, Dicks.
Flora, 139.
Trees by the bank of the Skell, near 
172 
Ripon — W.
Brunton.
About the roots of willows, in the marshes 
near Beverley — Teesdale.
On willows by Holgate beck, near York, 
and roots of trees in Eskdale — R.
Spruce.
Plentiful on trees liable 
to inundation, along the course of Codbeck and the Swale, near 
Thirsk —J.G. Balter.
Ayton, Cleveland — W.Mudd.
Frequent on 
trees near Tadcaster.
4. L.
polyantha, Hedw.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
Hypnum, Hoolc.
Isothecium, B.
and S.
On frees by the Foss, near 
York, and near Huntington.
On a tree stump in Askham bogs.
Near Castle Howard and Crambe ; but sparingly — R.
Spruce.
Tree 
near Welburn mill — M.
B. Slater.
Bolton, Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
On willows, Holmes, Thirsk, and a stump in Flazendale — J.
G. 
Balter.
On old *thorns by the roadside, between Broughton Hall 
and Helsbeck station.
5. L LATEBEICOLA, Wils.
MSS.
On decayed roots of old trees in Stanley dough, Hareley wood, 
near Todmorden ; very rare.
6. L.
subeuea, Wils.
MSS.
Rocks near the White force, Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Moist shady 
rocks in Gordale, and other places near Malham; and at Eaves 
wood and Ragley Naze, near Heptonstall.
7. L.
Speucii, Bruch.
A single patch with perichsetia, on a shady basaltic rock on the 
bank of the Tees, below Wince bridge — R.
Spruce.
Moist shady 
rocks near a waterfall in Greensclough, and also in Shedden dough, 
near Todmorden, near the border of the county; very sparingly.
XL.
HYPNUM.
1. H.
teichomanoides, Linn.
Fr. Spring.
Omalia, B, and S.
2. H.
complanatum, Linn.
Fr. Spring.
Omalia , Wils.
MSS.
Neclcera, B.
and S.
3. H.
eipaeium, Linn.
Fr. Spring.
Damp places ; not unfrequent.
4. H.
undulatum, Linn , Fr. Spring.
5. H.
denticulatum, Linn.
Fr. Summer.
6. H.
sylvaticum, Schwaegr.
Fr. Summer.
On shady rocks below Whitstonee'liff, and other places near Thirsk 
— J.
G. Balter.
7. H.
elegans, j Booh.
Muse.
Exot.
H. planifolium, Brid.
Near Ayton, Cleveland— W.
Mudd.
Gillaleys 
wood, Castle Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Rocks in woods near Todmor- 
den, but always barren.
8. H.
depeessum, Bruch 
1 73 
On calcareous stones in a wood near the Castle Howard railway 
station — R.
Spruce.
Shady rocks in Gordale, near Malham, and at 
Houghton, near Todmorden; rare.
9. H.
tenellum, Dicks.
Fr. Spring.
H. Algerianum, Brid.
10.
H. serpens, Linn.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
11.
H. populetdm, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
12.
H. molee, Dicks.
Teesdale reports this alpine species, doubtless in error, from “rocks 
at Crambe beck bridge, between York and Malton.” 
13.
H. Stramineum, Dicks.
Fr. May.
Terrington carr — Teesdale.
Codhill bog, Sleddale — W.
Mudd.
Bogs 
and sides of streams at Langfield and Stansfield moors, near Tod- 
morden; fruiting rarely.
14.
H. murale, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
Old walls and moist rocks ; frequent in the limestone districts.
15.
H. purum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
Woods and hedgebanks; very common.
16.
H. piliferum, Schreb.
Fr. Winter.
Frequent in similar situations.
Fruiting abundantly in Mowthorpe 
dale, Castle Howard — R.
Spruce.
17.
H. Schreberi, Willd.
Fr. Winter.
Woods and heathy ground ; frequent.
18.
H. MONILIFORME, Wahl.
H. julaceum, Schwaegr.
On Pennyghent — II.
Lbbotson.
19.
H. HETEROPTERUM, Brudl.
H. catenulatum , H.
and T.
non Schwaegr.
A single tuft on a wet cliff 
in Eskdale — R.
Spruce.
Shady- rocks above Boltby and Gormire, 
near Thirsk — J.
G. Baker.
Stackhouses, near Settle — A.
0. Black.
Wet shady rocks near Todmorden, but always barren.
20.
H. plumosum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
Walls, roofs, and rocks about streams; frequent.
21.
H. CjEspitosum, Wils.
MSS.
Fr. Winter.
Boots of trees near York, and by the river Cock, near Tadcaster — 
R. Spruce.
22.
H. pulchellum, Dicks.
Fr. July.
H. nitididum , Wahl.
Shady rocks in Teesdale — R.
Spruce.
Gibson 
wood, near Heptonstall; rare.
If IT.
pulchellum, Dicks., and 
H. nitidulum, Wahl., are distinct, (vide Phyt.
ii.
152,) the Teesdale 
plant belongs to the former, and the Todmorden plant to the 
latter.
23.
H. rufescens, Dicks.
Fr. July.
Marshy ground on Malham moor, Craven.
174 
24.
H. sericeum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
Rocks, walls, and trunks of trees ; frequent.
25.
H. sALEBROsim, Hoffm.
(not H.
and T ) Fr. Spring.
Trunks of trees, Oakcliffe wood, Kirkham.
— M.
B. Slater.
26.
H. glareosum, Bruch.
Fr. Winter.
H. salebrosum, H.
and T.
(not Hoffm.) Frequent in sandy and lime- 
stone districts ; but I have seen fruit only in Stockton forest, near 
York — R.
Spruce.
Hedgebank between Tkirsk and Sutton-under- 
Whitstonecliff, and other places— J.
G. Balter.
Near Cleveland 
lodge, Ayton — W.
Mudd.
27.
H. lutescens, Huds.
Fr. Winter.
Hedgebanks and walls; frequent in the limestone districts.
28.
H. nitens, Schfeb.
Fr. Spring.
Abundant, and fruiting freely, in Terrington carr, near Malton — R.
Spruce.
Near Rievaulx abbey, and in a bog below the Head hagg, 
Coneysthorpe — H.
Ibbotson.
Boggy ground at the bottom of Fla- 
zendale — J.
G. Balter.
29.
H. albicans, Neele.
Fr. Winter.
On thatched roofs and dry hedgebanks ; not unfrequent.
Banks of 
the Ure, near Clifton castle — W.
Mudd.
Roofs at Terrington — H.
Ibbotson; Boltby, &c.
— J.
G. Balter; and Thirsk — J.
H. Davies.
Amongst the Middlesborough ballast hills — J.
W. Watson.
Dry 
banks near Todmorden ; rare, 
30.
H. ALOPECURUM, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
31.
H. dendroides, Swartz.
Fr. Winter.
Climacium, Mohr.
Woods and boggy ground ; common.
32.
H. curvatum, Swartz.
Fr. Winter.
Isothecium, B.
and S.
Rocks, walls, and trunks of trees; very 
common.
33.
H. myosuroides, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
In similar situations to the preceding ; frequent.
34.
H. splendens, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
35.
H. proliferum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
36.
H. recognitum, Hedw.
Fr. Summer.
On loose masses of limestone under the shade of trees at Helk’s 
wood, Ingleton— W.
Wilson.
Hildenley quarry, near Malton — M.
B. Slater.
Roadside between High Startforth and Lartington — 
A. 0.
Black.
37.
H. PR.ELQN gum, Linn.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
The variety H.
Swartzii, Turn., is frequent in damp, shady situa- 
tions, but is always barren.
38.
H. Stokesii, Turn.
Damp rocks at the north-east corner of Gormire, near Thirsk — 
J. G.
Balter.
39.
H. pumilum, Wils.
MSS.
Fr. Winter.
175 
On calcareous rocks in Mowthorpe dale — R.
Spruce.
Rocks below 
Rolston scarr, near Thirsk — J.
G. Balter , Shady rocks near Tod- 
morden.
40.
H. Tee sd alii, Dicks.
On trunks of trees in woods at Castle Howard, about 1770; and on 
roots of trees near Beverley — Teesdale.
What is probably the same 
occurs on a stone in Rigg mill beck, near Whitby — Miss A.
S. 
Braithwaite ; and on Kilnsey crag ; sparingly.
41.
H. flagellaee, Dicks.
Fr. Winter.
Abundant by the Esk and Goadland beck — B.
Spruce, Bolton, 
Wharfdale — S.
Gibson.
Banks of the beck above Boltby, near Thirsk 
— J.
G. Balter.
Frequent on wet shady rocks, by the side of streams 
amongst the hills near Todmorden.
42.
H. Blandovii, W.
and M, Fr. Spring.
Terrington carr, near Malton — R Spruce, H.
Ibbotson.
43.
H. crasslnervium, Tayl.
Fr. Winter.
H. pseudo-piliferum, B.
and S.
On limestone throughout the county; 
rarely fruiting, but found in that state in Mowthorpe dale — R.
Spruce.
Banks of the stream above Boltby, near Thirsk — J.
G. 
Balter.
Oxcar’s wood, Castle Howard — M.
B. Slater.
Rocks near 
the Wharfe at Bolton abbey, and at Malham Cove.
44.
H. rutabulum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
45.
H. rivulare, B.
and S.
Fr. Winter.
Banks of Codbeck, the Swale, and the streams amongst the Ham- 
bleton hills, &c.
; plentiful — J.
G. Balter.
Goadland dale — M.
B. 
Slater.
Frequent on stones in rivulets near Todmorden.
46.
H velutinum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
47.
H. ruscifolium, Neck.
Fr. Winter.
48.
H. striatum, Sclireb.
49.
H. confertum, Bicks.
50.
H. cuspidatum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
Fr. Winter.
Fr. Winter.
51.
H. cordifolium, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Boggy places; not unfrequent.
Near Ripon — W.
Brunton.
Boggy 
part of Swinemoor, Beverley — Teesdale.
Wet ground between Cop* 
grove and Newby — Rev. J.
Dalton.
Ganthorpe moor, Castle Howard 
— H.
Ibbotson.
Banks of Gormire, near Thirsk, especially at the 
north-east corner — J.
G. Baker.
51.
H. polymorphum, Iledw.
(not H.
and T.) Fr. Spring.
H. Sommerfeltii, Myrin.
On wet limestone at Crambeck, and on the 
ruins of Kirkham abbey — R.
Spruce.
53.
H. chrysophyllum, Brid.
Fr. Spring.
H. polymorphum, H.
and T.
(not Hedw.) Jackdaw crag, near Tad- 
caster — R.
Spruce.
On the park wall at Castle Howard — H.
Ibbotson.
Stony places opposite Middleton, Teesdale — A.
O. Black.
54.
H. stellatum, Schreb.
Fr. Spring.
Boggy ground, especially in moory situations ; frequent.
176 
55.
H. erodes, Spruce.
With H.
seorpioides, on boggy ground in Stockton forest, near York 
— R.
Spruce.
Banks of stream in Gillaleys wood, Castle Howard — 
A. O.
Black.
56.
H. loreum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
57.
H. triquetrum, Linn.
, Fr. Winter.
58.
H. breyirostre, Ehrh.
Fr. Winter.
Castle Howard woods — H.
Ibbotson.
Hedgebank between Carlton 
Miniott and Skipton bridge, near Thirsk — J.
G. Baker.
Abundant 
in Bolton woods, Wharfdale, and in Helk’s wood, Ingleton.
59.
H. squarrosum, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
60.
H. FiLiciNUM, Linn.
Fr. Spring.
Damp places and marshy ground ; common.
61.
H. palustre, Linn.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
Damp stones and rocks in rivulets ; frequent.
62.
H. ochraceum, Turn.
Fr. May.
Stones in the Swale, below Topcliffe bridge — J.
G. Baker.
Abun- 
dant on wet stones in the moorland rivulets near Todmorden.
In fruit on dripping rocks in Gorple dough, Heptonstall.
63.
H. fluitans, Linn.
Fr. Spring, Summer.
In pools and streams and wet hollows, amongst the moorlands ; 
frequent.
64.
H. fluviatile, Sivartz.
Stones in rivers in the north riding — Teesdale.
Very common on 
stones in all the rivulets about Hip on — W.
Brunton.
Stones in the 
Swale, below Aisenby — J.
G. Baker.
On submerged stones in the 
Wharfe, at Bolton abbey.
65.
H. aduncum, Linn, (not H.
and T.) Fr. May.
Boggy places ; not unfrequent.
66.
H. revolvens, Swartz.
Fr. Spring.
H. aduncum « revolvens, Brit.
FI.
in part.
Side of streamlets amongst 
the Hambleton hills near ftievaulx, and other places — J.
G. Baker.
In a bog near Malham tarn, and on Longfield moor, near Tod- 
morden.
67.
H. lycopodoides, Schwaegr.
H. aduncum ^rugosum, Brit.
FI.
Peat mosses in the north-riding — 
Teesdale.
Stockton forest, near York — R.
Spruce.
Pilmoor, near 
Borougkbridge — J.
G. B a ker.
68.
H. uncinatum, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
69.
H. rugulosum, W.
and M.
Giggleswick scarrs, near Settle — R.
Spruce.
Plentiful amongst 
Gordale scarrs, and below Malham cove.
70.
H. commutatum, Hedw.
Fr. Spring.
Damp ground and borders of streams, especially in limestone 
districts ; frequent.
The variety condensatum, Wits.
MSS., (H.
177 
aduneum « revolvens, Brit.
FI., in part,) is common in damp 
hollows, especially in moorland districts.
71.
H. scorpioides, Linn.
Fr. May.
Stockton forest, near York — R.
Spruce.
Battersby moor, Cleveland, 
— W.
Mudd Plentiful in bogs on Malliam moor.
72.
H. pratense, Koch.
Boggy ground above Boltby and between Sowerby and Dalton, near 
Thirsk — J.
G. Balter.
Damp banks, Hareley wood, near Todmorden.
73.
H. incurvatum, Schrad.
Fr. June.
Stones in the Tees, a little below the High force — R.
Spruce.
74.
H. resupinatum, Tayl.
II.
multijiorum, Tayl.
olim.
H. cupressiforme y tenue, Eng. FI.
Every- 
where, with H.
cupressiforme, from which Bruch will not admit 
that it is distinct — R.
Spruce , Sc.
75.
H. cupressiforme, Linn.
Fr. Winter, Spring.
76.
H. Crista-castrensis, Linn.
Fr. Winter.
In fruit on the south side of the Tees, near Gainford — J.
Backhouse.
Castle Howard park — H.
Ibbotson.
In Dentdale, near Sedberg ; 
sparingly — Rev. G.
Pinder.
Amongst the heather on the summit 
of Cronkley fell, Teesdale, and very fine near the ebbing and flow- 
ing well, Settle — A.
O. Black.
77.
H. molluscum, Hedw.
Fr. Winter.
Rocks, walls, and wooded banks ; common, 
178 
Sinnmarg of |tumhr of %cties.
Native.
1. Andreacese ...
...
...
3 
2. Sphagnacese ...
...
8 
3. Phascacese ...
...
...
8 
4. Archidiaceae ...
...
1 
5. Bruchiaceae...
...
...
3 
6. Weisiaceae ...
...
...
11 
7. Dicranaceae...
...
...
21 
8. Leucobryaceae ...
...
1 
9. Fissidentaceae ...
...
8 
10.
Seligeriaceae ...
...
7 
11.
Pottiaceae ...
...
...
6 
12.
Trichostomaceas ...
...
28 
13.
Distichiaceae ...
...
1 
14.
Tetraphidaceae ...
...
2 
15.
Encalyptaceas ...
...
4 
18.
Zygodontaceae ...
...
2 
17.
Ortho trichaceae ...
...
21 
18.
Ptychomitraceae ...
...
1 
19.
Grimmiacese ...
...
14 
20.
Hedwigiacese ...
...
2 
21.
Ripariaceas ...
...
...
1 
22.
Schistotegacese ...
...
1 
23.
Sphlachnaceoe ...
...
5 
24.
Disceliacese ...
.. 1 
25.
Funariacese...
...
...
5 
26.
Meesiacese ...
...
...
3 
27.
Bartramiacese ...
...
7 
28.
Bryacese ...
...
...
42 
29.
Polytrichacese ...
...
11 
30.
Buxbaumiacese ...
...
2 
31.
Hypnaceae ...
...
...
93 
Total ...
323 
Tncognit.
2 
2 
2 
7 
ADDENDA.
Whilst tlie work has been passing through the press, various ad- 
ditional items of information have come to hand.
In order that it may 
he rendered as complete as possible, I subjoin in this place a notice of 
some of the more important.
— J.
G. B.
80.
C amelina sativa, Crantz.
Cornfields at Maltby, near Doncaster — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
Fallow 
fields near Roche abbey — Rev. G.
Finder.
87.
Cardamine impatiens, Linn.
Dowker gill, near Sedbergh — Rev. G.
Pinder.
179.
Arenaria tenuifolia, Linn.
The Rev. G.
E. Smith informs me, that he has collected this spe- 
cies on “ rocks at Maltby; ” thus confirming the accuracy of Salt’s 
report, and Air. Moore’s supposition ( vide pp.
51, 52).
Erodium cygnorum, Nees.
The Rev. G.
Pinder has obligingly furnished me with specimens 
of a plant identified by Babin gton with E.
cygnorum, of Nees von 
Esenbeck, collected on “ waste ground near Guiseley,” during the 
present summer (1854).
It is a native of West Australia, and he 
suggests that the seeds have been introduced amongst wool.
262.
AIedicago denticulata, Willd.
On old rubbish heaps near Guiseley, 1853— Rev. G.
Pinder.
329.
Potentilla verna, Linn.
Smeaton crags, near Doncaster — P.
Inclibald.
Went vale, near 
Pontefract — W.
Robinson.
357.
Alchemilla alpina, Linn.
I am informed by the Rev. G.
Pinder, that this species occurs 
also in Dent dale, but not so plentifully as about Cautley, 
372.
Epilorium virgatum, Fries.
The Gormire plant is identified by Babington with that described 
in the “ Manual of British Botany,” under this name.
During 
the present season, I have observed it on the edge of Guisborougli 
moor, near Highcliffe, and also amongst the ballast hills at Mid- 
dlesborougli.
180 
340 — 3.
Rubus suberectus, Anders.
In. tlie plantation near the vicarage, at Cantley — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
All .''' Sedum eupestre, Smith .
This species grows upon garden walls at Rievaulx.
Perhaps the 
reported Guisborough station may he (or have been) similar in 
character.
520, Gallicm pustllum, Smith.
During the present season, I have collected this species on the 
rocky hanks of the Ure at Ays garth force, in Wensleydale.
A Galium which grows amongst the rocks at the White force, 
in Teesdale, is probably the G.
commutatum of Jordan; but 
whether it is a form of this species or G.
saxatile, or may he speci- 
fically distinct from both, I cannot at present undertake to 
suggest.
572, Hieracium caesium, Fries.
With reference to specimens from the Hambleton hills, of the 
plant given under this name, which I submitted to his considera- 
tion, M.
Jordan, of Lyons, remarks — “II est, a moil avis, tres 
different de 1’ H.
caesium, Fries.” 
582.* Hieracium gothicum, Fries.
On the top of the moor above Ingleby Greenliow, Cleveland !
— 
W. JVLudd.
580.
Hieracium crocatum, Fries.
On the top of the moor above Ingleby Greenliow, Cleveland, with 
II.
gothicum and umbellatum !
— TP.
Mudd.
670.
Campanula patula, Linn.
Between Swinton and Doncaster — Rev. G.
F. Smith.
707.
Pyrola rotundifolia, Linn.
In the sixth edition of Hooker and Arnott’s “ British Flora,” I 
observe that “ Castle Eden, Dene, Yorkshire” is given as a locality 
for this species.
My herbarium contains an example which may 
be regarded as representing the variety arenaria, from that 
locality, which is, however, not in Yorkshire, but near Hartle- 
pool, in Durham.
745.
Verbascum vtrgatum, With.
Alien.
Specimens of this species, from three Yorkshire stations, are pre- 
served in my herbarium ; but at present it is known only as a 
casual straggler from garden cultivation.
928.
Schoberia fruticosa, Meyer.
Alien ?
In considerable abundance on the sea-bank to the east of the 
docks at Middlesborougli, 1854!
— T.
Simpson.
It is quite proba- 
ble that the plant may be a veritable native at this station ; but, 
as it is so near the docks, I prefer to regard, for the present, this 
point as uncertain.
I have myself seen tivo or three bushes of 
it, during the present season, on the side of the docks nearest 
the ballast hills.
181 
944.'^ Rumex aquattcus, Linn.
Roadside between Redmire and Carperby, in Wensleydale, and 
banks of the Ure, near Wensley, 1854 — R.
D. Carter and J.
G. B.
946.
Rumex alpinus, Linn.
Alien.
I am indebted to the kindness of the Rev. G.
Pinder, for speci- 
mens of this species from “ Menstone, near Otley, Wharfdale 
Tulipa sylvestris, Linn.
Wood near Heath, Wakefield — Rev. G.
Pinder.
1077.
1111 .
Native.
Atlantic ?
1184b 
1240.
1324.
1390.
1408.
Alisma natans, Linn.
Upwards of half a century after its original publication, the Rev, 
G. Pinder has confirmed the accuracy of Teesdale’s suggestion, 
that this plant grows in the vicinity of the mere at Hornsea.
The same learned botanist believes that he has also observed it 
from a train “ in ditches by the railway side, between York and 
Sherburn.” 
. Scirpus glaucus, Smith.
Amongst the docks at Middlesborough !— W.
Foggitt.
Carex laevigata., Smith.
Dr. Ainley informs me, that this species is frequent in the vicinity 
of Bingley.
Glycerta distans, Wahl.
Plentiful between Sheffield and Gainsborough — Rev G.
E. Smith.
Lastrea spinulosa, Presl.
Woods at Arncliffe, near Egton, Eskdale — Rev. G.
E. Smith.
IIymenophyllum Wilsoni, Hook.
Howgill fells, near Sedbergh — Rev. G.
Pinder.
Foal’s foot, Ingle- 
borough— J - .
Nowell and A.
Stansfield.
Phascum patens, Hedw.
Wood near the end of Gilla leys, Castle Howard; sparingly — 
A. 0.
Black.
Sphagnum laricinum, Spruce.
“ Sphagnum laricinum is known only as found in Terrington earr, 
by Mr. Spruce.
I can make nothing of it, except as an anomalous 
form of S.
contortum, and have accordingly noticed it as a variety 
of that species, differing in no essential character, unless in the 
cortical cellules of the stem, which are not in a single row or 
stratum, auin all normal states of contortum.
As for the reticu- 
lation of the leaf, I have aquatic states of contortum perfectly 
coincident” — W.
Wilson, in litt.
Nov. 1th, 1854.
Gymnostomum conicum, Scliwaegr.
Banks near Feliskirk, and roadside between Thirsk and Sutton — 
J. II.
Davies.
Gymnostomum Donianum, Smith.
Crevices of basaltic rocks on the Yorkshire side of the Tees, near 
182 
Wince bridge — A.
0. Black.
Wet sliady rocks in a deep ravine 
below Dumb bank mill, near Heptonstail — J.
Nowell 
Gymnostomum microstomum, Jrledw.
Cronkley scarrs, Teesdale — A.
0. Black , 
SPLACHNUM AMPULLACEUM, Linn.
Downholme moor, near Richmond — Jos. Ward.
Weissia pusilla, Iledw.
Rocks on the west side of Forge valley, and in Raincliffe wood, 
near Scarborough — A.
0. Black.
Weissia verticillata, Schwaegr.
Banks of the Ure, at Ays garth force, Wensleydale.
Grimmia maritima, Turn.
On the cliffs south of the Spa, at Scarborough — A.
0. Black.
Didymodon aquaticus.
“‘Didymodon aquaticus, Brid V mentioned in Spruce’s list, has 
reference to a moSs which I found near Malham, and could not 
then identify.
Since then, I am satisfied that Dillenius’ moss, 
referred to by Bridel, is Racomitrium protensum ; and the Mal- 
ham moss I now regard as a very peculiar barren form of Tortula 
fallax, having the leaves much recurved and squarrose.
It may, 
however, turn out to be a distinct species, whenever fruit shall 
be obtained.
This form or species, I think, will be found, rather 
frequent in limestone districts, on banks” — W.
Wilson, in litt.
Nov. 7th, 1854.
I have lately received fine specimens of the same 
moss from Ingleborough, (coll.
J. Nowell,) and noticed it in the 
vicinity of Thirsk.
Didymodon capellaceus, Sivartz.
Very fine at the White force, and other places in Teesdale — A.
0. 
Black.
Fissidens crassipes, Wils.
MSS.
Stones in the Codbeck, near the bridges at Thirsk and Sowerby — 1 
J. H.
Davies.
Very fine on stones in the Swale, near the bridge 
at Topcliffe.
Banks of Guisborough beck, below Marske mill.
Fissidens osmundoides, Hedw.
On the Yorkshire side of the Tees, between the High force and 
Wince bridge — A.
0. Black.
Dicranum falcatum, Hedw.
Rocks on the summit of Cronkley scarrs, Teesdale — A.
0. Black.
Dicranum squarrosum, Schrad.
In fruit on the bank of the Tees, just above the High force — A.
O. 
Black.
Damp ground above Boltby, and on the edge of Guis- 
borough moor, near Higlicliffe.
Dicranum fuscescens, Turn.
D. congestum, Brid.
Rocks at Higlicliffe, near Guisborough.
183 
Orthotrichum Lvellii, H.
and T.
Trees on the edge of Guisborough moor, below Highcliffe.
Bryum squarrosum, Hedw.
A. single specimen in fruit at Terrington carr, Sept.
1854!
— A.
0. 
Black.
This is, I believe, the first time that this species has been 
found in Britain, in a state of fructification.
Bryum Wahlenbergii, Schwaegr.
Scalby, Raincliffe wood, and Forge valley, near Scarborough.
Gil- 
laleys wood, near Castle Howard.
Terrington carr, and woods 
near Gantborpe.
Plentiful in Teesdale— -A.
O. Black.
Boggy 
ground on the edge of Guisborough moor, near Highcliffe.
Bryum intermedium, Bricl.
A curious form on an alder tree overhanging the Codbeck, between 
Sowerby -and Dalton — J.
H. Davies.
Damp sandy ground on 
Carlton moor, near Thirsk — G.
B. Baker.
Bryum pallescens, Schwaegr.
What is probably this species occurs on walls at Middleliam, in 
Wensleydale.
Bryum atro-purpureum, W.
and M.
On the south bank of the Swale, near the sand quarry at Leckby.
Bryum Rostratum, Schrcid.
Banks above Redmire, in Wensleydale.
Leskea polyantha, Hedw.
Trees on the banks of the Ure, at Aysgarth force, Wensleydale.
Hypnum sylvaticum, Schwaegr.
Shady rocks below Highcliffe, and other places in Cleveland.
Hypnum flagellare, Dicks.
On the banks of Guisborough beck, between Marske mill and 
Saltburn 
Hypnum eluviatile, Swartz.
Stones in the Ure, at Aysgarth force, Wensleydale.
fitkt iff % §im%, 
PAGE.
Acer .
. 54 
Aceras .
# 
119 
Achillsea .
. 90 
Aconitum 
40 
Acorus 
. 126 
Actsea 
40 
Adiantum .
. 143 
Adonis .
38 
Adoxa 
. 73 
^Egopodium 
74 
iEthusa 
. 75 
Agrimonia 
61 
Agrostis 
. 134 
Aira, 
135 
Ajuga _ .
. 101 
Alchemilla 
66 
Allium 
. 121 
Allosorus 
141 
Alnus 
. 114 
Alopecurus 
134 
Althaea 
. 53 
Alyssum 
44 
Ammophila 
. 134 
Anacharis 
123 
Anagallis .
. 105 
Anchusa 
104 
Andrsea 
. 149 
Andromeda 
92 
Anemone .
. 38 
Angelica 
76 
Anictangium 
. 153 
Anomodon 
171 
Anthemis .
. 90 
Anthoxanthum 
133 
Anthriscus 
. 77 
Anthyllis 
57 
Antirrhinum 
. 98 
Apargia .
81 
Apera 
. 134 
Apium .
74 
Aquilegia .
. 40 
Arabis 
45 
Arbutus 
PAGE.
. 92 
Archangelica .
76 
Arehidium .
. 150 
Arctium .
85 
Arenaria 
. 51 
Aristolochia .
. Ill 
Armeria 
. 106 
Armoracia 
44 
Arrhenatherum .
. 136 
Artemesia 
87 
Arthrolobium 
. 59 
Arum 
. 126 
Arundo 
. 135 
Asarum .
. Ill 
Asperula .
. 79 
Aspidium 
. 141 
Asplenium .
. 142 
Aster 
88 
Astragalus .
. 58 
Athyrium 
. 142 
Atriplex 
. 107 
Atropa .
95 
Avena 
. 135 
Ballota .
. 101 
Barbarea .
. 45 
Barkhausia 
84 
Bartramia .
. 169 
Bartsia .
97 
Beilis .
. 89 
Berberis .
70 
Beta .
. 108 
Betula .
. 114 
Bidens 
. 86 
Blechnum 
. 143 
Blysmus 
. 129 
Borago .
. 104 
Botrychium 
. 144 
Brachypodium 
139 
Brassica 
. 46 
Briza 
137 
Bromus 
. 138 
Bryonia .
69 
PAGE.
Bryum .
. .165 
Buniura .
. .
75 
Bupleurum .
.75 
Butomus .
. 124 
Buxbaumia .
.169 
Buxus .
. .112 
Cakile ...
42 
Calamintha .
. 101 
Callitriche .
. .69 
Calluna ...
92 
Caltha ...
39 
Camelina .
. .44 
Campanula .
. 90 
Campylopus .
.159 
Capsella ...
43 
Cardamine .
. 45 
Carduus ...
85 
Carex .
. .130 
Carlina .
. .
86 
Carpinus .
. .113 
Carum ...
69 
Castanea .
. .113 
Catabrosa .
. 136 
Caucalis .
. .77 
Centaurea .
. 86 
Centranthus .
.79 
Centunculus .
. 106 
Cerastium .
. 52 
Ceratophyllum .
69 
Ceterach .
. .
140 
Chaerophyllum .
77 
Cheiranthus .
. 46 
Chelidonium .
. 41 
Chenopodium .
.107 
Chlora ....
98 
Chrysanthemum .
89 
Chrysosplenium .
72 
Cichorium .
; .85 
Cicuta ...
74 
Cinclidium .
. .169 
Cinclidotus .
. 162 
Circsea .
. .68 
186 
PAGE.
PAGE.
PAGE.
Cladium .
128 
Eupatorium 
. 87 
Hyoscyamus .
95 
Clematis 
. 37 
Euphorbia 
111 
Hypericum 
. 53 
Cochlearia 
43 
Euphrasia .
. 97 
Hypochseris .
81 
Colchicum .
. 123 
Fagus 
113 
Hypnum .
. 172 
Collomia .
94 
Fedia .
. 80 
Iberis 
43 
Comarum .
. 62 
Festuca .
138 
Ilex .
. 92 
Conium .
73 
Filago 
. 87 
Tmpatiens 
55 
Convallaria 
. 122 
Fissidens 
158 
Inula .
. 89 
Convolvulus 
94 
Foeniculum 
. 76 
Iris .
120 
Cornus 
. 73 
Fontinalis 
171 
Isoetes 
. 144 
Coronopus 
42 
Fragaria 
. 62 
Isothecium 
171 
Corydalis .
. 41 
Fraxinus 
93 
Jasione 
. 91 
Corylus .
113 
Fritillaria .
. 121 
Juncus .
127 
Cotyledon .
. 71 
Fumaria .
42 
Juniperus .
. 117 
Crambe .
42 
Funaria 
. 163 
Knautia .
80 
Crataegus, .
. 67 
Gagea 
122 
Koeleria 
. 136 
Crepis .
. 
82 
Galactites .
. 86 
Lactuca .
82 
Crocus 
. 120 
Galanthus 
121 
Lamium 
. 101 
Cuscuta .
94 
Galeopsis .
. 102 
Lapsana .
« .
85 
Cynoglossum 
. 104 
Galium .
78 
Lastrea 
. 141 
Cynosurus 
137 
Genista 
. 57 
Lathrea .
99 
Cyperus 
. 128 
Gentiana 
73 
Lathy rus .
. 
. 60 
Cypripedium 
120 
Geranium .
. 54 
Lemna .
- .
126 
Dactylis 
. 138 
Geum 
61 
Leonurus .
. 101 
Daltohia .
171 
Glaucium .
. 41 
Lepidium 
43 
Daphne 
. Ill 
Glaux 
106 
Lepturus .
. 140 
Datura .
95 
Glechoma .
. 102 
Leskea .
171 
Daucus 
. 76 
Glyceria .
136 
Leucodon .
. 170 
Delphinium 
40 
Gnaphalium 
. 87 
Ligustrum 
93 
Dianthus .
. 49 
Grimmia .
156 
Lilium 
. 121 
Dicranum 
159 
Gymnadenia 
. 119 
Limosella 
98 
Didymodon 
. 156 
Gymnostomum 
151 
Linaria - .
. 98 
Digitaria 
133 
Habenaria .
. 119 
Linum, .
. 
52 
Digitalis 
. 98 
Hedera .
73 
Listera 
. 118 
Diphyscium 
153 
Hedwigia .
. 170 
Lithospermum 
104 
Dipsacus .
. 80 
H elianthemum 
48 
Littorella .
. 106 
Doronicum 
88 
Heliosciadum 
. 74 
Lolium .
139 
Draha 
. 44 
Helleborus 
39 
Lonicera 
. 78 
Drosera .
48 
Helmintha .
. 81 
Lotus .
. 
58 
Dryas 
. 61 
Heracleum 
76 
Luzula 
. 128 
Echium .
104 
Herminium 
. 119 
Lychnis .
50 
Elymus 
. 140 
Hesperis .
. 
46 
Lycium 
. 95 
Elyna 
130 
Hieracium .
. 82 
Lycopodium .
146 
Empetrum .
. Ill 
Hippocrepis .
59 
Lycopsis .
. 104 
Encalypta 
154 
Hippophae^ 
. 110 
Ly copus .
. .
99 
Epilohium .
. 67 
Hippuris .
68 
Lysimachia 
. 105 
Epimedium 
70 
Holcus 
. 136 
Lythrum 
69 
Epipactis .
. 118 
Elonckeueja .
51 
Malaxis .
. 
. 121 
Equisetum 
145 
Hookeria .
. 171 
Malva 
53 
Erica .
. 91 
Hordeum 
140 
Marrubium 
. 103 
Erigeron 
88 
Hottonia 
. 105 
Matricaria 
89 
Eriophorum 
. 129 
Hum-ulus 
113 
Meconopsis 
. 41 
Erodium ..
54 
Hutcbinsia 
. 43 
Medicago 
57 
Eryngium .
. 73 
Flyacinthus 
122 
Melampyrum 
. 97 
Erythrsea 
93 
Hydrocotyle 
. 73 
Melica.
. 
136 
Ery simum .
. 46 
Hydrocharis .
123 
Melilotus .
. 57 
Euonymus 
56 
Hy menophy llum 
- 143 
Mentha .
. 
100 
187 
PAGE.
Menyanthes .
. 94 
Mercurialis .
. 112 
Mespilus .
. .67 
Meum .
. .
76 
Milium .
• .134 
Mimulus .
. 98 
Moenchia .
. .50 
Molinia .
. .
136 
Monotropa .
. .92 
Montia .
. .
70 
Myosotis .
. .103 
Myosurus .
• 38 
Myriophyllum .
. 68 
Myrica .
. .
117 
Myrrhis .
* .87 
Narcissus .
. 121 
Nardus .
. .140 
Narthecium .
. 128 
Nasturtium .
. 46 
Neckera .
. .170 
Neottia .
. .118 
Nepeta .
. .
102 
Nuphar .
. .40 
Nymph sea .
. 40 
(Edipodium .
.151 
(E nan the .
. 75 
OEnothera .
. .68 
Onobrychis .
. 59 
Onoclea .
. .
144 
Onopordum .
. 86 
Ophioglossum .
. 144 
Ophrys .
. .
120 
Orchis .
. .119 
Origanum .
. 101 
Ornithopus .
. 58 
Orobanche .
. 99 
Orobus .
. .60 
Orthotrichum .
. 163 
Osmunda .
. .
147 
Oxalis ...
45 
Oxyria .
. .
110 
Pseonia ...
40 
Papaver .
. .41 
Parietaria .
. 112 
Paris ....
122 
Parnassia .
. 72 
Pastinaca .
. .76 
Pedicularis .
. 97 
Peplis .
. .69 
Petasites .
. 87 
Petroselinum .
.74 
Peucedanum .
. 76 
Phalaris .
. .133 
Phascum .
. 149 
Phleum .
. .134 
Phyteuma .
. 91 
Picris .
. .81 
PAGE.
Pilularia .
. 145 
Pimpinella .
. .75 
Pinguicula .
. 104 
Piiius .
. .
.107 
Plantago .
. 106 
Poa .
. .
. 137 
Polemonium .
. 94 
Polycarpon .
.70 
Polygala .
. 49 
Polygonum .
.108 
Polypodium .
. 141 
Polytrichum .
.162 
Populus .
. .
114 
Potamogeton .
.124 
Potentilla .
. 45 
Poterium .
. .66 
Primula .
. .105 
Prunella .
. .103 
Prunus ...
60 
Pteris .
. .
143 
Pterogonium .
. 170 
Pulicaria .
. .89 
Pulmonaria .
. 104 
Py rethrum .
.89 
Pyrola ...
92 
Pyrus .
. .67 
Quercus .
. .
113 
Radiola .
. .
53 
Ranunculus .
. 38 
Raphanus .
. .47 
Reseda .
. .
, 47 
Rhamnus .
. .56 
Rhinanthus .
. 97 
Rhynchospora .
.129 
Rihes .
. .
70 
Rosa .
. .
.65 
Rubus ...
52 
Ruppia .
. .
125 
Rumex .
. .109 
Ruscus .
. .122- 
Sagira ...
51 
Sagittaria .
. .124 
Salicornia .
. 108 
Salix ....
114 
Salsola .
. .108 
Salvia .
. .99 
Sambucus .
. 78 
Samolus .
. .106 
Sanguisorba .
. 66 
Sanicula .
. .73 
Saponaria .
. 50 
Saxifraga .
. .72 
Scahiosa ...
80 
Scandix .
. .77 
Scheuchzeria .
. 124 
Schistostega .
.153 
Schoberia .
. 108 
PAGE.
Schcenus 
. 129 
Scirpus .
120 
Scleranthus 
. 70 
Scolopendrium 
143 
Scrophularia 
. 97 
Scutellaria 
103 
Sedum 
. 71 
Sempervivum .
71 
Senecio 
. 88 
Serratula 
85 
Sesleria 
. 135 
Sherardia 
79 
Silaus 
. 76 
Silene 
50 
Sinapis 
. 47 
Sison 
74 
Sisymbrium 
. 46 
Sium 
75 
Smyrnium 
. 74 
Solanum .
95 
Solidago 
. 88 
Sonchus .
82 
Sparganium 
. 126 
Spartium 
56 
Specularia .
. 91 
Spergula .
51 
Spergularia 
. 51 
Sphagnum 
151 
Spiraea 
. 61 
Spiranthus 
118 
Splachnum 
. 154 
Stachys .
102 
Staph y lea .
. 56 
Statice .
106 
Stellaria 
. 52 
Stipa 
135 
Stratiotes .
. 123 
Symphytum .
104 
Tamus 
. 123 
Tanacetum 
87 
Taraxacum 
. 85 
Taxus 
118 
Teesdalia .
. 43 
Tetraphis 
* 153 
Teucrium .
. 101 
Thalictrum 
37 
Thrincia 
. 81 
Thymus .
100 
Tilia .
. 53 
Tofieldia .
123 
Torilis 
. 77 
Tor tula .
161 
Tragopogon 
. 80 
Trichomanes .
143 
Trichostomum 
. 157 
Trientalis 
105 
Trifolium .
. 58 
188 
Trigloehin 
PAGE.
. 124 
Ulmus .
PAGE 
113 
Vinca 
PAGE.
93 
Trigonella .
. 57 
Utricularia .
. 105 
Viola .
. 48 
Triodia .
. 136 
Vaccinium 
92 
Viscum .
77 
Triticum .
. 139 
Valeriana .
. 79 
Wahlenbergia 
. 90 
Trollius .
. 139 
Verbascum 
95 
Weissia .
. 154 
Tulipa 
Turritis .
. 121 
Verbena 
. 99 
Woodsia 
. 140 
45 
Veronica 
96 
Zannichellia .
. 126 
Tussilago .
. 88 
Viburnum .
. 78 
Zostera 
. 126 
Typha .
Ulex .
127 
. -56.
Vicia 
Villarsia 
Cwripla.
59 
. 94 
Zygodon 
. 163 
Page 10, lines 27 and 28 — for “ country ” read “ county.’’ 
„ 13, line 18— for “71£” read “ 74£.” 
„ 16, „ 37 — for “Salex” read “ Salix.” 
„ 48, after line 9 — insert “ VIOLA.” 
,, 60, line 13 — for “has been in” read “has been found in.” 
,, 76, „ 12 — for “Anglica” read “ Angelica.” 
„ 85, „ 20 — for “ Serratuta ” read “ Serratula.” 
„ 95, ,, 18 — for “ Satrmonium ” read “ Stramonium.” 
„ 102, „ 30 — for “in a garden” read “ near a garden.” 
„ 128, „ 8 — for “Incognit.” read “Alien.” 
,, 129, „ 1 — for “ Rhyncospora ” read “ Rhynchospora.” 
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS 
TO 
BAKER AND NOWELL’S 
Sttplemmt iff §aiiws’s Jflora of |Msjmu 
Flora.
Supplement.
Allis, Thomas, Osbaldwick, York .
- 
1 
Ainley, Dr., Bingley 
- 
1 
Atwood, Miss, Clifton Yale, Bristol .
- 
1 
B airbridge, — , Harrogate ....
— 
1 
Bainbridge and Hewison, York 
- 
2 
Bayldon, John, Horbury .
. ..
- 
1 
Baxter, William, Oxford ....
- 
1 
Be AN r William, Yernon Place, Scarborough .
- 
i 
Bingley, William, York .
- 
l 
Binns, Edwin, Hebden Bridge ....
1 
l 
Black, A.
0., London 
1 
l 
Blanshard, W., Leeds 
- 
i 
Boston, William, Carthorpe 
- 
i 
Brown, I., Ackworth .
. ..
, 
- 
i 
Camidge, T.
S., York 
_ 
l 
Clapham, Richard, Austwick Hall, Clapham .
1 
l 
Clark, Joseph, Cincinnati 
- 
2 
Collier, William, Dispensing Chemist, York 
- 
1 
Cuthbert, James, Grassington 
- 
1 
Charlesworth, Edward, Museum, York 
- 
1 
Daubeney, Professor, Oxford ....
- 
1 
Davies, Robert, York .
...
\ 
- 
1 
Davison, Robert, Heslington ....
- 
1 
Dixon, E.
P., Hull 
- 
2 
Dixon, George, Ayton, Cleveland .
- 
1 
2 a 
VI 
Dodsworth, Benjamin, York .
Flora.
Supplement.
1 
Dugdale, John, Accrington, Lancashire 
- 
1 
Edmonstones, Miss, Walton Hall, Wakefield 
2 
Edwards, E., Marford, Hertfordshire 
- 
1 
Ellicomb, Mrs., London ....
- 
1 
Ellis, Mrs., North Grimstone .
- 
1 
Ellis, R.
A., North Grimstone, Malton .
- 
1 
Elsley, C.
H., York ....
- 
I 
Embleton, Dr., Embleton, Alnwick .
- 
1 
Eitzwilliam, The Earl ....
_ 
1 
Flounder’s Institute, Ackworth 
1 
1 
Ford, John, York 
- 
2 
Fowler, George, Manchester 
- 
1 
Gifford, Miss, Minchead, Somerset.
_ 
2 
Gill, Mr., Bookseller,- Easing wold .
- 
2 
Graham, E., Holcomb, Lancashire .
- 
1 
Graves, W., York .
- 
- 
1 
Grime, Dr., Blackburn 
1 
1 
Hailstone, Edward, Horton Hall, Bradford 
_ 
2 
Hartley, William, York 
- 
1 
Harrison, Miss Emily, The Parsonage, Mickley 
- 
1 
Hawkridge, P., Scarborough .
- 
1 
Hebblethwaite, M., Camp Hill 
r 
1 
Henderson, R., Tang Hall 
- 
1 
Henderson; — , Wentworth House .
2 
Hey, Rev. William, York .
- 
1 
FIoggard, John, Clifton .> 
T 
- 
1 
Hodgson, Mrs., Holgate Lane .
1 
1 
Holmes, Todmorden .
1 
1 
Inchbald, P., Storthes Hall, Huddersfield 
- 
1 
Kenrick, Rev. John, York .
. .
- 
1 
Hitching, John, Retreat, York 
- 
1 
Lamb, Joseph, Jun., Newby Wiske 
- 
1 
Lawley, Honble.
and Rev. S.
W., Escrick 
1 
LeadBitter, John, York ...
1 
1 
Til 
Flora.
Supplement.
Leeman, George, York .
. .
1 
L upton, Wm., Nurseryman, York - .
1 
March, John, York .
l 
Mason, Thomas, York 1 .
1 
Matthews, — , M.
D., York ~ .
1 
Mayer, J., F.S.A., Liverpool .......
l 
Metcalfe, J.
W., Acoml>House, York ....1.1 
Meynell, Thomas, Aiskew Hall, Bedale .
. .
- .
l 
Milne, C., York .
. ...
. .
- 1 
Moore, 0.
A., York .........
l 
Mudd, W.j Great Ay ton - .
i 
Murray, Dr., Scarborough - .
1 
Oldfield, George, York - .
i 
Oldfield,- Joshua, York - .
i 
Oldfield, Bev. Wm.
Henry, York - .
i 
Oliver, D., Jun., Newcastle ........
l 
Pearson, John, Milnrow, Rochdale ......
1 
Pearson, Samuel, York .........
j 
Phillips, Professor John, Magdalen Bridge, Oxford .
- .
1 
Pinder, Rev. G., Guiseley, Leeds .
. .
. .
- .
i 
Pinkney, John, Rokeby Park Gardens .
. .
. - .
1 
Polman, — , Mytholm Royd - , i 
Preston, Cooper, Flashy Hall , ......
i 
Priestley, William, Thorp Arch .
2 
Pulleyn, Rev. R.
Kirby Wiske - ' .
j 
Pulleyn, J., York .
I 
Purchas, W.
H., Ross, Herefordshire ......
i 
Rawdon, W.
F., York 1.1 
Rennie, John, Jerveaux Abbey .......
1 
Robinson, Henry, York .
. .
. .
. l .
j 
Roper, John, York i 
Rowntree, J., York 1.1 
Russell, Lady Frankland, Thirkleby Park ...
- .
6 
Salkeld, William, Darlington 1.1 
Sharpe, Rev. S., Vicarage, Wakefield ......
i 
Simpson, Thomas, Hopetown - .
1 
Simpson, Thomas, M.
D., York - .1 
Vlll 
Flora.
Supplement 
Slater, M.
B., Malton 
- 
1 
Slater, John, Malton 
- 
1 
Smallwood, E., York 
- 
1 
Smith, Rev. G.
E., Cholmondley Bickerton, Chester 
- 
2 
Smith, Peter, Hopetown 
- 
1 
Sowden, Rev. S., Helbden Bridge ....
1 
1 
Stead, Henry, New Laythes, Leeds .
. 
- 
1 
Steele, Rev. R.
T., East Harsley .
- 
1 
Stillingfleet, Rev. E., Hotham, Brough 
- 
1 
Storey, John, Newcastle 
- 
1 
Sunley, James, Sowber Hill .
. .
. 
- 
1 
Sunley, William, Leeds Botanic Garden 
- 
1 
Syme, J.
T., Botanical Society, London .
- 
1 
Sotiieran, Mr. H., York 
- 
2 
Swale, Joseph, Heslington Road ....
-- 
1 
Tate, J., Halifax 
4 
Tatham, John, Esq., Settle .....
- 
1 
Taylor, Mrs., St. Mary’s, York ....
1 
1 
Todmorden Botanical Society ....
1 
1 
Travis, T.
H., Hull 
- 
1 
Turner, John, York 
- 
1 
Turner, N., York 
- 
1 
Umpleby, M., Masonby, Tliirsk ....
- 
1 
Yolans, Wm., York 
1 
1 
Waddington, — , Whitby 
1 
Wade, Edwin, York ......
- 
1 
Walker, William, York 
1 
1 
Walton, S., York 
- 
1 
Ward, James, Richmond 
- 
1 
Waterhouse, John, Halifax .....
- 
1 
Watson, LI.
C., Thames Ditton, Surrey .
- 
3 
Watson, J.
W., Bootham, York ....
- 
1 
Weatherley, R., York 
- 
1 
Wellbeloved, Rev. Charles, York ...
- 
1 
Wilkinson, Rev. J.
W., York .....
- 
1 
Wilson, G., The Right Honble.
the Lord Mayor, York 
- 
2 
Wood, John, Chairman of Inland Revenue, London 
- 
1 
Printed by JOHN COULTAS, Ouse-Bridge, 