This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online.
It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain.
A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired.
Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country.
Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.
Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you.
Usage guidelines 
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible.
Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians.
Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you: 
+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes.
+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us.
We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.
+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search.
Please do not remove it.
+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal.
Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries.
Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed.
Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world.
Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.
About Google Book Search 
Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful.
Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences.
You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
at |http : //books .
google .
com/ 
f 
a^ 
THE 
PHTTOLOGIST 
A BOTANICAL JOURNAL.
EDITED BY 
ALEXANDER IRVINE, 
FBLU>W OF THE BOTAKICAL SOCISTY OF LONDOIT.
VOLUME TEE FIFTH.
*Qi iiieyciKvyBrj rh tfyya aov, Kvpie !
— navra iv <TO<f)iq €iroirj<ras.
VAAM.
py'.
24.
Benedicite uniyersa gei*minantia in terra Domino ; laudato et superexaltate 
EtTM in secula.
— Hymn.
Hi Pueror.
v. 76.
LONDON : 
WILLIAM PAMPLIN, 45, FRITH STREET, SOHO SQUARE.
186L 
PBIFTBD BY 
JOHW EPWABD TATLOE, LITTLE QUEEV STKEET, 
LIKCOLlf's IFN FIELDS.
PREFACE.
The Publisher and the Editor hereby tender their hearty thanks 
to the buyers and readers of this periodical, and especially to 
those whose contributions constitute its entire contents.
In this volume there is another instalment of the Polyonymal 
Pinax of the British Plants, and it is believed that there will 
be room found for the residue during the current months of 
1862.
An expectation is indulged that the Publisher will be 
encouraged to reprint it, instead of a new edition of the London 
Catalogue.
The List of Local Botanists is printed in the June Number.
Chelsea^ Jan. 1, 1862.
CONTENTS.
Page 
Annual Address to the Contributors, Correspondents, and Readers .
1 
Arenaria balearica 46 
Books lleceived for Keview, 96, 128, 160, 192, 224, 288, 320, 352, 384 
Botanical Letters from Argyleshire ; by James Lothian .
. 271, 331 
Botanical Notes, etc 32, 61, 93, 126, 157, 191, 221, 
253, 286, 318, 348,380 
Botanical Notes for Malvern 275 
Botanical Professorship, Cambridge 237 
Botanical Ramble on Ben Ledi 378 
Botanizing at Faversham 107 
Botanizing at the Beginning of April, Three Days' 165 
Botanizing in the Den of Invermay ; by John Sim 269 
Botanizing in the North-eastern Provinces of Spain .
225, 296, 327, 356 
Botanizing near Methven, Perthshire, Results of a Day's ; by F.
B. 
W.White 330 
Botany, British, Chapters on ] 29 
Botany of Hulne Park, Northumberland; by W.
R. ......
193 
Botany of Humphrey Head ; by C.
J. Ashfield 257 
Botany of the Borders of Suffolk and Norfolk ; by C.
J. Ashfield .
. 321 
Botany of the Doward HHls, Hertfordshire; by B.
M. W.
. .
. 101 
Botany of Kent, Additional Remarks on ; M.
T. M 374 
Botany of the Fond de Leffe, near Dinant, Belgium; by H.
C. .
. 353 
Botany of the Red River 214 
Breadalbane Mountains, Scarce Alpine Plants met with on ; by James 
Backhouse, jun 303 
British Ferns, New Varieties of; by Thomas Moore, F.L.S., F.R.H.S. 69 
British Plants, Comparative List of 310 
Buddie's Herbarium 176 
Communications received 32,64,96,128,160,192,224, 
256, 288, 320, 352, 384 
Cumbrian Botany ; by E.
Green 65 
Dates of Flowering of Plants in the Vicinity of Ross ; by B.
M. W.
. 188 
Ferns, Fertilization of; by Piscator 106 
Flora of Harrow, Addenda to 198 
Fritillaria and Crowflowers ; by S.
B 205 
Fungi, Chapter on; by A.
Jerdon • .
. 265 
Humphrey Head, Visit to; by J.
Windsor, M.D., F.L.S 259 
Hydrochans Mor9U8-rana ; byJ.
H 30 
Hydrocharis Morsm-ranay on the Hybeniacula of; with an Illustration 190 
VI CONTENTS.
Page 
Isatis tinctoria ; by John Lloyd 151 
Isoetes hystrix, recent Discovery of; by G.
Wolsey 45 
Kentish Botany : Plants of Ham, Pegwell Bay, Sandwich, etc.
By A.
206 
Kentish Botany 238, 334 
Kingston (Canada) Botanical Society .
. .
113 
Lathy rtu tuherosus ; by N ]86 
Lepigonum salinum and L.
nefflecfum, Note on 81 
^li^h&Td!a-hane:** Doronicum Fardalianches; by S.
B 325 
List of South Kent Plants, Addition to ; by H.
C 70 
Local Botanists, List of; T.
S., etc 161 
Maianthemum bifolium 236 
Norfolk, on the Fen and Ditch Plants of; by W.
Winter' ....
152 
Notes from the Journal of P.
and M.
CoUinson ; by Z 305 
Notes on Norfolk Plants; by W.
Winter ...
289 
Notes on the Botany of North Kent ; by 1 371 
Observations on a Week*s Botanizing in South Kent; by A.
. .
.177 
Orchids, British; by Z 171 
Orthotrichum anomalumy Supplemental Notes on ; by J.
B. Wood, 
M.D., F.R.C.S 26 
Oxford Mosses, Additions to the List of; by H.
Bos well .
. .
.262 
Plants found near Slough, Stoke, and Bumham Beeches ; by W.
T. 
Dyer 366 
Plants, List of, collected about Dover, Walmer, Folkestone, and 
Sandgate; by H.
C 33 
Plants, Localities of Uncommon, within Twelve Miles of Plymouth ; 
by T.
R. A.
Briggs 368 
Plants near Turville, Bucks ; by Sidney Beisly 344 
Plants of Ratcheugh Crag, Northumberland ; by W.
R., jun.
...
97 
Rare Plants near Spindlestone, Northumberland; by W.
R. .
. .
79 
Remarkable Pear-tree at Holme Lacy, near Hereford; by J.
L. .
. 75 
Remarks on the Botany of the Chiltems; by C.
J. Ashlield .
. .118 
The Botany of the Burnham Beeches ; by T.
P 168 
Reviews ....
87,90,121,125,155,220,246,279,283,345 
A Guide to the Isle of Wight ; by the Rev. E.
Venables .
. .246 
British Fungology, Outlines of; by the Rev. M.
J. Berkeley .
. 87 
Excelsior; by Dr. Lindsay .
. .
. .
. '.
. .
. .
. 90 
Flora of Cambridgeshire ; by C.
C. Babington 121 
Floraof Preston; by C.J. Ashfield 279 
Preston Chronicle ' 155, 220 
Stansfield's Catalogue of Ferns 283 
The Canadian Naturalist and Geologist 345 
The Chemist and Dniggist 125 
Sinclair, Dr. Andrew, Death of 284 
Todmorden Botanical Society .
83,119,216 
Valeriana Calcitrapa 116 
Vitality of Seeds ; by George Jorden 72 
Ferbascum tkapsiforme, Schrader ; by R.
362 
William Williams, the Snowdon Guide, a Brief Notice of ...
. 307 
Worcestershire Naturalists' Club 219 
vu 
CONTRIBUTORS, CORRESPONDENTS, AND AUTHORS 
WHOSE BOOKS, &c., ARE REVIEWED.
A., 92, 177, 206.
A Botanical Wanderer, 255.
ABhfield, C.
J., 118, 128, 192, 205, 224, 
266, 257, 288, 320, 352, 381, 384 
Ashley, W., 384.
Babington, Professor, 121, 237, 256, 320.
Backhouse, James, jiin., 303, 318, 320, 
384.
Baker, J.
a., 32, 96, 128, 160.
Beisly, Harriet, 32, 96, 128, 191, 256, 
352.
Beisly, Sidney, 63, 128, 160, 192, 206, 
224, 256, 287, 320, 345, 352.
Beta, 94.
B. M.
W., 101, 188.
BosweD, H., 256, 262, 320, 352.
Briggs, T.
B. A., 224, 254, 256, 288, 
352, 368, 381, 384.
Brocas, F.
Y., 224, 256, 288, 384.
Cole, Eev. R.
E., 160.
Croucher, Joseph, 32, 288.
Davies, G., 160, 192, 223.
Dickinson, W., 160,222, 287.
Dyer, W.T., 320,366.
Ferguson, William J.
H., 384.
Fisher,H.S., 126,128.
Frost, G., 224.
a. D., 287.
GKssing, G.
W.,158,160.
Gissmg, T.
W., 32, 93, 320.
Green, Edwin, 32, 65.
Green, Rev. G., 76.
H., 96, 177.
H. C, 33, 70, 96, 190, 256, 352, 356.
Heward, R., 32, 93.
Hind, Rev. W.
M., 96, 128, 204.
Howie, Charles, 128, 192.
Hussey, James, 32.
I., 371.
Inchbald, Peter, 96.
Ingle, T.
W. B., 384.
J., 90.
J. S.
M., 128, 160, 224, 256, 288, 320, 
352.
Jerdon, Archibald, 224, 256, 265, 288.
Johnson, T., 256.
Jones, J., 96.
Jordan, George, 72, 96.
Lamond, G., 320.
Lawson, Dr., 64, 96.
Lees, Ed., F.L.S., 288.
Lindsey, Dr., 90, 160.
Lloyd, John, 64, 79, 94, 95, 96, 128, 151, 
159, 224, 256.
Lothian, James, 192, 224, 271, 331.
M. A.
W., 380.
Mackay, J.
B., 128, 160.
Macfarlane, Rev. G., 256, 352.
Marshall, William, 223, 352.
Masters, M.
T., 384.
Mill, J.
S., 64.
Moore, D., 29.
Moore, Thomas, 64, 69, 96.
More, A.
G., 96, 160.
M. T.
M., 378.
N., 106, 128, 186.
Notcutt, W.
L., 384.
Oxenden, G.
C, 256.
Pamplin, William, 64, 96, 128, 160, 
224, 256, 288, 320, 352, 384.
Piscator, 107.
Q., 127.
Quffirist, 160.
R., 95, 126.
Ravenshaw, Rev. T.
F.; 160.
R. E.
C, 159.
Reynolds, F., 224, 237.
Richardson, W., 32, 96, 160, 192, 256, 
288, 852.
Richardson, William, jun., 224, 256, 
288, 352.
S. B., 63, 64, 159, 192,327, 349.
Schimper, W.
P., Dr., 26.
Seemann, Berthold, Ph.D., F.L.S., 320.
Sim, John, 32, 64, 96, 128, 158, 160, 
192, 224, 256, 269, 288, 320, 352, 
384.
Sinclair, Dr. Andrew, F.L.S., 223, 284.
Smith, Richard, 224.
Southall, H., 188.
VIU 
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS.
Stansfield, Tom, 96, 119, 128, 160, 192, 
224, 852, 384.
T. P., 168.
Walker, M.
A..
320.
Walker, Rev. H.
A., 320.
Watkins, B.
M., 188, 192, 256, 288.
Webb, the Rev. R.
H., 288, 252.
Wells, S., 77, 96.
White, F.
B. W., 256, 330.
WiUiams, William, 223, 307.
' 
Williams, the Rev. Mr., 288.
WiUiams, W.
P. 
Wilson, W., 32.
Windsor, John, M.D., F.L.S., 32, 160, 
192, 256, 259, 288, 384.
Winter, W., 96, 128, 152, 224, 256, 
287, 289, 352, 384.
Wolsey, aeorge, 45, 64, 96, 128, 160.
Wood, J.
B., M.D., F.R.C.S., 263, 296.
W. P., 32, 61, 64, 127, 128, 159, 192, 
256, 288, 351, 352, 384.
W. R., 81, 193.
W. R., jun., 97.
W. W., 255.
W. W.
N., 160, 192.
Z., 71, 95, 172, 307.
1 
THE PHYTOLOGIST.
1861.
: 
ANNUAL ADDRESS.
The great Christian festival which has lately been celebrated, 
the Mistletoe and the Holly, the latter of which in some places is 
called Christmas, remind us of the approaching new year, and 
imposes on the Editor the not ungrateful labour of congratulating 
the contributors and readers of the ^ Phytologist' on the comple- 
tion of the Fourth Volume of this periodical.
His thanks and 
the thanks of the Publisher are very respectfully tendered to the 
subscribers, purchasers, and readers of the magazine.
The Editor's efforts to extend the usefulness of the work have 
been ably supported during the past year by a steady increase in 
the number and value of the contributions.
The readers are re- 
ferred to the Contents and to the Lift of Contributors for proof 
of what is here asserted ; and the multifarious and useful papers 
published during the past twelve months are ample testimony that 
the labours of the proprietors in procuring efficient support have 
been successful.
For this voluntary, gratuitous, and eflScient 
assistance, of which the last or fourth volume is the result, we 
beg to offer our sincere and grateful acknowledgments.
As one 
of the results of an increased number of correspondents, we con- 
fidently expect a corresponding increase in the variety and value 
of the forthcoming productions, and a wider extension of our 
circulation.
We have been reminded in a friendly way, by one of the earliest 
and firmest patrons of this Series, that we are supported by but 
few of the original contributors, viz.
by few of those who wrote 
in and for the former Series when it was in a flourishing condition.
N. S.
VOL.
V. B 
2 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
[Jamcary, 
It should not be forgotten, while considering the causes of the 
disappearance of well-known names from our list, that a period 
of nearly twenty years which have elapsed since the establish- 
ment of this journal, produces gaps in all ranks, those of botanists 
not excepted.
Deaths, removals, and the infirmities that follow 
increasing years, have during the last twenty years materially 
diminished the number of those who take an interest in local 
botany and in the collecting and recording of facts relative to the 
British plants.
While we record this with pensive feelings, and 
live continually in ominous expectancy of the inroads of our last 
enemy, we announce, with much satisfaction, to all our readers, 
who will be gratified by this information, that there are bands of 
hopeful juniors rising up and receiving a course of training from 
the veterans of science, and are preparing to take our place and 
fulfil our functions.
Our hope is not lost with the loss of a couple of the earliest 
and most diffusive writers in the Old Series, — who are alive, and 
long may they live, if long life will bring late repentance !
We 
know no other wilful deserters but these, who are like the shep- 
herds celebrated in the famous eclogue, — 
"Arcades ambo; 
Et pugnare pares, et respondere parati." * 
If few of the original subscribers continue to support our un- 
dertaking, few have abandoned us ; and we have the goodwill of 
the remainder, if not their active co-operation.
It is known to almost an, if not all, our readers, that at the 
commencement of a new year, and also of a new volume, an 
abridgment of what has been accomplished in British botany 
during the past twelve months is expected in our annual exposi- 
tion ; and it will be our care to make this synopsis as compre- 
hensive, clear, and instructive as we are able.
The Editor also claims the privilege, once in the year, of oflFer- 
ing — deferentially, of course — some hints and suggestions to both 
correspondents and readers, of explaining the past, and expressing 
* The learned quoter of the above paragraph might have more appropriately 
compared the two learned pundits to the two Kings of Brentford, who entered 
smeiing at one rose or nosegay.
The two Virgilian shepherds were prepared to 
banter each other ; the two modem representatives of the Brentford monarchy, 
unlike the shepherds, are celebrated for singing the same song, JSandem cantUenam 
eanwe amahant.
i 
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
3 
hopes of the future, and hereby endeavouring to remove hin- 
drances to the enlargement of our knowledge and to the enjoy- 
ment of the pleasures of botanical science and correspondence.
As we are about to co-operate for another period, we should divest 
ourselves as much as possible of personal feelings and sectarian 
tendencies, which are so embarrassing and prejudicial in all un- 
dertakings.
In our brief notice of the past year's proceedings, we assign 
the first place to the few botanical works that have come under 
our notice.
If there be any others which are not here, our apology 
to our readers is, that the authors did not seek our opinion ; and 
as we believe that counsel is impertinent or intrusive when it is 
not asked for, we abstain from criticism when we are not desired 
to exercise this part of our function.
The first book on our list is entitled, ' Sketches of the Natural 
History of Brighton,' which was reviewed with some detail in 
our May number.
This work, though not exclusively botanical, is 
an important acquisition to our stock of local botanical literature.
The botany was drawn up by one who is well acquainted with 
the subject, and it may be relied on as a fair contribution to our 
knoMedge.
It will be a nucleus for more extensive researches, 
and it may be amended and enlarged in subsequent editions.
The Rev. T.
F. Ravenshaw's work, ^The New List of the 
Flowering Plants and Ferns growing wild in the county of De- 
von,' contains several hundred species hitherto to be found only 
in several detached publications or in private memoranda.
Besides these works, there was published early in this year a 
complete Flora of the parish of Harrow, in a local newspaper.
As a nearly entire reprint of this appeared in our number for 
April, we need not do more here than merely notice it as the only 
modem catalogue of 'Middlesex plants in print, and as a founda- 
tion for an entire and complete Flora of the most important of 
the metropolitan counties.
Another county Flora, by the learned author of the ^ Manual 
of British Botany,' has also been issued since the spring of the 
past year.
A review of this comprehensive work will shortly 
appear.
The ^ Visitor's Guide to the Isle of Wight,' only announced in 
our pages, contains a succinct account of the botany of the island, 
drawn up by one of our contributors.
A notice of this work is 
4 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
[January, 
also in the Editor's possession^ and it will be printed as soon as 
possible.
^ 
Another little book on the botany of Dover and its neighbour- 
hood has also been sent us^ and a review of this is under con- 
sideration.
The paper called the ^ Isle of Man and its Flora^ is one of the 
most interesting later additions to local botany.
The reverend 
author of this very graphic sketch of an insular Flora, honoured 
the 'Phytologist^ by presenting his list to us for publication.
We expect soon to have the pleasure of submitting to the readers 
of our journal another insular Flora from the opposite coast.
G. Munby's 'Catalogus Flantarum in Algeria/ Crepin's 'Flore 
de Belgique/ ' Enumeration of Ceylon Plants/ ^ Index Filicum/ 
^The Useftd Plants of India/ 'Species Filicum/ etc., are omitted 
in this report, as works which have little or no connection with 
British Botany.
We have much pleasure in again calling the attention of the 
readers of the ' Phytologist,^ and especially of those who are 
more or less acquainted with the botany of Essex, to Mr. Gib- 
son^s aimouncement of his forthcoming Flora of this county, and 
of his desire of further information.
A hint has reached us of 
another county Flora by a well-known botanist ; but as there is 
no direct notice of the forthcoming work from the author him- 
self, we forbear to publish it, though its speedy appearance has 
been announced on good authority.
The above-named works, either published or in progress, show 
that British botanists are not hiding their talent in a napkin, nor 
letting their energies flag.
Several of them are making consider- 
able sacrifices of time and labour, if not of money, in order that 
their contemporaries and posterity may enjoy the fruits of their 
observation and experience.
• 
A hint is humbly oflFered to those authors infuturoy who are 
waiting for more information before committing the results of 
their labours to the press and ultimately to the public.
Prom 
general experience, and from our own also, it may be pretty con- 
fidently predicted that they may wait tiU the Greek kalends, and 
wait in vain.
How do the Essex botanists, for example, or those 
who have at some previous period resided and botanized in that 
county, know what additional information the author wants or 
wishes?
B. may send to A.
many facts which A.
knows already : 
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
5 
how is B.
to know this unless A.
and B.
have been previously cor- 
responding ?
The author in posse circulates his intentions, his 
wants, and his wishes.
" Give me/^ he says, " your ideas on the 
subject : how would you treat it?^^ And he seldom gets any facts, 
suggestions, or hints, tiU the time is past when they can be 
serviceable, and the disappointed author has frequently to com- 
plain that the knowledge came too late.
But let A.
paint his 
picture, or lay out his garden, or plant his shrubbery ; or let the 
author in futuro write or compile his book, and then B.
will be 
able perchance to oflFer A.
some fresh hint, or give him some 
original information.
A. should not say it is too late.
Apelles 
and Zeuxis exhibited their paintings, — their works, not their in- 
tentions, — ^and listened to the criticisms of cobblers, and used 
them in the emendation of their celebrated productions.
The 
eminent printers of the sixteenth century stuck up their proof- 
sheets on the ga;tes of schools and colleges, and challenged the 
students and scholars to detect an error in their composition ; 
hence the immaculate editions of the Scriptures, classics, and 
other works issued from the presses of those early and learned 
typographers.
If an author will venture to publish a county Flora or a Flora 
of any sort, he will not have to wait long for criticism.
Fault- 
finders, who see blemishes or defects in the best workmanship, — 
who see motes or spots on the sun, — and good-natured friends 
with their sage advice, which sometimes comes too late, will flock 
to the inspection and dissection of his work like bees to a honey- 
pot.
The German and Italian printers of the olden times stimu- 
lated the acumen of the youths to whom they submitted their 
proofs by offering a reward of a florin or of a crown for every 
error discovered.
A botanical author may get his work corrected 
and save his pocket ; for scores of mistakes will be either courte- 
ously or uncourteously brought to his notice.
This botanist says 
he has entered too many plants, that one asserts that he has 
entered too few.
One finds fault because the Beech is called a 
native, another that Anckusa has no star, and that the Snowdrop 
has no dagger.
And probably no two botanists in Great Britain 
will agree about the numbers and limits of species in Hieracium, 
Salix, RubiMSy etc.
The author of a Flora will be shown his de- 
fects for nothing ; and if he be wise, he may learn something from 
[ 
6 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
[January, 
all his instructors, though they are far from being unanimous ; 
knowledge, like sorrow, never comes too late.
But if he be senti- 
mental, he may well say with the sentimentalist of old, " Grant 
me patience, just Heaven !
Of all the cants that are canted in this 
canting world, though the cant of hypocrisy ma;y be the worst, 
the cant of criticism is the most tormenting.^' 
In the last century, when the botanical public was smaller than 
it is now, authors were few and far between.
The revered names 
of Hudson, Withering, Relhan, and Sibthorp were representative, 
and their works embody the history of British Phytology for 
above half a hundred years.
There are now more works pub- 
lished in a season than there were, in not very remote times, 
issued in three generations.
Then the cares and responsibili- 
ties of authorship were probably more onerous than they are in 
our days ; but the rivalry was much less, and the honour much 
greater.
Authors then were indeed inter aves rariores ; like the Phoe- 
nix, which appeared after long intervals, and unlike this bird, 
for they have perished and their works are forgotten ; their dicta 
and opinions were received as oracular, and they themselves were 
canonized among the celebrities in the annals of science.
To 
have only indicated a shade of doubt about the veracity of their 
statements, and about the absolute perfection of their works, 
would have brought upon the unhappy sceptic an avalanche of 
contradiction, a torrent of reproof, an anathema as sincere if not 
as formidable as the thunder of the Vatican in its palmiest days.
The times are changed, — tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in 
illis.
Authorship is now less esteemed because it is not so un- 
common.
Authors are known ; formerly they were unknown, 
except by a select few.
In them the old saying was exemplified, 
" Omne ignotum pro magnifico'* But reputations are still ob- 
tainable even in botany ; there are niches in Flora's temple still 
unoccupied, but they are not so easily achieved as they were in 
the days of our forefathers.
The authors of the county Floras, either published or in pro- 
gress, are respectfully informed that the pages of the ' Phytolo- 
gist ' are freely open to them for the announcement of their in- 
tentions and for the publication of their desiderata.
The Editor 
will be most happy to receive and print all suggestions for the 
improvement of local botany, and enter all additional informa- 
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
7 
tion about recently discovered plants or new localities for previ- 
ously known rare species.
Since the publication of the Floras of Brighton, Devon, and 
Harrow, notes have reached the office of the ^ Phytologist/ re- 
questing that certain additions should be made to these local lists 
of plants, and that additional localities for others should be re- 
corded.
This will ever be the case.
; When a list, or county or 
local Flora is published, all who read it will endeavour to supply its 
omissions or amend its defects.
This cannot be done previously, 
because the deficiencies or inaccuracies in the knowledge of the 
author are unknown.
The reverend author of the ^ Flora Hertfordiensis,^ which is 
perhaps the most carefully compiled local Flora in Britain, pub- 
lishes supplementary parts whenever a sufficiency of matter to 
fill a sheet has accumulated.
This plan of publishing supple- 
ments has succeeded in the case of larger and more expensive 
works than county Floras, and it is to be recommended on the 
score of economy.
A new edition mostly supersedes the original 
work, but that objection does not hang to a supplement.
Several seHes of new species, — new at least to some readers of 
the ^ Phytologist,^ — have been submitted to British Phytologists.* 
For further particulars of these species, or segregations, as some 
one pedantically calls them, or splits or chips, as they are rather 
irreverently named by others, the readers are referred to vol.
iv.
pp.
87-89, 121, 138-139.
These real or presumed additions to the British Flora are very 
plainly and carefully described in the Reports of the Thirsk 
Natural History Society, and by a correspondent who entitled 
his articles on this subject, ^ Which is Ranunculus heterophyU 
lus F' — ^ Look after Draba verna, — ^ British LepigonaJ It is not 
necessary to enter here the outlines of these papers, nor even to 
name the plants.
Whatever may be the opinion of botanists in general about 
the validity, or genuineness, or permanence of these species, if 
they be thought worthy of this dignified rank, there can be no 
* This double meaning of the term Phytologist is very tantalizing.
Properly 
it is the name of a person, not of a book ; as geologist, entomologist, etc.
The 
title of our work should be, * The Phy tological Magazine,' if we wanted to give a 
learned title to our humble periodical.
We hope our readers will not give us tiie 
credit of inventing this pedantic, ambiguous name.
1 
8 ADDRESS or THE EDITOR.
[January, 
question about the moderate views promulgated by their advo- 
cates.
Their claims have been urged clearly and briefly, in order 
that their distinctness may be tested by the observation and 
knowledge of others.
Their distinctive characters are contrasted, 
and the readers or judges are left to draw their own conclusions.
All that need be said here is that the pages of the ' Phytologist* 
are at the service of those who reject or disown these novelties, 
as they have been open to those who have temperately urged their 
claims on the attention of our readers.
During the past season a few plants have to be recorded, seen 
at Wandsworth steam-boat pier, certainly a British station, and 
if the plants are not British, they grow on British soil, at Bat- 
tersea, Chelsea, and Farson^s Green.
These are all importations, 
whatever be their status in the national Flora of Great Britain.
The first place is given to Lathyrus tvberosuSy of which only 
one plant was seen, and was not recognized then, but, as has been 
stated already in the ' Fhytologist,^ vol.
iv.
p. 318, was taken up 
and replanted in the garden ; and when the report of the discovery 
of the species at Fyfield, near Ongar, in Essex, reached Chelsea, 
the Wandsworth plant was examined, and it proved to be this 
interesting species.
We expect an historical account of this 
plant as a true Briton for a future number of this journal.
Several other plants have been detected in the above localities, 
though notices of only a few have as yet appeared.
Their non- 
appearance has been caused rather by want of room than want 
of material.
It is believed to be good policy to prefer contri- 
butions from distant correspondents, to editorial communica- 
tions; — to cause the latter to make way for the former.
The 
Editor is expected to be more tolerant of delay than contributors.
But his articles on this subject, though deferred, are not lost ; as 
the French say about an expected pleasure, " Un plaisir difiere 
n^est pas perdu.^^ 
The new stations observed for rare plants, and communicated 
for the first time, during the past year, are numerous and im- 
portant ; they are so many that this part of our report must be 
epitomized, or it would fill more of our space than can be con- 
veniently spared.
The most important discovery in local botany is that of Son- 
chas palustris in Plumstead marshes.
The species is by common 
consent admitted to be one of the very rarest of rare British 
186 L] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
9 
plants; and this station for it is one of the most satisfactory of 
British stations.
It is as remote as it can well be from a centre 
where the plant could have been cultivated, and it grows here in 
so great abundance that the herbaria of all the botanists in Eng- 
land might be furnished with specimens without detriment to the 
locality of the plant.
It covers, when in flower, another rare 
species, Leucojum astivum, ti plant for some years lost, in its old 
station, opposite BlackwaU.
Much importance will not be attached to the discovery of 
Isatis tinctoria at the Wandsworth station of the West End 
Crystal Palace railway.
The banks of railways are notable for 
producing many species which in the phyto-geographic phrase- 
ology now current are very properly called suspected aliens.
If 
not aliens to the soil of Britain, they are aliens in these places.
Yet it is impossible to define very satisfactorily what are and 
what are not alien species.
Even here, as Mr. Lloyd very justly 
observed in his notice of the above migratory plants there are, 
not a quarter of a mile lower down the contiguous line, three 
plants which were unknown on Wandsworth Common less than 
twenty years ago ; all of them non-migratory, most impatient of 
removal and cultivation.
How came they to their present loca- 
lity ?
Nobody doubts their British birth, though they are new 
comers to the Wandsworth Common station, like the Isatis.
If 
plants are to be discarded qimsi railway species, we should reject 
DroserOy Lycopodium, and Osmwnda, because we know that they 
were recently introduced into the station adjoining the railway, 
where they are now found.
One of them, the writer is sorry to 
tell his readers, is no longer in that artificial swamp.
Only a 
few years ago it was there, but unluckily it attracted the atten- 
tion of a young Wandsworth botanist, and he, ajs many others 
do, made private property of a common plant.
The plant still 
exists, and may be seen by the curious in such matters.
This 
young disciple of Idnnseus, who has not before his eyes the fear 
of Mr. Hewitt Cotterell Watson, the eminent chorographic bo- 
tanist, intimated, when he was chidden for taking away a rare 
plant, the only one of the kind there, that he would transfer a 
bit of the root to its original station.
Surely the fact that the 
Royal Fern can be transplanted will not unsettle its claim as a 
British species.
But even if so, the fact that the Osmunda re- 
galis can be transplanted, will not upset the nativity of the re- 
N. S.
VOL.
V. 
10 ADDRESS OK THE EDITOR.
[January, 
maining two plants^ the Drosera and the Lycopodium, which will 
not bear transplantation.
The most important plant next to Lathyms tuberosus and 
Sonchus palustris, for which a new station has been reported, is 
Maianihemum bifolium {Convallaria bifoHa, Linn.).
The plants 
wherewith this rich and rare gem of Florals coronet was asso- 
ciated, are genuine natives {omnium consensu) and their station, 
which is that of the Maianihemum, would have increased our list 
but for their accidental publication in a local guide.
This fact is a weighty proof of the importance of local lists, and 
an encouragement to those who avail themselves of their utility 
to give them a wider circulation than that for which they were 
originally compiled.
How many of our readers have seen this 
Scarborough list, or even heard of the Forge Valley?
Still 
these are facts, whether ignored or admitted* in certain quarters.
It is true that there is such a place as Scarborough ; many of us 
have seen the town, and " seeing is believing." I believe there is 
a locality near Scarborough called Forge Valley, because I have 
been told that there is a place there known by this name.
I 
further believe that in a wood somewhere in Forge Valley, in the 
neighbourhood of Scarborough, Maianihemum bifolium grows, 
because I was informed of the fact, and received, with the infor- 
mation, a specimen of the plant.
This fact was previously un- 
recorded, and the growth of Aciaa spicaia, Trienialis europma, 
Pyrola minor, etc.
(see vol.
iv.
p. 232), was recorded only in a 
local list, and these additional facts were probably unknown to 
two-thirds of the Yorkshire botanists.
Lastrea remota^^ discovered some time ago in the latter dis- 
trict, was announced for the first time during the last summer.
(See ^ Phytologist,^ vol.
iv.
pp.
137, 227.) As its credentials are 
indorsed by Mr. Thomas Moore, the most eminent of British 
pteridologists, there is no doubt about the propriety of its ad- 
mission among the discoveries of the past year.
• We wish our obliging correspondent Mr. Eeynolds would take the trouble 
of writing out a list of the rarer plants about Scarborough, for publication in this 
periodi6al.
t Has Lastrea remota passed muster as a species and as a British plant ?
It is 
fiuspected that Cfkenopodium Sotrys must be put in the same class as the Wands- 
worth plants.
It was collected at Hagley years ago ; but, like manj other and 
more valuable things, it did not meet with a famed historian to transmit its claims 
to posterity.
Sic transit gloria !
1B61.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
11 
Omithogalum pyrenaicum has been reported as observed grow- 
ing abundantly in some of the woods at East Ilsley, in Berkshire.
(See vol.
iv.
270, and Index.) 
The confirmation of a previous discovery, viz.
that of Gentiana 
Pnmmonanthe near Chobham, in Surrey, and the detection of a 
new station (or Schoentts nigricans on Bagshot Heath, appropriately 
appear as a conclusion to the local botanizing of the season.
The new stations for rare plants recorded by Mr. Sim are, as 
usual, very numerous, and more than usually important.
Vero» 
nica peregrina, hitherto unknown as a British plant, although 
previously recorded in the ' Phy tologist ' as a true Irish species, 
is among the most important of the new discoveries about Perth.
The newly recorded stations, or the confirmations of some hitherto 
dubious localities, are far too numerous to be entered here.
We 
have only room for the following, viz.
Anchusa sempervirens in 
woods near Dunkeld.
Our correspondent expresses in strong 
and unmistakable terms his belief in the nativity of this plant.
It was seen by ourselves in Roslin woods, and it appeared to be 
quite as much at home there as Myosotis sylvatica and Geranium 
sylvaticum, only it was not nearly so plentiful as either of these 
species.
It is believed that Fife is a new station for Verbascum Lych- 
nitis ; not new in the strict sense of new, viz.
that the plant 
never grew there before ; but it is believed to be a newly dis- 
covered locality, one not known before the visit of our corre- 
spondent to the ruins of Lindores Abbey.
Mr. Sim has very recently informed us that the station where 
he finds Cynoglosmm sylvaticum is not in the Carse of Gowrie, 
the station where it was seen by George Don, and reported in 
Hooker's ' Flora Scotica ;^ hence he infers that there may be two 
stations in Perthshire for this rare species.
Our Perth correspondent has discovered, in an island in the 
river Tay, the noblest of all Scotia's noble rivers, a new station 
for Lathyrus syluestris.
This rare Scottish plant is probably not 
quite a new discovery to the botanists of Scotland, but none of 
them have observed it previously so far north.
Indeed, like the 
shepherd, sung so pleasantly by Horace, who wandered far from 
home, '' Ultra — Terminum curis expeditus/' this fine plant has 
wantonly transgressed the laws and leaped far over the limits 
assigned as its legitimate bounds, careless (curis ewpedita) of the 
disquietude it thereby causes to phyto-geographers.
12 ADDRESS OF THE EDiTOE.
[January, 
Some of our readers, perhaps many, have seen an unkind notice 
of Mr. Sim's discoveries, which we consider of no mean or com- 
mon order, by one of our readers who is notoriously unfriendly 
to the ' Phytologist/ The author of the aforementioned notifi- 
cation rather harshly blames our correspondent, and it may be 
added, the inoffensive humble person with whom Mr. Sim is so 
kind as to correspond.
Another of our correspondents sent us a rather reprehen- 
sive .review of the effusion to which only an allusion has been 
made.
This review was declined, for reasons which appeared co- 
gent to us, and it is hoped that they were satisfactory to our 
correspondent who sent us the article.
We do not, on the present occasion, mean to trouble our rea- 
ders any further about this offensive paper ; though if left alto- 
gether unanswered, it might possibly be injurious to us, and it 
was probably circulated with such an intent ; but any of our 
friends may, on application, have a perusal of this and of several 
other similar documents.
The Editor trusts that his friends and well-wishers will have 
patience with him for a m&ath^ only a little month, and then he 
engages to prove to their entire satisfaction, that he is not guilty 
of printing and publishing false and groundless reports, nor of 
what is far worse, falsifying his Index to hide his own careless- 
ness.
He is as innocent of both those charges as he is of taking 
improper liberties with the wife of his friend, or of stealing his 
neighbour's sheep.
The Editor published it, (the reader may say, what?
— ^let him 
have patience, the whole case shall be laid before him,) as an ex- 
ample and illustration of the physical capabilities of some plants 
to bear considerable vicissitudes of climate, — as a fact confirma- 
tive, not subversive, of Nature's law, viz.
that the distribution of 
plants, or the extent of the earth's surface which they may occupy 
here and there, is limited strictly by their idiosyncrasies, or, in 
other words, all other laws, (but those determined by the ability 
of the plant to bear heat or cold or any atmospheric change 
whatever,) made and provided for limiting the areas or the alti- 
tudes of species are vain illusions, the idle fancies of would-be- 
thought discoverers of the laws of Nature.
* The whole material necessary for dealing with this case is now in the hands of 
a correspondent who will treat the affair with justice and moderation.
1861.] ADDRESS OP THE EDITOR.
18 
For the present also we hope our amiable correspondent Mr.
Sim will also have patience with us.
We do not deny that he 
has feelings and susceptibilities just like other men, nor that 
they have been sorely tried.
Botanists, like poets, are occasionally 
liable to fits of irritability.
His wrongs shall be rectified, and the 
saddle put on the right horse.
There is a time for everything ; 
but the festive season of Christmas, when our hearts should be 
overflowing with a grateful sense of the deliverance accomplished 
for us many centures ago, and which we now commemorate, is not 
a fit period for writing angry diatribes against our fellow-mortals 
and fellow-sinners.
The effects of good fare and of cheerful so- 
cial intercourse naturally indispose us for redressing personal 
grievances.
The Editor of the ^ Phytologist,' however, has the pleasure 
of bearing a faithful although feeble testimony to the merits of 
his amiable Perth correspondent, and confidently avers that he 
does not know a jnore single-minded, trustworthy, truth-loving, 
upright man alive.
In his short notice of what he saw, and 
which we published in another part of this journal, hef gave no 
opinion about the origin of the plant, and also refrained from aU 
remarks which could have been offensive to the most sensitive of 
phyto-geographers.
Our correspondents would soon forsake us if we were not faith- 
ful to the principles which we publicly avowed when we under- 
took the management of this periodical.
We are bound by our 
well-known professions as well as by our private inclinations, to 
publish all botanical facts, by whomsoever they may be reported.
Our readers will see more on this heafl in a subsequent page of 
our address.
One or two remonstrances have reached the Editor about the 
unsatisfactoriness (what a long word!) of anonymous announce- 
ments and nameless contributors.
Our justification may be stated 
in the old saw, " Necessity has no law,''* or in a similar well- 
known and pithy proverb, viz.
" We have Hobson's choice, this or 
none.'' It is surely well known to all our readers, for it has 
often been stated, that all contributions are gratuitous.
Our con- 
tributors know this ; some of them by long experience.
If the 
articles were paid for, we might not always have them on our 
* The sense of the Greek proyerb is, *' Necessity is the strongest thing, for it 
conquers all things," — Kparti murrw.
14 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
[January, 
terms ; as they are unpaid, we must receive them on the conditions 
imposed by the contributaries.
But it is a great mistake^ and one which has often been cor- 
rected, to assert that any article printed in the ' Phytologist ' is .
anonymous.
This however has been repeatedly and pertinaciously 
affirmed, and there is no more truth in it than there is in the 
equally positive affirmation that the omission of the 192nd page 
of the third volume of the Thytologist/ either before or after the 
entry of the page where the obnoxious plant, the Balearian 
Arenaria, is entered for the first time as a plant new to Scotland, 
was a significant proof of the mala fides, the faithlessness, of the 
Editor.
The Editor has asserted over and over again that he takes on 
himself the entire responsibility of every article that is printed 
in the ' Phytologist.' In order to save himself from the conse- 
quences of omissions, blunders, etc., he prints no facts whatever, 
however trivial, on anonymous authority.
Although a very few 
contributions have the appearance of being anonymous, because 
they are subscribed by a letter or by two letters, sometimes with 
initials of real names, and sometimes with fictitious names, their 
authors are all known to the Editor.
As these contributions, which are apparently though not really 
anonymous, form a Considerable portion of the trading stock of the 
grievance-mongers, and are also, it may be admitted, occasional 
sources of embarrassment, trouble, and vexation to the Editor, a 
brief explanation may be here given, and we hope it will convince 
the convincible that this is one of the encumbrances insepar- 
able from our editorial functions.
By prescriptive right, all reviewers are entitled to the privilege 
of secret or irresponsible publication.
It is sometimes supposed 
that the Editor writes the reviews, but several of our contributors 
know that they are not all written by the Editor ; but they are all, <i 
very properly, anonymous.
Many reviews, in modem times, are 
such milk-and-water messes, such wishywashy afiairs, that any- 
body might write them, and the most timid might subscribe 
his name at their conclusion.
But they are privileged articles.
It would be non selon les regies, — " contrary to custom," — for the 
author of these articles to sign his name as a guarantee for 
the genuineness of his article.
Again, all communications from the fair sex are by universal 
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
15 
consent suffered to appear anonymously, unless they happen to 
be authors by profession.
Such a liberty as that of publishing 
their names, would be resented by their fathers, husbands, bro- 
thers, and by a host of male friends, admirers, etc.
Would any 
man be so fool-hardy as to risk the fate of Pentheus by publish- 
ing a list of his fair correspondents ?
There are a few and only a few of the sterner — I will not call 
them the braver — ^sex, who stipulate that their names shall not 
be printed, although their communications are of bond fide cha- 
racter.
These and all others who prefer it have the full sanc- 
tion of the Editor to withhold or publish their names as they 
please.
To save their feelings from hostile criticism, or their lives 
from subsequent trouble, or their houses from intrusion, they 
publish anonymously.
Some have one object, some another, and 
some probably have no object at all, but whim, and the plea- 
sure of mystifying quiSnuncs (excuse the solecism) or curiosos 
impertinentes.
In all these cases the Editor is responsible for the truth of the 
facts entered anonymously, or under fictitious names ; but he 
knows the correspondents, and the contributions are sent under 
the conditions of secrecy.
They have confidence in the Editor 
that he will not bewray them, and he has confidence in them that 
they will not impose upon him nor send him mare's-nests, and 
thereby make themselves and him ridiculous.
It is not expected 
that any editor, supposing him to have got much experience by 
living long, seeing much, and thinking more, can be aware of all 
the changes which are daily taking place in the relations of 
plants under many circumstances, and in places far distant 
from his residence and usual haunts.
He therefore necessarily 
must rely upon the testimony of others who have seen what he 
cannot see, although well acquainted with the botany of the 
places where he has resided at various times.
He does not, 
while living in London and studying the history and character 
of plants in books and in herbaria, profess to know what grows 
in Devon, Wales, and Scotland better than those botanists who 
are resident in these parts of the kingdom.
The Editor of the 
' Phytologist ' is not gifted with the second sight ; he cannot, 
while botanizing in Surrey, see plants growing on the hills of 
Kinnoul and Moncrieffe.
. No facts are printed, as such, in the ^ Phytologist ' on anony- 
16 ADDBESS OF THE EDITOR.
[Janiuaryy 
moas authority.
As Helenas said to the Trojan hero, the mythic 
founder of the Iioman empire, '^ repetens iterumque iterumque 
monehoy^ there is no such thing practised.
Our correspondents 
and contributors know in general, and if there be any who do 
not ]uiow it, they are hereby informed, that they may get any 
further information about any fact or contribution whatever, by 
privately applying to the Editor, or by stating their requests 
through the medium of the ' Phytologist.^ 
In these cases, in modem advertising phraseology, an early 
application is recommended.
The most retentive of memories 
are sometimes jogged in vain.
The circumstances of long-past 
discoveries are but indistinctly seen through the mist and haze 
of bygone transactions ; memoranda are often mislaid, or, what 
is as bad, cannot be found when wanted ; occasionally they 
never existed except in the good intentions and slippery recol- 
lections of the discoverers.
There is a term, well-known in law, 
called ^' the Statute of Limitations," or seven years ; within which 
time a claim must be made, otherwise it will be '^ barred " by the 
said statute.
Any query about facts published anonymously or undersigned 
by initials or fictitious names, should be made early, for the rea- 
sons above stated; it should not be delayed till, in legal phrase, 
it is barred by the Statute of Limitations.
It will be a pleasure to the Editor if his correspondents freely 
take the liberty of consulting him on all occasions, either about 
plants or contributions.
He will heartily and readily afford all 
the information he possesses, either privately or through the 
medium of the magazine.
But he shrinks from taxing the me- 
mory and patience of his friends beyond certain limits, or, in 
plainer terms, he would demur to ask a contributor for more 
definite explanation of a fact which had been printed seven years 
ago, even though it had appeared in the ^ Phytologist.' Most 
persons of experience know how teasing and worrying these 
explanations of long-past observations become.
We have not 
forgotten the unbecoming squabbles and sharp altercations re- 
corded in the Old Series of this journal, and therefore it is ad- 
visable to confine the occasions for controversy within as narrow 
bounds as practicable, and endeavour to avoid a renewal of the 
unpleasant reminiscences of the years that are past.
We have another word to say to our correspondents before 
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
17 
taking our leave.
Occasionally their kind missives reach us 
just after the entire copy (notice to contributors and all) has been 
sent to press.
It is not convenient to recast the last page on 
which these appear, and consequently our friends must wait a 
month or more before they see the acknowledgment of their con- 
tributions.
Although connected with the press in one way or 
other, less or more, for nearly forty years, I have never known 
any copy or proof lost, through the carelessness of the Post 
officials, but one.
Our correspondents therefore need not take 
the trouble of inquiring about the reception or non-reception of 
their articles.
The ratio of their safe delivery and safe custody 
is to the probability of their loss as about ten thousand to one.
It is not impossible that we might forget to notice their re- 
ceipt, but that they have been miscarried or lost, if sent through 
the post-office or through any of the public accredited means of 
conveyance, is most improbable.
It is to be regretted that one of the subjects submitted to the 
consideration of our contributors has hitherto been productive 
of no results.
Perhaps a dozen readers of the Phytologist re- 
sponded to the appeal made for help in compiling as complete a 
list of English botanists — one as complete as possible — with the 
sanction of the owners of the names whereof it was to be com- 
posed.
With one exception the proposal met with much appro- 
bation, and it has been asked, and the question is not an un- 
reasonable one, why so good an intention has not been carried 
out as originally promised and intended.
The only reason to be 
given is to be gleaned from the reply of a Greek paterfamilias, as 
related by Hierocles, or some other merry Grecian.
When the 
former was asked wjiy he took his little dead son out by a back 
door or back window to be interred, replied that he was ashamed 
to bring out so small a child before so large and grand a com- 
pany, assembled at the front of his residence, to assist in per- 
forming the funeral rites.
We were ashamed to publish the few 
names transmitted to us before so many who are doubtless as 
eager to promote British botany as they were, but who might 
not choose to publish this to the world.
It is hoped that the 
eminent botanists who consented to have their names entered in 
the proposed list will accept the above as an excuse for the non- 
fulfilment of their request.
Every man should be the best judge of the cogency of the 
N. S.
VOL.
v. D 
18 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
{Jarmart/y 
motives which may induce him to embark in, or not to engage 
in, a specific series of obligations of a voluntary nature.
We are 
not, and do not profess to be, able to adjudicate for any one in 
such affairs ; we only laid before our readers what was suggested 
to us, and which received our cordial approbation.
We regret, as has been stated, that our good intentions could 
not be realized for the reasons above stated, but we have not 
abandoned the project.
But on mature reflection we are con- 
vinced that a list of the botanists who have authorized us to pub- 
lish their names for the aforesaid pixrpose (see our Address for 
1860) would be, to use a proverbial simile, like taking coals 
to Newcastle.
The addresses in our possession, viz.
those 
which we have authority to publish, are about as notorious as 
45, Frith Street, London, or 28, Upper Manor Street, Chelsea.
Surely the merest tyro who has acquired but a smattering of the 
literature of the science, knows that the author of the ' Manual of 
British Botany ^ lives at Cambridge, but who except his most inti- 
mate or privileged friends would take the liberty of intruding on 
his privacy, or of interrupting his scientific and learned labours ?
The eminent individuals who have consented to assist in this 
movement are not exactly those who are earnestly and humbly 
requested to suffer their names and addresses to appear in the 
' Phytologist.^ If the gentlemen who are anxious to promote the 
knowledge of the plants of Britain, to ascertain their census, area, 
habits, peculiarities, etc., are alone to be the subjects of such a 
catalogue, containing more of detail than a mere list, — for exam- 
ple, addresses, department of botanical science professed, etc., as 
that originally intended, — we may state that there is one printed .
and circulated with the annual volume of the ^ Phytologist.' 
Those who possess the four published volumes can draw up for 
themselves a list of all the distinguished British botanists in 
the kingdom.
Their residences are generally known ; and their 
particular address may be procured by a private application.
The aim of the ^ Phytologist,' for the last half-dozen years, 
has been to introduce botany into the homes and houses of the 
humbler ranks of society ; to encourage a taste for such elevating 
recreations among those who have fewer objects of gratification, 
than are within the reach of the so-called favourites of fortune ; 
to afford means of indulgence in the pleasures of research, obser- 
vation, and comparison, to a class which has been sometimes 
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
19 
considered incapable of the enjoyment of science, and unfitted, 
by want of education, for adding anything to its resources.
Our object is twofold, viz.
to increase the knowledge of plants 
and of their relations, and to increase the number of those who 
take an interest in the subject.
The science will be expanded 
by the increased number of observers.
We want to widen and 
deepen the channels of instruction, to procure more information, 
and to spread it over a wider extent.
We wish, parodying the 
ancient distich, 
" That those may read (the Phytologist) 
Who never read before," 
And " that those who always read 
May 'now read more" (botanical works).
The ^ Phytologist ^ flies at humbler game than the elite of the 
botanists of Britain, thought it does not reject help from any 
quarter.
If the latter class condescend to patronize its well- 
intentioned efforts, to enlarge the mind by exhibiting science in 
as attractive a form as possible, it is hoped that we are not un- 
^, grateful for their patronage, nor undeserving of such acts of 
'benevolence.
But we aspire to the honour of occupying a wider 
sphere — not offering assistance to those who can help themselves, 
but being helpful to all who will accept help at our hands ; to 
cater for the ol ttoWo/ (the million) ; to disseminate sound infor- 
mation among as many as .
can be reached through our means.
We know that there are collecting botanists about Manchester, 
also in North Wales, in Surrey, Hants, etc., and no doubt in 
several counties and in many towns of the United Kingdom.
There are young men, amateurs, who would be very much en- 
couraged as well as enlightened by an occasional intercourse with 
those who may be denominated veterans in the science.
And 
the benefits of an enlarged communication between the older 
and the younger membei^ of the confraternity would be mutual.
The latter have much physical energy, quick apprehension, and 
endurance of correction ; the former have more experience, tact, 
and judgment.
A list of the viri obscuri who are notoriously 
attached to botanical pursuits, and who are known to our cor- 
respondents as persons who would not decline, when they had 
nothing better to do, to go out as guides to visiting botanists, 
and who would not think it degraded them to receive compensa- 
tion for their time, (only what would be adequate remuneration 
20 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
[January, 
if at their usual employment,) and who would think it an honour 
to have their names printed in the ' Phytologist/ is with us a 
special desideratum.
During the time that this Address has been in hand, we have 
been favoured with more than one communication, convincing us 
that our humble efforts in the educational line have not been alto- 
gether unappreciated, nor totally unproductive.
A zealous north- 
country correspondent, a veteran it is believed, like ourselves, has 
hunted up his botanical friends on the eastern borders, and has sent 
us a brace if not a leash to put in our botanical game-bag.
What 
is still more gratifying, we have received from the same district a 
paper on local botany, drawn up by a youth, who will not be of- 
fended to be described as a tyro, for he is' in the strictest sense 
in statu pupiUari ; but his knowledge, diction, and good sense, 
would be creditable to some who are probably older than his 
grandfather.
He has read his ' Phytologist ^ to good purpose, 
and the fruits of his reading have appeared after not many years.
It is by the united efforts of local botanists alone that the 
Flora, of even a small kingdom like Britain, can be successfully 
investigated.
The ^ Cybele,' which is a collection and condensa- 
tion of many of the facts known at the times when the several 
volumes of the series were issued, is also a fair proof that science 
or knowledge is continually progressive while books remain sta- 
tionary.
There are many facts no^ well-known about the British 
plants, their history, area, census, habitats, climatic peculiarities, 
etc., which were not discovered when the publication of this use- 
ful work was begun, and it may be added since its conclusion.
A continuous work alone is the proper depository of such dis- 
coveries.
No recorder or reporter of fresh facts illustrative of the Phy- 
tology of the British Isles will be deterred from communicating 
his observations and the result of his experience by the super- 
ciliousness and repulsiveness of the EAtor, nor alienated by his 
dictatorial demeanour.
It is unquestionable that the ^ Phytologist ' is the only work 
that comprehends and continues the history of the British species 
in recent times, and it must be the only source from which the 
future historians of our Flora can draw their materials, and hence 
the importance of enlisting into the ranks of its supporters all 
the active, fresh, youthful botanical energy of the country.
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
21 
There are, it may be assumed, no naturalists, however humble 
their acquirements are, and however lowly their rank in society 
may be, who have not seen some hitherto unobserved facts or 
phase, or phenomenon of nature.
Observations, experiences, and 
useful inferences are, it may further be assumed, often lost be- 
cause not recorded at the proper time ; this fear of communi- 
cating the result of experience often arises from mauvaise horde, 
an excess of modesty which indisposes its possessor to seek pub- 
licity, lest ridicule and contempt should be the reward of his 
humble attempts to enlighten others, or to direct them to a source 
of gratification which has never disappointed him.
We are far from advising young persons, or indeed any persons 
not pretty well aware of the difficulties and dangers of literary 
composition, to seek ^* the bubble reputation ^' either " at the 
cannon's mouth '^ or at the typographer's press.
It will assuredly 
be more for their own ease and comfort if they rather shun than 
seek notoriety, till they have something to write about which 
nobody knows but they themselves, and which nobody can tell 
so well as they can.
And even when they have got the materials 
for composition, if their grammar or their logic fails them, they 
will find more to laugh at their mistakes than to help them, or 
to sympathi^ with them in their disappointment.
These need 
not have the slightest fear when they entrust their hoarded scraps 
and stores of knowledge about plants and their associations to 
the Editor of the ^ JPhytologist.' They may freely expatiate on 
the feelings of delight and joy which they experience when they 
discover a plant formerly to them unknown ; and they may com- 
municate the notice of their simple rational pleasures to one who 
has still as keen a relish for these pursuits as he had in bygone 
times.
If he cannot participate in their enjoyment, he can sym- 
pathize with them and encourage them.
He has not forgotten 
the good efiects on himself of encouragement judiciously be- 
stowed.
The contributions made by those who may very properly 
be called tyros in botany, will, be as safe in his custody as the 
confession of the penitent in the bosom of the confessor, or as 
the aflfairs of a client are in the hands of his legal adviser.
There 
is no blabbing of secrets which are committed to us.
We do 
not print the letters of our private correspondents without so 
much as saying, ' With your leave ' !
Our readers, it is hoped, will tolerate another word, which 
22 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
{January, 
indeed does not concern all of thenij nor the major part of them, 
but only such of them as criticize what they read.
We rather 
encourage this propensity in all our readers.
We are critics, 
and nothing unless critical ; and we only want to regulate this 
bias of humanity, not to forbid its manifestation.
There are, 
and always have been, fault-finders, who complain of the fare 
furnished them as deficient in quality, or in quantity, or in both.
These readers and contributors also, for thev sustain both 
characters, are reminded, not for the first time, that the ' Phyto- 
logist- is at their service for bringing their complaints before 
the readers in general.
In our pages they have the opportunity 
of propounding all sorts of proper and answerable questions, and 
a place where they may state, temperately of course, their opi- 
nions about any paper or article, or controvert any fact printed 
in the magazine ; to olBTer their views omnibus de rebits et quibus- 
dam aliis.
If any mistatement appears, or any real or fancied grievance 
is discovered in any article, the discoverer or the complainant is 
respectfully invited to send his plaint or his discovery to the 
Editor immediately for publication.
He begs leave to suggest 
that correspondents need not take the trouble of writing to him 
privately on the subject ; a short note in the ^ Phytologist* may 
generally be sufficient to answer the requirements of the case.
The Editor will of course exercise his privilege of modifying 
such strictures and remarks as might be oflFensive to the author 
of the article which may become the subject of censure ; but he 
would rather not be made the medium of conveying animadver- 
sion privately.
He is a censor only in his public capacity as a 
critic and an Editor.
This is confessedly the courteous mode of proceeding in all 
such cases ; and it is not only the most useful course, it is also 
the common practice of journalism.
It is but fair to give every 
writer the opportunity of meeting the charge urged against his 
facts or his views, that he may either defend, retract, or modify 
his previous convictions.
Of course the Editor cannot vouch for the perfect immaculacy 
of every article which he commits to the press.
He must rely 
on the fidelity and accuracy of his correspondents : but he pro- 
fesses entire impartiality on all botanical subjects, and endea- 
vours to deal fairly with all who contribute to the miscellany.
1861.] ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
23 
We conclude this subject by repeating that every correspondent 
is desired to express fully and freely his opinions on all matters 
connected with botany, or the management of this magazine; 
to offer his counsels, or suggestions, or hints with manly inde- 
pendence, as a promoter of science, and not as a partisan, and 
without troubling himself about the possibility of his views being 
either pleasing or distasteful in other quarters.
Every one will admit that he who writes for the instruction of 
the public, must study the style of conciliation, and abhor the 
inspirations of the spirit of detraction, and strive against egotism 
and self-laudation ; but every botanist may not only avail him- 
self, to the utmost latitude, of the ^ Phytologist' for the contra- 
diction of any statement that appeared therein, but he may 
exercise his privilege of preserving his incognito, of wearing his 
mask where and when and as long as he pleases, without a ques- 
tion about his motives for concealment.
The Editor apologizes for the unusual length of this article.
Since Jie undertook the editorship, now nearly six years ago, 
there has been no necessary cause for so long and so unpleasant 
an Address as the present.
He begs to tender the excuse^ usually 
n^ade by those whose indulgence of themselves, at this festive 
period, has passed beyond the limits of moderation, viz.
that 
"Christmas comes but once a year.^^ He, for the succeeding 
eleven months, abandons all exclusive claims to the pages of the 
magazine, and freely offers them to those who have something 
more cheering and instructive to offer to the readers than com- 
plaints, remonstrances, and requests, for redress of grievances.
In saluting our friends " with conge profound,^^ i.e. making our 
bow and courteously retiring, we beg to present them all with 
the usual civilities, the customary compliments of the season, 
assuring them that with the past we are well contented, and that 
we see much that is both hopeful and encouraging in the pro- 
spects of the future.
In taking our leave of the Old Year, with only a few regrets at 
its departure, we introduce its successor with the charitable hope 
that it will not be worse than the last, the weather only excepted : 
this was so tantalizingly bad, so provoking by its continuous 
changes from bad to worse, that an apology can hardly be offered 
or accepted in its behalf.
In bidding adieu to our readers, we 
offer them our good wishes, and pray that they may enjoy, as 
24 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
[Januarf/, 
much prosperity and contentment as we hope and desire for 
ourselves.
From these charitable aspirations the friend who has been the 
cause of our inflicting so long a programme on our phytological 
supporters, is by no means excluded.
As we are not profound 
physiologists, like Dr. Carpenter, nor deeply conversant with the 
laws of natural selection, so ably illustrated by Mr. Darwin, 
all our conjectures about the secret causes which grieve our 
friend would be only abortive eflbrts to discover what is possibly 
a mystery to himself.
Whatever be the origin of his distemper, 
it is clear from the symptoms that he is smarting under some 
imaginary ill, or is letting his clear philosophic mind become 
beclouded by the darkling shade of' jealousy and disappointment.
The torrents of abuse, the cumulative rebukes, so plentifully 
poured out and heaped on a few scientific sinners, that can 
barely see an inch before their respective noses, for supposed 
ofiences against laws never appointed by Nature, are surely too 
cogent proofs that they proceed from a mind ill at ease.
All 
attempts to lead or scare such a herd of mediocrities, or imbe- 
ciles, is just labour wasted, like milking the he-goats, getting 
blood out of a lamp-post, skinning flints, hunting the gowk, etp., 
etc.
To be in a pet with such noodles is not very unaptly com- 
pared to a " tempest in a tea-pot,^' or to a little puddle trying to 
lash itself into a fury, and to imitate the swelling billows of the 
mighty deep.
It is not very easy to persuade ourselves that our facetious 
friend is in earnest, even though the big blusterous words in 
which he gives vent to his indignant feelings are not such as are 
usually employed by writers who are in the merry mood.
Yet it 
is more reasonable to believe that he is making game of us for his 
own diversion, than that he has any serious intention of making 
us unhappy by the manifestations of his displeasure.
As we profess some acquaintance with the healing art, and are 
not altogether unskilled in the functions of ministering " to a 
mind diseased,^' we can tell the patient where he will find a recipe 
for his malady far more eflScient than any to be found in Kant, 
Pichte, Hegel, Cousin, Brown, Dugald Stewart, George Combe, 
Spurzheim, or Gall.
This is contained in an epistle written by 
the holy Apostle Paul to the Church at Colosse, in the third 
chapter, and at the I2th verse, as divines say, where the servant 
1861.] ADDRfiSS OF THE EDITOR.
25 
of the Lord Jesus Christ wrote for our learning and comfort, as 
well as that of the Church in his days, " Put on therefore, as the 
ELECT of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, 
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering; forbearing one 
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel 
against any : even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.
And 
above all these things put on charity.
. .
. And let the peace of 
God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one 
body ; and be ye thankful.'^ 
Charity is like a cloak, for it not only warms the heart of him 
who is clothed therewith, but it hides or makes an excuse or 
allowance for the shortcomings of others.
He who has Christian 
patience and forbearance, and the peace of God above all, will 
^hot be sorely vexed either by the petulance or the neglect of 
reviewers, — ^naughty men !
— who are unable to see and unwilling 
to award a due recompense to merit, as distinguished as it is dis- 
interested.
We bid hin> adieu, for the present, rather in sorrow than in 
anger, because our sincere desire is that every human creature 
may rejoice at this season, when all Christians celebrate the great 
festival of humanity.
We dare not mar intentionally the joy 
wherewith every heart should be full ; rior may we with a good 
conscience interrupt that peace proclaimed from heaven by an- 
gels and confirmed by Him who was the Lord of angels, and the 
Prince of Peace, by harping on our own petty wrongs, and 
clamorously insisting on an immediate redress of our grievances.
We are well aware that the great and awful day, when time shall 
be no more, is surely and rapidly approaching, and this season 
specially reminds us of future events which are as certain as the 
past ; and as we all profess to be followers of Him who was meek 
and lowly, it should not be taken amiss if one who has seen many 
returns of this anniversary, should put his readers in mind of 
the example of Him who said, "Blessed are the peacemakers, 
for they shall be called the children of God.^' 
Non magnis compmere parvum, another volume of our publi- 
cation is closed, aind we are about to close another weightier 
volume in the great book of the history of time.
The past 
year, ungenial as it was, did not bequeath at its close a legacy 
of famine and scarcity, as a punishment for our sins.
For this 
we are thankful.
The sinister predictions of July were happily 
N. S.
VOL.
v. E 
26 ADDRESS OF THE EDITOR.
[January^ 
unfulfilled^ through the goodness of an overruling Providence.
The harvest^ though late, was completed before the beginning of 
that harvest in the Cheviots, recorded by the late genial historian 
of the ^ Botany of the Eastern Borders/ who tells us that the 
earliest hairst that ever was seen, was seen at Benty Dod. This 
inauspicious harvest did not begin till the first dg-y of the new 
year, viz.
on January 1st (year unknown) .
During the past anomsdous season, fears were frequently ex- 
pressed that there would be no harvest at all worth gathering in.
Happily these gloomy forebodings have not been realized ; our 
barns may not be, like our shops, *' filled with all manner of 
stores," but there is as yet no scarcity of the stafi* of life, and 
there is no valid cause for " complaint in our streets." The 
necessitous poor will be provided for by the generosity of the 
charitable, or from the public purse ; and all should remember 
that we are dependent on the Almighty, on Him '' who feedeth 
the young ravens when they cry." 
Chelsea, Jamkary 1, 1861.
Supplemental Notes on Orthotrichum anomalum.
By J.
B. Wood, M.D., P.R.C.S., etc.
Since my previous observations on O.
anomalum were sent to 
the press, I have received from Dr. W.
P. Schimper his more 
mature opinions with regard to the Moss gathered at Aberdour, 
referred by me to O.
anomalum, Bry. Eur., but which he at first 
considered to possess claims sufficient to entitle it to rank as a 
distinct species.
He has, however, subsequently satisfied himself 
of the correctness of the original name under which it was sent, 
and now considers it as a modified form only of the true O.
anmna^ 
lum, Bry. Eur., diflfering only from it in the firmer capsule and 
peristome, which are much more highly coloured than in its 
normal state.
Under these circumstances, I consider it my duty 
to oflPer to Dr. Schimper the best and most ample apology in my 
power, for having thus hastily given to the readers of the ^ Phy- 
tolc^st^ his first and immature impressions respecting it, de- 
rived from a merely cursory examination of the specimens sent to 
him for reference, instead of waiting, as would have been much 
better, until he had more thoroughly completed those arduous 
and extensive researches on which he was still occupied, and 
1861.] ORTHOTRICHUM ANOMALUM.
27 
while so many new species, originating out of this inquiry, were 
crowding upon him and necessarily operating in a great measure 
to prevent him devoting so great an amount of time and atten- ^ 
tion to the especial study of this plant, as under other and more 
favourable circumstances he doubtless would have bestowed upon 
it.
I hope this explanation will be satisfactory alike to my friend 
Dr. Schimper and to your readers.
That erroneous impressions 
are frequently the result of all primarj^ investigations on most 
subjects in connection with Natural History, few I think will 
deny, nciore especially where, as in the present instance, the case 
is surrounded with difficulties of no ordinary character, and which 
require for their unravelment an amount of patience, experience, 
and ability which is not found to be possessed by many.
Even 
my friend Wilson, on first seeing the Aberdour Moss, was much 
more disposed to refer it to O.
strangulatum than to the species 
to which it really belongs ; a circumstance not at all to be won- 
dered at, seeing that at that time we knew but little of the real 
merits and characters of the species, and had no practical ac- 
quaintance with them.
I now proceed to quote some of the 
subsequent observations made by my friend Schimper in his last 
letter.
He says: " I certainly consider your 0.
anomalurriy Hook, 
and Tayl., as perfectly distinct from that so named in Bry. Eur., 
which is unquestionably the one described by Hedwig in his 
' Musci Frondosi,' where the capsule is represented at plate 37, 
t. 2, with sixteen stria, and concerning which it is said in the 
text, ^ Harum (striarum) aliae omnem longitudinem metient, aliae 
ab or& ortae circa medium evanescunt.^ ^^ He then proceeds: 
'^What name must be given to your English Moss?
(the O.
anomalum of H.
and T.).
I w^ould suggest that of O.
neglectum I 
As to your plant from Aberdour, I cannot now satisfactorily dis- 
tinguish or separate it from that of the true O.
anomalum, Bry.
Eur. and of Hedwig, and you will find in the parcel that I have 
had the pleasure of sending to you, numerous specimens which I 
gathered during the last summer in the vicinity of Baden Baden 
and near Strasbourg, which perfectly accord in every respect with 
your own.'^ 
As regards the name to be given to our indigenous species, I 
confess that I hardly think the one suggested by Dr. Schimper a 
suitable or appropriate one ; but on discussing this question with 
my friend Wilson, when on a visit here last week, he very kindly 
offered to make still farther inquiries into the previous history of 
28 ORTHOTRK^UM ANOMALUM.
[Jamiary, 
the species, and I have just received from him the result of his in- 
vestigations, conducted with his usual care and accuracy, and the 
most strict and rigorous adhesion to facts ; and which, to my 
mind, are perfectly satisfactory and conclusive, and will, I hope, 
be so considered by all who really take an interest in the ques- 
tion.
In his letter, he says : " Under the article of O.
saxatile 
(Dill.
Bridel), in BridePs Bryol.
Universa, vol.
i. p.
275 (= O.
anomalum, H.
and T.), described with ^peristomium simplex, den- 
tibus sedecim per paria coadunatis, distinctis tamen, linea me- 
dia longitudinali exaratis, siccitate suberectis, nunquam reflexis/ 
Bridel cites Grimmia striata, var.
rupestris, vel saxatilia of Red- 
wig's Fund.
Muscor.
vol.
ii.
p. 89, t.
7, fig.
35, ^ubi peristomium 
bene sistitur, contra in Muse.
Frond, t.
37, peristomio potius ad 
0. cupulatum pertinente, unde probabilis Hookeri opinio, Hed- 
wigium has duas species utut distinctissimas commiscuisse.
Hook, 
et Tayl.
Muse.
Brit: '' 
The work cited is Hedwig's ^ Fundamenta Historise Naturalis 
Muscorum,' Lipsiae, 1781, 2 vols.
4to, six years before the pub- 
lication of his ' Musci Prondosi,^ where, as I suppose, he has cited 
his Grimmia striata, var.
rupestris (0.
saxatiU) as a synonym.
I did not previously advert to this fact of the Moss of Hook, and 
Tayl.
having been so given, and I am now sensible that Hedwig's 
representation of the Moss first published under that particular 
name of O.
anomalum, must bear that name (O.
anomalum), even 
if it be proved and admitted that the Moss published in ^ Funda- 
menta Historise ' be quite a difierent species, while Hedwig con- 
sidered it identical with that of ' Musci Frondosi,^ 2, t.
37 ; and if 
so, then, notwithstanding BridePs calling Hedwig's Muse.
Frond.
Moss O.
saxatile (Dillen.), that name (and not the one suggested 
by Dr. Schimper, O.
neglectum) should be borne by the Moss of 
Hook, and Tayl.
There are now obvious reasons for this change, 
although H.
and T.
saw "no reason for altering the name (O.
anomalum), as Bridel has done, to that of O.
saxatile.'^ I think 
this should be stated quickly to our good friend Schimper.
There can be no doubt that 0.
saxatile, Brid.
Bry. Universa, 
1. 27.
5, is O.
anomalum of H.
and T., and is, moreover, well 
described in that work ; so that even if Hedwig had not given it 
the name of var.
saxatilis of Grimmia striata, Bridel's name 
ought most assuredly to be retained.
That of 0.
neglectum is 
scarcely apposite, for truly neither Bridel nor British bryologists 
ever neglected this Moss.' 
1861.] ORTHOTRICHUM ANOMALUM.
29 
At the commencement of this inquiry, I certainly never enter- 
tained the least idea that results so important, so interesting and 
unexpected, would have accrued from what was simply intended 
as a means for acquiring further information as to our indigenous 
species, as compared with that of Bry. Eur.
I cannot avoid the con- 
fession that I feel deeply gratified that means so small should have 
been productive in eliciting such an amount of highly interesting 
information to bryologists in all countries.
It would now appear 
from the researches of Dr. Schimper, that we have in Europe, 
belonging to the section of 0.
anomalum, the following species, 
viz.: — 0.
anomalum, Hedw.
and Bry. Eur., O.
sawatile, Dill.
Bridel 
(our indigenous 0.
anomalurriy H.
and T.), 0.
Blyttii, O, Seem- 
merfeltiiy and O.
sclerodon ; all found in Norway.
In addition to 
these, I may mention also as belonging to the same group, and 
recently detected, O.
Breutelii, and O, arcticum, in Greenland ; 
O. Barthii, in Labrador j and 0.
Pylaiseii, in Newfoundland.
Surely there is sufficient stimulus and encouragement here to 
excite all to further and renewed research.
The field for investi- 
gation and continued inquiry is yet ample, and will doubtless still 
afford to all who perseveringly investigate its treasures for them- 
selves, rewards far exceeding their most sanguine expectations.
I hope the knowledge of such facts and results as have already 
been made manifest may stimulate anew all the bryologists of 
this and other countries, and I shall feel most especially obliged 
by any communications from the numerous readers of the ^ Phy- 
tologist * bearing upon this subject.
I may mention here, as one 
result of this inquiry, the discovery for the first time in this 
country of the interesting O.
Sturmii, Hoppe, gathered by my 
much esteemed friend Mr. D.
Moore, of Glasnevin, on mossy 
rocks, at Luggielaw, in the county of Wicklow, which had lain 
hid and undetected in his herbarium since 1857, and sent to me 
with numerous others, supposed varieties of 0.
anomalum, but 
from which it is easily recognized.
I have also lately received 
from Scotland genuine examples of 0.
arwmalum, Br. Eur., be- 
sides those from Aberdour, and I would especially request the 
attention of our Scottish friends to this species, hoping that they 
may be able to communicate through the pages of the ^ Phytolo- 
gist ' further information relating to its distribution and occur- 
rence in that part of the kingdom.
30 HYDRocHARis MORsus-RANiE.
[Januartfy 
HYDEOCHAEIS MOKSUS-RAN^.
Having obtained plants of the Frogbit {Hydrocharis Morsus- 
ranee) from ditches near Christchurch, in Hampshire, and grown 
them in a pan of water for three or four years, an opportunity 
has offered of observing the manner in which this aquatic lives 
unharmed by the winter frosts, and disperses itself through the 
waters in which it grows.
The peculiarities noticed do not seem 
to have been mentioned in any of the leading botanical works, 
and are perhaps of suflScient interest to warrant their admission 
into the pages of the ' Phytologist^ for general information.
Hydrocharis Morstts-rame is described in all the Floras as 
being perennial; but it decays entirely away every autumn in 
October or November, and disappears altogether from the sur- 
face of the water which it has hitherto nearly covered with its 
leaves.
In what sense, then, is it perennial?
— and how is its 
permanent existence secured otherwise than by seed?
It is 
observed to be in the following manner : — The Frogbit sends off 
in different directions floating runners, ending in plants, which 
again send off others, and in this way it occupies and covers the 
surface of the waters in which it is found.
But whence does 
the original plant proceed which produces all these proliferous 
runners, for during the winter months there is not a trace of one 
left?
It is seen to take its rise from a little bud or bulb; for 
besides the runners bearing plants putting forth leaves and 
flowers, each plant, towards the end of summer, sends off one or 
more runners which end in a scaly bud, and at the time of the 
decay of all the rest of the plant in the autumn months, these 
scaly buds retain their vigour and vitality, become detached from 
the perishing runners, and sink to the bottom of the water, where 
they pass the winter upon the mud.
Early in May the little 
scaly buds, which have lain tranquilly below during the previous 
months, yielding to the influences of the season, and to the mys- 
terious periodicity of their nature, rise once more to the surface, 
expand, put forth their leaves and proceed to run their summer 
course of existence as before.
The history of the Frogbit would appear then to present 
these points, which are remarkable.
First, it offers an instance 
of a water-plant, the perennial existence of which is secured by 
means of scaly buds, produced at the end of runners, and sepa- 
rating from the parent plant, — in other words, by means of 
1861.] HYDaOCHARIS MORSUS-RANiB.
31 
subaqueous bulbs.
For what is a bulb?
To quote Balfour's 
' Class-book of Botany/ page 67, " It is a bud produced under- 
ground, the centre corresponding to the axis, which is clothed 
with scales, and which sends flowering stems upwards and roots 
downwards." Bulbs, like other buds, are formed upon or at the 
end of stems.
In general, these stems are reduced to a mere 
disk, but there are very many cases in which bulbs are formed 
at the end of long runners, an example of which is to be found 
in the wild tulip {Tulipa sylvestris), the bulbs of which are de- 
scribed in the ' English Flora' of Sir J.
E. Smith, as observed by 
Mr. Ker, to be " formed at the extremity of lateral shoots of 
a considerable length.'' Sir W.
J, Hooker also, in his ' British 
Flora,' notices "that.
the wild Tulip increases by throwing out 
a long stout fibre from its root, at the extremity of which a bulb 
appears." Anisanthus (Gladiolus) Cunonia, and several species 
of Oralis from the Cape, may also be cited as instances in point.
Here, then, in the Frogbit, we have a true bulb, by means of 
which it increases and continues permanently to live, but it is 
subaqueous, — a form of bulb not hitherto, it might seem, clearly 
recognized.
Secondly, the dispersal of the Frogbit is ensured 
by means of the bulbs produced at the end of runners of some 
length, and then detached in the autumn from the parent stem, 
and moving freely with the gentle movements of the water in 
which they lie, a fact worth noting.
Thirdly, it is seldom that 
the eye witnesses so distinctly as in the case of the Frogbit the 
marvellous arrest of the decay affecting the whole of the rest of 
the plant at the precise point at which it reaches the bulbs at the 
extremity of the stems.
There the vital force might be supposed 
to become enfeebled and to fail, but, on the contrary, it is there 
found to be stored up in all its wondrous energy, and there it 
resists successfully the destruction which dissolves all else except 
the little bulbous reservoirs in which it lies contained.
Although 
this wonder is repeated continually in other plants, very strikingly 
in such as are of only annual duration, the seeds of which alone 
survive the general decay, yet it is most plainly to be seen in this 
analogous preservation of the Frogbit's bulbs.
In the last place, 
the return of the bulb of the Frogbit to the surface of the water 
at the appointed time, in exact obedience to the law of its nature, 
brings strongly into notice another of the surprising facts which 
are scarcely adequately to be explained in the present state of 
human knowledge.
1 
32 BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[January.
' BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Notice to Contkibutobs.
The Editor regrets that there have been long in his possession several 
communications which he could not publish for want of room.
He parti- 
cularly refers to articles from Mr. Sim, Mr. A.
G. More, Mr. Lloyd, Mr.
Beisly, Mr. Jerdon; also from three other correspondents whose names 
he is not at liberty to publish.
There are also waiting for insertion 
several extracts from the letters of correspondents whose missives, he ac- 
knowledges, bear a not very recent date.
He entreats all these kind 
friends to have patience with him, and he will try and do his best to please 
them all.
Arenabia baleabica.
(Extract from a Letter.} 
All I know about Arenaria halearica may be simply stated in a few 
words.
A young lad, gardener at Moncrieffe House, brought, about the 
beginning of June, 1859, a portion of a little plant which he said grew on 
the north waU of their fruit-house, about two feet from the ground : there 
was only one patch of it, about a foot in diameter.
I sent a bit of it to 
you, as I could not find any of our descriptions of the British Arenarug 
to agree with it.
I thought it came nearest A, ciliata.
At last I looked in 
my Botanical dictionary, and found therein described, shortly and in- 
sufficiently, a plant under the name of A.
halearica, which I thought might 
be the plant in question.
I sent a bit of it to Mr. C.
C. Babington, Cam- 
bridge, who at once replied, confirming my opinion.
On the 16th or 17th 
of June last year, I went myself to Moncrieffe, and on the tool or fruit 
house saw the A: halearica and collected some of it myself I never 
intended to say whether this plant be indigenous to Scotland or not, I 
only recorded a fact, waiving all conjectures relative to the how or the 
when of its appearance there.
There it was, and probably there it will 
continue to grow as long as the tool-house whereon it has settled itself 
stands.
Nature pleases herself in the selection of suitable localities for her 
offspring.
Botanical geographers would fain confine her within bounds, 
but their laws, not hers, are like the spiders' webs which catch the weaker 
denizens of the insect world and let the stronger break through.
Some plants wiU submit to the laws made and provided for the restraint 
of their wandering propensities, but not all.
The plant in question, Are- 
naria halearica, may be one of these, one of the vagrants of Flora's do- 
miiuon ; unhappily she is not the only one that discomforts phytogeo- 
graphers.
John Sim.
Communications have heen received from 
Dr. Windsor; J.
B. Wood, M.D., F.R.C.S.; Joseph Croucher ; Edwin 
Green ; R.
Heward ; James Hussey ; Harriet Beisly ; J.
G. Baker ; John 
Sim; W.
Wilson ; T.
W. Gissing; W.
P. W.
Richardson.
[February, 1861.] 33 
PLANTS OF DOVEE, &c.
List of Plants collected about Dover, Walmer, Folkestone, and 
Sandgate, from the middle of May to the beginning of July, of 
the past year, 1860.
By H.
C. 
FILICES.
Only the following common species were observed : — Lastrea 
F^lix-mas, Polystichum aculeatum.
Athyrium Filix-fosmina.
On banks near St. Badigund's.
Asplenium Ruta-muraria, On a wall at the foot of the Castle 
hill, Dover ; also on the wall leading to the entrance of Walmer 
Castle.
Scolopendrium officinale.
Common on banks, but only the 
normal form.
— I did not meet with any of the varieties so fre- 
quent at Torquay.
Pteris aquilina.
Not common, and very stunted.
GRAMINE^.
Phalaris arundinacea, Anthoxanthum odoratum, Phleum pra- 
tense, Arrhenatherum avenaceum.
Melica uniflora : Combe Wood.
Milium effu»am : the same 
locality.
Kceleria cristata, Pers.
Shakspeare^s Cliff.
Avenapr(BCow {Aira, L.).
Downs near St. Badigund^s.
Poa annua, P.
nemoralis, P.
pratensis, 
Catabrosa aquatica.
Ditch near Charlton church, with Gly- 
ceria aquatica and G.
Jluitans.
Sclerochloa maritima, Lind.
(?) Very abundant on the cliffs 
within reach of the sea spray.
— The locality given in the British 
Floras is ^^ salt-marshes.'' 
Sclerochloa rigida, Link.
Common, especially on the beach at 
Walmer.
Briza media, Cynosurus cristatus, Dactylis glomerata, Pestuca 
pratefisis.
Bromus asper.
Grounds of Walmer Castle.
Bromtis sterilis, B.
mollis, Lolium perenne, Hordeum muri- 
num.
I devoted little time to the study of the Grasses, and none to 
that of the Carices and other Cyperaceae, etc.
N. S.
VOL.
V. .
F 
34 PLANTS OP DOVER, WALMER, [Februavyy 
ALISMACEJE.
Alwna Plantago.
LILIACE^.
Agraphis nutans.
Abundant in all the copses.
— We also found 
a variety with pure white flowers, a more delicate plant than the 
common Bluebell.
Allium ursinum.
Plantation at Kersney Abbey.
— ^This I found 
in May 1849, but was unable to ascertain if it still grew there, 
as the grounds are now closed to visitors.
ASPARAGACE^.
Convallaria maialis.
Westwood, about sixteen miles from 
Dover.
— For this locality I cannot vouch, not having been able 
to get so far.
A basketful of the plants was brought to us for 
sale by a decent old peasant woman, who, in answer to our in- 
quiry as to where she had obtained them, named Westwood, as- 
suring us that they grew there in abundance.
TRILLIACE^.
Paris quadrifolia.
Combe Wood and plantations at Walder- 
share.
Often with^ve, and occasionally with six leaves.
ORCHIDACE^.
Orchis ustulata.
East Cliff: near the Cornhill C.
G. station 
(June).
Orchis fusca.
Combe Wood (June 8th).
Orchis Morio.
Meadows.
Orchis (Anacamptis, Rich.) pyramidalis.
On chalk downs.
Gymnadenia conopsea, Rich.
Also on sunny chalk downs, with 
the last-named.
Habenaria chlorantha.
Copse on the road to St. Radigund^s.
Ophrys musdfera (MyodesJ.
Small plaintations to the right 
of Waldershare church.
Ophrys apifera.
Shakspeare's Cliffy ( Jiily) • 
Ophrys aranifera.
Exceedingly plentiful on Shakspeare's 
Clifl^, and still more so on the waste ground near the railroad at 
the bottom of the steps cut in the side of the cliff*, beyond the 
tunnel.
Spiranthes autumnalis, I gathered on the downs leading to 
St. Radigund's, Sept.
3, 1849.
1861.] FOLKESTONE^ AND SANDGATE.
35 
Listera ovata.
Common in all the Copses, 
CephalafUhera grandiflora.
Plantation to the left of the road 
in going to Waldershare, and woods of Kersney Abbey, at the 
root of the Fir-trees.
IRIDACE^.
Iris foetidissima.
On banks along the Folkestone road, and 
iij Kersney Wood, etc.
(not in bloom).
ELiEAGNACEiE.
Hippophae rhamnoides.
Waste ground at the foot of Shak- 
speare's Cliff, and on ascent to Abbott's Cliff.
— In both places I 
only found plants with male flowers.
EUPHORBIACEiE.
Euphorbia helioscopia.
Common in waste ground.
Euphorbia Peplus, Common.
Euphorbia amyffdaloides.
Abundant in woods and copses.
Mercurialis perennis.
Not uncommon,* 
Mercurialis annua, A troublesome weed in cultivated ground.
URTICACEiE.
Parietaria officinalis.
On old wglls, and on the East Cliff, 
growing luxuriantly in the chalk.
POLYGONACE^.
Of the following genera.
Polygonum, Rumex, Chenopodivm, 
there were many representatives, but not sufficiently in flower to 
be determined, with the exception of — 
Chenopodium Bonus-Henricus, which grey about the Priory, 
Poulton, and St. Radigund's farms.
Beta maritima.
Abundant along the shore and On the cliffs 
east and west of Dover.
Atriplex.
Several species {varieties according to Sentham), 
but these also, not being in flower, could not be determined.* 
Obione fHalimusJ portulacoides, Wall.
I^ittle saltmarsh be- 
tween Shakspeare's and Abbott's Cliffs.
Salicomia herbacea.
In the same place, not in bloom.
36 PLANTS OF DOVER^ WALMER^ [FebrvMry, 
CALLITRICHACEA.
Callitriche vema.
Var. ff of the Illustrated Handb.
B. P.
In 
the Dour and other streams.
PLANTA6INACEA.
Plantaffo media, P.
major, P.
lanceolata, and P.
Coronopua, all 
very abundant.
I looked in vain for P.
maritima, which is so 
common on the south Devon coast.
PLUMBAGINACE-B.
Armeria maritima grows in large patches on the sandy cliff 
near Sandgate.
Not observed on the chalk.
Statice spathulata.
On the cliffs on both sides of Dover.
— 
Round the margin of the saltmarsh at the foot of Abbott's Cliff, 
already mentioned, a Statice formed quite a turf, l)ut whether 
spathulata or lAmonium I was not able to determine, as it was 
only in bud.
According to Bentham, one is only a variety of the 
other.
PRIMULACE^.
Primula veris and P.
imlgaris.
Both more abundant and lux- 
uriant than I have ever seen them elsewhere.
The latter especially 
decked every hedgebank and copse with innumerable tufts of its 
pale yellow stars, occasioning a constantly recurring delight to 
me, for it does not figure ill the Belgian Flora, and it was many 
years since I had seen it blooming '^ k Tetat sauvage.'* 
Primula elatior ?
was brought to us from the neighbourhood 
of Mount Ararat (near Dover), where I was told it was common.
This is the plant known locally as the "Cowslip," while P.
veria 
bears the euphonic appellation of " Horse-buckles." 
Lysimachia nemorum.
In copses.
— The only on§ of its genus 
met with.
« 
Anagallis arvensis.
Cornfields and waste ground.
VERBENACE^.
Verbena officinalis.
Common, but not in flower.
LABIATJE.
Mentha aquatica.
Marshy ground beyond Biver, and in the 
Dour.
1861.] FOLKESTONE^ AND SANDGATE.
37 
Salvia verbenaca.
On the right bank of the road leading from 
the Arch Cliff Fort to Shakspeare's Cliff.
— This is the only loca- 
lity where we met with it.
Origanum vulgare.
Common everywhere on the chalk.
— Just 
coming into flower when I left.
Thymus Serpyllum.
Common.
Calamintha Acinos, Gaud.
(Thymus, L.).
About Guston.and 
Lrangdon^ etc.
Glechoma hederacea..
Under hedges and banks^ etc.
Lamium Galeobdolon.
Copses^ common.
Galeopsis Tetrahit, Copse to the right of the Folkestone road.
Stachys Betonica.
Abundant also in copses and borders of 
woods.
Ballota foetida.
Hedges and roadsides ; common.
— Not in 
flower.
Ajuga reptans.
Copses and banks.
— The finest specimens I 
ever saw ; some had spikes of flowers exceeding a foot in length.
SCROPHULARIACE^.
Veronica hederafolia.
Exceedingly common ; trailing along all 
the banks^ and overspreading the cornfields.
Veronica agrestis, .Not so abundant.
Veronica Buxbaumii, Also infesting the cultivated fields.
— One 
of the commonest weeds on the road from River to St. Badigund^s.
Veronica arvensis.
Heights at the back of the Castle^ and left 
of the road to Shakspeare^s Cliff.
Veronica montana.
Border of Combe Wood, on a bank near 
St. Badigund^s Abbey ; * also near Mount Ararat, about half a 
mile beyond St. Badigund^s, on a shady bank, with Ferns.
Veronica Anagallis.
Marsh beyond Biver, on the road to 
Alkham.
Veronica Beccabunga.
In the Dour, at the back of Charlton.
Scrophularia aquatica.
In the marsh near Biver.
Linaria Cymbalaria, On the Castle wall, Walmer ; also on a 
wall at Suckland.
Pedicularis sylvatica.
In a field near St. Badigund^s Abbey.
Rhinanthus Crista-gallL Meadows.
Bartsia Odontitis.
Cornfields.
Euphrasia officinalis.
Chalk downs.
38 PLANTS or DOVER^ WALMER^ [Febmory, 
OROBANCHACEiB.
Orobanche caryophyllacea.
I suppose this species is peculiar 
to Kent^ as that county is named as its habitat in all our Floras.
It is certainly very abundant, almost covering the piece of waste 
ground between the Shakspeare^s and Abbott^s Cliff tunnels, 
and extending up the side of the latter nearly to the top.
It was 
so matted together with Lottis comiculatus and Galium Mollugo, 
that I had some trouble to find out on which it was parasitic.
After several ineffectual attempts with the trowel, I at length 
succeeded in digging out one with the Galium attached to it, 
thus leaving no doubt of its identity.
It was new to me.
VERBASCACE^.
Verbascum Thapsus.
On the cliffs at Sandgate, and about 
Dover, not in bloom (July).
SOLANE^.
Solanum Dulcamara.
Common in hedges round Dover, but es- 
pecially luxuriant on the shingly beach at Walmer, where it grew 
in patches, the branches trailing on the ground and so intertwined 
as quite to form a matting.
The flowers too were in denser heads, 
and of a darker purple, than I had ever observed them when 
growing in hedges.
BORAOINACE^.
Borago officinalis.
A variety with pure white flowers (very 
pretty) on the cliff at Folkestone, near one of the flights of steps 
leading up from the Sandgate road to Albion Villas.
Lycopsis arvensis.
Waste ground close to the Sandgate 
turnpike.
Symphytum officinale.
A variety with blue flowers, similar to 
those of the Pvlmonaria of our gardens.
It was growing among 
the grass at the foot of the enclosed part of the cliff, between 
Folkestone and Sandgate.
Thinking we had stumbled on a grand 
prize, my youthful companion climbed over the invisible fence, at 
the risk of being prosecuted for trespass, to secure it.
We were 
much disappointed to find on examination that, excepting in 
brilliancy of colour, it did not in any way differ from the com- 
mon Comfrey.
1861.] FOLKESTONE, AND SAND6ATE.
39 
Myosotis palustris.
In all the streams.
Myosotis intermedia {arvensis, Hoff.).
Fields and waste places.
Myosotis collina, Folkestone cliffs (May), 
Lithospermum arvense.
Fields, 
Lithospermum officinale.
On the left bank of the road from 
Dover to Deal, about halfway between the two places.
Echium vulgare.
Extremely abundant on the chalk cliffs.
CONVOLVULACE^.
Convolvulus Sepium.
Common in the hedges, not in bloom 
(July 6th).
Convolvulus Soldanella.
In the sand, close to the road, at the 
foot of the Folkestone cliffs.
OENTIANACEiB.
Erythraa Centaurium, On the downs on both sides of Dover, 
just coming into flower (July 6th).
Gentiana Amarella.
Downs near St. Radigund's, etc.
(Sept.
1849).
Chlora perfoliata.
Abundant in the chalk at Dover and Wal- 
mer.
Not observed at Folkestone, where the soil is sandy.
CAMPANULACE^.
Campanula TVachelium.
Combe Wood.
— This and C.
rotundi- 
folia were the only representatives of this family met with.
COMPOSITE AND DIFSACEiB.
Carlina .vulgaris.
Cliffi east and west of Dover (not in flower 
July 6).
Carduus nutans.
Common on the chalk.
— On a part of Shak- 
speare's Cliff which has slipped several yards below the level, we 
noticed the variety with white flowers, also recorded among the 
Yarmouth plants ('Phytologist ' for February, 1860).
Carduus acanthoides.
Meadows at the back of Buckland.
Carduus tenuiflorus.
Abundant about Dover and Folkestone.
Carduus palustris.
Marshy ground near River.
Carduus acaulis.
Not unfrequent ; just coming into flower 
(July 6).
^Centaurea ScaUosa, Common and luxuriant.
— Centaurea 
nigra, the more usual species, was not met with, or was over- 
looked, probably from not being in bloom.
40 PLANTS OF DOVEB^ WALMER^ [February, 
Anthemis arvensis.
Clover-fields on St. Margaret's road, and 
border of field near Combe Wood.
Anthemis Cotula, Very common.
Pyrethrum maritimum.
Abundant on the East Cliffy and on 
the beach between Dover and Folkestone, 
Artemisia maritima (?).
I frequently met with a plant of this 
family, not in bloom, which differed from the common Mugwort 
in the shape and colour of its leaves, which were not white and 
iomentose at the back.
I cannot be sure I have named it cor- 
rectly, as I was not able to determine it by flowers or fruit.
Senecio aquaticus.
Marsh, near River.
Eupatorium cannabinum.
Side of the cliff leading down to the 
piece of waste ground between the two tunnels already men- 
tioned ; not in flower.
Hypochoeris radicata.
Folkestone and Walmer, etc.
Thrinda hirta.
Everywhere.
Tragopogon pratensis.
Not unfrequent on the chalk.
Lactuca [Prenanthes, Sm.) muralis.
Walls of St. Badigund's 
Abbey.
Crepis foetida.
Some very diminutive specimens by the side 
of the footpath along the beach at Walmer, in company with C.
taraxacifolia, but easily distinguished by its unopened, nodding 
flower-buds, whilst the latter was already in seed (June 28th).
Crepis taraamcifolia.
Common on banks and borders of fields, 
and so much taller and stouter than I am accustomed to see it on 
the banks of the Meuse, that careful examination alone convinced 
me they were one and the same species.
Dipsacus sylvestris.
On banks and in copses, where it grows 
to an immense height.
— Not in bloom.
Scabiosa Columbaria^ abundant ; and Knautia arvensis, round 
Dover.
VALERIANACEiB.
Centranthus ruber grew on a bank at Walmer, but seeing 
it in the garden, as well as on the walls of the Castle, I cannot 
consider it otherwise than an escape from cultivation, though it 
is said to grow wild in Kent.
BUBIACE^.
Asperula Cynanchica.
Edge of Shakspeare's Cliff, and else- 
where on the chalk.
1861.] FOLKESTONE^ AND 8AND0ATE.
41 
Rubia pereffrina.
Among stones lying between the waste 
ground already alluded to and the beach^ several patches of it, 
just coming into bloom.
CAPRIFOLIACEiE.
Viburnum Lantana, Hedges and copses.
Sambucus Ebulus.
In the interior (at the back of the farms) 
of St. Radigund's Abbey.
Lanicera Periclymenum.
Common.
ARALIACEiB.
Adowa Moschatellina, Frequent.
UMBELLIFERiB.
Sanicula europaa.
Plentiful in all the copses.
Pimpinella magna.
Guston and West Langdon.
PimpineUa Saxifraga.
East Cliff.
Burmm flexvjomm^ Combe Wood.
Fcmiculum officinale.
One tuft on the St. Margaret's road ; in 
greater quantity on the Folkestone cliffs, not in bloom, but un- 
mistakable fix>m its aromatic odour.
Critkmum maritimum, Dover cliffs, forming in places little 
plantations.
Angelica sylvestris.
Coombe Wood, and other shady places.
Pastinaca sativa.
Borders of fields.
Daucus Carota.
Most luxuriant on the East Cliff.
I did not 
observe D.
maritimus, which I had found on the rocks at Tor-* 
quay.
Torilis nodosa.
On a bank near the turnpike between Folke- 
stone and Sandgate ; also to the right of the road fix>m the Arch 
Cliff Fort to Shakspeare's Cliff.
Petroselinum aegetum.
Cornfields on the St. Margaret's road.
— ^We only found two plants, but, had time permitted, further 
search in the same direction would probably have led to the 
discovery of more.
Smymium Olusairum.
One of the commonest weeds on the 
chalk round Dover.
— It was coming into flower by the second 
week in May, and the last was an unusually backward spring, so 
I should think June, in ordinary years, would be late for it.
Of the Rose family I only found the common genera and spe- 
N. S.
VOL.
V. o 
42 PLANTS, 07 DOYEB^ WALMER^ [February, 
cies that grow everywhere, and it was too early in flie season for 
me to prick my fingers with the Srambles.
CRASSULACEiB.
Sedum acre.
Exceedingly abundant on the beach at Walmer, 
and very rich in colour.
LEGUMINIFEILfi.
Sarothamnus scoparius.
Ascent to Abbott's CliflF.
Genista tinctoria.
Shakspeare's Cliff.
Ulea?
europaus.
Chalk downs.
Ononis arvensis.
Borders of fields, etc.
Anthyllis Vulneraria.
Abundant everywhere on chalk.
Lottis comiculatus, var.
7. fAUosus.
Heights near the Bar- 
racks: 1849.
Medicago maculata.
Cultivated as a fodder plant on the 
cliffs at Folkestone, where it grows luxuriantly, but certainly wild 
by roadsides, and in waste ground at Dover and Deal.
Medicago dentictUata.
Folkestone cliffs.
TVifolium scabrum.
Walmer, very starved specimens, the plot 
of ground where they grew having been eaten down by cattle.
Vicia bithynica.
Folkestone cliffs.
May and June.
. Lathyrus macrorrhizus.
Combe Wood.
Lathyrus maritimus.
Beach at Walmer, almost within reach 
of the sea-spray.
— There were many patches of this, the most 
beautiful of our wild Peas, and it was in full bloom (June 28th) 
when we fell in with it.
Those who have had similar experiences^ 
will readily understand the feeling of pleasure with which I con- 
templated this new acquisition to my collection.
Lathyrus Nissolia.
Abundant on the Cliff at Folkestone, 
growing with V.
bithynica, and L.
Aphaca, the three forming 
such a lovely nosegay as to call forth an exclamation of surprise 
and delight.
The Grass-Pea also grew plentifuUy at Sandgate, 
and was peculiarly brilliant in colour.
Hippocrepis comosa.
Frequent about; Dover.
Onobrychis sativa.
Shakspeare's Cliff and elsewhere, much 
cultivated.
CBUCIFERiE.
Cheiranthv^ Cheiri.
Covering the East Cliff, which was quite 
1861.] FOLKESTONE, AND SANDGATE.
43 
gay with it, alls through the month of May ; also on the old walls 
of the Priory Farm.
Barbarea vulgaris.
Copse and fields near Waldershare church.
— By no means so stout and coarse, nor of such dark green leaves, 
as my Meuse specimens, owing probably to difference of soil and* 
situation.
Our Belgian plant is abundant on the dry, sunny 
limestone rocks along the valley of the Meuse.
Barbarea precox.
In a field at the back of Charlton, and on 
the Folkestone cliffs.
Arabia hirsuta.
Borders of cornfields, and on the East Cliff.
Brassica okracea.
Cliffs, East and West.
BrasHca campestris.
Fallow fields.
Sinapis nigra.
Folkestone cliffs, where it quite replaced the 
Charlock.
— We searched for it in vain on the chalk, round 
Dover.
Diplotaxis tenuifolia, D.
muralis.
Both firequent on the East 
and West Cliffs.
Lepidium Draba.
On the Cliff at Folkestone, and on the left 
bank of the road, near the turnpike.
Senebiera Coronopus.
Boadsides, and along the Parade.
Crambe maritima.
On the beach at Walmer.
— ^There was a 
little wooden hut near, with an enclosure in which there were 
some plants of the Kale.
But whether this sort of garden had 
been made to secure the Kale, or whether those on the beach 
were an escape fi*om it, I cannot say.
Raphantis Raphanistrum.
Cornfields on the Folkestone road.
PAFAVERACEiB.
Papaver somniferum.
I give this on the authority of the young 
relative who accompanied me in all my excursions, and who wrote 
me that she had discovered it, after 1 left, in walking from Dover 
to Folkestone, by the beach.
I am unable to give the exact 
spot,* 
GUmcium luteum.
All along the coast, from Folkestone to 
Walmer, where it is particularly abundant, growing quite to the 
water's edge.
* The locality, or rather, the unusual station for this plant, is beyond Lydden 
3pout, on the way from the houses on the cliff.
The place is generally known by 
the name of East Wear J^ay.
We particularly noticed this as a good lesson in 
botanical geography.
44 FLINTS OF DovsB, ETC.
[February, 
Chelidonium majus.
In all the villages around Dover^ as well 
as near the Water- works on the Castle Hill.
RES£DACBJE.
* Reseda Luieola, R.
lutea.
Frequent.
CELAST&ACEA.
Euonymus europaut.
Hedges and copses.
« 
POLTOAJLACEiB.
Polygala vulgaris.
Plentiful on the banks along thie St. Mar- 
garets road.
I also founds in a field near St. Badigund^s^ a variety 
which doseljr resembles P.
depressa, Wender^ if nqt identical 
with it.
Of the Mallows and Geraniums, I met with only the common 
kinds, excepting a variety of Erodium dcutarium, with white 
flowers, with a dark spot at the base of the petals, which we found 
on the cliff just at the entrance of Sandgate.
LINACEJB.
lAnum anffustifolium.
Abundant on the bank to the right of 
the road from Walmer Castle to St. Margaret's.
C ABYOPH YLLACEiB .
Silene nutans, var.
fi.
Smith.
Grows in profusion on the East 
and Shakspeare's Cliffs, the air being scented by the fragrance 
of its starry white flowers towards evening when they expand.
— 
It differs from our Belgian S.
nutans by its larger size and greater 
hairiness.
' Silene inflata.
A common weed in cornfields.
Lychnis diuma.
Copses and hedge-banks.
We found the 
variety with pale flesh-coloured flowers in a copse at the Walder- 
ha .
Lychnis vespertina.
Tolerably abundant in cornfields and on 
banks.
Lepiffonum marinum.
On the cliffs.
Arenaria trinervia.
Shady banks.
Cer ostium arvense.
Heights near the Castle.
1861.] ' IS0ETE6 HTSTBIX.
45 
FRANKENIACEJB.
Frankenia kevis.
Little saltmarsh at the foot of Abbott^s 
CUff.
RANUNCULACEJS.
Clematis Vitalba.
In all the hedges.
Anemone nemorosa, Flentifol in the copses.
Ranun^mlua circinatus {Batrachium, Reich.).
In the Dour^ at 
the back of Bnckland.
^ 
The Flora of Dover does not appear rich in plants of this family.
I noticed none but the most common species.
Omitted in their proper places, 
Pyrethrum Parthenium.
On the walls of Kersney Abbey, near 
the gateway.
Agrimonia Eupatoria.
Near Foulton Farm, and ascent of 
Abbott's Cliflr.
ISOETES HYSTEIX.
Recent discovery of Isoetes Hystrix, by George Wolsey, 
Guernsey ; in a Letter to the Editor.
This little plant I found in damp spots on L' Ancrisse Common, 
in this island, in June 1860.
The following description of the species and its localities is 
oo^lpiled from Qrenier et Qodron, ' Flore de France,' and from 
Lloyd's ' Flore de POuest de la France.' 
Isoetes hystriv, Durieu in litt., Bory, Compt.
rend.
Acad.
Sc.
vol.
xviii., January, 1844, etc.
Root tapering, black, furrowed, surrounded by white, shining, 
2-3-toothed scales.
Lloyd says three-toothed, 6r.
and God. two- 
toothed, sometimes with an intermediate short tooth.
Xieavds 
linear, pointed, scarcely frurrowed, slightly convex on the outer 
side with prominent nervation, contiguous at the base, and form-; 
ing a bulb, spreading above, one or two inches long.
Macro- 
sporanges finely reticulate, microsporanges truncate-aculeate.
Grenier and Godron state that it grows in dry mountainous 
or hilly pastures in the Isle of Corsica, and never in inundated 
places; abounds in moist pastures, and on the seashore, Bonifacio, 
^tc.
46 ARENARiA BALBABiCA.
[February, 
Lloyd gives a full and particular account of the habits of this 
interesting novelty, viz.
: " This species grows in patches {pieds 
isoles)y not forming a turf or sward^ on dry sandy flats, and seated 
on small tumps or little hillocks like mole-hills.
The disposition 
of its leaves, which spread out and form a circle, serves to distin- 
guish it from the plants with which it is associated, for example, 
from Romulea ColumruB (Trichonema Columns), and Scilla au- 
tumnalis, which frequently are found in the places where this 
plant grows/^ • This intelligent author further adds : " Although 
the ordinary stations or habitats for this species be exposed grassy 
flat places, I have often seen it growing on the sands at the base 
of dunes (small hills or sandy banks near the sea), where the 
plant is larger [plus robuste).
In Belle Isle I have seen it on 
several steep hills of no great height, exposed to the south, and 
surrounded with Romulea {Trichonema) and Ophiofflossum km- 
tanicum.
It grows on the south-western coast of France, fix)m 
the Loire to Cape Pinisterre.
It is perennial, and is in fructifi- 
cation from March to May.
It will probably hereafter be detected' in other parts of the 
Channel Islands, and we hope that the above brief, simple de- 
scription of the plant and of its habits and localities will assist 
in its identification those who may be so fortunate as to find this 
interesting novelty.
ABENARIA BALEARICA.
*' Semper ego auditor tantum, nunquamne reponam ?" 
'* Strange!
all this difference should be 
'Twixt tweedle-dum and tweedle-dee." 
Ill the Annual Address, printed in our first monthly issue for 
this current year, 1861, there is some allusion to the subject of 
the present article, which was then under consideration ; and an 
engagement was then made, that the matter should be frdly dis- 
cussed on the earliest fitting occasion.
This promise is now to 
be redeemed by the present performance.
In this case the pen is drawn, not to attack, but to defend; 
and it will not be used for inflicting castigation, but for main- 
taining the truth.
It is a compulsive, and neither a voluntary 
1861.] ARENARIA BALEARICA.
, 47 
nor an agreeable task which is now to be AilfiUed. It is seldom 
that the ' Phytologist* assumes the functions of a censor morum, 
and these duties, when undertaken, are discharged in the spirit 
of meekness, kindness, and charity, with a vivid consciousness of 
human infirmity, and with the sincere desire of dealing honestly 
and candidly, neither suppressing any important fact, nor setting 
" down aught in malice." ^ 
The earnest desire of the writer is to be a healer of breaches, 
a peacemaker; to write in the conciliatory mood^ not to exas- 
perate nor alienate, but to reconcile.
If justice demands firm- 
ness in the refutation of unjust accusations, moderation requires 
gentleness in the style or diction.
Suaviter in modo, foriiter in 
re, will be the rule in the following composition.
I will not incur the jealousy and hatred of mankind by assump- 
tions of superiority, nor by the affectation of philosophico-phreno- 
logical discernment, nor by any superciliousness of language, nor 
by dictatorial dogmatic assertions.
These are the weak instru- 
ments of minor mediocrities, who mimic and parody the affecta- 
tions of genius, and, by their feeble efforts to obtain notoriety, 
render themselves only objects of ridicule and commiseration to 
the rest of mankindi While they are laughed at for their egre- 
gious self-conceit, and the airs of importance which they assume, 
they are, by the more feeling and sensible portion of humanity, 
pitied for their weakness, for the defects of their education, the 
want of moral training and discipline, and for the faithlessness 
of their friends, who wanted the courage and the love to tell them 
of their infirmities and to admonish them to beware of the seduc- 
tive allurements of self-glorification.
I further beg to intimate to those readers of the ^ Phytologist' 
who have not seen the extract subjoined, that this is one of the 
ttain cases supplied to Professor De Candolle, to convince him 
" that our eminent botanists are not sound reasoners." "VJTith 
the other case the present deponent has no concern ; he has only 
to justify Mr. Sim, the correspondent who transmitted the fact, 
and the Editor who gave it publicity.
Another preliminary remark may be made on the author's 
reference to his '^own readers" needing no apology for his 
" troubling them with this second warning instance." His rea- 
ders might possibly save him the trouble of apologizing, but the 
readers of the ' Pbytologist^ might ask why he did not publish 
48 ABRNABiA BALSAEiCA.
[February, 
his objection to the report of the discovery^ in the same paper in 
which the original account first appeared.
This would have 
been both a courteous, customary, and satisfactory mode of pro* 
cedure.
If his object was merely the detection of error and the 
publication of truth, why was not the 'Phytologist^ used as the 
medium for contradicting the " pseudo-discovery ,'' as he calls it T 
The writer of this afticle will not attempt to surmise the author's 
motives for hi^ unusual and uncourteous proceeding; but he 
cannot help inferring that truth was not the sole object, and in 
this inference he believes that all those who are best acquainted 
with both the implicated parties will coincide with him.
It is well known to all our readers that Mr. Watson, or any- 
body else, might have challenged the statement about the Are^ 
naria; and, that if a contradiction or a counter-statement had 
been sent to the ' Phytologist,' that contradiction would have 
been made public.
But th6 author of the article knew that 
there was a sting in its taU, which would' have been extracted; 
the poison would have been squeezed out of the serpent's fangs ; 
therefore another medium was selected.
We make no complaint 
about this ; for the author of the ^ Cybele ' is the very last man 
in England whose aid is desirable in connection with the ' Phy- 
tologist.' Bather, he is the only botanist known whose room 
is better than his company.
But for all this, he is welcome to 
state a fact or correct an error in our pages.
He may say in 
justification that he knew the Editor of the said periodical would 
not give publicity to his article begause it was condemnatory of 
his editorial vigilance ; but this is a mere pretence, for the Editor 
has entered articles that were far from being complimentary 
to himself.
But it is now time to let Mr. W.
tell his own story, 
in his own elegant diction ; let the tail go with the hide, the bee's 
bottom, sting and all; the readers of this journal shall havQ 
served up for their delectation an efiiision which is just about as 
remarkable for its o&nsive personality as it is for the hobbling 
style of its composition.
" Abenabia baleabica not Native in Scotland, — So much mischief 
may be done by would-be-thought discoverers sending inaccurate reports to 
editors, who are themselves not duly prepared by the geographioo-botanical 
knowledge requisite for distingaishing between the probable and the impro- 
bable in local botany, that I can feel no apology needM to my own readers 
for here troubling them with a second warning initanoe ; one fortunately 
1861.] ARENARU BALEAR1CA.
49 
arrested in time to prevent another moat improbable species becoming per- 
manently incorporated in onr lists of truly British plants.
It is a fitting 
accompaniment to the preceding case of the Diervilla, resembling that one 
in the risk of a garden plant becoming thereby recorded for the future as 
if really a native production of Scotland.
In May last, 1859, I received 
from the Editor of the * Phytologist,* New Series, a note to this effect ; — 
'* 'I enclose an Arenaria^ sent this morning from Scotland^.
It is no 
state of A, ierpylUfolia^ and it does not agree with Babington's description 
of A.
dUata, It also differs from A.
norvegica as described by Babington.
A. muUicaulis is unknown to me.
Will you be so good as give me your 
opinion of it when you have time P* 
" Writing here from recollection, my reply was immediate, and to the 
effect, that if reported to me from the Mediterranean, instead of Scotland, 
I should unhesitatingly have named the plant A.
balearica ; that I knev 
of no boreal species to which it could be referred or related ; and that the 
alleged locality of Scotland was geographically improbable, unless I was 
wrong as to the name.
In the next month's number of the ' Phytologist' 
the following brief notice was given of this pseudo-discovery : — , 
" * Mr. Sim has sent us a specimen of what he thinks may be Arenaria 
balearica, a plant new to Scotland.
He has been advised to send a speci- 
men to Mr. Babington.' ("Phytologist,' 50, 192.) 
" So far, the readers of the * Phytologist' were in a very likely way of 
being misled into supposing this Mediterranean Arenaria a wild plant new 
to Scotland ; no intimation of a garden origin being stated or suggested, 
even while the idea of it being A, balearica is attributed to the finder him- 
self.
But in the same periodical for November then following, Mr. John 
Sim records a * botanical ramble,' made to the * Hill of Moncrieffe,' where 
he discovers Scrophularia vemalis, Anchma sempervirens, and other garden 
species, which no geographical botanist believes to be native in Scotland.
In the course of his ramble he visits the ' pleasure-grounds and flower- 
garden of Sir Thomas Moncrieffe,' and there he finds, * about the middle 
of June,' the plant new to Scotland, aa mentioned in the subjoined extract 
from his ramble : — 
" * On the waU of an old fruit-house, I saw a patch of Arenaria bale- 
arica, of which 1 gathered a few specimens ; how or by what means it got 
there I cannot tell, only there it is, and none knows how.' (' Phytologist,' 
55, 327.) 
" The question now arises, where did the previously found specimen 
come from ?
that which was sent to London in May, and recorded in the 
June number of the * Phytologist,' as a plant new to Scotland ?
Very sig- 
nificantly, that first record is omitted from the Index to the * Phytologist * 
for 1859, page 385, where Mr. Sim's confession of the fruit-house locality 
for the species is referred to only.
And considering how many localities 
N. S.
VOL.
V. H 
50 ARENARiA BALEARiCA.
[February, 
for improbably native plants have been already reported on the same au-; 
thority, it may become matter of some importance to future botanical 
topographers, to ascertain whether this case of the Arenaria balearica is 
a fair sample of the rest ?
Also, how far it may be held an exhibition of 
editorial care and competence, in announcing new British plants or new 
British localities?
While saying that I cannot place scientific reliance 
upon Mr. Sim's reports, or upon the phytological records of them, it would 
be most unfair not to disclaimr any insinuation against Mr. Sim personally, 
on the score of moral truthfulness.
I can well believe him writing with 
perfect sincerity of intention, while imperfect in his reports, and unsound 
in his conclusions from alleged facts ; the records being made worse against 
him by want of editorial discernment." (Supplement to ' Cybele,* p.
38.) 
The first sentence is a long one, containing several propo- 
sitions, hanging rather loosely together, more remarkable for 
intricacies and involutions than for that clearness and logical 
precision which might be looked for in the composition of an 
author who takes credit for more philosophical acumen than he 
allows to any other botanist, yea, more than to all of them put 
together.
Instead, however, of analyzing this ponderous period of the 
learned Thehan's, it will be easier for our readers to scrutinize 
the facts, which are like Sir John FalstaflF's halfpenny roll to a 
gallon of sack, or like some wretched daub of a painting in a gaudy 
and clumsy frame.
We fear exhausting the attention, or, it may 
be, the patience of our readers ; and we also regret the space 
occupied by so worthless a topic.
For what advantage will it be 
to a single individual, whether this Arenaria grow in Scotland 
or not.
W^ill the publication of its discovery be subservient to 
human happiness or to the amelioration of mankind ?
Only in 
an imperceptible degree.
Its eflect on society will beunfelt; 
and it will be forgotten, even by botanists, in the space of half a 
decade of years.
The fact itself, in the grand totality of scientific 
discovery, is like the infinitesimal globules of the homoeopathic 
practitioner, like a grain of strychnine irf a hogshead of water.
But the reputation of men is a more important concern than is 
the discovery or fancied discovery of a south European plant on 
one of the bleak hills of Caledonia ; and it is to this part of the 
subject that the candid consideration of our readers is humbly 
requested.
'^ The mischief that would be done " (more, the much mischief 
V 
k 
1861.] ARBNARIA BALEARICA.
51 
has been prevented, the ill weed has had its blossom nipped oS) was 
hatched by two persons, viz.
by Mr. Sim, the ^^ would-be-thought 
discoverer,^' and by the Editor, who was not suflBciently prepared 
(duly prepared) by "geographico-botanical knowledge '^ to deal 
with such difficult questions as the publication of a notice of a 
plant strayed from the Continent.
We ask our readers, if Mr.
H. C.
W. deserves so wpU of society as to have a monopoly of all 
botanical discoveries ?
Or is he alone to have the jirivilege of 
promulgating such scraps of information ?
No such j)retensions 
will be admitted.
Mr. W.
may make discoveries; and, like the 
barn-yard fowl, which cackles loudly and warns the whole home- 
stead when she has laid an egg, he may sound his own applausive 
trumpet-note, and beg the entire scientific family of mankind, and 
womankind also, to listen to his swan-like song of self-compla- 
cency.
And why not ?
Gentle reader, we gainsay him not ; he 
will never be blamed by us for celebrating his own praises ; we 
rather pity him, for it is universally credited that when a man 
humbles himself to speak and write in commendation of himself, 
he has lost all his friends.
But why will not Mr. W.
let us have the same liberty which 
he takes to himself?
" Would-be discoverers !'' Does not Mr.
W. wish to be a discoverer, to be enrolled among the benefactors 
of the human race, with Columbus, with Bacon, with Harvey, 
with Newton, Jenner, Watt, and Stephenson?
Yes, truly; but 
this discovery of Mr. Sim's is no discovery ; it is a pseudo-disco- 
very ; a discovery and a false discovery, an entity and a nonentity.
On this we join issue, lead a proof, request a fair hearing, and 
subsequently we will call on the jury for a triumphant acquittal.
Mr. W.
has perversely misrepresented the case.
In the first 
place, no discovery was either claimed or wished for by Mr. Sim ; 
for, from the tenor of his note, printed in our January number, 
p. 82, 1861, he disclaims its discovery altogether.
Let this pass.
How do you, Mr. Reviewer, exculpate the Editor whose skill in 
geography is not nearly up to the mark ?
Very easily.
Mr.
Watson may profitably remember th6 old proverb, " They that 
live in glass houses should not throw stones.^^ Mr. W.
edited 
the ^ New Botanist's Guide,* and in this work I find that he con- 
founds Brompton in Middlesex with Brompton in Kent.
Like 
Captain Fluellyn, he is as hasty in his temper as he is in judg- 
ments founded on defective comparison ; or he speaks and writes 
52 AKENARiA BALBARiCA.
[February, 
in a hurry, and, like the choleric Welshman, he is weak in the 
ratiocinative faculty.
He inferred that as there is a Brompton 
in Middlesex and a Brompton in Kent, " a river in Wales and a 
river in Macedonia; the name of the Welsh river is Wye, but the 
name of the other is out of his prains : but it is so like as his 
fingers to his fingers: there is salmons in both/' Mr. Watson's 
reasoning is as amusing as the Welsh captain's.
As '' there is 
salmons in both rivers," so there is the plant Geranium pyre- 
naicum at both the places called Brompton.
Possibly there is; 
but Sir James E.
Smith, who is quoted as the authority for the 
Kentish locality, does not bear out the assertion, for he limits it 
to the Middlesex Brompton.
Again, the learned author of the ' Cybele,' in his remarks on 
the altitude of Hypericum Elodes, states, vol.
i. p.
253, " Mr.
Bowman observed it {H.
Elodes) at one thousand yards of altitude 
in North Wales, and I think it was seen by myself rather higher 
on Dartmoor, in Devon." That is, as one of our correspondents 
expressed it, the accurate geographer saw the plant not on terra 
firma but in nubibus.
No part of Devonshire is within one 
thousand feet of the elevation where it was seen by our accurate 
phyto-geographer.
If any sharp-witted reader say, this is after all but a lame 
excuse for the somnolency of the Editor, it may be retorted that 
the accuser should enter into court with clean hands.
This Mr.
Watson cannot do, for his blunders are egregious and innu- 
merable.
But there is more to be said in justification of the 
Editor, if the court, both judge and jury, will have patience to 
.hear it.
But, abstaining from all banter and badinage, we mean to 
assert that this discovery is a real and not a pretended one.
Mr. W.
himself saw the plant, and other botanists examined it 
and identified it as the plant bearing the name set at the head 
of this article.
It was never observed there before, or rather, it 
was not recorded before ; therefore it was legitimately entitled 
to a notice as a discovery new to Scotland.
The author, Mr. W., 
is disposed to chuckle over the good efiects of his timely warning, 
like the fowls — anseres ornithologists call them — ^which by their 
cackling awoke the sleeping Roman sentinels, and thus preserved 
the Capitol from the nocturnal surprise of the Gauls.
The plant 
has already obtained no little notoriety as a plant new to Britain ; 
1861.] AKENARIA BALEARICA.
53 
whether it will ever get a permanent place in our list of truly 
British species^ time alone^ the universal discoverer, will show.
It will probably have to pass through the improbable, the uncer- 
tain, the doubtful, the colonials, and the denizens, before it arrive 
at the exalted rank of plant-citizenship.
I intended to offer a few remarks on the term or phrase ^' im- 
probable species/' but I will, to save time and space, postpone 
these, and confine my discourse rather to things than to words, 
except as the latter are representatives of facts or of activities.
I 
will not however pass over the flagrant breach of literary or social 
etiquette in the giving of publicity to the Editor's note ; although 
there is nothing in it of which he needs to be ashamed, yet he 
probably would not have written it if he had entertained the 
slightest suspicion that his correspondent was not an honourable 
man, and would regard it as a private communication of a strictly 
privileged nature.
I, as a friend, counsel the Editor of the 
' Phytologist ' not to trust Mr. Watson hereafter.
He has been 
once deceived : this is Mr. W.'s fault.
If he is deceived a se- 
cond time, the fault will be his own.
The first portion of this literary and scientific curiosity has 
now been criticized, and the result is that Mr. W.
is contradicted, 
and we hope is also convicted, to the satisfaction of any reason- 
able jury, of a double misrepresentation.
But there is more evidence forthcoming.
Listen or look again, 
most patient of readers.
^' The readers of the ' Phytologist ' 
were in a very likely way of being misled into supposing this 
Mediterranean Arenaria a wild plant new to Scotland.'' Ob- 
serve, lector benevolentissime, that the word tvild, underscored, is 
not ours, but Mr. Watson's, We wrote " new to Scotland," 
and we mean to maintain the absolute and incontrovertible accu- 
racy of this ; but we will not answer for the epithet tvild, simply 
because it is not ours, and we have only to justify what we have 
written, but are not called upon neither to admit nor to disown 
what Mr. W.
has written in our behalf.
The original report 
is admitted and justified^ but not burdened with Mr. Watson's 
addition.
Read on, gentle reader.
'' No intimation of a garden origin 
being stated or suggested, even while the idea of it (its) being 
A. balearica is attributed to the finder himself." We never 
heard of this Arenaria as a garden, or ornamental, or a cultivated 
54 ARBNARiA BALEARICA.
[February, 
plants and how could we hint or suggest its garden origin?
We 
knew that it was found in or about a garden^ but so are many 
plants notoriously wild.
We might have suggested what is not 
true, and a suggestio falsi is as bad as a suppressio veri.
We 
must be on our guard ; " Evil communications corrupt good 
manners/' Nothing was hinted, and nothing was suggested, and 
therefore nobody was misled into a false supposition.
Besides, 
there are Balearic plants which are also British plants ; and there 
are even more Arenarias than this one, which are common to 
both the British and the Balearic Isles.
How could it be af- 
firmed with certainty that this is not one of these common plants ?
There is positive evidence that it grew there, and there is only 
negative evidence against its being a probable native.
Surely 
the testimony of two or three or four witnesses is to be received 
as a proof much more credible and cogent than the mere opinion 
of a botanical geographer, who finds plants growing in or among 
the clouds, one thousand feet above the highest hills of Devon, 
and that with his eyes open.
Surely his unsupported siipposal, 
when he is about half a thousand miles from the spot, is not a 
very convincing kind of negative proof.
But it appears that the attribution of the name of the plant 
to the finder is a fault.
It is no such thing.
Can nobody 
identify plants but Mr. Watson ?
There are two mistakes here.
Mr. Sim was not the original discoverer or finder of the plant.
Yet it appears from his own statement that he had the patience 
to puzzle out the name, and was able to identify the plant by 
comparing it with a series of Arenarias described in his herbal.
Surely this is very creditable to our correspondent who sent the 
notice for publication.
But the amount of Mr. John Sim's ofiences against botanical 
geography is not yet told.
Listen, most courteous reader !
'^ In the same periodical for November then following/' — mark 
the accuracy of the statement and the elegancy of the phraseo- 
logy, — " Mr. J.
S. records " another " botanicsd ramble, made to 
the hill of Moncrieflfe, where he discovers Scrophularia vemalis, 
Anchma sempervirens, and other garden species which no geo- 
graphical botanist believes to be native in Scotland." This is 
the head and front of Mr. Sim's ofiendings.
If they had been 
found by Mr. Watson in a locality where they had not hitherto 
been noticed, he would have taken the credit of the discovery.
1861.] ARBNARIA BALEAUICA.
55 
We will not answer for the creed of geographical botanists, 
for if like Mr. Watson^s belief, it is a very loose one ; but as we 
do not know what it is, and have never yet heard that they have 
any general formula of faith in plant-distribution, the less said 
about it the better.
But we can say that, so far as we know, 
the plants above-named, viz.
the Anchusa and the Scrqphularia, 
are as much, if not more, wild in Scotland as or than in England, 
and probably as in France to the bargain.
We will present 
botanico-geographers with this fact, and wish it may do them 
much good.
We hope our readers will now acquit the Editor of the ^ Phy- 
tologist ' of both intentional and ignorant mistakes ; and con- 
sequently he expects not merely a verdict of acquittal, but a 
finding of wilful misrepresentation against his accuser.
But he hopes they will not be discharged by the judge until 
the writer^s opinions about wild and tajne plants has been sub- 
mitted to them, and in these his opinions he will neither com- 
promise the ' Phytologist ' nor its Editor.
He will merely give 
his opinion, and will support it both by evidence and illustration.
It may be taken for granted, by the general consent of all 
mankind, botanists not excepted, that all plants,like all animals,are 
divisible into two classes, wild and tame.
There may be, indeed 
there are, a few of both animate and sentient beings that are both 
tame and wild.
The ass is an example among beasts, and the 
Crab among plants.
As a logician may say, every herb and animal 
which is not tame is wild, and every one which is not wild is tame, 
with the exception of the small intermediate class which assumes 
both these distinctive characters.
From these premises it is inferred that as the Arenaria baleari^ 
ca is not a tame or cultivated plant, nor a plant having an inter- 
mediate character — it is a wild plant.
It can scarcely be called an 
escape from cultivation, for it belongs to a genus quite unsuited 
for the practice of the florist^s art.
That it grows on a tool- 
house is no valid reason for denying its wildness ; the Chickweed 
and Groundsel grow on garden- walls, and sometimes among the 
choicest flowers, and their wildness is uncontested.
It is not 
urged against its claims to spontaneity, if not to nativity, that it 
was planted on the tool-house, or that it has become semi-natu- 
ralized like the Snapdragon.
This latter plant has existed among 
us for centuries, probably for thousands of years ; the Arenaria, 
56 ARENAEiA BALBA&iCA.
[February, 
like the Aremonia, has taken us by surprise.
But the fact of its 
occurrence on a tool-house and in a garden^ though surprising^ 
is not to be ignored.
It is a fact, and an interesting fact, 
although it may be a puzzle to addle-headed plant-geographers.
It may be supposed to have been introduced among seeds, or it 
may.
have reached these islands in packages, or it may have 
reached us by swimming in currents, or have been transported 
by birds, or been attached to the hairy skins of beasts, — all fa- 
vourite and popular modes of plant-distribution.
But who can 
say with any certainty that the tool-house in the garden at Mon- 
crieffe is the only place where it grows and where it may ulti- 
mately be discovered ?
The Aremonia has been already detected 
in other localities in Perthshire, and in Lancashire also, if fame 
is to be believed.
It is surely not impossible for the Arenaria 
to obtain a wider location than that of a small spot on a brick 
wall !
Who can gainsay the possibility of this wider distribution ?
It may be discovered in other parts of Scotland, or in Ireland, 
or even in England itself, the refuge of the destitute.
There 
is positive evidence that it has been found; there can only be 
negative evidence against the probability of its being founds in 
future.
The candid critic starts a query, viz.
: " Where did the pre- 
viously-found specimen come from ?" Observe the style, curious 
reader !
*^ That which was sent to London in May, and recorded 
in the June number of the ' Phytologist' as a plant new to Scot- 
land ?'^ The answer to be given is plain and straightforward.
It came from the tool-house so often mentioned.
There is no 
mystery, nor concealment, nor affectation, about this point.
Everybody agrees here.
Mr. Watson does not even affect to 
doubt this part of the relation, but he subjoins a very significant 
remark, viz.
: " Very significantly, that first record is omitted 
from the Index to the ' Phytologist^ for 1859, p.
385, where Mr.
Sim's confession of the fruit-house locality for the species is re- 
ferred to only.'' 
There is some truth in this part of Mr. Watson's statement.
The first notice, viz.
that on p.
189, being only two lines and a 
half, was overlooked when the Index was compiled, and this 
omission is supplied in the Index to Vol. IV.
for 1860.
The 
significancy of this fact was originally of small dimensions, and 
it has gradually diminished, and has now totally disappeared.
1861.] ARSNARlA BiLEARICA.
57 
The fact was significant^ and it may now be left to the discre- 
tion of our readers to decide whether it was more significant of 
the mala fides, the faithlessness^ of the Editor, or of the malua 
animus of its discoverer.
The senseless twittle-twattle contained in the last paragraph 
of this impertinent curiosity is as singular and as rare a speci- 
men of harmless invective as it is of human imbecility.
The 
would-be ratiocinative author contradicts himself, *and inno- 
cently gives an answer to his own cavil.
That it is utterly 
without meaning I will not assert, for its intention evidently 
was to hurt one who' had never wronged him either by word or 
deed.
The animus of the period is plain as a pike-staff, but it is 
like the feckless dart of the aged, feeble Priam, on the shield of 
the armed, warlike son of Achilles, — it only recoils on the 
thrower.
It is as defective in moral dignity as it is in gram- 
matical structure and logical deduction.
It is, on the whole, 
just such an effusion as might originate in a mind clouded and 
darkened by the fumes of the incense of flattery burnt under 
the nostrils of one greedy of praise, or on the altar erected to 
self-idolatry.
Where is the causal reasoning, the philosophical inference, or 
logical definition, in the last paragraph of this pitiful exhibition 
of petty spitefolness, p.
40.
Courteous reader, be so good as to compare these two quota- 
tions, which are submitted to thy candid consideration : — 
Mr. W.
writes, "I cannot place scientific reliance" — (what is 
scientific reliance?) — " upon Mr. Sim's reports or (nor) upon the 
phytological records of them." Or, in plainer terms, that fact 
was no fact, but a figment of Mr. Sim's invention, and the 
phytological record of them is to be placed in the same cate- 
gory.
This is most emphatically denied, and the accuser is 
hereby challenged to prove what he has asserted.
Again : " It 
would be most unfair not to disclaim any insinuation against 
Mr. Sim personally, on the score of moral truthfulness." Look 
on that, and look on i;his.
I cannot believe him, says Mr.
Watson, and yet on the score of moral truthfulness he is unim- 
peachable !
*' Nescio quo teneam Proteu." 
Surely this is a pregnant example of the effect of '^ addiction 
to psychological studies" on the student himself, in qualifying 
him for a discoverer and a teacher of truth.
N. 8, VOL.
V. I 
58 AAENARiA BALEARiCA.
[Febttuiry, 
But it is the most childish of all childish twaddle to separate 
moral from scientific truth.
Both kinds are relative^ so far as 
humanity is the revealer of the truth, whether it be a truth of 
science or a truth of morals ; no finite being can possess truth 
absolutely.
This is an attribute of Deity alone.
What more would Mr. Watson know about the plant, or 
about the space it occupied on the wall of the tool-house?
Why did he not ask Mr. Sim for & more detailed report of the 
circumstances under which he saw it?
Mr. Sim would have 
told him that the patch of Arenaria balearica was not much 
more than as much as he could cover with the crown of his hat ; 
the number of the stems (flowering stems) was probably from 
fifty to sixty, or perhaps seventy or eighty, — a few more or a few 
less could not be of very great consequence, even to a botanical 
geographer I Mr. Sim knew that it was a south of Europe 
plant ; this he learnt from his herbal ; but he knows also that 
there are scores of plants common to the British Isles and to 
the Mediterranean, to both shores, both the European and the 
African.
How was he or anybody else to know that this was 
not one of those common plants ?
But this is not all.
^'Considering how many localities for 
improbably native plants have been already reported on the 
*same authority, it may become a matter of some importance to 
future botanical topographers to ascertain whether this case of 
the A.
balearica is a fair sample of the rest?^' This is where 
the shoe pinches; it is a matter of some importance to Mr.
Watson to discredit facts which he did not know, and for which 
he was ashamed to be indebted to observers whom he vilified, 
though just as trustworthy as he himself.
It may be a matter of some importance to future plant- 
geographers to know that the localities reported by Mr. Sim 
have been seen by hundreds of botanists, and a record of .their 
observations, confirmatory of Mr. Sim's, has appeared in con- 
temporary periodicals.
The 'PhytologisV has a backer in a 
local periodical published at Perth.
Also, a report of a recent 
botanical excursion to these very localities, last June (1860), was 
sent to the Editor of the ' Phy tologist,^ but, for reasons not ne- 
cessary to be advanced here, was not accepted for publication.
We would not insult our readers by remarks on 'improbable 
species'' and ''garden species," which no geographical botanist 
1861.] ABENA&IA BALEABICA.
59 
believes to be native in Scotland.
Some of our readers under- 
stand that Mr. Watson^s sense of '^ native'^ is not universally ac- 
cepted by botanists^ but surely the testimony of more than a 
himdred personal observers is not to be refuted by the opinion 
of one would-be plant-geographer.
As this article has already exceeded the limits within which 
the Editor wishes to confine such discussions^ it must be con- 
cluded with a few- brief but not trivial remarks on the subject 
of Arenaria balearica.
1st.
The little plant itself, the innocent cause of this conten- 
tion, is not worth one-hundredth part of the expense incurred in 
the denial and justification of its claims to appear in a phytolo- 
gical record of the occurrences of a season, or among the pro- 
ductions of a country.
The plant, economically, is of no value 
whatever ; it is neither fit for food, nor for physic, nor orna- 
ment.
Nobody but a botanist would go out of his way to pluck 
it, and by all botanists, except Mr. Watson, it* will be utterly 
forgotten in a short ti«e.
The latter-named individual may 
have cause to rememb^ it.
Again, in the 2nd place, the little plant is not only worthless, 
and will speedily be forgotten, and, consequently, is not de- 
serving of so lai^e a space in the annals of science, a matter to 
be regretted by economists, by the disciples of Adam Smith, but 
in addition to this, it has been made a subject of cavil and of 
nncharitable remarks ; much envy, and no little hatred and un- 
charitableness, have been elicited by or through its instrumen- 
tality.
This is very much to be deplored.
The property wasted 
in the controversy, foolishly thrown away, is not so precious as 
the time, the temper, the patience, and the charity, which are 
recklessly squandered on such foolish disputes, which will cer- 
tainly never be settled, because their settlement is impossible, 
and if it were, it would be of no practical use to any human 
creature.
The only excuse the ^ Phytologisf can offer to its indulgent 
readers, for trespassing so far on their property and their pa- 
tience, is, that the controversy was unsought, and would have 
been gladly shunned ; even after it was decided that our pacific 
tactics were to be abandoned for a brief period, a flag of truce 
was transmitted to the enemy, and was treated with disdainful 
contempt.
Hence we had no alternative but to enter the arena 
1 
60 ARENARiA BALEARicA.
[February, 
of controversy; the point of.
honour forbade onr declining 
what was tantamount to a challenge.
Jacta est alea, as Csesar 
said on crossing the Rubicon.
We have thrown down our gage ; 
let truth and honour be the umpires^ and we are indifferent 
about the issue.
If we are truthless and dishonoured^ we de- 
serve to be foiled, and if so, we promise to admit our error ; but 
it will be time enough to confess when we have been proved to 
be in the wrong.
For the present, we justify whatever has been 
done in the matter.
More than this, we condemn what Mr.
Watson has done, and tell him publicly that he ought to be 
ashamed of his ways, luid amend them.
We have stated the 
truth, so far as it was known to us.
That Mr. Watson has 
stated what he did not know to be true, and insinuated what he 
might easily have known to be false, we do most solemnly and 
confidently assert.
If we are to abide faithful to the principles on which the New 
Series of this journal was established, and in conformity to 
which it has hitherto been conducted,.
wt must give publicity to 
all facts which are reported by correspondents on whose fidelity 
and accuracy reliance ought to be placed.
Our pages, as has 
been repeatedly stated, are at the service of every one who has 
any strictures to offer, or any animadversions to make, on any 
communication whatever which is printed in the ' Phytologist.' 
It is hoped that our readers will be satisfied with what we 
have done to justify our correspondent and ourselves.
There 
has been no display of wounded vanity, egotism, or amour 
propre, in our defence ; we have guarded ourselves against 
acerbity of language as well as against bitterness of spirit.
The 
miserable being who is continually spitting venom, scattering 
firebrands, whose indignation seethes like the hot steam of a 
boiling cauldron, scalding, scorching, and piercing to the heart 
every one within reach, is an object of sincere commiseration, 
but not of ribald ridicule.
The most valuable reproof and rebuke, when administered in 
the acrimonious spirit of calumny and detraction, are lost; the 
object, which should be peace and goodwill, is sacrificed to the 
means ; the latter assume an undue prominence, and the result 
is that the breach, instead of bebig healed, is made wider than 
ever.
We hope we have now satisfied all reasonable persons 
that our intentions now, as heretofore, are pacific.
We are the 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUEEIES.
61 
decided enemies of contention, and we now desire to bid adieu 
to all hostilities, both literary and scientific, henceforth and for 
ever.
BOTAJS^ICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Wahlenbeegia hedeeacea.
{From a Correspondent.) 
In reference to the above-named plant, about which you request infor- 
mation, I cannot say that it was ever either collected or seen by jpe on 
Keston Common ; but I was told by the late Mr. Peete that it grew on 
the bog below the springs which are generally known as the Source of the 
Eavensbourne.
These springs are .opposite to the gate of Holwood Park, 
and not above one hundred yards from the road.
Inside the gate of the 
park there are the remains of both the rampart and fosse of a Eoman 
encampment.
In looking over my notes and an interleaved copy of the * New Bo- 
tanist's Guide,' or rather the Botanist's New Guide, to the localities of 
rare British plants, 1 perceive that in June, 1834, I found this elegant little 
plant in a bog' in Epping Forest, at High Beech, between Lough ton and 
Epping.
I have heard that it has been seen in several other parts of the 
Forest, but I have not seen it.
In Waterdown Forest, adjoining Groombridge, in Sussex, I have seen 
it very plentiful.
It also abounds in St. Leonard's Forest, near Horsham, and in Tilgate 
Forest, on the left of the Brighton road, near Peaseporridge Gate, a little 
beyond Starvemouse Moor.
Here it grows in slightly moist places, similar to those where you and I 
saw it on the table-land of the Berwyns, on the left of the road between 
Bala and Llangynog ; but in St. Leonard's Forest it grows most abun- 
dantly on the dry soil in the wood, about the mouths of the rabbit-holes.
It is not uliginal in that part of St. Leonard's Forest ; neither does it, 
by its distribution, evince any preponderating partiality for the west of 
our island ; and in Europe it is found on the eastern shores of the Adriatic.
Its altitude on the Berwyns, where it grows, as above-mentioned, not 
more than two miles from Llanderfel, is probably more than one thousand 
feet.
W. P.
A New Material foe the Manufactuee of Papee.
The following exceedingly interesting communication on a novel kind of 
straw paper is based upon an article in the columns of the * Breslauer 
Gewerbeblatt,* September, 1860: — 
"Among the many endeavours that have been made, both in ancient and modem 
times, to procure a fit substitute for paper, one at length has been crowned with 
success.
Becent experiments have proved Indian Com to possess not only all the 
ordinary qualities necessary to make a good article, but to be in many respects 
actually superior to rags, hitherto the only material found to be really available 
1 
62 BOTANICAL NOTEs^ NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[February, 
for that porpoee.
The disooTery to which we allude is a complete success, and 
indeed may be expected to exercise the greatest influence upon the price of paper 
within a yery short time.
Indian Com, it is true, cannot be grown except in 
countries of a certain degree of temperature — ^at least, not with the prolific insult 
of T^armer climates ; yet the plant is of frequent occurrence all oyer Europe, and 
can be easily cultiyated to a degree more thui sufficient to satisfy the utmost de- 
mands of the paper market.
Besides, as rags are likely to fall in price before 
long, owing to the extensiye supply of material resulting firom this new element, 
the world of writers and readers would seem to haye a brighter future before it 
than the boldest fancy would haye imaeined a yeiy short time ago.
This is not 
the first time that paper has been manu&ctured from the blade of Indian Com ; 
but, strange to say, the art was lost, and required to be disooyered anew.
As 
early as the seyenteenth century, an Indian Com paper manufactory was in fiiU 
operation at the town of Bieyi, in Italy, and enjoyed a world-wide reputation at 
the time ; but with the death of its proprietor the secret seems to haye lapsed into 
obliyion.
The manifold attempts subsequently made to continue the manufacture 
were always baffled by the difficulty of remoying the flint and the resinous and 
glutinous matter contained in the blade.
The recoyery of this process has at last 
been efiected, and is due to the cleyemess of one Herr Moritz Diamaut, a Jewish 
writing-master in Austria.
Hayiug busied himself for some time in experiments 
on In£an Com, the ingenious disooyerer has at length been rewarded with the 
desired results of his labour ; and a trial of his method on a grand scale, which 
was made at the Imperial manu&ctoiy of Schlogelmiihle, near Gllognitz (Lower 
Austria), has completely demonstrated the certainty of the inyention.
Although 
the machinery, arranged as it was for the manu&cture of rag paper, could not, of 
course, fully answer the requirements of- Herr Diamant, the results of the essay 
were wonderfully fayourable.
The article produced was of a purity of texture and 
whiteness of colour that left nothing to be desired ; and this is all the more yalu- 
able from the difficulty usually experienced in the remoyal of impurities from the 
rags.
Knots and other inequalities of surface, so frequent in the ordinary paper, 
and which giye so much trouble in printing, the new product is entirely free 
from, and this without the material undergoing any special process to attain the 
desired end.
" Another iomiense adyantage, and this in an economical point of yiew, is the 
reduction of the steam power required in the manufacture by one-third of its pre- 
sent amount, in consequence of the material being reduced to pulp by chemical, 
and not, as at present, mechanical agency.
The present proprietor bittie inyention 
is Count Carl Octayio zu Lippe Weissenfeld, who has bought it from the origi- 
nator, and from seyeral experiments deduced the following results : — 
" 1.
It is not only possible to produce eyery yariety of paper from the blades of 
Indian Com, but the product is equal, and in some respects eyen superior, to the 
article manufactured from rags.
• 
" 2.
The paper requires but yery little size to render it fit for writing purposes, as 
the pulp naturally contains a large proportion of that necessary ingredient, which 
can at the same time be easily eliminated if desirable.
'' 3.
The bleaching is effected by an extraordinarily rapid and facile process, and, 
indeed, for the common light-coloured packing paper the process becomes entirely 
unnecessary.
" 4.
The Indian-corn paper possesses greater strength and tenacity than rag paper, 
without the drawback of brittleness so conspicuous in the common straw products.
" 5.
No machinery being required in the manufacture of this paper for the purpose 
of tearing up the raw material and reducing it to pulp, the expense, both in point 
of power and time, is &r less than is necessary for the production of rag -pajpeie.
" Count Lippe haying put himself into communication with the Austrian Gk>yem- 
ment, an Imperial manufactory for Indian-corn paper {Maishtdm-papier, as the 
inyentor calls it,) is now in course of construction at Festh, the capital of the 
greatest Indian Com growing country in Europe.
Another manufiEictory is already 
in full operation in Switzerland ; and preparations are being made on the coast of 
the Mediterranean for the production and exportation on a large scale of the pulp 
of this new material." 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
63 
Let us express a fervent hope that a great traffic will arise in this cheap 
thoiigh precious material, and that English vessels will before long be 
freighted with shiploads of books and papers infufuro.
We see no reason, 
however, why the material might not be grown in large quantities in many, 
especially the warmer parts of England.
In Brandenburg, with its in- 
different soil, and where the temperature is certainly not higher on the 
average than that of Great Britain, Indian Com, though a novel introduc- 
tion, may now be seen on many a sandy acre rearing up its broad leaf- 
blades to a height of half-a-dozen feet or upwards.
What an era seems 
here to be opening for the future of cheap literature !
' In this one inven- 
tion lies, perhaps, the antidote for all the evils occasioned by the non- 
removal of the paper duty.
Baen^by Googe.
In the last number of the * Phytologist ' there was an extract from Bar- 
naby Googe, misprinted Goorge, relating to Buck-wheat, or Beech-wheat.
The work referred to is entitled, ' The whole Art and Trade of Husbandry, 
contained in four books, enlarged by Bamaby Googe, Esq., printed in 
London, 1614, by Y.
S., for Richard Moore.' It appears from Mr.
Googe's epistle to the reader, that the four Books of Husbandly were set 
forth by Master Conrade Heresbach, a great and learned counsellor of the 
Duke of Cleves, but put into English by Googe, and altered and increased 
with his own readings and observations, joined with the experience of 
sundry of his friends.
1 do not collect what part of this work, thus put 
into English, is Heresbach's, and what Googe's.
The work is valuable 
and very interesting to all who desire to know something of husbandry 
and gardening at that early period, ordering of orchards and woods, treat- 
ment of cattle, poultrie, and bees.
I should like to know more about the 
said Conrade Heresbach ; probably some of the contributors to the * Phy- 
tologist * can enlighten me.
S. Beisly.
Indigenous Plants.
— Myetle, Laurel, Cypeess.
Mr. George E.
Frere, in 'Notes and Queries' for September, 1860, 
refers to these plants as the badges of the Scottish clans, Campbell, Gra- 
ham, and M*Dougall, and says they are the only apparent exotic plants in 
the Hst of dan badges ; this list is given in Haydn's ' Dictionary of Dates.' 
Mr. Frere says the Campbells' badge is Myrica Gale, or Dutch Myrtle, a 
British plant, and not an exception to the rule he has heard, that the 
badges of all the clans were plants indigenous in Scotland ; but if the 
badges of Graham and M*DougaU are the plants known in the South by 
the names of Laurel and Cypress, they still remain exceptions to the rule.
I think the Editor of the * Phytologist ' can answer these questions, and 
we may be enlightened upon the subject of indigenous plants ; for it ap- 
pears that the clanships of Scotland originated in the time of Malcolm II., 
about the year 1008.
Is there anything inconsistent in saying that these 
plants grew in Scotland at that period, or do the names signify other plants 
which grew there ?
S. B.
1 
64 BOTANICAL NOTEs^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[February- 
A Labge Peae-teee.
(See * Phytologist/ vol.
iv.
p. 369.) 
The tree described below, if not larger, is probably more productive ; 
but we have in stock a notice of a Pear-tree, a genuine English produc- 
tion, which is probably bigger, certainly more productive, than both.
The * Nymphe,' a provincial journal, gives an account of a Pear-tree at the 
village of Amphion-vers-la-Kive, near Evian, in Sardinia, which is one of 
the sights of the neighbourhood.
Its trunk is said to be about eleven 
feet in circumference at the height of a man from the ground, and its alti- 
tude about sixty feet.
Once in three years it bears such an enormous 
amount of fruit that the branches have to be supported by strong iron 
supports.
The pears are beautiful in appearance, but extremely disagree- 
able in taste, and are used for making cider, of which, in 1816, they are 
said to havd yielded 1848 litres, or about 400 gallons, which fetched 540f.
; 
this year the crop gave 2000 litres, but the value of the cider is only half 
what it was in the former year.
It is calculated that the number of pears 
the tree produces in a fiill year is about 124,000, and a dinner-party of 150 
could be easily accommodated under the shelter of its branches.
Obigin of Species.
We have seen noticed in your journal some startling assertions, taken 
from the natural history of the 'Vestiges of Creation,' respecting the 
transformation of Barley into Wheat ; but I find that some of our ancient 
writers tell us of things quite as strange.
Eor instance.
Dr. William 
Bulleyn, in his * Book of Simples,' written in 1562, fol.
29, says, " Wheate 
will turn and degenerate out of his kind, and be changed into Darnel : 
specially in weate [wet] years ; so saith Matthiolus, in Dioscorides, lib.
ii.
c. 78- I have seen the like in a field named Helly, in a town called Hels- 
hoU, in Suffolk." S.
B. 
Yeetical eangb of Hypericum elodbs.
(From a Correspondent.) 
Please tell me if there be any part of Dartmoor more than a thousand 
yards high.
See 'Cybele,' vol.
i. p.
253, in remarks on the range and 
altitude of Hypericum elodea, " Mr. Bowman observed it (JS.
elodes) at 
one thousand yards of altitude in North Wales, and 1 think it was seen 
by myself (the author) rather higher, on Dartmoor, in Devon." W.
P. 
[Our correspondent is referred to the 'Phytologist ' for October, 1860, 
where he will see, on the authority of a recent historian of Devon, that 
the extreme elevation of Dartmoor is 2090 feet, considerably under the 
altitude where it (H.
elodes) was seen by Mr. Bowman in North Wales, 
and still more imder that where the learned author of the * Cybele ' thought 
he saw it on Dartmoor, in Devon.
In the latter county the plant appears 
to have been seen in nttbibua.'] 
Communications have been received from 
George Wolsey, with a specimen of Isoetes hystrix ; J.
S. Mill ; John 
Sim ; John Lloyd ; Thomas Moore ; William Pamplin ; Dr. Lawson.
RECEIVED FOR REVIEW.
Tlie Kingston (Upper Canada) Daily News, 
[March, 1861.] 65 
CUMBBIAN BOTANY.
By E.
Geebn.
Holborn Hill is a large village situated near the extreme 
southern point of Cumberland, and separated from Lancashire 
only by the Duddon Sands.
It stands on elevated ground, and 
commands a fine panoramic view, extending from Black Comb 
on the north, around the furthermost point of the estuary at 
Broughton, and so on along the Lancashire side of the sands to 
the long straggling Isle of Walney ; Coniston, Old Man, and 
other mountains of the Lake district filling in the background.
At the distance of a mile is a good and extensive .beach, on 
vrhich break the waters of the Irish Channel.
The air is pure 
and bracing.
Close to the village is a station on the Whitehaven 
and Fumess Railway, which is connected with another line 
branching oflf from the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway at Cam- 
forth.
There is a good inn, and one or two small lodging-houses.
It is frequented chiefly by the commercial traveller, the sports- 
man, and an occasional antiquarian or geologist.
For the two 
latter there is abundance of work ; for Druidical circles and other 
remains of antiquity abound in the neighbourhood, whilst the 
mighty mass of Black Comb affords endless scope to the mind of 
either a contemplative or a real practical geologist.
" It is,^^ as 
Professor Sedgwick says, composed " of contorted Skiddaw slate, 
and has by a great fault been raised two or three thousand feet 
above its natural level.^^ !Near Bootle, eight miles distant, is a 
red porphyritic dike, which I was anxious to see; but, being 
pressed for time, the slight search I made was unsuccessful.
According to Professor Sedgwick there are many other places 
on this mountain where the granite has been forced up in a state 
of fusion through the slate, thus creating a subject for man^s 
highest powers of thought !
I have been told on all hands, for I have not yet made the 
ascent myself, that the extensive and varied view from the sum- 
mit of the Comb is of no ordinary description.
I hope that this long preamble may induce other tourists to 
notice this neighbourhood ; for I feel assured that the visitor, 
whether he be a geologist or an archaeologist, a disciple of Lin- 
naeus or an humble follower of Izaak Walton, will find abundant 
N. 8.
VOL.
V. K 
66 CUMBRIAN BOTANY.
[March, 
scope for the indulgence of his tastes, be they geological, botani- 
cal^ antiquarian, or piscatorial.
The vale of the Duddon, bounded by its romantic rocks, will 
gratify the artist, and supply him with numerous objects for the 
exercise of his pencil, and his power of selection and combina- 
tion.
It is with the wild flowers adorning the banks of the 
stream that we are concerned ; and I can assure the genuine 
lover of botany that he will leave this vale a happier if not a 
wiser man than when he came.
I will now give a loose sketch of my rambles among the floral 
treasures of this locality between the 6th and 18th of last Sep- 
tember.
I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Sim, of Perth, 
in giving ane the names of a few of the plants I was unable to 
make out.
At the suggestion of the same kind friend it is that 
I publish this record.
The truth is, I was a&aid my materials 
were too meagre for these columns, and that what plants I might 
esteem a^ somewhat uncommon the people of the South might 
sneer at as weeds growing at their very doors.
The Daisy and 
Celandine are common all England over, it is true ; and perhaps 
some good people may think- that Verbena officinalis, Bartsia 
Odontites, Echium vtilgare, and the like, are also everywhere to 
be met with.
All I can say is, they are not common in this 
neighbourhood.
I have already given an account of the plants 
about Sea Scale, eighteen miles higher up the coast (see ^ Phyto- 
logist,^ November, 1839) ; and it will be seen on comparison 
that, even allowing for the diflerence of the times of gather- 
ing, the Floras of the two places, though in some respects simi- 
lar, yet vary very considerably.
Sallying out with my vasculum 
on September 6th, with that sense of pleasure so peculiar to 
the lover of Nature when treading fresh ground, I took the 
road leading to Broughton, and soon fell in with Ranuncultts 
sceleratus and Samolus Valerandi ; then making my way to the 
shore I gathered the prickly Eryngium maritimum, the beautiful 
(and to me Heath-like) Sagina nodosa, and the minute Radiola 
millegrana, all entirely new to me and all in flower, though the 
two latter had mostly shed their delicate petals.
Next day I 
crossed the railway at the station, took the road to the left, and 
then traversed the shore of the estuary until the most southern 
point of Cumberlj^nd was gained.
On the route I gathered Gen- 
tiana campestris, Statice bahtmensis (which grows here in abun- 
1861.] CUMBRIAN BOTANY.
67 
dance), Trighchin maritimum, and Plantago maritima.
At the 
Point, on a hedge-bank, grew the long straggling Vida hirmta, 
which is pretty common in the vicinity, though perfectly new to 
me.
Rounding the Point, I suddenly came upon a fisherman^s 
hut, of modest pretensions as to architecture.
An old woman 
stood before it, anxiously gazing across the sands : she was ex- 
pecting her son from the opposite shore, and feared the tide, 
which here rolls in its wall of waters with fearful rapidity, might 
surprise him.
Soon after passing this hut a strange fantastic 
outcropping of the mountain limestone broke upon my view, the 
only limestone 1 saw in the neighbourhood.
Here I observed 
Asplenium maritimum, very stunted.
On the following day I 
collected Anagallis tenella near the shore at Silecroft, and Con- 
volvulus Soldanella on the shore near Kirksanton, between which 
and Holbom Hill Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum grows in great 
profusion and luxuriance by the roadside.
On September 10th 
I visited a wood above Beck Farm, and there found the following : 
Geranium molle, G, dissectum, G.
columbinum, Hypericum humi- 
fusum, all abundant; also Gnaphalium sylvaticum?, G, uliginosum, 
and Eupatorium cannabinum.
I then returned through the vil- 
lage, crossed the railway, and behind the artificial tide-bank dis- 
covered a piece of spongy ground, which yielded my old friends 
Ranunculus sceleratus and Samolus Valerandi ; also, Cochleaina 
officinalis ?, a splendid fuft of Carew arenaria, Triglochin palu^tre, 
and many others of more frequent occurrence.
Next day I paid 
a visit to the small hamlet of Kirksanton, or " Chapel Sucken.'^ 
A chapel is supposed to have formerly stood where now is a large 
duck-pond, bordered by fine plants of Artemisia vulgaris and A, 
Absinthium.
The latter (common Wormwood) is much sought 
after by persons at a distance, who come here to gather it for 
medicinal purposes.
In the hedgerows below the hamlet 1 ga- 
thered Vicia sativa, Lycopsis arvensis, and Potentilla reptans.
Max is here grown to a certain extent, and the small farmers in 
this part of the county are giving more and more attention to 
its cultivation.
The linseed, after being boiled or steeped in 
boiling water, is given to the calves, which thrive well upon it.
The potato-disease has been much less virulent here than in 
most places.
In one year, indeed, when this valuable esculent 
was scarcely to be had for love or money, the Kirksantoners en- 
joyed almost a monopoly in the market.
The soil is generally 
68 CUMfiBIAN BOTANY.
[MoTChj 
sanely^ and from its contiguity to the sea must frequently be re- 
plenished with saline matter^ which may perhaps account for the.
mitigated form in which the disease here appears.
On the 13th I again went shorewards^ and passing Genista 
tinctoria and Drosera rotund\folia (now both out of flower), I 
arrived at Hotbarrow, where the above-mentioned outcropping of 
the limestone suggested the working of a quarry long ago.
Here 
on the shore grew Glaucmm liUeum, and in an old shaft which has 
been sunk for iron ore I feasted my eyes on splendid plants of 
Scolopendrium vulgare, of richest green.
One root bore seven 
fronds, of which four were forked at the apex ; but I presume 
that neither this individual plant, nor an individual forked frond 
of the same, is entitled to the rank of a variety.
Here also Ge- 
ranium sanffuineum grew in abundance, and facing the shore 
Agrimonia Eupatoria, Rosa stpinosissima?, and Hypericum per- 
foratum ?
Though I am alm/osty still I am not quitey certain as 
to the names of some of these plants, hence the notes of interro- 
gation.
On the irth I searched a streamlet above Beck Farm, and was 
rewarded by finding Hypericum Androstemmn, and fine plants of 
that beautiful fern, Polystichum angulare.
Iris Pseudacorus is 
plentiful here and everywhere.
Then skirting the hillside in the 
direction of the village I passed Sedum Telephium on the rocks, 
and in a marshy field below grew Drosera rotundifolia and Nar- 
thedum ossifragum, to me conim^on plants.
In the brickfield near 
the station grows Alopecwus geniculatus, Stellaria graminea 
and Trifolium filiforme are both rather common in the lanes, and 
on the sands Aster Tripolium is abundant.
During my stay here I read Dr. Windsor^s interesting paper 
(in, I think, the September number of the ' Phytologist ') and was 
fired with^ the zeal to become his humble gleaner.
I purposed 
starting one morning by rail to search Humphrey Head, and es- 
pecially the wood the Doctor mentioned, but circumstances pre- 
vented me.
There is one interesting plant at Humphrey Head, 
which I found some years ago, and although the Doctor does not 
mention it I cannot think that it has been extirpated ; I mean 
Atropa Belladonna, which grows neajp the Spa.
Should any reader of this journal think it worth while to visit 
this neighbourhood for any of the olgects touched upon he will 
have also an excellent starting-place for the Lakes.
A walk up 
1861.] NEW VARIETIES OF BRITISH FERNS.
69 
the glorious vale of the Duddon^ and the ascent of the mighty 
Wrynose Pass^ will put the tourist in possession^ as it were, of the 
keys of the Lake scenery^ and it will do him good to accustom him- 
self to the wild and grim before breaking in upon the beautiful.
€hrasmere, December 13^A, 1860.
NEW VAEIETIES OE BRITISH FEENS.— No. 1.
By Thomas Moore, F.L.S., P.R.H.S.
I propose to place upon record in your pages, as opportunities 
may occur, a short account of the new forms of British Ferns, 
the existence of which may have become known to me since the 
publication of the recent * Octavo Nature-printed British Ferns ;' 
and in doing so trust to offer information which may prove in- 
teresting to your readers.
The place of honour may properly be 
accorded to a very beautiful new form of Lady Fern.
1, Athyriijm Fiux-fcemina, v.
Vernoniji (Jervis).
— Fronds 
oblong, tolerably symmetrical; pinnse oblong-lanceolate, sud- 
denly and shortly acuminate ; pinnules crispy, irregular^ often 
ra,mose or geminate^ obliquely-ovate, usually somewhat distant, 
narrowing into a short winged petiole which is decurrent with 
the winged rachis, spht down nearly to the costa into linear-ob- 
long lobes which are distinct and finely saw-^toothed ; sori not 
well developed, placed near the.
base of the lobes, forming a 
series on each side of and not far from the costa.
This very handsome and elegantly crisped form of Lady Fern 
was found originally at Milwick by Mrs. Yemon, and was by her 
pointed out to Mr. Swynfen Jervis, of Darlaston, Staffordshire.
In the singularly decurrent or winged condition of its parts it is 
nearly the counterpart of BoUandi^, a v^y remarkable new form 
of Lastrea Filix-mas, described in the 'Octavo Nature-printed 
British Ferns.' The fronds are from fifteen to eighteen inches 
long, oblong-lanceolate, and nearly symmetrical.
The pinnae 
moderately distinct, oblong, suddenly contracting to a short ser-* 
rated point.
The pinnules are rather unequal in size, sometimes 
forked or ramose, sometimes growing two from one point, as if 
geminate, the basal ones rarely considerably enlarged, shortly 
petiolate, the petioles winged and decurrent with the winged 
70 ItENTisH PLANTS.
[March, 
racliis^ divided nearly to the oosta into linear-oblong serrated 
lobes^ the undivided portion about equal in width to the wing of 
the rachides^ so that the costse^ petioles^ and rachides appear 
about equally winged^ and the pinnae consequently bipinnatifid ; 
the segments are rather distantly toothed^ with their sides recurved 
in an undulated manner^ giving a very pretty crispy appearance 
to the surface.
The development of the parts is somewhat irre- 
gular^ and yet scarcely enough so to disturb the sjrmmetry of the 
fronds.
This variety is most nearly allied to that called conioideSj 
but partakes also of some of the peculiarities of latifolium, and in 
a lesser degree of those o{ poly dados.
It is a very handsome 
form, and very rare.
2. Athyeium Filix-fosmina, v.
Gbantije.
— Fronds dwarf, six 
to eight inches high, broadly oval-lanceolate, crispy, the rachis 
sometimes branched, and the apex slightly multifid ; pinnae ob- 
long, imbricated, slightly narrowed to a short bluntish point, 
somewhat irregular; pinnules crowded, overlapping, bluntly 
ovate-oblong, wavy, pinnatifid with shallow lobes, which are di- 
vided into two or three remarkably obtuse rounded teeth or cre- 
natures, connected at the base by a distinct wing to the rachis ; 
stipites and rachides stout ; sori not developed.
A very distinct and elegant dwarf form of Lady Fern, commu- 
nicated by Mrs. Grant, of Collumpton.
The plant was found in 
the neighbourhood of Truro, Cornwall, by Mr. Paul, and given 
to Mrs. Grant.
The short broad fronds with the parts very 
densely imbricated and the surface crispy, the rounded teeth of 
its pinnules, and the occasionally multifid and ramose condition 
of the rachides, are features quite unlike what are found in other 
described forms, and render this a welcome addition to the al- 
ready numerous varieties of Lady Ferns.
KENTISH PLANTS, ADDITIONAL.
Addition to the List of South Kent Plants, collected in the course 
of last summer.
By H.
C. 
C&UCIFERiE.
Cakile maritima, August 1.
In the sand between Dover and 
Folkestone, about two miles from the latter place.
— In the ' II- 
1861.] KENTISH PLANTS.
71 
liistrated Handbook of the British Plants/ the south of England 
is given with a note of interrogation as a station for this species.
Will not the fact of its being found near Folkestone help to 
settle the question ?
LEGUMINOS^.
Lotus major.
Little wood on the Folkestone Boad.
July.
Ervum tetraspermum, 
Trifolium striatum.
By the roadside at the foot of the cliflFs, 
between Sandgate and Folkestone.
June 23rd.
Lathyrus sylvestris.
West Langdon, near Dover, July.
COMPOSITE.
Picris hieracioides.
Sonchus arvensis.
Helminthia (Picris) echioides.
Between Dover and Folke- 
stone.
August 1st.
Cichorium Intybm.
Centaurea Calcitrapa, On the beach near Folkestone.
Aug. 1.
UMBELLIFERA.
(Enanthe Lachenalii (Gmel.) .
Salt marsh at the foot of Ab- 
botts Cliff.
August 1st.
— I have only been able to determine 
this species from dried specimens collected and sent to me by 
the young relative who accompanied me in my botanical rambles 
during my stay at Dover; but the long pedicels of the florets, the 
reflexed calyx, the tapering achenia, not inserted on an enlarged 
corky disk (Babington and Beritham), and the fact of its growing 
in a salt marsh, induce me to believe that I have named it cor- 
rectly.
In my first list I inserted Crambe maritime, but expressed a 
doubt whether it might not be merely an escape from cultivation.
I hesitated about admitting its spontaneous growth on a pebbly 
beach, as most of our Floras give sandy seashores as its habitat.
My doubts have, however, been removed by finding in the ad- 
denda (p.
126) to Jacobus ^Plantse Favershamienses,' 1777, a 
copy of which has lately come into my possession, " Crambe ma- 
ritima, St. Margaret^s at Cliff, — uncommon.^^ I fell in with it 
just about halfway between Walmer and St. Margaret^s, and 
have since received specimens collected between Dover and Folke- 
stone ; so that South Kent would seem to be a long-known and 
well established station for the Sea-kale.
72 VITALITY OF SEEDS.
[March, 
Another plant which I had no opportunity of examining except 
from dried specimens^ was the Statice, which is so thick as to 
form quite a turf-like border to the little Abbot's Cliff salt 
marsh.
Not feeling sure of its identity^ I submitted it to my 
correspondent, Monsieur Crepin, and he informs me that it is 
the same as that which grows on the clifis, the St, occidentalism 
Lloyd and Babington's Man. 4th ed., spathtdata of the earlier 
editions, and auriculdrfolia of Betitham.
[The fair authoress of these lists of Kentish plants has just in- 
timated that the species named Sclerochloa maritima and Arte- 
misia maritima are misnamed.
We are curious to learn what 
are their generally received names.] 
. VITALITY OF SEEDS.
Some Observations on the Vitality of Seeds.
By George Jorden.
The vitality of seeds is a subject highly interesting to the bo- 
tanist, physiologist, agriculturist, and chemist.
That the seeds of 
some species of British plants under certain conditions will retain 
their vitality in an embryal state for a great length of time is an 
indisputable fact , that plants are often found appearing and then 
disappearing after considerable intervals of time in different lo- 
calities, as I have oftentimes observed ; therefore botanists may 
not consider that they have exhausted any locality of its botanical 
treasures, for fresh denizens will occasionally make their appear- 
ance to surprise us during our explorations.
I have made repeated excursions aimually over a limited area 
of country for nearly sixty years, and occasionally even now find 
fresh acquaintances greeting me, whose seeds have long lain in 
repose until some meteorological influence or disturbance of the 
eartVs surface has bid them come forth and again fulfil their 
destiny, so that we know not where they are reposing in or on 
the earth's surface ; therefore we should be cautious when we cen- 
sure botanists with giving erroneous statements in recording cer- 
tain localities where they are not now to be found, but may at 
some future period.
The following I have frequently found where old hedges have 
been removed, woods felled, wastes cultivated, and other disturb- 
1861.
J VITALITY OF SEEDS.
73 
ances of the earth^s surface, where their seeds probably have 
been reposing a long time : — Acinos vulgaris, Mthusa Cynapium, 
Anthemis CotulayAnagallis arvemis, Ballota nigra, Capsella Bursa- 
pastoris, Cardamine impatiens, Cynoglossum officinale, Digitalis 
purpurea, Dipsacus pilosus, D.
sylvestris, Fumaria capreolata, 
F, officinalis, Galeopsis Tetrahit, Hyoscyamus niger, Lapsana com- 
munis, Myosotis arvensis, Nepeta Cataria, Polygonum Persicaria, 
P, Convolvulus, Papaver Rhoeas, PotentUla argentea, Radiola 
Millegrana, Reseda Luteola, Sagina procumbens, Sinapis arvensis, 
S. nigra, Solanum nigrum, S.
Dulcamara, Spergula arvensis, Ur- 
tica urens, Viola tricolor, Verbascum Thapsus, The seeds of these 
plants are most liable to repose without vegetating for indefinite 
lengths of time.
How long the seeds of these plants would re- 
main reposing in Nature^s lap is an abstruse problem not easily 
solved, even by the most acute physiologist.
Nature is very chary 
of her secrets; she must be tortured ere she will divulge them ; 
she likes to tease man and excite his inquisitiveness.
The plants whose seeds possess this property are mostly an- 
nuals, some biennials, and a few perennials, and more particularly 
the narcotic tribes, and those seeds that are round and small, 
whilst those properties of the seeds of those humble weeds, many 
of them not destined to exist above a few weeks, and at most a few 
months, should produce seeds that will remain in a state of non-^ 
entity in the earth for very many years ; but in the higher orders, 
as we ascend in the vegetable kingdom, this vital property dimi- 
nishes, and at last ceases altogether, for the seeds of many of them 
cannot by any means be preserved — some not more than one year.
Those instances, as in all others emanating from a Divine source, 
shows the care bestowed for the well-being of all oi^anized beings, 
whether animal or vegetable, even the meanest; for with the 
Creator of all there is nothing mean.
Geology, that sublime science which has done so much to ele.
vate the intellectual faculties of mankind, has rendered some ser- 
vice to botany, its lovely and inseparable partner : whenever a 
breach is made in her domain, she willingly repairs it.
Railway 
cuttings and excavations have revealed to mankind many valu- 
able discoveries, and brought to light many botanical gems which 
otherwise would never have appeared ; as I witnessed two years 
ago, where a railway-line was traced out through a dry barren 
pasture-field which had been cultivated at some remote period.
N. S.
VOL.
V. L 
74 VITALITY OF SEEDS.
[MoTCh, 
The occupier removed the soil to the depth of three or four inches 
for a space of about two perches, when there appeared in the 
summer following a number of our native plants which covered 
the denuded spot.
They grew most luxuriantly, pleased with 
their release firom so long a captivity.
The following plants were enumerated growing on that spot : — 
Lychnis vesperiina, Arenaria serpyllifolia, Potentilla argenteay 
Lycopsis arvensis, Anagallis arvensis, Polygonum Persicaria, P.
Convolvulus, Viola arvensis.
All these plants grow in arable fields 
in the neighbourhood ; the question is, did those seeds remain 
ever since this field was cultivated, or.
have from time to time 
found their way there by other means is a question not to be 
answered ; if they remained ever since the field was last culti- 
vated, it must have been more than half a century, which is not 
improbable^ 
The arable fields have selected a peculiar Flora of their own — 
obtrusive immigrants — from our own and foreign lands, and 
everywhere pertinaciously follow the plough, many of them most 
troublesome aggressors.
The most troublesome are Papaver 
RhoBOSy Sinapis arvensis, Anihemis Cotula, Florals tricolor banner, 
red, yellow, and white, which she spreads over the fields of Ceres 
to her great annoyance.
Those three are the most troublesome 
to the farmer amongst his cereals and legumes; the Poppy 
amongst the wheat, to which it is particularly attached, because 
this cereal allows it a longer sojourn to mature itself and ripen 
its numerous seeds ; but a judicious farmer would, as soon as his 
crops are secured, plough his fields, when the congenial weather 
at the end of summer would bring up the young plants and al- 
lure them from their slumber to destruction ; then either plough 
again or leave them a prey to the frost.
For nearly sixty years 
I have observed this pest to clothe the fields, whenever they were 
with wheat, a complete sheet of scarlet, and often the crops ren- 
dered worthless ; and when those fields were grassed for several 
years and then planted with wheat, still the poppy has appeared 
in abundance.
The old proverb " One yearns seeding is seven 
years' weeding,'^ more likely to be seven times seven.
The stink- 
ing Chamomile {Anthemis Cotula) is a noxious agrarian aggressor : 
when abundant in clover has caused the death of horses when 
turned in to feed when hungry and have eaten too much of it 
with the clover.
1861.] VITALITY OP SEEDS.
75 
There is a peculiar and distinct group of our native plants, the 
most charming which shun the company of the arable weeds, 
they are biennials ; they conspicuously present themselves to our 
notice and admiration by waysides, woods, wastes, hedges, ditches, 
borders of fields, and homesteads ; those are the most of note : 
Diffitalis purpurea, Verbascum Thapsus, F, Lychnitis, V.
Blatta- 
via, V.
virgatum, Cynoglossum officinale, Reseda Luteola, Hyoscya- 
mus niger, Echium vulgare, Dipsacus sylvestris, D.
pUosus, Car- 
duus nutans, Onopordon Acanthiuni ; they all produce abundance 
of seeds that lie dormant to spring opportunely to beautify the 
face of nature.
The Foxglove, Henbane, the great Mullein, I 
have reason to believe, have sprung up from seed where there had 
been no disturbance of the earth^s surface for between forty and 
fifty years.
I have not been aware that the seeds of any species of the 
Order Graminea possess the vitaline properties with those other 
plants enumerated ; nor is it necessary, as they were designed as 
a perpetual and permanent vestment of green to clothe the mead, 
the mountain, and the moor, till Flora presents a robe adorned 
with gems of every hue.
As the seeds of the Grasses do not possess this vitality, the 
mummy whea1^ fallacy must be exploded, and considered as a 
hoax upon the credulity of mankind.
I suggest that our botanic gardens would be most eligible 
places for experiments on the vitality of seeds, etc.
; it would af- 
ford valuable instruction as regards this obscure subject.
Bewdley, Pebrucvry 1st, 1861.
ACCOUNT OF A KEMARKABLE PEAE-TREE AT HOLME 
LACY, NEAR HEREFORD.
Our readers will be pleased to peruse the following account of 
this celebrated vegetable curiosity, which proves that there are 
wonders in our own land almost as marvellous as the productions 
of distant and tropical countries.
This example of one of the 
Hereford Pear-trees shows that the tendency to self-propaga- 
tion is not confined to the famous Fig-tree of Hindostan, the cele- 
brated Banyan.
76 PEAR-TREE AT HOLME LACY.
[Murch, 
Wc have received from the iDtelligent and obliging gardener 
of Holme Lacy Court the following account of the present condi- 
tion of the tree; and his statement is submitted verbatim to 
our readers : — 
"Holme Lacy Gardens, January 25th, 1861.
^^ Sir, — In reply to your request respecting the Pear-tree at 
this place, I enclose a description by the Rev. J.
Green, formerly 
clergyman ^f this parish, and an extract from a ^ History of 
Herefordshire/ lately published, and a few remarks on the same.
And first I must not lead you astray by describing it as a single 
tree.
The original has no existence, not even in tradition, as far 
as I can learn, and on its identical position it^ would be useless 
to speculate : in my mind there is no doubt but that it has partly 
or altogether fallen prostrate ;* and, as described by Mr. Green, 
the parts in contact with the earth became rooted, and this pro- 
cess is still going on among the prostrate stems, towards the ex- 
tremities.
These latter accessions have their connecting part 
traceable for more than twenty yards; but in the older trunks 
those upright stems, perhaps the first descendants of the original, 
have thrown off their connection, but still leaving enough to 
prove that that connection once existed ; and one of them is imi- 
tating its parent in parting with a limb to form another colony.
^^ I cannot altogether account for the difference between Mr.
Greenes estimate and my own ; but there would be a consider- 
able difference in the measurement of a tree such as this when it 
was in fruit ; and again, the space between the two larger trunks, 
24 yards, might be included in Mr. Greenes measurement, be- 
cause he was quite aware that that part once existed, being very 
recently cut away to obtain a view of the park from the vicarage 
windows, whereas in my calculation this space is left out ; and 
the solitary part measured by itself being 20 yards by 10.
Re- 
port says that what is now the flower-garden at the Vicarage was 
occupied by this tree.
And at one time 30 cords of wood were 
cut from it ; and a cord is 16 feet long, 2 feet high, and 2 feet 
* I come to this conclusion from the fact of a tree in a neighbouring meadow 
undergoing the same process ; it reaches along the ground no less than thirty yards, 
and twenty -fiye yards across.
Thirty feet of top, which had begun to form a tree 
nearly erect, lias just fallen again, and the cattle are maJiing sad ha\(oc.
In this 
tree the mark of the graft is distinctly visible.
This is the same variety as the 
larger tree.
1861.] PEAR-TREE AT HOLME LACT.
77 
wide, closely built together.
Seven hogsheads is the greatest 
quantity made lately, and 20 bushels make a hogshead.
Fifty 
feet is about the height ; and five of the largest trunks measure 
8 feet, 8 feet 6^-1 1^ in., 8 fl;.
9 in.
in circumference ; and at the 
present time they cover 1850 square yards.
" I ought to add, the soil is rich alluvial, about three hundred 
yards from the river Wye, and only a few yards above its level.
'' The following is an account of the large Pear-tree at Holme 
Lacy, from the pen of the Rev. Mr.
Green, as it^appeared in a 
local paper, 1858 : — 
" * This tree consists of eighteen immense branches, proceeding in all 
directions, as from a common centre, and lying upon the ground, appear 
to have broken themselves off, in consequence of their great length and 
weight, from an original parent stem.
At first only partly separating, they 
seem eventually to have become rooted at the first point of contact with 
the earth, and then completing the separation, and rising again from the 
earth in a peculiarly twisted shape, each branch has at length attained the 
bulk of an ordinary tree.
Although much of the tree has been cut away 
by former residents at the vicarage, the ground still covered by it measures 
fifty-seven yards in one direction, and in another, at about right-angles 
with it, sixty-nine yards.
" * The Rev. J.
Green has, however, traced it 65 yards in one dirfibtion, 
and 103 yards in another, thus showing that at one time about 6695 
square yards must have been covered by this enormous tree.' 
" Sir E.
Scudamore Stanhope, my employer, has kindly fur- 
nished me with the above.
The following I extract from a ^ His- 
tory of Herefordshire :' — 
" * Near the parsonage house is a remarkable Pear-tree, covering a large 
space of ground, and forming an orchard of itself, which, according to re- 
cords dated 1776, yielded from fourteen to sixteen hogsheads of perry, of 
a hundred gallons each, and is accounted for as follows : — A large branch 
having been broken by the wind, its head fell to the ground, the butt stiU 
adhering to the trunk.
Some time after it appeared to have struck into 
the ground, taken root, and formed a scion.
Willing to encourage this 
lu8V8 natura, the incumbent gave orders for other layers to be made from 
the tree in a similar manner, which became rooted, and bore fruit.' 
" If I -have omitted anything you would wish to know, please 
to say.
I believe these statements to be correct.
"Yours faithfully, 
"Samubl Wblls." 
78 PEAR-TREE AT HOLME LACY.
\_March, 
In addition to the above^ John Lloyd informed us that he first 
became acquainted with this tree in the year 1823 ; and he was 
informed that in favourable years its produce was about twenty 
hogsheads of perry^ containing one hundred gallons each.
The 
same kind correspondent sends an account of the same tree from 
an old friend of his.
His letter is also printed verbatim.
"Clapham Common, 31st January, 1861.
" My dear Sir, — I have obtained some more information con- 
cerning the Holme Lacy Pear-tree, from the landlord of the Stag 
and Spring Well tavern, Wandsworth-road, near Chandler's nur- 
sery, who informs me that the tree, which covens a quarter of an 
acre of land, stood originally in the parson's garden, but crawled 
over the hedge into a meadow adjacent.
Twenty-one hogsheads 
of perry have been made from it in one season.
It is a wild or 
nondescript pear, small and green, and so astringent as to be un- 
eatable.
It does not produce good perry, only what they term 
in Herefordshire family drink.
Now the worst remains to be 
told.
Some years ago the incumbent of the parish died, and his 
successor, wishing to make a substantial fence to his garden, cut 
and mangled the tree in a sad manner.
*^ Mr. Bluck, my informant, who is a very intelligent man, says 
he can clasp the original stem within about a foot ; he further 
informs me that there is a younger Pear-tree standing in a mea« 
dow belonging to a farm near the church, and this one shows 
the same Banyan propensities ; and further, that there is a full 
account of the tree in Buncombe's ^ History of Herefordshire/ 
^^ I hope, when you publish the account of the treq, you will 
speak of his Reverence's Vandalism in the way it deserves, and 
you will oblige the cider and perry drinkers of the whole county.
" The most remarkable fact in connection with this giant of 
the orchard is the enormous quantity of pears which it has been 
known to produce in one year.
At the time above mentioned, 
Mr. Wellington, who then held the situation of gardener at 
Holme Lacy Court, informed me that three years previous, twenty 
hogsheads of perry were made from it.
A customary local hogs- 
head holds about ninety-five gallons.
Imperial measure ; so if we 
multiply these two numbers together, we shall have a product of 
1900 gallons.
Herefordshire farmers calculate their seventeen 
bushels of pears (if they are of good quality) will, when ground 
1861.] RARE PLANTS NEAR SFINDLESTONE.
79 
and pressed, produce a hogshead of perry ; and according to that 
calculation, the tree must have borne the almost fabulous quan- 
tity of 840 bushels of pears in the year alluded to.
''John Lloyd." 
Note hy the Editor, 
Mr. Bluck says he can clasp the original stem within about a 
foot.
He evidently means the largest stem ; for it* appears that 
the original has long ceased to exist.
It is hoped that the above account will satisfy the most censo- 
rious of our readers, that this is not one of the mare's-nests which 
we have been accused of publishing.
We have the authority of 
about half-a-dozen eye-witnesses, several newspapers, and county 
histories to corroborate this account of one of the most remark- 
able of the curiosities of vegetation.
RARE PLANTS NEAR SPINDLESTONE, NORTHUMBERLAND.
{Jrom a Correspondent.) 
The Spindlestone hills extend from the ancient castle of Bam- 
borough to Belford, a town of Northumberland, fourteen miles 
from Alnwick, and three hundred and twenty from London.
They are about five miles in length, and are composed, like the 
coast rocks,fof basalt.
These hills are.
only half an hour's walk 
from the Belfori station of the North-eastern Railway, i.e. the 
coast railway from Newcastle to Edinburgh.
Several years ago I visited this rich locality, and some of my 
discoveries are honourably recorded in Dr. Johnston's ^ Natural 
History of the Eastern Borders.' 
The plants are entered here in the order in which they were 
observed by me for the first time in this locality, for I have 
visited it more than once.
In a plantation on the west side of the hill, Samfraga granu- 
lata was seen associated with Vicia lathyroides, both in flower 
(this was in May) ; also Primula veris and Asplenium TrichO' 
manes.
Another capture in this plantation was Spiraea Fllipendula, here- 
80 &ARE PLANTS NBAE SPINDLBSTONB.
[MarCU, 
tofore unknown as a Northumbrian plant.
Some exception may 
be taken to this locality (a plantation), but I have been informed 
by one of the planters of this part of the hill that no ornamental 
plants were introduced here, as the spot was planted merely for 
a fox-cover.
No walk, ride, nor drive, exists in the whole space, 
now covered with trees.
There is no doubt about the existence 
of the Spinea on the open bushy pasture while it was in its ori- 
^nal state ; fpr since the plantation, grew up the number of the 
plants has sensibly diminished, and in a few years it is to be 
feared the Spircea will cease to grow in this locality.
I next turned my attention to the south side of a large rock in 
the same plantation, and there I observed and collected Potentilla 
verna and Allium oleraceum, the latter not yet in flower (May).
The last-named plant is very plentiful on various parts of these 
hills.
Orchis Morio was also seen.
On this part of the hill grew 
also Trifolium arvense, Dianthus deltoides, Scabiosa Columbaria, 
and more plants of the SpircBa were in flower than when I visited 
the place at an earlier period of the season.
After leaving th.e plantation, I scrambled about the southern 
base of the rocks, and there foimd Astragalus glycyphylluSy 
Gnaphalium uliginosum, Hieracium pallidum, and other plants of 
less note.
While crossing the hill towards Warn Mills, on damp 
rocks, I succeeded in finding Spergula subulata and Sedum villo- 
sum ; also Draba majusci4a {?
D, verna) in abundance.
Arenaria 
verna was associated with the above.
My most interesting discoveries were still to come.
While 
standing with my face to the south (towards Alnwick), having 
the Cheviots behind my back, and while admiring the beauty of 
a glorious sunset and rich landscape, I chanced to see on the 
ground, at my very feet.
Allium Schoenoprasum and Mcenchia 
erecta, both plants additions to the Flora* of Northumberland.
When I first visited the place the Allium was not in flower, 
but some bulbs which I carried away and planted in a garden 
bloomed freely.
I pointed out this station to the late amiable Dr. Johnston, 
the learned author of the ^ Botany of the Eastern Borders.^ On 
these hills also I have collected a pink variety of Gnaphalium 
dioicum, and the narrow-leaved form of Orobus tuberosum {Lathy- 
rus macrorhizuSy var.
tenuifolius) ; also Cystoptmis fragilis and 
1861.] 
BBITISH LEFI60NA.
81 
Asplenium Adiantum^nigrum.
Allium Schcmopramm has been 
detected in two other spots, but under the same circumstances, 
viz.
on a bare rock on which \t was barely possible for ^t to 
bloom ; but the transplanted bulbs flower freely.
I beg to subjoin the following list of plants of which 1 have 
spare specimens, and also a list of such as I wish to have in re- 
turn ; and as I am not a professional botanist, and am not in 
the practice of writing for the public press, I am reluctant to give 
my name.
A note addressed to W.
R., Finkle Street, Alnwick, 
will be duly delivered to the author of this notice of the rare 
plants of Spindlestone.
List of plants which I can exchange : — 
CarcluTia heteropliyllus.
Crepis suociMBfolia.
Hieracium aurantiacum.
Pyrola rotundifolia.
Asperugo procumbens.
Statice Limonium.
Salsola £ali.
Banuuculus Lingua.
Helleborus yiridis.
Corydalis solida.
Sisymbrium Irio.
Hesperis matronalis.
Moenchia erecta.
Sagina subulata.
Impatiens Noli-me-tangere.
Polygonum Bail.
Fotentilla vema.
Euphorbia Esula.
Sedum yillosum.
Daphne Laureola.
The plants I want are — 
"Woodsia hyperborea.
Ophiglossum lusitanicum.
Qagea lutea.
Listera cordata.
Scilla vema.
Allium Schoenoprasum.
Convallaria Polygonatum.
Cladium Mariscus.
Seeleria cserulea.
Arundo Epig(jos.
Lastrea Thelypteris.
Athyrium latifolium.
Lastrea cristata.
Lastrea FTmseciL.
Gystopteris alpina.
Cystopteris montana.
Asplenium anoeps.
Asplenium lanceolatum.
Asplenium germanicum.
Adiantum Cap.-Veneris.
Hymenophyllum tunbridg.
W. R.
BRITISH LEPIGONA.
Note on t/ie Occurrence ofLepigonum salinum.
Fries, in Cheshire, 
and of Lepigonura neglectum, Kindberg, in the Isle of Wight.
I am indebted to Mr. G.
E. Hunt, of Manchester, for the 
opportunity of examining some specimens of a Lepigonum ga- 
thered by himself in Cheshire, the station being described as ^ on 
cinder-heaps by the side of a canal at Timperley.^ Another cor- 
respondent has also favoured me with some immature examples 
N. S.
VOL.
V. M 
82 BRITISH LSFIGONA.
[Murch, 
of what seems to be the same plants from the vicinity of the 
' salt-springs of Winsford/ also in Cheshire.
In the shape^ smoothness^ and colour of its seeds^ this Cheshire 
Lepigonum is very closely allied to L, marimmiy Wahlb., the L.
marffinatum, DC, differing however from that species by its 
more slender habit of growth^ its smaller flowers and capsules^ 
and by producing two kinds of seeds (winged and wingless) in 
the same capsule.
The root appears to be annual ; and, if one 
may judge from Mr. Hunt's dried specimens, the petals are 
shorter than the calyx, and of a bright pink colour at the top.
The peduncles are rather long and reflected, and are supported 
by fully developed leaves, instead of short bracts, as in L.
mari- 
num.
The seeds also of the Lepigonum from Timperley, are 
much smaller than in L.
marinum, of a bright brown colour, in- 
clining to reddish ; in shape compressed, suborbicular, with the 
border little marked, and perfectly glabrous.
A few winged 
seeds occur, but most are apterous.
I cannot resist the conclusion that this is the plant called Le- 
pigonum salinum by Fries, the Spergularia salina of Presl ; and 
from its station in the vicinity of saltworks, the name seems suf- 
ficiently appropriate.
It is to be observed that Brebisson, in the third edition of his 
* Flore de la Normandie,' mentions Lepigonum salinum as grow- 
ing in salt-marshes bordering on the sea, so that it would be well 
to look for the plant in similar localities on our side of the 
Channel.
Besides Lepigonum salinum, Brebisson gives, as occur- 
ring in the seaside meadows of Normandy, the true Lepigonum 
medium of Fries, a plant which I believe has not yet been dis- 
covered in England.
In the Isle of Wight I have found Lepigonum neglectum of 
Kindberg growing abundantly along embankments, and at the 
foot of walls bordering on the sea, as well as in the drier parts 
of salt-mairshes.
There can be little doubt that this plant will 
be found widely distributed in Britain, it having usually received 
the name of Arenaria media from English botanists.
Lepigonum 
neglectum resembles L.
rubrum, and, like it, has seeds studded 
with concentric rows of points or tubercles.
At the same time 
L, neglectum is easily distinguished by its much stouter habit of 
growth, by its short, entire, and dull-coloured stipules, by its 
peduncles being supported by short bracts instead of leaves, by 
1861.] TODMORDBN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
83 
its larger capsule, and especially by the shape of its seeds, which 
are rounder and more flattened than in L.
rubruMy some of them 
winged; their colour dull brown, their shape broadly obovate, 
obliquely pyriform, with one side nearly straight.
TODMOEDEN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
We have much pleasure in informing our readers that bo- 
tanical societies are increasing and prospering.
There is a very 
important colonial association of this kind, to which our atten- 
tion has been called by a correspondent, and of which an account 
will soon appear in the ^ Phytologist.' The above-named Society 
claims our first notice.
On Monday evening, the 7th January, 1861, there was a large 
gathering of botanists in the above-named town, and the pro- 
ceedings appear, from the report in the ^ Todmorden Post ^ of Sa- 
turday, the 12th, to have been of more than ordinary interest.
An account of the festivities and hilarity and hearty enjoyment 
of the opportunity aflforded the friends of science for social, genial, 
and scientific intercourse, is, of course, more gratifying to tho^e 
who were there and then present than it would be to our readers ; 
therefore we content ourselves with merely stating that there is a 
good report of the meeting in the paper above quoted.
We wish that the reporter had furnished the readers of his 
paper with the faintest sketch, the merest outline, of the Presi- 
dent's address, containing a review of the proceedings of 1860.
Mr. Stansfield electrified his hearers when he concisely recounted 
the botanical trophies of the past season, in which the members 
of the Todmorden Botanical Society appear to have borne no in- 
significant part.
The county of Lancashire has long been famed for the numbers 
and energies of its local botanists, and it has recently added an- 
other subject for congratulation, viz.
a Field Naturalists' Society, 
which now numbers more than three hundred strong.
Its head- 
quarters is Manchester, and the members, which are of both 
sexes, have their meetings, excursions, soirees, etc.
; and their 
perseverance, success, and enthusiasm in botanical pursuits are 
highly to be commended.
If botany be so prosperous in the 
provinces, what might be its success if cultivated with as much 
84 TODMORDEN BOTANICAL SOCIBTr.
[MaVChj 
ardour and energy in the Metropolis, where the access to books 
for reference and to public herbaria, and to collections of living 
plants, is so much easier than in provincial towns and in snch 
remote and obscure places in Todmorden !
London not long ago had a Botanical Society, which, like 
some village benefit clubs founded by the gentry and clergy, 
languished rather than lived for a brief space, and then died of 
sheer atrophy or inanition.
This result was a natural conse- 
quence of the narrow- minded and egoistic policy of its chief pa- 
tron, who cared more about realizing the petty object of self- 
ish vanity than he did about the interests of science.
The conceit of these would-be promoters of science, viz.
the 
Patron and the Honorary Secretary, who were, in fact, the alpha 
and omega, the head and tail of the association, was prominently 
manifested by their causing their pictures to be painted and hung 
up in the meeting-room.
Was the expense of this egregious 
example of foolish ostentation defrayed out of the fiinds of the 
Society, or did the eminent members pay for their likenesses out 
of their own pockets ?
We hope the provincials will not split on this roc^ or stum- 
bling-block of petty ambition and self-conceit.
Societies for the promotion of science, unless they belie the 
name which they assume, must have more comprehensive objects 
and be animated and governed by a more liberal spirit than the 
defunct Botanical Society of London was ; their professed objects 
should be catholic, not sectarian.
The performances of cligueism 
will do no good service to science nor to humanity ; and unless 
the principles of an association embrace this higher object, viz.
the promotion of knowledge among mankind in general, the com- 
bination will be an abortive effort to obtain even personal no- 
toriety.
We hope our Todmorden and Manchester friends will not 
mistake nor misappreciate the purport of these remarks.
They 
are the result of both thought and observation ; and though they 
be condemnatory of selfish aims and objects, they are meant to 
be both laudatory and encouraging to the hundreds (?
thousands) 
in Lancashire, viz.
at Todmorden, Manchester, and Liverpool, 
whose leaders, supporters, and patrons, appear to be actuated by 
right motives, and are obviously seeking the welfare and gratifi- 
cation of the many, and not striving through these means to 
promote their own paltry interest and personal gratification.
1861.] TODMORDBN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
85- 
We haTC a request to make to these zealous and successful 
Lancashire botanists, viz.
that they would not confine their dis- 
coveries and limit the utilities of their example to their own 
neighbourhood.
If they would send us, now and then, a report 
of their successes as published in their local papers, we would 
print them for the common information of all who takean inter- 
est in the subject.
Our periodical is very widely extended ; it 
embraces the United Kingdom and its colonial dependencies, and 
it has a very fair circulation in the Continent.
We beg to conclude our report of this interesting and instruc- 
tive meeting with the following extract from the * Todmorden 
Post,' above referred to : — 
" The programme being now complete [that is, all the speeches being 
spoken, all the songs sung, and all the healths drunk, as appointed by the 
authorities], a very animated conversation ensued upon the subject of 
Darwin's theory, before alluded to by Mr. Grrindon.* The gentlemen who 
took part in it were Mr. Grindon, Mr. Blomley, Mr. Hedley, Mr. W.
M. 
Sutcliffe, and Mr. C.
Chambers, to all of whom Dr. Wood replied in a very 
long and forcible argument, confuting the Darwinian theory in toto, which 
was listened to with breathless attention, and drew down upgn the Doctor 
the loudest applause.
The proceedings concluded about twelve o'clock.
We understand Dr. Wood presented to the Todmorden Botanical Society, 
privately, a collection of dried specimens of plants, 170 species, and from 
300 to 400 varieties, gathered in Britain, the Pyrenees, and Switzerland." 
Through the kind intervention of a friend and well-wisher to 
the progress of humanity, we are able to give our readers a very 
succinct history of this well-organized, carefully-managed, and 
successful Society.
It is from the Honorary Secretary ; and the 
thanks of the proprietors of the ' Phytologist ' are hereby ten- 
dered to him, for his very interesting history of an association 
which has far higher objects in view than the collecting, naming, 
and localizing the native vegetable productions of the district 
where the members reside.
" I deem it a duty I owe to you and to the Institution, as 
Honorary Secretary, to furnish you with a few of the statistics 
and other particulars of the Society.
* If Mr. Grindon or any other of the maintainers of the Darwinian theory (if 
there be one) about the origin of Bpecies, will be bo good as to draw up a succinct 
epitome of his view on this question, the Editor of the * Phytologist ' will gladly 
avail himself of such a precis for the information of his readers.
86 TODMORDEN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
\March, 
" You will see by the copy of Rules herewith sent, that it was 
established in 1852, by a few botanists and gardeners of the 
neighbourhood.
From that time to the present it has made 
steady progress, and the number of members now on the books is 
about a hundred and fifty.
It is not to be supposed that these are 
all botanists ; the greater number of them are patrons and friends, 
people who support the institution from a sense of its utility, as 
a moral agent working for the common good of the neighbour- 
hood.
We have three or four clergymen, some of them active 
students ; and nxany tradesmen and gentlemen give us encou- 
ragement.
. 
" The Society from its commencement has maintained a high 
moral tone, and has become the admiration of the neighbourhood.
No political or religious squabbles ever disgrace the meetings, 
which are held on the first Monday in every month.
The number 
of members that attend these meetings varies from twenty to 
forty or fifty, and the number of volumes taken out of the library 
is on an average about a hundred.
Several of the members 
have become tolerably well acquainted with British plants, and 
many, both* young and old, take a lively interest in the pro- 
ceedings.
" In the summer months the Society has monthly excursions 
on the Saturday immediately preceding the monthly meetings.
These excursions extend from four to ten or twelve miles round 
Todmorden, and are great sources of interest to those who par- 
ticipate in them.
Some account is given at the monthly 
meeting on the Monday succeeding the excursion : such as the 
nature of the district visited, the plants seen or gathered, and 
the incidents or accidents that occurred inter ambulandum, etc.
In addition to these the Society has a grand Midsummer ex- 
cursion, for three, four, or toore days, to some distant locality.
In 1858 it was to Ingleton, Craven ; in 1859 to the Lake dis- 
trict of Cumberland and Westmoreland ; in ] 860 to Connemara, 
Clifden, etc., west of Ireland.
Some twenty in number joined 
in the Craven excursion, including two clei^ymen ; about twelve 
in that to the Lake district ; and four in that to Connemara.
The Annalist attends all the important excursions, taking notes 
of all discoveries of any moment.
" The annual meeting is held in the May of each year; a good 
and substantial dinner is provided, the Secretary reads his Report, 
1861.] REVIEWS.
87 
the Treasi^rep makes his financial statement^ and the Annalist 
reads the transactions^ and the whole is blended with rational 
amnsement and instruction.
There are also occasional reunions, 
such as the one reported in the paper sent you by Dr. Wood.
" It may be as well to state that all the business of the Society 
is managed gratuitotMly, and the whole of the subscriptions ex- 
clusively devoted' to the purchase of books^ specimens^ etc.^' 
The following are extracts from the rules, etc., of the Tod- 
morden Botanical Society : — 
"At a meeting held as above, on the 26th May, 1852, it was resolved — 
" That this Society shall have for its object the study of botany, the 
purchasing of books and periodicals, the investigation of plants, their phy- 
siological and anatomical structare, their agricultural and horticultural 
value, the best modes of cultivation, their classification, arrangement, 
names, etc.
To further this object, lectures will occasionally be delivered, 
papers read, discussion entertained, and details of botanical rambles and 
experiments given by the members at their respective meetings.
"It is desirable that all the members should bring to the Society's 
meetings specimens of plants, flowers, fruits, seeds, etc., for the purpose of 
investigation." 
'^ ALso^ the subscription to be sixpence per month, or six shil- 
lings annually, to be paid in advance.^' 
The number of works on botany, horticulture, floriculture, 
chemistry, geology, entomology, conchology, etc., belonging to 
the Society and circulated among the members, is upwards of 
three hundred, probably amounting to upwards of a thousand 
volumes.
It is hoped that the Annalist will find time now and then 
to send us a report of the discoveries made by these enterprising 
botanists.
We recommend the example of the friends of progress 
at Todmorden to the consideration of our readers in all parts of 
the kingdom, and further take the liberty of telling them to " go 
and do likewise." 
Outlines of British Fungology, By the Rev. M.
J. Berkeley, 
M.A., F.L.S. London : Lovell Reeve, 1860.
We trust the publication of this work is a symptom that My- 
cology is about to become more studied by British botanists 
88 REVIEWS.
[March, 
than it has hitherto been; for hitherto^ certainly, the students 
of that branch of the science have been " few and far between/^ 
and the study of it " more honoured in the breach than in the 
observance/' It is now nearly a quarter of a century since the 
second part of the fifth volume of Hooker's ^English Flora' 
(written by the same Mr. Berkeley who is the author of the pre- 
sent work) appeared; and how few of the botanists of England 
have devoted themselves in any measure to the study of the 
Fungi during that period !
Other branches of cryptogamic bo- 
tany have received a considerable share of attention, and the 
Fems^ in particular, have been a very popular object of study, 
and have excited much interest, but the poor Fungi have lived 
and died unnoticed and uncared for.
One cause of this neglect arises, we think, firom a great and 
general misapprehension as to what Fungi reaUy are, and firom a 
tendency to consider them as disagreeable and even disgusting 
objects.
In this, however, there is a great mistake, as, though 
many of the Agarics and other larger kinds are not very pleasant 
to behold, especially when in a state of decay, there are innume- 
rable forms of beauty and grace to be found among the lower 
and smaller kinds.
On this point Mr. Berkeley observes, in the 
commencement of his first chapter, " Every one is more or less 
acquainted with the soft, fugitive, variously coloured, succulent 
plants .which abound everywhere in our woods and meadows, and 
which are known under the common names of Toadstools, Mush^ 
rooms, or Champignons, according as they are objects of diggust 
or admiration, from their real or supposed poisonous or nutri- 
tious qualities, .
. .
but tliere is no general conception that the 
multitudes of parasites which grow on dead and living plants, 
frequently inducing disease or decay, the mould which runs over 
our fruit and provisions, or the yeast of beer and mother of vine- 
gar, are closely allied productions, if indeed the very existence of 
some amongst them is recognized at all." 
The publication of a popular volume like the present wiU do 
much to clear away the ignorance which prevails on the subject ; 
and we heartily wish it success.
Mr. Reeve has secured the ser- 
vices of one of the first Mycologists of the day, either at home 
or abroad, and the book is altogether a handsome one, and got 
up in excellent style.
In his preliminary observations, Mr. Berkeley alludes to the 
1861.] REVIEWS.
89 
word " Fungohgyy^ used in the title of the book, and defends it 
on the ground of its being very generally received.
Certainly 
Mycology is the more correct term, but perhaps it does not con- 
vey the meaning of the subject-matter to the general reader so 
well as the more spurious one of Fungology.
After several chapters of " introductory matter," in which we 
think he rather takes it too much for granted that his readers 
already know something of the subject, but which are fuU of in- 
teresting facts and observations, our author goes on to give a 
complete list of British Fungi, including aU the discoveries that 
have taken place since the publication of the ' English Flora,' 
and which are numerous.
Greater attention is of course paid to 
the larger and more conspicuous Fungi, as the genera AgaricttSy 
Polyporus, etc.
etc., and by far the greater part of the volume 
is taken up in the description of these; while of the smaller 
Fungi a mere list, without the specific character, is given.
In a 
popular work, as this undoubtedly is, it was probably prudent to 
confine th« attention principally to the more showy and notice- 
able species ; but we could have wished that the reader's atten- 
tion had been more particularly directed to the many microscopic 
beauties which li^ hid in many of the smaller kinds, as, for in- 
stance, in the numerous and various species of Sphcma with 
which almost every dead or decaying branch is covered, and the 
sporidia of which assume the most varied and curious forms.
The ^Epicrisis' of Fries, which was published subsequent to 
the appearance of the ^ English Flora,' has (as was to be expected) 
been taken as the basis of the arrangement of the Hymenomy- 
cetous Fungi.
Assuredly that work is a wonderful production ; 
but we cannot help thinking that the distinctions of Fries are 
sometimes too refined and delicate for practical purposes.
Mr.
Berkeley well remarks, in his preface, that " few exercises of the 
mental powers can be more improving than the study of such a 
genus as Agaricus ;" for the subdivisions are so many, and the 
distinctions so nice and subtle, that it requires considerable exer- 
cise, both of memory and judgment, to assign to any particular 
plant even the precise subdivision to which it belongs.
And the 
same remark applies to other large genera.
The old genus Agaricus is now divided into upwards of a dozen 
distinct (though not very different) genera, and even the re- 
stricted genus Agaricus is subjected to many subdivisions.
N. S.
VOL.
V. N 
90 REVIEWS.
[March, 
We observe that Mr. Berkeley, in his descriptions of species, 
sometimes omits to give the colour (or colours) of the plant, and 
this we consider an omission of some importance, especially in a 
popular work, as the colour in these lower vegetables is often of 
considerable service in determining the species, and at any rate 
is a great help to beginners.
In the nomenclature of the smaller Fungi great improvement 
has taken place of late years, and many new genera have been 
formed for the reception of new or anomalous species.
Among 
these we may instance the partition of the old genus SpJuBria 
into a number of distinct genera, corresponding (in general) with 
the former subdivisions of the genus.
We notice, likewise, the 
transference of several old species to other genera, as Dothidea 
typhina to Hypocrea, Sphaeria Dothidea to Dothidea, Exdpula 
Rubi to Cenangium, etc.
etc., all which appear very proper and 
necessary.
The volume contains twenty-four coloured plates, which are 
mostly well executed and faithfully coloured, though we must 
except several figures, which are not very well done, as Agaricus 
vaginatus, Boletus edulis, Dacrymyces atillatus, Helvetia crispa, 
and a few others.
The colouring is perhaps too bright in some 
instances, but in general the illustrations are very good, and it is 
marvellous to see how many figures the artist has contrived to 
introduce in a single plate.
Here, however, we must repeat our regret that so little notice 
has been taken of the lower and smaller Fungi.
We think that 
at least half-a-dozen plates out of the twenty-four might have 
been devoted to these, with jnicroscopic delineations of their 
structure and fiructification ; and this would have been of great 
service to beginners, as it is almost impossible for young students 
to determine the smaller Fungi without the aid of figures.
J. 
Excelsior y or Murray's Royal Asylum Literary Gazette, Septem- 
ber, 1860.
Perth : printed by Robert Whittet, High Street.
This number of the ' Murray,^ as it may be styled for the sake 
of brevity, in rather humbler if not in briefer parlance than its 
primary and more august title, contains for its leader and prin- 
1861.] REVIEWS.
91 
cipal subject the Flora of Moncrieffe and Kinnoull hills, or rather, 
a list of some of their rare, and probably also their common pro- 
ductions, a list, we are respectftdly informed, " for which we are 
indebted to the kindness of Dr. Balfour, .
. .
the distinguished 
Professor of Botany in the University of Edinburgh/^ 
The learned Professor is equally and honourably distinguished 
by his love of the science, and by his desire to extend its know- 
ledge among his pupils.
His class expeditions have been fre- 
quently noticed in our pages.
We hope, for the credit of the leader, and especially for the 
reputation of the University of which he is a popular and ener- 
getic member, that the account of this class excursion, if not a 
caricature, is at the very least a gross exaggeration.
If it be not, 
all confidence in the ancient saying must be shaken, " Ingenuas 
didicisse fideliter artes emoUit snores, nee sinit esse feros.*' The 
writer of this notice will not register in the pages of the ^ Phyto- 
logist ^ the doings of Scotia's ingenious youth, the hope of the 
nation, the alumni of Edina's celebrated seat of science and 
learning.
There is enough, and more than enough, in the ^ Mur- 
ray ' of September, 1860, if true, to show that Scotland, proud 
of the scientific reputation of her children, has no reason to boast 
of their progress in the knowledge and observance of the graces, 
amenities, and civilities usually expected among the more polished 
classes of society.
Justice to ourselves demands a few strictures on the list itself, 
which forms the fundamental portion of the article in the ' Mur- 
ray.' The tumultuary proceedings of the " Philistines,^' as they 
are not very decorously called, are but like the garnishing to the 
substantial viands served up for the delectation of eccentric taste, 
not for the enlargement of our knowledge.
All the plants recorded by the learned Doctor have already 
been published in the ^ Phytologist,' some of them more than 
once.
The writer of the list and the editor of the ^Murray/ 
could hardly be ignorant of this fact ; they ought not to be so ; 
and in common courtesy they might have stated in their notice 
of their second-hand discoveries, that if they were not indebted 
to our pages for the information which they circulate as original, 
they might have noticed the other labourers who had preceded 
them, not as gleaners, but as original workers, in the same field.
Literary etiquette, as well as common honesty, would have re- 
92 REVIEWS.
[March, 
quired some reference to the periodical in which the plants grow- 
ing about Perth were originally published.
This new but not original list of the Perth plants is as remark- 
able an illustration of the ancient Latin verse, 
"Hos ego versicoloB feci, tulit alter honores," 
as can be supplied by the whole range of literary and scientific 
productions.
The honest and simple-minded author of the Perth Flora might 
adopt the language of the poet when a brother poet claimed the 
merit and reward of the famous distich which he did not write; 
and he would not be wrong in saying, « 
" Has ego herbiculas legi, tulit alter honores ; 
Sic Tos non vobis yellera fertiB oves.** 
The sheep is shorn, and her fleecfe taken, without so much as say- 
ing, " With your leave." 
As the name of the original discoverer of the stations of these 
rare plants is omitted in this new list, for reasons best known to 
the compiler and publisher, it will not be entered here, not be- 
cause we are ashamed of our correspondent, but because his name 
is as familiar to most, if not to all of the readers of this periodical, 
" as household words." 
After all, it is satisfactory to be able to produce the authority 
of the eminent 'Professor of Botany in the University of Edin- 
burgh as a voucher for the authenticity of the plants already re- 
corded in our pages, and also for the genuineness of the localities 
where they grow.
The ' Murray ^ may henceforth be quoted ais 
a corroborative, though secondary evidence, in support of the 
facts originally published in the ^ Phytologist.' 
One point, not satisfactorily cleared up in reference to the 
spontaneous Perth plants, has been omitted, and we (the Editor) 
are sorry for this omission ; we mean that in reference to Are- 
naria balearica, about which some remarks, not altogether of a 
friendly kind, though they may have been well intended, have 
been made by a contemporary, who shaD also be unnamed here : 
some of our readers know to whom this allusion is made.
We. hope that the next time the amiable Professor of botany 
above mentioned leads his pupils to the hills of KinnouU and 
MoncrieflPe, he will give us his opinion about the Arenaria bale^ 
arica.
A. 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
To the Editor of the * Phytologiet: 
It is customary with nearly all British botanists to consider both species 
of Boronicum as alien to this country.
My own observation of the plant 
being confined to one habitat for D.
Pardaliafiches] near Bewdley, in 
Worcestershire, I can scarcely offer an opinion.
The place where it grows 
there is a hedge and ditch, and at some distance from a house ; but, of 
course, in conveying manure or refuse to fields or meadows, seeds of 
garden plants may be taken to what appear very unlikely places for garden 
plants to grow.
In this habitat, an escape from a garden (in the true 
sense) it certainly is not.
What has led me to these remarks, is a passage 
in Ben Jonson*s * Masque of Queens,' apparently written for performance 
at the court of James I., about 1609, consequently anterior to the time of 
Bay. The passage [ 
'* And I have been plucking plants among 
Hemlock, Henbane, Ajdder's-tongue, 
Nightshade, Moonwort, lAbhao'd!
e-hamey 
Now you will observe that all the plants named here are acknowledged 
native except the " Libbard's-bane ; * and most of them are plants not at 
aU likely to be cultivated ; hence it is a fair inference that the Leopard's- 
bane would be a wild plant.
Gerard and Parkinson both give Northum- 
berland as a locality for B.
Pardalianchea.
I offer these observations for the benefit of those who have better means 
of observing this plant than I have.
T. W.
Gismng.
Wakefield.
To the Editor of the * PhytologiH: 
In the * Phytologist' for November, 1860, there is a paper on "Poets' 
Flowers," and in some lines from * Comus,' the Knotgrass is noticed.
On 
reading this article, it brought to my remembrance Sir Walter Scott's allu- 
sion to the plant in the * Lady of the Lake,' where he says, — 
" The Knotgrass fettered there the hand 
Which once could burst an iron band." — Canto iii.
5. 
It is possible that the plant quoted by the two poets may not be the 
same, but I am unaware of any other plant bearing the name of Knot- 
grass than Polygonum aviculare.
It has always struck me as one of the most beautiful passages in the 
same poem, Scott's description of Ellen's grace and sprightliness, as nar- 
rated in the following lines : — 
** A foot more light, a step more true.
Ne'er from the heath-flower dashed the dew.
E'en the slight Harebell raised its head 
Elastic from her airy tread." — Canto i.
18.
The plant alluded to by Scott is evidently Campanula rotundifolia, 
which is often called the Harebell, although older writers have given that 
appellation to Hyadnthus nonscriptiu.
E. Hewabb.
94 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[Mavch, 
* Phytologist,' vol.
iv.
p. 224.
Sir, — ^Your correspondent, A.
G. More, who dates Bembridge, June 2, 
1860, writes as follows : — " Those botanists who are in the habit of refer- 
ring to the latest (fourth) edition of the * Manual,' or to the paper pub- 
lished by Mr. Babingtbn in the * Transactions of the Botanical Society of 
Edinburgh,' will hardly require to be told that only twelve species of the 
Batrachian section have hitherto been recognized in Great Britain." 
Perhaps not ; yet there may be some botanists, like myself, whp have 
not all the four editions of the * Manual,' and never saw a single volume 
nor part of the * Transactions.' May such be excused for not knowing 
how many Batrachian Ranunculi have been hitherto recognized in Great 
Britain?
Your correspondent may reply, "So much the worse for them." 
I shall only say of the Batrachians the converse of what the Orientals (see 
Haji Baba, passim) say of their beloved friends, "May their shadows never 
be more.'' ' Beta.
Pteeis aquilina.
In August last I observed a quantity of Ferns in their marchantiate 
state (newly-developed), growing upon the front wall of an area which 
gives light to a single window in the smoky locality of Lambeth.
There 
were about thirty plants, and some of them had so far expanded theb: first 
frond that I could identify them with Fteria aquilina.
A few days ago I 
paid a second visit to the place, and to my great disappointment found 
that the bricklayer had been there, and with that fatal instrument to 
Ferns, a trowel, had scraped off every Fern, and stuffed the joints with 
mortar.
The question, how the Ferns came there is far from being an un- 
interesting one.
Clapham Common is the nearest locality where the plant 
grows wild, and the late Dr. James Forbes Young's garden in Kennington 
Lane is the nearest place where it was then cultivated, — ^the latter place 
distant about half a mile, and the former about three miles ; and with so 
many buildings intervening, it is scarcely possible that the spores could be 
blown from either place.
A more probable solution to the mystery attend- 
ing its origin is, that we frequently may see it upon costermongers' wheel- 
barrows, used to divide the different lands of fruit, and it is extensively 
used in packing fruit for the London markets.
John Lloyd.
Shambock.
Shamrock, the national emblem of Ireland, is Trifolium repens, not Ox- 
alls Acetosella.
(See * Phytologist,' N.s., vol.
i. p.
366 and 519.) C.
E. P., 
Torquay, who asks(see * Phytologist,' N.
s., vol.
iv.
p. 319), "on what grounds 
botanists now consider the Oxalia Acetoaella to be the real Shamrock of 
Ireland, and why it should not be a Trefoil," is hereby informed that 
botanists do not consider the Wood Sorrel to be Ireland's Shamrock.
They 
believe, or most of them believe as the writers in the * Phytologist ' do, as 
quoted at the head of this note.
The question might be easily answered on 
etymological principles.
Shamrogy or Shamrocky is in the Irish language 
the term for Trefoil, On principles of common sense the same result will 
follow.
The tradition is that St. Patrick took this plant as an illustration 
of the doctrine of the " undivided Trinity." The humble White Clover, 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
95 
Trifolium repens, the Saint could easily procure, as it grows everywhere ; 
he had merely to stoop and pick up an illustrative example of " three in 
one," and one developed into three.
He might have hunted for days ere he 
had the hap to light upon Wood Sorrel.
It is unphilosophical to reason 
on what is not a fact.
It is not true that botanists deny the identity of 
Shamrock and Trefoil.
A few of the fraternity, who wish to appear, wiser 
than their brethren, may^advocate the claims of Wood Sorrel, but some 
aflfect paradoxes.
E. 
• 
Cowslips of Jeeusalem, or Jerusalem Cowslips.
(See • Phytologist,' x.
s., vol.
iv.
p. 320.) 
Parkinson, in his 'Paradisus,' p.
248, London, 1629, informs his readers 
that there are several kinds of Jerusalem Cowslips, viz.
: — 
" 1 .
Pulmonaria maculosa, common spotted Cowslips of Jerusalem." — 
This is Pulmonaria officinalis, Linn.
",2.
Pulmonaria altera non maculosa, unspotted Cowslips of Jerusalem." 
— ^TMs is only a variety of the above.
" 3.
Pulmonaria angust\folia, narrow-leaved Cowslips of Jerusalem." — 
These have also spotted leaves, but the leaves are longer and rougher than 
in Nos. 1 and 2.
" The Place.
— The Cowslips of Jerusalem grow naturally in the woods 
of Germany, in divers places, and the first kind in England also, found out 
by John Goodier, a great searcher and lover of plants, dwelling at Maple- 
durham, in Hampshire.
" They flower for the most part very early, that is, in the beginning of .
April.
" In English they are diversely called, as Spotted Cowslips of Jerusfti- 
lem.
Sage of Jerusalem, Lungwort, and Spotted Comfrey." Z.
« 
An Intruder, 
In June, 1858, I observed Orobanche minor growing upon Clover in a 
paddock that had been laid down the preceding year.
In 1859 I observed 
it in the same place, and also among a collection of Cape Pelargoniums 
standing in a greenhouse situated upon an eminence, at a considerable ele- 
vation above the paddock, and about two hundred yards from it, and quite 
out of sight of it.
It did not confine itself to one species, but grew indis- 
criminately upon several with very opposite habits, as the hard-wooded 
P. tematum and P.
citrodorum, the succulent soft-wooded P.
echinatum, and 
the tuberous-rooted P.
iriste, but I did not observe it growing upon any 
species belonging to either of the subgenera Hoarea or Phymatanthus.
In 
the present year, in addition to growing upon Pelargoniums, it grew upon 
Sonchus platyUpis and various other plants, as weU as upon a gesneraceous 
plant in the stove.
John Lloyd.
Venus's Looking-glass.
Can you or any of your correspondents kindly inform me if the Speed- 
well has ever been known by the name of Venus's Looking-glass ?
I 
have always heard this name bestowed on Specularia Speculum (a garden 
96 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[MttVCh.
flower in England, bnt a common cornfield weed on our plateau above the 
Meuse), until lately, when looking over *Kecreative Science,* No. 14, 
p. 129, I fell on the following passage in an article by Dr. Spencer 
Thompson, on " Wayside Weeds and their Teachings," in which, after 
^numerating heath flowers.
Holly, Bindweed, etc.
etc., he says, " Next 
have we the Veronica, Speedwell, or Venus's Looking-glass, of real hea- 
venly blue " !
Is this a slip of the Doctor's memory, or of his pen P 
Eleochabis and ololeucos.
• 
Will the Editor kindly allow a word in favour of writing kololeucos, 
instead of the specific name usually spelt ololeueos, or ololeucus ?
(* Phy- 
tologist,' p.
274».) The aspirate is surely as much required in this case 
as in Heleochark.
H. 
[The editor has no objection to any innovation which is an amendment ; 
but at the same time he begs to suggest that the verbal critics would have 
the goodness, out of kind consideration for the less learned and uncritical 
of the fraternity, to enter, along with the new name, that by which the 
plant is more commonly known.] 
BoTKYCHiUM Lunaeia, curious var.
of, with compound fronds, on the 
hill above Llandderfel, between the farm called Maes-y-Clawd and Coed- 
y-Derw.— J.
Jones, 1860.
Notice.
— ^Mr. George Wolsey, of St. Andrew's, Guernsey, hereby no- 
tifies that he is now ready to supply dried specimens of hoetea Hystrix on 
the following terms, viz.
: — He will send three specimens for six penny 
postage-stamps, sent in an envelope, enclosing an empty envelope, stamped 
and addressed to the applicant.
— Note : Mr. Wolsey, the discoverer of 
this interesting novelty, can supply any number of examples on these con- 
ditions.
Communications have been received from 
W. Richardson ; Peter Inchbald ; J.
G. Baker ; John Sim ; A.
G. More ; 
J. B.
Wood, M.D., F.E.C.S.; W.
Winter; S.
WeUs; H.
Beisly; B«v.
W. M.
Hind ; John Lloyd ; Dr. Lawson ; George Jordan ; Tom Stans- 
field; George Wolsey; Thomas Moore; William Pamplin; H.
C. 
BOOKS AND NEWSPAPEBS BECEIVED FOE REVIEW.
The Todmorden Post, Todmorden Advertiser, 
The Manchester Examiner and Times.
The Harrow Gazette.
The Gardener's Chronicle, Jan, 2^th.
The Chemist and Druggist, 
The Kingston (Canada) Chronicle and News, 
Rules, etc,, of the Todmorden Botanical Society.
A Priced Catalogue of British and Exotic Ferns, etc., offered for Sale by 
Abraham Slansfield and Sons, Todmorden.
[April, 1861.] 97 
NORTHUMBRIAN BOTANY.
The Plants of Ratcheugh Crag, By W.
R., Jun.
A very young candidate for botanical renown makes his dibtd 
this month in our pages^ and the indulgence of the readers is 
hereby bespoken^ more out of deference to established cust6m 
than from any inherent necessity there is of speaking for one 
who can be safely trusted to tell his own story in his own way.
We beg to state that we like the following paper : first, be* 
cause it is a good one; next, because it is short; thirdly, because 
the matter of it is expressed in brief, plain language; and, lastly, 
because it is written by a youth who evidently loves the subject, 
and who has read the * Phytologist^ with advantage both to 
himself and tb the public.
It makes the heart of the liberal 
sing for joy when the instruction brings forth fruit suitable for 
the enjoyment of the recipient, and not unfit to be oflered for 
the information and gratification of others.
Some readers of the ' Phy tologist,^ when they see the heading 
of this article, may say, in what part of the world are these 
crags which they are invited to visit ?
I will therefore hasten 
to inform them that the locality to which I wish to introduce 
them is in "far away Northumberland.^' Ratcheugh Crag is 
a range of low, basaltic cliffs, three miles to the east of Alnwick, 
and about the same distance from the coast.
The western side 
of the crags, viz.
that next to Alnwick, is formed of almost 
perpendicular rocks, but it slopes gradually down on the eastern 
side ; the entire length is about half a mile.
It is divided into 
two parts by a road yrhich passes over the depression between 
them, and it is with the larger or northern part chiefly, that I 
intend to deal at present.
• 
It is somewhat in the shape of a crescent, with its points 
towards the south and east, and its convex side facing the north 
and west.
There is an observatory on the top, in which a good 
telescope is kept by his Grace the Duke of Northumberland.
The pro^ct from it is very fine, and extends from the east of 
Berwickshire to the north-west of Durham,' embracing almost all 
the Northumbrian coast, and any one can readily obtain admis- 
sion by applying to the person who has charge of it.
I have 
selected it, not because it is our best locality, — for there ar^ 
N. S.
VOL.
V. o* 
98 NOETHUMBEIAN BOTANY." [April, 
others in the neighbourhood that can well bear comparison 
with it, — but because I am better acquainted with it than any 
other.
For early spring plants, this is one of the best localities in the 
neighbourhood, and it is usually visited by those who are on the 
outlook for the first floral harbingers of genial weather and the 
time of flowers.
On the summit is the common Primrose and 
Cowslip, both very fine, and on the sloping bank, in front, grows 
Primula ifdermedia (/S P, elatior).^ But it afibrds greater rarities 
in Viola hirta and Sesleria asrulea.
The Seslena covers a large 
part of the top ; the Violet is also plentiful, but it grows at the 
foot and on the face of the rocks as well as at the top.
On 
walking round, other interesting plants may be seen, such as 
Viola sylvatica, Fragaria vesca, Oxalis Acetosella, Anemone ne- 
morosa, Ajuga reptanSy Orchis mascula and 0, maculaia, all in 
considerable quantity.
I have also seen two plants of Gyrnnadenia 
albida, near the north end, in May, 1858, and I gathered a 
single specimen of Habenaria viridis last June, in the pasture on 
the east side.
There is one part where the basalt rocks are 
overlaid with limestone, and very near the top of the lime there 
are a few dense bushes of Prunus spinosa, which always produce 
abundance of blossoms, and shed a perfume that surpasses every- 
thing else in the vicinity.
A Cerastium, which I took to be C 
semidecandrum, flowers here in March, and two months later 
the barest parts afibrd a few minute plants of Saxifraga tridac^ 
iylites.
It seldom exceeds an^ inch in height, and is generally 
very slender, but I collected one specimen 3|* inches high, and 
with the leaves large in proportion.
At the same time with the 
Saxifrage, Mcenchia erecta may be collected.
It grows in a 
small field to the south-east, lying next to th^ crags, among 
tufts of Aira pnscox.
On the banks near it are Montia fontana, 
Myosotis versicolor, Hypericum Jmmifusum and H.
pulcftrum, and 
a Draba 1 made to be — ^from descriptions in the ' Phytologist^ — 
» The following note is from Dr. Johnston's * Flora of Berwick :'^"The latter 
is a yerj remarkable monstrosity (?
variety), distinguished for its size and beauty.
The common stalk is strong, 4 or 6 inches long, bearing an umbel of about nine 
flowers, each supported on a partial stalk, with lanceolate bificteas at their bases.
The flowers are rather less than the single ones, but the limb is equally expanded.
This variety is the F.
elatior of Dr. HQoker's Fl. Lond., according to Smith, 
and probably also of Dr. G^reviUe, £1.
Edin.
48, though the description is some- 
what confused." 
1861.] 
NORTHUMBRIAN BOTANT.
99 
D. gldbrescens.
The Hypericums do not flower till at least a 
month after the others.
Myosotis collina grew on a wall on the 
east side of the plantation, but as the wall has been pulled down 
and rebuilt, that locality is destroyed for the present.
Two interesting Ferns are also to be had in May, viz.
Ophio* 
ghssum vulgatum, and Botrychium Lunaria : they grow in a pas- 
ture on the south-west side, in front of a large quarry.
The 
Moonwort is near a well in the field, and the Adder's-tongue 
about halfway between it and the plantation.
Erica cinerea grows on the banks beside the quarry, and 
Hieracium boreale, Stachys Betonica, and Teucrium Scorodonia, 
bloom there in July.
The botany of the crags is at least more 
varied in midsummer, although it then does not produce rarer 
plants.
I will commence at the south-western end, and notice 
the plants as I proceed.
The limestone before mentioned aflbrds 
a few plants of ScaUosa Columbaj-ia and Sedum acre.
In front 
of it are Vicia sativa and V, hirsuta, and just below them, two 
or three patches of Geranmm sanguineum, G.
lucidum grows on 
several parts of the wall that encloses the plantation.
Beside 
these, and on the rocks lying northward, are Arabis Mrsuta^ 
Pimpinella Saanfraga, Poterium Sanguisorba^ Helianthemum vuU 
gare, and Thymus Serpyllum.
Euon^mus europeeus clings to the 
face of the rocks, and on a ledge about halfway down, there is 
one large plant of Astragalus Glycyphyllos.
Hieracium vulgatum 
grows all along the front of the cliffs.
Proceeding to the north- 
ward, we will find Arenaria serpyllifolia growing on the rocky 
ledge.
I noticed a few plants of Sagina subulata growing in the 
midst of the Arenaria, Arenaria trinervis is plentiful at the 
foot of the precipice.
Lcavin^r tliese^ as vre go alon^, a few 
rather scarce Grasses may be picked up^ such b^ Avena pratensis, 
i/^/eria ui^S^&i BrQ^^^^Uh, Festuca dromoideSf and otliers- 
pt a» we proceed, and bo is Rosa 
h iViH' obscrvatorjj DianthiiM 
<*<>' re rlry place, both 
\\\\ 
1 
> hypoglattis a few 
^^ — September and 
PI the other side of 
Jon the ledge of the 
mh but it is so much 
( 
iOO NORTHUMBRIAN BQTANY* [April, 
damaged by the wind^ that it never reaches maturity.
A Utile 
further on, there is a white variety of Digitalis purpurea growing 
^mong the rocks ; further on, a patch of Vacdniunk MyrtiUus.
Near the eastern end of the plantation on the south side, where 
the limestoi^e rises again to the surface, several plants that grow 
on the crags are found, and with these Briza media and Avena 
puhescens grow in abundance.
Here ieu'e also Tragopogon minor, 
Carew glauca, ArUhyUis Vulneraria, Silene inflata, and Linum 
catharticum.
The higher part of the same field is a stronghold 
of Cofrduus tenuiflorus.
It is not only plentiful, but absolutely 
a pest, to the great distress of the reaper and haymaker, who are 
obliged to protect their hands, or experience the truth of the 
motto which surrounds Scotland's national emblem.
Nemo me 
impune, etc.
In the same field, but lower down, and beside Batcheugh 
(farm), I obtained a few specijnens of Crepis setosa, which was 
introduced with clover«seed.
Here are also a few Ferns to be 
collected: Asplenium Ruta-muraria, on the limestone; A.
7H- 
chomanes, sparingly, in the crevices of the rocks ; A, Adiardum- 
nigrum, more plentifully; and Polypodium vulgare, in great 
abundance.
Lastrea dilatata and Polystichum angulare grow 
in the plantation.
There are a few others I have omitted.
Thci 
most worthy of notice are Aaperula odorata, Scabiosa succisa, 
Ahhemilla vulgaris, Hyacinthus nonscriptus, Lastrea ovata?.
Lychnis diuma, L.
vespertiAa, and L, Flos-cuculi, plentiful in 
the plantation and the drive ; Galium saa^atile, on the top of the 
crags, and Adoxa Moschatellina, at the base ; PotentiUa r^ians, 
on an earth-capped dike at the south end; and Filago ger^ 
manica, on the dry banks near it.* 
, Lest my description should fail to give the reader a precise 
idea of the localities of the plants entered, I may remark that 
the greatest distance between the remotest here mentioned does 
not exceed half a mile, and even a stranger to the district would 
succeed in reaping a good reward, or be abundantly repaid, for 
his visit to this interesting locality.
* In May, 1858, 1 discovered a small patch of Doronicum plantagineum among 
the trees in front of the crags, but when the trees were cut down, to bum the 
branches, a fire was made on the place where it grew.
I fear the plant is now 
destroyed.
1861.] BOTANY OF THE DOWARD HILLS, 101 
BOTANY OF THE DOWABD HILLS.
Botany of the Dowards (Herefordshire) , Great and Little.
(From a Correspondent.) 
About ten years ago there appeared in the old series of the 
^ Phytologist' (see vol.
iii.
p. 856), ''Notes on the More Interest- 
ing Plants found daring a Day^s Excursion on the Great and 
Little Dowards ; by William Bennett, Esq./' and the reporter 
and his companions had no reason to be discontented with the 
result of their botanizing.
The most experienced in such researches best know that all 
the plants even of a very small district, say, for example, three 
or four ^uare miles, including considerable diversity of surface 
and probably some variety of soil and elevation, are not to be 
seen in a day, even by a company of acute botanists.
All the 
plants do not appear at the same period ; and even if they did, 
strangers who visit a locality remote from their usual haunts 
(about their own homes) seldom happen to fall upon the exact 
spots wh6re the rarer species grow.
Some hitherto unrecorded species remain still to be noticed, 
and the present contribution is offered to supply this infor- 
mation.
Clematis Vitalba is not qpe of the plants enumerated in the 
list above mentioned, though it is not unfrequent on these hills.
Helleborus fcetidus and H.
viridi^ are additions to Mr. Bennett's 
list.
See ' Phytologist ' as above quoted.
About twelve years ago H.
fcetidtis grew plentifully in a wood 
on Great Doward Hill, in Herefordshire, and has been gradually 
decreasing since that period, and some two or three years since 
it totally disappeared.
It has been frequently and carefully 
sought for by botanists well acquainted with its locality and 
habits, but without success.
The cause of its disappearance is 
probably the growth of the underwood, and it is probable, that 
when the underwood or coppice is again cut, the Hellebore will 
spring up anew.
It is believed that the removal of the underwood from the 
upper parts of the hill has been the cause of the increase of 
Careoff montana, which is now found in profusion.
Helleborus viridis grows in a pasture at the base of the Great 
102 BOTANY OF THE DOWARD HILLS.
[April, 
Doward sparingly ; but there are several large tufts of it growing 
in a brake adjoining.
This plant alternately appears and disappears in a large copse 
wood on the south side of Ranmer Common, in Surrey.
About 
two or three years after the wood has been cut, the green Hel- 
lebore abounds everywhere in the open spaces between the bushy 
underwood stools ; after the copse wood has grown from seven to 
ten or twelve years, the Hellebore begins to disappear ; and when 
the wood is full-grown, or when the Ash and other coppice wood is 
large enough for the hoopmaker's purpose, the plant has entirely 
disappeared, and reappears when the copse is cut as before.
The appearance and disappearance of plants is illustrated by 
another plant not uncommon in Surrey, viz.
Narcissm Pseudo- 
Narcissus.
The Hook Wood, between Guildford and Ash, on the 
north side of the " Hog's Back,^^ perhaps three miles from Guild- 
ford, is periodically cut down for the coppice wood, not all in one 
season, for it is much too large for that process, but a portion 
— say ten or a dozen acres — is cut annually, and by the time the 
last dozen acres are cut, the first-cut portion is grown up and 
ready for the cooper's use.
In a certain part, probably in more 
than one part, the Lent Lilies [Narcissi) spring up the first year 
after the wood is cut.
They probably grow during several years, 
gradually disappearing when the shade is too much for them.
In 
all this ttiere is nothing marvellous; and probably for this cause 
these facts are but seldom recorded and more seldom heeded.
Omne ignotvm pro magnifico.
The incredibly marvellous is won- 
derfully attractive ; hence the implicit belief in the germination 
of mummy-wheat after its interment since the times of Cheops, 
or between three thousand and four thousand years ago.
It is asserted, on the highest possible authority, that when a 
forest or part of a forest is either cut down or burnt down, — for 
the same results will follow in.
either contingency, — there is a 
fresh crop of wood springs up as different as possible from the 
wood which grew there before it succumbed to the axe of the 
woodcutter or to the combustion of the potash-maker.
There may be nothing very wonderful in all this.
The fresh 
crop of timber, unlike that which was removed, may have origi- 
ginally germinated or have sprung up with the more fortunate or 
hardy children of the forest, which, like the giants of old, op- 
pressed the weak, caused them- to hide in caves, dens, and holes.
1861.] BOTANY OF THE DOWARD HILLS.
103 
yet were unable to exterminate the feebler races.
When the 
Titans succumbed^ a humbler race took their place.
Were any change in the position of the earth^s axis to take 
place, or if by any other mechanical or physical alteration the 
Arctic regions could enjoy a somewhat higher temperature than 
they do at present, there would soon spring up a luxuriant growth 
of Birch, Pine, and even Oak trees; and if these were only 
slightly protected from cattle, the hills aqd mountains of Lapland 
would abound in forests like the pine-clad hills of Norway and 
North America.
This new arborescent vegetation would not spring from seeds 
which had lain dormant in the soil since the Creation, but from 
plants which had existed for centuries under the Heath, Moss, 
and Lichens with which these inhospitable countries are covered.
The herbaceous Willow would be as ligneous as the Willows of 
our brooks, if the short summer and scarcity of heat and light 
suffered it to ripen its .tissues and to convert them into woody 
fibre.
The trees of Sweden, or several of them, are found in 
Lapland, but only a few inches high ; the only ligneous portion 
of them is just the part protected by the scanty vegetation with 
which they are surrounded.
The Hellebores and the Daffodils probably need more caloric, 
as well as more light, than they can "get when the place where th6y 
grow is densely covered with trees, branches, and leaves.
WTien 
these are removed, the plants appear and grow vigorously, till the 
subsequent growth causes them to decrease, and finally to disap- 
pear.
. 
Hutchifisia petraa grows on the calcareous rocks, and Hippo^ 
crepis comosa, Spiraa Filipendula, and Onobtychis sativa on the 
grassy open places.
The latter is usually considered an escape 
from places where it was or is still cultivated.
Whether this be 
be so or not, the plant is well established in many parts of the 
kingdom.
. Tilia grandifolia and 71 parviflora grow in plantations.
Bota- 
nists are not unanimous in admitting their claims as natives of 
England, although they are entered in every Flora, from Goth- 
land in the Baltic to the Balearic Isles in the Mediterranean.
Acer campestre and Euonymus europamSy plants of the Dowards, 
have also an equally extensive range in Europe, viz.
from Sweden 
to the south of Spain, 
104 BOTANY OP THE DOWARD HILtS.
i^prilf 
Poterium muricatum is one of our recent acquisitions^ acquired 
either by separation from P.
Sanguisorba or by importation witli 
forei^pi seeds.
The plants whether a variety of P.
Sanguisorba 
or as distinct as Hereford is distant from Boss^ grows in old pas« 
tures on the Little Doward, where there has been no cultivation 
within the memory of the oldest inhabitant.
It does not appear 
to be an introduction in Herefordshire.
Pyrus Aria and P.
Torminalis are distributed over most parts 
of Europe, from Denmark to Greece, and they form part of the 
. arborescent vegetation of this part of the west of England.
Cotyledon Umbilicus appears to have a predilection for the 
western parts of England, and therefore if its distribution in 
England, independently of its European range^ is to be the sub- 
ject of consideration, it is far from being a western plant, for it 
is found in the most eastern counties of England.
The nature 
of the surface and the state of the atmosphere have more effect 
on the distribution of the plant than a few degrees east or weal 
have.
The plant however is not confined to the west of Europe, but 
is a denizen of Switzerland, and grows to the east of the Adriatic, 
and extends into Greece and Turkey^ about as far as possible in 
Europe from the Atlantic.
But this is an example of one of the 
necessary consequences of attempting to establish general laws 
without a competent knowledge of individual facts.
The result 
is, only vague and uncertain generalities.
Cornus sanguinea, Viburnum Lantana, Acer campestre, and 
lAgustrum vulgare are chiefly found in hedges ; and hence it is a 
matter of wonderment that their nativity has not been called in 
question by some sharp-sighted observers, who will nOt let the 
world be ignorant of their perspicacity while they have wind 
enough in their lungs to blow their own trumpets withal.
These 
wouldf be-wiser observers than their fellows will say, " True ; but 
they are not exclusively found in hedges : they are called sylves- 
trals ; and woods, like hedges, are mostly planted." But are there 
no natural hedges, as there may be and are natural woods ?
When 
wood covered most part of the country, and before clearings and 
roads were made, all the shrubs and trees now growing in hedges 
might have grown in the original forest, and they may have been 
left, and probably were left, as a protection to the cleared culti- 
vated portions which skirted the public thoroughferes.
Hence 
1861,] BOTANY OF THE DOWARD HILLS.
105 
probably most of the arborescent septal vegetation in England, 
and Scotland too, is descended from the original shrubs and trees 
that once constituted part of the ancient i(prests with which most 
of this country was originally covered.
Among the hedge-plants of the Dowards are also the follow- 
ing, and they have never yet been deemed suspected aliens, though 
they grow in hedges, and almost exclusively there, viz.
Bryonia 
dioica, Tamus communis, and Carex pendula.
These grow all 
over Europe, from Portugal to Hungary inclusive.
Sison Amomum, another plant of the Dowards, grows under 
^hedges.
This species has a moderate European range, viz.
from 
the Alps to the north of Greece.
In woods or plantations (these words are nearly synonymous 
in the modem history of rural affairs) the sylvan and septal 
(hedge-plants) vegetation is combined.
Most of the plants so 
called grow both, in woods and in hedges.
Some of the rarest 
on the Dowards are, in addition to those mentioned at the begin- 
ning of this notice, viz, the Hellebores, etc..
Daphne Laureola, 
Serrattda tinctoria, Monoiropa Hypopitys, Cephaianthera gran- 
diflora, Ophrys rnvscifera, Neottia Nidm^avis, Luzula Forsteri, 
L. pUosa, var.
Borreri, Carex moniana, C.
clandestina, C.
digi' 
taia, etc.
It has been already observed (see supra) that one of the rarest 
of these Carices, C montana, has become more plentiful since 
the hills were partly denuded of their wood.
It was first disco- 
vered by Mr. Purchas in its above-mentioned Herefordshire loca- 
lity.
The other two species of the genus with which this rare 
plant is associated are also rarities, at least in England.
C. digi- 
tata has an extensive range in Europe, viz.
from Norway to Swit- 
zerland, and from the west of England to the east of Europe.
C. clandestina has an almost equal horizontal range, but its la- 
titudinal extension is not so great as that of C.
digitata.
C. 
montana, the scarcest of the three in England, has a much longer 
range than that of either of ite two associates on the Doward 
HiUs.
The rarer pascuals (pasture plants) on these hills are Helian- 
ihemum vulgare, Agrimonia Eupatoria, Planiago media and P.
Coronopus, Carex pracox, Chhra perfoliata, Ophrys ajAfera, 
SpArma FUipendula, Erigeron acris, Hippocrepis comosa, Taxvs 
baccaia, Orobanche major, Pohpodium calcareum, etc.
N. S.
VOL.
V. p .
106 FERTILIZATION OP FERNS.
[April, 
Among the agrarial species may be noticed Sinapis alba and 
S. nigra.
Reseda luiea, Carduus nutans, Picris hieradoides, etc.
The rarer aquatics and marsh plants^ of this district are Ceras^ 
Hum aquaticum, Ranunculus fluitans, Myosotis palustris, 8ym^ 
phylum officinale, Carex acuta, C.
pallescens, Ophiofflossum vtU- 
gatum, etc.
The following species grow about roadsides or on banks, or near 
hedges or in waste places, " nooks and corners,'^ viz.
AraUs hir^ 
suta, Viola hirta, V, odorata.
Origanum vulgare, Arum maculatum, 
Inula Gonyza, Dipsacus pilosus, etc.
As the botanists of England may soon look for and also have 
the pleasure of reading a Flora of Herefordshire, the above list 
is given as a kind of first-fruits, or, as some would say, Primitim 
Flor<B Herefordiensis.
It is printed and published for the use of 
botanists in this county, and for the convenience of those who 
mean to visit it with botanical objects.
There are many rare plants both on the north and south extre- 
mities o/ the county.
Euphorbia stricta, for example, is to be 
found not very far from Boss, and ^5/ra?i^ia major not very far 
from Ludlow on the north.
Botanists are guided in their re- 
searches on the existence and distribution of plants more by the 
natural state of the country than by its political divisions into 
counties, which appear to have perplexed more than one geogra- 
phical botanist.
N. .
FERTILIZATION OF FERNS.
Every species in the animal kingdom is sdlowed by naturalists 
to be sexual, but under various modifications.
Every species of 
vascular plant is allowed to be so too ; but when we come to the 
cellulars we are at a dead -lock, for our elementary botanical 
teachers have not as yet enlightened us as to whether even Ferns 
possess any sexual development.
We are informed that they have 
been subjected to the strictest microscopical scrutiny, and that 
no stamens or pistils have been discovered, or any organs which 
may be supposed to perform such operations as are caused by 
them in other orders.
It may be asserted that the body of the largest shark may be 
1861.} FAVEBSHAM PLANTS.
107 
dissected with no better success^ and yet the animal deposits 
eggs, and the mode and limits which Providence has assigned to 
it to observe, as well as the smallest sprat, in reference to the 
continuation of their respective species, is perfectly understood 
by naturalists.
Taking it as an established fact that all animals and l^alf of 
the vegetables are sexual, may we not iijfer that Ferns may be 
sexual also, and that they bear the same analogy to fish as vas- 
cular plants do towards the higher orders of animals ?
May we 
not without any great stretch of our imaginative faculties assume 
that some of the plants, fronds, or spore-cases produce male 
spores, and others female?
When the indusium bursts and the 
spores disperse, it is quite probable that a male and a female 
spore may frequently fall into the same nidus, and that the male 
may be the progenitor of the marchantiate portion of the plant, 
and the female be fertilized by the vegetative influence of the 
male to produce the frond.
By the way, I may observe that 
when a pot of spores are under cultivation, many never survive 
the marchantiate state.
Now as all naturalists are well aware that fish, which are a 
lower order of animals than birds or beasts, deposit their eggs 
prior to impregnation, is it going tpo far to assume that Divine 
Providence, in its infinite wisdom, has thought proper to endow 
a certain inferior, order of vegetables with the means of propaga- 
ting their species in a similar manner?
To me such an hypothesis appears perfectly natural ; but, as 
Sir Boger de Coverly replied when he had an abstruse question 
propounded to him, " much may be said on both sides.^^ 
PiSCATOB.
^AYEUSHAM PLANTS.
An Accotmt of a few hours' Observations in and about the ancient 
town of Faversham, Kent.
On Monday, the 3rd of September, 1860, we left the London 
Bridge terminus of the North Kent railway for a week^s bota- 
nizing in south Kent, and we halted from three to four hours 
(from between one and two o^clock to between five and six) to 
108 FAVSUSHAM PLANTS.
[April, 
look for and collect a few specimens for which Faversham is ce- 
lebrated.
It is believed that the readers of the 'Phytologist' will ex- 
cuse this now oftener than the thrice-toM tale about the plants 
of Faversham : first, because all who read this may not have the 
works of Jaoobs and Cowell on their shelves; secondly, the pre- 
sent story will be only a short one ; thirdly and lastly, because 
we have something to tell them which was never printed before.
The station is on the right-hand side, or on the west of the 
town, and consequently, in going to the creek, where the rarest 
of Kentish or even of English plants grpw, viz.
Peucedanum offici- 
nale, the traveller has to pass through the town ; and future tourists 
are recommended to turn aside into the churchyard, as we did, 
and if they are not botanists, they may spend a half-hour not 
unprofitably in *^ meditating among the tombs.'^ Our object was 
not this; for examples enough of the ravages and trophies of 
time and of death are obtainable without incurring the expense 
of a journey to so distant a place as Faversham.
We went to bo- 
tanize, and we did so, energetically and successfully.
If there 
be two species of Parietaria, viz.
P. diffusa and P.
erecta, they 
are surely to be seen in Kent.
Probably they grow on these 
ancient walls or spread over the contiguous rich mould of the 
churchyard.
But this plant or these plants abounded in several 
parts of the coast subsequently visited, and many examples were 
looked at and compared, but with no definite or satisfactory re- 
sults.
The Pellitory, though mural in the interior of our island, is 
not so in Kent.
It grows &r from towns and from houses^ 
sometimes on the chalk rock or on the chalk debris, but it is 
quite as common on the rich marly soil of the underclifFs and 
even on the level ground, but as remote as possible from dwellings 
and ruins, its common habitat in the inland parts of the country.
Crepis biennis we did not observe about the churchyard.
It is 
entered in CowelFs list, and it may be there, though we did not 
see it ; but we saw plenty of common or garden Parsley, Snap- 
dragon, and blue Toad-flax [Antirrhirmm purpureum) ; these, with 
FesttAca myurus, or F, pseudo-myurus, or F.
bromoides, Hiera^ 
eium Pilosella, VercMica arvensis, Erigeron acris, and such-like^ 
formed the staple of the mural (wall) plants of Faversham church- 
yard.
1861.] FAYERSHAM PLANTS.
109 
Crepis Mennia, wMch we never saw but in Kent^ is stated by 
Stowell (see ^ Phytologist/ n.
s., p.
103) to be plentifal in this 
neighbourhood whereyer the chalk crops out.
But the pride and the glory of the Faversham Flora is the 
Peucedanum officinale, a plant in these our isles^ almost exclu- 
sively confined to Kent ; and this is the better known of its 
two Kentish reported stations.
We hesitated about going to 
Whitstable in search of it, but ultimately concluded that our 
time would be better spent in searching the coast further south.
This rare species still grows plentifully on the high bank 
-which skirts the creek on the Faversham side of the river.
If 
the tourist goes on straight to the harbour, and then follows the 
dike towards the east, leaving the creek on his right, he will soon 
see plenty of this plant.
Here also grow Allium vineate^ Juncus cosnosw, THghchinpa- 
' lustre, much relished by cattle, Juncus maritimus, Glyceria (Sck' 
rochloa) distans or G.
Borreri, These plants constitute the prin- 
cipal herbage of these grassy banks and salt meadows.
Aster 
THpoUum and Statice lAmonium grow luxuriantly on the mud- 
banks within the sea-wall (dike?).
Rumex Hydrolapathum and 
Potamogeton pectinatus grow in the water.
Our intention is not to make out a fourth list of Faversham 
species, but merely to notice and record the changes that have 
been observed since the publication of the last printed list (about 
four years ago : see ' Phytologist,^ vol.
ii.
p. 103), and to record 
with these newly-observed plants a few of the prominent and rarest 
of the others, for the convenience of those who may follow in our 
track.
There is a plant new to the Flora of Faversham, viz.
Lepidium 
ruderale, to be entered as a species belonging to this locality.
The rarest species of this genus, viz.
Lepidium latifolium, was a 
Faversham plant when Dr. Jacobs compiled his Hora.
It had 
disappeared when Mr. Cowell published his very complete and 
systematic localized Hsts.
Another species, L.
campestrCy an agri- 
cultural weed, was detected by the Rev. H.
A. Stowell and pub- 
lished in the 'Phytologist' for 1856, vol.
i. p.
254, n.
s. We 
have the pleasure of reportkig the above-mentioned plant, an- 
other member of the genus, not previously recorded as growing 
in this part of Kent.
Lepidium ruderale is a plant of migratory tendencies, but it 
110 PAVER8HAM PLANTS.
[April, 
is hoped that it may become permanent in this station.
It has 
been occasionally seen at Wandsworth, near the steamboat-pier, 
on the Surrey side of the river ; and also on the bank of the 
Kensington canal, on the Middlesex side of the Thames ; and it 
has been observed also at Tumham Green, Middlesex.
It is not 
uncommon about Greenhithe and Gravesend, and it is exceed- 
ingly plentiful on the river Coin, below Colche&ter.
The following additions are also to be made to the plants of 
Faversham, viz.
Diplotawis muralis, which appeared here plentiful 
enough, and it accompanied us during our whole route through 
Canterbury, Deal, and Dover, to Hythe, where our journey ter- • 
minated.
This species, unlike its relative, D.
tenuifolia, shows 
no predilection for walls ; it is everywhere, in Surrey and Kent, 
where it abounds, contented with a humbler station.
It would 
be too tedious to enter all the stations for a species which is in 
this part of the country nearly as common as Shepherd' s-purse.
On a wall on the left, near Davington church, while ascending 
the hill from the creek, Sedum dasyphyllum was detected in con- 
siderable abundance.
This rare plant may have been introduced 
subsequeptly to the publication of Dr. Jacobs^s Flora, but it had 
apparently been settled there long prior to the compilation of 
either of the modem lists of the Faversham species.
Verbascum Ly^hnitiSy as a mural plant, is also a new discovery.
This grew on a wall a short distance beyond Davington church, 
on the same road, and on the same side of it.
This plant was 
solitary when first observed two years ago.
There are now, Sep- 
tember 3rd, 1860, three plant8> viz.
the original or mother-plant, 
now of considerable bulk, having both flowers and fruit, also 
one of its descendants in flower, and the third and.
last has now 
well-developed radical leaves.
This locality produces abundant and fine specimens of Salvia 
verbenacay and also of the rare Galamintha Nepeta, which abounds 
both on the turf in the churchyard, and on the churchyard wall.
Thi» plant is probably sometimes mistaken for C officinalis, 
and C.
officinalis may also occasionally be mistaken for it j and 
the mistakes may be counter-checks, and the relative numerical 
proportions between the statistics of the two plants may not be 
much affected.
The numbers of stations known, or at least pub- 
lished, for C officinalis is at least twice as many as for C.
Nepeta.
But if the census of the individual examples is to be taken, C Ne- 
1861.] FAVEESHAM PLANTS.
Ill 
peia is a thousandfold more numerous than C.
officinalis.
The lat- 
ter grows here and there on banks and on roadsides ; the former, 
C, Nepeta, covers many acres in several parts of Kent and Essex, 
where it is the sole herbage, excluding every other plant except 
grass.
In some places it gives a hue to the fields where it grows, 
which at a considerable distance look as if fall of clover.
Cola- 
mintha Nepeta is gregarious in the counties of Essex and Kent, 
where we saw it ; and by this habit, as well as by its colour and 
the smallness of its leaves, it may readily be distinguished fix>m 
its near relations.
In a dried state, "or in the herbarium, the 
three species Calamintha sylvatiea, Bromf., C officinalis, and C 
Nepeta, are not very readily distinguished.
Any botanist accustomed to the comparison of herbarium 
specimens, and who is well endowed with energy and patience, and 
could spare the time, might do good service to the science, and 
might be helpful to the students of our native plants, if he would 
undertake the unprejudiced examination of the three ill-defined 
species of Calamintha, C.
officinalis, C.
Nepeta, and C sylvatiea.
He might commence with thelargest of the three forms, C.
sylva- 
tiea, Bromf., and he should diligently compare with this assumed 
species the largest forms of C, officinalis which may be in his 
herbarium.
This latter plant pretty well connects the smallest 
of the three, viz.
C. Nepeta, with the largest, C.
sylvatiea.
Pro- 
bably the examination of a dozen examples of each would decide 
the question about the specific distinctness or the identity of the 
three generally- received species.
If connecting forms be found 
among the dozen examples of the respective plants or species, of 
course their specific distinctness must be abandoned ; or if their 
distinctive characters be so minute as to be observable only by 
such a close scrutiny of a series of specimens, few botanists, it is 
to be feared, will have both the time and patience necessary for 
their satisfactory identification.
The important question, which of the two practices, viz.
the 
splitting or combining of species, is most conducive to the pro- 
gress of science, will be answered by the leaders of the two scien- 
tific sections in conformity with their own peculiar views.
Much 
may be said on both sides, much has been written not always in a 
courteous way, and it is probable that for the purposes of science 
the one mode of procedure may be as beneficial as the other ; 
but the segregative process will eventually be a cause of much 
112 FAVEBSHAM PLANTS.
[April, 
trouble and discomfort to the future historians of the British 
species.
The history of the recent mutabilities in the nomencla- 
ture of our plants may be an instructive example^ for the changes 
that have been made during the last thirty years far exceed those 
made during a century previous to 1830.
Something may be advanced here about the nativity of Sedum 
dctsyphyllum, a plant which is challenged by some and passed by 
other botanists.
Mr. Watson decides against its claims on the 
ground that the few natural stations where it has been seen are 
mentioned *' on authority not strong, and seldom corroborated by 
any second observer.' ' Seldom corroborated !
How often should a 
station be reported, and how many times should it be corroborated 
by subsequent observers, ere it is allowed to pass the ordeal of the 
sage of Thames Ditton ?
The ' Phytologist ' supplies corrobora- 
tive proofs of the genuineness of the Perthshire localities, both of 
Sedum albjim and 8, dasyphyllum ; confirmation strong as Holy 
Writ can be easily produced, '^in precise terms," and attested by 
hundreds of observers.
But will any phytogeographer answer this question, viz.
are all 
plants growing on old walls, whether '^ garden, abbey, or hos- 
pital '* walls, introduced there by cultivation ?
If he answers No, 
and further replies, only a donkey, but no botanical geographer, 
would ask such a question, — ^it may be asked, how came the other 
plants, the Arenaria serpyllifolia, or A.
lepioclados, or A.
balearica, 
which grows on the tool-house at Moncrieffe, or Shepherd's-purse, 
or Groundsel, and a multitude more, on the wall ?
These plants 
are never cultivated, but eradicated wherever and whenever they 
appear.
How are the genuine plants to be distinguished from the 
spurious?
They all grow together.
The others, it may again be 
asserted, are common plants, and therefore there can be no ques- 
tion about the legitimacy of their origin.
The other is uncom- 
mon, it is scarce or rare.
It may be asked again, are all rare 
plants which have the misfortune to grow on walls to be excluded?
Possibly they might grow on natural habitats if there were any 
present suited to their peculiar economy.
Mr. Watson's arguments are not convincing ; he did not judge 
accordantly with the evidence, and probably the evidence on which 
he relied was defective.
But a metaphysician should be able to 
sift evidence, and he should possess in addition the moral ability, 
to decide impartially.
1861.] KINGSTON BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
113 
In a head of pure fresh water near the town, Hippuris vulgaris 
still grows, with several other aquatics.
Cuscuta Trifolii had been 
well-nigh forgotten but for the friendly aid -of the notes made on 
the spot.
It may be as well to state here that every plant seen 
and entered in this report was entered into a note-book when it 
was seen or collected ; and these notes were subsequently copied 
out and sent to the compiler of this narrative of the journey.
Furthermore it should be stated that no plant was entered about 
which there was the slightest hesitation in reference to its identity.
When we had any doubt, or had reason to suspect that there 
might be a shade of suspicion about the name, the latter was in- 
stantly cancelled.
The Clover Dodder was plentiM in a clover-field near Daving- 
ton church.
It was seen attached to other plants besides Clover, 
especially to Cr^ns virem.
It did not appear to have done much 
mischief this wet season.
Rumewpvicher and Lolium nmltiflorum appeared in many places.
The latter, being a valuable agricultural grass, is spreading.
Thus ended our botanizing at Faversham, which did not detain 
lis more than three or four hours.
The writing of this notice 
has filled up as much time as the collecting of the plants did.
At 
five o'clock we started by rail for Canterbury.
KINGSTON (CANADA) BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
The ' Phy tologist ^ is indebted, as we believe, to Professor 
Lawson for several newspapers containing the historical account 
of the formation of this Society, and our thanks are hereby ten- 
dered for the means thus afibrded for giving our readers an out- 
line of these interesting proceedings.
A brief epitome is all we can find room for.
On the 7th December, 1860, there was a large meeting held 
in a class-room of Queen^s College, Kingston, to consider the 
propriety of organizing a Botanical Society ; and the proposal ap- 
pears to have been cordially received by the professors, graduates, 
and students of the University, as also by the influential gentle- 
men and citizens of that part of the colony.
•Hhe addresses by the Rev. Principal Leitch, Professors Lawson 
and Litchfield, were very appropriate.
We hope the Society, so 
N. S.
VOL.
V. Q 
114 KINGSTON BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
[April, 
auspiciously inaugurated on this occasion^ will have a happier 
existence and produce more satisfactory results than a similar 
Society which the ]fi&t of the speakers intimated that he aided to 
establish in the British metropolis.
The allusion here made is to 
the unhappy Society of London^ which perished by inanition or 
sheer famine.
This miserable abortion never had a healthy exist- 
ency^ and its foster-parents appear to have been the most ineffi* 
cient of all imaginable incapables.
But de mortuis nil nisi 
perum ; we dare not enter bonum ; this would be a sheer misap- .
plication of the word.
We trust thei'e is a better futurity for 
its younger and more vigorous lister of Upper Canada ; but we, 
for our part, should not, like the Professor, gratuitously state 
that our connection with the London namesake was of a very in- 
timate character.
De giLstibus ml disputandum.
Probably the Doctor did not 
know that the Institution which he helped to form in London, 
more than twenty-five years ago has been long -reckoned among 
the departed.
We anticipate for the Botanical Society of Kingston a pros- 
perous career of usefidness for many years.
Our hopes are chiefly 
founded on the comparatively unknown capabilities of the coun- 
try.
Possibly few countries on the globe, as some affectedly call 
the earth's surface, have had their vegetable productions more 
carefully and successfully investigated than the Bntish Isles, 
and still there are novelties to be recorded as well as seen ; not 
merely new localities for rare plants, but absolute accessions to 
the number of species.
What may we not expect in a large, per- 
haps the largest, dependency of the empire, the greater part 
hitherto unexplored ?
Another ground of our confidence in the 
success of this Society is in the characteristic energy and enter- 
prise of colonial settlers, whether these be provincials by birth or 
by immigration.
A third and the most important element in 
the constitution of this Society is the thorough cosmopolitan or 
catholic nature of its objects.
It appeals to the woodcutter, the 
pearlash-maker, the cultivator, the trader, the professional man, 
the moralist, and the theologian.
It is a grave mistake to divorce science from humanity ; and 
societies which confine their objects to the welfare, instructipn, 
or amelioration of their own associated members only, aA][uit 
themselves of scarcely half of the functions devolving on them 
in their combined or aggregate capacities.
1861.] KINGSTON BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
115 
Our readers would not thank the ^ Phytologist ' for a list of the 
members of this new co-operative association.
Few, indeed, of 
these names are known here, although they are no doubt the very 
^lite of the Canadian population of that part of the colony.
Our 
*readers*in the colonies must increase very manifold ere we can 
afford to print their names in our pages, unless they will conde- 
scend to employ the humble periodical, in which these remarks 
appear, as a vehicle for telling the British botanists what are the 
vegetable productions of their colony.
Of course the Secretary of 
the Society, Professor Lawson, does not come within the bounds 
of this class : he is a British botanist, and has been a contributor 
to the ^ Phytologist ' from its commencement.
Our readers are presented with some account of the constitu- 
tion of the Society, which will be more satisfactory than a list of 
members, or even an outline of the speeches delivered when it 
was formed.
The first law defines the objects of the Society, viz.
the study 
of Botany in all its departments and it» application to the fine and 
useful arts; these are to be carried out by periodical meetings, 
communications, field meetings, corre»pondence, interchange of 
specimens, experiments on plants, introduction of new plants, the 
publication of transaetions, etc.
The next law determines who shall be members, and these are 
divided into four classes, viz.
— 1.
Honorary Members.
2. Pel- 
lows.
3. Annual Subscribers.
4. Corresponding Members.
The fourth and fifth rules define the mode of election and the 
duties and contributions of the members.
(Note — ^the second 
and third classes only contribute, and the contribution is two 
dollars annually.) The remaining rules provide for the election 
of office-bearers, etc.
The Society may justly be congratulated on their sensible 
scheme of a moderate annual payment.
The first meeting of the Society was held on 11th January, 
1861, in the same place, for the election of Fellows, Subscribers, 
office-bearers, etc; The Society by this time probably amounts 
to above 200 members in alk The British honorary members 
elected at last meeting are the following ^-— Dr. Balfour, Dr.
Greville, Sir W.
Hooker, Dr. Lindley, Mr. J.
F. Syme, Dr. W.
L. Lindsay.
Dr. Mueller and Mr. Thwaites are the Colonial Honorary 
Members.
116 VALERIANA CALCITRAFA.
[ApHl^ 
At this meeting donations were presented to the Society^ al- 
iready an infli^ential and important body^ consisting of books^ 
memoirs^ monographs^ papers^ plants^ etc.
: and several papers 
were read^ among which is an interesting one from an exploring 
party in the far-west^ and from which an epitome will be made 
for the gratification of the readers of the ' Phy tologist/ 
We beg to inform our readers that this Society is named the 
"Botanical Society of Canada/' a rather comprehensive and,, 
some might say, an ambitious title ; but if the ground was not 
preoccupied, it is not only defensible but laudable, and every well- 
wisher of botany will be delighted to hear that their success has 
been as great as the auspiciousness of their beginning.
VALERIANA CALCITBAPA.
(From a Correspondent,) 
While rummaging over some old bundles of plants, I happened 
to light upon specimens of Valeriana (CerUranthus) Calcitrapa, 
from (so far as I know) an unrecorded locality ; and I am much 
mistaken if it doi^s not turn out to be the earliest direct testi- 
mony that we have of its existence as a British plant.
The plants 
are accompanied by a ticket in the handwriting of the late Mr.
Benjamin Porster, of Walthamstow, at whose sale the bundle of 
plants in which this Valerian occurs, came into my hands.
The following localities for this introduced (?
naturalized) 
species, viz.
1. Walls belonging to Chelsea Hospital, Middlesex.
2. Churchyard' wall, Eltham, Kent.
These two stations are re- 
corded in print.
See Withering's ' Arrangement,' vol.
i. p.
63, 
4th ed., 1801, and HulVs ^British Flora,' 2nded., 1808.
3. Pa- 
lace, Enfield, Middlesex, in MS.
. 
It is remarked in ^ Cybele,' vol.
ii.
p. 25, that the plant above 
named has very slender claims to inclusion among our British 
plants as a naturalized alien.
Those who are curious in such mat- 
ters, — I mean writers who would read even their Bibles if thereby 
they could fix a charge of plagiary on their contemporaries, or even 
on their predecessors, for they are not very particular about where 
the dirt is flung^ whether on the living or on the dead, — should 
turn to the 309th page of the old series of the ' Phytologist,' and 
there they will learn from what source the author of the ' Cybele ' 
1861.] VALERIANA CALCITBAPA.
117 
drew his inspiration.
As I do not mean to make scientific capital 
by trenching on the informer^s trade, I will turn to a more con- 
genial topic, and I intend to claim for the late Mr. Forster the 
honour (if there be any, hanging at the end of so slender a thread 
or modicum of information) of being the original discoverer of 
this plant as a spontaneous British production.
If the late above- 
named amiable botanist was not the first who observed it growing 
wild in several places as before said, he was the first to record its 
growth where it is still found.
In vol.
i. of the old series of the ' Phytologist,' and not in vol.
iii.
as quoted in the ^ Cybele,^ and on the Q48th and '649th pages, 
there is a note from the real Simon Pure, revealing the history 
of the distribution of CentranthiM Calcitrapa in the following, 
quoted from the ' Phytologist,' as before stated : — 
" It is now fifty, if not sixty, years since {Mem. the author of 
this note dated it 6th June, 1843) I first saw this plant on a 
wall at Eltham, where it was well known to the London botanists, 
who, I believe, always thought it had escaped from Sherard^s 
garden, and it was therefore considered a naturalized plant, etc.
We also used at the same to find it on the wall of a garden at 
Enfield, in Middlesex, which had formerly been that of Dr.
Uvedale.^' If fifty years be subtracted from 1843, the remainder, 
according to Cocker, will be 1793, and if the longer period, viz.
sixty years, be taken from the date when the above-quoted note 
was written, the remainder will be 1783.
Or if we take the 
mean period, the result will be 1788 ; and if we add the seventeen 
years which have elapsed since June, 1843, we have about seventy 
years as the historic period of this plant as a naturalized species 
in England.
In casting my eye over the geographical range of CerUranthus 
Calcitrapa I find that it is known in the middle and south of 
Europe, and also in the Balearian Isles I 
It is very devoutly to be wished that another Balearic plant, 
viz.
Arenaria balearica, may meet with as great success as this 
tiny.
Valerian, — that she may spread herself about and occupy as 
many stations, and, above all, that she may have her humble 
claims not only admitted but defended by as many celebrated 
and generous botanists as have patronized lier modest compa- 
triot, is the humble wish of one of Florals devoted admirers.
118 BOTANY OF THE CHILTERNS.
[April, 
Remarks on the Botany of the Chilterns.
By Chas.
Jos. Ashfield.
I notice, in the first volume of the ' Phytologist/ some notes 
of plants found near Tring, Herts.
I have botanized on the 
Chiltern Hills at different times, from Whiteleaf Cross, in the 
parish of Monks Risborough, to the other side of Tring, and 
can add my testimony to that of your correspondents (vol.
i. 
pp.
105, 331), as to the botanical poverty of the district.
Early 
in September 1850, I found some fine specimens of Atropa 
Belladonna, at the foQt of the hill on which the Bridgewater 
Monument stands, and on the hills in the immediate neighbour- 
hood an abundance of Gentiana Amarella, Dianthus Armeria, 
Malva moschaia, and one or two of the lAnari^—l believe 
spuria, fo* one — are to be met with in the hedges and fields in 
the neighbourhood.
In July 1850, I had several rambles in 
the neighbourhood' of Chequers and Whiteleaf Cross.
The 
greatest rarity, perhaps, that I met with, was Iberis amara, a 
great quantity of which grew in a cornfield at the foot of the 
hill on which the Cross is cut.
In the woods in the neigh- 
bourhood, Ophrys Nidus-avis and Prenanthes muralis, together 
with an abundance of Alchemilla vulgaris, Asperula odorata, 
Galeobdohn luteum, and Sanicula europaa, are to be found.
Helianthenmm vulgare grows plentifully on the higher parts of 
the hilk, especially on the top of King Cunobelin, the highest, 
I believe,, of the Chiltern range, and some dwarf specimens of 
Campantbla glomerata, from one to two or three inches high, 
grew in the space occupied by the Cro3s> and on hills in the 
neighbourhood.
I also met with a few specimens of Ophrys 
apifei^a and Orchis pyramidalis.
Galium Mollugo is plentiful 
in the hedges at the foot of the hills about McMiks Risborough, 
etc.
Buocus sempervirens grows on the sides of the hills about 
Velvet Lawn.
Sedum acre and Poterium Sanguisorba are not 
uncoismon in the same neighbourhood.
Geranium pratense is 
plentiful and fine about Great Hampden House and church.
I 
may have met with a few othev plants which I cannot call to 
mind at present, but I have a distinct recollection of those I 
have mentioned, and, indeed, have specimens of some of them.
You ask, in vol.
i. p.
108, if Habenaria chlorantha, Bu^ 
pleurum rotundifolium, Ajuga Cham^pitys, Spiranthes autumnaiis.
1861.] TODMORDEN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
119 
and Paris qttadrifolia are to be found ia the district referred 
to.
The first four I have certainly never met with between 
Whiteleaf Cross and Tring, but I am not quite certain whether 
I have found the fifth there or not 
I may as well mention that a ramble of a very few miles, in a 
north-westerly direction, from Whiteleaf Cross, will bring one 
to the most prolific station I am acquainted with for the Frt- 
tillaria Meleagris.
It is, I believe, on a farm called Waldridge ; 
but, at any rate, it is near the hamlet of Ford, in the parish of 
Dinton.
The field in which the plant grows is known through- 
out the neighbourhood, and, as I am informed, even so far as 
Aylesbury, by the name of the "Crowcup Field,'^ and many 
persons walk from miles round to gather the flowers every year, 
I have been told that Thalictrum flavum flourishes in the same 
locality as the Fritillary, but I have never seen it there.
I have 
seen Fritillaria growing in two other places, one at Great Mun- 
den, Herts, recorded by the reverend author of the 'Herts 
Flora,^ to whom I had the pleasure of being introduced some 
years since, and the other not far from hence (' Flora of 
Preston,^ part ii.), but in neither place is it so plentiful as in 
the Bucks locality.
Having mentioned Dinton, I may state that the following are 
some of the scarcer plants to be found in that parish: — 
Galeopsis Ladanum, Campanula hybrida, Linaria spvaria,^ Thlaspi 
arvense, Sambucus EbultiSy Erysimum cheiranthoides, Hyoscy- 
amus niger, Origanum vulgare, Rum^x maritimus, Bryonia 
dioica, Tamus communis, and a Rhamnus, I forget whether ca- 
tharticus or Frangula.
TODMOEDEN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
{from the Todmorden Post, March 9th.) 
The monthly meeting of the energetic members of this Society 
was held on March 4th, Mr. Stansfield in the chair, when the 
excursions for the coming season were arranged.
The times and 
places are as follow: — 1st, March 30, Ramsden Wood; 2nd, 
May 4, Sheddin Clough ; 8rd, June 1, Dentdale, Sedbergh ; 4th, 
June 29, Whiteley Dean ; 5th, August 3rd, Grand Excursion, 
North Wales ; 6th, August 31, Silverdale ; 7th, October 5, Grieve 
Clough and Boldsworth ; 8th, November 2, Thieveley Scouts.
120 TODIfORDfiN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
{Aprils 
As some readers of the * Phytolog;ist' may ii^ish to join these 
zealous Lancashire botanists^ we have much pleasure in giving 
publicity to the foregoing appointments.
The number of specimens laid on the table was limited^ but 
there were several very interesting forms of the Harf s-tongue, 
Scolopendrium mdgare; also some highly interesting varieties 
of Polystichum angutare, gathered by the President in the course 
of a recent ramble in the neighbourhood of Stainland ; inter aliUy 
P. ang.
cristatum, and P.
ang.
subtripinnatum.
A large leaf of 
the splendid omamental-foliaged plants Maranta zebrinUy was 
brought from Vale Nurseries ; also specimens^ in flower, of the 
beautiful Franciscea con/ertifolia, the very curious Rhipsalis salu 
comoideSy Centradenia floribunda, etc.
Among hardy herbaceous 
plants from the same place, HeUeborus orientalis and H, olympicus 
were remarkable.
The choice of books was duly proceeded with.
From the 
eagerness with which almost every description of work was called 
for, it was evident to us that there could not be many books 
with uncut leaves in the Society^s library; and we were most 
agreeably surprised to find that such of the books even as contain 
botanical mysteries, hidden under the guise of not very elegant 
Latinity, and designated by clumsy and uncouth Latin names, 
are not allowed to get dusty ; on calling for a work of this cha- 
racter we found we v had been forestalled.
These are healthy 
signs, and we are glad to report them.
Our report would be very incomplete were we not to notice a 
specimen of a fossil plant, from the Millstone Grit rock, brought 
by T.
E. Hammerton, Esq. The specimen in question was one of 
those denominated " swords '^ by the quarry-men.
It was from 
eighteen inches to two feet in length, and much flatter than 
ordinary, presenting no appearance of having been cylindrical, 
except at the inferior end.
It was difficult to say, from the con- 
dition in which the specimen was brought, whether it had be- 
longed to the endogenous or acrogenous plants ; if to the latter, 
it would probably be of the genus Calamites of Lindley and 
Hutton, but if so, it must have been an excorticated specimen, 
for no distinct traces were observable of the longitudinal grooves 
and cross-joints characterizing these plants ; if to the former, it 
must have been a gigantic Reed : that such existed at the time 
the Millstone Grit was deposited, is very probable.
The Presi- 
1861.] REVIEWS.
121 
dent stated that he had seen a fossil specimen, with the inferior 
portion of the stem more than six inches in diameter, with the 
protruding roots, exactly as we see in the larger kinds of Grasses 
at present existing.
^ 
We wish the members of this well-managed Society fine weather 
for their excursions^ which we also hope will be very successM, 
Our readers will naturally look for a report of the rarities and 
novelties which they may have the good hap to discover.
Flora of Cambridgeshire ; or, a Catalogue of Plants found in the 
County of Cambridge, By Charles Cardale Babington, .
M.A., F.E.S., F.L.S. London : Van Voorst, 1860.
The ' Flora of Cambridgeshire * is an admirable specimen of 
its class.
Four requisites are essential to the completeness of a 
local Flora.
First, a competent knowledge of the planti^.
Second, 
a perfect acquaintance with the literature of the subject.
Third, 
a thorough exploration of the field of study.
Fourth, and not 
least, a critical eye for anything suspicious in the place of growth 
of any doubtful native.
All these points have been most care- 
fully attended to in the volume before us.
In the fifty-six pre- 
liminary pages Mr.
£abington gives us a full account of all that 
has been written by former botanists upon the plants of Cam- 
bridgeshire.
Then follow some excellent topographical remarks ; 
a map of the county ; and a table of distribution, in which the 
plants are traced through eight subdivisions or districts.
The nomenclature and arrangement are naturally those of the 
fourth edition of the ' Manual of British Botany.^ Generic and 
specific descriptions are omitted as unnecessary in a local Flora ; 
and the matter under each species is limited to — 1.
The Latin 
specific name, followed by the English name, when there is a real 
one.
2. The denomination of the plant, as found in the works of 
Ray, Martyn, Lyons, Relhan, etc.
3. The general character of 
the' places where the plant grows, its duration and period of 
flowering.
4. The special localities, followed in each case by the 
name of the authority, or the initials of the observer.
JiXL important feature of Mr. Babington's ' Flora of Cambridge- 
N. S.
VOL.
V. E 
122 REVIEWS.
[April, 
shire' is its historical character.
Two hundred years have now 
elapsed from the time that the first Catalogue of Cambridgeshire 
plants was published by the illustrious Bay ; many other Floras^ 
Catalogues^ and similar treatises have since appeared.
Thus, the 
present Flora, as the last of a series of works upon the same sub- 
ject, becomes at once a record of the progress of botany, and a 
witness of the changes which have taken place upon the surface 
of the country — of the consequent disappearance of many plants, 
the apparently recent introduction of others.
Fully aware of the 
interest attaching to his work in an historical point of view, Mr.
Babington has taken care to give, under each species, a reference 
to the earliest writer who mentions it as found in Cambridgeshire, 
and, when possible, the name of the original finder is stated ; 
also, for the purpose of contrasting the present state of the 
Flora with its former condition, the localities which rest solely 
upon the authority of the older botanists, are distinguished by 
being printed in italics.
If anything, perhaps too great respect 
has, in a few cases, been shown for ancient authorities.
For in- 
stance, we cannot help suspecting that Senecio sylvaticas was mis- 
taken for S.
i;wco«w in the localities given; and possibly (Enanthe 
fluviatiUs for Cicuta virosa.
* It is a special province of the local botanist to distinguish be- 
tween indigenous and introduced plants, both by stating his own 
opinion, and by reporting exactly the kind of station in which 
a suspected plant occurs.
Mr. Babington appears to have be- 
stowed much care on this portion of his subject : he has been the 
first to adopt -the use of a separate brand {%) for the "probably,^' 
as distinguished from the '^ possibly '' (t) and " certainly ^' (*) 
introduced species.
He has also attached the mark of foreign 
origin to several of the ^^ colonist'' class.
In both these particu- 
lars Mr. Babington is supported by the high authority of Al- 
phonse De Candolle, as may be seen by a reference to the ^ Geo- 
graphic Botanique,' vol.
ii.
p. 642 (see also ' Phytoiogist,' n.s.
vol.
ii.
p. 451.) 
The following paragraphs, quoted from the Introduction, will 
give some idea of the surface of the country, and of the " great 
alterations caused by modern enclosures and drainage:'' — 
• * Cambridgeshire/' writes Mr. Babington, " may be described as flat 
and naked ; nevertheless it is not so absolutely flat as is generally sup- 
posed.
A range of conspicuous chalk-hiUs extends across the southern part 
1861.] REVIEWS.
123 
of the county, and the south-eastern district, consisting also of chalk, is 
undulating and well furnished with wood.
To the north of the chalk 
country a broad belt of level clayey land occurs, having much flint gravel 
distributed over its surface.
Formerly, each watercourse traversing this 
clayey district was bordered more or less widely *by a morass, and some of 
its depressed parts formed tracts of fen.
" Until recently most of the chalk district was open and covered with a 
beautiful coating of turf, profusely decorated with Anemone PuUatUla, As- 
tragalm Hypoglottia, and other interesting plants.
It is now converted 
into arable land, and its peculiar plants mostly confined to small waste 
spots by roadsides, pits, and the very few banks which are too steep for 
the plough.
Thus, many species which were formerly abundant have become 
rare ; so rare as to cause an unjust suspicion of their not being really na- 
tives to arise in the minds of some modem botanists.
" Until within about sixty years the whole of the clay district was open, 
although cultivated.
The homesteads were collected together so as to form 
villages, and each had one or two little paddocks attached to it; the 
remainder of the parish, the * field,' being without fences, and divided 
by slender lines of ancient turf, denominated * balks,' into long narrow 
strips called * yard-lands.* With a very few slight exceptions, all the 
'field ' is now enclosed, and the * balks/ with the various plants which grew 
upon them, destroyed by the plough.
Thus the plants native to the clay 
have suffered nearly as much as those indigenous to the chalk.
Where 
they were formerly abundant they are now rarely to be found.
*' Bbtanically speaking, the Fens have undergone an equally, if not more, 
destructive change.
The employment of steam has made the removal of 
the water so certain, that nearly the whole level may be cited as a pattern 
in farming.
With the water, many of the most interesting and character- 
istic plants have disappeared, or are become so exceedingly rare, that the 
discovery of single individuals of them is a subgecjb for wonder and con- 
gratulation.
There is scarcely a spot remaining (I oi^y know of one, 
near Wicken) in which the ancient vegetation continues undisturbed and 
the land is sufficiently wet to admit of it coming to perfection.
Owing to 
the necessary existence of numerous ditches to divide the fields and collect 
the water, those plants which are absolutely aquatic have not suffered so 
gi-eatly as the others." 
No wonder that we find in the Appendix some 50 species enu- 
merated as " Lost Pknts.** 
As might be expected, from its southerly position and its prox- 
imity to the European continent, Cambridgeshire afibrds a rich 
variety of indigenous plants.
Including nearly eighty species 
marked as introduced^ the species enumerated in the table of dis- 
124 BEVISW8.
[Aprilf 
.tribution amount to 928, a high number, when it is remembered 
that the maritime Flora hardly exceeds 80.
With the exception of Rcemeria hybrida, marked as probably 
introduced, Cambridgeshire has no British plant peculiar to itself.
It shares its most characteristic species with Suffolk and Norfolk 
and others of the eastern counties.
Such are Apera interrupta, 
Medicago sylvestris, M, falcata (all three treated as natives), 
Statice caspia, Primula elatior, Silene Otttes, Carum Bulbocasta- 
num, Seseli Libanotis, Barkhausia fcetida, Phleum Boehmeri, Me- 
dicago minima, Galium anglicum; and the well-known rarities 
of the Fens, many of them already lost.
Cineraria palustris, 
Sonchus palustris, Sturmia Lceselii, Senedo paludosus, Viola stag- 
nina, etc., nearly all of which belong to the " Germanic ^' or 
eastern " type " of Watson.
It is indeed the comparative preva- 
lence of this group which forms a principal feature of its Flora, 
for out of the 127 species placed by Watson in his Germanic 
type more than 80 occur in Cambridgeshire.
At the same time it is remarkable that several of the most 
local " Germanic " plants are wanting, e,g, Holosteum umbella- 
turn, Veronica verna, Artemisia campestris, Verbascum floccomm, 
apparently restricted to the adjacent counties of Suflfolk and Nor- 
folk ; and others with a wider range, Turritis glabra, Veronica 
Triphyllos, Cynoglossum sylvaticum, Carex bonrdnghausiana.
We 
miss also Hordeum sylvaticum, Daphne Mezereon, Phyteuma or- 
biculare, and some of our rarest Orchids, which do not reach so 
far north.
The southern or " English '^ type plants constitute a large pro* 
portion, and include, like the former group, many rare and local 
species, such as Hypochoeris maculata, Vicia gracilis, Chenqpo- 
dium hybridum, Veronica spicata, and many others, too nume- 
rous to be quoted at length.
The northern or " Scottish ^^ and ^^ internaediate " types have 
few representatives in Cambridgeshire: Thalictrum saxatile, 
Drosera anglica, Sanguisorba officinalis, Potentilla vema.
Par- 
nassia palustris, Antennaria dioica.
Campanula latifolia, Galeop' 
sis versicolor, Pinguicula vulgaris, Potam^ogeton pr^shngus, Carex 
dioica, and C.
filiformis, nearly all of which range further south 
in the damper climate and more hilly country of the west of 
England.
Erodium moschatum, an escape only, is the single species of the 
" Atlantic ^^ or south-western group which occurs in the list.
1861 J .
BBviEWs. 125 
As before remarked, the sea-side plants are few, being confined 
to quite a small district, itself mach circumscribed by recent drain- 
ing operations.
The only rarities are Statice caspia and Obione 
peduncfdata, the latter probably extinct.
We must not foi^et to call attention to the valuable matter 
given in the Appendix, itself a most itnportant contribution to 
British Botany, and which contains articles on the following 
subjects: — 1.
On Thalictrum aaxatile.
2. On Papaver dtibium.
8. Viola canina, Linn.
4. On Arenaria serpyllifolia.
5. On 
several Brambles.
6. On Serrafalcm.
7. On Triticum.
8. On 
the V^etation of the Pens.
9. List of the Lost Plants of Cam- 
bridgeshire.
10.
On the Geographical Relations of the Cam- 
bridgeshire Flora as compared with that of Great Britain.
It only remains for us heartily to recommend Mr. Babington's 
latest volume as a model County Mora.
We feel convinced that 
it will add to the well-deserved reputation of its author, and we 
trust that the ' Flora of Cambridgeshire ' will obtain an extensive 
circulation among all who take an interest in the distribution of 
British plants, as well as among the botanical students of the 
University, whose wants it is especially calculated to meet.
The Chemist and Druggist : a Monthly Trade Circular.
Pub- 
lished for the Proprietor, by James Firth, Cannon Street 
West, London, E.G.
This number, among other well- written articles with which the 
' Phytologist ^ does not meddle, contains one on the Natural 
Order Ranunculaceaj, which comprehends several ofSdnal plants, 
viz.
Aconitum, Actaa, Hellebore, Nigella, etc.
We need not quote the article on this Order to afford our 
readers a sample of the serial in which it appears, as most of 
them are already in possesion of the information which it con- 
tains.
The following extract from a reformer will speak for 
itself: — 
" For my owd part, I cannot coincide with many members of the trade, 
who -deem it more judicious to fill the shop with fancy articles supplied 
ready for sale, and offering a certain amount of profit, if sold, to the slower, 
but more steady, lasting, and legitimate mode of increasing trade by means 
of the preparation and introduction of medicines in such a form as to render 
126 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[Apvily 
them less nauseous, more concentrated, and purer, but equally efficacious.
The arguments usuaUy adduced against this are, that it involves a great 
deal of valuable time; that experiments are not conducted without ex- 
pense ; that the manipulation attending many chemical compounds requires 
experience and tact, which all individuals do not possess; lastly, and 
chiefly, that when prepared and submitted to the pubUc, these preparations 
do not always take." 
Another still more important suggestion is thrown out, and 
one which has a close relation to the matters with which phyto- 
logy has to deal, viz.
— 
" That prizes be given to the person or persons who shall best make 
and produce the active principle of any given plant or plants, in such a 
form as to' be fit for exhibition as medicines ; that the process be made as 
simple and practicable as possible.
That preference be given to such ar- 
ticles as rhubarb, gentian, etc., and that contributions be accepted of one 
shilling and upwards.
Other minutiae to be arranged as circumstances 
may from time to tune determine." 
Our next extract will further illustrate the nature and objects 
of this periodical, which, we should state, is published for the 
trade, and sold only to members of this trading community : — 
" The Colouring Matter of Leaves, — When leaves are extracted by alco- 
hol, a green oil is obtained, which is called cMorophylL Fremy has ascer- 
tained that this consists of a blue and a yeUow principle, which he has 
succeeded in isolating: to the blue principle he hasF given the name 
phylhcyanine, and to the yellow the name phylloxanthine.
Leaves* which 
become yellow in autumn contain only the latter." 
We may further say that this periodical, of which we have seen 
but two numbers, has our good wishes.
May the favourable 
gale of prosperity constantly fiH its sails, and may its circulation 
and usefulness be equal ta the talent and enterprise of its pro- 
prietor and manager.
R. 
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club.
Sir, — It may interest some of your readers to know that the Liverpool 
Naturalists' Field Club intend having a grand Festival in St. George's 
HaU, about the middle of April ; I have therefore the pleasure of enclosing 
a programme for your inspection.
Yours, etc., H.
S. Fisher.
The Editor of the * Phytologist ' regrets that he did uot receive the above 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
127 
note in time for its being printed in the March number.
He has much 
pleasure in giving publicity to the proposal ; and judging from the names 
entered in the list of the General and Sectional Committees, it may safely 
be predicted that this effort to utilize and popularize all the branches of 
Natural History will be decidedly successful.- The proposal has our good 
wishes, and if we were near Liverpool, the promoters of the good work 
should have our active and zealous co-operation.
The following is the 
programme, for which we are obliged to Mr. Fisher: — 
" The Committee having decided upon holding a Grand Anniversary 
Festival of the Liverpool Naturalists' Field Club, in St. George's Hall, 
during the month of April, earnestly solicit the immediate and active co- 
operation of eveiy member of the Club, and of all who take an interest in 
the pursuits of Natural History.
By early, combined, and sustained effort, 
it is believed that such a variety of rare and choice specimens in every de- 
partment of Natural History may be collected as cannot fail to be gene- 
rally delightful and instructive.
" Members who possess or can procure specimens or curiosities, cases 
of birds, insects, shells, minerals, fossils, etc., books, plates, or diagrams 
illustrative of Natural History, which they are .willing to lend for exhibition, 
are requested to communicate at once to the Secretary of that department 
to which the objects may belong, stating what amount of space will be 
required for their effective display.
" Vegetable or animal products used in manufactures or the arts will be 
acceptable.
" Ingenious members wiU oblige by sending in sketches of suitable de- 
signs for ornamentation, in keeping with the character of the- Hall and 
the objects of the Exhibition, 
" A committee of ladies will kiudly assist in the aesthetical department, 
and superintend the decorations and commissariat." 
Keteospective.
Arenaria balearica.
— This interesting little plant, the Earl of Ilchester 
has informed me, grows now on several walls and garden buildings on his 
Lordship's estate, Abbotsbury, Dorset.
Its origin or how it first came there 
is unknown, but there it is in tolerable plenty, and it has been observed in 
the chinks and crevices of damp walls for a considerable period, — several 
years ; I understood at least twenty years.
W. P.
Viola teicolor, vae.
arenicola.
(Phytol.
iv.
301.) The author naively subjoins, after a long description 
of the above variety, the following : — " I cannot here find any characters 
by which to separate this plant from F, tricolor, of which Mr. Babington 
very justly considers it a variety." It might be asked, why, then, did he 
trouble himself by describing it, and why did he cumber half a page of 
the * Phytologist ' with a long description of a well-known plant ?
Is not 
this a specimen of scientific twaddle ?
Q. 
Antieehinum Oeontium.— This agrarial plant has also been sent 
from Perth, and it is recorded in the list of additional species detected by 
128 BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[April.
our keen observant correspondent.
The range of the species must now be 
extended from York to Perth, an extent of above two hundred miles.
Antirbhinum MAJU9 anivcd in the same parcel and sent by the same 
obliging friend.
These two species illustrate the uncertainty that clings 
to recent very unsatisfactory attempts to separate whistt are called native 
from what are called introduced plants.
Antirrhinum Orontium is reported to have been found in thirty counties, 
and A, majus probably in Sixty ; yet the latter is now all but universally 
deemed an introduction and the latter a native.
They might be put under 
the same category without violating historical proof or natural probabilities.
Lathyrus tuberosus.
The above plant is entered among British productions by Dr. 0.
Mer- 
rett, in his * Pinax Rerum Naturalium Britannicarum/ ed.
sec., p.
46.
— 
Glandes terra, Peaar Earth-nut G.
(Gerrard), 1236.
Lathyrus arvenm 
sive terra glandes, P.
(Parkinson, 1061).
Note, — It may be stated that the doctor quotes no authority nor lo- 
cality.
N. 
Extracts from Correspondence.
....
We had the pleasure to see abundance of Galanthus nivalis in its 
beauty, and apparently quite wild, in some rough fields by the roadside as 
you go from Corwen to Cerrig y Druidion, Adoxa moschatellina growing 
near it.
Besides the Snowdrop, we can now add to our Merionethshire 
Flora Narcissus Pseudo-Narcissus, which grows plentifully on the lands of 
Garth Llwyd, a small farm in this parish.
The DaffodU also grows for a 
considerable distance on banks and borders of woods and fields near the 
railroad between Euabon and Wrexham, in the adjoining county, Denbigh- 
shire ; also HeUeborus fcetidus, W.
P. 
Llanderfel^ March, 1861.
Communications have been received from 
John Sim ; John Lloyd ; Charles Howie ; George Wolsey ; Tom Stans- 
field; C.
J. Ashfield; W.
Winter; H.
S. Fisher; Harriet Beisly; Sidnev 
Beisly; J.
B. Mackay; J.
S. M.; Rev. W.
M. Hind; W.
Pamplin; J.
G. Baker.
BOOKS RECEIVED FOB REVIEIV.
Flora of Preston and its Neighbourhood, Parts I, and II, 
The Gardeners' Chronicle, Feb, l%th.
The Chemist and Druggist, 
Notes on Books, 
The Todmorden Post, March 9th, 
The Preston Chronicle, March nth, July \Uh, and August Wth, 1860.
A Priced List of Hardy, fferbaceous, and Alpine Plants, by A, Stans- 
field and Sons, Todmorden, 
[May, 1861.] 129 
CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
CHAPTER VI.
Dr. William Turner and the earlier British botanists.
— ^The Father of English 
botany.
— Turner and Ray.
— Dr. Bulleyn.
— ^Dr. Thomas G-ibson.— Ghesner.
— 
Harbison.— Merrett.
— Turner's influence on his contemporaries and on pos- 
terity.
— Plants of Northumberland, Cambridge, Middlesex, Kent, Somerset, 
etc.
— General List of British Plants described in the Herbal.
Dr. William Turner, the author of Turner's ' Herbal/ and also 
of many other works, on theological controvapsy, medicine, etc., 
tas been very justly called the " Father of British Botany.'^ He 
is the first original English botanist, and he was evidently as well 
read in the works of Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Pliny, Paulus 
Egineta, Avicenna, Simeon Seth, etc., as he was well acquainted 
with the plants of England and Germany.
His great work on 
botany is the result of much observation and experience, and a 
lasting monument of his industry, erudition, and critical judg- 
ment.
One of his contemporaries, Dr. Bulleyn, observes, that 
his " Boke of Herbes will alwaies growe grene, and neuer wither 
as long as Dioscorides is helde in minde by us mortal wights.^' 
The illustrious Mr. John Ray well deserves the honour of pre- 
cedence among all English authors as the first who introduced 
method or system into this branch of human knowledge ; so Dr.
William Turner was the first writer, in our vernacular, who added 
the fruits of his own researches to the meagre compilations from 
the ^ Schola Salemitana,^ E.
Macer, Bartbolomseus) the ^ Grete 
Herball,* Dr. Linacre's Macer, etc.
etc.
Dr. Pulteney, in his ^ Sketches of the Progress of Botany in 
England,' relates that ^^the true era of botany in England com- 
mences with Dr. William Turner, the earliest, most judicious, 
and most learned authority, whose abilities, both as a critic and 
a philologist, are highly distinguished, and whose uncommon 
diligence, learning, and originality have secured him a certain 
passport to posterity.'' 
In the present series of chapters it is not proposed to enter, 
with much detail, into the lives and works of our eminent bo- 
tanists, but rather to offer succinct notices of the British plants 
described in their works, stating when, where, and by whom they 
were first observed ; but a little relaxation of our plan will be 
N. 8.
VOL.
V. s 
180 CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
made in treating of the life and labours of the first real observer 
and true describer of our native species.
The following brief notice of Dr. Turner, and of his works, 
is compiled from ' Summarium lUustrium Majoris Brit.
Scrip- 
torum,' by John Bale, Bishop of Ossory, from Thomas Fuller^s 
' Worthies of England,^ from Wood's ^ Athenae Oxonienses,' Tan- 
ner's ' Bibliotheca,' and last but not least, the Histories of Nor- 
thumberland.
William Turner, as Dr. Pulteney writes, vol.
i. p.
59, "was 
bom at Morpeth, in Northumberland, and educated at Pem- 
broke College, Cambridge, under the patronage and assistance of 
Sir Thomas Wentworth ;" and Hodgeson, in his ^ History of 
Northumberland,' vol.
ii., supplies the following note about our 
author : — 
- ** Just at the dawn of literature in England, two stars of pre-eminent 
lustre appeared in Morpeth, — ^William Turner and Thomas Gibson, both 
justly celebrated as divines, physicians, and naturalists." 
In Mackenzie's ^ View of the County of Northumberland,' vol.
ii.
p. 184, there is a note to the effect that *'an Herbal," by 
Thomas Gibson, still exists in MS.
Can any reader of this in- 
form the public where this early unpublished treatise lies buried ?
Fuller's notice of Turner, see ^ Worthies of Northumberland,' 
is very brief, very lively, and, like some other articles by this quaint 
author, is more conjectural than correct.
It is not an exhaustive^ 
but it is a very good-natured account of this early botanist.
" He was bom at Morpeth, bred in the University of Cambridge, where 
he became an excellent Latinist, Grecian, orator, and poet.
He was very 
zealous in the Protestant religion, writing many books in the defence 
thereof, and much molested for the same by Bishop Gardiner and others.
He was kept long in durance, and escaping at last by God's Providence, 
fled beyond sea.
At Ferrara, in Italy, he commenced doctor of physic : 
there gaining his degree with general applause.
He wrote a great herbal 
and a book of physic for the English gentry, as also treatises of plants, 
fishes, stones, metals, etc.
He afterwards went into Germany, where he 
hved in great credit and practice, and, as I conjecture, died there in the 
reign of Queen Mary.* Keader, I conceive him worthy of thy special 
notice because he was both a confessor and a physician, qualifications which 
* Neither of the late leamed editors of FxiUer'r* Worthies ' has thonght it worth 
his while to correct by a note the erroneous conjecture of their author.
1861.] CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
181 
meet not every day in the same person.
. .
. Thomas Gibson; It is pity 
to part him from the former, because symbolizing in many particulars of 
concernment.
1. Bom in this county, and in the same town of Morpeth.
2. Flourishing at the selfsame time.
Both -* ^* I*liysicians by profession ; this Thomas did incredible cures of 
disease.
4. Writing of the same subject, the nature of hearba, 
^5.
Professed enemies to Popery."* 
Thus far honest Thomas Fuller.
It will be seen below that Dr. Turner lived several years after 
the time when Fuller conjectures that he died, and he was as 
hostile to Popery as he was zealous for the Reformation.
Industrious Anthony Wood, who had no partiality for ultra- 
Protestants, informs his readers that ^^he, Turner, was much 
addicted to the opinions of Luther," and that he was besides hot- 
headed and meddlesome.
This crabby early authority supplies 
us with the following accoimt of his death after enumerating some 
of his works : — 
" After all the rambles and troubles that our author Turner made and 
did endure, he did quietly lay down his head and departed this life 7 July 
in 1568.
Whereupon his body was buried in the church of St. 01aves,t 
in Hert Street, in London, leaving behind him several children." 
Dr. Bliss, the amiable commentator and editor of ' Athense 
Oxouienses,^ informs the readers that 
" He (Turner) married the daughter of George Ander, an Alderman of 
Cambridge, who after the death of her first husband married to Bichard 
Cox, Bishop of Ely, and in her second widowhood did, in memory of her 
first husband.
Dr. Turner, leave to Pembroke Hall, in Cambridge, of which 
he had been Fellow, an annuity of five merks, and some pasture lands in 
KnapweU." 
John Bale, the early literary historian, and Bishop of Ossory, 
writes very forcibly in praise of our author.
For example, he af- 
firms that he was nowhere branded with the anti-Christian mark, 
(nusquam characterizatm, hoc est, nee rastis, nee unettiSy quod 
auditufit rarissimum,) "he had never received the tonsure, and 
was not consecrated to be a priest/' Hence it may be inferred* 
* From Nichors ed., 4to, 1811.
Nuttall's ed.
is word for word like Nichol's.
t Tanner adds to Wood*s account, — *'yel in eoclesia Grutched Friars (Stiype, 
in vita Parker)." 
182 CHAFff^RS ON BEITI8H BOTANY.
[May, 
that tbis gave a handle to Anthony Wood, who reproadies him 
for undertaking the office of a preacher without authority.
Pos- 
sibly he received deacon's orders at Cambridge, and «so was au- 
thorizied to preach.
In Bale there is the following list of Turner's works : — 
De Naturis Herbarum.
Epigrammata Diversa.
In Catonis Distica MoraJia. Prudes admodum, et si quid.
Sententiarum Flores ex Variis.
Causa, candide Lector, initi labo.
Ad Unionem Dissidentium.
Difficilia quae Pulchra, etc.
De Arte Memorativa.
Non est ignotum tuse dominationi.
In Publij Mimi Versiculos.
Quamvis tarn veteres illi Philo.
Pro Insequenda Komana Vulpe.
Alienum est omne quicquid oper.
Contra Wintoniensis Technas.
Licet ab ipsa pueritia fiierim.
De Missa Papistica.
Hand est tuse Majestati Illustriss.
De Hierosolymorum Excidio.
Mackenzie, in his ' View of Northumberland/ states that Dr.
Turner was elected Fellow of Pembroke College in 1531 ; but 
Dr. Pulteney's account is that he was a student of that College 
in 1538.
Are there any matriculation-books or rolls of this 
early date extant in Cambridge University to help to clear up this 
point ?
His first work on plants was printed at London, 1538, 
by John Bydel."*^ In this tract he describes himself as a very 
young man, and on the whole writes in a humbler style than that 
which would naturally be expected in an author who had been 
seven years a Fellow of a College.
* " Libelliis de re herbaria novos, in quo iMrbamm aliquot nomina Gh*»ca, Latina, 
et Auglica habes, una cum notnmibius officinamm, in gratifun Btudiosse juFentutis 
nunc primum in lucem editUB.*' Or, in Englifih, * A ISew Book on Plants, with 
their Greek, Latin, and English Names, Officinal Uses, etc., for Junior Botanists.' 
In an address to the reader, printed on the back of the titlepage, he notices that it 
may be justly wondered why a beardless youth like himself^ very slenderly skilled in 
the science of medicine, should Tenture to publish a work on botany, while he was 
iiware that there were so many persons in the coxoitry better aoquainted wi& the 
subject than himself.
The following are specimens of this very interesting tract, which is in quarto, 
and is contained in two sheets and a hal^ or ten folios : — 
*' Vigcum Angli vocant Mysceltyne, aut Myscelto (called in English Myscdtine or 
Myscelto).
Densissimus iste &utex nusquam nisi in arboribus naseitur; e terra 
nunquam pervenit.
yiscum tot ssecula Anglis ijgnotum fiiisse demiix)r« qumu in 
pyris et mails sylyestribus nusquam non proveniat." 
"This very bushy shrub grows nowhere but on trees, never on the ground ; and 
1861.] CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
183 
Our author's work^ ^ Historia de Naturis Herbamm Scholiis 
et Notis Vallata/ may be the work entered first in Bale's list, 
see ante.
Pulteney is probably mistaken in suspecting that 
Bumaldus is the only author who notices this treatise.
He is 
certainly so in stating that this is Turner's first botanical work : 
see below.
The ^Libellus de Re Herbaria' was printed at London, 1538; 
the ' Historia de Naturis Herbarum ' was printed at Cologne, in 
1544.
There is a fuller account of our author's literary labours in 
Bishop Tanner's ^ Bibliotheca ;' and the following list is partly 
derived from A.
Wood and partly from Tanner : — 
The Hunting of the Bomish Fox, which more than 7 years hath been 
hid among the Bishops of England, etc.
Basil, 1543.
A History of Birds, from Pliny.
In Latin.
Colon.
1544.
Rescuing of the Romish Fox, etc.
1545.
Hunting of the Romish Wolf.
(Pro Insequenda Romana Vulpe.
Bale.) 
Dialogue Containing an Examination of the Mass, etc.
(De Missa 
Papistica.
Bale.) 
New Herball.
(De Naturis Herbarum.
Bale ?) 
A Preservative or Triacle against the Poison of Pelagius.
1551.
A New Book of Spiritual Physic.
1555.* 
A Book of the Nature and Properties of the Baths of England, etc.
A Treatise of the Bath at Bath.
it is singular that it should have been unobserved for so many ages in England, 
where it abounds everywhere on apple and pear trees." 
** Mercwry vocatur; efus duo sunt genera^ matcula etfoamina, Mcueula haud temere 
apud nos reperUw; vidi tamen Cantahrigie^ f» horio aula regidRy* etc.
" There are two sorts of Mercury, the male and the female.
The latter is un- 
frequent in our country ; but I have seen it in the gardens of King's Gpllege, 
Cambridge." 
" Laptu saUctariuSy qfficima dicitur Utpulus** In officinal language, Lupulua ; 
and in En^h, Hoppes." 
'* In the sh^s the Daisy is oalled the lesser Consolida ,* in the language of the 
country a Daisy.
In Northumberland we call that a Daisy which has a purple 
flower and is raised in gardens ; the flower we call a Banwort." 
The imprint of this rare tract is " Londoni apud ioannem Bydellum, anno dni.
1638." 
^ In his prefece to this work he relates the following r^-" When as of late yearea 
I practised bodely phisick in England, in my Lorde of Sumersette's house, divers 
sick beggars came unto me, and not knowing that I was a phisiciaja, asked of me 
myne almose.
To whom I offered to heale their diseases for Godde's sake.
But 
they went by and by awaye from me and would none of that.^' 
184 CHAFTBRS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
The Nature of Waters.
The Nature of Wines.
The Nature and Virtue of Triacle.
The rare Treasure of English Baths.
Unio Dissidentium, containing the Agreement of the Doctors with Scrip- 
ture, and also of the Doctors with Themselves.
Dedicated to Domino 
Wentworth.
Another work or tract is entitled, — 
The Comparison of the Old Learning and the New.
Tanner writes that William Turner was ordained a priest by 
Ridley, also that about the same time the University of Oxford 
conferred on him the degree of M.D., on his appointment to the 
ofSce of Physician to the Duke of Somerset.
In his Grace's house at Syon he wrote his Epistola prefixed to 
his little book * De Nominibus Herbarum.'* 
Previous to his receiving these honours and preferments, or 
soon after his return from exile, on the accession of Edward 
VI., he had been promoted to a prebendship (Botevant) in York- 
Minster, also to a canonry in Windsor, and to the Deanery of 
Wilts in 1550.
Soon after this period, viz.
in 1551, Dr. Turner published his 
tnost important work, viz.
his ' Herbal,' which was dedicated to 
his patron, Edward, Duke of Somerset, and was printed by 
''Stuen Myerdman, and soolde in Panic's Churchyard, at the 
sygne of the Sprede Egle, by John Gybkin." 
This, which is the first edition of the first part, contains title, 
prologue (two leaves or foUos), ninety folios, and table of con- 
tents.
The obverse side or page of the last leaf is blank.
His zealous advocacy of the principles of the Reformation, or 
of the new doctrines, as they were then called, rendered England 
an unsafe abode during Mary's reign, and he again went into 
voluntary exile.
The second part of his ' Herbal ' was printed 
at Cologne ; hence it is probable that during his sojourn on the 
Continent he resided near this city.
This part is dedicated to 
Sir Thomas Wentworth, Lord Wentworth, and was printed by 
Arnold Birckman, 1562.
* In 1648 Dr. Turner published a small volume, entitled, * Names of Herbes in 
Qreke, Latyn, Englyshe, Duche, and Frenshe/ 12mo, London.
Thb work is not mentioned by the literary historians above quoted.
It b de- 
scribed by !]^ulteney, toL i.
p. 64.
1861.] GHAPTBRS ON BRITISH fiOTANT.
185 
When Queen Mary died, lie retnmed to his native country, 
and was reinstated in all his Church preferments.
The third part 
of the ^HerbaP was printed by the same printer in 1566, and 
has the following title:— 'The Thirde Parte of Wm. Turner's 
Herball, contayning the Herbe^, Rootes, and Fruytes whereof is 
no mention mdide of Dioscorides, Galene, Pliny e, and other olde 
authors.
Imprinted at CoUen, by Arnold Birckman, in the year 
of our Lord 1566/ The dedication is to the Company of Sur- 
geons, and is dated from Wells, June 24th, 1564.
In 1568 all the three parts were reprinted at Cologne, in black- 
letter, with a dedication to Queen Elizabeth.
This was the year 
of the author's death.* 
There are several reasons why the first rank, the most honour- 
able place, should, among the early botanists of England, be as- 
signed to Dr. Wm.
Turner; for, first, his knowledge was multi- 
farious, not merely as a naturalist, but as a scholar ; secondly, 
he was a good philologist, being well acquainted with the lan- 
guages of Greece and Eome, in which all science at that period 
was communicated, and, besides this accomplishment, common to 
all learned men, he was well acquainted with German, which was 
then called Dutch, as it still is in Germany, and also with f^rench, 
Italian, and English; thirdly, he condescended to write his 
^Herbal' in our vernacular, in a language scouted by the learned 
at this early period ; fourthly, to his extensive knowledge of 
plants he added something still more useful and attractive, a 
* Hodgeson, as quoted above, gives the following honourable testimony to the 
merits of Dr. Turner: — "William Turner, M.D., a native of Morpeth, is a cha- 
racter whom I wish from the first to introduce to my readers as one entitled to 
high consideration for his learning and labours.
No one will dispute the compe- 
tency of Conrad Gesner to pronounce judgment on the scholars and natural histo- 
rians of his time j and he, in the preface to his History of Birds, printed in 1555, 
has said that before himself a few in modem times had briefly written on the names 
and natures of birds, among whom Gyb. Longolius, a German, and William 
Turner, an Englishman, were both men of the greatest learning and deserving of 
the highest praise." Also, in his book 'Be Herbis Lunariis,* he says, — "About 
fifteen years since.
Turner, an Englishman, returning out of Italy, paid me a visit, 
and I found him a man of such excellent learning, both in medicine and most 
other sciences, that I can scarcely mention such another." 
William Harrison, another contemporary of Dr. Turner's, in his * Histories 
Descriptio Britannis,* under "Bath," calls him " Dr. Turner, the father of English 
physicke," and in another place " the famous clerk.
Doctor Turner." 
" Turner," says Dr. Merrett, in his * Finax,' *' was the most indefiit]g|ble man of 
his age, and published a book on birds, little in size but great in value." 
186 CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
feeling for and a sympathy with suffering humanity; and he 
wrote his * Herbal * not to show the extent and variety of his ac- 
quirements^ nor principally that he might contribute to the en- 
lightenment of his contemporaries and posterity, but he laboured 
with a more charitable intention, .vi?.
with the view of alleviating 
the ailments incident to the sinful and mortal condition of hu- 
manity.
In his preface he very forcibly apologizes for the language he 
employs, and asks " whether it were better that many men should 
be killed through the apothecary's ignorance of Latin, or that 
the herbal] should be set forth in English ?'^ And again, he says, 
" Whether it were better that the surgeons should kill men for 
lack of knowledge of herbs, or that an herball should be set out 
into them in English, which for the most part understand no 
Latin at all, saving such as no Latin ears can abide?'' (See 
Dedication, fol.
2.) These are pertinent questions, and the man 
who had the moral courage to contravene the conv^itionalities of 
his age deserves to be ranked among the prominent advocates of 
human progress.
Dr. Turner's erudition, judgment, industry, observation, and 
experience, were universally acknowledged by his contemporaries, 
but the honour which they paid to his meritorious abilities was 
too much like the cold tribute rendered to honesty, if we may 
credit the Latin moralist, who casts a little of the salt of satire 
into his moral hash: "Pro W/a* laudatur et alget^^ (honesty is 
praised, and, shivering with cold, it starves).
Lobel, the contemporary of Turner, writes in his ' Adversaria,' 
p. 98, ed.
1756, eight years after the Doctor's decease, that he 
had seeds of Crambe maritima from him, "cujus semina jam 
diu medicus Anglus hac parte exercitatissimus, Turnerus nos 
don^rat eamque monocaulum et fiovoairepiiov vocandam a se- 
mine singulari volebat" (and who wished it to be named mono- 
caulis and monospermous from its single seed).
On referring to 
Turner's ' Herbal ' we cannot find this account, which Lobel pro- 
bably quoted from memory, without reference either to the 
'Herbal' or to the communication.
The Dover Cole will be 
subsequently noticed.
Lobel, in his congratulatory .
epistle to 
John Gerard on the accomplishment of the great work of the last- 
mentioned author, gives Turner a place among his botanical 
worthies, Matthiolus Dodonseus, Turnerus, Clusius, etc.
Gerard 
1861.] CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
137 
mentions in his epistle to his " courteous and well- willing readers 
the excellent worke of Master Doctor Turner.^' 
In John Parkinson's notice of his predecessors.
Turner's name 
does not appear.
Johnson, the learned editor of Gerard,.
gives 
the following testimony to the merits of this great botanist : — 
" Let me now at last looke home, and see who we haue had that haue 
taken pains in this kinde.
The first that I finde worthy of mention is Dr.
William Turner, the first of whose works that I haue seene was a little 
hooke of the names of herbes, in Greek, Latine, English, Dutch, and 
French, etc., printed at London, anno 1548.
In the yeare 1551 he set 
forth his Herbal, or History of Plants, where he giues the figures of 
Fuchias for the most part.
He giues the names in Latine, Greeke, Dutch, 
and French.
He did not treat of many plants.
His method was according 
to the Latine alphabet.
He was a man of good judgment and learning, 
and well performed wat he took in hand."* 
It may be inferred that Turner^s ^ Herbal* was then, as it still 
is, a scarce book, and it is hoped that this will be received as an 
apology for the seeming neglect with which it has been treated 
by both ancient and modem botanists.f 
We will now give an outSne of the contents of this primary and 
most excellent English Herbal, premising this remark, viz.
that 
our object is to elucidate the history of our English native species, 
rather than to enter upon the great subject of plants in general.
Both Johnson and Pulteney relate that the arrangement of the 
'Herbal' is alphabetical, according to the Latin names; but the 
author does not adhere ve^ strictly to this order; he employs 
both Greek and Latin names, which are followed by those 
under which his plants were known in Germany, France, and 
England ; for the first plant on the first page of the first edition 
(part i.) is Absinthium^ and the two last are Agrimony and Bean, 
AffrimoniaX and Faba.
* Johnson's * Gerard,* Address to the Beader.
t Dr. PnltOTiey, who devotes about twenty pages of his work to our author, 
remarks ** that the succeeding herbalists, Gerard, Johnson, and Parkinson, seem 
not to have paid due honour to his merit and learning ;" and subsequently states 
that "in justice to Turner they shQuld haye noticed all the plants he has recorded, 
particularly the natives of England." 
" Bay," he further relates, " at the distance of nearly a century, was sensible of 
his worth, having styled him a man of solid erudition and judgment " (Fulteney's 
Sketches, vol.
i. p.
76).
See Baii Hist.
Flantanim generalis, in ezpUcatione nom.
abbreviaturum, etc.
X He employs the Greek name Eupatoria for Acrimony, This uncertainty about 
N. 8.
VOL.
v. T 
188 CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
The index^ or register^ which is on the recto side of the last 
leaf, is alphabetical according to the English names, and the 
number is nearly one hundred and seventy.
The localities noticed in England are chiefly Northumberland, 
his native county ; Cambridge, where he was educated ; Dover, 
by which he went to the Continent ; Sion House, Isleworth, and 
Richmond ; and Somersetshire, where he was chiefly domiciled 
after his last return to his native country.
The continental loca- 
lities are chiefly Bonn, on the Rhine, Worms, Basle, and several 
parts in the north of Italy.
The second part begins with Fagus and ends with Xanthium and 
Xyris, and here, as in the first part, the names are alphabetically 
arranged.
The number in both parts, with the additions made 
in the third part, is about three hundred.
This last part of the 
work is dated from '^Welles, June 24th, 1564,^^ and dedicated to 
the Company of Surgeons, to whom he apologizes for its imper- 
fections thus : — " Being so much vexed with sickness, and occu- 
pied with preaching and the studye of divinitie and exercise of 
discipline, I have hadde but small leisure to write Herballes." 
Turner, according to Pulteney, ^^is the first author who has 
given a figure of the Lucem, which he first brought into Eng- 
land, and named Horned Clover.
He treats lai^ely of its culti- 
vation from Pliny, Palladius, and Columella." 
Dr. William Turner's merits as an English botanist will be 
better understood, and the amount of our obligations to him will 
be more precisely known, when his labours in this department of 
the science can be compared with those of his predecessors, his 
contemporaries, and his immediate successors.
This part of the 
general subject will constitute the matter of a subsequent chap- 
ter.
For the present our account is limited to the British plants 
and their localities, which were first, as far as is known to us, de- 
scribed and published as indigenous, native, or spontaneous pro- 
ductions.
The number of English plants described in Turner's ^ Herbal ' 
is upwards of three hundred, about one- third of those enumerated 
in Ray's ^ Catalogue of the Plants of England,' and barely one- 
sixth of the species now generally believed to be of spontaneous 
the names, t.
e, Ghreek or Latin, causes much trouble to the students of Turner's 
* Herbal.* But the students, or even readers, of this excellent work are not nume- 
rous.
1861.] CHAFTEBS ON BBITISH BOTANY.
139 
British growth.
The following is an account of our author's dis- 
coveries, — ^for all his plants may be deemed such, as no one before 
him described the localities or the plants, and few did so much 
as name them, as native productions.
As has been hinted above, Wm. Turner's English plants may 
be arranged in four, classes, viz.
: — 1st.
Plants of Northumber- 
land and its vicinity.
2nd.
Cambridge and the contiguous comi- 
ties.
3rd.
Middlesex, Surrey, and Kent.
4th.
Somersetshire, etc.
The Northumberland plants specially recorded by Dr. Turner 
(his own order is followed) are the following : — 
1. Abtemisia maeina.
** Sea Wormwood.
In oure tyme it is plentc- 
ously founde in England, about Lynne and Holly Ilond (Holy Island), in 
Northumberland,'* etc.
(Pt. i.
fol.
1.) 
2. Paeis quadbifolia.
" (One benye.) The herbe that hath bene 
' taken for lyberdes bayne, groweth plentuously besyde Morpeth, in Northum- 
berland, in a wod cedled Cottying Wod." (Pt. i.
fol.
4.) 
d. SciLLA NUTANS.
This, which our author calls " ffiacintkus, is com- 
men in Englande, though it be not of the beste, and it is called Crow fowes, 
crow fote, and crow tese.
The boyes in Northumberlande scrape the roote 
of the herbe, and glew theyr arrowes and bokes wyth that slyme that they 
. scrape of." 
4. Bellis peuennis.
"In Northumberlande men call thys herbe a 
banwurt, because it helpeth bones to knyt againe." (Pt. i.
fol.
31.) 
5. Hellebokxjs viKiDis. Syterwurt.
" When I came in to Englande, I 
dyd hear that dyuerse husband men why te (with) whome I spake vsed (used) 
to put the roote of berefoot into beastes cares, and called the puttynge in 
of it syterynge of heastes, and in sume place called the herbe syter wurte." 
(Pt. i.
fol.
64, 65.) " I haue seen both the kyndes in Englande : the one 
kynde in gardynes whyche is wylde in Grermany ; and the other kynde 
with the broader leaflFe whyche is onely in gardynes in Germany (as farre as 
I could perceyue) in Northumberlande in the weste parke besyde Morpeth, 
a good stone cast fix)m the water syde in the syde of the hylle." (Pt. i.
fol.
65.) "I holde that a man for defaut of it (ff.
niger) may use that 
kynde of Berefote that goeth every year into the ground (H.
viridis)^ 
whereof groweth greate plentye in a parke besyde Colchester, and in the 
west parke besyde Morpeth, a Uttle from the river called Wanspeck." 
(Pt. ii.
fol.
160.) 
6. Ebiga.
"The hyest hethe that euer I saw groweth in Northum- 
berland, which is so hyghe that a man may hyde hymself in." (Pt. i.
fol.
85.) 
7. JuNiPEE.
"In England it groweth most plentuouslye in Kent; it 
groweth also in the bysshopryche of Durram, and in Northumberlande." 
(Pt. ii.
fol.
25.) 
140 CHAPTEBS ON BKITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
8. liEPiDiUM latipoliumP Id Turner this is named L.
magnum, 
" Thys Lepidium that Pliny and Paul describe, groweth plentuously about 
the water syde that lynneth thorow Morpeth in Northumberland, in suche 
places as great heapes of stones are casten together with the myght of a 
great spat or flood." (Pt. ii.
fol.
35.) 
9. LiNnH tJsiTATissiMUM.
" Flax, which is called of the Northern 
men Lynt, in Duche Flachs, etc., groweth very plentuously also in south 
parte," etc.
(Pt. ii.
fol.
39.) 
10.
Meum athamanticum.
"Men groweth in the bisshoprik of Durram, 
in wild mores, called felles, and vui.
myles aboue Bon (Bonn), in Germany, 
in a countre called Caltland." (Pt. ij.
fol.
57.) 
11.
Okobanche majus?
'' Orobanchey Chokewede (Pt. i.
fol.
88), 
groweth in many places in England, bothe in the Northe countre besyde 
Morpethe, whereas it is called our Lady of New Chapellis flour,* and also 
in the south countre, a lytle from Shene, in the broum closes." (Pt. ii.
fol.
71.) 
12.
Petasites.
" Thys herbe is called in Northumbrelande an Eldin, 
and in Cambridgeshyre a Butterbur, in Duch Pestilenz Wurz." 
13.
Plantago majok.
"The greatest kynde is called in the South 
parte of Englande Plantayn or grete Plantayn, and in the north countre 
Waybrede or grete Waybrede." (Pt. ii.
fol.
94.) 
14.
SoEBUS AucuPABiA.
" The tre groweth in moyst woddes, and it ' 
is called in Northumberlande, a rowne tre or a whitken tre, in the south 
partes of England, a quicke beame tre." (Pt. ii.
fol.
143.) 
The plants of Cambridgeshire and neighbouring counties ob- 
served and described by Dr. Turner are, — 
1. LiGUSTEUM vuLGABE.
" Pryvct gToweth very plentuously in Cam- 
brich shyre in the hedges, and almoste in euery gardin in London," (Pt. ii.
fol.
38.) 
2. Mybehis odobata.
"It groweth .
. .
veiy lyke xmto Humlock 
(Hemlock).
I never saw greter plenty of it then I haue seen in the hort- 
yard (orchard) of Pembroke haU in Cambridge, where as I was som tyme 
a pore felow." (Pt. ii.
fol.
60.) 
3. Lentils.
" Lentilles grow in great plenty in Cambridge shyre, and 
all throw Germany, where as they are husked and used for a meat." (Pt. ii.
fol.
33.) 
* " Thys herbe is called about Morpeth in Northumberland, new-chappell floure : 
because it grewe in a chappel there in a place called Bottell Bankes, where as the 
unlearned people dyd worshyppe the Image of sjnt Mary, and reckened that the 
herbe grewe in that place by the virtue of that Image." (Fol. 88.) 
1861.] CHAPTBBS ON BKITISH BOTANY.
141 
4. Sambucus Ebulus.
" Walwurt groweth mych about Cambridge." 
(Pt. i.
fol.
83.) "I have marked in our Englyshe ebulo in Cambiyge 
sliyre that the stalk was round and not foure square." (Pt. i.
fol.
58.) 
5. Petasites.
"This herbe is called in Northumberland an Eldin, in 
Cambridge shyre a Butterbur." (T*t.
ii.
fol.
83.) 
6. HoEDEUM MUEINCM.
" The way bent (way bennet) hath a leafe like 
grasse, and groweth plentuously in Cambridgeshire about highe ways." 
(Pt. ii.
fol.
17.) 
7. Ononis aevensis?
(spinosa).
"In Cambryge shyre this herb is 
called a whyne but I put pety to it to make dyfference betwene thys herbe, 
and a fur, whyche in manye places of Englande is also called a Whyne." 
(Pt. i.
fol.
18.) 
8. Pyeds communis.
"Pyra^wpw-da, thatisto say, prowdepeares, are 
lytle and sonest rype, and these are called, in Cambridge, Midsummer 
peares." (Pt. ii.
fol.
108.) 
9. EuoNYMUS EUEOPiEUS.
" Spyudell tree.
Althoughe 1 haue seen this 
tree oft tymes in Englande, and in moste plenty betwene "Ware and Bark- 
way, yet for all that I never could leame an Englyshe name for it." (Pt. L 
fol.
89.) 
10.
Tedcbium Scoedium.
Water Germander.
" Scordium gro'neih m 
Oxfordshyre and in Cambridge shyre in good plenty." (Pt. L fol.
130.) 
The following plants, localized in Tumer^s ' Herbal/ are some 
of those growing in the south-eastern shires of England : — 
1. Teagopogon minoe ?
" Gotes bearde.
Let us rede as Theophrastus 
doth: Out of the top cummeth a hore whyte bearde, wherupon i£ is 
called gotes bearde : thes be the wordes of Theophrastus.
The herbe 
whiche we cal gotes bearde in barune places hath but a short stalke, but 
in gardines and in ranke meddos it hath a longe stalke, and full of ioyntes 
like knees.
About London I haue sene in the feld thys herbe wyth a 
swete roote and wyth blake sede and a yelow floure, and after the floure is 
gone, with a great dele of longe whyte doune lyke tuftes of whyte here, 
but about Colon (Cologne) I saw it whyche had whyte sede and a bytter 
roote, all full of mylke, as in other places it doth appere." (Pt. i.
fol.
31.) 
2. Hypeeicum calycinumP (hiecinumP) "Greate Saint Johnes 
wurte.
I haue sene it dyuerse tymes in Syon parke." (Pt. i.
fol.
16.) 
3. Anemone Pulsatilla.
" It groweth in greate plenty aboute Bon 
(Bonn) in Germanye, and about Oxforde in Englande, as my frend Fal- 
coner tould me." (Pt. i.
fol.
17.) 
4. Anthemis nobilis.
" Chamomyle.
This herbe is scarce in Ger- 
many, but in England it is so plentuous that it groweth not only in 
gardynes, but also viii.
myle aboue London it groweth in the wylde felde.
142 CHAFTEBS ON BEITISH BOTANY.
[May^ 
in Eychmonde Grene, in Brantfurde Grene, and, in mooste plenty of al, in 
Hunsley Hethe." (Pt. i.
fol.
18, 19.) 
5. AvENA SATiVA?
" Thei is another kinde of otes, called pill otes, 
which growe in Sussex ; it hath no husk abydyng upon it, after that it Is 
threshed and is lyke otemele (oatmeal)." (Pt. i.
fol.
29.) 
6. Myeica Gale.
" There is a shorte bushe that groweth,in the fenne 
called in Duche Gagel, in Cambridgeshyre Gall, and in Summersetshyre 
Goul or GoUe." (Pt. iii.
fol.
47.) 
7. Veronica seeptllifolia.
" Paulis betoni.
Thys heibe groweth in 
Syon gardyn, and in dyuerse woddes not far from Syon, wyth a whyte floure 
myxed with blewe, and wyth a sede lyke unto bursa-pastoris." (Pt. i.
fol.
34.) 
8. Beassiga oleeacea and Ceambb maeitima.
" There are yit ii.
kyndes of wyld cole, wheroff I fynd no mencion in any wryter.
The one 
is a wonderful great cole, and hath leues thrise as thike as euer 1 saw any 
other cole haue.
It hath whyte floures, and round berryes, like yuy (ivy), 
where in the sede is conteyned." 
B. oleeacea.
" I neuer saw it in all my lyfe, sauyng in Doner clyffes.
This is myche lyke the other cole ; but it is whyter, and rougher, and bytter 
with aU." (Pt. i.
fol.
37.) " This herbe groweth at Doner (Dover), harde 
by the see syde.
The other kynde of wyld cole groweth euer by water sydes, 
with a leafe indentyd, as rokket is : in taste, smelle, fasshione, floure, and 
sede, lyke unto the gardyne^cole ; of thes I name in Latyne bramcam do- 
bricam, in Englyshe Douer cole : because I found it fyrst besyde Doner.
The secund kynde I cal brassicam fluviatUem, and in English waterkole, 
because it groweth euer by water sides." (Pt. i.
fol.
37.) 
9. Alnus Betula.
"Byrche is called in Latin betula, I haue not 
red of any vertue that it hath in physik : howbeit it serueth for many good 
uses, and for none better then for betynge of stubbome boyes, that ether 
lye or wyU not leame." (Fol. 84.) 
10.
Calamintha CLIN9PODIUM.
" Horse tyme.
I founde thys herbe 
lyght guer against Syon." (Pt. i.
fol.
60.) 
11.
PlaNtaqo Coeonopus.
" Herbe ivy or crow foote plantne.
Theodor 
Gaza calleth it sUigo, It groweth much aboute Shene in the hygh waye, 
and aboute the sea syde in the banks whych are made by man's hand." 
(Pt. i.
fol.
67.) 
12.
Ceithmum maeitimum.
"Sampere.
It groweth plentously be- 
syde Douer and in Susexe by the sea syde." (Pt. i.
fol.
68.) 
13.
HiEEACiUM VULGATUM?
(boeeale).
"Hawke wede.
I have 
sene this in greate plenty bothe in Englande and in Germany, in the fields 
about Bonne, in Englande in the medowe a lytle from Shene." 
14.
Mentha Pulegium.
"Penny ryal groweth much, without any 
settyng, besyde Hundsley (Hounslow), upon the heth besyde a watery 
1861.] CHAFTEBS ON BBITISH BOTANY.
143 
place, ...
in such pooles as ar fall of water in wynter, and ar diyed up 
in sommer." (Pt. ii.
fol.
107.) 
15.
' Castanea.
" Chesnut (Chestnut) trees growe plentuouslye in Kent 
abrode, in the feldes, and in many gardynes in England." (Pt. i.
fol.
47.) 
The foUoYiring are the plants observed and localized by our 
author in the west : — 
1. Allium vineale.
"Crowe garlyke or wyld garlyke.
This grow- 
eth in myddes (meadows) and fields in every cuntre." 
2. Allium uesinum.
** Rammes or ramseyes groweth in woods about 
Bath." (Pt. i.
fol.
7, 8.) 
3. "Hyssop?
We have in Sumershire besyde the commen hyssop that 
groweth in all other places of Englande, a Idnde of hyssop that is al roughe 
and hory (hoary), and it is greter muche and stronger then is the commen 
Hyssop.
Som call it roughe hyssop," 
4. CoLCHicuM.
" I have sene it growe in the west cuntre (country) 
besyde Bathe." (Fol. 62.) 
5. Smyenium Olusatrum.
" Our Alexander groweth in moyste places, 
and in llandes, compassed about the se, as in a certayne Bande betwene 
the far parte of Sommersetshere and Wales.
...
It groweth in every 
shyre of England in plenty." (Pt. ii.
fol.
68.) 
6. Peucedanum officinale.
" Harstrang.
I hear say that it grow- 
eth in England, and 1 founde a roote of it at Saynt Vincentis rock, a 
lytic from Bristow." (Pt. ii.
fol.
83, 84.) 
7. Peunus insititia.
"Bulles tre.
I never saw in all my lyfe more 
plentye of this sorte of Bulles trees then in Somersetshyre." (Pt. ii.
fol.
104.) 
8. AsPLENiUM Cetebach.
" Growcth also in England, about Bris- 
tow." (Pt. i.
fol.
27.) 
9. Convolvulus Soldanella, Bramca marina, Soldanell.
" 1 have 
not sene it in England sauying only besyde Porbek.
Howbeit, I thynke 
verely, that it is in other places, in great plentye." (Pt. i.
fol.
37.) 
10.
Halimus poetulacoides ?
Sea Purslane (Purcelline).
"I found 
the same herbe of late besyde He of Porbek." (Pt. i.
fol.
50.) 
11.
ANciausA officinalis ?
EedBuglosh.
(Pt. i.
p. 15.) "Thys herbe 
is called in some places of Englande cattys tayles, in other places wylde 
buglose ; it groweth in grauylly and sandy places, and in pyttes, wher as 
grauell is dygged out of." (Fol. 16.) 
12.
Cotyledon umbilicus.
Wall pennye grass.
"Thys herbe grow- 
eth in Welles (WeUs) and divers places in Summersetshyre in more plentye 
than ever I saw it in anye other place all my lyfe.
I call it pennye grasse, 
to put a difference betweene it and the sheepe killinge pennye grasse that 
groweth in merishe and waterye grouudes." (Pt. ii.
fol.
169.) 
144 CHAPTEKS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
IS.
BuPiiEUEUM PBEFOLiATUM.
Thiow Wax.
"I liave sene tHs in 
great plenty in a com field on the northe side of the citye of Wormia in 
Gennanye, and in no less quantityc in Someraetshyrc, between Sommerion 
and Marlocke." 
The following are a few of Dr. Turner's plants which have no 
particular locality entered, but he gives their habitats (place 
where they are generally found) .
The Doctor gives the following description of the virulent pro- 
perty of 
1. AcoNiTDM Napellus.
"And thys wolf bane of all poysones is the 
most hastye poison.
Howbeit, Plini saith, that this herbe is good to be 
dronken against the bytyng of a scorpyone.
Thys is also the nature of 
wolf^s bayne, if anye credence may be gyuen unto Plini, that it will kyll a 
man if he take it^ excepte it fynde in a man some thyng y* it may kyll ; .
with that it wyll stryue as with hys mache, which it hath founde within 
the man." (Pt. i.
fol.
5.) 
2. AsPAEAGUS "groweth in diverse gardins in England, and in sume 
places by the sea side, in sandy hilles." (Pt. i.
fol.
S7.) 
3. Anagallis AEVENSis. Pympcmell.
«* The male pympemell groweth 
commonlye in England in the come and in tylled groundes, and so doth 
the female growe in Gennanye about Bon (Bonn) and Colon." (Fol. 15.) 
4. AsAEUM EUE0P^i3M.
Folefote.
" Folfoole groweth only in gardynes 
in Englande; but it groweth wylde in certayne places of Germanye." 
(Pt. i.
fol.
25.) 
5. Cyclamen hedeb^folium.
Sowesbrede.
"I haue not seen it in 
Englande, wherefore I knowe no usuaU name for it ; but least it shuld be 
nameless, if it ether shnld be brought into England, or be founde in any 
place in England, I name it Sowesbrede, or rape violet, and the roote is 
lyke a rape." (Fol. 75.) 
6. Vino A minoe.
, Perwynckle.
" Perwyncle groweth wild in many 
places of Germany, and it groweth plentuously in Englande in gardynes, 
and wylde also in the west cuntre." (Pt. i.
p. 59.) 
7. CoEiANDEUM SATIVUM.
"The Icucs (Icaves) are wonderfull and 
stynkynge when they ar grene, the stalke is a cubytt and a halfe of 
hygh, full of lytle branches, the floures are white, and the sede is round 
and bare, and when it is drye, it is of a good sauoure and a good taste." 
(Pt. i.
fol.
66.) 
8. DiPSACCs sYLVESTEis and D.
pdllonum.
" The wylde tasel grow- 
eth commonly aboute diches and watery places; in the begynnyng of 
wynter the golde finches use mych to haunt this herbe, for the sedes 
sake, wher of they are very desyms; the other groweth in gardines." 
(Fol. 82.) 
1861.] 
CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
145 
9. TsATis TINCTORIA.
Glastum or Wadde* " The wylde kynde groweth 
not in England that I know, sauynge onlye in gardens, but it groweth 
plenteouslye wythout anye sowynge in High Germany, by the Eenes 
(Rhine's) syde." (Pt. ii.
fol.
11.) 
10.
iRis.
" 1 haue sene a litle flour de lice growyng wylde in Dorset 
shyre, but hole cartes full in Grermany, besyde Wormis, in the middowes, 
not far from the Rhene." (Pt. ii.
fol.
23.) 
11.
Mespilus.
Medlar.
"The second kinde is that is comen in Itali, 
Germani, and England, and is comenly called a medler." (Pt. ii.
fol.
56.) 
12.
OxALis AclfcTOSELLA.
Wod sour (Wood Sorrel).
"And it can not 
be Lotu% urbana (0.
corniculata), because it groweth alwaies wilde in the 
woddes, and commonly about tre rootes.
We gather that thys Alleleluya 
or Wodsour shoulde be Oxys, in Pliny." (Pt. ii.
fol.
74.) 
13.
RuBiA PEREGRINA.
Madder.
"Rubia groweth in Germany, and 
also in Englande.
And the moste that ever I sawe is in the Yle of 
Wyght.
But the farest and gretest that ewer 1 sawe groweth in the lane 
besyde Wynchestre in the way to Southampton." (Pt. ii.
fol.
118.) 
Here foUows a List of the British Plants, or most of those de- 
scribed in Dr. Turner's * Herbal/ with his names^ and the parts 
and folios (leaves) of his work where they are to be found.
Note.
— ^Q first is the common scientific name, the second is ^ 
the ancient name; p, means part,/, folio or page.
Achillea Ptarmica, p.
2, 106.
Aoonitum Napellus, p.
2, f.
4. 
Aoorus Calamus, p.
.1, f.
5. 
Adiantmn Gapillns-Yeneris, p.
1, f.
6. 
Agarick, p.
2, f.
29, 30, 31.
Agrimonia Eupatona, p.
1, f.
90 ; p.
8, 
f.28.
AgroBtemma Githago, p.
1, f.
41.
Ajuga Chamsepitys : Grounde Pyne, 
p. l,f.
53.
Alchemilla : Ladies' Mantell, p.
3, f.
23.
Alder.
See Betula Ahius, p.
1, f.
34.
AUiaria : Sauce Alone, p.
3, f.
1. 
Alisma Plantago, p.
2, f.
94, 95.
AniiiTn Sch(Bnop)*asiim, A, ursinum, A.
vineale, p.
1, f.
78.
AlthcBa officinalis : Marrische Mallowe, 
p. 1, f.
11.
Amaranthus Blitum, p.
1, f.
35.
AmaradulciB : Bitter Swete, p.
3, f.
2. 
Anagallis arvensis, A.
coBrulea: Pym- 
pemell male, P.
female, p.
1, f.
15.
N, S.
VOL.
V. 
Anchusa, Anagyris, p.
1, f.
16, 16.
— 
Not of English growth.
Anemone nemorosa, A.
Pulsatilla, p.
1, 
f.l7.
Angelica sativa, A, sylyestris, p.
3, f.
5. 
Anthemis nobilis: Camomyle, p.
1, £ 
18.
Antirrhinum Orontium : Galfes Snowte, 
p. 1, f.
18.
Apium : (Celery,) SmaUage, p.
1, f.
18.
Arbutus Unedo : Strawbery tre, p.
1, f.
22.
Aristolochia Clematitis ; Soupds 
Byrtheworte, p.
1, f.
23.
Artemisia Absinthium : Comen Worm- 
wode, p.
1, f.
2. A.
marina: Sea 
Wormwode, p.
1, f.
1. A.
vulgaris : 
Mugwyrt, 
Arum maoulatum : Cockoupynt, p, 1, 
f. 24.
Asarum europeum : Folfot (Foalfoot), 
p. 1, 26.
U 
146 
CHAPTERS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
Ash. See Fraxinus and OxnuB, p.
2, 
f. 71, 143.
Aaparagufli Sperage, p.
1, f.
27.
— ^In 
gardenB and hj the sea.
ABperula odorata : Wode Boee or Wode 
Bowell, p.
8, £ 25.
ABplenium Ceterach, p.
1, f.
27.
A^p.
Trichomanes : Maydenshereyp.
2,£157.
Atnplex hastata : Oreche, p.
1, f.
29.
Atropa belladonna : Njghte shad, p.
2, 
£142.
Aqnilegia : Columbine, p.
3, £ 6, 7.
Avena satiya : Filotes, p.
1, £ 29.
Ballota nigra: Stynkynge Horehonnde, 
p. 1, £ 30.
Betonica.
See Stachys, p.
1, £ 33.
Beech.
See Fagus, p.
2, £ 1.
Bellis perennis : Dasey, p.
1, £ 31.
Beta maritima : Bete, p.
1, £ 32.
Betula Alniis : Alder-tre, p.
1, £ 8.
— 
Water sjdes, etc.
Betula alba : Byrch, p.
1, £ 34.
Borago, p.
1, £ 39.
Botrychium Lunaria, p.
3, £ 53.
Brassica oleracea, B.
campestris?
: See 
Cole, p.
1, £ 36 ; Water Kole, p.
1, 
£ 37.
. 
Bryonia dioica : Brionye, p.
2, £ 166, 
167.
Bursa-pastoris, p.
3, £ 14, 15.
Buniiun Bulbocastaniim : Erath (earth) 
nut, p.
1, £ 20.
Bnxus: Boxe, p.
1, £ 40.
— GJroweth 
not of itself (is not spontaneous) in 
England.
Calamintha Clinopodium, Nepeta Ca- 
taria : Catmynt, p.
1, £ 41.
Calamintha Acinos ?, Clinopodimp ?, 
p. 1, £ 60.
Caltha palustris : Lukken Qollande, p.
1, 
£52.
Cannabis : Hempe, p.
1, £ 42.
CarduuB benedictus, C.
pratensis : Thys- 
telles, p.
2, £ 144.
Carduus benedictus, p.
3, £ 18.
Carex : Segge or Shergras, p.
1, £ 46.
Carum : Carawaye, p.
1, £ 45.
Castanea.
See Fagus, p.
1, £ 47.
Centaurea Cyanus: Blewbottell, p.
1, 
£75.
Chafvfeede or Cudweed, Cudwort what?
p. 1.
£ 48.
Cheiranthus Cheiri?: Wall Gelouer, p.
2, 
£ 163.
CheUdonium majus, p.
2, £ 15; C.
minus, id, 
Chenopodium Botrys, p.
1, £ 35.
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum, p.
1, 
£ 31.
Cichorium Intybus, p.
2, £ 21.
Colchicum, p.
1, £ 62.
Coniiun: Homloke (Hemlock), p.
1, 
£57.
Convolvulus Soldanella, p.
1, £ 37.
C. 
sepium : Withwynde, p.
1, £ 65.
— A 
Lily in whiteness; and it is, as it 
were, an unperfect worke of Nature 
learning to make Lilies.
Coriandrum : Coriandre, pw 1, £ 66.
Comus sanguinea: Cornell tree, p.
1, 
£66.
Corydalis solida : Fumitorye, p.
1, £ 44.
Cotyledon Umbilicus : Wal penye- 
wort, p.
2, £ 169.
Corylus Avellana: Hasell nutt, p.
1, 
£ 67, 68.
Cowslip, p.
3, £ 80.
Crambe maritima, p.
1, £ 36, 37.
Cratffigus Oxyacantha : Hawthorn tre, 
p. 2, £ 73.— Gbfitenbury Thorn, p.
2, 
£ 73.
— In Summersetshyre, about six 
myles firom Welles, in the park of Qha- 
senberry, there is an Hawthorne which 
is grene all the wynter, as all that 
dwell there about do steadfastly holde.
Crithmum maritimum : Sampere, p.
1, 
£ 68.
Cuscuta : Doder, p.
1, £ 46.
Cyclamen hedereefolium : Sowesbrede, 
p. 1, £ 75.— Not known as spon- 
taneous in England at this period.
Cynoglossum officinale and C.
sylva- 
ticum : Boggistonge, p.
1, £ 76.
Cyperus longus : Golangal, p.
1, £ 77.
Daphne Laureola: Lowry or Laurie], 
p. 1, £ 79.
1861.] 
CHAPTEBS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
147 
Daucus : Carrot ?
or Parsnep ?, p.
1, 
f.80; p.
2,f.
80.
Dianthufi : several undetermined, p.
1, 
f.43.
Dianthus deltoides: Wylde Ctelouer 
(Maiden's Pink), p.
1, f.
43.
Digitalis : Foxegloue, p.
8, f.
17.
Dipsacns Aillonnm, D.
sylvestris : Gh.r- 
din and Wylde Tasel, p.
1, f.
82.
Drosera rotundifolia, p.
3, f.
79.
Docks, many ; Sorrel, both, f.
121.
Echium vulgare: Wylde Buglose, p.
1, 
f. 16.
Epilobium anguRtifoHiim, E.
hirsutum, 
E. parviflorum : Herb Willow, p.
2, 
f.44.
Epimedium alpinum, p.
1, f.
89.
Erica': Heth, p.
1, f.
85.
Eryngiom maritimum : Sea Holly, p.
1, 
f.87.
Erythrsea Gentaurium: Oentory, p.
1, 
f.48.
Euonymus europseus: Spyndell tree, 
p. 1, f.
89.
Eupatorium cannabinum, p.
3, f.
29.
Euphorbia amygdaloides : Wode Spurge 
(Sion Parke), p.
2, f.
154; E.
helio- 
scopia, E.
Lathyris, p.
2, t 31.
Euphorbia Paralias, E.
Peplis, p.
2, 
f. 81.
E. Portlandica?
Euphrasia : Eyebright, p.
3, f.
29.
Fagus : Beche, p.
2, f.
1. 
Fagus Gastanea, p.
1, f.
47.
Ficaria ranunculoides, p.
2, f.
15.
Filago germanicum, p.
2, f.
11.
FoBuiculum : Fenel or Fenkle, p.
2, f.
5. 
Fragaria vesca ; Strawberye, p.
2, f.
6. 
Fumaria officinalis, p.
1, f.
44.
Qagea lutea : Wylde Leke, p.
1, f.
40.
— 
Lobel says, Adv. 56, "Anglice ne- 
morosis Sommerseti Omithogalum 
luteum collegimus." 
Galanthus?, p.
2, f.
62.
Galeopsis TetrahitP 
Galium Aparine : G-oosharethe or Cly- 
ver, p.
1, f.
20.
Q-.
cruciatum : May- 
den's Heir^, p.
2, f.
6. 
Genista : Broume, p.
2, f.
7. 
Gentian, p.
3, f.
25.
Geranium and Erodium: Pinknedle 
Cranesbill, p.
2, f.
8. — Our author 
names only Gf^, molle and S, cum' 
tarmms but he gives six figures, 
numbered Geranium one, two, three, 
etc., respectively.
Geum urbanum : Avenes, p.
2, f.
9. 
Geum urbanum ?, Cariophyllata sylves- 
tris : Cloues, p.
3, f.
22, 23.
Glaucium luteum : Homed Poppy, p.
2, 
f. 78.
— ^Thys groweth very plen- 
tuously about the see syde, in Eng' 
lande, bothe besyde Doner and also in 
Dorsetshyre.
Glaux.
See Trefoly, p.
2, f.
12.
Gnaphalium?
sp., p.
1, f.
48.
— Oen- 
tunculus is called in Yorkshire Gud- 
wede, and in Northumberlande Ghaf- 
wede.
GnaphaHum germanicum : Gottenwede, 
p. 2, f.
11.
Hedera Helix, p.
2, f.
87.
HeUeborus foetidus, H.
viridis : Bere- 
fot Syterwurte, p.
1, f.
65.
Heracleum: Kowe Parsnepe, p.
2, f.
145.
Hesperis matronalis, p.
2, f.
163, 164.
Hieracium vulgare : Hawkwede, p.
2, 
f. 14.
Hieracium Pilosella, p.
3. f.
58.
Hordeum murinum : Waybent, p.
2, 
f. 17.
H. temulentum : Darnel, p.
1, 
f. 41.
Holye tre, p.
3, f.
81.
Humulus Lupulus : Hoppes, p.
2, f.
42.
Hyoscyamus : Henbayne, p.
-1, f.
10.
— 
Towns and villages by the sea side.
Hypericum Androssemum : Tutsan, p.
1, 
f. 16.
H. calycinum?
or H.
hirci- 
num : Grete St. John's Grasse, p.
1, 
f. 26.
Hypericum perforatum: St. John's 
Ghrasse, p.
2, f.
18.
Inula Helenium: Elecampane, p.
2, 
f. 22.
Inula Gonyza ?, p.
1, f.
63.
Iris Pseudacorus, p.
2, f.
23.
Isatis tinctoria: Wadde, two kinds.
148 
CHAPT1SBS ON BRITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
the garden and the wilde wadde, p.
2, 
f. 11.
Juniper, p.
2, £.
26.
Knautia : Scabious, p.
3, f.
69.
— It y' 
groweth among the corn, is rankest 
of all other.
Lactuca ?
: Lettes, p.
2, f.
25, 
26.
Lamium album: Bed Nettcl, p.
2, f.
27.
L. amplexicaule ?, L.
purpinr- 
eum?, id.
Lappa major : Great Bur, p.
2, f.
82, 
Lastrea Filix-mas, p.* 2, f.
3. 
Lathyrus sylvestris ?, L.
tuberosus : 
Peese Earth Nutt, p.
1, f.
28.
Lathyrus macrorhizus P : Bitter Fitches, 
p. 1, f.
86.
Lemna : Ducke*s Meat, p.
2, f.
33.
licpidium, L.
latifoUum, L.
magnum, 
p. 2, f.
35.
L. ruderale : Sciatica or 
Wylde Cresse, p.
2, f.
20.
Leucojum sestivum, p.
2, £ 163.
Ligustrum : Primprynt, p.
2, f.
37.
Linaria vulgaris: Tode's Flax, p.
2, 
f. 73.
— Thoughe thys herb groweth 
plentuously in England, I ncTer heard 
any Englyshe name for it.
Linum usitatissimum : Flax or Lynt, 
p. 2, f.
39.
Lithospermum officinale, L.
arvense: 
Grummel or Graymile, p.
2, £ 40.
Lolium temulentum : Darnel, p.
1, f.
41.
Lonicera Periclymenum : Woodbynde, 
p. 2, f.
82.
Lycopodium alpinum ?
: Hethe Cipres, 
p. 1, f.
51.
Lycopodium Selago, and L.
clavatum : 
Chamepeuce, p.
1, f.
52.
Lysimachia Nummularia.
— I name it 
here " herbe two pejice >" it groweth 
in shadowy ditches, etc.
Lysimachia vulgaris, p.
2, f.
44.
Lythrum SaHcaria, p.
2, f.
44.
Malva sylvestris, M.
rotundifolia i 
Mallowe, p.
2, f.
44, 45.
Marchantia polymorpha: Liuerwurt, 
p. 2, f.
36.
Marrubium : Horehounde, p.
2, f.
6L — 
In places as the bourish Wormwod 
groweth.
Melittis officinalis, p.
1, f.
21.
Medicago Lupulus, M.
sativa : Homed 
Clover or Medic Fother, p.
2, f.
52.
Melilotus coerulea?, p.
2, f.
133.
Mentha arvensis: Ck)me Mynte, p.
1, 
f.41.
Mentha hirsuta, p.
2, f.
140; M.
Pu- 
legium, p.
2, f.
106, 107 j M.
sylvestris, 
M. viridis, p.
2, f.
53, 54, 55.
Mercurialis perennis, M.
annua : Mer- 
cury, p.
2, f.
55.
Mespilus : Medler, p.
2, f.
56.
Meum athamanticum : Mew* p.
2, f.
56, 
57.
— Groweth in the Bishoprick of 
Durram, in wylde mores called feUes.
Monk's Bhubarb, p.
2, f.
121.
Mustard.
See Sinapis, p.
2, £ 137.
Myrrhis, p.
2, £ 60.
Nastnrtiuin officinale : Sisymbrium, or 
Cardamine, or Water Cresses, p.
2, 
£140.
Nepeta Cataria : Cat Mynte, p.
1, £ 41.
Nuphar lutea: Nenufur, p.
2, £ 65, 
66.
Nymphaea alba : Water Eose or Water 
Lily, p.
2, £ 65.
One Berrye, p.
3, £ 31 ; p.
1, £ 4.
Ononis arvensis : Petye Whyne, p.
1, 
£18.
Onopordum Acanthium, p.
, £ 8.
Ophioglossum : Adder's Tonge, p.
3, 
£ 51, 52.
Orchids, several kinds : Adder Grass, 
p. 2, £149.
Origanum, Organ: Marjoram?, p.
2^ 
£69.
Omithogalum umbellatum, p.
2, £ 70.
• 
Orobanche major: Chokewede, p.
1, 
£88; p.
2,£7L 
Oxalis AcetoseUa : Alleluia, p.
1, £ 74.
O. comiculata : Lotus Urbana, p.
2, 
£ 42, 74.
— In gardens.
Papaver Argemone^ P.
dubium?, P.
hybridum, P.
Rhoeas ?, p.
2, £ 76, 77.
Papaver somniferum : Poppy, p.
2, £ 76, 
77.
1861.] 
CHAPTEKS ON BAlTISH BOTANY.
149 
Parietaria': Pellitore of the Wall, p.
2, 
f. 14.
Paris quadrifolia : One Berrye, p.
1, 
f. 4.
Pastinaca : Parsnepe, p.
2, f..
80, 138.
Peare tres at Cambridge, p.
2, f.
108.
Paeoni^ p.
1, f.
84.
— The female is com- 
mon thorow all England and Ger- 
many, and in diuerse places of Eng- 
land.
. .
. The male groweth also.
Petasites : Elldocken, p.
2. f.
83.--Thifl 
herbe is called in Northumberland an 
EldeD, and in Cambridgeshyre a 
Butter Bur.
Petroselinum : Parsley, p.
1, f.
21.
Peucedanum : Harstrang, p.
2, f.
84.
Phragmites communis: Beede, p.
1, 
f. 25.
Phalaris canariensis, p.
2, f.
85.
PimpineUa Saxifraga : Rough Saxifrage, 
p. 1, f.
81.
Pine, p.
2, f.
88, 89.~Not natiye in 
England.
Pink.
See Fuschius, p.
1, f, 67.
Plantago Coronopus, P.
lanceolata, P.
major : Weybrede or Plantayn, p.
2, 
f. 94, 95 ; P.
media.
^' 
Plantago Psyllium: Elesede, p.
2, 
f. 105, 106.
Polygala vulgaris : Milke Lentill, p.
1, 
f.96.
Polygonatum multiflomm, P.
yerticil- 
latum : Scala Coali (heaven's ladder), 
p. 2, f.
97, 98.
. 
Polygonum Convolvulus?, P.
Eagopy- 
rum, P.
lapathifoUum ?, P.
aviculare : 
Eliot Grasse, p.
2, f.
97.
Polygonum Hydropiper: Culerage Ars- 
smart, p.
1, f.
68.
Polygonum Fagopyrum : Bukwhoat, 
p. 1, f.
83.
Polygonum Bistorta, p.
3, f.
12, 13.
Pcdygonum Persicaria, p.
3, £ 61.
Polypodium volgare, p.
2, f.
4 ; P.
Dryopteris?,p.
l,f.
83.
Populus : Aspe, p.
2, f.
98 ; Pepler, 
two sorts, P.
alba^ and P.
nigra ?
— 
[WhereisP.^rwiMi/a.?] 
Potentilla comarum, P.
reptans, P.
Tormentilla ?
: Cinkfoly, p.
2, f.
110.
Primrose is not in Turner's Herbal ?
is 
P. veris?
: Porcellayn, p.
2, f.
102.
Prunella vulgaris : Selfe Heale, p.
3, 
f. 60.
Pnmufr spinosa, P.
domestica, P.
insi- 
titia: Plum, Slo, Bulles, etc., p.
2, 
f. 103, 104, 105.
Pteris aquilina : Feme or Brake, p.
2, 
f. 3.
Pulicaria vulgaris?, P.
dysenterica, p.
1, 
f. 64.
Pulmonariaangustifolia: SageofHiero- 
salem, p.
1, f.
29.
Pyrola rotundifolia : Limonium, p.
2, 
f. 89.
Pyrethrum Parthenium : Feverfew, p.
2, 
f. 78, 79.
Pyrus Mains : Appel Tre, p.
2, f.
47.
P. communis : Peare, p.
2, f.
108.
Quercus : Oke, p.
2, f.
109.
Baphanus sativum : Eadish, Crov^ote, 
p. l,f.
114j p.
2, fill.
Banunculus sceleratus, B.
Flammula, 
and other species not determined.
Bibes, p.
3, f.
62.
Bosa canina : Brere, p.
2, f.
119.
B. 
rubiginosa.: Eglenttne, p.
1, f.
77.
Bubia peregrina : Madder, p.
2, f.
118.
Bubus id£eus : Bramble, p.
1, f.
118.
Bumex, several : Docke, p.
2, f.
129.
Buscus aculeatus: Ejiehull?, p.
2, 
f. 121.
Salix, two or three sorts, p.
2, f.
125, 
126.
Sal8olaEali,p.
3, f.
38.
Salvia veronica foemina, p.
2, f.
126.
Sklvia : Clare, p.
2, t 70.
Sambucus nigra : Elder, Bourtree, p.
2, 
f. 124.
S. Ebulus : Walwurt, p.
1, 
f. 83.
Sanicula : Sanule, p.
3, f.
66.
Sarothamnus sooparius : Broume, p.
2, 
£7.
Saxifraga ?, p.
3, £ 67.
Saxafraga alba (granulata ?) p.
3, f.
67.
— I have sene of thys kynd in Essexe, 
150 
CHAPTEBS ON BKITISH BOTANY.
[May, 
by the see syde.
...
It groweth in 
diuerse places in England.
Saxifraga granulata, p.
3, f.
10, 11.
Scabiosa succisa: Deuil*8 Site, p.
8, 
f. 42.
Scandix : Finke Nedle, p.
2, f.
130.
Scilla nutans ?, p.
2, f.
27.
Scolopendriom yulgare : Hartutunge, 
p. 2, f.
86.
Scrophularia aquatica, S.
nodosa: Water 
Betony, Brown Wurt, p.
1, £ 61.
Scutellaria galericulata P 
Sedum, species ?, p.
2, f.
131.
Sempervivum tectorum : Houseleke, p.
2, 
f. 131.
Senecio vulgaris: Groundel, p.
2, 
f. 132.
Sherardia arvensis : Alysson, p.
1, f.
11, 
12.
Sinapis arrensis, S.
nigra ?, S.
alba ?
: 
Mustarde, p.
2, f.
137.
Sison Amomum ?, p.
2, f.
139.
Sisymbrium : Eresses or Oarsse, p.
2, 
f. 64, 140.
Sisymbrium Irio ?
p. 2, f.
22.
Smymium : Alexanders, p.
2, f.
68.
Smymium Olusatrum : Alexanders, p.
2, 
f. 67.
Sium : Sion, p.
2, f.
139.
Sium angustifoHum ?, p.
2, f.
32.
Sium latifolium, id.
Snowdrop?
(Galanthus), p.
2, f.
65.
Solanum Dulcamara: Wilde Yinde, p.
2, 
f, 168.
S. nigrum: Qurdin Vinde, 
p. 2, f.
168.
Solidago Yirgaurea, p.
3, f.
78.
Sonchus oleraceus : Sow ThisteU, p.
1, 
f.55.
Sorbus Aucuparia, S.
domesticaP, S.
Torminalis : Bowne, Sorb, etc., p.
2, 
f. 143.
Sparganium P 
Spirsa Filipendula, p.
8, f.
31.
Stacbys Betonica : Betonie, p.
1, f.
88.
Stacbys palustris : Yron Wurt, p.
2, 
f. 135.
Stacbys Sideritis, p.
2,£ 135.
Stellaria media P : Chickwede, p.
1, f.
10.
Stellaria Holostea: Stychewort, p.
2, 
f. 13.
Symphytum officinale: Gomfrey, p.
2, 
f. 148.
Tamus communis : Black Brionye, p.
2, 
f. 167.
Tanacetum : Tansey, p.
8, f.
3. 
Teucrium P sp.
: Groudne Pyne, p.
1, 
£ 53.
— I bere that it is founde in 
diuerse places in England.
Teucrium Scordium : Water G^ermander, 
p. 2, f.
130.
— Common byssop of 
Turner is Teucrium Scorodonia: wbat 
is tbe otber, " wbiche is greater mucbe 
and stronger tban tbe otber bys- 
sop"?
Tblaspi, p.
1, f.
152.
Thymus Serpyllum : Wild Thyme, p.
2, 
f. 132.
Tilia europsea : Linden, p.
2, f.
158.
Tormentilla, p.
3, f.
74.
Tragopogon minor; Bukke's Bearde, 
p.l, f.
81.
Tricbomanee (Asplenium), A.
Butu^ 
muraria, p.
1, f.
157.
Trifolium pratense purpureum, T.
pra- 
tense album, p.
1, f.
158.
T. arvense : 
Hare's Fote, p.
2, f.
26.
Tussilago : Horseboue or Bulfote, p.
2, 
f. 159.
Typha latifoliaP: Catte's Tayle, p.
2, 
f. 159.
Ulex : Fur, Whynne, p.
1, f .
18.
Ubnus : Elm tre, p.
2, f.
169.
Urtica romana, IT.
dioica, U.
nrens: 
Boman Nettell, etc., p.
2, f.
169.
Valeriana officinalis: Setwall, p.
2, 
f.161.
Valerian, p.
3, £ 75.
There is another 
kynde {Polefnonvum caeruleum)'whjche 
we call Valerian in England, and it 
bath a blew floure, and is called of 
some Latine men Valericma gneca.
Valeriana (PbamagnumandF.Yiilgare), 
p. 3, £ 76.
Verbena, yervine, p.
2, £ 162.
Veronica agrestis, p.
1, £ 10.
Veronica anrensis P, p.
3, £ 77.
1861.] 
I8ATI8 TINCTO&IA.
151 
Veronica Beocabunga : Broocklyme, 
p. 1, f.
50.
Veronica Gliamsedrys : Q^ermander, p.
1, 
f. 52.
Veronica hedersefolium : Chikewede, 
p. 1, f.
10.
Veronica officumliB (Salvia Veronica 
fcemina), p.
2, f.
126.
Veronica serpyUifolia : Paulis Betonye, 
p. 1, f.
34.
Vinca minor: Perwinkle, p.
1, £ 60.
V. major.
— In gardens.
Viola alba, p.
1, f.
163.
Viscum : Mistletoe, p.
2, f.
165.
Xanthium : Clot Bur, p.
2, f.
170.
Yew : Uhe, p.
2, 687.
ISATIS TINCTORIA.
By John Lloyd.
Since I discovered this plant near to the New Wandsworth 
station upon the Crystal Palace Railway {vide ^ Phytologist/ Au- 
gust, I860), several very interesting particulars have come to my 
knowledge concerning it, which I here submit to the readers of 
the journal above named.
The plant was grown for several years by Mr. Wilson Saunders, 
late of East Hill, Wandsworth, and his garden was about half a 
mile from its present station in the railway cutting.
The question naturally suggests itself.
Did it escape from the 
garden ?
From the proximity of the garden and the cutting, it 
may be inferred that it did do so ; but, on the other side of the 
question, th^t inference may be objected to upon two grounds : 
first, it has left no traces on the line of its supposed migration, 
although there is a cutting belonging to the South-western Rail- 
way between the above-mentioned garden and the Crystal Palace 
Railway upwards of twenty feet deep ; and secondly, Mr. Saunders 
removed from Wandsworth to Reigate during the time that the 
Crystal Palace Railway was in progress, and removed his plants 
of Isatis to his new abode.
The suggestion of J.
S. M.
in the 
'Phytologist' for September, 1860, that it was sown amongst 
the herbage, — appears to be a more reasonable solution to the 
question^ — as to how came it there, — ^than any other hypothesis 
which I have seen or heard advanced; and perhaps the plants 
which he discovered in Kent may owe their origin to a similar 
circumstance.
A short account of the plants which were taken 
to Reigate may not be uninteresting.
* 
They were planted in a shrubbery, where they have established 
themselves so firmly as to become almost troublesome weeds, and 
152 FEN AND DITCH PLANTS OF NOKFOLK.
[-^Wfly, 
escaped into a field adjoining the garden, where I saw a plant in 
bloom last summer ; and if they extend their radius, they may 
in time establish themselves in the debris belonging to the chalk- 
pits at Reigate Hill, which is scarce half a mile distant.
Mr. Jos.
Croucher, a young gardener who has paid some atten- 
tion to British plants, discovered it in Sussex, in July last, upon 
a bank near to the turnpike, by the side of the road between 
Turner's Hill and Rowfant station.
In a conversation which I had in August last with the intelli- 
gent foreman of the Botanic Garden at Glasneven, he informed 
me that it was not uncommon to meet with a stray plant or two 
in the neighbourhood of Dublin, and he related to me an inter- 
esting circumstance which came under his observation some years 
ago.
An old Elm was blown down, and the ground where it 
had stood was deeply trenched.
In the ensuing spring the fresh 
exposed soil produced a quantity of Isatis tinctoria and Sinapis 
nigra, neither of which plants had been before observed to grow 
in the immediate vicinity.
ON THE FEN AND DITCH PLANTS OF NORFOLK.
By W.
Winter, of Aldby, Norfolk.
The White Water-lily {Nymphaa alba) abounds in the ditches 
and broads (a local word for wide, open drains) at Ran worth, 
Homing, and South Walsham.
This, the queen of British 
plants, flowers here in June and July, and completely covers 
hundreds of square yards with its broad handsome foliage and 
its pure white flowers, which in some states of the atmosphere 
perfume the air with the most agreeable o'dours, to considerable 
distances around the places where it gijows.
It is occasionally 
found in places whence peat has been dug.
Its yellow and not quite so- beautiful associate, the Yellow 
Water-lily {Nuphar lutea), is equally common in aU thes^ parts.
These two plants may be distinguished by.
their leaves at all 
times when these are fuUy* developed.
The leaves of the White 
Water-lily are more circular than those of the YeUow; they are 
rounded at the apex, and their cordate bases are not so diver*- 
1861.] PEN AND DITCH PLANTS OP NOBPOLK.
153 
gent as in the Yellow Lily.
The latter has a longer and more 
pointed leaf, and the basal lobes are more divergent and longer 
than in its fairer relative.
These are the most conspicuous and the most ornamental 
plants of our sluggish rivers, dikes, and other deep waters.
Elatine hexandra^ grows sparingly in shallow pools and in 
bogs about Ranworth.
[This is probably the first record of the 
locality ; and we are pleased to enter it here for the benefit of 
future botanical geographers, whose scientific utilities and sym- 
pathies are not quite extinguished by their personal antipathies.] 
Hypericum elodes is also plentiful in the same locality as that 
reported for the before-mentioned plant.
I send a note on this 
plant to aid the correspondent W.
P., who marvels what part of 
Dartmoor is a hundred yards higher than the Carnarvonshire 
mountains, where Mr. Bowman (see ^ Cybele,' vol.
i. p.
253) is 
reported to have seen it.
[The veracious compiler of the last- 
mentioned abortive effort to exhibit the range of our British 
plants, thought he saw it rather higher on Dartmoor, in Devon.
The wish was father to the thought ; he wishes to be thought a 
farther-seeing and more correct relator of what he fancies he has 
seen than other men.] 
RanunculiM Lingua, although a Ranworth plant, and rather 
frequent in such places, is not very plentiful in this neighbour- 
hood.
Those who want to see this plant in perfection and abun- 
dance should visit the old haven at Sandwich in Kent.
The rarest plant in this coronal.
of Norfolk aquatics is probably 
Senedo paludosus, which occurs occasionally in bogs at Ranworth.
The Norfolk botanists should search diligently for Senedo palm^ 
iris {Cineraria) and for Sonchus paluatris.
The rediscovery of 
these plants, which are among the very rarest of England^s most 
precious rarities, will reward the toil of some ardent local inves- 
tigator.
Should this plant be reckoned among the aquatics?
Scarcely, for it is found in the same class of habitats as Sonchus 
palustriSy which sometimes is an aquatic, but is oftener found in 
marshy ground only occasionally flooded, and it grows well, or 
used to grow well, at Kew, in the Royal Gardens, one of the 
driest spots of England.
Villarsia nymphaoides ?
I believe I saw this fine plant asso- 
ciated with Sagittaria sagittifolia at Ranworth, in some muddy 
ditches.
The author of the ' Cybele,^ not always remarkable for 
N. 8.
VOL.
V. * X 
154 PEN AND DITCH PLANTS OP NORFOLK.
[May, 
consistency, asserts that this fine aquatic is wild in Norfolk, 
Cambridge, etc., which he calls its north limit, but that it is cer- 
tainly introduced in Stafford, Lancashire, etc.
(see ' Cybele,^ vol.
ii.
p. 178), and doubtfully wild in the intermediate counties of 
Warwick and Nottingham.
He does not inform us on what evi- 
dence he relies for these facts.
Probably only his own eyes, 
which deceived him in estimating the altitude of the moors of 
Devon, inhere he saw the marsh Hypericum much higher than 
the mountains of North Wales.
Stratiotes aloides in July and August is common in the 
ditches at Ranworth.
[The readers of the ' Phytologist ^ may 
prefer a brief account of the economy of this plant to the useless 
platitudes of the ^ Cybele ' about its distribution.
Those who 
care for seeing a sample of unmeaning twaddle, may compare 
' Cybele,^ vol.
ii.
pp.
473, 474, with what he has seen or read 
about the plant.] This plant is very singular in its mode of 
growth.
The numerous radical leaves which spring from its 
creeping runners, which penetrate far into the mud, and its exotic- 
like aspect, its flowers, its compressed scape, make an uncommon 
object.
In a ditch that some men were cleaning out, I saw its 
spreading roots more than three feet deep in the mud, and at 
least six feet in some places from the body of the plant.
It seems 
to occur all over the Fens, by the rivers Bure, Tare, and Waveney, 
and several other places in ditches at Loddon, Kirby, Norton, 
and Toft.
If this plant is not a genuine native of England, it is 
at all events spontaneous in Norfolk.
The last of my aquatic plants is Potamogeton oblonguSy com- 
mon at Ranworth, and it flowers in July.
This family is well 
represented in our neighbourhood, both in Norfolk and Suffolk.
Here many of the rarer species like the above are common.
I 
intend to send, in the course of the present summer (1861), a 
series of our Potamacea for publication in the ' Phytologist,^ in 
order to induce British botanists to pay a visit to this almost 
terra incognita of the British realm.
1861.] REVIEW.
155 
The Preston Chronicle for March 17th, July listh, and Augmt 
llth, 1860.
Newspapers, whether of daily or weekly appearance, notice 
periodicals of all sorts, both monthlies and quarterlies ; therefore 
the subject of this article, not being uncommon, requires no 
apology.
'Rambles by the Kibble^ is the title of a series of very amu- 
sing and instructive articles on the antiquities, scenery, natural 
and civil history of the many interesting localities, towns, vil- 
lages, churches, monastic remains, manorial residences, etc.
etc., 
which give a more than ordinary interest to one of the prettiest 
streams of Craven, celebrated for its dales, scars, rivulets, and 
streamlets.
" Of the many rivers that flow along the valleys of merrie England, 
there are few that, in the richness of antiquarian and historical associa- 
tions, the loveliness of the district it waters, or the number of objects of 
beauty and interest along its coarse, exceed our own Bibble.
In the days 
of yore the Koman masters of Britain colonized its banks and erected 
their stations, their homes, their temples, and their altars near its waters.
The Danes, Saxons, and Normans have left traces of their ascendency in 
the names of our towns, villages, and their inhabitants." 
Our pages are ndt quite appropriate for antiquarian or histo- 
rical lore, and even the pictorial is not always relished by the 
strictly scientific simplers, yet a sprinkling of something readable, 
interspersed here and there among the clumsy lumbering Latini- 
ties of nomenclature and description, is a relief to the reader : 
it is like a bit of open green common to a weary pedestrian who 
has trudged long on the dusty highway, with a brick wall or 
dosely-cropped thorn-hedge on his right hand and on his left.
The following plants were collected during an autumn ramble 
in the Fylde, between Lytham and the lighthouse, near the very 
mouth of the Ribble, and not far from Preston.
We should like 
to know the distance, in case we should follow the track of our 
Preston brethren.
The first-mentioned plant is common in Craven, and probably 
equally so in North Lancashire ; it is one of the rarest of British 
156 BEVisw.
[May, 
plants in the south of England.
Pamassia paltistris (Grass of 
Parnassus) grows in most of the lower ground among the sand- 
hills in considerable quantities.
It is not unknown in Herts and 
Bucks^ but the stations are few and distant.
" In situations similar to those in which we found the Grass of Parnassus 
we met with large quantities of the Pyrola rotutidifolia (round-leaved 
Winter- Green) ; in fact, in many places the ground was literally carpeted 
with it." 
This plant is a doubtful native of the south of England.
Many 
years ago the writer of this saw at Henfield a living plants said 
to be Pyrola roiundifolia, and also said to have been found in a 
part of St. Leonard's Forest called Miller's Race.
Can Mr.
Borrer or Mr. Mitten, or any other botanist, tell us if this be a 
Sussex plant ?
" A frequent inhabitant of the little grassy hillocks among the sand- 
hills is the Gentiana campestris (Field Gentian), which, though not very 
remarkable for beauty, is yet interesting on account of its rarity.
"The beautiful Un/thraa Centaurium (Lesser Centaury) is no unfre- 
quent neighbour of the last, and adds materially to the beauty of the floral 
scene by its very pretty bright pink blossoms.
It is a plant beloved of 
herbalists, on account of its tonic qualities, and is locally termed * Sanc- 
tuary.' But perhaps the plant most frequently to be met with about the 
sandhills is the Cynoglossum officinale (Common Hound's-Tongue).
Its 
dull purple flowers, with their mouse-hke smell, had vanished previous to 
our visit ; but we brought back to Preston many mementos of our walk in 
the shape of numbers of its seeds, which clung with great tenacity to our 
clothes.
" Between the sandhills and high-water mark there is a great abundance 
of the Glaux marUlma (Black Saltwort), and occasionally a few plants of 
the singular-looking Eryngium maritimum (Sea Holly) ; while in ditches 
between the sandhills and Marton Moss we saw several specimens of the 
Holtonia palustris (Water Violet).
The beautiful lilac-coloured blossoms 
of the last of course had long departed, the plant blossoming in June, but 
it was easily recognized, from its peculiarly jagged and divided leaves.
" The most conspicuous perhaps, and one of the rarest, is the Brasdca 
Monensk (Isle of Man Cabbage), and we saw abundance of the Thalictrum 
minus (Less Meadow Rue).
In the same locality, in their proper seasons, 
are to be met with Datura Stramonium (Thorn Apple), I^copais arvenm 
(Small Bugloss), SaUola Kali (Pricldy Saltwort), Cakile maritima (Sea- 
Rocket), Trifolium arveme (Hare's-foot Trefoil), T.
auffocatum (Suffo- 
cated Trefoil)^ and many others.
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
157 
" Anagallia tenella (Bog Pimpernel), with its lovely rose-coloured blos- 
soms, Samolua Valerandi (Water Pimpernel), and Epipactis palustris 
(Marsh Helleborine) are frequently to be met with in the most marshy spots 
among the sandhills.
Orchis Z«^i/bZia' (Broad-leaved Orchis) and Sper- 
gula nodosa (Knotted Spurrey) are not unfrequent neighbours of the three 
last, but prefer rather drier habitations.
From half-a-dozen to a dozen 
plants of Asparagus officinalis (Common Asparagus) are to be found upon 
oae of the sandhills, and how they came there is rather a mystery.
" Agrimonia Eupatoria (Common Agrimony) is not unfrequently found 
upon the sandhills, while Cochlearia Danica (Danish Scurvy-Grass) and 
Sisymbrium Sophia (Flixweed) abound on the dry banks and copses in the 
neighbourhood.
The rare Euphorbia Paralias (Sea Spurge) and Silene mart-' 
tima (Sea Campion) must not be omitted from our list, the former an in- 
habitant of the higher part of the hills and the latter of the shore, within 
a few yards of the base of the hills.
There are many other.plants, more 
or less rare, to be found within three miles of Lytham,^ chiefly on or about 
the sandhills ; but 1 think those whose habitats are above given are suffi- 
ciently numerous to show that Lytham offers quite as many attractions to 
the botanist as to the valetudinarian and pleasure-seeker." 
We shall be weU pleased to see more of these lively sketches 
of scenery, local history, and botany, especially higher np the 
river, in the direction of Settle, Penighent, etc., with which part 
of Craven and Lancashire we ate better acquainted than we are 
with the portion between Preston and the Irish Sea.
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUEEIES.
To the Editor of the ' Phytologist: 
Will you, or some readers of the * Phytologist ' learned in Willows, in- 
form me why no use is made (in any description that I am aware of) of 
the different colour of the anthers to distinguish between some at least of 
the different species or varieties of monandrous Salices ?
I find two kinds 
in this neighbourhood, which, with much doubt, I h&.ve assigned respec- 
tively to S, Woolgariana and 8.
Helix.
In the one wliich I have taken for 
S. Woolgariana, with lighter twigs, the catkins are larger, their scales more 
downy, and the anthers at first invariably crimson.
In the other, which I 
have called S.
Helix, with darker twigs, the catkins are smaller, their scales 
less downy, and the anthers invariably orange.
Babington (Manual, 
ed.
4) describes the whole group, Purpurea^ as having " anthers purple, 
ultimately black.'* These both become ultimately black, but at first they 
are veiy distinct as crimson and orange.
158 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[May, 
I am not acquamted with the other monandrous varieties ; but between 
these two at least, — whether I have named them above rightfully or not, — 
would not this difference of colour in the anthers form a useM mark of 
distinction for those who, like myself, are much puzzled to distinguish be- 
tween them ?
Yet I do not find it anywhere noted.
R. E.
C. 
" General Post Office, March, 1861.
" Sir, — In reply to your letter of the 11th inst., I have to acquaint you 
that books, having specimens of dried plants attached to their leaves, may 
be forwarded under the regulations of the Book Post, but that such speci- 
mens may not be sent loose, nor can seeds be regarded as coming within 
the privileges of the Book Post.
" All exchangers of plants have to do, is to have a guard-book made, with 
thin covers, and (say) about 12 or 15 inches long, by 6 or 8 inches wide, 
and when sending their specimens, have them securely gummed (by means 
of slips) to the leaves ; thus the advantages of the Book Post can be se- 
cured to a numerous body who have perhaps hitherto been ignorant of the 
privilege.
• I am, yours faithfully, G.
W. Gissing.
" Of course no letter must be sent." 
[Several of our correspondents have availed themselves of this privilege.
We have received and also transmitted hundreds of specimens by post.
"We thank our excellent correspondent for reminding us that this may not 
be generally known.] 
List op Plants found in the Neighboubhood of Pebth, by 
John Sim, dueing the Summee of 1860.
Allo8oru8 crispua : Bimam Hill; plentifully.
Anagallis caruJea : cul- 
tivated ground near Perth ; very, sparingly.
Anchma semperviren8 : foot 
of S^enton Rocks, near Dunkeld ; abundant and luxuriant, undoubtedly 
truly wild.
Anthemk arvensia : fields near Murthley Railway Station ; 
abundant.
Antirrhinum majus : precipitous cliffs of Kianoull Hill ; cer- 
tainly indigenous.
Antirrhinum Orontium : cultivated gfound near Perth 
city; rather sparingly.
-^rfl^i^^ir^M^a.- Stenton Rocks; plentiful.
Asperula 
odorata: wood at Stenton Rocks; in the greatest abundance.
Aaplenium 
8eptentrion4ile : near the top of Stenton Rocks ; plentiM.
JBrassica cam- 
pestria : foot of cliffs, KinnouU Hill ; sparingly.
Campanula rapunculoidea : 
hedges near Bowerswall and B&mhill, and several other places in the 
neighbourhood.
Cardum acanthoidea : foot of Stenton Rocks.
Carex 
paUeacem : foot of Bimam Hill, north side.
Cerastium semidecandrum : 
summit of rocks, Witch-Hill, Kinnoull parish.
Coriandrum sativum : waste 
ground; very sparingly.
Oynoaurua echinatm: waste ground, Witch- 
Hill; sparingly.
Cyatopteris fragilia : stone dikes near Caputh Ferry; 
luxuriant and plentiful.
*Dianthua deltoidea : summit of rocks.
Den of 
Balthayock, Kinnoull parish.
Euphorbia exigua : cultivated ground near 
Perth city ; rather sparingly.
Geranium columbinum/' Tocks, Craigie Moor, 
near Perth ; abundant.* Goodyera repena : wood of Scone.
Hieracium 
boreale?
banks of Tay, near Perth.
Hypericum calydnum: woods of 
Dunkeld, one mile east of the town; plentiful.
Lamium maculatum: 
wood of Scone, near Palace, probably an escape from cultivation.
lAf- 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
159 
copodium alpinum: Bimam Hill, towards summit, north side.
^Lyd- 
machia vulgaris : hedge-side, two and a half miles south-west of Perth, 
Aberdalgie parish.
Medkago saliva: border of a field, near Perth; 
sparingly.
(Enothera biennis : naturalized in fields about Perth.
Fapaver 
dubium: cultivated field*.
Fapaver Rhceas: cultivated fields.
Beseda 
fruiiculosa : dry barren ground, Witch-Hill, KinnouU parish ; only one 
plant.
Geranium nodosum and Fulmonaria officinalis: in a wood near 
Scone Palace.
Ribes Grossularia : Den of Quarry Mill ; plentiful.
Bosa 
systila : hedges and roadsides ; plentiful.
Sagina nodosa : sandy ground, 
banks of Tay, two miles north of Perth ; sparingly.
Stachys arvensis : 
cultivated fields, KinnouU Hill ; plentiful.
Trifolium incarnatum : culti- 
vated fields, occasionally; very likely an escape from cultivation.
Vacdnium 
Vitis-idaa : Birnam Hill.
Verronica peregina : a weed in cultivated nur- 
sery ground ; plentifully.
Verbascum nigrum : waste ground, Witch- 
HiU ; only one plant.
Plants having an asterisk were not seen in a growing state by me.
I 
only saw them some hours after they were gathered.
John Sim.
Bridge End, Perth^ October^ 1860.
Blechnum spicant, var.
ramosum, from North Wales.
This very handsome form of B.
Spicant, figured in 'Nature-Printed 
Ferns,' vol.
ii.
p. 226, plate 96, ^g.
a, was recently foimd near Llanderfel 
by Mrs. Jones, on a mountain between Cefn Isaf and Saman.
The above 
is a new station for this very elegant and rare form.
. .
. This coloured variety of the common Primrose we find growing 
in the hedge-banks of the lane between Llanderfel and Branas Lodge.
I 
do not remember to have noticed it elsewhere.
W. P.
Spikenard.
In a former number of the * Phytologist ' I stated my opinion that the 
precious ointment of Scripture, possessed by Mary, and called Spikenard, 
might have been composed partly of Attar of Koses, which gave it so much 
odour.
I find, iii confirmation of my opinion, the following in Bulleyn's 
* Simples,' under the head Boses : — " Thus do I end this precious flower, 
called the Kose, which the Arabians, for the excellent sweetnesse thereof 
dio cb!l\ Harder .
S. B.
* In the * Phytologist ' for August last is a question by Q.
: What is the 
genus and order of the Oxberry Plant ?
I can answer that question : in 
the counties of Worcester, Salop, and Hereford, the root of the Tamus 
communis is accounted as a good specific for the rheumatism, outwardly 
applied, aiid it is generally baown to the natives under the name of Ox- 
berry Root (p.
244)..
White Bryony is generally known by the name of Mandrake in the same 
localities.
Agrostemma Githago is called Cockle; and is not FsUlium 
Squill?
John Lloyd.
Can any.
Hampshire reader of this tell the writer what is the Squatmore 
which Mr. Aubrey, in his letter to Mr. Bay (see Derham's * Letters be- 
160 BOTANICAL NOTBS^ NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[May, 
tween Kay and his Correspondents ') says, " grows by the salt-pits, at 
Lymington, Hampshire, of wonderful effect for bruises : not in any herbal." 
"This I had," he continues, "from Th. Guidott, M.D., whose father had 
the salt-works, and is a witness of the cures done by it." QuiERisT.
Note.
— The Publisher and the Editor of this magazine have received 
several letters about an expected " eventuality which we prefer not to indi- 
cate here," but which our readers may be told in plain terms is the dis- 
continuance of our publication.
They are hereby ii^ormed that our inten- 
tion is to keep the vantage-ground : we have been bullied and we have 
been wheedled ; an appeal has been made to our pockets ; and for the sake 
of science, we have been humbly entreated to give place to our betters.
Our well-wishers are entitled to our gratitude ; and we can only inform 
them, that we will do our best, as hitherto we have done.
That we do 
not know more is rather our misfortune than our fault ; and though our 
station in society is but humble, we do not wish to emerge from our ob- 
scurity, — our social rank is quite equal to our expectations and to our 
wishes.
We are not ashamed publicly to profess that our aspirations and 
hopes are placed on more solid and permanent objects than the profit, dis- 
tinction, and honour which properly belong to or are the consequents of 
literary and scientific reputation.
It is not to be dissembled, that the hostile opposition which, in a cer- 
tain quarter, is expected to be a final extinguisher to the feeble light we 
have endeavoured to hold up to our less instructed contemporaries, may 
and ought to have the effect of making us more energetic in their cause, 
and of trying to improve the material of the * Phytologist.' This, bur 
readers know, must mainly depend on their continuing to send us such 
facts as are interesting and useful to those engaged in these pursuits.
In conclusion, we assure them that we will not adopt any shabby and 
disreputable means for increasing our circulation.
' 
Communications have been received from 
Greorge Wolsey ; Tom Stansfield ; G.
W. Gissing ; John Sim ; Dr.
Windsor; W.
Eichardson; Rev.R. E.
Cole; W.
Pamplin; A.
G. More; 
W. Dickinson ; Sidney Beisly ; Dr. Lindsey ; Rev. T.
F. Eavenshaw ; 
J. S.
M. ; W.
W. N.
; J.
G. Baker ; J.
B. Mackay ; G.
Davies, Brighton, 
etc.
BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED FOE EEVIEW.
The Chemist and Druggist^ March \hth.
The Todmorden Post, March 2Srd.
The Preston Chronicle, March 2Srd, 
The Chemist and Druggist, April 15^A.
Index Mlieum, Part II.
Beport of the Thirsk Natural History Society.
The Malvern News and Journal, April lOM, 1861.
The Daily British Whig, Kingston, Canada, April %nd.
[June, 1861.] 161 
List of Local Botanists, No. 1.
bur readers are indebted to the obliging and active Secretary 
of the Todmorden Botanical Society for the list of Lancashire 
and Yorkshire botanists published in this number of the ' Phy- 
tologist/ This i& only a small portion of the names and ad- 
dresses kindly furnished : the remainder will appear on a future 
occasioi^l^g^e Editor desires that all other botanists^ willing to 
assist in completing the list, will communicate with him direct^ 
and thus save Mr. Stansfield the trouble of applying for permia^ 
sion and of transmitting the names.
To our obliging correspondents in Alnwick, Perth, and Sy- 
denham, our kind acknowledgment of their zeal and goodness is 
due, and our thanks are hereby gratefully tendered.
The catholic principles on which the Todmorden Botanical 
Soci^y is established, and the energetic efforts of its members 
to render science sutbservient to the noblest and best interests of 
mankind, have been warmly commended in these pages; and the 
example of their readiness in offering to aid strangers who, for 
botanical purposes, may visit their resp^tive localities, is pro- 
posed for imitation by their more southern brethren.
We again beg to submit to the notice of all our readers that 
an eminent and dignified station, in the domains of science, will 
be accorded, not to those who know most, but to the men who 
make the best use of what they know, or by helping the weaker 
members of the brotherhood, not by eagerness to show their 
own superiority.
Our botanical creed is a short one, and soon said, but it is of 
a very comprehensive character.
Our readers do not, after 
having had it expounded, both by word and work for seven 
years, need that it should be restated.
But we propose one for 
those who are not able, out of the discordant principles now 
prevalent, to compile their confession of phytological faith.
They need not swear allegiance to Linnaeus, nor to the doctrines 
of his school.
They may adopt the system of Jussieu or of 
De Candolle, or that of any of the great scientific notabilities of 
modem times.
They need neither be splitters nor lumpers, as 
the two prevailing sects of British botanists are now, not very 
elegantly nor courteously, designated.
The sole article we 
should propose as a test of a real, not a pseudo-botanist, is this^ 
N. S.
VOL.
v. .
Y 
162 LIST OF LOCAL BOTANISTS.
[Jufie, 
viz.
that he loves plants as the exponents of Divine power, 
wisdom^ and goodness^ and admires them as examples of beauty, 
order, and harmony, enjoys them as conducive to the cultiva- 
tion of his piety, morals, and taste, and uses them for the va- 
rious purposes of economy and ornament, for which they were 
created.
This should be accepted as the first principles of 
botanical belief, and the practical part of this short creed is^ that 
the true believer should be ever ready to receive and circulate 
knowledge, acquire it not for its own sake merely, but that he 
may, while he enlarges the sphere of his own enjoyments, have 
the far higher gratification of contributing to the happiness of 
his family, his friends, and connections.^ 
William Jolliffe, Almshouses, Newport Boad, Ryde.
Daniel Humberstoye, Beckenham, Kent.
Alntoich, Northumherlandy LUt.
WUliam Eichardson, Finkle-street.
^ 
Heniy Hitter, Clayport-street.
John Thompson, Northumberland-street.
William Charetton, Narrowgate-street.
Perth lAH, 
F. B.
White, Athole-plaoe, Perth.
John Sim, gardener.
Scone Palace.
Andrew Dickson, gardener, Scone Palace.
Robert Farquharson, druggist, 22S, High-street.
John Ifacpherson, wearer, Pomarium-street.
Henry Boswell, Esq., Corn-market, Oxford.
T. W.
B. Ingle, Esq., Wakefield.
Todmorden List, 
Bev. Thomas Sutcli£fe, HeptonstaH 
John Nowell, the Market-place.
— M.
Tom Stansfield, Yale Gardens, Hon. See.
to the Todmorden 
^ Botanical Society.
— P.
John Holmes, Church-street.
Jonathan Hedley, Piatt's House.
William Patman, Ifytholm.
William SutdiflTe, HeptonstaH.
John Halstead, '< l^e Hollins." 
John Howarth, Bobin Wood Mill.
* In the following list, P.
denotes Pteridohffist, M.
Muscologist.
Where there 
18 neither of these letters affixed to a name, general botanist, or botany in general, 
is to be understood.
Also, it may be desirable to state that the obtainment of the 
gratuitous or paid services of any of those persons whose names are in this list, is 
to be agreed on by the respective parties.
This b not undertaken by the pro- 
moters of the present movement.
1861.] LIST OP LOCAL BOTANISTS.
163 
John Fielden, Vale Gardens.
James Horsfidl, Yale Gkurdens.
* Edmund Holt, Lumbutts.
Rev. Sutcliflfe Sowden, Mytholm.
B. W.
Foster, surgeon, Bank Buildings.
Halifax Lift.
Samuel "King, Lane House, Luddenden-foot.
Charles Eastwood, Lane House, Luddenden-foot.
* 
Ben, Barber, Woodfield House.
J. Walker, Post-office, Booth Town.
Suddersfleld Litt.
' 
W. Ghithrie, Fiiby Park.
White, Kirkheaton Nursery.
Peter Inchbald, Esq., Storthes Hall.
Rochdale Litt.
John Waddington, 47, Peel-street.
James Lund, Botanists' Lm, Ann-street.
John Aspden, Grove-street, Pinfold.
Wm. Thompson, "The One Ash." 
James Schofield, Church Stile.
Qreovge Brierly, Milnrow.
— ^M.
William Pavies, Oldham-road.
William Bentley, Royton.
Walter Morris, surgeon, Drake-street.
Rev.
— Mollineux, Crossfield.
Accrington LUt.
Fairbank Sutcliffe, Law-street.
George Lord, 9, Chapel-street.
• 
C^eorge Fowler, Spring HilL 
John Dugdale, 6, Button-street.
George Chadwick, Bank-street.
Abraham Heyes, Grange-lane.
LUt of Manchester Botanists, 
Leo H.
Grindon, 85, Rumford Street, Hon. Sec.
to the Field Naturalists' 
Society, author of the * Manchester Flora,' etc.
Joseph Sidebotham, 21, Gteorge-street.
— M.
G. C.
Churchill, Esq., Dickinson-road, Rusholme.
John Bland Wood, M.D.— M.
^ 
Thos.
Coward, Spring Gkirdens.
Rev. Stanford H!arris, M.A., Ivy Cottage, H!arpurhey.
Thomas Glover, Smedley-lane.
Edward Leeds, Stretford.
Joseph Fenton, Esq., Crimble Cottage, Heywood.
Richard Buxton, 72, Gun-street, Great Ancoats, auttor of < Botanical 
Guide to Plants within sixteen miles of Manchester.' 
Robert Holland, Mobberley.
George Edward Hunt, Bowdon.
164 LIST OF LOCAL BOTANISTS.
{JunC, 
John Leigh, M.B.C.S., 26, St. John-fltreet.
J. Holme Nicholson, Owens College.
W. P.
Scott, The Hodge, Broadbottom.
William.
Turner, Esq., Pendlebury House.
Horatio Micholls, Esq., Bowdon.
B. S.
Yates, Sale, near Ifanchester.
Bruce Findlay, Curator of Botanical Gbrdens.
Robert Lees, Bradford, Manchester.
William Patefield, Radcliffe.
John Holt, Stand-lane, near Badcliffe.
Thomas Bleachlej, Whitefield.
George Hilton, Simister-lane, Little Heaton.— P.
James Barlow, Swinton.
— ^P.
Henry Bleackley, Whitefield.
James Horsefield, Whitefield.— M.
George Hulme, Prestwich.
James Berry, St. James-street, Manchester.
Bichard Hsmipson, Wharton Chapel, Little Hutton.
Joseph Evans, Booths-town, near Worsley.
Joseph Caldwell, Tyldesley Banks.
James Cooke, Ancoats-lane, Manchester.— M.
Thomas Rogers, Cookson-street, Butler-street, Manchester.
— P.
Jonas Clegg, Esq., 21, Polygon Avenue, Ardwiok.
William Chambers, Salford.
. 
Stockport and NeigJiJbowrhood, 
William Spencer, Hoyle's Buildings, Stockport.
Joseph Dunning, New Zealand-road.
Isaac Williamson, Albion Inn.
Robert Barton, Heaton Mersey.
Christopher Thomily, Heaton Mersey.
* 
Middleton and Neigkowhood.
John Turner, Church-street.
Adam Simpson, Cooper Fold.
John Bayley, Bradshaw G-ardens, Chadderton.
William Kent, Street Bridge, Chadderton.
Edward Worsley, Bing o* Bells Inn, Hon. Sec.
to the Middleton 
Botanical Society.
BUtckhum, 
John Withei^ngton, Esq., surgeon.
ffaslingden.
Thomas Holdeti, Whitecroft.
Preston, 
C. J.
Asl^eld, Esq., 11, Frenchwood-street.
Edmund €braham, Bolton-street West.
Staleyhridge, 
Jethro Tinker.— M.
1861.] BOTANIZIKG AT THB BEGINNING OF APRIL.
165 
AsMon-undeT'Z^ne, 
E. dough, Yictoria Street, Byeeroft.
Whitehead, Dukinfield.
Sccle».
Mr. John Shaw, gardener.
Prestwich and Neighbourhood, 
James Fercival, Broughton Ghroye Works, Bury New Bead, 
Hon. Sec.
to the Frestwich Botanical Society.
William Horsfield, Besses oth Bam.
Oloswp, 
J. OUerenshaw, Dinting Vale.
Solmfirth.
Firth Hardy, Druid's Hall.
Zondo; 
W. Marshall, Esq., 11, Old Fish-street.
Sidney Beisly, Esq., the Cedars, Lawrie Fark, Sydenham.
Mrs. Beisley, the Cedars, Lawrie Fark, Sydenham.
Norfolk.
Ber. E.
jSimons, Oyington, Watton.
THREE DAYS' BOTANIZING AT THE BEGINNING OF AFBIL.
{From a Correspondents) 
I started on the Ist of April for Andover, drawn in that 
direction by the promises of Murray's ' Handbook for Hants/ 
which bore witness of Daphne Mezereon as growing abundantly 
in the woods in that neighbourhood, and particularly in an Oak 
copse, the remains of what was formerly Harewood Forest, and 
still called by that name.
I left this old country town, now no 
longer resonant with the passage of post-horses, and took the 
Stockbridge road.
The country is part of the chalk plateau of 
Hampshire, Berkshire, and Wiltshire, the ^'patria/^ as Cbny- 
beare and Phillips express it, of all the chalk hills, the North and 
South Downs, the Dorsetshire hills, and the great range which 
terminates in Flamborough Head, all being a kind of claws 
thrown out from diflereut angles of this body.
Plateau thoagh 
it be, it is as little of a level as Salisbury Plain itself, being all 
hill and dale, slope and hollow.
The part immediately round 
Andover must once have been (in American phrase) a '^ rolling'' 
166 THREE DATS^ BOTANIZING [Juue, 
chalk down : it is now a blaze of white cornfield^ with what 
hedges it has, reduced to the scanty, ugly mechanical measure of 
modem agricultural improvement ; but after some interval the 
hollows become deeper, the hills woody, with even an occasional 
patch of open down, and the country assumes some of the cha- 
racter of the more beautitul chalk districts.
About two miles 
from Andover the road divides, and the left branch climbs over 
a ridge towards the village of Wherwell.
On the summit of 
this ridge the road skirts one extremity of the forest of which I 
was in search, and which stretches from this place, over hill and 
dale for a mile or two, perhaps much further, in an almost direct 
line towards the south.
Presuming that what was said to be 
abundant in many places would be found with little diflSculty, I 
commenced a regular search through the forest.
A more im- 
mense abundance of Primroses, Anemone nemorosa, Adoxa Mos^ 
chatellina, or the Violet which we are now to call sylvatica, I 
never saw, all in the greatest perfection of floral development, 
though it was only the 1st of April.
A Luzula (I believe For- 
steri) was equally plentiful, and I saw isome fine Oxalis Acetosella.
The root of every tree was coated with luxuriant Moss, and in 
some places the same Moss covered the ground, but no Mezereon 
rewarded my search, and I must have departed re mfectd, had I 
not by good fortune met with some woodmen in the heart of the 
forest, whom I asked for information.
They all knew the plant, 
and knew it too by its right name; but they spoke of it as of 
a thing which they had only seen occasionally, and which, though 
growing in a number of places, is not abundant anywhere.
One 
of them led me to a place ftQl half a mile off, on the outskirt of 
the forest, near the road leading from Andover to Micheldever 
station, on the main Southampton line ; and here, amidst dense 
brushwood, into which, but for his information, I should never 
have thought of penetrating, we (or rather he) found two plants, 
on one of which there were a few flowers.
My guide said there 
had been more of the plant formerly in this place, but that the 
growth of the brushwood had been too powerful for it.
In a 
short time it will, no doubt, in this spot, disappear altogether, to 
show itself again when next this portion of the copse is cleared.
My guide had seen it in greater quantity, a few years ago, ten 
miles nearer town, in Bradley Wood, (I think he called it,) on 
Lord Carnarvon's property, near Kingsclere.
The flowering was 
1861.] AT THE BEGINNING OP APRIL.
167 
nearly over, as might be expected from the advanced state of 
other and later spring flowers.
The time to look for it would 
probably be March.
I have seen it in perfection about the middle 
of May, in the woods of 
** Yallombrosa, where the EtruBcan shades 
High overarched embower,* ' 
and in the eastern Pyrenees as late as May 28th : but these, 
though so far south, were mountain situations, and in the latter 
case the season was a very backward one.
The next day I crossed to the Isle of Wight to look for the 
Pulmonaria, stated by Dr. Bromfield to grow in all the woods about 
Ryde.
I first tried Quarr Copse, which, I grieve to say, is evi- 
dently in course of preparation for being cut up into villas.
I 
found no Pulmonaria, though abundance of Daphne Laureola in 
full and fine flower.
The next copse, however.
Shore Copse, (the 
one between Quarr Abbey and the Solent,) abounded in the 
Pulmonaria, which I found equally plentiful in all the other 
woods, and occasionally thickets, in that direction.
In some 
places it was as abundant, and almost as beautiful, as wood Hya- 
cinths elsewhere.
Its ample clusters of funnel-shaped flowers, 
in various stages of the transition (so common with Boragineae) 
from an original reddish tint to a bright metallic blue, made it, 
in this stage of its existence, a great ornament to the country.
Considerable obscurity hangs over the specific characters of this 
genus.
Dr. Bromfield names the Isle of Wight plant angusti- 
folia, and identifies it with P.
azurea of many German botanists, 
and of the ^ Prodromus ;' but in the shape of the leaves, and in 
some other characters, it seems to me to agree better with 
P. tuber osa or saccharata than with angustifolia (or azurea), at 
least as described by Grenier and Godron, if indeed aU three, and 
perhaps officinalis also, are not forms of a single species.
What- 
ever it be, it is one of the most beautiful of our rarer spring plants.
I sought, but vainly, for Prunus Cerasus, the Morella Cherry, 
which, according to Dr. Bromfield, grows in a wood between 
Wootton church and Whippingham' Street, but nearer to the 
latter, in the western angle of the wood.
Two beautiful woods 
answer to the description, and I searched them widely; but 
as they were long and narrow, and ran nearly due north and 
south, I found nothing which could be called decidedly the west- 
ern angle of either of them.
168 BX7&NHAM BBECHES.
[June, 
On the third day I walked to St. Helen's Spit^ a narrow slip 
of ground, partly sandbank and partly forzy common^ lying along 
the beach^ west of the narrow mouth of the inlet called Brading 
Harbour.
I had found more interesting plants here formerly, in 
particular Scilla autumnalis, very tall and luxuriant.
It now 
abounded with incipient Euphorbia Paralias, and the wreck of 
last year's Salsola Kali.
My object at present, still under Dr.
Bromfield's guidance, was Cerastium tetrandrum: and I certainly 
found it, but so mixed with C.
semidecandrum, and probably 
others, and among so many intermediate forms, that I much 
incline towards the growing opinion that at least these two and 
C. pumilum (Dr, Bromfield, and that eminent botanist Mr. Ben- 
tham, add glomeratum and even triviale), are but extreme speci- 
mens of the variations of one multiform plant.
The Editor of 
the Phytologist, to whom I had the pleasure of sending a few of 
my specimens, is far better able than I am to throw light on this 
interesting and difficult question.
EXTBACTS FROM COREESPONDENCE.
Remarks on the Botany of Burnham Beeches, 
A long letter might be easily written about the locality of these 
famous old trees, the scene of poetic sentimentalities and unsen- 
timental picnics.
Many a name is carved on the smooth bark of 
the Beeches; many an initial cut into the smooth green turf, 
which is here and there strewn with the relics and remains of 
rural refreshments.
The Editor's faithful correspondent has little 
to relate about the plants, because there are but few plants about 
which there is anything worth relating.
Buckinghamshire has the reputation of being rich in vegetable 
rarities : will any obliging correspondent make a note of them, 
and send it to the ^ Phytologist ' ?
The list of plants recorded in 
the ^ Botanist's Guide,' as the growth of this county, is a very 
short one, and one or two out of this meagre number have no 
right to be here, 'because they are not Buckinghamshire species.
[What are these intrusive species ?] 
From what I saw of this part of Bucks, — ^from the variety of 
its surface and soil ; there is marly, gravelly or gritty, and hanky 
1861-] BUBNHAM BEECHES.
169 
and boggy land here, — I anticipate that in this county, at the 
pipper season, a very fair amount of good plants may be detected.
I write ^ detected ^ advisedly ; for where next to nothing has been 
done, every rare plant observed will be a discovery.
The best way of reaching Bumhara Beeches from London, is 
to travel by the Great Western Railway as far as Slough.
There, 
or soon after leaving Slough, the botanist should go to the right 
hand, hf Famham Bx)yal, by a road almost at right-angles to the 
London and Bath road.
The distance to the Beeches is not more 
than two or three miles from Slough.
But It may be somewhat 
more, for a person is but an indifferent judge of distance when 
he travels with those who have Jhe art of beguiling the tedious- 
ness of the way, by kindness and sprightly conversation.
Your correspondent does not know how far it is from Slough 
to the Beeches ; he neither walked, nor did he hire or pay for a 
fly or cab.
In the latter case.
Cabby would have enlightened his 
mind and lightened his jpurse at the same time, and by one and 
the same process.
But it is not a very unpleasant walk, even in 
a sultry and dusty day, for the lanes are deep and well shaded, 
and there are several groves, copses, or small woods, which in 
May or the beginning of June might repay a visit with a reason- 
able supply of Orchids and other specimens of sylvan or septal plants.
I did not see any Orchids, for it was at the very end of August 
when I was here; but two Campanulas were observed in the 
long narrow lane about halfvray between Farnham Eoyal and 
Burnham.
The C, Trachelium is certainly there in plenty : not 
a rarity, it may be said, in many parts of the country ; and also, 
it is hoped, C.
latifolia, quite a rarity so far south as this locali- 
ty.
Inula Conyza (Plowman^s Spikenard), Malva moschata (cut- 
leaved Mallow), and Verbascum nigrum (black Mullein), were 
plentiful.
The more widely distributed V.
Thapsus (Moth Mul- 
lein, Taper Mullein, Kentish Blanket, etc.) was, as usual, very 
sparingly distributed.
Ex pede Herculem^ as the ancient sage 
observed : you can judge of the stock by the sample.
The bota- 
nist can tell by these examples, i, e.
when he sees these few pro- 
minent representatives of Flora, that he is in a district not desti- 
tute of good plants, if he only knows where to look for them, 
and has energy enough to keep a vigilant outlook, lest he should 
walk by them, and imagine that there are no rare plants on his 
way, because he did not see them.
N. S.
VOL.
v. z 
170 BURNHAM BEECHES.
\June, 
But the Beeches must not be forgotten in these generalities.
There they are j and huge and protuberant are their stems ; a^d 
though rather stumpy in their stature, amply umbrageous (shade- 
yielding) .
They surely possess more attractions for the artist or 
the man of taste, than for the timber- merchant.
To the botanist 
they appear in no way attractive, excepting he be a mycologist.
And here he may observe several huge Polypori attached to their 
shapeless, aged trunks, and also one of the most elegant of the 
Agaricus, growing, as it usually does, beyond his reach.
But the great hAvest is on the ground, under the trees or 
beside the trees ; for the Beeches of Burnham are not all patu- 
lous (spreading), and consequen^y there is not much which can 
grow under them : but cheek-by-jowl with them grow innumer- 
able Funguses, chiefly Agarics and Boleti, with Chanterelles, 
Hydnum, Clavarias, etc.
A list of these curious plants would possess no interest for the 
general reader, or even botanist, unless he were also a mycolo- 
gist, and such a one would rather see them than read abotit them.
The student of this portion of the Vegetable Kingdom might do 
worse than go to Burnham Beeches, any time between the end 
of August and the middle of October.
On the Stoke side of the Beeches there is an extensive heathy 
common, and between the common and the Beeches there is 
what, in the language of courtesy or by poetic license, might be 
called a brook, where the bard of the poet ^ stretched his listless 
length and pored on the babbling streamlet.
In this bog — for it 
is not a purling bum, except in the fancy of the poet or benevo- 
lent observer — there are several ponds or heads of very deep wa- 
ter.
In the lowermost — for there is a continuous series of them 
— grows Utricularia intermedia, if your informant is correct in 
judging by the radical leaflets and their bulbous appendages.
The plant rarely flowers with us : it certainly was not in flower 
when I was at Burnham, and it was raked out of the water in 
hopes of its proving Ceratophyllum submersum.
There are in the 
same water several Pondweeds [Potamogetones) ; but what they 
are deponent saith not, for a good reason.
At the tail of the bog, stretching out and upwards on the 
* See Cray's Elegy :— 
" His listless length at noontide would he stretch, 
And pore upon th« brook that babbles by.** 
1861.] BUBNHAM BEECHES.
171 
moor, there grow plenty of Rhyncospora banal, Drosera rotundi- 
folia, Scutellaria minor , and several other more common plants.
Malaxis paludosa, a plant which your correspondent wanted to 
see, but did not, may be there for all that.
The ground is boggy 
enough, and there is plenty of Sphagnum to line its nest withal.
Where the chaos of mountains and precipices may be, about 
which Gray wrote so pleasantly to his friend Horace Walpole, 
the narrator would very much like to be told.
He could not 
perceive any elevation half so high as the clouds in a fair day, 
nor anything like a precipice half so fearful as Shakspeare^s 
Cliflf.
Hills we found none to climb ; dangerous crags did not 
tempt us to risk our necks.
But there may be steep craggy 
places at Burnham, though not in our sight ; we were not long 
there.
The venerable Beeches are there still, with their " huge 
fantastic '^ roots, and there are other respectable vestiges of the 
vegetable creation.
The timorous hare and sportive squirrel still 
gambol near the harmless man who is contented with the soli- 
tude of the scene, or with what grows out of the ground.
The Londoner who is in quest of a change, i, e, of a scene 
nearly as unlike as possible to that in which his daily vocation 
lies, should visit this spot.
It is too little praise to tell that it is 
exactly what it was more than a hundred and twenty years ago, 
bating the poetic embellishments, when the poet described it to 
his aesthetic friend.
This place is exactly what it was hundreds 
and thousands of years ago.
There are no enclosures, no planta- 
tions, no cultivation nor improvements.
This unique place is 
still a solitary wild spot, its original character unchanged, and 
its sylvan beauty unimpaired.
Long may its leafy honours ap- 
pear green and glistening in the summer's sun, and long may 
the heaps of withered and decaying leaves, partially conceal the 
scarlet fungus which just peeps through the yielding mass !
Long 
may Burnham Beeches be spared the melancholy fate of Hai- 
nault Forest !
BEITISH OECHtDS.
To the Editor of the ' Phytologiat.' 
Sir, — If you think the accompanying Notes, extracted from 
172 BRITISH ORCHIDS.
{Jufie, 
an interleaved copy of Blackstone's ' Harefield Plants' worth a 
comer in your interesting journal, they are much at your service ; 
you might call the paper a chapter on Orchises of a hundred years 
ago.
Z. 
Keio^ March, 1861.
A Chapter on Orchids^ etc, of the last Century, 
Notes and additions in an interleaved copy of ' Blackstone/ 
which formerly belonged to Peter CoUinson, in whose hand- 
writing they are, in part, and in that of his son Michael Col- 
linson.
* At page 41.
— Paris quadrifolia : the Herb Paris grows in great 
abundance in Grass Farm Wood, opposite the eighth milestone, 
in the Mill Hill road, the only place I ever found it, April, 1766 ; 
and in Caper's Wood, between the seventh and eighth milestone, 
grows the black Hellebore, with a green flower (Helleborus viridis); 
flowers at Christmas; found it in March, 1765.
At page 67.
— Listera Nidtis-avis: found in the year 1755, in 
the Duke of Portland's woods at Bulstrode.
Orchis militaris : found in 1759, in bushy dry banks, going to 
Greenford [sic) Green, near to Dartford; also near the great 
Beech-trees, so remarkable a landmark in Kent, as you go to 
Sevenoaks : this in 1758, and it flowered finely in my garden at 
Mill Hill, in 1760.
Orchis fasca : found this fine Orchis in an old chalk-pit in the 
Duke of Portland's Park ; and it, together with the above, flowers 
finely in the Orchis bed at Mill Hill.
— Note.
I have with great 
care searched the chalk-pit at Harefield repeatedly, but was never 
able to find either this or the above.
Orchis mascula : in many places about Mill Hill, with a white 
flower.
At page 68.
— Orchis Morio : in many fields near Mill Hill, 
both with white flowers and with almost every variety of red.
Ophrys muscifera : I found this in a chalk-pit at HSrefield, 
but not in the one described by Mr. Blackstone, where I have 
often searched for it without success, 1758 ; it continues to flower 
in our Orchis bed here annually.
Orchis latifolia : near Rickmansworth, plentifully ; flowers with 
us at Mill Hill.
Orchis maculata (?) : I saw this species near Newbury, Berks, 
1861.] BRITISH ORCHIDS.
173 
in 1755, in moist meadows; sent it to MiU Hill, where after 
tliree years, it flowered finely, and is now decUned ; this same 
species we received last year from Bath, and it is now (1760) 
preparing to flower.
At page 69.
— Orchis conopsea: I found this sort growing plenti- 
fully on dry chalky banks, about two miles from the Beeches, iiear 
Sevenoaks ; not that place where the Man Orchis is mentioned 
to be found, that spot not being above a quarter of a mile from 
them; I have searched the Harefield chalk-pit, but was never 
able to find one plant of it : flowers in our Orchis bed annually.
Orchis ustulata : nor cOuld I ever find this in Harefield chalk- 
pit : hath been sent to us from Kent, from near Bath, and from 
Lincolnshire, and flowers freely in the Orchis bed.
Orchis pyramidalis : near Sevenoaks Beeches, arid near to 
Bumstead, in Essex ; I found one plant in the Harefield chalk- 
pit : it flowers with us at Mill Hill.
Herminium Monorchis : found it as described, in the Duke's 
pit plentifully ; is a very small species, and smells very sweet : 
flowers in our Orchis bed here.
At page 70.
— Orchis bifolia : once met with two plants near 
Mill Hill, 1757; again found it in plenty in 1766: it succeeds 
in our Orchis bed.
Ophrys apifera : I found this on the banks of the Avon, by 
the Hot Wells, Bristol, and removed some roots to Mill Hill, 
where it just flowered after remaining four years in the bed, and 
after died by maggots eating the heart of the bulbs ; I have also 
found it in sundry other places, as in the Isle of Wight, and at 
Verulam, near St. Alban's; always had bad success in their 
removal; but since, viz.
in the year 1765, have succeeded.
Orchis hircina : the Tragorchis is a most noble plant, but it is 
a very rare one ; I never saw it but once, and that was a little 
beyond Dartford, on the road to Greenstreet Green, very spa- 
rinffly.
I removed a large sod of them to Mill Hill in 1759, 
which consisted of three distinct bulbs, and which I carefully 
separated, but to my great mortification not one of them ever 
appeared.
My father formerly removed into his garden at Peck- 
ham this curious plant, and it flowered there with him for several 
years.
The place whence he got it was near to the fourteenth 
milestone, just before you come to Dartford Heath, which spot 
is since entirely demolished by enlarging the road.
We found it 
174 BRITISH ORCHIDS.
[JunC, 
since in Heath Lane and in Stanhill chalk-pit; the flowers are 
of gigantic size in the Orchis bed.
Again^ in May of the year 
1767, I found, in an old chalk-pit neUr Dartford Heath, several 
plants of the Tragorchis ; also six or .
seven of the larger Fly 
Orchis, growing upwards of a foot in height.
There had been a 
destroyer in the same pit a little before me, who had (by the 
holes in the turf) carried away with him in full flower near seventy 
roots, most of which would undoubtedly perish, and thus this spe- 
cies of Orchis rare to be met with here for the future.
Ophrys aranifera: On the 11th of May, 1767, I have found 
two roots of this, the early green- winged Bee Orchis in the chalk- 
pits of Greenhithe, and after, upon the same day, I found great 
plenty of them growing on an old stony, barren kind of heath, 
between Greenhithe and Northfleet, on the right hand of the 
road, and some little distance from it.
At page 72.
— The greater Fly Orchis : it flowers early in May 
at this present year, 1760 ; we received three roots of it from a 
gentleman at Bath, making a fine appearance in our collection 
here.
Orchis viridis >• I never yet gathered it wild : it hath been 
communicated to us by our before-mentioned Mend at Bath, 
and it shows for flower this- year, 1760.
At page 73.
— Neottia spiralis : this flowers the latest of all the 
Orchis kind ; we observed some years since that it grew plentifully 
in a field adjoining to our garden here at Mill Hill ; also in an- 
other field at Highwood Hill abundantly, both very dry and barren 
spots ; it smells very sweet, but what is most remarkable is, that 
though growing on the spot, with all the advantage of removing 
with large sods of earth, and to a soil in a manner its own, yet 
we have never been able to continue this little difficult plant 
above one season in our Orchis bed.
At page 74.
— Orchis chlarantha, the smaller Butterfly Sa- 
tyrion : my father saw this Orchis growing in a wood between 
Hampstead and Highgate (now the property of Lord Mansfield, 
and since enclosed by him with pales) ; it succeeded well for some 
years in the garden, and then went oft'.
I saw this plant, in 1756, 
growing in great abundance for more than two miles^ riding 
among the bushes in Enfield Chase, between Southgate and the 
Lodge, now in the possession of Mr. Jalabert (1760) ; there is 
one plant remaining of it in the Orchis bed, which continues to 
1861.] BRITISH ORCHIDS.
175 
flower yearly.
This Orchis is in my opinion by far the sweetest 
scented of the whole tribe.
— ^N.B. This flowers a month later 
than the larger kind.
At page 76, — An elegant kind of Bee Orchis, with white 
wings, and the body of a yellowish shade, growing at or near 
Rancomb, in Gloucestershire, was found by Mr. Robins, of Bath, 
one root of which, as well as an elegant painting of the same, we 
received from Mr. Haviland, of Bath.
Mr. Robins gathered ten 
or twelve in full bloom in 1760.
At page 85.^ — In the year 1787 I had a present of three roots 
of the Wasp Orchis {?), found at Clifton, near Bristol, of which 
one root flowered finely in the year 1791 ; the lip very narrow, 
yellow, and streaked with dark purple, very analogous to the 
insect it is named after.
At page 86.
— In July, 1788, found, for the first time, after 
many years^ inquisition in Harefield chalk-pit, the common Bee 
Orchis, not in the area, but on the bank upon the right-hand side ; 
and in July, 1790, another plant of the same, together with (for 
the first time) several very strong roots of the common Fly Orchis, 
never in the course of twenty-six or twenty-seven years observed 
by me before, although I had searched for it at various times ; 
found also abundance of Orchis pyramidalis, "and of O.
conopsea; 
but of O.
militaris, and of O.
ustulata I never could (after the 
most diligent investigation) meet with a single plant.
The whole of the above is copied from the interleaved copy of 
Blackstone^s ^ Harefield Plants,' as before mentioned.
Some of 
the entries are evidently by Peter Collinson, and others in the 
handwriting of his son Michael Collinson.
The following, extracted from Mr. Dillwyn's privately printed 
account of the garden at Mill Hill, will form an interesting 
appendage to the present' paper.
Under the article Ophrys 
muscifera, at p.
36 of the ^ Hortus Collinsonianus,' we read : — 
"Mem., July 4th, 1757.
Went to the Duke of Portland's, at 
Bulstrode; stayed to the 11th.
In returning found the great 
Fly Orchis on the declivity of a chalk-pit in Esquire Cook's 
park, in the parish of Harefield, Middlesex; but there is one 
Miles, a parson, of Cowley, near Uxbridge, who is Orchis-mad, 
and takes all up, leaves none to seed, so extirpates all wherever 
he comes, which is cruel, and deserves chastisement." And a 
176 buddle's uebbabium.
[June, 
little further down, under Orchis hircina, we read: — "Mem., 
July, 1763.
Miller's Satyrium, No. 2, now in bloom in my 
garden, three feet high, above fifty flowers.^' Again, under 
Orchis pyramidalis, we find this curious note by Mr. Dillwyn : 
'* In the ' Daily ^.dverstiser' for July 4, 1768, Orchis pyramid 
dalis appears in a list of plants stolen from Mr. P.
CoUinson, 
and there are memoranda of many imperfectly defined species, 
sufEicient to show that he possessed a large collection of the more 
hardy Orchises,^' 
KESULTS OF A FEW HOUES' RESEARCH IN BUDDLE'S 
HERBARIUM.
This collection, sometimes quoted by Sir J.
E. Smith, in his 
excellent work on the British Plants, forms a portion of the 
immense herbarium of Sir Hans Sloane, probably the largest 
contribution to science made by any single private individual of 
the age in which this eminent naturalist lived.
The volume is 
numbered, and there is a manuscript catalogue of the contents 
in the rooms containing the Banksian Herbarium, and this cata- 
logue may be readily consulted.
The specimens in Buddie's Herbarium are arranged after the 
system of Ray in his ^ Synopsis.' 
The following doubtful species occur : — 
1. Sorbits, or Pyrus domestical from hilly places in Cornwall, 
sent by Walter Moyle, Esq., and Mr. Stevens, of that county.
See Ra/s ' SynopsiV ed.
1696, pp.
295.
Smith, Sir J.
E., 
states, in loco, ^English Flora,' p.
364,vol.ii.: "In the mountainous 
parts of Cornwall, many places, according to Mr. Moyle and Mr.
Steve^is.'' 
2. Scilla bifolia, without a locality, but supposed to be a wild 
plant, because associated with other acknowledged British spon- 
taneous productions.
3. It is now clearly ascertained that the specimen of Tordy- 
Hum in Buddie's Herbarium is not anything but T, maximum.
Though entered by Sir J.
E. Smith as seen at Isleworth by Mr.
Doody (see Eng. Fl.
ii.
104), it is clear that he considers T.
officinale^ as entered in Buddie, to have been only T.
maximum.
1861.] KENTTSH BOTANY.
177 
The following is in Merrett's Herbarium :—?ili^dicayo denti- 
culatUy first, it is believed, distinguished from M.
minima or 
M, maculata by the Rev. G.
E. Smith, and published in his 
account of the plants of South Kent, is in the al^ve-mentioned 
collection, vol.
ii.
p. 68.
Also Melilotus vulgaris^ under title 
M, germamca.
This proves that the white Melilot is not a re- 
cent acquisition to our Flora.
This Herbarium contains branched examples of Botrychiam 
Lunaria.
H. 
KENTISH BOTANY.
Notes and Observations mude during a Week's Botanizing in 
South Kent.
By a Correspondent.
The indigenous plants of some of our English counties have 
been well investigated and ascertained, and Cambridge, Hert- 
ford, Devon, Bedford, Oxford, Hampshire, Shropshire, and Sus- 
sex may be quoted as examples.
Some smaller districts have 
also been well searched, and Manchester, Beigate, Liverpool, 
and Faversham are among the number of these favoured loca- 
lities.
The county of Essex is no longer to be a terra incognita 
to the botanists of other parts of the kingdom.
The county Flora of Surrey is still in abeyance, waiting for 
some enterprising, zealous member of the fraternity to enter into 
and complete the unfinished work of the late lamented Mr. Sal- 
mon, who effected more for the elucidation of the plants of his 
adopted county than any local botanist within the range of our 
acquaintance.
The metropolitan counties, with the exception of the fore-noted 
one, viz.
Essex, are still waiting for their local botanical his- 
torians to record and publish their native productions.
There 
are, it is believed, some manuscript materials on the Floras of 
the home counties, as they may be called, but they are at the 
present time unavailable for scientific purposes.
Isolated and distant portions of Kent have been searched, and 
lists of these districts have appeared ; for example, of the Black- 
heath hundred, by the Greenwich Natural History Society ; also 
the plants of Faversham, published by Jacobs in 1777, and again 
by Cowellin 1889, and again by Stowell in 1856.
N. S.
VOL.
V. 2 a 
178 KENTISH BOTANY.
[Jufie, 
The Rev. G.
E. Smith's ^Plants of South Kent' contributed 
much to our knowledge of the botany of certain localities in the 
south-east of Kent ; but as a whole, the botany of this county is 
still unknown.
The London botanists usually confine themselves to the north-r 
em parts of the county, along the Thames, and consequently the 
plants of Gravesend, Cobham, Cuxton, Northfleet, Greenhithe, 
etc., come in for the greater share of their attentions.
Who 
knows the botany of the Grays, — Foot's Cray, North Cray, St.
Paul's Cray, Crayford, etc.
? Did the late Mr. Peete, of Dartford, 
leave any manuscripts on this subject ?
Who has traversed the 
range of chalk hills bounding the Weald of Kent on the north- 
west through Westerham, Wrotham, etc., down to the mouth of 
the Medway ?
We are not aware of any addition to the know- 
ledge of our native plants being made in these parts during the 
present century.
The journey, of which a brief account follows, was undertaken 
partly for botanical purposes, and partly for change of scene, 
fresh air, and general conversation (interchange of ideas on 
scientific, social, and political subjects).
Although we rather 
shun than court publicity, and therefore do not publish our names, 
yet any reasonable information or explanation will be given by the 
Editor to any applicant.
It may further be satisfactory to the 
readers of the ^ Phy tologist ' to be assured that no plant is en- 
tered about which there was any doubt in our minds respecting 
either its identity or its spontaneity.
It is also proper to inti- 
mate that the pronoun we, (truly and necessarily employed in 
the following narration,) does not mean the editorial we, but is 
simply the representative of two persons who were engaged with 
one mind in the prosecution of a common object.
The writer 
is one, but the facts observed and recorded were seen by both 
the observers.
Although our botanizing, strictly speaking, commenced in the 
ancient city of Canterbury, our notice of a few Faversham plants 
is to be regarded as only an episode to this narration of our ex- 
cursion, yet we were now and then able to catch a hasty glimpse 
at certain plants on the railway bank or cutting along which we 
were moving at the rate of from thirty to forty miles an hour.
For example, between Woolwich and Erith we saw Erigeron 
acris, which is rather Kpascual (pasture) than a mural or rupes- 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
179 
tral (wall or rock) species.
Ferbascum Lychnitis also appeared 
on the chalk cutting between Erith and Greenhithe.
We sub- 
sequently saw this rare plant on a wall, a very unusual habitat (?).
(The yellow Foxglove, Digitalis lutea, is well established on an 
old wall in Garret Lane, Wandsworth.) Centranthus ruber is 
well established in the sides of the deep cutting between North- 
fleet and Gravesend.
This plant abounds on several chalk rocks 
in this vicinity.
We subsequently observed this introduced (?) 
plant in a still more unexceptionable station, see infra.
It may, 
however, be confidently asserted, that the examples which were 
seen about the railway on the London side of Gravesend were not 
indebted to human agency for their introduction into either this 
locality or into the one to be hereafter recorded.
We reached Canterbury in time to look at only a few of the 
antiquities of this most ancient town, to an antiquary, histo- 
rian, or devotee, one of the most interesting of British cities.
The plants observed on the walls were repetitions of some seen 
and already recorded as Faversham plants.
See ^ Phytologist^ for 
April, 1861, p.
108.
Before breakfast, while at Canterbury, we walked up to Har- 
bledown on the London road, about a mile from the city.
From 
this elevation, which is not great, there is a good view of the 
cathedral, the churches, gates, and other objects of interest in 
the ecclesiastical metropolis of the realm.
This hill was notable 
for its antiquities when Erasmus visited England, more than 
three centuries ago.
We did not see much of the remains even 
of the hospitals, lazar-houses, and chapels which once crowned 
this well-known spot.
We did not see clearly the city and its 
notabilities, because the atmosphere was hazy ; yet it was plea- 
sant to walk over this hill, and to look down into the deep hollow 
road, trodden by myriads of pilgrims in bygone times, and to 
muse ' upon the scenes and circumstances of days long past.
Solemn inferences and sentimental reflections might be indulged 
in on the contrast between the state of this city three or four 
centuries ago and its present condition; but these would be out 
of place here, as much so, as the old shoe of St. Thomas, kissed by 
devotees, would have been out of place in the exhibition of 
farming implements which was held this year, 1860, in the agri- 
cultural capital of England.
The present charitable foundations 
are of a rather more utilitarian kind than those were that existed 
180 KENTISH BOTANY.
[June, 
when Erasmns wrote his Peregrinatio Religionis, in which is in- 
troduced a rather humorous account of this ancient custom^ 
which scandalized the Protestant Dean Colet^ and appears to 
have only drawn a smile from the countenance^ and a coin from 
the pockety of the liberal-minded Reformer.
The memory of these superstitious usages has passed away.
The shoe is no longer^ if existing^ exhibited to exdte the pious 
admiration of the passenger.
It is probably in the collection of 
some virtuoso.
We saw no objects of interest on Harbledown^ 
neither antiquarian nor vegetarian.
At Harbledown^ or rather on it^ we observed Rumex pulcker, 
far fit)m an uncommon plant in Kent ; also TorUis infesta, an 
infestive (noxious) weed about Southend, on the opposite coast : 
here also Polystichum angulare was observed.
These plants are 
hardly worth recording, but they are entered as tibe only species 
which were seen, not as rarities in this part of the country.
C«i- 
tranthus ruber grew on walls here and there in this city.
About ten o^clock, on our second day^s journey, we started 
from Canterbury to walk to Sandwich, a distance of a dozen 
miles, good measure.
There is a &ir and wide road to walk or 
to drive on, but there is no public conveyance.
Coaches and 
omnibuses go to Dover, none to Sandwich.
It is now nearly two hundred and thirty years since Thomas 
Johnson, the famous editor of Gerard's ' Herbal,' with his friends 
William Broad, Leonard Buckner, Robert Larkin, James Clarke, 
etc., walked from Sandwich to Canterbury on an expedition like 
that on which we were employed.
Those who have the curiosity 
to compare the results of these exploring botanists, who travelled 
by the same road as ourselves, with the plants observed by us, 
will find some, though not many, common to both the lists.
Johnson names upwards of a century of plants collected by his 
company between Sandwich and Canterbury.
Probably our list 
will not contain one-tenth of the number which he observed.
The 
nomenclature usual in the first half of the seventeenth century 
is a formidable impediment in the effort to compare the results, 
of the two journeys,* 
* Mr. T.
Johnson and his associates obeerved above a hundred plants in their 
walk from Sandwich to Canterbury.
Of these only four or five are recorded in 
the present list.
Many more were probably seen, but they were not such as could 
with propriety be entered in an account of the raier species obsenred.
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
181 
We were singularly favoured with very fine weather, a most 
important item in the success and enjoyment of a botanical tour.
The summer of 1860 will be long remembered as one of the 
most inclement or unpropitious seasons which any one now liv- 
ing has ever seen.
Two fine days in succession were quite as 
unusual, as the fulfilment of predictions of a change of wea- 
ther at the change of the moon.
Where we happened to be all 
this week, the first in September, the weather was fine, without 
showers, and with a bracing, for the most part east or south 
wind.
We had a few drops, or a slight sprinkling of wet before 
we reached Ash, and when there, the road gave unmistakable in- 
dications of a heavy shower.
The nearer we approached the sea, 
the wetter was the road ; and the landlord of the Bull, Sandwich, 
informed us that they had there a considerable fall of rain.
Had 
we started only an hour earlier, our walk to Sandwich would not 
have been quite so pleasant as it happily was.
Our first plant (for this day, strictly speaking, was the com- 
mencement of our journey) was picked up on the roadside be- 
tween Canterbury and Littlebourn, on the left-hand side of the 
way, near a path across what was a park in not very remote 
times, but now a pasture field, and where there is a couple of 
gateway pillars, not unhandsome, and of the style of similar 
erections of the age of Queen Anne or George I.
; the place 
is not above a mile from Canterbury or from St. Augustine^s 
Abbey.
This is a very minute description of the locality; but 
the plant we saw.
thejre is rather a scarce species.
We could count 
on our fingers all the places where it has been seen in Surrey, 
Hertfordshire, and Cheshire, and leave some digits uncounted 
after completing the tale.
Therefore the station of Dipsacus 
pUosus is thus circumstantially described.
It grows here both 
fine and plentiful, well ensconced behind brambles and briers, by 
which it is both protected and concealed till about this "toason, 
when it overtops its prickly shelter.
If as much space is filled 
with our subsequent discoveries as with the first, this article will 
swell far beyond the usual limits, within which it is necessary, 
for the sake of space, to restrain such accounts.
Calamintha officinalis appeared on the roadside, and, as usual, 
in no very great abundance.
In a field on the left, cultivated 
with cabbages and other culinary vegetables, Linaria Eldtine, 
Stachys arvenHs, and Anthemis arvensis were found in plenty.
182 KENTISH BOTANY.
[JwnC, 
Cerasus avium grows in the hedge^ and Hypericum humijusum 
on the grassy borders of the road.
At Littlebourn^ Veronica Buxbaumii was well established.
This plant has now obtained a sufficient settlement in the south 
of England^ although barely thirty years ago it was as great a 
rarity as Arenaria balearica is at the present time, 1860.
It would now be accounted sheer pedantry, or affected purism, 
to refuse to enter this south European species in any list of our 
spontaneous vegetable productions.
Between Wingham and Ash, on the left-hand side of the road 
froip Canterbury, we were so fortunate as to light \ipon a large 
colony of Geranium pyrenaicum, rivalling in size and beauty 
those collected in the mountainous districts of the south of Eu- 
rope, from which this fine and rare plant has obtained its name.
This very gratifying discovery enlarged and rectified our 
knowledge about the distribution of this species, which some be- 
lieve to be a doubtful native.
This plant has long been known as 
a denizen of the valley of the Thames, above London, both on the 
Surrey and Middlesex sides of the river.
Its detection in the 
south-east of Kent is, it is believed, recorded here for the first 
time.
TorUis infesta and Fomiculum vulgare are also entered in the 
note-book made during this journey, and at this part of the 
route.
In the village of Ash, Sedum refleooum was very abundant 
on roofs and walls ; and while on the subject of introduced plants, 
it may be stated that Hypericum calycinum, M.
hircinum, Coro- 
niUa Emerus, were pretty well established as plants which ap- 
parently would establish themselves on a bank by the wayside, 
contiguous to a shrubbery.
After passing through Ash, we entered Sandwich marshes, 
and in the deep ditches collected Utricularia vulgaris, Hydro- 
charis Morsus-rame, in flower.
This fine floating species flowered 
very sparingly during the past season.
In these ditches Lemna 
trisulca abounded, with Ceratophyllum demersum, Ranunculus 
drdnatus, Myriophyllum verticillatum, (Enanthe fistulosa, Typha 
angustifolia, Scutellaria galericulata, and other more or less 
common aquatic plants.
At the entrance to Sandwich we turned aside to the left, to 
visif the ancient ruined fortress of Richboro', the Koman Rutu- 
piiE, and walked partly along the river-bank, and partly on the 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
183 
vei^e of the cliff on wMch this curioiis antique pi|e still remains, 
defying alike the operations of atmospheric influences and the 
insidious attacks of Father Time.
On our way along the flat ground near the river, Rumex puU 
chevj Centaurea Calcitrapay and Sisymbrium Sophia were seen, 
the latter very sparingly ; also Fceniculum vulgarey Apium grave- 
olens, Rumex Hydrolapathumy Ononis spinosa, and TorUis nodosa, 
in profusion ; Cynoglossum officinale, Hyoscyamus niger, and Py- 
rethrum maritimum, the three last- named not so plentiful.
On the edge of the cliff, in the field close to Richboro^ by the 
hedge, we lighted on some very sturdy remains of Smymium 
Olusatrum.
Not from from this place, there was a long narrow 
patch of potato-ground, where fine, well-established plants of 
Oenothera odorata were growing.
The ruins or remains of Richboro^ consist of an external wall, 
nearly perfect on all sides except toward the sea, which has made 
considerable encroachments on this part of the coast.
The wall 
is of great thickness, from twelve to twenty feet, and it is proba- 
bly twenty to thirty feet in height.
On the inner side it appears 
mostly composed of flint, imbedded in mortar now nearly as hard 
as the flints themselves.
On the outside, there are, besides flints, 
consecutive rows or layers of Roman brick or tile, arranged equi- 
distantly in a double band.* The vegetation of the wall is chiefly 
Echium vulgare, Centaurea scabiosa, and a few smaller but equally 
common plants.
At the base of the wall, in the interior, the ground is fiill of 
Fennel of gigantic growth.
This is spreading over the enclosed 
area, which this season, 1860, was cultivated with barley.
The 
Fennel will grow in any crop, and soon overtops the tallest 
cereals.
Fennel, probably because it is a plant usually cultivated in 
gardens, is a reputed introduction ; and this is probably the case.
But all along the coast, by the ditches, hedges, and about the 
cliffs, it is almost as common as Apium graveolens.
It is very common on the hills, and in the sand-pits between 
Woolwich and Dartford, where the wild Celery does not grow.
* If there be any truth in Archdeacon Battely*s map, Biehboro' has been much 
changed since it was described by Tacitus.
The coast and the river are not now 
where they are laid down in the map of the rererend geographer, who Uyed many 
centuries after the Boman historian.
184 KENTISH BOTANY.
[JuUC, 
Botanists who have been in Cornwall, Yeport it as being truly 
wild about the Land^s End. It can hardly be more wild than it 
is in most parts of south Kent.
On our return from Bichboro' towards Sandwich, we met with 
the same (Enothera ; but as the evening was now more advanced, 
it showed many more open flowers, and like Buttercups in June, 
"would be seen whether we would or no.'* It was well esta- 
blished all down the steep declivity, and had taken possession of 
the grassy borders of the railway.
Like the (Enothera biennis, 
it delights in railway embankments ; and like the more common 
species, it is evidently increasing; but it is a much more orna- 
mental and neater plant than the commoner species.
It will 
probably soon force itself on our notice, and also obtain a place 
among otir excluded species.
It will intrude whether we like it 
or not, and if it is not honoured with a name and a place among 
our spontaneous plants, it will continue to spread notwithstand- 
ing, and sometimes will find a place, as at Bichboro^ which it 
bids fair to retain.
It is to be wished that it may also obtain 
historians who may not be ashamed to admit its humble preten- 
sions to historic fame.
Conium maculatum was another not un- 
common species seen in this locality.
About the precincts of Sandwich, and in some parts of the 
town, Diplotaxia muralis, Phalaris canariensis, and Sinapis niffrc^ 
were observed.
The Canary GhrasS was not nearly so common as 
it is near London.* 
* This fact affords an instnictiye lesson to those who volunteer to instruct their 
less informed brethren in the mysterious doctrines about the distribution or dis- 
persion of plants.
It has been generally reported in books deecriptiye of the Isle of 
Thanet, that this plant, the Canary Ghrass, is extensively cultiyated in the north- 
east comer of Kent.
This £EU3t must be taken for granted, for we cannot confirm 
it.
But we can assure our readers that the Canary G-rass which grows so com.
monly in many parts near London is not " an escape from cultivation." 
Some of these escapes from cultiyation are quite as wonderfid as many of the 
wondrous accounts of the appearance of strange plants where they had neyer 
appeared before.
They are more so, because most of these plants called escapes 
were neyer cultivated ; nor are they worth cultivation, either for use or for orna- 
ment.
Sandwich, where a single plant of Canary G-rass was seen in September, 
1860, is not feu: from the Isle of Thanet, where this grass is said to be extensively 
produced.
The vicinity of London, where thousands of specimens may be easily 
collected, is £fir from the centre of its cultivation, or *' the type of its distribution." 
Why is it so oonmion near London and so rare near Thanet P The answer is easy ; 
London is the great emporium of the empire.
All, or nearly all, the harvest or 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
185 
Prosperity has deserted Sandwich, and has patronized its 
neighbour, Deal.
The former town has been decaying ever 
since it was forsaken by the sea.
It is a dull place, with few 
attractions even for the antiquary, and the town itself is not 
very interesting to the botanist, though some of the less fre- 
quented streets be green with vegetation.
Yet a botanist might 
spend a week very profitably in this ancient member of the 
Cinque Ports, and might find good botanizing between Pegwell 
Bay on the east, and Ham Ponds on the west ; and between 
Sandown Castle and the old haven of Sandwich on the south, 
and Ash on the north.
Mine host of the Bell is a good speci- 
produce of Camuy Ghrass is first brought to London, and from this centre it is dis- 
persed feur and wide oyer all the kingdom.
But the chief reason why the Grass is 
frequent near the Metropolis is, because there are more Canary-birds kept in Lon- 
don than there are anywhere elsQ.
Thus the appearance of Canary Grass, common 
Hemp, and !Flax, are easily accounted for.
London is the great mart of the whole world ; the productions of all the earth 
reach this great city.
It is the great centre, or type, as some would say, of vegetable 
distribution.
London is certainly the centre from which many of our novel plants 
have emanated or radiated, but it is not the field where they have been much cul- 
tivated.
The sweepings, the refuse, the rejectamenta of our granaries, seed-ware- 
houses, the sliakings of sacks, the litter of stables, all contain seeds from- distant 
parts of the world, some more, some less.
These find a place in the dust-bins, 
the dung-pits, and other more unsavoury localities ; ultimately they are all con- 
veyed to the country in the manure, or they ore conveyed by, and in, the sewage 
to the river, where some of them probably perish ; a remnant is dredged up in the 
sand and mud, and thus are deposited in waste places tOl these are used for more 
profitable purposes ; and the seeds or some of them grow, some for one season, 
some for several.
Commercial intercourse is the chief agency now in 6peration, disturbing the law 
of the distribution of plants, and sometimes they disturb and discomfort the minds 
of the inventors themselves, who have been at much pains in establishing the laws 
of Nature, which Nature, like an ungrateful hussy as she is, obstinately refuses 
to obey.
After the strangers have arrived, cultivation plays a most important part in their 
preservation ; but it has usually less to do with their introduction than other 
causes have.
Winds, tides, currents, a n i m als, birds especially, have obtained much 
credit for increasing the vegetative wealth of countiies ; but it is to the operations 
of human agency, to commercial intercourse, that we are most indebted for the in- 
creased and still increasing numbers of our plants.
When our London drainage has been completed, and when a system for the dis- 
tribution of the sewage of the Metropolis has been organized, then the botanist 
may expect a rich harvest of plants from all parts of the earth.
Many of them 
doubtless will perish ; but some will remain to astonish the simple natives who 
belieye in the marvellous and overlook and despbe cauA that are at work before 
their eyes.
|rOL.
V. N.S. 2 B 
186 LATHYRUS TUBEROSUS.
{JuUBy 
men of a bluff, honest Boniface.
His accommodation and fare 
are satisfactory, and his reckonings very reasonable.
LATHYRUS TUBEROSUS.
The following notices of Lathyrus tuberosm are sent by a cor- 
respondent : — 
There is in Tumer^s ' Herbal/ 29a, part 1st, original edition, 
a rather obscure intimation that this species is a native of England.
Prom the account of the plant given by this excellent author, it 
is probable that he confounded two distinct plants under the 
name of Astragalus, His notice is as follows : — " Astragalus is 
named about Colon (Cologne), Erdekelin; in Netherlands, Erd- 
nutt ; in Ouerland, Erdnusse.
I have sene it in England, in 
Come (Comb) Park, and on Rychemunde (Richmond) Heth ; but 
I never coulde learne the name of it in Englyshe.
I am com- 
pelled for lacke of another name to call it Peese-earth-nutt : be- 
cause it hath leues lyke a ly tie Peese, or a Ciche, and rootes lyke 
an Erthnut.
Although all the description of Dioscorides besyde 
dyd agre very well unto this herbe, yet when, as I had found the 
roote in certine moist places very lytic astringent, I began to 
dowt, but after that I found that in drye places, and that it nad 
a manyfest astryction, I dowted it no more, but that thys herbe 
was the ryght Astragalus, although Fuchsius do contend, that 
thys shoulde be ApiosJ' There is a figure of this plant on the 
preceding page.
It is probable that the plant found in Comb 
Wood and on Richmond Heath was Lathyrus macrofrhizus or 
Orobus tuberosus, Linn., a plant very common in such places.
John Parkinson, in his Herbal, published in 1640, appears to 
have known the true Earthnut, Lathyrus tuberosus ; for his de- 
scription agrees with this plant, and not with L, macrorhizus, 
" Fig. 4.
Lathyrus arvensis, sive teme glandes.
Pease Earth- 
nuts.
" These earthnuts have divers weake and small sqi;iare stalks 
running upon the ground, four or five foote long; the leaves are 
small, usually two set together upon a branch, with a clasper at 
the end of each, taking hold of what standeth next to it.
The 
flowers come forth from the joynts towards the tops of the stalks 
upon long foot-stalks, many growing together, being narrow, and 
1861.] LATHYRUS TUBEROSUS.
187 
of a deep reddish-purple, somewhat bright ; the cods that suc- 
ceed them are small and long, with small round seeds in them ; 
the roots are tuberous, black, and small, fastened to long strings, 
which spread much on the ground, in taste somewhat like to a 
dry chestnut.
Bauhinus maketh it and the next {Lathyrus ayU 
vestris lignosior) to be both one plant.
" The Peace .
. .
the fourth (the above-named plant), is said by 
Gerard to grow in many places with us, as Hamsted, Coome 
(Comb) Parke, etc.; but we rather think it was the next, for the 
roots of those we have hitherto found in our woods and hedge- 
sides have beene more wooddy than the other sorts, which, grow- 
ing in our gardens, we have seen to be more tender, s^ad came to 
us from beyond sea" (Park.
1062).
In Johnson's emaculated, not emasculated, edition of Gerard, 
it is observed by the learned editor, — who rarely abstains, when 
an opportunity is given, from throwing dirt on the memory of 
his author, — states that this was confounded with the more 
common Wood Pea, L.
macrorhizttSy and thinks it no wonder, 
since Dr. Turner, a man more exqaisite in the knowledge of 
plants, and who had seen the true Terra glandes in Germany, 
mistook this (the common Wood Pea) for it.
And indeed tlds 
grows here, and is much more astringent and woody than that 
o^ Germany, and in no wise fit to be eaten.'' De gustibus nil 
disputandum ; every man to his liking.
The writer of these notes 
has eaten the roots of the Wood Pea by the handfiil, and in 
tbose days thought them good, as some Highlanders do in these 
our more luxurious times.
See Ger. Em.
1236.
It will be seen from the above that both Johnson and Parkinson 
ignore the plant as a British species.
See Johnson's Gerard, 
p. 1236 ; and Parkinson, 1061.
The next notice of this plant is contained in the ' Historia 
Plantarum ' of the illustrious Ray, who distinctly states that, to 
his knowledge, it was not spontaneous in England.
The follow- 
ing are the synonyms and the authorities quoted by Bay in 1693 
(Hist.
i. p.
895).
" Chamaebalanus leguminosa, /.
J9.
Lathyrus arvensis repens tuberosus, C, B, 
Sive terrsB glandes, Parkinson, Dodoens, Lobel, Gerard.
Distinguitur abande ab aliis Lathyris radicibus suis tuberosis esculentis.
In Anglia, quod sciam, spontanea non occurrit." 
188 
DATES OF FLOWERING 
[June, 
The first reliable and authentic account of Latkyrus tuberosus 
as a genuine native of England^ is supplied by Petiver's Herba- 
rium^ where there is a specimen^ with the following note^ viz.
'* Lathyrus arvensis repens tuberostts, I had it fix)m the Rev.
John Sedgwick, who gathered it not far &om Lincoln^ in the 
north field of Blankney, near the road to Lincoln.^' 
There is in Buddle^s Herbarium a specimen of the same plant, 
and from the same locality, and indorsed by the same authority.
This latter-mentioned specimen is .in Herb.
Sloan, vol.
119.
Lobel, Tragus, and F.
Columna are undersigned as the authori- 
ties for the species.
The last mention of it, previously to its discovery in 1860 at 
Wandsworth and Fyfield, is to be found in Idghtfoot's ' Flora 
Scotica,' p.
1137.
Lathyrus tuberosua is recorded in Lightfoot in the Appendix, 
among his '^ doubtful natives, or such as have not yet come under 
the author^s in^pection.'^ All he says about it is as follows, at 
p. 1137, vol.
ii.
— " Lathyrus ttiberosus.
In Dr. Hope's Collec- 
tion, but where collected he does not know.'* 
This plant is stated in Green's Botanical Dictionary to be a 
"native of France, Germany, Flanders, Holland, Switzerland, 
Austria, and Siberia.
This is a most noxious weed to the hus- 
bandman, and is exceedingly difficult to extirpate/' 
A full account of its recent discovery will be forthcoming in the 
Flora of Essex, which has been announced in the ^ Phytologist.' 
EAELIEST DATES OF FLOWEKING OF THE FOLLOWING 
PLANTS OBSERVED IN THE VICINITY OF ROSS, 1860-1.
By H.
SouTHALL and B.
M. Watkins, 
Petasites yulgaris, Desf, .
Poa annua, L.
....
Taraxacum officinale, Wi^g 
Bellis perennis, Z.
. .
. 
Senecio yulgaris, Z.
. .
. 
Veronica hedefsefolia, L, .
Stellaria media, WUh, .
. 
Potentilla !Fragariastrum.
Merouxialis perennis, L, 
Primula vulgaris, ffuds.
Ch, 
Dec. 16 
„ 16 
„ 16 
« 16 
„ 16 
„ 16 
„ 16 
9 
16 
16 
Feb.
Corylufl Avellana, L, 
Taxos baccata, L.
. 
Alnus glutinosa, X.
. 
Tussilago Farfara, X.
Veronica agrestis, L.
Ulmus campestris, 8m, 
Lamium purpureum, L.
Viscum album, Z.
. 
Galtha palustris .
. 
Daphne Laureola, .
Feb. 16 
„ 25 
„ 26 
„ 25 
« 28 
March 6 
,/ 7 
n 7 
« 9 
„ 9 
1861.] 
OP PLANTS IN THE ViClNITY OP BOSS.
189 
Bammculns Ficaria, L, 
Viola odorata, X.
. .
Viola sjlyatica, Frie9 .
Viola hirta, X.
. .
. 
HelleboroB foetidus, L.
. 
HeUeborus yiridis, L, , 
Cardamine hirsuta, L, .
Oarex dandestma, Ghod^ 
Garex digitata, L, .
. 
Hutchinsia petrsea, Br, 
Arabis vema, Z.
. .
Loznla pilosa, WiUd.
. 
Anemone nemoroaa, L.
Salix Helix, Z.
. .
. 
Bibes G-roBBularia, L.
. 
GhdanihoB niyalis, L.
. 
Anthriscus sylvestrid, P«r*.
Luzula campestris, X.
. 
Chiysosplenium oppositifo- 
lium, L 
Glechoma hederaoea, L.
Popnlus nigra, L.
. .
Oxalis Acetosella, X.
. 
Ulex europeeus, L.
. .
Gugea lutea, Ker .
. 
NamBsuB PBeudo-Karcissas, X, 
NarcissuB biflorufi, Ourt.
Cardamine pratensis, X.
Bibes rubrom, X.
. .
Trfjmimn albom, X.
. .
Fnmns spinoea, L, .
. 
Primula yens, X.
. .
Primula yulgariB, elatior 
Viola tricolor, X.
. .
. 
Veronica agreetis, X.
. 
Sisymbrium thalianum.
Gaud.
March 9 
., 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
„ 9 
,, 9 
„ 9 
., 9 
« 9 
,, 9 
„ 14 
„ 16 
28 
30 
80 
80 
80 
April 
Geranium Bobertianum, X.
April 6 
Erysimum Alliaria, X.
. .
>» 
6 
Capsella Bursa-pastoris, DC, 
»» 
6 
Oarex prsecox, Jacq.
. .
» 
6 
Bibes alpinum, X.
. .
. 
» 
11 
Carex glauca, Scop.
. .
. 
» 
11 
SteUaria Holostea, X.
. .
»> 
16 
Veronica aryensis, X.
. .
»» 
16 
Veronica Ghamsedrys, L.
. 
» 
16 
Carex yulgaris, .FWm .
. 
»>• 
16 
Cerastium glomeratum, Thuil 
19 
17 
Plantago lanceolata, X.
t> 
17 
PrunuB insititia, X.
. .
. 
» 
18 
n 
19 
Myosotds aryensis, X.
. .
• n 
19 
Hyacinthus non-scriptus, X.
»j 
22 
Banunculus bulbosus, L.
. 
w 
22 
Veronica polita, X.
. .
. 
• » 
23 
Fragaria yesca, X.
. .
. 
»> 
23 
Gkdeobdolon luteum, Sm.
. 
M 
23 
Arum maculatumi X.
. .
>J 
23 
Prunus ayium, X.
. .
. 
>» 
23 
Vida sepium, L 
11 
24 
Luzula Forsteri, DC.
. .
» 
25 
Luzula Borreri, Bromf.
. 
» 
25 
Ajuga reptans, X.
. .
. 
)l 
25 
BananculuB aquatilis, X.
. 
» 
25 
Moshringia tnneryia, X.
. .
. 
» 
25 
Symphytum officinale, X.
. 
»» 
29 
Barbaiea yulgaris, Sr.
. .
>» 
29 
Chelidonium majus, X.
, , 
>} 
29 
OrobuB tuberosus, X.
. .
May 2 
» 
2 
Orchis mascula, X.
. .
. 
M 
2 
>9 
2 
CratsDgus Oxyacantha, X.
. .
>l 
5 
Notice.
— ^To the above list the following is subjoined for 
the information and benefit of botanists^ viz.
that I will send 
fresh spedmen&of the Luzulas to readers of the ' Fhytologist ' 
on the condition that they send me a stamped envelope with the 
name and address of the sender.
B. M.
Watziws.
Gleuftione, near Boss.
[It would be very obliging if our correspondent would include 
in his kind offer some of the other rare plants, viz.
Gagea^ Nar- 
C188U8, etc.
— ^Ed.] 
190 
HYDROCHARIS MORSUS-RANiB.
[June, 
HYDKOCHARIS MOESUS-EANiE.
On the Hybernacula of Hydrocharis Morsus-Ranse.
By L.
C. Treviranus."**" 
The fact that Hydrocharis Morsm-Rana, besides its seeds, has 
another mode of reproduction by certain little bulbs developed 
on the roots, which, becoming detached, pass the winter at the 
bottom of the water, has already been noticed by Nolte (^Ueber 
Stratiotes und Saffittaria/ 6), and is alluded to by Linnaeus, in 
Fig. 1.
a. Hjbemaculum of Hyd/rocha/ris Morsus-EatKB, as observed 
on the 2l8t of August, natural size, with the lowest scales bent back.
h. The same, magnified, the outer scales removed, c.
A vortical section of 
the same.
Fig. 2.
The same, on the 1st of March, in process of develop- 
ment, somewhat enlarged.
a few words, in the ' Flora Suecica/ Fried.
Nees (Gen. Flor.
Germ.
vi.
t. 15) has given a tolerable representation of these 
bulbs, but without mentioning their mode of development.
When 
* Translated from the * Botanische Zeituug,' No. 41.
p. 699 (1857).
1861.] BO'fANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
191 
observed towards the latter end of the month of August, they 
are long-stalked, elongate, oval bodies, the largest of which are 
about the size of a small cofifee-bean.
If cut through vertically, 
the lower half is found to consist of compact cellular 'tissue, in 
which the germ of rootlets is perceptible ; the upper, of rudiments 
of leaves, alternating with large gibbous stipules (sackf ormigen 
Nebenblattern), which are membranous, and veined with red.
Of the rudimentary leaves, the outermost has a long stalk, and a 
very small, kidney-shaped, not folded blade, with red spots ; in 
the second the blade is much larger and the stalk shorter, and 
in the third still more so.
By the 1st of March I found these 
little bulbs in a state of rapid development.
Each had put forth 
three or four perfect leaves, while the blade of the above-described 
rudimentary ones remained unaltered in size and shape, though 
its stalk had somewhat lengthened.
The accompanying drawings, 
made by me during these observations, will obviate the necessity 
of any further explanation.
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Haibbell V, Habebell.
It appears that Sir W.
Hooker, in his ' British Floi»,' considers that 
the Campanula rotundifolia is the Harebell of Sir Walter Scott's ' Lady of 
the Lake,* as he quotes the lines of that author in his description of this 
flower ; but it should be observed that Harebell is the common name given 
by our early writers to the Hyacinthua nonscriptua, 
Gerard (book i.
chap.
79) speaks of Jacinth or Harebells, including 
HyadnthuB anglicm, Ehshia Coles, in his Dictionary, gives " Harebells, 
Hyadnthus anglicua," And this flower is mentioned by Shakspeare in 
* Cymbeline,' on Fidele, as follows : — 
"Thou Shalt not lack 
The flower that's like thy fsK^e, pale Primrose, nor 
The azured Harebell, like thy veins." 
Coles also' gives Hare's-ear, Btipleurum, and Hare's-Lettuce, Sonchua 
lema.
We have also in our Flora, a Trifolium called Hare's-foot Trefoil.
I am therefore curious to know the name of the first writer who calls the 
Campanula, Harebell.
In the ' Illustrated Handbook of British Plants,' 
the 0.
rotundifolia is called Nodding-flower Harebell ; but the Rev. Mr.
Johns, in his * Flowers of the Field,' calls it Hairbell.
The latter appears 
to me most appropriate.
H. Beisly.
192 BOTANICAL NOT£S^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[June, 
Gold Blotched Weeping Ash.
In communicating several examples in connection with Ckftisus Laburnum^ 
var.
purpurascenSy as registered in the * Phytologist ' of September, 1859, 
I beg to add the following : — Several yeaxs ago, I grafted a scion of the 
Blotched-leaved Weeping Ash upon a stock of the oonunon Ash, in ground 
one mile from this city.
After two years, I lifted the plant to ground oc- 
cupied by me within the city itself, and there it rested several years, being, 
from its lofty position, exposed to our cutting winds from the sea.
Last 
season it made a start with young wood from the graft, and also from the 
stem about two feet below the graft, such young shoots being clothed with 
leaves having the same blotched variety as the graft ; the bark of the graft 
and the spontaneous shoots from the stem referred to, being also shaded 
mth a golden-bronzed or yellow colour.
Four feet down the stem, a 
shoot from the stock is also allowed to remain, bearing the green bark and 
leaves of the common Ash. G.
Howie.
St. Attdrew'gf Mcurch 5, 1861.
Shakspsre Plants.
In ' Hamlet,' act 1, scene 5, the Ghost says to Hamlet : — 
" And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed 
That rots itself in ease on Lethe's whar^ 
Wouldst thou not stir in this.'* 
In Mr. Donee's * Illustrations of Shakspere ' is the following note : — 
" The plant here alluded to might have been Henbane, of which Gerard 
says that it causes drowsiness and stupiiies and dulk the semes" I think 
some of the contributors to the ' Phytologist * may be able to give us a 
little more information on this subject.
S. B.
Petasites vulgaris.
A correspondent wishes to know a Kentish locality, within an easy 
walk of the Metropolis, for Fetasites vulgaris.
Can any of our readers 
favour us with one ?
Blechnum Spicani, var.
ramosum (see p.
159, vol.
v., N.s.), has both 
sterile and fertile fronds on the same stipes.
Communications have been received from 
G. Davies ; W.
P. ; B.
M. Watkins ; Dr. Windsor ; W.
W. N.
; Sid- 
ney Beisly ; John Sim ; Tom Stansfield; W.
Kichardson ; C.
J. Ashfield; 
James Lothian.
RECEIVED EOE BEVIEW.
The Todmorden Post, May Wth, 
The Preston Chronicle, May Wth, 
The Todmorden and Hebdenbridge Advertiser, May Wth.
[July, 1861.] 198 
NORTHUMBEKLAND BOTANY.
Botany of Hulne Park.
By W.
R.-, Alnwick.
Hulne Faxk^ near Alnwick^ in Northumberland^ the magnificent 
demesne attached as pleasure grounds to Alnwick Castle^ the 
princely seat of the Percies, Dukes of Northumberland, presents 
a wide diversity of scenery, with striking inequalities of surface, 
in one portion abounding in beautiful undulating meadows and 
gentle slopes, in others with rugged and lofty hUls rising 800 
feet above the level of the sea.
It embraces a rich variety of 
objects of interest to the antiquarian, to the scientific naturalist, 
to the botanical student, and to the lover of the picturesque and 
beautifiil.
It is surrounded by a lofty park wall, and the contents 
within its enclosure are estimated at between three and four thou- 
sand acres, its circumference being upwards of twelve miles.
The 
river Aln, crossed by numerous bridges of elegant rural designs, 
winds through the centre, forming a silvery thread, nearly divi- 
ding the park into north and south, its banks shaded and overhung 
with tastefully laid-out woodlands.
Within the park may be 
found almost every variety of sylvan scenery, of hill and dale, 
from the rich perfection of modeili cultivation to the romantic 
grandeur of the primitive mountain.
The river margin decorated 
with a choice selection of evergreen and flowering shrubs ; the 
lawns rejoicing in a luxuriant vegetation, and studded over with 
healthy forest trees ; the higher sections covered with the dark 
green pine, or waving with the purple blossom of the heath and the 
golden glories of the gorse ; the rude and immemorial grey crag, 
with weatherbeaten grandeur, in the loftier elevations, asserting 
its supremacy, and adding wildness and sublimity to the whole.
On the north bank of the river, embosomed in wood, stands 
Hulne Abbey, of Early English architecture, founded for the 
Order of Carmelite Friars about 1240, by the piety of William 
de Vesey, the lord of Alnwick of those days, and Richard Grey, a 
companion knight, two of the Crusaders whose chivalry had led 
them to the Holy Land, and who, on their return, had discovered 
in the chosen site for an abbey, a striking similitude to that of 
Mount Carmel in Palestine.
Its towers are still in tolerable pre- 
servation, and form interesting objects of inspection to the re- 
searches of the medisevalist.
On a lofty eminence on the opposite 
N. S.
VOL.
V. .2c 
194 NORTHUMBERLAND BOTANY.
[July, 
side^ stands Brizlee Tower^ a composite column^ ninety feet in 
height^ finished in the highest and most elaborate style of ma- 
sonry of the last century^ and &om whose summit^ reached by an 
internal staircase^ is obtained a prospect of extended and varied 
beauty.
To the north-west and between the openings of the Che- 
viot range^ the visitor catches a glimpse of the blue hills of plea- 
sant Teviotdale^ in Scotland.
To the east^ spread out before his 
eye^ lies a landscape teeming with all the wealth of cultivation, 
bounded by the coast-line^ marked by ancient castles and ruined 
keeps ; and further still the wide expanse of the German Ocean.
To the south, his vision is carried on to the fells of the county of 
Durham.
Nearly two miles further down, on a pleasant haugh, 
formed by a bend in the river, stand the remains of Alnwick 
Abbey, another monastic establishment, founded about 1147, by 
Eustace Fitz- John, for Premonstratensian Canons, of which all 
now left is the gate-tower, appropriated to the residence of one 
of the keepers, and on the beautiful lawn in front the Alnwick 
Horticultural and Botanical Society hojd their annual Exhibi- 
tions.
The soil of the park, resting upon the sandstone, is not so rich 
in rare plants, as from the inequality of its surface the inquiring 
botanist might be led to anticipate.
It abounds with several 
species which are clearly not indigenous, but appear to be legacies 
bequeathed to the district by the inmates of the religious (esta- 
blishments, and who were expelled during the reign of our dghth 
Henry, and from their long cultivation have in a great measure 
become naturalized.
Among these may be named the Euphorbia 
Esula, which is found in abundance on the walls of Hulne Abbey ; 
the Corydalis solida is another instance, and several others might 
be named in different parts of the immediate neighbourhood.
I may add, that, the Duke of Northumberland, the noble owner 
of the grounds, with that generosity and consideration whicb dis- 
tinguish his character, throws his parks open to the public two 
days in the week throughout the year, when they are accessible 
to all, from noon to sunset, throughout the summer.
And the 
Castle, garden, and parks, are open at all times to pleasure-parties 
from all quarters, on simply applying for a pass at the Castle 
offices.
The Flora of this part of the country is very attractive.
To 
commence, near Alnwick Abbey, on the banks of the Aln, not 
1861.] NORTHUMBERLAND BOTANY.
195 
far from the town of Alnwick, there is a locality for Helleborus 
viridis ; not a common plant in any part of the British Isles.
This station is rather too well known, and the roots are frequently 
dug up and carried off; and at present (April, 1861) there is but 
little of it to be taken.
It is an ancient and still popular remedy 
in the pharmacopoeia of the cow-leech (see ' Phy tologist ' for 
May, 1861) .
Dr. Turner, in his " Herball,'' writes, *' Dyuerse hus- 
bandmen used to put the roote of Berefoot intobeastes eares, and 
called the putting in syterynge of beastes, and in sume places 
called the herbe Syterwurte.^^ This practice is not unknown in 
modern days in other parts of the kingdom.
Viola odorata occurs a little further up the riverside; and east 
of the old lodge, Corydalis solida is found in abundance, asso- 
ciated with a few plants of Pulmonaria officinalis.
The latter 
plant is believed to be an introduction ; the former one has all 
the appearances of being in its natural habitat.
By the sides of the drive that intersects this part of the ducal 
domain, there are numerous patches of Chrysosplenium oppositi- 
folium and C.
altemifolium, both of them in perfection at this 
time (May 8th, 1861) ; Polygonum Bistorta abounds in the same 
locality.
On the west side of the old lodge, in a plantation a few yards 
from the drive, Lycopodium clavatum grows ; and in an open space 
further on towards the deer-park, Ophioglossum vulgatum and 
Hier actum aurantiacum are found.
Of the latter there is plenty ; 
but perfect specimens are rarely found, as the grass is often 
mown before the flowering of the plant.
This last-named species 
also occurs in some other parts of Scotland, but not without a 
suspicion of the probability of its having been introduced at some 
period not very remote.
Paris quadrifolia and Epipactis latifolia are found in many 
parts of the park, and in none more plentifully than in woods 
near the old house.
The plants on and about the ruined remains of Hulne Abbey 
are the following, and it may be observed that, in the language of 
modem botany, they are mostly introductions or suspected aliens ; 
for in botany no period of time, however long, gives to certain 
species the privileges of nationality.
Hesperis matronalis grows, but sparingly, close to the drive ; in 
a plantation on the opposite side of the road, Lathnea squamaria 
196 NORTHUMBSBLAND BOTANY.
[July, 
and Arum maculatum are plentiful.
Neither of the two latter 
mentioned have ever been branded as foreigners in England.
On the abbey walls Euphorbia Esuia is plentiful^ associated 
with a genuine native^ viz.
Polypodium vulgare.
Most botanists 
presume that the Euphorbia is an escape from the garden of the 
Carmelite friars ; but if so, it is pretty well naturalized by this 
time, for the holy brotherhood was dispersed and their establish- 
ment dissolved in the reign of Henry VIII., now more than three 
centuries ago.
The other mural plants growing on these ruins are as follow, 
viz.: — Cheiranihus Cheiri, Echium vulgare, Valeriana rubra, 
Parietaria officinalis, Pyrethrum Parthenium, Arabia hirsuta, 
Cardamine sylvatica, C.
hirsuta, Vinca major, Linaria Cymba- 
laria, Asplenium THchomanes, Lithospermum officinale, Cheli- 
donium majus, Hieracium sylvatica, Draba vema, Sedum acre, 
Linaria vulgaris, Arenaria trinervis, etc.
[We wish our cor- 
respondent would look for Arenaria bakarica, which as yet has 
been observed only in two localities in the British Isles, viz.
in 
the counties of Perth and in Wilts : see ' Phytologist ' for April, 
1861, p.
127.] 
Brizlee Hill is literally, or rather, botanically, covered with 
TrientaKs europ€ea ; and in the leafy month of June, it is a spot 
well worth visiting ; for such a profusion of these fine plants in 
bloom, as is aflbrded in this locality, is a sight of not very fre- 
quent occurrence.
Vaccimum Vitis-idma and Empetrum nigrum, 
Pyrola minor, Juniperus communis, etc., abound on the said ele- 
vation.
Ferns are plentiful in the woods, and in various parts of the 
park, though none of them are of great rarity.
The most in- 
teresting species are Polypodium Phegopteris, P, Dryopteris, at 
the base of the hill ; on the north side, Lastrea Oreopteris, L.
dilatata, and L.
Filix-mas are abundant.
Athyrium Filix-fcemina 
occurs everywhere in some one or other of its varied and beauti- 
ful forms.
Scolopendrium vulgare grows on a wall near Hulne 
Abbey.
Polystichum aculeatum grows in Blackbog Dean, and 
Pteris aquilina and Blechnum boreale all over the woods.
A few plants of Lastrea FUiw-mas, var.
incisa, are occasionally 
to be observed.
Rugley Wood, about two miles ftom Alnwick, produces the 
following rarities, viz.
: — Gagea lutea by the bumside, but not in 
1861.] NORTHUMBERLAND BOTANY, 197 
great quantity, only two small patches.
It has suffered much 
from the rapacity of greedy collectors, who were not contented 
to get the flowers and foliage, but who must needs dig up the 
roots.
This spring (1861) I was pleased to see that it had somewhat 
recovered from the ravages of these spoliators.
Crepis mcdscefolia is another of the rare denizens of Rugley 
Wood.
It grows but sparingly, on the west of the road.
[Surely 
this is a ^'sufficiently exact record of one of its localities,*' and 
the authority is unimpeachable.
The specimen, or one of the 
specimens, collected there, is in our possession.
We have also 
seen it at Stainforth Force, near Settle.] 
Carduus heterophyllus is abundant by the bumside, and ^olHus 
europatis and Paris quadrifolia are plentiful on the east side of 
the wood.
Kyloe Crags is a locality about an hour's walk from Beal station, 
on the North-eastern Railway, and is a basaltic range of rocks, 
extending north and south, passing westward with a rugged irre- 
gular point.
Here Convallaria Polygonatum was first discovered 
by Mr. A.
Price, at a date which cannot be now satisfactorily 
ascertained.
It was first made known in the ' English Flora ' 
(1824), and was subsequently lost sight of till 1849, when it was 
re-discovered by four members of the Berwickshire Naturalists' 
club, and published in their Transactions."^ 
The laudable prudence of the Club did not long preserve the 
locality as a profound secret ; for about five years ago I and three 
other plant-fanciers visited Kyloe Crags, where, after searching a 
whole day, we discovered three fresh localities, besides the one 
.found by the Club.
We found Asplenium septentrionale to be very 
scarce, Adiantum nigrum and A.
Trichomanes in abundance.
Euonymus europteus, Arabia thaliana, and Thalictrum minus are 
also found on these crags.
In Newnham loch, a little way from Newnbam station, Ranun- 
* *' Leaying the shore we directed our steps to Kjloe Crags, with a hope that 
another inyestigation might be rewarded by the discovery of the oft-sought-for 
Convallaria Polygonatwm, and the ' wandering botanist ' can only appreciate the 
feeling of delight that rushed across our mind when we held the long-desired trea* 
sure in our grasp.
Confined to one place, it was there plentifiil and in fiill flower.
To 
point out the exact spot would be to ensure its destruction, as has already happened 
to another rare tenant of these crags, the Asplenivmseptentriofude, and that chiefly 
through the instrumentality of one who calls himself a botanist, and a member of 
a similar Club to our own." 
198 ADDENDA TO THE FLORA OP HABBOW.
{Jultfy 
cuius lingua grows in bogs whicb surronnd the locb.
Tbe other 
rare species here srePyrola roiundifolia, Scutellaria galericulata, 
Lycapus eurcpteus, Typha laiifolia, etc.
; but recent dramage had 
caused some of these to disappear.
Note.
— Sisymbrium Trio still grows on the wall of Berwick^ 
but most abundant at the pier gate.
ADDENDA TO THE FLOBA OF HAEROW.
About twelve months ago we presented our readers with a list 
of plants occurring in a wild state in the neighbourhood of Har- 
row.
Since that time we have been enabled to add considerably 
to our own knowledge of the local Flora, and proceed to lay the 
results before the public.
About 151 Flowering Plants, 5 Ferns, 
8 Horsetails, and 3 Charte have been discovered.
Some little 
way has also been made towards preparing a list of the Mosses, 
Hepatiae, Lichens, and Fungi of the district.
This result is 
owing partly to the extending of our search over a wider field, 
and partly to a closer examination of the same ground searched 
last year.
The localities in which the plants have been found, 
and which are indicated by abbreviations in the last column of 
the list, are as follows : — Alperton, A.
; Eastcot, E.
; Greenford, 
Gf.
; Harrow, H.
; Harrow Weald, HW.
; Northolt, N.
; Oxhey, 
Ox.; Pinner, P.; Roxeth, R.
; Buislip, Rp.
; Stanmore, S.
; 
Wembley, W.
; and Wood End, WE.
Our Harrow Flora now assumes a respectable appearance, 
containing in all, of Flowering Plants, Fern Allies, and Char a, 539 
species and varieties, comprised in 260 genera and 73 families.
We hope that this list may, by further research, be considerably 
enlarged.
As it is, after deducting a few plants that occur by 
merest accident, the remainder is sufficiently large to enable us 
to withdraw the depreciating remarks made last year in reference 
to the Flora of this neighbourhood.
An extensive Flora could 
not be expected in an inland district, of small extent, nearly all 
under grass, and having very little variety of soil.
Under these 
circumstances, and considering how large a portion of the neigh- 
bourhood has never been searched at all, we feel gratified that 
the results of occasional walks, within a term of two years, should 
have proved so satisfactory.
Our Flora is large enough to afford 
1861.] 
ADDENDA TO THE FLOBA OF HARROW.
199 
118 full proof of the creative wisdom of our Heavenly Father, and 
to exhibit to us His tender care in providing for the wants of his 
people.
Let us not be slow to learn the lesson of trust in His 
gracious providence and love, which the flowers of the field, so 
simply and yet so eloquently, teach.
Family.
G0MU and Species, 
HahUat.
Locality 
Bannncolaoes.
Clematis Yitalba, L, 
Hedges.
P. 
Banunculus heterophyllus, Fr, 
Pools.
B. 
„ peltatus, Pr.
99 
B. 
„ Flammula, L, 
Common 
HW.
PapayeraoesB.
Papayer Lecoquii, ZamoUe, 
Gardens 
B. 
„ Bhoeas, L, 
Waste 
H. 
„ Boxnniferum, L, 
»» 
H. 
CrudferiB.
CoronopuB Euellii, GitH, 
Boadsides 
H. 
*Lepidium satiyum, L, 
ComfieLds 
B. 
Gardamine Bylyatica, Link ?
Woods 
A. 
Arabis thaliana, X.
Old walls 
BF.
Barbarea pnecox, Br.
Gktrdens 
H. 
Erysumim cheiranthoides, L.
Cornfields 
-WB.
^Sinapis alba, L.
Waste places 
H. 
Yiolaoee.
Viola arvensia, 3f«r.
Cornfields 
-WB.
DroseraoeiB.
Drosera rotundifolia, L, 
Common 
HW, 
OaryophyllaoMB.
Lychnis Githago, Lam.
Cornfields 
WB.
Sagina apetala, L.
Old walls 
H. 
Spergnlaria rubra, St Eil 
New churchyard 
H. 
Stellaria uliginosa, Mur.
Ditches 
HW.
Linaces.
*Linixm usitatissimum, L.
H. 
TiinnTn catharticuni, L.
Common 
HW.
IfalTacen.
Boadside 
P. 
Hypericaoee.
Hypericum humifusum, L.
Common 
HW.
„ pulchmm, L.
» 
HW.
„ calycinum, L.
Hedge-bank 
H. 
GeraniaoeflD.
^Geranium rotundifolium, L.
Garden 
H. 
Oxalidacefle.
Oxalis Acetosella, L.
Woods 
P. 
Spartium sooparium, L.
Common 
HW.
Genista tinctoria, L.
99 
HW.
„ angUca, L.
99 
HW.
Melilotus officinalis, WiUd.
Wayside 
v. 
Trifolium medium, L.
99 
OX.
„ procumbens, L.
Cornfield 
WE.
Omithopus perpusillus, L.
Common 
tiw.
Vicia Cracca, X.
Meadows 
P. 
„ lathyroideSjZ.?
Waste 
BP.
„ gracilis, Lois, ?
Meadows 
B. 
Orobus tenuifolius, Itoth, 
Woods 
P. 
BoBaoMB.
PrunuB domestioa, L.
Hedges 
B. 
^iOO 
ADDENDA TO THE FLOBA OF HABBOW.
U^y, 
Family.
Oemuemd Species, 
SabUat.
Locam^ 
Bosaoes.
PrunuB avium, L, 
Copse 
H. 
BubuB nitidus, Salt.
Conmion 
HW.
„ pygm»U8, Weihe.
Edge of wood 
ox.
„ Lejeunij, Wiethe, 
n 
ox.
„ Balfourianus, Blox.
Hedges 
WB.
Bosa tomentosa, Woods.
99 
B. 
OnagraoefB.
Epilobium virgatum.
Fries.
Ditches 
H. 
Haloragacea).
CaUitaiche platycarpa, KiUz.
99 
HW.
Lythraoee.
Lythrum Salicaria, L.
Canal 
A. 
Peplis Portula, X.
Pools 
HW.
Portulacaceas.
Montia fontana, L.
Streams 
HW.
UleoebraoeflD.
^Polycarpon tetraphyllom, L.
Ghirden 
H. 
Scleironthaceffi.
Scleranthos aiinuus, L.
Cornfields 
P. 
SaxifragacesB.
Saxifraga tridactylites, L.
Old walls 
H. 
Umbellifers.
Hydrocotyle vulgarig, L.
Conmion 
HW.
Sanicula europsa, L.
Wood 
P. 
HeloBciadium nodiflonun, Koch.
Streams 
P. 
Bdbiaoes.
Galium palustre, L.
Ditches 
B. 
„ dongatum, Pres.
»> 
Yalerianaoee.
Valeriana officinalis, L.
99 
BP.
Fedia dentata, Bieb.
Cornfields 
BF.
CompoBite.
Tragopogon minor, JV.
Meadows 
WE.
Apargia hispida, ^tUd.
tj 
A. 
Grepis virens, L.
9' 
P. 
Hinraoium Pilosella, L.
Waysides 
H. 
„ aurantiacom, L.
Old walls 
H. 
„ Yulgatum, Fries.
Common 
HW.
„ boreale, Fries.
99 
HW.
Arctimn minus, Schk.
Banks 
B. 
Serratula tinctoria, L.
Meadows 
B. 
Garduus acaulis, L.
Common 
BP.
ArtOToisia vulgaris, L.
Banks 
GP.
Filago minima, Fries.
Conmion 
HW.
„ germanica, L.
Banks 
E. 
Solidago Yirgaurea, Z.
Woods 
P. 
Senecio sylvaticus, L, 
Common 
HW.
„ Jaoobaea, L.
Waysides 
H. 
Anthemis Cotula, L.
9) 
H. 
GampanulaceiB.
Campanula rotundifolia, L.
Common 
HW.
Apoojnace®.
•Vinca major, L.
Waysides 
OX.
QentianaoeBB.
Erythwea Oentaurium, Fers.
Waysides 
P. 
Scrophulariacee.
Veronica scutellata, Z.
Streams 
HW.
„ officinalis, L.
Common 
HW.
• „ peregrina, i.
99 
H. 
Euphrasia officinalis, L.
99 
HW.
Melampyrum pratense, L.
Woods 
P. 
Scrophularia aquatioa, L.
Ditches 
P. 
1861.] 
ADDENDA TO THE FLOBA OF HABBOW.
201 
Family.
Sorophulariaoen.
Lamiaoee.
BonginaoeflB.
FrimuIaoesB.
Flantaginaoen.
Foljgonaoeffi.
Euphorbiace».
UrticaoeeB.
AmentifeinD.
Liliaces.
Fluyiales.
Araoea>.
tTtmoaoeflB.
CyperaoeflD.
QewM and Spede*.
Lrnaria pymbalaria, Mill, 
„ spuria, MiU, 
„ Elatine, MiU, 
M Yulgarici) MiU, 
Mentha yiridis, L, 
Origanum yulgare, L, 
Thymus Ohamjedrys, Fr, 
Calamintha Glinopodinm, 8pen, 
Teocrium Scorodonia, L, 
Galeopsis Tetrahit, L, 
„ Tersicolor, Owrt.
Stachys Betonica, Bewth, 
Scutellaria minor, L, 
*Borago officinalis, L, 
Primula elatior, Ang, jilmh, 
liysimaohia nemorum, L, 
Flantago Coronopus, L, 
Folygonum amphibium, L, 
Bumex yiridis, Sibth, 
^Euphorbia platyphyUa^ L, 
•Cannabis satiya, L, 
Farietaria diffiisa, Koch, 
Saliz vitellina, fi^.
Salix alba, L, 
Salix repens, ISng. JBot, 
„ prostrata, Ung, Bot, 
FiitiUaria Meleagris, L, 
Allium yineale, L, 
„ oompactum, ThuU.
Alisma lanoeolatum, With, 
Fotamogeton pectinatus, L, 
i, oblongus, Vw, 
Typha angustifolia, L, 
Juncus acutiflorus, Ehrh, 
„ lamprocarpus, Mhrh, 
„ supinus, MiBndk, 
„ bufonius, L, 
„ squarrosus, X.
Luzula sylyatica, Bich, 
„ pilosus, WUld, 
„ Forsteri, DC, 
Sdrpus sylyations, L, 
„ palustris, L, 
Cares stellulata, Qood,* 
„ oyalis, Qood, 
„ yulgaris,9FWtf#.
„ flaya, L, 
HabUat.
LoeaUty.
Old walls 
8. 
Cornfields 
p. & Gtt, 
)9 
p. 
Banks 
w. 
Canal bank 
A. 
Banks 
p. 
Common 
HW.
Banks 
HW.
Common 
HW.
Cornjaelds 
B. 
» 
H. 
HW.
n 
HW.
Wsate 
H. 
Ghirden 
B. 
Woods 
P. 
Common 
HW.
Canal 
GP.
Wod&s 
P. 
'R.oadside 
E. 
Waste 
A. 
Church walls 
P. 
Fool in sandpit 
P. 
Hedges 
H. 
Common 
HW.
» 
HW.
Meadows 
P. 
» 
B. 
»» 
B. 
Fools 
A. 
Canal 
OP.
Streams 
HW.
Fools 
A. 
Common 
HW.
99 
HW.
99 
HW.
Boadsides 
H. 
Common 
HW.
Woods 
P. 
99 
P. 
»9 
P. 
Canal 
N. 
Common 
P. 
99 
HW.
9> 
HW.
Meadows 
H. 
Cbmmon 
HW.
N. 8.
VOL.
V. 
2 D 
202 
'ADDENDA TO THE FLOBA OF HABBOW.
IJuly, 
Famify.
HabUat, 
Locality, 
Cyperaces.
Oarra: paniceft, i.
Meadows 
H. 
„ pendula, ffudt.
Woods 
F. &A.
„ glauca,^cop.
Meadows 
H. 
„ pUulifera,i.
Dry banks 
ox.
QTamina.
Phalaris arundinacea^ L.
Ditches 
H. 
* „ oanariensiB, Z, 
Ckirdeii 
H. 
Milii»T" ^^um, IJ, 
Thickets 
WB.
Apera Spioa- Venti, Beam>, 
Boadside 
B. 
Common 
HW.
„• alba,i.
Meadows 
H. 
Arundo Fhragmites, L, 
Pools 
A. 
Aim flexuosa, L.
Common 
HW.
Arrhenatheram bulbosum, Lindl 
. Dry brooks 
OX.
Triodia decombens, JBeauv.
Common 
HW.
Molinia coBrulea, Mmnch.
»> 
HW.
Poa nemoraUfl, L, 
Meadows 
B. 
Bromus oommutatus, 8chd, 
^> 
B. 
Loliom temulentmn, Z.
Waste 
A. 
„ • aivense, With, 
Meadows 
OX.
Nardus stricta, L, 
Common 
HW.
FOioeB.
lAstrea spinulosa, Pred.
Woods 
OX.
Common 
HW.
Aspleniam Adiantum-nigruTn, L 
.Dry banks 
HW.
Bleohnmn boreale, iSto.
n 
HW.
„ anomalmii 
ti 
HW.
Equisetaceie.
Equisetum sylyaticum, L, 
Common 
HW.
„ paluBtre, L.
n 
P. 
„ fluviatile, Pries.
»» 
P. 
ChAraoee.
Chara syncarpa, ThwU, ?
Beservoir 
BP.
„ Tulgaris, Jut, 
Pools 
B.&A.
„ fragilis, Desv.
Beservoir 
BP.
The remarks of "A." on "The List of Harrow Plants'' re- 
printed from the ^Harrow Gazette' in the ' Phytologist ' of 
April, 1860, certainly demand an answer, andan answer in keep- 
ing with the kind tone of his closing paragraph.
The materials 
obtained during last summer for an " Addenda to the Flora of 
Harrow/' made it desirable that the answer should be delayed * 
until the first portion of the "Addenda" should be ready for 
publication.
I have to thank "A.," in the first place, for 
pointing out several errors, into which I had inadvertently fallen ; 
and which it was most desirable should be corrected.
I further 
trust that the replies given below to his queries and criticisms 
may on the 'whole be deemed satisfactory.
Be it remembered 
that the paper was originally drawn up for non-botanical readers; 
1861«] ADDENDA TO THE FLORA OF HARROW, 203 
that only one mark was used to indicate plants of doubtful 
origin; and that doubt was only expressed in the case of plants 
likely to have been purposely introduced^ except in the case of 
the Anacharis Alsinastrum.
Corydalis lutea was originally printed with an asterisk, which 
was overlooked in the reprint.
This small defect was counter- 
balanced by several original typographical errors corrected in the 
reprint.
Cor(mopus didyma was an error of memory, and, without 
reference to an authority, was set down as the name of the more 
common C.
Rtiellii.
Barbarea arcuata has been compared with a plant so labelled 
from Loughall, county of Armagh, A.
G. More, and appears to 
be identical with it.
Sifmpis nigra.
Not found ; set down in error.
Rosa vilhaay I believe rightly named.
Examples were distri- 
buted last year through the Thirsk Club.
CratmgtAs monogyna.
Inserted only as a variety, 
Ribe8 rubrum and R.
Grosmlaria, apparently wild, but in a 
locality that admits of doubt.
How can it be known, with respect 
to most plants, whether they are of truly spontaneous growth in 
any particular locality, or have been accidentally introduced ?
Vibumum,OptdtAS Bud V.
Lantana occMxm the neighbourhood, 
under very different conditions of locality, etc., giving to the 
latter every probability of spontaneous growth, and to the for- 
mer no more than a bare possibility.
Hypericum hirsutum, 
Bryonia dioica, Plantago media, and Sison Amomum, I have 
found plentifully in several neighbourhoods where the calcareous 
element in the soil is very small indeed.
Tragopogon porrifolivs I do not consider indigenous.
It was 
found last year in a new locality, but evidently of accidental 
growth.
Arctium.
Very few plants of Arctium were found in flower 
in this neighbourhood in 1859, - and those few all A.
majus.
Yet it appears from the search made last year that A, minus is 
the more common plant of the district.
Vinca minor ^ Found in a new locality last year; yet still 
of a doubt.
. 
Verbascum Thapsus.
Doubtful, though it occurs where it 
could not have been planted either for ornament or use.
204 ADDENDA TO THE FLORA OF HARROW.
[Jult/, 
Veronica Bvabaumii.
Two new localities found for this.
There was no intention to give this a higher claim to be.
con- 
sidered indigenous than is accorded to it in our leading works.
Myosotia sylvatica.
For the present I am willing to consider 
that this was put down in error.
At the same time^ I have a 
strong feeling that I must have seen this plant in 1859^ but have 
not been able, so far, to verify this conviction.
Atriplex Babinfftonii, A confessedly seaside species, yet occa- 
sionally occurring inland.
In 1857, I found it plentifully be- 
tween Eensal Green and Kilbum.
Last year also I found it in 
this neighbourhood.
Atriplex paMa, L., has been set down through mistake.
Fagu8 sylvatica seems to have some pretensions to be classed 
as indigenous.
The Bushes, Pondweeds, and Grasses were justly supposed to be 
few in number; but those only that had been observed could be 
inserted in the list.
Important additions have been made to all 
these families \ but the number of Pondweeds is still very small.
'* A." must have overlooked a statement made in the prefatory 
remarks to the "List of Harrow Plants," when he says that 
varieties have been made to "do duty for species." It was 
distinctly stated that the plants enumerated amounted to " three 
hundred and eighty-five species and varieties.'^ There are several 
varieties mentioned in the " Addenda '^ without any distinctive 
mark attached, such not being requisite for the readers for 
whom the list has been specially prepared.
I shall be glad to 
receive any remarks, either directly or through the pages of the 
* Phytologifet,^ in reference to the " Addenda," that may enable 
me to make the "List of Harrow Plants " more perfect.
And 
while I do not strongly object to any friendly critic preserving 
his incognito, if he desires ; still, if not unpleasant to him, I 
should much prefer that he throw off his disguise and plainly 
show his colours.
Had the List written last year been intended 
for the pages of the ^ Phytologist,' it should have had my signa- 
ture aflBxed, that its readers might be able to attach neither 
more nor less of authority to its statements than is their just due.
W. M.
Hind.
Harrowy February 2, 1861.
J861.] FBlTILLARfA AND CROW-FLOWERS.
205 
FEITILLAEIA AND CROW-FLOWEES.
Mr. C, J.
Ashfield^ in his remarks on the botany of the Chil- 
tems, in the ' Phytologist ^ for April, 1861, notices the -Fri/i/faria 
MeUagris (Fritillary, or Snake^s-head), which grows abundantly 
in a field near to the hamlet of Ford, in the parish of Dinton, 
and is throughout the neighbourhood known by the name of 
CroW'Cup Field.
I wish to know something more about this 
plant, and particularly whether it is the one Chapman alludes 
to, in his ' Ovid's Banquet of Sense,' as 
** Oup'Hke 7\inll-planUy strewed in Bacchus' bower." 
I have for some time thought that the Fritillaria is the plant 
there alluded to, as it is termed '^ cup-like " as well as '^ twilled ;'' 
which words are descriptive of the shape of the flower, and the 
marking of its petals.
I think also that the name Crow-cup 
Field, given to the field at Dinton where it so abundantly grows, 
favours my opinion.
Respecting Crow-flowers generally, I am 
curious to know why so many of our common plants have thf 
prefix crow.
In Gerard's Herbal is the following : — 
" Of Crowfeet : There be divers kinds of these pernicious herbs, 
comprehended under the name of Ranunculus, or Crowfoot, and 
the knowledge of them is as necessary to the physician as any 
other herbs, to the end they may shun the same, as Scribonius 
Largus saith." He then gives, — common Crowfoot, right Crow- 
foot, Crowfoot of the fallow field, white Mountain Crowfoot, 
round-rooted Crowfoot, Crowfoot called Auricomm Golden-hair 
Crowfoot, Frog Crowfoot, grassy Crowfoot, winter Crowfoot, 
Portugal Crowfoot, Locke's Gowlons, or globe Crowfoot, and 
several others, which are all called Ranunculus.
He also notices 
Crow-flowers, or Wild Williams, called in Latin Armoracia ayU 
vestris; Crowfoot, Crane's-bill, Crow Garlic, Crow-toes, Hya 
cinths, and yellow Crow-bells.* 
In Halliwell's ^ Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, 
he has Crowberry {Empetrum nigrum), Crow Leek (Hyacinth), 
Crow Parsnip (Dandelion), Crow's-nest (wild Parsley), Crow 
* ^'The Crow Garlic," sajs Coles, in his * Adam in Eden,' **grow6th in fertile 
pastures in all parts of England, particularly in a field called the Mantels, on 
the back side of Islington, by London.'* If these plants take their names from 
the shape of the bird's foot, what part of them is so shaped P 
206 , KENTISH BOTANY.
[«My> 
sope (the herb Saponaria), Crow-toe (the Ranunculus), and 
Crow-bell^ to which is the following interesting note from Au- 
brey's 'Wilts Royal Society MSS,/ p.
126 :— 
" In a ground of mine called Swices^ growes abundantly a plant 
called by the people hereabout Crow-bells, which I never saw 
anywhere but there.
Mr. Robert Good, M.A., tells me that 
these Crow-beUs have blew flowers, and are common in many 
shady places in this countrey.^' 
These Crow-bells must be, I conclude, the same flowers as we 
call Hare-bells {Hyacinthus nonscripttcs) , and they may be the 
same as the Crow -toes of Gerard.
But I remember Milton, in 
' Lycidas,' speaks of " tufted Crow-toes :" does he mean by these 
the Hyacinth P Shakspeare, in ' Hamlet/ act iv.
sc.
7, speaks 
of " Crow-flowers '' in connection with Nettles and Daisies, with 
which Ophelia made her fantastic garlflnds.
These appear to 
me to be some of the Ranunculus or Crowfoot tribe.
Sidney Seisly.
KENTISH BOTANY.
Plants of Ham, Pegwell Bay, Sandovm Castle, Oldhavm, 
Sandwich, etc.
Next morning, (see ^ Phytologist ' for June, 1861, p.
185,) the 
5th, before breakfast, we went to Ham^ to botanize about its 
celebrated ponds.
But ponds we saw none, though of deep water- 
ditches plenty.
, 
The distance from Sandwich to Ham is under two miles, and 
the way is by the Deal road, turning off to the right about a mile 
from the former town.
On our way we met with Pimpinella 
magna, not very plentiftil, and with Crepis biennis, most luxuriant 
and in great abundance.
This fine plant, which is still occasionally confounded with 
Crepis taraxadfolia, is common, in many parts of Kent, particu- 
larly about the roadside between Gr&vesend and Rochester, and 
in the fields near the path from Cbbham to Hailing.
It is also 
plentiful about Sevenoaks.
But nowhere is it more abundant 
than on the roadsides near Ham. Here it varies much in size, 
and in the shapes and divisions of the leaves.
Its height is from 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
207 
two to six feet ; the stem-leaves are sometimes all quite simple, 
sometimes they are pinnatifid, with lobes three or four inches 
long.
The plant is now pretty ^ell distinguished from C taraxa^ 
cifolia, but its distribution is still but indifferently established.
In the ' Cybele ' the area of C.
biennis is entered 6 ; this means 
that it has been observed in 6 out of the 18 botanical provinces; 
and the county census is 10, or it has been seen in 10 counties.
In the same work, C.
taraxacifolia is entered as having a provin- 
cial extent of 4, and its comital figure is 8.
On comparing notes 
we found that C tareuvacifolia has a greater area than C.
biennis; 
we have specimens of the former from Surrey and from Warvdck- 
shire or Leicestershire, of the latter we have examples from Kent 
only.
It is certain that these two plants were confounded and 
mislabelled in the herbarium of the Botanical Society of London, 
as they were in the * English Flora,' and in 'English Botany,' 
both in the original work and in the Supplement.
A correct figure of C.
biennis is still a desiderata in our illus- 
trated Floras.
Those who wish to get a better acquaintance with 
these two species, and to ascertain their distinctive characters^ 
may easily accomplish this in a short visit to Kent.
About the Erith station, C.
taraa^actfolia is unusually abun- 
dant, and in a chalk-quarry near the Bosherville Gardens at 
Northfleet the other species grows.
The finest, however, and the 
most multiform examples of C, biennis is near Ham.
On reaching the low meadowy lands, where, as already said, 
we saw no ponds, we turned to the right, into a boggy peaty 
field, which was full of HydrocotyU vulgariSy — SaJix adscendens 
of 'English Botany,' — with several large and small trees of Popu- 
lus nigra.
This being unsatisfactory, we entered another enclo- 
sure, on the opposite or left-hand side of the road, and.
in the 
ditches here saw plenty of Hottonia paltistris still in flower (5th 
September) ; also further on towards the wood or copse at the 
further end of the meadovr, Chara hispida and C.
vulgaris^ and 
Sparganium natans (in flower), Alisma ranunculoides, Lemna 
irisuka, Potamogeton plantaginetis, and other commoner aquatic 
plants were here seen in abundance.
In the wood there were gigantic specimens of Rubtis idaiis, 
equalling in length R.
fruticosus, if this name be admissible ; also 
Lastrea Thelypteris, at least four feet in height ; Carex paniculata, 
the leaves of which rivalled those of the far-famed Pampas grass.
208 KENTISH BOTANY.
{Jultf, 
Lysimachia vulgaris was very luxuriant^ and so was Menyanthes 
trifotiata, of course long past flowering.
The other plants ob- 
served were Valeriana diaica, Sparganium simplex, and Triglo- 
chin palustre, with others of less note.
This was a pretty fiEdr 
amount of work done before breakfast.
After refireshment we started for Pegwell Bay, celebrated 
among gastronomical enthusiasts for its shrimps and shrimp 
sauce, brown bread and fresh butter, etc.
We saw no specimens 
of either fish or sauce, but we saw what pleased us much more, 
viz.
myriads of Medicago minima and Trifolium scabrum.
The 
herbage of the gravelly parts of these flats is chiefly composed of 
these pigmy Leguminifers, with abundance of Phleum arenarium 
and Erigeron acris intermixed.
In lower and moister places 
appeared Erythraa pulcliella, varying from a couple of inches to 
a foot in height ; also Samolus Valerandi and ISpergula nodosa.
Nearer the river appeared Artemisia maritima, with a variety 
which does not agree with A.
gallica found on the shores of the 
Mediterranean; slsoSuada fSchoberiaJ maritima, if this be its 
now current name.
(In books it has at least as many aliases as 
an Old Sailey bird, or a grandee of the highest rank in Spain.} 
Statice Armeria, Glaux maritima, Atriplex portulacoides, Trigh- 
chin maritimum, and (Enanthe Lachenalii* abounded.
This latter plant is found plentifully dispersed over miles of 
these salt-marshes.
Psamma arenaria and Medicago denticulata 
of the Rev. G.
E, Smith, abounded on tjie drier parts, while many 
acres of mud-flats were covered with Salicornia herbacea.
In 
Norfolk, land is worth fencing off from the sea, when this plant 
grows on the muddy shores.
After reaching the mouth of the river which flows into Pegwell 
Bay, we turned back towards Sandwich, in order to go along the 
seashore to Deal, and as we did not want to go through the 
town, we ferried across the river, and directed our course toward 
the houses of the coastguard on the sftnd-hills, which here form 
a natural s^a-wall.
* This species, the name of which only is one of our recenfc acquisitions, has 
usually a preference for maritime localities ; yet we haye receiyed specidiens from 
near Boss, at least forty miles from the sea and twenty from a tidal riyer.
In the Kentish locality it yaries in size from a few inches to a yard in height.
We haye examples from the Boss station, of the dwarf state of the plant, where its 
small stature is not so easily accounted for, as on the sandy beach of Pegwell Bay, 
where its stunted growth is attributable to the sandy soU where it grows.
1861,] ^ KENTISH BOTANY.
209 
All along on the brink of the river, and especially on the 
margin of the ditches inside the river-wall, large masses of Juncus 
acutus appeared at intervals, a welcome sight to inland botanists.
When passing over the meadow, and not far from the houses of 
the coastguard above mentioned, we were so fortunate as to light 
upon several fine specimens of Polypogon monspeliensis, a plant 
unrecorded in the list of the plants of South Kent.
Is this a 
recent importation ?
We had now reached the famous sandhills which lie between 
Sandwich and Deal, along which we were told was a painful and 
very dreary walk.
It happily proved most agreeable, interesting, 
and instructive to us.* 
On the sand appeared Eryngium maritimum, one of the most 
attractive of our seaside plants, not to handle, but to look at and 
admire.
It is very much to be wished that decorative artists, those who 
devise and execute the patterns for our paper-hangings, our 
draperies, furniture, and such-like, would now and then take a 
walk by the seashore and study the multifarious forms exhibited 
by our maritime vegetation.
This would probably improve their 
taste ; at the very least, it would have a tendency to enlarge their 
minds, and ultimately be the means of introducing more variety 
into their productions.
The Rose and the Convolvulus, the Trefoil and the Lily, are 
all beautiful, but they are repeated till they become tiresome.
Toujours perdrix, said the facetious Frenchman, mais toujours 
perdrix.
Too much of one dish palls the appetite ; the constant 
* Johnson's notice of the results of herborizing in this locality, viz.
the sandhills 
about Sandown Castle, should not be passed over in sUenoe.
His list of plants 
seen in this locality is very brief.
See Ealph's edition, 4to, 1847, pp.
25, 26 :— 
Malva vulgaris floribtts alhis ; AnagalUa ctquatica^ 8 Lobel ; Cotyledon aguatica^ seu 
Acris geptetUrionalirm, Lob.; Buglossum sylvestre, Dod.
; Tithymaku ParaUui, 
The cultivated specimens are omitted.
We saw no marine nionsters of any sort, not so much as a sea-serpent ; yet 
we are curious about the snake fifteen feet long, formerly killed here, the stuffed 
skin of which was in the possession of Charles Duke or Duck (Carolus Anas), 
the learned pharmacist of Sandwich.
This fine specimen of a sea-snake was as thick as a boa constrictor, and it con- 
tained in its capacious stomach a large portion of the population of the rabbit- 
warren.
Are there any notices of the capture of this marine monster extant in any 
of our local histories of South Kent ?
N.S. VOL.
V. 3 B 
210 KENTISH BOTANY.
[July, 
repetition of the finest poetry^ mnsic^ or artistic embellishment, 
renders the object not only incapable of yielding pleasure^ but it 
finally becomes disgustingly tiresome.
As a variety the artist might copy the leaves, the bracts, the 
heads, and even the stem of the Eryngo, or Sea-holly.
If he be 
skilful in the art of adaptation, he might make his own fortune 
and ameliorate the taste of his countrymen at the same time.
On the sand wetted by the spray, if not by the tide, Honkenya 
peploides and SaUola Kali grew sparingly, and on the dry sand- 
hills, Hypocharis glabra and Silene conica, the former plentiful, 
and the latter sparingly.
Three or four patches were all that 
appeared in our way between the preventive-houses and Sandown 
Castle.
Carex arenaria and Triticumjunceum were not unfrequent, 
Phleum arenarium was very common ; Eryihraa pulchella and 
Carlina vulgaris were far firom scarce; Convolvulus Soldanella 
appeared only here and there ; and very few specimens were in 
flower at this late period of the season.
We passed by Sandown Castle after looking into that desolate- 
looking fortress, and went over the hills straightforward to the 
old haven of Sandwich, which has been for generations and cen- 
turies choked up by the encroachments of the Goodwin Sands.
Sandwich then had a direct communication with the sea: its 
roadstead or nagivable river is now very circuitous.
It is not very easy to believe the alleged connection between 
Tenterden Steeple and the Goodwin Sands ; but it is far more 
incredible that the river Stour left its ancient direct channel 
between Sandwich>nd the sea, and made for itself a way, thrice 
as long, through the meadows.
Literary antiquarians have, proved, at least to their own satis- 
faction, that the alleged connection between the silting of Sand- 
wich harbour and the building of Tenterden steeple is well 
founded.
Bishop Latimer, in his quaint, homely style, while 
preaching, related to his audience a story on which this tradition 
and proverb are founded.
The Bishop said that a commissioner, 
Mr. Moore, was sent by the government to inquire into the 
cause of the stoppage of Sandwich Haven by the Goodwin 
Sands.
After he had examined many people, and had heard 
their opinions about the cause and its remedy, he spied in court 
an old man, a very old man, much older than any of those who 
had given evidence on this subject.
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
211 
The old man volunteered to say something, and his testimony 
was to the effect that Tenterden steeple had caused the choking 
of the former channel.
The old man stated that when he was a youth; he had heard 
this from men who were then very old, and they said that Ten- 
terden steeple was the cause of the obstruction and abandonment 
of the ancient haven of Sandwich.
The old man^s evidence was 
abruptly ended by a shout of derisive laughter, and he retired 
abashed : and hence the saying is employed, as the learned Bay 
informs us, when an absurd or ridiculous reason is assigned for 
something in question.
The historian Puller both quaintly and truly remarks on this, 
saying " that one story is good till another is told, and though 
this be all whereupon this proverb is generally grounded, I met 
since,^^ says he, " with a supplement thereunto ; it is this : — Time 
out of mind, money was constantly collected out of this county 
to fence the east banks thereof against the irruption of the sea, 
and such sums were deposited in the hands of the Bishop of 
Rochester.
But because the sea had been quiet for many years 
without any encroaching, the Bishop commuted (diverted) this 
money to the building a steeple and endowing a church at Ten- 
terden.
By this diversion of the collection for the maintenance 
of the banks, the sea afterwards brake in upon Goodwin^s sands.
And now the old man had told a rational tale, had he found but 
the due favour to finish it.
And thus, sometimes, that is cause- 
lessly accounted ignorance of the speaker, which is nothing but 
impatience in the auditors, unwilling to attend to the end of the 
discourse.^^ 
What truth there may be in this traditionary and local saw of 
the county, the narrator of the anecdote will not attempt to 
clear up, but he can state with much confidence that the same 
physical causes which have diverted the course of the river Stour 
at Sandwich, so far from what probably was its direct and ancient 
course to the sea, are still in operation ; and every year is in- 
creasing the distance of the mouth of the harbour from the town 
of Sandwich.
On the western side of the river's mouth, there is 
forming a mud-bank covered with Saltwort, as before said, and 
on the east side the water is gradually encroaching on the land.
This process will continue, if the natural cause or agent is not 
counteracted, to produce still greater effects, and the mouth of 
212 KENTISH BOTANY.
[July, 
the river Stour will reach the chalk-bound eastern side of Pegwell 
Bay^ and the mouth of Sandwich Haven will be removed several 
miles further from the town.
Many years* ago, — nearly half a century, — ^the writer of the 
above remarks was informed that the river Cowie in Kincardine- 
shire, which flows into .the bay of Stonehaven by a channel which 
is, for about a mile, parallel with the sea-line (the river is on one 
side of a shingly beach and the sea is on the other), flowed 
straight to the ocean from the mill and bridge, which are both at 
the east entrance to the town.
This account, now a tradition, is 
confirmed by a very excellent map of the above-named county, 
made from a survey completed in 1774.
In this map the two 
rivers which flow into this bay, are represented as at least a 
mile or two apart, whereas in 1820, and probably 'still, the rivers 
Cbwie, on the east,- and Carron, on the west, were only a few 
yards distant where they entered the sea, in fact, no more than 
the breadth of the jetty or landing-place of the harbour.
What 
took place within the memory of living witnesses, may have 
taken place in times long past, although the testimony of the 
occurrence is but traditionary.
When we reached the old haven of Sandwich, our thoughts 
were not engaged on any such physical speculations ; for we had 
never previously seen so many and so fine examples of Ranuncu- 
lus lAnffua^ and consequently our delight and admiration were 
fixed on the present gratifying show of fine and rare plants, and 
there were no regrets expressed at the departed glory of Sandwich 
and its once busy haven : we only regretted that we were not here 
a few weeks earlier in the season.
And we were not sorry that 
we were not here, and spectators of the desperate sea-fight fought 
in this roadstead in 1046, when '^ Lothen and Irling came with 
twenty-five ships to Sandwich, and there took unspeakable booty 
in men, in gold, and in silver, so that no man knew how much it 
all was.^* 
Sandwich* and its haven have doubtless a history worth relating 
if the materials be forthcoming.
Its name frequently occurs in 
the Saxon Chronicle, and it was the scene of many battles.
As 
early as 851, King Athelstan fought on shipboard and slew a 
great number of the enemy (the Danes), took nine ships, and put 
the others to flight.
We are content to be the chroniclers of 
humbler objects, and relate that the great and lesser Spearwort, 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
213 
the Yellow Flag^ the Sulrush^ the Marestail^ and the great 
Water Dock, now fill up the narrow space where kings con- 
tended, not for glory, but for spoil, like the ancient Greeks.
Sic 
transit gloria mundi.
Here we were not unobsanirant of prepara- 
tions for a warlike struggle, which we hope will never come : but 
this is not the place for such inferences or anticipations.'^ 
On our way along the sandhills from Sandown Castle to Deal, 
we collected here and there the following plants, viz.
— Allium 
mneahy Carduus tenuifloruSy Sclerochloe distans ; S.
maritima, 
long past flowering ; Scabiosa Columbaria, a considerable distance 
from the chalk; Chenopodium olidum, near Deal; Poly gala 
depressa, Wend.
; Juncus coehosus, perhaps Carea^ lavigata, and 
Hippophae rhamnoides in fruit.
This we fancied might be the rare plant which our worthy 
(jocular?) host at Sandwich foretold that we might find if we 
had any luck ; or if we were as lucky as a party of fifty botanists, 
who were at his house some twelve months ago, were.
He very 
modestly told us that he was no botanist, and therefore could 
neither tell us the name of the plant nor give a very characteristic 
description of it ; but he said it was a shrub, and grew on the 
sandhills, and produced a poisonous berry ; also that a single leaf 
of the plant, if infused in a gallon of water, would render the 
infusion so poisonous, that a small portion would render our 
deadliest foes perfectly innocuous.
This reminded us of Hector 
Boece's story of the Scottish king Duncan Macbeth, and Sweno, 
the leader of the Northmen.
It is alleged by the historian that 
the latter chief and his army were drugged and hocussed with a 
decoction of Atropa Belladonna, which the Scots administered in 
ale and wine.
There is probably quite as much truth in this 
story (see ' Gentleman^s Magazine^ for July, 1859) as there is in 
that of our host of the ' Bell ' in Sandwich.
* The indulgenoe of solemn reflections on the altered state of Sandwich hayen, 
and on the contrast between the past and present condition of the kingdom, would 
not make our readers much wiser.
They are too much engaged with the realities 
of active life, to haye much sympathy either with the reminiscences of the past or 
with anxious forebodings about the future.
We were well satisfied with what we saw, and wish our readers may haye as 
much ex^joyment as we had when they visit Sandwich.
Sl4 BOTANY OP THE RED BIVEB.
[July, 
BOTANY OF THE RED EIVER.
Extracts from a Paper read before the Botanical Society of 
Canada, beaMng the following title : — On the Botany of the 
Red River Settlement and the Old Red River Trail.
By John 
C. ScHULTz.
{Read 11 M January, 1861.) 
"The Red River Settlement of late years attracted much atten- 
tion in Canada^ on account of its isolated position and the many 
and vague reports that were in circulation regarding it, some 
describing it as a land of milk and honey, and others as a cold 
barren waste.
But little was known of the real resources of the 
country till thp years 1857 and 1858, when the attention of our 
Government was directed to it, and they ordered two expeditions 
to be fitted out, 6ne under the charge of Mr. Hind, and the other 
under Mr. Dawson.
These gentlemen, on their return, after an 
absence of eighteen months, submitted their reports, accompanied 
by maps and a geological description of the country traversed.
These were published and widely distributed, and many of you, 
no doubt, have seen them.
Therefore any account that I give of 
the settlement will be as short as possible.
" It is situated on the Red River, near its entrance into Lake 
Winnepeg, occupying both banks of the Red River and the As- 
siniboine, which empties into the Red River at the Hudson's Bay 
Company's post Fort Garry, the centre of the settlement.
The 
settlement extends from the mouth of the Red River up about 
forty miles, and on the Assiniboine river about twenty miles.
The 
distance of the settlement from St. Paul is said to be six hundred 
miles, and from Lake Superior about three hundred.
The popu- 
lation is estimated (rather high, I think) at ten thousand, inclu- 
ding the roving population, who live altogether by hunting.
The 
climate resembles that of Montreal in the length and continued 
cold of the winters, and the rapid vegetation in the spring after 
the snow is off the ground.
All the cereals are raised in abun- 
dance, the average produce to the acre exceeding that of Canada.
Garden vegetables are also grown in abundance.
Indian corn, 
however, is not so successful, being nipped by the early frosts.
"While residing last summer at Fort Garry, (the Hudson's Bay 
Company's post in the settlement,) I had an opportunity of collect- 
ing specimens of plants, some of which are now exhibited to the 
1861.] BOTANY OiP THE RED RIVER.
215 
Society.
Prom want of the necessary material, they were rather 
imperfectly prepared, but may perhaps serve to give a general 
idea of the botany of the immediate vicinity of the Fort.
On 
referring to the list it will be observed that here, as in other 
prairie land, the richest family is the ComposiUB, many species 
of which are found.
At the Fort we have not only the ordinary 
prairie Composites, but a great abundance of such plants as 
Artemisia Absinthium, especially on the drier and higher parts.
Next in frequency come the CrucifercB, which generally follow 
man ; these are abundant in the immediate vicinity of the Fort.
There are many species of Rosacea and Leffuminosa, truly indi- 
genous ; UmbellifercB are not unfrequent, and we have interesting 
representatives of Ranunculacea, Xanthoan/lacea, Violacete, Balsa- 
minacea, Caprifoliacea, Rubiace€e, etc.
The timber trees near 
the Fort are small groves of Aspen and Balsam Poplar, and on 
the banks of the rivers.
Oak, Ash, Elm, Maple, Aspen, ^and 
Balsam Poplar." 
The author graphicaUy describes his journey, which abounded 
in adventures, dangers, and other excitements, observing the 
zoology as well as the botany of the trail, as it is called, between 
the settlemQpt and Canada.
At Detroit Lake he met with a 
party of Ojibway Indians, with whom our traveller and his com- 
pany exchanged tea,, tobacco, etc., for fish, which the Red-men 
caught in great abundance.
" After leaving the lake," he proceeds, ^' the trail passes through 
many miles of dense woods, consisting chiefly of Oak and other 
hard woods.
In these woods, and southward, is found the Qin- 
seng {Aralia quinquefolia) [?
Panax quinquefolium,'L.'].
Crossing 
Otter-tail River, Rush Lake, and some small streams, we finally 
arrived at civilization again, in the shape of a collection of a 
dozen of houses, named in Minnesota maps Otter-tail City, and 
inhabited by travellers who purchase the furs of the Chippe- 
ways.
After taking dinner here at a two-roomed hotel, for which 
we paid two dollars, we left the city and crossed Leaf Mountain, 
the heights of land or apex of the two great watersheds of the 
Red and Mississippi valleys.
Here, as on the rest of the route, » 
the prevailing timber was Pine and Spruce, with occasional 
Tamarac swamps.
The trail here followed down the course of 
Leaf River till it empties into the Crow- wing River.
Here the 
trail ended, and, crossing this river in a scow, we had now a 
216 TQDMOBDBN BOTANICAL 80CIBTT.
[/^kf* 
bridged road fbrtj-five miles to the little town of Crow-wing^ 
where we arrived on the 2nd of Noyember, completing a trip 
of something over four hundred miles in fifteen days.
At this 
place we left our horses, and took stages, a hundred and fifty miles, 
to the city of St. Paul, and from thence by Mississippi boat and 
railroad to Canada.
'^ I may mention here that in St. Paul I noticed several barrels 
of ginseng-root which had been collected by Indians and others, 
and was intended for export from New York or elsewhere to 
China.
This American Ginseng is the Aralia quinquefoUa, a 
difierent species, it is believed, from the Chinese one, but never- 
theless highly esteemed in that country.
It is said to be used 
there as a medicine in cases of debility, but its medicinal proper- 
ties are not so highly esteemed in this country.
Its uses in 
China must be very extensive, as, independent of the Oinseng 
obtained in China, and the enormous quantities exported from 
America, imports are registered at Shanghai of the enormous 
quantity of 55,000 catties, from the 1 1th November, 1858, to 30th 
June, 1869.
This root is found in abundance in the western 
part of Minnesota, principally in the woods on Oak ridges, and 
there are persons who make large sums by collecting it and 
selling at St. Paul for one dollar per pound; by sending it to 
New York, they get a much larger price.
Now as this root is 
so valuable, and as the climate and soil in some parts of Canada 
resemble that of Minnesota, I wish merely to mention the possi- 
bility of cultivating it in Canada.
Hitherto the market has been 
supplied by indigenous growth, and the consequent disappearance 
of the plant in many parts of Canada and the States, suggests 
the propriety of adopting measures by which its production may 
be increased by artificial means.
^' A list of the plants collected at Fort Garry and along the route, 
with their localities, and critical remarks on the more interesting 
and obscure species, will be published in the Society's Transac- 
tions.'* 
TODMOEDEN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
Monday evening last, the 6th of May, was the time appointed 
to celebrate the anniversary of this flourishing Society ; and at 
half-past six, about forty-four sat down to dinner, and Mr. A.
1861.] TODMOBDEN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
217 
Stansfield^ Sen.^ the worthy President of the Society took the 
chair.
We have much pleasure in again reporting to the readers of 
the ^ Phytologist/ the increasing prosperity of this excellent as- 
sociation.
The following abstract or summary of their proceed- 
ings will^ it may be confidently asserted^ afford much gratifica- 
tion^ not to botanists merely^ but to all who are interested in the 
progress of humanity in the ways of peace and charity.
'^ Although^ during the year, we have lost through death, re- 
moval from the neighbourhood, and other causes, as many as ten 
members, yet, with new-comers, the total number at present on 
our books exceeds a hundred and fifty.
*' Of books our library contains 830 volumes, purchased at a 
cost of from £150 to £200.
" During the year, 700 volumes of books have been issued to 
members, some of whom, as you are aware, living at a distance^ 
hav6 the privilege of keeping books for three months ; a circum- 
stance which ought to be taken into consideration in any estimate 
of the working of our Society, as drawn from the number of 
books circulated.
'^ As usual, there have been many Excursions made during the 
year.
Of such of these excursions as our excellent Annalist may 
have attended, he will no doubt have preserved a faithful record, 
which he will have the pleasure of reading to you this evening.
'^ Mr. Patman is a gentleman who grudges no labour in behalf 
of the Society ; and this spirit of disinterestedness is the general 
characteristic of our members, to which may be attributed the 
flourishing condition of our financial adairs.
'^ Among the more notable features of the botanical campaign 
of last season, may be instanced the discoveiy of the very re- 
markable Lastrea moritana (or Oreopteris) Nowelliana, so named 
in merited honour of our amiable and much respected Vice- 
President.
This extraordinary variety of the fragrant Moun^ 
tain Buckler-Fern, which was discovered by Messrs.
Nowell and 
Stansfield whilst on a botanical ramble in North Wales last 
summer, is the.
more notable as so very few deviations have been 
found hitherto, from the normal type of this beautiful Fern.
" Our eminent Muscologists, Mr. Nowell and Dr. Wood, of 
Manchester, have also had recently such success in their specialty 
as has startled the whole Muscological world.
I refer to the 
N.S. VOL.
v. 2 P 
218 TODMORDEN BOTANICAL SOCIETY.
[July, 
' new light ' thrown hy the above gentlemen on the genus Or- 
thotrichum, in regard to which discoveries, as our botanical 
journals will have made patent to you, not only English but 
foreign pens have been at work.
"The various commendatory notices of our Society that have 
appeared, from time to time, in the pages of the London jour- 
nals, and especially the ' Phytologist,' must also be another 
source of congratulation.
" For the large gratuitous contributions of dried specimens of 
plants made to the Society during the year, we owe much grati- 
tude to the donors.
Dr. Wood, of Manchester, and H.
Boswell, 
Esq., of Oxford, in especial, have presented to the Society what 
must be considered most valuable acquisitions, in enlargement of 
our horius siccus.
'' The Editor of the ' Phytologist ' having resolved to publish 
a List of all the Botanisfts (properly so called) in the kingdom, 
some time ago appointed your Secretary to report for Lslnca- 
shire and Yorkshire, etc., and much correspondence, of course, 
has been necessary.
The List of Botanists above referred to, is 
now in course of publication, and will no doubt shortly be in our 
hands.
" As to the matter of finance, we have some £30 of uncollected 
subscriptions, and a balance in hand which will almost cover all 
the outstanding accounts.^ ^ 
After carefully reading the foregoing Report, it would be both 
stingy and uncourteous to refrain from offering these persevering 
men the humble meed of approbation at our disposal ; and to 
wish, in Oriental phraseology, as the author of * Haji Baba' taught 
us long ago, "that their success may never be less." Their 
financial statement affords a most favourable contrast with the 
monetary accounts of more than one Society in which we formerly 
took an active part.
We only wish we had room for a more detailed account of the 
interesting proceedings of the evening.
Probably when the An- 
nalist publishes or prints his history of the past yearns excursions, 
he will be so obliging as to send us a copy, from which we are 
certain of gleaning some facts which will be both instructive and 
pleasing to our readers.
It is also a gratification to hear that 
the Darwinian theory is exciting considerable attention, and that 
1861.] WORCESTERSHIRE NATURALISTS^ CLUB.
219 
it can be discussed with interest and animation.
It is fervently 
to be hoped and desired that these discussions are not sheer 
logomachies, rather disputes about words than about realities.
For our own part we would rather hear or read Mr. Patman^s 
notice of new localities for rare plants, than peruse the most in- 
genious speculations about their origin.
The former are what 
people Q2\\ facts, the latter are only fancies.
This brief notice of an exceedingly well managed and econo- 
mical Society, is published in our pages solely for the purpose of 
showing how much good may be accomplished by a very small 
pecuniary expenditure.
The example of the office-bearers espe- 
cially deserves to be commended and imitated ; the members get 
their quid pro quo, i, e, the full value of their contributions, six 
shillings per annum ; the officials get a barren vote of thanks for 
their meritorious services.
They are not mercenaries, nor ven- 
dors of scientific information.
We have dwelt longer than is our wont on this subject, not 
indeed for the sake of eulogizing these good men, but in the 
confident expectation that, following in their steps, similar socie- 
ties, supported at small cost, say by annual payments of five 
shillings, wiU be established in every town or even populous 
parish in England.
This is advocated and urged on botanists, 
wherever two or three can associate, not so much for the sake of 
science, as with the ulterior and higher object of making people 
more intelligent, more liberal, and raorep charitable.
In the 
serious business of life, botany, like every other science, is only 
one of the means employed for the attainment of noble ends ; and 
these are to make mankind better and consequently happier.
WORCESTERSHmE NATURALISTS' CLUB.
The first meeting of this Club of practical observers was held 
on Wednesday last, the 15th of May, 1861, at Malvern, when a 
large number of members responded to the hospitable invitation 
of Dr. Grindrod to breakfast with him at Townsend House.
After breakfast, the officers of the Club for the ensuing year 
were elected as follows: — The Rev. David Melville, Rector of 
Great Witley, President; Rev. A.
H. Winnington Ingram, 
F.G.S., and Edwin Lees, Esq., F.L.S.; Vice-Presidents; and 
220 RBViEWk [July, 
William Matthews, Esq., A.M., P.G.8., Hon. Secretary.
Dr.
Grindrod then exhibited his unique collection of Silurian fossils.
The botanists detected the rare Burnet {Poterium murica" 
turn) and then made a traverse to Brockhill Wood, whose tangled 
mazes it was found difficult to emerge from, and here some of the 
heavier- weighted naturalists were " thrown out.'' Those who were 
enabled to break through the briars soon found themselves in the 
romantic Purlieu Lane, a place of double interest, botanical and 
geological, and while a select few ferreted out the habitat of the 
rare Gagea lutea, others were fishing specimens of Batrachosper^ 
mum out of the brook.
Several new members were elected, viz.
the Kev. W.
Lister 
Isaac, Pirton Rectory; George Dawson, Esq., Birmingham; 
Mr. Jacob Gill, Cradley ; etc.
J%« Preston Chronicle and Lancashire Advertiser, for Saturday, 
May the Uth, 186L 
The readers of th^ Chronicle are again (see 'Phytologist,' vol.
v. 
1861, p.
155) treated to another instalment of the botanical, anti- 
quarian, and.
historical ^ Rambles by the Ribble,' and this portion 
of the series is entitled, ^ Ingleborough, Geerstoues, Ribblehead, 
Ingleborough Cave,' etc., and it is just as chatty and pleasant as 
the previous papers on the same subject ; and this is high praise.
The botanical discoveries were not numerous, many plants 
were not to be expected in a very ungenial spring like the last — 
probably worse.
The party were fain to cower under rocks 
and dry stone dikes and cairns, to shelter themselves from the 
merciless storms of hail and sleety rain, which prevail more or 
less in these parts till St. Bamaby's day, June 11th.
Three 
kinds of Club-Moss were all the rewards they obtained in the 
field of botanical acquisitions.
Pew of our readers need to be told 
what they were^ for they are no rarities on the Yorkshire hills.
"A contented mind is a continual feast;'' a truth which is 
amply established by these ardent plant- and cave-hunters ; and 
they exercise the rare gift of making the most of everything, 
both plants and space.
The top of Ingleborough, or Foalfoot, as 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
221 
the people there call it, is a Jofty rock forming the summit oif 
crest 'of the hill.
Queer names Englanders employ I there is a 
deep hollow near Dudley, barely a mile from the town, which 
is called the Wren^s Nest.
The summit of the Foalfoot is called 
^^ a vast expanse of table-land,' not much less than a mile in cir- 
cumference.'' When we were there, our companion told us that 
it bad been a race-course ; but the single round made, in racing 
phrase, only a short heat.
About the Babble, which is hereabout but a tiny brook, the 
botanists collected Trollius europisus, Primula farinosa^^one of 
the most elegant of the Primrose tribe ; also Pinguicula vulgaris^ 
the marsh Valerian ; Saanfragu ffranulata^ and S.
tridactylites, 
A few weeks in summer might be very pleasantly and profit - 
.ably passed in rambling among these Yorkshire gills, climbing 
the hills, enjoying the extensive prospects, and now and then 
{ducking a plant and floweret as a memento of the place and 
period.
It is not agreeable to be on Ingleborough, or even at its 
fool, when the snow covers and conceals every blade of grass, 
every hedge, and every tree.
May is an uncertain month ; bitter 
cold has been the weather this season, 1861.
The end of July, 
or the beginning of August, is the botanical season for Ingle- 
borough ; and for fine weather's sake, so conducive to personal 
enjoyment of fine scenery, and irrespective of herborizing pur- 
poses, we should prefer the end of August, or the beginning of 
September, when the temperature is more equable, and the at- 
mospheric changes less sudden and severe.
We wish our lively 
chatty tourists better weather the next time they go to Ingle- 
borough ; and like John Gilpin's poetic historian, we wish that 
" when they next set out to walk, may we be there to see." 
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICE^, AND QUERIES.
Cumbrian Botany.
Having occasionally wandered over the interesting district so correctly 
described by Mr. Edwin Green in your March number of the present 
year, I feefsome pleasure in being able to add a few names of plants by 
no means common here, to be found within the limits he points out ; and 
which appear to have escaped his notice.
Euphorbia portlandica grows sparingly along the Drigg shore, between 
the ordinary high-water mark and the high spring-tide mark \ and E, Fa- 
222 TOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[July, 
ratios near Haverigg.
I could show Mr. Green a flourishing plant of 
U. amygdaloidesy but it is not a native *of the northern counties, and may 
therefore be less interesting to him.
Typha (apparently) latifolioy less 
robust than I expected, was brought to me a few years ago, and said to 
have been gathered in the Chapel Sucken ditches (pools, or poo's, pro- 
vincially), and most probably may stiU lie found there.
On referring to Mr. Green's route in the November number, 1850, I 
find he examined the line of road between Seascale and Drigg, but has 
not recorded the LycopuB europaus which grows along the sides of that 
road, as weU as in a few other Cumbrian localities.
At the edges of the copses between Thwaites Schools and the river 
Duddoi^ I have observed the Helleborm viridis, in scattered patches.
lithospermum maritimum grows here and there along the shore, but not 
abundantly, for some distance ; and on the muddy margin of the estuary 
of the Esk the Artemisia gallica flourishes.
A few years ago I noticed the Inula dysenterica growing in a hollow 
near the southern end of St. Bee's heads ; but l fear the encroachments 
of the sea at that point have swept away the whole of the roots, as well as* 
an acre or two of very valuable land where it grew.
Other Cumbrian plants and their localities I have mentioned in Mar- 
tineau's ' Guide to the Lakes,' edition 1861.
Workington, Ma/rch 18, 1861.
W. DICKINSON.
\E, Faralias is in * Cybele ' placed among those species which are sup- 
posed to belong rather to the west than to the east of England.
One 
of the proofs of its belonging to the assumed Atlantic type, is rather a 
hobbling supporter of this assumption, viz., Coast of Suffolk (Eev. W.
Notcutt !
!).— • Cybele,' vol.
ii.
p. 362.
Its European range is not limited to the western shores pf our quarter 
of the world, for it extends to Greece and Turkey ; as it grows on the 
east of England, though not so commonly as on the west.
So it grows 
on the maritime parts of our continent, from the Atlantic to the Adriatic] 
Fertilization of British Orchids by Insect Agency.
(JVom the Gardeners' Chronicle, «7a».-26, 1861.) 
Eeferring to your number for June 9, 1860, p.
528, Mr. Darwin asks 
for information on this point from persons residii% in an Orchis district.
It is not as a person answering that description that I venture to reply to 
his inquiries, because, with ihe exception of 0.
Mario, rarely 0.
mascula, 
and most rarely 0.
viridis, and Listera ovata, we have none of the British 
Orchids growing near Ely. In the spring of 1860, I met by accident a 
poor fellow in a street near Hungerford Market, who, for the important 
sum of sixpence, sold me fifteen roots of the Fly Orchis {fiphrys musdfera), 
which he had collected near Guildford, Surrey.
I planted them in my 
garden, where they aU flowered vigorously, bearing from sevdh to twelve 
flowers each.
Not one of the seed-vessels swelled, and long after the 
flowers had withered, 1 narrowly inspected every one of them, and found 
the pollen-masses still in their pouches, waxy and moist, where one would 
have expected to find them shrivelled, like the flowers.
I bought at the 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
223 
same time several roots of the Butterfly Orchis, and one of 0.
maculata.
The seed-vessels of the Butterfly Orchis in most instances swellfd off, and 
I think every one upon the 0.
maculata was fertilized.
I examined the 
latter frequently, and found the pollen-masses had been dislodged.
If it 
had not been for the 0.
maculata growing with the rest, I might have 
referred the condition of the Fly Orchids to the absence of insects on ac- 
count of the rainy weather, but as they all grew together and flowered 
at the same time (or nearly so), insects could as well get at the Flies as 
at the others.
Wm. Marshall.
:Ely, 
Bartramia stricta, Brid, 
This Moss, hitherto unknown to Britain, and found only in Spain and 
Portugal, etc., I found in March this year, at Maresfield, Sussex.
From 
£. pomiformis this Moss may be known by its smaller habit, rigid and ap- 
pressed leaves, never crisped, and the fruit-stalk is erect ; the leaves also 
have aristate points.
(I depend on Mr. Mitten's authority for the correct- 
ness of the species.) G.
Davies.
Hypnum dispalatum, Wils, MSS., 
Is a species I find near Lindfield, Sussex.; it is recently separated by 
Mr. Wilson from Hyp7i>um hians, Hedwig, a Sussex plant very near to H.
Swartzii.
Mr. Mitten is of opinion that the distinctions separating H.
dis' 
palatum from H.
Mam are scarcely sufficient to constitute a species.
Search should be made by all bryologists, especially in the south of Eng- 
land, for fruited examples of these and allies, for at present there is much 
controversy about the Eurynchium section of Hypnum.
Idem, Brighton, April, 1861.
Death op the Botanical Guide of Llanberis on Snowdon.
Another of these sad accidents has just happened.* An old and cele- 
brated guide, William Williams, left Llanberis at 10 a.m. on Thursday, to 
conduct a lady and gentleman up Snowdon, thence to descend on the 
Beddgelert side.
Deceased was a noted botanist, and while his party rode 
slowly forward on ponies he indulged in his favourite science, rejoining them 
when he had obtained the plants.
Arrived at the summit, he left them 
again in order to gather some Fenis, taking the direction of Capel Curig, 
when his foot must have slipped, and he was precipitated down a declivity 
of 300 yards.
The party, after waiting an h#ur and a half, descended to 
Beddgelert, and thence wrote to Mr. Williams, of the Victoiia Hotel, 
Llanberis ; but owing to the guide's non-appearance scouts had already 
been sent out, and the body was found lying at the foot of the precipice.
Crowds of persons attended his remains to the grave.
— From the * Times ' 
of June U, 1861.
An account of the death of Dr. Andrew Sinclair, F.L.S., while engaged 
in a botanical expedition in New Zealand, has reached us, particulars of 
which sad occurrence shall be given in our next number, if possible.
* Thursday, the 13th June last ; see * Morning Chronicle,' June 20th, 1861.
324 BOTANICAL NOTB8, NOTICBS, AND QUBBIB8.
Palm.
(Salix cinerea, Orey Sallow,) 
This tree, in some parts of Kent, is called by the common people Palm^ 
which on hearing led me to consider why it was so called.
I thought as 
it came so early into bloom, or catkins, the branches might have been used 
by the early Christians to symbolize JPalm Sunday, the anniversaiy of the 
day on which our Saviour entered Jerusalem, and was met by a multitude 
of people bearing branches of Palms and singing " Osanna in excelsis." 
Palm Sunday is the sixth Sunday in Lent, and tl^ next before Easter, and 
I think this Willow is the most conspicuous of oar trees which shows the 
earliest indications of spring by its foHage and bloom.
I should like to 
know if this tree is called Palm in other parts of England.
T find, on referring to the ' Glossary of Dates, Charters, and Customs of 
the Middle Ages,' by R.
T. Hampson, under Palm Sunday, the following 
interesting note taken from the Cott.
MS.
Claud.
A ii.
fo.
52.
The old 
sermon for 'Dominica in Ramis Palmarum' has the following account 
of the day : — " Grode Cryston men and women, ze know welle dl this day 
is calde Palme Sonnenday : than wyste Ihu tha hist passion was negh, and 
tooke Lazar w^ him, and so ryding on asse hi zode towerde Jeruslem, 
and whanne the pepul herdun tlwt alle zode azennes him, bothe for wondur 
of the man that was reysed from deth to lyve, and also for to done Cryste 
worchep, wherfore many haddon flowres in his way, and many broken 
braunches of olyfe and of palme and keston in the way, and spreddon 
clothus in the way, mixing melody and sungynge thus: Blessed be 
thu, etc.
; but for encheson we have non olyfe that beroth grene leves^ 
we takon in stede of hit hew and palmes wyth, and beroth aboute in pro- 
cess, and so this day we callyn Falme Sonnenday" 
I think we may read palmes wyth, for withy, which is one of the names 
of the Willow, and hew is of course our yew, 
I expect that some of your readers will be able to inform me when this 
ceremony of strewing branches by the early churches commenced, and 
when it was discontinued.
S. Beislt.
CotnmunicaiioM have been received from 
James Lothian ; John Sim ; Sidney Beisley ; E.
J. Ashfield ; Tom Stans- 
field ; W.
Pamplin ; W.
Richardson, jun.
; J.
R. A.
Briggs ; F.
Y. Brocas ; 
W. Winter ; Richard Smith ; Archibald Jerdon ; J.
S. M.
; John Lloyd ; 
G. Frost; F.
Reynolds.
• 
BOOKS, &c., RECEIVED FOR REVIEW.
The Chemist and Druyyist, May Ibth, 
Notes on Books.
The Perth Reporter, May %Uh, 
The Preston Chronicle, May 29^^.
Jackson's Oxford Journal, May \%th.
The Chemist and Druggist, June I5^A.
The Ly'ttelton Times (New Zealand), April Srd, 1861.
{August, 1861.] 225 
BOTANY OF SPAIN.
A Few Days' Botanizing in the North-Eastem Provinces of 
Spain, in April and May, 1860.
No. I.
Catalonia.
There is hardly any country in Europe whose floral treasures are 
less known to botanists than those of Spain.
That country has pro- 
duced few indigenous botanists.
She possesses, practically speak- 
ing, no local Flora ; the only one known to Europe being the 
old, rare, and costly work of Cavanilles, in which, along with such 
of the native plants as were known in his time, descriptions and 
figures are given of the Americj^n and other exotics cultivated 
in the Madrid Botanical Garden.
There, is another book, which 
the present writer had never heard of, but which he saw on a 
bookstall at Barcelona ; a ^ Flora of Spain,^ bearing a date soon 
after the middle of the last century, in which the names given to 
species are Linnsean, but the genera are arranged on the simple 
and primitive plan of alphabetical order.
M. Boissier, to whom 
the botany of the Mediterranean basin is so much indebted, has 
made excursions in several parts of Spain, the botanical results 
of which have been published.
And this is nearly all which has 
been done for Spanish botany.
Yet the country is one of the 
most largely endowed in our quarter of the globe, with the con- 
ditions on which variety of indigenous vegetation depends.
It 
reaches farther south than any country in Europe ; the rock of 
Gibraltar being some fifty miles nearer to the Equator than the 
most southern promontories of Sicily or Greece.
The low lati- 
tude of the northern provinces, compared with England, Ger- 
many, and the greater part of France, is more than compensated 
by their mountainous character, which renders their vegetation a 
copious sample of all northern climates, to the Arctic inclusive.
Modem investigation has shown that there is as marked a 
diflference between the western and eastern Floras, as between 
the northern and southern ; and of this distribution also, both 
branches are fully represented in the Peninsula.
Its northern 
and western coasts, especially if we include Portugal, are the 
typical example of the western or Atlantic Flora; while the dry 
eastern districts, from the Pyrenees to Carthagena (and no do'abt 
N. S.
VOL.
V. 2 G 
226 BOTANY OP SPAIN.
[AuffUSt, 
the south coast also)^ belong in all respects to the Mediterranean 
portion of the eastern botanical region.
Of soils there are all 
varieties, from the richest alluvion to the barest granitic or 
calcareous rock; and the proportion of waste is probably un- 
equalled in any European country, Greece and Turkey excepted.
That a country with these attractions to botanists, should have 
been so little explored by them, is an effect, doubtless, of the 
same causes which have made, until lately, the resort of travellers 
thither, for any but commercial purposes, comparatively infre- 
quent ; the disturbed state of the country through civU war, the 
danger from banditti, and the absence of the facilities for travel- 
ling afforded by roads, inns, and means of conveyance.
The first 
two of these hindrances have completely, and, it is to be hoped, 
permanently disappeared.
Civil wars are ended, and brigands are 
now never heard of.
The remaining difficulties are in a course 
of rapid removal.
Security and freedom — for in spite of the im- 
perfections of her institutions and of her administration, Spain is 
a free country — are producing their natural fruits.
The impulse 
given to the national mind by political emancipation ; the free- 
dom of speaking and printing which has been enjoyed for nearly 
a generation ; the downfall of the Inquisition, and the decline of 
the great enemy of modern ideas, the Catholic hierarchy (for 
Spain, though still a Catholic, is no longer a priest-ridden coun- 
try) have brought that fine people once more into the full cur- 
rent of European civilization.
In the material department of na- 
tional improvement, Spain is rapidly recovering her lost ground.
Instead of the desolate and neglected appearance which we are 
taught to expect, every province which I visited, except the 
naturally arid and unfertile plain of Aragon, wore the appearance 
of diligent and careful agriculture, and not unfrequently of active 
and successful manufacturing industry.
The soil of Spain will soon 
be completely intersected by railroads.
The lines from Madrid to 
Valencia and Alicante, from Cadiz through Xeres and Seville to 
Cordova, are open throughout.
Of those from Madrid to -the 
French frontier, at both extremities of the Pyrenean chain, large 
portions have been opened, as well as many shorter and branch 
railways.
The common roads are now numerous, and some of 
them good.
The diligences surprise one by their number.
Their 
rapidity was already noted at a time when the state of the roads 
seemed hardly compatible with that quality.
But what most 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
227 
surpassed my expectation was the inns.
My experience is indeed 
limited to a few provinces..
There, however, they are not only, in 
the great towns, very tolerable, but even in small roadside places 
we found them equal to the small country inns of France.
The 
hotels of Madrid, indeed, cannot be compared to those of the 
great towns of France, and are inferior to those of some places 
in Spain itself; but Madrid, except in being the seat of the 
government and Court, is the capital of Castile rather than of 
Spain.
At Barcelona, Valencia, and Zaragoza, there are hotels 
about on a par with those of provincial towns of secondai:y rank 
in France; while not only at places like Tarragona or Guada- 
laxara, but even at an insignificant village like Alcolea, on the 
plateau of Castile, a hamlet distinguished by nothing but by 
beiug one of the stopping-places of the diligences from Madrid to 
Zaragoza, we found a roadside inn at which it was possible to 
sleep and even to make some stay in comfort.
I should not in- 
deed advise any one to travel in these provinces in the months 
of August and September, both on account of the heat, and of 
the plague of insects which might at that season be expected.
But these months are later or earlier than a botanist in the 
south of Europe has any inducement to travel.
Botanists, 
walking tourists, and all who are accustomed to penetrate into 
the nooks and comers of a country, will find Spain, in the present 
day, no more closed to them than any other part of Europe.
I should not presume to offer as worthy of attention, such 
fragmentary notices as I could pick up in a mere run through 
any country whose botany was known, and which possessed local 
Floras.
Even as regards Spain, my passing observations have 
little of the value which would belong to those of a profound 
botanist.
My only qualifications are delight in the subject, and 
some acquaintance with a considerable portion of the general 
Flora of Southern Europe.
I have therefore to apologize be- 
forehand for many deficiencies, and doubtless for some errors.
It requires a really good botanist to investigate the plants of a 
country, with a universal '^ Species Plantarum '^ for his sole guide : 
neither can a traveller carry about with him De CandoUe^s ^ Pro- 
dromus^ and Kunth^s 'Enumeratio,' which, moreover, even joined 
together, are not complete ; and to determine plants by them 
afterwards from dried specimens, is a task of which eveiy one 
knows the difficulty.
The books I had with me were the ^ Flore 
228 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
[^Atigust, 
de France/ by Grenier and Godron ; Woods^ ^ Tonrist^s Flora ' 
(in which Spain is not included) ; and by way of a general Flora, 
the Compendium of Persoon, which, notwithstanding the ex- 
treme brevity and frequent want of precision of its descriptions, 
enabled me to determine some plants which I could not otherwise 
have identified.
I must premise further, that the only mode of 
travelling in Spain (except on horseback) being by public con- 
veyances, want of time, and of information as to halting-places, 
confined us for the most part to journeys from one large town to 
another; and the rapid pace of the diligences precluded even 
that common resource of Continental travelling, taking advantage 
of hills for pedestrian exploration of roadsides.
My experience 
therefore of Spanish botany was mostly confined to the imme- 
diate vicinity of considerable towns.
Of the intermediate spaces 
I saw, in general, only what could be seen from a diligence 
drawn by from ten to sixteen mules at full gallop, or through the 
windows of a railway carriage ; and thus, although I passed a 
whole month in Spain, I had but a few days of real botanizing 
during that period, which extended from the middle of April to 
the middle of May, in an extremely backward season.
It is a 
proof of the botanical riches pf the country, that with only these 
opportunities and such imperfect qualifications, I can still furnish 
a respectable list of plants.
The province which I first visited, and of which I saw most, 
was Catalonia; which, both botanically and geologically, may 
serve as a representative of the whole north-east region of Sprain.
It differs from Aragon and Valencia chiefly in being more 
mountainous.
Its northern portion is a confused heap of moun- 
tains ; and all the way to Barcelona these come down to, or very 
near, the sea.
Towards Barcelona they open out into a crescent 
of no great depth, leaving a semicircular plain, in the centre of 
which, on the sea, stands this fine city, rich in the signs of 
prosperous industry, and hemmed in by a girdle of populous 
villages as prosperous as itself.
Close beside it, on a hill culti- 
vated to the top, is the celebrated but not formidable-looking 
fortress of Monjuich, the scene of so many exploits in the old wars.
The plain is rich and fertile, without artificial irrigation, at least 
in the usual Spanish manner, by canals.
Such irrigational ap- 
paratus as I saw (all of which was quite close to Barcelona) con- 
sisted of those curious irrigation-towers, the work of the Saracens, 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
229 
which form a conspicuous, and, at first sight, a puzzling feature 
in the country about Palermo.
The plain is crossed here and 
there by gullies, cut deep into the soil by the torrents of rain 
which must descend at certain seasons from the adjacent moun- 
tains.
The conditions of soil and climate in Catalonia, are much the 
same as in the Mediterranean provinces of France, and the 
botany accordingly is very similar.
It is the country of the 
Olive, the Fig, the Vine, and, further south, of the spreading and 
shady but stiflF-leaved Caruba [Ceratonia Siliqua) but not of the 
Orange and the Myrtle.
The Aloe {Agave americana), and the 
Prickly Pear {Cactus Opuntia) are found ; but not, as in Sicily, 
in wild abundance, forming a great feature in the landscape.
The first chiefly appears in the form of hedges (as in Roussillon) ; 
and the Cactus I did not observe further north than Tarragona.
There too I first came upon the Palmetto {Cham(erops humilis), 
the dwarfish representative of the mighty family of Palmes ; that 
stifi* low prickly bush which half covers with its che^mux-de-frise 
of fan-like leaves the vast wastes of Sicily.
It abounds also on 
the line of road from Tarragona to Valencia, and its fibres are 
made into a kind of matting, the production of which is part of 
the domestic industry of the ccJlintry.
The plants of the Catalo- 
nian landscape were chiefly those of the rocky calcareous wilds of 
Languedoc and Provence, called locally Garrigues, from the pro- 
vincial name (according to M.
Leonce de Lavergne) of the dwarf 
evergreen Oak which covers them; the Quercus coccifera, in 
which the Kermes insect, the European variety of the cochineal,^ 
elaborates its brilliant dye.
This, and Quercus Hex, are the 
principal representatives of the old Order Amentacea.
Pistada 
Lentiscus, the Mastic-tree of Scripture (to my surprise I saw 
little of the still fin er P.
Terebinthus, though equally or more 
common in the south of France) ; the fragrant Tree-Heath 
{Erica arborea) ; the still more powerfully odorous woody 
Thyme {Thymus vulgaris), inferior in beauty, but superior in 
odour to our T, Serpyllum (which grows there also) ; that common 
southern plant, the Rosemary {Rosmarinus officinalis) ; the Spa- 
nish Broom of our gardens {Spartium Junceum) with its intoxi- 
cating perfume; the prickly Broom of the south of France 
{Genista Scorpius), which though humbler in stature than our 
tall Furze, colours the landscape in spring with similar masses of 
230 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
[AuffUSt, 
brilliant yellow, while it projects its sword-like flowering branches 
vertically and laterally, like the dwarf autumnal Furze of our 
commons ; these form the most conspicuous clothing of the un- 
cultivated ground in the coast region of Catalonia.
The honeyed 
Koniga maritima, in flower at all seasons, and especially after 
other flowers have disappeared, covers the ground, both waste 
and cultivated, to great distances from the sea; and another 
winter plant, Diplotaxis erucoides (which is brought into Rome 
by cartloads in full flower throughout January), adorns the cul- 
tivated lands with its light-grey cruciform blossoms.
If to these 
we add several species of Cisttis and Helianthemum (of which 
hereafter), a tolerably complete idea is given of the vegetation, as 
it exhibits itself at this season to an eye merely wandering over 
the face of the country.
To. proceed to local details; the plants of Barcelona maybe 
divided into those of the plain, and those of the crescent of low 
calcareous mountains which overlook it.
The brightest flower of 
the plain, in these spring months, is Hypecoum procumbens^ a 
Papaveraceous plant, with a flower like that of Chelidonium majxiSy 
and about as large, though the plant itself is small in comparison.
It hap a long, crooked pod, and its leaves are cut like those of an 
Erodium.
Notwithstanding thetname procumbenSy the plant, 
though spreading, is erect, and grows copiously among the corn, 
in appearance like an agrarian RanunculuSy of greater size and 
finer quality than R.
arvensis.
I found this plant in other parts 
of Spain, and I had already found it near Perpignan.
I will 
not affirm thlit some of it may not be H.
grandiflorum, if there 
be any real diflerence between the two.
I met with another un- 
doubtedly difierent Hypecoum further south, which will be com- 
memorated in its place.
Of Ranunculi I noticed near Barcelona 
only R.
bulbosuSy and the aquatic but not batrachian species 
rnuricatus, allied to sceleratus, but with a fruit of a somewhat 
similar character to arvensis.
A fine Fumaria, with large white 
and purple flowers (which I also saw near Perpignan), seemed to 
be muralis of Grenier and Godron; but those authors, I ob- 
serve, have on reconsideration decided their plant to be not one 
species but three, none of them the true muralis of Sender.
The Crucifera I noticed were those common plants of southern 
France, Sisymbrium Irio and obttisangulum, and Lepidium Draba.
Reseda Phyteuma, a plant nearly resembling odorata, but without 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
231 
its smelly was here^ as in most parts of the south of Europe, 
abundant.
This plant reaches so far north in France, that it 
might well have been looked for in England.
The family Gera- 
mace(B is represented by Erodium malachoides.
Oxalis comicur- 
lata, and the brittle bush Coriaria myrtifolia, with .
its currant- 
like racemes clothing its dry -looking branches long before the 
leaves come out, are here common.
Of Leguminous plants, the 
most worthy of notice is Lathyrus OchruSy a procumbent species, 
with large oval leaflets, (like a greater and paler L, Aphaca,) 
which haunts, as in Sicily, low moist places in the alluvial 
ground.
The place of our Lotus comiculatus is taken by another 
Sicilian plant, the equally yellow and not less elegant L.
omi- 
thopodioides.
Another Leguminous plant, with oval leaflets and 
round leaf-like stipules, is Arthrolobium (formerly Omithoptis) 
scorpioides.
Of Rosacea, the principal is that happily ubiquitous 
shrub, the Hawthorn ; I did not examine whether in both its 
forms or only in one.
It is curious that the form moriogyna is 
sometimes the only one found in a large tract of country.
Ac- 
cording to Gussone, there is no .other in Sicily.
The only Po- 
tentilla I saw was P.
verna, which is rather frequent.
The Com- 
posites were those common in the south : Sonchus tenerrimtis, 
like our common Sowthistle, but much more fragile and delicate ; 
Picridium vulffare, with its urceolate flowers and hard scarious 
phyllaries ; that ornament of banks, Urospermum Dalechampii, 
and the coarser U.
picroides; the small Marigold, Cakndula 
arvensis ; this last is found as far, north as Normandy, and I 
believe no botanist knows^ any more than myself, why it does 
not grow in Kent.
Who can tell why Specularia Speculum, the 
Venus^s Looking-glass of our gardens, comes up to the very 
Straits of Dover as a cornfield plant, while, though so generally 
cultivated in England, we never see it wild, even as an escape 
from culture?
— or why Orlaya grandiflora, which I have gathered 
in cornfields between Boulogne and St. Omer, should not be 
found in England at aU ?
— or why that commonest of Continental 
weeds, even on the sands opposite the English coast, Eryngium 
campestre, should be the rarest of rare plants in England, and 
should not spread even when introduced as a ballast plant.
These 
secrets of vegetation will, perhaps, be some day unveiled.
The 
only Thistles in flower near Barcelona, at this early season, were 
the same as in Sicily ; Carduus pycnocephcdv^s (allied to C.
tenuu 
282 BOTANY OP SPAIN.
[AUffUSt, 
florus) and the elegant Galactites tomentosa.
Of Boraginece, I 
observed the common Borage^ and a fine Echium, perhaps the 
violaceum of the Channel Islands^ but it was not sufficiently ad- 
vanced to enable me to distinguish it with perfect certainty from 
E. plantagineum, one of the handsomest of the tribe^ which^ as 
well as others^ has been confounded under the name violaceum.
The ScrophtUarinciB were Antirrhinum Orontium ; the brilliantly 
yellow lAnaria supina ; ScrophtUaria peregrina of Italy and Sicily; 
S. canina of southern and middle Europe.
The genus Euphorbia 
was largely represented : E.
Pepltis and helioscopia of course ; 
those fine plants serrata and Characias, the first common in the 
south of France, the second everywhere in the South {E.
Cypa- 
riasias and gerardiana, so frequent in southern Europe, I did not 
see) ; but the principal Euphorbia of the plain of Barcelona is E, 
terracina, less striking in appearance than some of these, but more 
curious when examined.
Thecalycinal glands characteristic of the 
genus, which in this, as in many other species, are of a crescent 
form, are terminated in E.
terracina by a pair of setae, exactly 
resembling the antennse of an insect.
The JJ^onocotyledonece which 
I noted were that common weed Muscari comosum^thQ wild original 
of one of the ornaments of our gardens, and Asphodelus fistulosus, 
the smallest European species of its genus, not general in the 
south of France, though not unknown there, but most plentiful 
here as well as in Sicily.
Of Ferns, no abundance could be 
expected in these dry climates, but the Ceterach grew plenti- 
fully here and elsewhere, as did also the Maidenhair {Adiantum 
Capillus^Veneris) , wherever there was local dampness and depth 
of shade.
The mountain Flora of Barcelona is much more copious, and 
as I explored it twice, at some interval of time, I can give a 
rather fuller account of it.
Apart from their form and compo- 
sition, these heights would scarcely be entitled to a more ambi- 
tious name than that of hills.
The range, at least this part of 
it, is of small breadth, and the line of summit looks down upon 
a wide extent of country, rugged and rocky enough, but of little 
elevation, though varied with occasional eminences, among which 
the lofty and many-pinnacled ridge of Monserrat is supreme.
The rocks of the maritime range are calcareous, like those of 
Bas-Languedoc and Provence, and the mountain sides are cut 
through by deep ravines, of which the gullies that intersect the 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
233 
plain are a continuation.
The rocks, though in most parts 
thickly clothed with bushy shrubs, show few trees, except a pine- 
grove here and there.
The species of the Pine I did not verify, 
but it had the aspect of P.
halepensis, the common Pine of the 
Mediterranean provinces of France.
The remaining wood was 
chiefly /fear, kept low and bushy by the woodcutters.
The floral 
treasures of this range are considerable.
Leguminosa are the 
most abundant.
Besides the thorny Genista Scorpius and the 
Spanish Broom, I noticed two other plants of kindred character : 
the Furze which fills so large a place in the winter Flora of 
Provence {Ulea^ parviflorttSy or provincialis), and the thorny 
Cytisus, which covers Sicily in March with its yellow blossoms, 
Calycotome spinosa,.
unless I am mistaken in this last, which was 
not yet in flower.
Of non- thorny Cytisi there were as many as 
three : C.
candicans {Genista of some authors), one of the most 
elegant, and here the most flowery of this elegant genus; C 
triflorus, a shrub of the height of a man, which blackens in dry- 
ing, and with which all who have botanized near Naples must be 
familiar ; and the dwarfish C argenteus (by some called Argyro- 
, hbium linmBanum), one of the Garrigue plants of the south of 
France.
Anthylliswas represented by A.
tetraphylla, a Palermo 
plant; Trifolium, by the well-named T.
stellatum; Medicago 
by several, which, for want of sufficiently developed fruits, I did 
not determine, but which were apparently some of the common 
ones of the south of France, — M, minima^ denticulata, pr^Bcox, 
Gerardiy orbicularis, or marginata.
The commonest of the Co- 
ronilke of southern France, C, Emerus, made a large display of 
its loosely hung blossoms.
Here, as everywhere in Spain, the 
Hippocrepis comosa, the charm of English chalk hills, brought 
pleasant remembrances of the floral beauties of Surrey and Kent, 
thdugh often, doubtless, confounded with H.
glauca, a plant equally 
commos, and if specifically different, perfectly resembling comosa 
in habit and general appearance.
The Lathyri were represented 
by the delicate and slender L.
setifglitLS, and the large-flowered 
Ij. Clymenum {tenuif otitis of Gussone), which I have also found 
at Perpignan and at Palermo.
Vicia pfesented me with V, tenui- 
folia of Roth, an improved likeness of V.
Cracca ; and the much 
less beautiful trifiora of Tenore, the first plant I met with which 
is not a native of France.
Astragalus offered a species rather 
insignificant in appearance, A.
sesameus, a plant not unlike, at 
N-S.
VOL.
V. 2 H 
284 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
[Augtist, 
the first glance^ to Bisserrula Pelednus ; and another, the com- 
monest, but one of the most gorgeous of this splendid genus, 
which grows in Normandy, and ought to grow in Kent, A.
mons- 
pessulanus.
My Catalonian specimens were not of the usual 
colour, but paler, and with a mixture of yellow; a character 
attributed to the neighbouring A, incantMy but not, so far as I 
know, to any form at monspessulantis ; this plant, however, seemed 
to possess the essential characters of the more common species.
Among Leguminos<B not yet in flower, I may mention two 
common plants of southern Europe, the bushy Dorycnium suffru^ 
ticosum, with its small round heads of pale flowers, which I have 
known to whiten at a distance large spaces of ground ; and the 
trefoiled Psoralea bUuminosa, with its elegant flowering clusters, 
and long axillary peduncles.
The greatest ornaments ' however of these bushy hills were 
the Ciatiy which form in some places a great part of the whole 
vegetation.
Without reckoning Helianthemums, there were four 
species of Cistm proper ; bushes covered all over with large and 
brilliant blossoms; the decumbent salvuefolius, with its milk- 
white cups ; the erect albidus, with its grey foliage and delicate 
mallow-coloured flowers, larger than the largest wild Rose ; the 
stiflBish, narrow-leaved monspeliensis, with flowers rather smaller 
thsin salviafolitis, flat and wheel-like, instead of cup-shaped; and 
a rarer species than any of these, C Ledon, which, with monspe- 
liensis, by their viscous touch, and rich resinous smell, form a 
transition to the real European Gum Cisti, C.
ladanifertts and 
laurifolius.
The Cisti, happily for Spanish landscape, are, like 
the EriccB, gregarious plants, and, of all Cisti I know, none are 
so gregarious as C Ledon, Near Perpignan, and on the plateau 
of Morieres, near Avignon, it covers acres of ground.
Of Carol- 
liflora not previously mentioned, I noticed a Verbascum, pro- 
bably V, Boerhavii ; the deep blue Lithospermum pwrparoccsru-' 
leumy not unknown in England, and one of the most frequent as 
well as beautiful of the wood and thicket plants of the South in 
April and May ; Veronica Teucrium, which vies with, if it does 
not surpass our beautifut Charmedrys ; that curious plant, La^ 
vandula Stcechas, named, like several other plants, from the isles 
of Hyeres, but tolerably general in the south of Jlurope ; and 
Stachys hiria, a plant in France confined to the extreme south- 
eastern corner.
Other plants in flower were, a rare but rather 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
235 
dull-looking Polygala, P.
rupestris, groTmig in clefts of the 
rocks; Paronychia argentea, one of the ornaments of Sicily, 
carpeting the ground with its silvery inflorescence and herbage ; 
Osyris cUba, a scraggy bush of the family EUagnea, abundant in 
the South, which, covered at this season with yellow blossoms, 
fills the air all around with a powerful fragrance like that of 
the Galia.
At the back of the ridge, looking towards the north 
and north-west, I came upon plants of a decidedly English cha- 
racter.
Euphorbia Characias and serrata were replaced by E.
amygdahides ; and I found here the first Orchid I saw in Spain, 
Cephalanthera ensifolia, a rare, but still a British species.
Our 
common wild Strawberry was occasionally visible.
These were 
nearly all the plants of interest which I saw in flower.
Most of 
the Composite were not yet in a state to be recognizable.
The 
only ones in flower were Senecio vulgaris and viscosus.
Inula 
viscosa, B,nd Phagnalon {or Cony za) «aa?fl/ife were distinguishable.
The plants not in flower included several of the most character- 
istic shrubs of southern Europe : the gorgeous Pomegranate, the 
evergreen Phillyrcea media, the common Arbutus {A.
Unedo), and 
one of the most powerfully and sweetly odoriferous of European 
climbers, which retains its fragrance for many years in the herba- 
rium, Smilax aspera.
To these let me add the perfoliate Lonicera 
implexa, and another Honeysuckle, which was probably etrusca, 
the other common one of the South ; for our Woodbine is in 
southern Europe a mountain plant, and our garden L.
caprifo- 
Hum I have seen wild only in Italy.
The curious -^^/^ara^'M* 
acutifolius ; Bupleurum rigidum, one of the oddest species of a 
genus already anomalous among Umbellifers ; and Daphne Gni- 
dium, an ornament of late summer and autumn, complete the 
list of my observations in the Barcelona mountains, with the ex- 
ception of Monserrat, the copious botany of which I keep for a 
separate notice.
Many of the plants above enumerated, I afterwards met with 
in the same line of country further north, where another ever- 
green oak, the Cork tree {Quercus Suber), abounds, and its pro- 
duce is an important article of commerce.
Here, too, the English 
Broom, Sarothamnus scoparius, makes its appearance, even in 
the plain, at least near the foot of the mountains.
Other com- 
mon English plants, Stellaria Holostea, Chj'ysanthemum segetum, 
Centaurea Cyantcs, are abundantly visible to the passing eye.
286 BOTANY OP SPAIN.
[AuffUSt, 
together with Lavandula StcBchaSy Cistus aUridus and salviafolim, 
Ulex parviflonuf, Euphorbia terracina and amygdahides, Muscari 
comosum, and an Ononis, probably Natrix.
In the woody hills 
near Gerona, in the middle of May, I had a botanical walk of 
considerable interest.
A deep shady wood of deciduous trees 
afforded the beautiful Geum sylvaticum (otherwise atlanticum).
This, with Onobrychis supina, and the dwarfish and quaint Litho- 
spermum apulum, I observed nowhere else in Spain.
I found also 
(besides many of the Barcelona plants) the beautiful Allium ro- 
seum, the rush-like Aphyllanthes monspeliensis, with its large and 
curiously lined azure flowers, the narrow-leaved Phillyraa (P.
angustifolia) of our shrubberies; a Sideritia, (I believe S, hirmta); 
and a characteristically southern tree of the family Vrtice€B, Celtis 
australisy the Micocoulier of the south of France : not to men- 
tion Helleborus foBtidus, Aquilegia vulgaris, Alyssum calycimum, 
PotentUla reptans, and sundry common Ranunculi and Heli- 
anthema.
{To he continued.) 
MAIANTHEMUM BIFOLnJM.
. To the Editor of the ' Phytologist' 
Sir, — ^At the beginning of the present month (June, 1861), I 
visited the habitat of the Maianthemum bifolium, in Forge Valley, 
near Scarborough, and found it growing in great abundance.
The 
following remarks refer to it : — It ei^tends about ninety yards in 
a continuous line, on the brow of a steep cliff, with a north- 
easterly aspect, and in some places reaches down the embank- 
ment twenty yards or upwards.
Within these limits it is in 
some places so dense that a foot could not be put down without 
treading on some of the barren leaves.
It is shaded by Oak, 
Mountain Ash, and Birch, and grows in black peat.
I think 
that it is to be wished, with regard to this plant, that some one 
of our eminent botanists would visit the locality, and give his 
opinion as to its claims as a native.
Should it be denied a place 
among our indigenous plants, it would become a question what 
period of time would it require to establish it in the manner it 
is.
Its companion, Trientalis europcea, grows in complete beds.
1861.] BOTANICAL PROFESSOBSHIP^ CAMBBIDGE.
237 
and reminded me forcibly of the beds of seedling Rhododendrons 
that one occasionally sees in nurseries.
Near to the same spot, in 
a sinfflar soil, and with the same aspect, grows Lastrea Fcenisecii.
I had also the good fortune, early in the spring, to meet with 
Carea?
diffitata, in the same valley.
I did not find merely a few 
solitary roots, but it was generally dispersed throughout the 
valley.
Dried specimens of any of the above-named plants, I 
am agreeable to exchange or give to any lover of botany.
Fredk.
Reynolds.
Ayton, near Scwrhorough^ \^i% June^ 1861.
BOTANICAL PEOFESSOESHTP, CAMBRIDGE.
The readers of the ' Phytologist,^ and British botanists in 
general, will be well pleased to hear that " Charles Cardale Ba- 
bington, Esq., M.A., of St. John's College, F.R.S., F.L.S., etc., 
was unanimously elected Professor of Botany, in the room of the 
late very sincerely lamented Professor Henslow.'^ Mr. Babington 
is Well known as the author of the ^ Manual of British Botany,' 
a work which placed our Flora in its real relationship with the 
vegetation of Europe, as expounded by continental botanists; 
and which has extended the knowledge of our native plants more 
than any work since the publication of the ' English Flora ' of 
Sir J.
E. Smith.
Very great progress has been made in the 
accurate distinction and critical comparison of our native plants, 
since the general circulation of the Manual.
Professor Babington 
is also the author of a Flora of the Channel Islands, a Flora of 
Bath and its environs, and of a Flora of Cambridgeshire, recently 
reviewed in the ' Pby tologist.' He is, besides, one of the editors 
of the 'Annals of Natural History,' and is distinguished as an 
antiquary by his work 'Ancient Cambridgeshire.' 
He is, besides, one of the valued contributors to our pages ; 
and we have much pleasure in announcing to our readers the 
above intelligence, and hope that the Professor may long enjoy 
the honourable position in which he has been placed by the 
unanimous choice of the authorities of his Alma Mater.
238 KENTISH BOTANY.
[AuffUSt, 
KENTISH BOTANY.
Walk from Deal to Folkestone, through JValmer, under the Cliff to 
Kingsdown and St. Margarefs, along the Downs by the South 
Foreland, Dover, Lydden Spout, and Eastwear Bay.
At Deal we refreshed and rested for the night; and next 
morning, the 6th (see ' Phytologist/ vol.
v. p.
213), set out by 
Walmer, Kingsdown, the South Foreland, etc., to Dover.
This 
is not the nearest way to Dover from Deal, but the direct road 
neither affords the fine views nor the rare plants which we had 
the pleasure of collecting on this our fourth day^s excursion.
There are not so many plants to report as on the previous days' 
botanizing, but the following are of far greater interest than the 
majority of those which had hitherto been observed.
About Walmer, on the beach, or between the road and the 
sea.
Reseda lutea, Diphtaxis muralis, Onopordon Acanthium, 
Trifolium fragiferum, T.
scabrum, and the much rarer T, suffo- 
catum were collected.
Linum angustifolium was very plentiful, 
among which a broad-leaved form was seen, which may have 
been mistaken for L.
perenne, a species recorded as occurring in 
these parts.
Marrubium vulgare was seen here for the first time during this 
botanical tour.
Chlora perfoliata, Anthyllis Vulneraria, Fosni- 
culum vulgare, Chenopodium murale, and Ldnaria spuria abounded, 
and several were, notwithstanding the sterility of the soil, very 
luxuriant.
Centranthus ruber, and Linaria Cymbalaria were 
well established on the beach in shingly depressions ; a situation 
in which we had never seen either of these two plants previously.
The plants selected, in all probability, these stations for them- 
selves.
Their establishment there could hardly have been ef- 
fected by human agency.*^ 
* A remark on some plants in this country, usually found only on walls, will 
not here be inappropriate.
The Sedums are usually mural plants in the south-east of England.
Sedum 
aUmMf S.
dcLtyphyUnm are seldom or nerer found here growing on the ground.
They grow on rocks in Scotland, and probably, one of them at least, in the west of 
England, also on rocks.
Bocks in the south of England are as rare as brick walls 
in Scotland ; and these and seyeral other plants are necessarily restricted to what 
are called artificial erections.
But the plants are not necessarily indebted to 
human agency for these artificial localities ; in all probability they selected these 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
239 
At Walmer, or rather on Walmer's shingly beach, on the west 
end of the village, towards Kingsdown, there were observed 
several very luxuriant forms of Medicago denticulata ; the stems 
were quite procumbent, above a foot long, bushy, or with nume- 
rous series of branches, and with only a single twist, or a turn 
and a half, of the cochleate spiral fruit.
During the subsequent portion of our walk we observed other 
gigantic forms of Leguminiferous plants, and these will be men- 
tioned in the sequdi.
Medicago denticulata was probably long considered only a 
variety of M.
maculata on the one hand, and M, minima on the 
other.
It differs from the former in the absence of a spot on 
each leaflet, and it is usually smaller in size.
From the latter it 
differs in its flatter firuit.
The fructification of M.
maculata 
resembles in figure the nave of a cartwheel, having many convo- 
lutions of the spiral.
In M.
denticulata the convolutions are 
few, viz.
from one to three, with flat sides; in M, maculata 
and M, minima, the convolutions are numerous, and the base 
and apex of thecochleate spiral are rounded, not flat.
Also when 
the fruit of M.
denticulata is quite ripe, it is frimished with pro- 
minent radiating ribs, ^d it is also of a black colour.
This Medick, M.
denticulata, has been observed and collected 
during recent years at Wandsworth, near the steamboat-pier; 
also at Southampton, not far from Itchin Ferry, and at Black- 
situations for themselyes ; or selected brick walls and tiled roofs because there was 
no natural site present suited to their economy.
' Some plants have a preference for walls and roo& in this part of the kingdom, 
but are not exdusiTely restricted to such places.
Saxifrctga tridactylites and 
Sedum acre are examples.
These indeed often grow on walls, but in some places 
they grow plentifully on the ground.
Various species thrive equally both on walls 
and on the ground.
Shepherd's-purse (Capsella Burm-paHoris) and Arenaria 
aerpylUfoUa or A, leptoclados are familiar examples.
Parietaria officinalis, 
jAnaria Oymhahvriay Centranthus ruheTf and Cheiranthu Cheiri rarely grow on 
any other situation but on walls.
The first of the last-mentioned four plants is 
uniTersally admitted to be a genuine native ; the three remaining are as uuiver- 
sally branded as certainly introduced, their introduction being at a more or less 
remote period.
These three species, viz.
lAnariay Cheiranthust and CerUranthus, grow in the 
southern parts of our isle on toalb, because here there are but few places where 
rocks of any kind crop out or rise above the surface of the ground.
Bocks there 
are none in the south-east of England, except a few in Sussex, and where the 
chalk, the common substratum of a third part of England, is laid bare by the sea, 
or by the operations of the quarrymen.
Hence but little stress can be laid on the 
240 KENTISH BOTANY.
[Augwt, 
heath and Parson^s Green.
The variety M.
ajnculata has very 
recently been detected at Battersea, on a gravelly heap of soil 
lately laid there to raise the level of the new park.
This park is 
nearly opposite the steam-boat Cadogan Pier, and close to the 
Prince Albert public-house, on the Surrey side of the river.
Before we reached this part of the beach, we lighted on a fine 
colony of young plants of Lavatera arborea (all seedlings), pro- 
duced from the rejectamenta of the adjoining gardens.
It was 
observed in a cottage garden on our way firom Canterbury to 
Sandwich, and it is probably more or less cultivated about Deal 
and Walmer.
The Lavatera will probably remain undisturbed 
in this locality, and it would be grafifying to learn (if any reader 
of this who resides near Walmer, or ever goes thither to botanize 
would inform us) that it is still growing in that place.
Several of 
the plants were in flower, some in firuit, but the greater portion 
were seedlings.
Between Walmer and Kingsdown we looked vigilantly and 
anxiously for Lathyrus maritimus ; and we had the gratification 
of seeing this fine and rare plant in great perfection and profu- 
sion also, scattered over the pebbly beach, not far from Kings- 
fiict of these plants growing on artificial erections, in determining eith^ tiieir 
non-nationality or their nativity.
More confirmatory evidence than the mere fact 
of their growth on walla, in quarrries, and by the coast, must be adduced before 
their alien origin can be satis&ctorily established.
In our excursion along the greatest part of the rock-bound co^t of Kent, our 
attention was much engaged on these points ; and we were inclined to admit that 
there is no valid proof of alienism which can be established against these plants 
firom the stations where ihey are now seen.
Historical testimony might decide the 
point, but this is negative, not positive.
Farietaria offidnaUs grew everywhere, both at the foot of the chalk rock and 
at a distance from it ; so did JSupatorium cannabinum.
Lmaria Cymhalaria and 
Centrawthus ruber ^ neither of them uncommon in Kent, grew in depressions on 
the shingly beach.
Cheiranihus Cheiri was struggling with the rank vegetation of 
Thistles and large Umbellifers, and had well established itself on the earthen ram- 
part of Dover Castle, far enough firom either rocks or walls.
This latter plant 
appeared here and thei'e on the verge of the cliff, all along from the South Fore- 
land to the town of Dover.
It probably grew on the rock below, which was not 
approachable ; it certainly grew well on the thin covering of soil which topped 
the chalk rock.
We were unable to detect, in this locality at least, any natural indications 
of aUenism in the appearance and circumstances of the Wallflower.
Botamsts 
have universally agreed to maintain that it is an alien in England ; but it is not 
easy to discover on what grounds, except that of conteniporary testimony, which 
is often conflicting, and not always supported by Nature herself.
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
241 
down.
AU the specimens were in fruity and a few still in flower 
and fruit both.
There need be no fear about specifying the loca- 
lity as definitely as we can; for there is no risk of robbing the 
station.
The roots of the Sea Pea run so far among the shingle 
that the plant can protect itself from (against) the ravages of 
rapacious plant seekers^ and the greediness of plant sellers.
It 
is desirable that others should enjoy the delight we felt^ even 
though they might not have the time, the patience, nor the per- 
severance to hunt for it so long and assiduously as we did.
This 
was one of our most important captures, it may not be termed a 
discovery ; for the localities, though vaguely given, as " Beach 
near Walmer,'^ " Between Kingsdown and Walmer,^^ and " Be- 
tween Deal and Dover,'^ are probably all meant to signify this 
one station where we saw the plant, very near to Kingsdown, and 
above a mile from Walmer.
The other plants observed in this part of our day^s walk were 
Crambe maritima, here and there sparingly on the shingly beach ; 
Geranium robertianum, the maritime variety ; and a pelorian form 
of Linaria vulgaris, Glaucium luteum, Echium vulgare, etc.
From Kingsdown we walked on to St. Margaret^ s, under the 
cliflT, and a very warm walk it was.
The breeze, though blow- 
ing briskly from the sea, was counteracted by the influence of 
the clifl^, and never reached within a hundred yards of the lofty, 
steep rocks.
We kept botanizing on the underclifi"; the upper 
one was a perpendicular or overhanging chalk rock, on which 
nothing did or could grow.
Here we first lighted upon large plants of Brassica oleracea, 
long past flowering, and far, very far beyond our reach.
We 
subsequently saw them growing on a lower site, on the debris 
of the fhalk, between the road and the sea.
Here abounded 
Erythrcea Centauriuniy or the narrow-leaved variety, which we 
were good-natured enough to consider E.
linariafoUa ; and broad- 
leaved forms also appeared, which we cpuld not prevail on our- 
selves to name E, latifoUa. Gentiana Amarella was in great 
force, as geologists say, and very luxuriant, often a foot high, 
*very broad-leaved and bushy.
Is this the variety or species 
called G.
germanica ?
lAnum angustifolium again appeared, with 
the largest forms of Chlora perfoliata ever seen, and of the most 
intense glaucous hue, with flowers of the deepest possible yellow.
With many other plants seen before, and too tedious to enu- 
N. S.
VOL.
v. 2 I 
242 KENTISH BOTANY.
[AttfflJlSt, 
merate, — ^probably to read about^ — ^there were seen Linaria minora 
Nepeta Cataria, Beta maritima (on the cliff), Cynoglossum officii 
nale, and Pyrethrum maritimum.
Here also Statice spathulata, 
or S.
binervosoy and Crithmum maritimum introduced themselves 
to our notice ; the former of the two claimed, and also got, a 
considerable share of onr attention.
Orobanche minor and Orchis 
pyramidalis we were just able to recognize, though their season 
had long past.
The most common plants of the place were Eupa^ 
torium cannabinum, Parietaria diffusa, and P.
erecta?
most 
abundant on these rocks, and in the interstices of the fallen 
masses ; and Picris hieradoides particularly large and handsome, * 
with deep orange-coloured flowers.
Petroselinum sativum was as well established on the beach near 
St. Margaret's as Linaria Cymbalaria and Centranthus ruber are 
near Walmer.
At St. Margaret's, on the cliff, we saw the Dover variety of 
Silene nutans, a very coarse, large, and rough-leaved form of this 
plant.
It differs very much from the delicate slender form in 
which this species appears on the rock whereon Nottingham 
Castle is built.
The walk to Dover along the narrow seashore, between the 
waves and the cliff, was no further practicable because of the tide, 
which at this time approached too near the rock to permit a 
comfortable or safe passage in this direction, and no other way- 
was left but that over the downs, along the sea margin of the 
cliff, by the South Foreland.
Prom this lofty eminence we had 
an extensive view of the sea and of the whole coast from the 
North Foreland all along to Shakspeare's Cliff, beyond Dover.
We could see plainly all Pegwell Bay, where we were yesterday, 
with the lofty cliffs about Margate ; also the towns of Sandwich 
and Deal.
Walmer village, with its castle, which has not much 
of a castellated appearance, was in the foreground of this exten- 
sive prospect.
The coast of France to the right of Calais, and 
the steep chalk rocks bounding on the south what are called the 
Chops of the Channel, were very distinctly seen.
Proceeding 
along by the light-houses, the town of Dover appeared snugly 
situated between the hills and the shore, with its future harbour 
of refuge on the left, and its majestic castle on the right.
This 
was a view worth going seventy miles to look at ; and it would 
be easier to imagine the delight of the spectator than to describe 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
243 
his feelings^ if he have any feelings, or any sympathy with the 
beautiful and the picturesque.
We were looking for plants^ not for sublime scenery ; and oiur 
description^ like our subject^ ought to be of a simple character ; 
therefore no attempt is macle to describe scenes which made a 
very deep impression on our feelings^ and which will never be 
forgotten.
They may be more durable than the stupendous cliffs 
themselves^ wluch have existed nobody but the geologist knows 
for how many myriads of ages.
Our business was to observe and 
chronicle humbler objects.
On these bare lofty hills, exposed to every wind that blows, we 
observed Spirtea FUipendvia, Erigeron acris, Silene nutans, /8, 
the variety which gro^s about these coasts; also Onopordum 
Acanthium, quite at home, but not so stately as in gardens, where 
it is dignified with the name of Scotch Thistle, probably because 
it does not grow in Scotland ; abo Carlina vulgaris and Carduus 
acaulis were there, though mostly in an incipient condition.
Further on Cheiranthus Cheiri became quite a common plant, 
neither on rocks nor on walls, for there are no rocks above the 
surface, nor walls on these bleak downs, yet it appeared to be well 
satisfied with its situation, and throve and increased prodigiously, 
to the great chagrin of botanical geographers, who obstinately, if 
not maliciously, confine its locality to.
strictly artificial erections, 
'^ almost all its habitats on walls and buildings^^ !
! !
The cliffs near Dover may be called artificial, for every portion 
of the earth is the work of the Almighty artificer, though they 
do not owe their being to human agency.
This plant, the Wall- 
flower, has taken a fancy to the Castle Hill, and spreads profusely 
among the rank growth of Thistles, Helminthias, and other coarse 
plants.
Part at least of this huge rampart may be artificial, in the 
general and restricted sense of this term, but even here the Cheir- 
anthus, if not native, is certainly spontaneous.* 
* K the area of the two plants Cheiranthus Cheiri and Matthiola incana be con- 
trasted, it will be seen that the "Wallflower has what may be called a general distri- 
bution, or it is found in most counties of England and Scotland.
In the former 
the county of Cheshire ought to be added, for it grows on the rock on which 
Beeston Castle is built (see * Phytologist' for January 1860, p.
6), and it grows on 
rocks in other parts of the island, from the Gloucester Aron to the banks of the 
fair Tay. Between the South Foreland and Dover Castle it grows on the ground : 
in this tract there are neither rocks nor old walls.
It is true that the little soil of 
the South Downs lies on the chalk rock, but so does the soil of the North Downs, 
244 KENTISH BOTANY.
[AUffUSi, 
In a cultivated part of the downs^ opposite to Dover Castle on 
the east^ plenty of Linaria spuria, Calamintha AcinoSy and Lo^ 
Hum multiflorum was growing; also Sinapis nigra and S.alba, 
the former very plentiful^ and the latter not scarce.
This is a 
rare plant in Kent^ though extremely abundant in Surrey.
Here 
Diploiaxis muralis was profusely distributed all over the culti- 
vated parts of these hills.
We went round the external rampart, crossing the meadow 
between the Deal road and the Castle, and firom this elevation, 
with the Castle on the left and the town before us and on our 
right, we had a most satisfactory and very pleasing view of this 
charmingly situated ancient seaport.
Dover is snugly ensconced in one of the deepest combs of the 
south-eastern downs.
This term ' comb ' is almost peculiar to the 
chalk formation of the south of England, and always signifies a 
more or less deep depression stretching into the hills at a right 
angle, or forming some angle with the main ric^e which indi- 
cates the direction of these remarkable elevations.
The comb at the bottom of which Dover is situated, may be 
compared to a basin with about a fourth part of its circum- 
scribing sides broken off, and this broken-off part may represent 
where the common turf is chiefly formed of Srachifpodium pinnatum and Fegtvbca 
ovina ; but in these parts the WalIfloiv«r does not grow as it grows between St.
Margaret's and Dover.
The other plant to be contrasted with the Wallflower is Matthiola incana, 
which is recorded as having been found in only two places in England, viz.
near Hastings, Sussex, and in the Isle of Wight ; yet this rare plant, found in 
only two localities, is called native, or a denizen, which may be whichever you 
please, gentle or uncapricious reader !
— and the Wallflower, for which hundreds 
of localities could readily be furnished, is branded as a certainly introduced plant 
or aHen !
! !
It will be, or it may be, alleged that the Wallflower, which abounds on the 
downs, at the verge of the cliff near the South Forelaixd and Dover, came originally 
from the small gardens of the coastguard men and from the Castle.
This allega- 
tion is far from improbable ; but is it not also probable that the Stock in the Isle 
of Wight came also from the gardens of the fishermen about Freshwater ?
Ad- 
mitting that these threw away the old stems of the plants, — which is the common 
practice, — a stiff breeze from the north-east would easily blow them along the downs 
and over Ihe cliff.
Among the rejectamenta of Freshwater's little bay, or cove, I 
found stems and fruit of Lavatera arhorea^ a plant which is common in the gar- 
dens of Freshwater.
It is not so common however as the Stock is, and the conse- 
quence may have been that the latter grows on the cliffs of the Isle of Wight, 
while the former is unknown in the Isle except as a garden plant.
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
245 
the side of Dover which is opposite to the seabeach.
The town 
fills the bottom of the comb^ and has extended along the shore 
to the east, under the hill on which the Castle stands.
When 
the traveller enters from Deal, the Castle is on the left.
When 
he arrives from the Continent, the Castle is on the right, and 
the new fortress building on the west of Dover is on the left- 
hand.
The background is completely shut in by steep hills, so 
that Dover is open only on the south, or that part which is oppo- 
site to the sea.
Entering either from Deal or from Folkestone 
the visitor tbtains a bird's-eye view of the town.
This is surely one of the most singularly situated and the most 
picturesque of England's numerous and beautiful urban locali- 
ties.
Its environs, especially its clifls, are most favourable for 
botanical pursuits ; but as it was now late in the season, and, 
what was worse, late in the day, we had but little leisure to note 
the rare plants of this ancient military and naval station.
We 
had made arrangements for sleeping at Folkestone, seven or eight 
miles further, and determined to take Lydden Spout in our way, 
therefore haste and good speed were both requisite, in order that 
we might reach our quarters in proper time.
* 
The only notable plant observed at Dover was Diplotawis 
tenuifoUa, which abounded on the walls, and was not scarce 
along both sides of the road between Dover and Haugham (here 
pronounced Hauffham) .
The sun was^ setting as we scoured along the land side gf 
the Shakspeare, as they call this celebrated precipice, a singtdar 
and well-merited honour to England's greatest poet.
It was dark before we reached the houses on the cliflf,* which 
are occupied by the Prevjentives and their families.
A little boy 
belonging to one of the coastguard-men volunteered to conduct 
us down the precipice by a zigzag rude staircase, consisting of 
four hundred and forty-four steps, united by several inclined 
planes by way of landings.
* Future botanists who may follow our track (for there are good pickings, 
rich gleanings, obtainable after those who have spent more time on this coast than 
we could afford), should, instead of going on straight to Lydden Spout, d^end the 
cliff by the " Shrimpers' Steps," a short distance beyond the Shakspeare, and 
botanize along the shore till they reach Lydden Spout.
We suppose the way 
between the cliffs and the sea is passable at all times, but this should be ascer- 
tained.
On reaching Lydden Spout, either the seashore or the top of the cliff may 
be chosen by the traveller, but the latter is the easier 'way for the pedestrian.
246 REVIEWS.
[August, 
It was now so dark that we could not distinguish the tall Sow- 
thistles and the wild Lettuce from the equally gigantic black 
Mustard^ and consequently the rare plants entered by the Rev.
G. E.
Smith as found in his time within tliree hundred yards of 
the Lydden Spout, were as much a myth as the story of Lear and 
Edward, son of the Earl of Kent, a story which has given both 
renown and a name to one of the most remarkable objects of this 
singular coast.
We passed along the beach a considerable way before reaching 
the spout, which, we too rashly concluded, on reaching the beach, 
to be as great a myth as the celebrated fountain of Arethusa, 
which flows half a hundred times as many miles under the sea as 
this runs underground in South Kent.
Lydden Spout, however, to our great satisfaction, by its pleasing 
sound informed us of our proximity to fresh- water.
This spout, 
by which water suflScient to turn an ordinary water-wheel, pours 
down a steep incline, takes its name from Lydd, a village in the 
interior, about four miles from the coast.
Near this village 
there is a stream which disappears by a swallow-hole, and emerges 
from the clifi* by a large hole or cutting, a few hundred yards on 
the Folkestone side of the rude staircase by which we descended 
from the top of the cliff to the beach.
It was too evident that our botanizing had terminated for this 
day at least, unless we could have botanized by candle-light; 
and even if this had been practicable, we had no candles.
In this 
emergency the best thing to be done was done, viz.
to pick our 
way in the dark between the sea and the cliff along Eastwear 
Bay, and by the martello towers to Folkestone.
This we did by 
the combined exertion of plucky resolution and strong thews, and 
by the useful aid of the coastguard force, who kindly pointed 
out our way.
We reached our destination rather late, and in a 
rather weary plight.
A GuiSk to the Isle of Wight.
By the Rev. Edmund Venables, 
M.A., and eminent Local Naturalists.
The tourists, excursionists, or valetudinarians of the isles of 
Albion, have no reason to be discontented with the extent and 
1861.] REVIEWS.
247 
variety of the topographical books now in circulation.
The fourth 
estate has good reason^ not only for being contented with this 
branch of literature, but for being proud of the excellence of the 
guide-books now cuiTent.
They are prepared for others than 
wayfarers who go to a place to tarry only for a brief period, and 
they may be perused with pleasure and improvement by a higher 
class of readers than those who only want to know how far it is 
from Cowes to Ventnor, and the names of the best hotels, and 
where the most comfortable quarters are procurable.
The antiquary, the historian, the geologist, and the botanist, 
can now get trustworthy information in these works, which are 
compiled to supply the wants of the genuine student as well as 
to fill up the spare hours of those who seek only relaxation, 
exercise, fresh air, and novelty, and who come here to admire 
and enjoy the beautiful and the picturesque.
Murray's handbooks to several parts of England, viz.
to the 
south coast, Kent, etc., have long been in great repute for the 
comprehensive character of their contents.
Stanford's ^ Guide to the Isle of Wight ' is not inferior to 
Murray's celebrated handbooks in the interesting information it 
contains.
The author and the publisher may think this high 
praise, for Murray's topographical publications are deservedly in 
the highest estimation for their excellence.
The new * Guide to the Isle of Wight ' has one distinguishing 
feature, viz.
the Natural History portion ; and this has been very 
carefully compiled from existing works, verified and enlarged by 
the personal observations of the authors.
This feature is not 
peculiar to this Guide, for most guide<books introduce a little 
botany, etc., not always judiciously selected, from more general 
works.
In the present work, the authors of the chapters on Na- 
tural History have given their names as vouchers for the truth 
and usefulness of what they have compiled on these subjects.
The geological portion of the work has been contributed and 
condensed from memoirs furnished by the many excellent geolo- 
gists who visited this Isle and have written on the formations of 
its singularly formed exterior.
The labours of the late lamented 
Professor Edward Forbes, we are glad to perceive, are not for- 
gotten by the reverend author of this new ^ Guide to the Isle of 
Wight.^ 
The articles on the botany, entomology (in part), and zoology, 
248 BEVIEWS.
[AuffflSt, 
are by Mr. A.
G. More^ well known to the readers of the 
' Phytologist.' Mr. George Guyon contributed the sections on 
the Coleoptera, Mollusca^ etc.
Two reverend contributors to the 
' Phytologist/ the Rev. A.
Bloxam and th^ Rev. T.
Salwey, sup- 
plied the list of rare Mosses^ Lichens^ and Fungi.
It will not be doubted^ much less denied^ that this local work 
offers high credentials, both for the authenticity and proper 
arrangement of the facts which are recorded in its pages.
The 
work is divided into three parts, and the contents are given below.
I. ^^Introduction, Approaches to the Island/' and ^^ Hints 
to Visitors." This part fills 8 pages.
II.
^^ Places of Principal Resort, Walks, Drives, and Excur- 
sions." This part fills upwards of 300 pages, and is divided into 
ten chapters, of which Cowes, Newport, Ryde, Sandown, Shank- 
lin, Bonchurch, Ventnor, etc., South-western Coast, Freshwater 
Peninsula, Yarmouth, and Voyage round the Island, form the 
principal topics.
The third part contains a general synopsis of the past and 
present condition of the* island.
This is divided into the fol- ' 
lowing chapters, entitled Topography, Productions Natural and 
Artificial, Civil and Religious Affairs, Antiquities, General His- 
tory of the Island, Geology, Zoology, and Botany.
This is a 
very extensive range of subjects; yet it is but bare justice to 
state that the articles which we have read are all treated in a 
very satisfactory manner.
, 
Several of the places described have been visited by us, and 
therefore we can vouch, on the crede ewperto principle, that the 
descriptions are genuine, interesting, and graphic.
Instructive 
and suggestive essays might be easily composed on some of the 
topics above enumerated; for example, on its supposed ancient 
connection with the mainland of Hants, when the centre of the 
Solent was the bed of a river ; and on the contingency still in 
the womb of futurity, when the peninsula of Freshwater has 
become an island, and the little river Yar a strait separating the 
new islet from the mainland of the eastern and larger portion of 
the island.
The trade in tin, believed to have been carried on by the Vec- 
tians of a long bygone age, centuries ere the haughty Roman 
taught the ancient Britons the superiority of Rome in warfare 
and civilization, — and the coastguard, soon to be numbered 
1861.] REVIEWS.
249 
among the things that were, like the tin-trade and Roman 
superiority, remind us pensively, if not painfully, of the mutations 
of human afiairs.
We however are neither historians nor anti- 
quarians, nor sentimentalists, but botanists, and therefore we 
wiU not be like the shoemaker who went beyond his last.
The 
antiquities, the social state of the islanders, their religion, and 
their politics, must be left unsaid ; our vocation is of a humbler 
kind.
The brief space left for further notice of this excellent 
tourists' guide, must be filled up with some remarks on the 
r6mm6 of its vegetable productions, so well compiled, as above 
said, by one of the earliest and most esteemed contributors to 
the^Phytologist.' 
Botanists rarely have reason to grumble at the meed of praise 
which they receive from each other; and this should not be- 
begrudged, for it is usually all they get for their botanical 
labours.
Our author, for his botanical resume, divides the Isle of 
Wight into five divisions : viz.
first, the seashore ; second, the 
Northern Tertiaries; third, the Central Chalk range; fourth, 
the Valley of the Greensand ; fifth, the Undercliff^, with the 
downs above it.
" Only the more prominent or interesting '' 
species, the reader is respectfully informed, " can find room here ; 
but those who require more complete informatidn, will necessarily 
refer to Dr. Bromfield's ' Flora Vectensis,' where the localities 
are most carefully indicated, and also to Babington's * Manual,^ 
which contains the,'' as our author informs us, " most accurate 
descriptions of all our British species." 
Some botanists might demur before indorsing the latter clause 
of the sentence ; but the author is well qualified to bear testimony 
to the value of a Flora which he and most British botanists have 
consulted with much profit.
Mayhap he has not seen all the 
other British Floras now in circulation and use ; or possibly he 
ignores their existence ; or, worse still, not only holds them cheap, 
but deems them intrusives, — mischievous interlopers on the pre- 
serves of science, whose room would be better than their com- 
pany.
The seashore on the north and east, and the lower cliff on the 
south of the Island, will most amply repay the botanist for the 
expense and trouble of a visit to these rich localities.
Respecting 
the former our author says that " It is upon the tract of the 
N.S. VOL.
V. 2 k 
250 REVIEWS.
\_Augtist, 
' dunes/ or sand-hills^ lying immediately below St. Helen^s^ that 
the priBcipal harvest will be made.
This small piece of gromid, 
not exceeding probably forty or fifty acres^ has been ascertained 
to yield no less (fewer) than two hundred and fifty species of 
flowering plants^ that (this?) being nearly one-third of the whole 
Flora of the Isle of Wight; and among those^ not the least interest- 
ing are twelve out of the thirteen indigenous Trefoils.
Indeed^ the 
abundance of Leguminosa and CaryophylkiB is the most striking 
feature of the sandhills^ and brings to mind the use which has 
been made of the prevalence of these two families of plants to 
characterize a region warmer than our own.
The two Stonecrops 
also might suggest a resemblance to the arid sands of the deserts^ 
were it not for the Reindeer Moss^ which is the next plant to 
meet the eye." 
It may be observed that Quarr Copse, near the ruins of Quarr 
Abbey, can boast of the largest example of Pyrus torminalis in 
the island, probably the largest in existence ; see ^ Flora Vectensis,' 
p. 167.
And within the ruined walls of what was once a large 
garden, orchard, or perhaps vineyard, there still flourish fine and 
numerous examples of Inula Helenium, an example of the remains 
of cultivation, not of an escape.
Cultivation has long ceased in 
this locality, and the Elecampane is a melancholy evidence that 
on this now neglected spot there once grew better things, that 
are not to be found on " cow-pasture " or " sheep-leas.'' 
Our author notices the curious fact that Serratula tinctoria 
and Betonica officinalis may be seen growing in the open pasture 
behind the fort (near Freshwater), a locality very difierent fi-om 
the sheltered woods they usually inhabit.
These shady, sheltered 
spots may be the usual localities of these plants in the Isle of 
Wight ; but in Surrey it is not considered a great curiosity to 
see them both on the extensive and open heaths of this heathery 
county.
It would not be fair dealing towards the author and publisher 
of the 'New Guide to the Isle of Wight' to skim ofi* the cream, 
as they say, or publish in our pages a list of the rarest and most 
interesting plants which appear in this summary of the Vectian 
Flora.
All that is desirable here is a mere statement that this 
part of the work is most conscientiously performed.
It is a 
satisfactory condensation of the most elaborate work on local 
botany ever published in this country ; and which is honourably 
mentioned by the author of this botanical synopsis.
1861.] REVIEWS.
251 
Some botanists may be of opinion that our author is not 
exactly correct in stating that Erodium maritimum, Coronopm 
didyma, Euphorbia portlandica, and Agrostis setacea find (have) 
their eastern limit in the Isle of Wight.
Did he here abandon 
his trustworthy guide ?
Dr. Bromfield admits the existence of 
Agrostis setacea on Bagshot Heath.
It is believed to grow also 
on the Blackheath tract of hills^ not far &om Ewhurst.
Both 
these localities are east of the Isle of Wight.* Erodium tnaritimum 
and Euphorbia portlandica have both been reported from Kent.
We will not vouch for the verity of the report, but we do vouch 
for the extension of Coronopus didyma for at least one degree 
further east than any part of the Isle of Wight (see ^ Phytolo- 
gi3t/ sub voce Senebiera.) Our author may say, "Ay !
but it is 
a mere interloper in the vale of Thames, i.e. about Kew, Wands- 
worth, Parson^s Green, Brixton, and Highgate.^' Possibly this 
may be true, but is it anything else than a stray plant in the 
Isle of Wight ?
On Dr. Bromfield's authority, it is rarer in the 
Isle of Wight than in the vale of the Thames, and therefore 
more likely to be an interloper in the island than in Middlesex.
We dislike hypercriticism, but we confess that the first plant 
entered by name in the general synopsis was a puzzle.
"Statice 
occidentalis grows on rocks and cliffs^' (p.
468).
Is this plant 
the same as Statice rariflora^ Drej., or Siatice spathulata, Desf.?
It cannot be S.
rariflora, for this is said, and doubtless trtdy, to 
grow in salt-marshes and in muddy places, and is probably, as 
Dr. Bromfield states, a variety of S, lAmonium, In the sequel, 
viz.
on p.
473, S.
spathulata is entered as one of the plants to be 
numbered with the extinct species, " Euphorbia PepliSj Lathyrus 
maritimus" Again, two or three lines lower down the same 
page, it is stated that " two of the rock plants are peculiar to 
this end of the island ; if, at least, we suppose Statice occidentalis 
still survives,^^ etc.
By a logical, inductive process, it may be in- 
ferred that Statice occidentalis and S.
spathulata are synonyms.
It would have saved us some trouble if our author had told us 
so at the first ; or better still, if he had been contented with one 
name for his plant, which is, after all, only a very problematical 
inhabitant of the Isle of Wight.
It may be of some help to those jisitants of the Isle (botanical 
visitants) who may not be so well read in the nomenclature of 
botany as the author of this sketch, to be informed that Lepigo- 
252 BEYiBws.
[August, 
num rupicola (is this specific name a noun or an adjective?) is 
Spergularia rupestris of the London Catalogue^ and attributed^ 
but erroneously, to Cambessedes, and which probably is Arenaria 
rubra, var.
macrorhiza, Moris, Fl. Sardica, i.
p. 278 ; see Brom- 
field's Fl. Yeetensis, p.
76.
The amiable author last quoted adds 
to the synonyms the following, — " Moris very judiciously con- 
siders this a mere variety, and assigns very sufficient reasons for 
his opinion.'^ It might further be questioned whether SpergiUa 
subulata and Sagina subulcUa be merely synonyms, or represen- 
tatives of two different plants !
In this synopsis of the Vectian Flora, the author has ventured 
to enter a few exotic or at least doubtfully native plants ; for 
example.
Arum italicum, Melilolus arvensis, etc.
; and the fol- 
lowing are humbly offered as supplementary to these suspected 
or certain aliens, viz.
Hypericum calycinum, in a wood skirting 
the shore between Ryde and Quarr Copse; Linaria purpurea, 
not merely on walls, where it is not uncommon in some parts of 
England, but on the garden ground, where it had no appearance 
of having been either sown or planted by the present generation.
Impatiens parviflora, not far from Ryde, on the road to Upton ; 
Actinocarpus Damasonium ?, Villarsia nympheoides, Hydrocha- 
r%8 Morms-ranae, — see Bromfield, 476, who writes, '^ abundantly 
naturalized in a pool on Barrett^s Common, two miles and a 
half from Ryde,'^ — Stratiotes ahides ?
The45e plants, or some of 
them, were seen in a small pond between Upton and St. Helen's^ 
several years ago.
There was no doubt about the Villarsia, but 
there is a doubt hanging to the others.
It is now several years 
since we were there, and our memoranda are mislaid.
It was 
unknown to us at that period, that they were not as common on 
the Isle as they are on the mainland.
The geographical relations of plants have been very much 
altered in modem times.
The list of extinct plants and of the 
new arrivals in this island, shows that the laws which have been 
supposed to affect the distribution of plants, are not universally 
applicable.
Observation and history both teach us that we must 
liberalize our vegetable creed.
We are not apprehensive that these critical remarks will be 
misunderstood ; our object i% simply to do justice both to the 
subject and to the author.
In reference to the former, it is 
hinted that a more liberal use of the English appellatives might 
1861.] REVIEWS.
258 
have been made, and that when it was either necessary or expe- 
dient to employ the scientific names, all needless synonymy 
should have been avoided.
In this periodical it has never been the practice ^^ to look a 
gift-horse in the mouth," and we are disposed rather to be 
thankful for what we get, than to fret ourselves and our readers 
because we have not got more.
All tourists and residents, and especially botanical visitors, will 
appreciate the accurate and comprehensive lists of interesting 
species here recorded.
, We can vou«h for the accuracy of much that is here stated 
about the botany of the island, because we have been there, and 
have seen the plants growing, and '^ seeing is believing ;'' many 
of our friends and correspondents have been there also, and they 
have told us what they saw ; and besides all this, there is the 
unimpeachable authority of the late Dr. Bromfield, than whom a 
more careful, trustworthy, and conscientious observer and faithful 
narrator never lived.
It is self-evident also that the grouping of 
the species into maritime, marsh, heath, and wood plants, is a 
great improvement on the mere systematic arrangements.
The 
connection of certain species with certain soils, as Saginas and 
sand.
Trefoils with shingle.
Orchids with chalk, etc., binds toge- 
ther the two sciences Geology and Botany, which mutually eluci- 
date each other.
We are obliged to the author and publisher for setting before 
us an example of a really useful guide to one of the most popular 
resorts of our migratory and pleasure-seeking population ; and 
we hope that the publisher will be enpouraged to publish a series 
of handbooks to the other favourite localities, of which we have 
so many in our kingdom.
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Dates op Flowering of Plants in the Vicinity of 
Plymouth.
As the * Phytologist * for June gives the dates of flowering of spring 
plants observed in the vicinity of Ross, I send the dates at which the fol- 
lowing were observed in flower in the neighbourhood of Plymouth, think- 
ing it may interest some of the readers of the * Phytologist ' to compare 
the two lists : — 
254 
BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
lAl^ffUSt, 
„ 22 
„ 22 
„ 23 
.. 26 
„ 26 
„ 26 
„ 26 
„ 27 
,, 27 
„ 27 
„ 27 
» 27 
» 30 
,, 30 
May 2 
BanunculuB acris ....
April 20 
G-eranium dissectum 
Yicia sepium .
. .
Veronica montana .
Orchis mascula .
. 
Agraphis nutans, Link 
Medicago macolata .
Medicago lupulina .
Lysimachia nemorom 
Lithospermum anrense 
Alliiim ursinum .
. 
Barbarea vulgaris, Br.
Jjepidium Smithii, Hook, 
Lotus comiculatus .
Poterium Sanguisorba 
Potentilla reptans .
Hjpochoeris radicata 
Hieracium Pilosella .
Crataegus Oxyacantha 
Lithospemum officinale 
AnagaUis arvensis .
. 
Diplotaxis muralis ....
,, 7 
Potentilla anserina ....
„ 7 
Melampyrum pratense ...
„ 8 
Bhinanthus Crista-galli .
. „ 8 
Bimium flexuosum ....
„ 8 
Pyrus Aucuparia ....
„ 13 
Trifolium pratense ....
t, 14 
Arabis hirsuta, Br » 14 
Berberis vulgaris, L, .
. , „ 16 
Cotyledon UmbiHcus ...
„ 16 
Digitalis purpurea ....
„ 16 
Orchis latifoUa, L »» 16 
Papaver dubium, X.
. .
. ,» 18 
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum „ 18 
Polygonum Bistorta ...
„ 21 
Tamus communis ....
,» 23 
Malva sylvestris « 23 
Kubus cffislus, L }> 23 
Cnicus palustris ,» 25 
Viburnum Opulus ....
„ 25 
Sambucus nitpra j, 25 
Apargia hispida )> 25 
Stachys sylvatica ....
„ 28 
Jasione montana ....
,j 30 
Hypericum humifiisum .
. „ 30 
Orobanche major, Hook, .
. „ 3o 
I enclose a specimen of Tillaa muscosay obtained from the locality men- 
tioned in my last communication.
T. R.
Archeb Bbiggs.
9, Torrington Plctce^ Plymouth^ Jime 4, 1861.
Dwarf form of (Enanthe Lachenalii.
(See 'Phytologist' for July, 1861, p.
208.) 
(Enanthe Lachenalii grows (or rather did grow, being fearful that from the 
eiFects of draining, its habitat is destroyed) in Caughtou Miirsh, near Boss, 
a freshwater marsh, contiguous to the Wye river, and at least twenty miles 
Primula vulgaris, .
. .
. 
Jan.
25 
Kanunculus Ficaria, L, .
. 
)) 
26 
Cardamine hirsuia, Z.
. .
. 
Feb 
4 
Potentilla Fragariastrum, 
»» 
4 
Chrysosplem'um oppositifo- 
lium, Xr.
}» 
19 
Vinca minor 
9) 
19 
Tussilago Farfara .
. 
» 
19 
Narcissus Pseudo-NarcissuB 
}} 
20 
Mercurialis perennis .
. 
9> 
25 
Oochlearia danica, Z.
. .
. 
M 
26 
Sisymbrium thalianum, Hook 
» 
26 
Viola odorata 
t) 
26 
Adoxa Moschatellina .
. .
)j 
26 
Nepeta Giechoma, Benth, .
. 
»* 
26 
Oxalis Acetosella .
. .
. 
March 9 
Bibes Grossularia .
. .
}» 
9 
Veronica serpyllifolia .
. 
Kanunculus hederaceus 
J) 
9 
)) 
9 
Moehringia trinervia .
. .
>» 
14 
Stellaria Holostea .
. .
») 
14 
Viola sylvatica, Fries .
. 
► » 
15 
Viola hirta 
» 
15 
Saxifraga TridactyUtes .
. 
>>.
15 
AlcheimUa arveusis .
. .
)» 
21 
Veronica Chamsedrys .
. 
» 
21 
Luzula oampestris .
. .
»> 
25 
Myosotis collina, Sook, .
. 
» 
25 
Linaria Cymbalaria .
. .
)} 
25 
Fedia oUtoria, VahL .
. 
») 
80 
G^eranium robertianum .
)) 
30 
Geranium lucidum .
...
»> 
30 
Plantago lanceolata .
. .
») 
80 
AUiaria officinalis, Hook, .
.April 2 
Kanunculus bulbosus .
. 
>} 
4 
Anthriscus sylvestris .
. 
» 
6 
Lychnis diuma, Sibih.
Myosotis arvensis.
Hook.
. 
» 
6 
») 
6 
Anchusa sempervirens .
. 
>» 
9 
Barbarea preecox, Br.
. .
>} 
12 
Prunus spinosa ....
Kanunculus repens .
. .
)} 
12 
i» 
17 
Scandix Pecten ....
}> 
18 
Myosotis versicolor.
Hook.
>» 
18 
Geranium moUe ....
») 
18 
Ajuga reptans ....
» 
20 
Geranium rotundifolimn .
w 
20 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
255 
from the tidal part of that river.
I have, I believe, gathered the two forms 
from this marsh, but not on the same part.
This plant attracted my notice 
some nine years since, and I have found it each year, except the last.
1 
purpose searching, this season, another marsh in the vicinity of Boss, where 
possibly it may be growing, but has hitherto escaped notice.
Utile bt Dulce, 
Sir,— In your journal for the last month, page 155, you make a remark 
"that even the pictorial is not always relished by the strictly scientific 
simplers" I hope however you will not hold your excellent journal 
bound by this.
If we wish botanical science to advance, we must unite 
the utile and dulce ; and few articles excite a deeper interest than well- 
told botanical rambles, forming Kttle Eegisters of 'Botanical Facts, which 
attract attention and lead to others.
As one of your readers I have been 
much pleased by the occasional notes of your excellent correspondent, Mr.
Sim, of Perth, many of the facts which he has adduced from time to time, 
could be borne out by similar ones in other districts.
During some lei- 
sure moment, I may drop you a string of them.
Please, Mr. Editor, be not too Kberal in the use of drj^ technicalities.
Let us all avoid a misty, cloudy style, and doxour best to make botany as 
accessible and usefu} as it is pure, delightful, arid ennobling.
A Botanical Wandeeer.
Campheltoum, Argyleshire^ Wh May^ 1861.
Elevation of Daktmook.
I send a communication in answer to W.
P., and it is as follows : — 
Hypericum elodes.
In the last number of the * Phytologist,' your cor- 
respondent W.
P. asks if there be any part of Dartmoor more than a 
thousand yards high ;* he will find, on looking at the undermentioned 
works, that no part is near the height he mentions.
I give the following 
notes with pleasure, being the highest in the Devonian range of hills ; — 
Migltest poinL Reference.
Page.
Author.
Height.
Cawsand Hill.
Geographer Generalized.
186 Sullivan.
1782 ft, 
Cawsand Hill.
Introduction to Geography.
59 Sullivan, 1782 ft.
Cawsand Beacon.
Manual of Geography, 86 Hughes.
1792 ft.
Cawsand Beacon.
Manual of British Geography.
20 Hughes.
1792 ft.
Cawsand Beacon.
Map of England and Wales.
Hughes.
1792 ft.
Cawsand Beacon.
PhysL Map of Eng. and Wales.
Chr.Knowl.So. 1792 ft.
DAETMOOS HILLS.
Bippon Tor. Geography Generalized.
186 Sullivan.
1549 ft.
Bippon Tor. Saturday Magazine, vol.
xiii.
114 Sullivan.
1549 ft.
W. W.
ExEMEBiA HYBRID A (Glaucium violoceum).
This plant, which is stated in * Phytologist/ vol.
v. p.
124, to be 
peculiar to Cambridge, grows in certain fields which are not far from 
Castle Acre Priory, about four miles from Swaffham ; also at Cressingham, 
about three miles from Watton.
It grows, at or near Swaifham-, in some 
256 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUEEIES.
[AugUSt.
fields belonging to Colonel Mason, and sparingly at Little Cressingham.
All the above-named places are in the county of Norfolk, and the fields 
where this rare plant grows are on gravelly hills, and it was in flower 
before the end of June.
I have no personal records of its occurrence in 
the adjoining county of Suffolk.
W. Winter.
TiLLiEA MUSCOSA AND SCEGPHULAEIA VEENALIS.
Sir, — As I am not aware that the occurrence of Tillaa muwosa and 
Scrophularia vernalk in Devonshire has been hitherto recorded, it may in- 
terest some of the readers of the * Phytologist,' to hear that on the 13th 
May, 1861, I found the former of these plants growing on slaty soil near 
au old quarry on ColweU Estate, not far from the Plym, in the parish of 
Egg Buckland.
On the 18th May, I was delighted to find a few plants 
of the rare Scrophularia vernalis in full flower, growing in a hedge-bank in 
a shady situation below Ham Wood, near the hamlet of Weston Mills, a 
few mfles from Plymouth.
T. E.
Archbe Briggs.
Abctic Plants 
Now on Sale hy Mr, Brocas, Botanist, 25, ffart Street, Bloomsbury, W.C, 
These specimens, which are in a very good condition, were collected in 
1860, by a gentleman who visited Greenland on professional business and 
for scientific purposes.
These Arctic species, besides being well dried and 
pressed, and consequently in excellent preservation, are indorsed by Mr.
Bennett of the British Museum, by Mr. Watson, and other competent 
judges, as most valuable things of this kind, of exceeding rarity, and of 
special interest.
Some of these specimens are examples of genera and species determined 
by the late Mr. Eobert BroiiTi, and published in his Appendix to the 
History of Arctic Discovery under Captain Parry.
There is an account 
of some of them in the Eeport of the British Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Science, held at Aberdeen in 1859.
Another attractive feature is added to these Arctic species, viz.
tickets 
which contain a more than ordinary detailed account of the localities where 
they were collected, such as latitude, longitude, soil, elevation, etc.
Mr. Brocas showed the Editor of the * Phytologist' a sample of the 
collection, and he has much pleasure in reiterating the testimonials given 
in their commendation by the eminent botanical authorities above men- 
tioned.
Communications have been received from 
John Lloyd ; W.
Pamplin; J.
S. M.
; F.
T. Brocas ; B.
M. Watkins ; 
Sidney Beisly ; John Sim ; G.
Macfarlane ; Archibald Jerdon ; W.
Kichardson, Junr.
; W.
P. ; H.
Boswell ; T.
Johnson ; G.
C. Oxenden ; 
H. C.
; W.
Richardson ; Harriet Beisly ; Dr. Windsor ; F.
B. W.
White ; 
Pirofessor Babington ; C.
J. Ashfield.
[September, 1861.] 257 
BOTANY OF HUMPHEEY HEAD.
By C.
J. ASHFIELD.
Having often heard of the botanical treasures of Humphrey 
Head, a bold promontory of limestone jutting out into the Bay 
of Morecambe, near the crossing, place over Lancaster Sands, 
and having read Whitaker's and several other interesting descrip- 
tion of Cartmel and its fine old church, a friend of mine and 
myself during this present month of July resolved upon taking 
a trip to those places.
As we were successful in our botanical 
researches, it occurred to me that an account of the latter might 
not be unacceptable to the readers of the * Phytologist.' We 
reached Cark station between eight and nine ; and as the weather 
appeared to be rather doubtful, we determined to get through 
the botanical portion of our programme in the early part of 
the day, leaving our antiquarian investigations until the after- 
noon.
On our arrival at Cark, therefore, we inquired our way 
to Humphrey Head, and of the two roads which were mentioned 
to us, we took the one (though considerably the longer of the 
two) by the coast, expecting to meet with some seaside plants.
We found none, however, except a few of the common species, 
such as Statice Armeriay Plantago maritimay etc.
After walking 
a few miles we came to some romantic sea- worn rocks of some 
twelve or fifteen feet elevation, which were beautiftilly festooned 
and crowned with plants of various kinds, such as Helianthe- 
mum vulgarey Centaurea Scabiosa, Campanula roiundifoliay etc.
A 
very short distance from these rocks brought us to the western 
side of Humphrey Head.
The side of the hill facing us was 
very precipitous, and of considerable elevation, and among a 
great variety of trees and shrubs which clothed it, we saw a 
great number of fine specimens of Taanis baccata (these appa- 
rently truly wild), which formed a striking contrast to the silvery 
leaves of the Pyncs Aria with which it was occasionally inter- 
mingled.
We ascended the hill at its northern end, at which 
point it can be climbed without difficulty, and made our way 
along the top at its western edge.
We soon spied out Helian- 
themum canum in great quantities, a good many specimens of 
Spiraa Filipendula, plenty of Thymus Acinos, here and there 
some plants of Geranium sanguineum and Juniperus communis^ 
N. S.
VOL.
V. 2 L 
258 BOTANY OF HUMPHREY HEAD.
[^September, 
lots of Rosa spinosissima, and near the southern end of the hill 
a considerable quantity of Veronica spicata, var.
hybrida.
This 
last-named plant grew on ledges on the face of the hill, in several 
instances in inaccessible places.
We returned along the eastern 
side of the hill, which is considerably more sloping than the 
other, and much more bare of vegetation.
We observed Glau^ 
cium luteum, Sedum Telephiuniy and Silene maritima between the 
foot of the hill and high-water mark.
In due time we arrived 
at the point where we commenced our ascent ; and having had a 
very early breakfast before leaving Preston, we resolved to take 
as direct a path as possible to the Cavendish Arms at Cartmel, 
and order dinner.
Before, however, taking our final leave of Humphrey Head, 
we should mention that we found the following among many 
other common species of plants dispersecl about the hill : — ClinO' 
podium vulgare, Carlina vulgaris^ Thymus Serpyllum, Asplenium 
Adiantum-nigrum, Helianthemum vulgare, Anthyllis Vulneraria, 
Solidago Virgaurea, Malva moschata, Erica cinerea.
We did 
not find HypochoRvis maculata, which is said to grow on Humphrey 
Head, and we were unable to examine a portion of the lower 
part of the western side of the promontory, owing to the state of 
the tide.
A very pleasant walk of three miles through rural shady 
lanes redolent of woodbines, newly mown hay, etc., brought us 
to Cartmel.
Our anxiety to realize our anticipations of dinner 
did not however prevent our botanizing upon our way, or turning 
a short distance out of it for the purpose of inspecting Wrays- 
holme Tower, an ancient " fortified house of a junior branch of 
the Harringtons of Aldingham in the fourteenth century, but 
now degraded into a cowhouse,'' which lay a little to the right 
of the road.
On the top of* the Tower we saw a quantity of 
Parietaria officinalis^ and on the walls adjacent we found Scuvi- 
fraga tridactylites and Asplenium Ruta-muraria, An old wall by 
the wayside, between Humphrey Head and Cartmel, was lite- 
rally covered with luxuriant specimens of Sedum acre, Asplenium 
Trichomanes, and Polypodium vulgare.
The hedges abounded 
with Tamus communis, interspersed occasionally with lAgusimm 
vulgare and Lonicera Periclymenum, In the ditches were large 
quantities of Agrimonia Eupatoria, (Enanthe crocata, Valeriana 
officinalis, Sium nodiflorum, and occasional specimens of Ly thrum 
Salicaria, Sparganium ramosum and simplex.
In one place we 
1861.] VISIT TO HUMPHREY HEAD.
259 
/ 
saw several plants of Hippuris vulgaris, and in another a large 
patch or two of Anagallis teneUa. On the h^dge-banks we not 
unfrequently met with Lysimachia vulgaris, Geranium lucidum, 
and Scolopendrium vulgare ; the last being in its normal form 
and two or three of its varieties.
On the banks in the village of Allithwaite we saw Verbena 
officinalis, Malva sylvestris, moschata, and rotundifolia.
Cam- 
panula Idtifolia made its appearance in one place near Cartmel, 
and Chenopodium Bonus^Henricus flourished by the side of the 
churchyard wall in that town.
Our botanical researches finished 
here, and as we were within a few yards of our hostelry, we very 
shortly sat down to dinner; and, as it may be imagined, did 
full justice to the good things which were set before us.
After 
dinner we sallied forth to inspect the fine old conventual church 
of Cartmel ; but a description of this, however agreeable it might 
be to the individual tastes of many of the readers of the ^ Phyto- 
logist,^ would be out of place in the pages of that work.
SuflSce 
it to say that we returned to Preston in the evening, thoroughly 
pleased with our jaunt, and only puzzled to decide whether our 
botanical, or antiquarian and architectural tastes had received 
the most gratification.
One word should be said for the scenery, 
which possessed ail the charms that mountain and valley, wood 
and water could bestow upon it.
VISIT TO HUMPHREY HEAD, ETC.
By John Windsor^ M.D., F.L.S.
Leaving Manchester by rail on the afternoon of June 20, 1861, 
on a short visit to some relatives in the neighbourhood of 
Morecambe Bay, I reached Flarkburgh, in Cartmel, the same 
evening: 
On the following morning, accompanied by two of the other 
sex, both near relations, I started for Humphrey Head, aided, 
for the first time on my visits there, by a vehicle, which con- 
veyed us quite to the spot, thus saving much time as well as 
fatigue, and enabling us to leave the Cark station for Ulver- 
stone about half past eleven a.m.
The fruits of my explorations, however, on this occasion.
260 VISIT TO HUMPHREY HEAD.
[September, 
although I trust not less attentive than on fonner ones, were 
not quite so sati^actory, perhaps, as on my first visit, chiefly 
owing, I believe, to the tide being up to the very base of the 
impending cliff for a considerable portion of its extent.
On the beach below the nether portion of the promontory, I 
picked up in plenty Triglochin maritimum, Glcmx maritima, 
Plantago maritima, Armeria maritima^ Cochlearia danica, Sa- 
moltis Valerandi, Juncus aupinus, etc.
Passing further on, as far as the tide permitted, I saw on 
the rocks, Sesleria ccerulea out of flower, Hieracium pallidum^ 
H. murorum, Arabis hirsuta, Arenaria serpyllifolia, Prenanthes 
muralis, Lactuca Prenanthes, PimpineUa Saosifraga, etc.
Of .Hy- 
pochcsris maculata I saw some specimens in full flower, but some- 
what out of reach, though I was half-inclined to make the dan- 
gerous attempt, but was dissuaded by my companions.
Had the 
tide permitted a further advance along the base of the rock, I 
doubt not that I might have collected specimens, as I did last 
year, both of it and of Veronica hybrida, Silene maritima, etc.
Compelled thus to retrace my steps, I scaled the wall skirting 
the wood, and passing up it by an imperfect, craggy path, 
pointed out to me last year, I was enabled readily, though not 
without some scrambling, to reach the summit, and thus avoided 
a very circuitous route, involving much time and labour.
I 
regretted not having time for a more protracted research of 
the wood, and in passing up only observed Paris quadrifolia in 
great abundance, Polystichum aculeatum, and the white-flowered 
form of Orchis maculata.
I may remark that I unsuccessfully sought for Atropa 
Belladonna neair the wall, where your fair and intelligent cor- 
respondent, some months ago, speaks of having found it.
I 
believe it is still found about the ruins of Furness Abbey, some 
distance off.
Having gained the summit, I found most of its old occu- 
pants : as Spiraa Filipendula ; Helianthemum canum in flower, 
near the brink of the precipice, in several places, but still 
rare in comparison with H.
vulgare near it ; Asperula cy- 
nanchica, which I collected abundantly last year, and trans- 
mitted to the Thirsk Botanical Exchange Club, seemed to be 
entirely supplanted by Galium pusillum, probably from my 
earlier visit on this occasion.
The surface of the mount was 
1861.] VISIT TO HUMPHREY HEAD.
261 
decorated with Helianthemum vulgare.
Thymus Serpyttum, Eu- 
phrasia officinalis, Polygala vulgaris, etc.
The nearer, bushy, and craggy parts of the hill afforded, co- 
piously.
Geranium sanguineum, Anthyllis Vulneraria, Ligustrum 
vulgare, Bhamnus Frangvia, Rubus saxatUis, etc.
Being met again by my friends just as I had completed my 
researches, we returned direct to the Cark station in time for 
the train to XJlverstone, where I had occasion to stay a few 
hours, and left there, about four i^.m., by the train for Coniston, 
passing the venerable remains of Furness Abbey, which I had 
visited on a former occasion.
After enjoying a beautiful day at Flarkburgh, Humphrey 
Head, Ulverstone, etc., the sky began to darken, and a storm 
appeared impending as we reached Coniston.
At the latter 
place the railroad ceased, and we entered the coach for Amble- 
side.
We were scarcely seated, before the rain began to fall 
very heavily, accompanied by almost incessant thunder and 
lightning, which did not cease until we were about alighting at 
the end of our day's travelling.
Early the following morning, before breakfast, I visited 
Stockgill-Force Wood.
Here I found Impatiens Noli-me-iangere in tolerable plenty 
in two places, though not yet in flower.
Crepis paludosa 
abounded throughout the wood; also Galium saxatilis, Ltysi- 
machia nemorum, and Melampyrum pratense, etc.
-I had hoped 
to find Melampyrum sylvaticum, which I thought I had col- 
lected there on a former occasion, but certainly on this I could 
only meet with the commoner species.
Myrrhis odorata I found a large patch of, in a lane skirting 
the south-easterly side of the wood, and apparently as truly indi- 
genous as I have often formerly seen it in some places near 
Settle, Yorkshire.
Leaving Ambleside soon after breakfast, the morning being 
very fine, we sailed down Winandermere lake to Bowness, 
but the train not starting for Manchester for some time, we 
took advantage of a boat, and were rowed round Curwen's 
Island, but in this pleasant trip Lobelia Dortmanna was the 
only plant collected.
In conclusion, I may remark that, although looked for about 
Flarkburgh and Cark on the Cartmel road, not being quite up 
262 oxPORD MOSSES.
[September^ 
to the places where it grew^ and where I had formerly seen it^ I 
failed to meet with Sedum anglicum, which grows abundantly 
in many places in the north of Lancashire and Westmoreland^ 
on rocks and stones^ especially on grit^ rather than on limestone, 
and nowhere^ perhaps, more abundantly than in Langsleadale^ 
above Kendal.
[Our very kind correspondent sent subsequently the following 
addendum : — " My son, Joseph Windsor, visited the station of 
NolUme-tangere about a month later than th^ime when I 'was 
there.
He found, he reports, that the plant is abundant there 
and in full flower, 27th July/'] 
OXFOED MOSSES.
Additions to the List of Oxford Mosses.
By H.
Boswell.
In a few preliminary remarks to a list of Mosses sent you 
last autumn, I hazarded an opinion that the number of species 
still to be found in this neighbourhood over and above the hun- 
dred and twenty therein enumerated, would probably not exceed 
ten.
In this I have under-estimated the richness of our local 
Flora, and undervalued the bryological riches of the district; 
for since that time myself and my friend Mr. HoUiday have 
discovered a§ many as thirteen species additional to those before 
given; and if so many have been found in nine months, it would 
seem not unreasonable to hope for yet more, especially as some 
of these present are by no means such as would have been 
deemed most likely to form part of the supposed ten.
As it is 
probable that I shall have less time to devote to the subject in 
future, I now beg to ofier you a list of the addenda, as the best 
reparation in my power to make for the disparagement cast upon 
the productiveness of the neighbourhood ; and likewise as an en- 
couragement to such of your readers, if any such there be, as 
may be, like myself, young in the study, to persevere, and still 
hope for greater success, however great or however little they 
may have hitherto found, and to induce them to think nothing 
done while aught remains to do.
Besides the new species, five others, formerly given as occurring 
only in a barren state, have since been found in fruit.
1861.] OXFORD MOSSES.
263 
In addition to these, four species, which I have failed to meet 
with in this district or county, have been communicated from 
the vicinity of Faringdon, by Mrs. Milne.
From the close re- 
semblance in respect to soil, etc., between the two counties, 
and their close proximity, it may perhaps be expected that some 
or all of them may occur in Oxfordshire, as well as in Berkshire.
Phascum alternifolium.
Hedge-banks between Shotover and 
Cuddesden, opposite the windmills ; near, but not mingled 
with P.
subulfitum.
Fruit, April, May.
Phascum crispum.
Roadside between Gosford and Weston-on- 
the-Green, near Islip.
One small tuft was brought by Mr.
. Holliday, but no more could be found.
Fruit, April, May.
Gymnostomum tenue.
On stones in the canal bank near Wol- 
vercott, in tolerable plenty.
Fruit, June.
Gymnostomum microstomum.
Between Shotover and Cuddesden, 
mingled with Phascum alternifolium, Eoadside through 
Bagley Wood.
April.
Pottia truncata, var.
major.
South Hinksey ; scarce.
March.
Didymodon flexifolius.
Powder Hill Copse, fruiting plentifully; 
growing in company with Leucobryum glaucum and Campy- 
lopus torfaceus.
February, March.
Tortula vinealis.
Headington Hill; fruit very scarce.
June.
Barren in one or two other places.
Tetraphis pellucida.
North side of Shotover Hill, with nume- 
rous cyaihuli, or cups bearing gemma^ but no fruit.
— These 
gemma, or buds, are an admirable provision for continu- 
ing the existence of the plant in the absence of fruit, and 
very interesting objects for the microscope.
Schimper thus 
speaks of them : — " Cyathuli nuUam affinitatem morpholo- 
gicam habent cum capitulis pseudopodiorum Aulacomnii 
quae e foliis abortivis efiformantur, dum cyathuli laudati e 
foliis perigonialibus hypertrophis seque antheridiis defor- 
matis originem ducunt.^^ 
Bryum pallescens.
Dry bank by the road between Gosford and 
Weston ; small.
Moist bank in a field by the Cherwell, 
near Parktown ; growing among grasses and Carea?
glauca, 
and more than twice as large.
Ftuit, June, July.
Fissidens eanlis (T, Bloxami): Copse neaj: Watereaton, inter- 
mingled with F.
incurvus.
Clay bank near Bagley Wood, 
in company with F.
bryoides.
Fruit, February, March.
2Q4 OXFORD MOSSES.
[September, 
Fissidens incurvus {F.
viridulus, e incwrvus, Bryol.
Brit.
; F.
in- 
curvus, in part, Schpr.
Synopsis Muse.) .
Copse neax Water- 
eaton.
Thicket near Bagley Wood.
Near Cumnor.
Fruit, 
February, March.
— ^This seems to be quite distinct from 
F, viridulus, though Schimper unites them and F.
tama- 
rindifolius.
Specimens of F, viridulus, communicated from 
Lancashire by Dr. Wood and Mr. Nowell, have synoicous 
flowers.
Hyjmira radicale.
Shotover Plantations, very sparingly, with 
H. filicinum, etc.
Fruit, April.
Hypnum pakistre.
Stones in several places along the canal ; 
sometimes mingled with H.
riparium.
Fruit, April, May.
Hypnum fluitans.
By the road from Gosford to Watereaton ; 
plentifully.
Frequent about Woodstock, Mr, Hollidayy 
Barren.
Hypnum Kneiffii.
Deep ponds near Bagley Wood, with a few 
female flowers.
Further edge of BuUingdon.
Lane between 
Marston and Headington Copse ; growing among grass with 
H cuspidatum.
Near Weston-on-the-Green, Mr. Holliday.
Some stems two feet in length.
— The Marston locality 
agrees with that given by Sibthorp for JET.
fluitans, and this 
probably is his plant.
Specks found in fruit since the former List, 
Polytrichum piliferum, Wootton Heath ; sparingly.
May.
Hypnum Swartzii.
Headington Copse, near Marston.
Copse 
near Watereaton.
Near Cumnor.
December, February.
Hypnum purum.
Coombe Wood, near Cuddesden.
Wootton 
Heath.
Winter.
Hypnum tamariscinum.
Headington Wick Copse.
Copse near 
Watereaton.
Winter.
Hypnum squarrosum, Coombe Wood, near Cuddesden.
Winter.
Berkshire Species, (Mrs. Milne.) 
Mnium cuspidatum.
Woods near Buckland.
Splachnum ampullaceum.
Near Pusey.
Hypnum albicans.
The Warren, Buckland.
Hypnum undulatum.
The Warren, Buckland.
June 28, 1861.
1861.] CHAPTERS ON FUNGI.
265 
CHAPTEES ON FUNGI.
By Archibald Jerdon.
CHAPTER VIL 
I now come to the fourth Order of the Fungi, viz.
that of 
Hyphomycetes, which is characterized by the spores growing oA 
threads or flocci, which are generally erect, and often accompa- 
nied by a creeping (or horizontal) mycelium, formed of similar 
threads, called an hypJiasma, Many of the Fungi of this divi- 
sion are popularly known under the general name of '^ Moulds,^' 
and are found in all parts of the world.
They are very destruc- 
tive to all organic substances, inducing or hastening decay, and 
even inorganic substances are not free from their ravages.
Suborder 1.
Isaeiacei.
Common receptacle or stem compound ; spores terminating the 
threads (or cells), pulverulent.
A small but interesting group of Fungi, in some instances 
approaching the Hymenomycetes.
I shall notice the genus An-- 
thina, which approaches Clavaria in form, though not i%struc- 
ture.
Anthina.
Stroma vertical, elongated, dilated upwards, contiguous with 
the at length rigid somewhat attenuated stem, floccose, covered 
with sporiferous flocci, free only at their apices.
Anthina flammea, Fr. Flame-coloured Anthina.
Attenuated 
downwards, smooth, bright red-saSron, dilated above, plumose, 
yellow.
On dead sticks, leaves, etc.
A pretty little Fungus, about an inch or so in height, and of 
a beautiful red colour, with yellowish tips.
It is not common, 
and requires to be sought for among dead leaves, etc., in damp 
woods.
• 
Suborder 2.
Stilbacei.
Mycelium floccose or cellular ; stem or receptacle composed of 
compacted threads or cells, the tips of which produce minute dif- 
fluent spores.
In this group the stem (or stroma) is compound, as in the last, 
N. S.
VOL.
V. 2 M 
266 CHAPTERS ON FUNGI.
^September, 
but the spores are moist and difllueiit, instead of being dry and 
volatile.
I shall take as examples the genera Stilbum and Tubercularia.
Stilbum.
Spores collected into a solid head, involved in jelly.
Flocci 
forming a solid stem.
Stilbum TOMENTosuM, Schrad.
Glandular Stilbum.
White; 
head globose; stems equal, glanduloso-tomentose.
— Grev.
Sc.
Crypt.
Fl.t.2S}.
Parasitic on different species of Trichia (a genus of the Order 
Gasteromycetes) .
A curious microscopic plant, not of common occurrence.
It 
appears as minute white dots on the affected Fungus, and requires 
a considerable magnifying power to determine its structure.
TUBEKCULARIA.
Spores simple, subglobose, closely packed upon an erumpent, 
distinct,' more or less stemlike disk.
The genus is now considered to be a spurious one, and the 
differ^t so-called species to be, in all probability, immature or 
undeveloped states of species of Sphcerus.
TuBERCULARiA VULGARIS, Todc.
Common TuberctUaria.
Erum- 
pent ; stratum of spores red, margin naked.
On dead sticks and branches; extremely common.
One of the commonest of our Fungi, occurring on almost every 
kind of dead or dry wood (except that of Coniferous trees).
It 
forms small, pale red, raised dots or spots, about a line in breadth, 
on the branch affected, and affords, when examined by the mi- 
croscope, a multitude of minute oblong spores'.
It is now con- 
sidered to be a state of Sphaiia cinnabarina, of which Fungus it 
undoubtedly in many cases forms the stroma or base.
Suborder 3.
Dematiei.
Mycelium floccose or cellular, mostly sparing ; fertile threads 
erect, carbonized, and rigid ; spores whorled or collected in heads, 
often large and septate.
Many curious forms occur in this suborder, which is distin- 
guished by its carbonized (or dark-coloured) threads.
These are 
generally of a dark brown, approaching to black, but often have 
a shade of olive.
I take the genus 
1861.] CHAPTERS ON FUNGI.
267 
Cladospobium.
Spores arranged in short moniliform branchlets, at length 
falling oflF.
Flocci septate above.
Cladosporium herbarum^ Lk. Common Cladosporium.
Tufts 
effuse, soft, dense, green, then olive-bladt ; fibres collapsing, pel- 
lucid, as well as the olivaceous spores.
On all sorts of decaying substances.
Very common.
Forming a short dense stratum, or scattered tufts of a dark 
olive-green colour, generally extending over a considerable sur- 
face.
The spores, which are somewhat variable in size, become 
at length uniseptate.
Mr. Berkeley says, " This is perhaps the 
commonest of all Fungi, growing on all decaying substances, and 
in consequence assuming various forms.^^ 
A variety, Cladosporium Fumago of authors, attacks the living 
leaves of fruit-trees, and does much mischief.
Suborder 4.
Mucedines.
Mycelium generally abundant, giving off erect fertile threads, 
which are mostly white or coloured.
Spores generally simple, 
scattered, or collected into little heads, sometimes forming simple 
or branched moniliform threads.
A large group, comprehending most of the productions known 
under the common name of "Moulds." They attack living 
structures, as well as those in a state of decay, and are often very 
injurious to man.
It is still a question whether parasitic Fungi 
are the cause or the effect (or rather the accompaniment) of 
decay ; but there can be no doubt of this fact, that decayiqg sub- 
stances afford a favourable nidiis for these plants.
I shall notice two genera of this suborder, Aspergillus and 
Botrytis, 
Aspergillus.
Spores simple, globose, more or less disposed in moniliform 
row s, closely packed upon the apices of the fertile flocci.
Aspergillus glaucus, Lk. Blue Mould, Sterile flocci effused, 
white, fertile, simple, their apices capitate ; spores rather loosely 
packed, at length glaucous.
On various decaying substances, as bread, cheese, etc.
This is the common " Blue Mould," and too well known to 
need any further description.
268 CHAPTERS ON FUNoi.
[September, 
BOTEYTIS.
Spores simple^ collected in little sori (or heaps) on or towards 
the apices of the flocci and their branches.
BoTRYTis EPPUSA, Grcv.
Spinach Mould, Pale purplish- 
grey; spreading fertile flocci branched above; branches short, 
divaricate ; spores large, oval.
On the under side of the leaves of the garden Spinach; 
common.
Forming effiised pale purplish-grey spots on the under side of 
the leaves, and rendering the leaf attacked yellow, especially over 
the spots.
Another species, Botrytis infestanSy is generally considered to 
be the cause of the potato-disease.
Suborder 5.
Sepedoniei.
Mycelium predominant.
Spores arising immediately from 
the mycelium, or from very shor,t fertile threads, very abundant, 
generally large.
A small group of Fungi, characterized by the high develop- 
ment of the spores, while the fertile threads are much reduced, 
and the plants therefore appear to consist almost wholly of spores.
I take the typical genus Sepedonium as an illustration.
Sepedonium.
Spores globose, pellucid, at first covered by the flocci of the 
fleecy mycelium.
Sepedonium chrysospermum, Lk. Yellow Sepedonium.
Flocci 
fleecy, dense, white, spores golden-yellow, not appendiculated.
— 
Grev.
Sc. Crypt.
Fl. t 198.
On decaying Fungi, common, frequently penetrating the whole 
Fungus, and converting it into yellow dust.
It is found principally on Boleti and some Agarics, and its 
presence may be known by the unhealthy appearance of the 
plant, and in particular by a white cottony web or coating which 
covers the afiected part.
When this is broken open the yellow 
spores are seen filling the interior.
They are very minute, and 
it requires a high power of T;he microscope to render them distinct.
1861.] PLANTS OF IN VERM AY.
269 
PLANTS OF INVEEMAY.
Seven Hours' Botanizing in the Den of Invermay.
By John Sim, A.B.S.Ed.
The "Birks of Invermay," so finely celebrated in Scottish 
song, I have long wished to visit ; not so much with a view to 
admire the scenery as to explore the botany.
The Den of Invermay, which contains the " Birks/^ extends 
from about a mile below Invermay House until the Ochil Hills, 
from which the small river May has its source.
This rapid 
stream traverses* the entire Den from beginning to end, until 
within a mile of its junction with the Earn, where the ground is 
flat on both its banks.
The May, unlike the sluggish Earn, is a pure and rapid 
stream, abounding in trout, and *adomed with the most exquisite 
scenery imaginable.
The small river comes bounding down 
along a rocky channel, at one time purling gently along amongst 
boulders, at another leaping over precipitous rocks and falling in 
deep pools, again rapidly pursuing its course onward, confined 
in deep fissures worn by its waters during the lapse of countless 
ages already gone by.
This is a theme for a geologist, who will 
find much in these water-worn rocks to amuse and instruct.
The banks of the May are well wooded with ^^Birk^' (Birch), 
Oak, Hazel, and Ash, etc., the three former undoubtedly planted 
by Nature and not by man.
The fragrant Birch-trees are cer- 
tainly of great antiquity, as their immense size plainly indicates.
The Oaks too are often large, and well bound with Ivy.
The river May traverses the parish of Forteviot, and after a 
course of about nine miles from its source in the Ochil Hills, 
falls into the Earn, near the bridge of Forteviot, about six miles 
south-west of Perth.
As I said, 1 had long intended to visit the Den of Invermay, 
but I never, from some cause or other, accomplished my design 
until the 4th of June, 1861, when I and a young friend took 
train for Forteviot station, and on arriving there we steered our 
course directly up the left bank of the May, for the purpose of 
collecting and examining the wild-flowers which grew in the vi- 
cinity of this little river.
What we got there during our seven 
hours' ramble, you shall now see.
In sheep-pasture, a little to 
the south of Forteviot station, we saw an" immense quantity 
270 PLANTS OF iNVERMAY.
[September, 
of Astragalus hypoglottis ; in fact the grassy turf was literally 
blue with this plant in many places : being a rather rare species 
we gathered a good supply.
Nearer the river's brink grew 
plenty of Lotus comiculatus, Anthyllis Vutnerariaj Cardamine 
amara, Lychnis diuma, and Artemisia vulgaris ; by the road- 
side, Cerastium arvense; and on the pasture, near Forteviot 
bridge, Briza media; near the riverside we collected a few 
examples of Hesperis matronalis.
About three-quarters of a 
mile from Forteviot station we entered into the woods of Inver- 
may, and after passing onward about a quarter of a mile further, 
came into the Den, where a pathway has been kindly con- 
structed by the proprietor.
Our first capture worthy of record 
was Campanula latifolia, it is plentifully and widely distributed 
all along the Den ; we also collected Careaf sylvatica and C.
pal- 
lescens, neither properly developed.
Arenaria trinervia was 
frequent.
Asperula odorata was in super-abundance; so was 
Geranium sylvaticum, Lychnis diurna, and Agraphis nutans; 
these plants were in profusion.
Anemone nemorosa seemed to be 
equally abundant, but had gone out of flower.
Geum interme- 
dium and G.
rivale were also plentiful, but G.
urbanum very 
rare.
Asplenium Trichomanes in same places fringed the rocks 
abundantly, and our common Polypodium and Lastraa Filix-mas 
grew everywhere.
Polystichum lobatum adorned the deep rocky 
ravines, and Cystopteris Jragilis hung its delicate fronds within 
the spray of the roaring linn.
Helianthemum vulgare and 
Thymus Serpyllum garnished the rugged clifls, and the " bonnie 
Broom^' adorned with its golden blossoms their summit.
The music of the feathered race saluted the ear, and by their 
mellow music rendered our happiness complete.
The cuckoo's 
monotonous lay was heard in the distance, while the strains of 
the mavis, deliciously varied, resounded throughout the neigh- 
bouring trees.
Passing still upwards, we all at once came upon a fearful 
ravine, spanned by a narrow wooden bridge.
Many feet below, 
the river, almost hid by rocks, drove rapidly along.
A few yards 
above the bridge, a fine cascade tumbled its waters into a fright- 
ful abyss.
The scene was grand and solemn : not a sound to be 
heard but the " roar of the linn ;'' not a thing to be seen but 
the umbrageous canopy of the surrounding trees and the huge 
walls of rock above, and the yawning chasm with its waters 
1861.] 
PLANTS OP INYEBMAY.
271 
below.
We crossed this wooden pile, and soon, under the trees, 
discovered Rubus saxatilis and Neottia Nidtis-avis, the latter 
certainly a rather rare and very local plant.
There were only a 
few plants of it, which we took with ns.
I here subjoin a list of the most of the plants I observed and 
collected during my seven hours' ramble by the river May.
Those plants whose occurrence I consider universal are omitted.
Adoxa moschatellijia.
Agraphis nutans.
Aira flexuosa.
Ajuga reptans.
Anemone nemorosa.
Anthyllis Vulneraria.
Arctium Lappa.
Arenaria trinenria.
Artemisia Tulgaris.
Asperula odorata.
Asplenium Trichomanes.
Astragalus hypoglottis.
Athyrium Filix-foemina.
Betula alba.
Bracbypodium sylvaticum.
Briza media.
Bunium flexuosum.
Campanula latifolia.
Cardamine amara.
Cardamine sylyatiea.
Carex pallesoens.
Carex preecox.
Carex sylvatica.
Cerastium arvense.
Cystopteris fragilis.
Digitalis purpurea.
Festuca ovina.
Festuea duriuscula.
Fragaria yesca.
Gtdium uliginosum.
G-eranium lucidum.
Geranium sylvaticum.
Geum intermedium.
Geum lirale.
G«um urbanum.
Helianthemum vulgare.
Heeperis matronalis.
Hypericum hirsutiun.
Hypericum perforatum.
Hypericum pulchrum.
Iris Fseudaconis.
Lamium album.
Lastrea Filix-mas.
Listera ovata.
Luzula campestris.
Luzula pilosa.
Luzula sylvatica.
Lycbnis diurna.
Melica uniflora.
Mimulus luteus.
Neottia Nidus-avis.
Orchis maculata.
Orchis mascula.
Oxalis Acetosella.
Fetasit-es vulgaris.
Fhalaris arundrnaoea..
Fimpinella Saxifraga.
Folygala vulgaris.
Folypodium vulgare.
Fotentilla reptans.
Frimula vulgaris.
Frunus communis.
Fteris aquilina.
Fyrola minor.
Banunculus auricomus.
Ueseda Luteola.
Bhinanthus Crista-galli.
Bosa spinosissima.
Bosa villosa.
Sambucus nigra.
Sanicula europsea.
Sarothamnus sJopariuB.
Saxifraga granulata.
Scrophularia nodosa.
Silene inflata.
Stachys Betonica.
Stellaria nemorum.
SteUaria Holostea.
Thymus Serpyllum.
Bridge JSnd, Perth, June 186L 
BOTANICAL LETTERS FROM ABGYLESHIRE.
By James Lothian.
No. I.
Sir, — ^Permit me, in the first place, to give you a general idea 
of this district, on the botany of which I propose to send you an 
Occasional letter, as opportunity occurs.
272 BOTANICAL LETTERS FROM ARGYLESHIRB.
[September, 
If you look for a moment on BlacVs map of Argyleshire, 
you will see that this district consists of a long peninsula^ form- 
ing the southern division of the county of Argyle.
It extends 
north and south.
Its average length between Loch Tarbert and 
Southend will be about forty-five miles^ and its average breadth 
about seven miles.
This is the district of Cantyre proper.
The 
peninsula extends however beyond Lech Tarbert some fourteen 
miles further, terminating at the Crinan Canal.
This district 
north of Loch Tarbert is termed Enapdale, and forms the north- 
ern division of the peninsula.
Properly speaking, the peninsula 
of Cantyre is bounded oa the north by the Crinan Canal, on the 
east by the Sound of Killbrandon and part of Loch Fine, on the 
south by St. George's and the North Channel, and on the west 
by the Atlantic Ocean.
Its average length may be quoted 
roughly at sixty miles, and its breadth nine miles; its geogra- 
phical position about 55° N.
and 5° 36' W.
This district is partly hilly and partly level.
A chain of hills 
extend along the centre from the south to the northern extremity, 
and it is intersected by beautiful heaths, plains, and glens.
The 
district around Campbeltown, the principal town in the county, 
consists of fine level tracks, which extend along the west and 
east shores for fifteen or twenty miles, and stands at a small 
elevation above sea-level.
The .
north-eastern portion, as you 
approach the Crinan Canal, is finely wooded.
The north-west 
and south-west is mountainous and rugged.
At the latter point 
stands the well-known light-house of the Mull of Cantyre, the 
guiding star of the mariner coming in the North Channel.
The district of Kintyre proper is rather defective in wood ; 
nevertheless some plantations of Larch, Fir, Oak, and Hazel cop- 
pice are met with, as at Limecraigs, Carradale, Carskey, Largie, 
and on both sides of Loch Tarbert, which is well wooded and 
very picturesque.
The Elm, Laburnum, Turkey Oak, and Pintis 
maritima, perhaps above all others, thrive best at these places.
Further north the Birch and Oak as well are magnificent.
This district contains many small rivers, and numerous fresh- 
water lakes, but not of any magnitude, of which I may make 
further mention in the course of our correspondence.
The climate is humid, but generally mild," still visited not 
unfrequently by severe and stormy gales from the south, west, and 
south-west.
1861.] BOTANICAL LETTERS FROM AR6TLESHIRS.
273 
There is some scope for the student of history and antiquarian 
lore, from its having been in former times the field of battles 
and feudal warfare between the Campbells and McDonalds, lords 
of the isles, and some of the Celtic chieftains of the Emerald 
Isle.
It has also been the scene of the labours of some of the 
early apostles of the Christian Reformation, and at a later period 
formed an asylum to the persecuted Covenanters.
Here also 
King Robert Bruce sought shelter and found it.
There are 
some ancient castles and burying-grounds ; of the latter at least 
eighteen or twenty, possessing more or less interest to the anti- 
quary and student of history.
One of the most interesting ob- 
jects of this description is an ancient stone cross which stands in 
the centre of the town of Campbeltown.
It is elevated some five 
feet or six feet above the level of the street, on a platform, to 
which a flight of steps leads.
Underneath the platform is a fine 
spring, which supplies this section of the town with water.
The 
cross itself is a fine piece of workmanship, consisting of !^unic 
knots and wreaths, and bears an inscription in raised Saxon cha- 
racters on one side, telling who the owners were, and who erected 
it.
It was conveyed from the island of lona to its present site, 
where it is a great ornament to the town, and is an object of 
interest to all visitors.
Kilkenan Castle stands also in the vicinity, said to have been 
erected by King James Y.
of Scotland.
Close to this andent 
Castle there is a beautiful and picturesque country, laid out about 
two years ago, designed by Mr. J.
Lothian, garden architect and 
surveyor.
It forms a fine promenade, and is much visited by 
inhabitants and strangers.
In an old burial-ground adjoining the 
cemetery there are some monuments of considerable antiquity.
I may mention in passing that agriculture is brought to high 
perfection in this district.
In some departments of this science 
it is perhaps second to none in Scotland, and for which we are 
chiefly indebted to the enterprising, intelligent, and energetic 
commissioner to his Grace the Duke of Argyle, who is the chief 
proprietor in the district, ample communicatioi^ being afforded 
between the highland and the lowland districts by steamers daily.
The harbour of Campbeltown is one of the best in the kingdom, 
and the first on the west coast of Scotland.
Cantyre is a field for the sportsman and lover of the gun, 
good game being abundant.
Most of the lands are occupied for 
N. a, VOL.
V. 2 N 
274 BOTANICAL LETTBR8 FROM AR0TLE8HIRE.
ISeptember, 
this purpose by English gentlemen.
It is also good for the 
lovers of the rod^ although for fresh- water fishing far inferior to 
such as the lake districts of Perthshire.
Sea fishing can be en- 
joyed to perfection.
The ornithologist^ entymologist^ and geologist will each find 
here considerable scope for research.
To the botanist it forms 
a fair field for exploration.
Hitherto it has not been mucli 
visited by professional botanists, with the exception of Professor 
Balfour of Edinburgh.
Some years ago the learned Professor^ 
with a party of his students, made an excursion through the dis- 
trict, with the neighbouring district of the island of Islay, and 
published the results of this botanical excursion, but for private 
circulation only, which, with my own knowledge of the botany of 
our district, enables me to report it to my botanical brethren as 
a fair field for exploration.
In cryptogamic plants it is very 
interesting.
I should have added that the islands of Sanda and Gigha on 
the coast forms part of this district, and can be easily explored, 
particularly during the summer months.
In my anxiety to give an idea of the district, I am afraid I have 
extended this epistle beyond reasonable bounds, and for the pre- 
sent must content myself by a bare indication of the botany of 
the district by simply naming a few of the plants to be met with.
Among phsenogamous plants I may mention the following, 
viz.
Convolvulus Soldanella, C, sepium, Saanfraga qppoHtifoliay 
Anagallis tenella, Galeobdolon lutea, Linum catharticum, Prunella 
vulgaris alba, Epilobium latifolium, Nymphaa alba, Ranunculus 
aquatilis, Sagittaria sagittifolia, Rubus saa^atilis, etc.
Among Ferns the genus Scolopendrium, Asplenium, and Aspi- 
dium are well, represented.
We Have also the Hymenophyllum 
tunbridgense and Osmunda r eg alts abundantly ; and the student of 
marine botany will find our shores an interesting field for prac- 
tice.
Meantime I must reserve further details until my next.* 
* Some readers of the ' Phytologiflt' would be obliged to Mr. Lothian for spe- 
cimens oiEpUohiwn latifoUum.
— ^Ed.
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES FOR MALVERN.
275 
BOTANICAL NOTES FOR MALYEEN.
The Vernal Flora.
" Let Mother Earth now decked with flowers be seen, 
And sweet-breath*d zephyrs curl the meadows green."- 
I have no intention so to load these " Botanical Notes " with 
technical scientific definition or verbiage, as to render them un- 
readable; for I rather design to glance at the face of Nature 
pictorially, picking up a flower here and there, when it gives a 
colouring to the scene, and thus inciting the wanderer to a study 
of the beautiful and curious from the appearance it makes, seem- 
ingly to invite attention.
I once met a rustic working man in 
one of my excursions in South Wales, who had got some not 
very common plants in his hand, which caused me to inquire if 
he was a botanist.
" Why, Sir,'^ was his reply, ^^ I* can't tell 
the learned names that you botanists give to flowers ; but as I 
go along the lanes, and look under the hedges, the opening blos- 
soms seem to speak to me, and I can't help plucking them to 
examine their loveliness, and hear what they have to say.'' 
There nature spoke out, and the simple, unsophisticated Welsh- 
man opened his heart to those influences that are supposed to be 
most powerful when addressed to the cultivated mind, though 
this is not invariably the case.
But people in general would 
study botany more, and like it better, if they paid attention to 
the minute objects that make up the local colouring of a scene, 
and tried to understand them in all their bearings.
Even if they 
got but little beyond artistic knowledge, this would be worth pos- 
sessing, and they could go into botanical nomenclature if the charm 
carried them on to do so.
Yet, how few, comparatively, could ac- 
count for the tints upon a rock standing forth out of the Malvern 
Hills, and, from recollection, give it the proper hues, or know 
what plants contributed to the local colouring the rock possessed ; 
perhaps even a pre-Raphaelite painter would be puzzled : but if he 
knew anything of botany, what an insight into correct form and 
changing colour, under different circumstances, would he possess !
The rock that is black as charcoal in the midst of summer, with 
the dry bumt-up skins of the Umbilicaria lichen, looks very dif- 
ferent when all those innumerable crowded thaUi are olive-green 
under the influence of the vernal rain; and where the purple 
276 BOTANICAL NOTES FOB MALVEBN.
[September, 
investiture of the Jungermarmia covers the base of rocks M'ith a 
regal robe, the tinting that prevails is and mpst be very different 
to that where the bare syenite is merely studded with circles 
of the white " Crab's-eye " lichen, or the irregular green patches 
of the Lecidea geographica.
So also Flowering Plants, when in 
sufficient abundance, present artistic features that vary according 
to the season of the year, so that a drawing or painting ought 
really to denote at what period the view is taken; and when 
photography gives colour as well as form, a view will correctly 
denote this.
As remarked in the ^ Botany of the Malvern Hills,' 
by E.
Lees, F.L.S., to which in our Notes we must of necessity 
refer as a text-book of the plants of the district, it is thus re- 
marked: — "In summer the immense quantities of Foxglove 
(Digitalis) give a rich pink hue to the rocky slopes they cover, 
often mixQd with the tall golden torches of the great Mullein, 
Verbascum Thapsus ; while in other spots a bright purple mantle 
is created by the flowering of the wild Thyme.
As autumn slowly 
approaches, the gorsy patches sparkle most refiilgently, though 
their golden splendour is somewhat chastened by the burnt-umber 
of the withered brakes extending far and wide, and scorched by 
the blaze of August.
In May, the Hawthorns and Mountain Ashes 
wave on the sides of many of the ravines in milk-white purity, 
while in autumn their pendent coral berries give another phase 
of beauty to the inspiring and diversified scene." Much more 
might be said on plants and flowers thus considered pictorially, 
and the subject is so interesting and suggestive that I may pos- 
sibly recur to it again.
The latest improvements in the laying 
out of flower-gardens and ornamental grounds have now re- 
ference to colouVy and thus whole parterres of the same flower 
placed together are now brought to display spreads of crimson, 
lilac, azure, or gold, contrasting or combining in the most al- 
luring manner.
For a natural display of this kind we again 
commend a sight of the beds of wild lemon-tinted Daffodils in 
Eastnor Park, which, once seen, will long live in the memory.
I must now advance to the Vernal Flora, which is beginning to 
unfold in all its varied lustre, notwithstanding that cold winds 
will blow, 'and that what country people call "blackthorn 
weather" is sure to annoy the explorer about the time that the 
Sloe or Blackthorn, Prunus spinosa, comes into flower, and 
" that is now," as the song testifies.
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES FOR MALVERN.
277 
The Vernal Flora may be considered as introduced by the 
" Lady-smock/^ Cardamine pratensis, or Cuckoo-flower,, which 
in warm spots is in flower by Lady Day, March 25th, though 
its culmination or general flowering does not take place before a 
month afterwards.
Now it is that, according to Shakspeare, — 
" Cuckoo-buds of yellow hue 
Do paint the meadows with delight ;" 
these " cuckoo-buds" — so called in an opened state, as we have 
ascertained is still the Warkwickshire term for them — ^becoming 
when the sun breaks forth at noon the resplendent golden stars 
of the Pilewort, Ranunculus Mcaria, In damp, oozy spots, as 
before remarked, the Marsh Marigold, Caltha palustris, becomes 
pre-eminently splendid, and dazzles from afar; while the well- 
known jagged-leaved Dandelion becomes very numerous ^mong 
the springing grass, to which its yellow composite flowers offer a 
brilliant contrast, while a later period of the vernal floral region 
is marked by their conspicuous white clocks.
Now, it is that 
the exquisitely beautiful 
«Loye-sick Cowslip that the head inclines," 
and that gives out so pleasing a fragrance, scatters its pale-yellow 
clusters over the pastures ; and on the margin of woods the early 
Purple Orchis, Orchis mascula, becomes a brilliant object of at- 
traction, distinguished as much almost by its spotted leaves as its 
broad purple spike of flowers.
This merits poetical as well as 
botanical notice by being the " Long Purples'^ that fair demented 
Ophelia held in her hand among the " Dead Nettles" and other 
emblematic flowers of the spring that she gathered and contem- 
plated ere the '^ envious sliver broke" that plunged her delicate 
form in the fatal waters.
Willie Shakspeare knew the vernal 
flowers of Warwickshire pretty well as to their vernacular names, 
whether handled by " cold maids " or '^ liberal shepherds." But 
more anon on the vernal flowers, when we can get a truly, bright 
vernal day to rejoice among them, as we have done of yore, 
among friends dead, changed, or lost — though still embalmed in 
the memory of pleasant excursions.
Just one glance on the turf of the hills, to show the tints that 
come and go, variable as the hues on beauty's cheek, or those 
that stem Time himself gives to human prospects, or the changes 
that, alas !
brighten up for a moment or shadow the mind.
" Early 
278 BOTANICAL NOTES FOR MALVERN.
[^September, 
in the spring/' to quote again from the ^ Botany of the Malvern 
Hills/ we find "the Wood Spurge, Euphorbia amygdaloidea, 
throws a light-green verdure about the declivities, contrasting 
well with dead Grasses, withered Brakes, and the dark tufts of 
yet unflowered Gorse; soon after, tufts of Broom, Sarothamrms 
scoparius, in many spots vein the hillside with golden gleams; 
and still later the rising and uncurling fronds of the Brake give a 
verdant cincture to the then arid masses of rock bearded with 
crisp Lichens.
But on the rocky masses themselves much depends 
upon a showery season, as then minute plants are well developed, 
scarcely observable at any other time/' 
The Mosses remain at their acme of perfection, and should now 
be studied and collected by those fond of that elegant tribe of 
the cryptogamic plants.
The species that presents itself at 
present so abundantly on the rough stone walls, and with its 
crowded green thecse, or stalked urns, gives them such a pleasant 
verdant colouring, is the Bryum caspititium* A beautiful Jittle 
Byrum, with star-like tufts of leaves, called Byrum roaeum, grows 
in the little beech-wood on the hillside at Malvern Wells.
Note, — We have this week received information from an 
esteemed and acutely observant botanical friend now visiting 
Malvern, that he has latq^y found a considerable quantity of that 
delicate little plant the Adoxa Moschatellina in the space between 
the well-known Purlieu Lane and Mathon Lodge, late the re- 
sidence of Canon Cocks.
In such a beautiful locality an enthu- 
siastic wanderer might well exclaim — 
<< Ah !
little Adoxa, they say 
Thy flower possesses no glory, 
But m at thy habitat stay 
And prove 'tis a palpable story." 
I might, indeed, whisper in the ear of curious botanical visitors 
to or residents of Malvern, If you want to find any rare plants, 
search the vicinity of Purlieu Lane.
{To he continued,) 
1861.] EBViEws. 279 
Flora of Preston.
By Chakles Joseph Ashfield.
— Parts I.
and 
II., reprinted from the Transactions of the Historic Society of 
Lancashire and Cheshire, Vols.
X. and XII.
Read 21st Ja- 
nuary, 1858, and 16th February, 1860.
Botany is well represented in Lancashire, though there is no 
county list of its floral productions extant.
There are excellent 
Floras of Manchester and Liverpool, and a complete list of the 
plants gro¥dng near Preston may be confidently expected.
The 
two parts now before us give promise of a more comprehensive 
work on this subject.
Our object in giving publicity to what is now doing in Pres- 
ton is twofold ; first, to invite those botanists who reside in 
Lancashire, or who have botanized about the lower part of the 
river Ribble or along the shores of its estuary, or on the banks 
of the Irish Sea, to assist the compiler of this new Flora with all 
the information they can supply about the plants and localities 
of the district ; second, to induce such of our readers as mean to 
visit Lancashire and the lakes of Westmoreland and Cumber- 
land, to take Preston in their way thither, and to spend a day or 
two investigating the vegetation of the sandhills about Lytham, 
Blackpool, the Naze Point, etc., or to look into the peat bogs, or 
hunt the moors which are so plentiful in this part of the county.
We hope that the following list of rarities will be a sufficient 
inducement to them to takeour counsel.
Our author tells us that Chelidonium majus is now scarce in the 
immediate vicinity of Preston, " being much sought after by her- 
balists.^' We thank Mr. Ashfield for this useful hint ; though 
there is naturally on our part a desire that no plant should be 
extirpated and lost in any part of the country, yet we are pleased 
to hear that there are some who find uses in plants generally 
deemed worthless.
This species in bygone times was an herb 
of renown ; but now, like many other plants, it is neglected.
It 
is more than probable that the faculty now can obtain many 
more potent remedies for the numerous bodily ailments to which 
poor humanity is subject ; still it is satisfactory to know, from 
the experience of a more enlightened age, that the reputation of 
our ancestors is not a modem delusion, and that their know- 
ledge and wisdom were not mythical.
280 REVIEWS.
[September, 
Aquilegia (Columbine) is occasionally found in woods by the 
side of the river Brock, between its source and the railway station.
It is much to be desired that the learned author would give us a 
map of the country with the stations where his plants grow pro- 
minently marked.
It would be very gratifying to us to tell our 
readers wh^re this wood is, but we hope they will get a better in- 
formed guide to this locality than the writer of this notice.
The 
other rare plants of Ranunculacea and its kindred Orders, are 
Ranunculus Linpua, between Blackpool and Kirkham ; and one of 
the two British Hellebores, H.
viridis, " a thicket by the side of 
a foot-path leading from the wood, Plumpton road to Cottam 
Hall.^^ TVollius europ€eus is not a rare plant in the Craven dis- 
trict, and in this Flora it is localized "near the Liverpool Water- 
works, in Heath Charnock ;^' also " at Plymouth bridge, near 
Chorley." Corydalis lutea is found both as a weed in gardens 
and on old walls.
We have seen it cultivated in cottage gardens, 
and sometimes spreading through the hedge or paling fence, but 
it is more partial to walls.
Asarum and Aristolochia, both renowned and very scarce plants, 
are found in this district, the former at Barton the latter at 
Warton, on the right side of the road to Lytham.
Geranium pfueum is also one of the Preston plants, and here, as 
in most if not in all other parts of England, a doubtful native.
It is reported as found in a meadow and in an orchard, localities 
that will not pass muster among some botanists.
To G.
pratense, 
G, sanguineum, and 6.
lucidum there is no objection.
As G.
sylvaticum abounds in pasture-fields in Craven, it may turn up 
not far from Preston : probably much nearer than Pendle Hill, 
where Primula farinosa is said to grow, and where Pinguicula 
vulgaris certainly grows.
As the former is found on the Lanca- 
shire side of the Bibble, somewhat further north than Skipton, it 
may be expected on the Pendle Hills, which are much higher than 
any of the hills near Settle, about which Primula farinosa grows 
abundantly.
Utricularia vulgaris and U.
minor occur here, the former at 
Martinmere and the latter on Leyland Moss.
Hottonia palustris 
is found with the former, and the queen of British aquatics, 
Nympfuea alba ; also Hippuris vulgaris and other more common 
aquatic plants.
If we were asked by a farrier, or perhaps we should write ♦ 
1861.] REVIEWS.
281 
by a cowleech or a horse-doctor (forgive us, ye practitioners of 
the noble art of healing the many ills flesh is heir to) where 
grows Hound's-tongue ?
We should answer unhesitatingly, Be- 
tween New Brighton and the mouth of the Dee, along the 
sandhills which skirt the Wirral sea- ward.
It appears that 
the plant is quite as abundant on the sandhills between Lytham 
and Blackpool.
This is a fact worth knowing; for the spe- 
cies, though not to be accounted scarce in the interior of our 
island, would not, in many counties, afford an unlimited sup- 
ply of the article.
It is the root which the Surrey leeches 
employ, and they can get but a little of it, and in the winter 
cannot find it at all.
They might soon procure a cartload 
from the Wirral at any period of the year.
Hyoscyanms niger is another valuable officinal plant of this 
district.
It is not stated that it is plentiful here, but it is very 
abundant in the counties of Huntingdon and Northampton.
The CrudferiB and the Umbelliferce are well represented in 
this Flora.
The rarer plants of the first- mentioned group are 
Lepidium Smithiiy Cochlearia danictty Cakile maritima, Braasica 
monensis, Sisymbrium Sophia ; most of these occur near Lytham : 
also Cardamine amara, Nasturtium sylvestre, near Preston.
Ery^ 
aimum cheiranthoides and Sinapis nigra grow in cornfields here 
as everywhere else; although some writer in the ^Phytologist' 
says it, S.
nigra, is not a field plant but a waysider.
At all 
events, whatever may be its habitat in Middlesex, here it grows 
in cornfields, and no mistake.
Plants are probably as capricious 
in their localities as some people are in their dispositions ; allow- 
ance will be made by those who have a moderate share of the 
milk of human kindness in their composition ; or, what is better, 
a trace of charity, which is slow to think ill either of men or of 
plants.
The* rare Umbellifers muster strong, as we may say in 
these days of volunteering ; Caucalis latifolia, Myrrhis odorata, 
Bupleurum rotundifolium, Smyrnium Olusatrum, (Enanthe peuce^ 
danifolia, Apium graveolens, PimpineUa magna, Eryngium mari- 
timum, Sison Amomum, Conium maculatum, and several humbler, 
commoner species appear in these lists.
One of them, Caucalis, 
is probably a straggler, and it will be a question with some cri- 
tical botanists whether (Enanthe peucedanifolia be genuine, or 
whether it be not the commoner (E.
Lachenalii, Those who are 
N. S.
VOL.
v. 2 o 
283 KBVIBW8.
[September, 
on the spot can most satisfactorily decide this point : we give 
no opinion^ because we have no specimens.
Verbascum virgatum is another plant about which the author 
is not quite positive that it may not be a stray, like the Caucalis, 
Boraffo, Anchusa sempervirens, etc.
He does not indicate a 
doubt about the genuineness of the localities for Omithogalum 
Mmbellatum, Gagea lutea, Galanthm nivaliSy Crocus vemus, Nar- 
cissus Pseudonardsms ; nor does he hesitate about that of 
Saxifraga umbrosa ; he merely says that his belief is that this 
form should be called S.
hirsuta.
The Gentianace(B, as might be expected, abound here.
The 
most remarkable are Gentiana Pneumonanthe, G, campestris, 
Chlora perfoliata, Menyanthes trifoliatay Erythraa littoralis, 
(jB.
linariafolia).
Is Erythnea latifolia absent?
We have seen 
what is so called, from the vicinity of Liverpool.
Possibly our 
author may agree with some botanists who cannot discover good 
distinctive characters whereby they can satisfactorily separate 
E, pulchelltty E, linaruefolia, and E.
latifolia from E, Centaurium.
The rarer Composite are Senecio saracenicus and S.
viscostis ; 
Hieradum murorum is reported as " frequent on old walls, and 
on heaps of rubbish .^^ We have never seen it on walls.
Our 
belief is that the plant which is so common on the walls of 
Chester is H.
sylvaticum, var.
maculatum, or H.
vulgatum.
We 
are pretty certain that the Hieradum on old walls about Becken- 
ham and Sydenham is H.
vulgatum ; and we further believe that 
this Hieradum received its name of murorum because it never 
grows on walls, as lucus a non lucendo, 
Pyrola rotundifolia is one of the most interesting plants of 
the district, and here it abounds.
Bartsia viscosa, a still greater 
rarity, grows at Lytham, at the back of the sandhills.
Butomus 
umbellattASy with Stratiotes aloides, grows near Preston, Mentha 
piperita and M, rotundifolia, Drosera anglica, D.
intermedia, 
and 2).
rotundifolia, Andromeda polifolia, Vacdnium Vitis-idcsa, 
V, Oxy coccus, Potentilla vema, Epipactis palustris, Hydrocharis 
Morsus-rancs, etc., grow in this part of Lancashire.
Our list is 
not nearly exhausted, but our readers' patience will not last for 
ever.
Enough has been told to induce botanists to pay a visit to 
Preston, where they will have far more enjoyment in seeing and 
collecting the floral treasures of the district, than in merely 
being informed whereabout they are to be found.
R. 
1S61.] REVIEWS.
283 
A Priced and partially Descriptive Catalogue of Stove y Green- 
house, and Hardy "Exotic and BHtish Ferns, Selaginellas, and 
Lycopods, offered for sale by Abraham Stansfield and Sons^ 
Todmorden.
December, 1860.
The varieties of Ferns are steadily increasing; the supply is 
stimulated by the demand; for this commercial maxim is of 
universal application.
We reviewed Mr. Sim^s Fern Catalogue 
several months ago, not without some wonderment at the num- 
bers of new forms; and again we have to admit as our belief, 
that curiosities in vegetation will never ceasg.
The varieties, the 
named varieties alone, of the common Lady-Fern, amount in the 
Catalogue before us to upwards of two score.
The diflTerent 
forms of Blechnum Spicant are now 24.
Such of our readers 
as want to know something more definitely about these plants 
will send for the Catalogue.
This brief notice is printed to call 
their attention to the fact that there is in the north of England 
an extensive establishment for the cultivation, keeping, and sale 
of a stock of these charming plants, of which the worthy owners 
may be justly proud.
It may also be stated that the named varieties of Scolopen- 
drium vulgare are above 60.
The prices of these not expensive 
novelties of cultivation, as some of them may perhaps be justly 
called, vary from a shilling to ten and sixpence.
Few indeed — 
from three to half-a-dozen — reach the last-entered quotation; 
while fewer still reach the somewhat formidable figure of twenty- 
one shillings.
The buyers can hardly grumble at the prices.
The number of British Ferns in this List, with their varieties 
all named and priced, is 304 (including the Lycopods) .
The hardy exotic Ferns, with their varieties, are above 40.
The prices of these vary from one shilling to seven and sixpence.
The greenhouse and stove exotic Ferns, number upwards of 
320, and the prices vary from one shilling to thirty shillings.
Since the aboVe was written^ a second edition of this interest- 
ing Catalogue has been sent by Messrs.
Stansfield, and in this 
amended reprint, several of the typographical errors have been 
corrected.
We should feel obliged to our respected contributors 
to tell us if Cystopteris virens be a species or a variety ; in either 
case a specimen would be acceptable.
Again, it may be asked if 
lonchititoides is not a misprint of hnchitidoides ; see p.
8. 
284 DEATH OF DR.
ANDREW siNcuLiB.
[September j 
DEATH OP DR.
ANDBEW SINCLAIR.
{Prom the ' LytUlton Timet; April 3, 1861.) 
Among all the records of accidental death which have darkened the 
columns of this journal almost without intermission since the foundation 
of the settlement, none can be found so lamentable as that which it is our 
painful duty now to register.
News has reached town that Dr. Andrew 
Sinclair, who passed through Christchurch and Lyttelton but a few weeks 
ago, to assist Mr. Julius Haast in his exploration of the interior of this 
island, perished by drowning in the upper waters of that fatal Rangitata 
river, on Monday the 25th of March.
An authentic account which we 
have received states that on the day mentioned the exploring-party were 
about to proceed to the sources of the eastern and middle branches of the 
Rangitata, having finished the survey of the western branch, when an acci- 
dent rendered necessary the return of a man and horse to Mr. Butler's 
station (Mesopotamia) ; Dr. Sinclair determined to return with them, his 
object being to collate the^ large quantity of valuable specimens of botany 
he had collected, to complete various drawings, and to recruit his health, 
which had suffered ijB»m the hardships to which he had been exposed.
Having one horse between them.
Dr. Sinclair and the man who accompa- 
nied him, named Richard Stringer, adopted the plan, where the river- 
crossings were bad, of letting the horse take over one of them at a time, 
and sending him back for the other.
At one spot, where the river divided, 
leaving an island in the middle, Dr. Sinclair went over first, selecting a 
not very favourable crossing.
On reaching the island he endeavoured to 
send the horse back, but the animal refused to return, and set off by him- 
self to cross the next stream towards Mr. Butler's station.
Dr. Sinclair 
followed the horse into the second stream, which was fleet and broad, and 
Stringer, after watching him for some time, went down the bank a little to 
find a better crossing for himself.
On reaching an elevated spot which 
commanded a complete view of that part of the river, Stringer turned 
round, and to his surprise failed to catch sight of his fellow-traveller.
He 
at first paid little attention to the circumstance, thinking that Dr. Sinclair 
having crossed, was resting, or gone in search of the horse ; but after 
watching for some time longer the painful reality began to force itself upon 
him, and he returned to the camp — not two miles distant — and related 
his sad story.
Mr. Haast hurried to the spot, where on the following day 
he was joined by Mr. Butler and the rest of the party.
About sundown 
on this day the body of the unfortunate gentleman was discovered, about 
three hundred yards below the place where he had crossed, in a position 
which gave every indication that he had left the water alive.
The body 
was some yards from the stream, and the head was resting on the arm.
No time was lost in conveying the remains to Mr. Butler' s^ where, a 
coffin having lieen prepared, the solemn ceremony of interment took place 
in a spot carefully selected and fenced round.
A document was prepared 
and attested by those present, detailing the circumstances of his death, in 
precise language, in case legal investigation (which could not be had on 
the spot) were not required.
We learn, however, that steps will be taken 
for securing the observance of the desirable forms of law.
1861.] DEATH OP DR.
ANDREW SINCLAIR.
285 
Dr. Andrew Sinclair, whose untimely end we have thus recorded, has left 
a name and a character behind him to which we regret that we must fail to 
do justice.
He was a surgeon in the Eoyal Navy, and had served with 
credit afloat, visiting almost every comer of the world in the course of his 
duty.
His experience and his scientific attainments, especially as a botanist, 
brought him into communication with many leading men in the world of 
science at home, with several of whom he formed a lasting friendship.
After leaving the regular service, his professional abilities secured him em- 
ploym'ent on several occasions as Surgeon- Superintendent of ships bringing 
convicts to the Australian colonies, in the performance of which most diffi- 
cult duty he was eminently successful, and most so in the most trying of 
all, the charge of female convicts.
In 1843 he came down to New Zealand 
on a botanizing tour, the second which he made to this country, and hap- 
pened to be a fellow-traveller with Captain Titzroy, then coming to 
Auckland to assume the dutie* of Governor of the colony.
He landed at 
Auckland on the 23rd of December in that year, at a time when local 
party spirit ran high, and a difficult task was set before the new Governor 
to steer with safety between the contending political factions.
It hap- 
pened that, on the resignation of Mr. Willoughby Shortland, the task of 
appointing a Colonial Secretary devolved upon ^e Governor; and he, 
believing it to be utterly futile to name one of the local leaders of party, 
ojffered the appointment to Dr. Sinclair, who long refused it, though 
repeatedly pressed upon him.
Alleging a consciousness of want of quali- 
fication for the post, he for some time resisted the Governor's entreaties, 
and at last only accepted office to relieve the Government of the Colony 
from embarrassment.
As an official Dr. Sinclair worked hard and attended 
regularly to his duties ; and though he has not left the reputation of ability 
as a secretary, there is no doubt that he rendered as valuable service as 
the system of government, which left the Govenior all-powerful, and his 
highest subordinates but clerks, permitted any official to render.
He held 
his office until the introduction of responsible government, within jthese 
last five years, released him, with a pension, from serving the colony in one 
way to benefit it in another way no less important.
Dr. Sinclair was the first collector of specimens of New Zealand natural 
history, in botany, conchology, and entomology.
He sent home such a 
variety of plants, shells, and insects, as to induce Dr. Gray, of the British 
Museum, to commence the first scientifically arranged catalogue, which 
may be foimd appended to Dieffenbach's work on New Zealand.
He was 
of late years again closely occupied by his botanical researches, and spent 
a large portion of his time in the investigation of the natural productions 
of i\Sa country.
It was in the prosecution of his favourite pursuit that he 
feU a victim to the perils which beset the explorers of nature among our 
inhospitable Southern Alps.
But the passion for science by no means 
closed the heart of Dr. Sinclair to human sympathies.
If he earned a 
reputation at a distance as a natural historian, he was better known in his 
immediate neighbourhood as a true philanthropist.
In 1843, 1844, and 
1845, the population of Auckland underwent severe privations and dis- 
tress, such as the settlers of this part of the colony have never known.
Many an industrious and honest man received then at Dr. Sinclair's hands 
that assistance which he wanted to tide him over the crisis ; and not a few 
286 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[5^/emfar, 
prosperouB men of the present day have reason, in recalling that time, to 
name him as the man who caused them to be what they aie.
Uaving no 
fiunily of his own, his generosity also gathered round him relations not a 
few in number to share in the prosperity which he had earned, and late in 
life enjoyed in the neighbourhood of Aucldand.
In priyate life Dr. Sinclair was a true Christian gentleman, liberal in 
the expression of opinions, pleasant and courteous in manner; as an 
official he was honest, upright, scnq^ulbus, and laborious ; as a man of 
science he was ardent but painstaking.
The loss of one of his attainments 
and character, with the means and leisure which he possessed, is a public 
calamity ; for there are few among us with his advantages, and fewer still 
who can use them as he did.
His age we do not know ; but though far 
from a young man, he had much of the vigour of youth still remaining, 
and might in all probability have enjoyed many years of life agreeably to 
himself, and usefully to his fellow-colonists, had not the melancholy acci- 
dent which it has been oar duty to narrate carried him ofif from the midst 
of his labours.
BOTANICAL ^OTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
How TO DE8TK0Y CUSCUTA.
Another of man's enemies is said to lie at his mercy.
Cuscuta is no 
longer to be dreaded ; chemistry has done for her.
What the first Darwin 
calls her " dangerous charms " have ceased to be dangerous ; and the 
growers of Flax, Clover, and Lucerne may sleep in peace.
A French che- 
mist, M.
Fonsard, having remarked that Cuscutas contain '' an enormous 
quantity of tannic acid," bethought him of iron-salts as a fatal enemy, and 
called them to his aid.
He mounted on wheels a barrel filled with water, 
and introduced into it as much green vitriol (sulphate of iron) as would 
saturate it ; the proportion is immaterial, as water will only take up a 
fixed* quantity.
To his barrel he adapted a tap and india-rubber hose, with 
a noz^e.
In the field he cut away most of the Cuscuta and Lucerne at- 
tacked by it, so as to lay the soil completely bare.
The part mowed off 
was put in heaps and burnt, or else drenched with the sulphate of iron.
The spaces whence the Cuscuta had been removed were also well watered 
to some distance all round, so as to be sure that every thread was reached.
The effect was admirable ; in an hour or two every morsel of Cuacida was 
destroyed, or, more correctly speaking, "mineralized," and nothing remained 
but a heap of black threads twisted and entangled in all manner of ways.
A 
tannate of iron had been formed inside her.
As for the Lucerne, it is greedy 
of green vitriol, and pushed with the utmost vigour after the operation.
Hellebobus vibidis 
Is undoubtedly wild in the locality mentioned in your number for July, 
Tol. V.
p. 221.
It grows in straggling plants about the edges of the oak (un- 
fenced) copses and hedge-sides, not near any garden or inhabited place or 
pleasure-groimds.
I have lately been told by one who is able to distin- 
guish it, that the green Hellebore occurs sparingly in Threapland Wood, 
And also in Plumbland Wood, both in this county.
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
287 
The former place is a rugged ravine of natural copse, with beds of 
mountain limestone jutting out here and there, and is most unlikely to 
have had this or any other plant inserted, as the whole has been open to 
the pasturage of cattle, where practicable, as far back as memory serves.
I am not aware of any other Cumbrian locality.
W. Dickinson.
Anemone banunculoides.
I have collected the above-named plant at Scoulton, about five miles 
from Watton.
In this locality it grows in a wood, on the right side of 
the road, next the turnpike, and dose by the public-house.
It also grows 
on the road to Thetford from the same place.
This last station is now a 
meadow, but was once a wood as I have heard.
In this place there is-a 
pit, where edible frogs are said to be, but I never found any, though I 
have searched dilligently.
But the plant is there, with many others, 
especially Orchids [Listera ovata for example), also some Junci^ Carices, 
and Grasses.
- W.
Winter.
Pyeola rotundipolia.
In answer to the question in the April number of the * Phytologist ;' — 
in the Flora appended to Horsfield's * History of ^ssex,' Charlton Forest, 
near Chichester, is stated to be the habitat of the aoove-mentioned plant.
G.D.
Things not Generally Known.
As the pages of the * Phytologist' often give its readers the derivation 
of the English names of British plants, I wish to call your attentio%to a 
note in * Notes and Queries ' respecting the derivation of our friend Jack- 
by-the-hedge, or Sauce-alone (Alliaria officinalis).
As this note is incompre- 
hensible to me, I give it verbatim, that i/ou may see what is done, in other 
quarters by other periodicals, upon the subject of botany.
" Sauce, — Sarce, vegetables ; Essex.
(Halliwell's Dictionary.) This word 
is used in Norfolk and Suffolk, in the same sense as in Essex.
Beading 
yesterday in Luther's Bible, Exodus xii.
8, 1 found the words " mit bittern 
Salsen," which our translation renders "with bitter herbs." Probably, 
then, the East-Anglian word is a remnant of the Saxon.
I find in Eliigers 
Dictionary, part ii., Whittaker's edition, " Salse, f.
(pi.
n. sauce)." But in 
part i.
(English-German) I do not find " sauce " translated " Salse." We 
have the word applied to one of the popular nam^s of AUiaria officinalis, 
Jack-by-the-hedge, or Sauce-alone.
May not Sauce-alone mean Sauce; 
a-lalie, i.
e, sauce (herb) a (at or by) lane ?
— G.
B. Frere.
" Soydon SaU, Diss:* S.
BeisLY.
More Materials for the Manufacture op Paper.
A Company has recently been formed with a view of obtaining cotton, flax, 
hemp, and jute from India, and also for the purpose of making use of 
certain fibres which it is expected will produce materials of great value to 
the silk, linen, mohair, and paper trades.
The fibres have been sent to 
different manufacturers and subjected to their processes, and in all cases 
with satisfactory results.
One house asked for 50,000 tons this year, and 
888 BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[S€plembei\ 
100,000 tons for five succeeding years, and others for very large supplies.
40,000 acres of land had been offered to the Company in one part of India, 
and 15,000 acres in another part, and many thousand more could be ob- 
tained if the Indian Government would grant facilities.
The principal 
fibres referred to are the Rheea of Assam (one of the strongest and best 
fibres known) ; the Neilgherry Nettle, the Aloe, the Pine-apple, and the 
Plantain.
The most important is the Rheea, which can be grown to any 
extent, and imported into this country at highly remunerative prices.
The 
Company propose to turn their attentipn in the first place more particularly 
to the Punjaub and north-western provinces of India for flax and hemp, 
and to Assam and the Sunderbunds for Rheea and Cotton.
Mr. Ewart said 
the principal object of the deputation was to show Sir Charles Wood the 
fibres out of which paper could be made.
Mr. Spensley then presented 
various portions of the Rheea fibre, both in its raw and manufactured state, 
and explained the mode adopted in preparing it.
Various specimens of 
paper, lace, hemp, substitutes for horsehair, etc., were exhibited, and it 
was stated that if the fibre was operated upon while young, eighty per cent, 
of flax could be obtained.
— Times.
Claytonia alsinoides.
This plant is perennial, and it is very hardy.
It is now in blossom in a 
shady, cool part of my garden, where the same plant flowered last season 
(1 860) from May to October.
J. Sim.
Notice.
, 
Mr. B.
M. Watkins, of Glewstone, Ross, Herefordshire, hereby in- 
timates that he did not undertake to supply applicants generally with 
fresh specimens of the Luzulas X.
Borreri, L, pilosa, and L.
ForaterC be- 
cause recent examples are not procurable at all seasons ; but he suggests, 
that as fresh examples are more satisfactory than dried ones, botanists 
should avail themselves of the facilities afforded by the Post-office for 
their exchange.
He will undertake to supply specimens in a recent state 
to those who wish to compare them, if early application is made, and the 
address of the botanist^transmitted accompanied with a postage-stamp.
Communications have been received from 
Archibald Jerdon ; J.
S. M.
; W.
Richardson, Jun.
; Dr. Windsor; W.
Pamplin ; Miss E.
Stackhouse ; the Rev. Mr.
Williams ; F.
Y. Brocas ; W.
P. ; the Rev. R.
H. Webb ; John Sim ; Ed. Lees, F.L.S.; Joseph Croucher; 
WiUiam Richardson; T.
R. A.
Briggs; C.
J. Ashfield.
BOOKS, ETC., FOR REVIEW.
The Chemist and Druggist y July \hth.
The Alnwick Mercury, June lat.
Berrow's Worcester Journal; July 20th.
Dundee, Perth, aud People's Journal, August Srd.
EBBATUM.
In No. H N.S., for June, 1861, in Hst of plants near Boss, p.
189, for Arabia 
vema read Braba vema.
^ ' 
[October, 1861.] 289 
NOTES ON NOEFOLK PLANTS.
By W.
Winter.
Nat. Ord.
RANUNCULACEiE.
— Thalictrum minus I find about 
Cortin, in Suffolk?, about three miles from Lowestoft; also at 
Garlestone; in both places sparingly, on sandhills.
Anemone ranunculoides.
This very rare species has been long 
known to grow in various woods, meadows, and even by road- 
sides, in Norfolk (see ' Phytologist ' for September, 1861).
The 
learned author of the ^ English Flora,' though connected with 
this county (Norfolk), does not refer to any of the stations which 
have been long known, but only recently published.
He asserts 
the true nativity of the plant in strong terms : — " This having 
never, as far as can be learned from old writers, been a garden 
plant in England, cannot safely be asserted to have escaped from 
gardens.
I have wild specimens from the excellent author of the 
' Flora Anglica,' and from the late Mr. G.
Anderson, two men 
whose accuracy and judgment are as unimpeachable as their 
honesty'' (Eng. FL vol.
iii.
pp.
38, 39).
Sir J.
E. Smith enters 
King's Langley, Herts, and Wrotham, Kent, on the authority 
of Hudson ; and Abbot's Langley on that of Mr. G.
Anderson.
Sir W.
J. Hooker quotes these three stations without the authority, 
and subjoins ^'scarcely a native." Honourable knights occa- 
sionally differ, as do learned doctors.
It is worthy of remark 
that both the honourables were, at all events in early life, con- 
nected with Norfolk, if not natives of this county.
Mr. Daw- 
son Turner, another botanical notability, does not appear to have ' 
been aware of the existence of this rarity in his native county.
This Anemone has very recently been detected in another 
locality in Herts, but several, miles from either of its two re- 
corded stations.
The writer of this has seen a specimen which 
grew at Scot's Bridge, near Rickmansworth.
In this last- 
mentioned locality there is abundance of the plant, associated 
with the blue Anemone, A.
apennina, which is said to grow at 
Wimbledon, but on authority not unimpeachable (see Eng. PI.
p. 38).
*' In Wimbledon woods (where it still grows), Mr. Rand.^' 
Hooker says, '^In Wimbledon woods, growing with Eranthis 
hyemalis.'^ I have seen it in Wimbledon garden growing with 
the winter Aconite {E, hyemalis), and I should like much to see 
N.S. VOL.V. 2 p 
290 NOTES ON NORPOLK PLANTS.
^October, 
it growing in Wimbledon woods.
N.B. The fact of its growth 
in Wimbledon woods is not at all startling, but the authority is 
not sufficient for the establishment of its ^Ivan station.
One of the Norfolk localities for this rare plant is in the 
•grounds of Wheatacre Rectory, a place about three miles from 
Gillingham.
In ^ Cybele/ vol.
i. p.
75, there occurs the following notice of 
this species : — " Alien.
Scarcely a naturalized plant in Britain, 
though introduced into Hudson's ' Flora Anglica,^ and retained 
by succeeding authors.
The counties of Kent, Hertford, Suf- 
folk, Salop, and Nottingham have been indicated for this species ; 
that of Berwick turning out to be an error, through the mistaking 
of RanunculiLS auricomua for the present plant." 
This, it must be admitted, is an odd mistake, and probably is 
a rare example of taking for granted what any discoverer would 
rmsh to be true ; but it is not a solitary mistake.
In the work, 
wherein it is so considerately and kindly recorded, there are 
many such evidences of overweening confidence in the observa- 
tive, reflective, and ratiocinative abilities of the amiable author.
In Leighton's ^ Flora of Shropshire/ the plant is localized, 
'^Woods; rare.
Badger Dingle, H, Bidwell, Esq. I" 
A remark on the situation of Badger Dingle may be useful to 
some plant-hunters.
This locality is the station of more rare plants, though not of 
any so rare as the yellow Anemone, viz.
of Geranium lucidumy 
which is entered on Mr. BidwelFs authority; also of Chryso^ 
splevium oppositifolium, and others of less note.
Its situation is 
five miles south-east of Shiflhal.
See 'Flora of Shropshire,' 
pp.
186, 256, 331, 534, etc.
TrolliuLS europceus is found at Norton, but it is rare.
This will constitute an item in some future supplement to the 
' Cybele Britannica ;' or, as the learned Secretary of the Thirsk 
Natural History Society elegantly and truly describes such 
awkward facts, " new to the Ouse province.^' Though it has pro- 
bably grown there ever since the eastern lowlands, Norfolk and 
all, emerged from the humid lap of old mother Thetis.
Aquilegia vulgaris occurs sparingly in woods about Ranworth, 
a very wild tract of country, and an obscure village about nine 
miles from Norwich, intersected by sluggish rivers, or dikes or 
drives (the provincial names of huge open drains), and abounding 
1861.] NOTES ON NOBPOLK PLANTS.
291 
in rare aquatics^ and in such as love to grow on the brink of deep 
waters.
Nat. Ord.
PAPAVBRACEiE.
— Chelidonium majus is very common 
about Banworth and Aldeby.
Rcemeria hybrida : this plant is not peculiar to Caihbridge- 
shire, as stated in the ^ Phytologist ' for April, 1861, p.
124; 
it is found in several places in Norfolk, though nowhere very 
plentiful, as at Fritton, two miles from Long Stratton (see ^ Phy- 
tologist ' for August, 1861, p.
255).
Hudson's authority is con- 
firmed as far as it probably can be by a manuscript account, 
penes me, of a specimen of Glaucium phceniceum from this very 
locality, preserved in the herbarium of a Llangollen botanist.
This veteran recommended a renewed search for the plant ; but 
the search was productive of no result but disappointment.
Nat. Ord.
Cruciper^.
— Cakile maritima grows on the sea- 
shore, between Yarmouth and Lowestoft.
Hutchinsia petraa, which is found on the ruins of St. Bene- 
dict's Abbey?, Norwich, is another rarity, and an example of a 
very local species.
But this fact, which is new to science, though 
not to nature, is corroborative proof of the genuineness of the 
Eltham locality for this plant.
Let the assumption be granted 
that the monastic orders planted and propagated many foreign 
plants, this was not one of a sort which they would be likely to 
patronize, for it is neither useful nor ornamental ; and like many 
other minute rupestral or mural plants, it is not very readily 
naturalized.
It is not improbable that its apparent predilec- 
tions for the western parts of England originate in its finding 
there both a moister climate and a more rocky surface.
Teesdalia nudicaulis is not scarce on banks near the sea, about 
Yarmouth and Lowestoft.
In this locality it was in flower last 
season, 1860, on the 16th June.
(It was in flower at least two 
months earlier on Barnes Common, near LondoiT.) 
Lepidium latifolium, in salt-marshes by Breydon, in this dis- 
trict, and at Beedham, but sparingly.
The history of this plant 
in England tells a doleful tale to the lovers of British botany, 
and forebodes the total disappearance of this species.
About 
a century ago it was not uncommon in the marshes and about 
the creeks near Faversham, in Kent.
It has not been seen 
there, or, more correctly, no record of its appearance there has 
been published, for probably more than half a century.
Lepi- 
292 NOTES ON NORFOLK PLANTS.
[October, 
dium Draba is taking its place in our lists^ and possibly it ap- 
pears in some of the ancient localities for this fine plant.
Lepidium Smithii and Nasturtium sylvestre grow sparingly 
by hedges near Banworth.
Cochlearia danica appears among 
stones ftt Breydon^ near Yarmouth^ and also at Burgh Castle^ 
though rare.
Is found by watersides.
Note, The common Orucifers are omitted in the above enu- 
meration; those quoted are very favourable representatives of the 
Order in a county which is nearly flat^ and possesses no rocky 
elevations.
Further^ Iberis amara, which occurs^ was intro- 
duced from Berkshire, probably among seed- wheats and Brassica 
oleracea, from Torquay, Devon.
The following are not grouped in Orders, because there are 
so few under each Order that to enter them as above would oc- 
cupy more space than is necessary.
Reseda alba grows on sandhills at Gisleham, near Lowestoft.
A great many plants like those observed at Wandsworth, are re- 
ported from this locality.
(Will some obliging friend send a list 
of them to the Editor or to the Publisher of this magazine P) 
Viola odorata is plentiful about Ranworth and Aldeby, in 
woods and on hedge-banks.
The white variety of this early fa- 
vourite is found occasionally in these parts.
Frankenia kevis grows in salt-marshes, near Yarmouth, in 
abundance.
It is one of our frequent maritime species.
The following rare Caryophyllaceous plants (would Dr. Lindley 
call them CaryophyUads ?) occur in this district (a strip of coast 
between Lowestoft, Yarmouth and Norwich), viz.
Dianthus pro- 
lifer, in pastures, near Norwich; also at Thorpe and Catton 
occasionally.
(Is it plentiful in pastures ?
— ^Ed.) D.
Caryophyllus, 
on an old wall near the Cathedral Close, Norwich, August 1st, 
1856.
I have not seen it since.
Of Silene Otites I found some 
tiny plants in flOwer at St. Faith's, near Norwich, August 15th, 
1855, and again July 28th, 1859.
I found a few plants of S.
anglica, in flower, about Whit-Sunday, 1857, in some fields be- 
longing to Sir B.
Mitton, near Thetford, and also at Brandon in 
the same year.
Moenchia erecta is common.
Stellaria nemorum is another addition to the Ouse province, as 
a Cybelian or a Watsonian would enter this species, that is, if he 
condescended to enter it at all in his records of new discoveries.
J 
1861.] NOTES ON NORFOLK PLANTS.
293 
The probability is that, like his great leader, the magmis Cory- 
pJuBUS of British phytogeographers, he would ignore the plant 
because of the humility of its first printed record in this district.
But the fact would be still* a fact, but it would be as if it were 
not to the readers of the ^ Cybele/ and especially to such of its 
few readers as rely upon the fidelity of its reports, Tiz. such as 
pin their botanical faith to its pages.
This northern species of 
Stitchwort (S.
nemorum) does grow, notwithstanding, in moist 
woods near Ranworth.
Note, A specimen was sent to the Editor of the ' Phytologist,' 
and anybody may see it.
It probably has grown there since the 
creation.
Cerastium arvense is not scarce on sandy hills in the same 
vicinity, viz.
near Ranworth.
Geranivm pyrenaicum grows on a hilly pasture at Aldeby, and 
it is one of the rarities of the neighbourhood.
It is entered in the ' Cybele ' as a naturalized alien ; and this 
may be so, or it may not.
Who would now venture to affirm or 
to deny that the author of the ^ Cybele ^ himself is or is not a 
naturalized alien ?
We may be allowed .to differ without bitter 
hatred about the nativity or the alienism of certain humble plants 
which are so utterly unheeded as to be called weeds by the mil- 
lion, and the question about their nationality is scouted by the 
majority of those who take some little interest in the science of 
plants.
But what does the author mean by the nativity of the 
localities upon which doubt is thrown by the scanty numbers of 
the plants, by the proximity of gardens, etc.
? He caniiot mean 
that we have imported the hiUy pastures of Norfolk, nor the 
rocky precipitous elevation of Arthur^s Seat> in the Queen's 
Park, Edinburgh, where this plant grows !
What does he mean?
Simply that all the quoted localities for G.
pyrenaicum are near 
gardens, and that in these subhortulan localities there are but 
few plants to be found ; both of which are pure assumptions, and 
as far from truth as the mountains of North Wales are distant 
from the hills of Dartmoor.
The eminent and learned author of the ' English Flora,' whose 
religious belief was not deemed very comprehensive by his 
orthodox contemporaries, might .
have stated, if the question 
about the nativity of this plant had been agitated in his days, 
that the old authors on plants do not inform us that this Qera« 
294 NOTES ON NORFOLK PLANTS.
[October, 
nium was ever a garden species^ and that therefore it could be 
no escape firom cultivation.
Whether there be any validity in 
this argument or not I will not try to determine^ but it is certain 
that this plant is not now one of our cultivated productions.
There is no good reason for believing that it ever enjoyed this 
honour^ except in botanical collections^ and no marvel^ seeing 
there are so many hardy herbaceous members of the same family 
far more showy and far more common than this one is.
Although this plant was well known^ and not unaptly de- 
scribed by Hudson, (' Flora Anglica/ p.
65, ed.
i. : G, perenne 
habitat inpratis montosis, it grows in upland or hilly pastures, 
alsoprope (near) Enfield; et inter (and between) Hyde Park and 
Little Chelsea), yet it is not noticed by Ray nor by his learned 
editor* Dillenius.
It is the large-flowered G.
molle of Curtis, 
who, like Linnaeus, combined it with 6.
molle of more recent 
authors.
Althaa officinalis is very common in marshes about Ban- 
worth ?, and in other parts near the coast.
The rare Leguminifers are well represented in our district : for 
example, we have Medicago falcata, frequent in pastures and 
fields near Ranworth; and the white flowers of MeliiottAS vid- 
garis are very conspicuous and ornamental on the sandhills about 
Yarmouth, where this suspected alien is very abundant.
7W- 
folium subterraneum grows at Ranworth, but it is not one of 
our frequent plants.
T, medium is plentiful in our pastures, and 
T, maritimum also on the seashore, especially in salt-marshes 
near Breydon, Yarmouth.
T. procumbens abounds everywhere ; 
passim occurrit, as the ancient botanists used to describe the fre- 
quency of very common plants.
T. suffocatum grows on the sandy 
shores near Lowestoft, but it is not common nor even frequent.
Lathyrus paltistris is found sparingly in the Ranworth bogs ; 
and Astragalus Glycyphyllus occurs here and there in the woods 
near Aldeby.
The above is a highly respectable company of the 
members of one family, all found in a corner of a very flat, uni- 
form county, with as little variety of surface-elevation as any of 
our English counties.
Spircea Filipendula grows sparingly in pastures near Fritton ?, 
and is in flower in July.
Geumrivale and Comarum palustre are 
common in wet and boggy parts.
Fragaria elatior is found in 
the grounds (?
what grounds, woods or wastes ?) at Wheatacre 
1861.] NOTES ON NORFOLK PLANTS.
295 
Bectory.
Epilobium angustifolium is a Banwbrth plants and a 
very conspicuous one : it flowers in August.
(This species has 
a predilection for peat-bogs and for fens.
It also thrives well on 
rocks above Killin, BreadalbanCi a situation probably above 2000 
feet in altitude ; here it is on a level with the coast.) 
Bupleurum rotundifolium grows sparingly in chalky-marly 
cornfields about Crostwer and Korstead.
It is one of the rarest 
of our plants.
We are comparatively rich in rare Composita ; for example, 
we have Crepis paludosa, a plant which a neophytogeographer 
would describe as new to the Ouse province.
It has probably 
been here since NoaVs Flood ;* it is certainly here now, in moist 
woods near Knapton and Cromer, and it bears no marks of 
being a recent importation, like the Iberis amara, Arenaria 
balearica at Moncriefle, etc., and some of the species lately re- 
ported from Wandsworth.
Diotis maritima is indeed a gem, a rare flower of our Sufiblk 
shore, near Orford.
May its numbers never be fewer, but on 
the other hand may it increase and multiply along both the 
southern as well as pn the eastern coasts !
Senecio paludostis is only occasionally found in bogs at.
Ban- 
worth.
It is a large handsome plant, with conspicuous flowers, 
and easily distinguishable from our other British Ragweeds.
(We wish some Norfolk correspondent would tell us, or rather 
the readers of the ' Phytologist,' where Senecio palustris {Cine' 
raria palustris) and Sonchus palustris grow in their bounds.
They have been recently told of a good locality for the latter.) 
Artemisia campestris is found, though rarely, on heaths near 
Yarmouth.
Is this a new station for this rare plant ?
The 
Thetford locality has been long known.
Campanula latifolia has been detected in an osier-bed?, or 
alder-wood, called Laseys, at Banworth, a fine plant with large, 
handsome, pale-blue flowers.
I first observed it here in July, 1 857.
Andromeda polifolia occasionally appears at Banworth.
I ob- 
served it in June 28th, 1855, and 1857, when it was in flower.
I also found Pyrola rotundifolia in flower, October 19th, in 
a wood by the side of a lake at Fritton, south-west of Yarmouth; 
also in bogs at Bardwell, among seeds, and growing out of 
what are called gnat-hills.
Here there are large tumps of Carex 
paniculata, where Lastrea spimUosa abounds.
Sometimes L.
296 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
^October, 
cristata and L.
Thelypteria are to be found growing together in 
one hassocky^ bunchy elevation.
Geniiana Pneumonanthe I founds though rare^ on moory 
heaths^ at Herringfleet^ two miles from Mildenhall^ Suffolk^ and 
at Beltin^ Suffolk, five miles south-west of Yarmouth, on Sep- 
tember 28th, 1860.
Villarsia nympfueoides I saw in some muddy ditches at Ran- 
worth, growing wit]i Sagittaria saffitiifolia.
Anagallis teneUa is common in the bogs about Banworth.
Rumex pratensis occurs occasionally at Ranworth, Homing) 
and Fritton, associated with EpipacHs palusiris.
Verbascum Lyehmtis is on the East Suffolk railway, and 
Lysimachia thyrsiflora at Surlingham Broad side, Norwich.
Habenaria viridis grows on hilly pastures near Aldeby.
It is 
rare here as it is everywhere.
I saw it in flower July 19th, 1860.
Fritillaria Meleagris is occasionally seen in meadows.
Burgh 
St. Peter's.
Colchicum autumnale is common in meadows near Banworth, 
and occasionally in meadows at Burgh St. Peter's and Aldeby.
Carea^ dioica grows in springy bogs, at E^nworth ; it flowers 
in May. It is associated with C curta and other Carices.
Setaria viridis is now and then observed in fields about Thorpe, 
near Norwich, but it is not common ; it flowers in August.
Gastridium lendigerum is found sparingly near foul, mephitic 
ditches at Gillingham, near Beccles.
(It is to be hoped that 
the sanitary commissioners will attend to this matter.) 
This rare grass is also met with near a railway crossing at 
Aldeby.
Poa bulbosa abounds at Yarmouth in May.
Lastrea cristata grows sparingly in bogs at Fritton, and near 
the Broad, at Surlingham, near Norwich.
BOTANY OF SPAIN.
A Few Dayff Botanizing in the North-Eastern Provinces of 
Spain, in April and May, 1860.
No. II.
Tarragona, Valencia, Zaragoza.
The place in Spain which added most to my Barcelona stock 
1861.] BOTANY OP SPAIN.
297 
of plants, was Tarragona ; a fortified town, picturesquely situated 
on a hill overlooking a broad space of sea from north to south, 
and commanding westward a wide stretch of uneven rocky 
ground, in which cultivation and waste are blended in varying 
proportions.
I will not lengthen the record by speaking again of 
any plant mentioned in my former paper, except Dorycnium 
suffruticosum, Lonicera implexa, and Phagnalon saa^atile, all of 
which I here found in flower ; and except the Prickly Pear and 
Palmetto, which I have already mentioned that I first saw at this 
place.
Here too was another Cistus, with large white flowers, 
Cistus umbellatiAS, a, Helianthemum of some writers ; and grow- 
ing copiously on a wild rocky hill, the original Gladiolus of our 
flower-gardens, G.
byzantinus, far more beautiful, to my think- 
ing, than the spotted ones of modern introduction.
This plant I 
had only before seen wild at Floridia, near Syracuse.
It is not 
a plant of the French Flora, though France can boast of several 
species of this fine genus.
The one I best know, G.
communis 
of Bertoloni, segetum of Grenier and Godron, which grows 
profusely in the com at Avignon and elsewhere, is of a paler 
colour than G.
byzantinus, with petals of more unequal length, 
and hung more loosely together.
The G.
communis of the 
French botanists I Ao not know.
But Tarragona supplied too great a harvest of botanical trea- 
sures to be catalogued without some sort of arrangement.
' To 
begin, then, at the beginning, I will first mention Clematis Flam- 
mula, the decumbent though climbing species of the south of 
Europe; where however the more luxuriant Clematis of our 
own hedges and thickets is also not unfrequent.
This last I do 
not remember seeing in Spain, except at Monserrat.
Of Fumi- 
tories there were two, the parmflora, and a less common plant, 
with a dense oval head of dark flowers, 7.
spicata.
The remain- 
ing Thalamiflora which I noticed were those common garrigue 
Helianthemums, the white H.
pilosum (allied to polifolium) and 
that very variable plant, the bright-yellow JET.
italicum ; three 
species of Silene, S, quinquevulnera, S.
hispida (I believe) of 
Desfontaines, recognized by the * Flore de France' only as a 
Corsican plant, and a third {S.
turbinata), not in the French 
Flora at all, which will be more particularly mentioned hereafter ; 
Alifuea hirsuta, a plant rather general in the South ; Erodium 
romanum, still more common, resembling a large-flowered E.
N. S.
VOL.
V. 2 Q 
298 BOTANY OP SPAIN.
\October, 
cicutarmm, without a stem ; and one of the common Rues of the 
south of France (with the characteristic odour) ^ Ruta angttstu 
folia.
Of Leguminosm there was still greater variety.
To many 
of the Barcelona species were added Lottis edulis, with its thick 
curved pods^ a plant which I had found in Sicily ; and a Me- 
lilotus, I believe sulcata ; the densely downy Medicago marina, 
the only beach plant in flower here at this period of the season ; 
a Scorpiurus, probably the common species^ S.
stibvillosa, though 
its backward condition disables me from speaking positively ; and 
a Sippocrepis, much more curious than the comesa, H, ciliata, 
whose slender, jointed, crescent-shaped pods are scooped out on 
the inner side in bay-like^ nearly circular indentations, pene- 
trating beyond the middle of the breadth, and justifying the title 
of Horse-shoe Vetch.
This plant was long confounded with H.
multisUiquosa, L., which it seems is a different species ; but those 
who have seen our plant side by side with H.
unisiliquosa, will 
feel tempted to persist in giving it the contrasted name.
The 
next in order of the plants which I noticed, is the blue Asperula 
arvensis.
The Composite included the common Immortelle of 
the garrigues, Helichrymm Stcechas ; a Santolina (I believe) 
which I also found further north, but which I will not venture to 
name; the brilliant Chrysanthemum coronarium, only coming 
into flower ; a most delicate little plant, the annual Daisy {Bellis 
annua), more daintily coloured but more humble-looking than 
even its better-known sister ; and lastly, one of the most curious 
of the CynaretB, Leuzea conifera, not six inches high, with a flower 
occupying half its length, like a yellowish-white cone, with a 
small opening at the top.
The CoroUiflora were many and 
interesting : the exquisitely coloured Anagallis carulea ; the 
' splendid Convolvultis althaoides, in size resembling C.
sepium, L., 
in colour, C arvensis ; the creeping Echium calycinum, one of 
the least beautiful of its handsome tribe; our common Snap- 
dragon, Antirrhinum majus, which here and in Languedoc is as 
splendid as in English flower-gardens ; lAnaria triphyllos, a plant 
of cultivated ground, and its taller but less conspicuous sister, 
£/.
simplex ; one of the handsomest of the genus Orabanche, O.
sped^sa, in the same field as the Linaria first mentioned ; Plan- 
tago LagopuSy and the rarer and more curious P.
albicans ; and 
six of the family Labiatte, being Mentha rotundifolia ; the com- 
mon Lavender, Lavandula Spica ; that common plant of the 
1861.] BOTANY OP SPAIN.
299 
south of Europe^ Sideritis romana; Salvia clandestina (other- 
wise horminoides), an ally of S.
verbenaca ; Micromeria graca, one 
of a small-leaved^ wiry genus^ detached from Satureiay and 
characteristic of the extreme south of Europe ; and, last of all, 
the magnificent Phlomis LychniteSy covered with a grey down all 
over, except the lai^e hright-yellow flowers.
This genus counts, 
1 believe, only three European species, which are at the head of 
European Labiaia in the size and brilliancy combined with the 
multitude of their flowers.
One of the species, P, Herba-venti, 
is widely and rather concisely branched, forming, though herba- 
ceous, a kind of small bush ; it is found at Montpellier and other 
places in the south of France.
Our species, P.
Lychnites, has a 
simple stem, with great whorls of flowers, like those of the taller 
and still more magnificent ornament of Sicily and Greece, P.
fruticosa.
The Apetala I noticed were Euphorbia flavicoma, digi- 
talis, and Paralias (the last not yet in flower) ,• an Urtica of the 
pilulifera section, possibly pilulifera itself, which I did not stop 
to determine ; and the picturesque Passerina hirsuta, not a l)each 
plant, but seldom or never found far from the sea, and which 
in February hangs in profusion from the clifis of Bagnoli, on the 
approach to Fozzuoli from Naples.
Of Monocotyledonous plants 
the handsomest 1 saw, except the Gladiolus, was a plant looking 
like a Scilla or Hyacinthus, and with small pendent flowers, of 
a bluish colour (if I remember right) while growing, but turning 
red in drying.
The petals, which are united at the base, consist 
of three shorter and broader, alternating with and included 
within the same number of longer.
This I decided to be Uro- 
petalum serotinum {Lachenalia serotina of some authors) .
1 found 
but one specimen.
A. more singular plant was an Asparagus, of 
which more hereafter.
These, with Juncus acutus, on wet ground 
near the sea, and two grasses, Gasiridium lendigerum and the 
beautiful Lamarckia aurea (which, in spite of its name, is, at least 
until withered, rather silvery than golden), complete the record 
of the best and richest herborization (that of Monserrat excepted) 
which I have made on Spanish soil.
Properly however it was 
not one, but two herborizations on the same ground, at an interval 
of about a fortnight.
From each of the other centres at which I halted in my 
journey, I made but one botanizing expedition.
The results 
however were not without interest.
800 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
[October, 
The plain^ well named Huerta (garden) of Valencia^ has been 
often described.
It is a rich mass of cultivation^ fertilized by 
the elaborate system of irrigation for which it is indebted to 
the Moora^ consisting of canals traversing the country above 
its levels from which large or small ramifications are carried 
into or along the edge of every field.
The rivers, which from 
the shortness of their course are nowhere considerable^ are so 
drained by the canals that in summer they may be crossed dry- 
shod as they approach the sea.
A region of this character is 
seldom favourable to the botanist ; and the mountains, if that 
name may be given to the heights which support the great 
plateau of Castille, are too far off to be within reach of an or- 
dinary excursion.
The wild plants therefore were chiefly those 
of cultivated ground, or of the damp borders of streams \ of the 
former class, two were especially abundant and conspicuous: 
Allium roseum, which had delighted me on the hills of Fatras 
and elsewhere, with its umbels of brilliant fiowers ; and a tall 
lai^e-flowered Silene, with something of the port and colour of 
the elegant Lychnis Viscaria.
This plant, which is not in the 
French Flora, I make out to be 8.
turbinaia of Gussone.
Of 
more common plants I observed Anagallis arvensis, and a fre- 
quent corn plant in eastern and southern Europe, Saponaria 
Vaccaria.
The waterside species which I remarked were JEw- 
phorbia pilosa, a large species, in a dense greyish coat, which 
frequents similar situations in the valley of the Rhine, and other 
parts of the South ; the universal Iris Pseudacorus; and a gigantic 
Thalictrum, which I had not the means of determining.
This 
is a poor tale of plants for so southern a region ; but after about 
an hour's walk, 1 came to a patch of rocky ground, which, being 
above the region of the irrigation, had remained in the state of 
garrigue, or had only vines and olives growing on it, and this 
furnished me with plants of a different order and greater variety.
Here I first saw the lurid and night-odorous Stock of English 
greenhouses, Matlhiola Irisiis, a plant which also grows in Pro- 
vence.
The garrigtie abounded with the narrow-leaved and 
silvery Convolvulus Cneorum, bringing reminiscences of Megara 
and Corinth.
A Hedysarum, 1 believe H, humile, made its ap- 
pearance in small quantity, as did the uniformly grey and downy 
Mercurialis tomentosa, unlike the dark-green hue of the two 
English species, and with its fructification not spiked but clu8« 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
301 
tered or solitary.
Here I again saw Hippocrepis ciliata and 
Smilax aspera.
The decumbent Alkanna tinctoria (formerly 
a Litkospermum) spread out as usual its stems close to the 
ground, with their terminal clusters of blue flowers, and their 
thick covering of leaves, iucrusted underneath with the dense 
calcareous soil in which the plant delights.
In the herbarium 
it sometimes stains the paper with a violet dye.
I found here, 
though in small quantity, a species not French [angibstifolia, I 
believe), of the very southern genus Sideritis, which, by its wiry 
look and the spinous induration of its sepals, speaks plainly of 
the arid climates in which it flourishes.
But the strangest 
plant I saw was a bushy mass of Thorns, exactly resembling a 
small furze-^bush in winter, when without traces of leaves ; until, 
on looking for the yellow papilionaceous blossoms, I perceived 
instead a profusion of small greenish hexandrous flowers, pen- 
dent on short thin footstalks from near the axillae of the wiry 
and thorny sprays projecting from the stem.
By the aid of 
Persoon I identified this as a plant of Spain, and especially of 
this part of it.
Asparagus horridus.
It is the same which I 
afterwards found, in my way back, at Tarragona.
The only other noticeable plant which I saw at Valencia was 
the stately Asphodelus ramosus^ of which I had seen at Tarra- 
gona a few roots (as I believed) still far from flowering.
It 
does not seem to be a common plant in these parts of Spain, 
though widely spread in the Mediterranean region.
It abounds 
in many parts of Languedoc and Provence, near Rome and in 
some other parts of Italy ; and in Sicily it, together with the 
Palmetto, covers nearly all the uncultivated ground.
I am 
afraid, indeed, that the meadows, celebrated by poets, from which 
Proserpine was carried ofi^ while gathering flowers with her 
attendant maidens, were in tnith no other than these Asphodel 
wastes, which, notwithstanding the beauty of the plant, are by 
no means so pleasing to the eye or the mind as a real English or 
mountain meadow.
This Asphodel is now called by French 
botanists A, microcarpus.
It is confined to the hotter districts 
of Europe.
There is another species or race, called by them A.
subaipirms, which covers in large masses the middle regions of 
some of the higher Pyrenees, and it is said also of the Alps.
On a superficial view this is not distinguishable from the former.
A. albus is also a French species, and there is another allied to 
802 BOTANY OP SPAIN.
[October, 
it, which has only of late become known in France itself, for it 
is not mentioned by De CandoUe. It was seen by the present 
writer in its native place before the publication of the third 
volume of Grenier and Godron, in which it is for the first time 
distinguished and described.
It has been named by them A.
spharocarpus, and I will venture to make it the subject of a 
short digression.
Perhaps English botanists may some day turn their steps to- 
wards a region not yet much frequented by them, but which has 
many claims to their notice, — the peninsula of Brittany.
The 
tour of this province is one of the most attractive short Con- 
tinental excursions which an Englishman can make.
In the 
first place, it is about the cheapest ; a consideration no less im- 
portant to botanists than to others, their pursuit not being one 
of those which bring in a golden harvest.
The inn charts, 
when once fairly within the peninsula, are (or were half-a-dozen 
years ago) less than two-thirds of the ordinary scale of travel- 
ling in France.
Besides being the cheapest, this excursion is 
one of the most beautiful of those which are easily and quickly 
accessible, and its style of beauty is that which English people 
usually prefer.
The interior resembles, more nearly than any- 
thing else on the Continent, the wilder and rockier parts of 
England, while the coast scenery rivals that of Cornwall.
The 
journey also naturally combines with a visit to that corner of 
the British dominions so interesting to an English botanist and 
to a political economist, the Channel Islands.
The north coast 
of Brittany has not, as far as I could observe, much of botanical 
attraction, if we except the neighbourhood of Dinan, which 
produces Galeopsis villosa, Gratiola officinalis, Sinapis Cheiran- 
thiASy Sedum album, reflexum, and rubens, Tragopogon porrifolius, 
and others.
But the southern coast, from the peninsula of Pen- 
march to the Loire, unites the attraction of rare plants with 
that of its unrivalled Druidical remains.
Among these last, the 
traveller will scarcely fail to visit those of the peninsula of Loc- 
mariaker ; and if he does so, it should not be from Auray, but 
from Vannes, in a boat down the river, and across the gulf or 
inland sea known as the Mer de Morbihan.
Among the nume- 
rous islands (the popular imagination reckons three hundred and 
sixty-five) with which the sea is studded he will doubtless land 
on a small one bearing the name of Gavr Innis, and containing 
1861.] BOTANY OF BEN LAWE&S.
303 
one of the rarest of Druidieal monuments, a chamber entirely 
covered in, smaller certainly than the remarkable one near- 
Saumur, but excelling it in being subterraneous, and (what is still 
more important) solitary.
This island is fiiU of the Asphodel in 
question.
I was told that it grows on several of the other islands, 
and that its white flowers (replaced where I saw it in June by 
red fruits) are the glory in spring of this marine region.
The 
authors of the ^ Flore de France^ enumerated four other locali- 
ties, all in the west or west centre of France, but three of these 
four have a mark of interrogation attached to them by the 
authors.
(To he continued,) 
BOTANY OF BEN LA WEES.
Scarce Alpine Plants met with during a recent Ten Days' Ramble 
among the Breadalbane Mountains.
By James Backhouse, 
Jun.
Gentiana nivalis.
This plant was found in great profusion on 
Ben Lawers; not, as heretofore, scattered sparingly upon the 
clifls, but in hundreds ; as many as a dozen sometimes occur- 
ring in a square yard.
Though rather past its best, some of the 
brilliant blue flowers were expanded in the morning sunshine.
Woodsia alpina.
Thirty-seven tufts of this Fern were counted 
in about fifteen minutes.
Some of the fronds were four inches 
long.
Phleum alpinum.
A solitary example was gathered from a 
wet ledge on one of the peaks of Ben Lawers.
In the same 
vicinity — 
Veronica saxatilis and 
Erigeron alpinus were luxuriant.
Sawifraga cemua.
Two fine specimens of this species were 
gathered on the same mountain with eaipanded blossoms.
Three 
or four others had partially developed flowers, and several plants - 
were four to six inches high.
It was very abundant, associated 
with 
Draba rupestris and a 
Cerastium, which has long been confounded with C.
alpinum^ 
301 BOTANY OF BKN LAWEKS.
[^October, 
but is, I have no doubt, specifically distinct.
It is downy, not 
silky ; much more rambling in habit, and has flowers equally 
large.
It is scattered oyer a large district, including the highest 
peak of Ben Lawers, and down to the lake on the east of the 
summit.
Cerastium alpinum occurs in the same region, and in count- 
less thousands over the micaceous mountains of the district; 
but where mingled with the above-mentioned, it retains its usual 
characters, and does not, so far as I noticed, show any tendency 
to intermediate forms.
Junctis ccLstaneus.
Sparingly, in very wet places on the 
Ben Lawers range, and in Glen Lochay ; always (?) having a 
northern aspect.
Myosotis alpesiris adorns the high ledges on Ben Lawers 
with a grand display of its unrivalled blossoms.
Arenaria rubella was abundant among the micaceous shale of 
the tighest "corries'^ of Ben Lawers.
Cystopteris montana.
This Fern was met with on Ben Lawers, 
occupying the moist ledges of a crag, where access was rather 
difScult.
The fronds were short, not fertile, and but sparingly 
scattered over a distance of fifty to a hundred feet.
On a cliff 
overlooking Glen Lyon, we found it in great profusion, cover- 
ing the mossy ledges, for nearly a quarter of a mile, with thou- 
sands of fronds.
The largest specimens were twelve inches high ; 
one was six to seven inches in width, and several were in fine 
fructification.
Its range of altitude was apparently three to 
four hundred feet.
On the same rocks were Bartsia alpina (very 
luxuriant), Pyrola roiundifolia, Pyrola secunda; and countless 
masses of Saussnrea alpina, Salix reticulata, Jierbacea, and venu- 
hsa ?; Saonfraga oppositifolia, S.
aizoides, Cerastium alpinum, 
Silene acaulis, Cherleria sedoides, Carex capillaris, Dryas octo-^ 
petala, and Sagina saxatilis.
The micaceous crags of this district are mainly carpeted with 
Silene acaulis.
Sax. oppositifolia and aizoides, Cerastium alpinum, 
and Cherlerea sedoides.
They form the principal herbage ; hang- 
ing in fine sheets from the rocks, or densely carpeting them 
with soft green cushions.
Intermingled with them may often 
be seen the nodding heads of Luzula spicata, or tufts of the tall 
and elegant Carex atrata, waving in the wind.
Close search on 
the wettest ledges will frequently be rewarded with abundance 
1861.] COLLINSON^S NOTES.
305 
of Juncus biglumis, while the bogs above yield the black-headed 
Carea?
saxatilisy Epiiobium anagallidifolium^ and many other in- 
teresting things^ which amply compensate the botanist for the 
rain and storms that frequently assail him.
Polystichum Lonchitis abounds almost everywhere in the cre^ 
vices of rocks^ at an elevation of two thousand feet and upwards^ 
frequently associated with 
Pseudathyrivm alpestre ; and on Ben Lawers, with a 
Lastrea, of which the fronds are highly divided^ so as idmost 
to resemble Cystop.
montana.
COLLTNSON'S NOTES.
(To the Editor of the * Phytologut') 
Dear Mr. Editor, — Prom the same source as that from which I 
sent you a few notes upon Harefield and other Orchises, viz.
some 
original manuscript notes by the CoUinsons (Peter and Michael), 
I now have the pleasure of communicating a sort of supple- 
ment to that paper (see ^ Phy tologist ^ for June, 1861, p.
171).
The present relates chiefly to many Orchises observed during 
a visit to and sojourn in Rome, in the year 1770.
This paper 
appears to be entirely in the handwriting of, and is signed by, 
Michael CoUinson.
It follows here in the order and in the exact 
words of the journal.
"June, 1770.
— Observed in the gardens of the Capuchin Con- 
vent, near Albano, in the wood within the enclosure, the com^ 
mon Bee Orchis in full flower, not the least variation from our 
English kind, and this was the only place in all Italy where I 
saw it.
" May, 1770.
— ^About a mile or two before we entered Bome^ 
-as also at a place a little more remote, and not far from a monu- 
ment called Nero's Tomb, I observed the green-vnnged Bee 
Orchis y the same as our English kind, only higher and stronger, 
and nearly out of flower, growing on the green banks close to 
the side of the road, where there also grew a noble tall species 
of ^<pAorfe/, branched with white flowers in full bloom.
N. s.
VOL.
V. 2 a 
306 collinsok's notes.
^October, 
" June 10th.— About eight miles from Bome^ in the road to 
Tivoli, on the left-hand^ a little short of the Solfaterra riyer, 
I found the green-winged Bee Orchis, in full bloom^ growing close 
to the road^ among the bushes.
Could perceive no difference be- 
tween this and the English sort.
Brought home roots and speci- 
mens with me.
It is a most extraordinary circumstance that a 
green-winged Bee Orchis should be in flower so late as the 
above period in so warm a latitude as the Roman one; it is 
therefore obvious that there must be some difference between 
this described species and that I observed before^ on the Ronci- 
glione side of Bome^ as well as our English species^ though I was 
not able to perceive it.
" Not far from the above spot, in our way to the Solfaterra lake, 
famous for its floating islands (though I think very insignificant 
ones), I was struck with a glorious kind of Bee or Fly Orchis 
growing among the bushes, of which I brought away many roots 
and specimens.
The flower was more of the Fly Orchis shape 
than the Bee ; the wings of a violet-pale-purple; the lip very 
long; of the Fly shape, of a yellowish, rich dark velvet, the mid- 
dle crossed with a dark purple zone ; the leaves resembled those 
of the Bee Orchis, but rather larger.
Another very singular 
Orchis, of the Spur kind, and with palmated roots, grew in 
company with the above, of a sweet scent and ^ingy-purple 
colour.
" In May we observed, growing on the banks beside the road 
leading from Ronciglione into the Campagna of Borne, and 
just at the entrance into it, a very beautiful kind of Orchis, of 
a rich crimson colour, bulbous-rooted, a most rare species, un- 
like any known to us.
Brot^ht away roots and specimens.
As 
the plant dried, the richness of the colour faded, to my great 
concern.
'* Orchis papilionacea?
— In May, 1770, in a noble forest of Oak, 
Beech and Chestnut, just beyond the lake and town of Bolsena, 
on the lejft-hand, in the road to Viterbo, I observed a most 
curious kind of bulbous-rooted Orchis, O.
provincicdis ?, of a 
brownish-yellow colour, a most glorious spike of flowers, grow- 
ing on the mossy banks in the little glades, at the roots of the 
trees.
Observed the same species a few miles on the other side 
Bolsena, between that town and Aquapendente, growing in the 
banks by the roadside, in which banks was also abundance^ of a 
1861.] NOTICE OF WILLIAM WILLIAMS.
807 
beaatiiiil Cyclamen, in fall flower about the middle of May.
Near Aquapendente^ the Honeysuckles that hung on the ever- 
green Oaks and other trees by the roadside (which harboured 
numbers of nightingales) , dispensed their sweets in abundance.
They seemed to be of the early, sweet-scented kind.
Near Flo- 
rence we saw the yeUow Sprinff Aconite, and also the Soldier 
Orchis of Parkinson, the same, I mean, which grows in Parent 
woods, near Dartford, in Kent.
"April 1770.
— Observed the Trago Orchis, growing close to the 
Pont du Gard, in Languedoc ; and in June we also saw it in 
full flower among the privet-bushes about one mile from Al- 
bano, near Rome.
In May, found a most curious crimson bulb- 
ous-rooted Orchis near Lake Aguano, at Naples.* 
*•' At Valdagno, under the Alps, a few miles north of Vicenza and 
Verona, where we resided some weeks, I found, about one mile 
from the town, on the left-hand, in the road to Recoara, about 
the middle of July, 1770, a very elegant kind of Bee Orchis, 
with a yellowish lip, and crossed by a zone of a still deeper colour, 
with white wings, at the ends a little tinged with purple, Ophrys 
scohpax ?
This beautiful plant, notwithstanding the advanced 
season of the year, was in full bloom.
I also met with it in 
another place, nearer to the town, not far from the cross, grow- 
ing upon the dry green banks, above which in many places the 
rock shows itself.
The broad-leaved Man Orchis I also saw 
the seed-vessel of; and a kind of yellow or orange-coloured Lily 
grew among the bushes, a little higher than the cross." 
Z. 
Kew, July 1861.
A brief Notice of William Williams, Botanical Ofdde to 
Llanberis, Snowdon, Twll Ddu, etc.
The untimely and melancholy fate of the late W.
Williams, 
of the Victoria Hotel, Llanberis, has been lately noticed in our 
pages, and must be still fresh in the recollection of our readers, 
The following statements have been communicated t^ »s by the 
* ** The roots of this fine plant, which are sent oyer from thence, have continued 
to flouiflh in England for many years.'*^(M.C.) 
308 NOTICE OF WILLIAM WILLIAMS.
[October, 
Rector of Llanberis, and by a brother of the deceased, through 
the medium of our reverend firiend the clergyman above-men- 
tioned.
The brother of the deceased supplies the account of his first 
entrance into active life, and it is here given in his own words, 
in reply to one which the Rev. Mr.
Williams of Llanberis wrote 
requesting information.
" Llanfair, near Ruthin, July 4th, 1861.
"Rev. Sir, — In reply to your favour respecting my late bro- 
ther, 1 can inform you that he was born in the year 1805, in the 
parish of Llanfwrog, Denbighshire, and went to service at the 
age of thirteen, and was chiefly engaged as a sub-groom.
He 
served Mr. M.
Turner, of Abbot's Bromley, Staflbrdshire, as a 
groom, and here he stayed four years: 
" Subsequently he was employed at hotels and inns, viz.
by 
the proprietor of the White Lion, Ruthin, and afterwards at the 
Black Lion Hotel, Mold, as a general driver.
He served in the 
same capacity at the Penrhyn Arms, Bangor, and also at the 
Liverpool Arms.
" When he resided at Bangor, he went to school for about six 
months, and this was all the education he had, and it was ob- 
tained at his own expense.
" I feel greatly obliged to you for your inquiries about my 
late brother.
My poor and aged mother is in tolerable health, 
and desires me to send her best thanks to you for your kindness.^' 
The Rev. Mr.
Williams sent to our Publisher the following 
particulars, which we offer to our readers as the best account we 
can give them about W.
Williams, the late botanical guide, of 
Llanberis.
" Llanberis, July 1 9th, 1861 .
'^ My dear Sir, — I enclose a letter which I have received from 
a brother of William Williams, containing some particulars of 
his early life.
I have not been able to learn when he first 
turned his attention to botany ; but I have been informed that he 
received great help from Mr. Babington and the Rev. Mr.
Butler 
in acquiring a knowledge of the rarer plants of this neighbour- 
hood.
The oldest guide here tells me that when Mr. Williams 
began to act as guide, insects and crystals were his hobby.
He 
186h] NOTICE OP WILLIAM WILLIAMS.
809 
had resided at Llanberis nearly thirty years, and had ascended 
Snowdon occasionally three times in the course of the same 
day.
"I always found him straight-forward, truth-telling, and 
honest.
A different impression of his character from this might 
be left on the minds of some, who may have read a communica- 
tion from Mr. John Barton, in the ' Phy tologist * of January, 
1857.
But this may be easily explained.
Mr. Williams was 
jealous about the rarer Ferns : not from any mercenary motive; 
he was jealous for the character of the locality, and did not like 
it to be robbed of what proved a great attraction to many visi- 
tors.
To persons whom he knewy he never hesitated to show 
the habitats of the rarer plants.
" He was always ready to assist a poor neighbour, and very 
charitable.
I donH think he could refrise, if it was in his power, 
to relieve a fellow-creature in distress.
On the last Sunday 
of his life, he attended the night service at the Independent 
Chapel.
A collection was made for a poor widow, and when the 
plate was handed to W.
Williams, he put down a half-crown 
and a penny.
The holder of the plate, thinking that he had 
made a mistake, called his attention to the money he had de- 
posited.
Williams however said it was all right.
It appeared 
afterwards that he had given all the money he had in the 
world.
''He was also an affectionate and dutiful son.
He visited 
his aged parents every winter.
Somehow or other he was 
prevented last winter from going to see his mother (his father 
died about three years ago), but he was very anxious to do so 
before the busy part of the season commenced.
He could not 
for some time before his death mention her name without shed- 
ding tears, and had his life been spared him another week, 
the last fond wish of his heart would have been gratified.
But 
an all- wise Providence overruled it otherwise.
He met with his 
death by falling from Clogwyn y Gamedd, and his remains were 
interred close by those of Mr. Frodsham, who was killed by 
falling from Clogwyn ddu yr Arddu, August, 1859." 
810 
A COMPAKATIVE LIST OF BAITISfl PLANTS.
[OctobcT, 
A COMPABATIVE LIST OF BEITISH PLANTS.
Showing the different Names and Species adopted m the four best-known 
English Works.
7%e order here folkwed it that of BMngton*9 ' Manual' (ed, 4,J, from which the 
uawiet are tjt the Unt instance taken^ omitting the species enclosed in brackets.
BABINOTON.
Rosa rubella.
Bom spinosiBsmuL 
Mosa hibemica, 
Rosa Wilsoni.
Rosa involuta.
Rosa Sabini, 
Bosa Tillosa.
Rosa tomentosa.
Bom ioodon.
Rosa micrantha.
Bom rabiginosa.
Rosa sepium.
BoMcaniiia.
Roia braetescens, 
Rosa otesia.
Rota tjfttyla.
Bom arvensis.
Cratsegus Oxyacantha.
CotoDMster Tnlgaris.
MespiluB germanica.
Pyrus oommonis.
Pjras Mains.
Pyrus Aucuparia.
Fyrut fennica.
Pyrus Aria.
Fifrut scandica, 
"PjiuM toiminafis, 
Lythrum Salicaiia.
Lythrum liyssopifolium.
Peplis Portula.
Tamarix angHca.
Epilobinm angustifoMom.
JEpUobium rotmarinifoliu 
Epilobium hirsntum.
Epilobium parviflorum.
Epilobium montaunum.
Epilobium lanceolatum, 
Epilobium rosenm.
Epilobium tetragonum.
LONI).
CAT.
{Omitted.) 
R. spinoiisaima.
R, hibemica.
R. Wiltoni.
R. involuta.
R. Sabini, 
B. Tillosa.
R. tomentosa.
B. inodonu 
R, micrantha, 
B. rubiginoM.
R. sepium.
B. canina.
R. canina.
I 
R. canina.
R. tyttjfla.
B. arvensis.
C. Oxyacautha.
C. vulgaris.
M. gennanica.
P. communifl.
P. Malus.
P. Aucuparia, 
R.Aria.
P. Aria.
P.Jria.
P. torminaiis.
L. Salicaria.
L. hyssopifoliom.
P. Portula.
T. anglica.
E. BugustifoKum.
t. E.
rosmarinifol, 
E. hirsutnm.
E. parviflorum.
E. montanum.
E. lanceolatum* 
E. rbseum.
£. tctragonum.
BOOKER & ARNOTT.
R. rubella.
B. spinosissimA.
R. hibemica, 
R. Wilsoni.
R. involuta.
R. Sabini.
B. villoM.
R. tomeniosa, 
B. inodora.
R micrantha.
B. rubiginoM.
R. sepium.
B. canina.
R. bractescens.
R. easia, 
R. tystyla.
B. arvensis.
C. Oxyacantha.
C vulgaris.
M. germanica.
P. eomnumis.
P. Malus.
P. Aucuparia.
P. Jria.
P. Aria.
P. Jria.
P. tonnmalia.
L. Salicaria.
L. hyssopifoUum.
P. Portula.
T. anglica.
E. angustifoHum.
{Excluded.) 
E. hirsutum.
E. parviflorum.
E. montanum.
E. lanceolatum.
E. roseum.
E. tetragonum.
BENTHAM.
R tpinotistima.
B. spinonssima.
R vilhsa.
A var.
{omitted,) 
R. tpinosissima.
R. villosa.
B. villosa.
JZ.
villosa.
A var.
{omitted,) 
R, rubigi$tosa.
B. rubiginoM.
R rubiginosa.
B. canina.
A var, {omitted) 
R. canina.
R, canina.
' 
B. arvensis.
C. Oxyacantha.
C. vulgaris.
M. germanica.
P. eommmuB.
P. Mains.
P. Aucuparia.
P. Aria, 
P. Aria.
T.Aria.
P. torminaiis* 
L. Salicaria, 
L. hyssopifolium.
P. Portula.
T. gallica, 
E. angustifoKum.
{OmHted^ 
E. hirsatum.
E. parviflorum.
E. montanum.
E, roseum.
E. roseum.
E. tetragonum.
* 
1861.] 
A. COMPARATIVE LIST OF BRITISH PLANTS.
311 
B4BINQT0N.
LOND.
CAT.
Epilobium obsourum.
E. tetroffonum, 
Epilobiam palnitre.
E« palustre.
Epilobiam alpinom.
E. alpinam.
Epilobium anagaUidifoL E, alpinum, 
Epilobiam alsinifoliom.
]&.
alfiiiiifolium.
CEnotliem biennis.
(E.
biennis.
Isnardia paluitrit, Lpaltutrit, 
Circsea lutetiana.
C. lutetiana.
Circsea alpina.
G. alpina.
MyriophyllQm¥ertici]lataio.M. yerticillatom.
Myriophyllom spicatnm.
M< spicatum.
Myriophtfllum olterHtflor.
M. aliemijlorum.
Hippuris vulgaris.
Bryonia dioica.
Montia fontana.
Corrigiola littoralis.
Hemiaria glabra.
Hemiara ciUaia, 
lUecebrum verticillatnm.
Polycarpon tetraphyllom.
Lepigonum rubrum, 
Lepiffonum marinum, 
Sperguk arvensis.
Scleranthns annnus.
Scleranthns perennis.
TiUsea muscosa.
Sednm Rhodiola.
Sednm Telephinm.
Sedum purpureum, 
Sedum villosom.
Sedum album.
Sednm dasyphyllum.
Sednm anglicum.
Sednm acre.
Sedum reflexwm, 
Sednm mpestre.
Sedum Forsterianum, 
Cotyledon Umbilicus.
Ribes Grossolaria.
Ribes alpinnm.
Ribes nigmm.
Ribes mbmm.
Saxifraga nmbrosa.
Saxifraga elegant.
Saxifraga Jdreuia, 
Saxifraga Geom.
H. .vnlgaris.
B. dioica.
M. fontana.
C. littoralis.
H. glabra.
H, glabra, 
I. Yertidllatnm.
P. tetraphyllnm.
Spergularia rubra.
HOOKER & AKNOTT.
E, ietragonum^ 
E. palustre.
E. alpinnmi 
E, alpinum, 
E. alsinifolinm.
(E.
biennis.
Z. paluttris, 
C. lutetiana.
C. alpina.
. M.
Terticillatum.
M. spicatum.
M, aliemiflorum, 
H. vulgaris.
B. dioica.
M. fontana.
C. littoralis.
H. glabra.
H, glabra.
I. verticillatum.
P. tetraphyllnm.
Spergularia rubra.
Spergularia rupestris.
{Omitted.) 
BBNTHAM.
E, tetragonum, 
E. palustre.
E. alpinum.
E, alpinum, 
E. alsinilolium.
(E.
biennis.
Ludungia paluttris, 
0. lutetiana.
C. alpina.
M. verticillatum.
M. spicatum.
i/.
spicatum, 
H. vulgaris.
B. dioica.
M. fontana.
C. littoralis.
H. glabra.
H, glabra.
1. verticillatum.
P. tetraphyllum.
Spergularia rubra, 
{Omitted.) 
Spergularia marina.
Spergularia marina.
Spergularia rubra.
S. arvensis.
S. annnus.
S. perennis.
T. muscosa.
S. Rhodiola.
S. Telephinm.
S, Telephium, 
S. villosum.
S. album.
S. dasyphyllum.
S. anglicum.
S. acre.
S. refiexum, 
S. mpestre.
8. Forsterianum, 
C. Umbilicus.
R. Grossnlaria.
R. alpinum.
R. nigrum.
R.Tnbmm.
S. umbrosa.
S, Oeum.
S, Mrsuta, 
S. Geum.
S. arvensis.
S. annnus.
S. perennis.
T. muscosa.
S. Rhodiola.
S. Telephium.
S. Telephium, 
S. villosum.
S. album.
S. dasyphyllum.
S. anglicam.
S. acre.
S. refiexum, 
S. rupestre.
S, Forsterianum, 
C. Umbilicus.
R. Groasularia.
R. alpinum.
R. nigrum.
R. mbrum.
S. nmbrosa« 
Far, or hybrid.
Far, or hybrid, 
S. Geum.
S. arvensis.
S. annnus.
S. perennis.
T. muscosa.
S. Rhodiola.
S. Telephium.
S. Telephium, 
S. villosum.
S. album.
S. dasyphyllum.
S. anglicum.
S. acre.
S. rupestre, 
S. rupestre.
S. rupestre, 
C. Umbilicus.
R. Grossohiria.
R. alpinum.
R. nigrum.
R. rubrum.
S. umbrosa.
S. Oeum, 
S, Oeum.
S. Geum.
312 
A COMPABATIVE LIST OF BRITISH PLANTS.
[^October, 
BABINQTON.
LOND.
CAT.
SaxifragB stellariB.
S. stellaris.
Saxifraga Hircnlas.
S. Hircnlus.
. Saxiihiga aizoidea.
S. aizoides.
Saxifraga csspitoaa.
S. csespitosa* 
Studfraga hkria, S.
Mrta, 
Saxifraga t^tiM.
S. isffhtu, 
Saxifraga bypnoides.
S. bypnoides.
Saxifraga latevirens, 8.
hgpnoides, 
Saxifraga pedaHfida, {Excluded.) I 
Saxifraga tridactylites.
S. tridactylites.
Saxifraga.
graniilata.
S. granalata.
Saxifraga oernaa.
S. cemua.
Saxifraga rivularis.
S. rivnlaris.
Saxifraga niyalis.
S. nivalis.
Saxifraga oppositifolia.
S. oppositifolia.
Cbrjrsospleniiim altemifol.
C. altemifolium.
Chrysospleniom oppositifoLC.
oppositifoliom.
Hydrocotjle vulgaris.
Sanicola europsea.
Astrantia migor.
Eryngium maritimom, 
Eryngium campestre.
Cicuta virosa.
Apinm graveolens.
Petroselinum satiyam.
Petroselinum segetum.
Trinia Tulgaris.
. 
Helosdadiom nodiHomm.
H. vulgaris.
S. europsa.
A. major.
E. maritimum.
E. campestre.
C. virosa.
A. graveolens.
P. sativum.
P. segetum.
T. vulgaris.
H. nodiflorum.
Helosciadium inundaium.
H. nodiflorum.
SisoQ Amomum.
S. Amomum.
^gopodium Podagraria.
M. Podagraria.
Carum Carui.
C. Carni.
Carum vertidllatum.
C. verticiUatum.
Buninm flexnosum.
B. flexuosnm.
Bnnium Bulbocastanum, Carum Bulboeatt.
Pimpinella magna.
P. magna.
Pimpinella Saxifraga.
P. Saxifraga.
Sium latifolinm.
S. latifolium.
Sium angustifolium.
S. angustifolinm.
Bupleurum tennissimnm.
B. tenuissimum.
Bupleumm aristatum.
B. aristatum.
IBupleurum falcatum.
B. falcatum.
Bupleurum rotundifolium.
B. rotundifolium.
CBnantbe fistulosa.
CE.
fistulosa.
CEnantbe pimpinelloides.
(E.
pimpinelloides.
(Enanthe Lackenalii, (E.
Lachenalii, 
(Enanthe nlaifolia, (E, silaifolia.
HOOKER & ABNOTT.
S. stellaris.
S. Hirculus.
S. uzoides.
S. eaespitosa.
S, hypnoidei, 
S. hypnoidet, 
S. bypnoides.
S, hypnoides, 
'. geranoides, or error.
S. tridactylites.
S. granulata.
S. cernua.
S. rivularis.
S. nivalis.
S. oppositifolia.
C. altemifolium.
C. oppQsitifolium.
H. vulgaris.
S. europsea.
(Excluded.) 
E. maritimum.
E. campestre.
C. virosa.
A. graveolens.
P. sativum.
P. segetum.
T. vulgaris.
H. nodiflorum.
ff.
inundaium.
S. Amomum.
M. Podagraria.
C. Carui.
C. verticiUatum.
B. flexuosum.
Carum BMocatt, 
P. magna.
P. Saxifraga.
S. latifolium.
S. angustifolium.
B. tenuissimum.
B. aristatum.
B. falcatum.
B. rotundifolium.
(E.
fistulosa.
(E.
pimpinelloides.
(E.
Lachenalii.
(E.
nlaifoiia.
BEMTHAM.
S. stellaris.
S. Hirculus.
S. aizoides.
S. cffispitosa.
S. hypnoides, 
S. hypnoides, 
S. hypnoides.
.^ A var.
{omitted.) 
S. hypnoides, 
S. tridactylites.
S. granulata.
S. oemua.
S. rivularis.
S. nivalis.
S. oppositifolia.
C. altemifolium.
C. oppositifolium.
H. vulgaris.
S. europsea.
A. migor.
E. maritimum.
E. campestre.
C. virosa.
A. graveolens.
P. sativum.
P. segetum.
T. vulgaris.
H. nodiflomm.
H. inundaium, 
S. Amomum.
M. Podagraria.
C. Carvi.
C. verticiUatum.
B. flexuosum.
Carum Bulbocast, 
P. magna.
P. Saxifraga.
S. latifolium.
S. angustifolium.
B. tenuissimum.
B. aristatum.
B. falcatum.
B. rotundifolium.
(E.
fistulosa.
(E.
pimpinelloides.
(E, pimpinelloides, 
(E.
pimpinelloides.
1861.] 
A COMPARATIVE LIST OF BRITISH PLANTS.
313 
BABIXGTON.
(Eoanthe crocata.
(EoAnthe Phellandrmm.
CEnanthe JlumaHlis.
CBnanthe Cynapium.
Fofniculum officinale, 
Seseli Libanotis.
Hatosdas scoticum.
Silans pratensis.
Menm athamanticum.
Crithmmn maritimum, 
Angelka sylvestris.
Peacedanam officinale.
Pencedanam palustre.
Peacedanum Ostruthium.
Pastinaca saliva.
Heradeum Sphondylinm.
Tordylinm mazimam.
Daucus Carota.
Daucus ffemmifer.
Cancalis daaooides.
Caucalis latifolia.
Tori/is AnthrUcus.
Torilis infesta, 
TorUii nodosa, 
Scandix Pecten- Veneris.
Jnthrisctts sylvestris, 
Anthriscns Gerefolinm.
AnthrUcuM vulgaris, 
Chasrophyllnm temolum.
Myrrbis odorata.
Ecbinopbora spinosa.
Conium macuUtmn.
LOND.
CAT.
(E.
crocata.
CB.
Phellandrium.
(E.fiuviaiilis, 
CE.
Cynapium.
F. officinale.
S. Libanotis.
lAgusticum scotic.
S. pratensis.
M. athamanticum.
C. maritimum.
A. sylveiitris.
P. officinale.
P. palustre.
P. Ostruthium.
P. sativa.
H. Sphondylium.
T. maximum.
D. Carota.
D, maritimtis.
C. dancoides.
C. latifolia.
T. Anthrisciu, 
T, infesta.
T, nodosa, 
S. Pecten.
A. syhestris, 
A. Cerefolium.
A, vulgaris, 
C. temulentum.
M. odorata.
(Excluded.) 
C. maculatum.
Physospermumcomubiense.P. oomubiense.
Smymium Olusatrum.
Coriandrum sativum.
Adoxa Moschatellina.
Hedera Helix.
Comus sanguinea.
Cornus suecica.
Viscum album.
Sambucus Ebnlus.
Sambucns nigra.
Viburnum Lantana.
Viburnum Opulus.
Lonicere Caprifolium.
Lonicera Periclymenum.
Lonicera Xylostenm.
N. 8.
VOL.
V. 
S. Olusatrum.
C. sativum.
A. Moschatellina.
H. Helix.
C. sanguinea, 
C. suecica.
V. album.
S. Ebulus.
S. nigra.
V. Lantitna.
V. Opulus.
L. Caprifolium.
L. Periclymenum.
L. Xylosteum.
HOOKES & ASNOTT.
(E.
crocata.
CE.
Phellandrium.
(E.fluviatilis.
(E.
Cynapium.
F, vulgare, 
S. Libanotis.
lAgusticum seoiic.
S. pratensis.
M. athamanticum.
C. mai'itimum.
A. sylvestris.
P. officinale.
P. palustre.
P. Ostruthium.
P. sativa.
H. Sphondylinm.
T. maximum.
D. CaroU.
B. maritimus, 
C. dancoides.
C. latifolia.
T. Anthriscus, 
T. infesta.
T. nodosa.
S. Pecten.
A. sylvestris.
A, Cerefolium.
A. vulgaris, 
C. temulentum.
M. odorata.
E. spinosa.
C. maculatum.
P. comubiense.
S. Olusatrum.
C. sativum.
A. Moschatellina.
H. Helix.
C. sanguinea.
C. suecica, 
V. album.
S. Ebulus.
S. nigra.
V. Jjantana.
V. Opulus.
L. Ca^folium.
L. Periclymenum.
L. Xylosteum.
BENTHAK.
(E.
crocata.
CE.
Phellandrium.
(E.
Phellandrium.
(E.
Cynapium.
jP.
vulgare.
S. Libanotis.
lAgusticum scotic, 
S. pratensis.
M. athamanticum.
C. maritimum.
A. sylvestris.
P. officinale.
P. palustre.
P. Ostruthium.
P. sativa.
H. Sphondylinm.
T. maximum.
D. Carota.
J), Carota.
C. dancoides.
C. latifolia.
CaucalisA nthriscus.
Caucalis infesta, 
Caucalis nodosa.
S. Pecten.
Charopkgllum sylv.
(Cultivated.) 
Ckitrophyl.
Anthris.
C. temulum.
M. odorata, 
(Excluded.) 
C. maculatum.
P. comubiense.
S. Olusatrum.
C. sativum.
A. Moschatellina.
H. Helix.
C. sanguinea.
C. suecica.
V. album.
S. Ebulus.
S. nigra.
V. Lantana.
V. Opulus.
L. Caprifolium.
L. Periclymenum.
L. Xylosteum.
28 
314 
A COMPARATIVE LIST OF BRITISH PLANTS.
[October, 
BABINOTON.
Linnsea borealis.
Sherardia anreDsis.
Asperula cynanchica.
Asperula odorata.
Galium borcale.
Galiam cruciatom.
Galium tricorne.
Craliom Aparine.
Galium spurium.
Oalium parisiense.
Galium erectum.
Galiam Mollago.
Galiam veram.
Galiam saxatile.
Galium montanum.
Galium eommutatum.
Oalium aylvestre.
Galiam oliginosum.
Galiam palastre.
Galium elongatum, 
Kubia peregrina.
Ceatrautbns raber.
Valeriana officinaliB.
Faleriana tambucifolia, 
Valeriana pyrenaica.
Valeriana dioica.
VaJerianella olitoria.
Valeriafiella carinaia.
Valerianella Auricula.
Valerianella dentata, 
Valerianella eriocarpa.
Dipsacas jsylvestris.
Dipsacus pilosos.
Knautia arvensis, 
Scabiosa succisa.
Scabiosa Columbaria.
Eupatoriam cannabinum, 
Fetasites vulgaris, 
Tussilago Farfara.
Aster Tripolium.
Erigeron canadensis.
Erigeron acris.
Erigeron alpinus.
Bellis pereuuis.
Solidago Virgaurea.
Ltmsyris vulgaris.
Inula Helenium.
LOND.
CAT.
L. borealis.
S. arvensis.
A. cynanchica.
A. odorata.
G. boreale.
G. cruciatum.
G. tricome.
G. Aparine.
{Excluded.) 
0. anglicum.
G. erectum, 
G. Mollago.
G. veram.
G. saxatile.
0, sylvestre, 
G. aylvestre, 
G. sylvestre.
G. aliginosum.
G. palustre.
G. palustre, 
R. peregrina.
C. ruber.
V. officinalis.
V, officinalis, 
V. pyrenaica.
V. dioica.
Tedia olitoria.
Fedia carinata.
Fedia Auricula.
Fedia dentata, 
{Excluded.) 
D. syhestris, 
D. pilosus.
K. ayvensis.
S. snccisa.
. 
S. Columbaria.
£. cannabinum.
F. vulgaris.
T. Farfai-a.
A. Tripolium.
. 
E. canadensis.
E. acris.
E. alpinus, 
£. perenuis.
S. Virgaurea.
HOOKER & ARNOTT.
L. borealis.
S. arvensis.
A. cynancbica.
A. odorata.
G. boreale.
G. cruciatom.
G. tricome.
G. Aparine.
G. spurium.
G. parisiense, 
G. erectum.
G. Mollugo.
G. veram.
G. saxatile.
G. saxatile.
G. saratile.
G. pusillum.
G. uliginosum.
G. palastre.
0. palustre.
R. peregrina.
C. ruber.
V. officinalis.
V. qficinalis.
V. pyrenaica.
V. dioica.
Fedia olitoria.
Fedia carinata.
Fedia Auricula.
Fedia dentata.
F. dentata.
D. sylvestris.
D. pilosus.
K, arvensis.
S. succisa 
S. Columbaria.
E. cannabinum.
F. vulgaris.
T. Farfara.
A. Tripolium.
E. canadensis 
E. acris.
E. alpinus.
B. perennis.
S. Virgaurea.
Chrysocoma Litwsyris.
L. vulgaris.
I. Heleniam.
I. Helenium.
BENTHAK.
L. borealis.
S. arvensis.
A. cynancbica.
A. odorata.
G. boreale.
G. Cruciata.
G. tricorne.
G. Aparine.
G. Aparine, 
G. parisiense, 
G. Mollugo.
G. Mollugo.
G. verum.
G. saxatile.
G. saxaiUe.
G. saxatile.
0. saxatile.
G. uliginosum.
G. palustre.
G. palustre, 
R. peregrina.
C. ruber.
V. officinalis.
V. officinalis, 
V. pyreniuca.
V. dioica.
V, olitoria.
V. carinaia.
V. Auricula.
V, dentaia.
V. dentaia, 
X).
sylvestris.
D. pilosus.
Scabiosa arvensis.
S. succisa.
S. Columbaria.
E. cannabinum.
Tussilago Fetasites.
T. Farfara.
A. Tripolium.
E. canadensis.
E. acris.
E. alpinus.
£. perennis.
S. Virga-aurea.
L. vulgaris, 
1. Helenium.
1861.] 
A COMPARATIVE LIST OV BRITISH PLANTS.
315 
BABINGTON.
Inula Couyza.
Inula crithmoides.
Fulicaria vulgaris.
Fulicaria dysenteriea, 
Bidens tripartita.
Bidens cernua.
Anthemis arvensis.
Anthemis Cotula.
Anthemis uobilis.
Achillea Ptarmica.
Achillea tomentosa.
Achillea Millefolium.
Achillea tanacetifolia.
Diotis maritima.
Chrysanthemum Leucanth.
Chrysanthemum segetum.
Matricaria PartAenium, 
Matricaria inodora.
Matricaria Chamomilla.
Artemisia Absinthium.
Artemisia campestris.
Artemisia vulgaris.
Artemisia maritima.
Tanacetum vulgare.
FUago germanica, 
Mlago apiculata, 
FUago spathulata.
Mlago minima, 
FUago gallica, 
Gnaphalium luteo-album.
Gnaphalium uliginosum.
Gnaphalium sylvaticum.
Gnaphalium norvegicum, 
Gnaphalium supinum.
Antennaria dioica, 
Antennaria margarilacea.
Doronicum Pardalianches.
Boronicum plantagineum.
Senecio yulgaris.
Senecio viscosus.
Senecio sylvaticus.
Senecio squalidus.
Senecio erucifolius.
Senecio Jacohsea.
Senecio aquaticus.
Senecio paludosus.
Senecio saracenicus.
LOND.
CAT.
I. Couyza.
I. crithmoides.
P. mUgaris.
P, dgsenterica, 
B. tripartita.
B. cernua.
A. arvensis.
A. Cotula.
A. nobilis.
A. Ptarmica.
(Excluded.) 
A. Millefolium.
(Excluded.) 
D. maritima.
C. l/cucanthemum, 
C. segetum.
Fyrethrum Farth, 
HOOKER & AENOTT.
I. Conyza.
I. crithmoides.
P. vulgaris.
P. dysenterica.
B. tripartita.
B. cernua.
A. arvensis.
A. Cotula.
A. nobilis.
A. Ptarmica.
A. tomentosa.
A. Millefolium.
A. tanacetifolia.
D. maritima.
C. Leucanthemum.
C. segetum.
M. Farthenium.
Fyrethrum inodora.
Matricaria inodor.
M. Chamomilla.
A. Absinthium.
A. campestris.
A. vulgaris.
A. maritima.
T. vulgare.
F. germanica, 
F, apiculata.
F. spaihulata, 
F. minima.
F, gallica.
" Samian." 
G. uliginosum.
G. sylvaticum.
' 
G. norvegicum.
Gf supinum.
Gnapha.
dioicum, 
Gnapha.
margarit, 
D. Pardalianches.
D. plantagineum.
S. vulgaris.
S. viscosus.
S. sylvaticus.
S. squalidus.
S. erucmfoUus, 
S. Jacohsea.
S. aquaticus.
S. paludosus.
S. sai-acenicus.
M. Chamomilla.
A. Absinthium.
A. campestris.
A. vulgaris.
A. maritima.
T. vulgare.
T, germanica.
F. germanica, 
F. germanica.
F. minima, 
F. gallica, 
G. luteo-album.
G. uliginosum.
G. sylvaticum.
G. sylvaticum.
G. supinUm.
Antennaria dioica.
Antennaria marg, 
D. Pardalianches.
D. plantagineum.
S. vulgaris.
S. viscosus.
S. sylvaticus.
S. squalidus.
S, tenuifolius.
S. Jacohsea.
S. aquaticus.
S. paludosus.
S. saracenicus.
BENTHAH.
I. Conyza.
I. crithmoides.
Inula Fulicaria, 
Inula dysenterica, 
B. tripartita.
B. cernua.
A. arvensis.
A. Cotula.
A. nobilis.
A. Ptarmica.
(Excluded.) 
A. Millefolium.
(Excluded.) 
D. maritima.
C. Leucanthemum.
C. segetum.
Chrysi Farthenium, 
Chrysan.
inodorum.
M. Chamomilla.
A. Absinthium.
A. campestris.
A. vulgaris.
A. maritima.
T. vulgare.
Gnapha.
german.
Gnapha.
german.
Gnapha.
jgerman.
Gnapha.
arvense.
Gnaph.
gallicum.
G. luteo-album.
G. uliginosum.
G. sylvaticum.
G. sylvaticum.
G. supinum.
Gnapha.
dioicum, 
Gnapha.
margarit, 
B. Pardalianches.
D. plantagineum.
S. vulgaris.
S. viscosus.
S. sylvaticus.
S. squalidus.
S. eruca/olitcs, 
S. Jaccbsea.
S. aquaticus.
S. 
b. saracemcus.
316 
A COMPAJBUITIVE LIST OP BRITISH PLANTS.
[OctobcT, 
BABINOTON.
Senecio palustrii.
Senedo campesiris, 
SaoMiirea alpina.
Carlina vulgaris.
Arctium tomento^um* 
Jrctium mqfi4S, 
Arctium intermedium.
Arctium minus.
Arctium pubetu.
Serratula tinctoria.
Centaurea nigra.
Cewtawrea nigrescent, 
Centaurea Cyanus.
Centaana Scabiosa« 
Centaurea solstitialis.
Centaurea Calcitrapa.
Onopordum Acanthiom.
Cardaus notans.
Cardutts erispus, 
Carduus tenuijhrus.
Carduus laneeolcUus.
Carduus eriophorus, 
Carduus arvensis* 
Carduus palustris, 
Carduus pratensis.
Carduus iuberosus, 
Carduus acaulis.
Carduus heteropkyllus, 
Sifybum Marianum.
Lapsana communis.
A moseris pusilla.
Cichorium IntybuB.
Hypochceris glabra.
Hypcxihceris radicata.
Hypochceris maculata.
Tkrincia hirta.
Apargia Aispida.
Apargia autumnalis.
Tragopogon minor.
Tragopogon pratensis.
Tragopogon porrifolius.
Picris bieracioides.
Helminthia echioides.
Lactuca saligna.
Lactuca virosa.
Lactuca Scariola.
Lactuctf mnialis.
LOND.
CAT.
HOOKER & AENOTT.
Cineraria palustris.
Senecio palustris.
Cineraria campest.
Senecio campest.
S. alpina.
C. vulgaris.
A, Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
S. tinctoria.
C. nigra.
C nigrescens.
C. Cyanus.
C. Scabiosa.
C. solstitialis.
C. Calcitrapa.
O. Acantbium.
C. nutans* 
C. acanthoides* 
C. tenuijlorus, 
C. lcmceo/<ttus, 
C. eriophorus.
C. arvensis.
C. palustris.
C. pratensis.
C. tuberosus, 
C. acaulis.
C. heterophyllus, 
Carduus Marianus, 
L. communis.
A. pusilla.
C. Intybus.
H. glabra.
H. radicata.
H. maculata.
T. hirta.
A. hispida.
A. autumnalis.
T. pratensis.
T. pratensis.
T. porrifolins.
P. bieracioides.
H. ecbioides.
L. saligna.
Z. virosa.
L. Scariola.
L. muralis.
S. alpina.
C. vulgaris.
A. Lappa* 
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa, 
S. tinctoria* 
C. nigra.
C. nigrescens.
C. Cyanas.
C. Scabiosa.
C. solstitialiSi 
C. Calcitrapa.
O. Acantbium.
C. nutans.
C. fkeanthoides.
C. tenuiflorus.
Cnieus laneeol.
Cnicus eriophorus.
Cnieus arvensis.
Cnicus palustris.
Cnicus pratensis.
Cnicus tuberosus.
Cnicus acaulis.
Cnicus heterophgl, 
Carduus Marianus, 
L. comiAtiuis.
Lapsana pusUla, 
C. Intybus.
H. glabra.
H. radicata.
H. maculata.
T. hirta.
A. hispida, 
A, autumnalis, 
T. pratensis, 
T, pratensis.
T. porrifolins.
P. bieracioides.
H. ecbioides.
L. saligna.
L. virosa.
L. Scariola.
L. muralis.
BENTHAJC.
Senecio palustris.
Senecio campestris, 
S. alpina.
C. vulgaris.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
A. Lappa.
S. tinctoria.
C. nigra.
C. nigra.
C. Cyanus.
C. Scabiosa.
C. solstitialis.
C. Calcitrapa.
O. Acantbium.
C. nutans.
C. acanthoides.
C pgcnocephalus.
Carduus laneeol.
Carduus eriophorus.
Carduus arvensis.
Carduus palustris.
Carduus pratensis.
Carduus tuberosus.
Carduus acaults.
Carduus heterophyl.
Carduus Marianus.
L. communis.
A moseris pusilla.
C. Intybus.
H. glabra.
H. radicata.
H. maculata.
Leontodon hirtus.
Leontodon hispidus, 
Leontodon autumn.
T. pnttense, 
T. pratense.
T. porrifolinm.
P. bieracioides.
H. ecbioides.
L. saligna.
L. Scariola, 
L. Scariola.
L. mimJis.
1861.] 
A COMPARATIVE LIST OF BRITISH PLANTS.
817 
BABINGTON.
Leontodon Taraxacum* 
Sonchus oleraoens.
Sonchus asper, 
Sonchus arvensis.
Sonchus palustris.
Mulgedium alpinum.
Crepis icuraacbcifolia.
Crepia fcBtida, 
LOND.
CAT.
HOOKEB & ARNOTT.
Tarasicum officinale.
Leontodon Tarax, 
S. oleraoeua.
S. oleraceus.
S, asper, & asper.
S. arvensis.
S. arvensis.
BENTHAM.
Tarax.
Dens-Ieonii, 
S. oleracens.
8. oleraeetu, 
S. arrensis.
Crepis virens 
Crepis hiennis.
CrepU sucoisafolia, 
Crepis paladosa.
Hieracium Pilosella.
Hieracium aarantiacnm.
Hieracium alpinnm.
Hieracium holosericeum 
Hieracium eximium 
S. palnsiris.
S. palustris.
S. palustris.
3f, alpinum, Jf. afpina, Sonchus alpinue.
Borkhausia taraxa.
Borkhausiataraxa.Crepie taraxacif, 
BorkhautiafoUida, Borkhausia foetida,()repi8fcUida, 
C. virens.
C. yirens.
C. biennis.
C. biennis.
C, succisafolia.
C. sueciserfolia, 
G. paludosa.
C. paludosa.
H. PiloseUa. H.
POosella.
H. aurantiacum.
H. aurantiacom.
H. alpinum.
H. alpinum.
H. holosericeum, H.
alpinum, 
— - H, eximium, H.
eximium, 
Hieracium calenduliflorum.H. ealenduliflorum, H, eximium, 
Hieracium gracilentum, H, gracilenlum, H, grcbcilenium.
Hieracium globosum, 
Hieracium nigreseens, 
Hieracium lingulatum, 
Hieracium senescens.
Hieracium chrysanthum.
Hieracium cerinthaides, 
Hieracium iricum, 
Hieracium pallidum, 
Hieracium lasiophyllum, 
Hieracium Qibsoni, 
Hierctcium Orgenteum, 
Hieracium niiidum, 
Hieracium aggregatum, 
Hieracium murorum.
Hieracium casium, 
Hieracium casium, 
Hieracium stelligerum, 
Hieracium vulgatum, 
Hieracium gotMcum, 
Hieracium trideniaium, 
Hierac.
prenanthoides.
Hieracium strictum, 
Hieraciiim lUnbeUatnm.
Hieracium crocatum, 
Hieracium rigidum^ 
Hieracium corgmbosum.
H. globosum, 
H. nigreseens, 
H, lingulaium, 
H, senescens, 
H. chrysanthum, 
H. anglicum.
H. iricum, 
H, pallidum, 
H, lasiophyllum, 
H. Gibsoni, 
H. argenteum.
H. nitidum.
H. aggregatum, 
H. murorum.
H. casium, 
H, obtusifolium, 
H, flocculosum, 
H, vulgatum, 
H, gothicum, 
H, tridentatum, 
H. prenanthoides.
H, strictum, 
H. umbellatum.
H. crocatum, 
H. rigidum.
* 
H. corymbosum.
H. globosum.
H. nigreseens, 
H. lingulatum, 
H. chrysanthum, 
H. chrysanthum, 
H. cerinthoides, 
H. Iricum, 
H, pallidum, 
H, lasiophyllum.
A, Gibsoni.
H, argenteum, 
H, nitidum, 
H, aggregaium, 
H. murorum.
H, casium.
H, casium, 
H, stelligerum, 
H, sylvaticum, 
H. gothicum, 
H. tridentatum, 
H. prenanthoides.
H. strictum, 
H. umbellatum.
H, crocatum, 
H. rigidum, 
H, corymbosum.
C. yirens.
C. biennis.
C, hieraciddes, 
C. paludosa.
H. POoseHa.
Not established*.
H. alpinum.
A variety, 
A variety.
A variety, 
A variety, 
A variety, 
? H.
murorum, 
A variety.
A variety^ 
A variety, 
H. cerinthoides, 
H. murorum, 
A variety, 
A variety, 
A variety, 
A variety, 
A variety.
A variety, 
H. murorum.
A variety, 
A variety, 
A variety, 
H, murorum, 
A variety, 
A variety, 
H. prenanthoides.
A variety, 
H. umbellatum.
A variety, 
A variety, 
A variety.
{To be continued,) 
318 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[OctobeT, 
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Maiantbemum bifolium.
I met with this plant in abundance early this summer, in the locality near 
Hackness (a few miles from Scarborough), where it was discovered two (?) 
ye«ars ago.
It is growing in the utmost profusion, among Trientalis euro- 
paa, Vacciniums, Luzulas, etc., on the slope of a steep brow covered with 
scattered trees.
I purposely omit giving a definite description of the 
place.
Suffice it only to say that before knowing where the plant was, I 
decided where, if it were a native, it " ought to Ae." This was determined 
partly by the aspect, partly by the general configuration of the country, 
and partly by the kind of vegetation clothing the district ; and proved 
quite correct.
Never, in Norway, did I see it more abundant or finer, 
that I remember.
For a considerable distance the hillside is carpeted 
with it.
It is not however the quantity merely, but, as said b^ore, the 
general circumstances and position of the locality, which leave no doubt 
whatever on my mind of its being a genuine native.
Jas. Backhouse, Jun.
[It may here be remarked that the question about the nativity of Mai- 
anthemum is now settled.
It may also be inferred that all the other re- 
corded localities, viz.
Ken wood, near Hampstead ; Wobum woods, in Bed- 
fordshire; the woods at Howick, Northumberland,; and even Dingley 
wood, six miles from Preston in Aundemisse ; and " Harwood, neere to 
Blackbume " likewise, are or have been genuine stations where this rare 
species either grows or has been seen growing.
One or both of these an- 
ciently known localities are recommended to the attention of our botanical 
correspondents in Preston and Lancashire.] 
Heebaeium ot NoKTH Gekman Plants.
By W.
Lasch and C.
Benit.
(First and Second Fascicles.) 
The cryptogamic portion of this work has just reached us, and we have 
much pleasure in recommending it to British botanists in general, and to 
the readers of the * Phytologist * especially.
The specimens are well dried and pressed, and carefully strapped on 
white paper.
The attached tickets are neatly printed, and contain the 
name of the species, with the authority, the habitat, the soil, the census', 
the time, the special locality, and the name of the collector.
This publication is marvellously cheap, even in these times of cheap 
publications.
The price of the two parts before us is five shillings, and 
the number of specimens is forty-nine.
In addition there is a printed 
index, and a preface to the whole.
The paper on which the specimens are fixed, and the boards in which 
all are placed, with the printed sheet, surely cannot cost the publishers 
much less than a shilling.
Hence the price of each, specimen is rather 
less than a penny.
Surely this is a bargain.
But cheapness is not the sole quality of the work, it will be eminently 
useful, especially to societies and to botanists whose herbarium is not very 
comprehensive.
The north of Germany produces nearly all our British 
plants, and several species which are not natives of our kingdom, and con- 
sequently this issue of specimens accompanied with the modem names 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
319 
will be a convenient herbarium for reference to all who study the native 
plants of the British Isles.
Note on Hypebicijm hirsutum.
(See * Phytologist' for July, 1861, p.
203.) 
Last Wednesday, the 12th of June, 1861, while we were walking 
along the Finchley road which unites the Great North Ex)ad by Bamet 
with the north-west of Ijondon, and about a mile below Finchley, and 
•about as far from Golder's Green on the Hampstead road to Hendon, 
there is a deep depression in the surface, with a small brook at its bottom, 
on the side of which we saw several plants of Hypericum hirsutum, not 
then in flower.
We went down from the road in hopes of seeing .ii^o««rw« 
minimus in a cornfield on the left-hand side of the road : cornfields are 
rarities in this part of Middlesex.
The MousetaU was invisible, but the 
St. John's-wort was not ; and the Scirpus sylvaticus was plentiful, and not 
much shorter than two yards of good measure.
Botany of Mauritius.
(From the * Qardeners' Chronicle^' Jan, 1861.) 
I will take the liberty of asking you, as you have adverted to the sub- 
ject, to inform the public that a Flora of Mauritius is in progress, and 
that it will be completed with as much speed as is consistent with coiTCct- 
ness, and as my public duties will permit.
I am quite certain that none 
but a resident botanist can give good descriptions, for I fiud every now 
and then considerable errors in De CandoRe, Sprengel, and other books, 
arising from the descriptions having been drawn up from dried specimens.
The Cryptogatoous Flora below the Ferns is almost uninvaded by former 
botanists, and will afford to me a very rich harvest in my favourite division 
of the Vegetable Kingdom, of which 1 know most of the British species.
The Fungi are interesting from their similarity to those of England.
I 
have found numbers of my old friends.
The climate is delicious ; the 
winter about the temperature of June, and in the summer the thermome- 
ter in the shade rarely rises above 87° Fahr,, so that an Englishman with 
an Englishman's energy can readily go about throughout the entire year, 
and, as malaria is absolutely unknown, without danger.
The fears I have 
seen expressed that the native Flora of Mauritius w3l be extirpated by the 
progress of cultivation is absurd.
A few localities may be lost, but from 
the mountainous character of a considerable part of the island, it is inca- 
pable of cultivation, and the majority of the species will always be pre- 
served.
Neither do I ^'^ar that the island will become barren by destruc- 
tion of the forests, as is the mountain-tops that break the clouds, and 
the rainfall remains the same ; but should the forests be destroyed to a 
large extent, it will then be necessary to have recourse to the storage of 
water in tanks, which would be readily made by damming the ravines, the 
sides of the ravines forming three sides of each reservoir, and these sides 
are often 150 to 200 feet high, and of solid basaltic rock.
— Ph. B.
Ayees.
WOECBSTERSHIEE NaTUEALISTS* ClUB.
The July meeting of this Club was held on Wednesday last, upon the 
breezy platform of Bredon Hill, but the recent precarious weather acted 
as a damper upon the ardent volunteers who lately showed such zeal in 
820 BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUEAIES.
^October.
the cause of practical science at Wit]ey Court, and on the ramparts of 
Holt Castle.
The Rev. D.
Melville was* from ecclesiastical business, 
obliged also to depute Mr. E.
Lees, V.P., to act on his behalf, so that with 
rather a fatiguing route before them, only the more determined and enthu- 
siastic appeared in the field.
Among these we observed Dr. Buchanan 
Holl (Cheltenham), Messrs.
J. D.
Jeffeiy, Josiah Jones, G.
Beck, H.
lines, 
E. Gillam, Haywood, Jeffeiy, Jun., etc.
The upper barren portion of Bredon Hill, bordering on the precipice, 
displays a natural Thuilery unexampled in a highly-cultivated county like 
Worcester, for whole squadrons of the Great Woolly-headed Thistle (Car- 
duus eriophorus) covered the crests of the oolitic escarpment, while the 
beautiful nodding purple heads of Carduus nutans crowded the undulating 
grounds by hundreds in close spinous array at the foot of the precipice.
The Spear Thistle (^Carduus lanceolatm) also grew peculiarly horrent, while 
wherever the native tmf appeared on the table land of the top of the 
hUl, the Stemless Thistle {Cnicus acaulis) was seen in flower in great 
abundance and luxuriance.
Of course Carlina vulgaris, rather dwarf, ex- 
hibited itself on the heights.
Other plants characteristic of Bredon 
botany that presented themselves, were Squinancy-wort {Asperula cynan- 
chicaj, not found elsewhere in the county, though abundant here ; Acinos 
vulgaris (both purple and white flowers), Scabiosa Columbaria^ Speoularia 
hybrida, Spiraa Filipendula, Sedum acre, Geranivm columbinum, Onobrychis 
saliva, and Brackypodium pinnatum, the latter in excessive quantity on 
the higher ground.
The Bladder-Fern (fiystopteris fragilis) was also 
gathered in crevices of the oolitic precipice.
Not a single specimen of 
Foxglove {Digitalis) or Ulex was observed anywhere on the hill, though 
they are so common at Malvern.
Cynoglossum sylvaticum.
I have now, for a period of four or five consecutive seasons, seen this 
plant in this neighbourhood put forth from the same root, buds and blos- 
soms, and if this fact is not sufficient to prove its perennial duration, I 
should like to know what is.
John Sim.
Bridge Bnd, Perth, May 1861.
Communications have been received from 
W.T. Byer; Sidney Beisly; Professor Babington; John Sim; J.
Back- 
house, Jun.
; Berthold Seemann, Ph.D., FiL.S.; T.
W. Gissing; H.
Bos- 
well; M.
A. Walker; J.
S. M.; G.
Lamond; Rev. H.
A. Wklker; William 
Pamplin, etc.
BEOEIVKD FOR REVIEW.
The Preston Chronicle^ August 1th and \Uh, 
Perns, Lycopods, etc, {See p, ^1%), • 
Notes on Books, 
In the number ior September, 1861, p.
260, line 12, for Laduea Prenanlhes, 
read i.
prenanthoidee ; and value it aa a synonym of Prenanthee murcUis, Alao 
in p.
274^ line 17, for forms read fbrm.
[November, 1861.] 821 
NOKPOLK AND SUFFOLK BOTANY.
On the Botany of the Borders of Suffolk and Norfolk , near 
the Source of the River Waveney, By C.
J. Ashfield.
On the 13th of September, 1861, being then on a visit in the 
neighbourhood, I went on a botanical expedition to the locality 
named in the title of this article ; and the following account of 
the success I met with, will probably not be unacceptable to the 
readers of the ' Phytologist.' The chief scene of my investiga- 
tions on the occasion referred to, was a considerable tract of 
marshy and fenny land, in some places tolerably dry, and in 
others abounding in pools of water, from a few inches to several 
feet in depth, known by the name of Lopham Fen, and situated 
partly in Norfolk and partly in Suffolk.
The rivers Waveney and Little Ouse owe their origin to two 
copious springs which rise in the neighbourhood, and the former 
river runs eastward to Yarmouth, and the latter, westward to 
Thetford and Lynn ; and both form the boundary of Norfolk 
and Suffolk.
On the banks of these streams, Lopham Fen is 
situated.
The spot is a few miles westward of Diss, in Norfolk, 
where there is a station on the Eastern Counties Railway.
The route I took is as follows :— I left the railway at Mellis, 
which is the next station to the south of Diss, and a walk of 
about five n^iles from thence, through portions of the villages 
of MeUis, Burgate, Wortham, and Redgrave, brought me to the 
Fen.
Before I enumerate the floral treasures I discovered in the 
latter place, I must devote sotme space to the mention of certain 
noteworthy plants, which are to be met with on the way thither.
I must premise, that I have been well acquainted with the 
whole district for many years, and that although I did not find 
quite all the plants mentioned, in the late occasion, yet I have 
seen most if not all of them growing in the places named, at 
some time, and have in my possession dried specimens of all of 
them except one or two.
The first plant I have on my notes is Rosa rubiginosa, of which 
there are several specimens in the hedges on each side of the 
road to Burgate ; indeed, it is anything but an uncommon plant 
in the district.
N. S.
VOL, V.
2 T • 
822 NOBFOLK AND SUFFOLK BOTANY.
[November, 
A short distance will bring one to the road leading to the 
Glebe Farm, belonging to the Eectory of Burgate ; and in the 
field next the road may be found an abundance of Habenaria vi- 
ridis, while in the pasture-field beyond the farm-house, and also 
in the field adjoining to and south of the Rectory garden I have 
frequently found Ophrys apifera.
After passing the Rectory, the road leading to Burgate church 
is shortly reached ; and I should here advise a divergence from 
the direct road to the Fen as far as Burgate wood, which is 
situated a little beyond the churchy and contains many scarce 
and interesting plants.
One of the chief of these is Pulmonaria officinalis^ which is 
tolerably plentiful, and, I should say, certainly wild.
It grows 
on the left of one of the principal openings through the wood ; 
I found it in the same place as much as twenty years ago, and 
also during my late visit.
The greatly lamented Professor Henslow does not include this 
plant in his * Flora of Suflblk,^ and, indeed, gives few or no ha- 
bitats of plants in this part of the county.
I fully intended to 
write to the Professor relative to the Pulmonaria and two or 
three other Burgate plants ; but the news of his death prevented 
my doing so.
Neottia nidus-avis, Melampyrum cristatum, Scutellaria ffolericu- 
lata, Habenaria bifolia, Paris quadrifolia, Peplis Portula, Lytkrum 
Salicaria, and many other plants will, at the proper seasons, re- 
ward a search of Burgate wOod.
There are several ways from the wood to Wortham Green, 
across which the road to the Fen passes.
By the direct road from 
Mellis to Wortham, Sison Amomum is frequently to be met with ; 
indeed, it is very general here, and is a common weed in the Rec- 
tory garden at Burgate.
Convolvulus sepium and Humulus Lu^ 
pulus are very frequent and graceful ornaments of hedges in Bur- 
gate.
Ononis arvensis is abundant by the side of the road near 
Wortham Green.
Sagina nodosa grows on the right-hand side 
of the Green ; and Potamogeton densus and Hydrocharis Morsm^ 
rame are abundant in the same locality.
Further on, in a hedge 
to the left, Tamus communis and Bryonia dioica are frequent, 
and Verbascum Thapsus is not otherwise.
After leaving Wortham Green, Calamintha Clinopodium and 
C. officinalis (C.
adnos, in a cornfield near the Fen) are com- 
1861.] NOBFOLK AND SUFFOLK BOTANY.
323 
mon on hedge-banks on each side of the road^ and in the hedges 
Evonymus europceus is frequent.
On a bank to the right, about 
halfvray between Wortham Green and Redgrave church, I found 
a few specimens of Dipsacm pilosus, which plant also grows by the 
side of another road in the same neighbourhood.
In Redgrave 
churchyard grow Galium verum and Salvia verbenaca, and in 
the immediate neighbourhood is an abimdance of that handsome 
plant, Verbascum nigrum, • 
Before leaving the neighbourhood of the church, I would sug- 
gest that the botanist forsakes his particular avocations for a few 
minutes, for the purpose of inspecting the interior of the building, 
which contains two such monuments as few country churches can 
boast : one of them is to the memory of Sir Nicholas Bacon 
(the Premier Baronet) and his wife, and the other to that of Chief 
Justice Sir John Holt ; both former owners of Redgrave Hall.
Continuing along the road beyond the church a short distance, 
brings one to a footpath on the right, which leads directly through 
several fields to the Fen. In these fields the following plants are 
to be met with: — Orobanche minor y Cichorium Intybus, Reseda 
Luteola, R.
lutea, Sarothamnus scoparitts, Carduus nvtans^ Sea- 
diosa arvensis, Trifolium procumbenSy T, arvense, Hypericum, 
several kinds, Linaria vulgaris, and Echium vulgare.
Rosa ru- 
iiginosa is very plentiful in a hedge bordering on the Fen.
Arrived on the Fen itself, the first plant which attracts one's 
attention, at this season especially, is Pamassia palustris, which 
is abundant there.
Bearing to the right from the spot where I 
entered the Fen (on the side nearest to Redgrave church), and 
continuing two hundred yards or so, and at a short distance from 
a small fir plantation, I found several plants of the Orchid family 
in an immature state, which was, doubtless, ^ther Malaans palu- 
dosa or Liparis LoeseUi, I have heard that the latter plant has 
been found in this district.
On the border of the fir plantation 
alluded to, I found a quantity of a plant of the Aster tribe, very 
much resembling, in its foliage and mode of growth, the Michael- 
mas Daisy of the gardens, the blossom being purple with a yel- 
low disk.
The plant has every appearance of being wild, and I 
found it in the same place some fifteen years since ; it is not de- 
scribed in any botanical work to which I have referred.
I will 
not particularize the localities in which I found the other Fen 
plants, as they were distributed generally either in the pools or 
324 KORFOLK AND SUFFOLK BOTANY.
[November, 
about their margins^ or in the two rivers, or on the heathy por- 
tions of the Fen.
The plants which I noted down were the following : — Cladium 
Mariscus, frequent ; Schcenus nigricans, very abundant ; Lemna, 
the four British kinds ; Char a hispida, Menyantkes trifoliata, My- 
riophyllum verticillatum, Rumex Hydrolapatbum, Lythrum Sali- 
caria, Aligma ranunculoides, Hydrocharis Morms-ranee, Hottonia 
palustris, Sparganium ramosum, Samolus Valerandi, Calluna vul^ 
garis, Sium angustifolium, Eupatorium cannabinum, Scabiosa sue- 
cisa, Hydrocotyle vulgaris, Epipactis palustris, Cotnarum palustre, 
Lycopus europaus, Pinguicula vulgaris, Ranunculus Flammula, 
Potamogeton, several kinds, but these were mostly too far decayed 
to distinguish them ; Utricularia vulgaris was plentiful, and U, 
miTwr equally so, Anagallis fenella, Drosera rotundifolia, D.
longi- 
folia, (I am not quite sure whether D.
anglica is there or not,) 
and (Enanthe Lachenalii.
These are all that I found on my late 
visit to Lopham Fen. I have no doubt that a botanical expedi- 
tion to the locality earlier in the season would be amply rewarded.
I believe several* of the Orchid family are to be found there.
I 
gathered the pretty little Genista anglica there some years since, 
and I have seen a specimen of Lysimachia vulgaris which came 
from thence.
A walk through the beautiful Park of Redgrave would agree- 
ably vary, though somewhat lengthen, the return to Mellis sta- 
tion; but the gratification of seeing the fine old Oaks which 
abound in the Park, would alone, in my opinion, compensate one 
for the extra exertion.
The way to the Park is opposite to Bed- 
grave church.
In conclusion, I may state that the following are some of the 
scarcer plants to be found in the parish of Burgate : — Ophrys 
muscifera, Orchis pyramidalis, Erigeron acris, Senebiera Corona^ 
pus, Orchis, conopsea.
Spiraea Filipendula, Erysimum cheiran- 
thoides, Hottonia palustris, Lithospermum officinale, Galeopsis 
Ladanum, lAnaria minor, and Caucalis nodosa.
Sambucus Ebulus 
some time since grew in .Burgate churchyard, but I believe is now 
lost there.
I have a specimen of Delphinium Consolida marked 
" Wheat-field, MeUis, Sufiblk, September, 1841 ;'' and another of 
Conyza squarrosa, marked " Hedgebank, Mellis, Sufiblk, July, 
1841.^^ Hottonia palustris grows more luxuriantly, and with 
more numerous whorls of blossoms, in pits about Mellis Green, 
1861].
libbard's-bane.
325 
than I have ever seen it elsewhere.
Daphne Laureola grew in a 
hedge by the side of the road from Mellis to Burgate some years 
since, and probably grows there still, although I did not observe 
it on the occasion of my late visit.
It had every appearance of 
being wild in the locality referred to.
Prestwiy October 2nd, 1861.
LIBBABD'S-BANE.— LEOPARD'S AND OTHER 
"BANE PLANTS." 
Doronicum Pardalianches.
Mr. Gissing, in his note in the ' Phy tologist ' for March, 
says it is customary with' nearly all British botanists to con- 
sider the Doronicum as alien to this country ; and he speaks of 
one place, near Bewdley in Worcestershire, which " is some dis- 
tance from a house, but in conveying manure to fields or mea- 
dows, seeds of garden plants may be taken to very unlikely 
places for garden plants to grow.^^ In this habitat an escape 
from a garden (in the true sense) it certainly is not; and he 
then refers to a passage in Ben Jonson^s 'Masque of Queens,^ 1609, 
and quotes some lines in which lAhbard* s-bane is noticed with 
other wild plants, and hence infers that lAbbard^s-bane may be 
properly termed a wild plant.
I see nothing unreasonable in this inference, but am inclined 
to agree with Mr. Gissing ; and I would ask why, instead of its 
having been cast out of the garden to take its place in the field, 
it may not have been taken out of the field to be cultivated in 
the garden.
If so many of the seeds of pur garden plants have been so 
cast out with refuse and manure into the fields, I should like to 
know how it is that there are so few of the garden plants grow- 
ing in the fields.
The process has been, in my opinion, vice versd ; 
for if all plants, were originally what are termed wild plants (or 
plants formed to grow naturally without particular cultivation), 
the cultivation of them would be more likely to produce our 
garden plants, than the garden plants cast out to produce wild 
plants.
Take for instance the Celery, the Spinach, Beet, and many 
others, which in a wild state being found palatable, would attract 
826 LiBBARD^s-BANE.
. {NovembeT, 
the attention of man to their greater care and cnltivation^ by 
which they would become increased in size and flavour; and I 
doubt not that if the power of cultivation were arrested^ these 
plants would fall back into their wild state ; but I must leave the 
solution of this to wiser heads than mine.
I give however, for the benefit of thie curious, some informa- 
tion fipom old writers on this plant, which may aid in the de- 
cision of the question.
In Du Bartas' ' Divine Weeks/ trans- 
lated by J.
Sylvester, I find the following lines, in his notice 
of poisonous plants : — • 
" Only the touch of choak-pard* aconite 
Bereayes the scorpion both of sense and might." 
This plant was by some of the old writers called Aconite, as 
well as LibbarcPS'bane.
Cole's Dictionary says, *' Libbards bane, 
Aconitum" Dr. William Turner (who has received such ample 
justice in the ^ Phytologist,' see "Chapters on British Botany '') 
has the Libbard's-bane, of which he says, "The herbe that hath 
been taken for Libbard's-bane groweth plenteously beside Morpeth 
in Northumberland, in a wood called Cottingwood.'* 
In TopselVs 'History of Four-footed Beasts,' under the descrip- 
tion of Panther, he says, "There is a kind of Henbane which is 
called Pardalianches, or Libbard's-bane, which the inhabitants of 
Pharnacus and Mount Ida were wont to lay in the Mountains 
for the destroying of Leopards, Bardols and Panthers." See Leo- 
pard' s-bane in Gerarde's History of Plants, which he calls Doro- 
^ • I find in Nares's * GHossary,' edited by HalliweU and Wright, the foUowing :— - 
" Choak-wort, a Plant, 
** The libians called it Beena, which implies 
It makes them dye like birds 'twixt earth and skyes ; 
The name of Choak-wort is to it assigned.
Because it stops the T^om of the mind." 
TayWi Works, 1630.
In the same work is giyen " Ohoak Fear,'* a coarse kind of pear *, and the author 
refers to Lilly's ' Euphues and his England,' 1628, — " instead of a pill to purge 
his hot blood, he gaye him a choke pear, to stop his breath," etc.
There is also " Choke-plum, a similar plum," which in Heywood's 'Spider and 
Flie ' is called a choking *' choke plum." 
The description of Choke-pear in the Glossary is not satisfactory ; if the authors 
had referred to Parkinson's 'Orchard,' they would haye found the following : — " The 
choke-pears and other wild pears, as they are not to furnish our orchard, but the 
woods, forests, fields, and hedges, so we leaye them to their unknown places and 
to them that keep them and make good use of them." 
I 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
827 
ronicumy and says, " Of this plant there be sundry kinds, whereof 
I will touch four */^ and the figures of the plants are given.
He 
also adds, that he had two kinds growing in his garden, one of 
which, "Great Leopard' s-bane, Doronicum majus officinarumy 
has been found and gathered in the cold mountains of Northum- 
berland by Dr. Penny, lately of London, a man of much ex- 
perience and knowledge in samples, whose death myself and 
others do greatly bewail.'^ 
Was this Doronicum which grew on the cold mountains of 
Northumberland, an outcast from the garden ?
S. B.
BOTANY OF SPAIN.
A Few Dayg* Botanizing in the North-Eastern Provinces of 
Spain, in April and May, 1860.
No. IIL 
From Valencia to Madrid we travelled all the way by railroad, 
and had no opportunity of botanizing, except an hour's walk at 
the point where the Valencia branch meets the Alicante line.
This point is Almansa, in the kingdom of Murcia, and the rail- 
way-station is in the very field of battle, where the English arms 
sustained one of the few defeats they underwent in the war of 
Marlborough and Queen Anne.
To write the name Almanza is 
in every way a mistake ; it is spelt with an s, and that letter in 
Spanish is never sounded like z.
The shabby-looking little 
country town, which I only saw from outside, is still, probably, 
much what it was then.
The adjacent country was mostly, at 
this season, in a freshly-ploughed state, and my botanizing was 
limited to a strip of ground between two lines of cultivation.
There, however, I found Adonis autumnalis.
Sisymbrium Irio and 
Sophia, Erysimum perfoliatum, a Camelina (I believe sylvestris), 
Hypecoum procumbens, a single plant of another Hypecoum, H.
pendulum, the curiously podded Enarthrocarpus arcuatus, and 
the fine dark-coloured Poppy, Rcemeria hybrida.
It is remarkable 
(and could scarcely have happened at any season but early spring) 
that all the plants I saw were of the three neighbouring families, 
Ranunculacea, Papaveracem, and Crudfera, 
828 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
[November, 
Wliile at Madrid I did not botanize ; the time we passed there 
was occupied with the town itself^ and especially its almost un- 
rivalled picture-gallery, which they who have not seen are unac- 
quainted with one of the two great schools of painting of the 
world.
The neighbouring country is a treeless and bushless ex- 
panse of com — a uniform green in spring, a melancholy stubble 
in autumn — comprising the lofty plateau of Castille, of which 
the mountainous swell has neither the variety of hills nor the im- 
posingness of a real plain.
It is as unpromising to the botanist 
as it is unattractive to the lover of nature, to whose eye every- 
thing about the capital of tod(zs las Espanas is wearisome, save-^ 
at the few points from which he can look over the north edge of 
the plateau, across a broad valley, to the snowclad mountains of 
Guadarrama, by the blasts from which sentries are said to have 
been frozen to death at the gates of Queen Isabella's palace.
My next botanizing was in a walk in the dusk near Guada- 
laxara, the place where the railway from Madrid towards Zara- 
goza at that time terminated; it has since been extended further.
This little town is made imposing by the vast chateau of the 
Mendozas, a building which tells of Spain in what are called her 
great ages, being in reality the ages by which she was ruined.
The only new plant which met my eye was Reseda undata, now 
identified with R, alba, a plant of our gardens, sometimes found 
in England as an escape from culture, to me indissolubly asso- 
ciated with the place where I first saw it, the ruins of Nero's 
Golden House.
I was more successful at Alcolea, the small village mentioned 
in my former paper, halfway between Guadalaxara and Cala-^ 
tayud, the first considerable town in Aragon.
The plants which 
were here in flower, were those of a much earlier time of year, 
owing to the great elevation of the plateau on which, though 
now drawing near to its eastern boundary, we still were.
Though 
it was the Ist of May, Genista scorpius (which near Avignon 
begins to flower in February) had not yet expanded its buds.
E'i'ysimum perfoliatum also, was not yet in flower.
Hutchinsia 
petrcBtty the plant of St. Vincent Bocks and Eltham churchyard, 
was there ; Potentilla vema, another Clifton plant ; two Crucifers 
which grow near Rome and flower in March ; Arabis vema and 
the less beautiful Calepina Corvini; another Arabis, probably 
ciliata ; two Veronica of the earliest spring, hedenefolia and tri- 
1861.] BOTANY OP SPAIN.
329 
phgUos; an Alyssum, new to me, which I believe to be A.
pervr- 
«iantem, a plant noted in the ^ Flore de France/ with only one 
habitat (in the Eastern Pyrenees); Ceratocephaltis falcatuSj for- 
merly classed as a Ranunculus, whose small flower gives birth to 
an oval head of scythe-shaped carpels, sometimes equalling in 
dimensions all the rest of the plant ; and last of all, abounding 
among the young corn, a plant of the Order Primulacea, with a 
small bright flower sunk in the hollow of a very large calyx, 
which I did not at first see to be a lowland species of the high- 
land genus Androsace ; it is A.
maadmay which I found again at 
Zaragoza, and the seeds of which are said in the country to be 
edible.
Of plants not in flower I noted only a Euphorbia and 
the formidable Thistle Picnomon Acarna.
From Zaragoza, the prosperous capital of a backward province, 
noted for its glorious siege and for its two splendid cathedrals, I 
made a successful herborization.
The immediate vicinity con- 
tains abundance, both of waste and cultivated land, dry rocky 
garrigue, and low arable, fertilized by water tumbling in cascades 
from sluices in a broad canal carried along a very high embank- 
ment.
Of plants already mentioned I noted Rcemeria hybrida, 
Fumaria spicata, Mathiola tristis, Lepidium Draba, Sisymbrium 
obtusangubim and /no, two Helianthema, Genista Scorpius, and 
I believe Calycotome spinosa, Hippocrepis ciliata and comosa, Vi- 
da triflora, Paronychia argentea, Helichrysum Stoechas, Thymus 
vulgaris (a variety with a lemon scent), Planiago Lagopus and 
albicans, Mercurialis tomentosa, Asphodelus fistuhsu^, and a small 
variety of A, ramosus, I have hardly anywhere seen Ranunculus 
repens so magnificent.
The following were new to me, in Spain 
at least: — an Adonis, I believe A.
microcarpa; Papaver hybridum 
in profusion j the richly-coloured Glaucium corniculatum (other- 
wise ^Aomicet^m), a plant also of Avignon; a cruciferous siliculose 
plant of dried-up appearance, not unlike in aspect to an advanced 
state of Alyssum campestre or calycinum, but which proved on 
examination to be Berteroa incana ; a tall Reseda allied to lutea, 
I believe R, Jruticulosa ; to Hippocrepis ciliata was added a larger 
species, with pods similarly jointed and scooped out, H.
unisiU- 
quosa ; the spreading Hedypnois polymorpha, with its clumsy 
club-like peduncles; the red-flowered ^nd downy-coated Cyno- 
glossum cheirifoUum, one of the handsomest of its tribe ; a fine 
dark-flowered Teucrium, not in the French Flora, — I made it 
N.S. VOL.V. 2 u 
830 BOTANY OP SPAIN.
{Noven^cT, 
out to be r.
thymifolium ; lastly, a tiny grass, with a round, rather 
prickly head, Echinaria capitata.
At Lerida my botanizing was limited to a single field, but in 
that small space (besides Alyssum calycirmm and the beautiful 
Anchusa italica of our gardens, a common cornfield plant in 
Spain and all over southern Europe as high up as Burgundy on 
the east and La Vendee on the west) I found four plants which 
I did not see elsewhere in Spain ; two species of Silene, S, conica, 
and the rarer, more stately, and larger-flowered 8.
conoidea; a 
less handsome, not to say ugly, Boragineous plant, Nonnea ven- 
tricosa, one of the roughest of its rough tribe, without the usual 
lustrous beauty of their flowers ; and the rather vulgar-looking 
sister of an otherwise most elegant race, Malcolmia africana.
Between Lerida and Tarragona I saw from the diligence the 
following plants, scattered in abundance over the country: — i?«- 
meria hybrida, Lepidium Draba, Cistus (if I mistake not) umbels 
latvs, Ulex parviflorua, Convolvulus althteoides, Cynoghssum chei^ 
rifolium, Mercurialis tomentosa, a Gladiolus, and the blue AphyU 
lanthes monspeliensis.
To these I will subjoin the following, 
which seemed universal in the parts of Spain which I have bota- 
nically visited : — Adojm autumnalis, Lychnis vespertina, Affro- 
stemma Githagoj Vicia sativa, Scandix Pecten-Veneris, Maruta 
Cotuta, Podospermum laciniatum, Hieracium sylvaticumj or some 
of the many species (or supposed species) allied to it, Anchusa 
italica, Lycopsis arvensis, Lithospermum arvense and officinale^ 
Plantago Coroihopus and lanceolata.
And here ends Spanish bo- 
tanizing, with the exception of a visit to Monserrat, and two 
days at the end of May in the Spanish Pyrenees, of which I 
will endeavour to give some account in a future number of the 
'Phytologist.' 
THE RESULTS OP A DAY'S BOTANIZING NEAR METHVEN, 
PERTHSHIRE.
By F&ANCis B.
W. White.
First, near the village of Pitcaim, Campanula rapunculoides 
grows by the roadside, where the hedges are festooned with So- 
lanum Dulcamara, Vicia Cracca, Lathyrus pratensis, and other 
climbing plants.
1861*] BOTANICAL NOTES FROM ARGYLESHIRE.
831 
In a wood near tte river Almond, grow the following rare 
species, viz.
i-— Campanula latifolia, Cardutis heterophyllus, Circaa 
lutetiana, Epilobium %ngusUfoliumy Carex sylvatica, Polypodium 
Dryopteris, A^erula odorata, Solidago Virgaurea, and other in- 
teresting species.
Rosa rubiginosa, R.
tomentosa, and R, arvensis, are not un- 
common in the hedges and on the bushy, furzy, open wastes.
Saxifraga aizoides fringes the margins of the riUs that descend 
from the heights into the river.
Mentha sylvestris, Hypericum hirsutum, H, humifimim, Gen- 
tiana campestris,AgrimoniaEupatorium, Calamintha Clinopodium, 
Linaria vulgaris, Sedum Telephium and 8.
reflexum out of reach, 
etc., grow by the roadside not far from Methven, and several 
Orchids in open parts of the same locality; the chief of these 
were Habenaria chlorantha, H.
bifolia, and Gymnadenia conopsea.
The rocky parts were adorned with the pretty Antennaria dioica.
The bogs afforded Potam^geton oblongus ?
and P.
natans, also 
Triglochin palustre, Veronica scutellata, Equisetum sylvaiicum ?, 
Narthecium ossifragumy Sedum villosum, Hydrocotyle vulgaris, 
Comarum palustre, Carex curta and C ampullacea, Alisma ra-- 
minculoides, Drosera rotundifolia, Sparganium simplex and S, 
ramoswm, and other rarities too numerous for entry.
The Ferns which I obsierved in addition to that already noted, 
were Lastrea Oreopteris, L.
aculeata, var.
lobata, and Cystopteris 
fragilis.
After a long walk, in weather which did not increase the plea- 
sure of being on unsheltered wastes, or in the rocky channels of 
mountain torrents, or under the drip of Scotch Firs, Elms, and 
Larches, I reached home thoroughly tired ; but well pleased with 
the result of my day^s botanizing.
Perth, July lOth, 1861.
B0T4NICAL LETTERS FEOM ARGYLESHIRE.
By James Lothian.
No. II.
LiMECRAIGS and CrOSSHILL.
Sir, — ^To a resident botanist, or a party arriving in Campbell- 
town on a botanical tour, the above localities form an easily reached 
832 BOTANICAL NOTES FROM AKOTLESHiRE.
[November, 
and pleasing short excursion^ well suited for an evening's explo- 
ration after the arrival of the steamer from Glasgow.
The party 
can get refreshed at the White Hart Hotel or Argyle Arms, 
after which they can easily search those localities in two or three 
hours.
Leaving town by Argyle Street and Killkerran road, ten mi- 
nutes will enable them to reach Limecraigs, an old residence of 
the Ai^yle family.
Shortly after entering the avenue, the man- 
sion, an old square building, appears through the fine old trees 
which line both sides of the approach, meeting overhead like a 
Oothic arch.
The house is occupied as a shooting-lodge by a 
sportsman, who possesses the extensive range of shooting to the 
rear, extending about ten miles southwards.
The lands surround- 
ing the house are laid out in pasture, grazed .by flocks of sheep 
and cattle, which give animation to the scenery.
Surrounding 
the house there are fine old specimens of trees, and throughout 
the park their huge trunks and beautifully formed heads, and 
rich tints of foliage, are objects of attraction.
To one of these 
I must more especially direct the attention of the botanical 
wanderer.
This specimen stands at the end of a small bridge 
in close proximity to the house, exhibiting the most remark- 
able natural union of two branches that has come under my 
own observation.
The tree in question in its early stages has 
evidently grown forked, that is, with two leading top branches, 
and after growing in this manner for a series of years, one of 
them appears to have started away ahead of its companion ; the 
latter, as if seeing that it was to be left behind, has turned its 
head inwards and ingrafted itself with its neighbour, and so com- 
pletely has it efiected this, that no mark or scar appears giving 
the least indication of how it has been effected.
There it stands, 
forming a complete ellipse of some two yards long, with the union 
as perfect above as at the fork below.
Probably another similar 
instance is not to be met with in the kingdom, and most certainly 
not in Kintyre.
It is one of those freaks of Nature which seem 
to put Philosophy to defiance.
Immediately in front of the man- 
sion there is a fine formed specimen of variegated Sycamore, re- 
presenting very completely the class of round-headed trees.
A short distance from the house, away to the rear, as you cross 
the park in the direction of Crossbill, you reach a belt or small 
plantation of Oak, Firs, etc.
There, during the time of flowering.
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES FBOM ARGYLESHIRE.
* 888 
I have met with Lysimachia nemorum, Geranium Roberiianum, 
Aspidium FiUx-mas, Marchafitia polymorpha, Chrysosplenium op- 
positifolium, Scabiosa sticciaa, abundantly.
The Oxalis AcetO" 
sella and the Hyacinthus nonscriptus grow at this spot in great 
profusion ; and among the dense blue masses of it^ I have year 
after year picked up here the H.
nonscriptus alba.
Three species 
of the genus Rubus appear very abundant^ viz.
R. corylifolius, R, 
fruticosuSy and R, suberectus.
To these I may add the Ranunculus 
grammeuSy"^ Spiraa Ulmaria, Iris Pseudacorus^ Myosotis palustris, 
Stellaria glauca, and several of the Grasses.
Crossing the boundary of Limecraigs policies, Crossbill is 
reached.
It is a range of fine green knolls, partly covered with 
natural pasture, and part of it has been subjected to the plough.
Ascending from the north side, as you stand for a moment to 
draw your breath, the first object that attractsi the eye is the 
splendid blaze of the Foxglove, Digitalis purpurea, which grows in 
great masses here ; where also upon one or two occasions I have 
met the Z>.
purpurea, var.
alba.
The Viola canina, Polygala 
vulgaris, several varieties, the Pinguicula vulgaris, the yellow 
Primrose, Jasione montana, Tormeniilla repens, Potentilla reptans, 
Galium verum, G.
scuvatile, Orchis maculata, Lotus corniculatus, 
Plantago lanceolata, and P.
maritima, are everywhere, and as you 
reach the top, the Alchemilla vulgaris and A, arvensis are found, 
and lAnum catharticum in great abundance.
On a fine summer evening, this is a spot, fragrant with the 
wild Thyme, where the lover of Nature and her manifold charms 
may enjoy a rest and a beautiful bird's-eye view of the town of 
Campbelltown, its harbour and shipping, and the country around 
it ; as well as a fine distant view of Arran, Islay, Jura, with her 
lofty Pass, Mackrehanish bay, and a part of the Atlantic Ocean.
As he sits gazing around him with pleasure, — if poetical, with rap- 
ture, — he may not be aware that he sits on the top of a mine.
A tunnel passes right through the centre of this knoll, through 
which the water supply of the town is conducted from a large 
reservoir, or rather a lake, situated in the deep green glen be- 
hind him, by which I may now conduct you.
Descending the south side of Crossbill to the reservoir, im- 
* Will OUT obliging correspondent send to 46, Frith Street, Soho Square, Lon- 
don, a few specimens of this JRanunculus, which has been often reported as a British 
plant ?
Has any reader ever seen an example collected in these isles ?
884 KENTISH BOTANY.
[Novemberf 
mense masses of the Ulex europiBUs are everywhere^ as well as the 
Sloe Thom^ difiiising the fragrant perfume of its snowy blossoms 
on every breeze.
Tront are leaping in the lake, and various kin^ 
of water-birds are flying about.
Beaching the east bank, which 
is an artificial one, a deep glen at the south end of the tunnel 
meets the eye, where a delicious little spring flows from the base 
of the limestone.rock.
Here the Prunella vulgaris is very abundant, 
and where I have also found the P.
vulgaris alba ; on the marshy 
banks of a rivulet that flows down through Knockbay glen, are .
^ found the Caliha palustris and several species of the more com- 
mon Ferns, Lychnis dioica, etc.
Ascending from this glen, the 
rambler can proceed a few hundred yards southwards and take a 
homeward direction by Knockbay Farm ; on his way he would 
meet with Ajuga reptans and Anagallis tenella abundantly.
He 
may deck his Qap with the badge of the clan McDonald, Erica 
cinerea, and his breast with the fragrant Honeysuckle, found here 
in dense thickets.
He shortly reaches Eillkerran road, when a 
quarter of an hour will bring him to his quarters.
But I must close for the present.
I am afraid I have encroached 
upon your time and space, beyond what my vasculum of wild- 
flowers will warrant, on this occasion.
I hope my next will be 
better filled, and that I may be able to inform you of a greater 
and a rarer catalogue of our local rarities, which while we 
search for them and study our beautiful wild-flowers, may we be 
made better and wiser ; may we ever sing with the bard, — 
" Instruct us, Lord, 
Thou Father of the sunbeam and the soul.
E'en by the simple sermon of a flower, 
To live to Thee." 
KENTISH BOTANY.
Walk from Folkestone to Lydden Spout ^ under the Cliff by East- 
wear Bay, and back to Sandgate, Shomecliff, Seabrooke, and 
Hythe.
The morning of the 7th of September was very fine, and soon 
after six o^clock we were abroad, and wending our way back 
again by the martello towers, over the clifi" to Eastwear Bay, re- 
tracing our steps to Lydden Spout, prepared to return over the 
ground which we had passed unprofitably the previous night.
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
835 
On the underdtfiB surrounding or enclosing Eastwear Bslj, a 
most productive locality, we observed many of the plants which 
had been previously seen and collected in other parts of our 
journey, and we only report specimens of the following as actu- 
ally collected, viz.
Juncus obtusiflorus, Iris fcetidissima, — which 
to us bore no disagreeable smell, although its name denotes as 
much as if it stunk like asafoetida, — (the odour of that to which 
the smell of this plant is compared would have been anything 
other than offensive to our olfactory organs, for we had not yet 
broken our fast, and our digestive apparatus wanted some object 
whereon to operate : roast beef is not procurable in Eastwear 
Bay, nor roast mutton either,) — THfolium striatum, and T.
me- 
dium : the latter Professor Buckland demonstrates to be identical 
as a species with T.
prateme; the learned Professor does not teU 
us on what evidence, axioms, or postulates hi^ demonstration is 
founded ; is it proved on a priori or on a posteriori principles?
Eastwear Bsfy also produced lAthospermum officinale, Lactuca 
virosa, and Potamogeton obhnffus or natans.
This fine aquatic was 
far beyond our reach ; it might have been procured by swimming.
Most of the remaining rare plants of this locality, and they are 
numerous, had been previously observed, except Rosa rubiginosa, 
which was scented at a considerable distance on this fine morn- 
ing, when the dew hung long on the luxuriant vegetation of this 
undercliff.
Here were also noticed gigantic specimens of Hippo- 
phae rhamnoides, more than six feet high.
This locality will well repay the expense of a visit, in the month 
of June or in the beginning of July ; we were here a couple of 
months too late.
In ordinary seasons very little would have been 
seen worth collecting so late as the 7th of this month, but this 
year the weather and the state of vegetation were exceptional, 
and the vegetation of August was still existing in September.
On the face of the steep cliffy, on our way to the Spout, Brassica 
oleracea ag^n appeared, and in a fissure down which trickled a 
tiny rill, there was seen Scolopendrium vulgare.
Ferns were by 
no means common in the course of our tour.
At the base of the 
cliff Papaver somtdferum appeared quite at home, very far from 
a cottage or garden, but probably not very far from a cornfield.^ 
• There is some cuitiration on the cliff here and there, and we passed through 
a field which is not probably more than a mile from Eastwear Bay. We did not 
see Fapaver sommferum dining our long walk from Canterbury, through Sandwich, 
886 KENTISH BOTANY.
[November, 
There are no cottages under the cliff, but about a mile from the 
Spout there is the huU of a ship, removed a little distance from 
the sea, and fitted up for the abode of coastguardmen and their 
families.
On the shingle, not far from this semi-marine residence, some 
fine plants of Cakile maritima introduced themselves, and from 
these we replenished pur vasculums.
Crithmum maritimum was 
also plentiful, and within reach.
About Eastwear Bay and the 
Lydden Spout the gathering of Samphire is not so formidable a« 
process as it was on Shakspeare^s Cliff in the days of good King 
Lear.
There were no samphire-gatherers here but ourselves, 
and our wants were soon supplied ; we had no occasion to risk 
limb or lith to procure all that was wanted for our purposes.
Near the Spout there were some plants of Frankenia lavis, 
well grown, barely in flower, just enough to enable us to state 
positively that the plant grows here.
We spent half an hour 
looking for Euphorbia Paralias, which we could hardly have over- 
looked if it had been there when we were, and then we ascended 
the undercliff and gathered some large plants of Orobanche ca- 
ryophyUacea, all quite withered.
This rare Kentish plant is nearly 
as tall as O.
major, and it was invariably found near Galium 
MoUuffo ; hence it was inferred, naturally enough, that it grows 
on the roots of the latter plant.
This however we did not stay 
to determine, for our appetite reminded us that we had not yet 
breakfasted, and it was now eleven o^clock, and we had four good 
miles to walk before we could reach our hotel ; therefore we left 
the Orobanche, ascended the four hundred and forty-four steps, 
inclined planes and all, reaching the top of the cliff in about 
fifteen minutes after we commenced the ascent by the steps.
Our nearest way to Folkestone was along the top of tHe diff, 
across some fields to the Dover road, by which we entered this 
ancient town the second time, but the first time in broad day- 
light.
The situation of Folkestone is very similar to that of Dover, 
only the combe in which the former is built is not nearly so deep 
nor so extensive as that which contains the latter; or, in other 
words, the hills about Dover are considerably steeper and higher 
Deal, and DoTer, to Folkestone ; but as it is a cornfield plant, it may possibly haye 
tumbled or was blown oyer the clifi^ as the Isle of Wight Stock may have been 
driven by the storms into the sheltered nooks where it grows.
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
337 
than thejr are at Folkestone.
The combe of Folkestone does not 
bear the deep basin-like form of that of Dover.
The cliffs and 
entire scenery about the latter town are remarkably striking, 
unlike those of any other part of the south-eastern coast observed 
by the reporter.
Folkestone is certainly an enjoyable town, though not so 
agreeable as its more celebrated and better-known rival.
Our destination, on this the fifth and the last day of our botani- 
cal excursion, was from Folkestone to Hythe, through Sandgate, 
Shornecliff, Seabrooke, etc.
Our way was along the undercliff, which has now become less 
productive, in a botanical sense, than it was in the time of the 
Rev. G.
E. Smith, who botanized here about thirty years ago.
Enclosures and cultivation have produced this alteration.
Pha- 
laris canariensis was more plentiful here than in any part of our 
previous journey — one of the many proofs that the centre of its 
distribution is not where it is cultivated.
Petroselinum sativum 
was well established on these steep banks ; and Tamarix gallica, 
though probably planted here, throve amazingly.
No shrub 
braves and endures the keen sea air better than this ; few shrubs 
have a more handsome, bushy, and lively appearance.
It is not 
only an ornament to the cliff, but.
it might be used as a nurseling 
or a protector for sheltering and raising more valuable but not 
so hardy shrubs and trees.
There is a small beach between Sandgate and its castle — for cas- 
tles are plentiful in this part of the country, all built upon one 
plan or after one model ; they are circular, like a stumpy cylinder, 
or a torso, i.e. a human figure deprived of its head, arms, and legs, 
the height of which does not much exceed its breadth.
The 
martello towers are in proportion and figure not unlike a Stilton 
cheese, and they are not very ugly ; but the proportions of San- 
down, Deal, and Sandgate castles are exactly those of a double 
or thick Gloucester, the diameter is about twice the height.
Let 
not the curious reader fancy that the south of England is orna- 
mented and fortified with such noble erections as Windsor Castle, 
or even like the smaller castellated edifices of Aberdeenshire.
These Kentish castles have no beauty to boast of; of their de- 
fensive or their offensive capabilities, the less that is said the 
better for them : for as picturesque objects they do not enhance 
tlfe attractiveness of the coast scenery; their defensive capabilities 
N. S.
VOL.
V. 2 X 
338 KENTISH BOTANY.
[NovembeT, 
have never happily been proved by aggressive attacks.
They 
however have their botanical nses^ in marking off the coast into 
portions of moderate dimensions, and by their help localities ara 
definitely described.
Between Sandgate and Sandgate castle 
there is a pretty considerable portion of the raised beach well 
covered with grassy turf.
Here were seen large forms of 7W- 
folium striatum, and still larger examples of T, omithopodioides.
In most parts the latter is only a very diminutive plant; here it 
is at least a foot long.
We have seen cultivated specimens as 
large as these, but we never saw the wild plant so large as those 
we collected at Sandgate.
At the village of Sandgate we ob- 
served Ciraea lutetiana not an uncommon species, but this was 
the first we met with it since setting out on our present botanical 
travels.
Prom Sandgate we ascended the cliff to Shome, and along the 
brow of the hill, opposite the barracks and artillery-ground, we 
collected enormously large specimens of Trifolium subterraneum.
These were at least three feet long, with stems not quite so thick 
as a goose-quill, but quite as thick as strong pack-thread.
The 
plant was still growing ; it had fruit at one end and flowers at 
the other; and if left long enough, and if the weather had been 
favourable, it might have rivalled the length of the Sargassum, 
the weed of tlie Gulf-stream, or in plainer terms, it might have 
gone forward from Shornecliff to Hythe, if it had met with no 
interruptions or accidents by the way.
At Seabrooke we met with our first and sole botanical disap- 
pointment, which was borne with considerable equanimity and 
firmness, even though our success on this our last day^s botani- 
zing had not been very decided.
We had long cherished the idea of seeing Cyperua longns/ one 
of the rarest ornaments of Florals brow, in th^ county of Kent.
Seabrooke, its " unpromising warren-hills,^^ Whiting Brooks with 
its " black boggy track,^^ were all reached and satisfactorily iden- 
tified.
The graphic description of this district given by the re- 
verend author of the ' Botany of South Kent,^ had been read, re- 
read, considered, and mentally digested so much and so intensely, 
tl\at we could then have repeated it from beginning to end, long 
though it be, without missing a word, a stop, or a hyphen.
We 
were now within reach of realizing our hopes of acquiring a trea- 
sure so long coveted and so much valued.
• 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
339 
We ascended the hilPs brow, and perceived a wood, small and 
picturesque enough, on our left, which we deemed likely to con- 
tain the precious prize ; but, alas !
further on and straight ahead 
two other copses or woods made their appearance, both of them 
in provokingly picturesque positions.
We passed by the first- 
seen wood and went to those more remote, and found them both 
quite impenetrable.
From these copses we went up to the farm- 
house on the brow on the left, and inquired for Whiting Brooks, 
the name of the depression where both the wood and the copse^ 
so well defined by our reverend guide, are situated.
We were 
directed back to the wood and copse first seen when reaching the 
brow of the hill.
The open boggy part of the wood we found, 
and everything corresponded to the description which we had 
carefully perused and studied till it hung to our memories like 
the burden of some favourite old ballad, or like a piece of good 
luck which only happens once or twice in a long lifetime.
Every- 
thing was there except, horresco referem, "the tall, graceful 
CyperuSy spreading around its slender brancl^es, tufted with chest- 
nut spikelets, like a delicate exotic or miniature Palm, wandering 
from its native clime to adorn this secluded spot,^' was — what 
shall I say ?
— was, in dog Latin, non est inventus.
Like weary, 
hungry pedestrians as we were, we left the secluded spot, minus 
the sweet Galingale, consoling ourselves with the assurance that 
we had found the place though not the plant, brooding over our 
disappointment, and speculating on the cause of our ill-success.
Between Seabrooke and Hythe we met abundance of Salvia 
verbenaca, one of the last of the plants to be recorded as the 
produce of this journey.
It was plentiful on the roadside between 
Seabrooke and Hythe.
Next morning, before leaving for London, we strolled up the 
town into the churchyard, (not of Hythe, but of Folkestone, for 
the crowded state of the former compelled us to return a third 
time to Folkestone,) where several fine healthy plants of Hen- 
bane were growing about the tombstones on the east end, 
that nearest to the town.
The esplanade on the cliff was just 
looked at,.
and the situation was much commended.
The views 
from this part of Folkestone are very good and extensive.
In 
front there is the sea; the downs are in the rear; on the left 
Shakspeare's Cliff, Eastwear Bay, and Folkestone Harbour ; and 
ctt the west Hythe, Romney Marsh, and Dungeness.
340 KENTISH BOTANY.
[November, 
This is probably a very healthy situation ; for these houses on 
the top of the cliff have the benefit of the fresh and cool morning 
gale from the downs^ and also of the sea-breeze which blows 
steadily from some point of the south during the day.
Thus at Folkestone ended one of the most agreeable and suc- 
cessful botanical excursions either of us ever had, though we 
were far from being novices in this way of holiday-spending and 
plant-seeking.
Before commending to our readers particular 
parts of the country to their special notice, some observations 
remain to be made on certain species, especially in reference to 
their distribution.
It is assumed by some botanical observers whose opinions on 
the distribution of species are entitled to much deference, that 
certain plants are native to the valley of the Thames, which 
means that there is no suspicion of foreign origin or introduction 
attaching to them ; and that others are only entitled to rank as 
denizens, which means that their claims are doubtful, or that 
they occupy a neutral position, or lie between the unsuspected 
and the suspected natives, like Mahomet^s coffin suspended in 
the air between earth and heaven.
Mercurialis anrma is plentiful in the valley of the Thames, 
both above and below London, and it was almost if not quite as 
abundant at and below Canterbury.
This species passes muster 
as a native, though not frequent in England.
In all these loca- 
lities M.
annua is associated with Dtphtaxis muralis, and this 
latter plant is called a " denizen.^^ The late Dr. Bromfield, in 
vol.
iii.
of the ' Phytologist,' o.
s., p.
823, produced many reasons 
why M.
annua should not be reckoned a true native.
This platit, the annual or French Mercury (see ' Phytologist,' 
O.S., vol.
iii.
p. 823), was profusely distributed by waysides, in 
cultivated places, as well as on rubbish and in gardens, in villages 
and towns in all parts of our route from Canterbury to Folkestdhe.
Another plant of cultivation which we found, it may be said, 
everywhere, is Dtphtaxis muralis, probably long overlooked and 
mistaken for a state of D.
tenuifolia.
This plant is extending in 
all directions, and it appears, like several other species, to evince 
a special predilection for railways.
Only the other day, Septem- 
ber 18th, it was observed plentifully on the gravel adjoining the 
platform at Wraysbury station of the South-Westem, London 
and Windsor line.
« 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
341 
Reference has already been made tb the Wallflower, which is 
extending itself about Dover, and though it has a decided pre- 
ference for walls and rocks, yet on this coast, where there are 
neither of these habitats, it appears well contented with a hum- 
bler station.
The Wallflower, in its choice of location, bears a 
considerable resemblance to Diplotaans tenuifolia.
This latter 
plant, like the Wallflower, prefers walls when they are within 
reach; and when they are not, it grows on the ground.
At Dover, 
Southampton, and Chester, it looks particularly happy on walls, 
and about these towns it is not particularly abundant, except on 
walls and roofs.
Linaria purpurea and Antirrhinum majus prefer walls, but the 
former has been seen growing vigorously and increasing greatly 
in cultivated ground about Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, where walls 
are about as scarce as walls and hedges are on the South Downs, 
in the south-east of Kent.
We have a specimen from sandy fields 
near Windlesham in Surrey.
Diplotaxis muralis does not select 
walls for its habitat ; about Wandsworth and Batter^ea walls are 
as common as cabbage-grounds once were, yet this species, unlike 
its near British relation, shows no preference for such places.
Sinapis nigra is exceedingly common in Kent, and it is not 
rare in some parts of Surrey, especially by the river Thames, 
near London.
On the contrary, Sinapis alba, which is uncom- 
mon in Kent (we did not observe it in more than one place?), 
is frequent in the cultivated fields of Surrey.
Perhaps botanical 
geographers will tell us why a plant, such as white Mustard, 
abounds in one county, and is scarce or aliiiost absent from an- 
other lying exactly between the same parallels.
Common Parsley prefers walls and rocks, but it was frequently 
seen thriving well on the flat ground, where there were no rocks 
nor old crumbling rotten walls near it.
Fennel is almost universal in those parts of the county through 
which we passed.
Near the sea it may be said to be universally 
distributed.
It was quite at home in the fenny parts of our 
route, on banks about the ruins of Richborough, where it was 
particularly fine ; and also on the chalk, where it was equally 
luxuriant and plentiful.
Several plants were quite unexpected where they were found.
Among these may be named Geranium pyrenaicum near Wingham, 
Polypoyon monspeliensis in the salt-marshes near Sandwich or 
842 KENTISH BOTANY.
[Novembcr, 
Pegwell Bay, close to the houses of the coastguard, and Papa- 
ver somniferumy which is plentiful in some cornfields in North 
Kent, and also on dike-banks in the Fens (eastern lowlands); in 
Eastwear Bay it seemed content with its situation at the base of 
the lofty cliffs.
Veronica Buxbaumii is extending its range.
Its stations are 
increasing, and it follows from this increase of centres of distri- 
bution that its area is gradually increasing.
So much for the distribution of the plants seen in this excur- 
sion, about which some remarks appear necessary.
About the identification of species, all was accomplished that 
we expected.
There were only two plants about which there has 
been any difference of opinion among British botanists.
The Dover Catchfly, Silene nutans, which was first observed at 
St. Margaret^s, between Kingsdown and the South Foreland, is 
the first.
This had flowered a long time, probably two months, 
ere we visited South Kent ; but judging by the radical leaves of 
the plant, it.
seems to be nothing else but a very decided variety 
of the common form.
It certainly is not the same as the Isle of 
Wight form, which we observed on the lofty cliff east of San- 
down Bay, four years ago.
This was one of the botanical doubts 
which were cleared up in our late journey.
The second is the Dover Statice.
Two forms of Statice spathulata 
(Uke other notabilities it has a long array of aliases) have been 
known on the south-east coast, ever since the publication of the Rev.
G. E.
Smithes work on the plants of South Kent.
The large form, 
which abounds between Kingsdown and St. Margaret's, differs 
very much in size and appearance from the form which is equally 
abundant in Eastwear Bay, and especially near the Lydden Spout.
The plants of this variable species on the east of Dover, are, at 
an average, about two feet high, more or less.
Those on the 
west of Dover, in the aforesaid localities, vary from a few inches 
to above a foot ; say from three to fifteen inches.
The large spe- 
cimens on the east of Dover have many barren branches; and 
the small examples of this plant in and near Eastwear Bay have 
no barren branches.
But there are numerous intermediate forms, 
which serve as connecting links between these two extremes, and 
show that these differences do not constitute a variety.
There are some parts of the coast, partly examined by us, 
which might be worth a more complete exploration at an earlier 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
348 
part of the season ; and there are certain parts, both of the coast 
and in the interior of this county, not visited by us, but which 
we are firmly persuaded would amply repay the labour of investi- 
gation.
• 
Of the first class of localities, viz.
on the coast traversed by us, 
that part of the undercliflF between Kingsdown and St. Mar- 
garet^s should be explored about Midsummer or at the beginning 
of July.
The same may be said of the extensive undercliflF of 
Eastwear Bay, which possesses greater variety of soil, and pro- 
bably bears a richer Flora, than the cliflF at Kingsdown, which is 
entirely formed of the debris of the incumbent chalk.
That at 
Eastwear Bay possesses ponds, and has rills of fresh water trick- 
ling here and there down the cliflT.
But besides these there is the shore, and the ditches of Romney 
Marsh, unexplored probably for a century.
This would be a 
somewhat monotonous sphere of botanical labour, but it would 
not be entirely unproductive.
We observed no rare forms or species of Atriplex.
At the first 
blush we imagined that we had detected A.
ladniata, A.
rosea, 
and A.
Babingtonii.
After a careful comparison, all the three 
above named were easily reducible under one description, viz.
A. 
Babingtonii, with which description they all agreed passably well.
A. rosea, as we called it, was a little more frosted than A.
Babing- 
tonii, while A, laciniata had its leaf a little more elongate and 
more toothed than either of the two other forms.
Its stem dif- 
fered entirely from what is called A.
laciniata by Continental 
botanists.
There are also some inland localities celebrated in the annals 
of botany worth visiting, viz.
Elham and its environs, especially 
the Roman road between Hythe and Canterbury.
In woqds or 
copses not very far from Hythe or Cranbrook, Cyclamen hedera- 
folium was said to grow, and it would be very gratifying to be 
able to confirm this tradition, for it is little more.
If it had been 
found there in recent times, it would have been entered in the 
Rev. G.
E. Smithes work on the plants of this district, which was 
within a few miles of his residence, or by the carefiil author of 
the ^ Paversham Flora,^ Mr. Cowell.
There is another rarity recorded as having been met with, by 
Mr. Oxendon, between Charing and Walmer, a rather indefinite 
locality.
Charing is on a range of chalk hills some miles from 
344 PLANTS NEAR TURviLLE, BUCKS.
[November, 
Asbford, which is very accessible by the South-Eastern Railway.
See ' Phytologist/ n.s. vol.
iii.
p. 268.
These two rare plants, viz.
Cyclamen hederafolium and Orchis 
Mrciria, with other pickings, would well repay a journey to South 
Kent.
PLANTS NEAR TUBVILLE, BUCKS.
In the ^ Phytologist* for June last, your correspondent on the 
Botany of Burnham Beeches says, — " Buckinghamshire has the 
reputation of being rich in vegetable rarities/' and he wishes 
some correspondent to make a note of them.
I have not seen 
the Botanists' Guide for this county, and cannot say whether 
this notice of mine may be worth insertion, but such as it is I 
send it, that you may know what plants can be seen by any one 
who will walk three miles in this district, and use his or her eyes 
in looking for them.
The country for some miles round this spot 
is on the chalk, .
and abounds in scenery of the most beautiful 
and picturesque character ; high hills and long deep vales, mostly 
covered with beech- wood, intersected by cornfields, heaths, and 
pastures.
Some of the valleys are from five to six hundred feet 
deep, very spacious, with gentle sloping sides, affording extensive 
views firom the hills, but no streams run through them.
In 
these fields and pastures I found in blossom the Iberis amara in 
great abundance; Fumaria capreolata spreading its full size; 
Sinapis arvensis covering broad acres with its golden blossoms ; 
Viola tricolor plentiful ; lAnum catharticum, Myosotis arvensis, 
and Spergula nodosa in great abundance ; Reseda lutea and TVa- 
gopogon praiensis (John Go-to-bed-at-noon) fast asleep ; Bangui- 
sorba officinalis, and Poterium Sanguisorba, In the woods grows 
the Columbine, Aquilegia vulg(f.ris, which I now believe to be the 
plant which Izaak Walton called Culverkeys, and which one of 
our early poets, George Chapman, calls "a thankless flower." 
It was this flower Ophelia gave to the King of Denmark in her 
madness upon the death of her father Polonius.
Near to this 
grows the Pyrola media, Habenaria bifolia, Paris quadrifolia, 
Oxalis Acetosella out of bloom.
Orchis maculata, Arctium Lappa 
stout and tall, Lysimachia vulgaris plentiftd, Tamus communis, 
Bryonia dioica (the English Mandrake), Epipactis rubra.
Vibur- 
num Opulm, etc.
Mrs. Beisley gathered specimens of most of 
1861.] EEViBw. 845 
the abbve.
Some of the fields were glowing like burnished 
copper with the blossoms of the Onobrychis sativa, and the 
Heaths were profuse, with Digitalis purpurea, Furze, and wild 
Thyme.
The hedges by the roadsides were enriched with Dog- 
roses, Honeysuckles, Clematis, and Cornel.
I must not forget to mention that on Turville Heath is an 
avenue of Lime-trees, a quarter of a mile in length, and which 
for magnitude and beauty I should say are unsurpassed.
This part of the county of Bucks borders on the eastern side 
of Oxfordshire.* 
S. Beisly.
The Canadian Naturalist and Geologist, and Proceedings of the 
Natural History Society of Montreal.
Montreal: B.Dawson 
and Son. London : Sampson Low and Co. No.
I. No. II.
No. III.
No. IV.
Vol. 6.
In this miscellany the first article of a botanical kind is an 
account of the Cornus florida, a little tree generally distributed 
through the United States, said to be of extreme beauty, — the 
neatest and showiest species of its genus.
It is figured in the 
' Botanical Magazine,^ t.
526, and is probably not unknown to 
the nurserymen of the United Kingdom.
This is a very good 
article.
The " Physical Geography of the Appalachian Mountain Sys- 
tem '^ is an elaborate essay on the directions or bearings of this 
central chain, the elevation of its peaks, table-lands, the depres- 
sions of its valleys, gaps, etc.
Among the miscellaneous reviews there is one on the Botani- 
cal Society of Canada, or rather, an abstract of recent discoveries 
* This part of the county appears to me to be situated between the bounds de- 
fined in the Act of Parliament of 23 Elizabeth, 1581, which prohibited cutting of 
wood and timber to convert into coal or other fuel for the making of iron, or iron 
metal in iron mills, within twenty-two miles from the City of London, or within 
twenty- two miles of the riyer Thames, from Dorchester, Oxon, downwards the said 
river ; and it is worthy of remark that charooal-buming is now carried on in the 
woods of this district.
N. 8.
VOL.
v. 2 Y 
34f6' RsviBw.
[November, 
CQmmaiucated to that flourishing association.
One of these is 
entitled " Seaweed as a Manure/^ an article that cannot be much 
known practical^ in Upper Canada^ and cannot be expected to 
excite much interest ; potash or its reftue^ if there be any, would 
be more likely to rouse the attention of West Canadian farmers.
The writer relates its utility in fertilizing the sandy hills of the 
east coast of Scotland.
But the learned Professor must know 
that its application there is easy, because these sandhills (sand 
dunes, he callus them) are contigiSious to the shore.
It would be 
expensive to convey a bulky material like seaweed a distance of 
a thousand miles.
Possibly the author intended that the phos- 
phates and other manureal materials should be extracted before 
its conveyance to the Upper Province.
In the April number of this periodical there is a list of plants 
collected in the counties of Argenteuil and Ottawa in 1858, by 
W. S.
M. D^Urban.
This gentleman was five months in the 
district, and probably observed most of the plants growing there.
His list is arranged systematically, and he prefixes an asterisk to 
th6 introduced or naturalized species.
The entire catalogue of phsenogamous and cry|>togsfmoti8 plants 
observed by him during a residence of five months, consists of 
862 species, viz.
276 of the former and 86 of the latter.
A com- 
parison of the species common to both Britain and America 
(Upper Canada) may be interesting to those who study the dis- 
tribution and relations of plants, or to phytogeographers, as 
they delight to call themselves.
Among the 276 phsenogamous plants of Canada enumerated 
in this list, there are 38 common to both Europe and America, 
viz.
Ranunculu8 Flammula, Caltha palu8iris, Act<Ba spicata, Car^ 
damifie hirsuia, Drosera longifolia, Oxalia AcetoseUa, Spinea sa- 
Ucifolia, Agrimoma Eupatoria, Fragaria vesca, Epilobium angus^ 
tifolium, (Enothera biennis, Circaa alpina, Ribes rubrum, Linnaa 
borealis, Viburnum Opulus, Erigeron canadensis, Vaccinium Oxy- 
coccus, Andromeda polifolia, Pyrola rotundifolia, P.
secunda, 
Monotropa Hypopitys, Utrictdana vulgaris, Veronica scutelfata.
Prunella vulgaris, Scutellaria galericulata, Menydnthes trifoRata, 
Polygonum aviculare, Myrica Oak, Acorns Calamus, Typha lati- 
folia, Sparganium simplex, Junctis tenuis, J.
bufonius, Eleocharis 
palustris, Scirpus sylvaiicus, Carex tenella, Agrostis vulgaris, Poa 
pratensis.
Milium effasum.
1861.] BBViEw. 347 
Besides tbese thef-e ariS'22 intrdduced British' plants, or they 
assumed to be such/ viz.
Ranvnculus acris, Capselia Bursa-pas- 
toris, Silene noctiflora, Agrostemma Githago, OxaUs sipcta, Tri- 
foHum pratense, T: repens, AcMllea Millefolium, Leucanthemum 
vulgare, Tanacetum vulgar e, Cirsium lanceolatum, C drvense, 
Tarcuvacum Dens-leqnis, Plantago major, Verbascum Thapsics, 
Galeopsis TetraMt, Cynoglossum officinale , Chenopodium album, 
Polygonum Persicaria, Rumex Aceiosella, Phleum pratense.
Thus there are, it appears, 60 of the 276 phsenogamous species 
in the Ottawa district, common to both hemispheres, either by 
nativity or introduction, or rather more than one-fifth, and fewer 
than one-fourth, are.
found growing spontaneously in both con- 
tinents.
This is a large proportion of plants common to the two conti- 
nents of Europe and America, and especially when it is considered 
that th^e is a wide ocean between them.
The number of Ferns and Pern allies recorded as found in this 
district is 33, and nearly the half of them, or 15, are common 
both to the British Isles and to America.
Of the lower families 
nearly all the registered species are common to both continents.
It would be an interesting question for botanical geographers 
to solve, viz.
whether or not there be as many British plants in 
an equal area of Independent Tartary as there are in the small 
section of Upper "Canada of which a botanical list is given in the 
'Canadian Naturalist' now before us.
The question is — Are 
there as many British plants as one-fourth or one-fifth of the 
entire, vegetation in the district round the Sea of Aral, and in 
the countries known by the names of Turkistan and Bucharia?
This tract is about as far east as the basin of the Ottawa is west 
of London.
In solving the question about the migration of 
plants westward, as the great wave of population has flowed from 
the east to the west, it should be taken into consideration that 
land is almost continuous firom Asia through Europe from east 
to west, or vice versd, while between Europe and America the 
continuity, is interrupted by the Atlantic Ocean, 
This woufd probably be productive of more interesting and 
more practical results than the futile attempts to assign geogra- 
phical limits to objects which are as liable to change in their re- 
lations as the earth's surface, which is altered by the increase of 
population, migrations of people, and the like.
The idle disputes 
848 BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[NovembeV, 
about the nativity of plants will continue to serve as stimulants 
to pigmy intellects, and even be amusements to minds of a higher 
order and more catholic tendencies, till the subject is treated in 
a general, ^comprehensive, and philosophical manner.
Then the 
geography of plants, like other departments of physical geo- 
graphy, will be studied in a way worthy of its importance, and 
divested of what renders it both repulsive and ridiculous; the 
abortive attempts to classify species into natives, denizens, colo- 
nists, etc., will be superseded by investigations founded on facts, 
not on baseless assumptions.
It is gratifying to know .that our British Isles are not like 
thankless recipients, scapegraces who take and give nothing in 
return.
For the ornamental Mimtdua lutetis, (Enothera biennis, 
Diervilla trifida, etc., we have sent to America the usefulTimothy- 
grass, Phleum pratense, Dandelion, and Hound^s-tongue, with 
several things for which the colonists will not thank us, such as 
Thistles, Buttercups, etc.
The Vegetable Kingdom is not exempted from the general law 
to which all created things must submit, viz.
that of continuous 
change.
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Botanical Society of Canada.
An extra meeting of the Society, called for the purpose of disposing of 
an accumulation of interesting papers, was held on Thursday evening, 28th 
March.
There was a full attendance of members and subscribers.
The 
Very Rev. Principal Leitch, President, occupied the chair.
Letters were 
read from Sir William Hooker, K.H., Director of the Royal Gardens, Kew, 
and from Dr. J.
H. Balfour, Professor of Botany in the Edinburgh Uni- 
versity.
The following communications were read : — 
1. Suggestions for Observations to be made by the Members of the 
Botanical Society of Canada, during the ensuing summer, with reference 
to a Colonial Elora, proposed to be published by the British Government.
By Sir William J.
Hooker, K.H., Director of the Royal Gardens, Kew, in 
a letter to Professor Law son.
Botanists will be gratified to hear that a 
series of Colonial Floras are in preparation, and one of them, that of Hong- 
kong, is published.
We have not room for the letter sent to the Secretary 
by Sir W.
J. Hooker on the interesting subject of a new Canadian Flora, 
which will be a welcome addition to our literature.
On the motion of 
Judge Logic, of Hamilton, seconded by Andrew Drummond, Esq., of the 
Montreal Bank, the Society's thanks were voted to Sir William Hooker, 
and the Secretary was requested to communicate to him the desire of the 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
849 
Society to aid in every possible way in carrying out his wishes, and espe- 
cially in forwarding the important object of a Canadian Flora.
2. On the Fibre of Aaclepiaa incamata.
By Judge Logic, of Hamilton.
An interesting series of specimens, showing the fibre in various stages of 
preparation, etc., were shown.
3. On the Flora of Hamilton and its vicinity.
By Judge Logic.
On 
the motion of Dr. Dickson, a cordial vote of thanks was accorded to Judge 
Logic.
4. On the History, Properties, and Cultivation of Cotton.
By F.
E. 
Stanton.
Communicated by Dr. H.
Yates.
Mr. Briggs moved a vote of 
thanks, which was warmly accorded.
* 
5. List of Plants observed in the Neighbourhood of Prescott, C.
W., 
chiefly iu 1860.
By B.
Billings, Jun., F.B.S. Th^ks were voted and the 
paper ordered to be printed in the Society's Annals.
6. On the Sugar Maple, and the Preparation of Sugar, and Saccharine 
Solutions from Maple Sap. By John May, B.A. Dr. Lavell moved a 
vote of thanks, which was seconded by Mr. Paton, and given with applause.
7. Notices of the EiFects of Frost on Vegetation in Britain during the 
present winter, in letters from Professor Balfour and Dr. John Lowe, to 
the Secretary.
The above communications will show that this new Society does not 
neglect the one thing needftil in these our days, viz.
utility.
Shameock.
— Clovee {Trifolium repens), 
" To live in Clover,** — I think it is now generally agreed that the true 
Shamrock which St. Patrick gathered to illustrate the doctrine of the Tri- 
nity was the Trifolium repens (white Clover), although some of the con- 
tributors to the * Phytologist ' have supposed the Oxalis Acetosella to have 
been the saint's plant.
It is nevertheless true that the Irishman gives his 
patron saint the credit of having selected the Clover, as he wears a piece 
of this plant in his hat, or in the button-hole of his coat, on the saint* s day 
(17th March).
There is an expression often used by us, " To live in clo- 
ver," or " To be in clover," and Webster, in his dictionary, says, " To live 
in clover is to live luxuriantly or in abundance, a phrase borrowed from 
the luxuriant growth of clover, and the feeding of cattle in clover." But 
I think this definition is not quite satisfactory.
I find in reading * Euphues 
and his England,' where he speaks of fidelity, the following: — "For as 
safe being it is in the companie of a trustie mate,.
as sleeping in the grass 
Trifole, where there is no serpent so venemous as dare venture." From 
this I should be inclined to conclude that " to live in clover," or " to be 
in clover," originally meant a state of security or safety, rather than a state 
of luxuriance.
But it is worth remarking that the word clover is derived 
from the Dutch claver, and this word signifies a club, — ^hence claver or 
clubgrass.
Most of the clovers when in bloom are club-shaped ; but is 
there any analogy between the club and the idea of safety?
— ^if so, we might 
in support of this refer to the accounts which history relates of the exploits 
of Hercules with his club, and the general use of the club in early times of 
warfare.
The club was also the origin of the sceptre as a badge of royalty.
S. B.
860 Bor^ki&cjiiL N<n»Bs^ NOTICES^ AN'D QUERiBS.
INovember, 
Herbabia.
Sale of the Herbaria of the-late Mr. J.
D. Salmon, F.L.S.
1. The Horn of Surrey, in six portfcdioe, all nam^ and arcanged in painted deal 
ease, with MS.
district catalogues and map, £4.
15».
2. The Flora of Gbdalming, named, and arranged in six portfolios, £1, 7s.
8. V&ar paroek of plants, Surrej, Essex, and Kent, 12s.
.4.
Twoparoelsof Bntish Lichotis, Mosses, etc., 7s.
6. Parcel of Swiss plants and ditto of Musci, from the Alps, 3s.
7. Duplicate plants, ex Hsrbf W.
H. Campbell, Edinburgh, and W.
Oourlie, 
jS\m.f Glasgow ; in thir^-fiye brown-paper parcels, £1.
15».
8. Surrey plants, ex Ueth.
Walter Beeres, Famham, three parcels, 3».
9. Musci, named, two parcels, £1.
1^.
'10.
Ditto, not named, two paa«els, €«.
11.
Ditto^- named, tlunee parcels, ex Herb.
Wm.Qoni^lie, Jim., Glasgow, Mf.
^ 12.
Lichcois, named, tSree parcels, ditto, £1.
4f.
. 13.
Cryptogamia, named.
Hepatic® and foreign Musci, three parcels, ditto, 14f .
14.
Alg», ex Herb.
W. H.
Campbell, Edinburgh, two parcels, 13*.
15.
Misodilaneous plants, etc., six parcels, 4*.
17.
Box coKtaiaiBg Ferns, Grasses, etc., 4f .
18.
Britishji^idicates, floven^g and ocyptogamio, partly, named^ tea thick par- 
cels, .15*.
19.
British herbarium, about 1000 species, named and localized, 800 mounted 
on demy cartridge paper, many collected by Balfour, Syme, and other well-known 
botanists, £1.
11*.
20.
European and^t^ier exotic plants, mostly named, fiye paxcelsr 9*.
21.
One hundred rare British plants, 10/.
22.
Good collection of British Ferns, 4f .
23.
Parcel of dried plants, 6*.
. 24.
A collection of British Gi^asses, about 110 species, named and mounted, 12*.
25.
A collection of British and European Carices, 100 species, named, localissed, 
and mounted, 16*.
"26.
A collection of British Mosses (about 200), in three cases, named and neatly 
mounted,- £1.8*.
27> .Two lajcg^ bundles of British and i<uropean plants, from various localitiesy^*.
The interesting lots, No. 1, No. 2, and No. 19, deserve a remark.
The first lot consisted of specimens that had been selected frwn a gene- 
iral herbarium of British specimens ; and they were the finest obtainable, 
in the best possible condition, and very neatly mounted as described.
Surely somewhat less than fiVQ pounds was a very low price for this col- 
lection.
The paper on which they were mounted cost nearly double the 
«Qm at which they were sold.
The next lot, viz.
the specimens illustrating the Flora of Godalnuug, 
^ete also in an excellent condition, but mounted on a paper of smaller 
(toaensions.
It is to be wished that this excellent collection may be trans- 
ferred to the custody of the Guildford Institute, or to that of Godalnaing, 
if^this wealthy town has such an institution.
The> nineteenth lot, as above said, was the original eoBectionfrom>^hieh 
the Flora of Surrey was selected.
This set contained excellent plants, and 
was.
sold v«y cheap — at less than three shfllings a hundred.
^ 
It is not desirable that dried plants should command a ready and re^ 
munerative sale ; for if they did, most of our rare plants would speedily be 
extirpated.
Upon the whole, it is better for scientific purposes that they 
shoiQldbear.a'iugh value in the eye of the possessor, but should feti^ocdy 
a nominal price when submitted to public competition.
1861.] BOTAmCAL NOVBS^ NOTIOBS^.
JbITD' QUSSUSA;.
351 
A Ne^ U^se pok A^pblss.
We ar6 threatened with « dder fflminej noC.fiN>m the faOure of tike apples, 
although a pasrtial cvop, but because they lam likely to W applied ta a- move 
profitable purpose (90 far as the ^^wers are ooncemed) thaB^ in making a^ 
household beverage.
li seems :that the Manehest^ (ialico dyers and printerss 
have discovered that apple juices supply a desideratum long wanted in 
making fast colours for their printed cottons, and Bumbevs have been intO' 
Devonshire and the lower parts of Somersetshire buying up all ike apples^ 
they can get, and giving such a price for them as in the dearest years 
hitherto known has not been offered.
We know of one farmer in Devon- 
shire who has a large oarehi^d, for the produce of whieh^ he neveH belbre 
received more than iS^SO, and yet he' has sdd it this year to a Manehester 
raan for J6360.
There can be no doubt that the disfcovery will crtote quite 
a revolution in the apple trade.
— From ike ' Tiime9* Ododer !> 1861.
DetmsMre, September 2Tth, 186(1.
— The quantity of cider is not likely 
to be so great this year as formerly, in consequence of the sale of many 
orchards to manufacturer, who are about, it is said, to use the juice in 
some colouring processes.
— From the * Times/ September 30M, 1861.
Db. Tobk£¥*s HbebaeiuMv 
Through the 'American Medical Times,' W6 leftm that l)r.
ttsmj hm 
presented " his immense herbarinmy the frtrit of forty yea«* dssidttotia la- 
bour, together with his taltitfble botanical libwory,*' id tftt trtisteear of 
Columbia College, who have provided acconmiodation for them, and also 
a residence for Dr. Torrey, in the College.
This collection is said to em- 
brace examples of nearly all the collections of Government expeditiona^ 
from that of 1819, imder M^jor Long, to the reeent results.
Besides, 
the collection embraces numerous specimens from the Floras of Europe, 
Asia, Australia, and South Africa.
Dr. Torrey does not propose aban- 
doning his botanical pursuits ; but hopes, under the auspices of the College, 
to prosecute them under inore favourable circumstances.
SgBOPHULABIA YEBNAtlS.
This interesting plant w'as known as British at an earUn' date than we 
are generally disposed to assign to it.
Sir J.
E. Smith, who worked up 
the origin of our British Flora with scrupulous care, seems to have over- 
looked the earliest record of this plant, as 1 perceive by a manuscript note 
in my copy of Smith's * English Elora,' as follows :— Sir James says, vol.
iii.
p. 139, " Neither Dillenius nor Bay takes notice of this species." My 
annotated copy of the ' English Flora ' adds, — " but William How docs.
See *Phytologia Britannica,* p.
110 (Lond.
1650), under the old nani6» 
Lamium Pannonicum aliud, Clusius, W, P.
CbEPIS BIENNIS.
A friendly critic has pointed out a slight uiaccuracy in a notice of Kent- 
ish plants, p.
207, vol.
V. Instead of writing, " and in * English Botany,' 
both in the original Work and in the Supplement," it shoidd have been 
** in * English Botany,' and the confusion of the two species is admitted in 
the supplement to that valuable work." — See Orepis taraxacifolia^ E.
B. S.
352 BOTANICAL NOTSs^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[November.
ClNCLIDIUK STTOIUU.
Sir G.
Bunbury, Bart., exhibited a specimen of Cinclidium stypium, a 
rare Moss, discovered on Tuddenham Heath, near Mildenhall, in Novem- 
ber last, by Mr. Edmund Skepper, a zealous ^nd intelligent botanist of 
Bury St. Edmund's.
This Moss is new to the Plora of Suffolk.
Tudden- 
ham Heath was long since noted as the locality of several rare plants, and 
especially of Liparis LoeselU, — I^om the * Gardeners* Chronicle * of Decem- 
ber 15, 1860.
Addenda to the List of Oxfordshibe Mosses.
The Bryum pallescens, near Parktown, proves on closer examination to 
be B.
uliffinowm, with the operculum' larger and less oblique than usual.
Fruit, July.
Bryum incUnatum was accidentally omitted.
One large tuft grew on a 
decayed Willow, near Sparsey Bridge.
Fruit, June.
H. Bos well.
Oxford^ Avfftut 5, 1861.
Yerbascum thapsifobme.
Some readers of the * Phytologist ' have heard from private sources that 
this rare British Verbascum was discovered last August not far from Ash- 
ford, Kent.
A correspondent has promised to supply a detailed notice of 
the history, relations, and recent discovery of this species ; and it is hoped 
that his account will appear in the next monthly issue.
Othello, Act 1, Scene 3.
— loffo to Roderigo (speaking of Othello) : 
" These Moors are changeable in their wills : fill thy purse with money.
The food that to him now is as ItMcious as Locusts, shall be to him shortly 
as bitter as Coloquintida" 
Communications have been received from 
W. PampUn; John Sim; Sidney Beisly; H.
Beisly ; W.
P. ; C.
J. Ash- 
field; T.
E. A.
Briggs; W.
Winter; T.
Stansfield; W.
MarshaU; W.
Bichardson; the Eev. G.
Mackfarlane; H.
C. ; W.
Bichardson, juu.
; 
J. S.
M. ; Eev. E.
H. Webb.
BOOKS, ETC., RECEIVED FOE EEVIEW.
The Queen, September 14.
The Canadian Naturalist and Geologist, for February, April, June, and 
August, 
Cleghom^s Forests and Gardens of South India, 
The Todmorden Post, October I2th, 
Page 297, line 10 from bottom, for y, spicata, read P.
(Pwmaria) spieaia.
Page 299, line 10, for concisely read copiously ; line 15, for digitalis read aeg^taUa.
Page dOO, line 25, for BMne read Rhone, 
[December, 1861.] 353 
BOTANY OF THE MEUSE.
Botany of the Fond de Leffe, near Dinant, Belgium, 
The Fond de Leffe is a small valley, or rather gorge, running 
up from the Meuse, just below the Dinant, some five or six miles 
in the direction of Ciney.
The Dinantais proudly name it their 
^^ petite Suisse '/^ and though its scenery is scarcely grand enough 
to warrant the appellation, still there is sufficient pi6turesque 
beauty to please and satisfy stay-at-home travellers, who are un- 
able to make invidious comparisons.
The hills rise abruptly on either side, now exhibiting masses 
of rugged rocks, whose forma and tinting would delight the eye 
of a painter, now wooded to their summit, while at their base 
flows a little sparkling rill, gurgling over pebbles, or forming 
tiny rapids where it encounters large stones.
Lower down the 
valley it is converted into a ^^water-power," and instead of 
" wandering at its own sweet will," is dammed up, and forced 
to turn the wheels of paper-mills and '^ poHssoirs/' these latter 
used for smoothing and polishing the marble, of which several 
different kinds are quarried here, and form a very lucrative 
branch of commerce.
These mills, with the cottages and gar- 
dens of the workpeople, give life to what, without them, would 
be a wild and lonely glen.
Our valley has various attractions.
Its bold masses of weather- and lichen-stained rocks, alternating 
with dense woods or fresh green meadows, offer charming sub- 
jects for the artistes pencil ; the geologist would find matter for 
study in its singularly contorted stratification, and in the fossili- 
ferous deposits, occasionally laid bare by the quarrymen ; nor is 
it without interest for the archaeologist.
About two miles up 
the valley, on the side of a hill, is the so-called " Chemin des 
Geans,^^ along which the rock is distinctly marked by a groove, 
apparently worn into it by wheels.
Popular belief ascribes these tracks to the Romans, who are 
said to have had a military road here.
I was even shown the 
spots where posts were placed at regular intervals, no doubt to 
support some kind of rail ; a necessary precaution, for the road 
runs along an almost perpendicular slope, a fact that sadly tests 
my credulity ; for I cannot understand how any vehicle could 
have preserved its centre of gravity on such an inclined plane ; 
N. 8.
VOL.
V. 2 z 
854 BOTANY OP THE MBU8B.
[December, 
unless indeed the Romans adopted that ingenious mechanical 
contrivance in such general use in the backwoods of Australia^ 
of having a long and a short pair of wheels^ which are changed 
from side to side as occasion requires.
But I am neither artist^ geologist^ nor antiquary^ therefore it 
is not the pursuit of any of these objects, that draws me to the 
Fond de Leflfe.
For me it has a twofold interest, — first, as 
being the residence of some dear members of my family, with 
whom I have spent many a long, pleasant day, during the past 
summer ; and secondly, that while thus '^ visiting my relations,^^ 
I had the opportunity of making acquaintance with its rich 
and hitherto little-known Flora.
The following list of a few of 
its rare plants will be sufficient to prove what an interesting field 
is here open to the researches of the botanical tourist.
Spring- 
time brought us Phalangium fAnthericumJ Liliago, Lurutria re- 
diviva, Arabia arenosa, Ophrys apifera^ Cardamine impatiens, 
Myrrfiis odorata, Globularia vulgaris, etc.
Later in the season 
the rocks (limestone) were literally covered by the large white 
umbels of Seseli (lAbanotis) montanay among which Lactuca per^ 
ennis displayed its pretty purple, star-like flowers, together with 
Allium spharocephalum, Verbascum Lychniiis, Vincetowicum offi- 
cinale, Dianthus Carthusianorum, Asperula cynanchica.
Near 
the water grew Epilobium roseum, Dipsacus pilosus, Mentha ro- 
tundifolia, I could lengthen my list by adding the names of 
many other, though less rare, species.
But what will give the 
Fond de Lefle a lasting fame in the annals of Belgian botany, is 
the discovery we have lately made there of a plant quite new to 
our Flora.
Some weeks ago, my nephew sent me a sprig of an 
Artemisia he had met with in his walks, which, though in too 
young and imperfect a state for determination, I saw immedi- 
ately was new to me, and fancied might prove to be A.
cam-- 
pestris, which has hitherto only been found in one locality in 
Belgium, namely between Sougnez and Aiwaille, in the province 
of Liege.
On the 27th of September, as we were spending the day in 
the valley, my nephew proposed to escort me to the spot where 
his plant grew.
We started, accompanied by his young sister, 
who shares my taste for botany, all three much excited at the 
prospect of a rare acquisition for our herbaria.
After walking 
some distance, a turn of the road brought us to the object of our 
-1861.] BOTANY OP THE MEUSB.
355 
se^ch.
There was the Artemisia, in immense quantities^ cover- 
ing the entire surface of the limestone rock, and peeping out of 
every chink^ for thie space of several hundred yards, to the exclu- 
sion of all other vegetation, excepting a little parched-up grass.
It was just beginning to flower, but we were able to select a suf- 
ficient number of specimens for examination at home.
Having 
consigned these safely to the vasculum, we strolled on up the 
valley to a hillside, whose scanty herbage was enlivened by the 
bright-purple blossoms of Gentiana germanica.
Is this species 
identical with, or distinct from, our English G.
Amarella ?
I 
collected the latter some years ago on the downs near Dover \ 
but, except for its smaller size and paler colour, cannot perceive 
any essential distinction between them.
Not far from the Gen- 
tian, among a heap of loose stones, its favourite habitat appa- 
rently, was a goodly patch of Polypodium calcareum, the fronds 
varying from little more than an inch to five or six inches in 
length and breadth.
On consulting our watches we now found 
that we had barely time to reach home by the dinner hour, and 
therefore turned to retrace our steps, determined not to loiter, 
nor to look right or left.
We kept our resolution till we came 
to some little ponds, pools I should rather call them, verdant 
with Duckweed, and promising a fine harvest of the vegetable 
" marvels of pond life,^^ This was a temptation too strong to 
be resisted.
My companion, nothing daunted by the uninviting 
appearance of the decaying mass, tucked up his sleeve, dipped in 
his hand, and drew forth, first Chara foetida in fructification ; 
next Potamogeton denstts, and P.
crispus, in seed ; and lastly a 
hard, bony substance, having neither root nor branches, only an 
axis, surrounded by three or four toothed, broad leaves.
These 
treasures were all stowed into the vasculum for further exami- 
nation, and then we hurried back to dinner.
My first work after this meal, was to refer to my books in 
order to identify the Artemisia.
A first glance sufficed to con- 
vince me that it difiered entirely from A, campestris.
Further 
study seemed to prove it A.
camphorata, but this species did not 
figure in any of the Belgian Floras, so to make assurance doubly 
sure, I forwarded some specimens to my correspondent, M.
Cr^pin (author of the 'Manuel de la Flore de Belgique^), and 
in a few days had the satisfaction of receiving from that gentle- 
man a full confirmation of my surmise, that we had been so for- 
856 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
[December, 
tunate as to detect a species previously unknown in Belgiufai^ 
though it had been found growing abundantly on the rocks near 
Givel, on the French frontier.
What strapge freaks plants play with the theories of botanical 
geographers I And what a Puck-like spirit of mischief seems to 
direct them in thus overleaping the lines and boundaries set to 
their wanderings, by these savans I Last year it was the ap- 
pearance of Arenaria balearica in Britain, that gave rise to so 
much angry discussion ; and lo I here is another South-European 
species, which has skipped from Dauphin^ to the valley of the 
Meuse, between the fiftieth and fifty-first degrees of north latitude.
What a theme for learned speculation I 
Having settled the question of the Artemisia, we had next to 
ascertain the nature of the hard bodies taken from the pond.
They proved to be gems (what are called in German Knospen- 
keime), a secondary mode of propagation of Potamogeton crispiis.
I found them figured in BeichenbacVs ' Deutschlands Flora,^ 
(the half-coloured edition) vol.
v. f.
80, as P.
crispus, var.
gem- 
mifer.
They are also figured and described by Treviranus, in a 
number of the ' Botanische Zeitung^ for 1857.
Thinking they 
may be new to other readers of the * Phytologist,' as they were 
to me, I have translated and subjoin his note and a copy of his 
drawing.
H. C.
Roux-sur- Meuse, October 13^, 1861.
BOTANY OF SPAIN.
A few Days' Botanizing in the North-Eastern Provinces of 
Spain, in April and May, 1860.
No. IV.
MONSER&AT.
The celebrated mountain Monserrat (which there is no good 
reason for writing with the French orthography, Montserrat), 
consists of a long range of many summits, which from their peak- 
like and serrated appearance, when seen from far oflf, might be 
supposed to be of slate.
The greater is the surprise of the tra- 
veller when he finds on approach, that the whole mountain is 
composed of pudding-stone, and that the turrets and pinnacles 
are not pointed, but rounded.
The highest summit is stated to 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
357 
be 3800 feet above the sea, from which its distance is not great, 
and the mountain is a conspicuous object from the coast road, 
south of Barcelona.
From the northern, or rather north-eastern 
coast, it could also be seen for a considerable space, were not 
the view intercepted by intervening high ground.
From the 
range behind Barcelona, a fine view of it may be had ; but at an 
angle which does not give it the advantage of its entire length.
It is only from the Tarragona road, at a considerable distance 
fr^m Barcelona, that it can be seen spread out lengthwise in its 
full dimensions.
On a ledge in a receding hollow (or coomb) of 
the mountain, nearly in the middle of its length, and seemingly 
about the middle of its height (though really much lower), stands 
the famous monastery.
Like the other monasteries of Spain, once 
so wealthy and powerftd, it is now shorn of its glories ; but it is 
still inhabited by a few monks, though in a number dispropor- 
tioned to the size and aspect of the edifice, and their hospitality 
is extended to travellers to the extent of lodging, but not of food; 
which last is supplied at a tolerable restaurant within the pre- 
cincts of the convent, the utility of which establishment atones 
for its violation of the reUgio loci.
The lodging in the convent 
itself is gratuitous ; but travellers who can afford it, make a do- 
nation (also gratuitous) to the funds of the convent.
The sleep- 
ing chambers, or cells, are neat, sufiBciently commodious, beauti- 
fully clean, and the views from their windows magnificent.
The 
one which I occupied looked across the hollow of the mountain, 
upon the splendidly wooded other horn of the crescent, then vocal 
with numerous nightingales.
A copious spring, which issues 
from the mountain just outside the gateway, had, no doubt, a 
share in originally deciding the locality of the convent.
The easiest way to Monserrat from Barcelona is by the Mau- 
resa railway, one of the four which diverge from that city.
From 
the railway station to the mountain there is a broad and good 
carriage-road, by means 6f which tourists and pilgrims are landed 
in the very yard of the convent, from that universal symbol and 
instrument of modem civilization, an omnibus.
If this commo- 
dious mode of access makes the expedition less romantic, it does 
not make the place less beautiful.
The prosaic vehicle winds its 
way up the mountain-side through, for the South, a rather dense 
wood, which, more or less open, according as the woodcutters 
have been more or less recently in operation, covers a great part 
358 BOTANY OF SPAIN.
[December, 
of the mountain^ both in its higher and lower regions.
There is 
another mode of approach at the southern end of the mountain 
from the Martorell station of the Valencia railway ; but on this 
side there is neither carriage nor road^ but a mule-path only^ and 
travellers must make their way up the mountain and along its 
side to the convent, either on foot or mounted.
Beyond the 
monastery there is no road higher up ; but mountain paths are 
not deficient.
The path to the top, after a stiflF climb, leads for 
a considerable distance along a wooded ravine hemmed in by 
summits of a pillar-like or sugar-loaf character.
The view from 
the highest of these includes the greater part of Catalonia, 
northward to the Pyrenees, westward and southward towards the 
Segre and the Ebro.
I can hardly speak in sufficiently strong terms of the profusion 
and variety of the flowers, southern and northern, Mediterranean, 
subalpine, and almost alpine, which covered the mountain-side 
when I saw it ; not always in separate regions, but often mixed 
together on the same spot.
It is fitting to begin with the trees 
and shrubs, which, still more than flowers, give the general 
character to a landscape.
The Qaercus Ilex and cocdfera of the 
South (the latter not so plentiAil as in many other places) are 
combined with the Holly (Ilex Aquifolium) of the North.
A 
denizen of both equally, the Box-tree (Btumis sempervirens), here 
attains a lofty growth.
The Juniper of our chalk downs [Juni^ 
penis communis) is joined with J.
phcmicea, a Southern and a 
garrigue plant.
With Celiis aitstralis, the Micocouliery a Medi- 
terranean tree, is found the Mountain Ash {Pyrm Aucuparia) of 
the North.
Another flowering rosaceous shrub, Amelanchier vul- 
garis, abounds, as it usually does where there are clefts in calca- 
reous rocks, from the stony hills of Provence to the chalk cliffs 
above the Seine in Normandy.
The Laurustinus {Viburnuni 
Tinus), a plant of Italy and the south of France, is side by side 
with another of the same genus, V.
Lantana, the Wayfaring-tree 
of our chalk hills.
Phillyrea media and Rhamnus Alatemus, 
natives of the garrigue, which reach English shrubberies, are ac- 
companied by the Mastic, Pistacia Lentisctis, the Terebinth, P.
Terebinthus, and the universal Hedera Helix.
But the flowers of Monserrat are more various and remarkable 
than the wood products.
I have seen few places in the South where 
the vernal wood-flowers are so abundant.
The blue colour is that 
1861.] BOTANY OP SPAIN.
859 
which predominates.
The lovely Hepatica, of which the pink is 
rare compared with the far more beautiful blue variety, glistens 
from under every thicket.
A flower of still deeper blue, our 
early Polygala calcarea, helps perhaps even more to colour the 
mountain-side.
Viola canina is in like profusion ; as is also, in 
the barer places, the peculiarly Southern Aphyllanthes mons- 
peliensis, a leafless plant (as the name indicates), of the Order 
Juncete, but which, wherever it grows, studs the ground with or- 
namental blue flowers, each division of the corolla marked by a 
midrib of a deeper blue.
In the lower regions of the mountain, 
Linum narbonense expands its still finer and larger blue flowers, 
the most magnificent of their tribe.
In the shady woods, our 
Columbine, Aquilegia vulgaris, is not unfrequent.
Another of 
the most abundant flowers is Globularia vulgaris ^ a plant un- 
known to England (though not requiring a very Southern cli- 
mate), whose round heads are also blue, though of a less beauti- 
ful tint.
Another plant of the same genus, G.
Alypum, is also 
here met with, a more decidely Southern species, though rarer 
even in the South than G.
vulgaris.
Of flowers other than blue, 
one of the most plentiful — it is so indeed wherever it grows 
in the Pyrenees, the Cevennes, or the burning rocky wastes of 
the Mediterranean — is the rosy Saponaria Ocymoides, with its 
masses of blossom carpeting the ground.
Anthyllis Vulneraria 
is frequent ; that is, its red-flowered variety,' much the commonest 
in the South.
Of Cisti I only saw the purple C.
albidus, the most 
beautiful of the common species, and only matched by the very si- 
milar C villosus, which supplies its place in Sicily and Greece.
But 
there were numerous Helianthema, among which one white (pro- 
bably H.
apenninum) and several yellow, which^ not feeling quite 
certain that I have determined them rightly, I forbear to name.
The red Valerian, Centranthus ruber (which we possess, though 
probably naturalized, in Greenhithe chalk-pits and other places 
in Kent), here showed its dark-red masses; a fact rather excep- 
tional, for I have found C.
angustifolius much more common, 
both in the French Alps, the Pyrenees and the mountains of the 
south of France.
On a turfy part of the mountain-side, at a con- 
siderable elevation, I found Ranunculus gramineus, a handsome 
and rather rare plant allied to R, Flammula and Lingua ; and at a 
height above that.
Arbutus Uva-ursi (now Arctostaphylos) spread 
out its luxuriant stems and pitcher-like flowers.
The small 
860 BOTANY o?
SPAIN.
[December, 
yellow Narcissus, N.juncifoUus, formerly confounded with N.
Jon- 
guUla, grew copiously in the same r^on ; and near the summit 
of the mountain (on the grassy ledge on which are the ruins of the 
highest hermitage, that named after St. Jerome), N.
bifkrus, more 
heautiful than even N.poeticus, filled the air with rich fragrance.
But the plant most associated with Monserrat is Ramondia 
pyrenaica, known to those who have botanissed at Gavarnie, Eb- 
quierry, and other places in the Higher Pyrenees, as one of the 
most exquisite v^etable productions of that mountain chain.
This plant, the only European representative of the Order Cyr- 
tandrace<B, was earliest known and described (under the name 
Verbascum Myconi) as a Monserrat plant ; these excepted, it has, 
I believe, no other known habitat.
I was fortunate enough to 
find in a rock, a' plant or two already in flower ; not on the higher 
part of the mountain, but on its lower slope, very near the car- 
riage-road.
Though I possessed far more beautiful specimens 
collected on the rocky side of the torrent at Gavarnie, it gave me 
great pleasure to find it in what, if not its first abode, is at least 
the first place in which it was scientifically recognized.
The remaining plants which I observed on Monserrat I shall 
enumerate in the usual* order.
They are doubtless but a small 
part of the botanical riches of the mountain, so many plants 
being, at this early time of the year (the second week of May, 
in a very backward season), not only not in flower, but not yet 
recognizable.
Of Banunculace(B, there were Clematis Vitalba 
and two Thalictra ; one of these had not even begun to flower ; 
another, in the lower region of the mountain, and in very small 
quantity, had barely begun, and I could not with certainty deter- 
mine it.
Its appearance is not the usual one of a Thalictrum, 
and if a French species, it must be T.
tuberosum.
Ranunculus 
gramineus I have mentioned, to which add R, bulbosus and 
Helleborus fcetidus.
Of Crucifers, I saw Arabis sagittata, Gre^ 
rardi, and Tkarrita; Cardamine hirsuta; Biscutella hemgata 
abundantly, the smooth, though hard form, which justifies the 
name (not jB.
ambigua, the common one of the South, now 
generally accounted a variety of the former) ; an Erysimum ; 
Sisymbrium Irio, Columme, and obtusangulum ; Diplotawis eru* 
coides ; and, of course, Alyssum calycinum, and Lepidium Draba.
The Resedce were represented by R.
Phyteuma and R.
fruticulosa.
The CaryophylkiB, by Sitem italica, with other large and small 
1861.] BOTANY OF SPAIN.
361 
species of that genus, not in flower ; and an Arenaria unknowQ 
to me.
Of OxalidecBy I noticed O.
comiculata ; of Geraniacea, 
only two Erodiums, E, dconium and malachoides, LeguminostB 
were, as usual, abundant.
Besides Calycotome spinosa and Ge^ 
nista ScorpizAS, there was a light-green dwarf Genista, one of 
several species which have leaves on the upper part and only 
thorns on the lower part; the real Spanish broom, S.
hispanica.
The Cytisi were C, arffenteicSj and that bush of golden flowers, 
C sessilifoliua.
The Astragali were A.
monspessxdanus, and a 
species with pods like large hooks.
A, hamosus: Besides these, 
and the Anthyllis already mentioned, there were Dorycnium 
suffruticosum, Lotus comiculatus, Psoralea bituminosa, Coronilla 
EmeruSflHippocrepis comosa (unless I mistook H, glauca for it), 
Arthrolobium scorpioides, and Lathyrus setifolius.
Of Rosacece, 
besides several Roses not yet in flower, there were Pyrus com- 
munis, Potentilla verna, the wild Strawberry [Fragaria vesca), 
and Poterium Sanguisorba.
Umbellifers, at this season, I could 
scarcely expect to find, I only noticed, of course, not in flower, 
the common Fennel {Foeniculum vulgare) and the tall Bupleurum 
fruticosum, with its large, entire, coriaceous leaves.
I observed 
Momordica Elaterium, the European representative of the Cu- 
cumber tribe; several Honeysuckles, Lonicera implexa, Xylos^ 
teum, and perhaps others ; various Sedums, one apparently alHs- 
simum, and a Rubia, probably peregrina ; none of these hovvever 
were in flower.
Several Galiums were, but I did not stop to 
determine them.
The CompositcB which I was able to recognize 
at this season were, Pallenis (formerly Buphthalmum) spinosa, 
Calendula arvensis, Urospermum Dalechampii and picroides, (all 
common plants) ; Crepis albida, a fine mountain plant, which 
seemed as much at home here as in the Pyrenees ; a Santolina, 
and, I believe, a Phagnalon ; the last two not yet in flower.
The 
Heaths were Erica arborea, and another (probably multiflora) 
out of flower.
Of Primulacece, I only noticed Anagallis arvensis.
Of Boraginea, an early-flowering Order, there were several : As- 
perugo procumbens exhibited its ugly form in luxuriant tangled 
masses, under the walls of the convent.
On the mountain-side 
the handsome Lithospermum fruticosum put forth its blue funnel- 
shaped flowers.
Echium vulgare and Borrago officinalis make 
up the list.
Of the Order Solanea I only remarked Hyoscyamus 
niger, a plant very widely diflftised, though seldom abundant in 
N. S.
VOL.
V. 3 a 
362 VERBASCUM THAPsiFORME.
[December, 
any of its localities (an English station^ the chalk-hill near Box- 
ley, is an exception).
There was a Verbascum, resembling V.
Thapsus, Antirrhinum majus, and an Orobanche of a blood-red 
colour.
LabiatcB, a numerous Order on the calcareous wastes 
of the South, were rather frequent, and later in the year there 
are, no doubt, many more.
Lavandula Spica and Phlamis Lych- 
nites were there, but not yet in flower; Thymus vulgaris and 
Rosmarinus officinalis of course ; Salvia clandestina ; a Teucrium 
not in flower, T believe the dark-coloured one which I had 
found near Zaragoza ; Sideriies hirsuta, one of the goodliest of 
its stiff genus.
Of Plantains, I saw only the common Plantago 
Cynops.
Of Apetalce, only Daphne Laureola, and four Euphorbus, 
E, CharaciaSy serrata, amygdaloides, and another.
The Mono^ 
cotyledoneiB, besides those previously mentioned, were Orchis 
mascula ; Gladiolus byzaniinus (in the hot lower regions) ; the 
fiirze-like Asparagu^s [A.
horridus), which I first found at Va- 
lencia; TamiAS communis; Smilax aspera; Ruscus aculeatus, a 
plant which looks more congenial to the South than to the damp 
thickets which shelter it in our own country ; Convallaria Poly- 
gonatum ; Asphodelus ramxisus and fistuhsus, and lastly, though 
not yet in flower, Lilium Martagon, that ornament of mountain 
woods on the continent of Europe, which though existing in 
profuse abundance in several similar localities in our south- 
eastern counties, an idle scrupulosity so long kept out of our 
British Floras.
Here I am obliged to end what is no doubt a very scanty 
sample of the treasures by which, a botanist able to visit Mon- 
serrat repeatedly and at various seasons, might hope to have 
his labour rewarded.
There only remains to be recorded a two 
days^ excursion in the Spanish Pyrenees, and my memoranda 
of Spanish botany will have been exhausted.
Verbascum thapsiforme, Schraderu History of the Species or 
Variety ?
Mr. Hudson, in his excellent 'Flora Anglica,' 3rd ed.
1798, 
is the first English author who has described and localized this 
plant, about which there are so many different and conflicting 
opinions, both among the ancients and among the moderns.
1861.] VEllBASCUM THAPSIFORME.
363 
The following is the account of this species, if it be a species, 
given by the judicious author of the ^ Flora Anglica :' — 
" Verbascum thapsoides,foliis decurrentibus,caiQe ramosa.
— Sp.Pl. 1670.
Verbascum angustifolium ramosum, flore aureo, folio crassiore.
— B.
Hist.
Ill, 856.
Verbascum album mas, flore luteo.-r-Dalech.
Hist.
1301.
• 
Verbascum angustius.
— Dod. Pempt.
148.
Verbascum foliis viridibus crassioribus.
— Hist.
Ox. ii.
436.
Anglis, bastard Mullein.
Habitat in pratis et pascuis cretaceis et arenosis, in comitatu Cantiano, 
passim; (J .
vii., viii.
(Flowers in July and August.)" 
Dr. Withering in his third edition of the ^ Botanical Arrange- 
ment of the British Plants/ quotes Hudson as his authority for 
the locality of the plant (vol.
ii.
p. 249) .
And further states that 
it is a ^^ hybrid plant produced in the gardens of Upsal, in the 
year 1761, from the seeds of V.
Lychnitis, impregnated by the 
pollen of V.
Thapsus, both of which grew in the same bed." The 
learned author quotes Gerarde, p.
773, fig.
2, who says that " the 
floures are white, the special mark to know it from the male 
kinde, being like in every other respect." It may be a question 
whether this be the present plant under consideration, which has 
yellow and not white flowers.
The plant described in Gerarde, 
on p.
775, fig.
4, agrees better with V.
thapsiforme of mddern 
authors.
Gerarde calls his plant Verbascum Lychnite minus (Small 
Candlewick Mullein), and tells us that " it differs little from the 
last rehearsed {V.
Lychnitis), saving that the whole plant is of a 
better savour, .
. .
the floure also is much larger, and of a straw 
or pale-yellow colour." 
Withering, who informs his readers that this plant originated 
in Sweden in 1761, quotes Fuchsius, Dodoens, Gerarde, and J.
Bauhin, as the authorities for his V, thapsoides, although these 
authors lived centuries before this species existed, if we are to 
credit the account of its first appearance.
Aliquando bonus 
dormitat Homerus : the most vigilant are now and then caught 
napping.
Sir J.
E. Smith, under Verbascum Lychnitis^ quotes Hudson, 
Withering, and the ancient authorities, together with Schrader, 
Willdenow, Hoffmann, etc., and observes that the '^ mule variety 
/3 he has never seen wild, nor is there any authentic specimen in 
the Linnaean Herbarium." 
364 vBRBAscuM THAFsiFORME.
[December, 
The next British authority is Dr. Lindley, who is quoted by 
Hooker, as his authority for the plant ; and the latter observes 
that it grows " by roadsides in Kent." 
Here it may be observed, that by several living authorities on 
this subject the plant has been ignored ; some being doubtful of 
its very existence, and others sceptical about its being, a British 
or a Kentish plant.
The writer of this notice has much pleasure in notifying to all 
British botanists that there is such a plant, viz.
a species, it may 
be said, universally recognized by Continental botanists, among 
whom it will be sufficient to mention De Candolle, Fries, Willde- 
now, who calls it V.
thapsoides ; Meyer, who enters it as V.
ThapsiiSy while the V.
Thapms of English botanists, and of most 
Continental authors, is by him called V, Schraderi ; and this 
nomenclature is followed by Cosson and Germain, in their ex- 
cellent 'Flore des Environs de Paris.' Whether the Kentish 
plant be estimated as a species or as a variety, all Continental 
authors describe it as a species.
My first acquaintance with this 
plant is of a very recent date.
About two or three years ago, 
Mr. Atwood, of Rouen, sent me seeds of many Norman plants, 
and among these, some of Verbascum thapsiforme, and of V.
phlomoides.
These were distributed among several botanists and 
cultivators ; some succeeded in rearing plants, and some failed.
I was in doubt, till my plants flowered, whether I had F.
thapsiformey or only V.
thapsus.
And even after they were in 
flower I was still dubious, as I had never seen V.
thapsiforme, 
if my plant was what is generally so called, or some nearly allied 
form, V.
phlomoides, for example.
A Liverpool botanist, who did me the honour of 'giving me a 
call, and to whom I had sent seeds of the plant, recognized my 
plants as the same as his, raised from seeds, and which he had 
decided to be the plant in question.
Soon afterwards I was in- 
formed by a very kind friend, to whom I gratefully acknowledge 
my obligations, for helping me to the names of many continental 
species, that there was no question about my plants raised from 
the Norman seeds ; that they were what foreign botanists unani- 
mously call a species, and name it V.
thapsiforme.
My scepticism about the plant was now entirely removed, but 
there were still doubts hanging to it as an English or a Kentish 
plant.
These were very unexpectedly, very satisfactorily, and 
1861.] VERBASCUM THAPSIFORME.
365 
much to my gratification, cleared away, during the course of the 
last month (August, 1861).
For this we are indebted to the 
fortunate discoverer of Sonchus palustris, in Plumstead marshes 
(see 'Phytologist' for 1860, vol.
iv.
p. 310), to whom the 
readers of the said magazine should be very grateful; for he has 
communicated the localities of many rare British plants, from 
time to time, during the last twenty years ; probably more than 
have been contributed by any other individual botanist during 
the above-named period.
In giving a precise description of the locality where the Son- 
chus grows, there was no danger to the future existence of the 
plant ; but the same definite description of the spot where the 
Verbascum grows, might be the means of its destruction in the 
locality where it was seen on the 16th of last August.
It is 
hoped that the readers of this notice will be pleased to accept 
of the information that Verbascum thapsiforme grows not very 
far from Ashford, in Kent.
It is not considered prudent to point 
out the exact spot, for fear of the eradication of the plant.
Within living memory the plant has been seen plentiful in 
another part of the county, twenty miles at least from Ashford.
The publisher of the ' Phytologist ' saw it at Cuxton, probably 
more than thirty years ago ; and he was informed by the late 
Mr. Anderson, the then Curator of the gardens of the Apothe- 
caries^ Company, at Chelsea, that the V.
thapsiforme grew there 
(at Cuxton), and that V.
pulverulentum grew in the same part 
of the county.
Mr. Pamplin remembers very distinctly that he saw the 
branched variety, V.
thapsiforme, but he does not vouch for V, 
pulverulentum.
He however asserts that the latter was in the 
Chelsea Collection, and that Mr. Anderson told him that he 
(Mr. A.) brought/It from Kent.
It is to be wis?
^d that the discovery of this also may reward the 
perseverance of >ome future discoverer.
— From a Correspondent.
Note to " Verbascum thapsiforme." 
I will he .
add a few diagnostic marks to help all future dis- 
coverers of iiis rare plant to decide whether they have detected 
the genuip' species, or a variety of F.
Thapsus, which sometimes 
varies in / he size of the flowers, and has also, in very luxuriant 
forms, a/ endency to produce a branching spike.
866 BUCKINGHAMSHIRE PLANTS.
[December, 
There is little obvious difference between the stems and leaves 
of V.
Thapma and those of V.
thapsiforme.
Both the plants are 
tall, from four to six feet higb^ with woolly leaves.
Only the 
bracts of the latter-mentioned are taore acuminate than they are 
in the former, xwhich are like the leaves, only more pointed.
The 
points in V.
thapsiforme are elongated.
In this species the 
sepals (lobes of the calyx) are hairy and pointed.
The prominent 
distinction is in the corolla, which is very much larger than in 
any form of V.
ThapsuSy and the two lobes of the corolla contigu- 
ous to the two long stamens are much larger than the three 
opposite lobes, And of a different shape, being elongated.
In 
F. Tfiapsua, the lobes are equal.
These two characters are con- 
stant in all the examples seen.
The two more elongated stamens 
are quite smooth, and the anthers are attached throughout ; the 
latter are deep-orange, and the stamens and hairs are yellowish- 
green.
In F.
phlomoideSy for this plant has recently established itself 
near the middle of Clapham Common, the leaves are not woolly 
on the upper side, but of a very light green colour, and are much 
smaller than they are either in F.
Thapsus, or F.
thapsiforme.
The bracts are not acuminate, and the lobes of the corolla are 
equal.
The corolla is not so large as that of F.
thapsiformey but 
larger than in F.
Thapsus.
The longer stamens are also quite 
smooth, and the anthers are attached, as in F.
thapsiforme, V, 
phlomoides is but a small plant when compared with its two 
relatives, being not above half a yard high in the recently ob- 
served station.
Note.
— ^This rare plant, F.
phlomoideSy was first 
observed on Clapham Common, the 29th August, 1861, and 
again on September 13th.
Here it was spread over about a 
couple of rods or so, and there might have been then from thirty 
to forty plants, some of them in flower, but the greater part of 
them only with radical leaves.
^ 
A List of Plants found near Slough, Stoke, and Burnham Beeches, 
Bucks, By W.
T. Dyer.
Alchemilla arvensis.
Stoke.
Anagallis ccsrulea.
Stoke.
Asplenium Trichomanes.
Stoke.
1861.] BUCKINGHAMSHIRE PLANTS, 367 
Asplenium Adiantum-nigrum, Stoke.
Athyrium Mlix-foemina, Black Park.
Blechnum boreale.
Bamham Beeches.
Butomus umbellattcs.
Thames, Eton.
Campanula Trachelium, Lane near Burnham Beeches.
Carlina vulgaris.
Chuck Quarry, Burnham Beeches.
Cheiranthus Cheiri.
Stoke walls.
Cuscuta Epithymum, Stoke Common.
Drosera intermedia.
Stoke Common.
Drosera rotundifolia.
Stoke Common.
Erigeron acris.
Walls of Windsor Castle.
Eriophorum angttstifolium.
Stoke Common.
Euphorbia amygdaloides, Burnham Beeches.
Equisetum limosum.
Thames, Eton.
Equisetum paltcstre, Burnham Beeches.
Equisetum sylvaticum, Burnham Beeches.
Fedia dentata.
Stoke.
Fedia olitoria.
Stoke.
Geranium pratense.
Eton meadows.
Geranium pyrenaicum.
Waste ground near Stoke Green.
Hydrocharis Morsus-rana.
Windsor Park.
Hypericum humifusum.
Burnham Beeches.
Inula Conyza.
Stoke.
Juncus squarrosus.
Stoke Common.
Lactuca muralis, Windsor Castle walls.
Lamium Galeobdolon.
Stoke.
Lastrea dilatata.
Black Park.
Linaria Cymbalaria.
Walls; Stoke.
Linaria minor.
Wall opposite South-western railway-station, 
Windsor.
^ 
Linaria repens.
Hedge near Sefton Arms, Stoke.
Lycopodium inundatum.
Stoke Common.
Lysimachia nemorum.
Burnham Beeches.
Lysimachia Nummularia.
Burnham Beeches.
Lysimachia vulgaris.
Eton meadows.
Molinia carulea.
Stoke Common.
Nuphar lutea.
-Thames, Eton.
Nymphaa alba.
Thames, Eton.
Osmunda regalis.
Burnham Beeches.
Polygonum Fagopyrum, Stoke ; escaped from cultivation.
868 PLANTS OF PLYMOUTH.
[December, 
Polystichum aculeaium.
Stoke.
Polystichum angulare.
Stoke.
Pyrethrum inoctorum.
Stoke.
Rhinanthus Crista-galli.
Stoke.
Rhyncospora alba.
Bumham Beeches.
Rosa nUnginosa, Chalk quarry^ Bumham Beeches.
Ruscus aculeatus.
Bumham Beeches.
Sagittaria sagittifolia, Thames^ Eton.
Salix repens.
Stoke.
Sanicula europaa.
Burnham Beeches.
Scolopendrium vulgare.
Stoke.
Scutellaria minor.
Burnham Beeches.
Sinapis tenuifolia.
Windsor Castle Terrace.
Sison am^mum.
Stoke.
Trifolium incamatum^ Stoke ; escaped from cultivation.
Verbaacum Thapms, Stoke.
PLANTS OF PLYMOUTH.
Localities of some Uncommon Plants and of Varieties of Common 
Species within twelve miles of Plymouth, By T.
B. Archer 
Briogs.
Ranunculus hirsutus.
Fields between Torpoint and St. John^s.
July, 1860.
Ranunculus parmfloms.
Common between Plymouth and 
Yealmpton.
Near Plymstock ; Egg Buckland.
Berberis vulgaris (L.).
Bank above a small creek &om St.
John^s Lake, between Torpoint and St. John^s village.
Appa- 
rently quite indigenous in two or three spots.
Papaver Argemone (L.).
Field between Torpoint.
and St.
John's.
July, 1860.
Cardamine pratensis, flore pleno.
Abundant in a meadow be- 
tween Plymouth and Plympton St. Mary's Church.
Yealm 
Bridge, very sparingly.
Erysimum cheiranthoides (L.).
Not very common.
In toler- 
able plenty in a field between Buckland Monachorum and Ro- 
borough Downs.
August 3rd, 1861.
Thlaspi arvense (L.).
Cultivated ground near St. Budeaux 
1861.] FLANTS OF PLYMOUTH.
869 
village.
The only locality of this plant I know of in the neigh- 
bourhood of Plymouth.
Silene anglica (L.).
Shaugh.
A single plant, in a cornfield 
between Torpoint and St. John^s.
July 23rd, 1861.
Malva rotundifolia (L.).
Not common.
Near the Devil^s 
Point, Stonehouse; Yealmpton village.
Hypericum dubium (Leers) .
Common Wood ; Fursdon ; Egg 
Buckland.
Hypericum montanum (L.).
Abundant.
On limestone by the 
Yealmpton road, within a few miles of Plymouth.
Plymstock ; 
Fordbrook.
Acer Pseudo-Plat anus, A variety with variegated leaves 
grows by the tram-road between Crabtree and Cressbrook Farm.
Geranium pyrenaicum.
Cutting by the Plymouth and Yealmp- 
ton road, near the turning to Elburton village.
Abundant ; but 
probably an escape, as Petroselinum sativum grows at the same 
place.
Geranium pusillum.
Not common.
Pomphleet, and near 
Plymstock, 1860.
Radiola millegran^ (Sm.).
Roborough Down.
Euonymvs europaea (L.) , I have found a variety with dirty- 
white seed-vessels, growing between Plymouth and Manadon.
Medicago sativa.
Between Plymouth and Saltash Ferry.
Trifolium ornithopodioides (L.) .
Pasture above Whitsand Bay, 
Cornwall.
Lathyrus latifolius (L.).
Near a hedge-bank in a field ad- 
joining the Plymn Bridge road, between Fancy Corner and 
Plymn Bridge.
Hubus saxatilis (L.).
By the tram-road.
Common Wood.
— 
This plant is not mentioned in Ravenshaw^s Flora.
Rosa rubiginosa (L.).
A plant among coppice wood on Col- 
well estate.
Egg Buckland.
Near Allowpit, Egg Buckland.
Rosa tom^ntosa (Sm.).
By the tram-road.
Fancy.
Pyrus torminalis.
In a hedge at Wembury.
Petroselinum segetum.
Between Lipson and Laira.
Sison Amomum (L.).
Plymouth and Yealmpton road, abun- 
dant.
Between Crabtree and Plympton St. Mary Church.
Senecio erucifolius (L.) .
Waste ground and on rubble-heaps 
from limestone quarries, by the Plymstock and Yealmpton roads.
Abundant in some spots.
Catdown, 
N. S.
VOL.
v. 3 b 
370 PLANTS OF PLYMOUTH.
[December, 
Centaurea Cyanus.
Not general.
Cultivated ground between 
Torpoint and St. John's, July, 1861.
Hieracium sylvaticum, var.
maculatum (Sm.).
Banks under 
trees at Mauadon.
Probably an escape.
Specularia hybrida (A.
DC).
Field between Torpoint and 
St. John's, 1860.
Common Wood, 1861.
Wahlenbergia hederacea (Reich.).
Roborough Down; Hoo 
Meavy ; Common Wood.
Eryihraa pulchella (Fries).
Fields between Torpoint and 
St. John's; Bovisand.
Linaria spuria.
Field near Egg Buckland, 1858.
Eflford, 1860.
Linaria minor (Desf.).
Near the limestone-quarries at Pom- 
phleet and BiUacombe.
Cornfield between Jump and Tamerton 
Foliot, July 9th, 1861.
Pedicularis palustris (L.).
Roborough Down, 1861.
By the 
Leat, near Jump- village, 1860.
^ 
Eufragia viscosa (Benth.).
Springy place in afield between 
Torpoint and St. John's, 1860.
Not there this season.
Sibthorpia europcea.
Common.
Near Bickleigh; Fursdon; 
Egg Buckland ; Wembury ; near Milton village ; near Denham 
Bridge.
Mentha rotimdifolia (L.).
Honicknowle.
Near Antony, Corn- 
wall.
Mentha piperita.
Near St. Budeaux.
Lamium ampleancaule.
Gardens near Torpoint, Cornwall.
Neighbourhood of St. Budeaux and King's Tamerton.
Lamium Galeobdolon (Crantz) .
Neighbourhood of Yealmpton ; 
Morwell.
Pinguicula lusitanica (L.).
Bog adjoining Fursdon estate.
Egg Buckland.
Primula veris (L.) .
Leigham, Egg Buckland.
Pasture near 
the Knackersknowle and T^ai^erton road ; very sparingly.
Anagallis arvensis (L.) .
I found a variety with purple flowers, 
growing with some having flowers of the common colour, in a 
field below Shallaford Lane, Egg Buckland, on June 13th, 1861.
Littorella lacustris (L.).
I found a single plant in a pit on 
Roborough Down, on September 12th, 1859.
ChenopQdium olidum (Curt.).
Stoke Damarell.
Torpoint, 
Cornwall, 1860.
Polygonum Bistorta.
Goosewell Hill ; Egg Buckland, in an 
orchard, and on a hedge-bank.
Weston Mills.
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
371 
Orchis pyramidalis (L.).
Bank^ and in a small pasture on the 
Tealmpton road, about three miles from Plymouth.
In great 
plenty in July, 1858, since which the field has been in cultivation.
On rubble-heaps, and in waste ground near Oreston Quarries ; 
sparingly.
Narcissus biflorus (Curt.).
In an orchard, and on a hedge- 
bank at GooseweU, Egg Buckland.
I have not named some other uncommon plants which occur 
in this neighbourhood, as I am aware their localities have been 
previously given by Mr. Ravenshaw and others.
For a like 
reason I have also omitted other localities of some of the fore- 
going.
I have noted the following additional localities, in this neigh- 
bourhood, of Anckusa sempervirens, Barbarea pracox, and Ge- 
ranium rotundifolium : — 
Anchusa sempervirens.
Crabtree ; near Saltash, on the St.
Stephen's Boad ; Thombury ; Egg Buckland.
Barbarea prcecooe.
On a bank by Tamerton Creek ; between 
Tothill and Laira; by the tram-road, near Marsh House, Egg 
Buckland.
Geranmm rotundifolium.
Between Tothill and Laira ; abun- 
dant.
Near Plympton St. Mary Church, by the Plympton 
road; sparingly.
Catdown; Plyrastock.
Between Torpoint 
and Antony, Cornwall.
Plymouth, August, 1860.
KENTISH BOTANY.
Notes and Recollections about the Botany of North Kent, between 
Dartford and Bexley, 
Our object in visiting this comparatively little-known tract was, .
first, to settle some doubts about Fumaria parviflora, which this 
summer (July, 1861) was abundant in a turnip-field near Darenth, 
and to procure specimens of Amoseris pusilla and of Senecio vis- 
cosuSy which is plentiful at Bexley Heath.
The train by which we travelled left the London Bridge ter- 
minus at 9.20 A.M., and conveyed us comfortably to Dartford.
in 
less than an hour.
Botanists seldom walk as the crow flies, or, in other words.
372 KENTISH BOTANY.
[December, 
rarely take the direct line between two points.
Our course on 
this occasion was more than usually devious.
To give an exact 
description of the places of interest which we visited would be 
impossible, unless we had travelled with the Ordnance map in our 
pocket and marked the spot where we found a rare plant.
We soon found the Fumaria, which is in a sloping field on the 
left-hand side of the Dartford and Sevenoaks road, about a mile 
from Dartford.
The field was then doubly cropped, with peas 
and turnips, the former nearly ready for gathering, the latter were 
only coming forward to take the place of the peas when removed.
While here we observed to the south-west the heights near 
St. Mary Cray, and decided on going thither the best way we 
could improvise ; and adopted the valley of the Darenth for part 
of our route.
We were induced to go this way in hopes of seeing 
Epipactis palustris ; but this proud beauty did not condescend to 
gratify two of the most ardent of her admirers.
Orchids were scarce this season ; they were remarkably so in 
the vale of the Darenth, which surely produces Orchis latifolia, 
though we did not see it.
We saw only O.
maculata.
The river yielded Ranunculus 
fluitans and Zannichellia palustris ; and the ditches and mea- 
dow drains produced Potamogeton ptisillus vrith Lysimachia Num- 
mularia and other commoner plants.
The only thing we observed 
which by stretching our liberality may be called rather rare, was 
Thalictrum flavum, not far from the viaduct of the London, 
Chatham, and Dover Railway, which here crosses the valley which 
lies between the Crays and Farningham.
Before reaching the table land between Sutton and Chisel- 
hurst, we met with a few small plants of Hypericum montanum.
One of us remembered seeing it more than thirty years ago on 
the same banky tract, but nearer Farnborough, or, more correctly, 
on the hill between Eynsford and Farnborough.
Our road or path led us on past a solitary farm, of which the 
name is forgotten, but it lies -between Sutton and a new church 
building, in a part of the country where there is not a house in 
sight.
From this new church we descended one hill and ascended 
another in the direction of Bexley, and in a cornfield on the 
ascent, just one example of Adonis autumnalis was seen, and 
probably a dozen of Bupleurum rotundifolium.
In a cloverfield 
on the same acclivity we looked for Orobanche minor, which we 
^ 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
373 
did not see, but saw plenty of Ajuga Chamapitys.
The only 
noticeable cornfield plants seen in our walk, besides the above, 
were Poppies.
Papaver hybridum and P.
somniferum were very 
abundant, the latter particularly plentiful, 
Dartford Heath, which we crossed, supplied us with Cuscuta 
Epithymum; this was only, at this early period of the season, 
making its appearance.
From the north end of this large tract 
of elevated open space, a path led us through fields to Bexley 
village, and another path led us through what may have once 
been Bejdey Heath, but it is a heath no more.
The land is now a 
great strawberry-bed, and between the rows of these plants, which 
bear the finest of our native fruits, grow the plants of which we 
were in quest.
In one of the fields both the Amoseris and the 
Senecio were quite eradicated, a consequence of careful cultiva- 
tion.
In the last of the fields crossed by the pedestrian coming 
from Bexley village to Bexley Heath, there is plenty of Senecio 
viscosus as well as S.
sylvaticm ; and in the last field but one there 
is no lack of Amoseris pusilla.
We had now walked, since leaving Dartford station, a consider- 
able way, and had been on foot nearly seven hours, viz.
from 
about ten a.m. to five p.m., and when at Bexley were only two or 
three miles from Dartford, where our walk began.
Probably we 
were, even when most remote, not more than four or five miles 
from the station.
Judging by the time spent, our walk probably 
exceeded fifteen miles.
We had now completed our botanizing but not our walking, 
for we had from seven to eight miles further to trudge ere we 
reached home.
The easiest way by which the London botanist can reach 
Bexley Heath is by the North Kent line ; and he may either 
go to Dartford or leave at Erith.
Probably the distance from 
Dartford is less than it is from Erith ; but the walk is neither so 
pleasant nor is the scenery so good as between the latter place 
a«d Bexley Heath.
The heights above Erith are as picturesque 
as any part of North Kent ; they equal the best of the scenery 
between Greenwich and Gravesend.
When he reaches Bexley Heath, he should inquire for the path 
across the fields to Bexley village ; and after leaving the great 
road from London to Dover, in the first field, now in strawberry 
culture, he will find the Senecio viscosus between the rows, and in 
874 KENTISH BOTANY.
[December, 
the next fields and probably in the third from Bexley Heathy 
Arnoseris pusilla wiU be seen.
If not in the field, it will probably 
be found about the borders.
Clean culture is detrimental to the botanist ; although it be 
agreeable to see the evidences of care and the promise of success.
One of the remarks we made was that the oflScinal Poppy, 
Papaver somniferum, was extending its area.
In some fields 
through which we passed it is now as plentiful as it has been for 
many years near Greenhithe.
The scarcity of Adonis autumna- 
lis, of which we only saw a single specimen in our long walk of 
the 12th of July, several miles of which was through corn- 
fields, is attributable to the season.
The plant is both vernal and 
autumnal ; it is plentiful in the very beginning and in the end of 
summer.
We were too late for the spring state of this rare spe- 
cies and too early for the autumnal.
I have seen it, many years 
ago, in considerable quantities in the stubble, on fields between 
Crayford and Dartford.
Apera Spica-venti was plentiful this year (1861), in a corn- 
field between Dartford Heath and Bexley village.
We were well satisfied with the results of this day's excur- 
sion, and hope that it may be the precursor of many more 
equally agreeable and successful.
One of the objects of our 
ambition is to convey to the readers of the ^ Phy tologist ' a 
sample of the vegetable riches of this county, which is, with the 
exception of a few limited spots, a terra incognita to the majo- 
rity of English botanists.
A. B.
July 26, 1861.
Additional Remarks on the Botany of Kent, 
To the Editor of the ' Fhytologist: 
Sir, — Much of the district traversed by your correspondents, 
and commented upon by them, in the articles on Kentish Botaiiy, 
in recent numbers of the '' Phytologist,' being familiar to me, I 
take the liberty of sending you a few remarks on the subject, pre- 
mising, however, that I hJtve no novelty to record, no distin- 
guished stranger to announce.
The first plant I allude to, Dipsactis pilostis (which I have 
known in the spot you describe, near Canterbury, for at least 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
375 
twenty years), simply for the purpose of mentioning its presence 
in a hedge bounding some meadows between Brockley and Lewis- 
ham.
I am not aware whether this is one of the recorded 
stations for this plant or no ; all I can say is, that I have speci- 
mens gathered by nayself, at the spot in question, some two or 
three summers since.
To the noticeable plants at Richborough 
may be added the Tansy {Tanacetum vulgare), which I gathered 
there in September, 1856, and which is probably still to be found 
there.
Growing plentifully on Kingsdown beach, intermingled 
not unfrequently with the Sea Pea, is a form of Solanum Dulca- 
mara, which may be worth noticing.
The branches are prostrate, 
I spreading on the beach in all directions, so as to form a circular 
patch ; the bark of a dark olive-green or of a rich purple hue ; the 
leaves small, lanceolate, few of them showing any tendency to 
become lobed at the base ; the flowers occasionally destitute of 
the spot at the base of the lobes of the corolla.
The same plant, 
further on in the underclifl", assumes its ordinary appearance, 
so that the variety on the beach would seem to be due to the 
peculiar circumstances under which it grows in the last-named 
situation.
Brassica oleracea, so common along the cliffs near 
St. Margaret^s Bay, and the stalks of which, eaten au naturel, 
were esteemed such a luxury in our school-boy days — what will 
not school-boys eat ?
— is mentioned, as last year, perhaps from 
the unusual amount of rain, numerous instances were found 
wherein the lowermost flowers of the cluster were absent, and 
their place supplied by a tuft of green leaves — a cabbage in 
miniature.
This was the case all along the chalk range from 
Kingsdown to Eastwear Bay, and is certainly not so common in 
all years, at least so far as our observation goes.
At Lydden Spout, one of the most noticeable plants found on 
a visit, in August, 1860, was the Hippocrepia comosa, at that time 
bearing in profusion its singular pods, which at once suggest the 
idea;that they are formed on the model of a pinnate or of a pin- 
na tely divided leaf.
Eastwear Bay !
what naturalist, what geologist, what lover of 
beautiful scenery does not rejoice to find himself there?
It 
matters not whether he roam along the summit of the lofty chalk 
hills, and gloat over the splendid prospect before him; whether 
multo cum labore he scale the chalky walls themselves, thread the 
intricacies of the Warren, cautiously tread the steeps of Copt 
376 KENTISH BOTANY.
[December, 
Point, or, with less risk, skirt the base of the nndercliff along 
the beach, or leave the imprint of his foot on the sands and far- 
famed fossil bank beyond.
Everywhere he will find much to 
interest and delight him.
To the geologist and collector of fossils 
this district is especially interesting; every tida reveals fresh spe- 
cimens, the constant falling of the gault brings to light others.
To 
the marine zoologist and seaweed-lover the sands and rock-puddles 
afibrd, at low tide, never-ceasing sources of interest.
Your cor- 
respondents have told us what to expect in the botanical way, 
and to their record I beg to add a few words.
Papaver somniferum not only grows at the base of the cliflf, but 
also, as your present correspondent knows to his cost, in less 
accessible situations.
Accompanied by the partner of his joys and 
woes, he was attempting to descend the cliff by a disused and 
rugged pathway; a small part of the descent had been accom- 
plished, when a sudden squall of wind, rain, and hail — ^such hail !
— 
attended by thunder and lightning, arrested their progress, and 
compelled them to remain on a little ledge of rock, overhung by 
a projecting block of chalk, a station which, under the circum- 
stances, seemed anything but secure, not to say comfortable.
However, while waiting here, to allow the storm to abate its 
fury a little, before retracing our steps, we caught sight of 
Papaver somniferum and Iris foetidissima, the latter in fruit.
Specimens in our herbarium attest the fact, and compensate for 
the thorough soaking, and whitewashing to boot, that we got on 
that day.
Centaur ea Calcitrapa and a curious variety of Origa- 
num wlgare are to be found hereabouts ; the latter I think I have 
seen named as O.
vulgare, var.
cylindrostachya, or prismato- 
stachya, I do not remember which ; at any rate, the inflorescence, 
in place of being in globular masses, is lengthened out more into 
the form of a spike ; the bracts, moreover, being increased in 
number, size, and intensity of colour, so that the appearance of 
the plant differs much from that of the ordinary form.
One of the most remarkable things to be noticed here, is the 
well-marked difference in the vegetation of the chalk and of the 
gault clay.
Your geological readers who may have visited this 
charming spot, will know how clearly defined is the boundary 
between the two formations : the character of the vegetation is 
hardly less clearly definable.
On the one side are the well- 
known chalk plants, in all their luxuriance and beauty, many of 
1861.] KENTISH BOTANY.
377 
which are noticed by your correspondents ; on the other, at a 
distance of only a few feet, there is the Coltsfoot, the Equisetum, 
the rough tufts of Rushes, and little else beside ; the special chalk 
plants are not to be found beyond the border.
Some years since, 
when pursuing some investigations on the distribution of wild 
plants in Oxfordshire, I foUnd equally trenchant distinctions be- 
tween the vegetation of the oolite and that of the clay, and I 
arrived at the conclusion that the diflference of the vegetation on 
the soils in question depended more upon the degree of moisture 
than upon the chemical nature of the soil, though of all varieties 
of soils those having a predominance of lime in them have the 
most especially-marked Flora.
On the other hand, many plants 
which in this country are confined to chalky or limestone dis- 
tricts, occur on the Continent in widely different spots.
Chlora 
perfoliata, one of the plants usually considered especially to 
belong to the chalk, may be found in Oxfordshire on the clay ; 
and I have once gathered it on the gault of Eastwear Bay, but 
once only, whereas it is abundant on the chalk not a stone's- 
throw from the clay.
The presence of Scolopendrium vuJgare at Eastwear Bay and at 
Lydden Spout seeJhs to have attracted the notice of your corre- 
spondents (whose mask, by the way, hardly conceals their fea- 
tures), as also it did my own.
Although familiar with the plant 
as occurring occasionally on chalk, greensand, and other lime- 
stone soils, I never before saw it so close to the sea.
In the 
localities above mentioned, the plant was always seen by the pre- 
sent writer, close by the rills of fresh-water which ooze out from 
between the chalk and gault, while at Lydden Spout the water 
pours out pleno rivo.
Following the track of your correspondents, I may notice the 
abundance of that most elegant little i^lsxitAnagallis tenella, on the 
oozing ground at the base of the greensand cliffs between Folke- 
stone and Sandgate, where also Samolus Vakrandi and Lavatera 
arborea may be found — the latter an escape from gardens.
At 
the top of the cliff, by the side of the pathway leading towards 
Sandgate, may be found the Thrift, Armeria vulgaris , in plenty ; 
also Sedum acre and a white-flowered variety of Geranium rober- 
tiarmm.
My search after Cyperus longus was as fruitless as that 
of your correspondents, while Newington Moor, auother spot 
eloquently described by the botanical historian of this district^ 
N. s.
VOL.
V. 8 c 
378 NOTES OF A BOTANICAL KAMBLE ON BEN LEDi.
[December, 
the Rev. G.
E. Smithy is touch interfered with, both pictorialljr 
and botanically, by the ngly gash cut right through it by the • 
railway.
On both accounts, now even, it is still well worthy a 
visit.
To go a mile or two beyond your correspondents* range, but 
in the same district, I may add that a recent visit to Lympne 
(November, 1861) yielded Smymium Olusatrum and Lavatera 
4irborea, At Lympne, the greensand range ends, or rather di- 
verges from the coast line, and the flats of Romney Marsh begin ; 
hdre moreover the antiquary may find much to interest him in 
the stalwart remains of the old Roman encampment, and of the 
mediaeval castle and church, — the latter on the brow of the hill, 
the former nearly at the bottom, — ^ position due in some degree 
to the frequent landslips.
A rambler with natural-history tastes 
finds so much generally besides natural history to attract his at- 
tention, that I may be excused for adding a word or two on the 
Roman walls of Lympne, especially as your correspondents have 
had their say about Richborough.
There the walls are mainly of 
flint with bands of tile, and here and there masses of tufa, brought 
probably from Italy as ballast : this at least is the suggestion of 
a practical geologist and naturalist.
At Lympne the walls are of 
greensand, Kentish rag, and — sandwich- wise — layers of thick tile.
The condition of the stone, especially of the rag, is seemingly as 
good as it ever was, — a fact for the House of Parliament Decay 
Commissioners to ponder over.
At both Richborough and 
Lympne HeUw lapicida may be found.
M. T.
M. 
NOTES OF A BOTANICAL EAMBLE ON BEN LEDI.
On a beautifiil morning, about the middle of July, a few ar- 
dent lovers of Mora left the Scottish capital for the purpose of 
exploring the botanical treasures of Ben Ledi.
That noble moun- 
tain is about three miles west of Callander, in Perthshire, and 
rises nearly 3000 feet above the sea-level.
It does not seem to 
be much noticed in botanical works in indicating the localities of 
Scottish alpine Flora.
The party referred to, of which the writer 
was one, were resolved to see with their eyes what plants were 
really to be found on its rocky sides find bald grey summit.
We 
ascended the mountain from the banks of Loch Lubnaig, and 
1861.] NOTES OF A BOTANICAL EAMBLE ON BEN LEW.
379 
crossing its summit descended on the village of Kilmahog.
In 
Loch Lubnaig we found plenty of Subularia aquatica and Lo- 
belia Dortmanna ; and saw the Nymphcea alba and Nuphar lutea.
On the banks of the loch the graceful Galium boreale was 
growing in profusion.
Here we also gathered Valeriana offici- 
natis in fine condition.
On the meadows between the loch and 
the mountain^ we collected in considerable abundance fine spe- 
cimens o( Habenaria bifolia^ H, chlorantha, Gymnadenia conop- 
sea, G.
albida.
Orchis kttifolia, O.
maculata, Geranium pratense, 
and Polygonum viviparum.
In a bog at the base of the moun- 
tain, among Sphagmtm obtusifolium and S.
squamosum, we found 
Vacdnium Oxy coccus in fruit, and Narthedum osdfragum coming 
into flower.
In the same locality, Parnassia palustris, Drosera 
rotundifolia, Geum rivale, and Comarum palustre, were gathered.
In a small plantation of Oaks and Birches, we stored our field- 
books with very large specimens of Polypodium Phegopteris, and 
saw Geranium sylvaticum in abundance.
From the base of the 
mountain, all the way to its summit, the beautiful Alchemilla 
alpina met our eyes; and in mossy places, we gathered Eriopho- 
rum angustifolium and E.
vaginalum.
Like golden fringes, on 
the sides of all the hills, the Saxifraga aizoides appeared, ac- 
companied by tufts of Oxyria reniformis ; and in moist and 
springy places we collected lonely specimens of Saxifraga steU 
laris and Sedum viUosum, Hanging over the moist shady rocks, 
in straggling tufts, mostly in fruit, but in a few instances in 
flower, was seen the Saxifraga oppositifolia.
Under the shade 
of large blocks of rock, which at some period had been hurled 
from the summit of the mountain, we found fine fruited speci- 
mens of Hymenophyllum Wilsoni; and higher up, among the 
debris of the nearly perpendicular rocks, we collected Allosorus 
crispus, and saw Polystichum LoncMtis, but not fully developed.
On the northern side, jmd near the summit, we met with abun- 
dance of Saxifraga cernua, Gnaphalium supinum, Lycopodium 
alpinum, L.
Selago, L.
claratum, andX.
selaginoides ; and among 
the moist rocks large patches of Silene acaulis still in flower : 
also Sedum Rhodiola, AspUnium viride, and Cystopteris fragilis.
On the dry shady shelves of the rocks Polypodium Dryopteris 
was plentiful, while high among the clifls fine plants oiHieracium 
prenanthoides were tempting us to danger.
On the bare craggy 
summit, we found Rubus Chamamorus in fruit.
On heathy 
380 BOTANICAL NOTBs, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
[^December, 
places, all over the mountain, Empetrum nigrum, Vaccinium 
Myrtillus, and V.
Vitia-idaa, were plentiful.
On the dry grassy 
slopes, we found plenty of Festucu ovina, Antennaria dioica, and 
Gentiana campestris.
Of the more common Ferns, we collected 
during our ramble on the mountain Lastrea Oreopteris, L, dUa- 
tata, Blechnum boreale, Polypodium vulgare, AspteniumAdiantum^ 
nigrum, and A, Trichomanes.
We made a large collection of 
Mosses, of which the following are the most worthy of notice : — 
Bartramia fonfana, B.
pomiformis, B.
arcuata, B.
halleriana, 
Bryum nutans, B, cuspidatum, B.
capillare, Andreaa alpina^ A, 
Rothii, Dicranum virens, Weissia acuta, Grimmia stricta, and 
Polytrichum alpinum.
Our time did not allow us to explore this 
famous mountain as we wished to have done, especially its rocky 
cliffs ; and we have no doubt but should we have another oppor- 
tunity of revisiting it, we will be rewarded by the discovery of 
several other alpine floral gems.
BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
Epipactis pukpubata in Middlesex.
A fair correspondent — ^but one who does not wish her name to be kept 
secret, like several of our correspondents, both of the softer and rougher 
sex — has sent me, among other matters, the following account of the un- 
expected appearance of the above species where it had not been previously 
seen, or if seen, had not been recorded in any recent publication : — 
" I can assure you that this Orchid, whatever be its name, has never 
been brought here, and certainly is of spontaneous growth.
I have re- 
sided in this place for thirty-one years, and never saw it till within the last 
few years anywhere about the grounds, nor in one particular locaUty till 
two years ago.
Of this I am perfectly certain, and am quite willing yon 
should attest the same as a fact on my authorky.
M. A.
W." 
Note, The locality of the above is near Enfield.
— Ed.
List op Plants found within Five Miles op Lytham, on 
THE Bank of the Kibble.
In and about a ditch on the left-hand side of the footpath immediately 
after passing the new dock: — Scirpus maritimus, Slum angustifolium^ 
Jpium graveolena, all plentiful.
Between high-water mark and the culti- 
vated ground : — Cakile maritima, occasionally ; Melilotm officinalis, occa- 
sionally ; Rumex maritimus, scarce ; Geranium sanguineum.
Naze Point, 
scarce ; Atripiex laciniata, occasionally ; (Enanthe peucedantfolia, salt- 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES, NOTICES, AND QUERIES.
381 
marshes, abundant ; Silerie maritima^ Honckenya peploides, Tlantago mari- 
tima.
Aster Tripolium, Statice Armeria, Glaux maritima, Eryngium mari- 
timuniy Ononis arvensis, Arenaria marina, Triglochin maritimum, Juncvs 
maritimus, J, compresms, Daucus Carota, abundant ; Spergula nodosa, not 
uncommon ; Samolus Valerandi, occasionally ; Trifolium fragiferum, fre- 
quent; Ergthraa Centaurium, frequent; Inula dgsenterica, occasionally; 
Fimpinella Saxifraga, in one spot plentiful — this is more uncommon than 
P. magna, in this neighbourhood ; Salsola Kali, not uncommon ; Anagallis 
arvensis, frequent.
In the fields about Naze Point, there is an abundance 
of Genista tinctoria.
In a hedge on the left-hand side of the road leading 
from the riverside to Freckleton, I saw for the first time in my life, a large 
quantity of Convolvulus sepium, of which the blossoms were a beautiful 
rose-colour, or pink.
By the same road I discovered one very fine plant 
of Oklora perfoliata, which I left undisturbed.
Its seed-vessels were 
mostly formed, so that the plant will probably increase in the situation re- 
ferred to.
. C.
J. ASHFIELD.
Discovery of Rubus laciniatus, Willd., neae Plymouth.
Since I last wrote I have again visited the locality of the above-named 
plant, which is situated near the viUage of Knackersknowle, a little beyond 
the third milestone from Plymouth on the Plymouth and Tavistock road.
The habitat is a hedge-bank, the bottoni of which is now several feet above 
the level of the highway, as the hill has been " cut down." This is the 
only place where I have ever seen it, but I am glad to say there are several 
plants here, and that -it appears to be on the increase, as some of them 
have rooting shoots several feet long; it now extends for about eight 
yards, and would furnish many dozens of specimens.
I could send you 
more, (such as the one now forwarded,) if of any use to you.
T. R.
A. Beiggs.
Torrington Place, Plymouth, Oct, 29, 1861.
[Several years ago I received a specimen of the above species from an 
unknown correspondent, with a request to be told its name.
I have fur- 
ther to state that there is a British-grown specimen in Sir W.
J. Hooker's 
herbarium, with a note that it had been sent to him from Wales.
It is 
hereby requested that the correspondent who sent a specimen to the Edi- 
tor of the * Phytologist,' will be so kind as to inform him where and under 
what circumstances the above-specified example was found.
— Eu.] 
Sea-Geass Papee.
" A specimen has been laid before us of paper made by Mr. Hartnell, of 
the Isle of Wight, from common Sea Wrack.
The specimen is from a first 
trial made by Mr. Hartnell, who is no paper-maker ; nevertheless, we have 
no hesitation in saying that, though resembling straw paper in colour and 
texture, it is far superior .to the best straw paper which the writer of this 
notice has ever been able to obtain for writing purposes.
Into the ques- 
tion of relative cost and ultimate price we are not prepared to enter ; but 
we believe that Zoster a marina, or Sea Wrack, is a very abundant, and 
hence, "probably, a cheap material.
It is said particularly to abound on the 
382 BOTANICAL' NOTEs^ NOTicis^ AND QUEBiBS.
[December, 
coasts of the Isle of Wight.
The paper made from it is, as we have said, 
like straw paper, and henoe not very white in colour, and more like India, 
paper in that respect ; but perhaps great improvements in the bleaching 
may yet be effected in the manufacture of such paper." — Builder.
Mr. HartneU's paper, made of the new materiaL, Grow Wrack, may be 
superior to the common straw paper now so extensively used ; but unless 
the fibrous matter be in great plenty as well as of excellent quality, it will 
scarcely answer the purpose.
We fear the economical element is absent ; for the natural supply would 
be soon spent.
Would any material, to be used exclusively in the paper 
manufacture, pay the expense of cultivation and yield a fair profit to the 
cultivator P 
TiLLJEA MUSCOSA.
In ' Phytologist,* vol.
v. p.
256, Tillaa mmcosa is recorded as being 
recently discovered near Plymouth, in Devonshire.
It is a Dorsetshire 
plant, according to the late Dr. Bell Salter's list of plants growing wild in 
that county.
(Where is this list to be seen or had P) In * Cybele,' vol.
i. p.
895, there is the following statement about this rare species : — " Through 
cultivation as a botanical curiosity, it has become naturalized in places near 
London ;** (what places ?) " but I know not of any truly native habitat in 
the province of Thames ?" Does any reader of this note, know any habitat 
in said district, either native or naturalized P 
DiFLOTAXIS MU&ALIS.
Another county, at least,.
should be added to the county census of this 
plant, on the authority of Eavenshaw's * Elora of Devonshire,' and also on 
that of a list of early-flowering plants published in the * Phytologist ' for 
August, 1861, p.
264.
SCKOPHULABIA TEKNAlIS.
Some grave doubts have been commurdcated in reference to the genuine- 
ness of the Plymouth locality for 8, vernalis ; and we beg to ask our 
readers to supply us with stations where it is apparently a true native.
The Mitcham station, npw, it is to be feared, no more, is or was not one 
without exception.
Probably the Scottish localities recently published are genuine.
We 
have seen Anchttsa sempervirens truly wild in Scotland ; but we have not 
yet seen it in England, in any place where it could be regarded as other 
than only spontaneous or naturalized.
Is Scropkularia vernalis to be 
placed in the same category in England P We have seen Lamium macu- 
kUum thoroughly natursJized.
Is this species to be added to this class of 
unaeknowled^, or but partially acknowledged, naturalized plants P 
"Naturalized Aliens." 
Accustomed as I have been for some years past» to botanize in the wilds 
of Derbyshire, I often meet with (dants said to be aliens, which I km per- 
1861.] BOTANICAL NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
883 
suaded would uot be thoaght so if the writers saw than growing here» 
some on rocks all but inaccessible even to a daring climber like myself, 
and others in the most dreary situations, far from the haunts of men, in 
the plains or dells lower down.
These remarks were elicited by the perusal 
of your October number, in which Geranium pyretudcum is branded with 
the name of alien, (See vol.
v. p.
293.) I found this plant in great plenty, 
together with Pimpinella magna, on the 21st of last month, in the neigh- 
bourhood of Baslow, and in as wild a locality as the author of the 'Cybele' 
could wish.
Hutchinsia petrtBa, too, is found at the foot of the limestone 
rocks in some places, (as well as under walls,) far away from human dwell- 
ings, in great abundance.
Achillea decolorans is not, as has been sup- 
posed, confined to the neighbourhood of Matlock, for 1 found it, on the 
10th of October, a great distance from that place.
As 1 have not yet seen 
in your valuable periodical a list of the plants that occur in my beat, I 
may, at some future time, supply you with such a notice* 
W. Ashley.
[We hope our correspondent will speedily perform his promise.
— Ed.] 
Notice to Micboscoptcal Obsebveks, etc.
We have the pleasure of announcing to students of the minute -objects 
of creation, whether vegetable or animal, that Mr. W.
Winter, now of Al- 
deby, near Beccles, proposes during the ensuing year to devote his time 
and study to the microscopical productions of the undrained Norfolk Pens, 
a locality unsurpassed for the multiplicity and variety of its productions.
Mr. Winter, who is celebrated as the discoverer of several species of in- 
sects, either new to science or previously undiscovered in Britain, hereby 
offers his services to all interested in these investigations, as a collector of 
Alffa, Characea, Infuaoria^ Imtecta, etc.
He proposes to supply mounted 
specimens of the whole of his discoveries, in sets ; the price to subscribers 
will be one guinea each.
For this subscription, each member will be enti- 
tled to specimens of all the objects collected, which wiU be mounted in any 
way most convenient to the recipients, and will be ready for delivery next 
November.
As Mr. Winter's whole time will be spent in exploring these fens and in 
examining and mounting their interesting productions, he wishes that all 
those who mean to promote his undertaking will send their names, ad- 
dresses, and subscription, as early as convenient, for it is intended to issue 
only a limited number of sets.
On the 3rd of December, a list will be sent to each subscriber and ap- 
plicant, and the specimens will be issued on the 10th of November, 1862.
Exchange of Specimens.
Having good duplicate specimens of several of the rarer Mosses (in fruit), 
I shall be glad to exchange for any of the following : — Sphagnum mollus- 
cum, S.
rubellum, S, contartum and varieties, Tortula kU^folia, T, Muelleri, 
Orthotnchum pumilum, 0, pollens, 0.
fastigiatum, 0.
rupestre, 0, spe- 
ciosum, 0.
Lyellii, 0, Ludwigii, 0, Drummondii, Timmia ausiriaca, Bryum 
demissum, Funaria hibemica, F, Muehlenbergii, S^lachnum spharicum.
384 BOTANiCAX NOTES^ NOTICES^ AND QUERIES.
[Dei^ember.
Tayhria serrata, (Edipodium griffithianum, Leucodon sciuroides, L, Lagurus, 
Hgpnum arcticum, H, Oakesiif H, Kneiffiiy H, hamuhsum, H.
ochraceum, 
IT.
demi8sumt H, micanSy ff, incurvatum^ H.
Muhlenbeckii^ H.
silesiacum, 
H. sylvaticum, etc., in fruit.
A list of duplicates, and other desiderata, 
will be sent on application.
T. W.
B. Ingle.
4, OommercicU Street, ffuddersfield.
Keston Heath Plants.
On the 16tb of tlis present July I visited the bog on Keston Heath, 
from which a copious list of pl^ts, collected last September, appeared 
(from another hand) in the * Phytologist.' Owing to the earlier .iime of 
year, I found several plants which were not included in the list.
These 
were Carduus pratetuis, Eleocharis muUicaulis, Carex sieUulaia, Cpanicea^ 
and another which, looking to the straightness of the beak, would seem 
to be 0.
(Ederi, but which, by the great distance between the lowest fertile 
spike and the others, answers better to the description usually dven of 
C.flava.
Prolonging my walk across Hayes Common, I found, at the 
angle next the camp, a considerable quantity of Corydalia claviculata.
Descending the hill through the fine grove of old Oaks, and.
taking the 
track lilarest to the foot of the Hayes Common ridge, in the direction of 
Keston church, I found several interesting plants.
A large cultivated field 
was.
dotted over in almost its whole extent with great tufts of Brotmis (or 
Serrafalcm) arvensis, a plant recognized as British in Sir J.
E. Smith's 
' English Flora,' but relegated by Mr. Babington to the class of plants 
" not even naturalized." If not yet naturalized where I saw it, this gi*ass, I 
think, can scarcely fail of becoming so.
Further on, at the commencement 
of the chalk, I crossed several cornfields in which Papaver somniferum is as 
abundant as F.
Bhceas, In two of these grows, in tolerable abundance, 
Camelina foetida (as our form of C, sativa is now called) in great size and 
perfection.
The same fields produced Specuhria hybridan and ValerianeUa 
Auricula, .
Is not V, Auricula, with the exception of V, olitoria, our only 
common species ?
^ Can any of your correspondents point out where the 
real F, dentata is to be found P I sought for the meadow in which, a few 
summers ago, I had seen three fine plants of Isatia tinctoria, but I was 
unable to find it.
In the place where I believed it to be, a fine crop of 
wheat is now waving.
Communicalions have been received from 
John Sim; C.
J. Ashfield; T.
Stansfield; W.
L. Notcutt; Dr. Wind- 
sor ; James Backhouse, jun.
; W.
Winter ; W.
Pamplin ; T.
W. B.
Ingle ; 
T. R.
A. Briggs; W.
P.; F.
Y. Brocas; William J.
H. Ferguson; W.
Ashley; M.
T. Masters.
BOOKS RECEIVED FOR REVIEW.
A Manual of British and Foreign Flanta.
The Canadian Naturalist and Geologist , October, 1861.
Index Filicum, Farts 14 and 15.
Vorgefasste Botanische Meinungen, von Dr. J.
Roeper, 
385 
INDEX.
Abbofcsbury, Dorset, 127.
Abbot's Cliff, 71.
Accrington, 163.
Acer campestre, 103.
Acer Fseudo-Flatanus, 369.
Acinos vulgaris, 73.
Aoonitittn Napellus,- 144.
Aoorus Oalainus, 145, 346.
Actsea spicata, 10, 34^.
Actinocarpus Damasonium, 252.
Adonis autumnalis, 327.
Adoxa moschatellina, 41, 100, 254, 271.
Agraphis nutans, 34, 254, 270, 271.
Agrostis setacea, 251.
Aira praecox, 98.
Ajuga Chameepitys, 145, 373.
Alchemilla yutgaris, 100.
Aldeby, 292, 293, 294, 296.
Alisma ranunculoides, 201, 207, 324, 
331.
Alliaria officinalis, 254.
Allium oleraceum, 80, 99.
Allium Schcenoprasum, 80, 81, 145.
Allium ursinum, 34, 254.
Allium vineale, 109, 143, 201.
Alnus glutinosa, 188.
Alnwick, 81, 97, 162.
Althaea officinalis, 145, 294.
Alyssum calycinum, 236, 360.
Amaranthus Blitum*, 145.
Anagallis cserulea, 366.
AnagaUis tenella, 296.
Anchusa officinalis, 143.
Anchusa sempervirens, 11, 158, 254.
Andover, 165.
Anemone nemorosa, 45, 270, 271.
Anemone Pulsatilla, 123, 141.
Anemone ranunculoides, 287, 289.
Anthemis arvensis, 40.
Anthina flammea, 265.
Anthoxanthum odoratum, 33.
Antirrhinum majus, 128, 289.
Antirrhinum Orontiom, 127.
Apargia hispida, 200.
Apples, a new use for, 851.
Aquilegia YuJgarifi, 236, 290, 344, 859.
N, S.
VOL.
V. 
Arabishirsuta, 43,99,158, 196, 254,260.
Arabis Thaliana, 197, 199.
Arctic plants, 256.
Arctium minus, 200.
Arenaria balearica, 32, 46, 49, 55, 58, 
59, 127.
See Betrospective Notice o^ 
Index, iTifra, p.
392.
Arenaria rubella, 304.
Arenaria vema, 80.
Amoseris pusilla, 371, 373, 374.
Arrhenatherum avenaceum, 33.
Artemisia Absinthium, 215.
Artemisia campestris, 295, 354, 355.
Artemisia inarina, 139.
Arum maculatum, 106, 145, 196.
Arundo Epigejos, 81.
Arundo Fhragmites, 202.
Ash, 102, 182, 215.
Ashfield, E.
G-., 164.
Ashford, 344, 352, 365.
Ashton-under-Lyne, 165.
Asparagus officinalis, 157.
Aspden, John, 163.
Aspergillus glaucus, 267.
Asperugo procumbens, 81.
Asperula cynanchica, 40.
Asphodelus ramosus, 301.
Asplenium anceps, 81.
Asplenium maritimum, 67.
Asplenium septentrionale, 197* 
Asplenium TWchomanes, 79, 100, 270, 
271.
Astragalus GUycyphyllus, 80, 99, 294.
Astragalus hypoglottis, 99, 270, 271.
Astragalus sesameus, 233.
Athyrium Filix-foemina,v.
Grantiae, 70, 
Athyrium Filix-foemina, v.
VemonieB, 
69.
Athyrium latifolium, 81.
Atriplex Babingtonii, 343.
Atropa Belladonna^ 68, 118, 146, 213, 
260.
Atwood, Mr., 364.
Avena pratensis, 99.
Ayioenna, 129.
Avignon, 328, 329.
8 D 
386 
INDBX.
Ayleebory, 119.
Ayton, near York, 237.
BagBhot Heath, 61.
Bala, 61.
Bale, John, 131.
Bangor, 308.
Barbarea prseoox, 371.
Barber, Ben., 163.
Barlow, James, 164.
Barnes Common, 291.
Bamet, 319.
Barton, Bobert, 164.
Bartramia stricta, 223.
Bartsia Tiscosa, 282.
Battersea, 240, 341.
Bauhm, J., 363.
Bayley, John, 164.
Beal, Northumberland, 197.
Beisly, Mrs., 165.
Beisly, Sidney, 165.
Beckenham, 162, 282.
Beck Farm, 67.
Belford, 79.
Belleisle, 46.
Bembridge, 94.
Ben Lawers, 303, 304.
Bentley, William, 163.
Berberis vulgaris, 254, 368.
Berry, James, 164.
Berwick, 198.
Beta maritima, 242.
Bewdley, 75, 93, 325.
Bexley, 372.
Bindweed, 96.
Blackburn, 164.
Blackheath, 240.
Blackpool, 279, 281.
Blackwall, 9.
Bleachley, Thomas, 164.
Bleackley, Henry, 164.
Blechnum Spicant, yar.
ramosum, 159, 
192.
Bliss, Dr., 131.
Bootle, 65.
Borago officinalis, 38, 201, 361.
Boswell, Henry, 162.
Botanical guide of Llanberis, death of, 
223.
Botanical Letters from Argyleshire, 271, 
331.
Botanical Notes for Malvern, 275.
Botanical Professorship, Cambridge, 237.
Botanical Eamble on Ben Ledi, 878.
Botanical Society of Canada, 348.
Botanists, local list of, 161.
Botanizing at the beginning of April, 
three days', 165.
Botanizing, near Methven, Perthshire, 
results of a day's, 830.
Botany of Ben Lawers, 308.
Botany of Hulne Park, Northumber- 
land, 193.
Botany of Humphrey Head, 257.
Botany of Kent, additional remarks 
on, 374.
Botany of Mauritius, 319.
Botony of Spain, 225, 296, 327, 356.
Botany of the Borders of Suffolk and 
Norfolk, 321.
Botany of the Chiltems, remarks on, 
118.
Botany of tlie Doward Hills, 101.
Botany of the Meuse, 353.
Botany of the Red River, 214.
Botrychium Lunaria, 96, 99, 146, 177.
^otrytis effiisa, 268.
Bowdon, 164.
Boxley, 362.
Bradford, 164.
Brassica campestris, 43.
Brassica oleracea, 48, 142, 241, 292, 
335, 375.
Brighton, 223.
Brierly, George, 163.
Britis)!
Botany, Chapters on, 129.
British Ferns, new varieties of, 69.
British Lepigona, 81.
British OrcMds, fertilization of, by in- 
sect agency, 222.
British Plants, a comparative list of, 
310.
Brixton, 251.
Briza media, 100, 270.
Brompton, in Kent, confounded with 
Brompton in Middlesex, 51.
Bromus commutatus, 202.
Broughton, 65.
Bryum pallesoens, 263.
Buddie's Herbarium, results of a few 
hours' research in, 176.
Bulleyn, Dr., 129.
Bunium flexuosum, 41, 254.
Bupleurum fruticosum, 361.
Bupleurum rotundifoUum, 118, 281, 
295,372.
Bumham Beeches, 866, 367, 368.
Btttomus umbellatus, 282, 367.
Buxton, Richard, 163.
Buxtts sempervirens, 118.
Bydel, John, 132.
Cactus Opuntia, 229.
Cakile maritima, 70, 281, 291, 336, 380.
Calamintha Clinopodium, 322.
Calamintha officinalis,, 181.
Cad well, Joseph, 164.
CalUtriche platycarpa, 200.
Calluna vu^aris, 324.
Cambridge, 180.
IW»E3f, 
387 
Campanula hybrida, 119.
Campanula latifolla, 169, 259, 270, 271, 
295, 331.
Campanula rapunculoides, 158, 330.
Campanula Trachelium, 39, 367.
Campbeltown, 255, 272, 273, 331.
Canterbury, 110, 113, 179, 335, 374.
Cardamine amara, 281.
Cardamine eylvatica, 196.
Carduufi acaulis, 39, 200.
Carduus benedictus, 146.
Cai*duu8 heterophyllus, 81, 197, 337.
Carduufi nutans, 39, 320, 323.
Carex acuta, 106.
Carez arenaria, 67.
Carex clandestina, 105, 189.
Carex curta, 296, 331.
Carex digitata, 105, 189, 237.
Carex dioica, 296.
Carex flava, 201.
Carex glauca, 100.
Carex Isevigata, 213.
Carex montana,.
101, 105.
Carex pallescens, 106, 158, 270, 271.
Carex panicea, 384.
Carex paniculata, 207, 295.
Carex pendnla, 105.
Carex prsecox, 105, 189.
Carex saxatilis, 305.
Carex sylvatica, 270, 271, 331.
Carex tenella, 346.
Carex vulgaris, 189.
Carlina viJgaris, 39, 243.
Catalonia, 228, 229.
Caucalifi latifoUa, 281.
Centaurea Calcitrapa, 71, 183.
Centranthus ruber, 40, 180, 238, 369.
Cephalanthera grandiflora, 35, 105.
Cerastium alpinum, 304.
Cerastium arvense, 44, 293.
Chadderton, 164.
Chadwick, George, 163.
Chambers, William, 164.
Charetton, William, 162.
Cheiranthus Cheiri, 42, 146, 243.
Chelsea, 365.
Chenopodium Botiys, 146.
Chenopodium olidum, 370.
Chichester, 287.
Chiltem Hills, 118.
Chlora perfoliata, 241.
Chobham, 11.
Chrysanthemum segetum, 235.
Chrysospleniumoppositifolium, 195,290.
Churchill, G-.
E., 163.
Cinclidium stygium, 352.
Cladium Mariscus, 81, 324.
Cladosporium herbarum, 267.
Clapham Common, 94, 366.
Claytonia ajsinoides, 288.
Clegg, Jonas, 164.
Clematis Flammula^ 297.
Clematis Yitalba, 101, 199.
Clough, E., 165.
Cochlearia danica, 254, 292.
Cochlearia officinalis, 67.
CoUinson's Notes, 305.
Cologne, 135.
Comarum palustre, 32^ 
Combe Wood, 33, 39.
Conium maculatum, 184, 281.
Contributors, Notice to, 32.
Conyallaria maialis, 34.
Coavallaria Polygonatum, 81, 197.
Convolvulus Soldanella, 39, 67, 143, 
210.
Cooke, James, 164.
Coriandrum sativum, 144, 158.
Cornus florida, 345.
Comus sanguiuea, 104.
Coronilla Emerus, 182.
Coronopus didyma, 251.
Correspondence, extracts from, 128.
Corsica, Isle o^ 45.
Corydalis solida, 81, 146» 194, 196.
Corwen, 128.
Cosson and Germain, 364.
Cotyledon TTmbilicus, 104,143, 146, 254.- 
Coward, Thos., 163.
Cowes, 247.
Cowslip, 146.
Cowslips of Jerusalem, or, Jerusalem 
Cowslips, 95.
Crambe marituna, 43, 136, 142, 241.
Crepis biennis, 108, 109, 206, 351.
Crepis foetida, 40.
Crepis paludosa, 261, 295.
Crepis setosa, 100.
Crepis succissefolia, 81, 197.
Crepis taraxacifolia, 40, 207.
Crithmum maritimum, 41, 142,242,336.
Cumbrian Botany, 65, 221.
Cuscuta Epithymum, 367.
Cuscuta, how to destroy, 286.
Cuscuta Trifolii, 113.
Cuxton, 365.
Cyclamen hedersBfoliura, 144, 343, 344.
Qmoglossum sylvaticum, 11, 320.
Cynosurub echinatus, 158.
C^erus longus, 146, 338, 377.
Cypress, 63.
Cystopteris alpina, 81.
Cystopteris fragilis, 270, 271.
Cystopteris montana, 81, 304.
Cystopteris virens, 283.
Daphne Laureola, 81, 105, 167, 188, 
325.
Daphne Mezereon, 124, 165.
Darlaston, Staffordshire, 69.
Dartford, 173, 372.
388 
INDEX.
Dartmoor, elevation of, 256.
Davies, William, 163.
Deal, 42, 110, 185, 208, 209, 213, 238.
Be Candolle, 364.
Delphinium Consolida, 824.
Dianthus deltoides, 80, 158.
Dickson, Andrew, 162.
Digitalis purpurea, 254.
Dinton, Chiltem Hills, 119.
Dioscorides, 129.
Diotis maritima^ 295.
Diplotaxis eruooides, 230.
Diplotaxis muralis, 382.
Dipsacus pilosus, 73, 181, 323, 354, 374.
Dodoens, 363.
Doronicum Fardaliaiichee, 325.
Dover, 39, 42, 110, 245, 336, 337, 355.
Draba majuscula, 80.
Draba mpestris, 303.
Draba vema, 7, 196.
Drosera anglica, 282.
Drosera intermedia, 282.
Drosera longifolia, 346.
Drosera rotundifolia, 68, 199.
Dugdale, John, 163.
Dunkeld, 11, 158.
Dungeness, 339.
Dunning, Joseph, 164.
Eastwood, Charles, 163.
Eccles, 165.
Echium vulgare, 323.
Elatine hexandra, 153.
Eleocharis and ololeucos, 96.
Elevation of Dartmoor, 255.
Ehn, 215.
Eltham, 117.
Ely, 223.
Empetnmi nigrum, 196.
Enfield, 117.
EpUobium angustifoUum, 295.
Epilobium latifolium, specimens of, 
wanted, 274.
Epilobium roseum, 354.
Epilobium virgatum, 200.
Epipactis latifolia, 195.
Epipactis palustris, 157, 296, 824, 372.
Epipactis purpurata, in Middlesex, 380.
Epipactis rubra, 344.
Erica arborea, 229.
Erigeron alpinus, 303.
Erigeron acris, 105, 208, 243, 824, 367.
Erith, 207.
Ervum tetrasflermum, 71.
Eryngium maritimum, 66, 147, 156, 
209, 281.
Erysimum cheiranthoides, 281.
Erythreea Centaurium, 241.
Eiythrsea pulchella, 208.
Eton, 367, 368.
Euonymus europ»us, 44, 99, 103, 323.
Eupatorium cannabinum, 40, 67.
Euphorbia amygdaloides, 35, 147.
Euphorbia Characias, 232, 235.
Euphorbia EsuU, 81, 194.
Euphorbia exigua, 158.
Euphorbia Faralias, 147, 157, 168.
Euphorbia pilosa, 300.
Euphorbia platyphylla, 201.
Euphorbia portlandica, 221, 251.
Evans, Joseph, 164.
Fagus Castanea^ 147.
Farquharson, Eobert, 162.
Faversham, 108, 291.
Fedia dentata, 867.
Fedia olitoria, 254.
Fenton, Joseph, 163.
Ferns, fertilization of, 106.
Festuca bromoides, 99.
Festuca ovina, 271.
Fielden, John, 163.
Fife, 11.
Filago germanica, 100, 200.
Filago minima, 200.
Findlay, Bruce, 164.
Flora of Harrow, addenda to, 198.
Folkestone, 39, 245, 336, 337, 339.
Forge Valley, 10.
Foster, R.
W., 163.
Fowler, George, 163.
Frankenia Isevis, 45, 292, 336.
Fries, 364.
FritiUaria and Oowflowers, 205.
Fritillaria Meleagris, 119, 201, 296.
Fritton, Norfolk, 291, 295, 296.
Fuchsius, 363.
Fumaria eapreolata, 73, 344.
Fumaria parviflora, 373 .
Fumaria spicata, 329.
Fungi, Chapters on, 265.
•Gagea lutea, 81, 147, 189, 196.
Galanthus nivalis, 128, 189.
Galeobdolon luteum, 118, 274.
Galeopsis versicolor, 201.
Galeopsis villosa, 302.
Galium Mollugo, 118.
Galium palustre, 200.
Gulium saxatile, 100.
Gastridium lendigerum, 296, 299.
Genista anghca, 199.
Genista Scorpius, 233.
Genista tinctoria, 42, 68.
Gentiana Amarella, 241.
Gentiana campestris, 66, 331.
Gentiana germanica, 355.
Gentiana nivalis, 303.
Gentiana Fneumonanthe, 11, 282, 296.
Geranium oolumbinum, 67.
INDEX.
Geranium lucidom, 99, 259, 290.
Geranium pbseum, 280.
Geranium pyrenaicum, 182, 293, 369.
Geranium sanguineum, 99, 261.
Geranium sylyaticum, 270, 271.
Cterarde, 363.
Gesner, 129.
Geum intermedium, 270, 271.
Qeum rivale, 294.
G^eum urbanom, 147, 270, 271.
Gibson, Dr. Thomas, 129.
Glaux maritima, 208, 260, 381.
GlosBop, 165.
Glover, Thomas, 163.
Gnaphalium dioicum, 80.
Golden-blotched Weeping Ash, 192.
Goodyera repens, 168.
Googe, Bamaby, 63.
Graham, Edmund, 164.
Ghravesend, 110.
Greenhithe, 110, 174, 359.
Gnndon, Leo H., 163.
Groombridge, Sussex, 61.
Guthrie, W., 163.
Gymnadenia albida, 98.
Gymnadenia Conopsea, 34, 331.
Habenaria bifolia, 322, 331, 344.
Habenaria viridis, 98, 296, 322.
Hairbell v.
Harebell, 191.
Halifax, 163.
Halstead, John, 162.
Ham, 206.
Ham Ponds, 185.
Hampson, Richard, 164.
Hampstead, 174, 318.
Harbledown, 180.
Hardy, Firth, 165.
Harrison, 129.
Harris, Rev., Stamford, M.A., 163.
Harrow, 198.
Haslingden, 164.
Hayes Common, 384.
Hedley, Jonathan, 162.
Helianthemum canum, 257.
Helianthemum yulgare, 99.
Helleborus fcetidus, 101, 189, 360.
Helleborus viridis, 81, 101, 139, 189, 
195, 286.
Helmiiithia echioides, 71.
Hendon, 319.
Heptonstall, 162.
Herbaria, sales of^ 350.
Hereford, 104.
Herminium Monorchis, 173.
Hesperis matronalis, 81, 195, 270, 271.
Heyes, Abraham, 163.
Hieraciom aurantiacum, 81.
Hieracium murorum, 260, 282.
Hieracium pallidum, 80, 260.
Hieracium vulgatum, 99, 200.
Highgate, 174, 251.
Hilton, George, 164.
Hippocrepis comosa, 42, 103.
Hippophae rhamnoides, 35, 213, 335.
Hippuris vulgaris, 113, 259.
Hoffmann, 363.
Holbom Hill, 65.
Holden, Thomas, 164.
Holland, Robert, 163.
Holly, 96.
Holmes, John, 162.
Hohnfirth, 165.
Holt, Edmund, 163.
Holt, John, 164.
Honkenya peploides, 210.
Hooker, Sir W.
J., 364.
Horsfall, James, 163.
Horsefield, James, 164.
Horsfield, William, 165.
Hotbarrow, 68.
Hottonia palustris, 207, 280, 324.
Howarth, John, 162.
Huddersfield, 163.
Hudson, Mr., 362.
Hulme, George, 164.
Humberstove, Daniel, 162.
Humphrey Head, 257.
Humphrey Head, visit to, 259.
Humulus Lupulus, 147, 322.
Hunt, George Edward, 163.
Hunter, Henry, 162.
Hutchinsia petr»a, 103, 291.
Hyacinthus anglious, 191.
Hydrocharis Morsus-rana, 30, 182, 190, 
282, 322, 324, 367.
Hymenophyllum tunbridgense, 81, 274.
Hyoscyamus nicer, 73, 183, 281, 361.
Hypericum Androsaemum, 68.
Hypericum Elodes, 52, 153.
Hypericum Elodes, vertical range o£^ 64.
Hypericum hirsutum, note on, 319.
Hypericum humifiisum, 98.
Hypericum pulchrum, 98.
Hypnum dispalatum, 223.
Hypnum fluitans, 264.
Hypnum palustre, 264.
Hypnum squarrosum, 264.
Hypochoeris maculata, 260.
Hythe, 110, 337, 339.
Iberis amara^ 118, 292, 295, 344.
Isley, East, in Berks, 11.
Impatiena Noli-me-tangere, 81, 261, 
262.
Inchbald, Peter, 163.
Ingleborough, 221.
Ingle, T.
W. B., 162.
Intruder, an, 95.
Inula Conyza, 169.
890 
INDEX.
Inula Helftfiium, 2S0.
Iris foetidissnui, 35, 336.
Iris Pseudacorus, 68, ^71, 300.
Isatis tinctxnna, 9, 145, 147, 151, 384.
Iskworth, 138.
Isoetes hystrix, 45, 96.
Jolliffe, William, 162.
Juncus acutus, 206.
Juncus biglumis, 305.
Juncus castaneus, 304.
Juncus coenoBUs, 109.
Juncus obtusiflorus, 335.
Juncus squarrosus,.
367.
Juncus BupinuB, 201, 260.
Juniperus communis, 196, 257.
Kentish botany, 177, 206, 238, 334, 
371.
Kent, William,.
164.
Kersney Abbey, 45.
Keston Common, 61.
Keston Heath plants, 884.
Kew, 153, 172, 251, 307.
King, Samuel, 163.
Kingsdown, 241.
Kingston (CSanada), Botanical Society 
ot 113.
Koeleria cristata, 99.
Kdniga maritima, 230.
Lactuca (Prenanthes, Sm.) muralis, 40, 
260, 367.
Lactuca viroaa, 335.
Lambeth, 94.
. 
Lamium purpureum, 188.
Lastrea Oreopteris, 196.
Lastrea remota, 10.
Lastrea spinulosa, 295.
Lathyrus macrorrhisus, 42.
Lathyrus Ochrna, 231.
Lathyrus maritimus, 42, 240, 251.
Lathyrus sylyestris, 11, 71.
Lathyrus tuberosus, 8, 128, 186.
Lavatera arhorea, 240.
Laurel, 63.
Leeds, Edward, 163.
Lees, Robert, 164.
Leigh, John, M.E.O.S., 164.
Lepidium Draba^ 43, 230, 292, 329, 
380, 360.
Lepidium latifoUum, 140, 291.
Lepidium ruderale, 109.
Lepidium Smithii, 254, 281, 292.
Lepigonum marinum, 44.
Lepigonum neglectum, 82.
Leucojum sestiyum, 9, 148.
Ligustrum yulgare, 104.
Libbard's-bane, 325.
Lilium Martagon, 362.
Linaria purpurea, 252.
Lindley, Dr., 364.
Tjinnm angustifolium, 44, 238.
Linum catharticum, 100, 199,333,344.
Listera cordata, 81.
Listen ovata, 271, 287.
Lithospermum maritimum, 222.
Lithospermum officinale, 39, 196.
Liverpool, 84, 127.
Liverpool NaturaUsts Field Club, 126.
Llanberis, 307, 308.
Llanderfel, 61, 96.
Lobelia Dortmanna, 261, 379.
London, 84, 165.
Lonioera Periclymennm, 41, 258.
Lord, George, 163; 
Lotus major, 71.
Lowestoft, 289, 291, 292, 294.
Lund, James, 163.
Luzula campestris, 271, 189.
Luzula Forsteri, 105, 189, 201.
Lycopsis arvensis, 38.
Lydd, 246.
Lydden Spout, 43, 245, 246, 334, 336, 
342, 375, 377.
Lynn, 321.
Lysimachia vulgaris, 159.
Lytham, 155, 27&, 281, 282.
Maopherson, John, 162.
Madrid, 327.
Maianthemum bifolium, 10, 236, 318.
Malaxis paludosa, 171, 323.
Manchester, 88, 163.
Margate, 242.
Marrubium vulgare, 238.
Marshall, W., Esq., 165.
Medicago falcata, 294.
Medicago maculata, 42, 254.
Medicago Tninima^ 208.
Melica uniflora, 83.
Melampyrum cristatum, 322.
Melilotus vulgaris, 294.
Mentha hirsuta, 148.
Mentha Pulegium, 142.
Mentha rotimdifolia, 298, 354.
Mentha sylvestris, 331.
Mentha viiidis, 201.
Menyanthes trifoliata, 208, 282, 324 
346.
Merrett, 129.
Meum athamanticum, 140.
Micholls, Horatio, 164.
Microscopical observers, notice to, 383.
Middleton, 164.
Mill Hill, 172, 173, 174, 175.
Mimulus luteus, 271.
Moenchia erecta, 80, 81, 98, 292.
Mollineux, Eev. Mr., 163.
Moncrieffi), 56.
INSBX.
891 
Monotropa Hypopitye, 106.
Monseirat, 356.
Montia fontana, 98, 200.
Morpeth, Northumberlancl, 130.
Morris, Walter, IBS- 
Mosses, addenda to the list of Oxford- 
shire, 352.!
Mosses additions to the list of Oxford, 
262.
Myosotis alpestris, 804.
Myosotis collina, 39, 99.
Myosotis versicolor, 98.
Myosurus minimus, 319.
Myrica Gale, 142.
Myrio]^hyllum vertioillatum, 324.
Myrrhis odorata, 140, 261.
Myrtle, 63.
Mytholm, l63.
Narcissus biflorus, 189, 360, 371.
Narcissus .poeticus, 360.
' 
Nardus stricta, 202.
Naturalized aliens, 382.
Neottia Nidus-avis, 105, 271, 322.
Neottia spiralis, 174.
Nepeta Cataria, 78, 242.
New Brighton, 281.
Nicholson, J.
Hohne, 164.
Norfolk, 165.
Norfolk, on the fen and ditch plants 
of, 152.
Northfleet, 174, 207.
Norton, 290.
Norwich, 290, 292, 296.
Notes on Norfolk plants, 289.
Notice about Luzida pilosa, etc., 288.
Nowell, John, 162.
Nymphffia alba, 148, 152.
Oak, 215.
(Enanthe LachenaJii, 71, 208, 324.
CEnanthe Lachenalii, dwarf form of, 
254.
CEnanthe peucedanifolia, 281.
CEnothera odorata, 183.
Ollerenshaw, J., 165.
Ononis arvensis, 322.
Ononis spinosa, 183.
Onopordon Acanthium, 75, 148.
Ophioglossum lusitanicum, 81.
Ophioglossum vulgatum, 99, 106.
Ophrys apifera, 84, 105, 118, 173, 822, 
354.
Ophrys arauifera, 174, 34.
Ophrys muscifera, 34, 105, 824.
Ophiys Nidus-avis, 118.
OphiTS scolopax, 807.
Orchids, British, 171.
Orchis bifolia, 178.
Orchis chlorantha, 174.
Orchis conopsea, 178, 824.
Orchis fusca, 84, 172.
Orchis hircina, 178, 844.
Orchis latifolia, 157, 172, 254.
Orchis maculata, 98, 260.
Orchis mascula, 98, 254, 271.
Orchis militaris, 172.
Orchis Morio, 8iO.
Orchis papilionaoea, 306.
Orchis provincialis, 806.
Orchis ustulata, 34^ 178.
Orchis viridis, 174.
Omithogalum pyrenaicum, 11.
Orobanche caryophyllacea, 38, 336.
Orobanche major, 105, 14i8, 254.
Orobanche minor, 95, 242, 323.
Orobus tenuifolius, 199.
Orobus tuberosus, 80.
Orthotrichum anomalum, supplemental 
notes on, 26.
Osmimda regalis, 274, 367.
Oxalis Acetosella, 199, 271, 383, 346.
Oxalis comiculata, 231, 361.
Oxalis stricta, 847.
Oxford, 162, 263.
Palm, 224.
Fapaver Argemone, 148, 368.
Papaver dubium, 125, 159, 254.
Papaver hybridum, 148, 329, 373.
Papaver somniferum, 43.
Paper, a new material for the manu- 
&cture of, 61.
Paper, more materials for the manu- 
facture of, 287.
Parietaria officinalis, 35, 196.
Paris quadrifolia, 34, 139, 172, 196, 
260, 322.
Pamassia palustris, 156, 328.
Parson's Green, 240, 251.
PateiSeld, William, 164.
Patman, William, 162.
Faulus Egineta, 129.
Pear-tree at Holme Lacy, near Here- 
ford, account of a remarkable, 76.
Pear-tree, a large, 64.
Peckham, 173.
Pedicularis palustris, 870.
Pegwell Bay, 208.
Percival, James, 165.
Perth, 127, 162, 269, 820.
Petasites vulgaris, 192.
Petroselinum segetiun, 41.
Peucedanum officinale, 108, 109, 143.
Phascum crispum, 263.
Phleum alpinum, 303.
Phyteuma orbicidare, 124.
Picris hieitunoides, 71.
Pimpinella magna, 281.
Pimpinella Saxifraga, 41, 99, 260, 271.
392 
INDEX.
Pinguicula YulgarU, 221, 824.
Pinner, 198.
Plantago maritima, 67.
Plants, dates of flowering of, in the 
vicinity of Plymouth, 253.
Plants, dates of flowering of, in the 
yicinity of Boss, 188.
Plants, herbarium of North German, 
818.
Plants, Kentish, additional, 70.
Plants, list of, found in the neighbour- 
hood of Perth, 158.
Plants, list of, foimd near Slough, Stoke, 
and Bumham Beeches, 366.
Plants, list of, found within five miles 
of Lytham, on the bank of the Kib- 
ble, 380.
Plants, indigenous, 63.
Plants near Turville, Bucks, 344.
Plants oi Dover, 33.
Plants of Faversham, 107.
, 
Plants of Invermay, 269.
Plants of Plymouth, 368.
Plants of Batcheugh Crag, Northum- 
berland, 97.
Plants, rare, near Spindlestone, North- 
umberland, 79.
Pliny, 129.
Plumstead marshes, 8, 865.
Plymouth, 253.
Poa bulbosa, 296.
Poa nemoralis, 202.
Polygala vulgaris, 44, 261.
Polypodium Phegopteris, 196.
Polypodium vulgare, 149.
Polypogon monspeliensis, 208.
Polystichum aculeatimi, 196.
Polystichum angulare, 68.
Polystichum Lonchitis, 304.
Populus nigra, 189.
Potamogeton orispus, 355, 356.
Potamogeton densus, 322, 355.
Potamogeton oblongus, 154, 201, 331, 
335.
Potentilla vema, 80, 81.
PotentOla Tormentilla, 149.
Poterium muricatum, 104, 220.
Poterium Sanguisorba, 99, 344.
Prenanthes muralis, 118.
(Lactuca 
muralis.} 
Preston, 164, 258, 279, 281, 292, 318.
Prestwick, 165.
Primula &rinosa, 221.
Primula vulgaris, 254.
Prunus communis, 271.
Prunus domestica, 199.
Prunus insititia, 143.
Prunus spinosa, 98, 254.
Psamma arenaria, 208.
Pseudathyrium alpestre, 305.
Pteris aquilina, 94.
Pulmonaria angustifolia, 95, 167.
Pulmonaria officinalis, 195, 322.
Pulteney, Dr., 129, 130, 132.
Pyrethrum maritimum, 183, 242.
Pyrola media, 344.
Pyrola minor, 10, 196, 271.
Pyrola rotundifblia, 81, 282, 287, 295.
^TUfl Aria, 104.
PyruB Aucuparia, 264.
Pyrus communis, 141, 149.
I^rus Mains, 149.
I^rrus tormiimlis, 104, 260.
Badiola Millegrana, 66, 73.
Banmer Common, Surrey, 102.
Ranunculus bulbosus, 230, §54.
Ranunculus circinatus, 45.
Ranunculus fluitans, 106.
Ranunculus gi^mineus, 336, 369, 860.
Ranunculus heterophyllus, 7.
Ranunculus hirsutus, 368.
Ranunculus Lingua, 81, 153, 198, 212, 
359.
Ranunculus parviflorus, 368.
Ranworth, 152, 290, 292, 293, 294, 295, 
296.
Ratcheugh Crag, 97.
Ray, Mr. John, 129.
Reigate, 151.
Remarks on the botany of Bumham 
Beeches, 168.
Reseda Luteola, 823.
Retrospective notice about Aremiria 
halearica,.
127* 
Reviews, 87, 90, 121, 125, 155, 220, 
246, 249, 283, 345.
Rbinanthus Crista-galli, 37, 254, 271, 
368.
Kibes Grossularia, 254.
Richardson, William, 126.
Richboro', 182.
Richmond, 138.
Rochdale, 163.
RoBmeria hybrida, 124, 255, 291, 327, 
329, 830.
Romney Marsh, 339, 843.
Rogers, Thomas, 164.
Rosa rubiginosa, 821, 323.
Rosa spinosissima, 99.
Rosa tomentosa, 200.
Ross, 104, 253, 254, 256.
Rouen, 864.
Ruabon, 128.
Rubia peregrina, 41, 149.
Rubus laciniatus, discovery of, near 
Plymouth, 381.
Rubus nitidus, 200.
Rubus pygmseus, 200.
Rubus saxatiUs, 261, 271.
INDEX.
393 
Bumex maritiinas, 119.
Bumex pratensis, 296.
Buta angustifolia, 298.
Byde, 162, 252.
Sagina apetaia, 199^ 
Sagina nodosa, 66, 322.
Sagina subulata, 81.
Saeittaria sagittifolia, 153, 296, 368.
SaBx alba, 201.
Salix cinerea, 224.
SaUola Kali, 81, 149, 210, 381.
Salvia yerbenaca, 37, 323.
SamoluB Yalerandi, 66, 157, 208, 260, 
824, 377.
Sandown Castle, 213.
Sandwich, 180, 208, 209, 210, 212, 
335, 
Sanicula europsMi) 41, 118.
Sarothanmns scoparius, 42,^71, 323.
Sauce, 287.
Saxifit^ aizoides, 331, 379.
Saxifiraga granulata, 79, 150, 271.
Saxifraga oppositifolia, 274.
Saxifraga tridactybiea, 98.
Soandix Pecten, 254.
Scarborough, 10, 236, 318.
Sohoenus nigricans, 11, 324.
Schofield, James, 163.
Schrader, 363.
Scilla bifolia, 176.
ScOla nutauB, 139.
.Scilla yema, 81.
Scirpus maritimus, 380.
Scirpus sylvatiens, 319.
Sderanthus annuus, 200.
Sclerochloa maritima, 33.
Sderochloa rigida, 33.
Scolopendrium vulgare, 377.
Scott, W.
P., 164.
Scrophularia peregrina^ 232.
Scrophularia yemalis, 49, 256, 351, 
382.
Sea-grass paper, 381* 
Seabrooke, 338, 339.
Sedum dasyphyllum, 110, 112.
Sedum reflexum, 182, 331.
' 
Sedum Telephium, 68, 258, 331.
Sedum villosum, 80, 81, 331.
Seeds, vitality of, 72.
Senecio erucifolius, 369.
Senecio paludosus, 153, 295.
• 
Senecio saracenicus, 282.
Senecio viscosus, 235, 282, 371, 373.
Sepedonium chrysospermum, 268.
Serra&lcus arvensis, 384.
Serratula tinctoria, 105, 200.
Sesleria cierulea, 81, 98.
Setaria viridis, 296.
Seth, Simeon, 129.
N. 8.
VOL.
V. 
Settle, 157, 197, 261.
Shakspeare's Cliff, 40.
Sliakspeare plants, 192.
Shamrock, 94, 349.
Shaw, Mr. John, 165.
Sibthorpia europsa, 370.
Sidebotham, Joseph, 163.
Silene anglica, 369.
Silene oonica, 210.
Silene inflata, 100.
Silene maritima, 157, 258, 260.
Silene nutans, 242, 243.
Silene Otites, 292.
Sim, John, 162.
Simpson, Adam, 164.
Simons, Bev. E., 165.
Sinclair, death of Dr. Andrew, 284.
Sion House, 138.
Sison Amomum, 105, 281, 322.
Sisymbrium Irio, 81, 150, .198, 327, 
360.
Sisymbrium Sophia, 157, 183, 281, 327.
Sisymbrium thalianum, 189, 254.
Sium angustifolium, 324.
Sium latuoUum, 150.
Sium nodiflorum, 258.
Smith, Sir J.
E., 363.
Smymium Olusatrum, 41, 143, 183, 281, 
378.
Snowdon, 307, 309.
Solidago Yirgaurea, 200.
Sonchus palustris, 8, 153, 295, 365.
Sorbus Aucuparia, 140.
Sowden, Bev. Sutcliffe, 163.
Sparganium natans, 207.
Species, origin of, 64.
Specimens, exchange of, 383.
Specularia hybrida, 370.
Spencer, William, 164.
Spergula subulata, 80.
Spikenard, 159.
Spirsa Filipendula, 79.
Spiranthes autumnalis, 34.
Stamland, 120.
(See Todmorden.) 
Staleybridge, 164.
St. Andrew's, Guernsey, 96.
Stansfield, Tom, 162.
Statice bahusiensis, 66.
Statice binervosa^ 242.
StaticQ caspia, 125.
Statice Limonium, 81, 109.
Statice spathulata, 36.
St. Margaret's, 241, 242.
SteUaria nemorum, 292.
Stenton Bocks, 158.
Stilbum tomentosum, 266.
Stockport, 164.
Stoke, 366, 367, 368.
Stoke Common, 367.
Stratiotes aloides, 154, 252, 282.
3 E 
394 
INDEX.
Subularia aquatioa, 379.
Sutdiffe, Fairbank, 163.
Sutdiffe, Bev. Thomas, 162.
Sutcliffe, William, 162.
Sydenham, 165, 282.
Tamus commnnis, 105, 119, 322.
Tarragona, 229, 296, 297, 301.
Taxus baccata, 188.
Teesdalia nudicauliB, 291.
Tenterden, 211.
Tetraphis pellucida, 263.
Teucrium Scordium, 141, 150.
Teucrium Scorodonia, 99.
Thalictrum flexuosum, 99.
Thalictrum minus, 289.
Theophrastus, 129.
Thetford, 321.
Things not generally known, 287.
Thirsk, 290.
Thompson, John, 162.
Thompson, Wm., 163.
Thomily, Christopher, 164.
Thymus Serpyllum, 270, 271.
Tillsea muscosa, 254, 382.
Tillfloa muscosa and Scrophularia yer- 
nalis, 256.
Tilia europsa, 150.
Tilia grandiflora, 103.
TiUa parviflora, 103.
Tinker, Jethro, 164.
Todmorden, 83, 162.
Todmorden Botanical Society, 83, 119, 
216.
Torrey's, Dr., herbarium, 351.
Treyiranus, L.
C, 190.
Trientalis europsea, 196, 236.
Trifolium aryense, 80.
Trifolium incamatum, 159.
Trifolium maritimum, 294.
Trifolium medium, 199.
Trifolium omithopodioides, 369.
Trifolium stellatum, 233.
Trifolium striatum, 71, 335.
Trifolium subterraneum, 294, 338.
Trifolium suflTocatum, 156, 238, 294.
Triglochin maritimum, 67, 260, 381.
Triglochin palustre, 109, 208, 331.
Tring, Herts, 118.
Trolfius europseus, 290.
Tubercularia yulgaris, 266.
Tulipa sylyestris, 31.
Tumham Gh?een, 110.
Turner, John, 164.
Turner, Dr. William, 129, 130, 131, 134, 
135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 144, 145.
Turner, William, 164.
Ulex europffius, 189.
Ulmus oampestris^ 188.
Upton, 252.
Urticaromana, 150.
Utile et dulce, 255.
Utricularia intermedia, 170.
Utricularia yulgaris, 280, 324.
Valencia, 296, 300, 301< 
Valeriana Calcitrapa, 116.
Valeriana rubra, 196.
Valenanella Auricula, 384.
Valerianella Olitoria, 384.
Venus's Looking-glass, 95.
Verbascum Blattaria^ 75.
Verbascum floccosum, 124.
Verbascum Lychnitis, 11, 75, 110, 296, 
354, 363.
Verbascum nigrum, 159, 169, 323.
Verbascum phlomoides, 864, 366.
Verbascum thapsiforme, 352, 362, 363.
364, 365, 366.
Verbascum Thapsus, 73, 75, 822.
Verbascum yirgatum, 75, 282.
Veronica Buxbaumii, 204.
Veronica hybrida, 260.
Veronica montana, 254.
Veronica peregrina, 11, 159, 200.
Veronica spicata, 124.
Vicia bithynica, 42.
Vicia gracilis, 124, 199.
Vicia lathyroides, 79, 199.
Vicia sepium, 254.
Villarsia nymph^eoides, 153,252,296.
Vinca major, 196.
Viola canina, 125, 359.
Viola hirta, 98, 189, 254.
Viola odorata, 195, 292.
Viola sylyatica, 98.
Viola tricolor, yar.
arenioola, 1, 27.
Viscum album, 188.
Waddington, John, 163.
Wahlenbergia hederacea, 61, 370.
Wakefield, 93, 162.
Walker, J., 163.
Walmer, 39, 239, 241.
Walmer Castle, 33.
Walthamstow, 116.
Wandsworth, 151, 239, 261, 292, 296, 
341.
Wandsworth Common, 9.
Weissia acuta, 380.
Westwdod, 34.
White, F.B., 162,163.
Whiteleaf Cross, 118.
Whitstable, 109.
Willdenow, 363, 364.
Williamson, Isaac, 164.
Williams, William, the Snowdon guide, 
a brief notice of, 307.
Wimbledon, 289.
j< 
I 
INDEX.
Withering, Dr., 363.
Witherington, John, 164.
Wood End, 198.
Wood, John, Bland, M.D., 163.
Woodsia alpina, 308.
Woodsia hyperhorea, 81.
rsmre 
319.
Worcestershire Naturalists' Club, 219» 
Workington, 222.
Worsley, Edward, 164.
Wrexham, 128.
Yarmouth, 291, 292,294, 295,296,321.
Tates, B.
S., 164.
Yew, 151.
York, 128.
Zaragoza, 296.
Zostera marina, 381.
END OP VOL.
V. 
lOHN SOWASD TATLOR, PBINTSS, 
LITTLC QUBSN BTBEST, LIMCOLN'S INN PTSLDS.