N3.
THE ROYAL FERX.
C. K.
OGDEN 
THE FERNS 
OF THE 
ENGLISH LAKE COUNTRY: 
WITH A LIST OF VARIETIES.
W. J.
LINTON.
LONDON : HAMILTON, ADAMS AND CO.
WINDERMERE : J.
GARNETT.
1865.
QK 
LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY OF CATJFC 
SANTA 
PREFACE.
FOE the general scientific part of this book I am indebted to 
the Editor of Nature-printed Ferns Mr. Thomas Moore 
whose various works upon British Perns have exhausted nearly 
all that can be said upon the subject.
On this ground my 
book could hardly be more than a mere abridgement and 
paraphrase of his writing.
For new and original matter I have 
to thank Mr. F.
Clowes, of Windermere, who very kindly fur- 
nished me with the lists of local varieties, at the same time 
according me so much help and supervision as may, I trust, 
be sufficient guarantee for correctness.
My obligations ought 
also to be expressed to Mr. Barnes and other collectors, from 
whom, through Mr. Clowes, I obtained information for these 
lists.
The General Description and the Chapter on Meanings 
of Names and Terms have been added not only to give a more 
universal interest to the book, but as almost necessary for the 
collector or student, since nearly all the genera of British Ferns 
(sixteen out of nineteen) are found in the Lake Country.
The 
engravings are from nature, and as many have been given as 
are wanted to show the characters of genera and species, some 
11.
PREFACE.
few only having been omitted as not distinguishable in figures 
on so small a scale.
The Keinote Buckler Fern, introduced 
to the British Flora by Mr. Clowes, and first described in the 
Addenda to Mr. Moore's 8vo.
edition of Nature-printed British 
Ferns, 1862, has, I believe, been engraved only once before now.
So much of Preface seemed right to explain the nature 
of the work and to render fitting acknowledgements and thanks.
I have only farther to say that I shall be obliged to any one 
who will favour me by either pointing out possible errors or 
giving me information as to new varieties or habitats.
And 
I ought to add that Fern-collectors may obtain good specimens 
from Mr. Qrier, nurseryman, Arnbleside, or Mr. Wood, fern- 
seller, Bowness.
W. J.
LINTON.
BBANTWOOD, CONISTON, 
SjiPi..
1865.
CONTENTS.
General Description .
. .1 
Table of British Ferns .
. .
. .
8 
List of Lake Ferns .
.12 
The Common Polypody .
. .
. .
13 
The Mountain Polypody, or Beech Fern .
. .17 
The Three-branched Polypody, or Oak Fern .
. .
20 
The Limestone Polypody .
. .
. .23 
The Rock Brake, or Parsley Fern .
. .
. 25 
The Alpine Shield Fern, or Holly Fern .
. .27 
The Common Prickly Shield Fern .
. .
. 29 
The Soft Prickly Shield Fern .
. .
.31 
The Female Buckler Fern, or Marsh Fern .
. .
35 
The Mountain Buckler Fern, or Heath Fern .
, 37 
The Common Buckler Fern, or Male Fern .
40 
The Remote Buckler Fern .
. .
.44 
The Rigid Buckler Fern 48 
The Narrow Prickly-toothed (Crested) Buckler Fern .
51 
The Broad Prickly -toothed Buckler Fern .
. .
55 
The Hay-scented, or Concave Buckler Fern .
. 59 
The Lady Fern .
. .
. .
. 61 
The Black Maiden-hair Spleenwort .
. .65 
The Sea Spleenwort .
. .
. .
. 68 
The Common Maiden-hair Spleenwort .
. .70 
The Green Spleenwort .
. .
72 
The Rue-leaved Spleenwort, or Wall Rue .
. .74 
The Alternate-leaved Spleenwort .
. 76 
The Forked Spleenwort .....
78 
The Common Hart's Tongue .
. .
81 
The Common Scale Fern .
. .
. .87 
The Hard Fern 90 
The Brake, or Bracken .
. .
. .93 
The Brittle Bladder Fern .
. .
98 
The Oblong Woodsia .
. .
. .101 
The Tunhridge Film Fern .
. .
. 103 
The One-sided (or Wilson's) Film Fern .
. .105 
The Royal, or Flowering Fern .
. .
107 
The Moouwort .
. ...
. .112 
The Common Adder's Tongue .
. .
. .
116 
Meanings of Names and Terms .
. .
.119 
FERNS 
OF THE ENGLISH LAKE COUNTRY.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
IN the broad primary division of the great Vegetable 
Kingdom into FLOWERING and FLOWEELESS Plants 
FERNS are placed at the head of the second class.
Possessing a distinct stem and leaves (the latter usually 
named fronds, to distinguish them from the leaves of 
other plants) , they are without flowers, ordinarily so 
called, and consequently cannot produce seeds in the 
ordinary flower-manner.
They have also a special 
structure: for while the Flowering Plants are either 
EXOGENS plants whose stems consist of pith, wood, 
and bark, growing in concentric circles, and whose 
leaves have veins branching like net-work, or ENDO- 
plants without distinction of pith or bark, 
2 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
whose stems are merely confused pithy matter or woody 
fibrous thread-like bundles, and whose leaf-veins are 
parallel, the Flowerless Plants, called ACROGENS, 
have their wood disposed in a zigzag manner, and their 
leaves are either without veins, or ivith veins of the 
most simple character, scarcely branching at all, or 
branching only in repeated forks.
The greater outer 
distinction, however, is that of the absence of any ap- 
parent flowers, and the arrangement of the seed (or 
spores) in seed-vessels (or spore-cases) upon the leaves 
themselves.
This is speaking of the Ferns only, for 
other Acrogens (called also Cryptogamic Plants), such 
as the Fungi, have, or seem to have, no leaves at all.
These spore-cases are set in clusters called sori (in 
the singular sorus), looking like patches of brownish 
or greenish brown dust, round or oblong or in lines, 
upon the backs or margins of the fronds ; and as no 
flowering-plant bears such, the full-grown Fern is easily 
distinguishable.
The spores says Moore " are minute, roundish, 
angular, or oblong vesicles, consisting of two outer 
layers, or coatings, enclosing a thickish granular fluid, 
and they are very numerous and arranged without 
order within the spore-cases.
They are so small and 
dust-like, that when thinly scattered over a sheet of 
paper they are scarcely visible to the naked eye, though 
lying by thousands amongst the also minute emptied 
spore-cases.
The colour, no less than the form of these 
spores, is variable ; they are usually pale brownish or 
yellowish, but they are sometimes green, and the tints 
of brown and yellow are much varied.
These organs 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 3 
differ obviously from seeds, in that they consist merely of 
a homogeneous cellular mass.
In true seeds the radicle 
(or young root) and the plumule (or young shoot) 
are present in the embryo, and are developed from de- 
terminate points ; but Fern spores, consisting merely 
of a small vesicle of cellular tissue a vegetable cell,* 
grow indifferently from any part of their surface, the 
parent cell becoming divided into others, which are 
again multiplied and enlarged, until a small germinal 
scale, or primordial frond, is formed, and from this, in 
due time, the proper fronds are produced.
The surface 
of the spores is sometimes smooth, sometimes tuber- 
culate, or even echinate" (prickly like a hedge-hog).
From this almost invisible dust spring the multi- 
tudes of Ferns that crown the summer with their 
various plumes.
Each atom of dust becomes a green 
speck, then a scale in which root and stem and leaves 
are yet but one confused and undeveloped mass, then 
a bud.
then a young frond pushing its crozier-like form 
or its tender spikelet through the earth, then a full- 
grown magnificent plume like the Royal Fern twelve 
feet high by the Irish Lakes, or a dainty coronal of 
feathers like the common Male Fern so abundant in 
our own English Mountain District.
The proper roots of Ferns are fibrous, proceeding 
from the under side of the stem when the stem is pros- 
trate or creeping, but from all sides indifferently when 
it grows erect.
When sufficiently numerous they 
form entangled masses.
The fibres are mostly rigid 
* Hence the name of Cryptogamic, from crypt, or cell.
B 2 
4 FEENS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
and wiry, often in youth more or less covered with fine 
soft hairs.
The stem is sometimes called a caudex, sometimes a 
rhizome.
The caudex is the root-stock, not the root, but 
a true stem, either uprightly-growing or drooping, the 
upright stem of some foreign ferns sometimes growing 
to the height of fifty feet or more, like a forest tree.
The rhizome is the creeping stem, or that part of the 
stem extending on or under the ground, extending 
very far indeed in some ferns, farthest in the Common 
Bracken.
When not under ground, these creeping 
stems are generally clothed with hairs or scales, some- 
times becoming quite shaggy.
The rhizome varies con- 
siderably in size, from that of the Common Polypody, 
which is as thick as one's little finger, to that of the 
Film Ferns, as fine as thread.
The fronds consist of two parts, the leafy portion, 
and the stipes, which is the part of the stalk above the 
caudex or rhizome.
The farther continuation of the 
stalk, forming in the leafy part a midrib, or midvein, 
which becomes branched when the frond is divided (as 
in the Oak Fern), is called the rachis (rachides in the 
plural).
The stipes is generally more or less furnished 
with brownish membranous scales, sometimes only a 
few at the base, sometimes extending along the rachis.
When the frond is divided quite down to the rachis, or 
midrib, it is said to be pinnate, and each of the leaf- 
like divisions is called a pinna (Latin for a feather).
When these pinnae are again divided in the same man- 
ner the frond becomes bi-pinnate, or if thrice divided 
tri-pinnate.
When the division is nearly but not quite 
GENERAL DESCRIPTION 5 
down to the rib or midrib the pinnule (or small pinna), 
the pinna, or the frond, is called pinnatifid.
The TRUE FERNS are developed in a peculiar man- 
ner, coming up in a crozier-like form, having the rachis 
rolled in from the point to the base.
In the more com- 
pound ferns the frond-divisions are each again rolled in 
after the same fashion.
This is called being circinate.
All the British species are circinate (and therefore True 
Ferns) except two the Adder's Tongue and the 
Moonwort, in both of which the fronds are what is 
called plicate, or folded straight, like the folding of a 
lady's fan.
The order in which the veins, or ribs, of the fronds 
are disposed is called the venation ; and deserves atten- 
tion as affording one of the means of distinguishing the 
groups.
It is from some determinate part of the veins 
that the spore-cases proceed.
This part is called the 
receptacle.
In some few native kinds the receptacle is 
projected beyond the margin of the frond, and the 
spore-cases are collected round its free extremity.
More commonly, however, the veins stop within the 
margin, and the spore-cases grow in round or elongated 
clusters, situated sometimes at their ends, sometimes 
at their sides, and protruded through the skin of the 
lower surface of the fronds.
The seeds (it has already been said) are called spores, 
tho seed-vessels spore-eases, the clusters of spore-cases 
sori.
These sori, generally placed on the back or mar- 
gins of the fronds, are in the great majority of British 
species surrounded or girt by an elastic ring or band, 
sometimes vertical and burst by an irregular trans- 
(5 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
verse fissure when the spores, having reached maturity, 
need to he dispersed, sometimes horizontal or ohlique, 
instead of vertical.
In the earlier stages of their 
growth the sori are also covered with a thin transpa- 
rent membrane, called an indusium.
As the sori grow, 
the indusia get broken and thrust hack, sometimes 
flung off'.
To some species there is no perceptible 
indusium.
Its presence or absence therefore affords 
yet other means of help toward correcter classification.
What classification itself is, how far from being 
exact to the wonderfully arranged variety of nature, 
however necessary it is to assist the memory and the 
understanding of the botanist, may be seen from the 
interpenetration and confusion of characteristics even 
in the Table of British Ferns which follows here, and 
may be gathered also from a few remarks by Dr. Lind- 
ley qualifying an attempt to precisely describe only the 
three great primary orders of Exogens, Endogens, and 
Acrogens.
Having spoken of the principal differences 
between the three classes as to be briefly expressed 
thus : 
EXOGENS, wood growing concentrically leaves 
with reticulated veins flowers with their parts ar- 
ranged in fours or fives embryo, or germ, dicotyledonous 
(or two-leafed), 
ENDOGENS, wood confused leaves with parallel 
veins flowers with their parts in threes germ mono- 
cotyledonous (or one-leafed), 
ACROGENS, wood sinuous leaves forlc-veined or 
altogether unbranchcd no flowers and no germ, 
he adds : 
GENERAL DESCBIPTION 7 
" In applying these differences to practice, it is 
necessary to attend to the following rules: 
" The classes are not absolutely distinguished from 
each other by any one character, but by the combination 
of their characters.
For this reason a plant may have 
one of the characters of a class to which it nevertheless 
does not belong, because its other characters are at 
variance with that class.
Thus some species of Kanun- 
culus have the flowers with their parts in threes ; but 
they do not on that account belong to Endogens, 
because their wood is concentric, their leaves netted, 
and their embryo dicotyledonous.
Arum inaculatum 
has reticulated leaves ; but it is not an Exogen, because 
its wood is confused, and its embryo monocotyledonous ; 
its flowers are neither in fours or fives nor threes, all the 
parts being in a state of peculiarly diminished struc- 
ture.
The genus Potamogeton (a water plant, one of 
the Naiads) has the flowers in fours ; yet it does not 
belong to Exogens, because its leaves have parallel 
veins, and its embryo is monocotyledonous." 
No better \vords could have been written, whether 
to stimulate the learner to care and thoroughness in 
research or to rebuke the dogmatism of pedantic 
system-builders and teach that modesty and liberal 
allowance of dissent which should characterize the 
student of Nature and the worshiper of Truth.
TABLE OE BRITISH FEENS.
FEKNS in Latin FILICES are flowerless plants, 
bearing seed-vessels (spore-cases) on their fronds.
"All 
Ferns" says Moore, "are referrible to one of three 
groups : Ophioglossaeete Polypodiacece Marattiacece.
Of these the Ophioglossaceae and Marattiaceae are 
but small groups, while the Polypodiacea: include the 
greater portion of all known Ferns.
These three 
groups may each be regarded as a distinct order of 
plants, forming together the Filices, or Ferns." The 
Marattiacese are not found in the British Isles.
We 
have therefore only to do with the two natural orders 
POLYPODIACEA!
or True Ferns and OPHIOGLOSSACE.S: 
or Adder's Tongue Ferns.
POLYPODIACEJE are Ferns whose young fronds are 
rolled up in a circinate form, and whose spore-cases 
arc girt with an elastic ring.
The presence of this 
ring, in some form or other, nearly or completely sur- 
rounding the spore-case, is the distinguishing pecu- 
liarity of the True Ferns.
Polypodiacese are divided 
into those whose spore-cases are without valves and 
those which are two-valved.
In the first division 
are two tribes or groups : Polypodinece, without 
TABLE OF BKITISH FERNS 9 
valves, bursting by an irregular and transverse cleft, 
the elastic ring vertical and nearly complete ; and 
TricJiomaninecB, without valves ; and bursting irregu- 
larly, but surrounded by urn-shaped involucres, the 
ring horizontal or oblique, complete.
The second 
division has only one tribe, or group : Osmtrndinece, 
spore-cases two-valved, opening vertically or at the 
top, the ring merely rudimentary.
OPHIOGLOSSACEJE are Ferns whose young fronds are 
folded up straight, and whose spore-cases have no 
ring.
They are two-valved like the Osmundineae.
POLYPODIACE^].
1. Polypodinese ; 2.
Trichomanineae ; 3.
Osmun- 
dinese.
POL YPODINE^] fructification dorsal, that is, the 
spore-cases borne on the back of the frond.
Com- 
prising the sub-groups Polypodiece, Qymnogrammece, 
Aspidiece, Aspleniece, Lomariece or Blechnece, Pter- 
idece, Adiantecs, Cystopteridece, Peranemeae, 
POLYPODIES Sori (or clusters of spore-cases) round, 
and with no special indusium (or covering) : compris- 
ing two genera Polypodium, Attosorus.
* GTMNOGBAMME^: Sori linear, no indusium : one 
only genus Gymnogramma.
* Of GYMNOGEAMMEJE genus Gymnogramma there is only 
one British species, the Small -leafed Gymnogram & leptophylla, 
lately found in Jersey, hardly therefore a British fern at all.
Of 
ADIANTE.S: again its one British genus, Adiantum, has only one 
species, the Common Maiden-Hair Fern A.
Capillws Veneris, not 
found in the Lake District.
Neither is the one British species of 
the genus Trichomanes, the Bristle Fern T.
radicans.
10 FEBNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
Sori round or roundish, springing from 
the backs of the veins, having a special indusium : 
two genera Polysticlium, Lastrea.
ASPLENIE^E Sori oblong, or elongated, springing from 
the sides of the veins, having a special indusium : 
four genera Athyrium, Asplenium, Scolopendrium, 
Cetarach.
LOMARIEJE Sori forming longitudinal lines between 
the midrib and margins of the leaflets, or divisions, 
of the fronds, with a special indusium : one genus 
Blechnum.
PTERIDE.E Sori borne upon the frond-margins, which 
are changed, continuously or interruptedly, into 
special indusia : one genus Pteris.
* ADIANTEJE Sori in patches on the reflexed lobes of 
the frond-margins, which form indusia : one genus 
Adiantum.
CYSTOPTERLDE^: Sori with special oval indusia affixed 
behind and bent hood-like over them : one genus 
Cystopteris.
PERANEME^; Sori roundish and springing from the 
backs of the veins, with special involucriform or 
semi-involucriform indusia : one genus Woodsia.
TRICHOMANINE^E fructification marginal, that 
is, having the spore-cases on the edges of the frond; sori 
produced around the ends of veins projecting from 
the frond-margins, and surrounded by urn-shaped mem- 
branes, expansions of the frond : two geneva * Tricho- 
Hymenoplitjllum.
* * See note at page 9.
TABLE OF BEITISH FEBNS.
11 
OSMHNDINEJ3 fructification marginal-paniculate, 
that is, having the spore-cases on the edges of distinct 
stalks, or in irregular dense branching clusters, terminat- 
ing the fronds : one genus Osmunda.
OPHIOGLOSSACE.E.
Fructification paniculate, in irregularly branching 
clusters, spicate, or sessile (sitting close to the stem 
without any sensible stalk) in two ranks on a simple 
spike, terminating a separate branch, of the frond : two 
genera Botrychium, Opliioglossum.
CIBCINATE 
LIST OP LAKE EEENS.
(16 Genera 35 Species.) 
POLYPODIUM : (1) P.
vulgare, (2) P.
Phegopteris, 
(3) P.
Dryopteris, (4) ealcareum.
ALLOSOEUS : A.
crispus.
POLYSTICHTTM : (1) P.
Lonchitis, (2) P.
aculeatum, 
(3) P.
angulare.
LASTBEA : (1) L.
Thelypteris, (2) L.
montana, (3) 
L. Filix-mas, (4) L.
remota, (5) L.
rigida, 
(6) L.
cristata var.
spinulosa, (7) L.
dilatata, 
(8) L.
aemula.
ATHTEIUM : (1) A.
Filix-foemina.
ASPLENIUM: (1) A.
Adiantum-nigrum, (2) A.
ma- 
rinum, (3) A.
Trichomanes, (4) A.
viride, 
(5) A.
Ruta-muraria, (6) A.
germanicum, 
(7) A.
septentrionale.
SCOLOPENDBIUM : S.
vulgare.
CETEEACH : C.
officinarum.
BLECHNUM : B.
spicant.
PTEEIS : P.
aquilina.
CTSTOPTEEIS : C.
fragilis.
WOODSIA : W.
ilvensis.
HTMENOPHTLLUM : (1) H.
Tunbridgense, (2) II 
unilaterale.
OSMTTITDA : 0.
regalis.
BOXETCHIUM : B.
lunaria.
OPHIOGLOSSUM: 0.
vulgatum.
THE POLYPODIES.
THE COMMON POLYPODY.
Polypodivm vulgare.
The name of Polypodium, meaning many-footed, is 
given to this genus, on account of the many branchings 
of its rhizome (or creeping stem) .
The common Poly- 
pody is an evergreen (the fronds, even in severe frosts, 
14 FERNS OP THE LAKE COUNTRY 
lasting till new ones are produced), growing luxuriantly 
on tree trunks, moist rocks and walls, and mossy banks, 
easily distinguished by its large round patches of orange 
or tawny-brown spore-cases, no other of our native ferns 
having its fructification at all similar in appearance.
The rhizome of the Common Polypody is often as 
thick as a man's little finger, covered with light brown 
chaff-like scales, tapering to a point, sometimes droop- 
ing so as to leave the upper surface smooth and greenish.
From this upper surface spring *the fronds, and from 
the lower side chiefly the densely-matted fibrous roots 
by which it clings for support.
The stipes (or stalk) is 
naked, sometimes nearly as long as the leafy portion, the 
whole frond measuring from two to eighteen inches or 
more.
The general outline is lance-shaped, very deeply 
pinnatifid, the lobes or segments oblong, generally 
round but sometimes bluntly pointed at the end, and 
occasionally notched along the margin.
Each lobe has 
a slightly wavy mid-vein, or rib, branching alternately, 
each branch having four or five alternate branchlets, 
the lowest of which on the side next the point of the 
frond (rarely any other) produces a sorus at its club- 
shaped head.
The fructification is usually confined to 
the upper part, and is generally ripe by the end of Sep- 
tember.
The Common Polypody differs essentially from all 
the other British species associated with it, in having 
its fronds articulated with the rhizome, that is at- 
tached in such a manner that they fall off at the ap- 
proach of decay.
Its texture, too, is stouter and firmer 
than that of other native species.
The rhizome is per- 
LIST OP LAKE FERNS 15 
rennial.
It is one of the commonest ferns, found 
everywhere, on the coast line, and (in the Scottish 
Highlands) at the height of 2,100 feet, very abundant 
and handsome in the Lake District, abundant also 
throughout Europe, and the north of Africa, found also 
in Caffraria, in northern Asia from the Ural Mountains 
to Japan, and widely dispersed in North America.
Its medicinal reputation is as old as Pliny, who says 
that the root, dried and powdered and snuffed up the 
nose, will destroy polypus.
It is supposed to be the 
"rheum -purging Polypody" of Shakespere; and in some 
country places they still use a decoction of the fronds 
as a remedy for colds and hooping-cough, employing 
for the purpose the ripe fertile fronds, which, called 
Golden Locks and Golden Maidenhair, are gathered 
in the autumn and hung up to dry like other herbs.
The fronds contain a large quantity of carbonate of 
potass.
It is easily cultivated, requiring only a light 
porous soil and that the rhizome should be kept on 
the surface, with a constant supply of moisture, good 
drainage, and moderate shade, 
YAEIETIES.
lifidum, Burneside Hall, J.
M. Barnes.
acuto-bifidum, Stainton, J.
M. Barnes.
aurilum, not rare.
(Having next the rachis in the upper margin, a distinct lobule, like a 
small ear.) 
crenatum, not rare.
foliosum, Silverdale, J.
M. Barnes.
~multiforme, Whitbarrow, J.
M. B.
; Windermere, F.
Clowes.
(A most variable fern no two fronds being alike.) 
16 FEE3TS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
pulcherrimum, Whitbarrow, J.
Acldison.
(Like semilacerutn, but more beautiflal.) 
serratum, in several places.
submarffinatum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
marginatum, Windermere, F.
Clowes ; Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
truncatum, Crosthwaite, F.
Clowes; Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
variegatum, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
multijidum, Staveley, Martindale, Whitbarrow, F.
Clowes.
semilacerum, Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes, F.
Clowes; Ulver- 
stone, J.
Crossfield.
semilacerum robustvm, Wbitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes.
hastifolium, Witherslack, M.
Read.
sinuato-auritum, Whitbarrow, J.
If. Barnea.
WMtakeri, near Kendal, M.
"Whitaker.
(A very uniformly crenate form.) 
TAB.
BIFIDUM 
MOUNTAIN POLYPODY, 
OR BEECH FERN.
Polypodium Phegopteris.
The Beech Fern is one of the tenderer 
ferns : produced from the perennial rhi- 
zome about May, and dying off in the 
autumn or at the first approach of frost.
It grows abundantly on the slate in moist moun- 
tainous places and in the shade of damp woods, from 
the coast level to (in the Western Highlands of 
Scotland) an elevation of over 3000 feet.
The stem is 
slender, creeps very extensively, and is slightly scaly, 
18 FEBNS OF THE LAKE COUNTBY 
producing black fibrous roots.
From it spring deli- 
cate hairy pale-green fronds, to the height, when full- 
grown, of from six to twelve inches.
The stipes is 
fleshy and very brittle, frequently longer, sometimes 
much longer, than the leafy part of the frond, having 
near its base a few small and almost colourless scales.
The fronds are triangular, extending to a long narrow 
point; in the lower part pinnate, but with this di- 
vision seldom carried beyond the two lowest pairs of 
branches, those of the upper parts of the fronds being 
pinnatifid (connected at the base).
The pinnae (or 
leaflets) have an acutely lance-shaped outline and 
are deeply pinnatifid, usually standing in pairs, oppo- 
site to each other, the lowest pair drooping toward the 
root and set on at a short distance from the rest.
The 
united bases of the pairs of the other pinnae when 
they happen to stand exactly opposite to each other 
exhibit more or less distinctly a cruciform figure, by 
which, regard being had also to the general triangular 
outline and sub-pinnate division, this species may be 
known from the other Polypodies.
The venation con- 
sists of a slender flexuous midvein (or rib), from which 
proceed alternate or sometimes opposite veins extend- 
ing to the margins of the lobes or lobules, either 
simple or once forked at about half of their length.
The veins when simple, or the anterior venules when 
divided, bear a sorus at a short distance from the edge 
of the lobule.
This almost marginal fructification 
extends nearly over the whole frond, the sori being 
small and circular, arranged in series, and often becom- 
ing confluent in lines.
When the fructification is but 
THE BEECH FEBN 19 
partially developed only one or two of the lowermost 
veins are fertile, in which case the marginal series of 
sori is not very manifest.
The spore-cases are small, 
numerous, and of a pale brown hue ; the spores ovate 
and smooth.
The fronds in this species become lateral 
and distant from each other on the underground stem, 
in consequence of its rapid elongation; and they are 
adherent, that is to say, the stipes is not furnished 
with a natural point of spontaneous separation.
For cultivation in pots or cases it requires good 
current moisture, and grows well on the damp and 
shady sides of garden rock-work.
HABITATS.
Scawfell, Wastdale, Borrowdale, En- 
nerdale, Keswick, Tindal Fell, Newbiggin Woods, 
Stockghyll Force, Ambleside, Grasmere, Casterton 
Fell, Wallington, Coniston, &c.
VARIETIES.
interruptum, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
muUifidum, Burton, J.
Jones.
C2 
SMOOTH THEEE-BEANCHED POLYPODY 
OB OAK FEBN.
Polypodiwn Dryopteris.* LINNAEUS.
This, the smallest of the Polypodies, is also one of the 
most delicate of all British Ferns : very easily recog- 
nizable by its smooth fronds, of a bright lively green, 
divided into three branches, the last characteristic 
even more obvious in the young fronds, which are 
rolled up in little balls at the ends of their three slender 
stalklets.
Its height is generally not more than six 
inches, often less, but it sometimes grows to twelve or 
fourteen.
It is fragile, produced about April, and in 
succession throughout the summer, soon withered by 
heat or drought, and at once destroyed by frost.
The 
fronds rise from a slender creeping stem, which often 
forms densely matted roots.
The stipes is usually 
much longer than the leafy part, thin, brittle, and dark 
coloured.
The general outline is five-sided, owing to 
the division of the fronds into three triangular branches.
One of the peculiarities of the Oak Fern is the deflection 
of the rachis (or midrib) at the point where the 
branches take their rise ; and another (of less botan- 
* Also Polystichum Dryoptcris, Lastrea Dryopteris, &c.
THE OAK FERN 
21 
ical importance, but very helpful in distinguishing it 
from its near ally, the Lime stone-Polypody) is its per- 
fect smoothness, a constant distinction, most easily seen 
on the stipes and rachis, but equally occurring over the 
whole plant.
The fronds are divided so that each 
branch is pinnate at the base, pinnatifid toward the 
point ; the pinnae are also pinnate at their bases, then 
pinnatifid, and at their points acute and nearly entire ; 
the pinnules and ultimate lobes are oblong and obtuse, 
with a rather wavy midvein, from which the venules 
branch alternately, extending to the margin, in those 
of moderate size simple with a sorus at each extremity, 
in the larger branched with the sorus on the lower 
branch.
The fructification varies much, according to 
habitat and season, being sometimes very much crowded 
and sometimes very 
sparse.
The spore- 
cases are small, round- 
ish obovate (inversely 
egg-shaped), and at- 
tached by a slender 
stalk ; the spores 
ovate (egg-shaped), 
oblong, or roundish, 
with a granular sur- 
face.
Like the Beech 
Fern, the Dryopteris 
is found from the 
coast-level to a great 
elevation.
It is seen 
c 3 
22 I'EENS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
sometimes on the lime-stone with the Lime-stone 
Polypody, but is rather to be classed as a slate fern, 
liking a rocky district, with running water, and the 
not stagnant moisture of woods, needing both shade 
and shelter.
It is easily cultiveable in a mixture of 
fibre, peat, leaf-mould, and sand, either in the house or 
on artificial rock- work.
HABITATS.
Lodore, Borrowdale, Honister Crags, 
Scale Force, Gillsland, Wastdale, Dalegarth, Stock- 
ghyll, Grlenridding, Hutton Roof, Casterton, Coniston, 
Furness Fells, &c.
THE LIME-STONE POLYPODY.
Polypodium caleareum.* SMITH.
The Lime-stone Polypody differs from 
the Oak Fern in its stouter, erecter, and 
more rigid habit, and in the mealy-looking' 
glandulosity of its surface ; yet still more 
in that the division of its fronds is pinnate 
rather than into three distinct branches.
The fronds are also of a duller and deeper 
green, and without the marked deflection 
of the rachis.
And instead of the branches being 
rolled up into three balls, the young pinnse curl in on 
their rachides and the entire frond upon its rachis, so 
that the frond is of the ordinary bipinnate structure.
* Also P.
Robertianum, P.
Dryopteris, Lastrea calcarea, Lastrea 
Robertianum, Phegopteris calcarea, &c.
24 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTEY 
Its fronds, including the stipes, vary from six to eight- 
teen inches in height ; their form is triangular with 
a tendency to the pentagonal appearance of the Oak 
Fern, because of the larger size of the two lower pinnae.
These lower pinnae are pinnate, with pinnatifid pinnules, 
the upper pinnae also pinnate, with the lower pinnules 
again pinnate and the upper pinnatifid.
The fructifica- 
tion is scattered over the whole dorsal surface of the 
frond ; the sori are small and round, consisting of nu- 
merous crowded spore-cases, entirely without indusia, 
arranged in linear sub-marginal series along each side 
of the lobules, or in series between the midrib and 
margin when the lobules are but slightly developed, 
often more or less confluent.
Spore-cases pale brown, 
roundish obovate, small, and numerous.
Spores ovate 
or oblong, somewhat granular.
The Lime-stone Polypody, as its name infers, is found 
usually on exposed rocky limestone tracks : grow- 
ing there very abundantly.
In cultivation, however, a 
lime-stone soil is not essential to its well-being.
Like 
the generality of ferns, it requires good drainage ; but 
bears the sun more than most others.
It grows almost 
throughout Europe, in Canada, and the United States 
of America ; and has been gathered by Dr. Hooker and 
Dr. Thomson on the Himalaya Mountains at the ele- 
vation of 6,000 feet.
HABITATS.
Scale Force (J.
Bobson), Whitbarrovv, 
Newbiggin Woods, Gilt Quarries, Baron Heath, Arn- 
side Knott, Hutton Roof Crags, Farleton Knott, 
Caskill Kirk, &c.
Only one variety : 
variatile, Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes and F.
Clowes.
THE HOCK BRAKES.
THE MOUNTAIN PAESLEY TEEN.
Allosorus crispus.
BEBNHARDI.
Osmunda, or Pteris crispa.
Of the Eock Brakes there is but one British species 
the Mountain Parsley Fern, known at once by its like- 
ness to tufts of parsley, and distinctly differing from 
other of our native ferns in the marked division of its 
sterile and fertile fronds, the first of which have these 
segments broad, flat, and leaf-like, while the second 
have them involute, or rolled in at the margin, cover- 
ing the sori instead of an indusium.
The fronds of the 
Mountain Parsley Fern are annual, coming up in May 
or June, and dying down in the autumn, from four to 
twelve inches high (including the stipes), of a lively 
26 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTEY 
green, triangular or ovately triangular in outline.
The 
barren fronds are generally as long as the stipes, bi or 
tri-pinnate, and smooth.
The segments or leaflets into 
which they are cut are more or less wedge-shaped and 
notched or cleft at their ends.
The fertile fronds have 
the leaflets of an oval or oblong or linear form.
The 
venation of the barren fronds consists of a slender vein 
extending along each pinnule, casting off another into 
each of its lobes, this again alternately branching, one 
branch being directed towards every marginal point.
In the fertile fronds a midvein enters each ultimate di- 
vision and passes sinuously to its point, throwing out 
nearly to the margin alternate veins, usually simple but 
sometimes forked, bearing a sorus near their ends.
The 
fructification usually occupies the whole system.
The 
son small, roundish, at first distinct though contiguous, 
ultimately becoming laterally confluent and forming a 
continuous line.
Spore-cases small, elliptic obovate, 
stalked.
Spores smooth, roundish, oblong or bluntly 
triangular.
The Mountain Parsley Fern is peculiarly a mountain 
plant, delighting in the shades and corners of boulders, 
and to be among loose slate-stones, and at the feet of 
the unmortared walls that wind about the fells and 
mountains.
It is well-fitted therefore for garden rock- 
eries ; but is apt to die off in winter if allowed to be too 
damp.
HABITATS.
Skiddaw, Keswick, Whinlatter, (W.
Christy), Borrowdale, Ennerdale, Scawfell, Helvellyn, 
Blencathra, Kirkstone Pass, Ambleside, Coniston, Gras- 
mere, &c., &c.
THE SHIELD (AND BUCKLER) 
EERNS.
THE ALPINE SHIELD FEKN, 
on HOLLY FEEN.
Polystichum Lonchitis* BOTH.
POLYSTICHUM is an extensive genus 
of the group of Aspidiese ; and con- 
sists for the most part of harsh 
spiny evergreen ferns, scattered 
from the torrid to the frigid zone, 
but represented in this country 
by only three species : Poly- 
stichwti Lonchitis, Polystichum 
aculeatiim, and Polystichum angu- 
lare.
These species, however, are 
veiy variable, and so closely con- 
nected by intermediate [forms that 
it is difficult sometimes to distin- 
guish their exact limits.
The Alpine Shield^Fern is one of the rarer ferns, 
taking its other name of Holly Fern from its hard 
and prickly appearance.
It is an evergreen, (with a 
* The Polypodium Lonchitis of Linmeus.
28 FERNS OP THE LAKE COUKTET 
scaly tufted stem from the crown of which the young 
fronds are produced in spring, to remain fresh and 
vigourous until the spring following, arriving at matu- 
rity in autumn and flourishing through the winter.
It 
is a true rock fern, growing to a height of from six to 
nine inches, but higher and more luxuriantly in damp 
and slightly elevated situations.
The fronds are of a 
deep green, pale beneath, of a rigid leathery texture, 
erect or drooping according to the conditions of their 
growth ; once pinnate, and in their general outline 
narrowly lance-shaped, or lanceolate.
The pinnae are 
short, crowded, and shaped something between a sickle 
and a crescent, the upper side of the base having an 
ear-like projection, called an auricle, while the lower 
side is as if cut away.
The margin is set with spinous 
teeth.
The venation is very indistinct, the veins twice- 
branched, the branches extending to the margins with- 
out joining with others.
The sori form a line on each 
side the mid-rib, parallel with it and half way between 
it and the margin, generally becoming confluent in age, 
and covered by a circular membranous scale attached 
by a short central stalk.
Spore-cases deep brown.
The name Polystichum is from two Greek words signi- 
fying many and order, given on account of the number 
and regularity of the lines of sori.
It is difficult of 
cultivation, needing pure mountain air, and therefore 
seldom thrives under artificial treatment.
HABITATS.
Helvellyn (Isaac Huddart and F.
Clowes), Fairfield (James Huddart), Deepdale (M.
Hanlcey), Ullswater (Rev. W, H.
Hawker], Farleton 
Knott (/".
Jones).
THE COMMON PEICKLY SHIELD FERN.
Polystichum aculeatum.* ROTH.
The Common Prickly Shield Fern is one of the 
larger and hardier ferns, preferring, however, a loamy 
soil and the partial shade of woods or hedge-banks, 
where it grows to the height of from a foot to two feet 
or more, with a short stipes densely enveloped in rust- 
coloured membranous pointed scales.
The fronds, from 
four to seven inches across, are, like the Alpine Shield 
Fern, rigid and leathery in texture, of a shining dark 
green above, paler beneath, erect and spreading, or 
occasionally drooping, growing up in a circle in April 
or May, from a stout tufted stem, or crown.
The 
general typical form is broadly lanceolate ; but the 
variety LOBATUH is very narrowly lanceolate ; bi-pin- 
nate, with alternate pinna3, these pinnse being again 
more or less divided into a series of pinnules, either 
decurrent that is insensibly merging in the sub- 
stance of the rachis which supports them, or tapering 
to a wedge-shaped base and attached to the rachis 
by the point.
The pinnules are of a long crescent 
shape, with the upper base extended into a small 
auricle, or enlarged lobe, and the lower base sloped 
away, the apex going off to an acute point, and the 
margin notched with spiny teeth.
Venation, fructifi- 
cation, and indusitun, similar to P.
LoncJiitis.
* Poli/podium aculeatum, Linnaeus.
Also Aspidlum aculeatum.
30 FEttNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
The variety LOBATUM, considered a distinct species 
by some botanists, differs chiefly in the narrower outline 
of the frond (already noticed), and in the pinnules 
being much more decidedly decurrent, or running to- 
gether, at the base.
Every possible variation in the 
relative portions of the pinnules is to be met with, from 
the typical bi-pinnate form of Poiystickum aculeatum 
to a simply pinnate form of the species, which from its 
resemblance to P.
Lonchitis has been called loncliiti- 
dioides.
This latter, owing its origin only to some 
special circumstances of its growth, cannot be con- 
sidered as a permanent variety ; but the intermediate 
variation lobatum, which is the most common of 
these abnormal ferns, is at least sufficiently different 
to be considered a variety.
The Common Prickly Shield Fern is one of the most 
easily cultivated of all our larger and hardier species, 
while the lobatum, being smaller, is well adapted for 
pots.
With good drainage and moderate shade, they 
thrive admirably.
HABITATS.
Irton Woods (Rolson) Ara Force 
(H.
Fordham) Ambleside and Eydal.
VAEIETIES.
grandilobwn, Mardalc, J.
M. Barnes.
multifidum, Levcr\s, J.
Wood; Whitesidc Fell, J.
M. Unrnos ; 
Silvcrdale, J.
Crossfield.
THE SOFT PRICKLY SHIELD FERN.* 
PolysticJium angulare.
PEESI.
This specimen is not easily distinguished from 
P. aculeatum, though certainly distinct.
The two 
may, however, be generally known from each other by 
the following differences : 1 P.
angulare is less 
stout, less erect, and altogether less rigid in texture, 
normally lax and more herbaceous, while equally large 
or larger.
2 jP.
aculeatum has its pinnules either 
confluent or decurrent (in which case there is no diffi- 
culty in distinguishing it), or when the pinnules are 
distinct, as in the most perfect plants, they are wedge- 
shaped at the base, the anterior side being truncate, 
and the posterior obliquely incised in straight lines, the 
two lines describing an acute angle, by the apex of 
which they are attached to the rachis ; while in P.
angulare the truncated anterior base is more curved in 
outline and the two lines of the base describe a right 
angle or an obtuse angle, at the apex of which is a dis- 
tinct slender stalk, by which they are attached.
3 
P. aculeatum has its sori attached at a point along 
the middle part of the venule, the apex of which is 
carried out to the margin of the pinnule, the sori thus 
being placed nearer to the point of forking or branching 
than to the apex of the venule; while in P.
angu- 
* Or Angular-lobed.
Polystichum aculeatum, Aspidium angu- 
lare, A.
aculeatum, Polypodium angulare, &c.
32 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTBY 
fare the fertile venule stops about midway across the 
pinnule and the sorus is generally placed at or almost 
close to the apex.
The basal pinnules and the portion 
rather below the middle of the frond should be taken 
for examination.
The upper parts of the fronds alone, 
in these Polystichums, are useless for the purpose of 
identification.
COMMON AND PRICKLY SHIELD FERNS.
The Soft Prickly Shield Fern is one of our most 
graceful ferns, strong-growing and tufted-stemmed 
sometimes forming great masses, the fronds lanceolate 
and rising to the height of from two to five feet, lasting 
through ordinary winters and in sheltered places re- 
taining their verdure until the new fronds are produced, 
the old fronds only gradually dying off as the new 
ones become developed, in or about May. The stipes, 
varying from a third to a fourth of the length of the 
THE SOFT PBICKLY SHIELD FERN JJ3 
whole frond, is very shaggy, with reddish chaff-like 
scales continuing though decreasing in size throughout 
the upper portions of the frond.
The fronds are bipin- 
nate, with numerous tapering distinct pinnae, having 
their pinnules flat, and somewhat crescent-shaped, from 
the prominent am'icle at the anterior base, often blunt- 
ish at the apex but sometimes acute, always with 
spinulose marginal serratures, and sometimes in a few 
of the lower pinnules with deep lobes so that the pin- 
nules become pinnatifid.
The pinnules taper to an 
obtuse or right-angled base, and are attached, as before 
said, by a slender stalk, which does not form a line with 
either margin.
The pinnules have branched free veins ; 
and the sori are generally ranged in a row on each side 
of the midrib and covered by a peltate (fixed to the 
stalk by the centre) scale or indusium.
Not only one of the most beautiful, this is also 
one of the most remarkably varied of our Ferns.
Evergreen, and able to readily accommodate itself to the 
changes of artificial culture, it is specially fitted for the 
out-door or in-door fernery; growing readily in pots 
(with sufficient room) in the garden or shrubbery, in 
free sandy loam, or on shady rockwork.
It is easily 
increased by division whenever lateral crowns are pro- 
duced.
It is rare in the North of England, or of 
Europe, though found in Sweden and Norway ; but is 
more plentiful in the South of England, and very 
abundant in Central and Southern Europe ; in Asia 
also, from Georgia to India and Ceylon ; in Abyssinia 
and on the African coast of the Mediterranean ; and in 
North and South America, in New England and in 
D 
34 FERNS OP THE LAKE COUNTRY 
Mexico and Chili.
It is found not infrequently in the 
Lake District, generally in warm sheltered ghylls.
VAEIETIES.
liserratnm, WMtbarrow, J.
M. Barnes; Beetham, J.
Crossfield.
acutum dissectwm, Whitbarrow, F.
Clowes.
proliferum, Humphrey Head, A.
Mason.
tripinnatum, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
VAB.
PROL1FERUN 
THE FEMALE BUCKLE R FERN, 
OE MAESH FEEN.
Last rea Thelypteris.* PEESI-.
The Lastreas (not Lastrseas as often written) take 
their name from M.
deLastre.
They are to he known 
from Polysticlium (both belonging to the Aspidiese) 
by the outline of the indusium, which is kidney-shaped, 
or roundish with a notch in the side, the attachment 
to the frond being at the notched part.
There are no 
less than eight species of this genus found in Great 
Britain (and in the Lake District), and the group in- 
cludes some of the largest, the commonest, and the 
most elegant of our ferns.
The name of Marsh Fern (sometimes Marsh Buckler 
Fern) comes of course from the place of growth, peaty 
bogs or marshy land.
The rhizome creeps extensively, sparingly branched, 
producing fronds at intervals, slender, smooth and 
blackish brown, having a few pale brown scales at the 
growing point, and numerous fibres.
The stipes is as 
long as or longer than the leafy portion in the fertile 
frond, rather shorter and slighter in the barren, the 
whole frond growing to the height of from six inches 
to more than three feet, the fertile fronds the taller.
*The Polypodium Thelypteris of Linnaeus, also Aspidium The- 
lypteris, Polystichum Thelypteris, Athyrium Thelypteris, &c.
36 FEKNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY.
The fronds, produced about May and perishing in 
Autumn, are delicate in texture, pale green, lanceolate, 
and pinnate ; the pinnae mostly opposite, a short dis- 
tance apart, and pinnatifidly divided into numerous 
crowded entire rounded lobes, the lobes of the fertile 
frond appearing narrower and more pointed on account 
of the bending under of their margins.
The venation 
of the lobes consists of a distinct somewhat wavy mid- 
vein, from which alternate venules branch or fork out, 
each branch bearing a sorus half way between the 
midvein and the margin.
The sori often become con- 
fluent and are partly concealed by the bending back of 
the margin.
The indusium is small, thin, shapeless, 
and soon thrown off.
The Marsh Fern is to be known from the other 
Buckler Ferns by its long, comparatively slender 
rhizome, which is unlike that of any other native 
species.
It ought not therefore to be confounded, as it 
sometimes is, with L.
Oreopteris which has a short 
thick tufted caudex, merely decumbent in habit.
It 
differs farther in having its fronds of their full width 
almost to the very base, and supported by a long bare 
stipes, while L.
Oreopteris has diminishing pinnae 
carried down almost to the base of the stipes ; and in 
its fronds being almost free from glands, while those of 
L. Oreopteris are very conspicuously glandular and 
very fragrant.
It is still less like other species.
It is 
readily cultivable, wanting only a moist peaty situation, 
a damp garden border or a boggy pool, where its ram- 
bling stems may have room to spread.
If set in pots 
they should be large and shallow.
MOUNTAIN BUCKLER FERN, 
SWEET MOUNTAIN FERN, OR HEATH FERN.
Lastrea Oreopteris.* PRESL.
The Sweet Mountain Fern is known at once by its 
balsamic scent, the fragrance of which is given out 
strongly from numerous minute resinous glands on the 
lower surface when the frond is drawn through the hand.
The fronds are noticeable also for their coronal appear- 
.. *Lastrea montana (Moore), Polystichurn Oreopteris (deCandolle), 
Aspidium Oreopteris, A.
odoriferutn, Polypodium moiitanum, P.
fragrans, P.
Thelypteris, Phegopteris Oreopteris, &c.
08 
38 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
ance, set on the stem like the feathers of a shuttlecock 
and growing in graceful tufts to two or three feet high.
They are annual, springing up in May and dying off 
in Autumn ; bright green or yellowish, erect, lance- 
shaped in general outline, and pinnate.
The stipes is 
unusually short, the leafy part being continued nearly 
to the ground, and the lower pinnae becoming so short 
that the frond tapers downward as much as toward 
the point.
The pinnae are generally opposite, narrow, 
tapering and pinnatifid, and bear the sori almost close 
to the margins, in most instances very abundantly.
The fronds differ, as was said, from L.
Thclypteris in 
in the shortness of the lower pinnte, and again in the 
margins being flat and not turned back upon the sori.
Each lobe has a distinct and slightly wavy midvein, 
alternately branched, the branches simple or divided, 
with the sori near their extremities.
The indusia are 
small and soon perish or fall away, sometimes seem 
to be altogether wanting ; but the plant is too 
closely allied to other species of the genus to allow 
of its separation on this account.
It grows in damp 
woody places, especially luxuriating by the sides of 
shady becks and waterfalls ; but is much more pro- 
fusely met with on heathy mountain sides.
It is the 
common fern of many parts of the Scottish Highlands, 
growing sometimes at an elevation of 3,000 feet ; 
abounds in the English Lake Country, and in Wales ; 
and is more or less plentiful in waste districts through- 
out England.
Though so common it seems not easy of 
cultivation, needing perhaps the pure air and ready 
drainage of its native mountains.
In smoky London 
THE MOUNTAIN BUCKLER FERN 39 
the plants will not long retain their vigour.
It grows 
abundantly throughout the district.
VARIETIES.
caudata, Windermere, F.
Clowes.
cristata, Windermere, J.
Huddart 
interrupta, Windermere, J.
Huddart ; Levens, Crossfield.
breviloba, Mardale, J.
M. Barnes.
curvata, Farleton Kuott, J.
M. Barnes, J.
Jones.
subcristata, Mardale, J.
M. Barnes.
truncata, Potter Fell, J.
M. Barnes ; Farleton Knott, J.
Jones 
VAR.
CRISTATA 
COMMON BUCKLER FERN, 
OR MALE FICHN.
Lastrea Filix-mas.* PKESL.
The Male Fern is so called from its robust appearance 
in contrast with the more delicate though similar Lady 
Fern (Filix-foemina).
It is an annual except in sheltered 
spots, where the old fronds will continue green until the 
new come out.
One of the commonest of our Ferns, 
it is yet one of the most beautiful, especially on account 
of its coronal growth, like a circle of erect but gracefully 
waving feathers springing from one stem, the fronds 
* Polypodium Filix-mas (Linnaeus), Aspidium Filix-mas, &c.
THE COMMON BUCKLER l<M-:i;\ 41 
smooth, of a lively green, somewhat paler underneath, 
averaging a height of from two to three feet, but vary- 
ing from twelve inches to even six feet, according to 
age, variety, or locality.
The stipes is short, stout, and 
densely scaly.
The fronds are broadly lance-shaped ; 
bipinnate, though less decidedly so than some other 
species, only those pinnules which are nearest the main 
rachis being quite separate ; the pinnse are narrow and 
tapering, with a few of the lowest pinnules distinct, 
the rest united at the base, these pinnules of an 
obtusely oblong form and serrated, or notched, on the 
margin.
The sori are usually confined to the lower 
half of the pinnules, but they are very crowded and 
abundant.
This is one of the best of our Ferns to be studied 
in order to understand the fructification, for here the 
indusium, in almost fully developed fronds, is remark- 
ably prominent, closed over the spore-cases and seen 
to consist of a lead-coloured tumid kidney-shaped scale, 
which in due time is raised on one side for the dis- 
persion of the spores.
This may be seen by watching 
the fronds just as they are reaching their full growth.
The veins also of this species are very manifest, each 
pinnule having a flexuous midvein, with alternate 
venules, simple, forked, or sometimes three-branched 
in different parts of the pinnule, the three-branched 
occurring at the base and the unbranched at the apex.
The sori are borne on the branch toward the apex of 
the pinnule and form a line of dots on each side of the 
mid- vein and at a little distance from it.
The variety L.
INCISA is a magnificent Fern, growing 
42 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
much larger than the commoner typical form of the 
plant, with the same general features, only larger in 
every part, its pinnules more elongated and tapering 
more deeply cut along their margins, the branchings 
of its venules more numerous, and its sori covering a 
larger surface, reaching almost to the apex of the pin- 
nules.
Another variety, L.
PALEACEA is remarkable for 
the abundant and usually golden scales clothing its 
stipes and rachis.
This variety is very distinct and 
permanent.
The typical Male Fern, also its Incised and Golden- 
scaled varieties, may be found, though not at any very 
great elevation, over the whole of British ground and 
throughout Europe from Scandinavia to the Isles of 
Greece.
In Asia it extends from the Caucasus to Lake 
Baikal, and from the Ural Mountains to the Himalayas 
and to Assam.
It is found also in Northern Africa and 
in Madeira.
And in the Americas, in Newfoundland 
and in Mexico, from California to Peru and Brazil.
But, it is said, not in the United States.
Its culture is 
not at all difficult ; it will grow in any shady places, in 
almost any kind of soil, the best a sandy loam, moist 
but not wet.
The Male Fern has long had and still retains a 
medicinal reputation as a specific against tape-worm.
Galen used it ; Pliny also, who also called it Filix- 
mas.
Its astringent stems have been employed in tan- 
ning leather, and its ashes in bleaching linen, and mak- 
ing glass and soap.
Bishop Gunner speaks of the young 
curled fronds being boiled and eaten like asparagus, 
and says that the poor Norwegians cut off the succulent 
THE COMMON BUCKLER FERN 43 
laminse at the crown of the root (the bases of the future 
stalks) and, adding a third portion of malt, brew from 
them a kind of beer.
In times of great scarcity they 
mix them with their bread.
Cut green and dried in 
the air, this Fern, like the Bracken, is used in Westmor- 
land and Cumberland as litter for the cattle ; and if 
steeped in hot water would, it is said by the bishop, 
be a not despised but readily-eaten and fattening food 
for the cattle as well as the Norwegians.
The young 
erosier-like stems were of old, called St. John's hand 
or " lucky hands," considered to be preservative from 
witchcraft.
VARIETIES.
paleacea, Common.
abbreviata, Common.
erosa, Keswick, Miss Wright ; Troutbeck, P.
Clowes.
1 cristata, Borrowdale, J.
D. Harrison.
interrupta, Windermere, F.
Clowes.
Pinderi, Elterwater, Miss Beevor.
Clowesii, Troutbeck, F.
Clowes.
Barnesii, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
'digitata, Burton, J.
Jones.
grandiceps, Burton, Wearing.
excurrens, Ravenscar, J.
A. M artindale.
attenuato-multifida, Mardale, J.
M. Barnes.
crispata, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
multiformis, Long Sleddale, J.
M. Barnes.
pulchra, Mardale, J.
M. Barnes.
stricta, Mardale, J.
M. Barnes.
serrata, Burton, J.
Jones.
producta, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
THE EEMOTE BUCKLEK FEKN.
Lastrea remota.
MOOEE.
This Fern the A.spidium rigidum or remotiim of 
Braun, makes its first appearance in England in the 
Addenda to Mr. Moore's " Nature Printed British 
Ferns " published in 1863, having heen discovered in 
the neighbourhood of Windermere, by Mr. F.
Clowes 
and Mr. Huddart in 1856.
It had previously been 
only known as a native of Southern Germany.
Braun 
inclines to regard it as a mere divided form of the 
THE REMOTE BUCKLER FERN 45 
Common Male Fern, but Moore claims for it the rank 
of a species.
In general character and aspect it much 
resembles those vigorous examples of L.
cristata var.
spinulosa which are sometimes met with, having the 
same narrow elongate erect fronds; but in its struc- 
tural characteristics it differs materially from that 
plant and agrees much more closely with L.
Filioc-mas.
From L.
Filix-mas, the incised pyramidal-pirmuled 
forms of which most nearly resemble it, it must however 
be separated on account of the farther divisions of its 
fronds, which are tripinnate.
In Filix-mas also the 
serratures of the lobes are often acute, while in remota 
they often terminate abruptly in a hard short point, 
being what is called mucronate, still oftener mucronulate, 
thus forming the intermediate step between Filix-mas 
and L.
dilatata, which is mucronate and spinulose.
Mr. Clowes, who has carefully cultivated and observed 
it, considers it to be a hybrid between L.
Filix-mas 
and L.
cristata and spinulosa.
The caudex of L, remota is stout and ascending, 
with a thick scaly crown ; its stipes, a foot long, is 
stout, and clothed with numerous scales of various 
size, some ovate-acuminate, three-quarters of an inch 
long, others smaller, lanceolate or linear terminating in 
a lengthened hair-like point, the margin slightly wavy 
or toothed, along with these larger scales numerous 
others occurring, minute, ovate caudate, and peltately 
attached ; the rachis, both primary and secondary, is 
furnished with scales which become smaller upwards.
The fronds, from three to four feet high, are erect, 
narrow oblong lanceolate, sub-tripinnate, and smooth ; 
46 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
the lower pinnae three to four inches long, ovate- 
acuminate, the central six inches long, linear oblong 
acuminate, all ascending, opposite or sub-opposite and 
distant below ; pinnules (basal ones of second pair of 
pinnse) an inch and a quarter long, shortly petiolate, 
pyramidal or pyramidal ovate, acute, pinnatifid, almost 
pinnate ; lobes oblong, about three-quarters of an inch 
long, obtuse, the lowest sub-lobate at the base, other- 
wise serrated, the serratures most numerous and pro- 
minent at the apex, acute, mucronulate.
The pinnules 
become gradually less pyramidal or ovate, and more 
oblong, at length linear oblong, as they recede from 
the main rachis ; below, except the lowest, they are 
also sessile, narrowly attached, but gradually more and 
more adnate upwards.
The pinnules of the upper 
pinnse resemble the smaller pinnules of the lower.
The venation consists in the larger lobes of a flexuous 
primary midvein from which alternate venules proceed 
toward the serratures, sometimes branched, the sori 
being situated midway on the simple venules and close 
above the fork upon the branched.
In the smaller 
pinnules the vein bears a sorus midway on its lowest 
anterior venule, so that a row of sori is formed on each 
side of, and at a little distance from, the principal vein.
The basal lobes often bear two or three other sori, and 
are traversed by a series of alternate simple venules.
The fructification occupies the whole back of the 
frond, from base to apex.
The sori are prominent and 
distinct, in two series, near the vein of the smaller 
pinnules and on the lobes of the larger.
Indusium 
persistent, reniform, indistinctly erose-dentate (irregu- 
THE REMOTE BUCKLER FERN 
47 
larly toothed) on the margin, not glandular.
Spore- 
cases roundish obovate.
Spores oblong, granulated, 
the majority abortive.
No known varieties.
THE RIGID BUCKLER FERN.
Lastrea rigida.
PRESL.
This Fern is of moderate size, growing from a foot to 
two feet in height, erect, and spreading, the fronds 
annual, springing from the crown of a comparatively 
thick scaly tufted stem, or caudex.
It is one of the 
most elegantly divided of the Lastreas, the pinnules 
being all doubly and very evenly serrated, or toothed.
The fronds are narrowly triangular, rarely somewhat 
lanceolate, bipinnate, with narrow tapering pinnu> ; 
comparatively small, and generally broadest at the 
base, always covered with minute glands, giving off a 
pleasant balsamic fragrance when bruised, to be smelt 
also in the sunshine from the untouched plants.
The 
outline of the pinnules, bluntly oblong with shallow 
lobes (differing in this from the other native species of 
the genus), is most nearly approached by some forms 
of Filix-mas incisa, and the serratures also, as in that, 
are not at all spinulose or bearded, but short and 
merely acute (it is, however, distinguishable from that 
by its size, its outline, its glandular surface, and its 
glandular-fringed indusium).
It can hardly be mis- 
taken for any other of the Lastreas, nearly all the rest 
of them having spinulose serratures.
THE RIGID BUCKLER FERN 49 
The stipes is densely scaly.
The venation is similar 
to that of Filix-mas, the pinnules having a flexuous 
midvein, with alternate venules again pinnately 
branched.
The sori are borne on the lowest anterior 
branch of each venule, that is, on the lowest veinlet on 
the side next the apex of the pinnule, and are covered 
by a kidney-shaped indusium which does not fall away.
The Eigid Buckler Fern is almost entirely confined 
to a few limestone craggy tracts within a small area of 
the contiguous parts of Westmorland, Lancashire, and 
Yorkshire.
The Eev. GK Finder writes:"!
met 
with Lastrea rigida in great profusion along the whole 
of the great scar limestone district, at intervals be- 
tween Arnside Knott (where it is comparatively scarce) 
and Ingleborough, being most abundant on Hutton 
Roof Crags and Farleton Knott, where it grows in the 
deep fissures of the natural platform, and occasionally 
high in the clefts of the rocks ; it is generally much 
shattered by the winds, or cropped by the sheep, which 
seem fond of it.
With regard to the shape of the 
frond, I may mention that among some hundreds of 
specimens I found but one or two which had the fronds 
oblong-lanceolate, all being more or less triangular, and 
not having the lower pair of pinnse shorter than those 
in the upper and middle parts of the fronds.
The 
fronds of young plants are remarkably triangular.
The two forms of fronds no doubt depend upon the 
situation, whether sheltered or otherwise, and on other 
causes ; still I imagine the triangular to be the true 
Form of the plant." Its elevation above the sea ap- 
pears to range between 200 and 1,500 feet.
In 
1 
50 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
cultivating it, it should be borne in mind that it is 
more impatient than other kinds of stagnant moisture, 
and that it is better for the caudex to be a little above 
the soil, to provide a better fall for the decumbent 
fronds.
HABITATS.
Arnside Knott, Hutton Roof Crags, 
Farleton Knott, Silverdale, Whitbarrow.
potyclados, Farleton Knott, J.
M. Barnes.
interrupt, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
THE CRESTED BUCKLER FEEN.
Lastrea cristata,* PEESL.
Lastrea cristata, L.
uliginosa, and L.
spinulosa, 
constitute a group distinguishable by habit and other 
characters from the allied dilatata group, with which 
the more highly -developed form spinulosa is sometimes 
associated.
"In our 'Handbook of British Ferns 
(2nd ed.)," says Moore, "this group was treated as 
consisting of three forms of one not very variable 
species ; and notwithstanding that many Fern authori- 
ties do not appear to adopt this view, we have no 
doubt whatever that the plants possess a close natural 
affinity, and have characters which separate them from 
the forms of Lastrea dilatata, however similar to the 
latter, in some cases, may be the degree and mode of 
division in the fronds points on which botanists are 
at times too prone to rely.
The close affinity of the 
three forms now alluded to is evidenced by marks far 
more important than those to be derived from such 
characters as the outline or cutting of the fronds, 
namely, by the creeping caudex, by the erect narrow 
fronds, by the sparse and pallid broad appressed scales 
of the stipes, and by the entire indusia, in all which 
* Polypodium cristatum (Linnceus).
E 2 
52 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
respects they perfectly agree.
On the other hand, it 
is in these points that they differ from the dilatata 
group.
In the folio edition of this work, we were led, 
in deference to the more commonly received opinion, 
to treat of spinulosa separately ; but after some years' 
further observation, we revert to our former view, and 
place it here under cristata"* 
To this it may be well to add the special distinctions 
which characterize the whole group of what were once 
called Crested Shield Ferns L.
cristata, uliginosa, 
spinulosa, dilatata, and cemula, although L.
cristata is 
only known in the Lake Country by its variety spinu- 
losa, the true Crested Buckler Fern and var.
uligi- 
nosa occurring only in more southern counties.
Lastrea cristata grows with very erect, narrow, ob- 
long fronds, whose deltoid pinnae are not quite divided 
down to the midrib, the lobes being attached by the 
whole width of their base, and oblong, with a rounded 
apex.
The stipes is sparingly furnished with broad, 
obtuse, membranous, whole-coloured scales ; and the 
caudex is creeping.
Lastrea uliginosa has two or three sorts of fronds.
One set, the earlier barren ones, resembles those of 
cristata, the fertile being bipinnate at the bases of the 
pinnae ; the fronds narrow-oblong, the lobes tapering 
to a point.
The scales of the stipes are broad, blunt, 
and whole-coloured, and the caudex is creeping.
This 
connects cristata with spinulosa.
Lastrea spinulosa grows erect ; has narrow, lance- 
shaped, bipinnate fronds, rather more deeply divided 
* Nature-Printed Tirilish Ferns, octavo edition, 1863.
NARROW PRICKLY-TOOTHED BUCKLER FERN 53 
than the foregoing.
The scales of the stipes are blunt 
and whole-coloured, and the caudex creeps.
Lastrea dilatata spreads more, and has broader or 
ovate lance-shaped fronds.
The stipes is clothed with 
lance-shaped scales, darker-coloured in the centre than 
at the margins.
The caudex is erect.
Lastrea amula is spreading, evergreen, and has 
fronds smaller than those of dilatata, triangular, bi- 
pinnate, the lobes having their edges curved back so as 
to present a hollow upper surface.
The scales are 
narrow, pointed, and jagged ; and the caudex is erect.
The Narrow Prickly-Toothed Buckler Fern L.
SPINULOSA (sometimes spinosa) has a stout stem, or 
caudex, either decumbent or slowly creeping horizon- 
tally, with the fronds growing erect from its apex ; the 
fronds branched, sometimes tufted, slightly scaly, 
formed of the enlarged and enduring bases of the de- 
cayed fronds, surrounding a woody axis, the scales 
resembling those of the stipes.
The fronds are from a 
foot to three or four feet high, bipinnate, the pinnse 
obliquely tapering, the inferior pinnules being larger 
than the superior.
This is most obvious at the base of 
the frond, where the pinnse are broader than they are 
toward the apex.
The lower pinnules on the basal 
pinnse are oblong, narrowing upwards, the margins 
deeply cut, the lobes being serrated, and the teeth 
somewhat spinulose ; those toward the apex of each 
pinna, as well as the basal ones of the pinnse nearer 
the apex of the frond, become gradually less and less 
compound, so that, although the margins are still fur- 
nished with spinulose teeth, they gradually lose the 
B 3 
54 FERNS Of THE LAKE COUNTKY 
deep lobes which are found on the lowest pinnse.
In 
all the more compound Perns there is a similar differ- 
ence of form according to the disposition of the pin- 
nules, and in all such cases it is usual only to describe 
the most complete that is, those at the base of a few 
of the lowermost pinnse.
The venation in the less 
divided pinnules consists of a midvein giving off 
branched venules, the sori borne on the lower anterior 
venules proceeding from these, about midway between 
the vein and the margin, thus forming an even double 
row on each pinnule.
The same arrangement occurs 
on the lobes when the pinnule is more divided.
The 
indusia are kidney-shaped, with the margin entire.
L. spinulosa is common over the whole of England, 
generally in moist shady places, ranging from the sea- 
level to an elevation of 600 feet.
In Scotland, Wales, 
and Ireland it is rare.
In the Lake Country it is 
common in bogs and damp woods throughout the 
district.
THE 
BROAD PRICKLY-TOOTHED 
BUCKLER FERN.
Lastrea dilatata.
PEESL.
The Broad Prickly-toothed Buckler is one of the 
most compound and handsome, as well as one of the 
most common, of our native Ferns, growing in broad 
arched fronds, from a large tufted stem, to, when most 
luxuriant, even the height of five feet, always more 
or less drooping or curved.
It is a species very diffi- 
cult to understand, on account of its many varieties, 
some of which pass almost into L.
spinulosa on the 
one side, and others into L.
cemula on the other.
The 
distinguishing characteristics, however, of L.
dilatata 
in the group of Crested Shield Ferns, of which it forms 
a very large proportion, are its lance-shaped dark- 
56 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
centred scales and its gland-fringed indusia.
The fol- 
lowing description applies to the more usual or typical 
form of dilatata.
Fronds ovate, lance-shaped in general outline, on a 
stipes of moderate length much thickened at the base 
and densely clothed with entire lance-shaped pointed 
scales very dark brown in their centres but nearly 
transparent at their margins ; bipinnate, with elongate- 
triangular, or tapering, pinnae, placed nearly opposite, 
and more or less obliquely, from the larger develop- 
ment of the lower side.
Pinnae pinnate, pinnules near 
their base often so deeply divided as to be again almost 
pinnate, the rest pinnatifid or in the upper parts merely 
deeply serrated, but the margins, whether deeply or 
shallowly lobed, set with teeth ending in short spinous 
points.
Venation similar to the more compound parts 
of the allied species.
Sori in great plenty, ranged in 
double lines across the larger lobes of the pinnae or 
along the less divided parts, and covered by kidney- 
shaped scales or indusia fringed round their margins 
with projecting glands.
The typical form of L, dilatata grows nearly all 
over the United Kingdom, from the coast-level to an 
elevation of 3,000 feet.
It prefers shady situations, 
moist woods and glens, thickets and hedgerows.
It is 
widely dispersed through the northern hemisphere, and 
in the Hookerian Herbarium is a specimen labelled 
" from New Zealand." It is common everywhere 
throughout the Lake District.
L. dumetorum is a distinct variety of dilatata.
Its 
type may be taken from one found by Miss M.
Beever, 
BROAD PEICKLY-TOOTHED BUCKLER FEEN 57 
dwarfish, with broad-ovate or elongate-triangular and 
sometimes deltoid fronds, remarkable for their glandular 
surface, and for the large abundant sori produced 
freely on plants of a very immature age.
Some of 
its modifications have been referred to var.
collina, 
from which, however, they differ in their abundant 
glands and fimbriated or jagged scales.
Miss Beever's 
plant was found on the fells of Silverthwaite, West- 
morland, and the same form has been gathered by Mr.
Clowes near Hawes Water, and by the Eev. Gr.
Finder 
near Elter Water.
L. collina is another distinct and permanent variety, 
a remarkably neat and elegant plant, growing erectly, 
the frond having sometimes an ovate outline alternately 
elongated at the apex, sometimes more elongated, ob- 
long-lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, dark green, a foot 
to two feet high, smooth or sparingly glandular, bi- 
pinnate.
The stipes varies from one-half to one-third 
of the frond, green above, tinged with dark purply- 
brown at the base, with entire lanceolate dark-brown 
scales, conspicuously darker in the centre.
The scales 
narrow, with a long subnate point, at the base of the 
stipes, where they are' most numerous, broader and 
shorter higher up ; the rachis almost without.
The 
pinnse, especially the lower, distant and spreading, the 
lowest pair unequally deltoid, the next more elongate 
and less unequal, the rest narrower, parallel-sided, 
rounding slightly near the end to an acutish point, not 
acuminate.
Pinnules convex, obtusely oblong-ovate, 
the basal narrowed to a broadish stalk-like attachment, 
the rest sessile and more or less decurrent ; the larger 
58 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
pinnules deeply pinnatifid, with blunt oblong lobes, 
sparingly toothed, the teeth coarse acuminately aris- 
tate (or bearded), mostly at the apex.
Sori mostly 
arranged in two lines along the pinnules, as in the 
smaller forms of the species, and covered by gland- 
fringed indusia.
This variety was first brought into 
notice by the Eev. Gr.
Finder, found by Elter Water, in 
Langdale, and by Mr. Ecclestone at Torver, near Conis- 
ton.
This last is rather larger and more divided, with 
concave pinme and strongly convex pinnules ; it is also 
somewhat glandular.
L. alpina is remarkable for being more delicate and 
membranaceous than other forms of the species ; the 
fronds normally oblong, or straightsided, with the 
point tapered off as in the typical spinulosa, but in 
some specimens even broadly ovate, almost or quite 
tripinnate below, bipinnate upwards.
Found by Mr.
Clowes at Hawes Water.
OTHER VARIETIES.
contracta, Mardale, J.
M. Barnes.
interrupta, Witherslack, J.M.Barnes; Windermere, F.Clowes.
irregularis, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
stenophylla, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
glandulosa, Winderraere, F.
Clowes j Levens, J.
Crossfield.
tenera, Windermere, F.
Clowes.
alpina, High Street, F.
Clowes.
dumetorum, Coniston, Miss Beever ; Mardale, F.
Clowes.
collina, Coniston, Miss Beever.
grandidens, Lindal, J.
Crossfield.
Howardii, Levens, M.
Stabler.
THE HAY-SCENTED BUCKLER FERN, 
TRIANGULAR PRICKLY-TOOTHED, OR CONCAVE.
Lastrea cemula.
BBACKKNRIDGE.
The Hay-scented Fern is a plant of from a foot to 
two feet in height, growing in a circle of triangular 
arched or drooping fronds with a crisped appearance, 
from the turning back of the margins of all the seg- 
ments.
Its fragrance is like that of new hay, like hay, 
too, more powerful as it dries, and lasting for a long 
time.
Its stipes is of about the same length as the 
leafy portion of the frond, clothed with jagged pale 
brown scales.
The fronds are bipinnate, the lowest 
pair of pinnse being always longer and larger than the 
rest, and the pinnules on the inferior side of the pinnae 
always larger than those on the superior.
The pin- 
nules are oblong-ovate, the lowest often again divided 
into a series of oblong lobes, mostly decurrent, but 
sometimes slightly stalked, the margin cut into short 
spinous-pointed teeth.
The veins of the pinnules 
alternately branch from a sinuous mid vein, and divide 
again into two or three alternate venules, the lowest 
anterior venule bearing a sorus, the exact ramification 
of the veins depending on the degree in which the 
pinnules or lobes are divided.
The son are spread 
over the whole surface, in two tolerably even lines 
60 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
along each pinnule or lobe.
Indusia small and kidney- 
shaped, with uneven margins fringed by small round 
stalkless glands.
The whole frond is covered with 
similar glands.
By these stalkless, or sessile, glands, 
as well as by the fewer and narrower scales of the 
stipes, L.
aemula is distinguished from L.
dilatata 
whose glands are stalked.
In ordinary cases, the tri- 
angular outline and hollow crisped surface of the 
fronds are sufficient to distinguish the Concave Buck- 
ler Fern, which is also more decidedly evergreen, and 
has this further peculiarity, that the fronds decay from 
above downwards not like the Broad Prickly-toothed 
Fern, upwards from the base.
Its range of elevation 
does not appear to exceed 600 feet.
It prefers shady 
and rocky localities, and is easily cultivated.
HABITATS.
St. Bees' Head (J.
Huddart), Brough- 
ton (J.
M. Barnes), Coniston (Miss Beever), Winder- 
mere (F.
Clowes), 
THE SPLEENWORTS.
THE LADY FERN.
Athyrium Filix-famina.* EOTH.
The genus Atliyrium holds a place between the 
Aspidice (or Shield Ferns) and the Asplenice (or 
Spleen worts).
Its generally elongated sori mark it, 
however, as belonging rather to the latter group, 
though there is a sufficient approach to the roundish 
kidney shape of Lastrea to account for its having been 
also attributed to the former.
It is, nevertheless, not 
* Polypodiura Filix-foemina (Linnaeus), Aspidium Filix-foemina, 
Asplenium Filix-fojmina, Cystopteris Filix-fojmina, &c.
62 PERNS OP THE LAKE COUNTRY 
so like to Lastrea as to be mistaken for it, and is dis- 
tinguishable also from the other Aspleniums by its 
annual fronds and its herbaceous texture.
The Lady Fern, so called because of the peculiar 
delicacy of its fronds contrasted with the masculine 
robustness of the Male Fern, grows like that in plume- 
circlets or coronals from the caudex, which in winter, 
whether close to the ground or a few inches above it, 
bears a tuft of incipient fronds, each rolled up separ- 
ately and the mass nestling in a bed of chaff-like 
scales.
In May or June they are developed, twenty 
or more being usually produced.
In the summer a few 
more generally arise in the centre, the whole dying off 
in the autumn.
The form of the fronds is lanceolate, 
more or less broad, the stipes scaly at the base and 
about a third of the length of the frond.
The fronds 
are bipinnate, the pinnae always lanceolate, more or 
less drawn out at the point, and always again pinnate, 
though sometimes with the bases of the pinnules con- 
nected by a narrow leafy wing, but not so much so as 
to render them merely pinnatifid.
The pinnules, how- 
ever, are more or less lobed or pinnatifid, the lobes 
being sharply toothed in a varying manner.
The 
venation, owing to the delicate texture of the frond, is 
very distinct, consisting in each pinnule of a wavy 
midvein, with alternate and again alternate venules, on 
the anterior side of which, at some distance from the 
margin, is an oblong sorus.
In the larger and more 
divided pinnules the venation is more compound, and 
more than one sorus is borne on each primary vein, 
which thus becomes a midvein with branches on a 
THE LADY FERN 63 
smaller scale.
The sori are slightly curved, the basal 
very much so, being horse-shoe shaped ; the indusia of 
the same form.
This horse-shoe shape is made by the 
lateral line of spore cases crossing the vein and then 
returning, and sometimes the indusium is circular all 
but a small notch, so somewhat resembling the fructifi- 
cation of Lastrea.
One side of the indusium is fixed 
lengthwise to the side of the vein which forms the 
receptacle, while the anterior one (that toward the 
midvein of the pinnule) becomes free, and is split into a 
fringe of hair-like segments.
The Lady Fern is common all over England and 
Ireland, less so in Wales and Scotland (in the High- 
lands at an altitude of 3,000 feet), but found in all our 
Northern, "Western, and Channel Islands ; it is found 
also in one or other of its forms from Lapland to 
Crete, from the Ural mountains to Kamtchatka, from 
the Mediterranean to India, from Abyssinia to Algeria, 
from Canada to British Columbia, and in the United 
States and South America.
It is perhaps the most 
prolific in varieties of all our British species, the 
varieties being very marked, singular, and permanent.
It is common everywhere in the Lake Country.
VABIETIES.
Barnesii, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
Irachypterum, Whiufell, J.
M. Barnes.
defectum, -Tebay, J.
M. Barnes.
eroswn, Brigsteer, J.
M. Barnes ; Windermere, F.
Clowes.
exiguum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
fimbriatum, Farleton Knott, J.
M. Barnes.
64 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
folioso-multifidum, Old Hutton, A.
B. Taylor.
grandissimu/m, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
limbo-spermum, Tebay, J.
M. Barnes.
multicuspis, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
parvicapitatum, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
plumosum Barnesii, Hilnthorpe, J.
M. Barnes.
rhaticum-multifidum, Burneside, A.
B, Taylor.
subcruciforme, Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes.
subdiffitatum, Burneside, Martindale, A.
B. Taylor.
uncum, Arnside, J.
M. Barnes.
laciniatwm, Newby Bridge, Wollaston.
marimtm, Windermere, J.
Wood.
oxydens, Windermere, C.
Monkman.
curium, Windermere, J.
Wood; Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
ramulosum, Windermere, F.
Clowes.
subdepauperatwn, Windermere, F.
Clowes.
flexuosum, Silverdale, J.
Crossfield j Windermere, J.
Huddart.
latifolium, Keswick, Miss Wright ; Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
Monlcmani, Troutbeck, C.
Monkman.
strigosum, Burton, J.
Jones.
exile, Levens, J.
M. Barnes j Burton, J.
Jones.
potydactylum, Dent, A.
Mason ; Windermere, F.
Clowes.
crispatum, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
laciniatum-dissectvm, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
BLACK MAIDEN-HAIR SPLEENWORT.
Aspleniitm Adiantum-nigrum.
LINN.ETJ8.
The true Spleenworts (so called from some old-time 
supposed virtue in curing diseases of the spleen) are 
small evergreens, known from all other of our native 
Perns, except CeteracJi, by the long narrow single sori 
lying in the direction of the veins which traverse the 
fronds, Ceterach being distinguished from them by 
having the backs of its fronds clothed with brown 
scales, under which the sori are hidden.
From their 
F 
66 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTKY 
next neighbours, the Athyriums, they are known by the 
latter having hippocrepiform (or horse-shoe shaped) sori 
and the free margins of the indusia fringed, while in 
the Aspleniums the sori are not curved, and the mar- 
gins of the indusia are but slightly jagged, if not quite 
entire.
The Spleenworts, too, are evergreen ; while 
the Lady Fern is deciduous.
There are nine British 
species of ASPLENIUM fontanum, lanceolatum, Adian- 
tutn-nigrum, marinwn, Trichomanes, viride, Euta- 
muraria, germanicum, and septentrionale.
Of these, 
A. fontanum and A.
lanceolatum do not belong to the 
Lake District, though there is a tradition of the former 
having inhabited Wythburn (found there by Hudson, 
about 1775) Tintil exterminated by the " greed of col- 
lectors." Let the race take heed !
The Black Maiden-hair Spleenwort is an evergreen, 
growing in tufts, and varying in height from three or 
four inches to eighteen or more, including the stipes, 
which is often as long as or longer than the leafy 
portion, except in stunted specimens.
The stipes is of 
a shining dark purple.
The fronds are either erect or 
drooping, according to situation, of a thick leathery 
texture, triangular, more or less elongated toward the 
point, bipinnate, sometimes tripinnate ; the pinnae pin- 
nate, triangular-ovate and elongated at the point, the 
lower pair longer than the next above them ; the pin- 
nules, especially on the larger pinnas, again pinnate, 
the alternate pinnules deeply lobed and the margins 
sharply serrated.
The veins are numerous, each pin- 
nule having its distinct midvein, branching into simple 
or farther-branching veins, on which the sori are pro.
BLACK MAIDEN-HAIR SPLEENWOET 67 
duced near the junction with the midvein, that is to 
say, near the centre of every lobe or pinnule.
All the 
ultimate divisions of the fronds, as well as all the 
larger lobes, have midveins with these simple or 
branched venules.
When young, the sori are distinct 
and of the elongated narrow form common to the 
genus, but, growing older, they spread till they often 
become confluent and cover the entire under-surface of 
the frond.
The indusium is narrow, its margin free 
and entire ; but it is soon lost, being pushed away by 
the growing sori.
This species is very variable : in 
dry and exposed places small and obtuse, in more 
sheltered drawn out and elongated.
These extreme 
states are ranked as varieties.
Some have been found 
also with the fronds variegated with white.
It seems 
to be nearly as common as the Athyriums, though not 
.growing to so great an elevation, for it is found nearly 
everywhere, from Scandinavia to the Cape of Good 
Hope, in the Sandwich Islands, in Afghanistan, in 
Java, and in St. Helena.
It thrives moderately well 
in cultivation if planted in a sandy soil and well 
drained ; and is easily manageable as a pot-plant, but 
requires a pure atmosphere.
It is common throughout 
the Lake Country, either on the slate or limestone, 
often preferring old walls.
VARIETIES.
intermedium, Heversham, J.
M. Barnes.
depauperatwm, Winder in ere, P.
Clowes.
acuti-dentatum, Witherslack, J.
Crossfield.
F2 
THE SEA SPLEENWORT.
Asplenium marinum.
LINN.ETJS.
A sea-side Fern, as its name denotes, but occasion- 
ally found inland ; a tufted evergreen species, erect or 
decumbent, the fronds growing usually six or eight 
inches long, linear or linear lanceolate, of the deepest 
glossy green, and of a leathery texture, with a stipes 
shorter than the frond, smooth, channeled in front, 
chestnut-coloured or purply-brown.
The fronds are 
simply pinnate, with stalked pinna?, connected by a 
narrow wing extending along the rachia ; obtusely 
THE SEA SPLEENWORT.
C9 
ovate or oblong, unequal at the base, the anterior base 
being much developed, while the posterior appears cut 
away, with the margin serrated or crenated.
The 
venation is tolerably distinct : each pinna has a mid- 
vein, giving off veins alternately on either side, branch- 
ing again into a series of venules.
The sori, lying 
obliquely on the anterior side of each venule, form two 
rows on each side of the centre ; oblong or linear, with 
persistent indusia opening along the anterior margin 
as the spores ripen.
The chief variation of the Sea 
Spleenwort consists in the elongation of its parts, the 
pinnae sometimes tapering to a narrow point, sometimes 
also being auricled at the base and deeply lobed.
It 
keeps very close to the sea-level.
In cultivation it 
requires warmth, and grows best in sandy peat-soil, in 
the interstices of stones or rock-work.
The Sea Spleenwort is most abundant on the west 
coast of Europe, extending, however, eastward in the 
Mediterranean.
It is found also on the African coast, 
in the Western Isles, and, according to Sir W.
Hooker 
in St. Helena.
This peculiar distribution has been sup- 
posed to indicate that it took place prior to the great 
disruption of the chalk and the vast deposit of allurial 
mattar along the eastern coast of England.
HABITATS.
Whitehaven, St. Bees' Head, Head of 
Morecambe Bay, Sea-cave near Silverdale, Piel Castle, 
Hey sham.
trrt.0 
COMMON MAIDEN-HAIR SPLEENWORT.
Asplenium Trichomanes.
LiNN^TJS.
The Common Maiden-hair Spleenwort is but a di- 
minutive plant, yet it is one of the most elegant of the 
hardy evergreens, noticeable for the contrast between 
its purply-black stipes (and rachis) and bright green 
pinnse, and for th regularity with which the latter are 
disposed.
Its numerous small slender fronds, generally 
not more than from three to six inches long, though 
sometimes double that, grow in tufts in rock crannies, 
and delight in the crevices of old walls.
Its fronds 
are simply pinnate, the pinnae small and numerous, 
equal-sized, roundishly-oblong, attached to the rachis 
by a stalk-like projection of their posterior base, the 
margins entire or crenated (with convex or round 
teeth).
The pinnse are jointed to the rachis, and when 
old are readily displaced, leaving the black naked 
rachis among the other fronds.
A distinct midvein 
passes through each pinna, branching on each side into 
COMMON MAIDEN-HAIR SPLEENWORT 71 
veins and venules, the anterior bearing the linear sori 
just within the margin of the pinnae.
The sori, when 
young, have a thin indusium, with a rather round- 
toothed free margin, but when older become confluent, 
and cover the whole frond.
This also is a very uni- 
versal Fern, found not only in the Old and New 
f World, but also in the newer world of Australia.
It 
\ once had a medicinal reputation, and, according to 
Eay, was usefully employed in affections of the chest.
It is also sometimes referred to in old medical books 
'as the plant from which the syrup called Capillaire is 
) produced.
Turner, in his Herball, published in 1568 
calls it "English Mayden's Heare," and says: "the 
juice stayeth the heare that falleth of, and if they be 
fallen off, it restoreth them agayne." It grows best 
in cultivation, in sandy loam with leaf-mould, and does 
not require so much shade as other ferns.
HABITATS.
Ambleside, Keswick, Borrowdale, and 
Calder Bridge.
The most beautiful of its VARIETIES is the incisum, 
with pinnso deeply pinnatifid with linear notched seg- 
ments.
It has been found in Borrowdale by Miss 
Wright, and in Lindale-in-Cartmel by Mr. A.
Mason.
OTHER VARIETIES.
depauperatum, Kendal Fell, J.
M. Barnes ; Whitbarrow, F.
Clowes; Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
Ufurcum, Windermere, F.
Clowes ; Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
multifidum, Windermere, F.
Clowes ; Keswick, Miss Wright ; 
Ulverston, Mrs. Hodson.
ra/mosum, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
rotundato-multifidum, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
THE GREEN SPLEENWOKT.
Asplenium viride.* HUDSON.
The Green Spleenwort has so close a resemblance to 
the Common Maiden-hair as to be often mistaken for 
it by hasty observers.
It is distinguished by its green 
compressed rachis (that of A.
Trichomanes being dark 
brown or black), by its persistent pinnae (deciduous in 
A..
Trichomanes), by the more central situation of its 
sori, which are placed rather below than above the 
vein-fork, and by being always of a much paler green 
and of a more delicate herbaceous appearance.
It is 
an evergreen tufted species, with bright pale green 
fronds, narrow, ' linear, simply pinnate, from two to 
eight inches losg, supported by a short stipes, dark at 
the very base, but else green, the rachis all green.
The pinna?
are small, generally roundish-ovate, slightly 
taper toward the base, and attached to the rachis by 
the narrowed stalk-like part, the mai'gin being deeply 
crenated.
The venation is distinct ; the midvein 
sends off alternately a series of venules, either simple 
or forked, which have the sori on their anterior side.
The sori are oblong, covered at first by membranous 
indusia, which are soon pushed aside ; the free margin 
is jagged or crenate.
* Aspleninm Trichomanes ramosuin (Linnteus), Asplenium in- 
termedium (Prest), 
THE GEEEN SPLEENWORT 73 
The Green Spleenwort is found in most moist, 
rocky, mountainous districts of Great Britain ; it oc- 
curs also, though less frequently, in Ireland, and 
throughout Europe.
It is to be cultivated in pots in 
a close damp frame ; or on moist shady rock-work, if 
covered with a bell-glass.
If exposed, it is apt to 
suffer from occasional excessive wet, which often does 
not properly drain away ; and also from the dry hot 
air of summer.
The glass protects it from both these 
casualties, and provided it is not kept too close it will 
then thrive well.
The proper bell-glasses for these 
half-hardy Ferns have a small opening in the crown, 
which may be closed or not at pleasure, but which is 
generally best left open.
In pots, the plants should 
have a gritty, porous soil.
HABITATS.
Ambleside, Patterdale, Kendal Fell 
(W.
Christy), Hutton Eoof, Farleton, Arnside (Rev.
G. Finder), Casterton Fell, Mazebeck Scar (R.
_B.
Bowman), Borrowdale, Ashness Grhyll, Barrow Force, 
Grillsland, Brandy Grhyll on Carrock Fell, Whitbarrow, 
&c.
VARIETIES.
mitltifidum, Farleton Knott, J.
Jones j Scout Scar, J.
Cross- 
field, J.
Wood.
subbipinnatum, Whitbarrow, J.
Huddart.
varians, Kendal Fell, J.
M. Barnes.
THE RUE-LEAVED SPLEENWORT, 
OR WALL RUE.
Asplenium Suta-muraria.
Lnrcratrs.
This is a very diminutive Fern, growing, as its name 
implies, upon old walls, and very common on the lime- 
stone rocks, like the Rue in general appearance ; some- 
times not above an inch high, seldom in the most 
favourable situations reaching to the height of six 
inches.
Its fronds are numerous, of bloom-covered 
(glaucous) green, usually triangular in outline, bip in- 
nate, and with a stipes about half the entire length of 
the plant.
The pinnse are alternate, with rhomboidal, 
or roundish-ovate, or obovate pinnules, the base wedge- 
shaped, tapering into a more or less distinct petiole, 
the apex rounded or truncate, or sometimes acutely 
prolonged, always toothed with 
small or nearly equal teeth.
The 
more luxuriant fronds become 
almost tri-pinnate, the pinnules 
deeply pinnatifid, and the lobes 
formed like the ordinary pin- 
nules.
When the plants are 
quite young, the fronds are 
simple and roundish kidney-shaped.
At a later stage 
they are occasionally only once pinnate, with pinnatifid 
pinnae.
The upper margins of the pinnules are irreg- 
THE RUE-LEAVED SPLEENWOET 75 
ularly-toothed.
The venation consists of a series of 
veins repeatedly forked from the base, so that there 
is no distinct midvein.
; the number of the venules 
corresponds with the number of marginal teeth.
Several sori are produced near the centre of the pinna, 
covered by indusia opening inwardly with a jagged 
or irregularly-sinuated margin.
The plant is ever- 
green and easy of cultivation.
It is so common that 
there is no occasion to give any special habitats.
It 
extends to about 600 feet above the sea-line.
In its normal conditions A.
Huta-muraria is easily 
recognizable : the characters afforded by its triangular 
(deltoid) outline, bipinnate or tripinnate division, and 
distinct wedge-shaped pinnules, together with the 
smallness of the fronds, sufficiently distinguishing it 
from the other Aspleniums.
There are, however, cer- 
tain of its forms which are not, at first sight, so easily 
separated from A.
germanicum, being narrow on the 
fronds or pinnules, and sometimes scarcely more than 
pinnate.
These forms are best distinguished by the 
round-toothed (crenulate) indusia, and by the fine 
even toothing of the anterior margin, the indusium 
in A.
germanicum being entire, and the apex of its 
pinnules being less deeply and unequally notched.
VARIETIES.
cristatum, Farleton Knott, Wollaston.
unilaterale, Troutbeck, Miss Wright ; Kendal Fell, J.
M. 
Barnes.
cuneatum, Sizergh, J.
Crossfield.
ramosum, Silverdale, J.
Crossfield.
THE 
ALTERNATE-LEAVED SPLEENWORT.
Aspleniwn germanicum.
WEIS.
The Alternate-leaved Spleenwort stands between the 
Wall Rue and the Forked Spleenwort, sometimes, in- 
deed, marked as a dubious species, but decided by 
Moore to be perfectly distinct.
It is one of the rarest 
of our native Ferns, rare also in Northern and Central 
Europe.
In other parts of the world it is not known.
It is so rare here in Great Britain that Moore records 
only one single variety.
Its altitudinal range is from 
300 to 600 feet above the sea.
The Alternate Spleenwort grows in tufts, the fronds 
from three to six inches high, sub-evergreen (the fronds 
more or less persistent), narrow linear in general out- 
line, pinnate, divided into distinct, alternate, wedge- 
shaped pinnae, one or two of the lowest having gene- 
rally a pair of very deeply-divided lobes, the upper 
more and more slightly lobed, all having their upper 
ends toothed or notched.
The venation is very in- 
distinct, on account both of the narrowness of the parts 
of so small fronds and of their opacity.
There is no 
midvein, but one of the venules extends to each of the 
teeth, each vein entering from the base becoming twice 
or thrice branched as it reaches the broader parts .up- 
wards, six or eight veins generally lying near together 
THE ALTERNATE-LEAVED SPLEENWORT 
in a narrow fan-like manner in each 
of the larger pinnse, the smaller hav- 
ing proportionally fewer.
Two or 
three linear sori are produced on a 
pinna, covered by membranous in- 
dusia, the free margin of which is 
entire, or slightly sinuous, but not 
jagged.
The sori at length become 
confluent.
It is very difficult of 
cultivation.
For the cultivation of A.
germani- 
cum, Moore (our chief authority) 
recommends that it should be potted 
in sandy peat-soil, well drained by a 
mixture of rubbly matter (indeed, 
good drainage seems indispensable to 
almost all of the Fern kind) ; and that it should* be 
kept under a bell-glass in a shaded frame or greenhouse.
The plants are very liable to die in winter, the best 
safeguard from which is not to allow any water to 
lodge about the crowns, nor to keep the bell-glass too 
closely or too constantly over them.
HABITATS.
Borrowdale (Miss WrigU and H.
E. 
Smith), and near Scawfell (Eev. H.
W. Haivker in an 
excursion with J.
Huddart and F.
Clowes.
THE FORKED SPLEENWORT.
Asplenium septentrionale.
HULL.
This is another of the small and rare Ferns, though 
more widely distributed than A.
germanicu/m, and 
growing to an elevation of 3,000 feet, tufted some- 
times in large masses and grassy looking, differing 
from A.
germanicum (which some botanists consider a 
variety of it) by its fronds being either simple with 
mere lobes, or forked with two distinct branches, each 
like* its own smaller fronds, and never being regularly 
pinnate as A.
germanicum is.
It is also narrower in 
its parts, with a thicker texture, and less leafy.
The 
fronds are from two to six inches long, slender, and of 
a dull green ; the stipes is rather long and dark purple 
at the base ; the leafy part of the frond, hardly to be 
called leafy, is narrow elongated lance-shaped, split 
near the end into two or sometimes three alternate 
divisions, or in the smaller fronds into as many teeth, 
each of the divisions of the frond having its margin 
cut into two or more sharp-pointed teeth, the points of 
the larger teeth very frequently split again.
The 
forked fronds are indefinite in form and apparently 
one-sided, one division being smaller than the other, 
and looking like a side branch with nothing to balance 
THE FORKED SPLEENWORT 79 
it on the other side of the rachis.
The lobes are some- 
times so much separated as to look like distinct pinnse.
There is no midrib or vein, the rachis answering the 
purpose if the frond is not lobed, or else becoming 
forked so as to send up one vein to each of the teeth.
Three or four long linear sori are crowed into this 
small space, so that when the ripening sori burst the 
indusia, they become confluent over the whole under- 
surface.
This confluence of the sori over the whole 
under-surface has led some writers to consider this 
plant an Acrostichum.
Others, from the sori being 
face to face in consequence of their growing on each 
side of the vein and almost close, have thought it a 
Scolopendrium, the mark of which is to have the sori.
confluent in pairs face to face.
It has therefore been 
sometimes called Acrostichum septentrionale and Scolo- 
pendrium septentrionale.
If the plant, however, be 
examined when young, it will be found to be a true 
Asplenivm.
The Forked Spleenwort does not appear to be found 
in Ireland ; but, though rare, has a wide range in 
Great Britain, from Devonshire to the Orkneys.
It 
grows abundantly in some of the mountainous tracts 
of Central Europe, and extends from Eussia and Scan- 
dinavia to Italy and Spain.
In Asia it inhabits the 
mountain ranges of the Ural and the Altai, and is 
found from Northern India to the Caucasus.
It 
occurs also in New Mexico.
It prefers fissures of 
rocks, or between the stones of loose walls.
As in the case of the allied species (Moore again, in 
the octavo edition of his Nature-printed British Ferns), 
80 FEENS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
many persons fail to cultivate this Fern with success ; 
probably from the use of fine soil in too large masses.
Naturally this is a rupestral (rock-growing) plant, and 
this condition should be imitated by its being planted 
among masses of porous sand-stone in the interstices 
of which, and only in the interstices, a little sandy soil 
should be placed.
It would no doubt also be an ad- 
vantage to plant somewhat horizontally instead of too 
vertically and to have the upper stones large enough to 
shade the crowns of the plants from the sun.
Many 
Ferns do not need so much shade as is given in a col- 
lection to the tenderer sorts ; and this partial shadow- 
ing would be more congenial to some of the wall or 
rock species than a more general exclusion of the sun.
HABITATS.
Scawfell, by Wastwater, Honister Crags, 
Borrowdale, Newlands, Keswick, Helvellyn, Patter- 
dale, Eed Screes (Ambleside), Crummock Water.
THE 
COMMON 
HART'S TONGUE 
FERN.
Scolopendrium vulgare.* SMITH 
Scolopendrium forms a sub-group of the Aspleniece, 
in which the sori, instead of being simple and distinct, 
are brought together in opposite pairs, so that what 
appears to be a line of spore-cases forming a sorus is in 
fact a double line forming a double or twin sorus.
The name Scolopendrium is from Scolopendra, a centi- 
pede, from some supposed resemblance between the 
* Asplenium Scolopendrium (lAnnaus), Blechnum linguifolium, 
82 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
feet of the centipede and the lines of fructification of 
the Fern.
Its English name comes from the likeness 
of the whole frond to the shape of a Hart's tongue, 
differing altogether from the generality of its feathery 
fellows, in being only one long shining bright green 
leaf, partially erect when dwarf, but drooping in its 
larger development, growing in groups or tufts, on 
rocks, damp masonry, and moist banks, from four 
inches to upwards of two feet long, hanging down in- 
deed like great tongues lolling over the grey walls or 
grassy banks.
The dwarf fronds are thick and of a leathery texture, 
the larger thinner and less rigid ; their outline is what 
is called strap-shaped, that is nai'row oblong lanceolate 
much elongated ; they taper toward a point at the 
apex, and become narrower downwards, cordate 
(rounded like the thick end of the heart in cards) at 
the base ; the margin is entire, or very slightly wavy ; 
and the stipes is shaggy and about half the length of 
the leaf.
The venation consists of a strong midvein or 
midrib, extending the whole length of the frond, from 
which run forked veins, their branches parallel and 
proceeding direct toward the margin, terminating just 
within it in a club-shaped apex.
The veins are usually 
forked twice, but are not constant to any exact num- 
ber of divisions.
The sori, which are oblong patches 
of unequal length, lying in the direction of the veins 
at short intervals along the upper two-thirds of the 
frond, are composed each of two lines of fructification 
united at their sides, each of these lines, however, 
consisting of a complete sorus, so that the two united 
COMMON HART'S-TONGUE FERN 83 
are properly called a twin sorus.
This twin sorus is 
always produced between two fascicles of veins : that 
is, the lowermost venule produced by one vein and the 
uppermost of another below become each a receptacle 
upon which one of the two contiguous lines of spore- 
cases is produced.
Their indusia are attached on the 
upper and lower sides of the venules, the other edges 
overlapping, so that the free margin is outside the fas- 
cicle of venules to which it belongs.
When very 
young, the separation where they overlap is not ap- 
parent, but becomes so as they advance toward matu- 
rity ; till at last they open down the centre, one in- 
dusium turning up and the other down, the two lines 
of spore-cases becoming confluent and confused.
This is the normal condition of Scolopendriwm ; but 
the genus is one of the most remarkably prolific in 
varieties, and in remarkable varieties, among all known 
Ferns, the greater part of these, though not un- 
frequently altogether monstrous, permanent and re- 
taining their peculiarities in cultivation.
Several forms 
very distinct in themselves, and distinct also from the 
parent, have been produced from the spores by artificial 
treatment, indicating how probably the same process is 
going on in a state of nature, more slowly perhaps and 
imperceptibly, but as certainly, giving rise to new 
forms, some transient, but some to be perpetuated.
The fructification of Scolopendriu/ni is, of course, as 
being one of the Polypodiacece, normally dorsal ; but 
in some of its varieties there is a very curious deviation 
from the law : the sori are produced on the upper as 
well as the lower surface, and sometimes abundantly 
G2 
84 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
so.
This occasionally happens from the elongation of 
the normally-placed sorus of the underside, which ex- 
tends to the margin and returns on the upper side 
when the sori are placed opposite the marginal crena- 
tures.
But it also frequently happens that the sori 
are produced on the upper side distinctly within the 
margin, and where there are no corresponding sori 
beneath.
Those varieties which have the margins 
toothed (crenated) or lobed seem most liable to assume 
this suprasoriferous (bearing-the-sori-on-the-upper-sur- 
face) condition.
The Hart's Tongue seems to be pretty generally 
distributed throughout England, Scotland (more 
sparingly), Ireland and the Channel Islands, and 
through most countries in the northern temperate 
zone.
It is not a sea Fern, but prefers the coast 
neighbourhood in more northern latitudes, ranging to 
an elevation of some 500 or 600 feet.
With all its 
varieties, it is hardly to be considered a common Fern.
It may be easily cultivated, and no Fernery should be 
without some few at least of its endless changes.
Medicinal virtues have been attributed to it; among 
others, that of being good for burns and scalds.
It is 
abundant in the limestone districts, and found also 
here and there upon the slate.
VARIETIES.
t 
limarginatum, Ulverston, Mr. Uadwin ; Beetliam, J.
Cross- 
field; Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes.
contractum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
crispum-sori/erum, Whitbarrow, A.
B. Taylor.
COMMON HART'S-TONdUE FEEN 85 
crista, galli, Levens, J.
M. Barnes; Whitbarrow, F.
Clowes; 
Arnside, J.
M. Barnes.
cristatum, Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes ; Beetham, J.
Crossfield.
cymbiformce, Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes, G.
Stable.
fissum, Brigsteer, J.
M. Barnes; Silverdale, J.
Crossfield.
glomeratum, Storth, Miss Nicholson.
iMcisum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
intermnricatum, Milnthorpe, J.
M. Barnes.
laciniatum, Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes.
latiniato-marginatum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
lineare, Whitbarrow, J.
M. Barnes.
marginatum, Whitbarrow and elsewhere, F.
Clowes, J.
M. 
Barnes, J.
Crossfield.
muricatum, Farleton Knott, J.
Jones.
polycwpis-transver&um, Brigsteer, J.
M. Barnes.
undosum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes ; Beetham, J.
Cross- 
field.
polymorphum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
projectum, Milnthorpe, J.
M. Barnes ; Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
reniforme t Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
rimosum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
rugoso-marginatum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
sagittato-crispum, Milnthorpe, Miss Wilson.
nudisontm, Milnthorpe, J.
M. Barnes.
supralineatum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes.
supralineato-fimbriatum, Levens, J.
M. Barnes ; near Ulverston, 
Mrs. Hodgson.
undulowm, Levens, Garnett.
variegatum, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
imperfectum, Whitbarrow, Wollaston.
ramosum, Grange, Dawthwaite.
varidbile, Hevershani, J.
M. Barnes; near Ulverston, Mrs.
Hodgson.
sculptwratum, Farleton Knott, J.
Jones ; Ulverston, Miss A.
Hodgson.
macrosorum, Wharton, Miss A.
Hodgson ; Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
G3 
86 FERNS OF TIIE LAKE COUNTRY 
crispatitm, Furnees Abbey, Mrs. Hodgson.
exsertum, Grange, Miss A.
Hodgson.
pocelliferum, Farletoii Knott.
cornutum, Silverdale, J.
Crossfield., 
crispum, Ulverston, J.
Crossfield.
digitatum, Cark, J.
Crossfield.
divaricatum, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
limbospermum, Beetham Fell, J.
Crossfield.
potyschides, Arnside, J.
Crossfield; Holmes, J.
M. Barnes.
cornwto-abruptum, J.
Crossfield.
aLbescens, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
THE COMMON SCALE FERN, 
OR SCALY SPLEENWOET.
Asplenium Ceterach.* LINN.EUS.
Ceteracli, the botanical name of this genus (of which 
there is only one British species), is said to be a cor- 
ruption of CTietherak, the name given to it by Arabian 
or Persian medical writers.
Its old English designa- 
tion of Milt-wast is said also to be a corruption : the 
Milt being the Spleen, and wast said to be from waste, 
because of some story of its destroying the spleen, 
but more probably, as Bailey puts it in his good old 
dictionary, "Milt-wast, wort, 
Herbs" (making toast the 
synonym of wort, a herb), 
Milt-wast is simply Spleen- 
wort, and no corruption at 
all.
It was also called Finger 
Feme, "because," says Turner 
in his Herbal (1551), "it 
is no longer than a manne's 
finger," and Scale Feme, " be- 
cause it is all full of scales 
in the inner syde.
" The 
Scaly Milt-wast or Spleen- 
wort, growing generally about 
the size of " a manne's finger, " sometimes not 
* Ceterach officinarum (Willdenow), Scolopendrium Ceteracli, 
Gymnogramma Ceterach, Blechnum squainosurn, &c.
88 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
so large, but sometimes even six or eight inches 
long, is a tufted evergreen, living on the limestone, 
and lodging, when away from its native rocks, on any 
old walls or ruins.
The stipes is short and scaly ; the 
fronds are commonly pinnatifid, sometimes pinnate, 
divided rather more deeply.
The upper surface is a 
deep opaque green ; the under is densely crowded with 
closely-packed and overlapping scales, whose rusty 
brownness, as they project beyond the margin, seen 
yet more fully in the exposed under-surface of the 
young partially-developed fronds, contrasts with the 
deep green of the upper surface.
The pinnae or lobes 
are ovate, either entire or lobed in the margin.
The 
venation is indistinct, on account of the opacity of the 
thick and fleshy fronds.
Indeed, it is only to be made 
out by examining young fronds, removing the scaly- 
covering, and the outer skin of the frond itself.
It is 
then seen that the principal vein, entering at the lower 
corner, proceeds sinuously toward the upper side of the 
apex, branching alternately, and branching again, the 
venules becoming more or less joined near the margin.
The sori are borne irregularly along the sides of the 
venules, most of them directed toward the apex of the 
pinna.
At first they are quite hidden by the scales, 
but ultimately the spore-cases protrude between them, 
though, being nearly of the same colour, never very 
obviously.
In old times this plant had a great medicinal reputa- 
tion.
Gerard writes of it : " There be empiricks or 
blinde practitioners of this age who teach that with 
this herbe not only the hardness and swelling of the 
COMMON SCALE FERN 89 
spleene, but all infirmities of the liver, may be effectu- 
ally and in a very short time removed 
But this is to be reckoned amongst the old wives' 
fables, and that also which Dioscorides telleth of, touch- 
ing the gathering of spleenewort in the night, and other 
most vaine things which are found here and there 
scattered in old books." There may be yet some grain 
of truth in even old wives' fables ; and CeteracJi, though 
its Arabic name be lost, is still retained in Italy in the 
list of officinal plants.
On the Welsh coast they use 
it as a bait in fishing for rock-cod.
It does not appa- 
rently extend further north than Scotland, but is 
spread over the centre and south of Europe, North and 
" South Africa," through Central Asia, and, it is said, 
in Brazil.
It grows freely in the garden in lime- 
rubbish, requiring to be kept rather dry.
HABITATS.
Arnside Knott (Miss Beever), Miln- 
thorpe, Scout's Scar (Kendal), Ambleside (Miss S.
Seever), Grosforth (Robsori), Keswick, Sand with, St.
Bees, Yew Crags and Ara Beck (Ullswater), Whit- 
barrow, &c.
ramosum, Arnside, J.
Crossfield.
crenatum, In several places.
THE COMMON HARD FERN.
Slechnum Spicant.* HOTH.
BlecTinum (a Latinized form of the Greek Blechnori) 
is only a Fern any kind ; but Spicant, erect and 
spike-like, as an ear of corn, well expresses the peculiar 
appearance of this plant, with its erect fertile frond 
standing above the less erected barren fronds around 
it.
The Hard Fern, too, is a no less expressive title, 
for the plant is hard, rigid and hardy too.
It is one 
of the few English Ferns producing distinct-looking 
kinds of fronds fertile and barren.
The barren grow 
in tufts, very gracefully and droopingly disposed, from 
six to twelve inches high ; and in the centre of them, 
always higher, and sometimes twice their height, rises 
the hard upright fertile frond.
The barren fronds are 
attached to the caudex by a very short scaly stipes, 
the stipes of the fertile frond also scaly ; the scales long- 
pointed and sparse, are half the length of the whole 
frond, and of a dark brown.
Both kinds are narrow 
lanceolate, the barren being only deeply pinnatifid, 
while the fertile are pinnate ; the segments in both are 
long and narrow, like the teeth of a comb.
The vena- 
* Osmunda Spicant (Linnaus), Asplenium Spicant, Lomaria 
Spicant, Blcchnum borcnle, &c.
COMMON HARD FEfiN 91 
tion of the barren fronds is dis- 
tinct, a stout midrib or vein pro- 
ducing lateral veins once or twice 
forked, the venules extending pa- 
rallel toward the margin, and ter- 
minating in a "small club-shaped 
head.
The venation of the fertile 
frond, not so distinct on account 
of the contraction of the parts, 
differs in having a longitudinal 
venule on each side the midvein, 
forming the receptacle to which 
the spore-cases are attached.
The 
spore-cases are arranged in two 
linear sori, one on each side of 
the midvein, distinct while young, 
but often becoming confluent and 
covering all the under-surface.
The indusia, when mature, burst 
toward the midrib, and become 
split, here and there, at points 
opposite some of the venules.
The Hard Fern is an evergreen, 
not large, but strong and very 
distinct - looking ; growing in 
heaths and rough stony places, 
in woods and shady bottoms, pre- 
ferring moisture, but careless of 
situation, and growing in Cum- 
berland at an elevation of 3,000 
feet, in Scotland a thousand feet 
92 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
above that.
From Lapland to the Cape of Good Hope, 
from Japan to the Azores, from Chili to Brazil, it 
grows everywhere, and is one of our most common 
Ferns, yet a very elegant plant, not by any means to 
be despised because it is hardy and easy of cultivation.
Coniston, Ambleside, and Ullswater are named as spe- 
cial places of its inhabiting in this Lake Country.
VARIETIES.
anomalum, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes ; in Eskdale, Isaac 
Huddart and P.
Clowes.
condensum, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
heteroptyllum, Kentmere, J.
M. Barnes.
linecvre, Witherslack, J.
M. Barnes.
longidactyhim, Brigsteer, A.
B. Taylor.
polydactylon, Sleddale Fell, J.
M. Barnes.
projectum, Borrowdale, J.
M. Barnes ; Kirkby Moor, J.
Cross- 
field.
stnctum, Coniston, Miss Beever ; Long Sleddale, J.
M. Barnes ; 
Windennere, P.
Clowes and J.
Crossfield.
multijidum, Windermere, P.
Clowes.
deniigerum, Windermere, F.
Clowes ; Black Combe, J.
M. 
Barnes.
cristatvm, Windermere, Isaac Huddart.
vellum, Burton, J.
Jones.
BBAKB, OE BEACKEN.
Pteris aquilina.
LINN.ETTS.
Pteris is the Greek pteros, a feather, applied of old 
to some kind of Pern, and well applied here, Pteris 
aquilina, the eagle feather, being doubly applicable to 
the magnificent, however common, Bracken.
Bracken 
is Saxon ; it is the Female Fern of old writers before 
Linnaeus, not to be confounded with TTielypteris, 
the Feminine Fern, nor with Filix-foemina, the Lady 
94s PERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
Fern.
Fern itself is old Saxon also.
The Bracken 
grows everywhere, except on chalk -(possibly not getting 
depth there), and is the commonest of all our Ferns.
Over sandy wastes, on hedge banks, in warm moist 
lanes and woods, it grows abundantly, overtopping the 
rankest flowers, climbing among the bushes, half sup- 
ported by them, to a height of from a couple of feet to 
sometimes eight or ten.
The caudex, thick and black- 
ish, is usually creeping, creeping just beneath the sur- 
face more extensively than that of any other Fern ; 
but in some cases growing straight downwards to a 
great depth, Mr. Newman stating that he has found it 
even fifteen feet below the ground.
The fronds appear 
so soon as the frosts are over, coming up in little curls 
like shepherds' crooks, or croziers ; sometimes like 
little grey-green downy hooks stuck into the grass, the 
upper part of the stipes not yet having burst the sur- 
face.
The young stipes is downy and soft, growing 
angular and hard in age, spindle-shaped at the base.
The fronds, erroneously said sometimes to be three- 
branched, are truly bipinnate, or tripinnate when very 
luxuriant, the pinnae standing opposite in pairs, each 
pair in succession becoming fully developed while the 
main rachis is extending upward and the next pair is 
beginning to unfold.
It is only when the plant is 
very poor that the fronds appear three-branched, the 
development of the lower pair of branches not leaving 
the plant energy enough to carry up its rachis and 
produce the other pairs of pinna?
which it would nor- 
mally possess.
The true habit of the plant is still more 
clearly shown when it attains its fullest luxuriance, the 
BRAKE, OR BRACKEN 95 
full-grown fronds then consisting merely of a series of 
pairs of branches from bottom to top.
The unrolling 
of the young fronds is very curious, and well worthy of 
watchful notice.
The bipinnate branches, or pinnae, are in general 
ovate slightly elongated, their pinnae (the secondary 
pinnae) narrowly lanceolate.
These last are placed 
rather closely together, and again divided into a series 
of pinnules, which are either undivided and attached 
to the rachis by their stalkless base with a line of 
spore-cases along each margin, or become larger and 
then more elongated and deeply pinnatifid with the 
lines of spore-cases on the margins of the lobes.
The 
apexes of the primary and secondary pinnae and the 
pinnatifid pinnules become less and less divided, until 
at last they end in a single lobe more or less elongate.
The venation is very various, depending on these 
differences of development.
Each pinnule has a dis- 
tinct midvein, producing alternate lateral veins, which 
become twice forked and extend to the margin, where 
they meet a longitudinal marginal vein, which forms 
the receptacle.
The indusium consists of a bleached 
membranous, fringed expansion of the upper skin of 
the fronds, which turns back so as to cover the spore- 
cases ; but there is here another membrane lying 
under the spore-cases, no doubt a similar expansion of 
the skin of the under-surface.
The fronds are annual, 
but owing to their rigid texture do not easily die off 
altogether, only losing their summer verdure, standing 
often through the winter, or until bowed bv the 
weight of snow, in all their summer glory of form, and 
90 FEENS OF THE LAKE COUNTEY 
as gloriously beautiful in their varieties of brown as 
they were in their living greenness.
The Bracken grows everywhere : not only through- 
out our own islands, but in all parts of the world, from 
Lapland (at about 67 degrees north) to the Cape of 
Good Hope.
It rises above the coast-level in the 
Scottish Islands to an elevation of 2,000 feet.
It is 
useful for very many purposes.
In our north country 
the dried fronds make capital litter for cattle ; they 
are also an excellent elastic material for packing and 
storing fruit in, a fine covering to preserve plants from 
frost, and make good thatch, employing the stems also.
They are not bad fuel, though light and quick-burning ; 
and, cut green, are good manure for land, one-third of 
their bulk, according to Sprengel, consisting of mineral 
substances, potash, silica, lime, soda, chlorine, mag- 
nesia, oxide of iron, phosphoric acid, &c.
The dry 
herbage is said to be rich in nitrogen.
They are espe- 
cially good for manui'ing potatoes.
Good also for feed- 
ing pigs, who are fond of the "roots" (the underground 
caudices), which are succulent and starchy, and who 
have no objection to a jelly made by boiling the young 
and tender fronds.
Mr. Lees suggests that the same, 
not made into jelly, but boiled as greens, would not be 
bad eaten with the pig instead of by him ; and Dr.
Clarke recommends them when very young, tender, 
and blanched, as a substitute for asparagus.
The New 
Zealanders eat the " roots " of a variety of the Bracken, 
P. esculenta, pounded between stones and roasted ; in 
Siberia these same stems are used in brewing a kind of 
beer, one-third fern-root to two-thirds malt ; and the 
BRAKE, OR BRACKEN 97 
Kev. M.
J. Berkeley speaks of bread made from it, 
" better to my taste, and probably not less nutritious, 
than Cassava bread." These root-stems are also, on 
account of the quantity of tannin and astringent 
matter contained in them (which, by the way, would 
rather interfere with the asparagus flavour), much 
used abroad in preparing chamois and kid leathers.
The alkalic properties of the fronds make them useful 
too in soap.
Farther, the Bracken is not without a 
medicinal reputation : it is still retained in the Materia 
Medico, as a remedy for worms, and a bed of the green 
plant is looked upon by country folk as " the sovereign- 
est thing on earth " for rickets in children.
Common 
as the plant is there do not seem to be many varieties.
VARIETIES.
crispa, Araside, J.
M. Barnes.
multifida, Levens, J.
M. Barnes ; Windermere, P.
Clowes.
variegata, Windermere, P.
Clowes.
THE 
BEITTLE BLADDER FERN.
Cystopteris fragilis* BEENHAEDI.
The Bladder Ferns (kystos is Greek for bladder) are 
so called because the indusium, even in age inflated or 
bulged out like a hood, has when young the look of a 
flask or bladder.
The plant differs in this from the 
flatness (the sori in both being round) of the Poly- 
stichums and Lastreas with which it was formerly 
* Polypodium fragile (Linnaeus), Aspidium fragile, Athyrium 
fragile, Asplenium fragillimum.
BRITTLE BLADDER FERN 99 
ranked, under the general name of Aspidice.
There 
are three British species of Bladder Ferns : the Brittle 
or Fragile Cystoperis fragilis, the Alpine C.
regia, 
and the Mountain G.
montana but only the first is 
really authenticated as belonging to the Lake Country, 
no claim being made for O.
montana, and the likelihood 
of C.
regia depending only on the following paragraph 
in Moore's last edition : " We have not seen a native 
mountain specimen of C.
regia unless it be one from 
Saddleback (Blencathra), in Cumberland, gathered 
many years since by Mr. S.
F. Gray." There appears 
indeed to be only one authenticated habitat of the 
plant in England : that at Low Leyton, in Essex.
The Brittle Bladder Fern is of a very delicate and 
grassy appearance, the root-stems spreading under 
favourable circumstances into large patches of nume- 
rous crowns, each of which throws up a tuft of several 
fronds, from six inches to sometimes a foot in height.
The stipes, erect, and rather more than a third of the 
length of the frond, is brittle, dark, shining, with a few 
small scales at the base.
The fronds are lanceolate, 
bipinnate ; the pinnae lanceolate ; the pinnules ovate- 
acute, cut more or less deeply on the margin, the lobes 
furnished with a few pointed teeth.
In some vigour- 
ous plants the pinnules are so very deeply cut as to 
become pinnatifid, almost pinnate, the lobes themselves 
then resembling the smaller pinnules nearer the apex 
of the pinnae and frond.
The venation, from the deli- 
cacy of the frond, is very readily seen.
In the ordi- 
narily-sized pinnules there is a somewhat twisty mid- 
vein, giving off a side branch or vein to each of the 
H2 
100 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
lobes into which the margin is cut, these veins again 
branching into two or more venules according to the 
size of the lobe, and each branch generally bearing a 
sorus at about midway of its length.
The sori are 
thus generally numerous and rather irregularly placed, 
often becoming confluent and covering the whole 
under-surface ; but their number, and confluence, vary- 
ing much, depending upon the various circumstances 
of growth.
The sori are nearly circular ; the flask or 
bladder shaped (like a hood over them) indusia become 
in age torn or split at the point into narrow segments, 
turned back, jagged and fringe-like, the whole being 
pushed off by the ripening spores.
HABITATS.
Borrowdale (Miss Wright and G.
B. 
Wollaston), Whitbarrow (Wollastori), Egremont (Eol- 
sori), Ullswater (Wollaston), Arnside Knott (H.
D. 
Oeldart), Fairfield, Kendal, Windermere (Clowes), 
Kentmere (Clowes), &c.
angiistata, Whitbarrow, F.
Clowes ; Arnside, J.
Crossfield ; 
Sizergh, J.
M. Barnes.
dentata, Kentmere, F.
Clowes ; Arnside, J.
Crossfield ; Kendal 
Fell, J.
M. Barnes.
interrupta, Windermere, J.
Huddart.
THE OBLONG WOODSIA.
Woodsia ilvensis.* R.
BEOWN.
The genus Woodsia (so called from Mr. Joseph 
Woods) is the British representative of the group 
Peranemeae.
Of the two British species, the Oblong 
Woodsia and the Blunt-leaved or alpina, only the first 
is found in the Lake Country.
Even that is very rare.
It was first discovered in 1846, in a small quantity, on 
one of the Westmorland 
mountains, by Mr. Hud- 
dart, who afterwards found 
some hundred plants near 
Scawfell, in Cumberland.
The next year other sta- 
tions were found in West- 
morland by Mr. Huddart, 
both alone and in company 
with Mr. Clowes.
In some 
of these places were only 
a few plants, but in one a 
great many and very fine.
The Oblong Woodsia is especially a mountain Fern, 
an annual, dying down to the ground in winter and 
coming up again in spring.
Its caudex is short, erect 
* Acrostichum ilvense (Linnaus), Polypodium ilvensc, Aspidium 
rufidulnm, Lastrea rufidula, &c.
Eonuunr 
102 FERNS OP THE LAKE COUNTRY 
or decumbent, furnished with a few scales on the 
crown, forming tufts, which in favourable circumstances 
grow into masses rather large in comparison with the 
diminutive nature of the plant.
The stipes is scaly 
and articulated, or jointed, at a short distance from the 
base, so that in age the upper part with the fronds 
falls away, the lower part still adhering to the caudex.
The fronds are seldom more than four inches high, 
offcener less ; their form is lanceolate, varying in 
breadth, pinnate, the pinnse usually set on nearly or 
quite opposite in pairs, obtusely oblong, with the mar- 
gin deeply lobed or pinnatifid.
They are of a thick 
dull-looking texture, and are more or less clothed on 
both surfaces, but especially on the veins beneath, with 
minute bristle-like scales and shining jointed hairs, 
among which the sori lie almost concealed.
The vena- 
tion of the segments of the pinnse consists of a rather 
indistinct midvein, from which the smaller veins, simple 
or branched, extend to the margin near which the sori 
are produced.
The indusia are peculiar in that they 
are not placed as covers to the sori, but attached under 
them.
When very young, indeed, they enclose them ; 
but later they split from above into narrow scale-like 
segments, not easily distinguished without a glass from 
the frond-hairs among which they lie.
In the full- 
grown state the sori lie in tufts of hair-like scales 
formed of the torn margins of the indusium, the latter 
being attached to the frond at the point beneath the 
capsules.
No other native Ferns possess a structure 
at all approaching to this.
THE EILM EEIINS.
THE TUNBRIDGE FILM FEEN.
Hymenoptyllum Tunbridgense.
SMITH.
The Film Ferns Hymenophyllum, so called from 
the two Greek words hymen a, film or membrane, 
and phyllon a leaf, belong to the same group (TRI- 
CHOMANINE^;) as the Bristle Ferns Trichoinanes.
They are all small moss-like plants, the smallest of our 
native Ferns, distinguished from other (foregoing) 
Ferns by having their fructification on the margins of 
the fronds, and from each other by the form and nature 
of the involucres which surround the fructification.
These involucres are deep urn-shaped pits, in which are 
contained the spore-cases, clustered around hair-like or 
bristly receptacles, which bristles are indeed the ends 
of the frond-veins projecting into the urns.
In TTy- 
menopliyllum these bristles are always shorter than the 
urn ; while in Trichomanes (a British genus also, but 
not found in the Lake Country) they project more, so 
that the fronds become bristly when very full of spores.
Hence the name of Bristle Fern.
They are known 
also by the farther difference that the involucres of 
101 FEENS OP THE LAKE COUNTRY 
Trichomanes are entire, and those of Hymenopliyllum 
split lengthwise into two valves.
The Tunbridge Film Fern (named from its being 
first found near Tunbridge, in Kent) grows in matted 
tufts upon rocks in moist warm places, usually carpet- 
ing the damp surfaces of the rocks themselves, but 
sometimes choosing the mossy ground, or living moss- 
like on the trunks of trees the black wiry rhizomes 
or creeping caudices interlacing themselves among their 
neighbour plants.
The fronds are very short, from an 
inch to three or at most six inches long, membranous 
and half-transparent, almost erect, and of a dull dead- 
locking brownish-green even when at their freshest ; 
lanceolate or slightly ovate, pinnate, with pinnse pin- 
natifid or bipinnatifid, and having their branches 
mostly on the upper side, though sometimes alternately 
on each side of the pinna.
The fronds are virtually a 
branched series of rigid veins, winged throughout, ex- 
cept on the lower part of the short stipes, by a narrow 
membranous leafy margin.
The sori are produced 
around the axis of a vein, which, as before said, is con- 
tinued beyond the frond-margins, and enclosed in an 
urn-shaped indusium, involucre, or cover, consisting of 
two almost perfectly round (orbicular) compressed 
valves, spinosely serrate on the upper margin.
It will 
grow well in pots in equal parts of peat and silver sand, 
scarcely caring for any other mould, but requires a 
glass, and constant but not stagnant moisture.
HABITATS.
Coniston, Buzzard Hough Crag near 
Wrynose (JRay), Hawl Ghyll near Wastwater (Hobson), 
Ennerdale (7.
Dickinson).
ONE-SIDED (OR WILSON'S) FILM FERN.
Hymenopfyllum unilaterale.
WILIDENOW.
In Hymenopliyllum unilaterale the pinnae are what 
is called decurrent in the upper part that is to say, 
they are prolonged beyond their points of insertion, as 
if running downwards, so that the fronds appear to be 
one-sided, or unilateral.
The name of One-Sided 
might therefore be employed to designate it just as 
well as if not better than the cognomen of its dis- 
coverer.
Like H.
Tunbridgense, it grows from nume- 
rous slender thready stems, into dense tufts, from 
which spring a crowded mass of half-drooping brown, 
green, or olive-coloured, semi-transparent fronds, 
averaging from three to four inches in height.
The 
fronds are lanceolate and pinnate, the rachis is usually 
somewhat curved, the piling are one-sided, convex 
106 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
above, and all turned one way, as already described, 
the outlines of the pinnae wedge-shaped, digitately 
pinnatifid (like the fingers of a hand notched almost 
to the bone).
The extreme or ultimate lobes are 
linear-obtuse with a spinulose-serrated margin.
The 
fronds when luxuriant have a tendency to become 
branched.
The veins are twice-branched, branching 
alternately from the rachis, forking again so as to ex- 
tend a venule to each segment ; and after leaving the 
midrib are furnished with a narrow membranous leafy 
whig or border (which the rib itself has not).
The 
sori are collected round the free ends of the veins and 
contained in the urn-shaped covers or involucres, which 
differ from those of H.
Tunbridgense in being more or 
less obviously stalked instead of sessile, and in having 
their valves entire instead of serrated at the upper 
margin.
Mr. Clowes notices also a farther difference 
between the species : that the fronds of H.
Tunbridgense 
are annual, " never grow more than one year;" while 
those of H.
unilaterale are perennial, lasting for several 
years and annually renewing their growth, bearing 
spores year after year.
HABITATS.
Patterdale, Ambleside (J.
BowcrbanTc), 
Stock Ghyll Force (Miss Beever), Dungeon Ghyll, 
Scaw Fell (Black Eocks and Great End), Bowfell, 
Ennerdale (Dr. Dickinson), Scale Force (H.
C. Wat- 
son), Honister Crag (Rev. G.
finder), Gratesgarth 
Dale, Borrowdale, Lodore (Miss Wright*), Keswick, 
near Hawkshead (Miss S.
Cowburri), Coniston Old 
Man (Miss Beever), Silverdale (Miss Beever), Dale- 
garth (Robsori), High Stile (Finder).
EOYAL, OE FLOWERING FEEN.
Osmunda regalis.
LINNAEUS.
"At Loch Tyne dwelt the waterman, old Osmund.
Fairest among maidens was the daughter of Osmund 
the waterman.
Her light-brown hair and glowing 
cheek told of her Saxon origin, and her light steps 
bounded over the green turf like a young fawn in his 
native glades.
Often, in the stillness of a summer's 
even, did the mother and her fair-haired child sit beside 
the lake, to watch the dripping and the flashing of the 
father's oars as he skimmed right merrily towards 
them over the deep-blue waters.
Sounds, as of hasty 
steps, were heard one day, and presently a company of 
fugitives told with breathless haste that the cruel 
Danes were making way towards the ferry.
Osmund 
heard them with fear.
Suddenly the shouts of furious 
men came remotely on the ear.
The fugitives rushed 
on.
Osmund stood for a moment ; then snatching up 
his oars he rowed his trembling wife and fair child to a 
small island covered with the great Osmund Eoyal, and 
helping them to land, bade them to lie down beneath 
the tall Ferns.
Scarcely had the ferryman returned to 
108 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
his cottage, when a company of Danes rushed in ; but 
they hurt him not, for they knew that he could do 
them service.
During the day and night did Osmund 
row backwards and forwards across the river (or the 
lake ?), ferrying troops of those fierce men.
When the 
last company was put on shore, Osmund, kneeling be- 
side the river's bank, returned heartfelt thanks to 
Heaven for the preservation of his wife and child.
Often in after-years did Osmund speak of that day's 
peril ; and his fair child, grown up to womanhood, 
called the tall Fern by her father's name." So says 
the heart-thrilling legend, touching, in its conclusion, 
even to the scientific botanist, accounting for the name 
of the stateliest of our Ferns.
There is another sup- 
position, however, that the name is derived from os 
and mimd, Saxon words for home and strength or 
peace, though what house-strength or house-peace has 
to do with the Flowering Fern it is difficult to say.
Why not even a third guess, hardly likely to be farther 
off than the others, that it has something to do with 
Osmonds in old Saxon iron ore, for is it not found in 
the iron countries, in Durham and in South Wales, and 
in our own iron district of Cumberland, if not nearer 
than Egremont or Sea Scale, yet that is nearer than 
Loch Tyne and the river of the ferryman ?
Whatever 
the origin, however, of the name given it by Linnaeus, 
the Koyal Osmund is indeed the grandest of.
our Ferns, 
under all circumstances a handsome plant, but espe- 
cially beautiful when, in very luxuriant growth, its 
fronds, loaded at their tips by the fertile panicles, are 
bent down gaacefully until they almost reach the sur- 
ROYAL, OR FLOWERING PERN 109 
face of the water by the side of which they prefer to 
grow.
From these panicles, springing like clusters of 
flowers from the ends of the fronds, comes its name of 
Flowering Fern.
The fronds of the Flowering Fern grow to an aver- 
age height of three or four feet, sometimes even to the 
royal stature of eight, ten, or twelve, and six feet or 
more across.
The caudex is tufted, in very old and 
vigourous plants forming a trunk a foot or more above 
the ground, from the crown of which, whether it is 
close to the ground or elevated, grow the fronds.
When young, these fronds have generally a reddish 
stipes, with a bloomy surface, the bloom being lost at a 
later period.
They are annual, perishing before the 
coming of winter, smooth and of a bright yellow green, 
paler beneath, lanceolate in general outline when 
mature, bipinnate, the pinnae lanceolate or ovate- 
lanceolate, with pinnules oblong-ovate, somewhat au- 
ricled at the base, especially on the posterior side, 
bluntish at the apex, and finely serrated along the 
margin.
Some of the fronds are entirely barren, while 
others have several of the upper pinnse transformed 
into terminal fertile panicles.
Each short spike-like 
branch of the panicles (or flower-clusters) represents one 
of the pinnules, the spore-cases being collected on it in 
little knots, more or less evident, these knots (or 
nodules) corresponding to the fascicles of the veins.
This is very plainly seen in partially-transformed pin- 
nules.
The venation, as seen in the barren fronds, 
consists of a stout midvein giving oif nearly opposite 
veins, which are forked once near their base, the venules 
110 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
being parallel, slightly curved, and once or twice forked 
before reaching the margin, where they are lost.
In 
the fertile parts of the frond only the midrib of the 
pinnules is fully developed, and the spore-cases are 
attached to a small portion of the veins, which becomes 
developed just to serve as a receptacle.
The spore- 
cases are of a reddish-brown, nearly globe-shaped, 
shortly stalked, reticulated, and two-valved, the valves 
opening vertically.
The Flowering Fern grows naturally in wet, springy, 
or boggy places, not much above the sea-level in Eng- 
land, and sometimes on the sea-shore hardly above 
high-water mark.
It is common throughout Europe ; 
is found in Asia, in Mingrelia, and in India ; in North 
and South Africa, in the Azores, and in Madagascar ; 
and in North and South America, in Canada and New- 
foundland, the United States, Mexico, and Brazil.
It 
is of easy culture, needing only moisture and a peaty 
soil in any sheltered situation.
The caudex is said to 
possess tonic and styptic properties ; according to 
Gerard, the "root" boiled or stamped, and taken with 
some kind of liquor, is " thought to be good for those 
that are wounded, dry-beaten, and bruized." In Cum- 
berland and Westmorland, and that adjoining part of 
Lancashire which should be Westmorland also, it is 
known as the " bog-onion," and held in esteem as an 
external application for bruizes, sprains, &c.
The cau- 
dices are beaten, covered with cold spring water, and 
allowed to macerate all night ; the thick starchy fluid 
thus formed being used to bathe the parts affected.
HABITATS.
Windermere (T.
G. Kylands), Lough- 
EOYAL, OR FLOWERING FERN 
111 
rigg and Skelwith, Colwith (R.
Fordhani), Ullock 
Moss by Keswick, Whitbarrow, Scale Hill, Egremont, 
Sea Scale and Gosforth (Rolsori), Irton, Millom, 
Brantwood by Coniston, Yewdale under Coniston 
Crags.
THE COMMON MOONWOET.
Botrychium Lunaria* SWARTZ.
The Common Moonwort (a 
Botrychium, of the order OPHIO- 
GLOSSACEjE, distinguished from all 
the Polypodiaceae or True Ferns, 
by their young fronds being not 
circinate, but folded straightly, 
though at the same time resem- 
bling the Osmundinese in having 
no elastic ring and in being two- 
valved) is one step farther in the 
course of natural variety, for, as 
through Polypodiaceae and Tri- 
chomaninese there is one regular 
progression and change of method 
of fructification from the spore- 
cases without indusium to the 
spore-cases with indusium, from 
the simplest forms of indusia to 
the flask or bladder shapes, from the spore-cases on the 
backs to the spore-cases on the margins, and the spore- 
cases (as in Osmunda) on the ends of fronds transformed 
into seeming stalks, so the Ophioglossaceae show yet 
* Osmunda Lunaria (Linneeus), Ophioglossum pcnnatum, &c.
THE COMMON MOONWOET 113 
one more change, the change into the appearance of a 
distinct flower-stalk being yet more marked, so much 
so as to be not at first sight distinguishable from the 
stalk of a veritable flowering plant.
Of the OPHIOGLOSSACE.E there are two British genera 
Botrychium or Moonwort, and Ophioglossum or 
Adder's Tongue, readily known from each other by 
their external features.
Both genera have two-branched 
fronds, one branch looking like the leaf and the other like 
the flower ; but they differ obviously in this, that Botry- 
chium has its branches branched again, while those of 
Ophioglossum are simple and undivided.
The roots and caudex (or root-stem) of Botrychiwn 
differ essentially, says Mr. Newman, from those of 
the "True" Ferns.
"The roots are stout, succulent, 
and brittle.
The caudex is about the same size as the 
roots, perhaps rather stouter ; it descends perpendicu- 
larly, and the roots issue from it at right angles.
Be- 
fore the plant has felt the influence of spring, the frond 
exists in a quiescent state, but perfectly formed.
It 
then appears like a simple stem, scarcely an inch in 
length, and perfectly erect.
On a closer inspection the 
component parts of the future frond will be clearly 
perceived ; the stipes is swollen, and rather stouter 
than the upper part, the two branches of which face 
each other, the fertile branch of the frond being 
clasped by the barren or leafy part ; and the fructifica- 
tion being thus entirely concealed, the uppermost pin- 
nse are incurved, as if to give still farther protection to 
the fruit.
The whole is invested and completely en- 
closed in scale-like alternate sheaths, doubtless the 
114 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
decaying stalks of many previous years.
As the spring 
advances, the frond rapidly increases in size, until in 
April it makes its appearance above ground, and in 
May or June attains its perfect development."* Mr.
Newman also found the frond of the ensuing year in 
every respect perfectly formed indeed, exactly in the 
state in which it is found in the early spring before 
development ; while the frond for the next following 
year, though less perfectly formed, also had the fruit- 
ful and leafy portions distinct from each other.
These 
observations being made in May, while the plant was 
still growing, the fronds of three successive years were 
distinguishable at the same time.
The name botrychium is from the Greek lotrys a 
cluster, because of the likeness of the branched clusters 
of spore-cases to the form of a bunch or cluster of 
grapes.
The English name of Moonwort is given on 
account of the lunate (or crescent-like) form of the 
pinnae in the British species.
The Common Moonwort prefers dry, open, and ele- 
vated pastures and waste lands, and likes to skirt them 
under the shade of hedge-rows.
It may easily be 
passed over, half hidden as it is among the herbage, 
for its height only varies from some two or three 
inches to six or eight ; but once seen there is no mis- 
taking the double row of fan-shaped pinnae which form 
its sterile branch.
The lower half of the plant consists 
of a smooth, erect, cylindrical, hollow stipes, whose 
base is clothed by the brown membranous sheath which 
had covered it while in bud.
Above are the two 
* Newman, History of British Ferns, third edition.
THE COMMON MOONWORT 115 
separate branches of the frond, one branch spreading, 
leafy, oblong, pinnate, with its crescent-shaped or fan- 
shaped pinnae filled with a radiating series of twice or 
thrice-forked veins, one vein extending into each of the 
rounded teeth or lobes into which the margin is divided, 
the other branch erect, fertile, compoundly branched, 
that is first divided into branches like the pinnae, then 
again into further branches, on which, distinct, but 
clustered, the grape-like stalkless spore-cases are pro- 
duced.
The spore-cases are two-valved, and open 
transversely when ripe.
The valves are concave.
Oc- 
casionally, but very rarely, there are two branches : 
and a variety has the pinnae pinnatifid.
The Moonwort is widely but sparsely scattered 
over the British Isles ; and is found also in all quarters 
of the globe, including Tasmania and the Australian 
Alps in Victoria.
It ranges from the sea-line to 3,000 
feet above it.
It has not generally been very success- 
fully cultivated ; but it seems may be, if taken up with 
a sufficiently large sod, and carefully kept cool and 
equally moistened.
Even in the natural state it is 
unable to bear much drought.
HABIT ATS.
-Res wick, near Aspatria (Rev. J.
Dodd), 
Braystones, Muncaster Fells, Furness Fells above 
Coniston Water.
i2 
THE 
COMMON ADDER'S TONGUE.
Ophioglossum vulgatum.
LnraraTJS.
The genus Ophioglossum (Adder's Tongue, from the 
Greek opJiios a serpent or adder, and glossa a 
tongue) is the type of the order Ophioglossacese, men- 
tioned before as differing from the True Ferns in having 
ringless spore-cases and their spring fronds straightly 
folded.
It differs from Botrychium in having the 
branches of its two fronds quite simple or undivided, 
instead of being pinnate and bipinnate as that is.
It 
differs yet more markedly in that 
its fertile branches are not merely 
the branched panicles of Botry- 
chium, but distinct spikes in which 
the spore-cases are distichous (ar- 
ranged in two rows opposite to 
each other), like the florets of 
many grapes.
Yet a third re- 
markable difference is noteworthy 
- that while in Botrychium, as 
already seen, the next year's fronds 
are found within the bases of the 
growing stems, in Ophioglossum a 
bud is developed by the side of 
this year's frond.
There are two British species 
of Ophioglossum the Common 
Adder's Tongue O.
cidgatum.
THE COMMON ADDER'S TONGUE 117 
and the Dwarf O.
lMsitanicum,i\ie last only recently 
found in Guernsey.
The Common Adder's Tongue is 
widely dispersed, and abundant where it occurs.
The 
only locality given for it in the Lake Country is in the 
meadows by St. Bees.
It is scattered over the whole 
of Europe and Asia, North America, and Mexico, and 
found in some of its varieties at the Cape of Good 
Hope, in J^"ew Zealand, and Australia.
The Common Adder's Tongue is small and stemless, 
the stem only represented by the central crown of its 
few coarse brittle roots.
The young fronds, from six 
to twelve inches high, are produced in May and perish 
by the end of the summer.
The stipes is variable in 
length, smooth, round, hollow, and succulent.
The 
upper part is divided into branches one branch leafy, 
entire, smooth, obtusely egg-shaped and slightly variable 
in form, traversed by irregular-angled veins, forming 
elongated meshes within which are smaller veinlets, 
the other branch erect, contracted for about half its 
length, forming a linear slightly tapering spike, in the 
substance of which, upon each of its two opposite sides, 
a line of crowded spore-cases is imbedded.
The spore- 
cases are therefore considered to be produced on the 
margin of a contracted frond.
When ripe, the margin 
splits at intervals corresponding with the centre of each 
spore-case, so that the spike then resembles a double 
row of gaping spherical cavities.
The leaves, pounded in a mortar, are said to yield "a 
most excellent greene oyle, or rather a balsame for 
greene wounds, comparable to oile of St. John's- Wort, 
if it do not farre surpasse it." The plant prefers loamy 
i3 
118 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
pastures and meadow land, where its abundance, dis- 
liked by the cattle, by no means improves the grass.
It is readily cultivable, but likes the shade of surround- 
ing herbage.
A. TRICHOMANE?.
var.
incisum.
MEANINGS OF NAMES AND TERMS.
ALLOSORUS CEISPTTS 
alias Greek, differing ; sorus Latin, from soros 
Greek, a heap.
crispiis Latin, crisped, like parsley.
ASPIDITTM L.
from aspidion G., a shield.
AspLEtfnjM ADIANTTTM-NIGBUM 
Aspleniwm L.
from asplenion G., spleenwort.
adiantum L.
from adiantos G., dry ; and nigrum L., 
black.
germanicum L., alternate.
marinum L., marine.
Euta L., rue; mwaria L., growing on walls.
septentrionale L., northern (from the seven stars in the 
Great Bear).
Trichomanes G., a hair or bristle ; and manos, soft, 
thin, porous, or mania, excess.
mride L., green.
ATHTEITTII FILIX-FOSMINA 
Aihyrium L.
from aihyros G., open (from the opening 
of the indusium).
Filix L., a fern ; faemina L., feminine.
BLECHNTJM SPICANT 
Blechnum L., blechnon G., a fern.
spicant L., spiked, growing to a point like a spike.
BOTRYCHITJM LT7NAKIA 
Botrychium L., botrys G., a bunch or cluster of grapes.
120 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
JJunaria L., lunar, lunate (referring to the crescent-like 
shape of the pinna?).
CETEEACH OFFICINAETJM 
Ceterach, corruption of CTietTierak, Arabic or Persic (mean- 
ing not known).
officinarum of officina L., officinal (used in medicine).
CYSTOPTEBIS FBAGILIS 
Tcystos &., a bladder ; pteris G., a fern.
fragilis L., fragile, brittle.
HYMENOPHYLITTM UNILATERALE 
hymen &., a membrane or film ; phyllon (?., a leaf.
unilaterale L., one-sided.
LASTEEA JSMITLA 
Lastrea, the Latinized name of M.
de Lastre.
cemula L., emulating, rivalling.
cristata L., crested.
dilatata L., dilated, spread out, broad.
Filix-mas L.
t filix, fern ; mas, male or mascu- 
line.
montana L., mountain-growing.
remota L., remote.
rigida L., rigid.
spinulosa L,, spinulous, prickly-toothed.
Thelypteris Q-., thelys, feminine ; pteris, a fern.
OPHIOGKLOSSTTM vtrLGATtrst 
opTdos G., a serpent or adder ; glossa (?., a tongue.
vulgatvm L., common.
OSMUNDA EEOALIS 
Osmunda, derivation and meaning unknown.
regalis L., royal.
POLYPODITTM CALCABEtJM 
polys <?., many j pous &., a foot : many-footed.
calcareum L., chalky, limestone-growing.
Dryopteris &., drys, an oak ; pteris, a fern.
Phegopteris <?., pTiegos, a beech ; pteris, a fern.
vidgare L., vulgar, common.
MEANINGS OF NAMES AND TERMS 12 J 
POIYSTICHUM ACTJIEATTJM 
polys G., many ; stictos G., order (from the numerous 
orderly sori).
aculeatum L,, prickly.
angula/re L., angular.
loncJtitis L., a spleenwort.
PTEEIS AQTIILINA 
Pteris G., a fern, from pteron G-., a feather.
aquilina L,, eagle-like.
SCOLOPENDBITJM, from Scolopendra, the scientific name of a 
centipede.
AVOODSIA ILVENSIS 
Woodsia, Latinized from the name J.
Woods.
Ilvensis L., Elban, from the island II va, Elva or Elba.
acrogenom, growing chiefly from the extremity.
acuminate, extended into an acute terminal angle.
oppressed, pressed close, lying near the stem.
aristate, bearded.
articulated, jointed, separating readily at the joint.
auricle, a small ear-like lobe.
caudate, with a tail ; ovate-caudate, an egg with a tail, like a 
tadpole.
caudex (plural caudices), the root-stalk or stem.
circinate, rolled down, like a crozier-head.
confluent, running into or uniting with one another.
cordate, having lobes like the thick end of the heart in a pack 
of cards.
cotyledons, the seed-lobes, the first leaves in the rudimentary 
plant or embryo.
crenate, having the edges round-toothed.
. crenulate, with smaller teeth.
cruciform, in the form of a cross.
deciduous, falling off, as the leaves of annuals.
122 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
decumbent, reclining upon the earth and rising again from it.
decurrent, prolonged beyond the point of insertion, as if running 
downwards.
deflected (deflexed), bent downwards.
deltoid, triangular, like the Greek letter D delta.
dentate, toothed.
dicotyledonous, having two cotyledons.
distichous, in two rows.
dorsal, placed upon the back.
dorsiferous, bearing on the back.
echinate, prickly, like a hedgehog.
endogenous, growing from within increasing by internal 
growth.
exogenous, growing from without by additions to the outer 
parts of the stem, 
fascicle, a bundle, as of larch leaves growing from a common 
point.
frond, the combination of leaf and stem in ferns, &c.
glaucous, bloom-covered, like a plum or cabbage-leaf.
herbaceous, herb-like.
hippocrepiform, horseshoe-shaped.
indusium (plural indusia), the membranous covering of the 
involucre, a sort of calyx or ring inclosing an aggregate of 
flowers.
involucriform, divided at the margin into hair-like incurved 
segments.
involute, having the edges rolled in on each side.
lanceolate, knee-shaped.
linear, lying in lines j also narrow, with parallel margins.
lobes, the divisions or segments of a leaf; lobules, smaller lobes.
lunate, crescent-shaped.
monocotyledonous, having only one cotyledon.
mucronate, abruptly terminating in a hard short spine.
mucronulate, not so distinct a spine.
nodule, a knot.
MEANINGS OF NAMES AND TEEMS 123 
orbicular, perfectly circular.
ovate, egg-shaped ; obovate, inversely egg-shaped.
panicle, a cluster of flowers.
paniculate, having panicles.
peltate, fixed to the stalk by the centre, or by some point dis- 
tinctly within the margin.
persistent, lasting, not deciduous.
petiole, the stalk of a leaf.
pinna (plural pinnae), the leaflet or primary division of a pin- 
nated leaf.
pinnate, when simple leaflets (or pinnae) are arranged on each 
side of a common leaf-stalk ; 1ripinnate, when the pinnae 
are again divided ; tripinnate, a third division.
pinnatifid, divided not quite to the stalk.
pinnule, a small pinna the secondary division of the leaf.
plicate, folded lengthwise, like a lady's fan.
plumule, the bud of a seed.
rachis (plural rachides), the midrib or vein of a leaf or frond.
radicle, the first root of a plant.
receptacle, the part in which the organs of reproduction are 
placed.
reflexed, curved very much backwards.
renifortn, kidney-shaped.
reticulated, like net-work.
rhizome, the creeping root-stalk.
rupestral, growing in rocky places.
serrated, with teeth like a saw.
sessile, set en without any perceptible stalk.
soriferous, bearing sori.
sorus (plural sori), a cluster of spore-cases.
spicate, in the form of a spike.
spinulose, having spines or thorns.
spores, the seeds of ferns.
stipes, the proper stalk of the fern.
sub, in composition means nearly, as sub-ovate, nearly egg- 
shaped; sub-pinnate, not altogether pinnate.
124 FERNS OF THE LAKE COUNTRY 
subnate, under-growing.
svprasoriferotis, bearing the sori on the upper surface.
truncate, terminating abruptly, as if a piece had been cut off.
tuberculate, lumpy, wart-like.
venation, the system of veins.
venules, veinlets or small veins.
whole-coloured, all of one colour.
UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 
A 000 580 984 3 
THE LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
Santa Barbara 
THIS BOOK IS DUE ON THE LAST DATE 
STAMPED BELOW.
}Oj?i-9,'66(G6338s8)9482 
DEC.
Vrrfll 